$2.50  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·74
Autumn, 1977


WOMEN }IND LITER}ITURE


Articles


BY   JOHN  WILSON FOSTER, SEAN RYAN, D.  W. RUSSELL, BARBARA HERNER, JAMES  DOYLE, DEBBIE FOULKS, DAVID  STOUCK


Poems


BY  GEORGE WOODCOCK, TOM MARSHALL, ELIZABETH GOURLAY, JAMES  HARRISON, PETER GELLATLY


Review Articles and Reviews


BY  ANN P. MESSENGER, MICHAEL BRIAN OLIVER, MARILYN BOWERING, CLARA THOMAS,  FRANCES FRAZER, PATRICIA KEENEY SMITH,
MARY MCALPINE,  SUSAN  WOOD



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









BEGINNING AGAIN








EIGHTEEN   YEARS AGO, George  Woodcock accepted  the editor­ ship  of a  new  magazine to  be  called  Canadian  Literature. To  many,  a  journal  devoted solely   to  the  study of  Canadian  writers and  writing  seemed  an unlikely  venture. But  in  the  intervening years Canadian writing  has  flourished; the  study  of  Canadian writing  has  grown  from  an  almost  secret  pursuit  into  a public  venture and   a  respectable academic enterprise; and  George  Woodcock  has   built   Canadian   Literature  into   the   independent   journal  of  opinion   and analysis  which  in the  first editorial  he promised  it  would  be. On  July  1st of this year  he retired  from  the editorship. Readers will be  pleased  to know that  he will continue to write for the magazine, and so to share the insight  and the fine literary  judgment which  characterize his work.  But  the  daily organization of the  maga­ zine  he leaves  behind.  He  also leaves  more  than  one editorial legacy. There are several  issues' worth  of excellent  essays awaiting publication; there  is his reputa­ tion,  which,  as the  incoming editor, I find  not  just a little  daunting; there  is the journal's independence, which  he  established  and  which  Ireaffirm  now  as  an editorial  policy to be preserved and still further pursued.
At  the  same  time  as  George  Woodcock is  retiring, there  are  other  changes taking  place  in editorial  guidance, for Donald  Stephens and  Ronald  Sutherland are   also  leaving   their   posts.  They   have   contributed  greatly   to  the   journal's development and  in very  particular ways to the shape  it has taken  from  issue to issue. Their work has been much  appreciated. Fortunately they, too, will continue to  write  for  Canadian  Literature,  so readers  will have  the  continuing benefits of their   perspectives.  As  they  leave,  Iwelcome  the  assistance  of  a  new  Associate Editor, Herbert  Rosengarten, who  will  already   be  familiar to  readers,  for  his reviews and  comments  have  been  appearing regularly  here  for  nine years.

2

BEGINNING AGAIN

The   articles  that   have  been  published   in  Canadian  Literature  over  the  past years have varied  greatly  in approach and  intent. Textual analyses have appeared alongside  autobiographical and  polemical  commentaries; large  thematic surveys have  alternated with  close examinations of symbol,  structure, and  metric  form. Many  of these  articles  were  generated, moreover,  by the  particular needs of the time  they  were  written. Eighteen   years  ago  few  Canadian works  were  in  print (the  New Canadian Library, for example,  had only just started), booksellers were inclined  to  hide  what  Canadian books  they  stocked,  and  few  readers  could  be relied  upon  to be familiar  with  titles, names or plots. Writers  had  to be identified, plots  to  be  explained.  Much   of  the  critical   process  was  devoted   to  gathering information and,  under  various  guises, listing it. Now, though  this process has by no means  been completed, the  work that  has been done has made  us aware  of the complexities  of the literature we are studying and suspicious of the generalizations that  have  often  been  accepted  as axioms.  On  a  personal  level, neither  Frederick Philip  Grove  nor  Malcolm   Lowry  turned out  to have  lived  quite  the  lives they publicly  declared  to  have   been  theirs.   At  a  more  general   level  there  is  that perennial   tension  about   identity.   Generations worried   themselves  because  they couldn't find  it  in  Canada. The  more  we have  come  to know  about  intellectual history  and  cultural expression,  however,  the  more  we have  realized  that  it  was not  a matter of a missing identity,  but  a matter of looking for it with eyes, ears, and minds attuned to societies other than our own.
We  need  further  explorations now  of the  many  connections between  cultural and   intellectual  history:    of  the   impact  of  ideas  and   social  experience   upon literature in Canada. We need sound  studies of the interrelationships between literature, the  other  arts,  and  science.  We  need  further illumination of  writers and  writings  that  are too little known; interviews,  reminiscences,  and  biographical accounts;  perspectives  on  the  publishing industry   and   political  involvement   in literature. We  need comparative studies  which  will not merely list parallels  or differences  but  will  use the  process of comparison to elucidate their  subject  and to  guard  against  easy  assertions  of distinctiveness.  We  need  reflections  on  news­ papers   and  other   kinds  of  journal, on  television,  radio,  and  film,  and  on  the literary  connections or the literary  potential each  medium  possesses. And  we need sophisticated considerations of  and  by our  major  writers.  There is  much  to do. This  journal  has  never  been  bound  by its academic connection. It seeks readers  and   writers   both   inside  and   outside   university   circles.  Beginning  again   after eighteen  years, it still takes as its subject, as its first editorial announced, "Cana­ dian  writers and their work and setting, without further limitations."

W.H.NEW





3

FINIS- JIN JICROSTIC



Going away is a kind of returning, Entering again a mirror of oneself,
Or  perhaps plunging into a sea cavern  to Recover  what the years had hidden  away. Given that  the task has been good, we all still End  in the longing for liberation.

Would  I have started, I now ask, if
Others had  not shown  a mad confiding,
Or continued if my voice out of the unknown Darkness  had  not roused others, an eventual Chorus  of critics? 	As Roethke would have it, One  learns by going where one has to go. Criticism  may be creation's left-handed
Kin,  but is, too, offspring  of the cruel muse.
 


George  M-'oodcock


Hell take such memories!     Bell tolls, clock chatters, And now's a time to march, like Flecker's  pilgrims, Never attaining the receding goal, perhaps, but Daring what comes and yet not lacking
Sadness for all inevitably must end.

One says goodbye to what  one has been making,  not in
Valediction, for it is mind  out of one's mind, Ever to be there like the departed child, yet Rendered free to receive a different

Turning, to accept  a new guide and  a new
Orchestration of themes,  tunes and soundings.

Bill New in fact  takes over; Woodcock goes.
If names have meaning, or if puns have point, Let's have no doubt the future is renewal.
Let's also skip false modesty, self-deprecation.

No journal  lives on hot air eighteen  years. Even so, urge declines as other  urges rise, and
We  (editorial form)  depart, remain, and so we say, (skipping beyond line, scansion, and  acrostic
form): Le Redacteur est parti: Vive le Redacteur!

4

THE POETRY
OF MARGARET ATWOOD



John Wilson  Foster







GARET
from the fact  that  her poetry explores certain  fashionable  minority psychologies. With its cultivation  of barely controlled hysteria, for instance, her verse is that of a psychic individual at sea in a materialist society. This hysteria, however, assumes specifically feminine  forms and  lends Atwood's work certain  affinities (of which current   popularity  is  the  least  important)  with  that  of  Virginia   Woolf  and Sylvia Plath.  For like these two predecessors, Atwood confronts her own sexuality and  the  contemporary   roles  laid  down  by  men  for  her  to  play.  A  minority psychology similar  to  that  which informs  her identity  as a  woman  informs her national  identity,  for  Atwood  is a  contemporary  Canadian aware  of belonging to a minority culture on the North American  continent  and in reaction recollect­ ing  and  re-enacting  her  pioneer  ancestors'  encounter  with  the  wilderness and
with  the  native  people.  Appropriately,   the  Canadian   ancestral  experience - repository of the spiritual  identity  of a people-happens to be best commemo­ rated in the  journals and  memoirs of some remarkable  women, including Catha­ rine Parr Traill, Susanna Moodie and Anna Jameson.
Charges  of  opportunism   could  easily  be  levelled  against  a  poet  so  deeply
involved with the minority psyche. But they are answerable by our exhibiting, as I hope to do here, the essential coherence of Atwood's poetic themes. Her poetry succeeds not by masterly technique  or style but by a peculiar force of content, by exciting transformations  of experience that  appear  only to the superficial reader as mere opportunities.  Among the experiences of being an  individual,  a woman and  a Canadian, Atwood intuits an  underlying connection deeper than minority membership.  These  experiences flesh out  in  multiple  guise the  root formula  of her poetry. Like a mathematical expression, that formula sustains a wealth of individual  existences -of  image, motif, subject  and  dramatic situation.  Stated briefly, Atwood's  poetry in the six volumes to date 1 concerns itself with the self's inhabitation   of spaces and  forms  and  the  metamorphoses  entailed  therein.  All that  is thematically  important derives from  this:  invasion, displacement,  evolu-


5

MARGARET ATWOOD

tion  and  reversion, as well as those notions significant enough  to warrant  book titles-survival, ingestion ( cf. The  Edible Woman, a novel),  and surfacing. The message of Atwood's  poetry is that  extinction and  obsolescence are illusory, that life is a constant  process of re-formation.  The self is eternally divided in its atti­ tude to the forms and spaces it inhabits, simultaneously needing, fearing, desiring and despising them.
Because  the  scenario  of  inhabitation  takes  place  through   space  and  time (spaces in  time  become forms and  forms become spaces),  we can see its perti­ nence  to  the  contemporary  Canadian's encounter  not  only with  the  landscape and  its inhabitants but also with the past preserved in part by that  landscape - that  is, with  his pioneer ancestors  (whose  journey itself enacted  the scenario), with the native people and with his own primordiality. Also, since roles are spaces and forms, we can see its pertinence to the current re-definition of femininity. And behind the feminine and Canadian, the individual. If the self's identity as woman and  as Canadian is threatened  by the variety of the Canadian past and  present, its identity  as human  being is threatened  by the fact that  self apparently  cannot exist outside forms and spaces. At best, self is merely reflected off the surfaces of others'  forms of self. This  is the  frightening  phenomenology  of Atwood's world superimposed,  skin-like, upon  the  illusory solidity of its rocks, animals,  artifacts and people.




ATwoon's SPACES are rooms, houses and even the human body, but  in the beginning they are the spaces fashioned by her pioneer ancestors
-the cabin and the clearing. How these spaces were created, inhabited, defended
and sometimes abandoned  is recorded  in the  journals and letters of the pioneers and  early visitors themselves, which thus  provide an illuminating  background  to the poetry. Always they concern a journey:  the  journal and guide are the arche­ typal  Canadian literary  forms which function  in the Canadian literary imagina­ tion  as  does  the  novel  in  the  English,  something  Atwood  has  recognized  in subtitling  her  critical  work  A  Thematic Guide  to Canadian  Literature  and  in "re-writing" the  journals of Susanna  Moodie. There  was to begin with the ocean voyage and  after, more important, the  journey across the land.  Ireland,  Seamus Heaney  has noted, has "no  prairies/To slice a big sun at evening," and he adds:

Our  pioneers  keep striking
Inwards and  downwards.

New world pioneers on the other  hand  encountered such prairies and  much else that Ireland  lacks: towering mountains  and awesome gorges, deserts, icefields and inland  seas. The  long  journey from landfall  to backwoods is an overland  move-

6

MARGARET ATWOOD

ment  ("surfacing," one might  call it)  that  even today  the Canadian can re-enact, as Atwood  does  in  "Migration: C.P.R." which  chronicles  a  journey  from  "the misty east"  through "the  inner  lakes,"  prairies,  mountains and  "faulted gorges" to the forest by the western ocean.
The  pioneer's  "long  day's  journey  in the  woods," as Mrs. Traill  describes it in
The    Backwoods   of  Canada    (18g6), ended   not   with   welcome   but   with   the hostility  of  wilderness,  wild  animal   and  settler.   In   "Paths and   Thingscape," Atwood's  Mrs. Moodie  complains:

I am watched like an invader who knows hostility but
not where

All are  begrudging and  "unforgivingly previous"  to her.  Rarely  in The  Journals of Susanna  Moodie or in  Roughing It  in  the  Bush  (I 852), or in the  journals  of Mrs.  Jameson and  Mrs.  Traill is the  red  man  anything but  benign  towards  the white man,  but  behind  the annoyance of the  Indian asked in  "First  Neighbours" about  the  toad-like  object  on  the  stick  lies the  real  hostility  between  the  races.2
In  fact,   the  white  man   desired  the  removal   of  the  red  man   "back   from  the extending limits  of civilisation," as Mrs.  Jameson noted,  "even  like these forests, which fall before us, and  vanish from the earth, leaving for a while some decaying stumps  and  roots over  which  the  plough  goes in time, and  no vestige remains  to say that  here they have  been." 3   It is upon  the "malignant face" of the forest, that most formidable prior  occupant of the clearing,  that  Atwood's Mrs.  Moodie,  like all  pioneers,  vents  her  greatest  wrath. "A  Canadian settler  hates  a  tree,"  adds Mrs.  Jameson, "regards it  as  his natural enemy,  as something to  be destroyed, eradicated, annihilated by all  and  any  means"   (I,  p. g6). Settlement could  not take  place  but   by  the  penetration and   destruction of  the  forest.  The  old  was obliterated by the new.
But the  new is at first mere negation. Disembarking at Quebec, Atwood's  Mrs. Moodie  is "a  word/in a foreign  language," but  later  in the  bush  her  husband  is not  even  that,  but  is merely  "an   X,  a  concept/defined against  a  blank" ("The Wereman").  The   clearing   represents   the  settler's   negative   and   unintelligible signature  upon  the  wilderness,  the displacement of its prior  occupants. But soon it  signifies  a  new  phase  in  the  scenario   of  inhabitation:  the  immigrant  upon landing  who  became  a  pioneer upon  striking  for  the  backwoods  has upon  clear­ ing  become  a  settler. The  pioneer  has  become  a new person  as the  clearing  is a new feature of  the  landscape. A  new  flora  appears which  the  settler  begins  to name  as though  it had  just been created.4   The  landscape is culturally virgin with no  associations.5    It  is  also,  and  in  this  notably  different  from  Mrs.  Jameson's native  Ireland, too new for ghosts.6   For  forest and  pioneer, settlement is oblitera­ tion and a fresh beginning.

7

MARGARET ATWOOD

The  cabin, erected immediately  after  the first minimally necessary felling, is a space within a space. Like the clearing it is at first blank, a mere negation of the bush. Soon both cabin and  clearing are havens (concentric areas of withdrawal) against  the forces of the old that  return  to deny the new. In  "Dream  3:  Night Bear Which  Frightened  Cattle," the "lighted  cabin"  is the last refuge from the bear  which invades  the clearing like "an  echo" of the previous inhabitants.  The settler's  life is a  nightly siege, terrified  as he is of being ambushed  outside  by nightfall. Indeed, cabin and clearing create for the first time in the wilderness the vital dialectic of inside and outside.7   "Survival"  means the successful maintenance of the inside against the outside constituted by annoying settlers, "trespassing" Indians,  wolves and  bears, the  oppressive summer  and  "relentless  iron  winter" (Jameson) , the  bush and  the darkness. The  clearing, inside relative to the bush, is outside relative to the cabin, a dialectic Atwood exploits in "Two  Fires" when the  clearing  is mercifully  inside  the  burning  forest, but  mercifully outside  the burning  Moodie cabin.

(each  refuge  fails us; each  danger becomes a haven)

Here, as in other  poems, Atwood represents the enclosed spaces of her locales by parentheses.
Even when  positive, the cabin  and  clearing remain  precarious.  Mrs. Jameson sees the clearing  as a man-made  island  resisting "a  boundless sea of forest." In The  Circle Game,  in such  poems as "After  the Flood, We," "Descent Through the  Carpet" and  "Winter  Sleepers," Atwood  also sees the landscape  paradoxi­ cally as aquatic.  The  image of a re-forming sea conveys the idea that  the forces displaced by the cabin and the clearing are not really obliterated after all but are, by an Archimedean  principle, merely re-located. Nothing is destroyed in Atwood's universe:   it  simply  assumes  another  space,  another  form.  The  forces of  the wilderness, outside the clearing, shift, when the clearings link up to create villages, towns and finally the suburbs of "The  City Planners,"  downwards. The suburban  homes, Atwood prophesies,

capsized,  will slide
obliquely  into the clay seas, gradual as glaciers that  right  now nobody  notices.

The  clearing  reverts;  the wilderness resumes. Because in "Progressive Insanities of a  Pioneer,"  from The  Animals  in That  Country, she sees the wilderness, by being an "unstructured space," as "a deluge," Atwood likens the cabin to an ark, a motif recurring in her poetry and suggesting that the settler and his descendants at best merely float on top of the unseen forces of the wilderness.

8

MARGARET ATWOOD

"IN  EXILE," writes Atwood,  "survival/is the first necessity." The physical   toll  in  survival   is obvious,   but  in  The   ]ournals   of  Susanna   Moodie Atwood  has,  as  it  were,  read  between  the  lines of  Roughing It  in  the  Bush  in order  to  re-create the  assault  upon  the  pioneer  psyche. The  scenarios  of journey
and  settlement are  scenarios  of profound personality  change. European civilized self-assurance  quickly  gives way, as it does in the first few poems in The  Journals of   Susanna   Moodie, to  feelings  of  worthlessness   and   self-negation  when   the settler  is confronted by the  unstructured space  of the  bush.  In  consequence, the clearing  is as much  psychic as physical,  head-space for the  embattled personality. But it is also by virtue of precisely that  a prison which excludes the distant  civilized world  as  well  as  giving  the  illusion  of  preserving  it.8   When   Atwood's  pioneer stands,  the  centre  of a space  unenclosed  by any  walls or buildings,  paradoxically he cries "Let  me out!"  ("Progressive Insanities of a Pioneer"). Comparably, one old woman  in Roughing It in the  Bush speaks of the settler  as "a  bird in a cage," a  view  Susanna Moodie  came  to  share  when  she  described  the  purpose  of her book as "revealing the  secrets of the  prison-house." Climate did  not  help:  Anna Jameson  writes  of being  "imprisoned by this relentless  climate" and  of being "completely blockaded  by ice and mud."
The   feeling   of  imprisonment  frequently  led   to  lethargy   and   to  "inaction,
apathy, and,  at  last,  despondency.... "9   That it is a short  step  from  this to the feelings  of  persecution suffered  by  Atwood's Mrs.  Moodie  is evidenced   by Mrs. Jameson's fearful  resolve to  "try  all  mechanical means  to  maintain the  balance of my  mind,  and  the  unimpaired use of  my  faculties,  for  they  will be needed" (I, p.  172).  Though Atwood's Mrs.  Moodie  imagines  persecution, her fears are grounded in  the  reality  of frequent deaths  at  the  hands  of fire, fever, drowning and  wild  animals. But  paranoid delusions  are  the  outgrowth of a schizophrenia rooted   in  exile  itself.  In   "Thoughts from   Underground," Mrs.   Moodie  post­ humously  recalls  the  agonizing  dilemma of wanting to love Canada and  actually
hating  it:

I said I loved it
and my mind saw double.

At  first  it  is  a  case  of  the  settler  physically  inhabiting Canada and  psychically inhabiting the  homeland (a  body-mind dislocation  common  in Atwood's poetry), but  later  it  is a  case  of the  self torn  between  occupying  the  present  inside  the cle-aring and  the displaced  past outside  the clearing.  The  latter wins. The   journals of  Susanna   Moodie, like Atwood's other  volumes,  records  how  the  settlers  who dared  invade  the  primal  and  aboriginal wilderness  are  in  turn  invaded   and  re­ possessed. John  Howison  wrote  of  how  the  settlers'  "habits of thought at  length become  assimilated   to  those  of  the  Indians, and  they  conceive  that  they  have

9

MARGARET ATWOOD

wandered  out of their sphere, whenever they mentally or sensibly lose sight of the wilderness"  ( p. 165). Atwood's Susanna  Moodie reverts not only to Indian  but also  to  animal  form,  reflecting  the  role  animals  played  in  the  physical  and psychical world of the Canadian settlers. In "The  Wereman," Mrs. Moodie is a fox, an owl and a spider, for it is as if there is one continuous spirit of the wilder­ ness that  assimilates the settler's European  self and that merely incarnates itself in various forms. His wife is not even sure she herself has not been transformed:

I can't think what  he will see
when  he opens the door

This  wilderness spirit is indestructible,  which is why Atwood's  Mrs. Moodie can speak posthumously and  why Atwood, as a poet and  as the writer of The  jour­ nals, is Mrs. Moodie "re-incarnated."
Mrs. Moodie is not merely native and  animal,  but in the end she is the land­
scape itself. Ironically, she who inhabited  the clearing, displacing prior occupants, is in psychic reality inhabited  like the land by the animals. Only when she rounds the first hill when leaving ("Departure from the Bush")  is she "unlived in." This total  loss of the  old self is indistinguishable  from  acute  schizophrenia  (it  is as though  the  posthumous  poems are  not  just Atwood's  fancy  but  also the living Mrs.  Moodie's  fantasies)  when at  the end of the volume she becomes one with the landscape:

at  the last
judgement we will all be trees 10

She  lies beneath  Toronto,  herself one of the  displaced  wilderness forces driven beneath the settlers' brittle surface arrogance.



l:E PIONEER's  physical journey was also a  psychic journey during  which the haughty  Old  World assumption that  the self-humane, civil­ ized,  superior  to  the  rest  of  Creation -existed  splendidly  independent   of  its chosen habitats  was gradually  broken  down. For Atwood, the pioneer journey is in  addition  an  extended  metaphor  for her  own  journey  through  the emotional landscape  of everyday life. Indeed,  the  journey can  no longer be literal because although  Canadians  still traverse a vast terrain, they cannot recapture  the settlers' imperious  feeling  that  they  had  discovered  the  land.  That   Indians   had  pre­ empted  the  settlers  did  not  diminish  that  feeling  (the  Indians  were not  really people and when deceased could not qualify even as ghosts), whereas in "Migra­ tion:  C.P.R." Atwood's characters  feel themselves everywhere pre-empted, if not by pioneer ancestors, then by the natives; prairie objects, for example, are


10

MARGARET ATWOOD

(like an inscribed shard, broken bowl dug at a desert level
where they thought no man had been,
or a burned bone)

The  pioneer  journey  in  the  metaphoric sense is most  graphically presented  in "Journey to the Interior" from The  Circle Game. The  similarities  Atwood  notices at  the  opening  of the  poem  are  not  between  coastal  and  interior  topography but between   the  real  Canadian  landscape and   that   psychic  landscape Atwood  in­ habits.  The  coast and  interior  are in fact radically  different  (a luxury of  Canada's vast landmass) and  offer a variation on the distinction  between  outside and  inside we  have  already   noted.   But  there  is  an  inversion.  The   wilderness  outside  the clearing   represented danger   and  unfamiliarity and  the  clearing  safety,  whereas the  coast  in "Journey to the  Interior" represents  the security  of  everyday  life and the  interior  the  unknown  where  there  is a "lack  of reliable charts." The  interior  is the   metaphoric  wilderness,  that   Atwoodesque landscape  of  lines  broken  by  a curious  metrical whim,  familiar objects  ("lucent/white mushrooms and  a paring knife/ on the  kitchen  table") suddenly  highlighted and  menacing, odd  repetitions that   are  evidence   not  so  much   of  a  poet's  laziness  as  of  a  journey  become  a circling in an undecipherable forest.
Atwood's poetry  is a  journey  into  this  interior  landscape between  insight  and hysteria.  Her  poetic  voice, slightly  paranoid -it  is difficult  to know whether the "we" of so many  of her  poems actually  signifies another person,  or whether  the poet  is using  a schizophrenic version  of the  royal "we" -suits her theme  of the metamorphosing and  divided  self.  Like  the  historical  Susanna Moodie,  she is a civilized  city  dweller  confronted by  what  is primitive  and  irrational in  the  land around  her.  And  like  her,  too, she  is conscious  of being  inadequately equipped for  the   journey.   "Provisions" is  the  contemporary  and   psychic  equivalent  of "Looking in  a  Mirror" from  The   Journals of  Susanna  Moodie  in  which  Mrs. Moodie's  china   plate  and   shawl   from   India become   casualties   of  the  forest. "Provisions" has us confronting the wilderness

in thin raincoats and rubber boots
on the disastrous ice, the wind rising,

with  the  environmental and  intellectual paraphernalia of the irrelevant city, and is  placed   appropriately  at  the  beginning of  The   Animals  in  That  Country  as though  to warn  us of the  dangers  ahead. But the  journey  is completed, for many of  Atwood's  poems  concern   the   psychic  hazards of  "settlement"; that   is,  of making   sense  of  our  lives and   the  world  around   us, and  of  creating   fulfilling relationships.


I I

MARGARET ATWOOD

In  "The   Planters,"   Mrs.  Moodie's  husband   is seen  moving  "between   the jagged edge/of  the  forest and  the  jagged river."  Edges-transitional slivers of doubt  between hazard  and security, the  known and  the unknown-were  natu­ rally important to settlers. Atwood is preoccupied by edges ("There is no center," she proclaims in "A  Place:  Fragments"), and  in "Evening  Trainstation  Before Departure" asserts:

I live
on all the edges there are.

And  there  are  many:   mountain   road-sides  (in  "Highest   Altitude"), ends  of forests,  deserts  and   glaciers   ("Habitation"),  beaches   ("Notes   from  Various Pasts"), a roof's edge and  the edge of a mirror  (both  "Head Against White"). Even  Atwood's  poetic lines, broken  off at  conjunctions,  prepositions and  other weak joints, have jagged edges. All of these are metaphors for mind and emotion pressing against the outer limits of those forms they are forced to inhabit, and simultaneously  hugging  those boundaries  in exquisite fear  of the  chaos beyond them. The choice is between safe imprisonment and dreadful freedom.
Images  and  situations  of entrapment abound.  The  city is a  prison in  "The End of the World:  Weekend, Near Toronto" from which the drivers are "intent on  getting  out."   Rooms  are  recurring  and  menacing  enclosures in  Atwood's poetry:  in  "Frame," she occupies a  room whose window she fashioned  herself (and  showing everyday but typically distorted Atwood images)  and  from which "I dream/always of getting outside."  These spaces become forms containing  the self which in tum  expands to fill and  threaten  them.  In  corollary, the body is a space to be worn, explored or even abandoned. In  "Fortification" it is "a  metal spacesuit"; in "First  Prayer,"  the speaker  thinks of her body as a chrysalis-cast or a flayed skin. This notion is taken even farther  in "Astral Traveller" when the speaker leaves her body but finds it difficult, no doubt because of her ambivalence, to return.
It  is skin,  that   membraneous  edge  between  inside  and  outside,  by  which Atwood  is especially fascinated, though  it sometimes takes the forms of outlines, margins or surfaces. The fighting bull in "Bull Song" thinks it a mistake "to have shut  myself/in  this  cask skin,"  and  in  "Corpse  Song"  the  decomposed  body, addressing  the  living, exclaims:   "I resent  your skin, I  resent/your  lungs, your glib assumptions."  There  is a sexual  aspect of Atwood's  dermophobia   (or is it dermophilia?); it  is as though  a  diffuse, vaginal  sexual  urge  resents the  forms nature  has decreed for sexual expression and gratification.  In "More  and  More" the speaker  wishes to assimilate the  world and,  apparently,  sexually absorb  her partner,  "if possible through  the skin," but unfortunately  instead of leaves she has "eyesjand teeth and other non-green/things which rule out osmosis."
In  the light of this, it is small wonder  that Atwood is drawn  to all the orifices


12

MARGARET ATWOOD

leading   from  the  inside  to  the  outside-highways, doorways,  eye-sockets,  gills and  mouths.  Of  these,  the  mouth   is the  most  important. The  pioneer's  concern with  provisioning is  transformed  by  Atwood   into  a  sexual  preoccupation. Her belief is that  eating  is a brute  fact opposed  to love which, the speaker  in "IsjNot" reminds  her  lover,  is not  a  case of merely  filling cavities. It is difficult not to see Atwood's ambivalence towards  mouths  and  eating  as a metaphor for her ambivalence towards  the  phagic  receptivity  of the  female  form,  with  its vaginal mouth,  and  the  male's  active  delivery  of  the  seminal  "food." Not  surprisingly, the  killers of the  hen  in "Song  of the  Hen's  Head" who desire its edible treasures are "scavengers/intent on rape."
Like Susanna Moodie, then, Atwood  both desires and fears escape from the imprisonment  of  form.   Tantalizing  images   of  unstructured  space   attend   her poetry.  In  "Migration: C.P.R." the  travellers  after  jettisoning  on their  way west their  "eastern suitcases"  emerge  with  faces scraped   blank;   however,  the  rider  is attached:

(but needing new houses, new dishes, new
husks)

The   pioneers  were  compelled  to  provide  themselves  with  these  new  husks, but the   husks  these  contemporary  travellers   assume  are  new  only  in  the  sense  of being  novel;   actually   they  are  secondhand:   primordial,  aboriginal, ancestral. Yet if on this level we can  no longer  find unstructured space,  we can still dream of doing  so, still entertain the  Canadian fantasy  of trail-blazing, as Atwood  does when  she  resurrects   Captain  Cook  and  has  him  ill  at  ease  in  a  fully-mapped world and at length  re-entering "a  new land  cleaned of geographies" ("The Reincarnation of Captain Cook").
On  other  levels, the uncharted is a genuine  threat  and seduction. In commend­ ing  the  unstructured space  of the  wilderness  to  her lover in  "Attitudes Towards the  Mainland," the  speaker  tries  to convince  him  of its solidity.  But  he will not believe  in  its  solidity;  for  him  it is a  place  in  which  one  can  drown. Both  are right,  but  the  solidity  of the speaker's wilderness  is  not  the solidity  of depth  but the  solidity  of  brittle   surface   off  which   the  self  is  merely  reflected.  Atwood's poetry  is filled  with  reflective  surfaces -mirrors, eyes, glass, photographs. They  suggest how we merely "surface" -float, skate or cast reflections -through life, rarely  penetrating behind  or  below.  In  "Tricks  with  Mirrors," for  example,  the loved one is forever  trapped behind  the  narcissistic reflection  of the lover. Fanci­  fully, the subjects  in "This Is a  Photograph of Me"  and  "Girl  and  Horse,  1928" are similarly  trapped behind  the photograph which is in each  case a mere surface

MARGARET ATWOOD

representation of  an  instant. They  are  part  of a solid world  only  in the sense of being  dead   and   no  longer  selves. The  solidity  of  unstructured space,  which  is fatally  incompatible with self, is usually  represented in Atwood's poetry,  befitting the  Canadian landscape, as green.  Susanna Moodie  is "crept in/upon by green" in "Departure from  the Bush"; water  is a "green  violence"  in "River"; a "green vision"  invades   the   progressively  insane   pioneer;    (the   Boston  strangler  is  the subject  of "The Green  Man") ; and  those charting the  land  in "The Surveyors" find  themselves  "changed/by the gradual pressures of endless/green on the eyes." We  cannot  inhabit this green  unstructured space  even if we discover it; the most we can do, and  the  most Atwood  and  other  pioneers do, is to wrest a living-space from the  wilderness.  Otherwise we become  an indistinguishable part  of the land­ scape,  retreat to the  animal  and  primitive  recesses of our  being.  What this means emotionally and  sexually  is that  we cannot  gratify  our  desires fully, truly inhabit the  other   person,  this  side  of  becoming  that   person.  Atwood   in  "A  Pursuit" follows the other

Through  the wilderness of the flesh across the mind's ice,

wanting the other  to be a place she can  inhabit. Success would  be a kind of death. Self and the spaces and forms it occupies are synonymous.



IN THE MATTER of confronting his primordial and  aboriginal past,  the  contemporary Canadian  can  be  more  truly  a  pioneer  than   the  early settlers.  The   latter,  pre-Darwinian, would   not  have  acknowledged  their   own
animal origins,  neither  did  they  acknowledge that  the  native  people  were  their ancestors  in Canada. Atwood  on the other  hand  realizes that  mutual inhabitation of  the  land  binds  native  and  settler  as surely  as racial  genetics.  These  acknowl­ edgements entail   their  own  kind  of  journey.  Archetypally, it  is a  Heaneyesque journey  "inwards and  downwards" rather than  outwards and  across as was the pioneer   journey,  a  journey  "underland," as Atwood  describes  it in  "Procedures for  Underground," rather   than   overland. For  evidence  of  the  predecessors  lies beneath  us  and,  in  one  more  sense  of  the  word,  the  poet  "surfaces" with  this evidence  after  her  subterranean exploration. It is also a  journey  back  instead  of forward  ("We  must   move  back," writes  Atwood   in   "A  Place:  Fragments," "there are  too many  foregrounds"), in recognition  of the fact  that  metamorphosis is  not  just  spatial  -that  inhabitation of  successive  forms  and  spaces  we  have already   noted -but  temporal, that   is to  say,  evolutionary.  But  because  these metamorphoses can  be  replayed -by  vestigiality,  by  re-enactment, by  dream,

MARGARET ATWOOD

by the  racial  memory  that  is imagination -we  can  be  one  with  the  past.  The traumatic feeling  of being  cut  off from  the  past  is assuaged  by this but  above  all by  the  life-forms  and  culture-forms that   have  been  long  since  vacated   by their temporal substance but  can  be inhabited once  more  by a  protean poetic  imagi­ nation.
Because the  Canadian landscape is so various and  primitive, and  not cultivated
to a  European degree,  it facilitates  man's  awareness  of the  primordial. Vast  and depthless  lakes seem  to commemorate the  aquatic origin  of life. Atwood  exposes the  nerve  of our  fascination with  and  fear  of making  the descent.  For it is a kind of  drowning,  daydreams and  nightmares of  which  haunt   her  poetry.  "Descent through   the  Carpet" begins  with  a  real  sea  outside  a  window,  but  it is a  mere surface   that   reflects   the   mountains  and   sailboats.   Paradoxically  it  is  inside, through  a carpet  depicting plants,  that  the poet begins her descent,  drifting  down to  a  darkness   populated  by  "the   voracious  eater" and  "the voracious  eaten."
\Vhen  her  daydrcam is shattered, she  ascends,  breaking   the  skin  of the  water;
her  own  skin  "holds/remnants of  ancestors/fossil bones  and  fangs." Here  and elsewhere,  "surfacing," in  yet  another sense of  the  word,  refers  to  this  decisive evolutionary breakthrough:  the appearance of the terrestrial air-breathers.
Human embryonic  gills testify  to our  aquatic origins.  In  "For Archeologists,"
Atwood   asserts  that   our   terrestrial  progenitors too-in   this  case  early  cave­ painters -"survive"  in  us  not  as  vestige  but  as  an  imprinted and   as  yet  on­  decoded  part  of  our  structure. Less dubitably, the  blue  jay's  reptilian  ancestor  survives  in  the   bird's   "lizard   eye."  The   entire   panorama of  our  evolution   is attempted in  "A  Night  in  the  Royal  Ontario Museum" in  which  the  museum  becomes  a  labyrinth  down   which   the  poet  is forced  to  view  the  increasingly ancient  relics and  remnants of our ancestors.  Past Greek and  Roman marble, past Chinese  bronze  and  Amerindian wood, the poet reaches -as though at the laby­ rinth's  centre-mastodons, fossil shells and  finally  "thundering/tusks dwindling to pin-/points in the stcllarjfluorescent-lightedjwastes of geology."
If fossils arc  casts, hollow forms  which  life has vacated,  so too are  the skins of animals   preserved   in  museums.   In   "Elegy   for  the   Giant   Tortoises,"  Atwood imagines   the   huge   reptiles,   outdated  in   their   ill-fitting   and   useless  armour, ascending the steps of a museum  towards  "the square  glass altars"

where  the  brittle gods are  kept,
the  relics of what we have destroyed, our  holy and  obsolete symbols.

Gods  in  animal forms  arc  represented by the  Indian masks  Atwood  sees in  the Royal  Ontario  Museum.   These  too  are  casts,  of a  cultural rather than  animal kind.  Even  when  no longer  worn  they  remain  for the  poet potent  and  menacing, as do totem-poles  no longer in use.

IS

MARGARET ATWOOD

Why then is my mind crowded with hollow totems? Why do I see in darkness
the cast skins, poised faces without motion?

she asks in  "The Totems." The  totem-animals once inhabited her  but  one  night crept  out  through her  eyes, leaving  their  totems  behind. This  explanation  iden­ tifies the  poet  with  Susanna Moodie   ( cf.  "Departure from  the  Bush")  but also with  the  native  people  whose  totems  are  the  preserved  records  of the  people's having  been  inhabited by  the  animal spirits.  But  in  fact  the  animal  gods "with metal   feathers  and   hookedjoracular  beaks  and   human  bodies"  still  exist  but merely,  in  the  titular line of another poem,  "avoid  revealing themselves." There are  still ways  of reaching them.  In  "Fishing for Eel Totems," Atwood  turns  her preoccupation with  eating  to magical  effect, catching a tongue-shaped eel, eating  it, thereby  ingesting  knowledge  of the  earlier language: "After that  I could seej for  a  time  in  the  green  country." The  oral  origins  of myth  are suggested  too in "A Messenger."
It is clear  that  Atwood  has  been  profoundly influenced   by Indian mythology, especially from  British  Columbia where she lived for a time.  Many  of the  poems in You  Are  Happy, and  certain  poems elsewhere  (for  example, "The Totems"), resemble  Indian tales  of origination. Moreover, Atwood's animal imagery  is not naturalistic  but   heraldic   and  emblematic, and   this  heraldic   stylism  she  shares with   totem-carvers.  Consider,   for  instance, the  animals  in  "Buffalo  in   Com­ pound:  Alberta" which  walk  in  profile  "one  by  one,  their jfirelit  outlines  fixed as carvings" and  enter  "the shade  of the gold-edged  trees."  Even more telling are the  metamorphoses which  operate within  Atwood's sexual  and  pioneer  contexts  but  which  are  also the transformations that  inspire  totemism  and involve, as they do  in  Atwood,   men,  animals   and   the  landscape. "A   carver,"  wrote  Viola  E. Garfield,  "may  include  a figure representing the dwelling  place of  a story charac­ ter,  a  camp  site  or  place  of  refuge,  or  any  phenomenon he  desires. He  always depicts  it  as  animate. Features of  the  landscape are  usually  illustrated as land  animals,  while  those of the sea are  given  the  anatomical characteristics of ocean dwelling  creatures. Sometimes  they  are  carved  with  human, rather than  animal, attributes."11   The  relationship between  man  and  animal is paramount. "In the beginning   people  and  animals  were  not  distinct  and  separate, but  animals  were people,  and   many  retain  the  ability  to  think  and act  as  people  in  the  present
world ... Down   through  the  generations men  have  been  known  who  assumed

2
 Anthropomorphism and  zoomorphism animate The  ]ournals

of Susanna  Moodie and  indeed  much  of Atwood's poetry,  and  are aspects of the primordial unity  to  which   her  characters and   personae   revert.  The  section  of poems in  You   Are  Happy  entitled  "Songs  of the  Transformed" seems especially

16

MARGARET ATWOOD

indebted   to  Indian cosmology,  concerning as they  do  human spirits  in  animal shapes.  It  is no coincidence  that  "Owl Song,"  in which  the  owl is the  heart  of a murdered  woman,   bears  a  resemblance   to  the  Tlingit   and   Haida tale  of  the unkind  woman  turned  to an  owl and  depicted  on totem  poles  (Garfield, pp.  26-
2 7).  We  could  even  argue  that  the  stylistic  metamorphoses with  which  we are
familiar   in  poetry -metaphor,  simile  and   personification  -are  in  Atwood's poetry  derived  as much  from  a totemic  awareness  as from  poetic  convention.


As MUCH AS   the  journey  overland, the  journey  underland is a  journey  inwards, an  exploration of the self and  its relationships. Atwood  has
discovered  on  this  journey  that   one  price  of evolution  has  been  our  loss of an ancient  language of signal  and  skin. The  words we use are really vestiges of more potent  words that  now, as the poet tells us in "Notes  from Various  Pasts,"

lie washed ashore on the margins, mangled
by the journey upwards to the bluegrey
surface, the transition

The  act  of love is one  way back  to that  submarine reality.  In  "Pre-Amphibian" the  lovers  are  released  from  the  lucid  solidity  of day  into  an  aquatic primordial night   where   their   ancestors,   in  a  suggestively  sexual   image,   are   "warm  fish moving." When   the  act  is completed, the  lovers  are  "stranded, astounded/in a drying  world" with  the air "ungainly" in their  new lungs. In such a poem as this, Atwood  betrays  a horror  of fixed form,  which  is associated  with daylight, solidity, dry land,  coldness, mind  and  racial  orphanhood. The  lover in "Eventual Proteus" has, as the relationship developed,  re-enacted the evolutionary scenario-he has been rock,  fish, mammal and  bird -but  now that  he has reached the  condition of man  (that is, the  relationship has peaked)  and  evolutionary forms  have given way to dull social spaces  ("vacant spaces/ of peeling rooms/ and  rented  minutes"), love is no longer  possible. The  lover  cannot  resume  the  legends  of his disguises: his emotional shape is brittle  and final.
Yet  the  alternative  to  fixed  forms  and  spaces  is the  emptiness   they  enclose, and  of hollowness and  vacuity  Atwood  has a morbid  dread. Equally  feared  is the water   from   which   ancestral   forms   must   be  dredged.  Her   pervasive   fear   of drowning seems to be  a fear  of the  poetic  imagination, and  her relative indiffer­ ence  to  poetic  form  I read  as  a studied  and  negative  concern  with  it,  a deter­ mination not  to  succumb to its  hollow  and  dermal  illusions  of  solidity.  Fear  of drowning and  the  recurring images  of surfacing  seem  in  addition to indicate a thinly-veiled  queasiness  about  birth: the  phylogenetic ocean might  equally  be the

MARGARET ATWOOD

amniotic  fluid and  her references to skin references to the amnion. But it is hard, too, not to read fear of drowning, after Virginia Woolf, as a disguised repudiation of  a  sexuality  that  leads  to  merely  banal  coupling.  Better,  it  would  seem,  to return  directly, at least in imagination,  to the presexual unity of being to which coupling  seems a  clumsy attempt   to  revert.  Either  way,  the  price  paid  is the unique  integrity  of the  self, and  this  Atwood  is loath  to surrender.  Drowning images the loss of self; "going  under,"  which is a necessary operation  to recover the  past, is also the  process of succumbing  to anonymizing  forces hostile to the self; "surfacing" is to come through  with  both a knowledge of the past and  an intact self.
Not that  old forms are acceptable simply because they represent a kind of dry
land.   Feelings  of  being  marooned,   beached  and  stranded   pervade  Atwood's poetry; wreckage and relics of relationships are strewn on her shores. Often these feelings derive from Atwood's sense of being a woman in a man's world. It is as if women  have suddenly surfaced,  been cast precipitately  among  the air-breathers and  are  uncertain  what  roles to inhabit.  The  poems in  Power  Politics and  the "Circe/Mud  Poems"   sequence   in  You  Are   Happy  are   re-examinations   of women's  inherited  roles, the  former  psychological and  the  latter  mythological.
The  Circe episode in The   Odyssey  is, like other  myths Atwood has borrowed
(of Proteus, the phoenix, Frankenstein and Amerindian totemism), a myth of metamorphosis,  pressed by Atwood  into  curious  service of  her  two  overriding themes. First of all, Circe is contemporary  woman addressing contemporary man. When  Circe  disclaims all responsibility for her actions in The   Odyssey  (itself a male  fantasy),  she  is  contemporary   woman  renouncing  the  roles  men  have created  for her.  It  was not she who turned  the men into swine, she asserts, but their own masculine  nature  no longer at one with the female sea on whose rim they have been spilled. She did not desire Ulysses, either his presence ("One day you simply appeared  in your stupid  boat")   or his putative  charms.  Indeed, she is tired of masculine mythic heroes, of male heraldry and hollow heroics:

Men  with  the heads of eagles no longer  interest  me

She searches instead  for  those  who have escaped mythologies  (as she wants  to escape The Odyssey) and if they desire a metamorphosis, "they  would rather  be trees."
This  echo of Susanna  Moodie  ("at  the last/judgement we will all be trees") connects these Circe  poems with  Atwood's  pioneer theme.  Homer's  sea, in  the two italicized poems framing the Circe sequence, is transformed  into a forest:  his epic has become a Canadian  odyssey. Circe is the voice and spirit of the wilderness
-now  female -resenting  the  penetrations  of  the  male  pioneers.  As though addressing  a  pioneer, Circe asks petulantly  of Ulysses: "Don't you get tired  of

18

MARGARET ATWOOD


saying  Onward?" Yet  Atwood is not  being  anti-pioneer. Circe at  length comes  to accept Ulysses,  and  is even  apprehensive about his departure which  is inevitable because "you  leave  in  the  story  and  the  story  is ruthless." Beginning in  rebellion against her  role  in  the  epic,  she  at  last  defers  to its narrative ineluctability.  Like­ wise, the woman must  accept the man, and  the  bush the pioneer.
Forms, spaces and  roles  are  inescapable. Besides, "form," as Gaston Bachelard tells us, "is  the  habitat of life."  And  also,  we might add, of identity. In  reflecting this, Atwood's poetry is emphatically prepositional, even  though the  poet identifies prepositions, because they  "pre-position" substance, with  the  enemy. The inescap­ able  must  constantly be resisted.  In  her  first volume of poems,  Atwood  repudiates all  prepositions except one:  "with." The closing  lines  of "A  Place:  Fragments" express  the  enigma and  dilemma of  Margaret Atwood's highly  personal relation­ ship  to the confusion that is womanhood and  Canada:

not above or behind or within it, but one with  it: an

identity:
something  too huge and simple for us to see.


NOTES

1 The Circle Game  (Toronto: Anansi,  1967; first published  by Contact Press, 1966), The  Animals  in That Country (Toronto: Oxford, 1968), The Journals of Susanna Moodie  (Toronto:  Oxford, 1970), Procedures   for Underground  (Toronto:  Ox­ ford,   1970),  Power   Politics   (Toronto:  Anansi,   1972),  and   You    Are   Happy  (Toronto:  Oxford, 1974).
2   "First   Neighbours" is a good example of how Atwood  adapts incidents  from  Mrs. Moodie's  book:  it was not Mrs. Moodie  who asked the Indian about  the deer liver, but  a  young  friend,   and  the  Indian laughed   when  replying.  Roughing It  in  the Bush  (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1923), p. 483.
3    Winter Studies and  Summer  Rambles in  Canada, II  (London:  Saunders and
Otley,  1838), pp.  249-50.
4    "It is a  remarkable fact ... that  when  one  growth  of  timber  is cleared  from  the land,  another of  quite  a  different   species springs  up  spontaneously in its place," observes  Mrs.  Jameson, I,  p. 95;  see also Mrs.  Traill, The   Backwoods  of Canada (Toronto:  McClelland and  Stewart, 1966), p. 78. Of her habit  of naming  which­ ever  plant  was new to her,  Mrs. Traill allowed: "I suppose  our scientific botanists in  Britain  would  consider  me very impertinent in bestowing  names  on the flowers and  plants  I meet  with  in these wild woods,"  p. 6r.  We might  call this an Adamic motif  in pioneer  literature. Compare Mrs.  Moodie: "Every  object  was new to us. We felt as if we were  the first discoverers  of every beautiful flower and  stately  tree that  attracted our  attention, and  we gave  names  to fantastic rocks and  fairy  isles, and   raised   imaginary  houses  and   bridges   on  every  picturesque spot  which  we floated  past  during our aquatic excursions," p. 263. If the pioneer's  self-comparison with  Adam  was not  conscious, comparison with  Robinson  Crusoe  was:  see Traill,

rg

MARGARET ATWOOD

p.  53,  Moodie,  p.  342,  and  Early  Days in  Upper Canada: The   Letters  of John
Langton (Toronto: Macmillan, I926),p. II3.
5    "In Canada the  traveller  can  enjoy  little  of the interest  derived  from  association, either  historical  or poetical," Jameson, II, p. I 04.
6   Mrs. Moodie  records a conversation she had  on this topic with a friend,  and  adds: "The unpeopled wastes of Canada must present  the same  aspect  to the new settler that   the  world  did  to our  first  parents after  their  expulsion  from  the  Garden of Eden; all  the  sin  which  could  defile  the  spot,  or  haunt it  with  the  association  of departed evil, is concentrated in their own persons," Moodie, p. 25 I.
7    This  phrase  I borrow  from  Gaston  Bachelard's The Poetics of Space, trans.  Maria
Jolas (Boston: Beacon Press,  I g6g) .
8    "The sympathies which  once  bound  the  settlers  to the world,  and  made  them  feel a common  interest  with  the rest of mankind, are  in the course of time broken  and annihilated, and  they listen  to details  of recent  battles,  murders, earthquakes, and conflagrations, with as much  nonchalance as if the events had happened in a planet that   had  long  since  ceased  to  exist."  John  Howison,  Sketches of Upper   Canada (Edinburgh: Oliver  and Boyd, 182r), p. r64.
9   Moodie, p. 448. Both Howison,  p.  r64, and  Jameson, I, p. 171 speak of lethargy  as a hazard  of settler life.
10  This  notion  of Mrs. Moodie's is not very different from  the notions of the paranoid schizophrenic Septimus  Smith  in Virginia Woolf's  Mrs.  Dalloway.
11  Meet  the  Totem  (Sitka: Sitka  Printing Company, 195I), pp. 43-44. For a further account of Northwest totems, see Viola  E. Garfield  and  Linn  A. Forrest,  The Wolf and the  Raven  (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1948).
12  Garfield,  p. 7· The  important role of animal and  bird skins in Indian tales of trans­ formation  (see  Garfield  and  Forrest)  might  illuminate  Atwood's  pre-occupation with skin.



from OUT THERE: EMILY C]IRR
Tom Marshall

silent  fire 	green  apocalypse still and  full fire gathering around the fierce

old woman  of the forest at her easel    her dis-ease 	her ecstasy:

leaf and  bough interlocked in carved  nebulae     cloud-trees leaf-

galaxies  that  surge out of void space    leaving off
on air

20

FLORENCE MCNEIL AND PAT LOWTHER


Sean Ryan


A GREAT  DEAL   of  what  P"""-'  fo,  lit«ary cnhcm assessment  of  who  the  important writers  of any  period  are  is simply  accidental,
the  result  of  whim,  conceit,  puffery,  self-aggrandizement, greed,  private  malice, in-group games, and sometimes simply stupidity.
Roy  MacSkimming in a recent  review in Books in Canada   (November 1974) compared the  rating  game  to championship boxing, said  "sometimes in Canada it seems  as if  we  do  rank  our  poets with  all those symbols of recognition  in  the form   of  junior   and   senior   grants,   writer-in-residence-ships  and   invitations   to represent  the country  abroad  -."
Despite  the  playfulness  of  MacSkimming's metaphor, there  is an  element  of
truth   in  his observations. One  reviewer  recently  referred  to  Susan  Musgrave as "perhaps our   next  major   poet."  The   situation  of  hankering for  novelty,  new faces, new voices is oddly  reminiscent  of the  ballyhoos surrounding press agentry and  rock stars or new models of automobiles.
The  situation needs  no further comment. Literary  history  of the  past  with  all its mistakes, its constant  revisionism, its incessant  reassessing should  give us hope. Always,  beneath the  ballyhoo  there  is a striving,  a work going on, poets working to create  the  cultural nexus, the imaginative web which  connects  us to our  coun­ try's invisible life:  to the rich past and  the promising future.
Possibly you  have  in  mind  right  now  poets who  would,  you think,  qualify  for this role. The  poets you wish I would  have talked  about.  I speak  here only of two poets  who  have  produced   a  substantial  body  of  work,  work  of  an  impressive maturity.
When   I wrote  the  following  pages  I meant   to  do  only  a  work  in  progress report.  Since then,  Pat  Lowther's tragic  death  has made  my hopeful  anticipations seem  banal   and   grotesque.   But  what   I  perceived  in  her  work,  as  well  as  in McNeil's,  was  a  sharp   scalpel-like   probing,   a  daring   to  go  into  the  depths  of personal  perceptions, and  a corresponding ability  to  render  those  perceptions  in hard  honest unflinching terms. Her work endures.
And  so I would  like  to begin  with  the  poetry  of Pat  Lowther, only because  I
encountered  it  first.  Her  first  book  was  This Difficult  Flowring, published   by


21

MCNEIL & LOWTHER

Very  Stone  House  in  1968. In  a review of it in Canadian Forum, Len Gasparini said: "Christ! I've  never read  poetry like this by a woman! Her  poetry offers no easy exits for tailor made sensibilities."
One  can  see in  this first book all the  major  themes  and  preoccupations which were  to  be  constant   in  her  work:   an  existential  sense  of  the  human condition which  is expressed  in  personal  lyrics about  love and  childbirth, and  poems with a larger  context,  i.e., politics, as in her  poems to Pablo  Neruda, himself a poet, a socialist,  a politician, and  a humanitarian. One  finds in her work also a pervasive sense of the timeless world of geology, the world which existed before the intrusion of  human  consciousness,  and   the   worlds  outside  our   limited   perceptions,   the reaches  of  intergalactic space.  Most  recently,  this  interest   found   expression  in a  multi-media creation   commissioned   by  the  MacMillan  Planetarium in  Van­ couver: Infinite Mirror  Trip, poems, slides and  music  presented  in conjunction with the  Planetarium's star show in August of 1974.
On  the  subject  of the  new consciousness of the  woman  revolution, she said  in the  anthology  Mountain Moving Day  (edited by Elaine  Gill, The  Crossing Press,
1973):

(it  is)  part  of  a  new  outreach   of  consciousness ... at  one  time  I  believed  we humans   were  coming  to  the  end  of  our  evolutionary   cycle-devolving  like dandelions.  Now  I see the  half-breeds  of the future  passing like migrating  birds, and I begin to have a kind of hope. Maybe they'll find some clear space for consciousness, for going on. Not that  I wholly trust them to be right. It is too easy to be wrong when you've grown in a culture that functions basically by mind manipulation.  Maybe  we  have  to  go  through   the  whole  trial  and  error  thing again. After all, thats how we got here in the first place.

Thus  we see how all her concerns  intermesh, the evolutionary process in time, human  intervention into  this  process  with  the  innovation of  self  reflection,  of frontal   lobe   manipulation,  the   biological   traps,   an   inevitable  moving   into   a corner  and  yet the  rising out  of those traps  or roles through the  very instrument of imprisonment: consciousness. In  "Doing it Over" a poem in Dorothy  Livesay's anthology Womans Eye  (Air  Press, Vancouver, 1974)   Lowther says:

Once we've had babies we cant stop
all our lives swelling and germinating
in our dreams we may be more like plants
than  we thought apple trees cant forget the seasons
nor can we ever be done with newness but make beginnings
over and over again


22

MCNEIL & LOWTHER


in the roots of ourselves in the dark
between our days

For  her,  politics  is not,  as it is for  Atwood,  a metaphor for  individual power game  strategies; politics is the  real  world  of the  possible, where  human  concerns larger  than  the  interpersonal might  be acted  out.  In  her  most quoted  line, from The  Age of the Bird  (a poem sequence  to Pablo  Neruda, done in broadside format in a limited edition  by Blackfish Press in 1972), she says:

Often now I forget how to make love
but I think I am ready to learn politics

In  this series of poems, The  Age of The  Bird the image  of the bird  is emblem­ atic  of what  stage  in the evolutionary process immediately after  the reptilian  age, just on  the  brink  of the  time of mammals and  the coming  of man, in her  poem "Woman" she says, "I think  I wanted  to be wings, the essence of  wings."  Neruda is  a  magician,  performing the  function   of shaman, making  the  dreams  of  the people, and even in death, a continuing source of unity.

Always on earth was your substance grain, ores and bones
elements folded in power
humans patient in time, and weather now you too live with skeletons
heaped about you
our small perfect hands
touch you for comfort

The  poems employ  a religious, chant-like rhythm, creating a tone of responsorial ritual:

They have killed you with bullets for that you were not
gold and silver
they have even given away your life, for that you
came in hair
and mud and giant flesh
they have cut off your fingers for that you took
no attitude  of prayer
before the male and female mountains

In  Milk  Stone  (Borealis  Press,I 974)   ("Milk" is a verb in this title, according to  the  author), the  long  ambitious poem  "In the  Continent Behind  my  Eyes" creates  an  interior  cinemascope of the  whole evolutionary process beginning  with

MCNEIL & LOWTHER

a  present  urban   scene  and  spiraling back  into  prehistory. It merges  the  arche­ typal   and   the   personal   in  a  blend   of  reality,   hallucination  and  dress  which approximates  the  form   of  a  speeded-up  film.  The   theme   is  the  intrusion   of human consciousness  into  blind  time,  the  interruption of eons of  indifference  by the coming  of the human race.
There is a  constant   process of interrelating the  self living  in a  here  and  now
world with  past selves, with birds again, so we are right  back there  at the moment on  the  evolutionary scale  just after  the  death  of the  reptiles,  and  the  cave bears whose claw  marks  on the  walls of their  caves may  have  taught our  ancestors  the rudiments  of  painting.  The   cave  bears   passed  from   the  evolutionary  process before  we came.  Yet we may have  picked  up where  they left off-we may have learned  from them. They are still in us.
In  this poem  Lowther creates  a sense of being one with  the landscape, of being in simultaneous time,  as in James Dickey's  work there  is a constant awareness  of a  primitive  self within,  dormant, but  alive. She celebrates  the  essentially human, but  constantly  places it in the context  of the elemental. Art, the  making of poems, as  in  Dickey's   poem  "The  Eyebeaters," is  a  crying  out,   an  attempt  to  posit meaning in a dark  painfilled world.
"In the  continent behind  my  eyes," she  begins,  "voices  are  pretending to  be birds."  Then the  "City   like  an  open  brain  zaps  messages"  and  she  is plunged into  a vortex  of accelerating images  of stalagmites and  leaf mouths  and silver fur hands  the  postures of hunters and  the city is a concrete  flower  we grew. Into  this sudden  merging   of  the  self  into  geologic  time,  she  questions  when  it  was  and what  it  was  that  "invited us out  of our  bodies to make  a world  web in time  to build on the rock Death."
This  ultimate pain  of  consciousness,  of  a  sense of loss, yet  a feeling  of  com­ munion with  the  archetypal memories  of past selves finds final expression in "the sea  I had  forgotten to  account   for  the  first metaphor, its endless  business even now the sea is inventing sex and death." And then

in the spring water seemed full of voices
whose words we had forgotten
we gave each other  names we found the cave he died in water ran down the wall....
I create every possible existence
while behind me might erases beginnings
my fingers trace
his gouges on the wall
soon I will take a sharp stick
and  begin

MCNEIL & LOWTHER

As Peter  Stevens  said  in  a  review  of Milk  Stone  (Globe  and  Mail, March I, I 975)   "What Milk   Stone  offers  is  a  considered   reaching out  towards   untold possibilities  for  man  and   woman   once  both  recognize  the  potentialities within themselves  in  their  relation  to  an  expanding universe.  What shines  through in this volume is the clear direct sight of a singing woman, working out her own responsibilities  beyond  the  limits set by society. It is a clear  eyed and  firm poetry full of singing."
A  Stone  Diary  (Oxford, I 977), prepared for press before  her death  and pub­ lished  posthumously, is a coalescing and  consolidation of these recurring strategies  and concerns.  The  central shaping image is still stone:

By the turn of the week I was madly in love with stone ...

. . . the stones shine with their own light, they grow smoother and  smoother

There  are  more  letters  to  Pablo   Neruda, more  poems  about   the  agony  of human  existence, evanescent  and fragile as it is compared to the "silence between" separate human lives lived in isolation -from self, from  others,  from  the eternal galactic   universe,  which  is known  only  from  contact   with  the  surviving  stones. How  will we survive?
Some  reviewers  have  read  this final work as ironic  and  prophetic of her death. A  more  judicious  reading  will see the  poems as statements of affirmation, quietly spelling out her resilient will, saying words to scatter the dark.




EoRENCE  Me NEIL also  has a strong  sense of the  presence  of time in our existence. However,  unlike Lowther, whose chief concerns are with prehistoric  time,  the  timeless world  of galaxies  and  silent stones, McNeil  exhibits wonder  over  the artifacts of human history. In "Indian Artifacts" she says:

It was peaceful on the beach trail
their persian cat cleaning the pearl ruff till the motorcycle and the cat collided and fur and bones invited by
hypnotic chrome
and when the motorcycle apologized
and left
and the fur stopped moving
we walked to the Indian  banks
and spent the day digging

25

MCNEIL & LOwrHER

without luck
for evidence of another civilization

In  poems  like  "I9I5  Fighting Plane" and  "Art  Nouveau" as  well as "I902
Talking Machine" she  places  old  photographs and  advertisements next  to  our own position; for instance  in "I9I 5 Fighting Plane" she speaks of the fear

that this pilot buried at first in elite silence
has come to share his not so private graveyard with innocent thousands who never looked up
to applaud
his comic heroics

and  "Art  Nouveau" contrasts  the  old ads for  cigarettes  where  a soldier home on leave
contemplates  with delight the arabesque of smoke refined from his cigarette

and  stands  by "patriotic pianos"  while his loved one reveals an ankle in iridescent moonlight  and  tends curling roses

which point imprecisely
down the long long trail

and  elsewhere in the

last half of the magazine there are photographs
blurred and unreal, and stiff geometric legs of dead horses
the abstract confusion of ordinary arms and barbed wire
are reproduced poorly and clarify nothing

She  exhibits  the  same  strong  sense of  place  and  time  in W alhachin  (Fiddle­ head,  I97I) a series of poems  which  are,  in the  style of her  Emily  Carr poems, the  thoughts of someone  from  the  past.  In  W alhachin  it is the imagined  mono­  logue  of  an  Englishwoman who  came,  in  I907,  with  a  group  of settlers  from England to colonize the  area  of Walhachin, near  the Thompson River  in British Columbia's dry belt. Irrigation flutes were built and a town  began  to grow. Trees  began to grow. By I9I4, things were looking promising. But then  the First World War  intruded and  most  of  the  men  were  called  out,  a  heavy  rainstorm wiped out  most  of  the  flutes,  most  of  the  men  did  not  return and   the  project   was abandoned. The  sage  grew  again,  and  it  is  again  a  desert,  but  there  are  some dead trees still to be seen there.

MCNEIL & LOWTHER

"this landscape is incomprehensible" the woman  thinks have lost time
in the canyon a jackrabbit runs away
from my unhappiness
the whistling sage sends out messages
I cannot  follow


and finally:
 


1914
Wandering in August
through  the trees
confirming to patterns we set out


I can hear already
the troop train exploding through  the dry plateau
whose moon has followed me
and blown itself up against a whole sky
there are banners in the country whose decisions
uproot out our own
because we have nudged uneasy canyons into compromise
because the long days of killing sage
have ended in this temporary outburst we are no less British
the small grass bayonets my shoes
there are dreadnoughts at anchor in the Thompson.

Her  third   book,  The   Rim  of  the  Park  ( Sono  Nis,  I 97 I )  is a  collection  of artifacts, snapshots, tableaus, documents, vigils, nightwatches, things looked at so closely and  with so cool and  detached an eye that  the reader  does not notice that  the friendly  guide, chatting amiably, is taking  him further into the  park, far from the  safe  rim,  the  civilized  outside,  and  closer  to  that  "dark zoo"  in  the  centre.  This is no mere collection, it is a collision.
McNeil  is obviously  fascinated by  the  art  of  photography, and  many  of  her poems  use  it  as  a  metaphor.  Moreover, her  own  art,  her  working  with  words strives  to  the  same  end;   fixing  in  a  final  light  the  transitory moment  in  flight, fixing things  in  a  past space,  freezing  the  last gestures  of dead  men.  In  "Posing for a Picture": she protests the staginess of role playing  and  posing:

I would like you to move me off the moutains love out of the sky

and  in "Silents" she pays tribute to the "popcorn sunset" of a film past, as well as photography itself in "Photography":

MCNEIL & LOWTHER

Fuzzed into
Quadruple exposure

It  is this same sense of wonder  for time's erosive force that  one senses in the "tourist" poems:  "Unchartered Canada" which catalogues "scenic values," and "Arrival  and Departure" which is the best poem I have yet seen about those monuments to the age of steam and iron, the railway stations, where one

hears from the vaulted dome standard time in roman numerals;

poems  like  "The Hotel, Frank Alberta," "Banff," "A  tavern in Sunburst, Montana," "The  Old  Indian  Church," "Seaside Restaurant" and  epiphanies in the old Joycean  sense, an instant  widening of sensibility, an opening and  bright disclosure.
Again the world of lost childhood cartoons and the funnies

I was away a long time
the balloon over my head said
("Homecoming")

the scratchy, faint  voices of the  past  ("1902  Talking  Machine") and childhood toys  ("the  dead  tin  soldiers" and  "biplane  royalty" in Chivalry)  and  art  ("In Courbets   paintings   the   arresting   quiet/  of  the   mid-Victorians"    ["Burial   at Armans"]  and "Roualt's black figures/ are outsides" ["Miserere"]) are attempts to fix the fleeting moment to lose, to incorporate, absorb, assimilate, pin down.
But paradoxically,  when we are led through  the world of these poems, a kind of sinister  museum,  where  the  eyes of the stuffed  birds glitter  with  ambiguous intent, we cannot stay in the moving immediate world on its edges. McNeil forces the family  album  onto our  laps and  open  to see the grinning  skulls behind  the placid faces of that long ago picnic.
For all her machinery of a world of perceived things, photographic  evidence, vistas  noted  and  catalogued,  her  deepest  concern  is with  the  living,  the  sad inheritors of this blandly smiling, impervious, obdurate  presence of the past. The inheritors  are  surrounded   by  dead  men  and  women;  when  they  speak,  their ancestors chorus. They are never alone. Out for a Sunday stroll, they are destined to  be mugged  by long dead  cousins. The  dark  zoo waits at  the  chill end  of a Sunday afternoon.  It is always four in the afternoon and almost closing time.
I do not  mean  to suggest that  these poems are  morbid,  down or depressing. Quite  the  contrary,  Florence  McNeil  suffuses this  world  with  a  tender  light, touching the awkward  past with a gentle wonder, without  flinching, as she is no sentimentalist.

MCNEIL & LOWTHER

In  poems  like "Elegy" and  "Cemetery Visit,"  she breaks into  a frozen  inward sea, facing  it with  brave  words. Louis Zukofsy once said of poetry that  "the  words must live, not merely seem to glance at a watch." Florence  McNeil's words bleed.
McNeil's strong  sense  of  the  presence  of  the  past  in  the  present  is further explored  in  Ghost  Towns   (McClelland and  Stewart, 1975). The  same  sense of synchronistic existence  in  a  world  which  isn't  exactly  ours,  peopled  as it is with ghosts, is entrenched in these latest poems.
She  moves  from  early  pioneers  of the  air  (Montgolfier, Lilienthal, Bleriot)  to movies  and  photographs ("reruns on  the  return  of tom  mix,"  "newsreel", "art nouveau")  childhood memories  ("first  dive,"  "domestic alice,"  "west coast christmas"), to a tangible  present  ("Skating," "having said love").
There can,  of  course,  be  no  final  word  on  the  work  of  these  two  writers.  I
hoped  to avoid  falling  into  the same  trap  I began  with,  touting  the "next  major poet"  or  the  next  champion. Their  work  is here  and  available. Perhaps one day
we can catch  up with it.



QUESTION


"Who  are you, Elizabeth?
I ask myself
encased in this steel cabin
drinking  white rum and  soda at an  altitude
32,000 feet ... beneath  me
a mattress of white clouds very soft they look
but I am continually cognisant they would not hold me
up
every so often the clouds part and I peer down into a frozen landscape
brittle ice covering curlecued lakes small trees 	a haze indecipherable
existence is incredible I think
looking at
these effervescent bubbles exploding steadily
in the bottom of this crystal
cup.
 

Elizabeth Gourlay


29

ANNE HEBERT

Les Invites au proces


D. W. Russell


  INVITES  AU   PRocE:s, a  "poeme  dramatique et  radio­ phonique"  by Anne Hebert,  was broadcast July 20, 1952 by Radio-Canada, but remained  unpublished  until  1967,  when  it  appeared   in  a  volume  along  with Le  Temps   sauvage and  La  Merciere  assassinee.1  The  broadcast  date,  and  pre­ sumably  the  period  of composition, of Les Invites  au  proces is roughly that  of Le Torrent   (1945)   and  Le Tombeau des rois (published  in 1953).2   But while these  latter  two  works have  justifiably received considerable  critical  attention, and  while  the  two  other  plays  published  in  the  same  volume  in  1967  have attracted  much  comment,  Les Invites  has evoked only brief remarks.3  Allusions to Les Invites are found fairly frequently,  however, in critical studies of the work
of Anne Hebert.  Passing references, for example, are made to Les Invites in two
separate articles by Albert LeGrand and Grazia Merler dealing mainly with Kamouraska.  Rene Lacote also mentions  Les Invites in his brief remarks on the theatrical   works, included  in  his excellent  introduction   to  the  poetry of Anne Hebert.  Sometimes  the  critical  remarks  on  Les Invites  are  not  just slight, they are  also slighting.  Laurent  Mailhot  dismisses the  play in one short  paragraph  in Le Theatre  quebecois, saying,

Les Invites au proces est une sorte de foret vierge, dense, riche, mais touffue, aussi fantasque que fantastique, plus romantique que surrealiste, plus syrnboliste que syrnbolique.4

And  finally, Pierre  Page, in his  work on  Anne  Hebert  published  in  1965, two years before Les Invites appeared  in print, devotes two pages to it, beginning his analysis with a negative judgment:

si nous l'avons retenue ici, ce n'est pas pour sa valeur forrnelle. Elle est en effet assez complique et son unite dramatique est tres difficile a percevoir. Les person­ nages sont un peu trop nombreux, les lieux multiples, !'action dispersee.5

He continues, however, to give some small praise to the work, using the image of the forest (later repeated by Mailhot, cited above) :
c'est une foret tres dense ou l'on trouve l'annonce de tous les themes poetiques qui

ANNE HEBERT

seront  ulterieurement  developpes:   l'amour,   la  mort,  le  mal,  la  culpabilite,  la sincerite.

Such  a lack of critical  enthusiasm for one of her works is not new, of course, to Anne  Hebert. We are  reminded, for example,  that  the original  publication of the volume  of stories,  Le Torrent, had  to be undertaken at the author's expense, and that   the  title  story,  now  widely  acclaimed, was  not  always  so  well  received. 6
Similarly,  critical  views of  Le  Temps sauvage  and  La  M erciere assassinee have
not  always been favourable.7  Now, however,  with  a greater  distance  in time from the  earlier  works,  and  with  additional insights  afforded by later  works of Mile Hebert, a  more   balanced  critical   view  is surely  possible.  This   analysis  of  Les Invites  au  proces attempts to show at least one  possible path  of meaning running through the  dark  forest,  visible some  twenty-two years  after  the  work  was first presented  to the public.
Part  of the  difficulty  that  Les  Invites  presents  to the  reader  is its form.  Both Page  and  Mailhot refer  to  the  lack  of  a  clearly  unified  structure, while  Page comments  that  the  work shares  the  same  dream-like liberty  of action,  character, and  place as some of the stories of Le Torrent. Although he here seems to be using the  reference   to  the  dream-like quality   as  a  negative   criticism,  Page  sees this quality  as a positive value in his analysis of Les Chambres de bois and  Le Torrent. Referring to these  two works, he states  that  the  characters exist to fulfill a poetic necessity, not the dictates of traditional literary  realism:

ce sont les acteurs  d'un  monde onirique  et leur necessite est celle du reve. Comme Perceval  ou  la  bohemienne  Arnica, ils surgissent lorsque l'ame  poetique  a besoin de styliser dans un masque, un des multiples etats de sa relation au monde.

This  statement could  apply  with  even  more  force  to  Les  Invites   au  proces, where  the form  of the work, which  is addressed  to listeners only, not to readers or spectators, is strikingly  similar  to a dream  sequence. The  formal  unity of a dream sequence  is not,  obviously, that  of a stage  play, but  is formulated according to a different  kind  of "logic."8  As Gilles Houde reminds  us in the  introduction to his study  of the mythic  structure of Le Torrent, the symbolic language of the dream, although at  first it may seem incoherent, intensely  personal,  or even absurd, does in fact  have  a  very strict  interior  logic.9   Les  Invites  au  proces is also structured according to  this  "necessite   du  reve,"   and   its  own  interior   psychological  and poetic  ordering make  it a powerful  expression  of certain  basic human truths.
The  last verse of the title poem of Mystere  de la Parole offers a very significant definition of the role of the poet:

Que celui qui a rec;;u fonction de la parole vous
prenne en charge comme un coeur tenebreux de surcroit, et n'ait de cesse que soient justifies les vivants et
les morts en un seul chant parmi l'aube et les herbes.10

ANNE HEBERT

The  need to establish the harmonious  existence of opposites ("que  soient justifies les vivants  et les morts en  un seul chant")  is a major  one in this collection of poems, and  is repeated,  for  example,  in  the  poems "Je  suis la  terre  et  l'eau", "Eve,"  and  "Des  Dieux  Captifs."  As expressed in  these poems, the role of the poet is to help man  reconcile the existence of opposites, for such a reconciliation is necessary for real life, for the  confrontation  of reality "avec  toutes ses contra­ dictions existentielles."11   In  Les  Invites  au  proces Anne  Hebert  has presented us with  a  parable  of a  society which  has  not  yet learned  to accept  this dialectic nature  of reality. The examination  of the lack of a balance between the opposed qualities of all of life is central  to the work. At the end of the  play  this lack of balance is expressed by Le Voyageur, who explains that the society ( "le village") has attempted  to hide or deny the dark side of its nature:

C'est  le village  qui  reclamait depuis  Iongtemps  cette  nappe verte  et profonde pour y couler  quelques  peches.  C'est  fou  Ia confiance  aveugle  qu'ont les hommes  dans les chambres de debarras, les prisons,  l'enfer  et  toutes  les histoires  de meme  acabit.
Un  seul  petit  placard reserve  pour  son linge sale et l'homme se croit a l'abri de Ia
crasse pour le restant  de ses jours.

The  folly of this attempt  to gain  a false purity  by hiding  part  of man's  nature has been well shown by the story just related. Pere Salin has been the most persis­ tent in this attempt.  A major  part  of his imbalance stems from  his denial of the aspects  of  life  usually  associated  with  women,  such  as  beauty,  love,  passion, tenderness, etc. This denial is shown by the fact that  he has killed his wife, Saule, and  he declares to his two daughters  at  the beginning of the  play that  they are nothing.  Replying to the beautiful  Aude who has laughed  irrepressibly, he says: "Tu  es pareille aux autres, ni belle ni laide, stupide, nulle, tout simplement."  He refuses to acknowledge the feminine qualities of either beauty or ugliness:

Un  jour,  j'ai  rec;u en  garde  deux  petites  bonnes  femmes  d'age  egal. J'ai tire leurs cheveux  derriere leurs  oreilles  en  nattes  dures  comme  des anses de panier.  Je  leur ai  donne  des  robes epaisses,  ete  comme  hiver,  des  jupes  raides,  larges  comme  des
cerceaux et longues  pour  Ia vie. J'ai appris  le travail  et le silence .a l'une  et l'autre.
Ou est la difference?

The  sterility of his refusal to accept even the existence of feminity is symbolized by the landscape  of his Inn.  It  is in the  middle  of a deserted  plain, the roads leading to it are "effaces" and bramble covered, the courtyard is "embroussaillee" and has a "maigre  potager." This sterility and isolation came only after the death of Salin's  wife, after  he has denied  the existence of the female principle. Before this time all was the opposite, as Aude recalls:

Autrefois,   ]'auberge  etait   pleine   de  monde.   Maman souriait   dans  le  soleil.  Le jardin  eclatait de fruits et de fleurs.

32

ANNE HEBERT

Behind  Salin's   rejection  of  the  female  qualities  lies  his religious  pursuit.  His ambitions are  twofold: to find  his salvation  through a faithfulness to the land - literally  to  uncover  a  buried  treasure in the  earth   (the  relics of a saint) ; and  to find  salvation   by  making  his son  into  the  image  of a sacrificial  offering  for  the sins of the  world  (a  bouc  emissaire or a new  Christ  who must  in fact give up his own  physical  existence  completely  for  the  sake of others) . Both  these  ambitions are  thwarted, however; Salin  is betrayed  by the  land,  in terms  which  are evoca­ tive of the betrayal  of the land in Trente Arpents: 12

J'apprends aujourd'hui que  je suis un  vieil homme  que  la  terre  a  trompe.  J'ai creuse la  terre.  Je  me suis penche sur  la  terre.  J'ai  defait  ses plus petites mottes avec  mes  doigts,  avec  mes dents.  Je  l'ai  priee,  conjuree ... Elle  me  n'a  rendu aucun fruit,  que son efHuve fade au visage. J'ai  epouse tous mes champs, l'un apres l'autre  en  une  etreinte  profonde  et  rien,  rien ... Dix annees  de labeur  et de foi va.J.ncues.

His  son,  Isman, whom  he  has  trained to  accept  the  role  of sacrificial  offering
( "Tu  n'echapperas pas a la  grandeur et  au  sacrifice  que  je t'ai  assignees"), is
too  weak  to  accept  this  role.  When  falsely accused,  he commits  suicide,  and  his death   cannot  exculpate the  others.  Rather, his suicide  leads  to the  investigation which   uncovers   the  murder  and   the   murderer of  Saule.   The   investigation  is begun  by  the  Gendarme  (a  symbol  of society's  attempt to  explain  logically  the existence  of evil, a representative of imposed  order) who says, in reaction  to the suicide,

Pardon,  pardon,  tout ceci me semble irregulier. Vidons l'etang.  Touchons du doigt l'origine du malheur,  decouvrons les racines de la fteur noir.

Defeated   in  his attempt to  gain  salvation   by denying  part  of reality,  Salin  is won  by the  very  force  which  he tried  to deny.  Le Voyageur, the  incarnation of dark  and  hidden  desires,  becomes  the  new  directing  force  of Salin  and  his Inn. As Le  Voyageur informs  Salin,  he  has  in fact  been  part  of his character in  the past:

Tu  fus juste, si juste et content  de l'etre  que des le commencement  j'etais en toi.

The  new orientation of Salin's  life and  Inn  is symbolized  by the colours given the Inn  by Le Voyageur: red and  black  (passion  and  death) are now the attractions instead  of the sterile and  isolating atmosphere of the misguided  search for spiritual salvation  through physical denial.  The landscape of the  Inn  is transformed into  a lush  garden,  with  red  and   black  animals and   birds,  all  of  it  dominated  by  a strange  massive flower in the  pond:   "une  seule fleur  immense,  noire et lisse avec au  centre  un stigmate de sang." As well, there  are new roads from all parts of the world leading  to this garden.

33

ANNE HEBERT



TRANSFORMATION   of  the  Inn  and  garden  opens  the second  movement   in  the  play.  Now  that   Salin's  family  has  accepted,  even espoused, the existence of all that is symbolized by the heavy enchanting  perfume and  the colours of the strange  flower, there is still the problem of recognizing the existence of opposites, the dialectic nature  of reality. The  female or physical side of life has  now come  into  its own,  but  with attendant difficulties. The  female qualities  are  symbolically divided  into opposites, Aude  representing  beauty  and physical pleasure, love, joy, etc., Ba representing ugliness, work, self-denial, and suffering.  Both  girls  dream  of  the  prince  charming,   who  takes  the  form  of Renaud,   and  Aude  claims  him  as  her  own  right,  while  trying  to  banish  the thought  of her sister Ba's existence. This single-minded pursuit of perfect physical happiness  is as misguided  as her  father's  quest for spiritual  treasures,  and  the recognition of the existence of the opposite qualities is needed for a psychological balance. Thus  the hunchback  Le Bossu comes out of nowhere to unhorse Renaud and seize Aude (thereby fulfilling the psychic need).
The  appearance of Le Bossu, as was that  of Renaud,  Le Voyageur, and  later
the  Gendarme,  is directly  related  to  the  psychological needs of Salin  and  his family-they are present in the play because of the "necessite du reve," for it is in dreams that one's unconscious psychological needs are embodied.
Salin, Ba and  Isman  are all powerless to prevent the rape of Aude, Salin now being only able  to  help the  powers of evil, Ba remaining  prisoner to her  work ( "je  ne puis delier mes mains de cette tapisserie"), Isman  being constrained  to silence and resignation  ("Pere,  vous m'avez voue ace role de silence et d'accepta­
tion. Sans revolte, sans meme changer rna douceur, je re<;ois le mal et la honte"). But Aude  (Beauty)  refuses to accept the role that  must be played psychologically by Le Bossu (the  Beast),  and  finally succeeds in destroying him  (as her father had  destroyed Saule). This  brings a  result opposite to what  she had  expected; the distance between herself and her ideal (Renaud) becomes greater and she becomes prey to the desires and  charms  of venal love in the person of Le  Mar­ chand.  She appears  eventually in the play as a skeleton, reciting the lines  (later found in Le Tombeau des rois):
Je suis une fille rnaigre
Et j'ai de beaux os.
Je les polis sans cesse
Cornrne de vieux metaux.
J'ai pour eux des soins attentifs
Et d'etranges pities.

Ba questions this destruction of physical beauty:

Tout ce qui fut doux, perissable et cher est defait comme le sable.... Ce moment

34

ANNE HEBERT

ou  je fus  sous  l'etang, transformee et  petrie  a nouveau   par  !'amour, etait-il  done suffisant  pour  que  Ia mort  de  notre  soeur  s'accomplit aux  mains  des hommes,  ses amants?

Under the  new  rule  of the  Inn, all  levels  of society  are  attracted to come  and express  their   hidden dark desires,  to  rid  themselves of their  secret  evil  wishes  and to  express  the  reverse  of  their  public selves.  For  example, the  aristocratic mother of Renaud, no doubt wanting the  best for  her  son,  wishes that he will never  know love or suffering:
UN   ENFANT-Qui done    s'est   jure   d'empecher  Ie  Chevalier  de   toucher   a
!'amour?
UNE  FEMME-J'ai vu Ia mere  du  Chevalier faire  un  voeu au  bord  de l'etang!

and
L'ENFANT-Qui  done   s'est   jure   d'empecher  Ie  Chevalier  de   toucher   a Ia douleur?
LA FEMME-La mere du Chevalier a fait  un voeu.

In  effect,  Renaud, like  Aude, initially persists  in ignoring the  existence of ugliness and  suffering, since  he  refuses  to  even  consider Ba  as  he  tries  to  find  Aude. He only  pays  attention to  her  when  she  is transformed  physically, but  he still cannot bear  to see her  hands "marquees de  travail et  de  malheur". When Ba does show him  her  hands, he flees:
Ba! Folie! Tu  as enleve  tes gants!  Je vois Ia douleur et le mystere  a toi lies. Je vois le fantome d'Aude qui  passe dans  un  manteau bleu! Je  ne puis supporter cela. Je fuis! Adieu,  douce,  belle petite  fille, tendre  petit  visage, o prunelles  violentes. Ba!

Later, when  he sees her  hands again (this time they are  wounded) :

RENAUD-Que les mains  de  Ba soient  enfouies  dans  Ia nuit! Effacez  les !ignes des  ses  paumes!  Que   nul   n'y  puisse  lire  queq! ue  sombre   destin.   Cachez   Ia verite qui  jure sur Ia robe claire.
BA-Renaud, comme  tu me rejettes.
RENAUD-Que Ia  nuit  te  reprenne ainsi  que  si tu  n'avais jamais  existe.  Pour moi,  je  serai   tranquille.  0 Ia  douce  chambre d'enfant!  Ma  mere  veille a Ia
porte  et chasse Ia vie indiscrete et sournoise.
AUDE-Et moi,  Renaud, me  chassera-t-elle aussi?  Je  suis  detruite et  si calme.
Le  vent  me  balance  a ta  porte  comme  un  arbre  sans  racines.  Un  jour,  tu me
verras, face a face, et tu mourras comme le Bossu.
RENAUD-Non! Non! Ma mere, renforcez  rna prison, etouffez-moi que je ne decouvre  pas le visage ronge sous le manteau bleu.

Renaud's  refusal  to   countenance  either  ravaged  physical beauty  (death)   or suffering (in  life)   is a flight  from  reality and  an  attempt to retreat to the security of  childhood. His  mother is only  too  ready to  help  him  in  his  attempt to  avoid reality.

35

ANNE HEBERT

Ba alone  succeeds  in reconciling  the existence  of the opposites  of suffering  and love.  She,   like  Aude,   has  dreamed  of  the   perfect   lover,   Renaud,  but   when rejected  by him  she throws  herself into  the  strange  pool dominated by the  giant flower. By doing so she  has accepted the  existence of suffering  and  death  as part of love and  life, and  she emerges  from  the  water  transformed physically,  except for her hands. She recounts her experience:

C'est  un  pauvre  amour  qui  m'a  toute  lissee, du  fond  de l'etang.  Comme  j'allais m'enfoncer  en  cette  tendresse,  j'ai  joint  mes mains  pour  prier,  cela a fait  surgir
une  force  terrible  dans  mes poignets  et  je suis remontee  a la surface, guidee par
mes anciennes mains qui refusaient de mourir.

Now  she  is  accepted   by  Renaud for  her  beauty,   but  she  is still  conscious  of suffering  and death :

BA-Je vois le fond de l'eau et la douleur qui est dans la mort!
RENAUD-Tais-toi. Des que  je me  penche  sur  toi, tu  me  paries  du  mal  qui habite le monde.
BA -Le mal est grand, Renaud.

In  the  end,  when  the  body  of Saule,  her  mother, is discovered  at  the  bottom  of the pool, the transformation of Ba is seen by herself as follows:

En une seconde naissance plus glorieuse que la premiere, voici que j'emerge de la profondeur  de  cette  femme  tenebreuse  possedee du  desir insatiable  de fteurir  au soleil.

Ba is the only one ready to fully accept  life, to take possession of the contradictions of existence, and  to "blossom in the sun." No other  member  of her society is equal to  this  arduous task  of  grasping   life  in  all  its  complexity.   Instead, the  people around her  at  the  Inn   plunge  on  towards their  own  destruction as they  try  to exorcise  the  source  of evil by condemning first Salin,  then  Jasmin. Le Voyageur returns in  response to their  desire to deal  justly, that  is, to condemn, classify, and forget  the criminals,  and  he helps them  to perform  this rite. Le Voyageur  reminds them,   however,   that   in  doing   this  act   of   judgment  they   are   also  affecting themselves:

Et  pour  Salin, qu'avez-vous decide? Comment  le marquerez-vous  pour l'Eternite? Et  quels fins stigmates  prendrez-vous sur vous en  retour,  bonnes gens? Car  il y a le signe de celui qui est marque et le signe de celui qui marque.

In  fact,  all  these  people  share  some  degree  of guilt,  since  they  have  all  been attracted to the  Inn  by their  own  inner  dark  desires which  they had  hidden  until they succumbed to the strange  perfume  of the black flower. They  refuse to accept this  guilt,  however,  preferring to  believe that  if they  can  condemn  someone  else as the  source  of the  evil they  will be freed  of having  to accept  their  own darker instincts.

ANNE HEBERT

Le  Voyageur, who  functions  only  to fulfil the  people's  own  desires,  hastens  to finish  his task,  and  it seems all will be destroyed,  including Ba. But in the end  it is revealed  that  Le Voyageur  has made  a pact  with  his opposite,  Le Bedeau,  and the Innocents are rescued:

Le sacristain s'impatiente  dans sa voiture neuve. Il n'aime pas !'atmosphere de ces lieux, cet homme. Bon, rendons-lui les Innocents, comme il en a ete decide. Drole d'idee!  Enfin,  moi,  (_;a   ne  me  regarde  pas.   (Commandant)  Que  les Innocents rejoignent  le  Bedeau!  Il  les ramenera   au  village. Repatrie,  le petit  pendu!  La terre  benite  sera  creusee,  proprement   derriere  l'eglise pour  lui  faire  fete.  Et  la
fille au  manteau  bleu, dans la nuit,  lui parlera  d'egal a egal. Allons, en route bel
equipage! Voici Ba et Renaud  et cet autre  enfant  qui est sans nom. Recollez-moi
tout cela ala vie quotidienne! Ah! singulier voyage! En voiture, triste enfance! Le
voeux des Morts vous accompagnent, sans rompre aucun silence.

The  younger  generation is spared  to continue life, but  their  future appears rather ambiguous. Isman  and  Aude  will still be "le  petit  pendu" and  "la  fille au  man­ teau  bleu,"  although their  deaths  will  be  consecrated   by  the  Church.  Renaud, one suspects, will still remain  a child  at heart.  Ba may be faced  with  a life that  is a  "singulier voyage,"  a  "triste  enfance," despite  her  insatiable desire  to "fl.eurir au  soleil." It is only later,  in Mystere   de la Parole, that  Anne  Hebert  presents  a persona  who  is able  to seize existence  fully, as we see expressed  triumphantly in the final stanza  of the collection:

Incarnation, nos dieux  tremblent  avec nous! La  terre  se fonde  a nouveau, voici l'image  habitable  comme  une  ville et  l'honneur   du  poete  lui  faisant  face, sans aucune magie:  dure passion.

When  Les  Invites  au  proces is seen  as a  dream   parable which  examines  the need for the  establishment of an equilibrium between  the opposites  which  consti­ tute   reality,  the  underlying dramatic  unity  becomes  evident. That  the  listener should  attempt to  interpret the  work  as  a  parable, or  modern   myth,  is  also, it seems, to  be expected, given the  unrealistic nature of the  play. The  title suggests that  the listener  is one of those summoned or invited  to a trial. The very names of the  persons  on  trial  suggest  their  psychological  symbolism.  Two  names  seem  to be  deliberate  French-English puns:  Saule-soul  and   Isman-is  man.  Salin,  by killing Saule,  has attempted to destroy the soul, or the anima  in Jungian terms, and  he is trying  to  make  his son into  a vehicle for the sins of all  Man; he wishes his son  to  be  Man. On  a  descriptive level, the  names  of Salin  and  Jasmin  are equivalent to their  psychological  roles:  Salin  brings  the sterility  of salinity  (such as  found   in  the  Dead   Sea,  for  example), while  Jasmin  brings the  odour   of sanctity   (the  holy relics are  his property, here associated  with the strong  perfume  of the  white  flowers of jasmine;  Saule  was murdered  because she was thought to be  the  lover  of Jasmin). The  names  of Aude  and  Renaud bring  with  them  the

37

ANNE HEBERT

appropriate idealized  physical  qualities of their  medieval  counterparts: Aude,  or Aide,  the  sister  of Olivier  and  the  beloved  of  Roland, and  Renaud, the  knight valiant   of  Renaut  de  M ontauban.13   That  it  is  impossible   for  such   idealized abstractions of feminity  and  masculinity  to exist in  real  life becomes  obvious  in the  course  of the  narrative. Finally,  Ba, who initially  is low  ("bas") in the esti­ mation  of her family  and  society,  regains  the qualities  of Saule  (and  soul)  in her rebirth  in the water.
While  the  listener  to  Les   Invites  participates as  a  spectator at  the  trial,  he
becomes  aware  that  it is also himself and  his own society which  are  on trial.  On one  level  Les   Invites  can  be recognized   as  a  condemnation  of  Jansenism, as exemplified  by  Salin   (a  similar  condemnation of Jansenism has  been  found   by critics  elsewhere  in  Anne  Hebert's works),14   and  on  a  more  general  level  Les Invites  au   proces  condemns   all  psychic  imbalance, every  attempt to  deny  or ignore  the  dialectic  nature of all reality,  both  in individuals and  in societies.



NOTES

1 Anne Hebert,  Le  Temps sauvage,  La  Merciere  assassinee, Les  Invites  au  proces,
Collection L'Arbre G-2, Montreal: HMH,  1967.
2   Anne Hebert,  Le Torrent, Contes, Montreal: Beauchemin,  1950, new edition, Montreal: HMH, 1963 (Le  Torrent is dated  1945 in the text); Le Tombeau  des rois, Quebec,  1953, and, in Poemes, Paris:  Editions du Seuil, 1960 (the title poem was  first  published  the  same  year  as  Les  Invites   was  broadcast,  in  Esprit   20 [October  1952], 443-46).
3   See, for  example,  Pierre  Page,  Anne  Hebert, Ecrivains  canadiens  d'aujourd'hui, Montreal: Fides, 1965; Rene La cote, Anne  Hebert, Poetes d'aujourd'hui, Paris: Seghers, I 969; Laurent  Mailhot,  "Anne Hebert ou le temps depayse," in Jean-Cleo Godin  et  Laurent   Mailhot,  Le  Theatre  quebecois,  Montreal:  HMH,   I970,  pp. I 23-50. Both Page and  Mailhot  give brief bibliographies of studies of the work of Anne  Hebert,  and  a  more  recent  bibliography  is found  in  Grazia  Merler,  "La Realite dans Ia prose d'Anne Hebert,"  Ecrits du Canada  jran9ais, 33 ( 197I), p. 82, note  I. In  addition  to the articles  listed by Dr. Merler,  we add  Albert LeGrand, " 'Kamouraska' ou I'Ange et Ia Bete," Etudes   jran9aises VII, ii  ( 197 I), I 19-43, and  F.  M.  Macri,  "Anne  Hebert:   Story  and  Poem,"  Canadian  Literature,  58 (Autumn  I973),  9-18.
4   Mailhot, op cit., p. I26.
5    Page, op. cit., p. 6r.
8  For  example,  see  Bertrand  Lombard's   review  in  Revue   de  l'Universite Laval, January   I95 I   (cited by Albert LeGrand  in "Anne  Hebert: de l'exil au royaume," Etudes   jran9aise, IV,  I   ( 1968),  p. 2 I), and  Page, op.  cit.,  pp. 30-33, who com­ ments on Gilles Marcotte's  revised opinion, expressed in his review of the second edition  of Le  Torrent  (La  Presse, I8 January  I964, as opposed to Le  Devoir,  25
March  I 950) .
1  See Mailhot,  op. cit., p.  I45;  he contrasts the negative views of Guy Beaulne and
Clement  Locquell with the mixed view of Gilles Marcotte  and the positive view of

ANNE HEBERT


G.  A. Vachon. Mailhot himself gives a sympathetic treatment of the plays, except for Les Invites.
8    Although occasionally,  for  the  sake of brevity,  Les  Invites will be referred  to as a "play" in  this analysis,  the distinction between  a stage play  and  a "poeme drama­ tique et radiophone" will always be understood.
9    See Gilles  Houde, "Les  Symboles  et la structure mythique du  Torrent," La  Barre du  jour, r6  (October-December 1968), p.  27.
10  Anne Hebert, Poemes, Paris:  Editions  du Seuil, 1960, p. 75·
11  Anne   Hebert, "Quand  il  est  question  de   nommer   la  vie  tout   court,   nous  ne pouvons  que  la  balbutier," Le  Devoir,  22 October 1960. In  this  short  prose  text Mile  Hebert elaborates on  the  necessity  of  coming  to grips  with  reality  that  has "contradictions  existentielles." (Also printed in  Quebec: Hier  et  aujourd'hui, ed. Laurier Lapierre, et al., Toronto: Macmillan 1967, pp. 278-81.)
12    In  Ringuet's Trente Arpents   ( 1938), Montreal:  Fides, 197 r, Euchariste is shown caressing  the  earth   with  his  hand   when  he  is at  the  height  of  his  fortune as  a farmer   (pp.  183-84), then  later,  when  the notary  has stolen his savings, Euchariste slips in the  mud  and  falls to the earth (p. 261).  His uncle Ephrem's death  had  also been seen as an  unwanted divorce  from  a beloved woman-his land  (p. 58).
13  The  latter is edited  by F. Castets   (Montpellier, 1909); trans.  H.  Berthaut, as Les
Quatre  fils Aymon (Paris,  1952).
14  See,  for  example, Georges  Amyot,  "Anne Hebert et  la  renaissance," Ecrits  du
Canada   franfais, 20 ( 1965), p. 246:
" ... la renaissance de notre  poete est a la mesure  meme  de cette  revolte. Je  pense
que  je  n'ai   pas  besoin  d'expliquer contre  quoi  le  poete  s'est  revolte.  La  'vieille
femme  envieuse'  c'est  le  jansenisme,  et  tout  ce qu'il  traine  avec  lui  d'hypocrisie
ascetique,  de  depouillement dans  la crainte, de maceration et de masochisme.  Oui, Garneau a  permis  la  liberation, mais  c'est  Anne  Hebert   qui  l'a  realisee.  Et  voici qui pour  nous, Canadiens fran<;ais, est particulierement emouvant."
Explicit   reference   to  the  condemnation  of  Jansenism  is  also  found   in  Albert
LeGrand, "Anne Hebert:  de l'exil  au  royaume," and  in Page,  op. cit., pp.  22-36,
83-84  (analysing Le Torrent and  Le Temps sauvage), and  Lacote,  passim.






CANADIAN   AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

availabl• at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741



39

RIVER OF NOW AND THEN

Margaret Laurence's Narratives




Barbara Hehner







TE mv<NERS,  Mrucgaret Laurence', mo" '"oent  novel, overflowing with ideas about life, about  life in Canada,  and about life in Canada as  experienced  by a  woman.  Laurence   has  been  quoted  as saying,  "Now  the wheel seems to have come full circle-these five books [the  Manawaka fiction] all interweave  and  fit together.m  The  extent  to which The  Diviners is made  to interweave  with  the  earlier  books is, in  fact,  almost  irritating.  The  Tonnerre family, members of which have appeared  in The  Stone Angel, The  Fire Dwellers, and  A Bird in the  House, play a major,  and thematically  defensible, role in the present  book. But why include  Julie  Kaslik  (sister of Nick, Rachel's  lover in A
]est of God)  and  her husband  Buckle Fennick  (Mac's  tormented  friend in The
Fire-Dwellers), when our interest in them is derived from the earlier books, and not from anything  they do in The  Diviners? And it is a  jolt to read that  Stacey Cameron  and  Vanessa  MacLeod,  Morag's  contemporaries,  play together, since they have not  previously seemed to exist on the same imaginative  plane:  Stacey of The  Fire-Dwellers is a fully realized fictional creation,  while Vanessa, of the short story collection, A Bird in the  House, is more an effective narrative  device than a memorable  character.
Not only characters,  but obsessive images familiar  to Laurence's  readers recur
in The  Diviners:  the disemboweled gopher, which Stacey of The  Fire-Dwellers, like Morag,  saw as a child;  the grotesquely fat  woman imprisoned  by her bulk (Hagar, of  course, Buckle's mother  in The  Fire-Dwellers, and  now Prin);  the burning shack that  trapped  Piquette Tonnerre  and  her children, which Laurence has described twice before; and  the greatest catastrophe  Manawaka ever experi­ enced, the  departure of the  Cameron  Highlanders  for Dieppe, mentioned  in all Laurence's Canadian fiction.
Laurence  has been quoted as saying that she will probably never write another novel, and  one can  almost feel, while reading The  Diviners, the  pressure on its author  to make a final important  statement  about  Life and Art. It seems to have

LAURENCE'S NARRATIVES

been  Laurence's ambition in this novel, dense with  themes  and  symbols, complex in  structure, but  meandering in  plot,  not  only  to  clarify  the  ideas  expressed  in her  earlier  books,  but  to  express  all  those  ideas  for  which  she  never  previously found  a suitable  fictional embodiment.
In  the  earlier  Manawaka books,  Laurence explored  such  themes  as the  diffi­ culty  of  achieving genuine  communication  between  individuals, and  the  limits placed  on personal  freedom  by family  and ethnic  background, in ways that critics have come to identify  as distinctively  "Canadian". Her female  protagonists merely survive   rather  than   triumphing,  and   they   grow   up   in   a  community   which displays  the  "garrison mentality" in its need  for  rigid  conformity and  its fear  of spontaneity  and  sensuality.  But  in  The   Diviners,  Laurence has  overturned the negativism  of  these  Canadian literary   themes.  Morag is no  Philip Bentley:  she has  published  five novels. She is in  touch  with  the  needs of  her  body  as well as her  mind,  and  has striven  to satisfy both.  She has freely chosen  a loving relation­ ship  with  the  Metis,  Jules  Tonnerre, and  borne  a  child  by  him  who  seems to symbolize  the  healing  of the division between  culture and  nature in the Canadian psyche.
At  times  The   Diviners  seems  almost   too  self-conscious  in  its  reworking   of
Canadian literary   cliches.  As  just  one  example,  Margaret Atwood   has  defined the  "Rapunzel Syndrome" in  Canadian literature:  imprisoned by the  repressive attitudes of  the  society  around  her,  the  woman   passively  awaits  rescue  by  the prince.2    Atwood   points  to  Rachel   in  A  fest  of  God  as  a  typical  victim  of  this malaise.  In  The   Diviners,  Morag, caught   in  a  stifling  marriage, sees herself as Rapunzel:  "Maybe tower  would   be  a  better  word  for  the  apartment.... The lonely  tower.   Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let  down  your  hair." To  Morag,  however, "letting down  her  hair" does not  mean  waiting  helplessly for the  prince  to save her;  it means  taking  a first step  towards  freeing  herself, by defying  current stan­ dards  of chic and letting  her straight black hair grow out.
Cultural  nationalism and   women's   liberation  dovetail   nicely  here.   Morag's marriage  to  the   Englishman  Brooke,  whose  taste   and   intellect   she  considers superior  to her own, can  be seen both  as the outcome  of the "colonial mentality," which  considers  indigenous culture inferior  to that  of the  mother  country, and  as the  result  of  growing   up  in  a  society  that   assigns  housework   to  women  and intellectual  achievement  to  men.  The   Diviners  comes  to  grips  with  currently­ debated issues much  more  explicitly  than  Laurence's previous  fiction:  the search  for  a  Canadian identity,  the  discrimination encountered  by women,  the  unjust  treatment of native  people, and  even ecology, find  a place in the novel.
The  Diviners  also uses the most sophisticated narrative technique Laurence has yet  attempted, and  an  examination of  this  technique provides  a suitable  intro­ duction   to  the  novel,  since  both  its  virtuosity,  and  the  unfortunate  outcome of this  virtuosity,  its obtrusiveness,  exemplify  the strengths and  failings  of the  novel


4_. I

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

as a whole.  In  The  Diviners, Laurence not only attempted to refine the  narrative devices she had  used before, but,  as with other  aspects of this novel, to stretch  her story-telling  abilities in new directions.




!:E RECURRING  narrative device  used  in  The  Stone  Angel, A  ]est of  God,  and  The  Fire-Dwellers is the  first-person,  present-tense  narrator who is also the  central  character of the  book. This  technique would seem to be a psychological  necessity for Laurence:

I ... have  the sense of a whole world going on inside each skull and I can hardly bear it that  this should be so, because I think I want a greater sort of contact  with other  people  than  in fact  may be possible. I'm  sure  this is one reason why I do identify  so much  with  the  main  character  in  my books ... one  has this  kind  of perfect identification  or communication.... 3

Paradoxically, the  first-person  technique provides  Laurence as a writer  with  the feeling  that  she  is sharing  another person's  mind  while,  by strictly  limiting  the point  of  view of each  novel, it conveys  to the  reader  Laurence's conviction  that human beings are hopelessly isolated from each other.
The  Stone  Angel presents  the  reminiscences  of ninety-year-old Hagar Shipley.
The  novel's  present,  revealed  to us by Hagar speaking  in the  present tense, covers only  a  few  days,  as  she  "rages   against   the  dying  of  the  light." But  Hagar's memories,  in  the  past  tense,  range  over  her  whole  life. Laurence exercised  great care  in  providing both  the  time  and  the  motivation for  these  memories  in  the novel's present:

Being alone in a strange place, the nurse's unseeing stare, the receding heat of the day-all  bring  to mind the time I was first in hospital, when Marvin  was born. 4

Laurence  wrote  in  "Ten Years'  Sentences," a  1969  article,  of  her  pride  in
being able to recapture the idiom of her grandmother's day:

Yet Doris never cared a snap about  that  pitcher, I'm  bound to admit. Well there's no explaining  tastes, and  ugliness is pretty  nowadays. Myself, I favour flowers ...

but  she  also  allowed  Hagar some unlikely  flights of rhetoric, whose equivalent is not to be found  in her next two novels:

I now think she must have been carved  in that  distant  sun by stone masons who were the  cynical descendants  of Bernini, gouging out  her like by the score, gaug­ ing with  admirable  accuracy  the  needs of fledgling pharaohs  in an  uncouth land.

Hagar's memories  are  presented  in  the  order  they  occurred, which  Laurence afterward  viewed  as  an  artistic   mistake: "The flashback  method  is, I think,  a

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

little overworked in it, and I am not at all sure that flashbacks ought to be in chronological order,  as I  placed  them  to make it easier for the reader  to follow Hagar's life."5
In A  fest  of God  and The  Fire-Dwellers, which portray much younger women, memories  play  a much  smaller  part  than  in The  Stone Angel. Thus  Laurence was able to present these memories out of chronological order without fear of confusing  her  readers. And she continued  to take great  care that  these reminis­ cences seem to be called up naturally  by events in the novels' present:

The   Flamingo Dancehall is shut  tight  and   locked,  blinds  drawn, but  tonight   it will be all mauve  and  green shifting lights, and  blare,  and  couples.  In  the summer there  are  dances  every night  here  now. It used to be only once a week, Saturdays, when   I  was  about   seventeen.   Sometimes I'd   go  with  three  or  four  other   girls, scarcely wanting to ... (A  Jest of God)

Stacey smokes and  waits.
-- I  couldn't  have  gone  in.  Yes  I could   have.  No  I couldn't. And  yet  I'm curious  as well. How  do they stash  them  away?  In  grey-metal drawers  like outsize filing cabinets,  chilled for preservation? I don't want  to know ...
Cameron's  Funeral  Home   was  never  entered   into   by  children.
Stacey and  her  sister were forbidden ... (The Fire-Dwellers)

A  Jest  of God  marks Laurence's  most sustained use of the first-person, present­ tense  narrative,   and  the  technique   produces  a  tour   de   force   recreation  of  a troubled and often divided mind:

And  Mother nods  and  says  yes it  certainly   is marvellous and  Rachel is a  born teacher.




and
 My God. How  can I stand-
Stop. Stop it, Rachel ... Get  a grip on yourself now.


Crack!
What is it? What's happened?
The  ruler.  From  his nose, the thin blood river....

I can't  have done it.

These  dramatic  effects are, however, offset by the equally striking limitations of Laurence's chosen technique. As Robert Harlow wrote of A Jest of God, shortly after it was published, "What  is lacking is ... objectivity, distance, irony.... One yearns  for  the  third   person  point  of  view  and  the  omniscient  author -old­ fashioned  techniques  for  an  old-fashioned story."6   Harlow  complained  particu­ larly about  the  presentation  of the  other  major  characters  in the  novel, which, apart  from Rachel's  impressions of their appearance  and  manner, relies on what they  reveal  about  themselves in  conversation  with  her.  "Both  Nick and  Calla suffer from  having to explain themselves ... dialogue cannot  be successfully used

43

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

in place of narration.m While it is true  that  we are never provided  with the depth of characterization which  would  unify  for  us Calla's flamboyant untidiness,  her devotion  to  the  tabernacle, and  her  lesbianism,  she is warm-blooded enough  for the  size of  her  role in  the  novel. The  surface  details: her use of "child," her pet phrases  such   as  "the  pause  that   refreshes,"   her  messy  and   gaudily   decorated apartment, are  enough  to sustain  our  general  impression  that  she is good-hearted and  down-to-earth.
But  the  characterization of Nick  Kaslik  is indeed  a  problem, since it is  Laur­ ence's  plan  to make  him a major  character in A  ]est of God. Although  his roots are  in  Manawaka, and  many  of his growing-up experiences  parallel Rachel's, he is a stranger to her. Thus  Nick has to tell Rachel   (and  us)  everything Laurence wants  us to  know  about   him,  during those  few  evenings  he  and  Rachel  spend together. Despite   all  Laurence's efforts  to  give  verisimilitude  to  these  briefing sessions  (Rachel  is  rigid  with  shyness  and  someone  must  do  the  talking), the novel  falters   whenever   Nick   begins   to  reminisce.   Although  Laurence  stoutly defended  the  narrative method  of A  ]est  of God  in "Ten Years'  Sentences," she abandoned  the  strict   first-person   point  of   view  in  her  next   novel,  The   Fire­ Dwellers.
The   Fire-Dwellers  is a  type-setter's nightmare. Stacey's  story  is told  in  blocks
of third-person present-tense narrative, flush  right  and  left;  paragraphs of  first­ person   present-tense  thinking  by  Stacey,   indented  with   a  dash;   passages  of dialogue,  without  quotation marks,  indented about  an inch  from  the left margin; memories  of  Stacey's   childhood, in  third-person past  tense,  with  smatterings of present  participles  (conversation within  these  memories  is  indicated by italics) ; and  the  interruption of radio  and  television  broadcasts in  block letters. Although this  complexity  can  be confusing,  it is well-suited  to the  portrayal of a harrassed middle-aged housewife  with little time for reflection  and little gift for articulating her feelings:

You missed your calling, Mother.  You should've been in the army.... Nuts to you. So long, Katie. 'Bye, kids.
'Bye.
Slam....
-Quick, coffee or I faint.
EIGHT-THIRTY    NEWS    BOMBERS  LAST   NIGHT   CLAIMED  A    DECISIVE   VICTORY....
Stacey ... switches off the radio.
-I  can't  listen.... Listen, God,  I  know it's  a  worthwhile  job to bring  up four
kids.... But  how is it  that  I  can  feel as  well that  I'm  spending  my life in one
unbroken  series of trivialities?

Apart  from  the  news broadcasts and  the staccato bursts of conversation, how­ ever,  the  novel stays as close to Stacey's  mind  as the entirely  first-person narrative of A  ]est of God.  As Allan Bevan points out in his introduction to the New Cana-

44

LAURENCE'S NARRATIVES


dian  Library edition  of The  Fire-Dwellers,  this limited  point  of view conveys the "terrifying isolation" of the  characters. Stacey's  conversations with  her  husband, as we know from sharing  her mind, communicate a little of what she feels for him:

-Can't  we ever  say anything  to one another  to make up for the lies, the  trivi­ alities,  the  tiredness we never knew about  until  it had  taken  up  permanent  resi­ dence in our arteries?
Hi. You're late, Mac.
My God. Is that my fault?

And  her  uncommunicative husband's thoughts are  as great  a mystery  to her  as they are to the reader :

Stacey kisses him and  he holds her unexpectedly  close for an instant.  She feels his tremor....
-Mac, what is it?  Are you nervous about  the new job? You're only forty-three, for heaven's sake. Or what is it? Why don't you say?

On  the  other  hand,  the  scenes  involving  the  most  relaxed  figure  in the  book, the  young,  happy,  self-reliant  Luke  Venturi, have  the  same  jarring  falseness as Nick  Kaslik's  monologues  in  A  ]est  of God. This  is meant  to  be a  twenty-five­ year-old  member  of the counter-culture speaking:

Yeh?  What  did  you  plan  to  do  with  it?  [Stacey  has  been  speaking  of  her father's  revolver.]  Or  rather,  whom?  Yourself, when  the Goth's  chariots and  the final  bill came  in, or when  some evangelist corporal  decided  this is the way the world ends, not with a whimper but a bang?

Before turning to the narrative problems  Laurence faced  in her most ambitious novel, The  Diviners,  it is interesting to look briefly at the almost  perfect  narrative form  of  her  most  modest  Manawaka book,  A  Bird in  the  House.  As Laurence sees it, the  motivation for a short story is quite  different  from  that  for a novel:

With  a novel the main  characters  come first, they grow slowly in the imagination until  I  seem  to  know  them  well. ... Most  short  stories  I've  written  seem to  be triggered  off by some event, either  in my own life, or something  I've observed or read about.8

Perhaps because  Laurence did  not have such  a desperate need to portray  a single dominant character in all  her  complexity   (although  often  at   the  expense  of complexity  in  the   other   characters),  her  narrator,  Vanessa,   is  perfectly   and delicately   poised   between   retrospective  omniscience   and   her   role  as  a  child participant in the  events she describes.  In  the  early stories,  particularly, Vanessa is an  almost  transparent recorder  of the difficult inter-relationships of her parents, Aunt  Edna, and  her  grandparents. Only  an  occasional  passage, such  as the  one describing   Vanessa's dissatisfaction   with  a  clothespeg  doll  she  is dressing  while eavesdropping on an  adult  conversation, characterizes the narrator as a little girl.


45

LAURENCE'S NARRATIVES


There is some  humorous exploitation of the gap between  Vanessa  the character's limited  understanding, and Vanessa the narrator's adult  awareness:

My  grandmother was a  Mitigated  Baptist.  I  knew this because I  had  heard  my father say, "At least she's not an unmitigated  Baptist ... "

but such "cuteness" is used sparingly.



IN The   Diviners  Laurence brought to  bear  all  that  she  had learned   in  her  earlier   fiction  about the  advantages and  drawbacks of  various narrative devices. Again she was faced  with  a problem  she had encountered when
writing  The Stone  Angel.  She  had  decided  that  Morag's life story,  like Hagar's, would  benefit  from  being  told  in  a series of extended   flashbacks.  A  novel  that maintains a  continuing tension  between  past  time  and  present,  the  past  moving rapidly  and  the  present  moving slowly, until  the  past catches  up with the present, may  appear  to  the  reader   to  be  more  "manipulated" by  the  author  than   an equally  craftsmanlike beginning-to-end narrative.  Laurence had  been  aware  of this  in  her  analysis of the  flaws in  The  Stone  Angel.  On  the  other  hand,  if The Diviners  began  with  Morag's childhood and  worked  its way through her life to the  present,  it  would  lose the  heightened contrast  and  modest  suspense  achieved by the flashbacks.
In  Chapter  Four,  the  hostile  reception   Pique   receives  in  a  small  Manitoba town, set upon  by drunken men of the community, is played off ironically  against Morag's attempt,  years  before,  to  be  accepted   in  just  such  a  community,  by dressing  in "Good  Taste" and  using correct  grammar. In  Chapter Three, Morag receives a phone  call from  Pique's father, but  we do not learn  the circumstances of Pique's begetting  until  Chapter Seven.  Similarly,  at  the  beginning of Chapter Eight,  Morag writes  a  nostalgic  letter  to  Dan  McRaith; we are  left  wondering who this man  is until the middle of Chapter Nine.
In  The   Diviners  Laurence made  extensive  use of a  technique that  she  intro­ duced   in  The   Fire-Dwellers:   a  third-person narrative  which   is so  intimately connected to the  protagonist that, on first reading, one is left with  the impression that  the story has been told in the first person. But the third-person narrative form of  The   Diviners, although  it  reveals  only  Morag's point  of  view,  is far  more flexible than  the first-person  narration of A  ]est of God. At times it approximates a train  of private  thought:

The  postcard  from  Pique  yesterday.  No  address.  Mustn't think  of  it.... But  a somewhat  more  newsy letter  would  be  appreciated.   Idiotic.  How  many  newsy letters  had  Morag  written  to  Prin  and  Christie,  after  she left Manawaka?  That was different. Oh really?

LAURENCE's NARRATIVES


But  at  other  times the  third-person narrative is free to use flowing sentences  and elegant   turns   of  phrase   which,   while  recording  Morag's  perceptions,   do  not masquerade as transcriptions of her thought:

The  willows along the river had been changed by the alchemy of autumn  from greensilver to greengold.

A few first person  passages, in italic  type, indicate Morag's thoughts, but  there are  far  fewer  of  these  than  in  The Fire-Dwellers.  This  is partly  a  result  of the character  being   portrayed.  Stacey   is  afraid   to  express  herself  honestly,  either because  what  she  really  thinks  is too  vulgar  or  sarcastic  for  the  social situation she finds herself in  (the  Polyglam  party), or because, within  her own family, her efforts  at  genuine  communication are  rebuffed   (Mac's arrival home  in Chapter
1 ) . Thus  Stacey's  thoughts, in the first person, are a rebellious and often anguished
protest  against  the  falseness of  her  wife-and-mother fa<;ade. The  mature Morag, however,  usually says what  she means. Sometimes she spares  the feelings of people she considers  pathetic :

"Anything you write now, I mean, will automatically  get published-"
Oh  sure. Just bash out any old crap and rake in the  millions.  I get my thoughts from the  telephone directory.

But more often she attempts to be honest, even if the truth  offends others, or hurts her own pride:

... I  am  forty-seven years old, and  it seems fairly likely that  I will be alone for the  rest of my life, and  in most ways this is really okay with  me, and  yet I am sometimes so goddam  jealous of their youth and happiness and sex that I can't see straight.

Usually   the  italicized   passages  are  used  to  highlight  a  particularly  significant realization   on  Morag's part,  and  if these  are  to  have  their  proper  impact, they must be used sparingly:

Would  Pique's  life be better  or  worse than  Morag's?  Mine   hasn't  been  so bad. Been? Time running  out.  Is that  what  is really going on, with  me, now, with  her? Pique, harbinger  of my death, continuer of life.

Laurence's choice  of  tense  for  the  narration of The   Diviners  was apparently just as carefully  considered  as her choice of person. The  Stone  Angel  made  what seems  to  be  the  obvious  grammatical distinction   between  Hagar's present  situa­ tion  and  her  memories: the former  are  related  in the present  tense, and  the latter  in  the  past  tense.  But in the later  books Laurence explored  for  herself  the effects that   can  be  created   by  different   tenses. The  present  tense  puts  us in  media  res is both  A  ]est of God  and The  Fire-Dwellers.  Both Rachel and Stacey are women with  severe  problems  in  their  present  lives, and  we feel that  we are sharing their struggles with them.

47

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

In  The   Fire-Dwellers,  Laurence  experimented with  the  present  participle in place of the verb in some of Stacey's  memories:

Stacey,  swimming  back  to  shore,  coming  up  for  air  intermittently  ... thinking already of the dance she would go to that evening, thinking already of the pressure on her lake-covered thighs of the boys

Although this  innovation was  not  followed  through consistently,  the  passages in which  the  participle was used suggest that  these memories  are still an active  part of Stacey's  image  of herself:  she has not yet come to terms  with  the fact  that  she is no longer a carefree  young girl.
In  Chapter Eleven of A ]est of God, which is basically a present-tense narrative, Rachel describes her decision to take control of her own life in the retrospective tranquility of  the  past  tense.  Similarly,   the  aura   of  serenity  in  A  Bird  in  the House  seems to  result  from  its consistent  use of the  past  tense :  all the  hurts  felt by Vanessa   have  been  healed  by  the  passage  of  time,  and  her  insight  into,  for example, her  father's  ("A   Bird  in  the  House")  and   her  grandfather's  ("The Mask  of the  Bear") true  natures has already  been  achieved. Although Laurence has said  that  the  writing  of  A  Bird in  the  House  was a process of self-discovery for  her,9   we do  not  share  the  process, only  the  achievement. The  fact  that  the adult  Vanessa  is an  unknown quantity, the  most faceless of Laurence's narrators, adds to the effect of calm detachment.
In  The Diviners,  Laurence's  protagonist is, for  the  first  time,  a woman   who
has already  found  a measure  of fulfillment, whose present  life is busy and,  by and large, satisfying.  Thus  Laurence's seemingly  perverse  decision to write of Morag's past in the present tense, and  of Morag's present in the  past tense, is the right  one. The   past  tense  narrative, in  much   of  Laurence's work,  suggests  an  achieved personal  equilibrium, and  this  Morag  possesses. On  the  other  hand,  Morag has experienced a  difficult  journey  to  her  present  autonomy, and  she vividly  recalls her  earlier  struggles; indeed,  she feels that  she  is constantly  reworking  her  past, even embellishing the  events,  in order  to link her  past  life to her present  life in a meaningful way:

What  happened  to me wasn't what anyone else thought  was happening, and maybe not what  I  thought  was happening  at  the time. A popular  misconception is that we  can't   change   the  past-everyone  is  constantly  changing  their  own  past, recalling it, revising it. What  really happened?  A meaningless question. But one I keep trying to answer, knowing there is no answer.




LAuRENCE's CANADIAN novels, whether narrated in the pres­ ent tense or the  past, in the first person or the third,  have always been constructed so that  we share  the consciousness of a single dominant female character. In  each

LAURENCE'S NARRATIVES

novel Laurence  has seemed to move closer to her own experience, and  in The Diviners she has carried  the parallels between herself and  her protagonist farther than  ever.  Morag  is, like Laurence,  a  divorced  writer,  author  of a  number  of successful novels, who,  having  once  made  a  romantic  pilgrimage  to  England, settles down to work in a cabin by a quiet river in Ontario.  Even Morag's smaller quirks  are  shared  by  her  creator,  as the  many  profiles of and  interviews with Laurence  have  made  known to her readers:  for example,  Morag  chain smokes and refuses to learn to drive.
One  is tempted  to think, while reading The  Diviners, that  Laurence  resorted
to the numerous irritating  ways in which the narrative,  as Robert  Fulford put it, "untactfully   draws  attention  to itsel£,"10   in  an  attempt  to distance  herself from her material.  Perhaps  these devices are  the evidence of her struggle to create a fictional past for a character  who, in the novel's present, bears such a close resem­ blance  to herself. Morag's  reminiscences are  presented as a series of  "Memory­ bank  Movies,"  which  break  into  the  narrative  flow, and  whose  often satirical titles  undercut   the  emotions  portrayed  in  them.  For  example,  the  account  of Morag's  newspaper  assignment, covering the horror of the  fire  at  the Tonnerre  shack, is entitled, "Down  in the Valley, Part  III." The section in which Brooke, whom  Morag  has considered  impervious  to  pain,  describes  the  unhappy  child­ hood that still haunts  him, is called "Raj Mataj." This is witty, but to what end? Laurence's  damaged   heroines  have  often  used  mordant  wit  to  deal  with  their pain. However, the premeditated  appearance  of the  Memorybank  Movies makes such humour distancing and unpleasant.
This  obtrusive  technique  is particularly   jarring  in  the  early sections of The
Diviners, when Morag is recalling her early childhood. Laurence's three earlier Canadian  novels showed increasing skill in simulating the stream of consciousness. Hagar's  reminiscences, although  capturing  the idiom of her generation  convinc­ ingly, are expressed in well-formed sentences, suggesting written  memoirs rather than  thoughts.  By the  time  she  produced  Stacey,  Laurence  was  attempting  to recreate the free associations and  near-incoherence of the inner voice. But in The  Diviners, for  the  first  time,  Laurence  sought  to  reproduce  the  thoughts  and speech patterns of a very young child.
Mercifully, she did not follow Joyce in returning  her protagonist to the crib. Morag's  earliest memories are expressed in adult  vocabulary, as Morag examines a number  of faded  photographs. Successive Memorybank  Movies portray Morag at  five, six, seven, nine, twelve and  fourteen,  her development  at  each  age dis­ tinguished not only by her opinions and  her degree of awareness but, with great care on Laurence's  part, by her vocabulary and syntax. Six-year-old Morag's first day at school is described this way:
Girls here. Some bigger, some smaller  than
Morag. Skipping with skipping  ropes singing....

49

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

And oh

Their dresses are very short, away above their knees. Some very bright  blue yellow green and new cloth, new right out of the store. You can see the pattern very clear, polka dots flowers and  that

Well oh

This is  almost   concrete poetry, suggesting an  immature mind bombarded with new  sights   and   sounds, while   making it  quite plain   to  the   reader that  this  is Morag's first experience of her  low social  status. Morag at twelve  is a vulgar little tough:

The   girls  yell at  her,  but  Morag doesn't   care  a  fuck.  They  can't   hurt  her.  The teachers  hate her. Ha ha. She isn't a little flower, is why.

but  at  fourteen she  tries  to  be  ladylike, while  fuming at  the  social  ostracism she now fully recognizes:

... no  one  will  say Good  Morning to  Morag  and  Prin.  Not  on  your  life.  Might soil their  precious  mouths.... They're a bunch  of-well  a bunch  of so and  so's. Morag  doesn't  swear. If you swear  at fourteen  it only makes you look cheap.

This writing, at  its strongest, becomes almost  transparent, as the  reader experi­ ences   the   illusion   that  he  is  sharing  Morag-the-child's thoughts.  Then  a  wry Memorybank Movie  title  pulls  him  back  to the  surface of the  page. As was  noted  earlier, in  A  Bird in the  House, where we  are  constantly aware  that   the  adult Vanessa is giving  form  to  her  childhood perceptions, a little  cuteness goes a long  way.   In the  early  sections  of  The  Diviners there are  long  passages  of  childlike thought  which,  when  we   are   suddenly  reminded  of  the  author  guiding our  responses to Morag, become forced and  un-heartwarming:

At  four  o'clock  Morag can  go home.  She  still does  not  know  how  to read.... But knows one thing for sure.
Hang onto your shit and never let them know you are ascared.

MEMORYBANK MOVIE:    MORAG, MUCH  OLDER

As  Morag matures, the  narrative  reaches one  further stage   of  complexity in the   Innerfilms:  Morag's fantasies in  the  past.  These tend   to  be  extended  self­ mockeries:

Innerfilm: Outside the  blizzard  rages.... Inside  the little  house, all is warmth, all is cheer.  Morag, having  put  in  an  excellent  day's  work  on  her  nearly  completed novl
chau. · ··The basement   contains  shelves  and  shelves  of bottled   preserved  plums, applesauce,  pears,   blueberries,  chili   sauce,   crabapple  jelly ... all   the   work   of Morag's hands.... The   friendly   neighbourhood farmer  is a  bachelor   (widower?

50

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

yes). Although  by no means an intellectual, he is a well-read man. Also handsome. And and

But  Morag is portrayed as  a  strong-willed  woman  who  has  made  a decent  life for  herself against  heavy odds, and  thus  we become impatient with  a negativism not supported by the  novel's  plot.  Laurence has always  given  her  protagonists  a portion  of self-deprecating humour, but  in The  Diviners this humour is beginning to seem more  like the undisciplined voice of Laurence's own  "Black  Celt."
To  be fair, some aspects of Morag's personality  and  development are deftly and convincingly portrayed, particularly her sensitivity to the  power of language, both in  its  inhibiting  aspect,  as  a  social  indicator,  and  its  liberating aspect,  as  an exquisite  medium  through which  an  artist  can  communicate. Even  at the  age of seven, Morag notices the grammatical lapses of her guardian, Prin:

She  was  the  only child  and  wasn't  none  too  bright  (you were supposed  to say wasn't any too bright, but Prin didn't  know that)

She  relishes vivid colour  and  rich  texture, even though  they are found  in bizarre forms  in Christie's hovel, and  puzzles over the  proper  way to describe them:

When she peers close [to  the flies], she can see their wings are shining, both blue and green. Can they be beautiful and filthy?

... a blue plush  (pl-uush-rich-sounding, but  really it is like velvet only cheaper and not so smo-ooth on the fingers) cushion

Both  aspects  of language continue to play an important part  in Morag's life. Her concern  for "proper usage" epitomizes her feelings of inferiority in her relationship to Brooke:

"Shall we have some sherry?"
"Please,"  Morag  says, having recently learned  to say, simply, Please, instead  of
Oh  yes thanks  I'd  just love some, or worse, Okay that'd  be  fine.

while  her  convictions  about  the  beauty  of the  poetic  mot  juste are strong  enough to allow her to combat  Brooke's patronizing influence:

" ... almost always if you get inside the lines, you find he's saying what he means with  absolute  precision. 'Sheer  plod makes plough down  sillion shine' -I'm  not sure it really does, but it couldn't  be expressed more concisely and accurately."

The   mature Morag   of  the  novel's  present  is no  longer  concerned   with  the social  niceties.  She  has  also come  to  doubt  her  earlier  belief that  language can accurately  convey  sensual  experiences,   although she  remains   convinced  of  the value of the effort:

How could that  colour be caught  in words? A sort of rosy peach colour, but that sounded corny and was also inaccurate.

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

I  used  to  think   that  words  could  do  anything. Magic. Sorcery.  Even  miracle. But  no, only occasionally.

Laurence  has been quoted  as saying, " ... it's one of the most difficult things to do, writing  about  a  writer.  But I  had  to. At first I  made her a painter,  but what  the  hell do I know about  painting?"11 However, her believable portrait  of the artist as a harassed Canadian woman is one of the most successful aspects of The  Diviners. Morag  experiences many of the barriers that  can stand between a woman and  creativity, including a husband's  ego, morning sickness, and sleeping children.
But  in  her  presentation  of the  internal  doubts  that  beset Morag  as a  writer (and  which surely afflict Laurence  as well),  Laurence  comes perilously close to sinking  her  novel under  the  weight of its self-consciousness. Morag  agonizes, in true  Calvinist  fashion, about  whether  spinning  tales may not simply be a form of telling lies :

A daft profession. Wordsmith. Liar, more likely. Weaving fabrications.

Elsewhere,  Morag  wonders  whether,  as  a  writer,  she  most  resembles Christie Logan the scavenger or Royland  the diviner. Does she simply "tell the garbage," by fictionalizing  other  people's pain, or is she, like Royland,  the  possessor of a special gift, which allows her to reveal to others basic truths  that  they could not see without  her  help?  She comes to the  tentative  conclusion that  fiction is  her truth:

Yet, with typical ambiguity, [Morag  was] convinced that fiction was more true than fact. Or that fact was in fact fiction.

Laurence shares Morag's concern about telling the truth in fiction:

There's not only the talent in writing well.... The greatest problem of all is to try and  tell enough of your own truth,  from your own viewpoint, from your own eyes, to be able to go deeply enough.... It sounds easy just to tell the truth. There is isn't anything more difficult.12

And she seems to have concluded that  this truth-telling is impeded by some of the ordinary  conventions of novel-writing. Although this realization does not make Laurence's  "distancing" narrative   devices any  more  successful, it  helps  us  to understand  why she chose them. Hagar's  and Rachel's first-person narrative  is abandoned  for the third  person in The  Diviners because, after all, Morag  is not really  telling us her own story. Similarly, Memorybank  Movies are substituted for a  smooth  transition  into  reverie, because no one has memories so detailed  and complete,  with  all  past conversations intact.  Here, as with Morag's  difficulty in describing colours, the novel seems to comment on its own technique.  Laurence has Morag  draw attention  to the "fictional" quality of her reminiscences:

52

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

Now  I am  crying,  for  God's  sake,  and  I don't  even  know  how  much  of  that memory  really happened  and  how much  of it I embroidered  later  on. I seem to remember  it  just like that,  and  yet, each  time  I think  of  it, are  there  new or different  details?  I recall  it  with  embellishments  which  don't  seem likely for  a five-year-old.

Later   Morag  muses  that   "everyone  is  constantly   changing  their   own   past." Apparently  Laurence's  Memorybank Movies  are  not  simply,  or  even  predomi­ nantly,  the result of her effort to distance  herself from  her material, but are meant  to  illustrate her  belief  that  every  person,  writer  and  non-writer  alike,  makes  a fiction  of his  past  truth, and  by doing  so, transmutes it into  new  truth. And  the
new truth  is myth.


A MAJOR THEME  in  The  Diviners is the  process of myth­
making,   and  in  particular, the  application of  this  process  to  the  needs  of  the
Canadian  imagination. In   discussing  this  theme,   we  must  consider   the  other characters in  the  novel.  The  presentation of  the  supporting players  has  always caused  Laurence  considerable difficulty.  Because  of  her  determination to  limit herself to the  point  of view of her  protagonist, these characters either  succeed  or fail  on  the  believability  of what  they  say. Laurence has had  particular  difficulty in devising  realistic dialogue  for male  characters, and  for characters considerably younger  than  herself:  the two problems  came  together  disastrously  in her charac­ terization  of  Luke   Venturi  in  The   Fire-Dwellers. Her   most   believable   male characters, such  as Bram  and  Mac,  have  been  relatively  taciturn, the motivation for  their  action  largely  supplied   by the  woman  protagonist, who  explains  in  her own idiom why they may have behaved  as they did.
As we  might  expect  from  this  most  self-aware  of  novels, The  Diviners deals
with  the  problem   of stilted  dialogue  for  romantic leads  and  ingenues  by  incor­
porating the unbelievability into the characterizations, of Brooke:

"Why, Morag? Why are you so determined  to destroy me?"
This  is all the more terrible because she knows the pain is real and  yet there is something melodramatic,  to her ears, in what he is saying....
"Have  I ever?"  he says. "Have  I ever wanted  to damage  you? Never. Never. Never."
Add two more nevers and it might be Lear at the death of Cordelia.

and of Pique:

" ... anyway, I stopped at a house, and asked if I could please wash, as I'd  had a slight accident, and they called the cops."
She  tries  to  speak  my  idiom  to  me. She  never  says Pigs, cognizant  of my  rural background.

53

LAURENCE's  NARRATIVES

In  the  past  Laurence has given  mythic  dimensions  to otherwise  rather  sketchy characters  by  suggesting   that   their   relationships  to  the  protagonist  re-enact   a biblical  situation. Thus  The  Stone  Angel's  Hagar (like the  biblical  Hagar)  lives in  exile from  her  husband Bram   (Abram), and  her  son  John, like Ishmael, is also an  outcast. In  A  ]est of God  Laurence developed  the  parallels  between  Nick Kaslik  and  the  biblical  Jacob, not  only  in  his relationship to Rachel   (who,  like her  biblical  namesake,  demands of him, "Give me my children"), but  also in his relationship  to   his   twin   brother    Steve,   the   brother    who   (like   Esau),   was disinherited.
In  The Diviners,  Laurence takes  the  essential  elements  in  these  myths:   exile and  dispossession, and  reworks  them  in  Canadian terms.  These  experiences  are not  limited  to  Canadians:  Brooke  has lost his boyhood  India forever,  and  Dan McRaith, the  Scotsman, knows  no  Gaelic.  But  Brooke  retains  his language; he still has an  identity  as an  Englishman, and  McRaith retains  the land,  journeying back to Crombruach to renew  his creative  powers. The  Canadian characters have lost both  their language:

[Gaelic was]  just a lot of garbled sounds to her. Yet she played the record often, as though  if she listened to it enough, she would finally pierce the barrier of that ancient  speech....

Jules, with two languages lost, retaining  only the broken fragments of both French and Cree, and  yet speaking English as though forever it must be a foreign tongue to him.

and  their land:

I'd  like at some point  to go to Scotland  [writes Morag  to her friend Ella]  where my people come from.... it haunts me, I guess.
The  Metis, once lords of the prairies. Now refused burial space in their own land. Morag's life is an  illustration of what  will and  will not  heal  the  pain  of these
losses. Morag   loves, in  tum, three  men:  the  Englishman, Brooke  Skelton;   the
Scot, Dan  McRaith/3  and  the  Metis, Jules Tonnerre. Only  the relationship with Jules  bears  fruit,  a child  who  carries  the  blood  of the  two  people  who  possessed the  land   before  them.   Brooke  represents  the  cultural inheritance that   attracts many  Canadians to England   ("I guess there's  something about  London, as a kind of centre  of writing," says Morag), but  makes  them  feel that  their  own  country is inferior.  Dan  McRaith represents  the  country  from  which  Morag's ancestors, too long  ago for  her to  know  their  names, set out  for  Canada. But the  value  of these cultures for her, Morag  comes to realize, is mystic and not literal.
In  A  ]est of God, particularly, the demands of the myth  with  which  Laurence was working  made  the  realistic  level of the  novel less effective. All Nick's Jacob­ like revelations  are  made  to Rachel  in the  course of normal conversation, and,  as

54

LAURENCE'S NARRATIVES

has  been  pointed  out,  these  monologues  are  not  only  boring  but  unconvincing. Laurence avoided   this  failing  in  The   Diviners  by striving  less for  a  continuous narrative flow.  Christie  Logan,  Morag's guardian, is the  first spinner of tales in the  novel,  and  his stories  of  Piper  Gunn, Morag's mythic  ancestor,  are  set  off both  typographically and  stylistically from  the  rest of the  text.  Although Christie IS  always  a colourful  speaker,  the  language in the  tales  has an  archaic sonority:

Christie's First Tale of Piper Gunn

It  was in the old days, a long time ago, after  the clans was broken and scattered at  the battle on the moors, and dead  men thrown into the long graves there, and no  heather  grew  on  those  places, never  again,  for  it was  dark  places they had become and places of mourning.

Although, as  Morag   enters  adolescence,  she  begins  to  correct   Christie's  story­ telling  from  her  history books, she later  gives up the  chance  to enter Sutherland, the home of her ancestors, saying to Dan:

"It has to do with Christie. The  myths are my reality.... And also, I don't  need to go there because I know now what  I had to learn there.... I always thought it was the land of my ancestors, but it is not."
"What  is then?"
"Christie's  real country. Where I was born."

That is, Christie's  tales were valuable to Morag as myth, and  not as history.
Jules  Tonnerre, Morag's lover,  is also a  teller  of tales,  about  his Metis  ances­ tors,  Rider  Tonnerre and  Old  Jules.  As with  Christie's  tales,  the  point  is  made  that  their value does not lie in historical accuracy:

Rider  was called  Prince of the  Braves, Skinner said  [writes  Morag  to Ella],  and his rifle was named  La  Petite.  Infactuality  (if  that  isn't  a word  it should  be), those  names  pertained   to  Gabriel  Dumont,  Riel's  lieutenant   in  Saskatchewan, much  later  on.  That's   okay-Skinner's grandad   had  a  right  to  borrow  them. I like the thought of history and fiction interweaving.

Jules'  stories stand  even farther apart from  the  text  than  Christie's. After  Morag first goes to bed  with Jules, they  have  a brief conversation about  his family  as he walks  her  home.  Although we are  invited  to  assume  that  Jules  told  Morag his stories  then,  they are  grouped  together,  each  with a title, several  pages later.
When  Morag  incorporates these  tales as well as Christie's  into  her mythology, she  has  come  to  terms  with  what   Margaret Atwood  calls  the  "ambiguity" of Canadian history, for in Christie's tales Riel is a villain, and  in Jules' he is a hero. "Canadians," writes  Atwood,   "don't  know  which   side  they're   on."14   So,  the proper  response  is Morag's when,  in  relating  these stories to her small  daughter Pique, she takes neither side.
The  gift  of myth-making, like the  gift of divining,  is "finally  withdrawn to be


55

LAURENCE'S  NARRATIVES

given  to  someone  else."  There comes  a  day  when  the  adult   Morag requests  a story  about   Piper  Gunn   and  Christie  is unable  to  remember one;  when  Jules, whose  myths  had  reached  a further stage  of refinement  when  he recast  them  as folk  songs,  develops  throat cancer  and  sings no  more.  But  Pique  is also a  folk singer and will continue the myth :

Would  Pique create a fiction out of Jules, something both more and less true than himself, when she finally made a song for him, as she would one day, the song he had never brought himself to make for himself?

At  the  end  of the  novel,  Pique,  whose  restless search  for  identity  has, as the time  scheme  of the  novel allows  us to see, paralleled   Morag's own, is making  a journey  back  to  her  father's people,  with  her  grandfather's knife  as a talisman. But she also wants to carry a Scottish  plaid pin of her mother's, and Morag assures her that, when she is "gathered to her ancestors," Pique  may have it as well. And then,  symbolically,  Pique  will recover  the  birthright that  Lazarus Tonnerre and John  Shipley,  the  original  possessors of the  knife and  the  pin, and  both  exiles in their own land,  had  traded  away.
Laurence's The  Diviners is a  noble  work  with  obvious  flaws.  In  it, Laurence
probably  touches  on most of the ideas she wants to express, most of the values she wants  to  affirm  before  she  falls silent,  but  at  a  cost. The novel contains  far  too many  characters, some  of  them,  like  McRaith, important to  the  theme  of  the book, but  dull as individuals. It has far too many obtrusive  narrative devices, and while  they  were  no  doubt  carefully  considered,  they  produce a  book  much  less impressive  than  the  novel  Laurence now  considers  naive  in  narrative form,  The Stone  Angel. But  Laurence will probably  not be surprised  if the  critical  response to The  Diviners mixes respect  for  the scope of her effort  with  disappointment at its flaws:

Sure  I'm  ambitious ... extremely ambitious,  because-Heavens, let's not deceive ourselves-to try and  get down some of the paradoxes  of the human  individual with  everything  that  has gone  to influence  their  life-their  parents,  the  whole bit about  history, religion, the myth of the ancestors, the social environment,  their relationship  with other  people and  so on-even  to attempt it means attempting the impossible.

and she concludes, quoting Graham Greene:

For the serious writer, as for the priest, there is no such thing as success.15


NOTES

1 Quoted  in  Marci  McDonald,  "The  Author:   All the Hoopla  Gets her Frazzled," interview with Margaret  Laurence  in The Toronto Star,  18 May 1974, p. H5.
2    Margaret  Atwood, Survival: A Thematic Guide  to Canadian Literature (Toronto: Anansi, 1972), p. 209.

LAURENCE'S NARRATIVES

3   Donald  Cameron, ed., "Margaret Laurence: The  Black Celt  Speaks of Freedom,"
Conversations with  Canadian Novelists  (Toronto: Macmillan, 1973), p. 105.
4    Except  for The Diviners  (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1974), all quotations from  Laurence's books  are  taken  from  the  New Canadian  Library  (McClelland and  Stewart)  editions.
6    Margaret Laurence, "Ten  Years'  Sentences," Canadian Literature, 41  (Summer
1969), p. 14.
6    Robert  Harlow, "Lack  of Distance," Canadian Literature, 31 (Winter 1967), p. 74·
7    Ibid.
8   Margaret Laurence, "Author's Commentary," Sixteen  by Twelve: Short  Stories by
Canadian Writers, ed. .John Metcalfe (Toronto: Ryerson, 1970), p. 71.
9    Cameron, p. 99·
10  Robert   Fulford, "The  Book:   It's   Fascinating Despite  the  Flaws,"  The Toronto
Star,  18 May 1974, p. H5.
11  Margaret  Atwood,   "Face  to  Face," an   interview   with   Margaret Laurence in
Maclean's (May  1974), p. 44·
12   Graeme Gibson,  ed., "Margaret Laurence," in Eleven  Canadian Novelists  (Toron­
to:  Anansi, 1973), p. 189.
13  Did  Laurence intend   the  suggestion  of  insubstantiality in  these  names?  Skelton, apart from  its literary  overtones,  sounds  a little  like "skeleton": Morag  is getting the bare  bones of a culture without the substance. And McRaith suggests "wraith."
14  Atwood, Survival, p. I 70.
15  Cameron)  p. 1 14.






SUBSCRIPTIONS

UNJIVOIDJIBLE INCREJISE!

Increased production and  mailing  costs since  we last adjusted our subscription rate  are  forcing  us to increase  our  rates  in the near future.

From 1 January 1978 the annual subscription will be
$1 0.00 in Canada

$11.00 in all other countries

Single copies will cost $3.00




57

HOWELLS' CANADIAN  SISTER




James Doyle



L MARCH  oF  • 8)3,  William Dean  Howe!wrote  to  h
younger  sister Annie  to discourage  her from  making  a short  story out of a trivial
experience she  had   had  while  travelling   in  Canada. The   main  reason  for  his disapproval, as appears from  his letter,  is that  Howells  had  already  written  up the  experience   himself.  "I  acknowledge," he  writes,  "that it was  rather  selfish of me to employ that  little adventure of yours, but you know your sketch had  lain unfinished   for  nearly  two  years."1   While  Annie  thus  dabbled   laconically  at  a literary   career,   her  brother   published   Their  Wedding   Journey  ( 1871)   and   A Chance  Acquaintance   ( 1872), two  novels largely  set  in  Canada and  involving (among  other   American  tourists)    Kitty   Ellison,  who  in  the  modestly   exotic settings  of  Niagara Falls,  Montreal, and  Quebec,  emerges  as one  of the  many resourceful   and  independent international  heroines  who  pervade   the  fiction  of Howells  and  his friend  Henry  James.  As Howells  insisted  in  another letter,  his sister provided  only the suggestion  for his American  heroine  in Canada, and there is no  justification  for  making  a detailed  identification between  Kitty  Ellison  and Annie  Howells.2   But  Annie  did  not  need  the  glamour  of such  an  identification, for  she  had  already  embarked  on  a real-life  Canadian adventure of her  own.  If her  semi-autobiographical  sketch   lay  unfinished   while  her  brother   wrote  two novels,  there   was some  reason  for  her  idleness.  In  the  187o's  Annie  was  busy creating  a new life for herself north  of the border; perhaps after she settled  down as wife, mother,  and  Canadian, she would  be able  to give more  attention to her incipient  literary  career.
In  1877,  at  Quebec   City-where  her  father   William   Cooper  Howells  was American consul-Annie Howells  married  the  French-Canadian journalist  and civil servant  Achille  Frechette, the  younger  brother  of Louis  Frechette, who  was ultimately  to  become   known   as  unofficial  poet  laureate  of  French   Canada. Various   psychological   inferences   might   be  made   about   this  marriage  of  the younger  siblings of the leading  American  and  French-Canadian men of letters  in

58

ANNIE HOWELLS


the  late  nineteenth century; and  it  is undoubtedly true  that  Annie  and  Achille were to some extent drawn  together by the similarities in their respective family situations. The  basic  facts  of Achille's  career,  however,  suggest  that  he  was not intimidated by the achievements of his brilliant  and  popular brother. Initially, he hoped  to follow  Louis'  footsteps  as a  poet  (his  narrative poem  "Les  Martyrs de la  foi  au  Canada" won  honourable mention  in  the  Laval  concours  de  poesie of
I 868,  and   was  published   in  the   Revue   canadienne), but  his  ambitions  soon turned  towards journalism. Shortly  after  graduating from  Laval  in I 868, Achille emigrated  to  Chicago   to  establish   (subsequently  with  the  help  of  his  brother Louis)   a  newspaper  for  the  small  francophone community of Illinois. There he met  Annie  Howells,  recently  of  Hamilton, Ohio,  the  young  and  clever  literary editor  of the  Chicago  Inter-Ocean. When  the  Frechette brothers' enterprise  was wiped  out  by  the  Chicago  fire of  187 1 and  they  decided  to  return  to Canada, Annie  was able  to follow them,  with  the excuse of visiting her father  in Quebec City  and  her  brother  who  was established  as a writer  and  editor  in Boston. By the  time  Achille  felt  prepared to take  on the  responsibilities  of marriage, he had abandoned  full-time   journalism   to  become   chief  translator  of  the   Canadian House  of Commons. He and  Annie settled  in Ottawa, where they remained  until Achille's retirement in 1910.3
From  the  187o's  until  around the  turn  of the  century,  after  which  she wrote
for  publication  only  very  occasionally,  Annie  regularly   contributed to  various American magazines.  For the most part she inclined  toward the so-called "domes­ tic  sentimentalist" school  of  popular fiction  which  exalted   romantic  love,  the virtues  of home  and  fireside, and  the domination of resourceful  women over well meaning but  less capable men. At the same time, she absorbed  some of  the realist principles  expounded by her  brother, particularly the  emphasis  on  the  ordinary and   commonplace  experiences   of  middle-class   Americans.   Unfortunately, she did  not follow William's precepts  about  the importance of  writing  from  personal experience, and  thus  she left  completely  undeveloped the one  aspect  of her own life  which   might   have   provided   the  most  fruitful  literary   material. Her   one attempt  at  a  story  based  on  her   Canadian  experiences   was  abandoned  after  William  wrote  of the  American girl  in  Canada in  A Chance  Acquaintance. But in  spite  of  its  very  clear  limitations,  Annie's fiction  is  by  no  means  devoid  of interest.
Her   first   significant   publication,  a   short   novel   entitled    "Reuben  Dale,"
appeared serially  in the  Galaxy  during the  winter  of 1874-75· As a first work  it is quite  promising,  especially in its reflection  of the  new  realist  trends  in fiction. The   central   situation  involves  a  woman   in  her  late   twenties   who  has  been disappointed in love and  who marries  a much  older  man  to avoid  spinsterhood. Shortly  afterward, she  meets Reuben Dale,  a young  and  handsome army  officer recently   returned  from   the   western   frontier.   The   conflict   and   psychological

59

ANNIE HOWELLS

interest  of  the story arises, however, not from  a  conventional  representation  of illicit love in the manner  of nineteenth-century  melodrama,  but rather  from the tension between the heroine's awareness of her sexual attraction  to Dale and her recognition  of  the  relative  comfort  and  security  she  has  found  with  her  un­ romantic  but  dutiful  husband.  The  best scenes in the  novel trace  in  detail  the heroine's  growing devotion to the  placid  course of domestic and  social routine, and  her acceptance  of both the virtues and  defects of her  husband's  personality. But the ultimate  direction of the story is towards an emphatic  assertion of tradi­  tional  morality:   the  would-be  lovers  are  punished   by  a  gratuitously  violent catastrophe,  even though they have committed adultery only in thought.
The  conclusion of "Reuben  Dale" also involves a false report of death by train
wreck,  a  plot  development  which  William  Dean  Howells  was  to  use in  The Quality of Mercy   ( 18g2). Like the American girl in Canada  motif of A Chance Acquaintance, the train  wreck episode is one of several examples of the fruitful exchange of ideas between William and Annie throughout  their respective writing careers. This  exchange is probably  reflected, although  indirectly, in Annie's next published  work of fiction, a short  story entitled  "Le  Coureur  des Bois" which appeared  in  the  May  1876  Scribner's  Monthly. The  immediate  inspiration  for the  story  was the  latest  volume in  Francis  Parkman's  narrative  history France and  England  in  North  America, for Annie took as an epigraph  a quotation  from The  Old  Regime  in Canada  ( 1874)  describing the colourful renegade fur traders of New France.  But she undoubtedly  found  her way to Parkman  through  Wil­ liam, for her attitude  towards Parkman's version of Canadian history is similar to that  which  William  expressed in  a  tribute  to  the  historian  in Their  Wedding journey. Although  Howells had  great  admiration  for  Parkman's  narrative  skill and  found  in  the  histories many  clues to  an  understanding  of  the  differences between  the  United  States and  Canada  of his own time, he rejected Parkman's exaltation  of  the  epic struggle  between  France  and  England.  For  Howells, the most positive aspect of New World  history was the fact that  the primitive world of  the  French  and  Indian  wars  had  been  replaced  by a  peaceful,  progressive, unheroic, and  essentially democratic  way of  life. Much  the same point, although expressed in a very different way, is made in Annie's "Le Coureur des Bois."
In  this story, a  young  French-Canadian girl leaves her father's  farm  on the St. Lawrence to marry a renegade fur trader  and try to adapt  to his nomadic life in the wilderness. The  brutishly masculine world of the coureurs  almost destroys her, and she finally attempts  to make her way through  the winter wilderness back to  her  father's   house.  The   possible victory  of  primitivism  over  civilization  is thwarted   by  a  last-minute   rescue  from  a  freezing  death  after  the  repentant husband  has set out in pursuit of her. The  conclusion, with the triumph  of what the  nineteenth  century  would regard  as female  values, is as domestic and  senti­ mental as some of the early scenes of "Reuben  Dale," or (to compare great things

6o

ANNIE HOWELLS


with  small)   the  conclusion  of  Jane  Eyre.  But  the  story  is also  a  celebration of progress and  civilization  over  primitivism  and  wildness:  a rejection  of Parkman's ancien Canada  in favour of William  Dean Howells' America.




AFTER THE LIMITED  but  promising  beginning of "Reuben Dale"   and  "Le   Coureur des  Bois,"  Annie's  literary   career   followed,  somewhat like  her  brother's but  on  a  much  smaller  scale,  a  rather eclectic  course.  In  the
I 88o's  she  published   in  Harper's   a  couple  of  articles  on  Canada designed  to
inform  Americans about  certain  unique  facets of life in the  northern Dominion, and  to advertise  the  attractions of the  country  as a tourist  resort. "Life  at Rideau Hall"  (July  I 88 I )   is  a  gossipy  description   of  the  English  governor-general's residence  in  Ottawa  and   the  brilliant   social  life  associated   with  it.  "Summer Resorts  on  the  St.  Lawrence" (July   I 884)   is a  rather  snobbish  account  of the various  spas  in  the  Thousand  Islands   region  which   attracted  the  fashionable tourists every summer. Her  short stories, with such  titles as "A  Visit to a Country House  and  What Came  of It" (Harper's, Sept.   I 877), "Isabel, Elsie,  and  I" (New England   Magazine, Oct.   I8go), "How Cassie  Saved  the  Spoons"  (Mc­ Clures,   Sept.   I 893),  are   mostly  slight   and   semi-comic   domestic  adventures, vaguely  resembling in  theme  and  tone  the  many  dramatic farces which  William was turning out  at  about  the same  time  for quick  profit from  periodical  publica­ tion  and   amateur  production. In  addition, Annie  published  two  collections  of short  stories  for  children, On  Grandfather's  farm  and  The Farm's  Little  People (both  I 897).
In  other  words,  Annie  developed  into  an  efficient but  unremarkable magazine
writer,  most  of whose  efforts  have  justifiably  remained buried  in the  periodicals or  limited  editions  where  they  first  appeared. Only  two  of  her  later  stories  are worth  further brief mention. "The Chances of War  and  How  One  Was  Missed" (Harper's, Sept.   I8Br) is a civil war  story which  explores  defeated  illusions and the  destruction of a society  in  dream-like retrospective episodes,  and  avoids  the sentimental  ending   inherent in  the  rather   trite   romantic situation  involving  a wounded   Union  officer  and  a southern belle.  Of  greater   interest,  however,  and perhaps   Annie's   best  work  of  fiction,  is  the  brief  "Widow in  the  Wilderness" (Harper's, Dec.   I8gg). Here,  the  subject   is an  Indian woman   who  has  been abandoned with  her children near  a trading post somewhere in the northern wilderness. The story consists of the vaguely sympathetic but uncomprehending comments  on  the  woman  made  by a group  of white  men.  In  the end,  they leave a  small  supply  of  food  near  her,  which  she  neither  accepts  nor  acknowledges; and  the  white  men  pass on, uncertain of but  eventually  indifferent to her fate.
The  concise and  entirely  objective  representation of the  Indian woman  recalls

6x

ANNIE HOWELLS


the  poems of Duncan Campbell Scott,  another Ottawa resident  and  civil servant with  whom  the  Frechettes were  possibly acquainted. If, as is quite  likely, Annie had  been reading such  poems as "The  Forsaken" or "The Onondaga Madonna," she  found  a literary  model  which  might  have  provided  fruitful compensation for the excessive sentimentality, the simplistic  characterization and other  faults which derived   partly   from  the  influence  of  her  brother's writing,  and  from  her  own limitations. But  Annie  not  only  failed  to  develop  this line of fiction;  after  I goo she  published  only  one short  story,  and  a tribute to  her  brother  on  his death  in Ig2o.   Her  rather   abortive  literary   career  reflects  two  facts:   she  was essentially an  amateur without  the all-absorbing commitment which  is surely one of the distinguishing features  of  the  true  artist,  and  she  was  an  unoriginal writer  who in  her  best  work  merely  shows  a  talent  for  reproducing certain   techniques and themes  developed   by  others.  Whatever interest  her  work  may  have  belongs  to the obscure  corners of literary  history where one finds the curious and occasionally interesting stories of the relatives of important authors.

NOTES
1 Manuscript letter,  quoted  in Jonathan Thomas and  David  J. Nordloh, "Introduc­
tion,"  A  Chance   Acquaintance, by W. D.  Howells  (Bloomington,  I97I), p. xxv.
2   Ibid., p. xxiv.
3  A brief account of the career  and  family life of Achille Frechette is given in Lucien
Serre,   Louis   Frechette:  Notes   pour  servir  a la  biographie   du  poete  (Montreal,
I 928),  pp.  I 73-76.



ONEBOUND,ONEFREE
 


James Harrison


Struggled and  felt the  bonds  tighten  that  manacled
Wrists  behind  the mast  at  his back;  shouted
And  watched  his words  break  like waves over  barnacled
Heads  of rowers  he never  knew  he hated
Till  then,  sealed in their  petty  to-fro  rocking Preoccupation with  being somewhere  tomorrow Other than  where  they were  today,  and  blocking Out the  unendurable joy and  sorrow
All around them.
Safe from success, allowed
Himself  to understand, as a dying
Body poised between  being and  unbeing
Since  birth  understands what  it  has swallowed, The  burden of that  song that  only he
And Orpheus heard  unscathed, one bound,  one free.

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS OF LOVE




Debbie Foulks




TE CREATIVE  INDIVIDUAL  often  ;, torn   by  ffiternal  emo­
tional  strife.  Perhaps such  conflict  is an  indispensable ingredient for  sustaining
the   creative   urge.   Certainly  Dorothy  Livesay's   Collected  Poems-The  Two Seasons reveals  a  repeated sense of  conflict; one  of  her  major  themes  involves the  contradiction inherent in romantic love. In  her  poems she vacillates  between her  desire  to  be  independent, to  remain  in  control  of her  personal  destiny,  and her willingness to submit  passively to male domination. Her  romantic feelings are further complicated by their  interplay with  her  intense  interest  and  involvement in the  major  social issues and  political  movements of her time. These  two sources of  personal   conflict  repeatedly furnish   themes  for  the  poetry  Dorothy   Livesay wrote over a fifty year span of literary productivity.
Prior  to her  most  concentrated period  of political  activity  in the  r 93o's, Live­ say's  poetry  exhibited   a  steady  romantic emphasis.  The  intimate  verses  which Livesay  wrote  in  her  late  teens  and  early  twenties  display  a  precocious  poetic talent  and  a  fervent  emotional intensity.  They  also reflect  her  obsessive  reliance on the conventional sex roles which were taken for granted  in the society in which she lived. They  reveal her personal  vulnerability to the destructive effects of these stereotyped   patterns of love  relationships. Yet,  even  in  this  youthful period,  the poet occasionally  shows a resentful  reaction  against  these  constricting influences.
Livesay's early poetry indicates  that  she prides herself on such typically feminine
characteristics as  a spontaneous and  instinctual reaction  to love rather  than  the objective,  abstract or intellectual approach which she considers  to be typically masculine.    This   attitude  is  exemplified   by   "Interrogation,"  where   the   poet challenges   her  lover  to  unreservedly  reciprocate  the  honesty  of  her  advances, to  accept the   reversal of  sanctioned  male-female proprieties. "If I come unasked," she queries,  "Will  you mind?/Will you be therejReady?" If she is the aggressor, the  initiator of a sexual  encounter, will her lover  accordingly respond without   equivocation-"forget what  ... [he]    ever  learned   of  etiquette?" She

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS

berates the lack of impulsive spontaneity  in her lover when he rationally puts off the hour of their meeting from early morning  until noon, a deliberateness which she attributes  somewhat  sarcastically to the alleged differences beween men and women. "Certainly: welljl've knownjMen need to be alone- (Why Am I not the same?/ Is love a single game?) "
"The   Difference"  also displays her  irritation  with  her  lover's slow, premedi­
tated approach  to love. She is exasperated  with his failure to respond quickly and intuitively to emotions. She feels that  his attitude  betrays hesitation and a lack of intensity of feeling towards her. She is indignant  at the insecurity which his lack of passion engenders. She compares  his love-making to a scientist's study of the seasonal cycle of a tree's foliage. "As if," she declares, "The  beauty of the thing could  bejMade lovelier or  marred  by any  mood/Of  wind ... as ifjAII  beauty had  not sprung  up with the seed." She is incensed that  he is slower to embrace their  love than  she;  that  he wants  to  know  all  her  qualities  before making  a commitment,  afraid  that  their relationship  could be marred  by changing moods. Such  hesitant  love she asserts is self-defeating and  deprives the act of love of its most intense enjoyment. "With  such slow ways you find no time to love/ A falling flame, a flower's brevity." Similar feelings are delineated in "Sea-flowers ... that sway  in  water/Beyond   the  arm  of light ... are  cold and  waxen  and  remote,/ Drifting  downward  out  of sight."  She concedes that  his contemplations  may be more complex, theoretical and thus immutable,  but she feels that they are inferior to the tanglible beauty of the concrete  joys of life. "Thus though  they be eternal/ Unheeding  suns or snowsji choose the trembling  flower of earth/That  breathes before it goes."
Woman  viewed  as  the  passive recipient  of  the  masculine  energy  force is a
theme displayed in an early poem, "The  Forsaken."  The  poet's identification of herself with  a  stone,  "grey  with  water's  passion,"  invokes the  self-image of a passive, lifeless victim of powerful natural  forces which assume masculine form. She and  her feelings often are personified in the form of inanimate  objects. The erosion of stone  by wind and  by the sweep of water might  be taken to represent the general social forces and  antagonisms  which  batter  our  lives, but the use of the  word  "kiss" in conjunction  with  the  wind seems to connote  a  male image.
An embryonic awareness of the situation  of women in her society is evident in her early poems, if sometimes indirectly. "Song of the Multitudes" contains many allusions to  the  boredom,  monotony  and  dissatisfaction inherent  in  housework. The  woman  in this  poem rationalizes  her dreary  domestic chores which  would become bearable if only her longing for a communion with nature  were satisfied. "Then  I could turn  within, tum  to my work/in  the house and learn these other ways," she reasons. Meanwhile,  her husband's  work traps  her in the city where she  depends  solely upon  him  for  consolation  and  companionship.  His  return home  becomes  the  highlight  of  her  day.  Because she  wishes to  live with  her

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS

husband, she must comply with the lifestyle which his job dictates. But her resignation to her situation is fraught  with resentment. The love which she shares with her husband  becomes a painful prison. Alone with her torment, she addresses her invective to the  mental  effigy of her  oppressor. "Therefore I say in all the beggar prayers/You  do not hear," she silently addresses him, "love is a prisoned place,jLove  is a darkness with one blinding lamp/To lighten it, where ever our tired  eyes/Must  gaze unswervingly or else we lose/All sense, all sight. Therefore I cry alone,/Let me go, let me fly away, let me find peace/Untroubled by the warring of two selves." She feels her nature  as a woman repressed, as she is beset with  these  contradictory  emotions. "So ... jBy little things  you hold me from the door/,'' she states; "Bid me to sing within when some far voice/Integrally my own is hushed, is dumb."  Today  thoughts  such as these have  become  common­ place in the quest for release from sexually stereotyped roles.
The  Lawrencian  image of the male as the embodiment  of darkness and power, the female as passivity and  light recurs throughout  her poetry. "Bartok  and  the Geranium" provides a colourful example of this symbolism. She, the geranium, "preens  herself in the light,''  which is sufficient for her natural  growth,  but the genius  of  "Bartok" requires  a  more  expansive  area.  "He   whirls/Explodes   in space/  ... Not  even  can  he  be/confined   to  the  sky/But  must  speed  high/and higher still/From galaxy to galaxy ... She's Daylight/He is dark."  She remains serene, calm and  benevolent, in contrast to his wild intensity. When  his madness is spent,  her patience  triumphs.  Thus,  the two spectral  opposites of male-female interaction,   one  dynamic  and  aggressive, the  other  resilient  and  yielding  are depicted  as compatible,  complementary,  and  mutually sustaining forces.
Enduring  love for the  poet often  is presented as an elusive and  unattainable
goal.  "If It  were  Easy"  conveys her  wish that  she  could  secure  strength  and "succour"  from  love as easily as she can  gain  warmth  from  a fire. If only she could "creep  close up  to love," then  she would  be shielded from  "Cold  heavy evenings/Storm-bound,  outside  the  door."  "Alienation" expresses her  chagrin at  being excluded from the "radiance" of the male domain. She implies that she would be content  merely to hover around  her lover as a moth around  a candle! A poem in the "Garden of Love" conveys a yearning for her lover to "Shape  her" to his "will,'' since she has "failed" and "hated" loving him. She pleads with him to "Forget  the hurt  [she]  had not meant to do." Similar displays of passivity and self-effacement recur throughout  her poetry.
Livesay's dependence  on self-definition through  earning  male esteem emerges in poems such as "Chained,'' "Dusty"  and  "Time," where the poet is unable to reconcile  herself to  the  end  of  a  relationship.  Despite  physical separation  she yearns to retain  a spiritual  tie with her former  lover, a "bond,'' that  still defies " ... angry scrutiny."  She continues to sense her lover's intangible  presence even after  his departure from  her immediate  life. "I think  you buried -/Tum  and

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS


see/Along my  path/Your shadow  dart." The  memory  of  her lover is compared to an  old  glove that  continues  to fit despite  its age  and  disuse. In  imploring her lover  to "not  seek/The letting-go," she seems to dread  the time  when she will no longer  please  him,  when  he will regard  her  as a "couch, a chair/You've grown too  used to, and  admire no morejits modem flair."  When  he is gone, Livesay is still  haunted  by  her  lingering  attachment to  her  absent   love:   "I turn  to  run through fields alone/Or seek companions in  a wood-/I find  your  feet  before me goneji am  made  captive  where  you stood." Even  in her bereavement love is tenacious,  and  in  her  distress she  empathizes with  whatever  similar  feelings her former  lover  may  be experiencing "because," she  admits,  "pain   has  the  face  of love, even while it strikes."  She laments her inability  to dispense with  the persist­ ing  sentimental remnants of a  lost love. She  bemoans  the  fact  that  she  has  not "learned ... after  this terrible,  beautiful loving/The way of lovejWhen it  goes."
Her  anxiety  that  love will lead to a shattering psychological  crisis also is evident
in  "Climax." Here  she  finds herself an  instrument of her  lover's  will. Her  heart is  "stretched  on  wires,jtight,  tight ... even  the  smallest   wind ... /Can set  it quivering- j And   simply   a   word   of  yours,jHowever  slight,jCould  make   it snap,"-a catastrophe which  seems inevitable.  Afterwards, love's warm  illusions are  replaced   by  an  attitude of  cold  detachment. "Consideration" outlines  the ensuing  bitterness: "A  biting  analysis/ of one  another ... " followed  by  the sort of  stilted   conversation  which   displaces   intimacy   during  a  time  of  emotional severance-"A   placing   of   words/On  little   shelves/ As  one   touches   delicate china." When  separation becomes  necessary, she  leaves  his arms,-"to  break/ Joy's fearful  snare."
The  positive  attributes which  she  sees in  love relationships often  are  counter­
poised  with  their  paralyzing negative  aspects.  Livesay  realizes  that  her  idealiza­ tion  of the  male  is a demeaning force  that  compels  her against  her  will. Love is a  cage  in  which  she  becomes  a  powerless  captive.  Yet  her  painful  addiction is compensated by the immense  joy she feels while safely under  the male aegis. The  poet's  fears  of conspiracies  within  the  night,  of the  darker, malevolent  elements of  nature are  allayed  by the  soothing  presence  of  her  lover:  "My safety  is with you,  who  lie  asleep."  The  "guardian  angel" which  Livesay  had  imagined   as a child  is  replaced   by  her  lover  and  she  is  at  the  mercy  of  harsh  realities  only when  he is absent.  "Song  for Departure" describes a temporary separation from her  lover  as  making   her  "common again/To  have  common  care." Love  is the passion  that   transforms   all  banalities,  all  mundane  objects   and  events  into  a meaningful whole. Yet like a "fever," its external  flush of excitement conceals  an inner   core   of  potentially   debilitating   disease,  of  insecurity   and   dependency. "Weapons" details  her  efforts  to  protect  herself from  the  enervating effects and uncertainties of this  consuming  dependency by her  creative  efforts  and  by more reliable   and   impersonal   intellectual  satisfactions.  Here   Livesay   refers  to   her

66

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS


persistent   efforts  to  remain   creative   despite  her  adverse  personal  circumstances and  frustrated loves. The  tools of her craft -pen, desk and  reading  lamp -are the  weapons   that   sustain   her  fight  to  comprehend and  define  "A  dark   [she] never learns to know."
On  the  other  hand,   Livesay  also  is obsessed  with  the  struggle  to figuratively penetrate and  possess her  male  lovers.  She  displays constant  frustration at  what seems  to  her  to  be  the  implacable, inviolable   nature   of  the  male.  "Symbols" portrays  male  affection  as a  house in which  the  poet dwells. The  poet views the man  as a  base of security,  a self-contained unit  which  remains  intact  in spite of her  attempts at  occupation. She  feels that  she  is "importunate without." She  is indignant at  being  barred  entry  from  the  man's  essential  centre  of being.  When she finally manages  to realize her intention, either  by manipulation of some weak­ ness in  the  male,  or  by  intense  insistence  and  pressure,  she  discovers  that   her object  has  eluded  her.  Once  "inside" the  "house  core,"  she finds either  that  her lover  is a  "bare, dusty  room," or  that  he has "fled." By being  overly eager  and intense,  she  has  transgressed  the  subtle  laws of male-female  interaction. She  has destroyed   the  relationship  by  plunging too  quickly.  Once  again  she  is barred  from the sanctuary in which she longs to take refuge.


0URING THE  ECONOMIC   upheavals of the  I 930's,  Livesay's preoccupation  with   love  no  longer   dominated  her   poetry.   She   concentrates
instead  on  the  crucial  social issues of the  time,  giving  a diverse  and  comprehen­ sive picture  of the dreary  conditions  arising from  the depressing  and  the marginal existence  of the  majority of  people  during  this decade.  Nevertheless, the  tone  of her   poems   remains   assertive.   The   poems   are   defiant   of  the   political   forces responsible  for  this  historical  disaster,  strong  in their  advocacy  of socialism,  and rousing  in  their  aspiration for  revolution. The  occasional  references  to  personal love in her  poems arc  now  put  into  a more general  social  perspective,  or at  least tempered   by an  awareness  of their  relative  insignificance.  Personal  tribulation is dwarfed  by overwhelming catastrophes of a universal implication.
"Comrade" reflects upon  the pleasant  memory  of one night  Livesay spent  with
a man,  an  isolated  episode which  brought her great  fulfillment  "love  more sweet than  IjHave ever known;  without  an aftertaste." This single incident  of  consum­ mation   was  devoid  of  egotistical  concern.   Years  later,  upon  meeting  the  man,  she sees him  as he now appears-changed from  the  vivid youth  of her memory into   a  "Grey  man/Without  dreams,/Without  a  living  or  an   overcoat." The  image  is not  a physically attractive one, having  shed its romantic illusions. Never­ theless, because they are both  committed to a similar political goal, and are united in a  humanistic love for people, their  shared  objectives  draw them  together  more

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS

firmly than  a physical embrace. "Sealed in struggle now," they are closer than if their  "bodies   were  sealed  in  love."  Although   romantic  symbolism still  finds frequent  use, as in "I Never Hear," the poet seems more relaxed. She has become reconciled to realities which include more than one aspect of the human condition. Her  social commitments  seem to  have displaced  those of a  more personal sort.
The  political climate of the forties and  fifties appears  to have shaped  some of
the  poet's  strength.  Her  dismay  at  the  social  situation  tempers  her  personal relationships. The  course of political developments did not evolve along the lines which  the  poet  had  envisioned. The  first years of  this  phase  are  those of the second World War, a period that is distinguished from all others not only because it  provided  an  unremitting   malevolent  enemy  who  perpetrated   atrocities,  but also because it  ushered in the atomic  bomb. With  the deployment of this bomb on Hiroshima  and  Nagasaki, one of the most horrific chapters  in human  history was begun-one  which  through  McCarthyism,  the  advent  of the "cold  war," and  numerous colonial wars, particularly  in Vietnam,  continues into the present. The  love portrayed  by Livesay in  this period is more than  a compensation  for personal  mishaps  and  minor  hardships.  Now love serves to assuage the anxiety and  agony  occasioned  by more  terrible  tragedies and  imminent  dangers.  "Day and  Night" illustrates her use of love as an antidote and  refuge against the harsh and  pervasive social realities which arise amidst the chaos of war. The  poet calls "to  lovejDeep  in dream/ ... Be with me in the pounding/In the knives against my back/Set your voice resounding/Above the steel's whip  crack."  This  poem also shows her anguish  at the  prevalence of death  on such a massive scale. She views love as a numbing anodyne while her own personal life absurdly continues: "It seemed a poor  thing  to do, to wed ... /When  Spain  cast a ballot and  was outraged,  raped/In an olive grove, by a monastery  wall. It seemed no time for love." Yet in the last of her "Seven  Poems for Duncan," she accepts somewhat reluctantly  the fact  that  "Life  goes on ... No hazard  here, for we/Like  sleepers plunging  deep/Into recurring  waves of  dreamjCannot awake  from  that  con­ nected bliss./  We are asleep on the long limb of time." Thus  love is the dream that  counteracts  a nightmarish  reality. "Lullaby" depicts the poet as hungry for love's sedative:  "drug  me and  dope me,jdress  me with love's fine hand/Till the end of our time."
Throughout the fifties, Livesay's insight into the social position of the female is becoming more concrete and  definite, and provides a leitmotif which counter­ acts  her  reliance  on love as a distraction  from social reality. Despite  the social forces,  pressures  and  conditionings  of  her  society, and   her  role  as  wife  and mother, she is attempting  to define her identity as an independent  woman. The  joys of  child-bearing   (as  in  "Carnival" and  "Serenade  of  Spring,")  and  the security of the family structure, were rewarding, but also involved time-consuming responsibilities. Her new focus of personal concerns tended to displace her outside

68

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS

political interests. However, she displays a growing awareness of the inherent limitations  of the  maternal  role. She  begins "The  Three  Emily's"  (referring  to Bronte,  Dickinson  and  Carr) ,  with  the  assertion  that  she  pities  their  lack  of fulfillment through  male-female union  and  motherhood.  The  three are "crying" in her head, and walk alone. In the second verse she acknowledges their unencum­ bered freedom. Their liberty was intellectual, natural and spiritual, and the world which  they  had  interpreted  so  beautifully  became  their  love.  "Their  kingdom
was the skyf ...From wandering  lonely they could  catch/The inner  magic of
a  heath- fA lake their  palette,  any  tree/Their brush  could  be."  In  the third verse she still insists that  each  one, "separate  man in woman's form,"  is jealous
of the  poet's fulfillment as a mother.  She imagines them reproachful  of her gift for creating human  life. However, she realizes that  because of her familial commitment  some of  her  artistic  freedom  is denied  her,  and  "only  for  a  brief
span/Am I an  Emily on mountain  snows ... f And so the whole that  I possess/
Is  still  much  less."  In  the  final  analysis,  the  whole  that  she  possesses-the combination   of  motherhood   and   creativity-seems inferior   to  their   perfect concentration  on and  integration  into the realm of artistic creation. Because they are  liberated  from  the  conventions  and  demands  to  which  Livesay is subject, they "move triumphant" through  her head and she is the one uncomforted.  The "Other" provides a stronger  reiteration  of this theme,  but  now  it is transposed to a realization  of man's constricting effect on women and some of the attitudes responsible for perpetuating  this relation. Most men do not see beyond the femi­ nine stereotype, one which defines a woman in terms of her capacity and willing­ ness to meet their  needs and  desires. They fail to recognize her  inherent  human potential. To  do so might threaten  the sanctity of their "property." Men, Livesay declares, "prefer  an island/With its beginning ended ... /A  road/circling, shell­ like/Convex  and fossiledjForever  winding inward ... A woman/Held as a shell/ On  a sheltering island." Livesay states that she can no longer comply with these limitations  and  be an  introverted  refuge,  symbiotically dependent  on  her  male companion.  She, the poet asserts, is "a mainland" ranging from "Upper country to the inner  core." She challenges anyone to show her some facet of life she has not experienced  in the expansive  travels of her thoughts  and  the comprehensive range of her emotions. Her final affirmation of her integrity is that she no longer needs to prove her capacities to others. The  experiences she has had  are totally beyond  their  comprehension.  She  consists of components  that  "none  shall tres­ pass: jNone   possess." The  kind  of  "mainland" she  embodies  defies definition because of "its inaccess." A woman whose thoughts and interests are so expansive is too much  for the  majority of men to handle.  Livesay's independence  and  her growing  disillusionment  with  her  original  vision frequently  find  expression in these  later  poems. "Wedlock" proclaims  her  existential awareness of the soul's ultimate  isolation,  even  in  love and  her  longing  to  overcome  this separation.

6g

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS

Despite  the  unity  of their flesh, "two  lovers must remain/ ... in each  alone ... prisoned  yet/As  soul alone must thresh/in body's net;jAnd our  two souls weep inwardly."   "On   Looking  into  Henry  Moore"  forcefully  expresses this  theme. Here  the poet portrays the conflicting characteristics of maleness and femaleness as embodied  in their opposing socially prescribed symbols. "When  I have found/ Passivity in fire/ and  fire in stone ... " the synthesis of the two will yield a com­ plete self-contained  person. "Female  and  malejl'll rise alone ... /self-extending and  self-known."  Like the legendary  Phoenix, she will be  resurrected and stand "anew,  alone ... /Devoid  of flesh ... this hasty dress." She would then be "one unit/As a tree or a stone/Woman in man, and man in  womb." A being uniting the features of both sexes, she then would be self-sufficient and truly independent.  While  this  extreme  and   dramatic   device  for  release  from  the  constraints  of "human bondage" seems a rather  alienating solution, it sharply defines the poet's yearning  to  be a "whole  self," to attain  a  kind of completion she usually finds only incompletely in sexual intercourse.
Livesay's later  poetry  also reveals her  increasing social cynicism, an  attitude
engendered  by her disillusionment with the Russian Revolution and its repressive policies under  Stalin's  rule, and  by the ensuing hostilities rampant  in the atmo­ sphere  of the cold war.  Her  poems express a more general and  diffuse humani­ tarian   philosophy.  She  prophesies  a  bleak  future  for  contemporary  youth  in "Generation  1955."  In  her  view, they  are  living  hedonistic  lives,  oblivious to social issues. In the economic upsurge and  material affluence which followed the war, she charges that they parasitically "lapped  it to their lips." They are ignorant of the empathetic bonds which  united  participants  in the earlier social struggles in  which  the  poet was involved. "They  never learned;" she  mourns, "They  see us, but are blind."
"After  Hiroshima" is an admission of defeat. The  visions and  revelations have
vanished. "The  beating rain bears no message for man;  ... No hearts dare listen while fear stirs  the womb.  What  the right  hand  doeth, stirring  the pot of evil/ The  hydrogen  brew;  the left hand  knows not, is sleeping." The  effusive lyricism which once characterized  Livesay's imagery is being replaced with apocalyptic visions that  are  more compatible  with the times. The  poet finds but a vestige of hope for the future  in the vigilance of the succeeding generation;  "Only  a child's belief,  rocked  in  a  cradle  of  doubt,jCan  prophesy our  safety;  illuminate  our hope."  However, lacking confidence in the form which future  political solutions may  take,  she seems to  retreat  from  the  vanguard  of  the social struggle.  Her despair is evident in her pain at foreseeing the future  of her grandchild's  world: "It's going to take a hundred  years to annihilate  a peoplejto  bitter the ricefields with bloodjdry Delta's  water into salt-/ a hundred  yearsjso our grandchildren growing  upjand their  children/Will be humans  who feel no pity/for  the green earth/ and  who  look  upon  procreation/with  indifference ... /When I  see my

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS


grandchild running/in a game of football/his helmet  is emptyfin his right  arms/ he  carries  his head." Thus  pessimism  pervades  her vision of mankind's potential for  survival.   Though still  militant, her  writing  subsides  from  the  revolutionary invective  in  which  she  had  once  been  so eloquent. Perhaps these  social factors contributed to  the  re-emphasis on  love  which  appears in  Livesay's  later  poetry. The  intensity  of her  response  to love seems to vary  with  the  fluctuations in  her personal and social outlook.
The  images  of  her  later   poems  remain   couched  in  idealized  terms  and  her evocation  of love  and  nature are  sometimes  lofty.  However, she  displays  a  new maturity in  assessing love, and  seems reconciled  to certain  immutable discrepan­ cies  between  her  ideal  visions and  expectations and  the  limitations  and  frailties of human beings.  She leaves  her  vision of perfectible  love to her  dreams,  where " ... no faltering/Grew between  your tree  and  mine." She  becomes more objec­  tive, even  in  her  personal  relations,  and  can  examine  her  own  emotions  and  put them  into  a  perspective  that  helps somewhat to alleviate  her former  compulsion  to  possess her  lover, and  her  reluctance to relinquish  him.  "Letter at  Midnight" and   "The  Morning After" show  her  growing  recogntion  of  the  seeds  of  her restlessness with  a  provocative   bravado that   has  hitherto been  absent,  at  least in  such  bold  form.  She  is  not  begging,   but  rather  demanding that   her  lover "Behave to  [her] with  love,"  for  she  is a  "country field/  untamed/Restless for rider." The   terrain   of  her  mental and  physical  nature is complex  and  full  of traps   that   need  careful   exploration and  contemplation. Her  former  self-efface­ ment  is replaced  with  pride.  She is a challenge  that  "Only a thorough-bred could hurdle  ... Only   a  bold  surefooted  beast/would venture." She  is inured   to  the pain  of  desertion  by a lover.  She  has  become  hardened, even  cynical.  She  now lives a life "On the  fringe  of  feeling-... Hard  sense builds  me a door/Where
I survey  the  morning." She  can  now sec beyond  immediate personal  pain  to the persistent  continuity of life. She  recognizes  that  "Tears will not  build  again  the house long planned/Nor man the bastion."




LIVESAY's RENEWED  dependence on love, in her more recent poems, is accompanied by expressions  of greater  physical need, although her tone becomes  more  cynical,  and  she  is wary  of emotional pitfalls.  Her  awareness  of the  implications of the  ageing  process heightens  her  concern  with  her mortality. An  alerted  sense  of  the  imminence of  a  vague  but  malevolent fate  prompts   a regression  to  her  former  image  of a  passive compliance in love. These  later  love poems  are  preoccupied with  physical  description, and  convey  a tone  of pathetic eagerness.   However,   they   deal   honestly   with   a  period   of  the   poet's   psychic

71

LIVESAY's TWO SEASONS

development  which is characteristic  of many women in our society who are past middle age.
"Notations of Love" describes Livesay's struggle to surmount  the signs of age­
ing. In spite of the "crow's feet" around  her eyes, the "skeleton of leaves," her lips stay fresh, "allowing the tongue to unsheathe its secret skin and bolt the lightning in." Clearly the ageing process has not quenched  her sensual requirements. Her descriptions of her own body are highly critical when she is not subject to the admiration  and  appreciation  of a lover. This self-deprecation  is exemplified by "Sorcery," a poem in which she depicts her features as witch-like; her breasts "withered  gourds," when they are not the objects of a lover's caresses. "Not  to be touched  and  swept by your arm's  force," she tells her lover, "gives me the ague/ turns  me  into  a  witch."  She  implores  the  "engineer  of spring"  to  restore  her vitality, to "magic  mejout of insanity/from scarecrow into girl again."  "Journey East" longingly laments that  " ... you cannot  hold what vanishes ... the essence is ... to catch  the bird in season/hold, hold a snowdrop/  ... then let it go."
"The  Touching" typifies Livesay's renewed but somewhat demeaning and self­
conscious approach  to love in her later poetry. She gains release from her disquiet­ ing  realizations only in the  dissolution of her identity  into that  of  another.  She requests her  lover to shelter  her  "from  the shiver of dawn."  She  urges him  to physically penetrate her "Again gently/so the penis completing me ... is my second heart  beating ... jl drown  in  your  identity."  "Four  Songs"  reveals the  poet's perceptive  self-awareness of  the  forces  that  motivate  her  sexual  relationships. "Give  me the  will you said/and in return/take from  my  fill of passion ... You did it from design/!from compulsion." "Eve"  finds her  jubilant that her powers
of attraction  are not yet extinguished:  "In  fifty seconds, fifty summers sweep and
shake me-/ am alive !jl can stand/up still/hoarding this apple/in my hand." "The  Skin  of Time"  gives voice to  her  vigorous resistance to the  constrictions which society imposes on ageing women. "How  can I cry, when 1/Fell  timeless, ageless, high/ As heaven's  hemisphere/How can  I  cease to  livejBorne  by your breath  my dear?" In a sense these passionate proclamations from a woman in her sixties are  a spirited  and  defiant rebellion against social convention. They reveal a sensitive vulnerability which renders the poet all the more human.
In  the final analysis Livesay's opposing visions of love are never fully resolved.
She fails to achieve the self-containment  she so envies in a man. She is dependent upon  love as a  panacea,  for  escape from  her  despair  over social and  personal realities. The  void within  her is most substantially  filled when occupied by male love both  physically and  emotionally. It  is most deeply satisfied when she feels that  the male has responded with equal intensity to her feelings. This reveals the vicious cycle which love can  become for her. The  male also is subjugated  to a degree of dependency and unhappiness, because the woman can only compensate for  her feelings of enslavement  by her desire to consume him. "I've  swallowed

LIVESAY'S TWO SEASONS

you/through all my orifices/you are  jonah'd  nowjfast  within me." Although she will grant  the male the satisfaction of pretending  she believes that  he makes love to her solely for "self-seeking ease," able to "take  me or leave me there/Just as you please," she is jubilant and sings that  his need for her is deeper than physical satiation.  She compensates for her bondage  to his "will  and  mind"  by assuring herself that  he is equally dependent.  This is contrary  to her earlier strivings for a liberating love.
The  persistent dichotomy of Livesay's romantic attitude  is most explicit within the framework  of a very recent poem, "The  Operation," where love is depicted first as a healing  process and  her lover as the doctor  "appraising how to create from bone and  flesh/a  new woman." However once his mission is accomplished, the  "intimate  flashing bond"  dissolves and  she is released from his "care."  The love which revitalized her is now portrayed  as a disease. "Love  was indulged in as  excuse/for   going  to  bedjwe   transmitted   kisses/and   I  caught   between  my thighs/the antibody."  From  her convalescent window she visualizes her lover as a "well man/free of opposites," free of the burden  of retrospective emotion.  In her  desire to  free  herself from  these  malingering  symptoms  of a  finished love affair she invents images of self-destruction. "I decided to complete the operation/ tear  myself into four  quarters." She finishes on a desperate note of yearning for
freedom  from  the  malady  of love:  " ... for  now you are ... gone/and I  must measure mejO let me grow/  ... to reach a dazzled strangeness/sun-pierced  sky." Despite the evidence that  she was continually  frustrated  by her failure to attain this  aim,  and  that  in  many  instances she  remained  divided,  her  poems are  a forceful and  accurate  record of both  the inner and  outer  conflicts of "women in love."
The  difficulty of these struggles for a woman with such an abundance  of intelligence, perceptivity and insight, a woman who achieved an enviable creative output,   accentuates   the  tenacious  grip  of  enculturation, the  pervasive  condi­ tioning  of  our  social structure.  If what  Livesay defines  as  "the  pull  between community and private identity that  is characteristic of being a woman" wrought such havoc in her own psychological existence, one can imagine the effect it has on those women who remain unenlightened  victims of a "locked-in role."





H)INGING
 


Elizabeth Gourlay


On the bare blackened tree one apple alone.
All her golden companions withered  and gone.

73

ETHEL WILSON'S NOVELS




David Stouck








ETHEL WILSON's  FICTION   ;. 'emarkable fo, a  mannered simplicity which hides both artful  invention and  philosophical complexities. The characteristic  grain  of Ethel  Wilson's  imagination  and  a  clue  to  her  thematic concerns are  revealed  by her style. In  a letter  to Desmond  Pacey she says that what  she likes best is "the  English sentence, clear, unlush, and  unloaded ... the formal  and  simple sentence."1  Yet, while the "simple" style forms the matrix  of her  prose, her writing is at the same time full of stylistic quirks-curious repeti­ tions,  illogical statements,  ellipses, lacunae-which arrest  our  attention,  direct us to something unspoken, covert. The  failure of men to communicate  with each other  is one of the  obvious thematic  corollaries to such  a style, the gaps in the writing  constituting  palpable  forms  of  arrest  and  discontinuity  in the  flow of human  relationships.  Indeed  Mrs.  Wilson gauges in  her  fiction the many  ways by which  human  contact  is broken-through guilt, shyness, fear,  jealousy, will to power, hate. The  recurrent  drama  in her novels and stories is the withdrawal from familiar surroundings  of the central character  who sets out on a lonely quest of self-discovery. This character  is usually a woman who has no mother and who, deprived of this intimate  bond  of family, must establish on her own a link with the larger  human  community.  The  pattern  is mythic  and  familiar,  but  what,  I think,  involves and  disturbs  us  as  we read  Ethel  Wilson's  fiction  is a  certain froideur in  the  narrative   voice,  an  implied  emotional  preference  for  retreat, evasion, and distance, which is always in tension with the author's vision of unity and  her theme  of human  responsibility.2    In  the following examination  of Ethel Wilson's  novels I  want  to  indicate  the  range  of the  author's  imagination   (she writes family  epic, pastoral,  satire,  romance)   and  the  actual  complexity of her prose  which,  in  a  deceptively simple style, grapples  with  the  most difficult of problems -human relations.
In  Ethel  Wilson's  first  novel,  Hetty   Dmval   ( 1947) ,a  the  theme  of  human
community  is struck at once in the epigraph  from Donne, the familiar "No man
IS   an  Iland,  intire  of it selfe." The  heroine  of the  title  is a  spoiled, attractive


74

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS

woman  whose  life illustrates  the  very  reverse  of Donne's counsel:   Hetty  Dorval islands  herself  in a  world  of selfish comforts  and  amusements and  leaves behind her   a  long  string   of  broken   commitments.  Her   story  is  narrated  by  Frankie Burnaby, a  young  school  girl  who  is  initially  infatuated  with  Hetty,  but  who eventually   comes  to  see  her  without  romantic  illusions.  At  the  outset  of  this pastoral   novel  Frankie is  going  to  school  in  Lytton,   a  pioneer  ranching  com­ munity  in British Columbia, when  the mysterious Hetty  Dorval  takes a bungalow near  the  town.  In  a  few  brief  scenes  (much in  the  manner of  Willa  Cather's "novel  demeuble")  the  author defines  the  relationship of the young  girl and  the older  woman.   In   the  eyes of  young   Frankie the  various  images  of  Hetty   (on horseback,   watching a  flight  of  wild  geese, in  the  cottage  surrounded  by  her elegant   furnishings  and   library   of  "yellow"  books)   fall  together   to  create   a forbidden, romantic picture  of sophistication and  freedom. This  is enhanced by Hetty's unwillingness   to  become  involved  in  the  mundane affairs  of  the  small town.
But  Hetty's romantic image  gradually tarnishes  with  time.  After  a  period  of school  in  Vancouver, Frankie  goes to  live in  England and  on  the  ship  crossing the  Atlantic she  and   her  mother   encounter Hetty   Dorval   deep  in  intrigue   to marry   a  wealthy  old  gentleman. Previously  Mrs.  Burnaby had  confided  to  her daughter that   an  ugly story  had  followed  Hetty  from  Shanghai to  Vancouver. Frankie  thinks  of Hetty's refusal in Lytton  to become involved  in the community and  at  the  same  time  she thinks  about  Donne's admonition. What was once for Frankie a romantic manifesto -" 'I will not  have my life complicated' " -now becomes a complex  problem  for the girl:  " 'No man is an Iland, intire of it selfe ;' " said  Mother's poet  three  hundred years ago, and  Hetty  could  not  island  herself, because  we  impinge  on  each  other,   we  touch,   we  glance,  we  press,  we  touch again,  we cannot  escape. "No  man  is an Iland. Who  touched  me?" Hetty  appears again  in  Frankie's life, this time  smashing  up  the  friendships Frankie  had  made for herself in England. Hetty's selfish and thoughtless ways are this time thoroughly exposed;   the  final  revelation  is that   her  chaperon, Mrs.  Broom,  whom  she  has always  treated  with  impatience  and   indifference, is  really  her  mother. When Hetty   finally  leaves  London   for  yet  another marriage, Frankie  finds  that  after what  she  has  been  through with  Hetty  she  cannot  bear  to have  her  life  compli­ cated  either.
The  "complications" and  community theme  dominates the  book, but  in Ethel Wilson's  fiction  the  evasion  of  human contact   ("Who touched   me?")   forms  a persistent  counter  theme.  The  style of Hetty  Dorval,  typically,  conceals  much  of the  experience  it  describes.  Notice  in  this  excerpt  from  the  first  paragraph the number of words and  phrases repeated:
Mr.  Miles,  the  station  agent,  was  in  his shirt-sleeves;  the  station  dog  lay  and panted,  got up, moved away, lay down and  panted  again;  and  the usual Indians

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS

stood leaning against the corners of the wooden station (we called it "the deepo") in their usual curious incurious fashion, not looking as though they felt the heat or anything else. The  Indians always looked as though they had nothing to do, and perhaps they had  nothing to do. Ernestine and  I  had nothing much to do, but school was out and supper wasn't ready and so we drifted over to the station.

The  repetitions  of course crystallize the feeling of monotony in a small town on a  hot   summer  afternoon,  but  they  also create,  here and  elsewhere, an opaque surface in the style, as if the author  were to say, "this  is all I am about to show you."  (This  technique  of limited disclosure is the  principle of style in Mrs. Wil­ son's first published piece of fiction, "I just love dogs.'" The  repetition of  events and dialogue gives this brief sketch the innocent charm of a children's story which contrasts  sharply  with  the  deliberate  ambiguity  of the  story's  title.)   In  Hetty Dorval  the repetitive style and  the surface allegory of involvement and  responsi­ bility veil an emotional drama  of initiation  involving the relationship of mothers and daughters, older women and young girls.
Hetty  initiates  Frankie  into  life's disillusionments  (a  process symbolized  per­
haps by the  Fraser  River  that  muddies the Thompson), but why, we must ask, does Frankie come to dislike Hetty so intensely. Possibly it is because her relation­ ship with Hetty is the first in a series of guilty involvements. Frankie's early affec­ tion for Hetty is guilty because it is secretive. Frankie's mother forbids her to keep company  with  a  woman  of  dubious  reputation  and  the  girl  is forced  to  play "peeping  Tom"  in  order  to  keep sight  of her  heroine.  Hetty  in fact supplants Mrs.  Burnaby  in  Frankie's  affections:  their  rivalry is  reflected in  their  parallel affinity for the secluded bungalow which Mrs. Burnaby eventually owns. Frankie for a time deserts her mother's love and this is perhaps why the emotional climax of  the  novel  is a  scene in  which  a  rejected  mother's  love is revealed.  Hetty's heartlessness towards  her mother  thus has guilty  implications for Frankie. There is also another  reason, I think,  why Frankie  becomes embittered  towards Hetty and that is because she eventually becomes her rival for a young girl's admiration.  When  Frankie  goes to  England  she  becomes protectress to a girl named  Molly Tretheway.  Frankie  dreams of some  day marrying  Molly's brother  Richard,  but in the meantime  it is Molly's innocent and gentle charms that attract  and sustain her.  Hetty,  however,  threatens to take  Molly away  from  Frankie  by marrying Richard,  and  to her  chagrin  Frankie  discovers that  Molly feels exactly the same way about  Hetty as Frankie once did herself. The final showdown between Hetty and  Frankie  comes  after the revelation by Mrs. Broom. Hetty leaves her mother and  shares  Frankie's  bed for  a  night.  This  scene fulfills the  emotional  logic of those earlier  scenes set in Lytton in which Frankie  feels such a strong attraction  for Hetty, no small part of which was her singular physical beauty. But Frankie's emotions are poisoned with guilt and  jealousy, and when she gives Hetty a smack on her  "round  silken bottom"  she renounces the life of desires and involvement

ETHEL WILSON's NOVELS

altogether.  The  author  makes us aware  of Frankie's  negative action in the final prophetic  glimpse of war  approaching. Hetty  has gone to live in Vienna  with another  man,  but around  that  city in  19 14 there has grown up a wall of silence
-the negation of man's humanity writ large.




ETHEL WILSON's second  novel,  The Innocent Traveller ( 1949),5  is very different from  Hetty  Dorval; it celebrates in loving fashion the life of a woman who lives to be one hundred  years old, but who learns less about living in  that  time than  does Frances  Burnaby  in one night  with Hetty  Dorval. The  subject of this novel is the author's  personal family history. It is a memory book and as the first fifty years of Topaz Edgeworth's life set in Victorian  England are  being  narrated, we  are  continuously  reminded,  by  means  of  interpolated speech  from  later  years, that  these  are  family stories being  remembered.  The Innocent  Traveller  is  probably  Ethel  Wilson's  most  artful   novel;  certainly  it affords the  greatest  pleasure of her  books. The  character  of Topaz  Edgeworth, effervescent, irrepressible, superficial, is one of the most delightful  and authentic creations in Canadian literature.  The  book is a pastoral of innocence celebrating the domestic joys of family and old age rather  than youth and erotic love.6  There are unforgettable  comic episodes such as great-grandfather Edgeworth's  courting at the age of ninety and later Topaz,  also in her nineties, thinking she has had a stroke  when  her  bloomers  drop  around   her  ankles  on  the  street.  The  whole world, as seen through  the eyes of Topaz and  the older members of the family, is providentially ordered and secure. Great-grandfather Edgeworth,  drowsing in the sunshine  of  his garden,  is content  because "his  world  was a  good world.  His Queen  was a good Queen.  His country was a good country ... His family was a good family and  God was good." For Topaz's  saintly sister, Annie Hastings, the world is a reflection of the divine order of the next world, while for Topaz herself it is completely defined by the existence of her father,  Queen  Victoria  and  Mr. Gladstone.  Even  the  Canadian   wilderness  in  this  book  has  the  childish  and animate  aspect of a  pastoral landscape -with mountains  that  "skip like rams" and "the  innumerable  laughter"  of the sea. But above all it is the sense of Family which gives the world its unity.
The  escapist  pleasures  of  celebrating  an  innocent  and  uncomplicated   past, however, are undercut  by the narrator's  preoccupation  with Time and Meaning. We are  told,  in  a  particularly  effective metaphor,  that  gradually  the members of the family "slipped one by one with acceptance or amazement through the strangely moving curtain  of Time into another  place." Death  is softened through the  various strategies of pastoral style  (the  death  of Topaz's  mother  becomes a comical ritual of dress and decorum; Topaz's father and sister die of ripe old age;

77

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS

the  tragic  death   of  Topaz's   niece,  Rachel,  is simply  not  described),   yet  its inexorable  presence is an  important   part  of the  family  history:  Et  in  Arcadia ego. But more disturbing than  the passage of time with all its attendant  anxieties of change, illness and death  is the difficult question of life's meaning. The author describes  bubbly  Topaz   with  such  evident  pleasure,  but  there  is always  the nagging  problem  of the significance of her life-of  what  "use"  was she? Mrs. Wilson  writes:   "Aunty's  long life ... inscribes no significant  design. Just  small bright dots of colour, sparkling dots of life." In the course of the narrative she is described  as a  "warbling   unimportant   bird,"  a  creature  as ephemeral  as "the dimpling  of the  water  caused  by the  wind"  and,  most memorably,  as a water glider who skims along the surface of life "unaware of the dreadful deeps below." When she has died she is but "a  memory, a gossamer." Seen with something like a cosmic eye, Topaz looks foolish and pathetic in all her commotion of living.
As an innocent, Topaz  has within  the reference of her family a kind of comic
sanctity. But outside that  framework she is a creature  of little worth-without resources, without  imagination  or  character.   In  a  finely crafted  chapter  titled "The  Innumerable Laughter" the author exposes that innocence by taking Topaz (one of Mrs. Wilson's motherless orphans)  on a brief journey into isolation. The chapter  opens with  a splendid  comic sequence:  Topaz,  who is holidaying with the family at  their summer  cottage, discovers nine young men swimming naked in the ocean. She dashes off to tell Rachel and says she wishes she could identify them:   " 'If they would only turn  right side up  I might  be able to see'."  (Mrs. Wilson is capable  of delightful  bawdy  humour: when Topaz's  father  decides to re-marry, we are told in a series of double entendre  that there is "Something  Up," that  he is going to Switzerland, which on the map is "pink," and that he is going to  bring  back  a  "piece.")   Topaz's  experience  at  the  beach  is followed by the threat  of Yow, the devilish Chinese cook, to put a snake in the supper stew. That night Topaz  decides to sleep outside on the porch alone. She takes all the accoutrements   of  her  civilization  with  her-shawl,  walking  stick,  umbrellas, biscuits-but gradually the sounds of the night begin to frighten  her. She thinks of the  bearded  decorum  of her  Victorian  father  and  relations and  then  of the nude men swimming. She imagines she hears a flute and "panics," and as the etymology of that  word implies, she fears a  revelation  that  will turn  her mad. One  can hardly miss the sexual implications of this experience. The images from the  day  (the  nude  men bathing,  the invincible Yow with the snake)  culminate in a metaphor  of sexual terror:  "Inside  the white satin  body of Topaz ... there opened  a  dark  unknown  flower of fear ... Her  whole body  dissolved listening into  fear  which  flowed into  the  terrible  enclosing night."  She rushes inside the cabin and Rachel, to quiet and comfort her, massages her body gently; gradually her  innocent  world  of family is restored.  In  this chapter  we see that  Topaz's innocence is not the Blakean kind that  perceives order and harmony in all things,

ETHEL WILSON'S NOVELS


but  is  pathetically dependent  on  a  social  order  which  is evasive  and  artificial. Topaz  is not exposed  in this manner again; she remains  a water  glider who never probes beneath the surface of appearances. But her innocence has been discredited and  in the  images  of Topaz  being  absorbed  at  death  like a drop  of water  in an endless  cycle or  like one  of the  gulls going  out  to sea,  there  is something just a little  sad,  for  we  are  made  aware   not  only  of  her  insignificance but  that  as  a human being she never experienced  the fullness or unity of being alive.
Ethel  Wilson's  next  book opens  with  the  image  of a golden  dawn  yielding  to "mere  flat  day"  and  that  image  defines  the  change  in mode  from  The  Innocent Traveller  to The  Equations  of  Love  ( 1952). 7   The  two  novellas  which  comprise The  Equations of Love, "Tuesday and  \Vednesday" and  "Lilly's  Story," are both works of the  satirical  or critical  imagination; they  take  their  direction   not  from memory  and  nostalgia  but  from  a cold eye cast on contemporary reality.  "What is  the   Common   sort  of  Terewth" is  the   question   Mrs.   Wilson   poses  in  the epigraph from  Dickens  and  the answer  in the  first story, "Tuesday and  Wednes­ day,"  seems to be that  man  is vain, sentimental and  pretentious and  that  it is his egocentricity  ironically   which   saves   him   from   recognizing   the   meaningless,  destructive void  that  surrounds him.  The  story  describes  two  days  in the  life of several  lower-class  characters in  Vancouver. For  Myrtle  and  Mort  Johnson  it is the  last  two  days  of their  life together, for  Mort  is about  to die  in  an  accident. Around   these  two  central  figures are  grouped  several  others:  Myrtle's aunt,  the radiant Mrs.  Emblem; Myrtle's cousin,  the  neurotically  withdrawn Vicky Tritt, Mort's friend,   Eddie  Hansen, and  others  whose  names -Pork,  Flask,  Mottle,  Uren-imply  character type  in the  manner of  Dickensian  satire.  The  narrator is  superior   and   constantly   exposes  the  empty  and   pretentious nature  of  her characters.  She  says,  for  example,   that   Mort  spoke  "with  a  simple-sounding nobility  which  had  no  basis in fact." Indeed  characters like  Myrt  and  Mort  are minimal  in their  humanity and  the motiveless conduct  of their  lives is reflected in flat, throwaway statements like "because he had  to get up some time or other,  he got up" -an example  of Mrs. Wilson's simple style with its calculated intention.
The  lives of Myrt  and  Mort,  structured by only a very basic routine, are almost without   pattern or  purpose,  and  yet,  as if  to  emphasize  this  by  contrast, Mrs. Wilson  creates  an  intricate literary  design around Mort's death. Mort  (his name
-the  French   word  for  dead-is  prophetic)  plays with  the  idea  of death  the
day  before his fatal  accident. He  accompanies his friend  Pork  (his name suggests flesh and  mortality)  to the  funeral parlour  where  the latter  works, and  there  he has  a  sentimental vision  of  Myrtle  lying  in  her  coffin. That night  he  takes  her some  flowers  left  over  from  a  funeral. Again,  the  next  day,  he  implies  to  Mr. Mottle  at  the  greenhouse  where  he is looking  for  work  that  his wife is suffering from  a  fatal   malady.   Mort's own  death   is precipitated by  his trying  to save  a drunken friend  from  drowning. That  final struggle  is witnessed  in preview,  as it

79

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS


were,  through the  eyes of  Vicky  Tritt who,  on  her  way  to  church, sees Mort struggling to  keep  Eddie  upright  as they  make  their  way  along  the street.  Mort dies  while  Vicky  is at  the  service  and  the  description  of him  with  outstretched arms  over  the  water  trying  to save  his friend  invites  a comparison with  Christ.8
Mort's death as  a  hero  becomes  formally  ritualized  when  Vicky  several  times tells her story if how Mort  valiantly  dove into  the water,  hands  pressed together, to save Eddie's life. For Vicky, Mort's heroism is more Hollywood  than  Christian (the  common  sort  of truth?) and  when  she arrives  back  at  her  boarding-house, another of  the  tenants, taking  in  the  wash,  asks appropriately if she  has seen a good show.
Vicky  Tritt holds  a  special  place  in  Ethel  Wilson's  fiction  for  the  extended description  of  her  lonely,  cheerless  existence  is  paradigmatic of  countless  lives depicted  or suggested  in the  course of Mrs.  Wilson's  writing.  Vicky lives alone in a  boarding-house; her room is lit by one bare  bulb  hanging from  the ceiling. She has a  job in a notions shop, but  except  for church  services and  an occasional  visit with  her cousin, Myrt, she has no other  human contacts. Her  one pleasure in life, carefully  meted  out,  is to  read  a movie  magazine each  week -an  image  of life lived  vicariously  and  at  a complete  remove  from  other  people.  The  shyness and pathetic anonymity of this  girl-woman are  contrasted sharply  with  the  "golden effulgence" of  Mrs.  Emblem, whose  "geniality and  human success emphasized to  Victoria May  her  own  inadequacy ... her  lack  of the  gorgeous  possession­ popularity." The   description  of   Mrs.   Emblem's  room   with   its  fussy,  ornate furnishings and  softly  glowing  lamps  is a kinky  vision  of  something  grotesquely pink and  maternal. Yet even for the personable Mrs. Emblem the best part  of the day  is when  she is alone,  tucked  up  in  bed,  reading  "the Personal  Column" of the  newspaper. Mrs.  Wilson is fascinated with  people whose lives are completely  anonymous and  depersonalized, people  who  live in  lonely  retreats  with  only  the barest   essentials  of  existence.  In   this  novella,  as  well  as  Vicky  Tritt, there  is Maybelle  Slazenger  whose  flat  is filled with  a  family  of dolls, and  there  is "old  Wolfenden," a recluse who lives in the  hollow  tree in Stanley  Park.  In  the short  stories  there   are  lonely  characters like  Mrs.  Bylaw,  the  old  woman   in  "Fog" whose monotonous existence is relieved  by reading  the ads in the newspaper, and  the  blind  man  in "Beware the Jabberwock, my son ... Beware  the Jubjub bird" who, after  losing his sight, lives in a little cabin  by himself rather than  return  to a life of dependence on his wife and friends.
The  central  figure in "Lilly's  Story" can be grouped  with the above;  her life too is minimal in  terms  of  human  relationships. Lilly  is another of  Ethel  Wilson's orphans (her  mother  abandons her  when  she is still a girl)  whose life becomes a lonely  journey.  Mrs.  Wilson  tells  us that  the  story  began  with  a chance  phrase about   Yow's  girl  friend  in  The   Innocent  Traveller:   "she  made  other  connec­ tions."9  The phrase  teased  the  author's  imagination, perhaps because  "connec-

Bo

ETHEL WILSON'S NOVELS

tions" between people in her fictional world are so tangential  and tenuous at best. The  emotion  which  prevents  Lilly from  establishing  lasting  relationships  with others is fear, an animal  instinct which keeps her "on  the run"  all her life. 10 The different  phases of her  life are  marked  by experiences of terror.  When she is a small  child  living  with  her  mother  in  a  wretched  cabin  in  Vancouver,  she is stopped  and  questioned  by the  police about  her part  in delivering stolen goods. Afterwards  she  has  nightmares  and  whimpers  " 'The  police! The  police!' " in her sleep. Her  first lover is Yow, the  Chinese cook, who brings her gifts stolen from the  Hastings family and starts  her running  in earnest from the police. On Vancouver   Island  Lilly lives temporarily  with  a  Welsh  miner  named  Rannie who fathers her child. When her daughter  Eleanor is born Lilly resolves to bring up the child respectably and  moves to another  part  of the Island  where she will not  be  known. She fabricates  a story about  her past and  her  husband's  death; her constant fear now is that she will be recognized by someone and exposed.
Her life at Comox, where she is housekeeper for Major  Butler and his wife, is almost  a  pastoral  retreat  for  Lilly;  despite  Butler's  amorous  advances,  which Lilly quickly rebuffs, there is peace and security in this life where order and good taste prevail. The  Chinese pottery figures of a horse and a hound on the mantel­ piece  (hunters  in still life)  reflect something  of the aesthetic  harmony  that  can be  achieved  in  life. At  the  same  time  Lilly is not  allowed  to  forget  that  life consists of real hunters and of the hunted -she watches Eleanor's kitten stalking a robin who is trying to kill a snake while overhead flies an eagle ready to pounce on the kitten. For Lilly it is the nexus that spells fear. Later, when she hears her daughter  described  casually as "the  maid's child," she decides to move, this time to  the  Fraser  Valley  where  again  she  hopes  to  live unknown.  Lilly  is like a frightened  animal  seeking a secure hiding place in which to raise her child. Her protean existence, shaped by her fears and by her desire for conventional respect­ ability, is recorded in her many names:  born Lilly Waller, she calls herself May Bates when  she  runs  from  the  police;  then  to  create  a father  for  Eleanor  she becomes Mrs.  Walter  Hughes;  then  finally  and  legitimately she  becomes Mrs.
J. B. Sprockett.  From  the Fraser Valley Lilly is forced to run  once again;  after
twenty years, Yow turns  up at the hospital where Lilly works, and so she flees on a  train  for Toronto.  Yow's reappearance is one of those many  coincidences in Mrs. Wilson's fiction which  point up  the gaps rather  than  the "connections"  in human   relationships.  In  Toronto   Lilly, working  as  a  chamber-maid, meets a
widower, J. B. Sprockett, and  we are  told th< ;t eventually they will marry. Lilly
appraises her new situation in a characteristic  way:  "She would be without fear; nothing, surely, could touch  her now. There  would  be security and a life of her very own in the house of Mr. and  Mrs. Sprockett."  Lilly does not change funda­ mentally,  for  when  she  decides to  tell  Mr.  Sprockett  about  her  past,  her sole confession is that she is wearing a wig. There  is almost an element of self-parody

81

ETHEL WILSON'S NOVELS

at the end of the story when the author  tells us sentimentally that the couple will
be married in the "United" church.
Fear estranges Lilly from other people, as it does the women in "Hurry, hurry" and "Mr. Sleepwalker." For another group of women, including Hilda Severance in Swamp  Angel, social relations are anxiety-ridden  because of shyness and  lack of self-confidence. Mrs. Wilson has never written an artist's story, but we glimpse something  like a  self-portrait  in  the  heroine  of the short  story "Mrs.  Golightly and  the  First  Convention."  In  a  transparently  simple, almost  confessional style ("Mrs. Golightly  was  a  shy  woman.  She  lived  in  Vancouver.  Her  husband, Tommy  Golightly, was not shy. He  was personable and  easy to like")  the story describes the  plight of a Canadian woman attending  a convention  with her hus­ band  in  California.  Her  husband  who  has  "the  gorgeous possession" of  social ease, leaves his wife to get on as best she can with the other wives. In spite of her desperate   desire  to  conform  and   please,  situations  become  awkward,  speech faltering. At one point during  a car ride arranged  for the wives, Mrs. Golightly escapes her situation  temporarily  by glorying in the sportive freedom of  the seals in the ocean.  (Animals are frequently  an index to intense emotional experiences in Ethel  Wilson's fiction.)  The story comes to a climax when, to her  grief, Mrs. Golightly  insults a  woman  twice, only to  discover later  that  the  woman  is not aware  she  has  been  injured.  The  supposed  victim says to  the  apologetic  and fumbling  Mrs. Golightly " 'You are too earnest, my child'."  Mrs. Golightly then recognizes the  necessary superficiality of society and  its  operations,  which gives her confidence but which ironically disappoints her just a little as well.



IN Swamp   Angel  ( 1954),11   a quest  romance,  Ethel  Wilson develops her  theme  of running  from  human  responsibility into  a complex and subtle piece of symbolic fiction. Here, to catch the ebb and flow of experience, to create a surface texture in the prose that  mirrors the formless and chaotic aspect of reality, the style is strikingly elliptical and fragmented.  Chapters do not always
appear   to  follow one  from  another; scenes are  juxtaposed  beside  each  other without  linear  connectives  in  the  narrative.  The  failure  of  human   beings  to connect with each other is reflected in tiresome monologues, in speeches tortured with  slang  and  in  chapters  which  consists of only one clipped statement  or an advertisement   from  the  newspaper.  But  beneath   this  jarring,  rough-textured surface  there  is a  pattern  of interconnected  symbolic incidents  which, carefully considered, have much  to say about  human  relations, especially the dilemma  of modern woman.
The   plot  itself  reveals  little.  A  woman  named   Maggie  Vardoe,  living  in
Vancouver,  leaves her husband  and starts life over as a cook at a fishing lodge in

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS

the  Interior of British Columbia. Her  success and  satisfaction  with her new life is marred   by  the  jealousy  of  the  lodge  owner's   wife.  In  the  meantime Maggie's husband  is rejected  by a series of women and  her friends,  the Severances, continue their  lives in  the  city-Hilda  Severance  marries  and  her  mother   Nell, after  a little  accident, dies. A more  rewarding approach to the  novel is through its title, which  is also the book's central  symbol. As Pacey has pointed  out, the two images yoked  together  suggest  the  range  of  human   experience -from  the  primal  and inchoate emerges  the  human   form  divine.12    Even  more  suggestive  is the  title's historical  origin  explained in  the  novel's epigraph: " 'Swamp Angel.  An 8-inch,
200 pound  ... gun, mounted in a swamp  by the Federals,  at the siege ( 1863)   of Charleston, S.C.' " The   gun  had  its  origin  in  a  battle   fought   to  prevent   the abolition  of slavery  and  this is the  direct  clue. The  Swamp  Angel is an image  of power,  and  its  possession and  relinquishment symbolically  describe  a  drama of will and  power in the novel.
The   Swamp Angel  belongs  to  Nell  Severance, "a  powerful   and   wilful  old
woman" who  was once  a  brilliant   circus  juggler.  The  gun  symbolizes  her  past triumphs, but  it  is still  a  potent   weapon  in  the  present  for  it  represents  Mrs. Severance's power  over  her  daughter Hilda. For  Hilda  the  gun  is an emblem  of her unhappy childhood, a childhood  filled with shame  at the fact that  her mother was a vagabond circus performer. In the elliptical,  non-sequitur style of the novel we are  given  a vivid  glimpse  of Hilda's confused  relationship with  her mother: "She  loved  her  mother   dearly  and  hated   her  a  little.  People  should  not  be so powerful.  People should  not  always succeed,  and  so she made  tea."  The  gun also carries  the  traditional  phallic  association  of  male  authority. In  her  interviews with  the  rejected   Eddie  Vardoe   Mrs.  Severance   twirls  the  gun  absent-mindedly but  menacingly; in  bed  she  keeps it  pressed  against  her  thigh.  The  gun  enters directly   into  the  symbolic  action   of  the  novel  when   Mrs.  Severance   falls  and sprains  her  ankle  on  the street.  The  gun slips out  of the old  woman's grasp  and a small scandal  ensues involving  the  police. Mrs.  Severance  feels she is no longer strong  enough  to control  its destiny and so she sends the Swamp  Angel to Maggie for safe-keeping.
The  transfer  of the  gun  opens  up  the significance  of Maggie's  story. Maggie  is Nell's  spiritual heir  for,  like Nell, she  is a strong  woman  who  wants  to  be free and  to have  control  over her own life.  (Maggie's type is anticipated by Rachel  in The   Innocent Traveller   who  feels such  a  release of the  spirit  when  she  reaches the  open  spaces  of  Western   Canada. Rachel imagines   herself  running a  farm "with everything dependent upon  her  and  upon  her  industry." She  would  have no husband   or lover.  Maggie  is also one of the author's motherless  women  who, we are  told,  was "brought up  from  childhood  by a  man,  with  men"  and  "had never  learned  the  peculiarly  but  not  wholly feminine  joys of communication, the deshabille  of conversation.... ") Our  first impressions of Maggie  are wholly posi-

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS

tive. She is calm, intelligent, resourceful, and when we meet her husband Vardoe, a truly unsavory individual, we admire her courage in breaking away. Her strong, creative instincts are such that  she can build up the fishing resort in one season, forget her tragic past in New Brunswick (her husband, child and father  have all died), and  before the first season is over at Three  Loon Lake, save from death  a wealthy  businessman, Mr.  Cunningham, who offers her an attractive  position in the  East  as a  reward.  But  we must  ask whether  Maggie's  actions are  entirely admirable;  remembering  that  Mrs.  Wilson  is fascinated  with  the  meshing  of contraries we can expect a negative side to the heroine's character  as well. Why, we should ask, does Maggie break her marriage vows and leave Vardoe? Certainly he is an  unpleasant  man  and  the two- and  three-sentence chapters about  his life after  Maggie  leaves (chapters  28-35, 37-38)  encapsule  brilliantly  the emptiness of  his  character. But  from  Maggie's  point  of view the  one  reason  given and dwelled on is the "nightly  humiliation" she endured  while she lived with Vardoe. She  thinks of her  marriage  as a  period of "slavery."  When  she is preparing  to leave Vardoe  she thinks only of freeing herself from the outrage  of "the  night's hateful  assaults." But if Maggie  does not enjoy the marriage  bed, then why did she marry Vardoe in the first place? The implied answer is that she was attracted to his weakness. Vardoe, the poor boy with "spaniel eyes" working in her father's store, physically unfit for the army, seems to have attracted  Maggie by those very qualities  which  elicited  pity in  others.  Perhaps  Maggie  subconsciously felt she could  dominate   this  man  and  that  marriage  would  not  mean  any  loss to  her freedom.  We are told nothing  about  Maggie's first marriage  to Tom  Lloyd, but the one time she thinks of him her thought  is cold and almost comic in its imper­ sonal stylized nature: "Dear  Tom,  casting, perhaps, with a crystal fly for a quick jade fish in some sweet stream of heaven."  Vardoe,  however, turned  out to have very conventional  ideas about  marriage   (male  supremacy,  female subjugation) and so Maggie leaves him.
Swamp Angel  is peopled largely by strong, forceful women and weak men. In
the  world  Maggie  creates for  herself at  Three  Loon  Lake,  her contact,  Henry Corder, is old, the proprietor, Haldar  Gunnarson, is crippled and Alan Gunnarson is still a boy;  in her service are the  biddable  Chinese brothers, Angus and  Joey Quong. Only the jealousy of Gunnar's wife spoils Maggie's haven, for it curbs her freedom  (she  must  constantly  watch  herself so that  Vera's  suspicions are  not roused).  The  irony is that  Maggie does not want Vera's  husband or her son; she prefers no social obligations or responsibilities. Yet Vera's  jealousy creates them. "Human relations ... how they defeat us," thinks Maggie.
Mr.  Cunningham's offer of a  position in the  East is the turning  point in the novel. Will Maggie "run  away" again from a difficult situation  (she has run from New Brunswick and from Vancouver)   or will she stay with the Gunnarsons and try to make their relationship work? Mrs. Severance's visit with Maggie at Kam-

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS

loops is decisive. The  old  woman  accuses Maggie  of escaping  to the  woods from the   reality   of  human relationships: " 'Everything of  any  importance happens indoors' " she  insists.  Then she  urges  Maggie   to  recognize  that   all  things  are interconnected in " 'the  everlasting web' " of creation  and  the  Donne  theme  "No Man  is an  lland" is sounded  again  in Ethel  Wilson's  fiction.  Earlier  in the novel Maggie  had  an  intimation of this herself  when she considered  how many  people were  involved  in  designing  and  creating the  English  crockery  Mr.  Cunningham had  sent  her  as  a  gift.  In  this  conversation Mrs.  Severance admits   that,  pre­ occupied   with   her   juggling  and   her  mate   Philip,  she  had  lived  on  an  island herself and  had  made  Hilda  suffer-binding her to an  unhappy childhood  and
a  quest  for  maternal love.  Only   after   the  old  woman   has  given  up  the  gun (symbol  of selfhood  and  power)   does Hilda  begin  to live a "normal" life. The latter   marries   Albert   Cousins,  another  of  the  novel's  gentle  men,  and  though Mrs.  Severance describes  Albert  as a "lamb" she also tells Maggie  that  "he  rules [Hilda] with  a rod of silk"-perhaps Ethel  Wilson's ideal vision of the marriage relationship.
The  final  scene  in  the  novel  shows  Maggie,  after  Nell's  death, throwing the Swamp  Angel  into  the lake;  the act  is coincident  with  her decision  to stay at the lodge  and  strive  for  a workable  relationship with  the  Gunnarsons. The  reminder of Excalibur in this gesture and  of the grail in Maggie's yellow Chinese bowl  (her "household god")  suggest  a  specifically  Christian dimension  to  Maggie's quest, as does her instinctive  act of compassion  in kneeling and  rubbing the feet of both Mr.  Cunningham and  Vera  Gunnarson when  they  come  out  of the  cold waters of the  lake.  But the  larger  significance  of Maggie's throwing away the gun is her relinquishment of  power  and  freedom  in  order  to  become  part  of  the  web  of creation, part  of the  human community. As the gun settles to the  bottom  we are told  in  a  repetitive style that  now  knits  things  together  that  "the fish, who  had fled,   returned,  flickering,   weaving   curiously   over   the   Swamp   Angel.   Then flickering, weaving, they resumed  their  way."




DEATH IS  THE  AGENT of separation and  loneliness in Ethel Wilson's  last  published   novel  Love   and  Salt  Water (1956).13   This  novel  is a "romance" in  the  sense  of Shakespeare's last  plays  where  characters are  tested through a series of misfortunes and  misunderstandings before being fully integrated into  society.  As in every one  of Mrs.  Wilson's  major  pieces of fiction the  journey motif  is the  central  element  of structure. Here  it  is coupled  with  a symmetrical narrative design  that  takes  the  heroine,  Ellen  Cuppy, from  the  unity  of a happy family  life to  almost  total  isolation  and  then  back  again  into  the  larger  fabric  of the  human family.  The  novel begins with an idealized  picture  of family life (only

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS

Ellen's  brother-in-law,  Morgan  Peake,  nearly  twenty  years older  than  his wife Nora, is a little out of place).  On their walks through  Stanley Park the members of the Cuppy family make plans for the future,  talk about  the ocean voyage they will take some day together.  Then,  suddenly,  Mrs. Cuppy  dies. When she finds her  mother's  body,  Ellen's  first instinct  is not  to tell anyone  (as if this would prevent  it  becoming  true)   and  this impulse  marks  Ellen's  gradual  withdrawal from the confidences of other people. Her nickname is "Gypsy" and she becomes a  wanderer.  Ellen and  her father,  to distract  themselves from grief, take a long Christmas voyage on a freighter from Vancouver through  the Panama  to Europe. Death  again  brushes Ellen and  hardens  her toward  life. On  the  boat there is a beautiful  boy-sailor  ("A  Botticelli angel  in  bathing  trunks")   whom  the  other sailors tease mercilessly. Ellen  feels much  pity  and  affection  for  him, but  in  a heavy storm  on Christmas  Day the  boy is swept overboard  and  lost at sea. Also on the voyage Ellen becomes alienated from her father, who meets and eventually marries one of their fellow-passengers.
Love  and  Salt  Water  is divided  into  three  parts.  In  the second  part  several years in  Ellen's life are  compressed into  a series of brief chapters  in which  we watch her grow more isolated from other  people. During  the war she serves as a Wren  in England,  almost losing touch  with her sister and  friends in Vancouver. When  she  eventually  comes back she  meets and  becomes engaged  to  Morgan Peake's temperamental  half-brother,  Huw. But Ellen lives the carefully-examined life; she recognizes Huw's  bad temper  and fears loss of self-possession for herself, so she breaks off the engagement  and  goes to live in Saskatoon. There she works for Mr.  Platt,  an old man who also lives without friends or family, who boasts he has " 'neether chick nor child' " and even depersonalizes Ellen by calling her "Miss Urn."  He  represents the furthest  point reached  by Ellen in her withdrawal  from human  concourse. But while she is working for Platt, she meets George Gordon which marks a significant turning  point in her life. Gordon,  who has withdrawn from society because of the failure  of his marriage,  is at  first only interested  in Ellen as a tennis or skating partner -they share the detached camaraderie  of sportsmen.  But his respect and  affection for Ellen gradually  changes to love and he slowly warms Ellen back to a personal and intimate involvement in life again.
Ellen's  reintegration  into  the  human  community  is effected appropriately  in
Part  III by means of events in the life of her family (just as, earlier, family events had caused her withdrawal). After Mr.  Platt's  death-in this light symbolic­ Ellen goes back to Vancouver for a long visit with her sister, Nora. At first she is highly critical of Nora's smothering  affection for her son Johnny, but when she rediscovers that  Nora's first son died, that  her second son is mongoloid, and that little Johnny is going deaf, she learns to be sympathetic towards her sister's family, especially to Morgan who regularly visits the retarded son. The death of Morgan's  cousin  Maud  Sneddon   (a  pathetic  little  figure like  an  aged  Vicky Tritt)  also

86

ETHEL WILSON's  NOVELS

makes Ellen think  about  the human  condition  and  the need for companionship among  men in the face of death.  On  a visit to happily  married  friends living in the  Okanagan   Valley, Ellen  becomes convinced  that  it will be right for  her to marry George. But in the nature of "romance" Ellen and George are to be tested before that  marriage  can take place. In a sequence with parallels to the first part of the novel (we are reminded of mothers and of tragic death  in the sunset that suggest Rossini's "Stabat   Mater" and  Johnny  is referred  to as a cherub  which recalls the  boy-sailor described  as a  Botticelli angel)   Ellen is responsible for  a boating  accident  in  which  Johnny  is nearly  drowned.  The  brutal  contraries  of love and  salt  water -the  frailness of human  life plunged  into  the  destructive clement in which we live-are  permanently impressed on Ellen by an ugly scar on one side of her face. Ellen's "sea change"  becomes the test of love for George Gordon.  Ellen  goes to the  train  station  to meet  him, accompanied  by Morgan who is now possibly the most loved member of the family; George's love for Ellen proves genuine, for  we are told  that  her disfigured cheek was repellent to him, but  that  he kissed her "out  of love and  pity and  delight."  The  novel comes full circle as Ellen becomes part of the human  family, and she and George begin their "happy  chequered life together."
As epigraph  for Mrs.  Golightly and  Other  Stories  Ethel  Wilson quotes from Edwin  Muir: "Life  ' ... is a difficult country, and our home.' " The line reflects the creative tension in Mrs. Wilson's art:  feelings of estrangement  circumscribed by reasonable and  philosophical acceptance.  Human  relations, their  complexity, their fragility, is Ethel Wilson's intimate  theme and  an oblique, elliptical style is the special signature  of her prose. But to say this does not invalidate  or detract from  the  philosophical  vision of  her  novels. Rather   Ethel  Wilson's  "modem" sense  of  the  universe  as  an  ungoverned  void  carries  conviction  because  it  is approached   by characters  who, for  complex, sometimes aberrant  reasons, have lived for  a time in isolation and  without  motive. Similarly her insistence on the humanistic  values of love and  faith  and  her almost mystical preoccupation  with unity,  "the  everlasting  web,"  assert  as  antidote  the  powerful  human  need  of community.


NOTES

1 See Desmond   Pacey,  Ethel  Wilson  (New  York: Twayne Publishers,  Inc.,  1967), p. 179. TheletterisdatedJuly 12,1953.
2     In  his  book  (op.  cit.)  Desmond Pacey  has  made  a  study  of the  large  themes  in Ethel  Wilson's fiction focusing  particularly on her humanist's concern  for love and friendship in a universe  that  frequently reveals itself to be destructive and  without purpose.  H.   W.   Sonthoff's  article,   "The  Novels  of  Ethel   Wilson,"   Canadian Literature,  26  (Autumn 1965), pp.  33-42, is more  concerned, on the other  hand, with  the unique  qualities  of tone in Ethel  Wilson's writing.

ETHEL WILSON'S  NOVELS

8  Hetty Dorval   (Toronto:  Macmillan, I 947) . All quotations are  from  this edition.
4    Most  of  Ethel  Wilson's  stories  are  collected  in  Mrs.  Golightly and  Other  Stories
(Toronto: Macmillan, I96I). All quotations are from this edition.
5    The Innocent Traveller (Toronto: Macmillan, I949). All quotations are from  this edition. W. H. New has a fine discussion of irony in this novel in Articulating West: Essays  on  Purpose  and  Form  in  Modern  Canadian Literature  (Toronto:  New Press,  I972), pp. 83-92.
8   For  a  description of  this  literary  mode  see Renato Poggioli,  "The Oaten Flute,"
Harvard  Library  Bulletin, I I  (May  1957), pp. 147-84.
7   The Equations of Love  (Toronto: Macmillan, I952). All quotations are from  this edition.
8    Pacey also notes this parallel. See Ethel Wilson, p. I I6.
9   See  Ethel   Wilson,  "The Bridge  or  the  Stokehold?" m  Canadian Literature, 5 (Spring I96o), p. 46.
10  Pacey  lists the animal images  used  to describe  Lilly. See Ethel  Wilson, pp.  I21-22.
11  Swamp Angel  (Toronto:  McClelland and  Stewart, I962). All quotations are from this  edition. For  a  study  of  the  journey  into  isolation  in  Swamp Angel  see John Moss, Patterns  of Isolation  (Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1974), pp. 129-49.
12  Pacey,  "Introduction" to New Canadian Library edition  of Swamp Angel,  p.  IO.
13  Love  and  Salt  Water   (Toronto:  Macmillan, I956). All quotations are  from  this edition. Frank  Birbalsingh  in "Ethel Wilson: Innocent Traveller," Canadian Literature, 49   (Summer 197I),  pp.  35-46,  sees  this  novel  as  central   to  Mrs. Wilson's  vision  of  chaos  lurking   beneath  the  smooth  surface   of  events,  of  man living "on  a brink."




WINTER



Mount Rainier is burning
An ember-heap
On  this frosty  morning
Vivid  over  the city A doomed  Pompeii Or  portent
Of  coming  rain Far  in some Satellite's eye. Slowly the colour Diffuses  (harms Delayed,  defused)
The sky is golden-grey
Grey  alone,  then  Black and  ordinary. The city starts its day.
 

Peter Gellatly


88

from  OUT THERE: EMILY CJIRR

Tom Marshall

Emily  vanished into  forest

Perhaps she fonnd her  way to
the lost island where Indian power is stored

Perhaps the island
IS In US
all of us who are at home here

The shaman left his power
like a mist
on the island white on green
the island  that grows in each of us now

the same but different  an archipelago called


Canada: our green rain-forest
cliff and
prairie wind-fall

water's foam:

white nada our nothing  that is also everything




Bg

review articles




IN THE NAME OF DRAMA


Ann P. Messenger


A  Bibliography of Canadian Theatre  History 1583-1975, compilers John Ball  and
Richard Plant. Playwrights Co-op.
CAROL BOLT,  Playwrights in  Profile:  Carol  Bolt, intra. Sandra Souchotte. Playwrights
Co-op.
CAROL BOLT,  Maurice. Playwrights Co-op.
CAROL BOLT, Shelter. Playwrights Co.op.
DAVID  FRENCH, One  Crack  Out. New Press, $5-95·
PETER MADDEN, The Night  No One  Yelled. Playwrights Co-op.
LEN  PETERSON, Burlap  Bags. Playwrights Co-op.
GWEN  PHARIS  RINGWOOD, The  Rainmaker. Playwrights Co-op. J. MICHAEL  YATES,  Quarks. Playwrights Co-op.


IF  CANADA   ever   produces   a Shakespeare (or even a Neil Simon), the Playwrights  Co-op  will have  had  a hand in it. Great  playwrights do not appear in isolation.   They   emerge   from  crowds­ standing head  and  shoulders  above  their lesser fellows,  it  is  true,  but  surrounded and   supported  by  the   multitude.  The  multitude in  turn  is supported by a  vital theatre   life -actors,  directors,    stages, audiences-to the  health  of which  pub­ lishers  make  an  essential  contribution. If plays  are  not  available,  they  cannot   be read  and  performed, and  the whole struc­ ture  breaks  down.  Publication  mattered less  in  Shakespeare's little  London, but only  publication  can  cross  the  miles  of Canada-and the rest of  the world.
Since  its  founding in  1972,  the  Play­ wrights  Co-op  has become  the most pro­ lific  publisher   of  Canadian   plays.  Any citizen or landed  immigrant has the right to  send  in  his  script   to  be  read; if it  is accepted   for  publication,  he  becomes  a member  of  the  Co-op  with  all  the  rights

go
 
and  privileges  and  services  appertammg thereto. Currently, slightly over one hun­ dred   playwrights  belong.  Together  with the  Dramaturge and  his  staif,  they seem to  be  an  extremely  active group.   They  gather at  membership meetings  and  con­ ferences   and   seminars;  they  read   each other's work at a series of Reading Rooms established   from  Vancouver  to  Halifax; they  organize   to  protect  and   proclaim their   rights  as  artists.  The   centre  of  all this activity  is the Co-op  publishing  house itself   in   Toronto.  Not   only  playscripts emanate from  its offices but  also a  cata­ logue  with  supplements, a  newsletter   to members  (with emphasis on opportunities for  marketing plays), lists  of  plays  suit­ able for  children  or high schools or com­ munity    theatres, a   quarterly  National  Playlist  which  summarizes  and  evaluates published    and   unpublished  new   work, and  all sorts of  announcements and flyers designed   to  sell  scripts  and   books.  The Co-op  is taking over the arrangements for playwrights on  tour  to speak  in  colleges

REVIEW ARTICLES



and  univers1t1es; it  acts  as an  agent   for playwrights    who   want    its   services;   it sponsored  a competition for plays by and about  women; it  co-ordinates the  adver­ tising  and   information about  children's plays  nation-wide;  it  helps  to   promote the    purchase   of   Canadian    plays    by libraries   and   school   districts.   All  these activities   (and  there  are  more)   are  sup­ ported   by  funds   from   various   sources, including the  Ontario  Arts  Council, the Metropolitan Toronto  Council, and   the Canada   Council.   Like   all   co-ops,   the organization  is   non-profit. It  exists   to serve Canadian  playwrights  and the cause of  Canadian  drama. The   need  for  such service  is  real, and  the Co-op  is fulfilling its  multifarious  tasks  with  great  energy. Publishing  plays  is  its  main   business. The   books   will   remain    when   all   the bustle  of other  activities  has faded  away. And  there  are  many  books, mostly large, paper-covered  typescript   volumes,  some with pictures  on the cover, produced  with only  a  few  typographical errors  or  other mistakes. Each contains information about  the playwright; most give informa­ tion about  dates  of first  performance, the cast, and so forth. Somewhat  more of this more  systematically  done  would  be  wel­ come. And some of the plays are good­ which   raises   the   question   of   quantity versus quality. Obviously,  the Co-op  does not  publish  every script  it receives;  judg­ ments  about   quality   are  made.  But  one could  argue  that,  in  its  zeal to give Can­ adian   playwrights as  much   exposure   as possible, the Co-op  may be doing  them  a disservice  by  publishing too much  that  is mediocre  and  thus  lowering  the  over-all  standard for the entire  body of work. The  Co-op's  own   National   Playlist  is  amaz­  ingly   honest   about    the   new   plays   it evaluates.  Some   recent   ones  are  called "strained,"  "rambling,"  "somewhat dated";  they   sometimes    "lack   central purpose" and  suffer from "trite writing." But  most  of  them  have  been  published.
 The  other  side of the argument is that  as much  as  possible should  be  made  avail­ able  to readers  and  audiences in order  to expand    and    encourage  the   Canadian theatre in all its many aspects. Out  of this quantity, quality, though  not guaranteed, will have a chance to emerge. This  seems to be the  philosophy of  the Co-op,  and  I think  that,  at this time, it is the right one. When    the    recently    reborn    Canadian drama reaches adolescence, it will be time enough for it to shed some of its baby fat. A step  in  that   more  critical   direction has already been  taken  with  the  publica­ tion of Playwrights  in Profile: Carol Bolt, with   an   introduction  by   Sandra   Sou­ chotte,   the  first  of  a  projected  series  of anthologies. This   volume  contains  three  plays:    Buffalo   Jump,   Gabe,   and   Red Emma. The   tone  of   the  introduction is analytical  and   rather  carefully   neutral, but   Souchotte  puts  her  finger   precisely on   Bolt's   strongest   and   weakest   spots. The  strengths include her  use of interest­ ing historical material, her comic playful­  ness, and  her  sense of the  possibilities  of fluid,  Theatre-Passe-Muraille-style  stag­ ing.  Herein   also  lies  the  greatest   weak­ ness: the plays tend to be loose collections of lively scenes strung together  with songs and  mime,  with  characters  ranging from the   occasional   sensitive   portrait  (Gabe has  some  interesting dimensions)   to  the more frequent trivial  and one-dimension­ al  figures.  It  is  a  rare  delight   to  find  a sense of humour in a  playwright who has some   considerable   degree    of   political commitment;   perhaps   Carol   Bolt   will eventually  learn  how  to  make  those  two qualities  mature  together   into   a  strong  and  clear  vision. At the end  of her intro­ duction,  Souchotte looks  forward   hope­  fully to "mature new works," gently indi­  cating  the state  of Bolt's development at
the present  time.
Bolt's  Maurice has  the  same  faults  as
the  plays in  the anthology. Designed  as a semi-musical  for   a   young  audience,  its

91

REVIEW ARTICLES



political   message  is  crude,   evading  the real   issues  of   the   Roncarelli  affair   in favour  of broad,  scatter-shot attacks on Maurice Duplessis. Historico-political children's  musicals  can  be  first-rate drama; John  Arden's  The   Royal  Pardon and The  Business of Good Government, which  belong  to that  curious  genre,  deal with  profound issues of  human freedom and   responsibility.   Bolt  shows  no  such depth, though the opportunities are  there in her  material. Shelter, too, making  a mixture of  political  and  feminist  points, has   no   real    seriousness   or   depth    of thought beneath the sometimes amusing nuttiness   of  its  surface.  The   useful  bio­ graphical  notes   in  the   anthology  show that  Bolt was  born  in  I941.  It's time she grew up.
Gwen  Pharis  Ringwood, on the other hand, grew  up  some time  ago.  For some forty  years  she  has  been  writing,  teach­ ing, and  directing, but  her  name is not a household   word  today   because  she  lives and works in the depths of British Colum­ bia  and   because   very  few  of  her  plays exist  in  print. CTR  has  reprinted  Dark Harvest, written  in   I939,  and   now  the Co-op    reprints  The   Rainmaker   (also known    as   Hat field,   the    Rainmaker), which  was first  produced in  I945· While most  of  the  Co-op's  scripts  are  contem­ porary,   a  number of  older  plays  appear on its lists because Canadian theatre does have  a  past,  a  past  which  is worth  pre­ serving  and  studying as dramatists today search  for  their  own  roots. The  roots  go deep  in  this  play;  its  prologue  and  epi­ logue are set in  I 945, but the  body of the play  chronicles  one   day  in  May   I 92 I, when  the  Rainmaker came  to  Medicine Hat   and   set   up   his  30-foot   towers   to draw  down  water  from  the  heavens  for the  parched farms.  There is a kind  of carnival, there  is a marriage nearly break­ ing, and  finally there  is rain, which saves the  crops  and   the  marriage.  It  all  adds up to a play well worth preserving.

92
 Len  Peterson's Burlap  Bags is another older   play  (first  copyright  I945),  again worth  preserving,  and  again  making  use of a frame  story.  But  there  the similarity ends. The frame scenes show a pair of roominghouse  rubbies   discussing  the funeral  and   worldly   effects    (some   of which  they have stolen)  of a strange  man who  lived  down  the  hall.  They  begin  to read  through his papers  and  the lights go down.  The   body  of the  play  takes  place in the strange man's  mind, as various characters, shapes,  and  voices  move through   his  disturbed  consciousness.  He has refused  to wear a burlap bag over his head  as most  other  people  do, so gradu­ ally  his clear  perception of  reality  drives him mad; when  he finally requests  a bag, there  are  none left, so he cries, "All right,  no  burlap bag!  I'll  go  on  seeing.  (More  subdued.)  Go  on   watching  the  absurd  world,  that  looks quite sensible through a burlap  bag."  But  shortly   after   that,   he turns  on the gas. The  message is perhaps too  clear,  but  the  use  of  the  stage  as  a psychological  place  was  daring in   I 945 and is still interesting.
The  stage  becomes a pool-hall in David French's One  Crack  Out, with only mini­ mal   interest   in   the   psychology   of  the central character. French has  his  admir­ ers, who find  this play  a powerful drama and   a   brilliant   evocation  of   pool-hall  atmosphere.  That  atmosphere, aided   by a lot of  rough language, is about  all there  is to  this  play. If it weren't for  the  four­ letter words, one would almost expect commercials  to  appear between   the scenes. French  has broken  out  of the Dis­ placed  Newfie pattern, but  not  into any­  thing   better.   However,  New   Press   has picked  up  this  play  and  offers  an  attrac­ tive  edition  for  $5·95·  The  Co-op   en­ courages   other   publishers to  take  on  its scripts, which  then  cease to  be printed  in the  Co-op   format. The  principle of  in­ volving  as many  other  publishers  as pos­ sible in getting Canadian plays into  print

REVIEW ARTICLES



is a good one,  but,  in  this case at least, it appears to  put  somewhat of a strain   on the reader's wallet.
Four-letter words  appear frequently in Peter    Madden's  The  Night    No    One Yelled, where  they are  used with  care  to create  character and  feeling as well as atmosphere. Less familiar words or words used  in  less familiar ways are  glossed at the  beginning of  the  play:   "screw" is a prison guard, "duster" is a western  novel, and  "fissnorkis"  is "need  you ask?"  It all comes  clear  as  the  prisoners,  each  sepa­ rately  caged,  reveal  their  sexual  frustra­ tions   and   fears,   their   different  feelings about    the   outside   world,   the   tensions within  and  among  them.  Until  the  end,  nothing happens, but as in David Storey's  The Contractor, the  shifting  cross-talk  is fascinating.  Janis   Rapoport,  writing   in Books in Canada, compares  this  play un­ favourably  to   John   Herbert's  Fortune
 and   Men's  Eyes;   I think   it's  better­ unpretentious,   linguistically   right,    and genuinely  gripping.
Most  of the  Co-op's  scripts  have  been written  for  and   produced on  the  stage. J.   Michael  Yates'   Quarks   is  an  excep­ tion:   The Net  and   Search   for  the  Tse T se Fly were  commissioned  by  the  CBC for television;  The Calling is a radio play. As the  author says, all  his  plays  are  "ir­ realistic," which  makes  their  appearance in print  especially welcome. One wants  to linger  over  the  layers  of  significance  in dialogue that   sometimes   appears  quite  straightforward   but   never   is.  All  these plays  want   re-reading-and  one  can't repeat  a TV  or radio  show at  will. Yates  has much  to say about  the nature of con­ sciousness, about  power,  and  about  com­ munication,  among   other   things.   It  is stimulating to  join  him  in  his search  for quarks,  those elusive sub-atomic particles






CARLETON  UNIVERSITY

Ph.D. in Canadian Literature

Bibliography  and   Textual  Criticism ... Advanced  Studies in   Canadian  Poetry   and   Prose ... History   of   Canadian Literary Criticism  ... Comparative Studies  in  French/Eng­ lish, Canadian/American, Canadian/Commonwealth Liter­ ature  ... Contextual  Studies  in Canadian Cultural History.

A specialized and  full)• integrated programme.


FOR  INFORMATION:

Supervisor of Graduate Studies,  Department of English
Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada  KlS 5B6
(613)  231-3849



93

REVIEW ARTICLES



of the  human mind  that  just might  exist. Generally speaking,  the  Co-op  is to be congratulated  for  its  publication of  this batch  of  plays, especially  for  the  format of  the  Bolt  anthology. But  the  Bibliog­ raphy  of Canadian Theatre History  1583-
1975  is a  great  disappointment. No  one will ever be completely satisfied with a bibliographer's decisions-what   to  in­ clude or exclude, how much to annotate, what  basic  principles of  organization  to use. In  this instance, the problems  are compounded: exactly  where is the divid­ ing  line  between   "theatre  history" and "drama"?  between   French  and   English theatre? The  real  strengths  and   weak­ nesses of a bibliography will appear con­ clusively  only  after   it  has  been  used  in the  field, so to speak,  for some  time.  But even   a   superficial    glance   at   this   one reveals serious weaknesses.
The  Bibliography is divided  into  sec­ tions,  and  within  most sections  the  items are  listed chronologically by date  of  pub­  lication  and  then alphabetically by author within   each   year's   group.   This   makes sense in the section  on  the Stratford Fes­ tival,  which  one  might  very well wish to study  by reading each year's crop of com­ ments.   Otherwise,  this  kind  of  chrono­ logical  listing  is  pointless.  In  Section  B, "History   to    I9oo,"    subsection    "Early Theatre to  I 7oo,"  an  essay on  the  I 694
TartuIf e affair   (one  of several)   precedes
an essay on a "first  night" in I 6o6 simply
by virtue of its date of publication. Surely the date  when  an  event  occurred is more important  than   the   various   subsequent dates   when  it  was  written   up.  Some  of the sections  are so brief that  the problem of finding  things,  created by this system, is minimal; in the larger  sections, it is serious. Another strange result  of  chrono­ logical  listing  is the  double  entry  of  re­ prints; for  example, all  of  the  essays in W.   H.   New's    Dramatists    in   Canada  (I 97 2)  which  are  reprints  appear twice. Why?   Macready's  diaries   and   reminis-

94
 cences appear four  times  (plus one wrong entry  in the Index) because four different editions  are  mentioned, which  appeared at four  different dates. These  items are in Section  B, "History to  I900:   Tours and Visits"; Irving's tour  appears in  Section J,  "Biography and    Criticism:    Actors, Actresses  and   Playwrights." Why?  This section  is perhaps the greatest  mish-mash in  the  book.  Essays which  are  clearly  lit crit  are  listed  cheek  by  jowl  with  biog­ raphy,  interviews,  and  a variety  of  other  kinds   of  material.  It includes   an   item about   David   Freeman,   "Determination never  to go back," from Time (Canada). Another item from  the same page of that  edition  of Time,  about You're Canna Be Alright, Jamie  Boy, is listed in Section  C, "Twentieth  Century   English   Canada," under  the name  of  Geoffrey James; there  is no note or cross-reference in the Index to indicate that  Freeman wrote  that  play. Section   C,  like  J,  is  a  great   catch-all, which  makes  the  absence  of annotation especially  infuriating. What, for instance, is  the   topic   of   item   C53?-"Phelps, Arthur  L.  Canadian  drama.  University of Toronto  Quarterly 9:82-94, October I939·" Section  A, "General Surveys," has its  peculiarities as  well.  It lists inclusive page  numbers   for  articles  in  periodicals but   varies   its   practice  for   sections   of books.  The  Oxford    Companion  to  the Theatre is  listed  simply  as  having   1088 pages  (and  is listed  again  at a later  date
I 8 items  down  the  page  for  the  Concise edition), while  Elizabeth Waterston's Survey: A Short  History  of Canadian Literature  is  shown   to  have  two  pages
( 155- I 56)    on   theatre.  This   "general" section  includes   Christopher  Dafoe's article   on  Winnipeg theatre  from  CT R
4;   other   items   in   that   issue  of  CT R, which  is largely devoted  to the  Manitoba Theatre Centre, appear in Section  C, "Twentieth Century English  Canada," subsection   "Manitoba," where   they   be­ long. The  British  Columbia subsection of

REVIEW ARTICLES



Section  C  is surprisingly brief,  surprising until  one realizes that  most of the sources used are published in eastern  Canada and the   creators    of   the   Bibliography    have chosen  to  omit   all  newspaper material, where  most  of B.C.'s  theatre history  is to be found.  The  Financial  Post is the  only newspaper included in  the  Bibliography, perhaps because  it seems a bizarre  place to find  theatre  material.  Other  coverage of standard  periodicals has oddities.  The Introduction  announces, "We   have  not fully   indexed    the   invaluable  Saturday Night   or  Canadian Forum, although a significant  number of items  from  each  is included." Why  not?  Which  items  have been   left   out?   On   what   principles  of selection?  Section  L on Periodicals has its uses, a simple alphabetical list of 114 items
 with enough  annotation to indicate the scope of each.  Section  K on Theses  is an alphabetical list by author, not the best system  for  authors  necessarily  unknown at  the  time  of writing; their  subjects  are the  main  interest, not  their  names.  Sec­ tion  M,  "Bibliography of Theatre  Bibli­ ographies," adheres  to the basic principle of organization:  chronological by date  of publication and  alphabetical  within  each year.  It makes  even  less  sense  here  than  elsewhere.  So  it  goes.  The  Bibliography will   be  used   by   students  of  Canadian theatre because  it  is the  only  tool  of  its kind. It will, however,  be regularly  cursed for being a chaotic  mess. The  Playwrights  Co-op,  for  all  its wisdom,  still has  much to learn, including, I would  suggest, how to use an apostrophe in its own name.





MISCELLANIES, METAMORPHOSIS,  & MYTH

Michael Brian Oliver

MIRIAM WADDINGTON,  The Price  of Gold.  Oxford  University  Press.
BRENDA FLEET,  Some  Wild  Gypsy. Borealis Press.
JOAN FINNIGAN, Living Together. Fiddlehead Poetry Books.


EvERYONE's LIFE  is   miscel­ laneous.  But  that   is no  excuse  for  every book  of  poems  being  a  miscellany.  Ima­ ginative   poets  have  always  been  able  to organize   their  perceptions of  themselves and  their surroundings into coherent pat­  terns  of  insight.  Etymologically the  poet is a  maker.  But  in  practice he or she has always  been   more   of  a  changer.   Craft applied  to  vision  results  in  metamorpho­ sis. The  miscellaneous  becomes  mythical. Miriam   Waddington,  Brenda  Fleet,  and Joan  Finnigan have  attempted metamor­ phosis   in   these   books,   but,   much    too often,  they  have  failed  to  transform the
 
miscellaneous   happenings  of  their   own lives into more than  momentary meaning. In  The   Price  of Gold   Miriam   Wad­ dington speaks in the cultured and  clever tones   of   a   middle-aged   woman    who teaches  and  writes  and   now  lives alone, having  married and  raised  a  family  and separated in the  past.  These  facts consti­ tute   her  personal   miscellany.  And  these poems represent her attempt to transmute her  autobiography into  the  substance of
truth.
There are  three  phases  to  her  labour:
"Rivers," "Living Canadian," and  "The
Cave."   Presumably  Waddington   means

95

REVIEW ARTICLES



something by these divisions. The  trouble is, it is difficult  to decide what. This  is especially  true   of  the  first  part.  Clearly the  poet  works  with  symbols most of the time,  and  obviously  she  associates  rivers with  lovers, but  the  equation is arbitrary rather than  archetypal and  the title sym­ bol of rivers actually  appears in only  two of  the  poems.  A more  apt  thematic title would  have  been  "Dreams," because  in both  the first poem and  the central  poem
-of the section she alludes to the difference
between Caedmon's dream  (an angel tells him  to sing)  and  her  own  (an  angel  tells her  to love). I mention  all this simply  to point  out  a  basic  problem  in  her  myth­ making   process.   If her   naming   is  not confused,  it is at least confusing.
But, granted that  her theme is love, the next  question   is  how  does  Waddington view her miscellaneous erotic experiences? One  thing is certain, she definitely recalls or describes her men with style. Besides relying on symbols, she generally  employs an imaginatively precise diction and a wittiness of tone that suggests everything from insight  to impatience to bitchiness (very  little  of  this,  to  be fair). All  told, she seems to regard love very humanely, even  sanely  enough  to create  such  a  de­ lightful  lyric as "Beau-Belle":

I'm  in love with a clerk from Trois  Rivieres who trills his r's
and slicks his hair;

He's smooth as a seal his smile is jolly,
though  my name is Miriam he calls me Polly

Still,  most  of  the  poems in  this first  sec­
tion  attempt to  summon   the  seriousness
-especially the loneliness-of love. The feeling  is there  all  right,  but  the  words, the  definitive  words, seem to be unfound in  the  spaces  between  the  clever  and  at times banal  words that  do appear. For example,  she asks, "Can you imagine what

g6
 it is/like to live  in a world  where/ there is no-one ... ?"  ("Someone Who  Used to Have  Someone"), but  she doesn't  bother to tell us what it is like. The same evasive­ ness pervades  most  of  the  poems in  this section.  In  short,  Waddington gives  the reader   many  well-wrought  phrases,  but little   deep   truth. We  hear   of  "all   the sorrow/ that  being  a woman/ asleep/ be­ side a man/ can  bring," only to have this real   but  undefined  feeling   re-surfaced with  a  metaphor: the  emotion   becomes "cruel knots/ and  ragged  tom/strings" ("London Night"). A myth  is an  image that  explains  life. It is not  just an image, however  metaphorical. The  point  is, if Waddington had  not arranged her poems in  such  a  systematic   fashion,   we  would not  expect   a  mythical   reconstruction of her  life. But  she  has -only  to entertain us with word tricks, images instead of explanations.
Waddington's dream-often  the  core
of myth -is this:

I stood and sang into  an  empty city and  there was no one to remember,  no mythic  heroine, no legendary
king
("London Night")

Here   is  the  central theme  of  the  whole book,  especially   of  the   second  section, embarrassingly  entitled    "Living   Cana­ dian." And  here we find the Myth of No Myth:   existentialism, if   you  will.  It  is certainly   not  accidental  that  throughout this  second  section,  where   the  theme  is twentieth-century  life, Waddington insis­ tently  sees  herself  as an  exile. Time  and again   she  recounts   the  general   modem malaise  of  absurd  injustices  and  meretri­ cious  motives.  For   her  Canada is  only colder than America,  newer than Europe: everywhere  is the  Waste  Land, or as she

REVIEW ARTICLES



calls it,  the  Land   of  Utmost:  "violence, buggery/ non-standard spelling &/what­ ever  Utmost   they  haven't/ invented yet; what  land   ($) ." But all  this is common­ place.   What   interests  the  reader   is  the poet's   responses  to  cruelty   and   sterility.  And   here   is   where   Waddington  most startles   and   disappoints.  She  exhibits   a kind of 1g r o-ish surprise at the way things are,  summed  up  in  her  trite  and   telling phrase,  "I ask  myself/ where  will  it/ all end?"  ("How I  spent  the  year  listening to  the  ten  o'clock  news"). Like  a  Victo­ rian  humanist she doesn't  seem  to realize one of the  axioms  of the  modem world: maybe  there  is  no  end,  maybe  reality  is discontinuous.  Like   most   sensitive   and  thoughtful people  she  wants  to  cry over "the disorder of/ everything human" ("Back  at  York  University"). But  some thinkers-including  existentialists­ have  been  able  to  affirm  the  disorder. It becomes    obvious    that    Waddington   is really   a   Romantic   Outsider,  in   Colin Wilson's  sense  of  the  term: she  doesn't  see the  Order or  Myth,  but  believes that  there must be one, ideally.
Nevertheless,    Waddington   does   not find her myth in these poems. Like love, politics remains miscellaneous for her, changed   only  into  a verbal  juggling  act. She  concludes   her   poem   about   human
disorder  by saying,  "it's  high  time  for me to be/ feeling so low." The  joke is appal­ ling.   Her   only   solution   is,   predictably, symbolism.  "The  Wheel" -referring to the   cyclic  myth   of  both   seasonal   and  p8ychic   change-speaks    lyrically    but cryptically  of "the seed" and  "the wheel"  and   concludes,  dogmatically,  by  stating that "the  wheel! is in the  seed." Reading these   social  poems   is  like  reading   The Diary  of Anne  Frank;  there  is a wrench­ ing  irony  about   them,  not  of innocence, but  of middle-aged humanist naivete.
The few poems in Waddington's last section, called "The Cave,"  display her attempt   to   solve   things    symbolically,
 largely love and  death. "The Bower" does it; "The Cave"  doesn't. The  latter  is a rhyming   game  with  archetypal  symbols, but  "The Bower"  says everything  Wad­ dington  has  been   trying   to  say  in  the whole  book.  This  one  poem  is a  perfect  lyric  and  does  metamorphose her  world. She   begins   by  asking   her   lover   for   a bower,  a  nest, a  tower,  and  a  flower. He refuses, then  replies:

The autumn wind
will  build  your  bower, Algonquin lakes
make  you a nest, sorrow  itself
will raise  you a tower, and death, death, will be your  flower.

The    question    is,   does   this   one   poem redeem   a   roo-page   miscellany  arranged as a mythical mosaic?
Younger,   around  30,  Brenda   Fleet  is
blatantly romantic in her attempt to mythologize  herself. Some  Wild  Gypsy comes  complete  with   a  Heathcliff-and­ Catherine, mauve   and  lemon  green  and purple  cover   (the   colours   of  decadent adolescence),  an   extravagantly  self­ conscious   preface   in   which    Ms   Fleet claims   to   be,   among   other    things,   an Earth Mother,  an  exaggerated introduc­ tion by a friend, a long prose explanation of the  legend  of the  poet's  life  (which  is in many ways the best thing in the book), and,  of course,  a photograph of the  poet in a bandana and  a gold earring, looking green-eyed  into  the mystery of life.
Excuse   my  cynicism,  but  such   melo­
dramatic  trappings  really   are   burden­ some.  I  am  not  anti-romantic.  Imagina­ tion, recklessness, and,  above all, individ­ uality  are  qualities   I  admire  and  aspire to  experience.  But   all   too  often   those claiming  imagination  display  only  fancy, those advocating recklessness go on living
-more secure  than  lucky, and  those  re­
garding themselves as special are only egoists.  Brenda   Fleet   has   put   together

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



this  collection   of  poems  with   the  same eye for effects that  Cinderella would have indulged  if she had  been allowed  to dress herself for the ball.
Sharon  Rusu  in her introduction claims
that,  "The structure of Some  Wild  Gypsy is in  four  select  sections  each  illustrative of part  of an  evolutionary process toward self-completion." She  also claims  that  by the end  of the  book, "Fleet  has discarded the  psychic  and  social  encrustations of a hostile  universe  in  order  to  free,  at  last, the   final   voice  of  the  gypsy."  All  this sounds  like something it took Yeats -an infinitely  better  poet-a lifetime to come somewhere  near  doing. If we can  believe Ms Rusu,  Fleet  must  be up  to wonderful things as she reveals herself in four stages.
The  trouble  is, she isn't. The  poems are divided    into    "The   Romantic  Voice," "The Ironic Voice,"  "The Voice  of  the Lover," and  "The Voice  of the Absurd." But  it  is very  difficult  to  distinguish  be­ tween  these  voices. When  it  comes  right down  to it,  Fleet's  only authentic  role  is that  of the Lover. Her sallies into religion, sociology, and   philosophy are  strictly schoolgirlish.  From  beginning to end  any insight  she displays is into  what  she calls "the  old cock and  balls story"  ("Michael II: For  The Time  Being"). And  this in­ sight,  through  sometimes  nice and  clear, doesn't  really  telescope.
Fleet  is the  lonely, sensitive  gypsy girl in  a  world  of stupid  men.   (In  fact,  her males seem to have sprung  from  the same academic waste  land  as Atwood's  weedy, seedy  collection  of losers.)  As Fleet  her­ self is quite  ready to say:

I'm  sorry  I'm  not  beautiful:
I'm  a witch, they say, with  silver  teeth crazily  shuffling  her  deck  of Tarot
and  turning up  the  thirteenth card
I'm  some wild  gypsy playing
havoc  in bed, sliding  needles into  my sleeping men,  a sort  of soft intrusion in their  lives.

("GypEy's  Apology")

g8
 Later   she  admits,   "Love   has  no  power except  love./ I'm  no gypsy"  ("Gypsy's Reappraisal") . If this is what Rusu means by  "the   final   voice  of  the  gypsy,"  the words  are  disappointingly  common-sensi­ cal -hardly a  fugitive   glimpse  of  the Inner Nature of Reality. Still,  I  suppose some gypsies never wake up.
Nevertheless,  Fleet's   concern   for  self­ image does work well for her in one way: it  gives her  the  presence  of mind  to  see passion and,  especially, relationships with the  cold,  incisive  eye  of  the  artist.   For example,  several  of  her  poems deal  with the  feelings  of  "the  other  woman" in  a triangular   situation,   and    these   poems exhibit  genuine   control, mainly   in  that  she   enhances    bitterness    with   wit   and irony,  instead   of  wallowing   in  sarcasm. And she has written the  best appraisal of Irving Layton I have ever read, certainly worth  quoting:

Irving Layton, I have  always wanted to get  past
my make-up your  cynicism my teens  your  senility
my crotch your  restlessness

long enough to say your  writing has  soul
and  so do you, big toughie

("To The Pole Vaulter")

A woman of metaphors and free (some­ times  lost)  verse, Fleet  certainly  displays a  flamboyant  yearning  throughout  this collection,   but  it  doesn't  lead  anywhere special,   certainly   not   through  spiritual long nights  and  brilliant dawnings.  True, the  last  and  best  poem  does show  Fleet aware of her-and everyone's-existen­ tial  predicament, but  it  does  not   follow from  the  first  go  poems.  Typically,   she sees herself as a detached fruit:

no part  of what  I see
but  separate in consciousness
so too my mind  swings reels  in  a void




Essays on the Constitution
Aspects of Canadian law and politics

FRANK R.  SCOTT

This  book reflects the achievements of a legal scholar and  teacher-and poet
-whose interests  and  concerns  have  always  been  in the vanguard of  Cana­ dian   political   thought and  closely  attuned to  practical matters of  national policy.  Some  thirty  articles  and  occasional  pieces from  four  decades  provide  a  remarkably coherent interpretation of developments in  regard  to  the con­ stitution, politics,  civil  liberties,  and  the  law.  Their appeal lies  not  only in their  insights  into  the  form  and  functioning of Canadian politics, but  also in their  unity  and  scope  as  the  work  of  a  man  who  has  helped  to  shape  our national awareness  and  culture and  has  been one  of the  most  influential of our political  thinkers.
$25.00 cloth, $7.50 paper


The Woman Suffrage Movement in Canada

CATHERINE L. CLEVERDON

The   history  of  woman  suffrage  in  Canada has  been  largely  ignored  in  the standard  accounts of  our  past  and  has  attracted little  attention-at least until   recently-from research  students. The  major   exception is Catherine Cleverdon's study.  Written over  a  quarter of a  century  ago,  it  remains  the authoritative account of the suffragist  struggle  which  took place here. Clever­ don skillfully marshals  a massive bulk of source material, adding lively details and  engaging  anecdotes to  make  the  account both  authoritative and  vivid. She  deals  with  the  struggle  for suffrage  in each  province and  on the federal level. This  work  provides  essential  background  material for women's  studies in Canada. 'Still the best history of women's suffrage in Canada.' Choice
$6.50  paper

prices  are  those  suggested at  time  of publication

University of  Toronto Press





99

REVIEW ARTICLES



having understood nothing neither world  nor  time through self's  separateness my white  agony

let  me, as dim  branches desire  the  darker source, return the futile self
to  become  Becoming
 








("Longing")
 has  been  trying  to cope,  mainly  through her  writing,   with   being  left  alone  in  a world   teeming   with   haphazard natural beauty,   sophisticated  friends,   a  tawdry middle   class,  pitiful   rural   poverty,   and lonely  menopausing  men.  The   material for  myth  is there,  and  she  often  tries  to find  an  elemental meaning for it all, but she only  catches  glimpses of the  personal

Granted, all  endings  are  beginnings,  and granted, this poem does suggest-how­ ever  fuzzily-a kind  of end,  still,  com­ ing as it does after a lot of aimless and miscellaneous self-consciousness, it  hardly gives  the  collection   the  impact of  myth (as, remember, the  pretentious parapher­ nalia  of the  book so solemnly  promises) . Perhaps  this  will  come   in   Fleet's   next book.
Living Together  by Joan  Finnigan pre­ sents  the  reader  with  another  mixed  bag of poems, the kind of pot-pourri favoured  by  the  CBC  in  its  programming  policy.
In  fact,  Ms  Finnigan is  a  CBC  poet  if there ever was one. Let me extend  the analogy.  If we listen  to this  book,  as we should,  we hear  a variety  of voices:  first the dramatic tones of actresses and actors, then the soliloquizing of a middle-aged literary  widow,  and  finally  the  reportage of a sensitive  and  ironic  urbanite  travel­ ling   in   the   Canadian  North,  the   final frontier  as  Star  Trek   would  say.  From beginning to  end  these  poems  broadcast well:   they  are  genuinely  interesting, but they achieve  at  best a state of anthology. Only  in  isolated  instances  do  they  trans­  form   the   poet's   miscellaneous   life  and the  reader's equally  miscellaneous  under­ standing.
First the facts:  Joan  Finnigan is the daughter of Frank  Finnigan, an NHL hockey star in the '3os. She grew up and received her education in Ottawa. She married Dr.  Charles  Grant Mackenzie a psychiatrist,  and   they   had   children. In rg6s  her  husband   died.  Since  then   she

100
 yet universal  truth of her life.
The   first  half  of  the  book  consists  of three  long  sequential poems  suitable   for radio  reading. The  eight  parts  of the first poem,  "Ottawa  and   the  Valley,"   recall the poet's childhood, and,  predictably, the world  appears eccentric to  the  little  girl in this bit of Dickensian nostalgia. Even more predictably, the child herself is a precocious and poetic creature, probably plain  and  bespectacled, certainly a visitor of libraries  and  an attender of Sunday School.   (So  many  children   in  literature are    so   damned literary!-they   are doomed   to  be  so  of  course,  since  non­ literary   adults   do   not   write   memoirs.)  Anyway,  this  period  piece  does  little  for anyone's  childhood.
The   next  sequence,  called  "Songs  for the  Bible  Belt,"  is  a  tiresome  and  con­ trived  dramatic dialogue  intended  to dis­ play the "dream of life/  as neat as death" in   bourgeois   Kitchener-Waterloo.   Un­  fortunately  this  poem  doesn't   live  up  to its  title,  mainly   because  it  is too  heavy­ handed  with  its  irony  and   too  self-con­ scious in its message. As an indictment of middle class dullness and  dread  it is about as subtle as Peyton Place.
The    third    long   poem,    "May   Day
Rounds:  Renfrew County,"  is  a  dense description of three  welfare  case histories told from  the point  of view of a sensitive: and   obviously   new,  government   official visiting  several  hopeless  rural  households for  the  first time.  Finnigan's style here  is Contemporary Canadian  Consciousness: a rough  blend of Local Colour  and  Natu­ ralism.  The trouble   is,  the  tone  of  the

REVIEW ARTICLES



poem  Is, like  the   tone  of  the  first  two sequences,  piously  liberal.  A line  of  Irv­ ing  Layton's comes  to  mind  here:  "The man  wept  because pity was useless." This woman   pities;    she   does   not   weep   in identification with  the death  of  the spirit.  Only   in   a  few  of  the  "Orser   Farm  Poems"   does  Finnigan   approach  meta­  morphosis  of the facts within  and  around her.  "A  Bird  And  Fish  Story"  states  the central   tension.  Alternating between  the self-images  of  bird  and  fish the poet  tries to resolve the problem  of having  survived her  husband.  Halfway   through  she  de­ cides that  she will stay in "the  safe cave/ and  write  on  the  sand"; in other  words, she attempts  to  affirm  her  femininity   by becoming   a   Woman   Artist.  But  by  the end  of  the   poem  she  sees  herself  as  a "winter   bird"   hovering    alone   around Noah's  ark,  denied  entry,  but  wishing  to live  "beyond   the  flood,"  to be a  Woman Alive. She  does not manage in this poem to overcome  the  personal  disaster  of her life  by finding  a  universal  truth, but  she definitely   moves  in   the   right   direction
with  the aid  of authentic symbolism.
Fortunately in two other poems in this group  Finnigan does achieve identity  with eternal   things   so  convincingly   that   the facts  of  her  life  become  the  truth   of all life -in   other   words,   she  realizes   the mythical   quality   of  her  own  experience. In  all  the Orser  Farm  poems it is winter she feels -and  the  possibility  of spring. Simple,  the  oldest  myth,  but  it  is always stirring  when  a  poet  shows  us why  it  is true.  Mythmaking is an  act of faith,  and even  when   we  cannot   share   the  poet's faith,  we must  be shown  his or  her  faith and as much  of the personal  vision as can be  transmitted,  if  we  are   to  grant   the value  of  the  work.  In  "Removal of  the Bees" Finnigan relates first to the winter sleep  of  bees  in  her  cellar  and   then   to their   first   April   flight   "upwards  to   a yellow-bellied  sun!"   But  "In the  Night
 the  Little  Cataraqui Died" is where  we see Finnigan arrive at a tense yet balanced dialectic in  her  personal  and  miscellane­ ous truggle.
graceful  triumph of the  Woman  over the
Artist, achieved  through art:

The cold  this  morning
is a  brilliant impasse  being  beats against;
in  the  orchard
the apple trees  claw
the  merciless  and  frozen  blueness
of a sky
the sun shines  in, hopelessly,
like an  unrequited  lover.

Every weed  is stark  against
the white desert  of the fields/
summer's seeds shaken down, no birds  to search
in barren husks.

All that  stirs
is a miniscule, miraculous defiance, gadfly  at  gargantuan -

The world  is lost, love, lost
in a winter that overwhelms the  planet of the  mind

The Little Cataraqui is my dumb orator and  this is how the  heart continues
in separation

It beats  slowly somewhere two  thousand feet  down  its river  bed
of eloquence

And  waits  to flow again in rapture.

The  rest of the  poems  in  this book are both inconsequential and anti-climactic. The  only exception  is "A Tenth Anniver­ sary"  which   reiterates  in   rhetoric   what she has already  achieved  through  symbol and  myth: namely, "that nothing is ever/  finished."   The   City   poems  are   at   best charming; the Northern poems are mostly clever.  Finnigan does  make  sense of her life,  exquisitely,  in a few of these poems, but   her   real   theme-Living  Together
-is   almost   lost  in   the  medley   of  her
program.
Three poets, three  masquerades.


IOI




STAGES
OF POETRY

MARYA    FIAMENGO,  In  Praise of Old  Women.
Valley  Editions.
BRIAN BRETT, Fossil Ground  at Phantom  Creek.
Blackfish Press. $4·95·
BRIAN     JOHNSON,  Marzipan   Lies.  The   Porcu-
pine's  Quill.

READING THREE  POETS at such different stages as Fiamengo, Johnson  and  Brett  in con junction   with  each  other,  makes  one very aware  of the process by which  a poet develops.  Though Fiamengo tends  to  be imagistic,  Brett  Snideresque and  Johnson is overwhelmed with  surrealism, the  real difference between  them  is of poetic  ma­ turity.
Brett and Johnson are concerned  with proving   the   significance   of  everything. They  reach  out  to  the  world  of  univer­ salities,  invoking  myths  and  elements  for the  sense  of  meaning  behind  all  things. When  this is successful it results in poems of   power,   as  in   Brian   Brett's   "Brujo, Witches   in   Mexico" where   he  invokes

death,  the  weaver spinning  & spinning
a thread  of red water
from  her  terrible  mouth.

In   the  context of  the  poem,  which   ties this refrain  to a specific incident, it works. Where   this  approach fails  is  where   the poet assumes that  by putting two things together   a  symbolically  significant   rela­ tionship  is formed,  as where  Brett says

a black bear shuffied through
the surrounding underbrush while
I listened  to the inevitable  silence of the shifting  constellations.

Fiamengo would not let that  pass. In fact,


102
 it is her nearly  unerring sense for finding valid  relationships between  events or sym­ bols or people that  illustrates her maturity as a poet.
Both  Brett  and  Johnson rely on  seren­ dipity  to  take  the  place  of craft,  though  with  Brett  it  seems  only  to occur  in  the first  section   of   his  book    (perhaps   the poems   are   chronologically   arranged?) . Many  of his poems call  up  a violent  ele­ mental   world  using  a  strong   and   often beautiful voice.  It  is  all  the  more  disap­  pointing then  to come across a flat ending
like "I tucked  away  my gearI shouldered
the  pack I and  walked  into  morning".  As
Brett  says "the  vision of solitude  becomes
repetitious as the milkman."
The   other   disappointment in  what   is on  the  whole  an  interesting and  strong book,  is the  "logging" genre  poems. Though they are quite well done, the material seems stock and  there doesn't appear  to  be  much   more   to  say  about the "Bullshit  Boys" or "Rock-Drill". May­ be it's part of a Western  poet's apprentice­ ship,  as  writing   sonnets  used  to  be,  but Brett clearly  has better  to do than  imitate Snyder  or, even,  Wayman.
Brian  Johnson's work  is more  difficult to  talk  about. The   organization  behind his use of imagery  is so private  as  to  be almost inaccessible, and the energy needed to penetrate his world in Marzipan Lies is out of proportion to what  there  is to find.
He seems trapped by his form -

thanks  to a mother's treason and  a crazed  tray
we started  before the storm
before the sea gave way to the moth
and  the flat white  shells of june-

but  when   he  fights  off  its  stranglehold and  allows  structure and  syntax  to  sup­ port  the load of imagery,  as in "Summer­ time  Momma", "Blood  in  the Tea", and "Nile  End", he  has  control  and  a  voice though   what   its  quality   is  remains   ob­ scure.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In  "Butcher's Dawn" where
dawn is drawn and  quartered
before  the  sun  is  even  up
making it  official
it is possible to find the poem's thread (though feeling  tenuous  about  it as The­ seus  might)    and   experience the   poem without  feeling  blocked  out.
I suppose  the raison d'etre of bizarre juxtaposition of images  is to shock  them into  meaning something, but  unless there is a deal of awareness  behind  this kind  of writing,   it   is  more   obstructionist than revelatory. It  is also,  in  Johnson's  case, hostile  to  the  reader   who  has  a  right,  I think,  to expect  some effort  at communi­ cation  on the part  of the poet. Otherwise, why publish?
Marya   Fiamengo  begins  with  the  as­ sumption  that    meaning  is   implicit   in existence,   that   it  does  not   need   to  be chased   after,   and   that   the   poet's   task (using  the  resources  of  the  craft)  is  to move things  about  to make the meanings  clear.  She  has  quite  a  different   sense  of proportion and  orientation than  Brett  or Johnson. She  does  not  try  to seize large abstracts,  such  as Death, but  points  and personalizes  it in "the limbs of murdered Partisan children".  Landscape, cultures, and  individuals are  parts  of the abstracts she  refers  to  and  as  parts  are  of  almost equal   weight-though  not   value-as illustratives of the abstracts.
In  In  Praise of Old  Women Fiamengo is concerned with women: women  as his­ tory,  politics,  society  and  women  as  wo­ men.  It is a  book of warnings  where  old women  like  history  are  ignored  at  one's peril  and  loss, for they are what  we have by way of reality  and  continuity.
In  "Overheard at  the  Pornographer's" there  is a reminder to men  who strive  to escape their  own age and  death that "Mortality ... is not  confined  to women over  forty,/ much  as you might  wish  it" and  the  chilling  conclusion
 You  will not  be  beggared yet who  cannot love
except  increase a self
in some  pubescent child's face.

North  American women  with "blue  hair f which gleams like the steel/ of jets" are exempla  of a society which  has turned  its back  on  age  and   wisdom   at   the  same time; they do not stand  up well against Hecate,  Medea,  Artemis,   or  Hagia Sophia.
History  and  women  come  together   in
another warning poem,  "British  Colum­
bia Gothic".

In  the  Kootenay country at Nelson
where  cold  water
gives asylum  to  hot  hills
an  Ukrainian woman serves  me coffee.

I look  into  her
water pale  blue  eyes bleached by  time
weather dim  like  my  mother's
sea-stained Adriatic  eyes
and  I hear  Mayakovsky shout,

"Mother the  Germans have  murdered evening in  the  street."

And  it does  not  comfort nor  amuse  me
to  read  in  the  Nelson  Daily  News of July  13th
that the  mountain town  of Kimberley
has  gone  Bavarian
for  the  summer tourist trade.

There is no  room  for  tolerance   in  a  vi­ sion which  keeps in its sights  the  histori­  cal past, and  in "Once at  Aleppo,I 974" with  the "malignant Turk,/ Europe's old
cancerf diseased  to the  bone"  and  "Ger­
man  at  West  Bay"  where  "the   jaws  of even  the  women f look wolfish and  skele­ tal,/ deaths  heads  in  the  sun," Fiamengo
continues what  has always been the old woman's   task,  of  remembering  and   la­ menting  the dead,  and  reminding so that  evil is not  repeated out  of  ignorance.
In  Praise of Old  Women is not a flaw­
less  book.  There are   places  where   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



short  line  form  is overloaded  and   there are  poems  like  "Lake Light" and  "Red on   Black" -nice   imagist   poems -but which  appear neatly self-indulgent in the context  of the  book.
Fiamengo shows her  abilities  as a  poet best, perhaps, in "A Tale  of Roses" where the  themes  of  women,  history  and  poli­ tics coalesce in a form  at once inevitable and  belonging  wholly to  Fiamengo.

Ah, Roses!
Roses living,  roses historical roses red and  roses dead
and  pink  lipped,  Mrs. Rose of stone but  most  of all
Rosa  Luxembourg,  Warsaw's   Proletariat
Rose.
How Das Kapital disposes
of women,  manners  and  especially  roses!

She  has  found   freedom   in  her  poetry to  be  intolerant or  humorous or  what­ ever she wishes. This  is enviable; and  she has  made   that   difficult  transition  from mythologizing (where Brett  is and  John­ son too, perhaps)  to writing  about  "real" things,  without  ending-as  do so many poets  who  fail  to  survive  that  change­ by writing about  the  price of gas-

5 cts less
in  Toronto/
thn  Vancouver.
MARILYN BOWERING


ST. JOHN'S

PAUL o'NEILL,  The  Oldest  City:  The  Story  of St.  John's,  Newfoundland, Volume  I. Press Porcepic.  $17·95·
PAUL o'NEILL's The  Oldest City is a  his­ tory of St. John's from  its earliest days to almost  yesterday, from Cabot and Cartier to  Joey  Smallwood and  Howie  Meeker.  Mr.  O'Neill has  worked  for  at  least  ten years  in  libraries and   archives  all  over Europe  and  North  America  to assemble a vast  array   of  material about  St.  John's, and  Newfoundland's  history  and  people.


104
 In  fact  the  book might  more  properly  be called   "biography"  than   "history,"  for O'Neill's sense of the city's corporate per­ sonality is so strong  and  he is so obviously drawn  himself to individual lives that  his work  transmits the continuous vitality  of the  people  who swarm  through its pages. The   story   of   St. John's  begins   with Cabot's Landfall in  I497· For almost  two centuries it is a  terrible story of exploita­ tion  and  bare  subsistence  for  those  who tried  to  live  there.  To  the  great  fishing fleets of west England, the whole of New­ foundland  was  merely  a  summer  fishery station,  and   decade  after   decade   those who tried to settle  and  stay on the island were  uprooted,  burned  out   and   driven away.  The   harrying and   destruction  of the Beothuk  Indians, natives of the island, was all part  of the same pattern. In  I675, when  St. John's had  already  been a  pre­ carious  settlement since  the beginning of the century,  the west country fishing fleets succeeded  in  having  Sir  John  Berry sent out  from  England to  remove  the  settlers from  Newfoundland.  Many   petitions   to Charles II for  their  removal  had  boldly and brutally stated the case for the fishing industry: "The  inhabitants of St. John's build  houses and make gardens and  orch­ ards  in  places fitt  for cureing  and  drying  fish,  which  is a great  hindrance and  not to be suffered." Sir John  Berry, however, was converted to  the  cause  of the colon­ ists. His  census of  I675  showed  I85  per­  sons  in  the  community, and   two  years later  his  second  census  showed  523  set­ tlers  living  in  28  communities scattered
about  the island  of Newfoundland.
In   the  sixteenth  century,  Newfound­ land  was one of the bases for English  and  Spanish   rivalry  for  the  dominion of  the Atlantic,  and   in   the   seventeenth  and  eighteenth centuries for French and  Eng­  lish attacks  and  reprisals.  Four  times, in I6g6,   I705,   I7o8  and   1762,  St.  John's was invaded  and  occupied  by the enemy.  Moreover,   it   is  evident    that   in  Paul

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



O'Neill's opinion its long colonial  history was  not  ended,   but  extended, by  New­ foundland's joining of the Canadian Con­  federation in  I949·

Newfoundlanders became possibly the  only people  in history to vote their  nation out of existence. The Latvians of the  U.S.S.R., the Moslems   of  Bangladesh, or  even   the  Der­ vishes  of the  Sudan, might  find  this  difficult to  understand. No  such   problem  exists  for the  average Newfoundlander  who,  blind   to nearly   five   hundred  years   of   neglect  and  maltreatment by Britain, is so saturated with  the  colonial mentality that  he  can  still  rally "round the  imperialist  flag"  as  the  sun  sets on  a  vanishing empire.

Many  years  ago  I  was  in  a  group  of students one  evening   when   E.  J. Pratt
spoke  of  his  boyhood,   in  particular  of being  present  on Signal  Hill  when  Mar­ coni received  the first trans-Atlantic wire­ less message.  Pratt  had   never  forgotten the  excitement, the  awe and  the  mystery of that  time;  talking  sixty or  more  years later,  he transmitted his wonder  to us, to­ gether  with  a  strong  visual  sense  of  the occasion which I know now was totally authentic  to  Newfoundland.  I  was  de­ lighted  to find  the same story of  Marconi that  Pratt told  treated in some  detail   by O'Neill-but without the boyhood  pres­
ence  of E.  J. Pratt. There are  dozens  of
stories   and    cameo-biographies   in   this
book. There are  scores  and  hundreds of facts and  equal  numbers of colourful opinions.  The seeker for formal,  decorous historical  writing  and  interpretation  will not  find  that   in  The Oldest  City-but the seeker for  a decorous  historical  tradi­ tion will not find that  in St. John's either.

St.  John's has  been  sneered at and   held  in deep   affection. It  engenders hostility and love.  Few  who  ever  become  involved in  the life  of  the  place   remain  indifferent.  It  has a  brazen  charm that  overflows  in  the  bound­ less   hospitality  for   which    it   has   become  world   famous. The  city  does   not  hide   the scars  of its  centuries of  neglect  and  hostility any  more  than it hides  its haphazard  streets quietly poked  away  from  the  rush  and   roar
 of  a   commercialized  world.  St.   John's   is flesh  and  blood,  obstinate in  security, warm humour, small, brave,  untidy, and   under­ educated. It has  survived four  and  one-half centuries of handicaps that have  challenged its existence. Often naive,  frequently cheeky, it  is  among the  few  truly   interesting cities on  the  North American continent.

Paul  O'Neill has compiled  a work that matches   his  city.  For  the  enthusiast  his book  is  like  the   exploration  of  an   old house  of many  rooms,  never  finished, al­ ways  surprising, full  of  mystery,  full  of objects of importance and  equally stuffed with  trifles.  It is  the  repository  of   cen­ turies of history, brought together through years  of  work,  with  infinite  regard   and total   enthusiasm  for   every  detail,   and, fittingly,   edited   by  Claire   Pratt,  E.  J. Pratt's  daughter.  For   enthusiasts,  for tourists, for self-adopted sons and  daugh­ ters-and   for   all    Newfoundlanders - Paul  O'Neill's  book is a  monument and  a  mine  of  resource  material.

CLARA  THOMAS


NOT THE WHOLE STORY

MOLLIE   GILLEN,    The   Wheel  of   Things:  A Biography of L. M. Montgomery, Author of Anne   of Green   Gables. Fitzhenry &  White­ side.  $9-95·

I  wonder  if   it's    absolutely necessary to houseclean? I wonder if  nine-tenths of  the things   we  think   so  necessary really  are  so! But  I shall   go  on  housecleaning and  won­ dering! I may  have  given  up  belief  in  fore­ ordination   and    election   and    the   Virgin Birth; but   I have   not   and   never   shall   be guilty  of the  heresy  of  asserting that it is not vital   to  existence  that  the  house  should   be torn   up  once   a  year  and   scrubbed! Perish  the  thought.

THE  WRITER  was  L.  M.  Montgomery in a letter  to her pen-friend Ephraim Weber, the same letter  that  announced the forth­ coming   publication  of  her   first   novel.


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Anne  of Green  Gables.  The  passage  re­ veals   at   least   three    of   Montgomery's salient  characteristics: her quiet  rebellion against   the  orthodox  Presbyterianism in which  she  had   been  raised  by  her  ma­ ternal   grandparents,  her  instinctive   loy­ alty  to  the  mundane  features   of  a  de­ manding   Puritan  code,   and   her   wry recognition  of  the  logical  contradiction. All her  life Maud  Montgomery was to remain   true   to  her  sense  of  duty.   She stayed   with   her   widowed   postmistress grandmother until   the  latter   died  when Maud  was thirty-six  and  her engagement to  the  Reverend Ewan  MacDonald was five  years  old.   Thereafter  she  was   an exemplary  minister's  wife   and   a   con­ scientious  mother to her  two sons as  well as a dutiful, realistic  protegee  of  her pub­  lishers, continuing to write to order  about  her most popular character, Anne Shirley, even   though  Anne   weighed  upon   her "like  an  incubus  when  she  ceased  to  be
an  inspiration."
Mollie Gillen's  biography of this rigor­ ously self-controlled woman  takes its title from  a  passage  of  Kipling's  Kim  para­ phrased  by Maud  Montgomery in a mo­ ment of weary revulsion from taxing trivi­ alities   that,   she   said,   kept   her   from "savouring life at all".  Social and  domes­ tic  duties,  publishers'   demands, and   the stresses   engendered   by   her    husband's ever-darkening melancholia and  her own attacks of nervous  disability  and  depres­ sion  composed  the  "wheel  of  things" in which  she  felt  herself   caught.  But   her simmering resentment seldom surfaced in her  utterances and   never  in  her  public behaviour. Superficially at least, hers was not  a  life  tailor-made for  a  best-selling biography.  Apart  from  the  runaway suc­ cess of  Anne  of Green  Gables,  it  had  no particular drama or  glamour. Its  colour and  excitements belonged  to  Montgom­ ery's inner  life, an inner  life that  becomes increasingly   difficult   to  discern   as  this biography  progresses.

106
 Much    of   the    trouble    undoubtedly stems from the fact  that  Gillen was not at liberty to quote freely from Montgomery's diaries, which repose in the protective custody of the author's son, Dr. Stuart MacDonald. Until  these are published, wholly  or  in  substantial part, much  will remain   mysterious   about   Montgomery's later   and   evidently   sadder   years.  Then too,  perhaps  Montgomery was  as  com­ plicated  as she sometimes  rather compla­ cently  claimed  to be. In  a  I905  letter  to Weber  she announced :

. . . as  to  [there]  being  only  "two  of  me" as you ask-bless  the  man,  there's  a  hun­ dred   of  me. . . .  Some  of  the   "me's"   are good, some  not.  It's  better  than  being  just two or three,  I think-more exciting,  more interesting. There  are  some  people who are only one. They  must find  life as insufferable  a bore as other  people find them.

Finally,  some  of  the  reader's sense  of incoherence  and   incompleteness  in   the portrait may be due  to biographer's bias. Clearly  Gillen  likes  Maud   Montgomery and  prefers  to  dwell  upon  her  merits - her love of beauty,  her humour, her ener­ getic,   responsible   conduct.  Failings   are not   overlooked,    but   they   are   usually identified  in  brief subordinate clauses, as in  this  sentence:  "Everything she  wrote rings  with  a  deep   inner   truth, a  hope that  decency,  morality, beauty  will  pre­ vail,  a  revulsion  from  the  limited  vision of  pettiness,   though she  knew  her  own frailties,  and  sometimes  could  not cleanse her own soul of pettiness." And the parti­ sanship   produces  some  perverse  conclu­ sions. Having just quoted  Montgomery -

If I  snubbed  as  they  deserve  nine  out  of ten of the  people  who plague  and  drain  me with their inanities  and  ineptitudes, I would have  a  reputation  for  snobbishness. . . . As I  have  learned   to  suffer  fools gladly  I  es­ cape   this   imputation:   but    I   sometimes think  the cost is too high....

the  biographer decides,  "She  had  no  use for snobs."

BOOKS IN REVIEW



On the other hand, Gillen scrupulously quotes  some adverse  comments, like Ken Macneill's rather chilling childhood recol­ lection   of  his  grown-up  cousin   Maud: "...  not  an  outgoing woman. She  had  a small  and  narrow facial  appearance and a somewhat  small tight-lipped mouth. In­  stinctively  at  first  I  did  not  particularly like her...."-and the grudging degrees by  which  he  warmed   to  her:   "...  I did not   find   her   quite   so  hateful   when   I attended her Sunday  School class later on...."But in a general  context  of liking and  approval they  are  startlingly  incon­ gruous  rather  than  complementary.
Gillen   is  also   scrupulous  about   dis­ tinguishing  between   her   own   educated guesses and  "facts" asserted  by authorita­ tive testimony.  Like Hilda  M. Ridley  be­ fore  her  (in  L.  M.  Montgomery, 1956), she is heavily  indebted to Montgomery's own  account  of  her  childhood  and  writ­ ing   apprenticeship, The   Alpine    Path (I 9 I 7).   But   whereas   Ridley   strove   for immediacy by fabricating speech "quota­ tions"    (unfortunately,  very   flat   ones) from   Montgomery's narrative   passages, Gillen  goes overboard in the other  direc­ tion  with  conscientiously  overt  specula­ tion:  "Did  that all-too-vivid  imagination picture   ... ?";  "And   it  is  possible  that  awareness  of  her  father's seeming  deser­ tion  grew...."; "Perhaps it was now ... that  she  may  have   re-read....";  "Per­ haps ... Maud thought of her stepmother as a usurper." Oddly,  Gillen  is sometimes merely  suggestive  where  she  might  have been    definite.    In    The   Years   Before "Anne"  ( 1974),  Francis   W.  P.  Bolger succinctly conveys the vigour of teen-aged Maud's resentment of her stepmother by quoting  her   declaration,  after   a  year's visit with  her  father and  his new  family in Saskatchewan, that  she did  not  "wish to see Mrs.  Montgomery again."
Gillen  does  make  some  notable  addi­ tions  to our  knowledge  of L.  M.  Mont­ gomery    by   quoting    extensively    from
 Montgomery's hitherto  unpublished  cor­ respondence with  George  Boyd  MacMil­ lan,  a Scottish  pen-friend. Gillen  tracked  down  these letters  and  has  used  them  to good  effect.  Montgomery springs  to  life in  a  long   1929  letter,   liberally   quoted  here, in  which she recounts her nine-year legal  battle  with  her  first  publisher.  But in  the main  The Wheel  of Things is a pleasantly   written  over-view   of   Mont­ gomery's   life,   scanting  the   mordantly humorous, astringent  facet  of  her  char­ acter  and  sometimes  lapsing into  its sub­ ject's  own  least  felicitous  style:  "...  she should  have  been floating  on airy  clouds of  joy."
Maud  Montgomery once  called  biog­
raphy "a screaming  farce." This quiet, honest  book  certainly  does  not  scream, nor  is it  a  farce,  but  it  isn't  the  whole story either.
FRANCES  FRAZER


ICE AND  FIRE

DERK  WYNAND, snowscapes, Sono  Nis Press.
RONA MURRAY, Selected  Poems, Sono Nis Press.

DERK WYNAND's snowscapes  are  largely psychic  phenomena. His  book,  to  over­ simplify, mixes poetry  with  prose. It con­ sists of wry observation, acid  little  lyrics that  melt like cold flakes, and  vanish  the moment  they are touched. These are com­ bined  with snatches of  conversation, vig­ nettes   from  the  ennui  of  contemporary life,  and  an  occasional  glimpse  into  the rigorous austerity of our past. Snow serves Wynand  as an  all-inclusive  metaphor for a  muzzled, muffled, fearfully hibernating and/or  migrating, and  finally  frozen sensibility.  The  perpetual  snowscape seems  to  constrain original thought and extinguish the  fires  of  imagination,  just as our pioneering ancestry  was often phy­ sically immobilized.
The  problem  is one of approach. In his
genuine attempt  to  convey  apathy and


107

BOOKS IN REVIEW



boredom, the  poet  writes  a  boring  book. The snow analogy works well, when used sparingly   or  variously,   but   not  so  con­ sistently  and  at  length.  There is  no  real transformation for  the  reader  to  experi­  ence,  rather a  kind  of smug  recognition that   only  affirms  the  blandness   of  life. Blake,  while  he  erred  on  the  side  of ex­ travagance,  at   least   produced  the  dra­ matically  interesting symbols of Ore  and Urizen   to  fight  the  old  battle   between  creativity   and    its   methodical   stifling. Wynand's  point,   no  doubt,  is  that   we have   nothing   left   to  oppose   emptiness  and  futility.
Many   pieces  do  resonate  metaphysic­ ally, when, for example, there is a tension drawn  between   scientific  assertion   and poetic association. One  poem in the  book draws   meaningful  suggestion   from   the otherwise  ordinary observation that  fresh, infinitely  yielding  snow  is soon  trampled into  gleaming unresilient ice. The  image in its context  reminded me of Hopkins' sorrowful  line:  "Generations have trod, have  trod,  have  trod." In  terms of  snow­ scapes, one can easily extrapolate a warn­ ing    against    fixity   and    set    direction, against  the  abstracting of life  into  facile theory  or  lazy  habit.  There is  a  menace about   the  hard   clarity  of  the  path   laid down.
Only  intermittently does the  book live up to its strong beginnings. The initial metaphor is stretched to  breaking point, and  by the end  of snowscapes, the poet  is indulging in  self-parody. Aesthetic  uni­ formity  is  too  slavishly  maintained.  Ac­ cording  to  this   writer,  our   snow-filled lives are devoid  of  intention. We exist in an external vacuum between  the idea and the   act.   Hamlet,  however,   shares   this problem  with  us, and  even those pioneers  Eliot  and Joyce create a "central con­ sciousness".  Wynand makes  his appraisal of enervated mentality far  too  cool  and too general.  He as much as says this in snowscapes.   Even   our   artists   are   frost-

roB
 bitten,   poets   of  "crystalline"  precision, who are short  on  real substance, abstract painters, musicians   barely  able  to  catch our  thin  music.  Wynand is in this book a "snow-artist".
His people are half-alive. We should  be shocked, but are barely ruffled by their desultory  conversation. Its featureless landscape produces a state of trance. Images   achieve   a  kind  of  slow  rhythm that  might far better  be suited to film. snowscapes does in fact end with a script, for  sound,   which   as  I  read   it,  seemed quite  appropriate for live presentation. It bristles   with   an   energy   missing  in   the poems. Monotony is given dramatic force. The   voice  of  mounting hysteria  leading to violence can be heard  as incantations accrue.  The  annihilating dreamscape, the confusion   of   geometric  whites,   carrot­ nosed snowmen,  blood, and  the poignancy of birds  hunting for grain  "in  the steam­ ing  path   of  our  horses"  might   be  con­ veyed and contrasted forcefully in theatri­ cal terms. There is even humour!
I  think  snowscapes  makes  intellectual and  ironical  sense; it is clever and  apt.  Its basic concept  is intriguing, but misfires in trying,  as the  jacket  announces, "to  mir­ ror the human experiences which colour  a world  as white  and  neutral  as  the  void."  The   job  of  imitation is  too  thoroughly, too   literally   done.   Finally,   snowscapes leaves  the impression  of  being contrived, and   too  frequently  lacks  the  impact of real  poetry.
My initial reactions to Rona Murray's books  were  all  positive.  Close  examina­ tions perhaps modified  and qualified  cer­ tain  responses, but  generally  supported a mounting  conviction that  she  is a  sensi­ tive,  moving  and  skilful  poet.  Her  work is  full  of  specifics;   her   poems  are   not vague,  but  create   actualities. There is a sense of discovery and excitement in the reading. She can be visionary, ironic, elegaic,   celebratory.  Like   Wynand,  she has  a  highly  developed   aesthetic  sense,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



taking special pains over the visual and musical  arrangements of  her  work.  But there  is variation.
The   first  section   of  Selected   Poems, "The  Enchanted Adder," based  on  the separate volume  of the  same  title,  is like a book of spells, mystifying and  haunting. Poetic  talent  is a  touch  precocious  here; the  ultimate feeling  is one of evasiveness. Yet  even as early  as 1965 when  this  col­ lection  was published, strengths were de­ veloping.   Murray  works   from   genuine rather  than   trumped-up  impulses.   The  endings  of her  poems almost  always  pro­  vide  that  sudden,  gratifying insight  that  makes marvellous sense of the whole.
She is capable of metaphysical conceit, exact,   complex,   yet  altogether natural. For instance, the "waxed hexagonal cells" of  an   abandoned  honeycomb,   "a   dead city", are compared to the lifeless yet structurally coherent cells of a discarded lover. The hand that lifts the "weathered board" is thus  provided with  a  "curious consolation".   Images    are   met    several times in one poem, slightly, subtly altered, deepening and  changing our own aware­ ness. In  one  piece,  anemones  move from a  still  but  "unequivocal"  brilliance to  a "whirling"  motion,    and   finally   "each particle of matter", which  the  poem  has carefully  catalogued,  "transforms, shifts, intersects  with  fire". The  pattern of  her language  is   unfaltering; lines  flow  and hold  exactly  as  they  should.   Assonance, internal  rhyme,  and  a  sort  of  staggered alliteration are  used with expertise.
Images can be startling. The  bleeding heart  of a tiger is connected in one poem with  love; in one Blakean  sounding fable of simple,  strong  rhythm, children  suffer a  spiritual  mutilation  at   the   hands   of crass adults.  An angel-mating is  reminis­ cent  of  Yeats; Murray's  winged  guides generally   are   as  sinister   as  Lorca's  or Rilke's,  beckoning   the  poet  to  a  fearful  destiny. The comparison is not gratuitous, for this poet's "angels" identify something
 of her  true  anguish  in  knowing  decay  to be at  the  heart  of all  beauties  and  com­ forts.  Death in  many  guises  stalks  "The Power  of the  Dog",  the  volume's  second book;  and  while  poetic  ability  does  not flag, it may have  been a mistake to make this  particular grouping  of  thematically and  artistically  similar pieces.
A healthy   contrast to  the  poet's  com­ pelling  but stifling death-halls of an inner  world  may be found  in the more relaxed,  even  spritely  "Let   it  be  a  tender sum­  mer", or  the  bizarre   but  intensely   real image  of a bisected  reptile defying  death in   "The  Lizard". She   can   produce  a Chagall-like exuberance,  "Reaction to  a Cathedral  Town",  or   social   comment laced  with  surrealism,  "Cattle Market". A  deceptively   delicate   sequence   called "The Beach",  sad and  gay at once, and  a poem   called   "Doppelganger"  seriously, disturbingly, masterfully consider  the ele­ mental, the unconscious  or other life, else­ where expressed semi-symbolically  as ani­  mals and earth. In a lighter, but nonethe­ less  meaningful vein,  "Rings, Wings  and Circles"  provides  a persuasive  meditation on  spheres -good ones  and  bad  ones. Finally, she can be corrosively self-critical. "And   now  this  morning" equates  a  wo­ man   attempting  to  consume   away   her past  life with  the  devouring sea.
The  last book, "Ootischenie", is a fine and   multi-faceted  achievement.  These
poems are an "attempt to interpret [theJ
Doukhobor experience" of that  area  and
partly   a  personal   account of  the  place. For  these inhabitants of a harsh  land

No Siberia could  be bleaker
snow flows like fine sand over shacks no light  glows from  windows
no sound 	through  cold
except  the  thud  of a distant  ax

Unlike    Wynand's,   Murray's   winter­ scapes remain  tangible  and  do  not  evap­  orate  into tedious  messages:  "a Sahara of
snow",   "salt-dunes",  and    "Yesterday I
half-eaten a  frozen  deer  I on  a  logging

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



road". Even when she is soothed and mes­ merized   by   snow,   its   seduction   is   re­ created, and  we  participate. Her  poems are not merely ideas, but shareable modes of  being.  One  of  the  best  poems  in  the book delineates the approach of a monster  horse  into   the  sleeping   town  of   Ootis­  chenie. The creature is hugely lugubrious only   by  contrast  to   human   triviality: "night clothes  turning'', "hands' anxious  manoeuvering".  His   presence   is  enor­  mous:  "thighs slow pistons",  eyes staring, breath    vaporizing.   He   pauses,   listens, "and then  /  moves  back  down  the  lath  and  plaster  street  /  into  rock again."
Rona   Murray  builds,   in   her   art,   a strong and graceful  edifice to offset the deterioration she  feels so keenly,  the  in­ cessant,  irreversible gnawing  beneath  all pretense  of certainty, all  the  momentary marvels    of   existence.   Selected    Poems leaves  one  finally  with  a  sense of  joyous life,  bravely   won.  "I   celebrate . . .  the making," says  the  poet; like  Yeats,  she would have  the dance  the constant frenzy of life's contradictions (especially  the elu­ siveness of language) , aesthetically  trans­ formed. Her  final words are subdued  but positive.
PATRICIA KEENEY  SMITH



CANADIAN MILLS

CAROL PRIAMO,  Mills  of Canada. McGraw-Hill
Ryerson.  $27.50

IN THE LAST FEW  YEARS, Canadian  pub­ lishers  have   been  offering   us  some  re­ markably beautiful and  expensive  large books.  Mills   of  Canada  is  among   the loveliest, and,  at  $27.50, it  is not all  that  expensive.
Carol  Priamo, its  author and  photog­ rapher, is a romantic, at least about  mills. She  writes  in  her  preface  that she  spent four   years   finding   and   photographing hundreds  of   sawmills   and  flour   Inills

I 10
 driven  by wind and  water in often  remote parts  of eastern  and  middle  Canada and it  is obvious  that  she  is in  love with  her subject.
Her photographs, which are in Andrew Wyeth  moods,  and  in  colour  as  well  as black and white, are sometimes misty, sometimes sharp, nearly always tranquil. They  issue up  a strong  sense of the  past
-"as if you found/ Time all alone  and talking   to  himself".   Miss  Priamo   took
those lines from  Richard Wilbur's poem, "The Mill",  and   aptly  ran  them  across her  book's  final  full-page  photograph­ a  millstone   abandoned   against   a  stone wall.
Like  any  honest   lover,  Carol   Priamo not  only  visually  presents  her  subject  in as lovely a light  as possible;  she also  ex­ plains  the intricacies and  pleasing peculi­  arities of her love and,  to help you under­ stand,  discusses   the   past.   Neither  the Greeks  nor  the  Romans  had  windmills,  she  says.  Our   Canadian   windmills   are descendants of the seventh century  wind­  mills of Islam  and  were  brought  here  in the  seventeenth  century   by  English  and Dutch settlers.  Nova  Scotia  had  the  first water-powered  gristmill   on   this  contin­ ent. It was raised  by Champlain's men in
1607 on the  banks  of the LeQuille River and  its great  stones  were  brought  across the  sea from  France which,  she  tells us, produced   the  finest  stones  in  the  world, the  bahr-stones.
Carol  Priamo  is diligent  in her research
and  does not stay  with  history's generali­ ties.  She  enters  into  the  complexities  of machinery -for   example,  she  explains  that  a hopper boy is a rotating rake which spreads   the  miller's   flour  so  that   it  can cool  and  dry. And  she  has  found  some lovely   old   engravings, lithographs and drawings  from  old millers'  catalogues which  not  only  complement  her  photo­ graphs but  help  the  reader  connect   the rushing  water  with  the  water  wheel  and the  cog  face  gear  and  the  vertical  shaft

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  eventually the  spindle  which  drives the millstone.
She tells us that millstones had their furrows dressed every two weeks and she explains how these stones, weighing nearly two tons, were raised and lowered to the precise level where they could grind finely and  yet not touch  each other.
In  fact,   Miss  Priamo   seems  to  cover
the  entire  field  of mills in  Canada from their architectural triumphs (with one bizarre  exception)  down  to  the  life  and worth  of the miller himself. That "worthy man" had  many  enemies  among  neigh­ bouring  farmers, whose fields he flooded, and  fishermen,  who  objected   to  the  sal­ mon fighting  the watenvheel on their way up-river to spawn.
Finally,  like the lover she is, she makes an  impassioned   plea  for  these  lovely old mills to be restored  and  treasured for  all time.  Mills  Of Canada  is something of a treasure in itself.

MARY  MCALPINE



AMERICANADIANS

H. A.   HARGREAVES,  North by  2000.  Peter Mar- tin,  $8.95  cloth, $3.95  paper.

North  by 2000 by H. A. Hargreaves is subtitled "a  collection of  Canadian science fiction." The  novelty is appealing; Canadians are  not  used  to  sf stories  ex­ ploring  the  computerized  complexities of Americanada in  the  twenty-first  century. One   of  the  six  stories  appeared  in  the experimental British New Worlds, four in the  prestigious  British  New  Writings in Science  Fiction anthologies; quality  seems guaranteed. Even  the  package  is  promis­ ing,  with  attractive layout  and  graphics. Finally,   a  dedication  "to   my   children, whose   evolving   struggles   with    ethical  problems  keep  me  optimistic" hints  at  a concern  with  human life,  not  just gadg-
 etry in this future North  American conglomerate.
Unfortunately,  Hargreaves evades  the human concerns  he raises. The  first story, "Dead  to   the   World,"  restates   the   sf cliche   of  a  lone   man   triumphing  over The  Computer in thirteen slick pages. Hargreaves writes competent if not mem­ orable  prose. Yet his concentration on the mechanics of  plot  and  problem  destroys his  ethical   point,  since  his  human being really doesn't  matter.
Later   stories,  while  more  complex   in plot and theme, all reveal this flaw. In "TeeVee Man," an injured engineer  races against time to fix an orbiting television transmitter; in "Tangled Web,"  a "spiri­ tual   advisor"  outwits   another   machine, the   bureaucracy  of  "Tundra  City,"   to affirm   religious   values   by   cremating  a dead  Sikh.  The second  presentation, de­ spite its potential, remains  as banal  as the first;  neither the  repairman's view of his job  nor,   more  important,  the  troubled pastor's  spiritual  rebirth is  convincingly developed.
Similarly "Cainn," potentially Har­
greaves' strongest story, ignores the hero's "vulnerable humanity." A disturbed young  criminal rejects  attempts to  rein­ tegrate  him  into  productive society, until  he gets lost in  a blizzard  near  Red  Deer.  Suddenly, we are  told  but not shown,  he becomes a "new Jason," finding "freedom in   submission."  The  conclusion,   which should   have  emotional  power,   becomes merely  predictable, as a cipher  repays  his debt  to a half-glimpsed, seemingly autho­ ritarian society.
Even   "More  Things in  Heaven   and
Earth," the  longest  and   most  satisfying story,  depends   for   its  impact  on   Har­ greaves'  initial  ideas,  not  their  presenta­ tion through character. In  a transmission studio,   linked   to   6,ooo   students,  Alan Hamilton lectures  on Shakespeare. A de­ voted  team  of  actors  aids him by acting  out  different  interpretations of  complex

II I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



passages,  infusing   text   and   scholarship with life. Hargreaves creates a teacher's dream. Then he  throws  "The Unit" an interesting problem  in  telepathy, a  melo­ dramatic case of sabotage,  and  lets  them scramble   for   unconvincing   happy   end­  ings:  all instead  of  developing the human concerns  which  could  arise  from  charac­ ters interacting  in his situation. Even  the hero's enthusiasm for the course, and  his abilities  as a teacher, take second place to his cleverness in solving the problems dic­ tated  by the plot.
Canadian? Hargreaves does tend  to glorify  the  group,   men   (women  are  ab­ sent,  or  mere  names)   working  together, using technology  to promote the common
good :  the  process,  or  so  we  like  to  be­ lieve, of Canadian history. Yet he focuses on  the  single  competent man,  the  prob­  lem-solving   faceless  Hero   of   American pulp  science  fiction. "Protected  Environ­ ment" could  be  an  illustration for  Sur­  vival,  yet  it  only  adds  a  helpless  super­  visor sitting at a radar screen to the basic situation   and  insights   of  "To   Build   a Fire."
In   North  by   2000,   Hargreaves   ap­
proaches, then  refuses to deal with, the quality  and  nature of human  life for  his plastic-ID-carded Americanadians. (Why "Americanadians"?  It   appears  to  have been   a  purely   bureaucratic   amalgama­ tion;   didn't  anyone   notice?)   Scattered references    to    Lambeth,  Ontario,   and Saskatoon, digs  at  the  University  of To­ ronto,   don't   make   the   slick  filler  of  a contemporary  sf  anthology "Canadian." Nor  does  the  glib  use of futuristic terms
-"autoteria," "Extended Living  Unit,"
"pedway" -in a world  of few  jobs, syn­ thetic   coffee   and,   strangely,   automatic delivery of real shrimp cocktail, make  the stories   memorable   science  fiction.   Har­ greaves   provides   (even   if  he  does   not develop)   stimulating ideas.  He  diverts  a reader  looking  for escape  reading. These

112
 are  the rewards  of pulp  fiction. He prom­ ises and  denies  what  genuine  "Canadian science   fiction"   could   give:   a  sense  of how we may live in our  north in 2000.

SUSAN  WOOD



ON THE VERGE

***   ALISTAIR SWEENY.   George-Etienne  Car­ tier. McClelland &  Stewart. $r6.gs.  Consider­ ing  his  importance as a  political  figure  in  pre­  Confederation Canada,  his   part   in   bringing about Confederation, and  his equally important if more  ambivalent role  as a railway promoter, George-Etienne  Cartier  has   received  surpris­ ingly   little   attention  from   English-Canadian historians and  biographers.  Indeed, more  than a century had  passed  since his death before  the appearance of  the  first  full  biography in  Eng­ lish,  which   is  Alastair  Sweeny's Life,  George­ Etienne  Cartier.  It is  a  thorough and  strongly written  book,  and   if   at   times  it  seems  some­  what  over-favourable to its subject, that  is per­  haps   a  proper   readjustment  of  the  scales   in view of the  past  neglect  of Cartier, who was no angel  but  a  very  interesting man.

*** 	MARY   BYERS,  JAN   KENNEDY,  MARGARET MCBURNEY  and   THE   JUNIOR   LEAGUE OF   TO­ RONTO. Rural  Roots:  Pre-Confederation  Build­ ings  of  the  York   Region  of  Ontario.  Univer­ sity  of  Toronto  Press.   $rs.oo. It  is  amazing how   relentlessly,  despite  our   paraded   inter­ est  in  the  historic past  of  Canada, the  visible relics   of  that  past   are   being   allowed   to  fall into   the   hands of   speculators and   under  the  destructive  machines of  the  demolishers. The number   of    pre-Confederation    buildings   is steadily shrinking, from  neglect or  destruction, and   this  makes   valuable  the   efforts   of  those  who  have  preserved such  buildings where  they could  and  of groups like  the  Junior League of Toronto who have recorded in words and photo­ graphs the  surviving  pre-Confederation  build­ ings  in  the  Municipal Region of  York-the area    of   small   villages    and    towns   that  sur­ rounded  Toronto in  the  days  before  the  great urban  sprawl  began. They  have   found   some amazingly  fine   examples  of   early   Canadian building, and  one  hopes  the  publicity provided by  this  visually  pleasing   book  will  help  to  pre­ serve  such   of  these   beautiful houses  are  now threatened with  destruction.
