





CANA
l TERATURE
N°·32





NEW W?J.VE   IN   C?J.N?J.DI?J.N POETRY


Articles

BY RALPH GUSTAFSON, WILLIAM H. NEW, JOHN  HULCOOP, D. 0. SPETTIGUE

Reviews

BY DOROTHY LIVESAY, HUGO MCPHERSON, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, MARYA  FIAMENGO, WAYNE BURNS, PETER STEVENS, FRANK DAVEY, WALTER YOUNG, ROBERT L. MCDOUGALL, DAVID M.  HAYNE,
JEAN-GUY PILON, JOHN  MATTHEWS

Annual Supplement
CANADIAN LITERATURE CHECKLIST,  rg66




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









TO  OTHER EDITORS





TEN  YEARS  would  once  have  seemed  an  extraordinarily  long life for a Canadian literary  magazine. As late as the early  195o's,  lack of patrons, lack of public  interest  translated into subscriptions, and  even  lack  of writers  and material made  the  existence  of  any  magazine in  this  country precarious in  the extreme. Here and Now  vanished  after  a few quixotically  elaborate issues;  Con­ temporary Verse  and  Northern  Review  lived longer,  but  expired  in the  mid-5o's from  publishing difficulties  as well as from personal  circumstances in  their editors' lives. Tamarack  Review  was founded to take  their  place,  and  the  broad  list of its first editors  showed  the  wide  feeling in Canadian literary  circles  ten  years ago of the  need  for a magazine to fill the  almost  complete  vacuum left  by the  expiry  of Northern  Review;  they  included not only  a central  core of  Toronto writers  and  publishers,  but  also an  "advisory" circle of writers  outside  Toronto consisting  of Alan  Crawley, James Reaney, F. R. Scott,  A. J. M. Smith  and  myself. Later  the advisory  editors  were dropped (my own experience is that such positions are rarely more than  titular in any case)  and  Robert Weaver became the editor  with  a local board   of  associates.  In   this  form -and  with  a  tendency   to  become  Toronto­ oriented as  well  as  Toronto-based, the  magazine  has  steered   through  most  of the  decade which  it  has  finally  completed  and  which  it  now  celebrates with  its tenth  anniversary issue.
The  issue  is large,   as  befits  a  celebration, and  astonishingly good  value  for
$1.25.  A touch  of nostalgia  has gone into the selection of contributions. Obviously the editors  have  been gathering material over a long period  for this occasion; and a good  moiety  of the  important figures in Canadian poetry  and  fiction  over  the past  decade are  represented. There are  unpublished works  by  poets  now  dead,

3

EDITORIAL



such  as Anne  Wilkinson  and  E. J. Pratt, slices of interesting works in progress  by Kildare Dobbs,  Brian  Moore  and  Mordecai Richler, an  amusing fragment of  a journalist's journal by Robert  Fulford. Only  one  item  in  the  issue is so pointless as to  tempt  one  to accuse  the  editors  of  burning incense  to  an  :::..thor's  vanity; rather than  spoil  a festive occasion  I refrain  from  naming the  writer.  I can  only wish Tamarack, with  the  warmth of one  who  was  in  at  the  beginning, another decade as long  and  successful  as that  which  it  has  already   enjoyed.  More  I  do not  wish, since  twenty  years is probably  as long  as  any  magazine can  maintain its vitality; Cyril  Connolly,  perhaps  over-precipitately, closed  down  Horizon after ten.
Writing recently  in  Le  Devoir, Jean-Guy Pilon   (editor   of  Liberte)  remarked
that   of  the  three   best  English-Canadian literary  magazines, two  are  published in Vancouver. The  three  magazines  he listed  were  Tamarack, Canadian  Litera­ ture and  Prism. If one is to accept  this flattering judgment, it can  only  be, from the  beginning of I g67, with a hesitation  prompted by the  appearance in  Victoria of a  magazine which,  from  its first issue, looks as if it  will make  the  trio into  a quartet. The  Malahat  Review, appearing just after  Tamarack's tenth anniversary, is published  by the University  of Victoria (with  funds  whose  rumoured lavishness has  stirred   the  envy  of  rival  magazines   throughout  Canada)  and  is  edited   by John  Peter  and  Robin  Skelton, both of them contributors to Canadian  Literature.
The  Malahat  Review  is announced in  an  introductory circular issued  by  the
editors  as "Canada's first thoroughly international  quarterly of life and  letters". If one can  judge  from  the  first issue, its claims  to this  title  are  formidable, since only one of the  contributors appears  to be a Canadian by birth; and  the  general scope  of its contents  resembles  that  of such  cosmopolitan magazines as  Partisan Review  or  Encounter.  The  editing  is imaginative and  professional, the  design  is conservatively pleasant,  and  the production is that  of Charles Morriss  at  his best. The  contributors include  William  Plomer  with  an  autobiographical essay, Maria Kuncewicz with  a nostalgic  sketch  of Seville,  and  Ruthven Todd with  "a  remi­ niscence"  of  Mira  which  is characteristically mostly  about  Todd; the  poems  by eight  non-Canadians and  one  Canadian  (David  Summers)  are  a  remarkably good selection; there  is a group  of hitherto unpublished letters  from  D. H.  Law­  rence to S. S. Kotelianski. If such  a standard is maintained, The Malahat  Review should  be publishing its own  decennial issue in 1977.
The  claims  of The  Malahat Review rather boldly  affront those  of Prism, which
in  recent  issues  has  been  calling  itself  Prism  International, and   which  has  cer­
tainly  been  broadening its field to include  more  translations and  more  American


4

EDITORIAL



contributions than  in  the  past.  Prism  has  also been  going  through another kind of  transition. Until recently  it  was  one  of  Canada's best  amateur  magazines­ amateur in the  sense that  it  was run  con amore  by literary  non-professionals. Its editors  usually  knew  a good  thing  when  they saw  it, though  they  did  not  always have  the  same  facility  in  detecting a bad  thing; they  took  chances,  which  quite  often  came  off,  and  encouraged a  respectable  quota   of  emergent writers.  Now Prism  is changing status   from  the  amateur to  the  apprentice; it  has  become  a house  organ  of the  Department of Creative  Writing at  The  University of British Columbia, linked  to  that   peculiar  academic-literary between-world, the  writers'  workshop  circuit.  This  is likely to be a narrowing influence countering the broaden­ ing effect of internationalism.  Of  the contributors to the  most recent  issue, no less than  four  are  involved  as teachers or students in creative  writing  programmes at the  Universities of  Iowa  and  British  Columbia, and  even  those  who  are  not  so involved  produce  too  often  the  kind  of  campus-obsessed   writing   which  has  be­ come  an  American  cliche  during the  past  twenty  years. In  the  current issue one story  begins:  "Registration was less than  twenty-four hours  off and  the  campus was  coming  to  life."  Another begins:   "It was around six when  Tom  got  home from  the university  and  he was tired  mentally  and  physically,  as he almost  always was  after  a  faculty   meeting." Both  stories  are  as  dull   and   parochial  as  they promise.
Prism is also publishing good  material-a  Montreal story by Hugh  Hood  and
a  translation of  a story  by  the  French   Canadian author Andre   Major are  out­ standing in  this  issue -but its  new  editors  should  beware of  the  constricting vision which  often  makes  writers  immured in universities  forget  that  most of real
life and  even of real  education still go on outside  the campus gates.
G.W.

















5



NEW WAVE IN
CANADIAN POETRY




Ralph Gustafson










ITHINK OF  KING   CANUTE. The  wn  of Sw'Yn Fo,kbeMd  was not  the  backwater  he is thought  to be. He  is supposed  to have faced  the ocean
waves and  regally ordered  them to quit  their  task of pure  ablution  round  earth's human  shores. Being a  hardheaded   Scandinavian with  much  experience  in  his blood  of tides and  the  affairs of man,  he knew  better.  He  assembled his court and,  with  a  proper  object-to-object  relationship  and  concrete  instance,  demon­ strated  what  happens  when  the monarch  of all  he surveys orders  the  waves to cease their  allegiance  to the  moon. The  irony  was lost on his  courtiers,  and,  as far as one can  judge, is still lost on all good conservatives.
Canute   was  being  a  good  poet. He  was  also being  a  good  critic:  obstinate
and  alert, with  authority  to demonstrate  the absurd.
Though  the possibility exists, since the Scandinavians got around  and did more than  their share to provide amusement for the wives while they dealt with the husbands,  as far  as I  know I can claim no descent from  Canute. Two  affinities, however, come to mind. The  Tinglid  to protect  the marches  and  borders,  I am in favour  of. And I have stood for hours gazing at the North  Sea.
The  occasion  I  recently had  was the  preparation of a  revised edition  of The Penguin  Book  of Canadian  Verse.  Since  the  first edition,  compiled  a  year  or eighteen  months  previous to 1958, the publication  date,  I have been aware  that a  revision  to  include  the  work  of  the  new  generation   of  Canadian poets was needed. In the inexplicable way Nature has of doing this, a cluster of poets seemed

6

NEW WAVE IN CANADIAN POETRY



to me  to have  been  born  similar  in importance to the  cluster  born  around  Con­ federation and  to the  cluster  born  around the First  World  War.  Because of  those unmanageable restrictions publishers  always come up with,  for the revision  I was given  far  too  little  leeway: sixteen  pages  added   to  the  first  edition, with  some opportunity for  internal thefts  and  manreuvres and  dispositions  requiring a foot­ rule  and  scissors-and-paste. If I had  little  liberation, I was, however,  strictly  put to the  necessity of examining acutely  the  poetry  new since  1958.
Twenty-five years  ago  when  in  the  Pelican  Anthology of Canadian Poetry  I
first published  abroad the  work  of English-Canadian poets, the survey  was made with  comparative ease.  There was then  nothing like the  present  national  vitality in manuscripts, readings,  subsidies,  prizes, broadsheets, pamphlets, private presses, periodicals,  and  books  of poetry  from  the  commercial houses.  Centres of activity were  few  and   localized.  Apart from  The  Canadian Forum, there  was  nowhere to  look  for  published "advanced"  work.  The   current  anthologies were  out  of date; in  fact,  my  ambition was  to  undermine them.  The  only  permanent  light in  the  gloom  had  been provided by  Smith   and  Scott's   New  Provinces. Con­ temporary Verse,  First  Statement, and   Preview   had   not  yet  appeared.  Isola­  tion  was  the  problem: pretty  much  as it  was  in  Lampman's day.  The  general  cultural climate  of  Canada was one  of  provincialism, complacency, or  indiffer­ ence.  During  the  decade following   World   War   II, those  negative  forces  were well in  retreat. When  next  I made  an  anthology  of poetry,  the  book  was able  to take  advantage of a  true  perspective  of the  past,  a present  of rich  provision,  and  was able  to assume  a confidence in the future which one or two critics, deploying themselves  from  abroad, felt  bound  to  temper. The  confidence  has  been  proved anything but  misplaced. The last  ten  years  have  produced a  poetry  that  makes historical  all questioning of Canada's poetic calibre. The  poets already  established write  frequently poems  of commanding quality. The  younger  poets on  the scene possess a  vitality   recognized  even  this  early  as  an  "explosion." Of  the  vitality,  there  can  be no doubt. Of  the way they are choosing to explode,  I am  not so sure.





l:E FACTOR distinguishing the new generation of poets  (apart from  the  quotient of  the  time  the  poet  has  had  to practise  his profession,  which I  disregard   as  the  poets,  I think,  would  wish)  is one  of  methodology. This  can be defined,  broadly, as the swing from  the Yeats/Eliot axis to the Pound/Williams

7

NEW WAVE IN CANADIAN POETRY



axis.  The   content of  the  poetry  is as it  always  has  been.  Birth,  copulation and death with  all  the  questions,  anguish,  elations and  extinctions which  those  pro­ cesses  impose,  still  and  obviously  make  up   the  emotional  context   of  the  new poetry.   Nor  would   I  except  the  social  disillusion.  There is  nothing  radically  different in  this  poetry  from  the  corruption found by  Chaucer in  his social  en­ vironment or  from  the  anguish  that  Tennyson went  through  because  of  his. As a matter of fact,  the  young  poets find  themselves  less oppressed  than  Hardy did. This  despite  World  War  II and  its  bomb.  What World   War  II imposed  is an intensification of response. It is in  the urgency  and  intensification that  the  differ­ ence  lies;  the  degree  of our  folly.
Disillusion  is irreducible; the inherited past  is totally  questioned. But  the debris is being  removed.   We  are  in  the  midst,  or  at  the  beginning of, the  re-creation. So  radically  have  protests  been  lodged  that  the  negations are  proving  no longer sufficient.   One   can't   mistake  these  new  poets.  The  dialogue is of  the  greatest interest. It is as if  caught  between  allegiance to  a secure  cynicism  and  declara­ tions  of  their  own  future. The  universe  is cold  and  indifferent. These  poets  de­ clare  an  exaltation in  objectivism  to  nature. The  stars  are  mechanized. But  the machinery is wonderful. Dogs  treat  their  own  kind  better  than  man  his. Love  is the  answer. It looks as if God  is dead.  But  he  isn't.  It is  only  that  man  has not made Him  work.  No one  ran  up  and  shook  Christ's  hand, Mr.  Kearns tells us, since  he  had  his hand  nailed  down  too.  Mr.  Kearns goes on  to tell us that  now he gets  Christ's message:  how  this "love-junk" can  really  hang  you up for good. Black  humour. Not  at  the  expense  of God.  Mr. Tom Marshall's "Astrology" too leads  us  in  an  interesting   direction. The  philosophies are  "de-commissioned  at
last."

Interlocking  roses of our summer day
are no less blasted in the tides of dust.

Why   not   take  up   penmanship, ornithology? Only  the   fullness of  transience will do.

So give me
conjunctions of dust; make again
the knotted turning of the seasons start;
give me the whole fire of your heart.

"To be mad  for  an  answer," Mr.  Newlove  defines the  position.  No one  pays any attention. Yet

8

NEW WAVE  IN  CANADIAN POETRY



Good company, fine houses and consequention people, you will not turn me
into a tin factory ...

except for the shooting,
how much will your funerals cost

in your consequential  houses? I know where the god is hiding, starved. I have slept
in the turning  mountain.

Intense   is the  de-commissioning of  philosophies  the  world  has  run  on.  As  in­ tense  is the  determination not  to be negated. These  poets  assert  the  positive Self and  they  ask no quarter. What they demand, as Miss MacEwen writes, is

sweet wounds which burn like stars, stigmata  of the self's own holiness,


and  which
 

appear  and plot new zodiacs upon the flesh.


There is  no  answer   except  in  "peculiarities and  particularities"  (John  New­
love) . On  the  other  hand, it  takes more  courage

than  red
wheelbarrows g1ve
to love:

flesh & dust
 
(Pierre  Coupey).


It is as if the  new Canadian poets are  being forced  to what  they won't believe. It  is as if  nullity  is being  imposed   on  them.  They  will  have  none  of it.
By those  who  want   a disillusioned  affirmation, these fresh  sensibilities  are  not to be ignored.




INTENSITY DIFFERENTIATES the  content of the  new  poetry. The   urgency  is unmistakable. It is this intensity  that  explains  the  radical  accep­ tance  of  the  prosodic   revolutions in  contemporary poetry.  Yeats  had  the  leisure

9

NEW  WAVE IN CANADIAN POETRY



to  prophesy  and  warn  of  the  Second  Coming with  traditional formality. These poets  have  not. They  arc  in the  midst  of the  advent  of the  Pitiless Beast. Imme­ diacy   and   objectism   are  the  demands; freedom from   the  traditional  linguistic  formalities. Hence, Ezra  Pound  and  his renovations: the shift in  poetic processes from  "formal" to  "open" composition.
I am convinced  that  this shift in methodology is (and was)  needed  and salutary. I am  not  at  all  convinced  that  what  is being  made of  this formal  revolution  is salutary. I am second  to no one in his admiration of Ezra  Pound. He is the greater maker. But  some  grave  warnings  are in order. Claims  are  being  made  on  behalf of  the  disciples  in  Canada that  are  unfounded. We  are  being  admonished that everyone   not  Poundian is benighted. No  poet  he.  Claims   are  being  made  that the  New  Wave  is writing  better  than  anyone  with  dry feet.  (I trust  I have  made it clear  that  I am  on  the side of renovation, immediacy, experiment,  encourage­ ment,  willingnes,
ing  on  of  hands   not  only  by  Pound   but  William   Carlos   Williams,  Olson  and Greeley  and  the  Black Mountaineers, Birney  and  Delta  and  Tish, or however  the descent.  Pound is the great  progenitor) . The "Poundians", by and  large  (a quali­ fication  on  behalf  of those  poets  I have  already quoted, if relevant, and  one  or two others), are  not  writing  well.
Harm is being  done.  The   New  Wave  Canada  poets  are  being  pushed  into  a
coterie   (they   seem  willing  enough). Labels   and   righteousness  and   pieties  are taking  over.  This  would  not  be good  even  if the  Poundians were  writing  well. I now  am  not speaking  of content,  emotions, exultations or exaltations, propulsions or  environments. I am speaking  of structures. The  new  formalities have  as their correct  objective the  achievement of greater interference with  the instant of  cog­ nition.  To  name the procedures leading  to this, "syllabling" or "kinetics" or "field composition", is valid. But the debate being  made of this is a debate over nomen­ clature. The  principles  are  nothing new.  Losing  sight  of  this  has  led  to  critical  arrogance. The tiresome  witness  of this  is the  seemingly  unending  hostile  align­  ment  of poets  who  have  washed  dishes for  a living  and  those who eat  (generally less well)  in the  Universities.  A poet is either  good or he is bad.
A more  serious  damage is being  done  by <esthetic arrogations. The  claim  to be exclusively right  on the part of the Pound  axis repeatedly refers to music: cadence, natural phrasing, "the  pressures  of  the  breath", rests and  pauses,  the  space,  the broken  line to notate  rhythm, thematic counterpointing. I think  this aspiration to achieve  the  condition of music  eminently right.  Poetry  strives  toward  the  condi­ tion  of music.  We have  returned to the <esthetics of Pater, at least in this respect.

IO

NEW WAVE IN CANADIAN POETRY



"Reprendre a la musique leur  bien,"  says Valery.  The  resthetic of modem poetry is to  take  back  its  own  from  the  greatest  of the  arts;  to  overcome  the  displace­ ment  by metres  of tempos; aural  statics,  deafness.  Nothing new, of  course. Vide "Beowulf". But  a  new  start   made   necessary  by  the  similes  and  rhetoric of  the Victorians and  the  poverties  of the  Georgians. The  movement goes back  to Poe, his "suggestive  indefiniteness", passed on  through the  French Symbolists  to T. S. Eliot;  goes back  through the  Provencal poets to Pound. "To compose in sequence  of the musical  phrase,  not in sequence  of a metronome," says Uncle  Ez.
Poetry,  however, is not  music.  Two  mistakes  have  been  made.  First,  the  error of  thinking  that  notation is music;  secondly,  the  error  of thinking that  language can  communicate as music  communicates. It can't. Poetry  uses language. Poetry, however  much  we strain to prevent  it, to be itself carries a burden of logical mean­ ing.  Music  uses the  logic  of  aural  structures and  is thereby  dramatic.  This  lan­ guage  cannot do.  Without its  integument of syntax  and  grammatical  structure, poetry  is undramatic.  Without the  drama of syntax  there  is no  tension.  Poetry  must   resolve  more   than   sound   and   rhythm; it  must  also  resolve  its  linguistic  meaning. I do  not  find  this sad.  I find  this inevitable. The  poet  has  the  greater challenge. We  should  have  remembered  all  about  this. We  reject  Swinburne and
Carman.
Doors and windows
Builded Bliss. But where's
The  bloody edifice?

This   misadventure  with  music  has  led  to  the  broken  line,  the  jettisoning  of metre,  the  placement of spaces  and  rests and  pauses on  the  printed page  which have so bemused  and  bewildered the conventional reader. The  advantages gained have  been several: natural breathing, the physiology of cadence, modulations and juxtapositions. The  method of  counterpoint, the  fugue,  the  canon. Some  of  the modem poetic  structures are  as strict  as serial  music.  Mostly,  these  "liberated" poems  are  unholy   messes -the  result  of  not  perceiving  the  difference   between music  and   language,  the  typewriter  and   rhythm, the  lungs  and   the  intellect: D. H. Lawrence's "swoonings" and  Eliot's "Quartets" (I am not being religious). A  warning should   be  directed  at  the  New  Wave  poets  presently  "exploding." What we are  getting is implosion. The  poem itself is injured.
The  errors  are  in  mistaking the  conditions  of music for  those of language and in  mistaking   notation for  music.  On  these  two  errors  hang  all  the  flaws  of  the prophets.


I I

NEW WAVE IN  CANADIAN POETRY

IQUOTE FROM   POETS of the  "new  direction" which  the intro­
duction   to  New  Wave  Canada  assures us is "at least  vigorous  and  very sure  of
where it is going." There is no question  of the vigour.  But listen:

Fragments, all I have, the chips off the block, the truth
in my words, of it.

You must find your own words, & breath for the words,
for it.
( Mysteriensonaten # 10)

sung as the shrill bird 	the word offers the ear cheer, as it be
(a song)

determines the rhythm
the encounter moves to-­
(song)

The sun is mine
And the trees are mine
The light breeze is mine
And the birds that inhabit the air are mine
(Song)

For my friends
whose marriage is dissolving in the hills all this water is superfluous
(Song)

These  are  not  the  whole  poems,  and  the  poems  are  not  inaccessible  in  meaning. They  are  just tone-deaf.
To  illustrate fairly  the  lapse  of  dramatic tension   because  of  the  crippling of syntax,   entire   poems  of  some  length  should   be  quoted. Inadequately, I  give  a fragment:

I2

NEW WAVE IN CANADIAN POETRY



Dog with three legs
with a name as round as his head is as round
as his eyes are


his many many other
 


bignesses
his eyes

come into
his eyes, look
at you, you look back
 




(etc.)


After  the  first four  lines, the sound  is nowhere  the meaning. But what  I illustrate here  is the  danger of  relying  solely on  visual  (rhythmical) structure for  tension. When  syntax  lapses,  tension  lapses. Drama of the intellect  is missing.
It is significant that  the  three  poets in  New  Wave Canada who  are impressive
are  each  alert   to  the  meaning that  is in  the  music  of  words  and  syntactically dramatic:  David   Dawson, George  Jonas,   and  Michael   Ondaatje. I judge  that they know the rules to be broken.
My  criteria  in   judging   such  adventure  (vitality)  consist  of  three   negatives. I consider   dead   (though it  may  look  alive  typographically)  the  poem   (I)  in which   the  liberation  (disenfranchising of syntax,   referants,   metre,  punctuation, or  whatever convention)  defeats  communication, or  so delays  it  that  the  poem is in jured,  or  so assumes  an  arrogance that  the  reader  is left to write  the  poem: when  the  theoretical poetry  is so inaccessible  that  Frost's  "immortal wound" has to be self-inflicted; ( 2)  in which  the structure or the lack of structure of the  line goes  against   natural  phrasing, the   instinctive   physiological   and   (nota   bene) intellectual pacing;  ( 3)   in  which  the  manipulation is not  accumulation and  is not worth  the  poetry  gained.
These   experiments  and   impulses   and   indifferences  and   disenfranchisements must  not  get  out  of  hand. It would  be  too  bad.  We will have  protests  and  not poetry.  We  are  being  presented with  poets, with serious  and  needful  significances to  communicate, doing  so  in  poetry  that  is  ugly  in  sound,   ugly  in  shape,  un­ challenged   in  craft,  and  impoverished of drama.
One  or  two  trespasses  and   then  I am  done.  The  enormous amount  of  con­
fessional  verse;   personal  complaints against   the  universe;   "the  private soul-at-

NEW WAVE  IN  CANADIAN POETRY



any-public-wall." The world is a  terrible place. It is  redundant just  to  discover that. Secondly, my  own  weary complaint: the  inverted romanticism: if it is ugly it  must   be  realer   than if  it  were   not; the  city  of  Toronto  made responsible for the  acne  on a girl's  face.
One can  write  well and  be young:

"all  the lonely rose time of summer" "thank god for the birds at dawn" "the falling  rain's  a harp  for me"

Youthfully, the  emotions of  these  lines  are  what they  should be.  Expressively, a poet should not be found dead with  them.
It is toil,  this  poetry. And, says  Pound: "Mais d'abord il faut etre  un  poete."










The   Ig66  winner  of the  University  of British  Columbia Medal  for  Popul­
lar  Biography   is D.  J. Goodspeed   for  his  book  Ludendorff: Genius   of
World   War   I, published   by  Macmillan.  This   is  the   second   time   the medal  has  been awarded for  a book treating a non-Canadian subject,  and again  the work demonstrates a maturity of approach and  a lucid style. Ludendorff has warranted a thorough biography for some time;  his proud dedication to the  war  and  to the aims of his country as he received  them, complemented by his military   acumen, led  to  his  being  one  of the  most powerful   and   catastrophically influential  men  of  this  century. In  a  sur­ prisingly  sparse  year  for  biographical writing in  Canada,  Ludendorff  is alive  with  character, certain  in its details,  objective in its  judgments, and  sympathetic in its approach. Thoroughly documented and  indexed, it will still  reach   more   than   an   academic audience. Mr.  Goodspeed  has,  in recreating Ludendorff's complexity and  in  examining  his involvement in his  society   and   his  influence   upon   the   century,   written  a  well-paced  narrative and  an absorbing book. The  Selection Committee this year  was C.  W.  Humphries, of  the  Department of  History, D.  G.  Stephens and W.  H.  New  of  the  Department of  English,  at  the  University of  British Columbia.



A LIFE  AND
FOUR LANDSCAPES


Frederick John Niven




William H. New







EDERICK JOliN NIVEN is today ahno't unknown.  That  fact
alone  would  warrant a critical  investigation of him,  but  a study  thus  motivated
could  easily end  by being  merely  an  arid  exercise.  Fortunately, in  Niven's  case, the  justifications for  reappraisal are  many.  He  warrants it  because  he  was  un­ usual  in  Canadian letters.  He  lived  by his writing  without  being  a hack; he  was a conscious  prose stylist at  a time  when  stylists were few;  he  was concerned  with problems  which  affected  his time,  not  (for  all his apparently "regional" settings) with  merely  local  issues;  he  was  a  man  with  wit,  humanity,  intelligence,  and  a willingness  to exercise  all three-and  if this caused  him  to  rebel  quietly  against orthodox social  codes,  to emigrate from  the  London  literary  world  of  the  19 w's  to the hinterland of British Columbia, and  to dare  to write honestly  about  the life that  he  knew  existed,  then  so  much  the  better  for  his  fiction.  He  was  also  the friend  of such  diverse literary  figures as Hugh  Walpole, Christopher Morley,  and I. A.  Richards; the  recipient (until he emigrated) of  regular and  favourable re­ views both  in the TLS and  from  such  critics as  Rebecca  West;  and  the colleague  of John Murray Gibbon   and  John Buchan.  For  all this,  the  man  is a  paradox, and  difficult  to assess. It is probably  inevitable that  thirty-three books of fiction, two of verse, and  a vast array  of  non-fiction  should  vary in quality; sometimes  his characters were  nothing more  than   stereotypes,  and  sometimes, too,  he  found  difficulty  in  reconciling the  fiction  he  was  writing  with  the  facts  in  which  his work  found  its base.

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



This  last item  brings us to one of the most interesting features of Niven's  work. Available criticism  amply  points out  the difficulties  in  using historical data  which the  author faced  in writing  his trilogy-The Flying  Years  (I 935), Mine  Inheri­ tance  ( I940), and  The  Transplanted  ( I944)  -about the opening of  the Cana­ dian   West.  Comments by  Desmond   Pacey   (Creative Writing in  Canada)  and Edward McCourt (The  Canadian West  in  Fiction)  show  that  Niven's  contact with  the  Canadian environment allowed  him  to create realistic scenes and  moods in these  novels, and  that  his characters, lifted  from  history  books or else pared  to meet  the demands of the factual events, tend  to be wooden. Western  Canada was not  the  only  environment he  knew  at  first  hand,  however,  nor  was  it  the  only occasion  upon  which  he drew  from  his own  experience for  some  of the  material in his books.  My  communications with  Mrs.  Pauline  Niven,  the  author's widow, have  substantiated what  his  autobiography,  Coloured   Spectacles   ( I938), sug­ gests:  that  many  of the  characters other  than   the  historical  ones  were  basically pictures  of  his own  family.  In  the  most  successful  books  there  was  some  meta­ morphosis; the  characters come alive in their  own  right,  and  the  four  landscapes Niven  knew  well-South America,   Scotland,  southern  England,  and   western Canada-he  sensitively  recreated   as  fictional  settings.   To   examine  only  the works set in Canada would  be to limit  our  assessment  of Niven's ability  and  our appreciation of  what  he  accomplished. To  trace  the  events  of  his  life  and  the forms  those events  took in his work  not  only  reveals some of the  character of the man, but  also suggests the scope of his literary aims.
South   America appears  most  rarely  as  a  setting,   and  always  in  combination with  some  other  place.  One  of his best  books,  Triumph (I934), uses it  well. It traces  the  life of a would-be  musician  frustrated by  home  and  family,  re-creates the  social  levels of an  English  society-consular, but  not  always  diplomatic­ in  Latin America, and  reveals how  the  man's  children in  various  ways succeed him.  The country does not correspond with  any specific  real one;  instead, it lives separately, created on the  page.  The  distant Andes  are  there,  and  the  heat,  and the  shimmer of colour,  and  together  they  contribute  palpably to the  novel's  suc­ cess. Landscape is one of the characters in a sense, but  in this book  at least it does not  replace  the  people as the focus or the  reality. Works  such  as the  pirate  story, The  Island   Providence   ( I 9I o), set  partly   in  the   Caribbean, or  the   western,  Hands Up!   (I 9 I 3), which  mentions  a  brother  who  dies  in  Panama, are  more credible  for their  scenery than  for their  characters, and  as works of art  are  better  ignored. But  they  do raise the  question  of source  of detail,  which  even  a cursory investigation of Niven's life quite clearly  answers.

I6

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



The  brother who  died  has  a  prototype  in  Niven's  own  brother, who  died  in Panama when  Niven  was still quite  young. The  family  in Triumph is clearly  but not  exactly  parallel  to  Niven's  family,  which  was connected with  the  British  con­ sular  service in Valparaiso when  Niven was born  there  on  March 3 I,I 878. The  youngest  of three  children  (his  sister outlived  him  by several  years),  Niven  did not  leave  Chile  until  he  was  almost  six, when  his family  sent  him  to  school  in their  native  Scotland. Later  they returned to Scotland  themselves.  His father was a manufacturer of sewed  muslin  there,  and  a lenient  man; his mother  was a de­ vout,  rigorous,  and  rigidly  orthodox Calvinist. 1   Understandably, the  home  they supplied in  Chile  is only  dimly  remembered  in  Niven's  work;   that  which  they gave  their son in Scotland-different in surroundings but  probably  not very dif­ ferent  in kind -was one  he remembered with  much  more  detail:  with  wit, nos­ talgia,  some affection, and  no little asperity.  In  time, the  two  homes  were  to lead to  substantially different  environments in  the  fiction.  Triumph is a  later   work than   many  of  Niven's "Scots" novels,  a feature  which  contributes to  its  differ­ ence from  them  in thought and  in direction  indicated  by the fictional  resolution.  By I 934  Niven  had   emigrated  to  Canada, and   his  renewed   contact  with   the worlds of the western  hemisphere caused  him, in his fiction,  to seek within  his en­ vironment rather than  outside  it for the solution  to  the  problems  he raised.  Early protagonists, like  Martin Moir  in  justice  of the  Peace  (I9I4),  cannot succeed because  they cannot escape  their  environment; Heriot, the  musician  in Triumph, fails because  he  does  not  exercise  his ability  in  spite  of his environment, and  his artistic  son can  only  truly  know  success when  he can  perform equally  well in  his father's old world  or  away  in  any  other.  Niven  comes to  this implied  change in attitude partly  because  of  personal  experience. Ultimately, with  his wife,  he  de­ termined on one  place  to settle. But to do this he had  to leave a beloved  Scotland and  an  active  London behind  him,  and  he  had  also to  escape  a  particular kind of home.






ONE SUSPECTS, without much  clear  basis for doing so, that Heriot is partly  a picture of Niven's  father. Coloured  Spectacles  mentions in  pass­ ing  the  manufacturer's  voracious appetite for literature and  his linguistic facility, but  nowhere  is there  an explanation of what  Niven merely calls the man's "restless­ ness".  There are  in  the  fiction,  however,  some sympathetic portraits of  softgoods

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



manufacturersEbenezer Moir in  justice  of the Peace, Walter  Maitland in The Story  of their  Days  ( 1939), and  John Simson  in The Staff  at Simson's ( 1937) which
himself.  Certainly the  other  members  of  Niven's  family  appear as characters the  brother  in  Hands  Up!, an  unsympathetic sister in  Dead  Men's Bells  ( 1912 ), and  his mother almost  everywhere,  which  makes  a  consideration of  the  factual mother-son relationship and  of that  in the  novels  a convenient and  central intro­ duction to the significance  of the Scottish  settings  in  Niven's  total  work.
Rachel Moir  is the fictional  extreme.  Rebuking and  then  completely  disowning
her son Martin, she almost  prevents  artistry  from  being  developed  in him  and  she certainly  goes a long way towards  destroying  him.  Mrs.  Niven,  similarly,  reacted strongly  against  Frederick's creative  talent, but  she  was  not  exactly  like  Rachel, for she also possessed many  finer qualities.  According to  Mrs.  Pauline Niven,  for example, the  fortitude of the  title figure  in  Mrs.  Barry  ( 1933)   and  the  illnesses and  sensitivities  of the son,  were  the  result  of  Niven's consciously  drawing upon memory  of his mother  and  of isolated  incidents from  his own  childhood. But  the lady's  less admirable qualities  and  the somewhat more  ambivalent ones were  also to appear in  the  fiction.  Mrs.  Niven  opposed  any  venture that  was  not  demon­ strably   practical and  which  was  not  sanctioned  by  the  dour  doctrines  of  Cal­  vinism,  and  so  her  vocational ambitions   for  her  son,  after  he  left  Hutcheson's Grammar School,  were bent  towards  stern  theology  or  worldly practicality. They  were  entirely   opposed   to  Niven's   own   inclinations.  In his  autobiography,  he (typically)  understates the case:
I wanted  to be a painter; I wanted-we had  no Great  War  then-to be a war­ correspondent.... My  folks, sensibly enough,  pointed   out  to  me  the  extremely precarious  existence of a painter-even  of a war-correspondent-and compro­ mised:  How about  an  applied art?  Or  how would  it he if, to begin with, I went to the Glasgow School of Art in the evenings, on trial, to see if  I had  the stuff in me, and  was apprenticed  to the manufacturing business? Designers were required in that  business. I recalled  that  Alexander  Smith  had  been a  pattern-designer­ which  helped  to  make  me  amenable  to  parental  reason,  and  dutiful.   But  my mother,  I believed, regretted  that  I had  not followed  in the footsteps of her folk, alumni  of the old Glasgow College, never entered  its  university. I broke a  tradi­  tion of her family then-when we humoured  each other.  That's life.

"Regret" was often open antagonism and  it contributed to the break  that  occurred between  the  two.
In  Dead  Men's Bells, Niven  depicts  a comparable break  over  a philosophical­
religious  question  between  Robert   Lindsay,  the  hero,  and  his mother. The  con-

18

A LIFE AND  FOUR LANDSCAPES



flict  comes  to  a  head   when   Rob  discontinues   his  ministerial  trammg  because "there is  too  much   of  the  old  necromancy in  the  theologians"-which  was heresy in  the  mother's eyes. Later, detecting her son in  a lie he felt  compelled to use in order  to avoid  further conflict,  she laments:

"Your second cousin ... wrote at that very time, as if the Lord wad try my soul, as was Job tried of auld, speiring if you was thinking of the future.... He ... said he could  put  ye in  the  way of a captaincy.  But  no-no'  after  a lee.... Ye will see the  justice o' this. Believe me, your mither,  that every sin has its punishment."
"I  ken it," said I grimly.

The  Scotland of this family,  like that  of the Murrays in Two  Generations (I 9I 6), is "that land  where  Calvin  once  gloomed", and  the  heroes,  like Lindsay  or  Ted  Murray  (or  like  Niven  himself), find  this  incompatible with  their  own  nature. "Heretical" Rob  argues  with  his uncle Tom  about  this:

"I  am like the lad in an auld  twelfth-century  French  ballad ... -I  had  rather be in the company  of the happy  than  wi' the constitutionally  gloomy."
"I do not ken the auld irreleegious ballads of France.... Life is stern  and  sober,
and  shunnor  or later  you will find that  it is so, and  that  you have a soul to save or damn  for all eternity.... "
His advice given me  then,  as the first cobbles of the street  of Eaglesham  rang under our tread,  made me think that  God must laugh, which struck me as a great thought....

But  this  was  "a night  of  many  stars,  and  the  Milky  Way  was  like  a  plume  of feathers, and  you  can  talk  little  Calvin  to a  young  man  in  the  open  and  under stars."  To Rob,  then,  nature offers solace, and  to nature  he escapes for  the adven­ ture  that  occupies  the major  portion  of the book.
Other heroes  cannot escape  in this way when  they discover,  as in  Ellen  Adair
(I 9I 3), that  over  their  family  hangs

the curse of Calvin  and  a misconceived Christ.... The  children  of such  families, if they love beauty, either  love it very tenderly,  with a minor  key in their  voices, or are carried  off their  feet, and  are as moths round a candle.

The  choice  for  freedom, or submission,  or destruction, belongs  to the  individual, and  as a child in such  a house, Niven  had  himself to choose. Aiming  for freedom, he  found   he  could  indulge   a  vivid  imagination in  solitary   play.  Remembering this after  some  years,  in  the  significantly-titled Coloured  Spectacles,  he  sees the humour, the  humanity, and  the  loneliness involved  in such  a situation:

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



When  I was a boy and  could  travel  only  on  the  atlas,  Deadwood Dick  took  me up  winding roads  between  scattered   bull-pines into  quick-rising hills.  The   trees were  very tall.  The  forest  glades  were  very quiet.  I  sometimes wish  I  had  a  com­ plete  set of the  stories in my library  now  to turn to occasionally from  some of the discoveries  of  the  coteries  which  are  thrust at  us with  an  intolerance  worse  than  that  which  accompanied the advocacy  of Ministering  Children.. .. His flights into the  hills were tremendous. They  atoned  a hundredfold for  the  egg-like weals upon  our  wrists  delivered  by a soulless mathematics master  for  deficiencies in  trigonom­ etry.... I followed  Dick  through the  solitudes  of tall  timber awash  with  the  scent of  balsam,  on  into  the  thickest  forest,  on  into  the  canyon....
Up  this canyon,  then  (the  stairs  up  to, and  the  corridor of the  top  flat, leading to  my  bedroom, used  to  be  the  canyon),  Deadwood Dick  guided   me.  He  went over  a "divide" (at  the  top  of the  stairs), and  came  down  into  a "pocket" in  the hills,  a  grassy  little  valley  (where   the  passage  widened), and   there,   having  un­ saddled, he left  his horse  free  to graze....
Deadwood Dick  strode  to  some  bushes  and  breasted   into  their  midst.  I  strode to  my bedroom door  and  breasted  against  it,  having first  turned the  handle. The bushes  whipped back  into  place  and  right  ahead   was  a  precipice and  a  cave­ for  Dick.  I  presume  he  kept  his treasure trove  in  the  cave  but  I  have  forgotten the  details  of his loot. What he gave me,  to last for  ever,  was a horse, big timber, and  silent  mountain paths.

Such exploits were  only  for  childhood, and   not  for  Niven's youth, at  which   time conflict with  his  parents became most  acute. But  he  began to  enjoy  solitude, and in  spite  of  the   delicate physical constitution which  had  plagued  him   since   his removal from   Chile, he  loosed  his  immense reserve of  energy by  walking from Glasgow out  into  the  countryside. Walks that Martin  Moir could  take  in  Justice of the  Peace, or  Robert Barclay in  The  Three Marys   (1930), or  Bliss Henry in A  Wilderness of Monkeys ( 19 1 1 ) , draw upon these  excursions for  the  observed details that make them  come  alive.  A move  of his  parents from Glasgow to  Edin­ burgh gave  Niven  new  vistas,  for

instead   of  the  Mearns   Moor   I  had  the  Pentland  Hills  and   soon,  extending  my tramps, I  had  the  nearer  Borders,  Tweedside from  Symington to  Broughton ... and  on  to  Peebles.2

It gave  him  new  material to  draw on  later, too,  for  Peebles was  to  become the setting for  important scenes  in  Ellen  Adair.
Although the  "art question" had   been  curtailed for  a  time   when it  was  dis­ covered that  Niven   had   a  degree of  colour blindness  (regarded  by  his  parents and sister,  Mrs. Pauline Niven  says,  as  a  "disease"), he  still  had   no  interest in

20

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



the  business  to  which  he  was  apprenticed. In  Coloured  Spectacles, he  notes  his feelings:
Tremendously  though  manufacturers interested me, and warehousemen,  and packers, and  weavers, I was not enthusiastic  about manufacturing. The  intention was for  me  to  pass through   the  various  departments   and  lemn the   business.  I began with winceys and  it was Charlie  Maclean,  head of the  wincey department, who informed  me, gazing at  me solemnly one day, "Freddy,  the  plain  fact is that ye dinna  gie a spittle for your work."

Like the hero of  justice  of the Peace, Niven attended night  classes at  the Glasgow School  of Art, studying under  Francis  Newberry; after  a while,  like Ted  Murray in  Two  Generations, he  quit   the  warehouse   to  work  in  a  library:  "The  only trouble  was that  sometimes  I would  be lost in a book when  I ought  to have  been attending to a subscriber." To  assist in the  payment  of his art  school  fees, Niven also worked  part-time in a  jewellery store, and  this experience was to appear first in  Ellen  Adair  and   justice  of the  Peace, and  then  as the  background for  a full novel,  Old  Soldier   (1936). But  the  question  of  becoming   either  a  painter or something practical stalemated when  doctors  recommended that   Niven  move  to a drier  climate.  He  was therefore sent  in his late  teens to the  home  of some  mis­ sionary  friends  of his mother's in the  Okanagan Valley of British  Columbia, and the  move,  which  cured  his ailments  for  a time,  was markedly  to  affect  both  his work  and  his life.




b:E MOVE WAS   NOT, this  trip,  a  permanent one,  but  it  did give him  a number of experiences which  were to lead  to his becoming an  author at  all. For  one  thing,  it  introduced him  to  new settings  and  to  another  response to  life, but  for  him  the  contact with  North  America  was  more  important than this at first indicates. In  fact  he was to spend  the  next  two  decades  moving  back and  forth  from  Canada to England, trying  to settle down  and  trying  to reconcile his attachments to several  worlds.  In  his fiction,  during  this same  period, he  con­ tinually  returns to two equally  thorny  and obviously related  situations. The person in  his books  who  rebels  against Calvinism  and  yet remains  within  the  Calvinist  world  dooms  himself  to  attritive conflict,  and  the  person  who  flees to  the  wild west runs  the  danger of  being  "diseased" by an  aimless  and  therefore  crippling wanderlust. Ultimately Niven  could  find  a satisfactory  solution  within  both  Scots and  Canadian settings,  but  this  was in  works  which  were  written  well  after  he

21

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



at last  decided  to emigrate.  In  the early  Old  World  settings,  characters like Rob Lindsay  had  to flee from  their  restricting  environment in  order  to  be successful; such  characters as Harold  Grey  in  A Tale  that  is Told   ( 1920)   are  merely  worn away  by their  environment when  they remain within  it. In  the later  New  World settings,  contrastingly, flight is an irresponsible act,  not a constructive one. Robert Wallace in The  Transplanted  ( 1944)   would  be a failure  if he left the small  B.C. town  in  which  he  lived,  for  he  would  then   be  deserting   a  society  to  which  he should  and  can  contribute. Reflexively  this  solution  begins  to  work  in  the  later Old   World  settings  as well, and  so John Maitland in  The Story  of their  Days
( 1939)   discovers  a  niche-controllable, but  still  alive,  unlike  that   of  Harold Grey -within a larger  world  with which  he cannot entirely  agree.  The  difficulty here,  of course,  is in reconciling  a responsibility  to society  with  an  equally  nebu­ lous  responsibility  to self.
In  Canada on his first trip,  Niven  travelled as much  as possible and  worked  at whatever job presented  itself-on the railroad in the  dry Thompson Valley  near Savona, in  a lumber camp  near  Shuswap Lake,  in  ditch-digging crews  in  Van­ couver. He  rode  rods and  walked  ties with  acquaintances whom  in  Above  Your  Heads   (1911)  and  Wild   Honey   (1927)   (published in  Great  Britain  as  Queer Fellows)   he  named  Hank, Slim,  Billy, and  Foureyes, and  in  Wild   Honey  he  re­ counts  in  detail  two  of these  trips:   from  Savona once  to  Vancouver  and  once through the  Camp McKinney gold  fields  to  the  Kettle  River  Country. Writing later  for Saturday Night  (July  5, 1941), he remembers his first jobs in Vancouver:

after  a spell of ditch digging I had change  of manual  labor  in shovelling  macad­ amised rock off scows that  were brought  by tugboats  and  moored  sometimes near where  the  Yacht  Club  boats  lie  now, sometimes  at  False  Creek.  In  those  days Indians   used to watch  us at  our  shovelling-with  commiseration  in  their  dark eyes I used to think. Yet what a miserable youth  I  was when owing to a strained muscle in my back I had to forsake manual  labor  and  take a  job indoors.

His heart and  lung trouble,  however, seemed  in the meantime to have disappeared.
Homesickness of a kind drove  him back  to Scotland again,  and  it was after  his return  (aboard  a  cattle  boat  from   Montreal, as  described   in  The  S.S.  Glory [ 19 15]), that  he first took up  journalism. "Three  Men  in  a Shack" appeared as sketches  of Western  Life in the  Glasgow  Herald, and  success led  him  to editorial work  on  various  Scottish  and  English  papers. In  1908,  he  was discovered  in  the London literary  world by Mrs. Isobel Thorne, the fiction  editor  for Shureys' Pub­ lications. Mrs.  Pauline  Niven  writes:

22

A LIFE AND  FOUR LANDSCAPES



My mother ... began  to  write  for  various  magazines  and  ended  up  editing  one of them  published  by the  firm  of Shureys'.  As the firm  grew and  expanded   my mother's  position  grew.... She  was also responsible for  Frederick's  first  book­ The  Lost Cabin  Mine. He offered it to her  but she urged  him to try  the  English publisher, John  Lane,  who published it and  the one that  followed it  [The  Island Providence]  which  he  wrote  in Devon  on  the  advice of John  Lane  who  was,  I believe, a Devon man.  I can't  remember how long Frederick  was in Devon, under a year, I think.  I was still at school but he sent his Mss to me and  I typed it  in the evening.3

These  were  active   years.  His  first  novels  appeared, strongly   influenced  by  the work  of Stevenson  and  by the  Deadwood Dick stories;  he was publishing also in such  periodicals  as the  Pall Mall  Gazette  and  the  Morning Leader; and  in I 9 I I he  married  Mary   Pauline Thome-Quelch, then  eighteen   years  old  and  fifteen  years his junior.
He  spent  several  months of  I 9 I 2   and   I 9 I 3  travelling and  freelance writing in Canada -four  novels appearing during these  two years. He  had  returned to London before  the  war  broke  out  in  I9 I4,  but,  his heart  trouble  recurring again in  England, authorities rejected  his application for military  service.  He  served  in other   capacities,  therefore-as  Assistant   Food   Controller  in  the   Ministry  of Food   attending to  the  distribution of  rationed   goods;  and   finally  in  the  War Office  under  John Buchan as Associate  Editor  of Articles  for Allied  and  Neutral Powers.  Five  more  novels,  a book of verse, and  a·collection of short  stories  that were  written   about  I9I2 appeared before  the  end  of  the  war,  and   two  more novels, including A Tale  that  is Told, which  won  the  enthusiastic admiration of Rebecca West,  soon  followed.  Quality, critical  reception, and  popular approval fluctuated greatly, for several  works were  frankly  money-making pot-boilers. But even these have  a place in the development of Niven's  thought; they demonstrate along  with  the  more  serious  works  the  division  between   Old   World   and   New World  settings  which  Niven  consistently used.


M Av  I 92 o is a significant  date  for  observing  any  change in  his work,  for  it  was  at  that  time  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Niven  came  to  Canada
together  and  stayed  to settle.  Initially it was to be only a three-month visit, on  a commission  from  John Murray Gibbon  of The  World's W ark, to gather material for  more  articles  on  Canada. Several  visits back  to  the  Old  Country, however, only confirmed their  choice of a home  at Willow Point, on the  beach  of Kootenay

23

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



Lake  a few  miles  from Nelson, B.C.  In  many ways  this  mountainous area  is like parts of Europe, but  Niven  notes  a difference when he speaks of what called  him back  to  the  West:

The Alps are  in a pocket  of Europe, and  seem almost  a kind  of sleeping  partner of  Messrs.  Cook;   but  the  Rockies  run   the  length   of  the  continent, and   are  in league  with  Eternity.... What  is the lure?  It is a sense of freedom. It is the  pines mounting up  the steep hills, and  the smell of the  pines  and  the  quiet  under  them.
. . . It is the  rank  tea,  tasting  like  nectar   after   working   in  the  woods.  It is  the
wagon-roads, the  two deep  ruts,  going down  through the  sands  of the  Okanagan, or  up  into   the  Cariboo,  or  twining   through  the   pine-needle floors  of  the   tall timber  tracts  in  the  Selkirks,  the  Cascades,  or  the  Pallisers.  It is the  trails  leading off  from  these,  with  the  gashes  blazed  on  the  trees,  blaze  by  blaze  showing  the way,  as lighthouses con  ships  through sea  channels. It is, as in  Murray Gibbon's song, "the  lakes of melted   jade",  these lakes  that   the  winds  play with,  as  a  hand ruffiing and  smoothing velvet.  It is the lonely  call  of loons in  the  hush  before  twi­ light,  when  the  grasshoppers all suddenly  cease  to chirp. It is the  mosquito-hawk that  zig-zags overhead, with  a flight  somewhat like  bat  or  swallow,  in  the  drizzle of a  reflected  sunset.  It is the  clear  air  that  lets  the  eyes  roam  over  great  spaces. It  is the  moon  rising  to silhouette a ridge  of firs and  light  their  tips  all down  the slope-and the  wonder  of it  all  getting  into  one's  blood.4

Significantly the  details  of his life now  begin to  appear in  his  nonfiction writings, largely in  periodical essays  and   related to  his  contact with   natural environment. The wilderness was  what inspired him  to  write (and writing was  by this  time  his sole source of income) ; at  times,  as Coloured Spectacles showed, it also  reminded him  of the  Scotland he still loved :

There is a season of the year ... when ... Scotland comes  to me.... The  creeks, tom-tomming in  the  gulches,  clutching  wanly   at   protruding  rocks,  delaying in trembling amber  pools become, in fancy,  Highland burns  in their  glens. Kootenay Lake  is changed to  a  Scots  loch.  A stipple  of  rain  is on  the  polished  water; the hazed  slopes,  seen  through that   smoor,  might  be  of  heather, with  a  birchwood yellowing  here  and  there.  Nothing is asked  of imagination save to  turn  the  odour of weed-smoke  to that  of peat-and  the  trick  is done.  All Scotland is mine  then, from  forsaken St.  Kilda and  the  roar  of the  Atlantic on  its cliffs to the  piping  of
a  piper,  on a Saturday night,  by the  Broomielaw.

But  the  separation from the  old  world  still  existed.
Living in  Canada had  its  drawbacks, one  of  which   was  the  tendency for  his reputation in  England to suffer. Niven  sets  forth his friends' advice and   his own reply  in  one  of  his verses  in  A  Lover  of the   Land  ( 1925), which   is noteworthy only  for  its biographical fact:

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



"Come  you back from hill and beach, Come and let men know your name, Here  in London  seek your fame,"
But I cannot  seek her there,
In  the  heavy thrice-breathed air.... No, I live the life I write,
Writing  little for delight
In  the living with such things
As that  great  hawk's patterned  wings.

The  natural world  sets  up  a  different  kind  of isolation,  and  it  caused   Niven  to find  in  his many  friendships with  such  persons  as Mr.  George  Gooderham, Dr. W. 0. Rose,  and  Dr.  I. A. Richards, a reaffirmation of the  necessity for  human contact.
Innumerable climbs  in  the  mountains of  the  Nelson  and  Windermere  areas, trips  to  Calgary where  he  learned  sign-language in  order  to  communicate with the  Blackfoot  peoples,5  occasional  travel  throughout B.C.,  to the  Yukon,  and  to Hawaii, together with  his vast memory  of lands  he had  previously  known  led  to a number of non-fiction articles  and  books:  Canada West  ( 1930), Colour in the Canadian  Rockies  (1937),6  and  Coloured  Spectacles  (1938)- which,  except for  Mrs.  Barry  ( 1933), was  the  first of  Niven's  books since  1920  to  be given  a T LS review.  More  fiction  had  also appeared since he emigrated; The  Wolfer  and Treasure Trail  came  out in 1923  (like many  of the Westerns, first written serially for  New  York  papers), followed  by  a second  collection  of  poems,  and  fourteen more  novels. Of  these,  Mrs.  Barry and  Triumph were  among the  first  Canadian novels to be selected  as Book Society choices.
There is a  development of  thought in  the  later  novels  that  culminates in  the posthumously-published The  Transplanted   ( 1944),  but  this  work  is technically much  weaker  than   many  of  his other   novels. Always  conscious  of  word  choice (Mine   Inheritance  was  completely rewritten   from  third  to  first  person,  for  ex­ ample'),  though never  what   one  could   justifiably  call  a  stylistic  innovator,  he died  before  revising  The  Transplanted   into  a  final  form.  The  heart and  lung  weakness  which  had  dogged  him  during his life caught  up  with  him  again.  In  a letter  to Christopher Morley  in 1929, he had  written:

A long talk I fancy  this may be. I have the  time for it! I am laid  up.  I seem to have  overdone  it  on  my  last  High  Country  expeditions  and  have  enlarged   my heart.  It feels enlarged  in more senses than  one. I lie here with  a very full heart indeed,  thinking,  thinking-and remembering,  remembering.  Sometimes  I  feel

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



it might  burst.  Extreme  athlete's  heart  the  doctor  calls it. You know  I am  crazy about  the High  Country-away up above timber. ...8
He  recovered; he  continued  to  live, to  climb,  to  en joy life,  to  write,  to  acquire what  Jay  MacPherson, in the Literary History of Canada, calls his "human and lit­ erary  maturity", but  repeated  heart  attacks  at  last  caused  a  move  from  Willow Point  to Nelson,  and  in  I943 to Vancouver, where  he died  in St. Paul's  Hospital on January I o,I 944·
Niven's  "maturity" is most evident  in  an  ability  to evoke  atmosphere. He  re­
corded  dialect  well, but this was just one part  of his clear  perception of the  world around him. His sense for the human and  the  natural landscape, for the  world  of his  youth  and  the  world of his adult  life, was accurate and  strong. It led  to  the immediacy of his descriptions  of nature and  to the  artistic  success of many  of his character sketches  both  in fiction  and  non-fiction. His  contact with  Canada not only  introduced him  to a new  environment and  a  new  set  of  characters, it  also started him  writing; it heightened his sensitivity  to the nature of landscape and  to its influence upon  people;  and,  in  time,  it altered   the  way  in  which  he  chose  to resolve  his characters' conflict.  He  himself  absorbed the  landscape in  which  he lived,  and  in  his  two  best  and  most  productive  periods,   I9I3-I920 and   I930- I939,  he demonstrated an  appreciation of  the  power  and  beauty  of  descriptive language.
The problems  he recounted  in his work  were  very  largely  ones he had  himself met  and   tried  to  solve.  This  does  not  mean   that   the  events  of  his  fiction  are wholly  autobiographical, for they are  not, but  they do bear  a distinct  relationship with  the  particularly itinerant life that  he himself  led. If matters ended  there,  the fiction  would  be  exceedingly  limited  in  scope.  In  many  ways,  however,   Niven's life, and  the  probleiiiS he met,  were  typical  of his age;  his works  have  interest  as Edwardian and  post-Edwardian social  documents, therefore, and   (more  impor­ tantly) the questions  they concern  themselves  with  are still significant  today.  One  of the  problems  his heroes, like Rob  Lindsay  and  Martin Moir,  face, for example, involves  their  reaction  against  a code of values  they find stultifying. This  to some extent is an  objectification of  Niven's  own  conflict   with  Calvinism, but  it  also serves as a microcosm  for his society, which  was at  this  time  reacting in different ways to moral  codes that  were much  more  overtly  liberal than  those current dur­ ing  the  nineteenth century.  Life  was altering  rapidly, and  in  some  quarters this was  equivalent  to  chaos.  For   Niven   himself   it  meant disorder-but   it  also allowed  another order  to come into  existence. The  restlessness that  led him  part­ way round the world he could  ultimately control  in the  "sanctuary" of a peaceful

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



home  in Canada. For  his character John   Maitland, "disorder" was  an  unhappy marriage and  a world  at  war,  both  of which  seemed  to  negate  the  values  which he felt  he knew  through art.  Yet for  him,  too, a reachievement of order  is  pos­ sible;  "Broad Sanctuary," which  is Maitland's resting-spot  in  London, is, though  a retreat, no escape  from  the  world,  and  it becomes an  image  of another stability that  can  emerge  from  change.
As Niven  also found  out,  the  determination of a way  of life lies in  large  part within  the  power  of  the  individual, but  a  person  often  finds  that  in  a  complex environment he must  choose  not  between  right  and  wrong  but  only  between  two wrongs. This  problem, too, Niven's  fiction explores. Robert Wallace in The Transplanted, for example, is forced  at the last to choose between  friendship and truth; he cannot have  both,  and  a denial  of either one  is contrary to the  dictates of  his conscience.  He  cannot remain   neutral about  the  question   either, for  this would  leave  him  in limbo; in order  to find  happiness -a  third  intangible-he must  and  ultimately does  make  the  necessary  choice.  Again  we can  see  Niven's personal  reaction  against  one system of belief lying behind  this, but  like the other conflicts he presents  in his fiction,  it is not at the last completely personal or local. Instead, the  problems  his characters face  are  those that  arise  anywhere when  an individual and  a social conscience  are  at war  within  a solitary  man. As a novelist Niven  did  not  always  present  these with  artistic  skill; sometimes  he did  not  even escape  triteness  and  flatness  of  characterization. But  his  work  still  is  worthy  of attention, for  at its best it transcends the doubtful fictional  virtues of documentary and  apologia. His imagination at those times goes beyond  the facts  he remembers and  allows him  to  create  out  of his several  landscapes  an  arresting and  credible world.




FOOTNOTES

' Conversation  with  Mrs. Pauline  Niven, May 28, Ig62.
"John  Buchan-In Memoriam," Saturday  Night, LV, no. 22 (March 30, I940),
6.
3  Letter  to  the  writer,  July  7,  I962.  The  Lost  Cabin  Mine  was first  published  in
I 908, antedating by one year the date listed in Watters.
4     "The  Call of the  West," The  Canadian  Magazine, LV,  no. 3  (July  I920), 224.
5  One  of  the  tribes  accepted   him  as a  member  and  gave  him  the  name  Apasto ( = "Talking by Signs"). See "Amerindian," Dalhousie Review, XIX, no. 2,  (July I939)' I45·
6    (Toronto: Nelson,  I937), I 25 p.  Watercolour  illustrations  by Walter  J.  Phillips.

A LIFE AND FOUR LANDSCAPES



Not  listed  in  Watters. Reprinted in  1962,  this  is the  only  one  of Niven's  works  to he presently  in  print.
7    MSS  are in the  U.B.C.  Library. Mine  Inheritance  was also made  into  a radio  play for  broadcast over  the  C.B.C.  in  three  parts: January 8 and  14, 1959.  Part  III  is undated.
8   Quoted by Christopher Morley, "The Bowling  Green," Saturday  Review  of  Litera­
ture, VI  (December 28, 1929), 6o3.














CANADIAN  LITERATURE PUBLICATIONS


A CHOICE  OF CRITICS
Selections  from  Canadian  Literature, edited  with  a criti­ cal  introduction  by  George   Woodcock.   Essays  on   the Canadian literary   landscape and  on  individual  writers, including Margaret  Avison,  Earle   Birney,  Morley   Cal­  laghan,   Robertson  Davies,   A.  M.   Klein,  Hugh  Mac­
Lennan,  Jay   Macpherson,  E.  J.  Pratt,  Gabrielle Roy,
A. J. M.  Smith, Raymond Souster, Anne  Wilkinson. Published   by  Oxford  University  Press  in   co-operation with  Canadian Literature.  Cloth  $5.00,  paper  $2.50.

CANADIAN LITERATURE I LITTERATURE CANADIENNE Edited  by Inglis  F. Bell and  Susan  W.  Port.  A listing  of Canadian creative   and   critical writings in  English   and French   for   the   period    1959-1963.   Cloth  $5.50,   paper
$2.50·

Obtainable   from
PUBLICATIONS CENTRE,  UNIVERSITY OF  BRITISH COLUMBIA
VANCOUVER 8, BRITISH COLUMBIA



PHYLLIS  WEBB AND
THE PRIESTESS OF MOTION




John Hulcoop










QLLIS WEBB's most «cent and  most  complex  book,  Naked Poems,  confirms   a  preoccupation with  certain   themes -love, poetry,  and  love as  poetry-which was   already  evident in   Even  Your   Right   Eye  (1956): "Moments  are   monuments ... Caught/  pressed   into   words/  made   crazy   in colour/ Made act/  as in love."  The  Naked  Poems clarifies  and  perhaps finalizes a  tendency   apparent in  the  earlier  volume  towards   reduction of  refinement  as Miss  Webb's characteristic solution  to  certain   technical   problems  arising  out  of her   particular  emotional  and   intellectual temperament:   "doubled  up   I feel/ small  like these  poems/ the  area  of attack/ is diminished." This  solution  reflects the  poet's  attitude towards life.  No  moment  is too short,  no event  too small,  no experience too  trivial,  to  merit  the  poet's  attention. The  poems  are  "small" not because  the  subject-matter is unimportant, but  because  the  poet's  eye sees  pre­ cisely. Apparently casual  and  often brief, her glance is exacting and uncompromis­ ing.  She  refuses  to  magnify  or  over-state.  Hence  the  absence  of  sentimentality in her  treatment of some  kinds  of experience (lovers'  parting)  which  might  tempt a less honest  poet to romanticize:

Then  you must go. I sat cross-legged on the bed.
There  is no room
for self-pity
I said
I lied


29

PHYLLIS WEBB



In  "Poetry," published  in  the  1956  collection,  Miss  Webb  writes:   "Fidelity j as in love/  is in poetry j an  unexpected satisfaction." Her  own  fidelity to the  bare and  sometimes  seemingly  inarticulate facts  of  daily  experience-"a/  chair,   a lamp,   a/fly   two  books  by j  Marianne Moore" -is, though not  by  now  un­ expected, still  one  of  the  most  powerful  and  sustaining elements  of  her  poetic
VISIOn:


I go in search
 
neither intense nor anxious
but in observation of the small event ...



These,
 
events,
 


these separate minutiae
 




dot  the  horizon


like small birds flying south for winter leaving quick facts
in my collection of unknowns, making the new familiar,
and now intense.
(Sunday Morning Walk, 1956)

The  same  quiet  insistence  on  the  deceptively  "small satisfactions" -"small  joys and  quiet  ecstasies"-resounds in the  1962  volume,  The  Sea Is Also A Garden: "My  cat is asleep under  the tree./ She is a brief lyric/  of singing  fur .. . j To  find some  terrible  meaning/ in  this  round  space  sleeping  .. . j  would  be,  perhaps, to have  struck/  God's   thunder." And  in  the  Naked   Poems  (I g65), Miss  Webb repeatedly  strikes  thunder out  of  the  "brief   lyric"  and   the  sound  is  "terrible" because  "unexpected" in  so small  a  verbal  unit  which  manages to  be  dramatic and  narrative as well as lyric in its economic complexity.




lNTRoouciNG THE "Naked  Poems" (Suites  I and  II in  the present  volume)   at  a  1g63 poetry  reading in  Edmonton, Miss Webb  called them poems  refined  down  to the  "bone-essential statement." She said she was trying  to establish  "a  kind  of narrative line with  a lyric intention". On  the  almost invisible "narrative line"  she  threads each  "brief  lyric"  or  "pearl poem" and  in so doing

PHYLLIS WEBB



reveals  her  self-confessed   debt   to  Sappho and   the  haiku,   and   perhaps an  un­ conscious debt  to Browning whose experiments with the dramatic lyric opened up the  form  and  left it charged with  a potential which  twentieth-century  poets have fully exploited. The  elusive but  essential "narrative line"  with its "lyric intention" accounts for  the  careful  arrangement of poems in  the  new  volume, and  suggests how  the five sections  are  to be approached and  read. "Suites  I and  II," "A Suite of  Lies"  and  "Some Final  Questions" all have  to be read  en  suite. It would  be difficult to anthologize any single poem from  a particular suite -for most obvious example, "Oh?"-and  justify  its  autonomy or  defend  its  meaning. But  "Non Linear," the  central of the five sections, suggests that  the eleven  poems contained therein  do  not  stand  in line,  even though they have in  common  certain thematic material  (the   creative and   the  love-making process) .  Each  poem  stands  alone, just  as  the  whole  "Non Linear" section  stands  alone,  flanked  on  both  sides  by two suites. It is the still and  lyric point of the turning narrative world,  "An instant of  white  roses" or  an  arrangement of "yellow  chrysanthemums ... a stillness/  in jade", images  and  ideas  which  echo ideas and images in Eliot's  Four Quartets:
Only  by the fonn, the pattern, Can  words or music reach
The  stillness, as a Chinese  jar still
Moves perpetually in its stillness.

Miss  Webb's  movement  towards   the   "still   point",  the  "intersection  of  the timeless/   With   time", the  lyric  with  the  narrative or  dramatic, is clearly  felt in poems  like "Rust On  An  Anchor" which  appears in the  1956  volume: "If to be remote/  (if  only  momentarily) j as a Chinese  poem/ Is to achieve  sanity j Then you and  If  like a Japanese ballet/ touch  it as if/ Between  the  acts/ of a violent comedy:? that  is to say:/ Now  and  Then/ the rare  mountain air/ is caught/ in a small/ Venetian glass  bottle...." The  same  movement  manifests  itself in The Sea  Is  Also  A  Garden.  Poems  like  "Countered",  "Breaking", "Making",  the "glass" poems,  "A  Tall   Tale", "Flux", "To  Nellie"  and   "Poetic Against  The Angel  of Death" announce in images  that  call on  the tradition of mysticism  and the  apocalyptic, in  allusions  to the  Buddha and  St. John of the  Cross, that  Miss Webb's vocation  as  Maker  ("making/  certain   order")  is  comparable to  what Eliot  calls  an  "occupation for  the saint"-namely,  the  attempt "to  apprehend/ The point  of  intersection of  the  timeless/   With  time."  "No  occupation  either, but something given/ And  taken,  in a lifetime's  death  in love."
"Who would  call  me to still centres/ needs a lesson in desire,"  says the speaker in "Flux" ( 1g62) :

PHYLLIS WEBB



Who would kiss me on the mouth claiming me another self
needs my body on their flesh tasting little bites of death,

death rerising in desire naming nothing but its hope, spiralling in calling flights flaming into nothing's throat.

Nothing finally is final­ every love is a rain opening the bud to fire
asking and receiving its own Easter.

The image  of flux  here is a fine example  of purposive ambiguity, of Miss Webb's ability  to  pack  multum  in  parvo. In  Eliot's  Heraclitean world,  "Desire itself  is movement," and  opposed  to  the  "still  point" which  is "inner freedom  from  the practical desire,/ The  release from  action  and  suffering." In  Miss Webb's world of  flux   (where "Nothing" is substantively  final,  so  that   finally  nothing can  be called  final), the  desire  to  lead  one's  beloved  to  "still  centres" needs  to  be  in­ structed in  the  nature of  desire:   in  other  words,  the  desire  for  "inner  freedom  from  the  practical desire"  leaves a lot to be desired,  is desire  which  still has much  to  learn.  In  Miss  Webb's  vision of mutability, "love  is a rain" (the  "small" and "Western wind" variety)   inspiring  the  bud  to burst  into  flames  (another kind  of fire,  another kind  of "refiner's fire",  like  the  "great rain" in  Ezra,  cataclysmic, destructive, death-dealing) ; death  rerises, Phoenix-like, in  the  rain-refined fire or desire  to love  which  asks and  receives "its  own  Easter"  (symbol  of a "lifetime's death in  love")  ; and  the  resurrection takes  place  at  the  "still  point," "spiralling in  calling  flights/  flaming  into  nothing's throat"-and  nothing, we know,  can be  called  finally  final.  The   lovely  contrapuntal  pattern  by  which   Miss  Webb  makes  "certain order", defines  the  indefinable but  sharply  felt  "still  point", dis­ closes  the  timeless  centre,  or  completes   the  perfect circle  of  her  poetic  vision, begins  to emerge  if we set beside the  1g62 image  of flux a sequence  from  the last suite  of  Naked  Poems:  "all  my  desire goes/   out  of the  impossibly/ beautiful// But why don't  you do something? j I am trying  to write a poem  j / Why? j Listen. If I have  known  beauty j  let's say  I  came  to  it/ asking   j / Oh?"  Here  the  poet asks herself  "Some Final  Questions" and  receives some  answers  ending  in "Oh", in zero, in "Nothing" which  is finally final  because  "every  love is a rain/  opening

PHYLLIS  WEBB



the  bud  to fire/   asking  and  receiving  its own  Easter." The last  poem  in The Sea Is  Also  A  Garden ends  with  a  single  affirmation, "Yes!" The final  question  in Naked  Poems is, though obviously  ironic,  equally  positive since it implies  another answer,  as yet unspoken, from  which  the perpetual question  will "rerise  in desire" for yet another answer. The reader may be puzzled;  some are even irritated by the enigmatic brevity  of  these  poems,  by  the seeming  emptiness  of "Oh?" But  Miss Webb  confirms  Rosamund Tuve's assertion that  mature irony appears as "a courageous and  thoughtful willingness  to see all aspects of reality" by anticipating the  reader's exasperated interrogation:

I don't  get it. Are you talking about process and individuation. Or absolutes whole numbers that sort of thing?

Sardonically, the poet answers "Yeah."
Implicit in  these  poems  from  the  final suite  of the  Naked   Poems  is the  identi­ fication  of two  processes, love-making and  poetry-making, both  of which are seen as making  a "certain order". In  "Non Linear", this identification is  explicit  and many  of the  poems  are  "about" poetry  and  love-making. Using  the sea,  perhaps the  most  important single symbol  throughout Miss Webb's  work,  as  an  image  of flux,  of  perpetual motion, she  writes:   "I hear  the  waves .. . j  they  are  the  root waves/  of  the  poem's   meter/  the  waves  of the/ root  poem's  sex."  Root  means  source,  essential  point  or  part, and  one suspects  that  the  "root  poem" is for  Miss Webb  what  "central poetry" is for  Wallace  Stevens.  Writers  of  central poetry  are "mystics  to begin  with.  But  all their  desire and  all their ambition is to press away from   mysticism   toward   the   ultimate  good  sense  which  we  term   civilization." Civilized  "good  sense"  is an  unmistakable element in  Miss Webb's more  mature poetry.  What she says in  "The Glass Castle"  ( rg62)  accurately describes  all her rna jor  utterances: "I  merely   make  a  statement, judicious  and   polite." All  the synonyms   for   "judicious  and   polite" -directed by  sound  judgment,  wise, polished,   refined   and   cultivated -can  be  applied   without  reservation to  both Miss  Webb's   recent   volumes.  The   "root   poem", itself  a  sexual  image,   derives its basic nature, its sex, from the rise and fall, the love-making up and the breaking­ down  death   of  the  wave  which,  while  it  appears to be in  motion through time and  space,  is  essentially  still  and  so motionless.  A  "wave  is a force  and  not  the water  of  which  it is  composed, which  is never  the same," says  Wallace  Stevens, and  he  expresses  the  same  thought in  "Peter Quince  at  the  Clavier":



33

PHYLLIS  WEBB



The body dies; the body's beauty lives. So evenings die, in their green going,
A wave interminably flowing.





RYLLIS WEBB, in the  Naked  Poems,  declares  herself a daugh­ ter or an  apostle  of "the Priestess of Motion", of Flux,  for which  the "wave inter­ minably flowing" is  a  perfect  image.  From   the  sea,  which  "is  also  a  garden", the  "mad gardener" (and  "The lunatic, the lover, and  the  poet/  Are of imagina­ tion  all  compact")  collects still moments, poems,  "pale/  delicates  at  peace/ on this  sand/ tracery  of last  night's!tide." In "listening for/  the  turn  of the  tide", she hears,  is hounded and  taken  by "the wave of the/ root poem's  sex":

Hieratic  sounds emerge from the Priestess of Motion
a new alphabet
gasps for air.

We disappear in the musk of her coming.

The "brief   lyric"  cries  uttered  by  the  Priestess  of  Motion in  her  coming  to  a sexual-poetic climax  in  "the  Act"  of  making love  with  the  Logos,  the  godhead to  whom  she  has  dedicated   herself,  whose  service  is her  vocation  (an  "occupa­ tion  for  the  saint") -these are  the  "hieratic sounds", the  cryptic  letters  of "a new  alphabet" which  "gasps  for air"  and  is given  room  to breathe in  the  beauti­ fully  printed volume of her  Naked  Poems  which  was designed  by Takao Tanabe.
This  "new  alphabet" with which  Miss Webb  spells out  the language character­
istic of her  best poetry, can be seen in embryonic form in both  her earlier  volumes:

The slight touch
and the words turn
(the spelling of swift eyes)

The shape of prayer
is like the shape of the small beach stone . . .
curved and going nowhere, to fall
in pure abstraction saying everything
and saying nothing at all. 	( 1956)

34

PHYLLIS  WEBB



A smile shakes alphabets over my belly
and I bend down scrabbling "Yes" from a young Adam.
( 1962)

In  the  Naked  Poems, the  new alphabet, taken  like a rib from  a young old Adam, becomes  the   "bone-essential statement"  with  which   the  poet  chooses  to  work almost  exclusively. And  though some of the  poems she makes out  of it are longer than  the  lyric  "Yes" in  "I Can  Call  Nothing  Love",  all the  poems  in  the  latest collection  are  what  she says they are, "hieratic sound", hieratic  meaning  (accord­ ing  to Webster)  "an  abridged and somewhat cursive form  of  hieroglyphic writing  which   in  late   use  was  reserved  for  religious  writings,"  and  which  is  therefore
related  to what  Miss Webb  calls the "shape of prayer".





E"abridged   and   somewhat  cursive  form" of
 these  new

poems  can,  if we speak  by analogy,  certainly  be called  hieroglyphic:

brother  and sister conjunctive  and peaceable

Here,   "conjunctive"  and   "peaceable" can   be   taken  as  adjectives  qualifying "brother and  sister". At  the  same  time,  the  poem  can  be expanded  (something like  a telegram)  to read,  "Brother and sister:  the simple statement of a relation­ ship  in  which  'and' is conjunctive and  expressive of the fact  that  the siblings are at  peace." And  if, as has  been  suggested,  Miss Webb's  attempt  to create  "a  kind of narrative line with  a lyric intention" is seen as her attempt to "apprehend/ The  point  of  intersection of  the  timeless/   With  time,"  to  reach  the  still  and  "very center  of consciousness" out  of which  comes Steven's  "central poetry"; and  if the dedication of oneself  to such  an  attempt is an  "occupation  for the saint" or for the  Priestess of  Motion who  makes  out  of the  world  of flux  a "certain order" in the form  of poems  articulate with  the "brevity  of bone", then there  is every  justi­ fication   for  calling  such   writings   "religious". They  are  religious  in  exactly  the sense  that  James Joyce  suggests  when  he speaks  of  the  artist  as "a  priest  of the eternal imagination, transmuting the  daily  bread  of  experience into  the  radiant body of everlasting life."
Nowhere does  the  "lyric   intention" intersect   the  "narrative line"   more  dra­
matically  than  in  the  first  two suites of the  Naked  Poems.  Here,  too, is the  most


35

PHYLLIS WEBB



elaborate expression  of what  I have called  the theme  of "love  as poetry": a subtle metaphorical statement of the  act of love as the  act  of imagination as the  act  of worship  in  which  the  beloved  (who  is the  speaker in  these  poems)   becomes  the poet  who  becomes  the  Priestess of  Motion   whose  "hieratic"  utterances are  the "brief  lyrics"  Miss Webb  has written; and  each  "poem is the cry of its occasion/ Part  of the  res itself and  not  about  it,"  to quote  Stevens  again.
"Suite   I" begins  by making  a room.  The speaker  is "enclosed/ by a thought and  some  walls". There are  "two  flies/   on  the  ceiling".  She  has   thrown her "blouse on  the   floor". At  the  window,  "plum curtains". There is a  bed  in  the room,  a  "chair,   a lamp,     aj fly    two  books  by/   Marianne Moore". And  the room is in a house to which  the speaker  has recently  moved,  "Moving/ to establish
distance/  between  our  houses."  Very  quickly,  at  the  end  of the  first  poem,  the
room  assumes meaning beyond  that  of a place  in which  to put furniture and  live. After  moving  to  establish  distance,  the speaker  says:

It seems
I welcome you in.

Your mouth  blesses me all over.

There is room.

Room  not  only  denotes  the  space  contained within  four  walls, floor  and  ceiling, but  also  suggests  the  room  which  must   be  made for  love  to  live  in. Having separated, moved  apart, the speaker  has made room  in which  to be herself, living by herself, and  room in which  to love.
In  the  third  poem,  the  room  becomes an  image  for  the  body and  the  mind  of the  speaker: "Tonight/  quietness.  In  mej  and  the  room./ I am  enclosed/ by a thought/ and  some  walls."  The  image  is a  chinese  box.  The  room  contains the speaker's body  which  contains  her  mind  which  contains her  thoughts, her  psyche or soul or whatever it is that  constitutes  who she is. Her  self waits quietly  enclosed by  a  thought as her  body  waits  quietly  enclosed  by the  room.  When  she speaks of peopling  the  room  with  things,  the  process is  (by  implication)  repeated in her mind  with  thoughts, images, visions, poems:

While you were away

I held you like this in my mind.

g6

PHYLLIS WEBB



"Like  this"  seems  to mean  that  she is now literally  holding  her lover in her  arms in  the  room,  and   metaphorically in  the  poem,  which  holds  the  lover  present  in the  mind,  and  the  memory  of the lover present  in the room :

It is a good mind that can embody
perfection with exactitude.

The   room  contains the  body,  the  body  the  mind,  the  mind  the  poem,  and  the poem  "perfection with  exactitude." It is the  paradox of perfection em-bodied in the  mind  that  enables  the  reader  to catch  the  reciprocity  of all these images: the room-body-mind  welcomes  the  lover  in,  holds  the  lover  in  mind,  embodies  her so  that  lover,  perfection and   poem  are  superimposed and  become  synonymous. Hence  the  final  poem  of  "Suite II":

You brought me clarity.

Gift after gift
I  wear.

Poems, naked, in the sunlight on the floor.
The   "clarity" which   the  lover  brings  and   the  "perfection" with  which  she  is
synonymous, and  which  is embodied in  the  speaker's  mind,  are  clearly  related. In  fact,  the  clarity  which  enables  the speaker  to embody  (or  make  poems)   with exactitude is inspired by  the  perfection   embodied   in  the  poet,  in  the  mind  and in each  poem,  by the lover. They  are indistinguishable. "Gift after gift/ I wear"­ these lines refer  back  to  the  beginning: "Your  mouth  blesses me/  all over." The  kisses are blessings, are gifts, gift after gift:  "And/ here/ and  here and/  here/ and over and/ over  your mouth." "Again you have left/ your mark," says the speaker  in  "The Bruise"   (Suite   I, poem  4). Bruises  ("little bites  of  death" in  "Flux") and  kisses, kisses and  blessings,  blessings and  blouses, blouses  and  gifts,  all these have  the same  essential  meaning. "Gift  after  gift/ I wear./  Poems ...": the gifts are  the  poems inspired (i.e.,  made) by and  embodying the perfection of love and love-maker. Because  the gifts are  also kisses, the poems are embodied in the kisses, or the kisses in the poems-"hieratic sounds". The  poems are "naked" like bodies

37

PHYLLIS WEBB



making  love and,  therefore, making poems. The  poetry is in the love; the love is in  the  naked  bodies; the naked  poems and  bodies are  in  the room;  and  all are enclosed  by  or  held  in  the  mind  of  the  poet  which  embodies  perfection  with exactitude.
The  poems are "naked,/ in the sunlight":

The  sun comes through plum curtains.

I said
the sun is gold in your eyes.
it isn't the sun you said.

It is love and desire that are gold, like the sunlight, in the eyes of the lover ("Who would  call me to still centres/  needs a lesson in desire"). Desire strips  (down  to the  "bone-essential  statement")  and  leaves the  poet  whose  mind  embodies  the poems  "naked/ in  the sunlight/ on  the  floor".  "I have  thrown  my j blouse on the  floor."  The  speaker's  blouse is a gift  from  her  lover:   "On   the  floor your blouse".  And  the light of desire in the eyes of the lover which, says the speaker, "took/ with so much/  gentleness/  my dark,"  falls "more  golden/  going down". The  images all relate with miraculous clarity and  consistency. The  lovers embody each other  (that  both are women is important and too obvious to need comment)  ; they  make  love on  the  floor-"two flies/  on  the  ceiling/ are  making  love/ quietly.  Or/ So it seems/  down here"-and  in making  love on the floor of the room, in which  room is made  for love and  self-pity, the  poems are made.
Lyric poetry is, more often than  not, love poetry, and  love is at once the most personal of all experiences yet the most common  to all men and so the most uni­ versal. Miss Webb intensifies both  the  personal  and  non-personal  aspects in her own  poetry by setting her lyrics within the framework  of an allusively suggested narrative,  and  by relating  lyric moods, emotions, states  of mind  to a  particular location.

Pearl  poem
white with virtue or opal
marred, shining

PHYLLIS WEBB



hold out for the moment when  you'll be heard then speak
from  the absolute
location
of your mist

The   paradox   at  the  end  of  this  unpublished  poem  describes exactly  how  the Naked  Poems speak. The  location  and occasion (a room in which room is made for  making  love)  are,  like the speaker's  mind,  absolute and  specific, they are so because clearly defined  by the  poet's "narrative line". But since the intention  is lyrical, the  poems are suffused with a universal mist which obscures the location of the location.  A room, yes; a house, yes; but where, when?  Fully realized, the lyric intention  makes it impossible and irrelevant  to answer  these questions. The Priestess of  Motion,  in  uttering  her  "hieratic  sounds"  (and  read  en suite, they constitute  a formidable  "lesson in  desire"), succeeds in  placing  us at  that  inter­ section of narrative  or historic time and  lyric timelessness, and  "We disappear  in the musk" and  in the mist "of her coming".
In poetry, as in all art, says Stevens, "the central problem is always the problem of reality."  The  poet whose poetry is "central" acknowledges "imagination as a power  within  him  to have such  insights into  reality as will make it  possible for him  to be sufficient as a poet in the very centre of consciousness." In identifying this still  point  and  very centre  of consciousness with  the sexual  orgasm,  and  in writing  "brief  lyrics"  the  form  and  hieratic  sound  of which  reflect  the  private and  ephemeral  nature  of those "small  joys and quiet ecstasies", Miss Webb offers an  evaluation  of her experience  of life. If life has any value, it is to be found in love; if love has any meaning,  it resides in its power to inspire the priestess of the eternal  imagination to transmute  the daily narrative  of experience into  a radiant body of timeless lyric poems.














39



THE WAY IT  WAS

Ernest Buckler




D. 0. Spettigue













CANAD<AN UTERATURE seems to have  come  into  ex tence at  an  opportune time  for  the  student of  English-Canadian  prose.  Two   articles that  have  appeared in this quarterly, Warren Tallman's "Wolf  in the Snow" and D. G. Jones'  "The Sleeping Giant", have set a new standard of imaginative criti­ cism of the  novel. It may now be possible to examine the English-Canadian  novel within  a conceptual framework whose  terms  are  supranational but  whose  appli­ cation is  readily   adjusted   to  the  national scene.   Ernest   Buckler  is  one  author whose  work lends itself to such  treatment.
The two  studies  already  mentioned show  the  influence of Northrop Frye  and Roy  Daniells.  Roy Daniells has been foremost  among those critics who have looked to the  accidents of geography  and  climate  for an explanation of certain character­ istics of English-Canadian fiction. His assessment  of the role of the "terrain", and Northrop Frye's  identifying of fear  and  the  "garrison mentality" as characteristic attitudes in  our  prose,  are  the  more  generalized precursors  of  the  "Wolf  in  the Snow" and  "Sleeping Giant" studies.  W.  R.  Wilgar's "Poetry  and  the  Divided  Mind", to  which  Mr.  Jones  refers, is another parent of what  may  be called  the "between two worlds"  theme  recognized  by recent  critics.
If it has been  difficult in the  past for critics  to find  a conceptual framework in which  to  treat   English-Canadian fiction,  that  is partly  because  the  writers  have had  such  difficulty  in finding  a focus  themselves.  They  have  therefore tended  to

THE  WAY IT WAS



look  to the  past  for  the  illusions of unity  or order,  or  abroad to greener  pastures than  a  raw  colony  could  offer.  Among  the  early  writers  Major   Richardson  de­ picts  British  redcoats besieged  in  their  forts  in  a  wilderness  connotative of  fear. Mrs.  Moodie,  during the seven years in the bush clearing  that  she calls a "prison­ house",  looks  to  England as  "home", but  exhorts  Canadians to  work  for  their  country's growth. Haliburton is another who  contrasts   the  dismal  present   with  what  Maritime Canada could  become.  E.  W. Thomson creates  a  Loyalist  who,  facing  death  by drowning, is content as long as he drowns  on the  Canadian side of the  river. The inhabitants of Scott's  Viger  are  trapped by  their  environment, but  those  in  his  northern  tales  are  a  part   of  the  landscape.  Modern  English­ Canadian writers  renew  the  imagery  of the  threatening terrain, notably  Sinclair Ross  and  Sheila   Watson, but   Malcolm  Lowry  finds  in  Canada both   rest  and  inspiration, and  Hugh  MacLennan's  Odyssean  heroes,  singing  its  vastness,  seek themselves  in seeking  the source  of its  nationhood.
With  nearly  two  centuries of fiction  behind  us, it is possible to identify  some­ what  more  nearly  than   Mr.  Jones  has done,  the  Edenic  image  in  our  fiction  as the environment of childhood or the immediate vanishing past,  and  to relate  both  Frye's  "tone  of deep  terror  in regard  to nature" and  Jones'  Sleeping Giant to  the perpetuation of the  settler's response  to the  British  North  American  terrain. The recurrent phrase, "the way  it  was",  in  Ernest  Buckler's  fiction  is  then  relatable to  the  three  fundamental attitudes to the  Canadian environment,  as threat  (the wolf-in-the-snow or exiles-from-the-garden or drowned-poet or buried-life theme),  as haven  (the  Canaan or  New-World or Promised-Land  theme) and  as  potential (the  Adam-about-to-awake or  child-of-nations-giant-limbed theme).
Ernest  Buckler  has  been  publishing  fiction  for  some  twenty-five  years,  but  al­ though he  began   his  writing   career   with  a  prize-winning article   and   won  the MacleanJs fiction  award in  1948, it was only with The  Mountain and the Valley  ( 1952)   that  he  won  critical attention. Again,  he  won  the  President's  Medal for the  best Canadian short  story  in both  1957  and  1958,  but  it was  the  publication in  1962  of the  New  Canadian Library  edition  of The  Mountain and  the Valley  that  won a wide  audience for the retired  philosopher  of Bridgetown, Nova Scotia.
Writer   of  poetry,   newsletters,   articles,  CBC  scripts,  novels  and  short  stories, Buckler  nevertheless has  come  to be known  as the author of one  novel. The  phe­ nomenon of  the  novelist  who  publishes  one  promising  book  and  then  sinks  into silence,  or  who  after  many  a summer publishes  a second  that  does  not  seem  to fulfil  the  promise  of the  first,  is almost  a  Canadian tradition. It  could  therefore be  predicted  that   Buckler's  second  novel,  The  Cruelest  Month  ( 1963),  would

THE WAY IT  WAS



excite  less comment than   the  first.  It  could  also  be  predicted  that   the  second novel  would  be less obviously confessional.  But  Buckler  is already  advanced in  a third   novel,  and   seems  quite   uninterested  in  conforming  to  expectation. One might  even guess that  he does not much  care  about  the  patterns of  English-Cana­ dian  fiction.  He  knows  what  his fellows  are  doing   but,  like  them,  if  he  reads fiction  at  all it is likely to be contemporary American or  European. It may  then be asked  whether there  is any  need  to stress the  Canadianism of an  author who, unlike,  say, Hugh MacLennan, does not  take  the  national approach. The reply must  be  that   there  are  distinct  patterns in  English-Canadian fiction  which   are just  now  coming  to  be  recognized  and  that  Buckler's   fiction,  which  seems  not only  to conform to  but  almost  to  epitomize  them,  is worth  studying as  part  of that  context. A second  reply is  that, despite  the  obvious  dangers and  limitations of parochialism, it is no disadvantage, when  judging  the  national product in  the international arena, to  know  what  the  national product is.


''"T
lHE WAY IT  wAs", or  "how it  was",  occurs  as  commonly
in  Buckler's  short  stories  and  articles  as in  his  novels.  "How can  you  tell,"  he asks in the  reminiscent article  "School  and  Me", "such   things  as how  it  was the morning the  mote-thickened spring  sunshine slanted   through the  open  window and you saw that  the figure you were dividing with was the same figure in the denominator of the  answer ... ?" In  "The Clumsy  One", a short  story  very close to  the  style of The  Mountain  and the Valley, the  narrator broods: "I had  the quicker  way with  the mind,  and  still I couldn't feel how it was with him,  the  way he seemed  to know,  with a quiet  sensing, exactly  how  it was with  me."  The  story "The Quarrel", which  won  the  Maclean's  prize  for  1948,  is built  on  a series of contrasts between  the  way a boy had  expected  the  day  of the  fair  to be, and  the way  it  actually   was:  "That's exactly  how  it  turned out  to  be.... You  see, that was  the  August  Sunday   which  was  to  have  been  twice  as  wonderful. ... But  it wasn't  like  other   mornings.... We  didn't  keep  saying   what   a  perfect   day  it was.... " And  at the climax: "Now  here is where  I wish for the subtlety  to show you, by the light of some single penetrating phrase, how it was driving  home.  But
I can  only  hope  that  you  will know  how  it  was,  from  some  experience of  your own  that  was sometime  a little  like it."
Roy  Daniells  is one of many  critics to comment on  the  prominence in  English­ Canadian prose fiction  of reminiscence, especially  of childhood scenes set on  the

THE WAY IT  WAS



farm  or in the  village  and  attempting to capture the flavour  of a way of life that can  no longer  be the  way it was. The  rural  idyll of the  late  nineteenth and  early twentieth centuries was  a sentimental development of that  characteristic. Grove, Knister, Connor, Slater  and  W. 0. Mitchell  have  exploited  such  material in sus­ tained  works,  and  it  has  been  the  staple  of  the  short  stories  and  sketches  that  make  up so much  of our  prose tradition.
The  Buckler  short  stories  date  from  two  Esquire  publications of  1940-41,  a
promising  year  for  Canadian fiction,  though  it must  be  admitted that   the  early stories showed  little  more  than  a facility  with language. The  published stories  to­ gether  seem  to divide  into  four  quite  distinct  groups.  The Saturday  Night  group of the  war  years have  a Sunday-school sentimentality about  them,  but  introduce the concern  with  guilt,  at  any  kind of separation or alienation, until separateness is resolved in  a moment of transfiguring unity.  The  second  group chronologically are the  Maclean's  stories of 1948 to 1951, which  include  Buckler's  best:   "Penny in the  Dust", "The Quarrel", "The Clumsy  One" and  "The Rebellion  of Young  David". To  these  should  be  added  "The Wild  Goose"  from  the  Atlantic  Advo­  cate, in  which  he  has  continued to  publish  to the  present.  These  five stories  are similar  in style, theme  and  characterization to The  Mountain and the Valley  and  might  be considered exercises  toward  that  novel, except  that  "The  Rebellion of Young  David" is incorporated in  The  Cruelest  Month. The   Atlantic  Advocate group  is generally  less impressive  but  includes  a  number of stories  exploring the personal  and  professional  frustrations of the writer in his search  for  the  unifying  vision. These  are suggestive  of The  Cruelest Month  and  again  explore  some of its specific  complex relationships. Two  stories  from  Chatelaine  of  1956  and   1957 extend   the  Mountain and  the  Valley  material. The   remaining stories  form   a group  of some  range,  from  humour to  thriller,  but  without much  enlargement of the  reader's experience.
Like the best of the stories, the  two novels are set in the  Annapolis Valley  area of Nova  Scotia. The  principal difference  between  them  is in range  of  character­ ization  and  time  span.   The   first  novel  is a  story  of childhood and  adolescence within  a closely  knit  family  group,  but  it  is framed   by  a  Prologue  and  an  Epi­  logue set  just before  the  protagonist's death, to which  all the past has contributed. The  action  of the second  novel occupies  only a few days,  with  generous  portions  of flashback, but  only  the  interpolated story  reaches  back  into  the  rural past  of The  Mountain and the Valley.  Like the novel, it is intensely involved  in the com­  plexities of hurting and  healing  in the context  of love.
The  representative Buckler  activity  is reminiscing,  the  area  of reminiscence is


43

THE WAY IT  WAS



characteristically the childhood  environment, and  the emotions  recurrently evoked are  those  of  contrasting gloom  and   joy. The   "it" of  "the way  it  was"  is  the meanest   of  terms  but  on  it  is  placed  the  burden of  conveying   the  most  tran­ scendent experiences  of  unity  in  the  fleeting  moment. Against   the  memories  of ecstatic  experiences  of wholeness are set those of separation, dissolution and  alien­  ation,  and  these are associated  with  guilt at the failure  to seize the offered moment in which  harmony might have been restored.  The  "was" of the  phrase  thus  repre­ sents  a  complex  of  times  in  which  the  moment  being  lived  by  the  character is contrasted with  an  ideal  might-have-been  which  in  tum is  extracted from   the recollection   of  an  actual   "was" of  the  character's  past.  That recalled   moment (often  the climax  for which  the suspenseful  preparation is also given, as the  days and  hours  leading  to a child's  Christmas)  can  only be rendered in terms  of sense impressions -the  way someone's  face  looked,  what  colour  the  leaves  took  in  a certain light,  how a voice would sound, the way the spring  earth  smelled,  the feel of new skates, the  warmth of familiar things-all intensely  realized.  At the same time,  one  is aware  of an  opposite  impression,   that   these  novels  are  remarkably abstract. Even  in  the sensuous The  Mountain and  the Valley  the  language may be  that  of the  withdrawn  intelligence extracting  the  essence of familial  relations in  analogies  almost  geometrically balanced. A  balance in  tension  is created by comparing the  present  situation with  a past  or  hypothetical situation which,  if it obtained  now,  would  reverse  the  present.  But  the  perversities  of  human nature wilfully distort emotion,  preventing communication, until  just the  right  combina­ tion  of sense  impressions  and  circumstance bursts  the  floodgates  of  remorse  and longing,  restores unity  and  duplicates in the  present  the  desirable  emotion  of the past.
This  is a language of simile-not  what  is, but  what  it is like. The  basis of the
similes is the  division  of personality  which  can  find  analogies in  two  contrasting kinds  of scenes, those of unity  and  those of discord. The basis of this division,  in tum, is the  divided  personality,  which  has its counterpart in  the  divisions  of the book.
The   novel  divides  into  six parts  with  Prologue and  Epilogue, the  eight  parts tending to  resolve  themselves  into  two  sequences. The  first,  the  Prologue   and Parts   One  to  Three, are  feminine  in  orientation; they  are  of  the  Valley.  Parts Four  to  Six, the  second  sequence, are  masculine; they  align  with  the  Epilogue, "The  Mountain". In  his  Introduction to  the   New  Canadian  Library   edition, Claude Bissell compares The  Mountain and the Valley  to "Fern Hill"  as "a mag­ nificent  paean  to the wonder  and  innocence of youth". The comparison is applied

44

THE WAY IT  WAS



to the  first half  of the  book only, for "the  very strength  and  sureness  of Buckler's treatment of  the  family ... makes  the  last  section  of  the  book  something of  an anticlimax." This is to overlook  the structural unity of David's struggle  with time. The  focus of the  first half  is forward: David's  responses to  praise,  to shame  and to love, and  his anticipation of the  revenge  or repayment or glory  that  he knows some  day  will be his. It is this sequence  that  has  all the  wonder, the  enthusiasm and  beauty  of  awakening youth.  But  the  seeds of destruction are  there.  For  all David's love of family  and  farm  home,  he is an  alien  spirit.  In  a  magnificently rendered scene  at  the  centre  of the  novel, his frustration breaks  out  in  a quarrel with  his father. With  the  cruel  desire to hurt  and  to escape,  David  provokes  his father to a blow, then  flees from  home.  But on the road  to the city he is haunted and  overwhelmed by the  recalled  faces of home,  and  he turns  back.

He came to the  bridge. He  could see the  house again.  The  ash of the  quarrel, of blows given and  felt, was tamped  down physically into  his flesh. The  soreness was drawn  out  wire-thin,  pendant  at  the corners of  his lips. Suddenly  he put  his head into  the only place left to hide:  the crook of his elbow along the  rail of the bridge.  He  began  to sob. He  sobbed because he could neither  leave  nor stay. He sobbed because he was neither  one thing nor the other.

The chapter ends  with  his grandmother giving  David  the  locket  containing the photo   of  the  sailor  she  once  had   hidden  in  the  barn -symbol  of  the  restless adventuring spirit she still supposes  David  will be. David  is puzzled  by the gift.

And  then  suddenly  he knew where he'd  seen a face like that.  He  was looking at  it  right  there  in  the  mirror.  This  locket had  something  to do  with  what  had happened  today.  She'd  sensed somehow what  had happened. She'd  sensed it  be­ cause she too knew what  it was like when the moonlight  was on  the fields  when the hay was first cut and  you stepped outside and it was lovely, but like a mocking
... like everything  was somewhere else.
He went to sleep at once, though.  He was eighteen.

At  this point  David  still is young  enough  to look forward to achievement and happiness. But  by  the  end  of  Part  Five,  with  Joseph's death, the  watershed has been crossed. Hereafter the  bright  moments  will exist only in  memory. "It would seem  as if everything had  gone  by while  he slept,  down  the  road,  and  now  he'd never  catch  up  with  it."
In  the second  sequence the  family  unity  that  had  provided the  vitality  begins to crumble; disintegration marks  the central  parts of the  book, and  thereafter the focus is backward as David  declines into  a defensive routine and  withdraws even from  the  limited  local  society.  This  is the  "buried life",  the  "ritual death" from

45

THE WAY  IT  WAS



which  David  must  resurrect  himself. The  means  to freedom  is his discovery  of his potential for  writing.  His childhood  sensitivity  to  the  familiar surroundings, and the  anonymity that  had  enabled  him  to become  the  voice for  others  and  release their  tensions  in  ribaldry,   now  enable   him  to  record   with  increasing  precision "the way it is" at  certain  moments  of the  rural day.  Like  a  new  Adam, he  will conquer his environment by naming  it. The environment itself has  thus  changed from  threat to potential,  and  now contains within  itself the  possible resolution  of David's conflicting desires.




kE TITLE, The  Mountain and the Valley, draws  attention to the  principal organizing device,  the series of related, usually  contrasting or  com­ plementary, symbols. The  book is "about" the  achieving of unity  in  an  environ­ ment   that   does  not  seem  to  encourage unity -and  thus  the  relation  between  Buckler  and  the  Canadian prose tradition. The  eight  images  named  in  the  titles of the  Prologue, Epilogue  and  the six Parts  of  the  book  are  all  indicative of the attempts, successful  and   unsuccessful,  at   reconciliation. "The   Mountain" and "The Valley" make  one  complementary pair.  They   relate  to  certain characters and   principles, as  Mountain vs. Valley,  Father vs.  Mother,  Male   vs.  Female,  Toby  vs. Anna, the tall  pine  vs. the  house  or, since  the  pine  is  to be the  keel for a boat,  the Ark  (in  Mr.  Jones'  terms)   vs. the  farm  or garden. As in D.  H.  Law­  rence,  male  and  female  are in opposition, antagonisms flaring or settling  dully  in at a word  misinterpreted, a jealousy mistakenly aroused. Anna can  find her fulfil­ ment  only  through Toby,  yet the  two  know  very few  moments of peace  in  their short  life together. Chris,  David's  older  brother (here,  as in  "The Clumsy  One" and  "The Wild  Goose"  the  slow,  inarticulate but  intuitively knowing  one,  the one  who belongs to the country) is forced  by the demands of young sexuality  into a  marriage and  a  house  where  there  is  neither  love  nor  understanding, where only separation can  follow.  David's  early  love is  the  pathetic Effie, a foil for  the Anna David  would  marry  were she not his sister. (Toby, whom she does marry, is virtually a  double   of  David.)  David   tries  to  demonstrate a  sexual   prowess  at Effie's expense  and  for Toby's benefit,  but  fails. Perhaps a kind  of unity  could  be achieved  in  a sexual  union  wherein  both  accomplishment and  security  might  be found, as in The  Cruelest Month. But  there  is no such  love outside  his  parents' marriage-this  is precisely  David's  problem on  one  level.  The climax  of  Part  One  is David's participation with  Effie in  a school  play.  Like a younger  Stephen

THE WAY  IT  WAS



Dedalus, he  dreads and  somewhat despises  the  gross  event,  but  finds  the  play becoming a  unity  and  achieving an  effect  beyond  the  worth  of the  parts  or  the players.  This  is the  only  promise  David  is given  of  a  potential harmony  that  is not  simply  the  effects  of  natural  phenomena operating on  youthful  sensitivity. But  a total  unity  is not achieved. David  lacks Stephen's awareness of the distinc­ tion  between  the  artifice  and  the  fact;  when  he tries  to  kiss his startled  princess and  a coarse voice shouts  applause, stepladder and  Effie and  illusion  crash  to the floor,  and  David  flees. The  play, first symbol in the first sequence, does not  point  the  way to a resolution.
The second  symbol,  for  which  Part  Two  is named, is the  Letter.   Via  a  pen club,  David  makes  contact with  Toby  who  will become  his only friend. That is, he has  communicated with  the  outside  world.  Toby  is a second  David-in  one scene  David  admires himself  in Toby's  sailor  cap  and  realizes  he  could  be Toby
-just as both  Toby  and  David  are  associated  with  the  half-mythical sailor  old Ellen  had  once  hidden in  her  barn.  He  is the  symbol  of  the  restless spirit,  the questing, moving  male  by contrast with the  waiting  female. After  their  marriage, Anna and  Toby are  separated  most  of  the  time,  he  away  on  naval   duty,  she awaiting his occasional returns. When  he is lost at sea, she does not  return to the farm. She  has  chosen  the  outside  world  and  cannot   go  home  again.  Toby   and Anna, then,  are  the  questing side of David,  and  with  their  loss he is doomed   to stagnate at  home.
In  the  second   sequence  the  equivalent communication  to  the   Letter   is  the Train of Part  Six.  As so often  in  North  American fiction,  the  train  is the  means to  escape  into  the  larger  world-it  has  this  role  in  Sinclair  Ross's  As  For  Me and My  House and  The  Well.  In  the last leave-taking with  Toby,  David  goes to the  front  field  to  watch  Toby  wave  from  the  train.  Toby, absorbed   in  another world  with  other  friends,  does not even look. David  goes berserk,  hacking in  im­ potent  fury  at  the  parsnips  that  are  rooted  like him,  the  half-self  that  will  never enlarge  itself again, "because all  the  crossroad   junctions  had  been  left  irretriev­ ably far  behind."
Balancing Part One, the  Play,  is Part  Five,  the  Scar.  During the  killing  and scalding   of  a  pig  (another of  Buckler's  wonderfully   exact  scenes  of  farm life), David  falls from  a  rafter  and  sustains  a  permanent injury and  scar.  Thereafter the  pain  is part   of  his  consciousness,  leaving  him  only  in  rare  moments of   re­ newed  hope.  The fall  and  scar  would  link  David  with  the  Adam   and  wounded god  figures of mythology, while  his weak heart  makes his exile from  the  vital  life a permanent condition, the state  of man.

47

THE  WAY IT \\-"AS



The Prologue  and  the  Epilogue,  entitled   "The Rug" and  "The  Mountain", are  the other  complementary parts.  Once  David  has discovered  that  he can  write, his ingrown  self can  be freed  into  anonymity by  becoming the  myriad   elements of its environment and  then  be expressed  in  words.  Only  then  can  the  Sleeping Giant wake,  the  wounded  god  be resurrected, the  Word   recreate the  Flesh.  But mastery  of words  is a  potential only.  David's environment provides  him  with  a stimulating flux;  it  does not  provide  the  models  of  harmony that   he  needs  for literary form,  and  his potential book is therefore never  written. He  is frustrated by sheer  quantity of impression.  The  challenge his environment offers  him  is to create the intelligible order  of literature from  what  might  be called  an  "unintel­ ligible  landscape". He tries to acknowledge each  component  individually and  of course  is overwhelmed. What  he  lacks  is  the  abstracting  power  of symbol,  the kind  of pattern his grandmother weaves out  of experience.
The Epilogue  continues  the Prologue, both occurring in the same afternoon and
developing the same  few phrases.  Here  old Ellen has something of the role of Lily Briscoe  of To  the  Lighthouse,  her  rug  pattern  developing parallel  to  the  action and  completing itself as the  action  is completed, so that  one unity is accomplished, that  of the  family  in the  context  of cyclical  time.  In  the  Prologue   David  stands at  the  window-a  telling  Canadian position-while  behind   him   his  grand­ mother selects  her  rags  and  weaves  them  into  her  rug.  In  the  Epilogue David flees this  house  of  death  and  bondage and  climbs  the  mountain of  his  lifelong desire,  while  Ellen  continues  with  her rug.
As he ascends,  David  goes through the nightmare of guilt  at all the creation he has failed  to name. No longer  recalling,  he is reliving  all the  significant  moments of his  past  that  cry  out  accusingly  for  expression.  He  is seeing,  hearing, feeling not  only  the  present  sensations  but  all  those  of  his  past.  Under the  pressure  of accumulated sensation   David   achieves  a  moment of  mystical  exaltation, "The complete translation to  another time"  which  Buckler  celebrates and  represents. "It is not a memory of that  time",  for "the years between  have  been  shed." The immediate becomes  the  past  and  "there is an  original glow  on  the  faces  like on the  objects  of  home." But  David's exultation becomes  horror   as he  tries  to  re­ spond  to all the  demanding past  in  the  present  as well  as the  swarming  present itself:   "That little  cloud  that  way  and  no  other; that   little  cloud  I  didn't see, exactly  the  way  it was",  and  so with  the  way  everything has  been  and  will be, and  even  might   have  been,  all  pursuing   him  "with the  relentless  challenge of exactly  how each  one was",  until in horror  he "put his arms  about the great  pine and   thrust   his  forehead  against   its  hard   body", screaming  "Stop". With   this

THE WAY IT WAS



strong   masculine image   his  nightmare ceases.  He  has  reached   the   top  of  the mountain and  has  ended  his  purgatory with  the  sudden  conviction   that he  can become   and   thereby   encompass and   control   all  those  demanding   experiences. Adam will become  his universe  in naming it: "I know  how it is with  everything. I will put  it down  and  they  will see that  I know."  Then  the  blackness  that  is the outer  border  of Ellen's  rug "swam in his head  again", turns  grey,  then  the  white of  the  centre  of  her  rug,  and  David, dead,  is buried  in  snow.  But  the  unity  of mountain and  valley is completed as a  partridge flies from  the  mountain to the valley in a single  direct  movement that  recalls the single brush  stroke  with  which Lily Briscoe completed her  painting and  achieved  the  unity  of the lighthouse. At this same  moment Ellen  has completed her  rug and  has shown  her  way  to unity, as she sorts through the clothing of the living and  the dead  to weave into  her rug. She  lets selected  objects  include  and  stand  for  the  multiplicity  of associations  as one  coloured  rag  in her  rug  is both  the  focus of all associations  of its  relation  to its onetime   wearer,  and  also  a  part  in  the  design  of the  rug  that  includes   those associations  but  recreates   them  in  a  significant  order.  The  concentric circles  of coloured  clothing  in the  rug  expand from  a point of white,  as David's conscious­ ness struggles  against  the  nightmare of expanding detail,  only  to  contract again sharply  to the  point  of lace  and  the snowflakes  which  are,  in  terms of the  novel, the achieved  unity,  and  in terms  of David's potential,  the irony of another  buried
life.
David  Canaan's literary  family  is a prominent one in English-Canadian fiction. There was the  ancestral Mrs.  Moodie  at  mid-century, warning that  this  land  of promise  was  a  "prison-house" for  the  educated until  the  prosaic  arts  of  nation­ building  had  been  accomplished. There was  Grove's  Len  Sterner at  the  turn  of the  century, still  pioneering, frustrated  and   defeated   by  poverty   because  the physical  accomplishment that  would  free the intellect from  material  necessity had still  not  been  realized,  perhaps could  not  be realized  where  nature  without con­ spired  with  nature within  to  distract a youth  from  the  very  struggle  it  imposed upon  him.  There was  Knister's Richard  Milne  carrying  on  a  forlorn   courtship with  the  ingrown   spirit  of  rural Ontario, as  David  with  the  Annapolis Valley. But Richard had  a road  out; for David,  the  trains  run everlastingly away. Among  the  moderns there  is Robertson Davies'  Monica  Gall, who  lacks even  the  aware­ ness of potential until  accident provides  the money-the only gift of her  environ­ ment-for  an escape  out  of Canada and  into fulfilment.  Finally  there  is Sinclair  Ross's  Philip  Bentley  perpetuating the spirit  of Horizon  by preaching a  creed  he no  longer  believes  in,  until  self-pity  and  the  promptings of  sex,  sole  agents  of

49

THE WAY IT WAS



revolt  in such a climate,  impel  him to flee to the city, where  a human community may  be found  sufficient to create  the necessary illusion of stability.  And  then  there is David, for  whom  the  green  and  golden  promise  of the  Annapolis Valley  seen through the  eyes of youth  fades  into  the  light  not  only  of  common day  but  of sterility  absolute.  Where  Sinclair  Ross achieves  the  effects of monotony in order  to render the  failure  of creativity  from  lack  of stimulation, Ernest  Buckler  achieves the  effects of redundance in order  to render  the  failure  of creativity  from  lack  of focus.




LIKE MANY ANOTHER  confessional   writer  of  the  modern mode,  Mr. Buckler is concerned  with  the  problems  of the literary  artist.  He is one who  can  master  words, who can  bring  to life the  way an  intense  experience was; he has the  language of the earth  and  the  home,  and  the  language of the flesh, as no  other  Canadian writer  has  them.  And  yet he  distrusts  words.  He  shows  with surprising earnestness  that  distrust  that  is so profound in  North  American  life­ and  that  perhaps most definitely marks  it off from  Europe-of  whatever savours too much  of the study.  This  bias in Canadian fiction  may  help  to  account for its fondness  for  the  pathos  of the  inarticulate victim,  the stories  of  children and  the animal story.
In  The  Cruelest Month, Letty  is illiterate. In  The  Mountain and  the Valley
it is said  of Chris  that  his thoughts were  not  "word-shaped",  though they  were thoughts nonetheless,  and  one  detects  in  David  -perhaps  in  Buckler  himself - that sense of guilt  on the  part  of the  very  articulate person  that  an  anti-intellec­ tual  society fosters, as though  too great  a facility  with  words  implied  a lightness of character; a kind  of black  magic  clings  to  the  rituals  of  words  even  yet. In­ articulateness is part  of the  simplicity  of  rural  life;  Joseph, Martha, Chris  and Ellen  are strong  almost  because their  thoughts are  not  word-shaped.
In The  Mountain  and the Valley  Buckler  refers  to  the  "original simplicity  of
rural people". He  contrasts  it  with  the  "artificial complexity" of city  people,  at least  of those  who have  not  gone  beyond  complexity to simplicity  again.  In  The Cruelest  Month   he  examines  city  people  whose  complexities are  word-shaped, whose  pastime  is finding  the  words for  their  own  emotions.
Formally, however, The  Cruelest Month has  a simpler  structure than The Mountain and the Valley.  Paul  Creed  has  an  old  house  in  rural Nova  Scotia; Kate Fennison, Morse Halliday, Rex and  Sheila  Giorno  gather there  for a spring-

THE WAY  IT  WAS



and-summer retreat. (It  has  to  be April  for  Wastelandic reasons,  but  one  feels that  this should  be a summer holiday; the  weather  lacks  the  sheer  miserableness of a Canadian spring,  and  the forest fire sequence,  though  made  plausible,  seems to  fit  a  later  season.)   The other  visitor  is Bruce  Mansfield,  whose  family  once owned   Paul's  place.  He  works  occasionally  on  Paul's  land, and   joins  the  group because  of  a sudden infatuation with  Sheila.  This  is the  familiar "frame-story" setting,  or the  pattern of a Shakespearean romantic comedy. The  characters with­ draw  from society into  a green  world  where old conventions are  allowed  to lapse, where  new  relationships are  allowed  to  develop  and  the  genius  of  the  place  so manipulates or simply  permits  the  action  that  the  characters return to  their  real world  with  a new  knowledge of themselves  as the  curtain drops.  In  this  case all the  actors,  obsessed  by guilt  and  fear,  have  failed  to fulfil  themselves.  But  being sophisticates-a  professor's   daughter, a  society  girl  and   her  husband, and   a writer -they  disguise  their  uncertainties under  a  varnish  of  words  that  is sup­  posed  to reveal  them. Among  these is set Bruce,  whose  condition of guilty  with­  drawal resembles  theirs,  but  who  is less wordy  because  he is native  to  the  area; the  enigmatic  Paul   whose  few  words  are  a  more  effective  defence   than   their many  words;  and   Letty,  the  middle-aged  and  illiterate  housekeeper   who  knows "the months  on  the  calendar ... and  the  days of the  week. And  her  own  name
... And  Paul's... And  the  short  words  you lived  by."  Letty  dotes  on  Paul,  but has no part  in his life with  these sophisticates: "They were  his kind.  She is not." But  Letty  is only  partly   right  about   this.  Like  David,   Paul  is  between   two worlds,  the  Annapolis Valley   world   and   the  distant   city -it is  the  familiar Archibald Lampman position.  But unlike  David,  Paul  has known  the  city world. One  of David's attributes was his capacity  to live vicariously,  to know  "the  way
it  was"  with  people  and  in  situations he  never  had  experienced himself.  David can  talk  the  city  talk,  but  he  feels the  guilt  of betrayal  if  he  does so.  When  he says "It's immaterial" to  Toby, he knows  he has  made  a  breach   with  his rural schoolmates that  can  never  be healed; language  becomes the stockade for a garri­ son of two. But  Paul  is a David  who  has "gone  outside", has  been  a city sophis­ ticate  and  now  has  returned to  the  home  soil  (as  Buckler  himself  did  in I 936). Here  he can  be one  with  the local people when  he chooses, or can  open his doors to city people  at  will.
The  reader's attitude to Paul  is likely to vacillate.  Interpreted generously,  he is sharing with  a  few  of  the  world's  misfits who  can  benefit  by  them  the  healing powers  of  Paul's place  and  of  himself.  But  their  adoration of  him,  which   puts him  beyond  all criticism  -he's  the singlest  damn   person;  you  don't know  any-

SI

THE WAY  IT  WAS



thing  about  Paul  but  you feel you  know  him-suggests  that  he  is to  be  less a character than  a  manipulator, a Prospero  whose  detachment is almost  too  clini­ cal.  Paul's place  is nicknamed Endlaw, not  only  as an  anagram of  the  Walden it  does  not  resemble  but  also as the  place  where  the  absurd   rituals  of  social  life are  to be set aside  (or  replaced  by other  rituals) . The   name  Paul  Creed -it  is almost  too apostolic-may indicate  a rooted  faith  or  certainty  by  contrast with the  creedless  visitors who  themselves  have  dubbed Endlaw "The  Home  for  In­ croyables", which  may  also suggest  their  unreality. Kate  says of  Endlaw: "You  know  time.  Anywhere  else, you hear  its meter  ticking  whether  you're  using  it or not.  Here,  that  meter's  stopped." Paul  calls  it  "the one  pocket  of  the  universe  that  nothing could  ever turn  inside out", but  this  is also  ironical, since  Paul  and his visitors are to be turned inside out  before  the  novel ends.
Kate  has  been  here before,  with  the father to whom  she had  devoted  her  life.
On  his death Kate,   now  a  rootless spinster, flees  the  image  of  herself  she  sees being  prepared in  the  faces  around her.  Morse  has  also  been  here  before;  his successful  novel,  significantly  called  Each  in  His  Narrow  Cell,  was  written at Endlaw. Now  that  his art  and  his life have  staled, he  returns in  the  hope  of  re­ newing  the  inspiration. The  married pair  are  Sheila,  society girl  who  has  not  yet told her husband that  her family has lost its money  and  she is pregnant, and Rex, her  poor-orphan spouse, whose good looks and  naivete  have  got him  a war  medal  and  Sheila  and  nothing  else. The  odd-man-out is Bruce,  the  disinherited  Adam  of this demi-paradise, and  sometime  medical  student whose guilt  at  causing  the death of his wife and son in a car  accident  has  made  him  a recluse. In  a kind  of Mid-Summer Night's  Dream  the  relations  between  characters are  rearranged in spite  of  them.   Bruce  and  Sheila  fall  in  love  and   move  inexorably  to  a  sexual union  before  an  accident  returns  them  to their  first  loves.  Kate, desperate to  be fulfilled  as a woman, allows herself to love Morse while  uneasily  aware  that  Paul  is her  soul-mate. Morse, thrice-married, accepts  Kate in  the  expectation that  she will be different, and  that  he can  teach  her  to  be  a  woman. The   probability is that  they  will become  another Sheila  and  Rex on a more  rarified  plane,  the  wife too readily seeing through, and  less and  less patiently condoning, the male  postur­ ing. And  Paul,  who loves Kate,  so steels himself  against that  temptation that  he is slow to see the  alternative.
Fugitives  from  self-deception  and  social  ritual, now  they  enmesh  themselves  in the  rituals  of  their  truth-and-consequences games  which  dare  the  participants to find the words for their secret selves. For Sheila,  the  most guarded, this is a temp­ tation. For  Kate it is part  of the excitement she seeks;  and  for  Morse,  the cryptic

52

THE WAY  IT  WAS



writer,  it's  all grist  for  the  mill. For  Paul  it  is perhaps  the  holiday  stimulant  he thinks  he  needs,  since  for  all  his easy intimacy   he only  "rents people", keeping himself  and  Endlaw inviolate through the  other  three  seasons.  The  member of the  party  the  others  ignore  as beneath them,  Rex,  must  amuse  himself  at  tinker­ ing  and  target  practice and  blunderings in  and  out  of the  others'  incomprehen­ sible conversations. They  treat  him  as a child -formally  his is a  counterpart to Bruce's  son Peter-but he is also, Caliban-like, an unwitting agent of the  action.  The  rifle he fires in  practice later  wounds  him  by accident  after  Sheila  has  told him   of  her   wish  for  a  divorce.   The   wounding,  misinterpreted  as  attempted suicide,  brings  the  remorseful Sheila  back to him, so duplicating the success of his phoney  war  wound  and  freeing  Bruce for a return  to his medical  training. At the end  Sheila  has accepted her lot with  Rex,  and  Kate and  Morse  have  gone  off to be  married.
But  the  projected holiday  at  Endlaw is cut  short.  After  his guests  arrive  Paul secretly  travels  to  Montreal for  diagnosis  of a heart  condition. As in The  Moun­ tain  and  the Valley there  is a watershed  between  the forward and  the  backward focus, so Paul's drive  to the hospital, glossed over with clowning, is "the first high point  in  the  arc  of dissolution". The  anchor in the others'  lives, he now  los·es his certainty and  feels the  necessity  to make  "the definitive  statement of  himself.  In one  single  sentence," which  was  the  way  of  their  game  at  End law.  Dismissing Kate  and  his other  talkative friends,  he determines to live his last  seasons  alone. Baffled and  hurt  they  leave,  but  they  complete  the  process  of  self-knowledge as they  go. As unwitting agent,  Rex  causes a forest  fire that  threatens Endlaw  just after  the last  visitors  have  left.  Morse  and  Kate  must  drive  through the  fire and so endure a  purgatorial ordeal  which  also faces  Paul  and  Letty  who  battle   the flames  to the  very edge  of the  house.  When  Paul collapses  Letty  learns  of his ill­ ness, as he learns  of his need  of her.  It  is "not  words"  he  wants,  but  the  living flesh.
The  controlling symbols  of this  novel  are  the  fire, the  gun  and  the  wounding of the  "king", the  exile and  quest  of the characters, Endlaw itself, the  opposition between   the  Word   and   the  Flesh   (the  sophisticated  talk  vs.  Letty's   wonderful silent  hands, Morse  and  Kate's tortured   examination of  the  marital relation   vs. the  simple  act  of  Paul  and  Letty), and  Paul,  whose heart  condition is the  tan­ gible  mark  of time  and  whose self in retreat  is the  human condition.
Ernest  Buckler  is a novelist,  not  a romancer, and  yet certain  characteristics of the  prose romance are discernible in The  Cruelest  Month. One  is the  convention, as  old  as  the  Decameron, of  the  withdrawal into  a  microcosmic   world   out  of


53

THE WAY  IT  WAS



society  and  out  of time. Another is the use of such  archetypes as the  purging  and refining  fire and  the sick heart. A third  is the  tendency of the  characters to melt into  one  another, a characteristic of Buckler's  fiction  as a whole.  Thus  the  short story  "Doctor and  Patient" plays  ironically  with  a  writer   who  feels  he  should have  been  a doctor  and  a doctor  who should  have  been  a writer.  In  The  Cruelest Month  Paul,   anonymously   undergoing  examination   in   a   Montreal  hospital, adopts the  name   Bruce  Halliday, from   Bruce  Mansfield   and   Morse  Halliday. Bruce  has  been  and  will  again  be  the  doctor-in-training;  Morse  is  the  writer. Paul,  who feels that  the chosen  name  suits him, is another Buckler  character who would  like  to  be  both.  But  in  some  sense  he  is both,  and  this  accounts for  his enigmatical anonymity. The  element  in him  that  would  like to be savage  author lives  vicariously  in  Morse  (who  also is Kate's lover  as  Paul  would  be), as  the element  that  would  be first Adam  in this garden of man  is displaced in Bruce.
The  range  of style is greater  in  this novel. These  are  outside  people  coming  to the  Valley  and  being  altered   by it; those  of  the  first  novel  were  Valley  people going  from  or  staying  in  it.  And  these  people  are  talkers,  so  that   a  conscious cleverness,  like the conscious allusiveness, must  be part  of the style. If a language of abstraction was part of The  Mountain  and the Valley, it is more so here where abstraction is a way of life:  "And for  the  moment they  felt  that  curious  disem­ bodiment, almost  to  the  point  of seeing  their  own  faces  as  physically  pinched, which   people  whose  chief  alacrities   reside  in  thought's analysis  of   feeling  feel between  peaks  of engagement." Beside this  language of  analysis  belongs  that  of the  characters assessing themselves  and  one  another, as in  the  anecdote of  Paul  and  the  bees. A third  language is Paul's  own  calculated  irreverence-that most essential  creative  gift-in  balance with  the  reverence  for  the  infinite  variety  of the  familiar recurrent patterns of existence.  This  latter  makes  part  of  that  lan­  guage  of reminiscence that  dominates The  Mountain and the Valley;  the chapter that  was published  separately as "The Rebellion of  Young  David" is of that  sort. The novelist's  problem  in introducing his characters is resolved  here  by a shifting  of point  of view. Part  One  begins with  the characters gathered at  Endlaw at  the end  of their  first summer  there.  Part  Two   jumps  five years  to show  them  indi­  vidually   in  the  circumstances that  will  bring   them   back  to  Endlaw, and  then  another few  days  to show  them  arriving. The  chapters of  reminiscence serve  to fill the  five-year  gap  as well as  to  justify  the  characters as  they  are  to  be  now. Thus Bruce's  reminiscent  chapter deals  with  his son  Peter; in  Part Two,  in  the present, Peter  and  Molly,  Bruce's  wife, are  both  dead.
Time and  place  make  up  the essential  grid  of Buckler's  novels. Together with


54

THE WAY IT  WAS



the  bridging of  time  goes  the  focussing  of time  by coincidental place,  a  device that   recalls  Virginia   Woolf's  Mrs.  Dalloway. Bruce  has  returned  to  the  family farm,   now  Endlaw, and  is  chopping wood  there  for  Paul-symbolically  he  is defining  boundaries. As each  of the visitors approaches he hears  or does not hear Bruce's  axe,  which  thus  serves to pinpoint place  and  time.  It is also a device  for irony,  since the sound  of the  axe  has  a different  meaning for  each:  Kate thinks it  a  happy   sound,  but  Bruce  is slashing at trees  as David  slashed  at  parsnips. Morse  hears  it and  recalls  boyhood  in  Minnesota. But, as in  The  Mountain and the Valley,  it  is not  recall  but  reliving.  Yet  Morse's  response  includes  the  com­ mentary that  makes  explicit  the  imagery  of the fall from  that  state  of  innocence which  axe and  deer  are to connote. (The deer appears  later  in the  novel for both couples  to see, with  much  the significance  of Frost's  "Two Look  at  Two".) The  scene  that  Morse  recalls  resembles  the  mountain and  orchard of  The  Mountain and  the Valley  and  the  imagery is  just in  its  vein of  multiple  simile:   "the axe more  beautiful like swimming naked  than  the  gun  is beautiful  like  Christmas". Both  the  form  of that  equation -like himself,  Buckler's characters have  an  eye for  mathematical relations-and the  choice of  swimming  naked  and  Christmas as criteria  of the  ecstatic  moment are  typical  of  Buckler's language of innocence. But  the  tree falls  and  l\1orse returns to the  cynical  author of  the  present: "and he's  lost  his  clean  beautiful  <L'\:e  somewhere ... and  his  very  breakfast  food  is shredded wit."
Here  again   the  contrast is  between  a  world  of childhood  which   recurs  now only  fitfully  to  remind   you  of  the  way  it  was,  and  a  present  world  which  is  a state  of experience, of knowing. The  criticism  so often  made  of the  younger  gen­ eration-that it  knows  too  much  -is made  by  Buckler  in  "School and  Me". It is an acknowledgement of the growing  sophistication of an  affluent society. But Grove  made  the same  observation a generation earlier,  and  perhaps every genera­ tion makes it. The point  is, for Canadian literature the here  and  now is the  place of knowledge, and  knowledge is the fruit  of the  archetypal fall. The  person  who knows can  never  be content with  this environment, and  can  never escape  it. One  hears,  in  The  Cruelest  Month, echoes  of The  Mountain  and  the  Valley  in  the images  of the great  good time  and  the great  good place that were one's  childhood in rural Canada -and one  realizes that  one is hearing them  from  generations of Canadian writers.  In The  Mountain and the Valley too  there  was a fall  to  mark  the loss of that  time and  place,  after  which  place becomes bondage and  exile and time  the  one inexorable fact.  Endlaw in The  Cruelest Month is the  place  where,  for a season, the garden seems to be regained, but  where in fact  man  must  labour

55

THE WAY IT  WAS



and   must  come  again to  knowledge. Those who  return to  the  stream of time  are returning to  a slightly  lower  world, a  world longer and  farther  exiled, but  they return there renewed by their  contact with  the  terrain and  themselves. And  Paul, who  makes again David's choice  for  the  Valley, choosing the  female of  the  flesh and   the  familiar way  it  was,  has  only  a  wince for  the  female of  knowledgeable word   and  the  way  it might have  been:

She  stressed it  again.  "Just as soon as you've  drank  your  coffee ... " Paul  winced.
And  then  he grinned.
For  a  moment the  April  morning seemed  to  preen   itself  in  that   faultlessness which  so mocks  the one  alone.  And  in  that  moment they  felt  the  one  inimitable safety.  That great,  sweet, wonderful safety  from  the  cry of things  not  understood, of things  said  and  things  not said,  of things  done  and  things  not  done,  of what  is near  and  what  far-off,  and  the  sound  of time  and  the  sound  of time  gone  by ...








POETRY AUSTRALIA
ANNOUNCES
two special Canadian zssues

Number 14, February 1967,  presenting to  Canadian readers   new  per­ spectives  in Australian poetry.  The issue features the work  of  seventeen Australian  poets  and  includes   critical articles   on  the  Australian and  Canadian poetry  of 1966.

Number 16, June  1967, the  Overseas  issue for  the  year,  is our  tribute to the Canada Centennial. Collected by A. J. M. Smith, this issue con­
tains  new work  by Atwood,  Avison, Bowering,  Cogswell,  Glassco, Gus­ tafson,   Jones,   Layton,   Livesay,  MacEwen,  Newlove,   Nowlan,  Page, Purdy  and  Souster,  and  has  been  designed  to introduce  contemporary Canadian poetry  to the readers  of POETRY  Australia.

POETRY  Australia  is  a   journal  of   new  verse  issued every  two  months from   South   Head   Press,  350  Lyons Road,  Five Dock,  Sydney,  N.S.W.,  Australia.
SUBSCRIPTION  IN  CANADA, $6.00  PER ANNUM




review articles




MAZO  EXPLORED
 


Dorothy Livesay



RONALD HAMBLETON,  Mazo de  Ia Roche   of ]alna.  General  Publishing.  $5.95.


RoNALD HAMBLETON is a man hoist  on  his own  petard. After  spending some  two  years  searching for  the  exact data  on  the  Novelist  Mazo  de  la  Roche he  has  ignored   exactitude  on  the  peri­ phery.  There is carelessness  in his supple­ mentary material and  in his bibliography. The   excuse  might   be  given  that   this  is not  a  Ph.D.  thesis,  nor  even  a  reporter's research; it  is  the  result  of  a  romantic affair!  Who  was  Mazo  de la Roche?  Mr.  Hambleton  spent  a  year  trying  to  inter­  view  her  for  the  C.B.C.; and   when  he did   so   he   was   not   satisfied.   The   real woman   and   her   history,   he  felt,   were carefully   concealed  behind    the   facade.  For  she   was  a  successful   (perhaps  the only  successful  world-known Canadian) novelist,  author  of  23  novels  published between   the  years  1923  and   1960.  Fur­ ther,  she  was  a  Canadian  writer  whose play,  W hiteoaks, held  the  London  stage for  three   years,  had   a  successful  North  American run,  and  was made  into a film. Ronald   Hambleton   is   to   be    com­ mended   for  challenging the  facade  and especially  for  exposing   the  gaps  in  the author's own  autobiography,  Ringing the Changes.  In   that   book   there  is  not   a single  date! The  reason  why  Mazo  de la Roche   was  not  anxious  to  make  known
 the exact  details  of her  age  probably  lay in her pride: she did  not  publish  her first book of fictional  prose, Explorers  of the Dawn,  until  1922, when  she was 43 years old.  Possession, her  first  novel,  appeared in   1923.  What   had   happened  in  those early years of this century in which  the unknown   recluse  was  practising  the  art of fiction?  Mr.  Hambleton does not delve into   this   period   at   any   length   and   it would seem, reading between  the lines of her autobiography, that  Mazo  was a long time  recuperating from  a  nervous  break­ down  which  occurred at  the  turn  of  the century.  Only  when  she and  her  parents,  with  the  devoted  "adopted" sister  Caro­ line   Clement,  moved    to   a   farm   near Bronte,   around   191 r,  did   health    and vigour  return. Two  of her  most  interest­ ing  realist  novels came from  that  experi­  ence:   Possession and  Delight. Their style is  that   of   an   accomplished,  practised  writer.  In  delineation of  character, evo­ cation  of  setting,  and  in  theme  Mazo  de la  Roche  knew  perfectly   what   she  was at.  Her  prose  was  strong,   clear,  fluent,  pulled  no  punches.
Although Ronald Hambleton does not dwell  on  the  stylistic  or  literary  signifi­ cance  of  Mazo   de  la  Roche's  work  he does  insist   that   Canadian   critics   have

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



grossly neglected  her achievement; an achievement  that   began  with  Possession and continued through six more "key" books:  Delight, Jalna, Whiteoaks of Jalna,  The Two Saplings,  The   Growth of a Man  and  Centennial at Jalna. Thus, though in Canada and throughout the world  Mazo  is known  largely  as the  cre­ ator  of  the  Whiteoaks, only three  of  the seven  books  which  Hambleton  considers her  finest  are  concerned   with  Jalna. If Mr.  Hambleton has done nothing  else he has   directed   critical   attention  to   the variety    and    strength   of   Mazo   de   la Roche's output.
Two  other  aspects of the writer's  work have been highlighted by this critical biography. First,   the  critic   proves  in  a well-documented fashion that  Mazo's writing was based  not on an imaginary "country  of  the  mind" as  myth  would have  it,  but  on  the  social history  of  On­ tario.  This  is "Whiteoak" country:  that  region  centred   in  Newmarket, where she was  baptized   Mazo  Roche  in I 879  and whose  radius  extends  from  Lake  Simcoe in  the  north   to  the  southwestern shores of  Lake   Ontario,  at   Bronte.   Canadian critics  who  have attempted to prove  that  the   Whiteoak   history   and   countryside was   "not   Canada  at   all"   will  have   a harder  row  to pull  now that  the facts are set  clearly   in   perspective.   Mazo   made unceasing  use  of  her  own  family  back­ ground   of   Ontario  pioneers   and   Mr. Hambleton  therefore stresses:

The life and  lifework  must  therefore be considered  side   by  side,   for   they   are   in­ separable  in   the   person    to   a  degree   not found  even   in   the   most   autobiographical writer. In  my  opinion,  Mazo   de  Ia  Roche was   being   a   novelist   even   when   she   was being    autobiographical    and    to   an    even greater  extent, was  being   frankly  autobio­ graphical  when   she  seemed   to  be  writing the  purest fiction.
 Because  he sets out  to prove  this thesis it  could   be  said  that   Mr.   Hambleton's book suffers from lack of that clarity one hopes  for   in  a  straightforward   chrono­ logical    biography.   Research    data    ob­ trudes    too   much,   particularly   in   the rather   tedious   history   of   the   $r o,ooo Atlantic  Monthly Award.  Not  always are the  reader's  interests   kept  in  view  and even  the  validity  of the  research  may  be questioned (as when  the  biographer gives me  a  grandfather named  James  Harris: pure   guesswork,   and   quite   wrong!).  A point   not  followed   up  at  all  is the  fact that  H. R. MacMillan, the B.C. lumber magnate, was  also  born  in  Newmarket. He was Mazo's  cousin and  was the proto­ type for  the  hero  of her  novel Growth of
a Man.
A  third   point   which   Mr.   Hambleton sets  out   to   prove   is  that   Mazo   de   la Roche was  "significant as  the  chief mourner of  the  dying  English   influence in  Canada." He  explores  the  theme   by means of research into vital statistics, genealogy,   visits  to  graveyards and  per­ sonal   interviews  with   friends   and   rela­  tives   (who   were   not  too  happy  that   a C.B.C.  reporter unconnected with Mazo's life  should  be permitted to  persist  in  his tabulations) .   Perhaps    in   his  desire   to leave  no stone  unturned  Mr.  Hambleton has  been  too  assiduous:  statistics  become tedious,   repetition   boring.   But   the   ac­ count  of Mazo's pioneer  forebears  is well worth  reading  and  so also is the  moving  account  of   Mazo's   life  with   her  sister­ cousin,  Caroline  Clement. He  does  jus­ tice  to  the  role  played  by Miss  Clement not   as   actual  co-creator of  the   novels, but   as   an   indefatigable  supporter  and critic.  What emerges  is a  portrait of two devoted women,  foils for  each  other, dynamic in their  energy and  imagination,

REVIEW ARTICLES



loyal in their  friendships. Some delightful photographs add  force and  verve to the narrative.
The  true  work  of criticism  of Mazo  de la Roche  as Canada's most prolific and certainly most fascinating novelist  has yet
 to  be  done.   Ronald  Hambleton  in   his labour   of  love  has  laid  out  the  way  for those  younger  critics  who  will, it is to  be hoped, approach the problem  afresh. An imaginative, perceptive appraisal is now essential.



FIRST AND LAST THINGS

Hugo McPherson


GABRIELLE  ROY,  The  Road   Past  Altamont.  McClelland &  Stewart. Cloth,  $s.oo;
paper,  $2.50.


AT THE CLOSE of A la  recher­ che du temps  perdu  Marcel  Proust thinks  of age as a pair  of stilts which  grow  until their  wearer,   tottering  precariously, sud­ denly  falls;  his own  stilts are  already  tall, but  he  must  cling  to  them   until  he  can recover  in  artistic  form   the  meaning of his  past.  In The  Road   Past  Altamount Gabrielle Roy's young  heroine  wears stilts despite  a  delicate "heart" in  an  effort  to see  farther  across  the  flat  prairie of  her world.  Miss Roy's  use of the  stilts  image may  have  nothing to do with  Proust,  but as  in  his  multi-volume novel,  the  linked tales  of  her  new  book  are  an  evocation of  the  past,  an  attempt to  release  from four  outwardly unremarkable  experiences the  mystery  of first  and  last  things.
Readers  who are intent on the latest developments of pop  style, mosaic  narra­ tive,  and   endocrine incident,  may  mis­ take  the  pellucid  simplicity of  these  new recollections of Christine, "Petite Misere"  (the   narrator  of  Street   of   Riches), for mere  ingenuousness and  dismiss them  al­ together. For  there is  none  of  the  astrin­ gent   social   documentation  of  The Tin Flute   in   this  book,   and    none   of   the
 quaintness of anecdote and  character that give Street of Riches its special warmth. Instead, the  adult  Christine might  be obeying   an   Eliotian  command  to   "de­ scend  deeper" into  the  meaning  of   her youthful   experience. The  resulting  tales have   an   oblique   and   delicate  stillness that  goes beyond  introspection; they  are,  in a deep sense, meditations.
In  the first tale, "My  Almighty Grand­ mother", Christine is six years  old. On  a summer   visit  to  her  formidable  Memere she  is suddenly  overwhelmed with  ennui
-not  "boredom" as  in  the  translation
-but an  inexplicable, lonely,  and  mel- ancholy  dullness.  When   the  usual  bribes of  food  and  diversion   fail,  Memere  en­ chants  her   by  making   and   dressing   a doll.  Christine breaks  into   joyful  tears: "You're  just  like  God.  You   can   make  things  out  of  nothing  as  he  does."  But Memere, already  in  failing  health, denies such  power.  Later  on  she  comes  to  live with    Christine's   Maman,  and    as   her faculties and  senses gradually desert  her she  comes  to   know  a  terrible  isolation  and   ennui   of   her   own.   Now   nothing satisfies,  until  one  day,  with  childish  m-

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



tmtwn, Christine brings out  the family album, names  for  M'emere  the  names  of "all  those who belonged  to her,"  and reminds  her simply:  "You  were beautiful in those days." For  the  remembering nar­ rator  these  recovered  moments  of  "play" become  resonant  with  meaning;  uncon­  sciously, that  long-ago  Petite  Misere  had begun  to understand the  delight  of crea­ tion  and  the ineluctable taxes of time.
The stories that  follow  produce  similar moments  of  illumination  for   both   nar­ rator   and   reader.  Christine's  next  com­ panion  is Monsieur St. Hilaire, an eighty­ four-year-old  gentleman  who   takes  her away from  the sweltering heat of the city for  a day  at  Lake  Winnipeg.  She  regards  this   new  friend   as  an   oracle  who  can answer  her  most  difficult  questions.  To­  gether   they  press  on  past  the  noise  and turmoil of  the Winnipeg Beach  fun-fair and   spend   their   day  beside  the  ageless lake,   watching  her   many   moods,   and pondering over the  past, the beckoning future, exploration, and  death. M.  St. Hilaire remarks  that "it's  always rather solemn beside the water when evening comes,"  and  Christine senses that  the end of  his  life  may   be  near   at   hand.  But death, she  learns,   is  natural -a  neces­ sary discovery;  for  young travellers, how­ ever, the "greatest discovery"  is love, "for the  country  of   love  was  the  most  vast and  profound there  was." At home again,  Christine  cannot express  her  new  aware­  ness her  day  has  brought; she  can  only cry   raptly,   "I've  seen   it,   Maman! ... Beautiful Lake  Winnipeg!"
The  remaining  tales,   "The   Move," and  "The Road  Past Altamont," confirm and  elaborate what  we now  recognize  as Miss Roy's presiding metaphor: life is a simultaneously exhilarating and  painful process  of  voyaging,   for   the   present   is

6o
 never  enough. What Maman calls "tragic desires for  perfection" impel  us-often recklessly-into the  future, and  deepen­ ing  insight  or  regrets  send  us back  to  re­ discover  a  past  that  we have  understood very  imperfectly. Maman   thinks   of  ex­ ploration   as  the   "family   disease"   and wishes an end  to departures; but  the  dis­ ease leads  to its own  remedy-the "great discovery" of  love and  belonging.
Stated directly, this metaphor sounds platitudinous, but  Miss Roy gives it a resonance that  expands in both  time  and space  to include the  vision of La  Veren­ drye  and  the  over-idealistic dream of the Highlanders  who   settled   in   Altamont; giddy  young  people's motor car  rides and Christine's  arduous   progress   on   stilts;  Maman's memories of  the covered wagon trek  and  her  longing to  rediscover  Que­ bec hills  in  the  Altamont landscape; the pathetic  move   of  the  Smiths   from   one hideous   urban   fringe    to   another  still more  ugly;  and   Christine's voyages  into the  self  and   out   to  the   great   world  of Europe.  In  form   the  book  is  a  musical suite which serves as a calm resolution  to many  of  the  themes  that   informed  Miss Roy's  earlier novels and  stories.
It may   be  that   one  or  two  of  these tales are too fragile to bear the weight of meaning  with   which   Miss  Roy   invests them,    but   they   reveal   a   sensibility   of great  depth and  a mature artistic  control. The  difficult  narrative method, blending the  child's innocent  perception with  the narrator's mature insight, is superbly handled, and  the  moments of intense emotion are  never  coy or sentimental. In my  judgment, indeed, the  first  two  tales must  be recognized  as small masterpieces. Christine's  temps  perdu    has   been   re­ covered  in enduring works of art.
HUGO MCPHERSON



CANADIAN  PAINTERS
 


George Woodcock



J.  RUSSELL  HARPER, Painting  in Canada:  A History. University  of Toronto Press.
$20.00.
KATHLEEN DALY   PEPPER, Morrice.  Clarke  Irwin.  $4.50.


IN  HIS "coNCLUSION" to  the Literary   History   of   Canada   Northrop Frye  suggests  that, now  a definite  record of Canadian writers  and  writing has been completed, the  time  has  perhaps come  to think  of  preparing an  evaluative  "Liter­ ary Criticism  of Canada". In making  this suggestion   he   was  obviously   moved   by the   feeling   of  frieze-like  flatness   inevi­ tably  created by  the  comprehensive nar­  rative  account of  the progress  of any art.  In  such  accounts  one  misses  the  chiaro­ scuro of good  comparative criticism; the high  lights  never  shine  brightly   enough  on  the  heroes  because  the  dim  chorus  of those  who  are  usually  forgotten must  be given  its due  illumination.
Yet   the   Literary   History   of  Canada was, despite  its faults,  a notable and necessary  achievement, and  it is with  the same  qualified   admiration  that   one  ap­ proaches   the   book  which   will   certainly balance it  as the  definitive  survey  of the
painting of our  land.  J. Russell  Harper's
Painting  in Canada, which  has been sup­ ported  from  the  stage  of research  to  that  of  production by the  Canada  Council, is in   one   respect   greatly   superior  to   the Literary  History. It is written by a single hand, and  its  author  sustains   a  level  of scholarship and  of  narrative clarity  which the   earlier  work   lacked   owing   to   the great    variety    of   competence  and   elo­ quence on the  part  of its many  authors.
At  the  same   time  Mr.   Harper's con-
 scientiousness   in   g1vmg  some   kind   of particular attention  to  every   painter   of even minor standing in the earlier, sparser periods  has resulted  in a distortion which makes the distant loom  too large  and  the near   too  small.   Good   painters  were  as rare  in  Canada as good  writers  until  the I8go's,  when  the  harbingers of a mature tradition  appeared  in  the   cosmopolitan James   Wilson  Morrice and   the  Quebec recluse Ozias Leduc, both  of whom  were remarkable artists  by any  standards, and both  of  whom,  by  their   pursuit   of   aes­ thetic   rather  than    quasi-literary   goals, followed  the  kind  of  exemplary  careers which  helped  to  free  artists  from  obedi­  ence  to  the  demands  of  an  art  market  dominated by the  didactic  values  of  the Victorian age. Yet more  than  half  of Mr.  Harper's  narrative  has  gone  by,  largely in  the  consideration  of   eighteenth   and nineteenth  century   artistic   nonentities, before  he reaches  either   Morrice or  Le­ duc.  Even  his consideration of the  twen­  tieth  century  is marred by  the  fact  that  too much space  is given  to  the  anecdotal history  of  the  Group of Seven-though here  credit  must  indeed   be given  to  Mr.  Harper  for  stressing  the  negative as well as the  beneficial  influence of the  Group,  whose members,  like the  leaders  of politi­ cal  revolutions,   lived  on  to  create   their own reaction. The result of this approach is  that  the  vital   and   excitingly   experi­ mental  post-war  period  from  I 945 to the

REVIEW ARTICLES



present   is  given  a  mere  32  pages  in  a volume  of 414  pages, and  many interest­ ing   contemporary  painters,   particularly in  Western   Canada, are  either   ignored  completely  or   merely  listed.   Why,   one wonders, are  independent-minded swim­ mers against the currents like Alistair Bell and  Joe  Plaskett  not  even  mentioned in the  discussion  of recent  trends  in  figura­ tive  work?   Why  are  Molly  Bobak  and John    Korner  no   more   than   casually­ dropped  names?   Why  does  Ed  Hughes,  whose  career   is far  from  ended,  appear merely  as a war  artist  twenty  years ago?
It would  be unfair  to add  to this criti­ cism of the content of A History of Paint­ ing the complaint that  Mr. Harper mainly
avoids  evaluation. True,   he  himself  de­ plores   the   lack  of  real  art  criticism   in Canada:

Newspapers and  magazines today   carry  in­ numerable reviews   of exhibitions, but  as in the  past  only  a  small  percentage  reach  the  level  of  critical writing. There is  no author­ itative  Canadian  observer   of   the   contem­ porary  scene   who   commands  a truly   wide  national  following  among   artists  and   lay­  men.   There  has  been   as  yet  no  Canadian theoretical writing on  art.

But  he does little  to fill in  the void,  and, indeed, this  can  hardly  be  asked  of  the historian whose  prime  task is to cover so wide  a historical  panorama as that  which extends over  the  vast  range  of time  and changing artistic values  from  early  New France  to   the   Canada  of   the   rg6o's. What  he  does   present,   particularly  for the generations before our own, is a mag­ nificent  chart on which  painters are care­  fully placed  and  over which the interplay between   artistic  movements  and   social­ national   circumstances  is  equally   care­  fully  traced. "Jacques de  Tonnancour," Mr. Harper tells  us, "has  remarked that what   Quebec  Province   needed   was   a
 vigorous  blow  from  the  outside  to  break the lethargy which  had  existed for years." Almost the whole history of Canadian painting, as here  presented, seems  like a series of "blows  from  outside," some fair, some foul. Mr. Harper pays no direct attention, for  example, to the  indigenous tradition of painting among the  Pacific Coast  Indians. From  the  beginning he is talking  of  types  of  painting  that  origi­ nated  in Europe, and  the nineteenth cen­ tury  has  almost  reached  noontide in  his narrative before  Canadian  circumstances influence  the imported arts  sufficiently  to show   characteristically Canadian  muta­ tions, appearing first in  Quebec with paintings  like  Joseph   Legan  's
cently   proto-Surrealist  ruinscape  of  the
fire  in  the   Faubourg St.  Roch   (I 863), and  not  long  after  in  the  west with  Paul Kane  plumbing  native   subject  matter more  deeply  and  more  dramatically than Krieghoff, with Adolphe Vogt and Daniel Fowler  beginning to  trap  the  real  Cana­ dian   light   on  canvas   and   paper  in  the I 87o's, and  in the  I 8go's with  the mature work   of  Homer  Watson   (whose   talent  Oscar   Wilde   had   perspicaciously  recog­ nized  a  decade  before), which,  in  tense, simplified   oil  sketches  like  "The Gravel  Pit", for  the  first  time  sees  "the Cana­ dian  landscape as Canada."
Yet even these painters derived  from European traditions, and Canadian paint­ ing was constantly renewed  by the arrival of  artists   taught in  Britain   and  France and occasionally influenced by the Orient. Sometimes these  immigrations  had curi­ ous artistic results, such  as William  G. R. Hind's   pre-Raphaelite   watercolours   of Cariboo miners  looking like the  heroes of William Morris  sagas, and  the  intriguing early  Japonoiseries of  Edward  M.  Rich­  ardson's sketches of Victoria in the  I86o's.

REVIEW ARTICLES



The worst  painters  remained  the  slaves of  London  and   Paris  academicism; the best  transmuted their  influences, though the  imported strains  are  rarely  far  below the  surface   (for  example, the  strong  Art Nouveau  and   Impressionist elements in the   work  of  the   Group  of  Seven).  As time  went  on  the  "blows  from  outside", though they  continued, were  manifested in  a  different way.  From   being  colonial, the   end   of   the   road   for   imperial art movements, Canada  became  cosmopoli­ tan,  its painters-or  the more  restless of them-forming part  of  the international artistic community  which has  grown  up world-wide since  1945;  movements, the­ ories, even  minor  gimmicks,  have  only to gain  notoriety in  New  York  for  them  to be  imitated in  Toronto and   Vancouver, to  the   amusement  of  the   rank-and-file painters and   to  the  rare   benefit   of  the
 genius   who -like Borduas   or  Riopelle
-can on occasion  make  gold  out  of any dross.
Painting in Canada  is the  kind  of book which  enables  readers   to  trace  heritages and  developments of this  kind  with  rela­ tive  ease,  and   which   also  shows   them how   elusive-though   it   may   be   real enough-is the  breath  that  can  be called Canadian in  Canadian art.   The  Group of  Seven  had   it  and   almost  lost  it  by becoming  self -consciously   nationalist; others,   like  Pellan   and   Shadbolt,  have kept  it, paradoxically, only  by immersion in  the  alien  element  of  periodic exile.
In  a  history  of art,  illustrations are  as important as  text,  and  those  in  Painting in   Canada-almost  four    hundred   of them-are carefully  chosen, so that  they do provide  a comprehensive visual  narra­ tive paralleling that  in writing. Here,  the



WINNER  OF  THE  GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S  AWARD

THE
CRYSTAL
S P I R I T A Study of George Orwell

BY GEORGE WOODCOCK

A   well-known writer  and   lecturer  examines the   man,  the   novelist, the   patriot, the   stylist,   in  this  absorbing and   expansive study  of  the famous  author   of   Nineteen    Eighty-Four. George   Woodcock  knew Orwell  in  England; he  has  made   no  effort   to  produce a  biography, "partly  because Orwell  specifically wished   that   no  such   book  should be  written, and partly because   I may  well  stand   too  near the  subject to  attain the   objectivity such   a  work  would   demand." What  Wood­ cock   has   created  is  an   endlessly   fascinating study  of  a  brilliant  and  complex personality.    $10.00

CLARKE IRWIN   TORONTO     VANCOUVER

REVIEW ARTICLES



form  of his book has enabled  Mr. Harper to bring  out of the  recesses of history and give us at least a flavour of the work of interesting and   individual  artists   whom we    might     otherwise   forget,    such    as Thomas  Davies,   the   charmingly   Rous­ seauish  topographer and  water  colourist who  came  to  Canada in  the  late  eight­  eenth  century, and  Father  Arthur  Guin­ don  who,  in  the  early  twentieth century,  before  the  Surrealist movement  had  been heard   of,  developed  his  own  Surrealist style of  painting,  influenced  by Hierony­ mus  Bosch.  Such  an  excellent  collection  of  visual  material makes  it  all  the  more regrettable that  the colour plates badly distort  both   the  tints  and   tones  of  the original works.
As a history, Painting in Canada  is so comprehensive and scholarly that it is unlikely  to be superseded  for many  years, but it leaves one awaiting its critical companion, and  at  present,  in the dearth of good  Canadian art  criticism,  one is at a loss to think  who might  write  it.
 Certainly the  writer   who  tackles  such a task will need a much sharper, more analytical view than  that  displayed  in Kathleen Daly  Pepper's little  book of biography-cum-exposition, James Wilson Morrice. Mrs.  Pepper is not  lacking  in anecdotes of  Morrice, whose  life lent  it­ self  to  such   treatment, and  she  devotes many   pages  to  recreating the  scenes  of his upbringing and  of his painting career. But   though,  in   occasional  flashes,   she does  bring   alive  the  man   and   even  his setting,  it is clear  that  the romantic vision of  the  artist's  vocation is  more  easy  for her  to  develop  than   any  serious  discus­ sion of  Morrice's actual works. Yet  Mor­  rice's  whole  life  as  a  painter was  domi­ nated  by  the  view  that   aesthetic  values were  the  only  important ones  in  an  art­ ist's   life.   In   this   respect    Donald   Bu­ chanan's study,  written twenty years  ago, is much  superior to Mrs. Pepper's volume,  and   remains  the   best   account  of   this "artist with  the  delicate  vision",  as  Ma­  tisse once  called  James  Wilson  Morrice.





THE GOLDEYE SWIM
 


Marya Fiamengo



MIRIAM  WADDINGTON,  The  Glass Trumpet. Oxford University Press.  $4.50.


THE OPENING POEM of Miriam Waddington's new collection, The Glass Trumpet, gives clear  expression  to the polarities of her  poetic  work.  "Things of the  World", the  title  of  both  the  poem and  the  opening section,  is in itself  signi­ ficant,  for  Mrs.  Waddington  writes both of  the   world   and   the  private  self.  She juxtaposes,  in  a  series  of  remarkably  as-
 sured,   mature  and   finely  crafted  lyrics, the introspective imaginative self against the  tangible external realities  of urban living: ("A  Song  of North York Between Sheppard and   Finch") ; the  city  as  fact ("Returning to  Toronto") ; and  the  city as  dream,  ("The  Far   City",   "Toronto the  Golden Vaulted City").
"Things of  the  World" is an  accurate

REVIEW ARTICLES



and   delicate   mtcrocosm   of  Mrs.   Wad­ dington's major   themes  and  pre-occupa­ tions.  The  poetic  persona, a "north  Win­

her  summers   at  a  lake  and  watches  the goldeye swim but "Later in the neon season/of  an  eastern   city",  she  eats  "its white  flesh" remembering how once  long


to  a  blazing innocence
easy  to learn but  the  other things that  harmed her

she  could  never  explain

The  entire  volume  could  be said  to  ring a  series of variations on  these  lines. The indestructability of nature synonymous with  innocence, the  sustaining power  of the  creative   imagination  represented by the  goldeye  whose  flesh  is later  eaten  in the  synthetic   non-poetic  neon  reality  of an  eastern   city,  the  inevitable encounter with  pain  and  the  recognition of  suffer­ ing  and   evil  as  part   of  the  schema   of things,  are  all  there.
The   one  crucial   aspect   of  experience

verse, sexual  love or  passion,  is not  pres­ ent   in  these  lines.  Since   this  particular poem  is an  evocation of  the  poet's  early girlhood    and   innocence   the   theme   of

What gives The Glass Trumpet its unique   and  distinctive  quality,  however, is the very power  and  conviction of the poems   dealing  with   the   passionate  ex­ perience  of  love.  Like  the  power  of  the

out  of sexual  love  is seen  by Mrs.  Wad­ dington as  a  liberating and   redemptive force  in human  affairs.
Those   rare   moments,  the   experience of  human intimacy, are  like  a  "lost  and broken  beauty", "a  speechless  love",  and
 




like an old,nervous and eager cow
my country
is being led up to the hub of history .••

Certainly it will he the biggest
hang-up affair
within the memory of centenarians,
and seismologists have heen alerted
everywhere
to record the shocks and tremors ..•

For everyone coming to watch
this extraordinary event there can he
standing room only for himself
and a single hag of overcharged peanuts .••

These are a few lines from Irving Layton's immortal Confederation Ode,
one of many fiery poems
in
PERIODS OF THE MOON Layton's newest collection of poetry.
At Your Booksellers
$5.00  cloth    $2.50  paper

McClelland & Stewart
The  Canadian Publishers







6s

REVIEW ARTICLES



the   return  to   the   isolation  of   the   self after consummation and  communion  re­ mains  in   the   mind  like   "Pictures   that tremble and  change/like what is left over
/after a visit  to a breathtaking exhibition
/in the  museum of  a foreign country".
Mrs. Waddington writes her love poems  with   a  supreme  honesty, an  illu­ minating  candour   whose very   unself­ consciousness makes her  among  the  most  direct  and   most   purely  lyrical  poets   of love  writing in  this  country. In  this  genre she   bears   comparison  with  few;  Irving Layton perhaps, at  his  best,  or  Leonard Cohen. The latter is  too  often  deflected into eroticism which is another species  of experience again.   What  distinguishes Mrs.   Waddington's  love  poetry and   sets it apart, makes it  peculiarly her  own,  is a  kind  of  amplitude of  response, a  range as  well  as depth and intensity of  feeling. It is a  highly  individual combination of a proud  and   precise awareness of  the  im­ plication of loss which sustains personal dignity   and    yet    supports  a   full    and generous commitment to  the  other, the beloved.
Miriam Waddington's poems have  been criticized in  the  past  for  either a lack  of intellectual structure or  for  a reliance on metaphysical ingenuities which impose  a forced  and    artificial  structure  on   her work. At  this  point it may  be valuable to say something about the purely lyrical sen­ sibility. The  contemporary  poetic  idiom is not  an  overwhelmingly lyrical  one and  the  poet  with  a  predominantly  lyric  bent  finds  himself  compelled by the prevailing geist  to  weight  and   encumber  his  work with poems of a more cerebral cast.  Mrs.  Waddington has  resisted  that  temptation admirably.  The  present   volume  is   r.e­ markably free  of  intellectual affectations of any  kind. "The Journeying" and  "Lev-

66
 elling" show  some  small  signs  of strain, a sense  of  tour de  force not  present in  the formal ease  of  "Winter One".
Concerned  as  she  is  with   the  projec­ tion   of  an   essentially lyrical  response to experience, Mrs.  Waddington's art   relies mainly on  those  heightened moments of insight  and   awareness  which  must  be clearly  delineated and  exactly articulated in  the  poem. This  necessitates above all a  controlled intensity. The poet  as maker must  walk   a  taut rope   of  imagery and rhythm to  form the  hard  crystal surface of   the   poem.  Occasionally,  Mrs.   Wad­ dington's language and  form drop  into a low   keyed   discursiveness  that   is   either description or  commentary and  that lacks the  essential tension of  poetry.  "Summer Letters" is such  a poem, "right  here on/ Mutual Street but/he's lucky  these/ruins are  all/num-/bered-".  There is a  kind  of ruminative verbal leisure here, a slack­ ness  of  language  that the   arbitrary line  breaks do  not  redeem.
At her  almost constant best, Miriam Waddington, although she may  stray  into dexterities of  language reminiscent of  E. E.  Cummings as  in  the  "you are my  me and my  how  my  pray and   also  prithee" of  the  "Mile Runner", is  a  poet   whose direct, vivid  observation finds  expression in  effortless felicity of metaphor and  sim­ ile   as  in   the   "bending / beside   the   sea thin / as  a  cardboard cutout"   of   "The Oracle"  or   the    "kindergarten   children weightless as  scattered leaves"  of  "Com­ mittee Work".
Perhaps the   most   arresting  poems   in The Glass  Trumpet  are   those   in  which the   poet    explores personal  identity  in richly allusive terms. The ability to  fuse the  myth of the  individual self with  the impersonal archetypal self is seen  in the haunting, evocative "Sea Bells"













































u'bsorrs1Bau
INCORPORATED 2•• MAY 1670

presents this work as one of a new series written by Ca adian

REVIEW ARTICLES



Oh   daughter toll  the  sea-green bell and  shake  the  coral  from  your  hair, the  sea  was once  your  bed  of birth, your  given  name ydur  knell.

The "Sea  Bells" and  a number  of poems also  dealing with  the  poet's  specific  cul­ tural links with her Jewish-Slavic past and  the   relationship  of   Jewish-Slavic  father and  Canadian  daughter are  compellingly  moving   as  is   the   effective  final   poem, "The Snows  of  William  Blake".
 If my  spirit should yearn
for  one  whose  absence I forgave, raise  a golden bough to  burn above   my  lighted  grave.

The Glass Trumpet emerges  as a  col­ lection   of   poems   which   testifies   to   an ardent  imagination  at   once   intelligent, compassionate,  and   warmly   human. Miriam  Waddington's   mind   and   craft  speak   to   us   of   "our   blind   sick- / ness healed" and  her  poetry does indeed  "hold  us open-eyed  in  pure  transparency".




THE CARDINAL'S BIER

Wayne Burns



WILLIAM  ROBBINS,  The Newman Brothers. Bellhaven House. $6.75·


IN   HIS  INTRODUCTION to The Newman  Brothers:   An   Essay  in   Com­ parative  Biography  Professor Robbins  has stated  clearly  what  his book  is and  is not intended to  be. "The  Newman  scholar," he explains,  "will  find  little  to add  to his specialized  knowledge in these  pages;  the philosopher  and   historian   will  find   no challenging  reconstruction. But  the  stu­ dent  of the period  and  the general  reader  may,   I   hope,  share   my  interest   in  two brothers  whose  search  for  religious  truth drove  them  far  apart, in spite  of a com­ mon   devotion   to   spiritual   values,   and whose  response  to  the claims  of  the seen and  unseen  world  was such  as  to  reveal in   them  perennially different types of humanity."
Robbins' "hope" that  the general  reader may  share  his interest  in  the elder  of the two  brothers is, to  say  the  least,  super-

68
 erogatory. The  story  of John Henry New­ man's search  for  religious  truth-as  he moved  from   Evangelism,  through Trac­ tarianism, to  Roman  Catholicism-has fascinated general   readers    (as   well   as scholars)    for  over  a  century  now.  And books  on  Newman  continue  to  appear, books  of  attack  and  defense,   books  de­ signed,  in  Robbins' own  words,  "to  show
'the  mystery  of Newman', or to deny that there  was any mystery."
In his own summary account of John Henry  Newman, Robbins  manages to  re­ consider   the  more  significant  aspects  of this  mystery:  to show,  for  example, that  "the extremes of  self-absorption and  ag­ gressiveness   are   there   at   all   times"   in Newman; that they are, in large  measure,  the  result  of  his "repression of the natural man." And  Robbins is equally   straight­ forward  in   treating "the  references   to

REVIEW ARTICLES



Newman  as having  almost  a feminine charm. 'His  friends,' says Wilfred  Ward,
'loved   his  very  faults   as  one   may  love
those  of a fascinating woman.' " Robbins then  points  out  how  these  and  other  ref­ erences  (e.g. Newman's "early dedication to  celibacy  and  the  ideal  of  virginity ... his  annoyance  at   the  marriage  of  dis­ ciples")   lend  themselves to  Geoffrey  Fa­ ber's  suggestion  in  The  Oxford Apostles that   there   is  "A   homosexual  strain   in Tractarian friendships." And  Robbins himself notes the connection between a passage in Newman's semi-autobiographi­ cal   novel  of   I848,   Loss  and   Gain    (in which   a  potential  convert  expresses  his repugnance  for   the   physical   aspect   of marriage)  and   Newman's own  response to  the  marriage  of young  Henry Wilber­  force,  when  that  young  man  was actually  "afraid  to  tell  Newman of  his  fall  from grace."
Further than  this, however,  Robbins cannot  or  will  not  venture:  "One  falls back  again,'' he  concludes, "on  the  term
'complexity.' There  is  no  doubting  the
richness of and  depth of Newman's friendships, but  psychological  speculation on  their  nature and  quality can  evoke as violent   disagreement  as  opinions   of  his mind,  his character, his very manner and appearance.'' What Robbins seems to  be saying is that  the biographer should  not follow out  the implications of his psycho­ logical  speculations  (or  for  that  matter any   other   type   of   speculations)   when those speculations evoke  violent  disagree­  ment; that   he  should, instead, fall  back on  the  term  "complexity", or some other  form   of  evasion  about which   there   can be no  violent  disagreement. But  whether or  not  this  is what   Robbins means,  it  is what  he  too often  does.  And  his inclina­  tions to "fall  back"  is all the more  regret-
 table because it prevents  his portrait of Newman from being much more than a composite  reproduction of  previous  por­ traits.
Of  course  it  can  be argued that  I am
being  unfair,  that  I am  asking  too much of a  I 85-page  book when  not  more  than half   those   pages   are   devoted    to  John Henry  Newman. But  to defend  the  book in this way is to raise the question  as to whether or not Robbins should  have  tried to  put   both   Newman   and   his  younger brother in  a  book  that   is  not  really  big enough  to hold  either  one of them.
In   any  event   Robbins'  treatment  of Francis   William   Newman   is  both  inter­ esting   and   illuminating-in    part   be­ cause  Francis  himself  is such  an interest­ ing man  and  brother and  thinker. Of his many  books  the  best  known  in  his  own time  were  The  Soul   (I84g)  and  Phases of Faith   (I 850),  both  of  which   ran  to nine   editions   by   I 874.   Less  successful, but  equally  representative  of  his  varied interests   and   changing  views  are   such books  and  articles  as  An  Appeal   to  the Middle  Classes  (I848), "The Ethics   of War" (I86o), The  Defective Morality of the  New  Testament  (I866),  "Marriage Laws"  (I 867), The Bigot  and  the  S cep­ tic  (I86g) and  "Vegetarianism"  (I875).
At  Oxford   Francis   (who   came  to  be
known   as  Frank)   took   a   double-first; then,  although he  could  not  subscribe  to the   Thirty-nine  Articles,   he   became   a curate, went  to  Ireland, spent  two  years as a missionary  in  Syria  and  Persia,  held professorships  (of Classics)  at the Univer­ sity of  London and  Manchester  Univer­ sity, and  supported all sorts of  liberal  and  rationalistic and  hum ani tar ian   causes. For while he had  begun,  like John, as an Evangelical, he  started  moving   towards moral   theism   at   about   the   same   time

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



John  began  moving  towards Catholicism; and  Frank's soul-searchings (as he groped his way towards  what  John  had  declared an  impossible  position: "a  halfway  house between  Catholicism and  Atheism") are every  bit as interesting as John's. It took him   half  a  century but   in  the  end   he rejected "mystery  in  religion ... the  res­ urrection ... belief  in immortality of  any kind ... [and] from  his early  attacks  on the   Scriptures  as  incredible  historically
... [he] passed  to  an  attack  on  them  as unedifying morally". What, in  his own words,   could   be  done   with   "the  inco­ herent,  hyperbolic, enigmatic,  fragments of   discourses   given   to   us   unauthorita­ tively  as teachings of  Jesus?"  Robbins  is at  his best in  presenting Frank's criticism of  traditional  theology.  Indeed   Robbins' treatment of  Frank's moral  theism  is al­ together quite masterful, especially in the way   it   brings   out   the  intellectual  and religious   implications  of   Frank's  long Quixotic   journey   through  the  maze  of nineteenth-century moral-theological con­ troversy.
The  contrast between   Frank's  career and  John's is of course  striking,  and Robbins   constantly tries  to  persuade the reader   (and  perhaps himself)  that  it is illuminating.  But   here   again   the   book falls short-not  because  Robbins'  efforts are  inept   but  because  the  contrast itself is so basic  and  so great.  Once  the broth­ ers start  on  their  wholly  divergent intel­  lectual-religious paths   they   really   have nothing to say to one another-as John  seemed  to  realize-and Robbins  can  do little   more   than   point   out   that   one  is going  one  way,  one  the  other,  and  that  both  are  representative of main  currents of  nineteenth-century thought.
But  if  the  divergence is intellectual it
is also  emotional, as Robbins  himself  in-
 dicates  time and again-most notably perhaps  in   his   statement  that    "Frank could  only  have  the  last  word  by a  kick at   the  Cardinal's bier."   Although  Rob­ bins  never  enlarges   upon   this  statement it   seems   to   mean    that    Frank   literally  kicked   the   bier.   In   any  event  the  kick was  not  Frank's last  word.  That came  in r8gr,  with   the   publication  of   a   little book   entitled   Contributions  C hiefiy   to the   Early  History   of the   Late  Cardinal  Newman -a  book  in  which,  according to  Robbins, Frank  "set  down  every  act or  utterance that, to  his  mind,  revealed  strains   of  fanaticism or   dishonesty  ... " The reason  he gave for  this attack, again  according  to  Robbins,  "was   the  danger that   many   uncritical   people,   especially young   people,  might  be  seduced   by  the Cardinal's great reputation ... " The  real or   unspoken   reason,   Robbins    explains,  "was  probably  a  sense of relief  at  releas­ ing   the   accumulated   resentments  and irritations   of   a   lifetime,   which    began wnen   'a   most   painful   breach,  through mere  religious  creed,  broke  on  me in my nineteenth year,  and  was  unhealable' ."
Robbins'  comment  on   Frank's   state­ ment -that  the  "word 'mere,'  breaking the  surface of the  reflective mind, sets up historical  ripples,   ironic  and  unending"
-helps to  explain   and   justify  Robbins'
emphases   in    this    "comparative   biog­ raphy," his  choosing   to  trace  the  "his­  torical  ripples" and  to "fall  back"  before  the  ground swells of  hatred  and  frustra­ tion  that  underlie the  ripples.  His choice is a  defensible one  (the intellectual rip­ ples are  interesting and  they make  a good book)    yet   it   is   the  present    reviewer's  opinion that  a still more  interesting book remains   to  be  written-the book   that  will  explain  why  Frank kicked  the  car­  dinal's bier.






ON THE EDGE,
ON THE SURFACE


MARGARET  ATWOOD,   The   Circle   Ga.me.  Con­
tact  Press.  $3.00; paper $2.00.
ROBERT  FINCH,   Silverthorn  Bush  a,nd Other
Poems. Macmillan. $4.00.

A  PHOTOGRAPH    OF   "blurred lines  and grey  flecks,"  a  scene  vague  in  its details
-some low   hills,  trees,  a  lake-with the  poet  "just under the  surface"  "diffi­ cult  to say precisely  where":  such  is the landscape  we  are  introduced   to  in  the first  poem  of  The  Circle  Game,  and  in the  rest of the  volume  Margaret Atwood writes  persistently of  this  uncertain and smeared world.  Life holds on but only precariously;  "cities   are  only  outposts", and  the  rows  of  ordered  houses  in  sub­ urbia,  although they "neatly sidestep hys­ teria," show  signs  of  the  "landscape  be­
hind  or  under I the  future cracks  in  the
plaster." This  "panic of suburb" may  be a  result  of  the   notions   of  city  planners
"each  in his own  private blizzard I guess­
ing directions." Dangerous evolutionary menace   lurks   under   the  surface   and   it seems that  whatever order  we can impose will be only temporary. One  means of survival   may  be  movement; if  we  keep on the move,  taking  our  collected  lives of things  and  people   with  us,  motion   may keep  us living:
I move
and   live  on  the  edges
(what edges)
I live
on  all  the  edges   there are
 Our  motions  may  be explorations into ourselves or into the regions of human relationships. Our  meetings   with  friends and  lovers, planned  or accidental, are al­ ways  difficult,  if  not  downright  destruc­ tive.  "Love   is  an  awkward   word", and Margaret  Atwood's poems  about human relationships offer   little   hope;  there   is almost  no  real  communication. Between human   beings   there   are   always   "sheer
cavernous  I inches   of   air"    but   human
feeling   may  exist  "on   a  few I uninten­ tional  I spilled   crumbs   of   love,"  so  we should  keep attempting to  discover  what  lurks  under   the  surface  of  other   human
beings:

there  are  mountains inside  your  skull
garden and  chaos, ocean
and   hurricane ... your  private
dinosaurs.

But there is always distance, open water between  islands; two islands  "are  alone  I and   always   will   be,"   but   "we   find   it
pleasing I . ..that there are two of them." We   must   try   to   journey    across   these straits   even  though   we  may  travel   in  a circle -and yet the whole point  of going round  and  round  may be in simply going
round   and  round. We  are  castaways  on barren islands but we must somehow con­ tinue   to  explore   and  describe   our  jour­  neys, even though we may  be  reduced   to the   bleached   bones   of  one   intermixed skeleton,  even  though the  expression   of our   discoveries  may   be  a  self-defeating notion.  Poetry  may  be only  a  game,  an­  other  way of  walking  in  circles:
and   words  here  are  as pointless as calling  in  a  vacant
wilderness

A poetry expressing these ideas will obviously   have   its  own   set   of   built-in

71

BOOKS IN REVIEW



limitations and  although the poet uses images of journeys, circles, games, and islands  as a continual frame  of reference, her   poetry  has  a  tentative air  about   it. The  lines stop, pause, turn  abruptly, hang unfinished, and  the  thought is sometimes interrupted  by  parenthetical  statements and  qualifications. One  begins to long for a dogmatic statement, for  the violence  to break   surface.   Although    Margaret   At­ wood  lives "on  all  the  edges  there  are,"  her  poetry  is not  really  "edgy," not  anx­ iously nervy in spite of the halting quality  achieved by the lining of the poems. Gen­ erally   the   poetry   seems   unruffled,   and sometimes  an  incongruous  placidity  takes over.   Yet   the   poems   give   a  consistent  vision  in  their  ideas  and  there  are  indi­ vidual  poems  (most notably  those involv­ ing  journeys  and  islands,  and  poems  like "Some  Objects of  Wood  and  Stone"  and "A   Descent   Through  the   Carpet")  in which   the  language  and   the  details   of private and  stunted landscapes  really  re­ lease  the  significance  of the  subject-mat­ ter.  The  Circle  Game, in spite of its lack of   variation  in  tone,   is  a  volume   well worth  reading.
Robert Finch's world  is also  unruffled, even  though he is obviously perturbed  by certain manifestations of modernity. Nos­ talgia   for   a  world   untouched  by   any­ thing  modern  is the  dominant impression gained    from   a   reading    of   Silverthorn Bush and Other  Poems. One could accept  the  poet's  attitudes if  one  felt  that  he  is really  annoyed  about  such  things  as jazz­ ing  Bach  and  Picasso's  paintings, but  no real  anger  breathes through the  poems.
The verse is generally regular  but there is no inner  drive.  The  predominant form is the  sonnet,  written with some technical competence,  yet  many  of  these  sonnets seem   mere   paltry   exercises.  There  are
 one  or  two  neat  lyrics and  an  occasional poem  in  which  the  wit  works,  but,  gen­ erally  speaking, this is a very dull volume  indeed, expressed   in  staid  language and flabby  rhythms,  often  limp  in  its  cata­ loguing  of detail,  often  pointless  in some of the  attempts at  humour and  occasion­ ally  degenerating  into  embarrassing dog­ gerel.  One would rather live on the edges, however  tentatively, then  in  the  genteel,  flat  and  regulated world  of Mr.  Finch.
PETER STEVENS


PARTY LINE
OLSON

RICHARD   CLARKE,   Fever    and   the    Cold   Eye.
Toronto:  Contact   Press,  rg66.  roo    pp.
$2.00.

Fever and the Cold Eye is an attempt in poetry   by  Richard  Clarke   to  "sell"   his own  sensibility.  This   sensibility  is  party­ line  Charles Olson,  not  just in its  admir­ able  passivity   (or  "limpness")   but in  its equally  unadmirable clinging  to a narrow interpretation  of  Olson's  conception  of man   as  a  participant  in  greater  nature. Clarke's poems  are  about  how  he  finds physical  contact  necessary for  knowledge, how   he   senses   with    joy   the   teeming  energy  below and  above  the earth's crust, and  how  he views Buddhistic concepts  of stasis as  unnatural. What  is most obvious is that Clarke  lacks Olson's  magnanimity; while  Olson   makes  such  an  attitude  to life   work-puts    it   to   use  in   examin­ ing   significant subjects  outside  itself­ Clarke, perhaps still surprised  at having mastered this attitude, can seldom get beyond  demonstrating his possession of it. Clarke's error   is  not  so much  in  accept­ ing   this   attitude  and   sharing   it  with

BOOKS IN REVIEW



many  other  young  poets as it is in failing to  apply  it  to  significant subjects in  his own  experiential world.  The  objects pre­ sented  in his poetry-snow,  water, trees, music,  women -lack particularity:  they reveal   no  locus  of  either  geography  or person,  and   are   hence  anyone's objects. Even  Clarke's  breath-group line,  though credibly  written, lacks  the  individuality such   a   personality-projecting  technique requires,  and  could  itself  be anyone's.
But  although  Clarke's sensibility   and line  both  belong  to  a  school  rather than a  man,  and  his  subject  is no  more  than the   somewhat  immodest  celebration  of this  sensibility,  it  should   be stressed  that many of Clarke's poems are first-class examples  of  the   kind   of  minor   poetry
 books are frequently attempts toward technical mastery  rather than  originality, and,    despite    some   melodrama  (lxv), some  awkward   and   pedantic  appositives
("that  is  I meaning I primal  human
act"-xxviii),  lapses  in  rhythm   (lxvi), and  some  overpoweringly weighted  one­ word  lines, Fever and the Cold  Eye  does reveal  a mastery  of a style of  writing. In addition, it shows  the  mastery  of a  phil­ osophy,   so  that   what  one   gets   here   is simplified    Charles   Olson    without   his range   or  individuality  but   at   least  fre­ quently   with    his   competence.   Clarke  should  be  praised  for  the  highly  success­ ful  apprenticeship that  this  book  reveals, but  both  he  and   his  readers   should   ask for  work  that  surpasses  it.

that   Charles  Olson   has   inspired.  First 	FRANK DAVEY



THE 	PUBLICATIONS 	CENTRE

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  BRITISH   COLUMBIA 	•
* 	ART  OF  THE  KWAKIUTL  INDIANS
and other West  Coast Tribes
 
VANCOUVER  8

By AuDREY HAWTHORN, Curator of the University of B.C's Anthro­ pology   Museum.  Mrs.   Hawthorn  draws   on  the   resources  of  the University's museum and   her  own  voluminous  knowledge for  this volume,   which   illustrates  the  richly  varied  ceremonial  art   of  the Kwakiutl Indians and  neighbouring coastal  tribes.  Published   jointly by U.B.C. and  the  University of  Washington  Press, Seattle.
Order from  Publications Centre, U.B.C.  $26.oo.
* 	THE CHINESE IN   CAMBODIA
By  WILLIAM  E.  WILLMOTT,  Associate  Professor   of  Anthropology, U.B.C. A  pioneer  study  of a  highly  important minority group  in  a pivotal  country of Southeast Asia. Based on a recent  field  investiga­ tion  in Cambodia, the  study  throws  new light  on the social organiz­ ation  on  the  Chinese community and  its  key  economic role  in  the country. I 32 pages.  $s.oo.

A  FREE   CATALOGUE IS  AVAILABLE ON   REQUEST.



73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



CANADIAN
ELITES


JOHN   PORTER, The   Vertical  Mosaic.  Univer­
sity  of Toronto Press. $15.00.

THE   TRADE  UNIONIST, admonished  by editorial writers   and  chief   justices  alike to obey all laws and work through the established  system   to   change   those   he does not like, is to be excused  his derisive laughter. Although he may  not know exactly    why,   the   trade    unionist    does know  that   the  established   system  is  not his,   and   is  unlikely   to  respond   to  his needs.  His  only  recourse  is  to  induce   a need  on  the  part  of those  for  whom  the system  does work,  and  so, indirectly, achieve  his  ends.  An  unnecessarily  com­ plicated   way  of saying  that  labour  lead­ ers  do  not   belong  to  the  establishment perhaps,  but   a  crucial  point   at  a  time when   civil  disobedience  has  almost   be­ come  an  accepted  political  weapon.
For  most  Canadians civil disobedience
is sinful.  Lulled   by the  myths  of  parlia­ mentary  democracy and  the  encomiums of  the  ruling  elite,  they  cannot   see  how the  system  works  for  anyone   if  it  does not  work  for  all.  And  secretly  they  dis­ like  trade unionists. John  Porter, with  a surgical    precision   marvelous   in   its  re­ straint,  skins   the   beast  and   shows   the real  ordering of  its  parts.  The  head  does wag   the   tail -and   run   all   the   other  operations as well.
Canada, we have been told, is not a melting pot, it is a mosaic. John  Porter agrees.   But   it  is  a  vertical   mosaic.   In Canada we  have  allowed  all  comers   to retain their  identities: "the  old  country" is a hallowed   phrase  in our  land.  But  we insist  upon  a hierarchy within  the mosaic,

74
 and  our  top  people,  whom  Porter   labels "the  charter group", are  the  British.  The French do constitute a separate charter group   but   it  is  only  recently   that   they have  begun  to clamour for  a place at  the top   of  the  Canadian  mosaic.  Immigra­ tion  to Canada has  always  had a  British preference built  in. The Canadian estab­ lishment  has,   for   the   most   part,   been drawn from  this charter  group  and,  con­ sequently,   accepted   the   myths    of   the racial  superiority of  the  British  and  the political    superiority  of   British   institu­ tions.
Porter  is not  making  a case against  the establishment; this  book is no polemic.  It ranks  as a major contribution to scholar­ ship. At the outset  Professor Porter  makes explicit   his  personal  values.  He  attaches "great importance to  equality of  oppor­ tunity    on   both    ethical    and    practical grounds." His values  do  not  detract from his  study,  however; they  lend  to it  a co­ gency  which   many   similar   studies   lack. What  he discovered, and  documents with care, is  that  "Canadians of British  origin have  retained, within   the  elite  structure of   the  society,  the  charter  group   status with  which  they started out.... "
Through an examination of the several elites  which  exist in Canada, Porter  veri­ fies his thesis and  demonstrates the domi­  nance  of the  values  of this  prime charter group. The economic, political  and  ideo­ logical  elites-the operators of  the  mass media, the  clergy  and  the  "clerisy  of the higher   learning"-are  not  only  drawn from   the  charter   group,  but   are   inter­ locking    through   shared    positions    and shared    values.    Members   of   academic communities  will  be  well  enough aware  of  the  fact  that   "those  intellectuals who are  powerful  within   the  ideological sys­ tem  are the  traditionalists, the clerisy, the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ideologists,  the  conservatives." And  those who have listened to colleagues debating reform    of   university    government   will know  that  arguments from  the  "window on  the  world" or  "community  represent­ ation" thesis, are  really  the  defensive  re­ actions   of  the  establishment faced   with demands from  the  utopians.
And  as access  to  the  centres  of  power
in  the  church  and   university   is  denied the  outsider, so too is access to the media of  communication,  "except  under   con­ trolled  situations when  they are presented as  curiosities." Without  explicitly stating  it,   Porter   documents   the  frustration  of the  utopian or the outsider in an  inward­ looking  society  where   the  institutions of democracy are  designed  to  produce rein­ forcements   for   the   establishment,  and only   safety-valves   for   the   avant-garde. Popping-off   is an  acceptable and  amus­ ing  pastime.   This   frustration  produced, and   no  doubt   still  produces,  the  "alien­  ated    intellectual"  who   in   the   thirties  buttressed  the  CCF,  and  who  today  may be   involved   with   the   NDP  but   likely finds  more   to  his  tastes  in  the   crypto­  anarchism of other  less formalized group­ ings.
The  trade union  leader  is an  outsider. In  terms  of his socio-economic status  this is so, and  measured by his acceptance by the charter group  elites, it is equally  true. Trade unionism   is  anti-property and   is seen within  the context of conventional wisdom  as  corrosive.  The   labour elite  is only   an   elite   within   the   labour   move­ ment.  Trade union  leaders  are seldom  on university   boards  of   governors,  and   are infrequently invited  to serve on  respected community   directorates   such    as   sym­ phony    boards,    community   chests   and their  like.  And  when   they  are,   there   is more  than  a  suspicion  of  the  same  kind
 of   tokenism   that    leads   television   pro­ ducers   to   include  negroes   in   walk-on parts.  There  are  no  newspapers  that  sup­ port  the  aims  of  organized  labour with the   same  consistency   that   the   aims  of business are  supported. It is  typical  that  all   work   stoppages are   called    strikes, whether  management  or   labour  called the  halt.   And  strikes,   it   is   known,   are bad.
When  sentenced   by the  courts  for  ig­ noring   in junctions,   and   admonished   to seek  change   the   democratic  way,   the trade   unionists,  like  the  rest  of  the  out­  siders  in  Quebec  and   elsewhere,   recog­ nize that  with  the  system closed  to them and  hostile to  their   interests,   they  have no  strength   but   their   determination to resist, and  no hope  but  in  their  numbers. This  clear and  dispassionate analysis of the power  structure in  Canadian society is more  than  welcome.  For  the  outsiders it  does not offer  any  remedy,  but  it does
show where  the  enemy  is.
WALTER  YOUNG


DUALITE CANADIENNE


RAMSAY  COOK,  Canada and  the  French­ Canadian Question.  Macmillan. $4.95.

AFTER A  YEAR  ABROAD,  six  months of  it spent  in  Australia, I knew  I was  home when  I read  Ramsay Cook's  nine  essays entitled   Canada   and   the   French-Cana­ dian  Question.  Professor  Cook  sees  this as  the  Canadian  question,  the  one  upon which    all   others   submissively   depend, and  he's  quite  right,  and  the  Australians deep in  their  Pacific hideout have  caught on  to  the  idea  too,  because  the  question

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



they usually asked me after "What do Canadians think  about Vietnam?" was "What  about    the   French   Canadians?" In  I 8g I Goldwin  Smith   examined   the logic  of  the  forces  which,  as  he  was  in fact  quite  pleased  to note,  would  in  due time  make  Canada a part  of the  United States,   and   he  called  his  book  Canada and   the   Canadian  Question.  I   should think   Professor  Cook  was  aware  of  that title  in choosing  his own. The  shift in the question underlines both the achievement and  the  failure  of the years between: the question of Canadian-American  relations has been  at least  partly  answered,  though not   (not   yet  at   any  rate)   in  the   way Goldwin Smith  expected; the question  of French-English  relations   has   taken   on such  urgency  that it threatens from within a  new  kind  of deadly  tension  whose out­ come  might  well be the end  which Gold­ win  Smith  foresaw.
I   wish   I   had   had   Professor   Cook's book  with  me  in  Australia.  Which  is to say,   as  the   jacket   immodestly   tells  us, that   the   book  is  "brilliantly informed." We   are   offered   the  services  of  an   ex­ tremely  capable historian  who knows well the  boundaries of his discipline. If he has a  sermon  to  preach, it  will be only  inci­ dental to  his  explication de  texte. "One of  the   articles   of  an  historian's  faith," Professor   Cook   says  at   the   outset,   "is that   people   would  find  the  present   less mysterious   if  they   had   a  fuller   under­ standing of the  past." French and English in   Canada,  he   suggests,  do   not   know enough  about  each  other's  history.  They  must   be  instructed, not  so  much  in  the expectation   of   immediate  solutions   to problems   as  in   the  more   modest   hope that knowledge will enable  them  to iden­ tify  accurately the  problems  which  con­ front them,  by this  means  providing the
 without-which-not for  rational  discourse. It is  rational  discourse   that    Professor Cook   wants,   and   he  sets  the   pace  ad­ mirably -in  his  balanced  assessment of the  intentions of  the  Founding  Fathers, in   his   dispassionate   accounts  of  co­  operative federalism  and  separatism and the  theory  of  associate states,  in  his mar­  vellously  sympathetic and  perceptive studies   of   the   work   of  Canon  Groulx,  Henri  Bourassa,   Michel   Brunet,  Pierre­ Elliott  Trudeau and  Andre  Laurendeau, to    name    only   those    least    known    to English-language  readers.
Is  it  all  without conclusion, then?  Not at all. Misconception removed  and true history  recorded, the  question  can  be put in  its  proper   terms.  Lord  Acton,  quoted more    than    once   in   this   book,   is  the mentor from  a  hundred years  ago.  "The coexistence," Lord  Acton had written, "of several   nations  under   the  same  state   is the test, as well as the best security of its freedom," "Can we," Professor Cook asks, "devise   the  terms   of  a  partnership that will  measure   up  to  Lord   Acton's  yard­ stick?" He  thinks  we can,  if  reason and the   will  of  God   prevail.  Nationalism  is the    plague    which    has    infected    both houses.   The  Founding   Fathers  had   it right,   with   their   conception  both   of  a strong   central    government   and    of   a nation-state    (not   a   nationalist-state) which   would   embrace  a   dualite  cana­ dienne.  Professor  Cook  does  not  find  the goals of  a strong  central government and a   nation-state  antagonistic.  Some   may. There will  at   any   rate   be  no  need,  in his opinion, to rewrite  the constitution (though amendments may  be  necessary)
if we will simply  set about  finding "insti­
tutions  that   will  give  full  expression   to the  cultural duality of the  Canadian nation-state," and  if we will at  the  same

BOOKS IN REVIEW



time   accept   the   idea   that   Quebec,  and indeed   any  province,  can   quite   readily be  treated   differently  from   other  prov­ inces.  That's the  message  which  emerges from   the  explication. It  is  a  noble  and rational vision,  and  both  its  nobility  and sweet  reasonableness  recall  Matthew Arnold,   with  whom   Professor  Cook  has some affinity, as also with Goldwin Smith.  Yet,   to  take   the   nearer   case,  Goldwin  Smith's  rational   argument  for   the   an­ nexation of  Canada to the  United States was  of  no  avail,  so  that   one  is given  to think   that   perhaps  some  of  our   better  responses  have  been irrational. The moral of this is  not  that  I  think  Professor  Cook wrong; it  is rather that   I  would  temper  the  rationalist's optimism  (was  it  Heine who said  that  we learn  from  history  that  we  do  not  learn   from   history?)  with  a reminder that  one of the best known antidotes to irrationality remains  the supreme irrationality of love for one's neighbours, whom  one  may  or  may  not, after  all, find  reasonable.
ROBERT L. MCDOUGALL


AGGRESSIVE INDIVIDUALIST

JEAN  LE  MOYNE, Essays   from  Quebec. Con· vergence. Translation  by  Philip Stratford. Ryerson. $4.00.

WHEN IN I962 the  Montreal critic and journalist Jean  Le  Moyne  published in French  his  collection  of  essays,  Conver­ gences, it was immediately  apparent that  this  was one  of  the  most  important vol­ umes   of   serious   writing   ever   to   have appeared in  French Canada. Now,  four years  later,  Philip  Stratford has  given  us an   admirable English   translation  of  Le
 Mayne's book,  making  it  available   to  a much  wider  Canadian  audience.
The   English   version,   under   the   title Essays  from   Quebec. Convergence (in the singular), is handsomely produced  by The  Ryerson  Press in  Toronto, and  is a further indication of that  publisher's dis­ criminating attention to French-Canadian thought and  letters.  It  opens  with  a  re­ vised  and  expanded   I966  Foreword  by the   author, setting  forth   his  conviction that   despite   recent  changes   in  Quebec, "the    spiritual   forces   that    conditioned French  Canadians to  become  what  they were  ten,  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago still validly  explain,   directly   or  dialectically, their   present  state", an  affirmation that several of the essays will bear out.  Next follows a brief Translator's Preface  to introduce the  work  of this  writer  who  is remarkably little  known  even  in  his  na­ tive   Montreal. It  is  to  be  hoped   that  Professor  Stratford will  one  day  expand  his introductory note and  thus provide  us with  the  first  English  study  of  Jean   Le Moyne.
There are  twenty-seven  essays and articles  in  this  English  edition, including three   replacements  for   pieces   dropped from   the   original    book.   The    earliest, "The Marx  Brothers", dates  from   I94I; the  most  recent,  an  eloquent  exposition of the centrality of Easter  in Christian thought, was  written in  I964.  The  ma­ jority  belong  to the  decade  from  I950  to I96I, and,  unlike  most  French-Canadian essays,  embrace  a  wide  variety   of  sub­ jects:    the   author's   youth,   the   role   of journalism,  French, English   and   Ameri­  can  literature, French-Canadian culture, anticlericalism, Zionism,  Teilhard de Chardin, negro spirituals, Schubert, Wag­ ner, Beethoven,  Mozart and  Bach. On  all these  topics Le  Moyne  displays  a  breadth

77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of  information  and   a  mastery   of  ideas that   are   a  refreshing  change   from   the work of earlier  Quebec essayists, whose writing  was frequently depressingly  paro­ chial  and  distressingly  superficial.
The  uncompromising independence of
Le Mayne's views on his compatriots sometimes  leaves the English reader gasp­ ing.  The  latter's  stereotyped   notions   of French-Canadian  ethnic  solidarity   can­  not   readily   absorb   statements  such   as this:

It  is  extremely  disagreeable  for   me   to have   to  state   that  my  incursions  into   the world    of   French-Canadian  literature  are, more  often  than not,  forced  visits, made  out of  a  sense  of  duty   and   professional  obliga­ tion;  that  on   such   occasions  I   find   very little    to   feed   on,   and   what   there    is,   is usually  perfectly unappetizing.  I  should  also add  that I could  forego  these  visits  entirely without  feeling  the   slightest   lack   of   any basic  nourishment.

Or  this:

Be  it  new  and   justified, or  retrograde  and evil-natured, the  spirit   of  nationalism is  al­ ways  a  manifestation  of  the   rankly   primi­ tive.

And  particularly this:

There is no shortage of would-be Francos among  us  here   (they   run   to  type,   even  to the  size), and  one  shudders at  the  thought of what  would   happen if  French Canadians constituted themselves an  independent state.

The same   aggressive individualism characterizes  Le   Mayne's  reflections  on all  subjects,  and   no  doubt helps  to  ac­ count   for  his  impassioned   tribute to  the Jewish  people  ("The Return to  Israel") , which  reads  like  a modern  amplification of Pascal's famous  passage. Yet for all his individualism, Le Moyne  is  not an icono­ clast,  and  does not  hit out  blindly. There
 is a discernible "convergence" in his writ­ ings  upon  a central theme  that  is  almost an  obsession  with  him:   his  search  for  a cosmic  unity  symbolized  by the  Incarna­ tion  and  threatened by dualism. It comes as   no   surprise  to   the   reader    that   Le Moyne   and   Saint-Denis   Garneau  were contemporaries and  close friends. Some passages of this book, particularly those concerned with  the  transparency of  real­ ity,  or  those  devoted to  music,  are  very reminiscent of parts  of  Saint-Denys Gar­ neau's  Journal, and  one of the  most  per­  sonal  essays in  the  volume  is a  scathing denunciation of  the  spiritual assassins of Le  Mayne's  poet-friend.
Le   Mayne's  metaphysical   preoccupa­ tions,  his  highly  personal  point  of  view, and   his  considerable  powers  of  penetra­ tion  and   analysis  would  be  sufficient  to make   his   writing   dense   and    difficult. When   these  qualities  find  expression   in language at  times  tersely  aphoristic and at   others  convoluted  in  its  abstraction, the  result is calculated to try  the  reader's patience  and   to  drive   the  translator to distraction. It  is   greatly    to   Professor Stratford's credit   that   he  emerges   from this  struggle  with  a lucid  English  version that  omits  almost  nothing found  in the original   and  adds  only what  is  indispen­ sable  to our  understanding.  There are  a few   Gallicisms    ("parents",   p.  30;   "ig­  nore",  pp.  39,  2 I 8;  "insupportable",  p.
122;  "desert", p.  179;  "the   compliment he once made", p. 148), and  the odd  slip ("vealites  charnelles" are not "fleshy" realities, pp. 45, 46; "Pierre Kalm" should be "Per  Kalm", pp. 73-77; "Aramenians" should  be "Arameans", p. I 43;  etc.)   but these  are  of little  importance and  do  not detract from   an  excellent   translation  of an  important  book.
DAVID  M.  HAYNE

BOOKS IN REVIEW



UNE SORTE DE MYTHE


PIERRE   PAGE,  Anne   Hebert.  Collection   Ecri­
vains  d'Aujourd'hui,  Editions Fides.

C'EsT  ACCEPTER une ·enorme gageure que d'ecrire un  livre  sur Anne Hebert, surtout lorsque l'on veut expliciter les multiples aspects  de  l'a:uvre  (poesie,  theatre et roman)  et  les  relier,  dans  la  mesure  du
possible  a  !'evolution  spirituelle  de
I'auteur.
une  enorme gageure, car  I'a:uvre d'Anne  Hebert,  qui   est   de   tres   haute qualite, ne  se  laisse  pas  facilement  ana­
lyser; ce n'est pas une a:uvre simple et candide. D'autre part, il s'est cree  autour d'Anne Hebert, depuis  Le  Tombeau  des Rois  principalement, une sorte  de mythe,
 plus encore  une aureole.  II n'est pratique­ ment  pas permis-comme  ce fut  et c'est encore  le cas pour  Saint-Denys Garneau
-de  parler  d'Anne Hebert  et  de  com­ menter  ses livres si l'on  ne fait  pas  partie  d'une  certaine alliance.   Une   fois  admis dans  ce  cenacle,  il faudra  cependant en respecter  Ies regles. Tout  cela  me semble fort   loin  de  !'auteur   lui-meme  qui   est une  femme  aux  belles  qualities  de  ca:ur,  d'intelligence et  de  vie.  Et,   pour   le  cas qui  nous  occupe,  un  excellent ecrivain.
Anne   Hebert    n'a   pas  du   tout,   a  mon
sens, la  petite  assiette  illuminee que  tous ceux  qui  ont   le  droit   de  parler  de  son a:uvre  lui appliquent immediatement der­ riere  la tete.
Tout  cela   pour   dire   que   M.   Pierre
Page  qui  a  publie,  il  y a  quelques  mois, cette  etude  sur  Anne   Hebert  n'echappe
pas  a la regie, malgre !'excellence de son





THE  COMIC 	jJRT  OF LjJURENCE STERNE
 Convention and  Innovation in Tristram Shandy and
A Sentimental Journey


JOHN H.  STEDMOND

A  discerning examination  of  the  various conventions in  Sterne's  allu­ sive   technique. It  offers  an   impressive portrait  of  Sterne as  a  great comic   writer with   his  own  inimitable view  of  life  based   on  the  con­  stant  "comedy of  human efforts   at  communication."                      $5.50

G E 0 R G E C H jJ PMjJ N 	A Critical  Study

MILLAR MacLURE

This  first   full-length  study   in   English  discusses   in   absorbing detail all  the  works  of  George Chapman, one  of  the  most  striking but  neg­ lected  literary  figures of  the   English  Renaissance.                           $6.50


UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO  PRESS




79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



travail,  un   peu   scolaire   cependant. Il parle   d'elle  comme  d'une   vestale,  et  de son   reuvre   comme   s'il   s'agissait   de   la Divine  Comedie.
Si nous oublions  cette de erence
sive,   nous   constatons   que   l'analyse   de l'reuvre d'Anne Hebert  est faite  avec beaucoup de scrupules et avec le souci constant  de   demonter  tous   les   meca­ nismes  d',ecriture   et  d'inspiration;  mais le  livre,  se  dit-on,  s'adresse  surtout  aux etudiants. A  la  fin  de  l'ouvrage, un  bon choix   de  textes  et  un  peu  partout  des photos    de   l'auteur   qui   sont   belles   et I'evelatrices.
M.  Pierre   Page  cherche  constamment des  significations  la  ou  il  n'y  a  parfois que  des ,emotions et  des images  pures.  Il erige   trap   en   systeme   tout   ce  qu'ecrit Anne  Hebert. Il ne lui concede pas suffisamment de  la  fantaisie  que  l'on  ac­ corde  generalement aux poetes, meme aux plus   graves,   et  lui  confie  constamment des  missions.  L'admiration  qu'il   voue  a cette  reuvre -meme  si elle  est en  bonne partie    justifiee -finit   par  indisposer   le lecteur.
L'aspect biographique, excellemment mais trap  rapidement esquisse, dans le premier   chapitre   de   ce   livre,    aurait merite   de  compl>eter l'analyse   des  textes tout  au  long de l'ouvrage.
A joutons   que   la   bibliographie  finale semble  tres complete et que ce livre, mal­ gre  encore  une  fois son caractere  un  peu trop   didactique, est  le  premier  ouvrage  serieusement  consac11e a   Anne   Hebert. C'est  beaucoup.
JEAN-GUY PILON







So
 DEGREES OF AFFIRMATION


RICHARD   OUTRAM,    Exsultate, jubilate.   Mac­
millan. $4.25.

READERS  OF Alphabet  and   Poetry  who have   been   impressed    by   the   work   of Richard  Outram  will   welcome    these sixty-one poems brought together  in a handsome volume  under  the  general  title of Exsultate, Jubilate. The  note of  affirm­ ation  which  the  title  proclaims is capable of  double   justification, for  in  one sense the   poems   progress    from   an   internal darkness   shot   through  by  incomprehen­ sible  light,   to   a   provisional  conclusion  which    accepts   the   positive   aspects   of fragmentation.  In another sense,  all  the aspects  of  existence  to which  Mr. Outram responds  are  present  from  the  beginning, so  that  each   of  the   four   sections,   and nearly  every  individual poem,  is a  form of  provisional affirmation.
The  four lines of the  dedication appro­ priately  incorporate many  of  the  themes  and  images  which   recur  throughout the poems:

Flames, in  a green night flowering,
Are  scarlet raiment for  a child  who  lies
Beside  his  dying father and  stares  down, Within the  encroaching  blackness.

The thirteen poems  of the first section, "Mute Woman", present  multi-faceted parallelisms  of   both   opposed    and   co­ existing  relatives  and  absolutes; "Grace is present   everywhere"  but   it   is   deduced from  an  exodus -a  non-being.  Any  at­  tempt  at  synthesis  or  system  dislocates, "out of  sequence"  by  the   unwinding of "imperfect  revelations". The   first  Adam  has  to   seek   respite   from   Eve,  for   the search for  the completion of Self through

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



means which are outside the Self only emphasizes   the  horror of  the  realization that  "one  is any  number". The search  for perfection, necessarily  conducted  by  im­ perfect  means,  threatens chaos  and  nihil­ ism  within   a  closed  system  where  every value  posits its opposite.
In  "Vision  and  Mystery", the  lions  of
power   guard   the  slumber   of   powerless­ ness,  but,   should   consciousness   return, immobile  perfection  is destroyed   by  the imperfection of change implied  in  move­ ment. As a consequence, the  lions

Knowing  how flame  must  follow at her side, Will  turn  relentlessly  and  savage  her
for  Love.
Though the  Unicorn is "raked by God's claws",  this is not yet the vision of Christ the  Tiger; it  is still  a  world  of  division where  the  questions  are  more  important than   the  answers.   It is  also  one  where man,  alone, as a latter-day Flying Dutch­ man   and   Noah,  with   a  cargo  of  beasts below deck, unable to make port, is spirit­  edly  fishing  for  Leviathan   (with   an  as­ pect  of  the  self for  bait),  confident, not of landing the  absolute in  his net,  but  of using  its power  and  sense  of direction to tow  him  to  port   after  singing  "one   old song."  But  the  whale  is  not  yet  caught, and  the  song is still  unremembered. One is left  with  "Mute  Woman", possessor of the  lethal  flame  holding promise  of new creation  from  the fertile   dark   of  chaos come  again.
The second and  third sections-"Wid­ dershins" and "Primer"-elaborate these themes   within  an  impressively   extended metaphysical   range    and    an   increasing sureness  of   technique. The  assurance of certainty is no nearer: the  universe  with­  draws  from   the   man   who   attempts  to touch the sun, leaving  him  scorched. The gong resounds,  but,  as in Forster's Mara-
 bar  Caves,  the  "semblance of  the  sound is  lost".   Man   is  set  in   a  green   world (green  dust,  green  light,  green  wrangle, green torrent, lucent  jade, emerald  weeds) which  betrays  him  if he comes to rely on it; set  both  with  and   against the  green world  is the  redness  of  the  bird,  blood, fire, blade,  rage,  pulse which  sets him  on to  possess, kill,  absorb,   lust,  choose,  be­ tray-perhaps, love-to "challenge with
/ The   brute  fact  of  my  being,  my  own
Myth."
Constantly  feeling   betrayed   by  meta­ phor,  lamenting the  degradation  of  the ideal  by the  apparently real,  he  finds, as the  artist  always  has,  that   by  the para­ digm -the  Word -the  ravaged   selves are  exorcised   and   enabled   to  act.  The nightmare of   "Widdershins"  appears  at first  glimpse  to  be  close  to  that   of  the Australian Judith Wright's bullock-driver, who endured hardship through the  years "till  they  ran   widdershins in  his  brain" turning to  a  "mad  apocalyptic dream" peopled with fiends and angels. But Mr. Outram's vision of a world  of formless separation  provides  one   point   of   refer­ ence:   a  blazing   axis  which  imperfectly mirrors  back  one's  own  eye.  This  image becomes,  in  a  later   poem  "Childhood", the   crystal   with   which   the   "elaborate game"  of faceted  and  pigeon-holed truth is played,  each  facet  reflecting "our  own eye magnified". The crystal  and  the mir­  ror and  the eye  must all  be shattered for them  to release  the  light  that  is in them,  and  in the final  section,  "Exsultate, Jubi­ late",   affirmation   becomes    more    pro­ nounced.
If the way to totality lies through frag­ mentation, the   external  world   provides examples   enough. "Ultimate   darkness" can  be seen, again  through the agency  of crystal,  to be "enfolded in  single, if mul-

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tiple  fires".  The perfection  of  the  magi­ cian's   performance   in   "Prestidigitator" had  evoked  no  response  from  the  audi­  ence,  for  his  apparent miracles  had   no relevance to an order  where  (to use D. C. Scott's   image)    "the  tenebrous   sky  was founded  on lightning." In  the final  poem of  the  volume,  the  juggler's  ball  is dropped, its  fragments and  his  tears  at its  loss  spread   through  the   universe   as points  of light.  This time the audience applauds.  Mr.    Outram  has   found    in these  scattered  fragments the  "light  be­ hind  the  eye"  which  informs  more  com­ pletely  than   the  objective  flashing  circle of imposed  Procrustean  synthesis.
It would  be interesting to consider  Mr.
Outram's  use  of  water   imagery   against the  background of  Milton   Wilson's  dis­ cussion   of  the   drowned   poet   theme  in Canadian poetry.  Equally,  there is much to  be  said  on  the  complex  interweaving of aspects  of the  polarities  which  are  es­ tablished. Stillness  and  movement, speech and  silence-the expected  juxtapositions never  have  the  expected  significance.  As good  poems should, these transform the reader's expectations to an  acceptance of their   own   internal  order.   We  shall   be hearing a lot more of Mr. Outram in the future.
JOHN MATTHEWS




ON THE VERGE


INEVITABLY,  as  the  months  build  up  to­ wards  Centennial year, the  marginalia of Canadian  publishing  consists  more  and more  of  books  that  reflect  a  revived  in-
 terest in special  and  local areas  of history. The most  impressive  of a tall  pile of this kind  of literature now before  us is Edwin G.    Guillet's   The    Story   of   Canadian Roads  ($8.50), a well-designed and well­ illustrated   history    of   roads    and   road transport  published by the  University of Toronto   Press   and   sponsored    by   the Canadian Good  Roads  Association.  Mr.  Guillet has  in  the  past  shown  himself  a social   historian   of  great   erudition and considerable stylistic charm, and  the book he now  presents  demonstrates these qual­ ities   so  long   as  he  deals   with   what   is distant  and    long   ago.   But   when   Mr.  Guillet comes  to  the  great, smooth  roads of today  his eloquence deserts  him.  How­  ever  much  he  may  dilate  on  the  advan­ tages of such  an efficient  present  over the uncomfortable  pioneer   past,  it  is still  of the  past  that  he  writes  with  the  feeling and   ease  of  familiarity.
Less  wide   in  its  geographical  sweep, even  more  close  and   personal   in  its  ap­ peal,  is The   Winter   Years  by  James  H. Gray     (Macmillan,  $4.95).   Mr.    Gray went   through  the   mill  of   the  Thirties, and   was  ground small  in  the  Winnipeg relief  system  until  he found  a new career  as a  journalist and  then,  as a reporter for the   Free  Press, witnessed   the  wider   di­ mensions   of   the   Depression,  the   great  desiccation of  South   Saskatchewan dur­ ing   the  drought  years,  and   the   rise  in Saskatchewan  and   Alberta   of  the   two radical movements, C.C.F. and  Social Credit, which  have  so deeply  influenced the   politics   of  western   Canada  in   the last  generation.  A  modest,   mordant  ac­ count  by  a  man   who  saw,  remembered and   knows  how  to  record  an  era  which seems as strange and distant to the young today   as  the   Black  Death or  the  Great Fire  of  London.


CJINJIDIJIN LITERJITURE -1966

















Jl CHECKLIST  EDITED  BY RITJI BUTTERFIELD



ENGLISH-CANADIAN

LITERATURE

Compiled  by Rita Butterfield



COLLECTIONS

BISSELL,  CLAUDE THOMAS  ( comp.)   Great Canadian  writing;  a   century  of   imagina­ tion.   [Toronto, Canadian  Centennial  Pub.,  I966].  (The  Canadian  centennial  library) I27  p.
KIRKCONNELL, WATSON. Centennial tales and selected poems.   [Toronto].  Published for Acadia   University   by   the    University   of Toronto  Press   [ I965) ].  530   p.
KLINCK, CARL  FREDERICK   and  WATTERS,  RECI­ NALD E.  (editors). Canadian  anthology. Re­
vised   edition. Toronto, W. J. Gage  [c I 966].
626  p.
RHODENIZER,   VERNON  BLAIR.  Canadian  litera­ ture    in    English [Montreal,   printed   by Quality Press,  1965].  I055  p.
RIMANELLI, GIOSE  and    RUBERTO, ROBERTO (editors).  Modern  Canadian  stories.   Fore­ word    by   Earle  Birney.    Toronto,   Ryerson  Press  [I 966]. 402  p.
SCAMMELL,  A. R. My Newfoundland, stories, poems,   songs.  Montreal,  Harvest  House (1966).  I40p.
SMITH, A. J. M. The book  of  Canadian  prose. Vol.   I    Early   beginnings  to  Confederation.
[Toronto]. W.  J. Gage   [1965]. 26I   p.


FICTION

BEATTIE, JESSIE  LOUISE. Strength  for   the bridge. [Toronto].  McClelland & Stewart [ci966]. 2I6   p.
BOOTH, LUELLA S. Old  Mamma. [Fredericton, N.B.]. Fiddlehead Books, I966.  97 p. (500 copies).
BOSWELL, HAZEL. Legends  of  Quebec,  from the   land   of  the   golden   dog.   Illustrated   by the  author. Toronto, Montreal. McClelland
& Stewart [I966].  I20  p.
 BOWEN-JUDD,  SARA (HUTTON). Enter certain murderers,  by  Sara  Woods    (pseud.)   Lon­ don,    published   for    the    Crime    Club   by Collins [ci966].  224  p.
BOWEN-JUDD, SARA    (HUTTON).   Trusted   like a fox, by Sara Woods  (pseud.) New York, Harper &  Row   [ 1966]. (A  perennial book)
217   p.    (First  published I964). CARMICHAEL,   HARRY.  See:  OCNALL, LEOPOLD
HORACE.
CLAVELL, JAMES.  Tai-pan,  a   novel   of  Hong Kong. New  York,   Atheneum, 1966.   590   p. COHEN,  LEONARD. Beautiful  losers.   Toronto,
Montreal,  McClelland  &   Stewart  [ 1966].
243  p.
Also:   New  York,  Viking Press,  1966.  243  p. DEANE, PHILIP   (pseud.)  A  time   for   treason.
Don    Mills,    Ont.,   Longmans  of   Canada,
I966.  I77   p.
DE  LA ROCHE, MAZO. jalna. Greenwich, Conn., Fawcett Publications, 1966.  256  p.
DE   LA   ROCHE,  MAZO. Whiteoaks  of   jalna.
Greenwich,   Conn.,   Fawcett    Publications
[I966]. 3I9 p.
GARNER, HUGH.  Men    and    women,  stories. Toronto,  Ryerson Press   [I966].  I72   p.
GODDEN,  RUMER. An  episode   of  sparrows.  To­ ronto,  Macmillan of  Canada,  1966.  264  p. (First  published London, Macmillan, 1956).
GOULDING, DOROTHY JANE.   Margaret.  New
York,   Toronto, McGraw-Hill, I966.   252  p. GROVE, FREDERICK PHILIP.   Settlers  of   the
marsh. Introduction  by  Thomas  Saunders.
[Toronto].   McClelland  &   Stewart,   I966 (New  Canadian   library,  no.   so)  222   p. (First published Toronto, 1925).
HORWOOD, HAROLD. Tomorrow  will   be   Sun­
day.   Garden  City, N.Y.,  Doubleday,  I966.
375   p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



ISRAEL, CHARLES E.  The  hostages. Toronto, Macmillan  of  Canada  [rg66].  319   p. Also:  New  York, Simon &  Schuster,  rg66.
319   p.
KROETSCH,  ROBERT. The words  of my  roaring. Toronto,   Macmillan   of    Canada   [rg66]
2 I I   p.
LAURENCE,   MARGARET.  A  jest of God. Toronto, Montreal,  McClelland  &   Stewart [rg66].
202  p.
LOWRY, MALCOLM.  Under  the   volcano. With an  introduction by Stephen Spender.  Phila­ delphia, New  York,   J. B.  Lippincott,  1965.
375   p.
Also:     Toronto,   New    American   Library, rg66.  406  p.
MCCOURT,  EDWARD ALEXANDER. Music at the close.   Introduction  by   Allan    Bevan.   To­ ronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart   rg66   (New  Canadian library no.  52)   222  p.  (First  pub­  lished   Toronto,  r 94 7).
MCINNES, GRAHAM CAMPBELL.  Humping  my bluey.  London, H.  Hamilton [rg66]. 222  p.
MACKENZIE, DONALD. Cool    sleeps    Balaban. [New York, Avon  Books,  rg66]. (An  Avon mystery)   rgr   p.   (First published rg64).
MACKENZIE,  DONALD. Salute from  a dead  man. [London].  Hodder  &   Stoughton [rg66]. r88   p.
MACMILLAN,  DONALD  A. Rink   rat. [Toronto, McClelland  &   Stewart]   rg66.  (Canadian best-seller library  no.  r 7)   248  p.
Also:    Boston,  Houghton,   Miffiin    [rg66].
247  p.
MILLAR, MARGARET   (STURM).   Beast   in   view. Toronto,  Bantam  Books   [rg66].  (A   Ban­ tam   gothic  novel)  202   p.   (First   published New   York,    1955).
MILLAR,   MARGARET  (STURM).  The devil  loves me.   New   York,  Popular  Library   [ 1 g66]. (A  Crime Club   selection)  144  p.
MILLAR, MARGARET    (STURM).   Wall    of  eyes. New   York,   Lancer  Books   [rg66]. 221   p.
MIRVISH, ROBERT FRANKLIN. The  last   capi­ talist.  Greenwich, Conn.,  Fawcett   Publica­ tions   [ rg66]  271   p.
MOORE, BRIAN.  The  emperor  of   ice-cream. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland & Stewart [crg65]. 250  p.
 OGNALL,   LEOPOLD   HORACE. Post   mortem,   by Harry Carmichael (pseud.). Garden City, N.Y., published for the Crime Club by Doubleday,   rg66.     (A   Crime  Club   selec­ tion)  r8g  p.
PERRY, w.  A.  The  wrong   way  home,   by  Wib Perry.   [Toronto, Ansu  Print, rg65]. 418  p. (5oo   copies).
RADDALL,   THOMAS HEAD. Hangman's   beach. Garden  City,   N.Y., Doubleday, 1 g66. 421  p. RICHARDSON, GRACE.  Douglas.   New    York,
Harper &  Row   [rg66]. 230  p.
RICHLER, MORDECAI.   Son   of  a   smaller  hero.
Introduction   by   George   Woodcock.    To­ ronto, McClelland & Stewart [crg66]. (New  Canadian  Library  no.   49)    208   p.    (First published  London,   1955) .
ROBERT MARIKA.   A  stranger  and   afraid.  To­ ronto, McClelland  &  Stewart [ r g66]  (Can­ adian  best-seller    library  no.    r 5)    320   p. (First  published  r g64).
RYGA,  GEORGE.   Ballad  of  a  stone-picker.   To­ ronto, Macmillan of  Canada [I g66] r 59  p. Also:   London,  M.  Joseph,  rg66.   159  p.
ST.  PIERRE, PAUL.  Breaking Smith's quarter horse.     Toronto,    Ryerson   Press     [I g66].
!64  p.
SCHIFFER, PAUL. Never   a  champion.   [Winni­ peg,    Paul    Schiffer   Publications,    crg66J. I75   p.
SHELDON, MICHAEL.  The  personnel man.  To­ ronto,   Montreal,   McClelland  &    Stewart [Ig66).  I73   p.
TAAFE, GERALD.   Girls   of   two   summers.   To­ ronto,  Montreal,  McClelland  &    Stewart [rg66].  139  p.
VAN    DER  MARK, CHRISTINE.  Honey  in   the rock.  Toronto, McClelland  &  Stewart [1g66]. 224  p.
VIZINCZEY, STEPHEN.   In  praise  of    older women;  the   amorous  recollections  of   An­ dras    Vajda.   New    York,     Trident    Press, Ig66.   I83    p.    (First   published    Toronto, Ig65 ).
WALKER,  DAVID. Come  back,  Geordie. London, Collins   [rg66]. 221  p.
Also:    Boston,    Houghton,  Miffiin    [ Ig66].
273  p.
WATSON, SHEILA. The double hook.  Introduc-

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



tion  by John Grube. [Toronto]  McClelland
&  Stewart [cr966]  (New   Canadian  library no.  54)    134  p.  (First published 1959).
WEAVER,  ROBERT  LEIGH (ed.). Canadian short storie;s.  Toronto,   Oxford  University  Press,
1966   (An  Oxford in  Canada paperback no.
7)   420   p.   (First  published  1960) .
WEES,  FRANCES SHELLEY. Faceless   enemy. Garden City.  N.Y.,  published for  the  Crime Club by  Doubleday, 1966.   192  p.
WIEBE, RUBY HENRY. First   and   vital   candle.
Toronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart  [CI966].
354  p.
Also:    Grand  Rapids,  Mich.,  W.  B.   Eerd­
mans Pub. [1966].  354  p.
WOOD,  HERBERT   FAIRLIE.  The  private war   of Jacket   Coates.  [Don  Mills,   Ont.].   Long­ mans   Canada  [1966]. 156  p.
WOODS, SARA.  See:  BOWEN-JUDD,  SARA (HUTTON)
WUORIO, EVA-LIS. Z  for   Zaborra.  New   York, Holt, Rinehart &  Winston [ 1966]  (A  Rine­ hart   suspense novel)     r88   p.    (First   pub­  lished   London,  r 965).

POETRY

ADAMS,  PERCY MILLER.  Song   of  the  scorpion; a  book   of  satire.  Toronto,  Phantom  Press [r965]. 48   p.
ATWOOD, MARGARET.    The    circle    game.   To­
ronto, Contact  Press  [1966]. 8o  p.
AVISON,   MARGARET.  The   dumbfounding. New
York,   W.  W.  Morton [cr966].  99  p.
BALL, NELSON.  Room of  clocks; poems,   1964-
65.   Kitchener,   Ont.,   Weed/flower   Press,
1965.   22  p.
BEISSEL, HENRY. New   wings   for   Icarus.  To­ ronto, Coach House Press [ 1966]. Unpaged. (soo  copies).
BEGGS, EDITH G.  (FRAZER). Over  the   years; original  poems  and   shorts. n.p.  1966.  85  p. BIRNEY, EARLE. Selected  poems,    1940-1966.
Toronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart  [cr966].
222  p.
BISSETT, WILLIAM.  Tires in  th   temple or  Th Jinx  ship   nd   othr  trips.   Vancouver, The Very   Stone  House,  I966.   84  p.
BLACKBURN,  PAUL. The   dissolving fabric.  To­
ronto, Mother/Island,   1966.   unpaged.

86
 BOURINOT, ARTHUR S. Watcher of  men,   the selected   poems     of    Arthur   S.    Bourinot (1947-1966)  [Ottawa, author, 1966]. 127p.
BOWERING, GEORGE. The silver  wire.  Kingston, Ont., The Quarry Press   [ 1966]. 72  p.
BROWN, JAMES. The  circus in  the   boy's  eye. Vancouver, The  Very   Stone  House,  1966.
40  p.
BURGEss,  IVAN. Flowers  of  grave   concern, collection   of   poems.   [Toronto,   Cameron Press,   1966]. 64  p.
CLARKE, RICHARD. Fever    and    the   cold   eye.
Toronto, Contact  Press   [1966].  roo   p. COHEN,  LEONARD. Let    US      compare   mythol­
ogies.    Toronto,   Montreal,   McClelland   &
Stewart,  1966,   76   p.   (Published  in   1956 for  McGill Poetry Series  by  Contact Press).
COHEN,  LEONARD. Parasites  of   heaven.   To­ ronto,  Montreal,  McClelland &    Stewart [1966].  8o   p.
COLOMBO,   JOHN  ROBERT.  The  Great  Wall   of China,  an   entertainment.  With   a  drawing by   Harold  Town.   [Toronto].  Delta   Can­ ada   [ 1966]. 62  p.
CREIGHTON,  HELEN  ( Comp.)  Songs   and   bal­ lads   from   Nova   Scotia.  [Don  Mills,  Ont.]. General Pub!.    [1966]. 334   p.   (First   pub­  lished   Toronto, 1932).
DAVEY, FRANK. Bridge  force.   Toronto,   Con­
tact   Press   [ 1965]. 77 p.
DAVEY, FRANK.  The scarred hull,  a long  poem. [Calgary,  1966].  (Imago, 6)   40  p.
DAY,   STACEY BISWAS.  Collected  lines.   Mon­
treal  [1966]. 48  p.
EVERSON, RONALD  GILMOUR.   Wrestle  with   an angel. Drawings  by  Colin   Haworth.   [Mon­ treal].  Delta Canada  [cr965].  48  p.
FARMILOE, DOROTHY ALICIA. The  lost   island and   other  poems. Windsor, Ont.,  Gryphon Press,   1966.  51  p.
'INCH, ROBERT. Silverthorn  bush   and   other poems.  Toronto,    Macmillan   of    Canada,
1966.   86  p.
FRASER,  RAYMOND JOSEPH.   Poems    for    the
Mirimichi. Montreal,  Poverty Press  [1966].
24  p.
GILL, M. LAKSHMI. During rain, I plant  chry­ santhemums.  Toronto,   Ryerson    Press [ I966].  26  p.

ENGUSH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



GNAROWSKI,  MICHAEL. Postscript for St. James Street.  Foreword  by   Louis    Dudek.   Mon­ treal, Delta  Canada,  I 965.   43  p.
GRIFFIN,  HAROLD. Confederation   and    other poems.    Vancouver,   Commonwealth  Fund
 MACEWEN,  GWENDOLYN. A  breakfast for  bar­
barians.  Toronto,   Ryerson  Press    [I 966].
53   p.
MCLEAN, FRANCES. B.C.   ballads,  centennial edition. n.p.,   I966. Unpaged.

[I966]. 48  p.
GROVES,  EDYTHE MURIEL. Yarns  for  spinning thoughts, poems.  Strathmore,Alta. [ci966].
 MCNAMARA,  EUGENE. For poems.   Windsor, Ont., I965.   so p.
 the    mean
Gryphon
 time, Press,

50  p.
GRUBE, JOHN  DEEN. Sunday afternoon at   the Toronto Art  Gallery. Fredericton, N.B., Fiddlehead Books,  I 966,   I 2 p. ( 500  copies) .
GUSTAFSON,  RALPH. Sift  in  an  hourglass.  To­ ronto,  Montreal,  McClelland &    Stewart [I966].  93  p.
HAWKINS,  WILLIAM.  Ottawa  poems.    Kit­
chener,   Ont.,   Weed/flower   Press,     I966.
36   p.
HENRY, EILEEN CAMERON.  Comfort me  with apples,  a   collection  of  poems.  Antigonish, N.S.,   St.   Francis  Xavier  University  Press, I965. 6o  p.
HERSON, BENJAMIN. Journey of  a  Soul.  Mon­ treal, printed at  the   Redpath  Press  of  Mc­ Gill   University  Press,    I965.  I58   p.   (980  copies).
HOGG, ROBERT. The  connexions.  [Berkeley, Calif., Oyez,   I966]. Unpaged. (soo copies)
JAQUEs,  EDNA. The best   of  Edna  Jaques. Saskatoon, Modern Press,  Prairie Books Service, I966. 52  p.
JOHNSTON, GEORGE.  Home free.  Toronto,  Ox­
ford   University  Press,   I966.  64   p.
KEIFER,   MARGARET    ( HURDON).   Songs    and soliloquies. New York, Vantage Press [ci965]. 63  p.
LACEY,  EDWARD  A. The forms of  loss.  Toronto
[Muddy York   Press].  1965. 30   p.
LANE, PATRICK.  Letters from   the  savage  mind. Vancouver, The  Very   Stone  House,  I966.
6o  p.
LAYTON, IRVING (ed.).  Anvil; a  selection  of workshop  poems.    [Montreal,  I 966]. 67   p. (Poems by  the   participants of  the   I965-66 poetry workshop at Sir George Williams University.)
MCCOLGAN,  CYRIL. A  spoonful of  ashes.  [Vic­
toria, B.C.,   I966]. 40  p.
 MATHEWS, ROBIN DANIEL M.  This  time,   this
place.   [Edmonton]. I 965.   I 8  p.
MAYNE, SEYMOUR.  From  the  portals of  mouse­ holes.  Vancouver, The  Very  Stone  House, I966.   52  p.
MILLER, HERBERT MCRAE. Poems   for   Peggy, including  some   reproductions  of  sculpture and    painting   by    the    author.   Montreal, I966.    I I3  p.
NICHOL, B.   P.  Scrapture,  second sequence. Cover  drawing by  Bill  Bissett. Toronto, Ganglia [I965?].   (Singing hand series  no. I).  [r6] p.
The open  letter, I.  Victoria, Canservcol Royal
Roads    [ I965].  20  p.
OUTRAM, RICHARD. Exsultate,  jubilate.    [To­ ronto].  Macmillan of  Canada,   1966.  89  p. PARKER, SIDNEY MANSFIELD. Dying   embers.  Truro, N.S.,   Truro  Printing &   Publishing,
I965.   I28  p.
PARKER,  SIDNEY  MANSFIELD. Tumbling waters.
2nd.  edition. [Truro,  N.S.,   1965]. 72  p. PELTON,  MILDRED   D.  Bon   voyage.    [Ottawa,
I96s]. 21  p.
PHILLIPS, BLUEBELL STEWART.  The blade  and the  beast; poems  about man  and  ideas,  love and   nature.  [Dorval, Que., 1966] 56  p.
PRATT, EDWIN J.  Brebeuf    and    his   brethren.
Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada  [I966].  So p.   (First  published  I 940).
PROCOPE, MERVYN. Energy=mercy  squared; poems.  [Toronto]. Toussaint Publications, I966. 35  p.
REYES,  CARLOS. The   windows.  Kitchener, Ont., Weed/flower Press,   I966.  r6  p.
ROBINSON,  ALFRED  JOHN  BRADFORD.  Suddens.
Illustrated  by  Allan Suddon. Toronto,  Ali­
quando Press,   I965.  24  p.   (I20  copies). ROSENBLATT,  JOE. The LSD   Leacock,  poems.
Drawings by  R.  Diagnealt. [Toronto].  The
Coach  House   Press   [ r 966]. so  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



SCOTT,  FRANCIS REGINALD. Selected poems. [Toronto,  Oxford  University Press,   rg66].
176  p.
SHOOFLER,  RENALD. Small  change. Montreal, Delta  Canada,  rg66. 40  p.
SIEBRASSE,    GLEN.    The  regeneration of   an athlete. [Montreal].  Delta Canada [cr g65].
58  p.
SOUSTER,  RAYMOND (ed.). New  wave  Canada; the    new    explosion   in    Canadian   poetry, edited with  an introduction and  working magazine  bibliography  by  Raymond   Sous­ ter.  Toronto, Contact Press  [crg66].  r67  p.
SPARSHOTT,     FRANCIS    EDWARD.   A    divided voice.    Toronto,   Oxford   University   Press,
1965. 71  p.
TORVILLE, CHARLES HOLLIS. Song of my soul. [Arranged and edited by  Walter  B. Hoover]. Saskatoon, Freeman Pub!. [crg65]. 92  p.
TURUNEN,  HELENA. El  Toro  and  other  poems. Toronto,  Roger Ascham  Press,  rg65. [67] p. WADDINGTON,  MIRIAM.  The  glass  trumpet.  To­
ronto, Oxford  University Press,  rg66.  g6  p.
WAH,    FRED.   Lardeau, selected   first  poems. Toronto,  Island  Press   [crg65]   (Island  no.
4)   52  p.
WEVILL,   DAVID. A  Christ of  the  ice-floes.  New York,   St.  Martins Press;   London, Toronto, Melbourne, Macmillan, 1966.   77  p.

DRAMA

MITCHELL,  WILLIAM  ORMOND. The black  bon­ spiel   of   Wullie  MacCrimmon.  In:   Three worlds of  drama, edited   by  Jack  Livesley.  Toronto,  Macmillan of  Canada   [1966].
VOADEN,  HERMAN   (ed.). Nobody   waved  good­ bye   and   other  plays.   Toronto,   Macmiilan of  Canada [ r g66]. 453  p.

ESSAYS

CUMMING,  JAMES  D.    Now  and   then. Toronto, Northern  Miner  Press   [1966]. 288  p.
DAVIES, ROBERTSON.  The  diary of Samuel Marchbanks. Toronto, Clarke, Irwin [rg66] (A   Clark  Irwin  Canadian  paperback  18)
196   p.    (First  published 1947).
JOSIE,    EDITH.   Here are   the   news.   Toronto, Vancouver, Clarke, Irwin  [ 1966].  135  p.

88
 LOWRY,    MALCOLM.    Selected letters of    Mal­ colm   Lowry,  edited  by  Harvey   Breit   and  Margerie Bonner Lowry.  Philadelphia,  New
York,   J. B.  Lippincott  rg65.  459   p.
MITCHELL,    HOWARD   T.   The  battle of   mole run  and  other offenses.  Vancouver, Mitchell Press   [rg66, crg67]. 125  p.
NORTHWAY,    MARY  L.   Laughter in   the   front
hall.    [Don  Mills,  Ont.]  Longmans Canada
[rg66]. 50   p.

HUMOUR

BERTON,  PIERRE  F.  DE    M.  Just add   water and stir.  Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, rg66 (Canadian   best-seller library  no.   14)   222 p.    (First  published  r 959)  .
BOLISKA,    AL.   The  world's worst    jokes.   To­ ronto,  Montreal,  McClelland &    Stewart [crg66]   (Canadian   best-seller    library)
'59  p.
LEACOCK,  STEPHAN   B.  My  remarkable  uncle.
Introduction by  John  Stevens. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart [crg65]  (New  Can­ adian  Library  no.  53)    192   p.   (First   pub­ lished    r 942).
NEEDHAM, RICHARD J.   Needham's  inferno. Illustrated   by   Duncan   Macpherson.    To­ ronto, Macmillan of Canada [rg66].  197  p.
POWE,  BRUCE.  Expresso '67,  a  compleat guide to    Canada's   centennial  of    conflagration,
1867 - r g.... ?  Drawings  by   Jeff    Chapleau. Toronto,   Peter  Martin   Associates [ 1966].
'5' p.

BIOGRAPHY

ALLAN, IRIS  CONSTANCE (SOMMERVILLE). Wop May;  bush   pilot.  Toronto,  Clarke,  Irwin, rg66.  170   p.
BAITY,   EARL   s.  Wilderness welfare, an  epic  of frontier  life.  Vancouver,  Mitchell  Press [r966]. 219  p.
BOWMAN,   CHARLES    ARTHUR.    Ottawa editor; the   memoirs  of  Charles  A.  Bowman.   Sid­ ney,  B.C.,  Gray's Publishing [ Cig66]. 273 p.
BOYLE,  HARRY  J. With   a  pinch of sin.  Garden
City,   N.Y.   Doubleday [rg66].  230   p.
CARR,  EMILY.  The book  of Small. Toronto, Clarke,   Irwin   [ r g66].   (A   Clarke  Irwin Canadian   paperback,  20)     r68    p.    (First

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



published  1942) .
CARR, EMILY. Growing  pains,  the   autobiog­ raphy  of  Emily   Carr.  With   a  foreword  by Ira     Dilworth.   Toronto,     Clarke,    Irwin [1966]  (A   Clarke Irwin   Canadian  paper­ back)    281  p.  (First  published 1946).
CARR, EMILY. Hundreds  and    thousands,  the journals   of   Emily    Carr.   Toronto,    Van­ couver, Clarke, Irwin  [1966].  332  p.
Also:     Limited   edition   with    portfolio   of
plates   ( 1 ,ooo  copies).
COLLINS,   WALLACE  BARRYMORE. Jamaican  mi­ grant.  London,  Routledge  &   Kegan   Paul  [r965]  122  p.
CREIGHTON, DONALD GRANT. John  A.   Mac­ donald.   Toronto,   Macmillan   of    Canada [1966].  2  vols.   (First  published   1952-55).
DENISON, MERRILL.  Klondike Mike;  an  Alas­ kan   odyssey.   Toronto,  McClelland   &   Ste­  wart    [ r 965]  (Canadian  best-seller   library no.  12)   393  p.  (First published  New  York,
1943).
DRURY, ERNEST CHARLES. Farmer  premier; memoirs of the  Honourable E.  C. Drury. Toronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart  [ c1966].
198   p.
Great Canadians, a century of achievement, selected by Vincent Massey [and  others]. Illustrated   by    Franklin   Arbuckle.     [To­ ronto].  Canadian  Centennial Pub.   [1965]. (The  Canadian centennial library)   122  p.
GREEN, H.  GORDON.  The  faith  of  our   father.
Toronto,  Montreal,  McClelland &   Stewart
[1966].  218  p.
GWILLIAM,  ELIZABETH CAROLINE. Sunset   and evening  star.   New    York,    Vantage   Press [1966]. 68  p.
INNIS,  MARY  QUAYLE (ed.).  The clear   spirit, twenty Canadian women  and  their times. [Toronto]. Published for  the  Canadian Federation  of   University  Women  by   Uni­ versity   of  Toronto Press   [ 1 966]. 304  p.
MAC GREGOR,    JAMES  GRIERSON. Peter  Fidler; Canada's forgotten surveyor, 1769-1822. Toronto, Montreal, McClelland & Stewart [cr966]. 265   p.
MARRIOTT,   HARRY. Cariboo   cowboy.  Sidney, B.C.,   Gray's  Publishing  [1966].  207   p. NULIGAK, 1.  Nuligak.  Translated   from    the
Eskimo by  Maurice  Metayer.  Illustrated  by
 Ekootak.  (Toronto].   Peter    Martin    Asso­
ciates   [ r 966]. 208  p.
PEPPER, KATHLEEN   DALY. James Wilson  Mor­ rice.    With    a   preface  by   A.   Y.   Jackson. Toronto,  Vancouver,  Clarke,   Irwin[r966].
101  p.
SHIPLEY, NAN. The   James  Evans   story.   To­
ronto, Ryerson Press   [1966]. 219  p. SINCLAIR, GORDON. Will    the    re.al   Gordon
Sinclair  please    stand  up.   Toronto,   Mon­
treal, McClelland &  Stewart [1966]. 195  p. SKELTON,  OSCAR    DOUGLAS. The   Jife    and times  of Sir  Alexander Tilloch Galt. Edited
and    with    an    introduction  by   Guy   Mac­
Lean.   Toronto,   Montreal,   McClelland   &
Stewart  [c1966].  (Carlton  library  no.   26)
293  p.   (First published Toronto 1920). SYLVESTRE, GUY;   CONRON,  BRANDON and
KLINCK,  CARL F. (editors)  Canadian writers
-ecrivains   canadiens,  a   biographical   dic­ tionary,  un  dictionnaire  biographique.  New edition,   revised     and     enlarged.    Toronto, Ryerson    Press    [ 1 966].  186   p.
TRUEMAN,  STUART. The ordeal of  John Gyles, being    an   account  of   his   odd   adventures, strange   deliverances,  etc.    as   a   slave    of the   Maliseets. Toronto,  Montreal.  McClel­ land   &  Stewart  [ 1966].  155  p.

JUVENILE

CLARKE, CATHERINE ANTHONY. The  hunter and   the  medicine man. Illustrated  by Clare Bice.    Toronto,   Macmillan    of     Canada [1966].  r83   p.
COOK, LYN. The secret   of  Willow   Castle.  To­
ronto, Macmillan of Canada [1966]. 235  p. ERSKINE, J.  s. The rightful king.   [Don  Mills,
Ont.].  Longmans Canada  [r966].  203   p.
FAULKNOR, CLIFF. The white  periJ.  Illustrated by   Gerald   Tailfeathers.   Toronto,   Boston. Little, Brown  &  Co.   [1966]. 166  p.
GILLETT, VIOLET. Where  wild   flowers   groW.
Illustrated   by    the     author.   Fredericton, N.B.,   Brunswick  Press   [1966]. 93  p.
GUEST,  JACK  A.  Thunder  below,   an   adven­ ture    of   Jim    Paine,  Queen's   Scout.   Illus­ trated  by  W.   Wheeler.   Toronto, T.  Allen  [1966].  149  p.
HARRIS,  CHRISTIE. Raven's cry.  Illustrated  by

8g

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Bill   Reid.   Toronto,  Montreal,  McClelland
&  Stewart [1966]. I95  p.
HERAPATH, THEODORA.   Journey  into   danger. Illustrated  by  William Wheeler. Toronto, Longmans of Canada [I966] (Canadian pageant  series  vol.  7)   135  p.
HOUSTON, JAMES.  Eagle   mask,   a  west  coast Indian   tale.    Written   and    illustrated    by James  Houston.  [Don   Mills,   Ont.].  Long­ mans   of  Canada  [I966]. 64  p.
HOWARD-GIBBON,   AMELIA   FRANCES. An   illus­ trated   comic    alphabet.   Toronto,    Oxford University  Press,   I966.   Unpaged.
ISRAEL,  CHARLES  E. Five  ships  west,  the  story of  Magellan. New   York,   Macmillan;  Lon­ don,    Collier-Macmillan   [1966].   154  p.
LITTLE, JEAN. Spring begins  in  March.  Illus­ trated  by   Lewis   Parker.  Boston,   Toronto, Little, Brown  &  Co.  [ I966]. 156  p.
MACDONALD,   ZILLAH and   COLIN. Prisoner in Louisbourg.  Toronto,   Macmillan  of    Can­ ada,  1966.   231  p.
MCEVOY, BERNARD L.    ( ed.).  Stories    from across  Canada. Toronto, Montreal,  McClel­ land   &   Stewart  [1966].  110   p.
MCLAUGHLIN, LORRIE. The  trouble  with Jaimie.  Illustrated  by   Lewis    Parker.   To­ ronto, Macmiilan of Canada [1966]  (Buck­ skin  books  no.  12)   98  p.
MOWAT, FARLEY. The    curse    of   the    Viking grave.  Illustrated   by   Charles  Geer.   To­ ronto,   Montreal,   McClelland   &    Stewart [1966].  243   p.
ORR, FRANK. Buck   Martin in  world   hockey. Toronto,  Musson  Book   [1966].  208  p.
PARKER, WILLIAM WILDER MCKINLEY. North
Star, Joan's grey   pony.   Edmonton [1966].
44  p.
PERKINS, CHARLES. Molly.  [Don   Mills,  Ont.]. Longmans of  Canada  [ 1966]. 130  p.
PHILLIPS, BLUEBELL  STEWART.  The   Jost  tem­ per   and   other  stories.   Illustrated   by  Gar­ dona   Phillips MacArthur. Photos  by  Cashin Studios.  [Dorval,  Que.,  1966].  26  p.
READ, ELFREIDA. The  spell   of   Chuchuchan. Illustrated	by     Alison     Green.    London, Hutchinson  [1966].  96   p.
SEAGER,  JOAN MURIEL. The vengeance of WoJ. [Illustrated  by   Douglas  Johnston].   New

go
 York,  Toronto,   McGraw-Hill   [c1966]. I24   p.
SWAYZE, JAMES  FREDERICK.  Blazing  trails   in Canada. Illustrated by J. Merle Smith.  To­ ronto, Department  of  Christian  Education,
Canadian   Council  of   Churches   [c1966].
I I7   p.
THOMPSON, FRANCES C.  Escape  from   Grand Pn .  Illustrated by David Craig. Toronto, Macmillan  of   Canada   [ I 966].   (Buckskin books   no.   I 3) .  II 8  p.
TOWNSEND,  ARTHUR HERBERT.  Adventures of the   Meadow  Place   gang:  a  juvenile  novel of	growing    up.     New     York,     William­ Frederick  Press,   I 966.   I 12  p.
WALKER, DIANA. The  singing schooner. Lon­
don,    Toronto,  Abelard-Schuman [1966].
176   p.
WEES,  FRANCES SHELLEY. Mystery  in   New­ foundland.  Illustrated   by   Douglas   Bisset. London, Toronto,     Abelard-Schuman [1966, CI965]. I58   p.
WHITELEY,  MARY. The  lost   mme    of   Bella Coola.   Don    Mills,    Ont.,   Burns  &   Mac­ Eachern [I 966]. I 49  p.
WUORIO, EVA-LIS. October treasure. Illustrated by  Carolyn Cather.  New  York,   Holt,  Rine­ hart &  Winston [I966].  I9I   p.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
AVIS, WALTER SPENCER. A  bibliography  of writings on  Canadian  English ( 1857-I965), Scarborough,  W.   J. Gage    [c1965j.  17  p.
BELL, INGLIS F.  and   PORT, SUSAN W.  Cana­ dian literature, litterature    Canadienne I959-I963; a  checklist  of   creative and   cri­  tical   writings,   Bibliographie  de   Ia  critique et   des   oeuvres   d'imagination.  Vancouver, University   of    British     Columbia    Publica­ tions   Centre,  I 966.    (Canadian   Literature supplement)  I40  p.
BUTTERFIELD, RITA  ( ed.).  "Canadian   litera­ ture- I965, a  checklist,"  Canadian  Litera­  ture   27: 83-I oo,   Winter  I 966.
CANADIAN  PERIODICAL  INDEX; an  author and subject   index.   January    I938- December
1947.   Ottawa,  Canadian  Library  Associa­
tion,    I 966.   Vol.    I -2   (of   3  vols.).
KLINCK,   CARL   F.    "Canada."    journal	of

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Commonwealth Literature  I :27-43,  Sep­
tember I965.
MCGILL	UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY.  LAWRENCE LANDE CLLLECTION OF  CANADIANA.   The Lawrence  Lande  Collection  of   Canadiana in   the   Redpath  Library  of   McGill   Uni­ versity;  a   bibliography  collected,   arranged and    annotated  by  Lawrence   Lande,  with an  introduction  by  Edgar  Andrew Collard. Montreal,  Lawrence  Lande  Foundation for Canadian Historical  Research, 1965.  301  p.
MILNE,  w.    s.   (ed.).   Canadian   full-length plays  in  English (II)  a  supplement  to  the preliminary annotated  catalogue. [Ottawa]. Dominion Drama  Festival,  I966.  39  p.
WATTERS,  REGINALD EYRE, and  BELL, INGLIS F. On  Canadian literature  r896-I96o, a check­ list  of  articles, books,  and  theses  on  English­ Canadian  literature,   its   authors,   and   lan­ guage.  [Toronto].   University   of   Toronto Press   [I966].  r65   p.


BOOKS AND  READING

CANADIAN    CULTURAL INFORMATION CENTRE.
Canadian literary awards, Part I. Governor General's  literary   awards.  Ottawa,   Cana­ dian    Cultural  Information  Centre,   I 966.
LOCHHEAD, D.   G.   "Herbert   Jeff erie-first Canadian printer?" in  Bibliographical Society   of  Canada.  Papers, Cahiers no.  4· Toronto,  1965.
"Paperbacks and  respectable pickpockets" [editorial].   Can ad ian    Literature   29: 3-6, Summer I966.


PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES

Intercourse, Canada's literary eighthly. No.   I, February   I,    I966.   Edited   by    Raymond Fraser  and   LeRoy  Johnson.  Poverty  Press, Box  513,   Postal   Station  B,  Montreal.
Journal of Commonwealth literature. No.   r, September 1965.  London, Heinemann  Edu­ cational Books  and   the  University of  Leeds.
New:  American and  Canadian  poetry. No.  r, September 1966.  Edited by  John Gill,  R.R.
3,  Trumansburg, New  York.
 Weed. No.   r,  January-February  I966. Edited by   N.   Ball,   Apt.    4,   22   Young  St.,   Kit­ chener, Ont.
West  coast   review, a  tri-annual  magazine  of the    arts.   Vol.    I : r,   Spring   1966.   Simon Fraser  University, Burnaby  2,  B.C.

HISTORY AND CRITICISM

GNAROWSKI, MICHAEL.  Contact   I 952-1954, being  an  index to  the  contents of  Contact, a    little     magazine   edited   by    Raymond Souster,  together  with   notes   on  the   history and     background   of    the    periodical    by Michael Gnarowski and  Some  afterthoughts on Contact magazine by Raymond Souster. Montreal, Delta  Canada  [CI966].  37  p.
ROBBINS,  R.  CYNEWULF. "R. Cynewulf   Rob­ bins   looks   at  "4"  Cyclic,   Causeway    )4, Folio,   Intercourse."    Canadia,n   Author  and Bookman 41: ro-r  r,   Winter   1966.


LITERARY  HISTORY   AND CRITICISM

GENERAL

BLISSETT, W.  F.   ( ed.).  "Letters in   Canada,
1 965."   University  of    Toronto   Quarterly
35: 355-457·   Summer  I966.
CONFERENCE ON   COMMONWEALTH     LITERA­ TURE,  1 964,   Leeds.  Commonwealth   litera­ ture:   unity    and   diversity   in   a   common culture.   Edited    by    John   Press.    London, Heinemann,  I965.  223  p.
HARLOW,  ROBERT. "Bastard  Bohemia, creative writing in the  universities." Canadian Litera,ture   27:32-43,  Winter   1966.
NEW,  WILLIAM H.   "The   Commonwealth  in print." Canadian Literature  30:53-58, Autumn   1966.
WILSON,  M.  CAROL. "The  crusaders."   Cana­ dian   Author  and   Bookman  4I :4,  Summer I966.
WISE, s. F. "Sermon literature and  Canadian intellectual history." United  Church  of Canada Bulletin I8:3-I8,  I965.
WOODCOCK,  GEORGE.  A choice   of  critics,  selec­ tions   from   Canadian  Literature.   Toronto, Oxford  University Press,   I966.  247  p.

91

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



FICTION
WATT, F.  w.  "Letters in   Canada-Fiction,"
University  of   Toronto  Quarterly 35:385-
390.   Summer  1966.
EGOFF, SHEILA A. "Canadian  historical fiction for   children." Canadian Literature 27:44-
52,   Winter  1966.
KATTAN,  NAIM.  "Le roman   canadien anglais."
 CARR, EMILY
BURNS, F.  H.  "Emily Carr" In:   Innis, Mary, ed.    The   clear  spirit.  Toronto,  published by the  Canadian Federation of University Women   by    the     University   of    Toronto Press    [ rg66].

COHEN,  LEONARD

Les    Lettres   Nouvelles,  p.   21-30,   Decem­
ber   1966- January  1967.

DRAMA
 GOSE,  E.   B.
Canadian
1966.
 "Of    beauty   and    unmeaning."
Literature   2g:6I-63,    Summer

DOWNER, ALAN  SEYMOUR. American  drama and  its  critics; a collection of critical  essays. Toronto,  University of  Toronto Press,   I965 (Gemini  boks;    patterns  of   literary   criti­ cism,  4)   258  p.

POETRY
GNAROWSKI,   MICHAEL. "Canadian  poetry   to­ day,    I964-66."  Culture  27:74-80,   Winter Ig66.
o'BROIN, PADRAIG.   "Canadian  poetry in   Eng­ lish,     1965."   Books    abroad,   an    interna­ tional   literary  quarterly  40:150-52,  Spring I966.

INDIVIDUAL   AUTHORS

BIRNEY, EARLE
BIRNEY,  EARLE.  "Turvey   and    the    critics."
Canad ian   Literature   30:    2 1-25,   Autumn
1966.
SMITH,  A.   J.   M.  "A   unified   personality,  Bir­
ney's   poems." Canadian Literature 30:4-
13,  Autumn  I966.
WILSON,  MILTON.  "Poet  without   a   muse."
Canadian   Literature    30:  I 4-20,     Autumn
1966.

CALLAGHAN, MORLEY
CONRON, BRANDON.   Morley    Callaghan.   New York,    Twayne   Pub!.     [ rg66].   (Twayne's world   authors  series).  r88   p.

CARMAN, BLISS
STEPHENS, DONALD.  Bliss Carman. New  York, Twayne   Pub!.     f rg66].    (Twayne's   world authors  series)    144   p.

92
 DE  LA  ROCHE, MAZO
HAMBLETON, RONALD.  Mazo   de   Ia  Roche  of
Jalna.    Toronto,    General   Pub.      [1966].
240   p.
LIVESAY, DOROTHY. "Mazo de [a Roche." In: Innis,  Mary   ( ed.).  The    clear    spirit.   To­ ronto,  published for   the   Canadian   Federa­ tion    of   University   Women   by    the  Uni­ versity   of  Toronto  Press   [rg66].

DENISON, MERRILL
COLOMBO,  JOHN.  "The muse  of  eloquence, or the  eloquence of money,  Merrill Denison  in­ terviewed   by    John   Colombo."    Canadia,n  Author  and   Bookman 41:12,  Winter  I966.

DUDEK, LOUIS
LIVESAY, DOROTHY. "The sculpture of poetry." Canadian  Literature   30: 26-35,     Autumn Ig66.

DUNCAN,  SARA JEANETTE
M. E. R.    "Sara    Je.anette   Duncan,    personal glimpses."  Canadian  Literature   27: r 5-19, Winter  I966.

FRYE, NORTHROP
KRIEGER, MURRAY ( ed.) .  Northrop Frye    in modern criticism, selected papers from  the English Institute. New  York,  London, Colombia University Press,  1966.  203  p.

HALIBURTON, THOMAS  CHANDLER STUART-STUBBS,   BASIL.  "On  the   authorship
of   'A   general  description  of  Nova   Scotia, I 82 3'."   In:    Bibliographical Society     of Canada.   Papers,  Cahiers  no.   4·   Toronto, rg6s.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE




JOHNSON, PAULINE
LOOSELY,   E.   "Pauline Johnson." In:   Innis, Mary     ( ed.).   The   clear    spirit.   Toronto. published for  the  Canadian Federation of University   Women  by   the    University   of Toron to  Press   [I 966].

KLEIN, ABRAHAM MOSES
MATHEWS, JOHN.  "Abraham Klein and  the problem   of   synthesis."  Journal   of    Com­ monwealth  Literature   I : 149-163,   Septem­ ber   1965.

LAURENCE,  MARGARET
"Laurence  of   Manitoba."   Canadian  Author and   Bookman  41 : 4-6,   Winter   1966.
READ,   s. E.   "The maze   of  life,   the   work   of
Margaret  Laurence."  Canadia,n    Literature
27:5-14,  Winter  1966.

LAYTON, IRVING
WOODCOCK,    GEORGE.    "A    grab   at    Proteus, notes  on  Irving Layton." Canadian  Litera­ ture   28:5-21,  Spring  1966.

LEACOCK, STEPHEN  BUTLER
CAMERON,  DONALD  A.    "Stephen  Leacock:  the novelist    who   never   was."  Dalhousie  Review
46: 15-28,  1966.

LOWRY, MALCOLM
THOMAS,   HILDA.  "Lowry's  letters."  Canadian
Literature  29: s6-s8,   Summer  1966.

LUDWIG, JACK
STONEHEWER,    LILA.   "The anatomy of   con­ fusion."    Canadian   Literature     29:34-42, Summer I 966.

MCLENNAN, HUGH
NEW,  WILLIAM H.  "The apprenticeship of  dis­ covery."  Canadian  Literature   29: 18-33,  Summer  1966.

MOODIE, SUSANNA   (STRICKLAND)
THOMAS,   c.    "The  Strickland sisters." In: Innis,  Mary    ( ed.).  The  clear  spirit.  To-
 ronto,  published for   the   Canadian  Federa­ tion    of   University   Women   by    the    Uni­ versity  of Toronto Press  (1966].

MONTGOMERY, LUCY MAUD
WATERSTON, E.   "Lucy  Maud  Montgomery." In:  Innis,    Mary   ( ed.).  The  clear  spirit. Toronto, published  for  the   Canadian Federation of University Women by the University  of   Toron to   Press   ( 1 966].

PURDY, ALFRED W.
STEVENS,  PETER.  "In  the   raw,   the   poetry  of
A.   W.   Purdy."  Canadian Literature  28:
22-30,  Spring  1966.

RICHARDSON, JOHN
MORLEY, W.  F.  E.  "A   bibliographical study   of John 	Richardson."    In:     Bibliographical Society   of  Canada.   Papers, Cahiers no.  4· Toronto,   1965.

RICHLER,  MORDECAI
BOWERING,   GEORGE.  "And the sun goes down."
Canadian Literature  29:7-17,    Summer
1966.
NEW,    WILLIAM    H.     "The  apprenticeship of discovery." Canadian  Literature  29: 18-33, Summer  1966.

TRAILL, CATHERINE  PARR (STRICKLAND)
THOMAs,   c.    "The   Strickland  sisters."  In: Innis,  Mary    ( ed.).  The  clear  spirit.   To­ ronto,  published  for   the   Canadian   Federa­ tion  of University Women by the  University of   Toronto  Press   [1966].

VIZINCZEY, STEPHEN
JONAs,  GEORGE.    "Experience and   innocence;
a  review   article." Cana.dian   Literature 28:
57-61,   Spring   1966.

WILSON, ETHEL
PACEY, DESMOND.   "Ethel Wilson's first  novel."
Canadian  Literature    29:43-55.    Summer
1966.





93



THESES

Compiled by Carl F. Klinck



IN  ENGLISH

A'COURT,   MARY.  The Faiths  of Four  Men: Emerson, W.  0. Mitchell, Melville, Sinclair Ross.  For  M.A.   (Trinity,  University of  To­ ronto)   (Professor Gordon Roper).
ADE,  JANET.   The Poetry   of Margaret  Avison. For   M.A.   (Trinity,  University of  Toronto) (Professor Milton  Wilson).
BOUCHER,   BROTHER  LAURENT.  Sources   of   In­ spiration  in  Charles G.  D.  Roberts'  Poetry of   Nature.  For    M.A.    (Laval)    (Professor John  C.  Stockdale).
CAMERON, (MRS.) DORIS   MARGARET.   Puritanism in Cana.dian  Prairie Fiction. For  M.A. (University   of    British     Columbia)     (Pro­ fessor  D.  G.  Stephens).
CAMPBELL,  STEPHEN   C.  John   Hunter  Duvar. For  M.A.  (University of New Brunswick) (Professor Desmond Pacey).
COURCHESNE,   PETER  DONALD WALLACE. The Hatchet    Man- an     original     novel.   For M.A.     (University   of    British     Columbia)
(Professor  J. Zilber).
FIAMENGO,     MARYA    EKATERINA.     The    Ikon­ Measured    Walk-original    poems.    For M.A.     (University   of    British    Columbia) (Mrs.  Dorothy  Livesay   Macnair).
GEORGE, GERALD A.  Theme and Symbol in the Novels   of   Hugh   MacLennan.  For    M.A. (Laval)   (Professor Thomas A.  Reisner).
HARVEY, (MRS.)   EVELYN B.  The Indefatigable Inditer: The  Reverend Jacob  Bailey,  I73I­ I8o8.   For     M.A.     (Carleton)      (Professor R.  L. McDougall).
HODGSON,  JOHN    MAURICE DEVEREUX.    Initia­ tion   and   Quest  in   Some    Early   Canadian Journals.  For   M.A.    (University   of  British  Columbia)   (Professor D.  G.  Stephens).
JACKEL,  (MRS.)   SUSAN. The Role  of Women in  Prairie   Fiction. For  M.A.   (Trinity,  Uni­ versity   of    Toronto)     (Professor    Gordon Roper).

94
 JEWISON,   D.  J·  P.  Grand    Circle   Sailing:   A Study  of  the   Imagery  of  Malcolm  Lowry. For    M.A.    (St.    John's   College,  University of  Manitoba)   (Professor G.  L.  Brodersen).
KILGALLIN,   ANTHONY.   Toronto in   Prose   and Poetry.  For   Phil.  M.  (Trinity,   University of  Toronto)   (Professor Gordon  Roper).
LESS,  (MRs.)    HOPE. Some  Themes  of   Com­ munity  and   Exile   in  Six   Canadian  Novels. For   M.A.   (Trinity,  University of  Toronto) (Professor Milton  Wilson).
LLOYD,  RODNEY  OSTEN.   Mexico and  "Under the    Volcano".  For    M.A.     (University  of Western Ontario)   (Professor C.  F. Klinck).
LUMSDEN,   SUSAN.   Joseph    Howe:   Editor  of the    "N ovascotian". For    M.A.    (Carleton) (Professor Wilfrid Eggleston).
LYONS,   (MRS.)    ROBERTA. Jewish   Poets    from Montreal:    Concepts   of    History    in    the Poetry   of A.  M. Klein, Irving Layton, and Leonard Cohen. For  M.A. (Carleton)   (Pro­ fessor   A.  M.  Beattie) .
MAYNE,  SEYMOUR. Touche-poems. For  M.A. (University of British Columbia)  (Mrs. Dorothy  Livesay Macnair).
MCKENDRICK,   LOUIS.   Robert Barr:   His   Life and  Work. For  Phil. M.  (Trinity, University of  Toronto)   (Professor Gordon Roper).
MCNAIR,   (MRS.)    DOROTHY LIVESAY. Rhythm and     Sound   in    Contemporary   Canadian· Poetry.  For    M.Ed.   (University  of   British Columbia)   (Professor D.   G.   Stephens).
NOEL-BENTLEY, PETER. A Chronological Study of   the   Poetry    of  Earle   Birney.  For   M.A. (Trinity,  University of  Toronto)   (Professor Milton Wilson).
ORANGE, JOHN.  Morley Callaghan's Catholic Conscience. For   M.A.   (Trinity,  University of  Toronto)   (Professor Gordon  Roper).
PARK, (MRS.)   SHEILA S. Susanna Moodie  and the  "Literary  Garland". For   M.A.   (Carle­ ton)   (Professor Gordon  Roper).

THESES



ROBERTSON,  ANTHONY.   Aspects  of  the   Quest in   the   Minor  Fiction  of  Malcolm  Lowry. For  M.A.  (University of British Columbia) (Professor  D.   G.   Stephens).
SCOTT,  ROBERT BARRY. A Study of Amateur Theatre in  Toronto: 1900-1930. For  M.A. (University of New Brunswick)  (Professor Desmond Pacey).
SPETTIGUE,  DOUGLAS. The English-C01nadian Novel: Some Attitudes  and  Themes in Relation to  Form. For  Ph.D.  (University of Toronto)   (Professor Frank  Watt).
VAN TONGERLOO, R. R. Thomas Chandler Haliburton: Satirical Humourist.  For  M.A. (St.  John's  College,  University  of   Mani­ toba)   (Professor G.   L.   Brodersen).

IN  FRENCH

BOURNEUF,   HENRI.   Saint-Denys   Garneau  et la. litterature europeenne. For  Doctorat  es lettres   (Laval)   (Professor  Clement   Lock­ quell).

DESJARDINS,    NOELL A       ( SOEUR      STE-NOELLE­ MARIE.    L'oeuvre  romanesque   de   Leo-Paul Desrosiers:     etude    des    personnages.    For Maitrise  es  arts    (Laval)    (Professor Henri Tuchmaier).
 DESPINS,   CARMEL. L'oeuvre  de  Felix   Leclerc. Les themes. For  Maitrise es arts  (Laval) (Professor Henri  Tuchmaier) .
GUILMETTE,  ARMAND. Neree Beauchemin. Biographie.   For    Diplome   d'etudes    supe­ rieures.   (Laval)    (Professor    Leopold Lamontagne).
GODBOUT,   ROGER.  Andre Langevin: les  person­ nOiges dans  !'oeuvre  romanesque.  For   Ma!­ trise   es   arts    (Laval)    (Professor  Henri Tuchmaier).
HURTIBISE,  LISE.   Les   themes  de   f'eau  et   la foret  dans   l' oeuvre   de   Rina   Lasnier  et  de Monseigneur Felix-Antoine   Savard.  For M.A.     (McGill)     (Professor  Jean    Ethier­ Blais).
JEAN NE-D'ARC DAIGLE  (SOEUR). Les  comptines acadiennes: inventaire  et  analyse  d'une  col­ lection. For   Maitrise es  arts   (Laval)   (Pro­ fessor  Luc  Lacourciere).
LACOMBE, GUY. Paul-Emile Breton, journaliste franfais  de   l' Alberta. For   Ma!trise  es  arts (Laval)  (Professor Jean  Darbelnet).
SAINT-PIERRE, YVONNE  ( SOEUR  ST-PIERRE). Ressources stylistiques  du  franfais  et  de l'anglais  d'apres  le   roman    canadien   con­ temporain.  For  Doctorat    d'universite (Laval)   (Professor Jean  Darbelnet).



LITTERATURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste et.ablie par Susan Port


ANTHOLOGIES

BOSQUET, ALAIN, ed.  La  poesie  canadienne contemporaine   de    langue     franfaise.   Ed. augm. Montreal, HMH,   rg66. '27I   p.
CABIAC,  PIERRE.   Feuilles  d'erable  et   fleurs  de lys;    anthologie   de   la   poesie    canadienne­ franfaise. T. I-'2.  Paris,  Editions  de  Ia  Dias­  pora   franc;aise,   I965-Ig66.
Ecrits   du  Canada  franfais, nos   '2 I-'2'2.  Mont­
real,   rg66.
Ecrivains   du    Canada.  Lettres   nouvelles,
 numero  special,  dec.   Ig66-janv.  rg67.
Image et  verbe; d'apres trente collages d'Irene Chiasson, des  poemes  de Franc;ois  Piazza, Anthony Phelps, Yves Leclerc et Raymond Charland. Longueuil, Quebec,  Editions Image et  Verbe,  Ig66. 64  p.
La  tourmente;  recueil litteraire  des  etudiants de   Ia   Faculte  des   lettres  de   l'Universite Laval. T.r-2.  Quebec, rg6s-rg66.
UNION   DES   JEUNES    ECRIVAINS.  Anthologie. roe,    Ig66.  Montreal,   Editions  Nocturne, rg66.   68  p.

95

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



ROMANS ET  NOUVELLES

BERNARD,  ANNE.   La    chevre    d'or,  suivi    de
Hecate.  Montreal,   Editions  du    Cercle  du
 LANDRY-GUILLET, SIMONE.  L'itineraire.  Mont­ real,   Cercle  du   Livre  de    France,    I 966. r6o   p.

Livre de  France, I966. I96 p.
BERTHIAUME,   ANDRE.  La    fugue.     Montreal, Cercle  du  Livre  de   France,  1966. I 33   p.
 LEBLANC, MADELEINE. Le  dernier   coup
Montreal,   Editions  Ia    Quebecoise,
88   p.
 de   fil.
1965.

BLAIS,  MARIE-CLAIRE. L'insoumise. Montreal, Editions du   Jour,  1966. 127   p.
CHOQUETTE, GILBERT. L'apprentissage.   Mont­
real, Beauchemin, I 966.   I 99  p. DESROCHERS,   CLEMENCE.   Le     monde   sont
droles,   suivies  de   La   ville   depuis    (lettres
d'amour).  Montreal, Parti Pris,  1966. I30  p. DUCHARME,   REJEAN.    L'ava/ee	des    ava/es.
Paris,  Gallimard,   1966, 28 I   p.
FERRON, JACQUEs.  Papa  Boss.  Montreal, Parti
Pris,  1966. 144   p.
FERRON, MADELEINE. Coeur   du  sucre;   contes.
Montreal,  HMH,   1966. 219   p.
-. La   fin des  loups-garous. Montreal, HMH,
1966.  187   p.
FOURNIER, ROGER. A  nous  deux. Montreal, Cercle du Livre de  France, 1965. 21 o  p.
-. Les   filles a Mounne;  nouvelles. Montreal,
Cercle  du  Livre  de   France,   1966.  165   p. GIRoux, ANDRE. Au-dela  des  visages.  Chrono­
logie,  bibliographie  et   jugements  critiques.
Montreal,  Fides,  r 966.    r 53   p.
GRANDPRE, PIERRE DE. La   patience   des   justes.
Montreal, Cercle du Livre de  France, 1966.
374   p.
GRIGNON, GERMAINE. Le   survenant, par   Ger­ maine   Guevremont,   pseud.     Chronologie, bibliographie  et   jugements  critiques. Mont­ real,  Fides,  1966.  248   p.
GUEVREMONT, GERMAINE voir   GRIGNON,   GER­ MAINE.
GUILLET,    SIMONE    (LANDRY)   VOir    LANDRY­ GUILLET, SIMONE.
HEBERT,  JACQUEs.  Les   ecoeurants;  une maniere    de   roman. Montreal, Editions du Jour,  1966. 1 16   p.
JASMIN,    CLAUDE.  Et    puis    tout    est   silence.
Montreal,   Editions   de     !'Homme,    1965.
159  p.  (Ed. orig. dans les  Ecrits  du  Canada fran,ais,  7,   I 960).
KEMPF,    YERRI.   Loreley.  Montreal,    Deom,
1966. I20  p.

g6
 MAILLET,   ANDREE.   Nouvelles    montrealaises.
Montreal,  Beauchemin, 1966.  144   p. MAILLY, CLAUDY. Le  cortege. Montreal,  Beau­
chemin,  1966. 336   p.
MATHIEU, CLAUDE. La  mort  exquise  et  autres nouvelles. Montreal,   Cercle  du  Livre  de France,  1965. 143 p.
PALLASCIO-MORIN,   ERNEST.    Les     Vallandes.
Quebec,  Garneau,   1966.  145   p.
PELLETIER,   AIME.  Histoires galantes, par Bertrand Vac, pseud. Montreal, Cercle du Livre de   France,  1965. 194   p.
PETROWSKI,    MINOU.   Le    passa,ge.   Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de   France, 1966. 141   p. PILON,  JEAN-GUY. Solange. Montreal, Editions
du  Jour,  1966. 123 p.
ROY, GABRIELLE. La  route   d' Altamont.  Mont­
real, HMH,  1966. 261   p.
SAVARD,  FELIX-ANTOINE.   M enaud,   maitre­ draveur.   3e    version.    Presentation,    notice  biographique    et    bibliographie par   Andre Renaud.   Montreal,  Fides,  1964. 2 r 4  p.
SILLONVILLE, OLLIVIA. Derriere  les  manchettes.
Montreal,   Beauchemin,   1966.  256   p. THERIAULT,  YVES.  Les   commetta,nts  de   Cari­
dad.  Montreal, Editions de  !'Homme,  I966.
175   p.
-. Le   temps  du   carcajou.  Quebec, lnstitut
Litteraire  du Quebec, 1966. 244   p. TREMBLAY, MICHEL.   Contes  pour   buveurs  at­
tardh.  Montreal,  Editions du  Jour,  1966.
rs8  p.
VAC, BERTRAND voir   PELLETIER, AIME. VIGNEAULT, GILLES.  Contes  du   coin   de  l'oeil.
Quebec,  Editions de   I'Arc,  r 966.  78   p.

POESIE
BEAULIEU,   MICHEL.    Apatrides   (Gestes    II).
Poeme: Michel Beaulieu. Eaux-fortes: Roland   Pichet.   Montreal,   Esterel,   r 966.
42  f.
BEDARD, PIERRE.  D'un  autre   ordre.   Montreal, Editions Ia  Quebecoise, 1965. 68  p.

LITTERATURE CAN ADIENNE-FRANCAISE



BEGUIN,  LOUIS-PAUL.  Le    mtrozr    de   janus.
Montreal, Sans le  Sou,   Ig66. gi  p. BOSQUET, ALAIN, 'ed.   La    poesie    canadienne
contemporaine   de    langue   franr;aise.    Ed.
augm. Montreal, HMH,  Ig66. 27I   p. BOUCHER, ANDRE-PIERRE. Chant  poetique pour
un   pays  ideal;  bilan   de   poisie   1956-Ig66.
Montreal,  Editions  du   Jour,  Ig66.  Iog   p. BROSSARD, NICOLE.  M ordre  en  sa chair. Mont­
real,   Esterel, Ig66. 56  p.
cABIAc, PIERRE. Feuilles   d'erable  et   fleurs  de lys;    anthologie   de   !a,  poesie    canadienne­ franr;aise.    T.I-2.    Paris,    Editions   de    !a Diaspora   fran<;aise,   Ig6s-Ig66.
DESJARDINS,  MARCELLE. Somme   de    sains poemes  t'aquins, suivie  de  Confessions d'une
petite   femme. Montreal, Editions  a !a  Page,
Ig6s. 86  p.
DUCLOS, JOCELYN-ROBERT.  Les  ido[es  de  chair.
Montreal, Sans le  Sou,   rg66. 78  p.
DUGUAY, RAOUL.  Ruts.   Montreal,   Esterel, rg66. go  p.
ETIENNE, GERARD.   Lettre  a  Montreal.  Mont­
real,   Esterel, rg66. 32  p.
FRANCOEUR,   SYLVIE. Etoile   du   destin.  Mont­
real,   Nocturne,  1g66.   I03   p.
GERVAIS,  GUY. Chant 1-11.  Montreal,  Editions d'Orphee,  Ig6s.
GODIN, GERALD.   Les   cantouques;  poemes    en lange   verte,  populaire et  quelquefois   fran­ r;aise.  Montreal,  Parti  Pris,   Ig66.  52   p.
GUIMONT, MADELEINE. Chemins  neufs.   Que­
bec,  Garneau, 1g66.  85  p.
GURIK, ROBERT. Spirales. Montreal,  Holt, Rinehart  et   Winston,  Ig66.  73  p.
GUY,  MARIE-ANNE. Flux    et   reflux.  Quebec, Leroy-Audy, Ig66.  I 16  p.
HAMEL, LOUIS-PAUL. Poemes. Char!esbourg, Chez  !'auteur,  Ig66. 8g   p.
Image et  verbe; d'apres trente collages  d'Irene Chiasson, des  poemes  de Franr;ois Piazza, Anthony  Phelps, Yves  Leclerc et  Raymond Charla,nd.  Longueuil,   Quebec,   Image   et Verbe,  Ig66.  64   p.
JACQUES, MICHEL. Roseaux  ensevelis.  Artha­
baska,    Quebec,  Editions  Ste-Cecile,  Ig63.
67  p.
JAQUEMI  voir  ROY, LISETTE (FORTIER).
 LABERGE, MARIE. D'un cri a ['autre; poemes et dessins.   Quebec,  Editions  de   !'Aile,  Ig66.
66   p.
LABERGE, RAYMOND.    E!igie   de    hauts    volts.
Quebec, Editions de  !'Aile, 1g66.  57  p. LANGEVIN, GILBERT.  Un   peu   plus  d'ombre  au
dos    de    la   falaise,     196I-196!l.  Montreal,
Esterel,  rg66.  8r   p.
-. Poemes    a  l'effigie    de   Larouche,  Larsen, Miron, Carrier, Chatillon, Caron, Marguere et  moi.  Montreal, Atys,   Ig6o. g  p.
LASNIER,  RINA. L'arbre blanc. Montreal,  Edi­
tions  de  l'Hexagone,  rg66. 84  p.
-. Rina   Lasnier;  textcs   choisis   et   presentes par    Jean  Marcel.  Montreal,  Fides,    Ig64. g6  p.
LEBLANC,  MADELEINE. Les     terres     gercees.
Montreal,   Editions  !a   Quebecoise, Ig6s.
37  p.
LEBRUN,  DENIS.  Du    sable    et    des    cendres.
Montreal, Sans   le  Sou,   Ig66. 8g   p. LECLERC,  CLAUDE.  Piege  a [a chair.  Montreal,
Editions !a  Quebecoise,  rg66.    1g5  p. LORRAIN,   ROBERT.   Mon  petit    monde  a   trois
pattes.  Montreal,  rg66.   102  p.
MOMBLEAU, MARIE.  A     l'aube;   poemes     et dialogue. Bagotville, Quebec, Editions de l'Aube,  rg66.   go  p.
NELLIGAN, EMILE. Poemes   choisis.  Chronologie et    jugements   critiques.   Montreal,   Fides, Ig66.  r66  p.
PARADis, suzANNE.  Le  visage  offense. Quebec, Garneau,  I g66.   I 76  p.
PELOQUIN, CLAUDE. Calorifere. Longueui[, rg6s.  n.p.
-. Manifeste subsiste. Montreal,  Ig6s.  12  p. PIAZZA,  FRANCOIS.  L'identification.  Longueui[,
Quebec, Editions Le  Crible,  rg66.   so p.
PICHE, ALPHONSE. Poemes,  1g46-Ig50. Trois
Rivieres, Editions  du  Bien  Public,  rg66. RACINE, Luc.  Les  dormeurs. Montreal,  Esterel,
rg66.   I44   p.
REMILLARD, JEAN-ROBERT.  Sonnets archaiques pour  ceux  qui  verront   l'independance,  suivi de  Complaintes du   pays  des  porteurs d'eau. Montreal, Editions Parti Pris,  Ig66. 6r   p.
ROY, LISETTE (FORTIER). Des heures, des  jours, des   annies,  par   Jaquemi,  pseud.  Quebec, rg66.    III  p.

97

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



ROYER, JEAN.  A   patience    d'aimer.  Quebec, Editions de  I'Aile,  1966.  82  p.
SAINT-AU!liN, DANIEL.  Voyages  prolonges.
Montreal,  Deom,  r 966.  89   p.
ST-CYR,  ANDRE. Avant.    Salaberry-de-Valley­ field,   Quebec,  Editions  Barard,  I966.   22  f. THERRIEN,  CHARLES    LEBEL.  Solitudes   min­
ganiennes.  Rimouski,  Quebec,  Editions  du
Cormoran, 1966.  56  f.
TREMBLAY,   GEMMA. Crateres  SOUS    la   neige.
Montreal,  Deom, 1966.  53  p.
-. Poemes    d'identite.  Paris,    Jean   Grassin, I96s. 79  p.
UNION  DES  JEUNES   ECRIVAINS.   Anthologie.
roe,    1966.   Montreal,   Editions  Nocturne,
1966.   68  p.
VENNE, ROSARIO.   Les   agates   trouvees.  Mont­
real,   Nocturne,  I965.   I35   p.
VIGNEAULT,   GILLES.  Qu   la   lumiere  chante.
Photos: Fran<;ois Lafortune. Textes: Gilles Vigneault. Quebec, Presses de l'Universite Laval,   I966.  n.p.
-. Pour  une  soiree  de  chansons. Quebec,  Edi­
tions   de  !'Arc,  I965. 42  p.
-. Quand   les   bateaux  s'en   vont.  Quebec, Editions de  !'Arc, 1965.  101  p.

THEATRE

BASILE, JEAN.  foli   tambour.  Montreal,   Edi­
tions  du   Jour,  1966.  167  p.
BENOIT,  REAL.  Le     marin    d' Athenes;    teU­ thUttre.   Montreal,   Cercle     du    Livre    de France,  I 966.   68  p.
DAGENAIS,   PIERRE. Isabelle;  drame    en   deux actes.  Montreal, Editions P. Dagenais, I966, c.I961.  100   p.
DUBE, RODOLPHE.  La  morte; comedic en  trois actes  et  deux tableaux, par  Fran<;ois Hertel, pseud.  Paris,   Editions de  Ia  Diaspora  fran­
<;aise, 1965.   26  p.
HERTEL, FRANCOIS,  voir  DUBE, RODOLPHE. HUARD,  ROGER-BERNARD. Huard   a deux   farces
(Serum  qui.... et   Au   coin   du  teUviseur).
Montreal, Editions Agora,   I965. 127  p. MCGIBBON, MME MARCELLE. Le  feu qui  COUVe;
piece    en    un    acte.    Montreal,   Association
canadienne  du    theatre   d'amateurs,   1964.
40  p.

g8
 TOUCHETTE, KATHELINE. Le    crocodile;   SUS­ pense   en   trois   actes, par   Katy   Touchette. Montreal,  Editions des Jonchets, 1966.  94 p.
-. Oeil    pour   dent;  piece  en  trois   actes   par Katy Touchette. Montreal, Editions des Jonchets,  1965.   125   p.

ESSAIS

DUBE, RODOLPHE.  Vers une   sagesse,  par  Fran­
<;ois  Hertel,   pseud.  Paris,    Editions  de   Ia
Diaspora fran<;aise,  1966.  135  p.
DUFRESNE, JEAN.  Au   carrefour  des  souvenirs, par   Marcel  Valois, pseud. Montreal,  Beau­ chemin, 1965.   I58   p.
HERTEL, FRANCOIS  voir   DUBE, RODOLPHE. VALOIS,  MARCEL voir  DUFRESNE, JEAN.

SATIRE ET  HUMOUR

FERRON, JACQUES. Papa   Boss.  Montreal,  Edi­
tions   Parti pris,   1966.   144  p.
HEBERT, JACQUES. Les   ecoeurants;  une   ma­ ntere    de    roman.   Montreal,    Editions    du Jour,  1966.   1 16  p.
HUDON, NORMAN.  Parlez-moi d'humour. Mont­
real,   Editions du   Jour,  I965. 128  p. STANKE, ALAIN. Montrea/ites. Montreal,  Edi­
tions  de  !'Homme, 1965.   128  p.

BIOGRAPHIES

FALMAGNE,   THERESE  (PRINCE).   Un  marquis du  grand   siecle, f acques-Rene de  Brisay  de Denonville, gouverneur   de  la  Nouvelle France   1637-I7Io.  Montreal, Lemeac, 1965.
341   p.
FAUCHER, CLAIRE (MONTREUIL).  La   joue droite. Dans  un   gant   de   fer, II, par   Claire Martin,  pseud. Montreal,  Cercle du   Livre de  France,  1966.   209   p.
GROULX, LIONEL-ADOLPHE.   La   grande    dame de  notre   histoire; esquisse   pour  un   portrait de Marie de /'Incarnation. Montreal, Fides, I966. 6I   p.
LA  ROQUE  DE ROQUEBRUNE,   ROBERT. Quartier Saint-Louis;  recit,  par   Robert  de   Roque­ brune, pseud. Montreal, Fides,  I966.  199  p.
LE  MOIGNAN,  MICHEL. Le   frere  Antoine   Ber­ nard; historien de  la  Ga.spesie et  du  peuple  acadien. Gaspe, Editions   Gaspesiennes,
1966.  123  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



LESAGE, GERMAIN. Manereui[,   fondateur   de Louisville, r66s-r6J!:l. Louisville, Quebec, Presbytere, 1 g66.  1 gg  p.
MAJOR,  ANDRE. M,emoires  d'un  jeune canoque, IV-VIII.  Action nation ale  55:622-32,  746-
51,  869-75, g86-g1,  I 155-59, jan.-mai/juin,
1966.
MARTIN, CLAIRE voir FAUCHER,  CLAIRE (MONTREUIL).
ROQUEBRUNE,  ROBERT DE  voir   LA   ROQUE DE ROQUEBRUNE,  ROBERT  DE.

LITTERATURE  DE JEUNESSE

CHARLES-HENRI, frere. Les  yeux  remplis d'etoiles, par  Dollard des  Orrneaux, pseud. Montreal, Editions de  !'Atelier, 1964.  187 p.
CORRIVEAU, MONIQUE. La     petite   fi.lle    du printemps. Quebec, Editions Jeunesse, 1966.
180  p.
DES ORMEAUX,  DOLLARD  voir  CHARLES-HENRI, frere.
DURAND, LUCILE.  Le    cordonnier  Pamphi/e mille-pattes. Montreal,  Centre  de   Psychol­ ogie  et  de  Pedagogie, 1965.   62  p.
-. Togo, apprenti-remorqueur.   Montreal, Centre  de    Psychologie   et    de    Pedagogie,
1965.  79  p.
ESTRIE, ROBERT  D' voir  MATTEAU, frere ROBERT.
 -. Les  dauphins de  Monsieur Yu.  Montreal, Lidec,  1g66.   142   p.   (Volpek  3).
-. L(]J     montagne   creuse.  Montreal,   Lidec,
1965.   (Volpek  ').
-. Le   secret   de   Mufjarti.  Montreal,  Lidec,
1965.   '35 p.   (Volpek  2).
TRUDEL, GJSELE. Monsieur  Solei/.  Montreal, Editions Ia Quebecoise, 1965.  40 p.

BIBLIOGRAPHIES

BEAULIEU,  ANDRE. Les    journaux  du   Quebec de   I 764  a  1964,   par    Andre  Beaulieu  et
Jean Hamelin. Quebec, Presses  de  l'Univer­ site    Laval,   1 g65.    ( Cahiers   de    l'Institut d'Histoire, 6).
BLISSETT, w.   F.   Letters  in   Canada:    1965. Livres  en fran<;ais. University of Toronto quarterly  35: 503-536, July  1 g66.
Catalogue  de   /'edition   au   Canada   franfais, rg66-r967. 2e  ed.  Montreal, Conseil  Supe­ rieur   du  Livre,  1966.   358   p.
CENTRE D'INFORMATION    CULTURELLE   CANA­ DIENNE.  Prix  litteraires canadiens. Premiere partie: Prix  litteraires  du   Gouverneur General. Ottawa,  1966.   24  p.
DULONG, GASTON. Bibliographie   /inguistique du   Canada   franyais   [de   James  Geddes et Adjutor Rivard  ( 1go6)  continuee par  Gas­ ton   Dulong]. Quebec, Presses   de  l'U niver­

GAGNON,  MAURICE.
Montreal,   Lidec,
104).
 Une
1966.
 auenture   d' Ajax.
142   p.    (Unipax
 site  Laval,   1966.   166  p.
Fiches    bibliographiques  de   litterature   cana- dienne. v.1,  no   1- 	sept.   1 g66-

-. Les  savants refractaires. Montreal,  Lidec,
1965.   "9 p.  (Unipax 102).
-. Le    tresor   de   la   "Sa.ntissima Trinidad."
Montreal,   Lidec,   1966.    143   p.    (Unipax
103).
-. Unipax intervient. Montreal, Lidec, 1965.
118   p.   (Unipax  101).
LECLERC, CLAUDE. Marionnettes  de   mes amours. Montreal,  Editions  Ia  Quebecoise,
1966.   Bo p.
MATTEAU, frere  ROBERT. Notawisi,   l'origna[ par   Robert d'Estrie,  pseud. Montreal,  Cen­ tre   de   Psychologie  et   de   Pedagogie,   1965.
76  p.
THERIAULT,  YVES.  Le     chf1teau     des    petits hommes    verts.     Montreal,    Lidec,    1966.
134  p.  (Volpek  4).
 Montreal, Fides.   mensuel.
HAMEL, REGINALD.   Bibliographie  des  Jettres canadiennes-fran<;aises,   1965.   Etudes   fran­ yaises,  numero special,  juin   1966.
Index   analytique.  v.I- 	fev.    Ig66- Prepare conjointement  par   Ia  Bibliotheque de    l'Universite   Laval   et    le   Service    des bibliotheques de  Ia  Federation des  colleges classiques. Quebec,  Presses   de   l'Universite Laval,  Ig66.   Mensuel  (sauf   juil.   et  aout).
Livres  et auteurs canadiens, 1965.  Montreal, Editions Jumonville,  1966.   178  p.
PORT, susAN.   Canadian literature  1965.  Lit­ terature canadienne-fran<;aise.   Canadian literature 27:94-100,  Winter   1966.
SAINT-DENIS, soEUR.    Gaspesiana. Montreal, Fides,   1965.   180   p.

99

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



OUVRAGES   CONSACRES A  L'EDITION

BEAULIEU,  ANDRE et  JEAN HAMELIN.  Les  jour­
naux  du  Quebec  de  1764  a  1964.  Quebec,
Presses   de  l'Universite Laval,  I966.   334  p.
COUSINEAU, JACQUES. Aux  origines de   Rela­ tions.    Relations   26 (30 I) :25,    janv.     I 966. DOUCET, PAUL.  Affaire    Jlfaintenant;   role   de Ia  presse.   Ma.intenant   45-48:272-273,   aut.
I965.
GAGNON,  JEAN-LOUIS. La   presse   fran<_;aise de
Montreal  des   origines  a  Ia   belle   epoque.
Academie canadienne-franyaise.   Cahicrs
10:7-19,  I966.
LALONDE, MARC. Les   journaux  et   Ia   loi   au Canada.   Cite    libre    I 6 ( 86) : I 5-2 I,    avril­ mai;  I 6 ( 88-89) : 19-26,   juil.-aofit    I 966.
LEGER,  JEAN-MARC. La   presse   montn alaise, miroir  de   Ia  diversite  du   Canada.  Quebec
5:47-50, oct.    I965.
Nos   editeurs  a  Francfort.  Vient  de   paraitre
2:21-23, 26,  nov.  1966.
PELLERIN, JEAN. Journaux du  Quebec, miroirs deformants.  Cite    libre    I6(83): I-3,   janv.
1966.
TREMBLAY, JACQUES.  Pour    une    cite    Jibre.
Cahiers  de    cite    libre    17:3-18,  sept.-oct.
1966.
TISSEYRE, PIERRE. Ou   va  !'argent du  Jecteur.
Vient  de   paraztre   2: I3-16, mai   1966.


LINGUISTIQUE

ANJOU,  JOSEPH   D'.  Au   service   du   fran<;ais. Voir   chaque  numero de   Relations.
BARBEAU,   RAYMOND.   Le  Quebec  bientot   uni­ lingue.   Montreal,   Editions  de    !'Homme, I965. 159  p.
CLOUTIER, NORMAND.   Le   scandaJe  du   jouaJ. Magazine  Maclean  6:IO-II,    26-30,    fev. I966.
DAGENAIS,   GERARD.  Des  mots   et   des   phrases,
1-11.  Montreal,  Editions du  Jour,  1966. DARBELNET, JEAN.  The  French  language  in
Canada.  Culture  27:9-27, mars   1966.
-. Petite  chronique  de  Ia  langue  fran<;aise.
Voir     chaque   numero   de   L'enseignement secondaire.
DEPOCAS, JAN.   Chronique  d'une  langue;  a

roo
 joual    sur ... une   ou   deux    langues.   Parti pris  3: 57-6o,   mars   1966.
DES MARCHAIS, GILLES. Defense et  illustration du  quebecien. Parti  pris 3:24-43, jan.   I966. DULONG, GASTON. Bibliographie  linguistique
du   Canada   franyais   [de   James  Geddes  e.t
Adjutor    Rivard    (I 906)      continuee   par Gaston Dulong]. Quebec, Presses  de  l'Uni­ versite   Laval,  1966.   I66  p.
GENDRON, JEAN-DENIS. Tendances phonitiques du    franyais     parte     au    Canada.   Quebec, Presses   de  l'Universite  Laval, 1966.   254  p.
LEFEBVRE,  GILLES-R.  Faut-iJ     miser     sur    Je
"joual"?  Quebec 6:63-67, fev.   1966.
-. Langue  de   Paris    ou   parler   quebecois?
Culture  vivante  1 : 7-10,   57,   1 g66. LORRAIN, ROLAND. La    mort    de   mon    joual;
l'histoire  incroyable  d'un   Canadien   fran­
fais   decide   a  parler    bien.   Montreal,   Edi­
tions  du  Jour,  I966. 127  p.
LOSIC, SERGE. Qu'est-ce que   !'Office de  Ja Langue  Fran<;aise.    Quebec 4: I 3-20,    mai I965.
QUEBEC. OFFICE DE  LA   LANGUE FRANCAISE.
Cahiers, no   1. Norme  du   franfais, ecrit   et parte  au  Quebec.   1965.
QUINN, BERNARD  JOHN. French-canadian slang and    colloquial   expressions.  University   of South  Florida    Language Quarterly 5:43-
44,  Fall-Winter  1966.


REVUES

Cahiers  de   cite   libre.   17e   annee,  no   !-
sept.-oct.   1 g66-         .   Montreal.   (Le    titre varie:  I e- I 6e annees, Cite  libre).
Conferences  ].  A.  de  Seve.  I,   1963/64- Montreal,  Faculte  des  lettres  de  l'Univer­ site   de   Montreal,   1965-
Culture  vivante. Quebec, Ministere des affaires culturelles. no  I- 	I966-
Fiches    bibliographiques  de   littba.ture   cana- dienne.  v. 1,   no.    I- 	sept.    1966- Montreal, Fides.   Mensuel.
Meta;  journal     des    traducteurs,   translator's journal.  v.I 1,  no    I-	mars    Ig66- Montreal, Presses  de  l'Universite de  Mont­ real,    (Le   titre  varie:   V.I-10,   journal   des traducteurs).

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



Passe-partout.  janv.     I965-    ?     I965.   Saint­ Constant,  Quebec.
Poesie.  v.I, no   I- 	hiver 	I966-
Quebec,  Societe   des    poetes    canadiens­
fran:;ais. trimestriel.
Theatre vivant. no  I-	I5  nov.  I966- Montreal, Holt,   Rinehart    et    Winston. trimestrielle.

HISTOIRE ET  CRITIQUE LITTERAlRES
OUVRAGES ET ARTICLES GENERAUX AUDET, JULES.  Notre  parole  en   liberte.  Inci­
dences   10: 7- I o,  aoilt   I 966.
BARBEAU,  VICTOR. La  face  et l'envers; essais critiques. Montreal,  Academic   canadienne­ fran<;;aise, I966.  I58  p.
CENTRE D'INFORMATION CULTURELLE    CANA­ DIENNE. Prix  litthaires  canadiens.  Premiere  partie:  Prix  litteraires   du   Gouverneur General. Ottawa,  I966. 24  p.
CHARBONNEAU, ROBERT. L'art d'ctre canadien. Societe  Royale  du   Canada.  Memoires.  4e ser.,  t.  3, SeC. I: 19-28,   juin   I965.
CORRIVEAU, MONIQUE.  La   Jitterature    de jeunesse     de    langue   franc;;aise.    Canadian library   23: I22-I24,  Sept.  I966.
coTE,   JEAN-Lours.    Sincere  et   genereux  avis
a   un    jeune     litterateur   canadien-fran<;;ais.
Incidences 9:9-2 r,  jan.   1966.
Le   Devoir,  Montreal.   Supplement  litteraire.
Devoir    57(75): 13-44,    31    mars     I966    et
57(250) :9-20,  29-40,   27  oct.   I966.
ELIE,  ROBERT. Une   litt!  rature  temoin d'une nouvelle  naissance.  Quebec  5: I 7-23,   oct. I965.
ETHIER-BLAis, JEAN. L'ecole litteraire de Montreal. Etudes  frant;aises  I: 107-r 12,  oct. I965.
-. Exils    [Fran<;;ois  Hertel,   Marcel  Dugas, Paul   Morin].  Montreal, Faculte des  lettres de   l'Universite  de   Montreal,  1965,   32  p.
(Conferences J. A.  de  Seve,  5).
FALARDEAU,  JEAN-CHARLES.  La  generation de La   releve    ( 1934-          ) . Recherches   socio- graphiques  6: 124-133,  mai-aoilt  I 965.
GRANDPRE, PIERRE  DE. Dix  ans  de  vie  [itteraire au  Canada  franr;ais. Montreal, Beauchemin,
1966.   293  p.
 La   question des   influences. Lettres nouvelles, no  spec.,   p.   I09-I r6,  dec.  1966- jan.    I967.
HARE,   JOHN.    Literature   and     society;  an apology  for  a  sociology   of  literature.  [sum­ mary  bibliography, p.  4 I 9-23].  Culture 26:
412-423,  dec.   1965.
HAYNE, DAVID   M.  Les   grandes   options  de   la littha,ture. Montreal, Faculte des lettres de l'Universite   de    Montreal,    1965.    28    p.
(Conferences J. A.  de  Seve,  2).
KATTAN,  NAIM.  Lettre de Montreal; une saison abondante.   Canadian  literature  28:5 2-55, Spring 1 g66.
-. Litterature et  societe   du  Canada fran<;;ais. Lettres  nouvelles I3: I43-148, janv.-fev. I965.
LAROCHE,  MAXIMILIEN.  Litteratures du  Quebec et  d'Haiti,  IV-VIII.  Action  nationale 55:
6r2-62I,  734-74I,  852-868, 976-980, I I42- r 154,   janv.-mai/juin,  I966.
LEGARE,   R.  Prix   litteraires.  Culture 27:474-
476,  dec.  I 966.
MAILHOT,  LAURENT.  Une  critique qui  se  fait. Etudes  franr;aises 2:328-347, oct.   I966. MARCEL,   JEAN. Les  forces   provisoires de  !'in­
telligence;  cinq   ans   d'essais    ( 1 960-I 965).
Livres   et  auteurs 1965:23-32.
MARCOTTE, GILLES,  ed.  Presence  de  [a critique.
Montreal, HMH,  r 966.
-. Traduit  du   fran<;;ais. Lettres  nouvelles, no spec.,   p.  78-84,   dec.   I966-janv.  rg67.
PREFONTAINE, YVES.  L'histoire   est-elle    Ja litterature? [ et  choix  de  poemes  et  chansons de  l'epoque  de   !'insurrection Papineau]. Liberte  7: 96-r 25,   janv.-avril   1965.
Les   prix   des   Concours  litteraires  de   Ia   Pro­
vince.   Quebec 6:84-85,  fev.   I966.
Les  prix  litteraires 1965-1966. Vient  de  parai­
tre  2: 13,  sept.   1966.
TOUGAS, GERARD.   Situation  de   [a  [itterature canadienne-franr;aise. Montreal, Faculte des lettres  de   l'Universite  de   Montreal,  r 965.
28  p.   (Conferences J. A.  de  Seve,   I).
TRUDEL, MARCEL. Notre  vocation  nordique.
Vient  de  paraitre   2:26-27, mai  1966. VANASsE,  ANDRE. La  notion de  l'etranger dans
Ia    litterature   canadienne,   IV-V.    Action
nationale 55:6o6-6r r,  844-85I, janv.,   mars
I966.


IOI

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



YON,    ARMAND.    Les   canadiens  fran ais   juges par   Ies  fran.;ais de  France,  I 830- I 939·   Ire partie:  Les   peintres  de  Ia  vie  canadienne. II: Une  ere  de  critique (I880-I9I4).  #9=
Journalistes    et    gens     de    lettres,    # I o:
Auteurs d'ouvrages "canadiens."   Revue d' histoire  de  l' Amerique  fra.nt;aise 20:56-74,
262-27 I,  juin,   sept.    1966.
WARWICK,  JACK.  Les   "pays   d'en   haut"  dans
!'imagination   canadienne-franc;aise. Etudes frant;aises  2: 265-293, oct.    I 966.

LE  ROMAN
BERNARD,   MICHEL.     Le     roman    canadien­
franc;ais.   Quibec  6:87-90, fev.   I966. BUITENHUIS,   PETER.  Canadian  literary Jetter.
New     York   times    book    review    7 I : 24-25,
July   24,  I966.
CLOUTIER, NORMAND. La contestation dans  Je nouveau  roman  canadien-franc;ais. Culture vivante 2: 9- I 5,  I 966.
-. Le  scandale du  joual.  Magazine Maclean
6: IO-I I, 26-30, fev.  I966.
ETHIER-BLAis,  JEAN. Letters in Canada: I965. Livres en franc;ais.  Romans. University of Toronto  quarterly  35:509-523,  July    I966.
FALARDEAU, JEAN-CHARLES.    Ideologies et themes sociaux dans trois  romans canadiens du  XIXe  siecle   [Robert  Loze   d'Errol Bouchette, Charles Guerin de  P.J.O.  Chau­ veau,   Jean  Rivard d'Antoine  Gerin-Lajoie]. Etudes  /ranfaises 2: 133-I6I,   juin   1966.
GAY,  PAUL. L'amour  dans   Ie roman  canadien­ fran<;ais   ( I952-I 962).   Enseignement  secon­ daire  44:233-248,  nov.-dec.  I965; 45:5-23,
5I-66, I03-I20, I5I-I73, jan./fev.-sept./oct.
I966.
PARADIS,   SUZANNE.    Femme   fictive,     femme reelle; le  personnage /Cminin  dans  le roma,n canadien-frant;ais 1884-1966.  Quebec,  Gar­ neau, I966.   330  p.
PAYETTE,   ANDRE,    ed.   Numero  special   sur   Je roman  I960-I965. Liberte  7:459-571,  nov.­
dec  !965.
RENAUD,  ANDRE.   Romans,  nouvelles et  contes, I960-I965. Livres et  auteurs  I965:7-I2. ROBIDOUX,   REJEAN     et    ANDRE     RENAUD.   Le
roman     canadien-frant;ais   du    vingtieme
siecle.    Ottawa,   Editions  de    l'Universite d'Ottawa,  I 966.  22 I   p.

I02
 VACHON,   GEORGES   ANDRE.   L'espace  politique et    social    dans    le   roman   qw§becois.   Re­ cherches  sociographiques  7:259-279,   sept.­
dec. I966.

LA  POESIE
BRAULT, JACQUES.  Une poesie  du  risque.  Cul­
ture   vivante  I :4I-44,  I966.
La   chanson  frant;aise  par   Jacques   Charpen­ treau et  autres. Montreal,  Bellarmin,  I965. I36  p.
GAGNON,   LYSIANE.    La    chanson   quebecoise.
Liberte  8:35-49,  juil.-aoil.t,    I 966.
MARTEAU,   ROBERT.   Aux   poetes  du   Quebec.
Esprit   n.s.  I 2: 77 2-776, dec.   I 966.
SYLVESTRE,   GUY.    Letters  in   Canada: I965. Livres en franc;ais.  La poesie.  University of Toronto  quarterly 35:503-509, July   I966.
VAN     SCHENDEL,   MICHEL.   Paesie    quebecoise I960-I965; l'apprivoisement  du   vertige  ou Ia  rencontre des  nouvelles traditions.  Livres et  auteurs  I965: I3-22.
WYCZYNSKI,    PAUL.   Poesie    et   symbole;   per­ spectives   du   symbolisme,  Emile   Nelligan­ Sa.int  Denys   Garneau-Anne  Hebert, la  [an­ gage    des    arbres.   Montreal,   Deom,   I965.
252  p.


LE  THEATRE

BOSCO,  MONIQUE.   Un   public de  theatre  dont on   se  moque.  Magazine  Maclean  6: 46-4 7, juil.    I966.
ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN. Letters in  Canada: I965. Livres en  fran.;ais. Theatre.  University of Toronto  quarterly 35:523-524,   July I 966.
KEMPF,   YERRI.    Les   trois   coups   a  Montreal;
chroniques  dramatiques   1959-1964. Mont­
real,   Deom, I965.   383  p.


OUVRAGES  CONSACRES AUX ECRIVAINS

ANGERS, FELICITE

LE     MOINE,   ROGER.    Laure  Conan  et   Pierre­ Alexis     Tremblay.   Revue   de    l'Universite d'Ottawa  36: 258-27 I,    500-538,   avril-juin, juil.-sept.  I 966.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



AQUIN, HUBERT
CLOUTIER, NORMAND.   Hubert  Aquin.   Maga­ zine    Maclean  6: I4-I5,   37,    40-42,    sept.  I966.

AUBERT DE  GASPE, PHILIPPE DESCHAMPS, NICOLE. Les   Anciens   canadiens
de   I 86o; une  societe de  seigneurs et  de  va­
nu-pieds.   Etudes   franl(aises	I: 3-IS,   oct. I96s.

AUBIN, NAPOLEON
 CONAN,  LAURE voir  ANGERS, FELICITE. DANTIN, LOUIS voir  SEERS, EUGENE
DESROSIERS, LEO-PAUL
RICHER,  JULIA.  Leo-Pa,ul    Desrosiers.    Mont­
real,   Fides,   rg66. I 92  p.

DUBE, MARCEL
CLOUTIER,   NORMAND.  Marcel  Dube  broie   du noir.   Magazine Maclean 6: IO,  24-27,   aoO.t I966.

DUCHARME, REJEAN

TREMBLAY, JEAN-PAUL.   Aime-NicoJas dit
Napoleon  Aubin.  Enseignement   secondaire
45:30-34,  janv.-fev.  1966.
 DUGUAY, RAOUL.  L'avaiee    des l'avaleuse  des   avaleurs!  Parti
120,  nov.-dec.  I 966.
 avales   ou
pris  4: I I4-

-. Un   journaliste satirique du  Canada  fran­
c;ais au   XIXe siecle.   Revue  de  l'Universite
Laval   2o:8I6-83I, mai   I966.

BESSETTE,  GERARD
SHORTLIFFE,  GLEN. Gerard   Bessette; ['homme et   l'ecrivain. Montreal,  Faculte  des   lettres de   l'Universite  de   Montreal,  1965.   39   p.
(Conferences J. A. de  Seve,  3).
-. Gerard   Bessette,  l'homme   et   l'ecrivain.
Etudes  franl(aises   I: I 7-42,   oct.   I965.

BLAIS, MARIE-CLAIRE
CALLAGHAN,  BARRY. An  interview with  Marie­ Claire  Blais.   Tamarack  Review    37:29-34, Autumn  I965.
LAMARCHE, JACQUES-A. La    thematique  de l'ahenation  chez    Marie-Claire  Blais.    Cite libre  16:27-32, juil.-aoO.t  I966.
MAJOR, ANDRE. L'affaire  Marie-Claire  Blais.
Vient  de   para.!tre  2: I7-r8, mai   I966. ROBILLARD,  HYACINTHE-M. Marie-Claire   Blais
ou   le   necessaire  bistouri.   M aintenant 54:
21 I-2I3, juin   I966.

BRIEN, ROGER
LEGARE,  ROMAIN.   U ne  somme poetique.  Cul­
ture   26:467-476, dec.   Ig6s.

BRUNET, BERTHELOT
CHARBONNEAU,   ROBERT. ParalleJe.  Academic canadienne-franl(aise.   Cahiers IO: I9-37, I966.
TOUPIN,  PAUL.  Les    paradoxes  d'une   vie   et
 GODIN,  GERALD.  Gallimard publie un Quebecois de    24   ans,    inconnu.  Ma,gazine    Maclean
6:57, sept.   I g66.

FAUCHER,  CLAIRE (MONTREUIL) MENARD,   JEAN. Le   dernier  roman  de   Claire Martin.  Incidences  I: 38-41,   nov.    I962.

GARNEAU, FRANCOIS-XAVIER WYCZYNSKI,   PAUL, ed.   Franr;ois-X avier   Gar­
neau;  aspects    litteraires   de    son    oeuvre.
Ottawa,  Editions de  l'Universite d'Ottawa, I966. 207  p.

GARNEAU, SAINTS-DENYS
BOURNEUF, ROLAND.  Saint-Denys  Garneau  et l'avenir  de  Ia   litterature   canadienne­ franc;aise.  Enseignement  secondaire 45: 209-
2 I 2,  nov.-dec.  I g66.
LE MOYNE, JEAN. Saint-Denys Garneau's  testi­
mony  to  his  times.  Canadian literature 28:
3I-46,  Spring  I966.

GASPE, PHILIPPE  AUBERT DE (FILS)
LACOURCIERE,  LUC. Philippe Aubert de  Gaspe
(fils).  Livres    et   auteurs canadiens I964: IS0-157·

GELINAS, GRATIEN
STRATFORD, PHILIP. Clash  at  the crossroads; Gratien Gelinas' Hier, les en/ants dansaient. Revue d'etudes canadiennes I:40-42, nov. Ig66.

d'une  oeuvre.  Montreal,   Cercle  du   Livre 	GODBOUT, JACQUES
de  France, I96s.  I38  p. 	GARNEAU, RENE.  Jacques   Godbout;   revolte

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



plutot  que   revolution.  Mercure  de   France
354: 556-560,  1965. GRANDBOIS,  ALAIN
BAUDOT,  JEAN A. Dictionnaire  du  vocabulaire
d'Alain   Grandbois.  Montreal,   Centre   de calcul    de   l'Universite  de   Montreal,   1966. gog   p.
HEBERT, ANNE
AYLWIN, ULRIC. Vers   une  lecture de  !'oeuvre d'Anne  Hebert.  Barre  du   jour  2: 2-11,  ete
1966.
BESSETTE,  GERARD.    La    dislocation  dans    ]a poesie   d'Anne  Hebert.  Revue  de  l'Univer­ site   d'Ottawa  g6:5o-6o,   janv.-mars   1966.
ROCHON, CLAUDE. Le   temps    sauvage  ou   Ia souffrance  criee.  Incidences   1 1:43-45, automne  1966.
HEMON, LOUIS
GABOURY,   PLACIDE.   La   structure  romanesque dans    !'oeuvre  de   Lois   Hernon.   Enseigne­ ment   secondaire 45: 185-20 I,  216-242, sept.­  oct.,   nov.-dec. 1966.
JASMIN, CLAUDE
MARCOTTE, GILLES. L'aventure  romanesque de Claude  Jasmin. Montreal,  Faculte  des  let­ tres    de    l'Universite  de    Montreal,    1965.
28  p.   (Conferences J. A.  de  Seve,  4).

LANGEVIN, GILBERT
DUGUAY, RAOUL.  Gilbert   Langevin,   poete maudit. Pa,rti pris 4:97-IOI, sept.-oct. 1966.

LEVEILLEE, CLAUDE
CLARI, JEAN-CLAUDE.  Notes  sur  deux  chansons de    Claude   Leveillee.   Liberte   46: 58-62, juil.-aoO.t  1966.
 des    lettres   de    l'Universite   de    Montreal,
1966.  44  p.  (Conferences J. A. de  Seve,  6).
MORIN, PAUL
CHARBONNEAU,   ROBERT. Paral!e]e.   Aca,demie canadienne-franfaise.  Cahiers  10:19-37,
1966.

NELLIGAN, EMILE
Numero  special  de  Poesie,  automne  1966.

PANNETON, PHILIPPE
BROUILLETTE,   BENOIT. Geographic   et  !ittera­
ture. Societe Royale du  Canada. Memoires.
4e  ser.,  t.g,  sec.  I: 13-18,   juin  1965.
RAINIER, LUCIEN  voir    MELANCON,    JOSEPH­ MARIE
RINGUET,  VOir PANNETON,  PHILIPPE

ROY, GABRIELLE
GAULIN,  MICHEL.  La    route    d' Altamont   de
Gabrielle  Roy.   Incidences   10:27-38,  aoilt
1966.
GENUIST, MONIQUE. La   creation  romanesque chez    Gabrielle Roy.  Montreal,  Cercle  du Livre   de  France, I g66.   174  p.
MURPHY, JOHN  J.  Alexandre Chenevert; Gabrielle  Roy's   crucified Canadian. Queen's quarterly  72:334-346,   Summer  1965.

SAVARD, FELIX-ANTOINE
BROCHU,  ANDRE. Menaud OU  ]'impossible fete. Action  nationale  56: 266-291' nov.   Ig66. ETHIER-BLAIS,  JEAN. Le  vol  des  oies  sauvages.
Incidences 2:99-105,  fev.  Ig66.
Felix-Antoine  Savard.  Lectures   12: I38-194, fev.-mars  1966.

SEERS, EUGENE

MARTIN,  CLAIRE voir  FAUCHER, CLAIRE  (MONT­ REUIL)

MELANCON, JOSEPH-MARIE
 BEAULIEU, Dantin.
1966.
 PAUL. L'oeuvre  poetique de  Louis
Etudes   franfaises	2:73-98,    fev.

MARIE-HENRIETTE-DE-JESUS, Soeur.  Lucien Rainier   (abbe    joseph-Marie Melan(on); l'homme   et    !'oeuvre,  par    Soeur    Marie­ Henriette-de-]esus,    Olivier     Durocher (pseud.).  Montreal, Editions   du   Levrier, Ig66.   345  p.
MIRON, GASTON
BRAULT, JACQUES. Gaston  Miron,  poete    du quotidien. Culture vivante 2: 6-8,  1966.
Miron  le   magnifique. Montreal,  Faculte
 TARDIVEL, JULES-PAUL
SAVARD,    PIERRE.  Jules-Paul  Tardive!,    I85I­ I905;  heraut  du    Canada   franc;ais   tradi­ tionnel. Livres et  auteurs  I g65: 170-1 71.
-. Jules-Paul  Tardive!  et   Louis    Veuillot. Enseignement   secondaire  45:85-99,   mars­ avril   Ig66.

VIGNEAULT, GILLES
FOURNIER, ROGER. Gilles   Vigneault.  Liberte
46:50-57,  juil.-aout  1966.
