$2.00  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·53
Summer,1972


OF HE:2lVENLY HOUNDS  :2lND E:2lRTHLY MEN


Articles

BY FRASER SUTHERLAND, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, RONALD SUTHERLAND, KATHLEEN O'DONNELL, JAMES POLK, JEAN  RIGAULT


Translation

FROM JEAN  DE BREBEUF


Review Articles and Reviews

BY D. G. JONES, W. H. NEW, DONALD CAMERON, SANDRA DJWA, CHRISTOPHER XERXES  RINGROSE, MARYA FIAMENGO,  MORRIS WOLFE, D. G. SPETI1GUE, DESMOND  PACEY, PAT BARCLAY


Opinions and Notes 	\

BY ROBERT HARLOW, GEORGE WOODCOCK


A QUARTERLY OF
CRITICISM AND REVIEW













OR EVERY BELLOWS BURST...







An intellectual hatred is the worst,
So let her think  opinions are accursed. Have  I not seen the loveliest woman born Out  of the mouth  of Plenty's  horn, Because of her opinionated mind
Barter that  horn and every good
By quiet  natures understood
For an old bellows  full of angry wind  ...


So,  PRAYING  for his daughter  and  animadverting on  his love for  the  splendid   Maud  Gonne-ruined by nationalist  politics-wrote W.  B. Yeats. These  days  his words  return  to  me, not  only -and  most appropriately
-in connection  with  his  native  Ireland,  but  also when  I see the  rising effects
of  "intellectual hatred" in  Canada  as well. Here  I refer not  only to  what  has gone on in  Quebec,  but  also to much  that  happens  in Anglophone  Canada.
Canadian Literature is not  a  journal  of politics, but  there are  ways in which
the literary  and  the  political  life unavoidably  meet. When  any country  emerges into  a sense of the need  to claim its political destiny, it is inevitable-and  just
-that  writers should  be called on to speak  (which  is their  way of acting), and with a very few exceptions -Mordecai Richler is perhaps  the most distinguished and  certainly  the  most  regrettable -Canadian  writers  have  taken  their  stand

3

EDITORIAL



for  independence. They   have  shown  themselves-to use  an  uneasy  but  exact word -patriots.
But,  as  I  have  said  elsewhere,  patriotism and  nationalism are  not  the  same. The patria is a cultural and  physical  entity,  a land  and  a way of life that  accept love;  the  nation   is a  political  entity,  a  machine that  demands obedience. It is the  failure to  understand this  truth   that  still  produces so many  fruitless  contro­ versies which,  through the  present  close link  between  literature and  the academy in  Canada, impinge upon  the  world  of writing. Even  twenty  years  ago,  a con­ troversy   over   the  employment  of  American  scholars   in   Canadian   universities would  have sounded a distant  drum  for most Canadian writers. Now that  CanLit has  become  an  academic field,  in  which  courses  are  proliferating from  year  to year,  we  find  ourselves  forced  to  listen  to  the  confusions of  those  who  seek  to apply  political  criteria  where,  as the experience of so many  totalitarian lands  has shown  us, their effects can only be fatal.
Too   often   the  arguers   tend   to  divide  themselves into   dogmatic blacks  and
whites,  in an  area  of light  where  it is only the  prismatic colours  of creation that count. After  five  recent  months  abroad, which  only  enhanced my sense of  per­ sonal  identity with  Canada, I returned to find the same  old  issues being threshed out   in  Canadian  Forum.  In  a  feature entitled   "The  Canadianization  of  our Literature Departments", S.  P.  Rosenbaum, a  Canadian who  appears to  have spent  some  decades  in the  United  States  before  returning to run  a small  English Department  in   Ontario,  criticizes   the   more  extravagant  talk  of  our   cultural nationalists (e.g.  the  Mathews-Steele demands  for  citizenship quotas  applied   to teachers in  Canadian universities)   and  suggests  also  that   the  creation of  more courses  in  Canadian  Literature may  not  be  the  best  way  to  encourage a  real feeling for what  writers are doing in this country.
Valid  as these arguments may  be, they are  advanced with  a cold intellectuality
and   a  curious  imperviousness to  the  depth   of  feeling-the sense of  frustrated need -that  today  inspires  the  resolve of Canadians to create a culture of their own,  independent and  expressing  a consciousness  that  -whether  one chooses to call it regional  or national-is unlike any other. It is a matter of opinions versus feelings  and,  as  Yeats  knew,  in  that  struggle  it  is always  safest  to  trust  feelings. This  is the  conclusion  that   Professor  Rosenbaum's opponent, Henri Beissel, has unfortunately also missed. Though he lacks the  peculiar acrimony of ecrivains manques  that   distinguishes  the  leaders  of  the  academic Canadianist movement, he still bases his arguments on strangely  legalistic  criteria. "What our  nationalists are  interested  in  knowing," says  Professor  Beissel, "is  a  man's  citizenship since

4

EDITORIAL



that  is the measure of his commitment  ... " It is, of course, nothing  of the kind. Patriotism   and  citizenship  have  no  necessary connection,  nor  have  citizenship and  commitment, for  the  simple  reason that  the acquisition  of citizenship  is a mere  form  which  the  most  cynical  of intriguers  can  and  often  does adopt  in order  to further   his  own  ends.  A man  who hesitates to take  up  citizenship  be­ cause  he  feels  that  forms  are  meaningless may  in  fact  have  a  truer  sense  of identity  with Canada than  a man  who hastens to take the oath  merely to make sure  af    his  job. So  far  as  writers  are  concerned-I leave  it  for  others  more qualified  to speak  of teachers  of literature -it  is in  their  work  rather  than  in the  political  acts  they  may  perform  outside their  writing  life that  we must look for evidence of their commitment.
The  truth  is that  the  feelings  which  accompany  a  man's  transfer  from  one land  to another,  from one culture  to another,  are far too complex to be funneled into that  moment  when, in some courtroom,  he takes an oath and signs a paper. We  would  certainly  have  a  poorer  literature,  and  a  less interesting  society, if there  were no-one  here  but  birthright  Canadians.  Yet there is no simple way of changing   over,  no  total  and  irrevocable  moment  of  rebirth  in  which  a  man ceases to be a foreigner  and  becomes a Canadian. Our  greatest Canadians have often  been  precisely  those  in  whom  the  impulses of  their  originating  cultures survived  most strongly.  (Was  not even Sir John  A. Macdonald conscious to the end  that  he could not discard  his British roots, and are not an essential Scottish­ ness and  a  radical  Irishness  necessary components  in  the peculiar  achievements of Hugh  MacLennan and Morley Callaghan?)
Here  the  most salutary  book that  has been published  in Canada for many  a
day is undoubtedly  Nairn Kattan's Reality and Theatre  (Anansi, $6.50), which appeared   two  years  ago  in  Montreal  in  its original  French,  and  last  year  in Paris.  Kattan, who was born  in Bagdad  44 years ago and  migrated  to Canada
I 8  years  ago,  has  been  a  contributor to  Canadian  Literature  almost  from  its beginnings,  commenting   with  the sensitivity of an  outsider  steadily  moving  in­ ward  on  Canadian writers  in  both  our  languages. His  past  presents an  almost kaleidoscopic  pattern   of shifts, from  the Jewish ambience  of his  childbirth into the Arab  world, and  thence  on to the peripheries of English culture  and into the luminous  vortex  of Paris,  until at last he came to Canada and settled.  That  the end  af   such  a  pilgrimmage  should  have  been Canada  and  not  France  is some­ thing  that  can only be understood  by reading  Reality  and Theatre. It is a series of essays, circling  round  a central  theme  that  in  Middle East, from  which  Kat­ tan  came,  man-whether  he is Moslem or Jewish-faces  reality  directly and

5

EDITORIAL



nature as  an  enemy,   without   the  mediation of  icons,  while  in  the  west  such mediation is a  necessary  part  of man's  approach, so that   in  every  way  life  be­ comes  a succession  of theatres. This  results  in  a  progressive  loss of contact  with reality,  the  death   in  life  that   characterizes modem  civilizations  and  which  en­ traps   even   the   peoples  of  the   East  as  they  are  led  away   by  the  passions  of nationalism. Among  the  many  striking  sentences of a classically  aphoristic book, Kattan makes  a  notable  distinction   between   the  fates  of  civilizations  and  those of individuals (of whom, after all, cultures are composed).

Death  comes in  any case. It ends  as winner,  and  no civilisation  has escaped  its reign. Only a few isolated individuals, exiles from civilisation, escape death's domination, accepting  each day  as a rebirth.  Doubtless  they merely postpone  the final  deadline.   But  when  it  comes, they  do  not  depart   as  losers. They  do  not submit before their time.

The most  significant  of the  essays of  Reality  and Theatre to those  Canadians who  share  with  Kattan our  multiple  origins is that  chapter, entitled  "The Word and   the  Place", in  which  he  talks  of  his  own  voluntary exile  and   his  equally voluntary acceptance of  a  new  home.  And,  for  anyone -immigrant or  birth­ right-who   attempts  to  live  with   full   awareness  in   that   peculiar   d}Tiamic equilibrium of origins  and  cultures  which  we  call  Canada, the  last  sentences of his  book  bear  a  salutary mes<>age:  that  we  cannot create our  present by  reject­  ing our  past.

If I accept  the  fact of being divided  between  communion  and  the  ancient  hope, it is because  I reject the division of being, I refuse to live simultaneously  in two worlds.  My  two  universes are  not superimposed.  They  continue  each  other,  pro­ long  one  another   in  the  movement  that  is  life.  Though   my  relationship  with reality  is  conscious,  it  is  not  frozen  by  a  lucidity  of  awareness  that  rules  out adventure or  chance.  Alternation  within  continuity  is creation; and  my  rapport  with  others  is  not  a  closed  achievement   but  an  eternal  starting-point. I  have opted  for  a  language  which  I  must  invent  as  I  speak.  I  have  chosen  a  place which  I endow  with presence by inscribing  my invention  upon  it. I have  chosen a  rapport with  others  which, far  from  imprisoning  them  in  their  own  language or  in  a  fixed  place  not  of  their  choosing,  draws  them  into  a  movement  where language,  place and  the Other  are invented  every  moment,  obliging me to invent myself. I do not accept the fixity of safe places or the comfort  of certitudes.

* 	* 	*
As  I have   been  writing  these  last  words,  on  a  darker  morning than   June should  offer,  a  flat  voice from  Toronto has  announced over  the  radio  the  death

6

EDITORIAL



of Edmund  Wilson. There  can have been few practical  critics who-in the past generation-have entirely  escaped the  influence of  this  man  who  raised reviewing  once  again  from  a  mere  craft  to  the  kind  of  art  that  Hazlitt  had once  practiced.  His  polymathic  grasp of so many  fields of knowledge, used by a  supple  and  penetrating intelligence,  enriched  his writing  in  every direction, and  books like  Axefs Castle,  The   Wound   and  the  Bow  and  To  the  Finland Station  became  classics in  their  own  time  and  are  likely  to  remain  so. In  0
Canada, though  his  vision was at times a little blurred,  Wilson showed  a sym­
pathetic  understanding, before other  American  writers,  of the forces that  were creating a native Canadian literature.

GEORGE WOODCOCK






































7



HEMINGWAY

AND CALLAGHAN



Friends and Writers



Fraser Sutherland





IF MORLEY  CALLAGHAN  has a hound  of heaven on h;. tmil, it is  probably  Ernest  Hemingway,  for  Callaghan cannot  escape  the  Hemingway
legend. This  is what  comes of knowing a famous  writer  in his struggling  years. No matter  where  Callaghan  turns  people will ask what  Hemingway  was really like and  worse, from  Callaghan's  point of view, find the work of the two writers similar.
The   details  of  their  friendship  are  well  known,  and  Callaghan   has  helped make them so in That  Summer  in Paris. Indeed, he hardly  does a talk or article on a literary subject  without at least one mention  of Hemingway; possibly this is inevitable for perhaps no writer, except Joyce, has had more influence on the techniques  of modem  literature  in  English. The  friendship  lasted  from  the  fall of  1923,  when  Hemingway  briefly returned   to  Toronto from  Europe,  to  late
1929,  when  a  barrage   of  letters  ensued  over  a  rumour   that   Callaghan   had
knocked out Hemingway  in a Paris gym. Callaghan hadn't, though  he did knock Hemingway  down,  partly due  to the fact  that  Scott  Fitzgerald,  acting  as time­ keeper, accidentally  prolonged the round. "All right, Scott, if you want to see me getting the shit knocked out of me, just say so,m Hemingway  had told an aghast Fitzgerald.  Hemingway   claimed,  then  and  later,  that   he'd  had  a  long,  boozy lunch  at  a local restaurant  before the bout,  to the detriment of his boxing.2   The episode -and  its aftermath -is trivial, but  it does point up the surfeit of pride Hemingway  and  Callaghan  shared.  One  might  have  expected  the  friendship  to end like this:  both  writers were zealous in their  own interest  and even had simi-

8

HEMINGWAY AND  CALLAGHAN



lar  features, if one  may  believe John  Glassco's amusing  account: "Morley  Cal­ laghan  was short,  dark,  and roily-polly, and wore a striped shirt without a collar; with his moon face and  little moustache he looked very like Hemingway; he had even the same shrewd  little politician's eyes, the same lopsided grin and ingratiat­ ing voice."3   Fellow politicians or not, the two writers were running, and as in the feria at Pamplona, the running had its hazards.
Without   question,   Hemingway  was  vital  to  the  first  phase  of  Callaghan's
career.  "No  man  meant  more  to me than  Emest,"4   Callaghan  remarks.  While Callaghan  went to law school in Toronto and worked summers at the Star, Hemingway  acted  as a sort of Paris literary agent for him, showing his stories to Ezra  Pound,  Ford  Madox  Ford and  Fitzgerald. Fitzgerald  spoke well of Callag­ han  to  Max  Perkins,  Scribner's  editor  in  New York, and  Scribner's  went on to publish  Callaghan's first two books, Strange Fugitive and  A Native  Argosy. Per­ haps  more  important was the  timely encouragement   Hemingway  gave  during  his Toronto  stay:  "You're a real writer. You write big time stuff. All  you  need to do is keep on  writing."5   A writer may indeed succeed  without  a single word of praise or support  from  another  older writer  (Hemingway was three years and five months older)  but  he will become more bitter than  he has to be. "There has to be some one person in the world who thinks you're good,"6   Callaghan  himself once told Robert  Weaver.
Though   he  frankly  confesses his early  debt  to  Hemingway,  Callaghan   goes
on  to say in That Summer  in Paris that  "In  the years since those days he had gone far  along  another   path."7   In  reviewing the careers of both  men,  however, one  finds that  the  paths  are  comparable.  Every career  has its pattern,  and  the patterns  of Hemingway's and  Callaghan's careers have similar shape.  Both had some  of  their  early  success  with  stories  published  in  Paris  "little"   magazines, before  decisively  breaking  through  to  widely-read  outlets  in  the  United  States like Atlantic Monthly and Scribner's Magazine.
By  1929,   however,  Hemingway   had  produced  his  greatest  work:  The   Sun
Also Rises, A Farewell to Arms, and the superb stories of In Our Time and Men Without Women. Callaghan had  written  some fine stories in  A  Native  Argosy but  his first novel was not good enough to be truly lasting, and  neither  were the works that  shortly  followed it: the novella, No Man's  Meat, published in  Paris (1931), and  the novels It's  Never Over  (1930) and  A Broken  journey  (1932). In  terms  of popular  acceptance,  though,  the early books had  a modest success. For  Callaghan   the  success was soured  by the  Scribner's  promotion  that  linked his work with Hemingway's. Callaghan  seems to have bitterly resented this, and


9

HEMINGWAY AND CALLAGHAN



his admirers  have never tired of piously decrying the terrible injustice perpetrated by Scribner's  copy-writers and  by critics who dared  to associate the two writers.
The  Thirties  were to be good years for both Hemingway  and Callaghan  as far as volume was concerned. But in overall quality, Callaghan's work would triumph. Hemingway  would  produce the two 'non-fiction'  works, Death in the  Afternoon (I 932)  and  Green  Hills of  Africa  (I 935), the fourteen  stories of Winner  Take Nothing   ( I935)   and  the  broken-form  novel, To  Have  and  Have  Not  ( I937)· The   Fifth  Column  and  the  First Forty-Nine  Stories,  mainly  comprising  earlier work, was published in I938. Looking over it all, though,  no one could deny that some kind of decline had taken place.
In  the  same  year  as Winner   Take   Nothing   appeared  Callaghan's  parable­ novel Such  is My  Beloved. This  book, and  three  others  which  quickly  followed it-They Shall Inherit  the Earth  ( I935), More  joy in Heaven  ( I937)  and  the short  stories of  Now  That   April's  Here  ( I936)  -marked the  peak of  Callag­ han's career. During the decade Callaghan  settled down in Toronto, but Heming­  way, with  his extreme life style, was on the move:  from  Tanganyika to Cuba  to Spain.  The  books began to be less integrated  works than  by-products of a legend.
After the fine flow of the Twenties and  Thirties  both  writers entered  a period of drought.  Callaghan  called his a time of "spiritual  dryness."8   Whether  one calls it accidie or simply "Black-Ass",9  as Hemingway did, it is the valley of the shadow to  any  writer.  Callaghan's lasted  from   I938  to  I948  when  two  short-and slight-works appeared, Luke  Baldwin's Vow  and The Varsity  Story. Heming­ way,  too,  would  come  upon  arid  days, ten  years from  the  publication  of For Whom the  Bell Tolls  to  I950 and  his worst book, Across the  River and Into the Trees.  During  the long period  of limbo, Hemingway  spent  much  of his time in legend-making: touring the Far East for the newspaper PM; hunting German submarines  in the Gulf Stream;  and helping to free Paris from the Axis.
Callaghan  was busy in the war years and  he too was building a public image,
though  one rather  different from Hemingway's.  After  I943 he toured the country as chairman  of the  CBC radio show that  became  known  as "Citizen's Forum". Thus   emerged  the  Morley  Callaghan   of  radio  and   television:   pipe-smoking, affable, folksy, the homey underlilt of Irish brogue and  just a whiff of the cracker barrel  philosopher. Besides his "Citizen's  Forum" stint, and the later appearances on  the TV  show, "Fighting Words",  Callaghan  also, like Hemingway,  kept his hand   in  magazine   journalism,  with  pieces for  Saturday   Night  and  the  now­ defunct New World.

IO

HEMINGWAY AND  CALLAGHAN



By 1948, Callaghan  felt able to resume "serious" writing. Luke Baldwin's Vow, a  juvenile-novel  (an  expanded  version of the unbearably-titled  short story, "The Little  Business Man") and  a quasi-novella,  The  Varsity  Story,  were  published, the  latter  to  help  out  a  University  of  Toronto  fund  drive. The   Loved  and  the Lost followed in 1951  and  brought  him the Governor General's  Award for  Fic­ tion, the first of many  honours. The  award  was an example of the "sigh of  relief effect" that  often comes when a writer, barren for a long spell, bears forth some­ thing that  at least resembles a worthwhile work. The same phenomenon occurred in 1952  with  the  publication  of Hemingway's  The  Old  Man  and  the  Sea that won  the  Nobel  Prize  for  him,  a  sort  of  universal sigh  of relief after  the  long drought  of the Forties and  the critically-disastrous Across the River and  Into the Trees.
After  The   Loved  and  the  Lost, there  was an eight-year  fallow  until  Morley Callaghan)s Stories was published in 1959, and The  Many  Colored Coat in 1960. At this  point  the  critic  Edmund Wilson intervened  with one of his papal  bulls, published  in The  New  Yorker  and  later in 0 Canada:  An  American's  Notes on Canadian   Culture, to  the  effect  that   a  neglected  Callaghan   deserved  to  be canonized  with  the like of Chekhov and Turgenev.  There  was a strong  reaction to the charge of unjust neglect, but whether his reputation was new-found or not, it  was, as George  Woodcock says, "quietly  brought  to earth,  and  by Callaghan himself,  who  published  a  novel-A  Passion in  Rome-which  not  even  his most  devoted   admirers   could  compare  with  the  masterpieces  of  the  Russian Golden  Age.mo  Callaghan's  next  work,  That   Summer   in  Paris  ( 1953)   was, however, a success in every sense. Now, one awaits publication  of his new novel, Thumbs Down  on  julien  ]ones, from  which  four  excerpts  were  broadcast  on CBC Radio in June  1970.
For Hemingway,  the later  years were not those of fallow and then harvest but
almost a total drought, silence except for a few attempts  half carried  through  and work  on  the  beautiful,  bitter  A  Moveable   Feast, published  in  1964  after  his death: silence until that shotgun blast in Ketchum, Idaho.




CALLAGHAN's RESISTANCE to any attempt  to associate him with Hemingway  has been bolstered by a few knights who come stumbling  to his defence. One of these is Brandon  Conron, who writes :


II

HEMINGWAY  AND CALLAGHAN



The  history of Callaghan's  image is charged  with irony. His literary  reputation was  jeopardized  from  the  very beginning  when  Scribner's  Magazine  linked  him with  Hemingway.  The  effects of  this association  are  not  yet obliterated. Almos.t every  review of Callaghan's  early works, and  even of many  of his later  writings, contains  the  inevitable,  and  too often  irrelevant,  mention  of  Hemingway.  Most critics,  indeed,  in  their  confidence of  the  similarity  of style in  these two writers have  never  bothered  to  examine  carefully  Callaghan's work.  Their   reviews are full  of  frills, inaccuracies  and  misinterpretations because  they  failed  to  see that his fictional technique is highly originalY


This   is  nonsense  of  course.  Callaghan's technique is not  highly  original   but derives  from  a "school" of North  American writing that  has common techniques and  at least some of the same concerns. When  Hemingway said that  "All  modem American literature  comes from  one  book  by  Mark Twain called  Huckleberry Finn"12  he was pointing  out  this school, a North  American branch of what  Cyril Connolly, in  Enemies of  Promise, calls "The New Vernacular". The  writers  who followed  Twain, whether   at  a  first or  further remove,  had  a  wide-eyed  way  of looking  at  the  world,  an  innocence of  perception that  in  story-form allied  itself with  seemingly  dull-witted narrators. Twain  and   his heirs  travelled light.  They might  have  read  all the books in the world,  but  this in no way  blurred the clear­ sighted  integrity of their  vision. All surplus  intellectual baggage was shucked  off, whole  trunkloads of  western  culture, for  the  sake  of seeing,  tasting,  feeling  on one's  own.  Though Callaghan's overall  vision  depends to a  degree  on  a species of  Catholicism,  he  believed  with   the  others   in  keeping  his  lens  clean.   From  Huckleberry   Finn  to  Sherwood   Anderson's Winesburg,  Ohio  to  Hemingway's In  Our  Time   this  line  has  profoundly affected   modem  writing, in  poetry  spin­  ning  off  the  movement called  Imagism   and  in  tum,  Ezra  Pound and   William Carlos   Williams.  Callaghan, through  Anderson and  Hemingway -and  like all the  others -drew  on  this  bank  of resources  and  all  of those  writers  could  have espoused  his de<;ire to have writing  "as transparent a'l glass.m 3
Victor  Hoar  is another one of those who are  quick  to defend  the  unblemished maidenhood of Callaghan's work, citing Hemingway as one "to  whom  Callaghan has  been  persistently  and  tediously  compared."14  After  saying  this,  Hoar goes on to compare, with  ::;ome justification, the  figures  of Marion Gibbons in  A Broken journey  and  Lady  Brett  Ashley in The  Sun  Also Rises. Callaghan himself  pro­ tests  too  much.   When  Robert   Weaver  tells Callaghan that  "the  Canadian  idea used to be that  you are sort of a Canadian Hemingway", he replies:

12

HEMINGWAY AND  CALLAGHAN



I really don't  know what  to do with  people. You shouldn't  blame  this on Cana­ dians.  You  see, the  difference  is that  as soon as a  new writer  appears,  you feel uncomfortable   unless you  can  label  him  or  link him  with  something.  And  I - unfortunately or  fortunately as the  case may be-was  linked  with  Hemingway. All my early stories were appreciated   by Hemingway, that's  true.  He really liked them,  but  then  we had  the  same editor,  Max  Perkins, at  Scribner's.... But  the relationship   was  very flimsy in  terms  of  writing so what  I would  like some  of these boys to do is get a collection of my stories and  get a collection of the early Hemingway  stories, and  sit  down  and  read  them.  Wyndham  Lewis, the  English critic, did  this;  and  he wrote  a piece about it-he was astounded  by it. He said that  he  went  on  for  years  thinking  that  I  was somehow  or  other  very close to Hemingway   until  he  read  a  collection of my stories. Wyndham  Lewis said  that he  could  see a very  close relationship  between me and  Tolstoy  but  he could  see very little between me and Hemingway.15

Every  writer  likes to be compared with Tolstoy  but  it's not  quite  so cosy being likened  to a contemporary. No writer  likes to be called a camp-follower, imitator, or  sycophant. Callaghan is none  of these  but  it's silly to  pretend that  he  didn't learn  from  Hemingway, almost  as silly as to claim  that  "his  fictional  technique is highly  original." After  taking  Callaghan's advice  and  reading a  collection   of his stories-in  fact  all  his works-I have  found  dozens  of meeting-points with Hemingway's fiction.
Both Callaghan and  Hemingway have been concerned  with  telling a story from the  point  of  view  of  someone who  is  "abnormal", a  difficult  problem for  any writer. The  early  Callaghan stories, like "Amuck in  the  Bush"  and  "A  Country Passion" succeed  very well, and  in the same  way as Hemingway's "Up in  Michi­ gan". In  "Amuck in  the  Bush"  Gus Rapp, a lumberyard worker,  gets in  a fight with  the  boss,  is  fired,  and   drinks  some  squirrel  whiskey.  Planning  to  revenge himself  on  Walton, the  boss, he sits with  "his  head in his hands, spitting at  a bug crawling on  the  picket  walk  and  thinking about  grabbing the  kid  that   always became   Mrs.  Walton when  he  thought about  it much."'6   He  assaults  Walton's wife  and  daughter. Failing in  the  kidnap attempt he is later  captured. As he is put  into  the  police  car  "the kids  yelled and  threw  pebbles  and sticks  at  him."17
His  mental fog  as  thick  at  the  end  as it  was at  the  start, the  things  he  cannot change inside  him  have  their  correlatives in a crawling bug,  a screeching night­ bird,  a swooping bat.
This  literary country is sometimes  called  Moronia and  another of its denizens is Jim Cline,  the  ex-convict protagonist of "A  Country Passion". Cline  wants to marry   Ettie  Corley,  a  pathetic sixteen-year-old who  is about "to  go away  to  an

HEMINGWAY AND CALLAGHAN



institution  in Barrie."18  When he takes Ettie for a drive he is charged  with seduc­ tion and  abduction. He convinces himself that  if he escapes he could "get people behind him."19 He does escape, only to be re-captured.
Gus Rapp  and Jim Cline might well be cousins of Jim Gilmour in "Up in Michigan". Gilmour,  a  blacksmith, "came  to Hortons  Bay from  Canada." One night  he gets drunk  and  lays the shy hired  girl at  his boarding  house. The  girl, who  has wanted  yet been frightened  of this, is left with  a drunken  Jim sleeping on the dock -their  bed -and a "cold mist coming up through  the woods from the bay."20  Just  as Gus Rapp  has a sexual desire for Mrs. Walton, without  being able to know it as such, so Liz Coates desires Gilmour.  Her  pathos is that  all she gets in return  for this feeling, a tender  one, is a hard  ride on a harder  dock.
The  single or dual  point of view; the simple,  direct  diction  and  clipped  dia­
logue;  the use of repetition to denote  welled-up feeling  (the  verb "liked"21  or its variants  are used nine times in the fairly short third  paragraph of "Up in Michi­ gan")  are  all  devices Callaghan   and  Hemingway   use in  giving  voices  to  the inarticulate. It is part of their legacy from Twain  and Anderson.
The  Hemingway  influence lessens after  the early stories and  Strange  Fugitive, though  one  may find traces of it in  all Callaghan's work. Even  as late  as The Loved and the Lost, one sees passages like this:

The  church hung  there in the snow; it could sail away lightly like a ship in the snow. Then  he turned and looked at Peggy's lifted face, on which the snowflakes glistened and melted, making her blink her eyes. He looked again at the church and  then  at  her face. Her shoulders were white, his own arms were white, and the  slanting  snow  whirled  around  them.  Feeling  wonderfully lighthearted  he started to laugh.22

The  main  features  of the style:  the subtle  alliteration  of the  w's;  the  repetition of a  key word,  "snow"; and  the simple straightforward diction  all could  have been learned  from  Hemingway. This is not to say that  Callaghan lacks a style of his own, one different  in some respects from  Hemingway. Hemingway's pacing, for  instance,  is much  more  urgent,  the  tempo  quicker.  A Callaghan  story is a heavy mist or at  most a spring shower; a Hemingway  story is a rainstorm. Cal­ laghan's  irony tends to be more subtle than  Hemingway's; his lyricism has a dif­ ferent  rhythm,  and  the details he chooses are more abstract.  But these differences are secondary; in general they have the style of their school.
Callaghan's view of style, says Woodcock, "is  essentially moralistic, and  every one of his works fails or succeeds according to the ability with  which he manipu­ lates  the  element  of  parable  within  it."23   The  choice  of  the  parable-form, the

HEMINGWAY AND  CALLAGHAN



mould  into  which  the style is poured,  is the one major  technical  difference  be­ tween  the  work of the  two  writers. Although  there  is always a moral  centre  to Hemingway's  work, the only thoroughgoing  parable  he ever wrote was The  Old Man  and the  Sea. The  Callaghan  book which best develops the parable's  poten­ tial is Such  is My  Beloved,  in which the young priest, Father  Dowling, is deter­ mined to give meaning  to Christian love and in doing so is driven to madness. In loving two  prostitutes  in  his own way, he is destroyed by  pimps, hypocrites and Pharisees. He is a smashed  man, like so many of  Hemingway's people and espe­ cially Frederic  Henry  in A Farewell to Arms. In his Spectator review of Heming­ way's A Moveable  Feast Callaghan  sneers at what  he calls "the  farewell to anns  theme".24   Though   A  Farewell to  Arms  is a  romance  and  not a  parable-novel, how  like Father   Dowling's  situation  is the  one  in  which  Frederic  Henry  finds himself:

If people bring so much courage to this world the world has to kill them to break them, so of course it kills them. The world breaks everyone and afterward many are strong at  the broken places. But those that  will not break it kills. It kills the very good and the very gentle, and the very brave impartially. If you are none of these you can be sure it will kill you but there will be no special hurry.25

Father  Dowling  is one  of those "strong  at the  broken places".  Like Henry, too, he has made a kind of "separate peace"." 6
Of  course, the formal  Christian  vision which Callaghan  brings to Such is My
Beloved  ("Man's career  occurs in the imperfect  world of time,  but  its meaning
... depends  finally on  a larger  reality out of time," 27    as Hugo  McPherson  puts it)  is very different  from  that  in most of Hemingway's  work, as is its structural co-efficient, the  parable  form.  But Callaghan  is not more "religious"  than Hem­ ingway. With both,  the object is to make the best of human  possibilities, and the ethic revealed in their work is a species of humanism.
Interestingly  enough,  the  figure of the  "smashed  man",  of which  Dowling is one example,  recurs  through  all of Callaghan's  and  Hemingway's  work. Young or old, the smashed  man -usually  the central  figure of the story -is wrecked by the forces of nature  or  his society. With Hemingway,  the damage  is usually, though  not always, done  by nature; in the case of Callaghan it is usually society. Jim Cline and Gus Rapp are smashed men, as is K. Smith, the hangman  in "Two Fishermen". Smith  is a pleasant  little guy who likes to go fishing, yet at the end of the story, "Smitty  had  his hands over his head, to shield his face as the crowd pelting  him yelling, 'Sock the little rat. Throw  the runt  into the lake'." 28   In the

HEMINGWAY AND  CALLAGHAN



novels, too, the  central figure is always a smashed man. Harry Trotter in Strange Fugitive  and  Kip  Caley  in  More  Joy in  Heaven both  die in  a burst  of gunfire. John  Hughes in It's  Never  Over  and  Peter  Gould in  A Broken  Journey  are  both reduced  to a kind  of numbness,  Gould  with  his broken back  and  Hughes severed from  his  girl:   "It was  such  a  cold  wind  it  was  more  important Lillian  should not  miss  the  car   than   they  should  go  on  talking."29   Bill  Lawson   in  the  early novella  "In His  Own  Country", and  Father Dowling in Such  is My  Beloved  are driven   insane.   Andrew   Aikenhead  in  They Shall   Inherit  the  Earth, Jim  Mc­ Alpine  in The Loved  and  the  Lost  and  Harry Lane in The  Many Colored  Coat all lose jobs and  social  rank.  Sam  Raymond, the  painter turned  photographer in A  Passion in  Rome   arrives  in  Rome  a  broken  man  though he is  healed,  or  per­ haps  annealed, by the  fires of aesthetic,  erotic  and  divine  passion  that  Callaghan attempts to stoke all at once.
It would  be tiresome  to recite all the broken  men  in Hemingway's fiction. The portraits range  from  Krebs in "Soldier's Home" (a  preview  of Jean-Paul Sartre's novel,  Nausea) to  Harry in  "The Snows  of  Kilimanjaro" to  Manuel Garcia in "The  Undefeated." 'The great  bull-fighters  in  Death  in  the  Afternoon: Maera, Belmonte  and  Joselito,  are  all smashed  men.  From Jake Barnes  in The Sun  Also Rises to Robert Jordan in For Whom the  Bell Tolls  to Santiago in The Old  Man and the Sea, the central figures are emasculated, destroyed, or ruined.


IN  TRACING  some  of the  similarities in the  writers'  work,  two important  points   may  be  made.   The   fact,   first  of  all,  that   Callaghan's  work
comes  close  to  Hemingway's or  other   American models  does  not  make  him  a citizen  of  the  literary   United   States.  Though  Callaghan has  called  himself  an American writer, Canadian mythic  patterns and   nuances of  tone  can  be found throughout his fiction. It is not,  however,  my concern to bring  them  out  here.
As a  second  point,  there  is no  basis for  saying  that Callaghan is a Canadian
Hemingway or  for  that  matter anyone   else  other   than   himself.  He  is his  own man,  and  has  his own  "view  of life",30  as he likes  to  call  it.  As a writer  with  a good  deal  of  stubborn  courage, Callaghan  would   want   to  resist anything that diminishes his own  identity.  This  is easy to understand but  it should  not  obscure the  fact  that   he  has  taken  those  things  he  wanted -and  perhaps some  he did not   want-from   Hemingway  and   the   writers  they   mutually  admired.  Nor, simply  because  it  may  hurt  someone's  feelings should  the  critic  ignore  the  meet-

HEMINGWAY AND  CALLAGHAN



ing points. A mature criticism  must take account of a writer's context, the "school" in which  he learned his lessons, and  what  these lessons were. There is nothing to be lost in that, and  a great  deal to be gained.




FOOTNOTES

1 Morley Callaghan, That Summer in Paris, New York, I964, p. 2I2.
2    Carlos  Baker,  Ernest  Hemingway: A  Life  Story, New  York,  1969, p. 598.
3  John  Glassco,  Memoirs of Montparnasse, Toronto, 1970,  p. 89.
4    That Summer in Paris, p. 6.
5    That Summer in Paris, p. 25.
6    Robert  Weaver, "A  Talk   with  Morley  Callaghan" in  The First  Five  Years:   A Selection from the Tamarack Review, Toronto, I962, p. 120.
7     That Summer in Paris, p. 6.
8    Morley   Callaghan, "The  Pleasures  of  Failure", Maclean's Magazine, 78,  March
6, I965, p. 13.
9   A. E. Hotchner, Papa Hemingway, New York, I967, p. 72.
10  George   Woodcock, "The  Callaghan Case",   Canadian  Literature,  Spring  1962, p.6I.
11   Brandon Conron, Jo.,forley Callaghan, New York, 1966, p. 167.
12  Ernest  Hemingway, Green  Hills  of Africa, Hammondsworth, 1966,  p.  26.
13   That Summer in Paris, p. 17.
14  Victor  Hoar, Morley  Callaghan, Toronto, I970, p. 27.
15  "A Talk  with Morley  Callaghan", p. I27.
16  Morley  Callaghan, Morley Callaghan's Stories, Toronto, I959, p. 84.
17  Morley Callaghan's Stories, p. 88.
18   Morley Callaghan's Stories, p. 7·
19   Morley Callaghan's Stories,  p. I3.
20    Ernest   Hemingway, The  Short   Stories  of Ernest  Hemingway, New  York,   I966, p. 86.
21   The Short  Stories of Ernest  Hemingway, p. 81.
22    Morley  Callaghan, The Loved  and the Lost, Toronto, I95I, p. 33·
23    George  Woodcock, "Lost  Eurydice: The  Novels of  Morley  Callaghan" in  Odys- seus Ever  Returning, Toronto, I 970, p. 29.
24    Morley  Callaghan, "The Way  It Was",  The Spectator, May  22,  I964,  p. 696.
25    Ernest  Hemingway, A' Farewell to Arms, New York, I957, p. 249·
26    A Farewell  to Arms, p. 243·
27   Hugo   McPherson, "The Two  Worlds  of  Morley  Callaghan", Queen's Quarterly,
Autumn I956, p. 352.
28    Morley  Callaghan's Stories, p. 202.
29   Morley  Callaghan, It's Never  Over, New York, 1930, p. 225.
30     "A Talk  with Morley  Callaghan", p. I 38.


POET AS PHILOSOPHER




Douglas Barbour







Lours DUDEK,  along  with   Irving   Layton   and   Raymond
Souster,  was one of the  prime  movers  of modem Canadian poetry  in the  194o's.
As  members of John  Sutherland's First Statement group, these  writers  brought a  new  excitement to  the  poetry  of  the  time,  a  brash  vulgarity which  revealed their   proletarian  adventurousness. Layton   and   Souster   are  today   very  popular with   the   poetry   reading   public.   Dudek   has  failed   to  attract a  similarly   wide readership, and  during the  poetry  explosion  of the  past  decade, has managed to publish  only  one  book  (Atlantis, 1967). To  most  younger  readers and  poets  he is known  less for his poetry than  his elitist statements about  recent  Canadian poets, like those  which  fill his Canadian Literature 41 article  on  Poetry  in English dur­ ing  the  Sixties.  The recent   publication of  his Collected   Poetry 1 is thus  a  most welcome   event,  for  it  provides  the  needed   opportunity to  read   and  assess  the whole body of his poetry.
For   a  reader  not  very  familiar  with   Dudek's work,  the  overwhelming fact about   Collected   Poetry  is  the  way  in  which   it  demonstrates how  much   of  a piece  his  poetry  is. Dorothy  Livesay 2   has said  that  Dudek  had  not  yet found  his voice  in  the  early  poems of Unit  of Five  ( 1944), East of the  City   ( 1946), and Cerberus  ( 1952). This  is true,  of  course,  as  true  as such  a  statement can  be about any  young,  apprentice artist.  What  struck  me,  however, as I read  through this  book,  was  the  way  in  which  certain   approaches to subject   matter, certain ways of articulating what  can only be called  arguments, form  a part  of his poetic content   right  from  the  start. Although he  doesn't   find  the  proper form  for  his "statement" right  away,  he is always  striving for  an  intellectually tough  poetry. Even  in  the  early  poems,  where  his control  of  "voice" is weak,  the  philosophic tone that  marks all his serious poetry is present.

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER


0NE OF  DUDEK'S  CONTINUING INTERESTS has been the pro­
cess of thought.  His  poems often provide  paradigms  of that  process, or icons of
the results of that  process. They  move from a formal, traditional metric towards a  prose-like, argumentative, "open" metric,  which often  resolves (in  the longer poems, and  especially Atlantis), into a near-prose of short  maxims which remind me  of  La  Rochefoucauld. Dorothy  Livesay, writing  before  the  appearance of Atlantis,  noted  this  tendency  towards  prose statement   but  concluded  that  his "prose  content,  like his prose syntax,  is a kind of disguise."3    But such an  early poem as "On  Poetry",  for example, is full of abstractions  and  presents a definite argument; it is not merely a disguise of those things:

The flame of a man's imagination should be organic with his body, coincident with an act, like an igniting spark.
But mostly, he fails in the act
and expels his bad humour in visions. A man curses, seeing the thing he hates in pain, cursed by his vision: this is poetry, action unrealized:
what we want most we imagine most, like self-abusing boys.

Later   in  this  poem,   Dudek  suggests  Shakespeare   "should   have  been  all  his monarchs", an argument closely analogous to Borges' in "Everything and  Noth­ ing".  The  point  of  this  comparison  is that  Borges, too,  is presenting  a  subtle, philosophical,  aesthetic  argument, and  he  does so in  prose:  the  medium  con­ sidered most proper for that kind of intellectual subtlety.
"On  Poetry"  is interesting  partly  because it is an early poem in which Dudek essays the  open form.  But  he does not stick with it, and  many  of the  poems of the  next  few  years  (I think  they  are  from  the forties  and  early  fifties)  are  in traditional  forms,  like  the  quatrains of  "Flower  Bulbs".  This  very  interesting poem,   which  is a  love  poem  of sorts, is yet  very reminiscent  of  metaphysical poetry  in  the  way it  uses an  image from  nature  as a basis for a closely argued and  witty  proposition.  The  argument  is just as important as the  lovely image which informs it, if not more so.
The  poems about  the  city, usually New York, from  this  period,  relate to the social-consciousness poetry of the thirties, but once again  reveal the philosophical interest with which Dudek approaches  all his subjects. They are socio-political meditations,  and  would  be entirely  suitable  to a book  of essays by a left-wing historian.  "Line   and  Form" is one  of  the  most interesting  of  the   pre-Europe poems, because it is so obviously an essay in the aesthetics of universal creation.

rg

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



Aesthetics  is one  of  the  major  areas  of  philosophy that  interest  Dudek, and  the concerns  of this poem will reappear throughout all his later  poetry.

Eternal forms.
The single power, working alone rounds out a parabola
that flies into the infinite;
but the deflected particle
out of that line, will fetch a frisk of sixes and eights
before it vanishes:
an ocean arrested
by sudden solid
ripples out in the sand.

So this world of forms, having no scope for eternity, is created
in the limitation of what would be complete and perfect, achieving virtue only
by the justice of its compromises.

This  is only  the  final  third  of the  poem,  but  that  last sentence, with  its opening "So", the  "Thus" or "Therefore" of this particular  demonstration, perfectly illustrates the argumentative method  Dudek  is using.
Even  in such  an  obviously  philosophical poem,  however, Dudek  makes  use of what  is an  obsessive image  in his work,  and  that  is the great  Sea  itself. Here  the line, "an ocean  arrested" is both  a major link in his argument and  a reference  to the  vast  chaos  of possibilities that  the sea  has  always  represented to man. It is a natural  reference for  Dudek  to  make,  for  he  has  always  been  possessed  by  the sea;  it  appears in  all  his work,  from  the  early  tone  poem,  "The Sea", through Europe and  En Mexico,  to  Atlantis and  beyond. Although his poetry  tends  to be intellectual and  lacking  in  obvious  emotionalism, the  sea  always  provokes  emo­ tional  outbursts from him. It is his true muse.




DUDEK WROTE A LOT  OF  SHORT POEMS in the Fifties, includ­ ing  the  formal  and  philosophical love poems  collected  under   the  heading "Pure Science" and  the  various  humorous poems  and   parodies that  were  published in Laughing  Stocks  ( 1958). Personally, I find  few  of Dudek's  "humorous poems" funny, and  I don't think  his sense of humour is amenable  to  poetry.  Too  often

20

POET AS PHILOSOPHER



such  poems telegraph  their  punchline  and  utterly fail to provide  the  "surprise" of a good joke. Arthur  Koestler says that the "unexpected" climax to a good joke must  be "both   unexpected   and  perfectly  logical-but of a  logic  not  usually applied  to  this  type  of situation."4   It  is precisely this "logical  unexpectedness" which  is missing in  Dudek's  poems. His  parodies  of Canadian poets, however,
especially those  of A. J. M.  Smith,  A. M. Klein, and  Irving  Layton,  are often
dead on, and reveal an acute critical wit.
The  Fifties are crucial  years in Dudek's career, however, because during  them he wrote  the  two  long  poems, Europe  (I 955), and  En Mexico  (I 958). It  was in  these  poems  that  he came into full command  of his voice, and  it was there that  he truly  became a philosophical poet. Europe is an extended  personal essay, a  travelogue  by a  philosopher  with a gifted and  far-ranging eye. The  branches of philosophy which engage Dudek's mind-philosophy of history, politics, aesthetics (and  art-history), and ethics-all  appear  in Europe and in En Mexico. All will reappear in Atlantis.


ITHINK IT  IS  IMPORTANT  to note that  Dudek is a student  of modem  poetry and  a follower of Ezra Pound.  Unlike many of the younger prac­
titioners  of  the  popular  poetry  of primitivism  he lashed  out  against  in "Poetry in  English",  he  is a  highly  educated  student  of poetic  tradition,  especially of twentieth-century  modernism.  To  him  the  following  point  has  the  force  of  a prime-directive:

Integrity, we  should  remember, has  been   the prime virtue of  the   great twentieth-century  poets.  The entire   modern  movement was  a  retreat from   the idols  of  the  marketplace to  the  private  household  gods  of art  and  knowledge.5

I think  there  can  be little doubt  that  Dudek has practiced  that  kind of integrity and  faithfully  served  those gods. He is the only one of the three Cerberus poets even to attempt a truly long poem. He has walked the paths of his art  alone. If he has not  been completely successful in his poetic quest, surely one of the  rea­ sons is that  he had  to do it all by himself:  he had no other  poets in Canada to share his particular problems and efforts.
Europe is an oddly likeable piece of writing. Although I am not at all sure that it fully succeeds as poetry, I find myself completely won over by the man behind the work. This says a great  deal for the  poem, for I began the Collected Poetry


:ill

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



with  a definite  bias against  him,  based  mostly on my disagreement with  many  of his  criticisms  of  his  fellow  poets  in  "Poetry  in  English". In   Europe   the  poet shows such  a  genuinely  and  engagingly  interesting mind, uses that  mind  to deal with  such  interesting materials, and  expresses his opinions with  such  a refreshing forthrightness, I found   it  impossible  to  dislike  him.  In this  he  is like  Ruskin, another traveller  in Europe, to whom  he  refers  occasionally in the  poem.  As he continues to  speak  on  various  subjects  during the  poem's progress  he  wins our respect  because  his intellectual engagement with  them  is so clear  and  intelligent. He  is also like  Ruskin  in  creating a series  of little  personal essays, even  if they appear to  be  parts  of a  poem.  Although they  contain many  richly  poetic  images and  metaphors, the  very stuff  of poetry,  to  bolster  their  various arguments, they are  basically essays, as, for example, the lesson in art-history that is No. 50:

The Greeks were fine, but French classicism using the Greek for its own purpose,
smooth hypocrisy, conceit, & the display
of that corruption, le bon gout,
-the worst taste in manners or in art
the world has ever seen - spoiled two centuries of European  art,
opened the arts to worse corruption  still - the monstrous sugar teeth
of 'money' and 'amusement': here you see
in Chartres art is no entertainment, it does not amuse; money paid for it, but it paid for
something that the sculptor  really preferred;
pride was satisfied, but it was pride in objects, the full scale
of human performance-they worked for this, gladly. The wedge of ignorance entered Europe
with a blind idolatry of Greece and Rome; you can see it
as a straight line from the 15th century down, "art  for art," copying the Greek forms,
shape without sense, imitating
imitations, dramatic motion, sensuality for the boudoir, decorativeness
to make room for gold, for size.
After this, there was no honesty
whether in art or trade, to fight off the incisor


22

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



of the pure profiteer, the hog
with his snout in the mire, his belly in shit. The  Gothic tower had fallen,
the last craftsman
dropped  his hammer; it has come to all of us, poets, advertisers, dance hall singers and all,
we make our pilgrimage to Chartres, without praying beads;
look at the Virgin helpless, and up to the great dome where the light seems to rise and fall.

This  is witty,  and  provocative of thought, but, despite  its appearance, and  the rhythmic control of certain parts,  it would  strike  many  readers as very  different, at   bottom, from   what   they  know  as  poetry.  This  reaction  may  merely  reveal their  ignorance of certain aspects  of modem poetry,  as Dudek  suggests,  but  the periodic   sentences and   the  syntax   of  those  grand   periods,   are  surely  qualities normally associated  with  scintillating prose. This  is also true  of the  discussion  of the  true   meaning of  Greece   in  No.  70,  and  the  marvellously allusive  politico­ historical  commentary on  the  nature of evil in  No. 78.  I  kept  reading them  for their   prose  values,  despite  their  appearance on  the  page.  It  would  appear that Dudek   has  carried Pound's dictum, "that  poetry  should   be  written  at  least  as well  as  prose"6   to  its  limit.   Pound   also said,  "The  prose  artist   has  shown  the triumph  of  his  intellect  and   one  knows  that   such  triumph is  not   without   its sufferings   by  the  way,  but   by  the  verses  one  is  brought  upon   the   passionate  moment. This  moment has  brought with  it  nothing that  violates  the  prose sim­ plicities.  The  intdlect has not found  it, but  the intellect  has been  moved.m What  one  misses  in  so  many   of  Dudek's  poems  are  the  "passionate  moments" that would  lift  us out  of ourselves.  What  we find, however,  are  qualities of meditative vision  and  intense  ratiocination that  are seldom  to be found  in any  other  Cana­ dian  poet.
In  En  Mexico, Dudek  continues to work with the open  form, the  long discur­
sive, essay-like "canto", and  the  philosophical voice he had  developed in  Europe.
En  Mexico  displays  a new  mastery  of rhythm, however,  in many  of its parts.  In I 958,   Dudek   wrote  a  fascinating article  for  his magazine, Delta,  entitled, "A Note  on  Metrics". It  is an  obvious  development from  the  early  essays by Pound on  the subject, and  reveals the  depth of Dudek's  concern  with  metrics. The  Note is his major statement on the uselessness of traditional forms  for the contemporary poet.  Although he  continued to  use  those  forms  in  the  fifties,  he  has  not  used them  in  any  of his published work since  I958.  It  appears that  the  Note  was the

23

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



final  nail  in the  coffin of traditional  verse, as far  as Dudek  was concerned,  for in  it he insists that  if  you write in one of the  formal  metres, especially iambic, you "thus  neglect  the essential music, which  is that  of your sounds,  as they  fit the  content  of your  poetry, and  you produce  for the  most part  an  empty  rattle of sounds."8   En  Mexico,  and  all the poems following it, are written  in the light of  that   statement.  Dudek's  rhythmic   achievements   in  this  poem  have  been pointed  out  by  Dorothy  Livesay in  Canadian  Literature  30. His  achievements
in content  are every bit as important. En Mexico  is a more successful whole than Europe  because of Dudek's new mastery of rhythm,  but the centre of interest in the  poem  remains the philosophizing that  the trip  to Mexico engenders.
No.  3  of En  Mexico  is a commentary  on  religion, full of the short  maxims that I find so fascinating in his poems:

Optimism is foolish. Life can only be tragic, no matter what its success ...

Knowledge is neither necessary nor possible to justify the turning
of that huge design.

He achieves here a kind of juxtaposition of epigrams  which is far more powerful than  mere  statement could  be. The  mixture  of the  maxims  and  the images of life in  Mexico creates a powerful commentary  on contemporary civilization,  just as Dudek  wants  it to. Because the whole poem  provides such a resonant  context for  them,  these  short  aphoristic  statements   have  a  power  and  interest  that  is entirely  lacking  in Irving Layton's  "Aphs" from The  Whole  Bloody Bird. There is a  decorum  to  Dudek's  epigrams  which  the  boring  and  boorish statements  of Layton  lack,  and  that  decorum  is provided  by  the  unity  of tone  of the  whole poem.  It is also interesting to see, as in so many  philosophical  works, the state ment,  again  justified by the whole context, that  "Knowledge is neither  necessary nor possible".
No. 4 is a description of life in the people, of "America, the Continent,  dane
ing".  Here  Dudek  displays another  technique,  that  of "borrowing" the voice of another  poet to make a point. In a sequence  climaxing  with the lines:

now! say the strings in singing consummation we have touched the life giving
making a relay!
Take it from us, you swarming futures!
Sing, as we now sing!

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



he uses the voice of Whitman to further the argument of his poem.  These  "vocal borrowings" serve  the  same  purpose  as quotations would  in  a literary or  philo­ sophical   discussion.   Finally,  he  reaches  the  philosophical  climax  of  the  poem, flowing in the way of logical discourse out of what came  before:

Form is the visible part of being.
We know the logic of its adaptations,
a signature  of individuality, of integrity, the end of perfect resolution-
but not the inner stir.

Rest. Rest in that great affair.

The ending is a  fitting  one  for  such  a  poem,  and  it  attains a  powerful  philo­ sophical  intensity. In  many  ways,  En  Mexico  stands  as  Dudek's most  successful poem: an organic, unified  whole.
"Lac En  Coeur", another fairly  long  poem  of the  time,  is a quiet  meditation full  of questions about life. It is a lovely small  personal  poem,  an essay from  "the mind  and  heart  of love"  of the  natural world  around the  poet.  But  it is a  philo­ sophical  meditation, sharing, as do parts  of Atlantis, the  concerns of such  poems as  Yeats's  "Lapis Lazuli" and   the  later  Cantos,  but  without their  "passionate intensity" (which may  be a  good  thing,  but  "passionate intensity" in  "the best"  is not the same as it is in "the worst" ) .


DunEK, THE  POET,  seemed  to drop out  of sight  from  1958 until  I g67  (although excerpts from  Atlantis began  appearing in Yes  as early  as
1965), the  very  years  when   Layton   and  others  were  reaping their  first  major popular successes.  Atlantis  ( 1g67)  showed  that  he had  not  retired  from  the  field, but had engaged  his muse in a lengthy and  difficult struggle.
Atlantis is not the  unqualified success that  En Mexico  was. It is Dudek's longest piece of sustained writing, gathering all his themes and  ideas into a single massive argument. Yet,  in  the  final  analysis,  it fails  because  he  is unable to incorporate everything he  wants   in  quite   the  manner he  wants.  Had he  paid  attention to W.  C.  Williams's Paterson,  rather than   just  the  Cantos,  he might  have  learned an  invaluable lesson:  that if you do  use actual prose, it can  mix  with  your  own poetry   without  much   trouble, so  long  as  you  juxtapose with  care,  but  if you merely  make  your  own  poetry  too prosaic  in places, the  obviously  "poetic" parts

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



of your poem will clash with the rest. This is what  happens  in Atlantis, and  it is
a definite fault in the poem.
The   tone  of  Atlantis,  from  the  very  beginning,  is that  discursive  tone  that presents the  personal  essayist, once again  en voyage, once again  looking around and  noting  with  great  precision and  wit what  he sees, and  then  reflecting  upon it.  The  casualness of the speech  ("Speaking  of coral,  the  white whirling  wave/ behind  the  ship/is like a  Japanese   painting  of  a  wave")   does  not  mask,  but subtly  underlines  the  wide  range  of allusions and  ideas the speaker  commands. This  tone,  this  manner  of speaking, allows for a great  breadth  of material,  but not for everything.  In fact, it is a curious paradox  of this poem that  the sections of "pure  poetry"  are  both  the  most powerful,  and  the  most out-of-place,  parts of it. Near the end  of The  Prologue, Dudek catches  hold of the idea of Atlantis itself, and he is moved to write some lovely and evocative lines:

Here nothing is real, only a few
actions, or words, bits of Atlantis, are real ...

One day at sea, at sunset,
when the long rays struck the water, it seemed to me the whole sea was living
under the surface motion;

the waves moved like a great cosmic animal twisting and turning its muscular body under the grey glistening skin.

Yet  even  here,  in  the  midst  of such  writing,  he  feels the  need  to  inject  some moral  reflections on  the very next  page. These  lines contain  the  "voice"  of the rest  of  the  poem,  the  Ruskinian  figure reflecting  upon  Nature   ("it  seemed  to me") , but  they soar  above the prosaic philosophizing  that  is that  figure's usual mode of address.
In the  body of the  poem, Dudek continues to reflect upon things;  he discusses town  planning,  moral  philosophy, aesthetic  history, the concept  of pity, the  rea­ sons for  art,  and  much  else. He even goes in for  a very esoteric  aquarium  list, which  he  then  transforms,  through  some very  precise  description, into  a lyrical celebration  of the  many  varieties of ocean-going life-forms. All these discussions are fascinating  as discussions; some of them fall  terribly  flat as poetry. One need only compare  his reflections on the nature of evil with Auden's  "Musee  de Beaux Arts",  for example,  to see this. The concentration  of the Auden  poem gives it a

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



force that  is entirely lacking in Dudek's  rather  abstruse, though  very interesting, discussion. Or take his comment,

This voyage is almost over. I think
how everything will go on here
as before. As it must. And yet I know
that somehow I am a part of it, in it for good-or I do not live at all.

and  compare  it with the sardonic  and yet loving appreciation  of the same fact in George Johnston's concentrated epics, "In  It" and "0, Earth Tum!". This state­ ment should be a "passionate  moment" and yet it isn't, quite.
The  Epilogue  to  Atlantis  almost saves the whole poem. This  is a  poetry like that of the late Cantos:  pristine, the language  pure and magnificent as it apotheo­ sizes "Atlantis", that   region  of  the  human/ divine soul  for  which  Dudek  has quested  through  all his poems. The first two pages of the Epilogue shine with the very "Light" they  celebrate,  but the  effort of such an ecstatic  flight  proves too great,  and  the  poet  returns  to earth,  except for a few leaps of  a line or two, for the  remaining   five  pages  of  the  poem.  Still, it  is beautiful,  it  is a  passionate moment,  however  brief, and  yet it does seem somehow out of  place in this par­ ticular  poem.  It  is not that  Dudek i<;  wrong in his approach to poetry;  he is fol­ lowing  a  major  modem  tradition,  one  whose value  has  been  proven  time  and again.  It is merely that  in this poem he has failed to weld all his various elements into a harmonious sculpture  of words.
Since the  publication  of Atlantis,  Dudek  has written  a number  of short "Jeux
&  Divertissements".  They  are  all  poems with  a  point  to make,  many  of them about  our sexual lives. "Erotic  Tropes",  for example, perhaps the best of the lot, is full  of  a  wit  reminiscent  of Oscar  Wilde's  prose. Dudek  obviously does not consider  these  poems  important. The  groups  of longer  poems, collected in  the section, "Reflections  After Atlantis" are important  to him, I think.
Basically, they continue  the approach  worked out in Europe, En Mexico, and Atlantis. "The Demolitions",  an elegy for destroyed architecture, is essentially a lyrical, autobiographical essay. "Canada: Interim  Report" is a bitter,  politically oriented,  polemic. There are some rather  neat  juxtapositions, but the tone is too angry, the bitterness too diffuse; it all sounds like a variant  on the poems Souster and  Layton  had  in  The   New  Romans,  and  that  kind  of  poetry  is something Dudek has always, until this poem, had the good sense to ignore. The  philosopher ranting  can  provide  little  pleasure or stimulation,  for  he is using language  in a

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



manner,  for him, meretricious. "A Circle Tour  of the Rockies" is a mistake from start  to finish, but  not for the same reasons as "Canada: Interim  Report", and it is a mistake of major interest, which also differentiates  it from that poem. It is another  very good essay, and  one could imagine  Ruskin,  or even Dr. Johnson, writing it in prose. But to even think  that such language  would work in a poem about  mountains  betrays the kind of one-sidedness Dudek's  preoccupations have led him to. There  is absolutely no sense of a response to the overwhelming (emotionally overwhelming!) grandeur of the Rockies.

Clear it to the peneplane of un-being,
an empty consciousness, space-time, a blank page,
and something begins again. God knows
maybe just a new area of suffering. Of experience.

Is this  all he can say? These  words are  refractory  in this context,  they are  not the  right  material  for  a  poem. Compare  Ralph  Gustafson's  "Rocky  Mountain Poems" in I xion's Wheel: by a variety of strategies they immerse the reader with the  poet  in  the  many  experiences  the  mountains   offer  the  sensitive  observer. Where  Dudek's  poem discusses all kinds of things around  the basic and  absolute fact  of the mountains,  refusing to confront  them  in their  being, almost as if they were  unnecessary to the discussion, Gustafson  takes us right  into  the experience of  them  with  all  the  "visceral  drive,  committed   passion"9    Dudek  has  accused him of lacking. If the mountains  were unnecessary, they should  never have been invoked at all. The  point is that  Dudek failed to recognize the limitations of his poetic;  he did  not  understand   that  it was not  meant  to deal  with  the  kind  of grandeur (the  Awesomeness that  the great  Romantics  felt in the presence of mountains)   the  Rocky  Mountains  are.  His refusal to use image  or metaphor to any extent in the poem is the measure of that failure of recognition.
The  last poem in the book is the beginning of what  may become another  very long  poem  called  "Continuation  I".  It  is another  attempt   to  use "only  a  lan­ guage/to contain  the  essentials that  matter,  in  all the  flux  of illusion"  to  con­ struct  an  artifact  of words. Once  again,  a man  of rich  philosophic  experiences is reflecting upon all the things which interest him.  I hope he will keep it going.



l:ERE IS  A FASCINATING ASIDE  on the poet in "Continuations I": "0 the  poet  that  incredible  madman", says Dudek.  "He  is possessed with possibility." These  are strong  words, yet they have authority. Dudek  has always,

POET AS  PHILOSOPHER



like  his  mentors, especially   Ezra  Pound, been  "possessed  with  possibility"; that is why  his philosophizing has  been so rewarding, to him,  and  to his readers. But he  is  no  "incredible madman";  all  too  plainly  the  opposite. Isee  him  as  a product of the  Enlightenment who  has been  forced  to cope  with  certain aspects of humanity (the  "Evil" of the  twentieth century  which  he has written so many pages  about)  the  eighteenth century   did  not  have  to face.  But  he seems some­ what  out  of place,  really,  in  a  world  which  is still living  in  the  Romantic Age, for  Romanticism has touched him  only slightly, if at  all. Perhaps that  is an over­ statement, but  I think  it helps  to define him  and  his art.  Pound was  just such  a madman, but  Dudek  pleases us most when  he is rational, meditative, the  philoso­ pher to be listened  to and  argued with, but not possessed by.
We  are  overburdened these  days  with  "possessed"  and  "incredible" madmen in  poetry.  But  there  is no  one  else to speak  to us in  the  reasonable, honourable, voice  of  intellectual integrity that  is Louis  Dudek's. Too  many  younger  writers have  been  ignorant of his work,  and  the  possibilities for  poetry  that  it represents.

FOOTNOTES

1 Montreal: Delta, Canada, I97I. $s.ooj$4.oo.
2   "The Sculpture of Poetry,"  Canadian  Literature  30, Autumn  I g66, pp.  26-35.
3 Ibid., p. 30.
4  The  Act of Creation  (London: Pan Books,  Ig6g), pp. 33-4·
5   "Poetry in English," Canadian  Literature 4I, Spring Ig6g, p. I I4.
6  "The Prose Tradition in  Verse,"  Literary Essays, ed. T.  S. Eliot  (London: Faber
& Faber,  I954L  P· 373·
7   "The Serious Artist," Ibid., p. 53·
8   "A Note on Metrics," Delta 5, October  I 958, p. I 7·
9  Op. cit., p. 120.



THE MAINSTREAM



Ronald Sutherland









ALONG WITH  A  NUMBER  of other  activiti<s  in  Canada, literary  criticism  has  picked up  a great  deal  of momentum in the  last  decade. Like the St. Lawrence  River it has deepened  and  broadened  as it moved along, and  to a large  extent  it also has divided  in  two  at  the  Island  of  Montreal. In view af  the mighty  St. Lawrence's  present state  of pollution,  however, it would perhaps be injudicious to pursue the analogy.
But  it can  be said  with  reasonable confidence  that  the steady  increase  in  the volume  of  Canadian literary  criticism  is having  and  will  continue  to  have  a beneficial  effect  on  creative  writing  in  this  country.   I  imagine   that  there  is nothing  more  debilitating  for a  writer  than  to  be ignored,  to  be working  in  a vacuum  as it were. Frederick  Philip Grove comes immediately  to mind.
Despite the recent increase in the volume of literary  criticism, however, several
major  problems remain  to be resolved. They  are  basic problems which glare like a  hole in a  girl's stocking or a  pair  of mismatched  shoes, but  they  can  also be covered  up  and  ignored.  They  would seem  to invite attention, and  then  again they do not. For they are often charged  with emotional  overtones.  For instance, there  is the  question  of who  precisely is a  Canadian author. Anthologies  and literary  histories, to say the least, have tended  to be gloriously free of  discrimina­ tion,  grabbing   all  that  could  possibly be  grabbed. One  wonders,  indeed,  how Jacques   Maritain, Wyndham  Lewis, Willa Cather  and  Ernest  Hemingway, all of whom  lived for  a time in Canada, escaped  the conscription,  not  to mention Alexis  de  Tocqueville,   Charles  Dickens  and   Henry  David  Thoreau.  Perhaps they escaped  because their remarks about  the True  North were often in a some­ what  unappreciative vein.
But   what   about   Frances  Brooke,  Louis   Hernon,   Brian   Moore,   Malcolm
Lowry,  Arthur   Hailey,  Georges  Bugnet,  Robert   Goulet    (the  writer,  not  the

THE  MAINSTREAM



actor), Jack  Ludwig,  even Leonard  Cohen,  Mordecai  Richler,  Fran ois
and   Marie-Claire  Blais?  Does  citizenship  matter?   Does  it  matter   whether   a writer  came  to this country  after  growing up elsewhere, or went elsewhere after growing  up  here? If one takes the view that  where a person was born and grew up :is  the  determining factor,  then  the first six of the above dozen authors  must be disqualified  as Canadian. If one takes the opposite view, then  evidently  the second six would  have  to go. Or  can we have it both  ways? Are the pickings so slim that  we cannot  afford  to be fussy? Do we really have to stick national  labels on creative writers at all?
On  the one hand,  I am  not especially concerned  about  national  labels. Or  at least  in  the  application  of  national  labels.  As I  have  suggested,  it  can  be  a tricky  business, highly  emotional  as  in  the  case of  certain  Quebec  poets  who have  refused to be called  poetes canadiens  and  insist on being  poetes quebecois. On   the  other   hand,   it  seems to  me  that  in  a  relatively  young  country  like Canada, with  its mass psychological complexes and  crucial  problems of national pride  and  identity,  it is necessary to seek definitions. To imagine  that  Canadian criticism  can  become  an  organized  scholarly  discipline  and  attain  a  degree  of sophistication   without  defining  its basic subject  matter  is surely  an  example  of disorganized  and  very  unscholarly  thinking.  Some critics  and  budding  authors have  attempted to avoid  the issue by proclaiming  that  a writer's  universality  is more  important than  his "Canadianness." Of  course it is. In  the long run.  But one  must  keep  in  mind  that  an  author  does not  become  truly  "international" by virtue  of intent,  but  by virtue  of merit-by  creating  a  vision which  tran­ scends  rather   than   disregards  a  particular   national  or  regional  consciousness. Consider  for  a moment  some of the  more famous of internationally  recognized authors-Shakespeare,  Moliere,  Bums,  Flaubert,  Tolstoy,  Dostoievski, Joyce, Twain  or Faulkner. It is not without significance that these men were all strongly associated  with  unmistakable   national  or  even  regional  consciousness. It may not,  therefore,  be entirely idle to speculate  that  the Canadian writer  most likely to achieve a lasting international reputation  will be one who at the same time is most obviously and  thoroughly Canadian.
At  the  risk of infuriating the faithful  of various camps,  then,  I  am  going to
explore the  question  of who is a Canadian writer, limiting  myself, of course,  to those  cases  where  there  may  be  some  measure  of  doubt.  Furthermore, 1 am going  to  present  certain   ideas  on  the  closely related  question  of  the  "main­ stream"  of  Canadian  literature, a  question  I  have  already   touched  upon  in previous studies.1

THE MAINSTREAM



The  first  problem,  that  of  identifying  the  Canadian writer,  may  not  be  as mystifying  as  it  seems. All  writers  produce  their  works  from  within  a  certain sphere  of consciousness. Unless one subscribes to the  notion  of spirits  from  the great   beyond  descending  to  guide  the  pens  of the  entranced, then  one  must presume  that  a  writer  can  express only what  is within  his awareness,  however clear or vague this awareness might be and whatever unforeseen or unrealized implications  the  writing  might  turn  out  to  have.  Consequently,   the  work  of every writer  must perforce  be informed  by the sphere or  range of his conscious­ ness. This  sphere  of consciousness is in turn  the product  of what might be called cultural   conditioning.   People  think,  feel, act,  react  and  express  themselves  in certain   ways  because  of  cultural   conditioning  and   how  this  conditioning  has shaped  their  hereditary  potentials.  Outside  of complete  brainwashing, this con­ ditioning,  the  united  effects of acquired  knowledge and  the experience  of living in particular places, with particular  people, and  speaking  a  particular  language  at a particular time in history, is impossible to escape. When  the biblical Joseph, after  so many  years in  Egypt,  overheard  his  unwitting  brothers  speak  to each other  in  Hebrew,  it is said  that  he turned  and  wept.  James  Sutherland, in  his Oxford  Book  of  English  Talk, begins with  a  passage  which  seems to  be in  a strange  and  obscure  tongue;  he  then  goes  on  to explain  that  the  passage is in the  Aberdonian   Scottish  dialect  which  he  spoke  as  a  child,  and  that  unintel­ ligible as it may be to other  people, it is music to his ears. Cultural  conditioning  makes  the  man.  It  is possible, however, for this conditioning to be multilateral,  for  a  person  to  be  conditioned  by  more  than  one  culture; although  it  would appear   that   there  is  usually  a  dominant   influence,  or  at  least  one  influence which eventually gains dominance.
Now in pinning  a national  label on a writer,  I  would suggest that  the deter­
mining  factor  is not  primarily  where he was born,  where  he was brought  up or where he  has chosen to live, but rather  the sphere  of consciousness in which he has created  his works, the result of his total  cultural  conditioning and  especially of the dominant influence. Who would question that  Ernest Hemingway is an American  writer,  despite  the  years  he spent  outside  the  United  States?  Or  the Verdun-bom  Saul   Bellow? Or  James  Baldwin?  Or   Richard  Wright?   In  the great  majority  of cases, the dominant  influence is evident,  and  there is no  prob­ lem  of  identification.   In  other  cases,  rare  but  often  important, two  or  more influences  appear   to  be  of  equal  strength,  and  the  critic  is obliged  to  create special  categories.  I  am  thinking  of T.  S.  Eliot,  Henry  James,  Samuel  Beckett and Karl  Marx.

THE  MAINSTREAM



It is, of course, easier to determine  the dominant  cultural  feature  of a writer's sphere  of consciousness after  he is dead  than  to attempt  to do so while he is still writing. Alive, he may  yet shift one way or another.  But I see no harm  in  mak­ ing an  informed  inference,  subject  to adjustment  in the light of possible further  development.  With  regard  to the dozen  authors  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of this study, application of the dominant-influence sphere-of-consciousness criterion produces  interesting  conclusions.  Of  the  six  writers  raised  outside  Canada­ Brooke, Lowry, Hernon,  Hailey,  Moore and  Bugnet-only  Hernon  and  Bugnet qualify to be considered authentic  Canadian writers.
Brief as  his stay  in  Canada was, brought  to a tragic  end  by an  accident  in
1913,  Louis  Hernon,   judging  from  his Maria  Chapdelaine, became  immersed in a distinctly  Canadian sphere  of consciousness. There  are a number  of reasons why this immersion  should  have taken  place. Although  he was born  and  raised in  France,  Hernon  was hardly  a typical  Frenchman.  He  was from  Brittany,  an area   which  has  resisted  to  some  extent  the  formidable  assimilative  power  of French   culture  and  from  which,  incidentally,  came  many  of  the  ancestors  of French  Canadians. Moreover, Hernon was apparently  repelled by the French civilization  which surrounded him. He  went to England,  stayed  eight years and wrote  a  sports  story  called  Battling   Malone, but  then  decided   that   English civilization  was  just as decadent  as that  on the continent.  Seeking  the  primitive and  natural in  human   beings,  he evidently  found  what  he  was looking for  in rural  Quebec.  The  cultural  atmosphere  was compatible, and  he was able to lose himself in it, to become attuned  to its nuances and subtleties. Louis Hernon  did not  write  more  novels. Had  he done  so, perhaps  he might  have  revealed  that his cultural  immersion  in  Quebec  was only temporary.  But on  the basis of the sphere  of  consciousness  which  produced   Maria   Chapdelaine, a  book  so  well known  that  it requires  no commentary  here, it is appropriate to consider  Louis Hernon as a Canadian writer.
Georges Bugnet  ought  to be likewise considered. From  a town  in east central
France,  at  the age of about  26 he settled in a wilderness area  of Alberta  shortly after  the  tum  of the  century.  In  his forties, during  the  periods of winter  isola­ tion,  he  began  to  write  books. His  novels Nipsya, the  story  of  an  Irish-Cree  halfbreed,   and   La  Foret,  an  impressive study  of  the  effects  upon  the  human  soul  of  a  constant   struggle  against  the  vast  Canadian  bushland,  reveal  that Bugnet's  sphere  of  consciousness  became  dominantly   conditioned   by  his  life here.  One  may  not  agree  with  the  theme  of Nipsya, that  Christian  resignation is the only hope for the Cree Indians,  but there can be no doubt about  Bugnet's


33

THE  MAINSTREAM



acquired sensitiVIty  to  the  peculiarities of  the  people,  including  Indian,  metis and   white,  and   to  the  particularities of  the  physical  geography and  climate  of Canada.

BY coNTRAST, the  works  of Frances Brooke,  Brian  Moore, Malcolm  Lowry  and  Arthur Hailey   do  not  reflect  any  significant or  extended
immersion in  a  Canadian sphere  of consciousness.  Mrs.  Brooke,  who  spent  five years  in  this  country when  her  husband was  chaplain to  the  Quebec garrison, was  by  no  stretch   of the  imagination  culturally  influenced in  any  way  except that   her   conviction   of  the  superiority  of  the  English   race  was  confirmed.  Of course,  at  the  time  when  she  was  here,  I 763-1768, there  was  hardly anything to  be  culturally influenced   by, any  way.  Why,  then,  should  she  be referred  to as the  first  Canadian novelist, or her  History  of Emily  Montague be called  the  first Canadian novel?  She  would  undoubtedly have  been  shocked   to  the  tips  of her manicured  fingernails   if  anyone   had   suggested   to  her  that   she  was  anything other  than  a purebred English writer.
Brian   Moore,  on  the  other  hand, seems to  have  had  no  particular objections to  being  called  Canadian. In  an  interview with  Hallvard Dahlie  he states:

Then   when  it  might  have  seemed  that  someone  in  Ireland   might  have  started writing  about  me, it was announced  that  I was living in Canada and  was really a Canadian who was pretending  to write Irish  novels. I embraced  the Canadians with  both  arms  and  became a Canadian citizen and  announced   to everyone that I was  a  Canadian writer,  whereupon  I spent  my  life  being  told  by Canadians that I'm  not really Canadian.2

One  can sympathize with  Moore; although with  his proven  and  acknowledged talent as  a  writer,   he  is hardly  in  need  of  anyone's sympathy. I can  distinctly recall,  however,  another of his published  remarks, in  Le  Devoir  some  years  ago, where  he states  that  he could  never  think  as a Canadian nor  fit into  the  pattern of  Canadian  literature. Actually,   George   Woodcock's categorization  of  Moore as  one  of  those  "splendid  birds  of  passage"   appears to  sum   up  the  situation precisely.  Moore  did  live in  Montreal for  a time,  and  he  chose that  city for the setting of  his entertaining and  charming novel  The Luck  of Ginger  Coffey. But a setting does  not  mean  a sphere  of consciousness,  an  inside  awareness of subtle peculiarities. Ginger   Coffey   no  more   makes  Brian   Moore   a  Canadian  writer than   For  Whom the  Bell Tolls   makes  Hemingway Spanish. In  evaluating the sphere of  consciousness  in  which  a  book  was  created, characterization is obvi-

34

THE MAINSTREAM



ously of far  greater  significance  than  setting or atmosphere.  The  question  to be posed is:  To  what  extent  does the author  develop characters  who are recogniz­ ably  Canadian in  more  than   name?  There  are  no such  characters  in  Moore's Ginger   Coffey. The   protagonist   is  a  whimsical,  impractical  Irish  immigrant. The one "Canadian" who is developed to any extent is Grosvenor, who however remains  a  vague  shell  to  the  end  and  whose major  attribute is  that  he has an eye for  Ginger's  pretty  wife.  Another  of  Moore's  novels, I  Am  AJary  Dunne, has  a  protagonist  who  is nominally  a Nova Scotian.  But the  novel, set in  New York, is concerned  with  the  problems  of being a  woman  rather  than  a  Nova Scotian.  Brian  Moore  is  an  excellent writer,  and  no  doubt  history will decide whether  he  ends  up  with  any  kind  of national  label.  On  the  basis of his six novels  to  date,  however,  there  can  be  no  real  justification  for  calling  him  a Canadian writer.
Arthur  Hailey's  situation  is much  like that  of Moore. He  was born  and  edu­ cated  in  Britain,  came  to  Canada  for  a time,  then  went  to  the  United  States, and  he  is now  living,  I  believe, in  the  West Indies.  He  too  used a  Canadian setting,  for  his  political  novel  In  High  Places,  but  he  has  since  moved  on  to other things.
Malcolm  Lowry?  What  can  one say about  Malcolm  Lowry?  I  would  dearly
love to be able to consider  Lowry a Canadian writer. But on what  grounds? He lived  a  few  years  on  the  West  Coast,  then  returned   to  England.   He  used  a Canadian setting  for the  novella "The  Forest Path  to the Spring." With  regard to  the  posthumously  published  October   Ferry  to  Gabriola, George  Woodcock feels that  "it does become evident  that  he reacted  with  deep emotion  and  com­ mitment   to  his  Canadian  environment." Yet  in  his  masterpiece   Under   the Volcano, Lowry reacts with at least equal emotion to the  Mexican environment. So far  as sphere  of consciousness is concerned,  Lowry seems to  be  in a kind of no-man's   land,   or   perhaps   everyman's   land   would  be  more  exact.   Further  research  and  deeper  understanding of  Malcolm  Lowry's  art  may  modify  this view, but  for  the moment  I see nothing significantly Canadian about  his sphere of  consciousness. And   just  in  case there  is doubt  in  anyone's  mind,  I  should make clear at this point  that  whether or not an author  can be considered Cana­  dian has no connection  with the literary merit of his work.
There   is, then,  no  reasonable   justification  for  Canadian  literature to  claim
Brooke, Hailey,  Moore  or  Lowry, all of whom were culturally  conditioned  else­ where  and  whose spheres  of consciousness were not noticeably  affected  by  their sojourns  in  Canada. Swinging  over to those writers who  were born  and  raised

35

THE MAINSTREAM



here,   then   moved   away,   the  same   argument  which   excludes  four   of  the  six foreign-born  authors  can   be  used  to  preserve   Canadian  claim   to  five  of  the second  half-dozen: Leonard  Cohen, Franr;ois  Hertel, Mordecai Richler,  Marie­ Claire   Blais  and   Robert  Goulet.   There  seems   no   need   to  provide  detailed analyses.  Each  of  these  writers  may  in  the  course  of  time  become  assimilated into  another sphere  of consciousness,  but so far,  judging from  their major works, the  Canadian  cultural factor   is still  manifestly   dominant. Goulet  has  not  pro­ vided  much  to go on of late,  but  The Violent Season  is as  Canadian as a  book can   be.  The   same   can  be  said  of  Hertel's and   Richler's  principal writings,   if not  for  every  work  of each  man's  total  production to date. Despite  their  physical  absence   from   the   country,   these   five  writers   have   without  doubt   remained essentially Canadian.
Jack  Ludwig, on  the other  hand,  makes  an  interesting contrast with  the  other
two  Jewish-Canadian-born authors, Leonard Cohen and  Mordecai Richler. All three  are  naturally more  or less concerned with  the  Jew  in  North America, but Cohen's  Favourite Game  and  Beautiful   Losers  and   Richler's Son  of a Smaller Hero   and   Apprenticeship  of  Duddy   Kravitz,  all  four   novels  set  mainly   in Montreal, are  distinctly  Canadian. They  are,  in fact,  when  compared with  Jack Ludwig's  Confusions or  the  works  of  Jewish-American  writers  such  as  Philip
Roth  and  J. D. Salinger, much  more  Canadian than  they  are  Jewish. As critics
have  often   pointed   out,  the  novels  of  Cohen  and   Richler listed  above  embody many   of  the   characteristic  themes  of  Canadian  literature -the  land,   the  old order   versus  materialism,  the  profound nothingness that   results  from   a break with  the  established system,  the  frantic search for  replacement values.  Ludwig's Confusions, in  striking   contrast,  is  American through  and   through, from   the
comic   quasi-dedication  to  Richard  Nixon,   Tennessee  Williams,   Liberace,  J.
Edgar Hoover, Mitch   Miller  and  other  institutions of the  United States,  to  the

settings   of  Ivy  League   New  England  and   a  small   college  in  California. The book  is  funny, and  stylistically  clever  a  la  New   Yorker. It is  part  of  a  strong
trend   in  contemporary  American literature-the new  novel  of  manners,  dis­ tinguished  from   the  former   variety   by  its  complete sexual   frankness  and   its poking   beneath  the  surface   to  expose  the  hidden  quirks   of  the  social  animal. The   theme  of Confusions, the  individualist resisting  pressures  to  conform, is of course  as  archetypically  American as  coca-cola   and  manifest destiny.  The  only recognizable feature of the  one  nominally "Canadian" character in  the  book,  a Cree  Indian who  spouts  Thoreau, sexually  services  a good  proportion of Ameri-

g6

THE  MAINSTREAM



can  womanhood, and  talks  in the  idiom  of the  mod  graduate student, is that  he dislikes  American beer.  There can  be  no  question,  accordingly, that  Jack  Lud­ wig's  Confusions  was  created  from   a  sphere   of  consciousness   in  any  respect Canadian.
Like  Louis  Hernon, Ludwig appears to  have  been  able  to  become  effectively
immersed   in  a  new  sphere  of  consciousness.  He  has  taught  for  years  in  the United States,  and  his novel is distilled exclusively from  that  experience, it would seem.  It  is of interest  perhaps to note  here that  Ludwig is one of a large  number of  Canadians  who   have   been  attracted  to  teaching  positions   in  the   United States.   Some   of  these   expatriates,  A.  J. M.  Smith   and   Robert  Kroetsch   for example, appear  to  defy  cultural  assimilation, while  others  are  drawn   rapidly into the American sphere.
To  return to  our  original list of twelve  writers,  we  must  conclude that  when the   works   of  each   are   examined  in  the   light  of  the   sphere-of-consciousness criterion, only seven remain as authentically Canadian.
I  have  not,  of  course,  exhausted the  list  of  immigrant or  expatriate  writers
whose  inclusion   in  anthologies and  histories  of Canadian literature leaves  room for   doubt.   Patrick  Anderson,  Arthur  Stringer,  Marie  Le   Franc,  Maurice Constantin-Weyer, David  Walker,  Robert Fontaine, Norman Levine, Thomas Costain,   Lionel   Shapiro,  Mavis  Gallant,  Michael   Sheldon, Gerald Taaffe are a few  other  names  which  come  to  mind.  But an  exhaustive investigation is not my  intention here; rather I want  to  suggest  and  to  illustrate a  criterion   which is  possibly  more   sound   and   sensitive  than   whatever  has  operated  in  the  past. This   criterion,  based   upon   analysis  of  an  author's sphere   of  consciousness   as revealed   in  his  published works,  is certainly  more  reliable  than   the  circumstan­ tial  evidence  of  birthplace, citizenship,  settings  of books  or  sojourns  in  Canada.
I might   add,  incidentally, that   the   phenomenon  of  certain   Quebec  writers not  wishing  to  be called  canadien  is more  political  than literary. The very state­ ment   presupposes a  sphere of  consciousness  which  is acutely  Canadian,  at  least so long  as  Quebec remains a  part  of Canada. Paradoxically, there  is also some­ thing  peculiarly Canadian  about the  wish not  to be considered  simply Canadian in  the  political  sense;  it has  to do with  what  has been  called  Canada's "vertical mosaic." I should  point  out,  moreover, that  so far as the  terms Canadien franfais and   quebecois  are  concerned, the  latter  has now taken  on a special  significance. It symbolizes  the  new,  dynamic, progressive  Quebecker, as opposed  to the  back­  ward, inferiority-complex-ridden Canadien franfais.

37

THE MAINSTREAM




Now THE  CONCEPT of a writer's sphere of consciousness not only  serves for  general  identification  purposes;  it  also  has  bearing  on  what  I believe to  be the  emerging  mainstream  of Canadian literature. Within  Canada itself,  because  of  the  diversification  of cultural  influences,  there  are  numerous possible spheres  of  consciousness. Actually,  each  individual's sphere  will  be at least slightly different  from  another's,  but  general  transcendent patterns  can  be discerned.  In  Canadian  literature,   these  general  patterns   are  often  associated with  geographical  area-Toronto,  Winnipeg,  Vancouver, Quebec  City,  rural Quebec,  rural  Ontario, the  Atlantic  seaboard,  the small  town,  the  prairies,  the foothills of the  Rockies, English  Montreal,  French   Montreal, Jewish  Montreal. Some of the  general  spheres in  Canada  are  very similar  to those in the  United States, the small town and  the prairies for instance.  In addition, more often than not  American  writers  have  created  influential  works from  within  these spheres, making  it  difficult  for  Canadians   to  produce  something  strikingly  original  or distinctive.  Morley  Callaghan,  Sinclair  Ross, Sheila  Watson,  Stephen  Leacock, Ethel  Wilson, and  several  poets among  others  have  all  been  impeded  to some extent by this phenomenon.
On  the  other  hand,  a  sphere  of  consciousness which  is peculiarly  and  dis­
tinctively  Canadian does exist in  this country,  and  from  within  this sphere  the mainstream  o£ Canadian literature is rapidly emerging.
The  distinguishing  feature  of the sphere  of consciousness which  governs the
mainstream  of Canadian literature  is, understandably enough,  the same feature which principally distinguishes the Canadian nation -the co-existence in this country  of two  major  ethnic  or language  groups.  There  are  several other  side streains,  some  conditioned   by  attitudes   which  derive  from  the  Calvinist  and Jansenist  traditions,  such  as the  phenomenon  of  the  pretre manque  which  has recurred  so often in works of both language  groups;3  a good amount  of Quebec literature is floating  along in these Canadian side streams.  On  the other  hand, a lot  of Canadian writing in  both  English and  French  is in  various tributaries of  British,  French   and  American  literature.   Lately,  however,  the  mainstream has been gathering  force.
May  I  repeat  once  again  that  the  mainstream   of  Canadian literature   has nothing  to  do  with  literary  merit;  it is a  matter  of sphere  of consciousness, an author's  awareness  of   and  sensitivity  to  fundamental  aspects  of  both  major language   groups  in Canada, and  of  the  interrelationships  between  these  two groups.  At  one  time,  Hugh   MacLennan   appeared  almost  the  only  modern

THE  MAINSTREAM



creative writer in Canada who was moving with the current.  Political writers, commentators, journalists-many  of  them  had  been  swept  up,  but  creative writers  no.  A  few  writers  in  each  language  group,  of course, had  indicated  a superficial  awareness  of  the  other,  resulting  in  the stereotyped  anglophones  in such  books as Jean  Simard's Les Sentiers de la nuit or Lionel Groulx's  L' Appel de la  race, and  stereotyped  French  Canadians in  the  works of Ralph  Connor, Hugh   Gamer, Morley  Callaghan   or  Ellis Portal,  to  name  just  a  few.  But  in recent  years, several  Canadian authors  have  been drawn  into  the  mainstream, have  developed  much  more  than  a superficial  awareness. Hugh  Hood,  in  both his novels and  stories, is one  example. James  Bacque, in the  novel The  Lonely Ones,  Leonard  Cohen  in Beautiful  Losers, Ralph  Gustafson in his recent poetry, Dave  Godfrey   both  explicitly  and  symbolically,  D.  G.  Jones  in  Butterfly  on Rock  and  his  latest  poems,  Louis  Dudek,  Frank  Scott  and  John   Glassco, the last  three  heightening  an  awareness  they  have  always had,  George  Woodcock, Philip  Stratford, Fred  Cogswell, even Al Purdy and  George Ryga,  are some of the others. The  recent  wave of translations,  and  the magazine  Ellipse out of the University   of  Sherbrooke,   presenting  contemporary   anglophone   and   franca­ phone Canadian writers in translation,  are still other examples of  literary activity governed  by the  sphere  of consciousness which  characterizes  the  mainstream  of Canadian literature.
Among French-language Quebec  writers, ironically enough, those who are the
most  nationalistic,  who  do  not  want  to  be  called canadiens,  are  generally  the very ones who  are  right  in  the middle  of the  Canadian mainstream  as I  have defined  it.  For  clearly  they  have  the  most acute  awareness  of the  anglophone presence in Canada, of la mentalite  anglo-saxonne as it is often put.  In  contrast to  so  many   Quebec   writers  of  the  past,  who  were  in  tributaries   of  French literature   or  in  little  Quebec   puddles  and  side streaiTIS  of their  own,  contem­ porary  authors  such  as Jacques  Godbout,  Hubert  Aquin,  Roch  Carrier, Gaston Miron,   Michele   Lalonde,   Andre   Major,   Paul  Chamberland,   Pierre   Gravel, Yves Prefontaine,  Claude  Jasmin,  Gerard  Bessette, to mention  just a few, have waded  to varying  depths  in  the mainstream,  exhibiting  in their  works an indis­ putable,  if sometimes  subjectively  painful,  consciousness of  the  co-existence  of two  major   ethnic   groups  in  Canada. Compare,   for  instance,  the  spheres  of consciousness of  the  above  with  those  of  St.-Denys  Garneau, Albert  Lozeau, Emile  Nelligan,  Anne  Hebert,  Roger  Lemelin  or  Andre  Langevin.  Among  the chansonniers,  compare   Gilles  Vigneault   with  the  more  recent  arrival   Robert  Charlebois.

39

THE MAINSTREAM



Another irony  is that  the  one  phenomenon which  has  done  more  than  any­ thing  else to  get  the  mainstream of Canadian literature flowing,  the stroke  that  finally  burst  the  dam  of isolation  as it  were,  is the  upsurge in  Quebec Separa­ tism.  I have  said  before  that  Separatism, whatever  implications it  has  for  the Canadian  nation, has  been  an  extraordinary  stimulus  for  Canadian literature.1
It has  had  the  effect  of  tremendously increasing mutual  awareness in  the  two language groups  of  Canada; it  has  created  the  tensions,  turmoil, anxieties,  soul searching and  commitment which,   unfortunate as  the  fact  may  be  in  terms  of tranquil existence, are the stuff of great literature.
Quebec Separatism, then,  has  turned out  to  be  a  powerful motivating force in  the  emergence of  the  mainstream of  Canadian literature. In  a  way,  also,  it has  become  a guarantee of the  legitimacy   and  truth of  the  whole  concept  of  a mainstream. For  clearly if enough  English-speaking and  French-speaking Cana­ dians  do  not  become  engulfed  in  a sphere  of consciousness  embracing a mutual awareness and  comprehension, then  Canada as a nation  is not  likely to survive.  At  least  it  is not  likely to survive  as anything worthy of  being  called  a  nation. Which   means,  of  course,  that  the  question  of a  mainstream of  Canadian  litera­ ture    would    become   an   intellectual  exercise   in   redundancy.   Conversely,    if Canada does survive  as a  nation, it  means  that  the  mainstream sphere  of con­ sciousness   has  in  fact   predominated, that   enough  representatives of  the   two major  ethnic   groups   have  actually  developed  a  sufficiently  effective  awareness and  comprehension of each  other.  And  one  should  not  underestimate the  force and   importance  of  this  awareness.  Modem sociologists  and   ethnologists   have of late  been swinging around to the  view that  pluralist  societies  can survive  and are  preferable to  homogeneous national communities, the  kinds  of nations  where  one  man  can  persuade g8  per  cent  of the  citizens  to stand up  and  shout  "Heil
-my country right  or  wrong." Speaking about the  Caribbean  nations, Sidney W.  Mintz  makes a general  observation which  is highly  relevant to the  Canadian situation:


The  supposition  that  national  identity  is interdicted  by the  presence of large and seemingly unassimilable ethnic groups rests upon yet another  supposition-that national   identity  hinges  upon  some  sort  of  total  social  homogeneity  or  homo­ geneity of values, Furnivall's  concept of "social will." Thus  argued,  those societies with  the  greatest  sense of national  identity  will also  be those whose  populations are  most homogeneous in their  values. While this view has certain  common-sense appeal,  it  is not supported  by fact.... An unqualified  emphasis  upon  the  notion of  homogeneity-either of population  or of values-implies  that  national  inte-

THE  MAINSTREAM



gration  increases  as  the  number  of  distinguishably different  social groups  within a society declines. Yet  both  history and  sociological theory qualify  this  view;  not the  number  of groups,  but  the  extent  to which they interpenetrate in  the  main­ tenance   of  communication  and  in  the  solution  of  national   issues, may  be  the critical  factor.  National  identity  can be built in part on the recognition  of  conflict as  integrating,  and   does  not  require  cultural   (or,  for  that   matter,  economic) homogeneity. At the same time, cultural  and economic heterogeneity can serve to inhibit  the growth  of national  identity  if communication  between social segments, and their interpenetration, are hampered.4
Communication  between   the   segments   of  Canada, interpenetration if  you will,  is, as  this  essay  has  illustrated, steadily  increasing. And  the  supreme irony of all, to carry  the  argument to its logical conclusion,  is that  Quebec Separatism, as the  motivating force  in  the  increase  of communication and  the  emergence of a  mainstream sphere of consciousness,  may  one  day  have  to  be  regarded as the phenomenon which  did  most  to  promote a  genuine  Canadian sense  of  identity and  the very survival of Canada as a nation.
We  may   conclude, then,  that   many   weird  and   wonderful  things   are   now happening in  this  country and   being  reflected  in  the  Canadian  literary scene. We  are  at  the  moment of serious  re-evaluation, definition, purification and consolidation, finding   ourselves  as  it  were.  Perhaps  we  are  at  last  experiencing our  great   awakening. As  I mentioned at  the  beginning of  this  essay, there   has been  a  notable increase  in  all  areas  of literary  activity.  And  this  increase,  hap­ pily,  is  coupled  with   a  heightened  awareness.   Perhaps, like  the  great   Fleuve  St.-Laurent, despite  obstacles,  rapids,  shores  in  the  United States,  divisions  and  pollution, we may yet find our way to the open sea.


FOOTNOTES

1 See "The Fourth   Separatism," Canadian  Literature,  No. 45  (Summer   1970),  p.
,5£r.
2   Quoted  in Brian Moore  (Toronto: Copp Clark, 1969), p. 2.
3  See my essays "The  Calvinist-Jansenist Pantomime,"  Journal  of Canadian  Studies, V, 2 (May  1970)  and  "Children of the Changing  Wind,"  Op. cit., V, 4  (Novem­ ber 1970).
4   "Caribbean  Nationhood   in  Anthropological   Perspective,"  Caribbean   Integration,
1g67, p.  153· Available  in  Bobbs-Merrill Reprint  Series in Black Studies,  BC-206.



BREBEUF'S SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



Kathleen 0' Donnell







TEWELL KNOWN WRITINGS OF  Jean  de B>ibeuf eonsi.'<t of
the  two  lengthy  reports  included  in  The   jesuit  Relations,  and  several  letters.
Other works such as the Christmas  carol, the Huron  catechism,  and  particularly the spiritual   journal,  are less widely appreciated. Brebeuf's spiritual  journal  has not  yet  been  wholly  translated  and  published  in  English.  This  work  contains thirty-eight   entries,  thirty-one  of  which  are  written  in  Latin   and  the  rest  in French.
The  original  text  of Brebeuf's spiritual  writings  is included  in  a  manuscript of  I 652  entitled   Quelques  GracesI Visions.  Illustrations  et  autresIRemarques extraictes  desIManuscripts du P.  jean de Brebeuf. A further  source of Brebeuf's
spiritual  notes is Chapter  V of the  Relation  of May  I,  I 649  written  by Father Paul  Ragueneau to Father  Jerome  Lalemant. More recently, there  has appeared a  modem   French   version and  study  of  the  original  text  in  Rene  Latourelle's Etude  sur les ecrits de Saint   jean  de  Brebeuf  (Montreal, I953). His  work  is the basis on which my English version is made.
Brebeuf's  spiritual   journal  is  of  interest  as  a  historical  document   and  as  a report  of the author's spiritual  experiences. As entries are  dated,  there is histori­ cal  precision  in  this  work. It records, for example,  under  the  date  of   I I  April
1640,  the attack  made against the Frenchmen. Brebeuf's voyage to the Neutrals is noted  under  the  date  November  I7,  I64o.  On  January  I6,   I64I, Brebeuf refers to Father  Coton's defence of the Jesuit Order.
Brebeuf's  notes,  which extend  from  I 630  to  I 645,  reflect  his occupations  in
those  years. The  first entries were written  when  Brebeuf  was thirty-seven  years old. He  had  already  experienced a four-year  sojourn  in Canada. In  I 629, after

BREBEUF'S SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



Kirk's capture of  Quebec, Brebeuf  was obliged  to return to France. From   I 629 to  I 633,  he  remained in  France where  he was occupied  in schools except  during a  period  of illness in  I63o. In  I633,  he returned to Canada and  worked  mainly among the  Hurons until   I64o. He  was  missionary  to  the  Neutrals in  1640-4I, then  returned to  Huronia, and  to  Quebec in  I642.  From   I644  until  his death in  I64g, he laboured among the Hurons.
In   the  first  entries   of   I63o,   there  are  evident   the  complete dedication and
prayerfulness of  Brebeuf. He  had  at  this  time  already experienced  disappoint­ ment  and  suffering. These, as much  as the  ecstasy which  is  recorded, were  the beginning of his spiritual advance.
The   progression   is  marked  by  three   vows.  The   first  of  these  is the  vow  of service  written in  1 63 1. For  the  second  vow,  that  of  martyrdom, there  exists a record   in  Father  Paul   Ragueneau's Relation  of  1649.  He  reports the  vow  to have  been made  by Brebeuf  as follows:

My God  and  my Saviour  Jesus, what  can  I  render  to you for all the  benefits which  you have conferred  upon me? I will take from  your hand  the cup of your sufferings, and  I  will invoke  your  Name. I  then  make  a vow,-in  the  presence of  your  Eternal   Father   and  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  in  the  presence  of  your  most sacred  Mother,  and  of  her  most chaste spouse, Saint  Joseph;  before  the  Angels, the  Apostles and  Martyrs,  and  my blessed Fathers  Saint  Ignatius  and  St. Francis Xavier,-yes, my Saviour  Jesus, I make a vow to you never to fail, on my side, in the grace of martyrdom, if by your infinite mercy you offer it to me some day, to  me,  your  unworthy  servant.  I  bind  myself to it  in  such  a  way that  I intend that,  during  all  the  rest of my life, it shall  no longer  be a lawful  thing  for  me, when  remaining  at  my  option,  to avoid  opportunities of dying and  of shedding my  blood for  you.  (Save only that,  in some emergency, I should  judge that,  for the  time  being, it  might  be to the interests of your glory to behave otherwise in the  matter.)  And  when  I  shall have  received the stroke of death,  I  bind  myself to  accept  it  from  your  hand  with  all  pleasure, and  with  joy in  my  heart.  And consequently,  my beloved Jesus, I offer to you from  to-day, in the  feelings of joy that  I have  thereat,  my blood, my body, and  my life; so that  I may die only for you, if you grant  me this favour,  since you have indeed  condescended  to die for me. Enable  me to live in such a way that finally you may grant  me this favour, to die so happily.  Thus,  my God  and  my Saviour, I will take from  your  hand  the cup of your sufferings, and  I will invoke your Name, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus. 1

The  third  vow,   that  of  perfection,  is  dated  August    I 8,   I 645,   in   Brebeuf's spiritual journal. The expression  of these  vows  reveals  Brebeuf's great  humility and submission  before God and  before his religious superiors.

43

BREBEUF'S SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



That the  greatest   part  of the  journal  dates  from  the  year I 640  may  probably be  explained  by  the  fact  that   Brebeuf  had   at  that   time  been  commanded  to record  his spiritual experiences.  "He had  been  commanded to write  these extra­ ordinary things  which  occurred within  his soul, -at  least,  those  which  he could most easily remember."2
The  soul  of  the  author shines  through these  writings. Most  apparent are  his humility and  dedication. The  following  words  of Brebeuf  as given  in  the  Rela­ tion of  1649 show  clearly  his attitude to suffering and  to  approaching  death.

0 my God, why are you not known?  [he  wrote some time before dying]  Why is this  barbarous  country  not  all  converted  to  you?  Why is not  sin abolished  from it?  Why are  you not loved? Yes, my God, if all the  torments  which  the captives can  endure  in  these countries in the cruelty of the tortures,  were to  fall on me, I offer myself thereto with all my heart, and I alone will suffer them.3

The dominant image  is that  of the  cross which  is at  once  a sign  of security  and a  premonition of  suffering  and  death. There are  troublesome visions from  evil sources,  as  permitted  by  God,  and   also  visions  of  consolation  and   elation. In perfect   submission, Brebeuf   accepted   these  experiences  by  which   he  was  pre­ pared  for martyrdom.
The   journal   is given  here  in  English.  It may  be  appreciated as  a  historical
document, and  as the  writings  of one of the  first  mystics  of Canada.

* 	* 	*

JANUARY   I63o- I   felt  an  ardent   desire  to  suffer  something  for Jesus  Christ; I fear being  reproved  because up  till  now  he has treated  me  with  too  much mildness; I  am  afraid   especially  at  the  thought  that   I  have   grievously   offended  his  divine majesty. Nevertheless, I  shall  hold   firmly the  hope  of my  salvation  when   occasions of suffering  present  themselves.
THE  I ITH- Having   considered  attentively  my  sins so serious  and  so  numerous,
I  believed   nevertheless that  I  saw the  divine  mercy  that  extended its arms  to  me  to embrace   me  with   kindness  and  that   pardoned   by  amnesty all  my   past  sins;  it  re­ vived  the  memory of  my  good  works  performed   in  charity, but  stifled  by  sin, and finally invited   me  to  join in close  friendship, saying  to  me  as to  Paul  formerly: "He will  be  to  Me   a  vessel  of election  and  will  carry  my   name  to  Nations."  Then I thanked God, I  offered   myself and  said: "Make of me,  Lord, a  man  according  to your heart.  Teach me  what  You  want  me to  do. In  the  future, nothing  will separate me   from  your  love,  neither  nakedness, nor  the  sword, nor  death. Did  I, a member of  your  holy  company, I, destined   to  be  your  apostle   of Canada, if  I   had  been faithful, I  to  whom  was  given,  certainly   not   the   gift   of  languages,  but   a  great


44

BREBEUF's SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



facility  for learning  them, did  I  have to  be so careless! oh evil!  oh  unseemliness! oh deformity of my  conduct!"
I  did  not  find in  myself any  affection for venial sin that  would  lead me  to commit such with  pleasure.
I  prayed  to  God  not  to  cut  me  down  like  a useless tree,  but  to  grant  me  still this year, and I  promised  to bear better  fruits.
FEBRUARY  g-It  seemed  to  me,  being  suddenly ravished, that  I  was deprived   of
all  my  senses  and  united   to  God.  In  truth, this  ravishing  was  accompanied  by  a transistory  physical  feeling.
On  the  25th  of March of this  year r63o,  I  shall  have  passed thirty  seven  years;
in  fact, I was born in 1593 on the  feast of the Annunciation.
On  the  2oth  of January   r63o,  I  pronounced   the  vows  of coadjutor in  the  chapel of the  college  of Rouen, before  the  Reverend  Father  Jacques  Bertrix, rector.
In  the  month of September r63r, I  received  the  subdiaconate  at  Lisieux; then, the  same  year,  the  diaconate   at  Bayeux  in  December; in  r632,  I  was  ordained   at Pontoise,  at  the   beginning  of  Lent   and,  on  the   feast of  the  Annunciation  of  the Virgin, I offered  to God  my  first Mass at Rouen.
DURING THE  EXERCISES OF  Ifi3I, BEGUN  ON   MAY  I 2- Lord  Jesus, my  Redeemer, you  have  redeemed me  by  your  blood  and  your  very  precious  death. That is why  I promise  to  serve  You   all  my  life,  in  the  Society   of Jesus,  to  serve  no  other  than You, and  You alone.  I  sign  this  promise  with  my  blood  and  my  hand, prepared  to sacrifice my whole  life as willingly  as this drop.
ON  SEPTEMBER 4,  DURING THE EXERCISES- In  His  goodness,  God  has  provided me  with   mildness, with   gentleness  and  with  charity  towards  all;  with  disinterested­ ness as regards  all things  and  with   patience  to endure  contrarities. His  divine  good­ ness  wills  that   by  these  means   I  come  to  perfection   and  to  eternal  glory.  That is why  that  will  be  the  matter   of my  particular  examination, to  know   whether I  am using these talents  that  He has confided  to me as I should.
I637- On   the  21st,  or  the  22nd, or  the  23rd  of the  month of August, and  at the  time  of the  evening examination of conscience  and  the  litany  of the  Virgin, in a  vision  of  the   spirit  or  the   imagination, I  believed   I  saw  an  immense  horde  of demons   who   approached  me   with   the  intention  of   devouring  me,  or  at  least,  of biting  me.  But  not  one  of them  succeeded  in  harming  me.  Those that  were  in  front were  like  horses  of strange  grandeur, with  hair long  and  curly  like  that  of goats;  I scarcely  remember the   forms  of the  others,  but  I  know  that  I  had  never  seen  any­
thing   so  numerous, so  diverse  and  so  horrible.  This vision  lasted   perhaps   for the
space  of a  Miserere. I  do  not  remember having  been  afraid, but, placing  my  confi­ dence  in  God, I  said: "Do all that  God  permits  you;  you will  not  pull out  one  hair of my head without a sign of His will."
DURING THE  EXERCISES OF Ifi45·
AUGUST  IS-Henceforth,  I  shall  make, every  day  at  the  time   of  communzon, with  the  consent   of the  superior, the  vow  to  do  all that  I  know  will  contribute to the greatest glory of God and to His greatest service.

45

BREBEUF'S SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



This  Vow  will  have two  rules: (I) When   I  myself,  reasonably, with  clarity and without  any doubt,  shall  judge that  something  is  for the  greatest glory of God;  (2) the  superior or the  spiritual director whom  I  must  consult  when  in  doubt if I  can.
I  add  as explanation:   (r) This  vow  extends  to  all that  is  concerned  with  the
rule, so that  where  there would  be mortal sin in  virtue  of the  precept, there  would also be  sacrilege in  virtue  of the  vow;  (2)   in  things  which  are of  simple  counsel and not of precept, but which  are important  and of grave consequence  for the  glory of God,  this  vow  binds me  under  pain of mortal  sin. If the  thing  is less important, it  binds  me  only  under  pain of venial sin;  ( 3)  in  order  that  in  a thing  of small importance  I  be held by this vow  under  pain of venial sin, I must  see clearly, with certitude  and without  hesitation, that it may contribute  to the  greatest glory of God, whether  I  judge it  according to  the law of God,  or according to  the  rules of  deci­ sion given in  the  Exercises,  or  finally according to  the  lights of my  reason  and the grace of God,  or  whether  I  take  as rule  the   judgment  of the  superior  or  of the spiritual director.
DURING THE  EXERCISEs  OF   I64o- On  the  day before  retreat, after the  examina­
tion,  while  I  was  confessing, and  afterwards  while  I  was  performing  my  penance, two  suns appeared  to  me,  shining  with  a bright  light,  between  which  there  was a cross whose arms, head, and  foot seemed of the same dimension. I did not see what material  this cross was made of, but each extremity  ended in  a [leur de lis or in the face of a  cherubim.  On  the  upper  part of the  cross there  appeared,  if I  am  not mistaken,  the  image  of   Our  Lord  Jesus Christ.  Afterwards   I  had  doubts,  asking myself whether  it was not the image of the  Blessed Virgin  Mary.  From that  time,  I felt myself called interiorly to the cross and to mortification.
The   following day, it  was February 12, during  the  first exercise, I  endeavoured to  be in  God in  a thought  of pure love and  I thrust  aside the  sight of every  crea­ ture:  also I  was  pursued  by  all sorts of distractions  and  burdened  with  aversion. Then I  believed  I  heard within  myself: "Turn towards  Jesus Christ  crucified  and He  will  be  henceforth   the  base and  the   foundation  of  your  contemplations."   At once I  felt devoted to Jesus Christ.
The   same  day, I  believed  I  saw a truly  terrible  figure resembling  the  lion  head
that  is seen, I think, in a picture of Father Joseph  Anchieta, but larger at the  first and  increasing  little  by  little.  I  believed  it  to  be  the  devil;  however,  I  did  not experience  any  fear, but  I  said: "Act if  God  permits  you."  I  made  the  sign of the cross, it seems to me, and at once the spectre disappeared.
On  the  14th,  at  the  time  of the  meditation, I  believed  I  saw Our  Lord  Jesus Christ,   fixed to  the  cross, who  came towards  me  to  be relieved  of the  burden  and to  place it  on  my  shoulders;  willingly  I  offered  my  shoulders,  but  I  do  not  know what  happened.  I  know  only that  a dead body appeared  to me, separated  from the cross, not  as it  had  appeared  previously, but  entirely  covered  with  leprosy, without form  or  beauty.  All  the  time  I  thought  that  it  was the  body  of Our  Lord  Jesus Christ  because I  saw the wounds in  His hands, and  I understood  that  we must  not

BREBEUF'S SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



think  of Jesus  crucified  as we  ordinarily  imagine, but  rather  as a leper  in  whom there was neither  form nor beauty.
The   same  day, in  the  evening,  as I  prepared to  meditate  on the  perfections of Jesus Christ,  on  His  various communications  with  me  and  my  misery  before Him, thinking  that  all His  other  titles  must  come together, as to  a centre, in  His  extra­ ordinary  love  for us, I  at once believed  I  saw an immense  rose, marvellous  in size and kind, with all its beauty radiating from such a centre.
On  the  18th,  I  seemed to  see the  Blessed Virgin  Mary  carrying the  Infant  Jesus as on an azure blue  cloud, and  golden rays of rare beauty sprang out of this cloud.
I  hoped  that  the  Virgin  would  present me to Christ, but  nothing  happened.
On  February 23, during the evening examination, I thought  I saw something  like the   face of a  Spaniard, wearing  a  pleated  ruff  and  a  Spanish  hat.  At  once  the thought   came  to  me  that  the  devil was hiding under  this  form, seeking  to distract me  from prayer. I quickly turned my thoughts to other things.
On  the  26th  of the  same  month, at night,  during the  recitation  of the  rosary, I believed  I  saw the  tabernacle  of the  Sainte-Marie  residence on which  seven angels are  painted, and  I  felt myself urged to  prayer. Then  it seemed to me that  I was in the  house and  in  the  chapel and that  I  saw the  relics there:  I  was greatly inspired to invoke  all those saints.
On  March  9, after  the  evening  examination, I  was reading a spiritual book near the   fire. Then I  saw, near the  little  house of Sainte-Marie, an enormous  streaked serpent  that   seemed  to  come  out  of the  river  and  creep  towards  the   house. It appeared  to be  five or six cubits long. When  it was near the  house, it rose and threw itself on  one  of our  Frenchmen  that  it  seemed to  seize by  the  ears and  the  hair, until  one  of our  Fathers, running  behind, seized the serpent  and  crushed it  against the  ground.  All  then  began to  tramp  on it  and the  vision  disappeared  at once.
Next  I  saw, behind  the  gable end of the  little  house of Sainte-Marie, four dogs of astonishing size, with  long ears. They  were resting on their  haunches  and looking towards  the  house. Two  were smoke-coloured, and two  were dark  brown. I did not see any more than that.
On  March  I I, as I  began the morning examination  before the blessed Sacrament, I  saw a Jesuit- I  do  not  know  which  one-elevated  in  space, in  the  manner  in which  we ordinarily  paint  our Fathers, with  the  head surrounded  by a great light. Shortly  after,  antennae  like those  of a crab projected  from the  head  of this  Jesuit, then  the  whole  head  changed  into  a river  crab, evident   from the  numerous   feet, and  he  hung  down  towards  the  earth. This  vision was brief but  it  frightened  and upset  me  greatly, at the  thought  that  I  might  be this unfortunate Jesuit  in  whom such a terrible change would be produced.
On  March  21, being at the  residence of Saint  Joseph, during  my night  prayer, I saw a human   form arise above the  altar. It  had wings and, moving  them, balanced and supported  itself in  space, but  could hardly go forward, held as it was by a cord or by some other  means. I believed at  first, when it appeared  and attempted  to  fly, that  it had  four wings, but then  I saw only two. This  vision signifies, had I thought,

47

BREBEUF'S SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



that   I  or  some  other   person  tries  to  rise to  the   contemplation  of celestial  things, but  finds himself  prevented  from attaining them  by worldly  affections.
On   March 30, after  my  Mass,  as I  was  recollecting   inwardly to  listen  to  Christ speaking  within me, I  believed  I  saw a hand  that  anointed   my  heart  and  my  whole spirit with  oil. This sight  filled me with  extreme peace and tranquility.
On   April   11,  at  the  residence  of Saint   Joseph, a  sedition   arose,  during   which Pierre  Boucher's   arm  was  injured, while   Father   Chaumonot  and  I  were  stricken with   blows;  burdened   with  injuries   and  greatly   frightened, we  were  all  ordered  by Ondihoahorea and  the  other  captains  to leave  the  village.  At  night, as I  was thank­ ing  God   for all  that   had  happened, forcing  myself, although very  upset  and  dis­ tressed, to  conform my  will  to  God's, I  believed  I  saw the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary­ as  she  is  represented   in   pictures-- greatly   afflicted   and   her   heart   pierced   with  lances.  I  felt inwardly a voice saying to  me:  «The Blessed Mother of  God, although greatly  afflicted, was always  perfectly  submissive  to the  will  of God  and  she must  be an example for you in adversities."
On  May  9, in  the  town  of Saint  Joseph, I  was  enraptured  in  God  by  flights of vehement love  that   urged  me  to  strain  towards   Him   with  effort. Then  something appeared   to  me  under  the   form  of  an  old  woman who, hastening   to  embrace  me, struck  her  head  against  mine  so violently that  I  was hurt. Then I  suspected  this  old woman to  be the  devil;  I  fortified  myself with  the  sign of the  cross and  at once  the old  woman, remaining  at  a distance, did  not  dare  to  approach me  any  more.
During   the   days  when   I  was  at  Teanaostaiae, I  was  often   carried  to  God  by flights of love.
On   the  seventeenth of the  same  month, during   the  day,  while  I  was  praying  to God, I   felt  my  spirit  raised  while  I  was  considering   a  cross made  like  the  one  at Sainte   Marie  in  which  relics  from  the  holy  land  are  enshrined, or like  some  crosses that  are made  of stars. This vision lasted  a long  time, and  during  it  I  had  no other thought but that  God wanted  to send me some new cross.
On   August   4th, having   returned    from  the   burial  of  our  late  Chretien, in  the evening  during   the  examination, I  had  various  visions.  I  remember nothing   at  all of the   first. The second  presented  to  me  a  pavilion  or  dome  that  descended   from the  sky and  rested  over the  grave of our Chretien, and  next  it seemed  to me  that  his same  pavilion  was  pulled  up  by the  two  ends  and  drawn on  high  as if it  were  to be raised  to  heaven. I  did  not  see  however   that   it  was  raised,  nor  the   persons  who drew  it. This vision  lasted  long  enough  and  ended  there.  The sentiment that  I  felt from  it  is that  God  wanted  to  make  understood  the  state  of the  soul  of this  good Chretien.
On  the  12th  or 13th  of August, I  seemed  to  see a high  mountain entirely  covered
with   women  saints.  I  do  not  know   whether some  men   saints  appeared, but  more truly  it  seems  to  me  that  there  were  only  women saints. They were  disposed  on  this mountain in  the  way  of an  amphitheatre, in  such  a way  that   from  the   foot of the mountain up  to  the  summit   the  ranks  diminished  until  they  were  reduced  to  unity that   was  Our   Lady, who  was  seated  on  the   peak  of the  said  hill.  Then I  thought

BREBEUF'S SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



of our  Joseph  Chiwatenhwa, but  I  did  not  see him  on that  hill. I  believed  that  this vision signified the excellence of the Blessed Virgin over all the saints.
On   August   27th, at  night, while  saying  the  litanies,  I  saw  the   form  of a  man who   was  suspended   in  air,  but  inverted   so that   his head  was  below  and  his  feet above.  It  seemed  to  me  that   his  feet were  not  attached   to  anything, but  only  that this  man  was  upheld   in  air in  this  posture.  I  could  not  distinguish who  this  person was. But  immediately afterwards, I  saw and  knew  distinctly a certain  man, whether or  not  he  was  the  same  as the   first, who  was  seated  with   his  face turned   towards the  earth, and  was totally  covered  with  big postules, like  some ill  people who, during the  contagion, were  seen  to  be  covered, not  with  a  flax pox,  but  with  large  grains. And   not  only  was  he  covered  in   face and  body  with  this  leprosy  or  pox,  but  also the  air around   him.   And  I  do  not  doubt  that  there  appeared   someone  a little  dis­ tance   from  him, already  infected  with  the  same  contagion. The  idea  came  to  me that   that   vision  signified  the  sad  state  of that  unfortunate soul  and  the  contagion  that  communicated itself to others  following contact  with that  man.
On   August   31st,  at  night, during  the  litany  and  the  examination, I   first saw  a woman's  garment   of  a  ravishing   beauty, as  much    because   of  the   material   that appeared   admirable  as  because   of  the   ornaments  and   embroideries  of  gold  and pearl that  were  on it. A  lady,  whom I  do  not  doubt  was Our  Lady, was  dressed in this  garment; but  I  did  not  see her  face at  all, and  my  spirit  was entirely occupied and  ravished   by  the   sight  and  consideration   of this  rich  and  marvellously  ample garment. Then the  question   having  come  to  me  of why  I  did  not  look  at  this  lady directly, I  raised  on  high  the  eyes  of  my  spirit,  and  seemed   to  see  a  high  statue, covered  with  a veil and  with  a crown  above, in the  way in  which  we are accustomed to   represent   the   glorious  Virgin. But  this  vision  hardly   lasted  and   was  not  very distinct.
In  the  second  place, beside  Our  Lady  there  began to  half open  a great  globe the interior   of  which   was  decorated   with   many   and  diverse  beauties   more   surprising and  ravishing   than   I  can  conceive, and  than  I  know  how  to  explain. I  had  never seen  or read  anything of the  like.  The first idea  that  came  to  me  on the  opening  of this  globe was that  it was the  same  vision that  I had of a clock  with  infinite springs. But  it  was  entirely different. The  sentiments that  I  had  at  the  time  were  admira­ tion, love of God and  fear of being wrong.
On  November 17th, on  my  way  to the  Neutral  Nation, at  night, before  arriving, while   praying  to  God, I  believed  I  saw a multitude of angels  placed  before  me.
On   December  13th,  being   at   Andachkhroeh  Chenusolahissen, it   seems  to  me while  making my  examination, I  saw  a skeleton   fleeing  from  me:  did  it  come  from me?  or  rather, coming   from  elsewhere, was it  simply  close to  me?  I  do  not  know. I  know  only  one  thing: when   I  saw it, it  held  fast to  my  sides, and  it  disappeared at once.
On  January   16,  1641,  in  a  dream, I  believed  myself  in  the  company of blessed Father  Caton: he told  me  that  the   following  day  he had  a case to  plead  before  the judges;  in  my  turn   I  told   him  that   I  also, in  the   following   days,  had  a  case  to

49

BREBEUF'S SPIRITUAL JOURNAL



defend   and   that   however   I  had  not  yet  thought  of my  defence. In  retrospect, I thought that  the  Father  would  give  me  his  kind   help  in  the  defence  that  I  had  to make.
On  February  7th, there  appeared  two  hands   joined  as in  sign of pact. Also at this
moment, it seems to  me, or a  few days after,  during  the  night  prayer, there  appeared to  me  a  quantity of crosses that  I  accepted  willingly. The  following  night, while  at prayer,  as I  tried  to  conform  my  will  to  God's, saying  to  him; "Lord, your  will  be done", I  heard  as  it  were  a  voice  say  to  me;  "'Take  and  read."  The day  having arrived, I  took  up  the  Imitation of Christ,  and  I  happened on the  chapter  of "The Royal  Way  of the  Holy  Cross." Thereafter, there  ensued  in  my  spirit  a great  peace and  repose concerning the trials that  would  come  to me.
On   October 8, 1644, in  Huronia, in  the  chapel   of the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary, at
night, during    prayer,  before   the   meal,   I  seemed   to  see  violaceous   or  red  blood stains  on  the  clothes  of all  our  fathers, as well  as  on  mine, without anyone   being excepted. As I was  filled with  wonder, the  thought came  to me  that   justice  protected us all as with  a garment  of blood.
I, the  undersigned, priest  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  delegated by Reverend Father Paul  Ragueneau, superior   of  this  mission,  affirm  under  oath   that   the  present  writ­ ings,  contained in  the  leaves from  page  2 r 7 to  250, have  been  read  with  great  care  and   attention,  and   conform   totally   to   the   autographs  of   Father   Joseph-Marie Chaumonot, of  the  surgeon   Francois   Gendron, and   to  the  manuscripts of  Father Jean de Brebeuf.

Dated  at Quebec in New France, August 25, r652.
JOSEPH  PONCET, S.J.

I affirm the same.- PAUL RAGUENEAU.



FOOTNOTES

1 "Relation of   r648-4g,'' The   Jesuit   Relations, ed.   Reuben  Gold  Thwaites  (New
York,  1959), XXXIV, p. r67-r69.
2   Ibid. p. I63.
3  Ibid. p.  r89.



LIVES OF THE HUNTED


James Polk



L0  Canada, Edmund  Wilion  conf= that  American' m
the  early  nineteen hundreds tended  to imagine Canada "as  a kind  of vast hunt­
ing  preserve  convenient to  the  United  States"; he goes on  to recall  that  myth  of an edenic,  pristine  Canada which  the majority of outlanders still seem to cherish:

Canada  comes back to me from childhood as a realm of huge forests, frozen lakes, large  and   dangerous   animals-animals which,  however,  in  Ernest  Thompson Seton's stories, seemed to constitute a special race that was capable of  communicat­ ing with men, of becoming our fierce foes or our loyal allies.

Typically American, we sigh,  to see Canada as a hunters' game  park  and  to hold firmly  to  the  legends  transmitted by an  outdated, scarcely  respectable branch of our  literature. Our own  attitudes toward   the  natural world  are  less confident; much  serious  Canadian literature seems to express a jittery  fear  of the  wilderness as a  place  which  threatens human endeavour and  self-realization, rather than  a robust   Leather-stocking-like  delight   in  it  as  a  challenging  playground for  the hunter, a kingdom of communicating animals. In  "Wolf  in the  Snow", Warren Tallman identifies  "the continent itself-the grey wolf  whose shadow is under­ neath the  snow"1  as  a  forbidding presence  which  baffles the  characters'  aspira­ tions  in  Canadian fiction,   and   Northrop Frye  finds  "a tone  of  deep  terror in regard to nature" in Canadian poetry:

It is not  a  terror  of  the  dangers  or discomforts or  even  the mysteries of nature, but  a  terror   of  the  soul  at  something  that  these  things  manifest.  The  human mind  has  nothing  but  human  and  moral  values to cling  to if it is to preserve its integrity  or  even  its sanity,  yet the  vast  unconsciousness of nature  in  front  of it seems an unanswerable  denial of those values.2

The  tum-of-the-century animal story  may  seem  to  sugar-coat  this  distinctly
Canadian vision  of Nature, inasmuch as it  attempts to  shape  the  "vast  uncon-


51

LIVES OF  THE HUNTED



sciousness"  through animals  often equipped with  at  least quasi-human and quasi­ moral  values,  to see Tallman's generalized  "Wolf  in the  Snow" as a single furred individual with  every day, minutely-described problems. In fact Sir Charles G. D. Roberts states  that   the  function of  the  animal story  is to  mediate  between  the best of two worlds: it "helps  us to return  to nature, without  requiring that  we at the same  time  return to barbarism" and  "without asking  us to relinquish by way of toll any  part  of the wisdom of the ages."3 Obviously these remarks are wrapped around the  horns  of a familiar Romantic dilemma:  Nature  is good,  but  uncivi­  lized;  Civilization is good,  but  unnatural. However, Roberts insists that  the  kind of animal story  he has in mind  is of a specialized type,  "a  psychological  romance constructed on a framework of natural science."4  He notes that  Ernest  Thompson Seton's works  fit his category,  but  Black  Beauty  and  Kipling's "Mowgli" stories are   alien   to  the   genre,  since  the  animals are  "frankly  humanised" and   their notions   too  "complex" to  be  realistic. 5    What   Roberts is  really  announcing in "The Animal   Story" is  the  inadequacy of   British  fictional   conventions to  the Canadian landscape. The  British writer, steeped  in the social order, is doomed  to transform  his  animals  into  miniaturized   people:  thus   the   moles,  toads,   rats, weasels and  bunnies in  Kenneth Grahame and  Beatrix  Potter have  class accents, wear  clothes  and  own  houses. Whether dressed  or not,  the  British  animal usually inhabits a  domestic  world  of farmyards and  happy endings: Lassie comes  home through hedgerows and  towns-and she does come  home.  The  supposed  "wild­ ness"  of  the  animal  is  beside  the  point:  Kipling's jungle  beasts  are  disguised sergeants and  schoolmasters. The   Canadian writer   of  animal fiction,  less con­ cerned  with  a  structured social  milieu  and  living  in  a  less cosy natural environ­ ment,  is  likely to  find  the  British  animal story  an  unconvincing model; Roberts and  Seton each  chose to create  a mode of approach distinctively his own.
Distinctively Canadian? Roberts does not  mention any  American writers  in his
essay, possibly because  the treatment of animals in American fiction is so different from   his  own   practice as  to  seem  irrelevant.  The  attitude  toward  Nature  in America has  remained firmly  anthropocentric from   the  Puritans'  identification with   Israel   in  the   Wilderness  down  through the  great   quest  romances of  the Nineteenth Century to the  fiction  of Hemingway, Faulkner and  Mailer. Nature exists  to  challenge man,  to  jolt  him  into  self-discovery, to  reveal  the  truths of a transcendental  universe,  to  shout   out  sermons   from  stones.  Animals   are  often introduced to  give  striplings  a  chance  at  initiation into  manhood, but  even  the animal as sacrificial  victim  has  a way of turning into  a furred or finned  symbol, a  cosmic  beast  whose  significance   transforms the  insight   of  the  hunter.  Moby

52

LIVES OF  THE HUNTED



Dick, triumphant and  elusive at  the  heart  of the tradition, is the  classic example, but  he  (or  He)   is  not  alone.   Indeed, the  patterns in  American writing about animals seem  almost  inverted in  Canadian counterparts, where  the  emphasis is not on man  at all, but on the animal.

A GROUP OF  REPRESENTATIVE BEARS from  both  the  Ameri­
can  and   Canadian  traditions may  illustrate the  difference. The  hero  of Seton's
The Biography of a Grizzly  begins life by watching his mother and siblings  killed by  a  hunter; he  is  painfully   wounded   in  the  paw,   but  flees  into   the  forest, orphaned  and   whimpering. He  grows  up  into  "a  big strong sullen  bear,   with neither friendship nor  love",  plagued  along  the  way by unfriendly animals, hard winters,  and  the  traps  and  rifles of men.  In  a fit of savage  temper he mauls  two hunters to death, Seton  assuring  us that  this is only fair since the  hunters wanted to  kill him.  In  middle  age  he finds no mate,  is afflicted with  rheumatism and  is finally  tricked   by  a  lesser  bear  into  fearfully  relinquishing his territory. At  last, exhausted, half-blind and  racked  by physical  pains,  Seton's  grizzly commits sui­ cide,  choosing  to  enter  a glen  filled with  poisonous  gases and  to die  in  peace - "a truly   Roman  end",  as  one  critic   has  remarked.6    The   polar   bear   cub   in Roberts' "The Summons of the  North" also has an  unhappy career.  He  loses his mother to  hunters, then   is  picked  up  by  a  ship  and  imprisoned in  a  zoo.  He seems  to  endure this  last  indignity   with  a  noble  indifference, until  a  blizzard  in the  zoo recalls  to  him  his lost arctic  home : "to  his heart  it was the  summons of the  north,-and  suddenly  his  heart  answered.m  His  heart   apparently cannot stand  the  strain   and  the  bear  collapses by the  edge of his man-made pool,  never to rise again.
We have  no choice  but  to identify  with  these persecuted  bears  as they struggle
to survive  and  heroically accept  a defeat  which  is inevitable-"the life of a wild animal always  has a tragic  end," 8   Seton  writes, and  the italics are his. In  William Faulkner's "The  Bear", on  the  other   hand, we  are  on  the  side  of  the  young hunter who  seeks  a  grizzly  "absolved of mortality," a  bear  magnified into  "an anachronism  indomitable and   invincible  out  of an  old  dead  time,  a  phantom, epitome and  apotheosis of the old wild life." There is an armada of critical  exegeses on  this story,  but  perhaps it  is enough  to say  that  the  hunter's all  but  mystical encounters with  the  bear  make  him  comprehend the inviolability of the wilder­ ness and  lead  him  to  question the  honour  of his ancestral history: the  real  bear  resolves into  a  personal symbol  illuminating the  life of the  seeing  "I". The  plot

53

LIVES OF  THE HUNTED



of Norman  Mailer's  Why  Are We  in Vietnam? centres  upon  a ritual  bear hunt unifying,  and  then  alienating,  father  and son. D.J.,  the  hip  young hunter,  here finds a larger  truth  transmitted  through  the gaze of a dying grizzly: "something in  that  grizzer's eyes locked into his, a message, fellow, an  intelligence  of some­ thing  very  fine and  very far  away ... those  eyes were  telling  him  something, singeing  him, branding  some part of D.J.'s  future.'' Canadian bears are notably less spiritual  and  communicative,  and it is not because Faulkner  and  Mailer may be "better" or  "more  serious"  writers  than  Seton  or  Roberts; the difference  is between  the lives of the hunters  and,  to borrow  a title from  one of Seton's story collections, the lives of the hunted.
Sympathetic   identification  with  the  hunted  is sustained  in  Canadian  animal
stories even when the narrator is also the hunter.  Seton's  "Lobo,  the King of the Currumpaw", for  example,  is told  by an  expert  in wolf-traps  and  poisons, but all the interest is in the wolf:  his tragic early childhood,  his cleverness in survival, his loyalty to his mate, his poignant, dignified death.  When Seton was denounced for  the  unhappy  ending  of "Lobo", he insisted on the  priorities of the hunted:

In  what frame of mind are my hearers left with regard to the animal? Are their sympathies quickened  toward  the  man  who  killed  him,  or  toward  the  noble creature  who, superior to every trial, died  as he had  lived-dignified, fearless, and steadfast?9

Conversely, the American story told from the animal's  viewpoint tends to evade tragedy  and  slip into a celebration  of the hunter's world.  Jack  London's  White Fang seems to be a "Canadian" tale in its first half, where we follow the trials of a wolf as he endures the cruel north and even crueller men. But halfway through, White Fang is redeemed by the love of a good master, moves to California,  begets children,  alerts  the  family  when  his human   "love-master"  (London's  phrase) breaks  a  leg, saves  the  household  from  a  murderer, and  is canonized  as "The Blessed Wolf" by the admiring  populace of Sierra Vista. This  Horatio  Alger-like rise to the top is alien to the Canadian tradition; in fact, in "Wully, the Story of a  Yaller  Dog",  Seton gives us the  pattern  in reverse. Wully is a good sheepdog who,  through   human  neglect, declines into  a sheepkiller  and  is mistaken  for  a wolf. He  is shot as he tries to attack  his kindly owners when they find him out; redemption  through "love-masters" is not a feature of the animal in Canadian literature.
Admittedly  the human  beings in Canadian animal stories are not often lovable.
Wully's  derangement is  caused  by a  thick-skinned  sheepherder who  abandons


54

LIVES OF  THE HUNTED



him,  and  the  hunters  in other  stories are often  petty-minded,  vicious and  crass, such  as the  drunken   coyote killer in Seton's  "Tito" or the  callous "sportsman" who shoots  the  leader  of a seal  herd  in Roberts'  "Back  to the  Water  World". Man's  world  is anathema to the animals:  the vixen in Seton's "The Springfield Fox" feeds her baby  poisoned meat  rather  than  see him live a captive; in "The Grey Master"  Roberts shows that for a true  wolf death  is more honourable than pacing  a  cage  as a spectacle  for  unfeeling  people. By shooting  two  panthers,  a man  saves  the  lives of  two  children  in  Roberts'  "Do  Seek Their   Meat  From God",  but  the stark  conclusion  reminds  us of the animals'  rights:  the  children are saved,  but  two panther  cubs now lie dead of starvation.  The  elegiac endings to many of these Canadian stories, particularly Seton's, remind us that the human world  in  a  larger  sense and  as a  whole  is gradually  obliterating   the  animals' domain.  The  coyote-protagonists  of  "Tito" survive through  their  cunning,  but the  buffalo  and  the  antelope,  we are  mournfully told, have largely been hunted out of the Badlands.  In  "Redruff", a noble partridge  dies in an untended  snare, one of the  last of his breed  to flourish in the  Don  Valley:  "now  no  partridge comes to Castle Frank," the story concludes, "and  in Mud  Creek Ravine  the old pine drum-log, since unused, has rotted in silence away."10
These  doleful endings  and  the number  of stoic moose, tragic bears, grouse dy­
ing  in  the  snow,  woodchucks  devoured,  salmon  failing  to  make  it  upstream, grief-stricken  wolves and  doomed  balls of fur,  feathers  or  quills squealing  for dead  mothers  tend  to instil a certain  fatalism  in the  reader; it is interesting  to speculate  about  the  influence of Roberts'  and  Seton's  books, as popular  reading for children,  on the  collective Canadian psyche. Is there anything  the Canadian animal  may gain from  his struggle,  beyond survival? Does suffering improve  his soul?  Is tight-lipped   Presbyterian  endurance   his only recourse?  Certainly  some animals  are allowed to live beyond the last paragraph, but that this is an unusual event may be indicated  by one of Seton's titles:  "Badlands  Billy: The  Wolf that Won."
Roberts'  animals are generally more cheerful and pragmatic  than  Seton's,  and
when  the struggle  is localized  in a  particular  inter-animal  fight, as in  many  of the stories in The  Kindred  of the Wild  and The  Wisdom of the Wilderness,  the protagonist-animal often wins. But in the struggle with man even the rare triumph may seem an evasion, as in the conclusion of Roberts' novella Red  Fox, in which the hunted  fox hitches a ride on a wagon and is removed to "a  wilderness to his heart's  desire, a  rugged  turbulence  of  hills and  ravines where the  pack and  the scarlet hunters  could not come." The  availability of more and  better  wildernesses


55

LIVES OF THE  HUNTED



is not  offered to every fox, however, and  the captive  animals  in Roberts'  Kings in Exile can only meet their defeat with outrage  and forlorn dignity. Joseph Gold has argued  that Roberts' storie<> affirm a larger vision of the natural cycle: "While individual  creatures  constantly lose the struggle  for survival, life itself persists."11
However,  life's persistence offers little comfort for the animal  one is sympathizing
with in  a given story;  true, the cycle persists as the  bear  eats a salmon  in "The
Last Barrier", but it is the salmon's story.



IN  SETON's   WORK,  Nature   can  occasionally  persist  with  a vengeance.  The   hunter  who shoots  a  splendid  mountain sheep  for  money  in "Krag, the  Kootenay  Ram"  grows obsessed with  his kill and  keeps the  corpse with  him  in  a  mountain  shack.  Then  "the  Ram's  own  Mother   White  Wind" descends, "charged  with a mission of revenge"/ 2   to crush  the shack  in an  ava­ lanche.  The  hunter's  remains -"broken  bones  with  rags and  grizzled  human hair" -are found  beneath  the body of Krag,  whose shining golden eyes  remain unclouded  even after death.  The  hunter  is forgotten,  but the  ram's  head is "en­ shrined  on  a  palace  wall today."'3   Nature  prevails,  but  not  a friendly  Mother  Nature  or even a Thornton W. Burgess Mother  West Wind;  rather,  it is chilling Mother   White  Wind,  a  personification  of  the  kind  of  natural  world  Warren Tallman finds a  dominant  presence elsewhere in  Canadian fiction  and  charac­ terizes  as "old  Mother  North  America  with  her snow  hair,  her  mountain  fore­ head,  her prairie eyes, and her wolf teeth, her wind songs and  her vague head of old  Indian   memories."14     Seton's  concern  for  the  uncompromising  aspects  of Nature  is also evident  in his painting  "The  Wolves' Triumph" which depicts a pack  feeding  on a  human  body in the snow. The  painting,  rejected  by a  Paris exhibition  for  its  revolting  subject  matter,   was  finally shown  at  the  Chicago World's  Fair in 1893, "much  against the wishes of some members of the Toronto selection  committee,"  according  to  S.  E. Read,  "who  were  inclined  to  believe that  it  might  leave an  unfavourable  impression  of  the  Canadian way of life."' 5
In  his writing  Seton  conscientiously tries to correct  unfavourable impressions in several  ways. There  is an  unconvincing  "Angel  of the Wild Things" who flits into  the  occasional  story  to  guide  the  animal  on  the  right  path,  and  in  The Natural  History  of  the Ten  Commandments, Seton  tries to show  (with  dubious success)  that  animal  behaviour may run parallel with the laws of the Decalogue. However  he is too  professional a  naturalist  to depend  on  angels  and  Christian teaching  in his best stories, and  usually goes out of his way to deny his animals a

LIVES OF  THE HUNTED



metaphysical aura. Thus Lobo  "had not a collar  of gold  about  his neck  nor  was there  on  his shoulders an  inverted   cross to  denote  that   he  had  leagued   himself with  Satan";16 he is a great  wolf, but a real one. Yet in The Trail  of the Sandhill Stag Seton  writes  a story  which  seems to follow the  American pattern, complete with  the  redemptive "cosmic beast".  Yan,  the  protagonist, grows  from  youth  to manhood in  his  pursuit of a  great  stag,  yet when  he is at  last face  to face  with the  animal, he fails to shoot.  Long  years in the woods  have  taught the  hunter to respect  his quarry, and  the  deer's  serene  gaze  quells the  hunter's desire  to draw blood. The story ends with an apostrophe to the stag:

I  may  never  see you again.  But if only you would come sometimes and  look me in the eyes and  make  me feel as you have done to day,
beast  wholly  from  my  heart,  and  then  the  veil would  be a  little  drawn  and  I should  know  more  of  the  tl1ings that  wise men  have  prayed  for  knowledge  of. And  yet  I feel  it  never  will  be-I  have found  the  Grail.  I have  learned  what Buddha learned.  I shall never see you again. Farewell.

The  pattern of the story  may  be American, but the spirit  is undoubtedly Cana­ dian.   Even  here,  Seton's usual  elegiac  tone  is evident: the  stag  will not  return to drive  "the wild  beast" wholly  from  the  hunter's heart, and  in spite  of  having  learned  what   Buddha  learned,  Yan  accepts   the  limitations on  his  knowledge rather  fatalistically.  There  is  identification  with   animals   throughout:  on  the trail,  Yan  feels  "the strange prickling  that  he  knew  was  the same  as makes  the wolf's  mane  bristle  when  he  hunts". When  Yan  realizes that  wolves are  hunting him  just as  he  hunts  the  stag,  he reflects,  "Now  I know  how  a deer  feels when the  grind  of a  moccasined foot or the click of a lock is heard  in the  trail  behind  him," and  at  the  end  he addresses  the  deer  as "Little Brother". Other men  jeer at  Yan  for  his persistence -indeed, in this story it is  not  always  easy to tell the hunter from  the hunted.
Whether or not  the Ten  Commandments, Buddha, individual victories, natural process  or  "The Angel  of  the  Wild  Things" offer  convincing affirmations in  a given  animal story,  a sympathetic identification with  the  hunted remains a  con­ stant   factor.  Perhaps  this  is  connected   with  a  Canadian habit   of  mind  which shows  up  also in  partisan emotions  at  the  slaughter of baby  seals, in  campaigns for  the  better  understanding of wolves, or in the  popular adoption as a national symbol  of the  Ookpik, with  its defenceless feathers  and  persecuted eyes. Certainly the  obsession with  survival in  the Canadian novel, from  Sinclair Ross and  Ernest  Buckler   to  Margaret  Laurence and   Mordecai Richler,  may  indicate that   the animal story  is more  closely allied  with  the  mainstream of our  literature than  it

57

LIVES OF  THE  HUNTED



would  appear. At least, the  predicament of the  individual struggling for life with an  indifferent natural world  on  one side  and  a hostile  society  on  the  other  is as evident  in, for  instance, The  Mountain  and the Valley  as in The  Biography of a Grizzly.  In  recent   Canadian fiction,  the  protagonists often  seem  to  be  copying their  survival techniques directly  from  the  animals: the  man  in  the  tree  at  the end of Beautiful  Losers (a title that  would  do for a collection of Canadian animal stories)   is  literally   one  of  the  hunted. While   her  fiance   brags  of  his  hunting prowess,  the  heroine  of Margaret Atwood's The  Edible Woman crouches in the Ladies', feeling  kinship  with  a roll of toilet  paper which  is described  as "helpless and   white   and   furry, waiting   passively for  the  end". Robert Kroetsch's  Stud­ horse  Man,  moving from  one  narrow escape  to  another, is repeatedly  identified  with  his stallion,  last  member  of a breed  faced  with  extinction. However, at  the finish  there  is a  bleakly  comic  reversal: the stallion  kills the  man  and  becomes  a respectable member of society, impregnating mares  for science  and  birth-control, while the true spirit  of the wild dies with his master.
As Canada's  perennial questioning of its own  national identity is increasingly coupled   with  a  suspicion  that  a fanged  America lurks  in  the  bushes,  poised  for the  kill, it is not  surprising that  Canadian writers should  retain  their  interest  in persecution and   survival.  The   didacticism and   elegiac  melodrama of  the  tum­ of-the-century animal story  have  given  way  to irony  and  black  humour, and  we look back on the golden  age of nature writing from  an iron  age of urban despera­ tion.  But  as  Britain   has not  deserted  the social  order  in  its fiction  (see Anthony Powell,   or   Anthony  Burgess)   and   as  America  continues  to  turn   out   quest romances (see James Dickey), so Canadian literature may  not  be as far  away  as we think  from  the  preoccupations of Seton  and  Roberts, the  lives of  the  hunted.


FOOTNOTES

1 A Choice of Critics, ed. George Woodcock (Toronto, 1966), p. 10.
2   Literar•y History  of Canada, ed. Carl  F. Klinck  (Toronto, 1965),  p. 830.
3   Charles G. D. Roberts, The  Kindred of the Wild  (London, 1903), p. 29.
4    The same, p. 24.
5    The same, p. 27.
"'   S. E. Read, "Flight to the Primitive:  Ernest Thompson Seton,"  Canadian  Litera- ture 13 (1962),  p. 51.
7    Charles  G. D.  Roberts,  The  Haunters  of the  Silences  (London,  1907),  p. 30.
8    Ernest  Thompson  Seton, Wild  Animals  I  Have  Known   (London,  1902),  p. 12.
9   Ernest Thompson  Seton, Lives of the Hunted  (London, 1901), p. 12.
10   Wild  Animals I Have Known, p. 58.

LIVES OF  THE HUNTED



11  Joseph  Gold,  "The Precious Speck of Life," Canadian  Literature  26  (1965),  p.
25.
12  Lives of the Hunted, p.  103.
13  The same, p. 104.
a A Choice of Critics, p. 76.
15  "Flight  to the Primitive,"  p. 50.
16   Wild  Animals I Have Known, p. 53·













































59



LE  CONTE AU QUEBEC

AU DIX-NEUVIEME  SIECLE



Jean Rigault




LA vw.dm donne aux anciens Quebecois !'occasion de se
divertir,  de s'evader.  Si les pieds et les voix y trouvent  leur  compte,  les esprits,
les coeurs, les ames  ne sont  pas oublies. Les conteurs,  par  leur  art,  foumissent aux  gens de quoi peupler !'imagination, de quoi faire  vibrer la sensibilite et bien souvent aussi de quoi "elever" l'ame. Le Quebecois au siecle demier  dissocie diffi­ cilement  la  religion,  au  moins  telle qu'il  l'entend, et  la  vie;  H.  R.  Casgrain
souligne  la  difference  qui  existe a cet  egard  entre  le  paysan  quebecois  et  le
paysan  fran<;ais, son cousin germain:   "l'etranger qui  ne connaissant  pas !'habi­ tant  de nos campagnes  croirait  pouvoir l'assimiler au  paysan de la vieille France,  son  and tre,
il est loin de partager  son etat  precaire".I  La difference  reelle au  Ige siecle, n'a pas  toujours  ete  aussi grande,  et la  majeure  partie  des  contes  quebecois  trou­ vent  surtout   leur  origine  dans  le folklore  fran<;ais, et  parfois  dans  le  folklore
irlandais  et  meme  ecossais. Neanmoins,  les contes  a incidences  religieuses dans
le folklore du Quebec sont plus nombreux que ceux des pays d'origine, principale­ ment  de  France.   Le fait  est specifique d'une  arne  collective  due  a un  type  de societe, a un  mode  de vie,  a des donnees  historiques,  a une  psychologie nette­ ment  differencies.  C'est  cette  arne qu'on  pourrait saisir  a nu  dans  les legendes
et  les contes souvent  naifs transmis  par  la tradition orale;  nous avons tente  de la  decouvrir  a travers  les situations,  les commentaires, les morales  que  renfer­
ment les recits.
Nous tenons nos materiaux  d'anciens  qui les avaient  eux-memes  r us
de  leur  grands-peres,  nous  avons souvent  du  faire  appel  a des fonds  recueillis
par  des folkloristes, enfin, nous avons puise dans  les recueils oil des ecrivains du siecle passe ou du  debut  de celui-ci, conscients de la valeur  du  patrimoine  folk-

6o

LECONTE AU  QUEl3EC



lorique en  voie  de  disparition, ont  fixe  ce  qu'ils  en  connaissaient.  Nous  nous occupons particulierement  des  contes  et  des Iegendes  du  1ge siecle  parce  qu'ils alimentent encore  Ies "diseurs" contemporains; mais il est evident que  ces recits
se  sont   transmis  plus  ou   moins   deformes,   transformes, adaptes  a  travers   les
siecles;  bien  souvent, ils  ont   pour  sujet   Ie  debut   de  la  colonisation, ce  qui  a l'avantage de  Ies nimber de gloire  et de mystere et de Ies perdre dans  Ia nuit  des temps!
Nous  n'avons  pas  etabli   de  distinction   entre  Ies contes  et  Ies legendes.   Les
differences Ies plus  importantes entre  ces deux  genres sont  sans  doute Ia part  de realite   plus  ou  moins  grande que  !'on  peut  trouver   a Ia  base  de !'anecdote, Ie degre  de  creance que  le  conteur accorde a son  histoire  et  Ia  portee   didactique
de  celle-ci. Or, dans  notre  etude,  qu'il  s'agisse  de conte  ou  de legende, Ie  narra­ teur  commence presque  toujours par  annoncer: "voici  un fait  qui  est  reellement  arrive"; et  bien  souvent   il  est  aussi  sur  de !'existence   et  de  Ia  delivrance d'un  Ioup-garou que  de  Ia  rebellion  de  "37'' et  du  passage  des  Habits Rouges; de plus, ii est presque toujours un  pedagogue et Ie merveilleux  regne  partout.
Nous  nous  sommes   attache surtout au  merveilleux   chretien  qui  nous  parait
plus  revelateur de  l'a.me  quebecoise; c'est  lui, d'ailleurs, que !'on  rencontre dans Ia  plupart des  recits.  Le  merveilleux pai:en lui-meme n'est-il  pas  baptise  par  Ies habitants? Le  feu-follet  ne  s'enfuit-il pas au  signe de  Ia croix  et Ies Ioups-garous ne  sont-ils  pas  de  pauvres pecheurs? J.-C. Tache dans  son  avis  au  lecteur,  en exergue  de Forestiers et Voyageurs, ecrit:

Le  voyageur  canadien  est  catholique  et  fram;ais;  Ia legende  est catholique  et  le conte  est fram;ais:  c'est  assez dire que  le recit !t!gendaire et le conte, avec le sens moral  comme  au  bon vieux  temps, sont  le complement  oblige de !'education du voyageur parfait.

Les  premieres Iegendes  a etre  retenues  dans  les Soirees Canadiennes, en  I86I, sont   empruntees au   meme   Tache et  s'intitulent: l' Evangile  ignore,  l' Evangile preche, l'Evangile   accepte.  Avec  ce  titre  on  pourrait penser   a une  manoeuvre
due  a des intellectuels tendancieux, mais  Ies recits recueillis  de  Ia bouche meme
de gens du peuple  ne donnent guere un autre son.
Qui   sont   Ies  conteurs?  De   nombreuses  histoires   mettent  en   scene   l'ai'eul entoure de  ses  petits  enfants: H.-R. Casgrain introduit ainsi  un  conte: "Tenez si  vous  voulez  etre  sages  et  bien  prier  Ie bon  Dieu,  je vous raconterai une  belle histoire.  Oh! comme   nous  avions  hate  que  Ie chapelet soit  fini".  Cela  rend  un accent de  verite  et il est permis  de croire  que,  Ie travail  des hommes et le climat

61

LE  CONTE AU QUEBEC



devenus durs et les enfants se multipliant,  l'emploi de nourrice  incombe naturelle­
ment au vieillard devenu une charge.
11 y a aussi d'autres conteurs,  les colporteurs  et les mendiants  ambulants, qui vehiculent  les recits des autres  paroisses; il y a enfin des voyageurs  plus impor­ tants  qui  raniment  l'interet  des veillees; surtout,  parmi  eux, les pretres colonisa­ teurs.  Aubert  de  Gaspe  ecrit  dans  ses M emoires:  "Ces  moines  etaient souvent des   joumaux   vivants   ( ... )  le  Recollet  bien  accueilli  de  la  population,  le Recollet,  ami de tout le monde, etait la chronique  vivante  et  ambulante de tout ce  qui  se  passait  dans  la  colonie";  son  arrivee  "etait  consideree  une  bonne fortune".
Au XIXe  siecle le "diseur"  adapte  son recit  a son auditoire, aux circonstances
et  aux  coutumes  locales;  c'est  un  pedagogue  ne.  L'habitant  a  d'autant  plus besoin  de  lui  qu'il  ne  possede guere  de  livres,  il en  arrive  si  peu  de  France; d'ailleurs,  le paysan  quebecois n'est pas un  "liseux",  par  paresse peut-Ctre; mais aussi, sous l'infl.uence de ses pasteurs emus par  "l'esprit  de subversion"  repandu dans les  ouvrages franc;ais  et  craignant l'esprit critique ne  de  la  lecture,
l'homme  du  peuple  en est souvent  arrive  a considerer  le livre  comme  l'oeuvre
de   Satan;  enfin  les  ecoles  franc;aises sont   peu   accessibles.  Le  conteur   doit suppleer  tous  ces manques;  il ne l'oublie  generalement   pas  et  joue de  tous ses talents.  11 sait  capter  et   retenir  !'attention  du   paysan  epris  de  la  realite  en insistant  sur  l'authencite du  recit, en apportant des details suffisants de lieux et de  temps  qui  puissent toucher  l'auditoire; il  ne  manque jamais  de  glisser une lec;on et de l'appuyer  fortement.  11 ne se contente  pas du sens de son "narre"; il sait qu'il  faut  repeter et  parler  clairement  pour se faire entendre.  11 commence par  creer  I'ambiance:   "je  vais  commencer  mon  histoire  en  faisant  un  grand signe  de  croix  pour  chasser  le  diable  et   ses  diablotins.  J'en   ai  assez de  ces maudits-la    ( ... )". 11 fait   des  commentaires.   P.-O.   Chauveau,  rapportant l'histoire  de  Lanouet,  remarque: "il est bien malheureux de vivre et de mourir si loin  de tous les pretres";  Aubert  de Gaspe  dans la Legende  du Pere Romain Chouinard  souligne:  "Dieu  seul, bon  jeune homme,  est le ma.ltre de la mort  et de  la  vie".  Comme  dans les fables, la  fin du  recit semble I'occasion  d'exprimer en  clair  le  sens  du  conte.  Forestiers et  Voyageurs  se  termine   par  ces mots: "Heureux ceux  qui  croient!"   Le  Sagamo  du  Kapskouk   ou  l'Evangile   preche est  plus  poetique: "mais I'experience  nous  apprend qu'il  n'y  a  bois si sec que Dieu  ne fasse reverdir quand  il luy plaist !".  "On  ne prie pas, et le flambeau  de la  foi s'eteint  vite quand  il n'est  pas ranime  par  le souffle sacre  de la  priere!'', s'exclame   L.-P.  Lemay  en  terminant l'histoire  du  "Spectre de  Babylas",  alors

LE  CONTE AU QUEBEC



que  H.-R.  Casgrain  insiste sur  le role de la  Providence  et  que  J.-C.  Tache  en arrive  a intituler  un de ses demiers  paragraphes: "Reflexions" ! Une fois encore,
}'instinct  didactique du  conteur  ne fait  pas defaut.  Et  qu'on  ne  croit  pas  que cela  est le seul  fait  des conteurs-Ccrivains; sans doute,  la  plupart   de  ceux que nous devons citer sont-ils de plats moralisateurs, mais un recit recueilli tout demierement d'un  octogenaire  adopte  le meme plan. Le conteur  termine  ainsi: "c'etait la grand  mention  dans  le village ( ... )  tout le monde  est convainc que c'etait   une  punition  que  le  Bon  Dieu  lui  avait  faite.  D'abord lui,  y avait  pas d'affaire  a aller  la  ousqu'y  a ete, pis toutes les affaires qui sont arrivees, c'etait pas  du  a  arriver   ( ... )  Depuis  cette  affaire-la,  on  a  ben  slacke  l'ouvrage  le dimanche".2



RAGOGUE, le conteur  est surtout  interesse a enseigner  deux choses:  la morale,  la morale  chretienne  bien sur, ou }'observance de la pratique religieuse occupe  une  place  de choix, et, plus rarement,  mais cela se rencontre, un  certain   patriotisme.  Le  narrateur quebecois ne  peut  guere  passer  pour  un mystique,  il  oublie  rarement   les consequences  pratiques   de  son  invention;   il applique  son sens du mystere et de la poesie a }'expression d'images  et de mythes, mais son  but  est  le  plus souvent  utilitaire.  II ne revele son arne  profonde  que malgre lui, pour ainsi dire.
II  preche  la  priorite   du  divin  sur  l'humain,   la  charite,   la  resignation,  le courage,  la modestie, la fidelite, le "culte"  des enfants, le respect des personnes, des  objets  et  des  gestes saints.  II le fait  parfois  jusqu'a  la superstition  la  plus integrale,  parfois  aussi  jusqu'a  la  cooperation  active  a }'oeuvre  de  la  paroisse. On  lit  dans  les  F orestiers:  "Souviens-toi  qu'a  part  le Ciel tout  le reste ne vaut pas  la  peine  qu'on  se donne  pour  l'obtenir"; L.  Frechette  ne  manque  pas  de montrer  le Quebecois  parti  a  Paris qui,  enfin reduit  a  rien,  "tomba a genoux, pleura   longtemps   et   pria   ( ... ) .  L'esprit   humain   a  le  droit   de  connaitre. Mais  qu'il   ne  cherche   pas  en  dehors  de  Dieu,  c'est  peine  perdue".3    Plus  ou moins bien exprimee,  cette sentence est a la base de bien des recits. Le "diseur" ne se contente  pas d'humilier l'homme,  il lui rappelle  que,  chretien,  il vit dans un  monde  double,  a la fois naturel  et sumaturel, le second etant  de loin le plus important:  "je  dois  vous  dire  que  nous  venons  d'echapper, par  un  heureux hasard,  ou  plutot  par  une  protection  speciale  de  la  Providence,  a  un  ennemi autrement  dangereux   que   les  partis   d'Iroquois   qui   rodent   depuis  quelques
semaines sur nos rivages" ( Legendes canadiennes).

LE  CONTE AU  QUEBEC



La   menace  franc-mac;onne pese  sur  les  auditeurs; or  se  faire  franc-mac;on, c'est  appartenir au  Diable: "a  la mort,  le Diable  en personne viendrait reclamer (l'ame de  l'adepte)  au  tribunal du  Souverain Juge". C'est  L.-P.  Lemay   ("Le Baiser  fatal")  qui   nous  rappelle   ceci;  pourtant, comme   aucune des  traditions populaires directement recueillies ne s'en  fait  l'echo, il nous  est difficile de savoir s'il  interprete  la  tradition  ou  s'il  ecrit  pour  son  propre  compte  pensant a  un auditoire  donne.  Mais  la  plupart  des  conteurs s'accordent  pour   evoquer  des pactes  avec  le  Diable  sous une  forme  ou  sous  une  autre. C'est  Colette  qui  perit dans  l'incendie de  sa  masure,  pour  avoir  dit: "plutot epouser  le diable  que  de coiffer   Sainte  Catherine";4    c'est  Corinne  qui   appelle  ce  meme   diable,   danse avec   lui   et  meurt  folle.5     D'autres  encore   pactisent  avec  le  Malin;  "un   bon paroissien   craignant Dieu,  ne  ( doit)   avoir  aucun rapport evec  ses suppots de l'enfer" ! 6
11 peut  pourtant etre  bien  utile d'avoir le diable  "dans sa manche". Un  vieux conteur ne  commence-t-il  pas son  recit: "Quand les gens  des chantiers sacrent ben,  le Diable  buche".7   Mais les chatiments sont  sevcres  pour  ceux  qui  oublient la  grandeur de  Dieu:  "C'etait  dans  la  maison   de  Tante Guiguitte. Ils  etaient quatre. lis  ant  decide  de  voir  celui  qui  sacrerait le  plus.  Menou a sacre  le plus. Tout a coup  i1 a  disparu  par  le trou  de la cheminee. On  ne l'a  jamais  revu.  Lc
lendemain matin a quatre heures  les trois  autres etaient a l'eglise  au  confession­
nal" ( Contes   populaires,  p. II 6). Le conteur quebecois aime  a broder autour de
cette  phrase  que  lui  rappelle  la  liturgic:  "Homme, souviens-toi que  tu  n'es  que poussiere  et que  tu  retourneras en poussiere" et il ne se fait  pas faute  de rappeler que  "le  ciel  ( ... )  ne  punit   pas  toujours en  ce monde  (  ... )  c'est  a la  mort que les comptes se reglent ... " ( Contes  vrais, P·434).
De  nombreux recits  voudraient inciter  les auditeurs au  partage; ils se  termi­
nent  a peu  pres ainsi: "ils vecurent heureux, distribuant leurs  richesses et faisant la  charite a tous". La  bonte  d'un  chretien peut  sauver  l'ame d'un possede;  c'est
ainsi  que  le  cordonnier Richard a  rachete sa  femme qui  avait  vendu  son  arne au  diable.8   Comme dans  bien  d'autres pays,  le  pauvre est assimile  a  Dieu,  sans
doute  en  application de l'Evangile ou il est dit: "Tout ce que  vous avez  fait  au moindre de  mes  freres  que  voila,  c'est  a moi-meme que  vous  l'avez  fait". Mais
!'esprit du  Nouveau Testament redevient   souvent celui  de !'Ancien. C'est  ainsi que  la terre  de  gens qui avaient refuse l'aumone au  Mendiant, un  jour des Rois,
est transformee en  un desert maudit, impossible  desormais a travailler.9 Pourtant,
le diseur  exalte  aussi le pardon des injures,  la ranc;on du  bien  pour  le mal, en vue de delivrer  un loup-garou ( Contes vrais, P·334).

LE  CONTE AU  QUEBEC



L'habitant  apprend  encore   la  resignation;  le  narrateur  est  fataliste   et  son auditoire, sans  cesse expose  a la  rigueur  du  climat,  a la difficulte  de la tache,  est tout  dispose  a !'entendre. Le  conte  aide  le paysan  a  justifier son  acceptation de tout  malheur; cela  lui  vient  de  Dieu  en  qui  il doit  mettre son  espoir  pour  des jours  meilleurs.  L'aventure de  David  Larouche rapportee par  Aubert de Gaspe, le   pere,   illustre   parfaitement  cette   le<_;on:   alors   que   sa   femme   "en   bonne
chretienne" rappelle a David  qu' "il  faut  rendre au  Bon  Dieu  ce qui  nous  vient
de  lui", l'homme erre;  mais  enfin,  apres  des  aventures, "Larouche  se  le  tint pour   dit,  et  accepta ensuite,   avec  reconnaissance, le  bien  que  le  Bon  Dieu  lui
faisait,   sans  se  meier   de  vouloir   regler  les  saisons".   La  legende   de  la  Sainte­ Catherine, quant a elle, peut  bien  avoi.r pour  but  d'aider  les "catherinettes" a se
soumettre aux  "desseins  de Dieu". L'exemple de la jeune fille preferant se damner et bn1ler dans sa maison  plutot  que de demeurer a marier apres  vingt-cinq ans est
d'ordre a faire  reftechir les demoiselles  dans  le meme  cas. Les exemples  abondent
ace sujet.
Pourtant les conteurs ne  veulent  pas faire  des "femmelettes" des gens qui  les ecoutent et  ils insistent  sur  le courage  qu'il  faut  pour  blesser le loup-garou, sur celui  qui  manque pour  delivrer  le "fi-follet" ou  pour  repondre a 1' "Introibo ad altare Dei" du "pretre-revenant".
S'adressant  aux   femmes,   et  surtout  aux   filles, ils  insistent   sur  la  modestie. Comment preserver   mieux  les jeunes  personnes  alors  qu'on doit  les laisser  partir aux  veillees  et  s'enfoncer dans  la  nuit,  en  traineau, seules  avec  leurs  cavaliers, qu'en leur  contant les mesaventures des filles qui  ne  sont  pas sages.  Les  demoi­ selles sont,  de  plus,  averties  que  se friser  pendant la  messe ou  le  chapelet, c'est faire  apparaitre le diable dans  le miroir; c'est  dire qu'elles devront etre  modestes et  que  le meilleur moyen  pour  ce faire  est d'etre pieuses, et  d'assister aux  offices. La   legende   de  Satan  au   hal,   qui  se  trouve   au   Quebec  sous  de  nombreuses formes   et   qui   ressemble   par   certains   aspects  au   Faust,  prend   ici  une   valeur
nettement religieuse.  La  jeune  fille, coupable de coquetterie, de legerete,  le plus souvent d'infidelite a un  fiance  deja  designe,  arrive  parfois  a etre  sauv,ee grace a
!'intercession du  cure  du  village,  mais  il arrive  aussi que  la  danseuse  reste  dans les griffes  du  diable; et gare  a celle qui  demeure au  bal  apres  minuit, le soir  du Mardi Gras!
Se  faisant   presque toujours l'auxiliaire du  cure,  le conteur encourage les gens
a la  "revanche des berceaux"' en developpant le culte  de I'enfant. L'homme qui
a  injurie un  squellette-revenant ne  pourra se sauver  qu'en portant dans  ses bras un  bebe  recement  baptise, encore  incapable de  marcher, et  qu'il   ne  deposera

LECONTE AU  QUEBEC



pas  quoi  qu'il   arrrve   (Contes  populaires,  p.I I6). H.-R. Casgrain insiste sur  la supcriorite spirituelle du  petit: "Si  j'avais  connu, il y a  quelques  heures,  ce que le  bon  ange  de  cet  enfant  lui  a  fait  voir  et  entendre" ( Legendes canadiennes,
p.Io5)·
La   plus  grande  partie   des  contes   touche    au   culte   et  a ses  ministres.   L.
Frechette  ne   peut   mreux  donner  une  mauvaise  opinion  de  son  heros  qu'en ecrivant  ceci:   "jamais on  voyait  sa  corporence a la  messe;  jamais  il otait  son
chapeau  devant   le calvaire; c'est  toute  s'il  saluait le cure  du  bout  des  doigts"; "c'etait  ben   clair   qu'il   avait   appris   rien  de  bon   pour   le  salut   de  son  arne" ( Contes  d' Autrefois, p. II 9).
L'homme qui   ose s'attaquer aux  objets  rdigieux est  aussitot   puni:  Jacques
Ledur   re<_;oit  en  chatiment la  meme  balle  qu'il   a  tiree  sur  Ie Christ   d'un  Cal­ vaire.  II  en  meurt, mais  non  sans s'etre  confesse  ( C antes  Vrais). L'objet  benit et  le symbole  chretien ont  aussi  une  puissance  conjuratrice: tant  que  Rose  peut
garder sa  petite   croix  accrochee a son  cou,  elle  est  tranquille. Mais  le  diable
malin  VeUt la lui  arracher et l'etole  du  Cure arrive juste  a tempS pour  la SaUVer.10
Le  simple  signe  de  croix  a  une  puissance  merveilleuse; on  le fait  parfois  "des deux   mains"   ( Contes   d' Autrefois).  Avant    de   defendre  sa   vie,   devant    les "Sauvages" comme  devant  le loup-garou, on se signe.
Celui   qui   ne   respecte   pas  les  rites   et   le  calendrier  liturgiques  n'est   pas
"chanceux". Le  conteur de  "La  mort  du  Bonhomme Price", donne au  ded:s  de son  heros  une  raison  religieuse:  "Les  cures  avaient dans  leur  idee de l'arreter de travailler le  dimanche.  N'importe quel  cure   qui  veut  s'en   donner la  peine  est capable de  faire  <;a.  Y ont  Ia force  de faire  ce qu'y   veulent. Le  cure  Lapointe, y avait   la  tete  pas  mal  dure.   Probablement qui  a  ben  prie,  pis jeune.  En  tout cas,  y a  certainement fait  quelque chose  pour  poigner Ie Bonhomme" (Il  etait une   fois ... p. I I 4).  Celui  qui  laboure son  champ le  jour  des  Morts   verra  les sillons  se  remplir   de  sang; le  loup-garou arrive  parce   que   le  moulin   marche pendant la messe de minuit; Tom  Caribou est attaque par  une ourse  parce  qu'il
n'a   pas voulu  aller  a la  messe de  minuit, "c'etait sa  punition pour  ne  pas avoir
voulu  [se]  mettre [a genoux]  d'un  bon coeur le jour de Noel".
Mais  ce  sont  surtout les  Paques   qui  foumissent !'occasion de  se  damner  ou de se  racheter. Dans  Ia plupart des cas Ia legende  est  repandue et  diversifiee.  II s'agit   de  sept  ans  loin  de  Ia frequentation des sacraments:  "la  septieme annee approchait  tout   doucement,  et  comme   c'etait  l'epoque  ou  les  gens  places  en
aussi  triste   cas  se  transforment  en  loups-garous ... ";11 "depuis sept   ans  que c'pendard de  Tourteau faisait  pas ses  paques; y'avait vire  en  Loup-garou a Ia

66

LE  CONTE AU  QUEBEC



premiere  heure  du  huitieme  Careme" ... ;'2   "Qui  courra  le loup-garou  un  de ces jours, certain! -Dis-done  une de ces nuits  plutot. -Dame, quand  il aura ete sept  ans sans  recevoir  I'absolution"   ( Contes  d' Autrefois). Frechette,  donne une autre  version;  ce ne sont plus sept, mais deux fois sept ans, qu'il  faut  passer en ces conditions  pour  devenir  "Fi-Follet" et etre condamne  par Satan  a egarer "les  passants  attardes". Un  conte  narre  par  un  homme  de soixante-dix  ans  en
I 942,  reprend  le nombre: "mon  oncle disait avoir connu  un nomme  Lachance.
11 n'avait   pas  fait  ses Paques  depuis  quatorze  ans. 11 mangeait  toujours  de  la viande  le  Vendredi. 11 partait   tous les Vendredis  Saints,  au  soir, et il revenait seulement  a la  Quasimodo.  Cette  annee-la,  il mouillait,  il est parti.  OU. ca? Ou qu'on  ne le verra  plus  jamais. Un  jour un etranger  a vu de la lumiere au  bord du  fosse. 11 a ete pour  eteindre  la lumiere,  mais la lumiere  reculait  toujours.  Le feu  s'en   allait du  cote  de  l'eglise. Y'(l'etranger)   garroche une  pierre sur le  feu.   En   garrochant  la  pierre,  le  feu  disparait!  Mais  Lachance  etait   la! L'etranger a eu  ben peur  et il est retoume  chez lui. Lachance  va chez lui aussi. Et  pis, le  jour  de  Paques,  y va  a l'eglise et  y fait ses Paques"   ( Contes  popu­ laires, p. I I I). Au  Quebec,  comme dans  bien d'autres  pays, le chiffre sept  et ses multiples  revetent  une  puissance  mysterieuse. La  confession ne semble  pas etre du  gout  du  public,  car  en  plus de  tous  ces chatiments  evoques,  L.-P.  Lemay eprouve  le besoin de finir un  recit  ("La demiere  nuit  du  Pere Rasoy")   par  un petit couplet sur sa necessite.



LE CONTEUR voudrait  encore inciter celui qui l'ecoute  a etre un  membre  actif  de sa  paroisse. Bien sur,  il exalte celui  qui  porte  sa dime  au cure   ( Contes  d' Autrefois), mais  il  montre   aussi  les  mauvais   resultats  de  la demission des batisseurs d'eglises:  pratiquement toutes les eglises de la Province ont  ete  construites  par  le  Diable.  Les  paroissiens ont  bien  voulu  donner  leur argent, mais  pas  leur  temps; ils n'en  ont  deja  pas  trop pour  cultiver leur champ.  Le  cure,  desespere de  ne trouver  personne pour  charrier  ses pierres et les materiaux de  construction,  fait  appel  a  la Vierge qui  lui  envoie  un  cheval fringant.   Le bedeau  est alors charge  de le conduire,  mais avec defense expresse de lui oter  la  bride.  Comme  il se trouve  toujours  quelqu'un pour  enfreindre  la consigne, au  bout  de quelques  jours, le cheval noir, ou  parfois  blanc,  redevient Satan.   Le  travail   reste  alors  a  terminer,  et  dans  maintes  eglises on  montre, comme a l'lslet  ou a la Baie-du-Febvre,  les quelques pierres qui font  defaut  ( ce qui  est  une  attraction  touristique!). En  I 8gg,  1'Abbe  Charles  Beaubien  fait

LECONTE AU  QUEBEC


allusion   a  une   peinture  representant  un  cheval   blanc   qui   est  Satan  dans   la sacristie   de  l'eglise  du  Sault-au-Recollet. Et  le  tableau aurait  ete  peint   par  le cure  de  l'epoque.13   Inutile   de  dire  que  cette  oeuvre  n'a   jamais  existe,  mais  le fait   que   les  conteurs  la   citent   en   exemple   prouve  combien  la   legende   est
accreditee.
Le  Quebecois a  une  propension a se toumer vers son  passe. Bien souvent, les
"diseurs" narrant des  histoires  du  temps  de-s pionniers assimilent le chretien au soldat, le fusil a la croix:  "alors,  avec  un sang-froid admirable, pendant que  les
balles  siffiaient  autour de  lui  [ ... ]  il  passait  tout  doucement le canon  de  son fusil  a travers   les  branches, et  au  moment   de  viser  faisait   un  grand   signe  de croix"   ( Legendes  canadiennes,  p.64). On  ne  sait  s'il  s'agit   d'un exorcisme  sur
un  geste  coupable  en  soi,  du  "bapteme" de  l'ame du  sauvage qui  quittera  le corps  atteint  par  la  decharge, ou  de  simple  superstition  ou  coutume. Parlant
encore   du   pionnier,  Casgrain  lui  trouve   trois  types:  "il  est  a  la  fois  pretre,
laboureur et soldat.   Pretre! sa  piete  ardente, sa  foi  vive,  son  zele  pour  le salut des ames amolissent  les coeurs les plus durs  et entrainent vers la foi des peuplades entieres.  Fut-il  jamais  un  plus  beau  sacerdoce?" ( Legendes  canadiennes,  p.64).
II est  a craindre que  ce  ne  soit  pas  le  type  qui  ait  prevalu ... a mains  que  le
zele  ne  consiste  a peupler  le  ciel  a l'arme a feu! Un  autre conteur assimile  a
la  vengeance divine  le passage  des Anglais: "ce  feu  a commence a paraitre pas
longtemps apres  "le  derangement" de nos gens  par  les anglais, ajouta le vieillard
(  ... ) . Soyez surs  qu'il  y en  a,  dans  ces flammes, qui  sont  tourmentes pour  de gros  peches.  Ah!   le  Bon  Dieu  est  juste,  et  on  ne  se  moque pas  de  sa  justice comme  ·c;a!".14   H.-R   Casgrain exprime  pompeusement ce que  d'autres conteurs
disent  avec  plus  de  maladresse: "le  peuple  a qui  la  Providence a donne  de  tels
ancetres, s'il  est  fidele  aux   desseins  de  Dieu,  est  necessairement  destine   a  de
grandes chases"   (Legendes  canadiennes,  P·55). Les  exemples fourmilleraient  si nous   envisagions   les  contes   hors  de  l'angle   religieux, nous  voulons  seulement souligner   ici,  une  fois  de  plus,  le  lien  etabli   par   le  conteur  entre   les  valeurs chretiennes et les valeurs patriotiques.
A travers  les contes,  nous  decouvrons encore  les habitudes religieuses  des gens du  XIXe siecle;  cette  fois, !'auteur se livre  a son  insu.  Parfois,  ala fin du  conte
retranscrit nous  trouvons: "ce  fut  le signal  de la  priere" ( Contes  et Recits), ou encore: "puis  on  fit tres devotement la priere  en  commun, et  chacune aspergea copieusement sa  couche  d'eau benite  pour  chasser  les mauvais esprits et les cauchemars".15   La  figure  du  pretre  est  reveree:  "et  tout  le monde se leva respectueusement  devant   le  pasteur   aime   et  venere   de  la   paroisse"  ( Contes

68

LECONTE AU  QUEBEC



d'Autrefois, p.  04). Personne ne  s'etonne de  son  role:   "nous   ne  pouvons  rien contre   les  esprits   observai-je, nous   parlerons   de  cela  au  cure"  ( Contes   vrais, p.26)  ; "l'Cure y a ete  (  ...)  lis ont  ete trouver  l'eveque ... ( Contes  populaires, p. II 3) ; "l'homme etait  ben en peine. II va voir le cure et lui raconte son histoire" (Contes populaires, p.116);  "quand  le cure  fut  venu,  elle lui  raconta  en  secret toute  son  aventure" (Aubert de  Gaspe,  Memoires). Le  pasteur  est un  conseiller dont   les avis  paraissent  parfois  curieux. Pour  delivrer  quelqu'un  d'une  appari­ tion  le cure  "lui  dit  qu'il  ne  pouvait  faire  autre  chose,  pour  le  moment, que  de lui envoyer  des saintes  reliques". Les conteurs ont quelquefois de bizarres opinions  de leur  pretre. L'un d'eux remarque: "tous  les cures ont le Petit-Albert pour faire venir  le diable  quand ils en  ont  besoin"   ( M emoires) ; or, le Petit-Albert est un livre  de  sorcellerie   populaire aux  XVIII et  XIXe  siecles,  "publie en  France et interdit au  Canada puis-qu'il etait  cense donner le moyen  de communiquer avec le Diable.  Des qu'un cure  mettait la main  sur  un exemplaire, le Petit-Albert etait  brule". Le fait  que  le conteur suppose  que  tous les cures  ont  un  Petit-Albert, ce que   soutient  aussi   un   habitant,  un   "diseur"   populaire   ( Contes  populaires, P·39), confirme  le caractere de superstition dont le pretre  est entoure, beaucoup plus encore  que  de  veneration au sens strict  du  terme.  Combien de  pasteurs  sont peints  passant  l'etole  "dans le cou"  d'une pauvre creature menacee de damnation? (Rose   Latulippe) . Le  cure  acquiert certes  une  place  de  grand  prestige; il  peut meme  arranger des  mariages entre  des families  ( Contes   d'Autrefois, p. w8).
Les  ceremonies religieuses  trouvent aussi leur  place  dans  les contes: on decrit une noce  ( Contes vrais, P·430) ; on montre les gan;ons  trouvant jolies les filles qui
"font la quete le dimanche, a l'eglise,  pour  la chapelle  de la Sainte Vierge"; on
presente  "un vieux  chantre au  lutrin   (  ... )  qui  (met) sa  gloire a chanter plus
haut   que   les  autres les  psaumes   des  vepres"    ( Contes   vrais,  PP-430-43 I).  La pratique religieuse  est  tou jours  evoquee; un  conte  peut  commencer ainsi:  "par un   beau   dimanche, apres   la  messe.... ".16  Le  pretre   parait,  portant  "sur  sa poitrine, dans  une  custode  d'or  le supreme viatique", et  les gens  s'agenouillent "sur  le bord  du  chemin, dans  la  poussiere,  saluant  tete  nue  le divin  Voyageur"
( Contes   vrais,   p.I 5).  "Les   habitants   [viennent]  au   marche"  et   emplissent l'   "humble  eglise  de   Notre-Dame  des  Victoires";  c'est   "un   va-et-vient   con­
tinue!"' le   benitier  [est]  mis   a sec"; on  va  a l'eglise "faire  une   priere
avant de  mettre en  vente  sa  merchandise" ( Contes  vrais,  P·4 I ) . Au  chantier, le  contremaitre "dit   a ses  hommes:  approchez tous".  Se  recueillant  un  peu,  il

ajoute:  "nous allons  dire   le  Benedicite"  (Forestiers  et  Voyageurs, P·49). On tient  a "quitter la  terre  du  Bon  Dieu" "muni de  tous les sacrements de l'Eglise


6g

LECONTE AU QUEBEC



sans  en  manquer   un",  mais  on  mele  parlois  bien  des  choses. Si l'on  fait  des creches  au  village  ( Contes   d' Autrefois, p.85),  on  pense  que  le  "petit   Noel" connait  intimement  le Bon Dieu et "sait sa toute-puissance" ;17 on parle du tison
de  Noel comme d'une  protection  contre le tonnerre: a cet efiet, le 25 decembre,
on  met  dans  le feu  un  morceau  d'erable,   juste au  moment  du  Sanctus,  puis, avant  qu'il  ne soit consume, on le jette dans la neige. 11 servira  tout  le reste de
l'annee, a l'instar   du  rameau  benit.  On  pense  aussi que  l'hostie  consacree  ou
une  image   de  la  sainte  Face  sont  ininfl.ammables  et  le  marin   s'abstient   de toucher  au  haddock  parce  que  c'est  le  poisson de  Saint  Pierre.  Le conte  nous revele  un  melange  de croyances et  de superstitions  que  les conditions  de vie et
la dure  lutte contre  les elements suffisent parfois a justifier pleinement.

LEs SAINTS n'ont  guere de chance au Quebec.  A part  quel­
ques  personnages  de  1'Ancien  et  du  Nouveau   Testaments,   Notre-Seigneur,  la
Vierge  et Sainte-Anne,  patronne  des marins,  le tour  est bientot fait.  On  raconte des  histoires extraordinaires:  une  petite fille de 1'11e d'Orleans aurait  ete  trans­ portee  en  Louisiane  par  la  Vierge  et  !'on   cite  en  temoignage   une  lettre  de l'eveque  du  lieu  (Histoire   de  l'Ile  d'Orleans, P·33); Marie,  decidement  remu­
ante,  viendrait  soigner des enfants  pour pennettre a leur mere d'aller  a la messe.
11 y a  encore  l'histoire  de la Vierge des Hurons  de l'Ancienne  Lorette  qui s'est deplacee  pour  revenir a son village, et la legende de son rosier qu'on  n'a  jamais pu  couper,  avec la repetition lancinante,  tout  au long du  conte:  "la  Vierge, les
deux  doigts leves, mantrait  le ciel".18  Mais il y a aussi, au  Quebec,  les legendes au sens strict,  les histoires de martyrs  du  terroir,  telle !'Iroquoise  (I 827).
Les contes ou les legendes de saints sont pourtant relativement  peu revelateurs de !'arne  du  pays, qui se devoile mieux  a travers  les visions de sa fantaisie,  de
son  imagination,  et  !a  frequence   du  retour   de  certaines   figures,  de  certains themes.  Satan  est sans contredit  le heros du  recit  au  Quebec; il apparait sous bien  des aspects:  cheval, chien  ou chat,  nain  ou  colosse, hideux  au  seducteur. La  plupart  du  temps le conteur  mentionne  les comes et les doigts fourchus,  les ongles  qui  blessent  pour  que  le sang  de  la  victime  serve au  pacte  diabolique. Meme  quand   il se  transfonne   en  "dandy", Satan   doit  garder  sur  la  tete  un chapeau  en  poi! de castor et aux  mains des gants  de peau, il ne quitte  que son manteau de racoon.  Toujours,  i1 se trahit  ou se revele par  une odeur  de soufre: "il me  semblait  qu'une  haleine  brulante  me souffiait dans  la  figure, et  je crois vraiment   que  j'ai  senti  une  odeur  de soufre"  (Forestiers  et  Voyageurs, P·75);

LECONTE AU QUEBEC



"le  diable  disparut aussitot  avec  un  bruit  epouvantable en laissant  une  odeur  de soufre"  (Rose    Latulipe). Bruit,  soufre  et  flamme,   tout  !'arsenal  moyenageux et   international  de   l'imagerie  chretienne!  Les  chiens   et   les  chats   sont   de preference  noirs;   ils  sont   parfois   accompagnes d'un  "bucher  diabolique, qui (donne)  flamme et lumiere sans  bruler" (Forestiers  et Voyageurs). Les sorciers, associes  aux   demons,  peuvent  aussi  prendre  la  forme   d'un  animal; dans   le "Cabat des  Chats au  Pont-des-Chicanes", Marius   Barbeau parle  d'un pont  ou des  centaines  de  matous se  reuniss(ent)  pour  leur  sabbat".19   Quand il  s'agit d'un cheval,  il est  pimpant et  noir  ou  blanc; c'est  la  Vierge  qui  l'envoie, tout hamache; curieuse   interpretation  des  rapports entre   le  Ciel  et  l'Enfer, Satan devenant un esclave.
Le  folklore  indien   a  ete  plus  ou  moins  baptise  et  introduit dans  la  litterature
orale  quebecoise.  Le  Grand  Manitou exerce  son  influence sur  les sorciers   ( Le foyer  Canadien,  vol.IV,  PP·534-55 I); c'est  grace  a  lui  que   le  Carcajou  fait toumer le  lard   dans  les  chantiers et  c'est  lui  qui  rend   les  plantes  veneneuses, telle  l'herbe a  puce.   J.-C. Tache assimile  parfaitement le  Grand  Manitou au Diable: l'un   ou  l'autre  donne son  pouvoir  ala "Jongleuse". Les diablotins ou Mahounets tiennent les  hommes  en  esclavage: "Ikes  etait  ce qu'on appelle  'un adocte'; c'est-a-dire qu'il avait  un  pacte  secret  avec  un  'Mahounet': ils etaient unis  tous  deux  par  un  serment   comme  des franc-maA_;ons. II  n'y  a  que  le  bap­ teme  ou  la  confession  et  !'absolution qui  soient  capables de  rompre  ce  charmc et  de  faire  cesser  ce  pacte" (Forestiers  et  Voyageurs). Le  "Mahounet"  moyen­ nant    quelques  sacrifices   n'est   pourtant  pa'>   "mauvais  diable",  il   aide   son compere dans  ses difficultes.  D'autres etres  legendaires craignent  comme  lui  les sacrements  chretiens;  le   Geant  des   Mechins,   Outikou,  "ne   mange    pas   les Sauvages qui  ont  rer;u  le  bapteme et  qui  prient", mais  son  cri  fait  mourir  les autres; de  son  baton, un  bouleau   entier,  on  fera  une  croix  qui  chassera  a  tout jamais Outikou ( F orestiers et Voyageurs, pp. I I 5-12 3).
Les  creatures de  la  mythologie pai:enne d'origine europeenne sont  introduites
dans  le conte  chretien. Le signe  de leur insertion,  c'est  qu'on les chasse ou qu'on les  apprivoise  par   la  Croix. Ainsi  des  feux-follets,  ou  plus  generalement  "Fi­ Follets", englobant  les  bons  et  les  mauvais   genies:   "nos   Canadiens  des  cam­  pagnes  considerent les feux-follets  comme  des sorciers  ou  genies  malfaisants qui cherchent  a  attirer le  pauvre monde  dans  des  endroits  dangereux pour  causer leur  perte" ( Les  Anciens Canadiens). Les  "fi-follets" sont  le  plus souvent  con­ sideres  comme  des ames  en  peine  a l'instar des loups-garous; mais contrairement a  ceux-ci,  ils semblent heureux de  leur  sort.  Les habitants  de  Beaupre voient  le

7I

LECONTE AU QUEBEC



SOlT  "des  flammes   ( danser)   sur  la  greve  comme  si  tOUS  les 'fi-follets'  s'y  etaient donne rendez-vous. De petits etre grotesques, fantasques, chant[ent] et dans[ent] dans  des rondes effrenees" (Bulletin des Recherches Historiques, 35, pp.645-65o). Il  ne s'agit  que  des  pecheurs  de  l'Ile  d'Orleans qui  vont  a l'anguille, de  nuit,  a la  lanteme;  mais   leur   ile  en  a  garde   une   terrible  reputation!  ( Les  Soirees Canadiennes, I,  1861,   p.144).  D'apres A.  Desilets,  vers  18oo,   les  "fi-follets" hantent les eaux   profondes  du  Saint-Laurent/0  mais  le voyageur  attarde risque aussi  de  les  trouver sur  sa  route.  On  a  encore   plus  peur   d'eux que  du  loup­ garou, car  ils sont  insaisissables.  Pour  s'en  sauver, il faut  se mettre  entre  deux terres,   en  ramassant bien  vite  une  motte   de  gazon  qu'on se  pose  sur  la  tete; mais  pour  "delivrer" le feu-follet,  le meilleur  moyen  c'est  de planter  une  aiguille  dans  du  bois ou,  mieux  encore,  son couteau entrouvert. Le feu-follet, attire  par le  metal,  se  faufilera dans  le chas  de  l'aiguille ou  s'introduira entre  la  lame  et le  manche du  couteau; il se coupera, saignera et  sera  ainsi  "delivre". Personne n'a   jamais  ose assister  a  la  delivrance d'un  feu-follet; seulement, le  lendemain, celui  qui  revient  chercher  son  couteau   peut  bien  y trouver une  goutte  de sang.  Certains pretendent que  poser sur le sol deux  objets  en croix serait  efficace, mais ce ne sont pas les lec;;ons les plus communes.
Proche parent du  "fi-follet", sinon  par  la  taille,  du  moins  par  la signification, le loup-garou erre,  cherchant qui  devorer. 11 ne  revet  sa forme  animale qu'a la tombee de  la  nuit: "c'est  pas  drole  d'avoir un  mari  qui  se vire  en  bete  tous  les soirs  pour  aller  faire  le ravaud  le long  des chemins, dans  les bois, on sait  pas ou. J'aimerais autant  avoir  affaire   au  demon   tout   de  suite"  ( Contes d' Autrefois, p.l 15)· La  peau   du  loup-garou est  a  l'epreuve des  balles  (Contes  populaires, p.l 14),  a   moins   que   celles-ci  ne  soient   auparavant  trempees dans   de  l'eau benite.   L'animal n'est  pas  toujours un  loup,  a  vrai  dire; il se  presente  le  plus souvent sous l'aspect d'un  chien,  d'un  chat, d'un cochon  ou  meme  d'une poule. L'homme peut s'etre vendu  au diable  pour  obtenir sa metamorphose, mais generalement il s'agit   d'un chretien   qui  est  reste  quelques annees  sans  faire  ses Paques et  qui  appartiendra a Satan   jusqu'a ce que  quelqu'un ait  le courage de le delivrer. 11 peut  etre fort  gentil dans  la joumee! Pour  se sauver, il doit saigner, recevoir  une  blessure  en  forme  de  croix;  il faut surtout eviter  de  le tuer.  Celui qui  a  delivre  un  loup-garou ne  doit  reveler  son  identite a  personne   pas  meme au  cure.  Un  jour,  le grand'pere d'un  conteur qui  "etait ben  chum  avec  un autre
gars", s'entend demander:  "es-tu   peureux?" Son  chum   lui  donne  rendez-vous
a onze  heures.  Sur  un  pont  "un gros chien  arrive dessus.  Le gros chien  met  ses
pattes  sur  les epaules  de  mon  grand'pere. Mon  grand'pere lui sapre  un coup  de

LE  CONTE AU QUEBEC



poing en  pleine face.  Et  pis y'voit mon gas face a face devant lui, flambant  nu. Mon  grand'pere dit:   "maudit que  tu  m'a  fait  peur. Tu  meriterais  la  meilleure volee ... "-"Fais  pas  a.
populaires,  pp. I I I- I I 2). On insiste sur le fait que lorsqu'il attaque, le loup-garou se souvient  de  la ferocite  de ses aieux,  et on raconte  qu'une  blessure faite a  un loup-garou  en etat  de metamorphose  se retrouve sur son corps humain. On  rap­ pelle l'histoire  de cet homme qui, ayant  tue une louve a la chasse, lui coupe une patte et voit la main  de sa femme, une Iroquoise. Arrivant  chez lui, il trouve son epouse mutilee et apprend par la qu'elle est louve-garou. "Courir le loup-garou" est un  chatiment du  Ciel. 11 s'agit  la  d'un  mythe  tenace  et fort  repandu  dans I'Europe  moyenageuse:   crainte  des animaux  dangereux  et,  partant, assimiles au demon  et aux  possedes, mythe du  rachat  par le sang, melange d'anciennes croy­ ances  ou  la  metamorphose en animal  inferieur  dans  l'echelle  biologique  est un chatiment. Combien de contes de fees a travers tous les pays ne sont-ils pas proches parents  de ces histoires?  ( Meme dans les contes non chretiens;  voir la Belle et la Bete,  Blanche-Neige  etc.... ) . Ce  que  les recits  quebecois  ont  de  particulier, c'est que,  loin  d'oublier  !'element  religieux cause  du  chatiment,  ils en font  une piece   essentielle  et   le  ressort  dramatique.  Les   exemples  fourmillent   en   ce domaine.21
Les Quebecois  ont  encore  fait des lutins des creatures  du monde  chretien.  En
effet, pour  se debarasser  de  ces petits esprits malicieux,  il faut  tracer  une  croix sur  les batiments  et  mettre  un  rameau  benit  dans l'etable.  11s  peuvent  etre fort bans, si on les traite  bien, et on raconte l'histoire de cette jument que l'on trouve toute  pansee  le  lundi   matin   (Contes  d'Autrefois).  Mais  gare  au  paysan  qui s'aviserait   de  denouer   les  crinieres  de  ses chevaux,  tressees par  les lutins,  ses betes "attraperaient le diable!" Mecontents,  les lutins  font  beaucoup  de farces desagreables;   H.   Beaugrand   parle  de  faux  emoussees,  de  tourtieres   brulees, etc.... L'habitant  associe  plus ou  mains  les lutins  au  demon  et  leur  accorde, dans ses contes, la meme place que dans la vie joumaliere.
Quant  au sorcier, il est  omnipresent. 11 n'est pas toujours  metamorphose, mais
il a vendu son arne au Diable en echange d'un  pouvoir malefique ou pecuniaire, ou de tout  autre  avantage temporel. Le Petit-Albert donne bien des mo:yens pour ce  faire.  Les  conteurs  parlent,   par  exemple,  d'une   poule  noire:   "I' faut  une fourche  de  trois  ou  quatre chemins.  I'faut   attacher   cent  pieds  de  corde  a  la poule. Faut  qu'elle  soit toute  noire. La, ils la vendent. A minuit  juste, ils lachent la  poule et  pis ils appellent: 'Charlie,  j'ai  volaille a vendre'.  11s entendent  ben du  train.  11 faut  qu'ils  le fassent trois soirs de suite. Rien  que le troisieme soir il

73

LE CONTE AU  QUEBEC



voit   [sic]  Charlie.   Ils  entendent   ben  du  train. Ca  ne  fait  nen;   faut  qu'ils touchent.  Ils vendent  la  poule  pour  une somme  d'argent" ( Contes   populaires, p. I I 3). Le  refus de  nommer  Satan  trahit  la  terreur  supen;titieuse  que  celui-ci engendre.  Le reftexe est semblable  a celui qu'on  peut noter chez certains peuples
africains,  des Mossi par exemple, qui n'appellent jamais le lion que par  le nom de  Seigneur,  de  crainte  de  l'offenser ou de l'attirer. L'importance accordee  au nom  est  signe  d'une   civilisation  "nominaliste" ou  le  vocable  se  confond  avec l'etre.  D'autres  diseurs evoquent  la mouche  que  le bucheron-sorcier  cache  dans sa cognee et qui lui permet d'abattre trois fois plus d'ouvrage que les autres. Attention  aux  manches  de  cognees qui  portent  une  cheville !22   La  mouche  est bien  maltraitee,  serait-ce  en  souvenir  des cruelles  mouches  noires  du  Quebec? Le terrain  d'election  des sorciers est l'Ile  d'Orleans. Quand un sorcier meurt,  il n'a  de  cesse de s'y  rendre;  la Iegende de la  Corriveau nous montre  la sorciere
sautant sur  le dos  d'un  passant  et  l'obligeant  a transporter son squelette  dans
l'Ile; elle-meme ne peut traverser le fteuve seule, car il est benit!  Preuve supple­ mentaire,  s'il en etait  hesoin, de !'assimilation  du sorcier  au  demon.  La  "Jong­ leuse",  tellement  crainte  de tous, n'est qu'une forme  plus ou moins indienne  de la sorciere. "Les Jongleurs sauvages n'ont  aucun  pouvoir sur les blancs. La  jong­ lerie ne prend  que sur le sang des nations et  seulement sur les sauvages infideles, ou  sur  les sauvages  chretiens  qui  sont  en  etat  de  peche  mortel"   (Forestiers  et
Voyageurs, p.83). Le souvenir  de la  "Jongleuse" est encore  vivace a l'epoque
ou  H.-R.  Casgrain  ecrit,  tant  le conte a impregne  les esprits:  "le  prestige et le merveilleux  dont  la superstition  populaire  avait  entoure  cet etre  mysterieux  ne sont  pas  encore  eteints  et  plusieurs  pretendent   que  les pistes de  raquettes  qui se  voient  incrustees  dans  un  des rochers  du  rivage  ont  ete  imprimees  par  ses pas"  (Legendes Canadiennes, p.I72). J.-C.  Tache  assimile le "rammancheux" au  sorcier,  il  parle  ainsi  de  la  jonglerie qui  s'appelle   medecine:  "ceux  qui  la pratiquent pretendent  guerir les malades  [ ... ] , ils s'enferment dans des cabanes
a sueries, avalent  du  poison et font  mille et  un tours, avec le secours du  diable
comme  vous  pensez  bien"   (Forestiers  et  Voyageurs, p.8g). On  peut  assimiler aux sorciers les "jeteux  de sorts" qui  ne peuvent  etre  vaincus que par  un sorcier plus fort.  C'est  un  "queteux" ou  un simple habitant qui  jouent  mille tours aux gens et  aux  betes:  on a  vu  des cochons en  equilibre  sur  la  tete,  des taureaux ensorceles,  (a  cette  occasion,  LeMay  octroie,  dans  "le  boeuf  de  Marguerite", dix  pages  de  sermon  sur  le  diable,  p. I 40- I 49;  nous  ne  savons si  le  conteur populaire  etait  aussi prolixe, mais c'est possible!)'  des chevaux  devenus boiteux, des  hommes  forces  de  se gratter  l'oreille,  des  champs  desseches, des  roues  de

74

LE  CONTE AU  QUEBEC



chars  reculant  a  partir  du  moment  ou  on  passait devant  une certaine  maison, jusqu'a  la  traversee  de  la  riviere  ces choses la  ne  passent  jamais  les rivieres"
( Contes  populaires, p. I I 2).

L'ACTION  nu DIABLE  se manifeste encore d'une  maniere  fort curieuse. A condition  de prononcer  le serment suivant  a Belzebuth, l'air  peut se
remplir  de  canots  d'ecorce  de  bouleau,  bourres  de  "possedes" s'en  allant  voir leurs  "blondes" :  "Satan, roi  des  enfers,  nous  te  promettons  de  te  livrer  nos ames, si d'ici  a six heures, nous ne pronon ons
le Bon Dieu,  et si nous touchons  une croix dans le voyage. A cette  condition  tu nous transporteras, a travers les airs, au lieu ou nous voulons aller et tu nous rameneras   de  meme  au  chantier.   Acabris!  Acabras!  Acabram ! ... Fais  nous voyager  par  dessus les montagnes ... " On  trouve ailleurs que les hommes  ainsi embarques  ne  doivent   pas  boire,  sous  peine  de  culbute   ( Contes  dJ Autrefois, p.258). Certains  conteurs  attribuent au "sacreur"  le pouvoir d'obtenir un canot. Un camarade s'ennuie,  "l'sacreur  dit:  'Ben, j'vas demander  l'canot  pour nous transporter tous  deux'.  Comme  vous savez il ne faut  pas prononcer  le nom  du Bon Dieu  ni toucher  un clocher".  Parfois un des voyageurs se repent  et revient a  pied au  camp;  en arrivant  il apprend  que ses camarades  ne sont  pas rentres, ils ont du  culbuter.  Des conteurs affirment avoir entendu  chanter  "dans les airs: c'est l'aviron  qui nous mene, qui nous mene",  et avoir entendu  ramer,  au "bruit sourd  des  rames  frappant sur  le bord  du  canot.  Ca  faisait  roup,  roup,  roup"
( Contes    populaires,   p.I I5). Voila  un  conte  bien  proche  du  tapis  volant  des Mille  et Une  Nuits. On le comprend  assez si on songe a l'isolement des bucherons qui ne peuvent avoir de contacts avec personne et qui entendent  le passage des outardes,  des canards au-dessus de  la  foret,  parfais  le soir ... On  trouve,  pres de  Quebec,   une  autre   version  de  la  chasse-galerie,  plus  proche  de  celle  qui semble etre l'originale  et qui viendrait  d'Anjou.  Massicotte raconte  qu'en  Anjou, "un   certain  sieur  de  Gallery  en  expiation  de la  faute  qu'il  avait  commise  de chasser pendant  la grand'messe,  fut  condamne  a chasser de nuit  dans les plaines etherees  jusqu'a  la  consommation  des siecles" (B.R.H., 4,  I938,  p.I63).  C'est la version de Quebec  qui  ajoute  les cris:  "Kss,  Kss, mange-le, mange-le", per us par  les  diseurs.  Parfois  les deux  versions se  melent,  tel  dans  le  recit  recueilli d'une  personne du Mont-Tremblant ( Contes  populaires, p. I I 5).
Le  conteur   evoque   encore  les  douleurs  et  les  cris,  les  manifestations   des possedes en  quete  de  prieres.  Aux  alentours  de 1'Anse Pleureuse,  ce sont  des

75

LE  CONTE AU  QUEBEC



vagissements;  "le  feu  des Roussi"  ( Contes  et  Recits)  est  une  flamme  bleuatre qui  court  sur Ia baie  pour avertir  les passants de  prier  pour  les pauvres  noyes; de  nombreux  bruits  mysterieux viennent  deranger  les habitants  et leur  rappeler leur  devoir  d'intercession  (La  Tour de Trafalgar). Un  chretien  mort en etat  de
peche,  et  enterre,  est retrouve  pendu  a un  arbre.  Si  un  passant  insulte  un  tel
squelette,   il  se  voit  donner   par  lui  un  rendez-vous  imperieux.   II  ne  peut  se sauver  de remplacer  le mort  et  de  purger  Ia peine a sa  place  que  s'il  porte  le
hebe;  le squelette  exige qu'il  le pose; si le passant  resiste, il a gagne.  L'un  des pend us s'adresse ainsi a son insulteur:  "t'as  ben faite, parce que si tu l'avais mis a  terre  tu  serais  a rna  place. J'suis  oblige  de  rester  dix  ans  encore"   ( Contes
populaires, p.I 16).  II est original  de voir le corps sortir  du  tombeau  pour aller dans  un  arbre  tenter  le badaud  injurieux; de plus, c'est le cure qui  a donne  Ia recette  du salut.  Mais les revenants  ne viennent  pas seulement  sur Ia terre  pour se  faire  remplacer,  ils peuvent  y  faire  tout  simplement   leur  purgatoire.   Bien souvent,  il s'agit  de  pretres qui  ont  mal  celebre  leurs  messes comme  celui "des
Trois  messes" de  Daudet.  Le schema  est tout  a fait  le meme  et se repete  dans
plusieurs  eglises de  Ia  Province:    Lotbiniere,   Ile  Dupras   ou  Sorel.  Plusieurs conteurs  rapportent  cette  histoire: 23   "je  fus  condamne   a faire  mon  purgatoire
pendant  trente ans, sur les lieux memes que  j'avais profanes. Au coup de minuit, mon  arne  rentrait   dans  mon  corps et  se  trainait   sur  les marches  de  l'eglise". Cela  durera   jusqu'au   jour  ou  un  passant  attarde   et  courageux  osera  repondre au  pretre.  II y a ici Ia foi naive que le purgatoire  dure  un temps donne,  que Ia
punition  correspond  tres exactement  a Ia faute  materielle,  que les lieux profanes
doivent  etre  purifies par  Ia penitence  du  pecheur.  Toutes  ces croyances ne sont pas propres  au  christianisme;  I'element  qui  parait  peut-etre  le plus significative­ ment  chretien,  et  qui  recouvre  alors taus  ces exemples  ainsi  que  ceux  des "fi­
follets"  et  des  loups-garous,  c'est  Ia  croyance  fondamentale  a Ia  Communion
des  Saints,  qui  autorise  et  rend  necessaire Ia  priere,  l'aide  pour  la  delivrance des autres,  morts  ou  damnes. C'est  certainement l'eiement  le plus constructif  et le  plus  profond  de  ces mythes;  il  implique  Ia  foi  dans  un  monde  depassant l'a.'lpect du  notre  et  ou seule compte  l'amitie  de l'ame  avec  Dieu.  A travers  le conte,  le  "diseur"   depasse meme  le cadre  de  Ia doctrine  catholique:  il sauve
aussi les damnes;  signe qu'il  est difficile a l'homme  de croire que  tout  espoir est
a jamais  perdu,  surtout  quand  cet homme  est habitue   a surmonter  les obstacles nombreux  crees par un pays redoutable.
Le  Diable  est  un  personnage  tellement  quotidien   pour  le conteur  quebecois qu'il  lui foumit  matiere  a conseils et a explications:  on dit  "ouvrez" et non pas

LE CONTE  AU QUEBEC


"entrez" lorsque  quelqu'un frappe  a la  porte  de  peur  de  permettre  !'intrusion du  Malin  (A la  veillee) ; on sait le pourquoi  des iles dessechees:  Satan  y a  jete
une  femme  vendue   a lui;  pourquoi  aussi le  cure  commence  si  vite  a  lire les
vepres apres la messe de "la  Notre-Dame  de Mars": c'est que le Diable chagrine du  mystere de !'Incarnation a  obtenu  d'avoir  les ames  des enfants  nes entre  la messe et  les vepres  de  ce  jour-la,  et  l'Eglise l'a  joue ... Mais  Satan  fait  aussi
bien  des  tours.  Il  s'achame a empecher  la  benediction  des eglises; on  raconte
que  celle de l'Etang du  Nord  aux  Iles de la Madeleine,  construite  avec du bois d'epaves  a ete abattue avant  d'etre  terminee. Les naufrages survivants,  interroges, ont  rapporte   que  le capitaine  du  navire,  le matin  de la  catastrophe a dit:   "je donne  la cargaison  au  Diable".  Le bois est maudit,  des prieres publiques  et une benediction  permettent  pourtant de terminer l'eglise. Mais Satan  ne frequente  pas
que  les temples, il va  aussi aux  "petits  bals  a l'huile",  et  nous  connaissons les
exemples de Flore de Sainte Luce et de Rose Latulipe qui se sont laisse enjoler par le  demon.  Parfois,  les cavaliers  et  les cavalieres sont  happes  dans  la  nuit  par le diable  et  on  ne les voit  plus, ils s'enfoncent  dans  la neige. Heureusement, le cure  est bien souvent  en  priere  dans son eglise, il sait  qu'une arne se perd et le bedeau doit le conduire  bien vite sur les lieux.
L'Eglise  a  le  pouvoir  de  conjurer  les sorts et de  mettre  en  echec  le demon. Cela est particulier  aux  contes du Quebec, qui sont, finalement,  assez optimistes. L'Eglise  a tout  pouvoir,  sauf sur les tresors qui, enfouis dans  les poeles ou dans le sol, ont la propriete  extraordinaire de se mouvoir de haut  en bas et de gauche a  droite,  empechant ainsi  toute  possibilite de  recuperation; pourtant les tresors caches  ne  manquent pas  au  Quebec P4    Mais  l'Eglise n'y  peut  rien  tout  ce qui est enterre  appartient au demon;  souvenir naif peut-etre de la croyance qui situe le  Malin  au  "sous-sol",  au  centre  de la  terre,  ou  reste d'un   manicheisme  plus ancien.  Mais  aussi l'argent   n'est  pas si important  que  les ames;  l'essentiel c'est qu'elles  puissent  etre  sauvees  et  cela est  bien sympathique dans  un  peuple  de
paysans!  Le conteur  a souvent  recours a l'exorcisme.  P. Aubert  de Gaspe dans
sa "Iegende de Joseph-Marie Aube"  (Memoires, pp.186-1g6)  et P.-O. Chauveau dans  la  "Legende de Lanouet" en decrivent  le processus. Dans  le demier  recit, on trouve ces mots:  "Tu le vois bien, Fanfan,  c'etait  bien le demon  (sous forme d'ours). Et  la  blanche  lumiere  etait  la Sainte  Vierge".  I1 y a toujours  un  anti­ dote et  pour  que  personne  ne  puisse en douter, le conteur  ajoute: "une  de nos legendes a une authenticite que  je ne lui soupc;onnais pas d'abord, c'est l'histoire de Lanouet.  Il  paraitrait que le fait s'est passe ala Baie des Chaleurs  et non pas

77

LECONTE AU QUEBEC



au  Labrador, et  que  le pretre  qui  re<;ut  la lettre  etait  M.  Dejardins,  chapelain de l'Hotel-Dieu".25
Dans le conte, au Quebec, le Diable est bien souvent enchaine sur une haute montagne  et  Dieu  lui accorde  meme  de dormir  un  peu,  pendant  la  procession des  Paques  Fleuries!  Le  Christ  est humain:  tandis  que  le  jongleur  assene des coups  de  marteau  sur  un  crucifix,  "les  yeux  mourants   du   Manitou   crucifie versent  des  pleurs"  ( Contes  vrais) ; alors que  le  Perc  Rasoy  meurt,  Seraphine,
l'abandonnee, voit le crucifix saigner;  a quelques  maisons de la, le moribond  le
voit aussi, il sait  que  le sang coule pour Seraphine,   a qui il abandonne tous ses
biens et qui choisit le Christ pourepoux (Contes vrais, p.236). Dieu enfin permet que  des  morts  viennent  annoncer   a des  vivants  leur  fin  prochaine,  afin  que
ceux-ci s'y  preparent en chretiens. La  Croix  a vaincu  le vieil arbre  du  peche et une  curieuse  legende  l'explique  parfaitement: "Dieu  ordonna  qu'on  mit sur  la langue   d'Adam   quand   on  l'enterrerait  un  pepin   de  la  pomme   ( qu'il   avait mangee   malgre  le  Bon  Dieu  et  pour  ecouter  le  demon). Or  ce  pepin  avait germe  sur  la  langue  d'Adam,  et  produit  un  pommier  avec le bois duquel  on  a fait  la  croix  de  notre Sauveur.  Et cette croix, ajouteraient encore  quelques  uns plus instruits, a ete plantee justement sur la fosse de notre  premier  perc"  ( Contes populaires,  P· II 8).  Traduction simpliste et  naive  du  parallele  etabli  par  Saint
Paul  entre  Adam  et  Jesus:   "d'un   cote,  le  peche  d'un  seul  passant  a tous  les
hommes  pour  leur  condamnation; de l'autre, la  justice d'un  seul, passant egale­
ment  a tous les hommes pour la justification de la vie"  ( Romains,  v, I 8).



tUT N'EST   POURTANT  PAS   ROSE  au   pays  de  Quebec  et l'orthodoxie   de  la  religion  catholique  est  parfois  malmenee.  Ainsi, les contes, rapportes   par  Marius  Barbeau  dans  "Grand'Mere  raconte", laissent  entrevoir toute  un  tradition manicheiste  ou Satan  est createur  comme  Dieu,  createur  du mal;  le crapaud, par  exemple, serait son oeuvre.  11 est vrai que  cette  tendance ne  constitue  pas  l'essentiel, mais  elle traduit   certainement un  aspect  de l'ame d'un   peuple  relativement  primitif, isole, dans  un  monde  dur  et  hostile. D'autre part, on ne se gene guere pour introduire  dans les contes les plus traditionnels, du type  de  la  bergere  epousant  le Roi,  le role de  la  Vierge  Marie  veillant  sur  la jeune  fille. 26    La  lutte  des bons, soutenus  par  le Ciel, et  des mechants,  avec les
forces infemales,  est toujours evoquee. Sans faire tout a fait de Satan  un createur,
combien   d'anciens    chretiens  n'ont-ils   pas  cru   a  un   monde   plus  ou   moins
manicheiste?  Mais, il est vrai, ceci n'est pas la norme  au Quebec, ce n'est qu'une

LECONTE AU  QUEBEC



des tendances d'une arne, inquiete en meme temps que sensee. L'element apaisant triomphe, dans  les contes  ou  le diable  est joue par  les hommes  et par  les femmes (Contes populaires, p.114).
Vers   186I,   les  veillees,  les  conteurs,   les  loups-garous, les  "jeteux de  sorts"
etc. ... deviennent  de  plus  en  plus  des  souvenirs.  F.-A.  Larue ecrit:  "dans  le temps  passe c'est  a peine  si vous auriez  pu  rencontrer une seule  personne  de nos
endroits qui  n'eut delivre  son loup-garou et converse  deux  ou  trois fois au  moins avec  les morts.  Aujourd'hui plus  rien;  mais  aussi  les temps  sont  bien  changes" (Soirees   Canadiennes, 1861). L. Frechette abonde   dans  le  meme  sens;  apres avoir  parle  de  loups-garous, il ecrit: "inutile d'ajouter que  cette scene se passait il  y  a  bien  des  annees   car  fort  heureusement, l'on  ne  s'arrete plus  guere  dans
nos  campagnes a ces  vieilles  superstitions et  Iegendes  du  passe".27  Cependant,
dans   les  regions   plus   reculees   de  la   Province,   beaucoup  d'habitants   restent superstitieux et quelques conteurs exercent  encore  leur  art.  H.-R. Casgrain note, parlant  d'une  epoque  anterieure, il  est  vrai:    "la   superstition  etait   encore   si repandue  et   si  vivace,   que   les  personnes   instruites   memes   qui   n'ajoutaient aucune foi  aux   contes   populaires, ne  pouvaient, en  les ecoutant, se  defendre d'une secrete   terreur.  Et  dans  un  pays  comme  etait  le  Canada,  couvert  d'im­
menses  forets  inexplorees,  peuplees  de  races  etranges et  a peine  connues,  tout
etait   propre  a  entretenir  et   a  fomenter  les  idees  superstitieuses".  ( Legendes
canadiennes, p.I o8).
La  peur,   l'isolement, le  mystcre  d'un   monde   immense, dur  et  en  partie  in­ connu; les longues  soirees  d'hiver avec  la  neige,  peu  de feu  et peu  de lumiere et si  peu  loin  des  loups  et  des  ours;  le manque d'instruction, l'emprise  d'un cure
prechant surtout la  loi  morale, invitant a craindre les forces  du  Mal,  expliquent
le developpement religieux  du  conte  au  Quebec. L'originalite est moins  dans  les formes,   communes  a bien  d'autres pays,  que  dans   la  force  de  persuasion   du
conteur  et   dans   l'insistance  sur  l'aspect   religieux.   Le  conte   doit   instruire  en divertissant; il y parvient grace  a l'art  du  conteur, pedagogue intelligent, grace a  son  intention  d'enseigner  et  de  preparer  a  mieux   vivre,   par   des  exemples souvent  pitoyables, grace  a son  imagination creatrice d'un  monde ou  le naturel
et   le  sumaturel  se  cotoient  et  se  melent,   un  monde   ou   finalement  le  Bien triomphe.
Le  conte  au  Quebec est  une  mise  en  scene  animee, turbulente  parfois,  fan­
tastique souvent, de  cette  reflexion  d'un   Sauvage:  "le  chene  seculaire me  rap­ pelait  en  quelque sorte  la  puissance  de  mon  Dieu".28   Mise  en  scene  non  pas mystique, mais extremement  quotidienne, realiste, voire meme  interessee,

79

LECONTE AU  QUEBEC



n'oublions  pas   qu'il  faut se  sauver.  Les   contes  du   XIXe siecle   au   Quebec revelent un  temperament ala  fois actif  et  reveur, temperament d'un petit  groupe de   paysans d'origine  franc;aise   dans  un   immense  pays   ou  il faut  lutter pour survivre.

REFERENCES
1 Casgrain, H.-R., Les legendes canadiennes, Montreal, Beauchemin, I907.
2    Rigault, Jean et  ses Collegiens   du  CEGEP de  Sherbrooke, Il  etait  une   fois en
Terre  Quebec,  Anthologie  de 56 contes et  recits quebecois, Sherbrooke, CEGEP,
I969,  p.  I I5.
3   Lemay,  L.-P.,  "Sang et  Or" dans  Contes Vrais,  Montreal, Beauchemin, I907.
4    Ducharme, Charles M., "A Ia Sainte  Catherine", I 889.
5    Haerne, A. de, "Le Diable au Bal", Sherbrooke, I 866.
6    Frechette, "Le mangeur de  grenouille", dans  Contes  d'autrefois,  Montreal, Beau­
chemin, I946,  p. I4I.
7    Raconte  par   M.   Emile  0., de  Saint-Henri  de  Lanoraie,  Collection F.  Royer,
cite par  Royer,  M., Contes populaires . .. , McGill, I943• p. I I4.
8  Stevens,   Paul,  "Les  Trois  Diables"  dans  Contes   populaires au  Quebec, Ottawa,
s.e. I867, pp. 9-29.
9   Hello,  Ernest, "Le  gateau   des rois"  dans  Contes  extraordinaires,  Paris,  Bruxelles,
ed. ste gle de lib. cath.  I 879.
10    Aubert de Gaspe,  Rose Latulipe, Montreal, Beauchemin, s.d.
11   Faucher de  Saint-Maurice, "Le  Feu  des Roussi", dans  Contes  et Recits.
12  Montigny, Louvigny de, "Une histoire de Loup-Garou", I 898.
13  Bulletin des Recherches Historiques, vo!. 5, p. 245·
14    Turcotte, Histoire de file d'Orleans, Quebec, s.e., I867, p. 77·
15     (Robertine Barry), Franc;oise, Ala  veiltee, I893·
16   Boucherville, Boucher de,  La  tour  de  Trafalgar, publie   dans   l' Ami  du  peuple,
I835·
17    Dandurand, Mme  R., "Deux souliers",  I883.
18  Frere   Marie   Victorin, "Le  rosier  de  Ia  Vierge", dans   Recits  Laurentiens,  Proc.
des Fr. des Ec. Chr.,  pp. 23-49, Montreal, I942.
19  La Presse, I I aout  I934, p. 45·
20   Souvenirs d'un octogenaire, Trois-Rivieres, Dupont, I922,  p. 42.
21  Le loup-garou de  Benjamin Suite  en  I876, de  LeMay ou  de Frechette; le Noyeux
de   J.-C.   Tache, ou  encore   une   histoire   de  Sylva   Clapin  dans   le  loup-garou
(B.R.H., 3,  I899,  p. 304); citons  encore  le loup-garou  de  Louvigny de  Montigny en  I898  etc....
22     Massicotte, E. Z., "LaMouche" dans B.R.H. 27,  1921, p. 246.
23   Aubert de   Gaspe,    "Legende  du   Pere   Romain Chouinard"  (notre extrait),
Faucher de Saint-Maurice, "le  Fantome de  Ia Roche", L.-A.  Olivier; "Ia  legende de  Ia messe du  revenant", rapportee par  Marius Barbeau dans  Journal of  Ameri­ can Folklore, vo!. 33, I920, p. 263.
24    Aubert de  Gaspe,   Le  Chercheur  de Tresor,  Quebec, Leger   Brousseau,   I878,  p.
28 et Royer,  M. Contes populaires ... , pp.  I09-I  I 3·
25   Souvenirs et Legendes, Quebec, I877, s.e. pp.  I5 et sq.
26    Turcot,  Marie-Rose,  "La   Belle  Marie", dans   les  Contes   populaires  canadiens,
Montreal, Fides,  I 948.
27    Frechette, La Noel au Canada, Toronto, George  N. Morang, I900.
28   H. L., Le Sacrifice  du Sauvage, s.l., s.e., 1845·

8o




review articles




BETWEEN MlNDSCAPE AND LANDSCAPE
 





D. G. Jones



DOUGLAs  BARBOUR, A  Poem as Long  as the  Highway.  The Quarry Press,   $2.00. DOUGLAS BARBOUR, Land  Fall. Delta (Canada), $2.00.
ANN  WALL,  ed.  Mindscapes:  Poems  by  Zieroth, Jiles, Musgrave, Wayman. House of  Anansi, $4.50.


IN  A   RECENT BOOK   Robert Hunter  wrote,  "Our  awareness of  the environment  is  growing   at  the  moment like  a  bruise:   we  are   beginning  to  feel pain  and   becoming conscious  of  lacera­ tions, deep  self-inflicted  wounds." If any­ thing   links   the   five  authors  and   three books  under   review, it  is  just  such  pain,  symptomatic  of  a   split   between   mind­ scape and landscape.
Douglas  Barbour's Poem as Long as the
Highway traces  a  journey  from  Ontario's
40 1   westward  to  the   Pacific  Coast.   As travelogue it is surprisingly thin.  George Woodcock's cross-country tour  in Canada and the Canadians yields a much  richer harvest of local detail: flowers, wildlife, incidents of history, past  and  present. Barbour's book,  as it  turns  out,  is not  so much  a landscape as a mindscape.
It is concerned with  an  imaginative space, a map  of community, but of a community that  hardly  exists. The  old communities,  like  small   towns  bypassed by  the  Trans-Canada, are   now  off  the map.  "Our  past," says  Barbour, "is  too
 close,  it/remains  unseen." It is  not   just too close, it was conceived  on too small  a scale:  "Grandfather's inch  of shade  on  a barren map." With  no great  imaginative effort  Barbour  can call  up the experience of a  spring  night  in  a farmhouse of fifty years  ago-in  all  its  sensuous  immedi­ acy. But it's not on the map:

We  see the  still  houses, they  might be empty
as we pass.

The   poem  is  really  concerned  with  an­
other,  and  greater, imaginative effort. The  journey   becomes   an   exercise   in
"drawing the  mind  through the  iris out/ to  the  turning rim."  The speaker   wants to  break  out  of  the  old  flat  projections that   produced  an   inch   of  shade   on   a barren  map. He would have us listen to "descants on/ the  song of a sphere."
The   actual  travelling is  not  the  most effective way  of accomplishing these things. "Learning is not/ direct// in ratio to  distance/ travelled." And  though the author  is  concerned  to  keep  the   senses

81

REVIEW ARTICLES



honest,  there  is, inevitably,  an  element  of the willed in such an imaginative project. Like  the  poem  as  long  as  the  highway, such  new mindscapes will "have to be crafted,  structures/ to  cross  vast   terri­ tories,"    and   "construction is/ slow  as/ growth  is."
Until  growth  catches  up  to the  mind's
drive   outward,  and   love  follows,  until that    vaster    space   is  mapped  and   in­ habited, we shall  travel  in  a  kind  of  no­ man's land,  lonely, sharp  with light, freez­ ing  with  snow.  These   images,  linked  to the   Alberta   landscape,  colour  much   of Barbour's other   book,  Land  Fall, which taken   by  itself  might   also  appear slight. Land Fall contains  two poems explicitly about  pain-Barbour   refuses  to   culti­  vate   pain,  except   as  "an  occasion  for  a possible  song."  He  will  affirm  it  only  as a guide,  or  as something that  in  another perspective  may  become  ecstasy.  Mean­ while,   just  as  in  the  physical  body  pain "comes/  and goes through the interstices  of   the   flesh/  to   mesh   certain    forward nerves,/ relay  news to the front  lines," so we may  suggest  it comes and  goes in  the body  politic,  amid   the  interstices   of  the many  small  communities. And  the  news that  it  relays  to  the  front  lines  demands
a new growth  in the organism.
Meanwhile the  individual remains  ex­ posed  to  a purely  northern  knowledge,  a frigid    brilliance,   cold,   the   seasons   of death.  The  opening  "Poem:  The   Dis­ tances" links the two volumes.

Say  only  this,  say only  the  hope the  urge  expressed
in  the  movement outwards the
sweeping gesture of construction;
and  isn't this enough and can't we say and  saying
comprehend its  magnanimity:

to  whisper
 across  this  frozen  country certain possible  words.

At  the  other   extreme is  the  work  of Susan  Musgrave. Of  the four  new  voices in  Mindscapes,  hers  is the  most startling. Her    nearest    relative    might    be   Sylvia Plath. What she gives us is a map  of  inti­ macy,   of  the   rich   gardens and   under­ ground wealth   of  the  individual  psyche, raped. The inner world  becomes  no  less than   the  body  of creation,  teeming  with vegetable and  animal life:  mindscape is revealed  as landscape, myth. Ideally these would  be love poems  in  which  that  crea­  tion  finds  its  fulfilment  and  celebration within  a larger map  of community. As it is,  these  are   poems   of  malediction,  the cry  of  a  creation abandoned  to  a  bank­ rupt   mindscape. It  is  the   invasion   of Eden.  Love  becomes  hate; the commun­ ion   becomes   a   cannibal  feast.   "Once More" begins:

We  sit at  the  river you,  drunk already, and  I
your  day's feed.

Somehow, the  speaker goes on,  the  body survtves:

Though not for  long.
I toss you pieces  from  my thigh, fingernail parings,
a section of hair.
I could  last.  What might vanish
is the  offering I never made.

Love,  the spiritual body, cannot be offered  because  it is not on the map; it is not   visible  to  this   mind   which,   having lost its love, can see only flesh.
Though many  of the  poems focus on a very personal,  individual relationship, the mind  in  question and  the  nightmare it generates is not so much  individual as representative, as  these  lines  from  "The Way Out" may suggest:

REVIEW ARTICLES



For  too long  my veins  have  been  filled with  unaccomplished people,
my  body  is an  exquisite lair
for  middle-aged defeat.

Paradoxically the  bankrupt mind  takes refuge  in the  flesh, and  Eve,  nature, con­ tains  stillborn in  her  womb  the  spiritual body that  ought  to contain her. Converse­ ly, the  natural child  that  should  be born of love becomes  an  abortion. "Now, too/  you  are  wanting  the  spilled  child  out  of me,"  she  begins  in  "The Spilled  Child."

Now  you too.
Down  among the  many dawns
bleached in  iron  rivers whoring on  chains
of muddy fish - you too
in  the  blackness that  bites  off
all  the  white flowers,
the  darkness that meets you
everywhere
with  sad  news from  home -
you  too
want the  spilled  child
to die in  secret or  not  at  all,
to sew her  body
to the ground with  worms

Spiritual and physical have been turned upside  down  and  inside  out; the  poems, correspondingly, reveal  startling shifts  in imagery, and violent reversals in normal perspective.  In  a  world   where  only  the ghost  of  love  remains, one  can  logically say:

Love

you're gone  now anyway
and  all  but  the  living wish  they  could  die.

Not surprisingly, the speaker of these poems  may  look for  life  in  death; or,  in a mad  world, for sanity  in madness. "Celebration" begins:
 Being somebody's last  woman
and  the only  passenger of the  day
I rode  out  after  madness.

Here,  where  the  world  gives no sign of that  movement  outward, the sweeping gesture of construction, where  there  in nothing  of  that   magnanimity, we find  a landscape of pain.
Paulette Jiles  does  not  intend  to suffer
the full impact of that  pain.  "There are fools," she writes  in  "Privacy," "who  say what  they think/ and  there  are  places for them." More  to the point  still, "Someone is  always  fool  enough   to  feel  what   he feels." Miss Jiles defends  herself with wit, inhabiting a  middle  ground  between privacy  and  publicity.  Her  work  is not  a map of intimacy, nor of new and  larger community, but  rather of tense neurotic landscape we inhabit in the  meantime. It is one in which  landscape is seen through a distorted  but  familiar mindscape. Here the blacksnake  becomes:

A tangle  of black  calligraphy,
taut as a  telephone cord  during an important call.
He  has the  arrogance of Texas oil, the  way
his eyes dart little migraines.

The  ironic  eye may  be  brilliantly pointed,   but   since   the   speaker   cannot help  feeling  what  she feels, sometimes,  it is inevitably  turned upon  herself. Her schoolgirl  self has  suffered  the  same  dis­ tortions  as the  snake. There she is:

My  head  is stuck  in a large, five-pointed star.
It is wired  for  neon.

She must cultivate her own schizophrenia. The  big, simple-minded shape  of the star reminds her of the 34,o8o hours spent in "damp classrooms,  made of children,/ wood, and  negative  writing," where:

REVIEW ARTICLES



I betrayed my friends by becoming catatonic;
my chintz clothes tied  themselves on me
every  morning.
My  friend the  epileptic foamed  and
snapped
but  the  teacher read  on anyway her  voice  like  a pill
soothing my  nerves.
Sometimes I wondered whose  nerves  they were.

Miss Jiles navigates by constantly mak­ ing   adjustments  for   the   deflections   or distortions in  the  map  provided   by  her society.  But  not  surprisingly  she may  ex­ claim,  "Here I  am  twenty-five/ And  I'm tired    of   it   already."  In   an   Eden   of "Mechanical   Vegetables," she  too  may take  refuge  in madness.  And  the growing  images    of    snow,   freeze-up,    white-out betray    the   real   nature  of   the   garden  clearly.  It is one  in which  there  are  com­ munications but  no communion. One  can only   hope   that   the   network   will  break down,  which  is  just  what  happens on  a small scale in the found poem, a CBC telegram from  Inuvik  decribing a  break­ down  in  radio  communications owing  to extreme weather conditions. In  part  two, Miss  Jiles  undertakes an  apocalyptic re­ writing  of   the   message.   In   the   snowy silence, one hopes,  the Eskimos:

WILL SPEAK WITH  THE RED, ELECTRIC FIRE OF RADIOS, TRANSISTORIZED,
A  NEW COMMUNITY! AIRWAVES WILL SPLINTER
AT  LAST, WITH A  HERMIT'S URGENCY SAYING EVERYTHING
THAT  HAS NOT BEEN SAID.

The  character of what  Miss Jiles has achieved   as  well  as of what  may  be still to  come  is suggested  in "Faustus":

After  finishing this assignment on off-shore oil
I will write  poetry like
Nobody ever  wrote  it  before.
 It will be less writing than it will be a bodily attack -the ballet  of karate,
the  gestures of defiance and  defense.

Such   a   poetry   has   in  a  measure   been written  by  Ginsberg, though  Miss  Jiles may attack with more precise and lethal finesse. But,  perhaps we may  also expect that  everything that  has not yet been said on behalf  of the outraged spirit,  the  voice of  the  silence,  may  also  be made articu­ late  with  the  same  urgency  and  the same  deft  force.  I'm  told  that  Miss Jiles is now in  Africa.  May  we suppose  that  her  eyes are white,  the pupils:

turned inward staring
for  weeks at a time  at  [her] personal
landscape.

Dale  Zieroth is possibly the first impor­ tant   poet   to   come   out   of  the   country north   of  Winnipeg.  Mindscapes   begins with  his  evocation of  life  on  the  prairie farms   and   in  the  small  Manitoba  com­ munities in  which  he  had  his  childhood roots.    Yet    these   particular  inches    of shade,  or sunlight, of snow or wheatfields or  pool  halls,  however  much   part  of  his body's   chart,  seem  to  have  no  place  on any   contemporary  map.    To   return  to them   is  like   returning  to   the   prairie grade-school:

Even  now,  we enter quietly afraid
to interrupt and  wondering about the
unlocked door. Later we could  speak  of
the  broken water cooler, covered with  dust and  tracks of mice, of the  word
scratched with  a nail  on  the  blackboard, of
the  smell  of damp earth and  rot.  We  had almost expected this. Still,  no one
would  mention how  we were  surprised not
so much
by the  dead meadowlark in  the  broken
window
as  by its  silence  ...

The school  does  not speak,  except  of the past.  It is a landmark, of a kind, but only

REVIEW ARTICLES



to  the  "homecoming  sons  of  farmers." The  intimate knowledge of the  land,  the values  of  the  community served  by  that school,  may  survive   here  and   there,  but need   not   be   marked  except    as   some things   are   marked  by  historical   monu­ ments. They  are  not particularly relevant. Though what  is may  be equally  puzzling.

Times are  when  we're
no longer sure  of the  things
we wanted to say, guessing at  least that we have  nothing important left to report. My father for one could  tell  us nothing about cities
yet he knows  muskeg and  wheat and  certain
kinds  of weather better than most  men with  a daughter and  three sons.

Zieroth   confesses  that   he  himself  has no better  knowledge of cities, of what  the significant  landmarks may  be. "I am  not ready for  the  morning," he begins frankly:

My life  fragments too easily, things have no core,  break  up,  sometimes end. I am  not  tough.

Yet  he is not simply  the  farmboy, new to cities.  He   speaks   collectively   for  urban man  when  he says:

Everyday we drive through this  city,  like tourists who  have  driven far  out  of their
way and
spent the  last  of their money to find  this place
holds  nothing delightful.

The   image,  rooted   in  the  most  familiar and    commonplace  experience  yet   em­ bodying  the whole  delusory  order  of  con­ temporary urban  experience,  is typical  of Zieroth's laconic,  understated  but pointedly  accurate   language.  Zieroth's "friends"  explain  that the  barren city  is the    product   of    American   capitalism; "their days full  of  books  by Marcuse and Marx," they   prop 1esy
 the  new  revolutionary order. Yet  that   is equally  a delusion: Zieroth's irony makes it  evident   that   he  has  little  faith  in  the uprising   "that  will  lead   them   forever/ out  of  the  hands   of  the  odious  strong." That city too will hold nothing delightful. There remains   the  pain:  the  pain  of the would-be suicide,  the  pain  of  being
caught   in   the   daily   machinery  of  this
city,  which   so  defeats   desire  that  it  in­
vades even sleep.

We  cannot forget the  timeless  clock-watching work,  bordered
morning
and  night  by the  push  and  smell of bodies.
Already
the  morning is in sight. We are  not yet asleep
when  the  journey begins  again, full  of the stony
senselessness  that changes nothing, choked with
a thousand small  and  nasty  turns. Each  day is the same  and  brings  us one  day  closer to
the
angry  ideology of random targets and
stones.

Life as seen from  "The Queen  Street Trolley" invites  a  revolution in  perspec­ tive.  But  the  required drive  of  the  mind  outward  tO\vard  a  larger   map  of  com­ munity  may  be  not  only  more  extensive  than  that  conceived   by  any  of the  tradi­ tional  revolutionaries  but  more  extensive  than   any  one  man's  imagination can  at the  moment  conceive.  Like  Barbour, we find  Zieroth  resorting to the image of the continental  drive.

Ahead of us, a country forever  too large  for one  man's mind;
behind  us
more  of the  same.

Edmonton looked  like  Winnipeg, and
Winnipeg looked  like something else ...

More   sceptical   than   Barbour, he  none­
theless  implies   that   this  is  the  kind   of

REVIEW ARTICLES



road we must travel  if we are to even approach our  Pacific desire:

There is so much road  behind  us;  there is always  more  ahead: these are  the facts of a
continent.
We stop  for a moment, beside  this road
the  length of a country, to check  our  maps, and  then  move  on,  dreaming of the Pacific.

It is with  "The Dream   of the  Gueril­ las"  that  Tom Wayman   begins  the  con­ cluding  section  of Mindscapes.  And  that  is a  nightmare of  violence  in  which  the dreamer is  whirled   away  from  the  steel carnival  of   the   cities,  from   his  father standing  with   one   leg  in   his  brother's coffin,  from   love  to  where  "a  stream  of lead hoses a body to bits/  under  the noise of the nightly warplanes," and  where it is said,  "the  guerillas are  coming/ for  you, and  you  must  go  with  them." Wayman  also questions  the  possibility that  the vio­ lent distortions of the  contemporary mindscape can  be  corrected   by the  vio­ lent  rhetoric and  guerilla  warfare  of  the revolutionaries. The   war  of  words  con­ tinues  on  both  sides, and "Where is Che Guevara?"

Lead in  the ciay, he is still : mucked in  under the  earth like a half-rusted gun,
dead.

The  problem  remains: "A duty  to words you can  live for,"  which  is one's real duty towards  Che.
It is  a  duty   towards a  generation  of
youthful deserters who  have  rejected  the mindscape of their  parents. Wayman's moving   poem   "For  the  American   De­ serters" puts  its  finger  on  the  extraordi­ nary   inversion   or   perversion   of  values that   has  accompanied the  older genera­ tion's   attempt  to   maintain  that   mind­  scape intact.

86
 Their parents want them to be dry  sticks, old  bones  with  bits  of meat  on  them. They want to carry them  out  at night
in bags  across  the  lawn  to the  incinerators.

The  cannibal feast   that   in   Miss   Mus­ grave's  poems  replaces   the  lover's  com­ munion becomes  a self-devouring parody of  family   life in  which  the  old  consume their   young.  Wayman's irony  touches  us closer  to  home,  if less viciously, when  he tells   us   that    the   people   of  Vancouver want  the  deserters to  be  birds,  sea-gulls, to fly away, to disappear.

The people of Vancouver do not  want anyone
to be lonely, or  hurt, hungry or frightened. But  there would  be nothing they  could  do
if anyone were.  Sometimes they  wonder why the  deserters are  becoming an  army again.

Wayman's defence  is neither in  death nor  in  madness,  nor  in  revolution nor  in wit, but in a kind of folly. He plays the buffoon. He  is  the  fool  wise  enough   to worry,  at  least  for  a  moment, amid  the asinine antics of "Poets Fucking by Moonlight," what  may happen to the girl clumsily   initiated  in  those  games.  Else­ where,  he confesses his fear  of  flying and prays  to those  on  the  ground  to pray  for his  little  light  passing  overhead. He  pre­ sents   a   grandiose   vision   of   himself   as literary dictator of  America  as he sits in his  Colorado office  slashing   poems   and grinding out  rejection slips  in  "Life   on the  Land  Grant   Review." But  he knows well  enough   where   the  real  power   lies, and   what   its  effects  are.  As  he  says  in "Ecology of Place":

The City  dreams of balance. Of  finding land  under its feet.
Of  exchanging commodities that are  not on fire.
But  it is the  dollar and  oil who stay  awake
all  night

REVIEW ARTICLES



to draw up  the  Plan. Fish  offshore begin  to choke.

I walk into the  street.

Wayman also ends  on the  road,  but on "Interstate Eight" he only confirms  his awareness  of ecological  disaster,  the white terra incognita on the map of community.

Between Utah and  Laramie the  dead
Indian
lies over  the  settlements.
Name, face  travestied on oil company billboards
and  fading local  hotdog stands.
Only the  land does  not  care:
the  snowcoated slopes  of Wyoming sit empty in  the  wind,
small  squared houses  of the  railroad  towns stuck  on  the  hills  like  tiny  burrs of ice. Even  at  Sinclair, the  refinery
looks  self-conscious, ashamed. And  is gone.

Compared to Newlove's  "The Pride," compared even  to Atwood's "Backdrop Addresses Cowboy," this landscape  is mute   indeed.  Here  the   land   does   not speak,  finds  no mirror in  the  mind.  Here there  is no  evidence of  Barbour's  move­ ment   of  the  mind   outward,  nothing of that  magnanimity. There is  only  evasion as the cars, slicing  the lunar  landscape of Colorado, "swerve  to avoid/ caved-in  fur and   red  flesh/  of  the   bear  dead   in  the road." Here  there   is  only  a  mindscape that  seems designed  to self-destruct.

This happens
but  the  mind  does  not  budge.
The scientists lie:
in bone-cold space, the  rock  America
the  Indian planet	earth 	does  not  move.

There is every  reason  to  sing  descants on  the song of a sphere. But  any  possible words   that    might    be  whispered  across this  frozen   landscape  are   drowned out where  "Violence overflows,  the  shouting and/ the bodies crowd  in sometimes," and
 the  red-faced   officials  simply  keep  talk­ ing. What  comes  through loud  and  clear  everywhere in Mindscapes is the news for December:

In  the  papers
an  oil tank  bums at  El Segundo and  a girl  is jailed  for fifteen  days.

The  one thing  certain  is the  pillar  of fire and  smoke drifting south  over the Christ­ mas  freeways.   It is  the  smell  of  death. After  days filled  with  "nothing more  im­ portant than  despair";

after arguing through her  prison  night that the  wine  is good,  that our  individual
tragedies
are  inevitable against the  historical one, black  under the  moon,  the  smell  of oil
like  touring between the  decks  of a warship, the  smell of oil.

Of  the various  collections of new verse to appear in the last couple of years Mind­ scapes  is the  most  cogent,  the  most  con­ trolled,   the  one   with   the  most   wallop.  Four   pairs  of  eyes  look  steadily   at   the confusion   and  violence  of  contemporary society   and   see  clearly   the   murderous character of what  we have called civiliza­ tion.  And they  keep their  cool. They  keep their   humanity,  and  that   gives  them  an ultimate saving  humour that   guarantees the integrity of  their  reports, that  even in the  mental   hospital   allows  Susan   Mus­  grave  to speak  for outraged sanity:

In  the  mental hospital where  you live there are  rows and  rows of lavatories - sometimes late  at  night  you can  go
from  one  to the  other and  pull  the  chains.

Even  the  most  radically metaphorical or mythical  of the four  poets  has her  eye on the plain  fact, and  the  ultimate banal­ ity  becomes a  potent  metaphor:  no bull­ shit.  The language of  all  three  books  is

REVIEW ARTICLES



tempered and  held  as closely as  possible to  the  rhythms  and  syntax,  the armature of  direct  speech.  All  three  books exhibit an  unusual unanimity. If Barbour is con­ cerned   to  speculate  on  the  apocalyptic form   of  new  maps,  Musgrave, Zieroth, Jiles  and  Wayman  show  us the  need  for such  speculation. They  chart the  body of fragmented humanity.
 The three  books would make  highly appropriate  companions to  Robert Hunter's  Storming of the  Mind, or  vice versa,  the one illuminating the other. To­ gether   they  would  make  up  a  shelf,  not six feet,  not even  six inches,  but devastat­ ingly  relevant to every  home in America, on the Indian planet, Earth.




ARTIFICE AND EXPERIENCE
 


W.H.New


IAN ADAMS, The Trudeau Papers.  McClelland & Stewart, $5-95· JUNE BHATIA, The Latchkey Kid. Longman, $6.95.
LLEW DEVINE, The Arrow  of Apollyon. McGraw-Hill-Ryerson.
GRAEME GIBsoN, Communion. Anansi, cloth  $6.95, paper $2.50. DAVID HELWIG,  The Day Before  Tomorrow. Oberon.
JOAN HAGGERTY, Daughters of the  Moon. Bobbs-Merrill. CHRIS SCOTT, Bart/eby. Anansi, $8.50.


THE TECHNICAL  RANGE of contemporary Canadian  novels indicates not simply  the degree  of experimentation of   which   their   authors are   capable; it suggests also the multiple guises in which "reality" can  be recognized.  Consider, for example, the opening passages of a few recent  books:

a)  The ladies  of Tollemarche, Alberta, were always  wonderfully  clever   at   disposing  of their  menfolk; so  that  these   gentlemen, if not  already in  their graves, were  encouraged by   their  wives   to   depart   northwards  in search of  business....  (Bhatia: The  Latch­ key  Kid)

b)   It is  early   in   April   but   the   snow  still lies on  the  ground, shrouding the  vague contours of  the  landscape. My  emotions of this   morning are   like   that, pale   and  tenu­ ous,   a   simple    line   drawing.... Our  lives have been  brutalized beyond  belief,  reduced to    a  bleakness   impossible   to   express. (Adams: The Trudeau Papers)

c)   Later  that  evening, Anna  left   by   the same  door,  the  weighted hinges  dragging it closed   behind her.  Ibiza  again, bare  feet  in

88
 white   dust.   She    was    back,    back    from Paris.... (Haggerty:   Daughters of    the Moon)

d)  Heavenly reader, let  me  anticipate  your two   most    serious  objections  to   Bartle by: the  first  that it  is a  work  of  plagiarism; the second  that it employs too many  gimmicks, stocks  in  trade, and  cliches  of the  writer's imitative art.  (Scott:  Bartleby)

June Bhatia's gauze  ironies  reveal  her acceptance of  an  empirical view  of  soci­ ety, while Ian Adams' portentous allitera­ tive  utterances make  us  conscious  of  the rhetoric of  his story  more than  the  story itself.  Joan  Haggerty,  by  contrast, relies on  image  and   rhythm, to  focus  on  two women's   dislocating  responses   to   their sexuality.  And   Chris   Scott,  ingenuously probing   the  artifice  of  language  itself, circles  again   and   again   over  the  reality of the creative imagination.
The  most   easily   approachable   books
are   certainly  Adams'  and   Bhatia's, and they might seem at first thought to be the

REVIEW ARTICLES



most  "real" simply  because  of  that.  The ladies and  gentlemen of Tollemarche, Alberta,  have  their  counterparts in mate­ rial  society,  that   is,  and   if,  in  creating them,    their    author   exaggerates   social prejudiceS  for  the sake of her ironic  tone, she  remains pictorially  descriptive in  her exploration   of    human   behaviour.  Yet "human behaviour" is not ultimately illu­ minated  by such  a book. When  it ascribes motivation  to  any   of  its  characters, it does  so with  such  abruptness as  to deny life  its complexity and  subtlety. And  the resolutions  possess  all  the   credibility  of the average television show, geared  to the timing  of the  commercials more  than  the pace of the drama.
Mrs. Bhatia's commercial is announced fairly  early: "In this war amongst  the teacups,  the  worst  sufferers  were  the children." However admirable the  senti­ ment,  the constant urge to reduce experi­  ence  to  epigrams  makes  stereotypes out of her characters. Hank Stych, the "latch­ key  kid"  of  the  story   (or  child   with  a housekey  round  its  neck,  to  obviate   the need for a parent or babysitter at home), grows  up  to  resent  his  parents' involve­ ment   in  Moral  Causes  rather than   Hu­  man   Beings.   At  about   age  eighteen  he therefore writes  a scandalous, best-selling book  to  discomfort them,  dislodge  them from  their social  niche,  and  demonstrate the deeply-felt truth that  he Really Cares. His mother belatedly  discovers that  Tolle­ marche's mentally retarded children need her  as  a  volunteer. In  such  humble  cir­ cumstances she  finds  true   reward,  for  a travelling princess  visits  her.  And  Hank, who   is   given   to   saying   contemporary things  like  "Jeepers" when  he isn't  writ­  ing   dirty   books,   heads  off   to  England (apparently  the  spiritual  home  of every Albertan), marries   the  widow  who  used
 to live next door, enjoys his money, writes another book, and  gives promise  of Some Day   being   reconciled   with   his  family. Hence  what  could  have  been a very witty book is punctuated with  so many  cliches that   it  trips  over  its  own  technique. As critical  views of "Albertan" moral legisla­ tion,   Robert   Kroetsch's The   Words   of My   Roaring  and   The   Studhorse   Man pierce pretentiousness and  provoke  indig­  nant   laughter  much  more   readily; they use language coruscatingly and  wittily  to an   artistic  purpose. The   Latchkey   Kid merely  romanticizes, and   however  much it   attempts  to   represent  daily   life  and attack  superficial  social conventions, it simplifies experience too often  to do other than  escape  life and  ends  up  the prisoner of conventions of another kind.
Avowed   thrillers  like   The   Trudeau
Papers or  Llew  Devine's The   Arrow  of Apollyon,  by  contrast, openly   admitting their  use of a conventional form,  manage to  convey  a  certain   rough   vigour.   Both books, moreover, use the suspenseful swift narrative to probe as urgent a moral  issue as  that  which  lies behind   The   Latchkey Kid:  the impact of money  on conscience. Devine's  book opens  with  a murder  asso­ ciated  with  the  Toronto  Stock  Exchange and   investigates the  manipulation of people  and   currency   that   lead   to  and follow  upon   it.  The  greed  of  one  man,  the weakness of  another, the amorality of a third :  all  bear  upon  the  way in  which the  Market  works  and   ordinary  people are unknowingly affected. We respond  to the  characters in  exactly   this  dehuman­ ized  way,   however.   Two-dimensional, they  are  not  "real"; only  their  greed  or
weakness or amorality is, as though the author were  writing a latter-day morality play  in  which  virtues  and   vices contend for  the  soul  of  modern society.  Indeed,

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



the   central  presence   of   the   book,   an archer-financier  and   international   mys­ tery allegorically  named  Max Bowman, is drawn  in  such  deliberately  larger-than­ life terms  as to  become a  counterpart to the  mediaeval  deus  ex  machina. Myths  collect   around   him.   Beyond   close  ac­ quaintance, he is therefore beyond knowl­ edge; beyond  knowledge,  he contains  all possibilities and acquires  any powers that  the  imaginative minds  of  ordinary  men accord  him,  either  for good  or  evil. Whether people  thus  relinquish  their  will to control their own affairs, or eternally require a  saviour,  or  are  inevitably  con­ trolled   any  way  by  some  external  force remains unanswered. And the book's clos­ ing  ambivalence counters any  easy  reso­ lutions   that   might   readily   have  sprung from  Devine's literary form.
It is still  neither more   nor  less  than
capable  escape   fiction,   a   rendering  of social  pressures  in such  a way as to make them  both  comprehensible and  bearable. Any such  form  is beset by the dangers  of oversimplifying, sentimentalizing, and such  distancing that  the book's presump­ tive  relationship with  actual  life may  go unnoticed.  The   Latchkey   Kid   fails   in part  because  it pretends its radically  sim­ plified   characters are   real.  Devine's  is openly  allegorical. Ian  Adams'  The Tru­ deau  Papers  demands  that  we accept  as "real" a  world  of  the  near  future when nuclear "accident"  over  Canada  causes an  American  "peacekeeping'' occupation and  engenders  divisive  internal  fighting. Such  imaginative speculation acquires  its fictional   credibility in  two ways:   by the author's journalistic amassing of data  and by the  rhetorical bias he gives his  narra­ tor. The motivation of behaviour and  the sequence   of  events  are  worked  out  with the  clarity   of  a  well-written  news  story,

go
 and  the  effect  of that  documentary sensi­
bility  is to imply  the  truth of non-fiction
-just as  in  Brian   Moore's recent   The Revolution Script-even when  the force of the author's argument lies not in the logical   arrangement  of  empirical  facts but in emotional intensity and interpreta­ tion.  Adams  has  a  shrewd  sense  of what  makes convincing detail and a knowledge of how  to use political  rhetoric to  under­ line   his  message.   He   is  concerned  not only  with  the  insidiousness   of  American influence   in   Canada  but   also  with   the insidiousness  of  power   itself.  Hence his guerilla   nationalists tum  out   to  rule  as corruptly as did  the Old  Guard. Idealism fails  to  flower  in  such   a  desert,   but   it does  not  thereby  cease  to  be, and  if  the novel  accomplishes its  underlying aim,  it will  provoke   a  number  of  readers   into questioning the nature-or  the very existence-of the ideals that motivate Canadian society in time present.
In  concerning himself  manifestly  with
the  superficially  subdued present  instead of distancing cataclysm  into  the future, David  Helwig  writes in The Day Before Tomorrow a  less spectacular  book  than The Trudeau Papers but  an even  more disturbing one.  The impact of  the  kind of violence  he describes  depends on  con­ trolled   use  of  understatement,  and   the novel has more of the  brooding nightmare about   it  than   does  Adams'  overt  object lesson.  The  dangers to  society  that   Hel­  wig explores  are  not  those of Foreign  In­ vasion   and   Atomic  Halocaust,  but   the invasions  of  the sanctity of the individual mind.   Cast  as  a  variety  of  spy  story,  it follows   the   political    awakening  of   a character   named    Jake  Martens  as   he grows tired of the attitudinizing of simple Canadian   protest    groups,    becomes   in­ volved  in  London locating his career  dip-

REVIEW ARTICLES



lomat brother John  (who has  committed treason out  of desperate disaffection with government policy), and tunes in  at last on   the   momen.t  in   history  in  which he lives and  must act.
The two  meanings of the  word  "act" contribute to the  tensions of the  book, for if  its  ultimate commitment is  to  action as a way of confirming one's individuality, it   distinguishes  constantly  between  that and acting-seeming, appearing to  do. The protest groups signified for  Jake just such  a  lack  of  substance, and for  all  the flamboyance  of  his   brother's  disappear­ ance, so  does   the   exchange  of  affinities that   his   treason  represents.   Instead  of coming closer   to  reality,  John  enters an  unstable realm of  "nightmare  sequence" in which an  anonymous "They" that had  sought  his  aid   now   fails   to  identify or help  him. Thrown back  upon himself, he discovers he  has  forsaken himself, that to have  once  said   "I  have given   myself  to the  future, I  must put  myself   in   their hands" is to render oneself  completely powerless. Somehow Jake intuits that  un­ derstanding,  and  realizes that   NOW   is the   only   point  where  action   and   indi­ viduality can  coalesce. And  NOW, being  "real", is  imperfect and   therefore frus­ trating for  those  who serve an  ideal  in  it. To:J  often such  service imprisons rather than  enfranchises  people, for  in  appear­ ing to act they  embrace the  perfect future or  the  perfect past.  The one   has  the  in­ substantiality of  dream, the  other the artificiality of  history; both have their impact  on   Helwig's  present  moment  of active  existence,  but    neither  takes    its place, and to distinguish among them becomes the  task  of all  who live.
In another way it is also  the  task of the writer,   whose  contrived   literary   tech­ niques must  convey these  disparate ap-
 prehensions of the  nature of truth. In the chapters evoking John Martens' discovery of  his  life's  continuing emptiness,  there­ fore,  Helwig's style  breaks into fragmen­ tary   sentences;  he   distorts  observations and  dislocates time. Jake, contrarily, ope­ rates   within a  strict  linear,  moment-by­ moment frame of  resistance, and  Helwig records the conversations he  takes  part in almost   without  apparatus,  in   order  to allow   readers -as   Callaghan  had    at­ tempted to do   in  the 1g2o's-to  over­ hear   them  directly  and  so   become  in­ volved   in   the   character'sfauthor's   mo­  ment. Counterpointing these  two styles is a  third, a compulsion to  speak  in  aphor­ isms   ("The future is  perfect  because it does  not  exist", "An aphorism says every­ thing and  means nothing")   which seems  to  epitomize the  characters'  experience. The  "seem", however, is  important. As Alice  Munro spells  out in  Lives  of Girls and  Women, art  can   only  approximate (for  all that it  can  intensify and  distil)  a life  that  is lived. To accept  the  aphorism rather  than  the   substance  would   be  to equate the  intellectual and emotional dis­ tillation  with    the   empirical  event.  For  Helwig's  characters  it  means a  blurring of  life  and  theory; for   Helwig  himself, the challenge was concurrently to demon­ strate the  blurring and enunciate the dis­ tinction,   and  despite  its   somewhat unvarying tone -which   works  against his stylistic differentiations-his book manages intelligently to  grapple with  the  art  and experience of life.
The  same cannot  be   said   either  for Joan  Haggerty's  Daughters of the  Moon (for  all its  sensitivity to  explicitly female experience)  or  for  Graeme Gibson's  fan­ tasy  about the  "sexual, ... lyrical  and  ... nightmarish"   possibilities  of   one's    life, Communion. Both books take  rhythmic

REVIEW ARTICLES



pattern as their  best stylistic technique, which  carries  particularly strong sexual overtones in Haggerty's novel. Daughters of the  Moon concerns  the emotional  links between   two  women,   Anna  and  Sarah, who   each   marry,   recall   family   experi­ ences,  suffer  marital  breakup,  and  come to bear  children. In  the process they  dis­ cover  their   love  and   their  separateness, the  concurrence of  their  experience and the  identity of   death, and  as  the  prose patterns recur  and  the story steps in and out of dreams, signs, and  daily events, we approach an  understanding of  the  pres­ sures  that  affect  their  lives. Yet  so con­ sciously   is   the   language  made   into   a sexual  rhetoric that   the  novel  ultimately  seems  arch,  a  defective   Woolf-Lessing­ Drabble set-piece   that   contains   illusions but cannot seed them.  The  style manages to catch  at  the  heat  and  doldrums of the Mediterranean setting,  and  to capture some  of  the  emptiness of the  lives being lived,   but   none   of  the  characters  ever proves very interesting.
Presumably the  rhythms-as Gibson's
bookjacket advises  about  Communion­ are  meant to  be  "haunting" and  "mes­ merizing" and  "rise  to  a  harrowing and purgative   intensity";  in   them   lie   the "truth" of   the   identities  to  which   the characters  lay  claim.   Certainly   for  Gib­ son's Felix  Oswald, a veterinarian's assis­ tant   identifying  with   a  dying   husky­ feeling  violent, beautiful, angry, animal, caged,  controlled, uncontrollable, and superior  to authority-the recurrent but interrupted visions  of  passion  blend  con­ quest  and  defeat  into  an ambivalent  por­ trait   of  an  ordinary  man.   Both  avatar and servitor in his own imagination, Felix consumes   himself  with  each  new  "com­  munion";  his  identity  is  lost,  therefore, with each  fulfilment-reminiscent of

92
 Cohen's Beautiful Losers. The  trouble  is, his imagination is too  tiresome  to arouse much  sympathy; as an advance on the barren  "realities" of  the  "veterinary" world,   his  visionary  glimpses  seem  curi­ ously  negative;  and   seen  as  an  absurd  dilemma, his predicament neither engages nor  dismays.
Much livelier and wittier-though
sometimes   overwritten and  far  too  long
-is  Chris   Scott's   Bartleby, and   in  it, we  take   the   next   step   out   of  fictional realism.   A  shaggy   Shandyan  funhouse, Bartleby  recognizes  as "real" not  the  life presumably  devised  on  the  page   but  in the   process  of  devising  artifice  itself.  In life,  life  is  real,  but  in  a  book,  only  the book  is.  Within such  a  framework,  any­ thing  is therefore possible, and Scott con­ trives  to write  about  the Writing of Book in such  a way as to reveal  the impositions of an  author upon  his characters, the  in­ dependent vitality  they  manage nonethe­ less to acquire in  readers' minds,  and  the control they (subsequently, paradoxically) exert   upon  the  creative abilities  of  their  author.  Taking the  form  of  a  burlesque quest story, the characters' search for their creator and  for creativity takes them  into bouncing bawdy  adventures, into  conflict with  a Protean figure  named  De'Ath, and into innumerable quarrels with  the author at  his  typewriter over  what  they  may  or may   not  do,  and   when.  If he  consigns events   to   the   wastebasket  on  occasion, they  steal  his  chapters and  only  release them    long   after    they're  needed.    And when  he  needs  all  his  characters at  one point   and   they  disappear, he  is  forced into  writing THE END  abruptly, in  the middle of his book-only  to  turn  about on  a fresh  page,  equally  as abruptly and artificially, with  a continuation:

REVIEW ARTICLES



-THE END  of Book  One, that is, because I have  just  hit  on  the  explanation-forget about   the    end,   reader-and     amazingly simple   it  is:   the  fog,  the   fog  from   the  last chapter has  filtered through to this  chapter!

'There is  no  fog,'   said   Damon  Gottesgabe.

'Extraordinary,'  said    I.  'That's   extraordi­ nary,   Damon,  but   I  have    just   read   your words' -I    will    not    allow   myself    to   be drawn into   that  trap,  reader.  Nevertheless, I  read   what  he   said   and   read  it   aloud:
' "There  is   no   fog,'    said   Damon   Gottes­
gabe," but  there is, there is a fog!'

'It seems   very   clear  to   me,'   he  continued while  I searched the   MS,  'that the  fault  is yours ... you   have   forgotten  what   day   of the   week   it   is,   see   fogs   where    there are none,  and now  to  cap   it  all  you  have  lost not   just  one   or   two   of  the   persons   in  the book, but  all of them.'

'Enough, enough, Damon,' I conceded, 'the narration has  not  been  without fault.'

The  ironies  and  exaggerations of this ad­ mitted   Cock  and  Bull  story  demonstrate a shrewd  sense of  comic  timing,  and  in­ troduce the  finest  parodist Canadian lit­ erature has  for  a  long  time  seen.  Scott's  style  keeps   pace   with   a   huge   cast   of characters,  some  his own  and  some  bor­ rowed,  all  speaking  in  the  syntax   their original author gave  them  and  grumbling at it, and his knowledge of literary arche­ types and  analogues allows  him  to move
 gamely  through a range  of allusive  tech­
niques.
The  end  of all  this flamboyance is not merely to bewail the rigidity of the straightforward narrative process of  mod­ ern  realistic  fiction  but  also  to affirm  the joyful,   invigorating   spontaneity  of   the spoken/written   word-and   not   merely to berate  the categorizing impulses  of the modern  society   that   are   epitomized  by the realistic  novel, but also to insist on the continuing human capacity to utter  the idiosyncrasies,  potentialities, aspirations, and  unpredictable forays of the creative mind.  "Upon the  very  principle of  beg­ gary" does "The Narrative Age founder", Scott   writes.   It was  June  Bhatia's and  Ian   Adams'  intention  simply  to  use  the language  of narrative;  it is Scott's  inten­ tion  (like Robert  Kroetsch's or  Abraham Klein's) to  revitalize  it.  In  the  process of attempting  to  do  so, he  explores  a  prin­ ciple  that  Malcolm Lowry  had  absorbed from  Ortega: that   an  author is created by   the  works  he  writes  as  much   as  he creates   them   and   that   they,   therefore, have an independent "reality". He  also rediscovers what Stephen  Leacock averred in "Fiction and  Reality" as early as  rgr6:




CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at

the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COWMBIA VANCOUVER 8, B.C.	228-4741


93

REVIEW ARTICLES



'That   accusation is,'   repeated   Mr.   Pick­ wick,   'that  :we  are   not   real,  that   we   are caricatures, that  not   one  of  us,  and   I beg the  company to mark  my words,  not a single one  of  us,  ever  existed, or  ever  could  exist;  in  short, my friends, that  we are  mere mon­  strous exaggerations, each  of  us  drawn in  a crude and  comic  fashion from  a  few imagi­ nary  characteristics!!'

... the  truth was  that from  the  time  of  the Romans onward  Art   had  of  necessity  pro­ ceeded  by  the   method  of  selected   particu­ lars   and    conspicuous qualities:    that    this
 was  the   nature and   meaning of  art  itself: that exaggeration (meaning the  heightening of  the  colour to  be  conveyed)  was  the  very life  of  it ... :  that by  this  means  and   by this  means alone could   the  real  truth-the reality greater than life  be conveyed.

Such  praise  of  the  artist's craft  describes a  willingness   to  render experience  inno­ vatively    rather   than    photographically, and   to  hold  faith   in  imaginative truths rather than strictly  empirical ones.



SECOND IMAGE, FIRST TRY

Donald Cameron


RONALD  SUTHERLAND,   Second Image:  Comparative  Studies  m  Quebec/Canadian
Literature. New  Press.  $7.50.


I EXPECTED to admire Second Image. The  topic is vitally important, the critic  distinguished. The  chapter  titles­
''The Calvinist-Jansenist Pantomime",
"The  Fourth  Kind    of   Separatism" - suggest that  the right  questions  are about to  be raised.  I opened  the  book with excitement.
I closed it with  puzzlement. Sutherland does  tackle  large  questions,  and  many  of his points  are stimulating. But  the  points never come together, and  the dominant impression is one  of fuzziness, of  impor­ tant   insights   crying   to  be  released   but somehow   never  quite   being  granted exit permits.
In part  the  problem  is simply loose argument and verbosity, as though Sutherland  is  not   quite   sure   what   he wants  to  say, and  consequently does  not quite say it:

How significant this apparently distinctive tendency of Canadian literature may be in terms  of  national habits, parental behaviour,

94
 memory patterns and  artrst1c  qualities, is difficult to say.  It is, however, definitely significant  that   the    tendency   should   be shared  by   writers  of   the   different ethnic groups of  Canada,  providing one  more  in­ dication  of   the    existence   of   a   common Canadian mystique.

If that  means  what  I take  it  to mean,  it could  be cut  by about half.  But  I am  not certain just  what  it is intended to mean, and  I doubt that  Sutherland is, either.
Such inexactness pervades the book, hinting at  a significance it never quite expresses. Like a fainter Northrop Frye, Sutherland  isolates   themes   in  order   to draw  large  conclusions about  the  state  of our   culture.  Like   Frye   too,  Sutherland sets  up  large   conceptual  systems  which make the sceptical reader wonder whether anything so  unruly   as  a  litera­ ture   does   actually  occur   in   such   neat  categories. We  desperately  need compre­ hensive,  generalizing criticism  in Canada, but  it  demands a  rare  subtlety  and  dis­ crimination. The  conviction Frye  some-

REVIEW ARTICLES



times  inspires   is  a  consequence  of   pre­ cisely the  nuanced expression  Sutherland seems unable to provide.
Sutherland argues that  "to be in the emerging mainstream of Canadian litera­ ture ... a  writer   must  have  some  aware­ ness of fundamental aspects  and attitudes of both  language groups  in  Canada." By this  novel  and   provocative  thesis,  Mar­ garet   Laurence,  Morley  Callaghan  and Sheila  Watson are  not Canadians; rather they  are  "in  the  tributaries of American literature".  Comparable  Quebecois writ­ ers,  however  are  "in  the  various  Quebec tributaries of Canadian literature". By implication,  no  English-Canadian   com­ munity  exists   except    by   the   grace   of sychological
community, and  Sutherland argues  that outside  central Canada, the international border   ceases  to  be  meaningful. In  that case, though, how can  there  be compara­ tive   Canadian   studies,   which   Second Image   is  ostensibly  presenting?  At  best there  can be Quebec/ American compara­ tive  studies.
If  Sutherland cannot see  that  such  a
sweeping  dismissal  of  English  Canada is fatal   to   the   assumptions  of   his  study, what   are  we  to  make  of  his  powers  of logical   analysis?   Elsewhere   in  the  book he   claims   that    Canadian  literature  is peculiarly marked by its attitude  to child­ hood,  and   compares Rejean  Ducharme with    W.   0. Mitchell.   Another   essay maintains that  "Canadian  Puritanism has evolved  in  much   the  same  way  and  has taken  much  the  same  form  of expression in  Protestant  English  Canada as  in  Ro­  man   Catholic  Quebec", and  Sutherland spends  pages  distinguishing our  Puritan­ ism  from  that of  the   United States.   As evidence   he   cites   Roch   Carrier,  Anne Hebert,    Roger    Lemelin  -as   well   as
 Grove and Sinclair  Ross. Sixty pages later he is telling  us that  "the  border does  not really  exist for  the  prairie sphere  of  con­ sciousness."  Then  what   in  tunket  were the earlier  chapters about?
But  the  notion   of  a  Canadian  main­
stream preoccupied with English/French relations can stand alone. For Sutherland, Hugh MacLennan is at its centre, and "likely  to  occupy   a  position   much   like that  of Mark  Twain in the  United States, as  the  prime  mover  in  the  emergence of a  distinctive   Canadian literature." The notion  has considerable merit, but Suther­ land's  defence  of it leaves a great deal  to be desired. Sutherland argues persuasively  that   in  the  dark   places  of  our  lives  in which  the  imagination blossoms, English and  French  Canadians are  very  similar people. In that  case, the "emerging Cana­ dian  mainstream" probably has  little  to do  with  French/English  relations, and  a great   deal  to  do  with  the  obsessions  we share: the overt  concern with  the ethnic is simply  a  superficial recognition  of  an essentially  political   reality,   not   the  sine qua   non   of   Canadian  experience. The  genuine mainstream will have  to do with puritanism, sexuality,  family  relations, moral  outlook,  metaphysics, sense of  his­ tory, and  so forth. The  important  knowl­ edge is of the things  we have  in common, not  the knowledge  that  we do  have  them m common.
That Sutherland is at least as interested in  politics  as  in  literature is made plain by his outright plea,  more  or  less  gratui­ tously inserted  and  occupying  two and  a half  pages,  for  a  unilingual   Quebec. I hasten  to add  that  I do not myself believe that  literature can  be divorced from  poli­ tics, and  that  with  many  of Sutherland's political  attitudes  I  am  in  hearty   agree­  ment.  But  distinctions need  to  be  made

95

REVIEW ARTICLES



between  admirable politics and literary merit,    and   though  the   most   satisfying works do fuse the political, the moral, the philosophical and  the  aesthetic   passions, the  same  qualities may  exist  separately, too, as any number of unreadable leftist journals will reveal.
Confusion about  these larger  questions
added to the impulse toward  rigidity characteristic of system-builders leads Sutherland to commit a number of  howl­ ers. His reading of The Watch That Ends The Night, for  instance,  is  shot  through with  outright error. The  mis-spelling  of Jerome  Martell's name  is  no  doubt   the  fault   of  the  same  proofreader  who   re­ versed   one   of   Edmund  Wilson's   judg­ ments  by adding a "not". But it is Suther­ land,   not   the   proofreader,  who   claims Catherine's  baby   is  delivered   "without great  strain", a  view  which  contrasts  in­ terestingly  with   the   novel,  which   says that   "Sally's   birth   came  close  to  killing Catherine."
Again,  here is Sutherland:

Catherine finally  accepts George as her husband. By  that  time   she  is  helpless, but George, despite the  fact   that   he  knows  she still  loves  Jerome, takes  it  upon   himself   to care   for  her  and  her  daughter Sally.

Evidently Sutherland believes that Cath­ erine  does not love George, and does love Jerome in  the  same  old  way.  But  Mac­  Lennan  tells  us  that   George  and   Cath­ erine  went  away  for  a weekend  together and  then  inserts-as he is wont  to do at moments of  high  personal   emotion-a vibrant description  of  the  autumn land­ scape.  Then, without transition:

"Yes, George," she said,  "yes!" Three weeks  later we were married.

To  underline the  point,  MacLennan has
George  say this:

g6
 Together  we  grew   intimate  with   the   sea­ sons,  and   we  planted  our   lives  in  one   an­  other without trying to  annul the  past.  She,  who   had   said   'yes'   with   all   her   might  to Jerome, now said  'yes'  to me.

Sutherland tells us that:

George  can   endure  the   experience of   wit­ nessing    how    his   wife   has   never   stopped loving    the    husband   who   abandoned  her.  For  George ... it  is  more  important to  love than to be loved.

But  MacLennan  reports Jerome's  meet­ ing   with    Catherine  in   very   different terms:

Each   seeing   the   other saw  in  a  flash   that what  they   had   believed  was  their past   no longer  existed.  For    a   few   moments   they were  almost like  husband and   wife  meeting after death in  the  next  world.

And  when  Jerome tells Catherine that  he still  longs  to  make   love  to  her  at  least once  again,  she says simply,  "It's too late for that, Jerome."
Finally-and I confess to a certain vested  interest here,  because  we are  talk­ ing  of an  episode  which  is for  me one of the  most  remarkable in  all  of  Canadian fiction-Sutherland tells us  that on one early occasion,  Catherine

attempts  to   make    George  a   gift   of   her naked   young  body;  ironically, her   attempt at  seduction fails,   not  because of  a  lack  of desire  and  affection on George's part  but because  his   affection  is  so  strong  that  he cannot  take   the   risk  of   putting  the   girl's health in  danger  [i.e.  by  making her  preg­ nant, as the  context makes clear].

But  MacLennan actually says this:

But   I  trembled and   was  afraid  not  merely as  a  boy  is  who  fears to  make  a  girl  preg­ nant,  but   because I  was   not   yet   a   man.
She  waited for  me,  she  held  me,  she  was
as quietly restless  as a quiet sea.
Finally I  sat   up   and   heard  myself   say,
"No,  I can't."
And   when   I said   this   I felt   a  kind   of

REVIEW ARTICLES



virtue go out  of me and  became an utterly defeated boy  and  less of  a  man than I had been  for  months.

Iam  virtually  certain  that   millions   of boys have  had  parallel experiences, and I know  of no other  male  writer  than  Mac­ Lennan -certainly   none   in  Canada - sufficiently   confident  in  his  own  sexual identity to  be able  to  portray it.  Of  this delicate  and   candid   scene   Sutherland's summary is a grotesque travesty.  But  in­ deed,  he so thoroughly misreads the novel as  to  cast  doubt on  his entire enterprise. The  Watch That  Ends   The  Night   is,
 finally, a religious  book-but  in his  dis­ cussion of it, Sutherland not only fails to mention religion,   but   indeed   makes   it clear that  he regards the novel as directed  towards  rebuilding "a  structure of social and   moral   values"   on   a   principle  of "realistic involvement" with  others  in an essentially godless, value-free world.
Unquestionably we  need  books  which
attempt  what   Second    Image    attempts. But  they  ought   to  be considerably more rigorous  than   this.  Second   Image  is  im­ portant, finally,   just  because  it  is a  first try.



COD, SEALS AND HERRINGS

Sandra Djwa


MAUD KARPELES, Folk  Songs   from Newfoundland. Oxford. $24.00.


THE  BALLAD   REVIVAL   of  the last fifteen years has dealt  very favourably with  the  Newfoundland folk  song.  After an  academic silence  of  almost  40  years, there  have  been  three  publications within a decade. (The lack of attention, it should be noticed,  was strictly  academic; in Newfoundland since 1927 successive gen­ erations of  schoolchildren have  been en­ titled  almost  by  birthright to  free  copies of Gerald   S. Doyle's  Old-Time Songs  of Newfoundland where patriotic standards such  as "The Squid  Jiggin' Ground" and "The Ryans  and  the  Pittman's" are  pre­ sented   for  the  general good  of  the  con­ stitution along with  Andrew's Liver  Salts and   Doyle's   Pure   Newfoundland   Cod Liver Oil.)
The   three   new  volumes  of  folk  songs are Kenneth Peacock's Songs of the New­ foundland   Outports, a second  edition  of
 Ballads and  Sea Songs  of Newfoundland, edited  by Elizabeth Greenleaf and  Grace Mansfield, and finally, from  the Faber and Faber  folk  song  series,  a  very  handsome new   edition    of   Maud   Karpeles'  Folk Songs  from Newfoundland. Miss Karpeles is one of the  best known  collectors  of the folk song  in  Ne..vfoundland and  this  en­ larged  new edition will be appreciated by the   general   reader   as   well  as  the  folk music  specialist.  She  accompanied Cecil Sharp in his famous ballad  collecting  ex­ pedition  to the southern Appalachians in
1916 and 1918. The two had originally planned an  expedition to Newfoundland, but following Sharp's death in 1924, Kar­ peles  determined  to  carry   on  the  work alone.  In  two  expeditions to  Newfound­ land   made   in  September   and   October
1929, and  July  and  August  1930, she col­
lected  191 tunes,  150 of which  (go songs

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



with  variants)  are  published  in  this volume.
Karpeles had  little  experience  in  "not­
ing tunes" and  as this was before the day of the  tape  recorder, she admits "some trepidation". Although Sharp hoped  that Newfoundland  would   prove   a  treasure trove  equal  to  that  of the isolated  Appa­ lachian region,  Miss Karpeles was not  at all  sure  that   the  barren  shores  of  New­ foundland   would    provide    very   much more  than  rock, fish, and sea. She quotes  from   the   then   contemporary  historian Rogers   (A  Historical   Geography  of the British Colonies, rgr 1):

There  is  no  civilized  nation  in   the   world which   is so marine in  its character as  New­ foundland. The  sea   has   asserted   its   sway over    Newfoundlanders;  they   are   wedded with    the    sea   and    "their   children's  eyes change  colour  with    the   sea".  Cod,   seals, herrings and  the   clownish   lobsters   mould their destiny.

As her  introduction goes on  to  reveal, there   were  not  only  cod,  seals  and  her­ rings  in  Newfoundland; there  were  also folk  songs  to  be  collected  and  for  that  matter,  other   collectors  busy  about   the task   of  classification.  In   fact,   Karpeles was preceded by two months  by the Vas­ sar  College  Folklore Expedition of Eliza­ beth  Greenleaf and  Grace  Mansfield. A consequence of  this  was  the  publication of their  collection, Ballads and Sea Songs of Newfoundland  in 1933, a year earlier  than   that   of  Karpeles' Folk  Songs   from Newfoundland.
A comparison of the  two volumes  em­
phasizes  the  distinctive qualities of  Kar­ peles'   book.   Initially,  both   expeditions were  overwhelmed by the  bleakness  and isolation   of  the  island,  the  hospitality  of the  Newfoundlanders  who received  them and  the  amazing vitality  of  the folk song tradition. Greenleaf and  Mansfield  tran-

g8
 scribed  all  the  songs  they  heard, making no distinction between  variants on  tradi­ tional   songs  and   ballads   and  those  bal­ lads, chantys or "Come-all-ye's" that  were locally   composed.  Karpeles,  in   distinc­ tion,  following the  collections  of  Francis Child  and  Cecil  Sharp, is interested  pri­ marily    in   the   ballad    or   folk   song   of traditional origin.  She explains:

The  proportion  of  authentic  folk   songs   is small  compared with   the  general repertory. In  addition to   the   composed  songs   of  an earlier generation, songs  are  constantly  be­ ing   made  up   about  contemporary   events such    as   exploits at  sea,   shipwrecks,   etc. These are  often set  to  a  well-known "Come­ all-ye" type  of  tune. They usually   have   but little  aesthetic  value  and   since   my  interest lay  in  songs   that   represent an  older tradi­ tion  I did  not  note any  of them.

This   distinction  will  be  a  disappoint­ ment  to those  general  readers who might  want   to  differ   with  Miss  Karpeles' aes­ thetic  standards and  to add  that  we come to  the  folk  song  not  just  to observe  con­ tinuity of tradition,  but also for  the sense of  a  people  which  can  only  be found  in the  folk song that is  native  to that  place. Further, as the  recent  Peacock  collection  very  ably  demonstrates, there  are  many Newfoundland folk songs of great  beauty.
Yet  there  is some  justice  to  Miss  Kar­
peles'  argument that  the characteristic "Come-all-ye" form  of the Newfoundland tunes  indicates "a certain lack  of  inven­ tion". I suspect   it  might   be  possible  to accommodate a  great   many  Newfound­ land  songs  simply  by setting  up  the  beat for  "Jack Was  Every  Inch  a  Sailor" as slowly   or   as  briskly   as   any   new   lyrics might  require. But  the  primary difficulty with   Miss  Karpeles'  aesthetic is  that   in Newfoundland in  1929 the  folk song was not,  as  it  might  have  been  in  the  more  cultivated  drawing rooms  of  England, a

REVIEW ARTICLES



matter of pianoforte and  tea.  Even  today in the Newfoundland outports, the canons are  those  of  use rather than  those of art. The folk  song  is  the   chronicle of  local place  and  tragedy as  in  "The Wreck  of the  Steamship Florizel";  it  is  the  com­ munity  celebration  of  "The  Kelligrew's Soiree" or  the  work  party  of  "The Squid Jiggin'   Ground". The  folk  song  is  that  brew which  knits the community together when  sister  Mary  comes  down  from  St. John's to  get  married or  John-Joe is up from   the  fishing  with   a  good  catch.   It aims for the cove and  not for the drawing room.   For  this   reason,   any   attempt  to impose standards upon  it which  are other  than  those  of  custom   and   use are  spuri­  ous.  Those  general   readers, lured  by the title,   Folk   Songs    from    Newfoundland and  expecting to  find  here  the  pungent lyrics and  riotous  immediacy which marks the  native  Newfoundland folk  song, wil! be  disappointed.  Instead  they   will  find "Fair  Margaret  and    Sweet   William", "Spanish Ladies", "The  Outlandish Knight" and   "Bound  Down   to  Derry". For   such  readers,  a  somewhat  different title  of,  say,  Folk   Songs   of  the   British Isles From  Newfoundland, might  be more immediately   descriptive   of   the   book's contents.
What then,  can  we expect  to find? Primarily there is a very fine and varied collection  of the songs of the  British  Isles still extant in Newfoundland in 1929 and
1930. In  this  new  edition, Karpeles  pro­
vides  6o   new  songs   that   were   not   in­ cluded   in  the   earlier volume.   She  also categorizes   the   songs,   giving   pride   of place  to the "Child" ballads   (those cata­ logued   by  Phillip   Child   in   his  English and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads, 1882), fol­ lowed   by  further  "Ballads"   and   "Sea­ Songs".   The   successive  groups   of  cate-
 gories   are   largely    thematic,  gathering several songs under  general  topics such as "The  Drowned  Lover",  "Female  Sailor Boy"  and   "Wooing  and   Courtship". If we are  to gather anything from  this mis­ cellany  it  might   seem,  from  the  number of songs dealing  with  the topic, that  New­ foundlanders  are   most  attracted  to  the traditional songs of wooing and courtship.
As we do not find here songs conceived in  North   America, our  interest   is  often caught by speculations as to why particu­ lar songs survived  over hundreds of years, by  Newfoundland  variations in  the  text and  by melodies  of  particular distinction. The lovely song "She's Like the Swallow" has always been a favourite:

She's  like  the  swallow  that flies so high, She's  like the  river  that never  runs  dry, She's like the  sunshine on  the lee shore. I love my love and  love is no more.

'Twas out  in  the  garden this fair  maid  did go,
Picking the  beautiful prim-e-rose;
The more  she plucked the  more  she pulled
Until she got  her  whole  a-per-on full.

It's out  of those  roses she made a bed, A stony  pillow  for  her  head,
Now  this fair  maid she lay down, no word did  she say
Until this  fair  maid's heart was broke.

There are a man  on yonder hill, He  got a heart as hard as stone.
He  have  two  hearts instead of one. How  foolish  must  that girl  be
For  to think I love  no other but  she.

For  the world  was not  meant for one  alone, The world  was meant for every  one.

In   damp   windy   Newfoundland  where the  only  warmth is  that   of  the  sun  and only then in sheltered corners  of the fore­ shore  cliffs, the  words  of the chorus with its plaintiff  identification of  lost love and  lost  warmth  have  particular  resonance: "She's like the sunshine on the  lee shore/ I love my love and  love is no more".


99

REVIEW ARTICLES



The editorial policy  in this  new edition clearly  differs  from  that   of   the    first volume, where Karpeles corrected or "amended" the  songs sung  to her in New­ foundland. The  1934   version   of   "She's Like  the  Swallow" gives as the fourth line of  the  third and final  stanza:  "Until this fair  maid's heart did  break." "Did break" is the  usual  form of  the  verb in  the  stan­ dard   collections  from   which  Karpeles derives her  authority,  but "broke" is the past   and  present   form  of  the   verb "to  break" in   most   Newfoundland  dialects. This usage  has its  justification in  the  his­ torical  language of  the  people as in  these lines  from  the   song   "A   Great  Big  Sea Hove   in   Long  Beach":   "Me  boot    is broke,   me    frock    is   tore,    But   Georgie Snooks  I do  adore, To me  right fol  didy fol de". Happily, in this  new edition, Miss Karpeles'  emendations  are   relegated to an   appendix and  the   new  transcript  of "She's Like   the  Swallow" indicates  that her    Newfoundland   respondent,  a   Mr. John  Hunt  of   Dunville,  actually  sang "was broke", and, in  fact,  added the  two variant verses at the  end  of the song. This change will he greatly appreciated by the folk  singer  who  wants to sing  the  song  as it   is  actually  known  in   Newfoundland, and not  some  tidied-up  version from   the drawing rooms   of  the   rgth century  col­ lectors.
One final  point; when  reading through Folk  Songs  from  Newfoundland I found that my  eye  was  caught by  the  attribu­ tion  of  "The Cruel Ship's Carpenter" to










100
 a  Miss  Jemina  Hincock of  King's Cove, Bonavista  Bay.   I  do   not   know   of   any Hincocks in Bonavista Bay but  there have always been  Hancocks in King's Cove, so I found myself   wondering if  this  was  a mechanical error or an  error in  transcrip­ tion.  The odds are  for  the latter: in  local  dialects, the  initial h of a word  is dropped and  a   Miss   or   Mrs.  Hancock  is  almost invariably  a   "Miz   Incock",   sometimes with  no  juncture between the  z and the  i. The  immediate   temptation  to   a   tran­ scriber  unfamiliar with the  vowel  change which   can    accompany  the    dropped  h
would be to substitute the  i for  the  a and
to  render Hancock as  Hincock. This is a small   matter but  it does  illustrate one  of many   difficulties  Miss    Karpeles   must have faced   in  putting together her  New­ foundland  collection.
In the  folk  song,  as in  the  language in
general,  there  is  almost always change between the  verbal forms and their  writ­ ten  codifications; this  process  is  continu­ ous  and perhaps the  primary  sign  of  life and vitality. Miss  Karpeles in her  preface marvels that  there is so  little  change be­  tween   the    English    original    of   "Lord Bateman" and the version sung to  her  in Newfoundland; I  think I would be  pre­ pared  to  marvel  at the  change. For   this  reason, I  am   so  glad   that in   this   new version  of  Folk   Songs   from  Newfound­ land  Miss  Karpeles has  seen  fit  to  aban­ don editorial correction and special musi­ cal  arrangement to  give  us  the  songs  as they  are actually sung in  Newfoundland.






TEXTS AND CONTEXTS

ELI  MANDEL,  ed.,  Contexts of Canadian  Criti­
cism.    University  of   Toronto  Press.   Cloth
$11.75; paper $3.45.

ONE OF  THE MORE  UNUSUAL and  useful anthologies to appear recently  (despite  its exorbitant  cloth   price)   is  Eli  Mandel's Contexts of Canadian Criticism. Though its  basic  premise-that there   does  not exist  a   history  of   Canadian  critical thought-has  often   been  averred,  Pro­ fessor  :Mandel   has   gone   on  to  chart   a way of filling the  gap.  He  brings  together essays involving practical and  theoretical criticism  and  essays on  Canadian  histori­ ography, in order  that  he might  (explicit­ ly, in  his introduction, and  implicitly,  by the   arrangement  of   essays)    probe   the multiple  relationships  between   fact  and fiction,   idea   and   action,  attitude  and utterance, that  such  a   juxtaposition  es­ tablishes.
The   literary  essays  by  Frye,   Wilson,
West,   McDougall,  and   Tallman,   how­ ever,    are    readily    available   elsewhere.  Dorothy Livesay's  work on the documen­ tary  poem  does make  a welcome  appear­ ance,  and   Henry  Kreisel's  excellent   and evocative  essay  "The Prairie: A State  of Mind" is  brought to  the  larger  audience it  deserves.  But  for  literary  students, it is paradoxically  the   historical  and   social essays that   prove  the  most  arresting and the    most    useful.    "Whereas,"   Mandel points  out  in  his  introduction, following
 William  Kilbourn and Carl  Berger, "the critic seeks to find informing or structural principles  for  his  art  in  history,  the  his­ torian   seeks  out   his  structures in  story, Canadian  history   proving    itself   finally just another 'art  of narration'." But there  are  differing  vantage points  from  which to view the "structural  principles" of that
historic story:  J. M. S. Careless' frontier­
ism  and  metropolitanism, Underhill's continentalism, Kilbourn's observation of a "Laurentian" school.  At one  level these encourage -even   determine -a  litera­ ture   that   merely   describes   the  environ­ ment; at  another they  describe  the  ten­ sions  between   man  and   landscape  that  have   fostered    the   often    contradictory efforts   of  many   writers   to  isolate   and  animate the national conscience.
Mandel   does  not  quote  the  New  Zea­ lander   Allen  Curnow's poem  "The  On­ historic Story", with its recurring discovery of  "something  different/ Something  no­ body  counted   on",   but   his  response   to history   takes  its  ambivalent attitude  to ordered   (linear, historic)    time  into   ac­ rount. History  exists not  just as a defined past,  but  also  in  the  eye  of  the  present moment. The  inheritance, record,  and immediate processes for  the  communica­ tion  of culture all  therefore  come  under  scrutiny-from  Mandel himself,  and  in essays by Innis,  McLuhan, Francis Spar­ shott,   and   George   Grant.  One   end   of their  several  arguments is to identify  the media   as  a   man-made  "landscape"  as psychically  engaging  as  the   geographic frontier,  equally  large  before  the  imagi­  nation,  at  once  stimulating and  enervat­ ing,  constricting and  attractive. Another is  to  contemplate the  two-way   relation­ ship between  cultural identity and  politi­ cal  nationality. A  third   is to  re-examine the   nature   of  the  so-called  "primitive"


101

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and  to discover, as Mandel does in an unresolved passage, not only its difference from  the conscious  historical  world of written literary artifice  but also its extra­ ordinary contemporaneity. One  asks  of an  anthology only  that  it  provoke  reflec­ tive  questions. One  scarcely  needs reflec­ tion,  however,  also  to ask  that   Professor Mandel one  day  explore further the  con­ textual  map    he   has   drawn  here   and complete the Canadian Literary Criticism  he has admirably begun.

W. H. NEW


VISION ENVELOPED IN  NIGHT

GWENDOLYN MACEWEN,  King   of  Egypt, King of Dreams. Macmillan. $7.95.

IN I 893  Sir  William  Flinders  Petrie  dis­ covered, by  the  Nile  at  Tel-El-Amarna, more  than  three  hundred and  fifty cunei­  form   letter-tablets,  most  of  which   were appeals for  aid  addressed  to the  youthful Pharaoh Akhenaton by  the Eastern  out­  posts of the  Egyptian empire.  No aid had been  forthcoming, for  Akhenaton, whose brief  reign  from  1380 to I 362 B.C. forms one  of  the  most  remarkable episodes  in Ancient   History,   was   a   pacifist    who devoted   his  life  to  the  propagation of  a new  religion,  Atonism,   based  upon   the  worship of  a  single  God  whose  divinity lay  in  the  vital  and  omnipresent energy of the  sun. He  pitted  his historically  pre­ cocious  monotheism against  the  supersti­ tious  polytheism  embedded in  the  minds of   the  Egyptian  people,  and  against  the power  of the  priests.  Under  the  rule of a Pharaoh  preoccupied with   religious  re­ form  and  reluctant to use military  force,


102
 the once great  Egyptian empire collapsed; the appeals for aid went  unanswered, the dependencies fell  into  other   hands,   and when  Akhenaton died  in I362 B.C. at the age   of   thirty,  not   only   had    Atonism aroused   the  opposition  of  almost   every level of Egyptian society,  but  that  society itself  was  in  chaos  as a  result  of the  loss of foreign  tribute. The massive  empire created by the  military exploits  of  Akhe­ naton's  grandfather  Thutmose   III and father Amenhotep II had shrunk  to little more  than  a nation-state.
Gwendolyn MacEwen's novel  King  of
Egypt, King  of Dreams  is a  chronicle of Akhenaton's reign  which  draws  upon  the known   facts  of  his  life,  particularly  his battle  to establish  Aton  as the only God of Egypt  by erasing  all  trace  of other  Gods from   the   land    (thus  arousing the  im­ placable  hatred of the  priests  of the God Amon). But  in  dealing with  this  remote  period   the  "facts"  available to  the  his­ torical    novelist   are   meagre,   and   Miss MacEwen  has   had   to   make   informed guesses  about   the  many  obscure  aspects of Akhenaton's reign. How did  the young Pharaoh  die?   Why   did   he   banish   his beloved  Queen  Nefertiti? What were  his relations with his mother Tiy?  What kind of man  was Akhenaton?
For   Akhenaton  himself,   rather  than the  empire he lost, is at  the  centre  of the novel,  and  Miss  MacEwen's provision  of a  character for  him  is its  principal  suc­ cess:   his  extraordinary   clairvoyance  in matters which  interest  him,  and  dulness in  affairs  which  bore  him;  his passionate  intuition of  the  glorious  nature of  Aton, and   his  frustrated attempts to convey it intellectually; the strangeness of his horse­ like  dolichocephalic  head   and   narrow­ chested, thick-thighed  body,  which   Miss MacEwen  manages  to  convey   as  alter-

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



nately vibrantly beautiful and  heavily repulsive,    borrowing   beauty    from    his verve and  authority, or sinking  into gross­ ness as  his  hopes  and  confidence  are  as­ sailed.
The book  is in  fact  built  on  contrasts, of which  the most obvious  is that  of Akhenaton's progress,  as he "created a religion  but  lost  an  empire through  neg­ lect'', but  this  is accompanied  by others: the  nourishing energy  of the  sun, and  the bitter    desert    nights;  the   radiance  of Nefertiti  and   the   brooding   destmctive darkness  of Akhenaton's mother Tiy;  the contrast between  the fanatically religious Pharaoh and  his  hesitant sceptical uncle Ay;  the  glory  of  Aton,  omnipresent, but to the  populace insubstantial and  remote.  This  contrasting darkness and  light,  and the   ambiguous  nature   of   Akhenaton's body, is brought out  in  the  starkly  brilli­ ant  opening pages,  where  the Pharaoh as a sickly child  lies in darkness assaulted  by a piercing  shaft  of light:

As  a  child   in   the   palace  of  his  father  he spent  a  great  deal   of  his   time   in   a  dark room,  lying  naked   between thin   sheets,  and there  was  a   narrow  sliver   of  light   from   a niche in  the  wall  which   at  certain times  of the  day  drew a band of fire  across  his  belly, dividing him  in  two....
He  used  to  actually smell  the  sun  in  that
dark   room;  Ra   in   his  absence  was  wholly present, and   that painful sliver  of  light  was a  dividing knife  of  fire across  his  flesh  (cut­ ting  him  up,  he  claimed, for  sacrifice) .

But there is a further contrast which emerges as one reads through the whole novel:  between  the  energy  of the  writing when   the  author's interest is completely engaged, and  those slacker  passages where the action seems "manufactured". My impression is that  what  fascinates Miss MacEwen about Akhenaton's spiritual vision is the  way it saturates his life, and the way it relates  to the polytheism of his
 people   (which   is  far   from   despicable) and  the  tired  scepticism  of Ay; and  this she conveys to  us with  remarkable inten­ sity.  But  there  is a  corresponding  slight­  ness in  the  evocation of  the  civilization in which Akhenaton found  himself-one of the greatest  civilizations the  world  has seen -and   which   he   threw   into   con­ fusion.
Akhenaton acts out his Reformation against a background of minor  characters who  are  not  sufficiently  realized,  or  con­ vincing,  representatives of the civilization  they  are  meant to embody:  the questing  sculptor,    the   languorous   aesthete,  the apologetic  clerk,  the  resentful priest,  the ineffectual Vizier.  And  this  detracts per­ haps  from  our  sense of the  magnitude of Akhenaton's   failure,  as  well   as  of   the courage of  his enterprise.
This might explain why certain scenes lack  the energy  of the  better  parts  of the book; why, for example, one is hardly affected   when   a  sculptor  hangs   himself after  the consummation of an  adulterous affair with Nefertiti, whispering the Queen's name: "Nefer Nefmaton, I have attained the unattainable." It seems, despite  its  flamboyance, marginal  to  the author's main  interests. Likewise,  the scenes where Akhenaton's imperial and spiritual duties  coincide are  explored   in a surprisingly uninteresting fashion.  A messenger from beleaguered Palestine, begging for  troops,  simply  stimulates Ak­ henaton to enquire "Have you ever  seen the  summer  flowers  nodding their  heads  in the warmth of the sun?"
It is when Miss MacEwen centres  upon the  vulnerable intensity  of  Akhenaton's quest  that  King  of .Egypt, King  of Dreams impresses   one   as   a   genuinely  striking achievement. In his hymn  to Aton, which appears to  have  influenced   the  writer  of

BOOKS IN REVlliW



the   Psalms,  and   which   Miss  MacEwen has translated beautifully within the novel, Akhenaton addresses  his God ecstatically:

The wings  of birds lift  prayers  to your spirit And  all things fly and  walk when  you shine! Fish  in  the  rivers  leap  towards your  face, The highways of the  world  are  open; ships
sail  free
And  your  rays illumine the very surface of the  sea.

By  the   end   of   the   novel  we  come   to register   it   as  genuinely   tragic   that   this tenderly  glorious vision of God should be enveloped in night.

CHRISTOPHER XERXES RINGROSE


CAREFUL AND CARELESS

LAURENCE   SOULE,    The  Eye    of   the    Cedar.
Klanak. $2.00.
SUSAN    MUSGRAVE,  Songs   of   the   Sea-Witch.
Sono  Nis. $s.oo.
JOAN  FINNIGAN, It  was  warm  and  sunny  when
we set out. Ryerson. $3.95.

LAURENCE  SOULE is  a  careful   poet   of careful verse.  His  book, The Eye  of the Cedar,  like  his  opening poem,  is  set  in a  moderate  key  and   his  scope  in  this volume  is a modest  one,  1o poems in all. "A  Moderate Man", sets the  tone  for the volume   as  a  whole.  People   pass  in the lees and  gullies of the moderate man's life. He  sees suffering, injustice,  brutality, but  the  doorman lets  him out.  He  either cannot  act   or   feels   paralyzed    by   the futility of  action. The final  poem,  "The Chess  Game",  echoes   the  same   theme; other   minds   move,   but  the  "I" of  the poem  is a  pawn   in  a  chequered nation. In between  we  have  "The Haida",  per­ haps   the   strongest  and   most   arresting


104
 poem  in  this  volume   where,  "A  culture of  totem   ghosts  utters   no  sound". Here is a  lyrical  evocation of a  lost  culture, a poignant  elegy   that    conveys   a   certain tautness of language and  a muted  inten­ sity  of  feeling  that   I find  lacking  in  Mr.  Soule's other   poems.  If I  have  a  com­ plaint  about   Mr.  Soule  it  is  that in  his unpretentiousness he   succumbs  to   the anti-climactic where loneliness is fed with coffee  bars.  However, Mr.   Soule  avoids both   sensationalism  and   sentimentality, and  he  has  his  moments of  celebration where students and  people  stand  singing in  the   streets   of  the   world,   and   where dancing  occasionally emancipates  birth. Laurence  Soule's    verse,   while   free,   is conscientiously structured.  He  employs  a variety of  stanza   patterns; his  language, like  his tone,  is quiet,  on occasion  vivid;

the  orange waves  of sound scramble the  waterfall of seconds.

In his final poem the chess metaphor is effective.  Evidently, Mr.  Soule  is medita­ tive  and   detached   by  temperament and thus,  while  he emerges as thoughtful and  concerned, his  poems  suffer  from  a  lack of  immediacy and   urgency.   They   were no doubt felt,  but  not  so much  upon  the pulse as in the retrospective mind.
If Mr.  Soule  is detached, Susan  Mus­ grave   is  vibrantly  self-engrossed.  She  is not   careful;  she   is  often   careless,   but spontaneously, valiantly,  vividly  so. Miss Musgrave is  a  young  poet  and  this  is a young  woman's book, but there  is no mis­ taking the authentic voice of an emerging poet.   Precision   of  observation, concrete­ ness of language, vitality  of imagery, ima­  ginative power, all these Susan  Musgrave abundantly  displays.

My  ribs  are  torn
like  old  whores' petticoats.

BOOKS IN REVffiW



she  writes  m  "Exposure"; and   m  "Jan.
6th":

The  long  days  mate with the  nude on  the  calendar.
I have  packed time  like a suitcase
and  now  there is nothing left  to do
but  organize my boredom.

Miss Musgrave's is a  narrow canvas,  but while  highly  personal it  is  no  mere  em­ broidery   frame.  She   has   the  ability  to evoke  landscapes,  but   she  is  no  nature pantheist. Her  landscapes become a meta­  phor  for  a  personal  vision  which  mirrors  an    emotional,   moral   and    intellectual state.
Not all Miss Musgrave's poems are equally successful. Parts of the title poem, "Songs  of a Sea-Witch" are  uneven.  She might  have  been  more  selective; the con­ fessional  tone  becomes  occasionally  repe­ titive; "North Sea  Poem"  repeats  much of  what  "Mackenzie River   North"  says. However,  Miss   Musgrave's  is  a   young talent   and   I am  inclined   in  her  case  to agree  with  Blake  that  this  road  of  excess may  yet lead  to the  palace of  wisdom.
It  Was  Warm and  Sunny When We Set  Out  is a g6-page  book of long, medi­ tative   poems   interspersed  with   shorter  lyrics.   Miss   Finnigan  has   managed  to cover    love,   death,   nature,    childhood, despair   and   affirmation. One   is  aware,  while  reading  these  verses, that  here  is a woman  of  considerable sensitivity  of feel­ ing,  with  warmth,  intelligence and   hu­ manity of  character, but  critical  opinion to  the  contrary, I  do  not  find  in  Joan Finnigan a compelling poet.  These  poems strike  me  as  the  sensitive   journalism   of the  commonplace. Undoubtedly, they are meant to illuminate the  pedestrian, show us the  poetry  inherent in  the  ordinary as well  as the  extraordinary  moments. Too often,  however,  they fail  to move beyond
 recorded  observations into any significant statement. Poems  that  begin  to grow  to­ wards  something more  than  mere  obser­ vation   collapse   into   a   kind   of   poetic truism;

a child  with  a fluttering butterfly caught between his hands
making a decision for love.

I may  well  be in  error,  and  it  may  be upon  me  proved, but  while  I find  abun­ dant  evidence  of  all  the  right  emotions,  emotions    of   themselves    do   not   make poetry,   nor   do   detailed   acute  observa­  tions,   nor   even   painful   or   exuberant retrospections.
Miss  Finnigan  employs   phrases   like,
"the cultivated pastures of consciousness", which  are  empty  abstractions that  vitiate the  vital  life  of  poetry.  The danger  in­ herent   in   Miss  Finnigan's  style  is  that  when  it does  not  work  it  is  perilously,  if not actually, sentimental and  cliched:

Oh, my spun silken  children:
I wish you  better luck
than we both  had at the country fair.

A kindly  human sentiment simply and directly  expressed,  this  most  certainly is, but  an  imaginative use  of  language, or significant  statement, it is not.

MARYA FIAMENGO



UNCERTAIN EXPERIENCE

DAVID   KNIGHT,  Farquharson's Physique.  Mus­
son  Book Co.  $8.so.

DAVID KNIGHT's first novel, Farquharson's Physique:  and What It Did to His Mind, concerns   Henry  Farquharson's   passage

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



from  innocence to  experience-from "what one  might   do"  to  "what one  did do."  Farq   (as he's known), a happy, unthinking,  thirty-seven year  old  Cana­ dian  English  professor,  together  with  his wife  Joan   and   his  son  Jamie,  moves  to Ibadan University in  Nigeria  in  Septem­ ber  1965 to  take  up  a one  year  appoint­ ment.  Within a week of  their  arrival, the Farquharsons  establish  as  "shallow   and complete" a  way  of  life  as  they've   had in Canada.
Farq  is sexually  incompatible with  his
wife because  of his size-a fact in which he  takes  some  pride   ("after all  he  was big") . For some reason  (never really made clear)    Farq   had   never   been   as  aware as he is in Africa  of "the plain  success of his own  body."  At tennis,  he admires  the fact  that  his arm  has  a mind  of its own. When  two  men  break  into  his home,  his arm  seizes a  frying  pan  and  clubs  them to death  in a scene as brutal  as Raskolni­ kov's  killing  of the  old  woman.  The  kill­ ing  changes  Farquharson's life.  After  it, for  the  first  time,   he  sees "fractions  of lives,  opening,  like doors  blocked,  just so far."  He  begins  an  affair  with  a former student, Gail Johnston; in his lovemaking with   her    (unlike  that   with   Joan)   his whole  body has a mind  of its own.
His  physical  experiences affect  him  in­ tellectually  and    emotionally  and   ulti­ mately   lead   to   his  death.  He   tells   his Shakespeare students, "The fuss has been about  tragic  flaw. Flaws one can run into everywhere: ... Life has  them  every­ where.   But   where    does   life   have   the logic?"  He  begins  to see  the tragedies  he teaches  in  political  terms, with  Cordelia, for  example, an   Ibo.   He  experiences   a fear   of  death for  Le
develops  a "hunger in  his balls" that  has nothing to do with  sex. At one  point,  he

106
 wills  his  feet  to  stop  but  they  take  him through a  hostile  crowd   to save  the  life of  a  man  he  dislikes.  By the  end  of  the novel,  Farq   has  become  a  "whole self", a  "wretchedly unhappy person" eager  to go  home,  aware of  how  little  he  knows about   Nigeria   (or  anything else) . Before he can  leave,  however,  he dies, trying  to save an Ibo.
Although  politics   plays  an  important part  in his metamorphosis, Farq,  and  we, are  never  certain what is going on. There are  only  fragments. He  rents  a  house  in which  a political opponent of Nigeria's premier lived; the  car  he drives  was used by  the  premier to  call  on  his  mistresses. He   learns   that   there   are  changing  alli­ ances,  that   at  least  four  political  parties  are  vying  for  power,   that   census  figures have   probably   been    rigged.   There  is trouble in Dahomey and  in Uganda; four cabinet ministers are hanged in  the  Con­  go;  Nigeria abolishes political  parties; the killing  of  Ibos  begins.  All Farq  comes  to
know  is that  somehow  he is political.
Knight's greatest strength is his ability to capture the  absurdly comic -a  priest who  saves  the  balls from  roll-on  deodor­ ant  bottles; Farq's decision  not to put  the corpses   of   the   men   he's   killed  on   his chairman's lawn   because,  after   all,  "he  was  a  professor   as  well  as  a  killer"; his masturbating before  he  goes off to  teach Spenser's  Epithalamion;  his  bursting in on  Dr.  Bill  Garnett  (in   bed  with   Gail Johnston)   to   show   him    Joan's   pink urine; Garnett's giving  up sex for  a time because  a sore  toe  won't permit the  male superior  position    and    he   will   use   no other.
The portrait of life at  Ibadan Univer­
isty  reveals  that   only  the  geography changes; the  academic mindscape  every­ where  has  become  the  same.  Nonetheless,

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



there's a  delightful freshness about Knight's  descriptions of  marking  "spon­ taneously identical" essays; of  administra­ tors  who  can  only  talk  at  cross  purposes; of the  student who  asks, "If the  professor please,  will   we  be  questioned  upon  this on   the  examination?" ; of  the  questions that  no  one  would ever  ask  (or  answer) outside an  examination room.
When   Farquharson's Physique:    And
What  It   Did  to  His  Mind  is  good,   it's very  good.   This is true all  the  time  that Knight is showing us  (as  the  novel  says) "two  civilizations  bashed  against  each other"  with  both  looking "pretentious, ridiculous  and    delightful".  During  this time, one  feels  that perhaps he's  reading a  comic counterpart  to  Dave  Godfrey's The New  Ancestors.
Unfortunately,  as  innocence  becomes experience, Knight's control of  Farquhar­ son's  Physique   becomes  less  certain; in­ stead of  being a  controlled  descent into blackness, the   second  half   of   the   novel degenerates into  a   kind   of   tediousness. Even  the  comic touches seem  forced and  out of  place. The  last  line  of  the   novel doesn't work  and, other than superficially, one   realizes, neither  does  the   title; both these   things  merely  reinforce the  feeling that  what  began so  well   haended dis­ appointingly.
MORRIS WOLFE



KEEP THE MIRACLE SECULAR!

MIRIAM  WADDINGTON,   A. M.  Klein.  Toronto: Copp Clark. $2.15.

THE   SMALL PAMPHLETS in  the   critical series  put   out by  McClelland & Stewart
 and  by Forum House have justified them­ selves  repeatedly as  suggestive  introduc­ tions   to   the   younger  poets.  The  larger Studies in Canadian Literature have  been  able    to   assimilate   earlier   criticism,  to develop in  new  directions and   to  synthe­ size  to  an  impressive degree. Still, they  are  not  quite full-length books,  and one  notices   in  them  a   tendency  to  short­ change some  topics in  order to  develop a pet  theory  or  exploit original materials. This  is  the   case   with   Miriam  Wad­ dington's  A.   M.  Klein. Tom  Marshall noted in  his  Klein  anthology  that  Mrs. Waddington  was   attempting  to   revive interest  in   Klein's  social   verse    of   the
'thirties,  and    her    book    illustrates  the point.  She   makes  her    second chapter, "The Radical Poems", the  organizing centre in  order to  set  up  the   thesis  that Gentile critics, carelessly associating a Jew  with  Orthodoxy, ignore the secular tradition.
The trick  is to  show  that the  language
is more  secular than religious, and this  is not  easy. Following a respectable line of critics from   W.  E.  Collin on,  Mrs.  Wad­ dington's  first    chapter   emphasizes   the  richness of  Klein's  multilingual  vocabu­ lary    and    syntax,   the    double-barrelled effect  of  his  puns  and  Joycean coinings. A close  look  at  his  word hoard is some­ thing every poet deserves, and  Mrs. Wad­ dington  is   well   qualified  to   make  the  appraisal and to fashion her  book  around it.  She  reverts to  Klein's language in  her  last  chapter, and by  then is in  a  position both  to  justify  his early  archaisms and  to advance the  view  that  language, poetry, is   the    "miracle"  the   poems and  The Second  Scroll  all  move towards.
That it should be  a  secular miracle is the  thesis  foreshadowed in  the  second chapter. Challenging Sutherland, Dudek,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Pacey, Matthews, Mrs. Waddington not only  approves "Barricade Smith",  "Vel­ vel Kleinburger", "Abraham  Segal"  and the  other  social sequences  of  the Thirties as  valid  for  their   time  but  also  defends  them  as poems. She traces the consistency of Klein's views from  youthful  Utopian­ ism   to   the   social   complexities   of  The  Rocking  Chair   and   acknowledges  that  her own social bias is close to Klein's own communal  and   moral   interest.   The day of social  justice  Klein  dreamed of  never arrived  but  its hope  "shines  through the darkness  of  Poems,  shows  a  new  intel­ lectual    control    in   The   Hitleriad,   and subtly  illuminates The  Rocking Chair."  The later  illness  is not  probed,  but  per­ haps  there  could  be  only  one  end  for  a poet  committed both  to social justice and to realism.
Klein's  place   in  Canadian  literature,
long accepted as definitive,  is maintained here,  drawing support not only from  the obviously Canadian poems but from "Portrait of the Poet" seen as "more than any other  single poem,  Klein's  final state­ ment   of  his  faith" as  well  as  "the  most profound  statement  that   has   yet   been made   about   the  position  of  the  artist  in Canadian  society.   If we   interpret  the figure of the artist  as someone who repre­  sents,   not   just  a  writer,   but  everything that   strives   for   consciousness   and   self­ realization in  the  individual, then  Klein's  poem  becomes the autobiography of all Canadians."
Having made  of "Portrait" the  poet's credo, a faith  in the miracle of creation through language, Mrs.  Waddington con­ cludes  with  her  "Signs  on a White Field"  from    Canadian   Literature   25.   I   am tempted to say that  this is regrettable, not because   it  isn't   a  good  article,   but   be­ cause  her approach is on the whole nega-

108
 tive-"So, on all three  counts, diction, theme, and structure, I found The Second Scroll a strange, unpleasing work"-and therefore her book ends anticlimatically. Having proceeded chronologically, she must  come  to The Second  Scroll  last, but her  argument was largely  concluded with The Rocking Chair.
I say  "largely" because  it  is true  that
the Second  Scroll essay does end  with  the now  broadly  interpreted word  "miracle", and   this   is  altogether  appropriate.  But the   critical   mind   which   treats   Klein's language so  authoritatively  falters   with the   formal   problems  presented  by  The Second   Scroll.  Accepting Klein's  use  of the  word  "novel" as specific,  Mrs. Wad­ dington shows  that   this  is not  defensible  as a novel. Curiously, neither she nor any other    critic,   even   after   acknowledging Klein's debt  to Joyce's  Ulysses,  has  done formal    justice    to   The   Second    Scroll. Northrop Frye once observed  that  Ulysses is  composed   of   four  distinct   forms  and the same observation might  apply  to The Second  Scroll  if one  were  to look closely at  the literary conventions embodied and parodied in it. Then, following  Frye, one would  recall  that  out  of the compound of four  forms  might  emerge  a fifth  encyclo­ pedic form  which  would  be that of sacred writ,  the new "Scroll". 1'vt:rs. Waddington objects  to the  glosses which  of course are inappropriate to a  novel  but  are  insepa­  rable  from  sacred  writings   as  the  Com­  mentaries. She  recognizes   that   the  first chapter is autobiographical, but  does not see this as the  confessional  quarter of the compound  book, nor does she see that  the form  which  dominates is the  anatomy or encyclopedic satire.   Interpolated   verse and  drama are  characteristics of the ana­ tomy, as are  the exuberant and hyperbolic experimentation with language and, final-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ly, as the  term  itself suggests,  the fascina­ tion   with   the   body.  The  Second  Scroll incorporates not  only  the  Roman womb, including  the  umbilical  entrance to  the Sistine  Chapel, but  the  anatomical tour de force  of the Casablanca episode,  from the  "teated  domes  and   phalloi   of mina­  rets"  to  the  intestinal streets  and  cloacal mellah.  This  could  have  been  related  to Spenser   (The House  of  Alma)   and  the archaisms, which Mrs. Waddington handles  so   well,   and    so   might    have brought her  study  full  circle.  But  no, be­ cause  she  rejects  the  term  and  the  con­ cept, "messianic",  Melech's  physical burial  and  resurrection,  ultimate  anoint­ ing  and   ascension   all  are  overlooked   in her  concern   to  keep  the miracle  secular. She warns, wisely, against  the use of terms which  pre-direct  the  critical  gaze;  avoid­ ing  them,  she  leaves  her  study  less com­ plete than  it might have been.

D. G. SPETTIGUE


THE MOBILITY OF ENGLISH

Four   Hemispheres,  an   anthology  of   English short   stories  from   around  the  world, edited by W. H. New,  Copp Clark. $4-95·

THIS  ANTHOLOGY  will  be  a  most  useful textbook  for  those  involved  in presenting courses  in  "Commonwealth Literature" or   "World  Literature  in   English".  It brings together short  stories  by over thirty authors  from   such   diverse   countries  as Australia,  South   Africa,   Canada,   New Zealand, the  West  Indies,  Malaysia,  In­ dia, Kenya,  Nigeria, and  Ceylon. To read the  biographical notes on these authors is to   realize   how   little   nationality   counts
 in the contemporary world,  how human mobility  has increased. David  Martin, for example,  was born  in Budapest, educated in  Germany,  has  lived  in  Holland and India, fought  in  Spain, and  now lives in Melbourne; Ruth  Prawer Jhabvala was born   in   Germany   of   Polish   parents, moved   to  the   United  Kingdom  at  the age  of twelve,  married an  Indian  archi­ tect  and  now  lives in  Delhi;  Doris Less­ ing  was  born  in  Persia,  spent her  child­ hood  in Rhodesia, but  has  lived  in  Eng­ land   since  I 949·  What  do  these  people have  in  common?  The English  language and   their  humanity:  to  fit  any  of  them into   a   national   pigeon-hole  would   be absurd.
Clearly we do have, in this age of rapid transit, a  new  phenomenon, a  literature in  English  but  not  of England, whatever title   may  eventually  be  attached  to  it. But  how  to  approach it?  Does  one  read it  for  its sociological  interest, for  what  it tells  us  of  the   societies   from   which   it springs,  for  its  aesthetic values,  as proof of  the  variety   of  which   a  literary   form such  as the  short  story  is capable, or for ithuman interest, as pr(X)f of the  differ­ ences  but  basic  similarities  between   the responses of people  to the crises of human life?  Dr.   New   has  clearly   plumped  for the  last  approach, for  he  has  arranged his stories  thematically, with  a group  on "Grmving Up",  another  on   "Love", a third  on  "Living" and  a  fourth on  ''Dy­ ing".  I  am  not  particularly fond  of  this arrangement myself,  since  I do  not  like to  read   a  series  of  stories  on  the same general   theme,   but   I confess  I   cannot suggest a more  desirable  alternative.
As might be expected, the stories in the anthology  are  uneven  in  quality, but  the general level is high and the Canadian entries-by  Sinclair Ross, Alice Munro,

109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Morley  Callaghan, Mavis  Gallant,  Mar­ garet   Laurence,  and   Dave   Godfrey­ stand   up  very  well  to  the  international competition.
DESMOND PACEY


HOPE FOR A HAPPY ENDING

CAMERON  LANGFORD,  The  Winter  of the Fisher.
MacMillan,  $6.gs.

ANIMAL STORIES share   something in common with western  novels and science fiction.  Except for a limited  number of staunch devotees,  no one pays them  much attention.  Which  is  unfortunate, for  in the right  hands  an animal  story can move us  to  laughter,  pity,  tears,  and   an   un­ sentimental  recognition  of   our   proper  place   in   the   world.   How   many   man­ centred   novels can  claim  to  do as much?
Charles G.  D. Roberts  once  described
the great  animal story as a "psychological romance constructed on a framework of natural science". The  genre,  evolving through   the    ages   from    simple   fable, "bring 'em  back  alive"  narrative, and  the anthropomorphism of  such  works  as Black  Beauty  or  even  The  Jungle  Book, has reached new heights. The modern animal story  seeks to capture the  person­ alities and  fathom the reasoning processes of its  virtually unknown  subjects. It is a voyage  of  exploration,  painstakingly  re­ searched  and   ecologically   sound.    The  Winter   of the   Fisher  is  a  splendid   ex­ ample.
The fisher  is a northern forest  animal, a member of the weasel family ranging between   the  marten and  the  river  otter in size, with  a magnificent pelt similar  to


I IO
 that  of the  Russian  sable. Chiefly  noctur­ nal,  it  is an  intelligent and  efficient  pre­  dator, able  to  charge   full  tilt  and   head first down  a tree  after  its prey. The book describes  the  life of one such  animal be­ tween  its  birth  in  spring and  mating the  following spring.
It is  quite   a  year.  As  well  as  facing natural hazards such  as fire and  blizzard, the   fisher   carries   on   continual  warfare with  an  ingenious, determined  fur  trap­ per.  What might   have  been  an  unequal contest  becomes  a well-matched  battle of wits when  an  old  Indian hermit commits himself  to  the  fisher's  side.  The  helpless reader  finds  himself  hurtling through the book   in   an   agony   of   suspense,   hoping  against hope  for  a  happy ending.
Beautifully  paced,   the    story    skates
safely over  the  pitfalls  of melodrama with the  help  of "round" characters, a wealth of   detailed   information,   and    a   prose tinted  the  discreetest  of mauves.  The trapper, whom  we long  to hate,  is honest and  intelligent, and  not  without a  sense of  humour. The old  Indian just squeaks past   a  state   of  sainthood  by  becoming tipsy on Christmas Eve  (with  unfortunate consequences) .
In  the contrast between  the two men we
are  presented with  two  choices  for  man in his relationship with  animals. Each  we can   respect,   but   there   is  no   doubting which  the author prefers. Cameron Lang­ ford,   who  died  in   I 970  at  the  untimely  age  of  42,  was  a  spokesman for  a  silent minority which   is  dwindling  apace. We need  more  stories  of  the  quality of  The  Winter of the  Fisher; not  just to increase  our  respect  for  other species, but  to show us how  best to  conduct ourselves  as men.

PAT  BARCLAY










TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE


SIR,

In  your  "Swarming of Poets" (Canadian Literature  50),  as   on   other   occasions,  you take  a positive delight in  badmouthing  work­ shops   for   writers  on   Canadian   campuses. I have   not   been   able   to   decide   what  kind   of threat these  gatherings are  to  you,  but  threats they  must   be  because  you  waste  some  of  your best  prose  vilifying them,  and  the  emotion you feel   against  them   throws   those   remarks  into  curiously bold  relief   when  comparing them   to your  usual  even  reportage. It seems  so  fashion­ able-and  also    too   easy-unlike    the    list you  selected to  review.  It must  make  even  the converted  among  your  subscribers  wonder  at such   cheap shots   from  a man   who  otherwise seems  objective enough.
In  the  face  of  this  it  is  therefore interesting to  note  that  of  the  list  of  poets  you  present as comers,  a   half   dozen   are   people  who   have attended   workshops over   a   period  of   years. Susan  Musgrave with   Robin  Skelton in  Vic­ toria.  Tom  Wayman  is   his   own   man   to   be sure,    but    he    attended  workshops at   UBC  where  he  got  his B.A. and  graduated  from  the program  Jim   Hall   used   to  run   in  California where he  got  his  M.A.  Dirk  Wynand  holds  an M.A.   from   UBC's  Writing  Department.  An­  dreas Schroeder has  been  with  the  department for   five  years   and   will  take   his  M.A.   at   the end  of  this  university  year.  Jan Skapski spent  four   years   with    us   and    also   has   our   M.A.  And   of   course,   there   is  Bowering  who   was Birney's  student.   I  may    have    missed   some others  who   were  on   your   list.   I  don't know who  attended  whose  workshops in  other parts of Canada.
You  quote Skapski; so will  I : "The analysts gather:  hindsight/always upwind of  events." One  event  that  you seem to want to remain resolutely  upwind  of  is  the   advent  of  work-
 shops.  They   are   here   and   it must   be  because they   are   in   demand.  They  are   part   of   the plethora which   you  say  has  overwhelmed your editorial desk.  They are  places  to  try  out,  and coupled  with    what  you   call   "easy   publica­ tion", the  Canada  Council, the  CBC,  dozens of  little  mags  and   myriad  admirable individu­ als,   they   are   helping a   generation  come   to consciousness. Plethora, it  seems  to  me,  is part of  birth. If some  of  its  methods used  to  assist that   birth   strike   some  people as  illegal   use  of high   forceps,   then I  suppose the  only  answer is  that   parturition   now   looks  as  if  it  will  be successful. I  should   perhaps  remind you  that  in  the   black   ghettos  of  the   USA   one  of  the things   they  do  to  find  their   voices  is to  estab­ lish  writer's  workshops. I can't  help  but  think  that  at this  time   in  Canada's history   the  im­ portance of  finding our   own   voices  is  no  less urgent. The   writing workshop is one  tool.  On the   record   it  seems   now   not   to  be  what  the uncreative writers in  Ottawa might call  a "negative asset."
Surely the B.A. and  the M.A. are of little consequence:  dues   paid   by  both   the  depart­ ment   and    its   students  to   a   system   in   flux. Degrees never   are   important  to  the  real   con­  tributors  to   any   field.   They  are   simply   one way of buying time,  of getting rid  of  juvenilia, of  finding   out   more   quickly   (now  when time has   become   a   riptide)   what's   been   done so one  isn't   faced   with   rediscovering  the   whole world    over   again,   and  of   trying  out   many directions under, it  is  hoped, the  steady gaze of  eyes  no  less  benevolent than yours.  Of  the two  or   three   dozen   M.A.s   we've   graduated, not   more   than   six  or   eight  are   doing   some kind   of   teaching. The  rest  are   writing some­  where,  somehow, and   publishing in  little mags  and   small   presses.   You   are   right   in  pointing out  that   at  least   some  of  the  life-style  of  the Thirties is with  us again. Certainly, the  future looks   as   bleak,    even   bleaker. In  times   like these  various  personal and  group searches intensify. The  study    groups  of   the   Thirties (held under the  aegis  of  that old  guru   Marx) have  given  way  to  many kinds of  groups now, and   among  them   are   workshops  at   universi­ ties.   Their  students  are   committed   early    to their  craft; not  to  continue on  is a  cop-out to many  of  them, a  kind   of  death  to  the  best  of them.  If the  threat that you  feel is  that  writers
will  be  recognized  by  transcript, then   I  think you   should    rest   assured  that  standing  erect and  on  one's  own  behalf  is still  as  vital  to  the art   of   writing  as   it   is   to   that    other  great creative urge.
ROBERT HARLOW


I I I

OPINIONS AND NOTES



THE EDITOR REPLIES:

What Mr. Harlo.w  carefully omits  from  his choleric  letter is that  I  have  made  the  columns of Canadian Literature freely available  to  him and  other   partisans  of creative  writing schools; interested readers  will  find in  Canadian Litera­ ture 27  a  long   and   defensive  article   on   the subject in  which I  gave  him  a dozen  pages to put  his  point   of  view.   But  the   fact  that I  am tolerant of the  opinions of those  with  whom I disagree   does   not   mean   that   I   am   ready   to stifle  my  own  opinions, though  this  appears  to be  precisely   what   Mr. Harlow, in  the  manner of all True Believers, :would  have  me  do.
I admit, indeed, to  having  spoken  flippantly
on  a subject regarding which  I  have  deep  and reasoned   opinions, but  one  cannot   always  pre­ serve  a  grave   seriousness towards the  actions and   arguments  of  those   one   disagrees   with, and   I  submit  that   making   fun  of  them is  as legitimate  a   form   of   dialogue  as  any   other, though  I  suggest   that   Mr.  Harlow is  let ing his  rage  run  away  with  him  when  he descnbes my   mildly   satiric   remarks  as "badmouthing" and  "vilifying".  However, since  Mr.  Harlow seems  to   prefer  the   scalpel  to  the   pinprick­ or  the  sword  to  the  banderilla if one  dare  use the    language   of   the    corrida    of   which   his taurian  rushes  remind  one- he  shall  not  be denied. I  propose  in  the  near  future  to  present a close  and  careful examination of the  writing school  considered  as  a  social  curiosity, which

























112
 it   is,  rather  than  as  a  vehicle   of  creativity, which I believe it is not.
However, before   leaving  the    present   skir­ mish  ground, I  would   comme,nt on  two  of  Mr. Harlo:w's   points.   First, I  omitted  to   say   that  some  of the  young  writers I  praised  (I  did  not
-as Mr. Harlow asserts- praise Susan  Mus­ grave) had  attended workshops, for the  simJ!le reason   that   my  article   was  not  about  creatiVe writing  courses, which  I  mentioned  merely in the  aside  to  which Mr. Harlow so  humourlessly objects. Of  course, good  writers  can  overcome and  utilize any  experience, including that  of a creative writing school, but  one  does  not  have to   list   all   the    hurdles   they  have    leapt    to explain or appreciate  their  achievements.
Finally, I   can   only   be   amused  when   Mr.
Harlow  suggests  that   writing   workshops  are some  "kind  of  threat" to  me; surely  it  is  he who   writes   in  the   tone   of  a  threatened man. I  can  see  no  way  whatever in  which creative writing schools  or their  alumni can  possibly threaten  me  as  a  writer; I  do  not  think  they even  threaten  writing,  for  they   cannot   harm the  true  artist.
But   pretensions  and   presumptions  are   fai;
game    for   the   critic,  and   I   suggest    there    IS enough  of  both   in  the   activities and   denizens of    creative   writing   schools    to   provide   .the satirist  with material for a whole  new  Dunc1ad.

GEORGE WOODCOCK
