$1.25  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·35


Winter, 1968



WYNDH]IM LEWIS IN  C]IN]ID]I




Articles
-
BY  J. STANLEY MURPHY, C.S.B., ANNE WYNOHAM I.EWIS, C.  J. FOX, SHEILA WATSON, LORNE PIERCE, W.  K.  ROSE, WYNOHAM LEWIS



Reviews

BY MIRIAM WAODINGTON, FRANCES FRAZER, A. W.  PURDY,

GEORGE  WHALLEY, ROBIN  SKELTON, W.  H. NEW, MAURICE HODGSON, ABRAHAM ROGATNICK, ROBERT  KUBICEK




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









MOMACO  REVISITED








W-DHAM LEWIS had  a double  claim to glory. Among the  seminal  writers  in  English  of the  period  between  the  two Great  Wars,  he appeared   as fourth   to  the  great  trio  of  Pound,  Eliot  and  Joyce;  Eliot in fact described  him  as "the  greatest  prose writer  of my generation." As the founder of Vorticism and  a fine painter  in his own right, he was also one of the leaders of  British  avant  garde  painting  during  the same era.  Yet for  much  of his life Lewis lived  under  an  obstinate  eclipse, struggling in poverty, officially  unrecog­ nized, and  never granted  the critical acclaim which he and his admirers regarded as his due.  The  works of Lewis's friends and  contemporaries  have  been widely published  and  widely read;  Eliot and Joyce are among the standbys of freshman English  reading  in  every  North  American  university, and  anything  Pound  ever wrote seems now  to be standard equipment  for  the  undergraduate poet. But  I have  never  yet seen a single passage of Wyndham  Lewis's writings in a college anthology  or  reading  list, while, until  the  last year  or  two, Lewis's books have been mostly out of print  and  hard  to find. True, there has recently been a minor flurry  of interest  in Lewis, but  it still hardly  balances the generation  of neglect.
In  that  generation  of neglect Canada  plays a special role. Lewis's associations
with  Canada   weave  a curiously  persistent thread  through  his life. He  was born in  Canadian waters,  when  his father's  yacht  was berthed  offshore at  Amherst, Nova  Scotia.  During  the  First  World  War  he  became,  partly  on  the strength of this tenuous link, a Canadian war artist. And then, at the beginning of World War  II,  he found  himself trapped  in Toronto; the English currency  regulations did  not allow him  to obtain  from  London  the money he needed  to pay his pas­ sage  home,  and  his Canadian earnings  never gave him  a sufficient  surplus for


3

EDITORIAL



the fare. Between Canada  and St. Louis, Missouri, he hovered  till the war ended and  he could return  to Notting Hill and his last great fight, against blindness.
Lewis  reached  Canada   after  a disillusioning  period  in  New  York, where  he
found  himself ignored and unable to make even a tiny living from either writing or painting.  By contrast, his first days in Canada were unexpectedly  encouraging. Though   he  found  Toronto  "a  mournful  Scottish  version  of America", he did some CBC  talks, picked up a small contract  from  the Ryerson  Press, and sold a few  drawings.  In  retrospect it seems a  wretched  harvest  for  a  man  of Lewis's quality  and  standing,  but great  artists have often survived by such  meagre pick­ ings, and  Lewis at  the time was able to  believe that  at last he was on  the up­ grade.  "After  the winter of my discontent  in  the long and  chilly shades of that statue  of liberty, I feel as if I had come up out of a coalmine or a dungeon  into the fresh air again."
Within a year he was disillusioned. "Things have come to an awful mess here," he wrote. "If I don't  do something to break out of the net, I shall end my days in a  Toronto   flophouse."  His  income  had  fallen  sharply  after  the  novelty of his presence wore off, and often he and his wife were on the edge of starvation,  living from  hand  to mouth  in a cheap  and  raffish residential  hotel, the original  of the Hotel  Blundell  of Self Condemned. The  University  of Toronto  almost  ignored him, and  most of the writers who lived in Toronto  during  the war years seem to have  been  unaware  of his presence. The  only literary  names  mentioned  in  his letter  from  the  Toronto  period are  those of Lome  Pierce, who befriended  him, and  Douglas Le Pan;  A. Y. Jackson was almost alone among Canadian painters in trying to make Lewis feel welcome in the country of his birth. Finally, in 1943, a  tiny Catholic  college, Assumption at  Kingston,  gave him  a modestly paid  but welcome  teaching  post;  there  Marshall  McLuhan and  Felix  Giovanelli  sought him out and  got him lecturing and painting  assignments at St. Louis.
On  the  whole, Canadian  hospitality had  been shamefully  scanty. Lewis inter­ preted  his situation  as the result of Anglophobia  and of the resentment  of  medi­ ocrities in  high  academic  positions towards  their intellectual  betters. One of the aims of this special issue of Canadian Literature is to give, through contributions  by people who knew Lewis or have studied  his works closely, and  through  hither­ to  unpublished  writings by Lewis himself  while in  Canada, some idea  of what actually  happened  to him here. We have no intention  of  claiming Lewis as more than  peripherally  Canadian; it seems, however, that there is a place in Canadian Literature for  the discussion of an episode in  Canada which is of great  interest in the larger  context of Anglo-Saxon literary  history.

4

EDITORIAL



I  suspect  the  neglect  Lewis experienced  in  Canada,  though  we must  accept the shame,  was a particular aspect of his general fate. He was not one of those writers whose bestselling fame, in  the age before our own, assured  them  a  wel­ come anywhere.  His works were, in fact, unpopular  among those who read popu­ lar  successes, and  impenetrable to those who were disinclined  to make  reading an  instrument   of  thought.  There  was little superficially attractive  in  either  his novels or  his critical  writings,  nothing  in  the general sense poetic,  scanty space for  the softer  feelings  to cling. Lewis was, of course, among  the great  satirical novelists of  his  period.  The   Apes  of God,  The   Revenge   for  Love,  mock  with superb  savagery  the literary  and  political shames and  pretences of the 193o's in England,  and  they have a universal insight into  the  bogus that  carries them be­ yond  their  own  age.  What  helped  to  make  these  books so inaccessible  to  the general  reading  public  was the  elusiveness of any  emotion  except  anger;  Lewis tore away the masks from  the people he satirized  and revealed to us hollow men, without  either  true  thoughts  or true feelings. On  his own face, however, he kept the  mask in  place.  His favourite  mask was that  of the  Enemy;  it was the title of one of the magazines he edited, but it was also a guise which he himself liked to assume-the enemy  of the  fake and  the insincere. It  is true  that  Lewis at­ tacked  the  hollow  men,  the  men  of sham  feeling, because he himself respected true feeling and  grieved to find it so rare. It is also true that the masks he himself wore were there  to protect  his own over-sensitive feelings. But this was not very evident  to the average  reader,  and  Lewis, who lacked the facile talent  to please as well as the inclination  to exploit the emotions, remained a writer for the few, a writer's writer.
Another  complexity which further  removed Lewis from the average reader was the  apparent ambiguity  with  which  he  viewed his creations.  As human  beings they were hollow;  as creations of art, might they not be complete? Lewis in fact always saw  in  art  the  breaking  down  of life, its reconstruction  in  a static  and crystalline form. The  essence of Vorticism was the concept of the still, unmoving centre. This  was why  Lewis attacked  Bergsonian and  other  similar  philosophies of time;  this is why, in Tarr, the hero explains to his mistress that  "deadness ... is the first condition  of art," and  goes on to say:  "The  lines and  masses of the statue  are  its soul.  No  restless, quick,  flame-like ego is imagined  for  the inside of it.... This is another  condition  of art: to have no inside, nothing  you cannot see. Instead,  then, of being something impelled like an independent  machine  by a little  egoistic fire inside,  it  lives  soullessly  and  deadly  by its frontal  lines and masses."

5

EDITORIAL
 


hns BRINGS  us to  Self  Condemned, which  is and  is not  a

Canadian novel-indeed,  is and is not a novel. It is on one level  autobiograph­
ical,  drawing   much  from  Lewis's  experiences  in  Canada, seen  with  a  highly subjective  eye. It paints a portrait  of Canada, but the portrait  is rather  like those coldly hieratic images he painted of his literary contemporaries. Most of the Canadians who read Self Condemned find the portrait  unrecognizable, "a bad likeness".
Undoubtedly   it  is the  multiplicity  and  mutability   of  its  aspects  that  makes Self Condemned  uncongenial  to so many  readers.  Viewed  from  the naturalistic standpoint, it seems a strange mixture of heavy and  rather  amateur  social docu­ mentation,  authorial  comment, and likely catastrophes  heightened  to melodrama. But what  has to be borne in mind, even on this level, is that it is an exile's novel, and  the reality of exiles is always subjective-in this case the obsessive, distorted life of ex-Professor Harding  and his wife Hester in the hotel suite where wartime restrictions  on  travel  and  Canadian  hostility  conspire  to  maroon  them  in  the mythical  city of Momaco.
This is one aspect of Self Condemned which perhaps only exiles, or those who have  been  able  to  place  themselves into  convincing  imaginary  exile, can  com­ pletely understand. When  I first read  Self Condemned  ten  years ago I  had  re­ cently emerged from a situation very similar to that of Lewis in wartime Toronto. Like him, originally a Canadian by fact of birth  and little else, I had returned  to Canada, lived through  three years of poverty, uncongenial  work and slow literary recognition,  and  had  just won  a  measure  of liberation  when  Self  Condemned appeared. My mood was still largely that  of the exile, and  I easily  became  im­ mersed in this subjective world of another exile. Today,  though  my memories still enable  me to understand  this aspect of Lewis's book, I see it more distantly,  and am  aware of the distortions of actuality;  I have, in other  words, ceased to be an exile, and  I know that,  though some of Lewis's insights about  Canada  are start­ lingly correct, others are equally startlingly wide of the mark.
Such a change of attitude  towards the superficial content of Self Condemned perhaps  makes it more easy to see clearly its other  aspects in which, like mirror writing, Lewis's view of art  and life is symbolized. The  bleak tragedy of Harding and  his wife, the  steady  attrition  of their  personalities  in  the  hotel  room  that, through   their  poverty  and  lack  of  friends,  becomes  their  microcosmic  world, seems to have a real and solid power, until one remembers what  a deceptive com­ passion on  the  author's  part  has masked, that  Harding -though  he shares his

6

EDITORIAL



creator's view of history,  his hatred of the state,  his anger  at the time philosophers
-is really  another  Lewisian   hollow  man  and  so a  projection of  the  Vorticist viewpoint that   art  becomes  real  only  in  the  moment  of suspended life.  It  is on this  level  that   the  novel  moves  into  shape.  The  Canadian scene,  its  faits divers observed  and  preserved   as  meticulously  as butterflies  dead  and  pinned  on  cork, takes its place  in  the grand mosaic. The  best known,  most spectacular passage of the  book  is also  its  key. The hotel  bums  to  a shell  in  the  middle  of  the  harsh Canadian winter   and  is afterwards unrecognizable under  the  stupendous  castle of ice that  has been  constructed by the hoses of the firemen.

What  Rene  and  Hester  gazed into  was nothing  to do with  what  had  been the Hotel  Blundell.  It was now an  enormous  cave, full of mighty  icicles as much  as thirty  feet  long,  and  as  thick  as a  tree, suspended  from  the  skeleton  of a  roof. Below, one looked  down  into  an  icy labyrinth;  here and  there  vistas leading  the eye on  to other  caverns:   and  tunnels  ending  in mirrors,  it  seemed.... It was a cave in which  no polar  bear could inhabit,  in which the Great  Auk could not lay its  egg, and  into  which  no  ex-guest  could  enter  with  his ice-pick, to search  for diamonds  which, in his breathless exit, he had had to leave behind. It was a sinis­ ter, upside-down  forest of ice, rooted  in air;  a piece of sub-polar  absurdity  which would stand  there  till the first thaws.

As  the  hotel  becomes   transformed, so  m  their  negative apotheoses   do  both Harding and  Hester. Despairing of  ever  leaving  Canada, Hester  throws  herself under a lorry,  and  Rene  is called  to inspect  her body. He  finds himself

... looking down  on  a  much-soiled  collection of objects. They  were arranged  in the most paradoxical  way. Like a graffito the essentials were picked out. He recog­ nized  the  low-bottomed   silhouette  of  a  female  figure,  the  clothes  shapeless and black with  blood. Slightly  to one side there was a pair of legs in  horrible  detach­ ment, like a pair of legs for a doll upon a factory table, before they have been stuck on  to  the  body. At  the  top,  was the  long forward-straining,  as it  were yearning neck. Topmost  was the  blood-stained  head of Hester, lying on  its side. The  poor hair  was full of mud, which flattened  it upon the skull. Her eye protruded: it was strange it should still have the strength  to go peering on in the darkness.

Repeatedly the image  of Hester as graffito returns to Rene; in other  words, she has undergone the same  dislocation as life must suffer for the work of art  to come into  being;   in  Rene's mind  she  has  become  the  equivalent of  a  work  of  art. As for  Rene   himself,  it  is reserved  for  him,  when  all within  is clearly  dead,  to approximate, in  the  last  clause  of  the  novel  (which  by  now  has  revealed  itself as a determined anti-novel), the  condition  of the ice-hotel:

7

EDITORIAL



... and  the  Faculty  had  no idea  that  it was a glacial  shell of a man  who had  come to  live  among them,  mainly  because  they  were  themselves  unfilled  with  anything more  than  a little  academic stuffing.

But the glacial shell, with no content, accords precisely with the definition of the work of art  in T arr.  Rene and Hester, and  the world they belong to, symbolized by the Hotel,  have all been received into the timeless and static world of art, the still centre of the Vortex, the dominion of the Enemy.











































8



WYNDHAM  LEWIS AT WINDSOR




]. Stanley Murphy) C.S.B.









IN THR   LATE  SUMMER  of  1942,  while I w"'  v>S<tmg  St. Michael's  College, Toronto, I walked over to Sherbourne  Street, rang  the bell at
the  Tudor   Hotel,  and  asked  for  Wyndham  Lewis. I was greeted  with  a quiet reserve, which  receded  at once when Lewis heard  me say that  Cecil J. Eustace, author  and  educational director  for the publishers, J. M. Dent & Sons, had sug­ gested that  I should  invite  him  to participate  in the Christian  Culture series of lectures and  presentations  which I had founded in 1934 and  which were centred mainly on Assumption  College, Windsor.'  C. J. Eustace, who had met Wyndham  Lewis in Dents'  office in connection with the possibility of his somehow receiving royalties due  on  his books from  Britain,  had  told me that  he  would  be a most valuable  lecturer.  He  had  also inadvertently  given me  an  insight  into  Lewis's whimsicality, which was liable to leave the listener puzzled for a moment.  Know­ ing that  Eustace,  a convert  to Catholicism,  was an  enthusiastic  student  and  ad­ mirer of Jacques  Maritain, Lewis asked:  "What kind of a Catholic  are you? Do
you follow the Popes and  the Councils, or do you follow Maritain?"
On  my first encounter  with  Wyndham  Lewis, our conversation  was necessarily brief and serious. He asked if the works of Maritain  and Etienne Gilson were prominent  in our philosophy course, and obviously he felt they should be. He mentioned  some of his Catholic  friends in England, and said:  "I am afraid  that my mother  was a 'bad'  Catholic." He was most interested in the Christian  Cen­ tury Series and in Assumption College. Before I left, he agreed to come to Windsor the following January 2nd  and  give a lecture  on Art. I suggested that  I would


9

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT  WINDSOR



try  to  get  him   a  lecture at  Marygrove College, Detroit,  on  the  occasion of  his Christian Century series lecture, and  promised to write him  as soon  as I returned to Windsor.
I did  so,  and  it  was  on  the  12th  September, I942, that he  answered me  from
the  Tudor Hotel:


Dear  Father Murphy,

Except  that  I have  been  very much  driven  for  the  last  week or so, I am  afraid I have  no valid  excuse for  having  been so long in answering and  I apologize  very much. But  I can say that  I have  had  to hunt high  and  low for the enclosed  photo­ graph, which  is the  best  I  can  find.  It  is a  Press photograph taken  in  '39· Will it be all right?
Please  take  care  of it. If you give it  to a  photographer, insist that  he look after it  and  return it  to you!  As soon  as you need  it  no  longer,  please  register  it  back to  me. -Apologies, again,  for  what  must  seem  extra  fussiness.  But  I require the whole  of  this  photograph for  subsequent use in a book.
As to the  subject  of the  lecture,  I was  reading in  La  Nouvelle Releve  the  other
day  (a  Fr.  Canadian review)   a defense on the  part  of the  editor  for his respectful treatment of Andre  Gide.  It occurred to  me  that  a very  interesting address  could be written  upon  the relation  of art to religion.  I think  that the  vicar of the church in which  Bach's  music was first played  would  be apt  to look a little  askance  at one of his parishioners who expressed  himself in terms  bordering on veneration for this terrific  music-which is a mate  of the frescos on the  ceiling  of the Sistine  Chapel at  Rome,  by Michael  Angelo. The "Air for G. Strings" is like the hurrying Jehovah and  the  unawakened Adam,  reaching out  his hand  for that  touch  which  will bring him  to  life.  Now  I  think  that  there  is a  great  deal  to  be said  upon  this  subject: and  if that  strikes  you as a line of discourse  which  will interest your audience, shall I begin  pondering that? The  Relation of  Art  to  Religion it  could  be  called,  or Religion and the  Artist.
Finally,  I must  now  write  to  St.  Mary's Grove,  and  for  them  I should  choose
some  other  subject.  It is agreed,  is it  not,  that  you give me  a fee of one  hundred dollars?   I  don't know  quite  what  to say about  that  to St.  Mary's Grove,  but  sup­ pose I had  better  just ask what  they would give me.
With  my  kindest  regards,  and  greatly  looking  forward to seeing  you again.

Yours  sincerely, Wyndham  Lewis.

Though he  managed to  misplace the  record of  the  January 1943  date for  his lecture, he  wrote in sufficient time  to  re-confirm it, and   I recall meeting him  at the   N.Y.C. railroad station in Windsor. Soon   he  was  made comfortable in  the

10

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT  WINDSOR



best suite at  Assumption College,  and  dined  in the old refectory  with  the faculty; the  students sat  at  tables  beyond  the  arches  which  symbolically  separated them, but  not  their  voices, which   at  times  became  somewhat tumultuous. Just  before Lewis  was driven  to the  Vanity Theatre in Windsor's main  street  for  his lecture, he  complained of  a cinder  that  had  lodged  in his eye and  was exceedingly  con­ cerned. However, it  took  only  a  few  minutes  for  Sister  St.  Desmond,  the  in­ firmarian, to remove  the  impediment, to Lewis's great  joy.
His  lecture, "Religion  and   the  Artist", was  given   to  the   usual  Canadian­
American audience which   attended the  Christian Culture series, and  dealt  to a great  extent  with  Rouault as the  Painter of Original Sin.  He  read  from  a typed and   hand-corrected  manuscript,  once  pausing   to  remark:  "I  cannot seem  to make  out  what  Ihave  written here:   seems like islands  of light  and  dark." He told  me  that  he  had  ceased  to  try  extemporizing in lectures  some  years  before; had found  that  it made  him  too nervous. He mentioned  one occasion  when several speakers  were  present  and  that  "amiable buffoon,  G.B.S." so successfully played to the  audience that,  without a written  text, it threw  one off.




houGH AssuMPTION CoLLEGE then  had  less than  7%  of the student-population  that   flourishes  on  the  university  campus today,   it  was  the
decision  of  the  President, Very  Reverend V.  J. Guinan, c.S.B.,  and  of us who
were  his advisers  to invite  Wyndham Lewis as a Special  Author-Artist to lecture for  a  year;  the  Christian Culture series offered  to subsidize  a  portion of the  ex­ penses.  Lewis's  enthusiasm in  accepting the  project  is evident  in  the  two  letters to me which  appear in  W. K. Rose's  collection, The  Letters of Wyndham Lewis. He  wrote  of "being enormously obliged ... for bringing  to so happy  and expedi­  tious   conclusion   this  plan  ... cannot   imagine   for  myself  more  congenial   sur­ roundings ... really  very  great  thanks,  and  I am  looking  forward in  every  way to  coming  among you  again, to  teach  alongside  of you  and  your  colleagues."• Shortly   afterwards an  unforeseen  accident   increased  the  blight  which   hung over  this  period  of  Lewis's  life  in  Toronto. On  the  4th  March, 1943,  he wrote
tome:

My dear Father  Murphy,
Thank   you for  your  letter-as  soon as the  influenza  bugs have  been driven off and  my  brain  is a little  clearer, I will write again. This  is just a note to  say that  2  weeks ago last  Monday  the Tudor  Hotel  burnt  down. As it was 30  below


I I

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT WINDSOR



zero at  the  time, my wife got a very bad  chill. We went to a neighbouring  hotel. I nursed  her  and  got  the infection  myself. We  are  back in  the  rear  part  of the Tudor  now  (it is quasi-impossible to find an apart. in Toronto  at  present). Both feel momentarily  pretty rotten. By next week the weather  will have grown more clement,  probably,  and  I shall  be myself again.  As I said,  this is  just a  note to acknowledge  your letter.  More shortly.
Yours sincerely, Wyndham  Lewis.
In  May  1943,  Wyndham Lewis made  a special  one-day  trip  to Windsor at my suggestion  "to  play  a part  in home-finding", an  almost  insuperable task in  those war  years.  We  were  not entirely  successful.  However, when  the  Lewises came  in mid-June, before  Summer School,  they stayed  a short  time  in  a local  hotel,  and then  sub-let  for  the summer-from a soldier  Lewis  met on  the street-a  pleas­ ant  place in the Royal Apartments, on Ellis Street, near  Gullette. To John Burgess at  this  time  he  described   Windsor   as  "a   very   agreeable little  city,  and  quite charmingly  arranged ... Gullette  is  a  handsome street,   with   the  Detroit  sky­ scrapers at the end of it."s
In  late  June Summer School  began  and  lasted  for  six weeks. Out  of interest and  respect,  I attended all of Wyndham Lewis's classes. The content of his course
-Philosophy  of  Literature-involved  the  philosophic principles   embodied in various  works  of  fiction,  from  Tolstoy's  War  and  Peace to  novels  by Steinbeck and  Hemingway. Most  of  the  class were  teachers, many  of  them  nuns,  though George  Haddad, the  Canadian concert  pianist,  and  an  Irish  Oblate Father were among others  who  attended this five-hours-a-week course. I can still hear  Lewis's resonant  voice  so  often  echoing  Hemingway's title,  For Whom the  Bell Tolls, though  always-I am sure unconsciously-he said "For Whom  the Bells Toll."
A  phrase   he  sometimes   used,  and  illustrated  effectively  from   the  works  being discussed was:  "A  Conscience for Reality." After his first class or so, as we walked across  the  campus, he confided  that  teaching nuns  was a new experience to him. He  found   them  agreeable  and  likeable,  but  wondered how  much  background in contemporary fiction many  of them  would  have.  In  a letter  to John Burgess of the qth July,  he  comments at  some  length  on  his  course,  "My priestly  colleagues are   pleasant  fellows,"  he  adds.  "How good  the   religious disciplines are for people." 4   On   the  17th  August,  again  to  John Burgess,  he  writes:   "The  priests are  very  pleasant  and  do not mind  my not  being  a catholic. They  accept  me as a well-wisher:  they  respect  the  principles  of  others ... they  have  treated me  with great  kindness,  as also the  nuns."  5

12

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT  WINDSOR



I  have  observed  that  sometimes  Lewis would  toss out  a  whimsical  remark, perhaps intended  to puzzle the listener on matters that he had not entirely setded in his own mind. On  campus  there was a well-known author,  Father  H. A. Rein­ hold, who had early been expelled from Germany by the Nazis and later hounded  by them  from  Switzerland. His  course in  Liturgy  drew  many  comments,  fore­ shadowing  much   that  has  happened   since Vatican   II.  Listening  to  two  nuns discussing the course and emphasizing certain changes advocated  by Father  Rein­  hold,  Lewis remarked: "What is Father  Reinhold  trying  to do -throw us all back into the Greek  Church?"
Lewis brought  not only a vast background  of experience but also fresh studies into  his classes. He  was a presence whom no intelligent person could ignore.  He had  great  respect for the moral  virtues, but an equal  respect for the intellectual virtues. As delicately  as a surgeon, he would separate  the spurious in treating  a book like For Whom the  Bell Tolls.  He  knew Spain,  and  he tried  to keep  his own "conscience for reality" pure.
During  July  1943,  Marshall  McLuhan  and  Felix Giovanelli came to Windsor from St. Louis University  to see Wyndham  Lewis. Their  meeting was a memor­ able evening. The  young professors were keenly intelligent admirers of  their host's genius. Lewis was very happy.  He discussed his courses, the projected  Heywood Broun  Memorial   Lectures  that  fall,  and  a  plethora  of  other  items.  Marshall  McLuhan  had  long  been  acquainted   with  Lewis's painting   and  writing,  and later,  in   1944,  he  contributed   a  penetratingly   brilliant  essay,  simply  entitled "Lewis",  to the issue of St.  Louis University Studies entitled  "Key Thinkers  and Modem  Thought." 6  I  recall one incident  of that  evening.  Lewis, in the middle of a long explanation, left the room for a moment  to Giovanelli,  McLuhan and myself. When  he  returned, he hesitated  to  recapture  the  train  of thought.  We were all interested.  Dr.  Giovanelli  beckoned, respectfully:  "Please  continue  your paragraph!"
Later  in 1943  Lewis was fortunate  enough to discover a first-floor apartment, with a large western exposure  window, along the Detroit  River;  it was next to a park,  had  a  good  view of the Ambassador  Bridge and  Detroit,  and  was about fifteen minutes'  walk from  Assumption.
Early that  fall Bishop  (then  Monsignor)  Fulton J. Sheen opened the Christian Culture  series in Detroit.  At his room at the Sheraton  Cadillac,  Lewis did a black pencil sketch of him.  In  the long conversation  that  followed, Monsignor  Sheen told  Lewis that  he  would  be  proud  if he could  see how  well-marked  his own copy  of Time and  Western   Man  was, that  in  his classes he  frequently  quoted

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT  WINDSOR



from  the  book,  and  that  Lewis was the first writer  he had  encountered who  pin­ pointed   the  extravagances of  the  Time-Philosophy. They   got  on  well.  Later, Lewis said  to me:  "He  is bright  and  able."
The  Heywood  Broun  Memorial lectures,  twelve  in  number, were another out­
growth  of the Christian Culture series, and  in 1943 they were delivered  by Wynd­ ham   Lewis  under   the  general   title:   "Concept of  Liberty   from   the  Founding Fathers of the  U.S.A.  until  Now."  They  provided  the basis for his book, America and  Cosmic  Man.
One   evening   Waldemar Gurian, the  distinguished European  author  of  Bol­
shevism, Theory and  Practice  (1931), then  a  Professor  of Political  Science  and founder of  the  Review   of Politics  at  the  University of  Notre  Dame, Indiana, stopped   overnight in  Windsor   on  his  way  to  London, Ontario. Miss  Pauline Bondy,  then  at  Windsor  and  now  head  of the  Department of French at  Vanier C.l., held  a  small  gathering in  his  honour   at  her  home   near  the  college.  Dr. Gurian, the  Hon.   Paul   Martin  and   I were  there; Lewis  came  later.   Gurian, short,   all  intellect   and   unconsciously   abrupt, shook  hands with  Lewis,  and - without premeditated malice  I am  sure-reminisced:  "I first  heard  of  Wynd­ ham  Lewis  as I talked  with  Carl  Schmidt, author of The Necessity  of Politics, in
a  Berlin  cafe  in the  late  twenties.  Schmidt said:  'Democracy is dying,  according to Wyndham Lewis'." Lewis remained  carefully  silent  during the evening,  taking no chances  of further misinterpretation.
That Lewis  feared   misinterpretation  (what  intelligent person  does  not  have some  concern  for  the  effects  of war  psychosis!)   was  evident. He  was  disturbed when  his  corner   meat-market owner  confided   to  him  that   Father Murphy had over  the  years  brought some  rather  suspect  people  to  Windsor,  such  as  Prince Hubertus Zu Loewenstein, the anti-Nazi German exile who had  been pro-Loyalist during the Spanish Civil War.  There was also loose gossip about  Lewis himself in his apartment house  by people  who  had  never  read  a line  of his writings,  never seen  his or  any  other  paintings, and  had  never  before  encountered a great  artist or  author.
Later   that   fall  Jacques  Maritain, second   recipient of  the  Annual  Christian Culture Award  Gold  Medal  of Assumption College,  revisited  us to give a special lecture  entitled  "Moral Philosophy". Lewis  was intrigued by it, and  wished  that many  others  could  have  heard  it. During the  afternoon before  the lecture  he did a  pencil  sketch  of  Maritain and  was  photographed with  him;   the  photograph appears in  Lewis's  Rude   Assignment   ( 1950).
About   the  same  time,  Lewis  asked  me  to  pose  for  a  colour  pastel.  I greatly


14

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT  WINDSOR



enjoyed  the  walks  along  the  river  to his apartment and  the  conversation during the  various  sittings.  He  often   mentioned the  difficulty  of  painting people  who knew  nothing of art  and  expected a photograph. To see him  work was a joy, and I paid  him  the  tribute of total  confidence,  never asking to see the result while the sessions were in  progress.  In 1956  this pastel was shown  in the "Wyndham  Lewis and  Vorticism" exhibition at  the Tate Gallery, and it was also reproduced at that time  in  the  Illustrated   London News.
Very early in 1944  I recall  meeting  Lewis in the street  near  the  Prince  Edward Hotel  and  learning that  their  Christmas had  been anything but  placid; their  dog had  been  dangerously ill. A few days later,  Lewis told me that  the dog had  died. The  significance of the  loss deepened many  years later  when  I read  this passage from  a letter  to Felix Giovanelli:

... The  death  of our  hirsute  gremlin had left an ugly gap ... People never forgive you for  possessing more  of anything  than  themselves-more reputation  is a sore offence;  and  if you put  yourself in  their  power they can make  you tolerably  un­ comfortable.  By coming to Canada-in  the middle of a world-war-I  did  that. And my wife has had  to pay as well as myself. So this small creature,  which stood for all that  was benevolent  in the universe, sweetened the bitter medicine for her.?

During the  fall  of  1943  and   the  following  winter  Lewis  repeated his course in the  Philosophy of Literature to students  in the regular  seminars, and  originally intended to continue until  the  end  of the  spring.  However, thanks  to  McLuhan and  Giovanelli, opportunities for  lecturing and  painting developed   at  St.  Louis, and  when  he left  us in  February 1944,  I took over his small  class and  continued until  the  end  of  the  term.




OM MY  MANY  CONVERSATIONS with  Lewis,  I recall,  among other  opinions,  the  following:
He  regretted  that  his friend  Ezra  Pound, such a splendid  poet and  critic, should have  been  so wild  on  political  and  racial  matters.  He  predicted that  eventually Ezra  would  receive  "the fool's  pardon" for  his having  broadcast for  the  "Boss", Mussolini.  Lewis said  that  he could  never  be a Communist. He  felt that,  without ever  taking  a  vow of  poverty,  he had  chosen  to remain  poor  rather than,  out  of attachment to wealth, producing lies to please. Lewis said he never forgot the impression that  one  Hindu made on  him  when  he came  to congratulate him for writing  Pale  Face. The  Hindu said: "As far  as I know,  no one  in  my family  or

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT WINDSOR



ancestry  has ever destroyed  any  kind of life."  Lewis objected to the naive classifi­ cation  of Morley  Callaghan as the "Canadian Hemingway", and  praised Callag­ han  for  the  fresh  originality  of his collection  of stories,  Now  That   April's Here. He  liked  Bruce  Hutchison's The  Unknown Country, and  quoted  from  it  in de­ fending the  Canadian  painter, A. Y. Jackson. He  was  amused  when  occasional letters  came  to him, intended for D. B. Wyndham Lewis, biographer and  origina­ tor  of  a  famous   newspaper   column  under   the  pseudonym "Beachcomber."  He felt  that  D.  B. was finally  persuaded to insert  his full  name  by his publisher in order   to  embarrass Wyndham  Lewis. Sometimes a fan  of D.  B. would  write  to Wyndham Lewis, after  reading  one of  the latter's books, and  say in effect: "You are  not  your  own  dear  self."
I recall  spending one evening  with  the  Lewises,  all in  good spirits,  when  Mrs. Lewis mentioned that  one of her relatives  had  become  a Catholic and  had  moved from  England, and  that  she herself had  almost  become  a Catholic. "You  should not  have  said  it that  way,"  Lewis remarked, with  a benevolent twinkle,  "It's like saying  that  you almost  caught  the  train."
On  another occasion,  at one of his Heywood Broun  lectures,  there  was a great deal  of coughing, certainly  involuntary. Partly for  dramatic relief, but  also  half­ seriously,  Lewis  said: "I am  afraid   the  room  will soon  fill with  germs,  and  we shall  all  go  down." My  recollection  is  that   after   that   the  coughing  got  under  control.
Not long after  his departure from  Windsor, on the 2nd  May,  1944, Lewis wrote me from  the Coronada Hotel  in St. Louis:

Dear Father  Murphy,

Constantly  since my arrival  here I have  been on the  point of writing  you, but realising  I had  nothing  definite  to  tell  you, I refrained.  Now  I  am  able  to  an­ nounce  this  at  least:  I  have secured  an  oil-portrait, as well as several  well-paid drawings.  After  a brief struggle on arrival  I succumbed  to MeL.  and  went to the Plaza. The  expense was terrific. However,  I may have  to thank  its  dismal splen­ dours  for  some of my success. What  happens  next  I  do  not  know.  I  am  bound to  you  and  have  already  overstayed  my  'leave'.  On  the  other hand,  we shall  I hope  be  able  to shuffie things  round  in  such  a way that  I  can  prolong  my stay here  and  do  this  work  (and  almost  certainly  other  work  will materialize  in  the near  future)  :  then  later, somewhat  more  in funds  than when  I departed,  return to Windsor  and  catch up on my indebtedness for  February.  Some time next week it  will be necessary to return  to Windsor  for  24  hours  and  we can  straighten  it out  then. It will be much easier to explain  things when I turn  up. I am distressed about  my little  class (I  got in a  bit of one  of  my  lectures  at  Assumption  in  my

16

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT WINDSOR



lecture  at  Chicago, and  it  was very  effective. The  Chicago  lectures developed   just before  I  left.)   But  it can  be explained to the class that  I am  practicing  instead  of preaching, for  a while,  but  will return to take  up the story later.  These  things  here have  to  be snatched   at or  they  will evaporate. The iron  has to be smitten while  it is hot  (which is the  problem; but  we can solve it between  us.)
Give  my  love  to  all my cassocked  colleagues: I must  pick  up  that  pamphlet on
the  C.C.F. when  I am  there.  I  know  that  Father LeBel, Father Lee,  and  Father Garvey,  will   be  glad  to  hear  of my  success down  here ... With the  most  cordial greetings,
Yours,
Wyndham Lewis.

P.S. Re.  Hutchins. Of course  I should  be delighted to go to so important a centre as  Chicago. As you  realise,  I cannot  myself write  to Hutchins. But  if you  under­ took to do so, you would  certainly have my permission.  The  University of  Chicago might   consider   having me  there   on  these  terms.  To  have  a  practicing  artist­ someone  working, all  the  time,  on  the  spot-is  more  useful  (and  more in  con­ sonance   with  contemporary ideas  of education)  than  a mere  routine instruction. I could  put  aside  2  hours  every  day  in my studio  to  receive  visits of students (or some  such  period). Once  a week  I would  give a formal  lecture  on  the  principles of  art   and   visual   understanding. This   lecture   would  have  to  be  prepared  and  would  take  a  day  perhaps. Nevertheless   I  should  have  a  good  deal  of  time  for private work.  (You  are  naturally at liberty to quote this passage if you like.)    W.L.

I quoted the  passage but  was  unable to  get  Lewis  into  Chicago or  any  other universities. The idea  was  twenty years in  advance for  most  places.
It was  necessary for   Lewis   to  return to  Canada once   a  month to  renew his Visitor's Visa  to  the  U.S.A. Around mid-March he returned for  a  day, bringing with  him  an  important letter from Marshall McLuhan, and  some  of  McLuhan's writings, which  he  highly endorsed; this  was  to  lead  to  McLuhan's joining the faculty of  Assumption  College for  over  two  years.  "Lewis," McLuhan used   to say,  "is  a  one-man Gallup Poll." On   the  same occasion Lewis  encountered the Irish poet, Padraic Colum, in  the  corridor near my  office.  They had   met  before in  Europe, and they  chatted briefly. A few  days  later, on  the  2grd   March, Lewis wrote to me from St.  Louis.

My dear  Father Murphy,
Many  tasks have  intervened since I got  back here,  to delay  me writing to thank you  for   your  extremely attractive  proposal   the  other   day,  upon   such  generous terms: namely  to  translate the  lecturing  assignment temporarily suspended, into  a painting  assignment ... I went  away with  a renewed  realization of how  benevolent the  will was that  had  opened these  possibilities for  me of fruitful work  and  kindly

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT  WINDSOR



contacts.  For  I do wish to say how greatly  I have  appreciated, too, the friendly co-operation  of our  colleagues.... MeL.  is delighted  to  have  received your  invi­ tation.... Remember  me to all and sundry:  I am sorry my visit was so hurried  and that  I was unable to have a talk with Fathers  Garvey and Le Bel, as well as Father  Lee.  What  a  nice chap  Padraic  Colurn  is-he  gave me a sad  account  of poor Joyce's  last  days though  Heaven  be thanked  his wife  is safe &  provided  for  in Switzerland.
Yours most cordially,

Wyndham  Lewis.

Returning from  St. Louis on  July  I8,  1944,  Lewis  gave  a three-weeks' course on  "The A.B.C.  of  the  Visual  Arts".   I  attended most  of  these  classes;  so  did Marshall McLuhan. On one occasion when a thorny misunderstanding between Lewis and  a lay-professor developed, McLuhan reached over to me and whispered: "They're both  on  the  same  side."  Weeks  later,  the  lay-professor said  to  me:  "I am  sorry  that   I  id
After  this  Summer School  course,  Lewis  worked   for  five  weeks  on  a  series  of portraits of former  Presidents  of Assumption College.  He  had  written earlier  from St.  Louis: "You  will not  have  to give me the  bum's rush  in the  autumn. I shall be off  somewhere by then.  We will regard  this  as a breathing space,  and  mean­ while  you  will have  got  a little gallery  of  pictures." From  Windsor,  on  the  28th August,   1944,  Lewis  wrote  to  me  in  Corunna on  the  St.  Clair  River,  where  I was  vacationing:

Thank  you for your letter. We were sorry not to see you on the 25th, but at the end  of the  week we shall meet up, by which  time all the  pictures  but one will be completed.
Meanwhile  we have  another  thing  to annoy  us very much:   having lost all our mail during  our absence, we have now lost all our goods to a Laundry (the "Puri­ tan"-name  of evil association) .... Well,  until  Saturday. Do  not  bathe  in  this weather. It seems the fall has hit us.

In  the  early  fall  Lewis  gave  up  his  Windsor apartment  and  the  college  car drove  him  and  Mrs. Lewis  to the  train  in  Detroit, bound  for St. Louis. Later  he returned to Windsor  and  lived in a downtown hotel for several  months, eventually going  briefly  to  Ottawa, then  to  Montreal, to  catch   the  first  passenger  ship  to leave  Canada for  England   after  VJ  day.  Before  leaving  Windsor, he did  a large painting of  Nell  Martin, the wife of the  Hon. Paul  Martin.
He  always  said  that  one  day  he would  write  about Canada, especially  about the Toronto of his experience, but  that  he would  be kind  to those at Assumption.

WYNDHAM LEWIS AT WINDSOR



Chapters  XXXII and  XXXIII of his novel Self Condemned drew to an extent on the Assumption College of the war years, with similarities and even greater dissimilarities that  need not be itemized here. A letter he wrote to Roy Campbell, on whom he built a character  in another  novel, gives an insight into his manipu- lation of material in a novel:  "... the necessity of altering and dislocating ... the forcible  fusion  with  the  drama  ... and  do  not  consider  what  my  behaviourist puppet  hints at is a reflect on anything that  could cross my mind  [regarding Campbell]."8
The  Wyndham  Lewis I knew:  an appreciative  and loyal friend:  "a  friend of man",  as he once called Roy Campbell. I relished his humour,  admired  his bril­ liance,  respected  his integrity,  and  will always remember  his gentleness.  Seven years ago, after  the eminent  British philosopher, Father  M. D. D'Arcy, S.J., lec­
tured  here, he wrote to  thank  us and to say:  "I was happy  to have visited a spot
that  was kind to my dear  friends, Wyndham  Lewis and  Roy Campbell."


FOOTNOTES

' Affiliated  then  to  the  University of  Western  Ontario, I20  miles  away  in  London, Ontario, Assumption College  was later  to receive its own university  charter, eventu­ ally  becoming  known  as Assumption University  of Windsor,  and  now  as  Assump­ tion  University, merged  in  the  new  University  of Windsor.
2   The   Letters  of Wyndham Lewis, ed.  W.  K.  Rose, London, I963,  pp.  348-50  and
352-53·
3 Ibid., pp. 357-5 s.
4   Ibid., p. 357·
s  Ibid., p. 364.
6  St. Louis University Studies, Vol. II, I948.
7   The  Letters of Wyndham Lewis, pp. 375-76.
8  Ibid., p. 205.



ON CANADA




Wyndham Lewis









tERE AREN'T  ENOUGH PEOPLE  ffi it, that's  what's  the  matte< with  Canada." How  often  have  I  heard  that  complaint  from  Canadians of all classes-Canada's long thin body wants swelling out, until it is something  more than  a mere elongated  northern  fringe to the United  States. Such is the general feeling.
Well, the moment  this war is ended  a tide of immigration  will flow westward from  Europe.  Canada  if it wants  to can  be filled up full to its scuppers-if  it thinks it can  handle  that  many  people. Mere filling up is not enough,  however. The  requisite number of peacetime passengers to make its giant trans-continental railroad  system a success, or the volume of hardy  labour  to open up its bush and operate  its  remotest  mines, is not  the  only  thing  required  by a  great  state.  It needs something  else, beyond mere human  volume. It will want  more Bantings, Lauriers,  Tom  Thompsons,  and  Longfellows.
Canada has a wonderful chance  just now to do a bit of filling up of the selec­ tive  and  qualitative  kind;  the  kind  of replenishment   a  cultural  eugenist  would aim at, were he commissioned, not to bulk out, but to jack-up, the national stock. Now  is the fluid time, when a lot of rare and high-grade  material is going begging. All manner  of firstclass brains, displaced by the human  earthquake, are roaming around, as it  were disembodied. How  like ghosts they look, some of  them,  how like ghosts they  feel, at times. But what is their misfortune is other people's oppor­ tunity.  They  could  be given a body, tools might  be placed in  their  hands. They would be ghosts, it would be discovered, that in the long run immeasurably  repaid those who offered them hospitality.
Hospitality!  There  is a great human  word, that once exercised a magical com­
pulsion over men. The  stranger  within  the gates was to be fairly and  pleasandy


20

ON  CANADA



treated,  such  treatment increasing  the credit of the host as well as being  some­
thing due to the notion of the brotherhood of man.
That  the Canadian is less hospitably inclined than others no one would believe, for-experience  of such  hospitality  apart-why  should  he  be? It  is inhuman to be inhospitable,  and there is nothing inhuman  about John  Canuck. Americans, as a whole, are even proverbially hospitable. But Canada is a newer country than the  States.  And  the  trouble  about  a  "new"  country  is  that  everybody in it is almost  a stranger  himself-at two or  three generations  removed,  anyhow.  He is so near to the time when his father, or grandfather, first set foot where he is at present  established,  that  the  notion of a stranger  doesn't  mean  as much  to him as it does elsewhere. He  is apt  to complain  on the one hand  that  there  are  not enough  people in the country,  and  yet to look upon a new face when it turns up as an intruder. It is a queer, though  understandable, inconsistency.
In  this connection  it is interesting  to note -and  it confirms the view I have just expressed as to the cause of this phenomenon -that a Canadian who came to Canada as a boy is apt  to be much  more xenophobic  than  a five-generation Canadian; the latter  being as a rule very tolerant  and liberal in his treatment of the newcomer. Many  people I personally have met here who have proved trouble­ some have been people who were not Canadian-born. There  is even a marked dif­ ference between those who have been here since childhood and those who are more recent arrivals.  Whereas  those who have been here only five or six years-they are  really problems  for  the  war-transients.  Sometimes they are little  monsters of exclusiveness. I  am  really afraid  of them, and give them a wide berth!
Because of  the  war  great  numbers  of people have  been displaced,  many  up­
rooted.  They  have  either  been  violently displaced, like the Jewish scientists and business executives expelled in the Hitlerite  persecutions, or they have been self­ displaced, for business, health, or other reasons. Obviously, a persecutory govern­ ment  takes action  against  its victims in order of their importance; an individual  of great  talent,  initiative  and  influence is savagely dealt  with,  whereas an  indi­ vidual  of no great  consequence is left alone. That  is why so many  uncommonly gifted  people  are  drifting  about,  of those violently  displaced, both  Jewish  and non-Jewish.


IN THE CATEGORY of what  I have called the "self-displaced" I, for instance,  am  to be counted.  My case is, I dare to say, typical of that  class of voluntary  displacement. In  the last war  I was a soldier. I could  not be that


2I

ON CANADA



in  this  war,  and  the  particular calling  I followed,  that  of artist  and  writer, was susceptible   to  an  extreme  degree  to  any  great  disturbance. Already  by  the  time of  the  Munich crisis-when  it  became  plain  to everybody (however laggard in believing  it)   that   the  lunatic militarist  who  stepped  into  the  Kaiser's  shoes  was bent  on  a second  European war-my income  began  to shrink. War  itself would shoot  to pieces my modest  personal  economy.  So I headed for  America, where,  I believed,  I might  pursue my work with some prospect of success.
Two  years  ago  this coming  fall  I moved  up  here  to  Canada from  the  States, and  am  a great  authority upon  all matters connected with  the  "transient" in  an American community, especially  the "war-transient". All problems  of adjustment I know  from  A to Z. I would  qualify  to be the  "Dr. Anthony" of the  Adjustee. There is nothing I do not  know  about  these  painful questions, and  this accumu­ lated   wisdom  I shall  one  day  embody  in  a  book,  such  as  Maxim  Gorki  might  have  written-the  author of "Creatures who  once  were  men."
To  begin with,  "transience,"-at least a temporary residence, a very prolonged visit, such  as war  conditions  may  entail -is not  understood by the  native  of a new  country. Either   (as  he sees it)  you come  there  to stop-to  citizenize  your­ self -or  else only  for  the  most  fleeting  visit. A  real  warmth of welcome  never extends  from  Sunday to Sunday. A week is the maximum life span  of that ephem­ eral,  the  visitor."  It is a hectic  life, but  like all hectic  things,  it is short.
It is  rather as if  Miss  America  were  a  young  lady  who  was  prepared to  kill
you with  love for two or three  days; if you then  made your escape well and  good; otherwise  her  manner would  suddenly  grow  chaste  and  stern  and  you would  be expected  to engage  yourself for ever. To  be a year in America and  not to want  to be  a  citizen  is  a  situation   no  American ever  yet  has  understood, nor  ever  will. There  is  something  wanton  about   it-something  morally   objectionable. The French are not like that,  now. You can  reside in France all your life:  the French­ man  perfectly  understands that,  it never  occurs  to him  you want  to be a  French­ man.  You  couldn't be,  except  in  name,   anyway, for  Frenchmen of  course  are born,  not made.
There are  many  Adjustees  naturally who are  not  mere  war-transients; who are indeed  most  anxious  to become  Permanents as soon  as possible. All, in their  pro­ bationary period, however,  are exposed to the same  experience, and  at first Tran­ sients and  Nontransients are grouped  together.
Quite the first thing  that  the refugee, evacuee, war-transient, or what  not, feels in  war  time,  is  gratitude to  these  peaceably minded  people,  so like  himself  in many  respects,  for  taking  him  in. He or she often  has landed from  a ship  which

22

ON  CANADA



has been blacked out for weeks, sailing through seas at night that seemed seething with  submarines -each  blow  from  a  big wave sending  the  heart  up  into  the throat.  Stepping  ashore,  that  heart  is full of thankfulness. Then  next  the exotic sense will play its part. The  novel scene interests and pleases. The people are new people:  and  what is new is always nice.
After that  the refugee, evacuee -the transient or non-transient-becomes an
Adjustee.  He  discovers that  he  (to  abbreviate  the genders,  though  this goes for she  too)  is a  member  of a  new class:  that  his classification does not  consist in his being a doctor, artist, economist, but in being a person-who-does-not-belong. There  is no use blinking the fact that  this is not a pleasant discovery. It leaves no bitterness,  or  should  not  do  so. But as most of these people  are  in  flight from rabid  nationalism,  it is a kind of disagreeable reminder of that  upon  which they believed they had  turned  their backs forever.
In  the longer settled countries nothing of this kind would occur  (though  many other  things would  occur  that  were not necessarily nice) . There  this same  indi­ vidual would belong  more at once -for he would, for purposes of  classification, belong  among  men  and  women  of his particular  calling. His nationality  would matter  less than  his trade  or  profession. But in a new  country-at all events in Canada-what he does is overshadowed by what he is until such time as he shall have  qualified  by  long  residence  to  be  regarded  otherwise.  Identified  thus  by his national status and geographical  position, he is apt to feel a little like a floating island  that  has somehow  got  into  the mouth  of  the St.  Lawrence  and  become a mild traffic problem.  He  feels a thing  and  not  a  person. He feels excluded - he feels dead.  And  the  people he associates  with are naturally  those in his own class-slightly defunct,  not quite there,  like himself. It is a grim company.
Perhaps  I ought,  by the way, to make it clear at this point that  I have no beef
myself; as an  artist  I  found  my way to other  artists. Real  whole-time  artists do not abound  in Canada. Of those Mr. Alex Jackson is the acknowledged  chieftain. By that  chieftain, in his picturesque Toronto  headquarters, I was accorded a royal welcome. He  received me, coming from  a foreign milieu, like a brother.  He has shown  me  every  courtesy,  and  with  the greatest  friendliness  helped  me on  my sometimes  perilous  way.  Never  have  I  had  more  profoundly  the sensation  that it  did  mean  something  to  be  a  workman  of that  sort,  one of those  who  have become  known  for  making  pictures:  enjoying  a direct  fraternity  with  another, wherever  he  happens  to live;  as all carpenters  or garment  workers have.  In  a word, Jackson  has demonstrated that for him there is only one  art,  though  there are many  nations. Far  too many  nations, some of us think, for the world is clut-

23

ON  CANADA



tered up with stupid frontiers -and we seem more and more to pass from one of these compartments  into  another  at  our  peril. "Demain -c;a  sera le genre  hu­ main!" Alex Jackson,  who is a great  Canadian, definitely belongs to the "genre humain" of the revolutionary song.
No, this article is not a beef:  the rigours of my own  "transience" have been mitigated  by  two or three  people who it is  true  are  exceptional  people, but  all the same are Canadians.  I should be sorry to have a beef against a country which produced  such  sterling  timber  as Alex Jackson.  This  article  is a  minor  bit  of friendly advice to the Canadian, which I am able to offer him not because I am more intelligent  or "smart" than  he is, but simply because I have been in a situa­ tion  he  has  never  been in.  Consequently  I  know  about  a few things  of  which he can  have  no knowledge. And  these are things  that  matter  an  awful lot, ulti­
mately, to Canada.

A NATION, like a woman,  has to make itself attractive, if it
is going to attract. And it must  attract,  in order  to grow  and  increase. To  stop
drably  and  dowdily at home and  tell the rest of the world to go hang is no way to live. If a nation  wants  to repel, rather  than  attract, it only has to neglect its social equipment  and throw away its manners.  But no modern  nation  can afford, any more than  a modern woman, to neglect those arts and graces that  advertise it, and make people seek its company.
Now, greatly daring-but  from the very friendliest motives-I am whisper­ ing  a  few  things in Canada's pretty  ear.  For  what  is written  here will not  go beyond  the frontier  of Canada. I am saying that  Canada should give more care to making  itself agreeable and gracious, in its intercourse  with strangers.  For this new  country   needs-paradoxical  as  that   may  sound -new  blood.  All  new countries do.
Quite  one of nature's  oddest laws is that  a new country  has to keep on  renew­ ing itself and  getting in  more and  more  new blood:  else in a  surprisingly short time it grows  just as stuffy and  routine-ridden as an old  country.  Only its laxity has not got that  mellow charm that excuses the stuffiness of the older lands.
One  feels that in "Upper Canada"-Anglosaxon  Canada-there is a sort of pride  in  being  repellent,  rather  than  attractive, to the stranger  within-the-gate. What  the Canadian of these parts tells you is that  the social organism  to which he  belongs is "snooty": or, he will say, "more  English than  the  English."  And he seems in an odd way pleased about it. This, I submit, is short-sighted. "Toronto

ON  CANADA



the Beautiful",  as Mr.  Mitch  Hepburn  calls it, should forget about being English. It could  with  great  advantage take a leaf out  of its far  more  attractive  French sister Montreal's  book, and  get a wrinkle or two from "Little  old New York."
But  the  problem  of  being  attractive  has  never been  present  to Canadians, I
think,  because of the great  isolation in which they have lived. And  the isolation of  Ontario   has  in  the  nature  of  things been greater  even  than  that  of French Canada. Yet if Canada is ever to blossom out into a sizeable country its middle­ centred  in  Toronto and  Winnipeg-is  just as important as its  extremities.  It would be no use at all to [be]  all Gallic charm at one end, and all titanic Western beauty  at the other,  while remaining  smug, drab  and snooty in the middle. Can­  ada  is  unpopulated, and  I  think  that  Canada  should  face  up to  the fact  that there  are  reasons for  this. For  instance,  it is cold:  then  it  is  most of it covered with bush. People have to [be]  lured into it to some extent:  and Canadian social attractiveness should  be almost five times as great as that of  California,  according to all the rules. It is very great;  I am not saying it isn't. But it will have to make a further  effort.
Although every Canadian will agree that Canada  is underpopulated, what they would be apt  to argue is that  numbers is its only requirement, thank you-when you talk about  all this brilliance  that is going begging. It has quite enough valu­ able or showy citizens as it is! But a new country has to import its Shakespeares and  Newtons,  as it  imports  the  choicer  wines. As to  Einstein,  the  present-day Newton, the United  States has got hold of him, I am afraid. Then Canada should hold out for a Leibnitz.
I do not mention  business talent for that is found everywhere. Indeed,  Canada exports business talent,  as can  be seen in  the case of Lord  Beaverbrook  and  Sir James Dunn.  It does not need to import anything of that kind. Far more political talent  has  been  exported   by  Canada   than  has  ever  come  into  it.  It  provided England  with a notable  Prime  Minister-Bonar Law. And in Medicine Canada has in  Banting  an  international star  of the first magnitude.  Business talent  and political talent sprout  up in a new soil better than in an old one, if anything.  Yet there are ways in which Canada could profit by a discriminating import policy­ a careful grafting.



THE HOTEL




Anne f!JYndham Lewis








OR ENFORCED STAY in Canada  WM bmught  about  by newly  imposed  war  regulations which  prohibited women  from  travelling to  Eng­ land  and  also prohibited the transfer  of money  to Canada. Fortunately, we found
sympathetic friends  in Canada, among  whom  were  the late  J. S. McLean, Presi­
dent  of  Canada Packers,  who  commissioned   portraits, and  A. Y. Jackson, the Canadian  painter, whose  generous   friendship  and   help   were  given  with   un­ affected  simplicity.
On   arriving  in  Toronto, we  booked  into   "the Hotel", a  replica  of  a  small English  manor house  in  which,  without  doubt, our  most  notable  experiences in Canada were  enacted. At  the  beginning of  our  stay,  it  was  a sedate  and  quiet hotel,   but   gradually-as  the  war   continued-the atmosphere changed  into that  of  rambustious turmoil. In  these  circumstances a  kind  of community spirit emerged, and  both  guests and staff became  increasingly interested in us and  aware of our  invidious  position,  until  we were  accepted as a rather strange but under­ standable addition to this slowly congealing wartime community. Conspicuous in this  group of  harmonious though  heterogenous characters  was  Affie, the  mana­ geress who,  with  apparent foresight,  never  failed  to visit us and to cheer  us with her  gossip  whenever difficulties  threatened to  overwhelm  us.
As the war  increased  in violence, so this group of human beings became notice­ ably  more  anarchistic,  resisting  the  intrusion of  outside   events,  until  finally  it seemed  to  be divorced  from  the  warring world  outside. Only  once,  in  the  earlier  part  of our  stay,  did  we hear  any  reference  to the  war,  and  that  was from  Affie. Even  the war  casualties  in my own immediate family  were  not discussed, and  the natural feelings one had  towards  them  seemed  to be stifled instantly in this warm  human cocoon.  The  sense of nationality decreased, and  a quality of Universalism came  into  being.

THE HOTEL



(The only  other   time  I ever  experienced this  quality  of human  universalism, "community-spirit", was in a hotel in Agadir, the last outpost  of the French administration on the edge of the "dissident" Sahara. The  hotel patio  after  dinner was  the  general meeting-place, where  Legionnaires, army  personnel,   journalists, gun-runners, the  hotel  proprietor and  a  few  guests  gathered together, the  con­ versation  interrupted only  by anonymous obese insects cannonading into the dim lights.  Probably it  was this experience which  gave  birth  to the idea  that had  the whole  Hotel   in  Toronto been  magically   moved,  lock, stock and  barrel, and dumped down  there,  no-one  would  have  noticed  any difference.)
The  pattern came  to its natural end  one  winter  morning when  our  breakfast serenity  was shattered by muffled shouting and  the heaving  tramp of feet. On investigation, we saw  a fireman rushing  down  the  passage  banging on  doors  and shouting, "Fire! All  out!"  Incredulous, we  returned to our  breakfast, but  were interrupted by a  resounding knock,  followed  by a fireman's face  poking  through the open  door  and  saying sternly,  "Fire! All out!"
A general  exodus  was  in  progress.  From  the  front  of the  premises,  where  the fire was the  most  fierce, firemen  helped  the stragglers  to grope  their  way through the  dense  smoke.   Many   were  clad  only  in  pyjamas   and   dressing-gowns, poor protection against   the  exereme  cold. Some  lost all their  possessions and  were  left penniless;  their  spirits  were  at  the  lowest ebb.
It was  a  striking scene,  the  contrast of  frozen  snow  emphasizing the  black billowing  clouds  of  smoke  which  were  penetrated intermittently by long  sullen­ red  beams  that   rapidly   disappeared  and  reappeared only  to die,  darting again into  sight  and  exploding with  firework  zest into  crackling  cascades  of sparks.  A party   atmosphere  began   to  hang   over  the  scene  as  people  from   neighbouring houses  teamed   together   to  revive  the  chilled  and  tired  firemen  with  continuous cups of  tea.  Other people  were  bustling  among  the forlorn  guests, offering  them temporary shelter.  At the  end  of the day, the fire at last extinguished, the firemen gone,  the  Hotel  lay  deserted  and  in darkness.
A few  days  later,  in  our  temporary lodgings,  we received  a message from  the Hotel   that   Affie  had   died  from  the  effects  of  the  fire;  we  were  invited to  the funeral service.  So  the  only  casualty  of the  fire was this  possessor of remarkable foresight  or  sensitivity, who  had   always  been  on  the  spot  to  comfort   with  gay nonsense  without ever once  hinting that she knew of our troubles  and our need for distraction. It was  a subdued gathering at  the  funeral, and  we dispersed  silently at  the  end  of  the  service.  It was  our  farewell  to  this  warm  and  kind  group  of people. As a fitting  goodbye  to Affie, there is this quotation from Self Condemned.

THE HOTEL



It was a sinister, upside-down forest of ice, rooted in  the air; ... but Rene saw it as a funeral  vault for Affie, which would be mysterious and  inviolable for long enough to suit her volatile taste. Her hooting cry could sound there in the night - the only human  sound that  could be heard ... and  only Affie [could]  be at home in this unearthly scenery.

The Hotel  became  the  mainspring of Self Condemned, serving  to confirm  the ideas-universalism and  opposition  to war and  to the continuing injustices caused by  the  "Establishment" methods   which   have   penetrated so  many  countries­ that   Wyndham  Lewis  held  for  so  long.  Fundamentally,  Self  Condemned is a "protest" book.
After  the  fire we departed for  Windsor,  Ontario, where  my husband had  con­ tracted to give a series of lectures  arranged by Father Stanley  Murphy at Assump­  tion  College.   When   we  were  finally  settled   in  an  apartment,  Father  Murphy came  to visit us with  two companions, the late Professor Giovanelli, and  Professor Marshall McLuhan. With  a  youthful  enthusiasm, they  set  to  work  to  promote lectures   and   portrait  commissions  in  St.   Louis,  Missouri,   and   they  were  sur­ prisingly  successful,  so  that   eventually   we  found  ourselves  in  St.  Louis  under  their enjoyable tutelage.
Yet  at  the  end  of our  stay  in  Canada the  main  original purpose  of our  visit remained incompletely fulfilled;  this had  been  to carry  out  research  into  the lives of  Wyndham Lewis's  grandparents in Canada, and  to go back  to his birthplace in Nova Scotia.



THE WILD LAND


A Celebration of Globalism



C.]. Fox






W.EN WYNDHAM  LEWIS Cllille to  North  America  in
1939,  he brought  a set of intellectual  premises that  could readily  accommodate the shock of a "war  transient's" life in the New \\'orld. They  also served Lewis well when he came to forge the experience into art and into an appropriately spectacular  vision of the future  world society.
By 1939  an  advocate  of globalism,  he  also numbered  among  his numerous
books The  Wild  Body and  Filibusters in Barbary. The  first, published  in 1927, included  short  stories set in  the  countrysides, primitive yet hotel-ridden,  of  Brit­ tany and Spain. Filibusters in Barbary, a travel book which first appeared  in 1932, described  a  1931  trip  through  the mushroom  towns and  the fierce  backlands  of Morocco.  The   British  edition  of  Filibusters was  withdrawn   from  the  market because of threats of libel suits, an instance of the economic and other misfortunes that  haunted  Lewis in the 193o's. It was thus as a man conscious of  his environ­ ment  through  experience  and  observation,  as well as in terms of  his global con­ cepts, that  he entered  upon his life in the New World.
"In   the  nine  months  preceding  the  outbreak  of war  our  debts  were steadily
piling  up,"  wrote  Lewis to his friend  Naomi  Mitchison on July 8, 1942. "... It was under these circumstances  that I collected what I could, and made a bee line for New York."' By November  1940, the United States visitors' permits originally issued to Lewis and  his wife had  expired, and  they made  their  way to Toronto. There,  "in an apartment hotel-14 bucks a week", they stayed until the middle of 1943. By July  of that  year Lewis was teaching in Windsor,  Ontario, and for the  rest of the  time  until  his return  to Britain in 1945, that  city and  St. Louis, Missouri, were his main places of residence.

29

THE  WILD LAND



The upheavals of wartime had  dumped into  the Toronto hotel a vast variety  of human fauna, many of them  peculiar  to Canada. To the author of The Wild  Body and  Filibusters  hotels had  already  the appeal of microcosms, and the Toronto establishment was soon the object of fascinated scrutiny  to his satirical  eye. Its convulsive  affairs, and those of the community beyond it, were recorded  with professional  gusto in his notebooks,  which  are now part  of the extensive  collection of  Lewis  manuscript material at  Cornell  University. In  a  recent  account of the collection,  W.  K.  Rose has described  these  notebooks  as "full  of newspaper  clip­ pings  and  notations of language, popular culture and  plain factual detail." There are,  among  other  observations,  written notes  and  drawings of the  hotel  furnace room,  and  "hundreds of snatches  of conversation are quoted, often  with explana­ tory  notes.... He  records radio  commercials ... and  popular songs."2
In  scrutinizing the  community beyond  the  hotel's  precincts, Lewis focussed  on the  ostensibly  more  refined  section  of society.  Seen  through his eyes, in  terms  of salon  and  academy, that  society appeared little more  than  a grotesque aping  of its Mayfair original. Once  more, this time as author of The Apes of God, he felt that he  was  recording familiar  phenomena. Together, the wild  New  World  hotel,  and the  absurdly derivative high  society beyond  its bounds provided the  material out of  which   Lewis  built  a setting  for  the  "black sacrifice" of  his  novel,  Self  Con­ demned.
His  ancestry, as well  as his literary  orientation, braced   Lewis  for  his lengthy stay  in  the  New  World.  Born  in  1882  on  the  family  yacht  off Amherst, Nova Scotia,  Lewis  had  for  father a lively and  literate veteran of  the  American  Civil War,  and  though, after childhood, he seems to have seen little of Charles E. Lewis, he  evidently   acquired from  him  some  of  his sense of literary  style,  as well as a great   deal  of  knowledge  about   what   he  called   "the  hubbub of  battles." The Lewis  family,  abounding in  lawyers  and  merchants, had  spread   from  its  main base,  upstate  New  York,  into  Canada, to  which   its  ties  were  strengthened  by marriage. Lewis's  paternal grandmother, Romain by name,  was French-Canadian. A Romain uncle  maintained a business in  Montreal. A Toronto building, erected in 1852  by great-uncle Charles Romain, "gives  me a certain sentimental footing," wrote  Lewis from  that  city in 1940.3
His  French-Canadian  connections retained  a  considerable interest  for  Lewis. On   arriving at  Quebec   City  from  Britain  in  1939,  one  of  his  first  acts  was  to search   eagerly  through   the  telephone directory for  signs  of  the  Romains. Later, when  in  Toronto, he  went  to  other  parts  of  Ontario in  search  of  clues  to  the establishment which  the  Lewises had  formerly  maintained in  that  province.

THE WILD LAND



At the same  time, he remained  highly conscious of his American  connections. "It  should  also be remembered  that  at  6 ... I frisked and  frolicked with other little American  boys on  the  New England  coast-not  with little Britons on the English coast," Lewis wrote a young American admirer, Felix Giovanelli, in 1948. "The  American  beginnings  are irrelevant,  except that  I could not help imbibing from  my very American  father .much Stimmung,  a certain  sentiment,  and  a lot about  the  Civil  War.  And  my mother  was more American  than  Irish,  and  her memories  are  mine.  I  have  masses of my uncle's letters, who was an American coal magnate.  It adds up to nothing very solid, but must be reckoned in."4
It seems safe to "reckon  in"  Lewis's New World roots when seeking to explain his fascination  with  the historical destiny and  the sometimes wild ways of North American  society. By March  1943, he was writing of piling up "notes about  the ideologic foundations  of the  U.S.A." 5   These were the makings of America  and Cosmic Man  ( 1948)  and its argument  that America was the cradle of a radically new kind of universalism. The  notebooks, dealing with the savage side of North American  life, which provided  raw material for the backdrop  to Self Condemned, had been in the making since 1941. Thus, even during the war, Lewis was eagerly taking cognizance of those characteristics of life on the American  continent which most impressed  him,  the  cosmic and  the  crude. Eventually  he was to suggest a link between them.



CANADA,TO  HIS MIND, was in a cruder stage of development than  the  nation  to  the  south.  In  an  outline  for  a  never-executed  novel, called tentatively Hil/100, he wrote in 1942:  "If it is true ... that  'America is a country
that  has  passed from  Tartary to decadence  without  having  known  civilization,' then it is true of Canada that  it is not even decadent yet."
The  outline  for  Hill 100, now in the Cornell  collection, also mentions  a his­
torical incident  to which  Lewis attached  considerable symbolical importance and which further  illustrates  his concern  with the savage side of the North  American character. The  same incident  is recounted  in  America  and Cosmic  Man,  where Lewis writes of how La Salle, descending the Mississippi, left several meJn behind to build  a boat. "When  he came back, he found the boat  only half finished and his compatriots  had  vanished.  Upon  the  timbers  [were]  scrawled  these words:
'Nous  sommes  tous sauvages'." 6  Lewis quotes a  young Harvard instructor  who
warned  him  "that all foreigners should  bear in mind  that  message."

THE  WILD LAND



"This  is much too romantic,"  Lewis says of the instructor's interpretation. "The savagery  melted  away before the impact  of British civilization. But the invaders could not melt so great a wilderness without  themselves losing to it much of their personality. Not  the human  'savageness', however, of the romantic  imagination, but  the  alien waste of nature,  is still there  underneath: the  'wild land',  as they formerly called it, very imperfectly covered up." 7
Elsewhere, Lewis praised Canadian painters like A. Y. Jackson  for their stark
portrayals  of Canada's "wild  land".  But  as practicing  novelist he evidently  as­ sumed  the  persistence in wartime Toronto  as well of an  abundant human  wild­ ness. This  is reflected  in  the  brutal  atmosphere  of  the  Hotel  Blundell  in Self Condemned and  in the crude bush-Mayfair  that  is upper-class  Momaco. One is reminded  of his earlier remarks in Men  Without Art  ( 1934). "A breathless busi­ ness hustle,"  he wrote, left no room for the development  of a  European  type of urbanity  in the cities of the New World. "Undeniably, the 'American  scene' is of the utmost barrenness, physically and socially. It is planted in the midst of a rela­ tive wilderness, beneath  a surprisingly hard  and  penetrating light.... The  actual physical landscape  has something of a Swiss frigidity and  emptiness." 8
The  man who wrote The Apes of God  could speedily take the satirical measure of  a  Canadian upper-class salon, and  enjoy  himself hugely in  the  process. But his imagination   revelled also in  the more  patently  savage  offerings of the  Wild Land.  Lewis's early pictorial work had been preoccupied  with the ritualized  con­ tortions  of  primitive  creatures,  which  he  described  as "big  obsessed  sun-drunk insects." The  same general breed of "great  comic effigies" turn  up at Brotcotnaz, Bestre and  other  characters in The Wild   Body,  swarming  all over  "the  barbaric  environment", as Lewis termed  Brittany  years later.  With  these  characters,  dis­ porting  themselves in  microcosmic hotels,  and  with  such  comic  apparitions as the  hotelkeeping  Signor  Borzo, bounding   and  howling  across  the  Klondikean wilderness of Morocco, the hotel creatures of Self  Condemned form a direct line. Lewis's imagination  feasted on the wilderness of  Canada with a relish born of a longstanding  occupational  taste for such material.
Yet  that  imagination   responded  with  equal  enthusiasm  to  the  fact  that  the trans-Atlantic Wild  Land  was "a  human  laboratory  for  the  manufacture of a Cosmic Man." This new human  type, Lewis wrote, took the form of "a  perfectly eclectic,  non-national,  internationally-minded  creature  ... with   no  more  geo­ graphical  or cultural  roots with a chameleon." 9 Here again Lewis was on familiar ground.  As visual artist  and  writer,  he had  often  abandoned the  here-and-now  for themes cast in a world-shrinking, timeless dimension.  His early drawings  fea-

THE WILD LAND



ture  titanic  figures  which  use the  earthly  scene  as a bleak  backdrop or  platform for   their   cosmic   contortions.  In   an  early,  non-satrical  picture, called  Sunset Among  The  Michelangelos   (Victoria and  Albert  Museum), we  are  confronted with  four  naked  human beings,  muscular forms  looking  as  if  they  had   been sculpted  roughly  from  granite. They  straddle a massive rock formation against  a sky of blazing  red.  They  could  be the first, or the last, men.  Each  seems  the pic­ torial  rendering of the  "Norse giant" Lewis speaks of in his novel, The  Red  Priest (I 956), a creature who  sullenly  contemplates a sphere  alien  to him, civilization.
The  furtive  quartet in  Sunset,  seemingly  caught   by surprise  in  their  wild  ele­
ment  at  the  edge  of the  world,  appear to regard  the earth  in the  manner of  pas­ sengers  forced   to  endure a  rudely  accoutred space  ship.  The  same  intelligence which   articulated  this  primeval man-earth  relationship in  the  picture  was  able, forty  years later  in  Self Condemned, to visualize man  "riding an  immense  ball." This  ball  was "dashing around in a cold, black  emptiness' and  "was  warmed by a much  larger,  extremely hot  ball." ro
The  settings  for  such  metaphysical fantasies  as The  Enemy  of the  Stars and The  Childermass  have  the  same  elemental  quality  as those of the  early  pictures. The  sense of  place  is abstracted away.  The  place  is, simply,  "somewhere in  the cosmos".  In  The  Enemy  of the Stars, a play first published  in  I 9 I 4, the scene of the  central  character's "execution" is framed by earth, sky and  posterity.  There is almost  a contemptuous disregard  for the niceties of locale dear  to the  parochial hearts  of most  earthmen.
Lewis's  sensibility,   then,   seemed  profoundly attuned  to  the  idea  of  earth   as something other  than a conglomeration of cosy locales institutionalized into nation­ states.  To  this  deep-rooted globalism   he  also gave -comparatively  early  in  his career-explicit ideological expression.  In  The  Art of Being Ruled   (I 926)   he suggests that  already the  world  is one community, made  so by the new techniques of government and  communication. In  a  I929  essay, "A  World  Art  and  Tradi­ tion", he wrote  that  "the Earth has become one place, instead  of a romantic tribal  patchwork of  places." The  experimental art  of the  time  constituted "a  primitive form   of  a  world-art" which   he  feared   could  "stop  altogether  long  before  the political  omnibus, lumbering furibundly forward,  catches  it  up."  And  he  adds: "What has fact  on its side is still this strange synthesis of cultures  and  times which we  named   Vorticism in  England and  which  is the  first  projection of  a  world-  art...."u
Among  the  pictures Lewis produced in the  I93o's  and  1940's-in Britain  and
Canada -were semi-abstracts and  fantasies  of themes  ranging from  creation to


33

THE  WILD LAND



war.  These  sometimes featured forms that  can  be described  only as interplanetary. Yet  for  the  first  eight  years  of  the  rggo's, Lewis  the  political  commentator  ap­ peared   to  be  forsaking  globalism,  or  at  least  reacting against what  was  then its chief  institutional manifestation, the  League   of  Nations. By 1939,  however,  he had  reverted  to his original  position,  that  nationalism was obsolete, that  a world state  was  the  logical  next  step  for  an  increasingly homogenous  humanity. "The machine age has made nonsense of nationalism," he wrote  in a collection  of essays published  several  months  before his departure for  North  America.12
What he saw  and  felt around him on this last and  longest  of his trans-Atlantic visits-others had  been made  in the 192o's  and  rggo's-confirmed him in these views  and   provoked   enthusiastic announcements  of  an  "earth  culture, or  the eclectic  culture of  the  transition"  (the   title  he  gave  an  article  he  wrote  for  a British  publication, The Pavilion). America's destiny  was "not  to be just another
'grande nation':  but  to  be  the  great  big  promiscuous grave  into  which  tumble,
and  there  disintegrate, all that  was formerly  race,  class or nationhood." 13  Canada was  "an   integral part  ... of  the  North   American culture." But  most  countries, added   Lewis,  were  merely  regional  units  rather than  self-sufficient  cultural  en­ tities.  Canada's  natural splendours impressed  him  greatly. However, he  warned  in  an  unpublished wartime essay  (now  in  the  Cornell   collection)   not  until  the "smug, drab and  snooty"  character of central Canadian  communities  had  been altered   would   the  nation   obtain   what  it  most  needed-a  strengthening of  its "natural stock"  through immigration.
Self Condemned was written  largely in the early  195o's, in spite of the author's blindness   and  other  physical  ills. Specific  notes  from   the  Canadian years  were called  for  by  Lewis  during  composition, were  read  to  him,  and  were  inserted into  the story  as he dictated it. While some of the fictionalized Canadian charac­ ters  and  circumstances are  identifiable with  still-surviving features of  the  real-life scene,  the  book  in  its  totality  cannot   be  readily  construed as a  commentary on Canadian life as such.
The   work's  prime  significance  lies in  the  sepulchral destiny  of its  hero,  Rene Harding. We are  left with  little doubt  that  the  fate  of this  man,  who had  "stood up  to  the  Gods", would  have  been  every  bit  as horrific  if he had  chosen  to stay in  Britain  rather than  plunge  into  a  Canadian exile. The book's  remarks about Canadian life  are  certainly   not  likely to  endear the  author to frantic celebrants of Confederation's Centennial. Yet Lewis himself says in Self Condemned:  "Any criticism  of  Canadians, meaning English-Canadians, is in  general  irrelevant.... If you  criticise  them  you  criticise  the  average population of Belfast,  of Bradford

34

THE WILD LAND



and  Leeds,  and  of Glasgow. If you deplore  the materialism and  the humble cul­
tural  level, you are  merely  criticising  anglo-saxon  civilization." ' 4
Nevertheless,   without  the  stimulus   to  his  satirical   powers  of  wartime in  the Wild  Land, Lewis  might  not  have  retained  the zest required for a creative  effort so great  as that  which,  in  the  face  of appalling physical  difficulties,  he  put  into Self Condemned. He is said  to have  regarded  the North  American years, in retro­ spect  at  least,  as  a  rousing  experience. His  published  letters,  as well as  remarks made   to  London  visitors  during the  post-war   years,  suggest  a  strong  desire  to return to  the  New  World  and  experience  again  what  he called  "the  electric  in­ toxication of the  air  breathed by prisoners set free." '5
Through this  image  of prisoners  set free,  Lewis was to suggest  a link  between the  North   American's  grandiose destiny  as  Cosmic  Man   and   the  often   crude nature of that  new  man's social  life. The  savagery,  in fact,  was a celebration of the  freedom   inherent in  the  historical  status  of this  novel  type.  Incarcerated  in the  Old   World,   the  European was  a  creature beset  by  restraints. "The  animal which   is  house-trained, chained  up,  domesticated in  Europe, on  emigration  to the  New  World   celebrates its  freedom," Lewis  wrote  to  a  young  Canadian  in
1949·'6
The  same letter  cited examples of these celebrations-the wife-beatings, the drunkenness and  the  brawls  making   up  the  wild  life of his  fellow-guests  at  the Canadian hotels  where   he  stayed,  and  recounted with  few  fictional  trimmings in  the  hotel  scenes  of Self Condemned. In  listing  these frontier-like eruptions he was not indicting them.  On  the contrary, he urged their exploitation by Canadian writers.  "Every  hotel  we  were  in,"  wrote  Lewis  in  bemused   recollection  of  his Canadian adventure, "... rocked  all night  with  hysterical  whoopee  at least  once a week.... In  the States,  things  were much  quieter."



FOOTNOTES

' Letters of Wyndham Lewis, ed. W. K. Rose, London, rg63, pp. 327-30.
2     Wyndham Lewis  at Cornell, Cornell  University  Press, rg6r.
3  Letters of Wyndham Lewis,  p. 283.
4   Ibid., pp. 463-64.
5   Ibid., p. 353·
6   Wyndham Lewis, America  and  Cosmic  Man, London, rg48, p. 152.
1 Ibid., p. 153.
8   Wyndham Lewis, Men Without Art, London, I934, pp.  I50-5I.
9   A"merica and Cosmic  Man, p.  r82.


35

THE WILD  LAND



' 0   Wyndham Lewis,  Self  Condemned, Gateway paperback edition, Chicago, I965,
p. 2 I I.
II Drawing  and Design, 5, No. 32, pp. 30 and  56.
'Wyndham Lewis the Artist, London, I939, p. I6.
'3 America  and Cosmic  Man, p.  I 55·
'4 Self Condemned, pp.  I55-56.
'5 America  and Cosmic  Man, p. I69.
'6 Letters  of Wyndham Lewis, pp. 5II-I2.



HILL 100


Outline for an
Unwritten Novel



Wyndham Lewis







STORY wouLD OPEN in eady da)" of hench colonization of Canada. Hill   100  would   be  situated   in  goldmining area  of  Northern Ontario (border of  Quebec, or  inside  latter   province). Story  would  end  upon  same  hill several  centuries hence.  Hill  would  then  be  marked   Hill  I oo  upon   Ordnance maps  of U.S.  Army.  In  war  proceeding at  that  time, American Army  would  be holding  Hill   I oo  (or  Hill  1000?). There would  be an  attack  by  hostile  planes, and  hill would  be blown  up,  leaving  crater  as large  as base of hill. Inside  crater, inside  pit  blasted  out,  would  be remains  of auriferous rock formations.



CHAPTER Iwould  reveal Fr.-Canadian, Castou, sitting  with Indian at  base  of hill, covered  with  bush, gazing  into stream. Night  is falling.  It is July-it  is getting chilly.  Castou  shakes  himself. He  regards  cold stream  with dislike.  He   dislikes  Canada-abominates its  wilderness -loathes its  Indians. However, he  has  made  his bed,  he must  lie in it. He is a trapper. He  is very far from  the  hamlet in Calvados from  which  he came some years before.  There is no turning back-much  as  he  regrets  the  gentle  slopes of  the  Norman Hills,  the quays  of  Rouen, where  he  had  worked  as a  longshoreman, and  so  become  ac­ qainted with  the  immigrant  ships.
He  stands  up.  The  Indian stands  up. They  communicate with  each  other  in a
mixture  of French and  Dogrib. They  walk back slowly to the Dogrib  village. "Fait f'oid," grunts  Dogrib.
"T'as raison,  Mitouti," Castou   answers  ( "Mitouti" means  "Wolf's Ear".  Mi-


37

HILL 100



touti  has  very  pointed  ears,  which  seem always  pricked,  as if listening  for  hostile noises. "Quel sale kapac, nom de nom!"
Mitouti shrugs.  He  doesn't  think  much  of it either.  The  Dogribs  would  prefer
to  live  farther south,  but  the  Iroquois wouldn't let  them,  so they  have  to stop where  they  are.  They  have  tried  once or twice:  but  their  braves  are quite  second class-and get  no  better,  since  as  a  tribe   they  are  distinctly   undernourished whereas  the  Iroquois  get  much  more  to eat.  They  always  let  them  down,  lose a lot  dead  and  scalped.  So here  they stop, in  their  grim  and  dirty  little  village.
Caston   and   Mitouti   enter   the  village,  which  is very  filthy.  Castou   sticks  his chest  out  and  blows  a  little  through his  red  Norse  moustache. He  is dressed  a
l'lndien. The Indians are  squatting in  the  mouths of  their  ill-smelling  tents-­ at  least  the  braves  are  (if  these diminutive and  rather cowardly  males can  be so described). Mitouti  is their  Chief.  They  watch  him  pass with  a  proper  impassi­ bility, but  with  as near  to sullenness as a piece of wood can  get. For he has beaten  up  most of them once or twice, being much stronger and  braver than  any of them.  Mitouti is not  very brave,  but  he has a very bad  temper, and  a streak  of Iroquois blood.
They  go  to  Mitouti's wigwam.  Mimatauket, his wife, is cooking  a rabbit, and his daughter, the lovely Kakapo, is throwing on the wood.  For a Dogrib,  Kakapo is not  bad,  although  unspeakably dirty.  She  is seventeen, and  two  thick inkblack plaits  of hair  hang  over  her shoulders like shining  black sausages,  decorated with red  and  green  threads of  dyed  goatwool.  She  stands   up  as  they  approach and hurries  inside  the  tent,  from  the  door  of which  she ogles Castou.
The   French trapper swaggers  up  to Kakapo, and  thrusts  his arm  around her
untidy  waist.
"Ah  ah  rna belle!  Embrasse  done  ton petit  Castou !" he exclaims,  thrusting out his moustachioed lips.
A  raucous titter   comes  from  the  copper-blue lips  of  Kakapo. These  mouth­ rubbing habits  of the  Paleface  amuse  Kakapo. They  rub  lips. The  big  red  mous­ tache  of the trapper blankets  Kakapo's mouth: her chin rests in his beard.  Mitouti  takes  his pipe  out  of the  tent,  and  squatting down,  lights  up.  Mimatauket twirls the rabbit with a dark forefinger.
Such,  more  or  less, would  be the  first scene. The second  scene  (the  2nd  chap­ ter?)   would   describe  Castou, the  trapper, at  work.  He  would   be  sitting in  a canoe  in  a  small  lake,  just before  dawn. The caribou   would  come  down  to  the water's edge.  Castou  would  shoot  it. The   Indians would  take  care  of the  dead caribou   and  Castou  would  then  go the  round  of his traps.

HILL  IOO




l:E NEXT SCENE  (chapter 3?)  would show Castou  back in one of the  French settlements, married to Kakapo -who  would  have  grown  to look rather like  Mimatauket. They  would,  it would  be found, have  three  sons and  a daughter-Pierre,  Jules,    Denis,   and   Antoinette. The   latter   would   be  very swarthy and  pretty: the  three  sons still on the Indian side -though Pierre  would have  a copper-red moustache and  a bit of a beard.  All of course  would  be catho­ lics; Kakapo less dirty  and  very devout.
These   three  scenes  would   represent   the  establishment  and  beginnings of  the present  day  Fr.-Canadian family  of  Castou.   ( Castou  would  in  reality  bear  the name   of  Gaston   Laverriere:  but,  as  always,  describe  himself  as  "Castou", and as  his  patronymic would   be  too  difficult  for  him  to  attempt any  way  to  com­ municate, as Castou   he  would  be  known,  and  his family  would  become  that  of Castou.  His  daughter thus  would  be  Mademoiselle Antoinette Castou,  not  An­ toinette  Laverriere.




l:E NEXT  SCENE   (chapter 4?)  would  show  a "Tory" family, horrified   by  the  cold  of  the  Maritimes, and  especially  at  the  unbelievable  in­ clemency of ..... in Nova Scotia,  to which they had indignantly retired, after their fellow  citizens  in  Philadelphia had  parted  company with  the  British  Crown  and declared themselves  "independent" -it would show this greatly-tried and shiver­ ing  family  setting  out  to find  a warmer place, farther inland.
They   press  on,  by  road   and   river,  in  a  most  unpioneerlike determination   to
find  a  soft  spot,  or  at  least  one  comfortably warm,  until  they  reach  what  then was  called  Upper Canada. That would  be circa  r8rs, and  the  region  would  be that  lying  west  of  Kingston, Ontario. Port  Grace,  they  would  call  it;  because, being on the St. Lawrence, at the mouth  of a muddy  little river, it could be called a port,  and  "Grace" meant that  they  were  duly  grateful to the  Lord  for  having delivered  them  from  the  unmentionable rigours of what  the  French so unsuitably named   Arcady   (being   tougher, obviously,  than  the  Anglosaxons from  the  land of Penn) : and  for having so graciously  guided  them  to a relatively  warm spot­ at least as un-cold  as anything could  be in these frozen regions, which was all that  was  left  of  America  by  those  disgusting radicals, who  set  their  face  against Royalty  and  Quality, and,  in insolent  rebellion,  had, with that  odious Washington at  their  head,  set themselves up  as a State.

39

HILL 100



The   next  scene  (chapter 5?)   would  show  a  certain   Joseph   Biggs, operating a  rather prosperous  store  in  Port  Grace-reputed to  be about   the  richest  man in  town,  and   [a]   keen  politician. This  is about   1870.  Joseph  Biggs looks across the  St.  Lawrence at  the  Yankees,  and  is pretty  glad  to be a Canadian, when  he thinks of some of the ungodly things that  go on in the land  of the Almighty Dollar. Joseph   Biggs is a  pillar  of the  Methodist Church, and  the  Church is a  pillar  of his  business.  He  had  a son,  Joseph   Jnr., who  is ten  years  old.  Next  we should move  to the heart  of the Gay  Nineties: Joseph  Biggs Jnr. has married a charming girl of "French extraction"-Huguenot,  of course-named Antoinette Castou. The  Castous  turned  up in  Port  Grace  way  back  in  the  Eighteen  Twenties, mov­ ing in from  Montreal, I guess. (Lots  of Huguenots in Ontario, with  rather French names,  came originally  from  Montreal.) These  Castous  had  a corn-chandler's and [were]  pretty smart  people.
The  father of  Antoinette was a lawyer,  doing  a  big business in  Kingston and
Toronto. He  was a pretty  smart  man.  This  was 18gs, and  Joseph  Biggs Jnr. and Antoinette had  a  boy of  ten,  who  was  called  Richard Russlyn  Biggs. And  Dick Biggs became a very smart  man  indeed.  By 1910  he was, of course,  25 years old. He  had   demonstrated  his smartness already  in  several  notable  instances. Dick Biggs was  in  Toronto  (or  "Toronter" as it is called  by Hoi  Polloi). More  than one  pretty   smart   man  in  the  provincial capital  had   gone  bugeyed   as  he  had watched   Dick  Biggs at  work,  and  predicted he  would  go far.  He  was ostensibly interested in  agricultural machinery, being  an  agent  for  companies in  the  States (who  attempted to pass their  tractors  and  peashelling machines through the tariff wall, behind  which  Canadians live as isolated  as the Tibetans, or more  so; or did until  the  coming  of  the  Moving  Picture and  Radio. They  were  cut  off  by  the Atlantic Ocean from Great  Britain-to whom  they were supposed  to belong, politically,  and  because  of  whom  they  had  come  to this sunny  retreat to escape from  the  defilement  of the disloyal  Yankees; they  were  cut  off from  Asia by the Pacific; they  were  cut  off from  the  United   States  by  their  Tariff   Wall: and  as to the  north, there  was the  North  Pole-so  no one  could  disturb their  seclusion from  that  direction. Yes, the Canadian was certainly the  most isolated  people on earth, except  for  the  Eskimo.)
But  Dick  Biggs was not going  to spend  all his life as a salesman  and  agent  for
farm-implements; although that  opening up  of the  Buffalo  lands  and  the  amaz­ ing  operations of  Sifton  when   the  West  was  provided  with  a  huge  labouring population  overnight  had   made   agricultural  machinery a  boom-line.  No,  one day  Dick  Biggs began  prospecting  --not  himself  of course, he was too smart for

HILL  IOO



that,  but paying  other  people  to, buying  up claims, financing and organizing small companies. ByI 940  Dick  Biggs is one of the hundred mining  millionaires of  the great  gold and  nickel city of Toronto. He was one of the biggest gold-magnates in the  world;   since  Canada is  the  second  largest  gold-producing country, and   he was  the greatest of  all the gold-kings  of Canada.
Now  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dick  Biggs had  a solitary  child, a son,  at  present  24 years
old,  named   Alistair.  Alistair   had  been  in  the  Bahamas, and  there  he  had  met an  American girl,  called  Claire  Heming, whom  he  is about to  marry. She  has come  to the  Biggs home  at  Mimico  to meet her future father and  mother-in-law. Claire  had  only enough money  to get her to the Bahamas and  back to New York, and  she  was  pretty  surprised when  she landed  a gold  mine.
Alistair  does  not  look  as if he was in fact  a gold  mine.  He  was a small,  pallid, rather frightened little  creature. Yes, this  mountain-this  mountain of  gold­ had  brought forth, at last, a mouse.
As  Claire  goes  to  bed  the  first  night  in  the  Biggs place -in  a vast  and  very gloomy  Tudor apartment, but  the luxury  so great  that  the  bed  almost  whispered a  sigh  for  you  as you  sank  into  it,  and  the servants  almost  arrived   by  thought­ transference before  you had  touched  the  button  to summon  them-when  Claire contrasted the  shrinking little  animal  she  had   just  left  in  the  passage  outside, and   all  this  weighty   wood,  and  glittering   gold  and  aluminum  and   ponderous drapes, she could  not  believe  that  they  really had  all  that  to do with  each  other. But had  she been  able at that  moment  to transfer herself to the mines at Timmins she would  have  found it even more  difficult to see how so portentous an organism could  possess so  minute a  parasite.




AT SOME  POINT -for  the  above sketch  of the  background build-up does not  come  necessarily in that  order-there will be about  IOO  pages dealing  with  the  miner's life at  Timmins (or  wherever  it is the  mines  are  to  be situated, and  whatever the mines  are  called). Then there  will be I oo pages deal­ ing  with  the social structure of the  city of Toronto, which  is in fact  a vast mining camp.  It  is, at  least,  a great  city of over one  million  inhabitants,  swollen  to  this great  size because  of  the  presence  in Ontario of the great  gold  and  nickel  mines, and  of the presence  of all the mining  magnates and  their families in or near it, and  of  all  the  banks  and  commercial institutions in  the  service  mainly  of  the  great mines.  Thus  when  the  mines  are  booming,  the  Ontario  stock-exchange is a  bull

HILL  IOO



market, it  blooms   and  flourishes,  and   Montreal declines.  It is  vice-versa,  too, of course.
Now  the general  plan  of the  book is to show  first the  two  European races,  the French and   the  Anglosaxon, in  their  early  colonizing  stage.  We  start  with  the French trapper, who,  like  the  majority of the  early  French settlers,  married an Indian woman. There are  not  many  French-Canadian families  engaged  in  agri­ culture along  the  St. Lawrence who are not  partly  Indian. Quite  half  the French Canadians in such  a city as Montreal-and all the French Canadians in Quebec
-are perfectly  visibly possessed of Indian blood.  Well,  it will be our  purpose  to show  this conditioning of the  French-Canadian stock  in  operation. There will be patriarchal scenes  (perhaps the  one described  by Pierrette of the  arresting of the grandchildren, to  the  number of  roo  at  Easter,  kneeling  outside  the  front  door, being  blessed  by  the  grandpere  before  they  enter). Scenes  indicating the  early catholic  (jesuit)  construction for  a  powerful  isolated  theocratic state.  Then the very  different character of the  Anglosaxon  settlement will  be  described  or  indi­ cated.
Having  described   this  primitive   world,   and  shown   the  roots  of  the  present inhabitants, the  present  day world  of the gold  mining town  is shown -the  bush town-and shown  how it is very little less primitive. The life of the gold  mine­ the  Polish  Ukrainian  workmen living  in  shacks  with  50 bunks  apiece  etc.  etc. etc.   Further  the   perpetual  friction   between   the   French and  Ang.  Saxon   will be  shown   (for  instance   the  Fr.  Canadian landlord of  the  house  and  his treat­ ment   of  the  Electrician  boss, as told  to  me). But,  beneath  the  skin  of  canned foods,  radio,  the  primitive  state of this society will be brought out. One  can quote  the  story  of  Champlain, and  the six Frenchmen  who  disappeared;


"NOUS  SOMMES TOUS SAUVAGES"


written upon  the  hull of the stranded ship,  that  he had  left them  to build  on the
Mississippi.
Next  will  come  a  picture  of  the  political  structure of  the  mushroom city  of Toronto. It will be shown how that,  too, is in fact extremely privitive,  "ill-cooked", undeveloped. The  fearful  Indian-like squalor  of the  poor  sections-the rg  mil­ lion  dollars  spent  on relief in 1940. Against  this the  tasteless,  uncultivated  luxury  of the  mining  and  other  magnates. The  infinite  remoteness of all this  from any­ thing  that  can  be called civilized.
If it  is true   (as  Brockington  quoted  from  a French critic)   that  "America is a

HILL 100



country that  has  passed  from  barbary to decadence without even  having  known civilization", then  it is true  of Canada that  it is not even decadent  yet.

* 	* 	*
"lei, monsieur, c'est  une  barbarie !" said  he to the maitre d'hotel in  the  Mac­ Alpin  in  New  York,  during Prohibition. But what  could  be said  to  a Frenchman about  a Canadian city?
However   here,  within   this  locked-up   barbarous little  state,  in  its great  gold­
town ...









































43


CANADA	AND
WYNDHAM LEWIS THE ARTIST




Sheila Watson




NOT<eF.  OF    WYNDHAM   LEw's'' fin<t  and  only  official
connection with  Canadian art  is preserved in the Canadian War Services Records:

2nd  Lieut. P.  W.  Lewis,  Royal  Garrison  Artillery,   attached  to  Canadian  Corps
Headquarters for  duty  with  Canadian War  Records, 3 I st December, I g I 7.
Ceases  to  be attached to Canadian War  Records, Canadian Corps,  on  proceeding to England, 26th January, Igi8.

Because  of this brief union  the National Gallery,  Ottawa, is richer  by A Cana­ dian Gunpit, a canvas  approximately ten  by eleven  feet  intended for  a  proposed Ottawa Memorial to be designed  by E. R.  Rickards, the  architect who did  Cen­  tral  Hall  at  Westminster. A sketch  for  the  painting is on  permanent  loan  to the Beaverbrook Gallery  in  Fredericton.
"England's artists  were  being  'saved'," Lewis wrote  later  in Blasting and Bom­
bardiering, "by  Canada of all countries,  and  by Lord  Beaverbrook of all people. I mean  of course  that  we do  not associate  the  land  of the  'Mounties' and  Mont­ calm  with  the fine arts, and  Lord  Beaverbrook I imagined fully occupied  making  and   unmaking  Governments  and   Cabinets." At   his  own   request  Lewis  was seconded   from  the  Royal  Garrison Artillery  while  he  was  on  leave  in  London. He  returned finally  not  to the  Salient  around the  ruins  of  Ypres  and  to experi­ ences  like  those  documented in  the  fifty-four   pictures  exhibited  in  the  Goupil  Gallery  in I 9I g,  but  this  time  to Vimy  Ridge  as a  "painter-soldier, attached to the  Corps-headquarter Staff of the Canadian Army." He  could  be useful, he had  suggested   to  P.  K.  Konody,   the  art  critic  charged with  the  selection  of  artists, because  he  knew  all about  howitzers.

44

CANADA AND THE  ARTIST



In   a  report   submitted  to  the  Canadian  Government  Beaverbrook mentions
Lewis's  assignment and  refers to his place of birth:

The   latest  recruit  is  the  celebrated  modern  artist  Hon.  Major   Augustus  John, whose ambition  is to  paint  a gigantic decoration  thirty feet in length  symbolizing the experiences of modern  war. Among other artists who are working for the fund are  C.  R.  W.  Nevinson,  also  employed  by the  Imperial  Government, and  2nd. Lieut.  P. Wyndham  Lewis, a  native of Nova Scotia and  an  artillery  officer, who is painting a picture of a Canadian gun-pit.'

Augustus John  exceeded  his ambition by ten feet according to the  New  York Sun,  June g, I 9I 9, which  reported that  his panel, forty  by twelve feet, would  fill one  wall  of  "an   imposing   artistic  memorial of  the  part   Canada played  in  the Great War." In  fact  John only  finished  the cartoon.  He  arrived  at  the Canadian Corps  Headquarters several  days after  Lewis, who had  been sent  back  after  much delay  to his battery at Poperinghe to report  to his O.C.  "to  be personally  seconded by him." It was  a  private sortie  with  Augustus  John  that  Lewis  particularly  re­ called  when  he  recorded his  experience  with  the  Canadian unit.  And  it  was  to John that  he  wrote  from  Ottawa in  I945  just before  he sailed  back  to  England after  his four  and a half  year stay in Canada during  the second  war, "The peculiar  state  of mind  of these  people  cannot be conveyed in a letter." 2
At  the  time  of his  transfer in I 9 I7  Lewis had  been  particularly impressed  by the  informality of  the  Canadian  Quarters at  Vimy.  The officers, he  said,  "had no  ambition to  be imitation toffs as  the  English  had." They  held  commissioned rank  "but it  was on such  a rigid  understanding that  they should  not  throw  their weight  about, they  enjoyed  it  under  such  awful  democratic safeguards, that  the only  advantage that  it  took  with  it  was  that  they  had  the  equivalent of  much more  money than  their  subordinates, not much  more rank. Also they had  a Sam Browne  belt and  the others  hadn't." 3
Lewis, however,  was  not  a participant in the  routine  life of the  Mess or of the adjacent battery. He  was  an  "onlooker" in  an  area  of  questionable local  peace which   contrasted sharply with   the  rolling  wastes  of mud  at  Passchendaele, the "hell-blast" at  Nieuport, the  bursts  of shell-fire  with  their  whizzing   "spawn of
'splinters'," the  duck-boards and  observation  posts.  Although  he  was  detached
from   action,   a  palette   on  his  thumb, he  was soon  reminded  that  responsibility was  as inescapable as it  had  been  when  he  had  led  a group of  his  men  to  an O.Pip of "most  evil  report." At  this time,  realizing  that  they  were  being  hunted from  the air by "creatures of another dimension," he had  jumped  into  a shell-hole to save  himself.  What happened next  was a simple  parable.

45

CANADA AND THE  ARTIST



The  N.C.O. who  was on my  heels came  in  at  my  back.... No fellow  human has ever  impinged with  so resolute  a  pressure  on  my  own  flesh.... 'The bastards arc bracketing! muttered the  N.C.O. upon  my chest.... My sensation  was resignation to  an  ordeal rather than  expectation of  extinction. The   bitter   taste  of stupidity was in my mouth ...4

When he  wrote M onstre  Gai  and   Malign Fiesta  after   the  second war   Lewis described how  that luxurious extension of  mobility and   privacy, the  automobile, was   placed  at   the   naif  Pullman's  limited  convenience by  both the  Bailiff   and Sammael. Every  morning in the  new  quarters, Lewis  recalled in Blasting and Bombardiering, a  staff  car  reported for  duty:

I  ran  down  to  my battery  in the  car-to  my  new  Canadian battery. It was a '6 inch  How'   battery.   I  had  nothing to do  with  it,  of  course,  except  to  paint  it.  It stood  by itself in  the great  open  spaces of Vimy  Ridge.  There was nothing near  it. The   battery seldom  fired.  Everything was  different in  this  part  of  the  Line­
so different to start  with  I  could  scarcely  believe  my eyes, or ears.
. . . Away  in  the  distance,  over the  ruins  of Lens,  a shell would  fall occasionally. That was  all;  like a  big door  banging  far  away  in  the  distance. After  my  recent experience this peace was almost  uncanny....
I  made the  acquaintance of the officers and  men  of the  battery. I was my own
master  of  course.  Next  day  I  went  down  again  with  my  sketchbook,  took  up  my position  and  began  to make  a few drawings of the  guns.  It was a fine winter's day, there  was no battery  or anything at all in sight.  Just  a rolling  expanse  of old  battle­ fields, gradually softening  into  an  effect  like a rather untidy  looking common.
I  took  my pencil and  was  just about  to make  a mark  on the  paper, when  imme­
diately   overhead a  great  angry  shrapnel burst  occurred, spraying the  ground all round  and, in this idyllic scene, causing such an uproar that all the birds of the neighbourhood began  dashing  about-the  officers came  flying  up  from  the  Mess dugout, shouting in  amazement, 'What's  that?'  and  as  to  the  gunners, pottering among   the  guns,  they   just  vanished   right   and   left  as  if  they'd   been  shot.... It was  just  as if the  Germans had  got  wind  of my activities, and  had  said,  'Ha! We will  put  a little  shellfire into  this  picture!'
I felt someway guilty for this outrage.

He  was  thinking, no  doubt, about the  pre-war visual  revolution, of  dogmatic abstraction, and  of the  dangers inherent in the  expressionist doctrine which he had already  explored  as  he  created  the   figure of  Otto  Kreisler in  his  novel  Tarr. When he  recalled the  event  in  1937  he was  thinking of a new  war  in  the  making, of  a  new  explosion of expressionist violence, of the  fact that someone was  already putting a  torch to the  workshop.
Early in  his  account of  the  conditions under which A  Canadian Gunpit was

CANADA AND THE ARTIST



conceived  Lewis  recalled  a  picture  which  had  been  reproduced in  the  first issue of Blast.

My  picture  called  'The  Plan  of War'  painted  six months  before the  Great  War
'broke out'  as we say, depresses me. A prophet  is a most unoriginal  person:  all he is doing  is imitating something  that  is not  there,  but soon will be. With  me war and art  have been mixed up from the start.  I wish I could get away from war. ... Writing  about  it may be the  best way to shake the accursed  thing off, by putting it in its place as an unseemly joke.5

He  had,  he  said,  been  very  sans  fa on
about  war.  In  art  as in war  he had  been a condottiere. He  had  flung  himself into trigonometry and  ballistics  as "lighthearte\:lly  as Leonardo did  when  he designed siege-sledges  for  the  Florentine General Staff." 6 He  had  enrolled  others  now  en­ listed  in  the  service  of  the  Canadian  War   Records -David  Bamberg,  Frank Dobson,  Frederick Etchells,  C. R. W. Nevinson,  William  Roberts, Edward  Wads­ worth7-under the  banner of  Vorticism,   or,  at  least,  displayed   their  work  in his  two  issues  of  Blast.  Their  "records" like  Lewis's  A  Canadian  Gunpit  and Augustus  John's charcoal sketch  for a mural-Wadsworth's Dazzle Ships,  Born­ berg's  Sappers   at  Work, and   Roberts' The  First  Gas  Attack   at  Ypres among  others -were,  after  a series of exhibitions in I 9I 9, to disappear into  the storage  rooms of the National Gallery.
Some  of the  pictures were shown  with work done for the Imperial Government at  the  Burlington Galleries  in  Picadilly,  where  they were  reported   to be "viewed by great  throngs" -including Clive  Bell, who  concluded  with  some satisfaction that  all the painters were belated  Pre-Raphaelites, and  that  "the  brothers Spencer, the  brothers   Nash,  Mr.  Lewis,  Mr.  Bamberg, and  Mr.  Lamb were  probably not born  to  be painters." Their pictures,  he said,  departed from  "moral conviction" not   from   "visual  sensation." They   were   not  "expressing   something  that   had moved  them  as artists  but  rather what  they  thought about  something which  had horrified  them  as men." 8
When  the  pictures were  shown  at  the  Anderson Galleries  in  New  York,  June IO  to  July   gi, I9I9, the  "post-war" period,  which  Lewis  saw  culminating in England  with  the  General Strike  of  I926, had  already  begun  to  settle  in.  The New York Herald, June  I I, reported:

The  Duke of Devonshire,  Governor  General of Canada,  who with members of the Cabinet  was to have occupied  the centre of the stage [at  the opening of the exhi­ bition]  was detained  in  Ottawa by the labour  troubles which are now  occupying the  serious attention of  the  Dominion  Government.  Arthur  Knowlton,  President

47

CANADA  AND  THE ARTIST



of the Canadian Club of New York, was in the chair. He briefly introduced  Colonel R.  F. Parkinson, n.s.o., the Royal Ottawa  Regiment,  of the Ottawa  Journal, who is director  of the Canadian  War Records Office.

Lewis's  canvas,  together  with  the  canvases  of  Wadsworth and  Roberts, drew the  general   attention of  the  press.  A  Canadian Gunpit  was  reproduced in  the New  York Times Magazine of June 8. It was noted  that  "Wyndham Lewis is the leader   of  an  Independent Group of  which   Roberts was  a  member   in  pre-war days.  His  picture  of a Canadian gun  pit  also  marks  a return to something akin to realism,  though  by no means  a complete  surrender." The New York Tribune, June IO,  observed,  "The 'Gas  Attack' painted by Gunner William  Roberts and the  'Canadian  Gunpit'  painted   by  that   celebrated  Vorticist,  Wyndham  Lewis, have  undeniable vitality,  but  one  cannot  say  that  either  is the  least  beautiful." The World, New  York,  June   8,  reported, "Wyndham  Lewis,  whose  somewhat cubist  'Gunpit' is shown  was for three  years  a Lieutenant in  the  Field  Artillery." Between   I 9 I 9 and  I 920  the  pictures  were  exhibited in  both  Toronto and  Mon­ treal.  A history of the collection  was later  written by Captain Percy F. Godenrath. The title  was  Lest We   Forget.




LEWIS MADE HIS  OWN  COMMENT  on  all  this  activity  in  the
Foreword to  the  catalogue for  the  exhibition Guns  at  the  Goupil  Gallery:

The  War has, so far, been reflected in art with the greatest profusion. But the same can be said for life at any time and we are not much  the wiser. Whatever  we may think about  that  it is certain  that  the philosophy of the War,  all the serious inter­ pretation   of  it,  has yet to  be done.  That could  not,  for  a  hundred  reasons, be accomplished  during  the  War.  This  in  no way means  the  disparagement  of  the good work relating  to the War, in painting,  that  has been done so far. But all the War   journalism,  in  painting   and  writing,  will  cease  with  the  punctuality   and nettete  of a  pistol shot  when  the  curtain  goes down.  It  will then  be the  turn  of those with experience in the subject,  the inclination,  the  mood, to make the true record. Truth has no place in action.

Lewis  turned his own  attention first toward the  possibility  of collaboration  be­ tween  the  artist  and  the engineer,  next  to the  appearance of the Tyros  and  Apes who  began  to  people  the  landscape. Finally, after  the  General Strike,  he  turned  again   to  the  range  of  possible  imagery  between   "Ucello's aloof  pageant  of  ar­  mours,  clothes ... the  trappings and  wardrobe of  War" and  the  furious satire  of




















































Mary M cLean, 1940	on• •  'lgx!:tu 	Re produced  by courtes y of Mrs. Douglas  St cwarl

CANADA AND THE  ARTIST



Goya's  "Desastros  de Ia Guerra."  Behind  him  he  had  not  only  the  experience uf  I 9 I 4-19 I 8  but  also the Timon  drawings,  the  Vorticist  abstractions,  and  the images of embattled machines which can be found in the Captain  Guy Baker Collection  in  the  Victoria and  Albert  Museum.
The  great  canvases, The  Surrender of Barcelona (Tate Gallery), The  Armada (Vancouver  Art Gallery),  The  Stations of the  Dead  (Aberdeen  Municipal  Gal­ lery)  were completed in  I936-I937 at the time of the publication  of Blasting and Bombardiering, Count Your  Dead They  Are Alive or A New War in the Making, and  The  Revenge   for Love, a novel which stirred  up as much  controversy about the nature  of reality as the portrait  of Eliot  painted  at the same time was to do.
In  Canada during  the second war Lewis continued  to explore and  to expand this theme.  Lebensraum:  The  Battlefield, watercolour  and ink,  I2%" by I8%", the property of the Art Gallery of Ontario is, as far as I know, the only example in a public Canadian collection. Lebensraum  No.2: Empty  Tunic, watercolour  and ink,  9Y2" by  I3%", Three Martyrs, watercolour   and  ink,  I4"
Dragon's Teeth, watercolour and ink, Io" by I4Y4,", all in the Douglas collection,
Toronto, are  dated   I94I   and  1942.  Another watercolour and  ink  drawing,
9%" by  Is", Three  Gladiators, the  property  of Norman  Endicott,  also belongs to the same group.  In  two of the pictures classical architectural detail appears in the  context  of  warrior  figures. "Nationalism," Lewis had  written  in  the  early months  of  I939,  "perhaps  because to-day  it is self-conscious, is invariably  anti­ quarian." In  the  other  two  pictures  "Creation  Myth"  images on  which  Lewis was working  at the same time are conceived in an atmosphere  of  foreboding.  A drawing  of I943,  Mother and Infant  with Male, as it was called in an exhibition
at  York  University,  Toronto,  pastel and  pencil,  I4%" by  I r", the  property  of
Marshall  McLuhan, indicates the vitality with  which  Lewis continued  to record
"that never failing paradox,  the real."
Images  with which Lewis had been preoccupied  between the two wars-and earlier-appear in the work of this period. Among these are Witch on Cowback, watercolour   and  crayon,  I I //
Surprised at Dawn, watercolour and crayon,  I 7%" by I I%" in the  J. S. McLean
collection,  Toronto, and  Cow,  exhibited  at  York   University as  BulFs Head, crayon,  I 2" by  I o", the property of Norman  Endicott.  All are variations on the theme  of The  Childermass, a skilfully constructed  phantasmagoria, in which  the relationship  between  the  artist  and  his model-between Pullman  and  Satters­ thwaite -between the  executive  will  and  the  not-self -is  recapitulated by  a mass  cast-the  Bailiff and  the  appellants-the crowd-master  and  the  crowd

so

CANADA  AND  THE ARTIST



which now includes  the artist  and  his model however disaffected they may seem to be.
As an  epigraph  for  The   Art  of Being Ruled  ( 1926)  Lewis had  taken  some
lines from  Chapman in  which  the figure of horse and  rider is transformed  into an  emblem,  "A  doctrinal  and  witty hieroglyphic/  Of  a blessed kingdom."  As a postscript  he had  added  a fragment  from  Parmenides,  "I wish to communicate this  view of  the  world  to  you exactly as it manifests itself:  and  so no human opinion  will ever be able to get the better of you."
About  the same time a mounted  figure had appeared  on the cover of the first issue of Lewis's review The  Enemy.  A variant  version was made for the prospec­ tus. In  1931  Lewis was depressed  by the apathy  of England.  In  Hitler  he had registered the disturbing  waves set up by the "powerful  machine of the german consciousness." The  sedentary  habits  of six years of work  had  begun  to weary him. He left England  for North Africa. There, meditating between Agadir and the Anti-Atlas on the camel  pasturing  with its leather  lips between the stones on the salty ground  of  the  steppe,  he  had  occasion to think  again  of the  "witty  hier­ oglyphic." The  camel on which the life of the group depended,  he observed, had never  become domesticated  like the horse. He  "roared  with  indignation  at con­ straints  on his liberty  when  he was locked up  and fed on grain  and  dates in his brief stop in an oasis." 9
,
Witch  on Cowback  presents a terrified cow, ridden inland  into  a glaring light by a partly hollow figure which appears to be manipulated by a smaller figure on

CANADA AND THE ARTIST



its back.  The  witch's  head  is the "loud-speaker" head  which  Charles  Handley­ Read says first appeared  in designs for Beyond This  Limit  (I 935), a collaboration between Lewis and  Naomi  Mitchison." The  figure of the "loud-speaker" can be found in Lewis's work, however, as early as The Childermass where it is associated with the executive will as it is in The  Apes of God, where in one of Lewis's illus­ trations  the "loud-speaker" head is combined  with antennae.
While he was living at the Tudor  Hotel during  I94I  and  I942 Lewis also com­ pleted a number  of works in a series called "Creation Myth." An ink and gouache, I27'2" by I37'2", dated  I927, a section of dark sea with fish and rising submarine  forms called Creation  Myth  No.  I, is now in the Tate  collection. Another,  also called Creation Myth  No. I, was exhibited by Hugh  Kenner  at Santa  Barbara  in
I 957. There  are in the Duncan  collection at least four  pictures, dated  I 94 I  and I942,  that  belong  to this group,  all are  in  mixed  media  and  all of dimensions similar  to those already indicated: Creation  Myth No. I7, Creation  Myth: Ma­ ternal Figure, Gestation, and  Still Life in the Belly of the Bird.
Two  pictures  reproduced  in  Charles  Handley-Read's The   Art  of  Wyndham Lewis,  Four  Figure  Composition   ( I938)   and  What the  Sea is Like  at  Night ( I949)  link two other pictures painted in Toronto to the "Creation Myth" series:
Allegresse Aquatique, ink  and  watercolour,   I 2 7'2" by  I 7 Y2",   in  the  collection
of the Art Gallery of Ontario,  and  ]ehova the Thunderer in the Duncan collec­
tion. Other  pictures in the Duncan  collection, The  Island, oil on canvas, 3 I" by
22  I/8", Marine  Fiesta, watercolour  and  ink,  and  Two Women on  a Beach, watercolour  and  crayon on the same blue paper  as that  used for Creation  Myth: Maternal  Figure, belong to the same world of fluid forms.
Eric  Newton,  speaking  of the  surrealist  aspect  of Lewis's  work, observed  in I95I  that  perhaps  Lewis had not created quite enough specimens of what he and Charles Handley-Read called "imaginative composition"  as distinct from his paintings  of the  I 9 I 4- I 9 I 8 war  and  from  his paintings  and  drawings  from life "to  furnish  a classifiable world with its own fauna  and  flora."  Mr.  Newton was alluding  specifically to the world of the  "ball-headed creatures  that  inhabit  the
'Mud  Clinic'," 12  a painting  now the  property  of the  Fredericton  Gallery.  Even if this questionable  presupposition with its consequent  classification were granted, it should  be remembered  that  the "ball-headed creatures" appear  in some of the pictures  painted  in  I94I  and  in  I942  which  have  not  been seen except in two exhibitions in Toronto -one at Victoria College, University of Toronto, from February  6 to February  28,  I950,  one at York  University,  Toronto, November

52

CANADA  AND  THE  ARTIST



27 to December 30,  I964-and  in an  exhibition at the Santa Barbara Museum of Art,  August-September,  I957·
In   two  of  the   Toronto  watercolour and   ink  pictures-Lebensraum: The
Battlefield  and   Allegresse Aquatique-these figures may  be seen  in  landscapes which  include details  of Lewis's  immediate environment. In the  first they lie like a  blood-sacrifice   with  their  rifles and  helmets  at  the  base  of a distant group  of small  skyscrapers.  In  the second  they sport  and  make love in a wide stream below a  red  barn.  Both  are  related  to the  Inferno,  reproduced in Wyndham Lewis the Artist and  in  the  Tate Gallery  Catalogue for the exhibition of  I956. This  picture was  first  shown   at  the  Leicester   Galleries  in  an  exhibition   of  Lewis's  work  in December I937,  when,  according to the  catalogue, the  paint  was "still  wet."
Lewis  himself  had   something  to  say  about   doctrinaire  Surrealism  in   I929.
In  an  essay entitled   "The Diabolical Principle," The  Enemy  No. 3, he spoke  of a  "dogmatic subjectivism which  would  manipulate objective  truth, of  necessity, in  favour  of some  version  of the  private  world  of the isolated  mind" by omitting from  its consideration the  fact  that  all reality  is a merging,  in one  degree  or  an­ other,   of  the  external and   the  internal, that   all  reality,  to  some  extent,  is  one reality saturated with  the imagination." "Even  more is it the case,"  he said, "with the  reality  of art,  or myth.... All art  worth  the name  is already super-real." •3
Another group of works  painted in  Canada which  have  not  been  seen  except in Toronto and  at the Santa Barbara exhibition  is the "Crucifixion Series." Cruci­ fixion Series I and  Crucifixion  Series III  are in the Duncan collection. Crucifixion Series II  Piela is in  the  McLean collection.  Another  unnumbered example is the property of John Reid  of Toronto. The  images  in these  pictures  differ  from  the primitive  cruciform  figure  in  an  ink,  watercolour, and   crayon  painting dated  I 9 I 2, and   from   the  sketch  of  the  crucifixion  which  appears in  the  Portrait of Naomi  MitchisonJ 1938. The  images  suggest  that  Lewis had  continued to enter­ tain  a belief which  he had  expressed in Time  and Western Man when  he rejected among  other  images  the  image  of Bradley's  monotonous  Absolute.  In  form  and mood  these  pictures  belong  with  the  "Creation Myth" series.
Anyone  concerned  with  Lewis's  attraction to  aspects  of  neo-Thomism would be  interested in  the  typewritten text  of a  lecture  on  Rouault which  Lewis  gave for the Arts Club  in Chicago, February I944· In  this lecture  he recalled  by quota­ tion   the   Conclusion  of  Time and  Western  Man.  Although  Lewis  saw  in  the "uncompromising images" of Rouault not only a "religious  impulse  at  the  maxi­  mum  of its  creative   power" but  also one  particularly attractive to  those  caught  in  the  void  left  by  the  erosion  of the  notion  of Progress,  he was still  reluctant to

53

CANADA AND THE ARTIST



admit  the exclusive claim of a tragic  vision. At  the end  of the discussion of "God as Reality" in Time and Western Man  he had  observed  that  it was in the interest of  a  democratic God  who  had  shared   his  creative   power  with  men  that   "we should  find  our  salvation  in  being  simply  what  we are."

tiE LETTERS  of the  Canadian period  record  that  Lewis made some  portrait drawings  and  painted   a  number of  portraits while  he  was  living
in Toronto. In  his letters he mentions  specifically a drawing of Lome Pierce'4 and a  drawing of  Douglas  LePan   which  he sent  to  Felix  Giovanelli  who  was trying to make  arrangements for  Lewis to lecture  in St. Louis. '5 The  employees  of J. S. McLean commissioned   Lewis  to  paint   a  portrait of  McLean which  is  now  at Canada Packers  in Toronto. Lewis also painted Mary, J. S. McLean's daughter.
A  portrait of  Mrs.  R.  J. Sainsbury, the  gift  of R. J. Sainsbury, was  lent  to the
York  University   exhibition   by  the  National Gallery  of  Canada.
Lewis's  Portrait  of  an  Englishwoman, reproduced in  Blast  1914,  a  witty  ab­ stract  construction with  the  diagonal, dynamic, spatial  play  of forms  which  were being  developed  at  the same  time  by the  Russian  Suprematist Kasmir  Malevich, had  been  qualified  in the same  number by the  assertion  that  to paint  a recogniz­  able  human being  "should  be the  rarest  privilege,  bestowed  as a sort of Freedom of Art." By the time he wrote The Caliph's  Design in 1919  Lewis noted  ironically  that  "it  had  been possible within  the trivial space of ten years, entirely  to eliminate from  the  face  of the  earth  the  naked,  clothed  or other  lady-every  vestige and tatter even  of a  human being  from  the  horizon  of the  purest,  the  latest  art." As an  examination of Lewis's  painting will show  he continued to take  advantage of the  privilege  which  his technical mastery  of  abstraction had  conferred upon  him.
Lewis  could   hardly   have  expected   to  support  himself  either   in  the  United
States  or  Canada by portrait painting at  the  end  of 1939.  In  the  final  pages of Wyndham Lewis  the  Artist, a collection  of critical  essays on the visual arts, which included some sharp  prefatory  comment on  the  role of the  amateur, the  eclectic, and  the  entrepreneur, Lewis spoke of the  rejection of his 1938  portrait of T. S. Eliot  by the  Royal  Academy.  The  rejection  indicated, Lewis  remarked, "how  our particular  plutocracy   expresses  its  patronizing  contempt  for  the  things  of  the mind,  when  those  things  take  a visual form." The  submission  of the  portrait had been  a test case for him.
The Portrait  of Edith  Sitwell  (begun in 1923  and  completed in 1935)   now in the  Tate Gallery,   the  gift  of  Major   Beddington Behrens,   Lewis  finally  sold  to

54

CANADA  AND  THE ARTIST



the Leicester Galleries for  £50. The  I 938 Portrait  of Ezra  Pound  was purchased for  £I oo by the Tate  Gallery out of the Knapping  Fund  in  I 939, but Sir John Rothenstein  recalls that  he himself failed to persuade tl:ie Trustees of the Tate  to buy the portrait  of Eliot for  £250.'6 It was finally sold to the Durban  Municipal Gallery. The  first part of the payment made it possible for Lewis to leave London. In  October  of I939  Lewis was writing toT. J. Honeyman  from Buffalo to thank him for sending part of the payment. "I am sorry," he said, "that I had to bother you so much." '7
The  National  Gallery of Canada, to whose acting director  Lewis was to apply for work with  the  War  Records,  had  consented in  I939  to give temporary safe­ keeping  to  some  of  the  British  pictures  from  the  New  York  World's  Fair.  In October  John  Rothenstein  was in Ottawa, a guest of the Tweedsmuirs  at Govern­ ment House, arranging for the temporary exhibition for which Lord Tweedsmuir had  consented  to  perform  the  opening  ceremony. The Surrender  of  Barcelona had  been in  the  English  Pavilion.  Perhaps  Lewis thought  that  Canada was still interested in saving British artists as well.
It was,  however,  the  interest  of  particular  people  that  made  it  possible for Lewis to work. On July  IS, I94I, he wrote to Sturge Moore, whom he had known since his boyhood, "I have been miraculously fed and sheltered  (I have what Americans call an  'angel'.)" '8 In  I 94 I  he also wrote to Archibald  MacLeish, "I have succeeded in making  a living of sorts here-mostly by portrait  painting - it is very gruesome work struggling with people about the shape of their nose and the size of their feet;  and  Canada being a small and backward  country  does not make it easier."rg
Nevertheless Lewis was depressed by the psychological chill of wartime Toronto, by the combination  of money and methodism, by his failure  to find himself, until he went to Windsor, in any meaningful context. "I am reduced to writing articles," he wrote, "to fill the time and  my pocket-on 'Will there be a Canadian Renais­ sance?' ... So  I  make  quite  a  spectacular  explosion of intellectual  energy. The only intelligent  people here like the painter,  Jackson, regard  a marriage  with the States  as their  best bet and  I  think  the same."""  Lewis admired  Jackson  for his integrity as a painter  and as soon as he returned to England  paid particular  tribute to  him  in  the  first of  a series of articles for The  Listener, August  29,  I946,  in which he showed his broad  capacity to understand  work which had  its base in a "creative  necessity" that  was not closely related to his own.
Lewis apparently   met  A. Y. Jackson  in  I939  at  a  dinner  in  the  York Club given by J. S. McLean  and  arranged  by Terrence  MacDermot, then  Headmaster


55

CANADA  AND  THE ARTIST



of  Upper Canada College,  and  Douglas   Duncan. John Reid  recalled  that   the dinner took  place  on November  go, St. Andrew's Day,  because  Charles Comfort, who  had  been  invited  with  Jackson  and  Carl  Schaefer, was wearing a plaid  tie. Reid  recalled,  too,  that  Lewis was late for dinner because  it was on this day  that he  had  been  taken  on  a  tour  of Hart House  by  the  Warden. Lewis, then,  must have  returned to  Toronto from  Buffalo  for  a  few  days  before  he went  to  New York to see about  The  Vulgar Streak, a novel finally  published in wartime format by  Robert Hale   in  London. The  visit  to  Hart House   provided Lewis  with  an amusing chapter in  America  I  Presume, a  book  which  he  wrote  during his  un­ happy  year  in  New  York.



AFTER HE RETURNED to Canada in November 1940, Lewis found  accommodation in the Tudor Hotel  not far  from  the old post office on Bay Street  and  close to Duncan's small gallery on Charles Street. As his letters indicate he went  almost  immediately to Ottawa to make  enquiries about  work for the War Records. Eric  Brown,  who  had  been  Director of  the  National Gallery  since  the time  of  the  Beaverbrook scheme  and  who  had  secured  the services of a number of  resident  artists  for  the first War  Records, had  died  in April  1939· H.  0. Mc­ Curry was acting  director. Lewis apparently received  promises but  nothing seemed to come  of them.  This  time  paradoxically he was  to be commissioned not  by the Canadian  Government but  by  the  British  War   Artists  Advisory  Committee to paint  what  is usually  referred  to as the  "Anaconda picture."
The   difficulties  which  beset  the  painter  de  metier,  already   indicated by  the
dimensions of  the  paintings  of 1941-1942,  the  skilful  and  integrated use of blue drug-store paper, and  the  use of most  easily  accessible  materials except  in  com­ missioned  portraits, became  acute  at the time  Lewis began  his work for the British Ministry. To  Eric  Kennington, who  had  also  worked  for  the  Beaverbrook  fund  in  1914-1918  and  was of help to Lewis at  this time,  Lewis wrote in March 1943, "Since I have  been  given  the  choice,  I paint   a  picture  in  oils. I believe  I can put  my hands on  the money to buy a canvas: and  I can get free transport to the factory." After   a  hiatus  in  the  letter  which   is  explained  by  the  comment "Six weeks ago the  hotel  burnt  down  all but  the annexe", Lewis mentions the  problem  again. "I bought the last box of white conte in the  'Art  Metropole' here  the other  day.   I am  turning over  in  my  mind  methods of  making paint,  when  the  last brush  and  the  last  tubes of Burnt  Sienna  and  Venetian Red  are sold  and  I and a few others  here  are back where Cimabue was -lassoing hogs and  cutting their





..".,.'
-".-.l
..
:::::
":.".:
::>!
"
}	"..
.".,'
....
.."..
"
"







..
(3
z
"'
0z
<

CANADA AND THE ARTIST



hair  off  for  brushes.  There is a  lot  of  hoarding going  on  in  artists  materials I
believe." 21
After  the fire at  the Tudor Hotel,  Douglas  Duncan recalls, Lewis moved  across the  street  to  the  Selby. He  was  not  to  be  there  long.  Before  he  had  been  com­ missioned  by the British War  Artists Advisory  Committee he had  been attempting to  find  some  civilian  employment in  which   he  could  be of  use and  freed  from the  necessity  of  painting portraits, since,  as  he  told  Kennington, "he  could  not even  masquerade as a soldier." Although he brushed it aside he was also beginning to have  trouble  with  his sight.  By curious  coincidence the opportunity came  only when  he was  beginning  work  on  the  Anaconda  picture-the  "line  of furnaces serviced  by an  infernal personnel  (mainly  Central  European and  Russian)" and the  monster  with  a solitary  claw  which  drew   jars  of molten  glass from  the  fur­
naces. 22   In   March he  was  invited   by  Father J. Stanley   Murphy to  lecture  at
Assumption College  in  Windsor. This  was  undoubtedly one  of  his happiest  ex­
periences  in  Canada, but  it created  complications for  him  as an artist.
In   August   Lewis  wrote   to  Felix  Giovanelli from   the  Royal   Apartments  in Windsor, "I  have  to work  a little  more  on  my  painting for  the  British  Govern­ ment,  and  then  get  down  to  the  reading necessary  for  my  October  lectures  and  collect  material for  my  book."  (America  and Cosmic  Man). Two  days later  he wrote   again,   "My picture  is giving  trouble and   threatens  to  interfere with  the reading I  had   planned   in  preparation for  the  Heywood  Broun Lectures. But  I have  an  excellent  small studio  thank  goodness." On  November I I, he told  Gio­ vanelli,  "The Ministry  of  Information have  thrust  a new  problem  on  me;  they suggest  that  I should  secure  a zinc cylinder  here  in  Windsor, roll up the  painting I did for them,  so that  it may be transported in a bomber to England. I don't feel that   this  is going  to  do  my  picture  very  much  good,  especially  as  the  paint  is rather thick in places." •s
"Writing and  picture-making are  not  activities,  I have  found, which  mix very well,  unless one  becomes  the servant of the  other, as was the  case with  Blake, or with  Rossetti," Lewis wrote  in  Rude  Assignment!4  Although the  move  to  Wind­ sor  appears to have  brought to an  end  the  activity  of  I94I-I942  Lewis's  picture  making did  not  cease. "It is my  plan  to  paint  one  of the  priests  here," he wrote to  John Burgess  from  Windsor. "He is a  whole  hogging  Thornist;  and  I shall call  it  'The Thomist'." 2s Father  Murphy sat  for  him.  He  painted a  portrait of Mrs.  Paul  Martin. He  made  a fine pastel  drawing of Pauline Bondy  and  began  a  portrait in oil which  was  unfinished  when  he left  Windsor. It was  returned to Canada by  Mrs.  Lewis  after  Lewis's  death, as  a  pencil  sketch  of  Marshall Me-

CANADA AND THE  ARTIST



Luhan was and an oil portrait  of Margaret Giovanelli. In Rude  Assignment Lewis mentions  a  pastel  of "Mrs.  O'Brien  of Montreal" dated  1945.  It should  be re membered  also that  Mother  and  Infant  with Male is dated  1943.
From  St.  Louis came  offers of help from  Marshall  McLuhan and  Felix Gio
vanelli. "Please tell McLuhan," Lewis wrote to Giovanelli, "(though I am writing to him about  this)  that  I propose to do 'Thirty  Personalities of America' ... But that  is in the future  and  I want some portable specimens of my handiwork...." To  Giovanelli, who had sent him twenty-five dollars as an advance  on a portrait of his wife, Lewis replied, "Let  me thank  you first ... when  I come to St. Louis in February  I shall enjoy  portraying  her-though  I don't  like to think of your paying for it."• 6  Brought  to St.  Louis by the two men in 1944, Lewis painted  a portrait of Dr. Joseph Erlanger,  who that year had been awarded  the Nobel Prize.
After the rejection of the 1938 portrait  Eliot had written to Lewis, "... it seems to me a very good  portrait,  and  one by which  I am quite  willing that  posterity should  know me, if it takes any interest in me at all. And  though  I may not be the  best  judge of it  as portraiture, I  am sure  that it is a very fine painting."" 7
Earlier  he had  praised  Lewis for his impersonality, the impersonality  of the artist who can out of the particularity of experience express a general  truth  or create a myth.  From  the  portrait   of  Mary  McLean  Stewart,  oil, 29" x 20",  painted  in December  1940, when Lewis first settled down in Toronto  under  the "blanket  of war"  to the pastel portrait  of Pauline  Bondy completed in Windsor in 1943, the images of the creation  myth which had begun to appear  in the portraits  of 1937-
1938,  the  Portrait  of Eliot,  the  Portrait of  Mrs. Honeyman, The  Red  Portrait, Froanna The  Artist's Wife, and  the Portrait of Stephen  Spender  are caught  and focussed in  objects  of everyday  use. In  the  portrait  of Mary  McLean  they can be seen in the patterns  and shape of the chair and in the lines of her simple dress. In  the pastel sketch of Pauline  Bondy they appear  on the  jacket of the suit she is wearing,  in  the  tree like
hat  which suggest that she carries a new world on her head.




VoRTICISM,  LEWIS RECALLED  in  an  essay in The  Architec­ tural Review, November  1934, was a movement initiated  by a group of painters but  it  was  aimed  essentially  at  architectural   reform. The  Vorticists'  work, like Mondrian's, was often an exercise in architectural  theory, the picture a "spell", a positional abstraction  designed  to attract  an architectural  shell. In  Rude  Assign

59

CANADA  AND  THE ARTIST



ment  Lewis recalled  that  the way in which  the experiences of the  I9I4-I9I8 war, of the  "miles  of hideous  desert  known  as 'the  Line' " altered  his vision.

Had  you at  that  time asked me to paint  a milkmaid  in a landscape  of buttercups and  daisies I should probably  have knocked  you down.  But when  Mars  with  his mailed  finger showed me a shell-crater  and  a skeleton, with  a couple of shivered tree-stumps  behind it, I was still in my abstract  element.  And before I knew quite what  I  was doing  I  was drawing  with  loving  care  a  signaller  corporal  to  plant upon the lip of the shell-crater.

This  was not  a part  of the enterprise which  "turned an Academy rosebud  into a khaki  brave" or "in  the outer fashion  a cubed  cockney into  a cubed  Tommy." "8
It was  a movement away  not only from  the sentimentality which  caricatured the great   medieval virtue  of  compassion,  but  also from  the  vulgarization of  disgust and  from  a scientific scepticism which  cloaked  itself in impersonality. Such scepti­ cism  could  be  confronted in  no way except  by  a recognition of the essential  ab surdity   of  men  who  identified  themselves  with  a  machine. The  specific  at  this point  was  laughter, not  of  the  Bergsonian  kind,  but  something  primitive, hard, and  unchangeable, "the  sudden  handshake of mystic violence and  the  anarchist" or  "the bark  of  delight  of  a gregarious   animal at  the  proximity of its  kind.""9
The  Chinese  artist  who  thought of "human life as one  piece"  did  not  place  man
with  a capital M  at the  centre  of his pictorial universe.  Since  he allowed  a fish, bird,  tiger,  fly, frog  to enter  it  on  an  equal footing  with  the  human biped,  he never  arrived  at  the apotheosis  of the banal which  brought about  the decay  of all form  and  elegance  and  fostered  a defeatism in which  the traditional guardians­ religious  and  political-of the humanitarian values could contemplate the thought of bigger  and  better  bombs, laden  with  poison for the destruction of "alien" cities.
In  an  essay  on  Picasso  in  the  Kenyon  Review, Spring  I940, Lewis  had  an­
nounced that  his own solution  was a return to  nature, not,  however,  a return to the  world  of  the  camera  or  to the  world  of idealized   archetypes, both  the  result of  the  isloation  of the  eye from  the  other  senses.  What Lewis  had  to say  about Picasso's   "witty, distorted   reflections"   and   about   his  "power  to  caricature  all that  is brought to  him"  could  have  done  nothing but  alienate the  "modernists" who  in Canada, for instance,  were to be startled in  I 948 by the work of Riopelle and  Borduas, or  to find  in  the  work  of  Pollock  and  Rothko and  in  the  birth  of abstract  expressionism   in  New  York  a  wholly  unheralded  development. Lewis was  isolated  in  Canada partly  by  the  condition of  the  civilian  during war  but also by a  time  lag.  It is interesting that  he found companionship not  among  the artists  but  among the  neo-Thomists and  the students of contemporary literature.

6o

CANADA AND THE ARTIST



FOOTNOTES

' Canadian War  Records Office  Report Submitted by the  Officer in Charge to The Honourable  Sir  Edward Kemp, K.C.M.G.,   M.P.,   Overseas   Minister  of  Militia   & Defence.   March 30  ( Igi8)  by Beaverbrook, Lt.  Col., Officer  ijc  Canadian War Records,  p. 7·
2    The Letters  of Wyndham Lewis, ed. W. K. Rose  (London, I963), 383.
3  Blasting  and  Bombardiering (London, I 937), I 95·
4   Ibid., I74·
5   Ibid., 4·
6  Ibid., 8.
7 Canadian War  Records Office Report Submitted by Lord  Beaverbrook to the Honourable  Sir   Edward Kemp, K.C.M.G.,   M.P.,   Minister   of  Overseas  Military Forces of Canada. Aug. 3I,  I gig. Appendix 2, p. g.
8  Clive  Bell, "Wilcoxism!" Athenaeum, No. 4688  (March 5, Ig2o), 3I I-3I2.
9   Wyndham Lewis, Fillibusters  in Barbary  (London, I932), I 74·
'
" Charles  Handley-Read, The  Art  of Wyndham Lewis  (London, I95I),  57·
'"  Ibid., 27.
13  Wyndham Lewis,  The Diabolical  Principle  and  the  Dithyrambic Spectator (Lon- don,  I 93 I ) , 66-67.
'4  The Letters  of Wyndham Lewis,  304.
15  Unpublished letter, August  I3,  I943·
16  John  Rothenstein, Brave  Day, Hideous  Night  (London, Ig66), 207.
17  The Letters  of Wyndham Lewis,  265.
'8   Ibid., 292.
'9 Ibid., 302.
20   Ibid., 3I7.
' Ibid., 352.
2

22   Ibid., 353·
23  Unpublished letters,  August  g, August  IS, November  I I, I943·
24   p. I30.
25  The Letters  of Wyndham Lewis, 370.
26  Unpublished letter, November I I, I943·
27  The Letters  of Wyndham Lewis,  251.
28   Foreword, Guns   (London:  William  Marchant, The  Goupil  Gallery), n.p.
29   Wyndham Lewis, The Wild  Body  (London), 237.










6r



A RECOLLECTION
OF WYNDHAM LEWIS



Lorne Pierce




The   following  recollection  is  part  of  a letter  which  the  late  Lorne  Pierce wrote on  the  29th  April,  xg6o to W. K.  Rose, then   editing   Lewis's  letters.  It   is   pub­ lished  with  the  permission  of   Professor Rose  and  of  H.  Pearson  Gundy,  Lorne Pierce's literary executor.



LEWIS FIRST MET me in  '94'- He  had  come to  Tomnto with  his wife, and  was very restless, critical  of Toronto, and, I seem to recall,  the world,  if not indeed  the cosmos! He was uprooted, and  wanted the friends  he had known,   and  the  opponents even,  of  the  Old   World. Canada, immersed   in  the tension  and  confusion  of the  War,  its cultural life in  a sense "organized for  vic­ tory", had  little  time  for  the  amenities.  There were  few  small  groups  in  which he felt  at  home,  and,  badgered constantly  over funds,  and  the  business of  sitting it  out  in  Canada until  Peace,  he  was  not  at  peace  in  his  turbulent  soul. His quarters were  not  to his liking,  the  rooms,  and  their  care; likewise the food.  He had  a low opinion of authors and  artists  everywhere. They  were all hollow  men, recreant, two  unforgiveable sins!
He  came  to  my office  (I was  then  Editor-in-Chief of The Ryerson  Press,  the "mother publishing  house  of Canada", est.I 829)   unannounced. He  wanted to do my portrait, a crayon sketch. I was very busy, and  had  no time  to pose. Besides, I told  him  that,   having  sat  for  three oils,  and  a  bust   (the  best is now  in  the Museum of Fine  Arts, Boston,  I think), I had  been  done  to death. However, he said  that  he was most anxious  to do this portrait. He  was without work, or pros.­ pects, and  I could  help him by consenting  to sit. It would  mean  contacts, and such he  must  have  to  survive  until  war's  end.  I agreed, providing that  he  sketched

A RECOLLECTION



while  I worked  in  my  office,  and  he  was  pleased.  He  worked  away  on  a  large sheet  of paper, thumb-tacked to a board, but suddenly  rose, and  in disgust rolled the sheet  into  a ball, strode  to the  wpb,  and  threw  it in. He  tore out  of my office without a word,  banged  the door  and  was gone. Some days later  he returned, and without knocking  entered, sat  in  an  arm  chair  near  me,  and  began  work  again. He  repeated  this  a  day  or  so  later,  and   then  showed  me  the  result,  a  striking study,  vigorous,  probing, his commentary on the sitter  and  not  a flattering "like­ ness".  I liked  it, of course,  and  asked  him  why he went  to so much  trouble over an  unknown. He  replied  that  he was interested  in my face and  head, that  it repre­  sented  a challenge to him,  and  that  it reminded him of De Valera, whom  he had painted. He   crowned   that   by  saying  that   I  reminded him  of  De  Valera   and Mephistopheles! He  said  this laughing, and  I was bound  to laugh  with  him.  My daughter has  this,  for  months later  he  returned and  presented it  to  me  signed and  dated. He  said  that  he  had  used it many  times with  prospective clients, and that  it  had  brought him  success. I do  not  know  who  his sitters  were.
We  met  off  and  on  until  he  returned to  England. We  were  interested in  im­ porting for  Canada his British  publications, but  the hazards of war shipping and other  complications made  this  unsuccessful.  I liked  an  outline  he  did  of a small thing  on  the  British  Commonwealth, and  urged  him  to  develop  it into  a small book. This  became  "Anglosaxony: A League  that  Works."  Our ideas were almost identical on  this matter. I  had  begun  as early  as  rg2g  to  develop  the  theme  of Canadian  nationalism based  upon  an  entente  cordiale  at  home  between  French and  English,  and  a closer entente between  the component  parts  of the  Common­ wealth.  Lewis  was  all  for  this,  and  in  the  end  he  handed  me  his  Ms,  which  we published.
Lewis   was  already   concerned  about   his  vision,  and   had   moments of  great depression.  But,  in  most  respects,  the  world  was sadly  out  of  joint.  I liked  him very much.  He  was a veritable volcano  of energy, for ever sending  up showers of ideas,  hunches, impressions, imprecations, and  the odd benevolent blessing.



EXILE'S LETTERS




W.  K. Rose





What   is  the  use  of  talking,  and   there is no end of talking,
There  is no  end  of  things  in  the  heart.
-Pound, after Rihaku




READING LEwis's CANAmAN CORRESPONDENCE, one thinks
-or is it  only  hindsight-what a  plot  for  a  Lewis  novel!  Of  the  hundreds of letters  he wrote  between  November 1940,  and  August  1945,  only  a representative portion found   room  in  The   Letters  of Wyndham Lewis;  many  more  survive  in the  Lewis  Collection  at  Cornell  and  in  private hands. Taken together   and  read in  sequence, the  whole  group   provides  all  the  ingredients of  a  successful  long fiction: extraordinary human interest, a main  action  nicely  rounded in time  and space,   several   suspenseful   and   revealing   "sub-plots,"  patches   of  humour  and sentiment, and  plenty  of food  for  thought. This  epistolary  proto-novel seems  to need  only  some  focussing  and  an  underlying idea.
For  most  readers  some  human interest   will  doubtless  be  present   before  they begin.  We go to Lewis's Canadian correspondence because  we are  already capti­ vated  or  repelled  by or  at  any  rate  curious  about the  writer, that  celebrated and wonderfully gifted  bad  boy of modern English  art  and  letters. We have  read  his books, seen  his pictures,  perhaps become  acquainted with  his fascinating person­  ality  and  career  through  his earlier  letters,  or  the gossip of  contemporaries. What will The Enemy  make of Toronto, we ask, or Toronto of  him?
The tale that  unfolds is human comedy  bleak, not to say black, beyond our expectation. Trapped  in  his  "sanctimonious icebox," Lewis  flails  about   like  a caged  elephant. But the animal  metaphor is misleading; it is an all-too-human, far from  winning, yet admirably individual character that  emerges  from  these pages. The  writer  is ridden  by several concerns: the wish to be recognized as the notable

EXILE'S LETTERS



he  was  in  England, the  need  to  justify  his  earlier  pro-Axis  sympathies and  his departure from   Britain   in  rggg, the  desire  for  some  kind  of  companionship or ambience  to  replace   his  London life,  the  hope  for  a  more  stable  existence  in England after  the  war; above  all, an  almost  hysterical  pre-occupation with keep­ ing his head  above water.
These  interests  determine not only the contents  of most of the letters  but often the  correspondents. For  example, writing  to a friend  or acquaintance, Lewis will usually, en  passant, touch  him  for a small loan  or gift  (all  the same to him), but very  many   times  he  is  clearly  writing  for  the  purpose  of  touching. Again,  the particular concern and  the face  put  upon  it quite  naturally depend  on  the parti­ cular   correspondent. With   English  people-old  friends  like  Naomi  Mitchison  and  Sir  Nicholas  Waterhouse, influential acquaintances such  as H. G. Wells and  Henry   Moore -Lewis  is forever   justifying  his  removal  from  England  on  eco­ nomic  grounds, explaining his flirtation  with  Hitler  as  pacifism, and  announcing his new  Rooseveltian liberalism and  his eagerness  to return to bomb-ridden Lon­  don.  The  same  people  often  hear  as well of  Canadian  unfriendliness and  paro­ chialism  and  of their  correspondent's decision  to get into  the  establishment once he's  back  on  home   ground-"How  about   'Keeper  of  the  People's   Pictures'? We've  got  a  'Keeper of the  King's'. I  think  it absurd  that  because  I didn't have a  cotton-mill I can't 'Keep'  something." To  important Canadians, on  the  other  hand, the  expatriate  expounds on  the future of Canadian culture  and  on Anglo­ Canadian  relations.  If the  "melancholy monied  methodist' is not  perhaps suffi­ ciently  aware  of  his supplicant's eminence,  Lewis does not  hesitate  to place  him­  self in  the  most  exalted  company; he is also ready  to abase  himself  before some­ one  he  considers his inferior in  all but  wealth.
This  seesaw  effect sets the  tone  of the  Canadian letters.  It, more  I think  than
the  financial desperation or  the  constant  bellyaching, accounts for  the  uneasiness one  feels reading the  correspondence. It  is hard  to respect  a man  who's  jumped his rent  in  London, refuses to pay up but insists that  things  left in the  flat not be touched, and  at  the same  time  claims,  to a prospective  benefactor, that  his living expenses  in  Canada are  really  travel  expenses  because  he has to pay  his London rent.  To  an  English  enquiry regarding his birth,  the half-American Lewis insists on being  a pure  product of Albion,  while he declares himself a fellow New World­ ling  to someone  in  power  over  here.  The  miraculous fact  he seems never  to leak is that  he was actually, if fortuitously, born in Canada.
The  shenanigans and  self-seeking will not upset  a reader  familiar with  the lives
of other  asocial  artists.  What disturbs  here  is, rather, one's  sense of identification

EXILE's LETTERS



with  this beleaguered  man:  which of us, when the going was rough, has not cut his corner,  put  out his hand,  told his saving lie? There  is also the discomfort  of having  got  too close to family secrets. After such  knowledge,  what  forgiveness? Finally,  there is the irresistible fact  of Lewis and  his wife far  from  home, stuck in an unsympathetic  locale, frightfully hard-up.
Lewis's unceasing efforts to keep the wolf from  the door furnish the correspon­ dence  with  its sub-plot. There  is the story of his attempt   to  become  a resident artist in an American university, and coming excruciatingly close to jobs at Olivet College and  Reed. There  is the story of the Ministry of  Information commission, with a cast of notables including Sir Kenneth  Clark, Henry  Moore, and  Malcolm MacDonald.  This episode did, one way and another, put sizeable sums in Lewis's pocket. But like the others it ends ignominiously:  the commissioned painting  was never delivered. Then  there is the Vancouver  caper, about which more later. And there  are,  as always with  this great  comic artist,  the funny  bits. Lewis offering himself to Alfred Barr at the Museum of Modem Art for $4o a week steps right out of Snooty  Baronet. With  a picture in the Durban  Municipal  Art Gallery, he toys with  the idea  of prospecting for sitters in  South  Africa,  then  turns  around and  offers himself for a curatorship  in South  America!




T.rE LETTERS  are  instinct  with  both  humour  and  sentiment, qualities that  do much  to create sympathy for their author.  Exiled from  a world capital,  Lewis amuses his more urbane  correspondents  with  jokes about  the "this bush-metropolis of the Orange  Lodges" in which he resides. His plight seen with the  Lewisian  detachment   of  The Wild   Body   becomes  grotesquely  comic:   "in this place it is as if someone were sitting on  your chest-having taken  care to gag  you first-and  were croaking out  Moody  and  Sankey from  dawn  to day­ shut."  The  humourlessness of "these  solemn  yokels" is laughable.  " 'Well,'  she said, 'they described you as Mr. W. L. the celebrated  English wit ... .' It took me some time to understand  that  she regarded  the term  wit  as offensive and damag­ ing." He is continually surprised at finding himself, whose spiritual home was the rive  gauche, among such hicks. They don't  mention  the war. "The subject is not taboo. It just does not interest." So, when a tank "moved  down the street and as it  was abreast  a  group  of  people, myself among  them ... let fly  at  a  range  of fifteen feet with a quite sizeable little cannon  it had  hidden in its flank ... no one took the slightest notice. That  was what was so queer. I got the feeling that some-

66

EXILE'S  LETTERS



thing  unreal  was happening: and  it was the people who gave  it me." He dubbed his days in Toronto, after  the hotel in which  the Lewises lived, his "Tudor period," and  at the end  of his exile summed up Canada in a letter to Allen Tate:

They  have  retained  their  censors office here so I am debarred  from  telling you what  I think  of this  place:   but  if you turn  to the Book of Genesis you will see that   towards  the  end  of  the  week God  became  awful  tired.  It was in  the  last few  minutes   (He  was  not  feeling  at  all good)  that  He  produced  a  country  be­ ginning  with  C. It might  have  been Canaan; or perhaps it was place over which a King  reigns who is however only a commoner. A pretty  tough one that!

A  reader  of Lewis's  fiction,  poetry,  autobiographies, and  letters  quickly  recog­ nizes  his  ironic  stance, his  grinning Tyro's  mask,  as  a  natural  product  of  his temperament. It is  only  in  occasional   letters  and  in  the  later  novels  that  The  Enemy  gives vent  to the  warm-blooded, tender  side of his nature. We come upon it  in  the  Canadian letters  in  nostalgic  evocations  of  palmier  days in  London. To  his old  friend  Sturge  Moore,  he  writes:

How  calm  those days were before the epoch of wars and  social revolution,  when you used to sit on one side of your work table and I on the other,  and  we would talk-with trees and creepers of the placid Hampstead  domesticity beyond the windows, and  you used to grunt  with a philosophic despondence I greatly enjoyed.

The  quality of tender  intimacy in a few notes to his wife, in the Cornell  collection, is particularly affecting. Away  from  her  for  a few days,  he sends  his regards  to her  beloved  dog: "Tell him  that if I hear  he has misbehaved himself  during my absence  I shall  put  him in the  barph  and  there  administer  a severe flogging: after which  solitary  confinement of course, and  no bones for 24 hours." In  1944  Lewis reports  the death of this "hirsute gremlin" in a letter to a friend. He feels, he says, in a way responsible  for the pain  inflicted  by the loss of "this small creature, which stood  for  all  that  was  benevolent in  the  universe." "Like  the  spirit  of a simpler and  saner  time,  this  fragment confided  his destiny  to her,  and  went  through  all the  black  days  beside  us."  Now  his wife grieves, and  he is "just another human being-by  no  means  a  well  of  primitive   joie-de-vivre: so  not  much  comfort!"
The  letters  from  Canada are  more  personal  than  those of any  other  period  of Lewis's life. They  are also on the whole more discursive. H ors de combat  for really the  first  time  in  his career,  he  has  the  leisure  to comment at  length  on  topics of interest; deprived of  congenial companions, he  needs the  medium of  correspon­ dence  for small-talk and  rumination. Just  as so often in his novels we  jump  from the  purely  personal  or emotional passage to the philosophic discussion, so in these

EXILE'S LETTERS



letters  are  the/ cries of woe and  pleas for help interspersed with lively commentary on  public  events,  discussion of his own works, and  speculation on the "post-war."/ Since  Wyndham Lewis the  Artist  thinks  always  concretely, illustratively, his epis­ tolary  comment is apt  to be as vivid as that  in the essays and  novels. On  the sub­ ject of India's participation in the war,  he says in 1942:

As to  India  defending  itself:   an  Indian friend  of mine  informed  me that  his ancestors  had  not taken  life for  three  thousand  years. I asked him  how he knew that.  He  replied  at  once:  "I  know it because if they had  I should  not belong to the Caste  I do."-Not a promising subject for universal Hindu  conscription!

In  an  unpublished letter  to  Malcolm   MacDonald, Lewis  opposes  MacDonald's "theory that   the  bush  will attract and  absorb  the  red  blooded   people" with  his own  view "that the red-bloods  will go pink  and  scorn  the ancestral wilds."

In  Timmins  the other  day a tailor  was heavily fined for making  a zoot-suit:  and although  it is true that  the Finnish miners still kill each other in murderous  affrays up there, the boredom that  provokes this violence is being progressively liquidated, I  understand, in  the  dazzling  dance-halls  of  the  bush  cities. "Artie  hysteria"  is being sublimated  in hot  music. -I  mean  that  I  think  that  "the  frontier" that  is in  [A. Y.]  Jackson's blood is chronologie  and  not geographic,  and  it is far-off in the  past, in a limbo of snowshoes and  redskins. It  will hardly  come back via the a1r....



tiE TIME HAS  COME to stop  playing  games. The Lewis novel I
have  been  coyly adumbrating did  of course  get written and  eventually appear, in
1954,  as Self Condemned. He  had  projected it early  during his stay  in Toronto and  it must  have  been in the back, or on the side, of his mind  when  he wrote  the letters  I have  been  discussing.  In  an  article,  evidently   unpublished, of  1941  or
1942,  he says:  "I could qualify  to be the  'Dr. Anthony' of the Ad justee. There is nothing I do  not  know  about  these painful questions,  and  this accumulated  wis­ dom  I shall  one day embody  in a book, such  as Maxim Gorki  might  have written
-the  author of 'Creatures who  once  were  men'."
In  avoiding mention  of Self Condemned my aim  has  been  to cause  those  who know  the  novel  to  make  their  own  free  associations  between  it  and  the  letters, between  the  fiction and  the facts. A study  of the two in tandem does not, I think,

68

EXILE'S  LETTERS



tell us anything  new about  the relationship  between life and  art  or, specifically, about  the relationship  between Lewis's life and his art. Like most serious novelists, Lewis was essentially an  autobiographical writer:  the fantastic Bailiff's court in The  Childermass is just as truly a theatre  of its creator's  mind  as is the scene of "Lord  Asmund's  Lenten  Party" (The Apes of God) a thinly disguised Renishaw. The  fact  that  Self Condemned is probably  the most closely autobiographical of the novels makes it only a more crucial example of an old pattern  of  transforma­ tion. Still, it is rare  with  any  novelist and  unparalleled  in  Lewis  that  so much first-hand  raw  material  is available  to the scholar. Having  tried to suggest some of the intrinsic  qualities  of this raw material  as well as its relevance to Self Con­  demned, I shall  now focus directly on the novel in order  to spell out some con­ nections between it and  the letters. My purpose is not to explain the novel via the ur-novel   but  rather  to  demonstrate  more clearly the rewards  of  such  a tandem consideration.  The  parallels are so extensive that only a rigorous sampling is pos­ sible here.
First, let us consider  the  underlying idea, absent in the letters but essential to the  fiction.  Lewis found  it  in  the  feelings that  prompted  all  the  self-justifying passages in  the  letters  and  the  frequent  complaints  about  not  getting  his due. His hero, Professor Rene Harding, is a martyr to his beliefs; his failure is a failure to compromise them. This intransigence brings about his exile in Canada and sub­ sequent  deterioration. Finally,  he is too burned  out  to be able to face returning to England  and  the  pariah's  poverty.

"I  do not need you to tell me ten times a day that it is not worth while to work here, to work in Momaco. Of course  it is not. ... But I also know that I will never again become a nameless piece of human wreckage. But my shoes shall be shone: my pocket-book shall be packed with newly-printed notes...."


Here  Rene  might  well be paraphrasing a passage from an  unpublished  letter of r 943 to Sir Nicholas Waterhouse:

But I have really come to a decision. I will not-categorically-any longer live from hand to mouth trying to do good paintings, trying to write good books.... I am tired of seeing people lounging about in comfortable bureaucratic  jobs while I work my guts out about money.


Lewis always signed his letters to Sir Nicholas, "Professor."
Unlike Rene, Wyndham  did return; he even attained  a kind of official sinecure


6g

EXILE'S LETTERS



in his small  Civil  List pension and  regular  reviewing  for The Listener.'  The  point is that  in  Canada he felt deeply  threatened by his political  error  of the  3o's, and by  having   left  England as the  war  was  beginning. If Rene  Harding's suffering and  fate  seem,  like those of so many  tragic  heroes,  in  excess of the  given  cause (i.e., his moral  stand), do we not find in the letters  the source  of the  feeling  that nearly  topples  the  novel but  gives it such  an  impact?
Lewis's  choice  of  the  academic profession  for  his  hero  has  lighter  overtones, though  the realities were grim enough. The signature to Sir Nicholas's  letters  may itself  have  inspired   Rene's   occupation, but   certainly   Lewis's  long  quest   for  a university  position  in Canada or the United States  figured,  as did his finally secur­ ing  a place  at  Assumption College.  Nor  can  we disregard the  fact  that  the novel required that  its  hero  be in  some  relation  to  the  public  so that  his stand  might  reverberate. To  make  him an  artist  of any  kind  would  have rendered  next  to im­ possible any  authorial detachment on Lewis's  part. And  politicians  were even less familiar to the writer  than  professors. Still, one cannot contemplate without some amusement this  decision  by Lewis, whose  own  formal  education ended  dismally  at  Rugby  and  whose academic contacts  thereafter were tenuous. To  a prospective academic employer,  he  wrote  in  I 943: "As  to  the  nature of  that  work.  It will I  suppose  consist  of  daily  lectures,  of  an  informal  type.  That is what   teaching amounts to, isn't  it?"
Lewis wisely avoids  the academic scene as much  as he can in Self Condemned. Rene  has already left his post in England when  the novel begins,  and  his appoint­ ment   at   Momaco  never   really  materializes  on-stage.  Even  so,  the  occasional  glimpses  of  university  life do  not  convince  as the  rest of the  novel does:  "It was an  important dinner: the  President  of McGill  and  other  academic notables  were to  be  there." Compared with  the  high  and  true  comedy  of  Malamud's A  New Life, Lewis's  academia reads  like a parody  of C.  P. Snow.
Rene  as  professor  rings most  true  during his recuperative stay  at The College of  the  Sacred  Heart, for  here  Lewis is clearly  very  close ,to his own  experience. Readers of The Letters  will know  that  he was invited  by Father Murphy, Regis­ trar  of  Assumption College,  to lecture  in  the  college's  annual Christian  Culture of  his  assignments was  to deliver  the  second  annual  Heywood Broun  Memorial Series, that  he did so early in 1943,  and  then  was invited  to join the faculty. One  Lectures in  the  fall  of  1943.  This  series  was,  according to  a  brochure, "to  be given  by  a  world-famous authority in  the  realm  of ideas  who  is working  for  'a new  Christendom'." The  title of Lewis's  lectures, the  "Concept of Liberty  From  the  'Founding Fathers of the  U.S.A.  Till  Now" [sic], and  his letters  attest  to the

EXILE'S  LETTERS



seriousness  of  his  preparation, as does  America  and Cosmic  Man, published  in I 948 as a result.  Assumption is in Windsor,  across the river from  Detroit, whereas Sacred  Heart is across  the  river  from  Buffalo,  an  earlier  scene  of Lewis's  trials; but  the  identity is unmistakable from  the  beginning.
The  letter  within,  in  the  crabbed  peasant  fist of Father  Moody, was cordial  in the  extreme.  The  personality  of the  rubicund  priest, who had  visited him a year or so earlier,  and  offered him a course of lectures, if he had  time to give them at Sacred  Heart  College, was visible in every awkward scratch  of the pen and crude friendly word.  (Self  Condemned, p. 377)

Lewis's letters  to Father Murphy and  to others  at the time of his affiliation  with Assumption   accord   very  well  with  the  bright   and  lively  picture   we  get  in  the novel.  ("Rene's impression of these first days was that  he was sinking  down  into the equivalent of a wonderful feather  bed.") Here,  after  the  horrors  of Toronto, was a pleasant place  to live and  a most congenial, even indulgent, group  of hosts. Lewis  began  his  academic year  with  a summer  course  in  the  Philosophic Roots of Modern Art  and  Literature-"A distinct  honour  to have  him," reads  Father Murphy's bulletin. Although the  agreement was  that  he should  go  on  teaching till the following  June, it is already apparent in letters of August,  when  Marshall McLuhan and  Felix  Giovanelli were  working  to lure  him  to St.  Louis,  that  this professor  felt free to come  and  go as he pleased.  He did indeed  depart at the end of January (I 944), not  returning till the  following  July! "I am  distressed  about my little  class,"  Lewis  wrote  to  Father Murphy that  March. "But  it can  be  ex­ plained  ... that  I am  practicing, instead  of preaching, for a while, but will return  to take  up  the story  later." The  long-suffering  fathers  not only had  him  back  the following  summer but  commissioned   a group  of portraits. Their  generosity  evi­ dently  caused  Lewis to have some qualms  about  earning  money in St. Louis while still on  Assumption's rolls. As Rene  was on  paid sick leave from  Momaco, we are unnecessarily told, he returned the fees he received for his lectures at Sacred  Heart.
The University of  Momaco is itself, as this analogy  suggests, part  Assumption. The  parallelism is most  apparent in the  turn  in Rene's  fortunes that  is signalized by his appointment to  Momaco in  May  ofI 944· Just  as the  fire in  the  Blundell earlier  the  same  year  punctuates the  Hardings' drift  downward, so was the  real fire in  the  real  Tudor Hotel  in  February I943  followed  by Lewis's  appointment to Assumption and  its attendant joys.
But  Momaco also  means,  in  university  as in everything else, Toronto. During
his years in  that  city Lewis felt snubbed by its university.  When,  having  achieved academic status  at  Assumption, he was invited  by a professor  to speak  to a phil-

EXILE'S LETTERS



osophy  club  at  the  unfriendly institution, he  wrote  to  a  benefactor: "As  I  was in Toronto for nearly  3 years and  the  University studiously  ignored  my existence, I  should  answer  him  differently  if he were  not  a friend  of yours."  Aware  as he was  of  his lack  of qualification -"Harvard  is out  of  the  question  for  me,"  he wrote  to Theodore Spencer, "... if you know  some  old  colleague  or pupil  who is now  President  of a Girls College  (an  inferior  Vassar) or of some obscure  Western or  Southern university,  write  him  and  tell  him  about me." -and having  been so frustrated in his quest for academic work,  Lewis must  have smiled  a good  deal over  the  professional  success of his autobiographical hero.  Rene  tells Hester  that "there is an excellent  chance  that  I should  be asked down  to some large American University; Yale,  Chicago,  something like that." And  the  offer  comes, thanks  to the  "unusual rapidity" with  which  "the  existence  of so distinguished a man  upon the  North  American continent was recognized." To  the knowing reader  the irony of these opening  words  of the  novel's  last  paragraph is as cutting as the scorn  of the  closing ones is explicable: "and the  Faculty had  no idea  that  it was a glacial shell  of  a  man  who  had  come  to  live  among them,  mainly   because  they  were themselves  unfilled  with  anything more  than  a little  academic stuffing."


A DIFFERENT  SORT OF  EXAMPLE of the  curious  ways of life and  art  lies in  what  I have  called  the Vancouver caper. For  here  is a subplot  of
sizeable  dimensions  in the letters  that  undoubtedly contributed to the atmosphere of  lunacy   and  frustration in  Self Condemned  but  that   appears directly  in  the novel as only a passing instance  of Affie's curiosity:

The  'crossing water' business at the present seance, and the insistence on the amount of water being inconsiderable, was easily traceable  to a dozen or more letters which had  recently  come  from  someone  in  Vancouver,   who  urged  Rene  to come  out there.  He  backed up  this request with glittering  promises, assuring Rene  that  the local  University  would  immediately  offer  him  a  Chair.   Where  Victoria   Island came  in was that  the correspondent  invited  them  to stay with him at his 'proper­ ties', while  arrangements  were  being made  with  the  University  authorities.  This man's  father  was said to be on the Board of the  University  and  a very influential man.  This  correspondent  had  poured  registered  letters  in  at  the  rate  of  two a week. ...

Such  are  the  entire  fictional  remains  of probably the  most  extensive  and  cer­
tainly  the  most  intensive  exchange of letters  of Lewis's  Canadian years. It begins

EXILE'S  LETTERS



towards the  middle  of I 942  with  a  proposal  by David  Kahma, a young  British Columbian, that  Lewis become  the first star of an arts centre  he hopes to establish in  Vancouver, and  it  runs  its dramatic course  till the  end  of  the  year.  Kahma, innocent and  enthusiastic but  well-steeped  in Lewis's writings  and  with  a flair for secrecy equal  to his master's, appears out  of the  West like some  deus ex machina or  dream  of Tantalus. His  plans  are grandiose, his funds  seem  limitless;  there  is a mysterious  go-between named, as if eponymously,  Miss West;  there  are off-the­ scene  "advisers" looming  like the dark  powers of The   Apes  of God.
Desperate as  he  was,  Lewis  could  not  dismiss  the  proposal out-of-hand.  But his worldly sense told him to proceed cautiously. He seems not to have been much surprised when  within  a few  weeks, the  whole  vast scheme  had  dwindled to an invitation from  Kahma and  his bride  (nee  Miss West)  to the  Lewises to spend  a few  months  as their  guests  in  the  modest  house they were  about  to move into. It is some  measure  of Lewis's  feeling  of entrapment in Toronto that  by the  end  of August  he  was  ready  to  accept for  the  price  of return  rail  fare  for  him  and  his wife. At  this  point  the  correspondence has crescendoed  to daily  missives and  the reader  in the Cornell  collection  finds himself caught  up in the excitement. A cool­ ing  off period  follows  the  non-appearance of the fare.  Yet hardly a month later,  Lewis  is once  more  about to  board  the  train.  Then,  as week  follows  chequeless week,  the  mirage slowly and  finally  disappears.
The  story,  a fine ironic  mixture of comedy  and  pathos,  makes  a nice paradigm for  Self Condemned. It also offers  as a by-product a rather appealing fancy: if Lewis  had  gone  to Vancouver he might  well have  run  into  England's other  not­ able   literary   hostage   to  Canadian  fortunes.   The   similarity  between   Malcolm Lowry's  letter  from  Dollarton, B.C.,"  and  Lewis's  epistles from  Toronto  is strik­ ing,  and  the  temptation to compare them  is very strong.  But  this  would  require  a further chapter in  the  study  of exiles' letters.

FOOTNOTES

1  Lewis considered  bringing  Rene  back to London,  as a synopsis in the Cornell  col­ lection  reveals.  Hester  was  to  commit  suicide  there  instead  of  in  Momaco,  but Rene's  spiritless condition  would  have  been pretty  much  the  same.  The  synopsis indicates  a good deal of attention to the miserable post-war  condition  of London, as in  Rotting  Hill  ( 1951). It  may be that  Lewis decided to sacrifice the nice sym­ metry  of the  alternative ending  in order  not to deal twice with  this material.
0   See Selected  Letters  of Malcolm Lowry  (Philadelphia,  1965).





73



review articles


NO  MEETING POINTS


Miriam Waddington



AUSTIN  c. CLARKE, The  Meeting  Point. Macmillan. $5.95.


MAYBE I'M THE  WRONG   PER­ SON  to  review  this  book. I'm  white,  I'm  Jewish,   I  live  in  Toronto,  and  I  some­ times   go   to   the   Riverboat   and   other  coffee houses on Yorkville. The  only facts
in   my  favour  are   that   I  don't   live  in
Forest  Hill  Village   (or  Rosedale  either)
and  I  don't   have  a maid.
All the  same  I approached Austin Clarke's third  novel, The  Meeting  Point, with  the  hope  of finding  in it  a Toronto more   real,  if  not  more  attractive, than the  one  I  know,  and  aspects  of  Jewish, or  white  life, in  a  new context.   Instead, I  find  a story  confused  in its artistic  and social  intentions, filled  with  fictional  in­ consistencies,  and  conceived  in  a  hatred  which   seldom   rises  above   its   sad   and bitter  circumstances.
There  is   nothing  new   or   shocking about   hatred  in  modern   fiction;   but  in this book it's not only unreasonable, it's uninteresting,  and   you  get   the   feeling that  the writer  is taking  out on the reader what   his  characters ought   to  be  taking out   on   one   another.  In   spite   of  these flaws, The  Meeting  Point deserves a seri­ ous reading because Clarke  is attempting to  deal  with  the  two biggest  problems  of our   time-race   relations  and  poverty. Judging by this  novel,  his  talent  and  his

74
 conception  are   not  equal   to  his  subject
-at  least   not  at   the  level  which   such themes  demand. For  his  novel  is far  too short   to   deal   with   all  the   problems   it raises, and  yet it is far  too long and  repe­ titive  for  what  it actually does  deal with.
Briefly, The  Meeting  Point is the  story
of  Bernice   Leach,  a  fat,   forty-year-old Bajan   woman   who  comes  to  Toronto in almost    the    only   way   a   West    Indian woman  can  come -to work  as a domes­ tic. She  takes  a  job with  a Jewish lawyer and    his   family-the    Burrmanns-in Forest   Hill   village.   Her   sister,   Estelle, young,  glossy and  beautiful, comes  from Barbados  to  visit  her.   Propinquity  does the  rest.  Sam  Burrmann and  Estelle  ex­ plode   into  spectacular  sexual   fireworks while   the   reader   holds   his  breath   and waits  for  the  fireworks  to  die  down.  By the  end  of  the  story,  when  the  rich  man  has  had   his  pleasure   and   the  poor   girl has  paid  for  it,  everyone   is  even  more trapped   and   desperate than   before.   No one   has   changed  or   learned    anything. No  one  in  the  story  ever  loves  any  one else,  even  for  a  minute. Bernice  doesn't  love  her  child  Terence, whom  she left  at home   with   her   mother, or   her   former sweetheart, Lonnie.  Her   friend, Dottie, another  domestic,   doesn't   love  her  hus-

REVIEW ARTICLES



band  Boysie. Sam  Burrmann doesn't love his   wife,   his   children,  or   his   mistress Estelle.  He  doesn't even  seem  to love his work.  Mrs.  Burrmann, who  has  a  lot  to cope   with,   tries   to  think   her   way  into loving   everybody,   but   her   ideas   about love  and   her   insistent   good   deeds,  are no substitute for  real feeling.  To  love her cat Putzi is as much  as she can manage emotionally. And  the  author  doesn't love any   of  his  characters  either-not   the least   bit-except   once    in   a  while   he loves the  West  Indians through the mar­ vellous language he gives them.
Language, in  fact,  is the  most interest­
ing  incongruity in  the  novel.  Clarke  has two  languages:  a  stiff  and   lifeless  To­ ronto   English   which   he  uses  for  narra­ tion,  and  a wonderful  West  Indian Eng­  lish, as full  of dance, vitality,  colour  and endless    malleability    as   any    language ought   to  be.  The  West  Indian  language is reserved  for  the  speech  and  soliloquies of the  Negro characters, except for Estelle who  is  really  a  white  girl  dressed  up  in Negro   body.   Clarke's  Bajan   English   is a rich, full, poetic  language, as those who have    read    his   Amongst   Thistles  and Thorns  already   know.  His  other   English is  restrained, romantic in  the  bad  sense, and  lacking   in   humour.  It  hasn't  yet freed  itself from  the  grip  of Trinity  Col­ lege  where  Mr.  Clarke was a  student; it is too self -conscious  and  correct. Yet  the correctness  is  not   like   Conrad's,  deep underneath the  language;  it  is a  kind  of hard   crust,  a  frozen  surface. This  dich­ otomy   of   language  betrays   the   lack  of synthesis  which  flaws  the  novel  in  other  ways too.
The   novel  is  flawed,   most  of  all,  by
Clarke's  desire   for   shortcuts  and    this leads  to  confusion. His  heroine  Bernice, is a good example. She  is coloured, over-
 weight,  past her first youth,  and  works as a  domestic.   That's  four   strikes  against her.   And   not   only   does  she  work   for white  people, but for Jewish white people. One  of the Burrmann children says to another:  "You're  not  even   white,   wise guy ... you're  just  a  lousy little  Jew  like all of  us." Why  compound the  problems of black-white with those of Jew-Gentile? How can so many threads be kept from tangling? The  reader soon finds himself wondering if Sam  Burrmann is such  a bastard   because  he  is  white  or  because he is Jewish.
It's  the same with  Bernice's  job. Of  all
the   menial   jobs   she  might   have   had, Clarke   makes  her  work  as  a  live-in  do­ mestic.  This  kind  of  work  situation  has built-in  humiliations because the personal  part   of  the  job  can  never  be  separated from   the   impersonal  working   part.   A live-in maid inevitably  becomes a servant, whereas  a  domestic   who  lives  elsewhere can  retire  to  her  own  private  life, how­ ever  poor  or  bizarre  it  may  be.  But  the relation  of master  and  servant for  seven days a week cannot help but  be humiliat­ ing  for   both.   It   distorts   the   employer­ employee  relationship as well as the  per­  sonal  one,  because  it  mingles  them; do­ mestic  functions like caring  for  children, and  cooking  can't be bought  like ordinary services  in  any   case.  They   have   to  be performed out  of  love, or  the  recipients soon  know  the  difference. So, by placing the   central   characater,  Bernice,   in   an ambiguous  work   situation,  Clarke   de­ prives  her  of  all  social  context, and  de­ prives  her  of  a  chance   to  develop.  We miss  the  outer   world.   A  b.ctory   or  an office to  develop  workers, in  it; they  are companions, be  they  friends  or  enemies. But a family has no one in it except  itself, and    this   is  too   private,  narrow,  and

75



APOLLO
TREE 	sunbearer
to me 	worshipper
of sunbearing 	or
greengrower
to me 	lover of greengrowing	or
apollo tree
to me 	singer of
wands tree-rings 	and the burgeoning laurel


in montreal 	you in a carrell of cars 	you in a
haste of bells 	you
transforming laurel
in a fire 	in
a wind of snow
Miriam Waddington


l;u'bson's13al!<lOmpanl!
INCORPORATED 2u 	.,_

presents this  work  as one  of  a new  series written by  Canadian poets

REVIEW ARTICLES



special.  It is no wonder that  Bernice's character remains  static  throughout the story;  she has no real world  within  which to   define   herself   or   against    which   to rebel.  She  remains, to  the  end,  a  frag­ mented   personality, emotionally  shallow, volcanic  and  childish  in  all  her  relation­ ships.  She  lies, steals  from  her  employers  and   is  "resourceful  in   her   destructive­ ness", for she hates  all  white people,  and her  most  frequent  feeling  towards   them is one  of  revenge.
As for  the  white  people,  they  are com­ pletely   unbelievable.  Never   have  I  met such   an   un-Jewish  bunch   of   scrubbed  Jews  between  the  covers of any  book, let alone   in  real  life.  The  Burrmanns  and their  friends  are  idle,  vain,  neurotic and empty.  They  are  as  neat  and  tidy  and  as dead  as if they  had  all  just  come  out  of some   IBM   machine.  Their speech   is  a stilted   caricature  of  all  speech.   Here   is Sam  Burrmann telling  his wife why their sexual life is unsatisfactory: "I  must  tell you,  Rachel, I  must   tell  you,  from   the bottom  of my heart, that  it pains me even more  than  it can  ever  pain  you, that  you can't even  seem  to  carry  a  child  in  your womb    without  goddamn  losing   it,   or doing  some damn crazy thing  to it. Every man  needs a son.  I need  a son.  And  that seems  to  be  the  simple  reason   why  this is  not   working   out.   It is  as  simple   as that."
Sam   Burrmann  is  particularly   unbe­ lievable.  In  looks he's  like a Jew  straight out   of  Hemingway,  but   in  history   he's from    before    Krafft-Ebbing.    A   good­ looking  fellow,  he  grew  up  in  Toronto's slums  and   played   with   Negroes.   When  he   was   about  fourteen  he   allowed    a Negro  companion in an  escapade to take the  blame  and  go to the  reformatory. He was left  with  a long-lasting but  dormant
 guilt.   Somehow   Negro   girls   got   mixed up  with  his  blocked  sexual  development so the  result was a Jew  with  a guilt-love­ hate  feeling  about   Negroes.  Add  to  this an  academic flair  which  took  him  to  the University  of Toronto's  Anglican  college (he  must  have  been  one  of the  very few Jews  who  ever  went  to  Trinity), and  a loveless  marriage  to  a   virtuous  Jewish girl  who  was rich  but  sexually  inhibited. Then  bring   in   Bernice's   sister   Estelle, awaken  all  Sam's  sleeping  dogs, and  you precipitate  the  crisis of the  novel.
As a counterpoise to the love affair between   Sam   and   Estelle,   there   is  an­ other  love affair  between  Bernice's Negro friend   Henry-an unemployed  railway porter   of  fifty -and   Agatha,  a  Jewish graduate student in  her  twenties.  Again, the  psychology of this  relationship  is un­ believable. The  purpose  of these two love affairs  is to show  that  the  Negro's desire for  the  white  sexual  partner is not  love, but  hate.  "They love  you.  And  you hate  them."   Henry   tells  his  friend, and   goes on    to    describe    his    lovemaking   with Agatha: "... one night  it was hell in this bed.   I'm   thinking   of   all   those   black people lynched  and  killed,  all those black cats  murdered and  slain,  all  those  black chicks  raped   and   dehumanized, ... and man,  I'm  driving  and  driving. Hell  broke loose  baby.  I'm   thinking of  going  down to  the  Civil  Service  Commission on  St. Clair,  and  the  Man  there  telling  me, No jobs,  buddy ... Down   at   Eatons during the  Christmas rush  period,  and  the  Man there  telling  me,  there  ain't no  jobs. I'm thinking  of  the   Man.   The  Man.  The Man.   No  jobs ... And   I'm   driving like I'm   crazy ... You  think   that   chick  was hip  to what  I was thinking of the  Man? Goddamn, baby,  she  was  thinking I  was loving  her. But  man,  I was  re-paying!   I

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



was  repaying   her  for  what  her  brothers do  to  my sister ..."
And  that  is the  despair  at  the  heart  of
Clarke's book;  the  Negro  has  no  job. He can   forgive   white   people  for   the  snow and   the   frost;   even   for   the   northern Christianity which  doesn't  suit  his tropic nature;  but   no   job  means   no  place  in society,   and   there   is  no  such   thing   as abstract  human-ness. A  man   can   be  a man   only  through  other  men,  never  in isolation.  Love is more social than  sexual, and   Clarke  is  asking  why  do  so  many white    people    (to   him   the   malevolent Jews)   waste or corrupt their  social roles? And  why  do  they  deprive   black  people of theirs?  But  by caricaturing the  society he is trying  to describe,  he fails to under-
 stand  it.  He  makes  the social issues seem false  and  unreal; often,  merely  personal. His  contempt for  Agatha  and  his hatred of  the  Burrmanns make  the  reader  dis­ trust  him.
I came   away   from   this  book  with   a heavy   feeling.    There  are   no   meeting points   in  Austin   Clarke's novel,  and   he holds out no hope for any. Clarke's two Englishes  don't meet,  none  of  the  lovers come  together in  any  way  that   matters; there  is no letup  in  the  warfare between white and black. Bernice doesn't achieve freedom.  She  merely   becomes  a  better­ paid  servant who  is left  to  think  at  the end:   "Jesus  God!  this   is   a   savage world ..."  And  the  author  says  nothing to  contradict  her.








PATTERNS OF COMMITMENT IN AMERICAN LITERATURE

Edited by Marston LaFrance


Some  of  the  leading  scholars  in  the  field  of  American literature have contributed  to  this  collection  of eleven  previously   unpublished essays, among   them  Harry Haydon Clark   on  Hawthorne, Munro Beattie  on Henry   James,  Michael Millgate on  Faulkner, and  Roger  B. Salomon on  Mark  Twain. Sponsored   by Carleton  University this  volume  exa­ mines   the   major   writers   in   the   American tradition  to   produce  an original  interpretation and  fresh  understanding of this  literature.

$7.95 (paper $'4.95)

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO  PRESS



UNCREEPING FLESH
 


Frances Frazer



LYN cooK, The  Secret  of Willow  Castle. Macmillan. $4.25.
ZILLAH   and COLIN   MACDONALD, Prisoner  in  Louisbourg.   Macmillan.  $3·95·
1. s. ERSKINE, The  Rightful King. Longmans. $3-75·
JAMES  HOUSTON, Eagle Mask:  A West  Coast Indian  Tale. Longmans. $3.50.
FARLEY MOWAT,  The Curse of the Viking Grave. McClelland & Stewart. $4.50.


"HE  TURNED, took careful  aim and  fired,  and  ten  more  redskins  bit  the dust." This  caption in an  ancient volume of Chums underlies  and  purports to  des­ scribe  a dramatic drawing of an intrepid young  man  in a canoe  blasting away at a flotilla   of  painted,  gesticulating  savages whose hot  breath  is almost  upon him. The  river  is a  churning  mass  of  white  water,  and  drownings are clearly imminent. Both lethal  marksmanship and  dust-biting seem entirely  out  of the  question.
The  picture and   caption indicate the
nature of  many  stories  that   kept  yester­ day's-well, last  week's-children  rooted to   their    chairs.    They    were   shameless fabrications full  of fractured  facts,  man­  gled   history, and  purple   prose  and  dominated  by   one   plot.   The   youthful protagonist,  in  conjunction  with   daunt­ less, pipe-smoking Uncle  David  or brave, beautiful Aunt  Barbara, tangled with and routed fanatical Indians  after   the  idol's eye, fanatical tribes defending Eldorado, fanatical  German  schoolmistresses spying for the Fatherland, or savages  on the warpath for  the  sheer  fun  and  gore  of it. These  tales fed national prejudices with popular  lies  and   supplied  imaginations with  a  rich  diet  of  romantic ones.  Their characterization was often  minimal and their  prose styles were  seldom  impressive. But  they  did  have  drama.
 Most  modern  stories  for  children   are more  admirable on  several  counts.  They tend  to  be much  more  respectful  of  his­ torical,   anthropological, and   psycholog­ ical  realities.  Their  characters  are  more likely,  more  complex, and   usually  more consistent.  And  the  general   level  of  the writing  is  higher.  But  somehow  amid  all this   conscientiousness,    really   scarifying scenes  and   genuinely   moving   ones  are rare.
Given   the   increasing multitudes   of
writers  for  the  young  and  their  burgeon­ ing  output, it  is obviously  impossible  to support generalizations or  define  a  trend  on  the  basis of a handful of books. How­  ever, an  arbitrary selection  of five, chiefly historical,  works  from   the  current crop, may  perhaps  be  taken  as at  least  indica­ tive.
Lyn   Cook's    The  Secret    of   Willow
Castle  is a  carefully researched portrait of  Napanee, Ontario,  in  the  I83o's  and a  slightly  bathetic story  of  young  Hen­ rietta   Macpherson, daughter  of  the un­ crowned   king  of  Napanee and  devoted  half-cousin  to young  John  A. Macdonald. Despite  some  lip  service  to  romantic ad­  venture, particularly in such chapter titles as "A  Secret  Place  and  a Castle-Mirror" and  "The Note  in  the  Lightning Tree", the  author's  interests  are   evidently   his­ torical    and    moral.    While    Henrietta's

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



undercover friendship with  an  Irish  waif languishes   in   the   wings,  we  are  shown swatches   of  local   colour:  political  feel­ ings  of  the   day,   popular   pastimes,  the quaint  minutiae  of   day-to-day  domes­ ticity and  business in 1834. The little girls' relationship  is  treated  as  a  moral   force upon  Henrietta, bringing out  her  capaci­ ties  for   love,  loyalty,   and   self-sacrifice. Unfortunately, her   metamorphosis from wilful child  into  warm,  responsible  young lady   is  too  sudden  and   too  arbitrarily motivated   to   be   effectively    credible. Moreover,  it  occurs   early  in  the   book, and   after   it   a  fragile   plot  leans   upon "secrets"  that   don't  amount  to  much. Although  children  can  clothe  mundane objects  and  situations with  the  glamour of make-believe, their  excitement is hard to   make    convincing  and    contagious. Louisa   May   Alcott   could   bring   it  off; Lyn   Cook   can't  quite.   And  in  this  in­ sufficiently fictional  garden,   young John   A.,  depicted  as  a  sombrely  good­ natured paragon, is an  insufficiently  real toad.   On   the   credit   side  it  should   be added   that,   apart  from  Henrietta, some psychological  strokes  are  telling,  and  the only   real  secret,   Irish   Sarah's  identity, is used  for  some  effective  cliff-hanging.
By  contrast,  Zillah   and   Colin   Mac­ donald's  Prisoner in  Louisbourg  has  so much   plot   that   it  runs   over  the  sides. Why   did  double-faced Captain  O'Hara pour    pitch    into    rotten    logs   to   make treacherous masts  and  then   go  out  and capture the  ship  carrying  them?  I know why  the  Macdonalds had  him  pour  the pitch: it allowed  the young hero  and  the readers  to leap  to an appalling confusion.  But  his  own  intentions escape  me.
This book  about the  New  Englanders' capture of  the  French fortress  of  Louis­ bourg   m   1745  comes   closer   than   any

Bo
 other  of   my   five   to   the   old   Chums thrillers. U ndoctored history  is obligingly melodramatic and  the authors have added generous dollops of melodrama in the foreground  story  of  a  Bostonian   youth, Eben   de   Gervais.  Eben   is  an   engaging hero-narrator, despite  some  seeming  dis­ ingenuousness in  his professions  of  devo­ tion   to   a   brother   whose   petulance  he stresses.   And    volatile   little   Antoinette is  a  beguiling heroine.  But  the  villain  is a  problem.  I   understand  those  stealthy Indians and  sinister  schoolmistresses,  but I'm  blest   if    I  understand  Captain O'Hara, a  hero  to  his own  side, a  terror on   the   high  seas,  and   yet  a  credulous, anxious   fellow   on   land,   eavesdropping on  youngsters, scared  by their  games, and  so  unconfident that  he actually dons full masquerade regalia for an apparently foolproof   underground murder. One sus­ pects  that  the authors have  not conceived  him   thoroughly  or   indulged   in   much  dramatic  immediacy  because  they  were less  interested  in   romance   than   in   the major  events   of   the   Louisbourg  cam­  paign  and  their  thesis  that  it  was a dress rehearsal for  the  Boston  Tea   Party   and Bunker   Hill.  The  bizarre,  muddled little  plot   in  the  foreground  seldom   achieves  full   dramatic   life-despite    the   many time-honoured devices  it  contains.
The   Rightful   King  by J. S. Erskine  is in some ways the most satisfying of the historical novels in this set. It does not condescend  to  its  readers   lexically,  his­ torically,   or    philosophically, and    the cruelty  of  the   historical   events   that  en­ tangle   the   bright   young   squire-hero   is not   sentimentally   softened.   Nick   is   a privileged servant of  the  Yorkist  Brough­ ton   family   and   therefore  involved   per­  force   in   the   Yorkist   plot   to   dethrone Henry VII  and crown  the supposed  heir





GAGE 	UNIVERSITY 	PUBLICATIONS


AS  A  MAN THINKS
E. MoRRISON and  W. RoBBINS
Third   Edition. rg62
A  collection   of  contemporary  es­ says,   by   British,    Canadian   and American authors. Mature  think­  ing  on  themes  of  current  interest  to  Canadian students.  315  pages.
$2-95

CANADIAN  ANTHOLOGY
C. F. KLINCK and R. E. WATTERS
Revised.  1966
A   comprehensive   and    Catholic anthology of Canadian Literature, revised   and   enlarged  to  include selections    by   seventy-seven    au­ thors, with  authoritative   bio­  graphical   notes,    as   well    as    a sampling of criticism  by Frye, Mc­ Luhan and   others.  Extensive   up­ to-date  bibliography  compiled   by R.  W.  Watters. 626  pages.  $8.25

EDUCATION  AND PRODUCTIVE SOCIETY Edited  by DR. H. R. ZIEL
1965
As   a   result    of   the    urgings   of
governments,  industries,   philoso­
phers,  and   various   social  institu­
tions,  that   educators  be  alert   to
the exponential changes  occurring
in  our  productive society,  a  con­
ference    of   decision-making   per­
sonnel  in vocational and  technical
education throughout Canada was
held  at  the  University of  Alberta
in  1964.
This  book is a collection of the papers   appearing  at   the  confer­ ence,    along    with    the   resulting  comments. They  present a jarring  note  to  the  rapid  change  shaping
 our   educational  system,   our   so­ ciety,   and   the   need   for   a   more realistic  and  effective  program of education if mankind  is to  be the master   of  technology.  217  pages.
$5-5°

FORM  AND  SUBSTANCE
w. K. THOMAS
1963
A  guide   to   the   research    paper which   describes  the  effective   use of libraries as sources of material, shows how to shape  the essay, and points   the   way   to   correct   essay form.  102 pages.  $2.50

THE BOOK  OF  CANADIAN POETRY
A. J. M. SMITH
Third   Edition.  1957
A  complete   revision  of  this  stan­ dard   text,   with   the   addition  of twelve new contemporary authors.
547  pages.  $7.50

THE BOOK  OF  CANADIAN PROSE: VOLUME  I
A. J. M. SMITH
1965
This  anthology,  the  first of a two­ volume  series, includes  much  ma­ terial  never  before  seen  in  collec­ tions   of  Canadian  Literature - the  practical expository  writing of fur  traders,  explorers,   and   politi­ cians  who  made 1867  possible­ supplemented  by  a  critical intro­ duction  and   useful   notes  on  the individual authors   as   well   as  a selective  bibliography. The  book forms  a  companion to  the earliest  sections of The Book of Canadian Poetry. 261 pages. $6.oo

REVIEW ARTICLES



of  the  deceased  Duke  of  Clarence. The actual  plot   and   most  of  its  supporters died on the blood-soaked  field of Stoke, whereupon the claimant to the throne proved   to   be  Lambert  Simnel,   a  scul­ lion. There are  some fascinating fictional  additions to  history  here:   Lady  Brough­  ton,   conceived   of  as  more  beautiful   in her  own eyes than  to anyone else because none but  her  mirror receives her brilliant, narcissistic   smile;   old   Mark  who  bene­ volently   "damns  the  souls"  of  the  crea­ tures   he  tends   with  saintly  compassion.  And    there    are   some   provocative  sen­ tences: "His  simplicity  kept  him  thin  as it  kept  him  spiritually young,  facing  life in  middle  age  with the rigidity of a young scholar  and  the  uneasy  eyes of a  child."  Yet  in  this  book  too the  leap  toward  life and immediate urgency  falls short,  chiefly perhaps because  affairs  of  state  are  kept so firmly  to the fore,  but also because  the author's gloom and indignation at a medieval  world he pictures  as sick with feudalism cast  a  pall  over  the  story.  Re­ peatedly  Erskine   focuses  on  unjust  cus­ toms,   the   demoralizing   desperation   of little  men,  and  the consequent scarcity  of generosity   and   honour. If  one   seldom trembles for  Nick,  it is not  because  he is not  likeable  or  venturesome but  because nothing that  could  befall  him  would  be much  worse  than  the everyday  plights  of his  fellows.
James   Houston's  Eagle   Mask   is  not really  fictional, although in  dealing  with the heyday of British Columbia's coastal Indians  it  pursues   a  tenuous   story-line. The  coming-of-age of  a   representative young   prince   provides   some   continuity for simple vignettes of the Indians' life. Characters  and   events  are   typical.   The book's claim  to particularity and  life is in its  author's  illustrations, which  combine
 ritualistic formality with  vitality.  For  in­ stance, a  picture of a whaling boat  soar­ ing  broken   over   a  gigantic  whale's  tail is  a  symmetrical pattern  of   formalized waves  and  arched falling bodies, yet con­ veys   the   immensity   and   terror   of   the event.   Pictorially   the   work   is  exciting; verbally   it  is  principally informative.
Farley  Mowat's The Curse  of the Vik­ ing  Grave  also concerns  North  America's original inhabitants.  The  period is mod­  ern,  but  the setting  is the far  north  where ancient ways of life linger on. This  sequel to  Lost   in  the   Barrens  concerns   a  new crisis in  the  lives of  three boys who  com­ prise a kind  of miniature United Nations: one  white,  one  Indian, and  one  Eskimo halfbreed.   In   the   course   of  a  perilous  trek  to  Hudson Bay,  these  three  and  an Indian girl encounter Indian and  Eskimo tribes  and   assorted   battles   with  the  ele­ ments. Primitive history and  legends are worked   into   a   highly   educational  tale that   has  its  gripping moments. But  once again   "typical"  is  the   word.   The   boys stand    for   their   peoples'    viewpoints   as often  as  they  emerge  as individuals. The hospitable Eskimos and stoic, suffering Indians are  stereotyped weapons  in Mowat's  war   against   white  indifference and   red  tape.   And   the  book's  language tends to contract the  generalization disease  and  sink  into  colloquial  looseness and  cliche.
Young   readers   of  these  variously   re­ warding  books  may  well  find  them  en­ joyable  as well as profitable. But  I  doubt if they  will read  them  under  the blankets by  flashlight  after   curfew.   For   despite  considerable  virtues,    all   five   somehow  lack  the  qualities that   make  you  laugh,  cry, wait,  and  above  all, make  your  flesh creep.   And   aren't   these   the   addictive qualities that   make  readers?



OTHER	VANCOUVERITES

A. W. Purdy


SEYMOUR MAYNE,  From   the   Portals  of the  Mouseholes. Very   Stone House.  $1.50. BILL BISSETT, Fires  in  the  Temple. Very  Stone   House.  $3.00.
PAT LANE,  Letters from  the  Savage  Mind. Very  Stone  House. $2.00.
JIM BROWN,  The Circus of the  Boy's  Eye.  Very  Stone   House. $1.50.


IN 1943 A. J. M. SMITH  pub­ lished   The  Book   of   Canadian   Poetry,  which  contained most  of the  best-known Canadian   poets  of  that   time.   In   1947
John  Sutherland, as a kind  of rebuttal, published  Other  Canadians,  which   in­ cluded   some  writers   omitted   by  Smith,  and   attacking the   latter's  critical  terms of reference in  a pungent  foreword.
The   1966  parallel  to  the  Smith   book is New  Wave Canada, the  Contact  Press selection   of  new  poets,  edited   by   Ray­ mond  Souster  and  which  he  contends in his foreword contains "the  most  exciting,  germinative   poetry    written    by   young Canadians in  the  last  hundred  years  of this   country's   literary  history."  But   in
1966  as inI 943 some  poets  were  left  out of the  new anthology. And  I would  haz­ ard  a guess that  the  new  publishing  ven­ ture,  Very  Stone  House  of Vancouver, is a  direct   result   of  the   four   writers   re­ viewed   here   being   omitted  from   New Wave Canada.
Seymour Mayne  (originally from Mon­ treal)    is,  to  my  mind,   a  young  profes­ sional.  I'm  sure  he will  be writing poetry all  his  life.  In   From  the  Portals  of the Mouseholes   (his   third   book)    the   lan­  guage  is loose and  easy,  and  stems  from both   the   Williams-Pound-Olson-Greeley progressions and   the  submerged  lyricism of  metric traditionalists-not   to  men­ tion   Irving  Layton.  Mayne's  poems   in-
 elude  some  undoubted poses and  postur­ ings, but  in others,  when  perhaps  he for­ gets  himself,  his  cleverness  is fused  with the  subject  matter. Despite   the  seeming openness  of  Mayne's love  poems,  I don't  think  he really wants  the  reader  to know what   he  is like  personally, and   he  pre­ sents  no  clear   and   consistent  image   of himself  (not  that  I think  he  is obligated to).

Someone will  build  on  us, Your  children, mine, if  I have  any.
Leave   scratches on  furniture Kick  the  walls  of your  suite Scar  the  bathroom mirrors leave  a  mark     leave   it
That I was here
("The Time")

The  above  version  of Seymour  Mayne is not  performing, despite  the  injunction for breakage.  And  the excerpt  is only one reason  why I think  his poems  are  a map of loneliness.
Bill Bissett's poems  are  something of a
puzzle  to  me,  and  perhaps to  himself  as well.   He   writes   a   great    deal,   intends many poems to have the effect of songs, performs   wild   typographic  experiments on   the   page,   uses   his   own   brand    of phonetic  spelling,   and   occasionally   in­ dulges   in  the  "Oh  ain't  it   wonderful" type  of  exclamatory  holiness.  In   short, Bissett   has  a   rather   marvellous  incon­  sistency  of  style,  which   I think   is  rare and  good  in a  young  poet.

REVIEW ARTICLES



However, these various intriguing qualities have   not   jelled  into  coherence and  power.  Bissett rambles  (probably without knowing  where he is going or caring), and  has very little self discipline.
I think   that   even  the  wildest  rhetorical
 without excuse
a  wrong answer

WARNING
get  inside
out  of  darkness
 




("Christmas 65")

experiments need a measure of control, require  that   the   writer   possess  a  cool brain   which   observes  dispassionately all the body's most passionate excesses. And since  I  seem  to  be  pontificating, let  me add   one   more   quality    a   good   writer should  have: the ability to see his own mistakes  and  tum them  into  positive virtues.
Pat  Lane's poems  in  Letters  from the
Savage Mind  are  again  a reversion  to the commonplace: except that here the "commonplace"  is  streaked   and   veined with insights. Language: straightforward and   communicating directly   (except   in the  title  poem,  which  is diffuse). Subject matter: everyday life of a Vancouver workman.
The above  comments may  not  appear to  add   up  to  much,   yet  the  poems  do. As in certain other writers,  Lane's sum is more  impressive   than   the  parts,  though the  worker  is much  less in evidence  than the  other  two-thirds of his life. Excerpts are  difficult  to come by from  a man  who writes even-quality and fairly lengthy poems,  but  here  is a  recurring scene  in any  city:

a  long  blue  arm asking  me
where I'm   going and
no  answers

hard  looks questions

no  identification nothing
 The  Circus in the  Boy's Eye  has some
fine  erotic  drawings  (Bissett  again) , but the   poems   are   easily  good   enough    to stand   by   themselves.    If  Mayne is  the professional,  Lane   the  everyday  chroni­ cler,  Bissett  the  wild  experimenter, then  Jim   Brown  is  the  rather shy  and  intro­ spective    prototype    of    the    non-public poet:   probably  influenced    by  Leonard Cohen,  the  public  opposite of himself.
Brown's   language is  tough   and   mod­
ern,  but  this is deceptive. The poems  are by turns  sensuous,  gentle,  warm, and musing.   Here's the  last  part  of  "Waitin for  th  Bus":

waitin for  th  bus
me  in  my  university disguise sayin  as if  I (and
the  world   is my  oyster)
owned   the  fuckin country
,sayin   that   this  modern art on  the  fences  is  just  as  good as  art ever  was
and   explainin how  poetry
is doin   this  and   doin  that and  old  Tom sayin
its  shit

waitin for  th  bus and   old  Tom laughin
cause   I'm so  serious about nothin

The poems of these four poets are very different  from    the   schoolbook    literary ritual  drummed into  our  heads  by  tone­ deaf  teachers when  some of us were chil­ dren. All four  young, groping and earnest
-only  Seymour   Mayne has  much  sense of humour.

'Just walking­
taking in  the  scene!'
 Of  the four  I'm  most  interested in Jim
Brown's  development. There seems to me

REVIEW ARTICLES



little doubt that  Seymour Mayne will continue to write  and  improve-his ego demands  it.  About   Pat   Lane,  however good  his poems  are  now,  to  continue in that  everyday-poem-diary vein is a dead end.   And  Bill  Bissett,  just  possibly,  has the  most  potential -if he  begins  to  pay attention  to   someone    (not    necessarily
 me)   besides  his  own  admirers, who  are not likely to be very critical.
But  these are  young  poets,  well worth
reading now;  and   in  the  future one  of them  may write something that  will freeze you right  inside  your clothes.  Any one  of the four.  And I think  New Wave Canada made  a mistake  in omitting them.




GEORGE JOHNSTON
 


George Whalley



GEORGE JOHNSTON,  Home Free. Oxford University Press.  $4.25.


The Cruising  Auk  has sailed through five  printings since  it  appeared in  1959. Not  surprising. Paul  Klee  had  a thing   about   cats,  and   George   Johnston in  that   book  had   a  thing   about   aunts; and   although  the   Auk   poems  had   been written  over   a   period   of   ten   years  or more,   the  book  had   the  strange  consis­ tency   of   a  dream  landscape  in   which figures   appear  and   move   with  the  am­ biguous  and  impassive  logic of  a  Chagall  painting. If  (for  Chagall)  pigs are apple­  green  and  the  sky mauve, a  poet  may as­ sume  a horizontal posture  as wonderfully long  and  flat  as the  horizon and  his eyes turned  to  the   sky;   and   love,
same  device,  will  rise in  the  transfigura­
tion  of wedding garments at  an  angle  of forty-five degrees to the music of a violin played  by a cow, their  faces blank with ecstasy,  while   about  them   are   disposed jewel  textures   of  radical  pigments and the intrinsication of petals. For George Johnston, in  a  similar   logic,  there   were the presences of Mrs. McGonigle (with a shadowy    accompaniment  of   boarde ) and  her daughter Sadie; and  Aunt  Beleek
 (unmentionable  but   reappearing   none­ theless) ,  old  great-aunt Hairy   (a  name only,  though   other  females  are  noted  as hairy) ,  and    Mrs.    Belaney;    and    Mr  Murple (not  without dog), and  Edward; and   others.   These   move   in   a   twilight  pavane; laughter is to be heard, sardonic but   affectionate;  and   the   undertow  is dark  as sin  and  as vivid  as  the  fruits  of sin.   If from   time   to   time   there   were technical and  verbal  echoes  of  Eliot  and Yeats,  the  dominant tone  ( unborrowed) was  Betjeman,  occasionally  Housman­ a  solemn  and  slightly  mocking despair: for  all  men  are  grass,  their  mortality is tinged   with   folly,   and   their   occasional  glory  is that  they  will  obdurately pursue  illusion  in  order  to  outmanoeuvre muta­ bility   and   so   come   to   the   momentary havens  of  delight  and  disillusion.
In   The   Cruising   Auk   a   universe   of
desire  and  muted wonder   is fleshed  out with  swift  but  dreamy  strokes.  No narra­ tive  can  be inferred to  bind  Edward to Sadie,  or  to  his  death by  drowning; we could   not  prophesy   the  amorous fate  of Sadie, or of Elaine's disruptive femininity

REVIEW ARTICLES



(in  or  out  of a  bikini) ; we have  no way of formulating the  philosophy  of Mr. Murple or his Jog.  A girl, sillging to her­ self  from   a  boat,   makes  crooked  music on  the  waters,   a  little  Pentecostal,  cer­ tainly  out  of tune; she  has  betrayed  and forgotten her  many  lovers, is  untouched and   unchanged  by  the  "nights of splen­ dour" she  has  brought  them.   Edward's hat,  "moving on  the water's  face",  makes towards   the  sea,  and  the  boats  pass  up and   down   the   river   and   through  the bridge

Fishing, fishing  where  the  water's deep
For  Edward and  his trouble, sound  asleep.

Mr  Murple, hitherto earthbound, is  sud­ denly   Orpheus-and  we  are   not  sur­ prised.

The grasshopper does  not  so free The silly summer time  dispense As Mr.  Murple in  a tree
Playing upon  wind  instruments.

He  fills the  air  with  ornaments Trilling and  running gracefully Oblivious of audience
And  in  his improvising free.

The snake,  the  frog,  the  bumblebee
And  other forest  residents Hark  to his music  solemnly  Soothed to a charming diffidence.

So disposed in psychic space the figures imply a dream, a world, a garden  entered under  a  guest's  privilege-

This  home,  this  network, this great  roof of pity.

The unifying  principle is the  activity  of an  ironic  intelligence, a  clear  glance,  an embracing  compassion.   My  memory   of the  book is of something allusively single. Turning back  to  the  text,  some  of  the poems  one  by one  may  seem  occasional, or   "light",  and   a  few  don't   put   their feet  exactly   right.   Yet  out  of  materials

86
 whimsically diverse and light-heartedly random, materials of a  strange  and  vul­ nerable fragility, a  substantial  world  has been  constructed. There  is  no  escaping  the  moral  fervour; yet the  poet,  respon­  sive   and   watchful,   always   withdrawn, does  not  hector   with  earnest counsels  or utter    superior   judgments  through   the mask  of satire.  We  respond  instantly, be­ guiled  by the  simplicity  of a candid   host who-a     little    eccentric   and    absent­  minded -refrains even from  affiicting  us with  geniality.
Home  Free is a different matter and  I don't see  how  it  could  have  been  other­ wise.  The world  of The   Cruising  A'uk is not   only  single   but   complete:   to  have designed   extensions,  gazebos,   and   out­  works would  have  placed  too great  a bur­ den  upon  a structure so delicately poised. If Home   Free  is less  consistent  than the first  book, it gives clear signs of exploring deliberately a  new  manner and  a  wider  ambience.  About   half  the  poems  in  this book   are   written  in   clear-cut  stanzaic  forms   that   give  edge   to  irony.   A  new metric   provides  colloquial   fluency   and pace  in  other poems;  and  both  manners cross-fertilize  each   other,   the   flexibility sometimes   relaxing  the   stanzaic  sharp­ ness,  the   echoes   of  definite  metre   and rhyme  giving  unobtrusive   rigour  to fluency.  Two  poems  are  of  much  greater length   than  anything  in   The  Cruising Auk, and  in  these  George  Johnston ad­  dresses   himself -as   he   had    not   done before-to public  themes of present  con­ cern.   The  short   stanzaic   poems   are  at once   more   relaxed   and   more   dense  in texture, and  only  occasionally-usually when  couplets  are   used-do  they  take refuge  in  the  emotional  and   verbal   ap­ proximateness that   the  tradition of  light verse   permits.  (Avowedly   satiric   pieces

REVIEW ARTICLES



-"Bicultural"   and   "The  Royal   Com­ mission" -lose    points     through    some rather  permissive   marksmanship.)   Gen­  erally   the  shorter  poems  are  more  per­  sonal  than   before,  and  less  playful.  And almost   all  the  figures  from  the  dream­ scape   have   departed. Mr   Murple  and Mrs   McGonigle appear   only  once,   to­ gether; they  have  become emblems,  like the  Mrs  Porter to  whom   the  sounds  of horns  and   motors  bring  Sweeney  in  the spring.  Edward in  three  poems  returns in his   old    self-bemused,    sinning,    self­ destroying;  but   when   he   is  linked   to Sadie   in  marriage he  moves  out  of  the world  of myth  and  their  son is to be seen under   the  harsh   unallusive light  of  jour­ nalistic  biography.
Of the two long poems, I much prefer "Under the Tree". "Love in High  Places" can  be seen as an  extension in space  and
 time   of   "Music  on   the   Water"  (The Cruising   Auk   p.  36). A  freely  evolved parody    of   a   conceivable  ballad-stanza gives  Audenish   sharpness  to  the  fall  of words   and   encourages   reflective   com­ ment; it offers plenty  of scope, for  irony, sorrowful  lyricism, satiric sharpness,  nar­ rative,   moody   comment.  But   the   story and  moral  place  too  heavy  demands on the   poetic  resources,  as  though  an  epi­ gram were asked  to carry  the  weight  of a novel.  For  the  poem  covers  two  genera­ tions  and  there  is some  doubt whether it intends  an incisive vision of a little  group of  persons  or  the  framework for  a more generalized   social  and   satiric   comment. As  the  poem  grows  it  seems  to  lose  its initial  direction and  fineness of sensitivity and,  though  the  emphasis  shifts  more  to inclusive   comment  and    reflection,    the deep  compassion  that  shapes  and  colours





In  warm  green shallow  water Beside the grey and broken  docks,  The thin boys drop their  fish hooks, And  passionate to its slaughter

Leaps a sunfish  quick  and golden. The cruel boys knew  he would  come (Such his love  for the  killing sun) To a bare hook to be taken.

The air is bright  as lemons
As he lies on the weathered  boards. The single  fleck of red hoards
The light, the eye, like an omen

Direct and mysterious, drowns. In the water's  tropic, the sun
Fills emptiness  with  moving green.
On  grey blooms  and dies a gay gown.
 bright
as lemons?

Not  only  that. David  Helwig's poems are clean and  tough.
Warm  too and loving. Strong.
This  is one.
There are So more in a new collection from  Oberon,
Figures in a Landscape: poems and plays- 227 pages stitched  softcover $3.

box I 245 station b ottawa 4
oberon  press

REVIEW ARTICLES



just  about   everything George  Johnston's pen  touches   slips  away  into  a  mood  of weary  disgust.  Stan  is son enough  of  his father that   he  "Reminded Sadie  of  Ed­ ward  and  the dead  years -" and  "Made her   choke";  but   his   stature  is   much smaller, his allusiveness reduced. Through his own  neuter  passivity and  the incubus machinations  of  his  mother,  he  springs fullblown  into   the   stock   figure   of   the blind  self-seeking man-rudderless, sub­ servient,   cowardly,   deceitful,    abortive. Edward  could  at  least  see his own  habit  of  betrayal -
And  he  will also  remember
In his gut
Times when  his year  should  have  been  yea
And  it was yea  but:
Perhaps his best  friend  hunted in  the street
And  his door  shut.
For

There are  occasions that a sentimental man
Will  not  forget
But  will look  back  upon  with  twinges of emotion
And  some  regret,
When his behaviour has been  as he  thinks impulsive
And  warm  and  wet.

Stan  seems incapable of anything as posi­ tive  as  sentimentality. His  central  posi­ tion   in   the   poem   would   be   easier   to understand and  accept  if he  were  firmly related   to  the  poignant  opening section.  Sadie,  exhausted by the emptiness  of her life  with   Edward,  tries   to  kill  herself;  and  the  episode  and  its  lyrical aftermath is drawn with  harrowing precision.  Then by  abrupt   transition, Edward  has  van­  ished  and  Sadie  assumes  the  pitiless  and parasitic   role  of  the   possessive  mother, her   womanhood  obliterated  by  her  ter­ rible  ambition  to  manage   and   organize her son into  a worldly  but  hollow success
-a  success  which   he  neither   deserves

88
 nor  savours  and  which  by definition  she has   made   herself   incapable  of  making her own fulfilment. To say that  George Johnston has not successfully solved the formal and  dramatic problems  that  the theme poses is  perhaps to  say  that   he  is not  capable of  the  savage  contempt and passionate disgust  that  would  shape  such a theme  to self-declarative form.  The strength at  the  beginning is clear,  where compassion  rules;   later,   when   brutality is   demanded,  structure  and    precision falter.
"Love in High  Places"  is the last poem but  one  in  the  book;  "Under the  Tree" is the  first. If "Love  in  High  Places"  is a modern  parable  with   a  moral   too  near the    surface,  "Under   the    Tree"-on capital punishment-is  a  meditation of such sustained ardour that  it never  lapses into   propaganda.  The  poem   is  in   six movements, each  with  its  own  tone  and form.  The opening states  that  our  impli­ cation   in  a  guilt   for  which   we  are   not technically responsible   binds  us  together in  a  disagraceful fellowship  we  have  not deliberately chosen.

Hanging makes  us one
I am  a hangman, you  a hanging judge
Meet under the  hanging tree
For  the  hard work  that  is waiting to be
done
And  the  hanging tree  broods over  you and
me....

Then the tree itself-as wood, skilfully hewed   out,   beautiful -and the   lime­ stone   of  the   prison:  and   the   judge-

a  limestone judge
With  chambered ancient levels in  his mind, Veiny and  fossil  creatures in  his soul. ...

He  is kind  as we would  want  to be kind
Knows more than we know,
And  he has  consented to be our  judge
After a stern life  as befits  our  justice, A sentimental life  as befits our  justice
A steady voice  of a life whose  tones  speak

REVIEW ARTICLES



The steady words  of our  law  to the  hanging tree.

(But   I could  wish  that   the   judge  were not  also  a  parody of  the  successful  un­ rooted  man  whose life, arrested years ago, is  no  more   than   an   expedient  compro­ mise.)   A  lyrical   movement  follows  for the  child's   world   of  wonder  where   "so long  as childhood lasts"  there is safety­ as,  in  default of  innocence,  there  is not for  us-in  the  way that  "every  watched  road   has  a  secret   way  out." Then  the hanging  is  considered   from   the  funda­ mentalist position  as "a  prayerful thing", but   a   recollection   of   the   furtive  and senseless  squalor   of   the   murder  under­ mines   facile   rationalization.  In   an   in­ terior    scene   the   murderer's  aunt  and young friends,  unable  to commend either  the  crime  or  the  sentence, are  powerless to  mitigate the  punishment even  if  they knew  how -there  is no  time.  The  sixth movement  picks  from   the  opening  lines of the poem the key-word  waiting:  every­ thing  waits,  numbed  and  aimless, for  the final  constellation of  objects and  people that   will  comprise   the  event   of   execu­ tion,  the  execution of the event; they are waiting,  time suspended, for  the last and conclusive  item  in  the  pattern,  the  con­ demned    man.    The   poem    closes   in   a prayer  that  the earth  in its huge  compas­  sion  will   take   to  itself   even   our   guilt; and   the  verse  broadens  to  a  noble  and afflicting cadence.

God's good  kind  Earth, God's many­
bosomed  Earth,
God's suffering ugly cunning beautiful
Wounded creature of  Earth,
The pit  whence we were  dug, The garden in  which  we grope
For  love;
Kind Earth, our  gorgeousness of blood, Our fleeting pain of birdsong,
Our poised  in  air,  our  footsore, delicate, Our lifted  up  in grief,  our loosed  in  death,
 Carrion;
Darktongued Earth, tell  our  deeds  to the
dark.

The   overt   theme   is  hanging;  but   the poem   meditates  upon   the   even   larger reality  of  our  complicity  in  society  and in  law  that  protects society,  and  the  im­ potence  of  the  individual in  that  neces­ sary  implication; for  neither the  plea  of impotence, nor  even the prospect of social or  political  action, will  ever  resolve  our personal  responsibility.
The  shorter  poems  can  to some extent
be seen  in  thematic groups  though   they are   not   so  definitely   arranged.   Poems about   places  and   creatures  have  a  rich and   elegiac  sweetness,  a  little  Georgian perhaps, affectionate and  intent   without affectation-"Fields", 	"Honey", "The Siberian   Olive  Tree",  "Windy  Streets", "The  Huntress", "Spring  Moon", "The Lily   Pond",    and   sharpest   of  all   "Sloe Whisky".  These  are all acutely  perceived, happily  turned, imagist  at  times  in  their concentration, envigorated by unexpected turns   of  grave   wit.   ("Beside   the  Sea", however,  seems  not  to establish  its angle of  vision  crisply  enough   or  its  way  of going;    and   if   the   cat-poem  "Lopey" moves too exuberantly from  the  peculiar individual to the  genus cat,  it reminds  us what  a  stern  master   Hilaire Belloc  is in fitting   nervous   octosyllabic   couplets   to the   world   of   animals  and    children.) Three poems on  love are  among  the  best
-"Veterans"    (on   the   "seventy   times
seven  kinds  of   loving") ,  "Musk",  and "Us  Together"-the last  two  of an  en­ chanting  half-playful  delicacy.   Certain poems of a meditative kind  are more  per­ sonal  than  anything in The Cruising  Auk
-"The Bargain  Sale",  "The Creature's Claim",  "No  Way    Out",   "The  Old Man": these are important in establishing

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



a  presence  that   elsewhere  seems  deliber­ ately  withheld. "Pied   a Terre"  reminds me  of  "Love of  the  City"-one  of  the
most distinctive poems in The Cruising Auk-and  provides  a  counter-image to Stan's "place among  the Pre-Cambrian rocks"  in  "Love in  High  Places".
The   book   closes   (starting  at   p.  43) with  a series of poems that  bring  Edward and  Sadie  back,  at  least  in  name,  from their   earlier   poetic  existence;  but   three diverse  poems,  two  of them  bitter, inter­ vene-"Daisy", "A  Night-Piece  to  Mrs Treed", and  "Ballad of Jarvis  Street"­ to  destroy  any  impression  of  an  Edward cycle. "Bliss",  a comment on Edward  and "Edward's slut", is an  unforgiving poem, though incisive.  The  title  poem  "Home Free"   restores   Edward   to  that   mystery of  damnation  he  had  reserved  for  him­ self in  The  Cruising   Auk-

Someone has  given  Edward a pass to
Paradise:
Take it,  they  said,  and  go;  you'll  never earn the  price.
Walk  right up  to  the dragon, keep  an  eye for  the  tree,
Show  your  pass  to  the angel  and  he'll  admit you  free.

Edward sweats  for  a fortnight, the  salt  is in his shoes.
Who  knows  about angels  until  he hears  the news?
Who  knows  about gardens until  he smells the  pit?
Edward is holding a pass, and  he's  afraid of it.

"Multitude", in praise of Sadie and  her polycrotic  verminous kindness,  joins with "Bliss"  to  prepare the  ground  for  "Love








go
 in High  Places": there  is no fantasy  here and  pity  has  been  stretched  beyond breaking  point   by  embodiments of   aim­ less and   deliquescent  mortality.  But  the last  poem  in  the  book,  "Bed-Time", re­ covers the characteristic manner in which restraint  is  the  mark   of  seriousness  and the  lightness   of  touch   encompasses in  a gesture   of  ironic   regret   and  simple  pity the  gift  of life, the  fact  of death.

Edna the  dog  is dead  and  so is Min;
Mr  Smith's diet  worked  and  now he's  thin; Walter had  left  the  park  for  his loving
wife:
Better warm than happy defines  his life.

Toads are  asleep  and  so are  bugs  and snakes;
Millions of  things are  asleep  in  the  icy lakes;
Edward's asleep  where brown stalks  fuss and  wave
And  a squirrel has  planted oaks  beside  his grave.

This   is  probably  a  transitional  book, but  it  is in  no sense  tentative: in  modes not   attempted  before   by  George  John­ ston,  the  achievement  is substantial, skil­ ful,  and  emotionally exact.  The  extended technical resources broaden and  establish  more  solidly  his  own  tunes  and  his own vision-distinctive,   quaint,  witty,   seri­ ous,   recognizable, unashamedly  idiosyn­ cratic. I shall  turn   to  his  two  books  of poems  with  pleasure  and  admiration, de­ lighting in  all  that  most  amazes  me  for its  subtle  and  effortless  precision,  its  un­ obtrusive  technical skill,  the  absence   of rhetoric, the grave  unpretentious wisdom,  the compassionate gaiety.

.·





EVERYTHING LIVES

DOROTHY  LIVESAY,  The  Unquiet Bed. Ryerson
Press.  $3-95·

"EVERYTHING  THAT LIVES is holy," said William   Blake,  and   many   poets  of  our time,  in  an  effort   to  present   and  praise the  mystery  of  the  living  moment, have told  us to abandon the  formulae of  liter­ ary  contrivance, and  use the language of the  streets  and   the  rhythms  of  ordinary speech.  They  have  told  us,  too,  to  avoid the   speculative  and   the  overly   descrip­  tive, feeling  that  the clever  adjective and the  subtle  meditation  contribute more  to the  presentation of  self-praise  than  to the presentation of  an  intense   reverence for everything that   lives.   This   leads,   fre­ quently, to  a  sentimental fallacy,  and  to the   view   that   poems   are   not  made   by poets  and  found   in  books,  but  are  made  by  others  and   found   speaking out  from the rhythms and  objects  of our surround­ ings. Thus Dorothy Livesay, in the first poem  of  her  new  and   impressive  collec­ tion,  writes:

The real   poems   are   being written  m  out- ports
on  backwoods farms
in  passageways where pantries still  exist
or  where  geraniums
nail  light  to the  window
while  out  of the  window boy in  the  flying field
is pulled to heaven on  the  keel  of a kite....

Later in  the  same  poem  she  tells  us that

The living  speech is shouted out
by men  and  women leaving railway lines to  trundle home....
 Such  an approach might  lead a less sensi­ tive and  disciplined  poet  to  totally  aban­ don   fantasy    and   imaginative   richness, and  become  merely  a  neo-objectivist re­ corder   of  the  passing  scene,  or  a  crude  retailer    of    simplicities.    Miss   Livesay, however,  knows  that  the  task  is to catch  the  miracle of  the  fleeting  moment, not by  merely  labelling  it,  but  by transform­ ing it into an ideal  vision in which  the transitory nature of the perception is per­ fectly  balanced   against   the  timeless  and universal  nature of its implications.

.... the  essence  is
to catch the  bird  in  season

hold,  hold  a snowdrop capped and  cool
in  the  cold  snow - then  let  it  go.

The   balance  is achieved  m  these  poems, not only  by a disciplined  economy  which excludes   easy   rhetoric  and   pretention, but  also  by a  superb sense of  music.  In the fragment above the cadence, the vary­ ing  speed,  the  pauses,  the  echoing  con­ sonants  and  vowel sounds, all combine  to give   the   structure a   musical   authority which   supports, and   one   might   almost  say  "proves" the  authority of  the  state­  ment  made.
Perhaps there  is no subject  more  popu­
lar with those poets who are intent upon revealing  the common miracles  of our reality  than  that  of sexual  love;  Miss Livesay's   Notations   of   Love,  and   her other   poems  touching  upon   this  theme, are  astonishing  in  their   directness,  dig­ nity,   and   sensitivity.   Moreover,  instead  of  presenting us  with  erotic  intensity   as the  heart  of  the  matter, she  reveals  that  the  erotic  is part  of  a  total  transforma­ tion  of human awareness and  the  indivi­  dual's  sense of identity.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Each  time  you come
to  touch 	caress me
I'm born  again
deaf 	dumb each   time
I whirl
part  of some  mystery
I did  not  make  or earn
that  seizes me
each  time
I drown
in  your  identity
I am  not  I
but  root
shell
 in sandals, slacks old  sweater
and  my dyed
hair

I go disarrayed my fantasies
twist  in  my arms ruffle my hair

I go wary fearing to scare the  crow

No  one  remembers Dorothy was  ever  here.


each  time  you come
 fire
 Dorothy  Livesay   has   been   "here"  for
some  time.  Her  first  book  of  poems  ap­

I tear  through the  womb's  room
give  birth
and  yet                        alone
deep  in  the dark earth
I am  the  one 	wrestling the  element re-born.
This  section  from  The  Touching  reveals the  way  in  which   Miss Livesay  has  suc­ ceeded  in fusing  her  romantic archetypal imagery  with  a simple and  spare  diction; thus  the  poems  structure is  itself a state­ ment  of the  process  the  poem  describes: from  our  common experience, our simple passions,  arise  the  formidable dark   and radiant gods which  possess and  heal us.
Though many  of these poems are writ­
ten  in  the  first  person  and  therefore risk the   accusation  of  self-dramatizing  ego­ tism,  none  of  them  are  narcissistic,  and all  present   a  personality  nakedly   aware  of its own failures  and  hesitations. More­  over,  even  when  these  failures,  these  in­ adequacies, are presented, there  is always enough  wryness to prevent self-pity. Thus,  in  the  last  section  of Ballad  of Me  there  is a touch  of the absurd  as well as of the plaintive,  and   the  musical   structure  as strength  as  well as plangency.

Returning further now to childhood's Woodlot I go incognito
 peared   in  I929,  and  since  that  time  she has  always   been  one  of  the  least  noisy and   most  preceptive of  our  poets.  This new   collection    includes  a   magnificent poem   arising   from   her   recent   visit   to Africa, and  several  of the most subtle and disturbing lyrics  to  have  appeared  any­ where  in  recent  years, and  makes  it clear that  in  Dorothy Livesay  we have  a  poet of  real  stature whose  work  can  stand  up beside   that    of   any   other   poet   in   the English    speaking   world.    Occasionally, perhaps,  her  subtlety  results  in  thinness,  and  sometimes  the disciplined brevities  of her  method  frustrate the  poem's   move­ ment   towards  rhetorical  power.   These  are,   however,    minor   flaws   and   hardly worth  mentioning. I must  however  men­ tion  the  very  pleasing  typography  of the book  and  the  fascinating  illustrations by Roy  Kiyooka  who  has exactly  caught the combination of  symbolic  power  and  for­  mal   elegance  which   is  characteristic of Miss  Livesay's   work.   This   is  in  all  re­ spects  a splendid book. Buy it.
ROBIN SKELTON

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ENOUGH UNDERSTANDING

CLARA THOMAS,  Love  and Work  Enough: The Life   of  Anna   Jameson.  University  of   To­ ronto Press.  $6.so.

ANNA  BROWNELL  jAMESON   (1794-186o) i'i  now   best  known   here   for   her   1838 publication Winter Studies and  Summer Rambles in  Canada, recently reissued  in the  New Canadian Library. In  this work, as  in  others,  her  personal  biases  can  be seen;  she characterizes Toronto as having the  worst  faults  of  the  artificial  English social  system  and  none  of  its  advantages (a  view with  which  non-Torontonians in Canada perennially agree). That she was ultimately optimistic  about   Canada  was hardly   enough   to  calm   down   the   riled citizens   of   that    city.   Anna    Jameson's
 rhetoric,    however,    together   with    her acute    and   individual  perceptions  and her  consistent  goals-"To persuade, to convert   and   to   lead" -create   an   in­ teresting    and   readable  document.   Yet what  we are most  conscious  of, and what Mrs.  Thomas makes  quite  clear,  is  how much  Winter Studies reveals  the  stance, the  personality,  of  its  writer.
Indeed, Mrs. Thomas's introduction to the  NCL  reprint contains some of the material that  she  now  excellently  incor­ porates   into  her   longer   and  fuller   bio­ graphical study  of  Mrs.  Jameson,  Love and  Work   Enough. By  relying  in  large part  on  diaries,  letters,  and  reviews, she admirably recreates the  life and  times of that     complex    woman,    examines   her books,  her  friendships,  and  her   travels, explores some of her possible motivations, and   considers   some  of  the   attitudes  to




The President's Medals
THE  UNIVERSITY OF  WESTERN   ONTARIO

Dr.   D.  C.   Williams,  the   President  of  the   University  of  Western Ontario, announces  the   opening of  the   competition  for   the   President's  Medals  for
1 g68.   These  medals  are   awarded  annually  for   the   best   single   poem,  best short   story,   best  scholarly article,  and   best  general article submitted  for  the competition. A  cash  award will  accompany each  medal.
To  be  eligible, work  must   be  written by a  Canadian citizen   or  a  person  resi­ dent   in  Canada, and   must   have  appeared in  a  Canadian publication  in  the calendar year  preceding the  year  of  the  award. The  closing   date for  entries is  March 15,  1968.
Competitors should submit three   copies  of  each  entry,   at  least  one  of  which must   be  a  tearsheet from   the   issue  of  the   publication  in   which   the   entry appeared. Each copy  should  be  clearly   marked with  the   name and   address of  the   person submitting  the   entry, and   with   the  name   of  the  category in which  it  is submitted. No  entries will  be  returned. Entries should be  sent  to the  Chairman of  the  Awards Committee,  Professor R.  G.  N.  Bates,  Depart­ ment   of  English,  University  College, The   University  of  Western   Ontario, London, Ontario.
Judges reserve the  right not   to  make  an  award if  the  calibre of  the  entries does  not  warrant it.




93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



which   her   personality   gave   rise.   Love and  Work  Enough is a  good  biography, and  a  good  biography  is one which generally   results  if  its writer  has  love or hate  enough  for  the subject.  This  book is the  exception, for   there  is  certainly   no hate    expressed   here,   and   rather  than love,  it  is  a  kind  of objective  sympathy which  moves  through Mrs.  Thomas's prose.
It would  be easy  (though undoubtedly dangerous)  to caricature Anna  Jameson. She  was a woman whose personal <esthe­ tic  judgments insistently  linked  great  art with  moral  virtue  in the  artists. She  was a   feminist    whose   marriage   was   com­ pletely  incompatible and  ended  in  legal separation,  in   her   husband's  acute   in­ ebriety,  and  in  her  being  disinherited in his  will.  She   was  a  dominating -even domineering-woman who,  as  Harriet Martineau  noted,   would  be  "mortified" rather than   hurt   by severed  friendships. She even lived  and  travelled  with  Robert and  Elizabeth Browning  on  their  honey­ moon.   Clara  Thomas  conceals  none  of this,  but   wisely  she  avoids  ridicule   and takes    a   more    humane   view.   Though Anna   Jameson  seems  now  almost   mili­ tantly   proud, she  also  had   a  profound sense  of  duty,   of   reputation, and  of  re­ sponsibility   towards  her   parents.  These  qualities  led   her   into  many   friendships (as  it  happens, primarily  with  women), but  her  apparently thin  skin complicated her  life,  and   the  stance  she  assumed  in public    came   to   take   over   her   private view   of   herself   as  well.  Wisely,  again, Clara Thomas has  refrained from  mak­ ing  a  Freudian case  history  out  of  her subject.  She   shows   us,  instead,  a   pro­ lific  writer, a  respected  art  critic,  an  al­ most   compulsive   traveller;   we  meet   a woman   who   (in  her  own  day)   had  ele-

94
 gant  taste and  fine perception and  moved in  influential  literary   circles.  Unhappily for   herself,   Mrs.   Jameson  was   also   a woman  with  a "long-proven capacity for self-dramatization and self-pity". To these attributes we must  add  her  adventurous­ ness and  her  capacity for self-congratula­ tion,  not least observable in her "Summer Rambles" in Canada. When  on one occa­ sion  she shot  the  St.  Mary's rapids,  with an  Indian steersman, in a ten-foot canoe,  she tells us that  two glasses of champagne could   not  have  made  her  more  tipsy  or more  complacent.
Moments  of   self-revelation  like   this
seem  frequent in  Anna  Jameson's  work, yet  Clara   Thomas has  done   more  than simply   collect   and   annotate  them.    In a clearly-printed, well-documented, smoothly-written and  above  all  interest­ ing  book,  she  has  attempted  to  compre­ hend  another's personality,  and  then  she has  done  her  readers  an  invaluable ser­ VICe  by  helping   them  to  comprehend it too.                                     WILLIAM  H. NEW


HEROIC BIOGRAPHY

J.  G.  MACGREGOR, Peter  Fidler: Cana.da's  For­
gotten Surveyor. McClelland &  Stewart  Ltd.
$1'0.00.

OF THE MANY  JOURNALS  written by  ex­ plorers,   traders and   captives   during  the pristine   days  of  Canada's  development, few   are   able   to   maintain   the   tension  necessary to captivate the common reader. Hearne, Thompson, Harmon, Jewitt and a   handful  of   others   with   the   unique ability  to  mould  observation into creation would qualify. What happens, then,  when an  editor  is fascinated by a journal  writer whose  stature seems heroic  but  whose journals lack  the  creative spark? The re-

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



suit  may  be  a  work  such  as  J. G.  Mac­ Gregor's  biography,  Peter   Fidler:   Can­ ada's  Forgotten Surveyor.
J. B. Tyrell,  who edited  David  Thomp­
son's  Narrative in   rgr6, was  one  of  the first historians to recognize  merit  in early Canadian  journals. He  also  realized  that these journals could and should speak for themselves,  and  thus  Thompson's  narra­ tive is introduced and annotated by an un­
intruding editor. J. G.  MacGregor is not
an  editor,  but  a biographer, and  a  biog­ rapher with a task:  to raise his hero to the stature of Thompson and  in so doing  be­ come  Fidler's  self-appointed  apologist.
Fidler,  in   his   biographer's  eyes,  has been  forgotten. Obviously he  deserved  a better fate, for he was an outstanding Hudson's  Bay   Company  surveyor   who was  the  first  to  map  many  of  the  rna jor rivers  of  central Canada,  was  an  inde­ fatigable trader who  harassed -and was harassed   by -the  Montreal  fur  traders,  and   who  played   a  quiet  but  important role  in  the  founding of   the  Red   River  colony.   But   he   lacked   the   flamboyant nature  of  highland  explorers  like  Mac­  kenzie  and  the  brooding introspection of Thompson. He  was  an  educated man­ certainly  more  so than  either  Mackenzie or Thompson-and, as MacGregor often
 notes,  a  scholar.  The   qualities of  persis­ tence,  bravery  and  scholarship,  however,  do  not inevitably produce  fame,  no mat­  ter  how  rare  those  qualities might   have been  in  the  Canada  of the  early  18oo's. By writing  a  popular biography and  thus carving   a  pedestal   to  his  own  specifica­ tions, MacGregor has attempted to rescue his hero  from  obscurity.
This,   then,   is  the  answer   to  Tyrell's
Thompson-a biography designed  to in­ ject  into   Fidler   a  dimension  which  he lacked   in  his  own   lifetime,  popularity. But  in  the  attempt  to  popularize Fidler,  this   biographer  has   destroyed   all   sem­ blance  of  scholarship. For  example, not only does  MacGregor fail  to footnote the quotations  he  uses from  Fidler's  numer­ ous  journals,   but  quotations  from  other  journals  and  historical commentators suf­ fer  the same fate.
Perhaps the  best  sections  of  the  biog­ raphy   are   those   in   which   MacGregor drops   his  role   as  apologist   and   writes Northwest  history.  His  affection   for  the Indian is a constant  and admirable fac­ tor  in  the   book,  and  as  Fidler   follows and   lives  with  the  Indians,  MacGregor takes   the   opportunity  to   describe   the plight    of    the    nomadic  Indian   tribes caught   between   the   white   man's   push






RIChaRb asel & company,  tnc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences



PORTLAND, SAN  FRANCISCO,  LOS   ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



95

BOOKS IN REVIEW


westward and the aggressive and highly organized  Prairie  tribes. If his rhetoric at such times verges on pathos it, perhaps, comes  of  the  need   to  be  popular. The finest part  of the  book  describes  the attempts by the  Hudson's Bay Company to establish  Selkirk's  colony. Through all this Fidler  is silent in his journals,  but MacGregor  has   found   ample   evidence that   Fidler   was  very  much   involved   in his usual self-effacing way. That Fidler persuaded the  M'etis leader,  Cuthbert Grant,  to   surrender  himself   after   the Seven  Oaks  massacre  appears to be  con­ jectural, in  as  much  as  the  author  does not   document  his   statements,   but   the picture he  creates   of  the  then  aged  fur trader and  the  young  half-breed  is warm and  human and  one wants  to  believe.
Finally,   that    is   the   impression   that Peter Fidler:  Canada's Forgotten  Sur· veyor  leaves  one  with: the  desire  to  be­ lieve.   One   wants   to   believe   that   that  Fidler  was as great  a surveyor  and  jour­ nal  writer   as  Thompson, and  to  believe with   MacGregor  that   given  the  oppor­  tunity   Fidler   would   not  have  vacillated  in   the   Rockies   as  did   Thompson,  but would  have  pushed  on  down  the Colum­ bia  in  order   to  establish  a  trading post on  the  coast  before  the  Americans. But Fidler, in this  biography, is never  allowed to speak  for  himself.
Paradoxically, it  seems  doubtful that this  biography will achieve the popularity for  which   it  is  designed; and   it  could not, in this form,  be of great  value  to the historian.  Popular  biography, by  its  in­ herent limitations, cannot  illuminate  his­ torically,  and  so Fidler  remains "eclipsed by the long shadow  of David Thompson" and  lacking  an  editor  like  Tyrell,  Fidler  and  his  journals  remain  in  darkness.
MAURICE HODGSON

g6
 


CANADIAN MATURITY


ALAN  GOWANs,   Building   Canada:   An   Archi­ tectural   History   of Canadian   Life.  Oxford University   Press.  $15.95·

IT DOESN'T SEEM  POSSIBLE that  a history of Canadian architecture could  evoke adjectives like  "controversial", "provoca­ tive",  or  "stimulating", or any of the common words  we like to attach to a book that  makes  attractive reading. Even  the author,  Alan   Gowans,   in  his  introduc­ tion  to Building Canada, starts by quoting an  article  in  Canadian Art  of  more  than  a  decade  ago   which   comments that: "Very  few of our  buildings  ... can  by any stretch   of  the  imagination be considered good   architecture, or  even   architecture at  all".  Is  there  anything left  to say?  By his  mature,  candid  and   courageous ap­ proach  to   the   subject,  Gowans    proves that   there   is.
Building   Canada:   An    Architectural
History  of Canadian Life  is the  author's re-write of  his  book,  Looking  at   Archi­ tecture   in  Canada,  published  only  eight years  before.  The  difference  between  the tepid,  non-commital  sound  of  the  earlier  title  and  the  pointed   and  broader signi­ ficance   of  the   later   one  well  represents the   contrast  between   the   two   versions. The  literature  on  Canadian architecture has  been  small,  and   much   of  what   has appeared  so  far   has   been  suffocatingly redolent   of   ladies'   perfume    and   body powder,    ululating   with    references    to "nice  lines"  and   "fine  proportions" and tacit  intimations of  the  ultimate  superi­ ority  of  British   colonial   life  among   the upper   classes  and   up-in-the-air  noses  of Upper Canada. Alan  Gowans  quite  defi-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



nitely  seeks  and   reaches   another,  more convincing, level.
Aside    from    the    pithy    commentary which   can   almost    be   read   completely apart from  the  summary of architectural development,  Building   Canada   remains the only really useful, albeit incomplete, encyclopedia of Canadian architectural history.  And  since  each  aspect  of emerg­ ing  form  is succinctly explained in  terms of   its   stylistic   history,    the   uninitiated learn   something  about   the   general   pa­ geant   of   architectural  history,   at   least since  the  I 7th  century. However, in  spite of  its   refreshingly straight-forward   ap­  proach   to  the  factual material, the  book could   have   made   very  tedious   reading, to  be sure,  of  interest only  to  the occa­ sional   lecturer  who  might  add  the  lace curtains   and    foundation    planting   to make  it all palatable as an afternoon talk to the local women's club. But  the author will   not   leave   well   enough    alone.   He really   does  find   the   subject  interesting when  allowed  to look  at  it with  the ruth­ lessly penetrating  eye of the serious social critic.   Once   accustomed  to   the   notion that  a  thorough treatment of a Canadian subject   may  not   be  all  honey  and   self­ flattery, the  reader, too, discovers  a new profundity to  the  material at  hand.
Gowans   is   not   afraid    to   call   "gro­ tesque"   what   others  have   called   "good taste".   He   is  quite   unambiguous  about  associating Canadian  architectural   pre­ tensions   with   equally   pretentious  social notions   and   delusions   regarding   Cana­ dian  culture. He  sees the  architecture of today  as perhaps the  most  mature of the Canadian  arts   precisely   because   it   has rejected irrational fears  of  corrupting in­ fluences  from  beyond  the  confines  of the country's  political  borders.   The greatest  maturity will come when Canadian archi-
 tecture  ceases entirely  to  be "Canadian." What  does Gowans  say of Canadian art, Canadian literature-Canadian life? The answer is well implied  in his bitter reminder: "Irredentist  nationalism is  in­ deed  a cancer."
It is too  bad  that  the  make-up of  the book -that  is, the separation of the text in   one   section   and   the   illustrations  in another-succeeds in  creating two essen­ tially different  stories. Except  for a hand­ ful  of  post-rgs8 examples,   most  of  the photographs come  from   the  earlier, less interesting edition, and   are  largely  dull. In   too   many   cases  they   are  so  badly printed  that   they  are  practically  useless as  illustrations.  Nor  do  the  captions re­ flect any of the sparkle  which  the  author generates in  reference  to  the  same  build­  ings  in  the  new  text.  Just   in   terms   of quality   of   production,  if  one   confronts Building    Canada,  printed   in   Canada, with  Images  of American Living, another recent  work  by the  same  author, printed in the United  States,  it becomes apparent that   Canadian publishing, among other Canadian cultural institutions, probably needs   to  receive   part   of   the   collective kick  which   Mr.   Gowans   lets  fly  in  his book.                           ABRAHAM ROGATNICK


FEDERALISM TODAY

R.    L.    WATTs,  New   Federations: Experiments in  the  Commonwealth. Oxford  University Press.  $1 r.75.

MAJOR DISTORTIONS  and shortcomings may   appear   to  be  unavoidable  defects in as ambitious an  undertaking as a com­ parative analysis  of  the  federal  political  structures of such  widely varied countries as   India,   Pakistan,  Malaya,    Nigeria,  Rhodesia and  Nyasaland, and  the  West

97

•
BOOKS IN REVIEW


Indies.   Professor  Watts  admits  that  des­ pite the common experience of British rule and   the  common  problem  of   economic  under-development, the  essential   differ­ ences (historical, cultural, religious, racial,  geographical)   are  so striking   that   com­ parison  is  exceedingly  difficult.  The  fed­ eral  experiments themselves  seem  fragile and   temporary:   they   disintegrated  in central Africa  and  the  West  Indies;  one was  drastically  revised  in  Pakistan;  an­ other   is  now  suspended   in  Nigeria.  The  "federal  concept" itself,  even  if  broadly defined,    will   not   encompass   the  full range  of political  devices and forms  tried in   these   countries   since   1945.  Despite  these   difficulties   the   author  refuses   to write  a  narrowly  legalistic  study  of con­ stitutions, but  probes  the  intricate rela­ tionships    between    societies   and    their political  institutions. He  also  resists  the temptation to  find  or  create   similarities where   none  exist,  and  avoids  the  claim that  representative federations are politi­ cal  panaceas, for  underdeveloped  coun­  tries.  For  example, although  sympathetic to  the  Nigerian experiment,  he  does  not obscure  the threat socio-economic change, tribal  rivalries  and  regional  governments pose  to  unity,  law  and  order.  Therefore, the  turmoil  which  developed   in  Nigeria
 




after   the  book  went  to  press  is  not  un­ expected. He  anticipates  too  the  recent  shifts  in  the  focus  of power  from  central to  state   political   organizations in  India.
One-party,  arbitrary, unitary  govern­ ment   is  not   an   acceptable   alternative, states   Professor   Watts,   to  representative federalism. Yet  even  India  and  Malaya, the  more  stable  experiments  he  has  ex­ amined,  are   not  shown   to  have   passed his  test  of  success:   to  strike  an  "appro­ priate  balance ... between  adequate cen­ tral   power  to   provide  security  and economic development, and  sufficient  re­ gional   autonomy  to  protect  vital  local aspirations and  interests  in order  to avoid resentment and  discontent."
The ability  of  particular federal  forms
to  combat   poverty  and  reduce  local  ten­ sions  can   be   better  viewed   through regional   and  historical  perspectives  con­ fined   say  to  Southeast   Asia  or   Africa. Useful  comparative studies  can  be made  of   the   former  "white  Dominions."  It seems less relevant to find  points  of com­ parison   among   the  states   of  the  amor­ phous    Commonwealth.   However,   Pro­ fessor  Watts'  insight,  diligence   and  cau­  tions  have  prevented  him  from  succumb­ ing  to  the  artifices  and   unrealities often found in such analyses.     ROBERT KUBICEK




Write or Phone

THE   UNIVERSITY BOOK  STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS


g8
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back





INESCAPABLE BONDS

IN  HIS  REVIEW of Margaret Laurence's novel  A  Jest  of God   (Canadian  Litera­ ture    3 I),   Robert  Harlow states   that there  is a failure of technique in Mrs. Laurence's portrayal of the frustrations experienced by her schoolteacher heroine. In  his view, this failure lies in the absence of "objectivity, distance, irony"; in other words,  Mrs.  Laurence's handling of  the first-person mode of narration does not allow  for  the  kind  of  authorial  detach­ ment   which  would  enable   the  reader   to view  this  highly  personal  account in  the wider   perspective  of   irony.  The   impli­  cation   of  such  criticism   is  not  only  that the   author   was   unable   to   control   her creation,   but   also   that    the   book   lacks imaginative depth and  has  little  signific­ ance   beyond  its  surface  narrative. Such a  view,  it  seems  to  me,  underestimates the  full  impact  of  the  novel  as  well  as Mrs.  Laurence's skill in  handling a diffi­ cult  narrative method.
In  any novel presented through the consciousness   of  a  single   character  the reader   is  inevitably-and  intentionally
-given a  partial  vision   of  events;  in A   Jest  of  God   our   view  of  the   world in  which  Rachel moves is filtered  through the   lens  of  her   tortured  and   complex­ ridden  sensibility.  But  this does  not mean that   there  is no  way  that  we  can  arrive  at  a  clear  evaluation of  Rachel and  her miseries.  She  is  possessed  of  a  degree  of self-awareness that  allows  her  to perceive the   exaggerations  of   her    self-inflicted
 mental  agonies:   "I honestly  do not know why I feel the daft  sting of imagined em­ barrassments.  The   ones  that   occur   are more   than   plenty,   God   knows.  I must not  let  myself  think   like  this."  To  sug­ gest  that  there  is a  lack  of objectivity  is to   ignore   the   corrective   distance   pre­  sented  within  the character's own view of herself,   the   moral    perspective   that    is provided  by  Rachel's dual  consciousness. We   listen   to   Rachel's  laments  at   her failures  and  frustrations,  to  the  painful  analysis   of  her   incapacity  expressed   in self-pitying  tones.  But  there  is  a  second voice which  can  step  back from  the men­ tal action  and  mock  the self-pity  and  the self-dramatization;  there   is  an   internal conflict   between    that    part    of    Rachel  which  does  wail  pitifully,   and  that part  of  her  which  is  harshly  self-critical: "I dramatize myself.  I  always  did.   No-one would   ever   know   it   from   the   outside,  where  I'm  too quiet." This  is not  merely another  instance  of  Rachel  taking   pot­  shots  at  herself;  for  much  of  the  novel's strength is derived  from  this internal con­ flict, and the effect  is to create  an  ironic distance  between  the  Rachel who  is  tor­ tured   by  her  own   frustrations  and   the Rachel who  preserves  a degree  of objec­ tivity  in assessing her  own  weakness. She is  both  ironist  and   victim.
The  reader  feels both  sides of this con­ flict, and  perceives  another level of  irony springing from  the  inefficacy  of  Rachel's self-criticism,   from   her   inability   to  act decisively  even  when  she  is most  aware  of  her  own  weakness.  She  chastises  her­  self for  being so  weak  and  timorous; but the only result  is  that  she retreats further into  the  world  of  day-dreams, where  all her   desires  may   be  satisfied.   Even   her surrender   to   a   passionate   love   affair proves  to  be  no  more  than   a  surrender

99

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



to another illusion; and  at  the end  of the novel   she  is  left   to  speculate   about   a future  which    offers   little   promise    of change    from    the    past.    Rachel    is   a prisoner  of her  background and  upbring­ ing  as much  as of  her  ever-present  sense of inferiority. What she wants  for  herself is  always   coming  into   painful   collision with  what  she  knows is expected  of her, and   the   first-person   technique  conveys the  intensity   of  this  waking   nightmare by   the   constant  juxtaposition of  the dreams of  her  inner   world  and  the  de­ mands  of the  external  world.  The small­ town morality against  which she struggles is   given   concrete   embodiment   in   the words  of  the  people  around her,  and  in the  strong  sense  of  place  evoked  by her detailed   and   perceptive   observation    of her   environment.  Manawaka  provides the  sombre  perspective  against  which  we can  measure   Rachel's pain,  and  no  de­ tached  omniscient narrator is needed to convey the  claustrophobic atmosphere which  threatens to  stifle  her.
In  this examination of the  inescapable bonds of personality,  Mrs. Laurence has created   a  fictional  world  with  a  signific­ ance  stretching beyond  the  city  limits  of Manawaka,  Manitoba.  The   drama  of Rachel's  struggle   and   failure  is  played out  entirely  within  her consciousness, but
















100
 the  narrowness of the  point  of view does not limit  the  novel's meaning. The  theme of   individual  aspiration  conquered  by social  convention and  personal  guilt  is all the   more   forcibly   conveyed   by  this  in­ tense concentration on a single sensibility.
H. J. ROSENGARTEN

CANADIANA

Sir,
I am currently engaged  in a major revision  of my Check  List of Canadian Literature and   Background   Materials
!628-1950. Not  only  do  I  intend   to  ex­ tend   coverage   to  at  least  1g6o,  but  also to    include   earlier    titles    and    authors omitted because  they  were  undiscovered, overlooked, or  unlocated.
If you  or  any  of  your  readers   would
draw    to   my   attention  any   omissions, errors, or misclassifications in the present volume  I  shall  be very grateful. I  should also  like  to  receive  the  names  and   ad­ dresses of persons with substantial private collections of rare  Canadiana whose help I  might  be  able   to  enlist   to  make   this revision  as complete and  authoritative as possible.
R. E. WATTERS,
Royal  Military College of Canada, Kingston, Ontario.
