!/I.oo per copy


CANADAN
l TERATURE N°·8



Spring, rg61



Jl  SPECIJIL  MJILCOLM LOWRY  ISSUE


Poem$ and  Letters

BY 11-IALCOLM LOWRY


Articles and  Notes
BY CONRAD  AIKEN, ROBERT B. HEILMAN, EARLE  BIRNEY, MAX-POL FOUCHET, DOWNIE KIRK, GEORGE  WOODCOCK


A Lowry Bibliography

BY EARLE  BIRNEY AND  MARGERIE LOWRY




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW



UNDER
SEYMOUR MOUNTAIN



George Woodcock




MLCOLMLOWRY   was  born  in  England  in  '909· He died there in  1957. And during  the restless life that stretched  between those poles
of  destiny  he  wandered over  a great  portion  of the  earth-the Far  East,  the United  States,  much  of  Europe,  and,  of course, Mexico,  the setting  of his now belatedly  celebrated  novel, Under  the Volcano.  But almost  a third  of his life­ and  the most productive  third  so far as his writing was concerned-he spent in Canada. He  came to Vancouver just before the war, in 1939, and  the next year settled  in  a  squatter's cabin  on  the  foreshore of Burrard   Inlet  at  Dollarton,  a settlement  under  the shadow  of the  mountains,  a few miles east of  Vancouver.  There,  with  time off for trips back to Mexico and Europe  and  Eastern  Canada, he lived until  1954, when  he left for Sicily and, finally, England.
It was at Dollarton, and  at Niagara-on-the-Lake, that  Lowry finished the last,
published  version of Under  the Volcano. It  was at Dollarton  also that  he wrote the stories which are now being published as the first new volume of his work to appear  since his death-Hear Us Oh  Lord  from Heaven  Thy  Dwelling  Place.' He  worked  at  the same  time on at least two novels about  Mexico,  La Mordida and  Dark as the GraveJ of which, so far as I know, only fragments  remain among the  great  mass of  manuscript material  that  has recently  been  assembled at  the University of British Columbia.Among that material is also--apart from enough poems  to  make  a  considerable  volume-the almost completed  manuscript  of a novel, October  Ferry to  GabriolaJ which is set in British  Columbia,  and  which also will be published as soon as the editing is complete.

' Hear Us Oh  Lord  from Heaven Thy  Dwelling Place. Longmans, Green. $4.50.

R  This is now being edited by Malcohn Lowry's widow, Margerie Bonner Lowry, and Earle Birney, whose assistance in preparing this issue of Canadian  Literature  I wish at this point gratefully to acknowledge.


3

UNDER SEYMOUR MOUNTAIN



I do not think  there is much doubt  that  Lowry has one foot well in the realm that  is appropriate to Canadian  Literature.  It  is not  merely  that  on  Canadian soil he produced  the final, magnificent version of what  many critics regard  as the best novel written  in our land;  nor is it merely that  much  of his later  work was set in  Canada. We do not, after all, regard  D. H.  Lawrence  as anything  but an English writer, though he wrote many of his books abroad  and set them in foreign countries. Try  as he might to escape from his past, Lawrence  remained  the travel­ ling Englishman, refracting all he saw through  a personal and  alien eye; his best writing  on other  lands  was prompted  by the  lyrical observations  of an  outsider, and  when  he tried  to enter into the heart  of Mexico and  portray  it from  within, he produced  that literary monstrosity, The  Plumed Serpent.
Lowry's  relationship  to  his  adopted  home  was quite  different.  We  read  the
poems  he  wrote  on  Burrard  Inlet;  we read  the  three  Canadian stories in  Hear Us Oh  Lord  from Heaven Thy  Dwelling Place-"The Bravest Boat",  "Gin  and Golden  Rod", and  particularly  "The  Forest Path  to the Spring". And we realise that  he is not in fact writing about  Canada as a transient  outsider. He is writing about  it as a man  who over fifteen years lived himself into the environment that centred  upon  his fragile home where the  Pacific tides lapped  and  sucked under the floorboards,  and  who identified himself with  that environment-despite  trials of flesh and spirit-as passionately as those other strangers  who have rendered so well the  essence of their  particular  corners of Canada, Grove  and  Haig-Brown. If Mexico  stirred  him  through  that  combination   of antagonism  and  attraction which  so many  Europeans  feel there,  Canada-or at  least  that  fragment of it which  stretches  out  from Burrard  Inlet  to embrace  the Gulf of Georgia-stirred him through  a sympathy that led towards total involvement.
It is for  this reason, perhaps,  that  in his Canadian stories the Websterian  hell
of Under  the  Volcano  never comes to view, though  one gets a whiff of the sul­ phur  in "Gin  and  Goldenrod". No man goes down to destruction  under Seymour Mountain, and  along  the beaches of Dollarton  the  phantoms with  death's-head faces do not sing in the voices of demons as they did for Consul  Firmin.  On  the contrary,  here, in this closely and  lovingly described  land-and-inletscape, there is a  sense of  redemption; in  "The   Forest  Path  to  the  Spring" the  mountain lion who  sits in  a  tree  over the  path  and  embodies  destruction  runs  away from  the narrator's steady eye, and what the latter  remembers  about  his trips to the spring
-what he remembers  most vividly-is the almost mystical experience of joy that
at  times seemed  to carry  him in  a  rhapsodic  instant  from  the life-giving source back to the door of his cabin. Here, as in Under  the Volcano, the self is immersed.

4

UNDER SEYMOUR MOUNTAIN



But  in  the  novel  it  drowns  in  the  whirlpool  of self-negation,  whereas  in "The Forest  Path  to the Spring" it bathes in a universal calm,  the calm of a world of nature  as sympathetic as ever Wordsworth  wrote of, with which it identifies and from  which it returns  with  joy enriched.  It seems to me that  it is in this almost rhapsodic  identification  with place that we find our best reason to claim much of what  Lowry  wrote  for  the  literature  of Canada. For  it is not  a sense of place that  derives from  mere  observation,  like that  conveyed  by a sensitive and  com­ petent  travel  writer;   it  is rather  the  sense of place  that  derives from  a  mental  naturalisation which  adds  to a native's sense of identity  the wonder  of  newness a native can never experience fully after childhood.
The  stories in  Hear  Us  Oh  Lord   from  Heaven Thy  Dwelling Place  are  all
worth  reading  for  themselves;  some of the  non-Canadian examples,  while they do not attain  the intensity  of feeling of "The  Forest Path  to the Spring", are in­ teresting for their  experimental exploration of the problems of conveying multiple levels of meaning.  "Through the Panama" is an example; the narrator, a trans­ muted  Lowry figure, voyages to Europe  by freighter,  but  his journey is also that  of  a  modern  Ancient   Mariner, with  the  albatross  of  literary  creation  and  its attendant curse  hung  around  his neck as he considers his novels about  novelists who are his own  mirror  images. For Lowry belonged in  the early twentieth  cen­ tury  cosmopolitan  tradition   that  seemed to reach  an  end  about  the time of his death-the tradition of Proust  and  Gide, which came  to the conclusion, inevit­ able  after  a  century  of introspection,  that  the  proper  study  of the writer  is the writer's mind.
But  all these stories are  also part  of a great  continuum, a vast Work  in  Pro­ gress that  filled  Lowry's  life and  was never  completed-perhaps  never  could be completed.  In  this sense Lowry was of the Proustian  rather  than of the Gidian tradition. The  Gidians  write  many  separate  studies  of experience,  all  related,  but  each   self-contained; when  one  novel is finished  a  phase  of  investigation is ended,  its record  is terminated as quickly as possible, and  then the writer is on to the next experience  and  the next novel. But the Proustians, and  Lowry among them,  conceive  all  their  work as one great  inter-related  pattern  on whose parts they  work  continuously  and  simultaneously.  Proust  could  never  leave  the  one great  work of his life alone;  he worked backwards and  forwards  over his manu­  script, and only publication ever gave a final form to any of its parts;  only death,  one can  be sure,  put  a  period  to the work itself,  coming  by coincidence  at  the point when Proust had reached the end of his original plan. So it was with Lowry. He worked on several novels, on stories and poems, all at the same time, and  his

5

UNDER SEYMOUR MOUNTAII'I



revisions were multiple  to the  point of Flaubertian obsession. For this reason he spent many years over each novel, writing on others at the same time; his actually completed works are few out of all proportion  to those he sketched out and started. Another  decade  of work might-and equally well might  not-have presented  us with  a  masterpiece  in  its own  very different  way  rivalling  A  Ia Recherche  du Temps Perdu, perhaps  even in one direction  exceeding it, since Lowry possessed no cork-lined  room and  revised and added  to his Work in Progress as the result, not  of remembering a past  now dead,  but  of experiencing and  incorporating a lived present.
As it is, when October  Ferry to Gabriola is published  and  the devoted labours of Lowry's editors have salvaged all that is publishable  in fragmentary form from the  other  portions  of the great  cycle, we shall  perhaps  begin  to see, at  least in massive outlines, the  modem  Divine Comedy  of which  Under  the Volcano, for all its portentous self-sufficiency, was intended only as a part.









6



THE  POSSESSED ARTIST
AND THE AILING SOUL



Robert B.  Heilman



THAVE   BEEN  AN   ORIGINAL  ADMIRER  of  Malcolm  Lowry's
Under  the  Volcano, and  to remain  an admirer  for almost a decade  and  a half,
is very much  like belonging  to a semi-secret order  with  a somewhat  odd, quite small, but widely dispersed membership.  It is a very loose order, without  adopted procedure  and  certainly  without  program.  Membership is conferred  by taste, not sought  by will or  exercised  through  evangelical rigor.  Members  become known to each  other  only when  they discover each other  by accident.  The  big point is that  such discoveries do continue  to be made, year after  year, in more than  one part  of the  English-reading world. Yet they are an insistent trickle rather  than  a growing  stream  that  could  be converted  into  a literary  power system. Whoever has read  Lowry has been  unforgettably  impressed, but  readers  have been, it  ap­ pears, strangely  few. The  slender society of those who esteem him, whatever the strength  of  their  convictions,  have  been  given to contemplation  rather  than  to promotion  or even public  debate: he remains a private  possession  rather  than  a public figure-far less established in a literary niche than,  say, either  Nathanael VI/est  or  Djuna   Barnes,  whom  in some way he brings  to mind  and  who hardly have  a  greater  claim  upon  our  respect.  Perhaps  the  disinclination of Lowry admirers  to  shout  from  the  housetops is related  to  a  certain  meticulousness in their  literary  judgment: they customarily  speak of  Under  the Volcano  as a dis­ tinguished  "minor" work or as a "minor  classic". This  reserve is understandable; despite the often kaleidoscopic movement of both outer and inner landscape,  there is some limitedness of scope, some incompleteness of human  range, some circum­ scribing of consciousness that is felt partly in the fewness of the dramatis personae and  partly  in  the enclosing illness of the protagonist  (though  in saying this last, one must always be mindful that  the ailing soul may have extraordinary visions). But the  use of "minor" is not  an inadvertent disparagement: it is an  honorable

7

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



by-product  of that  need to place  which is felt only when  the  novel in  question arouses  the conviction  that  it is not an entertainment of the year but a work of art that will be valid for many other years.
If a  historian  leafed  through  the  journals  of 1947  and  noted  the new novels
reviewed,  he would  not find another  one written  in English,  I surmise, that  has achieved a more durable quiet esteem than Under  the Volcano  (I exclude Mann's Doctor  Faustus, to which I shall return  later). It has survived in a "population" where the normal  death  rate is close to IOo%. A minor irony:  it has survived its own  publishing  house. It  has survived, as we have  noted, an apparent smallness of canvas, and  it has also survived a quite opposite difficulty:  a fecundity of sug­ gestive detail  that  tends to over-stimulate  the imagination, that  is, to set it off in more  ways than  can  be decently  encompassed  within  an  overall  design.  Some­ thing  survives beyond the sense of chaos that  the fecundity  is in danger of  creat­ ing,  beyond an impression of a tropical creative  richness  (this in itself, of course, is not  to be disparaged,  even when  it is imperfectly  controlled). What survives, again,  is something   beyond  the  quality  usually  called  "intensity," though  the stresses  that   Lowry  images,  luxuriantly   and  often  fantastically,  do  induce  the severe  tautness  that  marks some kinds of aesthetic experience.  Intensity  is really a secondary  virtue;  it can be attached  to superficial forms of action  (of the order of fisticuffs, for instance), just as more profound  experience  can  be transmitted in  relatively  un-taut   moods such  as the  contemplative. The  criterion  is not  the presence  of intensity  but  the  depth  of  the  concern-the spiritual  burden-that intensity  accompanies.  The  less  substantial  the  matter,  the  more  the  hard  and gemlike  flame  will resemble  ordinary  flushed cheeks and  fever that  can  be aspi­ rined away. The fire in Under the Volcano is not easily put out.
The  sense of a largeness that  somehow  bursts out  of the evident  constriction,
the fertility that  borders on the excessive and the frenzied, the intensity that is not a surrogate  for magnanimity,  and finally an apprehension of reality so vivid that it seems to slide over into madness-these are symptoms of the work of the "pos­ sessed" artist.  If he has not  quite  achieved  majority,  Lowry  belongs to  the pos­ sessed novelists, among whom the great figures are Dostoevsky and Melville and, some of the  time, Dickens. They  may be distinguished  from  the "self-possessed" artists:  Thackeray and Trollope  and,  to snatch  an example  from current  fashion, C. P. Snow. Or, since Lowry's theme is human  disaster, a grievous, driving, frene­ tic  disaster,  let  us take for  contrast  Hardy,  who  seems  calmly  to organize  and impose  disaster  as if he were seated  at some cosmic  control  panel.  In  an  older writer  like Hawthorne or a modem  one like R. P. Warren,  there is somewhat  of

8

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



a conflict, or even an alternation, of possession and self-possession, of an unbridled urgency  and  a controlling  will. The  possessed artist is in the tradition  of Plato's Ion,  and  at  the  risk of too  neat  a  polarity,  it may  be  hazarded that  the  self­ possessed artist  has  ties  with  Aristotle's  Poetics:  rational   analysability  of  form appears  to  imply  rational  creatability  of form.  It  is not  altogether  a  parody  to picture the self-possessed artist, deep browed at his drawing  board, coolly planning plot and  catharsis.  In  C. P. Snow the key line, a recurrent  one, is surely, "May
I have a word with you, Lewis?" "A word"-a council-a plan-logos and logis­
tics:  life is ordered,  or, if it does not wholly accede to the order  designed for it, what  dissidence there  is is reflected,  not in unruly  surges of action  that  in their way elude  the author  and  his decorous creatures, but  through  the rational com­ ment of observers. Things  never get out of hand;  no wild dogs tug at the trainer's  leash. Perhaps  the  ultimate  figure in  the world of self-possession is Arnold  Ben­ nett: one of his rna jor aims seems to have been to keep his characters  down, to remain  the unyielding  bailiff on his huge Five Towns estate. Was not this-that he would never "let  go"-a subtle ingredient in what Virginia Woolf had against him?  That, really,  he saw  Mrs. Brown only in  terms  of attributes  that  were at his beck and call? Bennett illustrates the intimate relationship,  the virtual identity, between  self-possession and  the  rigorous  domination  of character and  scene  (or at least the air of this). In some way his sense of security seems to have been in­ volved in his paternal  tyranny: for his creatures, no out of bounds, no fractious­ ness, no  unpredicted courses, no  iddish  cutting  loose. And  if V.  S. Pritchett  is right,  Bennett  suffered  accordingly: his self-possession was close to suicidal.



SucH COMPARISONS  help  us to  place  Lowry.  In  sum:  the self-possessed artist-the one  who uses his materials  as an  instrument. The  pos­
sessed artist-the materials  appear  to use him as an instrument, finding  in him, as it were, a channel  to the objective existence of art,  sacrificing a minimum  of their  autonomy  to his hand,  which partly  directs and  shapes rather  than  wholly controls. This  is how it is with  Lowry. If Under  the Volcano  is a more talented book  than  any  one  of  the  outstanding   C.  P. Snow  novels and  is still less well known,  it  is in  part  that  the  work of the self-possessed artist  is more  accessible, less threatening, farther  away from anguish;  even in Hardy  the inimical and  the destructive  are  in  an  odd  way  almost sterilized because  for  the  most  part  they originate  in  an  outer  world  that  is unyielding or uncontrollable  only by fits and


9

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



starts,  rather  than  in  an  inner  realm  of constants  where  catastrophe is always latent   (Sue  Bridehead  is a  rare  exception). Snow  works in  a  wider  and  more accommodating territory,  Lowry in  a  very much  more  dangerous  terrain.  Pos­ sessed work may open up any depth  before one, any abyss in other  personalities or  in  one's  own.  It  does not  primarily  contemplate, though  it does  not  ignore, the  ailing  world,  which is generally  reparable  in  Snow,  or  traditionally irrepa­  rable  in  naturalist   fiction.  Rather  its theme  is the  ailing  soul.  It  is an  ancient theme  whose history concerns us here only in  that  in our  day  the theme  is used with extraordinary frequency.  Whether  it is that  illness is especially attractive  to us  because  we find  in it  a  novel  window to  reality,  or  an  apparently   better window  to reality, than  the less clinical ones that  we  have  principally  relied on; or that  the culture  is sick, as some critics aver with almost tedious constancy, and that  as a consequence  we must, to avoid self-deception  and  serve truth,  contem­ plate only sickness-these  differing conclusions are arguable.
In  the  contemporary   use of illness, at  any  rate,  we find  quite  different  per­ spectives.  In  Sound  and  Fury there  are  various  ailing  souls:  through  them we have a complex view of decadence and of a contrasting  vitality. In Robbe-Grillet's Voyeur   clinical  disorder  of  personality  is itself the  aesthetic  object: despite  all that  has been said  about  Robbe-Grillet's  innovations  in the vision of reality, the final effect is one of a disturbingly ingenious tour  de force. In  Magic  Mountain the ailment  of the soul is intricately  intertwined  with that of  the body;  a host of theoretical  salvations  are  examined,  and  the  final  note  is  one  of hope  through  a  surprisingly  simple  practical  therapy.  But  in  Doctor  Faustus  there  is a  more fundamental and  violent illness of soul, a counterpart of  a more fundamental and violent illness of body, one that is in effect chosen; we see a sick person and a sick era, sick thought  that is a culmination  of a tradition; yet a tradition in which the paradoxical affiliation of the destructive and  the creative is terrifying.
Doctor Faustus offers some instructive parallels with Under  the Volcano:  both works belong to 1947;  both recount  the spiritual  illness of a man  that  is in some way akin to the illness of an age; both glance at the politics of the troubled 193o's, but  both  are  artistically  mature  enough  to  resist the  temptations always offered by the political  theme-the polemic tone, the shrill "]'accuse." Instead  they con­ template   the  failures  of spirit  of  which  the  political  disorders  are  a  symptom. They  do this differently. Though  both draw  on the Faustian theme, Lowry intro­ duces it less directly  than  suggestively, as one strand  in  a mythic fabric  of con­ siderable  richness. Mann,  by now an old hand  at mythic reconstructions,  revives Faustus  in  the grand  manner.  The  mode of evil is affirmative: demonic  posses-

10

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



sion, a rush into destruction  in a wild flare of self-consuming, power-se1zmg creativity. In  demonic  possession there is a hypertrophy  of ego; Lowry's hero, on the contrary,  suffers from  a kind of undergrowth  of soul. One leaps on life rapa­ ciously; the other  falls short of the quality that  makes life possible. Both the rape and  the agonizing insufficiency are done with hair-raising immediacy. But Mann's  style is heroic,  whereas  Lowry's  stage is domestic. Geoffrey Firmin  (the  infirm Geoffrey)  is more  of  a  private  figure than  Adrian  Leverkiihn;  his life has less amplitude in itself; in the concrete elements of it there is not the constant pressure toward  epical-allegorical  aggrandizement. But this is a statement of a difference, not of a deficiency. Both novelists are possessed; both seem to be the instruments  of a  vision whose autarchy they do not impair  as they assist its emergence into public form. This  is true  of Mann,  despite his usual heavy component  of exposi­ tory pages; it is true of Lowry, despite some artifice and frigidity in the narrative  arrangements.
If Lowry's  work is, compared  with  Mann's,  "domestic", nevertheless the im­
plied  analogy  with  domestic  tragedy  is slight at  best. To  make  one important contrast: Lowry  has a  range  of tone  that  household  drama  never had.  In  fact, even in the orbit of possessed artists, his range is unusual: in recording  a disaster of personality  that  is on the very edge of the tragic, he has an extravagant  comic sense that  creates an almost unique  tension among moods. Desperation,  the ludi­ crous, nightmare, the vulgar, the appalling, the fantastic,  the nonsensical, and the painfully  pathetic  coexist  in  an  incongruous  melange  that  is still a  unity. The  serious historian  of the  ailing soul may achieve the  bizarre,  but  he  rarely works through  humor  or finds the Lowry fusion of the ridiculous and  the ghastly. With Lowry, the grotesque  seems always about  to trip up the catastrophic, the silly to spike the  portentous,  the idiotic  to collapse the mad. When  evil is present, it is more likely to be nasty than  sinister. The  assailing demons tend  to be mean little gremlins;  in a way, Geoffrey's disaster is the triumph  of meanness, not as a case­ history of an  eccentric  flop, but as a  universal image of man  in the smallness to which  he is always liable. This  can  take on its own dreadfulness,  partly  because petty vice contains  echoes of major failures, partly  because nemesis is not trivial, and  partly  because  there  is always  maintained  a  touching  nostalgia  for a large and  noble selfhood.  In  Lady  Windermere's Fan there  is a very bad  line about man's  being in the gutter  but looking at the stars; it is bad because the play con­ tains  no  vestige of  real  gutters  or  real stars, so that  words  alone  are  being ex­ ploited. But these antithetical images could be used of Under  the Volcano  with­ out  bathos,  for  it  contains  some of the more plausible gutters  in modem  fiction


II

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



while portraying  the survival, even in them, of a dim and struggling consciousness of other  worlds. Lowry is quite lucid about  what  is sickness and  what  is health, rather  more so, indeed,  than  another  possessed novelist usually credited  with ex­ pertise in these polar states, D. H. Lawrence.




LowRY DOES   NOT  MANAGE  the cosmic texture  of events that we find in  Doctor FaustusJ  but there is an extraordinary texture  of symbol and allusion. It  is doubtless natural  for the possessed novelist to call on many of the resources of poetry. The self-possessed novelist is not necessarily prosaic or shallow or one-dimensional,  witness Henry James;  but in the main we image him as forg­ ing steadily or deliberately  ahead,  on the direct  prose route to his end. The  pos­ sessed writer  has  an  air  of battling,  not  quite  successfully, with  a  multitude  of urgencies  that  come at  him from all sides and  fling off again  on  their own, not always forced into a common direction. If the overt action of  Under the Volcano is slight, the metaphorical action is intense. Numerous objects, properties,  occur­ rences, and  even ideas, recollections, and observations not only exist in their own right  but  also  work  figuratively  or  symbolically.  The  nexuses  are  imaginative  rather  than  casual, or logical, or chronological; hiatuses compel a high attention; dextrous leaps are called for. In such a sense the novel is "poetic," not in the sense that  a mistily atavistic syntax and  a solemn iambic  hauteur, as often in the self­ conscious experimental theatre, pass for poetic.
The  "story," as I have said, is slight:  Yvonne,  the wife of alcoholic  Geoffrey Firmin,  returns,  after  a year's separation,  to her husband  in  Mexico. The  events all take place on the day of her return.  Geoffrey's passing desires to pull out with Yvonne are overcome by a far more urgent  passion for alcohol. A French movie­ producer,  former  lover  of Yvonne, is with  them  for  a  while and  incredulously lectures  Geoffrey. Geoffrey's brother  Hugh,  ex-reporter and  sailor, now about  to run arms to the Spanish loyalists, in love with Yvonne, spends the day with them. The  chief event  is an  outing  by bus-Lowry's own  wayward  bus  ("making its erratic   journey"), which stops for  a while near  a  wounded  Indian left  by the roadside  but  leaves  without  anybody's  having  done  anything. Late  in  the  day Geoffrey,  who  has  constantly  been getting  separated  from  Hugh  and  Yvonne, outrageously  abuses Yvonne and  runs into the woods near  Popocatepetl. Yvonne and  Hugh  pursue.  Yvonne  and  Geoffrey lose their  lives by means symbolically associated with the episode of the unattended roadside Indian.

12

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



Hugh  makes  his  boat  for  Spain:   this we have  learned  from  a  retrospective prologue-the contents  of which  are certain  words and  thoughts  of the  French movie-man  a year  after  the day of the main story. This  prologue is supposed to introduce all the main themes;  but there is too much there to assimilate, especially since most of the material  is not dramatized. It is a cold beginning, and then one has to keep going  back  to it as to a table of contents-which is not the kind of re-reading  that  a concentrated book may legitimately demand.  Further, on tech­ nical matters: the retrospects on which a one-day story must rely tend to be flac­ cid in style (Hugh's) or foggy in detail  (Yvonne's) ; and coincidence has a fairly large  hand  in  things.  But,  once into  the story, one is less aware  of  these things than  of the imaginative richness. The minds of the characters  are sensitive record­ ing instruments,  tenacious  alike of facts and  of their suggestive value. The  book is a cornucopia  of images; both the psychic and the outer world have a tangibility which a thoughtless  slice of realism could never produce; humor and  horror  are never alleged  but  are  moulded  into a hard  and  yet  resilient narrative  substance.  Always one is driven  to follow through  on the evocations that  trail off behind  the foreground  facts.
So, besides reading  the story as story, we are always aware  of a multitude  of
implications  which,  in  their  continual  impingement   upon  us, remind  us of the recurrent   images  of  Shakespeare.  The  action  takes  place  in  November,  on  the Day  of the  Dead; Geoffrey feels his "soul dying";  a funeral  takes place;  burial customs, the  shipping  of a  corpse are  discussed; an  earlier  child  of Yvonne's is dead; Geoffrey thinks he is seeing a dead man;  a cantina  is called La Sepultura; Geoffrey  recalls  Dr.  Faustus's  death;   a  dead  dog is seen  in  a  ravine;  a  dying Indian  is found  by the roadside. Always there are vultures, pariah  dogs, the noise of target  practice. There are a decaying hotel, a reference to the House of Usher, the  ruins  of the  palace  of Maximilian  and  Carlotta. Geoffrey's soul appears  to him "a  town  ravaged  and stricken"; an imaginary  "little  town by the sea" burns up.  Frustrations and  failures are everywhere-engagements are  missed, the light fails in  a  cinema.  Always we are  reminded  of the  barranca or ravine,  near  the town-a fearful  abyss. Once  it is called "Malebolge"; there are various allusions to  Dante's   Inferno; Geoffrey  feels he is  in  hell, quotes  Dante  on sin, looks at Cocteau's  La  Machine lnfernale, takes  a  ride  in  a  Maquina Infernal, calls ironically-defiantly,  "I love hell";  at the end he is in a bar  "under  the volcano". "It was not for nothing  the ancients had placed Tartarus under  Mt. Aetna ...." There   are  continual references  to  Marlowe's  Faustus,  who  could  not  pray  for grace,  just as Geoffrey  cannot  feel a love that  might  break  his love for alcohol,

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



or rather,  symbolize a saving attitude; as in the  Faustus  play, soul is a recurrent word. There  is an  Eden-Paradise  theme:  a public sign becomes a motif in itself, being  repeated  at  the  end  of the  story:   "Do  you  enjoy  this  garden,  which  is yours? Keep  your children  from  destroying it!" Geoffrey  once mistranslates  the second sentence:  "We evict those who destroy." Geoffrey's own garden, once beautiful,  has become  a  jungle;  he hides bottles in  the shrubbery; and  once he sees a snake there.
The  lavish use of such rich  resources reveals the  possessed artist. They  might
serve, perhaps, only to create a vivid sequence of impressions, feelings, and moods. But Lowry is possessed by more than  sensations and  multiple  associations; there is a swirl of passionate thoughts  and  ideas as well as passions; thought  and  feel­ ing are fused, and always impressions and moods seem the threshold  to meanings that  must  be entered.  It seems to me that  he seizes instinctively  upon  materials that  have  both  sensory and  suprasensory  values.  How  present  the  central  con­ ception-that of  the  ailing soul? There  are  endless  symbols for  ill-being,  from having  cancer  to taking  dope. But Geoffrey's tremendous drinking is exactly the right  one, or by art  is made  to seem the right  one. In  greater  or lesser extent  it is widely shared,  or  at least is related  to widely  practiced  habits;  it is known  to be  a  pathological  state;  it  may  be fatal,  but  also it  can  be cured.  It lacks the ultimate  sinisterness of dope, the irresistibility of  cancer; hence it is more flexible, more  translatable. And  Lowry slowly makes  us feel, behind  the  brilliantly  pre­ sented  facts  of  the  alcoholic  life, a set of  meanings  that  make  the  events  pro­ foundly  revelatory:  drinking  as an escape, an evasion of responsibility, a separa­  tion from life, a self-worship, a denial of  love, a hatred  of the living with a faith. (There  is an  always pressing guilt  theme: Geoffrey,  who was a naval  officer in World  War  I,  is a kind  of sinning  Ancient  Mariner, caught  by Life-in-Death, loathing  his slimy creatures,  born of  the d.t.'s,  whom  he cannot  expiatorily  bless but must keep trying to drink away). The horror  of Geoffrey's existence is always in the forefront  of our consciousness, as it should  be; but in the horror is involved an  awareness of the  dissolution of the old order,  of the  "drunken madly  revolv­ ing world,"  of  which  Hugh says, "Good  god, if our civilization  were to sober up for  a  couple  of  days, it'd  die  of  remorse on  the  third." At  the end  Geoffrey, unable  by  act  of will to seize upon the disinterested  aid of two old Mexicans, is the. victim  of local fascists:  fascism preys upon  a  world  that  has already  tossed away its own soul.
The  episode which  most successfully unifies the different  levels of meaning  is that. of  the  Indian left  wounded  by the  roadside.  He  is robbed  by a  Spanish

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



"pelado," a  symbol  of "the exploitation of everybody  by everybody  else."  Here we  have  echoes  of the  Spanish Conquest and  a symbol  of aggression  generally. Yvonne  can't stand   the  sight  of blood: it is her  flaw,  her  way of acquiescing in the  de   facto.  Geoffrey  finds  rules against  doing  anything; everyone  feels that  "it wasn't one's  own  business,  but  someone  else's."  It  is modem irresponsibility and selfishness;  the  reader is prepared also to  think  of the  "non-intervention"  policy by the  refrain which  echoes  throughout the  book, "they  are  losing on the  Ebro." But  above  all  this  is the  story  of the  Good  Samaritan-only there  is no Samari­ tan.  Devil  take  the  least  of  these.  (Geoffrey's ship,  a  gunboat  disguised as  a merchantman,  has   been   named   the  "Samaritan"-a   comment   upon   modem Samaritanism.)
Hugh, held  back  by  Geoffrey, is almost  the  Good  Samaritan-Hugh who  is going  to run  arms  to Spain. To  Geoffrey  and  Yvonne,  he is "romantic"; doubt­ less he is, and  he  has  his own  kind  of guilt; but  at least  he insists on  action,  dis­ interested action. Here   we  come  to  what  is apparently the  basic  theme  of  the book:  man, in the  words  of a proverb  repeated chorally,  cannot  live without love. Lowry  flirts with  the  danger of the topical: the Spanish  war  might give the novel the  air  of  a  political   tract. But  ultimately, I  think,  the  author  does  succeed  in keeping  the  political  phenomena on the periphery of the spiritual substance, using them  for  dramatic  amplification of his metaphysic. It  would  be  possible  to read Geoffrey,   always  impersonally called  the  Consul,  as dying  capitalism, as laissez faire,  or as sterile  learning, like the speaker  in Tennyson's Palace  of Art. But such readings, though they  are  partly  true,  too narrowly circumscribe the  total  human situation with  which  Lowry is concerned.


LE CONSUL'S  CLIMACTIC ACTS of hate  are a world's confession. Yvonne  thinks  of the  need  "of  finding  some  faith," perhaps in  "unselfish  love."
Whence love  is to  be  derived, or  how  sanctioned and  disciplined, is a  question which  the  symbols  do  not  fully  answer.  Yet it is the  effect of Lowry's allusions­ Dante, Faustus-to  push  the  imagination toward  a final  reality  that  transcends all historical presents,  however  much  each  present  may  comment  upon  and  even modify  it.  Most  of all  this  effect  is secured  by his constant  allusion  to Christian myth  and  history-the crucifixion, Golgotha, the last supper, original sin. Lowry is hardly writing a  Christian  allegory; indeed, some  of the  Christian echoes  are decidedly ironic. But  his whole  complex  of image  and symbol  is such  as to direct

THE POSSESSED ARTIST



a  dissolving  order,  in  search  of a  creative  affirmation, toward that  union  of the personal and  the universal  which is the religious.
The   two  extremes which  are  the  technical dangers of  this  kind  of  work  are
the  tightly  bound  allegory,  in  which  a system  of abstract equivalents for  all  the concrete materials of the story  constricts  the  imaginative experience, and  a loose impressionism, in  which  a  mass  of suggestive  enterprises sets  off so  many  asso­ ciations, echoes, and  conjectures that  the imaginative experience becomes crowded and  finally  diffuse.  It is the  latter  risk that  Lowry  runs.  For  the  present  account, to  avoid  excessive  length,  consistently  oversimplifies  the  ingredients  that  it  deals with,  and  it  fails  to  deal  with  many  other  ingredients-for  instance, the  guitar motif,  the  cockfight  motif,  the  theme  of mystics  and  mysteries,  the  recurrent use of Indians, horses, the  movie The Hands  of Orlac, etc.  Lowry  has an immensely rich  and   vigorous  imagination, and  he  never  corks  his  cornucopia of evocative  images  and  symbols. Some disciplinary rejections, some diffidence  in setting  afloat  upon   the  imagination every  boat  that  he  finds  upon   a  crowded shore,  would have  reduced  the  distractedness  to  which  the  reader   is  occasionally liable  and  would  have  concentrated and  shaped  the  author's effect  more  clearly.  This  is to say,  perhaps, that  the  possessed  artist  might  at  times  borrow  a little from  the soul of the  self-possessed  artist.  But  if one  might  wish for  a more  ordered synthesis  of parts,  one  would  never  want  a diminution of the  power  in  Lowry's  possessed art.  There is great  life in  what  he has  written-in his solid  world  of inner  and  outer  objects  in  which the  characters are  dismayed  and  imprisoned as in Kafka's tales;  and  in  the  implicit  coalescence  of  many  levels of  meaning that  we find  in  Her­ mann  Broch.  Such  a multivalued poetic fiction,  with  its picture of the ailing soul, its  sense  of  horrifying dissolution,  and  its submerged, uncertain vision of a hard new birth  off in clouded  time,  is apparently the  especial  labor of the artistic con­ science  at our turn  of an epoch.



POEMS  BY
MJILCOLM LOWRY


Prefaced  by
Earle Birney




SCATIERED THROUGH THE  MASS  of typescript and  manu­
script  left by Malcolm  Lowry at  his death,  and  now housed in the Special Col­
lections section of the University  of British Columbia  Library,  are various drafts or  fragments  of  poems. A few of these, as the bibliography  in  this issue shows, were published  during  his lifetime, but about  1so were unknown.  With  the help of his widow, Mrs. Margerie  Lowry, I have edited a selection of these with a view to their eventual  publication  as a book. The group printed below has been chosen from this work.
Since Lowry seldom dated  poems, and  habitually  revised them,  accumulating
drafts indefinitely  (as with most of his prose)  it is not easy to arrange the present group  in  order  of composition.  From  internal  evidence, however, and  from  de­ tails supplied  by Mrs. Lowry, it would appear  that most of them were composed over the  years between  1940 and  1954 when the Lowrys lived on the Dollarton beach,  just beyond the upper  harbour  of Vancouver, except for three which may date,  in  their  original  conception,  from  the  middle Thirties,  when  Lowry  lived in Mexico.
Of  these  three,  "Autopsy"* (which  exists, untitled,  in  one incomplete  manu­ script  only),  is of peculiar  interest for the references it makes to incidents  in his early  years, incidents  which  he seldom openly referred  to, but  which  appear  to have  been  traumatic, and  to  recur  in  the  prose in  various  symbolic  disguises. According  to  Mrs.  Lowry,  his parents  placed  Malcolm  in  a  boarding school at seven, where he was subjected  to harsh discipline. He developed a disfiguring eye ailment,  which  was allowed  to go  without  adequate  treatment until  he was in danger  of blindness,  and  it  was necessary for him to  undergo  an  operation  and

* Titles marked in this way have been added by Mrs. Lowry and Dr. Birney to poems untitled by the author. ED.

POEMS BY  MALCOLM LOWRY



prolonged hospitalization. Lowry felt that  both  his parents and  the school authori­ ties were  blameable for the aggravation of his condition, and  he recalled also with bitterness that  his ailment  handicapped him  in  school  sports  and  made  him  the butt of schoolmates. The  phrase  "crucified at eleven" may refer  to the time when,  at  his father's insistence,  he  joined  a Wolf  Cub  pack  and  underwent some  form of sadistic  bullying  from older members. The  reference to Clare, in the conclusion, I take  to be to the  "Summer Images" of John Clare  in  which  that  poet describes
a  snail  as  a  "Frail brother  of  the  morn, I That from  the  tiny  bents  and  misted
leaves I Withdraws his timid  horn,  I And fearful vision weaves."
"In  Tempest's Tavern".;.:-, also  from  the  Mexican  period, is one  of  a  group Lowry   called   "Songs  for  Second   Childhood". I should   guess  that   the  Dawson reference is to  the  opening  section  of Ernest  Dawson's "Serephita". The  Words­ worth reference  is not so easy to place,  though  he may  have  had  "Resolution and Independence" in  mind,  or  the  "Sonnet Composed during a  Storm," or  any  of several  passages  in  Dorothy   Wordsworth's journals. Lowry  read  fairly  widely  in nineteenth century  poetry.
The title  of the  other  poem  dating from  the  Mexican period, "Lupus in  Fa­ bula"·X·,  I have    transferred from  another poem  to which  it  became  accidentally attached  and  which  it does not  fit  (see Bibliography). The  wolf  became  a com­ plex  symbol  in  Lowry's  work,  first of the  cruelty  of nature and  of the  "natural" man-I suspect  the  origin  of this in  the  Wolf  Cub experience-and later,  by an interesting  reversal,  of  the  plight  of  all  lonely  creatures who  cannot exist  in modern  society  and   are  persecuted to  extinction, including  himself.  "Tortu", according to  the  Consul  in  Under  the  Volcano, is a sort  of Land of Cockaygne containing "the ideal  University", where "not even  athletics is allowed  to interfere with  the  business  of ...  drinking"  (p.  56). I would  suppose that  Lowry  picked up  the  name when  he  visited  Haiti  in  the  forties,  and  that  it  was therefore not in  the  original draft. The  nearest  I can  find  to  a  Tortu is the  lie  de  la  Tortue (Turtle Island) off  the Haiti  coast.
In  1942, Under  the Volcano  made  an unsuccessful round of the  publishers and
was returned to Lowry  by his agent  with  advice  as to revision. According to Mrs. Lowry  he at  once  set about  rewriting it, while  continuing to compose  poems, in­ cluding the  "Joseph  Conrad"  published below.  I do  not  know  if  Lowry  was referring  to  a  specific  Conrad  passage,  but   the  opening lines  seem  to  echo a sentence in  Typhoon. Jukes,  during the  storm, is  "harassed by  the  necessity  of exerting a wrestling  effort  against  a force trying  to tear  him  away from  his hold"
-but Jukes  is clinging  to a stanchion, unable  to get down  to his bunk.  In  general

18

POEMS BY  MALCOLM LOWRY



the  imagery and  thought of  the  poem  recalls  Lowry's  own  Ultramarine, rather than  anything of Conrad (even  the famous  preface  to The Nigger  of the  Narcis­ sus), and  the  title  may  have  been,  as Mrs.  Lowry suspects,  rather  casually added.
In  the summer of 1944,  when  the revision of the Volcano was almost  complete, the  squatter's shack  in  which  the  Lowrys were  living  burned to the  ground; for­ tunately  the  Volcano  manuscripts were  rescued,  but  another  unfinished  novel, "In Ballast  to the  White  Sea", was destroyed  with  all its notes. This  is the event which   prompted "Lament"  (though the  manuscripts reveal  that   he  continued to  revise  this  poem  up  to  his  death in  1957). With  the  help  of  neighbors, the Lowrys  rebuilt their  cabin, the  Volcano was  successfully  revised,  and, in  1946,  accepted. "Strange  Type"-K· was  written   in  that  year,  when   he  was  correcting proofs,  and  "After  Publication ..."'(· a year  later,  when  he was  already tasting  the bittersweet of success.
The many  painstaking redrafts of "Hypocrisy" suggest  that  it  was  a  poem  he considered important,  but  with  which  he was  not satisfied.  It probably refers to certain unhappy experiences he underwent when  he first came  to British  Colum­ bia  and  lived  unwillingly in Vancouver until  he could  find  a horne on the beach. "The Dodder" reflects  the  beginning of Lowry's  interest  in  the  natural world about him  at  Dollarton, though that  interest  was still, at this stage, a rather book­ ish  one.  In   an  endeavour to  learn   how  to  identify  the  local  flowers  he  began  reading  Studies  of  Plant   Life  in  Canada, a  work  by  an  amateur  nineteenth­ century   botanist living  at Katchewanook, near  Stoney  Lake,  in  eastern Ontario. Lowry's  description of  the  dodder, and  the  other  flower  names  and  epithets in this  poem,  follow  closely  Mrs.  Traill even  though  she is noting species  which  do not  grow  around Dollarton, or indeed  in western Canada. Later, under his wife's tutelage, he  grew  more  accurate in  his  botanizing. The poem  is nevertheless re­ vealing  and   moving  for  its symbolic  application of  Mrs.  Traill's remarks to  his feeling  of  dependence upon   his  wife  and  their  life  of  "exiled  passion" on  the Dollarton beach. The  general  idea  of  the poem seems to me reminiscent of a son­ net  of  Conrad Aiken,  the  sixteenth  in  And   in  the   Human Heart, ( 1940), a presentation copy  of  which   was in Lowry's  library  on  the  beach. There are  at
least twenty-five drafts of this poem in the U.B.C. collection.

POEMS BY  MALCOLM LOWRY



Jl  LJIMENT -JUNE 1944

Our  house is dead
It burned to the ground
On a morning in June
With a wind from the Sound. The fire that fed
On our marriage bed Left a bottle of gin. Black under the moon Our  house is dead.
We shall build it again But our home is gone. And the world burns on.




JN TEMPEST'S TJIVERN

Another than Wordsworth dropped  his live work To listen to the wind's shriek of uprooted  trees, And vessel's smashed backs under  portentous seas Scrabbling with sharks as Rydal  hives with bees, The Ohio smoking in Frisco on a sharp  pen
Of rock, lightning a leash snarled  by force
At the bounding neck of God's mad dog, the dark;
The  universe snapping like hounds at some dread groom. I believe that Wordsworth  thought  of the calm ...
But to another, blessing chaos, since it must drown
In hurled gules of conflict's flesh, his own strike
Of the hour, his own grief, no peaceful lake
Lights by storm's flash. Such is the nature  of his doom That like some infant Aeolus Dowson in tempest's tavern, He claps for better thunder, wilder typhoon.






20

POEMS BY  MALCOLM LOWRY



JIFTER PUBLICJITION  OF "UNDER THE VOLCJINO"
Success is like some horrible disaster
Worse than your house burning, the sounds of ruination
As the roof tree falls following each other faster
While you stand, the helpless witness of your damnation[.]


Fame like a drunkard consumes the house of the soul
Exposing that you have worked for only this- Ah, that  I had never suffered this treacherous kiss
And had been left in darkness forever to founder  and fail[.]




HYPOCRISY

I sing the joy of poverty not such
As war insults with ruin of its own
Evil. But as the soul computes when much
Of its domain is lost. Here is a town Of which one's sudden mayoralty Prize of long kinship with disaster Qualifies,-to readjust the dead.
Ideas stampede here, where are encamped The  hypocrite, the undertaker-yet, lo, They are pitiable, and in different guise, With hanging heads, melancholy.
And shall I tell them every one
Of the good of the soul scrubbed to the bone, The walls bare of learning as the trees
Of leaves; and the sea-beyond-less bounded
For being innocent of ships.
What voices have they now, what forms of hopes? What  is the reckoning for having cheated death? The Cross knows what I'll not say, that last never[.] But no one shall heed my song, nor have they ever.


21

POEMS BY  MALCOLM LOWRY



LUPUS IN F]IBULJI

Wolf, wolf, cried the boy in the fable,
Who plagued the shepherds and the sheep alike, To return, laughing softly, to the stable,
And fold away the hours with reed or fiddle,
Bleating in music for deceived shepherd's sake. There  was no wolf then. But at night one struck; Long famished in iron hills she saw her table Spread whitely on the green plains of Tortu. Wolf, cried the boy. But now no herdsmen came.
Wolf, wolf, returned  the wolf, her icy heart aflame ...
So wolf and child were well met. But I say to you That, slept they once on never so proud an Alp,- It is the poor wolf now who cries for help.




THE DODDER

The  early flowered everlasting,
The  hooded violet, the branching  white Wood-violet, brooding in the May night Send petals forth even in Spring's  wasting,
-Sped by the monkish cellarage-tasting
Of cowled cuckoo-pint, jack-in-the-pulpit!­ All of these, where there was but one poet,
In Katchewanook, lacked no contrasting.
If I seek that which, poor, leafless, rootless, Twined  with goldenrod in ill-repute lives, It is, for exiled passion's sake, comfort Here, on Stony Lake: nor is it fruitless
What faithful coils are goldener than  leaves
To share, what blossoms parasites support.






22

POEMS BY  MALCOLM LOWRY



)IUTOPSY

An autopsy on this childhood then reveals:
That he was flayed at seven, crucified at eleven. And he was blind as well, and  jeered at
For his blindness. Small wonder that the man
Is embittered  and full of hate, but wait.
All this time, and always lost, he struggled. In pain he prayed that none other
In the world should suffer so. Christ's
Life compared  with his, was full of tumult, Praise, excitement, final triumph.
For him were no hosannas. He writes them now.
Matriculated into life by this, remembering how This laggard self was last in the school Marathon, Or that he was last, last in everything,
Devoid of all save wandering attention­
Wandering is the word defines our man-
But turned, to discover Clare in the poor snail, And weave a fearful vision of his own.




STR}INGE TYPE

I wrote:  in the dark cavern of our birth.
The  printer  had it tavern, which seems better: But herein lies the subject of our mirth,
Since on the next page death appears as dearth. So it may be that God's word was distraction, Which to our strange type appears destruction, Which is bitter.

POEMS BY  MALCOLM LOWRY



JOSEPH CONRJID

This wrestling, as of seamen with a storm Which flies to leeward-while they, united In that chaos, turn, each on his nighted Bunk, to dream of chaos again, or home­ The poet himself, struggling with the form Of his coiled work, knows; having requited Sea-weariness with purpose, invited
What derricks of the soul plunge in his room. Yet some mariner's ferment in his blood
-Though truant  heart will hear the iron travail And song of ships that ride their easting down­ Sustains him to subdue or be subdued.
In sleep all night he grapples with a sail!
But words beyond the life of ships dream  on.









NO SE PUEDE  . ..



Max-Pol Fouchet






(,EST EN  1947 que Stephen Spender me pressa de lire Under  the Volcano. 11 venait lui-meme de decouvrir le livre au cours d'un  voyage aerien,  entre  New York et  Paris. Je relate  cette circonstance,  et pour  remercier
le poete, et parce  que  j'eprouve  toujours le sentiment  de revelation que  j'eus des lors. Aujourd'hui, apres une nouvelle lecture, la sixieme, ce sentiment est le meme, sans alteration. Depuis Joyce, depuis les grands Faulkner,  rien d'aussi important, rien  qui  aille  plus loin  et  plus  profond ne  nous  a  ete offert  par  Ia litterature etrangere. Au-dessous du Volcan  est l'un des rares livres que notre temps imposera a l'avenir, quand  le tri s'effectuera  des fausses et des vraies valeurs, quand  Ia balle sera separee  de l'epi. Je  plains ceux qui ne sauront  pas le reconnaitre. lei se fait le point de Ia critique.
Dans  ce livre, non  plus que  dans  Ulysse ou le Bruit et la Fureur, on n'entre
aisement,  il est  vrai.  Les  amateurs  de  non-resistance  doivent  demeurer  sur  la berge.  D'ailleurs,  l'o::uvre confie sa  garde  a  un  premier  chapitre  cerberiforme! Quarante  pages  sans  fissures, sans  complaisance, sans  appeau, sans  attrape­ lecteur,  ou se deploie  toute  Ia thematique de l'auteur. Premier  chapitre qui  est, au demeurant, le dernier.  La se resume, dans la conscience d'un personnage, avec des ecarts divers, un drame  accompli dont Ia marche nous sera revelee par Ia suite.
Nous  voici  dans  une  tragedie  encore  bouillante,  et  nous ignorons  son  devel­
oppement.  Nous sommes au faite, non au fait. Apres, seulement apres, on s'accli­ mate,  on  respire;  le  mouvement  vous entraine.  Nous nous permettons  done  de donner  ce conseil au  lecteur  de bonne  volonte; il lira le chapitre  initial sans se laisser  rebuter, puis,  apres  connaissance du  reste, il reviendra  a  son  point  de depart,  et il s'apercevra que ce debut est, en soi, une merveille d'ecriture inspiree.
Defaut  de  composition?  Non  pas.  Procede  trap  intentionnel? Encore  mains.
11 s'agit  de quelques  autres  chases. De musique, d'abord, si l'on veut. Ce premier


25

NOSE PUEDE



chapitre, purgatoire  des impatients,  equivaut  a un prelude;  les leitmotive s'y font entendre, sans qu'on  sache encore a quel evenement  precis les rattacher. L'reuvre de Malcolm  Lowry, en effet, ressemble a une symphonie dont  les motifs, par leur recurrence,   assurent  I'unite  tonale,  se  reprennent en  modulations, s'organisent parfois en contrepoint.  C'est aussi un poeme, ou ces themes tiennent  lieu de rimes, d'assonnances.  Pourtant  on n'explique  pas ce livre en le comparant ala musique, a  la  poesie. II s'explique  en fonction  du  temps qui est le sien. Nous sommes ici dans  un  univers de retour  cyclique. Tout  evenement  s'y retrouve,  s'y redit parce qu'il  correspond  a un archetype absolu, le reprend,  le reproduit, le resonne. Dans le decor de I'intrigue, l'un  des elements principaux  est une grande  roue foraine: elle tourne,  toujours  presente,  dans  un sens ou  dans  l'autre, entrainant dans  sa giration  des cabines qu'elle  ramene  a leur position d'origine. Clair symbole d'un temps  de  retour  eternel,  qui  ne va pas d'un  depart  a  une  arrivee,  mais qui, se mouvant  sur  lui-meme, se retrouve  sans cesse. Cette  conception  donne  au  livre son allure de "revolution" constante. Les themes se redisent. Et la tragedie recom­ mence la tragedie.
Cet  univers de la repetition est celui d'un  age d'or.  L'homme y serait soustrait au devenir,  il y parviendrait  a l'extase,  a la paix sacrale. Que !'action  du livre se
passe au Mexique ne releve pas du hasard:  elle s'accorde  parfaitement aux ancien­ nes cosmologies. Mais les personnages,  eux, vivent  dans  une  duree  qui  est celle du  peche:  ils ont  derriere  eux la faute  commise;  en eux et devant  eux le chati­ ment,  l'Enfer.  Qui  sont-ils, ces personnages? D'abord, Geoffrey Firmin, le consul dechu,  alcoolique  et  savant. II n'ignore  ni la  Cabbale,  ni les sciences  tradition­ nelles, ni la  litterature, dans  la  mesure ou cette  derniere  suit  la voie  royale des mysteres. L'alcool pour lui n'est pas un vice, mais une passion de l'ame, un moyen de la connaissance.  L'ethylisme de Geoffrey atteint  ce dereglement  des sens, par lequel, aux termes de Rimbaud, on se fait voyant.






LE CONSUL A  UNE  FEMMEJ  Yvonne. Elle l'a  quitte; il ne l'a pas  retenue.  Yvonne  revient.  II souhaitait  qu'elle  revint.  II l'aime.  Elle l'aime. Pourtant les deux  amants  ne peuvent  se rejoindre.  Une  malediction  les separe. Un interdit  pese sur leur amour.  Pour etre ainsi chaties, quelle faute ont-ils com­ mise? lis  s'aimaient, oui,  mais ils n'ont  su  defendre  leur  sentiment,  le  prouver,
I'assumer.  lis se sont abandonnes  l'un  l'autre, Yvonne a laisse Geoffrey a l'alcool,

NOSE PUEDE



Geoffrey ne s'est pas oppose au depart  d'Yvonne. Ils ont detruit  le jardin d'Eden qui  etait  leur. Desonnais  ils ne peuvent  y revenir. C'est  la loi, et leurs supplica­ tions se heurtent  a son inflexibilite. "Nous  pourrions etre heureux tousles deux", dit  vainement   Yvonne,  et  Geoffrey:  "Ah! qui  sait  pourquoi  l'homme  s'est vu offrir l'amour?" lls connaissent  le verdict. Et ils n'ignorent  pas ou ils se trouvent: "Le  nom de ce pays est enfer",  s'ecrie le consul. Au-dessous du volcan! Ce n'etait  pas sans  raison  que  les Anciens  avaient  place le Tartare sous le mont  Etna,  et au-dedans, le monstre Typhee  aux  cent tetes, aux yeux eta la  voix relativement terrifiants.  Rarement un  livre  a  montre  des cceurs plus  laceres,  plus desesperes. Jamais l'impossibilite du couple ne fut exprimee de la sorte.
No  se peude vivir sin amar. Cette inscription s'etale sur un mur  de Quauhna­ huac,  la  petite  ville mexicaine  que  depeint  le livre. Etre  sans  amour, c'est done etre  mort.  Et, au  vrai, le consul et sa femme n'appartiennent  plus au monde, le monde  ne leur appartient plus. Geoffrey, le kabbaliste, comprend  les raisons d'un  tel abandon. La conception  esoterique de la Totalite le lui explique:  Dieu etant  le male, l'univers  etant  la £emelle, le Tout  se compose de leur union,  le chaos et le neant,  de leur  desunion,  et les creatures mortelles aboutiront a la Totalite  ou au chaos, selon qu'elles obeiront a l'amour.
Yvonne ne possede pas de telles connaissances. C'est d'instinct  qu'elle interprete la  ruine  du  paradis  perdu.  Elle reve de le retablir  ailleurs. Dans  quelque  ferme lointaine,  elle retrouverait sa foi, elle sauverait  Geoffrey de l'alcoolisme. Sauver Geoffrey?  Sauver? Voila  qui  nous conduit  plus loin. Le manquement ala loi se revele soudain  plus grave, il ne se limite plus a l'affrontement de deux protagon­ istes, il s'elargit a l'humanite meme.
Sur  Yvonne,  sur  Geoffrey, pese cette consequence  de la faute: !'abandon du
prochain.  Geoffrey sait qu'il se derobe sans cesse devant la misere du monde, qu'il invente  des  pretextes  pour  s'y  soustraire. Ils sont,  l'un  et  l'autre, Geoffrey et Yvonne  conscients de leur egoisme. Mais il y a plus:  un remords  tenaille le con­ sul: il n'a passu empecher,  pendant laguerre, que des prisonniers ennemis fussent massacres par !'equipage de son bateau, et l'on se demande  meme s'il est innocent de ce crime ... Quoi  qu'il  en soit, un chapitre  entier  developpe le theme de la responsabilite  envers  autrui. Quelque  lndien  agonise au  bord  de la  route,  assas­ sine par  un de ses freres de race. Yvonne se detourne  du  moribond, elle ne peut "supporter la vue du sang".  Geoffrey, lui, demande  a  Hugh,  son demi-frere,  de ne pas intervenir, d'attendre l'arrivee  de Ia police. Ne  voit-on pas que ces pages se rattachent a la parabole  du Bon Samaritain? Comment  s'appelait, justement, le navire meurtrier  que  commandait le consul? Le Samaritain. Le propos est net.

NOSE  PUEDE


Le  theme  de  Ia  charite,  non  respectee,  corollaire  du  manquement  a l'amour, devient l'une des obsessions majeures du livre.
La mort  du consul repetera Ia mort de l'Indien. Lui aussi mourra,  abandonne sur  Ia route.  Mais non sans avoir reu
joueur de violon, se penchera  vers lui et l'appellera compaiiero ... A cette parole de compassion le consul eprouvera  une ultime  joie, "cela  le rendit  heureux". Et Malcolm  Lowry ajoute: "Maintenant, il etait  le mourant  sur le bard  d'un  che­ min,  ou  ne  s'arreterait aucun  bon  samaritain." Ainsi se ferme  le cycle.  La  loi est irremissible.
Ce sujet doit pourtant sa valeur au contexte qui le vet, le multiplie, l'exhausse. Ce livre ne se situe pas sur les deux seuls plans du  roman  et de Ia connaissance,
il pose encore  des problemes de langage  et d'ecriture. On  assiste, en le lisant,  a
un  maniement prodigieux  de  vocables,  a des coulees verbales  de souvenirs,  de
citations, de surgissements de Ia memoire et de Ia culture.  Les peripeties de l'ecri­ ture  valent  celles de l'intrigue.  On  voudrait  isoler des paragraphes, des pages, les retenir  pour leur lyrisme particulier  et cependant ils sont entraines dans le mouve­ ment  general.  Souvent, les personnages du livre levent les yeux vers le ciel mexi­ cain,  contemplent   les demarches  stellaires, le deploiement  des  galaxies,  l'infinie
fete  foraine  ou  de  grandes  roues deploient  leur  giration  dans  l'espace.  C'est  a
cet  ordre  cosmique  que le livre fait  penser, avec ses themes qui  paraissent,  dis­ paraissent,  reparaissent  comme les astres. Le cerveau  humain  epouse ici  l'image de l'univers.  II toume  autour  du soleil central  de Ia connaissance  et de l'amour. Effet de l'alcool? Soit. Dans le vin, Ia verite. Mais ce vin est celui des mystiques.



MALCOLM LOWRY
A Note




Conrad Aiken





Mv OPINION OF  MALCOLM LOWRY "' a write<;. of coun;e already on  record, in the  "blurb" which  I was asked to write  for Under  the Vol­
cano when  it first  appeared. More  extensively, it can  be found in the  portrait of Lowry-on the  whole,  pretty  accurate-in Ushant,  my autobiography, where  he appears as Hambo. In  the  last section  of this is a fragment of imaginary dialogue between  us which  was actually written at Cuernavaca in 1937, when  I was staying with  him,  and  which, allowing for  the  necessary  "heightening", is very  close to the   mark.   It will  suggest,   I think,  something of  the  remarkable spiritual and aesthetic and  psychological symbiosis that  grew up between us immediately after our  first  meeting in  1929.  He  had  read  my  novel  Blue Voyage, and  wrote  me about it  to Rye,  Sussex,  where  he assumed  I was still living; and  he asked me to lunch  with  him,  either  in  London or Cambridge, where he was to matriculate in September. On  finding that  I was in the  other Cambridge-on the  Charles River
-he at  once  inquired whether I would  consider  taking him  on  as a  pupil,  the terms  to  be  arranged. The terms  were  arranged, he set  sail  on  a freighter from Liverpool to  Bermuda, on  another from  Bermuda to  Boston,  and   arrived   one day  in  July  on  my  doorstep in  Plympton Street,  Cambridge, next  door  to  the Grolier   Bookshop,  with  a  taropatch in  one  hand  and   a  small  battered suitcase in the other.
The suitcase   contained an  exercise  book  (and   not  much else)  in  which  was as  much   as  he  had  then  written of  his first  novel,  Ultramarine; and  it  was on this, as I have  described at  length  in Ushant, that  we were  to work  all that won­ derful  summer. Blue  Voyage  he  knew  better  than  I did-he knew  it  by  heart. Its influence on  him  was profound and  permanent, and  was evident even in that

MALCOLM LOWRY: A NOTE



first title-he was delighted  with  my suggestion  that  he  might  well have  taken the next step  and  called the book Purple  Passage. But  though  the influence  was to continue  even into  the later work, a matter  that  was frequently  and  amusedly discussed between  us, and was also to comprise a great  deal that  was said by me in  conversation,  it  was much  more complicated   than  that.  The  fact  is that  we were uncannily  alike in almost everything, found instantly  that we spoke the same language,  were  astonishingly en  rapport; and  it  was therefore  the most natural thing  in the  world  that  a year later, when difficulties arose between him and  his father,  I was able  to act as mediator  (I  had  by then  returned  to Rye), and,  as a result of this, for the next three years, in loco  parentis.  I became his father.
Time  and  space  were to interrupt  this quite  marvellous relationship,  but never to change  it. Tout passe, I' amitie  reste. His first letter  to me had begun:  "I have lived only nineteen  years, most of them badly." Would  he have thought  that  he lived the  rest  of his short life badly? No, I don't  think so. The  work speaks for him, and he knew that it was superb.










MORE THAN  MUSIC
Glimpses of Malcolm  Lowry


Downie Kirk


Sir,  more  than  kisses, letters  mingle  souls; For, thus  friends absent speak.
JOHN DONNE






IT WOULD TAKE a symposium of the friends with whom Mal­ colm  Lowry  corresponded to  describe  him  adequately from  his letters.  Yet,  one correspondent,  basing   his  impressions   upon   letters  which   were  written  during
the  decade that   was  the  most  productive period  of  his literary   career, can  still give a significant view of the man  and  the artist. One  naturally wonders, of course, what   right  one  really  has  to  quote  from  the  private  letters  of an  author; one  is sharply reminded  of  Heine's remark:  "To  publish  even  one  line  of  an  author which  he himself  has not intended for the public  at large-especially letters which are  addressed to  private persons-is  to commit a despicable act  of felony."
But in the case of Malcolm Lowry one may perhaps be pardoned, for obviously some  of  the  care  that   made  him  revise almost  every  paragraph he  wrote,  went into  the composition of his letters,  although it is doubtful that  he wrote  them  with a view to publication. In fact, it is their very naturalness that  makes them  valuable. He obviously  wrote  many  of them  under  pressure, at a time when  he was absorbed in the  composition of his novels and  his poetry; for  he makes frequent references to the  long  stretches of strain caused  by his creative  work,  in the  midst  of which he would  write  a letter  in  reply  to an invitation to spend  an evening  of complete relaxation from  his creative endeavours.

When  I'm  working at very high intensity  [he says on one occasion]  the writing of even the smallest note often takes an incredibly long time-an occupational psychological aberration of some sort doubtless due in turn  to the fact that the narcissistic  care  which  one  sometimes expends  on  prose makes a  fellow forget  a

MORE THAN  MUSIC



letter  should  be spontaneous and  to hell with  the semicolons, since your friend doesn't want to look at them anyway but is simply interested in hearing from you.
Joseph  Conrad  once said that  he could compare  the strain  of writing Nostromo only to the everlasting sombre stress of the westward  winter  passage around  Cape Horn. So it must have been with Malcolm Lowry; for he drove himself mercilessly to produce  his works:  with  him  there  was a  passionate  necessity to reflect and to distill in its purest form something within him that  would not give him peace. And  many  of the  letters-"the only true  heart-talkers," as someone  has said­ are  as  revelatory  of  Lowry  as  his  autobiographical fiction.  The  expression  of his thought  is neither  cryptic nor obscure. His commentary on life and  literature  is all  the  more  precious  because it is good  vivid talk  by the  Lowry  whom  not many could listen to with complete comprehension  for any length of time because of the abstruseness of his references and  the broad  leaps in  his thoughts.  He was, of course, shy, and  although  he was dying  to  communicate, he often  remained silent;  when he did open his mouth, it was to release a flood of words that  dazz­ led  you with its brilliance  but  frequently  left  you bewildered  about  its meaning.
We  are  now  aware  of  Malcolm  Lowry as an  outstanding novelist, as a dis­
tinguished short-story  writer and  as a considerable  poet, but his power as a critic is practically  unknown.  His book reviews and  literary  criticisms, although  not numerous,  are  penetrating. His letters, moreover, reveal  him as a sensitive critic of literature, politics, music, art  and  philosophy; in them  he discusses with acute perception  and in clear style a wide range of unusual subjects.
In  one letter  he tells about  reading Jose Ortega  y Gasset-especially his won­
derful  lecture on Goethe, and  his Towards  a Philosophy  of History. In the latter work the Spanish  philosopher suggests that  human  life in its most human dimen­ sion is like a work of fiction, that  man  is a sort of novelist of himself, who con­ ceives the  fanciful  figure of a  personage  with  its  unreal  occupations  and  then, for  the sake of converting  it into reality, does all the things he does. Lowry says this idea  recommends itself to him because he feels that  man  is a kind of novelist of himself. He  thinks,  too, that  there is something  valuable  from  a philosophic point of view in trying to put down what actually  takes place in a novelist's mind when  he conceives what he conceives to be the fanciful figure of a personage.
The part  that  never gets written, with which is included the true impulses that made him a  novelist or dramatist in the first place, and  the modifications of life around  him through his own eyes as those impulses were realized, would be the true drama, and I hope to finish something of this sort one day.
At this point he inserts a long parenthesis in minute  handwriting in the margin


32

MORE THAN  MUSIC



of his typed  letter, which  I quote  in full, because its remarks on Pirandello exhibit the honesty, fairness and  insight  of his literary  criticism:
This  would  be  not  unlike  Pirandello  who-!quote from  an  article  in  The Partisan  Review-"inverts the convention of modern realism, instead of pretending that  the  stage  is not  a stage at  all, but  the  familiar  parlor,  he pretends  that  the familiar  parlor  is not real as a photograph but  a stage containing  many  realities." This  is  Shakespeare's   speech  come  true.  My  feeling  is that  Pirandello  may  not have  wholly  appreciated how close to truth  his view of human  life might  be, as a consequence  of which  the  realities of "Six Characters  in Search  of an Author," say, do  not measure  up  to the  profundity  of the view, though  I have not studied him  sufficiently, and  the  accepted  critical  opinion  upon  Pirandello  is apparently faulty.

Lowry  continues his analysis  of Ortega's Towards a Philosophy of History  by stating that  although Ortega is not  concerned in this work,  at  any  rate,  with fic­ tion,  it is the  thesis  upon  which  he  bases his view of history-namely, that  man  is what  has  happened to him.  This  thought interests  Lowry  because  it is a  phil­  osophy  that  begins with one's existence, links up with Heidegger and Kierkegaard, and  hence  with  Existentialism. Writing in June, 1950, he notes that Existentialism has  already become  a music  hall  joke in France and  that it contains an  element of despair that  is absent  in Ortega. Sartre's Existentialism, as far  as he can under­ stand   it,  strikes  him  as  "a  sort  of  reach-me-down or  second-hand philosophy", changed dramatically to fit the anguish  of the French in their struggle against the German occupation. In conclusion, however,  he says:

Even  so, it's  refreshing  to read  a philosophy  that  gives value  to the  drama  of life  itself,  of  the  dramatic value  of your  own  life at  the  very moment  you  are reading.

Commenting on  Ortega's thought that   the  snob  is hostile  to  liberalism, with the  hostility  of a deaf  man  for  words,  that  liberty  has always  been  understood in Europe as  the  freedom to  be  one's  real  self and  that  it  is not  surprising that a man  who knows  that  he has no mission to fulfil should  want  to be rid of it, Lowry says that  this idea  at  first sight  appeared to him, among other  things,  one  of the most  convincing arguments against  communism that   he  had  ever  read  in  such a short  space,  but  that  on  second  thought he realized  it  was only  a statement in defence   of  the  old  school  of  liberalism,   and  he states  that  such  a  school  could not  exist  without the  possibility  of free  discussion of revolutionary tenets, includ­ ing  even  those  contained in  communism for  that  matter, or  without the right  to practical absorption of revolutionary tenets where desirable.


33

MORE THAN MUSIC




l:E POLITICAL  SITUATION  in  the world  looked grim  to Lowry in  I950,  although  it did not seem to him half so hopeless as it had done in  I939 or even in  I938.  In one letter, for instance,  he writes:  "Sometimes  I get the im­ pression that not even the people who are actually in the process of making history know  in the least what  is really going on. Or  if they do, it seems appalling  that they should  be in the position that  they are."  As for the eventual outcome of the present  human   predicament, he  felt  that  mankind,  striving  toward  a  rebirth,  would  probably  achieve  a  better  world  in  the  not  too-distant future.  He  was familiar,  of course, with the  pessimistic picture  drawn by Orwell  in his 1984, as he  often  talked  about  the  novel;  but  he  was  more  hopeful  than  Orwell,  and although  he was painfully aware that  man, if he did not take care, might destroy himself-as we might infer from Under  the Volcano-he felt that  the revolution­ ary forces of our  time would change for  the better  the present shocking situation in world  politics. He says, optimistically, that  "anything that  is a revolution must keep  moving or it  doesn't  revolute:  by  its nature  it contains  within  it the seeds of its own  destruction; so by  I989,  say,  everything  ought  to be hunky-dory,  all of which certainly doesn't make it any easier to live in I950."
Elsewhere Lowry discusses at length religion, witchcraft  and  Voodooism-sub­
jects in which he took an intense interest. Referring  to Mythologie  Vodou, a book on  witchcraft,  by his Haitian  friend,  Milo Marcelin,  he takes exception  to a  re­ view of it  in  Time   magazine;  he explains  that  it  is a  book  not  about  Voodoo chiefly but about  witchcraft,  and  that  there is a difference, although  it is not per­ haps apparent to the layman.
Lowry  points  out  that  Voodoo  is essentially a  religion  to  be  regarded  with
reverence, since it is without  question a matter-transcending religion based upon the actual  existence of the supernatural-a fact that is fundamental to man him­ self, compared  with which most other religions are simply techniques  to hide that fact  or at least to keep the supernatural at  relatively safe distances. He feels that only  the  Negroes are  powerful enough  or  holy enough  to be able  to  handle  it, and  that  even they of course abuse it. He thinks, furthermore, that  the white man should regard  with awe the great dignity and discipline that is behind Voodooism at its highest, its conception  of God and the meaning  it gives to life-and this he says is the religion of a race that  we so often glibly think  of as inferior, or com­ prising  medicine  men,  or  the  powers  of  darkness,  etc.  He  appeals  for  greater understanding of  the  coloured  people  with  words  that  are  as  timely  today  as when he wrote them ten years ago:

34

MORE THAN MUSIC



Heart  of Darkness  indeed!  Joseph  Conrad  should have been to Haiti.  What  he failed  to understand was that  the savages of the Congo had, to some extent, sub­ dued  the dark  forces that  are in nature  by creating their religion in the first  place in order  to subdue  them,  that  that,  in its way, was a civilizing almost a  pragmatic  process ... It is clear  that  Comrade  Joseph did not allow himself to be corrupted  by any  savages though; he stayed  in Polish aloofness on  board  in  company  with some a priori ideas.

Lowry  himself  felt  that  in  his rich  and  varied  life there  had  been  many  com­ munications between  his mind  and  others  by means outside  the channels of  sense, and   he  was  so convinced of  the  existence  of thought transference that  he  could not  dismiss  it  as  mere  coincidence. The  subject  of telepathy occurs  often  in  his letters.  Once a  "mysterious" crossing  of our  letters  (this  resulted  in  much  con­ fusion and  the resort to telegrams) caused him to write:

I am  being so supermeticulous about  what is more or less spontaneous  because I perceive, having  been reading  Bergson, that  the difficulties on one plane of  com­ munication and  the too great facilities on another  (if telepathic  ones can be called such)  might  have  led you into some inconvenience,  than  which  little is worse on Saturday afternoon  ...





MALCOLM LOWRY  was  blessed  with  a  keen  sense  of   hu­ mour, though critics seem to have overlooked  this priceless quality in his writings.  He  once  said  that  he intended to write  a book dealing  with  the  peculiar  punish­ ment   that  is meted  out  to  people  who  lack  the sense of  humour to  write  books like  Under the  Volcano. He  was, in fact,  a very witty  person,  and  his wit could not  help  overflowing into  his letters. It usually  appears in a tone  of good-natured banter. Commenting on  the  reception Under the Volcano received  in  France, he writes facetiously:

Finally, I thought  that  you would be tickled to know, The  Volcano  has made a hit  in  France,  where  it  is coming  out  three  times in  the  next  month: first in a classic series, then  Correa, and  it is also being serialized in the  Paris  daily  news­ paper,  Combat. They  have  decided  that  it is the  writing  on  the  wall,  that your amigo  is everything  from  the  Four Quartets  (which  he has never  read)  to Joyce (whom  he  dislikes) -finally relate  him  to the Jewish  prophetic  Zohar  (of  which he  knows  nothing) -they have  some other  comments,  too,  about  Macbeth,  but that  is nothing  to what  someone is just going to say in Victoria, over the C.B.C., where  they  have  decided  that  the  Consul  is really Moby Dick,  masquerading as


35

MORE THAN MUSIC



the  unconscious  aspect of the Cadborosaurus in  the  Book of Jonah,  or  words  to that effect.
A  knowledgeable devotee  of the  cinematographic art,  Lowry  once said  that  if Under  the Volcano  were filmed in his lifetime,  he would  insist on helping to direct it,  and  in  his letters  he  makes  many  interesting references to films. He  tells, for instance, of going  to see the film The  Hairy Ape, which  he had  heard  was good; he considered it d jevelsk (Scandinavian for devilish) in the worst sense, although the  suspense  was subtly  increased  by the accident of the lights failing  for an hour right  in the  middle  of the showing.  He  recalls that  people  looked  very sinister  and strange standing about  in the foyer, and  he made  a note  that  he ought  to use this in  a  book;  then  he  remembered that  he had  done  so in  Under  the Volcano. In another letter  he says that  he went  to see the  old  silent  film  Intolerance, played straight through without  any  music  at  all,  which  he considered a great  mistake, as Griffith  wrote  his own  score. "Very few silent  films,"  he remarks, "will  stand being  played  like that, without music, which  I think  is interesting. The  Passion of joan of Arc is an exception."
With  regard to C.  F. Ramuz's novel, When the Mountain Fell, Lowry  makes
some  enlightening remarks  on the author's style, in which  he detects  the influence of  the  movies.  From   his  reading of  Clifton   Fadiman's  remarks printed on  the cover  of  When the  Mountain Fell, he  had  gained   the  impression that  Ramuz's style was  being  approached in an odd  way, that  it  was supposed to be natural­ that  is, artless,  unsophisticated, stark, stern,  unintellectual, above  all uninfluenced. He  says he cannot see how a style, no matter how  arrived at-often  he imagines largely  by cutting-can hope fundamentally to be much more  than  simply  appro­ priate, in  the  fullest  sense, to what  the  author is writing about. He  says also that  he  did  not  find  Ramuz' style  particularly  simple  and  that   he  can  detect   many  sophisticated influences  including  avant-garde cinema. But  as  far  as  he  is con­ cerned   the  story  is none  the  worse for  that. His  concluding remarks on style are illuminating:

Just  the same one is all in favour of a clear, pure, concrete  style, and  one with the  utmost  of simplicity, etc. But if one has arrived  at  that  position, it is unlikely that  the  style has  been uninfluenced.  Doubtless  one  has  to pass through  a  maxi­ mum  of influences before achieving  a style at  all. It is difficult to see how a style like Ramuz,  even if it achieves great  clarity,  can  be called  unsophisticated.  Any­ how his simplicity, such as it is, strikes me as having cost a great  intellectual effort.

Lowry's  life-long  interest  in style, as well as his deep  love of language and  his ready  championship of the outcast, mark  him  as a kindred spirit  of the great  Aus-

MORE THAN  MUSIC



trian critic and  poet Karl  Kraus,  who, like Lowry, concerned  himself throughout his life with  literary  style and  poetics, carried  on an  unending  campaign  against inaccurate  and  slovenly use of language,  and fought  against injustice, corruption and  hyprocricy  wherever   he  found  them.  Lowry  doubtless  knew  the  work  of Kraus,  because he was steeped  in the writings of the authors of Central  Europe. He  often  spoke  in  admiration of Kraus's  compatriot  and  contemporary-Her­ mann  Brach. But he talked  most about the German-Jewish novelist, Franz Kafka, who like himself was definitely influenced  by the cabala  and  the  works of Soren Kierkegaard. There is much of Kafka's philosophical and religious symbolism-as well as traces of his compact,  intense and closely reasoned style-in Under  the Vol­ cano. In  his conversations  Lowry made frequent references to The  Trial  and The  Castle, and in one letter he writes that he appreciates  a Kafka-like scrupulousness on  my part,  but  hastens  to  remind  me  that  "Kafka  believed that  while the de­ mand  on  the  part  of  the  divine  powers for  absolute  righteousness  even in  the smallest matters  was  unconditional, human  effort, even at its highest, was always in the wrong."
Lowry had great sympathy  for the younger authors who were struggling for recognition  and  was  most  generous  in  assisting them.  When  he  reviewed their work, he made  his criticism  in the spirit of kindness, but  he could be caustic, as when  he reviewed  Thomas Merton's  The  Seven Story  Mountain. He considered it  a  very  questionable   book-a paradox,  in  fact;  for  Merton  had  gone into  a Trappist   monastery  pretending to give up  everything  and  yet went  on writing books. But even in  Merton's book Lowry recognized a kind  of sincerity or dedi­ cation  and  felt that  the book was important enough at this point in  history to be considered  on  another   plane  altogether.  He  ends his entertaining  review with  a timely, striking  thought:  "That  a  Monastery  might,  in  essence,  be  the  capital of  the  world  at  this  juncture  is a possibility which not  even  Nietzsche were he alive would care to question-or would he?"
No account  of Malcolm  Lowry's life and work at Dollarton  could be complete without  mention of his love of British Columbia and especially the country closely surrounding his shack on Burrard  Inlet. His descriptions of it permeate  his fiction and  the abundance of feeling he had for the place overflows into  his letters. The fear  that  he Inight  be evicted  from  his beloved house on the  beach  caused  him much  anxiety  which  he expresses in his letters. Nor did these feelings end on his departing to  Europe  in  1954· From  Ripe,  near  Lewes, in  Sussex, he  wrote in April, 1956:  "Though we like this place quite a bit, please don't  think we have abandoned Dollarton; we have not and think of it constantly." And finally, about

37

MORE THAN  MUSIC



seven  months before  his untimely  death,  he  wrote  these  nostalgic  words: "I am writing like mad  on  October  Ferry to Gabriola  ... It is better  than  the Volcano, a  veritable symphony of longing  for  the  beach. We  hope  to return D.V., mean­ time think  of you often and  are often homesick."
Reading Lowry's  letters again  was a great  pleasure for me. The immense vital­ ity,  the  exuberant  humour, the  depth   of  thought and   the  broad  humanity ex­ pressed  on  almost   every  page,  often  in  the  richest  of  poetic  imagery, gave  me moments of  sheer  delight.  As  a  tribute to  Malcolm  Lowry-the man   and   the artist,  I should  like to quote,  in closing, from  a poem of  his friend, Conrad Aiken,  for  whom  he had  the greatest  admiration and  who in  turn  cherished him  as if he
were his own son :
Music I heard with you was more than music,
And bread  I broke with you was more than  bread.



















g8



LETTERS FROM MALCOLM LOWRY




These two letters have been chosen because they show Malcolm Lowry  discussing literary  problems  and  their  relation  to the  life he  was constantly  trying  to  transmute  into  the  substance  of his books. Mr.  Albert Erskine, recipient of the first, was at  that  time editor for Reyna!&  Hitchcock,  who published Under the Volcano for the first time in the United  States. He is now managing  editor of Random  House. Mr. David  Markson,  recipient  of the second, is a young American  writer, now in Mexico City on a fellowship from  the  Centro   Mexicano  de  Escritores,  who  first  established contact  with  Malcolm  Lowry when he wrote  a thesis on Under the  Volcano for his M.A. degree at Columbia  University.




To  Albert Erskine



Dear  Albert,
 UNDATED.

Your  letter   arrived without hitch  . . . Meantime quam celerime  my  feelings and  prejudices-which I hope  will dispel some  doubts-in regard to fiction  about writings  and  writers  as such:
Your  feelings  and   prejudices are  shared   by  me,  almost  unqualifiedly, on  the
most  general plane, as indeed  probably by most other  writers,  though one reason I feel that  most  other  writers  share  them  is that  they  have  been  taught since  they began  writing that   all  editors  and  producers have  these  same  feelings  and  pre­ judices,  so  what's the  use  of  writing   about   writers  etc   (even  though  they,  the writers,  somehow persist in doing so in one disguise or another) when they would be rejected etc etc? ...
But I don't believe  the general public shares the prejudice, for there is an artist, a poet  in every  man,  hence  he is a creature easy for anyone to identify themselves with: and  his struggles  are  likely to  be universal,  even  on  the  lowest  plane  ... My  own  prejudice and  feeling  remain  on  this  plane  no  different in  essence let

39

LETTERS FROM LOWRY



alone  from  your  good  self's  but  from  those  adumbrated by  wordy  old  Bernard de  Voto  in  his  truly  horrendous excellent  little  bits  about Mark Twain and  his malicious  bits about Tom  Wolfe.
But  I note  that  even Bernard de Voto  had  to interpolate that "he  was a 'good
Joycean'-he hoped-and where  on  this line of his argument the  Portrait of the Artist  as a  Young  Man  would  come  in,  I simply  don't know.  But  with  me  the Portrait of the Artist  has always  partly  failed  (while  one  recognizes  its-ha ha­ importance of  course)   for  not  dissimilar  reasons  to  those  that   made  Wolfe  fail with de Voto ...
So I daresay  I am  even  'left'  of de Voto  on  the subject, and  as a consequence
even  more  prejudiced than  yourself  and I or  most  editors  or  writers  against  such writing and  on that  point that  does in the end  perhaps begin  to involve  the whole of  autobiographical fiction  and  much  beside-particularly it  would  seem  to  de­ pend  upon  the  technique-moreover what  if one  should  give  a real  turn  of  the screw  to  a subject that  is so often  treated halfheartedly? I think  unquestionably what  one is after  is a new form,  a new approach to reality  itself; though I would submit also in  tangential passing  that  I don't think  those  works that  treat  of the matter  tragically or  philosophically rather  than   romantically  have  suffered   in acclaim by reason  of this theme-Tchekov's The Seagull  is a case-perhaps irrele­  vant-that comes to mind,  and  Six Characters.
Of course  you can say that  these are single works, but in fact  virtually the entire basis of  Pirandello's work  involves  a not  dissimilar   theme   (in  this  case that  art, the  theatre, is somehow  realer  than  life). My  reasoning may  seem  slightly  cock­ eyed  here  or  irrelevant again  but  I know  what  I mean. Nine  out  of ten  people who  saw  The Seagull  would  scarcely  remember that  it  is almost  entirely  about  writing and  writers  or art  in one  way  and  other-what they  would  take to  heart  is  that   a  talent   not  put  to  proper   use and  directed can  destroy  its  owner,  and apply  that  melancholy truth  to their  own  talent, whatever it might  be.
But  I digress.  The  real  protagonist of the  Voyage  is not  so much  a man  or  a writer   as  the   unconscious-or  man's   unconscious-and  at   present   it's  a  little difficult  for  me  to  see  how  I can  swing  what  seems  to  me  the  superb irony  of Wilderness living  in  Laruelle's house  and  the  death of  'Vigil' unless  Wilderness has  written, so to speak,  the  Volcano. Apart from  this, though, both  Dark  as the Grave   and  La  Mordida'-especially the  latter-should exist  as powerful novels

' "Dark  as the Grave" and "La  Mordida" were never-completed  novels about Mexico which  Lowry intended  to form part  of a sequence centring  on Under the  Volcano.
-ED.

LETTERS FROM LOWRY



in  themselves, if done  aright,  without  obtrusive  reference  to writers  or writing. There  are emotional and sexual and alcoholic and even political dramas which overshadow  these matters,  albeit  I would lose what seems to me one of the most potentially   masterful  scenes,  i.e.  when   Wilderness has  his  novel  accepted  in Laruelle's  house  while technically  under  arrest, if Wilderness  hasn't  written  the Vole.
Even so Wilderness is not, in the ordinary sense in which one encounters  novel­
ists or the author  in novels, a novelist. He simply doesn't  know what  he is. He is a sort of underground man.  Also he is Ortega's  fellow, making  up  his life as he goes along,  and  trying  to find his vocation.  In  this regard  some of the notes to the  Path  to the  Spring\ though  chaotic,  may  prove helpful  re  the treatment I propose. According  to Ortega, the best image for man  himself is a novelist, and it is in this way that  I'd  prefer you to look at him. He is not going to be the self­ conscious  author   himself  of so many  novels, if  that  was  what  you  are  rightly afraid  of, even though  I have to make him responsible for the Vole. Moreover he is disinterested  in literature, uncultured, incredibly unobservant, in many respects ignorant, without  faith  in  himself, and  lacking nearly all the  qualities  you nor­ mally associate with a novelist or a writer. As I've said he doesn't  even think he's a novelist himself. The  Volcano--which  'Laruelle'  doesn't  think  much  of at first
-appears less as a novel than  as a sort of mighty if preposterous  moral deed of
some obscene sort, testifying to an underlying toughness of fibre or staying power in  his character rather  than  to any particular  aesthetic ability of the usual kind. His  very  methods  of writing  are  absurd  and  he sees practically  nothing  at  all, save through  his wife's eyes, though  he gradually comes to see. I believe this can make  him  a  very original  character, both  human  and  pathetically  inhuman at once.  I  must  approve  of him  as a doppelganger  and  am  reluctant  to turn  him into  a steeplejack,  a cartoonist  or a billiard  marker,  though  he can  be all those too, for  all it matters.  What  does he know? What  he suspects is that  he's not a writer  so much  as being  written-this is where the terror  comes in.  (It came in, just then.)   His tragedy  or his faith  or whatever is less that  of Faust  than  that  of Aylmar,  the  water  diviner-whose story  should  be  told  briefly  somewhere  or other-a character of  the  Middle  Ages who,  with  his wand,  was  used  by the French  authorities  to track  down  murderers,  half fake-because his talent  kept failing  at  embarrassing moments,  wouldn't  work at  all under  certain  conditions yet he had  to pretend  it was working, half genius, because he nearly  always got

This is "The Forest  Path to  the  Spring" which  appears in  the  collection of stories,
Hear Us Oh  Lord  from Heaven Thy  Dwelling  Place. ED.

LETTERS  FROM LOWRY



his man-a sort of latter day underground Aylmar, looking for himself or his soul. I'm  damned  if I don't  think him an original  fellow, not to be confused with the ordinary  novelist, and  I would have told you all this already,  had  Hear  Us only gone to you and  not to Giroux.  (Magic  didn't  seem to be working very well then, or  maybe it'll  turn  out it was working overtime  and  was just a bit too subtle for
one.)  ...
MALCOLM


To David Markson






Dear old Dave,
 UNDATED (POSTMARKED MAY  20, 1954
DOLLARTON, B.C.)

Hold  that  note,  Roland.  Blow that  horn.  For  one  thing  3000 bucks is 3000 bucks, so why not think in terms of what it could represent-!don't mean neces­ sarily,  though   the  speculation  be inescapable  on  this  particular morning,  how many  bottles of Jack  Daniels Tennessee Sour  Mash  Whiskey it  will beget-but rather  a  passage  to  more than  India,  Italy,  or  the  Whirling  Cyclades:  at  least Europe.  So if  the  opus  bores and  disgusts you anyway,  why  not  make  a  good job  of it  and  make  the  corrections-insert more  cock, so to say-your paper­ back-publisher   desires, and  if possible, and  himself not  bankrupt, collect. I  will provide  you with a title:  No Barricado  for a Belly. And  a pseudonym: Sigbjorn X. Ghostkeeper.  Or  perhaps Thomas  of Erceldoune  ... This would be a palpable hit  (even  if the  book isn't)   for  you, I  mean  should  it  chance  to help  produce the  environment where you can better  write what  you want.  For  to judge from your  recent letters, especially your last, it  would  seem  that  New  York is not proving  altogether  the right place. To  say the least. In  my own experience-odi et amo-that particular  city-it favours  brief and  furious  outbursts,  but  not  the long  haul.  Moreover  for all its drama  and  existential  fury,  or  perhaps  because of it, it's a city where it can be remarkably  hard-or so it seems to me-to get on the  right  side of one's despair;  once having got on the  wrong side of it, that  is; even hangovers  don't  seem the same in New York as anywhere  else, though  to be sure  they  may  not  last so long,  the  deceitful  medicament being  more  easily at hand; which  only  makes it  worse in  the end.  Not  that  one  can't  learn  a great deal  from  hangovers: everything, in fact, save how not to get one next time, but that  one can  too easily find oneself slipping into  the state  of mind  in that  city-

42

LETTERS  FROM LOWRY



or so it seems to me-where to be slightly tight or hungover  seems one's natural state, the only way to maintain one's balance and one's harmony  with the place: and  the bad  thing  about  this is not the tightness so much,  which as you say can be highly enjoyable  ... but  that  that state of mind is really as eminently  rational as it  is-or can  be-dangerous; an  uncomfortable  combination. I  hope I don't seem to preach.  Mens sano in corpore sano, was all I was talking  about.  I don't say one can't  keep fit (whatever  that may mean)  in New York, but after a while, does  one  really  want  to?  Perhaps  you rightly,  as you said,  consider  yourself a creature  of the city:  as once  I did:  maybe though  you reckon without  some of your unconscious  needs,  nay,  the absolute necessities, of that  creature,  such as a few stars, ruins, deserts, cathedrals, seas, forests, ducks, ships, (even if the thought of them be loathsome)  uncharted waters and undreamed  shores, even indeed other cities. And  above  all  perhaps  a swim when  you want  it: or don't  you want it? In  any  case, you have  us both  feeling somewhat anxious about  you;  your letters get  blacker  and  blacker-no matter  that  they may have cheered  this benighted author  up during  what seemed an acutely ultimate indigo  period, and  no matter that  the blacker  they get, the more entertaining they are:  that  has been my and our  benefit,  (which  reminds  me I would  like at  this moment,  with  yourself, to have a game of tennis). My advantage, your altruistic and  far-sighted  empathy: what  the hell,-!haven't given you much return. And it occurs to me, as you see, sprouting  parental whiskers at this point, that, somehow or other, your providence or yourself may  be making  a bad  job for you, of what  used to be called: "with­ drawal  and  return." Unless sexually, of course,-but that  ain't  all, Jules Romains to the  contrary; and  I don't  see even so how even that  could  be solved, far less fundamentally, unless you are slightly more, as the lady spiritualist observed to us, "En  Rappa with the Angelitic Host."
Joking  and  obscenities  aside,  however, I even sometimes  think,  in my darker
moments,  that  the  poor  bloody-minded  old Volcano may have had  a malign in­ fluence on your good self; it hurts somewhat  too much  to suggest you throw that God  damn  book  out  of  the  window  and  me  with  it,  even  if that  were sound advice, which  I'm  not sure it is, and anyhow I would no doubt  hotly protest:  not all fathers were made  for their own patricide and I never heard of Abraham ask­ ing  Isaac  to  sacrifice  him,  not  willingly anyhow:   but  keeping  that  work as a symbol for the moment  of something or other, you ought to try somehow to trans­ cend it, let it at least be useful to you, since it was apparently intended  for you, or its author  will feel he  has lived in vain.  I'm  not  sure  what  I mean.  But no matter,  to come back  to the subject,  you speak of  the work you've done recently


43

LETTERS  FROM LOWRY



not  merely as bad  but as though  you loathed  the thought  of it. As for that, even if so, it can't  be as bad as parts of what  I've  been recently writing  myself:  and you seem blissfully to have forgotten  why you wrote  the book. Quite  apart  from the  fact  that  it  seems to me something  of a feat  to write  any  book these days, however bad, the basic idea of writing the thing in the first place must have been founded  on  some  deep  need  or  you wouldn't have  done  it. So,  I  repeat,  you ought  to follow it up. If New York hasn't stimulated  you yet into doing the kind of work you fundamentally want  to do there's  no need  to rush to the conclusion that  the fault  is all  Dave Markson's. It could  be that  you need  (quite  apart  no doubt  as sailors say, from a good strong  woman)   complementary factors  to be found  only in Europe.  You can get to Europe  cheaply & swiftly from  New York, live there  much  more cheaply, and  your 3000 bucks would go a long way. If­ as  circumstances  seem  to  be  pointing  at  this  moment-we ourselves  are  going there,  probably  to Sicily (just  to vary the volcanoes-the Volcano is coming out in Italian  by the way this fall, as I think I mentioned) we could even dwell near one another,  apply mutual  cataplasms upon work in progress or regress. The idea is not a bad one ...
Mexico is the most Christ-awful place in the world in which to be in any form
of distress, a sort of Moloch that  feasts on suffering  souls, in fact:   moreover, if you are known  to take a drink, the bastardos  will count  every one you have, and wait  around   to  trip  you up.  Gringo-baiting  is their  national  sport:   even  bull­ fighting  takes second place. All in all a good place to stay out of:  (even  though one dreams,  quixotically  of returning  one day-a death-wish,  from  my  point  of view, if ever there  was one.)  But then, of course, again,  all might go merry as a marriage  bell. Or rather  merry if not quite as a marriage  bell. And it's unquestion­ ably  a  beautiful  and  interesting country, which  you  may  take  as  the  under­  statement of the year. The people are of course swell too:  both outside and behind bars, in both senses. Only I feel that  the custodian  does not correspond  ... But, if for  none  of  the  foregoing  reasons, a  trip  there  for  you  at this  period  might enormously  aggravate your problems, without  perhaps solving any ... However all  this  may  be, though,  your state  of mind  distresses  us both,  as I say. I came across  the  phrase  the  other  day,  in  reference  to  Kafka,  "the  lost art  of  being unhappy." It  would seem that,  so far as you and  I  are  concerned,  the art is not perhaps  so lost after  all. I suppose it is idle to say-and sounds phoney-that a certain  amount  of despair is actually necessary for people of our peculiar  tempera­  ment:  it doesn't  make it any the easier to suffer.  Margie  suspects me sometimes of suffering  sometimes  without  there  being any  proper  'objective  correlative'  for

44

LETTERS FROM LOWRY



it: as I  her:  but  one overlooks the fact  that  the mostly hellish kind of suffering of all  can  be simply  because  of that  lack-the Waste  Land  type. Or  one  may suffer because one  can't  suffer, because after  all to suffer is to be alive. Because I'm  twice as old as you I'm  not going to go it on these lines and end up by saying that  when  you've  reached  my age and  transcended  what  I've  transcended-or worse, not  transcended-then you can begin to speak;  you don't  need to be old to suffer any  more than  you do to drink. Melville, at  14, speaking through Red­ burn, woke up to find the mildew on his soul ...
I suspect you, though,-or at this moment-of undergoing  a more special and
inexplicable  kind  of blues. The  way you write, it's almost  as though  you were implying,  though  quite  without  self-pity, "But  nobody  cares what  the  hell  hap­ pens  to  me": or  rather,  "Perhaps all too many  people care  but  I don't  care  a damn   that  they  care." Well,  this letter  should  certainly  set  your  mind  at  rest immediately  on  the  point  that  at  least two  people whom  you really do  care  if they care care.  Possibly this was not at all the feeling or the point and  I am  just projecting  an emotion  on to you I have sometimes felt myself, in my case largely a  familial  one;  none  of  my  own  brothers- though  they expressed  themselves pleased  to  hear  of its success in  the  U.S.-has ever said  a  word,  intelligent  or otherwise, about  the Volcano; my mother kept Ultramarine locked up in a drawer (which  was perhaps  the  best place for it)  which perhaps  is irrelevant  too.
-But a truce  to all this. I have just now received your next letter of the  xgth, which renders much  of this letter superfluous. We're both very glad indeed  you're taking  the  line  you  are.  Your  terms  by the  way-the two  $xsoo-are exactly what  I  received  for  the  Volcano-or as Aiken  termed  it,  Under  the  Malcamo or Poppagetsthebotl. I'm  beginning  to think  your book must be good, not at all as you say it is. Don't  try proving you have any talent  though, etc.; that  way you can  overreach  yourself. But you can set your mind  at  rest:  you have:  lots of it, I can  spot  it  a  mile  off, being  myself a  talent-scout  of no  mean  ability. But it may take you some time to find your stride, there's lots of time too, all too much time, even, though  you may not think it ...
There's nothing  but  a sort  of heartbreak  here:   we love the  place  too much, and  that's  to be, alack,  in  the devil's clutches. It's  true  we  haven't  been evicted yet, but all the people up to the lighthouse have been served with eviction notices, and  even in tonight's paper  there's a heartless piece:  "Speedy  Eviction of  Squat­ ters  Sought.  District  Clerk  Fred  Saunders  said  legal  action  is being  hampered  by  the  slow  process of  catching  up  with  the  transient  beachcomber  owners  of
'dilapidated makeshift  shacks' in  the area  where  Municipal  officials plan  to de-


45

LETTERS FROM LOWRY



velop the park's  beach facilities." Etc. But before I begin to grow too lachrymose about  this I ought  to say we ought  to be thankful  for the line of demarcation of the evictions does end at the lighthouse:  we have had similar scares before, and weathered  them, and it is in every way possible, since there seems a special provi­ dence  about  the  place  that  we still could  be here ten years from  now. So  we're not leaving with  the object of the parting  being irrevocable: indeed it  had  been in our  mind  as a  counter-suggestion  to offer you the  house in our  absence, for that  would least save you rent, and it can be a wonderful  and  healthy life, but it is no doubt far too far and unfeasible, and together  with any happiness you might only inherit  the  anxiety  too;  Vancouver  is culturally  as  dead  as the dodo,  and by no stretch  of the imagination  could it supply you with  what  Europe  would at this stage;  moreover  the abomination  of desolation  is already  sitting in  the holy place and  at night  the glare of new oil refineries compose a veritable City of Dis. Nonetheless I cannot  bring myself to say we are leaving for good:  we would, to tell  the  truth,   have  been going  to Europe  anyhow  for  a  while-this life is too hard  on  Margie  as a constant  thing  and  this continual  Under-the-Volcano-my aspens  all are  felled-all-all-are  felled  feeling is so lousy it  could even  drive  one cuckoo,  I  feel, in  the end.  So we  aim  not  to  think  about  this too much,  enjoy what  good luck we have while we have it and  leave the  place beautiful  and  in good  repair  and  in some safe  hands  (if you don't  want  it, which you probably wouldn't anyhow  and  certainly  won't  if  [they]  give you your advance  and  you can  finagle,  as we  hope,  your  European  trip)   with  some  remote  but  optimistic idea of eventual return  ...
I still have no exact idea when we're coming  to New York, but we'll give you
the exact  date  in plenty of time:  we're hoping  you'll meet us as the airport.  We haven't   heard  from  the  Italian   Consulate  about  the  ship  yet. We hope  to sail in  September   for  various  reasons, one  being  that  it's  cheaper.  Thank   you for offering to put  us up in  N.Y. if you're there:  but for god's sake don't  let us put you to any trouble or anyone else out-we look forward  much to seeing you there; if not,  to rejoining  you somewhere beyond the  Pillars of Hercules.
All the very best love from us both.

MALCOLM




chranicle




PLAYWRIGHTS IN VANCOUVER
 




Peter Haworth





IT WAS RECENTLY SUGGESTED in tJri, magazine  that  the be!rt dramatic writing in Canada seems to be for radio  and  television. This  is certainly true  in Vancouver, and  the  reasons are  obvious.  We have  no professional theatre here  and  although there  have  been sporadic attempts to create one,  none  of these enterprises has  survived   more  than   a  few  years.  Despite  all  its  enthusiasm and talent  the amateur theatre can seldom offer ideal conditions for production. Then, too, in the  past our  best directors and  actors-those people who would  be working in  a  professional theatre  if  we  had  one- have  been  unwilling to  attempt  new plays,  and  working with  people  of lesser competence and  experience can  be not only discouraging but  actually harmful for the writer.
In  the  last  few  years,  however,  conditions in  amateur theatre have  improved considerably. The possibility of a new play being competently produced and  acted is much  greater than it was. This  is shown  particularly in  the productions which have  been  given  by the  Frederick Wood  Theatre and  the Vancouver Little Thea­ tre  Association. Between   them   these  two  organizations have  presented  at  least eight  new  plays  within  the space  of a year.  I shall be discussing six of  them.
Last  season  in  the  Frederick Wood  Theatre, Donald  Soule  directed a product­ tion  of  his  own  play,  The   Dinosaur's Wedding. The  title  suggests  comic  possi­ bilities  which  are  realized  delightfully both  in  the  plot  and  the  characterization. But  it  also  suggests  a  more  serious  theme   which  the  author  ignores.  The   play deals  with  people  who  cling  to ideas  and  codes  of conduct  as  outmoded as the dinosaur. Even  though these  conventions are  meaningless  and unrelated to their own  real  feelings  and  emotions, they  continue to live by them. Now,  people  who live in the  past  may  be funny, but  they are frequently pathetic as well. Mr. Soule gives us only  one  side  of the  picture. Yet  the  richness of comedy  lies in the  kind

47

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  VANCOUVER



of complexity he misses. What  could be more ridiculous than  Anouilh's  Leocadia throwing  her scarf around  her neck with an extravagant gesture and accidentally hanging  herself? Yet that  moment  remembered  from  the past, like the whole of Anouilh's  play, is a strange mixture  of the absurd  and  the touching.  By contrast The  Dinosaur's Wedding  seems to move in only one dimension.  Mr. Soule might well say that  he had  no intention  of writing  this other  kind of play. Perhaps  so, but,  to me, his characters  and  his situations all promise something  which is never realized.
What  about  the play he did write? There  is certainly  a good deal of excellent
comic invention  and  wit. The  characters,  even if they are somewhat  stereotyped, have  charm,  and  at  times the  play is extremely  funny.  But  Mr. Soule is like a composer  who over-orchestrates. The  Dinosaur's Wedding is far too long and far too wordy;  the genuine wit and  charm  are constantly  clouded  by the ponderous­ ness of the writing.
The  Dinosaur's Wedding  was a full length three-act  comedy. Most of our local
writers have preferred  to write one-act plays, possibly because they are more practicable for production  but also, I am afraid,  because it seems easier. In actual fact  there  are as few good one-act  plays as there  are good half-hour  radio plays. This  was  made  abundantly clear  a few  weeks ago  when  the  Vancouver   Little Theatre Association presented three original  plays in workship productions.
The  first play, The  Prisoner by Milton  Frieman, was little more than  an anec­ dote, and its treatment of a serious problem-the effect on a marriage of a parent living in the same house-seemed to be completely on the surface. The last play, Othello  Refinished  by Ralph  Kendall,  was a clever if mistaken  attempt  to write a new ending  for Shakespeare's  tragedy. This  kind of thing  can only be justified if it throws some new light on the original  play and  its characters; Mr.  Kendall  never  gave  us the  expected  revelation.  The  second  play,  Timmie  Timms' Day Before  Yesterday, began  brilliantly,  and  its first ten  minutes  raised  high  hopes. This  in itself is an achievement,  for the opening  of a one-act  play is always diffi­ cult.  In  a full length  play an author  can  build  up his dramatic world slowly by detail  and elaboration. The  audience has time to become familiar  with this world and  the  people who inhabit  it. In  a one-act  play he has no time for elaboration. It  must  hold  us immediately,  and  this is just  where  the opening  of Day Before Yesterday succeeded. Miss Timms  created  her world with swift, sure strokes; her characters  were real human  beings who  existed  in time  and  place, and  her dia­ logue  was easy and  natural,  and  at  times  very  amusing.  If only the  play  had continued  on  this level! Unfortunately  it did  not. For some strange  reason  Miss

PLAYWRIGHTS IN VANCOUVER



Timms  decided  to become serious. All the vitality, the  naturalness  and  the ease disappeared. Instead,  we were subjected to a good deal of ponderous soul-search­ ing and  moralizing.  Here  was a writer with a genuine flair for comedy who sud­ denly felt the need to preach.
Of all the new plays I have seen in the last year, the most interesting  were two
written  by Ray Hull: The  Quality  of Mercy and Bless This  House. The  Quality of Mercy  is a play about  Capital  Punishment,  and like most plays on this subject it is wholeheartedly biased. One  has the feeling that  Mr.  Hull  was angry when he wrote it, and  while one can sympathize with his point of view, it is apparent that  his lack of detachment has prevented him from writing a completely success­ ful play. He,  too, has an  unfortunate tendency to preach,  or rather  to harangue.  During  the  course of  the  play, either  directly or by implication,  he  has a great deal to say about  the place of the individual  in society, the dangers of  regimenta­ tion,  the inequality  of law  and  the corruption  of government. Indeed,  he has so much  to say that  it was the image of the soap-box rather  than the scaffold which loomed behind  most of his play. Each character  in tum became a mouthpiece for Mr.  Hull's  criticism  of government  or society, and  as  a  result it was extremely difficult to believe in them  as human  beings. The young idealistic hero corrupted by  politics appeared nothing  more  than  a  cipher,  the  villainous  prime  minister was only a target  set up for Mr. Hull's critical guns, the two condemned  men­ the young man  who escapes and the old man who dies-were nothing  more than symbols of the inequality  of justice. Only the old man  who presents the attitude  of the  opposition,  of those who support  Capital  Punishment,  seemed to exist in his own right;  it was as if, in  his attempt  to grasp a point of view different from his own,  Mr.  Hull  had  been  forced to understand  another  human  being. What distinguishes  The   Quality  of  Mercy,  however, is the  force  and  conviction  with which  all these  ideas  are  expressed. With  all its tub  thumping there  is a hard integrity behind this play which one can only respect.
Mr.  Hull's  other  play,  Bless This  House, is a comedy, and  on  the whole it is considerably  more successful than  The  Quality  of Mercy. The  subject  is a strike in a brothel, and  Mr. Hull  exploits the possibilities of this situation  in a way that reminds  me of Jules  Dassen's film Never on Sunday.  It  is, of course, a splendid opportunity to attack  the moral  hypocrisy of society, and  he makes the most of it, but  without  rancour.  The  play has a good humour,  a tolerance  and  moderation which  were  lacking  in  The  Quality  of  Mercy.  The  characters are  at  last  com­ pletely  believable.  Mr.  Hull  seems to like people even  when  he ridicules  them, and  this warmth  of feeling runs strongly through  the play. Mr. Hull seems to me


49

PLAYWRIGHTS IN  VANCOUVER



a  dramatist of great  promise,  and  I  hope  that soon  he  will turn  his gifts  to the writing of a full length  play. The  results could  be fascinating.
The   field  of  radio  drama is not,  unfortunately, part of  my  subject, but  as I
mentioned earlier some  of  our  most  significant writing  has  been  done  for  this medium, and  I must  at least  mention  the  work  of Mrs. Betty  Lambert. Here  is a writer  of passionate imagination, of subtle  and  varied  style. Her  two  radio  plays, The   Best Room  in  the  House  and  The  Good  of the  Sun,  are  bitter  and  dark, often  tragic   in  implication, and  the  world  she  creates  is her  own,  a  world  one can  immediately recognize.  As far  as I know  she  has  never  written for  the stage and  the  possibility  of a three-act play  from  her  pen  is an  exciting  one.
Our main  need is still a professional  theatre, a place  where  the talents  of writers like those  I have  mentioned can  develop  and  expand. Our drama up to now  has shown  promise  rather than  fulfilment.  A professional theatre could  turn  this pro­
mise into a solid achievement.









BVBRYMAN P4PBRB4CKS

Additional  titles now obtainable in the Everyman Paperback format









J. M.  DENT  &  SONS (CANADA) LIMITED

IOO SCARSDALE ROAD DON MILLS, ONTARIO
1300 ROBSON STREET VANCOUVER 5, B.C.
 CONFESSIONS OF  AN  ENGLISH OPIUM-EATER
BY  THOMAS DE  QUINCEY
This  subtle masterpiece  of English  prose is now offered in a completely re-edited edition  by a leading  De  Quincey   authority,  Prof.  John   E. Jordan  of the University of California.
288 pages. No. 1223. PRICE$  .go.

HARD  TIMES
BY  CHARLES DICKENS
No. 12g2. PRICE$  .go.

MOBY  DICK
BY  HERMAN MELVILLE.
Professor  Sherman  Paul   introduces   this  great sea story. No. 1 1 7g. PRICE $1.40.

RUSSIAN SHORT STORIES
Translation and Introduction by Rochelle S. Townsend.   Stories  from   the  classical  Pushkin and   Tolstoy,   to  such   realists  as  Kuprin  and Gorky. No. 1758. PRICE $1.00.


so



review articles




FOLK SONG AS HISTORY

Chester Duncan



EDITH  FOWKE,   ALAN  MILLS  AND   HELMUT  BLUME.  Canada's  Story  in  Song.  W.  G. Gage.  $s.oo.


WHAT  ANDREW FLETCHER said  some  centuries ago  about the  rela­ tive   historical  value   of  songs  and  laws ("If a  man  were  permitted  to  make  all the  ballads, he need  not  care who should make   the   laws   of   a   nation")  may   be mostly   romantic   nonsense,   but   it   does suggest   a   charming  way  of  taking   the
interpretation  of   the  history of   our country  out   of  the   hands   of  the   grim lawyers  who  now  run  things,  and  giving a  chance to  the  artists. It may  be  true that    without   these    songs   everything would   have   turned  out   pretty much   as it did,  but if they are  not  the "unacknow­ ledged  legislators" of  Shelley's  essay, folk artists  certainly throw  a memorable light on  what  has  happened. They   also  make it  bearable.  The only  thing   they  cannot quite  manage in  this  case  is to eliminate from  their  songs  some  of  the  less attrac­ tive qualities of the  Canadians who  have sung  or  heard them.   But  folksongs  are  a rather  frank   expression   of  the   national character. In reading this excellent  book, the   purely   musical  person   will  be  fre­ quently  disappointed  by  Canadian  reli­ ance  on  the  tunes  of others, by  banality, and  by a kind  of harsh, raw  quality that
 echoes  our  crassness  and  our  superficial­ ity-not always,  by the way, our  strength. But  the  "purely  musical  person" is  not the  best reader of  the  book,  in  the  sense that   "purity" of  this  kind  is certain not to  learn  much   about  Canada. It might  learn  a great  deal  about Germany. How­ ever,  taken   with  a  casual   curiosity   and  in  the  spirit  of  an  amateurism in  which  we  are  all   just  Canadians,  the  book  is satisfying.   It is   the   only   collection  of folksongs  I   know   in  which   the   editors  approach  their   task  with  an  air  of  per­  fect  naturalness. There are no wild claims  or  intense  persuasions. All is calm; all  is bright. The  text  is uniformly interesting. As Edith   Fowke  says in  her  introduc­ tion:   "Our  object  was   to   choose   the song,s  that    most    clearly    reflect    some aspect    of   our    national   development." And   so  the   reader must   not  rncpect all his  favorite  numbers  here,   but   he  gets quite   enough   interesting  pieces  for  one book.  He   also  g,ets  an   opportunity  for some  notes  towards a  definition of  folk­ song.   The    book   assumes,   for   instance
( 1 )  that  a  folk-melody can  be  by  Alan
Mills;  ( 2)  that  a Canadian folksong  can be imported; (3)   that  a folk-melody  can

51

REVIEW ARTICLES



be adapted with  impunity; and   ( 4)  that anything widely  enough  sung, even a national anthem, is folk.
One   thing   our  social  history  proves  is that  folksongs  cannot be expected to im­ prove  as a country grows older. Certainly the  early  ones  in  Canada,  including the Indian folksongs   here,  are  very  appeal­ ing,  and  the  early  French-Canadian folk­ songs  have   a  grace   and  gentility   which the   West   beat  out   of  everybody.  What  also seems evident is that  the songs which the   English   settlers   already   knew   and brought to bear  on  important new Cana­ dian    situations  often   have   a   blatancy and  vulgarity which   the  French  adapta­ tions    avoided   by   natural   good    taste. Nevertheless, when  pork, beans, and  hard  tack  introduce a  rasping  vitality  into  the middle  of   the   book   one   is  not    just frightened, but  caught  up,  and  all  one's social  instincts  (few  as  they  are)   are  apt to respond  to its  pioneer intensity.  Living in    our    various    air-conditioned   night­  mares,   we  are  apt   to  forget   how  com­ pellingly    brave    and    independent   the Alberta  Homesteader, say,  could   be.
Unfortunately, it's  the general  spirit of
a   frontier  power    that    is  apparent   in Western songs at  the  turn  of the century, and   the   verbal   detail   does  not  help   as much  as it should. The  lyrics are often amusingly realistic and biting, but it is obvious   that   Canada is still  waiting  for a Carl  Sandburg who could give this material poetic life. Clearly, at  the moment there  are  far  too many  dear  old ladies  and  city-slick,  meanly  arrogant young  men  in  our  company of  poets  to do  anything so  primitive  well.
There  are   two   shadows   in  the   later pages.  The old  theory that  hardship and disappointment stimulate artistic  activity receives a prairie jolt in the kind of vocal

52
 expression   that   came  out  of  the  Depres­ sion.  We  never  had  it so bad  and  yet, if it  were  left  to  our  songs,  this  traumatic experience   would  die   with   us.   And  secondly,    Mrs.   Fowke   tells   us:    "The coming of  radio,   television,  and   records  has  almost   brought  to  an  end   the  kind of   song-making and   singing  that    pro­  duced   most   of  the  songs  in  this  book."  She   goes  on:   "However, in   the  future certain Canadian events wilJ undoubtedly inspire  composers  to  write  songs  in  the folk   idiom." I  hope   so,  against  hope, though I cannot see the serious Canadian composers I  know  anything about   doing it  without a lot of self-conscious  flopping and  the  calJing  up of strange little cham­ ber  forces   of  13  players.  None  of   them  is  simple   and   direct   and   unfussed   like Bartok.  So, lots of things  have  happened and   will  happen  that   no  one  will  sing about, though many,  frustrated by civil­ ization,  wiii wish to do so.
Speaking  of  musicians, one  can  ima­ gine  no better choice  than  Helmut Blume to  do  just  the  kind  of  arrangements that  this  book's  purpose  demands. He  is  not always  interested  by  the  material. Some of  the  settings  seem  unnecessarily four­ part    square,   duiJy   competent,  or   non­  committal. Some  of  the  cumulative ones lack sweep.  But the majority have charac­ ter,   fluidity,    and   witty   ease.   Most arrangers of   folksonare broken-down organists and  educators who  have  never forgotten  their examinations in I 8th  cen­  tury harmony and  counterpoint. But here a   pianist   is  in  charge, one   who  knows what   tasteful  and   limpid   simplicity   can do  for  simple   (yet  usually  not  delicate) materials.  The   songs   are    never   over­ marked. Mr.   Blume   has  borne  in  mind  the   kind   of   person   who   wiii   read   the book  with   his  fingers,  and   so  what   the

REVIEW ARTICLES



piano   plays  is the  song.  It is a  triumph under   these  conditions  that   the  accom­ paniments,  in   most   cases,   give   us   an undisturbed and  unequivocal  view of the songs.   They    are   not   just   retiring  and  "correct".   They  are   innocent   and enthusiastic.
 In addition to  its  content, Canada's Story  in Song has a very handsome appearance. Music  and  script  are  cleanly printed. The  cover  sets  an  amusing  pre­ cedent, and   the   illustrations,  drawn  by Leo   Rampen,  are   clever,   funny,    and  beautiful.




A PORTRAIT IN SNAPSHOTS

Alan Thomas




Maclean's Canada, ed. Leslie Hannon. McClelland  & Stewart $8.50.


THE   ITCH FOR    PERMANENCE is  irresistible apparently.  A sizeable  pro­ portion  of    the    all-Canadian   books  recently  published  is  composed   of   the writings  of newspapermen and  journalists nervous   about  the  planned  obsolescence of   their   chosen   medium.  Harold  Innis  observes  that   many  American writers  of the   first  half   of   the  century  sharpened their   tools   in   journalism  because   there  was  no   protection  for   American  books against  the  dumping practices of  British publishers. Canada  can  surely  be having no  better  fate,  though the  book  trade  so far   seems  the   only  cultural  industry to escape  the  tender solicitude of a Royal Commission. Yet  there  is a  difference in the   collection under  review.   Almost  all the   writers  have   reputations  independ­ ent    of   magazine   publishing;   some   of
them   even   independent  of   writing.  So
the  point   must   be  other than   simply  to rescue  good  and   deserving writing from the  obscurity of  library files  and  micro­ film. It must   be  to  make  a  point  either
 about Canada, the accepted and  noble intent,  or   about  Maclean's  Magazine, and   presumably  in   these   times   of   ad­ versity   to   imply   something about   the relation between  the  two.
We know for sure  very little  about this relationship. Is  there,  has  there  been another Canadian magazine from  which as  good  a  collection   of  general  writing could  be taken? Memory fails to uncover one   with   as  rich  a  treasury  of  files.  Is this collection  truly representative of Maclean's  over   the   period?   Or   were these the good deeds that the magazine undertook  while  purveying a  good  deal of  the  formula material that   appears to sell a magazine? Do  the  readers of  Mac­ lean's  really  want   to  know  what  Ernest Buckler,   or  Stephen  Leacock, or  Hugh MacLennan  have   to  say?  Or   are   they being  treated to  culture in  short  bursts? If the   readers  are   avid   fans   for   this material then  we  can  relax  some  of  our fears  about   the  integrity of  the  country. If not,    then   perhaps  this    should    be

53













NOTICE


Accept  no substitutes. Self  perpet­ uating cults don't  just  happen. They   are  caused  by  such  (admit­ tedly)   plush  and  prestige  publica­ tions  as  Canadian Art. Join   the tastemakers  and  see  what   a  self­ perpetuating plush-covered  cult
looks like. Send $1.oo for a sample.
The really adventurous (or  the very  rich)   who can  afford  to take their  cults  sight  unseen  are  urged to  send  $7.50 for   a  packet  of six. We'11 deliver one  every  two months  for  a  year.  77  Maclaren
Street I Ottawa 4 I Ontario.





















54

REVIEW ARTICLES



viewed  as  worthwhile education  needing subsidy.
Anyway   the   title   is  an   apt   one;   this
is  Maclean's Canada, and   no  one  else's. The book  itself is handsomely bound, al­ most   a  text   book,  which   may   prove  a drawback,  but   does  suggest  one  impor­ tant  use  for  it; it  ought   to  be  in  every school  library, and  some of  the  first class historical-descriptive  writing  ought to  be incorporated in  school readers. The pic­ ture   layout   and   typography  are   hand­ some,  stylish, and   just  rakish  enough to be contemporary and  bold, without  being either  brassy  or   cheap.  Oddly   enough, the   contemporaneity  of  the   layout   and the  pictures,  with  the  exception  of "The Priceless  Notman  Discovery",  con­ trasts   sharply   with  the  writing  which  is at  its best when  it concerns the  past, and  becomes  strident and  anecdotal  when  it deals   with   the   present.  Bruce   Hutchi­ son's  "Southern  Ontario Baffles  Me"   is representative  both   in  title  and   in  con­ tent    of   the    apparent  discomfort   and  mystification   all    Canadians   but    the  moralists   feel  with   the   present.  And  if you   are   interested  in   any   signs  of  the future, then   this  collection  has  not   the slightest   trace   of  it.  It used  to  be  said that    all   Canadian  history   stopped  in
1867. Apparently it stops about every decade or  so,  though it  reaches   back  in this book, on occasion, a hundred million years.
Finally,  and   understandably  enough, the   style   of   this   collection  of   journal articles,   written so  as  to  sustain   a  short but  skittish  span  of  interest, is annoying if taken  in  too  large  doses. The constant sure-fire beginning, the reporting style lengthened into observation, all those techniques   designed    to   trap  a   casual reader   amid   graphic  blandishments, are
 not   suited   for   continued   reading.  But they  have  their   advantages. This  is one of the few books one feels no guilt about reading from  any point  to any  point,  and backwards if  one   prefers. The  editor   is to   be   congratulated  for   not   trying   to make  such material more  significant than it  is by spurious grouping.
In its  own  way  some  of  the  material
is first-rate. In  particular I  enjoyed   the geographical-historical writing which seems  as  apt   and   appropriate  in  style, form,   and   disposition  as  the  landscapes the  Group  of  Seven   did   in  their   time. Having first painted the wilderness  which creeps  into  all  our  lives  one  way  or  an­ other,  we  now  are  beginning to  be  able to  write  about it  and  its  impact on  our civilization.  The outstanding examples of this   are   Marjorie   Wilkins   Campbell's "The Mysterious  Kingdom of  the Sague­ nay",  Berton's  "How the Klondike Rush  Began" and   Bodsworth's  "How  the Prairies   were   Made".  One   longs  for  a decent  reputable guide   book  for  motor­ ists  in  Canada that   would   be  based  on writing of this sort.  Michelin and  Baede­ ker  have   probably taught  more  history than  all the  schools  put  together, and  we might   do  the  same.   As  one  approaches the  present,   the  events  seem  to  become more   and   more   trivial;  until  we  reach  the  epic of Marilyn Bell  which  I at  least would  rather forget. The fiction  is mixed,  with  one  outstanding story,  Ernest Buck­ ler's    "The   Quarrel",   which    offers    a degree   of   integrity  and   a   lack   of  self­ consciousness  that  one  does not  often associate  with  Canadian short  stories.
The  book  is called  a  "Portrait  of Canada", and  presumably is meant  with­ in  the  limits  of  metaphor to  be  seen  at one   glance.   At   least,   in   the  somewhat over-enthusiastic words  of the editor  it is

55

REVIEW ARTICLES



to  be looked  at  until  "the  threads  of the Canadian  fabric will  be woven  through this  book  into  a  truthful and  deeply  tex­ tured   tapestry, and  that  it might  help  to correct  some  of  the  regrettable  miscon­ ceptions  of  Canada  held  both  at  home and   abroad."  Well,  does  it?  It  all  de­ pends  on  what  view  anyone  at home  or abroad may  hold.  Certainly  it  is easy  to pick   holes   in   a   volume   that   hopes   to catch all or  even  a  representative slice of one's  own  country in  a single glance.  But suppose  we take  it on its own  terms,  as a selection    of   notable   Canadian  writers,  found   unawares  (since  not  all  of  them intended  their   work   to  be  seen   book­ naked)  writing about  their own country? What sort  of country does it  present?  At its  worst   the   portrait  shows  a  country without  humour (the  Leacock  inclusion  is certainly the  least  funny  of  his  pieces I've   ever   encountered,  and   the   other humourists  are  either   smart   or  cute), a country   without  any   political   concerns whatever,   except    sentimental   historical ones,  and  finally  a country which,  in  the words   of   Adlai   Stevenson, appears  to have  been carried "kicking  and screaming
 into  the  Twentieth Century". At its best, it  presents  a country achieving a feel for its  own  territory, a  country with  a  sur­ prisingly  delicate sensitivity  for  a  variety  of   human   relationships,  a   country  of exceptional modesty   almost  embarrassed about  acknowledging a  hero,  a  country determined  to  make  the  best  of  what  it finds,   but   not   very   confident  of  doing  much  on  its own.
None  of these  things  is of course  com­ pletely  true  or  false.  But  for  me  Canada is  a  country  of  great   if  quiet  humour, though little  of it  is suitable for  writing, and  a country of steadfast if not glorious  political  concern.  In   his    story    "The Quarrel", Buckler  says that  in imagining things  you always  imagine yourself  in the  centre  of  them,   a   condition  you   never quite   achieve   when   they   happen.  You do  not  achieve  it  either when  you  try  to make  them  explicit, and  one  is forced  to wonder  whether the  best  of  the  writing  in this book is not  reduced in significance by  being caught  in  the  act  of  trying.  As a  collection, the  book  is enjoyable casual reading; as something more  it slips away, making one  as uncomfortable as does the spurious photograph  on  the  back  cover.
I rather wish  the  editor had  not  only provided   more    information   about   the basis of his choice,  but-more important
-had dated the  portrait. Certainly the writing is about all periods  in Canada's history,  even  the  remotest ones, but  it has been  done  and  published during a sped­ fie and,  I dare  say, soon  to  be  identified and  labelled   period  in  our  history.  Since the  ascendance of  Sputnik  II  indicated that  our  ebullient and friendly neighbour to  the  South is not  master of  the  world,  we  have  felt  very  much alone.   I  doubt if   we   will   ever   write   about  ourselves again in  the  manner of  this collection.


UN GRAND  POETE


Gerard Bessette



RINA LASNIER.  Memoire sans ]ours. Les Editions  de !'Atelier. 1960.
Miroirs.  Les Editions  de !'Atelier, 1960.


MADEMOISELLE  RINA LASNIER vient  de nous donner son meilleur recueil de  poesie.
Avant  toutefois d'analyser le groupe de
poemes qui  constituent  la  valeur  de Memoire   sans  jours, disons   un  mot  des pieces  mediocres, plutot  nombreuses, qui deparent le  recueil.
11 y a  d'abord les poemes  qui  figurent sous le titre general de "Le  Christ  aux outrages". 11s rappellent  facheusement Madones  Canadiennes et  Le Chant  de la Montee, dans   lesquels   la   poetesse   nous avait  chante en un style farci  d'images conventionnelles la vie de Rachel et les vertus   de   la   Vierge.  Je   ne   blame   pas Rina Lasnier d'avoir echoue dans  ces tentatives.  Rien   n'est   plus   difficile  que de   renouveler  des   sujets   seculaires qui
ont   pu  fteurir   a une  epoque de  foi  col­
lective  intense  comme le moyen  age, mais qui, au XXe  siecle, requierent le talent cosmique d'un  Claudel  ou   la  fraicheur d'imagination d'un Peguy  pour  nous toucher poetiquement.
Rina Lasnier n'est  guere plus  heureuse
dans la section intitule "Petit Bestiaire farnilier" ou  elle  nous  sert  un  melange indigeste de descriptions realistes et de religiosite:

Culs-de-jatte assoupis  sur  leurs  moignons, [il  s'agit   de   carcasses   d'automobiles]
Amputes  des  vols et  des elans  voyageurs, Refuge  des chats,  des  lapins  et  des oignons,
 Arches  de  Noe  de  nos  jardins  potagers
(p. 134)
11 est  toujours dangereux de  vouloir edifier  un syrnbole a partir de donnees essentiellement prosa.lques. Sur  le plan  de
la  logique,  on  aboutit a un echec  analo­
gue  quand  on  essaye  de  tirer   une  con­
clusion   g.enerale   de   premisses   particu­ lieres.  L'image  ne  colle  plus  a sa  base;  elle ftotte,  desincarnee, dans  le vide:  cela devient   une   fantaisie  noumenale ou  du
bel  esprit.
11 est egalement inutile de  nous arreter
a "Silves". Quoique a un moindre degre,
les poemes  de  cette  section  souffrent des
memes  defauts que  "Petit Bestiaire  ..." et  que  "Le  Christ aux  outrages".
Au  contraire, "Malemer" et  ''Poemes
ha.Itiens", que  l'auteur a  places  au  debut de son recueil,  comptent parmi les plus beaux poemes de notre litterature. Non seulement  eclipsent-ils  le  reste   de   Me­ moire  sans  jours, mais   ils  laissent   loin derriere eux les meilleures pieces d'Escales et  de  Presence de  ['absence.
"Malemer" est, en effet, un poeme syrnbolique  dans   le  vrai  sense  du  terme, un  poeme  qui,  sans  jamais  sombrer  dans une  obscurite absolue,  dans  un  chaos  in­
differende a la  fa ton  de  la  plupart  de
nos poetereaux contemporains, suggere plusieurs  "solutions" sans en imposer aucune. La  mer  profonde, c'est le sein maternel, le  principe de  la  vie,  le  sub-

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



conscient,   Ia   poetesse    elle-meme, etc;
mais,  a Ia  surface, dans  le  deroulement
de  ses  vagues,  c'est   aussi  !'ensemble du
monde  exterieur avec ses multiples seduc­ tions, c'est  le danger de se laisser empor­ ter   par   le  verbalisme, de   disperser   en vocables   superficiels   l'unicite   inexprim­ able   de   toute   conscience,   etc.,   etc.   II
faudrait une  exegese  a Ia Noulet  ou  a Ia
Madaule pour  rendre  pleinement justice
a ce poeme  polyphonique.
Moins vastes, moins cosmiques que "Malemer", les  "Poemes hai:tiens"  com­ pensent  leur   relative  minceur   par   un rythme  plus  pulsatif, par  des images  plus immediates, et  par  un  primitivisme sau­ vage   et   touffu.  II   m'est   impossible   de juger   le   degre   d'originalite  de   ces poemes,  car   je  n'ai  pas  lu  les  ouvrages  de  Louis  Maximilien et de Jacques Rou­ main  que Rina Lasnier, avec  une admir­ able  honnetete  intellectuelle, mentionne au  bas des pages  comme  sources  d'inspir­ ation.
Pour  donner une  idee  de Ia beaute  de
"Poemes  hai:tiens",   je   citerai    quelques
!ignes de ''Ountougni" (il s'agit  d'une batterie de  tambours vaudouesque) :

Sur  la  peau  tendue du  silence,  ountogni, pulsion  solitaire  sans   paix   ni   appel,  . socle  du  son  insulaire au  centre de  la solen-
nite,
passe    rocailleuse  dans  Ia   liquidite  d'une fete.

Secret serein   de  la  duree par  le  bris  sonore du  temps,
insistance horizontale de la  corde raide  ten­
due  aux  dieux,
sommation  sans   surcharge de  signes,  d'exil
ou  de  transes;
mailles du  filet  neuf  aux  genoux ecartes du
tambourineur,
et  sous  ses  paumes, etoffe   vaste  de  l'ombre indivise;
cesures blanches avant  le  coloris   impur du chant,
os dur  du  son  sans  oscillations de  plumages;
 voix egale des morts sans echo sepulcral, sonorite du   sang   lie  au  sang, levee  proces­
sionelle de  Ia negritude. ( p. 2 3 ) .

Que  faut-il penser  du metier, de Ia technique de  Rina Lasnier?-Tout comme  pour  Ia valeur  et Ia qualite de ses poemes,  quelques distinctions s'imposent. Dans  les rares  pieces  comme  "Chansons" ou  elle  emploi   Ia  versification classique (sauf   pour    Ia   rime) ,   elle   reussit   fort bien:

Leve  du  coffre de  velours  Leve ta  viole  sous  ta  main Murmure d'amante ou  d'amour
A coeur battant des  le matin (p.  48)

Au  contraire, quand ses "vers" ne font que  se  rapprocher de  la  prosodic  tradi­ tionnelle  sans   tenir   compte  du   nombre de  pieds  ni de  Ia  cesure,   Rina  Lasnier
produit  des   textes   batards,  illisibles   a
haute voix:

Quand nous  cherchons une  foi vulneree, Quand  nous   cherchons,  plus   humbre  que
!'esperance,
Le  tison  d'une fois  trois  fois humiliee, C'est Pierre ... et sa face  fait  penitence.

C'est lui,  coq  rouge  et  credo de  la lumiere, Et  le soleil  bondit pour  une  autre evidence, C'est lui  le  pas  infaillible de  Ia croissance
Et  la  tete  du  ble honore la poussiere. (p. 38)

Heureusement, ce qu'elle pratique Ia plupart du  temps,  c'est  levers libre, sorte de  verset  claudelien ou  les "rimes" et  les assonances  irregulieres  sont   etayees   par de nombreuses alliterations et par  une gamme subtile de  sons  vocaliques. Voici un extrait de "Malemer";

Malemer,  aveugle-nee du   mal   de  la  lu­ miere-comment  sais-tu ta   nuit   sinon   par  l'oeil circulaire et sans  repos de  paupiere?

pierrerie  myriadaire  de  l'reil   jamais  clos
-malemer, tu  es  une   tapisserie de  regards te  crucifiant sur  ton  mal;

REVIEW ARTICLES



comment  saurais-tu  ta   lumiere  noire   et sans  intimite-sinon par   le  poeme  hermeti­ que  de  tes  tribus poissonneuses?

0 rime  puerile des etages du  son-voici !'as­
sonance sinueuse et  Ia parite vivante,

voici  l'opacite ocellee par  !'rei! et  l'ecaille
-voici  Ia   nuit  vei!Jee   par    l'insomnie et l'etincelle ... (pp. 16-17).

On  peut  fort  bien  se passer  de  regularite et  de  rime  classique quand  on  les  rem­ place  par  un si souple  et si subtil eventail d'assonances et  d'alliterations.
Je  devais  aussi  parler dans  cet  article de  Miroirs,  ce  recueil   de  "proses" paru en  meme  temps  que  Memoire  sans jours.
Mais .a quoi  bon?  A quoi  bon ereinter un
ecrivain de  talent, peut-etre de genie, comme  Mile  Lasnier parce  qu'elle  a com­ mis un  livre  mediocre, presque nul?
II  est  vrai  que  les trois  premieres "proses", qui  notent les impressions d'en­ fance d'une fillette  du  nom  de  Messalee, secretent  une   poesie   mineure,   un   peu mievre,  susceptible de charmer les adoles­  centes  et  les  romantiques  attardes. Mais le reste est nul.
Voulez-vous une elucubration sur la neige?  La  voici :
 La  neige  ne  raisonne pas  car  elle est  pure voyance; elle  regarde sans  juger  et  sans connaitre .  . . La   neige   a  des   yeux   pour voir   car   elle   n'a  pas   peche  contre  Ia   lu­ miere, mais  elle  ne  dit   rien  de  ce  qu'elle a vu   en   haut  ni   de   ce  qu'elle  decouvre  en bas ...

Pveferez-vous  un  etrange extrait de  la vie de la Vierge?

Approchez-vous, moinillons et  enfants de choeur  qui   ebranlez  Ia  Trinite a  coups   de
clochettes; et  vous,  rna  soeur   sacristine qui pleurez   vos  burettes cassees,  approchez.

II   serait   cruel   d'en   citer   davantage. Ces enfantillages sont d'autant plus penibles  qu'ils  veulent exprimer des sujets augustes,  sacves  pour  la  plupart des  lec­ teurs.  Mais  ce n'est malheureusement  pas avec  de  bonnes  intentions que   l'on  fait  necessairement   de   la  bonne   litterature. Autrement Neree Beauchemin, Pamphyle Lemay  et  William Chapman seraient les princes  de  notre  poesie.
Arretons-nous ici,  et  concluons  en distant  que,   grace   aux   vingt   premieres pages  de  M emoire  sans jours, Rina  Las­ nier   se  revele   peut-etre  le  plus   grand poete  du  Canada  franc;ais contemporain.




















59







POLAR DREAM WORLD

FARLEY MOWAT.  Ordeal  by  Ice.  McClelland  &
Stewart. $6.oo.

IT IS NO sURPRISE  to find Farley Mowat dreaming of  the  place  where  the  North and  the  sea  merge  in  an  unholy  mess of floating ice constituting, as he says with obvious  relish,  "one  of  the  most  implac­ ably   hostile   environments  to   be   found  anywhere on  earth". Having  first  led  us in  person   through the  Barrens and  out onto   the  Atlantic, he  then  sent  us  with Hearne  down   to  the  Arctic  shore;   and now,  continuing  his   literary   detour, he thrusts  us  up  among  the  islands  of  the High   Arctic   by  means  of  an  anthology of excerpts from  the  journals  of a dozen polar  voyagers-to  give  us  a  picture of the  grandeur of  men's  striving  over  the centuries for a passage through the archi­ pelago.   He   promises   a  companion  an­  thology   later   on,   revealing  the   human side  of  another  phase  of  Arctic   history, the  quest  of the  North Pole. And  in case anyone  wonders  whether  we  shall  ever get  the  author of  The  People of the Deer and   The   Grey  Seas  Under   away  from this  vicarious  adventuring  and  back among the  great  elements where  he  be­ longs,  we  have  a  further  announcement from   Mowat: he has bought himself a Newfoundland  schooner    and   plans   in due   course   to  retrace the  routes  of  the men   who   describe   their   Arctic  experi­ ences  in  Ordeal  by Ice.

6o
 A close study of  polar wntmgs IS standard procedure for intending Arctic voyagers,  and  Mowat also shares  with earlier explorers the  problem  of  keeping his sponsors  happy  while  he  prepares. In choosing what   to  offer  us from  the  vast polar   library   he  decided to  use only  the most  revealing human documents and  to ignore   the  author's fame  or  success  as  a criterion  for  selection. The   human  side of  the  story  was  what   he  was  after, he says. To  convey  it,  he settled  on  passages dealing with  the exploits of Frobisher, Hudson, Munck, James, Ross, Osborn, M'Clintock,  and   Hall; and   for   variety he  brought in  a  few  lesser items,  notably a welcome  excerpt from  William  Scores­ by, the  senior.
The explorers speak eloquently through Mowat's artfully edited  and  abridged versions of  their journals and, sure enough, the  effect  builds  up steadily  until we do indeed feel, as Mowat hoped  we would,   that   we  have   gained   some  idea of  what  it  must   have  meant to  go  look­ ing  for  the  Northwest  Passage.  The im­ pact   does  not   depend  on  our  historical knowledge;  the   excerpts  are   arranged chronologically  but,   quite   naturally  in view of the  editor's purpose and  method, they   are   in   no  sense  historically repre­ sentative.
Strange that Mowat felt  he  needed  to impose  upon  his impressive montage, de­ picting   men   in   assorted   awkward  posi­ tions  grappling with  the  polar  elements, a  frame of  historical  commentary offer­ ing  far  more  information than   we  need to get  the message  Mowat drew  from  his reading of  polar  literature, and  which  it is  his  main  purpose to  relay  to  us. The frame   is  constructed  of  prologue, con­ necting comments, and  epilogue which amount to a complete account of explor-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ation   in  the  region   and   period   covered by  the  narrative  excerpts. And  it  is not only  unnecessarily elaborate but  distinct­ ly   ill-fitting,  for   Mowat   tends   to   re­ arrange the  facts  to  justify  his selections  and   omissions   and   it   is  quite  often   a somewhat garbled  version  of  the  history that   we get.
Ensnared  by  this  format, Mowat had somehow to get  past  Baffin, no doubt  be­ cause   Baffin's   narrative  is  rather   dull stuff; in  doing   so  he  disposes  of   Baffin disparagingly whereas  more  careful study would  have  compelled him  to pay tribute to  a  figure  of  prime  appeal and  import­ ance.   The great   Parry   gets  very  unfair treatment in  deference to  Ross,  a  minor  name  by comparison but  a man  who had an  experience and  who wrote  a narrative which  Mowat thought useful for his book.
 Surely  any  attempt at  historical  justi­ fication   for  the  selections   and  omissions in an  anthology of this  type  is  risky. The  confusion    is  compounded    by   Mowat's weird  view  of  the  polar   ice,  not  as. the obstacle  to commerce and  science  which it  was,  but   as  a  dragon  to  be  engaged  for  honour's sake. So the editor's concern  with historical detail   becomes  even  harder to fathom.
In  Mowat's fanciful game  we have  the floating  pack-ice  on one  side,  and  on  the other  side the  men  in ships  whose  role is to  shatter  the   ice  wherever  it  may   be found, and  thereby  "to  conquer the  resi­ dent  defender" of the  north  pole  region. The  game  began  in  ancient  times  when men  first tried  to drive  ships into  the  ice and,  Mowat   says:   "The  epilogue to  the long  story  of  men  against  the  ice  is still











•


BY  ERNEST S. DODGE













OXFORD
 
A history of the  search for  the Northwest Passage, which  includes accounts of the  voyages  of Foxe, Cabot, Frobisher, Hudson, Cook, Parry, Franklin and  others.
The author has  drawn upon  all available sources, including Stefansson's private  research material.
Quotations from   contemporary logs and  explorers' reports heighten this  story  of endurance, courage and  suffering.

$6.so



6I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



unfinished. The  challenge still  remains. Nor  will  this  epic  story  be concluded by the  exploits  of submarines or aircraft, travelling  far   below  or  high   above   the field  of  battle.   It will  be  completed,  in the   end,   by  those   who  first  began   the struggle-by men in ships."
Further,  we  are   told  that   Nansen   in the  "Fram" "cheated the polar  pack"  by drifting straight across it "without engag­ ing  in  open   battle"; and   the  voyage  of the  "Nautilus" beneath the  pack  was "a gratifying  technical  achievement" but had  "little in  common  with  the  achieve­ ments  of  those many  men who had  for so long   striven    with   the   ice   on   its   own chosen battlefield"-the   surface   of   the ocean. A certain amount of this sort of romantic nonsense  can  be great  fun  in its place,  in  a  book  of  this  kind,  if  intelli­ gently   relieved   at   the   proper   moment. But  Mowat fails  to  do  this in  Ordeal  by Ice.   He    leaves   us   in   his   Wagnerian dream-world, to struggle home as best we can.   His   unsparing  fantasy   curtails  the value   of  his  book  to  Canadian  readers, for  it  obscures   the  historic  victory  over the   polar   ice   which   is  actually  being achieved in  our  generation by men  who have  at  last  figured  out  how  to  'defeat' the  Arctic-by befriending it.
T. C. FAIRLEY



OUTSIDE  AFRICA

MARGARET LAURENCE.   This  Side   jordan. Mc­
Clelland    &   Stewart.  cloth,   $4.00;  paper,
$2.50-

MARGARET LAURENCE is a Canadian from Manitoba who  now  lives  in British Columbia. With  her husband, a civil engineer, she  has  visited  many   parts   of
 Africa.  And  not  just  the  locale,  but  the subject  of all her  fiction-or at  all events as much  of it  as  I've  seen-is  Africa.
Set in Accra,  capital of the Gold  Coast during  the   period    of   its   transition  to "Free-dom" and  the state  of Ghana, This Side Jordan is an accomplished piece of writing. Terse, vivid and  serious, it is constructed with scrupulous care. Mrs. Laurence  has   looked   closely  at   Ghana with a sharp and  discerning eye. Her concern is with  the  colour  bar; her  con­ clusions  are   unexceptionable.  Why  then is the  whole  question, as put  by her, ever so slightly  boring?
I  think   it  may  be  because   her  novel,
as  fiction,  is disappointing. Not  that  she hasn't  heeded Henry  James'  injunction to dramatize. She dramatizes strenuously. The  trouble is more  radical.  The  whole novel  seems  to  be  an  effort   of  the  will rather  than   of  imagination. Parts   of  it sound    like   film   documentary:   "Africa has  danced pain  and   love  since  the  first man  was  born  from  its  red  soil.  But  the ancient drums could   no  longer  summon the  people   who  danced here.  The  high­ life  was  their  music.  For  they,  too,  were modern. They,  too, were  new." "Africa", "the    ancient  drums",  "the   people"­ these  are the abstractions of social science.
So too,  I think,  are  most  of Mrs. Laurence's   characters.  Johnny   Kestoe, for  instance, with  his carefully significant English  background, his  love-hate for Africans, never  quite comes  to  life.  Na­ thaniel,  the   central  figure,   is  a  failed­ matric black  school-teacher torn  between tribalism  and   Christianity-the  familiar man   of   two   worlds.   The   warring  ele­ ments  in his soul are  neatly distinguished, and  recorded as separate streams of con­ sciousness.  Much  research has  gone  into these  interior  monologues and   the  only

BOOKS IN REVIEW



thing    wrong    is   that    we   can't   believe them.   Educated  Africans are   mixed   up all  right-though  hardly more   than   the rest of us-but surely  not  so tidily  mixed up.
Nathaniel comes  not from life but from
books. As Joyce Cary's Mister  Johnson we believed  in him: as Elspeth Huxley's Ben­ jamin   (in  The Walled City)  we  thought him  a puppet. Mrs.  Huxley is an  African  expert   fed   on   White   Papers   and  bred on  white  supremacy. She  needs  a  black puppet  to  stick   pins  in.  Mrs.   Laurence has   no  such   excuse.  Joyce   Cary,   more generous,  was  able  to  imagine  his  way into  Africans by a  simple  trick  of seeing them   as  the   Donegal  peasants  he  had known   intimately  as  a   child,   which   is why   Mister   Johnson  is  real.   Which   is what  Mrs.  Laurence's Nathaniel isn't.  In his  more  convincing moments  he  seems, like  all  her  Africans,   if  anything Cana­ dian-just about   as  far  from   African   as we can  get.  Here he  is with  his wife.

"I am   not   the   right wife  for  you," Aya cried.  "Why  did   you   not   marry  someone who  could read?"
He  took  her  hands in  his  and held  them tightly,  so  she   would  not   think  the   same question  had   ever   occurred  to  him.
"You are  beautiful" he  said. She  clung to him.

Passages  of this kind  have  a queer  ring­ they  don't sound   from   the  imagination. Study   and  research have  told  the  writer  that    marriages   between   illiterate  wife and   educated  husband   are   a   Problem.  She  transcribes this general conclusion as action. It comes  from  Chatelaine:  these people   don't  need  Free-dom; they  need a  marriage  counsellor.
The same  sort  of thing  happens at  the climax  of  the  story.  It arrives  with  stark obstetrical detail  in a maternity hospital, with    the    simultaneous  births    of   Na-
 thaniel's daughter  and   Johnny  Kestoe's son.  The   two  married couples,   black  in one   ward,   white   in   another,  but   both under   the   same   roof,  achieve  their   to­ gethernesses   separately.  In   their  female  functions  all women  are  equal. "All same like  Queen  Victoria"  as  Bombay  pimps assure one. The new generation arrives in all  the  messy  pangs  of  labour, the   un­ controllable mystery on the colonial  floor. For  hospital  read  Ghana, for  birthpangs read  birthpangs:   the  figure  is  trite,  the allegory  too  willed.
Despite her skill, Mrs. Laurence's book seems condescending; it appears to ha,ve been  done  from   the  outside. It  reminds me of something James  Eayrs  said  to the liberals   at   Kingston  late   in   1g6o, that Canada  isn't   particularly  well  qualified for   the   role   of  African  busybody.   We solved  our   own   Aboriginal  problem   all right-a Final  Solution. But  it  takes  real concern-even the  deadly  concern of Mister   Johnson's executioner-to   enter into  the  soul  of Africa.
KILDARE DOBBS


CONSERVATIVE ENIGMA

ROGER GRAHAM:   Arthur   Meighen:  Volume I, The   Door  of  Opportunity. Clarke,  Irwin.
$].50.

THE  CONTRAST  between   the  private and the   public   images   of   Arthur   Meighen presents  a fascinating puzzle.  Those  who knew him have  never  been able  to under­ stand   why  so  many   Canadians  thought him   "a   cold   stick".   The   simplicity   of private tastes,  the  sharpness  of  intellect, and  the  liveliness  in  conversation which endeared  him  to  his  friends are  clear  in

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



this  account  of  the   first  forty-six  years of  Meighen's life.  So  are  the  powers  of logical analysis and the eloquence which made him  one  of our  most brilliant  pub­ lic  speakers.   The  book  also  shows  that  Meighen's verbal   agility  was  not  always an  asset.  Too  often  he  failed  to  be con­ tent   with   the   defeat   of  his  opponents; some   inner   necessity  compelled   him   to pursue them  with ridicule  and scorn until  they  were  demolished. This  quality, and the   envy   and   mistrust  which   his  intel­ lectual  capacities often  aroused, helps  to explain   why  even   some  of  his  cabinet colleagues felt  lukewarm and  were reluc­ tant  to accept him  as leader  of  the  Con­  servative party.
Although he died  only last year, Meig­
hen  is for  most  Canadians today  a shadowy  figure, significant  chiefly because his  weaknesses   were  part   of  Mackenzie King's success. Inevitably, the hostility between   King   and   Meighen   is  a  recur­ ring  theme   in  this  volume,  although on the   evidence  presented  here  it  is  hard to see  why  it  was as  bitter  in  these early years as the  author claims. Dr.  Graham's evidence  makes   it   easy  to  believe   that  Meighen was King's superior  in his grasp of  the  intricacies of  the  business  world
 and   of   legal   and   political  theory,   and there   are   several   revealing  comparisons of  Meighen's consistently disciplined and elegant use of the English language with King's  verbose   and   woolly  orations.  By any  standard, Meighen was emotionally healthier  than   King.   In   Meighen there was none of the acute  personal insecurity, which,  combined with  the  Calvinist  heri­ tage  both  men  shared, produced in  King  excessive  moral conflict  and  the  need  to be  justified  in  decisions  great  and small before   God   and   his  mother.   "The  in­ credible Canadian"  is  more  interesting, but    Meighen  is   the   more   attractive  person.
The  author's  impressive literary skills
and    the   value   of   Mr.    Meighen's   co­ operation in  the  preparation of the  book are  most  in  evidence in  the  early  chap­ ters.  The atmosphere of high  seriousness in   the   western   Ontario  farm  family   of Ulster   Presbyterian origins  where   Meig­  hen  grew  up  is recreated  well,  as is  the picture  of  the  hard-working, aloof   uni­  versity  student,  and  the  ambitious young lawyer  in  Portage la  Prairie. Desire  for recognition and  a general interest in pub­ lic affairs  led him  into  politics; apparent­ ly   his   adherence  to   the   Conservative party  was due  mainly  to family  tradition.
Dr.    Graham  explodes  the    popular
legend  that  Meighen was a docile servant of big business. In the best discussion yet published of the political ramifications of railway   problems during  World  War   I he  shows  that   as  the  chief  architect  of the  Canadian  National Railways system Meighen  espoused   public   ownership for reasons of practical necessity and not on principle; this did not prevent the most violent  opponents of nationalization from seeing  him  as "the embodiment of  social­ ism".   Although  Dr.  Graham   rescues

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Meighen  from   charges  of  "High  Tory­ ism"   his  attempt  to   present   him   as  a liberal Conservative is unconvincing. It is difficult  to make  a case for  the  essentially liberal   spirit   of   one  of  the  earliest   and most   vigorous   supporters  of  the  highly illiberal  Wartime  Elections Act  of  I9I7· Meighen  described  this  measure to  sus­ pend   the   franchise  of   males   of   enemy alien  birth  or  language  naturalized  after
1902  and   to  give  it  to  female   relatives of  men  overseas   as  "a splendid stroke". His  role  in  the  passing  of the  War  Mea­ sures  Act  of  191 4  and   the  hurried and drastic   amendments   to    the    Criminal Code  during the  Winnipeg strike  of 1919 adds  to one's  doubt about  his liberalism.  Surely  a political  leader  genuinely rooted in   the   British   parliamentary   tradition should  at  least  have  suffered  some agony in  coming   to  decisions   involving funda­ mental  liberties.
At some  points  the  story  seems to have been   streamlined  too   much   in   an   en­ deavour  to  appeal to  that   general  audi­ ence   among   whom   Dr.   Graham  wishes to   see  Meighen  honoured.   Thus,   it  is tantalizing to  read   that   one  faction  of the  Conservative party opposed conscrip­  tion   in   1917  without   being   told  which members  held  that  view; and  a more  de­ tailed  account of  precisely  when  and  why Meighen   himself   became   convinced  of the  necessity for  conscription would  have been  welcome.  The  author admits that  many   Conservatives  looked   on   Union Government as  an  escape  from  sole  re­ sponsibility   for   the  enforcement of  con­ scription, but  he  perhaps  underestimates the  political  motives  behind the  wartime coalition.  These  are   minor   complaints. This  book  lives  up  to  the  currently high standard of  political  biography  in  Can­ ada,   and   readers   will  look   forward  to
 Volume II,  and   especially   to  the  great encounter between  Meighen and  King  in the  constitutional crisis of 1926.
MARGARET PRANG


ON THE SIDE
OF LIFE

PATRICIA   BLONDAL.   A   Candle   to   Light   the
Sun.  McClelland &  Stewart. $s.oo.

PATRICIA BLONDAL'S  NOVEL, published a year  after   her  death, is hardly   the  kind of  book  to  appeal to  the  orthodox  pro­ fessional  critics  whose  touchstone  is  cos­ mopolitanism. Nor  will  it  appeal  much  to   the   other   group-the   regional   ones who  like  to  put  their  little  white  hands over   their   bleeding  Ontario hearts   and  cry "Beast!" (short for Original Sin) .
As a critic  who belongs neither to the academic nor  the  bleeding   hearts  school of  thought I  cannot give  this  book  my whole-hearted approval either. Yet  I feel it  is  a  very  important novel   because  it points  a direction and  shows  which  way our  literary  icebergs  are  drifting. It  indi­ cates  what  in our  Canadian life  has been submerged  and   is  at   last   ready   to   be revealed.
E.   K.   Brown   once  remarked  that "... it is almost  impossible  to persuade Canadians that  an  imaginative  represen­ tation of  the  group   in  which   they  live could   clarify    for   the   reader   his   own nature  and   those   of  his  associates."  A Candle  to  Light  the  Sun  is such  an  ima­  ginative record  of  life  in  a  small  Mani­ toba   town,   Mouse   Bluffs    (Souris).  In intention  and   conception   it   is   a   big sweeping  book.  It tries  to  say  that  ordi­ nary  small  town  Canadians are  not  ordi­  nary   at   all,   but   immensely individual,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



unbelievably subtle,  curiously  warped, madly proud, utterly perplexed. The shifting  external   events    around   these small  town  lives only  serve  to  reveal  the inner   tragedies,  heroisms   and   fantasies. They  are played out  through illness and death, love and  hate,  seduction  and friendship.
This   approach  avoids   the   fallacy   of
original sin  (which   is very  stylish), and skirts-not  always   successfully-the   ro­ mantic assumption of original  good. The truth is  that   man  is in  no  way  original. Nothing human is ever really lost; it only changes.  This,   it  seems  to  me,  is  what  Mrs.  Blondal  is writing about.
But  her  writing  still falls  very short  of her    life   view,   to   say   nothing  of   her literary goal.  Her  story  reads  everywhere like  the  sprawling incoherent first  draft of a very promising novel. It is full of untidiness and  over-writing such as this description of  the  prairie: "It wants  no plow,  no  pansies  or  nasturtiums or  any­ thing  else we give.  It wants  the  wander­ ing  feet  and  the  quick  gun  and  the  lone blanket   against   the  wind  of   night.   The  bright   green   of  home  stirred  in  a  quiet  corner of  her  brain.   Never  enough."
The plot,  which  I won't  summarize, is intricate  to   the   point   of  confusion.    It cries  out  to  be  taken   hold  of,  to  be  re­ structured, to  be  held  to  limits.  But  the author  wants   desperately  to  tell  us  all, all,  all.  She  doesn't want  us to  miss  one detail.   She   is  passionate, dreamy,  com­ pletely  devoted   to  and  unseparated  from her  material.  No  writer  can  afford   this much self-indulgence.
Even  in art  love is not enough. We feel the  tremendous push  and  force  of life in this  story,  but  after  a  while  we get  tired of listening to so much.  But  there  is still a  more  serious  defect  in  this  novel,  and

66
 that   is  Mrs.   Blondal's failure  to  make what   is  for   every   writer   a  very  funda­ mental choice.  Will  her  concern  be  pri­ marily    with   interpreting   the   life   she describes,   or   will   it   be   primarily  with entertaining the  reader-with seeing  him through  a   long   winter   evening  on   the Canadian    frontier?   The    choice    does make    a   difference.  Contrary  to   what  practical   people    will   tell   you,   Shake­ speare  did not  become  great   because  he wrote  for  money.
Then there   is  the  problem   of  charac­
ter.  Again,  the characters are  hurriedly sketched, but seldom  are these sketches worked   up  into   real  portraits. They   are merely  elaborated and  move  rather  me­ chanically within a  psychological  frame­ work   of  cause   and   effect.   Life  for   the Phoebes  of  this  world  is not  as simple  as Mrs.  Blondal  would   have   us  believe.  A little   innocent  perversion    (such  as  the town   clerk's   fetishism)   and  prostitution on  the  side  are   not  so  casual,   even  on the  prairies.
But  these are  all weaknesses of a begin­
ning writer. Mrs. Blondal  has written a generous and  affirmative book on the side of life. Such  a spirit  is rare  in our  world. The greatest novelists  have  seemed  only to touch  the surface of the life they wrote about, yet  underneath one felt  the move­ ment  of all  the  unseen  processes drawing sustenance  from  some   primary   self­ renewing source.  I don't know  if Patricia Blondal   actually had   this  kind   of  con­ nection  with  her  medium, or whether she could   ever   have  achieved  it,  but   I am certain that   she  wrote  out  of  an  aware­ ness that   it  existed.
MIRIAM WADDINGTON

BOOKS IN REVIEW



LA LIBERTE
DE CONSCIENCE


GERARD BESSETTE.   Le   /ibraire. Rene julliard, Paris.

LoRSQU'UNE   jeune liaerature  est   en pleine   ,evolution,   toute   ceuvre  qui  con­ stitue   une  innovation  par   rapport  a  un passe  recent  revet  une  importance  parti­ culiere.   Le   libraire, roman  de   Gerard Bessette,  me para!t se detacher de Ia pro­ duction  courante  et   justifie,  de  ce  fait, qu'on s'interroge sur  sa  signification.
De quoi s'agit-il dans Le libraire? Simplement  du   probleme  de   Ia  liberte de conscience. Pour  traiter cette  question en   romancier,  Gerard   Bessette   a   fait preuve   d'originalite  en   trouvant  le  ton juste.   Pour   avoir   meconnu  les  lois  du genre,  Jean-Charles Harvey, a Ia genera­ tion  precedente, n'avait  jamais ecrit  que des  romans mediocres. En  effet, en  voul­ ant  denoncer les abus  de pouvoir dont  le Canadien-franc;ais   peut   etre    victime, Harvey avait   donne  dans  le  requisitoire, qui  convient mal  au roman. Conscient de Ia  difficulte,  Gerard   Bessette   a   prefere une  objectivite teintee   d'ironie et  parfois un humour noir  assez inattendu,-je n'en vois  pas  d'autre  exemple dans  le  roman canadien-franc;ais,-qui  rendent   attach­ ante  Ia lecture du  Libraire.
Le  narrateur, qui  sera  le heros  du roman, trouve un  emploi chez  Leon, libraire a Saint-Joachin. Cette petite  ville a l'orthographe fantaisiste, peut  etre con­ sideree  comme le prototype de  Ia ville de province canadienne-franc;aise.  Simple  pretexte que  cette   affabulation,  qui  doit
nous conduire a l'essentiel: Ia decouverte
d'une censure occulte, irrespectueuse des
libraires autant  que  des  lecteurs.   Au  fur
 et  a  mesure  que  nous  assistons  a  Ia mise en marche de  Ia puissance  repressive  que represente !'intervention directe de  M.  le Cure, une seconde aventure-amoureuse celle-la-se   deroulera  jusqu'a  son   de­ nouement  peu  banal. Ce  second  theme  s'assortit parfaitement  au  premier,  puis­ que  Herve  (le narrateur)  brave  une autre censure,   celle   que   le   milieu   canadien­ franc;ais  oppose  aux  amours dites  illegi­ times.  Ce  ne  sera  ni  par  passion,  ni  par interet  que  cet  amoureux  hors  serie  en viendra   a   partager  son   lit   avec   Rose, dont   il  est  le  locataire. C'est   plutot par indifference.  La  profession  de foi  amour­ euse  de  Herv,e  merite d'etre  citee:

Cornme   je  l'ai indique, les  petits ebats amoureux qui  ont  suivi  la  soiree   de  cinema ne  m'avaient pas  deplu. Evidemment, je  ne suis  plus  tres   jeune. Je n'ai plus  I'allant d'autrefois-qui   n'a   d'ailleurs   jamais  ete bien spectaculaire. Peu  importe. J'etais en somme   satisfait.  Je  tenais  Ia   preuve  que j'etais encore  (si  !'on  peut dire)  viril.   Ce n'est   pas,   je  le  sais  bien,   un   talent  excep­ tionnel, mais  c'est  quelque chose.  Toutefois,
je  ne  tenais   pas   a repeter !'experience. Du
mains, pas  de  longtemps. Aussi fus-je
desagreablement  surpris  Ie   dimanche   sui­ vant-tot le  rna tin:  j'etais encore au  lit­ de  voir  entrer Rose  dans   rna  chambre. Elle  etait,  comme  on   dit,   en   simple appareil:
un    kimono    vert    a  ramages,  transparent,
qu'elle quitta  aussitot pour   se  glisser   entre
les  draps,  pres  de  moi.   En   un  sens,  c'etait gentil. Je  ne  Ie  nie  pas.  Je ne  suis  pas  un sauvage ...
Ensuite,  j'ai    dO.   m'executer.  Au   debut,
j'ai    cru   que   je   ne   pourrais  pas.   La   mi­ graine  me   vrillait  les  tempes  et   je  n'avais pas  encore  avale mon  sel  Safe-All. De plus,  j'ai  decouvert que   Rose  avait  un  bourrelet de   graisse,    une    espece    de   pneu   dans  la region  de  l'epigastre. En   tout  cas,  tel  que  je  suis,   je  ne  devrais  pas  chicaner sur   un bourrelet  de   graisse. Mais  c'etait plus  fort  que  moi.  11 me  fascinait.  Pour faire   diver­
sion,   je  me  suis  mis  a parler des  films  que
nous   avions   vus   ensemble. Malgre  sa   sur­
prise,  Rose  a  repondu d'un ton  assez  natu­ re!.   Elle   ne   manq).le   pas   de   tact.  Ensuite, de  fil  en  aiguille, j'ai  oublie le  bourrelet et

BOOKS IN REVIEW



j'ai    pu   m'executer.  Ce   fut   une   heureuse surprise. Je ne suis  pas  trop  rouille.

Le sang-froid avec lequel Herve  aborde Ia sensualite caracterise aussi sa conduite devant  I'enquete  de   M.  Ie  Cure.   Dans l'un  comme  dans  !'autre cas, nous  avons
affaire, semble  nous  dire  Bessette, a deux
activites  des  plus   banales:  Ia  vente   de
livres et l'accouplement. Ces deux  aspects de   Ia  vie  ressortissent   a   Ia  vie  privee. Toute  immixtion est  a  proscrire. Le  ro­ mancier,  en   choisissant   comme   livre delictueux L'essai  sur les moeurs  de Vol­ taire-livre  bien  inoffensif-souligne in­ directement   tout   ce   que   Ia  censure   a d'envahissant  et d'injustifie.
Herve  finira   par   fuir   Saint-Joachin,
sans revoir  Rose-a quoi bon?-et sans manquer de rouler  le libraire, Leon. A Montreal,  ou   il  trouvera  refuge,   il  lui sera loisible de se distraire ''meme le dimanche".
Cet  excellent petit  roman, dont  Ies quelques !ignes qui  precedent ne donnent qu'une idee  bien  approximative, ne  res­ semble   en   rien   a   La   bagarre   ( 1958). Bessette a done echappe a un des dangers les  plus   redoutables  qui  attendent  tout romancier:  ecrire  un  second  roman   qui ne   soit   qu'une   version edulcoree   du premier.  Parmi  ses  autres   titres,  rappe­ lons  que  Gerard  Bessette  s'est  fait  Ie re­ marquable  critique  que  !'on   sait   de  la poesie  canadienne-fran aise
essaye  aussi  a la  poesie.  Pour   toutes  ces raisons,   j'incline    a   penser   que   I'essai, genre   peu  pratique  parmi   les  meilleurs
auteurs canadiens, pourrait bien  etre  une destination  legitime   pour   un  ecrivain  a
qui  presque   tout,  jusqu'ici,   a  reussi. Certaines faiblesses  du  Libraire   ne  font que  renforcer cette  supposition. En  voul­ ant   arriver  a   un  compromis  entre  une langue tres  ecrite  et  Ia langue  populaire,

68
 le  romancier n'a   pas  toujours  obtenu  le style qui  eut convenu au  journal de Herve Jodoin. Le lecteur se defend  difficilement contre !'impression que  quelques  I'epeti­ tions  malencontreuses (apres  avoir bu  le contenu  d'une  "ftasque",  Herve se  sent ftasque  ( !) ; Rose  avoue  a son amant que la  vie n'est  pas  rose)   et  nombre de locu­ tions curieuses  ou simplement incorrectes, s'expliquent   plus   par   !'inadvertence  de Bessette que  par celle de Herve. Car  pour
!'auteur de  la  prose  raffinee  des  Images en  poesie canadienne-fran aise,
s'agir   que   d'un  certain inconfort,  occa­
sionne   par   une  formule  Iitteraire ne  re­ pondant  qu'imparfaitement  a  ses   dons. C'est   pourquoi  j'en  conclus,  que  si  Bes­ sette,  tout  rempli  d'idees et  de virtualites comme   il  est,  se  remettait a  ecrire  selon ce   que   je  devine   etre   son   gout   a  lui, c'est-a-dire en  ayant recours  a  une  prose savante et  suggestive  tout  a  la fois, il lui serait   des   lors   possible   de   faire   passer dans  une  serie  d'essais  toute son ironic  et tout  son  tres  grand talent.
GERARD TOUGAS

MUSIC
IN CANADA

HELMUT KALLMANN. A History of Music in Canada  I 534-1914·  University  of  Toronto Press.  $6.50.

MR.  KALLMAN's History of  Music in Canada is a substantial piece  of research. Not so long ago it would not have been possible  to  do  it-music history  being  so little   regarded-and  it   would   certainly not  have  seemed  worth doing.  It should remain  a  valuable  reference work  since it gathers so much  information into 270 pages;    I doubt  if   there   is  anyone   in Canada  to   challenge Mr.  Kallman's

BOOKS IN REVIEW



command  of   his   subject. If  the   book stimulates further  research,  it   may   be superseded, for  such  is  the  irony  of  the pioneer's  role.  But  it  will  not  be  neces­ sary,   I  imagine,  for   anyone   else   to  do this particular job again  for  a long while.
There is, however,   another  job  to  be done. This book might have done it, and certainly  it  could   not   be  done   without the  research that  was entailed in its mak­ ing.  The   job is to write  a lively  essay on the  same  subject for  the  general  reader. Only  intermittently  does  Mr.   Kallman's book  become   that. That  it  can   engage the mind  in this stimulating way, particu­ larly  in  the  first  few chapters, shows  that  the  task  is  possible,  that  our  musical  his­ tory  is  not  really  so  dull.  The  narrative momentum of Mr.  Kallman's beginning gradually disappears under too  much detail.  The mid-nineteenth century is less picturesque, granted;  yet  the  trouble  for the  reader   is  that   there   were  too  many records,    too   many   slight   events   to   be listed  or  names  to  be mentioned. Mr. Kallman's book  becomes  one  to be  refer­ red   to  rather  than   to  read   with  lively enthusiasm,  and   this  must   be  reckoned  its  principal limitation.
Certain things  come  out  of  Mr.  Kall­ man's survey   that   should   make  us  stop to  think.   In   spite   of   broadcasting,  the
 phonograph and the ease of physical communication,  our   public   concert   life in  the  main  cities  does  not  differ  much from that of a hundred years ago. Our institutions change  little  in  their  funda­ mental  character.  In   some   respects   we are  less fortunate. There are  fewer  pub­  lic   performances   of   opera   than    there were   seventy   years   ago.   The   chamber music   of   Haydn  and   Mozart  reached  Canada half  a  dozen  years  after   it  was composed;  the   time  lag  for  Tippett or Dallapiccola is  much  longer.
Musical  life in Canada was also more strongly  rooted   before   I85o   than   it  has even   been   since.   Standards  may   have been   naive   and   provincial,  but   people were less inhibited by the fact,  and musi­ cal   activity   did   reflect    the   society   in which   it  existed.   Music   was   in  a  real sense  an   activity   of   that   culture.  One  hundred years  later  we are  trying  to win back  some  of  that   rootedness  (without the  provincialism,  we  hope)    in  the  face of "big  name" values,  box office and  the international  celebrity circuit.
Mr.  Kallman brings  out  the  bare, per­ sisting  elements  of  music  in  Canada; as old   as  European  settlement   itself   and  never  lost in  the  much  more  anonymous urban   culture superimposed  in  the  past century. These elements were  folk music, regimental bands  and  church music. The folk music survived in  isolation, the most submerged  by  urban  culture,  to  be  re­ discovered   by   twentieth-century  collec­ tors.  The  regimental  bands   became   our instrumental tradition  and  were  eventu­ ally  metamorphosed  into   our  symphony  orchestras.  The  churches   became    the repositories   of   two   contradictory  tradi­ tions.   The   Catholic   French  Canadian community  seems  never  to  have  thought that  good  music  and  right  worship  were

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



incompatible. It may  have  frowned  once or  twice  at   the  music  of  secular  enter­ tainments;  it   never    equated   plainness  with     godliness.    Protestantism    became  puritan  quite   quickly.   Then   came   the reaction to  raise  the  standards of church music.  Music  could  be seen  as  a danger­ ously  sybaritic  influence  upon  a  whole­ some  community or  as  a  civilizing  force on   a   rough,   even   barbaric  frontier.  It depended  on   which   way  you  held   the mirror.  The   oratorio  society,   adapted from   the  English, was  the  perfect   com­ promise.  The rare  exception   was such  a community  as  that   of  the   Children  of Peace  at  Hope, Ontario. This  Protestant splinter  sect   built   its   community,   like the    American   Moravians,   on   worship and   music  equally. One  may  marvel   at the  standards  apparently  achieved   in  a community of three  hundred; one should marvel more  at the way music penetrated to the  heart  of this  culture, sank  its roots deep  and  produced so splendid  a flower.
There  are   some  great   performers  in this   history,    recognized    abroad  rather than    in   Canada;  there   are   some   able pioneers; there  are  no composers  of  repu­ tation. Yet  Mr.  Kallman teases the mind  as much  with  some of these composers  as he  does  with   the  story  of   the  Children of   Peace    or   the   rapidity   with   which operas   and   oratorios  achieved  perform­ ance    in   Canada.   Someone   should   go through  those  surviving scores  and   per­  form  and  broadcast the best of them.  We ought  to  have   the   chance   to  hear   our musical   history   (once   anyway)    as  well as  read  about  it.  We  probably   will  not find  a  Berwald or  an  Ives, but  we might  not  be  ashamed of what  we do discover. Mr.  Kallman's book  reminds  us that  we must   not   neglect   our   past   for   fear   of seeming   provincial.	PETER  GARVIE
 LE  COMBAT SINGUUER

ADRIEN   THERIO.    La   Soif   et   le   Mirage.    Le Cercle du  livre  de  France. (Collection  Nou­ velle-France) .

IL Y  A  une  jeune  generation intellectuelle canadienne-franc;aise qui s'affronte avec I'Amerique, mesure  le vide que  creuse  au lieu  de  le  combler   technique et  confort, et  qui  defie  ce monde:

Dans  quelques  annees,  si  vous   n'y   prenez garde, vous  ne  pourrez plus  vivre  votre  vie. La   civilisation  americaine  vous   la   presen­ tera    sur   un   plateau dare. Tant   pis   pour  vous  si  vous  devenez  jamais  americain, ou alors  vous  serez  un  hors-la-loi.

U n  jeune  professeur   universitaire  ori­ ginaire du  Quebec passe  un  an  dans ce decor   rose  et  dore,   tente,   sans  l'esultats  une  prise  de  contact au  moins avec  trois specimens  de  Ia  societe   de  Bowlingville  (Middletown, U.S.A.),   d'abord  un   de ses  etudiants,  adolescent  reveur, perdu; y  risque   sa  paix   et  sa  vertu   avec   une demoiselle naturellement  appetissante, Ia soeur   de  ce  dernier,  tandis que,  de  son cote,  sa  logeuse,  murissante et  d'autant plus  aggressive,  entreprend  systematique­ ment    de   se   l'approprier  corps   et   arne, pour   se  convaincre que,   Lancelot,  non, Galaad   comme   devant,  il  peut   rentrer intouche   venir   se  ragenouiller  au   bane d'ceuvre   de   ses  peres   dans   l'apre  mais integre  Quebec natal.
II  est  pourtant aime  de  ses voisins  du sud  ce  bien  fier  Quebecois, pas  au  point
de   les  faire   se  hausser   a  son  ideal  ap­
paremment raffine  et  austere dont   il  ne nous   detaille  d'ailleurs  pas   les  valeurs,
mais  a Ia mesure  et ressemblance de ceux
qui   l'aiment.  II  est  aime   par   sa  "land­
lady"    d'abord,  organisan t   pour   lui,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



comme   un  potlatche, son  confort  mate­ riel:     un    tapis    moelleux,  un    tourne­ disques,   des   petits   plats,   une   television lui  sont  successivement offerts,  pour,  en echange, l'avoir  de  plus  en   plus  a  elle au  point  de le poursuivre un soir d'etour­ dissement a l'alcool   jusque  sur  son lit ou le malheureux n'en  peut mais.  II est aime par  Bill, l'un  de ses e!E ves,
artiste, enfant qu'une civilisation mecani­ cienne,  un pere  bovin  et  une mere  revant  d'en   faire   un   ingenieur,  empechent  de fleurir.   Petit   Meaulnes  deja   maladif, il fait   penser  au  Voyageur  sur  la  terre  de Julien  Green.   II   est   aime,   finalement, notre   professeur,   par   Ia  soeur   de   Bill, dont   le  premier, il  s'etait  entiche, qu'il rejettera.
La   soif   et   le   mirage    est   strictment modele   sur  le  moule   du  roman  psycho-
 logique   fran<;ais.  C'est   un   exercice   de style  classique,   un   petit   drame  racinien a quatre personnages.

Je  n'avais pris   aucun interet  aux  eleves, meme  s'ils me  montraient beaucoup de sympathie ...
... je  me  sentais perdu  au  milieu   de  ce
monde etudiant ...
A  certains moments, je  me  demandais  ce
que   je  representais au  milieu de  ce  monde
americain ...
Tout ceci  sur  un  air,  parfois,  de  Benja­ min   Constant  ou   de   Fromentin.   Mais est-cc  parce  que  trop de  romanciers, trop  de traductions d'ceuvres  americaines nous ont   habitue   au   realisme   graisseux   des personnages  de roman   yankee?   Les  dia­  logues trap corrects jurent, en particulier, dans   Ia   bouche   de   Miss   Morgan,  Ia logeuse.
Est-ce sa vision  de l'Amerique  que  M.








u ...
Lllf
 


rn1,;111






The Tamarack  Review

ISSUE I9  (Spring Ig6r) contains a group  of poems  by MALCOLM LOWRY  with  an  introduction by EARLE BIRNEY;   stories  by DAVID LEWIS STEIN and  DAVE GODFREY;  A Dialogue  on Riddles  by FRAN­ CIS  SPARSHOTT;  and   articles  on  Camus by ROBERT   MCCORMACK and  on Graham Greene  by PHILIP  sTRATFORD.

Each issue  is $1.25 a copy; a year's  subscription is $4.00

THE  TAMARACK REVIEW, BOX I 57, POSTAL STATION K, TORONTO



71

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Adrien   Therio veut  nous  livrer  dans  cet amas  de  chair  feminine encore  bien sang1ee, mais menacee de menopause, qui n'a  pas Ia volonte  de maigrir, jette ses derniers feux  irises  par  l'alcool,  memere a  toutou, deja-"qu'on prend  comme  un ami  quand il  ne  reste  plus  personne"­ pitoyable,  pathetique.   C'est   le  meilleur  personnage  de   Therio.  De  !'autre  cote, Ia jeune  Amerique:  amibe spirituelle. Un gars  qui,  au  desespoir de  ne savoir  a qui vouer   son   amour:  a  son  professeur,   a quelque  petite amie,  a son  enfance, ren­ tre- apparemment il se suicide-dans le sein  de Ia nature.
La   soif  est  ce  besoin  d'amour,  cette part  d'humain que  toutes les facilites, le confort   americains  sont   impuissants a donner  a   ces   etres parce que-bien qu'anglo-saxon-ils  ont   une  arne  et  un cceur.  Cette soif  notre   heros   n'en   n'est pas exempt lui-meme puisqu'il tente  de J',etancher  aux  fontaines du  desir.
Pour  Ia femme murissante qui  supplee a   !'affection  humaine  par   Ia  biere,   le wisky et  son  toutou, pour  le  jouvenceau qui   va  se  perdre corps  et  arne  dans   Ia nature, pour  sa soeur  qui  ne sait  pas non plus  ce  qu'elle  veut   en  tatant  aveugle­ ment  et  de fa<;on  machiavelique a Ia fois de   cet  ,eternel   masculin,  pour   le  heros lui-meme qui   passe  au  milieu   de  cette societe  vide,  Ia  tentative devient  un triste mirage, se  solde  par  un echec  complet.
Plus   que   l'immaturite intellectuelle americaine,   Adrien    Therio  eclaire    ici
!'opposition entre  le genie de deux  races: Ia  sensibilite   du   temperament  latin   qui lui  permet de  jouir  de  la  vie en  puisant a  ses sources  intimes, face  au  vide  d'une societe   materialiste.
A quand le roman ou le meme  jeune universitaire   des    Laurentides   viendra dans  !'ouest se  mesurer  avec  une  societe
 qui   revendique  le  meme   nom  de  cana­ dienne? Le  challenge en  serait  d'autant plus  passionnant, et !'issue  trop probable­ ment   Ia  meme,   mais  canadiens fran<;ais et  canadiens anglais  pourraient livrer  un combat  singulier  a   armes   egales   sur   le plan   psychologique.  Cette  generation, ce livre  le prouve, devrait depasser  le theme  suranne de Two Solitudes.
ROLAND BONVALET


MYTHS AND SOURCES

ELLA   ELIZABETH    CLARK.   Indian Legends of
Canada. McClelland &  Stewart. $4.50.

Miss  CLARK   has   put   together  a  source book of stories, myths and legends of the various Indian tribes  of Canada, particu­ larly  for  the   use  of  teachers  in  schools, and  for  family   readings.
What can   the  teacher  or  the  general reader    derive   from   this   collection?  As tales   (of  the  beginnings of  the  world,  of origins  of animal and  landscape features, of   the   explanations  of   tribal    custom) they  are  so  bare  that   they  could  hardly hold   the   attention  of  any   beyond   the very  young.   It is  only  when   the  stories are   seen   as  clues   to  understanding  the local  culture that   they  take  on  meaning. Miss  Clark has  tried  to select  those  tales that  "reveal the  every day life, the  beliefs and   the  ceremonials of  the  early  Ameri­ cans" and   to  that   end  she  has  excluded those    that    treat   of   "brutal   or   erotic  themes".  However,  even   with  these worthy aims,  the  tales  are  too  brief  and too   simplified    to   give   more   than    the baldest   indications of  the  variations and meanings of  tribal  life. To  bring  out  any richness    and   complexity  of   the   many

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Indian cultures, the  teacher  herself  must be  very  knowledgeable.
Tribes which  are  represented by stories
and   legends   comprise  the   whole   range of  geographic distribution:  The Eastern Woodlands area, including all of the Iro­ quois    League,   the    tribes   around    the Great Lakes,  the  Plains  and  Plateau, and the  North West  Coast. These  are  all dis­ tinctive   cultures,   with   widely   different economies,  social  structures, arts, motives, histories; a few  legends  can  only blur  the differences in  tribal   life.  Miss  Clark  has provided an   introductory  paragraph  to most  of  the  stories,  orienting them  geo­ graphically  and  in  time.
The sources  to  which  Miss  Clark   has turned for  her  materials are  twofold.  She has recounted tales from anthropologists who have  worked  within  the culture, and who  have   presented  myths  and   legends as  reflections   of  cultural values  and   as clues  to  culture history.   But  their  stories have  been  pared  to  the  outline of simple plot   and   uncomplicated character,  and lose their  special  character. Other sources used by Miss Clark  are the accounts by travellers,  local   historians  and   settlers, who  have   had   varying  backgrounds for understanding what   they  saw  and  heard of  native   life.
Miss Clark obviously has a feeling of sympathy for the dignity and  imagination of  the  Indian, and her  language is straightforward and  direct, such  as could be   read   aloud    by   teacher,  parent,  or student,  without  coyness   or   embarrass­ ment.  Her  recounting of the vision quest and  some  other  personal  histories  in  the third  section  of the  book, will be success­ ful  in  involving the  sympathies of many readers.
Perhaps  if   these   stories,   myths   and
legends,  can   be  used  as  part of  a  more
 knowledgeable approach to the studies  of tribal   cultures across  Canada, then  they can   be  useful.  Since  publication of  this book was aided  by a grant from  the Can­ ada  Council, one  suspects  that  the  grant was   made    with    this   belief:    that   the Indian  cultures  are    different,   rich, diverse,  and  a  concern  with  these  quali­ ties will be rewarding  to the  student and  the  teacher.                 AUDREY HAWTHORN

CHRONICLE AND CREATION
E.  M.   GRANGER BENNETT.   Short of the   Glory.
Ryerson  Press,  $4.95.

ELIZABETH   BENNETT'S historical  novel, winner  of the  Ryerson  Fiction Award  for
1g6o, is better  history  than  it  is a  novel, for  it  is closer  to  a  chronicle in  its  con­ fined   and   rather  unimaginative   telling  than   it  is  to  creative fiction.  The  back­  ground  is  New   France  of   the   r6go's,  when  the colony  hung  in the balance be­ tween   French  and   English  in   the  long drawn-out struggle  for  the  fur  trade. In this   dark   moment  of   history   with   its cross-currents and   sudden  terrors,   Mrs.  Bennett has set her  re-telling of the  story of  Abigail   Davis,  an   English   girl   cap­ tured    by   Indians,   ransomed  by   the French,  and living  as  both  prisoner   and  friend  in  the  household  of the  Intendant de  Champigny. It is within this  ambigu­ ous  position,   and   from   the  conflict  be­ tween   the  god-fearing daughter  of   the Puritan   clergyman  and    the    pleasure­ loving,  deeply  Catholic  French,  that   the main  impetus  of the story  develops.  Abi­ gail  is  constantly  on  guard   against  the alien  and seductive society into  which she has  been  thrust, her  wariness  alerted   by the   deepening  division   between   French

73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  English.  Her  difficulties  are  resolved in   the   traditional  fashion   of  the   teen­ aged   novel   (and   Short   of  the  Glory  is written  primarily for  the  teen-aged girl) when   she  loves  and  marries   one  of  the enemy,  a  young  French voyageur.
The central conflict   is  real  enough­
that   of  the  captive among  alien  peoples
-but the  flat  style and  presentation generate little  interest in  the theme.  Mrs. Bennett is a  researcher rather than  a novelist; she  presents  the  daily  minutiae of   the   threatened  colony   undoubtedly based  on  authentic records-the  bustle, the  preparations, the  comings  and  goings
-but she  is not  skilled  at  dialogue or  at psychological interpretation  and  realiza­ tion.  She  re-creates many  historical per­  sonages-LaHontan,  Madeleine de Ver­  cheres,   the   merchant   La   Ber   and   his famous  daughter, the  mysterious  recluse
-but they  remain in  the  shadows.  The
mercurial  and   enigmatic  La  Hontan  is an  example of  Mrs.  Bennett's  presenta­ tion; here  was a curious  historical figure, both  hero  and  rascal, visionary  and  pre­  varicator,  but   Mrs.   Bennett   is  able   to re-create only  a  romanticized figure  with little  conviction or depth of characteriza­ tion.   Authority   and   investigation  are sound   in  Short   of  the  Glory, but  crea- tivity  is  wanting.	JOAN SELBY


CANADIAN INCIDENTS

KERRY   WOOD.   The    Queen's    Cowboy.  Mac­
millan.  $2.50.
JOSEPH   SCHULL.  Battle   for  the   Rock.  Mac­
millan.  $2.50.

Two  NEW  TITLES,  Queen's Cowboy and Battle   for the  Rock, have  been  added   to the  familiar series, Great  Stories  of  Can­ ada.  Let  no  one  boggle  at  the  nickname

74
 "Queen's Cowboy"-it  refers  to  Colonel James   Macleod, the  man  who  led  a  tiny band  of law enforcement officers into  the heart   of  the  Blackfoot domain. He emerges  from   Mr.  Wood's pen  loved  by his friends, respected by his enemies,  and human enough to turn  a garden hose on his five children lined  up for inspection, dressed  in  their  Sunday  best.
A  look  at  James Macleod's record   of
achievement goes a long way towards squelching  our    suspicions    of   his   bio­ grapher's  insistent admiration. Not  only did  this Commissioner of the  North West Mounted Police  succeed  in  subduing  the whisky  trade, winning the  regard of  the formidable Chief  Crowfoot, and  prevent­ ing  full-scale  war between   the  Blackfoot  and   the  refugee   Sioux,  but  he  also  died a  poor  man.
The opening pages  of  the  book  illus­
trate a  problem facing  the  author of  a short   biography  for   children:  how   to catch and  hold  interest in  an  adult  sub­ ject.   Mr.   Wood   has   employed   what   I like   to  call   the   "cherry  tree  method"; thus  on  page  two  we see the  tiny  James  catching fish  and   talking  scones  on  the Isle  of  Skye.  But  by  page  2 I,  when  the story  really  begins,  he  is  20   years  older,  articling for  an  Ontario  barrister named Cupid. It is too contrived. The book suf­ fers  generally  from such   choppy   narra­ tion; it  is  a  patchwork of  data  stitched together   by  a  loving,  but  uneven   hand.
Joseph   Schull's Battle   for the  Rock  is the story of Wolfe  and  Montcalm. Unlike Wood,  who champions a hero relatively unsung, Schull  seeks  to  scatter  the  ro­ mantic fuzz  surrounding the  best  known  of   all   Canadian  stories.   He   takes   the Tolstoyan view  of  history.  For  example, if  a  sleepy  French  officer  had  not  for­  gotten    that    a   much   needed   provisions

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



convoy   had   been   cancelled,  the   British troops   would   never   have   been   able   to effect   a   landing  at   the   tiny   cove   of Foulon,  joined   by  a  steep   goat   trail   to the  plain  above.
Schull's approach to the  soldiers them­
selves is subjective. We  see Wolfe  dying, his mind  hidden from  his officers, his thoughts  alternately  resolute    and   self­ accusatory.  Montcalm  is  a  gallant  man  beset  by the  pettiness of his civilian  asso­ ciates-not even  at  the last  does he learn  that    the   French   Ministry  has   ordered Vaudreuil to surrender all  military com­  mand to  the  General.
Above all, it is Schull's command of words   that   makes   Battle    for  the   Rock live  for  us.
The   days   of  the   saints   and   glory-hunters were  gone,  they  had  been  long  gone  before he  came.  These   were  the  days  of  twilight and   the  dregs.  This   was  the  land   of  hard and  dirty  fingers,  clutching at  furs,  clutch­ ing  at  the  King's  gold.  The   land  of  Bigot and   manageable men  . . . . . He  had  not been  one  of them,  this  general.  He  had  not smiled,  he  had  not  been  managed. He  had seen  the  shadow  of the  English  lengthening over  the  land; it  had  not  changed   him.
Yet  if the  author's skill  with  language and  psychological penetration is his greatest  strength,  it   may   also  prove   to be  the   weakness   of  the   book.  Too  ad­ vanced for  all but  the  most mature child,  will  it  also  be  passed  over  by  the  adult as a  juvenile?
PATRICIA BARCLAY


INVERTED MIRROR

NANSI   SWAYZE.   The  Man   Hunters.  Clarke, Irwin. $2.50.

NANSI   SWAYZE,  in   The  Man  Hunters, has  written of Anthropologists Diamond Jenness,   Marius  Barbeau, and   William
 J. Wintemberg. The  book   is  intended for   young   people   from   ten   to  sixteen years of age. The  stories on Jenness and Barbeau  start  off at  a  pedestrian pace  in high-buttoned boots. Irrelevant incidents are   told   in   the   precious   manner  of  a doting   aunt, and   one  wonders whether the  main  purpose of the  book is to intro­ duce,  to educate, or  to entertain.
If its purpose is introduction, this hap­ pens in the case of Wintemberg, the man whose  personality  comes   through  most strongly;  he  died  in  I941,  and   the  only works  by or  about him,  are  contained in the   Canadian   Geological  Survey    Bul­ letins,  which   are  not    available  for circulation.
If the   purpose  is  education,  then   a sore  posterior   from   riding with   stirrups too  long  is  given   as  much   space   as  an anthropological   find.    And    an   educa­ tional  purpose  is  in  any  case  marred by the  stilted  tone  of  many  passages.  "The half-breed undertook to  find  [Jenness] a horse  ... "  "Unfortunately  the  stirrups of   the   saddle  he   produced     were   too long  ... " For  a  ten-year-old, you  find, you   buy,  you  borrow,  or   you  steal,   or you  make.  But  you  do  not  "undertake," and  "produce."
The Jenness   biography  starts   with   a piffiingly  irrelevant  incident, and   much later    makes    the    brief    statement  that "...  Jenness's  careful studies saved  the histories  of  many   Canadian  tribes  from extinction." This  is  an   intimate  study of  Doctor   Diamond  Jenness, yet  one  of the   proudest  statements  that   could   be made   of  any  man   anywhere, is  slipped in  like  a  sentence from   a  school  text.
If the  purpose of the  book  is to enter­ tain,  then  its  beginning is hidden  in  the preface-the discovery   of  an  important grave.  "Perhaps it is a burial  with  a row

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of delicate beads around the neck of the skeleton.  As  soon  as  he  sees  that   he  is on   the   verge   of  an   important  find   he becomes  extremely careful. Once  he gets down   to   the   actual  uncovering of  the bones  he  must   drop   his  trowel  and   use a  spoon,  an  artist's paintbrush, or  a dentist's pick.  He  is careful   to  expose  as much as  possible  of the  burial  while still leaving  it  in  place." Farther on,  Swayze says  that   an  arcrueologist  is a  "detective of  the  past." This  is the writing  that  will make   a  twelve-year-old sneak  a  book  to bed   to  read   when   the  lights  should   be out.
There  is  an   ambiguous treatment  of the  Bcethuk  extinction. There is the  use of "however," "indeed," and  "of course," so often  that  circling them  has given  the book  a  polka   dot  effect.  Worn   phrases are used until their coming begins to be anticipated.
But  there   are  other   things  too. There is  a  scholarly   integrity. There  is  clear, plain  speaking about  the way the  Whites in  Hazelton  treated  the  Indians.  Basic­ ally   there   is  a   great   deal   about   three  wonderful  men.   With   the   Anthropolo­ gists,  we  are  man   in  search of  himself. For  when  the  answer  comes, it  is with  a flash  of  self   recognition. It  is an  inver­  sion  of  the  native peering   into  his  first mirror.                    EDITH  LAMBERT  SHARP
 DELICATE DESTRUCTION

NORMAN WARD. Mice in the  Beer. (Illustrated
by  Louis  de  Niverville).  Longmans, Green.

PIERRE   BERTON.   Adventures of  a  Columnist.
McClelland  &  Stewart. $s.oo.

THESE ARE two books of journalism; nevertheless,  it   is  not   fair   to  compare them   too   closely.   Mr.   Ward  is  a   uni­ versity  professor  who    ventures   into journalism from   time  to  time.  Mr.  Ber­ ton   is   (among other  things)  a   daily columnist. The  roles  are   just  not  com­  parable, nor  are  their  products.
Mr.  Ward writes  in  a  familiar genre: the  quiet, literate whimsy which  sets chuckles    rolling    silently    in   the   mind where  they  build  up  a  head  of  laughter which   must   ultimately burst  forth. This kind   of  writing  has   been   going   on   in Canada for  generations until   there  is, I think,   a  definite school  of  a  Canadian­ ized  humorous  understatement that   dif­ fers  subtly  from the  Englishman's, which is more likely  to have its base in actuality.
At any  rate  I could  hardly  imagine anyone  but   a  Canadian  quietly   saying, as   Mr.   Ward  does,   that    "One  of  the most  thought-provoking  spectacles to  be seen  in  this  country is  that   of  a  mouse in  a  beer  bottle." Or:  "One of the  more provocative   aspects    of    living    in    the multi-lingual culture of  western  Canada is that  when,  for  instance, a man  speaks of    smutty  wit,  you    are    never    sure whether he  is talking of some  celebrated passage from  Sigmund Freud, or of a diseased  cereal  grain."
Mr. Ward slips occasionally from his general   level    of    excellence   and,    too often,   I think, he  cheats   by starting out

BOOKS IN REVIEW



on one topic  and  allowing his whimsical explorations  to   lead    him    astray    into quite  another. This  habit  leads  to a kind of split-level  essay, but  the  form  provides too slight  a foundation for such  building.
However, Mr. Ward mixes an urbane maturity with an irreverent approach to such   Canadian  shrines   as  the   Canada Year   Book,  General  Wolfe    (the  donk­ less hero), the  Civil  Service, Orangemen and   Robert Burns.   He  avoids a  certain undergraduate,  recanted  Scotch-Presby­ terian  over-concern with  sex  that   marks some  other   practitioners of  this  form.
Louis  de  Niverville's illustrations  pro­ vide   a   delightful  counterpoint  to   Mr.  Ward's delicate destruction.
Pierre   Berton,   by contrast, lays  about with   a   two-handed  club,   smashing at some  things   that   may  matter  somewhat and  at others   that   certainly don't;  even when   he  is  being   funny,  he  forgets   to put   down   his  heavy   weapon,  which   is not  lightened by  any  originality.
This is  partly   the  result  of  his  book's being   a   collection  of   daily   newspaper pieces. Read  as they  were  first  published, one  at  a  time,  many   of  them   might   be effective.   Certainly  the  verse  "Requiem for  a  Fourteen-Year-Old" awaiting  exe­ cution   (or  typical   last-minute  reprieve) for   murder  fully   merits  preservation  as a  powerful piece  of  public  agitation cast in  a  striking form.
But,  on  the  whole,  Berton's pieces are not written to last. Several  of them are exposes   of   tricky   salesmanship,  which may  have  had  pertinence when  first pub­ lished   but  which   fall  flat  in  a  collected  volume.   Even   his  Moscow  copy  is  not very  exciting, and  his serious  pieces tend to   wallow   in   syrupy   memories  of   the good  old  days.
DONALD STAINSBY
 THE GENTLE CRAFT OF GHOSTING

EVAN  DAVIES  AND   ALED VAUGHAN.  Beyond  the
Old  Bone Trail. British Book Service. $3.75·

DONALDA MCKILLOP   COPELAND  AND    EUGENIE LOUISE   MYLES.   Remember, Nurse.  Ryerson Press. $4.50.
SARA     VEFFER   AND     RAY     SONIN.   Hidden    for
1,ooo  Days. Ryerson  Press.  $3.95.

THE GHOST has always been a marginal member  of the  community of letters, putting on  paper  other men's  thoughts, giving   a   shape    to   other    men's   inco­ herencies.  Of  all  types  of  writer  he  has sinned  most  against the  cult  of  original­ ity that  has  dominated the  arts  since  the Romantics.
Yet  there  have  been  respectable liter­
ary   ghosts.   Hazlitt   spectred  creditably for Holcroft and  Northcote. And if Plato had   not  assiduously   pursued  the  phan­ tom  craft,  we should   know  little of what  Socrates  had  to say.
Moreover, though  the  ghost,  who  ex­ presses   others    rather  than   himself,   is rarely  an artist, he is often  a good crafts­  man; in  fact,   the  craft   he  follows  is a demanding one  if it  is to  be  carried out successfully.  The ghost  may  not  actually  make  the dumb  speak, but  he does trans­  mute   the   spoken   word   into   that   very different medium, the  written word,  and where   he  is  a  good  ghost   he  does  this while  retaining  the  authentic tone  of the man  he is  impersonating, while  avoiding the  attribution of  a  literary slant   to  an unliterary mind.
So   much    in   defence  of   the   ghost's
craft.  The three   examples of  it  which  I am  considering demonstrate  the  kind  of book which  the  ghost  is usually  expected to  summon   up.   It is  that   cunous  phe-

77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



nomenon, a  piece  of  writing  proceeding from   an   urge   other  than   the   urge   to write. People  who employ ghosts have usually  had   some  special  experience, or think  they  have  lived an ordinary experi­ ence  in  some  special   way,  and  feel  the desire  to commemorate it. In  naiver  ages they  might   have  painted  awkward   little ex  votos, or  dedicated  shrines;  in our  age of  plentiful  paper   they  respond   readily to the demon who whispers, "You  should  write  a  book  about  it!"  So  they  call  on the  ghost-or  the  ghost  calls on  them.
At one time ghosts were discreetly anonymous; it  was  almost  a  rule  of  the craft.  Now   even   ghosts   demand  their place   in  the  sun,   unless  they  are  those very  superior spectres  who  write  the speeches  of  American Presidents; all  the writers  who  have  put  their  actual fingers to  the  keys on  the  books  I am  reviewing have   announced  their   names,   and   not always  wisely.
Beyond    the   Old   Bone   Trail   is   un­
doubtedly  the   best  of  the  three   books; it  might   have  been  a  very  ordinary tale if  it  had   not   been  ghosted   with  excep­ tional  ability.  A  young  Welshman, fresh from  the  Cardigan  countryside, took  up a   homestead   on    the    Saskatchewan prairies   in  1905. Everything that  is told on   his   behalf-the hardships  and   rare  perils,   the   disappointments  and    slight success-happened to  thousands of other people  at  that time.  It  is the  character of  Evan  Davies, the  old  Welshman  tell­ ing   his  tale   back   in   Wales   fifty   years after,   that   gives  the  peculiar  flavour  to the  book-his character and  his peculiar  sense  of   the   significant   details   of  that  life  lived  so  long  ago.  These  have  been well   caught  by   Aled   Vaughan,   who actually   wrote    the    text;    through   his prose one can  hear  the lilt of a garrulous
 old Welshman telling his tale, and  Mr. Vaughan has  been  wise  enough to  pre­ serve   not   only  Evan   Davies'  accuracies of  observation and  memory,  but  also  his delightful  lapses into  credulity. The whole  man  comes  alive in fragments like this:

The  timber wolf   could   be  a  dangerous joker   though. Fortunately its  natural  habi­ tat  was further   north,  in    the   timber country; only   the  odd   one  ventured  as  far  south  as  Saskatoon, and   then only   in   the  depth of  winter. It is  closely  related to  the  bear   family, and   will  attack  humans when angered.  When   attacking,  it   hugs   its   as­ sailant  with   its  front  paws   while   dancing around on  its  hind   legs,  and its  grasp is so strong that  eventually the  ribs  are  crushed and  the   victim  is   squeezed   to   death-a most  sinister kind   of  embrace.

Beyond  the  Old  Bone  Trail  is a readable book, and an interesting document, since,   if  it   produces  no  new   historical facts  about the  settlement of the  prairies, it  certainly gives an  insight  into  the  kind of  men  who  carried out  the  settlement.
Remember,  Nurse    and    Hidden   for I ,ooo  Days  are  both  written--or  written up-with  a   kind    of   breathless   sensa­ tionalism   which    is   evidently    thought appropriate  to   unusual   experiences.  In the    first   of   them    a   nurse    describes through her  literary  medium a  period  of work   among  the   Southampton  Island Eskimos.  She evidently used her  eyes and  ears  to  some  account, and  many   of  the observations  she  makes   on   Eskimo   life show  a  real  sense  of  the  tragic   disinte­ gration  of  a  primitive society  under   the  malign  impact of  North American civil­ isation.   But   her   own   petty,    everyday doings  intrude far  too  much.
Hidden for  I,ooo  Days is the  least readable  of  all.  This   is  at   least   partly because  its story-that of a Jewish  family who  hide   for   three   years  in  Nazi-ruled

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Holland-parallels so closely  the story of Anne  Frank that one  cannot help  com­ paring  the  two.  The  Frank  diary  fasci­ nated   not  because  it  recorded a  particu­ lar   instance  of   a  general   tragedy,   but rather  because    it   evoked   a   particular personality reacting to  the  tragedy.  The  heroine   of  Hidden  for   r,ooo   Days,  the mother of the fugitive family,  was clearly a   courageous and   resourceful  woman,  and  her  adventures  were  so strange that  one  sometimes  pauses to reflect  that  here is  a   detail   no   novelist   would   dare   to write  down  because  it  is indeed  stranger than   fiction.   Yet   somehow  in   the   in­ direct process  of  communication  all flavour   of   personality  has   gone   out   of the  account. We  know  what   the  family does  in  its  series  of  rooms;  we  know  be­ cause  we  are  told  about it,  not  because we  are  made to  feel  it.  We  do  not  live in  the  minds   of  the  sufferers,  nor  they in  ours.   And   so  the  adventure,  robbed of  the  presence it  should   have  created, becomes  a  cage  without a  bird-or per­ haps  with  only  the  ghost  of a  bird.
GEORGE WOODCOCK
 sor  Hiscocks  gives  a  brief  comparison of the two governments in West and  East Germany, and   Professor  Spencer  contri­ butes  an  excellently documented  chapter on  Berlin   which   describes   the  situation of  recurrent  crisis  up  to  the  beginning of  1960.  Finally  Professor  Mcinnis sums up  the  alternative  policies  which   could determine the  future of  Germany.
This    study    is   published   under    the
auspices   of   the   Canadian  Institute  of International  Affairs   and   can   be  fully recommended  as  part   of  the  service  of that  Institute in informing the  Canadian public  about   world   affairs.  It would   be, a most suitable book for  use by interested study groups.  Despite the lack of a biblio­ graphy,  there    are    full   notes   through which  reference is made  to larger  studies in  this  field,  such  as  Professor  Hiscocks' own  "Democracy in  Western Germany" or  John   Mander's  "Berlin:  The   Eagle and   the   Bear". It is  to  be  hoped   that this short  introductory outline will induce many   readers  to   delve   into   the   deep issues  and   complexities  of  the  German problem.



GERMANY TODAY

EDGAR MCINNIS, RICHARD HISCOCKS  AND ROBERT SPENCER.  The Shaping of Postwar Germany. Dent. $3.50.

THREE CANADIAN SCHOLARS,  from the Universities of  York,  Manitoba and  To­ ronto,   have   combined  to  write   a  short study   of   certain  important   aspects   of Germany since  I945·  Professor  Mcinnis, formerly  President of  the Canadian Insti­  tute  of  International  Affairs,  opens  with a   study   of   the   policies   of   the   Allied Powers  during and   after   the  war  which led  to  the  present "settlement";  Profes-
 JOHNS. CONWAY


SHORT NOTICES

SEVERAL IMPORTANT  reprints of Canadian books have recently become available. Perhaps  the   most   valuable  of  them   all is  George   G.  F.  Stanley's The  Birth   of Western Canada (University of  Toronto Press:   $6.95) .  This  is the  classic  history of  the  Riel   rebellions; it  was  published in  1936,  but  during the  blitz  of 1940  all the available stock was destroyed  when Longman Green's warehouse  burnt down.   Since   then   it  has  been  a  rarity, and   its   return  to   print-still  the   best

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



book  on  its  subject-is much   to  be  wel­ comed.  Macmillans  have   just   brought out  in paper covers  two Canadian novels which  have  become  regional  minor  clas­ sics;  they  are  W. 0. Mitchell's Who Has Seen  the  Wind  ( $1.50), whose evocation of  the  aura of  a  prairie small-town still remains  very  convincing, and  Ethel  Wil­ son's   The   Innocent  Traveller  ($1.75).  And  Apollo  Editions, distributed by Mc­  Clelland &  Stewart, have  issued  paper­ back editions of two Canadian books, the appallingly  titled    but   reasonably   well­ selected   anthology, Laugh with  Leacock ($2.25),  and  N.J. Berrill's  Man's Emerg­  ing  Mind   ($2.25), one  of the more civil­ ised attempts by a scientist  to weld human history   into   the  evolutionary   pattern.
* 	* 	*
Publishing fashion in Canada is begin­
ning  to run  towards house histories of companies and  corporations. In  For the Years  to    Come   ( Longmans  Green.
$5.75),  John F. Thompson and  Norman
Beasley   reconstruct  the   story  of   Inter­ national Nickel  of  Canada; in  The Ele­ ments Combined  (Clark,  Irwin. $6.50) William   Kilbourn   tells  that  of  the  Steel Company  of  Canada.  It is  not  easy  to make  a readable narrative about  the pro­ saic  facts  of  industrial development, but Professor Kilbourn, in his scholarly  study of the development of a business corpora­ tion  within   a  changing society,  has  suc­ ceeded   in  making  The   Elements  Com­ bined  a  book  that   can  be  read  with  in-











8o
 terest  by others than  specialists.   For  the Years  to Come rarely  flutters from  the ground.
* 	* 	*
Undoubtedly  the   most   pleasing  curi­
osity  among  recently  published books  is the  reprint of Cursory  Observations made in  Quebec in  the  Year rBr r  by "Jeremy Cockloft   the   Elder"   (Oxford,  $3.00) . This caustic commentary on  the  capital of  Lower   Canada a  century and  a  half ago    is   admirably   designed    by   Leslie Smart, and  is worthy  of a place on any bibliophile's  shelf.                                 G.  w.

THE LOWRY COLLECTION

The  literary manuscripts of  Malcolm Lowry   have   recently   been   acquired   by the Special  Collections Division  of the University of  British   Columbia Library. In order   to  provide ideal  conditions for the future study  of Lowry  and  his works, the  Library asks  the  generous assistance of all those who may be able to help in obtaining originals or copies of additional writings  by or  about Lowry,  correspond­ ence  to or  from  Lowry,  reminiscences of Lowry,  photographs of  Lowry.
BASIL STUART-STUBBS,
Special  Collections,
The  Library, University of British  Columbia, Vancouver 8, B.C.


MJILCOLM	LOWRY	(1909-1957)








THis IS A  FIRST bibliography of  works  by and  about  Clarence Malcolm Lowry,  who  wrote  occasionally  under  the name  of Malcolm Boden  Lowry, but  generally as Malcolm Lowry.  Although it is fairly  complete in  respect to Malcolm Lowry's own writings  (Part I), it is very incomplete in respect to  published comment on  his  work  and  life  (Part II, to  appear in  our Summer issue). Information of the latter nature has been prepared mainly from  a  scrapbook of cuttings (in  the  Lowry  papers), which  lacks  notices in  foreign languages other   than   French, and  is incomplete in  source  in­ formation for  many  of the items it does contain. In the short  period  since this  bibliography  was  begun   (Nov.,   Ig6o), it  has  not  been  possible  to check  or  complete all  the  dates  by reference to the  original  publications. It  is my  hope  that   addenda to  this  bibliography will  be  published from  time  to  time,  when  opportunities will also occur  to correct  errors.  In  the meantime, I would  be grateful to  receive  any information helpful to  the purposes of revision  and  extension.
Abbreviations in general follow the  MLA  Style Sheet,  but  the following should  also be noted: n, number of journal; TS,  typescript; UBCC, Uni­ versity  of  British   Columbia Collection of  Malcolm   Lowry's  papers  (see headnote  to  IH); Vole.,  Under  the  Volcano  (page  numbers in  cross­ references  are  to  the  first  New  York  edition,   IB2) ,  w. words.  Place  of publication of French language journals  is given only  for  those  published elsewhere than   Paris.  In  the  case of poetry,  the  first  line,  except  when  it duplicates the title, is quoted after  the date.
E.B., UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA, MAY I, Ig6r.








]I BIBLIOGR]IPHY PREP]IRED BY E]IRLE BIRNEY WITH THE ]15515T]INCE OF M]IRGERIE LOWRY

8I


PART	I

Works by Malcolm  Lowry












A: SHORT  STORIES AND NOVELLAS



1. Port   Swettenham. Experiment   (Trinity Coil.,   Cambridge)  n.5:  22-26,  Feb   I930. First    known  publ.  work,   later  rewritten into   chap.  5  of  Ultramarine, p   2I5-221 (see  IBI). One  of  group of sea  stories. including next  three items,  based  on  diary of   voyage   made  as   bosun's   boy,   1927-8, on   freighter  to  Asia.  Written  Cambridge I928-9.
2.  Punctum  Indifferens Skibet   Gaar  Videre.
Experiment n.7  [Winter 1930-1 ?].  I have not   been   able   to   check   this   issue   but   a
copy   exists   in   Brit.   Mus.   Title  listed   in "Index of  British  Short Stories" for  I 931. appended  to  E.  J. O'Brien's Best  British Short  Stories  of   1931.   Last   three  words of  title   (Norweg.: "the ship  sails  on")   is title    of   novel   by   Nordahl   Grieg  which Lowry   read   in  English tr.  before  going  to Cambridge, and greatly admired;  see
IGII.
3. Seductio ad absurdum. Best British  Short Stories of 1931. N.Y.,  Dodd, Mead, 1931, p  89-I07. Earlier, shorter version  of  chap.
4  of  Ultramarine.  O'Brien credits  to  Ex­ periment but  without giving  date. Accord­ ing    to    its    editor,   Gerald    Noxon 	this journal  ran   for   8  issues;   story   is   ot first  6,  the  only  ones  to  which  I have  had access; it  is either in  n.8,  which   not  even Brit.    Mus.   lists,   or   it   is   same   story   as IA2  under new  title.
 4.  On   Board    the   "West  Hardaway."  Story
3: I 2-22,  Oct  I 933.   According  to  Contri­ butor  Notes in   this   issue,   this   is  Lowry's "first  appearance in   America."  Another expanded  version of  incident  used  in  IA1 and   in  Ultramarine  2I5-222   (cp.  also  28-
32,   64-65,  I33-134).  Given   3-star  listing by  E.  J. O'Brien in  his  "Index of  Distinc­ tive  Short Stories" for   I933,  appended  to his   Best     [American]   Short    Stories   for
1934·
5.  Hotel  Room  in   Chartres. Story   5:53-58, Sep    I934·  Probably  written   in   France,
1934,  during first  marriage. Given  2-star listing by  E.  J. O'Brien, Best   [American] Short Stories for 1935.
6. Economic Conference. Arena    (London) n.2:49-57 [Autumn 1949]. A short  story described in  Contributor Notes  as  "a  pas­ sage  from   an  unpublished pre-war  novel." Mrs.  Lowry believes   it  was  written  in  the Cambridge  years   and   given   at   that  time  to  a friend and fellow-undergraduate, John Davenport,  later  editor of  Arena. Lowry  did   not   pursue  the   novel   and   had    for­  gotten   the   e:x;istence  of  this   piece,   which  was   publ.  w1thout    his   permission, after success  of Vole.
7.  Strange  Comfort  Afforded by  the  Profes­
sio.
Wntten   from     notes    made   on    visiting
Richmond, Va.,   and   Rome, I947-48.
8.  Brave   petit  bateau. Les  Lettres Nouvelles I: 1067-84, Nov.   I953· French tr.  of  next item   [by  Clarisse Francillon ?].
9.  The  Bravest  Boat.   Partisan  Review   21 :
275-288, May   I954· Written Dollarton CI950, after Lowry   read  news-story in  a Vancouver paper. Listed among "Distinc-

MALCOLM LOWRY BIBLIOGRAPHY



tive  Short Stories in  American  Magazines
... Foreign Authors ... Ig54" appended to  Best   American Short  Stories 1954, ed. Martha  Foley,  N.Y.,    Houghton-Mifflin,
Ig55, p  40!.
10.  I vantaggi del  mestiere. Carosella di  nar­ ratori    Inglesi,   ed.    Giorgio   Monicelli. Milan,  Aldo    Martello  n.d.    [ Ig54 ?],   p
275-2g4. Italian  tr.  of  lA 7  by  Monicelli.
11.  Etrange  reconfort.  Les   Lettres  Nouvelles
3: Ig3-20g, Sep   1g55. French tr., by Roger
Giroux, of lA 7.
12.   [Reprint  of   IA7]   Canadian  Anthology, ed.   C.   F.   Klinck  &   R.   E.  Watters.  To­ ronto, Gage, [Ig55],  p 4I0-42I.
13.  Le   Caustic  Lunaire,  Esprit    (Paris)   24:
21 I-224, Feb.   Ig56;  340-355, Mar   Ig56;
525-543,  Apr   Ig56.   French  tr.,  serialized in 3 nos., by Michele d'Astorg & Clarisse Francillon,  of   first   version    of   a   novella
titled   (in   unpublished  English original) "The  Last    Address."  For   later  versions, see IG2.
14. [Reprint of lAg]. British Columbia: A Centennial Anthology, ed.   R.  E.  Watters. Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart,   Ig58, p  I85-Ig7.
15.  Present  Estate  of   Pompeii.  Partisan   Re­ view    26: I75·Igg,  Spring  Ig5g.   Written Dollarton,   I g5os,    from    notes   made  in Italy,  I g48.   Listed  in   "Distinctive  Short Stories  in   American   Magazines  Ig5g.   II Foreign  Authors,"    appended   to    Best American Short  Stories  1960, ed.  Martha Foley   &   David   Burnett.  N.Y.,   Houghton Mifflin,  I g6o,  p 388.
16.  Through the  Panama. Paris  Review n.23:
87-I6I,  Spring Ig6o. Illus. J.  F.  Ulysse. Novella  written   Dollarton,   Ig5os,    from notes    made   during   voyage    from   Van­ couver  to  Rotterdam  via   Panama  Canal, Ig47·8.
17.  La    Traversee   du    Panama I Extrait  du Journal de  Sigbjiirn  Wilderness. Les  Let­ tres  Nouvelles   n.s.5: !Og-183,    Jul-Aug I g6o.   French  tr.,   by  Clarisse   Francillon, of  IA16. This issue  is  entirely  devoted  to work   by  or   about Lowry. For  remainder of   contents  see   IA I 8,    C24-3 I,  E 1- I o; II Aivi 1-I3-20-32; II  B2o.
18.   Pompei, Aujourd'hui. See  IA17 p  26-58.
Tr. by Francillon of lA I 5·
19.   [Reprint of  lAg]  Canadian Short Stories, ed.  Robert Weaver, Toronto, etc.,  Oxford D.P., World's Classics, Ig6o, p  228-48.
 20.  Elefante e Colossco. Quaderni Milanesi. n.r,    Ig6o.   Italian   trans,  of    IA23a   by Giorgio Monicelli.
21.   [Untitled  extract  from    IA22    cons1stmg of  last  Boo w,  beginning "The wash  from the  invisible freighter  ..."]. Vancouver Sun, Jack  Scott's column,  I6   Mar    Ig6I.
22.  The   Forest  Path   to    the    Spring.  New World   Writing, Spring Ig6I. Long  short­ story  written Dollarton, I g5os.
23.  Hear     Us    0  Lord     from     Heaven Thy Dwelling   Place,    N.Y.,    Lippincott,   May, I g6r. A  first  collection of  Lowry's  stories and novellas, ed. by Margerie Lowry. Frontispiece:   photostat of  words   and music,  in  Lowry's hand, of  a  Manx  fisher­ men's   hymn   whose   opening  line  supplies book's    title.   Lowry  planned    book   and  chose  title   before   he  left  Dollarton  Ig54·  Contents:   IA7-g-I6-I5-22,  &  two  unpubl. short  stories :
(a) Elephant and   Colosseum. Written Dollarton   Ig5os    from    notes,    Italy, lg48.
(a)   Gin   and   Goldenrod.  Written  Dollar­
ton  1g5os  and   set  in  that   area.




B: NOVELS

1. Ultramarine.   London,  Cape,   [June?] Ig33·   276   p.  Dedic.:  "To  Thomas  For­ man   and   Elizabeth Cheyne."  Mrs.  Lowry  understands this  novel  was  originally  writ­ ten   at   Cambridge  in   Ig3o,  accepted  by Chatto &  Windus, but  lost   by  them   and  re-written  in    1g31   from   notes   retrieved by  his   room-mate,   Martin  Case,   from   a wastebasket. The   stories  listed   as   IAl-3 may  be versions  of  the  earlier draft.
2. Under   the    Volcano. N.Y.,    Reyna! & Hitchcock,  [Feb]   Ig47.    375   p.   Dedic.: "To Margerie Lowry, my  wife." Begun  as a  short   story,  c1g36, Cuernavaca,  Mexico (see  IG6). First   draft as  novel  completed Mexico  1g38,  rewritten Hollywood 1g3g, rejected  by   several  publishers   1g40,  re­ written Do!larton  1g4I-4,  completed  Nia­ gara-on-the-Lake, Ont.,  Xmas  rg44.
3.  Under the  Volcano. London, Cape, [July]
rg47· 3g5  p.
4.  Under Vulkanen. Copenhagen, Gyldendal, I g4g.  3 r 6  p.  Danish tr.  of  IB2  by Vibeke Bloch.

MALCOLM LOWRY BIBLIOGRAPHY



5.  Under Vulkanen. Oslo,  Gyldendal  Norsk,
1949·   440   p.   Norwegian  tr.   of   IB2   by
Peter  Magnus.  Forord  by   Sigurd  Hoe!,
4 unnumbered  pages.
6.  Au-dessous du  volcan. Mercure de  France
307:272-312,  1    Oct    1949.   French  tr.   of chap. 1  of  IB2,  by Stephen Rorce, assisted by  Clarisse Francillon  &  author.
7.  Au-dessous du  volcan. Paris,  Club  franc;ais du   livre,    1949.   363   p.  plus   unpaginated Preface  ( 7  p; see   IIAiv29),   Postface  by Max-Pol Fouchet  (8 p; see  IIAiv19), &
Dedic.:  "A   Margerie,  rna  femme. I et  a
Philippe Thoby-Marcelin, mon  ami." Sub­
scribers' edition. Tr.  by  Stephen Rorce &
Clarisse Francillon.
8. A u-dessous  du   vole an.   Paris,   Correa,  1o May   1950.   Trade ed.  of  IB7.  Revised   tr. by  Stephen  Spriel with   the  collaboration of  Clarisse Francillon  &  the  author.
9.  Unter dem Vulkan. Stuttgart, Ernst Klett,
1951. 393  p.  Dedic.: "Fiir meine  Frau Margerie I und    fiir   Downie  Kirk."   Ger­ man tr.  of  IB2  by  Clemens ten  Holder.
10.  Under  the   Volcano. N.Y.,  Vintage;  To­ ronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1958.377 p. Paperback reprint of IB2
11.  A u-dessous   du    volcan.   Paris.    Le    club francais du  livre,  3 Feb 1959· 424 p. plus unpaginated   Preface  &   Postface   (as   in IB7)   and   unpaginated    Avant-propos (9  p.)   by Max  Nadeau; see IIAiv33. New ed.  of IB7,  "traduction revue  par  leurs auteurs."  Photogravure studies of author, front.
12.  Au-dessous du  volcan. Paris,  Correa, 1960.
Trade ed.  of IB1 1.
13.  Sotto il  volcano. Milan, Feltrenelli, March
1961, 459  p.  Italian tr.  of  IB2  by Giorgio
Monicelli.


C: POETRY

1.  In  Memoriam: lngvald Bjorndal and   his Comrade.   Atlantic   Monthly    168:   501, Oct 1941.  "While we sail  and  laugh,  joke and  fight, comes  death." Probably his first pub!.     poem;   sonnet,  Dollarton,   dated "November  25,   1940."  A  melody    which he   composed  for   this   poem   and   sang   to guitar accompaniment was  apparently  not recorded.  A   French  tr.    signed    "Phito" (i.e.  Philippe Thoby-Marcelin-see  IG15)
exists   in   UBCC,  titled    Une   Bouteille  a
Ia Mer. Based  on  news-item.
 2.  Sestina  in   a   Cantina.   Canadian  Poetry
Magazine   (Vancouver)    11:24-27,   Sep
1947.   "Watching  this   dawn's  mnemonic
of  old   dawning."  Double sestina,  Dollar­
ton.  MS in UBCC is dated "Sept. 1943·" Opening has  parallel in  Vole. 35·
3.  Salmon drowns eagle. Contemporary Verse (Caulfield,   B.C.)    n.21 :3,   1947.    "The golden eagle  swooped out  of  the  sky." Dollarton  1942-3. Based  on  story  told  him by    "Old   Sam,"  a    Dollarton   squatter. Lowry retells the  fable in  IA22.
4. Glaucous-winged   Gull.   C3    p    4·   "The hook-nosed angel with  spring plumage." Alternate   opening,  draft   in    UBCC,   is "The  angel    that  walks    like    a   sailor." There  are   echoes   of   Ultramarine  18,  & Vole. 151.
5.  Stoker Tom's Ukulele. C3  p  4· "Tom left his  seabag  behind  and   this  uke." Sonnet, Dollarton, early    1940s.   Cp.   Vole.  155.
6.  Indian  Arm.    Canadian  Poetry   Magazine
11:25, Dec   1947.   "Mill-wheel  reflections of  sun   on  water." Terza rima, Dollarton,
1940s.  Some  phrases later  echoed in Through   the    Panama   (IA16)   92,   Cp. Vole. 38,112 & esp.  270.
7.  Old  Freighter in  an   Old   Port. C6   p  24. "It had   no  name   and   we  docked at  mid­ night."  Sonnet,  Dollarton,   1941-2.   Many phrases   are    echoes    of    On    Board    the  "West  Hardaway"   (IA4)    16   &   Ultra­ marine 37·
8.  Port   Moody.  C6   p  25.  "Over the   mauve there is smoke  like  a  swan." Sonnet,  Dol­ larton, mid    1940s.   Phrases parallel  Vole.
3 7, 75,  124,  & recur in  IA22.
9.   [Poem].  Contemporary   Verse  n.24: 6, Spring  1948.   "These  animals  that  follow us  in  dream."  Several drafts, from  Cuer­ navaca   c1936   to   Dollarton    c1942.   Of various  titles    latest  is   prob.   Xocxitepec (for  Xocitepec, a  village nr  Cuernavaca?) Cp.  Vole. 36,  88-89, 240.
10. Sunrise. Outposts   (London), n.IO:  7, Summer   1948.    Spec.  Canadian   n.,    ed. Earle  Birney.  First  of   only   two   Lowry poems   yet  pub!.  in  Britain. Opening  ( cp. Vole. 122)   may  show  influence of  Conrad Aiken's The Kid   (Coli. Poems, 1953, esp. p 845). Sonnet.
11.   [Cain Shall Not  Slay  Abel  Today on  Our
Good    Ground].  A   Book   of   Canadian Poetry,  ed.   A.   J. M.   Smith,  2nd    (rev.) ed.   Chicago:  Univ. of   Chicago  P.;   To-

MALCOLM LOWRY BIBLIOGRAPHY



ronto:  Gage; London:   Cambridge Univ. P., 1948,  p 372-373. Mexico, 1936-8. An unpubl.   revision  exists   in   UBCC  titled A  Poem  of  God's Mercy. This & following
6   poems    are    retained   in    Smith's   3rd
(rev.)  ed.,   1957, with   same   pagination.
12.   [King Lear Blinded Oedipus in a Dream].
Smith p  373-374· Mexico 1936-8; rev. Dollarton   1941-2.  One    of   group  titled Moon  in  Scandinavia.
13.   [The   World  of    Ghosts   Moves    Closer Every  Hour]. Smith p 374· Mexico 1936-8. A  later  version is  in  MS  in  UBCC.
14.   Lupus   in    Fabula.   Smith   p    374-375· "Those animals that follow   us in  dream." A  later  but   not   final   draft of  ICg. This title    has    since    been    transferred   to   an­ other poem   for  which it  is  more  apt.  See this  issue.
15.   [He Plays  the  Piano with  a  Razor]. Smith p  375·  Irreg.  sonnet, Mexico 1936-8. One of  group  called  Songs   for   Second  Child­ hood.
16. & 17  [Reprints of  IC   r,  3]. Smith p  372,
371·372.
18.  The  Canadian Turned  Back   at   the  Bor­
der.  Arena (London)  n.2: 58-6o   [Autumn
194g]. "A  singing smell  of tar,  of the highway." Elaborately rhymed, 8  10-line stanzas. Vancouver & Dollarton,  rggg-40.
19.   [Reprint of  IC3, slightly rev.] Twentieth Century  Canadian Poetry, ed.   Earle  Bir­ ney, Toronto:  Ryerson, rg53. p  25  (notes, p  137-138).
20&21  [Reprints of   ICrr  &   14].  Penguin Book   of  Canadian Verse, ed.  Ralph  Gus­ tafson.  London,   Penguin,   rg59,  p    r63,
!64.
22.   [The  Flowering Past]. N.Y. Times  Sun­ day   r  r    Oct    rg5g, sec  4,  p   roE.  "There is  no  poetry when   you  live  there." Sonnet, Dollarton  c r g5o.
23.   [No  Still   Path]. N.Y. Times r   Dec   r 959, sec  L,  p  38.  "Alas, there is  no  still   path in  my soul." Sonnet, Dollarton, late  1g4os.
24.  Le  Vendredi-Saint De  M.  Lowry Sous  Un Veritable Cactus. Les  Lettres Nouvelles, n.s.s:8g,  Jul-Aug  1960. This  &   next    7 entries  record   tr.    into  French  by   Jean Follain   for    special   Lowry   n.    (IA r 7) . Dollarton, early   r 950s; see  IC3g.
25.  Reveil. IC24 p  go.  Dollarton, early  1950s.
See  IC4o.
26.  Harpies. IC24 p  go.  Unpubl.  original has same  title. Dollarton 1g43.
 27.  Nulle   Poesie.   IC24 p  gr. See  IC22.
28.  Pas  Le  Temps De  S'Arreter Ni  Reflecher.
IC24  p   gr.  Quatrains,  Dollarton  1g40s.
See  IC58.
29.  Hommes  A  Vestes   Battantes. IC24  p  92.
Unpublished   original   titled     Men    with
Coats   Thrashing.  "Our  lives   we  do   not
weep." Dollarton?
30.  Priere  Pour L'Annee Nouvelle. IC24 p g2- g3.    Unpubl.   original   has    many    titles, latest:  Prayer from   the   Wicket Gate  for Forty-One  Doors   for  Forty-Two. "A  tril­ lion    moons    the    thimbleberries:    coral." Sonnet to  Conrad Aiken,  New  Year's Day Ig42.
31.  L'Ukulele  De   Tom  Le   Chauffeur. IC24 p g3. See  IC5.
32-35.   [Reprints  of   IC3,  r,   g,   rr].   Oxford Book   of   Canadian  Verse,  ed.   A.   J. M. Smith.  Toronto,  London,  N.Y.:   Oxford
Univ.P.,   rg6o,   p    249,    250,    251,    251-
252.
36.  Imprisoned  In  A  Liverpool Of  Self.  Con­ tact    (San  Francisco)  n.g:83,  Feb   rg6r. Rime   royal,   Dollarton, late  rg4os.   (This issue  prints also  the  next  8  items).
37.  In The   Oaxaca Gaol, IC36 p 84.  "I have known  a city of dreadful night." Oaxaca, Mexico,    1936.   Lowry   wrote  this  after  he had    been   arrested  and    held    for   breach of a passport regulation.
38.  Don't  Have  One  For   The  Road.  IC36 p  85.  "Moons I  have   lost   and   suns   un­ wept   and    gone." Dollarton, late   rg4os.  Some   phrases are   echoed   in  IA22.

MALCOLM LOWRY BIBLIOGRAPHY



39. Mr. Lowry's Derivative Good Friday Under  A  Real   Cactus. IC36  p  85.  "Be­ cause  I am  a fraud." See  IC24.
40.  Eye-Opener.  IC36   p   85.   "How  like   a man, is  Man, who  rises  late." See  IC25.
41.   [The  Pilgrim].  IC36  p   87.   "A   pilgrim passes   through  the   town   at   night."  Son­ net,  Dollarton, late I 940s.
42-44.    [Reprints  of  IC4, 22,  7].  IC36 p 84-
86.
45.  Alternative. Tamarack Review (Toronto) n.I9, Spring I961. "Rather than that, I'd go   down  to   the   bar."  One   of  a   group titled The Cantinas. (This isue  prints also the  next  17 i terns) .
46.  Because  of  No  Moment. IC45. "And  now I brood  on  what I  think  I know." Dollar­ ton,   early    I940s.  One   of  a  group  titled Songs   from   the  Beach, or  Eridanus.
47.  Blepharipappus    Glandulosus   or     White Tidy-Tips. IC45. "I  prayed   to say  a  word as  simple." Dollarton. Cp.  Vole. 207.  One of  a  group  titled  Nursery Rhymes.
48.   [Blank Sonnet].  IC45. "There  is  a  tide in   the   affairs  of  men." One of  a  group titled The Comedian.
49.  Christ Walks in  this  Infernal District Too.
IC45. "Beneath the   Malebolge lies  Hast­
ings  Street." Vancouver, ci939-40.
50.  Epitaph.   IC45.  "Malcolm  Lowry."  Mex­
ico.
51.  The  dead  man    sat   in   the   sun.    IC45.
Mexico.
52.  Draft   Board.  IC45.   "Back    broad   and straight  from   crop  to  hooks." Dollarton, wartime.
53.   [Fragment].   IC45.  "A    wounded   voice over   the   telephone." Mexico   1936-8. Cp. lines  II-I2 with  Vole. I86.
54.  The  Dollarton  Bus  Stop. IC45. "I  fear it  much as  I  fear   death." Four-beat  "son­ net", Dollarton.
55.  Jokes   in  the   Galley. IC45. "There  is  no pity  at  sea." Rondelet, Dollarton. One of a  group titled The Roar   of  the  Sea  and the    Darkness.   Cp.    theme   with    Ultra­ marine; see also  Vole. I67.
56.  Lines   on   the   Poet   being   Informed that his Epic  about the  Philistines etc. Needed Cutting. IC45. "David." Dollarton, I946, while  revising Vole.
57.  Note for  a  Poem. IC45. "Study the irregu­
lar   verb." Couplet, Oaxaca,  I945·

86
 58.   No  Time to  Stop and  Think. IC45. "The only   hope   is  the  next  drink." Triolet. See IC28.
59.  The Paths of  Wolves. IC45. "So  he  would rather have  written those  lines." Sonnet, Dollarton.
60.  Semicolon  Technique.   IC45.   "Christ   I am  tired of  fruit in  poetry." Prob.  Dollar­ ton,  early   I 950s; cp.  a  passage in  Lowry's "Letter" on   Conrad  Aiken   (ID4)   p  83.
61.  Vigil    Forget.  IC45.  "Vigil  Forget  went ten  miles  in  a camion." Mexico. One  type­ script  in    UBCC   is   dated,   in    author's hand, I936.
62.   [The  Volcano is   dark].   IC45.  Mexico.
Cp.  Vole. 323-324.
63.-71.  Nine   new  poems  in  this  issue  of  Cana­
dian   Literature, with  prefatory note.




0: ARTICLES
AND REVIEWS

l. [Review  of  Turvey, novel   by  Earle   Bir­ ney].  Thunderbird   (University of   British  Columbia)  5:24-26,  Dec.   I949;   I300  w.
2.  Garden  of   Etla.   United  Nations  World (N.Y.)   June   I950,  p   45-47;  2300    w. General  article on   Mexico, Dollarton.
3.   [Advance  rev.   of   A   Long    Day's   Dying, novel    by   Frederick  Buechner].  Back   of jacket, N.Y., Knopf,   I95o;  I25   w.  Dol­ larton.
4.  A Letter. Wake (N.Y.) n.II:Bo-89, I952;
4500   w.  Essay  in  praise of  Conrad  Aiken, in form of letter dated "Dollarton, B.C. I Canada I Nov   28,  I95I," &  written  esp. for  this  "Conrad Aiken   number."
5.   [Advance  rev.   of   Masters  of   the   Dew, novel   by  Jacques  Romain  (Hayti)  in   tr. of   Langston  Hughes  &   Mercer  Cook]. Back   of   jacket.  N.Y.; 400   w.  Dollarton.
6. Preface. Signed "Malcolm Lowry" but written by Clarisse Francillon; see IIAiv29.

MALCOLM LOWRY BIBLIOGRAPHY



E: LETTERS

THE   FOLLOWING letters  appeared,  in   the French  translation  of   Clarisse  Francillon,  in the   Malcolm  Lowry  Special  Edition  of   Les Lettres Nouvelles, IAI7.
1. To  Clarisse Francillon, p 206. Undated. [1953?]. Begins  "Carissima Clarisse/Le nouveau libre ... " Vancouver.
2. To   Albert Erskine [ed., Reyna! &  Hitch­ cock  edition of  Vole.], p   I84-I86.  Dated "Dollarton, 15  juillet 46."
3.  To    Albert   Erskine,   p    I 86- I 88.    Dated
"Haiti,  janvier 47·"
4. To    Albert   Erskine,   p    I 88- I 89.    Dated
"Dollarton, Nov.  7,  I949·"
5.  To   Albert  Erskine,  p   I89-I93· Undated.
Begins    "Cher   Albert, I Votre   lettre   est arrivee sans  anicroche ..."
6.  To    Albert   Erskine,   p    I 93- I 94·   Dated
"Dollarton, Canada, Octobre."
7.  To    David   Markson   [American  writer, friend, author  of  unpub.  academic  thesis on   Vole.], p   I94-I97· Dated  "5 fevrier I954·" Dollarton.
8.  To  David  Markson,  p    I98-2o2.  Dated
"Io rnai  I954 ... Dollarton."
9.  To   David  Markson,  p   203-204. Extract, undated.  [About  24  May   I954].
10. To David Markson, p  204-205. Dated "Chateau d'Otrante./ Mardi, Novernbre." Dollarton, I 953.




F: RADIO ADAPTATIONS

THE  FOLLOWING are  radio  adaptations  of
Under the   Volcano made by  other  writers.
1.  Studio  One,  Columbia Broadcasting  Sys­ tem,  29  Apr   I947, g:30-I0:30  p.m.,  New York City. Writer-Director:   Fletcher
Markle.   Producer:    Robert   J.  Landry.
Script  Editor:   Gerald  Noxon.  Original
music: Alexander Semmler. Consul:  Eve­
rett Sloane. Yvonne: Anne Burr. Hugh: Hedley Rainnie. Narrator:  Joe  de  Santis. (For reviews see IIAv).
 2. German  language  adaptation.   Berlin [ 195 I?]   Consul:  Peter  Lorre.  Further information desired.




G: UNPUBLISHED MATERIAL

IN FEBRUARY,  1961,  the  University of British Columbia Library  purchased,  and   established in    its   Special   Collections,   the    posthumous papers  of   Malcolm  Lowry   in   the   possession of  his  widow,   Mrs.   Margerie Lowry. In  addi­ tion   to   extensive manuscript  and   typescript holdings  of   the   many  drafts  of    Under  the  Volcano  and   of  the   published   novellas, short stories   and   poems,    and   most   of   the   printed material  by  and   about   Malcolm  Lowry,  this connection contains the  following unpublished work:
1.  "October Ferry to  Gabriola". Novel.  Dol­ larton, c1949-54. Set  on  B.C.  coast.  Com­ plete    first    draft,   incomplete   subsequent draftings &  notes. Temporarily  on  loan   to Mrs.   Lowry  for   preliminary   editing  for pub!.
2.  "Lunar  Caustic."  Novella. Complete first draft  titled  "The  Last    Address"  (pub!. only   in   Fr.    tr.;  see   IA13),  New   York I934-5· Set   in   Bellevue  Psychiatric  Hos­ pital.  Complete second draft,   titled "Swinging the     Maelstrom."    Mexico   & Dollarton.  Incomplete  third   draft,  titled "Lunar Caustic." TS  of  editing from  these  drafts by  Margerie  Lowry &  Earle Birney  for  pub!.,  66  p.
3.  "Dark  as  the   Grave Wherein  my  Friend is  Laid." Novel,   Mexican setting.  Dollar­ ton  1950s.  Incomplete drafts.
4.  "La  Mordida."  Novel,    Mexican  setting.
Dollarton,  from    late    I 940s.    Incomplete drafts.
5.  "In   Ballast to   the    White   Sea."  Novel based   on   voyage  to  Norway c1930. Two MS   notebooks,  early    I 930s,   and   charred fragment  of   final   copy.   Remainder   des­ troyed  when   Lowry  beach   house  burned,
I944·
6.  "Under  the   Volcano."  Short  story.  Ori­ ginal   version,  dealing  with    central   inci­ dent  in   chap.  8   of   novel.   Cuernavaca Cl936.

MALCOLM LOWRY BIBLIOGRAPHY



7.  "Enter One in  Sumptuous Armour." Short story.   Draft,  revision, &  notes   for  further revision.  Original   c   1930;  notes    much later. Set  in  English public   school.
8. "June  goth  1934!" Short story.   TS  car­ bon  with  MS  revisions. Prob.   begun  1934,  France. Set  in  train, France.
9.  "In  the    Black    Hills."  Short  story.    TS draft & 2 revisions, plus  MS  additions. Western U.S. setting. Probably early.
10. "The  Lighthouse Invites the   Storm." Collected  poems,    about  1000   pages   MS
& TS. Some  in  unique copies,  others with many   revisions, extending  from   c1930   to
time   of  death. A  selection, preserving the
ti tie,   has    been    edited   ( 180   p   TS)   by Earle Birney  & Margerie Lowry,  for pub!. Some   of   these   have   recently  been   pub!.
serially   (see    ICg6-4r,   45-62,  &   poems in   this   issue   of  Canadian Literature).
 11.  "The  Ship  Sails   On."  Stage   dramatiza­ tion  of  Nordahl  Grieg's novel.  (See  IA2). Several incomplete drafts.
12.  "Tender is  the  Night." Screen adaptation of  Scott Fitzgerald's  novel.  Working copy and  final  draft.
13.  "Moby  Dick."   Radio   dramatization   of
Melville's  novel.  Drafts  &   final   copy.
14.  "Halt! I Protest." Essay  on  philosophy of freedom. Incomplete.
15.   [Critique  of   novel    by   Philippe   Thoby­ Marcelin  &  Pierre  Marcelin,  The   Pencil  of  God    (Boston: Houghton  Mifllin,  1951; tr.  Leonard Thomas)].  MS  notes,   So  p, incomplete.
16.   [Notebooks &  journals, MS,  several hun­
dred p.]
17.   [Letters  to   Lowry  and   drafts  of   letters from  him,  unsorted].
18.   [Unsorted  miscellaneous material].










THE SECOND PART of the Bibliography of Malcolm Lowry,  prepared  by Earle  Birney and  Margerie  Lowry,  will be  pub­ lished in our  next  (Summer) issue. It will be concerned  with writings of various kinds about Lowry.
The  Summer  issue will also include  a  further   piece  by  Malcolm
Lowry himself for which space could  not  be found  in this issue; it is the  Preface  he wrote  for  the  French  edition  of Under  the  Volcano, which has never before appeared  in English.
The  Summer  issue will otherwise  be  devoted  largely  to studies  of
Canadian  poetry,  and  will include-among  other items-essays on the Confederation Poets, on Emile Nelligan and  on Phyllis Webb.










88
