$2.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·56
Spring, 1973


POETS PJIST JIND FUTURE



Articles

BY  PATRICK ANDERSON, SANDRA DJWA, BARRIE  DAVIES, PETER STEVENS,  WARREN TALLMAN


Review  Articles  and  Reviews

BY  TOM WAYMAN, STEP HEN  SCOBIE, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, GEORGE WOODCOCK, FRASER SUTHER LAND, CLARA THO MAS, ROY  DANIELLS, JAMES POLK,  PAT BARCLAY, AUDREY THO.MAS,  :MARY JANE  EDWARDS, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, SEYMOU R  MAYNE, GERMAINE WARKENTIN, W. H. NEW, DENNIS D UFFY, ALAN SHUCAR D


Opinions and  Notes

BY  FRED COGSWELL, DE SMOND PACEY



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










PERIODICAL PRECARIOUSNESS





PERIODICAL CRITICISM has always lived precariously in Canada. During  the past decade  or so there has been an apparent change, and  one's mail has tended  to contain  an  unwonted  proportion  of journals  of literature and  the related  arts,  and  to a less extent  of affairs and social sciences. But this has been a nurtured growth,  which would hardly have been possible if it had not been for (a)   the willingness of the Canada  Council to support  such publications  and  (b) the  appreciation  by  many  of our  new  universities and  colleges of  the  prestige that  accrues  from  allowing  literary  or  scholarly  journals  to appear   under  their auspices.
11  am  concerned   here  not  with  the  pros  and  cons of subsidized  publication, though  one  cannot  declare  too often  the  need to regard  with  caution  even the patronage  one accepts, nor I am concerned with the larger question, which would need a whole issue of Canadian Literature to discuss adequately, of the dilution or distortion  of quality  that  may come from excessive nurturing. I am interested rather  in  those magazines  that  have survived over decades  without such institu­ tional help.
i'fwo  such   journals  have  recently  been  celebrating  significant  anniversaries. The  Canadian  Forum has reached  its golden  jubilee; Saturday Night  has gone beyond even its diamond  jubilee, for it is now 85 years old. A third  notable sur­ vivor, Maclean's, according  to my calculation,  is 77· The  University  of  Toronto Press has just published,  under  the title of Forum ($7.50), a thick and generous selection  of  articles,  poems  and  stories  from  the  fifty  years of The  Canadian
Forum, edited  by  J. L. Granatstein and  Peter Stevens. A similar selection from
the  past  of  Saturday  Night  is due  to  appear  some time  this spring  from  new press, prepared by Morris  Wolfe and  Robert  Fulford,  who has been the  maga-

3

EDITORIAL



zine's  editor  for  several  years.  Maclean's  has  not  announced  any  celebratory event,  but  the  journal  proclaimed  its transfiguration  into  modernity  a year or so back, when Peter Newman took over the editorship.
One  of the reasons for the survival of journals  which do not have a narrowly specialist  public  is usually, indeed,  their  power  of  transformation within  fairly clear  limits, their  flexibility towards  the currents  of the  times while at the same time retaining  the loyalty of their own particular constituencies among the popu­ lation.   It  is  rarely,  indeed,  that  a  magazine,   having  established  a  readership  defined  by education  and  class, moves outside  it,  though  it  only  survives if it adapts  itself to the shifts in taste and  attitude within  that  readership  (to  which of  course  it  will  have  contributed, for  the  relationship   between   journal   and readership tends in time to take on a symbiotic character).
Short  of looking  through  the  back files of Saturday  Night,  which is precisely
what  Messrs. Fulford  and  Wolfe  have  been  doing  on  our  behalf,  it is difficult before  the  appearance  of  the  projected   Saturday   Night   Scrapbook  to  chart exactly  the  course  which  that   journal  has  taken.  But  I  believe, from  what  I remember  of it in Sandwell's and Edinborough's days, and from dipping  through A Voice   from the  Attic  (the  collection of Robertson  Davies literary  pieces from Saturday  Night  a quarter  of a century  ago now republished  in the  New  Cana­ dian  Library), that  it always attracted a well-read  middle-class public, generally liberal  in  inclination,  willing  to  have  the  arts  explained  to  them,  but  perhaps  more  interested  in  political events and  social changes;  its base has  always been eastern   Canadian, and  it  has  moved  from  a  vague  continentalism  towards  a fairly hard-edged  nationalism as the people who read it have moved.
Maclean's, appearances   to  the  contrary,  has  always  been  the  journal  of the
lower  middle-class  non-book-reading  public;  it  is curious  to  note  that  though under  its new readership  the  journal  has boasted  that  it is now employing  real writers-writers are  now figures embodied  in  national  myth -it  in  fact  does very little to tell its readers about  the books those writers publish,  and indeed in many  issues contains  no comments  at  all on  recent  books. Sports,  the outdoors, popular  politics, popular  music, films, talk of doom, and  gossip about  Canadian celebrities:  these still -in slightly changed  forms from the past -loom large in its contents. On the other hand, the fiction which once occupied a considerable proportion  of its space has vanished, owing to a process of long attrition  during which its readership  found their  need for fantasy  increasingly  appeased  by radio and  television; their need for opinions and facts and true life stories, significantly, was  not,  for  here  print  seemed  still  to  give  a  needed  validation.   In  another

4

EDITORIAL



important way Maclean's  has changed  with its readership; Saturday  Night  was always  an  urban   journal,  but  Maclean's  was largely  read  in  the  country,  and then  it had  a fairly direct  attitude  towards rural matters.  Now its readership  has mostly migrated  to the towns, and the life of the country has become in its pages a matter  of nostalgia rather  than of experience.
There  are,  however, two constant  characteristics of Maclean's  that  have never
fundamentally changed.  One  is its studious avoidance-which Saturday  Night has never needed to follow to quite  the same extent -of giving any appearance of intellectuality,  of the highbrowism  which makes its readers uneasy;  if scholars or artists appear  in its pages, it is for their controversial or romantic  appeal,  not for  their  scholarship  or  their  art.  The  other is a Torontonian puritanism  which appears  and  reappears  in  a  Protean  variety of guises. It  was only ten years ago
-astonishing as it may  now seem-that Pierre Berton  was dismissed from the
staff of Maclean's  for having expressed in one of his articles views, on current hypocrisies regarding  sex, that  were unacceptable  to the readers. The  attitude of readers  has changed,  and  that  of Maclean's  with it; subjects  that  could not  be discussed a decade  ago are  now fair game. Yet puritanism  is an insidious  thing, which  always finds new guises. One  of them in recent years has been the smug­ ness of radicals  and  modish  radical fellow travellers regarding  the simplicity and honesty and  purity  of their  own way of life as compared  with  that  of others. A recent  example  of  this so-called  "new  journalism"  in  which  the writer  uses his (or  her)   assumed  superiority  and  sensitivity as a  gauge  by  which  to  judge her (his)   subject,  was  an  article  on  Adrienne  Clarkson  by  Melinda   McCracken,  which  doubtless  pleased  many  conservative readers  because it  "exposed  the in­ consistency"  of those  who  live what  they  conceive  to  be  a  civilized life while embracing  liberal causes. Others,  however, were disturbed  not because they were Adrienne  Clarkson's  partisans  (many  were far from that) but because the whole tenor  of the  article  seemed  an  ominous symptom of the  return  of Malvolio  (in jeans  and  scuffed  sandals   rather   than  cross-gartered)  -and  when   Malvolio returns it is surely time to expect Savonarola!
The  secret of The   Canadian  Forum's survival-as the  material  which  Pro­
fessors Granatstein and  Stevens  have  collected amply  displays-is  that  it  has kept  its faithful  and  very special  public  by fulfilling two functions,  of the only continuing  forum  of opinion  where  anyone  from  radical  conservatives  to anar­ chists  could  write  in  a  generally  tolerant  atmosphere,  and  of  our  one  literary journal  durable  enough  to last for fifty years. What  the New  Statesman and the Spectator  were  for  Britain,  The   Canadian  Forum  has  been  for  Canada-the

5

EDITORIAL



magazine  where  people  of  generally  intellectual   tum   of  mind  could  find  the matters  of contemporary concern that  interested  them freely discussed; the frame was always Canadian, and in its own way the  Forum  was always nationalist,  or at  least  anti-imperialist and  anti-continentalist. But,  more  than  that,  because it was the  one literary  journal of any significance  that  did survive from  the  early
192o's  to the  present, and  because many of its founders  and  editors were critics and  poets, its record  has been intimately  linked  with  the  modem  movement  in Canadian poetry,  beginning  with  Pratt  and  Scott  and  Smith  and  continuing  to the  younger   poets  of  today.  Forum-the anthology-is  thus  an  invaluable introduction  to  the  imaginative  and  intellectual   life of our  time  and  country, and  astonishingly  good value,  since its  broad  three-column format  gives room for three times as much  material as the ordinary  400 page book. Every reader of the  Forum  will probably  find favourite  pieces left out, but  it is a sign of a good journal if so large an anthology can be collected and seem incomplete.

A RECEPTIVE ATMOSPHERE  and  editorial enthusiasms are responsible for a number  of new journalistic ventures  which are worth mention­ ing briefly. From  Fredericton  comes the  journal  of  Canadian  Fiction, of which each  issue contains  a group of short stories and  fragments  of novels in  progress, and  a balancing  group  of critical articles. It  claims in its first issue to have "the  finest  sustaining   collection  of ... Canadian  criticism   and   reviews  available"; eyebrows  raised,  one  waits  to see. Ariel  ("A  Review  of   International English Literature"), started  in Leeds, has now moved  to Canada  and  this year begins publication   from  Calgary;  it  has an  interesting  selection  of  articles,  rather  like that  in  the  English Critical Quarterly and  may  well provide serious competition  with  the  University   of  Toronto   Quarterly.  Exile  is  another  quarterly  of inter­ national  pretensions,  from York University,  in  which  imaginative  writers are­ we are  told -to  be allowed to appear  "without a praetorian guard  of critics";  excellent idea, if we are allowed to see the imaginative creations of such writers, but  when  they  become auto-critics  by  talking  at  boring  and  meandering  length about  their  own  work, as up  to now  they  do  in  Exile,  one sees a  point  in the professionals doing it for them. All these are quarterlies. Northern   journey, from Ottawa, appears  to be an occasional periodical,  containing  an interesting  variety of critical  writing,  journals,  poems, stories, drawings,  photographs, by contribu­ tors  who  vary  from  first-timers to  established  writers  spanning   the  generations
from Atwood to Livesay and from John  Colombo  to Barker Fairley.

G.W.

6



A POET
PAST AND FUTURE




Patrick Anderson




BY JUNE '97' I had  been away from Canada for twenty­
one years. For ten of these years I had been without  my Canadian passport, and
the  little  certificate  which  documented  my citizenship  and  whose physical  pos­ session was one  of the  last acts of a despairing  nostalgia;  I  had  asked for it in Madrid  and  received it in Tangier.  Of the two documents  the passport was the more  precious. It  became  the symbol of a fine transatlantic mobility;  of  dollars, supposing  there  were  any;  of a  difference not  easily defined;  and  it  made  me almost a tourist  in  the land  of my birth.  I had  taken  refuge in it on  the one or two occasions when  anti-British  students ganged  up on me in  Athens. Once,  in­ deed,  when  I showed  it  to  an  inquisitive  waitress in  a  bar  she  had  expressed some disbelief,  pointing   (as it seemed to me)  to something sad about  my face, the  hollows  under   my  eyes, the  growing  wrinkles of  middle-age,  as though  a person so world-weary  was unlikely to belong to such  a fresh and  vigorous part of the world.
The  odd  thing  is that  last summer,  despite the above experience, I found  my­
self sitting  at  my work-table  in  rural  Essex writing  poems about  Canada. F. R. Scott  had  just posted me a batch of papers left in his house since, I think,I 947; the  batch  was nowhere  as big as I expected;  much of it was any way poor stuff, strained,  rhetorical,  beset by what  Thorn  Gunn  has called  "the  dull  thunder of approximate words"; but  there  was an evocation of a lake-scene in the Eastern Townships  which,  with  a great  deal of revision, might  just about  do  (it became the new "Memory of Lake Towns"). And then, almost simultaneously, a packet at  the  bottom  of a cupboard  produced  various scribbles on the writing paper  of the  Hotel  Morin,  Baie St. Paul, scribbles which had been intended  to delight my friends  on  the  recently formed  Preview  but  which  had  come to nothing  in that

7

POET PAST AND FUTURE



summer  of 1942, and some of these lines I started  to incorporate, with critical commentary,  in  a  long  new  poem  recalling that  holiday  ("Remembering  Baie St.  Paul"). An incident  when a cop challenged  me after  midnight  in a vacant lot opposite McGill provided the entirely new "Frisked!"; there was a piece about invigilating  an  exam  at  the  long defunct  Dawson  College;  and  soon  I found  I was once more pondering  the theme of snow (and, God knows, emptiness, child­ hood,  negation,  transformation, excitement,  awe)   which  had  been  part  of the rather  gimcrack  symbolic system with  which  I  used  to approach  Canada, and which by no means always fitted in with my supposed Marxism.
Such  poems were in obvious contrast  with those I had  been writing since my "poetic  revival" of three to four years before, although  the difference was princi­ pally  of subject  matter   and  the  necessary dependence   upon  memory  and  the drama  of time. My present work-and here I must apologize,  perhaps already too late, for the autobiographical insistence, indeed  the sheer egoism, demanded  by my subject-my  present  work was drawn  pretty  directly  from  personal ex­ perience and  concrete  objects carefully and  respectfully observed. As I sat at my window  I faced  an  assimilated world:  the  plants  on the sill, the clumps of lime trees, the stones of the path,  the twist of the small  road,  the garden,  the oaks by the  farm,  the  distantly  flashing lake, the  house and  its  bibelots, even  the  Ford parked  in  the  drive,  had  each  at  least one  poem  to  itself.  An  ex-rhetorician maybe,  I  was now  in  danger  of abasing  myself before  the  ineffable solidity of fact;   I  was surprised  how  often  I  thought  affectionately  of  Robert  Frost  and Edward  Thomas.
As to this "poetical  revival",  which meant  going over the old stuff  (but  there
were plenty  of poems I didn't  remember, for  I had  only a smattering  of  maga­ zines and  papers)   and  then  clearing  up  the  naggingly  not-quite-dead  bits and pieces, embedded  in psychological blocks, of my last burst of activity in  1954-57, and  then  starting  afresh, it was a renewal  partly  prompted  by an  accumulation of evidence from  Canada  that  I wasn't  entirely forgotten  there -that there was even, hopefully, a "renewal  of interest"  in my work. I  heard  that  someone  had fed "Poem  On  Canada" into a computer.  Mr. C. X. Ringrose got in touch  with me over his kindly, often  perceptive but also inaccurate  "Patrick Anderson  and the  Critics".1   I  read  handbooks.  I  found  a  quotation  here  and  there.  Young girls from  Alberta  high schools wrote me that  they had  been as..<,igned  to appre­  ciate  my  work,  and  where  could  they  find  some?  Professor  Wynne  Francis's piece on the  Montreal  Poets reached  me after  a  time-lag  of several years. 2   And then,  years  later  again,  F.  R.  Scott  sent  me  the typed  transcript   of  a  tape-

8

POET  PAST  AND  FUTURE



recorded  conversation   between  some  of  the  Preview  editors  which  had  taken place at  a sort of reunion  in 1966. Those  present, apart  from Scott, were Neuf­ ville Shaw,  Bruce  Ruddick  and  Margaret  Surrey;  the latter,  as  Margaret Day, had been a member of the group for only a couple of months.
Reading  this  transcript was a  bewildering,  moving, embarrassing  experience
even to  an  incorrigible  autobiographer such as myself. For  about  twenty  pages the  editors  returned   again   and  again  to  what  they  evidently  considered  my charismatic   presence  although,   doubtless,  they  were  also  recovering  their  lost youth. I appeared as a kind of cult hero, like Percival in The  Waves. And then, not  unexpectedly,  their  enthusiasm  flagged a little. Notes of qualification  began to creep in. Bruce admitted  I had  had faults of personality, all the more sinister for being unspecified;  Margaret  felt that  I had written only one good poem, the early and  once popular  "Summer's Joe"; Neufville wondered  why he hadn't felt much  urge to look me up when he visited England. Finally they all agreed I was dead  as  a  poet,  hadn't written  any  poetry  in years;  my six or so prose books didn't  concern them much.  In this rather alarming atmosphere  of myth I couldn't help  reflecting  on  a  rumour  I  had  been  told  about  some years before,  namely that  I  had  been  "seen  on  St.  Catherine  Street".  Nor  was this  all. The  editors went  on  to  refer  to another  story which  had  apparently  been current,  the story that  I was physically as well as poetically dead, my throat  slit in a tavern  brawl. (And  indeed  when  I  did  finally get back  to Canada last fall,  and  was dining with  the  Surreys  on my first night,  my old friend  Hugh  MacLennan happened to be at  the  next  table, from  which he told me with a look of gentle incredulity that  he had  read  my obituary  long since-"Oh yes, you died, I'm  sure of that. You died  after  a  protracted illness".)  No wonder  that  a woman  present  at  the tape-recording,  but   not   herself  an  ex-member  of  Preview,  described  it  as  a seance, adding  "I was bored, got rather  drunk  and  broke up the  proceedings by falling down  the stairs."  In  this portentous  context, reminiscent of the "passing" of Oedipus,  Tennyson's King  Arthur  or the late James  Dean,  I had  been sacri­ ficially murdered and then born again on a Montreal street.




HOWEVER, BY THE TIME the transcript  arrived,  plans were already  afoot  for  my  returning   to  Canada for a  brief  tour  of readings.  There were several things  I wanted  to say. What  I now knew of the generally accepted picture  of  the  literary  scene in  the  Forties seemed often  inaccurate and  some-

9

POET  PAST AND  FUTURE



times  unfair.  No doubt  my trip,  supported  by articles such  as this present  one, would enable me to attempt a rectification, an apologia.
One  point  I  wanted  to get rid of right  away:  I  had  not left  Canada in the
early summer  of 1950 with the automatism  of an  Englishman  naturally  seeking his own  country  after  a wartime  period abroad.  In  fact  over the next ten years prior  to  the  dreadful   moment  when  "landed  immigrant" and  "new  citizen" must  revert to "foreigner"-I had  made  many  attempts to return,  had  written to  many  universities,  had  sought  the  advice  of  many  friends.  When  Ronald Hambleton, a poet I much  admired,  interviewed  me at  the B.B.C. for transmis­ sion to Canada (this  would be in the late Fifties)  I recall becoming a little un­ easy at the pathos of my plea to be allowed to return.  And once an official at the High   Commissioner's   office,  perhaps   slightly  misunderstanding   my  position, advised me to "do  what adventurous  youngsters have always done -get up and go!"  even if it did mean  "a  process of shaking-down  on one of  our farms or in one of our lumber-camps."
Maybe  my desire not to lose faith  with  Canada became  a  bit sentimental.  I signalized  it  by including  substantial  pieces on  my adopted   homeland  in  every one of my early prose books where such an excursus was even remotely possible; there  are  long  passages in  Snake  Wine   (1955), Search  Me   (1957), while the Character  Ball  (I 963)  has no less than  five story-chapters  relating  to Canada. In  these books, which  the critics usually described  as "poetic" and  which often contained  sensuous  material  on  the  threshold  of  poetry,  I  brooded  on  various Canadian  experiences,  but  not  I  trust  without  irony  or  humour. To  tell  the truth,   I haven't   felt  particularly   English  for  many  years.  "Englishness"  is  a muddle  to me, as well as being associated with dark, awkward,  painfully rejected areas  of my childhood.  The  term  is super-saturated, exhausted  with  the  multi­ plicity  of  its implications.  "Canadian", which  outlines  an  emptiness,  gives the artist freedom to move.
'But the subject  which needed  most critical  re-assessment, and  where I might
be able  to say something  of value, seemed  to  begin  with  the  relations  between the two little  magazines, Preview and  First Statement, which  are generally con­ sidered  to  have  dominated  the  literary  scene in  what  Professor  Wynne  Francis has called "Canada's most exciting literary decade". It was here that inaccuracies  seemed particularly rife.
They  began, surprisingly enough, with Professor A. J. M. Smith's  introduction
to the  Oxford  Book of Canadian  Verse-surprisingly because Arthur  Smith  is not  only  a  leading  literary  historian  and  critic,  but  was  himself fairly  close to

IO

POET PAST AND  FUTURE



Preview   and   became  linked  with  its  members  when  they  contributed  to  the founding   of  Northern  Review  (he  was  a  member  of  that   journal's  editorial board). Smith's  statement that  Anderson "in  association with F. R. Scott, P. K. Page,  Irving  Layton,  Louis  Dudek ... edited  the experimental literary  journal Preview  is precisely so% wrong, for Layton  and Dudek  were, of course, among the  leaders of the opposition.  And yet this egregious howler, perpetrated as near to the  events as 1g6o,  has its paradoxical  interest, for if Smith-whose editor­ ship  has been  called  by Milton  Wilson "a  model of discrimination  and  scrupu­ lous choice"-was right in his feeling about Layton and Dudek  (he  just couldn't  be  right  about  the  facts), then  the  whole long argument that  First  Statement produced   the  vital,  virile,  honest,  native  element  in  modem   poetry,  and  that Preview   produced  the  over-complex,  sophisticated,  mannered,  effete  (and,  in­
deed, cosmopolitan)  element, becomes shaky indeed.
It  is this argument which is at  the back of Wynne Francis's  "Montreal Poets Of The  Forties".  Written  in a  jaunty  popular  style, Professor Francis's  article is amiable  and,  in its light  way, readable  throughout.  But it does not strike me as a fair  picture and  it does not use words with the respect and wariness one expects from  a  critical  mind.  It  was, of course, written  a  long  time  ago,  out  of what seems an  excited  identification  with  the  Stanley Street  people;  it has its points and  its  insights;  perhaps  necessary as  a  gesture,  it  is only  questionable  as an attempt  to write history. The  general theme, which caused  pain or at least irrita­ tion  to  us on  Preview, is that  the supposedly rival First  Statement  consisted of brash  but  highly creative and  dedicated  bohemian  ruffians, battling it out on the edge of subsistence,  facing  life in all its naturalistic  squalor,  while  the members of  Preview   were  prosperous,  professional, upper  middle-class  men  and  women, moving easily (and  apparently often in academic dress)  from  the "stately  build­ ings" of McGill and the "swank" boutiques of Sherbrooke  Street to the "spacious lawns  and  lovely homes  of  Westmount". In  order  to  build  us  up  as Establish­ ment  figures, to make  us into a big Goliath of an army for the Davids of Stanley Street  eventually  to defeat  ("Patrick Anderson's influence  was  dwindling ... ") she has frequent  recourse to the plural:  "most were not newcomers to the literary scene ... most of the other  poets on the Preview  roster  had  published  frequently in such magazines  as Poetry  Chicago  ... Several of  them  were McGill professors
... the  large  private  houses of Preview  supporters ... a  veritable  galaxy  of ac­
complished writers etc."
To  my mind  these statements,  mediated  by such words  as "most", "several", "galaxy", are totally  misleading, especially as they are meant  to refer to the early


II

POET  PAST AND  FUTURE



days of the  magazine  when it was making its name.  Preview  was always a very small group.  The  masthead  of number  2   (I seem to have lost the first)  consists of six names,  one of whom was to withdraw  immediately.  This  leaves us with four  young and  struggling  writers  (Page,  Shaw,  Ruddick  and  myself)  and  with the  older  and  already  well-known Frank  Scott,  to whom  we assigned something of a  paternal role;  he was supposed  to approve  and  advise  but  not  to initiate; indeed  we were sometimes a  little suspicious of him  because  we thought  that, with  his  passion  for  collecting little  magazines  and  sponsoring  movements,  he might  want  us to close down once we had  achieved some success. However  hard she tries, Professor Francis can extract  from  this bag precisely I (one)  professor with  the  then  notoriously  low  McGill salary  plus  I Westmount   house,  to  my mind  interesting  rather  than  "lovely",  and  so far  as I  recall without  a spacious lawn. I very much  doubt whether any of us four had already appeared in Poetry; I  certainly  hadn't. The  fact  that  we were making  Preview  a show-case for our work  proves that  we were new to the literary  scene:  that  was the whole point. And,  far  from  being established, Shaw  had  transferred  from  teaching  to a tem­ porary  job in a factory, Ruddick  was a medical student,  P. K.  Page had  a war­ time  job amongst  her stenographers,  and  I  was a teacher  on insecure  tenure  at
I go dollars  a month  for only ten months of the year. None of us had a house of
his own. I paid  I 7 dollars a month for my "mews".
Professor Francis  is kind to me but her approach has the same picturesque  and dramatic touches  which enable  her to begin her article  with  hundreds  of words on  the  proletarian  ambiance   of  First Statement  before  having  to  admit   that Preview came first and  that, although she hardly  dares to believe this, the future editor of First Statement, John  Sutherland, applied  for membership  in the senior group.  I  was a "poet  aflame with  purpose".  I was "Audenesque in appearance and  mannerisms", although  on  what  evidence  she  bases a  comparison  of our quirks  of behaviour  I  cannot  think. But it is with  my imminent  departure from Canada that  she is seen at  her most portentous: "He  felt towards  the end  that he had  failed,  that  Canada  had somehow won. His leave-taking  was more like a bafiled retreat ... " This  is nonsense. Towards the  end  I  was probably  happier than  I  had  been for  years. (There  are such things as private  lives and  personal reasons as well as the mystical game of wrestling with Canada, although  in fair­ ness I  have  to admit  I had  enjoyed  playing  that  game.)   Far  from  feeling  that  I  had  failed I  thought  my new poetry much  better  than  my old, and  was grate­ ful  to John  Sutherland for  a  26 page-long, perceptive  and  often highly critical review of my work in which he nonetheless recognized  and  even celebrated  the

12

POET PAST AND  FUTURE



new qualities.3  As for a baffled  retreat,  I departed  from  Montreal  with consider­ able  bounce,  agog  for  new  adventures,  by no  means  certain  that  my absence would be either  long or permanent. Technically  I was still employed by McGill. And when, around August, having already booked my passage back, I did break that  academic  tie I  was rewarded  with two wonderful years in Singapore.
Let  me attempt to  put  the situation  with regard  to Preview  into  a  ( substan­
tial)  nutshell.
I. It  appeared in  the  spring  of  1942  as a  mimeographed   foolscap folio,  its shape  and  general  appearance owing  much  to The  Andersons, a  single  issue publication  which  my wife, Peggy Doernbach,  and  I had sent to friends at  least a  year  before -and  whose  appearance,  in  its  turn,   was  rather  similar  to  a magazine  I had  produced  at Sherborne  School in  1932.  II.  It announced itself as  a  "literary   letter ... not  a  magazine",   doubtless  because  we wished  to  re­ publish  some  of  the  work  later,  and  was therefore  not  on sale to  the  general  public.  III. It achieved  some  immediate  success, being  welcomed  by  Arthur Phelps in a radio talk and receiving letters of approval from the American editors, George  Dillon  and  James   Laughlin.  Smith  also  approved,  putting  poems  by P. K.  Page and  myself into  his pioneer Book  Of Canadian Poetry  ( 1943) where there  was  as  yet  no  whisper  of  Layton,  Dudek,  and  Souster.  IV.  It was  the vehicle  of  a  group  of  young  people  living  in  wartime  conditions  and  neither  prosperous nor yet with much  in the way of professional prospects, together  with F. R. Scott  and,  later,  the  not  notably  well-off  lawyer-poet,  A.  M.  Klein,  who was to be given a special "visiting  writer" type of job at  McGill. Its meetings to discuss contributions were  down-to-earth; you  only drank  if you brought   your own  beer. It  owed much  to two women, my  wife and  Kit Shaw. It  occasionally opened  its  pages  to  outside  contributors  such as  Mavis  Gallant,   Denis  Giblin and  James  Wreford,  who  became  a sort  of editor-at-a-distance. By that  time  it was being published  in quarto form, with a simple cover. V. Its editors declared themselves anti-fascists but only I, who became entangled  in the far-left, deserved Professor  Francis's   term  "doctrinaire".  Professor Francis  uses the  plural   quite  unforgivably  when  she says "Many of them  displayed strong  sympathies  with  a continental  communism  of  the  Auden-Spender-MacNeice variety",  quite  apart from  the  fact  that  "continental" is meaningless  (which  continent?)  and   that  MacNeice  was  nowhere  near  the  communist  position. The  editors  drew  much of their  writing  from  a social concern with  the experiences  they met. VI.  John Sutherland, who  used to take  pot-luck luncheons with  me, proposed  himself for membership   of  Preview, supporting   his claim  with  a  prose  poem  about  a  bee

13

POET PAST AND  FUTURE



which got grassblades stuck up its nose. Perhaps  jealous of my new-found security in  the  group,  I  advised  against  Sutherland's immediate admission.  Sutherland soon started  First  Statement. Irving  Layton  proposed  himself, or was proposed, for membership.  He  was interviewed but not invited  to join. VII.  Preview  didn't take all that much notice of the new magazine. They probably respected John Sutherland but  had  the feeling that  he was surrounded (then  as in the days of Northern Review)  not by exciting bohemians  but  by callow, semi-literate  youths whose voices had  only recently broken. His acquiring a  press, and  the pleasant appearance of the first books he published, tended  to change their attitude. Thus he  published  my  first  book,  A  Tent For  April   ( 1945), but  not,  as  Professor Francis says, because no commercial  publisher  would have it; I was already pre­ paring  a  book for  Ryerson.  VIII. Eventually  the  two  groups  came  together.  I recall that  I suggested  Portage  for the title of the  new magazine, and then  the too pretentious  Northern Review. Editorial sessions were not, as Professor Francis claims, "stormy" but  Preview  people did insist that  Sutherland  give up most of his  lower-case gimmickry  after  the first issue. It  is incorrect  to imagine  that  the Preview  group  was immediately  eclipsed because Sutherland  became  managing  editor: in charge,  that  is to say, of the business side. They  contributed  much. A spot-check  shows  them  dominating   the  third   issue.  Long  after  the  notorious resignation  I was represented  by a substantial  group of  new poems in the spring of 1949·
There  is, of course, more to quarrel  with in "Montreal Poets Of The  Forties"
than  the  niggling  problem  of facts. There  is the suggestion  that  Preview   poets "excelled in tightly-structured metaphysical exercises ... highly  metaphoric poems  rich  in  Marxist  and  Freudian  allusions",  a  line  of  approach   which  is quickly  connected  with  the term  "imported" and  then,  obviously more suspect, "English" followed  by a  frequent  reiteration   of  the  epithet   "sophisticated" - even Smith  has a touch  of colonial naivete  when he describes me in the Oxford anthology  as having  a "sophisticated  European  sensibility", as though  Americans and  Canadians were still wet behind the ears. In contrast  to this, First Statement believed in "a  masculine,  virile [notice the indicative  redundancy] poetry of  ex­ perience ... They  would not write of the phoenix and  the hyacinth  but of  Berri Street and  De Bullion. Scorning the artifice  [my italics]  of metaphor and symbol
... etc."  Now  it  was an  American  critic, Cleanth  Brooks, who  first taught  me the  functional   nature  of metaphor  and  it  was an  American  poet,  Hart  Crane, who  showed  me  the  varied  use of symbol  in  "The Bridge"  and  my favourite "The Broken  Tower". If a  symbol is artifice  then  surely  it  doesn't  amount  to

POET PAST AND FUTURE



much?  The   fact  that   I  acquired   my  "modernism" during  two  years in  New York  is often  forgotten   (see  for  instance  "Dramatic  Monologue" in  Preview, June  1942 or, indeed,  "The Plotter"  in The  Andersons and later, oddly enough, in First Statement).4
When  Bruce  Ruddick  wrote  in  a  poem of "the  dark  tough  slum of the rec­
tum" he was, as a  young  medic,  writing  directly from  his experience  and,  not that  it  matters  much,  we can  be pretty sure  that  he didn't  have a  phoenix or hyacinth  in sight.  His  rectum  was, one suspects, neither  "imported" nor  "Eng­ lish" but  resolutely Canadian or, better,  universal. Furthermore one has only to read  quickly  through  Preview,  whether  with particular  attention  to such  poems as Ruddick's "Plague", Page's "The Stenographers", Scott's "Boston Tea Party",  my "Drinker" and  "Portrait", Klein's  "Rocking  Chair", or the  prose in  which Neufville Shaw  met  a factory  worker,  P. K. Page evoked a tubercular  French­ Canadian family or a bourgeois poetess presiding at tea, Bruce Ruddick described a conversation  on  the  way to a lunatic  asylum in "Old  Minka's Weather" or I encountered a mixed-up  American  soldier, to see that  Preview  writers drew very heavily on  their  actual  living and  were able to express this with crisp simplicity and  vernacular  tang.  There isn't much  of the "metaphysical exercise", but then writers  don't  often  publish  their  exercises, do  they? I should  say we were com­ passionate  people,  often  writing  from  anger,  often writing  quickly  and  loosely, and  far  from  "the  cold, intricate  brilliance of ... intellectual  gymnastics" which Professor Francis sees in us.
I  have  only to add  here  that  some of the  First Statement  brickbats  could be justifiably hurled  at  me although  I suspect I was too muddled  to be "brilliant" and  too  romantically   naive  to  deserve their  other  epithet  of "sophisticated". I was neurotically compulsive as a writer, had to produce at least one poem per weekend,  enthused   over  now  one  "influence" and  now  another,  tried  far  too many   things,   was  often   word-intoxicated    (rather,   alas,  than   aiming  for  the "tightly-constructed" or even the  "intellectual") and  had  remarkably  little con­ fidence in myself. I was also undeniably  English although  I had  had little to do with  the  "Poets  of the  Thirties" while I  was in England,  my heroes still  being Housman, Yeats, Owen. On  the other hand  I must have had a bit of  judgement, if only because  I  omitted  such  a mass of my Preview work from  my collected volumes. There are  many  poems in  the magazine  which  I can scarcely bear  to read  and  several  which  I  had  forgotten  completely.  I  have  been  in  danger  of subscribing  to the legend  that  I was simply an imitator  of  Thomas  and  Barker,

POET PAST AND FUTURE



since I had  periods, or just hours of the day, when  my dependence  on someone or other was grovelling.
In  a  brief  critical  note  to  my  entry  in  Contemporary Poets of the  English Language  (St. James'  Press)  Mr. John  Robert  Colombo  comments  on my three volumes of poetry  in  the  following terms:  "The poems suggest a wide reading in  Eliot  and  Auden  and  especially Dylan Thomas ... He  had  been called,  per­ haps unkindly,  'a kind of tea-drinking  Dylan Thomas'." The last phrase is arrest­ ing, comic and  memorable, but is there any possible justification for finding in the
97  poems  published  in  book form  more  than  seven  or  eight  which  show  any Thomas  influence at all? As for reading  widely in Eliot and  Auden, didn't  all of us  in  our  youth  read  all  of  them?  Since  Mr.  Colombo  assigns my  "Poem  of Canada" to the  wrong  volume, he may well betray  here  a failure  to check on what  I  really wrote.  Poverty, by the  way, forced  me to drink  tea;  by the time I was writing  my five or so "late" Thomas  poems in  rg47-49,  one of which was addressed  to  Thomas  himself and  set  in  a  bar,  I  was putting  down  about  as much  beer  as he was. Were  Mr.  Colombo  not  the  most incommunicative and letter-shy of editors I should enjoy tackling him on these points.
Furthermore, when I look, for instance, at the twelve poems printed  in Poetry
for  March   r943,  and  which  were subsequently  awarded   one  of that   journal's prizes, I can  find no Thomas  or Barker, not much  trace of anyone else, little by way of notably "English manner", but instead a quiet voice speaking with direct­ ness  and   simplicity   ("War  Dead",   "Military Camp", "The  Airmen"). And only  a  night  or  two  ago, shuffling some  mouldering   package  which  I  hadn't looked  at  carefully  for  twenty-five  years,  I  came  across  a  dozen  unpublished poems from the same high old days of Preview which seemed, so unfamiliar  they were, to  present  me  with a new  poet altogether,  very  young, very lyrical, very brief, writing often  a lean free-verse in which he  responded  to the rich darkness of a  Montreal  alley, a neighbour's  dress on the line, people crowding  round  an orator  at  an  open-air  meeting, a blind  man,  a  group  listening to music, a male neighbour  dressing for a party or "Notes  For  A  Dream  Landscape". At least at the  moment  of re-discovery these poems seemed  as light  and  precise as butter­  flies. Still  what  I  emphasize  now is  that  I  had  plenty  of faults  but  that  these should  not  be allowed to obscure the clear-eyed directness of my colleagues.







16

POET PAST AND FUTURE




l:E SAME  SLANTING towards First Statement  is seen in The Making   Of  Modern   Poetry  In  Canada,  edited  by  Louis  Dudek  and  Michael Gnarowski.  This  is certainly  a very useful book despite its unscholarly lack of an index and  its rather  smug claim to present "essential articles" but it quotes not a single one of Preview's  always succinct editorial notes, which at times amounted to manifestos,  while its chapter  on "The  Early  Forties" when  my magazine  un­ doubtedly  led  the  field, is largely concerned  with  the  opinions  of John  Suther­  land  and  with  material   concerning  the  editorial  split  in  Northern  Review,  a journal  which  only began  in late  1945. Louis Dudek  seems the  more excitable of the  two  editors.  In  1954  he numbers  me amongst  those "as angry  and  con­ cerned  about  life values  and  the  realities as ever, and  no  longer  to be shelved away  as 'socialistic',  or  'imitative' of English trends"  but  by  1958  he sums  up Preview  as "derivative" and  showing an "esoteric" unawareness  of the need for local literary  stimulus,  for variety, for native expression, a position echoed in an article of the same year by the opinion that of  the Preview group, with the excep­ tion of Klein and  Scott, "none  have  (sic)  survived".5  The  victory has, of course, gone to Layton, Souster and  himself, poets "characteristically rooted in Canadian life and  speech"  and  spurning "the  engrafted  English stock". Thus,  in the four years between  1954 and  1958, years in which I produced  the Canadian sections of my first two prose books and  also the radio play, "A Case Of Identity", with its scenes of poetry  making  in  Montreal  and  its conversation  with John  Suther­  land at the Coliseum skating rink, I had somehow fallen by the way.
·Professor Gnarowski  has at  times something of the vivid imprecision, the  pic­ turesque   brandishing  of  words,  that   we  have  seen  in  Professor   Francis.6    A strangely  tense  yet  respectful  entente  existed  between  the  elder  statesmen  of Preview  and  the  turbulent   turks  of First Statement   (my  italics)   but  what  does the   Professor  mean?   Was  there   an  "entente",  was  it   "tense",   why  was  it "strangely  " tense?-to proceed  no further.  Preview,  we  are  told, belonged to those who believed in "a universal content of ideas lodged in an English-language culture,  dominated by a social theme  which  could be best expressed in the cos­ mopolitan   language   of  the  intelligence."  Well,  what-as  a  supporter   of  the opposition-does he  want?  Specifically  Canadian ideas  not  viable  elsewhere, lodged  in  a  culture  of gobbledygook  and  expressed in  the  native -but  it isn't
-language of  the  intestinal  tract?   (This  would  tie  in  with  First  Statement's hippie primitivism and bad manners as instanced by Professor Francis not me: "huzzahs ... insults ... to  fight,  spit,  sweat,  urinate   and   make  love  in  their

POET  PAST  AND FUTURE



poems.")  Certainly  there is a hint of D. H. Lawrence  a few lines further  on. The disappearance of my colleagues and  myself from  Northern  Review  led to "the emergence  of  a  more  virile grouping  among  the  poets of  Montreal". I  always think  recourse  to  virility  as a  value-judgement  is dangerous,  especially  where women are concerned  (their  manly Miriam  Waddington versus our languishing Patricia   Page) ; it  smacks  of  the  Hemingway-Callaghan  fight  and  makes  me want  to match  Bruce Ruddick,  who used to roll naked  in the snow and  was one of the  most belligerent  men  I have met, against,  say, the  undoubtedly  ebullient Irving Layton.
I  can't   really  let  "elder  statesmen"  pass, not  when  I  think  of myself at  29 humping  a large  puppet-theatre onto  a truck  with  the assistance of one Jewish boy-boxer  and  two  elderly ex-Wobblies in  order  that  Peggy  Doembach and  I could present  our plays to a house-meeting somewhere  in the Cartier  division; it just doesn't  sound  elderly, to my way of thinking,  and  it isn't all that  "esoteric" or "sophisticated" or "English"  or "effete".  But there  is a more important point than  this. Professor Gnarowski says straight  out,  and  apparently from  the view­ point of 1943-44•  when he himself certainly  wasn't  around, that  the  First State­ ment  people "were  obviously destined for the greater  achievement". I shouldn't think  that  this  was so at  the time;  whether it is now is a matter  of critical  dis­ cussion, though  one would have thought  that  events have developed  beyond the time for either group  to have much relevance beyond an historic one -I cannot believe that  substantial   numbers  of poets today  are  against  what  Louis  Dudek once  called  "the   unreal   universe  of  language" or  what   Michael  Gnarowski describes as "the  cosmopolitan  language  of the intelligence". Canadians are not brutes or philistines. But, since this is an apologia  in its way, I can't  help feeling the  literary   historians  of  the  future   may  have  considerable   respect  for  the achievements of Preview:  Page's As Ten  As Twenty, Klein's The  Rocking  Chair, the later  poems of Frank Scott and the like. And, to instance  a mere contributor, hasn't  the  work of Mavis Gallant  shown exciting  development?  What  else may tum up?



AND THEN, in October  of last year, I found myself back in Canada. The  experience  was not of the sort that  I feel capable  of examining  in these pages. It was one of the big occasions of my life:  but bewilderingly quick, sharp,  poignant.   In  a sense I  was constantly  rubbing  my  eyes. I  didn't  really have time  to think.  Although  I  had  planned  to take notes, record conversations

18

POET PAST AND  FUTURE



on tape, make use of my camera, I did none of these things. I had brought  several folios of poems  with  me but  I felt thoroughly  confused by the typed  sheets and seemed  to  make  my  choice for  readings  in a slapdash  but  unadventurous  way, as  though   I  scarcely  knew  my own  work.  I  felt a  reluctance  to  return  to  my early,  Canadian poems,  the  anthologized  pieces in  particular, but  at  the same time  I  took few  risks. In  any  case the "poetry  reading"  brings out  the  ham  in one,  makes  one  play  for  laughs;  how  can  one  come  out  of the  blue,  a  man absurdly  half  a  myth,  and  a fading  myth  at that,  to share  with strangers  those intimate    strategems,   those   crucifixions  upon   some  half-understood  but   all­ demanding meaning?
In  Montreal, Ottawa,  Lennoxville  it  was a  period  of Indian  summer.  The leaves already  looked brittle  as paint.  Their  stillness was arguably  the stillness of art,  but  not quite  the art  of one's favourite  painter.  Not even the passing of Mr. Kosygin in  one  direction,  and  Miss Germaine  Greer in another,  nor  the depar­ ture  of yet one more member  of the League of Canadian Poets flying east, flying west, with  his typescript in his briefcase, was likely to agitate  them much. To me the air was charged  with greetings. From time to time I would  relax with an old associate, as likely as not from  Preview, as though  we sat  together  on a hill and viewed a distant  prospect, out of which our friendship  rushed forward  to suffuse us as the sun  races up from  behind  a passing cloud. Who talks of literary  prob­ lems, new  work,  book-reviewing,  publishers'  advances, the  difficulty of running  an  English  department, at  such a moment? I  would withdraw from  my friends to a Montreal  tavern.  I was used to being alone and  just looking. I was faithful  to Peel Street.
If to my friends  I was a figure of the past, and all the more so because there
had  been  little  communication between  us over the  years, to  the  various  aca­ demics I met I must often have seemed no more than  a provider of  footnotes for a  literary  portrait  long since completed.  I sensed a  possible  awkwardness  here. "Patrick Anderson  of Preview ... of the  Montreal  literary  scene in  the  Forties
... that  would-be  Marxist  with his unproletarian tone of voice and  his obsession
with  snow",  and  here  the  fellow was, full of twenty  years of book-writing  and journalism  and  criticism,  positively an  English man  of letters  in  his small  way, and  actually  claiming  to  be  writing  poetry  still, to  be  riding  quite  a  creative wave, with  Canadian   poetry  (whatever  he meant  by that) as a not  inconsider­ able  part  of the  product! It so happened  that  the  people  I  have  had  to  take issue with here, Professors Francis, Dudek, Gnarowski, were amongst my amiable hosts. I  was able  to talk  things  over with them  and  to offer my  version of dis-

POET PAST AND  FUTURE



puted  facts, having  regard  rather  to the  Preview  group  as a whole than  to my own  work of then  and  now.  (A  poet's sense of what  he is doing is in any case both intimate  and  technical;  he does not communicate easily his concern with raindrops splintered  upon a  flushing pane  or the  way the  colour  of a flower at night  is guessed before it is made  out,  nor  how a theme  puts  itself at  risk as it is coaxed  into one form amongst  many  possibilities, or a mood  slowly discovers itself among  wandering  patterns  of words.)  But  had  I  realized  earlier  that  my especial  sponsor,  Michael  Gnarowski,  was still  firmly committed   to  the  "other side",  believed my third volume, The  Colour As Naked, a too-literary  anticlimax to  the  preceding  collections, and  proved  himself therefore  entirely  unconverted by  Mr.  C.  X.  Ringrose's  arguments,  I  might  well  have  remembered  to quote that  gentleman's conclusion to  his article on  myself and  the critics:  "If  Patrick Anderson ever does return to Canada, he would be justified in demanding a reassessment of his poetry, or at least that  we abandon the current  cliches about his work."
A  warmer  attitude was noticeable  elsewhere:  In  that  final crowded  meeting at  my  old  university  of McGill,  Louis Dudek  insisted on  taking  the  chair  and paid  me the compliment  of the most flattering  introduction I have ever received, a  compliment   all  the  greater  because  he  insisted  on  himself  reading  aloud  a poem  I  had  thought  long  unfashionable  and  about  whose flourish of images  I still had doubts-none other, in fact, than "Winter In Montreal".
One  product  of my tour  was that  I read,  and  certainly  with enjoyment,  The Selected  Poems  Of  Irving  Layton.  I  had  been led  to  believe two things:  first, that  Layton  had  been for  many  years the  front-runner amongst  modern  poets, especially those of the First Statement persuasion;  and second, that  the discovery of a "native", "virile",  Canadian voice had  had  much  to do with  Ezra  Pound (that most cosmopolitan of poets),  W. C. Williams, the Black Mountain, Charles Olson's  projectivism  and so on. To  my great  surprise  I found  that  Layton  was writing   like  a  Preview  poet  somewhat  matured:  traditional, if  a  little  loose, socially-concerned  if also romantically  self-preoccupied,  often  Canadian in sub­ ject  matter   but  "engrafted" with  many  another  stock,  above  all  a  Laytonian  rather    than   a   nationalist.   Couldn't  he  have   written   my   "Frisked"?-and couldn't I,  if  he'll  forgive  me,  have  had  a  fair  shot  at  his  "Berry  Picking"? Ignorant as I still am  of Souster  and  Dudek  in  any  depth,  I  began  to suspect that  the long and for all I knew boringly familiar  controversy which I have been arguing about  here was never very meaningful,  and lost its small but conceivably useful bite way back in the early Fifties.7

20

POET  PAST  AND FUTURE



One final  point.  I am  no  philosopher but  I have  been  intrigued for  years  by T.  S. Eliot's  suggestion that  the  appearance of  a  new  writer, and  presumably also  the  reappearance of an  old  writer  reborn,  subtly  alters  the  literary  perspec­ tive.  As Isit  here   in  my  Essex  farmland, nearly   twenty-two  years  out  from Canada-or  better, nearly  six  months-and put  my  pen  down  on  paper to continue work  on  a  poem  or to finish this present  article, I am very slightly  and  almost  imperceptibly changing the situation three  thousand miles away.


NOTES

1 Canadian  Literature, No. 43, pp. I0-23.
2  "Montreal Poets  of  the  Forties",  A  Choice  of Critics,  Oxford  University  Press,
I966.
3 Northern  Review, Vol.  2, No. 5, April-May  I949· I led off this issue with five new poems, including "An  Apple before Bedtime".
4  When  I read  the long series of journals I kept in New York, and which include my preliminary  visit to  Montreal  and  Quebec  in I 938, I am surprised  at  how quickly I became  Americanized.  I seem never  to have fallen  back on  a  cultural  base in England. Nor, to  judge from  the endless bits and  pieces of reportage, diary, politi­ cal  analysis, did  I do so in  the  Forties. As a  practicing  poet  I felt  closer to  (less afraid of)  American  poets than English.
G   The  Making  of Modern Poetry in Canada, ed. Louis Dudek and  Michael Gnarow­ ski, Ryerson  Press, 1967,  pp.  172,  212,  280. Dudek  goes so far  as to state  bluntly that  it was "First  Statement which became Northern  Review", forgetting  that  the dying John  Sutherland still counted,  if not quite legally, Preview among his three ancestors in the summer of I 956.
6  Ibid.,  The  Role  of Little  Magazines  in  the  Development  of Poetry  in  English  in
Montreal," pp. 2 I 2-222.
7  I don't  believe you can  construct  a literature  on the basis of Imagism, a useful but short-lived  movement,  or on the proponents  of the "new  austerity" and  the "anti­ poem".

















21



LAMPMAN'S
FLEETING VISION



SandraDjwa







READING THE POETRY  of Archibald  Lampman, we are reminded  again  of the Victorian  capacity for dualism: he appears to accept both the  Socialist vision of human  progress and  the  Calvinist  sense of man's  inesca­ pable  evil;  a  professed non-believer,  he explores  the  ways of stoic and  hedonist without  ever losing his own devotion to a reinstated  Pale Galilean; a  pacifist of sorts,  he shrinks  from  violence yet writes several  fascinated  explorations  of the psychology of  brutality.  In  Amoldian  frame,  Lampman  regularly  suggests the need to "moderate desire" despite which some of his best poems are celebrations of anarchic   passion. An  idle  dreamer,  a self-proclaimed  troubled  soul,  a  Uto­  pian,  a feminist, and  a critic of society ... The  list of  epithets  gleaned  from  the poetry  are  often  self-contradictory;   yet,  most  often,  Lampman's varied  poetic stances  are  related  to  his  exploration  of  an  abyss  which  he  perceives  gaping between  the  benevolent  nature  which he would like  to affirm and  the often un­ pleasant "reality" of everyday life.
This  rift between  the real and the ideal world is bridged,  although  not always
successfully, through  the metaphor  of the  "dream". Lampman's first poems are superficially descriptions of the  peace, beauty  and  truth  received by the poet as he "dreams" in  nature,  but  the reader  is always made  aware  of the unpleasant "real" which the idyllic vision attempts  to subjugate; the "dissonant  roar of the city"  intrudes  into  the  "easeful  dreams"  of even such  idylls as the  early  poem "April". The  Victorian  parable  of the high dream  struggled  into fruition  ("The Story  of an  Affinity")  and  the  Utopian  vision  ("The Land  of Pallas")  are  all undercut   in  Lampman's canon  by  assaults  of  human   viciousness and  cruelty ("The Three  Pilgrims")   or by the perversions of human  reason expressed in the nightmare  vision  of  the  coming  machine   world   ("The City  of  the  End  of

22

LAMPMAN's FLEETING VISION



Things"). In  fact,  a  characteristic development  of many  of Lampman's later poems is that  of the dream  dissolving into the nightmare as in his sonnet, "Winter
Evening":

Tonight the very horses springing by
Toss gold from whitened nostrils. In a dream
The streets that narrow to the westward gleam
Like rows of golden palaces; and high
From all the crowded chimneys tower and die
A thousand aureoles. Down in the west
The brimming plains beneath the sunset rest, One burning sea of gold. Soon, soon shall fly The glorious vision, and the hours shall feel
A mightier master; soon from height to height, With silence and the sharp unpitying stars,
Stem creeping frosts, and winds that touch like steel,
Out of the depth beyond the eastern bars, Glittering and still shall come the awful night.

In  his earlier  work,  Lampman appears  to  accept  the  truth  of the  visionary experience:  dreaming in  nature,  he can  proclaim  "dreams  are  real and  life is only sweet".  But the  primary  difficulty with continuing  in the dreaming  state, as even  an  Endymion  must  discover, is that  the  poet  is not  always able  to  keep "reality" at  bay. Eventually,  he does find it necessary to ask himself whether  the visionary  experience  is  indeed  a  true  insight  into  higher  truth   or  simply  the embroidery  of a cheating  fancy. The  question  is stated  quite  explicitly in Keats' "Ode to  a  Nightingale":  "Was  it  a  vision or  a  waking  dream/ Fled  is that music:  do I wake or sleep?" Lampman's aspiring "Vision of Twilight" concludes with a similar questioning of reality:  "Comes my question back again-/ Which is real? the  fleeting  vision?/  Or  the fleeting world of men?".  Is the true  reality the product  of our imagination, "the  fleeting vision," or is it "the  fleeting world of men?"  Lampman's use of the same  adverb  to describe both states  (and  the fact that  both are  perceived through  a poem which is itself a "vision")   points up his transitory  sense of both states and  may be taken to support  the view that  he often sees the "visionary" and the so-called "real"  world from the essentially pas­ sive state of the observer in the dream.
Curiously,  Lampman began  to  write  poetry  not  as a  direct  response to  the
dream visions of the major romantics  (Keats'  Hyperion, IBig, or its Victorian descendent,  Hengist  Home's Orion, 1843), but  rather  under  the influence of a derivative  Canadian work  in  the  late  Victorian  stream,  the  Orion  ( r88o)   of

LAMPMAN'S FLEETING VISION



Charles  G. D. Roberts.  Orion,  a latter  day  Endymion,  is "a  dreamer  of noble dreams"1   and  Lampman, when  first reading  Roberts'  Orion,  was plunged  into a state of "the  wildest excitement": "A little after sunrise I got up and  went out into   the  college  grounds ... but  everything   was  transfigured   for  me  beyond description,  bathed  in  the  old-world  radiance  of beauty."  Lampman was  par­ ticularly  delighted   that  "those  divine  verses ... with  their  Tennyson-like  rich­ ness" had been written "by a Canadian ... one of ourselves".2
Lampman's first books, Among the Millet  (I 888)  and Lyrics of Earth  (I 895),
are clearly a response to Roberts'  Orion and Songs of the Common Day (I893). But  although   Lampman adopts  much  of Roberts'  romantic  dream  mythology, (the  "sleep"  of time  and  winter,  the  "dream" as a  description  of  human  life, and  the  Pan  myth  as it  relates to nature's  "dream" and  poetic experience)   his stance in nature  is somewhat  different from that  of Roberts.  From a comparison of Lampman's early sonnet, "In  November",  with Roberts'  sonnet, "The  Winter Fields",  we can  see that  Lampman's "dream" is not  only transcendental  meta­ phor  but  also  poetic  process. The  octave  of  each  sonnet  describes  the  wintry landscape,  but  in the sestet Roberts then deserts the fields for a dream-wish  pro­ jection  of  the  future;  Lampman, in  opposition,  brings  the  reader  back  to  the
still figure of the poet :
I alone
Am neither sad, nor shelterless, nor gray,
Wrapped round with thought, content to watch and dream.

This  conclusion  reinforces our  awareness  that  the  poem  itself has  come about because  the  poet, as observer, has stood and  "dreamed". In  that  sense, his con­ clusion is a low modulated  affirmation of the impartial "truth" of the experience just described.
As John  Sutherland and  Roy Daniells both  have  noted,  it is the figure of the
poet  as  apparent  idler  and   dreamer   which  appears  throughout  Lampman's poems, especially in  such  poems as "Among  the  Timothy" or  "At  the  Ferry" where the narrator states, "I look far out and  dream  of life."3  In this "dream" or "reverie" he gives himself up  to the  "beauty"of sense impressions from  nature. These  impressions are  analogous  with  high  truth  because  Lampman prefers, as did  the  early  Keats,  the  easy equation  of beauty  and  truth.  Furthermore, the truth  of nature is a truth spontaneously given:

... I will set no more mine overtasked brain
To barren search and toil that beareth nought, Forever following with sore-footed pain

LAMPMAN'S FLEETING VISION



1The crossing pathways of unboumed  thought;
iBut let it go, as one that hath no skill, To  take what shape it will,
An ant slow-burrowing in the earthy gloom,
1A spider bathing in the dew at morn,
Or a brown bee in wayward fancy borne
From hidden bloom to bloom.

Similarly, the   poems   "Ambition" and   "The  Choice" declare that   for  "poet" and  "dreamer" it is all sufficient  to "Sit  me in the windy  grass and  grow j As wise as age, as joyous as a child".
The romantic inheritance from  which  Lampman derives  this  wise passiveness is  almost  surely  Wordsworth's "Expostulation and   Reply". Wordsworth's  con­ clusion,  "Think you ... That  nothing of  itself will come,/ But  we must  still be seeking?" would  seem to underlie Lampman's assertion  that he will "let  it go ... j To  take  what shape it will". No longer  will he attempt to impose  his willed struc­  ture  on the  world  outside  and  so shape  the  poetic happening (as do, for example, Heavysege, Crawford, and  Roberts) but  he will rather sit passively and  so allow the  powers  of  nature to  impress  themselves  upon   poet  and   his  art as  do  the minutiae of "ant", "spider" and  "bee" from  "Among the Timothy".
This  formulation would  seem to be a fairly accurate description of Lampman's nature poetry; if in Roberts' work there is most often  an  active  straining for apo­ theosis, Lampman's poems, such  as his sonnet,  "Solitude", are  most often  a series of associations  tied  together by natural sequence  and  by the fact  that  they are the related  perceptions of the recording poet:

How still it is here in the woods. The trees
Stand  motionless, as if they did not dare
To stir, lest it should break the spell. The air
Hangs quiet as spaces in a marble frieze. Even this little brook, that runs as ease,
Whispering and gurgling in its knotted bed, Seems but to deepen, with its curling thread
Of sound, the shadowy sun-pierced silences.
Sometimes a hawk screams or a woodpecker
Startles  the stillness from its fixed mood
With his loud careless tap. Sometimes I hear
The  dreamy white-throat  from some far off tree
Pipe slowly on the listening solitude
iHis five pure notes succeeding pensively.

LAMPMAN'S  FLEETING VISION



·But the  point  should  be made  that  this is not  only  passive sense impression. Lampman's characteristic  stance is one in  which,  Meredith-like,  he insists upon cultivating   the  faculties  of  seeing  and   hearing:  "Let   us  clear  our  eyes, and break/  Through the cloudy chrysalis". No longer  "blind", man is enabled  to see "The threads  that  bind  us to the All,/  God  or the Immensity" (Winter-Store) . In  the sonnet  "Knowledge", Lampman describes the life which he would like to live as one "of leisure and broad hours,/  To think and dream" while "An   Athe­ nian  Reverie"  states  explicitly  that  the  function   of  these  "broad  hours"  is to inquire  into  the  deeper  meaning  beyond  the  surface  phenomena  of  life. This whole association of "dream" and "knowledge" is given an Arnoldian context in the  earlier  poem  "Outlook" where it is asserted  that  the  true  life is "Not  to be conquered   by  these  headlong  days"  but  to  allow  the  mind  to  brood  "on  life's deep  meaning": "What man,  what  life, what  love,  what  beauty  is,/ This is to live, and win the final praise."
Despite the easy conventionality  of these lines, Lampman's work does suggest a  genuine  preoccupation with  the nature  of the  buried  life, the  hidden  stream, the  authentic self which Arnold  in "Resignation" describes as lying unregarded beneath  life's phenomena,  a hidden  self which  must  be tapped  if man is to find peace and  a moral guide for his existence. The  protagonists of Lampman's major narrative  poems-the dreamer   of  "An  Athenian   Reverie",  Perpetua,   David and  Abigail as well as Richard  and  Elizabeth  of "The Story of an Affinity" - all ask variations  on  the general question  "What is this life?" More often  than not,  their  moral  struggles with  themselves lead  to an  affirmation  based  on  the fleeting  "vision",   a  glimpse  of  that   higher  reality  which  they  understand to underlie surface phenomena.




l:E INSISTENCE that  the  poet should  put  himself in touch with  nature's underlying  truth  seems to  have  been  a  part  of Lampman's early thought.  F. W. Watt  (writing  in The  University  of Toronto Quarterly  in 1956) describes Lampman's early fable "Hans  Fingerhut's Frog Lesson" which was first published in the periodical Man  (I 885) . Clearly an allegory of the artist in soci­ ety, it  describes  a  young  poet  failing  to  receive  popular  recognition  who  then reviles man  and  nature.  For  this hubris, he is metamorphosed into a  frog until he learns  to interpret nature's  cosmic plan,  described  by Watt  as "cosmic  opti­ mism based on  a stoical acceptance  of one's  lot and  faith  in  Nature's  maternal

LAMPMAN's  FLEETING VISION



purposes".4  Initiated  through  suffering, Hans Fingerhut undergoes a moral transformation: "From  that  day the great songs that  he made  were nothing  like his former  ones. There  was never anything  bitter or complaining  in them. They were all sweet  and  beautiful  and  wise."5   This  easy parable  of the  poet's  recon­ ciliation  with  himseH and  with society might be compared  with Lampman's own pronouncements on the nature of unhappiness:

All our  troubles in  reality  proceed  from  nothing but  vanity  if we track  them  to their  source. We  form  an  ideal  of ourselves  and  claim  what  seems  to be due  to that ideal. The ideal  of myself is entitled to love and  approbation from  my fellow creatures: but   the  love  and  approbation does  not  appear, and  I fret  and  abuse il:he constitution of  things.  To  the  ideal  of myself money  and  power  and  practical success are no doubt due,  but  they do not come, and  again  I abuse  the constitution of  things. (  8g6) 6

Lampman's early complaints  that  his poetry was not properly appreciated, his continued   penury,  his unhappiness  with  the tedium  of the  Ottawa Post Office, grief over  the  death  of a  young child,  suggestions of an  unrequited   love, and, above all, his fatal  illness and early death  are all legendary and  have contributed to the view of Lampman as a Canadian John  Keats. Despite the evidence of D. C. Scott's letter  to Ralph  Gustafson  ( qth July, 1945)  which argues "the  cast of Lampman's nature  was not towards melancholy"/ much  discussion of Lampman has interpreted the  poetry  to  infer  that  Lampman did  consider  himself heir  to "The woe and sickness of an age of fear made known". The truth  of Lampman's situation  may  have been somewhat  less onerous;  writing  for the Globin r8g2,
he proclaims:  "No  man  is more serious than  the poet;  yet no man  is more given to expressing under  different  circumstances the most opposite statements."
Implied   in  Scott's  letter  to  Gustafson  and  in  his  Introduction to  Lyrics  of Earth:  Sonnets  and Ballads, 1925, is the suggestion that  some of the "ills" which plague  Lampman's poetic  world  may  have  been  an  imaginative   recreation  of Socialist  thought rather   than  Lampman's actual  experiences  in  Ottawa,  circa
18go. Certainly,  we do notice there are  very few poems referring  to Ottawa life which are grounded in the realistic mode. Even when presented in a poem speci­ fically titled  "Ottawa", the  city is not recognizable as any place having a Cana­ dian  habitation and  a  name  but  is instead  the city of misty romantic towers or the city of industrial greed  and  social oppression. It  is also true  that  other  than  for the sensitive nature  poetry of the first two books, Lampman's later work does become a repository for the Victorian stock concerns of religious bigotry ("To an Ultra  Protestant"), social  in justice  ("Epitaph on  a  Rich  Man"), evolutionary

LAMPMAN's  FLEETING VISION



progress ("The Clearer Self"), the machine  age and  utopias  ("A  Vision of  Twi­
light").
However  stereotyped  the  invocation,  there  is a  note  of genuine  melancholia running  throughout  Lampman's  poetry.   The   early   sonnet   "Despondency" bleakly views the future:   "Slow figures in some live remorseless frieze/  The approaching days escapeless and  unconquered". He  concludes  that  life itself is "Vain   and  phantasmal as a  sick man's  dream". A  poem  such  as  "Sapphics" which urges man to follow the stoical fortitude  of nature  also presents a personal application: "Me  too changes, bitter  and full of evil,/  Dream  after  dream  have plundered  and  left  me naked,/ Grey with sorrow".  "Loneliness", like Margaret Avison's "The Mirrored  Man", starkly reveals an inner self:

So it is with us all, we have our friends
Who keep the outer chambers, and guard well
Our common path;
For far within us lies an iron cell
Soundless and secret, where we laugh or moan
Beyond all succour, terribly alone.

Other  than  for a large cluster of images which makes reference to the "dream" or "vision"  in relation  to the "beauty" of nature,  Lampman's poetic vocabulary is often concerned  with the negative emotions of "pain", "misery",  "fear", "loneliness",  "loss" and  "emptiness". The  particular association of the "dream" with  "grief" and  "death" which  begins to dominate about  1894 particularly in relation  to poeiDS such as "Chione" and "Vivia  Perpetua", suggests Lampman's grief  at  the  death  of his infant  son. Similarly,  the  long  narratives,  "David  and Abigail"  and  "The Story of an  Affinity", parables  of impossible love brought  to fruition,  may  be given  a  new  rationale  if they  are  viewed  in  the  light  of the autobiographical "A  Portrait  in  Six Sonnets"  and  Lampman's stifled  affection for  Katherine WaddelJ.B It is perhaps  because of this growing  burden  of  unhap­ piness, coupled  with the beginning of his own fatal  illness, that Lampman writes
in .a95:

J: am getting well weary of things. I was so far gone in hypochrondria on Satur­ day last that I had not the spirit to go to my office at all. I went straggling up the Gatineau  Road, and spent the whole day and most of the next under the blue sky and  the eager sun; and then I began to perceive that there were actually trees and grass and  beautifully loitering clouds in the tender fields of heaven; I got to see at last that it was really June; and that perhaps I was alive after all.9

For  the  early  Lampman, as for  his  alter-ego  Hans  Fingerhut, the  cure  for

LAMPMAN'S FLEETING VISION



melancholy  was to  return  to  nature.  And,  as in the  early  poetry  of Keats  ("I Stood  Tip-Toe Upon  a Little  Hill" or "Sleep and  Poetry")  the realm  of "Flora and  old Pan: sleep in the grass" is invariably associated with the poet's "dream". In  addition,  Lampman endows nature  with the instinctive apprehension  of  eter­ nal  truths.  Throughout  Lampman's verse, there  runs  a  conscious-unconscious antithesis  in  which  the  creatures  of nature  are  associated  with  the  instinctive knowledge  or  "dream" which  underlies creation,  while  man  is made  miserable by his own nagging  consciousness. Consequently, in  poems such as "An  Old  Les­ son  From  the  Fields",  and  "Comfort of the  Fields" the  lesson given to man  is the  in junction  to experience  the  true  "power" and  "beauty" of life by putting away  conscious knowledge.  At one with the other  creatures  of the  field, he can drain "the comfort of wide fields unto tired eyes".
This emphasis  on a wide passiveness would seem to be related to the idea that
the  poet, standing  a little  apart  from  both  nature  and  himself, is not  only in a position  to be impressed  upon  by the moving "frieze" of nature,  but  is also en­ abled to see into  the fixed plan or "dream", which he hypothesizes as underlying  the active surface  motion  of nature  and the universe. In  Lampman's work, as in the early  verse of Roberts,  the frogs have a special function  as emissaries of the poet's  "dream". In  the  poem "The Frogs",  they are specifically  associated with a  lack  of  conscious  thought:  "Breathers   of   Wisdom  won  without   a  quest,/  Quaint uncouth  dreamers". For  Lampman, the frogs become a way of commu­ nicating with the eternal first principle:

Often to me who heard you in your day,
With close wrapt ears, it could not choose but seem
That earth, our mother, searching in what way,
'Men's hearts might know her spirit's inmost dream; Ever at rest beneath life's change and stir,
Made you her soul, and bade you pipe for her.

As he listens, "The stillness of enchanted  reveries/  Bound brain  and spirit and half-closed eyes,/  In some divine sweet wonder-dream  astray", so that  the "outer roar"  of mankind  grows "strange  and  murmurous,  faint  and far away":

Morning and noon and midnight exquisitely,
1Wrapt with your voices, this alone we knew, Cities might change and fall, and men might die, Secure were we, content to dream with you,
That change and pain are shadows faint and fleet, And dreams are real, and life in only sweet.

LAMPMAN's  FLEETING VISION



In  effect,  the  peace  and  comfort  of  the  eternal   dream,   unconsciously  experi­ enced  by the frogs, is passed on to the poet who lays himself open to this experi­ ence.  In  another  poem "Favourites of Pan", Lampman adapts  Roberts'  earlier poem "The Pipes of Pan"  to suggest that  the poetic voice of Pan  (the  "dream") is carried  by the frogs.
In  the  first two  books, the  "dream" is the  direct  result of sense impressions
from nature; in the long narrative  poems, "The Story of an Affinity" and "David and  Abigail",  re-worked during  the early I 8go's,  the "dream" carries  the impli­ cations  of religious or social "vision".  In  the  first of these  (title  given  as "My  Story of an Affinity" by Bourinoe0 )  we find in Margaret, a woman  of  sensitivity and  independence, an embodiment  of the topical  feminism  of  Lampman's essay for The  Globe:

Give  [women]  perfect independence, place them  upon  an  exactly even footing
·with men in all the activities and responsibilities of life and a result for good will be attained which is almost beyond the power of the imagination to picture
:( 1892-93) 11

Both Margaret and  Abigail are women of charm  and  dignity whose actions have overtones  of the  philosopher-queen  of "The Land  of Pallas".  Lampman's stress on the  "Beauty" and  "Peace" of this utopian  land  and  the detail in which "the wise fair  women"  are  described as bringing  out  baskets of food to their  men in the fields, all suggest William Morris's News  from Nowhere  ( 18go), as does this conventional  passage of Socialist economics:

And all the earth was common, and no base contriving
Of money of coined gold was needed there or known, But all men wrought together without greed or striving,
And all the store of all to each man was his own.

The  insertion  into  this utopia  of a "ruin" describing  "The woe and  sickness of an  age  of fear  made  known"  is equally suggestive of the  museum  of machines and  the  attack  on codified religion from Samuel  Butler's  Erewhon  (I 872) :

And lo, in that gray storehouse, fallen to dust and rotten, Lay piled the traps and engines of forgotten greed,
The tomes of codes and canons, long disused, forgotten, The robes and sacred books of many a vanished creed.

Most interesting  is the concept of Pallas, "the  all-wise mother" which seems to blend the earth  goddess of the first nature  poetry with "the  wise fair woman", a development,  perhaps,  of the  Pre-Raphaelite Bume-Jones  ideal  by way of Mor-

30

LAMPMAN'S  FLEETING VISION



ris's Ellen and  Katherine Waddell. The  noble women of Lampman's major  nar­ ratives are all characteristically "grey-eyed", conforming in stature  and in dignity to that ideal figure of "A Portrait  in Six Sonnets" :

Grey-eyed, for grey is wisdom-yet with eyes, Mobile and deep, and quick for thought or flame A voice of many notes that breaks and changes And fits each meaning with its vital chord,
A speech, true to the heart, that lightly ranges
From jocund laughter to the serious word, And over all a bearing proud and free,
A noble grace, a conscious dignity.

In   "David  and   Abigail,"   the  spiritual   vision  is  associated  with  its  feminine exemplar  in  the  manner  of  Keats'  Hyperion;  Abigail's  "high  dreams"  are  re­ lated  to the desire to emulate  "those  great  women praised of old," a  Miriam or Deborah   whose  courage   and   wisdom  supported   the  tribe.  To  the  lovestruck David  who  is plunged  into  "dreams" at  the first sight  of Abigail, she is, as the maidservant   Miriam   astutely   remarks,  "the   vision  of  the  wise fair  woman." Similarly,  in  the  long  narrative poem, "The  Story of an  Affinity," the "vision"  of  Margaret  is  the  catalyst  which  "burst[s]  the  bolted  prison  of   [Richard's] soul"  and  transforms  an  aimlessly violent existence into  the  nobler  "dream" of a  formal  education and  the  development  of the self which  will  enable  him to claim  Margaret's love.  Margaret's own dreams  are for a life of  which  William Morris  might  have  approved:  "full  of noble  aims,/  A dream  of onward  and heroic  toil/  Of  growth  in  mind,  enlargement  for herself/  And  generous  labour for  the  common  good."  For  Richard, the  "dream" of  Margaret  proves a  pass­ port  to  the  authentic self which  guides  him  through  ten  years in  the  city and undergirds the shared "dream" of their future together.
This  insistence on  the  "dream" or "vision"  as the  mainspring  of human  ex­
perience  is sometimes  likely to strike  the  modern  reader  as a  somewhat  naive wish-fulfillment device:  Nabal,  Abigail's gross, wine-bibbing husband  is indirectly but  conveniently  dispatched  from a love triangle  by the after  effects of a great, black  "dream". Yet, even  while amused  at  the facility of this structure, we are somewhat  sobered  by Lampman's earnest  attempts  to re-define the  primary ex­ perience  of his poetry,  the  "dream", in  terms  of a  moral  guide  for  man's  be­ haviour  in society. Like faith,  the  dream  has the great  advantage of  being  un­ deniable as it is at once its own genesis and justification.
Among  the  Millet  and  Lyrics of Earth  demonstrate  that  the  dream  enabled


3I

LAMPMAN's  FLEETING VISION



Lampman to write some of his most striking poems; the charm  of the unusual narrative "In November" is the evocation of the tranced  state in the mind of the observer-poet.  Loitering  in  the  November  woods,  he  finds  himself  motionless amidst  a group  of mullein  plants,  and  feels as if he has become "One of their sombre company/ A body without wish or will." A sudden  ray of thin light, (associated  with  the  glimpse "of  some  former  dream")  induces  a  moment  of "golden  reverie" to man and  plant. The  attraction of this poem lies in the nicely understated  kinship between man  and  nature  and  also in the narrator's shock of emotional  discovery, a discovery which we as readers share:

And I, too, standing idly there, With muffied hands in the chill air, Felt the warm glow about my feet,
And shuddering betwixt cold and heat, Drew my thoughts closer, like a cloak,
While something in my blood awoke,
A nameless and unnatural cheer, A pleasure secret and austere.

In  this  poem,  as  in  the  earlier  poems,  "Among  the  Timothy" and  "At  the Ferry",  the dream  is linked with Lampman's passive apprehension of nature  and as such  it  does not  interfere  with  his observations.  In  fact,  it adds  an  effective (because  unexplained) suggestion of the supra-natural. But serious problems do arise in later  poems when Lampman attempts  to invoke the dream  in connection with  vague  abstractions  and  unrealized  experience;  the  dream  then  becames  a substitute for reality rather than an agent for perceiving it.
A  rationale  for  the  early  "dream" experience  together  with  some of Lamp­
man's  most characteristic  uses of the word itself is to be found  in the long narra­ tive poem "An  Athenian  Reverie".  A  Greek  watching  "before  the  quiet  thala­  mos" falls into a "reverie"  compounded  of the memories and  associations of his past and  present life. He views the land  itself as if it were "breathing heavily in dreams"  and  speculates on the "dim  dreams"  of the wedding  guests. Moving to a larger  generalization,  he concludes that love itself is "one  all pampering dream" but  this  he rejects with the alternative  of  Tennyson's "Ulysses": "to  me is ever present/   The  outer  world with  its  untravelled  paths,/ The  wanderer's dream." In  this same Tennysonian  vein, he describes as "greedy  and  blind"  the multitude of people for whom life is a "dull dream" to which  they never awaken.  In  con­ trast is the rich life of the man "who sees":
to whom each hour

LAMPMAN'S FLEETING VISION



Brings some fresh wonder to be brooded on, Adds some new group or studied history
To that wrought sculpture, that our watchful dreams
Cast up upon the broad expense of time, As in a never-finished frieze.

The process  described here  is actually  the  process of the  poem  itself, the  dream or reverie  which  moves over  the surface  of the dreamer's life casting  up memories and  associations  upon  the  mind.  The  Keatsian romantic rationale for the experi­ ence, reminiscent of Endymion, is also quite explicit:

Happy is he
Who, as a watcher, stands apart from life, From all life and his own, and thus from all
Each thought, each deed, and each hour's brief event, Draws the full beauty, sucks its meaning dry
For him this life shall be a tranquil  joy.
He shall be quiet and free. To him shall come
No gnawing hunger for the coarser touch, No made ambition with its fateful grasp; Sorrow itself shall sway him like a dream.

The dream   which  is also the  poetic  process becomes  at  once  a  means  of  appre­ hending life  and   an  antidote to  it; detached from  the  surface  flux  of  life  man  acquires both  the god-like  vision and  the god-like immunity to pain.
The importance of  this  whole  cluster  of associations  in  Lampman's poetry  is
perhaps the  imaginative conversion  which  he is enabled to make; in effect, he is able  to reverse  the  categories of "dreams" and  "reality". Because  the  "true life" of  existence   is  available only  to  the  detached observer   in  the  dreaming state, reality  itself can  be dismissed  as a harmless  dream; the  inspired  dreamer will find "sorrow itself shall  sway  him  like a  dream". The  great  advantage of this struc­ ture  is that  the  dream, coupled  with  the stoic stance,  becomes  a way of  circum­ venting  the pain  of every-day reality.




E      inherent in this way of looking  at  the world  is that  it is not  always  possible  to  maintain the  dream  and  so keep  reality  at  bay. This  difficulty is particularly apparent in poems such  as the revised "Winter-Store" from  Lyrics of Earth  ( 1895). In the earliest poems, the  high "dream" is sufficient

33

LAMPMAN'S FLEETING VISION



to hold unpleasant  reality in check; the "dissonant  roar" of the city intrudes  into the  poetic  dream  but  it does  not  take  over.  But,  in  the  second  version  of the poem  "Winter-Store", there  is a  schism  between  the  two  thirds  of  the  poem which deals with  the poet's "dream" in nature  and  his tranquil winter  recollec­ tions, and  the last third  of the poem which is a sudden  intrusion  of  the Socialist vision of the unhappy city. Lampman is no longer able to rest in a Meredith-like beneficent  nature,  at  "one  with  earth  and  one  with  man".  Instead  the  poem develops into a sudden  and forceful "vision sad and  high/  Of  the laboring  world
down there":

... through the night, Comes a passion and a cry,
With a blind sorrow and a might,
I know not whence, I know not why, A something I cannot control
A nameless hunger of the soul.

If the voices of the frogs can bring assurance of nature's cosmic plan, the "dream" which underlies the flux of existence, there are other  voices which remind Lamp­ man of the fear and sorrow which are also a part  of human  life. The voice which comes out of the depth,  "the  crying in the night"  of Lampman's much antholo­  gized "Midnight" would seem to be part  of a larger  sequence of  poems dealing with  the  fearful  aspects  of  existence.  In  this  sense,  the  comforting  noon-tide "dream" has its complement  in the midnight  sleeplessness  which  will not  allow "dream", ("New  Year's  Eve")  or, as in Roberts'  work, in the nightmare which grows out of the dream itself.
In  the  poem  "Winter", strange  voices rave  among  the  pines, "Sometimes  in
wails, and  then/  In  whistled  laughter,  till affrighted men/  Draw  close". The protagonist,  Winter, becomes a fearful artist prototype:

... Far away the Winter dreams alone.
Rustling among his snow-drifts, and resigns, Cold fondling ears to hear the cedars moan
lin dusky-skirted lines
Strange answers of an ancient runic call;
Or somewhere watches with his antique eyes, Gray-chill with frosty-lidded reveries,
he
In misty wedges through his girth of pines.

The  voice of Winter's  "ancient  runic  call"  becomes associated  with  cruelty and


34

LAMPMAN's FLEETING VISION



death: "The shining  majesty  of him  that  smites/  And slays you with a smile". In  "Storm", the "blind  thought" which impels the wind's  cry is associated with repression.  "All  earth's moving  things  inherit/ The  same  chained   might  and madness of the spirit":

You in your cave of snows, we in our narrow girth
Of need and sense, for ever chafe and pine; Only in moods of some demonic birth
Our souls take fire, our flashing wings uptwine; Even like you, mad Wind, above our broken prison, With streaming hair and maddened eyes uprisen,
We dream ourselves divine.

In  "Midnight", the  landscape   is again  desolate  and  associated  with  cold  and snow;  the  narrator, alone  and  sleepless at  midnight,   hears  some  unidentified "wild  thing"  crying  out  of the  dark.  Because of his implied  spiritual  isolation, we tend  to speculate  that  the  voice which  the  poet hears is a projection  of his own  grief.  Yet,  significantly,  Lampman   does not  admit  the  personal  reference which indicates  a consciousness of interaction  between man  and  his surroundings as does say, Coleridge, in "Frost  at  Midnight", but prefers to assign the voice of fear to some undefinable  part of the external world.
This  poem  seems to indicate  some of the disadvantages  of a theory of poetry which  postulates  that   the  mind  must  wander  freely  the  better  to  apprehend nature's infinite dream.  When  weary and  despairing, the poet's mind  might  well find  quite   opposite  principles  in  nature   to  that  of  Hans  Fingerhut's  "cosmic optimism"  yet  even  intimations  of demonic  forces must  be equally  accepted  as truth  because the mind  has given up  his own autonomy.  We can speculate  that as Lampman became  more depressed-the burden of death,  ill-health,  a stifled affection  and  apparent public  indifference  to his work detailed  in  the letters  to Edward  Thomson; -the press of this reality becomes too strong  for the protec­ tive dream  structure and  its opposite, the nightmare,  takes over. Such  a develop­ ment  is implicit  in  the  metaphor and,  we might infer,  in Lampman's own per­ sonality. This  tendency is prefigured even in the first book where the poetic voices of frog and cicada are replaced by the fearful cry of "Midnight".
In   Lampman's work  we  see  mirrored   the  dilemma  of  the  later   Victorian romantics;  he accepted  a  romantic  mythology-the Wordsworthian belief that it is possible to be "laid  asleep in body" and so "see into the life of things" -at the  very  moment   when  changing  social structures,  the  Darwinistic  imperative, and  above  all,  the  loss of  a  settled  faith,  made  it  impossible  to  assert  man's

35

LAMPMAN'S  FLEETING VISION



spiritual  transcendence  in nature.  For most of his poetic career, Lampman seems to  have  willed himself into  a denial of these facts:  "Pan is gone -ah yet, the infinite dream/ Still lives for them that  heed"  until that  time came when he was no longer  psychologically able to participate  in the comfort  of nature's dream.  It is then  that  there is a great press of new realities -assertions of man's  continued cruelty  to man,  bitter indictments  of social injustice,  and  horrible  visions of  reli­ gious persecution.
Perhaps, as Lampman's own "high dreams" for the future  are shaken, he turns to  the  example  of the  protagonist  of Tennyson's  Maud and  engages himself in the  pursuit  of the social good. The  aspiring "dream" of social progress begins to replace  nature's  "dream",  and   this  new  direction   in  Lampman's thought   is pointedly  indicated   by the  title of his last  book,  Alcyone   ( 18gg). The  name  of this star  is meant  to suggest man's "wider  vision" and this perspective, a Socialist evolutionary  vision of cosmic design, is perhaps  meant  to be contrasted  with the narrow  and  destructive  insularity  of the man  of no vision, the  "Idiot"  (Greek, idios)  from  the poem "The City of the End of Things". This poem, a nightmare vision of the  logical end of man's  selfishness and  greed, is a descriptive  tour  de force of the death-bringing city of machines.
At  this time, Lampman was a member  of an  Ottawa group  which met regu­
larly  to discuss Socialism and  Science. Animations  of Socialist thought,  particu­ larly  the  attack  on wealth and  social injustice  ("To a  Millionaire", "Avarice") and  Socialist utopias  ("A Vision of Twilight", "The Land  of Pallas")  now begin to fill the vacuum  left by the "dream" in nature.  Lampman has sometimes been described  as a  Fabian  but  his insistence on the social function  of "Beauty" and "Art" would  seem  to suggest that  he  had  been  influenced  by the  aesthetic  of William  Morris.  Certainly,  the conclusion of "A  Vision of Twilight" is particu­ larly suggestive of the social "dream  -vision" structure of  Morris's  conclusion to  News   From   Nowhere. Yet, despite  the  framework  of cosmic optimism  pro­ vided  for  Alcyone, Lampman's Socialist  heavens  do  not  carry  with  them  the beneficent   assurance  of  nature's "infinite   dream"; the  poet-wanderer  returns from  his vision of the  ideal  city, as the  first version of "The Land  of Pallas" makes explicit,  no longer able to find his way back to the social vision, and  un­ able to make the inhabitants of the real city listen to his dream  of a better  world. In  poems such as "The  Land  of Pallas" and  "A Vision of Twilight", Lampman raises the same questions which had hovered on the fringes of his earlier verse - an  inquiry   into  the  meaning  of  life,  especially  the  problem  of  evil.  Such  a rationale  is provided  by the inhabitants of vision city, "They  declare the ends of

LAMPMAN'S FLEETING VISION



being/   And  the  sacred  need  of pain"; but  unfortunately, the  narrator can  no longer accept  this truth  and  unquestioningly agree that  "dreams  are real, and life is only sweet".  Instead,  "A  Vision of Twilight" concludes with an  admission of a loss of faith: "But  in  veiling indecision/  Comes my question  back again -/ Which is real? the fleeting vision? j Or the fleeting world of men?"
Yet, if we are to accept  the pattern  of rebellion and  reconciliation  implicit in Hans  Fingerhut's experience,  or to note the continually  remade  "dreams" of an Abigail  or  a  Margaret which  reassert themselves in lowlier forms in the face of adversity   (Lampman  was  re-writing  "David   and  Abigail"  at  the  time  of  his "spiritual revolution")  and  to note that  he was actively attempting to move out of the  restrictions  of his old  nature  poetry, we might  conclude  that  Lampman was  developing  beyond  the  youthful  Keatsian  realm  of "Flora, and  old  Pan" into  a  concern  with  "a  nobler  life ... the agonies, the  strife of human  hearts". Lampman's later  poetry,  in  particular,  "A  Portrait  in  Six  Sonnets"  dated  by Scott  18gs-gg,  is a  direct  inquiry  into human  personality  in a manner  that  far exceeds  the  lovesick  "dreams" of  "The   Growth  of  Love".  This  sequence  also implies that  the  higher  vision is now to be associated with  Katherine Waddell: "Touched by her,/  A World of finer vision I have found".
Further, his stoic observation  of 1895• "It is necessary for every man when he reaches  maturity of understanding to take himself carefully  to pieces and  ascer­ tain  with  pitiless scientific accuracy  just what  he is, then  he must ad just  his life accordingly", is a far cry from that  boyish romanticism  which had earlier led him to identify with Keats, and suggests that  Lampman  was undertaking that mental stock-taking  which leads to a new vision of the self and  of the world. In particu­ lar, his interest  in Socialism would appear  to be an attempt to move out of the restrictions of nature  poetry  into what  he saw as the real world of  men. Writing for The  Globe  in 18gg,  he argues that  "the  greatest poets ... have been men of affairs  before  they  were  poets, ... those  men  who  have  been  poets only  have belonged, however  illustrious,  to the second class." In  April 1894, writing of an early  poem  derivative  of  Keats,  he  asserts, "I  am  only  just now  getting  quite  clear of the spell of that  marvellous person."11  In this context,  we may see Mor­ ris's Socialist "vision"  as Lampman's vehicle of  escape. Such  a movement  from the romantic  "dream" to a new sense of social  reality  would  be consistent with the  experience  of  Lampman's good  friend  and  fellow  poet,  Duncan  Campbell  Scott.  Like  Lampman, Scott  began  to write  under  the  influence  of Keats  and Charles  G. D. Roberts  but soon began to move away from  the infantile  reaches

37

LAMPMAN'S  FLEETING VISION



of dream  (The Magic House, I8gg)  when he encountered the realities of Indian life (New  World  Lyrics and Ballads, 1905).
The  poem  which  Lampman  was working on four  months  before his death  in
I 8gg,  "At  the  Long  Sault:  May, I 66o"  does  reconcile  man,  nature  and  the social vision. It  also suggests a new view of nature  which is neither  the entirely beneficent nature  of the dream  nor the entirely fearful  nature  of the nightmare: instead  both  beauty  and  fear  co-exist within  nature  and  are  reconciled.  If the poem begins in the old ideal mode, "The  innocent  flowers in the limidess woods are springing", Lampman for the first time, admits  that  even a beneficent nature might  have its serpent,  the soaring "grey hawk"  of the first stanza.  Again for the first time,  he does not  try to escape this evil by assigning  responsibility for it to the intrusion  of the  "toiling city",  his own antithesis  to a comforting  nature.  As a  result, "At  the  Long  Sault"  becomes a moving  acceptance of all "the  savage heart  of the wild" as Daulac's men, one by one, fall before the Iroquois:

Each for a moment  faces them all and  stands
In his little desperate ring;  like a tired  bull moose Whom  scores of sleepless wolves, a ravening pack, Have  chased all night,  all day
Through the snow-laden woods, like famine let loose; And he turns  at last in his track
Against a wall of rock and stands  at bay;
Round him with terrible sinews and  teeth  of steel
They charge  and  recharge; but with many  a furious  plunge  and wheel
Hither and  thither over the trampled snow,
He tosses them bleeding  and  torn ; Till, driven, and  ever to and fro Harried, wounded, and  weary grown, His mighty strength gives way
And  all together they fasten upon  him and  drag him down.

The  dream,  no  longer  a  passive gratification  of  the  senses, is now  the  high ideal of heroic action for the good of society, the "sleepless dream" which impels Daulac  and  his men "To  beat back the gathering horror/ Deal death  while they may/   And  then  die".  The  town, safe and  unknowing,  does not  "dream" that "ruin  was near/ And  the  heroes who met it and  stemmed  it are  dead." In  the last  stanza,  reconciliation  is achieved  as violence  modulates  into  pastoral:  the metre  of the  poem changes to the lyric elegaic as the flowers of French  chivalry are gathered  back into the natural world:

g8

LAMPMAN'S FLEETING VISION



The numberless stars out of heaven
Look down  with a pitiful  glance; And the lilies asleep in the forest
Are closed like the lilies of France.


NOTES

1 Richard Hengist Home, Orion. 10th ed. (London, 1874), v.
2   Archibald Lampman,  Lyrics  of Earth:  Poems and  Ballads, edited   and   with  an
Introduction by Duncan Campbell Scott  (Toronto, 1925), 8.
3   John Sutherland, "Edgar Allan  Poe  in  Canada",  Archibald  Lampman, ed.  Mi­ chael   Gnarowski  (Toronto,   1970),  159-178;   Roy   Daniells, "Lampman   and Roberts", Literary  History  of Canada, gen.  ed. Carl  F.  Klinck   (Toronto,  1965),
389-98.
4    F. W. Watt, "The Masks  of Archibald Lampman",  Lampman, 205-206.
Ibid., 2o6.
6    Arthur S. Bourinot, ed.,  Archibald  Lampman's  Letters to Edward William Thom­
son, 1890-96 (Ottawa, 1956), 33·
7    "Copy of a Letter to Ralph Gustafson", Lampman, 154-58.
8    Scott,   Lyrics  of Earth,  38;  Gnarowski, Lampman, xxiv;  Bruce  Nesbitt,   "A  Gift of Love", Canadian  Literature, No. 50 (Autumn, 1971), 35-40.
9   Lyrics of Earth, 23.
10   Bourinot, Letters, 18.
11  Lyrics of Earth, 31-32.










CANADIAN   LITERATURE on Microfilm

arrangements  have now been made  for microfilm  and  micro­ fiche  copies  of  Canadian   Literature   to  be   available   from University Microfilms

enquiries  should   be   addressed    to   UNIVERSITY MICROFILMS,
300  North Zeeb  Road, Ann  Arbor,  Michigan 48106,  U.S.A.




39



LAMPMAN
AND RELIGION


Barrie Davies


TERELIGIOus  BELIEFS and  religious po&tion of Lampman, as Desmond  Pacey points out in Ten Canadian Poets,  have been almost entirely
ignored  or  taken  for  granted   by  previous  critics  with  the  exception  of  Pacey himself  and  Roy  Daniells.  In  the  Literary   History   of Canada  Daniells  writes that  Lampman's "connection  with the Christian  tradition  is of the most exiguous and  awkward  kind."1  Desmond  Pacey is concerned  "to  document  the  case for believing that  he  (Lampman) had severe religious doubts."2  The  present essay is an  attempt to enlarge  upon the insights and  intuitions  of these two critics.
Lampman -like  Emerson, Thoreau, and  many  of the  English Romantics­
was  not  irreligious  but  did  experience  a  growing  revulsion  against  orthodox religion.  It  is convenient  to deal  with  Lampman's religious experience  in  three stages;  his rejection  of institutional  religion,  his perplexity  and  doubt,  and  the nature  of his religious beliefs. At the same time, it is important not to forget that such an order  is artificial in that  it fails to reflect the fluctuations  between  rejec­ tion, belief, doubt, and affirmation.
In  context,  it  is useful to  remember  Lampman's  background. For  the  first twenty-one  years of  his  life Lampman lived  in  a  staunchly   Anglican  environ­ ment.  Is it not significant, therefore,  that  there is no evidence  which shows that Lampman considered  following in  his father's  footsteps?  At  the  same  time, the fact  that  Lampman did not enter  the ministry is representative in  the sense that it can  be  duplicated   in  the experience  of many  literary  men  in  the  nineteenth century  throughout Canada,  America, and  England.  Charles G. D. Roberts  was born  in  the  rectory  at  Douglas,  and  D. C.  Scott  in  a  Methodist  parsonage  in Ottawa. W.  W.  Campbell,  born  in  the  Anglican  Mission  at  Berlin, eventually entered  the  ministry  but like Emerson publicly  renounced  it. The  nineteeth  cen­ tury  was a time when many sensitive men and women found it difficult to accept an  orthodox  religion increasingly undermined  by the findings of science, anthro­  pology, and  the  Higher  Criticism.  Having  established  that  Lampman's  distrust

LAMPMAN AND  REUGION



of institutional religion was broadly representative and  not unique, it is necessary now  to  detail   his  disagreement.   Such  details  also  imply,  because  of  negative emphasis, the religious ideas which he affirmed.
In  his essay on Shelley, "The Revolt of Islam",3  written  whilst he was still at
Trinity   College,  Lampman is shocked  by what  he calls the  "atheistic  opinions and  daring  blasphemy"4   of Shelley's poem. But the essay does not reflect a straightforward, orthodox   reaction.  Lampman clearly  admires  Shelley and  we have  an  example   here  of  something  which  was  to  become  characteristic  of Lampman's writing,  the  transference  of  religious terms  to  nature.  Shelley  is a "pure worshipper  of nature" and  "one of her peculiar  priests".5  The  essay seems to  me  to  foreshadow   Lampman's own  quest,  which  is  best  described  by  the words  he uses to portray  Shelley's search for "some  natural code of faith  which to  his  mind  conformed   more  closely to  the  workings  of  his only  instructress, nature's sel£."6
Like  Emerson   and   Thoreau,  and   the  Deists  and   Unitarians before  them, Lampman  rejected   many  aspects  and  beliefs of  institutional   Christianity.   His own  time  he  described  as  "a   philosophic  age  when  people  are  beginning   to realize with  a sort  of poetic clearness their true relations  with nature  and  life."7
Elsewhere,  whilst  protesting  against  contemporary  translations  of the  Bible,  he has a  further   comment  upon  the changing  temper: "The men  of the sixteenth century knew how to translate  the Bible, because they believed it in a sense which is not  intelligible even to  the devout  people of our  day,  and  because they were saturated  with its spirit."8  Both these comments imply that for the sensitive, thoughtful  and informed  man, subscription to orthodox  beliefs with the passionate intensity of earlier eras was no longer possible.
At the same time, Lampman realized that the majority of people clung to a moribund  Church  and  regarded  with suspicion any  attempts to establish a  per­ sonal  belief  which  provided  an  intensity  and  meaning  lacking  in  institutional religion.
Lampman hated  anything  which followed blind  custom  both  in religion  and in other aspects of life. Throughout his work, Lampman clearly and  without histrionics established  his own point of view which was always in reaction  to the deadening  quality  of the experience  of the mass of mankind.  W. W. Campbell, his flamboyant  contemporary, during  the first three  weeks of the column  in The Globe,  in  which  he  and  Lampman collaborated,  used  the  findings  of  anthro­ pology to show that  much of the Old Testament  and  the Story of the Crucifixion were mythic and  condemned  as "poor  and tottering" a religion "bolstered  up  by

LAMPMAN AND  REUGION



ignorance".9    Eme.tWn had  done  much  the  same  thing  fifty years  earlier  as a prelude  to  a  statement of his own  belief, but  clearly  the  religious attitudes  in Canada   were still rigid, for Campbell's  article  brought  a shocked rebuke  in the Monday  editorial,  which expressed "strongest  disapproval" and  condemned  and repudiated  "most emphatically his religious ideas".10
W.  W.  Campbell  had  begun  his Globe  column  with some  reflections on the
growing  class distinctions, the increasing disparity  between  the rich and  the poor in Canada, and  had  castigated  the churches  for their  indifference  to the "desti­ tution,  degradation and  misery both within the shadow  of the same church  spire, or within the sound of the same Sabbath  bell". He ended: "Religionists may cry out about  the hopelessness of mere humanity  as a religion, but it would be better did they put  a little more hope into the anguish of the world by putting  more of the humanities into their religion."11
There  have been many who have felt that  institutional religion has often been
conservative  and  reactionary.  Thoreau, for example,  believed the  Church  to be a  very timid  organization  and  a tool of materialism.  A criticism  of this kind of collusion is implicit  in Lampman's "The  Story of an  Affinity" which emphasizes the  richness  of  the  church,  the  "grandeur", the  "silken  ceremonies",  and  the "velvet stalls". The  pastor preaches on love and  the brotherhood  of man,  but  to a  congregation  composed of the "rich  and  the  proud", who remain  indifferent. The  Church  thus  continues  to announce  the  radical  doctrines  of Christ  but  has made  them  largely  ceremonial.  It  is no  wonder  that  Lampman in  the  Globe column  for  May  I8g2, like Emerson in "The Divinity School Address", calls for "genuine  and effective" sermons to be delivered only by the most gifted preachers moving from parish to parish.
In   the  same  column  for  September I 8g2  where  he  is  attacking   excessive
wealth,  there  occurs  the  clause,  "if  it  be  true  that  there  is a  life beyond  the grave". An orthodox Christian would not have expressed qualifications or doubt. Lampman seems not  to have shared  the belief in an  afterlife,  or rather  he was concerned  with  the possibilities of the present life and  this is where he wished to place his emphasis. In the column for November I 8g2 he incidentally dissociates himself from  the  popular  belief in the afterlife. The  tone of the language,  which has  a  touch  of  Thoreauvian  mockery,  disapproves  of  the  devaluation   of  the present  life for something  illusory:  "Whether we accept  with  the mass of man­ kind  the  belief in a happy  immortality  of the soul, or  whether  we refuse to busy our  thoughts  with  that  great  after-blank  into  which  we cannot  see how we shall penetrate   with  profit,  in  neither  case will the sound-hearted man  and  the  true

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



lover of humanity and life look upon death  as in anywise a hideous and desperate thing."
Lampman did  not endorse the doctrine  of Original  Sin. As early as his essay, "The Revolt  of  Islam",  he approves Shelley's "magnificent  dream", when men freed  from  the  corrupting social institutions  are able  "to  follow the instincts  of natural goodness  and  virtue  which should gradually  lead  them  to perfection,  to pure,  glorious,  unselfish happiness,  without  the further  aid  of laws and  systems of morals.m 2   Lampman continuously  played  down the other  world  of orthodox religion in order  to assert the infinite possibilities of the present life and the innate capacities of human  beings. Man needs neither Divine Grace, the Church, priests, nor  theology  and  dogma.  With  Emerson,  Lampman regarded  the  belief in a "system  of  post-mortem   rewards  and  punishments",  to  use his words from  the Globe column  for April  18g3, as false and degrading.
His poem,  "Virtue", is an explicit rejection of external  control and fear. Men cannot  be bribed  or frightened  into virtuous  behaviour.  The  only authority  for the  virtuous  life comes from  the "inward  light",  which  produces  "the  God-like habit". Only  when  he thought  of the Hon. John  Staggart  did Lampman regret "that the old theological fable of hell fire is not true."13 In the poem the reaction to orthodox  religion is openly contemptuous.  Religion is a "grudged control", producing  not  virtue,  but  something  peevish, crabbed  and  rancid,  a "sour  pro­ duct". Religion  has  become  petrified and  reactionary,  a  "custom"  maintained by the  "sharp-eyed", and  relying heavily on  the enforcement  of  crude  concep­ tions of a "painted paradise" or a "pictured hell". By contrast the reader familiar  with  Lampman's work  realizes how personal and  characteristic at times are  the religious insights found  here. By this I mean the emphasis on clarity, light, flow­ ing  movement,  and  self-fulfillment, whilst the line "Bathed  in  the  noon-tide  of an  inward  light"  is more  informative  of one  aspect of that  most typical  of his poems, "Heat", than many pages of critical commentary.
An untitled  poem, left in his manuscript  book for  188g to 1892, is significant
in  showing  how  radically  Lampman's religious ideas  had  changed  in  the  ten years since he had left Trinity  College:

How dealt the world, Oh Christ, with thee, Who shrank not from the common rod, Whose secret was humility?
They mocked and scourged; then hailed thee god.

And built out of thine earnest speech, Who gifts had for the simplest needs,


43

LAMPMAN AND RELIGION



Whose meaning was in all men's reach, The  strangest of phantastic  creeds.14

Like  the  New  England Transcendentalists, Lampman  no  longer  believed  in  the supernatural origin  of Christ.  He  considered, as Emerson did,  that  Christ  was a great  ethical  and  moral  teacher but  nevertheless  a man  whose meaning could  be understood  and   attained  by  all  men.  The   moral  precepts of  Christ had   been corrupted  and   perverted  by  orthodox  religion   and   made  into   an   elaborate mystery.
Lampman's impatience with  sectarian theology  may  be partly  explained from two  points  of view. He  had  been  influenced   by the  findings  of anthropology and archeology and   was  very  much   aware   of  the  rise  and  fall  of  religions.  In  the poem,  "In October", the sound  of the  falling  leaves  resembles  the  "failing mur­ mur   of  some  conquered creed".  Later   it  will  emerge   that   Lampman  did  not believe   that   the  truth was  confined   to  any  particular religion   but  that  many  religions  testified to truth.
Because  of  his  view  of  Christ,  Lampman maintained that  there  were  central and  constant truths in original  Christianity. The variety  of dogma had  confused and  distorted their  simplicity  and  beauty.  Such  attitudes motivate "To An  Ultra Protestant". The  poem  is an  explicit  rejection of institutional religion,  and, with it, all the impediments which  Emerson  and  Thoreau saw as "crutches", propping up a frigid  and  lifeless creed.
A  letter  from  Lampman to  E.  W. Thomson, dated November 2,   1897,  is an
important  document in  this  context. It provides  a  summary  of  Lampman's quarrel with  orthodoxy and   further details  of  the  nature of  his  rejection. For these  reasons,  I quote the  letter  in full  and  restore  a  meaningful passage  which is  missing  from   it  as  quoted   by  A.  S.  Bourinot in  his  edition of  Lampman's letters:
Yesterday  was a holiday and  the day before was Sunday  and  I went to Church, a thing  I do about  three times a year. It  always depresses me to go to Church. In those  prayers  and  terrible hymns of our  service we are in  the  presence of all the suffering  in the world since the beginning of time. We have entered  the temple of sorrow and are prostrate at the feet of the very God of Affliction.
"Lead  kindly light
Amid the encircling gloom"
Newman  hit it  exactly. It is the  secret of the  success of Christianity. As long as there  is  sorrow  on  earth,  the  pathetic  figure  of  Christ   will  [next  three  words mutilated] days when men were children, they were worshippers of light and joy. Apollo,  and  Aphrodite  and  Dionysias  were  enough  for  them,  but  the  world  is

44

LAMPMAN AND RELIGION



grown old now. It has gone through so much. It is sad and  moody and full of despair and it cleaves to Christ its natural refuge. I must say, however, that Sun­ day is a day that  drives me almost to madness. The prim black and stiff  collars, the artificial dress of the women, the slow trouping to the church, the silence, the dreariness, the occasional knots of sallow and  unhealthy zealots  whom one may meet  at  street  corners  whining  over some awful point  in  theology,-all  that gradually  presses me down till by Sunday night I am in  despair and would fain ssue                                                                                           15




LAMPMAN CONTINUED to go to church  infrequently  until the end of his life, but it is clear that orthodox  religion was not only unsatisfying but also profoundly  distasteful  to him. The  original insights of Christ are  no longer in evidence.  Orthodox Christianity  is prim  and  restrictive,  a dreary  ceremonial maintained  largely  by  people  who  are  themselves sick  and   whose  interest  is chiefly  aroused  by  sterile  casuistry.  Most important, there  is expressed  here  a conflict between  Paganism  and  Christianity.  Lampman  valued  the experience of the  Greeks  because  he  felt  that  in  their  vision of the  world  the  emphasis  was placed   upon   an   easy  correspondence   between  the  world  of  man,  gods,  and nature. What  Lampman sought  was a belief which  would  give man  a sense of "light  and  joy" and  in which  there  was room for the spontaneity,  total  absorp­ tion, and  imaginative play of childhood.  In other words, he could not be content with  a religion which appeared to encourage  men to remain  in a crippled state, dependent upon  "the  very God of Affliction", or with a ceremony  which was an expression of gloom and despair.
Thus  eventually, for  Lampman, Christianity  became synonymous with human
distress, and  was unacceptable because it failed  to give men  a greater  sense of their  own  potential.  Further evidence for  this statement  is provided  by "Storm Voices".  This  poem  is not,  as many  other  poems of Lampman are  not, simple description.  The  besieged  house is the contemporary  individual, and  his  condi­ tion  is critical.  Inside  the  house, the poet is aware of the  tremendous forces for dissolution,  and  the  darkness  and  rain  blot out  any  kind  of  perception from  a window  already  "narrow". Only if the poem is read in this way do such phrases as the "surging  horror" in  the  night  become meaningful.  The  storm  stands  for all  of  the  contemporary conditions  which  Lampman  felt  diminished  man.  The  poem  is especially relevant  because  the storm  is explicitly  identified  with a reli­ gious crisis. The  fury of the storm is the "thunder" of  organs  and  the "burst" of


45

LAMPMAN AND RELIGION



hymns,  and  the  darkness  is the  "gloom" of a  cathedral. Once  more  orthodox Christianity  is experienced as a religion of desperation  and  despair,  contributing to the sadness and  vexation of men who have  lost the capacity  for wonder  and the ability  to respond to the infinite which is at the centre of religious feeling.
It  is understandable, therefore,  that  in "The Land  of Pallas",  expressive both of  Lampman's ideals  and  criticisms of  contemporary society, the  "robes"  and "sacred  books" of "many  a vanished creed"  are  kept  only as a reminder  and  a warning.  In  this land  worship is "priestless",  but  of course  Pallas is a religious state.  Religion  here,  freed  from  its  institutional   aspects,  has  taken  on  a  new intensity. The  men  and  women of the land  do in fact  appear  to be divine, and the worlds of man,  nature,  and  the spirit are in continuous  intercourse  and  har­ mony. Nevertheless it is men and  women that  Lampman is describing. He is in­ deed setting  forth  the ideal, but  the ideal for  Lampman is synoymous  with  the potential  and  the  attainable.   The  religious faith  and  beliefs of the  people  are clearly   not   orthodox   or  traditional.  Later   I  shall   attempt   to  set  forth   the characteristics  of Lampman's beliefs which  are  close to those found  in  the land of  Pallas.  For  the  moment  it is enough  to  point  out  the  close  connection  here between  religion and  nature,  the sense of the immanence of  spirit  in the world, and  the  divinity  of the human.  Such characteristics  are  hardly  compatible  with orthodox  Christianity.
The  question  of Lampman's religious doubts,  using the word  religious here to describe not only Christianity  but other  beliefs as well, may be dealt with briefly. Lampman's feeling that  the Church  had  become  moribund and  oppressive can be found  in many  writers and  intellectuals  of the nineteenth  century  and  is part of  the  general  cultural  dislocation  of  the  century.  As  long  as  Lampman  was deprived of a tradition,  and until he was able to replace it with beliefs forged out of  personal  knowledge,  there  were bound  to  be evidences  of despondency  and nihilism.  At  the  same  time,  his personal  convictions,  always  elusive and  hard won, sometimes  failed him and  brought  further  moments  of deprivation.  How­ ever, when observed in the context of his work as a whole, uncertainty and  dis­ belief are  not  dominant. Moreover, these feelings must  not be confused  with the anguish  often  evinced in  his work, which  was the  result of  Lampman's  aware­ ness that  the mass of mankind  were ignorant  of, or indifferent  to, knowledge and powers  which  the  poet  believed could  transform  the  quality  of  man  and   his existence.  Desmond  Pacey  has  pointed  to  some  of  these  moments  of doubt  in "Despondency" and  "Winter   Evening".  The  poem  "To Chaucer" is very  im­ portant here as it charts the historical decline in orthodox  faith  from the  Middle

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



Ages, down  to the "doubt" and  "restless care"  of the contemporary situation.
In  the  introduction to  his book, The  Disappearance of God, J. Hillis Miller portrays  the nineteenth century  as a time when poets came to feel that  either the
lines of communication between  man and  God had  been dislocated or God had fled from the world. One  consequence of this feeling is the evocation of a Golden Age  when  God  dwelt  on  earth  and  a close affinity existed  between  the  divine and the human. Miller goes on to write that the Romantic poets,

still believe in God, and  they find his absence intolerable. At all costs they must attempt  to re-establish communication. They too begin in destitution, abandoned by God. All the traditional  means of mediation have broken down, and  romanti­ cism therefore defines the artist as the creator or discoverer of hitherto unappre­ hended symbols, symbols which establish a new relation, across the  gap  between man and God. The artist is the man who goes out into the empty spaces between man and  God attempting  to create in that  vacancy a new fabric of connections between man and  the divine power ... The central assumption of  romanticism is
,the idea  that  the isolated individual,  through  poetry, can  accomplish the  "un­ heard  of work", that  is create through his own efforts a marvellous  harmony of words which will integrate man, nature, and God.16

"To  Chaucer", and  several other  poems by Lampman, belong to the category which  Miller is describing. The  Middle Ages is seen as a Golden Age and  is sig­ nificantly described  in seasonal and  youthful imagery. By contrast  the  present is felt to be a fallen  world, a Paradise lost, or a Heaven   hich
sought.  But the  present  is not totally unredeemed,  and  this fact accounts for the paradoxes  which  become  apparent in the  poetry about  to be examined  and  for the  sense of struggle  alternating between  joy and  hope which  accompanies  the attempt   at  "a  new  fabric  of connections  between  man  and  the divine  power".
Underlying many  of Lampman's poems on the seasons is the theme  of death and  resurrection.  By this I mean  that  the seasonal movement  arouses in the poet a  religious  emotion  similar  to  what  the  Christian  has  towards  the  death  and resurrection   of  Christ.   Furthermore  the  poet  is so  closely identified  with  the seasonal  pattern that  he  too  undergoes a death  and  rebirth  which is felt  to be physical,  emotional,   and  spiritual.  This  theme  viewed from  a slightly  different angle may also be interpreted in terms of separation  and  re-union. It is the theme of the  Prodigal  Son,  of the  child who has lost its mother,  of the sense of being cut off from the natural sources of grace as in "The  Ancient Mariner".
The  tone  of  "In  October" is defined  by  religious imagery -the  "tall  slim priests of storm" and  the  leaves which utter  "low soft masses" for the death  of

47

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



the year. For the poet, too, it is a time of penance,  and  his heart goes out to "the ashen lands".
In  "Ballads  of  Summer's  Sleep",  the  alternation of  the  seasons becomes  a
religious struggle  in  which  victory  will be  obtained   only  when  "the  slayer  be slain".  This  image  is very close to that  of Christ's  victory over death.  It is also similar  to the  battle  of the priest-kings at the beginning  of Frazer's  The  Golden Bough, a battle  which Frazer  later identifies with vegetation  rituals of death  and revival. The  same emphasis is there in "Winter Hues Recalled" where February is "the  month  of the great  struggle twixt Sun  and  Frost".  In  "The Coming  of Winter", the seasons are  personified throughout. Summer  is a god dying in the shadow  of  the  mighty  "slayer"  winter  whilst  the  earth   prays  and  mourns  in black. The  earth  is now a widow who will be forced into marriage  with winter.
Several  other  poems, such as "Autumn  Waste",  "The Ruin  of the Year",  and "The March  of Winter",  marked  by the same  theme  and  similar structure  and imagery,  serve to  underline  that  such  a  preoccupation is not  merely fortuitous. Moreover,  the  two Greek myths most pertinent  here, Adonis -Persephone and Demeter-Persephone, are explicitly referred to in Lampman's poem "Chione", which is another  poem of death and descent into the underworld.
In  "Sirius", Lampman provides variation  by drawing  on Egyptian  mythology, but  the concern  is the same  as in the  poems already  mentioned. Isis or Hathor was the  wife of the fertility god, Osiris, also identified  with  the sun.  The  great star  of Isis was Sirius, which  betokened  the  rising of the  Nile and  the  resurrec­ tion of Osiris. In  Lampman's poem the waning of the "old  night"  and  the rising of the star  cause the poet to cry aloud to Hathor for he is "smitten  by her star".
Clearly  for  Lampman, Spring,  Autumn  and  Winter  are  the  equivalent  emo­ tionally of Easter,  Lent  and  the  Passion, and  it is interesting  to read  in  Frazer something which Lampman may have intuited or thought  out:
When we reflect how often the church has skilfully contrived to plant the seeds of the faith  on the old stock of Paganism, we may surmise that  the Easter celebra­ tion of the dead  and  risen Christ was grafted  upon a similar  celebration of the dead and risen Adonis17
It is worth  speculating,   too,  that  when  Lampman expressed  his  disgust  with orthodox  religion in  the letter  to Thomson  which I quoted  earlier, and  opposed the  pale  figure  which  institutional   religion  had  made  of  Christ  with  Apollo, Aphrodite,  and  Dionysus, he might  have  been setting  up  his own Trinity.  The choice is significant, for Apollo is associated with the sun and light and his return was celebrated  by festivals in  the spring.  Likewise Aphrodite is associated with

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



the  fertility  of the spring  and  Dionysus is a vegetation  god  who underwent  the pattern  of death and rebirth.
In  the general  context,  the  poet tends to dramatize  himself in two significant
and  interrelated ways. He  is both  a  dead  god  awaiting  the  moment  of rebirth and  a  man  divided  from  the  divine source  within  himself  and  the  world  of nature.  The  possibility of re-entry into a divine harmony still exists, but the occa­ sions are limited  in the contemporary situation  as opposed to a past  when union between  man,  nature,  and  god  was continuous  and  characteristic.  Christianity,  especially in its institutionalized form, is for the poet one of the factors which has contributed to this fragmentation.
In  "Favourites of  Pan", the  god  flees before the  "new  strains"  of  "hostile hymns" and "conquering faiths". The synthesis caught in "A Vision of Twilight":

When the spirit flowed unbroken Through the flesh, and the sublime Made the eyes of men far seeing,

is no  more.  However,  "the  infinite  dream" may  be attainable "for  them  that heed".  In the "Return of the Year", characterized  as the title suggests by imagery of conflict and rebirth:

This life's old mood and cult of care
Falls smitten by an older truth
And the gray world wins back to her
The rapture of her vanished youth.

At such  times, the  poet knows, "The Gods are vanished but  not dead". Hence, like the loons, in the  poem of the same title, the poet  will search  for the exiled Glooscap,  or  in  "The Lake in  the  Forest"  will experience  in  the wilderness the spirit of Manitou.
Contemporary  man  has  been  left  only  with  the  fragments   of  the  medieval
symbols of faith  and  correspondence  with the  Divine. Lampman puts it thus in
"Voices of Earth":

We have not heard the music of the spheres, The song of star to star ...

But in this poem there  is not that sense of poignancy and  horror  as, for example, in  Arnold's  "Dover  Beach",  because earth  does have voices, signs and  symbols, which awaken in man organic knowledge, "bedded" in his heart.
In  Lampman's poetry,  nature   is  nearly  always  called  "Mother" or  "Great


49

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



Mother", terms synonymous with Rhea  or Cybele, the "Mother of the Gods" of the Ancients. In  "Freedom" the poet leaves the city and  is re-united  in the arms of his mother. Cast out of Paradise or Heaven the poet's heart in "Among the Timothy", which was a "heaven", is dead like the white leaves that  hang through winter. But the  poet lies in the earth  as if buried,  and  his spirit  passes into "the pale  green  ever-swaying grass" to return  re-invigorated.  In  "The  Meadow", as the earth  burgeoned  with April so the poet's spirit "sprang to life anew". Finally, in  "Storm", the  dead  poet  buried  in  his grave,  "his  narrow  girth  of need  and sense", experiences divinity in moments of "demonic birth".



E        of Lampman's dissatisfaction  with orthodox religion  has led  logically to the  world of nature  which gave the  poet  an  outlet for, and an image of, his religious sentiments.
"Life  and  Nature" provides  a  transition  from  the  rejection  of orthodoxy  to
Lampman's later  religious position as it emerges through  rather  than  in nature. To  put  it  simply  at  the  outset,  nature  is felt  to  be an  intermediary, a  means whereby the religious experience is expressed and  realized. The  title is misleading because it  compresses too drastically  the ideas  behind  the  poem.  Essentially the poem  contrasts  life or nature  with  orthodox  religion,  which  the  imagery  indi­ cates  to  be  synonymous  with  death.  Once  again  the  poem  is an  example  of Lampman's ability to find correlatives for a state of mind, for a spiritual struggle. The  poet enters the city which is still and  deserted  and is overcome by the deso­ lation  which the inhabitants offer as worship to their God. Tormented by a lack of purpose and  direction, driven to the point of  distraction  and  madness he finds his attempts to assert life perverted  into  their  opposite.  He  leaves, goes into the depths  of  nature  where  he lies down  and  undergoes  a  metamorphosis, a dying into life achieved  by the loss of self in the procreative sound  and  movement.
Lampman,  then,  found  "a   natural  code  of  faith". The   several  influences
which  moulded   the  correspondence   between  matter,   mind,   and  the  Divinity appear  to be diverse, but all contributed  to the essentially eclectic religious posi­ tion  arrived  at  by Trancendentalism; they include  Plato  and  Greek  philosophy, Shelley,  Emerson,   Coleridge,  Eastern   mysticism,  Amiel,  Arnold,  and   W.  W. Campbell.
The  parts of "A Story of an Affinity", which tell of Richard's quest for knowl­
edge  are  a  likely  guide  to  Lampman's  own  reading.   Richard   meditates   on
"Plato's vast  and  Golden  dream":  Lampman's writing  shows that  he had  ab-

LAMPMAN AND RELIGION



sorbed  Plato's  belief in another  world beyond the material,  a world of immutable essences, Forms  or  Ideas,  especially beauty,  truth,  and  harmony.  Later  Richard learns  from  Coleridge  the  "heavenly  likeness of the things  of earth".  Coleridge, of  course,  is central  to  any  discussion of Transcendentalism. He  had  absorbed the  ideas  of  the  German   idealists, especially those of  Kant,  and  was a  major formative  influence upon  Emerson. What is most relevant  here is Coleridge's preoccupation with spiritual  unity and  the belief that  the  Platonic  Ideas, mani­ fested  in  the  material   world,  may  be  perceived  by  the  imagination,  which  is essentially the faculty that reconciles opposites in a new harmony.
The  poem "Earth -The Stoic"  reveals other  Classical influences apart  from Plato  which help to build up our picture of Lampman's cosmology. In the poem, Lampman speaks of the "fiery birth" of the universe and  the "sheer  will" which earth  communicates to the  heart  of man. The original meaning  of spirit was the conception  of  the  Stoics of  a  fire-like principle,  animating and  energizing  the Cosmos. The  earth  is the  Stoic and  is imbued  with the spiritual  principle, espe­ cially as it manifests itself in the force of heat. With all the images of  light and heat  in  Lampman's  poetry,  and  one  central  poem  entitled  "Heat",  there  is surely little  need  to emphasize  how important the Stoic  conception  of the  uni­ verse is to our understanding of Lampman's poetry.
Carl  F.  Klinck,  tracing  the spiritual  difficulties of W.  W. Campbell,  Lamp­
man's  friend  and,  as we have seen, his collaborator in the Globe column in  18g2 and  1893,  writes:  "Until the end of his life, he [Campbell] was Canada's chief popularizer  of  what  he  called  idealism,  and  what  the  historian  will call  tran­ scendentalism."18  It is  at  least  probable   that   Campbell   was  able  to  provide Lampman with  opportunities for  discussion of the ideas  and  major  documents of  transcendentalism, especially  those  of Emerson,  with  whose  work  Campbell was very familiar.
Indeed   Emerson  was  probably  the  most congenial  and  important  influence upon  Lampman in the  particular area under  discussion. There  are striking simi­ larities  between  both  men's  work, and  I  propose to allow  Lampman's religious position  to emerge  in  conjunction   with  references to  the  ideas  and  writings of Emerson.  Lampman considered  Emerson  to  be a  nature   poet  "in  the  fullest sense". His "sympathy with  nature" is a "sympathy  of force"  which  draws  him to nature  because "in  the energies of his own soul he is aware of a kinship to the forces of nature, and  feels with an  elemental  joy as if it were a part  of himself,
the eternal  movement  of nature."19 In his essay on Keats,  Lampman stated  that


51

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



the  concern  of  poetry  was with  "essences"  which  accorded  with  "That  divine and universal harmony". He also writes in the same essay:

1Whatever creation of the human imagination is genuinely beautiful is produced by an  impulse derived from, and allied to the power of the Divine Creator  him­ self, and  it has the right to exist. There is an energy in the spirit of the true poet which realizes what he creates ... 20

An unpublished  essay, "The  Modem  School of Poetry  in England", also asserts that  "all  true  art  must  rest upon  a sense of wonder-a sense of the  invisible that is around  everything."21
In  these various statements,  it seems to me, are  to be found  the aesthetic  and moral  sentiments   usually associated  with  the  Transcendental vision of  experi­ ence, and  since the beautiful is "allied to the  power of the Divine  Creator", the experience  is essentially  religious. Nature  in  "Earth-the  Stoic"  is conceived of as being imbued  with an animating  principle  known interchangeably as force, energy, or spirit.  Emerson is a true nature  poet  because he is aware  within  him­ self of an  energy akin to that  of nature  which  partakes of universal movement. The  central  essence is harmony,  and  this is  universal  and  divine. The  imagina­ tion, or the poetic faculty, is concerned  with  the perception  of invisible harmony  and  so "realizes",  that  is, creates, a  reality  which  is both  divine impulse  and  a divine  achievement.  Thus  nature,  art,   the  imagination of  the  poet,  and  the divine mind  are one. The religious experience is synonymous with a sense of unity between  the  individual,  nature,  and  what  Emerson  called  the  Oversoul,  or is a correspondence  between  the  spirit  or  energy  in  nature,   the  spirit  or  energy  in man,  and  Divine  Spirit  or  Energy. These  last  two  terms  are  both  Lampman's and   Emerson's   favourite   expressions  for   their   God.   Man   at  such   mystical moments  is divine,  and  Deity, Spirit,  Force, or Energy is both  immanent  within man   and   nature   and  transcendant or  beyond  the  creation.  Thus  to  describe Lampman as a  pantheist  is not  exact. The  more  accurate  term  would  be pan­ entheist  for  God  is more  than  the  spiritual  presence  permeating the  universe. Furthermore, the idea of a Christian  dualism  has no place in Lampman's belief, since  he  envisages no division between spirit  and  matter. Here  we are close to the insights which make up Lampman's religious position.
Man,  then,  looking at  nature  with  his imagination, would  see analogies  be­ tween  mind  and  matter  and  understand  them  as diverse manifestations  of  the universal  harmony   which is the  divine  unity.  For  Lampman "true  art" rested upon  a  "sense of wonder"  because of the "invisible  that  is around  everything".

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



Likewise  for  Emerson the  visible creation was "the  terminus or circumference of the  invisible" and   the  "invariable mark  of  wisdom  is to see  the  miraculous in the  common". It is clear  why  Emerson  felt that  the  task of the  teacher was "to acquaint man  with  himself" and  why with  Lampman he was saddened by con­ temporary man, "a god in ruins", "the dwarf  of himself".
There exists  a  close  similarity  between   Lampman's and   Emerson's attitude
towards science   and   its  effect  upon   the  religious  view  of  experience. Broadly speaking one  of the  effects  of scientific findings  in the  nineteenth century  was to make  orthodox religious  beliefs less tenable,  but science  could  apparently provide sanctions for  orthodox beliefs  because,  as  Douglas  Bush  writes,  "much of  what crumbled under the  pressure  of science  was rather the  adventitious accretions of religion,  such  as  the  scientific  validity  of  Genesis,  than religion  itself."22   If we consult   "The Story   of  An  Affinity",  we see  that   Lampman  meant by  science primarily astronomy, geology, and  biology, those branches which  most directly challenged orthodox religious  beliefs. The  protagonist of the  poem,  Richard,

explored the round
Of glittering space, the heavenly chart, and saw
The giant order of immense worlds, The wheeling planets and our galaxy; And far beyond them in the outer void Cluster succeeding cluster of strange suns Through spaces awful and immeasurable, Dark systems and mysterious energies
And nebulous creations without end- The  people of the hollow round of heaven
In trackless myriads dwelling beyond search
Or count of man -beneath his feet this earth
A dust mote spinning round a little star
Not known, nor named in the immensity.
He probed the secrets of the rocks, and learned
The texture of our planet's outer rind,
And the strange tale of her tremendous youth. He touched the endless lore of living things,
Of plant, of beast, of bird, and not alone
In the mere greed of knowledge, but as one
Whom beauty kindled with a poet's fire.

The  last  three  lines  are  particularly important, for though Lampman and  Emer­ son  did  not  object to science  itself, they  were opposed  to the scientific fact  unin­ formed by the poetic imagination as an end in itself.

53

LAMPMAN AND RELIGION



For Lampman and  Emerson, scientific discovery was a welcome ally in chang­ ing  moribund   beliefs, but  only  as a  prelude  to  newer  and  essentially  religious convictions  about  the  meaning  of life. This  is one  of the  themes  of a  lecture, "Historic  Notes of Life and Letters in New England", given by Emerson in I88o.
The   essay is close in  idea  and  phrasing  to  Lampman's essay in  his Globe
column  for  April  I8g3.23   He  begins with  a  pessimistic view of human  nature, human  history, and  the worst tendencies of his own  age,  but  "in  a time when these things are  becoming most apparent" he offers a new hope, "a  new concep­ tion  of  the  higher  life".  This  new  conception   he  identifies  as  "the  child  of science" but  is careful  to emphasize that  it is "reinforced by the poetry  inherent in the facts of the universe and all existence". Viewed in this way the conception "is not a materialistic  one, although  at first it may seem so". Instead it is "poetic  and  intrinsically  religious".  Men  armed  with  "the  new knowledge" can achieve "a  breadth  and  majesty of vision" and this "new spiritual  force" will enable men to live "in the very presence of eternity".
Emerson's  religious beliefs were influenced  by his reading  of oriental  religions and  mysticism. There  is evidence  that  Lampman, too,  had  read  and  thought about  Eastern philosophy and religion. A knowledge of this aspect of Lampman's reading  is useful because it affected all levels of his work, from his thought  to the structure   and  imagery  of  his poetry.  The   preponderance of  the  image  of  the circle, for example,  in his work, as in Emerson's,  may well have derived from an acquaintance with  Hinduism.  In  a  manuscript  book  of  poems  and  notes, for
I 894 to I 8gg, there is the following jotting:

,Mir-han-oya-final complete self-consciousness
Manvantara -the  great  process of  expansion  and   contraction -the   day  of
Brahma
Pralaya-the period of concentration, the night of Brahma 24

These rather  cryptic notes are in fact a condensation  of many aspects of Hindu religious beliefs and  cosmology. Hinduism  postulates  a  universe immense in size and  duration, passing through  a continuous  process of decline and  development. The   fundamental cosmic   cycle  is  the   day  of  Brahma which   is  equal to
4,32o,ooo,ooo  years and  known  as a kalpa.  The  god sleeps for a further  kalpa known as the night  of Brahma  and  then repetition  takes place. Brahma  is in the infinite,  the  unchangeable,  the  eternal,  absolute  pure  Being on  which  all  that exists depends  and  from  which  it derives its  reality.  The  world  is an  immense series of repetitive  cycles and  is thought  of as being  periodically  absorbed  into,

54

LAMPMAN AND RELIGION



and  emanating from,  the  Divine  Being. Brahma  is the  inmost  essence of  all things  animate and  inanimate, and  the  ultimate  is the impersonal  world spirit with which the soul of the individual  is mystically identical. The  true self is uni­ versal consciousness and exists both in itself and for itself or, as Lampman writes, in  "the   very  presence  of Eternity". Other  attributes  of the  Divine  Being  as it appears  in Lampman's poetry, such as divine light and  energy emanating to the individual   soul  and  the  immanence  of God  in  man  and  the  universe,  clearly derive from Lampman's acquaintance with Eastern religions.



R.HAPS BY Now Lampman's religious position and beliefs are clearer,  and  this essay may  be concluded  by an examination  of how these ideas operated  in, and shaped,  a number of poems apart from those already scrutinized.
The  impulse behind these poems is religious in the sense that Lampman sought to  recreate,  as  he said,  the  knowledge that  "with  the  fullest intensity  of  sym­ pathy  we are  of one  birth  with everything  about  us"25  and  to make known  the "heavenly  likeness of the  things  of earth". The  poems fall into  two  categories, the  alternate sides of the same theme.  Man is a god in ruins  because  in  his in­ creasingly  mechanized  and  urbanized  society he has lost contact  with the  vital forces of the natural world. These forces are varied manifestations of the central essence of nature, the spiritual  unity  of the  One,  the  World  Spirit. To  recover himself man  must die to the material  world and resurrect the god within, his true identity.  The   religious  experience  occurs  when  the  real  self  experiences  itself simultaneously  through  nature  in the presence of the World Soul. Then  all oppo­ sites are  reconciled,  and  the  feeling is characterized  by  a  sense of clarity  and harmony  which accompanies the unbroken flow of spirit.
In  "Freedom" men  have  lost  their  relationship  with  nature.  Though  their
souls originally  "were  sprung  from  the  earth" they  are  now  here  "degenerate children". "A  Prayer" uses the recurring image of modern  man physically handi­ capped  and  spiritually   maimed,  "weak",   "halt", and  "blind". The  poet,  in  a way which  recalls the  work of D. H. Lawrence, asks nature  to recover the men, "Born  of thy strength", from  the  partial,  mechanical  existence  of industrialized society and  restore them to integrated,  organic wholeness by endowing them with some  of her  energy  and  creativity.  "Sight" is a series of  detailed  contrasts. The  irony of life is that  beauty,  harmony, and infinite possibilities surround men, but, shut  in by walls and  the  perpetual  winter  of the spirit, men cannot  attune  their inmost selves to the wonders outside and thus remain unconscious to both.

55

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



"An  Athenian  Reverie"  is another  poem in which man is depicted  as a being unaware  and  unfulfilled. Man  ought  to be in a state  of metamorphosis.  Instead he is unable  to free  himself from  the chrysalis. This  theme  is developed in the image of the tree. Man sits beneath  it, half-asleep, enjoying  its shade, but is un­ able  to go beyond  the simply sensual and  immediately  apparent to the majestic formal  harmony  of the source. By contrast, the poet, alert and receptive, struggles with  "watchful dreams"  to add  a little to the  "wrought sculpture" and  "never­  finished frieze" of life. The  exact choice of image  to convey the fullest meaning is impressive here. The  frieze is the  middle  portion  of an  entablature linked  by the architrave to the column below and  by the cornice to the roof above. Life is a magnificent  structure,  like a Greek temple, and  the  poet  occupies a mediating  position between earth and heaven.
"Peccavi  Domine"  was written  as "an  act  of self-relief". 26   It  is an  important poem   because  it  displays  many  characteristics   of  Lampman's  belief,  and  its paradoxes,  abrupt oppositions, and  contrasts  are  akin  to the  technique,  as well as  the  theme,  of  Emerson's  "Brahma". Emerson's  poem  is about  the  absolute unity  underlying  Maya, or the Hindu  principle of Illusion and  variety.
Lampman's poem is a study in dejection, a lament  in which the poet chastises
himself for  ignoring  his deep  perceptions  of the  unity  of the  universe  and  the intuitions  of  his  real  self and  it<>   relationship  with  the  World  Spirit.  God  has many  names  and  many  attributes,  "Power", "Poet-Heart", "Maker", "Riddle", and  "Energy". The  World  Spirit  is like a  sphere  composed  of interpentrating circles and is present throughout the universe :

Within whose glowing rings are bound, Out of whose sleepless heart had birth The cloudy blue, the starry round,
And this small miracle of earth.

Because the  Divine  Being "livest  in  everything",  and  since  "all  things  are  thy script  and  chart", the task of the poet is to remain  alert and  interpret the mani­ fold signs of the world. Thus  he is constantly moving from  the border  of  illusion to  the  centre  of reality. The  Divine  Being-"protean", "ever-old" and  "ever­ new"-is also the  central  reality of the  poetic self. But here the poet  feels that he has  betrayed  the  promptings  of the "God  within" and  consequently  is sepa­ rated  and  alienated  from the emblems of spirit  in the  natural world. Instead  of being  led  beyond  the forms of nature  to an  awesome  awareness  of unity, as in "Heat", for example,  the poet here experiences no expansion  of self but rather  a

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



spiritual   rebuttal which  leads  to  the  sorry spectacle  of  his  "broken  soul". His torment  is made  more  unendurable by  the  evidences of spirit  with  which  the earth  shines and  glows, evidences which no longer beckon to him but mock and enhance  his self-division.
Elsewhere  Lampman turns  from self-division and  the spectacle  of fallen man
to  affirm  the  correspondence  between  universal spirit,  the spirit  of nature,  and the  soul of man.  On  these occasions, man  is rejuvenated,   resurrected  from  his sensual grave, aware  of the infinite in the finite, and of the poetic soul, the imagi­ nation,  intensely sympathetic to the emblematic  quality  of nature,  and  becomes the "expositor of the divine mind".27
A characteristic quality  of Lampman's poems at  such times is that  the land­ scape  seems to  glow  as  if lit from  within.  The  natural world,  in  other  words, becomes  luminous   and   transparent  as  spirit  shines  through.   This  experience, accompanied by its characteristic terminology, is a  leading  motif  of  Emerson's essay "Nature" because the  main  concern is to show "how  the universe becomes transparent,  and   the  light  of  higher  laws  than  its  own  shines  through  it."28
Lampman, of course,  was not  writing  an essay, but  that  the experience  I have attempted  to  define,  and   which  Emerson's  essay describes  in  part  at  least  is there,  can  be  demonstrated  in  several  poems. The   poem,  significantly  titled, "Cloud-break", concretely realizes the experience:

The islands are kindled with gold
And russet and emerald dye;
And the interval waters outrolled
Are more blue than the sky.
From my feet to the heart of the hills
The spirits of May intervene, And a vapour of azure distills
Like a breath on the opaline green.

There   is  a  sudden   intensification   of  colour  and   the  landscape   "distills"  its essence, becoming  "opaline" or translucent  with spirit. The  experience is momen­
tary and then,

The chill and the shadow decline On the eyes of rejuvenate men That  were wide and divine.

In  "The Bird and  the Hour", diverse visual and  auditory  experiences coalesce to manifest the underlying  spiritual  essence. At sunset the valley and sky dissolve in molten  gold. The  song of the hermit  bird, the "golden  music",  is part  of the

57

LAMPMAN AND RELIGION



unifying  aspects  of  the  landscape  and   prolongs  the  vision  which  appears   to emerge:
from the closing door
Of another world.

The  frogs in the poem of the same name, are  the expositors chosen by nature  of "her   spirit's   inmost   dream".   "Distance" expresses  simply   the  transcendental vision which is looking beyond the surface of natural phenomena:

Till this earth is lost in heaven
And thou feel'st the whole.

In  "Peace", "Nature" and  "Eternity" are  interchangeable since the  earth  is a "daedal spectacle", an  "open  radiance", and  a  "script  sublime".  The  fulfilled man  is he whose reality is found "only in the flawless mind".  Finally, the source of "The Largest Life" is the recognition of universal spirit, the knowledge that salvation  is self-salvation. This salvation enlarges, so to speak, in a universe which is felt to be dynamic,  the area  of spirit. The  "Great Light" becomes "clearer  for our light", and the "great soul the stronger for our soul".
Both Emerson  and  Lampman  entitled  one of their  poems "Xenophanes", and
a passage from  Emerson's essay "Nature" makes clear why both  were fascinated by  the  ideas  and  experience  of  this  early  Greek  philosopher  and   rhapsodist. Emerson writes:

Herein is especially apprehended the unity of nature,-the unity in variety which meets us everywhere. All the endless variety of things make an identical impres­ sion. Xenophanes complained in his old age, that, look where he would, all things hastened  back to unity. He was weary of seeing the same entity in  the tedious variety of forms.29

Xenophanes  asserted a divinity who is true existence as opposed to appearance, the One  and  the All, undivided and eternal  and  underlying  the universe. Lamp­ man  portrays  Xenophanes  as a  wanderer  and  a searcher  after  truth,  weary  in extreme  old age of the world of appearance and  longing for the reality which he has  seen. It is  the  same  "hunger" of  Xenophanes which  occupies  the  poetic imagination.
The esemplastic nature  (to use a work coined by Coleridge to explain the synthesizing power  of the poetic imagination) of universal spirit is the theme of "The Passing of the  Spirit".  Characteristically the theme  is worked out through images of nature  and  music. The  wind is one aspect  of the  World Spirit, an in­ visible cause  with  clearly visible effects. It  is also called  "the  world-old  rhapso-

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



dist"  or,  in other words,  a professional  reciter  of Homeric poems, an  expositor  of the  elemental and  universal. The movement of the  wind  of universal spirit  finds its response  in  a world  which  is intensely  sympathetic and  attuned to the univer­ sal  cause.  Tree after  tree  begins  to sway  and  sing, blending into  a  chorus  com­ posed  of strophe and  antistrophe, an  "infinite note"  which  is  both  initiated by, and  a  paean to,  the  universal presence  of spirit.  Likewise  the  finite  life of indi­  vidual man, "at sacred  intervals", is transformed and  completed in the  presence  of spirit.  It is at such  moments that  "we  dream ourselves immortal and  are still". Without  perplexity or  doubt we  are  awesomely  aware of  universal   harmony which  is completed by the soul of man. This,  for the poet, is the essential  religious  experience.
Much  has  already  been  said  about   "Heat", but  by  way  of  a  conclusion   it ought  to be added that this is a fine transcendental poem.  The landscape liquefies and  dissolves  and  all  contraries are  unified  in  the  presence of the  manifestation of spiritual force.  This explains  why  the  poet  believes that he  has  been  brought to the experience by "some blessed power". The god within  the poet is resurrected and  lives in  the  eternal presence  of the  divine  as it shines  through nature. God, who  through the  centuries became more  and  more  remote, has returned to earth in  his original guise,  man, and  the  poet  need  no longer  envy  the  men  of old, for he  has  vindicated  their   myth,   and   re-entered "The  glittering world" of  that "Immortal", "divine" and  "Gay-smiling multitude".


NOTES

1 Literary  History  of Canada,  gen. ed. Carl  F. Klinck, University of Toronto  Press
(Toronto, 1965), p. 394·
2   Ten  Canadian  Poets, p. 127.
3  Archibald  Lampman, "The Revolt  of Islam",  Rouge  et  Noir, I,  no. 4  (Decem- ber 1880).
• Ibid., p. 6.
5    Ibid., p. 5·
0    Ibid., p. 6.
1 Archibald   Lampman,  "At   the  Mermaid   Inn",   the  Toronto  Globe,  Saturday, November 26,I 8g2.
8  Ibid., Saturday, August 20, 1892.
9   Ibid., Saturday, February  27, 1892.
10  Ibid., Monday,  February  29, 1892.
11 Ibid., Saturday, February  6, 1892.
12  Archibald  Lampman, "The Revolt  of Islam",  Rouge  et  Noir,  I,  no. 4  (Decem­
ber 188o),  p. 6.


59

LAMPMAN AND  RELIGION



18  Letters  from  Lampman to E. W. Thomson,  MS Group  29940, Vol. I, 10 Febru­
ary, 1883, Public Archives, Ottawa.
14  MS book, 1889-1892, Trinity College Library, Toronto.
15  Letters  from  Lampman  to  E.  W.  Thomson,   MS  Group   29940, Vol.  I, Public
Archives, Ottawa.
16  J. Hillis Miller, The  Disappearance of God  (Cambridge, Mass., 1963),  pp. 13-14.
17  J. G.  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough, Macmillan  Co.  Ltd.,  (London,  1957),  p. 455·
18  Carl  F.  Klinck,   Wilfred   Campbell:   A  Study   in  Late  Provincial  Victorianism,
Ryerson Press (Toronto,  1942), pp. 56-57.
19  Archibald   Lampman, "At   the  Mermaid   Inn", The   Toronto Globe,  Saturday, April 22, 1893.
20    Archibald  Lampman, "The  Character and  Poetry  of Keats",  pref. note  by E. K.
Brown, The  University of Toronto  Quarterly, 15 (July 1946)  p. 357·
21  Archibald   Lampman, "The   Modern  School  of  Poetry  in  England", MS  Group
29940, Vol. I, Public Archives, Ottawa.
22    Douglas Bush, Science and English Poetry, O.U.P. (New York, 1950),  p. 136.
23    Archibald  Lampman, "At the Mermaid  Inn", the Toronto Globe, Saturday, April
8, 1893·
24    Archibald  Lampman, MS Group  29940, Vols. 3 and  4, Public Archives, Ottawa.
25    Archibald  Lampman, "At  the Mermaid  Inn", the Toronto Globe, Saturday, July
2, 1892.
26    Letters  from  Lampman to E.  W. Thomson,  MS  Group  29940, March  5, 1894, Public Archives, Ottawa.
27    Ralph   Waldo  Emerson,  "Nature", Selections   from  Ralph  Waldo   Emerson,  ed.
Stephen  Whicher,  Riverside  Editions,  Houghton   Mifflin Co.,  (Boston, 1960),  p.
so.
28   Ibid.,  p. 35·
29    Ibid.,  p. 40.






















6o



PERILS
OF COMPASSION


Peter Stevens


LALL   THE   HOOPLA of  publicity  and  pmmotion  af!onled novels  over  recent   years  in  Canada,  Mavis  Gallant's   third   novel,  A  Fairly
Good Time  ( 1970), went  virtually  unnoticed in the review columns. Some nod­ ding  acceptance  of her as one of our better  writers of prose is made  by antholo­ gists, for  her short  stories are  chosen to appear  in most Canadian  collections, a half-hearted   recognition  of her skill as a short-story writer.  But  surely it is time to look more closely at the work of Mavis Gallant and in particular at her novels, which are more thoroughly  ignored than  most recent Canadian writing.
Those  who  know  Mavis  Gallant's  stories will remember  that  many  of them revolve around  one  dominant theme:  the stress of relationships  within  families, particularly  the  relation   between   parents  and  children,   although   she  herself claims that  this is not  a conscious choice on her part.1 This  recurrence  seeJns to arise from  her  interest  in  people  "trying  to get out of a situation", because the family situation  can be so inhibiting  and confining and  because people constantly want  to break  from  the family while finding comfort within  it as well. A family can  paralyse and  give false security;  it can  protect  but shelter a person from the too insistent demands  of an  outside  reality. It  can lead  to both  domination and betrayal,  withdrawal and  smugness. All of these factors  occur  to  a  greater  or lesser degree in Mavis Gallant's characters and their situations.
One  of the most interesting  ways Mavis Gallant  develops the consequences of
family relationship  is to suggest that  within a family people know too much about each  other.  A phrase  she  uses to describe the source of present-day  problems in A  Fairly Good Time  is "complete  comprehension".  Within  a family  this  com­ prehension  acts  in  ambivalent ways. In  this same  book, talking  of  a  mother's  relation to her son, she says:

She had  the complete  knowledge that  puts parents  at  a loss finally:  she knew all about  him except  his opinion  of her.... He didn't  know all about  her. How could he? She was a grown  person with the habit of secrets before he was even conscious

6!

PERILS OF  COMPASSION



of her. He only knew what he could expect of her....  How can you be someone's friend when you have had twenty years' authority over him and he has never had one second's authority over you?


Lrs DOUBLE-EDGED THEME of closeness and  domination, to­
gether  with  the  will to escape from  the  role imposed  by a  relationship,  is the
primary  theme  of Mavis Gallant's  fin>t  novel Green Water, Green Sky ( 1959). The  theme  is sounded fairly early in the book:  "Once you were in a family, you were  in  to stay:   death,  divorce, scandal-nothing operated,  nothing  cut  you away."
The  novel centres around  a middle-aged  mother,  Bonnie, a divorcee who has been  pottering   around   Europe  with  her  attractive daughter, Flor.  They  have been  together  for years, becoming intolerably  close to each other  until  Flor tries to break  from  this stifling situation  by marrying,  but this does not work for her, as  her  husband   is  too  amenable   and  is sucked  into  the  tight  relationship  of mother   and  daughter.   Eventually  Flor  withdraws  from  the  world,  keeping  to herself in  her  shuttered  room  until  at  the  end  of novel we learn  that  she is in some kind of institution for the mentally sick.
The  novel is told in four segments. The  opening  one covers the span  of events
from  the  time  when  Flor is fourteen  to the time  of her  marriage. But it is told rather   obliquely  and  spasmodically,  seeming  to  focus  on  George,  a  cousin  of Flor's.  George,  at  the age of seven, is left  by his parents  for  a  day  in  Bonnie's care. He feels this as a kind of desertion,  and  it sets it  up in an  ironic  way the struggle  Flor will go through  to escape the grip of her mother.
ere
to protect  her fatherless daughter; Flor needs to stay with her mother  to prevent her from  ruining  her life in solitariness. At one point  Flor says pathetically:

I can't leave my mother, and she won't go. Maybe I don't dare. She used to need me. Maybe now I need her. What would I do at home? My grandmother is dead. I  haven't  got a home. I know I sound as if I feel sorry for myself, but I haven't got anything.

Yet behind  her statements  of protection  and  love for her mother  lurks an  uncon­ scious  rejection  of  her.  When  Flor  says, "I'll always  keep  her  with  me",  the novelist adds this comment:  "It  was a solemn promise, a cry of despair, love and resentment  so woven  together  that  even  Flor  couldn't tell  them  apart." This

PERILS OF  COMPASSION



phrase, "love and  resentment" is related to the title, almost  as if they are  undis­ tinguishable,  or,  at  least, strong  polarities of the relationship  pulling  with equal force:  "the  twin  pictures, love and  resentment,  were always there, one reflecting the other, water under sky".
There  is a simple incident  very early in the story which illustrates what  Mavis
Gallant   herself  can  do  within  a  very small  compass. Flor  weighs herself on  a scale  that  releases a  card  with  her fortune; this trivial  act  takes on  a meaning within  the context of the Bonnie-Flor relation when Flor suddenly says," 'Mama's waiting' ... throwing  her fortune  away."
The  second section  is the  longest and  most direct in  the novel. We are given a much  clearer  insight  into  Bonnie. She lacks a real identity  because she cannot face  her  own situation  in the  present. She sees herself as she was in the  past, a fresh and  unspoiled  child or as she would like to be, a sophisticated  provocative temptress.  Bonnie  has lived an  untidy life: she was divorced  when her husband discovered  she  was  having  an  affair-an  affair she  was  taking  very casually. Since that  time  Bonnie has wavered between her child-image  and  her temptress­ image,  whereas  the  truth  is that  she is really "a  lost, sallow, frightened  Bonnie wandering  from  city to city in Europe, clutching her daughter by the hand".
Because she  leans  heavily  on  her  daughter   (note  the  ambiguity  of the  word
"clutching" in  that  last  quotation-the reader  wonders  just which  one  needs the support), Flor has been robbed of any sense of her own identity. She is forced into  being possessed by her mother,  as well as feeling possessive about  her. She is constantly  looking in windows to see if she is really there. The  world around  her is collapsing, and  holding  on to Bonnie is no help, for  her mother's  world is an untidy  chaos. An  immense  feeling of dislocation overtakes  her. She senses Paris collapsing  around   her  and  experiences a  terrifying  moment  when  the sidewalk moves in front  of her in "a  soundless upheaval". (This is perhaps  reminiscent of a  similar  incident  experienced  by  another  dislocated  youngster,  Holden  Caul­ field, towards  the  end  of The   Catcher  In  The  Rye.)   The  outside  world  is no longer secure;  Bonnie  has uprooted  her from  her home, so she complains  to an imagined  Bonnie, "I might  have been a person, but  you made me a foreigner". She  retreats  into  her  own  cloistered room when she is left  alone  in  Paris. The  section closes with  Flor's  dream  or hallucination  of herself  riding  her boisterous pony,  perfectly  in control  and  triumphant in  a smiling  world, sliding from  the saddle into the arms of her father, a man Bonnie has taught  her daughter  to hate.
The  third  segment  shifts to the oblique view again,  and  at this point it seems
a  weakness. It  is a kind  of comic interlude  to begin with, as a new character  is

PERILS OF COMPASSION



introduced: Wishart. As his name suggests, he is a man  who lives out a fantasy. He  has created  a character  for himself, as he did  not  like his own identity  and past. He lives off European  women as a kind of middle-aged  gigolo. Bonnie mis­ understands him so much that she sees him as a solid husband  for Flor, someone who would also be a father-figure for her; the reader  can see that  Wishart would be a total disaster as a husband for Flor. He is living out a performance and sees the  reality around  him simply as material  for  the invention of clever anecdotes to amuse his audience.
Wishart  appears  and  disappears  too suddenly,  and  he seems merely  another example  of those drifting  parasites trying to live at ease at the expense of others. But it is a hollow life, since Wishart finds that  his hosts themselves are sometimes unreliable.  Such  a character  allows us another  oblique  view of the  life Bonnie and  Flor  live, revealing  Bonnie's pathetic  attempt to provide  some kind  of  sup­ port for Flor  without  any real understanding of either  her daughter or  Wishart. But the shift  of emphasis to Wishart,  though  it provides some comedy, disturbs the  balance  of  the  story. Apart  from  this  third  segment,  Green  Water, Green Sky  is a story  admirably  controlled  within  narrow  limits:  a  deliberate  study  of a  few  characters.  Bonnie  and  Flor  work  well  within  such  limits;  one  of  the interesting  technical  devices is the way in which  Flor  fades from  the story, as if the sense of her own individuality slipping is emphasized  by her retreat  from the story. It is also suggested that  her madness has allowed her to slip from the grasp of her  husband  and  particularly  from  her mother's  life, so that  the reader  has a strangely  ambiguous  feeling about  Flor's insanity: she is insane, yes, but she has escaped.






MAVIS GALLANT's  next  novel,  Its  Image  in  the  Mirror, which appears  in My  Heart is Broken  ( 1964)  is a study of two sisters; Jean,  the narrator, has lived in the shadow of Isabel, who is younger, more attractive  and more  lively. Jean  has always regarded  Isabel  as living a  bohemian  life, full of romance  and  glamour; Isabel is the one who breaks away  by an early marriage, who  has  an  affair  with a  married  man  when  her  husband  is away  during  the war.
1But the  usual  Gallant  irony  operates;  we discover  that  Isabel's  life is not  in fact  at  all  glamorous.  The  married  man  is no  dashing  lover;  he  becomes  an

PERILS OF COMPASSION



assistant  headmaster with  a  "failed poet's  face  concave  with  discontent". Isabel herself  marries a second  time  and  is living in what  sounds  like a romantic ambi­ ance-married to  an  Italian doctor  in  Venezuela. But  when  Isabel  visits Jean with   her  family,   the   children are  no  different from   Jean's, and  Alfredo,   her husband, turns   out  to  be  a  finicky snob.  Isabel,  seen  by Jean as  the  one  who escaped  from   the  narrow confines  of  the  family,  seems  to  have  trapped herself within  other situations just as confining.
The   bulk  of  the  novel  concerns  Isabel  during the  war.  Jean has  been  influ­
enced  by  her,  has  married  a  man  first  interested   in  Isabel,  and  goes  to  live in Montreal while  her  husband has  gone  off  to  the  war,  trying  to  find  there  the imaginary life of  romance. During the  novel  all  the  images  of romantic life are broken   down   to  a  flat  reality.  Jean takes  an  apartment, "a  bohemian, almost glamorous thing  to do",  but  shares  it with  another girl and  their  life is the  close, closeted life of two women  living closely together:

We  had  nothing  in  common  except  that  we were women, and  we had  to make that do.
'From this Sargasso of scarves, stockings, lipsticks, damp  towels, pins, uncapped toothpaste   tubes,  we emerged  every morning  side by side, clean, smooth,  impec­ cable as eggs.... Home  again,  we became like our rooms. We assumed  the shape­ lessness, the  deliberate   sloppiness  of  rooms  shared  by  women  whose  hopes  are somewhere else.

Jean meets  no  romance, but  only  a  furtive,  fumbling Lesbian  approach. The war  produces no hero; only  an  epileptic  veteran. Frank, her brother, goes to war and  is killed,  not  in glorious  action  but  in a freak  accident. There are  parties  the sisters  go  to,  peopled   with  what  might  be  thought of  as exotic  foreigners; they turn  out to be layabouts or pretentious artists without  talent.
In  all this  ironic  melange, Jean still sees Isabel's  affair with Alec Campbell as
possessing  the  possibilities  of  a  truly  romantic world.  In  a  kind  of epiphany at the  centre  of  the  novel  Jean sees Isabel  and  Alec walking  out  of the  dark  on  a Montreal street.  Before  they  see  her,  they  are  enclosed   in  a  world  in  which romance and   reality  seem  to  meld,  and  for  once  Jean senses  a  romantic  love existing,  the  love  her  mother has always  rejected  as  being  undesirable and  "too fantastic to exist".

They  leaned  inward  as they walked, as if both had  received an  injury  and  were helping  each  other  stand  up.  Isobel's  face  was a  flower.  Everything  wary  and closed, removed  and  mistrustful  had  disappeared.... He  was an ordinary  looking man, but that  made their love affair seem all the more extraordinary.

PERILS OF  COMPASSION



This  picture  of ideal love is broken when  the lovers see Jean  but  the  tableau of their  union  remains  in Jean's mind.  It  presses upon  her  that  all that  she has thought  about  her sister's bohemian  life was true,  even  though  she  herself has not experienced  it, even though  she is constantly  though  unconsciously resenting lsobel's  illicit love-life, an  attitude  not  unlike  the  confusion  of love and  resent­ ment that Flor feels in Green Water, Green Sky.
At the end of the novel Jean  is let into lsobel's life. lsobel calls on Jean  to tell her she  is pregnant  and  wants  Jean  to  help  her  through   the  pregnancy.  After lsobel's  confession and  her  plea for  complete  attention, Jean  reaches  to lsobel, feeling sisterly, trying to take her hand. But lsobel sees this as too intimate or too sentimental  a gesture and  withdraws  her hand  from Jean's. There  follows a very revealing paragraph which includes this comment by Jean: "She wanted my attention,  and  would pay for it." And so Jean  seizes her opportunity. After being in  lsobel's shadow  for most of her life, she now is prepared to get the most out of her hold over lsobel.
.But even this revelation of Jean's  use of her sister's situation  has already  been
undercut.  Jean's power over  her sister does not  last  and  does not  allow  her  to escape from  her own position. Earlier  in the  novel there  is an episode in which Isobel  visits the  family summer  cottage  with  her  children  and  her second  hus­ band.  It is a disaster as a family gathering,  and  Jcan  narrates it with a kind of caustic  humour.  But,  in spite  of Jean's  critical  view of lsobel's  later  marriage, her  distaste  for  Isobel's  undisciplined  life, her  belief that  her  own  married  life has  been  more  successful, there  lingers  the  idea  that   in  her  own  way  lsobel has succeeded. Thus, in the end the power Isobel seemed to place in Jean's hands is empty,  for when  lsobel returns  to the cottage  several years later, Jean  realizes that  she  has  never  had  any  control  over  Isobel.  lsobel  has  retained  her  own individuality   and   broken  through   the  barriers   of  the  family  relationship   for good : "I was part  of a wall of cordial family faces, and  Isobel was not hurt  by her failure,  or  impressed  by my success, but  thankful she  had  escaped".  So the reversal at the end of the novel is doubly ironic.
Another  way of looking at this novel is to see it, as Mavis Gallant  herself sees it, as a study in domination.  lsobel has dominated  Jean  for most of her life, and in a way Jean's telling of the story is a kind of exorcism of the dominance  of her sister's  spirit,  though  we  have  seen  that,  ironically,  this  has  not  really existed. There is also the  domination  of the mother  over  her  two  daughters,  something that  Isobel  recognizes and  breaks away from  and  Jean  herself eventually  comes to see.

66

PERILS OF  COMPASSION



Yet the author  herself seems dissatisfied with it as a novel. She has complained that  what  is wrong  with the  novel is that  Jean,  as narrator, is "too  lucid".  Yet, for  all Jean's lucidity,  does she really know what  is happening and,  most  par­ ticularly, does she know what is happening  to herself? Her voice gives the impres­ sion of order  and  control,  but  scattered  through  the narrative are stray  phrases which indicate  that  she is not as sure of events as the lucid tone suggests, so that one  of  the  deepest  ironies of the  book  may  be the discrepancy  between  Jean's  apparent comprehension  of these events and  her failure  to see  the  reality  as it exists. It is possible to see the story as a distortion:  phrases such as "I suppose", "I must  have dreamed", "I think",  "I expect"  occur at  times. Jean  even admits at the beginning  (thus  establishing that she is a deluded narrator) that  the open­ ing tableau  of the empty  house may be an invention on  her  part: "My  mother says I saw nothing of the kind."
If there is this ambivalence  in Jean's narrative  voice, then the final paragraphs take on a more sinister tone. At the end Jean  thinks she will write a letter to her husband  Tom  about  Isabel's  pregnancy in order to destroy any lingering idealism Tom  may have about  lsobel. But apparently  she does not send the letter. In one sense it seems an  act  of kindness  because "it  would  be  Isabel  delivered,  Isabel destroyed."  But  there  is something  malicious about  Jean's subsequent  remarks: "The story could  wait. It would  always be there to tell."  This  implies that  she will have it  ready  to use, even  though she says "I might  never tell it."  Early in the  story  she  has  revealed  the  power  she  possesses. "It has  often  been  in  my power to destroy my sister-to destroy, that is, an idea people might have about her-but something  has held  back my hand.  I think  it is the instinct  that  tells me  Isobel will betray  herself."  But the irony goes deeper  still, because we have seen  the  later  Isobel  early  in  the  story  and  she has  not  betrayed  herself. She seems totally unaffected  by the earlier experience and in fact by living in Caracas with  her  family she has removed  herself from  the sphere  of influence  of Jean's threatening knowledge.
One  further  thing  should  be mentioned  about  Jean.  Although she holds up to herself as an  idea  Isabel's  golden  bohemian  life, though  she suggests she herself married  in order  to escape from  the grip of her family, throughout the story she admits  that  she is really a re-incarnation of her mother.  She sees that  their ges­ tures  are  alike, even their  voices are similar. She remarks,  "I am  pleased  to be like her. There  is no one  I  admire  more."  Her  lucidity, what she  considers her real  apprehension,  is  an  inheritance from  her  mother: "I  sounded   like  our

PERILS OF  COMPASSION



mother: flat  and  calm and  certain  I  was right."  She  repeats  the notion  a little later: "I am  the only person who can tell the truth  about  anything  now."
The  structure of  Its Image  in the  Mirror  is a very important element  in the development  of our  perception  of the characters  and  their  relationships.  This is true  of all Mavis Gallant's  novels. Not one of them  is told in a strict chronologi­ cal  unfolding,  but  each  one  seesaws between  past  and   present  with  glimpses offered  here and  there, a full revelation not being possible until all the pieces can be placed  together  when the reader reaches the last page. Such  a method  leaves a  lot  of  play  for  irony, perhaps  the  most  important  technical  element  in  any Gallant  novel but  it places a strain on the reader,  making  him  try to hold these disparate  bits together through  the course of the novel. A Fairly Good Time, her longest  and  most ambitious  novel, causes special  problems  because  the  point  of view varies, and  even though  there is a kind of  chronological  framework  of the span  of a few days in the life of the heroine, there are some dizzying recollections from  the past as well as quick changes of  place. A first reading  of this last novel tends to leave the reader dissatisfied, but  on close examination  it reveals itself as a  very carefully  wrought  book, full of  incisive characterizations and  penetrating ironies,  with  perhaps  a  more sympathetic  attitude towards  the  main  character  than  we find in the other novels.
The  narrative framework  of A Fairly Good Time concerns a few days in the
life of Shirley, whose second husband  has just left her. The  last two chapters  are a kind of epilogue, taking place about  nine months later,  as she returns  to Paris, now divorced, to sort out the effects left in her apartment.
Shirley  has not  had  a very happy  life. Her  first husband,  Peter, was killed in
a freak  accident.  She married  Philippe Perrigny,  but does not fit into his scheme of life. The  people who surround  her are people who cling to her for help; even her own  personal  crisis starts with her spending  the night  with Renata, who has tried   to  commit  suicide.  She  is  taken  up  by  a  strange   French  girl,  Claudie Maurel,  and  through  her she meets  the  rest of the  Maurel  family, all  perverse and   neurotic.  She  seeks comfort  from  her  Greek  neighbour,  James,  who  had been  her lover previously and  who is now living an enigmatic  life surrounded by young nubile girls.
Shirley  is looking for some solution  to her life, some salvation,  and  she is cut
adrift  by her husband's  desertion of her. She comes to tenns  with herself and  her life at  the end  of the book by realizing that  she cannot  live by trying  to counsel others.  Her  advice  does not work, especially for Claudie,  and  so there a feeling emerges within  her that she should accept  the flow of life, not try and  live within

68

PERILS OF  COMPASSION



some schematic  moral  code,  and  should  refuse to think  about  the future  as an ordered  existence. Shirley is an illustration  of the epigraph  of the novel:  "there's only  one  way  of  being  comfortable,  and  that  is to  stop  running  around  after happiness".  Through the  novel Shirley keeps trying to arrange  the events in her life to make sense of them;  the longest chapter  in the  book is her own written explanations of "How  It Happened", but  they are  very eccentric  explanations. She seems trapped  in a marriage  in which her husband  expects her to be rational and  logical,  but  lives by  her  own system, which appears absurd  to him:  "this system, which worked successfully and  required only an occasional effort, seemed irrational to Philippe."
Shirley admits  she is "comfortable in chaos",  whereas an  "unwashed  cup left
by Philippe seems like a moral slip". Routine and repetition seem to her lunatic gestures; "the  mystery of behaviour seemed ... the only riddle worth a mention." Whereas  her  husband  wants  order,  lists, sequence,  Shirley suggests that  a  rela­ tionship  will falter  if  too  much  is known.  "Everything between  two  people is equivocal", she maintains, and  at one point she feels "how  much  easier it was to talk  to one's  friends  or someone  in  transit."  This  looseness of attitude explains why she has no compunction in returning  to James's  bed once her  husband  has left  her,  or  in accepting  James's  invitation  to  go to  Greece,  even  though  she knows it will have no real consequences for her future.
Her  outlook is essentially a comic one;  to take what  one can from life and cut
one's losses. She seems to approve the behaviour of her former father-in-law who remarried late in life after his wife's death:

Mr. Higgins had drawn  up a new way of life, like a clean will with everyone he loved cut out. I was trying to draw up a will too, but I was patient, waiting, wait­ ing for someone to tell me what to write.

It  takes some time  to discover this for herself. In  a sense the novel records the process within  her  of that  discovery. She has no philosophic or religious scheme of life:  "sane  people live their  whole lives like stones on a beach,  rolling a little this way and  that." She tries to find significant reasons for life, why, for instance, Renata  should  be brought  back to life but she concludes, "I refused all belief in the value of suffering and I always will. I despise it."
At  the  end  Shirley  has cast  off everyone. She is leaving  her  apartment, she
dismisses once and  for all the intellectual  milieu of her husband,  her mother  has died, James  she has left in Greece, Renata  and  Claudie seem to have faded  out of her life. Myopic  and  naive, irrational  and  imaginative,  she sees life awaken-

6g

PERILS OF  COMPASSION



ing to spring in the final paragraph of the novel. She has emerged as herself, even though  she recognizes that  her individuality  draws some strength  from her past: "Tall as  her  grandmother, unshakeable  as  her  mother,  she  spoke ... out  of a future."
A Fairly Good Time  is Mavis Gallant's  most complexly-textured novel. What
is different  about  it, apart  from the sympathetic  portrayal  of Shirley, is the use of dialogue.  Mrs.  Gallant  has said  that  the sound  of a character's voice is very important to her,  for it reveals so much.  In  her other  novels, although  there  is dialogue,  it  does not  generally loom large. The  author says that  she  has heard the dialogue  herself and  has transferred  it into the texture  of the writing.
Particularly  memorable  in  A Fairly Good Time  are  the  conversations.  They
are superbly  handled,  on occasions approaching a Pinter-like accuracy in their obliquity,  as if each  character  were pursuing  his own  idea  without  reference  to the other persons in the conversations. They cross and  meet only at certain  points. These  dialogues in their shifts and  illogicality are accurate  and  witty renderings, formalized  within  the convention  of the novel, of real speech  patterns.
A Fairly Good Time  is an advance for Mavis Gallant. Those who think of her
as  a  writer  with  a  somewhat  narrow  range  would  do  well to study  this  more thoroughly  peopled  novel with its variation  of narrative voice and its concentra­ tion on a comic (but not pitilessly comic)  heroine.
It  augurs  well for  the future  of her work. She  has already  created  a body of
fiction worthy of close critical consideration, and  there  is every sign that she will develop it into a canon of work of real significance.


NOTE

1 All comments attributed  to Mrs. Gallant in this article are taken from two CBC interviews, one with Earle Beattie for Anthology   (May  24,  rg6g)   and one with Fletcher  Markle for Telescope  (January  22 and  29, 1965).  I am grateful  to the CBC and in particular  to Robert Weaver, who made tapes of these interviews available to me.



NEED FOR LAUGHTER


Warren Tallman



AsHE  WRITES St. u,ba;n's Ha,seman Mordecai  Richler
is thinking  both  comedy  and  music, and  he's thinking  them on what  used to be
called  the grand  scale. At the outset a number  of major  themes are  introduced and  they  unite,  as they  alternate and  recur,  into his larger  comic theme,  call it the fortunate pratfall  of Jacob  Hersh. As theme gives way to theme,  a shuttling weave, Richler  adjusts  the  tone  and  tempo,  calling on all of the  writing secrets he has mastered  over some twenty  years in order  to orchestrate  his comedy of a sad yet exuberant and spiky Jew.



JAKE's sPIKINEss derives from the same  Montreal  ghetto  in which  Duddy   Kravitz  served  his  apprenticeship   in  the  1959  work  that  made Richler's  reputation as an important novelist. Duddy  figures in St. Urbain's Horseman  as a  minor  motif, a childhood  pal of Jake's  who is now  negotiating his talent  for swindling  into  a fortune.  This  latter-day  Duddy  closely resembles his earlier self -up to a point. As a first successful step toward  millions he mar­ kets a remarkably  effective diet pill, the secret ingredient  of which is tapeworms. When  a  chemist  cracks the formula,  Duddy  disappears  into a  maze of swindles within swindles, leaving the consequences to his partners and the complications  to a  large  number   of  extremely  thin  customers. Same  old  Duddy. But  not  quite. For  in diminishing  him from  a major  to a minor figure  Richler  also diminishes his earlier  potentialities.  As apprentice, Duddy  plunged  so thoroughly  into  his attempts to out-con  the  world that  he began  to move  beyond  mere swindles to more  interesting  human  possibilities. But in  the Horseman  the possibilities have vanished. He's  all millionaire, and  not much more. His fondest latter-day aspira­  tion  is to  get his eyes andjor hands  up  those slopes which  begin  at  the hem  of

NEED FOR LAUGHTER



every  passing  London  mini-skirt.  And  his rueful  self-appraisal-"Who in  the hell could  love Duddy  Kravitz" -cancels  his earlier  potential  as a young man with  a  consuming  appetite  to gobble the  whole world.  It's,  in  little, as though Falstaff were to grow thin, honest, and genuinely contrite.
Yet  Richler  robs  Duddy  of  his  large  hunger  for  the  world  deliberately,  in order  to  hand  it  over  to friend  Jake  in form  of a somewhat  different  hunger. While  minor  figure  Duddy  is making  his moves to  where  the  money is, major figure Jake  makes  his to  where  imagination  might  be, as a  television and  film director  of some distinction. Yet only some, for  he is shown  as good  but  not  all that good, successful but in curiously compromised ways, and  ambitious  but given to fumbling  his best chances away. At first glance this might seem the portrait  of a  man  who  can't  quite  make  it  up  the  ladder  to  where  the  sweet life begins, intense  gratification  of having  reached  the  top.  But  looking  again,  it  becomes evident  that  Richler  is searching  elsewhere through  Jake's  eyes, not the effort to get up, but a need to climb down. Jake positively doesn't want the sweetness, deliberately  insults  important persons, consciously consorts  with  film-world  no­ bodies, and  eventually  cultivates  the  malevolent  Harry  Stein.  To  make  friends with  Harry  is like holding hands with an unexploded  stink bomb, sure to go off. When  it does, a great stench settles in around  the good name  Jacob  Hersh. Yet the steps by which Jake  moves from respectability  to disgrace are waystations of a deeper search, his dream of his older cousin, Joey Hersh,  the Horseman.
Joey grows up in  Montreal  as still another  of Richler's  nothing  boys, son of a
disgraced  father  who deserts the family;  of a mad  and  madcap mother  who also disgraces  him, every other  day;  and  brother  of Jenny,  who early on establishes and  then  maintains  a reputation  as one of the more reliable town pumps. As her outspoken  mother  says, "she's  a whore",  but for free, come almost whomsoever. One  miserable 1937 winter day her brother disappears  and for six years, no Joey. Abruptly, one fine 1943 spring  day, along shabby  St. Urbain's Street,  lo a  fire­ engine  red  MG.  From  which steps a transformed  Joey,  with  an  endless supply of cash in  hand.  And a dazzling  procession begins, clothes from  the most  exclu­ sive  shops,  mysterious,  beautiful   women  from  some  posh,  long-legged  sexual heaven,   brooding   phone  calls  from  faraway   places -shades of  Gatsby  from over  the  way  in  New  York.  And  the  whispered  legend  starts.  Did  Joey  fight against  Franco  in  Spain,  is he a  communist,  did  he  visit Trotsky  in  Mexico? Was he, in between  times, a pro ball player, a  licensed pilot, an actor  in Holly­ wood, a man  with underworld  connections at the far end of those phone calls, in hiding, even being hunted down?

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



If adolescent  Jake  is fascinated  by these intimations  of an  heroic life, he is even  more  fascinated  by  a  transformation in Joey from  the  typically  timorous St.  Urbain's boy into  an  assertive, at  times a dangerous  Man.  When  Joey gets drunk, as he often does, he exudes hard-bodied, hard-eyed menace. When some French-Canadian toughs  beat  up a young Jew, Joey organizes a counter-attack which  lands  a  local  dignitary's   son  in  the  hospital.  Vengeance  is ours,  saith Joey.  But  the  Jewish  fathers,  frightened,  apologize. When  some other  French­ Canadian boys intimidate Jake  and  Duddy  at  the  local ball  field,  Joey comes along  and  intimidates the  French-Canadian boys. Later  he will fight  the Arabs in theI 948 war.  Most crucial of all, he will become, in Jake's imagination, The Horseman,  and   also  the  Golem,  in  Jewish  tradition   a  body  without  a  soul, searching   through   the  world  to  revenge  the  loss. It is  the  infamous  Doktor Mengele, one of the  monsters  at  Auschwitz, that  Jake  believes Joey is pursuing. The  dreadful  image  at  the  heart  of Jake's  nightmares  is of women  in the out­ houses while  other  women  crouch,  drinking  contaminated water  from  an adja­  cent stream.  Enter  the good  Doktor  to bring in sanitation  by destroying not the outhouses but the women.
Over  the  years it's become  clear that  Richler is essentially iconoclastic, almost invariably   asserting  tough-minded  scepticism  in  the  face,  under  force,  of  the modem  world-kid  me NOT! Letting  cousin Joey be Jake's  hero, his vision of
a  redeeming  manhood  for Jewish  men, Richler consciously selects a sleazy hero,
made  up  of  the  sleazy kitch  boys dream  along St.  Urbain's street.  Seeking  re­ venge  for  Mengele's  monstrous  treatment  of Jewish  women,  Joey  himself  mis­ treats  women,  deserts  a  wife and  child  in  Israel,  swindles  another  woman  in London,  and  plays the petty  cheat  to each next town he passes through.  Beyond adolescence Jake  never does catch  up with Joey except in dreams,  Nazi-haunted nightmares   into  which,  fleetingly,  his cousin  rides,  mounted  in  a  magnificent Plevin stallion.

Neighing, the  stallion  rears,  obliging  the  Horseman to dig  his stirrups in. Eventu­ ally  he  slows.  Still  in  the  highlands, emerging  from  the  dense  forest  to  scan  the scrub   below,  he  strains to find  the   unmarked road   that   winds  into  the  jungle, between   Puerto San  Vincente and   the  border  fortress  of  Carlos  Antonio   Lopez.

This  is Paraguay  where  4o,ooo  escaped  Nazis are thought  to live, Mengele  in­ cluded.  But  vengeance  is not  Joey's, saith  Mordecai  Richler.  Beyond his dream of his cousin as Horseman and  Golem, Jake falls into step with  a  London  body even more lacking in a soul, Harry  Stein, the Jewish lago, pure venom, gratuitous

73

NEED  FOR LAUGHTER



hatred,  malice incarnate.  Ride along with Joey in your dreams  and  there will be a shift in which you tag along with Harry. All German  girls beware.
To  understand how Jake  makes the transition  from dreams of Joey to friend­ ship  with  Harry,   the  reader  needs to  understand  Harry's   dim-witted  mistress, Ruthy.  And to understand  Ruthy  one needs to consider first, Joey's sister, Jenny. Every  good  writer  is likely to have  at  least one  well that  is  always  coming  in, from  which  words  will flow almost  easily into  place.  For  Richler  this  natural resource has always been Jewish lowlifers: in St. Urbain's  Horseman,  the Hersh family. And  how  Richler  loves it,  and  how he  hates it,  the intense,  hot,  heavy interest that  fathers,  mothers, sisters, brothers,  uncles, cousins and  aunts  all take in one another  to the exclusion of every other interest. Jenny,  the most intelligent of the  Hershes,  recognizes the almost incestuousness  of such  closeness when she tells Jake  that  brother  Joey  returned   to  Montreal  that  fabled  spring  of  1943 because  "he  wanted  to fuck  me,"  and  that  he  left  to  avoid  doing  so. Jenny wants  out  of the  hothouse, so she elects for self-education  in art,  literature and philosophy. As such, she becomes Jake's muse and  he "her  acolyte". Jake,  grown up,  remembers  her solitary,  back-bedroom  study  light gleaming  through  late St. Urbain's hours;  remembers  Modem  Library  books, a  map  of Paris, a drawing  of Keats, Havelock  Ellis, the Saturday  Review  of Literature;  remembers how he "had   revered  her,  how she  had  once  excited  him."  Given  the  double  pull,  of reverence, as for a muse, and  excitement,  as for a mistress, it's all but inevitable that  Jake  will follow after when she makes her move to escape from  Hershville.
But such an escape! Out  of the family warming  oven into the pale fires of the Toronto  culture-establishment by way of a calculated  marriage  to Doug  Fraser, whom Richler portrays as perhaps the most asinine playwright CBC Radio ever encouraged  in  all itll long history of encouraging  asinine  playwrights.  However, Jenny  marries  Doug,  not for  the imagination   he doesn't  possess, and  not for a sexuality  which he also doesn't  possess, but  as a way to become reigning  hostess for  Toronto  writers,  artists,  directors  and   producers.   Much  of  her  success as hostess consists in her willingness to go to bed with whomsoever, except her hus­ band   (reluctantly)  and  Jake  (not  at  all).  That woman  who  discovers she  has become  the  eternal   feminine  for  a  particular  man -Jenny  for  Jake -will realize that  in order  to be his muse she had best not be also his mistress. Swallow my  cousin,  cousin swallow.  When  adolescent  Jake  wants  her  she lets him  fool around  but then  tells him to go home and  grow up. When he does grow up and still wants  her, she declines and  sleeps instead  with  Duddy, driving  Jake  dotty. But  it will be at  one of her  parties that  he gains entree  to  his career  as a film

74

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



director  and  meets  his eventual  best friend,  the genuinely talented  writer,  Luke
Scott. A career and a standard by which to judge that career. Fleet sweet swallow.
But  enter   Richler's   scepticism,  clipping  her  wings  and  pouring  salt  on  her tail. Just  as cousin Joey is a sleazy hero, cousin Jenny  is a sleazy muse, the  best that  circumstances  provide  for St.  Urbain's boys, but  very much  bargain  base­ ment, damaged  goods. However, the scepticism is not to be understood  as simply Doubting  Mordecai  with  a moted  eye for all the things that  are under  the sun. It's that  he distrusts muses, at least the kind that Jake takes to be soul of  his soul. There   is  a  direct   connection   between  Jenny  in  Montreal   and  Toronto, and Ruthy  in London.  For lame-brain  Ruthy  is the would-be-muse to end all muses, totally  convinced  as she  takes  on  each  next  shabby  lover  that  Goethe  has  re­ occurred.  And  who is the first lover she takes on in these terms but cousin Joey, the  Horseman. Who,  having seduced and  swindled her, rides off  into the Euro­ pean sunset  with  her  life-savings in his saddlebags.  Enter  her next lover-who else but  Harry   Stein,  determined   that  Jake  will make  good  for  Joey,  so that Ruthy  will have savings he can swindle from her. Ruthy thinks that's super, since in her eyes Harry,  who boasts a high I.Q., is at the level where "there's Gertrude, there's  Ep  and   there's  Ein."  Moving  from  his  pre-occupation   with  Joey  and Jenny  to his pre-occupation with Harry  and  Ruthy,  Jake enters into some of the finest passages in  the novel, in which he  revels in their  shoddiness as one might indulge  a  madness  in  order  to be rid  of  it. Because muse Jenny  still knocks at inner  chambers  of  his being,  Ruthy's  atrocious  capacity  for  adoration answers. Because hero  Joe  still rides  his  dreams,  Horseman  and  Golem, Harry  appears,  vengeance incarnate. Before whom place a delectable dish, a statuesque  German girl, Ingrid. Threaten her. Strip her naked. Rape her. Bugger her. Fellatio. Down on  hands  and  knees. Put Joey's saddle on her back. Get out Joey's riding crop. Mount,  whip, and  ride to your revenge for Jewish women crouched by Auschwitz outhouses  drinking   their  own  shit-fouled  water  as  prologue  to  the  even  more horrible  gas chamber  cantata, writhing  and  clawing their way to the very top of death's  most  vaulting  ambition.  Small  wonder  that  Jake  Hersh  is a  hypochon­ driac. Fears success. Marries a Goy.
But  vengeance  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord.  Through  the  screen  of  lies Ingrid, Harry  and  Jake  need  to  tell in  court,  it's  clear  that  Jake  is scarcely  guilty  as charged.  His great  mistake is to arrive home unexpectedly, get involved with the drunkenness  of it all, and  become understandably indiscreet.  He does fondle her. He  does pinch  her,  viciously, to  his surprise. But when she goes suddenly  onto her knees and  fumbles at him, he pulls away. And when Harry  bog:ins the saddle

75

NEED  FOR LAUGHTER



and  riding  crop  routine,  Jake  quarrels,  gets  angry,  and  shoves  Ingrid   rather roughly  out  of the  house. All of which  the  jury comprehends. Also the  judge, who  is hard  on  Harry,  whom  he despises and  sentences  to seven years, and  on Jake  too,  whom  he  deplores  but  lets off with  a suspended  sentence.  However, the  real  judge  of the  event  is a sceptic named  Mordecai.  And  as he's  wincing with  the  pain  of it all, he's smiling, a benevolent  scepticism. He  knows that  in depths  of himself where  the  invisible worms fly in  the  night  Jake  is guilty,  his dream  of Joey  leading  him into  league with  Harry  to  heap  humiliation  on the tender  flesh of the German  girl. So he winces. But he also knows that  by letting his creature  Jake  act  out  the  nightmare,  he, Jake,  will arrive  at  knowledge of how  ridiculous  a  nightmare  it all is, how little  he is actually  interested  in such revenge:  a grope,  a  pinch,  and  a  push. So  judge  Mordecai  aids and  abets the crime  in order  to cure  the  criminal,  lets Jake  follow Joey  toward  revenge and meet Harry, the exact man for the job, lago come round again to arrange the denouement.
But  what  a fraud  of a vengeful fellow this Harry  Stein  proves out, an  inept
lago  who selects, among  other  things an entirely wrong  victim. Judge  Mordecai makes it clear that  pretty Ingrid is a mostly compliant  baggage who assumes that anal, oral and  genital  intercourse are simply what  people do on sexual occasions
-as, indeed,  they do. Iago  Harry  went too far and  did  hurt  and  humiliate  her
-for a while. Otherwise she experienced it all as another  one of those odd even- ings in a long series. The  greatest damage  to her pride was probably  when Jake pushed  her  out  of the  house, Gott  in Himmel,  all  this and  no screen test too! And  though  it did seem weird to be down  on her  hands  and  knees with Joey's saddle  on  her  not-so-pure  Aryan  back,  ready  to  be whipped  and  paraded   past wherever it is the shades of the Auschwitz women  huddle,  it doesn't seem at all weird  to  judge  Mordecai,  the smiling sceptic  who arranged it all. He sees it as the  ludicrous  end  point  of Jake's  bad  dream.  Under  a law  of rueful  laughter, the sentence  he imposes would seem to read, in the vernacular, come off it Jake Hersh,  dark is not the colour of your true love's hair. You are no inverted  Jewish Mengele, twisting  toward  revenge. You are  what  you actually  are, a spiky Jew up  from  St.  Urbain's street,  needing  to  be  a  spike  since  modem   times  have small  room for sensitive plants, as I,  judge Mordecai,  also spiky, can testify. But be a golden spike. And at the end,  the ridiculousness burned  deeply in burning the  bad  dream  out,  lo, friend  Lucas Scott drives up  in  his shiny fire-engine red reputation, the  best writer  in  town, offers his best script  to best friend  Jake  to direct. The sweet life. And Jake hesitates, weeps for the death  of co in

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



Horseman, but accepts, for once malleable. And a golden thread  takes over from the  invisible  worms  now  fled  into  some other  night  than  the  one  from  which Jake has awakened.
A comic world then,  the spirit of which is not from dark  to darker  to darkest,
but  from  dark  to  lighter  to  laughter,  and  release. Harry  Stein  is certainly  the worst news Richler  has given us to date, with his obscene phone calls, nasty put­ downs and  ugly feelings. But the passages that spell him out contain  some of the most elated  writing  in  the  novel. If he were true !ago  no one could  laugh. But as a failed !ago  he's a very funny nasty fellow. The portrait  of Harry reveals the reality  of Richler's  scepticism,  which has always been  the  main  fact  met in his novels. Just  as it cuts  against  everybody's pretensions  that  they  are  better  than they actually  are, it cuts against fears that they are worse. A humane, a forgiving scepticism,  then,  the  test  of which  is not  in some officious  pronouncement-I AM  THE HUMANE SCEPTIC-but where it belongs,  in the  writing  itself, the upbeat  music that  takes over when awful Harry  and awful Ruthy  make their appearances. They   are   unbearable -look the  other  way! -but  the  writing itself rescues them,  allegro, so that,  like Jake,  the reader  tags along. However, in other parts of the novel there are problems.




ER AN  OLDER   GENERATION of writers in Canada, young Mor­ decai  Richler  must  have seemed rather  markedly a wild one in much  the same way as the  older  Irving  Layton  and  younger  Leonard  Cohen  seemed  also wild
-then. And  so  he  was-then.  His  brash,  wrong-side-of-the-tracks   writing
rushes make  the  more  considered  styles of Hugh  MacLennan and  Morley Cal­ lahan  seem  almost  elegiac. But  time plays funny  tricks, and  in our  speeded-up world  doesn't  wait  around  very long  before playing them.  To  a  newer genera­ tion  of writers it's doubtless  Richler's prose that  seems elegiac, inviting compari­  son, not forward  to the much  more open, freely improvisational modes in which they work, but  back to modes they have all but abandoned. This isn't enmity, a new wave of artists  who would like to see Richler's ship sink. Surely, no serious writer  or reader  can fail to appreciate  the magnitude  of his attempt to create  a symphonic  novel, the four  movements, the many themes that  weave congruently through  the entire  work, the animated writing with which he attempts to achieve a comic triumph of spirit over some grim modem  realities. But respect it as they may, it will doubtless be precisely the imposed superstructure from which a good

77

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



many  younger  artists  will flinch as being an  unnecessary  burden  for any writer to carry on his bent and straining back. Heavy, heavy often does hang over his typewriter.
Never more so than  when the upbeat  writing  he needs in order  to sustain the
upbeat   intention   of  the  work  becomes strained,   particularly in  the  burlesque passages that  recur  intermittently  throughout the  novel. These  passages  are  an old  and   puzzling  story  in  Richler's  writing -fragments  of film scripts,  news­ paper  items,  letters  to Jake  from  pathetic,   backwoods  TV  aspirants,  a  do-it­ yourself  I.Q.  test-you  too  can  be a  Harry  Stein -and,  most  important, a number  of zany episodes that  mock the social, sexual, marital  lives and  times of Toronto and   London  establishment  sophisticates.  These  burlesques  do  double duty  in the novel. Musically they occur as a kind  of  running  scherzo, sounds of life's whirly-birds  crooning  through  crazy  days. Thematically they  explore  and present  the  public  level of Jake  Hersh's  life,  just  what  kind  of  wacky  modern wonderland it  is to  which  he  (and  all  the  rest  of  us)  are  more  or  less Mad Hatters. The  difficulty occurs when such  passages strain  in their  reach  towards laughter  and  become insistent, unfunny. For instance,  the evening that  Jake  and his wife have dinner at the home of his attorney, Ormsby-Fletcher.
It  begins with  Jake's  awareness that  given the  conflicting  lies he, Ingrid  and Harry  will be telling in court,  the logic of their  testimony  will count  for rather less than  the  presence on  his behalf  of an  "upright plodding  WASP"  lawyer. With  dull  propriety  itself at  your side how could  you possibly be guilty  of  un­ speakable  carnalities? If you grew up along St. Urbain's Street  you know how to con,  and  Jake   did  and  Jake  does,  deftly  manoeuvring  Ormsby-Fletcher into accepting   his  case.  Which  of course  makes  Jake  eminently  respectable  in  the eyes of  Ormsby-Fletcher,  positively  his favourite  Jewish  sex  pervert.  And  his wife's favourite   too.  Hence  the  invitation.  Everybody  knows  that  the  English have  the  most revolting food sense in the civilized world so the meal  becomes a series of soggy lumps.  Afterwards  Mrs.  Ormsby-Fletcher enthuses  (with  fluted voice)  over  examples  of  (it's  her  special  interest)   paintings  by  cripples,  teeth paintings, toe paintings, maybe even armpit  paintings.  Given Richler's  bawdiness it's a little surprising  that she doesn't bring in work by some paraplegic  Modernist who has given up brushes entirely to become the first penis painter,  now nurse if you'll  just ... When  Jake goes to  the  john  (vetting  the  hamper  for glimpses of the lady's  lingerie), the  toilet-ah  England-plugs. And  what  to do with  the contents?  Scoop it all up in his shorts and  throw  it out the window? Or smuggle it  to  the  downstairs  john,  one  hopes  in  working  order?  Or  smuggle  himself

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



downstairs,  establish  his presence there, and let four-year  old junior take the rap for the mess upstairs? Which latter, Jake does.
Few readers are likely to object to bathroom  humour  per se-shades of Swift,
Rabelais, Henry  Miller, the human  race generally, half the  jokes we tell. Or  to a demolition  job  on  English  uppah  claws ridiculousness. In  art  there  are always
rooms to spare,  including  those furnished  with  hostility a la Freud  insights into
wit and  laughter. Burlesque,  by which the enemy is turned  into a caricature  of himself, has always  been a favourite  style for such furnishings. Richler's charac­ teristic enemies are establishment  people, the mad hatters  at the top of  the social heap, the insufferable  ways in which they lord it shabbily over the rest of us. With lowlife vulgarity  he is very much  at ease. The  true  vulgar  leads after all to the vulgate,   that   common   tongue  which  the  artist  can  then  subtilize,  humanize,  liberate, a natural stamping ground for the comic spirit. But the highlife vulgarity of establishment  people-Mrs.  Ormsby-Fletcher-destroys subtlety,  humanity and  freedom  by revelling  in the shoddy,  the banal,  the  pretentious.  So the hos­ tility  that  Richler  feels does him credit.  Nor can  there  be any  objection  to the burlesque  masks he assumes in order  to project that  hostility; vengeance is mine saith  the  artist,  slyly. It's  the  writing  itself that  poses  the difficulty, the ways in which  it  tightens  into  a forced  hilarity  and  loses  comic  resonance.  This is very much  like those  evening  gatherings  at  which  people, laughing  hysterically, de­ molish some common  enemy.  Played  back the next morning,  with all the giggles gone,  the  exchanges  are  likely to  be  singularly  unfunny.   For  this  reader  the Ormsby-Fletcher passage, and  a  number  of others in the novel, are like that­ the next morning.
The  difficulty may be a double one. It takes a good hater to write successful burlesque,  one  able to revel in a happiness of malice made  sweet. William Bur­ roughs  for  instance -his  savage  joy. Richler  never  seems quite  able  to  revel. Like his protagonist,  Jake,  he is perhaps  too forgiving, gentle. Thus  one of the funniest  passages in  St. Urbain's  Horseman, the middle-aged  film  makers' soft­ ball  game  on  Hampstead Heath,  is no burlesque at  all, but  delicious roly-poly slapstick. Strictly  speaking,  these film folk are  much  more dangerous  enemies of art  than   ridiculous   Mrs.  Ormsby-Fletcher. They  are  establishment   vulgarians who  have long  since  converted  film-making,  which  they  control,  into  a shoddy game  of  wheel  and   deal,  no  mystery,  no  beauty,  no  power,  just  wheel,  just DEAL.  However,   Richler   writes  them  into  place  as  a  collection  of  huffing. puffing, show-off  teddy  bears  for  whom  he  feels  not  hostility  but  an  amused affection.  Hostility  need  not  enter  because he is seeing them  as lowlifers, clowns

79

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



to  their  own  careers,  whose  wheeling  and   dealing   takes  on  authentic  comic resonance  as they play ball in order  to, like they say, play  ball. My favourite  is the one who can't  decide whether  to hit a single, a double or a triple because not sure whether  it would be more politic to talk to the first, the second or the third baseman.  So  he strikes out.  However,  when  hostility  enters  and  the  burlesque masks go  on,  Richler's  writing  tends  to  tighten  into  a  more  strained  grimace. Which is to laugh-and write-the hard way.
But the more important difficulty must be traced  to Richler's symphonic superstructure. Once  he establishes burlesques of modern  life as a major  theme of the novel he must write a certain  number  of such  passages, whether  he feels like it  or  not.  This  is linear  imagination   at  work,  with  a  vengeance,  since  by page  1o he has committed  himself to four such themes that  he will need to sus­ tain  through  what  turns out to be a long 467 pages of writing.   Or  a short  467 pages if one considers the various economies he needs in order  to keep any given theme  in  balance  with the others. All writers  know it is difficult  enough  to sus­ tain  the  tone and  tempo of even a single theme  over a period  of  days, weeks or months.  What  happens  when  the  feelings in  which  the  theme  is grounded   just go away? Smoke writing. To sustain four themes, each with a somewhat  different tone  and  tempo,  and  at  the same  time  to shuttle  back  and  forth  in  order  to weave  them  into  a  larger,  unified comic progression  from  movement  to  move­ ment  to movement  to finale is a task for imagination that  can  be thought  either heroic or over-burdened. A further  difficulty in  the  writing,  the frequent  intru­  sion of expository asides in the midst of narrative  passages, argues for the over­ burdening.
Novelists are supposed to kiss and tell, but they are usually expected to drama­
tize, visualize or sound  the kissing and telling, not simply to explain  that  Jake  is happily  married,  has grown weary of modern  literature, or is a small "1" liberal who  realizes that  his very comfortable life style scarcely squares  with his feelings about  world misery. Goethe said it long ago, critics are dogs, yapping at artists' Achilles tendencies,  and  it seems all but certain  that  Richler  will be faulted  for the  too-frequent  intrusion  of this expository bridging.  Which is what  it seems to be, a shorthand way to keep one or another  theme  moving  and  evolving those times he is out of patience with direct presentation. Or,  more likely, is struggling to keep one theme  in balance with the others, a problem  in harmonics. Thus,  by simply  explaining   that  Jake  is  "immensely  pleased"  or  "enormously   amused" Richler  confirms  the  comic  nature  of  the  place  without   having  to  pause  and present the  pleasure  or amusement.  Yet when  he must explain,  it's clear that  he

So

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



realizes the  reader  might  very well be concluding otherwise, say that  Jake  must be horribly  depressed  or  not  one  bit pleased. However, the real issue is not  the intrusion  of the expository asides per se. There  is no law that says a novelist can­ not explain  those times he isn't interested  to present,  just as there is no law  that says a  critic,  or  anyone  else, cannot  narrate,  dramatize  or sound  his  responses. All writing is art  and  all writers should have access to all of the possibilities that language  affords. It's more apropos  to ask, do the expository intrusions stay lively enough  to  sustain,  even  enhance,   the  general  liveliness  Richler  is seeking  in creating  his comic vision of Jake  Hersh. I think not. When they occur, it's a little like listening  to  upbeat  music momentarily  interrupted by someone talking,  not from  the  audience,  but  from  the  midst of the music itself. Such intrusions  mar that  animation  which  is the  soul of this  novel. They  occur least  often  in  just those passages where Richler is at his lively best, the portraits  of Harry  Stein and Ruthy,  and  whenever  Jake  for old time's sake, or  for need, goes on back home to Montreal.
When  he is at  home with the various Hershes (or they visit him)  the tempo is
held at  a quick-handed fast, and  the tone stays sceptical. But it all dips down­ sweet  chariot-to  some  undersurface  where sad  is singing  to sad,  laugh  and chatter   as  they  will. There   is a  beautifully  modulated  passage in  which  Jake, about  to  quit  college, goes to a  delicatessen with  his father,  divorced  from  his mother.  The  crass jokes -"fart smeller, I mean smart  feller" -become muted sounds  on  some  cracked  harmonica  that  the father  discovers  he can  no longer· play  for  the  son,  try  as he  will. Similarly,  when  his mother  comes to London the  modulations  are superb,  the sweet chariot  herself, patting  her breasts, preen­ ing  her  body, seducing  her  grandchildren, cutting  out  the competition, effacing herself into  the centre  of attention, and  my boy, my boy, my  buoy. Who left his Maw  long  years ago,  as her  direct,  accusing glance  reminds  him at  the airport
-the husband   gone,  the  children  gone,  you Yankel  too-what's  left for  hot­
house eyes?
The   passages  that  give  us  the  mother  and  father  open  a  way,  perhaps,  to where the comic genius that  rules over this novel dwells. To follow Jake's feelings along lines that  lead  to inner  chambers of their defeated  but animated lives is to reach  a place where  there  is no laughter  at all but anguish  instead  that  human existence needs be so grim  an affair,  felt as grim-the tawdriness of his father's life and  reactions  to life, the obsessive stupidity  of his opposition  to Jake's mar­ riage,  the  ugly  pathos  of  his illness and  death,  the  even  uglier  travesty  of  his funeral.   Nor  is the  father  alone  in  this  lower  world,  for  shade  comes  to  join

81

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



shade,  the defeated  mother, Joey, Duddy, Jenny,  Ruthy,  Harry  Stein, all as well afBicted by tawdriness, ugliness, stupidity,  defeat.  And for silent chorus, hooded, the  Auschwitz  women,  the  excremental  lilies, in  life less than  excrement.  It is from  this grim  region that  the resonance flows which moves into the  best, most elated  writing  in the novel as the desolation  is redeemed  into a comic vision. If Richler  sends Jake  to melancholy  places, it's in order  to arrive  at  a genuine,  a felt need for laughter. It is when he moves away from the need into contact  with merely  social  ugliness, stupidity  and  defeat -the  world  of  the  establishment whirlybirds-that  the  writing  turns  non-resonant  and  strains  for  its  effects. There   can  be  no  desolation  at  heart  over  the  Ormsby-Fletchers' foolishness. They  are  merely foolish. As Jake  might well say, who needs them! And because need  doesn't  enter  in, because there  will be no second dinner  at  their  home, no necessary third  to still the voices of desolation,  there  can  be no deep  resonance to underlie the reach for laughter. So the writing strains because the comic superstructure  moves  in  with  its  relentless  insistence -and   there  must  have been times when Richler wondered why-that  he be a funny fellow.



SWIFT,Yeats says,

... has sailed into his rest; Savage indignation  there Cannot lacerate his breast. Imitate  him if you dare.

It  will be  to  Richler's  everlasting  credit,  since  works of art  endure,  that  he does dare  to imitate  Swift, in more than  a few ways. Gulliver's Travels  was the first English novel to take advantage of symphonic  form, inadvertently since the form  itself was only  just coming into being. In  Gulliver there  are the four lively movements,  liveliest of all being the third,  a swirling  prose scherzo, all over the geographical and  thematic  place.  And  the  fourth   movement,  in  Houyhnhnm­ land,  recapitulates and  resolves the themes  woven into  the  first  three.  Which  is a way of saying that  St. Urbain's  Horseman is Gulliver  come round  again. Most of the writing  devices Richler  uses have sanction,  in that  Swift  also used them. Just   as  Swift  laces  burlesque  passages  through  Gulliver, Richler   laces  them through  Horseman.  Just  as Richler  intrudes  expository asides into  his narrative,  Swift  intrudes  even more of them into  his:  passages concerning  law, education,

NEED FOR  LAUGHTER



family  life,  written   in  over  Lemuel's  shoulder.  And  both  writers  hold  to  the crucial  rule  that,  as  their  scepticism  cuts  the  ground  from  beneath   their  pro­ tagonists' feet,  redemption will occur  not in pronouncements but in the act, the art  of writing.  If the  human  spirit  is to  prevail over  the  grimness  of  things, it will prevail  in  the  interstices  of the words themselves:  "there  is a  music at  the heart of things."
And  there  is another  decisive similarity, though it leads to an even more deci­ sive difference.  Both  novelists choose as protagonist  a fool whom  they  then trap  into  experiences  which  will reveal and,  they hope, cure  the foolishness. Gulliver doesn't  seem exactly cured  at  the last, since he's mad enough to believe that  he's almost  a  horse and  likes it  that  way-farewell  mankind! Yet  he's an  awfully human  horse. If you  met  him  trotting  down  the  street,  you'd  be less likely to weep for mankind  lost than  to smile. Jake isn't exactly cured either, since he does leave the question  of Joey's  death  open, implying that  he might some day climb back on to the  nightmare desire that  vengeance shall be Joey's, Harry's and  his. But the similarity  that  leads to difference is a deeper one. Both Lemuel and Jake are  atheists;  Jake  by  direct  acknowledgement  of the  fact  that  throughout his ordeals  he never once calls on God's  help, as his creator  did every evening of his adult  life. Which  means that both fools must call on their  human  resourcefulness to outface or outfox the surrounding grimness. But Swift takes Lemuel's atheism as the  basic foolishness  that  branches  out into all his other  idiocies, driving  him finally outside  human  boundaries,  to Horseville. Richler  takes Jake's  atheism  as a source for his tenacious  humanity,  the stubbornness with which he clings to fair play for such  sorry specimens  as Joey and  Harry  Stein. Swift, then,  is on God's side, laughing,  while Richler  is on man's side, needing to laugh,  trying.
Because this is so, Swift would see Richler  playing the  fool to his fool by im­
posing on him an  untenable proposition that  mankind  can go it alone. Yet were he to sail on out of his rest and  re-appear  on a sudden  London  to tell Richler so
-fool Mordecai ! -it would surely be a double sign. Sign of his belief that  God forgotten   is  man  abandoned. But  sign  also  that  the  Horseman   from  Canad­ hnhnmland has written  his way into  the kind of company  he, Swift, always did prefer.  Which  is a  long  way for a spiky boy from  St.  Urbain's  Street  to have travelled.  Even  Duddy,  swindled  out  of his role as major  figure,  would  be im­ pressed. And  one see's  Horse  Lemuel  trotting  briskly along,  but  turning  solici­ tously to Horseman  Jake, flat on his back again:  You see Jacob, we Houyhnhnms have been doing this longer than you Canadhnhnms.






ARIEL
A Review  of International English  Literature


Editor   GEORGE WING



Articles on
DRYDEN  - HARDY -  MARKANDAYA  - PLATH RICHLER  -  STEVENS -  SWIFT


By
BARRY  ARGYLE -  DAVID MYERS -  EDWARD NEILL NORMAN PAGE    - PAMELA SMITH   - GERALD P. TYSON ARTHUR J. WEITZMAN


Poems by
ANNE FARRELL BAILIE  - WILLIAM BEDFORD YASMINE  GOONERATNE  - DAVID JAFFIN -  ALAN MCLEAN


Reviews



THE  UNIVERSITY  OF CALGARY
Volwne  4   Number  1   January  1973

Price $1.50 per copy. Subscription  $6.00 per annum.  Back numbers on request.

Orders and business matters should be addressed  to the Secretary, ARIEL,  The University  of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.	T2N 1N4




review articles



MIRIAM WADDINGTON'S NEW TALENT


Tom Wayman



MIRIAM WADDINGTON,  Driving  Home.  Oxford University Press. $2-95·


I THINK  MOST OF Miriam Waddington's  poems  in  her   recent  col­ lection  of new  and  selected  poems,  Driv­ ing  Home, are  boring.  But  as this  collec­ tion spans  thirty  years  of work,  boredom  here  is  perhaps  not   entirely   her  fault: the  worst   poems   reflect   the  fashions   of times  they  were  written in.  It  is difficult not   to   be   bored    with   intricate  little home-made myths  and  texts  designed  to fill up  with  sentiment  the  empty  prairies  or  an  empty  life.  And  it  is difficult  now not  to  be  bored  with  the  careful  encap­ sulating into  rhyme  of  the  passions  and anguish   of  a  social  worker   in   the  4o's and   so's,   and   of   the  lives  of  those  she was in contact  with.
But  I  wonder  if  Waddington  doesn't share  these  views. The best of  the  poems in  Driving   Home are  mostly  in  the  sec­ tion  of  new  poems   (since   1g6g) .  Here she  is  able  sometimes   to  get  inside  her present  life  and  show  it  to the  reader  in a  convincing  way.  In   "Eavesdropping" she imagines  all  the wonderful things  she hopes  for  at  the sound  of  the  telephone: literary fame,  academic recognition, and
 long-distance love.  Yet  the  reality  of her life reasserts  itself:

... the  telephone keeps  on ringing and I know  if I answer it it will only  be the insurance adjuster saying: your  car  is
a  total  wreck  madam
but  not  a complete write-off  so what
do  you want us to do about it?

In   the  same  direct   style,  another  poem shows a fence  post  in  her  back  yard  be­ coming  a  signpost  in  the  passage  of  the seasons and  the  poet's  life:

.. . then
autumn went south and
all of a sudden the  boys
I used to go around with were  sixty  years  old  and telling me  money
isn't  everything.

Not that  wistfulness is the only tone Waddington uses in  these  newer  poems. She  satirizes  effectively  a  lot  of  the  silli­ ness of  recent   Canadian poetry   in  "Sad winter  in  the land  of Can. Lit."

ss

REVIEW ARTICLES



There are  many things I must  learn in  order to write better in  Canada.
I must  learn ...
to spell  everything
my own  swt  way  just to prve  my indep endens of all  thr shtty authrty.

Waddington's appeal in this  poem  1s  to the  world's  standard of writing:

Dear Nelly  Sachs,
dear Nathalie Sarraute, isn't   there anything
you can  teach  me about how  to write better in Canada?

In  "Polemics" she charts a course of affirmation for her writing  and  life. She wants    monuments  to   the   future  that make  it clear  that

There were  heroes, wars were  halted, men  were healed, children were born,  people sang,
worlds were  changed ...

And as a contribution towards  these monuments, she  offers  two  looks  back­ ward   at  where   she  has  come  from.   In these   poems,   the   reader   duly   sees  the changes  she mentions, and  can feel some­ thing   of  Waddington's  dissatisfaction  at being   what    she   is   today.   From    "The nineteen thirties are  over":

... I am  not  really
this  middle-aged professor
but  someone from
Winnipeg whose  bones  ache with  the  broken revolutions of  Europe, and  even  now
I am  standing on  the  heaving ploughed-up field
of  my father's old  war.

Some hint of the  powerful  poems Wad­ dington  might   have   written out  of  her social  work  in  clinics,  jails and  as a wel­ fare  official can be seen in "Investigator"

86
 (I 942)  where  she captures for a moment something of the inside  of the  homes and lives of the  poor:

I could  tell  you,  and  no exaggeration,
of  the  in  and  out  of houses  twenty times
a day
of the  lace  antimacassars, the  pictures of kings  and  queens
the  pious  mottoes, the  printed blessings,  the dust piling up  on  bureaus,
the  velour interiors, the  Niagara souvenirs the  faded needlepoint, the  hair  pulled  tight and  the  blinds  drawn against day  and  the
feel of sun.

But  too  often   the  emotion is lost  in  the prison  of rhyme,  as in her  attempt to tell of her reaction to interviewing a thief (I957):

Armand Perault, petty thief what do  I know  of  your  belief?

This poem clunks along to the stunning insight  of:

I haven't heard much that was  new  to me or brought any  word  that was new  to you; it seems  our  separate selves must  curve wide  from  the  central pulsing nerve
which ought to  unite us, you  and  me ...

Waddington's poems  such  as  this  one fail  to  let  any  particular  emotion break out,  to  transcend  the  confines  of  rhyme in  any  way  so  that   the   poem   is  more than  reporting in  verse.  Or  maybe  there was  no  further emotion? In  "The  wom­ en's   jail"    (I 956),   an   unrhymed   poem, Waddington tells of how she secretly  ad­  mires  the  beautiful young girls in  jail for cheque-forging.

Being  especially human I am  no  judge of evil but  hear  how  it  has
a singing life  in  them
how  it  speaks  out
with an  endowed voice.

She ends this poem by comparing herself unfavourably to  the  women  prisoners.

my  blood  is free  from  alcohol

REVIEW ARTICLES



I am law-abiding, I am completely resistible -is  there  anything praiseworthy in that?

It is  the  tag  of  "evil" applied  to  these girls  or  their   crime,   plus  the  self-doubt expressed  as  the  easy  comparison of  the social  worker  to the  inmates, that  bother me. As someone  raised  with  the left-wing background  that   Waddington  mentions, plus having experienced her  work among the   poor,  could   she  really   believe  that cheque-forging  is  "evil"?  I  can't  help feeling   that   there   is  something  awfully genteel   about  this   poem   and   its   neat final  comparison-as  though the  poem is  a   careful,  conventional  mask   for   a more   jagged   and   powerful  response   to this  situation. And  so  with  a  number of her  other  social  poems.
My lack of complete belief in what Waddington  is  saying   appears  even   in the  new  poems  of  this  collection.  Some­ thing  is missing,  for  me,  in  a  poem  like
 
Now available in paperback $2.95


Memoirs  of
Montparnasse

JOHN  GLASSCO


"A   very  good   book,  perhaps  a  great   book."
Washington Star.

"The  tide   calls   to  mind   a  whole  genre   of books ... But  Glassco's   book,  published   from a  manuscript   nearly  forty  years  old,  is fresher and  truer  to  the  moment   than   the  others,  as well as being more novelistic and, in a sense, legendary."  Malcolm Cowley in The New Republic.

"The best book of prose  by a Canadian that  I have  read."  Louis  Dudek   in the  Montreal Gazette.

"Transformations"   when   she   says   she	 	

wants   to  spend   her  life  in  Gimli  listen­
ing  to the  silence  and  that

... I will compose
my songs of gold-eye tunes
send  them  across the land in smoke-spaces, ice-signals
and  concentrate all winter on Henry  Hudson  adrift
in a boat ...

Granted, this  poem  is doubtless meant to be a bit of  joie de vivre,  but  even so I'm not  convinced there  is much   joie in  con­ centrating all  winter   on  Henry  Hudson adrift  in  a  boat.  Henry  Hudson  strains  the   credibility  even   in   the   midst   of  a willing  suspension  of  disbelief.  Similarly, in "Dead lakes":

I look down
in the dead  waters
of Sudbury and
I think  of Flaubert ...
 
Memoirs  of  Montparnasse  was  widely  hailed on  its   publication   in   1970   and   promises   to become  a  classic.  It  is an  unsurpassed  novel­ like  account   of  a Paris   that   was  alive  with creative  people  and  eccentrics  who  lived,  like the  youthful  author himself, in  heedless, ener­ getic   pursuit   of  pleasure.    "It   is  all   there," Leon   Edel   writes   in   his   introduction,  "the twenty-four-hour day,  the  burning of  candles at  both  ends,  the  obsessions  and  compulsions, the strange  divorce from  what  was going on in the world, the crazy parties,  the beautiful  fool's paradise  from  which  the  depression  ultimately  awakened  us."
Now  that   it   is  available   in   paperback,   this highly  praised  book -a  work  of  literary  ex­ cellence with  a strong  appeal for  the  young­ becomes an  attractive possibility  for  Canadian literature courses in  universities.


Oxford  University  Press
70 Wynford Drive
Don  Mills, Ontario M3C 1J9

REVIEW ARTICLES



I  lose  the  poem  entirely  when  leaps  like this  are  too  large  for  me. Something else must   be  going   on   in  the   poet's   mind, I  keep   thinking,  to  make  these  images mean  more  to her  than  she has conveyed to  me.
And  I  find  this  strain  throughout the
older  poems.  In "Summer letters" ( I965) Waddington is attempting to compare a young  Canadian postman  at work  to various  academic and artistic  problems, specifically those having to do with Old English   scholarship.  The   leap   between the  two  subjects   loses me:   that   there  is no connection seems pretty obvious. The postman is also unrelated to the price of eggs, although there  is no poem  pointing this out.
And  disconnectedness appears in  more
of  the  early  poems.  In  some  sort  of  try to give Canada a veneer of European mythical  and   traditional  history,   Wad­ dington  has  lines  like   (from  "Lullaby" (I945)):
 I went  out  into  the  autumn night
to cry  my anger to  the  stone-blind  fields
just  as I was, untraditional,  North American Jewish, Russian, and  rootless in all  four, religious, unaffiliated, and  held
in  a larger-than-life seize of hate.

In  a  poem  about   her  travels   ( I966)   she describes  how around the world  she finds both  beautiful things  and  hatred of Jews. Her  response  here  is to suddenly feel that there  is nowhere she can  be at  home.  But in  "Driving Home" ( I 968)   she seems  to find  home  where  she  is, under   the  huge signs of  the  corporations:

the  traffic roars
in  the  mirror
tells  me
I am  on  my way  horne;
home? Fool
you  are  home
you  were  home in  the  first  place
and
if you  don't look  out
it's  going  to  be
now  this  minute classic  ESSO
bloodlit SHELL

and  night's sweet  gypsy  now
fiddles   you  to  sleep
far  from  snows  of winnipeg
and  seven  sisters  lakes.

Images of gypsies, or Elizabethan rhetoric in   poems    like   "Thou  didst    say   me" (I 945), "Sea  bells"  (I 964)  or "The mile runner"  ( I958),  appear slightly  incon­ gruous   in   the   Canadian   reality,   to  say the least -like the  pseudo-gothic Houses of Parliament rising  over  the sawmills  of Hull.
Just   how  Waddington herself  fits into the Canadian reality  is the question  dealt with in some of the better poems of this collection. In  "Fortunes"  ( I96o),  Wad­ dington  considers   how  luck  and  chance finally  don't  alter   her  own  specific  his­ torical  being:

88
 forever

The  finest  of the  older  poems  in  Driv­ ing   Horne   to  me  are   the   poems  about  love.  In  "Interval" ( I943)   Waddington shows  a  man   who  has  idealized   women  being   forced   at   last   to   recognize   their humanity.

Then he knew  there is no golden key
no one  has  hidden it,  there is no joyous room
where man  completes his marriage in a
moment,
there are  no easy signposts, only  a lonely
road
that each  one  travels with  his suffering.

In   "In  the   sun"    (I958),   Waddington tells   of   an   incident  where   her   reason knew

The world was  not  more or  less because we looked  at it ...

REVIEW ARTICLES



But   when    she   is   with    the    man    she chooses,   then :  "in   me   the   world   was more".  There are  also  poems  that  speak of the men  that  fail her, however: the poignant "Remembering you"  (I g65) :

When you  kissed  you kissed  like  a  young man
filled  with  greeting and  gaiety;
when  you  loved  you loved  like  an  old  man
filled  with slowness  and  ceremony;
when  you left  you
left  like  a  man  of no  age
filled  with fear  that ceremony
had  given  me  something
to  keep  more lasting than ritual richer and   brighter than darkness.

Despite  such  betrayals, Waddington can celebrate another relationship in "The lonely  love  of  middle age"   (I g66) . And in  "Icons"  (I g6g), she  says  she  carries with   her  the  idea  and   memory of  love, to  hold  out  against  the  darkness of  her age and  our  age.

... there is
no  such  thing
as love left in the world but there is still
the  image of it
 which  doesn't let me wither into blindness which doesn't let  me bury  myself
underground which
doesn't let  me say yes to the
black  leather police  ...
The world  is getting dark, but  I carry icons,  I remember the  summer
I will never  forget
the  light.

Celebrations like  this  of  the  dilemmas of Waddington's recent  existence  seem to me  the  best  and   most  interesting  work she  has  ever   done.   These  poems  speak more  directly  and  openly  of her  predica­ ment   than   her   earlier   work   does,  and  thus  the  recent   poems  give  me  the  im­ pression of greater  accuracy. I like Wad­ dington's work  of  the  last  seven years  or so  so  much   better   than  her   previous  poems that  I  find  it  difficult  in my mind  not   to  think   of  her   as  a   new   talent: emerging  strong   and   mature in  middle  age  with  a  lot  to  say about that  time  of life   in   her  social   position    in   modern Canada.




A DASH
FOR THE BORDER


GARY  GEDDEs, Rivers  Inlet. Talonbooks, $3.00. BP   NICHOL, Monotones. Talonbooks,  $2.00.
DWIGHT GARDINER, A Book of Occasional. Talonbooks,  $2.50.
DAVID ROSENBERG,  Paris & London. Talonbooks,  $3.50. BILL BISSETT,  Drifting Into  War.  Talonbooks, $2.50.
 




Stephen Scobie


B P NICHOL's Monotones opens with   a  quotation from   The   Writings  of Saint  And,  one  of  the  saints   on  whom Nichol    has   built    the    personal  mythic
 
structure of  The   Martyrology, in  which the saint  dreams that  he "foresaw  the imminent end  of all speech." This quota­ tion  reflects a  kind  of doubt or  obsession

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



about the limits of language, which runs through much contemporary  poetry. Con­ sider  also  this  short   piece, from  David Rosenberg's  Paris & London:
WHITE  CURTAINS
It's   all  a  matter of  getting   past  words  to
the  language outside  our  head,  either  visu­
ally  like  art   or  orally  like  poetry.  Because
words are inadequate, in this programmed space,   to   get   through  the   machines,   you
have   to come  out   from  behind   them  and make  a dash  for the  border  just as they stop at  the first security  check. This is what  is commonly  known  as "Checkpoint Charlie".
This kind of doubt is one of several possible  approaches  to  concrete  poetry, and  to  the  kind  of  annihilation  of  lan­ guage which we find in much of the work of Bill Bissett, such as Drifting Into War.  But  the  poet's  feelings that  "words  are inadequate" do not always extend so far;  often  the  doubt  resolves itself into being, not  so  much   about   language  itself,  as about   a   particular   kind   of   discursive language,  a  language  which  talks  about experience   rather    than   attempting  to reproduce  or  reenact  it  directly.  At  an­ other  point  in Monotones, Nichol rejects "all  this  cold  fucking  dispassionate  'dis­ course' " in favour  of "just  to be able to open the mouth and scream." This view, however, has its limitations. Rosenberg's statement  is oddly  reminiscent  of Eliot's
"words,  after   speech,  reach  I  into  the
silence";  these words come from Four Quartets,   which  is  a  supremely  logical and discursive poem, yielding as little as possible to any supposed "inadequacy" of words. Not only is "discourse" not neces­ sarily "dispassionate"; it is also,  as Eliot shows, a fully viable technique for making that  "dash  for  the  border"  and  across, into the silence.
Gary Geddes' book, Rivers Inlet, stands out  from  the  other  books under  review,
mainly  because it uses a much  more con-

go
 ventional, traditional mode of "discourse". In  their  varying  degrees, Nichol, Rosen­ berg, Gardiner and  Bissett are attempting a different  kind of poetry, a poetry which presents  the  process  of   perception   in  a very  direct  and   (apparently)  undiluted manner. One reads them for the qualities of  grace,  precision,  wit,  and  energy  in the movements of their perception and its structuring, rather  than  for any great in­ terest  in  the substantive  experiences  they are  talking  about.  Geddes,  on  the  other hand,  is conventional enough  to  present us with  a  communicable  subject-matter, and  with thoughts, emotions, and  percep­ tions  which  clearly  relate  to  it.  His  is a much more public voice: he has things he wants to tell us, and writing  the poems is as much  a way of discovering what  these things are as it is the  way of telling.
Rivers  Inlet  concerns the  poet's  return to scenes of his childhood,  and  memories of   his   parents  - a   common   enough theme,  and  one which  holds our  interest only in so far as its  particular realisation, in terms of its images, rhythms, and  per­ ceptions,  can  come  alive  for  the  reader. Geddes  succeeds  admirably  in  giving  his ideas a location, a place and  a habitation in a real and convincing world; he is able to present Rivers Inlet both in its physical appearance  and   in   its   emotional   am­ bience:
No fooling around with beaches and pleasant meadows, the only way to go was up.

(As an  east coast Scot myself, I also appreciate the  exactitude  of "a  dozen  I grey  stone   houses  holding   back   I  the North  Sea.")   Geddes  is also able  to ex­ tend  this particular experience into more generalized  statements,   though  some  of his lines on such occasions come danger­  ously close to cliche :

REVIEW ARTICLES



This  birth  is an end
and a beginning,  a place
we all come back to,
are never far from.

Particularly    strong   are   the   images  of water,  "an  element  I that,  having  none, distorts I the shape of things," an aware­ ness  which,   together   with   the   setting,
reminded  me  at  times  of  Margaret  At­ wood;  I am  sure  that   this  book  would find its place in her schema  of  Canadian literature. Rivers 1nlet is modest in scope and   intention,   traditional   in  approach and  form;  not  a  book to praise extrava­ gantly, but a  book to enjoy quietly.
In contrast to the way in which the subject-matter of Rivers  Inlet  is fully realised   and   made   available,   the   sub­ stantive experience of Monotones, A Book of  Occasion,   and   Paris  &   London  is always  kept   at   a   remove,   distant   and slightly elusive. The  poets are writing of
the  movements  of  their  own  minds  and the connections they make, without worrying too much if these connections remain absolutely private and inaccessible to the reader. Gardiner's self-deprecatory aside-

God you guys  talk abt  weird boring things.    Yourselves. And your friends.

-does not completely  answer the objec­ tions which a frustrated reader may raise. There  is always a potential emptiness, or sterility, in  this  type  of  writing,  a  point where  the  reader  tires  of  even  the most graceful   movements  of   perception   and demands  to share  something  of the sub­ stance  of what  is  being perceived.
Of the three  books, by far the best is Nichol's   Monotones;  and   this   is  due mainly to the poet's absolute conunand  of sound and  rhythm.  Contrary  to whatever
 




Ahonnez-vous a I

Subscribe to



ellipse



4 numeros 1issues

$5.00




12.  JEUNE POESIE I
YOUNG   POETRY

13.  ALAIN  GRANDBOIS I
JOHN  GLASSCO




ELLIPSE, C.P.  10, Faculte des Arts, Universite de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec.

Peter   Stevens   may   think,  bp   has   lost	 	

gz

REVIEW ARTICLES



nothing of  his  ear,  and  Monotones,  like all  his  work,  is a  joy  to  read.  At  times the rhythm is indeed  so authoritative that it creates  in the  reader  a profoundly emotional response, even if we are  not always  absolutely  clear  just what  it is we are  feeling  emotional about.  For  all  that, Monotones  still   seems   to   me   a  minor work, and  interesting chiefly as a prelude to the much more massive and satisfying achievement of The  Martyrology.
Dwight  Gardiner's  A   Book   of    Oc­
casional  has   its   moments  too,   though these  are  mostly  moments of  intellectual appreciation of the cleverness with  which the  poems are  being turned, as line crates line  and  images  from  one  poem  link  up with  others.  The poems  are  entertaining to read,  but  there  is a certain  tenuousness about them:  the  structure and  the  con­ nections  keep  the  emotion  at  bay.  In the same  way  as  Nichol  needed  the  imagery  and   mythic  structure  of   the   saints   to make  his  work  cohere,  so  I  suspect  that  Gardiner needs something more  than  just the  idea  of the serial  poem form  to focus
his  talents.
Rosenberg's  Paris  & London   is  the least  satisfactory of  these  works.  He  sets up  connections and  references  so allusive and  personal  that  they continually exclude the  reader   from   his  poems,  and  Rosen­ berg's   rhythms,  the   movements   of   his language,   are    simply    not    interesting enough, over  a  large  body  of  poems,  to compensate.
In  Bill Bissett, we continue to find a tremendous energy  of  form,  directed almost against itself. Bissett reaches to the edges   of  language  and   destroys   it,   yet keeps  returning. The visual forms  on  the page  (and   how  curious  to see the  deter­ mined   untidiness of  Bissett's  gestetnered productions faithfully  reproduced in  the

92
 normally immaculate Talon format)   al­ ways tend  towards the  destruction  of  any form  they  set  up,  while  in  sound  Bissett returns to  the  strict  and  revivifying form of   the   chant.  One   tends  to   think    of Bissett as a romantic artist,  with  a strong  innate  capacity for  self-destruction,  but he  is  also  (at  what  I think  is his  best) capable  of   the   strong    control    of   his chants, or  of  the  almost  classical  under­ statement of   poems  like  "Killer Whale" and   "Th  Emergency Ward." Thus,  for me  the  best things  in  Drifting  Into  War are   the   simple,    controlled   typestracts, produced by overtyping certain spaces within   squares   and   rectangles of  letters, which   present   clean,   abstract visual  de­ signs.  At   other  times,   as  in   "A   warm  place  to  shit," Bissett  proves  that  he  is better  than anybody  else at parodying the worst  of Bill Bissett.
Drifting  Into  War  is not  a book which
will  produce any  converts to  Bissett,  nor is  it   really   a   good   introduction  to   his work: both these functions are  best served by Anansi's Nobody  Owns  Th Earth.  It ranges  widely  in quality, some of it being rather  awful,   some   of   it   splendid;  as always, Bissett needs a good editor, though it has  to  be admitted that  a good  editor might take  away  from   the  total   impact of  his  work,  which   perhaps  depends  as much on the bad as the good.
Whatever "inadequacies" language may have,  it  is still  the   material of  poetry: there   is  no  other.  For   a  poet   working clearly  and  gracefully in the centre of a tradition, like  Geddes, the   resources   of the  word   are  still  amply   sufficient; for those  like  Nichol  and  Bissett, working at the  limits,  there   are  always  new  discov­ eries,  new  routes   leading  simultaneously back into  language and  on into  silence.



JOURNEY IN A
MYTHIC LANDSCAPE

Douglas Barbour


bp NICHOL, The Martyrology. Coach  House  Press, 2  vols. $6.oo.


bp NICHOL's The Martyrology is  a  work   of  major  dimensions.  Nichol has  found  a  way  to  make  the  many  pri­ vate  and  personal visions that  go into his poetry   available to  his  readers.  He  has, as   a   friend    said,   "created  a   personal mythology out  of language  itself"; a my­ thology   that  partakes of   basic   mythic geography   yet   remains   singularly  his own.   Moreover,  he  has  also  clearly   re­ vealed  the  ways in which  this  mythology,  the   hagiography  of   saints   about  which the work  turns, touches  the  various  myths of our  world,  from  the  ancient myths  of the  heavens  in  almost   every  culture  to the   various   popcult  myths   of  our   own time.
Before The Martyrology proper begins,
there    appears  a   short    sequence    titled "from:  The Chronicles of Knarn," which has   an   intergalactic  and   futuristic  set­ ting.  It is  a  kind  of  sf  tale,  setting  up a specifically  literary sf  dimension for  all that    follows,   effectively   distancing  the whole  work  by  making all  of  it,  includ­ ing   the   facts   of  the   author's  life,   fall within  the 'fictional' parameters of The Chronicles. Although it  is never  referred to even  indirectly throughout the  rest  of the  two  books  it  has  done   its  job,  and the  whole  poem  continues to make effec­ tive  use of  the  imagery,  metaphors, and  symbols   of   sf  and   fantasy,  as  well   as many  other  kinds.
 The  work proper  begins  with  a section titled  "The  Martyrology of  Saint   And" (I am  going to assume  that  the  basic etymology  of  the  saints'  names,  as in  St. And,  is  clear,  and   treat them   with   the same   seriousness   Nichol   does   through­ out) .   Among    other    things,   this   is   a straight  story    (further   suggesting   rela­ tions  with   sf:   those   books  in  which   a series of stories  are  linked  to form  a 'fu­  ture  history')  concerning Saint And's  life in  a  circus.  The   lines  "moving  towards  the   hills/  the   major    notes   are   lost   in minor movements" could serve as a warn­ ing  of  the  difficulties  to  be  faced  in  this long poem  (unfinished as yet). "Scenes from   the  Lives  of  the   Saints"  follows. Here  'fiction'  and  'fact' meet  in a variety of  ways, as  the  writer   speaks  of  and   to the saints, and  begins to enter the poem himself. But all this is controlled by the original   'fiction' set  up  by  The  Chron­ icles:  within  its terms, everything is 'past history,'   merely   a  writing  out   of  some deep  past, and  thus it is all mere  'fiction,' something   to be  read and  enjoyed  on  its own  terms.  Thus  the  'writer' within   the work,  ('bp', for  convenience's sake)  says, "this   is  the  real  world   you  saints  could never  exist in"  as he counterpoints scenes from   his  own  life  to  scenes  from   their lives, yet  later  he  will  come  to see  them as  very   'real'  indeed, and,  within    the work  as a  whole,  it  all  exists  together,  is


93

REVIEW ARTICLES



all  of  equal   importance  and   value.   In this section  specific reference  to such con­ temporary  myth   figures  as  Dick   Tracy and  Sam,  and  Emma Peel, is  made, and again  counterpointed to the  saints'  lives.
But   bp  Nichol   is  after   more   than   a mere  story  in  this  huge  poem,  and  thus further perspectives  are opened  up, with­ in  the  total  fiction  but  reaching out from it  to  engage   our  imaginations  on  other  levels:

suddenly it makes  sense.    is it the  poem makes  us dense?
or  simply  writing, the  act  of ordering the  other  mind
blinding  us to  the  greater vision
what's a poem  like you  doing in a
poem  like  this?	[my  italics]

This   excerpt,  referring  to  Saint   Reat's great  love  Saint Agness, provides  one  of the first insights  into  the Saints'  functions in  Nichol's vision:  they  are  language  it­ self, part  of  the  grand  poem,  to  be  con­ sulted,   prayed   to,  learned   from,  loved. And  to be written about.  But at the same time  they  are  the  way  of  mythologizing his  own   total   experience,  giving   narra­ tive/fictional meaning to his sense of lan­  guage  and  poetry.  And they mean  almost too much, such is his devotion  to/  knowl­  edge  of/  them: "all  these  myths  confuse me".
The next section of the poem, "The Sorrows  of Saint  Orm," brings  in  a  new level  of   personal   history   on   the   poet's part, and  yet clearly  refers back to earlier sections   through its  imagery  and  narra­ tive. Thus a context  within the  poem has been  created for  all  the  personal revela­  tions  to  follow,  and   a  counterpoint  be­ tween 'bp's' personal life and  the personal  lives of the saints  is inaugurated. Nichol's  brilliant use of  short  prose excerpts  from

94
 the various  'books' of the saints is very important structurally throughout. With­ in  the  fictional   context  of  the  counter­ pointed  stories  a  number of  other kinds of  statement  are   possible   as  well,  and Nichol  fully  exploits  the  freedom he  has discovered  in  this  form.  Thus he  warns  us  against too  full  an  acceptance of  the poem's  "facts" as truth: "except we write in  terms  of  passed  moments/ instances of unperceived   truth/ ruthless    working    in the   mind's   ignorance/ against  us."   But such  warnings work  within the  whole  to testify  to  the  deeper   truth of  the  myth, and  the  belief in language that  the  poem by its very existence  celebrates. Every line of these two volumes complicates, makes more  multiplex, the  whole,  thus  enlarg­ ing   the   total   experience  of   the   poem. (Although  one  can   point   to  some  sec­ tions  as obviously  weaker  poetically than  others,  the  general  level of  craftsmanship is very  high,  and,  on  the  whole,  Nichol's  control   of  rhythm and   rime   has  never been   better:   these   poems  sing,   almost  continuously.)
"Saint  Reat  and   the   Four   Winds   of the  World" follows,  with  a number of insights  into  love and  sex, and  their  rela­ tion   to  creativity.  This   is  mostly  done  through St.  Reat, but   information  con­ cerning all  the  saints  follows. One  aspect of the original 'fiction' that  is very useful to  the  writer   emerges   in  the  numerous poems  which  are  addressed to  the  saints. There are  also  poems  in  which  various  saints   speak,   and   numerous  'songs'   by both   saints   and  'bp'. The   poem   allows for  so many  possible  voices, so many  dif­  ferent  kinds  of  'documentation'. At  the end  of  this section,  for example, 'bp'  tells of his first encounter with  the  saints  as a child,  indicating why  he  has  become   a poet.

REVIEW ARTICLES



The second  volume   opens   with  "The Book of Common Prayer" in which  the possible   disappearance  of   the   saints   is first  suggested.  Book  II, as  a  whole,  is a darker work  than   Book  I; it  is a  test  of the  poet's  faith (in  the saints,  in poetry), and  parallels the  dark   night   of  the  soul that  is mandatory in so many  mystic writings: "held in this  room  i'm  sitting writing to you// prayers// as if you were there  & heard  me."
"Clouds," which  follows, documents the ancient  history   of  the  saints,   and   their original migration from  "cloud town"  to earth: "surely  when  they fell/  it was into grace".  The   various    glimpses    of   the saints'   careers,   the   selections   from   dif­ ferent  'documents'  are   revelations  of  a large    and    complex   "sub-creation"   on Nichol's   part.  In   some  ways,  the   very fragmentedness   of    the    documentation tends  to create for it a  powerful 'reality'. The   migrations  of   all   the   saints   are   a first  loss, despite  the  various gains  going to   earth   represents.  But   'bp'    also   ex­ presses  'loss'  here:  "began this  poem  in sureness/ now  the  truth's obscure  behind the  body's  veil// it  is  that   sense  impos­ sible becomes  the  poetry/ shields me from the  i within the  lie."
"Augeries" represents a  partial return to   hope:  "these   are   those   other   mys­ teries/  not  the  false  veils  i chose  to  hide behind". The sense  of  mystery  attached to  the   numinous  in   these   poems   is  of major  importance:   poetry   (or   its  lan­  guage)   is the  numinous to  Nichol:  thus the   saints.   In  "Augeries"   the   counter­ point  between  'bp's' life  and  the  lives of the  saints  is greatly extended:  statements to  them   that   are  also  statements about  them,   questions,   searches  for   meaning, and  a  theology  of  saints  based  partly  on their  disappearance, all appear; "there is
 a dream  in which  the quests intertwine": it is the poem in which both histories participate. If there   is any  flaccid  verse in  The  Martyrology it  is  in  "Augeries" and  perhaps a  few  of  the  paragraphs of the  next  section,   "Sons   & Divinations," in both of which  the need  to explain, and the  'form'  such  'explanations' must  take, might    have    dictated   deliberately   'un­ poetic'  lines.
In  "Sons  & Divinations" 'bp'  speaks of art   and   artists,   Blake's   Canada,  Joyce and  Stein,  the  "magic" of  their  artistry, and  then  proceeds to proclaim the saints' ultimate reality  in  terms  which  fully  par­ ticipate   in   the   poem's   existence  before us:

back  then  perhaps yes that was  the  time
i know  the  saints were  real  & lived  on earth
as i saw in  a flash
the  entire work  as i have  written it illuminated
given  from  the  dream world  half
remembered

'bp'  knows  the  saints  are  'real,'   yet  sees them  so within  the  poem; thus  we  can go as far  with  him  as  we  wish,  need  to go  no  farther, yet  still  will  be  able   to accept   the  'truth' of  "the poem  become the  life  work/ a  hymn". A  hymn  in  the midst  of despair, too,  for  we are  all  lost in  the  language lost  in  this  time;  which is why poets  now  (as always)   fulfill such a profound function in our  lives.
The next  part  of this section  is a study of  history: the  fathers we  fail,  and  de­ stroy.  In  a  beautiful "fasting  sequence" a certain  serenity  is achieved  beneath the stars  whose  patterns have  remained  the same   throughout  history   even   as   they have   shifted    together   across   the   skies. And   a   wider    world   takes   over   'bp's'
'world', the  saints  enter  the  true  heavens
(not  cloud  town) , the  star  systems,  the


95

REVIEW ARTICLES



fabric   of  the   universe   itself,  that   great poem.    "saint   rand    stranded   in    that strange place/ how  would  you  call  it/ 'a problem of resolution'?/ as tho  the 'i'  the writer  of these poems/ controlled your destiny": but  it  isn't  so, not  within   the larger   fiction  of  the  work  as  a  whole: there   the  saints   are   as  real  as  'bp':  "i know  only  your   story  comes  to  me  in sections/ i have  no control".
Finally   this  section   moves  to  a  con­
frontation with  basic  human fears,  espe­ cially  those  of  the  other   and   of   death, and   then   it   moves   beyond:    "it   is  not the  mystery  that  deepens/ it  is  the  sense of  awe".   With    the   burial   that   begins "Friends as Footnotes," and  the last fear, the   fear   of  death,  faced,  all   the   "lies seem useless time-wasting". Yet  the saints remain :   "we   meet   death/ it   is   unex­ pected  // you    saints   these   poems   are prayers/ i   don't   give   a   fuck   for   your history".
"always you are  conscious  the  world  is not   encompassed / only   the   words   you trust  to take  you  thru  to what  place  you don't know"  can  be  turned   to,  and   the saints,   the   words   ("speech  // eech   to / each") are  necessary,  desperately needed, and   yet  not   always   there,   though   you love them, love them like you love your womenfmen:

today the  words  flow
links  form  no  awareness of the  letters move  as blocks  piling  up
the  poem  compared to everything it isn't being  always  what it  is saint  and
a conversation

is that love ?

Finally   'bp'   dreams  they  are   dead   and wakes up "not knowing what  to do".  Yet he moves, and  the poem  moves with him, to the  recognition that  "language 'is' now
'was'": the  poem  must  create   the  now

g6
 m  which   it  happens. And   this  recogni­ tion  arrives  even  as the  saints depart. So the  final   poems   of  the  final  section   of Book   II  are   passionate   affirmations  of speech  in  the  face of the negation of lan­  guage  their  deaths  (disappearance)  rep­  resent   to   'bp'    in   "the   fantasy   that   is north america", a  place  in  the  total  fic­ tion  of  The   A1artyrology  as  much   as  a place  we  live  in.  These   final  poems  are exquisite expressions  of suffering  and  loss, finishing   with    the   powerful    chant  of "they   are  dead  dead  dead/ & i'm  lonely father/ father i am  lonely/ lonely  father/ i  am".  And   yet  a  short   postscript  sug­
gests  the  poem  will  go  on,  thus  holding out,  within the  work  itself,  the  possibility of further  poems.
Since  I have  heard parts  of Book  III, and   know   that   bp  is  now  at   work   on Book   IV,   I  can   say   that   the  implica­ tions  of that  postscript are  true, but  they are  important  without this  extra-literary knowledge. For  The  Martyrology, Books I  and   II,  may  appear to  be  a  pathetic acknowledgement of the loss of poetic inspiration to  a  superficial reading only, for the very density of the poetry, the multiplexity  of  meaning emerging from it definitely render a celebration, even  in the   teeth    of   despair,  of   the   ultimate power  of  poetry/ of  language/ to sustain us  humans  in  all  ages.  "To the   poet," says David   Aylward, "every  word  in  the language is a saint  who continually inter­ venes   between   him   and   the   world   of sense"  and   he  must   wrestle  with   them, track  them  down,  and  finally get them  to enter   the  landscape of  his  poems,  where  a  continual  exploration  is  always  occur­ ring.  bp  Nichol   has  done  this,  creating an  incredibly  rich  mythic landscape for his  explorations of   experience in  which  we can  join him  on a  journey  which  just

REVIEW ARTICLES



might   take   us  out   of,  and   thus   newly into,  our selves.
I  haven't even  begun   to  do  justice  to
the  multiplex  profundity  of  this  poem, nor  have  I  been  able   to  do  more  than barely indicate its purely  poetic depths. Nichol   is   already  a   master    of   poetic effect,   and   for   the   most   part   in   The
 Martyrology he handles rhythm and  rime with   consummate craft.  I   have   heard him   read   the  whole   work  and   it  truly sings.  That there  is much   more  of  it  to come  is one  of  the  greatest gifts  it  con­ tains.  The   Martyrology will,  I am  sure, take  its  place  one  day  as  a  major  work in our  literature.





CYCLES OF CREATION
 


George Woodcock



GEORGE SWINTON,  Sculpture of the  Eskimo. McClelland &  Stewart. $18.so. R. H.  HUBBARD,  Thomas Davies in Early Canada. Oberon Press. $g.g5. EDWARDs. CURTIS, In a Sacred Manner  we Live. Longman. $16.gs. EDWARDs. cURTIS, Portraits  from North  American  Life. new  press.  $20.
ERIC  ARTHUR   and   DUDLEY WITNEY.   The   Barn:  A  Vanishing Landmark m   North
America.  McClelland and  Stewart. $25.00.


I AM  NOT SURE we can  accept from  cyclic historians like Spengler  and Toynbee the  idea  that, given  a  minimal set of similar circumstances, cultures will follow  similar courses.  I  only  know  that there   is  a   remarkable  parallel  between the  impetus given to the Indian cultures of the  Pacific  coast  through the  coming  of the  white   man   with   new  techniques in the later  Igth  century, and  the similar impetus which  has become  evident  in the Eskimo cultures in response  to external stimuli  almost  a century later, in the mid­ twentieth  century;  there   are,  however,  equally  remarkable differences.
In  each   case  the  development of  the
culture after   the  impact of  external  in­ fluences  was assymetrical. Some ancestral techniques,   like   those   connected   with hunting and   food  gathering in  general, became  atrophied;  others,  and  especially those  related   to  the  production of  non-
 utilitarian artifacts, were extraordinarily stimulated by the introduction of more efficient techniques and  by the emergence of  a  market  outside   the  traditional magico-religious background. In  the  case of  the  Coast   Indians, the  sudden  avail­ ability  of metal  tools,  which  made  wood carving a simpler  and  more rapid  process, led  to  an  enormously  increased produc­ tion  of  artifacts  varying   from   immense heraldic  poles  sixty  feet   high   down   to exquisitely  carved   face-sized   masks  and  hand-held  rattles,   while  the  presence   of a  cash  market for  furs  and  fish enabled commoners to amass  fortunes which  they could   dissipate   in   potlatch  ceremonials and  hence,  in a changing culture, gain  a prestige  which  further eroded   the  ances­ tral   social   pattern. In  the   case  of   the Coast   Indians the  stimulus  provided  by contact with  the  whites  operated almost entirely  within the culture, since it was not

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



until  the  a.rtJ.stJ.c   revival  was  over  that non-Indian connoisseurs began to take a genuine  interest  in  the  magnificent  pro­ ducts of this society in its dying phase.
In the case of the Eskimos the situation has  been  somewhat   different.  Artifacts that  deserve  the  name  of  art  were  pro­ duced  in  the   Arctic  at  least  since  the early  days  of  the  Dorset  culture,   long before  the  birth  of  Christ.  But  the  cir­ cumstances   of  a  nomadic   hunting   life precluded   the  possibility  of   evolving  a monumental   kind  of art  like that  which the  prosperous  Coast  Indian   fishermen were  able   to  develop   in   their   winter villages. Artifacts had to be portable, and so they were, from the tiny ivory figurines of  the  Dorsets  down  to  the  little  soap­ stone seals and walruses, just large enough to be held and  caressed in the hand  and to take on a patina  of perspiration, which some  of  us  still  treasure  from  the  very end  of the forties when, thanks to James Houston,  Eskimo  art   at  last  became  a reality  for  those who  had  not  been for­ tunate enough  to travel in the Arctic.
The  resurgence  of Eskimo art,  in response to modern  techniques, has come
-like that of the Coast Indians-at the dying end  of a traditional  society, but it has emerged not in response to a demand from within  the Inuit  culture,  but to one from  outside.  Eskimo carvers, unlike the great  carvers of the Haida  and Kwakiutl Gotterdiimmerungen, have in recent years produced  their  artifacts  for  the  ultimate satisfaction  of the  Kablunait, the  heavy­ browed   people   who   are   outside   their traditions,  even  though  they  may  have gained  in  the  process  the  creative  satis­ faction  that  comes to every artist.  Ironi­ cally, by liberating them from the bounds of  a  traditional  iconography,  this  satis­ faction   seems   to   have  created   a   new

g8
 tradition that  may endure  in a dramatic­
ally changing  world.
This is why any book on Coast Indians
-or on any American  Indian culture­ is likely to have a melancholic tone, while any  book on  Eskimo art  is equally  likely to have  a  triumphant tone. For  there  is now  no  Indian  tradition in  the  visual arts  that  goes beyond  mere  imitation  of the past, while at present  the Eskimos, at least  in  Canada, are  still  in  a  stage  of constant origination.
Perhaps  the greatest  visual recorder  of the  Coast   Indian  culture   at  the   point when  it  had   just  passed  its  zenith  and was near final dissolution was the Ameri­ can   photographer   Edward    S.   Curtis. Curtis  travelled  for  decades  among  the Indians  of the  North  American  West, as well as among the Eskimos of Alaska, and the  twenty  volumes  of text accompanied  by   corresponding    photographic  albums which   he  published   between   I907  and I930 under the title of North American Indians  form  a splendid  visual threnody on  the   traditional  Indian   world.  Even the   technique   which   his  old-fashioned plate   cameras   forced   upon   him  as  he gathered   his photographs contributed to the  elegiac  tone;  the  subjects  are  posed and static, waiting  in an ominous stillness as if the first movement  would  break the spell and  for ever destroy the vision.
Another  particularly appealing  feature of the Curtis  photographs is the way in which  the eye of focus brings the texture of old skin and  the  lines of character in faces into  an extraordinary sharpness, while all else drifts  into a  strange  misti­ ness, so that  corporeality  itself  falls into doubt, and one realizes as deeply as words could   tell   the   fragility   of   the   culture  Curtis  portrays   (though  Curtis  was  too good  an  impresario   to  give  one  even  a

REVIEW ARTICLES



hint  that  it  was in fact  so moribund that to  gain   many   of  his  great   photographs he had  to deck  his Indian subjects  out  in native  dress he had  brought from  his personal  museum and  in wigs he had commissioned for  the  occasion) .
Twenty  years  ago,  when   Curtis   died, his name and work were known only to scholars.  Now,  in  the  seventies,  his  work is revived,  and  two rival collections  of reproductions have just been published. Comparisons may indeed  be odious, as Donne had  it  (or  odorous  as Shakespeare had  it). But  it  is hard   not  sometimes   to make   them.   The   first  selection   is   pre­ sented  with  a scanty  commentary by Don D.  Fowler  under the  curious  title of In  a Sacred  Manner We   Live.  The  second  is published under the title of Portraits  from North   American Indian  Life; it  has  in­ troductions by A. D. Coleman and  T.  C. McLuhan, the  latter  of which  is very in­ formative  on  the  details   of  Curtis's  life and  the  reasons  why he devoted so much  of it to his vast  documentary task;  it also includes, for   the   1 76   plates   which   it reproduces,   Curtis's  own   original   com­ ments.
There are  certain limitations  which­ being selections-these books share.  Since each   tries  to  give  us  a  little  from  every one   of  the   many   regions   where   Curtis found   his Indians, neither  gives in depth a sense of the  richness  of  his experiences and  perceptions. Especially, in  both  cases, the  few pages  devoted to  the  Indian cul­ tures  of the British  Columbian and  Alas­ kan coasts are quite  inadequate, for in this region  Indian art  in  the  sense  of  monu­ mental sculpture and  painting reached­ among  the   Tlingit  and   the  Tsimshian, the  Haida and  the Kwakiutl, whom  Cur­ tis  especially  studied-its  apogee   north  of   the   stone   culture  of   the  Valley   of
 Mexico.  Many  of Curtis's prints  recorded Coast    Indian   artifacts  of   the    highest quality that  have  since  been  destroyed  or lost, and  it is high  time  a Western  Cana­ dian   publisher   reprinted  as  a  separate book, with  an  appropriate  up-to-date in­ troduction and  apparatus of notes, all the photographs  which   were  made in  Cur­ tis's seasons among  the  Kwakiutl.
Given  that   the  two  volumes  under  re­ view  are  selections,   ridden  by  the  diffi­ culties  that  face  any editor  confronted by the  mass of Curtis's opus,  the  choice  be­ tween   them   must   rest   on  (a)    general amplitude and   (b)   quality of  reproduc­ tion.
In both cases Portraits from North American Life  is the  better book.  There are  more  prints,  and  they  are  reproduced with  care  and   fidelity.  Looking through In A Sacred Manner We  Live, one is constantly   aware,  because  the  printing  is just  a  little  too  blurred and   dingy,  that neither the close-in focus details nor the nostalgic  mistiness  of  the  backgrounds to the photographs can  be quite  fully appre­ ciated.  In  Portraits  from North American Life   the  reproductions are   clearer   and also,  because   of  their   size,  give  a  more faithful  idea   of   Curtis's   original  port­ folios. The  result  is a  book which  will fit into  very few shelves, for it is I4"
and   I8" wide.  But  there  is no  reason  of
course  why so splendid a  volume  should be kept on  a shelf!
Sculpture of the  Eskimo, by George Swinton,  is also a fine  piece  of book  pro­ duction, with  excellently clear  plates­ the  kind  of book  that  even  ten  years  ago would  have  been  printed  in  Holland or Britain  in default of  adequate Canadian facilities.   Altogether,   the   book   projects  an   extraordinary   sense   of   vigour   and  triumphal   process.   George    Swinton    is

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



among the  few knowledgeable experts  on Eskimo art, and  he is probably  the most imaginative in his approach to it. He is himself  a considerable painter, who  has consistently  avoided   fashion   in  obeying his personal vision, and  this gives him  an intuitive sympathy with  Eskimo  artists closer  than   that   of  anyone  else  I  have met, with the possible exception  of the anthropologist Robert  Williamson.
Wisely, unlike many art critics and aestheticians, Swinton has decided  that  if an artist  or an artistic  tradition is to be understood,   the    process   of   exposition must  at some level be visual. If we cannot offer  the  works  themselves  to the  reader, in  all  their   visual-tactile  complexity, at least   we   can   offer   him   a  good   visual image  and  from  that  point  proceed  with our  explanation. In  Sculpture of  the Eskimo   the   illustrations - in   keeping with    their    primary   importance - are shrewdly chosen  and copious-more than eight   hundred in  all.  They  are   used  to make  points  about iconography and  style, to support Swinton's persuasive  historical conjectures and  aesthetic  judgments, to chart regional  variations in  mode  and  to illustrate the  styles  of  individual  artists, and most of all to suggest the subtle relationship between general culture and  personal  feelings of fulfilment among a people  newly emerging to a sense of art as an  occupation different from  other processes of living  and  perhaps more satisfying.  Sculpture of the  Eskimo  is not the   kind   of  book   to  borrow   from   the library, at  least  if  you  have  any  feeling for  living  art.  It is a  book to possess and slowly absorb and  to use as a guide in assessing the  Eskimo  work you happen to encounter.
Much less ambitious, because  the  field
is far  more  minute, but  just as satisfying

100
 in  its  special   way   is  R.   H.  Hubbard's Thomas Davies in  Early Canada. Davies was perhaps the first significant  European artist  to  work  in Canada; he was here  in the   1 750s  and   1760s  and   again   in  the
178os, while,  between  these visits and  also after  the 1 78os he  produced water colours based   on   his  Canadian experience. He was  an  army  officer  trained in  topogra­ phic  drawing, but  he  had  a  talent   that  went  beyond  his training, and  he became  a painter whom  we can describe as minor  in  the   same  complimentary  way  as  we talk  of   Herrick as  a  minor   poet,  in  the sense  that  his forms  were  fragile  and  his vision   was   intimate.  But   within    these limitations Davies  displays  a  high  origin­ ality,  as the excellent  colour  plates in Dr.  Hubbard's   volume  show,   and   there   is something quite  unique in  his statuesque and    brilliant  Canadian    landscapes   in which   the  flowing  water  is  caught in  a sudden  solidity,   like  luxuriant  flows  of iridescent snow.  The  vibrant vision,  the ecstatic   sense  of  light  trembling on  the edge  of  eternity,  which  most  of  us enjoy only  rarely   after  youth,   Davies   retained to the end,  and  no painter recorded more  sensitively   the  feeling  of  a  pristine   land that   the  generations  of  war   before   the conquest  of  Quebec had   not  marred  as the  generations of peace  have  done  since his day.
Davies   rendered  the   land   as  an   ob­ server  saw  it.  But  there   is another  kind of   art    that    comes   in   the   process   of actually  transforming  and    humanizing the   land   itself,  and   this  is   exemplified  admirably in a very fascinating book, The  Barn,  by  Eric  Arthur and   Dudley   Wit­ ney.  Farming  knows  no  nation; it  is one of  those  basic  functions in  which   tech­ niques   and   the styles  that   derive   from them  move  inexorably over  frontiers,  as

REVIEW ARTICLES



migrant animals do.  And  for  this  reason it is impossible  to consider so anonymous and  yet so intensely  personal a domain  of vernacular art as the  barn, and  the crafts that  are  attendant on  its construction, in any  purely  local  way.  The Loyalists,  and other  Americans in  their   train,  brought to Upper Canada the  styles they  had  de­ veloped   in  Pennsylvania and   New  Eng­  land,   and   which  in  turn   were  based  on English  and  German  models;  the  people of Quebec adapted the  styles  of Norman and  Breton  farm buildings. It  was  not so much   the  origins   of  the  styles  as  their adaptations to local  settings and  to local materials that   were  important, and  that
 produced  the rich variety of genuinely popular art  which   the  authors have  re­ corded,  and  none  too soon.  Every  year  a few  more  fine  old   barns  disappear, for local   and   national   authorities  are   still little  aware   of  the  importance of  these irreplaceable monuments, with their treas­ ures of fine  carpentry and  folk sculpture and  primitive painting, that  decay in dis­ tant  lanes  or  are  endangered by the  im­ moderate spread  of cities. The  Barn is at once   a   splendid  visual   record   and   a splendid   narrational  portrait of   a  rural  Canada  now   past;  the   sadness   is  that  much   of  what   is  recorded   therein  will not  be preserved.



CULTURE  UNDER PRESSURE

Fraser Sutherland

MALCOLM   REID,    The Shouting   Signpainters:  A  Literary   and  Political  Account  of
Quebec Revolutionary Nationalism. McClelland & Stewart, $8.g5.


IN   AN   EXCITING   account  of Quebec life, Malcolm Reid  has portrayed a  culture  under  pressure. The  pressure comes   from   a  number  of  sources: the Anglophonic sea of North America, which daily   floods  Quebec  with   its  language, money  and  technology; the  decline  of the Catholic  Church,  with   the   need   for   a compensating  force   in  society;  and   the living  political  myths,  notably  that  of the Conquest.  As  the   barometer  rises,  the culture finds  varied  forms: the  linguistic bastard known  as  joual, the  chansons of Gilles  Vigneault-and  the  activities   of young  men  associated with  parti pris, the magazine and  the  publishing house -of whom  Reid  most  specifically  writes.
Parti   pris,  as  Reid  says,   implies a
"cocky pride  in one's basic prejudgments."
 The   magazine, which   appeared  in  Oc­ tober    1963  - was   founded   by   cocky young  men  determined to forge  a  move­  ment  out of Sartrean vocabulary, Marxist history,  and  the  revolutionary  politics  of Frantz Fanon's Les Damnes  de  la terre. The partipristes were  soon  engaged  in  a sort  of  intellectual guerilla  warfare with the  citelibristes,  that   circle  around  the  journal    Cite   libre,  founded   earlier    by Pierre   Trudeau  and   his  friends.   They  were  contemptuous  of  liberal   half-meas­ ures,  and  Cite  libre's links  with  human­ isme,   which   Fanon  defined    as,   "This Europe which  never  stops  talking  about Man   and   shoots   him   down   on   every street corner where  it meets him."
.Among the steps  parti pris took  was to
publish  the novel  that  Reid  credits  as the


101

REVIEW ARTICLES



first   written   in   the   language   of   the Quebecois  themselves: Jacques Renaud's Le Casse. The  title means both "broke", in  the  sense of  penniless, and  "broken." It  is thus  both an economic and  cultural comment.  The  language,  too, is broken. The  novel's anti-hero Ti-Jean  takes  pos­ session of the girl Philomene by chasing a rival from  her  bed, shouting, "Ma plote pour tout  l'temps  astheure!" This  trans­ lates, more or less, as, "She's my piece all the  time now!" The  novel  ends with Ti­
Jean stabbing  another  rival and  then, in
a tavern,  finding himself flat broke. Like
Orwell, Reid finds in language symptoms of oppression, and this is why he lays such stress on parti pris' "defence et illustration de  la langue  joual". He  regards  it  both as a symptom -"the English words and forms that enter their language are no graceful  cultural  borrowings, but the im-
 prints  of  an  English-language-using  in­ dustrial  system"-and as "the authentic way out  of the rupture with  the mother­  land."
Besides its explication  of  joual, the book's  most  interesting  passages develop the  contexts  and  characters of the  parti­ pristes: Gerald  Godin, Laurent Girouard, Renaud,  Paul   Chamberland,  Pierre Maheu,   Andre   Garand,  Andre   Major.  Each  reacted   to  pressure  in  a  different way.    Some,    like    Chamberland   and Garand,  chose  exile  in  Paris-modem canadiens   errants   indeed.   Others,   like Major, seemed to have, in their own lives, opted  for  art over  ideology.  And  some, notably Pierre Maheu, accommodated themselves with society; "played  by other people's rules." One of the funniest  things in the book is to hear Maheu  frantically rationalize  why he works for  an  English




In association with Canadian Literature
the University of British Columbia Press
publishes the Canadian Literature  series of reprints  and  original essays

WYNDHAM LEWIS IN  CANADA
Edited  by George Woodcock, Introduction by Julian Symons
110 pages 	paper  cover $4.00
"Wyndham Lewis in Canada  is a fascinating  volume ... In its hundred and  ten  pages, the editor  has assembled a range  of writing  which  not only gives a satisfying sense of 'covering'  Lewis's stay in Canada  from late 1940 to 1945, but also shows consistent good taste and intelligence." Rowland  Smith in The  Dalhousie Review.

DRAMATISTS IN  CANADA
Edited by William  H. New
212 pages 	paper  cover $5.50

MALCOLM  LOWRY: THE MAN AND  HIS  WORK
Edited by George Woodcock
184 pages 	paper  cover $4.50

THE SIXTIES: Canadian  Writers and Writing of the Decade
Edited by George Woodcock
138 pages 	paper  cover $3.50



102

REVIEW ARTICLES



ad  agency. He  is learning  techniques  to aid  the revolution,  it seems....
Reid's  book, with  its density  of detail
and energy of prose, makes most other journalistic    commentaries    on   Quebec seem shallow and shoddy. Reid is a man, to use a perhaps-dated word, engage. He has lived cheek  by  joual with  the  people he writes about,  and  like them  he strad­ dles  two  camps.   In   his  case,  the  am­ bivalence  lies  between  his  socialist  bias (his  book  was  published  in  Britain  and the  United  States  by the  leftist  Monthly Review Press)  and  the wire service ethic
-to report  facts  unadorned. That  does
not  topple  accounts  for  the  book's  suc­ cess. Not that  the  work is without flaws. The  prose  is sometimes  cluttered;  there are   barbarisms    ("literarization") ;   and, more rarely, chronological confusion. The  parti  pris  period  Reid  writes  about,  for instance,  is 1963-68,  but  the  lines are  a little blurred, especially when he discusses men like Pierre  Vallieres. As a result, the
 reader  is disappointed  that  the  events of October  1970, and  their  effect  on  parti pris, are not related.  Yet over all, the important thing is that Reid is no poseur: his  convictions  ring  in  the  words  with which  he  closes the  book,  "The  young men   I am   speaking   of  will   not   stop shouting  until  the walls come down."
All the same, parti  pris' direct  political action -supporting  strikes, etc. -seems to have been ineffectual. But the political fuel fed the cultural flame and as a courageous   and   fruitful   cultural  force parti  pris was, and is, of the first im­ portance   to  Quebec.   It   produced   one great  long poem, Chamberland's l'affich­ eur   hurle  (the signpainter  screams) which  makes Ginsberg's  Howl  seem  like adolescent ranting.  But my impression - whether or not Reid  meant  to give me it
-is that  if there  is a  revolution  it  will be made not by Mayakovskys and Yesen­ ins,  but  by  sooty  little  mechanics,   the Lenins of our generation.




FOUR CRITICAL PROBLEMS

Clara Thomas

RONALD BATES,  Northrop   Frye. WILLIAM  H.  NEW,   Malcolm Lowry.  RICHARD  ROBIL­ LARD,  Earle  Birney. ROSS  G.  WOODMAN, James  Reaney. Canadian Writers' Series, McClelland and  Stewart. 95¢  ea.


WHEN,  IN THE FALL of 1967, Dave  Godfrey  asked  me to write  a book on  Margaret  Laurence,   he  hoped   that the  future   Canadian  Writers'   Series would  be similar  in  format  to  Ecrivains de  Toujours  (Editions  du  Seuil). All of the   volumes   in   that    series   are   well­ printed,  on fine paper,  with  superb illus­ trations   and   photographs;   the  volumes on  Virginia   Woolf  and  William  Faulk-
 
ner, for instance, are little classics of ele­ gance.  The  exigencies of  English  Cana­ dian   publishing   speedily   eroded   Dave Godfrey's   dream.   Five   years   later   we have twelve titles in the Canadian Writ­ ers'  rigidly-limited  sixty-four  pages,  one of the most useful critical  projects  in the history  of   Canadian  publishing   and   at the same  time one of the least attractive. (I  hasten  to add  that  the  present  cover-

REVIEW ARTICLES



design  is a marked  improvement over the first one.)  Over  the  years I have mourned the  dwindling of  the  early  dream, while at  the  same  time  comprehending to some degree  the  pressures  of printing costs and certainly, at all times, applauding the de­ termination of  McClelland and  Stewart to sell these  books for  ninety-five cents.
Faced   with   the   present   four,   all   of them   excellent, I  regret   all  over   again the  meagreness of  their  setting,  the  poor quality of their  paper, the  narrowness of their   margins -and  above  all  the  total inelasticity of their  paging  and word allowance. In  I967  when  I wrote,  to the requirements   of    the    contract,    2o,ooo words  and  not  one  jot or  tittle  more  on the  works  of  Margaret Laurence, I felt that  I could   just  give an  adequate  com­ mentary  on  her  work  up  to  that  time. Since  then  she has  published  four  books; I would   not  like  to  try  the  assignment now.   How   then    did   any   one   of   the authors under   review  feel  about the  re­ sponsibility  of   "covering"  in  any   satis­ factory way Northrop Frye, Earle  Birney, Malcolm  Lowry,  or  James  Reaney? The  discipline of writing  to a rigid  word-limit is a  useful  one,  as we are  constantly tell­ ing  our   students,  but   surely   any  series which  has  done  well  enough   to  be con­ tinued  to its twelfth  volume  (the  Marga­ ret  Laurence has  sold  over  s,ooo  copies, for  instance), might   have  added an  op­ tional five to ten thousand words for the satisfaction of  its  authors and   in  justice to  their  subject.
Mr.  Robillard has come  to  terms  with the  problem   by selection.  His  volume  on Earle Birney  is prefaced by a  note  from the General Editor of  the series:

This series was  not  designed to be definitive; what is eventually needed  is at least  30  full­ length studies of  major Canadian  writers in


104
 English, but  the  task  of  even  a  preliminary survey  is especially difficult with  writers as prolific and   complex as  Earle Birney,  work­ ing  in different forms  and  constantly  moving onward, before the  critics have  had  time  to properly   analyze  and    assess   the   previous work.   In his  case,   then, it  was  decided  to concentrate  upon    the   earlier,  more  tradi­ tional poems, subjecting them  to that metic­ ulous   explication de  texte  which they  have  long  deserved.

The  book  proceeds chronologically through Earle  Birney's  career, from  an explication of "David" in its first section to  its  final   "World  Travels",  commen­ taries  on  some  poems  which  appeared in Ice  Cod  Bell or Stone ( Ig62)  and  others  which  have  been  written in  the  last  ten years.  Superficial   reading  and   teaching can   easily   obscure   the   complexities  of "David".  In  a  fine  and  measured  expli­  cation,   Mr.   Robillard   demonstrates  its progression,   "an   initiation to  the  ironies of reality". In  a very real sense this is a creative piece  of criticism for  it  refreshes and   re-establishes  one's   approach  to  a poem  which  is certainly widely  read  but is seldom,  perhaps, well read.
Mr. Robillard's book avoids the static, patchy  quality of many  explicatory works because   its  author is  convinced  of   Bir­ ney's  continuing  growth,  both   in   tech­  niques  and  in  perceptions. The  image  of the seeker  is central, he finds, to the  very latest  poems :

For  all  their flexibilities, many of the  earlier poems   suggested  fixed   perspectives; ... this kind  of  poetry still  persists, but  rather than move  within the  frames of  metaphor, many of  the  travel-poems lead  outward; in  them,
'nature'   (with  the    rather  fixed   attributes
earlier  implied in   that  term)  becomes  'ex­ perience.' The speakers in  the  travel-poems come   to  accept their  personalities; and  yet they    seek   myth   in   their  present  circum­ stances. They are content to  be human.

Mr.   Robillard  has  achieved   what   he and  every  author in  the series contracted

REVIEW ARTICLES



to  do:   to  write   for   the   information  of "the student and  general reader". By  be­ ginning with   "David", where   most  stu­ dents'  knowledge of Birney  begins, he has guided   and  explicated our  way  through a  variety   of  poems   and   finally  he  has given  his  readers both   a  feeling  of  pro­ gress  and   a  feeling   for   the   whole.  His book is both  refreshment and  instruction, a  valuable addition to  Canadian critical  literature.
The  design   of   Mr.   New's   work   on
Malcolm Lowry  is, likewise,  well-chosen to offer  the  greatest possible illumination to his readers  in the  space  at  his disposal. His  comprehension  of  the   intricate   In­ volvements   of  Lowry,   the  man   and  his writings,    is   the   starting-point   for   his study:

His  omnivorous mind   rendered his  life  vig­ orously   into   books,   and    then   a   turnabout made his  books  into   life.  From  Aiken   and  Ortega comes   the   idea   of  the  writer being written by  his work,  and  the  complex of re­ lationships makes   it  difficult  for  us  now  to separate fact  from fiction with  absolute con­  fidence. But  one  thing is  clear: even  when  his   own   memory   distorted   events,  he   be­ lieved  what  he  wrote, and   his  fiction   came  to  represent  the  truth of  his  experience as well  as distill his artistic experience of truth.

It is particularly enlightening for the student-reader of  Lowry  to  begin  where Mr.  New  begins,  with  a consideration of Hear    Us   0 Lord   From    Heaven Thy Dwelling  Place. The movement of its sec­ tions   towards  wholeness    and    a   cyclic completion  climaxes   in  "A   Forest  Path  To  The  Spring", in  Mr.  New's words "a  kind    of   glorious    coda,    recapitulating many  of  the  themes  and  elevating them into    a   moving    structure   of   personal faith."  In    this   work,    Lowry's    central vision  of  man  as  creator and   destroyer,  God  and  devil,  Tragic Hero  and  Cornie Buffoon,  is  presented and  finally  resolved
 with  optimistic grace:  "Laughing we stooped  down  to the  stream and  drank." From   this   vantage  ground,  the   whole body  of  work,   and   particularly  Under the Volcano, the "Master Work" and  the central   portion of  Mr.  New's  study,  can best  be  approached  and   comprehended as  the  achievement of  Lowry,  the  artist­ pilgrim  of the  world:

Every   man   is  also   the  Fool,   constantly  on the  brink  of  a  precipice, yet  also   (in  order to effect  his  translation) the  Magician, with all   the   symbols   of   the   Tarot   within  his power.   He   is  creator,  God   and   Man   to­ gether, with  the   happiness and   the  danger of   Hubris   this   implies.  He   is   comic,  but  also  potentially tragic. All  Malcolm Lowry's works    explore  this   proposition;   like    the stories  within  Hear  Us  0 Lord,  all  fit  to­ gether  like   interlocking  circles    in   a   still larger  design.  But  where Hear  Us  0 Lord resolves  the   problem in  an  optimistic  way, the  earlier works  show a much darker vision, and   the  characters in  them   encounter  sub­ stantially more  difficulty being  rescued  from  their  personal hells.

Neither  Ron  Bates  nor  Ross w·oodrnan has, I think,  taken  the  road  of easiest ac­ cess for the "student and  general reader". They   have   written  excellent  studies   for academic readers-in fact  for their  peers and  the  best  of  their  students.  The   per­ son  who,  for   instance,  listened   to  Pro­  fessor Frye deliver  "The Educated Imag­ ination" lectures  on  the  CBC,  the  person who sat in the  Stratford audience watch­ ing  Colours  in  the  Dark  and  now  wishes to know more  about our  greatest  scholar­ critic   or  our   most   original  and   many­ faceted  poet,  playwright and  teacher, has still  to wait  for  other  volumes.  For  such readers, and  I think  there  would be many of them,  reprints of  The Educated Imag­ ination   and  Twelve  Letters   to  a  Small  Town, each  with  expository  and  explan­ atory   introductions  in   a   "plain  style" would  be of the  greatest service.


105

REVIEW ARTICLES



That caveat aside,  however,  university students  and   teachers   have  needed   just such  a  book  as  Bates  on  Frye  for  a  long time. His analysis  of Fearful  Symmetry  is both   comprehensive  and   lucid; it  leads into  a  description and  discussion  of  the Anatomy   of	Criticism  to   which    Mr. Bates'  initial differentiation between  the centripetal thinker  (Frye)   and  the  cen­ trifugal one  (McLuhan) is an  illuminat­ ing  beginning. He  moves on  to  the other  criticism,   stressing   The   Well-Tempered Critic  and  finishing  with a brief consider­  ation  of  Professor  Frye's  Canadian criti­  cism,   in   particular  his  very   important "Conclusion" to  the  Literary   History  of Canada. Obviously  Ron  Bates knows, un­ derstands and   values  the  works  of  Nor­ throp Frye  from  multiple  viewpoints: he was a  former student;  he  is a  poet  him­  self  and, like  many  Canadian  poets  he has  found   a   releasing  dynamic  for  his own  work  in  the  creative-critical  works of Northrop Frye.  Refreshingly, however, Mr.  Bates  maintains a  valuable detach­ ment:  he is expositor  rather than  disciple and  his  greatest service  to  his  subject  is to  provide an  intelligent and   respectful clarification  of  the  works  while,  at   the same    time,    insisting    on    his   readers' awareness   of  Professor   Frye's  own  cau­ tionary    statement  at   the   beginning  of The Anatomy:

This book  consists of  'essays,'  in  the  word's original  sense   of  a  trial   or  incomp ete tempt, on  the  possibility _of  _a  synoptic v1ew of  the   scope,   theory,  prme1ples,    nd
niques of literary criticism. The pnmary  urn
of  the  book  is  to give  my reasons  for  bebev­ ing  in  such   a  synoptic view;   its  s condar; aim   is  to  provide a  tentative  verswn f which   will  make   enough sense  to  convmce my  readers that a  view,  of  the  kind that  I outlined, is attainable. The gaps  in  the  sub­ ject  as treated here  are  too enormous _for the  book  ever  to  be  regarded  as  presentmg my system   or  even   my   theory.  It is  to  be  re-

106
 garded rather as an  interconne ted suggestions which it is hoped  will  be of .some practical use  to critics and  students of  htera­ ture.

Ross Woodman on James  Reaney  is a felicitous pairing of  minds  and  imagina­ tions. There is no other  writer in Canada who   has  cast  his  net  so  widely   to  find forms   of   containment   for   his   creative energies  as James Reaney has done  in the past  twenty  years. Poetry,  plays, masques,  the  journal  Alphabet, his work  with  chil­ dren   at   the   Alpha   Centre  in   London, Ontario,  his  uniquely  original   planning and   success   in   a   "Canadian  Culture" course at  the  University of Western  On­ tario· all  these  areas  have  been  explora­ tory   aths
gress  of  Reaney's  synthesizing  imagma­
tive  vision  of  an  Everyman whose  roots are  in  rural Ontario but  whose  ultimate address, like Joyce's  Stephen's, is "The World; The  Universe". Ross  Woodman is a  spell-binding lecturer, a colleague of Reaney's at the University of Western Ontario and  like  Reaney. a  man  of  con­ stant, restless, imaginative reach. To read Woodman on  Reaney   is to  catch  a  fine flavour  of both  these  minds and  imagina­ tions.   Ross   Woodman  is   not   detached from   his   subject-matter;   he   is  not,   I think, detached from  any  subject which  engages   him; but   his  very  involvement communicates  his  enthusiasm for  James Reaney's work  and  so enhances for us his very evident  understanding of that  work.
Alvin  Lee's  James  Reaney in Twayne's World   Authors'  Series   gave   its  central place  of  detailed interpretation  to  Rea­ ney's   poetry;  Woodman's   volume   bal­  ance's somewhat  towards  the  plays  and  masques (I consider Colours  in  the  D rk a masque in its essential  form). Germame Warkentin   has   edited    and    introduced

REVIEW ARTICLES



a complete edition of James Reaney's poems,  now  published by New  Press; earlier   last   year   a  long-needed,  paper­ back  edition of  several  of  the  plays  was published, also by New Press. All of these works and  commentaries are necessary  to our   teaching,  our   understanding  and,  finally,  our   appreciation  of  the  quality
 of this constantly seeking and  affirming writer I poet I playwright I teacher I editor. The  energy  of enthusiasm in "Woodman on  Reaney" and   the  very  personalizing of  its  viewpoint  combine  to  make   this book  a  valuable addition  to  the  litera­
ture.




















CANADIAN  STUDIES

Early Canadian Periodicals on Microfilm

This valuable research   material is now  available through  the  support of  the  Donner Canadian  Foundation either  as  a  complete collection, or on an individual title basis. Included are complete runs of:

LITERARY GARLAND
CANADIAN MONTHLY  AND  NATIONAL REVIEW
ROSE-BELFORD'S CANADIAN MONTHLY  AND  NATIONAL REVIEW NEW DOMINION MONTHLY

The project is non-profit and  prices of copies are  at  cost. Lists of titles are available on request. Orders should  be sent to:
OFFICE OF  THE UNIVERSITY LIBRARIAN
SIMON  FRASER UNIVERSITY BURNABY 2, BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA






HOPEFULNESS ABOUNDING

Nineteenth  Century   Narrative   Poems.  Edited by  David  Sinclair.   McClelland  &  Stewart.
$2.95·

FoR  THE   CANADIAN who  thinks   he  has some  acquaintance with  the  literature of his  country  and   who   expects   surprises from  a volume  of reprints, this collection of  nineteenth-century narrative poems  is a  quite  startling and   revivifying  experi­ ence.  When   he  has  recovered  from   the shock  of  non-recognition, he  asks  what  has  happened. Why  the  unexpectedness of  the  impact? What  brought about   an outpouring of  long  descriptive and   nar­  rative   pieces  at  this  moment in  history? Why  do they  now  receive so little  critical  recognition?
The six  pieces  chosen  by Mr.  Sinclair range  over the half-century between  I834 and  I 884, a period  when  exploration was still a vivid memory, the Indian a presence not  to be ignored,  the  landscape an over­ whelming challenge and  the settlement of land  an ever present preoccupation. With the exception of  Goldsmith, born inI 794, the  lives  of  the  six  authors fall  wholly within  the  last century. Their birthplaces seem   the   result   of   prestidigitation,  for Goldsmith,  Howe,  Sangster,   Kirby,   Mc­ Lachlan   and    Isabella  Crawford   were born,   respectively,  in   New   Brunswick,  Nova Scotia,  Ontario, England, Scotland and  Ireland. All is as one  would  wish it, in  this marshalling of varying  sensibilities within a common culture and  a common

108
 experience of  Canada as a  new  country.
Editors in  this series of New  Canadian Library  Originals  do   not   have   much space  to deploy  their  critical theories  but in  his  very  compact introduction Mr. Sinclair has provided a number of starting points from which  any reader  may explore the  extensive   texts  that   follow.  Most  of them   are   reached  quite   naturally from the inevitable first question, What promp­ ted   this   abundance  of   versification? It becomes  easier  to answer  when  we recall that, in   this  same  fifty  years,  Arnold's Sohrab  and   Rustum, Tennyson's Idylls, Clough's Bothie and  Browning's The  Ring and the  Book also saw the light.
The impulse of the Romantics persisted
into   Victorian  sensibility   and   the   con­ ventions  of   the   long,   discursive   poem composed   of  narrative,  description   and reflection   admirably  suited   the  needs  of mid-century  writers.  A  standard  poetic  vocabulary,  simplified  and   enlivened  by Scott  and Wordsworth, provided  the right phrase  for  every  occasion.  The inevitable subjects  of   nineteenth-century  Canadian poets  were  themselves eminently suitable for Romantic treatment. Nature displayed  her   accustomed  wealth   and   variety  in new  forms   in  the  new  land.  The  tradi­ tional  noble  savage  entered, his savagery  in  the  ascendant,  but   his  pictorial  and dramatic  quality  unimpaired. The  past, though  in Canada necessarily very recent,  cast its spell over memory and  sentiment.
Above all, the long discursive  poem allowed a full expression of personal experience  and   of  the   history   of   com­ munities, of  hope   and   fear  and  fervent aspiration, of  patriotic pride  and  loyalty mixed   with   sentiments of  independence and   incipient  new  nationhood. All  this without straining the rather limited  talent possessed  by  most  of  the  writers repre-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sented:  the  available  conventions  of metre, of  diction  and   of  imagery   were nicely suited  to their  needs. They  did  not have  to strive,  like Clough, to take one example,  to   perfect  a   highly   personal metric and  display  a delicately calibrated personal  sensibility.
The immigrant from  Britain or  the Loyalist    refugee    from    New    England moved,  when  he came  to Canada, among landscapes and  seascapes  with  which  he was well equipped, both physically and mentally, to cope. Fredericton, New Brunswick, and  London, England, are separated by some five degrees  of latitude, for  which  potential difference of climate the  Gulf  Stream more  than  compensates. The   Irish   fisherman  or  Scottish   crofter would  not find a move across the Atlantic in any  sense a shock  to  his conception of nature or to his daily  round  and  common task.  It follows  that  the  poets  were  able to  make  use of that  most  fertile  resource of the  literary imagination-comparison and   contrast  in  close  association. They were  also able  to dream of creating anew what  they  had  known  at  home  in a form closer to their  ideal,  as The  Rising Village of Goldsmith tells us in its title.  And  they saw  this dream, at  least  in  part,  realized.

Here  England's sons, by fortune led to roam,
Now find a peaceful  and  a happy  home: The  Scotchman rears his dwelling  by some
stream,
So like to that  which blends with boyhood's dream,
That present  joys with old world thoughts combined
Repress the sigh for those he left behind :
And here the wanderer from green Erin's shore
Tastes of delights  he seldom knew before.

More clearly than any other component of  these  poems,  the  impact of  the Cana­ dian  landscape determines the  nature of
 the   total   experience  of   the   settler.   At times  it  is reminiscent of  his  homeland; its  challenge,   nevertheless,  can   only   be met  by devising  a new and  more  rigorous way of life; the intensity of its seasonal changes  is a  constant stimulus to  action and  to observation; the Indian, whether picturesque  and   immemorial  or  savage and  barbarous, rises out  of the landscape and retreats into it. The land provides a livelihood  and  hope  of  progress;  its  pos­ session and  retention have  been a  matter of collective  and  individual  combat with enemies;   no  concept of   court,  or  urban  life,  or  church or  academy  have  as  yet taken  a shape  that  will distract the  mind  from  Nature, the  ever  present  stem mis­ tress and  bountiful mother.
The   charm  of   the   antiquated   verse styles  resides  not   merely   in  the  under­ standing  we  get   of  a  colonial   culture. There is also,  in  the  stylized  vocabulary and  phrasing, an  insistent  reminder that  the  preoccupations of the  settlers  remain substantially our  own   problems,   though  altered   in   their   emphasis.  Wresting    a livelihood   from   the   earth;  maintaining independence   from   the   United    States; achieving  a  comprehension of the  native  Indians  (seen  then  as aggressors,  now  as sadly dispossessed) ; pondering the  nature of  the European connection and heritage: these,  in  forms  however   altered, remain still our preoccupations.
We  sense,  however,  one  profound change   of  sensibility,   now   that   pioneer days  are  past  and  gone.  It is the  loss of confidence,  of cheerfulness, of joy, of eagerness. Goldsmith's "Rising Village" ends   with   an   invocation  of   hope   and promise  for  "blest   Acadia". Howe  con­ cludes  that,  though the  native of  Acadia  may   move   to   another   clime,   yet   the memory  of his homeland will "Crowd on

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the mind  with  dreams  of mighty  power, And  cheer  his  heart  in  many  a  lonely hour." Sangster expands the theme of joy to  universal  relevance:   "How  utterably deep and  strong is Human  Love." Kirby concludes   his  poem   with   a   charming picture of practical  fellowship among the pioneers:

A worthy  stranger in our woodlands come To live among  us and erect his home.... Today we come to take you by the hand, And make an opening  on your timbered
land:
And raise a house wherein by fall of night, Your own free hearth  may welcome you
aright....
Some hewed the logs; some shaped with nicer  eye;
While  some strong-handed raised them up on high,
Notch fitting  notch,  till pleasant in the wood,
An ample  cabin in the clearing stood.

Isabella  Crawford  is in a somewhat  dif­ ferent   class,  both  in  sensibility   and   in craftsmanship,  from  the others. Her  evo­ cations  of   the  seasons  have  a  mythic quality,  clothed  in images of  Indian  life. Her melodramatic plot is made to involve wrong,  repentance and  forgiveness. Yet her   conclusion   is  on   a   par   with   the others:  a resolution of  doubts, an escape from  dangers,  a  realization of deep hap­ piness:

I would  not change  these wild and  rocking woods,
Dotted  by little  homes of unbark'd trees, Where  dwell  the fleers from the waves of
want,
For the smooth sward of selfish Eden bowers.

As the editor  claims, in his summary last sentence, "The refrains raised in lone Canadian woods, once the wilds are con­ quered  and  traditions rescued  from the flow of events, are songs of  joy."
It is  this  elan,  this  ineradicable   op-

I 10
 timism and abounding hopefulness, this chorus of testimony to the ultimate good­ ness of life, that  after  repeated  readings most endear  the  whole group  of  writers to us. Their  virtues are  not to  be lightly regarded.  When we have recognized their cheerfulness  and  their capacity  to impart  cheer,   when   we   have   seen   them   not merely as inheritors but  also as perpetu­  ators of  a high romantic  tradition, when, comparing  them with ourselves, we are driven  to confess "It's a  poor  heart  that never  rejoices",  we can  read  once  more their often simple and sometimes awkward lines and  see shining from  between them a  practicable   way  of  life,  a  variant   of those  immemorial   gifts  "the   means  of grace and  the hope of glory".

ROY DANIELLS


ST. FRANCIS AND THE BEAVERS

ANAHAREo,   Devil   in   Deerskins.   new   press,
$7·50.

IT  HAS   BEEN   ALMOST   thirty-five  years since Grey  Owl's  death  and  the  scandal which  followed  close upon  it,  when  the press   revealed   that    Canada's   famous Indian  writer,   conservationist   and   lec­ turer   was   really   a   white   Englishman named  Archie Belaney. In  a  sense, jour­ nalism was only tearing asunder  what  it had   joined  together   in  the  first  place: Anahareo's new book  makes it clear that Belaney himself was disturbed by publicity that  had  him  a  full-blooded  red  man,  a "St.  Francis  of  the Indians". Even so, he passed  among  his  intimates   as  a  half­ breed,  and   to   publicize  his  efforts  for wildlife    conservation    appeared    before audiences everywhere-including a royal

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



one at Buckingham  Palace -done  up in feathers and beaded buckskin, knocking them  dead  with Romantic oratory  about the Canadian North.  It was harmless enough, but finding that their St. Francis started  life as a middle-class  Briton left a bad  taste  in  the  public's  mouth,  already like the bottom of a birdcage from the Depression and  the advent  of Hitler. The controversy blew over, but sales of Grey Owl's  works plummeted   and  he seemed well on  the  way  to  demi-obscurity  as a minor  national  embarrassment.
Recently   there  have  been  signs  of  a renaissance. Macmillan have reissued five of the wilderness books in paperback; the CBC  is  planning   a  radio  documentary; and  articles  have  been  cropping   up  in journals, from a severe re-examination of the life in Ontario  History  to a generous appraisal   of   the   literary   style  in   The English  Quarterly.   I  have   met  several Grey  Owl  buffs in  Toronto, including  a teenage  French  student  from  Paris come to live among  the  Indians,  and  a history scholar   with    a   roomful    of   precisely labelled   photos,   clippings   and   memor­ abilia.  Of  course,  in  a  boom   year  for Canadian Studies, there's "renewed  inter­ est" in everybody, but perhaps  the success of Devil in Deerskins may also be seen as evidence that  the white man  who became an  Indian and  saved  the  beaver  is once again  corning  into  his own.
When Anahareo met him, Belaney was in  his late  thirties,  a  tall,  striking  figure with a braid and a hawknosed profile. Wounded  physically and  spiritually in World War I, he was at that  time earning a   reputation  as   a   guide,   drunk   and general  hell-raiser in the  Biscotasing area of   northern  Ontario.  After   a  spot   of trouble there, he fled to Quebec,  building a trapper's cabin  and  inviting  Anahareo,
 a pretty  nineteen-year-old  Indian  girl, to join him.  Eventually  they  were  married in a native ceremony which Anahareo describes in detail -perhaps because so much  fuss was made  in  1938 about  the four or five consecutive "wives" of the immoral ''Bluebeard."
Anahareo   thrived   in   the   wilderness, but  hated  the  brutality  of  fur-trapping, and influenced Archie to abandon it for good.  Starting   with  two  orphaned   kits, the young couple tried to set up a beaver colony  for   conservation   purposes,  and, after poverty, doubt and every sort of setback, they succeeded in establishing a beaver  sanctuary   in  Prince  Albert  Na­ tional  Park,  Saskatchewan.  By this  time Grey  Owl  was  a  famous   man,  having publicized   his   "little   people"   through  movies,  recitations   and   writing;  never­ theless, fame   made  him   miserable:    he separated   from   Anahareo   and  died  an unhappy   man.   Who   could   resist   this story?  It  has  virtue  rewarded,  with  suc­ cess exposed  as a hollow mockery; it  has appealing   animals,   romance,    northern adventure,   show   biz,   and   over   6o% national content.
It has also  been  told  before,  by Grey Owl  in  Pilgrims  of the  Wild, by Lovat Dickson  in  his  dated   but  still  readable Half-breed    ( 1939),   and   by  Anahareo herself  in   My   Years   with   Grey   Owl ( 1940). The  Grey Owl buff will want  to read   Devil   in   Deerskins,  but   there   is nothing   radically    startling   in   its   bio­ graphical  information, and  although  we are   given  more   than   we   knew  before about  Belaney's  tastes  and  opinions,  he remains a rather  shadowy presence in the book.  Anahareo  is  discreet  about  his re­ puted drinking and bad temper; she gives scant  commentary   on  the  breakdown  of their  relationship   and  offers  no  insight


I II

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



into   the  despair   which   apparently   des­ troyed   Belaney   after   he  became  public property. A description of whatever made  him  tick  is not  attempted; but  then,  he was a close-mouthed man  and  Anahareo was as surprised as anybody  to read  that  he  had  no Indian blood.
Definitive biography is not  the  aim of the  book,  and  it  is clear  that  the  "devil" of the  title  is meant to be the  author. By her  account, she  was  restless and  head­ strong, continually tearing off on her own to  prospect for  gold,  getting  stranded in mining camps,   paddling  away on  canoe trips,   drinking   herself   into   belligerence  and   repenting the  next  day.  She  tells  it well   and    her    adventures   are    perfect escapist  reading:  it must  have  been great fun  being  Anahareo, wheeling  around a true  North  which   was  more  strong  and free than it looks to be today  as we drive past the  deserted  shacks and those mourn­ ful  "Gateways to  the  North" on our  way to  the  cottage.
The  genre  is autobiography, and  yet Anahareo is no more  analytical about herself   than   she  is  about   Belaney.  She skates along  agreeably on the surface  of things  past  with  a style that  is sassy and pleasingly    archaic:   people    tease   each other as a "kid", "dope" or "greenhorn"; it is like tuning in Astaire  and  Rogers  on the  Late  Show.  Devil  in Deerskins evokes the   period   and   is  well-made  entertain­ ment,   but  it  also  points  the  need  for  a larger,  stronger book  on  Archie  Belaney, one   which    would    incorporate  all   the biographical data,   cast   some   light   on Belaney's  psychology  and   interpret  him against  his  cultural  background. For  he was  a  very  curious phenomenon indeed.
Dickson long ago mentioned Belaney's resemblance  to   his   near-contemporary,



II2
 Lawrence  of   Arabia.  Both   were   white men  who  hated WASP  Britain  and  who fled  into  a  primitive world  they  admired more.  It seems  to  be  that  both  remained boys  in  many   respects,   capable  of   un­ thinking  cruelty  and   enjoying   dress-up  and   games.  They   were  also  serious  men  who  spoke  for  the  rights  of   the   people  and  the  land  they  had adopted, and  they wrote  responsible  prose. They  seemed  to wither upon  exposure to the  society  they had  rejected, and  Grey  Owl  in particular got  trapped  by the  image  he  created for himself.   Both   represent  the   sunset   of Romanticism as failed  make-believe noble savages gone astray in the trivial Twenties and  drear Thirties. Why then  is Lawrence a cult-hero and  Belaney comparatively obscure?
It seems   that    Grey   Owl   is  still   an undiscovered treasure, a  national  legend manque  who should  be, and  perhaps  will be,  a  Canadian byword.  Why  has  there been  no comic  book,  no television  series? (Surely   the   material  packs   more   clout tl1an  Radisson  and   Groseilliers,   or   the white folks  of  Jalna.)  Belaney  was  ori­ ginally   rejected  because   he   was   not   a sinless   Ideal,  but   now   we   are   not   so finicky  and   his  credentials  seem  impec­  cable:   an   immigrant   who   becomes    a professional	Canadian    promoting   the myth  of the  sacred  North, the inventor of his    own    past 	(see   Frederick   Phillip  Grove), a  talent  subject to  the  mercy  of his   public's   expectations   (see   Leonard Cohen or Team Canada). Devil  in  Deer­ skins is all very well,  but something more  should   be   done   with   the   property.  A nation   usually   gets   the   St.   Francis it deserves, and  when  the  real  thing  comes along,   he  should   be  paid   respectful at- tention.			JAMES POLK

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



NOBLE
AND CONFUSED


ROBERTSON  DAVIES,  The Manticore.  MacMil­
lan,  $7·95·

A MANTICORE is a strange and  fabulous creature with  the  body of a lion, the face of  a  man,   and   a  sting  in  its  tail.  It is therefore a  noble,  if SQmewhat confused and    dangerous,  creature.   This    is   the symbol Robertson Davies employs in his latest  novel  to  convey  his  considered opinions  about the  condition of man.
Readers   of   Fifth    Business,   Davies'
fourth and highly successful novel which appeared  in  1970,  will  find  that,   in  his latest   book,  he  sheds  new  light  on  the drama surrounding Boy Staunton, the romantic playboy-millionaire (to some; others saw  him   as  an  egotistical   bully) who met  his death under remarkable and peculiar circumstances. The  narrator of Fifth Business, hagiographer and  bachelor eccentric Dunstan Ramsay, makes  a brief and   climactic appearance  in  The  Man­ ticore, but  this time the story is continued by  David   Staunton,  Boy's  brilliant,  un­ happy  son.
Davies'    singular  talents  as   a   writer make  reading these  two  novels  (and  one must read them both, to appreciate them properly)   an   experience  which    I  can only   describe   as  like  reading  an   Alex­ andria  Quartet  (Duet, in  this  case)   as conceived  by  T.  E.  White, the  scholarly humorist-historian author  of   The Once And  Future  King. The blend  of masterly  characterization,  cunning   plot,  shifting point  of view,  and  uncommon detail,  all fixed  in  the  clearest, most  literate prose, is superbly achieved.
But  back  to  the  manticore.  Although
 for  obvious  reasons  it  is impossible  here to  summarize  the   plot   of  Davies'   new novel, it should  be said  that  much  of its length    deals   with    David's   discoveries about    himself    under    Jungian   psycho­ analysis. The techniques and  aims of this branch  of  psychiatry   are  illuminated for us during  this  process, and  David  is led, by  degrees,   to  the   realization  that   the disease of which  his alcoholism  is only the symptom  is his inability  to feel. His mind  has been well  nurtured -he is a success­ ful  criminal  lawyer-but he  is a failure as a man  because  his emotions  have  been stunted   beginning  in   childhood,  when his  father  once  smashed   a  doll  he  had had  the  bad  judgement to love.
David, like most human beings, says Davies,  still  has  to  learn   to  understand his own  humanity; an  underdeveloped ability  to feel is like a manticore, and  it is no  accident   that   mythology  has  antici­ pated  our  modern  condition.
According to this way of thinking, patterns of  human behaviour "repeat themselves   endlessly,  but   never   in   pre­ cisely  the  same  way."  And  only  a  man  who    understands   the    importance    of psychological   truth  can  expect   to  know himself  fully.
As   a   kind   of   parting  shot,   Davies insists  that   "Man  is  a   noble   animal." ("Not a good  animal; a  noble  animal.")
" ... You needn't fall  for  the  fashionable modern twaddle of  the anti-hero and  the mini-soul ... [it  is so]  easy to be a spirit­ ual  runt  and  lean  on  all  the  other  runts  for  support and   applause in  a  splendid apotheosis  of  runtdom.  Thinking  runts,  of course-oh yes, thinking away as hard  as a runt  can without getting into danger. But  there  are  heroes,  still.  The   modern hero   is  the  man   who   conquers  in   the inner  struggle."


113

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



David's  "inner  struggle"  culminates in a  strange  kind  of  rebirth  in  an  under­ ground  cave, where 75,000 years ago our ancestors   worshipped   the   bear.   He   is heartened   by his  understanding,  in that cave, of the "greatness and indomitability and   spiritual   splendour  of   man."   The  link with the ancestors helps give him the psychological strength he has lacked.
This  brief  description  of what  Davies has attempted in The Manticore  is necessarily narrow and incomplete. Yet perhaps  it  should  be added  that  this  is the   novel   of   a   journalist-philosopher­ scholar-professor  who  was once an  actor with  the  Old  Vic. If ever  a  man  were qualified  to  entertain   and  enlighten  his readers  with  a  study  of  what  "maketh  the whole man",  it is Robertson Davies.

PAT BARCLAY


ALMOST...

ROBERT HARLOW, Scann. Sono Nis Press, $9-95·

THE  PUBLISHERS'   BLURB proclaims  this new  work  by  Robert   Harlow   to  be  a "major work by a major  novelist". Pub­ lishers have to say such things, of  course, even  if  they  are   usually  a  little  more
subtle  about   it  than  J. Michael  Yates.
Yates does not explain what he means by
either  major  novel or major novelist, but let us assume that  this can  be translated as follows: "Scann  is a book of universal significance, an important  book, touching upon a universally significant theme or themes and  written  by a man who has awesome command  of both  his material and  the way the material  is presented."
The   themes  are  there:   Birth,  Death,
Man,  Woman,  Eternity.  And there is no
 reason  why  these  themes  should  not  re­ main  major   while  given  an  exclusively Canadian setting  (Canada  as  the  north, that  is, not  Canada   as  Montreal  or  the Prairies or even the  Pacific rim, not that anybody  has  done  very  much  with  the last) -Canada, maybe, as the Romancers think  of it. I  say  "exclusively Canadian" because the wartime section, while it does take  place  in England,  is chiefly limited to a Canadian air base -about as English as  a  "Senior   Staff   Club"   in  Mrica   is Mrican. Against  the  modern-day  back­ drop  of a small  northern town  to which "civilization"   has  come  in  the  form  of Chargex  cards and  Hare  Krishna  monks (have  they  really  got  that  far?), junkie Indian   girls,  hippy  daughters   and  run­ away  runaway  sons,  chambermaids   who go to lectures  on Women's  Lib  (and  be­ come  converted   to  bralessness and  self­ hood,  bien  entendu), room  service  and modern dental  techniques, Harlow creates a kind of fictional Notes of a Century Before.    Trappers'   berths    on    paddle boats, halfbreed sons, cougars, wolverines, influenza epidemics, violence, hatred, passion,  porcupines   and   pack-ice.   The go-between  in  this  case is Amory Scann (a terrible  name), editor  of the local newspaper  and  wouldbe serious writer whose three-day pilgrimage into the past takes him  to the  Linden  Hotel  where he holes up over the Easter weekend and immerses himself in the history (? histori­ cal romance)  of the town's namesake and the important people  in  his  life. Scann's  descent  into   the   hell  of   Linden's   past constitutes  the  frame  of   the  novel  and, unfortunately, its greatest  weakness. As a person,   Scann   is   just    not   interesting  enough  and  some of his  puns are so bad that   one  is  tempted   to   put   the   book down, immediately,  in despair.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



First  page: "All  my Scanns," he notes, "are divided  into  three galls:  genital, excellence  and  levity  and  each  draws blood."
Later:  "The  God   who   never   sleeps, who   continues  to  create, is   physical­ not even  able  to be intellectual-and he lives in the gut. Gut bless us everyone ..."
Scann   talking.  "She  believed   in   the
whole  process  from  the  snapping canine and   the  substitute knife  to  the  horse  of another dogma ... "
"One expects  better   luck  even  from  a system based  on nothing more  substantial than  nearer-my-genitals-to-thee."
Scann   (calling down  to the  farmers on Easter    Saturday  morning) :   "Do    not spray  for  a  miracle."
I can  hear  novelist  Harlow objecting: "But  you're  not  supposed   to like or even admire the  atrocious Scann -he  is only the  medium." In fact,  he so much as tells us this in a lengthy  aside  to the  audience. "The whole  story  is  in  jeopardy (the War  section) as is the  novella  form  itself, the  very form  he is here  trying  to master
... One  gets  the  distinct impression that Scann   read  very  little.  He  had  a mania for  chronicling and  it  is very  easy to see where   his  main   interests were:  in  him­ self."
That's all  very  true   (and  equally  true, as  regards   self-interests,  of  a  character like Raskolnikov?); but  Scann is a  char­ acter  in  Harlow's novel  and  if  he  is too stupid   or  too  tedious   then   he  will  toss out  the  bathwater with  the  baby  and  the novel  will never  get  read.
Which  would  be a great  pity. The story of  Linden, of  Thrain, of  Erica, David, Ro  and   Ole   and   of  the   north   country which,  if they   didn't  conquer, at   least they came  to tenns with,  is really  worthy of all  the  "major" hyperbole. There are
 some amazing scenes in these sections: Linden   cutting off  his  own  mutilated
hand with an axe. No wasted words, just action,    pain,    shock   and   Thrain's   dis-­ belief.
Linden trying  to outwit the wolverine who violates  his traps, making frozen fishballs  around sharp sticks  or  burying his dollar  watch  beneath a  trap (a  trap which  eventually traps  him.)
Thrain with  the  dead  wolverine  cling­ ing  to  his arm  while  he drags  the mutil­ ated  Linden  across the snow  to his cabin. The cold, the  shifts  in light, the bodies strained  to a point  beyond endurance, the animals,  the   forest,   the   pride   of   these men-terrific    stuff.   Why   did   Harlow choose such  a flimsy  structure to  hang it all on, I wonder? Never  mind  all  the  old saws about  irony between  past and  present
-the thing  just doesn't hold  up. Scann's descent  into the other world  (which may, after  all, suggests  Harlow, be his descent into  the creative unconscious rather than a recreation of any  "real" history  or  bio­ graphy) is noteworthy for  what  is  brings  up.  The cold  and  isolation of  the  North and  its effect  upon  the  men  and  women  who chose or were chosen  or were driven there   is superbly told.  "Author Scann" is a  throwaway.  Rewrite  it  without him  and  you may  have  a major novel on  your hands.
AUDREY THOMAS


ANOMALIES

FRANK     DAVEY,    Earle   Birney.   Copp    Clark,
$r.gs.

FRANK   DAVEY's  Earle  Birney  is  one   of Copp  Clark's Studies  in Canadian  Liter­ ature. Each   book  in  the  series  attempts to  assess succinctly  the  work  of  a  distin-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



guished  Canadian writer.  Since  Earle Birney  is a  very well-known  figure in  the Canadian literary landscape,  he obviously deserves   a  place   in  a  series  which   has studied writers like Sir Charles  G. D. Roberts, Hugh  MacLennan, Morley  Cal­ laghan  and  A. M. Klein.  I doubt that  he deserves  Earle Birney, however.
In some   ways,  Davey's   study   is  not
bad.  He  sweeps  away  much   of  Birney's non-creative writing. Discussing Birney's years at  the  University of British  Colum­ bia,  Davey  comments:

Birney    appears  to   have   squandered  what little free   time  he  did  have  during the  aca­ demic year  by  writing popular-taste  articles and   radio talks  in  an  effort   to  supplement his  low  salary.... Radio talks  such  as  "On Being  a Canadian Author" or  the  four  talks  which  comprise The  Creative Writer  are  no more   than popular  journalism.  They are  of transitory    interest.... As  in   the    thirties, Birney  appears again to  have   lent   his  pen to  a cause outside writing-here  the  popu­ larization  of  literature and   the  few  dollars it could earn him.

He   mentions  only   briefly  Birney's   edi­ torial  work  on  anthologies of  poetry  and on  Malcolm  Lowry.  But  his  big  broom, however    patronizing  it   sounds,    clears away  these  endeavours and allows Davey to  concentrate on  Birney's  creative writ­  ing.  As  a  result,  his  novels Turvey  and Down  The   Long  Table,  his short  lyrics, and    what    Davey    calls    "The   Major Poems" -"David",  "The Damnation of Vancouver",    "November   Walk    Near False  Creek   Mouth", and   "The   Mam­ moth  Corridors" -receive fairly detailed  attention.
Davey  makes  interesting, if sometimes dubious, points  about both Turvey  and Down  The   Long  Table.  His  comments about  the  latter are  particularly  provoca­ tive;  at   least  he  moved   me  to  read  it. Although his criticism  of the poetry would

116
 be more  convincing if he had  provided a close textual analysis of each  poem he discussed, he presents a good case for his conclusion that  Birney is a "talented, conscientious, and  versatile" poet. In fact, Earle  Birney  might   have   been   a  more unified   and   satisfactory  book   if  Davey had  stuck  to  the  themes  and   techniques of  Birney's  poetry.  As it  stands  now,  the study's stimulating parts  do  not  add   up to a scintillating whole.
There  are   several   reasons   why  Earle
Birney   is  not   a   satisfying   study.   One is Davey's pugnacious and  exaggerated statements. In  a discussion  of Birney's concrete poems,  for  example, Davey  an­ nounces  that  "Concrete techniques them­ selves   are    certainly   legitimate    artistic methods. To  question them  is to question the  validity of all  visual  art." A  battle is joined  when  up  to  that  point  in  the  dis­ cussion  there  has been little evidence that  a  war  has  been  declared  or  that   one  is necessary.
Another weakness  is that often  without clearly  explaining what  they  wrote  or  in what   context  they  were  writing, Davey lobs  grenades at  comments about  Birney made by,  among others,   Milton   Wilson and  George Woodcock. Perhaps they have misread Birney's work. But Davey should present more  carefully  in  the  text  of  his book  the   material  on  which   he   judges other  writers. This  is  particularly  neces­ sary when  he talks  about other Canadian poets  in the paragraph immediately before  the   concluding  one,  weighs   their   work with   that    of   Birney,   and   finds   theirs  wanting.   Since   in   the   final   paragraph Davey states that  "the specialized  interests and   talents  of   Canadian  poets   make grounds  for   comparison  between   them few  and   shaky",   I wonder   why  he  em­ barked   on  this  "shaky" enterprise  at  all.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Certainly  Davey's singling   out   of  E.  J. Pratt in a discussion  of Birney's "human­ ism",   and   his  characterizing  of   Pratt's humanism as "that which  praises  institu­ tions  and   corporations",  seem  especially pointless.   Ironically,  in   this   case  when Davey  loses his  critical  game,  he  defeats himself.  His description of Pratt's human­ ism    can    be    understood   only   if   one
happens to have  read  his article on "E.  J.
Pratt, Apostle of Corporate Man" ( Cana­
dian  Literature  No. 43).
One   other  major  problem with  Earle Birney is its thesis that "It is the anomalies which  give Earle Birney's  career its shape and  character". The word  "anomaly" - irregularity or  abnormality-is  repeated many   times.  But  repetition   neither  sub­ stantiates a  thesis  nor  justifies  the  use of a  word  that   is  badly  chosen  in  the  first place.   I  can  see  nothing  abnormal, for example, about  the   biographical  details Davey    lists   in   the   first   paragraph   as anomalies. These include  Birney's  being born  in a log cabin  near  Calgary in  rgo4,
his  teaching  university   even   though   his
parents had  not "completed even elemen­ tary  school  education", and   his  being  a Marxist in the thirties. Nor can  I see any­ thing   irregular in  what   Davey  calls  the dominant subject   and   theme  of  Birney's poetry:  man   and   "the  hope  that some day  he  will  mobilize  his  powers  to  save himself".  Davey   names   these   concerns "humanism" and  links Birney  with  More, Jefferson,  and   Marx.   All   belong   to  a second   school   of   humanism  that   holds that  "man's glory" is "his  ability  to main­  tain   the  fragile  and   necessarily  minimal  state   superstructure  which    permits    his selfhood". Davey's definition seems anom­ alous;  Birney's   subject  and   theme   are certainly not.
Indeed, much  of  Birney's  appeal as a
 creative  writer  is due  to  the  fact  that  he has  consistently   explored  the   "rag  and bone shop" of his own experiences, made them   available  to  his  readers   in  words and   in  styles  that   they  can  understand, and   thus   helped   each   to  see  his  own heart. This achievement is neither regular nor  irregular, normal  nor  abnormal. It is an impressive  sum of parts, however.  And it  deserves a  thorough, balanced, and consistent  study.  Earle Birney, because of its anomalies, is  unfortunately not  it.

MARY JANE  EDWARDS


HUXLEY  OBSERVED

GEORGE  WOODCOCK,    Dawn   and   the   Darkest
Hour,  A  Study of Aldous  Huxley. Oxford,
$10.00.

GEoRGE wooncocK never ceases to amaze me.  His  range  of interests,  his  indefatig­ able  capacity   for  exotic  travel, and   his astonishing productivity surely  make  him Canada's  Polymath. As  Robert Fulford  has  pointed  out,  the  description he gives of Aldous Huxley  in his latest book, Dawn and  the  Darkest  Hour,  could  apply   just as  appropriately  to  Woodcock   himself: "Indeed, it  is in  a  continental tradition, that  of  the  homme  de lettres ... that  he really  belongs.  The  writer   who  is  proud  first  of  all  of  his  sheer  ability  to  write,  and  is willing  to apply  that  ability  to any task  which  seems  at  the  time  important without feeling  in  any  way demeaned if
-instead   of  a  novel   or   a   poem -he
happens to write a political  tract  or a newspaper  article, provided  always he is saying   something  that   seems  worth   re­ cording."
I  have  long felt  indignant that  Profes­ sor  Woodcock  has  not  received  sufficient appreciation in  this country; and  I  have


117

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



often   speculated  on  this  deplorable  ob­ tuseness.  It may  possibly have something  to  do  with  the  fact  that  the  majority of Canadian  literati,  situated   in   Toronto, tend  to be totally  indifferent  to anything east or west of their circumscribed world.  Among   academics  I  suspect   a  snobbish scepticism   that   no  one  interested  in  so many  things  could  possibly be more  than  a  journalist.  Moreover, Professor  Wood­  cock spurns the  arcane nit-picking all too characteristic of academic criticism  writ­ ten  only  to  impress  other  academics. He writes   lucid,  straightforward  prose,  the kind    of    prose   comprehensible  to   Dr. Johnson's  Common  Reader,  the  intelli­  gent,  literate layman. Moreover,  instead of   dwelling on  image-clusters, time­ sequences, or structure-patterns, Professor Woodcock    quite    clearly   believes   that works   of   writers   such   as   Orwell   and Huxley    can   be   understood   fully   only within a biographical and historical framework.
To  me the  particular interest  of Dawn and  the  Darkest  Hour  is  the  history  of Professor  Woodcock's own changing atti­ tudes  to Huxley.  To  read  of his  reaction  to  Crome  Yellow   in  the  Twenties as  a "sense  of  delicious  treason  in  the  knowl­ edge  that   Huxley  was  fascinated as well as repelled  by the  life of meretricious in­ tellectuality and   futile   moneyed   gaiety which  he portrayed so sardonically" is to understand  something of  the  excitement engendered by Huxley's  iconoclasm  dur­ ing   that    period;  otherwise,   read   in   a vacuum, Crome Yellow  appears as a tedi­ ously   jejune   contrivance.  As   Professor Woodcock   proceeds   to  analyze the  early novels,   it   becomes   increasingly   evident  why  Huxley   personified  for  his  contem­ poraries the  critical spirit  in  the  decades between   the  great   wars.  One  begins  to

u8
 understand, too,  why  Woodcock and  his friends  read   Eyeless in  Gaza  with  "be­ wilderment and  betrayal."
Time has  modified  that  hurt reaction; and   his  sensitive   critique  of  Eyeless in Gaza  marks  a  mature comprehension of the  centrality  of  this  novel  in  Huxley's career. Woodcock believes-in my judg­ ment, correctly-that  it   represents an apex  which   he  never  reached   before  or after. As the  depiction of a profound spiritual experience apparently similar  to Huxley's own,  the   novel  transcends the fiction  of  ideas  to  which  many  of  Hux­ ley's  detractors have  consigned  his  work.
Woodcock's   feelings    about    Huxley's subsequent  development  are   somewhat ambivalent. In  the  reformed womanizer, Calamy, of Those  Barren Leaves he finds the  early  seeds  of  Huxley's  mystical  stir­ rings;   and   through  his  later  essays,  fic­ tion,   and   the   dystopia   of   Brave  New World  he  follows  Huxley's  experimental efforts   to   push   back   the   frontiers  of heightened  consciousness.  There is sym­ pathetic understanding of  the  connection between   Huxley's feeble eyesight  and  his yearning for  expanded  inner   vision,  but Woodcock evinces  irritation at  Huxley's claims  for  peyote  as  the  key to  transcen­ dental   experience.   As  a   humanist,  his commentator seems  to find  it  difficult  to forgive Huxley's abandonment of  the hwnan dimension. He seems to find most rapport with  Huxley at the  point  of  con­ version,  but   for  Huxley   a  still  point of philosophic finality  was totally impossible. Professor   Woodcock   leaves   little   doubt that    he   accepts   Huxley's   belief   in   the authenticity of his  conversion, but  at  the same  time  implies  that   Huxley  was  self­ deluded, his mysticism  serving as a retreat from  the unpalatable aspects  of existence.  "For  Huxley  the  artist   had  died  in  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



prophet; the  celestial  light,  that  living emptiness, had   repelled   the  strange and fascinating creatures of the  human  dark­ ness."   Yet,    even   in   his   most   prolific period,   did  he  create a  single  character that   remains indelibly  engraved  on  the memory?
Professor   Woodcock subscribes  to  the general    view    that    Huxley's   novelistic powers  declined with  his mounting pessi­ mism  about man's satanic capacities for making this  world  a  hell.  His  last  novel, Island-which   Woodcock describes   as his happiest book-is for  Woodcock,  as for   almost   every   reader,  a   lamentable failure. This  may  be in  part  due  to psy­ chological reasons  external to  the  novel, and  it  may  be  that  we are  still  too close to   evaluate  it   perceptively.   Eyeless  in Gaza was  rejected  contemptuously by its first  critics,  only  to  be  ressurected even­ tually  as a near-masterpiece.
George  Woodcock's attention  through­ out  his  book  is centred on  the  develop­  ment   of  an   intricately  structured  mind played  upon  by  a   highly  emotional temperament. The   final   impression    is that  of an extraordinarily lovable  man  in his   vulnerability, courage,  and   genuine concern about man's fate. Professor Woodcock's own  interests and   attitudes are  a fine filter  through which  to achieve a measure of understanding of one of the most  interesting figures  of this  century.  I felt  slightly  cheated when  I  came  to  the end  of  Dawn  and  the  Darkest  Hour  be­ cause Professor  Woodcock  simply ends his book  with  the  close of Huxley's career.  I could   have   wished   for  a  summation  of his  own  views  of  Huxley's  ultimate im­ portance.
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH
 REFLECTING WINDOW PANE

AVI  BOXER, No   Address.  DC   Books.   $5.00
(cloth), $3.00  (paper).

AVI  BOXER   of Montreal, who emerged in the early Fifties with Eli Mandel, Phyllis Webb, D. G. Jones  and  Marya Fiamengo, has been one of the most  neglected  mem­ bers   of   that    generation  of   poets.   His poems  first  appeared in  CIV jn,  Artisan (the Canadian issue edited  by Gael Turn­ bull), and  Raymond  Souster's Poets 56: Ten  Younger  English  Canadians.  In the early   Sixties  after   an   hiatus  of  a  few years,  his poems  began  to  appear in  the Montreal little  magazines, Cataract  and Catapult,  Louis  Dudek's Delta,  and   Ir­ ving Layton's anthology, Love Where  the Nights are  Long. Boxer's fitful  publishing partially explains  why he was overlooked. The  book  that  was expected in  the  early Sixties  in  Montreal  has  now  taken  an­ other  decade   to  appear.  Nevertheless, in the last  ten  years Boxer  has continued to write  and  maintain  his sense of the  craft  of poetry. That he was an exacting crafts­ man   who  emerged   from   the   Montreal group   of  poets   did   not   fare   him   well when  many  younger  poets  were  content with    publishing   mere   exercises.   Boxer took  his  time,  for  his  was  a  finer   and  rarer  discipline.
Emerging  in   the   early   Fifties   Boxer came  into  contact with  a  group  around CIV /n.  His  real   teachers in  poetry, though, were  the leading members of the first two generations of Montreal poets, especially  Klein  and  Layton. Klein  and Layton  reinforced the strengths in Boxer's talent, particularly his gift  for  metaphor. In  his nostalgia  and  need  to return to his roots Boxer resembles  Klein.  Boxer's  cen-

II9

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tral   persona,  like  Layton's,   is  the  poet, whose chief counterpart is woman.  But Boxer's  very  strengths have  their  limita­ tions.  His  penchant for  the  pastiche   re­ minds  one  of  A.  J.  M.  Smith. And  his love of exaggeration can reduce  his imag­ ination  to   the   merely  fanciful  and   an over  reliance  on  the  conceit,  the  bane  of
Louis Dudek's early lyrical poetry.  I have underlined these  literary   debts  and  con­ nections  for  Avi  Boxer  does spring  from that  community of poets which  Montreal has been fortunate to have writing  in her midst.  He  has  learned  from  them,  yet in the   key  poems   his   own   voice  emerges firmly.
No Address, the title of this collection culled from a score of years, suggests the poet's  main  preoccupations: the  paralysis of action  and  the  search  for  identity and location. And  these  are  not  incidental to a   poet   who   strongly   identifies   himself with  a  poetic  school  that  is now  coming to   an   end.   Themes  such   as  paralysis, identity and location  bring out fear and anxiety  which  can  not be located  or fixed, and  so there  is "no  address." The  poet attempts to  direct   himself  to  a  point  of return. But,  in  effect,  Boxer's  return  to his roots is a return back  upon  himself in every possible way. In the title poem, the speaker   seems  to  precede   his  own  birth and   finds   himself   arriving  late   at   his parents' marriage. This   juxtaposition of the  past  and  the  future displaces  history and   identity for  the  poet  speaker.   As  a DP of the spirit, the persona of the poem suffers  at  the  peripheries of family,  love, and  personal  attachments. In "Yom Kip­ pur", the  poet  persona  appears in  all  the guises with  which  Boxer can endow him: the   holy  fool,   the   bewildered   son,   the false   messiah,   the   sackcloth   poet;   and finally  he  becomes  one  with  his  "young

120
 wife,"   his  Muse,   whose  pain   he  shares and whose pain makes the anguished cry which  becomes  his name  and  his poem at one  and  the  same  time:

0 pray
for  the  stunned adulteress
I carried naked  upon  my shoulders through the  judicious marketplace, for  the  jubilate congregation
that stoned her,  judaized her
against the  synagogue wall

and  pray, pray
for  my helpless  name
rising  from  her  torn  throat like  a cactus

The arena of  the  action   in  this  poem  is the  Jewish  world  and  the  heritage of the central  persona   who   does   not   lose  his identity  but   is  looking   for   a   place   to stand   in  the   midst   of  conflict   and  an­ guish,   a  point   from   which   to  make  or find  an  address.
"The  Calligrapher" follows  a  similar story  to "Yom  Kippur", but  in  this  case it  is told  in  the  voice  of  the  third  party. In this pastiche reminiscent of Japanese poetry,   the  retainer  (perhaps  the  poet's other vigilant self)  mourns how his Lord has  fallen  "into the embroidered web/  of this Spiderlady." Nostalgically he reminds him  that:

Once we were  happy, my Lord, catching fish for  your  aviary, goldfish  for  your  blossoming brook,
Now  they  say  you  have  taken to  verse,
and   turn   friends like  unwanted letters from  her  windowless door.

The pun on Boxer's first name  in "aviary" suggests  how  this  poem   is  a  key  to  his poetic   household, so  to  speak.   The  en­ trance  to   the   excellent and   well-made house   of   his   Muse   is   "windowless"­ perhaps too  self-contained and  turned in on  itself.  No  Address, the  book  itself,  is framed   by   poems   to   women.   In   both

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



poems   the  speaker  is  looking   out   from behind  a  window. In  the  opening poem, "1 :oo  A.M.", the  persona's "winter face" is pressed  "against the  windowpane." While  he kisses the woman's "black hair" in  the  former  poem,   in  the  last  of  the "Haiku Triad" which  complete the book, his action  is even  more  ambiguous:

Condensing in  frost
your  face  shakes  my  windowpane. I unkiss  your  tears

Though Boxer has found  a reflecting windowpane in his poetic  household, and though  this  collection  is  a  small   return for  many  years  of  writing, it  is very  ac­ complished.  Boxer's   finer   poems  should now  take   their   place  in  the  anthologies for  the  best  of his  work  is  enduring and memorable. And  I hope that the publica­ tion  of  this  collection  will  be  the  thresh­ old  to  a  growth and  enlargement of  his voice and  craft.
SEYMOUR MAYNE



DRIFTING
TO OBLIVION

JOHN   NEWLOVE, Lies.  McClelland &  Stewart.
AL     PURDY,   Hiroshima    Poems.   The   Crossing
Press.

joHN  NEWLOVE  writes  as if  he  were  the last  human still  alive  in  the  City  of  the End   of  Things.  The   perceiving  intelli­ gence  who confronts us in  his  poetry  still possesses all  the  experience  of   his  race, but   no  longer   the  capacity  to  bind   the things   he  knows  into  something we  can agree  upon:  truths, if   you  like.  One  of the poems in his earlier volume The Cave attempted such  a  truth:

The places  of  our  decisions will  be found
 in  pure  places, the  perfect moments endured, exalted  the  ordinances!

only  to tum aside:

-A memory
or  dreams only:  the  past  does  not  exist. Truth is  not  something we  are  judged  by but  something by  which we  judge,
a  scaled  gauge.

That particular poem  ended, "It is enough", but  Newlove's  latest  volume,  by its very title,  is a sardonic repudiation of even  the  scaled  gauge. These   poems  are not truths,  but lies. They  renounce the integrating  webs  of  memory   or  dream, and  move fully  into  the  exploration of a world    without   connection.   By   inverse logic,  they  thus  fulfill  the  traditional  ob­ ligation  of the  poet  to tell us things more truly  than   we  had   thought  possible;  as Newlove's  epigraph  says,  "Lies  and  per­ jury were so familiar to him  that  he often deceived  himself  and  told  the truth when he thought he was lying."
Like Black  Night  Window ( 1968)  and The Cave  ( 1970), Lies assembles anum­ ber of recent  poems  into  a collection  uni­ fied only by the formidable consistency of Newlove's  own  preoccupations. Newlove is one of those  poets  whose  work  it  is to write  himself   again and   again. Though we  can  make  certain  comparisons with other  contemporary poets-Purdy at one extreme,   Atwood   at  another-Newlove himself creates  the  only  context in which he  can   usefully   be  assessed;   he  is-a mark   of   real   distinction-sui   generis. Solitude   is  the  very  mark   of  his  poetic language,  with   its   obsessive   and   artful dubiety.   These   intense   lyrics  never  pre­ sent us with  the fulfilling recognition  that  comes  with  the  translating art  of  meta­  phor.  There  are  only  those  electric   ob­ jects-frog,   water,   woman,  bed,  crow, blood,   sweat -and   the   weavmg   voice


121

BOOKS IN  REVmW



making liaisons  between  them,  "a  dance of mind and sound slipping around each other, sister  and  brother."
In earlier volumes,  the  cumulative effect  of  all  this  was,  paradoxically, to free  Newlove  from  voicelessness and  dis­ solution. Like   Atwood,   he  has  had   the capacity to  tum isolation  into  knowledge of something beyond  self. But  the  poetic language  of   Lies  exists  only   to  render  "the noise  the  fish  makes  caught in  the jaw."  If he  were  to  ask  again   here  the question  posed  in  "The  Pride", "What completeness do  you  hope  to  have  from these tales?"  the answer  would  be a bleak one:

We only come  to dream,
It is not  true,  it is not  true -
that  we come  to live upon  the  earth.

There are   in  fact   no  poems  like  "The Pride" in this collection at all, perhaps because,  as one  poem  suggests in a revul­ sion  of  doubt,  "Everything  is  history  to us, even  the  future." But  then  of course all poems are  lies.
Newlove    and    AI   Purdy    are   closely linked   by  their   shared   concern   for   the drift  of civilization into oblivion,  and  the deposit   this  drift leaves  in  our  imagina­ tions.  Purdy's Hiroshima  Poems is a col­ lection  of seven longer lyrics provoked  by a visit to the monuments of a community that   has  experienced  this  oblivion   and survived,  and  like  the  Jews  of the  Holo­  caust, lived  its own  death. The  appalling conundrum of  how  to  respond   to  Hiro­ shima  fills these  poems, as it does  the lit­ erary  responses  to  both  tragedies. One  is reminded irresistably of  something Purdy  wrote  elsewhere:   "What  is  great   music and   art   but   an   alibi   for   murderers?"




122
 Purdy knows  the  risks;  as  he says at  the beginning, "the people who write  their re­ actions in ... [the  Foreign Visitors' Book] have  become   psychically  disarmed;  they have  had  no  time  to  prepare considered thoughts  or   formal  comments  on  what  they  have  just seen. Therefore what  they say is likely to be exactly  what  they feel."  Purdy's characteristic open  poetic struc­ ture  should  be  a  fine  vehicle  for  this  in­ tense,  unguarded reaction, but  in fact  his response  is uneven. At  his worst,  he  can be  unbearably  prosy,  and   some  of   the poems,  like "One Thousand Cranes", are just that, lyrics in which  the verse labours on  and   on  at  a  subject  almost  unutter­ able,   searching  for   poetry   and   finding  only  sentiment. But  the  topic,  "children and  death and  love  gathered in  an  awk­ ward  bundle of  words", haunts one  with the  obligation  to  master   it.  At  his  best, Purdy can  command  real  sonority,   and  he  rises  to  the  challenge in  the  last  and  most   accomplished   of   the    Hiroshima Poems,"Remembering Hiroshima", where the  poet's  attempt to write  about the un­ speakable subject  becomes  one  with  the human being's  assumption of  the  obliga­
tion  to judge:

And  yet the 1/we of ourselves  must  judge must  say  here  is the  road
if it  turns  out  wrong  take  another must  say these  are  the  murderers identify  them  and  name  their  names must  say there  are  the  men  of worth
and  publish  belief like fact
must  say all  this in the absence  of any god
having  taken  a gleam  inside  the  mind
having  grown  an  opinion  like rings on a tree
having  praised  quietly  the non-god of justice
having  known  inside  the  non-god  of love and  make  a  new god  from  all  these  human
things.

GERMAINE WARKENTIN

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



LACONIC TERRORS

ELI  MANDEL, ed.,  Poets of Contemporary  Can­
ada   rg6o-rg7o. McClelland   &   Stewart.
$2.95·

Eu MANDEL's anthology  Poets  of  Con­ temporary  Canada  1960-1970  presents  a curious   review  problem. As  a  collection  of works by ten  writers-Al  Purdy,  Mil­ ton   Acorn,    Margaret   Atwood,  George  Bowering,   Gwendolyn   MacEwen,  John  Newlove,   Joe   Rosenblatt,  Michael  On­ daatje,  bill  bissett,  and   Leonard  Cohen
-it provides  what  one  might  reasonably expect  of it.  It is clearly  printed; the  in­ troduction is lucid  and  informative;  the choice  of  poems  demonstrates  sensitivity to a range  of literary  techniques and  atti­ tudes; the  ten   poets   (with   the  possible exception  of    Rosenblatt)   even   reflect most  of  the  critical enthusiasms and  ap­  praisals  of  the  period  the  anthology rep­ resents.  It  will  be a  useful  textbook.  But it  will  also  prove  a frustrating one.
One  way  of  explaining why  is  to  say that  it suffers from  its title and its series. Though like its New Canadian Library predecessor    (Milton  Wilson's   Poets   of Mid-Century), it is in itself a good  book, any  book  that   contends  with  living  au­ thors  rapidly goes  out  of  date.  Wilson's selection,   that    is,   represents   poems   of mid-century; Mandel's,  because   (except  in  the  case  of  Cohen)   it  does  not  bring Wilson's  up  to date, effectively  represents  some-of-the-poems  of  Canada in  the  six­ ties. Mandel's  introduction  acknowledges these difficulties,  but  that  does not resolve them.  Because   Leonard   Cohen's  lyrics, folksongs,  and   dour  observations of   so­ ciety  epitomized  so  much   of  the  sixties consciousness,  one  can  see  why  Mandel found   it  impossible  not   to  include   ex­ amples  of them.  But  that decision  throws
 into even sharper relief the fact that  he decided  not  to represent, say, Margaret Avison  and   Alden   Nowlan,  two  of  the finest  contemporary poets,  who  between
1g6o  and   1970  produced  some  of  their most   controlled  and   developed    poems. They  await,   in  effect,  a  revision  of  the Wilson  book.  In the  meantime, some  of the  best  poems  by  several  major  Cana­ dian  poets  remain unavailable in  anthol­ ogies  that   (for  lack  of  books  with  wider  coverage)  are  standard  texts  for  courses in  Canadian  poetry.
The  problem  of NCL  selectivity, more­ over,  compounds  itself  from  volume   to volume.  Mandel's  welcome  inclusion   of Purdy  and  Acorn  acknowledges not  just Purdy's extraordinary poetic  growth  dur­ ing  the  sixties  and   the  slow  critical  re­ sponse awarded Milton Acorn's  socialist lyrics, but also the simple fact  that  neither poet appeared in an earlier  volume  in the series. At the other  end are Mandel's omissions.  Any  editor  assembling a  suc­ ceeding   volume -weighing  the   respec­  tive  merits   of  still   more   contemporary poets,   a   group  that   already    includes  David  Helwig,  David  Solway,  Dale  Zie­ roth,  Dennis  Lee,  Marilyn Bowering,  bp nichol, Susan Musgrave, Andreas  Schroe­ der,  Tom  Marshall, Joy  Kogawa, Victor Borsa,  Avi  Boxer,  Seymour   Mayne, and  David  Cull -must  first  face  up  to  the existing  exclusion   of  Phyllis   Webb   and Daryl  Hine.  As accomplished poets of the sixties,  they   might   have   been  expected here.  In  a  subsequent  book,  they  would not   be  out   of  place,   but   would   make overdue    appearance   and    occupy    the space   one   wanted    for   less  established
VOICeS.
Hine's  laconic  Classicism  attaches him less immediately perhaps, though no  less securely   than   do  :MacEwen's   myths   or


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



bissett's tantric chants (or Webb's spare evocations  of the limits of personality,  for that  matter) , to  the  "new  directions" in poetry  that  Mandel claims for the writers of  his  book.  He  is  a  paramount  crafts­ man   among   these   "mobile,   technologi­  cally sophisticated, contemporary writers"  who  equally surprise  us

with a  determined  regionalism, another ver­ sion  of  traditional  Canadian  concerns  with the   land,  wilderness,  the   pervasive   notion  that   an   ill-defined  terror  of  space  defint-s the    authentic  Canadian  sense   of    things.  This interplay of  cultivated  awareness  and an  almost   primitive  feeling  for  place  seems to  me  both   characteristic  and   revealing of contemporary  writers.  On   the   one   hand, these   writers move   with  exceptional  confi­ dence into   new  areas  with   new  approaches to  place,  space,   time,  and   personality;  on the  other hand, in  their  concern with  land  and   history  they   look   back   to   the   tradi­ tional  preoccupations of  Canadian  poetry.

In similar fashion one might point to the contemporaneity of Webb. The  kind of testament that   bp  nichol  accords  her  in his recent  The Martyrology-

early  morning victoria's streets we  are  all  linked
all  of us  who  use  the  language now 	tied
talking with phyllis 	the  kropotkin  poems how  she'd first  realized the  importance of
questions reading joyce's  "portrait"
focus  in 	language "is" not  "was" words  that particular form  the  sky is grey  &  restless

-underscores the  respect she  holds among readers (to borrow Mandel's words  about Acorn)   "for  whom  passion­ ate  language and  dedication to  craft  are matters of great  import".
One   of  the  virtues   of  the  anthology,
however,  derives  from  Mandel's own  re­ spect  for  language and  craft. The  sym­ pathy   he   brings   to  each   poet   lets   the writers  speak  individually, and  in  suffi­ cient  poems to demonstrate their separate


I24
 voices and  poetic  character. Nor  does his introduction  generalize those  voices  out of hearing range.   In  attempting to show how the world of the sixties has variously "chosen" the   ten  writers   who  represent it,  he focusses  on  the  subtlety  of  the  dif­ ferences  among them  rather on any over­ riding   (and  therefore suspect)   unifying  mystique. Referring  to  Acorn's  "radical humanism", to Rosenblatt's "modern bes­ tiary" in   which   "gothic  and   romantic" models  utter the  history  of  the  soul,  to Newlove's  "variations on  [the] theme  of myth  as  history,  history  as  myth", and  to the   "presence  of  a   manic   persona"  in "the    coolness   of    Atwood's  language", Mandel links  the  writers  without forging  their  identities,  and   so  provides  discrete  approaches to  their  work.
When    he   comes   to   Bowering    ("the bright land  is the  measure  of speech  and breath")  and  more  so to bissett  ("lovely rhythms ... [moving]  toward   elemental moments of pure  sound"), he encounters a  problem in  communications which  the Sixties   lovingly   embraced  but   which   a traditional  anthology can  do  little  more than   expose.   To   focus  on  the  effect  of concrete  design   is  within   its  scope,  but to  render  the  actual sound   of  language and  syllable  is  beyond  it.  The  imagina­ tion  can  create a  kind  of  internal sound system,   of   course.   Atwood's  deliberate monotones are carried by the  verse itself;  the mellow richness  of MacEwen's poetry  is somehow only reinforced by a recorded reading    such    as   Open  Secret 	(CBC Learning Systems)  ;  even  the  distinctive dialect   of   Alden    Nowlan's  Maritimes ( CBC  Learning Systems)   is adumbrated by the  language of the  poems  and  stories off   the    record.  But    the   hallucinative urgency  of a bissett  chant, or  what  Man­
del calls the "ecstatic discovery ... of uni-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



versal  recurrence", which   takes  its  form in insistent  repetition, can  be appreciated only by listening.
The  recent  release  of so many  record­ ings  of  poetry  in  Canada  testifies  to  an increasing commitment to  the art  of oral verse.  But  what   happens  when   the  oral poem turns  into ritual incantation? Cana­ dada  (Griffin  House;  performed  by  the four  horsemen:  bp  nichol,  Steve  McCaf­ fery,  Paul   Dutton, and   Rafael  Barreto­ Rivera)  is  an  apposite  example, full  of sound   and   system,  of   that   entente   be­ tween  technology and  metaphysics. The  result   is   perhaps   inevitably  a   private affair,  the  performers themselves  most in­ volved  in  their  performance and  illumi­  nated   by  it.  One   listens   to  a  machine more  aloofly  than   one  listens  in  on  the poet  himself. And one effect is to take us appreciatively back  to the book. It is a tribute to  poets  like  Atwood   and  New­ love   that,   stark   on   the   page,   divorced  from  the emotional entanglements of hu­  man    presence,    their    poems    have    the power  to absorb  readers  into  their  world. That  such  absorption is still  possible  in what  Mandel calls  the  "laconic,  ironic, self-deprecating,  tentative"   personalities of contemporary verse,  testifies further to the  continuing  power   and   potential  of the  printed word.
W.H.NEW


LEANNESS
OF THOUGHT

J.   MICHAEL  YATES,   the   abstract   beast.  Sono
Nis Press, $g.gs.

Great Bear Lake Meditations had this: writing pared to  the  leanness  of thought that  yet showed  forth  emotional richness.
 Economy of gesture  meant that  many associations  contracted  into  a  single image.  If the  present  collection  of fiction and radio plays had preceded  the Meditations, I would  have applauded the ingenuity behind  these literary  and closet­ dramatic   speculations  on   the   tensions between  mind  and  matter. I  would  also have  noted  that  cerebral  distinction is no substitute  for   stylistic   grace,   and   that  often   the   works   appeared  laborious  in concept   and   execution.  But   all   would have  been forgiven  on the strength of the promise shown  by the author.
Given,  however,  the  prior  appearance of Meditations,  which  carries  the  themes of silence,  solitude,  solipsism  and  schizo­ phrenia to  a  haunting  conclusion, there  appears  no   very   great   reason   for   re­  printing the  majority of the  items  in  this collection.  Many  of  them  are  the  sort  of fugitive   pieces   that   had   best   keep   on running.   The   plays   exceed   the   fiction  both in quantity and  quality; they possess the   advantage  of   having    been   created for a medium  where  thinness  is no draw­ back.   McLuhan-and-Carpenter's   dithy­ rambs on acoustic  space to one side, radio  drama   is   meagre    fare    indeed    when contrasted  with   the  real  stuff.  Thus, in the    radio    medium,    Yates's    bloodless, speculative   dialogues   between   self  and soul  needn't be  pressed  into  moving  the full   distance   to  fleshly  reality;  anyone  reading  them  makes  allowances for  their  origin. Still, they  bring  home-as if one  needed   it -the   genius   of   Beckett   in fleshing  out his  concepts for   the  stage. There is more  to Symbolic  Dialogue than  the meeting  of minds; reading a group  of serious   radio    plays    makes    the    most theoretical of sensibilities yearn  for I Love Lucy.
This is not to deny  the wit behind  such


125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



plays as the  title  piece, "Theatre of War", "The Panel" or  "Smokestack in  the Desert". They  possess a sense of the built­ in  fooleries  of  radio  that  reminds  me  of the  comic  routines of George Carlin. But the  pieces  remain great  ideas, excellent  matter for  Zen satori, rather than realized dramatic creations.
What more  can  I say?  The stories  in the  collection   are  avant-garde,  neo-Bar­ thian, what   have   you,  replete  with   the self-consciousness  of  Barth   and  the  art­ nouveau  intellectual swirlings of  a Borges
-but they  are  not  the  sort  of tales  one interprets.  They   are   little   flashes;   one either    gets   them,    and   finds   them    of interest  andfor  significance, or   one doesn't. Mostly I didn't, except for "Pile", which  adds  a hint  of Robinson  Crusoe  to the  usual  preoccupation with  body /mind and   sexuality. The  collection   will  save future researchers from  hunting around. The items in it show a mind  at its strong­ est  in  the  creation of  fables,  metaphors and  meditative  flashes  attempting-and often failing-to extend them sufficiently to meet   the   demands  of   narrative and dramatic literary form.
DENNIS DUFFY


MEETING MIDWAY

ALDEN  NOWLAN,  Between Tears  and  Laughter.
Clarke, Irwin and  Co.  Ltd.  $4.50 cloth.

ALDEN  NOWLAN has been leading  readers to insights  into  themselves  and  the  world they subtly  cohabit with others  through a half  dozen  volumes  of  poetry.  He  began with  an  abundance of the poetic necessi­ ties-wit,  honesty,  a  profoundly  empa­ thetic  sensibility,  and  an  incisive  feeling for  language-and  by  I970  he was able to assemble  a memorable book of selected
 poems,  Playing  the  Jesus Game. In  a foreword, Robert Bly correctly  grouped Nowlan  with  the  "umbrella rippers" of literature, those  who  tear  down  the  bar­ riers  to man's  clear  vision of the sky  and of  his  place   under   it.  "His  clear  direct  language  is  not   a   transformative  lan­  guage," Bly observed: "it's  not about one thing  changing another -but  a  descrip­  tive language, about the  way things  are." And  the  way  things  are,  as  Nowlan  sees them, is frequently delightful, often  terri­ fying,   "skating  out   along   the   edges   of fear", to  use Bly's expression;  they  exist, as Nowlan's entirely appropriate new title suggests,  in  the  psychic  teeter-totter land Between Tears  and  Laughter. And  in the execution  of   this   vision  in   the   present  volume,   Nowlan   surpasses   anything  he has  done  before  and   transforms himself from  a fine  poet  into  a superb one of the first  rank.
Nowlan's secret  weapon, which  he wields   with   unerring  skill   in   Between Tears   and  Laughter, is  his  quietly  con­ trolled   matter-of-fact  tone,   which  oper­  ates  in  a  sometimes devastating  tension with  the sudden impact of  understanding he imparts. A case in  point is his marvel­ ously  understated   "Why  he   wanted   to abolish  capital  punishment":
When I was a boy  I imagined I was  motivated by my extraordinary compassion.
As a  youth I laughed and  said:
"I suppose the  real  reason is
I'm scared they'll get  me."
Then I became a  man and  discovered
I'd always  been  afraid
if it didn't end  there'd  come  a  time  when I wouldn't be able  to stop  myself:
one  day  I'd have  to go down and  tell  them to  forget about the  fee,
I'd be hangman for  nothing, just  for  the  fun  of it,
if  they'd let  me.

BOOKS IN  REVmW



0, the  quietness   of  the  self-recognition, and   the  horror as  the  reader   recognizes the  implications of  the  poem  in  himself. And   poem   after    poem   in   the   volume works   in   much   the   same   way   toward much     the    same    effect:   in    "Sunday driver" the   poet   recounts the   anger   in the face of a driver of a black Chevrolet because  he  was  delayed  in  getting  away from  a  traffic  light; "Everybody laughs" at the story, the poet says, but he saw the dreadful  malevolence in  the  man's   face and  concludes: "He'd  have  killed  me  if there'd  been   a  button/ marked  'Death' for  him  to press."
The capital punishment piece  and "Sunday driver", like many  of the  poems of  Between  Tears  and  Laughter,  are  to­ ward   the  "tears" end   of  the  spectrum. But  Nowlan's range  is as broad as human experience, and   in   poems  that  vary  in length from   a  few  lines  to  a  few  pages he  deals  with  love  (usually  love's  arrows shot  wide) ; death   (especially  his  ironic sense of the inevitability of death) ; occa­  sionally   with   particular  people    (D.   H. Lawrence, for  example, whose only  mon­ ument at  his  birthplace,  Nowlan  points out  in  "The  pilgrim's tale", is a  sign  in
the  window  of a  fish-and-chips shop  ad­
 the  bars  that   limit  him  within   the  pur­ view of his will:  "Never once have I for­ gotten  myself/  and   been  stopped  by  the bars,"  he  boasts;   "I  am  Napoleon,  the great,  the magnificent tiger." He  answers anti-Catholic bigotry  by having  the  local boys in  "Sister   Mary  Cecilia" leave  be­ hind  the warnings of  their  parents  about  the nuns who  will eat them; the boys are won  over  by  the  simple,  if  spectacular, human act of

little  Sister Mary  Cecilia,
yoyo champion  of St. John,  New Brunswick, which means she's
the  best in the world.

Little  Sister Mary  Cecilia, keep that  ecumenical
yoyo twirling.
Go, girl, go!

The  importance of  the  simple  human act  is precisely what  Alden  Nowlan dem­ onstrates-continually,    forcefully,   deli­ cately.   In  one  of  his  poems   on   poetry ("The  encounter, the   recognition")  he says  that   he  enters   a  deserted   path   or corridor from  both sides at once:

I am wholly drunk.
I am wholly sober. We meet midway

vertising   a  rock  group   called   The   Sons and  Lovers) . A full  list would  be almost as inclusive  as a list of all of the  sad  and funny  attitudes and  foibles  a  human  be­ ing  can  discover  in  himself.  In  "A  tiger in the Dublin zoo" Nowlan  captures with equal  amounts  of   joy  and   sorrow   the human capacity for  simultaneous  dignity and    self-deception,  telling    of    the   im­ perious,    strutting  tiger   who   convinces  himself  of  his omnipotence  by  including
 and  recognize one
another.
"Hello,  Alden," I say.
That's how my best  poems are  created.

He  has  met  himself  in  almost  all  of  the poems  of  this  exquisitely   human   book, and,  finally,  because  it  is exquisitely  hu­ man,  it brings  the  reader to say  hello  to himself-sometimes   to   his   amusement and  often  to  his enlightening discomfort.

ALAN  SHUCARD






FOR LITERARY ANARCHY

Sir,
I don't very  often  write  letters  to  the editor, but  I  feel  that  I must  make  some observations about Ralph  Gustafson's re­ view article in your latest issue.
I do  not  particularly mind  Gustafson's
adverse  opinion of  my most  recent  book of verse, for the same criticism-and  the same  sort  of illustrative quotation-was often   applied,  in   his  own  day,   to  the work  of  William   Wordsworth, and  Gus­ tafson  certainly is a  much  gentler  critic  than  were either Jeffrey  or Gifford.
I am,  however,  quite  concerned over Gustafson's general contention that  poets now  have  too easy a time in getting their work  published in  Canada and  that  this is not  a good  thing.  It seems to me  that after  the dearth and  difficulty of  publica­ tion  in  the   193o's  and   194o's,  and   the kind   of  literary  straightjackets  imposed on  publishers and  reviewers  in  the 195o's by   the   influence    of   Smith   and   Frye, Canadian poetry  at  last is  emerging  into the  kind   of  eclecticism   (for  which  The  Fiddlehead  was  a  pioneer and  of  which Fiddlehead Poetry Books are  an exempli­  fication)   where   "every   bird/on  every spray/can sing  his  own  song/in his own way."  Any  new  freedom   must  naturally lead  to  the  kind  of excesses which  Ralph Gustafson  rightfully deplores,  but  at  the same  time  it  holds  more  promise  for  the




128
 future than   would  any  practice of  limit­ ing publication to only those poems which fit  the  dimensions of  some  preconceived procrustean  bed  which  exists in  a critic's mind   as  the   proper  shape   and   size  for poetry.
I am  reminded on  reading Gustafson
of the wealthy  Englishman who was over­ heard  to say in  his club:  "Money's such a   jolly  good   thing,   it's  a  pity  so  many people  are  allowed  to  have  so much  of it these days."
Yours for literary anarchy.

FRED COGSWELL



CHARLES
G. D. ROBERTS

Sir,
I am, with  the consent of Lady Roberts, collecting the  letters  of her  late  husband, the  distinguished Canadian poet Sir Charles G. D. Roberts (1860-1943), for eventual publication. I should  be most grateful if any of your readers  who have letters  written by Roberts in  their  posses­ sion would  get in touch  with  me. I should  be glad  to  receive  copies  of  these  letters,  or  the  letters   themselves.  Any  letters  en­ trusted   to me would  of  course  be treated  with   the  greatest care  and   returned  to their  owners  once copies have  been made.
I should   also  be  glad  if  your  readers would  supply  me with  the  names  of  per­ sons who, they believe, might  be in posses­ sion of Roberts letters.

DESMOND PACEY,
University of New Brunswick.
