$2.oo   per copy



CANADIAN
l]TERATURE N°·62
Autumn, 1974

C)JNJIDJ)JNS
CONSCIOUS  OR  SELF-CONSCIOUS?


Articles

BY  HALLVARD DAHLIE, ROBERT GIBBS, ART  HILL,
NANCY E.  BJERRING, RICHARD HAUER COSTA, !SOBEL MCKENNA


Review  Articles and Reviews

BY DOROTHY LIVESAY, W. H. NEW,  ADRIAN MITCHELL, AUDREY THOMAS, CHRISTOPHER  LEVENSON, FRED COGSWELL, MARY JANE EDWARDS,
PAT BARCLAY, ANTHONY APPENZELL, MORRIS WOLFE, DONALD CAMERON,
CARL  BALLSTADT, LINDA SHOHET, FRASER SUTHERLAND,  DAVID EVANIER, LAWRENCE MCDONALD, JOSEPH PIVATO, LORRAINE VERNON,
FRANCES  FRAZER, STAN  DRAGLAND, LINDA ROGERS


Note

BY  PAUL W. AUSTIN


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








PREMONITIONS OF MRS. PORTER





RECENTLY, when I was gathering material for a survey of Canadian  poetry  during  the  r g6os, and  at  the same  time  assembling  the  titles for  a  modest  checklist  relating  to  the  same  period,  I  was  impressed  by  the persistence of the  primitive  strain.  By the  primitive strain  I  mean  not  the  kind of  fake  illiteracy  and  bogus  naivete  now  cultivated  by certain  academic  poets who  have tried  to transplant American  aberrations  into  Canadian soil, but  that unconscious  capacity  for  the  incongruous,  that  unselfconscious desire to glorify the  banal   and   the   bathetic   which  emerges  among  versifiers in  mainly  rural societies that have no surviving traditions of oral poetry.
Primitive   poetry  of  this  kind  is a  product  of  universal  instruction   that  has not  become  universal  education; the power and  the desire to manipulate  words are there, and  even some sense of form, but unrelated  to a sophisticated sense of logical structure  or of the appositeness of images. Primitive  poetry, like primitive folk art,  is inclined  to  thrive  in  colonial societies, where  the  educated  minority apes  metropolitan literature  and  painting  rather  lamely  (as  the Acadian  Gold­ smith  aped  the Auburnian Goldsmith), while the men and  women who consider themselves the voices of the half-educated  minority produce work that projects in comically inflated form the small concerns of their small societies.
Magnification   of  the  ordinary  is a  way  of giving  modest  and  isolated  com­
munities  the importance in the eyes of their own people which the world denies them.  It  was shown  in action  when the people of Ingersoll, Ont.,  made a seven thousand  pound  cheese  to impress their  importance  on  the  people of Toronto, and   when  the  local   poet  James   Mcintyre   addressed  to  it  his  "Ode   to  the Mammoth  Cheese" in which he said, among many other delightful oddities:

3

EDITORIAL



Cows numerous as a swarm of bees, Or as the leaves upon the trees,
It did require to make thee please,
And stand unrivalled, queen of cheese ...

We'rt thou suspended from balloon, You'd cast a shade even at noon. Folks would think it was the moon About to fall and crush them soon ...

The   primitive   painters   and   sculptors  of  colonial  and   early  Confederation Canada had  their  recent  day  of glory in the  fine exhibition  of their  work  that toured  the  major  art  galleries of the  country  during  1973. The  primitive  poets have been unjustly  neglected, and so one greets with proper pleasure the republi­ cation of The  Four  ]ameses (Macmillan, $4.95)  which William Arthur Deacon, longtime book editor of the Toronto Globe and Mail, published originally in 1927.
The   poets  Deacon   chose-his   four   Jameses-were  James 	Gay,   James Mcintyre, James  D. Gillis, and  James  MacRae. They are poets so complete  and so original  in their  badness that,  as Doug Fetherling  remarks in his introduction to  the  new  edition  of The   Four  ]ameses, they  "make  the  invention  of Sarah Binks seem  redundant." For,  unlike  Sarah,  these are  naturally  bad  poets,  and highly serious poets-so serious that  James Gay styled himself, in all solemnity, "Poet  Laureate  of Canada, and  Master  of All Poets." His mastery was shown in poems like "The Elephant   and  the  Flea",  whose jaunty rhythm  and  succession of unexpected images reminds one of certain Trinidian calypsos:

Between those two there's a great contrast, The elephant is slow, the flea very fast,
You can make friends with the elephant and gain his good-will,
If you have a flea in your bed you cannot lie still:
A flea is a small thing, all times in the way, Hopping and jumping like beasts after their prey,
Oft dropt inside your ear-don't think this a wonder, You may think for a while it's loud claps of thunder ...

When  I first read  The  Four  ]ameses, these early Canadian poets sounded  too bad  to be true;  a quick glance  at the Watters  Checklist of Canadian  Literature showed  entries  relating  to at  least three of them,  which made  it fair  to assume that  Watters  had  merely overlooked the fourth; after my experience this year in sampling  the  world  of more  recent  Canadian poets I  realized that  versifiers of this kind were not merely authentic  but  representative of a surprisingly large and


4

EDITORIAL



persistent  movement.  Had  they  been painters such  men  would  long since have been  acknowledged.   For  what,  after  all, is it  that  we  admire-and call  the innocent   eye -in   naif  artists  like  Grandma  Moses  and   Henri   Rousseau  le douanier  but  an  inspired  silliness? And one can hardly  deny inspired  silliness to James Mcintyre when he sings:

Man in spring logging oft awakes From winter slumbers nests of snakes, And listens to the music grand
Of bull frogs, our Canadian band.

Nor -on  another   level -is  it  possible to ignore  the  premonitions  of  Eliot and his Mrs. Porter in the superb couplet:
St. Catharines famed for mineral waters
And for the beauty of her daughters ...

But it is not only Eliot of whom  we are reminded.  For surely some of our more celebrated   nineteenth   century   Canadian   poets  with  their  self-taught   oddities acquire  a  proper  background  when  we encounter  Mr.  Deacon's  Four  Jameses. The  Jameses,  undoubtedly, were among the men-at-arms in that  veritable  army of autodidactic bards  whose captain  was the best bad  poet of them  all, Charles Heavysege.  The  works  of Gay  and  Mcintyre, of Gillis and  MacRae, are  like bushes in the undergrowth from which that  king of primitive  melodramas,  Saul, rises like a giant  tree in  a  jungle  painted  by Henri  Rousseau. They  all-even Rousseau-belong in the same artistic ecosystem, parallel with but distinct from
that of high and sophisticated art.

GEORGE WOODCOCK



















5


SELF-CONSCIOUS CANADIANS



Hallvard Dahlie


ISEE  NATIONAL  "'11-consciousneo; firnt manifesting  itself in
Canadian fiction  some  thirty  or  thirty-five  years ago, with  its strongest  initial
expression in Hugh  MacLennan's Barometer Rising ( 1941). Fiction prior to this time was on the whole unconcerned  about  the separateness of a Canadian  iden­ tity  or  other  Canadian issues, for  writers  like Stead,  Ostenso,  and  Grove  were more or less preoccupied  with variations  of the "roughing  it in the bush" theme. It  was the  pioneer  or  rural  virtues,  rather  than  anything  exclusively Canadian, which  constituted  their  fictional  themes  and  in this  respect they were closer in spirit  to  rural   romantics  like  Willa  Cather   than  to  succeeding  generations  of Canadian realists and  nationalists.  These  writers were at  the end of a tradition  rather   than  at  the  beginning,  and  the  decade  of  the  thirties  marks  a  kind  of watershed   between  such  derivative  forms  of  fiction  as  the  historical  romance and  regional  idyll  and  the  newer  aesthetics  associated  with  the  emergence  of realism  and   nationalism   in  Canada.  Some  fifty  years  previous  to  this  time, William  Dean  Howells had  offered  a  formula  which has through  the years lost none  of  its relevance:   "I would  have  our  American  novelists,"  he intoned  on that  occasion, "be  as American  as they unconsciously can."  The  implications  of this statement  are of course twofold:  first, that  a novelist cannot  write outside of his own  experiences or  milieu, and  second, that  he must at  the same  time take his environment  for  granted  in order  that  his experiences can  be translated  into a larger  pattern  or  meaning.  He  must be "American" or "Russian" or "Cana­ dian" -that  is,  conscious of  his environment  and  tradition -in the  selection of his material,  but  in  its execution  he must drop  this consciousness and  trans­ form  the  regional  or  national  raw  material  into a form which  reflects aesthetic sincerity and universal significance.
Howell's   prescription   was  particularly   appropriate   for  the  novelist  of  an
emerging  literary  tradition, such  as that  in  Canada  at  the  end  of the  thirties.

6

SELF-CONSCIOUS CANADIANS



For  in  his haste to discard  his derivative image, the  Canadian novelist stood in danger   of  assuming  new  poses which  could  prove  equally  crippling:  that  of becoming a spokesman for Canada or a celebrator of her new identity,  of  becom­ ing  therefore  an  essayist and  propagandist  rather  than  a novelist and  artist.  Or alternatively,  depending  on  his degree of scepticism, sophistication, cynicism, or despair,  he  could  become  an  angry  young  man  towards  things  Canadian, and deliberately  set out to satirize or attack  the whole business, as  though  Canadian­ ism doesn't  matter  anyway. Both of these approaches  reflect  a self-consciousness towards  Canada, and  on  the  whole it  is not  until  the  last  decade  or  so that novelists  have  been  able  to  shake  this  burden,  and  leave  Canada, as it  were, alone, or simply take it for granted.  Perhaps  Canadian  novelists have for a long time  simply  reflected the  national  obsession with  explaining  Canada to all and sundry,  and tended  to view things Canadian  with a myopic vision; but it is when this  concern  superimposes itself upon,  or even  replaces, the  legitimate  aesthetic elements  of fiction, that  the trait  of  self-conscious Canadianism becomes fiction­ ally damaging.
In  terms  of content,  a  large  number  of Canadian novelists-in  particular, Hugh  MacLennan, Ethel  Wilson, Sinclair Ross, Robertson  Davies-have  been very Canadian in respect to character,  setting, and event, and  they have reached out  not  only into  their own  varied  experiences, but into  national  traditions  and history for intrinsically  interesting  material.  But frequently,  they  have  not  been able  to leave well enough  alone:  they have felt compelled to alternate passages of  sensitive  and   perceptive  writing  with  variant  choruses  of  "0 Canada" as though  to reassure  the  reader  that  Canada  is important enough  to write  about in the first place. This obligation to explain Canada  was activated  by Hugh MacLennan, not only in the "Forewords" to his first two novels, but also in an important article in the Saturday Review  of Literature in I 946, where  he said: "Canada may be respected, but no outsider feels it necessary for survival to understand the country. It is the Canadian writer's job to make his country interesting,  to  make  it  dramatic, and  to show  its intrinsic  beauty  and  impor­ tance."  And  Edmund   Wilson,  who has been condescending  on  more  than  one occasion towards Canadian literature,  echoed these sentiments some twenty years later  when  he celebrated  MacLennan as a "writer  strongly to be  recommended to anyone who wants to understand Canada."
To  give  MacLennan his  due,  it is only fair  to  point  out  that   his fictional celebration  of Canada's characteristics  did  reflect the  feelings of  Canadians at large,  and  it is this fidelity to national  sentiment  that  causes us on one level to

7

SELF-CONSCIOUS CANADIANS



rank  MacLennan with  those other  disseminators of Canadiana: MacLean's, the CBC,  the   National   Film   Board.   Many  of  us  recall  the  authorized   "school editions" of Barometer Rising and Two Solitudes which reflect the official stamp of approval  upon  MacLennan's powers of cultural  fertilization.  When  we read his novels today-aside  from  Each Man's Son and  The  Watch  that Ends the Night-we in a sense stand  amazed  at how much he got away with, at how far beyond  his  expository  "forewords" he  carried  his  lecture  method.  In  the  first chapter  alone of Barometer Rising, for example,  we learn  about  the geological history  of  the  Halifax   peninsula,  that  the  Narrows  is "one  of  the  most vital stretches of water  in the world,"  and that  the Citadel was "considered  a symbol and  bastion of the British Empire." Later we learn that  Halifax  is a terminus of the world's  longest railway,  that  the Labrador  winds cross the estuary of the St. Lawrence  on  their  way  to  the  Gulf  Stream,  and  that  when  it  is night-time  in Nova Scotia it is noon in British Columbia.
These facts in themselves, of course, fulfil part of the implications  of Howell's dictum,  and  perhaps  they  do  help  outsiders  as well as  Canadians understand Canada's "intrinsic   beauty  and  importance". But  according  to  MacLennan - and  it is MacLennan the novelist we judge here-these are the thoughts  which arise  in  the  consciousness of  his  characters  at  times of  unquestionably  strong emotional  crises. Neil Macrae  entertains  his complicated  geological observations while  he  is  furtively  seeking  anonymity   upon  his  return   to  Halifax;   Angus Murray   reflects upon  Halifax   as a  railway  terminus  mere  moments  before  he proposes marriage  to  Penny,  and  unless in some Bergmanian  symbolic manner he equates  his sexual  prowess with  a thrusting  CNR  locomotive, the reader will quibble  over  the  disparity  of  these two ideas. And  near  the  end  of the  novel Penny  is aching  and  throbbing for some reassurance of  Neil's love, but  all she receives from  him  is this  violent  outburst: "I tell you, if Canada ever gets to understand  what  her  job in  this  world  really is-well,  unless she does, she'll never  be  a  nation  at  all."  Understandably, Penny  "made  no answer,  but  con­ tinued to stare into the darkness."
It  would  be gratifying  to  be  able to  read  these passages as parody,  but  this
device implies a level of artistic sophistication, of critical observation, and a sense of humour  in which at that  period of Canada's development seemed to be singu­ larly lacking. Regrettably,  we must read them for what they are: examples of an obtrusive injection  of ideas that  belong to MacLennan the essayist, artistic flaws which  the  many  fine  passages in  his early work do  not  sufficiently compensate for.  When  MacLennan does indulge  in  a genuine sense of humour,  as in Each

8

SELF-CONSCIOUS CANADIANS



Man's  Son,  this awkward  and  self-conscious pose disappears,  and  one can  only wish that he had exploited this rarely used talent more frequently.
When   MacLennan  unconsciously  evokes the  character  of  Canada's vastness or  wilderness, as he does in the canoe trip episode in The  Watch that  Ends the Night,  he ranks with  the best of our novelists. And more to the point, character is not  sacrificed:   Martell's  reactions  are  rightfully only those  which  we would expect  a young boy in his situation  to experience-fear, sickness, a revulsion at what  he had  seen, and  finally, when the full impact  of his aloneness had struck him, a genuine sobbing and  crying out for his mother. And all along, the atmo­ sphere  of the  New Brunswick  wilderness is unmistakable;  MacLennan's  uncon­ scious  Canadianism  here  makes  this  episode  one  of  the  most  finely  sustained passages in  all his fiction. In  his Barometer Rising, he couldn't even  let twelve­ year old boys be boys, as it were, but had to invest them with amazing powers of generalization,   as  when  he  has  Robbie  Wain   view  the  departure of  the  SS Olympic  in  terms of an experience which, we are to believe, "crystallized  all the impressions he had formed of the past few years, what he had seen and  read and what  he imagined  the purpose of the world to be. The  purpose of the world was doing things, and doing them better than the other fellow."
The  above  quotation reflects another  element  of self-conscious Canadianism
that  weakens MacLennan's fiction -his tendency to moralize or find a purpose in incidents  which  by  themselves do  not  normally  carry  this  kind  of  burden. Thus,  Roddie  is not allowed to watch ships because he liked watching  ships, but because it  gave him  a sense of purpose. The  local girls, similarly, let themselves be ravished  by the sailors not,  presumably, because they enjoyed it, but  because they had  "no  better  place to be," and even the idleness or laziness of the aimless soldiers and  dockworkers was not  just good old-fashioned sloth,  but  "seemed  to have  a  purpose, as though  it were also part  of the war."  And  in the only scene in this novel where MacLennan even gets close to a description of physical love, both  Geoffrey Wain  and  Evelyn,  at  the  height  of their  somewhat  sophomoric love play, are moralizing to themselves about the reasons they enjoy making love. Here,  as in the  affair  between  Kathleen  and  Dennis  Morey  in  Two  Solitudes and  between  Bruce  Fraser  and  Marcia  in  The   Precipice, MacLennan  cannot shake  the  Puritanical  element  of  Canadianism   which  seeks to  hide  sexuality behind a cloak of moral rationalizing. This manifestation of lingering  Puritanism is not of course exclusively a Canadian trait,  but it is remarkably  well preserved in  Canada, and  other  novelists than  MacLennan have come to grief over  it­ even some, as we well know, who sing of the orgasm loud and clear.

9

SELF-CONSCIOUS  CANADIANS



I  have  perhaps dwelt   unduly and  unfairly   upon  Hugh   MacLennan, but  he seems  to me to represent the  best and  the worst  of the fictionally  possible worlds of Canada. If his artistry had  matched his undeniably sincere  feeling for Canada so that  he could  have  exploited an  unconscious  Canadianism rather than  a self­ conscious  one,  more  fiction  of the  quality  of The  Watch  that  Ends the  Night  or Each Man's Son would  undoubtedly have been produced.

A STEP  TOWARDS this experiential-artistic fusion  was taken by Ethel  Wilson  who,  like  MacLennan, invests her fiction  with  a strong  sense of
moral   and  social  purpose. Little  interested   in  novelistic  fads  and  experimenta­ tion,  she  sees  the  Canadian writer   achieving  stature  slowly -"like  the  strong  slow movement of water  or glaciers," as she expressed it once. Like MacLennan, too,  she  is fond  of  authorial  intrusion, and  occasional  preaching, but  is more consistently   interested  in   character  than   in  idea.   Her   exploitation  of  things  Canadian reflects  this  priority,  and  though  it is not  uniformly  successful,  it does tie  in  organically with  development of character  much  more  frequently than  in MacLennan. Thus in  Swamp   Angel,  one  of  the  prevailing patterns is that   of flight   and   movement-away from   crowds,  restrictions   and   stultifying forces, and  towards liberation and  self-fulfillment.  Mrs.  Wilson's  superimposing of this pattern against  a  map  of B.C.,  as it were,  is on  the  whole  effective,  because  the physical  routes  that Maggie Lloyd  follows in  her quest -the circuitous journey  from  Vancouver to  New  Westminster, the  bus trip  up  the  Fraser,  Similkameen, and   Thompson  valleys-do not  simply  spell  out  a  lesson in  geography. They  represent both  a literal  and  metaphorical  journey  up-stream, to a clear source  or beginning, as it were,  where  Maggie  can  take stock  of her  life and  begin  anew.  Though we do  learn  some  geography and  some history in this  novel, we are  not too  often   aesthetically  offended   for  in   the  process  we  learn   much   about   the character of Maggie and  of the  new  people  in the  midst  of whom  she is starting her new life.
But  on  occasion  Mrs.  Wilson,  too,  adopts  the  tone  and  technique of an essay­ ist, and  appears to be explaining Canadian facts to the reader  more interested in Canada than  in fiction,  and  we lose for a moment  all credibility  in  Maggie,  as in this scene, where  her bus is approaching Lytton:

Maggie opened  a map  upon  her knee. What  will it mean,  all this country? ... The   very  strange   beauty  of  this  country   through   which  she  passed  disturbed Maggie,  and  projected  her  vision where her feet could not follow, northwards-


10

SELF-CONSCIOUS CANADIANS



never  southwards-but north  beyond the  Bonaparte,  and  beyond  the  Nechako and   the  Fraser,  on  and  on  until  she  should  reach  the  Nation  River  and  the Parsnip   River  and  the  Peace  River,  the  Turnagain and  the  Liard,  and   north again  to  the  endless  space  west of  the  MacKenzie  River,  to  the  Arctic  Ocean. What  a land!

We  are  pulling  for  Maggie here-and  for  Ethel  Wilson-but we  balk  at  this rhapsodic evoking   of  Canada's vastness  being  engendered  by  a  map, a  Grey­ hound  bus, and  Lytton, British  Columbia. We realize that  in her odyssey  Maggie moves  into   an   understanding of  her  position  in  the  world -her  relationship with   human  beings,  with  animals, with  the  land,   and   perhaps  even  with  the cosmos  itself.  But  these  relationships are  handled  much   more  convincingly in those  scenes  where  Maggie is confronted directly  with  experience: fishing  in the Similkameen, watching  the  flights  of  geese or  the  fight  between   the  eagle  and the  osprey,  her  sudden observing  of the  fawn  and  the  kitten, her  awareness of the  sky and  stars  on  her  first  night  out  of  Vancouver. Here  the  elements  of the world -or  of  Canada, if  you  like -are  inseparable from   the  character and feelings   of   Maggie.  In   her   finest   passages,  Ethel   Wilson   demonstrates  how effectively   the   principles  of  artistic  selection  and   economy   can   operate  when such  extra-literary  considerations as  being  a spokesman  for  Canada are  ignored.
When  we turn  from  the serious fiction of MacLennan and  Wilson to the gentle satire  of Robertson Davies,  the  shift in tone  delights  us, and  on  the  whole  there is  a  satisfactory fusion  of  Canadian  experience and  artistic   vision.  In  a  sense, Davies   stands   mid-way  between   the  serious  celebrators  of  Canadianism  and those  who  deny  it  altogether, and  he has the  best of two  worlds,  as it were.  He can  proceed  with  his accurate shooting  of sitting  Canadian ducks,  but  one senses that  he  doesn't really  want  to destroy  them.  His  heart  is ultimately in Salterton, much  as Sinclair  Lewis's  was in Gopher  Prairie,  and  like his American  counter­ part,  Davies  gets  mileage  out  of his satire  chiefly  the first time  round, for it fails to expand or please significantly  on subsequent readings.  It is seldom intellectually realized,  and  depends for  its effect in large  part  on  an  in-group  recognition, on a kind  of select  snobbery and  superiority. In  a  passage in  Leaven  of Malice,  for example,  Davies   has   that   crusty   old  organist, Humphrey   Cobbler,  expound facetiously  on the importance of Canadian music:

"But  this is authentic Canadiana," said Cobbler, "a  suite of dances, composed in this very city in I 879 and  dedicated  to the Marchioness of Lome.  Title: The  Fur Suite.  I've  played  the Mink  Schottische.  I can give you the  Beaver Mazurka, the


I I

SELF-CONSCIOUS  CANADIANS



Lynx  Lancers,  the Chinchilla  Polka or the Ermine  Redowa.  Every one of them recreates the loyal gaiety of Victorian Canada."

This  particular outburst  adds  very little to the dramatic  dimensions of the situa­ tion  under  way at the moment,  and stands indeed as a rather  obvious intrusion.  Gloster  Ridley  and  Miss Vyner,  the two main  protagonists of this scene, dislike music of all sorts, not  merely Canadian music, so all we can really credit  Davies with  here is a  rather  crude  and  superficial opinion  of Canadian  culture,  which earns the reader's  snicker rather  than  his genuine laughter.  Much better  handled in  this same  novel is the question  of Canadian literature,  from  Rumball's prose epic, The  Plain That  Broke the Plough, to Solly Bridgetower's foray into Heavy­ sege and Amcan:

"Was  Heavysege, in  the  truest  sense, a Canadian  writer? ... Set your minds at rest. Who but a Canadian  could have written Saul's speech? Does not Jehoidah behave like a Canadian  when he refuses to cheer when his neighbours are watch­ ing  him?  Is  it  not  typically Canadian  of  Heavysege's Hebrews that  they take exception to Saul's 'raging in a public place'? Is it not Canadian self-control that David displays when, instead of making a noisy fuss he 'lets his spittle fall upon his beard, and  scrabbles on the door-post'? Friends, these are  the first evidences of the action of our climate and our temperament upon the native drama."

Nevertheless, even in this passage, there is a self-conscious Canadianism at work, in  the  fact  that  Davies elects to satirize a  poet who on the  whole has  no sup­ porters  in  Canada or  elsewhere. And  by supporting  Davies all the  way  in  his view on Heavysege, we are up to a point seduced into accepting as well his views on Canadian character.
In  A Mixture of  Frailties, where the satirical tone is much  more subdued,  the
intrusion  of self-conscious Canadianism doesn't work nearly as satisfactorily. The general ironic pattern  works well throughout  this novel, where we see the cultur­ ally deprived  Canadian, Monica  Gall,  becoming  the  recipient  of a  trust  fund, achieving a high cultural  level in England,  and thus ironically being liberated  by the most narrow-minded of the old Salterton  residents. Davies in this novel tries to  be  quite  casual  and  off-handish  about  the  Canadian  element,  and  is quite successful in his depiction  of Monica  in her confrontation with various segments of English society. But on a number  of occasions he lapses into an obvious aware­ ness of the stereotypes of the Canadian character,  as in this pointed remark about Monica: "She  was  perfectly  happy,  for she knew  that  she had  done  well, and (true  Canadian that  she was)  she could en joy her treat because she had earned it." This gratuitous  dragging  in of a facet of the Canadian  puritan  character  tells

12

SELF-CONSCIOUS  CANADIANS



us more about  Davies than  about  Monica, for up to this point in her education abroad,  Monica  had  not revealed any significant reliance upon  this trait.
A  more serious intrusion  is the  unbelievable though  superficially funny  scene
with  the  McCorkills  from  Medicine  Hat  who  invite  Monica  out  for  a  "real Canadian meal" in their  temporary  Wimbledon home. Here  Davies pulls out all the stops, but  the satire  falls flat:  Lome  McCorkill  wears a sweatshirt  with  the name  of a Canadian university blazoned on it, he has painted  all the woodwork with  "real   Canadian  rubber-base   paint,"   he  repeats  profundities   like  "that's swell," and offers Monica  a real drink called a Canadian lyric made up of course of lemon  juice and  maple  syrup. If the  whole episode is intended  as an  anti­ American   satire,  then  the  implication  is that  no  Canadian  would  behave  so boorishly, which  is a  kind  of self-conscious superiority  on  Davies'  part;  if it is intended   as  an  anti-Canadian  satire,  then  the  McCorkills  fail   to  emerge  as anything   except  caricatures,   and   the  description  of  the   furnishings  of  their "Canadian" home  reads  very  much  like  an  inferior  Babbitt.  Artistically  the whole episode fails, for its tone is significantly different  from that  sustained  dur­  ing  most of Monica's  English sojourn, and  it seems  to  have been put  in merely to remind  us that in Davies' view, real Canadians, whether in Salterton,  Wimble­ don,  or  Medicine   Hat,   all  suffer  from  a  permanent   form  of  provincialism. Perhaps  the major  problem  in this novel is  that of the inconsistency of tone, for at  times one isn't sure whether  Davies offers his remarks facetiously or seriously, as, for example, when  Monica -in Paris, and by this point a very sophisticated Monica-suffers  a sudden  pang  of  homesickness when she sees a fur  in a dis­ play window with the sign "Canada furs." In his earlier novels, Leaven of Malice and  Temper-Tost, which are more thoroughly satirical, this inconsistency doesn't occur,  and  the  self-conscious  Canadianism  in  those works  at  least  contributes  consistently to the prevailing tone.



WaAT STRIKES the reader of Hugh  MacLennan, of Ethel Wilson,  and  of  Robertson  Davies,  is a  kind  of  predictability   of  content:  the scenes, the  characters,  the actions, all frequently  reflect the stereotype,  and  one rarely  experiences that  delight  of the unexpected  which  is the  mark  of a truly original  novelist. It  seems at  times that  the stock devices employed  merely  rein­ force the uncritical  and  incomplete view held of Canada  by many outsiders-a land  of snow, of wheat  fields, of mounties, of vast empty spaces. One  can easily see where the poet John  Robert  Colombo got his material for his satirical "Recipe

SELF-CONSCIOUS  CANADIANS



for  a  Canadian  Novel," published in The  Atlantic  in  I964. This  poem  lists the ingredients for  a  novel-one  mountie, an  Eskimo,  one  Indian, a  small-town whore,   a  Montreal  Jew,   and   a  boy  with  a  dying   pet-and  concludes with instructions on how to serve it up:

Drain, bring to a simmer but avoid a boil.
Pour, place in oven, bake.

Slice in pieces, or leave whole. Serves nineteen  million
When cold.

But  in  a  very  real  sense this  poem  was written  after  the  fact,  for  even  at  the time  of  its  publication it  was  almost  as dated   as the  works  it  satirized. By the mid-sixties,  much  had  happened in Canadian fiction,  and  a new artistic  maturity had  emerged  in  writers   like  Mordecai Richler,   Brian  Moore,   Leonard  Cohen and  Margaret Laurence. In some  ways, the  element  of self-conscious  Canadian­ ism  shifted  during the  sixties  from  content  to style, and  certainly  from  affirma­  tion   to   negation  or   denial.   The  difference   between   Davies'  satire   of  sacred Canadian cows  and  Richler's, for  example,  in The  Incomparable  Atuk, reflects this  difference, for  Richler  is much  angrier  at  what  he considers  to be Canadian faults   than   Davies  is. The only  novel  where  on  the surface   he  appears to  be consciously  Canadian is his tour  de  force  The  Incomparable  Atuk, but  I think it  is misleading to  see this  book  as an  ordinary  satire  on  things  Canadian. For in  an  unmistakable way, it simply  fulfills the warning contained in the  epigraph from  Richard Rovere: "Cut  off  from  American  junk,  Canada would  have  to produce her  own," and  I suggest  that  perhaps Richler  with  tongue  in cheek set out  to  provide  one  of the  first  contributions to this genre.  In  terms  of content, I see it as too obvious  to be taken any other  way, for predictably, such stock objects of satires  as the  RCMP,  Moose  Jaw,  and  Diefenbaker are  given  the  usual  treat­ ment,  and  perhaps the  only genuinely refreshing  sally is the inability of Canada's "darling" Bette  Dolan   to  see her  sexual  insatiability as anything other  than  an extension  of the  Y's  keep-fit  programme. In  many  ways the  book is consciously Canadian in  that  it  stands  as a deliberate satire  on Canadian satire,  and  while it is not  consistently  junk,  it is far  inferior  to his other  Canadian based  novels, all of  which   reflect  an  aesthetic detachment  in  their  effective  exploitation of  the Canadian scene.
Fiction  of the  I g6o's  on  the  whole moved  away  from self-conscious  Canadian-

SELF-CONSCIOUS  CANADIANS



ism  in terms  of content, but  there  was a manifestation of this  trait  in  matters of style.  Richler  and  Cohen  emerge  here as two of the  relatively  few  novelists  who have  made  major  contributions in this area,  and  on the  whole  their  works avoid the   awkwardness, triteness,   and   straining for  effect  that   so  frequently  charac­ terize  our  fictional  experimenters. Self-consciousness  in  this  area  manifests itself in  the  organization of structural elements,  in diction,  in  narrative  techniques; as much  in  excessive  profanity, for  example,  as in  excessive  reticence, as  much  in over-playing  sexuality   as  in   underplaying  it  and   two   of   the   more   dreadful examples  of  these qualities  are  found in  Scott  Symons' Place   D'Armes and  Robert Hunter's Erebus. Symons  uses all kinds of  gimmicks  in  his work,  the journal  form,  typographical variation, a flippant  biography, photographs, margi­ nalia,  and  so on.  And  almost  at  random, we  can  open  the  book  and  find  such outbursts as  "the  Roundhead  Methodist  All-Canadian  Good-boy", or  "I, the proffered   Anglo-Canadian earn... ," and  "I grimly  realize  that   his is the  new Canadian caste  I fight ... the  half  castes. The  half-asses.... "; in short, he gives us what  Paul  West  accused  some  poets of  giving  us, "a  torrent of self-conscious flippancy".  He  substitutes  typographical  license  for  form,   and   a  collection   of sophomoric anti-Canadian  outbursts for  content; I can't really  argue with  the blurb  on the dust  jacket  which  states that "Place D' Armes is at once a first novel,
a meticulously  tangled  diary,  an  insanely  indiscreet  autobiography, an  existential Canadian allegory,  a  book  of  illicit  imagination.... " With   all  that   going  for you,  one  is tempted to  ask,  why  bother  to write  good  fiction?  At  any  rate,  this book  represents  a  very  self-conscious  attempt to  be experimental, daring,  icono­ clastic,  irreverent, funny,  and   its  total  effect  is one  of  annoyance  rather than  curiosity,  intrigue, or delight.
Hunter in  Erebus offends  us in  another way in his very self-conscious  attempt
to  prove  that  Canada's Puritan heritage  of sexual  reticence  will disappear if one offers  up  a sufficient  amount of filth and  vulgarity  in its place.  Perhaps his chief problem  is simply  that  he can't write,  that  he has no sense of language or  meta­ phor,   that   he  lacks  imagination and  a  sense  of  humour, and   that  he  has  no compassion  for  his characters. He  then  tries to compensate for  all these deficien­  cies  by  using  a  kind  of shock  treatment, by implying  for  example,  that  if  one four-letter word  or  sexual  scene  works  well,  then  ten  of  these,  as  it  were,  will work  ten  times as well. Again,  as in Symons,  the  effect is boredom  and  at  times even  embarrassment, not  at  his  lack  of  reticence,  but  at  his  lack  of  invention. His  kind  of self-consciousness  is as destructive fictionally  as any  other kind,  and

SELF-CONSCIOUS CANADIANS



it is of course a debatable point  whether  Hunter's sweaty sexual encounters  are preferable to MacLennan's glandless performances.
Here  I have  perhaps  set  up  straw  men  who are easy to destroy, for I don't think  that   as  novelists  Symons  or  Hunter   are  taken  seriously  by  very  many readers.  But  they  do,  I suggest,  reflect a tendency  that  is everywhere  apparent today,  a  tendency  to  substitute   superficial  rebellion  for  fundamental  thought, cliched  gesture  for  meaningful   act,  violent  noise for a  discriminating sense of texture,  and  formal gimmickry  for organic form. Again, these tendencies  are not peculiarly   or   exclusively  Canadian,  but   they   are   manifestations   of  a   self­ consciousness that  has severely affected the quality of recent Canadian fiction.
I do not suggest that  the elimination  of self-conscious Canadianism will make a bad  writer a good writer,  but  I do suggest that  it will help make a good writer a better writer. Perhaps  it is a matter  of recognizing that many of the constituents of what  we see as Canadianism are really part of larger frameworks: of  human­ ism, of spirituality,  of materialism,  of one ideology or another. And  artistically, the  psychological  manifestations   of  these impulses in  character are  more  con­ vincingly  presentable  than  are  the traits of a national  identity. Sociological self­ consciousness produces  a  negative  literature,  as Robert  McDougall  pointed  out some  years  ago,  and   his observations  on  contemporary  fictional  developments have  a  special  relevance  to  the  question  of  where  Canadian fiction should  go. "The probing  of man's  consciousness and  conscience at  the expense of external social  reference,"  he argued,  "has  been  increasingly the  mark  of fiction in  the western  world over the  past fifty years." Though  Canada  has lagged  behind  in this respect,  much  significant  activity  has  been going on in this area  during  the past decade,  and  I would  predict  that  the kind of Canadianism that  one hears shouted  about  on  all sides in  our  sociological world will have  increasingly  less viability in our literary world.


NEXT TIME FROM
A DIFFERENT COUNTRY


Robert Gibbs



I   prefer,  as  far  as  my  own   work  is  con­ cerned,  a language  which  is clear, straight­ forward,  and  with  little  adornment. I  do not  normally  allow  myself  a word  which  I should  not  use in  plain  prose, and  I  nor­ mally  also use the  sentence  construction of plain prose. I think of a good style, whether in  prose or  verse, as  being  rather  like  the lady  whom  Sam  Johnson  considered  to be well  dressed  because  he did  not  remember what  she had  on. Or  perhaps  as Yeats says of  his  later   poems,  the   poetry  is  naked. (Crabbe   speaks   of   poetry    "without  an atmosphere.") Nothing  requires greater effort, or is more beautiful, than simplicity. 1
T.ABOVE,   Elizabeth  Bcewstec's own  account  of  her  fust
large collection, Passage  of Summer, is a clear enough announcement. Reviewers
who have  commented  on  her work have generally remarked  on the  presence of the  qualities  she has so deliberately  cultivated.  George Johnston, in  a review of her later  collection, Sunrise North, calls Miss Brewster "one  of the most reliable writers  I  know,"  who  "declares  her  intentions  and  carries  them  out,"  but  he warns  us  that  although  her  poetry  "seems transparent and  simple ... it is not quite either."2
Taken  together,  the two collections mentioned, one published in 1969 and  the
other in  1972, give us a substantial  body of work by which to judge what seems and  what is in her poems, and, taken separately, two distinct arrangements or gatherings.  Passage   of  Summer, as  she  tells  us in  "Chronology   of  Summer" consists of  poems  written  over  a  period  of  twenty-four  years.3   Sunrise North, though  it contains a few early poems, consists almost wholly of work done  after

17

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



Elizabeth Brewster  moved  to Alberta in  I 968.  In  terms  of composition then,  the
I 969 collection  gives a long  view in time, while the new collection  gives us poems largely  written with  a  sense  of  that   behind   her.  In  a  conversation I had  with Miss Brewster  in  I97o, she commented on her own feelings about  the  two collec­ tions, one just out and  the other  projected:

I think  that  so long as I had  quite  a bulk of unpublished  work, in a way it meant that  I  wasn't  likely  to  make  any  particularly  fresh  break.  The  fact  that  it  was published  just at  the  point  when  I was also moving to Alberta  meant  that  these two things came  together,  There  was the publication  of the book-the book was accepted  in October-I moved  to Alberta in September.... The  new place and the new work were going to come together.4

To  my  question   whether or  not  this  change  had  affected  her  poetic  principles, Miss  Brewster  replied, "Oh, no, it's  a new viewpoint, a new  window  to look out of."  So  with  the  two  books  we  have  both  old  and  new  windows,  differences in space and time and  distance to consider.
Passage of Summer contains most of the  poems of Miss Brewster's three Ryer­ son  Chapbooks, East  Coast, I95I;  Lillooet, I954; and  Roads, I957· The   title poem  of  the  first,  "East Coast-Canada",  is  noteworthy from  both  thematic and stylistic standpoints. It begins:

Lying at night poised between sleep and waking Here on the continent's edge, I feel the wind shaking The  house and passing on:
Blowing from far across fabulous mountain  ranges, Far over the long sweep of the prairies ...

The  one  end-rhyme, muted by enjambement, since it is the  only one  of its kind in  the  poem,  has  the  effect  of  momentarily arresting the  rhythm. It is a short hold-out against   the  force  of the  wind,  which  once  let loose blows  pretty  freely through the  poem.  In  the  final stanza, there  is another kind  of resistance:

Drown it out. 	Drown out the wind. Turn on the radio.
Listen  to the news.
Listen to boogie-woogie or a baseball game.
Pretend we belong to a civilization, even a dying one.

The   injunction  to  herself   and   to  her  readers   has  urgency.  It is  perhaps the urgency  of necessity,  the  necessity  of keeping  an  isolating  and  obliterating force at   bay.   But   the   "boogie-woogie"  itself,  tonally,   undermines  the   imperatives.

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



Conscious   self-irony  breaks  m  with  "Pretend" and  continues to  assert  itself  to the end of the poem.

Pretend. 	Pretend.
But there are the woods and the river and the wind blowing. There  is the sea.    Space.   The wind is blowing.

Ironic  as the effort  has  been,  it has at least served  to control  poetically  the terrors out  there.  To  see the  full  measure  of that  control,  one  needs to look at  what  has happened in the two stanzas between  the first and the last.

The wind travels where we cannot travel, Touches  those we cannot touch;
For few and lonely are the sentinel cities of the North
And rivers and woods lie between. Far, few, and lonely ...

The  effect  is expansive, a  free  opening  of the  poem  to  those  distances  and  soli­ tudes.  But  the  expansion cannot go on  without  sheer  terror entering and  over­ whelming the controlled voice-

Space surrounds us, flows around  us, drowns us.
Even when we meet each other, space flows between. Our eyes glaze with distance.
Vast tracts of Arctic ice enclose our adjectives. Cold space.
Our spirits are sheer columns of lice like frozen mountains
Dashed against by the wind.

Internal rhymes  here  have  quite  the  opposite  effect  of  the  initial   rhyme.  They inflate  the  poem  and  serve  to translate the  view of a vast openness  from  outside to  inside.  But  control,  however   threatened,  however   urgently   calling   for  that imperative voice, "Drown it out," is still there, expressed as hyperbole, a rhetorical expansiveness   answering to  but  also  taking  charge   of  the  emotion. The   whole poem  moves  as it should, loosely as if freed  to the  wind,  but  not  as loosely as it seems, and  the  overt  irony  of  the  end  is only a gesture  in  the  light  of the  irony that   contains the  whole.  Here  is enough   to  see  the  deceptiveness of  Elizabeth Brewster's "transparency".
To  make  the  leap  from  this  early  poem  to the  last  poem  printed   in  her  new collection  may  be  instructive. The   mood  in  "Advice   to  the  fearful  self"  is still imperative, and  perhaps more urgently so-

19

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



If necessary, go through madness.
If necessary, walk through a wall of fire. Let the flames eat your hand.
Let your body shrivel like the top of a burnt match stick.

There is a  nakedness here,  an  exposure  to an  inner  necessity more  terrible than that   coming   from   outside,   but   the   voice  and   the  controlling  irony   are  still patently Miss Brewster's own.  Qualification, ritualization, hyperbole (in  the light of  these), contain the  emotion. The  expanding impulse  I noted  in  "East Coast
-Canada" is here, in the succeeding stanzas:

If necessary, drown.
Walk undersea like a deepsea diver
but without his mask or oxygen supply. Let the waves close over you.
See above your head
the webbed feet of seabirds flying in water.

The  extremity of the  in junction is kept  from  being  really extreme by the unfail­ ing decorum, by the  positive resonance of undersea images, and  by the heightened and  fanciful  upside-down view. What follows is the more stark  by contrast:

If necessary, be buried live. Let sand clog your nostrils. Close your mouth on pebbles. In the frozen ground
stiffen with winter.

The   "frozen fountain" image   of  "East Coast-Canada"  finds  a  counterpart here,   but   there   is  no   relieving   beauty   about   it.  Only   the   continuity  of  the rhythmic and   rhetorical design  keeps  the  emotion  bounded. The   fusion  that  a good poem needs comes with the final stanza:

If necessary, be conceived again. Swim in the river of the womb till, cast up fishlike on dry land you grow a mouth and scream.

If necessary, scream.

That  scream, a  release  of  what   "East Coast -Canada"  would  have  drowned out,  gets  through. There is not  the same  distance  here between  the  necessity felt and   the  composing imagination.  We  are  closer  to  that  "fearful self".  But  the

20

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



rebirth  image, the fish image, grotesque as it becomes, cannot  but exert its power as the culmination  of an ordered  series, a power to contain,  check, compose the emotional  content. The  ironic structure  closes even around  the scream. Elizabeth Brewster is not a "howl" poet yet by any means.
The  tightly rhymed  poem, "Peace", which appeared  as the  penultimate poem in East Coast  and in Passage of Summer as "Peace: 1", is almost a statement of poetic credo for such poems as "advice to the fearful self". The final stanzas are:

Peace is pain increased
Till it is numb, And a cry so shrill That it seems dumb.

Peace cannot be shaken
By death or strife,
For it has swallowed both
To make its life.

Explicitly, "peace" here is more than  the undisrupted  continuity  of the rhetorical pattern,  but considering the effect here as elsewhere of the formal constraints,  the swallowing of all extremities is a matter  of poetic synthesis as much  as of  experi­ ence. When  the formal  pattern  is as tight as here, there is an  almost  grotesque effect  (considering  the  content), and  yet to  the  unwary  the  poem  may  seem simply to affirm courage  and  stoicism. "Peace", the poem, may finally leave one shaken, though  the purely formal  bridge over the chasm is steady enough.



EN       is one of time rather  than  of space, nostalgia often overlays the ironic  control. Consider the last poem of East Coast, reprinted  as the second poem in Passage of Summer. "River  Song" begins

Where are the lumberjacks who come from the woods for Christmas, Drinking, fighting, singing their endless ballads,


and ends
 


Where are the logs afloat on the wide river? Oh sad river,
Sing a song of pain for your children gone, Oh glory gone.


The  river is still wide, but not as those ballads seem, endless, in either dimension. The  sense of  looseness, reinforced  in  verbs like  "slopping", "shovelling",  and


21

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



"churning", remains  through  the  diminishing lines. The  feeling is beautifully contained,  controlling  and  controlled  within  the rhetorical  frame.  But the sense of distance  predominates,  and  the isolating force of time is no less than  that  of space in "East  Coast-Canada".
An early poem which works quite differently from any so far examined  is "In the  Library". The  tense is present,  and  the ordering  of the emotions  allows for immediate  drama. The  effort appears  to be to realize a moment  of dissolution in
the self.

Believe me, I say to the gentleman with the pince-nez, Framed forever with one hand in his pocket,
With passion, with intensity, I say it- Believe me, oh believe me, you are not I. Making my chair squeak on the chilly floor,
Catching up my pencil, I say- But of course I am myself.

There  is interplay  here  between  the sure control of the composing  imagination and  the  Woolfian  sense of  the  elusive moment  and  the  tenuous  continuity  of personal identity.  The  drama  so far, however, is not so much  played as reported being  played  "with   passion,  with  intensity".  The   narrator-observer is still  in charge   though   the  distance  diminishes  and  a  more  dramatic urgency  breaks
through-

The minutes ripple over the varnished tables. This is June, I say, not yesterday or tomorrow.
This is I, not Byron or Vanessa.   I am not in the moon. I must differentiate my body from all other bodies, Realizing the mole on my neck, the scar on my hand.

But the truth  once given in to is not so terrible as the fear of it was. The  merging of the speaker's identity  with others' is perhaps no worse than  Keats' experiences of empathy.  That yielding, allowing other selves to invade  and  merge with and perhaps  obliterate  the self, calls out  another  kind of control  is evident  from the
final lines :

The elastic moment stretches to infinity,
The elastic moment, the elastic point of space.
The blessed sun becomes the blessed moon.

For  all the  dramatic slippage  the  poem has taken  us through, it ends with the control  surer  than  at  the  outset. The  orderly withdrawal  from  the experience is such  that   the  merely  personal  becomes universal. The  last  line states,  without


22

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



perhaps  meaning  to,   the   transmutation  that   has  occurred  from   dramatized dissolution to  imaginative and  rhetorical stability. What  has  appeared more  and more  as one  kind  of experience miraculously turns  out  to be quite  another kind, essentially  the  experience of making  a poem, stabilizing while  dramatizing an experience which outside  of art would seem to be unsettling.
That  Elizabeth Brewster  should   be  doing  such  things  with  language is  not
surprising, considering that  all art  is an ordering and  abstracting as well as a dramatizing  process.  The  acting out,   though,  that   constitutes  the   rhetorical, formal  synthesis  differs  widely  from  poet  to poet  and  can  be defined  only  by the poems  themselves.   When   a  poet  works  as  Miss  Brewster  most  often  does  with matters that appear to  be those  of undisguised, unadorned experience, the  effect is very different from  what  happens in more openly fanciful or mythopoeic poets.
Passage of Summer is not only a collection of poems, it is also an  arrangement, a larger  composition, as Miss Brewster  herself has pointed  out  in her chronology:

My  first two sections are,  in a way, related  to psychoanalysis, dealing  as they do with  early  memories  and  with  dreams.... After  the two highly  personal  sections at  the  beginning,  I turn  to the  world of external  objects and  then  to the section of "Portraits." Most of the  poems are based on real remembered  people, many of them  remembered  from my childhood.... The section which seems more objective and  impersonal,  "Pilgrims," may  be  after  all,  one  of  the  most  personal  in  the book.... Restlessness,  whether   physical  or  spiritual,   is  one  of  my  commonest states,  and  it  is reflected  in  "Explorations" and  in  the  religious  poems.... The concluding  section of "Poems  for All Seasons" once more brings in the  theme  of time.  I also wished  to end,  in  the  classical manner,  with  a serene, anticlimactic poem.5

Miss  Brewster  here  admits  to seeming  other  than  she is in  her  poems  and  to restlessness  while  insisting  on  the  classical  manner of serenity. Her  book  moves out   from   what   is  apparently most  personal  to  what  is  possibly  more   personal (but more  detached)  and   back.  The  whole  is encompassed  by  the  distancing effect of time. The  opening stanza of the first poem, "Past as Present", establishes the manner Miss Brewster  has said she wanted to end with -

Walking these streets so often walked before, I almost feel as though my feet could find Their  former path,  reach one familiar door And enter to a world long left behind.

She  does  enter   that   world  with   measured  steps  but  does  not  allow  it,  by  any means,  to assume control-

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



The fried potatoes and the apple sauce,
The still warm loaf, the doughnuts sugared white Would vanish from the table.   Ancient jokes Would circle ghostly in the encircling night.

The   whole  rhetorical   process is one  of  approach   and  withdrawal. The  "still warm  loaf" must  here vanish  in favour of ghosts from a distance  anterior  to the distance  established  at  the  beginning.  The  lost  world  of  childhood,  though  it assumes a presence in the  poem, keeps a distance, entering  clearly as memory or dream.
The  poem ends  by expanding  the vision to include history and  myth,  not so much   to  universalize  the  poet's  particular   experience,  as  to  bring  the  larger human  background  within the same range and under the command  of the serene, stabilizing imagination.

Those who drank hemlock or were crucified
Live in the triumph of their desolation.
Orpheus, though torn to death, remains untouched
To play his lute to a new generation.

There  is no faltering  here. The  control is such that  Orpheus  and  other sufferers remain  distant  and  fixed against  the poet's assertions about  them. Serenity costs this. But  considering  the  poem's  function  in relation  to the  book, the  carefully measured  pacing out of distances is needed for the stable frame. The  poem encompasses what the book encompasses.
The  last poem in Passage of Summer, "Saint  John  River in October", though
it is really more serene  I  think  than  "Past  as Present"  (not  having  to insist so much on stabilizing), is a no less calculated closing of the frame.

It is late afternoon
In mid-October.
The smell of brittle leaves
Is in the air.
I walk by the river
By which I have walked many times
And I remember ...

The  movement  is not  quite  the same as that  of "Past  as Present",  which begins by reaching  back and  as a whole purports at least to bring the past forward. The outward  movement  within  that  movement forecasts the designated  movement  of the book. Here the process is similar. The present, though, from the very first has the  taint  of  the  past,  and  once  the  poet  has  established  her  distance,  the  "I

24

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



remember" lines become  the  means  both  of keeping  it while  bringing the  past  at least into view. The  last stanza  fixes the dual  perspective:

And I am surprised that all that time has gone, That life has flowed away with the river,
And all the tears, humiliations, hopes, quarrels
Have gone into the soil like dead leaves
To be buried under another winter's snow
Or feed the root of next spring's pussywillows.

Effectively  all experience, all that  the book has memorialized, reflected  upon, dramatized, finds  its place  here  in  the  present  consciousness,  which  encompasses the dimension of time serenely and  tidily.
That final  adverb may  indicate a  patness  or  complacency in Miss  Brewster
that  only an insensitive  reader  would take at face value. Open Passage of Summer to  any  page,  as  I have  done  to  pages  fourteen and  fifteen.  What is here  is the conclusion  of one poem -
Tomorrow, I remember is Pascal's birthday, Puritan  and gambler
On the game of faith.
And I remember
The girl in my office
Who plays bingo every Tuesday. "Some people always win," she says "But me-I always lose.
But I go all the same."

The  game  of imagination is like enough  the  game  of faith  for  Miss  Brewster  to keep  a  nice  imbalance in  such  conversations with  herself  as  "Alone in  Hotel Bedroom". Also  on  these  pages  is "What I Want Is  Stone", a  declaration of principle, an  allying  herself  consciously  not  just with  neo-classicism  but  with  the past.  Yet the  declaration is as "maliciously" ironic  as it wants  to be -
I want to open a new novel
And find it was written by Jane Austen. Civilization should tame barbarism, Decorum should control passion,
The will subdue the act. Humanity should be a statue Senatorial, calm, with a Roman smile Ironic, wise, malicious, and Augustan.

What I want is stone.

25

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



Miss  Brewster  is  here  having   what  she  wants  imaginatively,   that   decorous, hardened  stance,  but  her smile, necessary to the accomplishment  of that  end, is directed at herself and any reader who might be taken in.
Sunrise North  is not without  design, but its design is less an enclosing than  an opening. It begins with  the conscious facing of a new landscape,  and that  points its direction.  "Rising  from  Winnipeg" keeps the ever shifting  view from  the air before us;  it records  the  movement  of an eye over what  it cannot  reflect upon. The  metaphors  for  the  landscape  are  inconsistent, trite,  but  occur  as what  first occurs  to  an  observer  not  familiar  enough  with  what  she sees to  compose  the experience.  As  a  single  poem,  it is  not  one  of  Miss Brewster's  best,  but  as  a tentative  feeling-out  of the unknown  land,  it is a good beginning. Similarly, the second  poem,  "Moving Day",  records  the  still  unformed  world  of  the  poet's living-room  being  formed.  The  poem is the  deliberate  process itself acted  out.

There will be a chair in that corner, I think,
and above it a painting of red on blue.
There will be books
and on the desk over there which is not yet over there I shall put a vase
for chrysanthemums
or for the first daffodils of next April.

I have not yet decided how I shall arrange
my visitors.

What  is not yet there is there. The  poet cannot  escape her arranging, but she can stand  off from  it enough  to mock herself. The  saving grace of irony is still here,  just  as  the  window  was  there  in  "Rising  from  Winnipeg", as  her  chief metaphor  of distance in these poems.
The  third  poem  in  Sunrise  North,  "Dwarf  highrise," records a later  stage in
the  progress. The  eye from the window no longer lightly falls on whatever is the handiest metaphor; it forms the world out there and enters its interiors, then withdraws to its own ironic distance -

Inside are people also small,

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



so small I can't see them.
They walk around  behind the lighted dots, fiddle with the minute knobs
of toy television sets.

They cook, eat, make love, do pushups with precise cardboard  motions.

The   precision  is the  poet's  but  the  diminishing she effects  is nicely  turned back on herself caught in the very diminutive act she sees-

Maybe someone has even taken a sheet of paper from a doll's house desk and sits imagining

a Lilliputian  poem smaller than a speck.

There is  immediacy here,  a palpable imaginative process,  but  not  so strong  as to erase entirely  the "malicious", Augustan smile.
By the  time  Miss  Brewster  gets to her  "Cold Spell", three  or four  poems  over from  this,  she  is  ready  to  extend   the  imaginative process. She  begins  "walking the  zero street", observing,  sensing,  composing. She  returns to her "twelfth floor" to  "stand by the  window", and  from  that  distance  and  with  that  insulation take in  the street  she  has  just  left.  Abruptly, in  the  final stanza, her  attention  moves across time and space:

What is the weather like in your country? I would like to be a magician
who, by gazing through my window, could bring  you
from wherever you were into this cold landscape.
Suddenly you would appear walking
past that house with the blue roof

Is  it  memory  working  here?  The  effort is for  magic,  the  power  to  translate the far to the near and  finally to the close -

I would have to warm
your cold hands with mine.

Starting from  where  these  poems  start,  the  effect  of regarding distances is very unlike  that  nostalgic  irony  that  sang "Oh glory gone",  in Passage of Summer.

27

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



krs SUMMONING of the far  from the near  and  making  the two one  results in some very moving love poems -"September  twilight",  "On
awakening  at  night",  and  "November Sunday".  The  poem which best illustrates perhaps  the  unforced  magic  of such  poems is "Thirty  below". The  perspective chosen is familiar  and  the  impulse  to  pull together  widely ranging  associations there from the start. The  poet is looking and listening through  "frosted  windows" to the  wind  and  the snow. But  her view is not confined to the street below, for
she thinks " ... how deepI all over the country nowI snow drifts ... "

A solitary  man  walking
wraps  his face in a woollen mask turns  his back sometimes
so as not  to front
this biting,  eye-smarting wind.

Here  the  view focusses on the solitary figure, but  the wider range  has prepared for the dramatic translation  that follows:

Suddenly I see my dead  father in an old coat  too thin for him,
the tabs of his cap pulled over his ears, on a drifted road  in New Brunswick walking  with  bowed  head
towards home.

The  mood  that  has summoned  and  prepared  for this vision does not  take  any­ thing  from its startling  clarity  and  the abrupt  sense it brings of distances giving way to simultaneity.
So distances  remain  but  the sharpening  of the senses to engage  with  the new landscape  has  reduced  them.  This  is not  to say that  the  individual   poems in Sunrise  North  are  better  than  those of Passage of Summer or that  the book is a better  book. What  comes strongly  through  is the sense of a  poet's  having  done one thing  well in collecting and  arranging one set of poems and  now moving on to something else, a new way of ordering experience.
Dream   poems  have  an  important place in  both  books. A dream  itself is an
abstraction, a composition of psychic experience. The  memory of a dream repre­ sents a further  abstraction, and  a poem that  records such a memory must be at least three  removes from  whatever  impelled  the  dream.  Miss  Brewster's  dream poems,  though   filtered  through   these  distancing  lenses,  retain  the  strength  of

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



experiences  vital  to  her  imagination, and  especially  to  that  very  composing and abstracting  impulse   so  evident   in  Passage  of  Summer. The  dream poems  of Sunrise  North  take  their  character from  the  impulse  of  the  book  as a  whole  to reduce  distances. The  dreams become  more  dramatic as the  voice  becomes  that of one  recording things  as they  happen. The  dream  process becomes,  as recorded, the composing process, the making of the poem.

In a square classroom
with a pointer in my hand
I stand explaining  my dream. There  is a blackboard
on which I make notes with white  chalk.
My explanation  satisfies others but not myself.

Here  in "Round Trip", as always,  the ironic sense of the self within  the compos­ ing  process  keeps  the  result  from  conclusiveness,  keeps  for  the  poem,  that  is, a necessary dramatic uneasiness.

I am not sure
whether it is good or bad to have come home again

or if I intend  to stay.

Within the dream the drama of this book is enacted; the "Round  Trip"  becomes a kind of exemplum for the larger  composition.
In  "Poems for  psychoanalysis", the  dreaming, composing, interpreting  func­
tions are removed from the individual psyche and dramatized through various personae:  the  psychoanalyst  herself,  the  patients   collectively  and   individually. The poet as "I" does not  enter  these poems;  she has become  an  ironic,  detached, and  self-effacing  observer  of  the  whole  tragi-comic play  of  interacting  psyches. This  self-effacement  in  favour of  immediacy and  drama  appears elsewhere  in such  particularly fine poems as "Conversation between  friends, largely  unspoken" and   "Gatrey  Ketcheson". To   move  into  psyches  outside   her  own  and   render their  memories,  dreams and  terrors  with  as much  clarity  as her  own  is a kind  of triumph over  the  framing and  distancing impulse,  yet one  that  involves  its own kind  of distance.
Similarly  the  religious  poems,  which  in  Passage of Summer for  all their  ironic tension  compose  together   a  testimony  of  faith,   have  in  Sunrise   North a  more

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



clearly  dramatic   character.  "Good   Friday  performance" is itself  a  play  with voices and actors, with the poet detached yet participating, with priest and congregation,   with  the  bird   beating   against  the  rafters.  As  the  dramatizing impulse comes to the fore, rhetorical continuity breaks-

The cross .. . Suffering .. .
Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates.

Let him loose.
Let the caged spirit free. The bird flits distractedly here and there.
He cannot find the way.

The  poem does not stay suspended  and  discontinuous. The  poet's ironic  aware­ ness of  the  ambiguities  of  her  faith  draws  all  the  elements  together  in  a very strong conclusion:

Be patient, be patient, they will try to let you out

unless you fall first crumpled, beaten, crazed, the broken victim
on the altar

with the other Victim.

So  in  Sunrise  North   two  impulses  find  play  and  interplay,   the  composing impulse, so strongly controlling  Passage of Summer, and the dramatizing impulse that   pushes  against  the  insulating   glass. The  second  of  these  impulses  is the stronger  for  the  interplay,  itself a dramatic  force in the  poems. "Advice  to the fearful  self",  which  ends  the  book with a "scream", has a clear  counterpart in "To a friend on the verge of breakdown":

I cannot break the glass.
You must smash your own hand through your own protection and save yourself by blood.

The  act of poetic creation  has for  Miss Brewster come close and  closer to being such an act.

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



I described the design of Sunrise  North  as "less an enclosing than  an opening." This  is true  not  just of the beginning. The  book takes us through  seasonal cycles, much as Passage of Summer did, but it ends less serenely. The  unsettled character apparent  in  "Moving day"  is far  less settled  in  "Moving day  again",  which comes near  the end of the book. Images of spring and  rebirth,  even the  painful and  grotesque  rebirth  of "advice  to the  fearful  self",  predominate in  the  final poems. This  restlessness is not, however, even at the end, uncontained, just as the "scream" remains a verbal enclosure of the scream as well as an expression of it. Serenity  reasserts itself  again  and  again,  as in "Under a  plane  tree",   placed third from the end -

Ah, yes, again  you prove
(doubt though I often  may)
that  love and  language conquer death.

If Miss Brewster takes an explicit  position, it is usually on the side of decorum. She is self-aware, which means that she is aware of limits which she cannot  cross or which she does not wish to cross as a poet.

I come from  a country
of slow and  diffident  words of broken  rhythms
of unsaid  feelings.

Next  time I am born
I intend to come
from  a different country.

One  can  sense the malicious, Augustan  smile closing round  this poem, in which Miss Brewster drinking  her "rum  and  hot water"  has concluded  that  she cannot join the free chant  of the "gold  man".  She is taking her place as deliberately  as she  planned  the serene  conclusion of Passage of Summer. But self-awareness is not  all.  The  mock intention  of the final  lines is not  (in  the  light  of what  has occurred  in this book)  as impossible of realization as it appears  to be. As a poet, Miss Brewster  moves on,  from  season to season, from  landscape  to  landscape, closing distances  and  opening  for  herself new  possibilities. Each  beginning  is a rebirth.  In  some very important ways, the  Elizabeth  Brewster of Sunrise  North has come "from a different country".

FROM A DIFFERENT COUNTRY



NOTES

1 Elizabeth Brewster, "Chronology of Summer," The Humanities Association  Bulle-
tin, XXI: 1  (Winter  1970), 38-39.
2    Quarry, XXI: 3 (Summer 1972), 55·
3   Elizabeth Brewster, 34·
4   Transcribed from  tape  in possession of author.
5    Elizabeth Brewster, 37-38.





















INCREJISE IN SUBSCRIPTIONS

Regrettably, owing  to increased costs and  a lower advertisement income due  to publishers' economies,  we are obliged to increase our subscription rates. From  the 1st January 1975, they will be:

I  YEAR    -$  6.50
2 YEARS- $12.00
3 YEARS- $1 7·50

All subscriptions received  before  1st January next will be at the  present rates.  But  even  at  the  increased rates,  Canadian  Literature  will still be one of the best bargains in the field of periodicals.

For  the  time  being,  the  price of single copies will remain $2.00.

HURRY TO SUBSCRIBE AND TAKE ADVANTAGE  OF THE PRESENT  RATESI


THE ALCOHOLIC ON ALCOHOLISM


Art Hill


lvou BEUEVE IN  heaven, be assmed that  Malcolm  Lowry ;, there  (and  probably  hates  it). It  is perhaps  an  unlikely destination  for a  man
who occasionally sold his clothes to buy a drink,  and  wrote  about  people who might sell their souls for a dash of bitters. Lowry's principal --,---virtually his only
-subject was  his  own  mind  and  the  demons  that  lived  there.  And  mean, spiteful creatures they were! But his instincts were always right. The poor damned wretches  who  stumble  through  his stories, their  foggy minds  periodically  lit  by insights almost too sharp  to believe, are  always looking for a  route  to salvation through  faith.  That  they never find anything  to have faith in is quite  beside the point. If heaven  makes any sense at all, it's intent  that  counts. And  their inten­ tions (like Lowry's)  are honourable.
Under  the Volcano, Lowry's masterpiece, is a novel written  (and  designed to be read  and  understood)   on many  levels. It  is about  a man's  distaste  for what he finds in himself and  his inability to live with it. It is about  the need for love, and the pain of being unable  to give it. But it is also a political novel, concerned with mankind's  capacity  for organized cruelty in a world moving toward  fascism. It  is filled with  mysticism, signs, omens and  portents, all expertly woven into the narrative  by a man  who knew the  Cabbala  and other  dusty doctrines,  and  who firmly believed that  nothing  is quite what it seems. It is influenced  by the cinema and  by Lowry's taste for  jazz. It is as complex as Joyce's Ulysses, to which it is often compared.
More  than  anything,  though,  it is about  drunkenness.  And  this is the  aspect of the book that  has never been adequately interpreted. All the critics mention it, of course. One could not write about Under the Volcano  without mentioning drunkenness.  But  many  take  the  attitude  that  it is unimportant, that  the  book succeeds almost in spite of it. Some of them seem embarrassed  by the confessional nature  of it, as they  would  probably  not be by the  most explicit sexual  revela-


33

THE ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



tions. Most of them,  I think,  simply have no conception of the devious workings of the alcoholic mind. They are blind victims of the blessed ignorance  that comes from  not  having  wasted  any  considerable  portion  of their  lives getting  drunk. Which  is all the  more  reason  to  pay attention,  because it's  all there  if one can find it.
To  begin  more  or  less at  the  beginning,  why  was  Lowry  a  drunkard? In attempting, without  any real hope of success, to answer this question, it is worth noting that  virtually every protagonist in a Lowry story is provided not only with an overwhelming  sense of guilt to justify his urge for self-destruction, but with a tangible  reason  for it.  Ethan  Llewellyn, in October   Ferry to  Gabriola, agonizes over a prep school friend  who hanged  himself. It is suggested that  he was almost an  accomplice  in  the  tragedy.  Everywhere  he looks, there  are  reminders  of the dead  friend. In Volcano, Geoffrey Firmin, the Consul, broods over the execution of some  German  prisoners on  a  British gunboat  he commanded  during  World War  I. The  circumstances  surrounding this event are always kept vague. Some­ times the  Consul  dismisses it as nonsense:  " 'People simply did  not go around,' he said,  'putting Germans  in  furnaces.' " This  remark is recalled  by  his  friend, Jacques  Laruelle, in the long retrospective first chapter, which takes place exactly one year after  the action of the story. But, Laruelle remembers, at other times he seemed to be tortured  by the memory of the act, and to demand the blame for it: "But  by this time the poor Consul had already lost almost all capacity for telling the  truth ... and  the  German   officers were  merely an  excuse  to  buy  another  bottle of mescal."
There  is ample room for doubt  that the incident ever took place. For one thing,
the  Consul's  age  (which  we can  compute  from other information)  would have made  him impossibly young, at the time of the incident, for the high naval rank which would have accompanied  command  of a ship engaged in vital missions.
Was  Lowry's arithmetic  bad?  Not likely; he was usually careful of detail, and
it is hard  to believe that  he would have let such an error slip through  in a book he had worked on for ten years.
The  obvious  probability  is that  Lowry deliberately clouded  this phase of the
Consul's  past. He  created  the  possibility of a shameful secret, and  along with it the strong  likelihood that  there  was none. This is the sort of thing  an alcoholic clings to:  a reason for drinking so awful that it can only be hinted at, but which can  yet be shucked  off if he is ever seriously called to account  for it. There  is, of course, no need to simulate  the feeling of guilt. All alcoholics have that auto­ matically-about their drinking.

34

THE  ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



It  is worth asking why Lowry felt it necessary to create a reason for his hero's alcoholism. Aside from the fact that  a drunkard  feels comfortable  with a reason, it is also undoubtedly  a concession to his readers. People who are not compulsive drinkers have a tendency to seek explanations for those who are. It makes for interesting conversation and  it gives them a sense of the fitness of things  ("there's a logical reason for everything"). The fact is that  the vast majority  of alcoholics do  not  know why they drink.  Those  who have permanently  renounced  alcohol are  quite  definite on this matter.  Those who have not cannot  be trusted  on this or any other matter having to do with drinking.
While it is impossible to single out a reason for Lowry's insatiable  drinking,  it is easy to  pick out  a  pattern  in  his life which  fits it.  His  father,  a  prosperous merchant   (whose stuffiness may be partially measured by the fact that  he signed his letters "Your  affectionate  Dad"), was hardly  the type to warm  up to a son whose first ambition  was to be a  jazz musician-especially since Lowry's three older  brothers  had  all toed the mark and  played the game. There was, from the beginning,  friction  and  misunderstanding between  the  Liverpool  cotton  broker and his youngest son.
Lowry was agonizingly shy as a child, hardly less so as a man. An eye ailment kept him almost blind from his ninth to his thirteenth  year. He had a nursemaid who, he said, used to beat him and once attempted  to kill him. The bitterness engendered  in  youthful  mishandling   never left  him,  and  it  is given voice in a number of his poems, notably in "Autopsy".1
The  best piece ever written  about  Lowry's prep school and  university days was done  by Conrad  Knickerbocker,2    a superb  reporter  and  a sensitive and  sympa­ thetic  chronicler.  Lowry,  he  says, had  a  neurotic  fear  of venereal  disease, the product  of an  almost endless series of parental  lectures on the subject,  complete with pictures and exhibits, long before he was old enough to be in any danger  of contracting such  an  illness  (at  least in  the  traditional  way) .  They  left  him  a "sexual hypochondriac" for the rest of his life.
Martin  Case, a brilliant  biochemist and one of Lowry's closest friends at Cambridge,  calls him "A  true  syphilophobe"  who talked about  syphilis so much that   people thought  he  had  it.  (It must  be remembered  here  that  syphilis, in those pre-penicillin days, was a far more terrifying disease than  it is now, almost akin to leprosy in its capacity  to inspire fear.)  But his aversion to girls went quite beyond  the  bacterial.  Case relates that  he once tried to introduce him to a girl, "a  literary  type",  but  Lowry  would  have none of it: " ... he thought  we were

35

THE ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



making fun of him. He simply couldn't  believe that  anyone wanted  to meet him, nor ... that his talents commanded  great respect in others."
Lowry  was, says Case,  "frightened of people in charge".  That says as much about  the  potential  or incipient  alcoholic as could ever be said in so compact  a phrase.  He  was frightened  of people in charge-not  just the  policeman  or the boss, but  the room clerk, the  usher, the stranger  on the telephone  (who must be in charge of something,  or one would not be talking to him). In  Case's corrobo­ rative anecdote, it was a janitor.
Lowry's  stories  repeatedly   support   this  description.  In   Dark   as  the  Grave Wherein My   Friend  is  Laid, Sigbjorn  Wilderness  (i.e. Lowry)   marvels at  the courage  of a  young  man  who faces the customs and immigration people at  the airport  unshaven  and  uncombed,  "whereas  Sigbjorn for fifteen minutes  prior to landing ... would  have  been  dodging  in  and  out  of the  lavatory  and  plaguing Primrose as to whether  he looked 'all right' ... this man ... even daring  to smoke
... seemed to him the epitome of everything that he would like to be."
Lowry is, then,  in  many  respects a prototypical  alcoholic. But he veers wildly from the true path of alcoholism in one all-important  respect:  the ability to write so clearly and  honestly about  his addiction.  His subtle understanding of his own devious alcoholic  mind  is the  more astonishing because he attained it while still addicted  to alcohol. The  feat  virtually  required  dividing  himself in two, divorc­ ing the mind of the writer from that of the man, in order that one might examine the other.
There   is  a  simple  and  obvious  reason  for  the  alcoholic's  inability  to  talk
honestly about  his condition.  All alcoholics lie. It  is intrinsic.  They  lie to their friends,  they  lie to  themselves,  they  even lie to other  alcoholics.  Non-addicted drinkers  often brag  about  how much  they drink;  alcoholics almost always mini­ mize it. This  is not  to say that  the alcoholic is basically dishonest. He may be a model of virtue  in all things, except where his drinking is concerned. But this is misleading, because almost every decision an alcoholic makes is influenced  by its possible effect on his ability to get a drink, now or two weeks hence.
To illustrate: given a choice of two parties to attend at some future date, the alcoholic will, within seconds, weigh half a dozen factors quite beyond the imagination  of the normal  person. The  possible congeniality of the company may not  be one of them.  He  may,  in fact,  prefer to spend the  evening  with  people he doesn't  much  like. If the  prospective host is lavish with  his spirits, that  will obviously weigh in  his favour.  But  more important  is his style  of entertaining. Does he urge people to pour  their own drinks? Does he leave the liquor around

THE  ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



where  anyone  can  get  at  it?  Is the drink-mixing  spot out  of sight  of the  room where the guests congregate?  Do the host and  hostess tend  to over-drink  (which draws  attention   away  from  others  who  do)? The  list of  possible questions  is unlimited,  but  the  experienced  alcoholic will consider all of them.  If the  signs are  favourable,  he  will get three  times as much  to drink  as the  average  guest, without anyone's seeing him. If he is plainly very drunk at the end of the evening, he  will be  put  down  as one  of those unfortunate people who  can't   hold  their liquor, at least by those who don't  know him. (The "invisible" drink is, of course, the source of the  peristent  notion  that  alcoholics regularly get roaring  drunk  on three or four drinks.)
If all this seems exaggerated,  it is not. If it seelllS ludicrous,  well, it is. The
total  dedication  of a  good mind  to such a trivial  pursuit  is patently  ridiculous. But it's deadly serious to the millions of good minds so dedicated  at this moment.

IHAVE DWELT on this at such length because it is essential that the  reader  understand   the  inspired  duplicity  of the  alcoholic  mind  if  he is  to
appreciate  Lowry's  unique  achievement.  It is a mind  thoroughly  given over to deceit, trickery, and  plain lying. And Lowry's was typical of the species. He lied, cheated  and  cozened with all the skill at his command,  which was considerable. But Lowry the Writer  pulled off the remarkable  feat of dissociating himself from the  drunkard, and  writing  about  him with  the  clearest eye that  has ever  been fixed upon  him. And he did all this without ever conquering  his addiction. True, there were apparently  periods of relative sobriety, but he never really renounced liquor  and  he died drunk.  The  alcoholic, even during  a sober spell, simply does not share  his secrets. Lowry broke that  rule, and the result is Under the Volcano
- something of a literary miracle.
In   her  book  on  the  Cabbalistic  significance  of  Under  the  Volcano,  Perle Epstein  footnotes  an  explanation   of a  mystically symbolic twelve-day  journey, during  which  the subject  remains  in a trance,  with the comment,  "This aspect of ritual  suffering is relevant to Lowry's hero, who goes through  twelve chapters of hell in an inebriated state to his martyrdom."3
This  viewpoint,  while perhaps  quite valid, is an example of the  usual critical approach  to the  drunkenness  theme  in Volcano. It  is seen as pure  symbolism; only  its figurative  meaning  is important. The  fact  that  Lowry  was  literally  a drunk,  writing about genuine, mind-shattering, cold-sweat, hand-shuddering drunkenness, is apparently  thought inconsequential.

37

THE ALCOHOLIC ON ALCOHOLISM



The  tragedy  of the  Consul in Volcano,  best described, lies in  his inability  to love another  human  being. The  phrase, "No se puede vivir sin amar,"  recurring throughout the  novel,  is translated   by almost  every critic  as "you  cannot  live without  love,"  when  it  really  means:   "You  cannot  live without  loving."  The difference  is pivotal.  Hardly  anyone,  deserving or  not, is totally  unloved.  Cer­ tainly,  the Consul was not. But loving comes from within and cannot  be forced. Its absence is intensely personal and painful.
Stephen  Spender,   in  his introduction to the  1965 edition  of Volcano, says: "Fundamentally, Under  the Volcano  is no more about drinking  than  King  Lear is about  senility. It  is about  the  Consul, which is another  matter,  for what  we feel  about   him  is  that   he  is great  and  shattered ... Most  of  all,  Under  the Volcano is about the breakdown of values in the twentieth century."
Spender  is one  of  Lowry's  most  perceptive  critics, but  we cannot  so easily
separate  the  Consul  from  his drinking,  because we cannot  separate  him  from Lowry.  Drunkenness,  in Volcano, is not  merely a thematic  device to exemplify mankind's  insensitivity to the evil within itself. Nor is it merely a technical device to sustain the Consul's wild fantasizing. It is both these things, but it is not merely, nor  even  primarily,  them.  It  is integral  to  the  Consul's  tragedy  because  it  is integral to Lowry.
It  is important to mention  here that  Lowry was not able to create characters in  the  normal  novelistic sense. All his major  characters  are versions of himself. This  being  true -conceded  by critics and  by Lowry himself -I  shall  not  be reluctant  to  discuss the  Consul  as if  he  were  Lowry,  which,  in  so far  as  his alcoholic behaviour is concerned, he is.
Toward  the end of the first chapter  of Volcano, Jacques Laruelle finds a letter
the  dead  Consul  wrote,  but  never  mailed,  to the  wife who had  left him  (but would return) . After  her departure, the Consul wrote, he had taken the train  to Oaxaca,   where  they  had  once  been  happy  together.  The  trip  was  a  horror. Awful things happened to him, but even worse was what  happened  within him. Like most seekers after  hell, he finds it in  his own mind. He sees himself "as  a great  explorer  who  has discovered some extraordinary  land  from which  he can never return to give his knowledge to the world:  but the name of this land is hell." In  Chapter  Ten,  we will hear him shout, as he runs drunkenly into the woods, toward  his death: "I love hell. I  can't  wait  to get back there."  Like Rimbaud ("]e  me  crois en  en fer, done  j'y suis"),  the  Consul has  created  his own  hell. Rimbaud, a poet, saw no need to put the words in the mouth of another,  but the
distinction is unimportant. The Consul's season in hell is Lowry's own.

THE ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



The  most significant  line in  the letter,  however, is a simple statement: "You cannot  know the sadness of my life." The apparent meaning is plain:  the Consul wants  his wife to come  back;  in  the timeworn  phrase of lovers everywhere,  he cannot  live without  her.  But  he  means  much  more  than  that.  He  means  the sadness of all of his life, including  that  part she had shared  with him. He means both what had  made him a drunk  (if he only knew what that  was)  and the fact that  he is a drunk,  and  that  being a drunk is a terribly sad thing, so sad, indeed, that one cannot face it without a drink.
"You  cannot  know the sadness of my life." This to Yvonne, who would  have said that  she well knew the sadness of his life, for she had lived it with him and found it so sad that she had left him. And yet the Consul is right. Because no one who is not  an  alcoholic  can  ever  understand  the  alcoholic's  need  to drink.  He does not  understand   it  himself,  but  he knows what  it  feels like, something  no "outsider" can know.  (This  is the basis of the success of Alcoholics Anonymous. It is not love or sympathy  that  the alcoholic seeks in AA-he may well get those at  home -but the company  of people who know how he feels. He can find that nowhere  but  with other  alcoholics.)  "You  cannot  know the sadness of my life." It is true. She cannot.
(It  can be argued  that  she could know the sadness of his life by becoming an alcoholic herself. This  is true. If she could, somehow, achieve that  dubious goal, she would finally know the sadness of his life. But it would not interest her much, for she would then be totally immersed in the sadness of her own life.)
The  Times Literary  Supplement, in an  unsigned lead  article  on  Lowry/ says he "could  remember  almost everything that  happened  during  bouts of  drunken­ ness-no  alcoholic  amnesia,  there ... " The  statement   is naively  absurd.  All alcoholics have blackouts -periods,  often of several hours, in which  they func­ tion  almost  normally,  may  not  even seem very drunk,  but  of  which they  can remember  nothing  at  all. Lowry  was no exception, 5   as is  repeatedly  made  clear in his writing.
In  Chapter  Five of Volcano, it is eleven a.m.  The  Consul  has  been  poking about  in his garden,  looking for  (and  finding)  a hidden  bottle. He sees his wife and  brother on the porch, waves ... and wakes up in the bathroom,  an hour and a quarter  later, holding  a glass of stale beer, from which he drinks slowly, "post­ poning the problem soon to be raised by its emptiness."
The  average  person,  waking  in  this condition,  would  be repelled  by the very thought  of a drink. To  the  Consul, the few swallows of warm  beer are as  anti­ toxin for the plague. But they must be taken deliberately,  "postponing the prob-

39

THE  ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



lem".  And  the  problem  is that  they will not be nearly enough. There  are bottles of fresh cold beer-celestial  nectar-in  the icebox, a room or so away. Soon, he will have to open one of them.  Why not now? Because the one thing a bath­ room  assures is privacy,  the  opportunity to drink  alone, the  absolute  assurance that  no one who loves you will say-and no one else who matters ever says it­ "Don't you think you've had enough?"
Now, Hugh  and Yvonne have been carefully avoiding criticism of the Consul's drinking.  He  could, if he wished, stride  boldly to the icebox,  pop open  a beer, and  be momentarily  restored  to  health,  without  drawing  so much  as a sidelong glance. But he fears what  they will-or even might-be thinking.  For it is one more affliction of the alcoholic that  he is always ashamed of his drinking. This is why,  drunk  or sober,  he  maintains  the fiction that  he could  drink  moderately, and  surely will next time. He does not, ever, consider stopping  until he faces the fact that moderation is not within his power.

0NE DEVICE  the alcoholic uses to enforce  the self-delusion that  he doesn't  "need" the drink  is the tactic of spurious indifference. Under  the
Volcano  is  practically  a  textbook  in  the  use of this gambit,  which  is absurdly simple. Given a drink  after  a period of abstinence  (of any length) , the alcoholic simply delays drinking  it. That's all, and  it is pointless, but  he feels like a hero. Alcoholism being primarily an emotional  ailment, the mere presence of the drink is calming.  Deferring  the moment  of consumption supports  the belief that it will be voluntary.  It is a  ritual  as fixed as the  mating  dance  of the  curlew,  and  its consummation  is even more certain: he will drink the drink.
At  the  beginning  of  Chapter Seven  of Volcano,  the  scene  is  the  home  of Jacques  Laruelle.  Laruelle,  a decent  man, has been Yvonne's lover when she fled from  the  Consul's  drunkenness,  and  the  Consul is uncomfortable  there.  Drinks are poured. He does not touch his, but instead scans the countryside through binoculars  from  a  balcony, commenting  lightly on random  topics. The implica­ tion is plain:  he is so indifferent  to liquor that he has forgotten the drink is there. He has not forgotten.
Suddenly,  unexpectedly,  Yvonne suggests that  they leave to see the fiesta. She
is more  uncomfortable than  he in  Laruelle's  house, but this has not occurred  to the Consul, involved as he is totally with himself. Almost desperately, she pleads with  him  to come. Quietly,  but  actually  with equal  desperation,  he expresses a

THE  ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



lack of interest  in the fiesta and  suggests that  she and  Hugh  go along, and  that he join them later.
Laruelle  goes downstairs  to see Hugh  and  Yvonne out. Left alone, the Consul permits himself to become aware of the profusion of good things that  have come his way, quite  unbidden.  He  has not touched  his drink,  the  others  have  barely touched   theirs,  and   the  cocktail  shaker  is  not  empty.  He  is  surrounded  by alcohol. But still he does not drink. The  Consul is playing the game to the limit. He  even eats  half a canape -proving  he is in no danger,  for it is well known that alcoholics have no interest in food.
Laruelle  returns and  angrily attacks  him:  "Am  I to understand that  your wife has come back to you, something  I have seen you praying and  howling for under the  table -really  under  the  table ... And  that  you treat  her  as indifferently  as this, and  still continue  only to care where  the next drink's  coming  from?"  The Consul is stunned  by this "staggering  injustice"  (no one but the player ever takes the game seriously).
Laruelle  goes off  to  prepare  for  a  tennis  match,  and  the  Consul  suddenly decides to return  a telephone  call received hours before. The  Herculean task of looking up the number  puts him in a sweat. He finds the number,  forgets it, looks it up again,  half completes the call, hangs up in panic. It is too hard. He cannot make the call without  a drink. He dashes back to the upper  room, downs all the drinks  plus the residue in the shaker, and saunters  back downstairs,  returned  to the living. The telephone call is forgotten.
The  game is over, this time. But he takes pride in the fact  that  it was played by the rules. At no time, he tells himself, did he intend to drink those drinks until the telephone  crisis left him no choice. At no time, in fact, was there the slightest possibility that  he  would  not  drink  them.  For  the  experienced  player,  there  is always a crisis.
A few hours later,  the  Consul,  Hugh  and  Yvonne are sitting  in the arena  at
Tomalin. What  they are  watching  is not a bullfight, but  a sort  of bull baiting. The  bull  is not  killed, or  even  hurt  much.  He  is simply  pestered  unmercifully and  robbed  of  his dignity.  It  is more  sad  than  brutal,  suggestive  of  a  people desperate  to be amused  but  unsure of how to go about it, and  metaphorically  of a  world  which  laughingly  tolerates  gratuitous  cruelty  and  seems about  to  end with  a  disinterested  whimper.   (It  is I 938,  and  a different  spectre  is haunting Europe.)
Hugh  takes a drink  from  a small bottle of rum  he has brought, and  passes it
to  Yvonne. She  takes a sip and  hands  it  to the  Consul, who sits "holding the

THE  ALCOHOLIC ON ALCOHOLISM



bottle  gloomily in  his hands  without  drinking."  The  game  is on again.  Yvonne and  Hugh,  not  being  compelled  to  drink,  can  drink  freely. The  Consul,  who must  drink,  must  also pretend  that  he is indifferent  to it. He  can  wait  for the crisis. It  comes  quickly.  In  response to  a  challenge  from  the  bull  ring,  Hugh goes down  to  ride  the  bull. He  does it well, but  the strain  is too much  for the Consul. Yvonne tells him there  is no danger:  "It's  all right, Geoff. Hugh  knows what  he's doing."  But the  Consul is not, cannot  allow himself to be, reassured. " 'The   risk ... the  fool,'  the  Consul  said,  drinking  habanera." But  of  course. And  he drinks it all-all  but  a swallow for Hugh, so no one can say, "Oh, did you finish it?" The  craftiness of the presumably  befuddled  alcoholic, when he is simultaneously  protecting  his liquor  supply  and  his "honour,'' cannot  be  over­ estimated.  The   giant   flaw  in  this  virtuoso  performance   is that   the  audience doesn't  know  the show is on. Those who know him are not studying  him. Why should they? They know him.
The  Salon Ofelia,  where the three go next, turns out to be a veritable theatre­
in-the-round   for  the  Consul's   repertoire.  " 'Mescal,'   the  Consul  said,  almost absentmindedly. What  had  he said? Never mind. Nothing less than  mescal would do.  But  it  mustn't    be  a  serious  mescal,  he  persuaded   himself.  'No,  Senor Cervantes,'  he whispered, 'mescal, poquito.' "
This short passage introduces  several basic alcoholic concepts. First, the Consul
has  ordered   the  deadly   mescal   (instead  of  something  "safe"   like  tequila  or whiskey)  quite  by accident,  it seems. Well, now it's done, he might as well take it. Probably  just what  he needs. Second, there is the idea of the "serious" drink. The  alcoholic  finds  it  comforting  to  think  that  he  won't  get  drunk  unless he wants  to. While this may  be true  for the moderate  drinker,  who can stop when he  starts  "feeling"  his drinks,  it  is most emphatically  untrue  for  the  alcoholic, who drinks faster  as each  drink  blurs his sense of guilt. This is a distinction  the alcoholic  refuses to  make,  even  as  he  refuses to  concede  that  his  drinking  is abnormal. Third,   he  tells the  bartender "poquito"-just  a little one. Needless to say,  the  drink  will  be  regulation  size, or  the  bartender will quickly have  it called to his attention. But the concept of the "little"  drink is cherished by those for whom every drink is too big.
There  is a swimming  pool at the Ofelia, and  Hugh  and  Yvonne decide to go
in.  The  Consul  does not  join them.  This  was predictable.  Alcoholics are spec­ tators.  Their  single  hobby  leaves  no  time  for  other  avocations.  But  there  are other  reasons. The  drunk's  fabled  bluster, for one thing, is tempered  with great caution.  He  knows that,  if he tries to participate  in  any activity  requiring  skill,

THE ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



he will do it badly, and  he is doubly reluctant  to take part  in anything  at which he was once expert.  Even if he could still do it reasonably well, the deterioration of his skills would be apparent to him, and he would be ashamed  of what  he has done  to  himself.  Living  constantly  with  shame,  he shuns  anything   which  will intensify it.
The  principal  reason for his spectator status, though, is simply that  the recrea­ tional  activities of others  get them out  of the way so he can  drink  unobserved. This  is why the alcoholic is always urging others to "have  some fun,"  go swim­ ming, go dancing,  go to the theatre,  go anywhere-go away, in short, and leave him to his own miserable fun.
Secret  drinking  leads  inevitably  to the  practice  of drink  counting,  which,  as done  by  the  alcoholic,  has  no relation  to standard arithmetic. Lowry expounds this point deftly, as the three principals sit down to eat at the Ofelia. The  Consul is, at  first, in a  jovial mood. He has had,  by alcoholic count,  very little to drink
-because the others did  not see him drink  the eight or nine secret mescals. He has sworn  Cervantes,  the  bartender,  to silence. Still, Hugh  and  Yvonne seem to suspect. Cervantes  must have told on him. The  bartender  is a native of Tlaxcala; years  ago  the  Tlaxcaltecans had  betrayed  Moctezuma  to  Cortez.  With  superb drunken   logic,  the  Consul  reasons that  this Tlaxcaltecan has  been  "unable to resist" the  equally  grave  crime of betraying  him to his friends. How  else could he  justify Hugh's  and  Yvonne's  attitude  toward  him? According  to his  double­ entry  drink-counting system, he has been observing a code of conduct so nearly puritanical  that  he really ought to let down a bit and have a drink. He is probably surprised  they  don't  suggest it. The  fact  that  they can see he is drunk  does not occur to him. By his count, he is obviously sober in their eyes.
Refusing  to accept  their concern for him as genuine, the Consul accuses Hugh
and   Yvonne   of  using  his  problem  as  a  pretext  for  their   own  love-making. Although  they  may  have  been  lovers in  the  past, this  is untrue  now.  But  the alcoholic  mind,  ever  suspicious,  ever  anxious  to  divert  the  attack  from  itself, lashes  out  at  targets  of  opportunity.   Do-gooders,  he  charges,  always  have  an ulterior motive. Shifting to a political analogy, he derides Hugh's  revolutionary fervour, insisting that  nations "get what they deserve in the long run."  Indirectly, he is suggesting that  he, too, will get what  he deserves finally, regardless of their solicitude, which isn't  really as unselfish as they pretend, so why don't  they leave him  alone.  He  is  tempted,   he  says, by  Yvonne's  offer  of  "a  sober  and  non­ alcoholic Paradise", but  he prefers to live in hell. Shockingly final as this sounds, it is not  really a  major  decision at all. It is one made  repeatedly  by  alcoholics

43

THE ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



who  face  the  problem  while  at  their  lowest point  of resistance. Paradise  is an agony away, and hell is so handy.
Arthur  Calder-Marshall, the British novelist, said of Lowry that  "he  regarded drinking  as an  essential  part  of the  creative  act."  The  anonymous  critic in  the Times   Literary  Supplement, quoted  earlier  says that  Lowry  used alcohol  as a "vision-giving drug". Max-Pol  Fouchet, who did so much to popularize  Lowry's work in France,  falls into the same error. He says of the Consul, and presumably means it of Lowry as well, «L'alcool  pour lui n'est pas un vice, mais une  passion de l'ame, un moyen de la connaissance." 6
This is a tiny sampling  of the notion, common among critics of Lowry, Dylan Thomas  and  others similarly afflicted, that  alcohol or any other drug can be used as a creative  instrument. It  cannot.  The  idea  that  this medium  of oblivion can be a "moyen de la connaissance" is patently  ridiculous. So how does the belief originate?  Probably  with  writers  themselves, in  collaboration  with  sympathetic friends. An  intelligent,  talented  man  finds it  hard  to explain  why  he spends so much of his time in a state of boozy ineffectuality. How nice to be able to say­ or have  his friends  say for him -that it makes him do what  he does, and  does very well, even  better.  If a banker  or a welder or a  jockey said it, it  would  be properly labelled  nonsense. But so deep is the mystery of creativity, even among artists  themselves, that  a  writer  can  get away  with  it. And  the  fact  is that  the imaginative  mind  often  does see a brighter  picture  of the world  under  alcoholic influence. Sadly, it is not a reproducible picture.


LowRY, who  understood  alcoholism as few alcoholics have, was unlikely  to  have  been  taken  in  by the  "creative  binge"  myth.  But  he was
thoroughly  familiar  with  its origins, as he demonstrated  in  an  early  passage in
Under  the Volcano.
At  the  beginning  of Chapter  Two,  Yvonne returns  to Quauhnahuac and  the Consul after  a  year's absence. She finds him drinking in a hotel bar at seven in the morning.  Nothing, obviously, has changed since she left. He has been praying for  her  return,   which  is totally  unexpected,  but  still he  greets  her  cautiously, suspicious of what  she may demand  of him. Recognizing that  she is stunned  by this negative welcome, he frames a long conciliatory discourse, which he does not speak aloud.  In  it,  he tries desperately  to explain  why his drinking  is vital and beautiful and essential. It concludes:

44

THE  ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



"All mystery, all hope, all disappointment, yes, all disaster, is here, beyond those swinging doors. And, by the way, do you see that old woman from Tarasco sitting in  the corner,  you didn't  before, but  you do now?" his eyes asked her, gazing round  him with  the  bemused unfocussed brightness of a lover's, his love asked her, "how, unless you drink as I do, can you hope to understand the beauty of an old woman from Tarasco who plays dominoes at seven o'clock in the morning?"

Every  alcoholic  with  a  soul  has  thought  a soliloquy equally  bittersweet.  Every morning  drinker  has pitied the poor sober wretch who simply has no conception of the  utter  loveliness of "an  old woman  from Tarasco  who  plays dominoes  at seven  o'clock  in  the  morning" or  reasonable  facsimile. This  capacity  to  invest the  ordinary  or  the  ugly with  an  aura  of beauty-very  real,  however  fleeting
-is the one positive justification ever put forward  for the alcoholic's addiction. All other reasons are defensive, mere excuses.
Note  well,  however,  that  Lowry  does not  attempt   to  make  the  old  woman
beautiful  to  us-which  he  could  surely  do  if alcoholic  creativity  were  not  a myth.  He  tells us only that  she looked beautiful  to the drunk,  which  is quite  a different  thing.
Remember,   too,  that  the  words  are  not  spoken.  Even  the  highly  articulate
Consul, we must assume, could not have said the words as skillfully as his mind heard  them.  The  wonder  of it  is that  Lowry could  write  them.  Obviously,  he could  not  have  done  so without  having  had  the  alcoholic  experience,  but  the writing of this passage was, none the less, a triumph  over -not of -alcoholism.
The  whole concept  of words imagined  but not spoken is well known  to alco­ holics. They yearn to say the things that will make everything all right, or to hear them from others. Unable to speak the words, they dream them. And they imagine them,  with  equal  vividness, coming from others. After the  Consul  and  Yvonne have left the bar and are walking home:
"The  Consul was beginning to shake again.
" 'Geoffrey, I'm so thirsty, why don't we stop and have a drink?'
" 'Geoffrey, let's be reckless this once and  get tight together  before breakfast.' "Yvonne said neither of these things."
So expertly and  profusely does Lowry use this device that  the reader  must be alert for it, or he will get the impression that a great deal more is being said than actually  is. A high  percentage  of the material  which appears  between quotation marks in Volcano is never actually spoken.
To this point, I have said little about  the humour  in Under  the Volcano. Sur­
prisingly, there  is quite  a  bit of it. In  Chapter  Three,  for example,  the  Consul


45

THE  ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



dashes out  to get a drink  while Yvonne is bathing,  and is soon found  lying face down  in  the street,  fully conscious but  disinclined to get up. He is roused by a passing Englishman, a hearty  Colonel Blimp sort of chap, who disputes Geoffrey's "absolutely  all  right"  with  the  marvellously logical argument  that  a man  lying face down in the middle  of a moderately  busy street cannot  be entirely all right. They  exchange  old-school-tie  pleasantries, and  they part  with Geoffrey trying to give him  his card,  which  on  closer examination  turns out  to be someone else's. In another  book it would be hilarious;  in this one we find it hard  to laugh. Such incidents  are  not  funny  when  they happen  to real people -and  the Consul has become  disquietingly  real  to  us. There  is additional  evidence of Lowry's  comic sense throughout the book, but like the passage cited it seldom invokes real amusement.
Critics who knew Lowry's sense of humour first-hand seem to resent the picture
that  is often  drawn  of a brooding,  morbid,  obsessed man. He was, says Douglas Day, "an  essentially happy  man",  and  critics have been remiss in failing to note "the  saving grace  of humor,  the refusal to take too seriously the annihilation of the   transparently  autobiographical  personae  who  serve  as  his  heroes."  The Consul,  says Mr.  Day,  "throughout his headlong  flight into  hell, almost  never gives in  to  maudlin  self-pity ... seems, in  fact,  almost  happily  to  embrace  his destruction."7
We are called  upon here to admire  a man who carries himself and  his wife to their  deaths,  severely damages  the  lives of all those who love him,  and  casts a little darkness on almost everyone he meets, because he does it all without  getting glum about it.
No, if  I  like the  Consul,  it  is because I  know that  he does want  desperately
to  make  right  all  the  things  he has made  so wrong. If I  feel compassion,  it is because  I  understand   a  little  of  the  mysterious agony  that  prevents  him  from doing it. But, more to the point,  the whole thesis of Mr. Day's argument is false because  it  is  precisely  Geoffrey's  alcoholic  self-pity that  turns  him  back  every time he is inclined to make a move toward his own salvation.
Robert  B. Heilman,  in  a more credible vein, mentions Lowry's "extravagant
comic sense that  creates  an  almost  unique  tension among  moods" and  refers to
"the Lowry fusion of the ridiculous and the ghastly".8
The  sad  truth  is that  drunks  are funny.  It  is one more cross alcoholics must bear  to know  that,  in  addition  to being simultaneously condemned  and  pitied, they are  also being laughed  at.  Lowry was too good a writer  and  too  serious a student  of his own  condition to overlook that vinic verity. But the ability to laugh

THE ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



at  oneself is hardly  a denial of morbidity. It  may,  indeed, be the  only  palliative for it and,  as such, the mournful proof of its existence.
One  of the  things  that  presumably make  drunks  funny  is that  they  can't think clearly.  But  this  is not  always  true.  As I have  pointed  out,  the  alcoholic  often becomes  a  master  logician   when  his liquor  supply  is threatened. What he  does find it almost impossible to do is to make a moral decision when the alternatives are tough. And  this  is at  the  very  centre  of Lowry's  "study" of  the  alcoholic  mind. It is exemplified  in  the  scene  at  Laruelle's house  when  the  Consul  and  Yvonne are  briefly left alone,  and  she begs him to forgive her infidelity. The Consul,  who knows  that  the  transgression was  as much  his as hers,  looks within  himself  and finds that  he wants  her,  needs her,  wants and  needs to love her. The right  answer is obvious.  But  he is a man,  steeped  in Victorian notions  of male  honour, as well as in self-pity.  He  finds it  impossible  to say, "I forgive,  I love,"  with  conviction. Only   fairness  and  simple  self-interest   weigh  in  its  favour. And  what   are  these against  the  bias of centuries? No doubt, they would  be controlling factors  to the clear  mind,  able  to  evaluate an  ethical  question  on  its merits.  But  the  alcoholic mind  shuns  the  mental labour involved,  in favour  of the  pre-tested response.  By this manner he rejects her, and  all is lost.
At  that   moment,  the  Consul   makes  the  commitment  which   he  will  finally confirm  in  the  Farolito, the  evil  cantina where  he  falls into  the  hands  of  local fascist  officials who,  he  realizes,  are  going  to  kill him.  A  moment comes  when they  neglect  to keep  watch   on  him.  He  can  walk  out,  and  save  his life. But  he needs one more drink-"one for the road." He has, in fact, chosen  to die. And it is not only for symbolic  reasons that  Lowry has him prefer  that  last drink  to a run for  survival. It  is the  choice  an  alcoholic  might  well  make  in  such  a  situation. Accustomed to reaching for  a drink  whenever  a difficult  decision  must  be made, he finds  it  perfectly  natural to do  the same  when  faced  with  the  most  awesome decision  of  all.  In  lesser  matters,  the  drink   often   postpones  the  decision   until someone  else must  make  it. And  so it does in this case. The  Consul  does not think of himself as electing  to die. Rather, he is letting  someone  else make  the decision
-which is easier to live with, even for a little while.
I have  tried  to show  that  it  is Lowry's  brilliant  analysis  and  interpretation of the  alcoholic  mind  that  makes  Under  the  Volcano one  of a kind.  The  Consul's drinking is not  incidental to  the  narrative, nor simply  a device  to allegorize  the mess mankind has made  of itself. Almost nothing Lowry says about alcoholic behaviour is simple  description or  mere colourful  detail  to lend  verisimilitude to the  story.  The   very  critics  who  have  been  so  keenly  responsive   to  secondary

47

THE  ALCOHOLIC ON  ALCOHOLISM



meaning on  almost  every  page  of  the  book,  have  largely  failed  to  perceive  the full significance  of  the  passages  which  deal  with  drinking as a complex problem in itself.
It should  be  clear  that alcoholism was foremost  in Lowry's mind -ahead  of mysticism,  politics,  domestic  relations per se, the  mystery  of Mexico,  and  all the other   elements   which   make   the   book  such   a  diversified  feast-as  he  wrote Under  the Volcano. The primary evidence  is in the book itself. But there  is more.
Lowry's   reaction   to  the  success  of  Charles   Jackson's The   Lost  Weekend  is
important in  this  regard. Some  of his distress is expressed  in  his Letters,9  but  his almost  paranoiac response  to it is better  described  by the  Lowry-figure in  Dark as the Grave, who says that, had  he realized  how successful it would  be, he might have  killed himself. The  Lost Weekend  is a good popular novel about alcoholism, hardly  comparable to  Lowry's masterpiece. But it is clear  that Lowry  considered it a premature invasion  of his private domain.
Lowry's   own   definitive statement  on  the  subject   comes  at the  end  of  the preface  he  prepared for  the  French edition  of Volcano.10  After  discussing  various aspects  of  the  book  at  some  length, he says finally:  " ... it  would   perhaps be honest  of me to admit  to you that  the idea  I cherished  in my heart was to create a  pioneer   work  in  its  own  class,  and  to  write  at  last  an  authentic drunkard's story." That seems plain enough, in or out of context.
On  the  matter of his inability to create  characters, Lowry  once  wrote: "There are  a  thousand writers  who  can  draw  adequate characters till all is blue for one who  can  tell  you  anything new  about  hell fire. And  I am  telling  you something new about  hell fire."
Was  it  new?  It was  an  old  story  to  millions  of alcoholics.  But  none  of them
had  ever  been  able  to  put  it on  paper.  Malcolm  Lowry  did.  And  that was new.




1 Canadian  Literature, Spring 1961.
 NOTES

2     "Swinging the Paradise Street Blues," Paris Review, Summer 1966.
3   The  Private Labyrinth  of Malcolm  Lowry: 'Under  the Volcano'  and the Cabbala
(New York: Holt,  Rinehart & Winston, 1969).
4    TLS, January 26, 1967.
7    See,  for  example, Selected  Letters  of Malcolm  Lowry  (London: Jonathan Cape,
1965), p. 189.
6    Canadian  Literature, Spring 1961.
5    "Of  Tragic Joy," Prairie Schooner, Winter 1963.
8    "The Possessed Artist  and  the  Ailing Soul,"  Canadian Literature, Spring 1961.
9    P. 46 et passim.
10   "Preface to a Novel," Canadian  Literature, Summer 1963.


DEEP IN
THE OLD MAN'S PUZZLE



Nancy E. Bjerring




I am  deep in the  old man's  puzzle, trying to link the wisdom of the body with the wisdom of the spirit until the two are one.

FATHER BLAZON (Fifth Business)



ROBERTSON DAVIES' finrt thcee  novels,  TemP"' To.t, Leaven   of Malice, and  A  Mixture of Frailties,  are  satires  on  Canadians and Canadian society. Often  heavy-handed,  and often hilarious, these three Salterton novels expose and  ridicule Canadian foibles and  affectations. Yet although  they are  about  Canadians  and  Canadian culture  (or  lack of it) , they  are somehow not truly "Canadian novels". At no time does Davies probe the Canadian psyche with  any  great  depth  or  clarity  of  vision;  he  contents  himself  with  exposing Canadian gaucherie  with a decided  tone of derision. Moreover,  he does not  just mock bumbling Canadian innocence and cultural ineptitude; he sets up an ideal, which he evidently admires greatly. Britain, he never lets us forget, is our cultural superior,  and  ought  to be emulated.  We always suspect that  Davies' sympathies (and   inclinations)   lie  not  with  his ineffectual  Canadian  heroes,  but  with  his Britishers, like Humphrey  Cobbler  and Sir Benedict Domdaniel,  who are always able to perceive with piercing accuracy  the true state of affairs, while poor Sally Bridgetower  and  Monica  Gall  have  to struggle  to approach   the same  level of awareness.  In  short,  Europeans  are  among  the initiated,  Canadians are  "rustic beyond  redemption", and,  could  we only see ourselves as others  see  us  (and Davies is clearly among the "others"), we would tum our backs on our struggling cultural  aspirations,  and  bow to those of our superiors. Ultimately  we can accuse Davies of having  little respect  for  his Canadian characters,  and  enjoying  them only inasmuch  as they provide him with foils to his eminently amusing and often scathing  wit.

49

THE OLD  MAN'S PUZZLE



In  1g6o, Davies  wrote,  in a piece collected  in A Voice   from the  Attic:

Nevertheless,  we  may  observe  that  in  writers  more  fortunate or  more  sagacious than  Leacock,  who  have  won  at  least a  part  of their  reputation as humourists, there  occurs  a  development which  is of great  interest;  at  some point  in middle age,  the  brilliant  and  often  nervous  quality  which  distinguished  the  humour  of their  early  work  gives  place  to  a  humour  of another  nature; the  source of the writer's  humour  seems to have changed,  and what  he draws from this new well is of a fuller flavour ... Why then  if the gift is so great does the humourist  seem to abandon  it, or relegate  it  to an  inferior  place, in middle age? The  answer is that he does not do so; rather,  he balances it against another  quality  which has arisen in  him  and  demands   expression,  and  that  quality  is  a  sense  of  tragedy.  This second quality,  this later-comer,  is not sufficiently powerful to alter  the quality  of his work absolutely,  but  it  gives it a background  of feeling which  is sufficient to turn  the  brilliantly  humourous  young man  into  the richly but fitfully humourous middle-aged one.

In  Fifth  Business, we see Davies'  observation on  the  British satirists,  Waugh and Huxley,   becoming applicable to  himself.  No longer  are  Davies'  characters mere caricatures  of  a  particular  Canadian  foible;   no  longer  are   his  revelations of Canada one-way  and  superficial. In  Fifth  Business, we get at last a truly  realistic depiction  of  Canadian  mores   and   morality,   of  psychological   orientation and motivation. And   finally   his  criticisms  of  the  "Canadian  sensibility" are  valid, sharp and  thought-provoking. The  easy laughs  at  the  expense  of the  Canadian cultural wasteland have  been  replaced  by real insights  into  the spiritual problem of Canada. Yet Davies  has not confined  himself to "Canadianism" as his previous novels  had  forced  him  to do. A man's  search  for his true  self and  for the  nature of  reality  is  hardly a  theme exclusive  to  Canadian literature;  but  the  reasons behind  Dunstan Ramsay's search,  the  nature of his search,  and  the shape  of his final discovery have a peculiarly Canadian flavour.
We are  aware all through the book of a mentality against  which  Dunstan must constantly struggle, and  in Davies'  mind  this mentality is exemplified  by most Canadians, though there  are  hints  that  it is common   to  all Anglo-Saxons. It is the  sort  of mentality which, with  its severe  unemotional empiricism, rejects  any notion  of spirituality or  the  mystical.  It  is a mentality shaped by external reality, and  can  be seen  in  the  novel  especially in Dunstan's parents, and  Boy Staunton, who  are  materially minded in  the  extreme,  and  who  cannot even  conceive  of spiritual self-knowledge; but  it  is shared   too, by most of the  town  of Deptford, Davies'  microcosm  of  Canada. It is the  tone  of the  opening of  the  book,  when RalllSay  is extremely irritated by the  article  published  about  his career  in his old

50

THE OLD  MAN'S PUZZLE



school  quarterly-written by  a  man  with  a  "scientific   v1ew of  history". The cliched  article  is so obviously neglectful of any true  perception of Dunstan Ramsay as  a  whole  human being  who  has  had  "great spiritual adventures", that   he  is goaded   into  writing  a  vindication of  his  life -in  the  form  of  a  book,  Fifth Business.
Davies  is sharply aware in  this  novel of the  stereotype  which  Canadians have
adopted for  themselves-plain, sensible,  hard-working, material souls,  proud  of their  ignorance of the  spiritual aspect  of their  nature, proud  of their  disdain  for the  impractical and   foolish.  It has  become  such  a  stereotype, that   Liesl,  com­ menting on the  "autobiography" of Eisengrim,  says:  "Now, tell me how  you are going  to get  the  infant Magnus Eisengrim  out  of that  dreadful Canada and  into  a country  where  big spiritual adventures are  possible?" Canada is a land that  has no  recognition  for  those  who  have  had  "great spiritual adventures".  Spiritual reality  has  no existence  in  Canada as Davies  sees it,  and  yet he is all  too aware that  in each  one  of us there  is a spiritual  self that  responds  to the "unbelievable" or  the  extraordinary, and  he believes that  it is crucial  for the self  to recognize  it. He   is  aware   that   conventional  Protestantism  does  not   provide  this  necessary spiritual factor, hence  his insistence  on the  "intellectualism" of the Presbyterians. But what does? Saints?  Illusion and  magic?
Davies  tantalizes us in this book -he is trying  to trick our  stubborn Canadian mentality  into   being   psychologically   aware.  He   makes   us  believe   that   Mrs. Dempster is a saint,  and  then  he suddenly  confronts us with  the fact  that  she is a simple   lunatic.  Eisengrim's magic   is  nothing  but   mechanical  cleverness   and illusion-but he is able to cause the death  of Boy Staunton. Why do we believe? Why  do we want  to believe?  What is in us that  makes  us want  to believe? These are the questions  which  Fifth Business explores.
In  his  portrait of  Deptford, the  hometown   of  his three   protagonists, Davies
has  made  a microcosm  of Canada. The  town  was described  as " ... more  varied in what  it offered  to the observer  than  people from  bigger and  more sophisticated places  generally   think,  and  if it  had  sins and  follies and  roughness, it  also had much   to  show  of  virtue,   dignity,   and  even  of  nobility," but  it  has  one  major limitation:

I have already  said  that  while our village contained  much of what  humanity  has to  show, it  did  not  contain  everything,  and  one  of  the  things  it  conspicuously lacked  was  an  aesthetic  sense;  we were all  too much  the  descendants  of  hard­ bitten  pioneers to wish for or encourage any such thing, and  we gave hard  names to qualities  that,  in a more sophisticated society, might have had value.

5I

THE OLD  MAN'S PUZZLE



The  nature and  character of Deptford (and  Canada) are firmly  rooted  in  prac­ tical  common sense  and  a solid  reliance  on  material, down-to-earth  reality. The  strongest   influence  of  this   orientation  upon   young   Dunstable  Ramsay  is  his mother, Fiona  Ramsay, though his whole  family  is renowned  for  its good  sense:

By far  the  majority  of the  Deptford  people  had  come to Western  Ontario  from the  South  of England,  so we were not surprised  that  they looked to us, the Ram­ says, for common  sense, prudence,  and  right opinions on virtually everything.

Mrs. Ramsay is inevitably spoken  of in terms of her "good  sense",  "Mrs. Ramsay had   her  head   screwed   on  straight", "A  Scots-woman widely  admired for  her practicality ... with   little  sense  of  humour", with  her  "unfailing good  sense". She  is firmly  opposed  to  any  sort  of softness or spirituality, nor  does she  under­ stand   it.   Her   moral   system   would   accommodate  no  shades   of   grey:   "Mrs. Dempster had  transgressed in  a  realm  where  there  could  be  no  shades  of right  and  wrong." This  is the  main  influence  on  Dunstable, and  although the  town manifested other  opinions,  the  general  tone  was the same. Amasa  Dempster, for example,  was  supposed   to  represent  feeling  and  emotionalism  as  opposed   to Presbyterian intellectualism and  practicality: "His quality  of feeling  was weighty.  I suppose  this  is what  made him  acceptable to  the  Baptists,  who  valued  feeling very  highly." But  this  sense  of  "feeling"  expends  itself  on  cavilling   about the "Devil's  picture book"   and   his  own  hard  lot  in  life. He  has  no  true  sense  of religion  or  the  spiritual, and   Dunstable  sees  where  this  attitude of  Dempster's leads:
I was most hurt  that  Dempster  had dragged  down my conjuring  to mere cheating and  gambling;  it  had  seemed  to me to be a splendid extension of life, a creation of a world of wonder,  that  hurt  nobody. All that  dim but glittering  vision I had formed ... had  been  dragged  down  by this Deptford  parson,  who knew  nothing of such  things, and  just hated  whatever  did  not belong to life at  the $550-a-year level. I wanted  a better  life than  that.  But I had been worsted by moral bullying, by Dempster's  conviction  that  he was right and  I was wrong, and  that  this gave him  an  authority   over  me  based  on  feeling  rather  than  reason:  it was my first encounter  with the emotional power of popular morality.

Even  the  local  atheist  offers  no  alternative. "If he hoped  to make  an  atheist  of me,  this  was where  he went  wrong; I knew a metaphor when  I heard  one, and I liked metaphor better  than  reason."
With   that  last  statement, Dunstable clearly  establishes  himself  as being  apart
from  the  general  stream  of the  village. From  his earliest appearance in the novel, he is distinguished from  the  other  boys his age. He  was technically guiltless in the

THE OLD  MAN's  PUZZLE



affair  of  the  snowball, Percy  Boyd  Staunton really  being  at  fault,   but  nonethe­ less, he suffers the agonies  of the damned when  Percy refuses to accept any of the guilt.  He  comes to feel that  he was responsible for Paul's birth  -" ... and  if this were  ever  discovered  some  dreadful fate  would  overtake me. Part  of  the dreadful fate   would   undoubtedly  be  rejection  by  my  mother." So  when  Mrs.   Ramsay takes  the  Dempster family  on  as  a charity-case, Dunstable  doesn't  really  mind becoming their  chore-boy; in  a sense it  allows  him  to  expiate some  of his guilt.  But  as  he  grows  older,  the  other   boys in  the  village  reject   him  because  of  his association with  the  Dempsters:  " ... some  of  the  oddity   and  loneliness  of  the Dempsters was beginning to rub  off on me"  and  he turns  for solace  to his loneli­ ness to  books of  magic.  He  resolves to  become  the  world's "foremost prestidigi­ tateur".  This   dabbling in  the  occult  leads  to  a  stormy  scene  with   his  mother, which  can  be seen  as  the  collision  of the  two  inclinations, the  one  towards the mystic,  the  other   towards  the  solid  and   the  real.  After   this  quarrel with   his mother,  Dunstable  gravitates  more   and   more  towards  the   influence  of  Mrs. Dempster, and  simultaneously he  begins  to  teach  Paul  some  of his magic  tricks, and   reads  to  him  from  a  storybook  of  saints.  From  these  early  inclinations, we see the  three  main  divisions  into  which  Dunstable's lifelong  preoccupation with the  mystical  falls:  Mary  Dempster, hagiography, and  magic.


AT THIS   EARLY  AGE,  Dunstable is  attracted to  Mrs. Dempster partly  because  of his rejection  by his mother, and  partly  because  she is so  unlike  the  other  Deptford people: "Her face  wore  a sweet  but  woefully  un­ Deptford  expression". He   has  been  so  thoroughly immersed  in  the  practical, and  so disillusioned  by it, in  his confrontations with  both  his mother  and  Amasa Dempster, that   he  begins  to  search   for  something else.  Hence,  his  interest   in Mrs.  Dempster grows.
It would be false to suggest that  there was anything  philosophical  in her attitude. Rather,  it was religious, and  it was impossible to talk to her for long without  being aware  that  she was wholly religious. I do not say "deeply  religious"  because that was  what  people  said  about   her  husband,  and  apparently   they  meant   that  he imposed  religion as he  understood  it on everything  he knew or encountered. But she ... seemed to live in a world of trust  that  had nothing  of the stricken, lifeless, unreal  quality  of religion about  it ... She lived by a light that  arose from  within; I could  not  comprehend   it,  except  that  it  seemed  to  be somewhat  akin  to  the splendours I found in books, though not in any way bookish.
When   the   town's   harsh   morality  decides   that   she  is  no   longer   respectable,


53

THE OLD  MAN'S PUZZLE



Dunstable  refuses to abandon her, even though  he knows that  his mother's stern morality  forbids continued  association. He says: "I regarded  her as my greatest friend, and the secret league between us as the tap-root of my life."
Dunstable  is directly  confronted   with  the  village's sense of  material  reality,
when  Mrs.  Dempster  performs  her  second miracle, that  of raising  Willie from the dead.  Dunstable's  belief in  this miracle finally alienates  him from  the whole village. His friends  think  that  he is a  "credulous  ass";  the  town  doctor  advises him that: "I might  become queer if I did not attempt  to balance  my theoretical knowledge  with  the  kind  of common  sense that  could be learned  from -well, for  instance,  from  himself."  The  Presbyterian  minister  advises him that: "The age of miracles was past,  and  I  got the impression that  he was heartily  glad of it. It  was blasphemous  to think  that  anyone-even someone of unimpeachable character-could restore  the  dead  to life." Even  his father  says:  "I would do best  to  keep  my  own  counsel  and  not  insist on  things  my  mother  could  not tolerate."  But  the  strongest   opposition  of  course,  comes  from   Mrs.  Ramsay herself. "It was clear  that  she now  regarded  a  hint of tenderness  towards  Mrs. Dempster  as disloyalty  to  herself, and  as loyalty was the  only kind  of love she could bring herself to ask for, she was most passionate when she thought she was being most reasonable."  Ultimately  Dunstable  realizes that: "Deep  inside myself
I  knew  that  to yield, and  promise what  she wanted,  would  be the end  of  any­ thing  that  was any good in me; I was not her husband who could keep his peace in  the face of her furious  rectitude; I was her son, with a full share of  her own Highland   temper   and   granite   determination."  When  she  at   last   challenges Dunstable   to  choose  between  herself and  Mrs.  Dempster,  he  runs  away  and enlists in the army.
While  Dunstable  is in  the  army,  Mrs. Dempster  performs her third  and  final miracle  for  him.  She  appears   to  Dunstable  in  the  face of a  small  statue  in  a church  in the middle of a bloody battle at Passchendaele, and saves his life. He is wounded  and  in a coma for many  months, and awakens in England.  During  his convalescence he hears of the death of his parents in the flu epidemic:

It  was years before I  thought of the death of my parents as anything other than a relief; in my thirties I was able to see them as real people, who had done the best they could in the lives that fate had given them. But as I lay in that hospital I was glad that  I did not have to be my mother's own dear laddie any longer, or ever attempt  to explain to her what the war was, or warp my nature  to suit her confident demands. I  knew she had eaten my father, and  I  was glad I did not have to fight any longer to keep her from eating me.


54

THE OLD  MAN'S PUZZLE



While  in  England,  he is tempted   to marry  the  charming  girl  who  had  nursed him  back  from  the  dead,  but  he is aware  of the  flaw in  their  relationship: "I know how clear it is that  what  was wrong between Diana  and  me was that  she was too much  a mother  to me, and as I had had one mother, and lost her, I was not in a hurry  to acquire another." Thus  Dunstable decides not to adopt  another stultifying set of Anglo-Saxon values. Diana's spiritual orientation does not satisfy Dunstable:

But when  I  told her about  the little Madonna  at  Passchendaele and  later  as a visitor to my long coma, she was delighted and immediately gave it  a  conven­ tionally religious significance, which, quite honestly, had never occurred  to me.

She  is a  romantic,  and  Dunstable  knows that  romanticism  is not  the  route  he must  follow either.  He  is determined  to  return  to Canada  in  order  to  prepare himself to discover the significance of Mary  Dempster and  the little statue,  and free now of the  restrictive force of his parents,  he sets out  as Dunstan  Ramsay, renamed  and  reborn.  This  rebirth  is significant  in  that  he  rids  himself of the name  Dunstable,  his mother's  maiden  name;  thus he is freed  of her  tyrannical influence on his soul.
One  cannot  help  but  be somewhat  surprised  at  Davies' rejection  of England as a  place to find oneself, in this novel, remembering  Monica  Gall's enthusiastic adoption  of the "mother  country". Davies has perhaps  realized that  a Canadian cannot find his true self, except in the context of his native land.
After  the  war,  Dunstan  moves from  his first phase of  mystical  involvement into  his second. Although  he remains in contact  with Mrs. Dempster,  she has no recollection of him, and she never again performs a miracle. But from Dunstan's fascination  with  her, comes his compelling  preoccupation  with  hagiography. In his search for the small statue  which saved his life, Dunstan  picks up bits of information  about  saints,  and  soon becomes intrigued  by one  particularly odd saint:  Wilgefortis,   a   Portuguese   hermaphrodite.  Although   on   the   surface, Dunstan's search is an intellectual  preoccupation  with the discovery of knowledge, the nature  of this saint is a clue to Dunstan's  actual  search. The  hermaphrodite is classically the  symbol for  the  whole self -the totality  of male  and  female, reason and  passion, which since their division has caused much  of the misery of mankind.  Dunstan's  search is for the "whole" selfhood, but he does not yet see it in these terms. He is now intrigued by a study of the spiritual, ashamed of his Protestant  ignorance:

55

THE OLD  MAN's PUZZLE



But  I became  aware  that  in matters  of religion I was an  illiterate,  and  illiteracy was my abhorrence. I was not such a fool or an aesthete as to suppose that  all this art  was for art's  sake alone. It  was about something, and  I wanted  to know what that  something  was.

He  is not  sure  of the  exact  nature of his search,  nor  exactly  what  he is searching for. He says:

I clung  to my notion,  ill defined though it was, that  a serious study of any impor­ tant  body of human  knowledge, or theory or  belief, if undertaken with  a  critical but  not  a cruel  mind,  would  in the end yield some secret, some  valuable  perma­ nent  insight  into  the  nature  of life, and  the  true  end of man ... The  only thing for me to do was to keep on keeping on, to have faith in my whim, and remember that  for  me,  as  for  the  saints,  illumination  when  it  came  would  probably  come from some unexpected  source.

Dunstan is searching for  the  "true end  of man" and  does not  yet see it in terms of his own search for self-knowledge.



PRALLELING Dunstan's rebirth and  awakened interest  in  the spiritual,  is  the   rising   career   of  Percy   Boyd  Staunton.  Where  Dunstan  has deliberately attempted  to  turn  his back  on  the  practical roots of his upbringing, Boy has  exploited   these  very  qualities. He  has  a genius  for  making money,  and he  becomes  a  material success.  Davies  emphasizes  that  the  nature of his success is completely  worldly  and  materially oriented; all through his life, Boy's success relied  upon  the  submersion of any  spiritual or  mystical  tendencies, and  thus,  as Davies shows us, he lacks any true knowledge of himself.
Davies goes out of his way to emphasize  how artificial  Boy really is: "It was characteristic of  Boy throughout his life that  he was always  the  quintessence of something  that   somebody  else  had   recognized   and   defined." Any  religious  or moral  attitude is essentially self-centred for Boy-not in the sense of gaining knowledge about  himself,  but  rather in  that  he defines  his total  self in  terms  of his material self. As Dunstan eventually says:  "You  created  a God in your image, and  when  you found out  he was no good you abolished  him. It's  quite  a common form  of  psychological suicide."  Boy's  conception of  Christ,   borrowed from  an American preacher, pinpoints this attitude:

I mean,  Christ  was  really  a  very distinguished  person, a  Prince  of the  House of David,  a  poet  and  an  intellectual.  Of course He was a carpenter; all those Jews in Bible days could  do something  with their hands. But what  kind of a carpenter

THE OLD  MAN'S PUZZLE



was He?  Not  making  cowsheds I'll  bet. Undoubtedly a designer  and  a  manufac­ turer,  in  terms  of  those days. Otherwise,  how did  He  make  his  connections? ... And an economist! Driving the money-changers out of the Temple- why? Because they were soaking  the  pilgrims  extortionate  rates, that's  why, and  endangering a very necessary tourist  attraction and rocking the economic boat ... the  priests got their  squeeze out  of  the  Temple  exchange,  you  can  bet, and  they  decided  they would have to get rid of this fellow who was possessed of a wider economic vision
-as well as great intellectual  powers in many other fields, of course.

But  Boy  and   Dunstan have  a  strange  symbiotic  relationship. Dunstan's major concern  is now  with  the spiritual; for Boy, " ... the  reality  of life lay in external things,  whereas  for  me  the  only reality  was of the spirit-of  the  mind,  as I then thought." But  in  a  sort  of  love-hate   relationship, they  each   provide   the  other with  a certain  service.  Boy provides  Dunstan with  a number of useful tips on the stock  market, and  in  a  sense,  provides  him  with  his material necessities-he  is Dunstan's tie  to the  material world,  and  as he says:  "I've been  your  patron and protector against  your  own  incompetence!" Dunstan acts  as sympathetic ear  to all  of  Boy's  problems  and   troubles,  and  of course,  at  the  end  is revealed  as the keeper of Boy's conscience.
Dunstan's quest  is still only  a vague  search  when  he goes for  the  first  time  to
Brussels, and  meets  Father  Blazon, who   is  one   of  the   keys   to   his  self­ discovery.  In the  character of  Blazon,  Davies  gives an  example of a  man  who has  found   true  self-knowledge through  religion   (albeit approached  in  a  thor­ oughly  unconventional manner).  "Jesuit training is based  on  a  rigorous  reform  of  the  self and  achievement of self-knowledge. By the  time  a  man  comes  to the final  vows, anything emotional or  fanciful  in  his piety is supposed  to  have  been rooted  out." Perhaps Blazon's  ultimate discovery  would  be  considered emotional and  fanciful   by  the  conventionally Catholic,  but  what  he  finds  is a  God  who teaches him the totality  of the selfhood:

Everybody  wants  a Christ  for  himself and  those who think  like him. Very  well, am  I at  fault  for wanting  a Christ  who will show me how to be an old man? ... I  think   that   after  forty  we  should  recognize  Christ   politely  but  turn  for  our comfort  and  guidance  to God  the  Father,  who knows the  good and  evil of life, and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  possesses a wisdom  beyond  that  of the  incarnated Christ. After all, we worship a Trinity,  of which Christ  is but one Person. I think when He comes again it will be to declare the unity of the life of the flesh and  the life of the spirit. And then  perhaps we shall make some sense of this life of marvels, cruel  circumstances,  obscenities  and  commonplaces.  Who  can  tell?-we  might even make it bearable for everybody!

57

THE OLD  MAN'S PUZZLE



This  is Davies'  metaphor-- the totality  of God in the totality  of self. But Dunstan is  not  yet  ready  to  recognize  this  as  the  answer  to  his problem. His  immediate concern  is  with   saints,   and   with   his  attempt  to  establish   the  fact   that   Mrs. Dempster is a  true  saint.   Wisely,  Blazon  advises  him:  "Tum your  mind  to  the real  problem. Who  is she ... who  is she in  your  personal  world?  What figure  is she  in  your  personal mythology? ... you must  find  your  answer  in  psychological truth, not in objective truth."
Having devoted   many   years  to  the  study  of  the  saintly,  in  Mexico  Dunstan gets an  opportunity to study  the demonic,  through his relationship with  Lies!and Magnus  Eisengrim, the  magician. Blazon  warned   him  to  learn  the  meaning of his personal  saint; he must  now discover  the meaning of his personal  devil.
From  Eisengrim, Dunstan learns  why the  public  has a fascination with  magic;

You  know  that  nowadays  the  theatre  has almost abandoned  charm; actors  want to  be  sweaty  and  real,  playwrights  want  to  scratch  their  scabs in  public.  Very well;  it  is  in  the  mood  of  the  times.  But  there  is always  another   mood,  one precisely  contrary   to  what  seems  to  be  the  fashion.  Nowadays  this  concealed longing  is for  romance  and  marvels ... People want to marvel  at something,  and the whole spirit  of our  time is not to let them do it. They will pay to do it, if you make  it  good  and  marvellous  for  them ... What  we offer is innocent-just  an entertainment in which a hungry part of the spirit is fed.

And  we  realize  that Davies  means  that  all  Canadians who  have  grown  up  in a stolid,  practical atmosphere crave  a  knowledge  of  the  marvellous, and  that  this craving  for   the   marvellous  is  really   a  craving  for  self-knowledge-for   the knowledge of something which  has  been  repressed  but  manifests itself in a fasci­ nation with  the  mystical.
While  Dunstan is with  Eisengrim's troupe, he is initiated into  the  "other side"
of  the  life of  the  spirit-into  the  demonic aspect  of himself,  which  can  round out  his "saintly" aspect. Part  of his initiation comes with his physical  relationship with  Liesl.  She  had  accused   him  of  lacking  the  complete  knowledge of  self­ that   he  had   not   lived   in  a  physical  sense,  and   which   had   been  symbolized throughout by his one-legged  crippled body. She calls him:

... you  pseudo-cynical  old  pussy-cat, watching  life from  the sidelines and  know­ ing  where  all the  players go wrong. Life is a spectator  sport  to you ... there is a whole great  piece of your life that  is unlived, denied, set aside ... But every man has a devil, and  a man  of unusual  quality, like yourself, Ramsay, has an  unusual devil. You must  get  to know your personal devil. You must even get to know his father,  the Old  Devil ... Why don't  you, just for once, do something inexplicable,

THE OLD  MAN'S PUZZLE



irrational,  at  the  devil's  bidding, and  just for the  hell of it?  You would be a different man.

How  do  the  pieces of  the  puzzle  fit  together?  In  spite  of  Liesl's  revelations, Dunstan  does not  yet  make  a  drastic  change  in  his life-in  his role as  Fifth Business:  "the  one  who  knows the secret of the  hero's  birth,  or  comes to the assistance of the heroine when she thinks all is lost, or keeps the hermitess in her cell, or  may even be the  cause of somebody's death  if that  is part  of the  plot", Dunstan   must  bring  about  the  denouement  of the  plot.  He  reveals to  Boy to exactly what  extent  he has been the keeper of his conscience. He shows Boy the Stone  which  he had so long ago embedded  in the snowball, and  informs Boy of his  fault  in  the  accident.  "Boy,  for  God's  sake, get  to  know  something  about yourself. The  stone-in-the-snowball  has been  characteristic  of too  much  you've done for you to forget it forever!" But Boy, the material  man,  refuses to own up to  his guilt  and  he  dies after  Eisengrim's  hypnotic suggestion,  though  through his own volition. The material man cannot know himself.
But  who  is Paul  Dempster,  alias Magnus  Eisengrim, in  the  workings of the plot?  It  is no  accident  that   Eisengrim  is a  master  of illusion,  for  his  human personality in the world is illusory too. Davies hints that Eisengrim is the "Faustian man",  one who  has sold his soul  to  the Devil, in order  to gain  knowledge and power.  Eisengrim   has  lost  contact   with  humanity,   and   is  absorbed   in  self­ aggrandizement. As Dunstan says:

It was clear enough to me that  his compelling love affair was with himself; his mind was always on  his public  personality, and on the illusions over which he fussed psychologically quite as much as Liesl did mechanically. I had seen a good deal of egotism in my life, and  I knew that it starved love for anyone else and sometimes burned it out completely.

Eisengrim  had  been convinced  by his father  that  his birth  had  been responsible for his mother's loss of sanity. He says: "I was too young for the kind of guilt my father  wanted  me to feel; he had an extraordinary belief in guilt as an educative force. I couldn't  stand it. I cannot  feel guilt now." Just as he feels no guilt for his mother,  he feels no guilt  about  hypnotizing Boy and  suggesting  that  he drown himself. He is no longer a human being.
Davies establishes a  unity of the saintly and  demonic sides of his hero's soul; from  the one original accident,  one character  becomes a saint,  another  a studier of saints, and another  a magician whose miracles "have a spice of the Devil about them". Dunstan,  for so long the chronicler of saints, becomes the chronicler of a

59

THE OLD MAN's PUZZLE



magician.  The  two  people  who  are  the oracles of the two points  of view, Liesl and  Blazon, both  advise Dunstan  the same way. Blazon advises him to know his own saint  and  how she affected  his personal mythology, but advises him to know the Devil as well:

The  Devil knows corners of us all of which Christ Himself is ignorant. Indeed, I am sure Christ learned a great deal that was salutary about Himself when He met the  Devil in  the  wilderness. Of  course, that  was a meeting of brothers;  people forget too readily that  Satan  is Christ's elder brother and has certain advantages in argument that pertain to a senior.

And  Liesl urges him to know his own devil, to round out his awareness with the "poetic  grace  of  myth".  Both  aspects  are  necessary, they  are  two  sides of the same  whole,  the  "union   of the  flesh and  the spirit"  which  must  be known  by each individual  in order  to be whole. We suspect that  Davies shows us that total conversion to one side or the other  produces the madness of the fool-saint, or the impersonal inhumanity of the magician. The complete neglect of it leads to the Canadian success story,  Boy Staunton. But  the  integration  of it  leads  to  self­ fulfillment, leads to the discovery of the true nature of man.
Ultimately,  we must ask:  what is it that Davies is advocating in Fifth  Business?
Is  he  recommending   that  Canadians shake  their  stolid frame  of  reference and immerse themselves in a study  of saints or magic? What  are we supposed  to do?
Man  may view his life either in terms of his function in the external  world, or
as an  integrated,  psychologically aware  being. Anglo-Saxons have always tended towards  the  former  attitude, and  Davies believes that  Canadians especially are affiicted by this orientation. Thus  his hero concerns himself with the view which his  milieu  disregards-the  world  of  the  mind.  It  becomes  necessary  to  jolt Dunstan  out of his too esoteric world, and into the realization of his being in the world-his  role as Fifth  Business. Thus  for Davies the question  becomes more than  a matter  of orientation, be it spiritual -saintly or demonic -or material. It  becomes more even  than  the  answer  which  Dunstan  finally achieves, for the idea  of the  perfection  of man  being found in the unity of flesh and  spirit is an ancient  one.  Davies finally  tries  to convince us  (and  this explains  the  form  of the  book -that of vindicatory  letter) , that  our life is not defined solely in terms of the external  world, nor in terms of our own intellectual yearnings, or imagined personalities. We must live in order to know life; we must live with the awareness of the total self.




6o


LOWRY'S  FOREST PATH

Echoes of Walden



Richard  Hauer Costa




Ew MAJOR writern cm> be 'o compactly formulated by biog­
raphy   as  Thoreau. His  life  was  simple  and   uneventful. Contemporary  under­
graduates who get  "turned on"  by the notion  that  a man  could  live alone  in the woods  for  two  years  get  "turned  off"  by  the  scarcity   of  compelling  autobio­ graphical material on the escape  to Walden  Pond. Thoreau's ]ournal, by his own admission, is not  autobiography, and  only  fragments of it  have survived for  the Walden period.  The  Correspondence  yields next  to nothing,  and  supplementary records  are  scarce.  The  few  pages  of objective  facts,  from  sources  outside Thor­ eau's  literary  texts, are  mostly concerned with surface matters: groups who came  out  for  picnics, children to whom  he showed wildflowers and  woodland creatures, the commercial side of the ice-cutting episode, and so on.
But  the  chief effect  of this prosaic  picture, at least for the student of literature, is salutary: to tum  the  reader  inward to the  text of Walden  where  actuality has been  transformed  by  art.  If Walden  is  a  masterpiece of  literature, it  must  be (and  I quote  from Charles R. Anderson)

something  quite  different  from  amateur  natural  history, dated  social criticism, or the autobiography  of a transcendental  crank. Before the mystical world of Walden can  be distinguished  from  the  literal  setting  of ponds and  woods and  township, we  must  learn  to separate  the  actual  Henry  Thoreau,  citizen  of Concord,  from the  fictive character  who is both  the persona and  that  voice that  speaks to us in the book.1

Anderson presents  a persuasive  case for thinking of Walden  as a species of poetry rather than  prose, if one  does not  insist on the  mechanical distinction of verse as opposed  to paragraph form. Wit and metaphor, he writes,

serve Thoreau  as the  negative  and  positive means of his quest.  These  set up  the direction  of the book and  open out its multiple contrasts. Not only are society and

61

LOWRY's FOREST PATH



solitude juxtaposed but the civilized and the primitive, complexity and simplicity; also matter  and  spirit, animal  faculties and  the higher laws, earth  and  heaven, nature  and  God.  Man  cannot  achieve his high aims by rejecting the one and leaping into the other, but must work his way up from the sty of materialism to the perfection he seeks.2

My purpose  here is to demonstrate  that  a later  writer -like Thoreau  a fugi­ tive from  his century  and  era,  but one whose demonic life had nothing  in com­ mon  with Thoreau's sylvan  peace -came also to seek transcendence. He came at last to seek it not on the easy-payment  plan of addiction -this writer's usual way-but on the Thoreauvian plan:  the evocation in art of the  felt life of spirit and higher laws, earth and heaven, nature and God.
Malcolm  Lowry  was an  alcoholic and  a symbolist. His lifelong sense of being
haunted, of living  perpetually  in what  he once termed,  in the  punning  manner he  learned  from  his  mentor  Conrad  Aiken, "introverted comas,"  produced  all those  Lowrian  personae:  guiltridden  John  Bunyans who live in  hell but  aspire to heaven;  above all, the Consul of Under the Volcano, literature's first character to  reflect fully the  noblesse-oblige of the addict,  the kind of pride  that  must be asserted to seek in drink  a means of transcending  the agony of consciousness.
The  problem  with Lowry is precisely that  which Professor Anderson isolates in the  case of Thoreau and  Walden : the need to separate  the citizen of Concord from  the fictive character who is the persona and  voice of the book. In  Lowry's case, the  need is to separate  the man  who drove unflinchingly  to an alcoholic's early death  and  the masks which loom as the protagonists of the books.
After  Under   the  Volcano   ( 1947),   Lowry  became  obsessed by a  subjective aesthetic  by which  he would  return  again  and  again  to the writer writing about a writer who is writing a book in which he is the main character. Only once after Volcano  did  one of his works outgrow its creator  so as to wrench  free of  auto­ biographical  trappings. That single instance is "The  Forest Path  to the Spring",  a  novella  which  Lowry  wrote  during  the  last  years, the  early  195o's,  in  the squatter's cottage  at  Dollarton,   near  Vancouver,  British  Columbia,  ten  miles through  deep woods from  the  nearest tavern. "Forest Path" was originally pub­ lished  in  New  World   Writing   (Spring,  1961)   and  reprinted  as the  final  and climactic  item  in  Lowry's  only  collection  of  short  fiction,  Hear  Us  0 Lord from Heaven  Thy   Dwelling  Place. Both appearances  were in 1961, four  years after his death.
In  "Forest  Path", one  finds  it  possible to  discern in  Malcolm  Lowry  what
Anderson  called necessary for an artistic appreciation  of Walden: the separation

LOWRY's FOREST PATH



of Lowry, the rootless addict  in life, from the fictive persona and voice that speak to us of rebirth  through  an identification  with the cyclical current  of nature. For once, Lowry eschews all ambiguity  of viewpoint -all those shifting  personae of a single story retold  ad  nauseum -for  a unity of narrative  stance  that  is abso­ lutely without precedent in his fiction.
Although  he employs the  "I", Lowry appears  reluctant  to limit  his narrator to precise identity.  He is never given a name. For once, here is no writer writing about  the writer  writing. To  be sure, Lowry reveals that  his narrator has been a jazz musician but one who has given up his old life of the night.

[H]ow  far  away that  seemed now, my life in  which my only stars were neon lights! I must have stumbled into a thousand alcoholic dawns, but drunk in  the rumble seat I passed them by.... Never had I really looked at a sunrise till now.

But this curriculum vita  appears  halfway into the story. No disquisition on drink takes over. There  is a  brief tribute  to jazz musicians like Venuti,  Satchmo,  and the  Duke,  who have for  him "the  aspects of a very real glory",  but  no detailed digression. Lowry's thrust at all points is toward  control of his materials and away from  the self-indulgent  ruminations  that  wreck most of his  post-Volcano  work.



AT  Lowry control in "Forest  Path" is that  he has subjected  the  felt life of the protagonist to a created structure  which elevates it to art.  That   structure  is more  than  chronology:  the  cycle of the  seasons around which  its eight  sections swing. What  really unifies these sections is that  Lowry has waived his usual subjective strategies for those of a kind of narrative  pastoral, a poem.
I of course am  neither suggesting extraction  of the best passages from "Forest
Path"  for  stanzaic  rearrangement nor  applying  to  it  that  hybrid  term,  "prose poem."  What  I  am suggesting is a technique  for reading  this story, one  which aligns "The  Forest Path to the Spring" toW alden.
I  have  never seen  anywhere  in  Lowry's voluminous  notes or letters  a single mention  of either  Thoreau  or Walden. There  is a reference  to Thoreau, not an especially respectful one, midway through Lowry's last book, October Ferry to Gabriola,  published in  rg7o. Their  kinship is accidental  but  pervasive, a matter that  goes beyond commonality  of circumstances. Certainly  Thoreau  and  Lowry, a century  apart,  were searching  for solitude and  rejecting an economy of  abun­ dance in favour  of a simple natural  life. The  real theme  of the two works is the

LOWRY'S FOREST PATH



search  for  perfection,  for a life of holiness; for a way to endure  what  Thoreau called his "several  more lives" away from Walden  Pond and  what  Lowry feared would be his life after eviction from his forest retreat.
The  goals in  both  works and  the  journeys towards  them  are  rendered  in  a deceptively simple series of image-clusters:  animal,  water,  rain,  and  shelter,  the imagery  of time,  the quest or  journey, the self reborn even as the ice thaws and the land  becomes green again. Lowry's story is poetic in the same way Walden is, and  the  presence of another-wife, helpmate,  guide-makes Lowry's counsels more outgoingly human, less cranky, than Thoreau's.
Lowry's  novella  is dedicated,  in  fact,  "To   Margerie,  my wife".  If Thoreau
went   to   Walden   Pond   "to   transact   some  private   business  with   the  fewest obstacles," Lowry  makes it clear that  retreat  to the Canadian Northwest  wilder­ ness could only work as a  partnership.  Life became "a  continual awakening ... until I knew her I had lived my whole life in darkness."
The  couple  arrived  at  Eridanus   (Lowry  gives Dollarton  a  name  dear  to the ancients -Eridanus,  river  of both  Life and  of Death)   on  Labour  Day  at  the beginning  of the  war,  intending  to combine  a  delayed honeymoon  with  a last summer  holiday. For a time, "the  garishness and strangeness of ... the sun ... to me,  long  used  to  the  night  and  sleeping  fitfully ... brought   the  quality  of  a nightmare." But metamorphosis soon takes place, a curious giving in to benevolent nature,  a sense of their  $12-a-month  cabin as part  of "eternal flux and  change" which  on  the  arms  of the  tides seemed alternately  to lower and  elevate "like a strange  huge  cave where some amphibious  animal  might have lived."  Fall gives way  to  the  first  frosts,  and  they  are  still  there.  In  an  epiphanic   moment  one winter's night, the poet-persona knows why:
[C]oming  across the porch from the woodshed with a lantern in one hand and a load of wood under the other arm, I saw my shadow, gigantic, the logs of  wood as big as a coffin, and  this shadow seemed for a moment the glowering embodi­ ment of all that  threatened us; yes, even a projection of that dark, chaotic side of myself, my ferocious destructive ignorance.

Lowry's real subject  in "Forest  Path" is the war which Nature  wins over nature, the triumph  of the discovered correspondence between elemental forces and man's abiding  but  muted  selflessness. Just  as Thoreau's arguments against  the railroads are  among  the  pretended  subjects  of Walden, Lowry's diatribe  against  the  oil refinery across the  bay is a  diversionary  tactic  against  another  antagonist  alto­ gether.  Tonally,  Thoreau's strategy  is directly hortatory:  go ye and  do  likewise. When  he lashes out  at  the  railroads,  Thoreau  explodes into  wit and  metaphor

LOWRY'S FOREST PATH



that  are  aimed  at  the  rescue  of time  from  the  deception of speed.  Men  live life too fast, thinking

it is essential that  the  Nat ion  have commerce, and  export  ice, and  talk through  a telegraph,   and   ride  thirty   miles  an  hour ... but  whether   we  should  live  like baboons or like men, is a little  uncertain.  If we do not get out sleepers, and  forge rails, and  devote days and  nights  to the work, but go tinkering  upon  our  lives  to improve them, who will build  railroads?  And if railroads  are  not built,  how shall we get to Heaven in season? ... We do not ride upon the railroad; it rides upon us.

From  this  point  in "What I Lived  For"  to the end of the section,  Thoreau opens each  paragraph on a cautionary note  against  being taken  in by the  lures of  tech­ nology.  The  essence of time,  he declares,  is not  changed by the  post-office or  by the  telegraph or by newspapers. Rather "Time is but  the stream I go a-fishing  in. I drink  at it; but  while  I drink  I see the sandy  bottom and  detect  how shallow  it is. Its thin current slides away, but eternity remains."
Malcolm Lowry's  way is more  confessional.  His entire  thrust is summed up by one  of  Thoreau's rare  acknowledgements that  his life  before  Walden had  been sham. He  went  to the  woods so as not, "when I came  to die, discover  that  I had not   lived."  Near   the   end   of  "Forest Path"  Lowry  apologizes   for  the  "mere heroics"  and  "vain   gestures" that   have  characterized his life.  Yet  he  must  "go beyond   remorse,  beyond  even  contrition ... pass beyond  the  pride  I felt  in  my accomplishment, and  to  accept  myself as a fool again." Eridanus, finally,  is out of  time  altogether. The   narrator gladly  accepts  his  previous  life  as  a  necessary hell,  felix culpa.  He  and  his wife  have  transcended the  passions  of the  moment and  the  attendant fears-even  the  hellish fear of losing their  house -for "now the  joy and  happiness of  what   we  had  known  would  go  with  us  whenever  we went or God sent us and would  not die."



E REAL  ANTAGONIST  is the  world  which   Thoreau  and Lowry  would  banish  in  the  interests  of discovering  the self. The  purpose  of  their experiments is now  clear: to  withdraw from  the  life of civilization so that  they can  merge  with  the  life of nature, to leave the  artificial  to the  real.  But  the lives at  Walden and  Eridanus are  means  not  ends. Walden and  "The Forest  Path  to the Spring" are the records of quests for the buried life of the soul.
In   the   midst  of  writing "Forest Path",  Lowry  wrote   to  his  agent   Harold Matson  that  his book, as far  as he knows, "is the only short  novel of its type that brings  the  kind  of  majesty  reserved  for  tragedy   (God  this  sounds  pompous) to

LOWRY'S FOREST PATH



bear on human  integration."3  The last is the important  word. Not only is his story a  raging  toward  self-integration but  its poetic technique  at all points a working toward  an  integration  of man's  primal  urges and  fears. Like Thoreau  an invet­ erate  punster,  Lowry devotes much of the first section of "Forest  Path" to a play on the names of the beach cottages, a practice which he sees as a human rebellion in  a  day  when  "streets  and  houses are  mere soulless numbers ... a  survival  of some instinct  of unique  identity  in regard  to one's  home ... for  identity  itself." One   notes  Lowry's  ability-it  was  Thoreau's eminently-to  synthesize  the mythological  and   the  quotidian.  In  recalling  the  legend  of   Eridanus,   Lowry observes that  Jupiter had  to save the world from Phaethon's "splendid  illusion", but  made  a  protective  garden  of the  place where  he died. The  Shell refinery is emblematic  of waste in  the  guise of industrial  progress,  but  no Jupiter destroys it (although today's ecologists might find a prophetic irony in Lowry's metaphor). Rather, "distant  rate-payers" consecrate the refinery as an open cathedral. Later, the  poet  will  reveal  that  one  night  the  "S"  in  Shell  failed  to  light,  leaving it revealed for what it is: Hell.
Lowry establishes a series of polarities to warn of man's fate:  squatter's shacks on one side of the bay, the refinery on the other;  the finding of paradise against the  threat   of  eviction;   God's  sovereignty  against  man-made   laws;  the  good fishermen and boatbuilders  against the real estate people and the tourists; the achievement  of oneness with  nature  against the false buffers of progress. All are one tension, of course, and  Lowry represents their reconciliation  in one magnifi­ cent  metaphor:  the  daily  act  of redemption  in  walking,  at  dusk,  through  the forest to the spring for water.
Lowry's  handling  of the  water-rebirth motif is pervasive but  never intrusive. The sheer logistics of obtaining water in the wilds -getting a boat, manoeuvring it to a spring,  returning  a distance  of miles to the shack -lead  to frustrations and  bitter  resolves to return  to the city. One afternoon  late in the fall, everything about  the  water  having  gone  wrong,  the narrator sees a ship's  canister  on the beach left by the receding tide. They recover it. A light rain  begins to fall. Their bitter   despair  forgotten,   she  explains  with  "inexpressible  wonder"  that  "rain itself is water from  the sea, raised to heaven by the sun, transformed  into clouds and  falling  again  into  the sea."  He,  who has been a ship's  fireman,  relives the story behind  the discarded  canister.  It does not matter  that  the story he tells his wife while cleaning  the  canister  is unlikely to have  happened.  What  matters  is that  they  have  recharged  each  other's  flagging spirits. One  of their  boatbuilder

66

LOWRY'S FOREST PATH



friends   then   shows  them   a  spring,  its  running   delayed  by  the  long  Indian summer, less than a hundred yards from their house.
His first walk down the path  to the spring takes the form of a ten-page  central section. It is an ode to recovery from life's sturm-und-drang, to man's  recoil from the dreadful  Wendigo, the man-hating spirit of the wilderness. He sees his hatred and  suffering  as like a forest fire, "a  perversion of the movement  of the inlet". The fire was his hatred, turning back on himself, self-devouring.
The  onset  of  winter  leads  to  contrasting  strategies  in  Walden  and  "Forest Path". Thoreau's winter  by  the  pond  never  threatens;  it is a  time  for  deeper reflection.  "Why  is it,"  he asks, "that   a  bucket  of water  soon becomes  putrid, but  frozen  remains  sweet forever?"  Thoreau's answer is witty,  metaphoric: "It is  commonly  said  that   this  is  the  difference  between  the  affections  and   the intellect."  Winter  at  Eridanus  shakes all the resolves of Lowry's characters with cosmic  terror:  " ... [W]e   would  lose  all  hope ... the  rending   branches,   the tumult  of the sea, the sound  of ruination  under  the house, so that  we clung  to one another  like two little arboreal  animals in some midnight  jungle.... "
Both  winter  sojourners  conclude  their  songs on  notes of apotheosis.  Thoreau bathes  his intellect in the  Bhagavad Gita. He lays down  his book, "so  remote is its sublimity from our conceptions,"  and  goes to the well for water,  finding "the pure  Walden   water  mingled  with  the  sacred  water  of  the  Ganges."   Lowry's narrator's actual  path  to  the  spring  is made  impassable  by winter,  but  he still walks it in imagination  "as if eternally through  a series of dissolving dusks".
Nothing  in "Forest  Path" compares  to Thoreau's rejuvenation  at  the sight of the  spring  thaw  on  Walden  Pond.  He sees man  molecularly,  as but  a  mass of thawing  clay where "one  hillside illustrated  the principle of all the operations  of Nature.  The  maker  of this  earth  but  patented  a leaf. What  Champollion will decipher  this  hieroglyphic  for  us, that  we may  tum  over  a  new  leaf  at  last?" But  the  ecstacy Lowry  represents  ascends the same pantheistic  empyrean.  "My God,"  he asks while looking at  the full moon blazing clear of the  pines behind the mountain, "why have you given this to us."
Thoreau's great  book concludes with a chapter  whose main  business seems to
be  a  series of exhortations:  to  explore one's  "private  sea";  to  advance  in  the direction  of dreams;  to simplify;  to step  to the  music one  hears;  to  love one's life poor  as it is. But  the  real  theme  of the chapter-of  the  whole work -is embodied  in a single sentence near the beginning of the chapter: "Our voyaging is only  great  circle sailing."  Thoreau's plea is to transcend  human   limitations which allow the present to be a mere replay of the past:

LOWRY'S FOREST PATH



[M] ere lapse of time can  never make to dawn. The light which puts out our eyes is darkness to us. Only  that  day dawns to which we are awake. There  is more day to dawn. The sun is but a morning star.

Thoreau's  plea  for  transcendence of  time  and   place  is echoed   at  the  end  of
"Forest Path" by Lowry's rage  against  giving in to the tyranny of the  past:

[It] was my duty  to  transcend  the  past in the  present.... Sometimes  I had  the feeling  I  was attacking  the  past rationally  as with a clawbar  and  hammer,  while trying to make it into something else for a supernatural end.

He  must  transcend the  hubris  that  has  enabled   him  to  read  mystic  portents in every passing moment; must  return to a state of acceptance of himself as innocent of such  perceptions. The  story  concludes  in  a  bucolic  kaleidoscope -a  pastoral celebration -and,  at  the  last,  in  Thoreau's "great circle  sailing" back  to  the regenerative fount, the forest path  to the spring.

NOTES

1 Charles  R. Anderson,  The  Magic Circle of Walden  (New York, 1968), pp.  10-11.
2    Ibid., pp. 17-18.
3  Selected   Letters   of  Malcolm   Lowry.  Eds.  Harvey  Breit  and  Margerie   Lowry
(Philadelphia and New York, 1965), p. 266.


























68



WOMEN IN
CANADIAN LITERATURE


Isobel McKenna


Most women don't even live lives of quiet desperation. (Quiet desperation  is  far too  dramatic)  Most  women   live  lives  like doing the  dishes,  finishing one day's dishes and  facing the  next, until  one day the rectal polyp is found or the  heart stops and it's over.  And  all  that's  left  of  them  is  a  name  on  a  gravestone.



BRIAN MOORE's  HEROINE  commenls thus  in  I  Am  Ma'y Dunne  ( rg68), his study of the confused Canadian woman of today. Moore may have been only transiently a Canadian writer, but he has caught exactly the mood of the Canadian girl who seeks a way out of the faceless secondary role the world offers her.
How did the situation  arise? For Canadians  the best record is found  in Cana­
dian fiction. Literature, much more than sociological or psychological studies, provides the rounded  picture, the most complete expression of the social and psychological nature  of a society, and does so not necessarily in the best writing.
Since the essence of literary  art is to show us what  a human  being is within  a
particular  culture,  in a particular time and  place, a glance at some fairly  repre­ sentative  Canadian novels in English can  be expected  to demonstrate  what  has been the position of women  in English Canadian society. Fashionable  plots and popular  attitudes,  varying over the years, provide the clues to understanding the society contemporary  to both  author  and  audience.
The  earliest novel in English which had  a Canadian setting  and  was to some extent written  here is Frances Brooke's The History  of Emily  Montague ( r 769). In  popular  epistolary style it gives a rather  charming  but  limited  view of  gar­ rison life in old  Quebec  at  the  end  of the  eighteenth  century.  Romantic  love triumphs  amid sleigh rides, balls, and  afternoon  teas. The  position of  women  is simply  that   of  transplanted  Englishwomen.  To   understand  Emily's  place  in society one cannot  seek for Canadian roots, but must look back to  England  and its current mores. That, in fact, is just what Emily does.

6g

WOMEN IN  CANADIAN LITERATURE



Emily's story is concerned  with  only English men and  women  in  a then  new and rather  exotic setting. Garrison officers and government appointees  have social importance; they  are  pleasantly  surprised  to  discover  elegance  and  charm  in seignorial  society. But  the  French  Canadian girls are  more  coquettish-hence less "ladylike" -than  the  English  girls, and  this  not  only  causes  the  English women  to accept  this as proof of their own superiority;  it also seems to be the first example  of what  Ronald  Sutherland terms  "the  myth  of la  femme  fatale canadienne"  (Second  Image). All the women have importance  only as wives or daughters of important men, and  this attitude  was to prevail  not only in  Cana­ dian  colonial society but long after  the creation  of the nation.
Such  was the  basis of Canadian novels until  reading  books became  more  of an activity of the lower and middle classes, since people like to read  about them­ selves, or  what  might  be their  own situations.  The  English ideal  dominated  in Canadian society generally and  therefore in its literature.  Both  actively and  pas­ sively the influence was reinforced  to produce  a watered-down imitation  of Eng­ lish social  values. The  Church   of  England  was fashionably  inclined  to  poetic expression;  Methodists  and  Presbyterians  believed in education  but for practical, "useful"  purposes;  English-speaking  Roman  Catholics  were often  poor, and  like their  French  Canadian  contemporaries,  were  usually encouraged   to  make  the most of the situation  in life to which they  had  been born. The  priesthood  was a high  vocation  that  attracted  bright  young men since it  offered education  along with  its  dedication,   but  cultivation  of  a  deep  interest  in  literature   was  rarely part  of their training.  Every congregation's  admiring  dependence  upon  its clergy increased  the  latter's  influence  and  encouraged  the  status  quo,  which  in  tum  meant  that  the secondary  role of women in society was praised  as the  true  one. The   romantic  place  of  nature   in  nineteenth   century  fiction  encouraged   the popularity  of  "nature" novels, where the absence of women is a negative indica­ tion of  woman's  place in  contemporary  society.
Managing   a  well-run  household  was  the  proof  of  the  Canadian  woman's
worth. In  pioneer circumstances,  this was a necessity. Physically, it was a natural division of the  vital work to leave outside work to the men  and  inside work to the women. The  Strickland  sisters, Susanna  Moodie and  Catherine Parr  Traill, were unusual  in  the  cultivation  they brought  to the backwoods. They  exempli­ fied the  educated   Englishwoman  of genteel  birth  whose leisure  might  well be occupied  in  writing.  To  express herself, or  to earn  some  much-needed  money, there  was little  else that  a  woman  could  do, apart  from  the  manual  labour  to which some hard-pressed  women  were  reduced,  though  if  she were sufficiently

WOMEN IN  CANADIAN LITERATURE



well-born, she might open a school for young ladies, where a doubtful  education would  be dispensed,  along  with  some training  in  managing   a  household.
There  was still something  of the feudal lady of the manor  in the style in which women  administered  the  many  facets of running  a  home.  Even  Mrs.  Moodie was conscientious about  such duties, since to her, as to her  contemporaries, this was  only  doing  her  share  in  the  partnership   of  marriage.   Every  mother   of young  women  became  the  administrative   manager,  assigning  actual   duties  to daughters  and  to servants.  Mrs. Moodie might despair of the servants  available in Canada, but she had  them;  the work involved in  running  a  house then  was accomplished  by a great  deal  of manual  labour  done by those who  usually had no  education   at  all.  In  a  supposedly  democratic  country,  varied  social  levels were an accepted fact  of life.
During  the  185o's  and  186o's,  Rosanna  Leprohon  wrote  with  some success when she turned  her emphasis  towards  Canadian  society as she knew it in  and near  Montreal.   She  quite   accepted  the  established  social  hierarchy,   and   her stories seem to vary from the currently  popular style chiefly in their  novel setting, involving French Canadian society, with women who did belong to their environment.
In  large  part,  Canadian  writers  sought  the  more  lucrative   and   prestigious
American  markets,  which determined  the kind of writing  they could  undertake. Most  of the  fiction  appeared  serially in  magazines, in stories that  were usually highly moral and  infinitely dull. About the time of Confederation, the American market  had  become  even  larger,  and  more  Canadian  writers  were  attracted. Most simply catered  to  popular  tastes, but  some, like Sara  Jeannette Duncan, had  genuine  talent  and  some originality.
Besides  literary   ability,   Duncan   demonstrates   shrewd   objectivity   and   an
accurate  eye for her society. The Imperialists   ( 1904)  remains  the  best portrayal of life in a small Ontario town during  the latter  part  of the nineteenth  century. Duncan's   characters  are  closer  to  actuality  than  those  of  her  rivals,  and  the gossipy atmosphere  of  little  towns  is clearly  mirrored.  The   central   character, Lome  Murchison,  is romantically  in love with Dora  Millburn. Dora  is not  very bright, the product of the superficial standards  of her society, and she turns from Lome  to a young man, shallow as she is, whose greatest recommendation is that he is English. This  lends him  a cachet  which  home-grown  heroes cannot  equal
-except  in the author's eyes. Here  we see the tide turning  against  the  former tendency to worship anyone and anything imported from Britain. Here, at least, England  no longer sets the  pace, though  the ties are not  yet cut.

WOMEN IN  CANADIAN LITERATURE



Dora  and   her  young  Englishman   illustrate  the  false  social  standards  con­ demned  by Miss Duncan, and  they deserve one another.  Lome's  sister,  Advena, is much  more  the  ideal  young  Canadian woman  of  the  period.  She  is high­ minded,  kindhearted, pure  and  constant  in her love. She  has also something  of the  martyr  complex,  then  considered  attractive  since it  implied  faithful  endur­  ance of great  trials  and  misunderstandings. The  hard  work  and  self-sacrifice so vital  in  the  pioneer  are  now  metamorphosed   into  a  kind  of  subservience  to society.  The   original  importance  of  the  group  over  the  individual   has  been replaced  by the  Victorian  male  domination  of the family  and  especially of the women in it. Negation  of personal desires is no longer a  requirement  for survival but a quality sanctified  by society as the mark  of the true "lady".
The  only gratification  of such  martyrdom  is a self-deluding  smugness  entail­ ing  a clouded,  hypocritical  view of social roles. But Advena  is  Canadian, with an honesty and independence which the author  feels are typical. Advena  endures so  much  and  no  more;   the  role  of  martyr  is  not  to  be  accepted  without   a struggle. She does something  about  her frustrated  love for the new young minister in town, and in the end, through  Advena's  initiative, she and  her young minister are  free  to  fall  into  one  another's arms.  The  solution  is  rather   pat,  but  the point is made  that  custom  and  manners  are superficial and  often false:  the true values of kindness, faithfulness,  and  sincerity  count  in  both  men  and  women. Both sexes can be dominated  by false values only to their own misfortune.  Despite the moral tone, Duncan  also makes the point that  to achieve any  kind  of fulfil­ ment in life, sincerity  requires  an  independent  spirit  to accompany  it. Although Duncan's  theme  here is political,  the women she  portrays are realistically part  of the story. In  Advena  especially, we see one who  is all that  her society expected and  admired,  but  who  also has some of that  freedom  of thought   balanced  by native  intelligence  which  the  author   herself   displayed.  Like  Duncan,   Advena manages  to get what  she truly  wants  and  at  the same time  to get along  within her society. It was the kind of compromise that had then to be made,  but at least it involved much  more  than  simple  mindless compliance.
Materialistic  values and  illogical snobbery are also attacked  in Duncan's  other, and  lesser, novels, which are  not set in Canada.  In  A Canadian  Girl in  London ( rgo8), Mary  Trent's father,  a Senator,  has sent her with  her  brother  Graham
to  become  acquainted  with  London  society,  but  they  are  glad  to  escape  its
hypocrisies to return  to the more direct simplicity of Canada.  But Mary's admira­
tion for  her wealthy  self-made  father  and  her  handsome  brother  betrays, in its

72

WOMEN IN  CANADIAN LITERATURE



acquiescence  to them,  her own sense of inferiority:  she sees clearly  but  can  act only directly.
This is the kind of situation  which gave rise to the popularity  of the Victorian belief that  "the  hand  that  rocks the  cradle  rules the  world."  For  all  her  inde­ pendent  intelligence  and  tactful  firmness, Mary's  role is still that  of an  adjunct  to the  males in the family. The  pioneer concept of the family  working  together to gain achievement still dominates  the role of the woman. It is father who makes the  decisions regarding  the  aims of the  family-which are  his  own.  Duncan's women  are  always conformist  to  a degree  that  allows them  to  fit within  their society, but at the same time they are individuals with no time for false pretenses, conforming  only within  the limits of their sense of justice.
Not  long  after  Duncan's   books appeared,  L. M.  Montgomery  published  the first of her stories about  Anne  of Avonlea,  Anne  of Green  Gables,   Igo8). An attractive, imaginative  little  girl,  Anne  learns  to  blend  her  independence  with the  conventionality   of  her  time  and  place,  and  through   necessity as  much  as through  following  her  own  wishes, she  gains  a  career,  she  becomes  a  teacher, then  a  rather  new and  honourable  profession open  to women.  Teachers  in  the public  schools  had  formerly  most  often  been  men;   women  who  taught   had either  been  nuns  or  faded  gentlewomen  who  provided  a  meagre  education   to those whose parents could afford to pay.
Much  of the long popularity  of Anne of Green Gables is due to her independ­ ent spirit,  her  confidence  that  she  can accomplish something  for  herself. She  is intelligent   and   better  educated   than   previous  generations   of   Canadian-born women  had  been. Her children,  who appear  in later stories,  receive her encour­ agement  in expanding  their horizons. Women in  Montgomery's  books still belong to the rural society that  dominates  then, but they feel fortunate  in comparison  to preceding  generations.  Life  is less difficult,  and  it  offers  many  new  chances; careers in nursing  and  secretarial  work as well as teaching  were then  just open­ ing up as fields of exciting opportunity  for women.
In the early days of the present century, the west was just beginning  to develop while  the  east  had  already  gone  through  its  pioneering  stages.  Ralph   Connor recalled in his novels the Glengarry area and the Scottish pioneers among whom he grew  up. He  portrayed  women  as he had  known  them-vital  to  their  society, though  confined  by  their  settlers'  lives. The  chief  reason  for  the  existence  of women  was  the  necessity for  good  wives and  mothers,  according   to  pioneer standards. In  Glengarry  Schooldays  ( I902)   Connor  described  Mrs.  Finch,  his

73

WOMEN IN  CANADIAN LITERATURE



most  admired example of  such  womanliness,   as  "last  to  bed  and  first  to  stir", with  a  "steadfast mind  and  unyielding purpose":

Her  husband  regarded  her with a curious mingling of reverence  and  defiance ... but while he talked  much  about  his authority,  and  made a great show of  absolut­ ism with his family, he was secretly conscious that another  will than  his had really kept  things  moving  ... withal  her  soft words  and  gentle  ways, hers  was a  will like steel ... Besides the law of order,  there was ... the law of work  ... To  the mother  fell  all  the  rest. At  the  cooking and  cleaning,  and  the  making and  the mending,  all  fine arts  with  her,  she diligently  toiled from  long  before  dawn  till after  all  the  rest  were  abed.  But  besides these and  other  daily  household  chores there  were, in  their  various  seasons, the  jam and  jelly, the  pumpkin  and  squash preserves,  the  butter-making and  cheese-making,  and  more  than  all,  the  long, long work with  the wool.

The  laws of order  and  work that  Connor  mentions  meant  that  each  could accom­ plish what  his or her talents suggested,  in terms  of their  society.  Where girls were concerned,  creative   and   administrative  talents   were  not   only  encouraged  but were  vital to the farm  life most  people followed,  and  to contemporary urban  life.
Despite    the   unadmitted  fact   that    both   knew   that    she   indeed    ran   the farm,  Mrs.   Finch   was  a  good   wife  who,   in   her   awareness  of  his  need   to appear absolute  master, never  argued  with  her  husband. In  quiet,  devious  ways, she  arranged that   injustices should   not  last  long,  and  the  family  accepted this oblique  kind  of  authority. When  this  ideal  wife and  mother became  ill, no  one related  this  to the  physical  exhaustion she must  have felt,  and  no  one  was more surprised  than   her   husband, lost  without   her.   Mrs.   Finch   demonstrated the strength  of  character for  which   she  was  noted,   and   suffered   in  silence.  This martyrdom  illustrates  the   endurance  which   pioneer   life  demanded;  when   it turned out  that  she  had  "malignant cancer" for  which  nothing could  be done, her  early  training served  her  well.  Mrs.  Finch  was granted after  her  death   the supreme accolade: "all  her  life ... she lived for  others."
The  other  woman prominent in this story is Mrs.  Murray, the  minister's wife, described  as "fine  and  fair  and  saintly", the  inspiration of all. The  influence   of a good woman was acknowledged and appreciated in pre-Freudian novels, and women  were well aware of this power which society granted them.  They  regarded it a duty  to  use it  well,  and  this  in  turn  encouraged a more  selfless attitude.
There is indeed  something almost frighteningly simple in the standards Connor portrays. Women  were  not  expected   to  work  outside  the  home  in  any  capacity that  interfered with  their  first  duty,  the  household -but  most  lived  the  life  of

74

WOMEN IN  CANADIAN LITERATURE



Mrs.  Finch,  with  plenty  to  occupy  them.  Certainly  Connor  grants  to  women ability, intelligence, charm,  along with a kind of superiority  to men. In  his later novels, he attempts  to fathom  character  more deeply,  but  society has  changed, and  although  he recognizes this, he cannot  cope with it.
Later,  beginning  with  ]alna  in 1927, came the stories of Mazo  de la  Roche, widely read outside this country but never considered great literature  here, largely owing to the  unrealistic  settings and  their  author's  soap-opera  imagination.  But her  characters  sometimes  display  the faults  and  virtues  of  real  people.  Meg  is sweet but unyielding, in the manner  of her contemporaries  who still felt the need to be martyred  by their convictions without ever examining them honestly. Old Adeline  may  be a  dominating, rather  irritating  old  woman,  but  she  is true  to her times. Such tyranny  within  the family was a woman's  sole outlet  if she had the  qualities  of leadership,  and  Gran  had  no special talents  outside  them:  she merely liked  to  run  things.  Her  own  generation  had  considered  her  ambitions not  only acceptable  but  necessary:  the  family  must  be  united  in  the  common cause. By virtue  of her  position as matriarch,  she had  a duty  to  perform  which society felt was absolutely  incumbent  upon  her. She was an  exaggerated  repre­ sentation  of the  kind  of woman  considered  "good"  in  the  author's  youth,  and her  portrait  seems drawn  partly  in admiration and  partly  in  irritation
As the years pass in the Jalna stories, women make greater efforts to attain independence.  Often  as not, they suffer for it, or are shown to be ridiculous and not very bright.  In  the  author's  own society a woman  was always faced  with  a choice:  either  a life of her  own, or life with a  husband  as mother-homemaker, based on the  pioneer concept  updated  to the disadvantage of women.
As  society  develops  beyond  the   pioneer  stage,   women   are   considered   as restricted by their own natures, although in practice the restriction  is imposed by society itself. But the pioneer evaluation  of women as individuals  still lingers. Frederick  Philip Grove shows sympathy for the overworked and  downtrodden immigrant  wives on the prairies, who work there much as they would have done in  their  homes  in  Europe.  Our   Daily  Bread   ( 1928)   and  Fruits  of the  Earth
( 1933), like his other  prairie  novels, reflect the west of the first decades of this
century,  still the  time  of the  pioneers. In  Settlers  of the  Marsh   (1925), Mrs. Amundsen  is a  victim  of  the  cruelty  of  her  husband's   harsh  peasant  attitude, and  this in tum  deeply wounds,  psychologically, her  daughter   Ellen. This  kind of loveless slavery disgusts Clara  Vogel so much that she turns completely against everything  that  might  have been good in farm  life. Uneducated and  untrained, Clara  turns  to  her  only  alternative  in  the  city,  where  easy  virtue  brings  an

75

WOMEN IN  CANADIAN LITERATURE



easy life. Ellen and Clara  are both victims of their society: the only future  offered to them  is marriage  and  homemaking  and  child-rearing,  and  when  they  refuse this, little remains. Ellen earns her reward  through  patient suffering,  while Clara did as she chose until  caught  by the nemesis of violent death.
Despite Grove's empathy  with these women characters,  the moral  views of his time  dictate  what  they  may  do,  or  be.  In  The   Master  of the  Mill   (1944), different  times  and  circumstances  are  involved,  and  the  women  have  differing roles. The  three  Mauds  of the story are the three faces of Eve, granted character­ istics which  belong to individuals  nevertheless. As R. E. Watters suggests in  his "Introduction" to the I 96 I edition,  the three  Mauds  encompass  "the  trinity  of mind,  heart,  and  spirit",  but  it is notable  that  each can  only  symbolize one of these qualities. It is also notable  that  in Maud  Dolittle we see  a  woman  who is brilliant,  with  keen business ability along  with  a  warm  heart. Grove  knew well that  many  women  were  indeed  capable  of more  than  housework,  and  in  this novel he has a situation  where such a woman  fits in.  But the society portrayed seems to share  the  views of  Mazo  de la  Roche:  these  women  either  marry  or have a career,  and  the only career  is Maud  Dolittle's as secretary.
Grove  accurately  reflects the  times of which  he  wrote.  In  Two   Generations ( 1946)  he not only portrays the "generation  gap" long before the phrase became trite,  but  he demonstrates  his belief in the "new"  woman, who wanted  her own life as well as a  husband  and  a  home. Like the other  Patterson  children,  Alice feels frustrated by her father's  narrow  attitude.  She, too, is determined  to leave the  family  farm,  although   her  own  ambition   is subordinated   to  that   of  her brother  Phil. Their  almost incestuous love for one another  is meant  to show the shared  ideas and  beliefs of the  younger  generation  who feel that  there  is more to  life  than   physical  labour.  They  are  surprised  at  the  support   their  mother provides,  and  come  to  realize  that  she, too,  was once  young  and  dream-filled. The  most  modem  woman  of them  all  is Nancy,  their  brother  George's  wife: she has struggled  to  become  a  dancer,  and  has  no  intention  of giving  up  her hardwon  opportunities. Grove allows Nancy to make everyone eventually happy: she bears George's son, the first grandchild,  but continues to plan for her career. The  opposite pole to Nancy  and  Alice is Cathleen,  brother  Henry's  wife. Grove loses no opportunity to point  out  the stupidity  and  conformity  which  make  her uninteresting  to all, even to Henry.
No matter  how dated  the story's details, Grove positively supports  the  notion
of women as individuals  with  talents  and  abilities to be encouraged.  He  is one of very few  writers  of his time  to do so. Despite  women  having  the  vote  and

WOMEN IN CANADIAN LITERATURE



being recognized as persons before the law, few novels, then  or later,  reflect any great  change in their attitude to women, whose characters  are  usually portrayed as more restricted and  less free than  in real life they need be. Society in general was slow to adopt  new  ideas  or  to face  realities, and  fiction  reflected  the  lag.
For instance, in Callaghan's Such  is My  Beloved  ( I934), the  two  prostitutes are convincing in terms of the novel's theme, but add  nothing  to the portrayal  of women as they exist in this century;  they are Eve in modem  dress, man's down­ fall, leading him out of Paradise.
Callaghan  sees the  Christian  virtue  of self-negation  as  the  woman's  role.  In They  Shall Inherit  the Earth  ( 1935), Anna's lack of self-centredness may be the giving of spirit  which man  must  learn in order to live in this world,  but  it also seems to  be the  old  martyr-complex  of women  in  different  terms.  Certainly  it projects an ideal of which  Ralph  Connor  would  have approved.
More  joy in  Heaven   ( I937)  is deliberately a  martyr  story,  with  Kip  Caley condemned  by society because it cannot  understand  his Biblical sense of charity. But  his mother  and  Julie  are  martyrs  too,  whose suffering  is only  intensified through  association with  Kip.  Only  the  "bad" characters  gladly  suffer  nothing.
In The  Loved  and The  Lost  ( 195 I)  Peggy Sanderson  embodies  another  ver­ sion of the martyr  role. In  her common sense, Sara  Jeanette  Duncan  would  be impatient   with  Peggy's  lack  of  understanding   of  reality,  although  she  would recognize the traces of Victorian  gentility in Peggy's difficulties. No  matter  how high  her intentions,  Peggy suffers for flouting society's rules, since  she does not recognize  that  society is still  insistently conformist  to  outworn  ideas.  One  can imagine a Mrs. Finch, for instance, finding a way to cope, even  though  it would be through  an attitude  which  Peggy could not abide.
Generally,  Callaghan's themes  are seen through  male  characters  who  have  a
strength  which raises them  against  the background  of his fiat style. The  women tend to be paler, blending into this background. His more recent novels change somewhat  in technique,  but  though  the settings are contemporary, there  is little difference in the characters  of the women, despite the author's sympathy.
One  of Hugh  MacLennan's best portrayals  of women  is rather  oddly,  in  his early novel, Barometer  Rising  ( I94I). Penny Wainwright  is almost  a complete metaphor  of twentieth  century  womanhood: she is caught  between  the  conflict­ ing  rules of the  older  generation  of her  father  and  his friends,  and  the  newer freedom  with  its stress on individuality.  She refuses to be a martyr,  but  acts to solve her difficulties. Penny's circumstances are not far  removed from the present as far as her position in society is concerned. In  MacLennan's later  books, how-


77

WOMEN IN  CANADIAN LITERATURE



ever, women tend  to be merely  types, with even less individuality and  sense of purpose  than  Sara  Jeannette Duncan's  characters.
Not surprisingly,  the  most penetrating studies of women tend  to  be in novels written  by women.  Ethel  Wilson  portrays  women sometimes tied  by marriage, or by love alone, but still as individuals  with some freedom of choice, often  pre­ occupied  with  the search  for  a  meaning  to their  lives. Margaret  Laurence  has much  the same  attitude. In  The  Stone Angel  ( 1964),  for  example,  she shows how one woman  born  out  of her time  remains strongly  individualistic,  reacting to the  restrictions  of  her  world.  In  the  end,  Hagar  has  been  defeated   by  her tum-of-the-century small-town  society as much as by the simple fact  of age. For such as Hagar  there  was no place.
The  push-and-pull  of contemporary society and its effects on a sensitive, intelli­
gent  Canadian woman  are  perhaps  best expressed in  Margaret Atwood's  The Edible Woman  (   g6g). Marion  McAlpin,  the central  character, leads the  con­ ventional  life of the recent  university graduate.  Atwood  herself is quoted  on the book's  jacket as stating  that  the novel is "about  ordinary  people  who  make  the mistake of thinking  they  are  ordinary", which sums up  Marion's situation.  She does all the expected  things,  even to being almost engaged  to a  young-man-on­  the-make.  But suddenly  Marion  cannot  eat:   unknowingly,  but  literally,  she is fed  up  with  conformity,  and  understands  this only when  she  realizes that  she herself is being eaten  up  by society. Symbolically, she frosts a cake as the image of a woman  and  serves it to  her friends. They  are appalled, so Marion  happily finishes by eating  it herself. The  old  martyr-complex had subtly  pushed  her into contemporary   "nonconformist"  conformity,  but  rather  like  Duncan's Advena, Marion  is saved by a sturdy indepedence  she had never suspected in herself. With none of Advena's  social  and  moral  commandments  to guide  her,  Marion  must find  her own way, and  it  is difficult. She is involved in a war,  not  between the sexes at  all, but of one kind  of society against  another.  The  "edible" woman  is the loser, the contemporary martyr-unless, like Marion,  she turns  against  the society that  is nibbling  away  her individuality.
Like  Susanna   Moodie,  Mrs.  Finch,  or  Nancy  or  Alice  Patterson,   Marion realizes that  femininity  is only a  part  of her own  unique  person,  and  is not  to be worn  as a hair-shirt.


review articles




KNISTER'S STORIES



Dorothy Livesay



Selected  Stories  of Raymond Knister, edited  by Michael  Gnarowski. University of
Ottawa Press.


AT LONG LAST the short fiction of Raymond Knister is seeing the light. After  fifty years of neglect, six of his short stories  have  been  selected,  with  an  intro­ duction by Michael Gnarowski in  a  new series  of Canadian short  stories  initiated by  the  University of  Ottawa  Press. The  project is commendable and  timely.  But perhaps more  needs  to  be  said  than   the editor   has  set  down,  concerning the  life and   writings   of   Raymond  Knister.  For too  long  he  has  been  known  only  to  the elite  as  an  imagist  poet  who  came  from an  Ontario  farm  to make  his way in  the twenties  magazines, This Quarter, Paris, and  The Midland, Iowa.  His chief desire, however,  was  to  write   fiction.   In   testi­ mony therefore we have  the experimental novel, White Narcissus, and  the biograph­ ical  novel My  Star  Predominant, centred  on  the  life of Keats  which  was published after Knister's death by drowning at  the age  of  33· There is also  the  evidence  of the unpublished novels in the Douglas Library, Queen's  University and  his  let­ ters  quoted   by  me  in  a  memoir  to  his Collected  Poems  (1949).
Raymond Knister's ancestry,  like Fred-
 
erick  Philip  Grove's,  was German on  his father's side and  Scottish  on his mother's. But Knister had  the advantage of not coming  to Canada as an outsider. He was born in  1899  near Comber in Essex Country and  grew up on his father's farm in  corn  and  tobacco  country. Already in his high school days he was reading vora­ ciously  whatever  came   to  hand   in  the Chatham public library, roaming through English,  German and   French  literature. It was interesting that  whereas the father was an  experimental farmer, sending his soy beans  to  win  a  prize  at  the  Chicago exhibitions,  the  son  brought   his  experi­  mental  writings    to   Chicago   where   he hoped   to  meet  those  new  realists,  Sher­  wood   Anderson,   Carl   Sandburg,  Ruth Suckow. Hemingway in the early  twenties  was  as  yet  unheard from,  but  the  realist movement in fiction and  the imagist movement in poetry,  emanating from Harriet Monroe's Poetry,  made a deep impression   on   the   shy,  stuttering  farm boy. He  went  to  Iowa  and  got  editorial work on The Midland.
His  first  literary  influences then   were those  found   in  the  American  mid-west.

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



But if I assert  that  Raymond Knister  was strongly  influenced by what  we might  call now the "magic" realism  of Sherwood Anderson, this  is to say  that  he found  in him   a  confirmation  of  his  own   views: start  with  precise observation, but see behind  it into  the nature of things. As Schopenhauer pointed out, in discussing Goethe's Confessions, the  special  quality of  the  artist  is that  it  is given  to  him  to perceive the  metaphysical real-das Ding an Sich. Consider for instance this paragraph by  Sherwood  Anderson  from the first chapter of Winesberg, Ohio:

That in  the  beginning when   the  world  was young   there  were   a   great  many   thoughts but  no  such   thing as  truth.  Man made the truth himself  and  each   truth was  a  compo­ site   of   a  great  many  vague   thoughts.  All about in  the  world  were  the  truths and  they were  all  beautiful. The  old  man   had  listed hundreds of  the  truths in  his  books.  I will not  try  to  tell  you  of all of  them. There was the  truth of  virginity and  the  truth of  pas­ sion,  the  truth of  wealth  and  of  poverty, of thrift and   of  profligacy,  of  carelessness and  abandon. And  then   the  people came  along. Each   as  he  appeared  snatched  up  a  dozen  of  them. It  was   the  truths  that   made  the people  grotesques.  The  old  man   had   quite an  elaborate  theory  concerning the  matter. It  was  his  notion that  the   moment one  of the  people  took  one  of  the  truths to himself,  called it  his  truth, and   determined  to  live his  life   by  it,   he   became  a  grotesque and  the  truth  he  embraced  became a falsehood.

And  here  is Raymond  Knister, speaking of his aims as a writer:

Life  is  likely  to  be  troublesome at  times. Let  us  veil  it,  they  say,  in  sonorous phrases and    talk    about   birds    and    flowers    and dreams. Birds   and   flowers   and   dreams are real  as  sweating men  and  swilling pigs.  But the  feeling about  them  is not  always  so real any  more  when  it  gets  into   words.  Because of  that, it would  be good  just  to place  them before  the  reader, just  let  the  reader picture them   with   the   utmost  economy and  clear­ ness,   and   be   moved    by   little   things   and  great. Let   him   snivel,  or   be   uncaring, or

8o
 make  his   own    poems from undeniable glimpses of the  world.
It would be good  for  the  flowers  and  birds
and   dreams,  and   good   for   us.  We  would love   them  better,  and   be  more   respectful. And   we  might   feel  differently about  many other common things if we saw  them  clearly enough.  In   the   end   we   in   Canada   here might  have   the   courage of  our   experience and   speak   according to  it  only.  And  when we   trust  surely,   see   directly  enough,  life, ourselves,  we  may   have   our   own   Falstafls and   Shropshire Lads   and   Anna Kareninas.
We   may   climb   ladders,  and   our   apples will  be  hand-picked, and  make  more  lasting vintage.

The  seriousness of Knister's practical approach to writing  short  stories  may  be seen from  the following  excerpts  from  his letters  to  an  Ontario friend, after  an  ill­ ness which  prevented him  from  pursuing university  studies.   (They  are  all  quoted, like  the   above   passage,   in   my  memoir  appended to the  Collected  Poems.)

When  I got  back  to  the  farm and  recovered my   health,  by  dint  of   working  fifteen    to sixteen   hours   in   the   field   until   autumn, I began   to   change  my  views   about  writing. There was  something about  the  life  that I lived,  and   all  the  other farm people   round me,   something that  had   to   be   expressed, though I  didn't  know   quite  how.   But   the attempt would  have  to be made in  the  form of  short   stories.   I  had   read   a  great   many short   stories   from   several  literatures.  Now for  a  subject: it  wouldn't do  to  start with an  autobiographical piece.  One  must  be objective. As  the  days  got  shorter, and   the time  for  more  leisure came  nearer, I looked about me earnestly.

He  found   his story  in  the  life  of an  old man  who had  helped  take in the crops.

Here was  my  story.   When   fall  work  was over  and   the  Christmas season,  I sat  down on   January 2,   1921,   and    wrote  it.   The writing was  quite bad,  but  the  composition or   the   architecture  had   been   given   some care,  and  I was  not  surprised, though rather gratified, when  "The One  Thing"  was accepted  by  The  Midland. I had   heard of The Midland through Edward J. O'Brien's year  books  of  the  short  story,  and   I figured

REVIEW ARTICLES



it  would   be  better to  have  even  one  cent  a word   and   a  printing in  such   a  place   than the  thousand dollars I  had  heard the  popu­ lar  magazines paid, and   run  the  risk  of  any loss of  prestige; the  deuce with   the  money! But   the  letter of  acceptance  from  John T. Frederick, while   it   praised  my  story   with the   most   ingratiating  discrimination, men­ tioned    that  The  Midland  did   not   pay  for stories...•
That  winter I wrote several more  farm stories, and  also  thirty or  forty  farm  poems, with    the   eye   on   the    object.  These  were printed at intervals in the  "little magazines," poetry  journals,  and   expatriate  quarterlies
-all American.   Some    recognition   came from   American critics, and   in  London  The New  Criterion   singled  out   a  dozen   of  my poems   from   a  galaxy   of  moderns for   their "objectivity". It  was  this  objectivity  which forbade   the    acceptance  of   my   work    in Canadian  magazines. My  poems  and  stories were   so   Canadian,  and    came    so  directly
from   the  soil,  that Canadian  editors would have  nothing to  do  with   them.... But  they weren't morally subversive, nor  eccentric mannered, these   attempts. It seemed  grue­ somely    significant  that   not    a    Canadian editor  would    have    anything   to   do   with them    and   that  probably there  were a  few other' young    men   in   the   country  writing about  it   with    the   same   immediacy,  who were  likewise  rejected.

Thus, it seems to me that  the same simplicity,   objectivity  and   intimacy   as was Sherwood  Anderson's, was the aim of Knister. But Knister is less facile  and obvious  than  Anderson. He  is more  pro­ foundly concerned with  the  loneliness  of man.
In  the six stories  chosen  by Gnarowski the  editor  finds  four  of  them  "myths of initiation" from  innocence to experience. This  emphasis  on  the  mythopoeic aspect of  the  stories  is  provocative,  yet  in  my view it runs contrary to Knister's own intention. All  writers  make  use  of  myth but  with  some moderns such  as Malcolm Lowry  or Robertson Davies  there  is a conscious  structure, a schema  of symbols. I do  not  feel  this  to be  the  case in Knis-
 ter's  fiction.  Listen  for  a  moment to  his own  stated   aims  in  writing, again   from the letters  quoted in my memoir:

... I  agree   with   what  you   say   about  the stories. "The Strawstack" was  the  harder to do,   and   it   is  not   nearly  so  true   as  "The Loading". I incline to  find  more  and   more that the  short  story  is one  of  the  trickiest of forms.  How  to impart a  hint  of  the  mystery and   wonder behind  the  circumstances, and yet  remain true to  these  latter? ...

Yes,  I  owe   a  good   deal   to  Muilenburg (Walter T.), although I had  written all  my published stories before seeing Ruth Suckow's.  She   began  publishing  just   one year  before  I did.... Walter I count in  my innermost  circle. Yet   the   contrast  between him   and   his  work    (to   the   casual)  is  im­ mense.  "Heart of  Youth" was  perhaps  the  story   that woke  me  to  country life,  as  life and   as  possible   material for  art;  and  from  my  first   reading  of   it   in   O'Brien  I   now regard it  as  to  me  the  best  of  farm  stories
-most  universal and  lyrical. ...

Again,  in a letter  dated April  1 I, 1924 from  The  Midland, Iowa  City,  Knister makes his views quite  clear:

Speaking of  understanding, your  remarks on  the  Bible  touch on  my pet  theory -that we  need  not  understand. We  do  not  under­ stand life,  nor  great art that is  its  essence.  Enough if we see its  mystery  and  beauty ...

The  truth that  emerges  is that  whereas Knister  sought  for a simple realistic  effect he possessed, in addition, an intensity and sensitivity  by which  he was able  to make the ordinary extraordinary. Again,  the phrase  borrowed from  painting, "magic realism" could well apply.
Moreover, though in no sense a natura­ list of the school of Zola or Dreiser,  nor a propagandist for change in society, Knis­  ter's  central concern was  the  relationship of  the  individual  to  the  community. In all  of  the  six stories  before  us  there  is a lonely,  introspective  key  character  who identifies  with  "one  thing", one  person, one  animal, one  object; usually  because

81

REVIEW ARTICLES



he  cannot fit into  the  norms  of the com­ munity. Lacking the  community,  lacking  love   of   neighbour, the   characters  are thrown  back   on   their   own   resources. Those   not  strong  enough  "crack up" or destroy   themselves.   In   the  story,   "The Strawstack", the protagonist commits  sui­ cide; in  the other stories  there  is a loss of contact  through submission, as in  "Mist­ Green   Oats";  accidental death,  "The Loading"; paranoia, "The  One   Thing" and  "The Fate  of Mrs. Lucier"; and traumatic revelation of evil, "Elaine". Because none of the characters succeeds, either morally  or socially, Knister's stories lack  the  easy  optimism and wit  of Stephen  Leacock. In   this  collection  at least  the  tone  is sombre  and  parallels in many  ways the  Collected  Poems. But perhaps this  is not  a wide  enough samp­ ling,  and  if some of Knister's  more jour­ nalistic  sketches  written for  The Border Cities   Star   and   Toronto  Star  were  set alongside, we would  find  a  lighter, more whimsical   side  to  this  writer's  body  of work.
The real  significance  that  comes  when
looking  at  Knister's prose  is to  find  that here  we  have  a  stylist  of  the  first  order. What F.  P. Grove  struggled  for  and  did not  attain, what  Ethel  Wilson found and perfected, and  what  Knister grasped at, was the  need for a wholly original way of handling language. Knister's prose  must be  read   slowly,  savoured, for  each  sen­ tence  has   weight  and   thickness,   its  rhythms carefully balanced. It is as if, to make  up for his own stammer, he takes a painful and  secret  pleasure in  creating a perfect sentence. Then that  sentence must be  intimately linked   with   the  next  and  the next,  to build  the paragraph. Nothing is dashed  off or left  to chance; and  there­ fore a few of the obscurities in the present
 text must be due to faulty proofreading. Certainly there are misspellings! and there  is something definitely  wrong  with the following excerpt:

Nearly   two  days  were  gone.  But  he  should have,  though only  until realization, for expectance the  last  one  of  her  absence.

A further aspect  of Knister's style is his vocabulary, recherche sometimes to the point  of obscurity.  More  often  his  origi­ nality  pays off. I like particularly phrases  such  as "stridor of haste", "inertly voiced remarks", "chivied and  lured", "pre­ figured prize",  "brusque unconscious­ ness".  Again  Knister's very  strong  sense of imagery, the  imagery  of sound  as well as sight, makes his prose leap  into  life.
In   "Mist-Green Oats",  for  example,
the  description  of  the  boy's  aching   feet and  how  he eases  them  by taking  off  his shoes and rubbing  his feet in the grass is utterly  vivid:

... Such   immeasurable  sweet   pain   he  had never  known.  At first  he could  scarcely bear to raise  his weary  feet  from  the  depth of  the grass.  Presently he  would  lift  one  at  a  time in   a   strange  and    heavy    dance,  for   the pleasure   it   was    putting   it    down    again among  the  cool   soft   blades. The  lowering sun   variegated  the   green  of   the   different kinds  of  evergreen  trees  back  of  the  house, of which he always confused the names. Something of beauty which, it  seemed, must have   been  left   out   of  it or   which   he  had forgotten, appeared in  the  closing  day. Something  was   changed,  perhaps. He   did not  know  how  long  he  had  been  there, scrubbing his soles  about like  brushes in  the grass, and regretfully hopping, until  he remembered that the  men  would  be coming in  for  their  supper at  any  minute. Beginning to  wonder  whether  anyone  had   witnessed his  movements, he  went  into  the  house  and replaced his shoes.

Or  consider  the following  passage:

He went out  into  the  dusk.  Innumerable crickets  joined  voices  to  produce a  trill.  A wind   was  blowing   and   he  sniffed   it  grate-

REVffiW ARTICLES



fully.  "As  fresh-as  fresh,  as on  the  sea," he   muttered,  slouching   toward   the   barn. The   cattle   were  in  the  yard,  spotting  the gloom. He  could  hear  their  windy  coughing sigh, which  was at  once contrasted with  the loud   drumming  snort   of   a   horse   as   he burrowed   about  in  the  hay  of  his  manger. The  closed  stable  was loud  with  the  grind­ ing of jaws on the tough  dried  stems.
This  evocation of  landscape  through all the pores of the senses is what  makes Knister's short  stories so memorable. The other haunting element is the structure of the   stories:  their   movement  with   great
 ease from  the authorial-objective point  of view to the subjective inner  eye of the protagonist. And finally  there  is the effect of  the  inconsequential,  ambiguous series of  endings   to  the   stories.  Here  Knister could offer a lesson to Callaghan, who presses home  his point  ad nauseum. Knis­ ter's  "point" is hard to come  by. We are left with  the question: just what does the story   mean?  And   that   is   perhaps  why there  will  be  many  more  interpretations beyond  mine,  and  beyond  Gnarowski's.




CATEGORICALLY SPEAKING

W.H.New

JOHN Moss, Patterns of Isolation. McClelland  & Stewart, $4.95.


AT THE OPENING of his chap­ ter   on   "Immigrant  Exile",  John   Moss enunciates the   belief   that  constantly underlies his book of  criticism. Differen­ tiating  Canada  from  the  United States,  he writes:

Canada  is  a   name   to   which   adheres   a complex   mosaic   of  histories   and   geogra­ phies.  It   is  a  place,  a  landscape.  Dreams and  ideas  have  always  been in  the  order  of what  to do with it. Being such a  vast  space, it  has  always  demanded  expansive  schemes to make it seem less so.
It is  just such  an  expansive  scheme  that Patterns  of Isolation  attempts to provide. Proceeding on  three   main   fronts,   Moss samples    Canadian  prose   writers    from Frances Brooke  to the  present  and  orga­ nizes  them   into  groups   on  the  basis  of what   he  identifies  as  their  cultural atti­  tude  and  thematic preoccupation (Garri­ son,  Frontier,  Colonial, and   Immigrant Exile)  ; he notes certain recurrent features of  Canadian fiction  (Indian lovers, illegi-
 
timate  births, fool-saints, regionalism, and ironic  sensibilities)  ;  and   he  appends to his basic structure some fairly detailed critical  readings of a dozen  works he considers  particularly significant (As  For Me  and My  House, The Nymph and  the Lamp, Swamp Angel, and  others). Along the way he offers incidental quarrels with six other critics  (Frye, Jones, Eggleston, Pacey, Atwood, and  Ronald Sutherland), arresting autobiographical asides, and capsule   judgments that  range   from   the provocative to the stale.
It is for  the  grand   design  it  attempts, and  for the  provocation it erratically pro­ vides, that  the  book  deserves  to  be  read.  Its  accomplishment lies  in  its  efforts  to synthesize current approaches to English­  Canadian fiction rather than to chart new pathways,  and   its  originality  lies  in  its pervading    sense   of   personal    discovery rather than  in the conclusions it  reaches.  Moss draws  his appreciation of garrisons

REVIEW ARTICLES



and  landscapes from  Frye  and  his appre­ ciation  of  irony  from  Watters  and  Ross. His  book's  thematic  organization bears  a generic  relationship with  that  of Atwood's Survival  and   Waterston's  Survey.  But though he openly  declares his reasons  for not  dealing with  French-language  fiction (English and  French works  "participate in  distinctly  separable  traditions  which only occasionally  converge"), Sutherland and  Warwick have  supplied leads  to Quebec literature that  he could  well have pursued  in his effort to classify garrison, frontier, and  colonial  exiles.
Patterns  of Isolation is bound  to get an ambivalent reception-probably  cooler than  Moss deserves,  considering the diffi­ culties   involved   in  compiling  any  indi­ vidual   history.   Readers  accustomed  al­ ready  to the  judgments in it,  particularly if  they  miss  the  synthesizing  process  in which  Moss asks  them  to share, will not feel  instructed;  readers seeking   instruc­ tion  in an area  they do  not  yet know  will find  Atwood's  book,  however   misleading it  might  be, livelier  and  easier  to follow;  the   readers  who  are   likely  to  be  most satisfied  are  those  halfway  between, who want  a structure for the ideas which  their preliminary readings in  Canadian  litera­ ture    and    criticism    have   led   them    to glimpse.
Of   the   problems   besetting  this  book,
the  most  enervating is the  author's  style. The  first  37 pages,  for  example, contain redundancies, awkward phrasing, and repetitive  sound   patterns  that   interfere with  one's  reading:

The preceding paragraph is almost verbatim the  same  as the  concluding paragraph....

But,   of  course, Canada  remains a  place   of exile  for  Rivers and   Emily, for  whom  con­ summation is  concomitant with   a  return to England....
 The frontier is a  context, relatively  uncom­ plicated,  in   which    duality   consists  of   a single   vision  of  reality  confronted by  itself as  in   the  concave  reflection  of  an   encom­ passing mirror....

A combustion of isolation without alienation allows  them  to recognize the  peculiar quality of  their frontier environment as  well  as  fall in love with  each  other.

Moss  is capable of  much   better writing than   these excerpts   indicate -his  anec­ dotal  memoir  of  his  grandmother  Isobel Cameron  is  a  case  in   point-but   the flaws  are  too  numerous  to  ignore.  They  particularly burden  the  opening section,  creating a  barrier  for  all  but   the  most dedicated  readers,   and  they  are  accom­  panied  there  by a rash  of consistent  mis­ spellings. One  of  Lowry's  titles  is inaccu­ rately   rendered   every   time   it   is  men­  tioned,   and   two   of   his  characters  are misnamed. It is hard  to know  whether to fault  Moss  for  these  and  the  other  inac­  curacies,  or  his  editor   at  McClelland & Stewart.  The   cumulative effect,   in  any case, is one of carelessness, which  detracts from   the   study.   Responsibility  for   the overall tone might similarly  be divided. Moss  sometimes   comes  across  as  thesis­ writer   and   editorial-writer   rather   than  critic.  The  fragments of  critical quarrel, for example,  are  not developed enough  to be  useful  or  interesting, and   could  well have been edited  out.
Problems  also arise  in connection with the   judgments   and   the  method  of   ap­ proach. Though  Moss's  enthusiasm  for Frances   Brooke  and   Howard  O'Hagan proves infectious,  his  even  greater claims for  Thomas  Raddall's The  Nymph and the  Lamp  ("the first rank  of excellence") do not convince.  And  if he offers some of the  most  helpful  observations yet  to  ap­ pear  on Rudy  W'iebe's work, and  some of the only comments on Hugh Garner's, he

REVIEW ARTICLES



fails (as have many before him)  to come adequately to terms with the novels of Robertson  Davies.   Moss's   methodology has much  to do with these difficulties.  He is committed to decribing patterns, which is  a  perfectly   sound  critical   occupation. But occasionally-schematic critiques all run  this danger-a  work that  fits a  pat­ tern  is identified, in a transition that may even  be unconscious, as therefore "good".
The  categories he  establishes  as  the typical frames of reference for Canadian novelists  are  themselves  interesting. A "garrison" mentality occurs when a writer sees a new world  through alien eyes, a "frontier" mentality when  he sees the new world   as  chaos,   a  "colonial"  mentality when  he  tries  to redefine  the  local  in old world  terms,  and  an  "immigrant"  men­ tality  when  he tries to reconcile some old world  sensibilities  with  the  physical  and psychological  landscapes of  the  new. But categories  become  containers, while  the writers  themselves beg not to be confined.  Moss  places  Lowry  and   Brooke  in  the "garrison",  for  example, though   Lowry, particularly, lives in a "frontier" too, and as an "immigrant".
Even  more  interesting is the  basis  for
the  book's  overall  structure, the  link  be­ tween  the  categories   themselves  and  the comments on regionalism, landscape, and particular  novels.   Moss   voices   this  assumption  most  directly   when   writing  about  Sheila  Watson  and  Charles Bruce. Both of  them, he concludes,

build the patterns of moral and  physical isolation, the conditions of human existence, from  those  of  the  natural world.  Both  re­ deem   their   characters  from   the   ultimate  oblivion   of  isolation   through    a   sense  of community   imposed   by  the   conditions   of their  natural surroundings.

Moss   sees  Canadian  society,   m   other
 words,  as  a  moral  structure, its  patterns of isolation establishing a communal framework.  The    impulse   of   the   book carries   Moss   from   critical  observation into  social  reflection,  therefore; the  pat­ terning is important to him  as a guide  to "the    processes   of   our   emergence  into national being".  For  that  reason  it  is all the   more   unhappy   that   his   categories have trapped him so often,  for they affect the   implicit   social   comment  which   his literary  scheme carries.
One  part  of  Moss's  mind   rejects  "im­
posed" systems, for  (about Atwood's Sur­ vival)   he  complains: "Literary  analyses according to the  dictates of rigid  systems tend  to  omit  much   and  to  distort  what  they  do  reveal".   But  ironically  his  own book ends up not describing but  prescrib­ ing.  The change  of a  single  word  in  the "almost  verbatim" paragraphs at  the  be­ ginning  and  end  of  his  book  epitomizes this   inconsistency.    In   the   introduction Moss  writes  that  no set of patterns other than  this one "better displays  the  indige­ nous  character of the  Canadian  commu­ nity"; at   the   end   of  the  book   we  are advised  that  none "better defines" it. The  book does not  bridge  the chasm  between  "displays" and  "defines",  but  more  puz­ zling   still   is  why   it   should   ever   have attempted to try.
The point  is that  Moss's  first  assertion
may or may not be acceptable; it depends on   the   extent   of  a  reader's  agreement with  his literary  judgments. But  the  sec­ ond one, because of what  it implies about  Canadian society, must  firmly be resisted. Mapmakers  can   draw   political   boun­ daries,  and  societies  can  abide   by  them.  To   accept,  however,  the   principle  that  Canadian  culture and  character can  be defined, placed  in a category, given  ideo­ logical   edges,  is  to  deny   its  essentially

REVIEW ARTICLES



ffexible nature, restrict  its capacity for change, and   give  it  what   Moss  himself calls  the  "codified" consciousness  of  the United States.  Patterns certainly exist  in
 Canadian literature, but  they  ought  not, because  they exist at any one  time,  to be­ come   cultural  dictators.  Nor   can  good writers  ever be so controlled.




GETTING THE VOICES RIGHT
Adrian Mitchell

DENNIS T. PATRICK SEARs,  The  Lark in the Clear Air. McClelland & Stewart, $6.g5.
SAROS COWASJEE,  Goodbye  to Elsa. New Press, $5·95·
MATT coHEN, The  Disinherited. McClelland & Stewart, $8.95.


DENNIS  T.  PATRICK   SEARS never   quite   decides    just   what   kind   of novel  he wants  to write,  and  what  could by the signs have  been  a very fine novel is marred  by  a   fundamental  disjunction.
There is much   that   is charming in  The
Lark   in   the   Clear   Air,   an   account  of the  events  of  a  year  or  so in  the  life of Danny  Mulcahy,  coming to  terms  with the   adult   world   in   a   remote   northern Ontario farming community. Danny is responsive to the sweet sounds and sights about him, and for the most part Sears manages to  keep  the  texture of  the  de­ scriptive asides to an exquisite thinness,  a clarity  or lucidity of vision  that  is appro­ priate to  the  title.  But  for  all that  charm  it is perhaps a little  too aware of itself as charming; and  it  is  this  self-awareness I think  that  creates the difficulties.
Sears  sets his  novel  at  a safe  temporal as  well  as  spatial   distance. The   year  is I93I, though the  Depression is not  really in  evidence because,  as  Danny  observes, he has always known  hard  times. It is the nostalgic  distance of  Laurie Lee's  Cider with  Rosie above  all else; but Sears mixes up his Lee with  the burly  roistering of the wild Irish  boyo, and  like so much of the determined Irish  cult in writing, Sears assumes  that   Irishness is fascinating  be-

86
 
cause  he finds it fascinating. The  real sentimentality of the novel is not in the images  of bird flight  or landscape, it is in the self-congratulatory admiration of things  Irish. The  Irish  are all great  giants of   good-looking  fellows.   They   have   a fierce  sense  of  justice,  and  so  on.  "You Irish  certainly have  a strongly  developed vein of poetry, don't you?" says the nice young   schoolteacher. That   isn't   really examined in the  novel;  it is roundly em­ braced.  (So,  one  might   add,  is the  nice young schoolteacher,  also   with  Irish gusto.)   Does Sears  mean  the  lilting Irish  eloquence which,  the  way  he  handles it, becomes a compulsive narrative flow pur­ suing its own emphases as they occur?  Or  does  he  mean  the  sweet-sad  view of life, the  denial  of  romantic  promise   by  the intrusion of hard  realities? Sears manages to capture what  is I suppose  a nice Irish flavour   in  the  diction of  his  characters, but  most of the  narrative is in a different idiom. In any case, Danny's observations tend  to be too determinedly colourful.
At one  point  in  the  novel  Danny  ven­ tures   out   on  to  the   Canadian   Shield: "depending on  how  you  looked  at  it,  it was a country of god-forsaken  wasteland or  the  prettiest   place  on  earth." That is Sears' intention, to show how perceptions

REVIEW ARTICLES



vary according to the angle of vision. The scattered references  to birds call attention to the  same  thing; the  meadowlark sings and  flies into  the clear  air  of the  day not to move men  with  its beauty but  to stake a  claim   to  the   territory  it   needs.   The beautiful and  the belligerent are the same thing. Unfortunately  Sears, through Uncle  Mick,  is too  inclined to  draw  the patent moral.  And what  he hopes to show as the  complexity of life  is not  sustained imaginatively. It  becomes   an  oscillating rather than   a  coordinated vision  of  life. In  the  same  way,  there  is an  unresolved conflict  between   the  terseness  of  Danny and   the  run  of  his  narration; a  similar inconsistent shift  between  the  taciturnity of  the   character  and   the   surrender to literacy.  The dangerous invitation to sen­ timentality  is  partly  kept   in   check   by Danny's maverick  toughness-but there are  some dreadful  descents,  especially  to­ wards  the end.
What  is best here is the  strong  sense of remoteness,    of   a   small   community  of people  locked  into  a  particular  locality; and  moments  of  genuine wistful  beauty, as  well as of  riotous  gusto.  It  is a  novel that  fills in a gap in the Canadian literary scene, a light  and  entertaining book  that is content to be not too ambitious. Sears listens to words and  he can tell a vigorous story, but  he has not achieved the control of an overriding vision.
Saros  Cowasjee's Goodbye to  Elsa is a
very  different  novel,  yet  it  bumps   into some  of the  same  difficulties.  It too  tells its  story  in  the  first  person; but  Tristan Elliott  is a much  more  riddling character than  Danny  Mulcahy. He  is an  ambigu­ ously  pathetic  figure,   who  both  invites and evades our sympathy. Although in his loneliness  he is taken  up with  self-pity  of a kind  that  makes  him more  than  a little
 ridiculous,  he  is also  harrowingly lonely. There is real distress  as well as posturing. Tristan  Elliott is  an   Anglo-Indian teaching history  in  Canada  ("a  country where   there   were   more   professors   than janitors"). He  has  no special  attachment to Canada or Canadians, or to any other place   for   that   matter.  By  birth    he  is neither English  nor Indian; his childhood in  India and   his  student days  at  Leeds University (the  best thing in the novel by far,  with   a  nice  control  of  comic  inci­ dent)  show  him  as skirting the  edges  of life. Tristan emerges  as a  strangely peri­  pheral   personality; and  Cowasjee's style reinforces  this impression. The novel, that  is, seems to work only  at  the  literal  level, not as imaginative conception. Its  wit, its symbols   and   allusions   are   all   carefully placed,   but   they  fail  finally  to  promote any  central meaning. "At  the  core of my being   there   is  a  strain   of  insincerity," Tristan  admits,   and   one   is  inclined to think   this  is  true   of  the   novel  too.  Its ambiguities are  in the  end  more  sardonic
than  comic.  What exactly  is the  tone  of "the   Canadians are  so neutral. ... They generally  take  the  colour  from  their  sur­ roundings", for example?
Cowasjee's real  talent is for  caricature and  parody. He  captures in  the  rhythms of his prose the rapid  patter of Indian English,  the  quick  transitions of thought and,  satirically, the  polite  changes  of opinion, especially  in the  sequence of events at Leeds. There, Tristan is without question comically  ignorant and  unaware of  his  foolishness.  Later, when  he  some­ times  pretends to  see  things  with  naive simplicity,  we  are  uneasy  about the  sig­ nificance  of that affectation for  the char­ acter.  The summary of academic politics and   the  lobbying   power   of  the  Faculty Wives' Association  is in  the  vein  of Lea-

REVIEW ARTICLES



cock's  not-quite-so-harmless irony,  but  is Cowasjee merely  indulging himself  at the expense  of his narratand the story line, or is this digression  ttf"be seen as a sign of Tristan's growing   instability? The  force of  Cowasjee's satiric   wit  keeps  breaking through the  presentation of character.
The novel has its more serious side too.
Tristan keeps a weather eye, his one good eye, on God.  Increasingly he quotes bibli­ cal   texts;   more   and   more   he  prays   to God; and  more  and  more  he  determines to pre-empt God's  authority. He  plans  to kill himself: and  he also  plans the  ritual  sacrifice  of a girl,  Marie  (who  has a boy­ friend   Joe,  a  carpenter-the proffered  allegory  seems  pointless). That he shoots instead   Marie's  identical  twin  sister,  or maybe  does  not   shoot   her,   is  certainly related  to  the  fact  that  he  has  vision  in only one eye; but  does it mean  anything? His ultimate design,  however  obsessive, is frustrated. Life  does  not  go according to plan.  But  since  on  the  way  to his savage and   despairing end  he  has  been  such  a memorable  comic   butt,  we   find   it   a wrench   to take  seriously  his testament of absurdity.
Matt Cohen   is a  very  much  more  ac­
complished  novelist.  The Disinherited   is a  more  complete  novel;  it  manages  the full realization of character in a situation. Where the other two novels are controlled by  the  demand of  the  narrative current, Cohen's eye picks  up  the  details,   notices the reflections  and  odd  angles; character, not action, takes precedence. It is a slower novel,   ruminative  but    not   ponderous, suiting  its pace  not  just  to the  rhythm of the central character, Richard Thomas, a farmer  in   Eastern  Ontario,  but   more astutely  to  the  quality  of  his  mind. It leads  us,  from  inside  Richard Thomas's thoughts, to those events in his past which

88
 he still does not quite  understand, and  to those significances  which  he  understands by apprehension rather than  comprehen­ sion. He is not an insensitive man,  but the quick  of  him  has  been  thickened by the  slow  routine  of   works   and    days,   and  coarsened   by  the  legacy  of  family   and  neighbourhood.
It is a very skilful piece of writing,  a beautifully sustained  reconstruction of the bewildering context  of domestic tension, family  history  and   various  external  fac­ tors   which   define   and   limit   Richard's awareness; and  throws  against his inward life  the subbornly  separate life of a body giving   in   to  a   series  of   heart   attacks. Cohen   is  honest   to  the  emotions of  his characters, and  sensitive  to  the  rhythms and  speech of his chosen locality.  He gets the  voices  right,   as  Margaret  Laurence would  say.
For most of the novel Richard Thomas is in a semi-private room in a Kingston hospital,  recollecting his thoughts and feelings  in  what  little  tranquillity he can find between  visiting  hours  and  the mini­ strations  of  the   night-duty   nurse,   and balancing that   remembrance  of  life  against    the   presence   of   pain   and   the imminence of death. Although it seems to him  at first that  he has a choice  to make, whether  to  die  or  not,  the  decision  has already  been  made. That  is  in  keeping with  the  way that   the  whole  of  Richard Thomas's  life has  happened  to  him.  He has  inherited his  life,  not  mastered  it­ and   to  that   extent   he  is  in  fact  disin­ herited.
This is the life-style of all the Thomases. Each  generation imposes some kind of disinheritance on the next. Erik, Richard's son, hopes  not  to inherit the  farm.  He  is less successfully portrayed, not because  he is a weaker character, nor because  he has

REVIEW ARTICLES



attempted to break  away from some Brangwen notion  of the  land  to  the  city, but  because  Cohen  takes  for  granted  too many   assumptions  about   him.   That is, Erik's  weakness  is not  always  interesting
-it becomes  often   (especially   early  in
the  novel)   tiresome  attitudinising. There is  no  quarrel  with   Cohen's  decision   to make   him   negative,  but   Erik   is   disas­ trously  inarticulate to himself. And  there are   some   cheap  points   scored   off   him extraneous  to  the  real  concerns  of  the novel.
In  his previous  publications Cohen has
 shown  that  he is a gifted  writer, that  he has  plenty  of imaginative flair.  The  Dis­ inherited  begins  for  him   the  process  of tough   discipline.   In   some   things   he  is over-inventive, in recounting the adopted son's  childhood  experience for  example. It in no way accounts for  Brian,  a minor  Straw   Dogs  character who   might   have been   all   the   more   convincing  for   not being   'explained'.  But   that   is  a   small objection to a novel  of  remarkable  care­ fulness  and   perception. Cohen  looks  to become  a  very   considerable   novelist indeed.





A BROKEN WAND?
 


Audrey Thomas


MARGARET LAURENCE, The Diviners. McClelland & Stewart, $8.gs.


IT IS  IMPOSSIBLE for me to pretend to any sort of objectivity when reviewing this  novel,  at  least  in  terms  of its content. On  pageI 47 Morag  (college girl)  is talking  to her  friend  Ella:  (They have  been  discussing  the  problem of  be­ ing brainy,  literate young women.)

I  know    [Morag  says]. And   yet   I  envy girls  like  Susie  Trevor so much I damn near hate  them. I  want  to   be   glamorous and adored  and   get   married  and   have   kids.  I still  try  to kid  myself  that I don't want that. But   I do.   I want   all   that. As  well.  All  I want is  everything.

That's it,  that's exactly  it.  We  want  the freedom,  leisure,   patience,  energy   and above  all  opportunity to  be  both  artists and  women,  even  mothers   if we  choose. We  don't  want   to  be  told   by  Leonard Woolf   (however  much   we  might  have longed  for his support -and  his press - at  times)   that   our   minds/bodies/what­ ever  are  too fragile  to bear  children. We
 
don't  want  to be called  "child" or  "little one"  by  the  men  we  admire. We  don't want  to be humoured. And  yet:

If only   there   were   someone  to  talk   it  out with.  Someone  to  share  the   pain   I  guess. And  maybe  she  [the married girl  in  the  flat upstairs in  London] is indeed worrying  un­ necessarily.  As   probably I  am.    But   you would    just    like   somebody  to   say-God, love,  I KNOW and   I'm worried  too.

Morag is caught in  the  traditional cul- tural   trap   which   says  that   "somebody" has to be male  and  this may  alienate her from  many  feminists.  It is from  the males
-Christie Logan, her  stepfather, Jules Tonnerre, her first lover and  father of her child  Pique,  Brooke,  her  English  profes­ sor husband, Dan  McRaith, her  Scottish  artist-lover, Rayland,  the  old   man   who divines  water,   that   Morag  learns   about  life,  about  herself.  The one  exception to this   is  Mrs. Gerson, her  girl-friend's mother, who  is both  loving  and  intellec-

8g

REVIEW ARTICLES



tual  (but  a widow so maybe she has more time  and  energy?) .
In  spite  of  her  metis  lover,  her  half­ breed  child,  and  that  child's agonized  cry that  "you've never  had somebody  tell you your  mother was crazy  because  she lived out  here  alone  and wrote dirty  books and had   cooky  people  coming   out  from   the city  to  visit,"  Morag is in  fact   a  pretty  conventional heroine. Perhaps that  is part  of  her  charm.  The "romantic" elements  of   the   book   (making  the   stepfather  a garbage  collector,   the  lover  a  metis,  the final  guide  a  diviner)  are   not  nearly  as strong as the realistic elements: Morag unwilling to clean  a fish and  throwing it back   in   the   water,   unable  to  give  up smoking in spite of her terrible cough, unhappy about  the fact  that  she is "some­ times   so  god-damned  jealous   of    [her  daughter's  and   her   daughter's   present
lover'sJ youth  and  happiness and  sex that
I can't see straight" (and  so gets up early and  slams  around in  the  kitchen),  guilty about   not  "really" living  in  the  country, not  "really" going  back   to  nature   (she does not garden, she has an  electric  stove and  uses instant coffee, takes a taxi  to the nearest   village   to  get   her   groceries,   is afraid of the weeds in the  river) . All this is so good and so true.
We learn  very little  about the  creative process from  Morag-she doesn't under­ stand   it  herself.  (It seems  to  me  impor­ tant   that  the  Gunn clan  has  "No  Crest, No Motto, No War  Cry".)  All she knows is that  she has  to be a writer. This  is the main difference between  Morag and  Stacey   Cameron  in  The   Fire  Dwellers. Stacey's   life  is  totally  caught up  in  her children  (and  husband) ; Morag, who  is very  like  Stacey  in  her  doubts, fears,  de­ sires,  has  this  other   side.  "I've got  my work  to do,"  she says, "to  take  my mind

go
 off life." The  fact  that  her very first book is accepted and  from  then  on it seems to be smooth  sailing  (from  a  literary point of  view)   is  maybe   a  little   improbable. Maybe  we would  like  Morag to struggle more,   as  a  writer, the  way  she  has  to struggle  as a  person.  She  is never  Down and   Out   in  London  or   Paris   or   New York.  (She  also  never  gets  pregnant  ex­ cept  the  one  time  when  she  wants  to.) She finds her loghouse  by the river on the first   try.   She   has   had,  perhaps,   the  "everything" she wanted, in the end.
Although the book is set in the present,
in  Ontario, l'vlargaret   Lawrence  weaves in   the   past   through  the   tales   which Christie Logan   and   Jules  Tonnerre  tell Morag  while she is young. Christie's tales are  bardic   in  language and  romantic in tone,  and  have  mostly  to  do  with  Piper Gunn,  Morag's  mythical  ancestor, who led  a  group   of  highlanders  to  Canada. Jules'    tales   are   of   an   equally   mythic character, about  his grandfather, "Rider Tonnerre", who participated in the metis uprisings.  As  Morag grows  in  historical knowledge,   she  discovers   that   the  tales are  indeed  fiction  (albeit  based  on  fact) but   also  discovers  that   it  doesn't   really matter. She  then  repeats the  tales  to her own  child,   just  as  the  child's  father­ and   later   Pique   herself-makes  songs out  of these ancestors' past  exploits.  The  "diviners" then  become  of course  not just Royland  and  Morag, the  "official" crea­  tor  of  the  book,  but  also  Christie, Jules  and  Pique. Dan  MacRaith, as painter, is another one.
The  image  of  the  water, of  the  river which  flows both  ways, is a good  one for the artist  and particularly good for Morag
-the artist  as woman. The  diviner's rod
becomes Prospero's Wand, only held per­
haps   by  Miranda. To   dowse  means   to

REVIEW ARTICLES



divine,  but  is also means   (dowse, douse) to extinguish (by water usually,  I think). Rayland's  power   has  been  extinguished by the end of the book. It was a gift from the gods, and  it is gone. Morag wonders when/if this will happen to her. Margaret Laurence tells us this is probably her last book   of  fiction.   Prospera /Miranda  de­ liberately breaks  the  divining rod. Why? The  swallows go but  they return. It seems a  strange, gratuitous  gesture  from   a

MAGPIES AND
 novelist   whose   keen   eye  and   ear   have ranged   over   such   wide   territories.  Any way, I'm not sure her kind of divining is something you can  quit  before  the gift actually goes. Maybe it has gone,  now; maybe  that's what  she's  trying  to  tell  us. For myself, I suspect she's still got a Back Forty  somewhere   in  the  rich  acreage of her  mind.  It may  be laying  fallow  at  the moment   but  it  will  not  be,  I think,  for very long.

NIGHTINGALES
 


Christopher Levenson


ELI MANDEL, Crusoe:  Poems New and Selected. Anansi, $5·95·
ELI MANDEL, Stony  Plain. Press Porcepic.


THE  PUBLICATION  within  the same year of a 'new  and  selected'  volume and   a   new   collection   allows   Mandel's readers  an  unusually convenient basis for both   prospect   and   retrospect.  Not  that the   poems   represented  in  Crusoe   (and chosen  by Margaret Atwood  and  Dennis Lee)   have  the  same  sense of completion as  those  in,  say,  Miriam  Waddington's Driving   Home, but   the  familiar  major themes  recur  under  different poetic guises thoughout the  book-ideas  of  madness and   sanity,   the  exploration  of  an  often savage  subconscious,  and   the  search  for spiritual and  moral  standards. These  are often  conveyed  through the  re-invigora­ tion of mythical archetypes but curiously, despite  some  notable  successes, Mandel's many  talents  when  mingled  often  smoul­ der rather than ignite.
Perhaps the  very  calm  and  collected­
ness with which he writes of the uneasy, haunted  and   terror-stricken  has   some­ thing  to do  with  it. Certainly the  poems
 
in Crusoe that succeed best are those like "Houdini", "Landscape" or "The Speak­ ing  Earth" that   proceed   in  terms   of  a single   unifying    metaphor   or   situation carefully  worked  through or, like "Meta­ morphosis", juxtapose  first  and  later  re­ actions   to  the  same  situation. Presenta­ tion  as  myth,  on  the  other hand, often has  the  effect  of  diminishing the  rawness of his raw  material. By comparison with later   work,  the  admired "Orpheus", for instance, seems literary, whereas Mandel's general  direction has  increasingly moved away  from  definition, both  semantic and metrical, and  towards the  open  and  in­ clusive.  As  he  writes   in  "The  Milk  of Paradise", "I put away this last unfinished  poem/ to  think  with  trouble of  a friend/ who  wrote  me words  and  whose words  I scorned." The desire for greater inclusive­  ness  necessitates   a   more   overt   personal  involvement  in  the  events  of  the  poem and   leads   Mandel   to   an   increasingly direct  linking  of the forms  of public  vio-

REVIEW ARTICLES



lence  and  horror and  Mandel's own familial   but  representative  experience as a mid-twentieth century Jew.
Within the rhythmic and  syntactic tex­
ture   the   movement  towards  simplicity, even  starkness,  of statement is parallelled by a  breaking down  of formal  structures so as to accommodate suggestions  and hesitations. The  earlier poems in Crusoe often   lack   rhythmic  interest  and   gain little  by being  read  aloud. There are,  of course,   exceptions,  such   as   "The  Fire Place" with  its  very  effective   use  of  al­ most Blakean  rhymed quatrains, but usu­ ally  the  voice  is informal, putting on  no airs and  yet not  colloquial. These  poems' clotted   nature is due  partly  to  long  sen­ tences  made  up of a sequence of subordi­ nate  clauses and  phrases   which,  in "Estevan, Saskatchewan" for example, do not  build  dramatic suspense as Yeats'  do, but   interlock and  complicate  the   prose meaning. The fact  that  they  are  written for  the  most  part  in  complete statements also  affects  the  tone  of  the  poems:  the resultant  air   of   authority  tends   to  the aphoristic, the images  more often  concep­ tual  than tactile.
Stony  Plain, a beautifully designed  and
printed volume,  confirms   the  shift  pres­ aged   in  the   last   poems   of   Crusoe  and suggests a turning away  from the  prophe­ tic  "visionary" ecstasy   that  John  Ower predicted in  Canadian  Literature 42, while   the   mythopoeic   element  has   re­ treated in favour  of  poems  that  are more overtly   political   and   contemporary.  A realistic  awareness  of  twentieth  century  horror  is  dominant -
an  iron  time     survival
a style learned in  the  light of our  own  extinction
("The death of Don  Quixote")
but   the   tendency  now   is  to  see  these

92
 horrors more in  terms  of artistic or  liter­ ary  exempla  (Quixote,  Wilde,  Camus; Bosch, Goya,  Velasquez)  or  in  such  his­ torical   figures  as  Ho  Chi  Minh, who  is treated laconically in the Auden  manner. More  of the surface paraphernalia of the contemporary world  is present,  so much  so  that  at  times  one  wonders  if  Mandel is  not  sacrificing  too  much   to  a  rather unsubtle  form   of   contemporary "rele­ vance". "For  Jimmy   Hendrix and  Janis  Joplin", for instance, comments:

... I loved  you Janis
as I love those whom  terror seized
for its own  poetry: Roethke and  Agee,
Dylan, Crane, Jarrell and  Sylvia
dead  at last in the oven  of her  own  head
not  those  whom  politics silenced  or made well
nor  the killers on horizons who make  guns
their  songs  and  celebrate the  will but  drunk, crazed, doped, defeated
by the  wild mistake that  believes  its own  art

One   appreciates  the   sentiment  but   the poem  has   too   much  of  a  manifesto quality; its  need   to  make   a  particular point  is too blatant. For  the  most  part, however,  these poems are  not  political  in any  limiting, propagandistic  sense:   the foci remain  power,  evil, responsibility, while  the  relationship to public  events  is that  of the committed private individual, not  the  spokesman.
In  terms  also of  that  crucial   index  of
poetic   vitality,   verse   movement, Stony Plain marks  a real  advance. Although in "Nerja" and  "Sea  Things" the Black Mountain-like self-consciousness of the layout  and  the  amount of emphasis  that one has to give to almost every word undermines the impact of the  totality, generally   the  suppleness   and   control   of the  pace  of these  poems  by spacing and line breaks together  with a corresponding dislocation  of  formal   syntax   results   in

REVIEW ARTICLES



greater subtlety, especially of ironic effects,  as  is  witnessed  by  the  ending of "For Ann: on the question of Franco's successor":
knowledge no longer a burden we know  freedom
songs.
Most poets are as much magpies as nightingales, displaying a fondness  for bright   words,  unusual sounds  and  unex­ pected  connotations. Mandel's  ostensible subject   matter  has  always  been  electic. Now  his  experiments with  syntactic dis­ location   have  made  it  easier  for  him  to adopt  new  poetic  strategies such  as  the "found  poem"   (e.g. "First  Political
 Speech" or "Manner of Suicide"), the ironic  juxtaposition of official  jargon  and personal  reminiscence found  in "Pictures in  an  Institution", and  the  sort  of  dead­ pan   impersonation,  a  revamped, less naturalistic version of the dramatic mono­  logue,   represented   here  by  "The Presi­ dent  speaks to the Nation" and  "Political Speech   (for  PET)"-variants  perhaps of  the  more  heroic   persona of  that   fine poem "From the North Saskatchewan".
Structurally no less than  thematically, then,   Mandel's latest   poetry   seems  in  a state of flux and openness. Above all, it reveals a steadily  increasing potential for combining subtlety  and  strength.



THE AMATEUR ANARCHIST
Fred Cogswell

PETER HUGHEs, George  Woodcock. McClelland & Stewart, $1.25.


GEORGE  WOODCOCK  has  been for a long time an extremely busy man  at a number of things,  and  Peter  Hughes in No.  r 3 of the Canadian Writers Series has been  given  only  sixty  pages -however, marginless   and  minuscule in  print  they may  be-in  which  to  deal  with  him  as man, polemicist, biographer, historian, writer  of travel  books, poet, literary critic, and  magazine  editor.  He has chosen, wise­ ly under  the circumstances, to write four articles  linked together  by a general  intro­  duction. Each  article  deals  with  at  least one  aspect  of  Woodcock's work  and  the general  effect is one of chronological pro­ gress  and  of  cumulative effect,  although it is sometimes difficult  to determine how much   the  ideas  under discussion  at  any given  time  are  Hughes' and   how  much they are George Woodcock's.
The   thread  that   ties  the   articles  to-
 
gether,  and   presumably the  thread that unifies George Woodcock's career,  is anarchism, and  before  proceeding further with  this review  I ought  to give its read­ ers  an  indication of  my  own  bias  in  the matter. As far  as  I  am  concerned  there  are   two   kinds   of    anarchists,  amateur anarchists, whom  I  regard as  true  anar­ chists, and  professional anarchists, whom I do  not  consider  to  be anarchists at  all. These  latter, and  their  views, form  most of  the  themes   developed  by  Hughes in this book, and  in it he seems to be asking for  sympathy   for  a  cause  that   does  not deserve  such  a  response.  Let  me explain.
The  amateur anarchist is  the  man  or
woman,   extremely   rare,   who   does   not wish to rule others  or  to be ruled  himself but because he knows that  for most of mankind the chief delight in living lies in the power struggle, he respects  their  value

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



systems and accommodates himself  as well as  he  can  to  the  mess  they  make  of  the world,   creating  oases   of   independence only  where  this can  be  done  without  in­ fringing upon  the  rights  of others. Free­  dom  for him is a series of  epiphanies, and the  joy of these epiphanies gives him  the strength to  survive  the  slavery  of routine and  conformity on  the one  hand  and  the creative energy  to  transform  his  epipha­ nies into  art  on  the  other hand.  Like  St. Francis and  Jesus  Christ   he  realizes  that  his  true  kingdom   is  not  to  be  found   in this  world  but  in  the  world  of  the  spirit.
Between   this,  the  amateur  anarchist,
and  the  professional, there  is a small  but significant difference. The   latter feels  it his duty  to save the  world  for anarchy by proselytizing. He  thinks  he is being his brother's keeper  and  knows what  is better for  his brother than  his brother does for himself.   His   good   intentions  in   reality mask  a  will  to dominate, to unify  in  ac­ cordance  to  his  will.  His  action  betrays  the   true   principles  of  anarchy.  That is why  I do not feel sorry for  the anarchists in their  struggles  with  either the Right  or the Left. If the principles of  Christ, when forced   by  either   peaceful  or  other per­ suasions  upon  others   not  naturally fitted to  receive  them,  become  hopelessly  per­ verted, what  guarantee  have  the  profes­ sional  anarchists that  their  work is in any sense worthwhile? Defeat  would  only in­ volve themselves and  followers  in  further frustration and ruin. Victory would  mere­  ly inflict  another  tyranny upon  a  world that  cannot exist without tyranny in  any case.
I  see George  Woodcock  as a man  and
a writer who began  as a professional anarchist of the kind described  above and who  has gradually transferred himself  to an  amateur or  "true"  anarchist. Conse-

94
 quently,  I have  little  patience with  Peter Hughes' attempts to show the significance of anarchism either by drawing parallels between  Godwin's time  and  our  own  or by showing the wisdom of some of its predictions, or by showing  how it has suffered   by  persecution  from   the   Left even more  than  from  the Right. All these things  in so far  as they affect  my life are a waste of time.
I  am  repelled   also  by  Peter   Hughes'
attempt to deal with  the disiilusion  which World  War  II produced as  if  it  were  a universal   phenomena. It  is  true   that  its effects on Woodcock  and  his friends  were as described  but Hughes neglects  to men­ tion  that  World  War  II brought  millions of  people  raised  in  the  depression   their first meaningful employment in life, that it brought many families,  through ration­ ing  and  price  control, the  nearest   thing  to luxurious living  they  had  ever  known, and  that  the cameraderies established  in the shadow of  bombing was a social fact whose disappearance after  the war is ever to be regretted.
Equally  distasteful to me is the attempt of  Hughes,   and  in  this  instance,  Wood­ cock,  to  be  derogative of  the  activity  of the   state,   particularly  with   respect   to education.  As  one   of    thousands  who would   not   have  received   an   education had   not   the  government  paid   my  ex­ penses,  and  as  one  who  has  taught   in  a public institution with  no greater curtail­ ment of his freedom  than  a private insti­ tution would have insisted  upon,  I must protest   such   passages   as   the   following which in no way represent what  I have, without interference, attempted  to do:

Bureaucrats outside  and  inside  the  univer· sities  impose  on  those  trying   to  learn  and teach  the  duty  of  increasing  the  gross national  product,  keeping  the  young  out  of

REVIEW ARTICLES



the    labour   market  until    companies  hire them, showing that   the  national or  provin­ cial   state  of   affairs  is   the   shape   toward which   all   creation  moves,   and   supporting the  building of  academic  empires  dedicated to the  stamping out  of  thought.

The  above statement is Hughes' not Woodcock's, but  if it  were  really  true,  in more than  a superficial  sense, I doubt whether Hughes or Woodcock, any  more than  myself, would have taught in a university.
After  allowance has been made  for  the
above strictures,  I   must admit  that Hughes has written well, sometimes bril­ liantly,   with  respect   to   Woodcock's achievement as a  biographer  of Godwin, Kropotkin, Wilde, and  Aphra  Behn; as a historian of  anarchy and  of Greek  influ­ ence   in   India; as  a  writer   of  polemic  essays; and  as the  author of travel  books in  which  the  writer's   knowledge   of  the place  visited  and  its  history  is united  by the  point  of view of a  humane and  civi­ lized  anarchism. What  is  disappointing, however,   is  that  Woodcock's biography of  George   Orwell,   which   Hughes  ap­ proves  of  as his best work of a biographi­ cal  nature, gets  almost  no  treatment at all  in any  of the essays in this book. This  is particularly regrettable in that  this age has seen  few,  if any,  writers  as wise, in­ telligent,  and   honest   as  George  Orwell.
On  page 5 I of the article  entitled "The Imaginative  Person"    there   is  one   bad faux-pas.  Fourteen lines  are  quoted   and referred  to  as  being  "irregular  ten  syl­ lable  lines."  This  is astonishing since  the basic  pattern of  the  lines  in  question is twelve syllables and  only one line in four-
 teen  in fact  has ten  syllables.  To  redeem this,  however,   the   article   contains four pages of as good appreciative criticism of George  Woodcock's poetry  as I have  ever read.
Hughes' treatment of Woodcock as an editor,   critic,   and   anthologist of   Cana­ dian  material is almost  equally good. It is marred  by  the  occurrence,  and  reitera­ tion  of a statement  so  patently false  that  it   defeats   its   purpose   despite   its  good intentions:

And  in  the  past  ten  years,  apart from  all  his other work,  he virtually created Canadian literature  through  the   journal  he   founded under that  name.

Literature  is  created  by  writers, and what  writers  write  for  are  readers,  pub­ lishers, and  money,  not  reviews  by  critics in a magazine. In  fact,  it  might  be more reasonably  argued  that  the literary flower­ ing  during the  last  ten  years  is more  the product of the money  the Canada Coun­ cil  has  been  giving  to authors and   pub­  lishers   to   encourage  their   efforts   than  through  any  reviews  or  articles  in  Cana­  dian  Literature, however  good  these may be.
Peter  Hughes' George  Woodcock is not hack-work  any  more  than  its subject is a hack-writer, and  its reading is an  exhila­ rating  experience  in   which   feelings   of delight, frustration, exasperation, and  ad­ miration  succeed  one  another as  the  eye hastens   through  its  pages.  There is  one constant throughout and  it is a good  one. The  varying   feelings  apply   to  Hughes. The  vision  that  the  book  gives of Wood­ cock never changes.







95







THE CAN HALF



CLARA THOMAs,   Our  Nature-Our Voices.  new press, $3.75  paper, $8.95  hardcover.
ELIZABETH    WATERSTON,    Survey.   Methuen,
$4.75  paper,  $8.50  cloth.
IN  ROBERTSON DAVIEs' Leaven  of Malice
( 1954), Dr.  Sengreen,  the  head   of  the English  department at  Waverley Univer­ sity, advises Solly Bridgetower to "'jump right into Amcan, ... particularly the  Canadian end  of  it.' "  Solly,  as  it  turns out,   decides   to   travel   without  Charles Heavysege,    "his   Passport  to   Academic  Preferment".  In   the   twenty   years  since Davies  wrote Leaven  of Malice, however,  many Canadians have  jumped  into  "Am­ can", especially  "the Can  half", and  pro­ duced  many  books about Canadian  liter­ ature. Two  such  books,  Clara  Thomas's Our Nature-Our Voices and Elizabeth Waterston's  Survey,   have  recently been published.
To  a  certain extent, these  two  works are  similar.  Each   is written by  a  Cana­ dian  professor  of  English at  a  Canadian university. Each professor  has taught Canadian literature  courses  for  many years and  published  several  scholarly  and critical works on  the  subject. Both  books are  aimed  primarily at  those who are  not very   advanced  in   their   study   of  "Can lit". Clara Thomas notes specifically  that  she  has chosen  her  material "with an eye to  the  likelihood  of  [its]   appeal to  stu­ dents,  particularly of the secondary school

g6
 
age  group." Both  books  contain pictures and  bibliographies as well as essays. One purpose  of  each  is to  trace  the  develop­ ment  of Canadian literature from  its be­ ginning  to  the   present.  The subtitle   of Our  Nature-Our  Voices is "A  Guide­ book   to   English-Canadian Literature"; that  of  Survey, "A Short History  of Can­ adian   Literature".  But   although  both books  survey  "Can lit",  in  the  end  each maps  out   a  different  route   through  its territory.
In  Our  Nature-Our Voices, Profes­ sor  Thomas directs   her  reader  down  a fairly   traditional  road   of   literary  criti­  cism.   Her    book   is   divided  into   three parts:  "The  Settlement: To   1867''; "Canada and the Empire: Confederation to  World   War   I"; and   "The  Modern Period  1918-Ig7o". She  begins  each  part  with  an  essay that  summarizes the  main events of the age she is chronicling. Then, in a series of essays, each on a different English-Canadian author, she describes briefly  the  life  and   main   works  of  the writer   and   adds  a  selected  bibliography of primary material by, and  secondary sources  on,  the  writer   she  is  discussing. The   essays are  interspersed  with  photo­ graphs  of  Canadian  people,  places,  and events.
Objections can  be  made   to  both   this kind  of survey  and  this  particular guide. The  difficulty  of saying  something  valu­ able  about  several  centuries of  Canadian history, over two hundred years of Cana­ dian   literature  in   English,   and   many authors in  less than   two  hundred pages leads  Professor  Thomas  into  several  al­ most inevitable traps.  A few of her state­ ments are wrong:  John Richardson's W acousta,  for   example,  was  first  pub­  lished  in   England  in   1832,  not  in   the United   States  in   1833,  as   Professor

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Thomas  states.   Although  she   describes the  life  and   works  of  fifty  authors,  she omits  others  who  might  just as well have been included. Such  writers  as Thomas McCulloch, Oliver  Goldsmith, William Kirby, and, for   that  matter, Charles Heavysege  are  all left  out  of Part  I. Sev­ eral  important modern authors are  miss­ ing  from  Part   3, although this  is  partly  due  to  the  fact  that   a  second  volume  of Our   Nature-Our   Voices  dealing  ex­ clusively  with   "The  Modern  Period" is being   prepared   by   Frank  Davey.   The  length  and  the quality of the content, and style of the essays, vary a great  deal.  Pro­ fessor   Thomas  tends   to   overuse   such terms  as "engagement"  and   "levels" in all  the  essays, but  both   her  matter and her manner sparkle  more  brilliantly when she discusses such authors as Anna  Jame­ son  whose  life  she  has  studied in  detail and whose works she obviously admires. Finally,   the   placement  of  the   pictures among  the essays seems a bit odd. The opening paragraphs of  the  essay  on "Ralph Connor", for  instance, share  the same page as a photograph of a theatre troupe   travelling to  the  Yukon,  whereas the essay on  Robert Service  is flanked  by photos  of Petrolia, Ontario, an  electric streetcar in  Ottawa, an  industrial plant, and a tanner's shop.
Still, despite these objections, Our Nature-Our    Voices does   achieve   its goal  of  providing  "a   beginning,  some­ where for curiosity  and  enjoyment to start from-not  an  ending, a  final  summa­ tion  or  a  solemn  pronouncement." Our Nature- Our Voices lets the reader  dis­ cover quickly who some influential Cana­ dian  authors are, what  they have written, and  how  they  can  be further studied. By describing rather than   categorizing the writers and  their works, Professor Thomas
 allows  the  reader   to  make  his own  con­ nections  and  to discover  his own  patterns of themes  and  images  in Canadian litera­ ture.  While  references are  made  to Cana­ dian  literature in  French, the  concentra­ tion on English-Canadian literature helps the  reader   digest  the  more  familiar half of   his  bicultural   pie.  The  photographs also  help   him   see  aspects   of  Canadian life  which   have   influenced  the   authors and  their  works.
Like  Clara Thomas in  Our  Nature­ Our  Voices, Elizabeth  Waterston reveals in  Survey   her  commitment to  "Can lit"  and  arouses  the  reader's  enthusiasm for it,  but  she  draws  in  Survey a  map  of its territory  different from  that  sketched by Professor  Thomas in  her  book. Survey  is a  collection of  eleven  short  essays, each on  a different theme  in  Canadian litera­ ture.   Each   is  introduced  by  a   picture which depicts an aspect of the theme and concluded by a bibliography of works for its "Further Study." On  the first  page  of each  essay, a date, a general title,  and  a specific title of a work are given, and  thus the  beginning of the  theme  in  Canadian literature,  the  theme   itself,  and   a  work central to it are suggested.  The essays themselves are arranged in a roughly chronological order according to  the "age" of  the  themes.  Although she  con­ centrates mostly on  English-Canadian literature, in her discussion  of each  theme Professor  Waterston  usually considers some  Canadian works  written in  French as  well  as  several  written in  English.   In addition to  these  essays, she  has  a  "Pro­ logue",  an  "Interlude", an "Epilogue", a "Survey Chart" that  lists important events in  American, British,  and Canadian his­ tory and  literature, and  an "Index".
As with Our Nature -Our Voices, the approach to  Canadian literature in  Sur-

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



vey and  specific statements in it are  open to   criticism.  Literary  history    recorded according to  themes  leads  almost  invari­ ably  to  some  repetition and  fragmenta­ tion.   Frances  Brooke's   The   History  of Emily   Montague,  for   example,  is  dis­ cussed in  the  essays on  the "Terrain", on "French and   English  Canada", and  on the "Canadian Lady". While  in each,  the reader  catches  glimpses  of  the  novel,  the thematic approach itself never allows him to see the work as a whole. This approach also  leads  Professor   Waterston  to  make some  rather  odd  statements. In  her  essay on   "The  American  Presence," for   in­ stance,   she  says  that   Haliburton's  Sam Slick  was  the  first  book  to  "focus  cen­ trally" on  the  use  of  "dialect  for  comic effect ... in a fashion  that  would  become standard in American humour." Although the  statement is partly true  in  that  Hali­  burton did influence American humorists, it  is exaggerated because  he  was also in­ fluenced  by  them,  particularly in  his use of  dialect. In  Survey,  as  in  Our  Nature
-Our Voices, there  are some mistakes in
fact,  and  the  quality of the  essays varies. But  while  these  criticisms  should  warn the reader to  beware,  they  do  not  lessen the  essential  value  of  Survey,  for  it  is a witty,  intelligent, and  sensible  book.  Pro­ fessor  Waterston has  isolated  several im­ portant  themes   in  Canadian   literature, traced    their   development  over   a   long period    of   time,   through  a   variety  of places, and in the works of many  authors. By pulling  together the  views  of  several authors on the same theme,  she illustrates well  the  continuity and  change in  Cana­ dian  literature. By  providing the  reader  with  a survey  of the  history  of "Can lit"  from   several  angles,  she   forces  him through a subtle  workout in optics  and  a complex   exercise  of  his  own  wit.  Thus,

g8
 she   guides   the   reader    through  several "states  of metamorphoses" from  which, entertained and  enlightened, he rather regretfully  emerges.
Clara Thomas' Our   Nature-Our
Voices and  Elizabeth Waterston's Survey, then,  are each appealing books. Although the  first is more suitable for  beginners in Canadian literature, and  the  second  for those who have already  taken  at least one course  in   it,  both  are  informative. Neither, of course,  is a substitute for  the careful   reading   of  Canadian  literature itself or the close perusal  of such publica­ tions  as A Checklist of  Canadian  Litera­ ture, the Oxford Companion  to Canadian History and  Literature, the  Literary His­ tory of  Canada, or  Canadian  Literature.  Each,  however,  gives  the  reader a  valid "Passport" for  his  travels   in  "the  Can half" of "Amcan."

MARY  JANE EDWARDS



IDENTITY
LOST AND FOUND


The   Oxford   Anthology   of  Canadian   Litera­ ture,  edited  by Robert  Weaver  and  William Toye. Oxford  University  Press. Cloth $I3.50, paper  $s.so.
An anthology  is a slippery  animal, whose real  substance   can   easily  elude   the  re­ viewer's grasp. One  can tot up the figures, stick  pins  in  regional   maps,  divide  out­  puts  by inclusions  and  come  up  with  a statistical who's  who. Or  list the  familiar names  which  have  been  selected  out.  Or  analyze   the  anthologist's  premises,   pre­ faces, or  preferences.  Anything, in short,  but  attempt to  deal  with   the  real  sub­ ject  of the  book.

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



Faced  with  the task of reviewing The Oxford Anthology of Canadian Litera­ ture,   I   am   sorely   tempted  to  carp  at details,  rather than  wrestle with  the ques­ tion  of the  book's  true  worth. "We know there     are    omissions -particularly    of some   younger   writers   from   Quebec­ but  here  we must  plead  the old  excuse of space   limitations"  say   Messrs.   Weaver  and  Toye,  in  a  statement whose  brevity can   fairly   be  described   as  cavalier.   A partial list of "omissions" would  include enough   stellar   talent   to  form   a  second, rival,  volume.  Imagine, if you will, a "Canadian anthology" which  omits Buck­ ler,   Clark,    Engel,   Godfrey,   Gustafson, Horwood, Kroetsch, Haig-Brown, Lowry, Mitchell,  Moore,   Watson    and    Wiebe!  (Not   to  mention  that   group of  writers whose sins against  the  proprieties include the   knack   of   popular  success.   Stephen Leacock  is permitted one selection  by the anthologists. But  what   of  Berton,  Bum­ ford,   de   Ia  Roche,  Grey   Owl,   Mont­ gomery,  Mowat  and  Service?  Are  we so richly  endowed   with  literary  giants   that we can  afford  to ignore  those  who  have done   most   to  make   some   part  of   the Canadian    experience    recognized,    not only   by  ourselves,   but   by   the   outside  world  as well?)
Few  anthologies, of course,  can  afford everyone.   Publishing   costs  must   be  con­ sidered. But editors  who find  it  necessary to  restrict   admissions   would   do  well  to re-examine  their   basic   premises   before the  red  pencilling  begins. Should histori­  cal  curiosities  be included at  the  expense of    contemporary   worth,  for   example? And  what   about   the   problem    of   bal­ ance? If Pierre Vallieres  is to be included, why  not  Claire   Martin? And  if  Robert Fulford,   why    not    Bruce    Hutchison? Surely  there  are  occasions  when  the  an-
 thologist   must   be  prepared  to  excise  a selection,    rather   than   offend    against others  equally  as worthy   by including it. We  have  all  read  books  which  inspire
us   to   pursue   their   subjects  in   greater depth. Indeed, Messrs. Weaver and  Toye have  anticipated this  reaction by supply­ ing a list of titles "For Further Reading". What  they may not have anticipated, and  what  I  suspect  they  may  have  generated in several  of  their  readers,  is the  impulse  to  compile  an  anthology of  one's  own.
With  all  this  said,  I  freely  admit to a regret  that  this  volume  was not  available in  the  fall  of   r 957,  when   the  first  full year's course in Canadian Literature was initiated  by R.  E.  Watters  at  the  Uni­ versity  of  British  Columbia. Our  text  at that  time was the now familiar Canadian Anthology, compiled   in  1955  by  Klinck  and   Watters  (and   selling,   incidentally, for  the  same  price  in  hardcover  as  the paperback edition  of The Oxford Anthol­ ogy does  today.  Sic  transit  economy.)
There were 47 Canadian authors repre­ sented   in  Klinck   and   Watters,  a   little better  than  half  of  whom  have  survived  to  appear  in   the   present   volume.   The  text  was  supplemented   by   those  novels which  we students were  able  to  unearth in  Vancouver's  used   bookstores.   (I still own a first edition  of  Who Has Seen  the Wind, inscribed  by  W. 0. Mitchell for  a lady  who, considering the  place  to which she  consigned   his  work,   deserves   to  be nameless.)  Although the course both awakened   and  stimulated, and  conveyed the  heady  sensation   of  being  in  on  the ground floor, it left us with a curiously defensive  attitude towards  writing  in Canada.  We   understood  that   much   of what we had studied  was derivative. We knew, also, that  some  of it  was first  rate. And  we  felt  an  instinctive obligation to


99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



shield  both  from  the scorn  and  ignorance of others.
Although the kind of Colonel  Blimpery which   once  put   us  on   the  defensive   is not  quite  dead,  it  has been  dealt  a heavy blow  by  the  publication of  this  new  an­ thology.  There are  8o  contributors,  dat­ ing  from  the  seventeenth century  to  the present   and  including  I 3  whose  writing  has   been   translated  from    the   French. Viewed  as landscape, their  work  reaches the  height  of a respectable  plateau, with the  odd  swampy   patch  more than  com­ pensated   for  by  a  number of  lofty  emi­ nences.  No  one  of  sensibility,  confronted with  the  evidence  of  this  volume   alone, could  deny  that  Canadian Literature has resoundingly  arrived.
Generalizations  are  risky  at   best,  but
I will  venture a few:
The bulk of Canadian writing (as represented   in   this   volume)   IS     over­ whelmingly   middle  class.
Few   writers   are   angry;  the   maJOnty observe,  reflect,  or  imagine without heat. Writers    of   the   middle    rank    appear self-conscious,   whereas   our   best  writers are  merely  conscious-or even  unaware
-of self.
If a  single  theme  dominates the  work of the  English-speaking writers in this volume, it is the theme of survival, but survival  in  the  sense  understood by  Sin­ clair Ross and  Margaret Laurence: "man emerges  as a creature who can survive­ and   survive   with   some   remaining  dig­ nity."  Our   French  writers,  on  the  other  hand,  are   nearly   all   influenced  by  the imminence of  death, and  of a life beyond it.
And one last, reckless pronouncement: our  best  imaginative writers, if  one  can rely on the preferences of Messrs. Weaver and  Toye  as  a  guide,  are  Atwood, Car-


100
 rier, Davies, Laurence, Layton, Munro, Purdy,  Richler   and   Ross.
Canadians who cherish  their culture, however,  may decide  that  the  most signi­ ficant   aspect  of  The  Oxford   Anthology is the sheer size and  worth  of  the remain­ der,  once  the  cream   has  been  skimmed off.  The   integrity  and   perception  evi­ denced  by so many  of  our  lesser writers  seems to me a clear  indication of literary  vitality.
If, on  our   literary  landscape,  we should  seek a watershed, Ithink  we can find it in the work of Hugh  MacLennan. Once  MacLennan had  tackled  the major social  themes  of contemporary Canadian life, the old search for identity problem began   a  gradual  decline.  Today, if  the work  of  our  best  writers   be  a  fair  cri­ terion,   the  identity  problem    no   longer exists. And  as  if  to  demonstrate  that  in all  things  we remain typically  Canadian, we have  uncovered   our  cultural identity  at a point  in time  when we appear to be in  mortal  danger  of  losing  it.

PAT BARCLAY


HOW WE CAME TO WHAT WE ARE

The   Book  of   Canadian    Prose.   Vol. I. The
Colonial  Century. Vol. II. The   Canadian
Century, edited   by  A. J. M.  Smith.  Gage.

WHEN A.  J. M. SMITH assembled  his Book of Canadian   Poetry  and  published   it  in I943, he not only prepared a pioneering anthology.  He  also established the  shape in  which  we  would   afterwards  perceive the  early  record  of our  country's poetry. Thus   the  Book  of Canadian  Poetry  not only  created   literary history,  but  also­ appearing  in   the   same   year   as   E.  K.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Brown's classic volume,  On Canadian Poetry-it answered  Smith's own early demand,  "Wanted,  a   Canadian   Criti­ cism",  by  demonstrating the  grounds on which  that   criticism  could  operate. Our  view  of  the  nature of  Canadian poetry, and    our   evaluation   of   the   important Canadian poets, were shaped by the Book of Canadian  Poetry  and  by Smith's later verse anthologies more surely than  by any body  of  actual  critical   writing with  the possible   exception  of   Northrop  Frye's annual surveys of Canadian poetry  which appeared during the  I 950s in "Letters in Canada" and  were  afterwards  published in The Bush Garden.
The Book  of Canadian Poetry  was  is­
sued  at  a  crucial   time  in  Canada's  cul­
tural  development. In  the  years  between the   wars,   E.   J.  Pratt  and   the   McGill school had   already shifted Canadian poetry  in the direction of modernism and cultural  nationalism, and  the  ferment of
poetic   activity   in  Montreal  during  the early  I 940s   suggested that  the   trend would  continue. Smith  was anthologizing in  medias  res, and  as his other  collections followed,  the Oxford  Book of Canadian Verse   in   I96o   and   Modern  Canadian Verse in I967, he continued to trace the development that stemmed from the trends his first selection  has accurately delineated. One  cannot suggest that  an anthologist, any more  than  a critic, actu­ ally  creates   a  movement in  poetry, but once  it  is on  its  way  he  may  affect  its final   development  by   revealing  to   the poets  as well as to the readers the signifi­ cance  of  what   they  have  done  and  are doing.  Such  influences  are  incalculable; they may well be profound.
The difference between the   Smith
anthologies of poetry,  gathered in the stream  of an ongoing  movement, and  the
 two  volumes   of  his  Book   of  Canadian Prose, are  immediately evident. Volume I of  the  latter, which   appeared in  1965 and is now republished as The Colonial Century, dealt  with  writings  up  to 1867;
Volume   II, which   appears for  the  first
time  as The  Canadian Century, presents writings  from  the  next  hundred years. It becomes quite  evident  as   one   reads through  the   volumes   that   a  solid   and distinctive Canadian  tradition  of  prose evolved  long before  a similar tradition in verse.  The   practical expository   needs  of explorers    and    traders,  of   settlers    and preachers and  politicians, ensured  it, even before  fictional   prose   assumed   any  real importance. What  Smith  had   to  do  in these  anthologies, therefore,  was  not  to delineate an emergent tradition of which he himself  was a part, as happened with Canadian poetry, but  to describe-in the process   of  choice -a   long   established tradition which  had  already acquired its distinctive qualities from  the character of our  history.
Smith's insight  was basically  similar  to that  on which  Carl  F. Klinck  planned the Literary   History   of  Canada:   that   any attempt  to  consider   Canadian  creative prose  as  merely  a  matter of  fiction  and belles-lettres would  be to miss not only its essential  character but  also  a  good  pro­ portion   of  its  finest  examples.  Much of the  best  prose  in  Canada  was  written in response   to   dramatic   occasions,   either  presently  felt or vividly remembered. The  explorers   travel   over   the   country,  the cultured  Englishwomen encounter the  rigours   of   wilderness   living,   the   politi­  cians rise above themselves  in the struggle  for   popular   liberties,    the   presence    of America  south of the border produces the epic   moments  of   I8I2  and   I867,   Riel dies, and  the colonial  age expires  not long


IOI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



after, with  a  new  nation   emerging with the  new century, and  the  historians look­ ing  back  and  seeing  the grand outlines  of it all.
All  this  provokes   the  kind   of  strong and  eloquent prose  which  one  associates with   men   of  hard   experience  and   pas­ sionate  opinion, and,  considering the spe­ cial   difficulties    of   a   prose   anthology, where  one so often  has to deal in extracts from   larger    works,   Smith   has  chosen remarkably well  and  arranged  his selec­ tions  with  telling strategy. Beside Samuel  Hearne  and   Alexander  Mackenzie and Joseph  Howe, the  expected men,  he puts the   fascinating  and   little-known narra­ tives of Jacob  Bailey  and  Patrick Camp­ bell;   beside   Sir   John   A.   Macdonald's great   I86s  speech   on  Confederation  he puts  the moving  speech  from  the  dock of Macdonald's victim,  Riel, and  Laurier's elegy  on   the   Metis   leader. And   as  we come  forward into  the twentieth century, and   inventive  prose  begins   to  take   the same  strength and   distinctiveness as  ex­ pository  prose,  the  novelists  assume  their appropriate place  beside  the essayists and the orators and  the historians. It is a salu­ tary  experience  to  read  Goldwin  Smith  and,   a  few  pages  later,   a  passage  from Duncan's The  Imperialist  that  obliquely  challenges  him,  or  to  read  Hugh  Mac­ Lennan  not   long   after   that   passionate nationalist of  another  genre  Donald Creighton, or   the   wilderness    fable   of O'Hagan's Tay  John in  the  same  section as  the  wilderness  fact  of  George   Whal­ ley's account of  John Hornby's death, or Dave   Godfrey  in  the  same  ironic com­ pany as Ramsay Cook.
What  eventually emerges  from  this fine
collection is not  merely  a realization that our  narrators and  expounders are in their own  ways  the  equals  of our  novelists;  it


102
 is, even  more  forcibly,  a  knowledge that from  the  beginning all  our  good  writers have  been  engaged-front-liners, as  it were-in  the  effort   to  understand and so to shape  the  human world  within  the indifferent wilderness. These patterns were  present   of  course  from   the  begin­ ning;   it  is Smith's peculiar  insight  as  a critical  anthologist that  he has seen them with  such  clarity   and   illuminated  their outlines  so well with  his selections  and  his lucid  commentaries.
So  these  are   books  for   anyone  con­
cerned  about  the Canadian past, whether his interest  is cultural or  social  or  politi­ cal, or the mere many-sided human desire to  know  how  we came  to  where  we are.

ANTHONY APPENZELL


SUPERIOR JOURNALIST

HUGH  HOOD, The  Governor's Bridge  is Closed.
Oberon  Press.

IF WITTGENSTEIN  is right  in  saying,  "To the philosopher, nothing is trivial," Hugh Hood,   at   least  in   his  non-fiction,  is  a philosopher of the  first order. The  range and  depth  of his interests and  opinions is remarkable. I can  think  of no other Cana­ dian  writer  whose love of "all things both great   and   small"   and   whose  ability   to communicate that  love are  as great.  One  comes   away   from    the   essays   in   The
Governor's  Bridge  is Closed  feeling  in­
vigorated.
Whatever the  subject, Hood's  enthusi­ asm  is  infectious.   In   "The  Pleasures   of Hockey," for  example, he  offers  the  fol­ lowing  analysis of  skating:  "To play  the game  right  you've got  to keep  moving  all the  time  you're  on  the  ice,  at  a  steady three-quarters,  say,  of  your   top  speed.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



When  the  time comes to make  your  play, you go hard. But you've got to be moving constantly. Watch the  best  players,  even at  a faceoff,  and  you'll  see them  moving in  little   circles,  edging   back  and   forth, flexing their knees. Or go out to watch a bantam practice, and  you'll  notice  there's this one kid who never stops. He'll  be the best player  on the ice." A couple  of times a  season,   adds   amateur  hockey   player Hood,  then  39, "usually  down  toward the beginning of March, I'll  hit a point where my  skating comes  together. There  is no physical feeling I know of that's quite like that,   and   only  one  that's  better. When my  skating finally  comes  right,  it  isn't  a short  intense  pleasure,  it's a long slow one, spread   over  my  whole  body,  a  sense  of great  health and well-being.  My legs seem to  be  swinging   loose  from   the  hip  in  a long  stride   that  eats  up  rink  space,  and my breathing is close to what  it would  be if I had  the guts to quit  smoking."
Hood  has  a talent  for arguing the seemingly unarguable, connecting the seemingly  unconnectable, and  making  it all  somehow  seem  obvious.  In  "Circuses and   Bread," for   instance,  one   of   two essays on  Expo  67,  he  celebrates  imper­ manence  and   gaudiness.   "A  man  com­ plains  that  the  buildings   [at  Expo]   look impermanent, which  is like Harold Town  saying  that   the  flag  is a  lousy  design  in poor  taste. The one  thing a flag must  not be in,  is good  taste.  Like  a  uniform or a tartan, a  flag  ought   to  be  loud  as  hell with  a green  elephant on it or an orange  sunburst. Imagine a  field  marshal's uni­  form  in modish decorator pastels! Expo is endearingly  frail." That  just  ten   pages earlier, in  an  essay on  Toronto's bridges, Hood  had  been  celebrating permanence, isn't  inconsistent; it's   just  a  demonstra­ tion of the multitudes he contains.
 The  connection of  architecture,  flags and  military uniforms is a comparatively mild  example of Hood's particular brand of radical  juxtaposition; Expo,  he tells us elsewhere, reminds him  of Spenser's Faerie Queene:  "All over  the site are enormous mouths to engorge you, entrails to digest  you and  rectums to expel  you." The total  image is reminiscent, he says, of the   House   of   Alma.   Joseph    Addison, given  his priggishness,  would  have  made a  good  Canadian; like  us,  Hood  argues, Addison  "had all  the  virtues   and  ... all in the wrong order."
If for  no  other   reason   than that   they lack  the  freshness  of  the  others,   Hood's two essays on  Quebec, "Swinging Deep: Splendeurs et  Profondeurs  de  Quebec" and  "Independance? Blague!" seem  out of place in this collection. Both are so typically  English-Canadian in  their  atti­ tudes  that  there's  an  air  of deja lu  about  them.  In  the former,  Hood comments, "I know   no   people   who   are   gentler  and more  agreeable, less quick  to  anger  or  to take offence, than  my Quebecois brothers, whose character remains what  it has been since the time of  Cartier and  Champlain, uncomplaining  and   humorous,  ready   to work  hard  for  a  tough  living  in  a  splen­  did   and   exacting  homeland."   In    the latter,  he  suggests  patronizingly  that   if Quebecois  won't  be satisfied  without in­ dependence,  they   should    be   given   it, "since it doesn't matter and  won't  change anything."
Perhaps the most irritating thing  about The  Governor's Bridge is Closed is the actual book  itself. Not  unlike other Oberon  books   I've   read,   it   fell  apart. Minor   irritations include  the  lack  of  a table of contents and  the fact  that  it's not clear in which magazines (or when)  some of the essays originally appeared.


103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Hugh  Hood  persists  in  the  belief  that, as he  puts  it in  "Get Yourself  a  Reputa­ tion,  Baby!",  because  "poetry and  fiction are   the   heavyweight   division   of  litera­ ture" that's what  he ought to be writing.  The irony  is that  Hood  is most  obviously a   heavyweight   in   his   non-fiction. The Governor's  Bridge  is Closed, it  seems  to me, is  Hood's  best  book, further proof, if any  were  needed,   of  the  correctness of Robert Fulford's 1967 view that  "deep inside   [Hood's]  personality, a  superior journalist   is  being ... strangled  by   an inferior  novelist."

MORRIS WOLFE


FUN AND  DUTY

PATRICIA   MORLEY,    The  Immoral   Moralists. Clarke   Irwin,   $2.75   paper,   $4.50   cloth. FRASER SUTHERLAND,  The Style  of Innocence. Clarke  Irwin,  $2.75  paper,  $4.50  cloth.

THERE'S A  DIFFERENCE  between  wanting to  write  criticism   and   wanting to  Be A Critic.  I suppose   most   critics'    motives are   mixed,   like  those  of  most   poets  or novelists-or  hockey    players,   for   that matter-but  the   distinction  helps  pin­ point   an   important   difference  between these two matching studies. On  the whole, Fraser   Sutherland  wants   to  explore   the work  of two writers,  and  Patricia Morley wants   to  Be  A  Critic-or  so,  at  least, the  books  suggest.
Which    is   not    to   say   that    Patricia Morley  has  not  done  her  homework   and does not  provide  any shrewd  insights.  But her   book  lacks   the  compelling internal drive   that   marks   any   good   writing,  in any   form.    The  Immoral  Moralist    is really a study of Hugh  MacLennan, with glances  at  Leonard Cohen, and  one finds oneself forced  to imagine the  dilemma of


104
 a cnt1c who wants to write a study of MacLennan. Four  or five such  studies already    exist,   and    Professor    Morley's view of her  man  is not  so original   as  to justify  another on  its  own.
But  if  one  adds  Cohen-to  most readers,  a writer   at  some  opposite   pole from  MacLennan-an Outrageous  Hy­ pothesis seems to take shape,  a hypothesis  the  demonstration of  which  would   pro­  duce  a  quirky  and  provocative  view  of both  writers.  Cap   it  with  a  catchy   title only  tangentially  related   to  the  text,  and  you  have   a  controversial  book,  a  book that  will  attract attention, the  academic equivalent of a  best-seller.
The difficulty  is that  the  book remains a  more-or-less   standard  study   of   Mac­ Lennan, and  the  inclusion  of  two  chap­ ters  (in  eleven)   devoted  to  Cohen seems thoroughly arbitrary.  Far   from    being driven  by a  passionate  need  to say some­ thing  about her subject, Professor  Morley is  loftily   judicious,  commenting  that   a particularly bitter  Cohen  passage  attack­ ing organized  religion  is "a  partial truth, obviously  not  the  complete truth, about the  state   of   Church  and   Synagogue  in Canada   today."  Hallelujah:   but   who cares?  MacLennan's attack on  the  Cal­ vinist   businessmen   of   Montreal  "must appear inconsistent and  somewhat unfair. MacLennan  seems  to  be  unable   to  see this   type   as  anything  but   hypocritical and  materialistic." Well, as a type, the Canadian    businessman  is   hypocritical and  materialistic, though  honourable  ex­ ceptions  exist;  and  MacLennan's work  is permeated by his awareness  of  alternative possibilities of social order. What is inter­ esting   is   not   whether    MacLennan   is right  or  wrong   in  his  view  of  business, but   rather  what  assumptions  he  makes about   the  nature  and   prospects  of  man

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



in society. Instead of exploring such questions,    Professor    Morley    offers   her own corrective to MacLennan's apparent extremism. Do  we  really  need  it?
I don't want   to  be  unduly scathing:
Professor   Morley   greatly  admires  Mac­ Lennan,  treats   his  work   with  affection and    respect,    and    obviously   wants    to understand his relation to the forces  that have   shaped   him.  Nevertheless,  alas,   I closed  the  book  feeling  that   I had  read part  of the dossier supporting an applica­ tion  for  academic promotion.
Fraser  Sutherland begins  not  with  an
Outrageous Hypothesis, but  with  a shop­ worn   one:    that   Hemingway  influenced  Morley Callaghan, and  that much  of that influence  can  be seen in  the latter's early style.  Ho  hum-but  around   this  dead horse 	  Sutherland    gardens   vigorously, building a little picket fence of biography and 	cnt1c1sm,	savaging 	encroaching couch-grass  in  the  form  of  rival  critical  judgments,  above   all  writing  with   tart  precision.   I  am   not   sure  The  Style   of Innocence   offers   any   striking  new   in­ sights,  but  it  surveys  the   territory  with droll	 competence.    Cheerfully    pugna­ cious,  Sutherland  writes  with   both  mis­ chief   and   energy.  "Soon   Loretto  [Cal­ laghan]  and   Hemingway's second  wife, Pauline, were  quietly   failing   to  get  on.
..." Remarking the  "tedious length" at
which  the landscape of A Broken  Journey is described,  Sutherland remembers that "in   I 930,  Callaghan, so Conron  reports, took a two-week  camping trip  to the Algoma   Hills.   One   wonders  what   the book  would  have  been  like if he'd  spent a  month  there."
In    what    almost    becomes    a   minor comic   theme   in   the   book,   Sutherland guns  down  critics  like  Brandon  Conron with  entertaining regularity. "Callaghan
 does  have  a  few  knights   to  come  clank­
ing  to his defence, like Brandon Conron.
. . . Conron's  comparison will  do  for  a start,  quoted at length  because it is so consistently wrong."  Victor  Hoar   bites the dust: Hoar  describes "In His Own Country" as a satire,  Sutherland remarks that  "of course, it is nothing of the kind." Damning as he praises, Sutherland later points out "one  of [Hoar's] rare  insights." Not all critics are met with machetes, however; Sutherland is willing  to tolerate Edmund Wilson  and he is downright respectful   of  George   Woodcock.
If Patricia Morley  writes  from  a sense of  duty,   Fraser   Sutherland  writes  from a  sense of  furious  fun.  The Style  of  In­ nocence  is, finally,  a young  writer's  exer­  cise, but  it  leads  me to expect  with  plea­ sure the novel  I am  certain  he is writing.

DONALD CAMERON


LEACOCK'S UNSOLYEO PROBLEM

The   Social    Criticism    of   Stephen   Leacock, edited and introduced by Alan  Bowker, University of Toronto Press.

IN The Social  Criticism of Stephen  Lea­ cock  Alan  Bowker  has  provided  us  with a  welcome  and   useful  selection  of  Lea­  cock  writings   to  place   beside  his  better  known   and    easily   available   humorous works,  and,  in  addition,  has  written an Introduction  which   examines  Leacock's career  as a  social scientist  and  places  his writings  in  a  context  often  neglected   by literary  critics.
Even though the seven essays are in chronological order, the first having been published   in   I907  and  the  last  in  I92o, they  show   a  remarkable  thematic  pro-


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



gression  and   cohesiveness.  Starting  with the strictly  Canadian question of  Imperi­ alism  in "Greater Canada", the selection takes  the  reader  through an examination of   peculiarly North   American  cultural and   social  problems  in  "Literature and Education in  America" and  "The Apol­ ogy of a  Professor" to a consideration of the  more  universal   questions of  modern morality,  the  status of  women,   and   the quest for social and  economic justice. The cohesiveness  of the selection  derives  from a  persistent spirit  of compromise as Lea­ cock  searches for  an  acceptable  middle  ground    between    the   order   and   values associated  with  the  European  past  and  a present   and   future  characterized  by  the material emphasis  and  rapid  technologi­ cal  development  of  America. That spirit  of compromise alone  places  him firmly in a Canadian  tradition.
"Greater Canada", for  example, is  a call  for  Canadian  nationalism to express itself in an imperial relationship with Britain, so  that   Canada would  stand   as an  equal  partner in  the  Empire, beyond the limiting nature of colonial  status  and safe  from   the  political   and   cultural  en­ croachment of the United States. Imperi­ alism  was  to  be  the  means  by  which  the incongruity between  the  unfulfilled  spirit of  the  Canadian  people  and  the  inspira­ tional,   physical  grandeur of  the  country would  be resolved.
Leacock  is in accord  with  many  earlier Canadian  critics   in   seeing   that   incon­ gruity  in a literary context. In "Literature and  Education in  America" he expresses regret  that  the literatures of  Canada and the  United States  have failed  to reflect a "new  world  rich  in  the  charm and  mys­ tery  of  the   unknown,  and   in  the  lofty stimulus  that   comes  from   the  unbroken silence  in America". He  even  invokes  the

106
 doubtful proposition that  Milton  or Byron would  have  made  outstanding poetic  re­ sponses  to the grandeur of the  Canadian terrain. But  here,  as  elsewhere,  Leacock  finds   his  thoughts   divided.  He   regrets  essentially   that   North   America    is  not Europe in its cultural attainments and  its educational emphasis; yet he is forced  to admit   that  the  character of  America   is more a product of time  than  of place. He recognizes that the social and economic progress  of the  nineteenth and  twentieth centuries has radically altered the condi­ tions   which   made   possible   the   literary achievements  of   a   Milton  or   a  Shak­ speare,  but  on  the  other hand  that  pro­  gress has ameliorated the vast inequalities and   injustices   which   existed   in  earlier times, and  such  amelioration can  only be welcomed.
The idea  that   Canada  was  born   too late  to know  the conditions conducive to a  tragic   or  an   heroic   imagination  is  a familiar one and,  indeed, it  seems appli­ cable  to Leacock.  Mr.  Bowker  notes  that  various  Canadian critics  have  raised  the question: Why  did  Leacock  not  write  a great  Canadian novel?  In  Bowker's  view the  answer  lies in  the  basic  theme   that  informs  these  essays.  As  a  North   Ameri­  can,  the man's energies  were  absorbed  by a  prevailing  social   concern  for   institu­ tions  and  by  his  fears  and   hopes  for  an age of  material progress. The instruments he  found   most  suitable  to  his  purposes were essays and  humorous sketches.
The  other essays in this book address themselves    to   variations  on   the   basic North American   problem. The  professor is seen  as an  anomaly in  the  eyes of  the populace in "Apology  of a Professor"; traditional morality is lost sight  of in  the preoccupation  with   material  gain,   and new,  fleeting  and   unjust standards are

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



grasped  at  in  "The Devil  and  the  Deep Sea"; the deterioration of family life is anticipated  in  "The  Woman Question" as  a  corollary   of  the   female   quest   for equality of opportunity. "The Tyranny of Prohibition" seems more of a period  piece than   the  others,   although  it  is  dealing with  the  unworkable and  unjust  imposi­ tion  of a law which  the social conscience is not really in accord.
The  longest piece included here is The Unsolved Riddle  of Social  Justice  which deals with  Leacock's  rather specific treat­ ment  of  the  flaws in  classic,  laissez-faire economics,  and  his dogmatic  and  biased rejection of socialism as a cure  for social injustice. In  conformity  to  the  tenor  of this  selection,  a  compromise  of  limited state  intervention  is anticipated and  ap­  proved.   In   Leacock's   view  the  greatest  social  justice will result  from  a combina­ tion   of individual incentive and  state responsibility.
The  most interesting facet  of this selec­ tion  for  me  is that  the  issues  confronted here   are   not   yet   solved.   Leacock   ad­  dressed  himself to very durable problems,  especially with  respect to North America.  Even Imperialism has a way of expressing  our  constant  desire  for  a Canadian style separate from  the United States,  and our quest  for  a  fully  mature literature is an ongoing  process.
Mr. Bowker, for his part,  gives us an Introduction  which   outlines    Leacock's rna jor  social  and  economic   ideas.  Most importantly, he shows that  Leacock  is in a  tradition which  includes  Harold Innis, Marshall McLuhan, and  George  Grant: that  he has a place as a prominent figure in our  intellectual as well as our  literary history.

CARL  BALLSTADT
 MARITIME MISHAPS


RAYMOND  FRASER,   Black   Horse   Tavern.  Ing­
luvin  Press.


A NATIVE  NEW BRUNSWICKER, Raymond Fraser  captures Maritime small  town  life in  these  stories  of  very  uneven   quality with  a pathos  to be felt  only  by one who has lived it. In ten stories, he alternates between  Newbridge, N.B.  and  Montreal as  settings.  Unfortunately  the   language and  technique  are   not   equal  to   the vision. The  process of narrative is often clumsy and  appallingly naive; Fraser's narrators work  themselves into  technical comers   from   which   there   are   no  exits. There are  errors  in sentence structure to be found only in elementary composition classes, and  time-worn cliches  intrude at regular  intervals.
Fraser  is at his best in portraying small town  misfits, socially  marginal characters who  haunt the  Black  Horse  Tavern in a perpetual stupor   and   live  in  ramshackle wooden   houses.  The   first  story,   "They come here  to die",  establishes the  tone of most   of  the   stories.   It  is  the   hopeless chronicle   of  Ralph   Ramsay, forty-year drunk, and  his  twenty-two year  old  pal, Danny   Sullivan,  a   younger    version   of Ralph. "What I should  do  is get  out  of here."  Ramsay  tells the  unidentified nar­ rator,  "Why don't I get  out?" In  a later scene,  Ralph and   Danny sit  in  Ralph's desolate   room   after   being   barred  from the  Black  Horse  for  disorderly conduct. Without a cent,  they contemplate leaving town,  heading for  the  big  city,  anything to  escape  from  this  tenement where  old men come to die. Our hopes rise momen­ tarily  only  to collapse  when  Danny pulls a  crumpled bill   from   his   pocket,   just


107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



enough   to  buy  a  bottle, and  the  two  of them  set out in a chill  November rain.

"We  can  sit  in  a  boxcar." "It's kinda  cold."
"A  few drinks  and  we'll  be all right." "Yeah."

The   small   town   breeds   a  congenital hopelessness.  A few  get  away; the  others drink. That is not  to suggest  that  Fraser's vision  is utterly  bleak.  He  infuses  a  pro­ vincial  humour into  pieces such  as  "The Newbridge Sighting"  and   "Spanish Jack";  he  captures  exactly  the   New Brunswick  dialect  that  uses "some" as an adjectival modifier as in "some  nice, it is." "The  Newbridge Sighting" is the  story
of an  entirely different breed  of drinking
man  from  Ralph Ramsay. Alec  Mooney is a rather flamboyant middle-age drunk who shovels snow for the CNR  but claims to   be   on   first-name  terms   with   "Mr. CNR" to  whom  he offers  regular advice on  railroad  policy.  When   Alec  sights  a flying  saucer,  the  local  bartender taunts him and even makes false tracks on the baseball  field for the RCMP. Alec blooms with  the prospect  of notoriety.

"Yes,   yes,   Moncton   Times,   Times    man called   me  up   and   wants   story,   wants   to know  all  about  it.  Interview, he  wants,  he does, interview.  Going  to  talk  to  man  from the  Times,  I am."

It is at  this  type  of dialogue that  Fraser excels.
The   worst  story  of  the  collection and
the longest  is a sixty-seven  page fiasco entitled "The Quebec Prison". The  nar­ rator  is Fraser's favourite  character  who appears  in   some   form   in   all   the   city stories-the small-town  New  Brunswick  boy,  disoriented and  disenchanted in Montreal, with  a strong urge  to drop  out of  a  phony  world  a  la  Holden Caulfield  or,  more  locally,  Herve  Jodoin. He  uses

108
 the  artistic self-consciousness  so  fashion­ able in "literature of  exhaustion", but he does it  so ineptly  and  with  so obvious  a lack   of   necessary  erudition, that the  reader  feels  mainly   pity  and   occasional  anger.
Take  the first pages of the  prison story. After  a few corny vaudeville jokes, the narrator tells us:

I  like  to  pretend   I'm   creative   and  a  man of  great   potential. If you  have  never  pro­ duced   very  much   in   the   way  of   art   it's important  to   believe   in   your   poetential. Observe.  I made  a  typing  error  and   pro­ duced   a  new  word,  "poetential".  By acci­ dent  I have  just  described  myself perfectly, since  I have  for  some  time  considered  my­ self a poet  ...

This  leads  him  to  discuss spelling  and to recall an atrociously spelled  passage he once  found   in  a  Public   Library,  which read,  "Alison  Peirson  was conuict  of the vsing  of  Sorcerie   and   Witchcraft,  with the   Inuocation  of   the   spreitis   of   the Deuill ... " Later our   poetential   poet mentions that  he has  a bachelor's degree and   has  "always   been  a  big  reader   of books."  He  dreams  of  extreme and  vio­ lent deeds  to rid the  world  of its evil;  his gesture  of  defiance  is to  pour  sugar  into the  gas  tanks  of  parked   cars  one  night while  drunk, for  which   he  is  jailed  for ten days. We are regaled  with forty pages of insight  into  the  isolation  and  despera­ tion  of the  prisoner,  very  existential, but after  Genet  or  the Soledad  brothers,  like buttermilk after   vodka.   There are  also twenty-four  pages  devoted   to  the  remi­ niscences  of  Dan  Kiley,  a con  artist  met in  jail.  They  are  simply  a  list  of  cheap  tricks, a  how-to  manual for  petty  larcen­  ists, a  watered  down  version  of accounts  in any city tabloid. When  the  narrator is finally  released,  his  "young  heart   leapt  with  joy." If this  were  parody, we could

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



smile, but it is painfully clear it is no such thing.
At  best,  a  few of  these  stories  merit  a
place   in  a   journal;  the   rest  had   been better  laid  aside.

LINDA SHOHET


AGAINST ODDS

DON    BAILEY,  If You   Hum  Me   A  Few  Bars I Might   Remember   The  Tune. Oberon  Press.

THE  CLAss whose  guest  I  am  is an  un­ usual  one. These  men  who  ask me inter­ ested,  intelligent  questions   about   poetry will  be  in  this  building for  at  least  ten years-some  of them  for  life.  What  in­ finitesimal  chance do  any  of  these  maxi­ mum-security  prisoners  have  to  become successful writers? Yet perhaps it is better for  them  to sit  here  and  talk  to  me  and the   talented  pretty   girl   who   is   their instructor  once   a   week   than    to   learn "skills"   that   will   be   rendered  obsolete long  before  they  re-enter society.
Don Bailey is one who, against  such enormous odds, has begun  to establish himself  as a  poet  and  short  story  writer. He's  a former  car  thief  and  bank  robber, as he  himself  states  in  the  preface  to his new collection  of stories.
One   might   have  expected   the  stories would  be taken  from  the criminal world; instead    they   revolve   around  a   central character, Gus,  who  drifts  through vari­ ous  perfectly  legal occupations: used car salesman,  part-time comedian, ad  writer, milkman, social worker.  In  the  process - such   is  the   sequence   of   these   untitled stories -he  divorces   his  wife,  takes  up various    girl-friends,   one   of   whom,    a social-work  case,  he  gets  pregnant.
The  tone  in  which   Gus  narrates  his stories  is so  low-key  that   each  seems  to
 end   with   a  denouement  that   is  like  a tired  little  sigh.  The  material is  unexcit­ ing  and  Gus  the  narrator even  more  so; hence   the   overall   effect   is   monochro­ matic.    I   had    to   fight   grimly    to   get through the  book.
Some great  writers -one example  is Thomas  Mann-have    used   dull   first­ person  narrators, but  always  to  point  up some  more  dynamic figure,  or  fast-mov­ ing  events.   When   neither   the   narrator nor   his  material  is   engaging  the   story exists   in   a   vacuum    which    not    even Bailey's   consciousness   of   form   can   in­ vigorate.
In  one story Gus  is given  a try-out  for a church  hall variety  concert. He watches a depressing  assortment of  amateurs try out-a  bumbling dancer,  a  singer  who thinks  she can  be another Brenda Lee - then   delivers   his  own   patter  of   jokes, focussing on  the one  girl in  the  audience who  appreciates his  humour.
This  girl, who "looks  like a mild night­ mare", is also given  a try-out. "She's like this scrawny  bird  way  up  in  a  tree  deep in  the  forest,   alone,   not   knowing  she's ugly or giving a damn,  just singing  it out because  she's free  to  do  it,  to sing,  to fly and   like   that   was   her   thing.    I  can't remember feeling   that    way   about    too much  but  I  imagine  that  was  the  feeling she  had."
Gus  gives  her  a  lift  home; when   he drops  her  off at  her  apartment  building she  invites  him  in  but   he  declines.  She gives him her telephone number and  they say good-night.

And  I'm   embarassed  the  way  she  stands on   the   curb,  watching  me   drive  away,   as if  she'd   been   hitch-hiking  and   I'd  picked her   up  but   taken  her   to  the   wrong  place. Well,  it  was  the  best   I could   do,  I say  to myself  and   I'm   wondering if  I'll be  able  to read   her  writing or  if  I'll even   try.

rag

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The girl represents a goodness, an authenticity that  Gus is reluctant to "try" lest he spoil it. He  is resigned  to drifting, the low aim, anything that  makes  no demands, like  the  bus  trip   at   night   he takes  in  the  last  story  of  the  book.  But the  inertia of the  narrator also enervates the  narrative.
As a whole,  the  book  has a few jarring discrepancies  which    might  easily   have been  corrected. A girl  named   Betty,  des­ cribed   as  his  friend   Vic's   "wife  of   the moment" appears in  the  first  story. The  last story also has a Betty, though not  the same  person.  Similarly, in  the  first  story "Jake" is to send over "a couple  of tricks"  to be looked  after  by  the  prostitute who, like  Gus,  is staying  at  Vic's  apartment. Surely  this is not the Rev. Jake  Phearson, the  "minister of  my  church" whom   we meet  in  a  later  story.  The minister is a good  drinker but  nothing leads  us to be­ lieve he is a  pimp! In  one  story Gus says that  he  never  saw  his  father; in  another he goes fishing  with  him.
At  least  two  of  these  redundancies or confusions   could   have   been  cleared   up by a  simple  name-change. But  the  other problem  with  the  book  is not  so  readily
corrected.   The    first   person    narration
 undermines	Bailey's    undoubted    skill. Structurally, he  knows  how   to  write   a story.  But  the  point  of  view,  the  story's heart, is defective.

FRASER SUTHERLAND



JOKING DOWNHILL

MATT  COHEN,   Columbus  and  The   Fat  Lady.
Anansi.  $3.25  paper,  $8.50  cloth.
MATT    COHEN,     Too    Bad    Galahad.    Coach
House.

"THE  WATCHMAKER", Matt  Cohen's first story  in Columbus  and The  Fat Lady, is powerful   and  moving.  The  watchmaker is haunted by memories of his childhood years during World  War  Two. His father had   turned  him  over   to  the  mayor   of another  town  for  safekeeping, a  gentile who,  his  father tells  him,  is his  father's "brother". After  the  war  he  learns  that his parents perished  two weeks after leav­ ing  him.  The mayor  was  a  former  lover of his mother; the  father  had  persuaded him  that  the  boy was  really  his own son. The mayor  is  reluctant to  take  the  boy; what   if  the  father  in   revenge   lets  the Gestapo know he is harboring a Jew?  He




CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741



I 10

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



strikes a bargain. The Germans are given a message that  two Jews are hiding in the town   at   a  certain  address.   When   they enter  the house, the watchmaker explains, "My  father and  mother were  waiting in the living room."
After such an auspicious and resonant beginning,    the   book   goes   downhill  in every  way.  I  had   to  place   checkmarks beside each story to remember I had  read it.  A sophomoric, dehydrated  style  takes over,   repetitive,  numbing,   and,    I   am afraid, Mr. Cohen's version of the literary put-on:

Elmer was  not,  however, an  amorphous being,    a   member   of   anyone's   imaginary mass,  nor  even   an   undifferentiated  portion of  the  Godhead....
The fact   that I light   the   cigarette  with the   lighter I  gave   her,   and   she   returned, will  seem  slightly melodramatic  to  her.   It will  make  her  feel  contemptuous of my weakness,  of  my  need  to  underline the situation.

Cohen speckles his  narratives with digressions about  writing:

This is all  getting very  chatty. Chatty is something  writing  is  not   supposed  to   be. Good    writing   is   tense,   taut,   evocative. Words  bounce off each  other like fleeing gazelles.
The most  important rule  to  keep  in  mind when   writing  a   short  story   is  that  every word   must   count. Every   short story   writer
and   every   short  story   reader  knows   that rule  ...

Mr.  Cohen  seems to  be perversely  list­
ing the very rules he is defying.
Since   the   trendy   and   derivative  for­ mulas  the  author is  following  include   a super-cool   attitude  toward   people   and life, he can  tell  us of a  character named Arthur: "Talking to  him is like taking  a shower.  Writing  about him  is like  trying to compose  the  yellow  pages  from  mem­ ory." He writes about  such  boring  people with  stultifying  boredom:
 He  moves  into   empty houses   and   makes plans  for  interior decoration. Unfortunately he  has  no  sense  of  colour or  proportion  so his  plans   are  completely uninteresting  ...
For    example   Arthur    fills    up    empty houses.  He  moves  into   them and   makes   all
sorts  of  plans. The fact   that the   plans   are terrible  makes   no   difference:  they   repre­ sent   love  and   it  is  Arthur's  special   know­ ledge  that empty spaces   need  love.  That is why  they  are  empty.

Cohen   invents  words  too;  then  he  re­ peats them. In the story "Straight Poker," we are treated to a word  he likes, "neces­ saries": "There  are  ablutions  to  be  per­  formed, cogitations on  the  night   before, ingestions  of  necessaries."  The   word  re­ appears later.
If all  this  sounds   flat,  desultory and self-indulgent, it is. After  the first story, Cohen    abandons  feeling,   commitment, and  real characterization for a frozen, anonymous landscape. Phrases  and  para­ graphs are  repeated over and  over again; traces  of   Vonnegut,   Barthelme   and Woody  Allen  abound.  It  is tame,  limpid, pretentious  stuff,  unworthy  of  an  ener­ getic young writer.
Too  Bad Galahad, published as a sepa­
rate book with good pop illustrations by Margaret Hathaway (Coach House), is included in slightly revised form in the Columbus collection.  Sir Galahad is a schoolteacher here,  Woody  Allen  the  hip inspiration.
The    title   story   starring  Christopher
Columbus  as  a  sideshow   freak   doesn't work  either. The   fat  lady  in  the  circus asks Christopher's son about  the  voyage:

"What was  it  like?"
"It was fun.  But  the  food  wasn't very  good."

What, then,  is Matt Cohen   up  to?  A writer    who   can   create  "The   Watch­ maker"  owes  us   an   explanation. The nature of camp-pop culture permits books

1 I I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



like this to get by. They  may be poor, but they may be deliberately poor. The reader risks   being   accused   of  taking   seriously what  the  author can  maintain was a  joke all  along.  But  is  this  collection  really  a joke?  Its  languor, its  enervating  effect, its  disconnected  and   laconic   language, are   not   very   funny.  In   fact   they   are damned depressing. Graeme Gibson  takes Cohen   very seriously  indeed; he includes him in his new book Eleven Canadian Novelists  in the  company of Richler, At­ wood and  Munro.
I  think, though, that  while  Cohen  has
abandoned emotion, characterization, co­ herence  and  intensity in all of these stories but  one,  he  is somehow   serious.  Let  us give him credit  for that, and  seek another clue  to this collection of stories. Here  is a quotation from one of them, "The Empty  Room":

The  author  sat   in   his   study.  He   had given   up   on   his   memoirs.  He   thought  he might  write    a   novel   about  a   wastepaper basket.  His   wife   brought  him    a   cup    of coffee.
Don't forget my  mother's coming to  din­
ner   tonight. How's the  work   going?
He  stood   up  and   stretched. Terrible....

DAVID EVANIER


NATIVE SONS

HARRY  J.  BOYLE, The Great   Canadian Novel.
Doubleday,  $6.95.
JAMES  BACQUE, A  Man of Talent. New  Press,
$6.gs.
IF THESE  TWO NOVELS provide  a fair indication of the current trends  in  Cana­ dian   fiction,   our   writers   are   becoming  much    more    self-conscious   about    their place  in time  and  space. They are,  to use
A.  J. NL  Smith's  categories, more  "na­
tive"  than   "cosmopolitan," more  in  the


112
 tradition   of   Hugh   MacLennan   than
Morley  Callaghan.
Read   together,  these  two  very  differ­ ent  books  give us  a  fairly  broad  picture of  ourselves  and   our   origins.  Harry J. Boyle's  hero  is fifty,  unhappily  married, alcoholic, an  advertising man,  and   the product  of   Roman   Catholicism,   Non­  such  Saskatchewan,  and   the  depression. The  Great  Canadian  Novel  is a  portrait of  the  Canadian artist  as  a  middle-aged man  who  has  compromised  his  art  and  his  life  by pursuing security  and  success according  to  terms   that   he   now   finds morally 	indefensible.   James 	Bacque's central   character, on  the  other   hand,  is thirty,  a  "trendy" bachelor, a  smoker  of pot,   a   dean   of   Combined  Studies   at Simcoe  University,  the host of a TV  show called  Mansweek, and  the  product of an establishment  family,    Rosedale,  Upper Canada College, and  Cambridge. A Man of  Talent  records   the  plight   of  a  man who  has successfully served  Caesar but  is unhappy because he has  no god  to whom he may  render  the  things  of his soul.
While these two books are as unlike as yesterday and today, it does seem fair to suggest that Boyle is not as successful at realizing    his    particular   world     as    is Bacque. The  Great Canadian Novel is perhaps most  rewarding as  a  documen­ tary,  a chronicle  of a  generation's beliefs and  values  as they  develop  over  a  fifty­ year  period.  In  fact, Boyle touches  on  so many  of the themes  that  previous  writers  have  taught us to associate  with  the  pro­ geny  of   the  prairies   and   the  depression  that  his book might  better  be titled,  "The Great  Canadian  Novel  Revisited." It  is all  there: the vulgar,  pre-occupied father and  sympathetic mother; the  influence  of the  prairie   landscape; the  struggle   with a  repressive  religious  heritage; the  rail-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



way  as  escape;   the  traumatic sexual  en­ counters; the isolation,  the loneliness and the  dreams; the society  distrustful of  the artistic  sensibility;   the   artist's   diffident  attitude towards  his  talent; and  the  be­ leaguered present  that  forces  a  nostalgia­ tinged   search  of  the  past  for  roots  and answers.
The    problem    is   that    Boyle   seems
merely   to  have   used   these   themes;  he does  not  advance our  understanding  nor deepen    our   emotional   involvement  in them.  He  comes  too  late  with   what   he has to say, and  he comes as a popularizer. He is a teller,  not a creator. And  most of the ideas that he tells us have been so domesticated by time  and  Maclean's that they  have  lost  their  ability  to  engage  us in  any  more  than  a  routine way.
This   time  lag  in  Boyle's  writing   also
undermines his attempts to create a hero whose artistic sensibility  is worthy  of our respect  and  sympathy. He seems to be trapped in  the expatriate romanticism of the twenties and  thirties. Shane Donovan, the man who must try to write the great Canadian novel,  or  rather "exorcise" it before it "tears him to ribbons," turns  his back on family and  job and  flees to pagan Mexico.  This  setting  gives Boyle a chance to mimic the style of the man  whose sentimental notions  of creativity he seems to  have  adopted. Here  is the  simple  but noble  Hemingway peasant:

Felipe was  okay.  Felipe  really   was  glad when   [Donovan] didn't drink too  heavily. Felipe felt  responsible for  him.
"There  are   bad   Mexicans -and   good
Mexicans, Senor Donovan. But   I have  not been  in  your  country, in  Canada, so  I  can­ not   say-but  some  are   good,   I   feel,  and  some  are  bad.  To   me  you  are   a  guest. In my  family,  a  guest   is  to  be  respected."

Here   is  the  "Child-woman," the  sexual thing   without  which   the   hard-drinking
 artist  is helpless  to  emerge   from  his  pri­ vate   purgatory  with   the  great   work  of art:

When he started working regularly at the typewriter, he  would  simply   reach  for  her. She  was  a  dusky   idol  who   sensed   exorcism in  his  use of  her  body,  but  she  didn't object or  appear to  mind. How   could  he  tell  her moods?  Did   he  only   imagine  there  was  a faint    trace   of  greater  happiness  when   he drank and  was  dependent on  her?  Wonder­ ful,  mysterious people! Dignity  edged   with  tragedy.

If I  could  believe  that  Boyle were  be­ ing ironic  in  his treatment of the  central character, I  might   be  appeased.  But  he nowhere   gives  evidence  that   he   knows more  than  what  he  makes  the  very  ordi­  nary  Shane  Donovan tell us.
Shane  Donovan, disillusioned by the artificial   and   irresponsible  values  of  the world of Yankee  advertising, decides  to reject  it at  the  height  of his career. It is otherwise   with  Jack   Ramsay, the  "bril­ liant,   young,   eccentric,  energetic,   intri­ guingly  left"  hero  of  A  Man of Talent. When  he is not  driving  his  XKE, flying his  plane,  skin-diving,  writing,  teaching, loving,  setting   up  a  university  press,  or hosting   a   weekly   TV  show,   Ramsay, labours   mightily   to  bridge   the   gap   be­ tween   anarchists   and  administrators  at Simcoe  University. But  when  the  student revolution  comes, he is caught in the untenable   middle;   the    world    he   has chosen and mastered rejects him. At the disconcerting age of thirty he is left  with nothing but  his  money  and   his  unsatis­ factory   self.  It is  easier   for  a  camel   to pass through the eye of a needle than  for a  man  of  talents   to  enter  into  heaven.
George  Grant, as  Bacque   makes  clear in this admirably executed novel, is right. The  effects of American technocracy run much  deeper  and  are  much  more  subtle

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



than   the  obvious   social   symptoms that Boyle discusses. At  the  fundamental  per­ sonal level, technocracy encourages a pre­ occupation with  notions  of  progress  and problem-solving  at   the   expense   of  any awareness   of  moral  values.  This   is  the lesson  that  Jack  Ramsay must  learn. He is so involved  in  the  exercise  of  his  tal­ ents  that, to the detriment of his soul, he cannot get  beyond  them.
He is tutored by Anna, a brilliant, inde­ pendent Mohawk girl, and  by her father, Chief   Sky,  who  asks  the   question   that  Ramsay    must    answer    before    he   can achieve   some   sort   of   inner    harmony: "Who  do   you   follow?"   As   Robertson Davies  is fond  of   reminding us, if  man does  not  have  a  god,  then  he  will  make one  of himself.
While  some  of  the  characters in  this novel are  not fully enough  developed and some of the incidents only tenuously inte­ grated  into   its  main   concerns,   Bacque  nonetheless   manages to  offer  us  a  com­ plex  and  challenging  embodiment of the predicament of the well-intentioned intel­  lectual. He  achieves  this impressive  result through his sure  handling of a variety  of prose styles  and  narrative points  of view. His  poetic  passages  transform  the  tired cliche  of  finding   a  "Canadian  type"  in the  wilds  of our  north  into  a felt  experi­  ence.  And his  rare  but  telling  visits  into Anna's   mind    provide   a   devastatingly ironic  corrective to  Ramsay's  sentiment­ alization   of  the  Indians'  psychic  reality.
Both   these   novels,   then,   in  different ways,  and   perhaps for  different  genera­ tions,  face  up  to  the  problem of  the  dis­ illusionment  that   is  becoming  the  after­ myth   of  the  great   American   dream  of success. Both  struggle  to  find  specifically Canadian   alternatives  to   a   world    in

I 14
 which,   as  Bacque   notes,   "Alienation   is not  a  disease....  It  is  a  circumstance."

LAWRENCE   MCDONALD


ANTINOVEL ANDJOUAL

JACQUES  GODBOUT, D'Amour, P.Q. Hurtubrise
HMH/Editions du  Seuil. $3·35·
AFTER  Salut   Galarneau!   ( I967),  God­ bout  has  gone  back  to  a  more  complex form   of   narrative  in   D'Amour,  P.Q.  Though  not   a   return   to   the   nouveau  roman  form  of  Le  couteau   sur  la  table (I965), this  latest  novel  by the  French­ Canadian  poet  and   filmmaker is a  rich piece   of   writing   that   radiates  out   far beyond  its  immediate  story  line,  almost allegorically.
The  subject   of  D'Amour, P.Q.  is  the writing  of a novel as it is complicated  by French   culture, identity and   aspirations in  North  America.  The novel  deals  with writer  Thomas D'Amour who  is having the manuscript of his book typed by a secretary,  Mireille.   She   and   her   room­ mate,  Mariette, begin  to change the liter­ ary language of his novel into very collo­ quial  French. The larger concerns of the novel,  then,  are  made  more  acute  by the question   of  language  itself:   is  standard French or   joual  to  be  Quebec's literary  medium? As in Jean Barbeau's comedies, Manon Lastcall and Joualez-moi d'amour  (both I 970)   the   source   of   the   satiric  humour  is   a   preoccupation   with   the question  of language:

Mariette: J'ai   I'impression   que    ceux    qui ecrivent couchent avec la langue. Voila. C'est  bien  dit  non?

Mireille:  Et si c'est leur langue maternelle, ils,consomment l'inceste, c'est  c;a?

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



]oual is not simply a native French Canadian patois but a North American jargon  which  has a large number of angli­ cismes,   especially   dealing  with   popular culture, and  as such it epitomizes French popular  culture on  this  continent. The  relationship that    develops  between Thomas and  the  joual-speaking   Mireille shows   the   dominance  of   her   physical vitality,  physical  language, physical  real­ ity,  an  energy  which  finally  leads  to  her dictating the revised book to him. The question   of  language, then,  is  part  of  a wider   problem    that    concerns   not   just French literature but the whole creative process  and  the  place  of popular culture in art.
In  a  I97I film Godbout employed  a popular Quebec superhero as a parody  in the   musical   comedy   IXE-13;  similarly we find  parody in  D'Armour, P.Q.  The experience of Thomas' re-examination of his art  parallels his shifting identities with several  super-hero  types:   Batman,  Tar­ zan,  Easy  Rider, RCMP. "Je  m'identifie
a mon  personnage,  je me  glisse dans  sa
peau,  il est fier d'avoir si bien  reussi son travail. ... " The   perfect   realization  of an imaginative creation is to make it real, to  live  it,   to  become   it-a   recreation which  could  lead to insanity  for the artist. The  Quixote-like illusion  of Thomas liv­ ing  these  figures  is indication that as  the type of the contemporary Canadian artist  he  is  searching for  his  identity  and  his role.  The   references   to  scores  of   items from American popular  culture and  Canadian  myth   are  emblematic  of  the challenge our  creative  writer   faces:   he must   bear  in  mind   his  roots,  traditions and  also  represent the  here  and  now  to produce   work   which   at   best  could   be ephemeral. Are  we  back  at  Galarneau's
 hot   dog  stand   or   in  a  timeless   cosmic pattern?
When  a work  is concerned with  social
issues the  mimetic  element seems  all  im­ portant. Yet French culture with  its sense of history  has produced a great literature which  has  its genesis  in  belles-lettres not in gut  experiences. Godbout's novel,  too, by questioning the traditional role of the author is part  of  the antiroman tradition. Thus  while it ends with Mireilie's declara­ tion: "Un  ecrivain, c'est  pas plus  impor­ tant  qu'une secretaire, oke ?"  we  remain unconvinced. Is  the  effective  manipula­ tion  of  narrative frames, collage  and  the realistic   reproduction  of   joual    due   to Godbout's fine  skill  or  to  his  secretary's tampering?  The   novel   is  successful:  it entertains, it intrigues, but we find that  it states  implicitly   that   joual  reality is  the raw    material  for   literature  not    its medium.  But   perhaps   this  too  is  God­  bout's intention.

JOSEPH  PIVATO



SKELETON ODYSSEY

DAVID     EVANIER,   The   Swinging    Headhunter.
November House, cloth $6.gs, paper $2.95·

The Swinging  Headhunter, whose author
-David Evanier- taught for  a period in Canada and  edited  the Vancouver literary journal  Event, is not  in  the  true sense  either   a  novel  or   a  collection  of stories. In its own introduction it is called "an  odyssey", through Times  Square, The Bronx,  Greenwich  Village,  Israel,  Van­ couver  and  back  again. The  Odyssey  of the  Jewish  hero  Bruce  Orav  begins  as a boy; ends  as a grown  man  in  a changing world  of  multi-liberators.  Never   in  any society  has  there  been  so  many  alterna-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tives to "salvation", from  Numerology to Hari Krishna to  Women's Liberation; flower people, black people and liberal Christians. Bruce  Orav knows that  the salvation  in  Judaism  or  in  any  honest, deep-rooted belief is an acceptance of the changing world  and  the  totality of  suffer­ ing:   the  floundering and  madness of be­ ing midstream in a  human stream.
Perhaps the  most  important  sequence
is  Greenwich  Village    Blues.   Here,   we have the sex-salvation of a little black chambermaid who  offers a meal  of  pork­ chops,  then  herself,  without the benefit of love-play   to  young   student  Bruce,   who cannot  accept. In   this  scene,  we  come closest  to  human   reality  but   still  can't make   precious  contact  between   people, since  each  is  hung   up  on  an  individual concept of  touching. This  is swiftly  fol­ lowed  by  a  scene  at  a  party  in Sheridan Square which  is crashed by the Bipps and their Liberation Theatre. The Bipps, with their  noisy aggressive  theatrics, insist that everybody  get liberated. "I tell you," yells Hannah Bipp, "there will be no walls between   lovers  of  the  world" ... "We'll break  the walls of anyone who opposes freedom and  love."
Everyone  in  this  travel  through life is
as isolated  as Orav himself, and  each behaves in his own, clumsy, deviate way, trying   to  break   down   walls.  Indeed the world itself becomes a kind of deviate "Liberation Theatre",  bent   on   conver­ sion.
The most  tender comment is implied
in the first sequence  in which Bruce, as a small boy worshipping his gentle Jewish teacher, sees life personified  in him.  This chapter  is  called    The  Light  Of   My Father and  symbolizes  a  kind  of  father­ image,  which   may  be  contained  in  any religion-Christ, God, Jehovah. This

II6
 figure,  however,   is swept  by  death  and Orav   learns  his  first  lesson. The  father­ figure  will  not  protect a  man  from  life:  neither  will  the   mother-figure;   neither will the scrambled  Liberation Theatre or the  various  circuses  of  The World. The relationship  with   Mr.   Silverzweig   is  so pure,  unblemished and  real  in its simpli­  city   and   joy  that   the   young   Bruce   is unable   to  mourn   his  death. This  purity is never  captured again  in Orav's travels except   under   the  blanket   with  his  first,
16-year-old   love. Even  that   tender   need
is  distorted and   labelled   as  dependency by  her  psychologist  Daddy and  his  pro­ fessional  associates.  Nothing  remains of original   simplicity   and   joy  except   what  Orav   is  able   to  integrate  into   a  quiet  acceptance of loss and love.
The  Swinging  Headhunter  is stripped
down   to  the   barest   prose,  so  that   the swift transitions from  one person or place to  another are  frequently baffling. Strip­ ping down  prose is a tricky business, since the   skeleton   must   be   soundly   propor­ tioned  when  it has little flesh to round  it out.  This  skeleton  could  have  done  with more   flesh;   many   readers   will  not   be patient  enough   to  fill  in  its  spaces  for themselves.
LORRAINE VERNON


MERMEN AND  HYBRIDS

w.   TOWRIE   CUTT,    Message   from    Arkmae.
Collins.
RUTH   NICHOLS,   The Marrow   of  the  World.
Atheneum, $5.25.
"0  vou CAN'T go  to  Heaven on   the O.N.R.  [Ontario  Northland Railway]," we used to sing in Northern Ontario sum­ mer  camps,  "'cause the O.N.R. don't  go that  far." The  first mild shock for indige-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



nous  readers  of Ruth Nichols'  The  Mar­ row  of the  World   is  occasioned  by  the protagonists'  abrupt   transition   from   a North   American  lake   to  a   realm  with affinities  to  Tolkien's Middle  Earth and C. S. Lewis's  Namia. Somehow an  Eng­  lish train or a London attic seems a more plausible  point  of  departure to  a  world inhabited by witches,  wizards  and  dwarfs.
In   some   ways   Miss   Nichols'   other­ world   is  right   in   the   tradition   of   its European  analogues, old  and   new.  For instance, her  dwarfs   are   the  traditional mining, gem-loving, treasure-guarding folk, whose avarice  is countered, but  just barely,  by their  merchant  integrity. The  ancient struggle between  good  and  evil is here   fought   out,   as   in   time-honoured folklore,  by a benevolent wizard  king and a   malevolent witch. And  the  witch Ygema's exorcised  mother, a spirit  of evil memory,   bore   the  same   name   as  King Arthur's sinister  half-sister-Morgan.
But the North  American strain  is also sustained  in the book. The  atmosphere of Ontario's rocky, watery  northland is  car­ ried  over  into   the  fantasyland in  which Philip,  the  boy  hero,  and  his  mysterious young  cousin,  Linda, attempt  to execute Ygema's  errand  and   obtain   release   to their  natural world.  Ygema,  terrified  of fire,  lights   her   copper-lined   hollow-tree home  with  imprisoned  fireflies. The  mer­ people are  not of the hair-combing, harp­ twanging  kind;   they  are   quasi-animal phenomena:

. . . the  face  that gazed  at  them  was  human: its   hair   sleek   as   an   otter's, its   dark   eyes sheathed with   lids  of  an  oriental  fold. Between  its  long   fingers, smoothly stirring the  water, beat  webs  of  transparent  skin.

Heme the  hunter could  belong  as easily to pioneer  Canadian stock  as he could  to the  old  European  woodsmen tribe.  He  is
 simply  a  convincing contender  with   the wilds.
In  fact,  the major talent demonstrated in this book is for vivid, plausible descrip­ tion that  can carry  the reader from  recog­  nizable scenes and atmospheres into semi­ enchanted  ones  without  missing  a  beat.  Linda's  frightening journey,  guided   by a reluctant  dwarf, into   the  bowels  of  the earth   to  obtain   a  quantity of  the  sup­ posed  germinative essence  of all  life, the ancient "marrow of the world", is a weird fairy-tale quest  through  solidly  real  geo­ logical  remains:

Two tiny  figures  in  that enormous silence, they   began    to   descend  the   steps.    In   the deep-cut walls,  their secrets exposed  to view, the  tale  of ages  lay  revealed. Here and  there the  stone was  embossed with  shells.  Farther down   Linda saw  the  bones  of  a  great  crea­ ture  splayed in  death, a  frozen  writhing of fins, swan-neck, and  slender tail. Lower still,  the   trunks  of   trees   were   embedded,  their bark   scaled   and   stippled   like   the   hides   of animals; and  above  them,  traced  smoke-like in  the  rock,  the  fronds of  ancient  palms.

Miss Nichols is also adept at conveying nuances  of mood  that  contribute  psycho­ logical credibility  to   the  incredible: Linda's warring horror,  exultation, and despair  as she assimilates the fact  that  she is Ygema's half-sister, Philip's angry  love and  repulsion  mingled  with  yearning and protective fear   as  he  watches over  her. She   thus   keeps  alive   strong   character­ bound   suspense  as  well  as  the  external suspense  generated   by  knowledge  of Ygema's malign  power  over  both  young­  sters.
If Miss Nichols ever  puts  a foot  wrong,
it  is in  the  odd  snatch   of  dialogue. The book is a dignified,  high-minded one, and serious speeches are appropriate, but even so a speech  like  Philip's "If need  be, I'll tell your parents" does not ring quite  true. In  fact,   Philip  in  speech  and   Linda  by


117

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



report sometimes   approach sombre  prig­ gishness. "My  lord,  Linda means  no dis­ respect," says  Philip  to  King  Kyril,  "but she  begged  me to tell you  that she prom­  ised  to  dance   with  Thawn. She  cannot  come  until  her promise  is fulfilled."
However, despite  a shortage of  leaven­
ing  levity  and  despite  occasional  porten­ tousness,   the   book   appeals  to   idealism without  preaching it,  and   is  compulsive reading.  The   last   paragraphs   seem   to promise  a sequel. It should  be worth  wait­ ing for.
The   sequel  threatened by  W.  Towrie
Cutt's  Message   from  Arkmae   is  not   a literary  one   but   a   universal  cataclysm. The   message  of  the  title  is addressed   to the human race by a seal chieftain:

Land  sick-air poisoned -sea filthy­ Dead  birds and sea beasts -
Man  wants all fish
For fun not for food

He fouls his last refuge.

This slim little book tells a slight story weighted  down  by ecological  concern. Set in the Orkneys, it posits a relationship between  seals and  islanders, especially  the "Selkie  Wards", an island  family  with coloration  and   hand  characteristics said to be inherited from  a shape-shifting seal woman.    The    chief   characters,   eleven­ year-aids   Mansie   Ward   and  his  cousin Erchie   and  Mansie's elder  brother Peter all  have  the  markings,  and  are  thus  by appearance and  nature qualified to make contact  with  their  seal  kin.  Mansie   and Erchie   do  so  in   a   hidden  cavern   they inadvertently   visit  when   their  boat  cap­  sizes.  There   they   meet   the   mysterious Finman, last  survivor of an  ancient race and   another  link  between   man   and   the sea creatures. And  with  him  they  witness the  anguish  of   a  seal  herd   ravaged  by

II8
 human hunters.  Peter,  an initiate in the Finman and seal mysteries,  is soon on the scene  to  provide  additional commentary and  take the boys home.
Apart from the boat episode, the first encounter with the silvery, bewhiskered Finman, and  a brief episode  in which porpoises  are  rescued  from  a  naturalist's sea-pen,  there is virtually no action  or suspense in Message from Arkmae. There are certain  charms  in its Orkney dialect, nature  lore,  and   anthropomorphic  fan­ tasy. But  the dominant element is propa­ ganda,  not   merely   against   hunting  for sport  but  also against scientific  investiga­ tions  that   meddle  with   creatures'  lives. Contradicting  Tennyson, the  Finman utters  a grimly topical  prophecy:

When all are swallowed - Bird, fish and land  beast - Man, red in tooth  and  maw - Man will eat man.

An  admirably well-meant warning, no doubt-but  I believe  that   readers  ex­ pecting  fiction  will be considerably  more interested in Ruth Nichol's  sly, slant-eyed mer-people than  in Mr. Cutt's remonstra­ tive hybrids.
FRANCES  FRAZER


TIES AND THREADS

GEORGE  AMABILE,   Blood  Ties. The   Sono  Nis
Press, Hardcover  $5-95·
DAVID  BROMIGE,   Threads. Black Sparrow, Paperback.

THE MANY ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  in Blood Ties to anthologies and  periodicals suggest  to  me  that  Amabile's first  book, the  sift  of several  years'  work,  has  been earned   by  a  longer   than   usual   (maybe than    necessary)    apprenticeship  in   the little mags. At any rate,  there  are no slips.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



There are  four  sections.  Two  parts,  II
and   IV   are   entirely   occupied  by  long
 I want  to frame them
in  terms  that would  clear up  the  past

poems,   "Generat..lon
 Gap"
 and   "Inner
 
He wants  to atone  for  thinking, about his

Space: The Light  Culture". And  part  I
begins  with  a fine long  poem on the acci­ dental  death  of   the    poet's   brother, Anthony Amabile.  A good  many of  the poems,   more    obviously   than    the   title poem even, are about blood  ties, meaning variously  family  (father, mother, brother, wife,  children)   instinct   ("my  blood moves/toward  gifts  of  touch  at  the  tips of  tongues  &  fingers"), or  the  viaducts  which   carry   poetic   inheritance  and   tie one  to the past:

as desired wind  eased  up  out of thought
and  took shape under the  powdering tip
of a Greek  chisel     It rises again   has  risen
for  thousands of years     in  the  blood between water & stone

If for  blood  ties  we  substitute  relation­ ships  we  get  a  reasonable  description of the  themes  of  many  of  the  poems  about  relationships  not  only  with   family,   but with  "ancestors"  like   Blake  (named several  times)  and  Van Gogh,  the Greeks and    the   Romans,   with   America,  with women   and   so  on.  But   mainly   broken relationships. Something has gone wrong:

Blake  & Van  Gogh  are  dead
A pick & shovel
lean  against the garage caked  with  mud

Irony  prevents  emulation of one's favour­ ite  artists  of  the  past;   Rome   is  "eternal city   of   decay;"  the   American   flag   in fireworks  "takes  five  minutes"  "to  come apart." The  experience of the  past  hasn't  improved us, as this list of  place suggests:  "Rome  Alexandria  London Hanoi  Chi­  cago/ unpronounceable reed villages." In many  poems  the motive  seems to be  to

try  to revive  the lapsed sentence
that released  silt shadows into  the  future ...
 dead  brother, "he's dead/ I'm  glad  it wasn't  me," or for the "reek" of failure to get   close  to   his   father.  Reconcilement with  the  past is never  easy, and  the  more one  reads  Amabile   the  more  one  under­ stands   that   blood   ties.  The   title   is  as ambiguous as the word  wedlock, title of a poem in part  I. In fact  just looking  at  the sequence  of titles which occur  toward  the end  of I, it may  be  possible  to see a sub­ merged  narrative:  "Blood   Ties," "Wed­ lock,"  "Frigidity," "Adultery," "Period." The  period  is menstrual but  it's  hard  not to  find  in  it  something of  the  end  of  a sequence closed with  the ironic  demythol­ ogizing  of  the  moon,  menstrual goddess, "a  bald girl who's never  been laid."
To   me   the   dominant  tone   of  Blood Ties  is elegiac. There is regret  for what  is gone  and   understanding how  hard-won and   temporary are  affirmations like  this one  (which  is even  a question) :

Is love  the  whole  fire
that writhes at  the  center of things scattering florid  echos
like tiger  lillies blown  through a ruined civilization?

Scattered flowers  bloom,  rather like  this, throughout  Blood  Ties, but  loss,  ironic consciousness,  is still  the  keynote.  There is a strenuous facing   up  to  the  fact  that the  present  is made,  like  I thaka, to pass, that  what  you see even  in  contemporary pop culture is "a  day-glo  history  of  west­ ern  civilization". "Inner  space"  uses  the imagery  of  the  drug  age  to  chronicle its replacement by the  future. In Blood  Ties  there  is a  tension  between  the  wish  to be at one with  the things  and  people one has been  cut   off  from,   and   the   knowledge

119

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



that   no  one  gets  a  chance  to  do  it  all again  with  hindsight.
Re-reading the book I found it slightly annoying that, except  for  part   IV,  every poem has a first-person persona, usually identifiable, I expect,  with  Amabile. Per­ haps  monotony is the  hazard  risked  by a poet   who  imposes   on   his  volume   such uniformity of  tone.  Or,  and I like  this explanation  better,  perhaps Amabile's I is a seeing  centre:  nearly  everything else is object  over  against   him,  and   the  per­ sona is the agent  of his irony. Also, I think there   is  a  good   deal   of  honesty   in  the reluctance  to generalize  experience.
Blood  Ties  is  a  strong,  accomplished
book,  and   the  small   reservation I  have about  the dominant singleness  of persona may not bother  other readers.
Threads  is David  Bromige's sixth  book.
It impresses  me  as  a  less deliberate, less finished   book   than    Amabile's. It  also seems  thicker  in a good  and  a bad  sense. There  is  less  clarity,   more   diffuseness, occasional    lines   which   will   not   come clear,    over-punctuation.  So   there    are hindrances  on   the   way   into   Bromige's poetry.   But   it   is  worth    persevering,  I think,    to   realize   that    the   difficulty   in Bromige  is inherent in  what  he  wants  to do.  Tortuosity of  thought and   image  is what   a   lot   of   his  poetry   is  about,   as acknowledged   in   a   title   like   "At   the Labyrinth," a "review" of  Polyani's  Per­ sonal  Knowledge.   A  strong   thread    (to use Bromige's  metaphor)  is  the  reflexive poem   about   what   it  is   that   sometimes  sparks   inside   a   particular   person   at   a particular time  and  place.  And  in  reflec­ tion on  the conditions for  making oneself receptive,  as  fully  alive,  as  free,  as  one can   be,  ear-open  for   the   sound   of  the "undine drum/upon the  edge  of things", Bromige's  poetry   records   the  search   for


120
 vital   language   to  catch   insight,   an   ac­ count  of the various  kinds of  comfortable order  he  has had  to eschew,  like  the  old "iamb" that  "haunts  these  signs  of feel­ ing," or

these thoughtful balances  I must one way or another  act to overthrow,  & yet to save myself from altering
I'd  close my ears to risk
becoming more myself....

In   "A   Note  on  Translation"  (Bromige includes    two   "versions"  of   poems   by Baudelaire) I find  a  key  to  what   he  is doing: "In  my  own  rages," he  says, "I know   what   force   accumulates  to   tear apart common  fabrics  when  one has been
'for one's-for  the family's-own good' suppressed.   Then the  hope  is  to  disturb assured    minds   helpfully,"   to   live   for poetry's   good.   The  "fabric"  metaphor should  be read  in  the  context  of the  ti tie poem,   where   Bromige   talks   about   the sometimes  ravelled  "fabric" of his soul­ "the  story we make  of our lives -a warp  of dream  a weft of actuality."
Threads, like Amabile's ties, are deeply ambiguous  to   Bromige.    Love,   for   ex­ ample,   is  one  "of   the   many   [threads] that  prevent  me from  dissolving utterly." But  marriage is a  thread that  suppresses, or has suppressed  him, and  several poems deal   with  divorce  and   its  necessity.  In "An Imperfect Failure," he asks

how can I speak for you, but know myself more fully alive, for that  move
& the harm, maybe only of a different  kind, it inflicted on our son, & you....

Threads are  necessary,  threads are  (shift a  letter)  threats  ( cf.   "An   Interlude") and   reading  Bromige   is  balancing  un­ easily with  him  between  the  threads  that bind and  those that  open  new possibilities

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



("One wants  to find out  what  he can do, what  knowledge is hidden  in  him") .
In  Bromige's  poetry  the  search  shows, and  so do  the seams often,  but  his poetry gains    authenticity   from    its   deliberate ruggedness. Bromige may not give you all you   expect   from   poetry-economy   or "form," for example-but to give up on him  early  will  be failing  to take  him  on his own  terms,  and  the  more  you read  it the more  you understand that  Threads is an  extended definition of  his own  terms. The  important  thing   about    Bromige's poetry   is  that   his   self-definition  holds emancipating possibilities for us all. What Bromige  says in "A  Passive Voice"  is too true:

"the mind" is dodgy,
or, say, the  habituation of it, wants its hierarchies, preserves itself. ...

This  general  statement illuminates others, more  directly  about  what  happens when the  pressure  of the  free  mind  is directed at those orderly  hierarchies:

in my mind what insists  on consistency of imagery
breaks, making a rockpile of,
my home.

And,  in  answer   to  the   temptation  one might feel to scoff at Bromige's more rambling poems, here are some lines from "Sides of an intent":

... even   the   words   get  out   of  hand  when the  intent is  to  hold  them   to  one's   rein ... Slurred-drunken  speech, drunkenness would be  a  kind   of  health, whole   with the  near­ blindness otherwise so troublesome.

STAN  DRAGLAND
 MEDIUM OR MAGICIAN

FRANK  DAVEY, King of Swords. Talonbooks. FRANK  DAVEY, Arcana. Coach House Press. DAVID     ROSENBERG,   Leavin    America.  Coach
House Press.
DAVID     DAWsoN,   Ceremonial.  Coach   House
Press.

SOMEWHERE IN  THE  permutations  of Frank   Davey's   tarot   cards,   the  symbols are  mixed.   There  is  no  guarantee  that when  the game is finished  truth will be revealed,  sword and  cup  will embrace, or the questor  will ever find  the chapel peri­ lous.   King   of  Swords   is  an   urban   ro­ mance. The  poetic   persona,  himself Arthur,  king  and   cuckold,  wanders through the  city  labyrinth  of  marriage and   art   and   friendship  looking   to   the cards,  to  symbol  and  legend  for  explica­ tion of  his own faltering existence.
As the cards are dealt, the questor finds he is no hero,  simply  an  involuntary medium for  events; births, deaths,  (hor­ rible  deaths with   human  flesh  trapped, burning, in  automobiles),  marriages and divorces.  He  knows,  but  is  powerless  to prevent,  what  the  cards signify. Like  the hare  in  a  paperchase,  he  litters  his  path  with  poems,  manuscripts, in  an  effort  to circumvent his own mortality.
They all ride again in Davey's poems; Lancelot, Merlin,  Arthur, Gwenevere, Sir Kay, Sir Griflet. Actually, they ride him, weaving  on the path  in a grotesque mode that  is neither  comic  nor  tragic. Gwene­ vere /Elayne digs  her   spurs   in   his  flesh and  he wonders  who is the hero.

"The uterus largest muscle
of the  body, far  heavier
... than the  powerful biceps
of a heavyweight champion prizefighter"
says Guttmacher. Cf.  Nineve. Elayne. Gwenevere.

121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



He  finds  the  ideal  lady  of courtly  love is no  lady,  but  a  soldier  too,  and  strong enough  to win.  Ideals pursued on  horse­ back,   literally   sexual,   with   the   sword, literally  phallic,  are  focused  on  the cup,  which  bleeds  with  lunar  persistence. The  grail  is  woman. She  is  a  doppelganger, the instrument of  perfection, of ideal and physical  love,  and  the  agent   of  his  im­ mortality, a  cornucopia, but  also  a  war­  rior and  the mother of the child  who will replace  him  as  the  king  and  hero  of  his own daydreams.
There are  times  when  the  analogy  is a bit  strained, and   there  are  no  unforget­ table  lines  in  King  of  Swords. The   best moments are  humorous,  when  the  poor, only  human  knight  is  able  to  laugh   at himself and the whole game.

Breasts  encrusted with  jewels, a clitoris of gold: our Gwenevere, cloistered
with  her  Avan lady.

Arcana  is more  flesh for  the  bones  of King   of  Swords.   The  tarot   cards   are dealt  again.   Indeed the  signs  are  unob­ trusively   present   in   the  watermarks  on the  paper; the  sun,  the wheel,  the  tower, the  horned  god. In  Arcana, Davey  aban­ dons the sustained metaphor, giving more substance to  reality,  letting myth  take  a back seat in his "used  Ford".
The  mysteries of Arcana are  the rituals
of life in Anytime.  Still,  the questor  seeks the  grail,  but  in  an  old  motor  car  on the Hope-Princeton highway. Arthur becomes Menelaus,  the  most  famous   cuckold   of all,   as   time   shifts   from    media:val    to Greek,  even  Iroquois.
The  romantic hero  has  more  control
over the mysteries in Arcana. He writes poems, becomes a father, begins to see himself  as magician.

122
 Even  when  all the  tools of life
-the cup,  the sword, the  dish,
the staff -lie  before  him  on a table he  wields  only
his wand  -his gesture moves
words  to  blossom green white  and red along boughs  miraculously round him  growing.

Sometimes the self-conscious  mirror- gazing is disturbing and  we hear "the screams  of Icarus returning home" as the poet  falls,  wings  melting, in  a  tangle  of his own banalities and conceits. He learns,

It is rock  that  makes  poetry,
the  shit  cakes on the  dog's  paws,
the  bitches  we hurl the  line  toward.

All  the  magic  and   the  best  efforts  of the  poet  are  expressed  in  "The Page  of Wands":

After  the  geese
have  appeared on  the  horizon
flown  southward overhead silence.

David  Rosenberg, in  Leavin  America, takes the  romance one step  further, leav­ ing   out   the   mythical  cast   and   going directly  to the stars. He  runs into trouble  when  he  fails  to  relate  the  particular to the  universal  in  a group  of  poems  which ostensibly  set out  to do  just  that. In  one jump,  the  poet-genius would become

medium with  everything
Motor City
under my feet
pure  imagination above.

Most often,  the poet is left trapped in his own   aging   bag  of  skin,   contemplating the cold stars he has counted on to reveal the  meaning of his existence.  Their light should   be  the  source  of  his  inspiration. He too should be literally  elevated  to stardom.
The poems in Leavin America are arranged  on   the   page   in   syntactically

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



divorced  clusters, set like points of light against  blue  paper. The  image  should explode   with  enough  power   to  fuse  the words   both   to  each   other  and   to  the Idea.  The  Idea  should  be manifested in relationships between  words  and  between levels of consciousness. This sometimes happens, but  when  it does not we are left with   the  fragments. Too   seldom   is  the unity  in  multiplicity revealed. However, the groping is validated by occasional flashes of light.
Since  the  stars  are  cooled  in  their  dis­ tance  from  human  existence,  Rosenberg looks  to  three   closer  sources  of  energy; sexual  love, work  (creativity), and  drugs. In   love,  he  is  Phoebus,   or  sun,   to  his moon   women; "men   have  always  been one   flesh  with   the   sun."  As   poet   and lover,  he  must  be  the  light,  the  biggest star  of all. Like  Icarus, Rosenberg learns that   as  a  mere  man  he  is fallible. Ulti­  mately,  cut  off  by  his  own  ambition, by his  self-styled  status  as  poet,  he  is  pre­ vented  from  taking  off  on  his  transcen­ dental  journey  by  the  weight  of his own expectations.
In  "Flower  Power'',  he  considers the
artificial route  to "poems beeping out mysteries",  the revelations he expects to experience through drugs

when  plants  work
a blue virginal
sonnet
they bestow on the Bard.

But  there  is no  quick   recipe  for  magic. The poet,  the  magician, must  learn   his craft,  prepare himself as a medium for revealed  truth.
Having dissipated his energy  in  imagi­
nary  trips  leading  to  blank  spaces  in  the sky,  the   poet   becomes   involuntary. He has  failed  in  the  attempt to  select  with his  own  camera; "I am  more  the  earth
 attached to  a star." As he  dives  through the  air,  he  begins  to  know  that   there  is some machinery he  has  not  yet begun  to understand.  A   mortal  after   all,   he   is learning to stand  and  wait.  Truths are revealed  in the mundane functions of life, the passing  of time.  As the days fade  and perish  one  by one,  there  is comfort and some truth in the  rituals of eating, work­ ing and  making love, waiting like a piano  to be played on.
Ceremonial, poems  by David  Dawson, is an  abrupt change from  the  aggressive heterosexual poetry  of Davey  and  Rosen­ berg.  In  these  poems,  there  is no time or energy  wasted  in  the  pursuit of  cups and  moons.  Dawson's moon  is a  mystery  that  is  endured, tolerated and  finally  called mother, but  is never  his  muse.  The  poet in  these  poems  is  passive,  the  cup,   the stone  himself.  Creation is  not  an  act  of will,  but   something  that   happens,  like tides, like seasons.
The  poem,  the  poet,  wait  like  a stone on  the beach  to be created by events,  the wind, the tide.

a slow drip  over stone wears
on the flat surface of this the essential witness.

In a "Canticle for  Stones" Dawson artic­ ulates   a   poetic   philosophy that   would occasionally  deny utterance. The medium is controlled by other voices, the sound  of the  wind   and   the  sea.  He  speaks  from compulsion  and   because  words   are   his tool.

Anthropologists tell us that  man first made tools
and  used them, made  weapons and  used
them,  before
he could name  them  before he could count
them
the word was much later.


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Dawson's poems  are  seeded  in  reflec­ tion   rather  than    action.  As   he   waits, listening  to sea stories,  the  history of  man recorded  in  the  sound   of  the  waves,  he examines his own  face  in  the  water. His gods   are   male,   like   himself;   Manitou, Zeus,   and    boys   burning   with    angelic  brightness. However, there  is  a  curious  absence    of   ego   in   this   acknowledged narcissism.
I do not claim the world is centred  here
in me, nor did I create it by my existence. perception is discovery is perception not
creation.
The  magic  is not  created but  heard. Dawson  is shaman rather than  magician. The  magic  conducts through him.  It is a gift, not genius.
While   the  poet  sings  and  dances,   the tune   is  called   somewhere  else.  He  is  a reed in the wind. The wind,  the mysteries are  not  to  be  questioned. The  truth  re­ veals itself as
that  part of the mind  which seldom speaks moves through  magic to utterance.
Dawson  responds  almost  as the  cup  to the  questors  Davey  and  Rosenberg. We discover   he  doesn't  seek  the  moon,  be­ cause  he  is it.  He  is a  reflector  of  light.  We only miss in his poems  the confronta­ tions that  make fire, the sun.
Every   use  of  language  is  at   least   a small  attempt to unlock  the secrets of the universe.    One    of   the   prerogatives  of poetry  is the  right  of  the  poet  to  attach some  cabbalistic  significance  to  the  ar­ rangements of words.  In  the  act  of  crea­ tion   or   arrangement  the   poet   becomes either   medium or  magician.  The words are  the magic  wires from which  he hangs suspended in the  dome  of  many  coloured  glass. The  rest of us can  only watch and hope  he won't  fall.
LINDA ROGERS


124
 AN ABUNDANCE OF REPRINTS
Canadian  Literature and  the  New Cana­ dian   Library   were   born   at   almost   the same  time.  Both  were  given  poor  prog­  nostications of survival, but  both  are still alive  and  flourishing after  fifteen   years, and  if Canadian  Literature  is now at  its
6rst  number, the  New Canadian Library has just published  I4 new titles  (probably the  largest  single  issue)   which  brings  its total  to more than   I 20 volumes,  covering the   whole   range   of   Canadian  writing from  the late eighteenth century down  to the present.
The  new selection is catholic in both nature and  quality, but  it contains an exceptional number of fine books whose reissue has in some  cases been  long over­ due.   One   such   is  Howard   O'Hagan's vivid  fragment of  Canadian  mythology,  Tay   John   ($r.g5),  which   shares   with Sheila   Watson's   The  Double  Hook  the honour of being the best evocation of the interior of  British  Columbia as  a  legen­ dary  landscape. There is Margaret Laur­ ence's  A  Jest  of  God  ($2.25), too  often discussed  in  this  magazine  to  need  fur­  ther   introduction,  and    Jack    Ludwig's Above Ground ($2.25), distinguished like all his books by its vivid  characterization and  its taste for the eccentric in behaviour and  attitude.
A  different  aspect   of  the   bizarre  ap­ pears   in   Wyndham  Lewis's   Self   Con­ demned  ($2.95), a grim satire on Ontario manners  and   mores   a   generation  ago, whose appearance  in  Canada  twenty years  after  its first  publication may  per­ haps  be  taken  to  show  that   we  have  at least  attained the  maturity of being  will­ ing to see ourselves as others may savage­ ly see  us.  And  finally,  available for  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



first  time  in  a  reasonably  priced  Cana­ dian   edition,  is  a   collection   of   Mavis Gallant's  superb   short   stories,   entitled The  End of The World and Other Stories ($2.95)   and  selected  and  introduced by Robert Weaver.
There are  two  books  that  at  least  lay
claim  to be autobiographies. One  is Fred­ erick   P.   Grove's   In   Search  of   Myself ($2.95), which  recent   events,  culminat­ ing  in  the  publication of  D.  0. Spetti­ gue's  F.P.G.: The  European Years,  have revealed to be largely  fiction, a fact  that  if  anything  enhances  its  interest,  since now   we  may  speculate  on   the  motives that  induced this strange man so radically to  falsify  his  own  past.  Ernest   Buckler's Ox Bells and Fireflies ($2.75)  is obviously much  nearer to actuality than  In Search of Myself, yet even Buckler  has obviously used many  of  the techniques he developed  in  the  writing  of  fiction,  and  heightens effects   with   a  kind   of  poetic   prose  in which  nostalgia  is persistently stimulated until  at  times it spills over into sentimen­ tality.
There  are   no  less  than   four  transla­
tions from  the French, the best being  that of Tete  Blanche ($r ·95)  by Marie-Claire Blais. The others  are  Allegro  ($r ·95), a selection   of  Felix  Leclerc's often   rather mawkish  fables,  Andre Langevin's  unex­ ceptional  Dust  Over  the  City   ($2.50), and   Charles G.  D.  Roberts'  rather stiff translation of Philippe Aubert de Gaspe's  rather stiff historical  novel, Canadians of Old   ($2.95). A  much  better   historical  novel  is Thomas Raddall's Pride's Fancy ($2.75), which  is  all  it  ever  pretends to be-a fine and racy yarn,  while  Roberts is represented more directly in his curious  and  in some ways very appealing fable of withdrawal into  the world of nature, The  Heart of the  Ancient  Wood  ($2.95). Yet
 another  Leacock    item   appears  in   the anthology Robertson Davies collected, Feast of Stephen   ($1.95), in  which  one of the  best items is the long introduction, where  Davies  emerges  as a  most  percep­ tive   Leacock student.  Archibald Mc­  Mechan's  Headwaters of Canadian  Liter­ ature   ($2.95)   has  its  interest as  a  thin but   often   shrewd   survey   of   Canadian writing up  to the  r 920s;  it was published almost  twenty years before  E. K. Brown's epoch-making  On   Canadian  Poetry, which  incidentally the Tecumseh Press of Ottawa has  just reprinted. The one  book among the  new NCL  titles  on  which  my endurance  failed  was   Robert Traill Spence  Lowell's  very  Victorian novel  of Newfoundland, New Priest in Conception Bay  ($2.95); it  may  well  be  the   least readable book ever reprinted in the series, and  that  is perhaps a kind  of distinction.
Those  who -as I do -consider Mor­ ley Callaghan's That  Summer  in Paris to be the best book he wrote since the 1930s, will be happy  to see it reprinted  by Mac­ millan in paperback, at $3-95·             o.w.
CANADIAN
ANTHOLOGY
A  NEW  EDITION of  the   Canadian  Anthology, selected  and   edited  by   Carl  F.   Klinck  and R.   E.   Watters,  has   just    been   published  by Gage   Educational  Publishing  ($11.95).  One cannot hide  one's  disappointment at the  scanty recognition that  has  been  given  in  this  edition to  the  changes by which  the  Canadian literary scene    has   been    virtually   transformed   since
1955, when  the first edition of the anthology appeared. Relatively few  of  the  new  poets  and fiction  writers  who   have   appeared since   that time  are  adequately represented, one  looks  in vain   for  evidence of  the  veritable  renaissance that   has  taken   place   in  drama, and  virtually no recognition is paid  to the extraordinary development of  Canadian criticism during the past  fifteen  years.  None of  the  important  new critics   is  present, none   of  the   important  new
dramatists.	o.w.

125





RUSSIAN VIEWS OF LOWRY

SoVIET publishers   are  steadily  increasing their  production of  translated Canadian literature and studies  of numerous aspects of  Canadian  life.  Translations  of   Lea­ cock,  Mowat, Grandbois, Gabrielle  Roy, Anne  Hebert, Hood, Ringuet, etc.  have appeared, as have  general studies  of Can­ adian literature and general introductions to Canadian culture and  history.
The  appearance of  the  present  collec­
tion  of some of Malcolm Lowry's  fiction 1 is interesting from  a  number of points  of view. First  of all,  it  indicates a widening of   Soviet   literary  horizons    to   include authors  whose   work   would   have   been unacceptable earlier. The translations are themselves   of  interest.  Perhaps  of  most interest  for   the   present  readers  is  the introductory article by V. Skorodenko on Lowry and  his work.
It is difficult to imagine a Soviet author writing and, even more,  publishing fiction like  Lowry's in  this collection. The major  work  is  Under the   volcano,  fol­ lowed  by  "The Bravest  boat",  "Strange comfort  afforded by the profession", "Gin  and  goldenrod", and "The Forest  path  to the   spring". ("The   Bravest   boat"  has also   appeared  in  another  collection,

1 La uri, Mal'kol'm  [Lowry, Malcolm], U podnozhiya vulkana. Rasskazy [Under the volcano. Stories.] Moscow: lzdatel'stvo
'Progress,'  [Progress  Publishing  House]  1972.
Translated  by  V.  Khinkis,   I. Gurovaya   &
0. Soroka, with an introduction by V. Skoro­
denko.  1 ruble,  70 kopecks.
 
Zateryannaya  ulitsa.)    The  presentation of  an   ex-diplomat  drinking  himself   to death in Under  the Volcano has, in the Soviet  context,  to  be carefully  explained for the reader.
In spite of its clear  political  bias, Skoro­ denko's article  is an educated and intelli­ gent   introduction  to  Lowry,  showing   a sophistication not  always  found  in Soviet critics.  Skorodenko  clearly  considers Lowry  a  Canadian writer  because  of his love  of   Canada, the  land   least  touched  by  Western  civilization, to  which  he  de­ votes his most poetic  descriptions.
After a brief biographical sketch, Skoro­
denko  moves directly to Lowry's  work, in particular Under the  volcano. This  novel, it is noted,  was to be central in a series of works, The Journey  which  never  ends, of which  "The Forest   path   to  the  spring" was  to  be  the  conclusion. The   complex structure, briefly  outlined, is  justified  by the  concept  of  the  novel:   there  are  two clear   levels. "This is a  novel  about   the death  of  one   man   taken   alone   and   a novel  about   the   lack   of  vitality   of  all [Skorodenko's italics]  of  Western  civili­ zation, about the irreversible  disease which  dooms  it  to  destruction  corroding it from  within." It is logical for Firmin  to perish,   for   he   is  not   only   behind   the times;  he is finally  against  history.  Time  is, thus, the essence of the novel. Although Firmin    realizes   his   situation,  he   does nothing to  help  himself  because  "bour­ geois  individualism, the  anarchistic idea of  personal  freedom, represented in Byron by  the  idea  of  struggle   against God,  in the twentieth century dooms man's  whole life  to  be  turned into  Quixote-like ora­ tion-spouting." Thus the hell of Firmin  is the socially conditioned hell of a civiliza­ tion   doomed    to   destruction,   and,    al­ though  Lowry  may  understand  and  even

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



sympathize with Firmin, he cannot but condemn him. This  juxtaposition of what is,  and   what   in  different  circumstances could  and  should  be, is a primary theme of the novel.
In Lowry's condemnation of Western civilization  there  is the suggestion  of  "an­ other" civilization in step  with  history­ that  of the Soviet Union: in Skorodenko's view  the  references to  the  Spanish Civil war  indicate this.  Hugh, a  typical  leftist intellectual  of  the   thirties,  is  a  symbol " ... not of that  weak bourgeois  individu­ alism  [i.e. of  Geoffrey], but of that  spon­ taneous, anarchical and  often  petty-bour­ geois  revolutionary-mindedness which can,  in certain circumstances, turn  into revolutionary-mindedness which  is  class­ orientated.  Precisely this   kind  of revolutionary-mindedness  during the Spanish  Civil war brought many  Western  intellectuals into  the  ranks  of  the  defen­  ders  of the  Republic. However it was in­ sufficient to help part of them  survive  the bitterness   of   temporary  defeat   and   the lesson  learned  from  it,  [and] to  remain  true  to the  cause."  But  even  Hugh is not completely   free  of  Quixote-like  flights, yet  he  is,  nevertheless,  "on   the  side  of history''. Hugh is the only one of the  three main   characters  to  survive   because   he represents hope  for  the  future. It should be  added   parenthically  that   the  editors have leaned  slightly  on Hugh's side by eliminating  all  references, even   jocular, to Trotsky, and all disparaging remarks about  the  Soviet  Union.
Skorodenko is particularly impressed  by Lowry's  style, with  its richness  of  expres­ sion and  detail.  Lowry's  ability  to convey the atmosphere of another country is seen particularly in his description of the peas­ ants  of Mexico, which  is not  just a back­ ground  but  an integral part  of the  novel.
 If Under the   volcano   is  about  man­ made    hell,    "The  Forest    path   to   the spring" is a  view  of an  earthly  paradise, for   "philosophic  nihilism    in   views   of man's  predestination in  the  universe  was foreign  to the  author. He was untouched by  fashionable  existentialist  crazes,  and  even   in  the  novella,   where   the  fate   of ancient  tragedy appears as contemporary history,  and  lives are  ruined, the  author has not concerned himself  solely with  the destruction of those values which  the bourgeois   Weltanschauung  advocates  as the  only  true  and  proper ones  for  man." Thus  in "The Forest  path" we see all the beauty  of the world  and  of life. This  story is filled with  "true democracy  character­ istic  of  Lowry  and  an  exalted  reverance for  the miracle  of life and  the world." Its version of love, the highest synthesis of the earthly and  the  spiritual, reminds one  of the Song of Songs.
"The  Bravest   boat"  and    "Gin    and goldenrod" also  reflect  this  exalted  view of   love.   Sigbjorn  Wilderness, partially autobiographically drawn,  is  meant   to play  the  role  of  the  Greek  chorus,  com­ menting,  in   "Strange  comfort"  on   the fate   of   artists   "destroyed   by   'circum­ stances,'  or more  exactly,  by  the crassness of the bourgeoisie,  deaf  to the beautiful." In  spite of being  depressed  by much  of what  he saw, Lowry recognized the great­
ness of man:

He   knew   that  clear  springs do   not   dry up:  they   are   fed   by  the   earth. "Could a soul,   washed    there,  be   cleansed  from    its filth   or   quench  its   thirst?"  asks   Geoffrey Firmin from  his hell.
Yes, asserts  Malcolm Lowry  by his  books.
Yes. It could  be.

The  several  translators have  produced good translations of difficult  confusing texts.  Most   Soviet  readers  (the   book  IS


127

OPINIONS AND  NOTES


apparently most popular in Moscow)  will probably extrapolate the factual informa­ tion  from  Skorodenko's foreword, assum­ ing that  all else is mere political verbiage  intended to get  official  approval. Never­  theless  the  article  is of interest  in its own right   and  one  is  gratified  to  see  serious study done on Lowry in the Soviet Union.

PAUL W. AUSTIN



QUE SAIS-JE?

THE    Que   sais-je?   series,    published  by   the Presses  Universitaires de  France, offers  perhaps the   most   condensed  of   the   world's   get-wise­ quick series   of  manuals of  knowledge. Whole  subjects with   vast  ramifications, ranging from  the  Roman Empire and  the  Religions of Tibet to  Boxing   and   Suicide, are   presented in  slim volumes of  about  I 20 small  pages. The pace  is always  breathless, and  even   the  conciseness of the  French language leaves  an  immense chal­ lenge  to   any   author  who   is   attempting  to present the  range and   depth of  his  subject at all   meaningfully. That   many    scholars  have done   precisely  this   is  shown   by  the  fact   that the  series  now  runs to  I ,6oo  titles. But,  at best, Que  sais-je?  books  merely open  doors, and   if, in  his  recently published I579th volume in  the series,  La Litterature Quebecoise, our  frequent contributor Laurent Mailhot gives  a brilliant overview  of  the   Canadian  writing in  French for   the   benefit   of  a  French  readership  barely familiar with  the  field,  this  will  arouse in Canadian readers a  hope  that he  may  write in the  near  future a  broader and  at  the  same  time more penetrating subject. His  knowledge and perceptiveness deserve a wider  scope.

A.A.




