!JI .25 per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·46

Autumn) 1970


THE FRONTIERS  OF LITERJITURE


Articles

BY  PATRICK LYNDON,  MAVOR MOORE, PETER STEVENS, P. K. PAGE, SANDRA DJWA, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, AUDREY THOMAS,  MIKE DOYLE, ROBERT HARLOW

Poem and Drawings

BY  P. K. PAGE


Symposium  on Writing  and Film

BY  HUGO MCPHERSON, WILLIAM WEINTRAUB, IAN MAC  NEILL, GUY GLOVER, JACQUES  GODBOUT

Opinions  and  Notes

BY  LLOYD ABBEY


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








THE FRONTIERS OF LITERATURE




THE  FRONTIERS  of literature  have  always  been  fluid.  In  a time of self-conscious intermedial  miscegenation we are inclined to think our  age unique.  In  fact,  the only difference lies in the  expansiveness of our  techniques. Essentially, writers have always been interested in the activities of painters and musicians, and have always wished to have some part of them, and vice-versa. Similarly there  has  always been  that  borderland  in  which,  in every generation, the art  of literature  had  blended  into  those varieties of craftsmanship  by which writers have earned  their subsistence through serving the channels of information and propaganda which only in very recent years have earned  the right to call themselves mass media.
The  links between  the  writer  and  the  visual artist  have  always  been  much closer than  the  advocates  of "pure" or  abstract  painting  have  been  willing  to admit.  Until  the late  nineteenth  century  nobody seriously doubted  that  the aim of  painting  was to  illuminate  themes  that  were identical  with  those of  poetry or fiction. William  Blake and  William  Hazlitt  were only  the  precursors  in  the early  nineteenth  century  of a  movement  which  reached  its height  among  pre­ Raphaelites  like Dante Gabriel Rossetti and  William Morris, who regarded  paint­  ing and poetry as almost interchangeable ways of expressing right sentiment,  and which achieved a second peak among the Surrealists, whose paintings always had literary implications  and  whose poems rarely lacked visual suggestiveness. In  our day of the early 1970s the conceptual  artists on the visual side of the frontier  and the concrete  poets on the literary side have come very  near to a hybridization  of their complementary tendencies.
In music the links are subtler, but not less complex. There  is a natural  musical element in all poetry-developed to a pathological extreme in writers like Swin­ burne  and  Victor  Hugo -and  even in  certain  rhythmic  kinds of  prose.  From


3

EDITORIAL



Yeats chanting  his poems like mantras,  to the musician setting them as songs, lies no great  distance.  From  the earliest days of oral  literature, the  composition  of verses to be sung  has always been a function  of the  poet;  music was a  part  of early drama,  and for many centuries the masque has been a form mingling poetry, music, dance  and  dramatic  action. With  Monteverdi  the masque  developed  into opera.  For generations  thereafter  the provision of verses for operas was the work of mere literary hacks, but in the eighteenth century Lorenzo da Ponte, with his inimitable scripts for  Le Nozze  de Figaro and  Cost  fan Tutte, raised the writing of libretti  to an  art,  and  in recent  years many  writers  of standing  have  turned to writing  for opera,  including,  in  Canada,  James  Reaney,  Mavor  Moore  and George  Woodcock.
The  newspaper  apprenticeship  of novelists is in  no  way  new:  indeed,  if our age differs substantially from past generations, it is in providing less of a position in  journalism for the serious writer. Perhaps  our  dailies are staffed  by mute,  in­ glorious  Hemingways,  but  there  is little evidence  to support   the  assumption  in the novels that  are occasionally produced  by reporters  or  columnists.  In  general, radio, television, and, to a lesser degree, film, have taken the place of newspapers and  magazines  as sources of income  for  writers  and  as  means  by which  they can expand  their  artistic capabilities. Radio  drama,  now a literary  form  doubly vanished  because of the decline of the medium  and  also because of  the failure to  publish  the  best  of the  scripts  that  yearly  gather  dust  in  the  unresearched archives of the CBC, extended significantly in its day the non-visual potentialities of drama  and  produced  a new kind of  theatre for voices, while, if television has been disappointing  in its encouragement of literary or quasi-literary  experimenta­  tion, the same is not  true of the cinema.
The  scope  of  the  collection of  writings  on  the  frontiers  of literature   which
forms  the  present  issue of Canadian  Literature  is necessarily limited  by space, and  there  are  aspects of  the  field which  have  hardly  been  touched -such  as opera  writing  (though  in  past issues of Canadian  Literature-Nos.  12  and  41
-James Reaney  has written  fascinatingly on the links between  writer, musician and  audience). Other  aspects of the drama  and  its changing  relation  to writing are documented  by Mavor  Moore, while five members  and  former  members of the Film Board staff chart  the present fragile relationship  between literature  and the  cinematic  arts.  As for  the daily  press, it is only in  the  review columns  that any  pretensions  to  literary  excellence survives, and  Phyllis  Grosskurth,  writing as a  professional critic,  throws  doubt  on the  prospect  of even that  relationship retaining  much  significance. In general summary  of the whole question  of "Lit-

4

EDITORIAL



erature  and  the  Mass Media", Patrick Lyndon establishes an important criterion when he defines literature  as "what  is written  to last, with a serious purpose, and involving an imaginative  re-ordering."
It  is because,  by and  large,  we accept  this definition,  that  we have  ignored
some of the more ephemeral  forms of intermedial  relationships. A mere  happen­ ing, amusing though  it may be, is not by any definition literature  or even related to literature.  On  the other  hand,  the work of concrete  poets, on  the  borderland between the literary  and  the visual, has to be taken seriously, as Mike Doyle and Peter Stevens have done. Peter  Stevens advances more widely, to survey writing from the point of view of the painter  who seeks by literary  means to expand  the understanding of  his  art,  and  Audrey  Thomas  comes towards  the same  point from the other side, considering the writer as critic and  appreciator of the visual arts;  their essays overlap  a little, but that  is both inevitable  and  fruitful.  We are brought  nearer  to the sources of creation by the feature  prepared  by P. K. Page; at  once  a  fine  poet  and  a  fine  painter,  she  demonstrates  in  prose,  verse  and graphic  art  how her various forms of  expression have so admirably  mingled.
There  is a further  aspect of the expanding  frontiers of literature  which involves a technological development  that  has been going on for many  years. Print-as was  pointed  out  long  before  McLuhan  -modified  literature  and  created  new genres. So, in their ways, did radio, television and film, but  we should  not  exag­ gerate  their effects, since the ultimate  aims of literature  and  the mass  media  are different,  and  new techniques  are often means to old ends. One  can see this by assessing the effect of the new tools which the writer  has acquired  over the  past fifty  years-typewriters, tape-recorders,  photo-copying  devices.  They  have  all eased his task, and  made quantitative changes in literary  production  theoretically possible, but  the limitations  of the brain's  power to create indefinitely has meant that  writers in the electronic age have done little better  in terms of output  than such  mass-producers  by pen  and  ink as Balzac and  Ballantyne.  But in terms of literary studies-of  providing  the material  for more exact scholarship  and  more insightful criticism -it does seem, from the evidence presented in Sandra  Djwa's convincing  article -that  the computer  can, if  it does nothing  else, unseat some of the glibber  and  more superficial of  literary  judgments  and  prompt  critics  to work with greater  care.
The  frontiers  of literature: by the geography  of the human  mind  they  touch on  every  province  of  consciousness, and  there  is always  infiltration  across  the borders. Pure  literature  -that  sterile ideal-can  never in fact  be achieved.



5



LITERATURE
AND MASS MEDIA



Patrick Lyndon






LRE SEEM TO BE SO MANY happy  jointmes  possible between literature   and  the  mass media:  style, content,  modalities,  audiences.  The   pen meets technology; the poet meets the mob. Perhaps, indeed, relations are so far advanced  that  mass media  and  literature  are  not  just brushing  lips but  are  old marrieds. Or  the apparent  contacts may be illusions, not even glances.
Mass-media  is such a fat  word, stuffed  with  boss dee  jays at one end  and  ye olde global village at the other, that it is difficult to find the bone. It seems to me that, essentially, mass media transmit  messages to which the great  majority of the population  expose themselves, often individually,  nearly  always voluntarily,  and among  Canadian adults  any  way for  about  six hours  per  day  per  person.1   In North  America  mass media  win over any single occupation, pursuit  or  recrea­ tion;  they take more time than  work, are more faithful  than  love, more persistent than  allergy.
Most of us need reminding  that  exposure to mass media  is usually voluntary.
The  only way, therefore, for a medium  to become  a mass medium  is to attract and  hold  a large  audience  without  the  benefit of sanctions,  elected  power,  au­ thority or the fear of God. Mass media do it by providing  individuals  with  "pro­  tection"  against the terrors, threats, and  insecurity of reality. It is not possible to understand   mass media  without  understanding   this;  the  form  of the  media,  in comparison, is nugatory.
Mass  media  provide  this  protection  by  presenting,  in  simplified  form,  fre­
quently  and  intensively, demonstrations  of all the  techniques  by which  man  has attempted  to neutralize  and  control  the irrationality  and  cruelty  of reality.
In  a world  which,  in reality, is bloody and  tyrannical  the  endless streams  of reports  on its activities-in page after  newspaper  page, on the hour, half hour, ten  minutes  before  the  hour,  and  so  on -show that   man   can  face  it.  The

6

LITERATURE AND  MASS  MEDIA



announcer   does  not  turn   to  stone.  The  newspaper  is  unsinged.  The  audience lives. In  fact  the purpose  of the news is not only to show that  man  can face it but that  he can apparently make sense of it, too.
In a world where, in reality, the best man often loses, the contests which mass
media  arrange  are so fairly  regulated,  so equitably  balanced,  so ruthless against cheating  that  the best man  wins-or  at least the winner  is the  best man.  Evi­ dence  that  reality can  be put  in order  by man for man.
In  a world of dreadful  chance,  where disease, ugliness, stupidity,  misfortune,
poverty,  disfigurement,  friendlessness are  not  deserved,  mass media  redress the balance through  projection. Helped by the many possibilities for projection which mass media  provide-covered with acne she can seduce  Apollo, fired today  he has  tenure  this  evening,  tied  to  Wawa  all  their  lives they  can  go  around  the world  this morning  and  snuggle  between  the sheets in  Buckingham   Palace  to­ night.  Mass media  help to straighten  out reality.
Even mass media's music has the same appeal. In  a world of errant, minatory noise the kind of music mass media provide offers symmetry,  regularity,  and  the comfort of easy resolutions. Once again man is in control.
And finally, when the scandal  of human  existence, in reality, becomes so gross that  one would  willingly lose one's senses and  one's conscience, mass media like the carousel, fast cars, drugs, alcohol, rock, give a taste of both without seriously harming  us. The  kick in  the eye of film, the punch-up  on TV,  the  fires on  the front  pages of newspapers lure us, safely. Too much and  the entire  audience may tum  on the gas:  hence  the omission of suicide stories in newspapers,  the refusal of the CBC to show Warrendale. But, generally speaking, mass media  help us to take leave, without  actually  shutting  the door on us;  in fact  always bringing  us back for more.
Mass media,  in  short,  are  society's great  psychic  regulator. They  shape  up
reality. Around  the clock. And  the majority  depend  on them.
Surely the media publish or broadcast material which is not so relentlessly regulatory?  What  about  Anthology? What  about  NET?  What  about  Cyril  Con­ nolly in The  Sunday Times, Saul  Bellow in  Atlantic?   What  about  Ulysses  at Loew's? But  none of these gets near  a mass audience.  When  the  first  words of the  announcer   herald  Anthology, dials  turn;  when  the  movie  house  marquee  shows Ulysses,  heads  turn.  NET,  The   Sunday Times, Atlantic, cater  to special audiences;  they are simply not  mass media.2  Those  who forget  that  exposure to mass  media  is voluntary  are  sure  that  if  Lawrence  Welk  were  forced  to  play Berio or Reader's Digest obliged to serialize A la recherche  du temps  perdu there

7

LITERATURE AND  MASS MEDIA



would  be a rub off. But it's turn-off. The  majority  come to mass media  for ser­ vices they need. If a medium does not provide this service at all, or insufficiently, it cannot  expect to attract  a mass audience.

Is LITERATURE a part of this?
NASA has made  us all so etymological and  McLuhan so morphological  that
many  people  would  probably  define literature   as anything   written,  and  would not flinch  from including  washroom signs, the  wrapping  around  Panchromatic­ X,  and  the  text  on  a dollar  bill. But  taking  all  words  back  to  their  roots and always defining content  as its form is not always useful.
Any  reasonable  definition of literature  it seems to  me, like Canadian  Litera­ ture's  itself, has  to be much  more  restrictive,  denoting  what  is written  to  last, with a serious purpose, and involving an imaginative  reordering. Literature, then, is an art,  and  belles lettres is another  way of putting  it.
What  society expects from  art  is, in  fact,  that  it should  be  the  psychic un­
regulator. The  artist  is charged  by society to extend  the  area  of man's  psychic security  by disorienting  him,  by  threatening   him,  and  by  constantly  changing pace. This  does not mean  the artist  does not  provide  pleasure  but  it is pleasure with  a penalty. Thus  all the rewards  which  mass society seeks, the artist  denies. Instead  of helping  to control  reality, he flings it at  us. Instead  of solutions  he gives problems, and  instead of resolution, suspension.
Consequently  whether we wish it or not, whether  it saddens  us or not, whether
it irks art-promoters or offends liberals the truth  is that,  among  the sane at least, art  can  claim only those who have enough  psychic security  to risk art's  assault. And  this is a  small  minority.  For  it  must  be  evident  now  that  those  of  us in education  or art-promotion  who might be best equipped  to expand  that minority, do  not  know  how  to do it  without  tearing  society  apart   and  starting   all  over again.  All  one  can  do is simply  to  expose. However  reluctant   we  may  be  to recognize it or however distasteful it is to write it  (for  it is a  desperate  truism) even  the  majority  of college graduates  in  North  America-after maybe   14-20 years of education -are  still corralled  between  the  fences of consumer  maga­ zines, Sears  pictures, popular  musicals, and  Johnny  Carson. 3   If this seems over­ drawn,  look around  the plane next time you fly (where  the proportion  of college graduates is usually very high, judging from  the rings). Indeed  look at  the  next reader  of Reader's  Digest; according  to the magazine it is read  by nearly half of all college-educated  Americans.4

8

LITERATURE AND  MASS  MEDIA



Only the visual arts today seem able to move outside their catch  basin. Often perhaps  their  appeal  is misleading or meretricious but  no matter  if they manage to catch  the eye. It is here where art and  mass media can  and  do marry.
It is very difficult to see how this can  possibly happen  with literature.  It  must be evident even to those who have been litterateurs from infancy  (if indeed there is any other kind)  that  literature  has worked itself out of all but a highly special­ ized audience.  This is not because electronic media suddenly  gave man  back his integrity, for the death  of literature  as a potentially demotic force seems to have long antedated  radio  and  TV.  Maybe the American  and  French  revolutions co­ incided, in the West any way, with the rejection of literature  as  a possible instru­ ment for general  public  use and  its consignment to the  aristocrat's  attic. To  the unlettered  the written  word cannot often have been friendly and hence was with­ out much  support  in the  new dispensation.
Alternatively  others  would  say that  the  common  man's  instinct  warned  him
that literary men tended  to be inhuman and therefore not to be emulated. George Steiner points out that some of the men who devised and administered  Auschwitz "had  been trained  to read  Shakespeare or Goethe, and  continued  to do so." He wonders whether  there is not "between  the tenor of moral intelligence developed in the study of literature and that required in social and political choice, a wide gap or contrariety." Steiner may be voicing the unspoken suspicion of non-literary man.
At any rate,  literature  has been shelved, and one limb has been decaying after another: as a form with a potentially public appeal  poetry dropped  off long ago; drama  as literature is insupportable; only porno and Judaism  keep the novel breathing.
All this is not solely because of a sociological shift. We have to recognize that literature's  need to petrify what is inherently fluid -language-makes it go out of date  much  more  readily  than  the other  arts. I  wonder  if we realize not only how difficult, but  how incomprehensible  centuries  of literature  are  to  those who are  not cognoscenti.  Indeed  by a reverse of the geometric  progression in  which we glory I  dare  say  that  today  25 years is the  maximum   period  requiring  no major  readjustment by the ordinary  reader of English. For consider this passage written  just outside  the  limit,  published  27 years ago.  Many  critics would  con­ sider this writer's  style preeminently  limpid  and  unvarnished. But read  him  now not as a critic but  as an ordinary  reader, in 1970:
I had a naturally ingenious and constructive mind and the taste of writing. I was youthfully zealous of good fame. There seemed few ways of which a writer need not be ashamed by which he could make a decent living. To produce something


9

LITERATURE AND  MASS MEDIA



saleable  in  large  quantities to  the  public,  which  had  absolutely nothing of myself in it; to sell something for  which  the  kind  of  people  I liked  and  respected  would have  a  use;  that  was what  I sought  and  detective stories  fulfilled  the  purpose.6

They don't talk  like that any  more. Maybe they  don't because of  mass  media, which  brings us  back  to  the  beginning. Certainly there are  points of  contact  be­ tween literature and mass  media, but  they  are  very  tenuous: quirks of style,  un­ easy  satire. Contact can  never  be  more  adhesive, for  literature and   mass  media are  antipathetic in  function and  in form  and  we do  not  know how  to  make  them friends.7



FOOTNOTES

1 This  composite  figure  is a  very rough  amalgamation of  BBM  and  CDNPA figures and  data  from  various  broadcast listening  and  viewing  surveys  published in  Mar­ keting  over  the  past  two  years. However  since  the  bases of  the  various  studies  are dissimilar   the  extent   of  weighting   needed  to  yield  a  composite figure  affects  the reliability. The  latest  composite  U.S.  figure,  no  doubt cobbled  together  from  dif­ ferent  studies  in  the  same  way, is reported   in  the  statement on  Violence in  Tele­ vision   Entertainment   Programmes issued   by  the   National   Commission  on   the Causes  and  Prevention of Violence  on  September 23,  I 969  as  follows:  "a  typical middle-income  American  male  devotes  a  total   of  about  five  hours   a  day  to  the mass  media."
2   The  Sunday  Times  has a fair  sized "quality" audience but  the  News of the World's circulation is four  times bigger and  the latter  indeed  claims  to reach  4I  per  cent  of all  the  adults  in  Britain   (British  Rates  and  Data, December I968). The   Atlantic shows  a circulation of 325,I67  (in  Standard  Rates  and  Data, December 27,  I969 where  it is listed  as a 'class publication')  but  Readers  Digest shows  I 7,585,6 I I  cir­ culation in the  same  issue.
s Readers  Digest claims  a readership of 40 million  adults, I2. I  million  of whom  are "college-educated" representing "42.6%  of all people  who  have  gone  to college"  in the  United States.  (Advertising  Age, January 5,  I970. page  34).
4  Even  if  it  can  be  argued   that  "literature" is delicately geared   to  the  hierarchical range  of  man  so  that   what   the  naive  reader   takes  from  True   Romance  may  be identical with  what  a more  mature reader  takes  from  Anna  Karenina,  that  Arthur Hailey  and  Robert Lowell  provide  the  same  insights   but  to  different classes,  the hierarchy and  the  classes remain.
5  Steiner, George,  Language and Silence. I967.
6  Waugh, Evelyn,  Work  Suspended,  first  published  I943·
7  It's  impossible  not  to disagree  with  John  R. Seeley  (Time's Future in Our  Time); "Let  us be clear  that  at least one course will not  be open  to us. We will not  be able to afford,  because  it  will be unworkable, a society  whose  'cultural' divisions  run  as deep,  and  whose cultural discrepancies rise as high,  as do  the  present  discrepancies and  divisions  in  wealth  and  income." But  it  cuts  no ice  to state  it. The only  solu­ tion  is to let literature, at  least, go hang.

10




THE DECLINE
OF WORDS IN DRAMA



Mavor Moore




IN Jo v cE's  Finnegan's Wake,  a  play ;. announced  which never takes place. H.  C. Earwicker  dreams it up in his dream,  for  presentation
at  the  Feenichts  Playhouse. It is "adopted   from  the  Ballymooney  Bloodriddon Murther by Bluechin  Blackdillain  ( authorways  'Big Storey')." It is a  pity  we never  had  the  play, for  if the  dialogue  had  been in  the same  style -language mocking  language -it  might  have  suggested  that  in  the  theatre   words  have reached  the end  of the line. Joyce ducked the challenge by making  Earwicker's play a Mime. But in Samuel Becket's recent forty-second epic Br.eath, words are dispensed with  and  vocal communication  reaches the  zenith of abstraction:  in­ halation,  baby's cry, exhalation.
Finnegan's Wake was published in 1939. The  previous year the French  icono­ clast Antonin  Artaud  had  published  his Le Theatre et son  Double, in  which  he sought  to  demolish  the literary  basis of theatre  in favour  of the  "concrete lan­ guage" of the stage, which "is truly theatrical only to the degree that  the thoughts  it expresses are beyond the reach of the spoken language." Artaud's proscription applied  equally  to the written  text. "The  fixation of the  theatre  in one language
... betokens its imminent  ruin, the choice of any one language  betraying  a taste
for the special effects of that language;  and the dessication of the language accompanies  its limitation."
Has this ruin already overtaken  us?
Artaud  saw at the root of our times' confusion "a  rupture  between  things and words,  between  things  and  the  ideas  and  signs that  are  their  representation." Wanting  a theatre  which would "break  through  language in order  to touch  life", he cursed  our  "artistic  dallying  with forms, instead  of being  like victims  burnt at  the stake, signalling  through  the  flames."  He makes a frontal  assault  on  the whole canon  of dramatic literature:


II

THE DECLINE OF WORDS IN  DRAMA



We must get rid of our superstitious valuation  of texts and  written  poetry ... Let the  dead  poets make way for others. Then  we might  even come  to see that  it is our  veneration  for what  has already  been created,  however valid and  beautiful  it may  be, that  petrifies us, deadens  our  responses, and  prevents  us from  making contact  with  that  underlying  power,  call  it  thought-energy,  the  life  force ... or anything  you like. Beneath the poetry of the texts there is the actual  poetry,  with­ out  form  and  without  text. And  just as the  efficacy of masks in  the  magic  prac­ tices of certain  tribes is exhausted -and these masks are no longer  good for any­ thing  except museums- so the poetic efficacy of a text is  exhausted.
In order  to survive, Artaud insists, the theatre must  make  capital of "what differentiates it from  text, pure  speech,  literature, and  all other  fixed  and  written means  ... On   the  stage,  which  is  above  all  a  space   to  fill  and   a  place  where something happens, the language of words  may  have  to give  way  before  a  lan­ guage  of  signs whose objective  aspect  is the  one  which  has  the  most  immediate impact upon  us."  Even  when  words  are  used,  he  wants  them  used  differently: "Let  there  be  a return   to the  active,  plastic,  respiratory sources  of  language, let words  be  joined  again  to the  physical  motions  that  gave  them  birth,  and  let  the discursive, logical  aspect  of speech  disappear beneath its  affective,  physical  side, i.e., let  the  words  be heard  in  their  sonority  rather than  be exclusively  taken  for what  they mean  grammatically ... "
Like the  philosopher Hume, and  like MacLuhan in our  own  day,  Artaud is of course  sitting  out  on  a  limb  and  sawing  himself  from   the  trunk   with  his  own argument: using  words  to plead  that  words  no longer  plead  well. But  like them he cannot be easily dismissed. If professors of English  literature do  no more  than smile loftily at his impertinent depreciation of their  vested interest, and  if  theatre­ goers  who  crowd  the  latest  "happening" have  never  heard of  him,  Artaud has proved  too prophetic to be put  down  as a crank  hypothesist. Like  most  prophets, however, he was less a foreseer than  a seer, observing  around him  currents whose direction and  force  others  less percipient underestimated. In  retrospect, we  can see how  it happened. From  the  vantage point  of  today's spontaneous and  often improvised theatre, more apt  to reveal  bodies than  minds, and  even from  the cal­ culated laryngeal ritual  of such groups  as Grotowski's Polish  Laboratory Theatre, we can  see the  chain  of now seemingly  inevitable steps  which  led  us here.  What Artaud did  not  perhaps allow  for,  in  his  concentration on  the  live  theatre, was the  possibility  that  if his diagnosis  was  correct  the  film  might  displace  the  stage  as a dramatic form  for  the  general  public,  and  the  theatre itself -like a  virgin protesting her purity  -lose more in  popularity than  it gained  in self-esteem.
I do  not  propose  to deal  here  with  the  traditional arts  of mime  and  dance, or


12

THE DECLINE OF  WORDS IN  DRAMA



with the more recent silent cinema,  which have always been primarily  wordless, but  with those fonns  of dramatic art  traditionally  employing  a verbal  text:  the play (known  as "straight" in the theatre), the opera  ( seria and buff a), the musi­ cal comedy, and  the dramatic film-although the categories have become some­ what blurred.  I wish to suggest the various influences which seem-at an  aston­ ishing  pace-to  be shaping  the  theatre  and  the lyric theatre  of today  and  to­ morrow, and  which  may change  forever the anatomy  of dramatic  criticism.
It  is no  news, of course,  that  the  television age inclines even literate  people
to think visually-a habit  which President Pusey of Harvard feared  would lead us to "think  with  the eye's mind  instead of the mind's  eye." But I  hope  we are beyond the point where any but a sheltered philosopher would claim that  the stimulation  of the mind  is antithetical  to sensory awareness, or even that  verbal language  is always the best means of expressing thought, let alone emotion.
I have never seen the  beginnings of the anti-verbal  theatre  traced  to  Maeter­ linck, but  when  that  volatile  theorist noted that  the most exciting  drama  in  the world went on inside the head of an old man sitting quietly by the fire, he plainly started  something.  Chekhov  was possibly the first great  playwright  to exploit  the possibility of achieving  a  kind  of reverse suspense by  having  his characters   do nothing  until  you were  ready  to scream.  Often  nothing  ever  happened  -and that  was the point  of it,  just as later it became  the point  of Waiting  for Godot. But  while  waiting  for  nothing  to  happen,  and  getting  stirred  up  by  pregnant pauses, may  provide  welcome  variety  and  plenty  of food  for  thought   between stretches of activity, it is fundamentally  an  interstice-and certainly  not one  of the  colourful  and  sensually exciting kind  which  provides  the  escape from  daily toil so often  required  of the  theatre, whether  verbal or spectacular.

BY FAR   THE   MOST  POPULAR form  of  theatre  today  is the
"musical", the  main  features  of which  (despite  the  label)   are  scenic spectacle
and  dancing.  The  effect of the musical on the straight  play has been  to  arouse a demand  for equally galvanic frenzy in the staging of even the most relentlessly verbal  drama, usually  at  the expense of the dialogue. It is one thing  to see this kind  of hyperthyroid   mise-en-scene  in  works written  for  the style, such  as The Great  White  Hope   or  Indians, but  another  to see  Euripides  and  Shakespeare used as raw  material  for  Walpurgisnacht. Moreover  the increasing  use of some form  of thrust  or  apron  stage -a  fashion  largely  popularized  in  our  time  by Ontario's Stratford   Festival  Theatre-has  made  constant   movement   manda-

THE DECLINE OF WORDS IN  DRAMA



tory:  in order  to  share  their  favours with  the surrounding audience,  the  actors must  resolve continuously-all too often  with  the  result  that  half the  audience gets the  first half  of a line and  the other  half  the  second.  Speeches  are  not so much  cut as lopped.
The  musical, or its hyperactive equivalent  in the straight  play, is usually  care­
fully choreographed  and "set''.  But a different style characterizes  the  free-wheel­ ing improvisation  of groups such as the Living Theatre,  where  dialogue is often made  up by the performers as the play progresses (or  whatever it does)  and  in­ volves the more exhibitionistic of the audience  as well. Much  of the  burden  of communication is also put  on sighs, wails, shrieks,  grunts  and  other  vocal  but non-verbal  expressions -all of which a writer is hard  put  to  codify by anything more exact than  "Oh !" or "Grrr !" In  fact the dramatist, in  this pluralistic kind of theatre, is no more than his title:  "The  word-man."
If it is true  that  operas are first and  foremost  musical  compositions, we need
not concern ourselves with libretti except as singable collections of vowels and consonants;  I do not agree with this, although  we may enjoy opera  in a foreign language  qua  music. But contemporary  opera  often  exploits speech patterns  and rhythms, and sometimes uses the very same improvisation  and  word-begging vocables that  characterize  our  "straight" theatre.  Here  is a stage-direction  from the electronic opera  Stacked  Deck,  by the U.S. composers Richard  Maxfield and Dick Higgins:

If the light is red or orange for ten seconds [note that  the  cue is visual and  me­ chanical, not musical],  he approaches the nearest lady and looks over her shoul­ der, grinning, and sends out a puff of smoke. If the light has not changed yet, and the lady has not reacted unfavourably, he may pick her up, set her on  his shoul­ der, turn his head and kiss her leg, grin, set her down gently, and motion offstage. If she slaps him, he sings "Palas aron azinomas" [gibberish]  and  pinches her be­ hind,  then dodges away from her, his head drawn  into  his  shoulders, chortling, and hides behind the nearest character. If she wants to go offstage, they go.

What  has happened  to bring us to this pass, it seems to me, is only intelligible if we view the theatre,  both "straight" and lyric, in the context of the mechanical dramatic arts  of film and  television with which  we are  surrounded, and  of the new mechanical  means which technology has at the same  time made available  to the live theatre.
While it is true that radio, and sound recordings, provided an unparalleled opportunity for  a  flowering of  the spoken  word  (and  still  do,  if  for  a  smaller audience), and while it is true that music and "sound  effects" have always played

THE DECLINE OF  WORDS IN  DRAMA



an important role in live theatre,  the new technology has given us an immensely wider range of both visual and aural effects than  the theatre  possessed before. In film, moreover,  all  possible effects can  be used together, can  be carefully  con­ trolled and  matched, and  be  just as carefully measured for  proper  amplification wherever the film is shown. Almost for the first time, that is to say, these elements are not necessarily separate  and then wedded, not different and then blended, but facets or aspects of a singly conceived artistic whole. The  words which characters  in  the drama  are called  upon  to say or sing, then, are  only  one  of these facets, and  by no means  necessarily the  most important.  (In  fact,  the  effect is always funny  when  a character  says something which we have  already visually compre­ hended.)   This  is particularly  obvious in the case of  the close-up, where  a slight movement  of the eyes, or a breaking strand  of rope, can literally speak volumes. A sting in the  music, a sound  effect, or a switch in  its source, can  do  the same. The  performer  needs neither  to explain  nor to  project.
Some of the  technological  advances that  have enlarged  the live  theatre's  ar­
moury  of  effects  need  hardly  be  mentioned: sophisticated  lighting,  front   and rear-projection, stereophonic  sound, infinitely mobile scenery, and  the  like. And as with  film, they  can  be  used as aspects of a  whole. But  while most  of  these reduce  the need for wordage  to inform  the audience  of what  is going on,  there are other  influences,  many  of them less obvious, which  have  contributed  to  the decline of the word.
One such is amplification  itself. The film has accustomed our ears to amplified sound.  We do not  have to strain  to grasp a whisper in a movie-house;  it grasps us. Hi-fi recordings and  electronic musical instruments  have further  deafened  us, to the  point  where  we can  either  quickly understand  what  we are  meant  to or ignore words or lyrics if comprehension is immaterial.  In either case we have be­ come unwilling to reach  for speech-especially in many of the huge  barns into which  the economics of modern  theatre  has forced our  productions.  This  devel­ opment  faced  the theatre  with a difficult choice:  either amplify or go  "intimate"
-intimacy being best achieved by what  the films cannot  offer, an  audience surrounding   the  players and  even actual  physical contact  between  them.  Most musicals  (which  must play in larger auditoriums)   use amplification  throughout, even though  this means sacrificing all subtlety  in the delivery of the lines, since Inicrophones reduce the range of the voice. Most straight  plays turn instead to "audience involvement". It is not by chance that the greatest international theat­ rical success of the moment,  the musical Hair,  does both.
Fihns have had  another  little noticed effect on the course of theatre.  To  make

THE DECLINE OF  WORDS IN DRAMA



a  profit,  a  film  requires  international distribution -and  since  the  coming  of "talkies"  language   (in  the  narrow  sense of  one  tongue)   has  proved  a  serious stumbling  block. Neither  sub-titles  nor  dubbing  meets  the  problem  more  than half  way, since we generally notice only as much  of the dialogue  as we have  to and concentrate  on the picture. We have thus acquired,  as an audience, a second habit  inimical to spoken language: a tendency  to disregard  what is being said in favour  of what  is being shown. To  prove  the  point  one  need  only compare  a twenty-year-old  film on its TV  rerun  with  most  of the  newer  productions:   the purple  passage has  given  way  to  the  grunt,   which  needs  no  translation.  Our dramatic heroes reflect the trend;  the Stanley  Kowalskis and  Willy Lomans  of this world are  not  notably articulate.  The  point  I wish to  make  here is not  the critical  cliche that  they are anti-heroes, but  that  the less articulate  they are, the more easily the stage-play translates into a film-which is much  more widely distributable  than  the stage-play -and  the  more  easily the  film translates  into Jugoslavian,  or what-have-you.  Actions not only speak  louder  than  words;  they seldom need an interpreter.
This  presents the  playwright  or  the lyricist, naturally,   with  a  serious problem
when  he wishes to make  these inarticulate  slobs express themselves in  anything resembling fine words. But here we must note still another,  perhaps  less  impor­ tant,  way in  which  the international reach  of film has  down-graded  speech. A primary  dramatic  function  of speech used to be the  differentiation  of  character  by nationality  (accent)   or class (dialect) . When  the Japanese watch  Mary  Pop­ pins spout  Japanese,  or  "transatlantic" English  replaces  British  and  American educated  speech, or assorted European  actors pretend  to belong to one family  (as they often do in films), national  distinctions go out of the window; one can only conclude  that  we are getting deaf to them.  Furthermore,  the democratization of our  whole social life-in  which  the films have  played  a  major  role-increas­ ingly makes nonsense of verbal class distinction. When presidents are less eloquent than  plumbers, even with the help of ghost-writers, speech becomes a poor index of status.




BuT THE  FILM,  when  all is said  and  done,  merely restricts the role of speech. It cannot be held responsible for the curious fact that language itself, whether spoken or written, seems to have become suspect-a  victim, per­ haps, of over-exposure. For  more is being said  and  written  today  than  ever  be-

x6

THE DECLINE OF  WORDS IN  DRAMA



fore, and  it  is all being given  much  wider circulation  than  ever  before,  mainly through  radio,  television, pocket-books, magazines and  the daily press. This seem­ ing anomaly -the  proliferation  of wordage on the one hand,  and  the shrinkage of its role in  that  mirror  of mankind,  the theatre,  on  the  other-disappears if we  note  two  things:  first,  that  all means  of  communication,  including  spoken and  written  speech as only two of many, are  proliferating;  and second,  that  the coinage of language  (in its narrow sense)  has  become debased.
The  chief responsibility for this, I believe, lies with the ubiquitous  advertising industry.  This  stricture  is not  likely to give any  advertiser  I  know  a  moment's unease, nor to worry his clients. We admire the word-jugglery of the modern promoter, and often succumb to his blandishments;  but in the process we have developed,  as a  defense-mechanism,  a  deep  distrust  of  verbal  cleverness of  all kinds. I do  not  mean  we do  not enjoy  verbal felicities, only  that  we no longer take  them  for  truth.  The  credibility  gap,  that  typical  lesion of  the  sixties and seventies, is caused as much by disenchantment  with words as by fondness for activism.
And that,  I take it, is what  Artaud  meant  by the "rupture between  things and
words,  between  things  and  the  ideas  and  signs that  are  their  representation." Apply this explanation  to the theatre,  and we are forced to ask whether,  after the preciousness of Wilde, the  prolixity of O'Neill,  the inanities  of Coward,  the  ob­ scurities of Eliot, our  dramatic speech  has not  worn itself impossibly thin.  Cer­ tainly the Theatre of the Absurd  has shown  us that  there is a vein to be  mined in turning  language  in upon itself, verbal jokes played at the expense of  language
-but is not  this the  very confession of bankruptcy  to  which  Artaud   referred? Is it not the beginning of an end?
The  question  is hardly  rhetorical, since our academies persist in  revering texts
which  would  appear  to have  become irrelevant,  persist in  ignoring  (or  at  least slighting)  all languages  which  cannot  be  printed  and  bound,  and  persist in  be­ lieving what so many of their students  apparently  no longer believe:  that  words get closer to life than  any other  means of contact or communication. Our  Eng­ lish Departments, and  other  Departments  of Literature,  are-with  a  very  few honourable  exceptions-the sturdiest  guardians  of this perishable  doctrine,  and not  unnaturally. But  they  are  manning  a  Maginot  Line.  Their  students,  when they are not learning  the new language  of film (with  precious little help, in most cases), echo Eliza in My  Fair  Lady:
Don't talk of stars
Shining above:

THE DECLINE OF WORDS IN  DRAMA



If you're  in love
Show me!

I grant  you that  Eliza sings (or says)  this to her swain, and  that  they couldn't get along without  words. Nobody wants to get along  without  words, surely. And surely -most important  of all-it is not a question of words versus other means of  communication  or expression. The  case, it  seems  to  me,  is  that  words  for thousands  of years carried, magnificently, a  burden  which  they  may  now share with other extensions of man, no less subtle or powerful, and  capable  of as much sophistication  and  profundity. There  are functions  which  words will continue  to perform  better  than  any other  means, and  functions  which  may  now  be better served by words among other means. The  text may even be primus inter  pares­ but this is not yet a status generally acceptable  to our academies.
"Why should we refuse", wrote Macneile Dixon in 1935 in his The  Human Situation, "to  admit  the infinite complexity,  the innumerable windows  through which the soul may view the astonishing landscape?"
The  theatre,  in all its forins, is exploring  the landscape  through  new windows,
as it must.





























18




CANADIAN  ARTISTS AS WRITERS
 





Peter Stevens





QL KANE was probably  the lin!t paintcr  to attempt a delib­
erate  delineation  of the land  and  its people, as he makes clear in the Preface  to
his journals, Wanderings Of An  Artist  Among  The  Indians  of North  America. He sees his paintings  as having not simply an aesthetic value, but also an intrinsic value to the historian,  for he is interested in depicting  Indian  costumes and  cus­ toms as well as the  "scenery  of an almost unknown  country."  A. Y. Jackson  in A  Painter's Country  claims  that  Kane's  paintings "furnish  a  valuable  record  of the  country  and  the  people  but  as works of art  they  are  not  very important". This  view is fairly common: Kane  is seen as a mere  forerunner  of the  photog­ rapher,  not  as a  very original  painter,  for his  paintings  and  drawings  show  no real individuality. The same might be said about the written  record of his travels.
For  the  most  part  Wanderings  Of An  Artist is written  in an  unadventurous, anonymous  prose but at  times there are flashes in it of a more interesting  writer. Certainly  he  writes clearly  about  the customs, the  ceremonies, the songs of  the Indians  (lacking  the understanding and sympathy that  the Indian  painter George Clutesi shows in  his recent  Potlatch  but  lacking  the  overly flamboyant  style of Clutesi as well)  but  expresses, despite his life-long interest  in the Indians,  a  sus­ picious mistrust of them.  He recounts on one occasion how sorry he was to leave a party of Indians  for he had "experienced  many acts of kindness at their  hands, hardly to be expected from so wild and uncultivated  a people." He is unrelenting in his description  of their filth and ugliness. He finds their language  a  barbarous  splutter,  but he does sense something of their doom, even though  he has no criti­ cism for the way the Hudson's  Bay Company  treats the Indians, for he maintains that  the  Company   pursues  a  "just  and  strict  course ... in  the  conduct  of  the whole of their immense traffic." Yet he sees "that  opening  up the trade  with  the Indians  to all who wish indiscriminately to  engage in it, must lead  to their anni­ hilation."  Thus,  there  lurks an elegaic tone behind the records  both in the paint­  ing and in the  writing.

CANADIAN ARTISTS  AS WRITERS



Kane  is impressed by the grandeur  of the country  and  includes some descrip tive matter  about  the landscape. He discusses the buffalo herds and  the waste in­ volved in their  hunting,  but  joins in  the hunt  wholeheartedly.  Kane  constantly understates  the rigours of his journey. He underplays  the fear  and  the  terror  he felt  in  facing  some  of  the  tribes,  his  tenacity  in  accomplishing  long  journeys through  western winters, his stubborn  courage  in pursuing  his objectives.
In a sense, then, Kane explored the land physically, captured  it and its inhabi­ tants  by means  of his art  and  ironically enough  gave  a  kind  of  immortality  to those Indians  he himself saw as doomed. He relates the Indian idea that by being painted,  a  human  somehow  was drained; painting  somehow  curtailed  life. On one occasion Kane  was told this by the mother  of an  Indian  girl he was sketch­ ing.  Kane  replied  by "assuring  her it  was more  likely to  prolong"  her  life. He seems rather  prosaic  at  times, for instance,  when  he  listens carefully  to  Indian  legends, then dismisses them with the comment  that  they are  "the  fanciful  crea­ tions of their superstitious credulity."
But an irony, intentional  or not, breaks into  the flatly straightforward account every now and  again  to give the reader  a fuller  notion  of Kane's  character. He watches a scalp dance for about four or five hours, "seeing  no variation  in it, nor any likelihood of its termination" and is thus "deeply  impressed with the sincerity of a grief which could endure such violent monotony  for so long a period." Dur­ ing one  journey the travellers find a cache of butter  hidden  the year  before, and Kane  laconically remarks, "it proved an acquisition  to our larder although  its age had  not improved  its flavour."
After the often painful and terrifying journey across Canada and  back, during
which  Kane  tries to  keep his civilized demeanour and  opinions,  at  least in  the even prose of the book, he finds on his return  that  "the  greatest  hardship  I had to endure,  was the difficulty in trying to sleep in a civilized bed."  So he had  dis­ covered the grandeur  and  beauty of the land  almost in spite of himself. Perhaps it really had  reached  under  Kane's skin, even if it  rarely  digs into  the staid  sur­ face of the prose of his journal.


EMILY  CARR  was much  more  sympathetic   towards  the  In­ dians,  and  Klee  Wyck  is full of her  concern  for  them,  and  her  willingness to accept  their  legends and  their  customs. When  she learned  that  the  old  Indians
in Ucluelet believed, as Kane's Indians did, that a picture did harm to the model, Emily Carr  refused  to paint  the old  Indians.  She  didn't   want  to damage  their

20

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS  WRITERS



belief, for "down  deep  we all hug something. The  great  forest hugs its silence. The  sea  and  the  air  hug  the  spilled  cries of sea-birds.  The  forest  hugs  only silence; its birds and  even its beasts are mute."  There speaks a much  more  indi­ vidual  voice than  Kane's.  Of  course, Emily Carr  wrote much  more  than  Kane, books devoted  to certain  segments  of her  life:  her  days  with  the  Indians, her childhood,   her  time  as  a  landlady   as  well  as  other  collections  of   her   prose sketches. These  segments  are  brought  together  in  her  autobiography   Growing Pains.
She  stresses the  pain  in  her  career  from  the  early  opposition  of  her  family through  the  misunderstanding of  her  teachers  and  her  neglect  of  painting  in order  to survive,  to  her  acceptance  as an  artist.  There  is no question  that  her whole life  was  centred  around  Canada, or  at  least  her  idea  of  the  Canadian west, a landscape  teeming  with  power, relentless in its swirling fertility  and  mys­ tery, just as she portrayed  it in her forest scenes. Her autobiography expresses her early interest in, and  deep  response to the forest, an immersion in  the woods "to be felt not with fingertips  but  with one's whole self." She  expresses her first en­ counter  with  the  forest:  "tree  boles pillared  the forest's  roof, and  streaked  the unfathomable forest like gigantic  rain streaks pouring, the surge of growth  from the forest's floor boiled up to meet it."
In  Europe she feels a great  need to return  to the west. Epping  Forest can  sus­ tain  her  only for  a day, for it  has no "turmoil  of undergrowth." She  discovers something  of the haunted  mysterious quality of her Canadian forest in Treganna Wood in  Cornwall  but  always she is obsessed by the  Canadian  landscape.  Per­ haps  the  best single section  of her  autobiography  is her  account of her  visit to the  Cariboo  country,  for  her  writing  here  is as  vigorous  as  her  painting,  full of resilient language,  a  little  exotic  and  quaint,  but  boisterous,  full  of  life, as she  plunges  whole-heartedly  into  tough  and  rough  space  after  the  meekness of England.
Her writing also gives some clear portraits of the people she came into contact with, although  at times it seems impossible that  one person could  meet so many eccentric  people in one lifetime. Emily herself emerges as a somewhat  eccentric, slightly dotty  person but  a woman with great  tenacity of purpose. Her  despair at being unrecognized  and  at being dismissed as an insignificant artist comes out occasionally in such remarks  as this, dropped  almost casually into  the  narrative: "it  was then  that  I made  myself into an envelope into  which  I could  thrust  my work deep, lick the flap, seal it from everybody."
Unlike  Kane,  Emily  Carr  often  talks about  what  she is trying  to  do  in  her


21

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS WRITERS



painting.  She talks of her own ideas in relation  to what she is taught,  clinging to her own belief in herself. She seems to immerse herself in her art  as much  as she does in the forest, so that the one becomes the other. It is a total response through art  to life in order  to get at  the essence, such  as she  recognized  in  Indian  art: "Our Indians  get down to stark  reality." She wants  to express the surge of life, the  "continual  shove of growing" she sees in  the forest and  it is no wonder she continually  returns  to images  of water  to  describe  her  view of  art  and  of  the forest. She sees art  as "a  fluid process" just as she sees the forest as being  "sub­ merged beneath  a drown of undergrowth."
Words become for her almost as important as her painting, even though she concentrated on it only during the last years of her life. She had kept a note-book with her when she painted in order to try to express the core of what she wanted to paint  and she found  that in words she could  present  "essentials only,  discard­ ing everything of minor importance  ... This saying in words as well as in colour and form gave me double approach." Emily Carr,  then, comes to terms with the land  through  a total response and  commitment  to her own ideas about  art,  writ­ ing  and  life. Both  her  painting  and  her  books  (despite  some  over-writing  and some sentimentalizing)   give a sense of real  joy in  her  work  with  an  underlying bitterness,  although  this rarely breaks into explicit statement.
A. Y. Jackson  has travelled all over Canada  and  has led a full, active artistic life, yet I find  his autobiography  A  Painter•s Country  a  rather  colourless book. Certainly  the main facts of his life are recorded  and some sections rise above the generally flat tone, most notably his accounts of painting  trips with Dr. Frederick Banting  and  Lawren  Harris.  Often,  however, Jackson  seems deliberately  to miss opportunities.  For instance, he dismisses his early European experience simply by saying "we  had  a most thrilling  time" and  he off-handedly  refers to his involve­ ment in a mutiny in the army without developing it in the narrative.  He does not expand  on  the  reactions  to  the  Group  of Seven's  work shown  at  the  Wembley Exhibition,  as he feels most  readers  will have  read  about  the  controversy,  not realizing  that  most readers would be interested  in  his own  personal  reactions  as one  of the  painters  involved. In  fact,  Jackson  is curiously  uninformative about how he became interested in art and gives only the barest details about  his paint­ ing. He faces the problem of the country itself, the problem of painting  a country not  "mellowed  by time and  human  association." He  recognizes how  certain  as­ pects of the country  lend themselves to different  kinds of painting; he, in  fact, suggests how Lawren  Harris  may have  changed  to abstraction   through  contact with the mountains: "The  Colin Range  was an amazing  place, a kind of cubists'


22

CANADIAN ARTISTS  AS  WRITERS



paradise  full of geometric  formations,  all waiting for the abstract  painter."
Of course, Jackson  writes of his fellow painters with some insight, so his auto­
biography  is enlivened  by his portraits  of J. E. H.  MacDonald, Lawren  Harris and Tom  Thomson.  He has a somewhat dry sense of humour, especially in deal­
ing with some of the characters  he met in his travels. However,  I think  a reader would  do  well to  consult  A.  Y.'s  Canada  as  well as  the  autobiography for  a clearer  picture  of Jackson.  Unfortunately, the text by Naomi  Jackson  Greves is by turns  excessively cloying or  self-consciously literary,  but  it  contains  passages from  letters and  journals  by Jackson  which expand  parts  of the  autobiography. At times Jackson  puts his reaction to the landscape into words in his unpublished journal: "It is a bleached out landscape, bare of vegetation, shale beaches strewn with debris, pieces of boats, canvas, pulleys, and Franklin's  water barrels grouped round  the roofless house, many of the barrels full of water.  Some bore great  rips of bears'  claws on  them."  He  sees the  country  as giving  "a  prodigious  cosmic thrill"  but  is not swamped  by it.  He feels the artist  is finally responsible  to his art,  not simply to a recording  of the country:

The artist is not dependent on old houses and barns. The old and the new are all grist to the artist's mill. There are colours and forms, and lines of movement and varying effects of light, and if there is less ready-made stuff then  it is up to the artist not only to observe but to emphasize and create and  to give his own  inter­ pretation to what he sees.

Jackson's  writing  is a kind of compendium  of camping  hints,  with some  por­ traits,  told  in  a simple if somewhat  flat  style, lightened  occasionally  by  laconic humour  that  breaks out  at  times into  critical comment  on  Canadian  neglect of art  and of the country.  He complains that  we are still locked in  philistinism and that  we have  given  over  too  much  to  the Americans.  Nowadays,  he  says, the Canadian Arctic "has  become as remote as Wall Street. If a Canadian wishes to visit the Canadian Arctic, he has to get permission from Washington."



kERE IS A   poetic streak in Jackson  which manifests  itself in his colour notations.  One  of his drawings  has this reminder  of colouring  written on  it: "water   warm  silver;  reflex green;  willow bright  orange;   old  fireweed; dwarf  birch"-almost  a plain imagist-like poem.
Of course, some of the Group  of Seven painters wrote  poetry:  J. E. H. Mac­ Donald  wrote some  nature  poetry  and  light  verse and  in  1922 Lawren  Harris

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS WRITERS



published  a collection of free verse pieces, Contrasts. This  poetry in general con­ sists of descriptive  catalogues in  somewhat  stodgy  and  artificial  language.  The volume  expresses  a  Whitmanesque   optimism,  embracing   all   humanity    (later Harris  was to say that his creed was "art  for man's  sake").  Harris  in his poetry and  in his art is a great Yea-Sayer;  he considers it blasphemy  "To  say nay, nay, and smile at aspirations, dreams and visions". He believes in no system and wants man  to respond freely to external reality to reach some transcendental quality.
These ideas crop up in Harris' essays as well as in his poems. A beautiful volume of  Harris'  paintings  published by Macmillan  is garnished  with statements  from Harris'  writings assembled by R. G. P. Colgrave, and Harris'  ideas about the trans­ cendental  qualities  of Canadian landscape  are  expressed  here  explicitly.  Harris acknowledges  the effect of the North  on his paintings  but its grandeur  is deeper than  a  mere surface  presentation  in  painting,  for  the  North  is "a  source  of  a flow of beneficent informing cosmic powers behind  the bleakness  and  barrenness and  austerity  of much  of the land."  Harris  finds the land  "mostly  virgin,  fresh and  full-replenishing."
One remembers that Emily Carr dedicated her autobiography to Harris and certainly  her idea of art as a "fluid  process" seems close to Harris'  notion of art as a total  response in each individual,  "an  urge to inner  activity".  Art is "a  dy­ namic  bridge between opposites". Harris  reaches beyond  Emily Carr's  insistence on stark  reality to "the  idea of a universal order  achieved  by giving  oneself fully to the particular." Art's function  (and  this sounds very modern  and  psychedelic) "is to enlarge our consciousness" so that it "leads  us both to find ourselves in our environment and  to give that  environment   new  and  more  far-reaching   mean­ ing."  Harris  insists that  we should  react  to  life around  us  "in  terms  of direct, immediate  experience."  All these expressions about  expanded consciousness and the going through  a directly perceived object  to some cosmic revelation  without being trapped  in a systematic approach  is related  to  his move into abstract  paint­ ing, for he once suggested that  the abstract expressionist manner  in painting  was "an  extension of experience beyond the  range  of realistic painting."
Harris'  poetry contains at times some implicit condemnation of modem  civiliz­
ation  and  industrialism, but in general Canadian painters  until recently have not indulged  in written social criticism. There  is no equivalent  to Borduas' manifesto in English-Canada. Jackson complains in his autobiography of Canada's  neglect of culture.  Greg Curnoe sends out occasional anarchic  blasts from  London, On­ tario,  even including  written  messages in some of his paintings.  The  nearest  we come  to  a  painter  as social critic  is Harold  Town  in  his  statements  made  on

24

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS WRITERS



various TV  and  radio shows and especially in the prefatory  essay to that  strange series of drawings,  Enigmas. These drawings are full of Amazonian  women sub­ jugating,  trapping, humiliating   man,  although  the  final  drawing,   three  black shapes  (presumably  men)  standing  on some of these Amazonians,  may  give rise to a vague optimism.
The  prefatory  essay does  not  explain  the  drawings,  but  is a  rambunctious
attack  on  things  Canadian. He  fires at  the usual targets:  erosion and  pollution (our  foremost  national  products), the  Canada   Council  ("relentlessly  dedicated to the discovery and  deification of mediocrity"), the Senate,  the discrepancy  be­ tween law and  justice, Americanization,  Canadian  womanhood,  and  Puritanism.
Canadians  have  no  real  concern  for  themselves as  Canadians   nor  for  the country.  They  love sports and  spend  more money on them  than  on culture  and the  curing  of  disease. They  see no  potential  in  their  resources:   "We   possess sweeping  forests, consequently  we insist on  importing  furniture from  the  little country  of Denmark, made  from  wood grown  in Africa,  and  held  together  by paltry  platitudes  of design."
What  saves this essay from  being merely a rather  hysterical destructive denun­ ciation is Town's  obvious concern for and love of Canada. He comes back to the land, suggesting that  Canadians need "a  proprietary  interest in  topsoil, a sense of place, an urge to challenge the present, and rush to the future." Somewhere there must be "an  indigenous self." So, just as the drawings end on a hint of optimism, Town finds some slight reason for optimism in the fact that  we have "an  aggres­ sive creative community." And  always there is the land,  "a geographic  complex of stunning  grandeur, with  a violent, yet surprisingly poetic  climate."  The  essay closes with  a  tempered,   almost  ironic  hope:   "We  are,  in  fact,  savagely  self­ repressed, nevertheless ours is the only nation  seemingly  steeped  in  a  consistent sort of idiocy."
Town's   writing  at  times shows a real if  somewhat  flamboyant  flair  and  wit, and  exists in  a  poetic atmosphere.  Some Canadian   painters  have  experimented with  writing  poetry.  I have  already  mentioned  Curnoe's use of  words  in  his paintings.  The  London  group  cohere to some extent  around  the literary  maga­ zine,  Alphabet. This   periodical  often  includes  graphics  and  on  one  occasion printed  a concrete  poem  (James  Reaney, the editor,  preferred  to call it  an  illu­ minated  poem)   by  London  painter  Jack  Chambers.  Reaney  has  recently  been writing some emblem  poems. The  sculptor,  Florence  Wyle,  published  a volume of poems in  1959  and  Roy  Kiyooka has written some interesting  poems. There

25

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS  WRITERS



has  been a cross-breeding of art  and  poetry in  the  realm  of concrete  poetry  in which we find writers taking over some of the graphic  effects of art.




l:E SMALL  GROUP  of  writers  of  concrete  poetry  in  Canada show a great  deal of variety in their methods. Some have used the typewriter  as something  akin to the painter's  brush. David  Aylward in his Typescapes deliber­ ately avoids using the letters on his typewriter;  he makes patterns  down  the page with  the symbols of  punctuation   and  abbreviation, and  these  patterns  are  off­ centred  as another  device to separate  his work from  'normal'  poetry.  The  effect is to take the  poetry out of the realm of word-meanings into  a  realm  of shape­ and-space  relationships close to a mechanical  calligraphic  pattern. Hart  Broudy in a recent set of 'typewriter-drawings' for CrOnk  uses type for sharp-edged  de­ sign and  by close clusters of letters achieves effects of  light and shade. Bill Bissett also uses the  typewriter  as a precision instrument  in  order  to gauge  exactly  the stresses and  pauses in some of his poeins. He strives  for a musical  notation,  and the repetitions of lines one after the other, the spacing altering  slightly every now and again, words merging at some points, are meant  to suggest the pacing of the chant-effects  within  a poem. This  writing  can  work  but  I  find little  relation  at times between  the  design of words on the  page  and  the  actual  chanting  of the poems by Bissett himself. The  flat even  quality  of the typewritten  lines does not suggest  the  rhythms  that  Bissett's voice  puts  into  the  poems. Some  method  of heavy and light emphasis  (such as Broudy uses) might give a more precise rhyth­ mic effect. Bissett has probably  gone farther  into  the  mixing  of art  and  poetry than  anyone else in Canada,  in such a book as The   jinx  Ship  Nd  Other  Trips,  for instance,  a meld of graphics  and  drawings  (to  me  these are  crude  and  gen­ erally undistinguished), lettering and  typescript as "illuminations" of poems and prose, and  typographic design, the whole book interleaved  with collages, abstract paint  patterns,  random pages of ads from glossy magazines. The  reader  must im­ merse himself within the book, not trying to extract  a literary  meaning but rather to involve himself in  a total response. I do not find the  book successful, because some individual  parts are more approachable than  others, some parts have a too juvenile tone, some  pages are too haphazardly  smudged,  so that  a totality  of re­ sponse is not really possible. Nevertheless, it is an interesting, if finally unsuccess­ ful attempt  to  extend  the concept  of concrete  poetry  beyond  the  framework  of the single page.

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS  WRITERS



Individual concrete  poems are what stay in the mind. Earle Birney has experi­ mented  with shape  in several poems. In  one he attempts  to turn  the  non-verbal ideogram  of  constancy  into  words,  retaining  ideogrammatic   shape.  The  word ROCK is the centre of a swirl of words representing water  around  the rock but the line of words, however  much  it eddies within the space  of the  page,  heads eventually  to  the  rock. Jane  Shen  has  attempted  to  transliterate  Chinese ideo­ grams, using the images implied by the ideogram to give the abstract  'meaning'. Lionel  Kearns  has  an  intriguing  design of  zeros and  ones,  a  large  figure one (made  of zeros)  enclosed  within  a large  zero  (made  of  ones)  to  depict  "The  Birth of God".  Although  the design is precise, defined and  almost mathematical,  the nature  of the one emerging from nothing implies an expansion of all the con­ tradictory  tensions and opposing forces within the universe.
Ian  Hamilton Finlay,  while admitting  certain limiting factors in the nature  of concrete  poetry, maintains  that  whereas "normal" poetry is circumscribed  within society, concrete  poetry is confined only within space. Space,  then,  a concern of painting,  is an essential part  of concrete  poetry and,  apart  from  Bill Bissett, the most consistently adventurous  poet of this nature,  a poet trying for total involve­ ment  with  language  in  space,  is bp  Nichol. His  fourneyings  And  The  Return contains  a  package  of cards,  small  booklets, cardboard   designs:  all  manner  of shapes and sizes of paper  and  card  which the reader  has to  manipulate in order to sense his relationship  with the words or patterns  printed  on  them.  Nichol has extended  his interest  since then  into  the nature  of seeing.  He seems to be ques­ tioning the very act of reading itself, apparently  wanting the reader  to go beyond a literal meaning  in order to weigh, independent  of  meaning, the nature  of letter­ ing itself. If a letter  can be seen in different ways, even though  it lies flat on the page,  he seems to suggest, a word will yield  different  "meanings" if we can  be made to see its variety of surfaces and  perspectives. His series "Eyes"  suggest this insistence on close looking.
The  typewriter  has helped in the design and shape of poems but  more than  a
typewriter  is necessary. One  of  the  most interesting  continuing  experiments  in poem-drawing  is the comparatively  unnoticed  work of Judith   Copithorne, espe­ cially in her  two books Release and  Runes. The  poems in  these books  are calli­ graphic  designs, words and  pen-strokes held together in one design on  the page. The  words may at  times be in a linear sequence surrounded by  rhythmic  callig­ raphy,  but  more often  the lines are looser, veering off in  all  directions  but  held within  the  fluidity  of the  calligraphy,  giving an  impression  of  spontaneous  and inner organic growth. The  shapes and lines that  Judith Copithorne "illuminates"

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS WRITERS



her  poems with  seem firstly to control  the  words,  hold  them  within  the  space created  by the calligraphy and secondly to free the words and lines because there is no necessity for the pen to keep to a rigid  pattern. She achieves a taut  equi­ librium  between freedom and control, and  the words themselves are suspended in free space, their meaning coming across in sections as the eye follows the pattern.  But the eye is also always conscious of the whole pattern  of  the poem-drawing  as an object  enclosed by the frame of the page. Sometimes  the  calligraphy  becomes too fussy, sometimes the words merge too obscurely with the design but in general Judith Copithorne's attempt  at calligraphic  poetry seems to me a very interesting and  worthwhile  experiment in mixing art  and  poetry.
Many of the poems and poets I have mentioned  in this brief survey of concrete
poetry  are  included  in the  cosmic  chef:   an  evening   of concrete   edited  by bp Nichol and  published by Oberon  Press. This is a boxed folio showing the variety of Canadian concrete  poetry,  full of sharp  design,  typewriter  sequence,  callig­ raphy,  comic strip  experiments, extensions of language  and  sound.  The  editor defines this area  of cross-breeding of art  and  poetry I have tried  to  give a short account  of here:

everything presented here comes
from that point where language andfor the image blur together into the
inbetween and become concrete objects to be understood as such.




kE MIXTURE  OF   ART   AND  POETRY  is  a  growing  concern  in Canada. More  and  more books of poetry are  being  published  with  illustrations. Eldon  Grier's  Pictures  On  The   Skin  is a splendid  book to look at,  poems  care­ fully arranged   on  the  page, interleaved  with  collages, silhouettes,  photographic negatives, drawings,  colour designs. Unfortunately the  poetry does  not live up to its presentation. The  poems, which include some about  various other  artists and musicians,  are  rather  fuzzy in  outline.  Grier's   painterly  interests  do  not  really work in this book. The  poetry has little visual quality  and  not much of the hard­  edged clarity one might expect from a painter.  Grier  acknowledges the influence of a  "chaotic   permissiveness" but  the  poems do  not  have  much  spontaneity  or outrageousness. They  exist in a kind of controlled  blur. His poetry is much  more successful in  his earlier  A  Friction  Of  Lights,  particularly  in  the opening  poem

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS  WRITERS



"An  Ecstasy", a collage of segments about growth in metamorphosis,  illogical yet cleverly juxtaposing  ideas, suiting the notion that  real creation  is an overgrowth that breaks limits. There  are several poems in the volume about  art and artists­ two very good poems about  Marini, for instance.  He also suggests the quality of Apollinaire  by using the notion of one of the poet's typographical experiments  as an image of its influence  on him:

I am almost asleep
but I feel a transfusion of fine little letters dripping slantwise into my side.

P. K. Page is another  painter  who has written poetry. She sees both poetry and painting  as an  organic  unity  in  her creative life, and  although  she has  concen­ trated  on painting  for much of the time since the I 95os, her selected  poems, Cry Ararat!,  include  some later  poems, and  some, particularly  those in  the first sec­ tion of the book, seem  very painterly. The  hieroglyphic shapes  in  "Bark  Draw­ ing" are visually presented  and  the poet, aware of the connection between words
and  sight,  talks of "an   alphabet   the  eye I lifts from  the  air."  Throughout  the
poems she sees words  as somehow  deadening.  They  have  power, for  the act  of naming  is a making,  as she suggests in "Cook's  Mountains", but  these same mountains  are entities in themselves and before being named  "they  were not the same."  Still, as she is told that  they are called the Glass House  Mountains, "in­
stantly  they altered  to become I the sum of shape and  name."  Words set a limit
but also connect with the visual response: "two strangenesses united into one". Nevertheless, a gap exists between the senses; in "This  Frieze of Birds," she feels the frieze can be made  into "an  intricate  poem, neat", but for real birds we can "find  no words",  though  the  poem tends to offer a contradiction to itself in the exact  descriptive  detail  in  the  closing stanzas. The  idea  is repeated  in  "Only Child", where a too scientific knowledge or naming  takes away life:

Birds were his element like air and not
her words for them -making them statues.

The  poet-painter  demands  a sensuous response to life, an  openness of spirit, for definition  and  limitation  wreak  violence on spontaneous  existence, an  idea  that seems  to  be  expressed  in  "Leather  Jacket"   published  in  a  recent  Canadian Forum. Perhaps  this idea  is related  to the  drawing  of  the  perky, intricate  bird entitled  "And  You, What  Do You Seek?" that  appears  as an illustration  in Cry Ararat!

29

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS WRITERS



P. K. Page's poems contain very clear visual pictures but she tends to push the images towards  abstraction. The details of the garden  in "After  Rain" move into a simplified  "primeval" atmosphere.  She sees a snowman  as a  primitive  figure merging with the landscape, just as the man in "Journey Home" becomes the landscape,  the  transformation  being a continuous,  growing  process. She reduces the knitting  women  in "The  Knitters"  to rather  abstract  monolithic  figures "by Moore".  This  merging towards abstraction  arises from  detail,  giving large shape to small particularities,  just as the insistence in  whiteness in  much  of the poetry seems to gather  the  diffuse prismatic colouring  of her world. Her  world is often chillingly abstract   (notice  how much snow there  is in  P. K.  Page's  poetry), but she  may  be trying  to express a large  order  and  pattern  in  the  world in which we are involved;  however, perhaps  the somewhat  cold and  psychological analysis in some poems prevents the reader from  participating in  an  involvement  in the world she presents.
The  best book of poetry devoted to the process of painting  itself is The  Danish
Portraits  by Heather Spears. This slim volume evokes a sparse and  rather  harsh Scandinavian landscape in some poems, but the poems dealing with painting  are not self-conscious or narrow, as they are not simply discussions of aesthetic  prob­ lems. These  problems are  related  to her own  personal  life, and  her  attempts  to catch  and  hold  a  real person in portraits  become  mirrors  for  her  own  effort  to discover her own  reality in relation  to the models and  in  particular to  the man she loves who serves as a model for a portrait.  Thus,  the poems are expressions of two  sides of  her  personal  life, preventing  them  from  becoming  mere  artificial or transcendental exercises.
"no  ideas"  expresses her  dissatisfaction with  her  recent  paintings  but  by the
end of the poem  we find the dissatisfaction arises from  the absence of her lover. If he were to return,  she could perhaps paint  again, make her eyes focus to catch a  real  presence -"I  could  wear I out  the  two  of  us  just  looking" -but she recognizes that  his reality as a lover would be a barrier  to her painting,  and  she
complains, "you'd  interfere."  The  poem is a presentation  of the problem of  rela­ tionships both in art  and life:  the artist wonders  about  her relation  to the object to be painted  but the artist as human  being wonders how this can exist within  a human  relationship  of love.
She encounters  the power of paint  to have an independent life of its own when she paints  a portrait  of her son. He had  burned  his arm  and  as she sketches the
pose, the burned  arm "wants  to remake I my picture  for its own sake." It is diffi­
cult to know whether  it is the pose arousing pity in  the painter,  the arm itself as

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS WRITERS



focus or the painter's  own memory of the day on which he burned  his arm which causes  this  emphasis.  All  these  layers  are  brought  together  in  the  concluding
lines:
a wound
radiating into sound
skin, radiating into sound how he screamed then.

So again  the  painter  is faced  with the  problem of the  discrepancy  between  art and  life and  the  difficulty arising from  her own knowledge of that  discrepancy,
for she herself is "still  precisely aware I of the  gap  between  the  imagined  and
the real."
This  discrepancy  is  at  the  centre  of  the  dozen  poems  which  make  up  the opening  sequence,  "The Danish  Portraits."  The  poems are  notations  about  her attempts  (usually failures)  to capture  the likeness of her lover in a portrait.  The poems give some  of  the  visual detail  but  somehow she  feels her  portrait   must catch  more than  she can see. When  her lover has gone, his presence "untames"
the room and  "creates  its own wilderness its own forms I At the very margins of
the visual."  This  presence  is beyond  her control  and  in  other  poems she senses that  a  painting  is somehow  a confinement,  a  narrowing  down,  something  that cannot  live up to the form in her imagination.  Yet a portrait  can exercise its own control,  can  lead  the  viewer into  the  painting  and  evoke its  mood  within  the viewer. The  painter's failure  to  paint  her  lover's portrait  is counterpointed  by two or three  poems which suggest that she can include  more than  reality within a painting.  The  opening  poem, for instance, details something  about  the sitter's real  life which  the  painter  regrets she  has  not  experienced  first-hand   but  the artist says she catches something  beyond  the  knowledge of the sitter's  character within the town. In another  portrait  of a girl "exposed and  unsure",  the painter pushes "the  encroaching shadow  back", makes

Light of your frailty and dismay
On the dark primed passive canvas.

But the poem also carries the idea of control and confinement. The  painter "con­ tains"  the  sitter  in  her  portrait.  And  this  is her  problem  with  the  portrait   of her lover and  accounts  for her  ambivalent  attitude,  for she likes his  "untamed" quality. He  recognizes something  in her eyes when she looks at  him  in  terms of a portrait.  He sees her eyes are "almost crazed" and he is afraid of  "the look that smites [him]  selfless." He cannot  accept this as part of human love, although  the

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS WRITERS



painter  herself says that such a look in her eyes "could  prove I The  exact  equa­ tions of a close embrace."  Time and again she finds herself lost in merely looking. She wants emphatically  to "do this marvellous thing",  which amounts,  I suppose, to a picture of real human love but to do it may result in the destruction  of that love, so she continually draws back:

I will do it
Like plunging my hands into blood
But I could not touch you, even if I could.

She also feels that  this fixing of her love would in a sense control  her lover, and yet his character  is unfixable:

I will make you enter this narrow dwelling
Because there is no telling
Where you would go, could I not confine
You here in my craft.

But the  portraits fail;  the drawings  lie unfinished  (or  even  unstarted)  with  "re­ gret  and  rational  rage I Folded  like tissue paper  between  each  page." And  her love has failed -"The truth  is you will never come again."
The  poems in The   Danish  Portraits  are subtle  and  uncompromising  in  their honesty about  the life of art  and  its relation  to  human  love. Art  and  love are constant  counterpoints,  a kind of interchangeable objective  correlative.  Perhaps the  poems remain  a little obscure in  places because  the  details of the  paintings and  the  personal lives are  not given fully. Seeing the  portraits  might  help,  but one  can  understand   why she  would  not  want  them  reproduced, as she  thinks most of them  are failures. But these obscurities do  not detract  from  the real  in­ sight into art  and love contained  in the twenty-six poems in the volume.




kESE THREE  POETS have all spent  a good deal of their  time outside Canada, so that the Canadian scene and Canadian concerns do not figure largely in their  work. The  same might  be said  of Jack  Shad bolt who has spent some years in Europe,  but  he has himself acknowledged  the effect of the Group of Seven on his work as well as the especial influence  of Emily Carr  and  Frank Varley. Shadbolt  has detailed  this in what  I consider  to  be the  best prose book by a Canadian artist, In Search  of Form, a book in which he describes his artistic

32

CANADIAN ARTISTS  AS  WRITERS



development, illustrated at each  step  by many  of his drawings and  paintings.
Shadbolt sees art  as a continuous process, layers of trial  and  error, revelations by  spontaneous  response,   refinements, extrapolations  from   reality   in  an  inter­ action  between   the  imagination and  the  intellect.  Creation, for  him,  "starts in the  preconscious and  works  through to final  intellectual recognition". The  artist works  towards a total  structure, a form  which  may  be  inherent, but  which  will emerge  only  through a sequence  of parlaying possibilities of varying  relationships between   and   within   objects.  These  objects  may  be  seen  in  various  gradations from  minute particularities to symbolic  abstractions and  all  the degrees  lying  be­ tween  may  be released  by breaking  open  the  object  to  take account of its  (and  the  surrounding space's  and  object's)  "rhythmic  proliferation."
Within the  work  of art  itself or within  the  process of its creation Shadbolt sees
a tension  between  the form  of the object  (the  thing  being  painted or drawn)  and the  energies  within  seeking  to  destroy  the  form.  Art  seeks  "a   planned  spacial equilibrium." He  makes  it  clear  that   he  has  never  been  afraid to  allow  spon­ taneous  happenings to occur  in his drawings to release the inner  energies of  form,  so that   "form creates  its  own  images." These  become  part  of  his own  style  (a word  he does not like to use)  and  he defines his own  artistic  process as a "dialec­ tic of opposites" in which  "improvisation [is]  resolved  by structure."
He  likes to  work  from  reality  but  strives  to re-create it in  as  many  authentic
ways  as  possible  in  order   to  understand it thoroughly. Only  then  can  he  work with  the constituent parts,  try  to loosen them  into  abstractions and  symbolic sim­ plifications  or  to  see the  emblematic disposal  of  parts.   Form  may  emerge  from these drawings, for "drawing is idea  more  than  fact."  He suggests that "form  also finds  the  experience," although perhaps this  happens   because  the  experience is working  within, searching for the form.  Thus, there  are  connections  between  the psychic  and  the  physical  without  the  intervention of the  intellect.  An artist  may learn  rationally about  composition and  colour  but  nothing can  change his own individual brush  stroke,   his  own  personal   physical  experience  of  the  medium itself.
All this sounds  very  much  like a discussion of certain  ideas current in  modem poetry.  Shadbolt's discussion  of his own  artistic  creation  sounds  at  times close to notions  of  the  deep  image,   composition  by  field,  concrete  poetry   and  organic form.  Certainly, Shadbolt's seems a very poetic temperament and  he makes great use in his book of words  associated  with  poetry: image,  metaphor, rhythm et al.
In  case  I have  made  this  book sound  too  theoretical by concentrating on  the ideas  about  the creative  process  (and  perhaps the last third  of the  book does tend

33

CANADIAN ARTISTS AS WRITERS



to emphasize the solution of some of Shadbolt's  artistic problems too specifically), let me hasten to add that  the book includes some autobiographical detail  as well as some evocative descriptive details-such as descriptions of Victoria and its surrounding district, and  the fishing fleet at Coullioure, for instance.  But even if the emphasis is on the problems of artistic development  and creation, the book re­ mains a completely fascinating study of one artist's sincere concern  to understand  his own  art,  the  motives and  springs of it  and  his  recognition  of  his  "sensuous involvement  with form."
Like Kane, nearly all these Canadian painters  who write see the land  as some­ thing  they have to return  to and  come to terms  with,  but  they do not  see it as something  by which they necessarily feel dominated. There  is more  evidence of love than  subjugation  in  their  attitudes.  This  brief  survey,  I  hope,  gives some sense of the ways in which Canadian artists specifically express their  concern  and love for both their art  and  Canada.


































34



TRAVELLER, CONJUROR, JOURNEYMAN

P. K. Page








and  painting ...
 CONNECTIONS AND  CORRESPONDENCES  between   writing

The  idea  diminishes to a dimensionless point in my absolute centre. If I  can hold it steady long enough,  the feeling which is associated with  that  point grows and fills a larger  area as perfume  permeates a room. It is from  here that  I write
-held within that luminous  circle, that locus which is at the same time a focus­
sing glass, the surface of a drum.
As long as the tension  ( atjtention?) is sustained  the work continues ... more or  less acute.

What  is art  anyway? What  am I trying to do?


Play, perhaps.  Not as opposed to work. But spontaneous  involvement  which is its own reward; done for the sheer  joy of doing it;  for  the discovery, invention, sensuous pleasure. "Taking a line for a walk", manipulating sounds,  rhythms.

Or  transportation. At times I seem to be attempting  to copy exactly something which  exists in  a dimension  where worldly senses are  inadequate. As if a thing only felt had  to be extracted  from  invisibility and  transposed  into  a seen thing, a heard  thing.  The  struggle  is to fit the "made" to the  "sensed"  in such  a way that  the whole can occupy  a world larger  than  the one I normally inhabit.  This process involves scale. Poem or painting  is by-product.
Remembering, re-membering,   re-capturing,   re-calling,  re-collecting ... words which lead  to the  very threshold  of some thing, some  place;  veiled by a  mem­ brane  at  times  translucent, never  yet transparent,   through   which  I  long  to  be absorbed.
Is it I who  am forgotten,  dismembered, escaped, deaf,  uncollected?
Already  I have lost yesterday and  the day before. My childhood  is a series of


35

TRAVELLER,CONJUROR,JOURNEYMAN



isolated vignettes, vivid as hypnagogic visions. Great  winds have  blown my  past away in gusts leaving patches and parts of my history and  pre-history. No wonder I want  to remember,  to follow a thread  back. To  search for something  I already know but  have forgotten  I know. To listen-not  to but for.

I am a two-dimensional being. I live in a sheet of paper.  My home has length and   breadth   and   very little  thickness. The   tines  of  a  fork  pushed  vertically through  the paper  appear  as four thin silver ellipses. I may, in a moment  of  in­ sight, realize that it is more than co-incidence that four identical  but independent  silver rings  have  entered  my world.  In  a  further   breakthrough  I  may  glimpse their  unity,  even sense the entire  fork -large, glimmering,  extraordinary. Just beyond my sight. Mystifying; marvellous.
My  two-dimensional  consciousness yearns  to catch  some overtone  which  will
convey that  great  resonant silver object.


Expressed  another  way-I  am  traveller.  I  have  a destination  but  no  maps. Others  perhaps  have  reached  that  destination  already,  still others  are  on  their way. But none  has had  to go from here before-nor  will again.  One's  route  is one's own. One's  journey unique. What  I will find at the end I can  barely guess. What  lies on the way is unknown.
How  to go? Land,  sea or air? What  techniques  to use? What  vehicle?


I  truly think  I do not write or draw  for  you or  you or  you ... whatever  you may argue  to the contrary. Attention  excludes you. You do not exist. I am  con­ scious only of being "hot"  or "cold" in relation  to some unseen centre.

Without  magic  the world is not to be borne.  I slightly misquote from  Hesse's Conjectural Biography. A prisoner, locked in his cell, he paints all the things that have given him  pleasure in life -trees, mountains, clouds. In  the middle  of his canvas  he places a small train, its engine already  lost in  a tunnel.  As the  prison guards  approach  to lead Hesse off to still further  deprivations,  he makes himself small and  steps aboard  his little train  which  continues  on its way and  vanishes. For  a while its sooty smoke drifts from  the tunnel's  mouth,  then  it slowly blows away and  "with  it the whole picture and  I with the picture."
Magic,  that  Great  Divide, where everything  reverses. Where  all laws change. A good writer or painter  understands  these laws and  practices  conjuration.
Yes, I would like to be a magician.



TRAVELLER,CONJUROR,JOURNEYMAN



One  longs for  an  art  that  would satisfy all  the  senses -not  as in  opera  or ballet  where  the  separate  arts  congregate -but  a  complex  intermingling -a consummate  More-Than. This  is perhaps  just another   way of saying one  longs for the senses themselves to merge in one supra-sense.
Not  that  there  aren't  marriages  enough  between  the  arts-some  inevitably more complete than  others. But no menage a trois. Let alone four or five.
Trying  to see these categories and their overlaps in terms of writing and  paint­
ing I start  a rough chart:


WRITING	WRITING/PAINTING 	PAINTING

Aural 	Visual 	Marriage 	Calligraphic	Painterly


Poetry  written	Some  of	Arabesques
to  be spoken:	Herbert's poems   Concrete  poetry
Chambers' Fire. 	Dylan Thomas'
Poetry   written	Vision and 	Bill Bissett's
 Klee Tobey etc.
 Monet etc.

to be sung:
 Prayer 	"typewriter

Cohen's Suzanne	e. e. cummings
 poems"  etc.

etc. 	etc. 	Illuminated  Ms.

I get only so far when I stop. Too many ideas rush at me. The  categories shift and  merge in such a way that  I am at times unable  to distinguish even between the visual and  the aural.  John  Chambers'  recording  of his poem Fire  brings me up short. This  is an  aural  poem. It  relies for its effect on  long silences between words -the silences as significant as the words  themselves. If one  wants  to  re­ produce this poem on paper one can use the conventions  of musical transcription or one can space the words on the page that  the poem becomes ... visual. What is time to the ear becomes space to the eye.
"In  not being two everything is the same."
Moving  through  the category  "Marriage" to "Calligraphic" and  "Painterly" one  must  come  at  length  to  pure  colour.  No  form  at  all.  And  moving  from "Marriage" through  "Visual"  and "Aural" one must finally arrive at pure sound
-no  words at all.
The  notes of the scale:  the colours of the rainbow.


"A  Father  said  to his double-seeing son:  'Son,  you see two  instead  of one.'
'How  can  that  be?'  the  boy  replied.  'If I  were,  there  would  seem  to  be  four
moons up there in place of two'."  (Hakim  Sanai  of Ghazna)



TRAVELLER,CONJUROR,JOURNEYMAN



If writing  and  painting  correspond  at  the  primary  level as I  believe they do, how and where do they differ?
With  a poem  I  am given a  phrase. Often  when  I  least  expect  it.  When  my
mind  is on something  else. And my hands  busy. Yet it must  be caught  at once, for it comes like a  boomerang  riding a magical  arc  and  continuing  its forward path  it will vanish  unless intercepted.  And  that  phrase  contains  the  poem  as a seed contains the plant.
It  is also the bridge to another  world where  the components  of the  poem lie hidden  like the parts of a dismembered statue in an archaelogical  site. They  need to be sought and found and painstakingly put together  again. And it is the search that  matters.  When  the final piece slips into  place the. finished  poem seems no more important than  the image in a completed  jig-saw puzzle. Worth  little more than  a passing glance.
Painting  or drawing  the process is entirely different.  I start  from  no where. I am  given no  thing. The  picture,  born  at  pen-point,  grows out  of the sensuous pleasure of nib, lead or brush moving across a surface. It has its own senses this activity:  varieties of tactile experience, rhythms.  Beating  little drums strumming taut  strings. And sometimes there is the curious impression of a guiding  hand - as if I am hanging on to the opposite end of some giant  pen which is moving masterfully and  hugely in some absolute elsewhere, and  my small drawing,  lesser in every way, is nevertheless related-a crabbed  inaccurate approximation.
Yet in all essential particulars  writing and  painting  are interchangeable. They are alternate  roads to silence.





THE DOME
OF HEAVEN



P.K.Page





I sense the Dome of Heaven  circling enclosing six directions in my eye fixed as sun at solstice which unlocks the polar seasons with its key.

Near.  Close.	Here. 	Intrinsic  to my flesh my pulse, my breath.
What is this rush of air
this lull, these tides
whose slow mercurial advances pull all waters in their mesh?

All waters -globe enlacing rope of brine, unravelled blue (eyes, veins, bracelets and chains swirl in this watery swell) .

Why do I see it in a looking glass as in a crystal ball?
Huge. Small.
The  Dome of Heaven is a speck a dot, the merest sphere
fading, invisible.


Somewhere the senses centre. Is it here?



CANADIAN  POETRY AND THE COMPUTER


SandraDjwa

WENREADING THROUGH the wo'ks of the Engllib Cana­
dian  poets of the I 88o's,  the critical reader is sometimes taken  a little aback  by
the continued  repetition  of certain  words and  phrases such  as "dream", "sleep", "vision",  "trance", "spell",  "secret",  "mysterious",  "unknown", or, if we prefer, there is "mystic spell", "charmed vision", "visionary moment", and "inappellable secret".
This  insistence,  at  the  diction  level, on  variations  of  the  dream   experience borders on the ludicrous  and  we are soon tempted  to blue-pencil  whole passages in  Carman   as  examples  of  romantic  excess, and  to  suggest  that  Roberts  and D. C. Scott might have done well to edit their styles a little. Yet, is this approach ultimately  helpful?  Is  an  appreciation  of  the  poets of  the  188o's  related  to  a stylistic norm  which stresses neatness and  economy, or does their  very excess at the diction  level point  toward  some fundamental understanding of the nature  of things-a  world view, a myth or a cosmology?
It  is possible to dismiss this whole cluster of diction  as simply vague transcen­
dental  aspiration,  the Canadian backwash of Victorian  romanticism.  And  there is no doubt  that  there is a certain  amount  of this involved;  historically speaking, Canadian  poetry  has  always  been  derivative.  However,  granted   this fact,  and granted  that  the  common  terms  of diction  are  also very  probably  inherited,   a more helpful approach might be the question of whether or not our poets did something  unique  with  their  particular  inheritance.  Did  they  construct  a  par­ ticular  myth or cosmology from  the common  terms of romantic  diction;  and,  if so, was there  any  continuance of myth or diction  from  the  poets of the I 88o's to those of the 192o's?
In  Roberts'  case, the  reader soon becomes aware  that  he consistently uses the
word "dream" and  that  it most often collocates with  "sleep",  "vision",  "spirit", and  "mystic".  To  determine  whether  or not these constant  references to "sleep" and  "dream" are simply the common coin of romantic  diction  as in, say, Keats'

43

CANADIAN POETRY AND THE COMPUTER



"Sleep  and  Poetry",  or  whether  they  are  associated  in  a  structure   unique  to Roberts'  poetry,  it  would  be necessary to classify each  occurrence  of  the  word "dream" together  with its most commonly collocated  words;  this would  include categories such as the common night dream,  the impossible wish, the day dream, and  the  waking  vision, that  moment  which  Wordsworth   describes in  "Tintem Abbey" when the poet is "laid asleep in body, and  becomes a living soul" and  is so enabled  to "see into the life of things".
For  Roberts'  poetry,  the  purpose of the  classification  would  be  to  determine whether he adopts any of these particular  aspects of the dream consistently and whether or not each occurrence reinforces a particular myth of the poet's experi­ ence in nature.  Further,  because we already know from  Roy Daniells' fine study of the I88o's  poets in the Literary  History  of Canada that  "dream" is also a very strong  metaphor  in Lampman's work, it might  be worthwhile  to  attempt  to de­ termine if there is a complex associated with this word which  passes from Roberts into the poetry of Lampman, Carman  and Scott. But, the amount  of listing and cross-referencing in a project of this scope would be quite  prohibitive for any one person, and  it is at  this point  that  the computer  comes  into  its own  as a  useful listing device.



BETWEEN  I g66  AND    I g68,   the  published  books of seven poets, Isabella  Valancy  Crawford,  Sir Charles  G.  D. Roberts,  Archibald  Lamp­ man,  Duncan  Campbell  Scott, E. J. Pratt,  Earle  Birney, and  Margaret  Avison, were key-punched.  Between  Ig68  and  1970,  seven  other  poets,  Charles  Mair,
Charles  Sangster,  Bliss Carman, A. J. M.  Smith,  A.  M.  Klein,  Irving  Layton
and  P. K. Page, were added. 1
The  procedure followed was the same in all cases. Each  poet's published books in chronological order were key-punched on computer cards at the rate of one typographical  line per computer  card. The  computer  cards  containing  the poet's canon were then fed into an IBM  7044 computer  for printout. Following  proof­ reading  and  necessary corrections, the computer  then drew  up a word  frequency count. This is an alphabetical  index listing every word that  a poet uses and  indi­ cating its frequency  of appearance.  On  the basis of the critic's  understanding of a  poet's  work, and  taking  into  consideration  both  the  frequency  of occurrence of particular  words  and  the  apparent collocations  or  associations of clusters of words, a selected list of words under the heading  of  thematic  categories was then drawn  up  by hand.  This  listing under  headings  was  key-punched  as a thematic

44

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



index  and  the  computer   then  printed  out  concordances  to  the  selected  words from its memory ban1c
After the works of Roberts had been key-punched and  a word-index  produced,
it soon became  apparent that  except for function  words  and  grammatical  sym­ bols, "dream" and  words associated with it did indeed form  the largest category of diction in Roberts'  canon,  as it also did in the works of Lampman  and  Scott. "Dream", "sleep",  "vision"  and  its  variants  occur  2 17 times  in  Roberts,  368 times in Lampman and  221 times in D. C. Scott. In each case, it has the highest frequency  of  any  thematic   word  occurring   (an  average  occurrence   would  be from  five to fifteen times)  and  indicates  that  for each  poet  the cluster of words associated  with  "dream" has  primary  significance.  Further, by  their  continued appearance with  a recognized structure  of value  delineated  by a particular dic­ tion cluster, it was found  that  certain  words such as Crawford's "love",  Roberts' "dream", Klein's  "little"  and  Margaret  Avison's "sun"  come to  take  on  meta­ phoric significance. This is not to suggest that  these elements of diction are always used as active metaphors. Yet, most often, the key terms emerge in context  as a metaphor  representing  a larger myth.
In Roberts'  work, the "dream" emerges primarily as a description of the poet's aspiration  towards  "the  Spirit  of  Beauty"  beyond  nature.  As  this  metaphor is explored  through  the  thematic  concordance,  it  can  be  documented   that  it  be­ comes associated with a whole mythic structure  in which Roberts expresses life as a  "dream" emerging  from  the  great  "sleep"  of  Eternity,  which  is, in  turn,  a "dream" of God. Through the human  "dream", man  is put  in touch  with  this eternal  world. Referring  to the dream  experience, Roberts  has two sets of termi­ nology  which  he  uses interchangeably; one  set  is  connected   with   Darwinian  evolution while the other is primarily Christian  in nature.
This  process is quite  explicit in a poem such as "Origins" where  the germ  of
life emerges from  Time: "Out of  the  dreams  that  heap / the  hollow  land  of sleep";  it then  develops  by evolutionary  processes, only  to  return  to  its divine maker, God. Similarly, in his poem "The  Marvellous Work",  Roberts  praises the evolutionary  God  whose "Eternal Cause":

Is graven in granite-moulding aeons' gloom; Is told in stony record of the roar
Of long Silurian storms, and tempests huge
Scourging the circuit of Devonian seas ...

Athwart the death-still years of glacial sleep! Down the stupendous sequence, age on age, ...


45

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



In the obscure and formless dawn of life, In gradual march from simple to complex, From lower to higher forms, and last to Man.

In  effect, Roberts  has taken  over the general  aspects  of  the  Wordsworthian­ Keatsean  transcendental  dream,  associating it with  poetic comfort.  However,  he changes  a few of the essential terms of the  dream  experience  to accommodate  some  of the  problems raised  by the  Darwinian  hypothesis.  But,  if  the  primary function  of the  dream  metaphor  is to  alleviate  pain,  Roberts'  choice  was  par­ ticularly  unfortunate as it carries along with it  its own  built-in  negation-that of  the  nightmare. So,  although  Roberts'  poetic  decorum   precludes  evil  as  a subject,  whenever evil or death  intrude into  his poetry  almost  despite the  poet, they do so, as does the nightmare,  through  the  dream.  The  blinding  of Orion, the capture  of Launcelot, and  the sick soul of the  poem "One Night"  all emerge from the dreaming state.
Archibald  Lampman  adopts Roberts' dream  metaphor and  with it much of his poetic myth  including  the  "sleep"  of time,  the "dream" of human  life and  the possible evolutionary  progress of the human  soul. However,  Lampman's concept of the poet is that  of the passive observer who, standing  a little apart  from  him­ self and  from  nature,  is empowered  to see into  the nature  of things. In  this for­ mulation,  the unconscious creatures  from  the world of nature,  such  as  the frogs and  cicadas, become poetic emissaries from  the world of dream  which  underlies the universe. This relationship is quite explicit in the poem "The Frogs".
In effect, the peace and comfort of the eternal  dream,  unconsciously known by the frogs, is passed on to the poet who lays himself open  to this experience. But if the  voice of the frogs can  bring  assurance  of the  eternal  plan,  the  "dream" which underlies existence, there are other  voices which  remind  Lampman of the fear and sorrow which are also a part of human  life. The  voice which comes out of the darkness, "the crying in the night" of Lampman's much anthologized "Midnight" would seem to be part  of a larger  sequence  of poems dealing  with the nightmare  aspects of existence often specifically associated with the loss of the comforting  "dream" as in the poem "The  Loons".
The  "dream" in D. C. Scott's work is first associated with "rest", "death" and "magic". In poems such as "The  November  Pansy", "The Height  of Land"  and "Lines  in  Memory  of Edmund   Morris"  the  transcendental attempt   to  reach  a
"mystic world, a world of dreams and  passion I that  each  aspiring thing creates"
is unsuccessful and  the "secret"  beyond  nature  remains  "unutterable", a "some­
thing"  that  "comes  by flashes I ... -a spell I golden  and  inappellable". When

CANADIAN POETRY AND THE COMPUTER



the transcendental dream  does succeed, as it does in a series of "magic" or  fan­ tasy poems, it  results in death  for the  mortal  concerned,  as in  the  poems  "The Piper of Arll",  "By the Willow Spring",  "Avis" and "Amanda".
In  Scott's  early work the death  theme is associated with  the dream  and  with
rest;  in  his later  work it becomes associated with a  dying  world.  In  the  poem "The November Pansy'',  he suggests that a "seed" of life might be dropped  from the dying world to re-kindle life elsewhere. This linking of human  death  with the suggestion that  the earth  is growing old is dominant  in Scott's later  work and it seems to mark  the end  of a cycle in which Roberts' evolutionary  "germ" of life has burst up into fruition  and is now decaying.




IN CONSIDERATION OF  THIS  ANALYSIS, it would appear  that  a critical  re-evaluation  of  the  work of Sir  Charles  G. D.  Roberts  is necessary to point  out  that  Roberts  did  establish a  poetic myth  with  his  inherited  romantic diction,  that  the function  of this myth  was to reconcile the  Darwinian germ  of life with  the  Christian  world spirit,  and  that  this myth  was adapted   with some slight variations  by Roberts'  major  successors, Lampman  and  D. C. Scott.  Fur­
ther, it would appear  that  the early work of E. J. Pratt,  supposedly a sport in the
Canadian stream,  might have developed in response to  the poetry of Roberts.
Pratt's  ode, The  Iron Door (1927), provides a good transition  from the 188o's to the  192o's  because it is a  poem which has its roots in the earlier  group,  yet, in development,  it rejects the transcendental  dream. The  whole visionary experi­ ence of the  poem  is specifically contained  within  a  human   "dream",  undercut  by contrast  with  the  reality of "terrestrial  day".  But, if Pratt  rejects  the  dilute romantic  aspirations  of the earlier "dream" poetry, he does so by  turning  to the law of tooth  and  claw  which  he finds explicit in Roberts'  tales of  the  wild and some of the later  poetry. "The Great  Feud",  for example,  has its genesis in  the first two  chapters  of  Roberts'  book,  In  the  Morning  of Time,  which  was first published  in  1919,  just as Pratt  was beginning  to write.  In  Chapter One  is the setting for "The  Great  Feud" -the red clay estuary complete  with giant lizards, the  prototypes for Tyrannosaurus Rex,  and  bloody  internecine  battle.  Here  too are  members  of  an  evolving  man-like  species  associated with  the  rudiments  of reason-prototypes for  the ape mother  and  her  brood.
Similarly,  a  prototype  of  the  battle  between  cachalot  and  kraken  in  Pratt's poem "The Cachalot" ( 1926)  is to be found  in a tale  entitled  "The Terror  of

47

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



the Sea Caves" from Roberts' book, The  Haunters  of the Silences  (1907). 2   It  is substantially  Roberts' concept of the national  epic and  the military sea poem  ( cf. "The Shannon  and  the Chesapeake")  which recurs in  Pratt's  later  poem, "The Roosevelt  and  the  Antinoe".  In  addition,  the  whole  iceberg  section  from  The Titanic   ( 1935), including suggestions of the  berg's  eventual  disintegration  as a part  of a natural cycle, can be shown to have a strong  relationship  with Roberts' poem "The  Iceberg",  first published in The  University  of Toronto  Quarterly  in
1931.
Pratt's progress would  appear  to  be contained  within  the  framework  of  the older  Darwinism  established by Roberts  and  Lampman. The  difference  between Pratt  and  his predecessors (and  in  parallel  development   to  the  later  poetry  of Scott)  is that he continually uses the earlier pre-formulated  world view to suggest its opposite. "The Great  Feud" is a dominantly  stavistic structure emerging from the  evolutionary  Darwinism  of one of Roberts'  later  romances.  A second  differ­ ence between Roberts and Pratt  is that the latter shifts the focus from external  to
internal nature  as he explains in Newfoundland Verse:   "the  fight I with  nature
growing  simpler  every hour, I her  ways being  known". Man  using the  full  re­
sources of his courage, reason and self-sacrifice can resist the primal forces of the sea;  however, when the primitive forces of external  nature  are internalized  within man,  "these blinded routes" are almost without  cure:  "the  taint  is in the blood". So that  where Roberts searches external  nature  for  the "secret"  of "beauty" or "life", Pratt turns inward in an attempt  to find the existential "why" of human behaviour.
It is at this point in clarifying the details of a poet's  myth,  that  the computer can  be of considerable  help  to conventional  scholarship.  One  of  the  great  sur­ prises of the Pratt  word-index was that  the encompassing  metaphor  appeared  to be  that  of  "blood"  rather  than  the  expected  "sea"  or  "water",  although,   of course, "sea"  is a larger category than  blood. Yet, as each reference  to the word "blood" was followed through  the thematic  concordance,  it began to appear  that Pratt  internalized  the tides of the sea within  the  veins of man,  as  is  explicit in the lyric "Newfoundland":

Here the tides flow, And here they ebb;
Not with that dull, unsinewed tread of waters
Held under bonds to move
Around the unpeopled shores -
Moon-driven through a timeless circuit

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



Of invasion and  retreat;
But with  a lusty stroke of life Pounding  at stubborn  gates, That  they might  run
Within  the sluices of men's hearts ...

Red  is the  sea-kelp  on the beach
Red  as the  heart's  blood,

This  is a  natural metaphor for  a  Newfoundlander, but,  more  importantly, it is also a natural metaphor in  terms  of Pratt's modified  Darwinism. Man, evolving from  the sea, still carries  part  of the sea within  him.  In  Pratt's myth,  the  blood­ stream  becomes  an  evolutionary battleground where  the  forces  of  instinct  ( asso­ ciated  with  cold-blooded creatures)  and  those of higher  reason  (associated with warm  blood)   are  continually at  war. As Pratt writes in "Under  the  Lens":

Along the arterial  highways,
Through the cross-roads and trails of the veins
They are ever on the move - Incarnate strife,
Reflecting in victory, deadlock and defeat, The  outer  campaigns of the world,
But without  tactics, without strategy.

Creatures of primal force, With saurian  impact
And virus of the hamadryads,
The microbes war with leucocytes ...

Once it was flood and drought, lightning and storm and earthquake, Those  hoary executors of the will of God,
That  planned  the monuments for human  faith.

Now, rather,  it is these silent and invisible ministers, Teasing  the ear of Providence
And levelling out the hollows of His hands,
That pose the queries for His moral government.

As is suggested  by  these  examples, Pratt  internalizes both  good  and  evil  and associates them  with  a physiological  metaphor of the bloodstream. In  Pratt's pub­ lished  books of  poetry,  "blood" and  its variants   (appearing 265  times)  are  pri­ mary  nouns  and  have  the  same  significance  in  Pratt's poetic  myth  as  does  that  of the  "dream" in  Roberts' world  view.  Clustered  about the  metaphor  of blood

49

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



is a  series of  related  nouns:   "vein",  "artery", "love",   "hate",  "instinct", and "reason". As might be expected, "red" (with its variants  of "crimson"  and  "scar­ let")  is the dominant colour.
In  Pratt's  work, the blood line not only determines  the  pedigree of the  crea­ ture, but it also establishes its physiological possibilities for good or bad. It is this aspect of the blood metaphor, suggesting the Biblical "sins of the fathers", which is evoked by the woman representing universal humanity  in The  Iron  Door  when she asks why "blood"  and "time" should always bring forth  a "Cain". Cyrus, on the  other  hand,  in The   Fable  of the  Goats, evolves a sport  "leucocyte"  in  his Aryan  bloodstream  which enables him to make  peace with  the Semite goat  and so save universal humanity  through  moral  evolution.  Consequently,  as has been expressed  in  the  critical  formulation  of  John  Sutherland,  Northrop   Frye  and Desmond Pacey, Pratt's  poetry moves from "stone to steel" or between the ethical norms of "the  temple and  the cave";  what  has not been noted,  however, is that it does so along the metaphor of the bloodstream.
In  this connection,  it is important to see that  for  Pratt  the  whole  process of
life from microscopic spore to man constitutes the evolutionary process. In his structure,  Christianity  is the evolved pinnacle of human  conduct,  and  when man falls away from  this ideal, he can only fall into atavism:

But  what  made  our feet  miss the  road  that  brought
The world  to such  a golden  trouve, In our so brief a span?
How  may we grasp  again  the  hand  that  wrought
Such  light, such fragrance, and  such  love,
0 star!    0 rose!   0 Son  of  Man?

Because of this, an  understanding  of the relationship  between Roberts'  book, In the  Morning of Time, and  Pratt's  poem, "The Great  Feud", is important to an understanding of Pratt's  work. Roberts  was  writing  of  man's  evolutionary  pro­ gress at the very time when Pratt, a pacifist, sick at heart  at the carnage  of  World War  I,  was coming  to the conclusion that  man  was not  progressing  but  retro­ gressing to his animalistic past. In  the  Morning of Time provided  a structure  of immense ferocity embodied in animal form which perfectly expressed  Pratt's  feel­ ings regarding  the bloody, brutal  and  unreasoned  precipitation of  World  War  I. Then,  too, Roberts'  stress on "reason"  and  evolutionary  "progress" indicated  to Pratt  the  precise lines of argument  with  which  he  must  disagree.  "The   Great Feud",  with  its perversion of reason and  the  moral  law, its  bloody internecine

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



combat  and  the concluding  implications of cyclic recurrence,  is Pratt's  atavistic answer to Roberts'  evolutionary  progress.
Pratt's  substitution  of an  atavistic  myth for  Roberts'  evolutionary  Darwinism is, perhaps,  the  key to  much  of  Pratt's  work. This  explains  Pratt's  fascination with the giant creature, the survival of the fittest, and the emphasis on the power of the superior  creature,  be it man or machine. And because Pratt  is also holding in  suspension  Wilhelm  Wundt's   mechanistic  physiology which  stresses the  un­ reasoned mechanical  response, that  which links the animal,  fallen man, and  the machine is precisely this mechanical instinctive response. When man or his repre­ sentative  (such  as The  Titanic) falls from reason to instinct, there  is  a magnifi­ cent  rush of unbridled  power. And  it is this response to the  removal  of reason which fascinates  Pratt.
Further, as Pratt  accepts that aspect of popular Darwinism  which suggests that inheritance  is carried  along the bloodline, these evolutionary or atavistic struggles are always carried  on in  that  arena.  "The  Witches'  Brew",  Pratt's  farcical  ver­ sion of  Milton's  Paradise  Lost,  establishes an  underwater   Eden  where  the  fall from  cold-blooded  to  purely  human   (warm-blooded)  sinning  is  accomplished through  an alcoholic apple in the bloodstream. "The  Great  Feud" is again  about the  fall  from  instinct  to  reason  and  the  return  to  brute  force  through   dema­ goguery  and  a  "yeasty"  ferment  in  the  blood. The  Titanic  also invokes  a  fall from steel to stone,  and  Brebeuf, associated with hubris,  falls  from  Christianity to  demonism  or  black  magic.  Similarly,  the  characteristic  technique  of  Pratt's  shorter  poems is the flashback to the primal  past, as in the reversion to the word­ less hate  of "Silences"  or  to  the  void  before  the earth  began  in  "The  Ground
Swell".


As THIS  DOCUMENTATION would  indicate,  there  was, in fact, a very close relationship  between the major  poet of the 188o's, Sir  Charles G. D.  Roberts,  and  the major  poet of the  192o's,  E.  J. Pratt-a  bend  in  the
stream of Canadian poetry rather  than  the sharp  break suggested by present criti­ cal comment.  Further, it is possible that  A. J. M. Smith, D.  C. Scott and  A. M. Klein, although  busy carving out new provinces for poetry, were also fully  aware
of the work done by their  predecessors and contemporaries.
In  this transmission,  D.  C. Scott would  appear  to be significant.  One  of the surprises of the A. J. M. Smith  concordance  was a substantial  "death", "love",

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



"beauty", and "dream" complex not unlike the formulation of D. C. Scott's con­ cordance.  This is not to imply that D. C. Scott's sometimes metaphysical  Beauty  and  Life   ( 192 r)  was to Smith as Roberts'  work was to Pratt,  for Smith's whole canon  is much  more  profoundly  influenced  by Eliot's  fertility  myth.  Yet,  there are significant  parallels with the older poets in Smith's  work. In  this connection we  might  compare   D.  C.  Scott's  "Variations on  a  Seventeenth  Theme" -a series of modulations on death  using the primrose, Eliot-fashion,  as an organizing metaphor-with  Smith's  habitual  practice. Then,  too, Smith's  poetic technique of metamorphosis,  often  related  to successive shadings  of  reality, would seem to be quite close to Scott's poetic ( cf. Scott's "The  Tree  and the Birds", and Smith's poem "The  Fountain"). Similarly, there are continual parallels with D. C. Scott's concept of the timeless geological North  ("Lines  in Memory of Edmund  Morris") in F. R. Scott's work, as well as a strong emphasis on the evolutionary  concerns of Roberts  and  Pratt.
If it  is Pratt's  concern  that  man  is in  danger  of  reverting  to  his animalistic past, in the poetry of Abraham  Moses Klein, man  very often is an animal,  and  a predatory  animal at that, as in this description of Hitler:

Fed thus with native quarry, flesh and gore
He licked his whiskers, crouched, then stalked for more.

Hitler  is also specifically identified  with an  atavistic  fall  and  the concept  of  in­ herited evil:  "Judge not the man for his face I out of Neanderthal! I ...the evil of the race I informs that skull!"  "Animal" is Klein's  largest category of  diction,
recurring  some  400  times with  "blood"   also  a  substantial   category,  occurring seventy-six  times.  In  Klein's  work,  "blood"  is  most  often  associated  with  the spilled blood of the small and  innocent  creature.  Klein's  poetry  appears  to  sug­ gest two worlds:  one is the  world of the "Black  Forest"  ethic  where  the  good little man is pursued  by the ravening beast; the other is the reconciling art world of Biblic wood and  fairy tale where the small  boy of "Bestiary",  hunting  at  his leisure, can stalk the "beast,  Nebuchadnezzar".
It is one of the ironies of the development of Canadian poetry that  E. J. Pratt
and  A. M. Klein,  both fundamentally kind  and  compassionate  men, should,  by virtue  of their  differing  historical  and  religious  perspectives,  have  been  funda­ mentally  influenced  by diametrically  opposed aspects of the same myth  or world view. Pratt,  strongly influenced by the Darwinistic superior  creature,  is fascinated by the spectacle of immense strength  and  power, the giant  whale,  the enormous iceberg,  the largest ship the world has ever known;  Klein,  who  has  been  made

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



tragically aware of the immense danger of unbridled  power during  the  Nazi era, holds as exemplar  the good little man,  the homoculus, the dwarf.
This  would  imply  that  Roberts'  evolutionary  Darwinism  has  become  atavism in  the  works of E. J. Pratt  and  that  the whole concept  funnels  into  the  Aryan
myth,  where it is picked up by A. M. Klein in the late  thirties. In  a  real sense, Canadian poetry has been a direct response to a world view or weltanschauung, and  if it  may  be  hypothesized  that  an  appreciation  of  the  Puritan   mythos  is essential for  an  understanding of the  poetry of the  United  States,  it  might  be equally hypothesized that  for Canadian poetry, coming as it does 300 years later, an understanding of the ramifications of popular  Darwinism  is essential.
But,  although  Canadian  poetry  has  developed  in  response  to  the  prevailing
popular  philosophies and literary influences (even Pratt  has a few poems suggest­ ing Eliot's fertility myth structure), it does not seem possible to argue that literary climate  alone  can  explain  the  links of connection  between  our  poets.  Current  interest  and  mere  chance  do  not seem  adequate  explanations  for  the  fact  that Roberts  and  Pratt  choose to write of the struggles of cachalot  and  kraken;  that Lampman and  Smith invoke machine  hells in corresponding  accents;  that  D. C. Scott, F. R. Scott and Earle Birney turn to the North land as the new Eden;  that Pratt  and  Klein both  write ironic litanies of progress noting  that  man  has turned to the beasts of the field for his instruction; that Klein's little hunter  seeks out  the enemy "spirochete" in Pratt's  "whispering  jungle of the blood";  that  Birney uses the  following  terms:   "Andromeda"  ( 1 ) ,  "apotheosis"   ( 1 ) ,  "architrave"  ( 1 ) , "Armagadding"  [Armageddon]  ( 1), "Betelgeuse"  ( 1),  "cordite" ( 1), "hiero­  glyphed"  ( 1 ) , "narwhal's" ( 1 ) , "pleiades"  ( 1 ) , "saurian" ( 1 ) , "saurians" ( 2),  "trilobites" ( 1 ) , "tyrannosaur" ( 2),  usually once, and with implications  of Pratt's  schemata; or further,  that  when insisting on  man's  need to accept  responsibility for  his own  evil, Birney  equates  man's  potential  savagery  with  the  iceberg  of Pratt's  Titanic, suggesting "the  iceberg is elective".
These  persistent linkings suggest that  we need to re-evaluate  one of the major issues of the  194o's-the  question  of the  continuity  of  Canadian poetry.  The term  "continuity" has  an  unfamiliar  ring in  this context.  In  most critical  texts we stress not  continuity,  but  the division of the Canadian stream  into  four  un­ related  groups:   those  of  the  pre-185o's,  the  188o's,  the  192o's  and  the  post-
194o's. If such a continuity  does exist, how may it be indicated?  Northrop Frye, reviewing A. J. M. Smith's The  Book of Canadian Poetry in 1943, states that  he senses a "unity  of tone"  in Smith's selections. In  his later  essay, "The  Narrative
Tradition  of  English  Canadian  Poetry"   and  his  "Conclusion"  to  the  recent


53

CANADIAN POETRY AND  THE COMPUTER



Literary  History of  Canada  ( 1967)   this has  been  expanded   to suggest  a  unity of tone achieved by a dominant  thematic  pattern -one of the cruel  North char­ acterized  by a forbidding  nature  and  a "garrison  mentality". However,  if  we are to  accept  John  Sutherland's angry  dismissal of Smith,  Frye  and  the  Canadian tradition  in his preface to Other  Canadians in 1947 or the tacit editorializing  of his lineal descendants,  Louis Dudek  and  Michael  Gnarowski  in  their  recent an­ thology of criticism, The  Making  of Modern  Poetry in  Canada  ( 1967), there was not only no continuity in Canadian poetry prior to  1940, there was no Cana­  dian  poetry worthy of consideration  prior to 1940.
Disregarding  the question of poetic  worth,  I  think  this assertion  can  be dis­
puted  on the basis that  there simply has not been enough  work done  in the area to  be able  to make so final a statement.  I am  inclined  to agree  with  the  later Sutherland, writing in Northern  Review,  when he suggests, somewhat  elliptically, that  it  might  not  be a bad idea if the  Canadian poet  were  not  unaware  of his place in the tradition  of Canadian poetry. The  necessity for this is obvious, and I would think that it would apply equally to Canadian criticism, too. Without an understanding of our  own  development,  we  cut  off our  poetic  roots:   without Roberts,  Pratt  is not entirely explored;  without  Pratt,  we negate  aspects of Klein and Birney; without D. C. Scott and Lampman, aspects of Smith's  poetic are incomplete.  Similarly,  Layton's  insistence on  the  image  of man  as a  "dis-eased animal", Cohen's  "Lines from  My Grandfather's Journal", Avison's  preoccupa­ tion with the technical  terms of space, Page's "dream" metaphors, and Atwood's
The  Iournal of Susanna Moodie do not emerge from a cultural  vacuum,  but are
intimately  related  to the development  of writing in Canada.


FOOTNOTES

1 The research from 1966 to 1968 was supported financially by the President's Grant Fund of the University of British Columbia and the Koerner Foundation, and that from 1968 to 1970 by the Canada Council and  the President's Research Fund of Simon Fraser University.
2   In  the  case of  Pratt's  poem "The  Cachalot,"  there  is also very likely an  inter­ mediary text, Frank Bullen's The Cruise  of The Cachalot; Round the World  After  Sperm  Whales,  18g8. From notes contributed  by both  Pratt  and  Roberts  to  an anthology of sea poems for school children entitled  Verses  of the  Sea   ( 1930),  it would appear  that  both poets were familiar with Bullen's work.  As  Bullen's work came after M oby Dick and does share some similarities with it, this supports Pratt's contention  that  he did not read Moby Dick  until  after  the  completion of "The Cachalot."




54



THE CANADIAN CRITIC: IS HE NECESSARY?


Phyllis Grosskurth






ABOUT ONE  HUNDRED  YEARS  AGO,  England'•  leading literary critic, Matthew  Arnold, declared that good criticism was more important than  second-rate  literature. He was speaking with particular  relevance to his own time. The  great  Romantic movement which Arnold described  as "abortive" had petered  out  with  the  early  deaths  of Byron, Shelley and  Keats.  Coleridge  had faded  away and  Wordsworth, for many years before his death  in  1850,  had  be­ come a conservative institution. Arnold, profoundly convinced  that  he was living in a creative  vacuum,  was gloomily contemptuous of the pallid,  pessimistic litera­ ture of his own day-including his own. Consequently, he looked to criticism to re-establish standards, to  distinguish  the excellent from  the  second-rate,  and  to act generally as a stimulus to a fresh period of creativity.
Time,  of course, has proved  him obtuse in his failure  to  recognize the genius
of, say, Dickens or  the  Brontes or  Browning. But let  us not  condemn  him  too harshly, since he was a man  with a real passion for literature  in contrast  to some critics, past  and  present,  who  make  one  wonder if they  nourish  a  pathological distaste for writing  or art  or music or the theatre.  For  the  moment,  then,  let us put aside the fact that  many of Arnold's  judgments have not accorded  with those of posterity  and  turn  to  the  reasons for  his  particular   attitude   at  a  particular moment in history. In  the middle of the nineteenth  century  English readers could feel proudly confident that  they possessed a long tradition  of literary masterpieces. (However,  it is possibly significant that  the Victorians  were still uneasily hesitant about  their  immediate  predecessors, the  Romantics,  particularly  in  view of the poets'  embarrassingly  unconventional lives. When  Keats'  love letters  to  Fanny Brawne  were  published  posthumously  in  1848,  Arnold  dismissed  them  super­ ciliously as "the  love letters of a surgeon's apothecary").
But  the  point  to  be  grasped  is that  a  nineteenth-century  English  critic  felt secure  in  measuring  contemporary works against  the  achievement  of  the  past.

55

THE CANADIAN CRITIC



Arnold's  particular method  of evaluation  was the  application of what  he called "touchstones". When confronted  with a new and  uncategorized  work, he would compare  it, for example, with the tone of Hamlet's dying speech  to Horatio:

If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart, Absent thee from felicity awhile,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain, To tell my story.

The  fallacy inherent  in this rather  simplistic approach is that  one can  be highly selective in the quality of the lines one chooses to use as "touchstones". It ignores the fact that  two authors  might be aiming for entirely different effects. This  par­ ticular  passage happens  to be deeply moving but  there  are others  whose  authors might cringe to hear them repeated. Wordsworth  was also one of Arnold's favour­  ite poets but he had absent-minded lapses and Arnold would never have used these immortal  lines as "touchstones":

This is a work of waste and ruin; Consider, Charles, what you are doing.

Nevertheless, there  was a great storehouse of literature which  was as familiar  to Arnold as his own name and  which had incescapably  moulded  his attitudes,  and this security  gave  him  an  assurance,  a sense of  confidence  even  when  he  was blandly wrong. Sometimes it even helped him to make  judicious evaluations.
One  often  hears  the story  about  the  president  of  Harvard  University  who, when  asked how long it takes to make  a great  university,  replied,  "Three  hun­ dred  years". This same observation  might  be applied  to the  creation  of a  great literary  tradition.  And that  is precisely what  we lack in this country.  As a  result it seems to  me  that  the outstanding  quality  of  the  average  Canadian  reviewer might be described as failure of nerve. When  confronted  with the spanking  new literature  of his own country,  he tends  to be  timorous,  hesitant,  or evasive;  or, at the opposite extreme, he becomes truculent, contemptuous, or  vitriolic. If we can  count  on  him  for  any  consistency, it  is an  almost  undeviating   lack of  en­ thusiasm  for  anything  Canadian. Why,  heavens,  it  might  stamp  him  as  being chauvinistic  or provincial!  This is just a single  instance  of our genius-for  this is what  it almost amounts  to -for  demeaning  ourselves, a manifestation  of our infinitely boring inferiority complex. The  contemptible attitude  of a great  many Canadians to  one of our most distinguished original thinkers, Marshall  McLuhan, is a case in point.  Morley Callaghan  is particularly  bitter  about  his treatment  by

THE CANADIAN CRITIC



Canadian critics.  I  do  not  exempt  myself from  this syndrome.  I  do  not  know how  many  books  I  have  reviewed -certainly  in  the  hundreds-but  only  a small  percentage  of them  have been written  by Canadian authors.  One  obvious reason for this omission is that  a great  many  more books are written  by  Ameri­ cans  and  by Europeans. And  let's face it, a great  many  more  important books that  seem to interest  the rest of the world. But I cannot  evade  my responsibility as easily as all that.  On  the whole-mea culpa-but  I do not enjoy reviewing Canadian books as a general rule. I, too, suffer from the syndrome common to the average  Canadian reviewer -I  honestly do  not  believe many  good  Canadian books are  written,  and  when  reviewing them,  I find myself  gripped  by some in­ hibiting force. I rather  suspect that many of the writers themselves feel somewhat inhibited  creatively here. Certainly some of them have told me that  they seem to gain creative confidence when they are working thousands of miles from Canada.
Why  this sense of inhibition?  Canada  may be a large  country  geographically
but her literary community  is very small indeed. We all tend to know each other intimately or at least to be friends of friends. And news travels fast among this incestuous group.  For example, a few years ago I reviewed Margaret  Lawrence's A  fest of God  for the Globe  and  Mail.  Even though  I usually adhere  to a policy of not reviewing books by personal friends, I agreed to take this one on because I had  been so enthusiastic  about  her previous novel, The   Stone  Angel. I  found myself greatly  disappointed  in  A  fest  of God  and  as a  result  I suffered  misery writing that  review. I even toyed with the idea of  sending  the book back to the literary editor and asking him to find a more "objective" reviewer, but  that alter­ native was rejected  by my Puritan  conscience. The  review itself was not  a  vitri­ olic piece. I simply stated  that  after the great excitement I had experienced  while reading The Stone  Angel, I felt sadly let down by A  fest of  God. Mrs. Lawrence is a very generous-spirited  person, and she has never conveyed to me that she felt any resentment  towards what  I believe she realised  was an honest opinion.  How­ ever, with  her  publisher  it was a different  matter.  A few days after  the  review appeared  I  ran  into  him at  a party  where  he proceeded  to attack  me in  highly emotional  terms.  Is  it  understandable  that  I  have  shied  away  from  reviewing Canadian  books ever  since  then?  A   fest  of God  went  on  to  become  the  very successful film, Rachel, Rachel, but  I  have not changed  my opinion.
I am  not going so far  as to claim that  all my criticism has been, in  Matthew Arnold's  phrase,  sweetness and  light. I do recall the great  pleasure I felt in the praise  I  lavished  on  Gabrielle  Roy's The Road   Past  Altamont. But  I  also  re­ member  with  a certain  grim satisfaction the hatchet  jobs I did on Graeme  Gib-

57

THE  CANADIAN CRITIC



son's  Five  Legs or  Scott  Symons' Place d'Armes,  two  novels which  happen  to have been written  by Canadians  but, in my opinion,  would have been deplorable in any language.  I  may be completely wrong about  this-as  I  may  have  been about A  fest of God (a book infinitely superior  to the two I have  just mentioned) for  one  cannot  evade  the  fact  that  ultimately  criticism  is based  on  subjective reaction.
At the risk of being tarred  and feathered,  then, I do not believe that  Canadian writing  at  this point  is either  extensive or impressive.  Perhaps  it  never  will be. There  are countries, old countries, which have  not developed  a literature  which has gained  an international reputation. And,  as American  influence  gains a strangulating hold  on  so-called  Canadian   culture,  my  pessimism, I  admit,  in­ creases. This does not mean that  I have lost faith in all Canadian  writers. There  are some whom I consider very fine indeed. But-and  here I seem to be contra­  dicting my earlier point-at this rather sensitive moment  in our  history  I  detect
a tendency to bestow on some writers the most absurd  attention  where in  more
prolific countries they would simply be lost in the shuffle.
Well, what  is one to do in this situation?  Throw  up  one's  hands  in utter  de­ spair? My answer is a qualified optimism. I have made it clear that  I am opposed to a myopic chauvinism;  and I am equally hostile to a petty  provincialism whose instinctive reaction is to deplore anything Canadian. A Canadian reviewer should be aware of what is being written in Canada and  he should  bring it to the atten­  tion of the Canadian public. He can also do what he may to offer help to promis­ ing young writers by reading  their manuscripts, or by recommending  their  work to publishers.  (Incidentally, most of us still  hold  the  romantic  notion  that  the novel is the most creative form of writing. I  couldn't  begin to tell you the num­ ber of starry-eyed students  who have told  me that  they were writing  "a  novel". One  of my own favourite  Canadian books is Peter  Newman's  The  Distemper  of Our Times.  Perhaps our literary future lies in non-fictional  writing).
But  the  outlook  for  responsible, informed  reviewing  in  Canada is very  dis­ couraging. Tamarack  Review,  The  Canadian  Forum  and  Saturday  Night  are in perpetual  financial difficulties. They  have been held together  by a noble band  of few active members and they deserve the highest commendation. But what I find absolutely deplorable in this country is the book review pages in our  newspapers. When  I arrived back in Canada  five years ago after living for some years in Eng­ land,  I  felt an  indescribable  sense of loss when  our  dreary  Sundays  could  not even be cheered by spreading  the weekly papers on the floor  and spending  hours

THE CANADIAN CRITIC



reading through  the arts sections. In England, literature, like the other arts, is considered  news.
As far as Toronto  is concerned,  the situation  has not improved  in the slightest
in those five years. On  Saturday  the Globe and Mail continues  to run  a fine sec­ tion on books in its magazine  supplement,  an arrangement  which  has  aroused a certain  amount  of criticism from some quarters. It is organized  by a  highly com­ petent, full-time literary editor,  William French, who knows what is going on in the literary world and  has the imagination  and  judgment  to  compile a balanced group  of reviews. In  1965 I was very pleased when he asked  me to contribute  a review every three or four  weeks, which is the Globe and  Mail's  policy with re­ viewers. This  pleasant arrangement continued  for two years; we parted  amicably when  I moved over to the Toronto  Daily Star to write a weekly review for two years; and  I am happy  to return  to his fold once more.
The  Telegram's book page is run  by Barry Callaghan  largely as a forum  for Barry  Callaghan  who generally  writes one long review, eked out  by a series of mini-reviews, something  like a  quick  shopping  guide.  But  the  situation  at  the Toronto  Star was the one that  I found even more depressing. Here  was a  news­ paper  with  the largest circulation  in  Canada,  yet on Saturday it ran  what  pur­ ported  to be a page devoted to reviewing books, utterly dull in format, duller still to read. The  only bright  spot was Robert  Fulford whose daily  column  was often devoted  to an urbane,  witty, well-informed discussion of a current  book.
Mr.  Fulford  was depressed  about  this situation  too. Two  years ago  he  per­
suaded  the  Star's  management to do something  about  it. The  Star's  policy was against appointing  a full-time literary editor, so Fulford's  job was virtually to act in this capacity in addition  to writing his daily column. It was a courageous thing for  him  to do but  it was exhausting,  and  it is little wonder  that  he left a short time  later  to  become  editor  of  Saturday  Night.  For  various  reasons  the  others dropped  away,  and  towards  the end  of my two-year stint  I  often  felt like the weary knight of Browning's  poem, "Childe  Roland  to the Dark Tower  Came".
But I still remember  with  mingled enthusiasm,  regTet, and  nostalgia,  the con­
versation  we had  that  day  with  Bob Fulford  when he outlined  his  plan  for not only giving vitality to the Star's book page, but for making it the best book page in Canada. His model was the 0bserver in which regular reviewers give a unique impress to a literary  section. I remember  Bob saying, "Why,  I  find  Cyril  Con­ nolly interesting even when he's writing about gardening!" Bob didn't  give us any sermons about  objectivity of treatment  or the importance  of sensing what  would be best sellers or  beating  other  papers with  the first review of a book. He  knew


59

THE CANADIAN CRITIC



that  we had developed individual styles of writing  and  individual  prejudices. He had enough faith in us to expect us to be as impartial and  perceptive as humanly possible; but  he expected us to have very human  reactions  too. He  knew we all shared  a passion for books. He  paid  us the  tacit  compliment  of  assuming  that what  we wrote  would be lively and  interesting.  And  I sincerely believe it was, even for a surprisingly long period after  Bob left. But it was bound  to fall apart without  an experienced guiding hand.
The  Canadian public's attitude  towards  books has something  of the awkward embarrassment with which it regards all the arts. I think we are still enough of a frontier nation to consider them somewhat effeminate, and our hard-headed Puritanism   whispers that  they  are  frivolous  and  therefore  dispensable.  Nor  do potential  readers  receive from publishers, book sellers, or  newspapers,  much stimulation  to read  books. In  this country  it would  be inconceivable  to imagine anyone  making  a full-time living from  reviewing  books. Most  of the  reviewing is done  by journalists or by academics.
Have  the reviewers themselves done enough  to create an enthusiasm  for books?
There  is little  opportunity  for  them  to find  a forum.  Even  when  they  do,  the publicity  departments of most of Toronto's publishing  firms are surprisingly  un­ co-operative  or  unenterprising  in supplying  them  with  advance  copies of  books. But what about  the reviewers themselves once  they have found  themselves  in the happy  situation  of talking about  a subject  in  which  presumably  they  are  enor­ mously concerned?  I have already suggested  that  some of them  tend  to display a lack of confidence in Canadian books. Yet  this is not  adequate  cause for  the extraordinary attitude  of the Canadian public towards the critics. I  cannot  think of another  country  where such an  uneasy  relationship  exists  between  critic  and public. I maintain  that  book reviewers suffer from guilt  by  association with TV, drama, and  music reviewers, many of whom seem to view their function  as that of demolition squads. The public is not wrong in regarding many of these as veno­ mous, self-important, and envious of those who are truly creative. They lack con­ fidence  in  their  responsibility as constructive  forces in  the  community.   Clearly some of them use their columns as outlets for personal aggressiveness.
This is not what  Matthew  Arnold had in mind when he talked about  criticism as an educative  function. It should, as Arnold comprehended, above all stress the importance of art in our lives. As far as Canada is concerned,  Canadian literary critics can  stimulate  people to read  books; they  can  make  people concerned  or angry  enough  to write letters to the  paper  when  a favourite  author  is attacked; they can  make  us aware of what  is being  written  in  this country  and  how  we

6o

THE CANADIAN CRITIC



differ from what is being done elsewhere and in what way we may be part of an international movement.  In other  words, criticism can create  the sort of dialogue which is so necessary to a cultural  climate.
True  eneugh,  we have not a native literary tradition  such  as Matthew  Arnold
had  to support  him.  But we have infinitely more literate  readers  whom  we can reach.  For that  matter,  we are  not hindered  by Arnold's  comparative  insularity. The  most popular  writer  among college students for the past few years has been Hermann Hesse. Only  by assuming that  we are part of the international cultural scene  can  we ever  hope  to gain  this sense of  nationality -by which  we mean feeling grown  up  and  being  taken seriously by the rest of the  world,  which  we hear so much about  these days.






































61



THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY

Canadian  Art Criticism


Audrry Thomas
'
ART  IS   ONE   OF   THE  NECESSITIES of  life,"  says  Henry
James;  "but  even the critics themselves would  probably  not  assert that  criticism
is anything  more than  an agreeable luxury-something like printed  talk." 1 Noth­ ing more, perhaps,  but sometimes something less, a great  deal less; or should  we say it  depends  on  who is talking? For,  six months  after  undertaking  to survey Canadian art  criticism both as literature  and  as a separate  literary genre, my first impulse is to confess to the reader  that  no such  thing  exists.  However,  the  curi­ osities which I did uncover, as well as the few articles and  books which may only be the exceptions that prove the rule, are too interesting and,  in the case of Emily Carr's  Growing  Pains and  A. Y. Jackson's  A  Painter's  Country, too important to be written off so quickly, simply because there is no real body of Canadian art literature  behind  them. This  article will be a survey  then,  neither  definitive nor particularly  comprehensive, of some of the  literary  curiosities  (and  some of the literary gems)  which I did discover in my search  for  the still unborn  Canadian art  criticism as a literary genre.
Let us begin with a curiosity. In the Canadian Magazine  ("of Politics, Science,
Art  and  Literature"), in  November,  1902, a woman  named  Kathleen  Hale  re­
calls a journey to the home of Homer  Watson:

It was an amber day in October, when with a sense of adventure we set out for that village [Doon]; the kind of day when, as Mobray says, "Nature  holds a bit of yellow glass to our eyes, till, like children, we catch  a  glimpse of the golden ages." Doon, nestling near the heart of Ontario,  is get-at-able by a "local" train, when it resolves itself into a station house and half a hundred  cottages.

This is a feature  article, with half-tone sepia reproductions of Watson's  paintings plus a photograph  of the painter's studio-an article intended,  presumably,  for the  well-bred ladies  who read  the Canadian  Magazine  and  saw  art  and  artists

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY



through  that  "bit  of yellow glass" the writer mentions in her opening  paragraph. And  the leisurely style of the  opening  to  what  is in  fact  a  rather  brief article, could have been -could  it not?-the exact style of the opening  of any one of
a number  of Victorian  novels, and  in that sense alone it becomes a literary  curi­ osity. And it has its descendants,  not only in the interviews with Margot Fonteyn or other illustrious artists on the women's pages of the Canadian dailies, but  also in the magazine  that  was to become the only Canadian Art  magazine,  or  only magazine of "Canadian Art criticism", if one wishes to be magnanimous.
In  the 1950 summer  issue of Canadian  Art  (nee Maritime  Art and  now  Arts­
canada), a  reviewer, whom  I shall make  anonymous,  begins her  review  (again a "feature" on a particular painter) .

Like a true artist, [X]  is very humble about herself and her work ....

The  romantic  conception  rides still, or rides again;  and  here is something  written by a man, in Canadian  Art, Autumn,  1953:

The art of Marthe Rakine, like the personality of the painter, is bright and  spark­
ling.

The  leisurely introductions are gone, perhaps, but for some reviewers the roman­
tic attitude  remains  unchanged, it would seem, since 1902.
Going ahead  from  1902 to 1943, we find something of the same attitude  in a much  more serious Canadian  Art  article  by Philip Surrey  (then  photo-editor  of the Montreal  Standard  and  also a painter), entitled  "Silk Screen  Prints  Enlist". This  article  is a criticism of the subject  matter  of the  famous  silk-screen prints done by such artists as J. W. G. Macdonald,  A. Y. Jackson, Thoreau  Macdonald, Lawren  Harris,  and  Arthur   Lismer, and  sent overseas to the  Canadian  troops. Surrey maintained that:

Nobody thought enough about the soldiers who were going to look at these  pic­ tures.... A Raphael  Madonna,  Botticelli's "Primavera",  Vermeer's  "Head  of a Young  Girl";  Degas'  ballet  dancers  or  "The   Millinery Shop" -all  of   these, though  they have no direct  relation to  his own background, would have  more meaning to a young soldier far from home than stark and stormy scenery.5

He  regretted  there  were no  paintings  of sports, offices, factories,  homelife,  tea­
parties or logging camps, no "pretty  girls".

We have tea-parties, night-clubs, logging camps, concerts, regattas, beaches,  bur­ lesque-houses, movies, churches, coal-mines, rail-roads, ships. None of these  were used.

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY



Presumably all  the  above  would  depict  Canadians back  home  smiling  as  they went  about  their  work and  play. The  romance and  gaiety  of Canada's coal-mines and   burlesque-houses! That  the  "stark   and   stormy  scenery" might   have  been more  appropriate does not seem to occur  to the  critic.  And  he  makes  no attempt actually  to assess the  artists'  work  as art,  rather than  as  propaganda or  therapy.
Yet  a genuine criticism  of the  extensive  use of landscape in  Canadian art  had been  made  by Andre Bieler in a Canadian  Art article  of the  year  before  ( 1942), "On the  Canadian Group of Painters".

By crowding  the  walls of our  galleries with  pictures  showing  only the  untainted beauty  of our  land, we have left no room for  the expression of that  deep  uneasi­ ness and  sorrow that  is in our  souls. The  depression  did  not  hit  us as it  did  the United  States.  That  sudden  bringing-down-to-earth so  beneficial  to  our  friends across the border did not occur here.

And  he goes on to say he does not suggest "that we should  all rush out  and  paint soldiers  and   sailors.... it  is  more   the  general  undertone  of  the   pictures   that counts.... "
The theme  of the  "lack  of humanity" in  Canadian painting will be  taken  up
again  and  again  as Canadian  Art  moves towards the  present  day  Arts Canada; it  is  a  lack  of  humanity usually  blamed   on  the  too  powerful influence   of  the Group of Seven,  who seem  to be blamed  for  almost  all  that  is bad  in  Canadian painting since  1920.
Bieler's  article,  a  review of  a show  that  was  more  than what  Arthur  Lismer
castigated as "a  popular review",2  represents an attempt to make  a literate assess­ ment  of Canadian  landscape painting. But  it  doesn't   really  come  close  to  litera­ ture as such,  to James' "printed talk". In  the  many  years Canadian Art, or  Arts­ canada has been  in existence, it has  published  very little  of that. Among  the  rare  examples,  one notices  Marius  Barbeau's 1946  article  on Henri Masson:

On another  wall of the same room we recognize samples of Masson's earlier  work: the  poor  folk of  Gatineau   Point  whom  the  flood  is dislodging  from  their  pre­ carious  holdings  at  the  edge of  the  river.  Furniture, belongings,  even  cattle  are being salvaged  in haste and  anxiety.  In  this chaos even  the  painter  has  not  had time  to set his house in order-the  pictures  rather  lack  unity.  The  eye of  the observer scatters its attention  upon many details, to the detriment of the whole.

Also  Barker   Fairley's 1948  article,   "What is  wrong   with   Canadian  Art?", in which  he looks at  what  has happened to Canadian Art since  the  Group of Seven success:

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY



Canadian art,  after  taking  a great  leap forward,  came almost  to a dead  stop and has  never  to  this day  recovered  the  momentum  it  had  then.  Like  a  man,  who, having  jumped  across the  rapids, is so astonished to find  that  he has  landed  dry on  the other  side, say in  a clump  of juniper,  that  he does not  dare  move out  of this uncomfortable  position.

And  Northrop Frye, in the  Christmas, 1948 volume,  talking  of the  northern land­
scapes of Lawren Harris:

In  the gauntness of the dead  trees, the staring inhumanity  of the lonely mountain peaks, in  the  lowering  mists along  the  sky-line and  the  brooding  confusions of colour in the foreground,  one can see what Coleridge meant  when he spoke of the poet as the tamer  of chaos.

Again,  in  1964,  I found  in Canadian Art  an  article  which  might  be classified as art  literature: "Emma Lake  Artists'  Workshop: An  Appreciation", by Arthur McKay. After  getting  in  the  usual  digs  at  Canadian art  criticism  and  pointing out   that   "we   accept  political   coercion,   economic   domination, Coca-Cola and predigested mass  communication, while  we resist exposure  to  the  more  humane and  civilized  arts  from  the  U.S.A.," he  discusses the  paradox of  the  success of the  Workshop:
For some reason unknown to anyone, the artists have co-operated  to a remarkable degree with  the  workshop  program.  I suppose Westerners  have  always given ear to the visiting evangelist. There  are equal measures of Bible-belt conservatism and radical  politics,  Presbyterian  sabbaths  and  riotous  Saturday   nights,  wheat  sur­ pluses, film  censorship  and  flying farmers.  It's  the  same  surreal  sub-culture  that elected  for  twenty  years the  most  radical  and  courageous  provincial  government in the country.

This  is witty,  literate writing   and  the  article  as a  whole  is full  of  the  kind  of "printed talk" that   makes  for  good  art  criticism.  There is  no  reason  why  the reader  of art  criticism,  like the  reader  of literary  criticism,  should  not  want  to be stimulated, excited, maybe  outraged, maybe  amused,  by  what  the  writer  has  to say.  Otherwise  why  not  simply   publish  lists of  works  currently  on  display  or statistical information about artists  and  their  chosen  media?  Why  try  to verbalize the  non-verbal unless one  is going  to treat  art  criticism  as something more  than lists or bibliographies? We don't have  to agree  with the  critic's  point  of view but we would  like  to be  convinced that  he  has one  and  is not  afraid to  use it! But many  of the  articles  examined showed  the  writers  to  be  men  and  women  of  no imagination, at  least  in  so far  as words  are  concerned. Oddly   enough, this  was

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY



more  true  of critics  who were not  also artists  than  of the  artists  themselves.  We shall  return later  to this point.
Most  of the  recent  art critcism,  however  new  and  slick the format of Maritime
Art/Canadian Art/Arts  Canada may  have  become, is as easily passed  over  as it has  always  been.  And  the  new,  "international" trend   of  the  magazine, a  trend which  really  got  under  way  in  the  sixties,  will  no  doubt mean  more  articles  by American and   European critics  and  even  fewer  by  the  few  Canadian  critics: more  articles  which  say "the  above is a reprint of an  article  which  first appeared in  Art News U.S. or Art International"-or what  have  you!
Perhaps it is unfair  to treat  in such  a cavalier fashion  a  magazine which  has
managed to stay  alive so long. But for literary  quality Arts Canada leaves a great deal  to be desired. It is too serious, thinks  of itself too much  as "one  of the neces­ sities of life", like bread,  and  not as "printed talk". Thus the  really best thing,  for many  years, is an "occasional piece",  a letter  written by Hugo  McPherson on the royal  exhibition in  the  Chapel  at  Buckingham Palace and  printed near  the  back of the  Nov.-Dec. 1962 issue of Canadian Art.
Up  a short  staircase ... is a mezzanine  gallery  designed  for  an  intimate   view of drawings.  Unhappily   two  corners  of  the  balcony  are  occupied   by  illuminated showcases filled with  royal  jewelry and  miniatures of famous  and  titled  people. The  visitors crowd  about  these cases like moths  at  the  world's  last  two candles, and  the  real glory of the  exhibition -long ranks  of  drawings  by Michelangelo, Leonardo  and  Holbein-can be seen only by those who elbow their way through the queues packed against the wall.

And  the  worst  thing,  also tucked  away  towards the  back,  is a newsletter  by some­
one  who  really  ought  to have  known  better:

... for  sheer  talent  and  saucy gusto the  twentyish  painters  of  British  Columbia, whether  they  have  a  yen for  Zen, are  plumping for  pop  or  opting  for  op,  are streets ahead  of any generation  in the province.3

This  is the  ultimate fascination of  the  magazine-that one  suddenly  comes across  a  perceptive essay like Macpherson's (for  the  public  and  what  they  want are  as much  a  part  of the  "Art Scene"  as the  artists  and  as valid  an  object  for critical  appraisal), or equally  easily a  paragraph of the  worst  kind  of  journalese in an  unotherwise unremarkable and  businesslike  article  by a man  whose name is well-known in  the  Canadian art  world  and  beyond. I recommend the  magazine be read  from  its modest  beginnings  to its present  rather slick and  "sophisticated" state,  as  a  modestly  interesting   historical   document containing a  few  words  of genuine worth  and  a great  deal of banal  (if  usually  harmless) verbal  rubbish.

66

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY






BUT WHAT  OF BOOKS?  If the  one  Canadian  art  magazine cannot truly  be said  to contain more  than  the occasional  essay, article or review of literary  merit,  are  there  not some inspired  books of criticism  by Canadians, some­ thing  by a Canadian Henry  Adams,  or  a John Ruskin  or  even  a  Henry  James? Certainly there  are  several  authoritative books  which  are  recognized   as such - The  Fine Arts in Canada  by Newton  McTavish, Canadian  Art by William  Col­ gate,  and  A Short  History of Canadian  Art by Graham Mclnness. There are,  as well,  many  studies  of individual artists  such  as  Blodwen  Davies'  1935  study  of Tom  Thomson or  John  McLeish's September  Gale:  A  Study  of  Arthur  Lismer and the Group  of Seven. There is J. Russell Harper's monumental volume,  Paint­ ing in Canada  and  a very curious  book called  Great Canadian  Painting:  A Cen­ tury of  Art. With  the  exception of the  book on Tom Thomson and  the  book  on Arthur Lismer,  these  are  mainly  histories, and  they  are  important for  their  com­ prehensiveness rather  than  for  their  literary  qualities.  This  is  especially so of the first  three  books  I mentioned. Even  Harper's book, which  is  written with  intelli­ gence  as well as knowledge, has only  occasional  flashes of  brilliance  (he  can  be ironic  when  he  wants  to)   such  as his comment on  the  local  reaction   to  Emily Carr:
Long delayed local appreciation of her one-man shows in Vancouver  and Victoria was some compensation  for  the former  days when  the ladies of Victoria  at  their annual  exhibitions  had  hidden  her paintings  on the  backs of screens so that  they wouldn't  disgrace the  pretty  flower studies.

Or  on  the late  19th  century vogue for a Parisian  "Art Education":

After  drawing  and  painting  for  long hours  they  [foreign  art  students  in  Paris] had an occasional momentary  art criticism from celebrated  painters  of the world's art  capital.  They  advertised  their prowess when they returned  horne, boasting they had  been instructed   by various famous artists, and  were respectfully stared  at  by less fortunate fellow  professionals who had  only managed  to receive a provincial training.

But Harper is best when  he quotes  from  the artists  themselves,  and  Painting in Canada  has  probably gathered together  more  "quotable quotes", more  flashes of insight  into  Canadian art,  artists  and  gallery-going public  than   any  other  book now available. Thus, Varley, in a letter  to Lismer about the  battlefields  of World War  Two:

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY



You follow up  a  plank  road  and  then  cut  off over  festering  ground,  walking on the  tips  of shell holes which  are  filled with  dark  unholy  water.  You  pass over swamps on rotting  duck boards, past bleached  bones of horses with  their  harness still on,  past  isolated  crude  crosses sticking  up  from  the  filth,  and  the  stink  of decay is flung all over.

Morrice  on Cezanne:

Fine work, almost criminally fine. I once disliked some of his pictures  but  now I like them all. His is the savage work that  one would expect  to come from  Ameri­ cans-but  it is always France  that  produces anything  emphatic  in art.

The  acid  remarks of Cruikshank in  the  1Bgo's:

Canadians   won't   look at  anything  small,  and  anything   like  crisp,  constructive drawing  makes them  uneasy. But I have decided  to do what  I know, without  be­ ing influenced  by the opinion  of a lot of farmers  who can  hardly  be trusted  to go to bed without  attempting to blow out  the gas.

Or  a letter  from  Douglas  Brymner  to his son  William :

... make one of the best paintings of, say, a girl, and  simply call it a girl, nobody, a few at  best, would care  about  it. But call it  Mignon   Aspiring  or  Esmerelda, a much  worse work  than  a  girl would  sell. Some  little  domestic  genre  pieces, or some touch of humour, with a taking title, or something  like Enoch  Arden Watch­ ing his Wife, anything  that  people can fix a story on....

It is obvious  that  Mr.  Harper knows a well-turned phrase  when  he sees one  and Painting in Canada  is worth  reading  for  this  reason  alone.  The   whole  complex and  everchanging "art scene"  comes alive through Harper's judicious  use of such quotations as those  above.
Equally  worth  reading, but  for different   reasons,  is Great  Canadian  Painting,
brought out  by McClelland and  Stewart in  rg66. Here  we have  art  history  and art  criticism  as camp literature. The  tone  of  the  book  is very  folksy  and  often facetious,  and  it is difficult  to take  the verbal  part  of the  book seriously. Of  Tom Hodgson:

His best paintings  have a swashbuckling vitality. This  is no more than  poetic  jus­
tice. Hodgson was twice, in 1952 and 1956, an Olympic  paddler  for Canada. Of  Dennis  Burton :
as a  boy he had  only one  contact  with  art  magazines.  They  were supplemented

68

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY



once a year by the  Eaton's  and  Simpsons' catalogues. This  last fact  may do more to account  for his later  love of pictorialized underwear  than  all his own explana­ tions.

Of  Lawren Harris:

He was a  grandson  of one of the  founders  of  Massey-Harris  Ltd.  and  ploughed back  [my italics]  the  profits from  a long line of farm  tools into  helping  painters like A. Y. Jackson  get started.

And  so on  and  so on  and  so on. The  editors  boast  that  "there are I o6  paintings reproduced here  in colour,  many  more  than  have  been  gathered in  a single book before". One  has  no  quarrel with  this statement. It's  a  pity  the  text  doesn't  live up to such  a "grand design". And  the comments, although often  amusing, are  an insult  to the  painters whose  work was reproduced. So far  as I can  determine this book is an  example of Canadian art  criticism  at its "literary worst".


Is THERE, then,  any art criticism  here in Canada which  could qualify  as literature? Yes-and  no. Emily Carr's journals  and  her  autobiography
Growing  Pains, are  probably the  most outstanding literary  works  to do  with  art and   the  artistic   process.  And   because   her  autobiography  traces   her  formative years,  first  at  Art  School  in  California, then  in  Europe, and  then  her  struggles with  the  "cultured" indifference of the  West  Coast  art  circles, a great  deal  of art criticism,  in  the  broadest sense, is included  in  this book.  Take, for  example, her comments on  European reaction to the  Canadian West:

Artists  from  the  Old  World  said  our  West  was crude,  unpaintable. Its  bigness angered,  its vastness and  wild spaces terrified  them.  Browsing cows, hooves well sunk  in  the  grass  (hooves  were  hard  to draw!), placid  streams  with  an  artistic wriggle meandering   through  pastoral  landscape-that was the  Old  World  idea of a picture.  Should  they feel violent,  the  artists made  blood-red  sunsets,  discip­ lined by a smear of haze. They  would as soon have thought  of making pictures of their own insides as of the depths  of our forests.

And  on  the  distortion of some  of the  then  "New  Art" of Paris:

Indians  distorted  both human  and  animal  forms-but they distorted  with  mean­ ing, for emphasis,  and  with  great  sincerity. Here  I felt distortion  was  often  used for design or in an effort to shock rather  than  convince. Our  Indians get down to stark  reality.

6g

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY



She  was a fierce woman  and  sometimes  a bitter  woman and  she  had  a terrific sense of drama. It is not necessary  here  to dwell on  the  reasons  for the  popularity of  Klee  Wyck, Growing  Pains, The  Book of Small,  Hundreds  and  Thousands. These  are  literature under  the special  genre-title of autobiography, and  they  are autobiography at its best. But Growing Pains and  the  journals  are  also full of  in­ tense,  original   perceptions concerning  the  artistic   process  and  art  in  general  as well as an  account of her  own  particular triumphs and  despairs.  Thus they  can (and   should)  be  considered  in  any  discussion  of  Canadian art  criticism.  Here  literature and  criticism  meet,  with  the  happiest possible results.
The  same  is true  of A. Y. Jackson's A Painter's Country. Maybe  it is because
both  Jackson   and   Emily  Carr are  "characters" that   this  is so.  In  spite  of  his famous association  with the Group of Seven and  his seeming  gregariousness Jack­ son  has always  been somewhat independent  (not  "isolated" like Emily  Carr, but "independent", which  she  also  was) . And,   like  Emily,   unafraid  to  speak   his mind.  His  autobiographical facts  are  very  different from   hers;  but   A  Painter's Country, as well  as  being  excellent  reading, is also  full  of  the  same  critical  in­ sights  as exist in Growing Pains, and  stated  with  the  same  originality  and  some­ times in the same  ironic  tone:

The  most  popular  picture  I ever  painted  was done  in  Quebec.  Known  as "The Red  Barn",  it is owned by William Watson, the  art  dealer  in  Montreal.  Not very long  after  it was painted,  the  University  of Saskatchewan   wanted  to  purchase  a couple of paintings  and  asked Dr.  McCallum  to choose them.  He sent  them  one
by J. W. Beatty and  my "Red  Barn."  They  bought  the  Beatty canvas;  the  "Red
Barn"  was returned  so quickly it could  hardly  have  been  taken  out  of  the  case.
Later  the Tate  Gallery asked to buy it, and  our  government  wanted  to present it to  Princess Elizabeth  when  she was in  Canada. Various  other  people  have  tried to purchase  it but  the owner will not part  with it.

In  a speech  on the departure of Arthur Lismer  for  Africa,  Jackson wrote:

The  first artist who came to Canada  noticed  a kind  of instinctive  antagonism.  He was a  French  portrait  painter,  who, making  a  drawing  of  an  Indian   in  profile, was nearly scalped by the indignant  sitter for making  him only half  a man. Criti­ cism is more enlightened  today, but  not much.

And  indeed  it  would  seem  that   the  only  enlightened critics,  or  the  only  critics capable of expressing  themselves  in  a  perceptive, sensitive,  original way,  are  the artists.  Perhaps this  is only  true  (if  it is true)  in  a  country like  Canada  where until  very  recently  the  Artist  belonged  to  such  a minority; and  such  a  minority

70

THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY



in such  a vast rna jority of hills and  fields and lakes and  space  that  he was able to  obseiVe his fellows from  a  kind  of  distance  that  would  not  be  possible in Europe, say, or even in Eastern  America.
Perhaps  professional criticism, other  than  by artists, is a thing  which develops
slowly-particularly in the visual arts, which comes to the frontiers of literature like electricity and  mains  water, only after  a community  of interest  has securely been established. At  the  moment  there seem to be just isolated gleams of light, not real "illumination".
Yet it may come. Jack  Shadbolt,  combining  the roles of Art  Historian,  Artist and Art  Critic  all in one, has attempted  to gather into one place a book unique I  think,  in  Canada, In  Search  of  Form-Shadbolt on  Shadbolt.  If it  is not "printed  talk" exactly  (the  Artist tends to lecture, not  to "talk"), it is definitely a step in the right  direction.  Like Growing Pains and  A  Painter's Country, this is a remembrance  of things past, but here the memories are concerned  solely with the painter's  own artistic development.  What  we know about  him as a person is incidental,  and  we have  no idea  of what  he said to  anyone  or  anyone  said  to him. He presents us with the drawing or painting and then  analyzes it, reminisces about  it, attempts  to fit it in to his general development  as an  artist.  Sometimes he indulges in a formality  of language  bordering on Jargon:

[the reader]  will see that  I have had a recurrent pattern  of going periodically in one direction toward the cosmic flux of all nature only to switch over for a period to an architectonically designed structure.

Sometimes  he is too lyrical,  too much  the  romantic   ("I am  nature.   Nature  IS
me") ; sometimes too self -consciously literary in his explanations:

the starkness of the black and white statement stirred my Grecian memories where often the chalk-white piers with their white boats stood out so dazzlingly against the dark blue of the water.

He is fond of words like "lyric",  "symbiosis", flux".
But nevertheless here is a man who is attempting  a whole book of art criticism
-not  really history in  the  J.  Russell Harper  sense, not  really autobiography  in the A. Y. Jackson sense, not either the quick, slick criticism of Arts Canada. That the painter  he writes about is himself is probably not a good thing here. In Search of Form  reaches  no literary  heights and  may  prove boring  to  those not  deeply committed  to an  interest  in  individual  aesthetic development.  But it  is the only "real" book of art  criticism  I came  across. It is not the  beginning  of a literary

THROUGH   A GLASS DARKLY



genre  but  it might  be the  beginning of a whole  series of longer  critical  works on Art.  Meanwhile Art  Criticism  in  Canada may  remain the  last  of  the  (literary) new frontiers.

FOOTNOTES

1 The  Painter's Eye: Notes and Essays on the  Pictorial Arts by Henry James. Selected and  edited  with an introduction  by John  L. Sweeney.
2   "It  is quite  easy to write a popular  review  (of the current  RCA  annual  exhibition in this case) . They  are already appearing  in the press. 'A portrait  of Dr. So and So (with  his history)  shown by the eminent  academician  with  his usual etc. etc... .'' ("The 64th  Annual  Exhibition  of the  Royal  Canadian Academy,"  Maritime   Art, Dec.-Jan.  1943-44) .
8 Tony  Emery, "Letter from the West Coast,"'  Canadian  Art,  March-April   rg65.












BC	STUDIES
A Quarterly devoted to articles in the Humanities and Social Sciences related to British Columbia

NUMBER 6-7, FALL-WINTER 1970- SPECIAL  ENLARGED ISSUE Archaeology in British Columbia: New  Discoveries Edited  by RoY L. CARLSON


Begin your subscription with this special issue

4 issues $5.00	Price of special issue $4.00


Subscriptions  and Enquiries

BC   STUDIES
203 Auditorium Building, University  of British  Columbia, Vancouver 8



WRITE 	ME	A	FILM?



A Symposium by
Canadian Filmmakers







INTRODUCTION
 


Hugo McPherson





WHAT ARE  THE  CONNECTIONS between  writing and  cinema in Canada? There is no authoritative answer  to this question.    Instead,  there   are   almost   as many   answers   as there   are  film  makers and   writers.   Hence  a   symposium,   the form   most  closely  related   to  the  group effort  of making  a film. I have  not, how­ ever,  taken  a  further step  towards  film: I have  not asked  each contributor to sub­ mit   his  article   to  a  score  of  colleagues to  have  it  revised,  praised, condemned, cut,   expanded,  re-titled, or  changed   to
another  subject  before    it   reached    the page-proof    (or   test   print)  stage.   That would   have   been   too  close  to  the   real process; and of course the budget for a symposium  is not  a  film  budget.
What follows  reveals   the  attitudes of
four   working   film   makers   and   writers who  occupy  important places  at  the  Na­ tional   Film   Board.   Each   has  chosen  an aspect  of  the  relation  between  film  and writing,  and   each   expresses   a  personal
 vision. So we will regard  this as a quartet, not  in  musical  terms,  where  four  voices play together, but in film terms, where discordant  voices  achieve   a  special  har­ mony or dissonance in a completed  work.
In  this  script, Ian MacNeill, film maker, and former Director of English Programme,  relates   the   costs   of   film­ making   to  the   individual  effort  of   the writer.  William Weintraub,   novelist, script-writer  and   film-maker,  dramatizes the   four-way   problem   of   scripted    and unscripted   films.  Guy  Glover,   producer, and  Director  of  English  Programme, em­ phasizes  the  inter-disciplinary,  non-liter­ ary  nature  of  the  film  art.  And  Jacques Godbout,  film  maker,  novelist,  poet,  and Directeur   de   la   production  fran«;aise, looks  philosophically at  fiction  and  film, and finds that  words and  visual images­ though  very different media-have  a common  bond  in  poetry. Bon  appetit! I shall  add  an  Afterword.

73

UNEASY RIDERS

William Weintraub




The   connection  between  writing  and  the  cinema  in  Canada?  Whither? I got some insight into this matter  the  other  day by eavesdropping  on a conversation that  took  place in the  cafeteria  of the  National  Film  Board (or any other  place where Canadian  film makers  gather).  The  conversa­ tion was between RALPH  OBSOLETE, a 40-year-old  film maker, and a
20-year-old colleague of his, PETER WITH-IT.






OBSOLETE:	This    fihn   you're    making, what's it about?
WITH-IT:  Alienation. How  people  can't communicate.
OBSOLETE: Of  course. What  else is there?
Who's  writing your  script?
WITH-IT:   Script?  Are   you   putting  me on?  Who  uses scripts?
OBSOLETE:  You're having  the  actors  im­
provise,  is that  it?  Realism?
WITH-IT:   You   older   cats   might    have called  it  realism.  We call it  honesty. OBSOLETE:    What makes  you  think   that
when   an   actor   makes  up   a  line  it's more  honest  than  when  a writer  writes it?  Or  more  perceptive?
WITH-IT: These kids aren't really actors, dad.  They're amateurs. More  like real people.
OBSOLETE:  You  mean  their  jaws will be more slack? While they're grunting around trying  to  think  of what  to say next?
WITH-IT:  Now  don't get  uptight, man.  I see you're  still  hung  up  on  that  struc­ ture   thing.  Well  that's not  where  it's at.  There's nothing that  turns the  kids

74
 off  faster  than a  well-made play.  No, we're  just going  to roll the camera and let   it   happen. That's  what   the   kids want.
oBSOLETE:  Easy Rider,  eh?
WITH-IT:  Easy  Rider?  Are  you  putting me  on  again?  The   kids  are  laughing at  that  one.  You  ought  to  get  out  on the   college   circuit.  It's   really   wild, man.
OBSOLETE:  I'd  like  to  read  you  a  quota­ tion,  which  I  just happen to have  with me.  It goes like  this:   "The making of a  film,  to  me,  is simply  the  extension of  the  process  of writing.  It's  the  pro­ cess of rendering the thing you've writ­  ten.   You're  still   writing when   you're  directing."  It  was  John   Huston  who said  that.
WITH-IT:  Who's  he?
OBSOLETE:   He   made The   Maltese  Fal­ con and  The  Treasure  of Sierra Madre and  a few others.
WITH-IT:  Oh,  John Huston.  We had  him in  school.  But  that's not  where  it's  at, man.  That's museum  stuff.
OBSOLETE:   And   Eisenstein   and   Hitch-

WRITE ME  A FILM?



cock  and  Bergman. They  all  seem  to think  that  writing the  screenplay  is important. Maybe  the  most  important part  of it.
WITH-IT:  That's more  of the  same.  Cosy stuff  for  Film  Society  liberals.  Look,  if you  want  to  write,  write.  If you want to make  films, make films. It's  two different  ball  games.  What we're  try­ ing  to  do  is create  a  new,  non-verbal language. That  old  words-on-paper bit isn't  going anywhere.
OBSOLETE:  Let's  talk  about your  last film
-Opus, I think  you called  it. If I  re­ member   correctly, you spent  ten  min­ utes  before  the  screening explaining to us how  you were  creating  a  new, non­ verbal  language. Then we saw the film
-six minutes long-and  then  you spent  half  an  hour  explaining the sym­ bolism  and   other   goodies.   That   was the  most  verbal  goddam  performance I  ever   saw.   Is  that   your   new,  non­  verbal  language?
WITH-IT:  I  can't help  it  if you old  folks have  to have  things  translated for you. OBSOLETE:   What you  mean   is  that   if  I had   been  high  on  acid   I  would  have understood  what   those  out - of - focus
blurs  meant.
WITH-IT: 	You're getting all    uptight again.  You  would   have  understood  if you cared.  All you want  in films is for the butler to open the door and say, "Anyone for tennis?" Anything to take your  mind  off what's relevant.
OBSOLETE:   (belligerently)  Unless  we in­
volve writers, we'll  never  have  a Cana­ dian  feature film industry. God  knows, we've  made  plenty  of features, and  all of  them   stink.   That's   because  we've never   encouraged   writers - brought them   along,   made  them   feel  part   of film making.  Instead, we've  frightened
 them off by creating a whole bloody mystique  about   film.  "It's a  director's medium  ... the   director   knows   best
. .. at   best  the   writer   is  a   necessary evil ..." We  resent  writers  and  writing because deep  down  we know that writ­ ing  is real  work  and   directing  is  just play.
WITH-IT:  You're hung  up  on  that  puri­
tan  work  thing,  man. Unless  you sweat you  won't   go  to  Heaven. Why  don't you relax?  Roll the camera and  let it happen. Let  it turn  you on. Don't  feel so threatened by freedom.
OBSOLETE:   We'll   never   have   a  feature film industry  unless we do something about  the  writing  problem.
WITH-IT:    (triumphantly) That word "industry" gives  you  away,  doesn't it? The  hell  with   meaningful  relevance, you want  factories with  Hollywood written  on  the  chimneys.
OBSOLETE:   (weakly)  Hitchcock ... Berg­ man  ... Faulkner    wrote     for     the  mov1es ...
(At  this  point,  SAMUEL SAGE, cup  of coffee  in  hand, enters  and  sits  down   at the  table.  He  is  Professor  of  Communi­ catiom   at  a  well-known  Canadian  uni­ versity,  and  a  film  sage.  He  is 50  years old  and  wears  a  new  beard  and  a  man­  dala around  his  neck.)
SAGE:  I liked  Opus, With-ln.
WITH-IT:  Thanks.
SAGE:  The  mosaic  thing  came  off  quite well, I  thought. And  there  was a kind of  "foreground  restlessness,"  if  I  may coin a phrase.  I was reminded of Oldenburg's use of mass.
OBSOLETE:     (shouting) What about   the boredom?  What about the goddam savage   bone-crushing  inhuman   bore­ dom  of  these  goddam  youth  films?
(We  notice,  for the  first time, that  while

75

WRITE ME A FILM?



the others have been drinking coffee, OBSOLETE  has   been   nipping    at   a flask.)
oBSOLETE:  (screaming  now)    Incoher­
ence is boring.
WITH-IT:  The alcohol  makes  them   up­
tight.  Ugly, isn't  it?
sAGE:	(smiling)   You    can    sometimes pacify   them   by  telling   them   a  nice, old-fashioned linear  story.
(WITH-IT lights  up  a  joint and  offers
one  to  SAGE. But SAGE declines, apolo­ getically, and   fills his  pipe  with   Edge­  worth  Tobacco.)
sAGE: What you don't understand, Obso­
lete,  is that  we young  people  see Film as part  of a total  Communications Picture. Subject matter is no longer  in the  ascendancy, no  matter what   your rear-view mirror  tells you. If we have to try to verbalize the New Cinema's qualitative parameters for  purposes  of identification through your generation's syntax, we might call them "honesty," "freedom," "relevance," "spontaneity." But  essentially,  Post-Syntactic is where it's at. One grooves with the Media Revolution, or  one  doesn't.
OBSOLETE:  Besides  an  inability   to  com­ municate, Sage,  what  other  qualifica­ tions  does  one  need  to  get  in  on  the Communications  racket?
SAGE: Don't you ever  get tired  of the old formulas, Obsolete? Time  didn't come to   a   stop   with   Clifford   Odets,  you know.
OBSOLETE: (drinking  openly   now)   For
chrissakes, Sage, you're  fifty years old! Why don't you take off that  goddam mandala from   around your  neck  and act  your  age!
WITH-IT: I wish I had  my camera. It's happening.
OBSOLETE: (muttering)  So  the  Canada
 Council sends  Old  Sage  ten  thousand to explicate With-It's films. "Come all ye  thesis  writers ... " In   the  nick  of time,  too, now  that  the  ole T.  S. Eliot lode  is drying  up.
SAGE:  Do  you  really  want  to stop  all  ex­ perimentation,   Obsolete?  Would   you have   stopped  Picasso   in   his   youth?  Would  you  have  stopped  McLaren?
OBSOLETE:   I want   to  stop   being  bored
by  experiments that   are   unsuccessful. We   used   to   throw    those   away,   but now   we  screen   them   for   the   public. And   I  want    to   stop   treating  every snot-nosed kid who comes along as a genius.  Nowadays everybody's a genius until   proven  otherwise. In  my  day,  it used  to be the other way around.
WITH-IT:   (with  his  generation's Love)
Never  mind,  Obsolete, you still serve a purpose, I guess.
SAGE:  It just so happens that  With-It  is
six years ahead of  his time.
OBSOLETE:  Then let's  put  his films away for  six  years  and   release  them   when people have developed the stamina to endure the  boredom.
WITH-IT: They  all get  hung  up on  value judgements, these  booze heads.
OBSOLETE:   (raving now)   It's  me  against the  whole  goddam  Global   Village! I don't want  to sit chanting around the electronic campfire until  my brain  is washed    away!   And   then,   when   we can't  think    any   more-just    feel­ McLuhan	arises,    new    Pope,    pre­  Gutenberg, pre-Luther, pre-everything, and   delivers   us  stunned   to  his  Jesuit  masters!
WITH-IT: What's with  him,  anyway? All
I want  to do  is make  films.
SAGE:	( calmingly)  Don't   you   realize, Obsolete, that  some  of  the  best  Cana­ dian  films  were  made without  scripts,

WRITE ME A FILM?



without writers? Documentaries,  cine­
ma  verite.
OBSOLETE:   That was  good   in  its  time, but  it's  old  hat  now.  You  see  cinema verite   all   over   Channel  Six.  Feature films  is where  it's  at,  if  I  may  coin  a phrase.    People    want    stories,   insight into   character,  comments on  the  hu­ man    condition-not   talentless   psy­ chedelic   blurs.   Films   for   people,   not for exegetists.
SAGE:  His  generation used  to hear  linear
narratives at  their  mother's knee. They never  got  over  it.
WITH-IT:  He's  hung  up  on  Doris Day. (At this  point,  JACK COMMERCIAL arrives,  just in  from  Hollywood. He  is a swarthy  man  who  smokes  a big cigar and has diamond rings on  his  fingers. He  sits down, slapping   an  alligator  briefcase  on
the  table.)
COMMERCIAL:  Which  one of you is With-
 
thean
thind pendent
VOICe  Ot
eastern  canada announces  Its

	*	*



contributors
Include

It?
WITH-IT:  I am.
SAGE:  I am.
COMMERCIAL: It's the young fellow I'm interested  in.  Tell   me,   With-It, is  it true  that   up  here  in  Canada the  kids
ride   their   motorcycles  in   the   snow?
 
George Dowering Robert Fulford Robin Mathews
.   EricNicol
Desmond Pacey
Melville Watkios

guet
 
Ernest Buckler Margaret Lalireoce lobo Newlove Alden Nowlan David Walker George Woodcock

That they  screw  in  the  snow? WITH-IT:  That's where  it's  at. COMMERCIAL:   (opening his briefcase  and
putting     one   million    dollars   on   the table)   That's the  picture I want.  Low budget,  hand-held  camera,  Eastman­ colour.  We'll  call  it  Hard  Rider. You interested?
WITH-IT:  (reaching  for the  money)  You got  yourself  a film  maker.
COMMERCIAL:    (withholding the  money)
Just  a minute. What about a script?
WITH-IT:   Uh?
sAGE:     (hastily) Oh,  we'll   get   you   a script,  all right,  sir.
 nat hentoff
* * *
theearisli
box.1172 fredericton, n.b.. ..
Single copies 35/; 	Subscriptioos $5.50





77

WRITE  ME A FILM?



coMMERCIAL: (throwing them   $25,ooo) Right. Here's twenty-five for starters. And  don't forget  to  remind  your  writ­ ers   that    ninety   per   cent   of   today's audience  is  under   eleven   years   old. We're   catering  to   their   fantasies   of what  it'll  be  like  when  they  grow  up to    be    teen-agers,    when    they    can groove.  Right?
SAGE:  Right. WITH-IT: Right.
COMMERCIAL:  (exiting) It's been a real pleasure working  with you, gentlemen. Let's  have  lunch  sometime.
OBSOLETE: (reaching  for  the   money) Would  you like me  to have  a crack  at that  script?
 SAGE:  (rapping  him   on   the   knuckles) No,  I think   we'll  get  Mack  the  Hack down  from  Toronto to  work  on  it.
WITH-IT:   (worried,  for  the   first  time)
But  Sage,  what's this  with  scripts?
SAGE: (sagely)  Now don't get  uptight, With-It. Mr.  Commercial needs some­ thing  on  paper  to show  the bankers,  so they'll   put   up   the  money.  Then  you can   throw   away   the   script  and   just shoot.
WITH-IT:  (nodding)  Spontaneity ... SAGE: Relevance.
OBSOLETE: (cradling  his hung-over head)
Honesty.

CURTAIN





THE FABLED MOVIE  CONTRACT

Ian MacNeill



Goo  KNows I  hesitate    to sully  the   pages  of  Canadian  Literature with   talk   of  money,   but   the  most   im­ portant thing  for  a writer  to know  about  films  is  that   they   are   expensive.   This applies  whether the  film is a  Communi­ cations  Arts  student's  maiden  project   or a  $20  million  programmed  disaster   like "Paint  Your   Wagon", for   budgets   are relative  to  the  financial resources  of  the producers or  backers.  At little  more  cost than   sweat  and   carbon   paper   you  can write  your imperishable novel. It may, of course,  never  get  published, but  there  it is. It  exists.  If no  one  else, your  friends  can  read  it.  Before  a  feature film-the movie equivalent of a  novel -can  exist, money  must  be  found  for  a great  many costly ingredients: film stock  (about $36
 for   a   minute's  worth   of  35mm   colour stock, developed and  printed, but  not counting materials for  release  printing) ; cameras   ($325   a   day   for   a   blimped
35mm  Arrifl.ex with standard lenses and accessories); actors  ($2oo  a day ACTRA minimum, including television buy-out rights  in  perpetuity, for  a  principal  per­ former  in   Canada,  to  $1  million   plus percentage  for   an   international   star) ; lights  ($36 a day  for a ten kilowatt  lamp,  of  which   you  may  need  five  or  ten,  as well  as  many   other   lamps)  ;  and  other  such  items,  including the  writer's fee.
The high  cost  of  films  strongly  influ­ ences   the   writer's  rOle  in   feature   film making. A novel may  be written for love, a feature film  almost always  is written as an  ingredient in  a  complex   commercial

WRITE ME  A FILM?



venture. Even  the  makers  of low-budget independent  films,  no  matter  how   fer­ vently   they  may   talk  of  the  art  of   the cinema,  are  entirely aware  of  the  profits that  may  be  made in  films. The  current Golden  Calf  is "Easy  Rider," reported to have  cost $36o,ooo  to make, and  accord­ ing  to  Variety, predicted   to have  final gross  earnings of  $6o  million. You  will see-or, better  perhaps,  not see-many imitations of  "Easy  Rider."
These  high costs and  high  potential profits    affect    film   writing   in   several ways:
I.  Unlike  novels,   plays,   poetry,   and other   forms  of  writing, film  scripts  are seldom written on speculation. They  are almost   always   commissioned  by  a   pro­ ducer   to  a  writer, and   usually  based  on what    is  known    in   the   industry  as   a "property" -a    novel,    short    story    or play, that  may  or may  not be the writer's own.  There are  two encouraging signs in the   Canadian   feature  scene.   Producers are  more  frequently asking  writers  to de­ velop  their  own  "properties" into  scripts, even  though  the  writers may  have  had no    previous    script-writing    experience. And  producers are  more  frequently com­ missioning  scripts   from  original,  unpub­ lished  stories.  But  producers, a  generally  unadventurous lot,  still  prefer  published properties,  and   the   best   way   to   break into  film writing in Canada is  to  write  a successful  novel.  If it  gets  film  bids, sign with  a  producer who  will  let  you  write  the   script.   And   work   through   a  good agent.
2.   Relatively few   feature  films   are
made  as compared, say, with  novels  pub­ lished.   So,  the   opportunities  for  script  writers  are  relatively few.  I know  of  no Canadian who  makes  a living  from  writ­  ing  only  feature films.  But,  again,  there
 are  encouraging signs. The  National Film Board,  in  recent  years, has commissioned about   a  dozen   feature-length  scripts   in English,  but   the  Board's   output of  fea­ tures  is likely to remain fairly small. The Canadian   Film   Development   Corpora­ tion,  since  it  began   operations  in  mid­
I g68,  has  helped   to  finance   directly or indirectly the development of about 35 scripts, almost all of them by Canadian writers.
3· To  complete a script  to the satisfac­ tion  of a  producer does  not  ensure  that  the writer's  name will appear, third  from the  end  of  the  list of  credits  (the   usual place  for  the  script-writer)  on  the  silver screen  at  the  Capitol Theatre. Hundreds of    entirely    competent,   even    brilliant scripts   languish   in  producers'  files  and fester  in  their   writers'   minds:  the   right star   was  not  available;  financing could not  be arranged; the distribution deal  fell through; the  subject is no longer  fashion­ able.  These,  and  many  other  interdepen­ dent   factors,  determine  the   "package", and  production  of  a  film  depends on  a suitable  package  being   assembled.   The Film  Development Corporation,  for  ex­ ample,  will  not  put  money  into  a  Cana­ dian   producer's film  unless  there  is also a  substantial financial  involvement  by a film  distributor. In  this  the  CFDC fol­ lows  industry   practice:  no   distribution guarantee, no  production money. In fact,  the  bankers  to  the  film  industry may  re­ quire  approval of  the  stars,  the  director and, of  course,  the  "property."
4· The  Dictionary of Occupation  Titles
(U.S. Department of  Labour)  defines  a
Scenario  Writer, in  part, as follows:
Writes  stories,  screen  adaptations or  scen­ arios  for  motion   pictures,   receiving  assign­ ments  and    recommendations   for   story treatment or  theme  development from Scen­ ario  Editor  or  Producer.

79

WRITE ME  A FILM?



That is not quite  accurate. The  writer for  film  may  also  receive  recommenda­ tions,  suggestions   ("you  can  ignore  this, if   you   want,   it's   just   a   suggestion"), direct   orders,   or   howls  of  injured  ego from   the  backers,  the  actors,  the  direc­  tor,   the   set   designer,   the   director  of photography   and   the   script   girl.   Film writing is not  a lonely occupation. But  it has  rewards which  have  attracted writers  like   Brian    Moore,    Mordecai  Richler, Faulkner,   Wallace    Stegner    and   many other  novelists. The  rewards  are  not only financial,  although  film  is  traditionally the  most lucrative market  for  writers.
5· How  lucrative? Here  are  some  ex­
amples:
A  Canadian  writer   recently   received
$15,ooo   from   a  Canadian  producer for the   screen   rights   to  a  first  novel.  The writer,   without   previous    film   writing experience,  also   contracted  to   do   the screenplay,  for   $6,ooo-$3,000   for   a first  draft   and,   if  it  proved   acceptable,
$3,000 for a final script, plus a small percentage  of  the   net   earnings  of  the film.   (Writers often  find  that   net  earn­ ings  are  highly  elusive.  A writer  in  high demand  gets  a  percentage  of   the  gross earnings.)
A    good    American   novelist,    whose books sell well, was commissioned  by a Canadian   producer  to   adapt  for   the screen one of his short stories that  had a Canadian background. He  had  no screen writing  experience.  Film   rights   to   the story,  $6,ooo.   Script, $g,ooo,  without a producer's option  to cancel  at  any  stage, plus  a bonus  of 25 per  cent  of  the origi­ nal  total  fee if  the  film  were  distributed in  the  U.S.A.
A  Canadian  producer  recently   com­ missioned   an   American   novelist    (four  novels  which   earned   critical  praise  but

8o
 little  money), who  had  done  no film writing, to  write  a  screen  adaptation  of a  European  novel.  Fee:    $6,ooo   plus  a small  percentage of  the  net  earnings of the  film.
These   screen  writers' fees  are  low,  in my opinion, but  it depends on how eager the writers  were  to get screen  writing ex­ perience  and   credits;  what    other   film offers  the  first  two  novelists  had  received for  their  stories;  and  on  recognition that  the   Canadian  feature   industry  is  very young. Credits are  the trade goods of the film  writer, the  subject  of  interminable contract  clauses,  frequent  litigation and lasting  bitterness.
More  like the  fabled  movie  contract  is one  for  a  recent   medium-budget  Holly­ wood film, commissioning an  experienced screen   writer    to   do   a   treatment  and screenplay  based  on  a  property  already  owned   by  the  producer.  Fee:   $15o,ooo,  paid  in  stages  and   without a  producer's option   to  cancel.  Delivery  requirements: eight  weeks  for  the  treatment; ten  weeks for  the  first  draft script; ten  weeks  "on call" for  revisions. Many  of the 32 single­ spaced  pages  of the  contract are  devoted to making clear that the writer retains absolutely   no  rights  in  his  work  even,  as the contract puts  it, "any  so-called 'moral rights'  of  authors." The  producers have the  right,   also,  to  "use,   adapt,  change, revise, delete from,  add  to and/or re­ arrange" the  material  in  any  way  they wish.   There  even   is  a   morals   clause: "You  will  conduct yourself  with  due  re­ gard   to  public   conventions and   morals  and  not  do  anything ... that  will  tend  to shock,  insult  or offend  the community or public   morals   or   decency,  or  prejudice us   or   the   motion  picture   industry  m general."
Before   you  elevate   your   life  style  to

WRITE ME A FILM?



meet   these  standards,  you  should   con­ sider   the   more   run-of-the-mill   rewards  for  screen  writers.  The current  ACTRA (Association of Canadian  Television and Radio   Artists)     agreement    with     the AMPPLC   (Association  of  Motion  Pic­ ture  Producers and  Laboratories of Can­ ada)  calls  for  a minimum writers'  fee of
$ r ,500   for   a   go-minute  film   for   un­
limited  theatrical use and one Canadian television network release. (For unlimited world  television  rights  an  additional  150 per  cent  would  be  paid.)  No  writer  can afford  to do good  work  for fees like that.
 Compare it  with  the  actors'  minimum of
$roo   a  day;   it  represents  15  days-to write  a go-minute script.  Or  compare it with  that  $325 a day  camera; it is the equivalent of a week's rental. Producers who  are  quite  willing  to  pay  fairly  high fees to performers or  for  equipment,  still economize  on  writing. But  of course  it is a false economy, as many Canadian films prove.  On  the  other  hand, I  have  yet to see a morals clause in a Canadian film writing  contract. We  may  be  poor,  but we can  remain  lasciviously  free.





THE NON-LITERARY  FILM
 


Guy Glover




THOSE WHO ARE CONTENT  to view   the   fiction   film   as   a   variety   of theatre are  quite  at  ease with  the  notion that  there  is a fundamental relationship between  film  and  literature and  between the  film-maker and  the  writer. A  sophis­ ticated  variation of the  "theatre" view is that   the   fiction   film   is   perhaps  better  thought of as  "operatic," with  the  script as a kind  of  libretto.
Since    film    deals    with    the    moving image  and  is a  temporal art,  however,  it is linked  with  music  and  dance as much as with  drama, and  such  a link  need  not be merely  postulated as a theory  but  can be observed  in  practice.
As various   potentials for  film  in  non­ narrative  and   non-figurative   forms   are explored  (documentary,   cinema    verite,  animation -both   figurative  and    non­ figurative,  etc.)   it   is  becoming  evident  that, if in  some  types  of film  a  relation-
 ship   to  literature  has  existed,   in  much that   already   has   been   created,  literary forms,  literary   elements   and   literary  in­ spiration have  been  either   absent  or  ex­ tremely  reduced,  and   these  non-literary tendencies  appear to  be on  the  increase.  This,  of  course,  raises  interesting and  perhaps  troubling  questions of aesthetics,  but  the  questions  are  no  more  troubling (or  need  not  be)   than  those  which  have  been  faced  by  the  practitioners of  other  media  in  which  it is quite  natural not  to expect   relationships  with   literature.   In this   connection,   Fontenelle   asked   the classic question  when  confronted with  a piece of programme-less music: "Sonata,
what  do  you  wish  of  me?"
Pre-stressed   concrete  can   be  used   to build  replicas  of the  Parthenon or  Char­ tres  Cathedral but  current  architectural theory   and   practice  have   found    other  forms  for  that   medium.  Film,  too,  can

81

WRITE ME  A FILM?



be  used   to   reproduce  plays,  novels  or other  forms  of literary derivation, but  it can  also  be  used  for  its  own  properties, in  forms  integral to  it.  It is a  fairly  ob­ vious fact  that  the film industry does  not use  film  in  this  way  and  that  the  com­ mercial    film   is   still   parasitic   on   the theatre,  the   novel   and   even   on   jour­ nalism.
Can  a  writer   play  a  role  in  the  crea­
tion  of the  "essential" film?
Many  directors themselves note down reminders in writing which  they  use dur­ ing  filming.  These  notes  bear  no  resem­ blance  to  literature and  would  often  be scarcely   intelligible  to  anyone   but   the individual who  wrote  them.  Nor,  except  in  dialogue elements -if  these  have  in­ deed  been written out  as part  of the film­ maker's notes (Godard, for  instance, does not  write   out  his  dialogue) -does  any writing  as  such   appear  in  the  finished product.
Some   writers   are   able  to  work  with film  directors  as  researchers   and   idea­ men,  helping to  invent  or  expand  char­  acters  and  action   (or  plot). Their  mate­  rial  is then  taken  over  by  the  film-maker and  turned to  his ends  and  to  the  ways of  his imagination. Some such  role  must have   been  played  by  Arthur C.  Clarke  who,  using  a  short  story  he  had  written some  years  ago,  provided   the  armature upon  which  Stanley  Kubrick   elaborated the  visual  poetry   of  "2001".  There are  whole    sequences    in    "2oor"   however which   came   out   of  Kubrick's  imagina­ tion   and   clearly   do   not   depend    upon anything  that   Clarke would   have   been able  to  write  down  on  paper.
In  some  kinds  of film, then,  it  appears that   some   elements   of  what   a   writer must  deploy   in  writing   a  literary   work can   be  used.  The   elements   are  clearly
 short   of  full   literary  compositiOn.   The verbal     element    (chiefly    dialogue)    is usually   of  considerably  less  importance than  in  a  theatrical text  but,  whether it bulks  large  or  small,  it  is of  a  different texture from  that  found   in a  stage  work and  is such  that  its rhythms are  achieved as much   through cutting as through the speech-delivery of the  actors  or speakers. This  suggests that  writing for the film requires, first,  specialized  study  and,  fin­ ally,  a  working   knowledge  of  the  pro­  cesses  of  film-making;  and   it   must  be assumed  that,  in  many  typical  instances, this  writing will  be  as  "invisible" as  the notations  of  a  choreographer.  In   many others,  equally  typical  instances,  the  col­ laboration  of   the  writer   will  not  be  re­ quired at  all.
The idea  that   a  "good  script" goes  a long  way  toward guaranteeing the  good film   (and   a  bad  script,   a  bad  film)   is still  current in  much   of  the  commercial film  industry; and   thus,  at  a  time  that the   "good   script"  has   come   to   mean much   the  same  as what   "the   well-made play"  meant at  the  end  of the  rgth  cen­ tury,   films  are  still   produced  of   which their   "good   script"  is  their   most   fatal  liability.  It is significant that  in  the  case of  "big-budget" films,  the  script  is  con­ sidered  a  basic requirement in  the search  for  financing and  it  is no less  significant that   "big-budget" films  with  their   built­  in  notion  of  the  script  "property" as the guarantee of  a  sound  investment,  have recently   been   reported   to   be  on   their way  out.
How  do  we  judge  good  film  writing? I have  suggested  a kind  of collaboration in  which  the  writer  might  work  to bring a  film  into   existence.   The only  way   I know to judge the success of a writer's contribution  to  that   collaboration  is  to

WRITE ME  A FILM?



inquire  if  he  has   been   invited   to   col­
laborate again.
Having written the foregoing I thought it  would   be  instructive  to  look  at   the point  of  view  presented in  a  book  bear­ ing  the  suggestive  title  Great  Film  Plays (Crown  Publishers,  New   York,   1959). Sure   enough,  in   one   of   two   prefaces  John Gassner   writes:  "We  assume  that  there  is a new  literature of  the  screen - the  screenplay. If this  fact  has  not  been widely    recognized   it   is   only   because screenplays   have   not  been   properly  ac­ corded   the  dignity  of  print ... Naturally not  everything that  is set down  on  paper  is worth   publishing,  but it  will  be found  on very little investigation that  film writ­  ing  already  has  substantial claims  to lit­ erary  recognition." In  a  second  preface,  "The   Writer   and    the    Film,"  Dudley Nichols,  himself  a  distinguished and  ex­ perienced screenplay writer, is persuasive in  his  moderation  and   good  sense;  but even   he,  in  his  final   paragraph,  writes "In  conclusion I hope  that   in  sketching the  successive  steps  of  making a  film  I have   not  underrated  the  importance of the  screenplay. It is, in  my opinion, pre­ eminent in  the  field  of film-making. It  is the  writer  who  is the  dreamer, the imag­ iner,  the  shaper."
Many  film-makers of the 6o's would question Mr.  Nichols'  last  sentence, sim­ ply   because   their    experience   does   not bear  it out.
Finally, if  literature has  an  influence
on   film  and   vice   versa,   we  should   be clear   in  what   sense  that  may   be  true. One   might    say,   for   instance,  that    in Under  the  Volcano, among  other  well­ absorbed     influences,   Hitchcock    is    as powerful  as Joyce  or  that  Gone  with  the Wind   is  a  not-unusual  case  of   a  novel
 



TRANSLATED BY BARKER FAIRLEY

No work of literature makes a stronger  appeal to our common  humanity than  Goethe's  Faust. This   epic-drama, completed   less  than  a  cen­ tury  and  a  half  ago  and  ranking  as  the  great  German  achievement in poetry,  addresses  itself equally   to  young  and  old,  whether  highbrow  or  lowbrow,  sophisticated or   unsophisticated, because  it turns  on  the  basic  problem  of every man-that  of  good  and  evil  and  the  search for  the  mastery  and  management of life. This  version  omits  nothing  of  the  original  text  and remains  scrupulously   true   to  every  shade   of meaning  from  first  to  last.  At  the  same  time it  brings  the  poem  so  close  to  contemporary English  that  it  reads  like an  English  work.

Leonard  W. Forster, Schroder Professor of German, University   of  Cambridge, has  called this  version  'the  most  humane   and  approach­ able translation of Faust  in  existence.'

Ten  ink drawings  add  to the beauty of  the  edition.
$12.50

UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO PRESS
Toronto I Buffalo

anticipating   a   film   of   the  same   name	 	

WRITE ME  A FILM?



made   some  years  later.  Conversely,  one might   say  that   Bresson's  Un  condamne
a mort  s' est echappe  is "Dostoyevskian"
and  that  in  La dolce vita Fellini  demon­
strates  spiritual kinship  with  Marie  Cor­ relli. On  this general  level the  two media  might   be  said  to  interact, though  obvi­ ously  at  a  safe  distance   and  well  down in  the  subconscious.   Sometimes  however it  is not  in  the  subconscious  at  all:   An­ tonioni    has   admitted to   conscious   at­  tempts    to   "Proustify"   his   material  in L'avventura   and    he   is   obviously   not alone  in  this  type  of  situation. It should be    remarked  that    prose   narrative   is usually  the  influence in question  and  not




LE  TEMPS:
La Poesie du Cinema





PEuT-ETRE bien qu'avant de mourir, le cineaste en moi etranglera l'ecrivain. Ou   vice  versa.  A  moins  que cette  schizophrenie ne soit mon  lot. Tout ce que  je puis  affirmer  aujourd'hui  c'est que  le cineaste  fait  vivre l'ecrivain; aussi bien  au  plan  financier qu'a celui  des contacts avec  la  realite.
Je  n'aurais jamais  ecrit  le roman  Salut
Galarneau! si je n'avais participe au film
A   Saint-Henri    le  cinq   septembre   qui m'amena a  realiser   8  temoins,  et  a me
lier  d'amitie avec   Maurice Nadeau. Ce qui  revient   a  dire  que  le  contrat  social du cinema documentaire m'a  permit  de signer,  au  niveau  de l'imaginaire, un contrat  de   transposition   litteraire.   En
 poetic  works  in  verse -not  so  unthink­ able  a  notion  as the  almost  total absence of   poetic    works    adapted    for    cinema would  seem  to  indicate.
It is doubtful that   my  remarks  would be  read   sympathetically   (or   at   all)   by the  young,   but  it  is  they,  in  fact,  who have  taken   up  the  non-literary film  and have  begun  to use it with  a freedom and purity little known in the past. Specific questions of  competence and  taste  aside, I  am  content with   their   intuitive grasp of   the   "essential  film"   and   it   is  with them,  fortunately, that  the  future of the medium  rests.











Jacques Godbout


somme c'est  a !'occasion de rencontres provoquees par  la  camera que  j'ai  ecrit, non,  que  j'ai  nourri plut6t certains livres, certains   personnages ... Grotowski    dit que  l'art est  d'abord une  rencontre. La rencontre d'un  metteur  en   scene   avec des   comediens,  avec   un   texte,   la   ren­ contre entre  un  ecrivain et  un  langage. Certaines  rencontres   ne   sont   que   des rendez-vous manques,  d'autres   laissent des traces.
La  profession   d'ecrivain n'est  pas  une
realite sociale: ou alors on est ecrivant, scripteur, bonne  a tout faire  portant en tablier  des dictionnaires. Le metier  de cineaste, lui, existe.
Je sais  de  nombreux ecrivains   qui  re-

WRITE ME A FILM?



vent  de  faire  du  Cinema, ou  qui  "pen­ sent"   cinema.  Peu   de   cineastes   revent d'ecriture litteraire. Le cinema documen­
taire  est  a l'ecrivain ce que  peut  etre  le
journalisme. Est-ce  Moravia qui  cessa il
y a  quelques   annees   d'ecrire pour  pren­ dre,   dans   le   journalisme,  un   bain   de quotidien?
Le  cinema   documentaire excelle  a de­
crire !'alienation, et c'est souvent  cette alienation qui  est a la source  des grandes
oeuvres   litteraires.  Mais   il  y  a  aussi  le cinema   de  fiction.  Dans  ce  domaine, au Canada  comme    ailleurs,    le   cinema    a puise    dans    des   oeuvres    romanesques. Mais  c'est !a un  phenomene de rencontre qui  depasse,  et  l'ecrivain, et  le  cineaste. C'est   par   accident  qu'un  roman  donne
naissance   a  un  film  libre.  Le  plus  sou­
vent  la  litterature est  une  frontiere, que peu  de metteurs en scene  osent  traverser. Car  il s'agit  de faire  un  cinema  libre, qui renvoit  au  cinema.
De   meme   que   les  livres   (la   biblio­ theque) donnent naissance  aux livres, de meme    le   cinema  est   a   la   source   du cinema. Ce  n'est  pas  un coucher de solei! qui  engendre une  peinture, mais  d'autres tableaux.
L'ecriture litteraire est une exploration du  langage, comme   on  dit  que  les  cos­ monautes explorent  l'espace.   I1 y  a  un espace  dans  les mots,  entre  les  mots,  que l'ecrivain  fouille    ( comme    les   lunautes qui  grattent le sol  pour  en  ramener des pierres) .  Et   ce   voyage   dans  les  mots, dans   la  magie   du   mot,   n'est   pas  sans danger.
Le  ridicule  qui  s'est empare des analy­ ses comparees du  cinema et de  la  littera­ ture   tient   au  fait   qu'il   y  a  eu   (il  y  a encore)    confusion de   vocabulaire:   on s'est  mis  a  parler  du  langage cinemato­ graphique,  de  la  grammaire du  cinema
 ... c'etait   par   analogie,  mais   l'analogie s'est  petrifiee.  Or  il n'y  a pas  de langage ni   de   grammaire   cinematographiques, car le langage exige des monemes, des phonemes,  des structures, un code. Le cinema  n'est  pas  un  langage, chaque image  est  unique,   et  si  certains   cliches ont  fait  leur  apparition, ils n'en  forment pas  pour  autant un  "vocabulaire".
L'ecriture veut  faire  degorger les mots. Le  cinema  veut  faire  degorger le  temps. La   problematique  du   langage,    sondee par  le style d'un ecrivain, donne  !'oeuvre litteraire. La problematique du temps, sondee  par  le cineaste,  donne !'oeuvre cinematographiq ue.
L'homme  cherche,  par   le  cinema, a explorer  le  temps,  avant meme  les 3  di­ mensions.  De  la  la  fascination  qu'exerce le suspense  (le  temps  suspendu). En  lit­ terature, il  en  est  ainsi  de  l'espace   des mots:    quel   est   celui,   par   exemple,   du mot:   seigle?  Ma  premiere association  en est une de tache  jaune,  puis de vent dans les damiers  des  champs de  tabac,  puis  le son me suggere aigle,  et  je m'envole.
C'est a ce point precis que l'ecriture litteraire  et   le   cinema   se  peuvent   re­ joindre: dans  la poesie.
Le  pouvoir  de  suggestion  de  la  poesie peut  donner   naissance  au  pouvoir  d'ex­ ploration  du   temps   qui   appartient  au cinema.  Les   vrais   ecrivains    sont    des poetes.  Les  grands   cineastes   aussi.   Les uns dans  l'espace  du mot,  les autres  dans le temps  que  fixe !'image. Pierre  Perrault et Jean-Pierre Lefebvre, au  Quebec, sont a  la  fois  des  poetes   (en  ecriture  et  au cinema)  mais  il  y  a  aussi  les poetes  qui oeuvrent  exclusivement avec  les mots  ou d'autres  avec  le temps.
Pourquoi  le  cinema  est-il  si  souvent cite  comme  "l'art du  XXe  siecle?"  Parce qu'il   est  ne  avec   celui-ci?   Non.   Parce

WRITE ME  A FILM?



qu'il  est un art du  temps et que la societe industrielle d'abord et  avant  tout  a {rag­ mente   le  temps.   Le  cinema  est  une  re­ prise   en   main    du   temps.   Le   cinema  n'est  pas  un  art  de  !'image,   ni  du  son, mais  du  mouvement en  ce  qu'il  est  un
temps.  Si tous les arts  cherchent a echap­
per  au  temps,  le cinema  lui veut  et  peut le dominer. Et  la  television  n'est  pas  un art  puisqu'elle n'a  de  sens qu'en rapport avec  le temps  reel  (l'assassinat  d'un  pre­ sident,  un  voyage  sur  la June) .
Et  le  genie  de  Godard aura   ete  d'ex­
plorer  le temps  cinematographique en y superposant l'espace  des mots, le jeu du theatre, la huniere de Ia peinture: ce qui
fait  dire  a plusieurs  que Godard, c'est du
mauvais cinema.
Or,   le  seul  mauvais   cinema   est  celui qui ignore  que  la premiere  grande inven­ tion   de   l'homme,  et   Ia  seule   au   fond puisque   toutes   les  autres   en   decoulent, c'est  le temps.  La  joumee  divisee en par­  ties,  puis  en  heures.  Puis  les  jours  addi­ tionnes.  Le  calendrier:  voila  la  base  de nos  civilisations.  Car  qui  divisait  le  jour et   depec;ait   l'eternite   avait   invenre   les mathematiques, les objectifs, !'argent. La prise  de conscience  d'une  existence  auto­  nome,  l'hypotheque,  Ia  famille,   la  pro­ priete,  l'espace  sont  autant de  fruits  du temps.  Et   les  arts   ne  sont,  comme   les religions,  que   des  tentatives  desesperees de  controler  le  temps.  En  ce  sens  !'ex­ pression   ultime   de  la  civilisation  ameri­ caine:  "time  is  money"   est  la  formule descriptive la  plus  lucide  et  la  plus desa­ greable    de   la   societe   post-industrielle. Mais  aussi  cette  expression  relie  la  civi­
lisation   d'aujourd'hui a celle  qui  naquit
d'un baton  enfonce   dans  le sable,  d'une
ombre portee,  mesuree.
Le  cadran solaire  ne pouvait  etre  utile que  sous un ciel  bleu. Dans  les pays nor-

86
 diques  I'homme inventa des systemes de mesure   mecaniques qui  se  pouvaient utiliser  malgre !es jours gris. Aujourd'hui ce  qui   separe   !'occidental  de  !'africain,
par   exemple, c'est   encore   la  notion   de temps.  L'homme blanc  est  a l'heure. Et
ses  heures   sont  comptees. Le  noir  et  le jaune  comptent en  mois ou en  annees,  ils ne  parlent  pas  le  meme   langage   car  ils ne  parlent pas  du  meme  temps.
Que  font  les touristes occidentaux? (Y
en   a-t-il   d'autres?)   lis   echangent  leur temps  de  vacance, leur  temps  de vacuite, le vide soudain dans  leur temps  normal contre le plaisir  d'un temps  exotique. Le Canadien  qui   va  en   Europe  recule   sa montre de vingt  annees  s'il visite les capitales et de  mille  ans  s'il fait  les chateaux. Le  Franc;ais  qui  va  en  Grece recule   dans   le  temps:  deux   cent,   trois cents  ans?
Les  bergers   que   nous  photographions en Espagne vivent  en l'an  1440, nous sommes  un  instant portes  vers  jadis, avec un  serrement au  ventre   et  une  nostalgie du  temps  perdu. L'industrie du  tourisme est  une  industrie du  temps  marchande: en   deplac;ant    des   hordes   dans   l'espace
1' American  Express  tire  son  profit  de  la
meme   denree dont   IBM   fait   des  cotes. Car   que   sont   les  ordinateurs  sinon   les
premieres   machines   a   comprimer    le
temps?
C'est    sur   la   notion    de   temps    que s'appuie  l'economie du  credit, la  struc­ ture  des  assurances, les  negociations col­ lectives  de  travail.
Le  temps,  c'est   l'espace   humain.  L'e­ ternite,  c'est   l'utopie  ultime.   L'amour, c'est   la   valorisation  du   temps.   Le  be­ douin  qui  entassait des pierres  pour  se re­ trouver dans  ses jours et ceux  qui  tentent de  congeler  les  incurables jouent  dans  la meme dimension. D'ailleurs l'ultime ven-

WRITE  ME A FILM?


geance    consiste   a  tuer,    c'est-a-dire  a
priver   brusquement du  temps,  ou  a  em­
prisonner, c'est-a-dire a trancher dans  un
temps  de vie donnee.
C'est  ainsi  que  toute  l'entreprise  semi­ consciente   des  societes  industrielles  con­ siste  a  utiliser  au  maximum le  temps  de chacun. En  ce  sens !'invention de  la  lu­ miere  electrique  est  beaucoup  plus  im­ portante que celle des armes  atomiques. L'effort entier  de l'economie tend  vers un controle de  plus  en  plus  precis  du  temps de chaque homme. L'espace humain est ainsi erode.  Les classes moyennes  qui for­ ment  la  majorite  democratique des  soci­ etes   occidentales  sont   prisonnieres  d'un quotidien qui  leur  est  debite  de  fac;on si parcimonieuse qu'elles  n'ont   meme   plus memoire de  ce  qu'etait  le grain   de  folie qui  peut  differencier la  joie de  l'atonal.
La  reforme agraire, dans  les pays sous­ developpes, consiste  en  la  repartition des terres  aujourd'hui entre  les mains  d'une minorite de  possedants.  La  reforme  ur­ baine,   dans   les  pays  industrialises,  con­ sisterait   en  une  meilleure repartition  du temps,  aujourd'hui propriete d'une min­  orite  de families.
Les  classes moyennes  n'ont pas  encore pris  conscience  qu'on leur  avait  vole leur temps  (en echange duquel, bien sur, elles ont   obtenu  des  objets,   comme   les  indi­ genes  obtenaient des  miroirs   des  grands  navigateurs)   et   le   sous-proletariat  est condamne au  coma.  Le  sous-proletariat, quand  il  reussit   a  manger,  se  vetir,  se loger,  n'aspire qu'aux valeurs  de la classe
moyenne; pourtant,  parce   qu'il   n'a   pas encore  realise  le  troc  temps-objet a con­
sommer, ce sous-proletariat possede  une valeur  (l'espace humain)  que  les classes moyennes    se   doivent     de    reconna.ltre, avant qu'il  ne soit trop  tard.
Vivre, c'est  consommer. Pourquoi done
 


THE GREAT BEAR LAKE MEDITATIONS
by  J. Michael   Yates
"A  man comes  north,"" Yates  says,
"'to  become  an  animal, to  turn  the  whole  day toward food  and  a  place  to sleep  warm."
Yates  is one  of  the  best-known
of the West-Coast  poets.  This is the  record of  his encounter with  the  Canadian  Arctic. Illustrations  by  Morse Clary.
Cloth 5.95  I paper 2.95

CANADA  ON  WHEELS: A Portfolio  of Early
Canadian Cars by  John de  Bandt
A charming  and  evocative picture-history
of motoring  in Canada. Over  40  illustrations
from old  newspapers and  magazines,
5  in full colour.  A Christmas book
for the car  buff and  also  for anyone
with  an eye  or an  ear  for the  sights  and
sounds  of yesterday. 5.95

MADE  IN  CANADA: NEW  POEMS OF THE SEVENTIES edited  by  Raymond  Souster and Douglas  Lochhead
The most complete collection  of modern
Canadian poetry  on the  market today. Over
1 50  poems  by 64  poets  including  Acorn, Atwood,  Birney, Gustafson, Livesay, Mandel, Newlove,  Ondaatje, Page.  With  introductions. Cloth 6.95  I paper  3.50

VOYAGES TO NEW  FRANCE
by  Samuel de  Champlain
A new  English text  with  an  introduction
by Marcel Trudel.  Champlain was  one of the
first white  men  to explore what  is now
Canada. In these  remarkable journals  he tells of  the strange, wild  land  and  its people,  how they  dressed, cooked,  made  war,  made  love. 6 engravings. Cloth 5.95 I paper   2.95

THE COSMIC  CHEF edited  by  bpNichol The first collection  of  Canadian concrete poetry. The 32  contributors include  Aylward,  Bissett,  Broudy,  Copithorne, Mayne, Smith, UU  and  bp himself.  A lively,  outrageous, essential  book. 4.95 (library  edition  6.95)

THE 12  DAYS OF CHRISTMAS
by  Carel Moiseiwitsch
One  of our oldest  nursery-rhymes
richly illustrated with  1 2 full-colour plates, one for each  of the  1 2 days  of Christmas. Two fan-folded friezes  in a sturdy
washable case.  A counting   book  of rare and  wonderful beauty. 2.95

6 new books from
OBERON  PRESS

WRITE ME  A FILM?



des   descriptions   de   "l'homme  aliene" dans  Ia  "societe   de  consommation"? Ce que  l'on  pen;oit  confus·ement c'est  que  si vivre  c'est  consommer, cela  ne  doit  pas se passer  ainsi. La  consommation aujour­ d'hui, dans  nos societes  du  desir, est  une consommation  dirigee   dont   le  principe est  le  suivant:   occuper   l'individu  dans toutes    ses   minutes,   lui   echanger   son temps  contre  un  objet  a  consommer. Le veau  tete,  il  est  heureux, il  ne voit  plus le  temps  passer.
Les   depressions   nerveuses   autres   que
pathologiques, nombreuses  dans les classes moyennes, semblent toutes  trouver  leur origine   dans  !'interpretation  du   temps: la  femme   au   foyer   qui  croit   qu'elle  y perd son  temps,  l'homme surrnene  parce qu'il  n'a  plus de  temps.  L'adolescent qui refuse  de  se  plier  au  temps  adulte.
Car  !'adolescent des societes  primitives
ne changeait pas de temps apres son initiation. Et  c'est  pour  eviter  des heurts trop   grands  que   le  commerce   a   com­ mence    de   soliciter    des  enfants   depuis l'age   de  huit   ans  desorrnais.  Ainsi  c'est au  sortir   de  l'enfance,  peu   a  peu,  que l'homme  apprend   a   ceder   son   espace humain.
Les   premiers  ministres,   et   leurs   col­ legues,  sont  de  parfaits   exemples  d'une alienation de  classe. Elus  le plus souvent par    les   classes   moyennes,   liheraux  en temps    de   prosperite,   conservateurs  en temps d'inquietude, les hommes politiques  qui  devraient  administrer une civilisation  et ses cultures  n'en  ont strictement pas le temps.  Car  ils partagent leurs  jours entre  des  relations  electorales,  il  passent  leur temps   dans  les  parlements,  les  comites, les meetings,  les diners,  les enterrements, les  inaugurations, les parades,  les bals, et consomment ainsi de la "politique" en capsules,   aussi   pris   et   en   tous   points

88
 semblables a ceux qui les ont elus. Le gouvernement de societes aussi complexes
que  la  notre   exigerait que   nous  elisions des  hommes et  des  femmes   a  qui   nous
donnerions le temps de  re{lechir. La  no­ tien  du  politicien-homme d'action  a  son origine  dans  les temps  anciens  ou  le  chef etait  a la tete  de la bande  armee. Le vrai chef  devrait etre  un contemplatif.
La  qualite de  la  vie  d'un  peuple   ne depend  plus  aujourd'hui  que   du   choix qu'il  fait  dans  son emploi  du  temps.1  De meme   pour    les  groupes:   les   contesta­ taires,    qu'ils    soient   maoistes   ou   John Birchistes,    affrontent  la   police   comme  jadis   s'affrontaient  les   arrnees   des   na­  tions.   Mais   il  ne   s'agit   meme   pas   de guerre civile:   il  s'agit   d'exercices ou  la violence    est   une   reponse    au   viol   du temps.
Qu'ont choisi  les hippies?  Quand  cinq
d'entre eux  habitent une  maison  et  par­
tagent  quelques  bouteilles,   du  saucisson et  de  la  marijuana, assis tout   le  jour  a
regarder passer  ceux  qui  ont  des  rendez­
vous  presses, voila  cinq  hommes qui  des­
esperement  cherchent  a  proteger   leur
espace   humain.  Ils   vivent   l'utopie  du
temps  pleinement  possede,  et  mieux meme:    les    hallucinogenes   etirent    le temps  dans une dimension inesperee, contraire  a celle qu'on tentait de leur imposer.
Qui   collectionne des  peintures  collec­ tionne   le  temps.   Et  les appareils  photos arretent le temps.  Et les cosmetiques ma­  quillent  le   temps.   La   valeur-jeunesse, cliche   de   la   publicite,  a   premiere  vue semble  vendre la force, la  joie, la beaute; il  n'en  est  rien:  Ia  valeur- jeunesse  veut faire  croire  au  client  qu'il  a  le  temps  de

1 La  valeur  de  !'Exposition universelle   rg67: Ia notion de temps etait abolie. Nous avions redecouvert le temps  de  vivre.

WRITE  ME A FILM?



consommer autre  chose  encore,   comme la  jeunesse a "tout son  temps  pour  elle". Si l'homme est un singe nu, il porte  au poignet   une  Timex  pour,   dirait   Pascal, lire l'heure sans gener  ses invites, mais surtout  pour   se  rappeler  ce  qui  le  dis­ tingue  du  singe:  il a le temps  de  penser. C'est  d'ailleurs en  pensant qu'il  inventa  le  temps.
Je    suis   loin   des   rapports   entre    le cinema   et   la   litterature?   Peut-etre  me suis-je  laisse emporter par  les mots,  c'est un   defaut   d'ecrivain.  Mais   c'est   parce



AFTERWORD




THIS   SYMPOSIUM -contain­ ing four  statements, but  lacking  points of view  from  either  established commercial film  makers  or  youth-is  only  a  begin­ ning on the question posed. I would  add a  few  comments to  suggest  the  broader spectrum. Jacques  Godbout  argues   that the  nature of  film  is essentially  poetic­ a release from  the  temporal  clock-watch­ ing   mode   that   regiments  contemporary life.  Guy  Glover's  definition  of  the  in­ tuitive   "essential  film"  is  close  to  God­ bout,   though   the  emphasis  is  different. William  Weintraub ironically reveals the gulf  between  the youthful roll-the-camera enthusiast  and   the  film  writer   who  be­
lieves  in  scripts; and   these  two  charac­ ters  have  their  individual evil geniuses­ the  academic swinger  who  is  devoted  to facile  "communications"  theory,  and  the commercial square who wants  a script,  a "property."
A  significant   general  point   is  that   no one   today   will  talk   about   a   narrowly-
 que   Je  suis  fascine   par   le  pouvoir   du cmema   d'enregistrer  le   temps   et   d'en
jouer  a volonte,  ce qui  est  un  defaut de
cineaste.
De toute  fa'<on, ici comme  ailleurs, litterature et  cinema ne vaudront que  si les  createurs tentent  de  fouiller  les  pro­
blematiques propres  a chacun de ces arts:
et l'espace  du  mot  n'a  pas a se conjuguer
avec  le temps  du  cinema, sauf  en  cas de genie, ce qui sera toujours un accident, surtout au Canada.






Hugo McPherson


confined  Canadianism in film. The  art  is international  and   multi-national.  Films are  documents which  people, particularly the   young,  "read"  avidly.   A  Canadian film  is simply  a  film  produced by a  per­ son  or  group  whose  centre  of  conscious­ ness is Canadian, though its  visual  idiom may  reflect  many  influences.
But  what  about  the  author  in  relation to film? We know that Chaucer rifled Boccaccio  in  producing The  Canterbury Tales,  and   that    Shakespeare  regarded any  literary  source  as  fair  game  for  the live  art  of  theatre. Why,  then,   be  sus­ picious   of   film   adaptations  of   literary works?  The full  spectrum is  bounded by two  attitudes. First,  film  desecrates  great  works of literature. Second,  film must  re­ ject  literature  altogether; some  younger  film  makers even  argue  that  a  university  education   castrates  a   film   maker;  the academic   process   deforms   his  imagina­ tion  in  advance.
The  central fact  in  this conflict  is that

8g

WRITE ME  A FILM?



one  art  cannot record  another. The  arts develop    their    own   means    and    styles. Thus,  for  example, The  Maltese   Falcon may  be a better  film  than  Dashiell Ham­ met's  novel;  or Wuthering  Heights  (with Laurence  Olivier    and   Merle   Oberon) may   be  inferior   to   Emily   Bronte's   ro­ mance.  But   somewhere  between   a   lit­ erary   work   and   a   film  is  a  script   or scenario.  John  Grierson,   first  Commis­  sioner  of   the  N.F.B.,  has  remarked  that  behind  every great  film lies a great script. Margaret Laurence, whose  novel  A  Jest of God  became  the  popular film  Rachel, Rachel, says that  she does not care about screen   adaptations.  On   publication  day her  work  as an  author is over. When  her novel  becomes  a  film  it  is a  new  work
-the   collaboration  of  people   working in  another art  form.
Obviously, works of the past may under­ go  extreme sea-changes in  their  adapta­ tion  to  the  new  audio-visual  modes.  But the    new    versions    can    no    longer    be thought of as mere  frivolities. Very  often a powerful artistic  light  burns behind  the images  which  we see on the screen.
And  that   brings  us finally  to  the  idea of  auteur  films which  is so strongly  sup­ ported   by many  young  film  makers,  and
 such   journals  as  Cahiers   du  cznema.  If the   author-director-producer  is  to   be­ come  the  presiding figure  in  tomorrow's cinema,  then   the  writer   has  indeed   lost his place  in the  art  of film. We have  seen this   auteur  phenomenon   frequently  in the  last  decade; we  must  recognize  that  it  implies  a  particular  and  rare  kind  of genius-a    domination   of   all   the   ele­ ments  which  make  a  film.  My  own  view is  that   such   talents  are   rare   exceptions in  film  making. We  welcome  them  when they    appear,   but   we   know    that    the wr:ter   and   the  script-writer remain   fun­  damental to the  art  of film.
Today, original scenarios-whether  a relatively brief  set  of  directions and   bits of  dialogue, or  carefully   finished   works (as  with  Hitchcock and  Bergman)  form the  most  significant bridge  between  tra­ ditional  fiction   and   film.  The   scenario  writer   must  see  and   hear  and  taste  and  touch   as  he   writes.   In  this  sense,  Ian  MacNeill  is   close   to   Godbout   and Glover: he  has  suggested  to  me  in  an­  other context  that   poets  have  more  feel­ ing  for  screen  writing than  conventional novelists. This  may  be one of the  reasons that    more    Canadian   fiction    has    not found   its  way  to  the  screen.






RlchaRb asel & company, 1nc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



go


NOTES ON
CONCRETE POETRY



Mike Doyle







THE  CosMIC  CHEF  GLEE & Perloo  Memorial Society  under the direc­ tion   of   Captain  Poetry   presents ... an evening    of    Concrete . .  . courtesy  . . . Oberon  Cement  Works.    "A   book   of
poems is a damned serious affair," said Wallace  Stevens.  A most  serious  element of Concrete poetry is the verbivocovisual play.  Highly  experimental  (still  in  gene­ sis, like  the  human  race  itself)   the  me­ dium   involves   much   "playing  around," but  is not  thereby  to be lightly dismissed. Group  action    and   manifestoes   appear alongside much  apparently anarchic ac­ tivity.  The   two  are   related   without in­ consistency.  As Ernst  Jandl says:  "There must  be  an  infinite   number of  methods of   writing   experimental  poems,   but   I think   the   most   successful   methods  are those  which  can  only  be  used  once,  for then  the  result  is a  poem  identical with the method  in  which  it was made."
Form-content  identification is  a  lead­ ing  characteristic of  Concrete,  which  it­ self seems,  in  part   at  least,  a  product of that    merging  or   fusion    of    art    forms which    has   been   occurring   throughout most  of  the  twentieth  century. Concrete shares  with  other  art  forms  a  concentra­ tion  on  its own  methods and  techniques, in  its case  deriving from  the  recognition
 of the narrow  range  of merely  linear reading.  Its antecedents have  been traced back  to  Mallarme,  or  even   to  picture­ writing,   the  formation  of  the  alphabet (obvious  source  of  bill  bissett's  "Evolu­ tion  of  Letters  Chart,"  Cosmic  Chef, p.
8).  Those   intimately  involved    in   the movement, however,  are  quite  clear  that it  is a new departure, with  its own  char­ acter    and    originality.   Dom    Sylvester Houedard, a  leading  English  Concretist, specifies:   "true   poesia   concreta  got  vi­ ably  geboren  in  mental  symbiosis at  ulm meeting  in  1955"  (TLS, August  6, rg64, p. 6g6).  This  date  is widely  accepted, so the  movement  runs  parallel  in  time  with the  activity  of  the  Black Mountain poets, Beat  poetry  and  "found" poetry,  sharing  with  all a  sense of the  poem  as thing-in­ itself  rather than  representation or  copy. But   what   is  "true  poesia   concreta"? Rich   in   antecedents  in   both   literature and   art,   the   movement  had    separate, widespread  beginnings in  the  late  'forties and  early  'fifties   (Belloli  in  Italy, Com­ ringer -whom   Emmett   Williams   calls "the   acknowledged   father   of  Concrete poetry" -in  Switzerland,  Fahlstrom  in Sweden, Diter Rot  in Iceland, the Darm­
stadt   Circle-which  included poets  of various  nationalities, and-perhaps most

gr

CONCRETE POETRY



energetic of  all -the  Noigandres group in Brazil) . Further, there  are at  least two separate  main   impulses  among  Concre­ tists,  described   by  Mike  Weaver  as  "ex­  pressionist" and  "constructivist".2   Pierre  Garnier, the French Spatialist, represents  the  first impulse   (see Stephen  Bann, Con­  crete Poetry:   an International Anthology, London,I g67,  and  particularly the  tone of Garnier's comments on his own  poems in  Emmett  Williams's An  Anthology of Concrete Poetry,  New York, I967); Bann cites  the  architect-poet  Mathias  Goeritz (German, resident  in  Mexico)   as a  type of  the  constructivist  (see  the  examples, one  fashioned in  iron,  in  Williams's  an­ thology);  "luz"  (light)    is   included   in Bann:

luzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzu uluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluz zuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzulu uzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzul luzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzu uluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluz zuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzulu uzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzul luzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzu uluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluz zuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzulu uzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzul luzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzuluzu

The  "expressionist" Concrete poem   re­ sembles  the  work  of "literary" poets such as  Ted   Berrigan  in   that   its   structure/ texture is  arrived at  intuitively, in   pro­ cess.  The  "constructivist" poem   is  gen­ erally  devised   according  to  an  a  priori scheme   (such  schemes  in  themselves  be­ ing  based  on  a  variety  of  principles.)
To  a great  extent, the material of Concrete  poetry   is  language  - words, letters, syllables, involving a conscious preoccupation  with   linguistics   and   se­ mantics. Perhaps the  most  widely-known manifesto is the  Noigandres group's land­  mark   "pilot   plan   for  concrete poetry",

92
 according to which  first emphasis  is on "graphic space"   (not  strongly  character­ istic,  on   present   evidence,  of   Canadian Concretists.)  Beyond  this  first  emphasis,  all depends on "spatial or  visual syntax", the  mode  of entry  being analogical rather than   discursive. Thus,  we  are  taken   be­ yond  Olson's "composition by field"  into what   Weaver  calls  a  "micro-aesthetic of perception".  The   perception involved   is not  (usually  or  primarily)  of the  under­ standing,    not    metaphorical   or    philo­ sophical,   but   is  aesthetic  and   sensory, spatia - temporal   and    immediately   dy­ namic.  Words  are  not  employed, as cus­ tomarily, in  the  service  of description or causality.  The   Concrete  poem   is  to  be judged   entirely   in  its  "opacity"  (to  use a  Poundian term),  in  what   is  there   to involve   the   senses,   although  the   Noi­ gandres group   claims   that,   in  it,  verbal and   non-verbal communication   are  ab­  sorbed  into  each  other.
Gomringer, from  the  start,   recognized the  anti-linear nature of  Concrete,  call­ ing  his own  poems  in  the  medium  "con­ stellations". With  perhaps a fine sense of irony,   he   introduced  the   technique  of "inversion",  or   spatial   arrangement  of the  poem  which   allows  it  to  be  "read" (experienced) towards  the  same   centre but   from   more   than  one  direction.  He saw  the  technique as  involving  "one  of the   intellectual   principles  of  existence" (thesis-antithesis) . Regrettably, The  Cos­ mic  Chef  contains no  dear  example of inversion, but  a good  one  by Nichol  him­  self  may  be  found   in  Mary   Ellen  Salt's  Concrete   Poetry:   A   World    View  (In­ diana   U.P.,   Ig68),  the   finest  Concrete anthology to  date   (see fig. II 3, "love").
Where Gomringer's "constellations" are
basically   visual/constructivist,  the   con­
cerns  of  the  Noigandres group  are  per-

CONCRETE POETRY



haps  more  complex.  For  one  thing,  while they   reject   direct   message   communica­ tion  as  an  art  activity,  they  nevertheless  insist on  the  nature of  language as com­ munication  by   words.   In   general,   the Brazilian  sense  of  "poesia concreta" is a step  nearer  the ideogrammic structure of, say,  Chinese.  As  implied  in   Fenellosa's  The   Chinese   Written  Character  as   a Medium for  Poetry,  the  ideogram is ulti­ mately   and   necessarily   causal   and   con­ nective,  even  though the  connective ele­ ment    is    greatly    diminished.   Yet    the Brazilians  have  also moved  further  away from  language than  has Gomringer. Two poems  in The Cosmic  Chef, from  David Aylward's Typescapes  (p. 34,  p. 7 I)  have little   obvious   connection  with   Concrete poetry  as language. (I find  p. 34 one  of the  book's  most  satisfying.)  In  the  mid­
'sixties, Pignatari and  a fellow-Brazilian, Luiz  Angelo  Pinto,  proposed  a theory  for the  Semiotic  poem.  They broadened the concept of  language to  include the  way in which any set of signs is used by any individual in  any  (single)   circumstance, thus in a sense returning to the poet's archetypal function as both  "namer" and "maker".  Aylward's pieces  are  like  this, but  are  limited  to visual/sensory response and  do  not  require lexical  keys like those provided    by   Pignatari,  Pinto    and   the British  Concretists, Ian   Hamilton  Finlay and  John  Furnival. Semiotic poems  may be   experienced   both    as   examples    of "nova  linguagem"  and    as   immediate visual  presences.
Aylward's   work,    together   with    bp
Nichol's   (the   hand   on  p.  37,  p.  57,  p.
66), affords  little  or  no opportunity to "read",  but   should    be   allowed   to  act related   to  the  plastic  poems  of  the  Jap­ anese   Kitasono  Katue   (Pound's   friend Kit   Kat)  and   to  Garnier's  rejection   of
 the   traditional   structures  of  literature, his sense of cosmic  space,  his perception of  words  as  concrete phenomena and  of their  "topography" (an  approach akin  to Gaston  Bachelard's The Poetics of Space, to phenomenology, to Roland  Barthes­ a  starting   point   for  The   Cosmic   Chef, see  p.  7  therein).  Garnier,  indeed,   de­ clares   that    the   poem    should    not    be "read,"  but   should   be   allowed   to   act upon  the  perceiver, first as an entity  and then   discretely.   Garnier  insists   on   the importance of "surface" (Poundian "opacity"),  proposing a  mystique  of  the holiness  of  things-in-themselves.
From Gomringer's recognition of the "play" element  in  Concrete, to Garnier's sense of its cosmic responsibilities,  the medium   is  widely  embracing.  Even   the most   expressionist    Concrete  poetry    is anti-rhetorical, a common  aim being to discard  worn-out language, forms, gram­ mar,  syntax.  Visual   rather  than  mental, Concrete is yet  centrally  concerned with word-structure,   thought-structure.  Thus Gomringer  is   able   to   emphasize   order  and  organization as important aspects  of it, to  perceive  it  in  terms  of architecture. Max  Bense sees the  contrast between  lit­ erary and  Concrete as being one between sequence  and   design,  and  declares  Con­ crete's  primary constructing  principle re­ garding words  to  be  the  "perception of their   togetherness". This  "togetherness" is the meaning of a Concrete poem; con­ tent  is form.  Thus  John   Riddell's comic strip  "Pope Leo"  (The Cosmic  Chef, pp. r3-I7) is satisfyingly  dexterous, but  seems at   best   impure  as  an   example  of   the medium.
In   some   respects   The  Cosmic   Chef is  confusing.    Its   visual   quality   cannot match   Solt  or  Stephen Bann,  but  it  has the  immediacy of  typewriter and  manu-


93

CONCRETE POETRY



script. Then again,  some of the items included  do   not   seem   to  be  Concrete poems  (though, obviously, I have  not succeeded  in providing a single clear definition of  "the Concrete poem".  This does not seem  to me possible at  present). Nelson  Ball,  to  take  one  example,   is  a fine sensitive  poet,  but  I would  not  have seen  his  work  as  Concrete, nor  would  I see   Seymour  Mayne's  "Pompass"  (p.
48),  which   is  like  a  fugitive   piece  of Henri    Michaux,  as  having   an   obvious place  in  The   Cosmic  Chef.  Both,  how­ ever,  are  more  than  welcome.
Real  "live  entertainment" is here  to a degree  not often  found  nowadays in more conventional anthologies. As sheer "play" my  fancy  is  tickled   by  bp  Nichol's  "Se­ mantic   chaos  equals  moral  anarchy" (p.
36) , and  by the  visual  jokes of bill bissett and   J. R.  Colombo  (p.  50,  p.  57).  A typical   "cement  works,"   the   book  is  a
fascinating  amalgam  of  personal   anar­ chies   (handwriting,  private   jokes,  Rid­  dell's  "tragedy")  and  standardized  con­ structions,  typographically  based.
bill  bissett's  S TH  STORY  I TO  is a
rich book, full of om-like, anti-thought chants ("o  lord  of  all  creation  it  is only to live."). He  asks:

is it  such a big deal  to  be
ready  for  the  blossom
of  the  future changes  seed
now

and   exhorts:  "do   more,  from   th   heart out." But  he  is not  hortatory, preaching, or  asking  for  critical   response.  He  offers a surface, not food  for  thought, the clear sound  of  a  bell,  a  declaration:  "th  an­ cient   lord   of  the   universe   asks  you   to be."  bissett's  Zen-like  poems  reject  pene­  tration. He  offers,  too,  Goeritz-like con­ structions, some  of  which   (for  example,

94
 the   page   involving  "v"   and   "x")  are foci  of  meditation.  Attractive and  sub­ stantial, the  book  is  given  its  coherence by  an  underlying  mysticism.
Maxine Gadd's Hochelaga "grabs" me,
but  has  almost  nothing to  do  with  Con­ crete.  She  has skill, intensity,  and  a  curi­  ous, still,  formal, sense:

he
so cold  and  clean,  his eye so grey and  clear
his skin  so cool and  pale,  a little  smile
my dove  hop down,  o
nothing ask, only  you lie there
and  let  me,  let  me

Bertrand 	Lachance   makes    interesting shape   poems,   particularly  "in   the   con­ crete   forest," "only   child  flashing  thru" and   a   vulture-like  airplane.  His   more  "literary" work  such  as  "the  whores  of granville st"  tends   to  be  rather  tedious.  Can't  think   of  anything,  right   now,   I want    to   say   about  Ken   West's   work.  During  his  short   life,  d.a.  levy  was  an energetic, prolific,  sensitive  poet.  He  de­ serves  someone's  troubling to  gather all his   many    small   press   publications  to­ gether  and  summing up for  him,  and  us. From   what  I have  seen  of  it,  blewoint­ ment  press  produces a higher  proportion of good  lively work  than  most, including the  Concrete scene  as  a  central part of its concerns.
That  scene   today   is  still   not   finally clear.   Perhaps  it  will  become   so  when the   two   lines   of   development,   expres­ sionist  and  constructionist, fuse together? Both   lines  share   one   healthy  objective, the  continuing task of purifying "the dia­  lect  of  the   tribe (s) ".  Even  the  expres­ sionist  Concrete poem  serves  to  control, rather than  to   indulge,  the   emotions. Even    though   some   so-called   Concrete poems    are   anarchic   (or   perhaps  just hopefully  liberated) the medium, at  core,

CONCRETE POETRY



seems firmly  based  on  rationality. In  the face   of  a  torrent  of  self-indulgent  ego trips,  its firm  link  with  reason  may make it  durable,  and   of  continuing  value   to our  life.

1 The  books which  prompted these  notes are:
The  Cosmic  Chef: An  Evening  of Concrete,
 .edited   by   bp   Nichol    (Ottawa:   Oberon Press); bill  bissett,  S  Th Story  I  To;  Ken West,  Wire; Maxine  Gadd,  Hochelaga; Bertrand   Lachance,  Eyes  Open;  d.a.  levy, Red  Lady  (all Vancouver:  blewointment press).
2   Mike  Weaver,  "Concrete  Poetry." The  Lu­
gano Review, Vol.  I,  no. 5-6,  1966, p. 100-
125.




BIRTH OF THE BUTTERFLY

Robert Harlow



THESE   NOTES are   personal, set  down   with   the   hindsight  not  avail­ able   to   me   during  the   dozen   years   I spent  with  the CBC in a  job that allowed me  some  access  both  to  the  production and  the  executive sides  of  its  operation. I must  say, too, that  I do  not share  Max Ferguson's romantic view  of  the  Corpor­ ation   (Here's Max),  nor  am I able,  for temperamental  reasons,  to  share   Frank  Peers'   classical   and   scholarly   approach (The  Politics   of    Canadian  Broadcast­ ing). A  beginning,  then,  might  be to  re­ state  what   most  of  those  who  read  this already   believe:  the   CBC   was  a  good idea.   The   proposition that    all   public radio  and  TV frequencies should  be used for  profit  and  the  perpetuation of private points  of view is not  a  tolerable one.  So, even  at   a  time   (now)    when   the  CBC has   become    a   $16o,ooo,ooo   giant,    in which   rather  inexpensive brains   jockey for   petty   power   and   ways  to   keep   it, there   is still  a  real  case  for  its  continu­ ance,  though not,  perhaps, in  its  present  form.
Another  beginning, and   this  closer  to the    subject     (the    CBC's    influence    on
 Canadian letters)   might  be this:  a  coun­ try already  blessed with  good writers may use any  new  medium  well  (witness  Ger­  many,  France, Italy, England, where  the best  authors  participate with  distinction in all forms of  expression,  and  where  the media  use  their  works  with  a  real  sense of   contributing to  a  cultural  heritage) . Good writers will enlarge  a country's consciousness and widen its horizon of expression even under adverse conditions. The  CBC,   however,   was  created  at   a time  when  there   were  virtually  no  use­ able   literary   talents   in   the   country   to contribute  to   the   new   public   medium. This  situation  was  made  more  complex  (and  the  situation  is  still  with  us today) by  the  fact   that  most  of  the   audience that  potentially  good  writers  might  have had  was  reading, watching, listening to the  products of  other  talents  from  other cultures.   Remember  too   that   the   CBC did   not  grow   from   fertile   ground  but was created  by legislation  to satisfy an intellectual need.  The Corporation's  ser­ vice   to   Canadian  letters   was   born   in triple    jeopardy:    no    writers,   minimal audience and  small  local  experience.


95

BIRTH OF  THE BUTTERFLY



In  the beginning and  before  the war, announcers, so the legend goes, wore evening   dress  to  read  the  news.  Singers did  Edwardian recitals. Musicians thumped  through  junior  symphony  rep­ ertoires.   Variety   shows  extolled  the  vir­ tues   of   Empire.  And   actors   and   pro­ ducers   and   writers   did   the   best   they could,   imitating  Arch   Ohler   and   BBC light  drama. No  sense  of   panic:  it  was enough   to  be alive  from  coast-to-coast.
During the  war, Dan  McArthur founded a news service that  still has traditions  and   real   virtues;    the   Stage series began  as a medium  for  dramatists, Ira   Dilworth's  Wednesday   Night   began to  function,  and   a  good,  if  sometimes over-anxious, Public Affairs department emerged.   Perhaps   this  department  more than    any   other   felt   the   brunt   of   the CBC's   de   facto  policy  not   to  create   a climate    where   good   writers    and   pro­ ducers   could  work  out  well  in  advance of the  public's  expectations. It tried,  and thought that  this  was what  it  was doing, but  it found  out  how  wrong it was when it   ran   headlong  into   that   dark  tunnel  labelled  "Tell It Like  It  Is" from  which it  never  really emerged. Neither  the Cor­  poration  nor   its   member    departments were   prepared   for,  or   understood,  the gap  between  the  new  age  born  in  Eng­  land  and  America  on  the one  hand, and the  Canadian public  and  its  parliament on  the other.
So,  during  its  first   twenty-five   years, the  CBC's   character  was  at  best  avun­ cular  and  stuffy;  at  worst  it  served  then as it  does  now, only  as an  instrument of public  policy.  Like  the  CN  and  CP,  Air Canada, the  pipelines  and,  sometime   in the  future, a  national   power  grid,   the CBC  quite   simply  helps  tie  Canada  to­ gether.  It was, and  still says it is, devoted

g6
 to   entertainment,  information,  the   en­ couragement of Canadian talent  and  the fostering of  a  Canadian  identity.  For  a long   while,   CBC   staff   people   believed these  were  not  mere  words  and  tried  to act  accordingly. It  would  be  difficult  to say  now  what   new  beads  the  CBC  tells when   it  says  its  private novenas   at  an­  nual  executive  conferences. Perhaps  there  are   no   new   ones;    perhaps   "give   the people   what   they   want" still  salves  as many  consciences  in  the  CBC  as  in  the U.S.A.  And  no one  seems to  understand that   to   follow   this   slogan   renders   the public  network  superfluous.
Yet   the   CBC   had   a  kind   of  golden age.  And  during that   time-for  a  dec­ ade   or   so   after    I 950  - it   produced enough    good   programming  to   gain   a place  in  the  hearts of  my  generation if not  in  those of any  other.  Still,  the  talent it  fostered   was  seldom   literary. In  fact, even  during those  better  times,  the  CBC, despite  its  liberal  image  and  stance,  was anti-literary. The reason  is simple;   it sought  to support  men-of-letters as other corporations support their idea men: as instruments of  its  own  corporate  means and  ends. Thus, what  writing  talent  we produced in the  fifties  wrote  for  a Cana­ dian  version  of Grub Street. Perhaps this would  not  have  mattered,  except   to  the taxpayers,  if  there   had   been   anywhere else for  real  authors to go. We  had  then no   theatre,  no   adventurous   publishers, few  magazines.  Certainly the  CBC  could not   have   done   it   all   alone.   Publishers  and   a   viable   theatre  are   necessary   to create a  literature, but  I don't  happen to think   this   lets   the   CBC   off  the   hook. While   writers  were   not   thrown   to  the dogs who  can  compute with  the speed  of light  the  lowest  common denominator of public  taste,  they  were  up  against   what

BIRTH OF  THE BUTTERFLY



was necessarily an institutionalized taste which   tended   to  recognize   only  certain modes  of  expression   and  could  only  tol­ erate  a low level of artistic consciousness. These  modes  and  levels  were  defined  by a  programme  policy  which   perpetuated the   taste   of  a  corporation  that   seldom knew  what  it  would  do to foster  a litera­ ture,   but   which   was  always  quite   clear what  it  wouldn't do, as outlined in Gov­ ernment White  Papers  and  various  exec­ utive  directives,   all  conceived  and  writ­  ten  with  hellish  good  intentions.
There are points  here which  must be sharpened. There was  a  kind  of  Golden Age. The  CBC  was able  to do  a fair  job of   recruiting  after   World   War    II.  In
1948 the recruits  were avant-garde. Those who  are  left  have  moved  up  in  the  Cor­ poration; they  are  still  avant-garde-in terms  of  1948.  A second  point: the  Gol­ den  Age  was  given  its  original  impetus by  A.  Davidson  Dunton,  a   man   who rightly  felt  that   the  CBC's   mission  was not  necessarily  to  be  popular.  Alphonse Ouimet, who  succeeded   him,   was  pres­ sured  to  take  the  opposite view.  Or  per­ haps   it   came   naturally  to   him.   Great  ages  sometimes   come  to  a  close  on  the heels  of  a  rousing   speech.   M.  Ouimet's speech   was  to  the  National  Convention of  the  Canadian Chambers of Commerce at   Halifax in   1957  where  he  declared, with  emotion, that   the  CBC  wanted   to be loved. If a moment were  to be marked  when  the  CBC  died  as  a  literary  possi­ bility-indeed,   as   almost   any   kind   of culturally   useful   possibility-that  mo­ ment   would   be  the   most   likely  choice. No  literary    (or  cultural)  force   can   be loved.  When    it   becomes    beholden    it ceases to breathe its own  air.
A still  larger  point  must  be made. Be­
cause  the CBC  did  not  establish  an  inde-
 pendent   definable    tradition	(as   with News)   in   collaboration  with   emerging writers,  it  has  been  unable   to  remain  in contact   with   the   young   and   vigorous. Nor,  because  it  never   had   an  indepen­ dent  vision, has  it  been  able  to  establish an  audience   which  will -or  can-tol­ erate  the incivilities  of real  creativity. Its true  audience  is now at  the  movies, and it  is loved  as  much   as  any  broadcasting outfit   is  ever  loved   by   an   audience   of older  apathetics, of  whom  not a few have been  taught  to   be   colonial   Americans, the  very  thing-rightly or  wrongly  but ironically-the  Corporation was  set  up to prevent.  And  this is an  indictment the CBC  could  have  escaped  only  by  under­ standing the  necessity of being deservedly unloved  a  good  deal  of  the  time.
Doing violence  to manners, mores, to conventional wisdom and  philosophy,  to everything  but life itself is basic to any publishable literature. The  CBC's   point of  view  on  this  matter was  solidly  cor­ porate. It  produced  (and    still   does), sometimes  shyly, sometimes  with  fanfare, a  little  electronic  music,   an   occasional ballet,  an  eclectic  original play  here  and there   throughout  the   winter  season.  In short,  these gestures  are  not a usual thing  and   the   result   is  rather   like   suddenly  seeing   your   mother   walk   down   Main  Street    with    one    breast    exposed.    It's  shocking,  so shocking  that  it's  impossible to say whether it's  a good  breast  or  not. A lot of breasts  have  to  hang  out  before compassionate judgment   is  even   think­ able.
In  Europe,  for  example, Larry  Kent's High  and  Maurie Ruvinsky's Plastic Mile have, I'm  told, been broadcast on TV. Without speaking of the  merits  of either of these feature films,  the  point  must  be made  that  neither of them  could  possibly

97

BIRTH OF  THE BUTTERFLY



be  broadcast  on   the   CBC.  In   Europe, time  has  been  available  for  all  kinds  of art,   and   in  sufficient   bulk  for  it  to  be accepted as relevant by its audience and appraised as  part   of  a  normal   schedule of programmes. This will not happen in Canada now. The  moment  during the fifties   when    the   tradition  could   have been established which  would  have made the  CBC  a real  influence  for  good inside the  literary scene  is gone. The  Corpora­ tion  opted  for  almost  total  pop  and  pap,  and   a   sycophant's   relationship  to   Ot­ tawa's   politicians.  To  begin  now  would require a  revolution  which   no  one  has the stomach for, or  the  psychic energy  to produce. The  potentially good men hired fifteen to twenty years ago are long since gone.  The   small  uprisings  of  the  sixties were   made  by   trendy    popularizers  of small originality. They  might  have done some   good -kept   the   battle   going­ had  there been  leadership at  the  depart­ ment   and   executive  levels,  but   by  that  time   there   was   no  one  of   strength  or stature left.  The image  of  the Corpora­ tion  became,  quite  naturally, the  butter­ fl">:.
My small  part  in  this losing game  was
played  out  during the  years about  which I  have  been  speaking ( 1951-64) . One  of the   black   comic   aspects   of  the   CBC's history   during  that   period   was  that   a good   many    production   people    sensed what  the  priorities should  have  been. We knew  that  we did  not  need press officers, but  good  programmes that  led  the  pub­ lic's  taste.  We  did  not  need  systems  and procedures men,  personnel  people,  hun­ dreds   of  head   office  drones   and   emis­ saries   proving   Parkinson's  Law    while ostensibly  satisfying   M.  Ouimet's obses­ sion with  re-organizing and  re-organizing again  the  superstructure of the  Corpora-

g8
 tion.  We  did  not  need  supervisors super­ vising  supervisors supervising  supervisors until   reality   became  power   instead   of programmes.  And   we  did   not   need   to have   to   think   that  executive  personnel  were  the   enemy.  What  we  needed   was the  sense  Dunton  had  given  in  his  time that   someone  was  leading  us  who  could handle  the  people  in  Ottawa and   else­ where   who  believe  that   new  experience is always  obscene  and  the  CBC  is a left­ wing  plot. But  even   under   Dunton we had   failed    to   make   contact  with   the clear-eyed  among  the   young.   And   this was a kind of slow suicide. The job of adjusting our  priorities was  never  done. The  CBC   simply   grew   old   and   died. Even  this  kind  of suicide  is a betrayal.
If the  CBC   had   ever  really  met   the
Canadian writer   it  would  have  been  in one   of   three   areas:  the   dramatic,  the documentary, or  the  literary. In  the  be­ ginning, there   were  neither   the  creativ.e nor  the  production talents  to  make  these forms  viable.  The  CBC functioned at  the level   of   a   local   Little   Theatre  group where    social   position    and   some   small "showbiz" experience fostered  careers  far more   quickly    than    was   good   for   the fledgling network. There came  a sense of Establislunent that   did   not   leave   the Corporation  until    hiring    for   television was   in   full   flood.   When   I   joined   the CBC   there   was  really  only  one  rule; in essence  it  was  "let  it  be  in  good  taste." One  didn't ask what  good  taste  was; one knew   or  wasn't  hired.   You   can   run   a tight  ship  if everyone  knows  what  every­ one   else  is  thinking and,  what's  more,  believes it. It gives a fine sense of mission (which  the  CBC  often  had), but  litera­ ture   out   of  such  environments tends   to be  Kiplingesque  at best.  One   must  ask questions,  voice  real  complaints if  there

BIRTH OF  THE BUTTERFLY



is  to  be  any  forward movement. There were,  of  course,  slips,  moments of   con­ summate  frustration  when   one   of   our own  went   beyond   the  bounds,  as  when Dan   McArthur wrote  his  famous memo to  Management headed  "Up Shit  Creek Without  a   Paddle."   But   these   things were  handled quietly;  Dan's career   lev­ elled  off abruptly. He  eventually became  someone's   Executive   Assistant.   He   was one   of   a   handful   without  whom   the CBC  would  have  really  come  apart.
Another  was  Andrew  Allan.  If there is  a  first   name   in   Canadian   post-war drama, his must  be it.  Without his work before, Stratford could  not  have  survived its  beginning.  We  are   indebted  to  him for  erudition,  professionalism, a  sense of style  and  mission  and  a  heightened  con­ sciousness  of  what   had  to  be  done.  Per­ haps  what  he  didn't  know  was  the  short time  there  was  to  do  it  in.  By the  time TV   came   along   he  had  established  the first possibility  of a Canadian drama, but then   both   time  and  continuity  ran  out on   him.  Drama  was  to  be  big  in  TV,  and   without  the  experience  we  gained in  radio.  Television  was  new,  different. Somehow, somewhere a new god was to reveal    a   shortcut  to   literary   creation
 through  the   use  of  dials,  knobs,  lights, lenses.  No  one  touched  with  only  mon­ aural   experience  would   be  able  to  see the  grand  design  or  be let in on the  new cosmic secret.  The natural laws of a  new creative   universe   were   to  be  deliveted, but  the  celestial  mail  got  held  up  in  a permanent  snow  storm  and  we've   been suffering   ever   since   from   what    those bright   young   things,   so  recently    auto­ beatified,  recoiled  in  Sheridanesque hor­  ror  from: radio  with  pictures.
Andrew   Allan   was  the  first  and   the
last   inside   the   CBC   with   a   practical, aesthetic   vision  of  the   possibilities  of  a dramatic  literature,  and   the   power   to put    it   into    effect.    I  am    not    naive enough  to think  he could  have  saved  the situation.   My   point    is   that    had    we allowed   ourselves   a  sense  of  continuity and  built  on  the  only  dramatic tradition we ever  had,  TV  drama might  have  be­ come  original   instead   of  minor,  eclectic  and  irrelevant to  what  we as  Canadians are.    With    leadership   we   could    have  forced  our  almost   thriving  dramatic lit­ terature. As it  was, instead  of encourag­ ing and  conspiring with  young  writers  to subvert  its audience to consciousness,  the  CBC,   along   with   Stratford,   conspired





Write or Phone

THE UNIVERSITY BOOK STORE
Vancouver 8, B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back



99

BffiTH OF  THE BUTTERFLY



only  to produce actors  and  directors, cos­ tume  designers  and  stage  designers:  me­ chanics -we are  famous  for  them.
But  the  drama is difficult  and  treach­ erous; it  is a  form  where  the  writer  has to  share  control; fashion  and  "creative" directors tend  to  take  over  the  inexperi­ enced.   Perhaps a  more  viable  form  for new   talent    is   the   documentary.  This  form  is, in  one  sense,  pre-fiction.  In  an­  other,   it  can  be  used  as  a  form  for  fic­ tion.  But  no  matter how  hard  one  tries it  can  never  just  report. It always  tells, and   in   the   telling   it  attracts  meaning willy-nilly.   But   in   Canada,  our   most known   saying,   the   one   that   is  in   the bones   of   every   one   of  us,  is  that   our history -our  experience, everything we do-is  dull.  The CBC  believed  that  too and   in   this  area,   where   it  should   not have  failed,  it  did.  A CBC  documentary was    a    serious   proposition,   conceived along  the  lines  of  a  Paris Review  inter­ view:  the  interviewer was  to  be  knowl­ edgeable,   pertinent,  polite   and   anony­  mous. Radio journalism never  really pro­ gressed   beyond   this :   the   idea   that    a documentary,   no   matter   about    what,  was,  in  fact,   a  document,  a  forging,   if you'll  allow  the  reference,  in  the  smithy of   someone's    (the   broadcaster's)   soul, "the   uncreated  conscience  of  the  race."  No  one   had   actually  heard   the   order,  but   all   of   us   knew   it:   documentaries were  to  be  objective. History,  experience contemporary   and     otherwise,    expired
wanly  in  rs, 30  and  6o  minute   chunks
as anxious  executive ears measured  care­ fully  whether equal  time  were  given  to every  point  of view.
Yet  history  in  its  broadest  sense -the sense  of  a  culture doing-is  pre-fiction and  necessary  to fiction.  It is the great instigator of literature, as in Tolstoy  and

100
 Faulkner  and   Ford   Madox Ford.   It  is, to switch images, our national wilderness where  writers, if  they  are  to  be  writers, must  slash  out  their  individual ways  to­ ward   identity,  and   even   sometimes   to­ wards  truth and  beauty.
But  literature-as  distinct   from   his­ tory-is  mostly  writers  writing  alone in unguarded  moments about   how  it  is  to be  alive   and   have   to  die,  and   in   this ultimate area  the  CBC  hardly made  con­ tact  at  all.  Canada in  fact, has  managed to  run  a  broadcasting  corporation for  a generation without  any real writers, with­  out  a Gunter  Grass,  a Vesaas,  a Diirren­ matt, a de  Mandiargues. We were bound  to   produce   a   McLuhan.  Our   medium had   to   be  the   message:    there   was   no other.
There   have,    of    course,    been    pro­ grammes  for   writers  on   radio.  During the    last   sixteen    years   Anthology   has broadcast stories  and  poetry  once  a week. I  was  in  on  its  birth, along  with  Robert Weaver   and, if    I   remember  correctly,
Helen James.1  It should   have  been  part
of  a  beginning, but  it  is nearly  all  there ever   has   been   on   a   regular   basis.  We should   have  gone  on  creating more  and more  ground for  writers to live  on.  One wonders what   would   have   happened  if we  had   bought  a   half-dozen  novels   a year  from   young  writers   and   had   them read  in  nightly   instalments in  the  place of   late    evening    concerts    of   recorded music.  Often the  CBC  has spent  four  or five   thousand  dollars   to   produce   dra­ matic   adaptations of  novels  old  enough  to  be  in  the  public  domain. To  buy  the rights   to   a  new,   unpublished   novel  of average length, and   to  have  it  narrated might  not  have  cost more.  I  mention the novel   for   a   reason:  the   trouble    with Canadian would-be writers has been  that

BIRTH  OF THE BUTTERFLY



they  have  not  been  able  to  go  any  dis­ tance.    Authors  of   stature  are   twenty­  book  men  who  have  gone  long and  deep into   their    consciousnesses   and   to   the roots  of their  experiences. The novel and the  full-length play  are  the major forms of   written   expression   that    allow   this ability  to go a distance. When  that  ability matures a literature of  substance is born,  an  identity is found  and a  confidence is fostered  both  in  those  who  write  and  in those  who  become their  audience. When  would-be authors are  asked  only  to write short, there  is little  impact and  small  dis­ covery.  A whole  culture suffers.  This  in­ sight  should  have  been  reflected  in  early CBC   programme  policy    (as   it   was  in music,    opera,  or   the   presentation   of adapted  literary  works  from  other  coun­  tries   and    times) .   Probably    our   books would  have  been  bad  to  begin  with,  but perhaps no worse  than  some  of our  com­ missioned  symphonies, operas   and  films.
The  fact   is  that    the   one   thing   the CBC  had  to  do,  if  it  were  to  be  a  suc­ cess, it  did   not  do:   it  did   not  provide  an  outlet   for  a  literature that  may  have spoken  to the Canadian  people. And  that
 is one  of  the  reasons  why  the  Corpora­ tion   is  dead   to   the  generation  that   is about  to take  over. They  literally  do  not know   that   the   idea   of   the   CBC   ever existed,   they  do   not   know   how  it  was betrayed,  and  I  think  it  matters little  to them  now. The  new  writers   are  writing short  for  a  dozen  good  little  magazines, and  long  for  Anansi, and   Oberon, and  Sono   Nis,  and   Prism  International  and  other  small  but  important presses. They  are  making  films on  their  own,  and  set­ ting up  theatres in  back  rooms  and  even on  the  streets.  The   next  few  years  may, I think,  be  a  wonderful time  for  Cana­ dian  letters,  Trudeau and  inflation will­ ing.  Yet,  I can't help  but  feel,  at  this distance   from   that  other  time   ten   and  twenty   years  ago,  that   the   new  maga­ zines  and  the  new  presses  and   the  new theatre and  the  new  writers  would  have been with  us a lot sooner  if the CBC  had not   conned   us,   diverted  us,   and   then failed  to  understand  and   act   upon   the most  important part  of  its  mandate and public  trust.

1 So,  to  complete   the   record,   were  George
Woodcock  and  Joyce  Marshall. [Ed.]





















101

OPINIONS AND  NOTES






THE  ORGANIC AESTHETIC

Sir:
George  Bowering's opposition to the "Northrop Frye  school" of  Canadian poets,  as  expressed   in  Canadian  Litera­ ture  36  ("Why James  Reaney  Is A Better Poet"), results  from  his  adherence to the aesthetics   of  organic  form.   For   the  ad­  herent  of   organic   form,  the   successful poem  is the  verbal  equivalent  of a given experience.  While   for   Frye   the   poem bears  hypothetical  relation to experience, for  Bowering  the  poem  embodies experi­  ence  directly.  Implicit in  Bowering's em­ phasis  on  the  honest   communication of personal  experience is a view  of his own verse  as  a salutary antidote  to  the  hu­  manism  of  the  nineteenth  century. The  poet   who,  without  religious   or   mytho­ logical props, finds in his day-to-day experience sufficient  value  to render  life worthwhile is, Bowering suggests, surely preferable to  the  poet  for  whom  experi­ ence  is  worthless unless  it  can  be  fitted into  some  universal   system,  some grand  mythological  framework.  For  Bowering, Northrop  Frye,  with   his  theories   of  lit­ erary   structure,  seems   to   make   poetry unnecessarily  complicated. It is, after  all, so simple.  Let  us be  open   to  experience and  record  it  honestly.  This is enough.
Frye  himself,  of  course,  would  see the
organic form   aesthetic for  what   in  fact it is:  a convention. Where earlier  poets pretended to be the media  of an inspiring muse, the adherents of organic form claim
 to   be  the   media   of  their   own   experi­ ences,  writing   being   essentially  the  dis­ covery  of a  form  which  fits a  particular experience,  rather than   an  imposition   of "ready-made" forms  and  symbols on  the poet's  material.  But  the  poet's  ordering of words inevitably involves  a certain  be­ trayal  of the  experience to  be  conveyed.  Language  is  not  a  mirror, it  is a  make­  shift  tool  of  communication, and  poetry differs from  discursive  prose by its height­  ened  attention  to  language. This  atten­ tion inevitably distorts  the  intended mes­ sage, or, more  accurately, transforms the message  into   something  quite   different from   what   the   poet   originally  had   in mind.  It  is in  this  modification that   the poet's  creative   capacity resides  and   that his true discoveries  are  made.
What  primarily concerns me, however, is the moral  implication of Bowering's organic  form  aesthetic, specifically  in  re­ lation  to that  pessimistic  view of  modem man    so   well    exemplified   by    George  Grant. In  this  view,  man   is  progressing to a total  mastery  of nature in which  the mind,  the  genes,  and   the  very  soul  will be  harnessed   for   the   purpose   of  even greater  advancement.   In   the   name   of man's   continuing  advancement all  man­  ner  of  atrocities  are  speciously  justified. Hence   not  only  Vietnam and  its  proto­  types,  but  also  the  extermination of  all life-forms  which  do  not  subserve  the  end of progress.
Many   see  Frye's   theory   of  literature (and  thus  presumably the  Frye  school  of poets  whom   Bowering   attacks)  as  con­ tributing  to  this  destructive  "progress". Grant, for  instance (in  Technology   and Empire), regards Frye's attempt to make of  literary  criticism   an  autonomous, ob­ jective  discipline   as   a   betrayal   of   the humanities to  the  sciences,  and   thus  to

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



the   general    drive   of  technological   ad­ vancement.   In    his    article,    Bowering echoes this view by suggesting that  Frye's critical  theory  takes  the  humanity out  of poetic  expression  and  leaves only  a  ped­ antic  machinery of  symbols.
However, it  is  not  Frye,  but  the  ad­ herents   of  organic form,   who,  in   their aesthetics, manifest   most  clearly  the  in­ fluence   and   effects  of   progress-worship.  If, after   all,  the  authentic  communica­ tion  of   experience is  all  that  counts; if non-literary  experiences    do   not   derive their  worth   from  their  relation   to  abso­ lute  standards of  value,  nor  literary  ex­ periences    from   their   relation  to   some vision  of  life  in  the  corpus  of  literature as  a  whole   (that is,  the  myth), what  is the  object   of  life  or  of  poetic  activity?  Surely  it  is to live  merely for  the sake of living,  to verbalize  merely for the sake of verbalizing,  and   to  progress  technologi­  cally  merely  for  the  sake  of  technologi­  cally   progressing.  Taken   alone,  the  last idea appears frightening, the second silly, and   the   first  somewhat   attractive.  But the   three   ideas   are   inextricably   linked and  are  thus  all equally  intolerable.
From this perspective the naivete of Bowering   and  other   organic  form  cam­ paigners  becomes   clearly   apparent.  For they  exemplify   both  in  their  theory  and in  their   writing the  effects  of  the  very process   which    they   claim   to   deplore.  Who  has railed  more loudly than  George
Bowering  against  J. Edgar  Hoover,  Am­
erican    imperialism,  Vietnam,  etc.   etc. etc.?    Yet    Bowering,    in    his   aesthetic theory   and   practice, demonstrates  him­ self  to   be   the   unwitting   product   and indeed   supporter of  the  very  things   he attacks. I suggest  that,  in  this, he is typi­ cal  of his school.
LLOYD ABBEY
 ON THE VERGE

***** Dictionary  of   Canadian  Biography, Volume II,  1701   to   1740.   Edited  by  David M.   Hayne  and   Andre  Vachon.  University  of Toronto Press,  $15.00. There  is  a  notable  in­ crease of  density in  the  second   volume of  the  Dictionary of Canadian Biography.  Volume  I embraced the  centuries from  the  arrival of  the  Vikings up  to  17oo; Volume II  covers  a  mere  forty    years    from     1701    to    I 740.    Still    the French  presence is  in   the  ascendant. Of   the
578  people included, 440  acted out  their   lives in  the  French provinces of  North America, 36 were   Indians and   the   remaining  102   were   a mixed  collection of Newfoundlanders, English, New  Englanders and   Hudson's Bay  men.   But their   presence  shows   the    extent  to   which, along  the   Atlantic  coasts   and   in   sub-Arctic waters, the  grip   of  Britain on  North America was gradually closing; the  next  volume will undoubtedly  see   the    balance  in   nationality shift   decisively. The  standard  of   the   entries remains high, and   the   longer   biographies are often essays of considerable import. Where necessary,  moreover,   the    editors  have    gone outside  Canada  for   writers,  and    only   occa­ sionally  does   one   feel   that   they   have  chosen  a   tired  veteran "expert", where a   younger and    more    originally  minded    scholar   might have  made a  better job. The  volume  is accom­ panied  by  a  useful  essay  by  Andre Vachon on "The Administration of  New  France", and   an invaluable  glossary    of    Indian   tribal  names current  at  this  period.

***  J. L.   HENDERSON.  John   Strachan.  Uni­ versity   of   Toronto  Press.   $4.50.  This   is   the first  of  a  series  called   Canadian  Biographical Studies which is linked   with  the  Dictionary of Canadian Biography. These  studies-brief  in form-are    intended   to   present  basic   biog­  raphies of  important  figures   in  Canadian his­ tory   who   have  received  insufficient attention. No    serious    Life    of   John   Strachan-first Bishop  of  Toronto and  a  great political figure in   his   time-has  appeared  since     187o,   and  the   curious  rigidity  of   personality projected in    Professor   Henderson's   highly   condensed biographical essay  is  perhaps the  explanation. Strachan was   not   one   of  the   more   engaging personalities in  Canadian  history, but   he  was one   of   the   more   important,  and   a   modern study  had   long   been   needed. Given  this  fact, the   main    disappointment  about  the   present book  is  that it  is  so  short, and   that   it  really penetrates  so   shallowly  behind   the    granite
carapace  under which   Strachan lived. 	o.w.
