$1.25  per copy




CANADIAN l TERATURE N°·19






S)ILUTE TO E. J. PR)ITT



Articles

BY PAUL WEST, FRED  COGSWELL, VINCENT SHARMAN, ETHEL WILSON, MICHAEL TAIT

Reviews

BY ROBERT  HARLOW, GILLES ARCHAMBAULT, MARGARET  PRANG, ROBERT  MCCORMACK, JOAN SELBY, JAN DEBRUYN,
DAVID BROMIGE  AND OTHERS


Annual  Supplement
CANADIAN LITERATURE  CHECKLIST,  1963




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










TITANIC,

BUT NOT  OLYMPIAN




THis ISSUE   OF    Canadian   Literature  is  devoted   largely   to new studies  of E.  J. Pratt, the  poet  who over  a generation has  become  the dean
of Canadian letters.  There has  not  yet been  a satisfactory and  complete critical study  of Pratt, and  we may  have  to wait some time before  his individual achieve­ ment   and   his  position   in  the  tradition of  Canadian  literature  are  adequately assessed. Appearing at  a  time  when  writing in  this  country was  emerging from colonial  dependence, he seemed  something of a giant  in  isolation,  and  still, like that  other  figure  of imperfect grandeur, Frederick Philip Grove,  he stands apart from   the  rest  of  Canadian writers,  distinguished by  his  largeness  of  texture as well as by his talent  for giving  new life to traditional forms, as Spenser  and  Keats  variously   did  in  their  own  times  and   places.  When  one  reviews  his career, the subject and  title  of what  is perhaps his finest poem does not seem accidental; he is a titanic rather than  an olympian figure. It is hoped  that  the studies  we publish in this issue will contribute to a more  complete and genuinely critical  understand­
ing of his achievement.

* 	* 	*
The  visual arts lie outside  our field and  within  the province of our distinguished contemporary,  Canadian   Art.  We   cannot,  however,   pass  without  mention  a volume   which   reveals  the  scope  and  excellence  of our  most  comprehensive art collection-that of  the  Royal   Ontario  Museum. Art  Treasures  of  the  Royal Ontario  Museum is prepared and  edited  by Theodore A. Heinrich, the  Museum's director. It is published by  McClelland & Stewart and  is technically one  of the

3

EDITORIAL



best art  books that  has ever  appeared from  a Canadian house; it is significant of the  limitations of our  book-producing industry that  the forty-one excellent  colour plates  were  printed in Holland, and  the  rest of the  book,  including the  hundred and  twenty  odd  monochrome illustrations, was  produced in  England. The  illus­ trations demonstrate the  comprehensive nature  of  the  Royal  Ontario  Museum, dedicated as it  is to "The Arts  of  Man  through all the  Years". Ancient Greece  and   Peru   and   Mexico  are  admirably represented; so  are  the  primitive arts  of Africa   and   the  Pacific.  At  the  same  time,  the  desire  to  be  comprehensive has resulted   in  an  inadequate  representation of  the  R.O.M's  chief  glory,  its  great  collection   of  Chinese  ceramic   art.  One   may  also  deplore  the  scantiness  of  the accompanying commentary. Yet, when  all is said,  this volume  leaves little  doubt that  Toronto contains  one  of the  best North  American  art  museums outside  the financially charmed circle  of New  York.

* 	* 	*
We  hear  a great  deal  about  Canadian anthologies of Canadian poetry.  Other anthologies produced in this country are often  less well-known outside  their parti­ cular  field of reference.  Yet there  is at least one excellent  production in this field which  has  been  going  through revisions  and  reprintings for  the  last  thirty  years, and   now  appears in  a  completely   revised  third   edition. This is  Representative Poetry,  published in three  volumes  by the  University of Toronto Press  (Volumes I and   III cost  $6.oo  each  and  Volume  II, $g.so).  Representative Poetry  is in fact  a college textbook,  designed  to cover three  years at the University of Toronto; it is prepared by the people who actually  teach English  there  and  who prefer  their own  selection  to  those  which  emanate from  the  College  Divisions  of New  York publishers.  The I ,soo-odd  pages  contain   an   ample   and   well-balanced intro­ ductory selection  of Modern English  verse from  Wyatt to Swinburne. The  notes and   critical   apparatus are  reduced   to  a  minimum, so  that   both  professor  and  student, not to mention  the general  reader who may  profitably use such  a volume  as  a  basic  introduction, are  virtually  left  without that  elaborate  mediation, be­ loved  of American scholarly  publishing, which  so often  in college texts turns  into  a  barrier rather than  an  aid  to  understanding. The  lazy  temptation to create  a course  of isolated  "greats" is  avoided; Representative Poetry  finds  room  for  the curious  and  the little-read, and for a surprising amount of work  by those pleasing minor  figures  who  give a literary  age its own  flavour. Of  course,  every  teacher  of English  should  dream  of  making  his own  anthology, containing the  works which he  can  most  fervently  expound; in  defaut of that  unattainable ideal,  one  wishes

4

EDITORIAL



that  more Departments of English would follow the University of Toronto  in preparing  their  own anthologies  to give scope for variation  of preference  and  at the same time express the collective taste of a group of practising  teachers. At the very  least  it  would  save  professors of  English  from  many  tedious  committees de igned
hack  scholars in another   land  for  the  benefit of that  profitable  branch  of big
American  business, commercial  college text  production.






























5



E. J. PRATT'S
LITERARY REPUTATION







Fred Cogswell









DURING THE  NINETEEN  FORTIES  and  fiftie.•, E.  J. Pmtt
was given a position of pre-eminence  in Canadian literary  circles similar to that
which  Bliss Carman enjoyed among  poets in still earlier  decades of this century. Whether  Pratt's poetic reputation  will prove  more  durable  than  Carman's is a question  to  which  most Canadian literary  critics  would  today  deliver a  ringing affirmative. "Carman," they say, "is an interesting  minor poet possessed of a thin vein of talent  and  during  his lifetime he was very much  over-rated.  Pratt,  how­ ever, is Canada's leading  poet, the most original  and  the greatest  in  theme and execution  that  this country  has ever had. All his work, it is true, is not of equal merit,  but  his best poems represent an original  contribution to the  poetry of the English-speaking  world. He  ought  to be better  known  outside of  Canada." And yet,  there  are  curious  analogies between  the  work of Carman  and  Pratt  which lead  me  to speculate  on whether  Pratt's  conjectured  final  position in  the world of letters will ultimately be radically different from that  of  Bliss Carman after all.
Both Carman and  Pratt  acquired  their reputation, for the most part,  by creat­ ing a large bulk of work of a high degree of technical  competence  upon a limited range   of  themes  which  were  meaningful   to  their  immediate  contemporaries. Carman's  idealism-a non-rigorous  paradise   into  which  a  whole  generation  beleaguered  by Darwinism  was glad to escape -was  parallelled  by Pratt's out­ door  world  of  elemental  conflict  on  a  physical  level -a  world  of  uninhibited

6

E. J. PRATT'S LITERARY REPUTATION



violence  into  which  a whole  generation of frustrated academics  were equally  glad to escape.  Today the  academics yawn  over  "Vestigia" and  "Lord of my Heart's Elation", but  is  there   any  guarantee that  future academics will  not  also  yawn over  the  even  longer   and   more  pointlessly  involved  "The Great   Feud", "The Witches' Brew", and  "Towards the  Last  Spike"?
Technical  competence in  general, and  the  mastery  of  haunting phrase   and delicate rhythm in  particular, have not saved  Carman from  the stigma  of "minor poet", although even  his  most  severe  critics  admit   his  mastery  over  these  attri­ butes.  More  than   any  other  quality, form  in  verse is subject  to  the  vagaries  of fashion.  Today the  academic critic  finds  the  colloquial  rhythms and  hard-hitting bluntness of  an  Irving Layton   or  a  Raymond Souster  more  exciting  than  Car­ man's   most  suggestive  nuance of  sound   and  image.  Such  a  critic's   reaction   is honest  and  natural, but  it should  not  be mistaken  for universal  critical  judgment. There was in England for almost  a century  a period when  the forms,  the rhythms,
and  the narrative techniques employed  by E. J. Pratt flourished, but  after Words­
worth  and  his contemporaries launched the "new" poetry  of romanticism, where then  were  Pope  and  Dryden and  Butler  and  Swift and  the techniques which  they had  devised  and  used so brilliantly? If James Reaney,  for  instance, were  to suc­ ceed  within   the  next  two  decades  in  imposing  a  mythopoeic surrealism  as  the language of Canadian poets,  where  then  will be the excitement and  the glamour of  the  language of  scientific  description and   the  techniques of  narrative verse displayed  in  Pratt's  metrical lines?
Carman was  a shy, sensitive,  harmless  man  whom  most  people  liked  and  few wished  to hurt. Canadian literary  criticism  is the  kindest  in the  world -kindest perhaps because  Canadian critics  are  also writers  and  would  be done  by as they do. An  attractive personality softened  the force of the fall of Carman's reputation and  possibly postponed it until  after  his death. Pratt  has been gifted  with an even more  attractive personal  character than  Carman, and  he  has for  at  least  thirty years  had   intimate  and   influential contact  with  those  who  have   the  greatest means  and  prestige  at  their  disposal  for  the  raising  of a literary  reputation. Few critics  in  Canada today,  even  if they felt like doing  so, would  directly  attack  the
poetry  of E.  J. Pratt. In the  first place,  such  an  attack  would  impugn the  judg­
ment  of  Canada's  leading critics,  men  who  have  acclaimed Pratt  as  our  one major  poet;  at  the  same  time,  such  an  attack  might  cause  pain  to a man  whose integrity and   warmth of  character have  made  him  a  living  legend. Pratt  need therefore fear  no  direct  attack  during his lifetime  upon  his position  as Canada's leading  poet.  Yet  by the shifting of their  grounds for praise  of his work  in recent

7

E. J. PRATT's LITERARY REPUTATION



years,  such  critics  as Sutherland  and  Dudek   and,   to  a  lesser  extent,   Frye  and Pacey  have  shown  not so much  insight  as their  desire  to supply  in  Pratt's  poetry what   currently  seems  necessary   to  be  found   in  great   poetry.   The   attempt  to make  the  underlying symbols  in  Pratt's work-often  fortuitous in  their  occur­ rence-its  major   ingredients marks  the  beginning of  the  pressure  of  changing problems, attitudes,  and   tastes  upon   an  idol  of  a  succeeding generation.  The new  faith   first  takes  over  the  old  idol  and  attempts to  reshape it  to  its  needs. Should   it  find  the  work  of  reshaping overly  difficult,  it  will  in  time  discard   the idol  altogether and  regard  it as a block of dead  wood  standing in the way of the true  poetry.  So it was with  Carman. How  will it be with  Pratt? Despite  the work of his  recent  admirers, Pratt does not seem to  me to wear  gracefully the  robe  of
the   Christian  humanist  scattering those  mythopoeic symbols  which   prove   the unifying vision  that  is at  one  and  the  same  time  the  justification of poetry  and the  proof  of the  cleverness of the  critic  who  first perceives  them. My own  feeling is that  as soon  as a genuine  mythopoeic poet  of stature emerges,  efforts  to make one  of Pratt will cease, and  much  of his work  will then,  as Carman's is today,  be consigned  to the  stony  limbo  of that  which  was  not  for  all  time  but  for an  age.




IN viEw  OF   some  of  the  opinions expressed   concerning the relative  modernity of Carman and  Pratt, it is a curious  paradox that  as an  indi­
vidual   in  relation   to  his  age  and  as an  artist  in  relation to  his  art,  Carman is modern and  Pratt is an anachronism, a mid-Victorian with  an  eighteenth-century practicality as a writer.
Modern poetry  is par excellence the production of an  internal proletariat, who axiomatically  assume   the   superiority of. the   ideals of  the   individual  (non­ conformity) over  the ideals of the crowd  (conformity), and  who put forward the thesis that  the  primary  role of art  and  literature is to express personal experience rather than  to  put  into  more  effective  words  socially  accepted  truths. In  his atti­ tude  to poetry  and  to society, as far  as the clarity  of  his expression  and  the  depth of  his  experience  allowed,  Carman was  typical   of   the  internal  proletariat. He missed  greatness   not  by  abandoning the  struggle  between  personal   and   mass vision,   between   expressionism   and   functionalism   in  poetry,  but   by  too  easily assuming that  he had  won it. Neither  the schizophrenia of "In the  House  of Idie-



8

E. J. PRATT's  LITERARY REPUTATION



daily" nor  the  sublimation of personal  grief  into  the  landscape were  to prove  a sufficiently  firm  and  lasting  bond  between  the poet and  his readers.
From  even  the  most  cursory  reading of Pratt's work,  it  becomes  clear  that  he is the  poet of all those in recoil from isolation -the poet of crowds  over solitudes, of action  over  contemplation, of mass action  over individual action, and  that  he accepts  as basic and  good  a whole nexus of activities-instinctive and  traditional
-that  are  shared   by  men   and   animals as  members   of  a  species  rather than possessed in isolation  as individuals. It becomes equally  clear  that  Pratt considers the  writing of poetry  to  be functional craft  in which  the  timeliness  of topics, the consulting of  monographs for  accurate information, even  the  choice  of metrical form,  are  affected  by the  classical  function  of providing pleasure and  instruction to a co-operative audience. Out of this intelligent  use of the  details  of  craftsman­ ship  and   this  careful consideration of  his  audience, Pratt  in  fact  has  achieved  a technical success which  had  eluded  English  poets for  upwards of  two centuries. He  successfully  adapted the  epic  narrative to  the  deeds  of  modem man. Since this  achievement is the  only  one  by Pratt which  is not  equalized by the  work  of Carman or  some  other   Canadian poet,  it  must  be the  rock  upon  which  Pratt's greatness must  ultimately rest.  It therefore  deserves  more  detailed scrutiny.
As early  as the  mid-seventeenth century,  such  writers  as Sprat and  Cowley  had speculated concerning the  possibility  of turning man's  material and  commercial conquests over  nature to poetical  use. During the ensuing  century a host of  versi­ fiers  (of  whom   Armstrong, Young,  Thomson, Grainger,  and   Dyer  were  most conspicuous) attempted the sagas of commerce  and  knowledge in  Miltonic blank verse. They  failed,  partly  through lack of imagination and  partly  through failure  to cast  their  living subject  matter into living language. Relying upon  the intrinsic  interest   of  their  theme, these  poets  for  the  most  part  introduced human beings and  their  conflicts  only cursorily  into  their  poems glorifying  modem materialism; hence  the  most  essential  elements  of narrative poetry-human involvement and suspence-were lacking  from  their  work.  In  style, they  relied  too heavily  upon Latinized  pseudonyms which   had  not  yet  become  sufficiently  absorbed into  the fabric of  the  English  language to  be  vital.  At  the  same  time,  their  use of epic imagery and  machinery was too  patently  artificial  and  derivative to be effective. Moreover, Miltonic blank  verse was too tortuous  and languid a form  to fit matter so positive  as that  of the  new  age. The  dreary failure  of these  eighteenth-century poets  was  sufficient   to  discourage those  who  came  after   them,   although  both Wordsworth and   Walt  Whitman were  to  advocate   strenuously the  use  of con­
temporary science  and  commerce as themes  for  great  poetry. It was E.  J. Pratt


9

E. J. PRATT'S  LITERARY REPUTATION



who  first showed  the  way for  the effective  employment in verse of modem com­
mercial  and  scientific  material and  vocabulary.
Pratt succeeded where  his predecessors  had  failed  because  he  never  lost sight of the  human elements  of suspense  and  conflict  and  accordingly made  his matter of information not  paramount in  itself but  subsidiary to the  struggles  which  en­ grossed  his  readers' interest.  Secondly,  he  substituted the  language of  scientific description  (by  this  time a standard part  of prose  read  by the educated)  for  the poetically  outworn language of physical  description. Thirdly,  by a study  of such good  narrative poets  as  Dryden, Scott,  and   Byron,  Pratt  found a  grammatical syntax  and   a  metrical rhythm   that  suited  the  pace  of  his  own  age.  As a  result, Pratt's narrative poems  restored  for  the  first  time  since  the  eighteenth century the  classic  position  of  the  poet  as one  who  could  express  in  verse  with  greater ease, lucidity, and  grace,  anything that  fell within the  providence of prose. Pratt's be!'.t work,  therefore, is a  superb  achievement of  technical genius,  ranking with that  of Dryden, whom  among  the  English  poets he  most  resembles.  For  no other  Canadian poet  can  such  a claim  be  made.






T.CHNICAL PRE-EMINENCE  is  all   the   greatness that  can   be assigned   to  Pratt. Despite  his  topicality, and   the  care  and   attention which   he gave  to historical and  scientific accuracy in  the  treatment of his themes,  Pratt is, compared  to  a  major   English  poet  like  Dryden, disappointingly limited. Here one  feels  that, like  Jack  London   and   Ernest   Hemingway, he  is  the  unwitting victim  of obsessions  born  of his North  American environment. North Americans have  preserved  and  continued the  Christian and  classical  traditions of European civilization;  at   the  same  time,  most  genuine and   most  deeply   rooted   in  their behaviour  are   often   attitudes of  which   they  are  seldom   consciously  aware­ attitudes engendered by the  realities  of a  recent   (in  Pratt's  case,  contemporary) frontier existence.  The  result  of  the  interplay of  European  civilization with  the influences of  the  frontier   is  the  development of  a  psyche  which   unconsciously differs   as  greatly   from  its  ostensible  pattern as  the  Christianity of  Saint   Olaf differed  from  that  of Jesus  Christ  and  Saint   Paul.  Underlying Pratt's Christian ethics,   his  mid-Victorian  code  of  honour, and   his  Wundtian  psychology,  and often   rising   up   unconsciously   and   dominating  his  work,   were  the  four   great  American  obsessions:   materialism,  derived   from   generations of  life-and-death

IO

E. J. PRATT'S LITERARY REPUTATION



struggle   with   matter;  hedonism, the  assignment   of  value  to  matter;  giantism, the  measurement of matter; and  infantilism, the arrested emotional development of man  through a too engrossing  concern  with  matter. Given  these four  primary obsessions, it is not  surprising that  any  manifestation of the  agency  that  manipu­ lates  matter, power,  should  appeal to  Pratt's imagination like the  presence  of a god.  To  Pratt, a  clash  of power,  whether between  an  iceberg  and  a ship  or be­ tween  great   prehistoric monsters,  has  all  the  terror  and  delight  of  a  gotterdam­ merung. In   the   Newfoundlander, Pratt, the  last-born literary  child  of  frontier  America, the  values  of  the  primitive  epic  found  unconsciously  a  belated  second home.
The  best test of the  truth of the foregoing  hypothesis  can  be seen in the climax of  "Brebeuf   and   his  Brethren". Few  passages  in  civilized  literature can  match it for  unrelieved amoral savagery  and  animalism. Brebeuf  gives the Indians "roar for  roar" like the  ferocious  and  wounded  animal he has  become.  They  drink  his blood  and  eat  his  heart,  hoping by  sympathetic magic   therefore   to  imbibe  his strength; he  in  turn  gets  superior  strength, not  from  the  symbols  of civilization and  religion,  "lilies" and  "words", but  from  the  hallucinatory sound  which  the
Indians cannot hear:

... invisible trumpets  blowing Around  two slabs of board, right-angled,  hammered By Roman  nails and hung on a Jewish hill.

The  "invisibility" of the  trumpets, the sole spiritual  note,  is hardly  sufficient here in itself to differentiate the  Christ  who presumably hung  upon  the Cross from  the geas which  primitive minds  identify  with  lodestone  iron  and  certain  positions  in which  in  magic  ceremonies matter may  be set  up.
Pratt, then,  combines a sophisticated and  masterly  poetic  technique, a wealth of erudition, and  a timeliness  in choice of themes  with  an  obsessive poetic  vision that  is almost  incredibly primitive. Sometimes  the  blend  succeeds; sometimes  it fails.  When  it  fails,  one  is left  with  a  product essentially  rococo-the senseless murders of "The Great Feud" or  the academic whimsy  of "The Witches' Brew" for  example. When  it  succeeds,  Pratt   creates  such  masterpieces of  narrative as "The Roosevelt  and  the  Antinoe", "The Submarine", and  "Behind the  Log"­ narratives in  which  the  epic  primitivism  of the  poet  harnessed to his skill in the suspenseful   depiction  of  action   imposes  Pratt's  excitement upon  many   North Americans almost  in  spite  of  themselves.  Pratt's work  will  never  be  popular in Europe. Whether it  will  maintain its  popularity upon   this  continent as society

I I

E. J. PRATT'S  LITERARY REPUTATION



moves further  and  further  in time and  living conditions  from its frontier  origins is unlikely. My own feeling is that  the curve of his literary  reputation  will be seen one hundred  years from now to have curiously paralleled  that  of his predecessor, Bliss Carman.






























12



E. J. PRATT'S
FOUR-TON  GULLIVER








Paul West








DEP IN   TORONTO  a  <ebellious, gifted   Newloundlande.
sits  eternally at  the  head  of  a  table,  a  large  cooked  bird  before  him,  congenial
men  around him  and   a  promise  of gradually warming, not  essentially  literary, talk  to  come.  Once he  addressed a  book  of his poems  to "the boys of the  stag­ parties" almost  as if,  in  evoking  all  those  virile  synods,  he  were  amassing  some counterweight to a bicepped image  of his own in The  Cachalot:

Out  on the ocean tracts, his mamma Had, in a North Saghalien gale, Launched him, a four-ton healthy male, Between Hong  Kong and Yokohama.

I  resort  to  jocular   vignette   because  Newfoundlanders, addicted to  jocose  tall stories  and   the  convivial, still  vehemently   list  Edwin   John Pratt as  the  best  of their  several   hundred  outstanding poets.  His  main  local  competition  comes,  I think,  from  another master  of the  convivial  whom  I met  in  an  outport: a  poet of soil and  soul  who  had  one  leg only,  no  wife, several  children, a few animals, baked  his own  bread, cut  the  children's hair  and  when  I last saw him  was enlist­ ing  their  aid  to  rear  the  walls  of a new  frame  house. This  game  widower, very much  a talking man, could  give Pratt a run for his money as well as a new variant

13

E. J. PRATT'S FOUR-TON GULLIVER



of the  healthy, several-ton male.  Pratt's renowned conviviality implies  this  other man's  view:    a  masculine,  massive   humanism  fit  to  give  any   Newfoundland Methodist a  spiritual embolism  and  yet  epitomizing the  earthiness and  vitality for  which   Newfoundlanders are  known  and, in  some  cases,  loved.
Born  in a fishing  village in  I883, the son of a Methodist clergyman, Pratt has
made   his life  and  career  in  Toronto but  only  after  student preaching and  ele­ mentary  teaching  in  such  settlements as  Moreton's Harbour.  He  reached  the University of Toronto in  I907  to study  philosophy and  psychology, was ordained in  the  Methodist  ministry,   and  eventually in I 9 q presented a  doctoral thesis entitled  Studies  in  Pauline  Eschatology, a work  he refuses to list among his publi­  cations  (it  was "done to a formula") . The  poet  did  not emerge untilI 925 in the characteristically  titled  collection,  Titans.  Methodism  and   academicism had  to go;   so  also  had   the  pedestrian  tropes  of  the  Newfoundland  narrative  poem, Rachel, the  dusty  truisms  of his unpublished  lyric  drama, Clay, and  the  pictur­ esque  cutenesses  of  A  Book  of  Newfoundland Verse. Once  the  inherited and
acquired mental clutter  had  gone,  he could  cope  with  the story of the  amphibian tyrannosaurus  rex  and  the  cachalot whale.  He  was  reliving   the  days  when  he used  to row  out  and  watch  the dead  whales  being  moored  belly-up  at  Moreton's Harbour. Much  of the  feeling  in The  Cachalot, as  E. K.  Brown  pointed  out,  is "in  the  best sense,  juvenile."  It is also atavistic  and  exuberant, and  Pratt's  poetry in general  has the same childlike  quality, the same  obsession  with  force, grandeur and  immensity  as boys' adventure stories. In  Pratt's epics especially,  we arc alone in  an  empty   room  with  God; or  rather, God  is  alone  with   man  because,  for Pratt, good,  godliness  and  gods  have  their  only  being  in  the  human heart. To read  his epics attentively, trying to respond  to all those whales,  icebergs, dinosaurs, giants  and  storms,  is to  attempt one's  own  studies  in  Prattian  Eschatology: for these are  his last  things,  far  from  those of St.  Paul  or of Newfoundland  Method­ ism.  And  the  first thing  we have  to get  used  to is Pratt's entranced  addiction to spectacle, to  conflicts  in  which  the  primitive   defeats the  civilized  and  force  in­ genuity. A certain huffing and  puffing in his poems,  as well as an absence  of overt tenderness or  clearly  realized  characters, produces an  effect  of  impersonal olym­ pianism. Call  it allegory  writ  large  or demiurgc-dabbling, it is like Hardy crossed with  Robinson Jeffers.  And  it is redeemed, as it  has  to  be if  we arc  not  to feel alienated  and  irrelevant among   his  colossal  icons,  by  two  things:  his  humour, essentially  that  of  Newfoundland  plus immersion in  literature, and  the  absence of terror. Wc  can  belly-laugh in the  company of his icons  and  there  is little  need to  whistle  in  his darkness.  For  his cosmology  is  weirdly  genial; his universe  isn't

E. J. PRATT'S FOUR-TON GULLIVER



mechanical so much  as triumphant, and  Pratt the preacher is still there, celebrat­
ing  personally  without regarding personal  faces:


Silent, composed, ringed by its icy broods, The grey shape with the palaeolithic face Was still the master of the longtitudes.


Take it or leave it, that's what  happened; where is the Titanic now?  Pratt's relish for  the  defeat  of  human presumption has in it something perverse  and  oddly  in conflict  with  his convivial  streak.
The answer, I feel, has  to do with  disgust-not the sort  of disgust  we find in
Penn   Warren  and   Sartre  (eructation and   vomit;   inevitable defeat, inevitable choice) but  cosmic disgust at man's grandiose incapacity. Pratt displays an almost Jewish   complicity with  cosmic  forces,  and  that  image  of  the  festive  board  with Pratt presiding-well, it's  just a bit dynastic  and  Arthurian. Isn't  it the humanist retort  to the  President of the  Immortals, the obverse of Pratt's comic  enthusiasm? To  him,  man  is not  big enough, not near  enough  to four  tons;  and  the race itself strikes  him  as puny.  This  is why he seems at times, for  all the  muscle  and  weight of his language, a metaphysical flirt determined to be on the winning side and  to celebrate men  only  when  they  are surpassing  themselves on the  verge  of  destruc­ tion.  Of  the  many-faceted, teeming  surface  of civilization  Pratt says little;  he is addicted  to  apocalypse  and   titans.   Even  in  his  brilliant  poem,  "Come Away, Death", in  which  the  words  are  granite-firm, there  is more symbolism  and  ana­ logue  than  circumstantial detail. But  there  is this,  just the sort  of thing  the  epics
lack:

One night we heard his footfall-one September  night - In the outskirts of a village near the sea.
There  was a moment  when the storm
Delayed its fist, when the surf fell
Like velvet on the rocks-a moment only....
There follows the typical  Pratt expansion of the theme  into  maximum references: What followed was a bolt
Outside  the range and target of the thunder,  And human  speech curved back upon itself Through Druid  runways and the Piltdown scarps, Beyond the stammers of the Java caves,

E. J. PRATT's  FOUR-TON GULLIVER



To find its origins in hieroglyphs On mouths and eyes and cheeks Etched by a foreign stylus never used
On the outmoded page of the Apocalypse.


These  grand  properties can  be  tiring,  not  in  a  poem  of sixty-odd  lines like this, but  when   they  recur  like  elephantine tapestries in  the  epics.  (Pratt plays  with archaeology and   pre-history  in  much  the  same  way  as Andre Malraux does  in his art  books.)




IT MAY   BE   THAT  PRATT,  heir  to  a  tradition of inbred, poor landscape poetry,  has determined not  to be Canadian: to sink the national in the
prehistoric, the  regional  in  the  cosmic.  His  eschatology dwarfs and  plunders his at-hand.  His   whale,   unlike   Melville's,   is  the   incarnation  of  laudable natural strength. Pratt is less interested in  depicting mores and  human enterprises than in showing  their futility. His iceberg  thrills him  more  than  the Titanic's passengers do  (almost twenty  are  named   in  the  poem) . It is not  the  heroism  that excites him  so  much   as the  spectacle  of destruction: the  consciously  created, the  man­ made, wrecked   by  the  unconscious  cliff of ice.  I find  this  excitement  somewhat twisted  although I sympathize with  his underlying view of an impersonal universe  surviving through a  prearranged calculation of favourable  chances. Most  people were not on the Titanic  anyway, and  Life, numerically speaking, won over Death. It is as if Pratt, in  Pleistocene  persona, counted  himself  among the stalking  ante­ diluvians and  cosmic  colossi. Succumbing to such  imaginative ambition, he  pre­  vents  himself  from  doing  what  he  claims  to  do: "to bring in  with the   more severe elemental qualities the human idiosyncrasies." It is not  people  that  emerge,  but  simian  mothers (as in The  Great  Feud)  and  impersonal bestiaries  like Jeffers  out  of Frost:

But goats, like men, have never found
Much standing room on neutral  ground.

After  1939  even,  it is the idea of heroism  rather than  the feat of any individual that  compels  him  to admire. And  his admiration is, as it literally  should  be, full of sad  wonderment. He  has  always  been  slow  to glorify  violent  heroism,  readier to

16

E. J. PRATT'S FOUR-TON GULLIVER



extol   the   passivity   in  stmosm,  preferring always   the  impersonal  violences  of Nature. In  Dunkirk no one fires at the enemy: all endure the process, as in "The Convict Holocaust"  and   Brebeuf. The   net  result  is  a  tough  surrender  which resembles  tough  stalemate. In  "The Truant" man  puts  God  straight:

... we concede
To you no pain nor joy nor love nor hate, No final tableau of desire,
No causes won or lost, no free
Adventure  at the outposts....


The  lyric  "Old Age"  takes  things  a step  further, expressing  the  vita  minima in images  like those of Yeats  and  Samuel  Beckett:  an old man,  "so poor  again,  with all that  plunder taken," has only "the  round  of a wheel chair  and  four  dull walls." Yet  the  old  man   thinks  he  hears  "silver horns blowing" up  on  the  hills. For Pratt, man   is doomed but,  in  accepting doom  bravely,  can  be  commensurable with  Nature and  God   (who have  no pain  nor  joy nor  love nor  hate) and  even colossal, once  we see things  clearly.  Man  has consciously  to undergo what  plants and   minerals undergo without consciousness.  And  beside  man  the  cosmos is

A series of concentric waves which any fool
Might  make by dropping stones within a pool.


The   poker-game in  The Titanic and  the  kaleidoscopic recipe  in  The  Witches' Brew  are cleverer  then, both  conceptually and  verbally,  than  any cosmos. Or so it seems. Actually this is a bit of perverse  pawnbroking. We have only to read some­ thing  like  Maurice  Maeterlinck's Life  of the  Bee  to  discount Pratt's  disparage­ ment   of  the  ordered  universe.   Pratt says  we  can  do  anything  better than   the cosmos can; but  this  is to shunt off the cosmos as sour  grapes.  Better  to shunt  it off  as too  well  organized to  be  tolerated. Because  he feels this  way -contemp­ tuously  envious, he  feels no  terror  at  either  the  vast spaces  or  their  silence.  And this is surely an  inadequate response eloquent of some confusion in Pratt: after all, he  who  is fellow-traveller to  titans  ought  not  to disparage  their  route  and  foot­  prints.  E.  K.  Brown  said  that  the  reader  never  feels small in  Pratt's world: "his  pictures   of  strength  release  one  from   the  petty  round  and make  one  feel  the ally, not  the  victim  ... of universal  power." The  alliance  flatters  but,  unless you accept   Pratt's  cosmography hook,  line  and  sinker,   turns   us  against   ourselves, making thanatos out  of  eros.

E. J. PRATT'S FOUR-TON GULLIVER



Or  does  he  mean,  aB  Karl  Menninger haB suggested, that  Man  has  an  extra­ ordinary  propensity for  self-destruction  and   rationalizes this  by  allying  himself with  destructive Nature? As  Menninger asks,  "Why does  the  wish  to  live  ever,  even  temporarily, triumph  over  the  wish  to  die?"   In  Pratt's  poems,  there  is a colossal game  going  on of identification: Nature is both  destructive and creative; if  Man   allies  himself  with  Nature, then  he  is  both too. But,  in  fact,  Man   is separate  from   Nature, and   his  own  destructions  and   creations  cannot chime  exactly  with those of Nature. Man  bombs beautiful cities and massacres thousands in the  process:  if he claims Nature aB  an ally in this, he is trying  to shift the blame. If he takes  the  blame  and  acknowledges he is a conscious being,  then  surely he is more  vicious than  Nature ever is. To  wish to be as impersonal and  inscrutable aB Nature is to  will our  humanity away.  And  if  Pratt means  that  we are  indeed  so wretched that  we prefer  not  to be human,  then his point  has some force.  But  he would  never  celebrate its force;   and  what  he  does  celebrate is something else. The  kind  of  cosmic  social-climbing he  revels  in  means  that   Nature is powerless to inflict  its worst  without  Man  and  Man,  therefore indispensable, can  work  the arrangement in  reverse  by  inventing  spiritualities of  his own:  charity, courage, honour, love,  congeniality over  dinner....






HERE WE  MUST  STOP.  The   Man-Nature argument is like that  about   the  chicken  and  the  egg, and  it  is jejune  to  debate their  mutual  in­ extricability  until  we  regard   it  aB   an  alliance. For  the  human mind  is  free  to conceive  of alliance or  not;  it can  propound it or deny  it. The  question  is open.  Man  is a conscious  participant in a process from  which  he cannot divide himself, and  all  his interpretations, like the  omega-point or  whatever it  is that  Creation moves  towards, are  guesswork.  But even guesswork  is human, is brave; it's  more inventive  than   being  a  vegetable.  And   Pratt's notion   of  martyrdom,  covering  what  both  Nature and  Man  do  to  men,  begins  with  the  decision  to  accept  and  develops  with the impulse  to justify. All this must,  and  does, provoke wry laughter
of sorts: Man

Yoked Leo, Taurus and  your team  of Bears
To  pull his kiddy cars of inverse squares.

Pratt's humour is the safety-valve. Asserting  Man against the cosmos, allying  him

18

E. J· PRATT's FOUR-TON GULLIVER



with  the cosmos-this is work of supererogation and entails taking  things seriously. Pratt, realizing  this,  as well as the  futility  of regimen  and  system,  works  human ingenuity against  itself  through polysyllabic,  comic  overtones:

You oldest of the hierarchs
Composed of electronic sparks....

His  poetry  is conceptual, allegorical   and  masculine. His  lyricism  is generic,  not personal:

... and at the equinoxes
Under  the gold and green of the auroras
Wild geese drove wedges through  the zodiac.


It is the  process of life -diurnal, chthonic, solar and  chemical that  obsesses him, and  the  only  moral  drama that  attracts him  is that  of enduring until  demolition. We  must  not  look for  people,  not even such  composites  as we find in The  Waste Land,  because   his  whole  tendency is generic-very  much   in  the  tradition of Pope's Essay on Man  and  Arnold's Empedocles  on Etna.  All he  declares  is the power  of the  spirit  and  his conviction  of spirit's constant  availability.
He is the bleakest  Canadian poet ever as well as the one with  the fewest samples of contemporary society.  Apocalyptic and  full  of sinew,  he  has  virtually no fop­ pery  at  all except  that  of titan-collecting. If he can be faulted for  magniloquence and  grandiosity he  must  be  praised  for  making  both  qualities part of his protest against the  forces  that  win  so often  he is tempted to side  with  them  until  Man  measures  up  to  the  monolithic titan  which  merges iceberg,  whale,  dinosaur and ocean.  Brebeuf  the  martyr is so huge  that  Indians  are  reluctant to let  him  into their  canoes.  Pratt, too, is a little  monstrous, but  our  mental canoes  get too many lightweights, and  he must  be received.
His  mechanical-biological paraphernalia has enormous dignity  within  the con­ fines  of  his  hearty   vision  of  the  incongruous. The  rare  feat  is to  have  sustained his own  mythology without seeming  to force the  traditionally "poetic" into  futile roles. He  has  demonstrated the  fusing  and  modifying  power  of a vision, a vision not  of streetfuls or  trainfuls or  housefuls,  but  pared  and  bleak,  never  squeamish or  quixotic,  always  confidently  nailed   down   and  offered  almost   arrogantly. I think   anti-Methodism has   led   him   too   far   into  cosmic  solecisms  and   anti­  philosophy has made  him  a bit of a simplifier; but he is after  all the master  of the Stonehenge style  and   the  robustest   apostate of   all. The  sea  moans  round  him

E. J. PRATT'S FOUR-TON GULLIVER



too, with  one voice only, and  he stared  at it for many  of his formative  years. It would be undiscerning,  then, not to remark  a Newfoundland tenacity and tough­ ness, as  well as  the  sense of maritime  disaster,  pervading   his work.  For his is essentially primitive verse written across the full sweep of an erudite man's vocabu­ lary  and  the  harshest  tensions of an  agile, dogmatic  mind.  He  has been  there, staring  at the sea from Toronto for almost sixty years; and it is still, as his poetry tells us, staring  densely back. The  momentum  of the tragic  vision has sustained him  as it has sustained  few Canadian writers,  and  that  in  the long run  is why Pratt  has to be compared  with, contrasted  with, such as  Milton  and  Verga.  He is not  quite of their measure, but  he is comparable, and  there has been no poet in  Canada remotely as profound.





















20



ILLUSION AND AN ATONEMENT

E. ]. Pratt and Christianity





Vincent Sharman








NORTITROP FRYE, Desmond Pacey, and John  Suthedand, three  important Canadian critics, suggest in their comments  on E. J. Pratt  that Christianity   forms  the  basis of  his work:   "His  religious  [i.e.  Christian]  views
organize  his poetry"';  "Christ's self-sacrificing death  on  the  Cross forms ... the chief symbolic centre"  of the  poetry.2   These interpretations seem, unfortunately, to  be  based  more  on  the  assumption  that,  because Pratt's  doctoral  dissertation was  entitled   Pauline   Eschatology, his  poetry is  Christian, rather than  on  a thorough  analysis of Pratt's poems. A Christian  interpretation of Pratt's  work is,
I  believe, erroneous;  but  even if such interpretation could  be reasonably  upheld it would be too limiting  to the intent  of his poetry; only ten of a total of  ninety­ eight  poems in Tlze  Collected Poems  of E.  ]. Pratt can in any way be construed as being Christian. Of  the long, major  poems, only Brebeuf  and  His Brethren  is, surely  and  only  through   careless  reading,  open  to pro-Christian  interpretation.
As I have suggested, too little reasonable and  thorough  analysis has gone into most Pratt  criticism.3 The  most fantastic  comments on Pratt  are in John Suther­ land's  The Poetry  of E.]. Pratt:   A  New  Interpretation. Two  examples should suffice. Sutherland sees the  whale  in  The   Cachalot   as the  "piscine  symbol"  of Christ,  as the fulfilment  in Christ  of the "Messianic  prophecy"  in Ezra: 4


... thou didst see a man coming up from the heart of the sea....


21

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



This  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  whale  is described in  the  poem  as the  greatest killer  in  all  the  oceans.  He says of Tyrannosauros Rex,  in The Great  Feud, that he,  too,  is a  symbol  of Christ,  because  he  "Rises above  the  petty  allegiances of the  other  animals" and  because  he "voluntarily accepts  the fact  of his death:  he appears to sacrifice  himself  to  a  higher  principle."5  The  conventional image  of Christ  is hardly compatible with a creature who on the  morning of the pleiocene
Armageddon is

... bloated, angry and unsound
Of wind and reeling down the height
For flesh, his object of the fight.


Pacey  comes  near  to fantasy.  He  dubs  Pratt a Christian humanist because,  in part, his poetry  reveals  that  "Man glorifies God  by seeking  to emulate the sacri­ ficial  life  of  Christ." 6  It is strange that  Pratt should   expect  men  to  glorify  the God   who,  throughout his  poetry,  is completely without  care  for  men; who  is, indeed, amoral; and  who  is more  like a Great Machine than  anything else.
I hope  that  the  following analyses of some of Pratt's important poems will help to suggest  a broader and  more  accurate view  of what  Pratt's poetry  is about.







SINCE "The Toll  of the  Bells"  (I92 3), in  which  the  poet's faith  is "raked up ... and  burned like a pile of driftwood", E. J. Pratt has viewed as illusionists  those who look with hope to God  and  to a divine,  miraculous Christ,
and   with   pride   to  systems  that   condone self-destruction  for  non-humanitarian ideals.  Men,  Pratt says, look in the wrong  direction, away  to the Deity,  to systems, to  Nature, rather than  into  themselves,  to the  defiant7  heart.
Pratt views  Christ  not  as divine,  but  as the  perfection of natural evolution in man   ("The Highway"). Christ  is no  more  sacrificing than  the  men  of  Be hind the   Log  who  die  oil-anointed in  the  Arctic   Ocean, and   no  more  loving  than those  exemplary men  of "Newfoundland Seamen" whose  "master  passion" is

Of giving shelter and of sharing  bread,
Of answering the rocket signals in the fashion
Of losing life to save it.


22

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



Christ  is the symbol of man  eternally sorrowing, of man  betrayed into death  by other  men, of man  extending  his greatest charity -his life for others.
Surrounded by death  in  the  amoral  universe, men  are  pathetically  frail  and small. Their  spirit, however, rises above their physical insignificance when charity and  defiance of death  for the sake of life on earth find expression. In charity and defiance is immortality; there is no Heavenly immortality for men in Pratt: there is nothing  beyond  the  death-sea.
The  Iron Door (An Ode), published in 1927, is Pratt's  earliest, most complete expression of a sense of the illusion of belief in Christian  Afterlife. In  the poem, the  poet  dreams  that  he  sees an  iron  door  in  a cliff by the sea. Clouds  of fog surround  it,  admitting occasional gleams of light. The  door  is in the shape  of a cross, and  on its lintel is "the  crest/  Of death". Before the door stand  the souls of  the  dead,  most  of  whom  question  the  purpose of  life. Eventually,  the  door opens, but only widely enough for the poet to see that the petitioners pass through it.  He  sees nothing  beyond  the  door,  although  he catches  the  "sense"  of light, life, and  space  beyond.  The  poet awakens from  his dream,  profoundly  affected by its meaning.
Pratt's  description  of  the  door  and  its surroundings,  at  the  beginning  of the poem,  indicates  the  direction  that  the poem will take. The  door  has been made by a "giant  hand" which  brought  it from "some Plutonian  cave". These sugges­ tions of myth  are  intensified  by the  presence of "death's crest"  placed  over the door  in  "ironic   jest",  as if  death  were  teasing  those before  the  door  with  the suggestion that  there  is something  beyond it.
The  door has no latch,  and it will open only once for the poet:


It seemed  the smith  designed  it to be swung
But once,  then  closed forever  more.


The  air  surrounding the  desolate  area  is filled with the music of the sorrows of mankind,  and  is associated  with  a human  desire for belief that  death  is not the end of life. The  music suggests that  in crises and  "drab  hours" does the need for belief  arise-a  need  that  gives  birth  to  dreams  that  are  more  glorious  than heaven  could  be. The  door  is, finally, a mirror  of the faces before it;  that  is, it is constituted  of men's despair.
Those  whose faces materialize  before the door are men and  women whom the poet has known. Some have given up their lives for others; a sea-captain  enquires after  the status  of honour  and  courage in the land of death; a child mourns  the

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



death   of  his  dog;  the  poet's  mother   (apparently)  is there,  calm  and  without doubt  that  further  life ensues; a cynic, whose need is apparent in his dejection, is prepared  to accept that the "whole cosmic lie [is] pre-disposed".
At  the  "darkest   moment"  the  door  opens for  the  petitioners.  The  poet  does
not know what  causes it to open and  presents several possible forces:  some talis­ man,  a  "wish  thrice-spoken",  a magic name,  or  unreasoning  faith. There  is no apparent logic to the door's  opening,  and  faith  and  magic  are equally  effective. The  logic is, of course, that  the door  opens because  those who  create it can do with it  as they  wish:  the door is the petitioners'  own illusion,  and  their  further illusion will see it opened.
The  poet,  however,  cannot  participate  in  the  revelation  of the  Afterlife.  He
can only "sense" the vision beyond the door;  he can participate only to the extent of appreciating what  the dead  believe they are going  to. He  cannot  see beyond the  threshold.  The  souls pass  through,  the  door  slams  shut,  and  although  the desolate  clouds  of death  return  to him,  as potent  as ever, the  poet,  in  spite  of death, clings to the meaning of the dream: for his Afterlife is illusion.
The   poem  concludes  with  a  reversal  of  the  conclusion  of  Milton's  sonnet,
"Methought I Saw ..." Pratt's conclusion is:

... I was left alone, aware
Of blindness falling with terrestrial day
On sight enfeebled by the solar glare.

Milton's  awakening  returns  him to a literal  condition  of blindness in which the return  of day  only temporarily  impairs  his dream-sight. Pratt's awakening  com­ pletes a  figurative  process begun  before  the  dream  began  (his  dream-sight  has already  been  "enfeebled"). The  coming  of day  renders  him  permanently  blind to apprehending Christian  Immortality. The  door, as suggested at the beginning of the  poem, will open no more for him. The  unpitying  glare of reason will not permit  him  the solace of unreasoned  belief.
Pratt's  rejection  of the belief in the Afterlife is related  to his rejection  of the concept  of the moral universe:  God is unheeding  of man;  it is His winds that  in "The Ground  Swell" feed the hungering  death-sea  with men,  and  it is His ears in  The I ron  Door  that  are  "unhearing" of the  pleas of suffering  and  confused humanity   existing  in  a  world  dominated by  death. God  is defined  in  "The Truant" as the  mechanical  force of the  universe, the  Great  Pan jandrum  who is scarcely aware  of mankind.  Yet it is man  who has made  this disinterested  force into  a deity, an attestation  of man's  superiority  over God:

24

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



Boast not about  your harmony, Your perfect curves, your rings
Of  pure and endless light-'Twas we
Who pinned upon your Seraphim  their wings, And when your brassy heavens rang
With  joy that morning while the planets sang
Their  choruses of archangelic  lore,
'Twas  we who ordered  the notes upon their score
Out  of our winds and strings.


The   Roosevelt  and  the  Antinoii, which  is the  climax  of  Pratt's poetry  of the conflict  of  man  and  nature, embodies the  illusory nature of the  benevolent God and   the  miraculous, divine  Christ.  During the  storm  in  which  the  crew  of  the wrecked  Antinoii is rescued  by the  Roosevelt  two men  are drowned. The  crew  of the  Roosevelt gather on  the  deck  to acknowledge, through  religious  service,  the heroism  of the  drowned men.  Their bandages and  slings proclaiming their  efforts against the  snow,  wind  and  sea,  they  hear  the  hymn  which  in  the  howls  of the wind  is only  partially audible. It is obscured  at  other  times  by  the  voice of  the amoral universe,   of  God,  that  laughs  "down the  ventilating shaft". The hymn that  the  mourning sailors  hear,  however,  informs  them  that  it is God  who com­ mands the seas, which  obey  Him.  He  is, further, a "father to the  fatherless", and  the "God of all comfort". But  God,  in fact,  is no comfort, for he has brought the two sailors  to the  "bellies" of the waves, the fanged  "creatures of  a fabled  past", and  the  men  lie not with  God  the  Father, but in "the  sea's stem foster-lap". The  crew  are  deluded. Their  father  and comfort is the  one  who  will  have  them destroyed. They   are  blind  to  the  irony  of  their  worship.
The  futility  of the illusion of the beneficent  God is focused  not only in the crew and  the  hymn, but  also  in  the  Roman Catholic priest  who  raises  his crucifix  to the  sea,  giving  absolution to the  dead  men,  and  who prays  for  God's  help.  That which   the  priest   begs  is  a  "crumb/ Of  favour" from  the  storehouse of  God's goodness,  which  is a  "cupboard" that  still  has  much  in  it  despite  the  many  de­ mands  that  have  been  made  on it: a reductio  ad absurdum of the  Omnipotent. That the priest  is sincere  is not in doubt, but his gesture is impotent:  the eventual rescue  is the  result  of chance and  men's  willingness to respond  with emotion and reason  to the  needs  of other, to respond  with  "the  heart's assent  unto the  hand". God  has  nothing to do with  the success of the venture: the  ray of sunlight, after  the  rescue  has  been  made, breaks  through the clouds and  defies the  rescuers; "As

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



if a god might  thus salute the deed"  repudiates  God as the source of the praise. The  mission was accomplished  in spite of Him.
The  image  of  the  priest  with  his crucifix  upraised  to  the  raging  Atlantic  is
balanced  by an image of Christ quietening  Galilee. The  comparison  between the two bodies of water reveals that  the Atlantic  is "no Gennesaret  of Galilee" which had  been  quietened  by "conjuring", by a  "word's magic".  The  denigration  of Christ's   miracle  as  illusion-and,  consequently, His   divinity-reveals  the Catholic  priest's symbolic acts as futile and  pathetic. The  terrible frailty of man, and  his need to find sustenance  against death,  are  thus dramatically  underlined.






R.TT'S GREAT EPIC,  Brebeuf and  His Brethren, expresses the theme of illusion through the misguided efforts of the Jesuit priests in seventeenth­ century   Canada. The  Jesuits  teach   abstractions that  bring  nothing  to  vast majority  of  Indians: it  is illogical to desire  a  Paradise  in  which there  will be starvation   because  there  can  be no  hunting; in  which  friends  and  enemies will exist side by side; in which there will not be the comforts of tobacco  and feasts. The  Jesuits'  response to  the  Indians'  lack  of  response is to  impress on  them another   abstraction, Eternal  Torment, the  threat of  the  torture-fires which  place  the  priests' persuasive techniques  in  an  infinitely  worse category  than  the Indians'. The  priests are so concerned  with the "will of God",  with Paradise and Hell,  with  the welfare of souls, and  with  the attainment of martyrdom, that  the charity  and  kindness-expressions of  human  feeling-with which they initially approached  the  Indians  take  second  place.  Ironically,  the  priests'  flaming  zeal brings  forth  not  warmth  from  the  Indians,  but  the  cold of death  from  burning  pitch, blazing forts, and fires at the stake.
The  Jesuits in the poem must subject "Desire  and sense ... to the reason" and must  "trample the  body under". Reason,  not  the  heart,  will lead  them  to their goal,  the  attainment of  "Loyola's  mountains... .j  Sublime  at  their  summits". Their  mutilated  bodies are only indications  to them of the nearness of their goals of martyrdom; they are manifestations of their self-centred devotion to the Code, to which their humanity  is subjugated. They are machines of Reason, and in their pursuit  of martyrdom,  are unwitting  agents of death,  victims of the illusion that their system has value to man.
In  Brebeuf himself the tragedy of the Jesuits is most apparent. He is a poten-

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



tially great  human being who has gentleness, kindness, nobility of character and background, courage, and  strength, who gives his life for  his ideal,  God,  through the  auspices  of  the  Jesuit   Order. He  seeks martyrdom, death, for  an  ideal  and through a  system  that  deny  the  humanity of men.  The  proper business  of men, in  Pratt, is the  pursuit of life, not death. Brebeuf  dies in ignorance of the futility of  his ideal.
The  well-known image  of the  cross which  climaxes  Brebeuf's illusion  is a mag­ nificent  statement by Pratt of the  tragedy  of illusion. The Indians search for  the source  of  Brebeuf's strength. They   tear  out  his  heart,   but  it  is not  there.  It is

... in the sound of invisible trumpets blowing Around  two slabs of board, right-angled, hammered By Roman  nails and hung on a Jewish hill.

Brebeuf's strength is in  the  "sound of  trumpets", which   may  be  heavenly, but which  has  nothing of humanity in it. Nor  have  the  "two  slabs of board" around which  the  trumpets blow. The  music, the  trumpets, the  boards,  and  the  "Roman nails"   are  cold.  As  the  mystical   nature of  Brebeuf's   mission  is  removed   from humanity, and  as the logic of his Christian direction  is cold, so is his martyrdom. The  source  of Brebeuf's strength is in  the self-glorification signified  by the sound of the  trumpets, which  like  the seraphim in "The Truant" and  the  land  of light in  The  I ron Door are  created by men  themselves.
The  ideals  for  which  the  Jesuits  strive  require  the subjection of their  humanity
to  Reason  and  religious  spirit.  Brebeuf  would,  for example, react  emotionally to the  lack  of  privacy   among the  Indians with  whom  he  lived-and  to  all  the annoyances of Huronia-but he hides his human reaction  and  transforms "hoary Gallic  oaths/ Into the  Benedicte". At the climax of the poem,  he does assert him­ self, momentarily in his agony,  when  he rebels against  the Indians' torture which will bring  about his end.  He  gives them

... roar for roar.
Was it because the chancel became the arena, Bvebeuf a lion at bay, not a lamb on the altar ... ?

But  he  subsides  again  into  the  passive  role of  the  martyr. When   he  roars  out, Brebeuf  acts  in  the  manner that  Pratt describes in "Silences", by which  the first step   to  salvation  is  through  communication of  emotion, "for   who  would   not prefer   to  be  lustily  damned than   to  be  half-heartedly blessed?"  The  torture by fire  and  boiling  water  are  the  fulfilment of his conscious  wish to die "per  ignem

27

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



et  per  aquam" and  to take  his place  in  "the line  of  martyrs". The Indians are vehicles  for  the  attainment of "Loyola's summits".
The virtues  of the  Indians, which  are eventually forgotten in their  desire  to rid
the  country of the  Jesuits,  are epitomized in two converts, Eustache and  Onnon­ hoaraton, whose  actions  are  contrasted to  those  scarcely  human  Jesuits, Joques and  Goupil. Eustache, at  the  Iroquois stake,  pleads  with  his  friends


... to let no thought of vengeance
Arising  from his anguish  at the  stake
Injure the French hopes  for an Iroquois peace ....


Onnonhoaraton offers  himself  as a sacrifice  in  place  of Joques. The  concern of these  two  Indians is with  life through peace  and  the  charity of self-sacrifice  so that  others  may  live. The  Jesuit  Joques, at  the same  "festival of torture", uses his last energies  to baptize  two prisoners  "with the dew from  leaves of Turkish corn", and  to give them  the sign of the "last  absolution". Goupil  is killed  (by a sorcerer) when  he tries to place  the sign of the  cross on  a child's forehead. The  concern of the priests is with  the acceptance of death; their  symbolic  actions  are vapid  in comparison with  those  of  the  two  Indians, which  affirm  life.
In  the  epilogue,  "The Martyr's Shrine", Pratt switches  the setting  to twentieth­ century Canada, and  indicts  contemporary Canadians on three counts of illusion. Pratt begins the epilogue  with  a reiteration of the phrase  "the winds of God" with which   the  poem  begins.  The  seventeenth-century winds  brought men  from  the safety  and  quietude of uninvolved lives in  religious  institutions in  France to the wilderness  of  Canada to face  the  ravages  of  weather and  the  violence  of "pre­ judiced  minds", to build  forts,  and  to scale  the  heights  of "Loyola's mountains". Twentieth-century Canadian winds  can only rouse  men  to  provide  a shrine  on a hilltop approached by highways,  near  Midland, Ontario. The indictment is bit­ ter:  those who  provide  the shrine  are pallid  beside those they honour: the  French Jesuits  may  have  been  misguided,  but  they  had  the strength of determination to accept a great  challenge. The shrine is a valueless  thing  because  it commemorates the  wrong  thing-the  self-pride  of the  Jesuits  functioning under  the  illusion  of the  values  of Reason and self-destruction, rather than  the  tremendous determina­ tion  of  which  human beings  are  capable.
Men  do  not  recognize  the  follies of the  past.  The illusions  of the  seventeenth century  arise  for  the  "ashes  of  St.  Ignace", which   are  "glowing afresh". The candles in  the  shrine  are  lit  "from the  torch  of Ragueneau's ruins". But  candle

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



flames are only pale imitations  of the zealous, ancient flames. Burned St. Ignace is still only ashes; the ashes glow but will never bum. The forest trails over which the  priests  travelled  are  now  modem  highways, the  dubious  blooms of "fern/ And  brier and  fungus". The  final two lines of the poem,

The shrines and altars are built anew; the Aves
And the prayers ascend, and the Holy Bread is broken,

are  a last, almost  wearied,  comment  on the illusion of those responsible for the shrine  and  on  the illusion which the shrine perpetuates.





BESIDES WRITING of religious illusion, Pratt  deals with men's illusions of Nature  and  of their own capabilities, especially as manifested  in their machines.  The  chief  poem  which  deals with  these  themes  is The  Titanic,  but "The Sea  Cathedral" and  "The   Mirage",  two short  poems, provide  a basis for Pratt's concept  that  beauty  in  Nature  is deceptive in its suggestions of spiritual significance. Beauty in  Nature  must, because it is not of man, pass meaninglessly away.  The  iceberg  in  "The Sea  Cathedral", although  "fairer   than  a  Phidian dream", is doomed  to be drawn  down  by the "inveterate sea" into  nothingness, because it is not a product  of man. Its beauty is only "immaculate". It is a show piece of nature  that  is temple-like but is

Without one chastening fire made to start
From altars built around its polar heart.

Similar  imagery  of the illusion of Nature  as an expression of beatitude  is present in "The Mirage". A cloud  structure  there is described  as religious imagery  that suggests that the cloud has religious significance. In the light of the poet's intellect, however, the cloud loses its value. It is only a thing of Nature; it has no "lineage of toil";  it has no contact  with man.
The iceberg in The Titanic presents the illusion of moral significance in Nature,
of having  transcendent value  (and  John  Sutherland was one critic who suffered from the illusion) .8 There are two aspects to the imagery of the iceberg, its empty beauty  and  its ugliness, which are conveyed in images of a religious and  a some­ what  scientific  nature, respectively. The  religious images  are  in  the  pattern   of those in "The Sea Cathedral" and "The  Mirage". The iceberg of The Titanic has

29

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



... fac;ade and columns with their hint Of inward altars and of steepled bells Ringing the passage of the parallels.


As the  iceberg  melts, it  loses "the  last  temple  touch  of grace".  Underlying  the appearance of the temple is ice of the "consistency of flint" that  has been pressed by "glacial time". The "paleolithic face", into which the temple deteriorates and "shambles like a plantigrade", is no different, basically, from the beautiful iceberg. Both  appearances are  accidents  of climate;  there  is no  opposition  between  the "fa  ade
amoral  nature.  The  iceberg is the same thing  both  before and  after  the sun has changed  its appearance: underlying its superficial beauty is its destructive potential.
The  ship,  the  Titanic,  is itself a  mechanical   universe  of  illusion.  It  has  its
own stars;  its lights turn  night into day;  its machinery  is, in effect, self-running; it  has its own  deities, the first-class gods whose materialism  creates commercial wonders. But there is nothing  attractive  about  the ship. It is grotesque,  and  man has let himself be displaced by it. He has made  himself a god in his creation  of the ship and  will not demean  himself with running  her:  there is scarcely anyone "behind the log". To the passengers, the ship has the safety of land. On the decks there  is light  from  a "thousand   lamps  as on  a  city street"; palm  trees line  an avenue  "With all the vista of a boulevard". The ship is a crag, a Gibraltar. This vulgar  bauble is men's universe, and faith in her is absolute:  "Even  the judgment stood in little need/  Of reason".
Specifically, the  lights of the ship symbolize man's  vanity  and  the illusion of his greatness.  Even  after  the collision with  the iceberg,  many  passengers cannot realize  their  danger.  As the  lifeboats lower  into  the  water,  those in  them  find the  necessity of the  descent  unreal.  For  them  the ship  is still secure;  the lights burn  invitingly -they  are  the stars of the  universe  that  man  has created; they have  superseded  the  stars  of the  natural   universe. The  lights  illumine  and  are a  part  of many  of those pretentious  aspects of the Titanic  that  make  her great in  men's  eyes:  the  boulevards,  the  palm  trees, the  saloons in  Regency  and  the taste of the "Louis  dynasty". The lights illumine her gigantic size, "From  gudgeon to stem  nine  hundred  feet".  Even  the light  from  cigarettes  gives confidence,  as the  men  stand,  elegantly  dressed, against  the glow of the ship  after  the iceberg has ripped  a three-hundred foot gash in her:

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



... the silhouettes
Of men in dinner  jackets staging an act In which delusion passed, deriding fact Behind the cupped flare of the cigarettes.


Dramatically the  listing Titanic glows on the ocean,  a pathetic creation, contrast­ ing  to the stars,  but  to the last turning night  into day. But it is light that "cheats" and  "beguiles". Safety  on the big ship is an illusion which  many passengers choose in preference to the safety  of the lifeboats; the light is an irony of security:

Inside the recreation  rooms the gold
From Arab lamps shone on the burnished tile. What  hindered  the return  to shelter while
The ship clothed in that irony of light
Offered  her berths and cabins as a fold?


When   the  stem   of  the  ship  lifts  "Against the  horizon  stars  in  silhouette", the eternal and   the  temporary and  illusory  are  posed  against each  other. The  ship's lights flash off and  then  on, and  the terrible  reality of destruction strikes.  Without her  lights,  the  Titanic  becomes  a  part  of  the  night  that  she  had  vainly  tried  to displace,  a part of the  Void,  that  "jet  expanse  of water", her black  grave.
But  not  all  of  the  passengers  on  the  Titanic   remain   under   the  illusion  that
men's  strength can  displace  the  universe.  In  the  face  of death, realizing the  pre­ dicament of the ship,  many  of the first-class passengers  perform a deliberate ritual  of self-sacrifice.  The  half-empty lifeboats  going down  without the gods are symbols that  man's illusion  has  been  atoned  for.  These  men  and  women  have  chosen to let  the  boats  go  unfilled.  They  have  rejected  any  desire  for  survival;  they  have accepted death. Theirs is a conscious  decision  to be sacrificed  to atone for "That ancient hubris in  the  dreams of men". And  Man thereby  is redeemed. But  Pratt is  too  realistic   to  say  that   because  Man is  redeemed from  the  illusion  of  his strength all  men  are:  hundreds who believe in the efficacy of the ship's  lights go down,  but  their  screams are  unheard in the  roar  of great  machines tearing loose below  decks  as the ship's  stem  rises to a 45° angle.
But if, in the  lifeboats  surrounding the vacancy  where  once floated  the Titanic,
men  are  implied as  rising  from  the  desolation   of their  illusion,  so in  the  image of the  "icy  broods" ringing  the  remaining iceberg  is implied  the  continuation of vast  power  of  the  amoral universe.
For  Pratt, what  men  must  understand is that  their salvation lies in  themselves,

E. J. PRATT AND CHRISTIANITY



not  in  Nature, God,  systems, or in ignorant pride  in  machines. To  maintain life should   be  the  end  of men's  actions,  the  accomplishment of  which,  in  times  of conflict,  is dependent on  defiance,  determination, and  Reason  under  the  control of  the  heart. But  illusions  persist:   men  kill  men,  die  for  ideals  which  embrace death, and  delude themselves  with  hopeful  prayers  addressed to the  "unhearing ears  of God". Imperfect men  must  make  direct  their  feelings  for other  men  for the  sake  of life. For  life is, finally,  all that  men  have,  and  only  men  can  care  at all whether men  live or die.



Notes

' Northrop Frye, "Editor's Introduction", The  Collected Poems  of E.  J. Pratt,  2nd. ed.  (Toronto, 1958),  xxiii.
2   Desmond   Pacey,  Ten  Canadian Poets   (Toronto, 1958),   p.  175.  Here  Pacey  is agreeing  with Sutherland's thesis, presented  throughout The  Poetry  of E.  J. Pratt: A New  Interpretation  (Toronto, 1956).
3  The  notable  exception  is Earle  Birney's "E.  J. Pratt  and  His  Critics",  in  Masks of  Poetry   (Toronto, I g62),  pp.  72-95.
4   p. 6g.
5   p. 103.
6   Ten Canadian Poets, p. 175·
7   Defiance   is Earle  Birney's designation  of the  most significant  of human  values in
Pratt's poetry:  "E.  J. Pratt  and  His Critics",  Masks  of Fiction   (Toronto, 1962),
p. go.
8   In The Poetry of E. f. Pratt:   A New  Interpretation.




















32



OF ALAN CRAWLEY








Ethel Wilson











IN '94'• a small quartedy publication  of poeiTy, Cont,mpv.­
ary  Verse,  appeared  in  British  Columbia. The   editor   was  Alan   Crawley. The
magazine spanned and  served  a  difficult  decade.
Contemporary Verse  appeared at  a  time  when  many  young  writers,  novices, wrote  alone  in  Canada,  whether they  were  poets or  writers  of  prose,  unknown to  each  other   and  usually  ignorant of any  vehicle  of  publication -should  they wish for  publication. There was, before  and-for a time-after  the  years 1937 and  1938  a sort  of anonymity, a vacuum in the  land  in the  area  of new  poetry and  prose  and  its publication, as far  as the  new writer  was concerned. The  war, intervening  dreadfully, became both  a  nightmare inspiration and  a  barrier.
It was  during these  years  in  Canada that   poets,  individually, became aware
that  the  needs  of the  poet  (and of his potential reading  public) might  be met to a surprising degree  in  the small  quarterly publication-Contemporary Verse­ issuing from  the  west of Canada, open  at first to poets anywhere and  then  limited to  Canadian  poets  everywhere. The   needs  of the  prose  writer  in  Canada  (and  his  potential  reading  public)  were  being  met  by  another  small  publication­ Northern  Review- published in  Montreal and  edited  by John  Sutherland who also  welcomed   poets.  John Sutherland was,  to me,  a splendid  and  tragic  young figure.  There  was  pathos and   defeat   and  victory  in  his  life,  his  dedication to Canadian letters,  and  his early  death. During a few arduous and combative years


33

OF ALAN CRAWLEY



he  offered  an  opportunity to  yet  unestablished Canadian  writers   (I was  one  of them) wherever  they might be. Alan Crawley and  John Sutherland, working independently  and   three   thousand  miles  apart,  provided for  us,  it  seemed,   a door  in the  west and  a door  in the east. These  doors  were  opened  to us, poets or writers of prose, by these two men, and if we would,  and  could,  we passed through the   doors  into  the  open  air  of  speech  and   communication. At  intervals other little   magazines came  and   went,  among   them   the  elegant   and   too  short-lived Here  and  Now- but  to  my  initial  ignorance and  subsequent knowledge  Con­ temporary  Verse  and  Northern  Review  alone  seemed  to have  a sort of  temporary permanence, then.
In  the third  issue of The Tamarack  Review  (Spring I957)  there  is an excellent
brief  history  of  the  origin  and  life of Contemporary Verse,  by Floris  McLaren. While  Alan  Crawley in  Vancouver edited  the  contents of  his small,  courageous publication, Mrs.  McLaren in Victoria was the  business  manager and  saw to the simple   but  financially   difficult  production. Over   an  unusually  complex  period of  eleven  years,  this  labour  was  a  continued offering  to  living  verse. The  poets were   encouraged,  advised,  criticized, rejected  or  made   known,   and   not  paid. Neither  were  the  editor  and   his  associates.  From   all  over  Canada  submissions came  in,  testifying  to the need for contact. I must  tell you, and  beg you to believe and  remember, that  the editor  of Contemporary Verse was blind.
Alan  Crawley came  of an  English  family  which  for several  hundred years had lived  close to the  Forest  of Dean  in  Gloucestershire; the  life lines of that  family ran  through the  Church, the  Army,  the  Navy,  and  Law.  In  I875  Alan's father, then   a  young  man, and  three  companions sailed  for  New  York  and, after  ad­ venturing in  the  west, turned   to  Manitoba where  the  hunting was  alleged  to be good.  Young  Crawley   and  two  of  his  friends  each  took  up  a  homestead  in  an unsettled   area  southwest  of Winnipeg. Some  time  later  he  returned to  England. There he  married and-no longer  the  young  hunter and  homesteader-returned to  Manitoba, and,   in  the  little  village  of  Holland,  opened   a  private bank  and insurance office. There the small  family  remained, settled  settlers  who  had  made  their  first  journey  across the  prairie  by oxcart, and  there  Alan  spent  his boyhood,  with  his younger  brother  who lived  to die in the war  of  I 9 I 4- I 9 I 8.
Alan   says:   "As  I  recall,  the  rooms  were  over-flowing with  books  and  with
newspapers and  magazines  which  came  continuously from  relatives  in  England. There always seemed  to be one of the family  reading out  of doors in the summer­ time,  or  reading aloud  to  the  rest  of the  family  in  the  long  dark  of  the  prairie winter   evenings." He  remembers no  poetry  among the  many  books-beyond  a

34

OF ALAN CRAWLEY



collection  of Percy's  Reliques and  the poems of Edward Lear, a curious combina­ tion  that   points  to  the  future eclecticism  of Alan's  mind. The   boy  became  in­ terested  in the history  of English  words and  names and  was soon a natural student of etymology. This  was  the  product of the  abundance of books  at home,  not  of his schooling,  for  he  attended the  little  village  school.
Later, he was sent  to St. John's College School in Winnipeg. Many  of the boys in  this  unique  institution were  the sons of Hudson's Bay factors in  the far  north who came  to Winnipeg in the  old Hudson's Bay Company river  boats  and  stayed each  school  year  at  St.  John's from  August  of one  year  until  July  of the  next. Alan's education was  entirely   Canadian and  of the  middle  west, supplemented by the  books and  reading habits  of his family  in the village  of Holland.
There was  not,  at  that   time,  a  law  school  in  the  University of  Manitoba  so,
after   matriculation, Alan   was  articled   for  the  study  of  law  to  a  member of  a prominent firm  in  Winnipeg. In  I 9 I 2  he was admitted as a barrister and  solicitor to the  Bar  of Manitoba.
At  about  that   time   the   Russian   actress  Nazimova  came   to  Winnipeg and appeared in  Ibsen's plays.  Alan   had  been  reading   Ibsen   with  fascination, and met  the  great  Nazimova. In  a talk  with  her,  she awoke  his lively interest  in the theatre and  also in the  Russian writers.  He  at once began  to read  Tolstoy, Chek­ hov  and  Dostoievsky.
In   I9I3 he  married Jean Horn  of Winnipeg. Shortly  afterwards he, his wife and   a  friend   H.  A. V.  Green  organized a group of amateur players  under  the name   of  The   Community  Players  of  Winnipeg. For  more   than   ten  years  the players  produced and  acted, first of all in a rented  theatre and  then  for  several years  in  a  theatre of  their  own  with  a  permanent and  paid  director. Alan's first productive period  in  the  arts  had  begun.
It seemed  peculiarly true  that  the  arts  lay latent  in  him  and  only  an  incident was  required to  awaken them  into  activity.  The  next  incident occurred in  Eng­ land. On  a hot  Saturday afternoon in London when  the streets  seemed strangely  deserted, Alan   stopped  in  front   of  a  small  shop  window   in  which  were  books of  poetry,  books  about poetry, and  some  unusual  Poetry  Sheets.  He  went  in. It was  the  Poetry  Book  Shop,  famous  in  England before  and  in  the  twenties,  but unknown  to  Alan   Crawley. There,  and   on  subsequent  visits,  he  met  Harold Monro the owner  and  himself  a poet,  Walter  de la Mare,  Ralph Hodgson, Davies and  others.  For  the  first  time  Alan  heard  of the  Georgian  poets and  the  young war  poets.  From   this  chance visit  the  interest  and  passion  grew  that  led  to the influence of Alan  Crawley among the young  poets of  Canada. He  returned home

35

OF ALAN CRAWLEY



with  volumes of poetry and  to a new found  land.
He  became  a  collector  and  student  of  contemporary verse and  formed  the habit  of reading  a  poem each day, regarding  it critically, and  memorizing  most of them.  He  read  all available  criticism of poetry,  particularly  modern  poetry. His interest  at  that  time lay in  the work of the  young English  poets. This  was his first introduction to new and  living verse and -like many  other  Canadians
-he did  not  know, then, whether  Canadian poets or Canadian poetry existed. That came  later.  Before long he began  to speak  over  the  air  on  the subject  of contemporary  poetry.
InI 934 Alan suffered a serious illness which was followed by the sudden  and complete  loss of his sight. He  retired  from the  practice  of law and  with his wife and  their two young sons moved from Winnipeg  to Victoria  in British Columbia. In  every  changing  scene of Alan's  life, his wife  has  accompanied   him  and­ speaking  diffidently about  a subject of great  delicacy-I am sure that she with her  taste,  her  sound  sense, her  wit,  her  instant  apprehension of things  physical and  of the mind,  her gift of communication, has carried  a mutual light, always. Jean  has a  gay casual-seeming way, but  she has a clairvoyance  of  life that  has enabled  her  to  do  that  which,  daily, she  does,  beyond  our  understanding. So when the shock and disaster of total blindness came upon Alan, his wife advanced  with him, both of them in good heart, to meet every new adjustment. The  accom­ modation  of life to circumstance  now included,  of  course, the learning  of braille.
I ventured  to ask Alan once, whether  the  mastery  of braille drew, almost  be­ yond  coping,  upon  his powers of concentration and  determination. He  told  me that  he was helped  by a phenomenal  memory -and  so his teacher  had said - and  probably  an  unusual  visual memory.  He  would  need  that,  I  thought,  as I passed my finger over his copy of the Bhagavad  Gita.  I looked at those multiple faceless dots and  tried to visualize the substitution  of an  unfamiliar  new delicate faculty of touch  for the lost familiar faculty  of sight.



IN 1934 AND   1935 the Crawleys lived in Victoria. As soon as he arrived  Alan  became  aware  of a living growing  interest  in Canadian  poetry.
He  formed  new  and  lasting friendships,  bound  by this strong  common  interest. In  1938  he  met  Dorothy  Livesay Macnair   and  her  husband  Duncan   Macnair who  furthered   his knowledge of Canadian poetry  and  made  him familiar  with the  work of Canadian poets throughout  the  country.

OF ALAN CRAWLEY



The  Crawleys had  now moved to Caulfeild in West Vancouver,  accompanied by their younger son, Michael, and there Alan's association with Canadian poetry and makers of poetry increased. He resumed speaking over the air. He spoke of contemporary  poetry  to  various  groups-in   University  extension  courses,  to C.C.F.   gatherings,   to  Normal   School  students,  in  meetings  arranged  by  the Vancouver  Library.  During  those years Alan became immersed in the enlarging world which he had entered.  His trained legal and critical mind helped him to be a severe yet inspiring  critic of contemporary  writing and  his judgment  was often described  as impeccable,  both in eastern  and  western Canada.
There  was now a stirring among the few western poets and a feeling of urgency that  some opportunity should  be made  for voices to be heard.  Following  many conversations  with  Mrs.  McLaren, Doris Feme, Anne Marriott, Dorothy  Livesay Macnair  and  her husband,  Alan considered assuming the responsibility of editing the new poetry  magazine,  should such a magazine  be published.  Before making his final decision he consulted A. J. M. Smith and P. K. Page in Montreal, Earle Birney  in  Toronto, Kay  Smith  and  Leo  Kennedy,  who  responded  with  their advice  and  opinions  and  sent manuscripts.
Alan decided, and  wrote in I 94 I : "In  spite of the distress of the times and the prospect  of disquiet  and  unsettled  days to come, I  feel that  the  publication  of Canadian verse is a worth  while and  reasonable venture  that  could do much  to help  modern  Canadian writers,  for  I  know of no magazine  now that  is giving this help. I am willing and enthusiastic  to do what I can for it." In  I94I  the first issue of Contemporary Verse  appeared.
During  eleven anxious  years of war and  peace through  which C V continued to  be produced,  Alan's  phenomenal   memory served him  well, as it does today. As each submission arrived from a young or mature  poet, his wife read the poem slowly to him, in its form, and  he typed it in braille, in its form. He then "saw", contemplated, memorized  the poem, and  arrived at his conclusions. He wrote to the poet in full and  his comments are still memorable to those who received them. He  never  returned   a  poem  with  a  polite  rejection  only. His  memory  held  the words for the time required  and, when no longer needed, the words melted away. Jean  then turned  to the next communication. This faculty of his, or combination of faculties, together  with the unfailing presence of his wife, and the constant  but distant assistance of Floris McLaren in Victoria, helped to achieve the quarterly miracle  of C V. Mrs.  McLaren  has kindly permitted  me to refer to her article in The   Tamarack   Review. These  references illuminate  the  times, and  I  am  very grateful  to her.

37

OF ALAN CRAWLEY



Among Canadian writers who have become well known and whose early poems were  published  in  C V  are  Louis Dudek,  Daryl  Hine,  Jay  Macpherson, P. K. Page, James  Reaney, Raymond Souster, Wilfred Watson, James Wreford, Miriam Waddington. All of these writers appeared  many  times in C V  and  their  names are an indication  of the intuition and critical perception of the editor. Among contributing  poets whose verse was already  published and well known were Earle Birney, Roy Daniells, Robert Finch, Ralph Gustafson, Ronald  Hambleton, A.M.
Klein,  Dorothy  Livesay, L.A. MacKay,  F. R. Scott, and A.  J. M. Smith,  whose
support  has always been most generous, constant,  and very much  valued by Alan. Poems  of  Margaret Avison, Irving  Layton,  Norman   Levine,  Malcolm  Lowry, Anne  Marriott, Phyllis Webb,  Anne  Wilkinson  and  many  others  appeared-a whole new galaxy in the northern  sky. In the first issue of C V Alan wrote, "Truth and  beauty  is not all told ..." and  he continued  in the telling.  John  Sutherland wrote to him, "I envy you your knack of catching  all the promising young poets." E.  J.  Pratt  showed  constant  interest  in  the  work and  sent a  poem for an  anni­ versary number  of C V. Two  of Alan's  young poets, men of great  promise, were lost in  the  war.  Bertram  Warre  (I9I7-I943), R.A.F.,  was killed  in action  over the western front,  and J. K. Keith  was killed fighting in Korea.
During  these years about  twenty of Anne Wilkinson's strange,  sensitive poems appeared. In  the  summer  issue of C V, I 947,  was the  first  printing  of "Five Poems" by Malcolm Lowry, the first of which was "Salmon  Drowns Eagle".  One issue consisted entirely of Dorothy Livesay's long poem "Call  My People Home". Another  was made  up of the work of three poets-Louis Dudek, James Reaney and  Raymond  Souster. Alan's arrangements were original  and  unpredictable and C V  was prophetic  in records of fulfilment and  further  promise.
In  September I 949  a brief was submitted  to the Massey Commission by Con­ temporary Verse  on behalf of poetry and the writers of poetry in Canada. In the introduction   to  this brief,  Mr.  Crawley  said:   "The boundaries of appeal  have been widened  and  ... there is a growing realization  that  the pressures, tensions and  relationships  of our  complex  industrial  society can  often  be  best  compre­ hended  through  the  poet's  uncanny  eye ... Poetry  is sterile without  communi­  cation.  It is in distribution  and  publication  by the spoken and  written  word that communication is given to poetry and  an  intimacy is established."
Later  in  the  brief  Earle  Birney wrote:   "... It (C V) is the  only Canadian verse magazine  which has constantly  maintained high editorial  standards. It has introduced   a  number  of important young  Canadian writers  to  the  public  and

OF ALAN CRAWLEY



encouraged  them   to  continue wntmg. What  space  it  has  been  able  to  give  to criticism  has  been  intelligently used ..."
The  early  days of Alan  Crawley and  the occasions both  slight  and  catastrophic
which  preceded his knowledge and  advocacy  of work by contemporary Canadian poets  and  their  fulfilment, testify  to  the  innate gifts and  selflessness of the  man who -under manifest and  unseen  difficulties-became the editor  of the most influential small  poetry  magazine of a chancy  and  critical time  for  literature in our  country.
My  best  means   of  presenting the  results  of  his work  in  Canada is to  quote from  some  of  the  letters  of  the  poets  themselves,  both  then  and  now,  and  I am grateful for  permissions. One   friend  speaks  today  of  the  remarkable ambience created  by  both   Alan   and   Jean, and  its  effect  upon   the  poet.  Another  says: "Among those  who  have  helped  in  the  revival  of writing of poetry  in  Canada, Alan   Crawley's name will  always  stand   out ... it is  as  though his  no-sight  in­ creased  his insight  ..."
Jay  Macpherson in a letter  received  today  says:  "What meant most  to me ten or  fifteen  years  ago  was  Alan's affection  and  forebearance and  generous  under­ standing of one's  work.  I'm much  more aware  now how practical all his kindness has  been ... Alan   talked   me  into  a  more  professional  attitude and  that was  a turning point  for me. I've  passed  his remarks  on since then  to numbers of student writers  ... he got  one  out  of  the  trap  of one's  own egotism ... how  rare  was his kind  of  loyalty."
And  from   another young-now  well-known-poet to  his  editor: "I want
to  thank   you  for  all  the  encouragement and  assistance  I got  from  you  and  C V
... the  best  verse  quarterly in  Canada. It is particularly valuable in  that  it  is not  afraid to  take  chances with  young  unknown   poets to whom  publication can mean  so much.  This  policy is of course the result of the editor's deep understand­ ing ... Take  C V  out  of the  Canadian literary  scene and  you  have  nothing left east  of  longitude 85°"
Further letters  during the  years  '41  to '53,  include  these.  From Frank Scott:


Dear  Alan:
At a time when many Canadians are considering the place of art  and  literature in their  national  life, I thought  I would send you a few words of appreciation for the fine contribution you have  made  to Canadian  poetry through  your editorship of Contemporary Verse.
The  "Little  Magazine" has an important function to fulfil. It must act as a focal point for younger  writers, giving them not only an early recognition  of their merit

39

OF ALAN CRAWLEY



but  also  a  sense  of  being  welcomed  and  received   by a  larger  circle.  It is to  the author  what  exhibition  in  a  gallery  is to  a  painter .  .  .  an  essential  part of  his self-expression. To  more  established  writers  it offers not  only an  additional oppor­ tunity  for  publication, but  also that  stimulating challenge to traditional styles and  tastes   which   creative  work  always  presents.   This function  Contemporary Verse  has  admirably  performed  under   your  guidance during the  nine  years  of  its  life
. . .  Your   contributors have  included, I  believe,  all  the  poets  who  have  made Canadian  poetry   the  living  part   of  our   culture which   it  is  now  recognized  as being ...


Montreal, 1953
... I hear  that  you  are  giving  up  C  V  at  last  ... nothing can  quite  take  its place ... Through it you have  become  part  of the  literary history  of Canada, and you  have  the  gratitude of a whole  generation of  poets.
I have  only  recently  returned from  my  year  with  the  U  N in  Burma. I have
some  unpublished poems  to send  somewhere; now where  can  I send  them?
Frank Scott

From P. K.  Page, 1949: Dear  Alan:
I have  been  thinking about   writing  in  Canada a great  deal  lately  ... largely, I suppose,  in  connection with  the  Massey  Commission, and  naturally I have  been thinking about you and  C V ...
Little magazines   are  essential  in  Canada if  the  movement-dare one  call  it
that?-which  has begun  is to continue. But  they  are  not  the  entire  answer.  Your policy has always been one in which  you were as much  concerned with the develop­ ment  of your  contributors as you were  with  the standards of your magazine. Other magazines may  be  just as concerned but  they  do  less about it  ...
Your  criticism, encouragement, and  even  chastisement, have  been  enormously
helpful to  me,  as they  have,  I know,  to  other writers ... and   (so has)   the  part played  by you in  being so much  more  than  an  editor.



From Louis Dudek on  hearing of the  possible ending of the  life of C V, a long and   interesting letter, hot  off  the  fire.  Fascinating, but  too  long  to  quote freely:

... that telegram (from  ten  poets)  from  F. R. Scott's house came  with  or went with  a  true  concern  for  C  V  ... A few  hundred readers? Say  it  were  ten.  Ten may  be a  node  of life in  the  midst  of an  organism.

OF ALAN CRAWLEY



From  Anne   Wilkinson, Toronto, 1947:

... how much  I enjoyed  your broadcasts. Enjoy is too tame  a word ... Canada is very lucky  to  have  you.  Poetry is alive when even one  person  feels as you do about  it.

From  J. G. McClelland, McClelland & Stewart, Toronto, 1953:

... it  was a  shock  and  a  disappointment to  hear  (on  my  return)   that  Con­ temporary Verse   is  no  longer  to  be published.  I  can  think  of  no  one  who  has made a greater  contribution to Canadian  letters than you have through the publi­ cation of this magazine.

I marvel  at  the  amount of correspondence which  Alan  carried on by means of his  braille   typewriter for  the   personal   benefit  of  the  young   poets-regardless of  difficulty,  all  for  choice  and  all  for  love of poetry  and  of  the  poetry  makers, wherever   he  detected  a  true  light.
By 1951  a kind  of lassitude had  settled  upon  Canadian poetry,  noted  by F. R. Scott  as  "this  apathy, everywhere, thick  and  heavy  like a fog." The  vigour  and stress and  shock  of war  were  now  in the  past  and  it may  be that  the  muscles  of the  people  relaxed   in  fatigue. Alan  indicated an  inclination to  close  the  book. As Robert Weaver said:  "When Mr.  Crawley  feels uncertain of himself  and  of his magazine at the  present  time, it seems to me that  he is simply  reflecting  the un­ certainties of  Canadian  poetry  in  a  period  of  change." In   the  Autumn  issue,
1952,  Alan  wrote: "We have  a strong  belief  that  the  work  of a little  magazine under the same  editor's direction declines in time from  the  peak  of its usefulness. In  this  conviction we  close our  files ..."




AFTER A  FEW  YEARS spent  in the  Okanagan Valley  where Michael was  fruit   ranching, Alan  and  Jean and  Michael returned to  Victoria where  they  still live.  Through his various  media  Alan  continues to  read  widely. Yesterday came  this  letter  from  him  which  indicates something of the  scope  of his  continued reading:

This  day,  Thursday,  with  a  sweet  breeze coming  through   the  open  window bringing  just  the  wished-for  heat  and  an  unusual  quietness  in  the  street  below, is the choicest time for me to write tomes amis and send some of the words I, We, have held for you until this letter ...

OF  ALAN  CRAWLEY



I have tried several times to get the Sybille Bedford book (The Faces of Justice) from  the  lending  library and failed, so I am very happy  to have it from you, and hope  there  is no deadline  for  return,  as at  the  moment  we are  partly  through  A Passage to India  again-I was lucky to get it on Talking  Books (but more of that later  on), a Tamarack  Review yet unopened,  The Paris  Review only nibbled  at, the  lately  published  reminiscences of Lampedusa, The  Leopard,  of whom we are very fond  and  admiring  just arrived  from London,  a gift of a discerning and  dear friend  and,  of  course,  The  New  Statesman and  The  New   Yorker  taking  their expected  precedence,  so ... there's  glory for  you and  some smack of spoiling ..."


Alan  has  a  quick  sense of  humour; his face  breaks  into  laughter; he  plays  a formidable game   of  bridge; he  marks  the  blessed  funninesses of  the  day;  his humour defeats  entirely  what  might  have  been  his melancholy.
Every  springtime my  husband and  I meet  Jean and  Alan  for  a  few  days  in the  sun  and  the  shade  in  a  quiet  and  beautiful spot  by  the  sea,  on  Vancouver Island. A great  deal is said, a great  deal is laughed at,  much  is asked, some things are  answered. When, last  time  we were  there,  Alan  said,  "This morning when  I was reading ...",  he meant  on that  sunny  dream-like day  that  he has been  read­ ing,  very early,  the  Bhagavad Gita, the  Lord's Song,  translated by Annie Besant.  In  the  dark, in  the  light,  he  reads.  In  cold  weather he  reads  at  night  with  his hands  warm   under the  bedclothes and   Jean-before  she  sleeps-hears the rustle  of  the  turning of pages, like a mouse  in the  dark.
I asked  Alan  once,  when  we were alone,  about  his Theosophical and  Christian faiths,  and   because  I am  not  a  student and  have  very  little  knowledge beyond the  knowledge of faith,  I cannot immediately understand. But  Alan  has studied very much  and  I think  he goes unafraid into  all faith  and  faiths  and  speculation. He  explores  in  the  continuous dark  with  his delicate finger-tips and  his  adven­ turous  and   honest  mind  the  invisible  yet illuminated areas  of faith. I  have  not liked to question him deeply, but  I think  that  his faith  is in Theosophy, and  in the living  Christ   in  man,  and  in  human friendship.
Alan's friends are  very  many,  from  east  to  west  of  the  country, both  literary and   un-literary, both   men  and   women.   From them   he  takes  their   essence  as they  take  his, and  they are  richer,  through this  remarkable and  courageous man who  has  contributed to the  literacy  of his country and  to  the  opportunity of his fellow  countrymen.





42



THE LIMITS

OF INNOCENCE

James Reaney's Theatre






Michael Tait





1:OCCASION of the following «flections was M<. Alvin Lee''
interesting two-part  essay  "A  Tum to the  Stage: Reaney's Dramatic Verse"  in
Canadian  Literature  nos.  15 and  16. In  the  first half  of this study  Mr.  Lee dis­ cussed   Reaney's  characteristic  themes   and   imagery   and   convincingly  demon­ strated the  links between  the  early  poems and  the  more  recent  plays. The second part  dealt  more  directly  with  the  plays  themselves,  and  it was at  this  point  that  I found   myself  quarrelling with  Mr.  Lee's  analysis.  The  assumption seemed  to be  that  Reaney's plays,  as  plays,  were  on  a  par  with  the  best  of his lyric  verse. Having seen,  like  Mr.   Lee,  stage  productions of  both  The   Killdeer  and  The Easter Egg I find  this view inscrutable. The  question surely is why, when  Reaney's poetry-in  particular The  Red  Hearl -is so compelling, the verse plays should be  so  unsatisfactory. But  here  we  have  a  difficulty,  for  Mr.  Lee  has  identified  any  playgoer  who  resists Reaney's style of  drama as a latter day  Malvolio, whose reservations are  a measure only of his own narrow  spirit  and  stunted imagination. Well,  I don't believe  it,  and   at  the  risk  of  a  wholesale  denial  of  cakes  and  ale will  attempt to  assess Reaney's dramas  from  a  somewhat  different  perspective.
Reaney has  written a variety  of works for the stage  but  only three  plays in the strict  sense:  The  Killdeer,  The  Easter Egg and  The  Sun  and the Moon. To  my knowledge only  the  first  two  of these  have  been  performed and  I shall  confine my  remarks in  the  main   to  them.

43

THE LIMITS OF INNOCENCE



Unquestionably  The   Killdeer  has  real  strengths.   Reaney  conveys with  con­ siderable  power  his vision of life in rural  Ontario, its strange,  often  sinister en­ chantment, the desolate eccentricities of its inhabitants and  their  sudden  acts of violence. At  the  centre  of this world which is recreated  with  variations  in  both The   Easter  Egg  and  earlier  in The   Red  Heart  is, as  Mr.  Lee  points out,  the figure of a child, or child-man,  threatened  by the knowledge of evil, vehemently and  ineffectually  protesting  his passage from  innocence  to  experience. The  Kill­ deer suggests a private, intense preoccupation  with  this transition.  The  depravity Reaney  depicts  in  this play seems to serve as a  powerful  emblem  for the  dark side of adult life which all morally immaculate children  must ultimately confront.  In so far then as the action concerns Eli, the youth who plays with children's  toys, The  Killdeer  revolves about its true  centre.  Moreover  Mr.  Lee's claim that  "the  play is held  together  by a carefully worked  out  pattern  of interlocking  images" is no  doubt  partly  valid. Certain  images of  possession, demonic  or  benign,  are clearly  useful in  extending  the implications  of the  theme.  (One  thread  of such imagery,  the  possession of son by mother, is  dramatically most effective. There  are no fewer than  three "terrible  mothers" in The  Killdeer  who by their hostility or  the deviousness of tainted  love damage  their  male  offspring.)
However  as  certain  Jacobean   dramas  illustrate   most  clearly  (The  Killdeer with its macabre  violence and intermingled  richness and confusion invites the comparison)   a pattern  of striking imagery, in the absence of plausible character­ ization and coherent action, is not enough to hold any play together. Structurally, in  terms of plot  line, The  Killdeer is anarchic.  Apparently Reaney  has left un­ answered in his mind such questions as whom  the play is really about  and  what story it is he wants  to tell. Crude  matters,  but  audiences demand to be satisfied on them  and  quickly lose interest if  they are not. In  the absence of such elemen­ tary decisions the materials for three or four  plays  jostle and  compete within the indeterminate confines of one large  theme.  Attention shifts, arbitrarily  it seems, from Mrs. Gardner  to Mrs. Budge, from Harry  to Rebecca,  from Eli to Madame Fay,  each  one of whom clamours  for a  play of his own. The  Killdeer's  lack of coherence  becomes  increasingly  marked  as  its  various  strands,  elaborated   and developed,  diverge.  This  centrifugal  momentum culminates  in  a disastrous  last scene in  which  contrary  to Reaney's intention, which  seems to be to present  us with  a decisive epiphany,  the fragments  of the  action  fly irretrievably  apart  and the  playwright,  having  lost  control,  takes refuge in  a kind of coy whimsy.
His complex story line faces Reaney with a number  of subsidiary difficulties. Complicated   plots  as  a  rule  entail  complicated   expositions  and  Reaney  is too

44

THE LIMITS OF INNOCENCE



inexperienced  a  playwright to  present  the  mass  of necessary  information  econ­ omically   and   dramatically. There  are  as  a  consequence  long  relatively  static expository   passages  at  the  beginning of each  act,  and  even  the  last scene  of the play,  during  which   a  number of  new  characters appear  unannounced,  is not entirely  free  of them. This  defect  is related  to the  practice of giving  us the  word for  the  deed,  of telling  us in  extended dialogue  about  events  and  motives rather  than   presenting them  in  the  immediacy of  dramatic action.   ("I didn't  realize what   Clifford   wasjUntil I had  married Eli  and  lived  out  there.jFor  five  years I've   lived  in  what   you'd   call  a  house/But it  was  an  inferno-").  Since  the dramatist does  not  always  calculate precisely  enough  what  scenes  from his sen­ sational story  will  best  hold  the  attention of an  audience, one  too  often  has the sense that  the  true  centre  of dramatic gravity  is somewhere off-stage.
The   characterization  in  The   Killdeer   betrays   a  comparable  uncertainty  of
purpose. The  characters for  the  most part  move on two levels. Having conceived them   in  the  context   of  the  bizarre fantasy   which  pervades the  piece,  Reaney then  attempts in  a number of instances  to demonstrate their  truth  to nature and invest  them   with  the  authority of  humanity. This  combination of  fantasy   and verisimilitude is precarious. It succeeds  perhaps in the  case of Mrs.  Gardner and Harry; it fails with  Madame Fay.  In so far as this character exhibits  the demonic artificiality of a sorceress from  some latter  day fairyland, she entertains; when, however,  her  "motivations", Dostoyevskian  in their  complexity, are  dissected  (as in  the  last  scene)   she  is an  embarrassment.
The Killdeer  then  is a curious  blend  of inspiration and  ineptitude. One under­ lying  source   of  trouble  is  Reaney's  reluctance, or  inability,  to  undertake  the dramatist's  paradoxical  obligation to  be  at  once  totally  aloof  from,   yet  totally committed to the  characters and  world  he creates.  Unfiltered  prejudices obtrude, for  instance, in  the  portrait of Vemelle whom  the  author  despises,  and  in that  of  Rebecca whom   he  too  clearly  adores.  More  serious,  however,  are  the  subtle sins of detachment most in evidence  in The  Easter Egg.
The plot of this second  play once again  concerns  the efforts of the false mother,
Bethel,  to hold  her  stepson,  Kenneth, in  bondage and  obstruct his development. The  latter  is another of Reaney's wise innocents,  apparently retarded and  helpless in the  adult  world  but  in fact  possessing secret reserves of power.  As in The  Kill­ deer we are  presented with  a wholly benevolent and beautiful girl, in this case one Pollex  Henry, who  undertakes to  protect  this figure  of innocence and  introduce him  as gently  as possible to the  realities of the fallen world.  Two  other characters complete the  cast:   Ira   Hill,  a  doctor,   and  George  Sloan,   a  clergyman. Their

45

THE LIMITS OF  INNOCENCE



courtships of Bethel and  Pollex respectively  provide  a tenuous addition to the plot.






ALTHOUGH STRUCTURALLY The Easter  Egg is much superior to  The  Killdeer, in  other  important respects  it  is a  lesser work.  In  the course  of its disorganized and  leisurely  progress  The  Killdeer  offers moments of theatrical magic  absent  for the  most  part  from  The  Easter Egg and  for  which  a neat  structure is no compensation. Only  two  scenes  come  alive  on  stage.  In  the first Pollex  makes  an effort  to instruct Kenneth's mind  and  heart  by a vocabulary lesson and  by telling  him  the story of Anna Karenina whose death, to Kenneth's sudden  horror,  she  attempts to  illustrate  with  a  toy  train. In   another strong scene,  George  Sloan,  the ineffectual young  cleric,  tries to ask Bethel  for the  hand of her stepdaughter but, intimidated by Bethel's  calculated misunderstanding and her  sinister  power,  eventually   proposes  to  her  instead. The  scene  generates the mood  of  macabre farce  which  marks  so much  of  Reaney's most  effective  work.
Aside  from  these episodes The  Easter Egg is a dramatic fiasco. The  exposition
is exceptionally clumsy  and  the  style of the  dialogue is frequently laborious and uncertain. The  characters by  and   large   are   a  more   self-consciously   cultured group than in  The  Killdeer and  Reaney  seems  at  a loss to know  what  language to  have  them   speak.   As  a  consequence  the  accents   of  colloquial conversation mingle  and  collide  with more  formal  verse rhythms. Another unfortunate feature of Reaney's dialogue in both  plays is its lack  of economy. As yet his sense of the precise  moment to expand, or alternately to prune  and  condense, is very insecure. Most  often  he dissipates the impact of potentially powerful scenes by unnecessary elaboration. A case in point  is the  important interchange between  Rebecca and Harry in  the  second  act  of  The  Killdeer  which  is  marred because  the  crucial speeches   are   too  diffuse,  and  opaque, to  be  effective  in  performance. In  The Easter  Egg  there  are  passages  which  appear simply  self-indulgence on  the  part of the  playwright: for example Bethel's  recital  of the  true  story  of Cinderella in the  first  act,  and  her  interminable tale  about a cow in  a ditch  in the  second.  In theory  these  speeches  may  be  justified;  in  performance they  come  across  as en­ tirely  expendable.
In  this second  work, as in The  Killdeer, the various levels of action,  naturalistic, fantastic, symbolic,  fail  to  coincide.  The   confusion is  most  noticeable in  those scenes  which  point  up  the  portentous significance of  the  object   (the  body  of a

THE LIMITS OF  INNOCENCE



dead   killdeer,   a  glass  egg)   from  which  the  plays  take  their  titles.  When   these objects  are  finally  exhibited, a  central   character in  each  case  undergoes a  pro found   and  violent  transformation. The  recalcitrant Madame Fay  suddenly  con­ fesses all  and   the  simple  Kenneth collapses  on  the  floor  only  to  be  resurrected after  a few moments full of adult  understanding. Although these sudden reversals clearly  serve  exigencies  of plot  and  theme,  from  the standpoint  of realistic  moti­  vation   they  are  incredible. Too  easily  Reaney,   having  assumed  this  standpoint, sacrifices  recognizable human psychology  to a  preconceived and  somewhat facile pattern of symbolic  gesture.
But  the  cardinal weakness  of The  Easter  Egg, as I intimated earlier, is in  the playwright's relation to his material. If on occasion  Reaney approaches too close to  his  imaginative creation,  more  damaging is his  manner of  remaining  aloof from  it.  As  Mr.  Lee  has  emphasized, the  character who  attempts to  elude  the human predicament by clinging to a child's  universe occupies  an important place in Reaney's work.  This  figure  is presumably a creature of that facet of the author's imagination which  also stands bewildered and  appalled by the  manifold  corrup­ tion  of  the  adult   world,   ("blood, pus,  horror, death, stepmothers,  and  lies"), which  resists involvement in it and  hence  declines seriously  to scrutinize it. There is a  great  deal  of sensational violence  in  Reaney's plays  but  one  is hard  put  to believe  in  any  of  it; not  because  of  anything akin  to  the  alchemy  of the  great  dramatist who  converts horror   into  pleasure,  but  because  these  murderous acts seem   unreal, devoid   of  emotional  resonance. At  intervals,  particularly in  The Easter  Egg  one  seems  to  detect  behind  Reaney's scenes  of blood  and  death, the cold,  half  gleeful   fascination  of  the  child,  insulated  from  shock  by  incompre­ hension.  That is to say,  there  is nothing of  authentic evil in  these  dramas, only the  artifice   of  Grand Guignol. The  spectator winces  or  laughs   (laughter is, of course,  the  common alleviating  response  to this  puerile  genre)  but  remains  un­  touched. This  has  repercussions on  the immediate level of theatrical effectiveness  Since  these  plays  tend   to  deny  the  reality  of  the  evil  acts  they  dramatize, the characters who  suffer  from  such  acts  or  attempts to  combat them  fail  to com­  mand  our  interest   or  sympathy. Further,  the   vantage  point of  premeditated innocence from  which  these  plays are  conceived  accounts, I think,  both  for their  frequent  lack  of   emotional  continuity  (in  The Easter  Egg  the  playwright  re­ peatedly  sabotages each  mood  as he establishes it)  and  for their  periodic  skittish­  ness.
Mr.  Lee  dismisses an  anonymous critic  who suggested  that  Reaney was a lyric
poet  who  had  not  learned the  craft  of the  playwright. However, I suspect  that


47

THE LIMITS OF INNOCENCE



Reaney  himself would   agree  that he  lacks  as yet some of the  reflexes of the seasoned  dramatist: a ruthless evaluation  of dialogue  for its stage effectiveness; the  nice  calculation  of the  point  at  which  the  interest  of  a  potential  audience may  begin  to flag  and  what  to do about  it; a sense of what  actors  may  fairly be required  to do. Reaney  is certainly  capable  of writing  good acting  parts  but too  often  his demands  are  scandalous.  For  instance,  in  each  of his three  stage pieces some  unfortunate performer  is obliged  to fall  on  his face and  grovel on the boards, centre stage. Sir Laurence Olivier in a superbly written scene from Anouilh's  Becket, in a moment  of transcendent fury, once almost brought  it off.
One  of the most important  attributes  of the dramatist is something  I can only identify  as the killer instinct;  the perception  of the  point  at  which a scene must reach  its climax and  of the one thing to do when it does. ("Soft  you, a word or two before you go ..."; "I'm not a dime a dozen!  I'm  Willy Loman ..."; Enter jack  slowly  from the  back  of the  garden. He is dressed in deepest  mourning.) As yet I miss this unpredictable inevitability in Reaney's  work and  no appeal  to the "rules of literature" which Mr. Lee makes on his behalf will satisfy in its absence.
Many scenes in Reaney's  dramas  have poignancy  and  charm  and  I agree with much  that  Mr.  Lee has written in praise of them. But Canada hasn't  many play­ wrights and  we can't  afford to bewilder those we have with indifference or con­ tempt,  or even panegyrics. I will concede, however, that  of all Canadian drama­ tists, Reaney is the most difficult to evaluate  justly. No one else has his capacity  to write for  the stage  at once so badly  and  so well.



reviev 	




PERFORMERS
AND ENTERTAINERS

Warren Tallman


JACK L unwm. Confusions. McClelland &  Stewart. $5.50.
MORDECAI RICHLER.   The Incomparable Atuk.  McClelland &  Stewart. $3.95.


LET   ME  SAY  why   I   don't much   care  for  either   of  these  novels  by means  of a distinction between  the enter­ tainer and the  performer. The  enter­ tainer's eye  is  on  his  audience.  If their mood   be   saccharine  he   will   come   on sweet.  If sweet  doesn't take  he  may  try sour,  or  sweet  and   sour,  or  bittersweet. Whatever  the   variation,   his  talents   are always  in  strict   fee  to  his  audience,  to the  willy-nilly  absolute that  they must  be entertained. The   performer   suffers   no such   limitation.  His  eye  is  on  his  per­ formance and   his  chief   need   is  to  do it  well,   give  it  everything he  has.   If the  audience  follows  along   he  is  lucky. If they  fall  away,  they  fall  away.  Bitter as  the   latter   experience  may   be,  it  is better  to  perform well and  lose the audi­ ence   than    to   play   the   entertainer  in order  to  hold   them. It is  important  to add  that  in  our  time  individual qualities and   abilities   are   likely   to  be  so  much superior    to   community  qualities  and abilities   that   the   writer   who   does   per­ form   well  is  all  but  certain to  lose  the great   majority  of  the  reading  audience.
Confusions is a satire  on academic  life.
 Jack  Ludwig's protagonist, Joseph  Gillis, ne  Joseph   Galsky,   is  by  reason   of  the implied   split  in  identity  a  schizy  young Ivy   League  professor  who   has   been picked  up for prestige  purposes by a California sunshine college  managed  by a  hopelessly  venal   and   inept   president, staffed   by  some  veteran  professors   who carry   on  all-consuming  social   and  aca­ demic   vendettas, some  rookie  professors who   are   filled   with   that   kind   of  zeal which  knows  no end, except  perhaps the  bosses', and  some  other rookie  professors  who  have  been  driven   all  but   dotty   by the  fatuousness,  viciousness  and   frustra­ tion   of  it  all.   Gillis/Galsky  belongs mostly,  though  not entirely, with  the lat­ ter  group.
This combination of a semi-lunatic protagonist and  a  completely lunatic world  would  seem  to  offer  a  writer   the chance  to  take   off  his  skin  and   dance around on the bones of all his enemies, hooting  out  wild  peals  of  loon  laughter as  he  nails  them   to  the  wall,  the  cross, the  floor,  the  door,  the  mast,   the  mat, the  stake.  That is, the  occasion   Ludwig has  created   cries  out  for  an  amok  writ-

49

REVIEW ARTICLES



ing performance, some sort of swirling scherzo,   as  Gillis   deals   his   tormentors their    just   deserts.   No  such   luck.   The writing  performance is minimized  to a steady   stream   of  facetious   wit   that   is light,   and   light  again,   and   light   again, ad  tedium.
The reason  for  the  boredom  is not  far
to seek. A man's writing,  like his speech, cannot take  on  colour,  variety,  intensity, vitality,  unless   he   is  actually    engaged with    his   subject.  I   can't    believe   that Ludwig  is  horrified,  fascinated,   indig­ nant,  contemptuous, angry,  or   even  amused   by   his   chamber  of    academic horrors, Gillis/Galsky included.  One  sure sign of his disengagement is his handling of  the   exploitation  by  the  college  of  a genuinely   schizophrenic   student  whose father  happens to   be  the   school's   Mr.  Money-Bags. Loon  Gillis-it takes  one to   know   one -detects   Dev's   sickness; loon   Gillis   combats  professors,   depart­ ment  chairman, reluctant deans  and  an even   more   reluctant  president in  order  that   the   dark   secret   be  acknowledged; loon  Gillis  joins forces  with  a good  dean (there's always  a good  dean) and  a good doctor  (ditto)  to  see  that   poor  Dev  is transferred from  the  debilitating college atmosphere  to  a  more   congenial  mad­ house; and  at  the  last  good  dean,  good doctor and  good,  g,ood Gillis all go, more or  less arm  in  arm,   to pat  poor  Dev  on the   shoulder  a  fond  farewell  as  he  de­ parts   with   vacant   grin   and   they   ALL FEEL, like,  AWFUL! As well  they  and Ludwig  might,   drowned  as  everyone   is in  the  soap  of  such  an  operation.  Lud­ wig's  need  to  dream up  this  lugubrious scandal and  to  make  it  the  main  course of  the   novel  is  in  default of  his  ability to  relate to  the  total  scandal   he  has  set before  us.  The   high  percentage of face-
 tiousness   m  his  wit  when   dealing   with the  total  scandal -the  college-points to the  boredom he feels. Like  writer, like reader. I conclude that  he never was interested to  take on his academic horrors and  write  them  into  the  limelight and oblivion   of  mocking  laughter  they   de­ serve.   I   conclude  that    he   decided   to write   a  "funny" novel  about  academic life-an  entertainment.  And  I conclude that   he  decided  to  do  this  because   he concluded  that   there  was a  going  audi­ ence  for  such  a  book.  As, in  conclusion, I'm  sure  there  is.
Despite surface similarities (another satire)    Mordecai  Richler's The   Incom­ parable  Atuk   is  a  different  matter. His protagonist,  Atuk,    the   Eskimo   poet,   is out  to con a motley collection of Toronto magazine,   newspaper,   advertising   and television  columnists, critics,  performers, impresarios and   publicity  freaks.  One  of this  collection, Seymour  Bone,  conducts a TV show,  Crossed   Swords, to  which viewers send  quotations that  a panel  of experts identify and discuss; since Nathan Cohen  is obviously  the model  for this  particular figure,  it seems likely that some of the  others also have  real-life counterparts. Any  who  recall  Cohen's crude 1957  Tamarack  Review attack on Richler  might  well   conclude  that    the latter is settling an  old score;  maybe several.   If so,  the   novel  should   have   a brisk  sale  in  Toronto.
But for readers elsewhere  there  are problems. With  The  Apprenticeship Of Duddy Kravitz Richler  demonstrated that  he is not simply a good but an exceptionally gifted  writer.  The proof  in Duddy  Kravitz is  in  the  writing,  which is memorable, an  impressive  performance in   just  the   way  that   some  actors'   per­ formances are  unforgettable. The Incom-

REVIEW ARTICLES



parable   Atuk   is  a  brilliantly   conceived novel,  a little  masterpiece of interlocking relationships so  arranged that   all  of  his bad   pennies   can   be  called   into   play  at will. But  the  writing is unimpressive, flat, a  perfunctory  performance  which   pro­ vides only  glimpses  of Richler's gift. It is as  though an  excellent  comic  play  were made  ordinary for  want  of  an  adequate performance. The  comedy  is  there,  most of it with  superb  potential, but the magic is  gone.   There  is   nothing   particularly impressive, for instance, in his demolition of Seymour  Bone. Just  here,  perhaps, the difficulty   can   be   located.  Richler  has bent  his  writing   to  the  task  of demolish­  ing   Bone   when   he   should   have   made Bone  an  occasion   on  which   to  demon­ strate  how   well   he   can   write.   More
 generally,  he  bends  all  of  the  writing  in the   novel   to   the   service   of   the   satire, when  he  should   have  used  the  satire  to show  Toronto, and   any  other interested parties,   that   he  is  head   and   shoulders better   than   any   other    writers  around. Like  every  other  art,  writing needs  to be liberated  over   and   over,   a  fact   which goes   double   in   Canada  where   it   has scarcely   been   liberated  at  all.   But   this will   never   be   accomplished   by   satiric attacks   on   the   Bones  and   drones   who hold  sway  in  Toronto. It will  be  liber­ ated   only  by   writing   performances  in which  some sense of  mystery  and  beauty  and   power  comes  to  life  in  among   the words-the very  things that  Richler has demonstrated he can  catch into  his writ­  ing.  Not,  however,   this  time  out.







THE CRITIC'S CRITIC
 


F. W. Watt



NORTHROP FRYE. T. S.  Eliot.  Writers and   Critics Series,   Oliver &  Boyd.  $ 1.25.


THE   FIRST THING that   must be said  about  Mr.  Frye's  book is that  for all its brevity  it is a penetrating and abundantly  rewarding study.  Such  qual­ ity  is expected and   taken  for  granted in a  critic   who   now   looms   like  a  ghostly colossus over  the  whole  world  of  modern academic   literary   criticism.  But   the  second  thing  to be said  is that  this is not one   of  his  best   books.  Not   only  is  the modest  scope  of  the  Writers and  Critics Series inhibiting for a critic  of Mr.  Frye's originality, but  there   is  something curi-
 ously unsatisfying  in  the relation between the  critic  and   his  subject. It  is  not,  as some  readers  have  felt,  a  matter of  anti­ pathy,  but  the opposite: Mr. Frye's witty severity,  disciplined  understatement and  acidulous   irony,    so   bracing   in   other  brews, here  mix  with a  substance (call  it Eliot's  "impersonality")  with  which  they have  too much  in  common. The result  is something    extraordinary   we    feel    we ought   to  enjoy   as  well  as  admire,  but don't  entirely,  a martini too dry for mere human  taste.

REVIEW ARTICLES



This short  paperback is not  the  "mor­ phology  of literary symbolism," the com­ panion   volume  "concerned with practical criticism"  which,   Mr.   Frye  remarks   in the  preface to  Anatomy  of Criticism,  is needed   to complement  that earlier  work of  "pure critical  theory."  It is, however,  a  large  enough  sample  to show  the  kind of  thing  to  be  expected from  Mr.  Frye's fully  developed critical approach directly  applied   by   himself   to  a  major   author. As  such   it  cannot  but   be  of  great   in­ terest,  not only  to students of T. S. Eliot, but    to   admirers  and  critics  of   Mr. Frye's vastly influential twentieth-century poetics.   Nevertheless, for   many   readers of   the   Writers  and   Critics   Series   this book  will  be baffling if not  dismaying.  It is  not   a   work   of   what   Mr.   Frye   has deprecated as  "public criticism." It does not   provide  a   simplified   exposition   of Eliot's  life  and   works  for  beginners.   It does not  try to capture and  communicate the  feeling  of special  poetic  moments,  to nourish   the  uninitiated reader  and  guide him   to  the   "living  Eliot." It does  not concern  itself  with   evaluations or  those mid-century revaluations this most monu­ mental of modem classics is now provok­  ing.  The reader who  expects these things will   be  left  in   the   cold  by   this  book's intellectual  rigour   and   academic  com­ posure.   He   will  look  in  vain  for  much  that    will  obviously   stir   his  pulses  and  raise  his ardour. Or  if he finds a chance rhetorical  flourish-The    Waste   Land,  "where loveliness  peeps  fitfully  through squalor   and  an  invisible  divine  presence haunts  the   misery   of   Europe"-wide­ eyed   at   so  untypical  a  Very  light   illu­ minating  a  whole  continent  of  art   and  experience he will  cry "This is criticism" and   abandon the  dense,  intricate pages all  about in  which  Eliot's   "morphology

52
 of   symbolism"  is   carefully charted. Such   a  reader  will   probably  not   have got   beyond   the   first  chapter,  however, where in language no doubt deliberately parodying the  university  calendar it is announced  that   "a  thorough  knowledge of   Eliot   is  compulsory  for   anyone   in­ terested in contemporary literature," and  where  it  is asserted   that   "whether  he is liked  or  disliked  is of no importance, but he  must   be  read." This  is the  academic principle at  best and  worst.  The demand is  for  impersonality,  for  a  reach   outside  one's   "natural"  range  of  sensibility  and  interest, and   there   is  faith in  a  supra­ personal   ground  on   which   all  civilized minds  can  meet.  The  opposite approach is to  say  that  it  is all-important  whether you   like  Eliot,   and   that   you  must   not read   him   if   you   dislike   him.   That   is dangerous and  uncivilized, but it has its attractions too-though  none   that   can be indulged, of course,  by specialists  in English   literature.
Mr.  Frye  deals  with  Eliot  as critic  and
as  poet.  The first  task  he  sets  himself  is to  separate  Eliot's genuine literary  criti­ cism  from   his  "literary  polemic,"  to  ex­ plain    in   effect   how   Eliot   on   the   one han.d  has  brilliantly articulated  some  of the  central literary   theories  of  our  time, and   on   the   other  has   voiced   a   good number of  social  and  literary   judgments which  seem  eccentric,  perverse,  and  nar­  rowly  dogmatic. The  reason   is  that   the  genuine  criticism  springs  from  the  study and   practice  of   literature,  whereas   the polemic   which  keeps  intruding is  based on  a  "historical  myth" which  Eliot   ac­ cepted,  the   myth   of  the   "going-down" kin.d in  which   the  modem  world  repre­ sents  the  "disintegration of  Christianity, the   decay   of   a   common   belief   and   a common culture." The   decline   is  not

REVIEW ARTICLES



merely   an   accomplished historical fact, for  the  ideal  in a sense remains alive  "to condemn  and   challenge the  contempo­ rary    world,"   and    the    possibilities    of degeneration  or  regeneration  are  omni­  present. Eliot's  criticism   is  therefore not always  based  on detached and dispassion­ ate  induction,  but  is  at  times  part  of  a continuing  Civil   War    in   which    sides must   be  taken   up:    for   or   against   the Protestant,  Romantic  and    liberal   ten­ dencies   of  the  English   tradition,  for  or against Milton, Shelley,  D.  H. Lawrence and  so on.  Criticism, in  Mr.  Frye's  view, must   be  a  great   deal  more  like  science than   like   warfare.  He   is   primarily  in­  terested,  then,  not   in   Eliot's  polemic, however  important that may have seemed to  Eliot,   but   in  his  contribution  to  the science  of  criticism.  It is of  course  true  that    the    very    determination,  in   Mr.
 Frye's cntiCism, to do without polemic becomes  in  itself  a  sort  of  polemic -a fact  for  which  the  rude  antagonisms and passionate  loyalties stirred up by his revolutionary  criticism    are   ample   evi­ dence.
The basic  principles of  the  science  of
criticism   are   to  be  found   in  Eliot:  the idea  that  all  poems  take  their  place  in  a literary  continuum  which   has   a  simul­ taneous  existence  and  composes  a  simul­  taneous   order,  the   idea   that   any  indi­ vidual  talent  is to  a  considerable degree  inspired and   formed   by  past   literature, the  idea  that   by  adding to  the  order   of poems,  every  new  poem  in  some  degree  modifies that  order.  What Eliot  does not do  is  to  make   clear   precisely   how   the tradition  has  its  effect  on  the  individual talent.  Here   is  the  large  area   Mr.  Frye has  himself  opened  up,  by  categorizing





The  Commonwealth and Suez
A Documentary Survey  1956-1957

BY JAMES  EAYRS


The  documentary material in  this  volume  is drawn  from statements and   speeches of   im­ portant  political figures  in  the  countries  con­ cerned; Each of  five sections is  preceeded by an  extensive essay amplifying and interpreting its  accompanying documents.




OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
Canadian  Branch




53

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  conventions, genres and  mythical structures in  which  the  literary  tradition is embodied, and  by demonstrating  ways in  which  these  "in  turn  exert  a defining power   on  the   poet's   mind."
Turning to  the  poetry,  Mr.   Frye  ex­
plains   that   the   "historical  myth,"  with all  its  contemporary  applications,  which lies  behind   Eliot's polemic  also  appears in  the  poetry.  Here, however,  Mr.  Frye is  not   concerned  to  extract  the   poet's "philosophy" or  to discuss the  relation  of the  "poetry" and  the  "ideas":  the  only way to avoid  an  illegitimate and mislead­ ing  separation of  this  kind  is  "by  study­  ing   the   conceptual   implications  of  the structure of his images."  What Mr.  Frye attempts to  do,  then,  is to  establish  the geography  of   Eliot's  total   imag native  world:  its  polarities of  heaven  and  hell, its corresponding humane hemispheres of innocence  and    experience,  its   cyclical movements through  the  seasons  and  the diurnal  round. He  is so  steeped   in  the poetry  and  plays  that  he can  suggest the peculiar  clusters   and   massing  of  Eliot's imagery   with   examples from   the  whole corpus -an  electric flow of  associations exciting  for   the   initiate,  but    a   little stunning for   the  layman.   Mr.   Frye  ex­ amines   the  earlier   poetry,  mainly  satiric in  kind,  and  presenting a "world without laughter,  love  or  children";  he  goes  on to   the   later   poems   and   to   the   plays, which    belong   to   Eliot's   "'purgatorial' vision."  With  severe  limitations on space, sacrifices  were  inevitable. There  is little about change,  development, growth. But the  treatment  of  Eliot's  poetry   (and   his criticism)   as  a  completed unity  is more than a  convenient device:   Eliot  is  that  kind  of   writer.  A  study  of  Yeats  would perhaps  have  required an  extra   dimen­ sion.   Mr.  Frye's    reading    moves   per-

54
 sistently  from  individual poems  outward to the whole reuvre: the approach works smoothly  with  a major poet  of such  con­ sistent   quality. Poets  more  uneven  than  Eliot    might   require,   and    reward,    a greater  respect   for   the  boundaries  and uniqueness of  poems.
The  range    of   reference within  and
beyond  Eliot's work, the  deftness,  the incisiveness,   and   the   remarkable   econ­ omy  of  expression   make  this  little  book something of  a  tour   de   force.  To  call  it as  Mr.   Frye  modestly   does  "an elemen­ tary   handbook,  claiming   no  originality beyond   that   of   arrangement" is  to  pre­ tend    to   both   more    and    less  than  is justified.  It  is  not  an  elementary hand­ book;  it  is  a  critic's manual, an  outline of  a  creed,  a   declaration  of  principles and  a  demonstration of their  practice, a pyrotechnical  display   of  acquired  read­ ing  skills, a tactical manoeuvre or  rather a  foray   in  that most  civil  of   wars, our contemporary   conversation   about  the meaning and   value   of   literature.



WITHOUT CAMOUFLAGE
 




William Hall



Hugh Garner's Best  Stories. Ryerson  Press. $4-95·


THE   FIRST IMPRESSION   that struck  me on  reading Mr.  Garner's short stories   was   that    they   had   an   air   that was   curiously   out-of-date. The  style  is drab   and   often  ungainly, unrelieved for the   most   part   even   by  metaphor;  the kind  of style that  one  associates  with  the so-called proletarian   writers  of   the
I 930s.  Many  of  the  stories   (particularly "E  equals   MC  squared" and  "Hunky") reflect the same kind of angry frustrated hatred for  the  boss and  the  foreman, the same savage disillusionment with the promises  of left-wing action  that  reduced so  much   of  the  fiction   of  the   I 930s  to the  level  of ammunition in  the  "war  be­ tween   the  classes."
My   second   impression  was   that   the world  of Mr.  Garner's fiction  is not  only out  of date  but  also strangely derivative. The label   A  Canadian  Hemingway  at­ tached   itself   to   "A   Couple  of    Quiet Young    Guys"    and    "No    More    Songs about  the   Suwannee";  A   Canadian Steinbeck  (with   suggestions   of  Erskine  Caldwell)  to  "The  Conversion  of Willie Heaps" and  "One-Two-Three  Little Indians"; A  Canadian James  T. Farrell to    "Make   Mine    Vanilla"   and    "The Father." The world  of Mr.  Garner, then, is  a  dated  world,   a  derivative world,  a world  empty  of humour, a world  as ugly and   depressing  as  the  style  in  which  it is  presented.
My  third  impression was as dishearten-
 ing  as  the  first  two.  Mr.   Garner's  style is not  only  ungainly, but  at  times  down­ right    bad.    In    "Our   Neighbours   the Nuns"   the  third  paragraph ends: "The leading   pair   [of  nuns]   were  always  two very   old   Sisters,   one   of   them   with   a plump kind  face  above   her  moustache, the  other   with  a  visage  like  a  dried-up quince."  The   next   paragraph  begins:  "Being  Protestant children, they  [i.e  the nuns]   had   a  mystery   about   them   that inspired us to pester our parents with questions   as  to  their   mode   of  life,  and their  reasons for living  as they  did." One hardly  expects  to come  across such faults (and   this  is not  the  only  example)  in  a volume   of   an   author's  best   stories.   A good   deal  of  the   dialogue,  too,  despite its  ring  of  truth, seems  unnecessary,  as does much of the mass of detail, which obscures where it is meant to enlighten. Idiosyncracies  of  behaviour,  that   noted once  would  have  illuminated characters as individuals, by repetition reduce  the individuals  to  faded   pale   automata. In almost  every story  ("Tea with  Miss Mayberry" is  a  prime example)   every­ thing  is stated, nothing suggested. If Mr.  Garner  has   ever   read   Chekov,   Joyce, Katherine  Mansfield or  for  that  matter Hemingway he  seems  to  have  absorbed little  or nothing of their craftsmanship or to  have  deliberately  refused  to  learn.
At this point  I  wondered if, under  the
circumstances, the  time  spent  in  reading


55

REVIEW ARTICLES



this  book  had  not  been  time  wasted.  For a moment, wrapped in the ineffable, if spurious, superiority of the  academic, secure  in his certainty of what  the best examples are  and  what  a  modern   short story  is and  ought   to be, I  was  tempted to  think   that  it  was.  But then  I  remem­ bered  that  certain  of   Mr.   Garner's stories:  "The  Yellow   Sweater,"  "The Magnet," "A  Manly  Heart" (despite the fact  that  its theme  is rammed  home  with the  subtlety  of  a  rivet  gun), "Some  are so   Lucky,"   "Lucy," "The  Father," "Hunky,"   and   one   or   two   more   had impressed   me,   for   all  the   objections  I could  bring  against   them,  as having  cer­ tain  qualities not  often  found  these  days in   short   story  writers.   Mr.   Garner  cer­ tainly  lacks,  on  the  evidence  of this  col­ lection,   the  kind  of  technical  virtuosity, even  at  times  the  kind  of  technical  com­ petence, that   the  most  inexpert appren­ tice  now  knows  is  expected   of  him.  But he   possesses  a   certain   quality,  I   think,  the  lack  of  which  renders  the  work  of a great    many   of  his  more   highly   skilled contemporaries as beautiful, but  as dead, as  a  Salvador Dali  landscape.
It is  difficult   to  describe  this  quality accurately. Energy defines part of it, will another part, honesty  more than  both  the others.    That  which   expresses   it   most clearly  is perhaps the overpowering sense, gathered  from   all   of  the   stories,  of  a limited  but  powerful, sensitive but  brutal moral   personality  projecting  itself   and its  vision without concealment or camouflage.
It  seems   to   me   a  reflection   of  this quality and,   though it  may  sound  para­ doxical   to  say  so, a  positive  virtue  that  Mr.   Garner  makes,   at  his  best,  no  at­  tempt    to   be   compassionate.  He   is  too honest   to  feign  a  virtue  when  he  has  it
 not,  even  though compassion is the  most fashionable and  rewarding of  all  virtues in   literary    circles   these   days.   A  good many   of  the   stories   I  found   successful are  first  person   narratives and  in  all  of them   the  narrator emerges   (as  a  boy in Toronto, a youth  in Spain, a middleaged man   "at   large")  as  essentially  the  same personality. He  is prickly  and  suspicious, aware, as  an   adult, quite   without  self­ pity,   of   his   own   limitations and   past mistakes.   He   is  intensely   curious  about  other  people   but   with   no  sympathy for them   if  they  are   his  contemporaries; a personality driven   by  the  energy  of hate  rather  than   by  that  of  love.  Only   the young,  the  helpless,  the  outcast and  the trapped rouse  any  feeling  in  him  at  all and  then  it's  an  impotent feeling  incap­ able  of  action.  There is at  times  a  kind of  wistful  yearning  towards love  but  it either   turns   sour    (as   in   "The  Yellow Sweater")  or  cools  (as  in  "The Nun  in Nylon   Stockings")   under    the   glare   of curiosity,  or,  at  its  worst,  congeals  (as in "A   Trip for   Mrs.   Taylor")  into  senti­ mentality.  In  one  story,  one  of   his best ("The  Magnet"), it  threatens  to  grow towards fulfillment as  love,  but  is quite  brutally  (though  not  at  all  melodrama­ tically)     frustrated.  This   feeling    never grows   to   any   kind    of    freely   moving healthy  emotion.  In  fact  if  Mr.  Garner might   be said  to  have  a  theme  common  to  all  these  stories,  despite   their   varied  backgrounds and   situations,  it  would   I think   be   just   this:   that    joy,  emotional freedom  in   all   its  forms-a   romantic memory,   love,   a   boy's  aimless   drifting afternoon  in  a  park-is  hardly   real  at all  and  is  anyway  inevitably going  to  be crippled,   choked    or   frustrated  at   the moment  of  birth.  If a  man  survives  the crushing out  of all his own  possibility for

REVIEW ARTICLES



joy then  he will do so, if he is a primitive like Big Tom  in "One-Two-Three Little Indians" :  "all   the  anguish and  frustra­ tion  drained from  him,  so that  there  was nothing  left   to  carry   him  into  another day."   The   "average  middleaged  man," like  the  man  in  "The  Yellow  Sweater," will survive  to see himself  as "the staring  face  of  a  fat  frightened old   man." No one  grows,  no  one  advances.
In fact my final impression was, quite seriously, almost one of relief that Mr. Garner's work  is  marred by  the  flaws  I noted    earlier.  They    prevented  me,   at least,   from   ever   falling   too  completely under   the  spell  of  his  honest   but  bleak and   despairing view  of  life.
 

Three Poets


BROWNING
The  Central  Truth: The In­
carnation  in Browning's Poetry
by WILLIAM WHITLA

Browning found  for   his  poetry and   for his  life  a  Christian point of  reference: God's Incarnation in  his  Son. 161 pages,  $5.00


SHELLEY
The Apocalyptic Vision in the
Poetry of Shelley
by ROSS GREIG WOODMAN

An examination of the  way in which Shelley's imagination   transmuted his radical ideas concerning man and society  into   a  series   of  visionary  works.
209  pages,  $6.oo


YEATS
The Vast  Design:  Patterns  in
W. B. Yeats's Aesthetic
by EDWARD ENGELBERG

An   analysis  of   the   "critical  prose" of Yeats,   with   Yeats   seen  not  merely as  a great Irish   poet   writing in  English, but as  a  great   European,  deeply concerned with    the   relationships  of   art    to   phil­ osophic,  cultural,   and    historical   ques­ tions.   234   pages,    (ill us.),   $6.oo


UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  PRESS




57





SOUND AND FURY

ERNEST  BUCKLER.  The   Cruelest  Month.  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart.  $6.so.

IN 1952, Ernest Buckler published The Mountain and the Valley,  a novel which attracted a  good  deal  of  attention  here and  abroad. It established  Buckler  as an author of  some  potentiality and  reputa­ tion.   Now,   eleven   years   later,   he   has brought forth  The  Cruelest  Month. It is a   retrograde  step,   and  will  more   than  likely cause  the  critics  to make  all of the classic remarks usually  said about  second novels.  It is not  a  good  book;  in  fact,  it is  so  bad   that   it  is  difficult,  if  not  im­ possible,  to  take  seriously.
Once  inside   this   book  you  may  feel like a gambler in a strange  town  running about   and   crying   plaintively, "Where's the   action?"  About   two  thirds   of  it  is talk.  All of a Henry Green  book is talk­ talk  such  as  you've   never  heard  before. Mr.  Buckler's book  is talk  which  you've heard many  times before -not from  the mouths of  human  beings,  but  from  the pens  of  bad  writers   who  think  they  are depicting sophisticated  people  saying sophisticated things.  Huxley  managed it, I suppose,  and  Norman Douglas in South Wind;  Ronald Firbank  could  do  it  and make    it   seem   very   real   in   an   oddly rococo way. But Mr. Buckler's talkers are very  unreal   because  they only talk  about  themselves,   or   more   impossibly,   about  something that interests  the author. They
 
not   only   talk   themselves,   but   they   try to  get   each   other  to  talk.  The  central third  of  the  novel  is comprised of  chap­ ters   where   a  half-dozen   characters  are paired  off   and   each   breaks   down   the other's reserve  and  reticence and  makes him   talk.  A  forty-year-old  spinster   and  a  fifty-year-old  thrice-wed Robert Ruark­ type   novelist   talk   themselves   into  mar­ riage;  a  medical   student  and   a  young New   York   matron  talk   themselves  into  listening to  the  wild  sexual  call  of  their autonomic  nervous  systems;  and   in  the end,   Paul,   the  hero,  one  supposes,  talks himself   into  falling   in  love  with   Letty,  the   illiterate   housekeeper   widow    who opines   that  "all the  readin' and   writin' that   was  ever   done"  (at   Paul's  place)  "wouldn't  amount to a fart  on  the  plains of  Arabia."  It is difficult  not  to like her. She speaks  eloquently for  the  reader.
Paul   runs  a  kind  of  hotel,  which  is a
haven   for   intellectuals,  called   Endlaw, which   is  twenty   miles   from   Granfort, which  is a fair  day's  drive  from  Halifax, which   is  a  naval   base  on  the   Atlantic seaboard  of  Canada. Besides  Paul,  who has learned that  if you  jolly people  along and   look  mysterious you  will  in  fact  be mysterious, there  is  Letty,  grotesque because  the  author thinks  of her  as such, and  Kate, who really  loves Paul  but  who becomes    engaged    to   Morse   who   is  a novelist   who   begins   to   write   a   novel about  the    characters  at   Endlaw  Mr. Buckler  is writing about, and  Sheila  who is rich  and  married to Rex  who  is tense about  his   lowly   background  and  his spotty  war  record,  and  finally  Bruce  who is  nurturing  guilt   because   he   was   the instrument  that   killed  his  son  and   wife in a car  accident. At  the end  of the  book there is  a  forest  ranger named   Leander Farquharson who  interrupts a forest  fire

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



which   is  the   best  thing   in  the  book  by far.  The reason,  I think,  is that  it is very active   and   doesn't  have   a  word   to  say about   how   to  write   a  novel,   or  about Life  or  Love  or  Relationships that  Must Be.  Another  thing   about the  forest  fire is  that    it   is  unpredictable. Without a word  it  jumps  the  creek  everybody  says it  couldn't. It also  gets  Letty's skirt  off her,  gives  Paul  a  heart   attack, separates all  of  the  sexual  sheep  from  their  intel­ lectual   wolves'  clothing, and  does  it  by just  going  about its  real  business,  which is  to   ignite   and   burn   down   as  much  timber  as  it  possibly  can  before  it  gets rained  on. I wonder if  there isn't  a lesson in  that   for  novelists  like  Mr.  Buckler.
What he  has  done-with  more  sweat and   toil  than   I  care   to  think   about­ is  to  write   298  pages  of   notes  on  what  could   be  a  story   of   more  than   a  little
 interest. They  are  the  kind  of  notes  that are   perhaps  necessary  to  a  good   novel, but once written down they should  be abandoned  and   used  as  the  memory   of actual experience is sometimes  used  to colour  our  speculation about  experiences yet to come.  It is enough for  the  author to  remember  that   Paul   is  the   kind   of selfish-little-boy-god  who   would   find   a mate   in  Letty.   It is  too  much   for  the story   to  have   him   actually  do  it.  It  is enough  for   Mr.   Buckler   to  know   that Morse  would  subject   a  group of  people to  a  game  of  Truth. It is embarrassing to have him do it. Actually, the most successful  character in  the  book  is Rex. He  is object   rather than   subject. He  is simply  viewed  by the  others  and  he acts from  real  tensions  that  he  does not understand. He  is consistent in  his  gra­ tuitousness from  birth  to  the  moment of his triumph when  he  has  his  wife Sheila  trapped and  he  flips  away  the cigarette butt   that   starts   the  forest  fire.  After   I had   closed  the  book  I  wondered about Rex.  The  others  I was simply  glad  to be done  with.
Mr.   Buckler   can   use  language  well.
Many   times   in   the   book   you   will   be dragged   into   a   paragraph  and   pushed out   again   with   your   imagination   tin­ gling  with  the  rightness  of  his  image  or his way with  words.  But he suspends  ani­  mation.  This   book   is  a   still-life   with sound   track.

ROBERT HARLOW











59

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



LA VIE
D'UNE  ECOLE

ADRIEN     THERIO.   Le   Printemps  Qui   Pleure.
Les  Editions   de  !'Homme.


Le  Printemps  Qui  Pleure est  un  roman dont   l'action se deroule  a la  campagne.
On  sait  qu'au Canada fran<;ais le genre champetre  a  longtemps ete   un   fourre­ tout   sentimental,  un  pn texte
facile. Les   paysans, les  villageois  de­
fendaient  la  these  du  retour a  la  terre avec   une   ardeur  toute   farouche,   sans pour  autant oublier  d'employer une  lan­ gue  denuee de  la  vraisemblance la  plus elementaire. Cette   vision  des  choses  est bien  perimee. Le  roman   de  M.  Therio nous  le  prouverait si besoin il  y avait.
Dedaignant les modeles  trop  idylliques du   passe,  M.  Therio a  decrit, dans   un style  qui   rappelle a  la  fois  Maupassant et  Erskine Caldwell, la  vie  d'une 'ecole de  village.  Les  personnages qu'il  invente sont a vrai dire bien  inqui,etants. L'amour, ils  le  pratiquent  tres  liberale­ ment  et aiment aussi a en parler de fa<;on fort  vulgaire. Ils  sont  voyeurs,  sadiques,  tortionnaires. Tous,  ou  a  peu  pres,  ont des aventures libidineuses, et le narrateur lui-meme a   une   imagination  pour    le moins  precoce.
Voici  en  quelques lignes !'intrigue du roman. Un  adolescent -le  narrateur­ s',eprend  de Yolande, compagne de classe qui    se   montre   plurot   distante.  Brime dans  ses desirs, le garc;on ne recule devant rien  pour  discrediter Eddy,  le  petit  ami que  la  jeune  fille s'est  choisi.  Cela  n'ex­  clut  ni  la  mouchardise, ni  la  dissimula­ tion, ni la fausse  representation. En com­ pagnie   d'un camarade de  nom  de  Jean­ Luc,   il  est  accuse   par   Yolande   meme

6o
 d'avoir lachement attaque Eddy.  Par mesure  de represailles, les adolescents s'emparent de  la  jeune  fille, lui  enlevent ses vetements et  la  forcent a  se  plonger dans   l'eau    froide.    Yolande  meurt   des suites  d'une  pleuresie causee  par  cette immersion. Le narrateur n'a  plus qu'a deplorer  sa  participation  a  !'affaire,  sa gou jaterie.
Bien  qu'oppose  a  la  sensiblerie   qui  a
trop   longtemps  fait   loi  dans   le  genre, nous  estimons  la cruditJe de ce livre plutot factice,  presque  puerile.  La   peinture a laquelle s'est livve l'auteur depasse le realisme  pour  atteindre au  procede. Nous ne  croyons  pas  vraisemblable le  deferle­ ment  de  passion  primitive qui assaille  les adolescents de  cette   ecole,  leurs  institu­ trices.  Il  aurait fallu  nuancer davantage, opposer,  par    exemple,   a   la   brutalioo abusive  une innocence plus convaincante, plus conforme a la  vealite.
L'ecriture, il faut bien  l'avouer, parait hative. On  ne retrouve pas le souci de correction   decelable  dans    M es  Beaux M eurtres, plutot une  certaine impression de  negligence. Esperons que les prochains mois  nous  permettront de  lire  un  roman de M. Therio qui surpassera le succes appreciable du  receuil  de  nouvelles  dont nous  avons  rendu compte plus  haut.
GILLES ARCHAMBAULT

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



TRANSMUTATION OF HISTORY


NORMAN  NEWTON.   The One   True Man.  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart. $4.50.

CHARLES    E.    ISRAEL.     Who  Was  Then  the
Gentleman?   Macmillan. $4.95.

THERE Is LITTLE to link  these  two novels in  a  single  review  except   the   fact   that both  deal  with  the  past.  Apart from  this historical stance, the novels provide nothing  but   contrasts.  The   One   True Man  is not  truly  historical; it  constructs a milieu based upon the conjectured Phoenician colonization of South Amer­ ica  in  427   B.C.  Charles  Israel's  novel, Who  Was  Then the  Gentleman?   as  the title  suggests, reconstructs the actual Peasants'  Revolt    of   138 r   in   its   total social,  economic  and   political   context.
Mr.   Newton's  book  suffers   from   the
disability   of  one   of  his  characters,  the priest  Baalyaton, of whom  he writes:  "In his  exposition  of  truth, he  was  not  like a   man   speaking   forcefully  from   inner knowledge, but  like  one  reading from  a book   which   has   convinced  him."   The narrative,   ploddingly   unexciting,   con­ cerns   one   Suniaton  who  arrives  in   the Punic  colonial  city of New  Gades to find considerable tension   in  the  relations be­ tween  his people  and  the  native  Ulmeca. Eventually  he   attempts   (after  the   in­ evitable  but  irrelevant  sexual  adventures and    misadventures),   quite  ineptly,    to avoid  bloodshed   by  making a  gesture  of peace; the  plan  fails, results  in the  death  of  the  Ulmeca  princess  he  loves  and  in the   destruction   of   New   Gades   and   its cruel  Phoenicians. Suniaton  retires  to  a mountain hermitage with  the  head  of his
 beloved tucked underneath  his  arm. "And  he  would  say,  as  he  looked  at  the skull,  It was  not  this  I  loved!"
This  book is badly  written  (and  over­ written).  Mr.    Newton   tends   to   write long   turgid    sentences   so   syntactically gnarled   that  essences  are  frequently lost. Even  shorter  sentences  are  chopped into bits,  so  that   we  have  islands   of  words swimming   in   a  sea  of   commas.  Faulty  grammar sometimes  leaps from  the  page with   distracting   force:   "with  all   due deference to  he  who  occupies  ..."  Fre­  quent   detailed   descriptions  and   exposi­ tions,  instead  of  assisting  comprehen­ sion   and  moving  the   novel  forward, impede both  understanding and  progress. Twentieth-century colloquialisms crop up in the formal speech of New Gades' Administrators to  distort the  tone: "Right here beneath our feet there are deposits  of  stone   oil  which   make   those near  Cartage look  pretty sick."  Imagery, highly  favoured  in  Mr.   Newton's  style, is  designed   more   to  impress   the  reader with  the  author's  ingenuity and  percep­ tiveness   than   to   do   the   novel   a  good turn.    Frequently  it   is  strained   to   the breaking  point;   sometimes,   ludicrously inappropriate: "The   moonlight  was  a strong   yellow-orange,  like  the   urine   of horses."
No character comes  to  life;  no  identi­
fication   with   even   the   hero's   condition and   behavior    is  possible.   No   sense  of time  and  place  is communicated. The obvious didacticism of the book and the na"ive circumstances  of  the   plot   inhibit sympathetic response.
Who  Was  Then the  Gentleman?  is at
once   a   more   subtle  and   more   skilful novel.  It engages  the  reader  immediately by introducing him  in  the  opening pages to  the   fugitive  priest,   John   Ball,  who,

6r

BOOKS IN REVIEW



though  filled   with   fear   and   weariness, conquers both  to  proclaim vigorously  to the   scattered  populace  of  the   English countryside  his  ideal   of  freedom. The work moves forward steadily  through the half   year   from   January  to  July,   1381, providing a  thoroughgoing development of   the   organization  of   the   revolt,   the economic  and   physical   repressions   that fired   it,   the  characters of  those  chiefly responsible  for   the   insurrection  as  well as  of   those   charged  with   the   duty   of quelling it.  Wat  Tyler  and  John  Ball, as the  dominant principals in the revolt, are sympathetically  drawn   and   given   vivid individuality  by   the   contrasts  in   their characters  which   bring   them   into   fre­ quent  conflict.   Ball, sensitive,  peace­ loving,   idealistic,  self-sacrificing,  is  fre­ quently at  odds  with  his devoted  friend,  Tyler,  a  man   of   fiery  passions,  urgent burning  hates   and   loves,  who   regards  bloodshed   as  a  hideous  necessity.  There is  an   interesting  interplay  between   the contrasts  these   two   provide   and   those offered   by   the   King's  councillors  who oppose   them:  Salisbury   and   Walworth. The one  is introspective, cultivated, cap­ able   of   compassion,  tolerance,   under­ standing; the  other is ruthless,  arrogant,
 full   of  anger  and   bloodthirst.  All  four are  developed not  only  as  public  figures but  as  private men.  Israel  gives  fullness to  the  verisimilitude of the  fictional con­ struction of their  private lives by a sensi­ tive  portrayal of  these  men,  their  wives and   their   loves.
In order  to provide variations in  tone, and   a  full  social  context for  the  narra­ tive,   the   author  focuses  attention  from  time   to  time   upon   a  group  of  typical peasants  who   find   their  way   into   the  forces   of   revolt:   Abel  Threder,  Roger  atte  Well, Old   Elias Roper,  Robert Ogden.  These   characters   are  lively Chaucerian types and  provide horseplay, earthy   fabliau    scenes,    rollicking   and  pathetic    simplicity.    They    are    frankly  "stock"  figures,   but   are   made  to   play their   parts   with   gusto   and   feeling   and  are  consequently well integrated into  the fabric of  the  book.
The scenes of action  are vividly staged; the  medieval atmosphere constantly  per­ vades  the narrative; interest is never per­  mitted  to   falter.  Who   Was   Then  the Gentleman? is an  exciting reconstruction of  a  momentous  event,   presented  with clarity, vitality  and  compassion.
J· DEBRUYN









BOOKS IN REVIEW



A HEROIC AGE


GUSTAVE  LANCTOT.  A  History  of  Canada. Volume I: From   its  Origins  to  the   Royal Regime, 1663. Translated  by   Josephine Hambleton.  Clarke,  Irwin.  $6.75.

THIS  TRANSLATION   of  the  first  volume of  Gustave Lanctot's  Histoire   du  Can­ ada,  originally published in  Montreal in I959,   is  the   best   account   available  in English    of   "the  heroic   age"    in   New France. Dr.  Lanctot's  knowledge of  the sources  for  this  period,  from  the  found­ ing  of  the  settlements  on  the  St.  Law­ rence   and   in   Acadia  until   the   French crown  took  over  direct   responsibility  for their   affairs,   is  unequalled.  Unfortun­ ately,  the  English  version  suffers  at  times from  a  somewhat wooden   translation.
The struggles   of  the  French  outposts in   North    America  to   maintain   them­ selves  against  the  Iroquois, the  climate, the  isolation   of  the   wilderness,  and   the indifference  of   the    home   authorities made  "la  survivance" a  driving force  in French Canada  from   the  earliest   days, and,  in  the  author's  view, had  produced by  I663  among the  2,500 settlers  on  the banks  of the  St.  Lawrence a recognizable Canadian   nationalism. Great  credit   for the  persistence of  the  French  enterprise in  North America is rightly  given  to  the Jesuits,  but  the  subtleties of the  relation­ ship   between  the   interests  of   the   fur trading companies and  those  of  the  mis­ sionaries  are  not  fully  developed. This  is not   to  imply   that  Dr.  Lanctot  belongs to   the   filio-pietistic   school   of   French­ Canadian historians; he  has  done  battle with   Canon  Groulx  and   his  supporters for  many  years,  notably  over  the  motives of  Dollard des  Ormeaux and  the  heroes of   the   Long    Sault,  and    this   volume
 makes  plain  that   the  early  settlers  were in  the  new  world   primarily  to  improve their econmnic lot and not as conscious bearers of French Catholic civilization. However, he  is at  some  pains  to  defend the  moral   character of  the  settlers   and traders against  charges  that  there  were among   them   many   of  doubtful  virtue, and   concludes  that   the  evidence  shows that   "the   people   who  came   to  Canada were  healthy, hardworking and  staunch­ ly  Catholic";  the  most  remarkable,  but perhaps  deceptive,  statistic  provided  in support of  this  claim  is that  in  the  forty years  before   I66I   only  one   illegitimate birth   was  recorded in  the  colony.
The   last  two  chapters  are   analytical and   are  the  most  interesting and  valu­ able  part  of  the  book.  Here the  author discusses  the   failure  of   seventeenth­ century  Frenchmen to emigrate in larg,er numbers, the  disastrous  economic conse­ quences   of   the  persistent Iroquois  wars, and   the  negligible   success  of  the  policy of   the   Frenchification   of   the    Indian population. The publishers of  this  trans­ lation  are  to  be congratulated for  bring­ ing   Dr.   Lanctot's  book   before   English  readers.
MARGARET PRANG




FAMOUS CANADIANS

The  Macmillan Dictionary of Canadian  Biog­ raphy, edited  by   W.   Stewart   Wallace. Macmillan. $ 1 2 .50.

THE PREPARATION at the University of Toronto of the  massive  Dictionary of Canadian Biography is proceeding at  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



leisurely   pace  that   is inevitable in  such multi-volume works  by many  hands.  As its  instalments begin  to appear, we shall at  last  have  a  reference   work,  compiled and  written by historians, and  presenting critical as  well  as  informative studies  of the  leading   figures  of  Canadian  history, as well as factual notes on a vast number of  minor   celebrities. But  the  Dictionary of   Canadian  Biography, even   when   it appears,  will  inevitably  be  the   kind  of book that  only a few scholars will be able to  buy  for  their  own  collections; most  of us will consult  it in  the libraries  that  can afford  to purchase such expensive  works. For   those   who   need   a  reference   book close  to  hand   one  can  recommend The Macmillan  Dictionary of Canadian  Bio­ graphy, which  has  just  been  republished in   a  revised   and   enlarged  form   under  the  editorship of Dr. W. Stewart Wallace.
It is a substantial volume- 822 pages in double  column-and it contains some six  thousand  entries  concerning   Cana­ dians  who  have  died  up  to 196I; wisely, it  avoids  the  living. The coverage is good. I   made  a   list  of  twenty   miscellaneous figures  of relatively  minor  importance in politics,  science  and  the  arts,  and  found  only  one  of  them  missing;  this  was  an unfortunate  omission,  the  novelist  Louis Hernon.  Thus the  net  has  not  swept  in quite  every  man  and  woman   worthy  of inclusion-though the  missing names  of any   significance  are   admittedly   few­ and  in  the  same  way it  has  occasionally  allowed   exactitude  to   slip   through  its meshes. Of  Malcolm Lowry, for instance,  we are  told  that  "he  lived in Canada ... for   twenty-five  years,   from  I 939   to I954"; mere   editorial   vigilance   should have  trapped that  error.  But  it is one  of
a  very  few  that   have  sprung to  my  eye m   a   first   extensive    sampling  of   the
 volume;  the  general standard  of   accu­
racy  is high.
The very difficulty  of including 6,ooo entries in a single volume has made it impossible   for   Dr.   Wallace  to  include long  or  in  any  way critical studies  in  his Dictionary. Information  takes  the  place of  opinion in  these  brief  studies,  few  of which are more than a single page column  in  length.  But  in  almost   every case  there  is an  adequate selective  bibli­ ography to  tell  one  where  to  go  in case the  skeleton  of life facts  presented  is not sufficient.  The  Macmillan  Dictionary of Canadian  Biography in its enlarged form  maintains its usefulness  to the scholar, the writer  or  the  journalist who  needs  at  his desk's   head  a  comprehensive  reference book  to  the  important Canadians of the distant and  the  recent   past.
GEORGE WOODCOCK




C.B.C. AND OTHERS


ALBERT  A.  SHEA.   Broadcasting  the   Canadian
Way. Harvest House. $2.00.

THIS   IS  A    USEFUL   HANDBOOK. It is  a pity  it  is  not   more.   Chapters on  "The Basic  Issue,"   "The BBG,"  "The  CBC," "Radio Canada"  (which Mr.  Shea  sen­ sibly  treats as  a  separate  organization), "CTV,"  "The   Undefended  Border," "The People, The Press and  Parliament," and  the  past  and  future of  broadcasting in  Canada  provide a  handy  summary of the  present situation and  how it grew.  As these  headings indicate, Mr.  Shea's sur­ vey   is  comprehensive  and,   as  far   as  I have  been   able   to  check,  it  is  also  ac­ curate. Occasionally, condensation results

BOOKS IN REVIEW



m   a  slight   blurring  of  the   facts   (e.g., CBC News  did  not  develop  its own domestic  reportorial staff  until  later  than is suggested  on  p.  108, and  in  the  "Pre­ view   Commentary"  affair   of    I959  the National  Office   of  CBC   Public  Affairs and   most  of  the  Toronto  producers did not    "follow    [the]   example"  of   their leaders but  resigned  simultaneously with them). But  these  are  minor  matters. In general, Mr.  Shea  has  produced a  good introduction  to   the  complexities  of  the broadcasting  industry in  this country, in­ cluding  clear  explanations of such  mud­  dles as  the  Grey  Cup  controversy and  of the   basic   debate  over   "single   system" versus  "dual  system".
Given  this, it is unfortunate that  he manages to  put  off  potential readers   by a format that  is sometimes agonizingly repetitious  and   a  style  which   is  at   its best  pedestrian and  at  its  worst  produces such   sentences  as:   "For  him   [i.e.,   the private broadcaster]  the  license  is a valuable asset  for  which  he pulled  many strings  and  may even  have  gambled some of his own  cash,  to obtain."
Even   more   unfortunate,  it   seems  to
me,  is the  absence  of any  theoretical approach to  mass  communications or  of any original ideas about their  role in contemporary society.  Despite some  evi­ dence  on  p.  g6  of  a  brief  flirtation  with Marshall McLuhan, Mr.  Shea's  general ideas  about   broadcasting tend   to  be  the conventional pieties  about the  enormous power    of   the    electronic   media.    It  is understandable  that    he   pleads   for   "a communications  research  institute."
To   the   extent   that   Mr.   Shea   has  a bias,  it  is strongly   pro-CBC. And  so say all  of  us, though perhaps we  may  some­ times   regret   that   criticism   of   the  Cor­ poration continues to come mainly  either
 from   those  with   an  obvious   interest   in its emasculation or  those  whose  commit­ ment  to  rt m  principle  inevitably causes them   to  pull   their  punches.
ROBERT MCCORMACK



THE FRONTIER OF WONDER

Nunny Bag 2; stories   for six- to nine-year-olds.
W.  J. Gage.

Rubaboo 2;  stories    for   boys   and   girls   from ten   to  twelve. W.  J. Gage.

OF THE  TWO COLLECTIONS of stories, poems,  and   plays  reviewed   here,  Ruba­ boo  2   is the  more  successful; its  greater success may  well  be due  to  the fact  that  its   age   group    is   somewhat   easier   to touch.   Before   the   age   of   ten   children thrive  on fantasy  -by  far  the most diffi­ cult  writing  to achieve-and  stories  that  embody  it  and  give  it  meaning are  their first  choice.  Their   wonder   has   not  lost its  edge.   For   them   there   never   was  a yesterday,  there  is  no  tomorrow, and  the "never-never"  world  of  the  imagination impinges   on   the  real   so  closely  and   so directly   that   the   line   between   is  indis­ tinguishable.  But  after   ten,  they  acquire memories,  they  know  nostalgia, they  are aware  that  there  is a future and  suspect that,   after  all,   time   is  real.   They   now have    a   capacity    to   enjoy    consciously stories  that create mood  or  make  social comments. The  boundaries of  their imaginations may  be curtailed, but  their ability  to  enjoy  on  an  intellectual  plane has  increased. They   are   easier   to  write for    since    their  demand  for    fantasy has lessened and  their  interests have broadened.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



It is not  surprising, then,  to find  that the   realistic    stories   in   Rubaboo 2   are more    numerous  and   of   a   consistently higher   quality  than   those  of  fantasy   in the  same  collection. Such  examples of fantasy  as  there are-"The  Golden Dragon" or  "The  Tailor and   the  Cat"
-are   too   whimsical   and   precious,   or ape   the  mannered  telling  of  the  tradi­ tional  fairy  tale  without  containing style and  substance of  their  own.  Among  the happier  of  the   realistic  stories   are   the nostalgic    remembrances   of    childhood passed,   such   as  Vicki   Branden's "The Pay  was  Ten  Cents" which  recreates the pleasures  of  life  in  a  small  town  half  a century ago.  Other pieces in  the  collec­ tion  contain social comment. This is par­  ticularly  strong   and   plain  in  "Alley   at the    back   of   Things",  a   play   by   Les Wagar. Centered on  the  trifling  incident of  a   butterfly  captive  in  a  bottle,   this becomes,  for  children,  an  uncompromis­ ing  look  at  life  in  a  modern  slum.
Nunny   Bag  2  is  decidedly   weaker   in
both  content and  style than  Rubaboo 2. Most  of the  writers  have tended  to "write down" to the children in their  use of language  and   in  the  emotions   they  ex­ press.   There  is  no   story   that   touches sincerely  or any deep  feeling. Here again,  the  fantasy   (such  an  important element with   this   age  group)   is  not  successful. "The  Little  Brown   Fox",   for  example, in which  a fur  piece turns into  a real fox, is  too  mundane in  language   and  in  ap­  proach  to   sustain   any   truly  magic moment.    The   same   plodding    quality  spoils  Beulah  Swayze's  "The Big Adven­  ture"  which   details   a  few  hours  in  the life   of   a   turtle  and   is  an   attempt  at understated simplicity,   but  lacks  the  in­ tensity   that   would   have  quickened  it.
Some  of  the  better  things  in  the  book

66
 are   the   poems.   Paul   Holliday's "Late, late   in  October"  has   just  that   mixture of   humour  and   "spookiness"  that  chil­ dren  treasure. But  such  poems  and other  "better  things" are  disappointingly  rare.
JOAN SELBY




INDIAN TRADER

D.   GENEVA   LENT.     West of   the    Mountains.
]ames   Sinclair   and     the   Hudson's   Bay
Company. University   of  Washington  Press.
$6.75·

BORN AT   NORWAY    HOUSE about    I8o6, son  of  a  Hudson's Bay  Company  officer and   a   native-born  mother,  James  Sin­ clair   was  educated  in  the  Orkneys  and  at    Edinburgh.  On    his   return  to   the Northwest he soon  established himself  as an  important  member of  the  Red  River  community.   Governor   Simpson    recog­ nized  his outstanding qualities of leader­  ship  when  he  chose  him  to  conduct  two parties  of  settlers   from   the   Red   River to  the  Oregon, one  in  I84I   and  one  in I856,  both  by passes through the  Rockies previously unknown except to the Indians. Sinclair was  a  prominent figure at  the   Sayer  trial   of  I 849,  the  crisis  of the  struggle  for  free  trade  in  the  North­ west,  when   his  calm   restraint  helped   to turn an  incipient revolt  of the Metis  into a  peaceful victory  over  the  Hudson's Bay Company.  He   was  killed  in  an   Indian raid    in   the    blood-stained    Oregon  of I8s6.
As  the  fur   trade settled   down   under
the overwhelming personality of George Simpson, many  natives  of the  British Northwest  had   difficulty   in  finding   an outlet  for   their    abilities.    An   arresting

BOOKS IN REVIEW



figure  among   them,  James Sinclair  emi­ nently   deserves   a  biography.  Miss  Lent  has  covered  a  wealth of  source  material in  an  effort  to  explore his  relations with the  Hudson's Bay  Company  and  particu­ larly  with   Governor  Simpson.  The reader's   sympathies  can   hardly  fail   to be  with  Sinclair, but  if the  responsibility  for  the disastrous waste  of his talents  lies with   Simpson    and    the   Company,  the case   against  them  is   inconclusively argued.
Biography  is  admittedly  one   of   the
most   difficult   forms   of  writing   but   the author's style scarcely  does  justice  to her subject. In  this  sense,  West  of  the Mountains is a surprising production to come from a university press. Surely the importance of the  subject and  the  devo­ tion  of  the  author deserved   more  atten­ tion  from  its  editorial  staff.
L. G. THOMAS


BISHOPS AND BOOTS

T. c.  B.  BOON.  The  Anglican Church from  the
Bay  to  the   Rockies. Ryerson  Press.

MR.  BOON IS  AN   ARCHIVIST of  great knowledge and   resourcefulness. He  here recounts  the   history   of   his  own   com­ munion, the  Anglican Church in Canada, from  its earliest  beginnings to the present  day.  Coterminous with  the  development of  European settlement in  the  territory of   the   Hudson's  Bay   Company,  the  Church of England  (as it  was for  almost all  its  history)    in   western   Canada  has had   to  share   the  many   trials  and   diffi­ culties   of  the  pioneer   communities. In­ evitably  Mr.  Boon's  book  becomes  some­ thing   of   a   chronicle  of   men   and   the places   they   ministered  to.  But   he  can
 draw   on  journals and   memoirs   to  illus­ trate  such remarkable  characters as Bishop Bompas,  who served in the North. west for  a  generation,  returning to Win­  nipeg   only   once   in   eighteen  years,   or Bishop    Stringer  of   the    Yukon,    who achieved fame  as the  Bishop  who  ate  his boots  while struggling to reach  a  habita­ tion  after  an  overland trek  to  an  Indian settlement in  the  Arctic  winter.
Mr.  Boon  pays  particular attention to the   ministry    to   the   Indians  and   the Eskimos.  We  are  forever  in  the  debt  of the  early   missionaries  for   their   skill  in translating and  transliterating the natives' languages.   He  has  sadly  to  acknowledge that  with  the  withdrawal of  the  English Inissionary   societies'  interest  in   these peoples,  there  has not  been a correspond­ ing  growth  and   recognition  of  their  sig­ nificance  among  the  Canadian Church. There  is  no  discussion  here  of  theo­  logical  trends,  and virtually  nothing about   the   activities  of   other    church  bodies.  But  for  an  accurate  chronicle of the   life  and   witness  of  these  men   and  their  families  who  contributed so  much to the formation of western  Canada, this
is a  valuable source  of  reference.
JOHNS. CONWAY


HOW LONG, 0 LAIRDS, HOW LONG?

A  Canadian Anthology, edited  by  Fred  Cogs­ well.    The  Bliss   Carman   Poetry    Society, Fredericton.  $1.oo.

IT's LONG BEEN BRUITED about  that Fred Cogswell,  through some  policy  of  hyper­ democracy, prints as many  non-poems as poems   in   The   Fiddlehead; and   here comes  confirmation of  that  rumor, in  an

BOOKS IN REVIEW



anthology that  certainly can't  claim  to be even  The Best of The  Fiddlehead, but  a very accurate cross-section  of that  maga­ zine's verse over  the last fifteen years. For every  Alden   Nowlan, find  a  Muriel   E. Newton-White ("Ah, Land  of  Whirring Wings"), for each  Henry Moscovitch, an Elizabeth Brewster  ("The Loneliness that  Wrapped Her   Round").
There is not even  a precise one-for-one
balance, because  a  third  group intrudes, composed   of  those  who  have  clambered into  the  Canadian  literary establishment, that   windy  loft,  by  no  visible  means  of ascent.  Here  is Daryl  Hine,  playing  with his  shiny  old   technique  in  one  corner; here  is   Wilfred   Watson,  eulogizing Dylan    Thomas   while   imitating  him; here  is   Alfred  Purdy, probably the
 most-published-in-Canada poet,  casting further  shadow on  the  enigma of  How Has   He   Done    It?;  here    too   are   Eli
Mandel,  Robert  Finch,  and   A.  J. M.
Smith.
There  are,   it's   true,   in   addition   to Nowlan's   poems,    two    (out    of   three) good  poems   by  Layton; one  by  Gustaf­ son;  one  by M.  Morris   (that  sure  ironic  tone!);  and   one   of   Milton   Acorn's­ "Charlottetown  Harbor"-seems  worthy of    anthologizing.   But   one   wonders  if these  few  examples will suffice  to set  all the  dylantantes, maiden aunties,  school­ teachers and  pseudo-philosophers  on  the right   track-which  in  many   instances  may  involve   their   resignation  from   the pursuit of  poetry-writing.
DAVID BROMIGE





68

BOOKS IN REVIEW



LOVE AND LOSS

LEONARD COHEN. The  Favourite Game. British
Book  Service.  $4.00.

THE   MONTREAL   POET Leonard  Cohen has   written  a   novel   about  a  Montreal poet   called   Lawrence Breavman. The author's  description  of   himself   on   the back  of  the  jacket  is the  key to his style and   really,   whether  he   intended  it  or not,  sequel  to  the  life  of  Lawrence Breavman:   "... lived   in   London  as  a Lord, pursuing the  fair,  my accent open­ ing  the  tightest Georgian  palaces  where I   flourished   dark    and   magnificent  as Othello.  In   Oslo   where  I   existed   in  a Nazi  poster ..." The note of antic hyper­  bole,  hints  of  a  rich,  funny, and   tragic  sex life, are  all extensions  of the narcissis­ tic   posture  of   Lawrence  Breavman,  of whom   it  can   at   least   be  said   that   he is  a  new  character in   Canadian fic­ tion:   where   before   have   we  had   such cheerfully hedonistic accounts of sexual experience?
The  Favourite Game, then, is love, and it  is  also  the  occasion   of  an  intriguing and  ambiguous image  at  the  close of the book,  a childhood game  in  which  jump­ ing  children  leave  queer,  flower-shaped patterns   on   the    snow.   The  image   is beautifully  set,   told   in   context  with   a stabbing carelessness   (a  hastily  scribbled note  in  the  poet's  journal)  and,  in  hav­ ing   us   consider   a   picture  of   childish  innocence and  beauty  at  the  end  of  this story   of   youthful  betrayals  and   leave­ takings,  is plainly  designed   to  emphasize  what  Breavman has  lost.   (Loss  is love's counter-theme,  Breavman's  name   pre­ sumably  a pun  on  bereavement.)  But the snow   image,   for   all   the   author's  care, is  still  a  sentimental  one,  and   the  book
 strikes,  with  its  bravado, its  sexual  pin­ ing,  its  claspings  and   partings  against   a backdrop  of  upper-class   Montreal  and graduate  student  New  York,  the  tough­  sentimental  note   of  a   thirties film  into  which,  unaccountably, a few modern-day characters have   been  dropped.
I  say  this  because   Breavman  is  very much   a  hero   of  today:  his  emotion   is seldom  externalized, it  is compressed  in­ wards  in  a  way  that  suggests  the  acting  style of  the  James  Dean  era.  His  gabbi­  ness is a way of deflecting emotion rather than   expressing   it.  Yet   there   is  a  tide of   feeling   running   through  the   novel, and  it  is Cohen's  success  that  for  much of  its  length   he  is  able  to  make  it  real. When   he  fails  it  is  because   the  ironies of   Breavman   become   indistinguishable from   the  author's.
Having obscurely  traced my  own  dis­ appointment (and  obscurely expressed  it, I fear) I  then  wondered  why I had  liked the  book  so much.   First  of  all,  it  is  un­ manufactured:  whatever  its  affinities,  it is clearly  the work of an individual mind. It is  extremely   good  on  growing  up,  a child's   sexual   and   social   curiosity,    the upper-class  Jewish   milieu   of   Montreal ("We  are Victorian gentlemen of Hebraic persuasion",)  and   the  growing apart  of two   boyhood   friends.  Breavman's  is   I think  one  of  the  best  growings-up in Canadian  writing,  true   and   funny and very  much   of  a  time  and   place.  In  the central episode, the novelettish element obtrudes: careful never to  utter the word  "love"  to his girls,  he finally  meets the  girl. Characteristically, he sees her  in a New York cafeteria with  another man, walks   trembling  up   to   her   table,   and makes a declaration of  her  beauty ("You're beautiful, I think,")  before  her doomed   companion, and   walks  out.  He

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



thereafter  courts   her,  wins  her,   hoards her  past  and  present  in his literary  hands and  then, for want of sense and courage, fearing permanent entrapment, he leaves her.  The story moves into  a uniquely  un­ convincing episode  in  which  Breavman, irresponsible in  all  his adult  encounters, assumes  a  protectiveness  towards  a  half­ mad  child  at  a summer camp.  The  child dies,  crushed  by  a  bulldozer.  Breavman, already  into  a new  affair,  talks  to his old love   on   the   telephone  from   Montreal, trying    to   keep   alive   a   dialogue  every word   of   which   is  now  a  knife  in   the girl's stomach. The  novel does not escape the  synthetic nature of all  this  unspoken suffering. The  image  of a  lost innocence remains purely  a  literary  device.
GEORGE ROBERTSON




DIVERS HISTORIES

A  PRODUCT OF  THE  PAPERBACK   REVOLU­ TION,  in  its  spread   to  Canada,  has  been the  sudden availability of  important his­ torical  texts  that  have long been  difficult to   obtain  outside   the   libraries.  The aficionados  of  history-representative of
a growing class of readers  in  present-day
Canada -can  begin  to  fill  the  gaps  in
 their   libraries  through  such   new  series of reprints as the  Carleton Library   ( Mc­ Clelland  & Stewart)  and   the  Canadian University   Paperbacks    (University   of Toronto Press). Among  the recent  Carle­ ton   books  are   Lord   Durham's  Mission  to Canada   ($2.35),  which  comprises  the Canadian   chapters    of    Chester  New's definitive biography of  Radical Jack,  and Aileen    Dunham's   Political    Unrest    in Upper Canada,  IB15-IB32   ($2.35), the original  publication of  which marked something of an epoch  in studies  of the development of the idea of responsible government through the  actual  cut-and­ thrust of  Canadian  proto-politics in  the first  third   of  the  nineteenth  century. A volume    of   selected   passages   from   the Jesuit Relations, edited  by S. R.  Mealing ($1.95),  resurrects  the   flavour   of   the frontier  fringes  of  New   France  during the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries through the eyes of the Jesuit missionaries; against  the  background of an    often    brilliantly   evoked    primitive Indian culture, the  baroque spirit  of the counter-revolution stands out in all its courage and  its eccentric pietism.  In the Canadian  U ni versi ty   Paper backs the most  important volume  bearing  on  Can­ adian history  to  appear recently  is  Ken­  neth   MacNaught's sensitive  and  sensible biography of  J. S.  Woodsworth, A  Pro­ phet  in  Politics  ($2.25).
G.W.


CfiNfiDIJIN 	LITERJITURE - 1963

















)I  CHECKLIST EDITED BY INGLIS F. BELL


ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE
compiled  by Inglis F. Bell









COLLECTIONS
DRAINIE, JOHN,  ed.  Stories  with   fohn  Drainie.
Toronto, Ryerson, I 963.  220  p.
GODBOUT,   JACQUES    and    JOHN   ROBERT    CO­ LOMBO,   eds.   Poetry   64.   Toronto,  Ryerson, I963.  I53   p.
WRIGHT,  WALTER. Men of Medeek. By Will Robinson and   told  by  Walter Wright. Kiti­ mat,  B.C.,   Northern  Sentinel  Press,   I962.
93  p.



FICTION

BIRNEY,  EARLE.  Turvey. Toronto,  McClelland
&   Stewart,  I963.  288   p.   (New   Canadian
Library, No.  34).
BLONDAL,    PATRICIA.   From    Heaven  With  a Shout.   Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart, I963.  I08   p.
BODSWORTH,   FRED.  Last   of the   Curlews.  To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, I 963.   I 28  p. (New   Canadian  Library, No.  37).
BOWEN-JUDD,  sARA (HUTTON). Sara  Woods pseud.)   Error    of   the   Moon.  Don    Mills, Collins, I963. I92  p.
-. The   Taste  of   Fears.   London,   Collins, I963.  I92   p.
BUCKLER,  ERNEST.   The  Cruelest Month.  To­
ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, I 963.  298  p.
BUELL,   JOHN   EDWARD. Four   Days.   London, Macmillan,  I963. 232  p.
COHEN,  LEONARD. The Favourite Game.  Lon­
don,   Seeker and   Warburg, I963. 222  p.
CONNOR, RALPH.  see  Charles William Gordon.

72
 CUOMO,  GEORGE. jack   Be Nimble. Toronto, Doubleday, I 963.  23 I  p.
DRAINIE, JOHN,  ed.  Stories with   John  Drainie.
Toronto,  Ryerson, I963. 220  p.
GARNER,  HUGH.   Hugh Garner's Best   Stories.
Toronto,  Ryerson,  I963.  254   p.
GORDON, CHARLES WILLIAM.  (Ralph Connor pseud.)   Glengarry  School  Days:    A   Story of  the   Early   Days   in   Glengarry. Toronto, McClelland  &   Stewart,  I963. 340   p.
GRAY,  SIMON.   Colmain. London,  Faber  and
Faber,  I963.  I99   p.
HARRIS,  JOHN   NORMAN. The Weird World of
Wes  Beattie.  Toronto,   Macmillan,   I963.
2I6  p.
ISRAEL, CHARLES.  Who Was Then the  Gentle­ man?  Toronto,   Macmillan,   I963.   298   p. JOHNSON,    LEE.   Keep  It    Simple.   Toronto,
John  Gifford, I963.  I9I   p.
KELLEY,  THOMAS  PATRICK.  Vengeance of  the Black   Donnellys;  Canada's Most  Feared Family Strikes  Back   from  the  Grave.  Win­ nipeg, Harlequin  Books,   I962. 190  p.
LUDWIG,   JACK.   Confusions. Toronto,  McClel­
land &  Stewart,  I963. 276  p.
MCCOURT,  EDWARD. Fasting  Friar.  Toronto, McClelland  &  Stewart,  I963. 222   p.
MACEWEN,  GWENDOLYN.  julian the  Magician.
Toronto,  Macmillan,  I963.  I5I    p.
MAC KENZIE,   DONALD.   Knife   Edge.  Boston, Houghton Miffiin,   I96I.  I48   p.
MILLAR, MARGARET (STURM).   How    Like    an
Angel. London,  V.  Gollancz,  I963.  278  p.
-. A  Stranger in  My  Grave. New  York,  Ran­
dom   House,  I 960.   3 I o  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



MIRVISH,  ROBERT FRANKLIN. The  Last Capital­
ist.  New  York,   W.  Sloane  Associates, 1963.
320  p.
MONSARRAT, NICHOLAS.  Smith   and    jones.
London,  Casswell, 1963.   160  p.
NEWTON, NORMAN.  The  One True Man.  To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1963.   196  p. PENNINGTON,  RICHARD.  Peterley Harvest.  To­
ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1963.  286  p.
RADDALL,   THOMAS H.   The  Nymph and   the
Lamp.   Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart,
1963.   333  p.  (New  Canadian  Library, No.
38).
RICHLER, MORDECAI.  The Incomparable Atuk.
 Collection   of    Poems.  Montreal,   Quality
Press,   1961.   20  p.
BOURINOT, ARTHUR  S.   To  and   Fro   in   the Earth. (Poems 1963). Ottawa, 1963.  37  p. BURWELL,   ADAM  HOOD. The Poems   of  Adam
Hood   Burwell, Pioneer   Poet  of Upper  Can­
ada.   Edited   by   Carl    F.   Klinck.  London, Ontario,  Lawson  Memorial  Library,   Uni­ versity   of   Western  Ontario,   1963.   110  p. (Western Ontario  History Nuggets, No. 30).
COYSH,  REGINALD RICHARD.  Rustic Ramblings: Poems.    Vancouver,  Gallery  of   B.C.   Arts,
1963.
DANIELLS, ROY. The  Chequered  Shade.  To­

Toronto,   McClelland
192  p.
 &    Stewart,    1963.
 ronto,  McClelland  &  Stewart,  1963.   91   p.
EVERSON,  RONALD GILMOUR.  Blind  Man's  Holi­

RUSSELL, FOSTER  MEHARRY. High on the  Hog. Coburg,   Ontario,    Northumberland    Book Co.,    1963.   315   p.
RYGA,  GEORGE.  Hungry  Hills. Toronto,  Long­
mans,   1963.   180  p.
SHELDON, MICHAEL. The  Gilded  Rule.   To­ ronto, Nelson, Foster and  Scott, 1963.  191 p. sTEAD, ROBERT  J. c. Grain. Toronto,  McClel­
land   &  Stewart, 1963.   208  p.   (New  Cana­
dian Library, No.  36).
THERIAULT, YVES.  Agaguk. Translated   by
Miriam   Chapin.  Toronto,   Ryerson,  1963.
229  p.
TROOP, ROBERT.  The  Sound of  Vinegar. To­
ronto,  Macmillan,  1963.   243   p.
WALKER,  DAVID. Sandy. London, Collins  Clear­ Type Press,   1961.   192  p.
-. Storms of Our  journey, and  Other Stories.
Don   Mills,  Collins, 1963.   255  p.
WEST,  PAUL  NODEN. A    Quality  of  Mercy.
London, Chatto and   Wind us,  1961.   206  p. wooDs, SARA. see  Sara Bowen-Judd.



POETRY

ACORN, MILTON. Jawbreakers.  Toronto,  Con­
tact   Press,   1963.   54   p.
ADAMS, PERCY  MILLER.  The  Hull    and    the Grain. Toronto, Phantom Press,  1961.  44  p. ANDREws, FRANK. see  Frank  Andrews  Kmie­
towicz.
ARNETT,  MRS. L. V. BELVADERE.  Canada and  a
 day.  Toronto,  Ryerson,  1963.   34  p. GARNEAU,   SAINT-DENYS. St.  Denys    Garneau
and    Anne    Hebert.  Translated  by   F.  R.
Scott. Vancouver, Klanak Press,  1962.  49  p. GODBOUT,   JACQUES  and    JOHN   ROBERT   CO­
LOMBO,  eds.   Poetry   64.   Toronto,  Ryerson,
1963.   153  p.
GRIER,  ELDON. A  Friction of  Lights. Toronto, Contact Press,  1963.  61  p.
HOWITH, HARRY.  Burglar Tools. Ottawa,  By­
town  Books,   1963.   52   p.
JAMESON, VERE.  see  Evan Vere  Shute.
JONEs, BARRY. Rock   and  Sand. Toronto, Aliquando  Press,    1963.   13  p.
KMIETOWICZ,   FRANK ANDREWS. (Frank   An­ drews   pseud.)  Bum   on  Fifth Ave.;  Song   of an   Ugly   Man.  Toronto, New  Line  Frater­ nity,   1962.  85  p.
LAYTON,  IRVING.  Balls   for a One-Armed   jugg­
ler.  Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,  1963.
121  p.
MACEWEN,  GWENDOLYN. The Rising   Fire. To­
ronto, Contact  Press,  1963.  82  p.
MALUs,  MICHAEL. Night  Is   a  Flaming City. Montreal,   Delta,    1963.    62    p.     (McGill Poetry   Series,   No.  6).
NEWLOVE, JOHN.   Grave  Sirs.  Vancouver, Robert Reid   and  Takao Tanabe,  1962. Unpaged.
NOWLAN,   ALDEN  A. A  Darkness in  the   Earth. Eureka, California, Hearse Press,  1 959· 16 p. PARKER, PETER  JAMES  BLAKE. Look    Ahead to   the   End;   Poems.  Toronto,  Aliquando
Press,   1963.   10  p.

73

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



PURDY,  ALFRED  w.  The Blur  in  Between. To­ ronto,  Emblem  Books,   1962   [1963].   2I   p. RAMlER, LESLIE R. Poems  on Gaspe  and  Other
Verses. Fredericton,  Brunswick Press,  I963.
40   p.
SERVICE,  ROBERT WILLIAM.  Songs   of  a  Sour­ dough. Toronto,  Ryerson, I962.  I25  p. SHUTE,  EVAN   VERE.  (Vere  Jameson   pseud.)
The  Little  Black    Bag.   London,  Ontario,
Temside  Pres  ,   I962. 34  p.
soLWAY, DAVE. In  My  Own Image. Montreal, Delta,  1962.   55  p.
WEiss,  DAVID  c.  Advice, Not  Judgment.  Mon­ treal, Standard  Fashion and   Book  Corpora­ tion,   1963.   24  p.



DRAMA
DAVIES, ROBERTSON.  A  Masque of Mr. Punch.
Toronto,   Oxford   University  Press,    1963.
72  p.
PROCUNIER,  EDWIN R. A  Knife to  the  Throat, and Nine  Other One-Act Plays. Agincourt, Ontario,  Book    Society    of   Canada,   1962.
2I7 p.
STANBROOK, RALPH,  FRED PHILLIPS  and LAWRENCE  COHEN. Spring Thaw's  Election Satire. Maclean's 76:17-19,  April   6,  1963.



ESSAYS
MAKOW, HENRY. Ask  Henry. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall, I962.   158  p.
PENFIELD, WILDER. The Second   Career.  Bos­
ton,  Little, Brown,  I963.   I9I   p.



HUMOUR
CLARK,  GREGORY.  Hi,  There!  Toronto,  Ryer­
son,   I963.  228   p.
KINRADE, LAURA w.  Half    Pints.  Toronto, Burns  and   MacEachern,  1962.   I22   p.
LEACOCK, STEPHEN.   Nonsense   Novels.   To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  1963.  158  p. (New   Canadian Library, No.  35).
MOWAT, FARLEY. Never  Cry    Wolf. Toronto, McClelland  &  Stewart,  I963. 247  p.
 NICOL, ERIC and  PETER WHALLEY. Russia, Anyone?  A   Completely  Uncalled-For   His­ tory   of the  USSR.  Toronto, Ryerson,  1963.
94  p.
O'HEARN, WALTER. Lady   Chatterley Latterly.
Toronto, McClelland   &   Stewart,   1963.
192   p.
SOMMER,  ROBERT. Expertland. Toronto, Doubleday, 1963.   210  p.



BIOGRAPHY
AITKEN,  KATHERINE  (sCOTT).   Never    a  Day
So    Bright.   Winnipeg,   Harlequin   Books,
1963.  256  p.
AUDAIN, JAMES. My   Borrowed  Life.  Sidney, B.C.,   Gray's  Publishing Co.,    1963.   226  p.
BISHOP,   MORRIS.  Champlain: The  Life    of
Fortitude. Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,
1963.   310  p.  (Carleton Library, No.4). BOYLE,  HARRY  J.   Homebrew   and    Patches.
Toronto,  Clark  Irwin, 1963.   173  p.
CALLAGHAN,  MORLEY.  That  Summer in  Paris.
Toronto, Macmillan, 1963.   255  p. CARELEss,  J.  M. s. Brown of the  Globe, Vol.
2: Statesman of Confederation, I86o-r8Bo.
Toronto,  Macmillan, rg63. 408  p.
CARR, EMILY.  Klee    Wyck.  Toronto,   Clarke
Irwin,  I963. 13I   p.
CONGER, LESLEY see  Shirley Suttles.
DAFOE, J.  w.  Laurier:  a  Study  of  Canadian Politics. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, I963.  II2  p.    (Carleton  Library,  No.   3).
DIONNE, N. E. Champlain. Toronto, University of  Toronto Press,   1963.   299  p.  (Canadian University  Paperbooks, No.   I3).
EASTON, ALAN. so   North. Toronto,  Ryerson, I963.  288  p.
GRAHAM, ROGER. Arthur  Meighen:  Vol.  2: And     Fortune   Fled,   1920-1927.   Toronto Clarke Irwin,  I963. 535  p.
GRANTMYRE,   BARBARA  (LUCAS). Lunar Rogue.
Fredericton,  Brunswick Press,   1963.   I 77 p. GRAY, JOHN   MORGAN.   Lord    Selkirk   of  Red River.  Toronto,  Macmillan,  I963.  388   p.
HARKNESS, ROss.   f. E.  Atkinson of the   Star.
Toronto, University of Toronto Press,  I 963.
39° p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



LAURENCE, MARGARET.   The   Prophet's  Camel
Bell.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  1963.
241  p.
LE BOURDAIS,   DONAT MARC. Stefansson,   Am­ bassador   of  the   North.  Montreal,  Harvest House,  1963,   204   p.
LENT,  D.  GENEVA. West  of   the   Mountains; fames Sinclair and  the  Hudson's Bay  Com­ pany.     Seattle,   University  of    Washington Press,  1963.   334  p.
LONG, PHIL  s.  The Great   Canadian  Range.
Toronto,  Ryerson, 1963.   178  p.
MAC GREGOR, J.  G.   Edmonton   Trader;   the Story  of fohn   A.  McDougall. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I963. 262  p.
MACLEOD,  MARGARET  ARNETT   and   W. L.  MOR­ TON.  Cuthbert   Grant  of    Grantown.   To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1963.  174  p.
MCNAUGHT, KENNETH WILLIAM  KIRKPATRICK. A  Prophet  in  Politics; a  Biography of  f. S. Woodsworth.  Toronto,   University  of   To­
ronto  Press,   1963.   339   p.   (Canadian  Uni­
versity   Paperbooks, No.   J7).
MAC PHERSON,  MARY-ETTA.  Shopkeepers  to   a
Nation:  the   Eatons.  Toronto,  McClelland
&  Stewart,  I963.  I22  p.
MASSEY, VINCENT. Wha(s  Past  is  Prologue; the  Memoirs of the   Right Honourable  Vin­ cent    Massey.  Toronto,   Macmillan,    I963.
540  p.
NEATBY, H.  BLAIR. William  Lyon  Mackenzie King: Vol. 2:  The  Lonely Heights. Toronto, University  of  Toronto  Press,   I963.  480   p.
NEW, CHESTER WILLIAM.  Lord  Durham's  Mis­ sion   to  Canada;  an   Abridgement  of   Lord Durham;   a   Biography   of    fohn     George  Lambton, First  Earl  of Durham. Edited and  Introduced  by  H.  W.  McCready. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  1963.  233  p.
NEWMAN,  PETER C. Renegade in  Power: the Diefenbaker Years. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart,  I963.  414   p.
ONSLOW,  JOHN.    Bowler-Hatted    Cowboy. Edinburgh, W.  Blackwood,  I962.  288  p. ROBERTS,  LESLIE. The  Chief: a  Political  Bio­
graphy  of  Maurice  Duplessis.  Toronto,
Clarke, Irwin,  I 963.   205  p.
SAMUEL,  SIGMUND. In   Return:   the    Auto­ biography   of   Sigmund   Samuel.   Toronto, University of  Toronto  Press,   1963.  184   p.
 STANLEY,  GEORGE F. G. Louis  Riel. Toronto, Ryerson,  I 963.   433  p.
SUTTLES,  SHIRLEY,  (Lesley    Conger  pseud.)
Adventures of an  Ordinary Mind. Toronto, George J. McLeod,  1963.   236  p.
SYMONs, R. D. Many Trails. Toronto,  Long­
mans,    1963.   202   p.
WALLACE,  w.   STEWART.  The Macmillan  Dic­ tionary  of Canadian Biography. Third  Edi­ tion.  Toronto, Macmillan, I963. 821  p.
WATKINs,  ERNEST.  R.  B.   Bennett;  a   Bio­
graphy. Toronto,  Kingswood House,  I963.
27I   p.
WEST,  PAUL  NODEN. I,  Said    the    Sparrow.
London, Hutchinson,  I963.  I66   p. WINDSOR, JOHN   BEST.  Blind    Date.   Sidney,
B.C.,    Gray's   Publishing  Company,   I 963.
I92   p.
wooD,   HERBERT  F.  Forgotten Canadians.  To­
ronto,  Longmans,  1963.   134  p.



JUVENILES

ALLEN, ROBERT  THOMAS. The  Mystery of the Missing  Emerald.   Boston,    Little,   Brown, I963.  I6o   p.    (Secret  Circle  Mysteries, No.7).
AUBRY,  CLAUDE.  The  King   of  the   Thousand Islands. Translated by Alice  Kane. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1963.  55  p.
BALLANTYNE,  LARIENE.  The  Scout  Who  Led an  Army. Toronto, Macmillan, I963. I06  p. (Buckskin  Books,  No.  8).
BELL, ELEANOR.  New   Salesgirl   at  Kendall's. Toronto, Ryerson, 1963.  I5I   p.  (Canadian Careers Library).
BENHAM, LESLIE and   LOIS.  The  Heroine of
Long     Point.   Toronto,   Macmillan,   1963.
113  p.  (Buckskin Books,  No.4). BRAITHWAITE,   JOHN   VICTOR   MAXWELL. The
Valley  of   Vanishing  Birds.   Boston, Little,
Brown,  1963.   160   p.   (Secret  Circle  Mys­
teries,   No.  8).
-. The  Young  Reporter.  Toronto,  Ryerson,
1963.   147  p.  (Canadian Careers Library). BRAMWELL,    BARBARA  and    HEATHER.   Adven­
ture  at  the  Mill. Toronto, Macmillan, 1963.
113  p.  (Buckskin  Books,  No.5).

75

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



BUTLER, K. c. Igloo   Killinek. Toronto,  Long­ mans,     1963.    164   p.    (Canadian   Pageant Series,   No.  6).
CLARK,  CATHERINE  ANTHONY.  The  Man with
Yellow  Eyes.    Toronto,   Macmillan,   1963.
122  p.  (Buckskin Books,  No.  7).
COOK, LYN. Samantha's Secret  Room. Toronto, Macmillan, 1963.   210  p.
DOWDS, GERTRUDE.  Mystery  of  the   Cuckoo's
Call. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1963.
155  p.
DUNHAM,  GEOFF. Mud/ark. New  York,  Henry
Z.  Walck,    1963.   36  p.
FOSTER,  MALCOLM.   Prince    with    a   Hundred Dragons. Toronto,  Doubleday, 1963.  6o  p. GAMMON,  DAVID. The Secret  of Spaniards Rock.
Boston, Little, Brown, 1963.  158  p.  (Secret
Circle  Mysteries, No.   10).
GUEST,   JACK  AARON. Lake    of   the    Yellow
Water. Toronto, T. Allen,   1963.   151  p. HAGELUND, WILLIAM ARNOLD. The   Halibut
Hunters.  Toronto,   Ryerson,  1963.   180   p.
(Canadian Careers Library).
HAMMOND, ARTHUR  HENRY  PERCIVAL. The Mystery of the  Disappearing Dogs. Boston, Little, Brown,  1963.  158 p. (Secret Circle Mysteries,  No.   9).
HARRIS, CHRISTIE LUCY (IRWIN).  Once   Upon a   Totem.  New    York,    Athenueum,   1963.
148  p.
HILL, KAY.  Glooscap and  His  Magic; Legends of the  Wabanaki Indians. Toronto, McClel­ land   &  Stewart, 1963.  191   p.
LAMBERT,  RICHARD   STANTON. Mutiny  in   the Bay:    Henry    Hudson's  Last    Journey.   To­ ronto,   Macmillan,   1963.    1 6o   p.    (Great Stories of  Canada, No.  27).
LAYTON, AVIVA.    The    Singing   Stones.   New
York,   Abelard-Schuman,  1963.   40   p.
LINDSAY,  FREDERICK  WILLIAM.  Mouse  Moun­
tain. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1963.
96  p.
MCCLELLAND,  HUGH. The  Magic  Lassoo.  To­
ronto,  Macmillan, 1963.  42  p.
MCKIM,  AUDREY. Sun    H ee   and    the   Street
Boy.    New   York,    Friendship  Press,    1962.
!26  p.
MCNAMEE,  JAMES. My  Uncle  foe.  New  York, Viking  Press,   1963.   63  p.
 MONTGOMERY,   LUCY  MAUD. Anne   of   Green Gables. Condensed  and   Abridged  by  Mary W.  Cushing and  D.  C.  Williams. New  York, Grosset  and   Dunlap,  1961.   105   p.
NOBLE, IRIS (DAVIS). The Doctor  Who Dared, William Osler. New  York,  J. Messner, 1959.
192   p.
Nunny  Bag  2; Stories for  Six   to  Nine-Year­ Olds. Toronto,  W.  J.  Gage,   1963.  163   p. PRICE, WILLARD DE MILLE.  African Adventure.
New  York,   J Day   Co.,   1963.   189  p.
REID, DOROTHY M. Tales  of  Nanabozho.  To­
ronto, Oxford University Press,  1963.  128  p. RITCHIE,  c.  T.   Runner   of   the    Woods:  the
Story  of   Young   Radisson. Toronto,  Mac­
millan,   1963.    160   p.    (Great   Stories  of
Canada, No.   28).
Rubaboo  2;  Stories  for  Boys   and   Girls   from
Ten to  Twelve. Toronto, W. J. Gage, 1963.
213   p.
STRAITON, BILL and   LEN  NORRIS The  Tiger Witch.  Toronto,  Longmans,  1963.   58   p. THOMPSON, FRANCES  C. Danger   in  the  Coves.
Toronto,  Macmillan,  1963.   122   p.   (Buck­
skin  Books,   No.  6).
VAN   STOCKUM, HILDA. jeremy Bear.  London, Constable Young Books,  1963.   32  p.
-. Little Old   Bear.  New  York,  Viking Press, I 962.   32  p.
-. The  Winged Watchman. New  York,  Far­
rar,   Straus and   Cudahy. 1962.   204  p. VERRAL, CHARLES  SPAIN.  Robert   Goddard:
Father   of the  Space  Age.  Englewood  Cliffs,
N.J.,  Prentice-Hall,  1963.   8o   p.
wooD,   KERRY.  The Boy  and  the   Buffalo.  To­ ronto,  Macmillan,  1963.   120   p.   (Buckskin Books,  No.  9).
YOUNG, scOTT.   A   Boy   at   the   Leaf's Camp.
Toronto,  Little,  Brown,   1963.   256  p.



BIBLIOGRAPHY

BELL, INGLIS F.,  ed.   Canadian  Literature-
1962:   a    Checklist.   Canadian  Literature
No.   15:88-w8,   Winter 1963.
Canadian Books  1962. Compiled by  the  Com­ mittee  on   Canadian  Books   of   the   Young People's  Section,  Canadian  Library   Asso-

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



ciation.   Canadian  Library   20:94-99,   No­
vember  I963.
Canadian  Index   to   Periodicals   and    Docu­ mentary   Films;  An    Author   and    Subject Index. Vol. 15,  1962. Edited by Margaret E. Wodehouse and  Marion C.  Wilson. Ottawa, Canadian Library  Association, and National Library of  Canada,  I963. 382   p.
Canadiana.  1962.   Ottawa,  National  Library of  Canada,  1963.   2v.,   1053   p.
KIRKCONNELL, WATSON. Letters  in   Canada:
I g62:  Publications in  other  [than  English and   French]  Languages. University  of  To­ ronto   Quarterly 32:522-53 I,  534-536,  July  I963.
NAPIER, N. British   Columbia:  a  Bibliography of Centennial Publications, I957-•959· British   Columbia  Historical  Quarterly  2 I: I99-22o, January   I957-0ctober   I958.
ROME, DAVID.   Jews   in   Canadian  Literature: a  Bibliography. Montreal, Canadian  Jewish Congress and   Jewish Public Library,  Ig62.
2I8 p.
scoTT,  DORis,  ed.   Young  Canada's  Choice.
Canadian Library 20:22-25,  July  I963. WATT,   FRANK  w.,   ed.   Letters  in   Canada:
I962. University  of Toronto Quarterly 32:
367-536, July  I963.



BOOKS   AND   READING

DEVEREUX,  E.  J.  Early Printing in  Newfound­ land.  Dalhousie Review   43:57-65,  Spring I963.
Fond  Farewell to  the   Bylaw   that Kept  Mon­ treal    Newsstands  Pure.  Maclean's   76:59, May   4,  I963.
FULFORD,  ROBERT. Salinger, and   the  Sad  Case of  the  Suburban  Censors. Maclean's 76: 63, March  9,   I963.
GERWING,  HOWARD  B. A  Survey  of  the  Anti­ quarian Book  Trade in   Vancouver.  British  Columbia  Library  Quarterly  27: 8-I 6,  July  I963.
ROBERT,  MARIKA. What Jack  McClelland Has Done   to  Book  Publishing in  Canada.  Mac­ lean's 76:24, 31-34, 38,  September 7,  I963.
A   Spectre  is   Haunting  Canada.  Canadian
Literature  No.   I 7:3-5.  Summer  I963.
 STAINSBY, DONALD. Literary   Criticism  in Canadian   Newspapers.  Canadian  Author and   Bookman 38:4-5,  Winter  Ig62.
TOYE,  WILLIAM.  Book    Design   in    Canada.
Canadian Literature  No.   I 5:52-63, Winter
I963.



PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES
The  Bloody    Horse:   a   Magazine  of  Poetry. Vol.   •; No.   •;  January I963; 370   Marie Anne   East,   Montreal  24,  P.Q.
Campus   Canada.  No.    I;  November I963; Brock  Hall,   University of  British Columbia, Vancouver  8,  B.C.
Edge. No.  I;  Autumn I963; P.O. Box  4067, Edmonton, Alberta.
Encore. No.  I; June I963; 336  Laurier Street, Hawkesbury,  Ontario.
Heretic. No.   I; [I963]; University of  British
Columbia, Vancouver  8,  B.C.
Limbo. No.   I; June I963; 3477  Kingsway, Vancouver   I6,   B.C.
The Literary  World. Vol.  I; No.  I; November I963; P.O.   Box  395,  Station H,  Montreal, P.Q.
The Performing Arts  Magazine. Vol.  I; No.  I; March I96I;  P.O. Box  5I7, Postal   Station F,  Toronto 5,  Ontario.
Talon.  No.    I;  June  I963;  IS68    Jefferson
Avenue, West   Vancouver,  B.C.

HISTORY AND CRITICISM
BIRNEY,  EARLE.  C p M 27:    I946-1948.  Cana­ dian   Author  and   Bookman 29:4-5,  Winter I963.
BOURINOT,  ARTHUR S.  C p M 27:    I948-I954· Canadian  Author   and    Bookman   29: s-6, Winter  I 963.
c PM 27-the    Future.   Canadian Author and   Bookman 29:6-7,  Winter  I963.
DEACON,  WILLIAM ARTHUR. C p M    the.  First
27 Years: the  Launching. Canadian Author and   Bookman 39:2,  Winter  I 963.
GNAROWSKI,   MICHAEL. The  Role   of  "Little Magazines" in   the   Development  of  Poetry in   English    in   Montreal.  Culture  24: 274-
286,  septembre I963.

77

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



KIRKCONNELL,  WATSON. C p M 27:   the  Early
Years.    Canadian   Author    and    Bookman
29:3,  Winter  1963.
STEIN, DAVID LEWIS. How  to Keep a Little Magazine  Alive:  Get   Mad. Then  Give   It Away.   Maclean's  76:46,  August 24,   1963.



LANGUAGE

DARBELNET,  J. The French Canadian  Linguis­
tic  Tradition and   Canada. Culture 24:21 7-
224,   septembre  1963.
GAGNE,  RAYMOND c. On  Establishing a  Phone­ mic   Standard  Roman  Orthography  and   a Literary Language for Canadian Eskimo.  In Thought  from     the   Learned     Societies   of Canada  1961.   Toronto,  W.    J.  Gage, ( 1962 ?j. I 25-1 39·
HIGINBOTHAM,  JOHN  D. Western Vernacular.
Alberta Historical Review 10:9-17, Autumn
1962.
HOHN,   E.   o.   Names   of   Economically    Im­ portant  or   Conspicuous  Mammals   and Birds   in  the   Indian  Languages of  the  Dis­ trict of  Mackenzie,  N.W.T. and   in  Sarcee. Arctic  15:299-308,  December 1962.



LITERARY  HISTORY AND  CRITICISM

GENERAL
COOK, ELEANOR  and  RAMSAY. Writing in  Eng­ lish.  In John T. Saywell,  ed.  The  Canadian Annual   Review   for    1962.  Toronto,  Uni­ versity   of  Toronto  Press,  1963.  361-377.
DESBARATs, PETER. Nothing's  Too   Good   for
Official Culture  in  Quebec. Maclean's 76:
68,  September  21,   1963.
MCCORMACK,  ROBERT. Letter  From   Toronto.
Canadian  Literature  No.  16:52-54, Spring
1963.
MCDOUGALL,   ROBERT L.  The   Dodo  and    the Cruising  Auk:  Class   in   Canadian   Litera­ ture.   Canadian   Literature   No.    18:6-20, Autumn  1963.
MAGEE,  WILLIAM  H.  Ontario in  Recent  Cana­ dian  Literature.   Ontario  History   55: I07-  I 15,  June  1963.
 o  BROIN,  PADRAIG.   Fire-Drake.  Report  of  a Talk  by   Irving  Layton  on   Jewish Writers in   Canadian  Literature.  Teangad6ir Series
11     1: 73-8o,   November  1961.
-. Poetry-Ante   1962.   Teangad6ir   Series ii  1:81-91,  March  1962.
ROLAND, P.   H.   Criticism  and    Canada's   To­
morrow.  Canadian  Author   and   Bookman
39:8-10, 14,  Winter  1963.
STAINSBY, MARl. A  Paraphrase of  the   Vision, French-Canadian Writing in Translation. British  Columbia  Library  Quarterly  26: 3- IO,   January  1963.
WEST,  PAUL NODEN. Canadian Attitudes: Pastoral  With Ostriches and   Mocking­ Birds.    Canadian  Literature   No.   16:19-27, Spring  1963.

FICTION
FULFORD,  ROBERT. On  Books:   a  Rich Vein  of Satire in This Fall's Canadian Novels. Maclean's  76:79-80,  October  5,   1963.
-. On    Canadian   Novels:   Mediocrity  from Montreal  to   Murmansk. Maclean's 76:45, February 9,  1963.
HORNYANSKY, MICHAEL. Countries  of   the Mind.  Tamarack Review No.  26:58-68, Winter  1963.
-. Countries   of   the    Mind II.   Tamarack
Review No.  27: 8o-89, Spring  1963. STEVENSON, LIONEL. Canadian Fiction Then
and   Now.   Canadian  Author  and   Bookman
39: I 1-13,   23-24, Autumn   1963.
WATT, FRANK W.  Letters  in   Canada:   1962: Fiction.   University  of   Toronto  Quarterly
32:391-405, July  1963.

POETRY

BOWERING, GEORGE. Promises, Promises. [R. G.
Everson, Michael Malus, Harry  Howith].
Canadian Literature No.  18:56-58, Autumn
1963.
DUDEK, LOUis. A  Load of  New  Books:   Smith, Smith,  Webb, Miller/Souster,  Purdy,  Now­ lan.  Delta 20:  27-32,   February   1963.
HOPE, A. D. Australian and   Canadian  Poetry.
Dalhousie Review  43:99-102,  Spring  1963. HOWITH,  HARRY. Five   Poets.    [Peter  Miller,
Alden   Nowlan,   Alfred   Purdy,   A.   J.  M.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



Smith,  Phyllis    Webb].   Canadian  Author and  Bookman 38: 9-1 o,  Spring  1963.
MANDEL, ELI  w.   Turning  New   Leaves    ( 1 ) .
Canadian Forum 42:278-280,  March 1963. Poets  in  Contact, an  Adventure in  Publishing.
Canadian Author and  Bookman 38:2-4,  IO,
Summer  I963.
SKELTON, ROBIN. Canadian Poetry? Tamarack
Review  No.   29:71-82,  Autumn   1963. STEVENSON,  LIONEL. How   Good   is  Canadian
Poetry?   Canadian  Author   and    Bookman
38:  I4-15, Summer  1963.
WILSON, MILTON. Letters  in   Canada:   1962: Poetry.   University   of    Toronto   Quarterly
32:368-91, July   1963.

DRAMA AND THEATRE
BRUCE, HARRY.  Theatre:  the   National  Move­ ment:  Talks in  Gaspe, Ambition  Out  West,  Action  in   Halifax.  Maclean's   76:70,  Sep­  tember 7,  1963.
BRYANT,  CHRIS.  Theatre.  Canadian  Art   20:
302-303, September-October  1963.
FULFORD, ROBERT. On    Satire:  the    Country Changed,  but   Spring  Thaw  Didn't.   Mac­ lean's   76:57-58,  May   4,   1963.
GARDNER,  DAVID.  Drama: English Canada. In John  T.   Saywell,  ed.   The  Canadian   An­ nual   Review  for  1962. Toronto,  University of  Toronto Press,   I963. 378-390.
GELINAs,  GRATIEN. Gratien   Gelinas  Speaks Out on  Canadian  Playwrights; Interview by Lawrence Sabbath. Performing Arts  2:27, Summer  1963.
GOLDING,  HELEN.  The  Neptune Theatre.  At­ lantic  Advocate  53: 17-24,  August  I 963. Hungary's  Loss,   Toronto's  Gain,  a   Theatre
in  the  Budapest Manner. Maclean's 76:63,
June  r,  1963.
KEITH, w.  J. In Defence of  Stratford.  Cana­ dian   Forum  43: I93-195,  December   1963.  LJUNGH, E. w.  Curtain Going Up!  Dominion Drama  Festival.  Performing  Arts   2:28-30,
Summer  1963.
MICHENER,  WENDY.  Theatre   '63:   Halifax: The  Neptune  Theatre.   Tamarack  Review No.   28: 78-86, Summer   1963.
MONSARRAT, NICHOLAS.  To   Stratford   with
Love. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1963.
128   p.
 PANZICA, NORMAN. The  Crest:   Quo  Vadis?
Performing  Arts   I :s-6, 63,  Spring-Summer
1962.
PETTIGREW,   J.  Stratford,  I963.  Queen's
Quarterly 70:44I-448,  Autumn 1963. RUSSEL, ROBERT.  Crest   Theatre ... Canadian
Art   20:6o-6r,  January-February  1963.
-. The  National  Theatre  School. Tamarack
Review  No.   27:71-79,  Spring  I963.
-. Theatre '63:  Stratford:  The  Taming of the    Bard.    Tamarack   Review   28: 72-77, Summer  1963.
sABBOTH,  LAWRENCE. French Canadian  Thea­
tre  As an  Art  Form. Canadian Art  20:356-
357,  November-December 1963.
TAIT,  MICHAEL. Playwrights  in   a  Vacuum: English-Canadian Drama in  the  Nineteenth Century. Canadian Literature No. 16:3-18, Spring  1963.

JUVENILES
LUNN,   JANET.   Canadian   Children's  Books.
Quill     and     Quire   29: IO-I2,    November­ December  1963.


INDIVIDUAL   AUTHORS

ACORN, MILTON
COGSWELL, FRED.  Three  Arc-Light  Gaps.
Fiddlehead s6:57-58,  Spring 1963.

BALLANTYNE, R. M.
SELBY, JOAN. Ballantyne and  the  Fur  Traders.
Canadian Literature No.  18:40-46, Autumn
1963.

BARBEAU, CHARLES MARIUS MACMILLAN,   E.  Marius  Barbeau:   his   Work.
Canadian Author  and   Bookman 38:I1, I3,
Winter  1962.

BEAVERBROOK,LORD
MUGGERIDGE,  MALCOLM.  The Cult   the  Beaver
Built.  Maclean's 76:20-2 I, 60-64, November
2,   I963.

BERTON, PIERRE
BELL, INGLIS F. Green Men   and   Owls.  Cana­
dian    Literature   No.     15:    70-73,  Winter
1963.

79

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



CALLAGHAN, MORLEY
CALLAGHAN,  MORLEY.  Those   Summers in  To­
ronto.  lvfaclean's 76:25-27,  37-40,   January
5,   1963.
WEAVER,  ROBERT.  A  Golden  Year.  Canadian
Literature No.  16:55-57,  Spring  1963.

CAMPBELL, WILFRED
TAIT, MICHAEL. Playwrights  in   a  Vacuum: English-Canadian Drama in  the  Nineteenth Century. Canadian Literature No. 16:3-IB, Spring   1963.

CARELESS, J. M.S.
READ, STANLEY  E. Of  Love  and  Politics.  Cana­
dian    Literature   No.    IB:    59-62,    Autumn
1963.

COHEN, M. CHARLES
WISEMAN, ADELE. A  New   TV   Play:  David: Chapter II. By M.  Charles Cohen. Alphabet No.  6:77-79,  June   1963.

DOBBS, KILDARE
REANEY, JAMES. Rough  Run.  Tamarack   Re­
view   No.   26:69-71,  Winter  1963.

FRENCH, DONALD GRAHAM
Donald  Graham  French. Teangad6ir Series  ii
I :7-10, July   1961.

FRYE, NORTHROP
DUDEK,  LOUIS.  Northrop   Frye's  Untenable Position. Delta  No.  22:23-27.  October  1963. MANDEL,  ELI w.  The Language of  Humanity. Tamarack  Review  No.   29:82-89,  Autumn
1963.

GARNEAU, SAINT-DENYS
GARNEAU, SAINT-DENYS.   journal.  Translated by John  Glassco. Toronto,  McClelland & Stewart, 1962.  139  p.

GARNER, HUGH
FULFORD,  ROBERT.  On   Hugh Garner:   Every­ one  Loses  Everything.  Nobody  Knows Any­ body.    Maclean's   76:73-74,   November    2,
1963.
HORNYANSKY, MICHAEL. Countries  of   the Mind.   Tamarack   Review   No.    26:58-68, Winter  1963.

8o
 GELINAS, GRATIEN
PRIMEAU,  MARGUERITE A. Gratien Gelinas and his  Heroes. British Columbia Library Quarterly  26:13-19,  April   1963.

GRAHAM, GWETHALYN
GRAHAM,  GWETHALYN and   SOLANCE CHAPUT ROLLAND. Dear    Enemies.   Toronto,    Mac­ millan,  1963.   112   p.

GROVE, FREDERICK  PHILIP EGGLESTON,  WILFRID. Frederick Philip Grove.
In Claude T. Bissell,  ed.  Our  Living  Tradi­
tion. Toronto,  University of  Toronto  Press,
1 963.    (Canadian   University  Paperbooks, No.  5)    105-I27.
NESBITT,  BRUCE H. The Seasons: Grove's  Un­ finished   Novel.    Canadian  Literature    No. I8:47-5I,  Autumn I963.
SAUNDERS,  DORIS B. The  Grove Collection in the University of Manitoba: a Tentative Evaluation. In Papers  of the  Bibliographical Society of Canada, Cahiers De La  Societe Bibliographique  Du    Canada II.  Toronto, Bibliographical  Society   of  Canada, La  So­ ciete    Bibliographique   du    Canada,   I 963.
7-20.
SAUNDERS,   THOMAS.   The   Grove   Papers_
Queen's  Quarterly  70:22-29,  Spring  I963.
-. A   Novelist   as   Poet:   Frederick   Philip Grove. Dalhousie Review 43: 235-24 I, Sum­ mer    I963.

HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER CHITTICK, v.  L.  o.  Haliburton as  Member  of
Parliament. University of Toronto  Quarter­
ly  33:78-88, October  I963.
FRYE, NORTHROP. Haliburton: Mask  and  Ego.
Alphabet  No.  5:58-63,  December I962. MURRAY, FLORENCE  B., ed.  Muskoka and  Hali­
burton,  I615-IB75, a  Collection  of   Docu­
ments.   Toronto,    University   of    Toronto Press,    I963. 56o   p.   (Volume VI,  Ontario Series,   Champlain  Society) .

HARLOW, ROBERT
STOBIE, MARGARET.  Document  in   Disillusion. Canadian  Literature  No.    I 7:60-62,   Sum­ mer   I963.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE




HART, JULIA CATHERINE
BENNET,  c.  L. An  Unpublished Manuscript of the  First   Canadian  Novelist. Dalhousie  Re­ view   43:317-332,  Autumn  1963.

HEAVYSEGE,CHARLES
TAIT, MICHAEL. Playwrights in a Vacuum: English-Canadian Drama in  the  Nineteenth Century. Canadian Literature No.  r6:3-18, Spring  1963.

HOOD, HUGH
GODFREY,    DAVE.    Turning  New    Leaves     (2).
Canadian Forum 42:229-230,  January
1963.
HORNYANSKY,     MICHAEL.     Countries of    the Mind II.  Tamarack Review No.  27:80-89, Spring  1963.

KIRKCONNELL, WATSON
KIRKCONNELL, JAMES  W. Watson Kirkconnell: a Scholarly Volcano. Canadian Author and Bookman 39: 1 1-12,   24.   Winter   1963.

LAMPMAN,  ARCHIBALD
BEATTIE,    MUNRO.     Archibald Lampman. In Claude T. Bissell,  ed.  Our  Living Tradition. Toronto, University of Toronto Press,  1963. (Canadian   University  Paperbooks, No.  5)
63-88.

LAYTON, IRVING
TAAFFE,   GERALD.  Diary of  a  Montreal  News­
paper  Reader.  Tamarack  Review  No.   27:
49-62, Spring  1963.

LEACOCK, STEPHEN
DAVIES,    ROBERTSON.     Stephen  Leacock. In Claude T. Bissell,  ed.  Our  Living Tradition. Toronto, University of  Toronto Press,  1963. (Canadian   University  Paperbooks, No.   5)
128-149·

LE  PAN, DOUGLAS
DAVIES,  MARILYN.  The Bird  of  Heavenly Airs: Thematic   Strains   in    Douglas   Le    Pan's Poetry. Canadian Literature No.  15:27-39, Winter  1963.
 Tamarack  Review  No.  29:98-102, Autumn
1963.

MACEWEN, GWENDOLYN
MACEWEN,  GWENDOLYN.  Genesis. Teangadoir
Series   ii  I:56-63,  November  I 96 I.

MAIR, CHARLES
SHRIVE,   NORMAN.  Poet   and   Politics:  Charles Mair  at   Red   River.  Canadian  Literature No.  17:6-2r,  Summer 1963.
TAIT,    MICHAEL.    Playwrights in   a   Vacuum: English-Canadian Drama in  the  Nineteenth Century. Canadian Literature No.  r6:3-18, Spring  1963.

MCGEACHY, J. B.
PORTER, MCKENZIE.  The Many Loves  of J. B. McGeachy. Maclean's  76:25,   42-45,   Sep­ tember  21,   1963.

MACLENNAN, HUGH
Lone Struggle of Hugh MacLennan.  Canadian
Author and   Bookman 38:19,  Winter 1962.

MITCHELL, W. 0.
HORNYANSKY,    MICHAEL,    Countries of   the Mind. Tamarack Review No.  26:58-68, Winter  1963.
NEW,  WILLIAM H.  A  Feeling of  Completion: Aspects  of  W.  0. Mitchell.  Canadian Literature  No.   17:22-33,  Summer  1963.

MOORE, BRIAN
HORNYANSKY,    MICHAEL.    Countries of   the Mind. Tamarack Review No.  26:58-68, Winter  1963.

MOWAT, FARLEY
BELL,  INGLIS  F.  Green Men and   Owls.  Cana­
dian  Literature No.  15:70-73, Winter 1963.

NEW, CHESTER
TUCKER,     ALBERT.    Popular  and     Mistrusted.
Canadian  Literature  No.   15:66-70, Winter
1963.

0 BROIN, PADRAIG

LUDWIG, JACK	LYALL,  NAOMI.  "A  Green, A Growing". Yean-
CARROLL, JOHN.    On    Richler   and   Ludwig.	gad6ir   Series   ii   1: 134-145,  May   1962.

8I

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE




O'HEARN, WALTER
TAAFFE,   GERALD.  Diary of  a  Montreal  News­
paper  Reader. Tamarack   Review   No.  27:
49-62, Spring  1963.

PRATT, EDWIN JOHN
DEACON,    WILLIAM    ARTHUR.    Laureate    Un­ crowned:  a  Personal Study of  E.  J.  Pratt. Canadian Author   and  Bookman   38: 2,  20, Spring 1963.

REANEY, JAMES
LEE, ALVIN. A Turn to the  Stage. Reaney's Dramatic Verse: Part I.  Canadian  Litera­ ture   No.   15:40-51,  Winter  1963.
-. A  Turn to  the  Stage: Reaney's Dramatic
Verse:  Part  II.  Canadian   Literature   No.
16:43-51,  Spring  1963.
WATSON,    WILFRED.   An    Indigenous   World.
Canadian   Literature  No.  15:64-66, Winter
1963.
WILSON,   MILTON.  On  Reviewing Reaney.
Tamarack    Review    No.   26:71-78,  Winter
1963.

RICHLER,  MORDECAI
CARROLL,  JOHN.    On    Richler   and    Ludwig.
Tamarack  Review  No.  29:98-102, Autumn
1963.

ROY, GABRIELLE
HORNYANSKY,     MICHAEL.    Countries  of    the
 Mind II.  Tamarack Review   No.  27: 8o-89, Spring  1963.

SMITH,
ARTHUR JAMES MARSHALL
BIRNEY,  EARLE.  A.J.M.S. Canadian   Literature
No.   15:4-6,  Winter  1963.
FULLER,  ROY.  Poet   of  the  Century. Canadian
Literature No.  15:7-10,  Winter 1963.
SMITH,   ARTHUR   JAMES   MARSHALL.  A   Self­ Review.  Canadian Literature  No.    15:20-
26,  Winter  1963.
WILSON,  MILTON.  Second and  Third  Thoughts
About  Smith.  Canadian Literature No.  15:
11-17, Winter  1963.
WOODCOCK,   GEORGE.   Turning   New    Leaves.
Canadian  Forum  42:257-258,  February
1963.

SOUSTER, RAYMOND
MANDEL,  ELI   w.   Internal  Resonances.  Cana­
dian   Literature.   No.     17:62-65,   Summer
1963.

STEAD, ROBERT J. C.
ELDER, A.  T.  Western Panorama: Settings and Themes in  Robert J. C.  Stead.  Canadian Literature  No.   17:44-56,  Summer  1963.

STRINGER, ARTHUR
PORTER,   MCKENZIE,    The  Purple  Prose    and
Purple  Life   of  Arthur  Stringer.  Maclean's
76:26-30, February 9,  1963.


SECOND SUPPLEMENT TO MJILCOLM  LOWRY  BIBLIOGRJIPHY

compiled  by Earle Birney









Works by Malcolm Lowry

A:  SHORT STORIES AND  NOVELLAS
32.  Reprint  of  IA23,  London,  Cape,  1962.
33·  Ecoute  Notre  Voix  fj    Seigneur ... Paris, Juillard,  1962, being n.27  of Les  Lettres Nouvelles. French  tr.  of  IA23 by  Clarisse Francillon   (except  23a,   by  George   Bel­ mont).
34·  Lunar  Caustic. Paris  Review  n.29: 15-72, Winter  Spring  1963.   Ed.   from   MSS   by Earle  Birney  &   Margerie   Lowry.  Illus.
J. F.  Ulysse.  Novella drafted N.Y.C. 1934;
2nd   draft  Cuernavaca  1935;  3rd  incom­
plete at death. See  IA13 &  IG2.
35·  Lunar  Caustic. Les  Lettres  Nouvelles 35: II-II7,  Apr.    1963. French  tr.   of   IA34 by  Clarisse Francillon.
36.  Reprint  of  IA23a in  The Story at  Work, ed.   Jessie   Rehder,  N.Y.,  Odyssey,    1963, pp.  390-404.
37·  Reprint of  IA23a in  Bennett Cerf's Take Along  Treasure, ed.  Cer£ & Leonara Horn­ blow,   N.Y.,    Doubleday,   1963,  pp.  273-
285.
38.   Under the  Volcano. Prairie  Schooner 37:
284-300,  Winter   1963/64.   Short   story, first  version of  Vole. See  G6.  Special Malcolm Lowry Issue  of  Prairie  Schooner.



B:  NOVELS

15.  Reprint of  IB1,  Phila &  N.Y.,  Lippincott,
1962; Cape  1963.   203   pp.
 16.  Reprint of  IB3.   Harmondsworth  (&  Vic­
toria,   Austr.),  Penguin  Mod. Classics   n.
1732,  1962.  377  p.
17. Pod  Wulkanem. Polish   tr.  of  IBID  by Krystyna Tarnowska. Warsaw, Panstwowy Instytut  Wydawniczy, 1963.   467   pp.
18.   Unter  den   Vulkan. New   Germ.  tr.    (of IB10)    by    Susanna  Rademacher.   Ham­ burg, Rowohlt, Aug.   1963. 404  pp.
19.  Ultramarina. Ita!. tr.   by  Valerio Riva   of
IB15. Milan,  Feltrinelli,   Nov.  1963.
263  pp.


C:	POETRY

134.  The Devil's Kitchen. Massachusetts  Re­ view  2 : 41 2, Spring 1961. "The  walls  of remorse    are   steep,    there  is   no   delay." Sonnet.
135.  Exile.   IC134  p.  413.   "The exile   is  the luckiest   of  men." Sonnet.
136.  Bosun's   Song.   IC134  p.   413.   "Here  on the   poop   each   lousy   night I stand."
137.   Queer Poem.   N.Y. Times, 17  Sep.  1961, edit.  p. "I knew  a man without a heart." Quatrains.
138.  A   marathon  of   gulls.   Harper's   Bazaar
v.3ooo: 181,  Nov.  1961.
138a.   It was  not   so.  IC138 p.   181.
139.  Thoughts While Drowning. Audience (Cambridge,   Mass.)    n.    49: 42.    "Let others quarrel above  my grief." Acapulco.
140.  The  Lighthouse  Invites  the  Storm.
IC139   p.   43·   Fragment   intended   for title-poem  of   his   collection.  Cp.    Vole.
199·

LOWRY SUPPLEMENT



141.   In  the  Shed.  Delta   (Montreal)  n. 17: g, Jan.  1962.   "Dead men   tell  cryptic  tales and   this  is  one." Sonnet. Dollarton. Cp. Vole.  271.
142. Loathing. IC141 p. g.  "Loathing is as beautiful  as  the  scourge."  Mexico.
143· On  Reading Edmund Wilson's Remarks About Rimbaud.  IC 141  p.   10.  "-fore­ man   of ·quarries in  Cyprus."  See   Axel's Castle, N.Y.,   1954,  ch.  8.
144·  Quatrains.  IC141  p.   11.   "Fear  ringed by  doubt is  my  eternal moon."
145.  Kingfishers in  British  Columbia. Atlantic Monthly 209,  n.6,  p.  55,  June 1962.  "A mad kingfisher." Dollarton CI943· "Hokku,cinquiam,tanka"   (author's  note on  MS).
146.   For   Under  the  Volcano. Evidence   (To­ ronto)  n.4:81-2,  Winter 1962.  "A  dead lemon   like  a  cowled  old  woman ..." Cp.  Vole. 225.
147.  Self   pity.   IC146  p.  82.  "Pity  the   blind and  the   halt    and  yet   pity."  Acapulco,
1946.
148.   Prayer  (for   his   father).  IC146  p.   83. "Give way,  you  fiends ..."
149·  Rilke  and    Yeats.  IC146  p.   83.   "Help me   to  write."  Vancouver,  1939.
150.  Doctor Usquebaugh. IC146 p. 84. "The doom of each, said  Doctor Usquebaugh,"
151. Men With  Coats Thrashing. Exchange (Montreal) n.3: 10, Feb.-Mar. 1962. Ori­ ginal of  IC2g.
152.   Foul  or   Twenty-Five!  Raven    (Van­ couver) n.Io:s,  Mar. 1962.  "Gloomy is this   weary   scrimmage."  Dollarton.
153.   The sun  was  almost  shining. IC152 p.  6.
Dollarton.
1 54·  Poem.  Fiddlehead   (Fredericton,   N.B.) n.52:8,   Spring  1 g62.   "Like  the   black iron   steps." Dollarton, late.
155·  The Coiled Heart. IC154 p. 8.  "No  road in  existence strikes such  terror." Sonnet, early.
156.   The Ship of  War.  IC154 p. g. "The ship of  war   sails  in   the  grey  morning."  Son­ net,  early.
I57·  Love   Which  Comes   Too   Late.   Perspec­ tive    (St.  Louis)  12:172,  Spring  1962.  Mexico. Cp.  Vole. p.  10.
 158.   Injured  Stones. IC157  p.  172.  "A  child may  find  no  words  for  its  sorrow."
159.  Saint  Malcolm Among the  Birds.  Tama­ rack  Review  n.23: 39,   Spring   1962. "And now  the  seagulls  peck." Unfinished sonnet, late,   Dollarton.
160.  He   Liked The  Dead.  IC159 p.  39· "As the   poor    end   of   each   dead  day   drew near."
161.   Epitaph. IC159 p.40. "MalcolmLowry."
162.   The  Drunkards.  New     Yorker  5   May
1962,   p.   46.   I:   "Notions of   freedom are   tied   up  with   drink." II :  "The  noise of   death  is  in   this   desolate bar."  Two sonnets, early, Mexico. Cp. Vole.  302.
163.   Happiness. Ladies Home journal 79:88
Jun.  1962.   "Blue  mountains  with   snow and  blue   cold   rough water."  Dollarton. Cp.   Vole. 202,  277.
164.   Thunder   beyond  Popocatepetl.    South­ west    Review,   Summer   1962,   p.   230. "Black  thunderclouds  mass   up   against the   wind." Mexico.
165.  For   the   Love   of  Dying.  Harpers  Maga­ zine,  n.1348:38,  Sep.    1 g62.   "The  tor­  tures of hell  are  stern ..." Mexico, early.
166. SELECTED POEMS OF MALCOLM LOWRY/Edited  by   Earle  Birney    with the  assistance of Margerie Lowry. San Francisco. City  Lights,  (Aug.)  1962. Pocket Poets  ser.  n. I7.  Introduction, pp.
7-10  (see  II Avii2). Two   previously  un­
published photographs  of  Lowry.  Poems
(pp.  11-79). Reprints:  IC2,  4,   7,   10,
1 1  (titled A  poem of  God's  mercy),  14 (titled Xochitepec), 15  (titled The Comedian), 22,   23,  36   (titled Trinity),
37,  40,  41,  49,  53,  s8, 61,  62,  6s,  7o,
71, 87,  91,  93,  94,  g6, 99,  108,  III, 112,
I 14,   I 15,   118,   I 19,  120,  122,   125,   126,
129,   133,   137,   139,  140,   145,   146,  149,
151,   154   (titled  New   Ship),  158,   159,
160,   161,   162 I  (titled Without The Nighted  Wyvern),  162 II  (titled The Drunkards), 163,   164,  165.
Previously unpublished  poems:
a.  The  days    like   smitten   cymbals  of brass.    P.   2 1.   "When  I  was   young, the  mildew on my soul." Early. Cp. Melville's Redburn.
b.  Grim  vinegarroon. P.   27.  "My hate

LOWRY SUPPLEMENT



1s  like    a   wind     that   buffets    me." Dollarton  CI940.  Sonnet.  Cp.   Vole.
338.
c.  In a  Mexican church. P. 31.  "Christ, slashed with  an axe, in the humped church."  Mexico, sonnet.
d.  Prayer for   drunks. P.  34·  "God  give those   drunkards  drink ..."
e.  A Quarrel. P.  49·  "The poignance of a quarrel in  the  post!" Irreg. sonnet. Dollarton.
f.  Nocturne.  P.   5 I.  "This  evening Venus sings alone." Dollarton, Forties.
g.  Poem.  P.  59·  "Wet  streets in  Liver­
pool." Early fragment.
h.  Midtown  pyromaniac.  P.  6o.   Begun New  York   1 934,  reworked at  Dollar­ ton.   Sonnet. Cp.   Lunar  Caustic,  last sentence.
1.  Hostage. P.  65.   "A   day   of  sunlight and   swallows." Dollarton.
j.  The ship  sails  on: for  Nordahl Grieg.
 P.  67.    "Now  we   have    considered these    things,  each    to   each."   Van­ couver, I944; written after  receiving news  of  the  death in  war  of  the  Nor­ wegian   novelist    whose    novel,    The  Ship   Sails  On,  Lowry   had   been   at­ tempting to  dramatize.  See  IG1 1.
k. The past.  P. 6g. "Like a rotten old ladder."  Dollarton.
1.  The  plagiarist. P.   76.   "... See   the wound  the  upturned stone has left." Fragment  edited  from   a  longer   un­ finished   poem.
m.  The search. P.  78.  "In  Dante no,  in Shakespeare  no."  Dollarton, late. Quatrain. Cp.  Vole. 207.
167.  2nd   prtg. of  IC166, Ig62. Adds   4  new photos. at  end.
I68.   For  Nordahl Grieg Ship's Fireman. Cam­
bridge   Poetry    n.2.    London,  Hogarth,
1930,  pp.  47-49·  Ed.  John Davenport et al.  "Two  Norwegian firemen, friends in the  same  watch".






STAGE  DIRECTIONS
JOHN GIELGUD
A  wise,  stimulating and   practical book  has  been  written out  of  the  rich  experi­ ence  of one  of  our  greatest actors and  directors. It will  appeal to  everyone who is  interested  in   the   stage-whether actor,  director or  playgoer-and it  will prove invaluable  to  students of  the  art  of  the  theatre.  Illustrated.	$5.25

THE  WILD  GARDEN
ANGUS WILSON
This book  offers  one  novelist's own  explanation of  the  mysterious creative  pro­
cess  in  which he  has  found himself  involved.	$4.00

THE  PRACTICE OF  JOURNALISM
J. D. DODGE AND  G. VINER (EDITORS)
This  book   is  designed  to   fill  a  long-felt  need   for   a  good   practical  work   on journalism.   Among  the   subjects  covered    are   reporting  style   and    technique; sub-editing; photography; printing; the  organization and business  side  of  news­ papers;  magazine work-both   writing  and   layout;  radio  journalism;  public relations; law  for   journalists; and  sources   of  information.  Illustrated.	$7.50

BRITISH  BOOK  SERVICE (CANADA) LIMITED
1068  BROADVIEW AVENUE, TORONTO 6, ONTARIO

LOWRY SUPPLEMENT



16g.   The Ex-Poet. Saturday  Review  45,  n.  I:
21,  6  Jan.  1g62.   "Timber  floats   in   the water. The trees".
1 70.  Prayer from   the  Wicket   Gate for  Forty­ one    Doors   for    Forty-two.    A38: 33-4· Orig. of  C3o.
1 7 1.  On   Board   the   Mat sue  M aru.  A38: 334· "Two  bells". Mexico, early.   Cp.  Ultra­ marine  118.  Japanese  verse  forms.
172.  [The Sun  Shines]. A38:334. "The sun shines:   where  is   the    lyric?"   Mexico, early.
1 73·  [Wrecker of  Gardens]. A38: 335·  "A  fig for  6-par-T-pak  ginger ale!  ..." Ultra­ marine  period.



E:  LETTERS

15.  To  Derek   Pethick. Date not  given.  Cana­
dian  Forum  42:62-63,  June  1g62.
16.  To    John   Davenport.   A38:321-4.    Un­
dated. Oaxaca  [c1g37].
17.  To  Nordahl  Grieg. A38: 324-5.   Undated. [From Los  Angeles? c1g38].
18.  To  Downie Kirk.  A38: 326-8.   Dated  Feb.
1 gs 1,  Dollarton.



G: UNPUBLISHED  MATERIAL

28.  Letters between Lowry  & T. Downie Kirk,
8  Aug.  1g47   to  1 Feb.  1g57   (48  letters). UBCC.
2g.  Letters   between   Lowry    &    Clemens  &
Hildegard  ten   Holder,  16  Mar.  1 gso   to
10  Oct.  1g52.



Works about Malcolm Lowry

A:  CRITICAL

REVIEWS OF  Ultramarine  (IB15).
g.  ANON. British  Book   News  274:45g-6o, Jun. 1g63; 200  w.
10.  -. New   Yorker   38:230,  20  Oct. 1g62;
125  w.

86
 11.  -. Times  Literary   Supplement  22  Mar.
I g63; IOOO W.
12.  -. Virginia Q. R.  3g:xiv, Winter 1g63;
130  w.
13.  ASCHERSON, NEAL. New   Statesman  6s:
242,   15  Feb.   1 g63; 250  w.
14.  BUCKLER,  ERNEST. N.Y. Times   Book  Rev.
14  Oct.  1g62; soo  w.
15.  DEMPSEY, DAVID.    Saturday    Rev.   45:30,
17  Nov.   1g62; 370  w.
I 6.  EDELSTEIN, J. M. New  Republic    147:22,
17  Nov.  1g62; Boo w.
I 7.  GRIFFIN,  L.   G.   Library    ]rnl.    87: 3467, I  Oct.  1g62; 160   w.
I 8.  KNICKERBOCKER, CONRAD, Kansas    City
Star   28  Oct.  1 g62; 400  w.
1 g.  POORE, CHAS. N.Y. Times   18  Oct. 1 g62;
700  w.
20.  PREE, BARRY.  London Magazine   ns  3: Bs-
86; 250   w.
2 I.  STRATFORD,   PHILIP.   Can.   Forum   43:43, May   1g63; 6oo   w.
22.  LAWRENCE, ROBERT C.  B.C.   Library   Q.
27  n2: 28-2g, Oct. 1g63; 250  w.

n 	REVIEWS oF  Under The  Volcano
(IBr6)
82.  ANON. British  Book News  264:606-7, Aug.
1g62; 400  W.
83.  -. Fife  Free  Press g  June  1g62; 150  w.
84.  -. Leamington  Morning   News  26  Apr.
1g62; 300  W.
85. 	Liverpool   Post  13  Apr.   1g62; 250  w.
86. 	Oxford   Times 1 1  June  1g62; 1 oo  w.
87. 	Time & Tide   24  May   1g62; 100  w.
88. 	Times  Literary   Supplement  11  May
1g62;  2500   w.   "A   Prose   Waste   Land."
8g. 	Wigtownshire   Pree   Press   26    Apr.
1g62; 50  W,
go.  BOATWRIGHT,  JAMES. Shenandoah  (N.Y.) Winter  1g62;  2200   w.
gi. BRADBURY,  MALCOLM.  Sunday  Times
(London)  2g  Apr.  1g62; 6oo  w.
g2.  c., M. G. Irish  Times 2 June 1g62; 350  w. g3.  CHURCHILL, R. c.  Birmingham Post 1  May
1g62; 400  W.
g4.  GASCOIGNE,   B.  Sunday   Telegraph  (Lon­
don)  2g  Apr. Ig62; 400  w.

LOWRY SUPPLEMENT



95·  HARDCASTLE,  MICHAEL. Evening  Post  I 2
July    rg62;  100   w.
g6.  J .,  K. Oldham Evening  Chronicle  4 May rg62; ISO w. Also Scarborough  Evening News  I4  May   Ig62; 70  w.
97.  KENNEDY,  MAURICE. Irish  Times 26  May rg62; soo  w.
g8.  MARKSON, DAVID.   Myth  in   Under   the
Volcano. A38: 339-46.
gg.   M.,  E.   Glasgow   Herald    3   May    rg62;
200  W.
100.   MACNEICE, LOUIS.  New   Statesman  29
June  rg62. Reference, in  article on Dub­
lin,  "Under the  Sugar Loaf."
101.  MAYNE, RICHARD. New Statesman 4 May rg62,   p.   148-149;  1400   w.
102.   MOORE, BRIAN. Spectator   4  May    1962;
100  w.
103.  MUGGERIDGE,   MALCOLM.   Daily  Herald
(London)  7  June  1962; 400   w.
104.  NYE ROBERT. Tribune (London)  4  May rg6 ;  300    w.    Also    Financial    Times (London)  12  May   rg62; 450  w.
105.  PIERSON, HUGH. Mayfair  Magazine  June
1962; IOOO W.
I06.   SCANNELL, VERNON.  Yorkshire  Post   3
May   rg62; 150  w. Also  Bridlington Free
Press 25  May   rg62; 1 oo  w.
SHEDD, MARGARET.  News   (Mexico City) g Sep. rg62; p.  8A.  "Lowry's Translator, Raul  Ortiz/lnterviewed   By  Centro   Di­ rector"; rooo   w.
108.  sMITH,   PETER DUVAL.  BBC  Home   Ser­
vice  5  May   rg62. The  World   of  Books;
1000   w.
109.  TOYNBEE, PHILIP.   Observer    (London)
29  Apr.  rg62;  1400  w.
rzo.   URQUHART, FRED. Books   of   the   Month
(London) June 1962; 200  w.
1  r 1.  HAAS, RUDOLF. Nachwort  to   Germ. tr. of  Vole. (IB18)  pp.  395-404.
112.  LISOWSKI, JERZY. Poskowie (Epilog)  to
Pol.  tr.  of Vole. (IB17)  pp.  459-467.
113.  DAY,    DOUGLAS. Of   Tragic    Joy.   A38:
354-62.
I 14.  EDELSTEIN, J. M. On   Re-reading  Under the  Volcano. A38: 336-g.
115.  HIRSCHMAN, JACK. Kabbala/Lowry,  etc.
A38: 347-353·
 iv   FOREIGN LANGUAGE REVIEWS   (of IBg,
German tr. of Vole.)
55·  BAUR, JOSEPH.   (Dusseldorf)  Freie  Wort
26 Jul. 1952; 400  w.
56.  BRACHVOGEL,  H.   H.   (Berlin)  Telegraf  4
Nov.   1957; 400   w.
57·  BRAEM,   HELMUT. Stuttgarter  Zeitung  29
May   1957;  woo  w.
58.   HAARTLAUB, GENO.  Die  Zeit  6  Dec.  1957;
400  w.
59·  HORST, K. A.  (Stuttgart)   Merkur Hft. g,
1952·
6o.  KUBY,  ERICH.   (Miinchen)    Suddeutsche
Zeitung  6 Dec.   1951; 750  w.
61.   NOSTITZ, 0.   VON.  (Heidelberg)   Literar­
ische  Deutschland   25  Nov.   1951 ;  300  w.
62.  P.,  H.  Norddeutsche  Rundschau  7  Mar.
1952; 200  w.
63.  R., B.  Frankfurter Rundschau 9 Oct. 1952;
soo  w.
64.  srEDLER,  w.    J.  (Berlin) Neue   Zeitung
r6  Sep.  1952; 6oo   w.
65.  STROMBERG,   KYRA. (Stuttgart)   Deutsche
Zeitung  17  Nov.  1952; 400  w.
66.  THOEL, ROLF. (Hamburg) Welt  am Sonn­ tag   24   Feb.    1952.  (Also   discusses    the Peter  Lorre film) .
67.   u., s.  (Ulm)  Schwabische Donau  Zeitung
24  Jan.  1952; soo  w.
68.  UHLIG, HELMUT.  (Berlin,  etc.)   Neuphil­ ologische   Zeitschrift Jahr.   4   n.5:352-5, Sep.  1952; 2000   w.

LOWRY SUPPLEMENT




Vl     RADIO & TV  COMMENTARIES

6.  BRAEM,  HELMUT M. Si.idwestfunk    (Stutt­
gart)  6  Jan.  Ig52; on  IBg;  I5  rllin.
7·  FAERBER, LEO  M.  Hessischer    Rundfunk
(Frankfurt  a.M.)  22  Jul.  Ig52; on  IBg;
3  min.
8.  KOEPPEN, WOLFGANG. Siiddeutscher Rund­ funk   (Heidelberg)   22   Oct.    I952;  on IBg;  I5  min.
g.  PEARCE,  A.   P.    (producer)   BBC   Home
(London).  Talk, 30  mins.   See   IIAii106.
10.  PETER,  JOHN.   CBC   Transcanada    (Vic­
toria)   I I    Sep.   Ig62; on   ICI66; g  min.


Vll  COMMENTS  ON THE  POETRY

8.  BIRNEY, EARLE. Five   signallings  in   dark­ ness/Malcolm Lowry.  Evidence (Toronto) n.4:76-78, Winter Ig62;  IOOO  w.
g.  -. Introduction.  Selected Poems   (see  IC I66); 1000  w.
Io.  -. Malcolm  Lowry, poete  meconnu.
Lettres  Nouvelles n.2g: 7 I -8 I, Oct.  I g62. Tr.  by   Bernard  Lafourcade  of   IIAvii2.
II. BROMIGE,  DAVID. rev.  of  ICI66. Northwest
Review 6: I I 3-5,   Winter   I g63;  I ooo   w. I2.   COGSWELL, FRED. rev.   of   ICI66.   Cana­ dian  Forum 42:23I-2, Jan. I963; 1000  w.
I 3·  EDELSTEIN,  J.  M.  rev.   of   IC I 66.   New
Republic I47:22,  17  Nov.   Ig62; 400   w. I4.   KIRSCH,   ROBERT.  rev.    of    ICI66.   Los
Angeles Times  8  Apr.   Ig63; 500  w.
15.  KNICKERBOCKER,   CONRAD. rev.  of  ICI66;
150  w.  See   IIAiii2.
I6.   MATHEWS, ROBIN.  rev.  of  ICI66.  Queens
Q  70: 283,  Summer  I g63; 200  w.
17.  PETER, JOHN. See  IIAvi10 above.
IS.  SKELTON,  R.   Vancouver  Sun   IO   Oct.
Ig62; 250  w.
Ig.   XIRAU, RAMON. rev.    of   ICI66.  Mexico
City News   g  Sep.   Ig62, p  SA;  300  w.
20.  BIRNEY,  EARLE. Against   the   Spell  of
Death.  A38:328-33.
21.  -.Notes to  CI70-I73· A38:335.

viii GENERAL CRITICISM

14.  ANON.  Canadian  Reader   (Toronto)    2 n.g:7,  Jul.  rg6I;  350   w.   rev.   of   spec.

88
 Lowry issues  in  Tamarack Rev. &  Cana­
dian   Lit.
I 5·  KIRK,  T.  DOWNIE. Letter  re   trilogy   plan for  Vole., etc.  Times Literary Supplement
3  Mar. Ig6I;  200  w.


ix  REVIEWS  OF  Hear  Us  0 Lord  ... (IA23, 32, 33).  See also IIAii:82, 88, go, 92-4, gg,  IOI-2, 104-5, 108-10.

33·  ANON.  Booklist     57:635,  I5   Jun.  Ig6I; IOO w.
34· 	Bookmark  20: 2 I 2,  Jun.  I g6 I ;  50  w.
35· 	Time 77: go,  2 Jun. I g6 I; II 50  w.
36.  ADAMs,  PHOEBE.   Atlantic   Mo.   208-g6, Aug.   Ig6I; 400   w.
37·  BRADBURY, MALCOLM.  Critical Q  4: 377-g, Winter  I g62; I 200  w.
38.  BURGEss, JACKSON. San  Francisco Chron­
icle  6  Aug.   Ig6I, p.  24;   I75  w.
3g.  CHAVARDES,  MAURICE.  Le  Monde  28  Jul.
Ig62; 700  w.  (Rev. of  IA33).
40.  CHURCHILL, R. c.  London Times 3  May
Ig62; I50  w.
41.  CURLEY, THOS. Commonweal  75:  I02,  20
Oct. Ig6I; 700  w.
42.  EDELSTEIN, J. M. New   Republic I44:24,
5  Jun.  Ig6I;  I20o w.
43·  ENGLE,  PAUL.  Chicago Sun.  Tribune  g
Jul. Ig6I, p.  3; 350  w.
44· FULFORD, ROBERT. Canadian  Reader  2 n.g:2-3,Jul. Ig6I; rooow.
45·  GRIFFIN, L.  W.  Library  jrnl. 86: I478,   I Apr. Ig6I;  200  w.
46.  KIRK US, VIRGINIA. Bulletin  for ... 2g: 236, I   Mar. Ig6I;  250  w.
47·  o'cONNOR,   w.   v.   Saturday  Rev.  44: Ig,
27  May   Ig6I; 6oo   w.
48.   STEINER, GEO. Nation  Ig2:465,  27   May
Ig6I; 500   w.


x 	COMMENT ON Lunar Caustic

I.   [FRANC!LLON, CLARISSE]  Untitled   pref. to  her   French  tr.  See   IA34.
2.  KNICKERBOCKER,   CONRAD.  Pre£.  to  IA34, pp.   I2-I3; 700  w.

LOWRY SUPPLEMENT



B:  BIOGRAPHICAL
(See also 11Ax2)

41.  ANON. Canadian  Press   despatch, Ottawa,
9   Apr.     1962,    posthumous  granting   of
Governor-General's   Award to   Lowry;
350   w.
42.  -. A  legend  a  little after his  own  time.
Macleans  I5  Jul. 196I, p.  19.
43· -. Frontispiece note  to  IB16.
44·  D[AVENPORT), J [oHN]. rev.  of IB15, Lon­
don   Observer  IO  Feb.   I963;  roo   w.
45·  KIRK,  T.   DOWNIE. Glimpse  of   Malcolm Lowry   from   his  Letters. Unpublished TS in   UBCC,  memorabilia sec.,   26  pp.
 C:  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL
(See also  11Ax2)

17.  ANON. French  tr.   of   C1 I   in   IA33,  pp.
7-8.
18.  -. Note  to  IA34, p.  I5.
19.  BIRNEY,  EARLE.  First   Supplement to  Mal­ colm  Lowry  Bibliography Canadian  Liter­ ature   n. 1 1 :90-95,  Winter  1962.
20.  LOWRY, MARGERIE.   Introductory  note   to
Ultramarine  ( IB 15), pp.  5-8.
21. ROSS,  ALEXANDER. Pauline Johnson honored-but what   about  Lowry?  Van­ couver   Sun   14  Dec.   1963,   p.  6.
22.  ANON. Malcolm Lowry:  I909-1957. A38:

46.  KNICKERBOCKER,    CONRAD. The   Voyages	283. of  Malcolm  Lowry. A38:301-14.
47·  NOXON,  GERALD. Malcolm   Lowry: 1930.
A38:3 I5-320.












8g


LITTERATURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie  par Doreen Dowd










ANTHOLOGIES

CRESCENDO,   par    Edes    Alexandre  et   autres. Montreal,  Editions Nocturne,  1963.  101 p. ECRITS    DU      CANADA   FRANCAIS,     nos.    15-16.
Montreal,  1963.
LABERGE,    ALBERT.    Anthologie  d'Albert    La­ berge. Pre£.  de  Gerard  Bessette.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France,  1963.  310  p.
MAJOR,   ANDRE.  Nouvelles, par   Andre Major, Jacques Brault et  Andre Brochu. Montreal, A.G.E.U.M.,  1963.  139 p.
MOSAIQUE,  par  Simone Archambault et  autres. Montreal,  Editions  Nocturne,  1963.  91  p.
LE     PAYs,   par    Paul    Chamberland  et   autres.
Montreal, Librairie Deom,   1963.  71  p.
POESIE 64-POETRY 64.  Montreal, Editions du
Jour, Toronto, Ryerson, 1963.   157  p.



ROMANS  ET NOUVELLES

ARCURI, JOSEPH.  Le  rat  Richard. Ste-Rose-de­ Laval, Que.,  1963.  27  p.
BASILE, JEAN  voir BEZROUDNOFF, JEAN-BASILE. BEZROUDNOFF,  JEAN-BASILE. Lorenzo, par  Jean
Basile,   pseud.  Montreal,  Editions du   Jour,
1963.   120  p.
BILODEAU, LOUIS. Belle et grave.  Montreal, Beauchemin,  1963.  169 p.
BUISSERET,   I.   DE.  L'homme  peripherique.
Montreal,  Editions a Ia  Page,   1963.   143  p.
CHARBONNEAU, RENE.  Le  destin de  Frere Thomas.  Montreal,  Editions de  !'Homme, I963.   157 p.

go
 FOURNIER,   ROGER.  Inutile  et   adorable. Mon­
treal,  Cercle  du   Livre  de   France,   1963.
204  p.
GAGNON,  MAURICE.  L'ins pecteur   Tanguay; meurtre sous  Ia pluie. Montreal, Editions du Jour, 1963.   110  p.
HEBERT,  ANNE.  Le  torrent, suivi  de  deux nouvelles inedites. Montreal, Editions HMH,
1963.  248  p.
JOLY,  RICHARD. Le   visage   de  l'attente.  Mon­ treal, Centre de  Psychologie et  de  Pedago­ gie,   I963.  236 p.
LANGUIRAND,    JACQUES.     Tout   compte  fait.
Paris, Editions Denoel,  1963. 193 p.
LARSEN,  CHRISTIAN.   L'Echouerie. Montreal, Beauchemin,  1963.  125 p.
LEBLANC,  MADELEINE.  La  murail/e  de  brume.
Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1963.   160  p.
MAHEUX-FORCIER,  LOUISE.  Amadou. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France, 1963. 157 p.
MAILLET,  ANDREE.  Les  Montrealais. Montreal, Editions  du   Jour, 1962.   145  p.
MAJOR,   ANDRE.  Nouvelles, par   Andre Major, Jacques Brault et  Andre Brochu. Montreal, A.G.E.U.M.,  1963.  139 p.
MALOUIN,   REINE    (VOIZELLE)     Ou   chante  /a vie.   Quebec,  Editions  de   !'Action   Catho­ lique,  1962.  1 70  p.
MARTEL,    SUZANNE.     Quatre  Montrealais  en l'an    3000.  Montreal,   Editions   du    Jour,
1963.  160 p.
MATHIEU,   CLAUDE.  Simone en  deroute.  Mon­
treal,  Cercle  du   Livre  de   France,   1963.
21 l p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE  FRANCAISE



MONDAT,  CLAIRE. Poupee. Montreal,  Editions du  Jour, 1963.   139  p.
PELLERIN, JEAN.  Un soir   d'hiver.  Montreal, Cercle  du   Livre   de   France,  1963.   2 17  p. PELLETIER, A!ME. La    favorite    et   le   conquer­
ant,  par    Bertrand   Vac,  pseud.  Montreal,
Cercle  du   Livre   de   France,  1963.   397   p. PETROWSKI,  MINOU.  Le    gafjeur.   Montreal,
Beauchemin, I963.  104  p.
-. Un   ete  comme les  autres. Ecrits  du  Can­
ada  Francais I5:219-319,  I963.
ROBERT, GEORGES-ANDRE.  Les  chacafs sont  par ici.  Paris, Editions Karolus,  1963.
SAINTE-ONGE,  PAULE. La   maltresse. Montreal, Cercle  du   Livre  de   France,  1963.   184   p. THERIAULT, YVES, Le  grand   roman  d'un  petit
homme. Montreal, Editions du  Jour,  1963.
I43   p.
 DANTIN, LOUIS VOir SEERS, EUGENE. DESJARDINS,   MARCELLE.  Man coeur   charge   a
blanc.  Quebec,   Editions   de   I' Arc,    1963.
!26   p.
DESPRES,  RONALD. Les    cloisons    en    uertige.
Montreal, Beauchemin, 1962.  94  p. DESROCHERS, ALFRED. Le    retour    de   Titus.
Ottawa, Editions de  l'Universite d'Ottawa,
1963.  6r   p.
DESROCHES,  FRANCIS. Cendres chaudes. Que­
bec,  Editions, Garneau,   1963.  82  p.
DION-LEVESQUE,  ROSAIRE  voir  LEVESQUE,  LEO ALBERT.
GAUGUET,  JEAN voir   LAROUCHE,  JEAN-MARIE. GODIN, GERALD. Poemes   et    cantos.  Trois Rivieres,  Editions   du   Bien    Public,   1962.
43  p.
GOULET, ANTOINE. jeux     et   sortileges. Mon­

THERIO,   ADRIEN.  Ceux  du
 Chemin-Tache.
 treal,  Editions Nocturne,  1963.   87  p.

Montreal,    Editions   de
!64 p.
 !'Homme,    1963.
 GRANDBOIS, ALAIN. Poemes; Les  ifes  de  [a nuit, Rivages de  l'homme, L'etoile pourpre. Mon­

TREMBLAY, JACQUELINE   (GRENIER)    Marie­ Anne, rna  douce. Montreal, Centre  de  Psy­ chologie et  de  Pedagogie, 1963.  145 p.
-. Poursuite dans  la  brume. Montreal, Fides, I962. 140  p.
VAG, BERTRAND  voir  PELLETIER, AIME.



POESIE

ALLEN-SHORE, LENA. L'orage dans  man  coeur.
Montreal,  Editions du   Lys,  1963.  37  p. ALMA,    QUE.  EXTERNAT CLASSIQUE. Poemes.
Alma,  Que.,  Comite  d'Edition   du   Phare,
Externat  Classique, 1963.  63  f.
AUDET,  NOEL. Figures  paralleles. Quebec,  Edi­
tions  de  l'Arc, 1963.   103  p.
BLAIS, MARIE-CLAIRE.  Pays  voiles. Quebec, Edi­
tions  Garneau, 1963.   44  p.
Bosco,  MONIQUE. Poemes.  Ecrits   du   Canada
Franrais 15: 169-90, 1963.
BUJOLD,  FRANCOISE. Une  {leur   de bout   dans un    canot.  s. r.,   Editions   Sentinelle,   1962.
29  p.
CHAPDELAINE, JACQUES.   Trans-terre.   Mon­
treal, Editions du   Lys,   1963.  53  p. CRESCENDO, par    Edes    Alexandre  et   autres.
Montreal, Editions Nocturne,  1963.   IOI  p.
 treal, Editions de  l'Hexagone, 1963.  246  p.
GRANDMONT,   ELOI DE.  Une   saison   en   chan­ sons, precedee de  Chardons a foulon et  d'un premier poeme. Montreal, Editions  Lemeac,
1963.  121  p.
HEBERT, ROBERT.   Au   centre   de  ['echo.  Mon­
treal, Editions Naces,   1963.   38  p.
HUARD, ROGER-BERNARD.   Histoires   pour    en­
fants  snobs.   Montreal,  Publications  Agora,
1963.   106  p.
KUSHNER, EVA   (DUBSKA) Chants de  boheme.
Montreal, Beauchemin, 1963.  64  p. LANDE,  LAWRENCE  voir  VERVAL,  ALAIN. LANGEVIN,  GILBERT. Symptomes. Montreal,
Editions Atys,  1963.  55  p.
LAPOINTE, GATIEN.  Ode    au    Saint-Laurent,
precedee  de   ]'appartiens  a  la  terre. Mon­
treal, Editions du  Jour,  1963.
LAROUCHE,  JEAN-MARIE.   La  saignee   du   pain, par   Jean  Gauguet,  pseud.  Montreal,   Edi­ tions   Atys,   1963.   38  p.
LASNIER, RINA. Les  gisants, suivi  des  Quatrains quotidiens. Montreal,  Editions de  !'Atelier,
1963.   109  p.
LEBLANC, MADELEINE. Visage  nu.   Montreal, Beauchemin, 1963.   6o  p.
LEGER, PIERRE. Le   pays  au  destin   nu,  suivi  de
Journal   pour    Patrice,  ou   les   feux    de   la

gr

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



rampe    du   poeme.  Montreal,   Beauchemin, I963.   97  p.
LEGRIS,  ISABELLE.  Parvis    et    sans    entrave.
Montreal,  Beauchemin,  I963.   I30   p. LEMOINE, WILFRID. Sauf   conduits. Montreal,
Editions Orphee,  I 963.
LEVESQUE, LEO  ALBERT. Quete, par   Rosaire Dion-Levesque, pseud. Quebec, Editions Garneau,  I963. 50  p.
MAILHOT,  CARL. Meilleur  est  reue.  5.1.,  I963.
48  p.
MAJOR,  JEAN-RENE.  Les    archipels   signales.
Montreal, Editions Erta, ci958.
MENARD,   JEAN.  Les   myrtes. Montreal,  Beau­
chemin,  I963. 66  p.
MONCTON, N.B.  SEMINAIRE NOTRE DAME   DU PERPETUEL-SECOURS. CLASSE DE   BELLES­ LETTRES  ET RHETORIQUE. Poemes. Moncton, I962,  76  p.
-. La   route   des  etoiles. 2.  ed.   remaniee  et augm. Moncton,  I963. 99  p.
MOSAIQUE, par  Simone Archambault et  autres. Montreal, Editions Nocturne, I963.  9I   p.
OTTAWA.   UNIVERSITE. ETUDIANTS.   Cahier   de poesie,    r.  Ottawa, Editions du   Coin    du Livre, I963. 6I   p.
PALLASCIO-MORIN,  ERNEST. P/eins  feux   sur l'homme.  Montreal,  Librairie Deom,  I963,
6s  P·
-. Le   vertige   du  dego{).t. Montreal,  Editions de  !'Homme,  I 96 r.
LE  PAYS, par    Paul    Chamberland  et   autres.
Montreal, Librairie Deom, I963. 7I   p. PELOQUIN,  CLAUDE. jericho. Longueuil, Que.,
Publication Alouette,  I963.  32  p.
PERRAULT, PIERRE.  Toutes  isles.   Montreal, Fides,   I963.  I89   p.
PILON, JEAN-GUY. Pour  saluer  une  ville.  Paris, Seghers, Montreal,   Editions  HMH,   I963.
74  p.
POESIE 64 -POETRY 64.  Montreal, Editions du
Jour,  Toronto,  Ryerson, I963.   IS7  p. RICHER, MONIQUE. Aurore. Montreal, Editions
Nocturne, I963. 45  p.
ROBERT, GUY. Et  le  solei/  a chavire. Montreal, Librairie  Deom,  I 963.  s6  p.
ROBILLARD, HYACINTHE-MARIE.   Blanc   et  noir.
Montreal, Editions du  Levrier, 1963.  96  p.
 ROUSSAN,  JACQUES DE.  Eternites  humaines.
Montreal,  Librairie Deom, I 963.  5 I   p. SEERS,  EUGENE.  Poemes d'outre-tombe, par
Louis  Dantin,   pseud.  Pref.   de    Gabriel
Nadeau.  Trois  Rivieres, Editions  du   Bien
Public, I962. I64   p.
-. Un  manuscrit retrouve a  Kor-el-Fantin;
la  chanson-nature  de   Saint-Linoud,  pseud.
Eleutheropolis,  i.e.   Trois  Rivieres,  Presses
Ideales,  I963. 2I   p.
SHAWINIGAN. SEMINAIRE STE-MARIE. ACADEMIE LITTERAIRE. Naitre ce  matin. Trois Rivieres, des  Rapides,  I96o.  I36   p.
-. Souliers de  Iaine.  Trois Rivieres, Editions
Editions des  Rapides,  I 959·
VERVAL, ALAIN.  Experience,   par    Lawrence Lande and   Alain   Verval.  Montreal,  Freres des  Ecoles   Chretiennes,  I963. 75  p.



THEATRE

BAILLARGEON, PIERRE.  Madame Homere. Mon­
treal, Editions du   Lys,  I963.  I23  p. FERRON,  JACQUES.  La    recherche   du    pays.
Montreal,  A.G.E.U.M.,  I963.
-. La   tete    du   roi.   Montreal,  A.G.E.U.M., I963. 93  P·
HEBERT, ANNE. Le   temps   sauvage.  Ecrits   du
Canada  franr;ais  I6: I I-Io8,  I963. LAURENDEAU,  ANDRE. Marie-Emma. Ecrits du
Canada  franr;ais  IS:II-IOI,  I963.
PREVOST, ARTHUR. 3  actes   en  une   soiree: Qu'est-ce  que    r;a    veut    dire!    Trouvez  un titre, ]ouez-moi r;a. Montreal, Editions  Prin­ ceps,   I962.  I23   p.
TOURNIGNY,  CLAIRE. La   crue. Ecrits du  Can­
ada   franr;ais  I6: I3I-I88,  I963.



ESSAIS

LESAGE, GERMAIN.  Notre evei/   culture/.  Mon­
treal, Rayonnement, I963. 200  p.

ROUSSAN, JACQUEs DE. Paradoxes. Montreal, Editions a Ia  Page,  I962.  I48   p.
ROY,  PAUL-EMILE. Les    intellectuels  dans    la cite. Montreal, Fides,   I963. 85  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



TROTTIER, PIERRE.  Mon Babel.  Montreal,  Edi­
tions  HMH, I963. 2I7 p.
VADEBONCOEUR,   PIERRE. La   ligne   du   risque.
Montreal, Editions HMH,  I963. 286  p.



HUMOUR ET  SATIRE

BAILLARGEON, PIERRE. Madame  HomBre. Mon­
treal, Editions du  Lys,   I g6g.   I 23  p. CODERRE, EMILE. Jean  N arrache  chez  le diable.
Montreal,  Editions   de  !'Homme,   I963.
I25   p.
ECRITS  DE    LA    TAVERNE ROYALE. Montreal, Editions de  !'Homme,  I962. 139  p.
LANGUIRAND,    JACQUES.  Le    dictionnaire   in­ solite.  Montreal,   Editions  du   Jour,   1962.  I55   p.



BIOGRAPHIES

CARRIERE, GASTON.  Explorateur pour le Christ: Louis   Babel, o.m.i., IB:J6-191:J.   Montreal, Rayonnement, 1963.   I50  p.
DAVELUY, MARIE-CLAIRE. Jeanne Mance, suivi d'un  Essai   genealogique  sur  les  Mance  et les  De  Mance, par  Jacques Laurent.  2.  ed. revue. Montreal,  Fides,    1962.   418  p.
DESROSIERS,  LEO-PAUL.  Dans  le  nid   d'aiglons, la  colombe.  Vie   de   Jeanne Le  Ber,   Ia  re­ cluse.  Montreal et  Paris,  Fides,   I g63.  140 p.
ECCLES, w.  J. Frontenac, tr. par  Franc;oise  de
Tilly. Montreal,   Editions  HMH,  1962.
185   p.
FREGAULT,  GUY. Le   grand   marquis: Pierre  de Rigaud   de   Vaudreuil  et   la   Louisiane.  2. ed.   Montreal  et   Paris,  Fides,   1963    (?) 0
481  p.
GRAVEL,   MGR   ALBERT. L'abbe  Elie-j.  Auclair et  son  oeuvre. Sherbrooke, 1963.   6o  f.
HOLLIER, ROBERT. Dollard:  heros    OU     aven­
turier?   Montreal,   Editions   de    !'Horizon,
1963.   125  p.
LAPLANTE, ROBERT. Ti-Blanc,   mouton   noir.
Montreal, Editions   de    !'Homme,   1963.
126  p.
RENHAS DE POUZET, ERIC-M. Ta nuit  resplen­
dira.   Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1963.   172   p.
 TREMBLAY, EMILIEN. Lepere Delaere et l'Eglise Ukrainienne  du  Canada. s.r.,  1961.   355  p. VIAU, ROGER. Lord    Durham.  Montreal,   Edi­
tions  HMH, 1962.   181  p.



LITTERATURE  DE JEUNESSE

AUBRY,  CLAUDE.   Le   loup   de  Noel. Montreal, Centre  de    Psychologie   et    de    Pedagogie,
1962.  58  p.
AUDET, ANDREE.   L'Aventureuse   en   vacances.
Quebec, Centre  Pedagogique, 1962,   Cig6o,
9I   p.
CERBELAUD-SALAGNAC,  GEORGES.  La  ville  SOUS
le  feu.  Montreal, Fides,  1963.  143  p. CHABOT, CECILE. Imagerie.  Montreal,   Beau­
chemin,  I962. 59  p.
-- Ferie.  Montreal, Beauchemin, rg62. 63  p.
-. Paysannerie. Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1962.
63  p.
CORRIVEAU,  MONIQUE (CHOUINARD). Les   jar­ diniers    du   Hibou.  Quebec,  Editions   Jeu­ nesse,  1963.   134  p.
DAIGLE,  JEANNE. L'etoile du  sourire; piece  de Noel  en un  acte. Saint Hyacinthe, Que., Editions d'Aigle,  Ig62.  50   f.
-. La   Noel   des  {leurs;   mystere  de   Noel   en trois  actes.  Saint Hyacinthe, Que., Editions d'Aigle, 1962.   58  f.
DAUPHIN, RENO Voir  LUSSIER, ROLAND. HARVEY, FRANCINE. jeannot   fait    le  tour   du
monde. Quebec, Centre Pedagogique, 1961.
95  p.
-. Mes amis, les   betes. Quebec,  Centre
Pedagogique, 1961.  go  p.
LAFLEUR, CLAUDE. Le   braconnier. Montreal, Fides,   s.d.   16  p.
LUSSIER,  ROLAND. Vacances merveilleuses, par Reno Dauphin, pseud. Quebec, Centre Pedagogique,  196 I.  go  p.
ROUSSAN,  WANDA DE. Les  rois de  lamer. Mon­
treal, Fides,  1963.  2I2 p.
THERIAULT, YVES.  Avea,  le   petit     tramway.
Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1963.   66   p.
-. Les  aventures de  Ti-]ean. Montreal, Beau­
chemin, 1963.   65  p.
-. Les  extravagances  de  Ti-]ean.  Montreal, Beauchemin, 1963.  64  p.

93

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



-. Maurice  le   M oruceau. Montreal,   Beau­
chemin, 1963.  67  p.
-. Nauya, le  petit  Esquimau. Montreal, Beau­
chemin, 1963.  62  p.
-. Le   Ru    d'Ikoue.  Montreal, Fides,    1963.
96  p.
-. Ti-]ean   et    le   grand    geant.  Montreal, Beauchemin, 1963.  67  p.



BIBLIOGRAPHIES

BILAN  LITTERAIRE  DE   L'ANNEE  1961.   Archives des   lettres  canadiennes  2: 31 1-381. Centre de   Recherches  de   Litterature  Canadienne­ franc;aise,   Universite  d'Ottawa,  1963.
CENTRE    D'INFORMAT!ON    CULTURELLE     CANA­ DIENNE.     Canadian  cultural    publications. Publications culturelles  canadiennes.  I I. ed. Ottawa, 1963.  15  p.
DOWD,   DOREEN.    Canadian  literature,   1962.
Litterature   canadienne-franc;aise. Canadian
Literature  15: 100-108, winter  1963.
INDEX   DE    PERIODIQUES   ET    DE    FILMS    DOCU­ MENTAIRES   CANADIENS.   V.     15,   1962. Ot­ tawa,  Association Canadienne   des   Biblio­  theques  et  Bibliotheque   Nationale  du  Canada, Ottawa, 1 963.
LIVRES  ET    AUTEURS  CANADIENS:   1962.  Mon­
treal, 1963.   107  p.
WATT,    FRANK   w.,   ed.   Letters  in   Canada:
1962.    Livres   en    Franc;ais.    University  of
Toronto  Quarterly 32:491-522, July   1963.



OUVRAGES CONSACRES A  L'EDITION

LECLERC,    RITA.    En    guise    d'epiJogue ... au Salon du  Livre. Lectures 9: 198,  avril  1963. MICHAUD, PIERRE.  La  pornographie. Cite  Libre
13:25-27,  oct.   1962.
ROBERT, GUY.  Ou  en  est  notre  bibliophile? Vie des  Arts   29:22-27, hiver   1962/63.

X

94
 Tendances  actuelles  de   !'edition.  Main­
tenant   15:104-105,  mars.  1963.



REVUES

AMERIQUE   FRANCAISE;    revue  de   creation  et de  recherches litteraires. v.  14  no  1 -
1963- 	trimestriel.  Publication  interrom- pue   1956-1962.
c'EsT-A-DIRE.  Publication  du   Comite  de  Lin­ guistique  de   Radio  Canada.   Montreal,  v. I-           1961  -
INCIDENCES. Faculte  des  Arts, Universite d'Ottawa. no  1 -       1962  -
MIEUX  DIRE.  Bulletin de linguistique de !'Office de  Ia  Langue  Franc;aise. Quebec,  Ministere des  Affaires Culturelles. Montreal  no  1 -
1962-



LINGUISTIQUE

ANJOU,  JOSEPH  D'   Bilinguisme ou  metissage?
Relations 23:104, avril   1963.
-. Comment sauver notre langue?  Relations
23:270-273, sept.   1963.
-. Dans  le  meme quotidien. Relations 23:
2 13,   juillet    1963.
-. La   demie d'un  demi.  Relations  23: 362,
dec. 1963.
-. Encore l'orthographe.  Relations 23:332, nov.   1963.
-. La   grande  pitie  de   l'orthographe.  Rela­
tions   23:276,  oct.    1963.
-. Modestie en  minuscules ou  en  majuscules?
Relations 23:47, fev.  1963.
-. Noms  a particule.  Relations 23:68,  mars
1963.
-. Orthographe et  syntaxe. Relations 23:149, mai   1963.
-. La  "presse" du  journalisme. Relations 23:
45,  fev.   1963.
-. Recidives  et   originalites. Relations  23:
233> aout  1963.
-. Sentir  Ia  logique  du   franc;ais.   Relations
23: 14,  jan.  1963.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



ARES, RICHARD. Langues officielles  et langues maternelles.  Action  Nat ion ale  52:432-447; IOI2-I036, jan.,   juin    1963.
BEAUDIN, DOMINIQUE. Un  pont sur Ia riviere d'encre. Action Nationale: 52:467-469, jan.
1963.
c'EST-A-DIRE.   Publication du   Comite  de  Lin­ guistique  de   Radio  Canada.   Montreal.  v. I  -      1961 -
DARBELNET, JEAN-LOUis.   The French   Cana­ dian   linguistic tradition and  Canada.  Cul­ ture   24:217-224,  sept.   1963.
-. Regards  sur  le   fran,.ais  actuel. Montreal, Beauchemin,  I963.  176 p.
DAVIAULT, PIERRE.   Langage et  traduction.  Ot­
tawa,   lmpr. de  Ia  Reine, 1961.  397  p.
EMPEDOCLE    (pseud)   A   Ia   fortune  du   mot.
Action  Nationale  52:465-467;   577-579; I070-I072, jan.,   fev.,   juin    1963.
EVERYMAN'S  FRENCH-ENGLISH,    ENGLISH­ FRENCH   DICTIONARY with  special  reference to    Canada.   Camp.   by    Jean-Paul  Vinay,  Pierre Daviault and  Henry  Alexander. Lon­ don,  Dent,  1962.  86I p.
LEBEL,  WILFRED.  Le   vocabulaire  des  affaires.
The  business vocabulary. Montreal, Editions de !'Homme, 1963.  46,  46 p.
LORRAIN,   LEON.   Le    langage  des   affaires.  2. ed.,  revue et  augm. Quebec, Editions  Peda­ gogia,   1962.   152  p.
MIEUX  DIRE.  Bulletin de linguistique de !'Office de  Ia  Langue Franc,;aise.  Quebec, Ministere des  Aflaires Culturelles. Montreal, no.  1  -
I962-
VACHON-SPILKA, 1.  La  linguistique au  Canada­ fran<;ais   (editorial)   Revue   canadienne  de Linguistique 9:8- I o,  automne  1963.



HISTOIRE ET
CRITIQUE LITTERAIRES

OUVRAGES ET  ARTICLES GENERAUX
BELLEAU,   A.     La    litterature  est   un   combat.
Liberte  5:82, mars-avril  1963.
BOSQUET, ALAIN. Lettre aux  jeunes ecrivains canadiens. Liberte  5: 167-168,  mars-avril
I963.
coST!SELLA, J.  Anguish in  Quebec. Canadian
 Author and  Bookman  38:7, winter  1962. ECOLE  LITTERAIRE  DE   MONTREAL. Archives des
lettres  canadiennes   2: 11-307.    Centre de
Recherches  de   Litterature   Canadienne­
franc,;aise, U niversite d'Ottawa,  1963. GODBOUT, JACQUES.  Lettre a des  amis  franc,;ais
a propos   de  ce  qui   nous  arrive. Cite   Libre
14:24-25, mars   1963.
KIRKLAND-CASGRAIN, CLAIRE.  0 Canada! Can­
adian   Library  20:14-17, July  I963.
LEBEL,   MAURICE.  D'Octave  Cremazie a Alain
Grandbois. Quebec,  Editions  de   I'Action,
1963.  285  p.
LETTRES   CANADIENNES:    LEUR   PRESENCE   ET LEUR  RAYONNEMENT  EN    FRANCE.  I. La  Jit­ terature:  poesie,  essais,  critique et  histoire, par  Rene  Garneau. 2.  Les  romanciers cana­ diens  et l'universalite de  Ia langue franc,;aise, par   Robert  Elie.   France   Amerique  M aga­ zine   53: 113-I I 5.   oct.   1963.
LIVRES  ET   AUTEURS  CANADIENS:   I 962.   Mon­
treal,   1963.  107  p.
LOCKQUELL,  CLEMENT.   Notre  Jitterature,  est­
elie  le  miroir de  notre   milieu? Culture 24:
!67-177, juin    1963.
PILON,  JEAN-GUY.  L'injustice des  concours litteraires  du   Quebec.  Liberte  5: 165-I67, mars-avril  1963.
QUARTIER LATIN,  MONTREAL. La  litterature  par elle-meme.  Montreal,   A.G.E.U.M.,   I962.
62  p.
ROBERT,  GUY.  Notre litterature,   1962.   Main­
tenant  14:68-69, fev.  I963.
-. Une   litterature  ou   des   ecrivains?   Main­
tenant   24:386-389, dec.   I963.
STAINSBY, MARl. A paraphrase of the vision: French-Canadian  writing in  translation. British    Columbia   Library   Quarterly   26:
3-10,  January 1963.
THERIO,   ADRIEN.  Le   journalisme  au  Canada­ franc,;ais.  Canadian  Literature   17:34-43, summer  I963.


LEROMAN

BLAIS, ROBERT.  Le  renouveau du  conte   paysan dans   la  litterature canadienne-fran,.aise. These.   M.A.,   Universite d'Ottawa,   1962.
COLLET,  PAULETTE.  Les  paysages   d'hiver dans le   roman  canadien-franc,;ais.   Revue   de

95

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE  FRANCAISE



l'Universite  Laval  17:404-419;  549-562, jan.,   fev.   1963   (extrait d'une these,   Ph.D., Laval,  1962).
ETHIER-BLAIS,  JEAN.  Letters in  Canada:  1962. Livres en Fran,.ais. Romans et theatre. University  of   Toronto  Quarterly  32:500-
511, July   1963.
LEGARE,  ROMAIN.  Le  pretre dans le roman canadien-fran«ais.  Culture   24: 3-12,   mars
1963.
MARCOTTE,   GILLES.    L'experience  du   vertige dans  le roman canadien-fran,.ais. Ecrits  du Canada  franfais  16:231-246,  1963.
ROBERT,   GUY.   L'art   du   roman.  Maintenant
21 : 282-284,  sept.    1963.


LA  POESIE

DIONNE,  RENE.  Alain Bosquet et  Ia  poesie canadienne.  Relations:   23: 101-104,  avril
1963.
LAPOINTE,  PAUL-MARIE.  Notes   pour   une  poeti­ que  contemporaine.   Liberti  4: 183-185, mars   1962.
LOCKQUELL,  CLEMENT.   Influences qui   ant  af­ fecte    Ia   poesie    canadienne-fran,.aise   con­  temporaine.   Societe   Royale   du    Canada. Memoires. 3·   ser.,   t.  56, sec.  I:43-46, juin
1962.
ROBERT,   GUY.   Fonction  du   poete:   vivre   et dire.  Maintenant   18:211-213, juin    1963.
-. Le   "Maintenant"   poetique.  M aintenant
16:140-141, juin    1963.
SYLVESTRE,   GUY.   Letters  in   Canada:  1962. Livres  en   Fran«ais.  Poesie.    University  of Toronto  Quarterly 32:491-500, July   1963.


LE  THEATRE

CONSTANTINEAU,    GILLES.    Notre  theatre  est fige,  desuet,  et   nuisible ... vive   le  cinema. Magazine  Maclean  3:10, 47, aout  1963.
ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN.  Letters in  Canada: 1962. Livres en Fran,.ais. Romans et theatre. University  of   Toronto  Quarterly  32: 5oo-
51I, July    1963.
GELINAS,  GRATIEN.  Gratien Gelinas speaks  OUt on Canadian playwrights. Interview by Lawrence  Sabbath.  Performing  Arts   2: 27, summer  1963.
 HENAULT,  GUY.  La  critique fait   de  son  mieux dans  des  conditions difficiles.  Magazine Maclean 3:61, mars   1963.
-. Notre theatre  est   dans   le  noir: une  en­ quete  est-elle   souhaitable?  Magazine  Mac­ lean  3:47, jan.    1963.
-. Poesie et  peinture ont  leur  passeport, notre theatre, non! Magazine Maclean 3:81, juin
1963.
JASMIN,   CLAUDE. Le   theatre  descend dans   Ia rue  {Paul Buissonneau)  Magazine Maclean
3:19-21;  37-38, aout   1963.
ROCHETTE,  GILLES.  C'est vrai  que   notre  thea­ tre  est  fige,  desuet,  et   nuisible;  le   theatre, non!  Magazine Maclean 3:89-90,  nov.  1963.
SABBATH,  LAWRENCE.  French-Canadian  thea­
tre   as  an  art  form. Canadian Art   20: 356-
357,  Nov.-Dec.   1963.
-. Invasion  of   French   theatre.   Performing
Arts   1:34-36, spring-summer  1962.
SABOURIN,  JEAN-GUY.   Apprentis-Sorciers.
Maintenant  16:139, avril   1963.



OUVRAGES  CONSACRES AUX ECRIVAINS

ANGERS, FELICITE
DUMONT,  MICHELINE.   Laure Conan. Academic
Canadienne-Franfaise. Cahiers,   7:61-72,
1963.

ASSELIN, OLIVAR
GAGNON,  MARCEL-A.  Olivar Asselin.   Academic
Canadienne-Franfaise.  Cahiers,  7: 117-128,
1963.

BRUNET, BERTHELOT
TOUPIN,    PAUL.    Berthelot  Brunet.  Academic
Canadienne-Franfaise.  Cahiers,  7: 167-173,
1963.

BUIES, ARTHUR
GRIGNON, CLAUDE-HENRI.  Arthur Buies,  OU l'homme  qui   cherchait  son   malheur.   Aca­ demic    Canadienne-Franfaise.   Cahiers,   7:
29-42,  1963.

97

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



CHAUVEAU,
PIERRE- JOSEPH-OLIVIER
LEBEL, MAURICE. P.- J.-0. Chauveau, humaniste du  dix-neuvieme siecle. Societe Royale  du Canada. Memoires. 3- ser., t.s6, sec.I: 1-IO, juin   1962.

CONAN, LAURE
voir   ANGERS, FELICITE.

DANTIN, LOUIS
voir   SEERS, EUGENE.

DAVELUY, PAULE
DAVELUY, PAULE.  Femme au  travail. Canadian
Library 20:65-66,  Sept. 1963.

DUGAS, MARCEL
GRANDBOIS,   ALAIN. Marcel  Dugas.  Academie
Canadienne-Franfaise.  Cahiers, 7: 153-165,
1963.

FERLAND, ALBERT
CHARTIER,  EMILE. Albert  Ferland,  1872-1943·
Lectures 9: 115-II6, jan.  1963.

FERRON, JACQUES
MAJOR,  ANDRE. Entrevue avec  Jacques Ferron.
M aintenant  18: 213-214, juin,   1963.
-. Jacques Ferron, ou  Ia  recherche du  pays.
Liberte  5: 95-97, mars-avril  1963.

FOURNIER, JULES
DUHAMEL, ROGER. Jules  Fournier.   Academie
Canadienne-Franfaise.  Cahiers,  7:87-103,
1963.

FRECHETTE, LOUIS
ETHIER-BLAis,  JEAN.   Louis    Frechette.   Aca­
demic   Canadienne-Franfaise.   Cahiers,  7:
73-85,  1963.

GARNEAU, FRANCOIS-XAVIER DAVELUY, MARIE-CLAIRE.  Fran«;ois-Xavier  Gar­
neau. Academie  Canadienne-Franfaise.
Cahiers, 7:7-27,  1963.

GELINAS, GRATIEN
PRIMEAU, MARGUERITE.   Gratien  Gelinas and his  heroes. British Columbia Library Quarterly  26:13-19,  April   1963.

gB
 GILL, CHARLES
HAMEL,  REGINALD. Charles  Gill,  prosateur.
Montreal,  1963.   24   p.

GIROUX, ANDRE
LEGARE,  ROMAIN.  Andre  Giroux. Lectures 9:
143-146, fev.   1963.

GRANDBOIS, ALAIN
DEROME, GILLES. Confrontation d'Alain Grand­
bois.  Cite   Libre 14:26-28,  nov.  1963.

HEBERT, ANNE
ROBERT, GUY. La  poetique du  songe. Montreal, A.G.E.U.M., 1962.   125  p.

LANGEVIN, ANDRE
LAMARCHE, GUSTAVE. Le    roman   d' Andre Langevin.  Action  Nationale 52: I037-1045, juin    1963.

LE  FRANC,.MARIE
DESROSIERs,  LEO-PAUL. Marie  Le   Franc  et son  oeuvre. Lectures 9:202-205, avril   1963.

MONTIGNY,
LOUVIGNY  TESTARD DE
CHOQUETTE, ROBERT. Louvigny  de  Montigny.
Academie    Canadienne-Franfaise.   Cahiers,
7=139-151, 1963.

MONTPETIT,  EDOUARD
LORRAIN, LEON. Edouard Montpetit. Academie
Canadienne-Franfaise.  Cahiers,  7: 129-138,
1963.

PANNETON, PHILIPPE
ANGERS, PIERRE.  Ringuet (Philippe Panneton)
Academie    Canadienne-Franfaise.   Cahiers,
7= 175-194,  1963.

RINGUET
voir   PANNETON,  PHILIPPE.

SEERS, EUGENE
GARON,   YVES.    Louis  Dantin.   Academie
Canadienne-Franfaise.  Cahiers, 7: 105-116,
1963.

THERIAULT, YVES
TAAFFE,  G.   Busy  individualist.   Maclean's
Magazine 76:8o-8r,  Oct. 5,  1963.


THESES

compiled  by Carl F. Klinck











BARTLEY,   ALBERT.  Anticlericalism  in   French­ Canadian  Literature.  M.A.,   University  of Western Ontario,  I963.
BLAIS,  JACQUES.   Un nouvel   /care.  Contribu­ tion  a ['etude de  la symbolique dans l'oeuvre de  Saint-Denys Garneau.  Diplome d'Etudes
Superieurs, Laval,  I963.
BOLGER, SOEUR MARIE CLARENCE. Germaine Guevremont, peinture de l'ame  paysanne canadienne-franfaise. M.A., Laval,  1963.
CAMPBELL,  JOHN   HUGH.   The Prose   of  Sir Charles G. D.  Roberts. M.A.   University of New  Brunswick, I963.
COLLET,   PAULETTE.   L'hiver dans   le  roman canadien-franfais. Doctorat D'University, Laval,  1963.
CROZIER, DANIEL F.  Imagery and  Symbolism in the   Poetry   of Duncan C.  Scott. M.A.,  Uni­ versity   of  New  Brunswick, I963.
DAVIS,   MARILYN   I.  Belinda or  the   Rivals- A Burlesque of Sentimental Fiction. M.A., University of  Western Ontario, I963.






100
 FARLEY, THOMAS  E. Love   and  Death in  Cana­
dian   Poetry. M.A., Carleton,  1963.
FRANCis,  WYNNE.  Urban  Images in  Canadian
Poetry. M.A., McGill, 1963.
GIROUARD,      ANDRE.      Etude   comparative  du thi!me  de la solitude chez Florentine dans Bonheur d'Occasion et Florence dans l'oeuvre  du   marne   nom    de   Marcel  Dube. M.A.,  Laval,   1963.
LEMIEUX,   MAURICE-ROLAND.  jean Rivard d' Antoine   Gerin-Lajoie,  un   plan    de   con­ quete    economique.  Diplome   d'Etudes   Su­  perieurs,  Laval,  1963.
MACGILLIVRAY,  RICHARD.   Theme and  Imagery in  the  Poetry   of Isabella Valancy Crawford. M.A., University of  New  Brunswick, I963.
NEW,   WILLIAM   H.   Individual and  Group  Iso­ lation  in    the    Fiction   of   Frederick    john  Niven:  Setting  as  a  Basis   for  a   Study   of Conflict  and   Resolution.  M.A.,   University of  British Columbia, I963.
PURCELL,  PATRICIA EILEEN.  Le  Paysage  dans ['oeuvre  de  Saint-Denys Garneau. M.A., Laval,  1963.
SANDERSON,   GERTRUDE.  In  Search of  Unity. A  Study of Aesthetic and  Religious  Experi­ ence   in   the   Writings  of   Saint-Denys  Gar­  neau,  Robert  Elie,   Anne    Hebert,   Andre Giroux, Eugene  Cloutier, and  others. M.A., University of  Western Ontario,  I963.
SHARMAN, VINCENT. Patterns of Imagery in Three Long   Poems   of  E.  j. Pratt. M.A., University of  British Columbia,  1963.
WARWICK,   JACK.   The journey in  French Canadian Literature. Ph.D., University of Western Ontario,  1963.
