$5.00  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·83
Winter, 1979

SPECIJIL ISSUE: INTELLECTU}IL HISTORY

Articles

BY  SUSAN MANN TROFIMENKOFF, DOUGLAS OWRAM, PIERRE SAVARD, WAYNE ROBERTS, A. B.  MCKILLOP, ALLAN SMITH, GRAEME PATTERSON, GEORGE WOODCOCK, FRANCIS SPARSHOTT, DENNIS DUFFY,  ELI  MANDEL
Bibliography

BY DAVID  STAINES
Poems

BY  ALFRED G. BAILEY, DAVID  SOLWAY, RALPH GUSTAFSON, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, PATRICK  LANE, DARYL HINE, TOM WAYMAN
Reviews

BY  MICHAEL STEIG, KATHY MEZEI, PAUL STANWOOD, D. J. HALL
Opinions and  Notes

BY  JAMES  DOYLE, NORMAN SHRIVE, MAURICE LEBEL


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









A SHAPING CONTEXT




IN MANY WAYS, INTELLECTUAL  HISTORY can be seen as a series of articulate  relationships between a people, its place, its time, and its institutions. By "institutions" I  mean a variety of structures.  People are  who they are  partly because  of  their  church  and  their  school,  their  form  of  government  and  their banking  system, the  holidays they celebrate  and  the  newspapers  they read. And they are who they are in Canada  in large part  because of the various roles of the Roman  Catholic  orders,  Ryerson's  Methodism,  and  the  Anglicanism  of Bishop Medley  and  Bishop Strachan; because of Joseph  Howe's  and  Goldwin  Smith's and Rene Levesque's journalism; because of the nineteenth-century influence of Queen's   University,  Laval,  McGill,  Dalhousie,  and  the  University  of Toronto; because of systems that allow into existence things like Royal Commissions, Legal Aid, labour  unions, and  Letters  to the  Editor.  Through such channels  we have been trained, sometimes constrained  (certainly,  as John  Porter  pointed  out some years  ago  in  the  Vertical  Mosaic, they  helped  stratify  Canadian society  and organize levels of power) ; at the same time we use the freedom of expression that they have led us to desire as touchstones of other values as well.
"Place" and  "time" refer to equally varied  concepts -not  just to locale and
contemporaneity but also to more general attitudes toward  the nature  and func­ tions of space  and  tradition. "Space" involves a sense of relationship -whether hemispheric  or  personal-which in turn  constitutes  one of the chief  elements in people's  intellectual  preference  for  centralized  and  hierarchical  or  regional  and diversified  systems  of  order.  Attitudes  toward   "home" and  "here"  punctuate postcolonial as well as colonial writing, linking  place with  political allegiance. A sense  of  place  affects  government,   therefore,   through  definitions  of  cultural  "unity" and  notions  concerning  the  virtues  of  regional  and  ethnic  variation.  It affects economics,  through  principles of land  ownership  (the  private  home, the CPR  grant,  the church  estates).  It affects many of the principles of design in art and  architecture. It  affects communications theory,  transportation means,  and the identification   (as in  Innis and  McLuhan) of  transport  with communication

2

EDITORIAL

in a spatial age. A sense of space also affects ecological attitude: Malcolm  Lowry, for  example,  identified  an  idea  of "wilderness"  with  Canada's true  soul;  land was to enjoy rather  than  develop. In  an entirely different  context  (a  1978 bcok from  Arno  Press entitled  Ernest  Thompson Seton:  Man in  Nature and  the Pro­ gressive Era  I88o-I9IS), John  Wadland  charts the functional  disparities between technological  aspirations  and  biological necessities, and  the  organizational and philosophical  ones  between  Seton's  pantheistic  "Woodcraft  Indians" and   the institutionally  more successful Boy Scout Movement of  America. Being in and on and  of the landscape  differs widely from being owner over it, and  in the rational  basis for this distinction  lies much  of the history of  twentieth-century Canadian social change, industrial  growth,  American connection, and literary concern.
"Time," clearly,  is involved  in  such  change.  To  extrapolate its  meaning  to involve "tradition" is to see its involvement also in various institutional  survivals and  in matters  like Canada's regional-central  dispute. Linear  notions of tradition tend  to define culture  centrally  and  singly:  a frame  of mind  which  Creighton, Grant,  Frye, and  Abbe  Groulx  all enunciate,  though separately  and  differently. Alternative  notions of tradition -brachiate, perhaps, or discontinuous,  or multi­ nuclear-emphasize disparities  and  simultaneities  instead,  as in  Eli  Mandel's  doppelganger poems, or Robert  Kroetsch's Seed  Catalogue, or possibly Marshall  McLuhan's Understanding  Media.  Tied  with  this  distinction  is  yet  another: between public  polity and  private belief, public myth and  private ritual. To grow within a culture  does not  necessarily mean  to accept it wholly, nor does it mean to reject another  utterly.  And  from this ambivalence  derive still further  connec­ tions between a nation's art and a nation's minds.
One  must  guard   against  easy generalizations  about  a  national  imagination, for there  are many  elements  that  go into the making of public traditions,  and  as many  more  that  impel  how  people think  and  act  privately.  No  truly  creative writer serves only the state. No truly creative thinker draws ideas only from within
a national  boundary.  And in Canada-which has inherited so many institutions, modified so many  others,  been further  shaped  as it deliberately  leaves its borders open to immigration, transportation, and the free exchange of ideas and informa­ tion -no  claim  that  intellectual  history is a purely national  phenomenon could ever  be satisfactorily  countenanced. English,  French,  and  American  educators (and  educations) have  had  their  impact;  Montalembert, Disraeli, Emerson,  and Arnold,  as  well  as  Garneau,  Macdonald,   Haliburton,  and  Aubert   de  Gaspe, influenced  Canada's nineteenth-century experience. And  the Canadian pantheon  manages to include Greek muses, Norse gods, Christian saints, Jewish sages, Jung,  Marx,   Darwin,   Freud,   English   travellers,  American   engineers,  Shakespeare, Dickens, Voltaire,  Locke, and  Dewey. As well as Gandhi,  Mohammed, Fanon,  and  Lao  Tzu.  The  point  is that  people read  widely, following their  own  minds along paths that others might or might not follow. Traditions constantly reconnect

3

EDITORIAL

and  coalesce. And  asking  where  ideas  come  from  is  consequently  a  question destined never to be answered with crisp finality.
Still,  people do  write and  do exchange  ideas, and  there  is ample  justification
for seeing in the ideas and beliefs and social movements of any time a context for literature. Who  is Ralph  Connor  without  his  Presbyterianism?  or  Mazo  de  la Roche  without  her  conservative imperialism?  Understanding Charles  Mair  and Pour  la  Patrie  requires  an  understanding  of  the  Canada First  Movement  and Catholic   nationalism;  reading   Dennis  Lee  and   Jay   MacPherson   requires  an appreciation   of  George  Grant  and  Northrop   Frye. Behind  Jacques  Ferron  lies parti   pris, and  behind   parti  pris lies Cite   fibre as  well. For  Leacock  there  is Veblen;  for Atwood  there is Simone de Beauvoir;  for Nichol there is McLuhan; for  McLuhan there  is Innis. And so on. We  know  that  aesthetic  values emerge from  cultural  values;  analyzing and explaining  the connections can lead us to an illumination  both  of a nation's  intellectual  heritage  and  the dimensions of its art. We  also  know  that   these values  may  well  express  only  the  set  of  mind  of  a particular group; hence it is also worth questioning  the viability of such ideas as well as their  literary  impact, for we are  jostled then  into analyzing  the depth  of bias and  the validity of axioms -such as the almost doctrinal  environmentalism that  surfaces in  Canada-that have variously influenced  artists'  and  historians' imaginations,  critics' methodologies, and mythmakers' presuppositions.
When  we examine  ideas and  attitudes,  therefore,  we are doing more than  just cataloguing   historical  "facts"; we are  engaging  ourselves with  the  "fictions"  of belief which  as a society we have accepted -despite  historical facts as often as because  of them.  Works like  Carl  Berger's  The Writing of Canadian  History (University  of Toronto  Press)  and  Serge Gagnon's  Le  Quebec et  ses Historiens (Les  Presses de  l'Universite  Laval)   do  more,  then,  than   just itemize  historio­ graphical   accomplishments;   they  also make  clear  the  intellectual  horizons that govern  the  shape  of each  generation's  sense  of itself  and  its  potential.  In  this context  it is perhaps  worth  reminding ourselves that  Canada's  potential  was not always regarded  as great. For Edward  Gibbon  Wakefield, one of  Lord Durham's aides, a  colony was in  1829 an  uncivilized and  even  uncivilizable  phenomenon
-a  notion  which  of course depended  upon  an  assumption  of the  perfectibility (and  the Englishness)  of civilization. By the phrase  "a  new people," he wrote in A Letter   from Sydney,

We mean ... a  people like what  the Canadians  will be, and  the United  States' Americans are-a people who, though they continually increase in number, make no progress in the art of living; who, in respect to wealth, knowledge, skill, taste, and  whatever belongs to civilization, have degenerated from their ancestors; who are precluded from acquiring wealth except by the labour of slaves; whose educa­ tion, though universal, stops before the age of puberty, and thus becomes, if  not an evil, at  least a  dangerous thing, instead of the greatest good; who, ever  on the

4

EDITORIAL


move, are  unable  to bring anything  to perfection;  whose opinions are only violent and  false prejudices,  the  necessary fruit  of ignorance;  whose character is a com­ pound  of  vanity,  bigotry,  obstinacy,  and  hatred  most  comprehensive,  including  whatever  does not meet  their  own pinched notions of right;  and  who delight  in a forced  equality,  not  equality  before the law only, but  equality  against  nature  and truth; an  equality   which,  to  keep  the  balance  always  even,  rewards  the  mean rather  than  the  great,  and  gives more  honour  to the  vile  than  to the  noble.... We mean, in two words, a people who become rotten  before they are ripe.

The   subjects  Wakefield deemed   worthy  of  notice -nature,  economics,  educa­ tion,  social  equality,  justice-are among   those  which   have  continued  to  pre­  occupy  analysts  of national life. But if we now believe that  as Canadians we have an  intellectual and  cultural future, that  is in  large  part  due  to the  development over many  decades  of an intellectual and cultural past.
To  examine the  work  of a selected  group  of clerics, historians, journalists, :md teachers-from 	Ryerson    to   Groulx,    Montalembert  to   Creighton,  Smith  to Woodcock,  and   Watson  to   Grant  and   Frye-is  not,   of  course,   to  exhaust Canadian  intellectual history  or  to  clarify  all  of its connections with  literature. There are  other  figures  worthy  of enquiry: among  them  Howe,  Alline, Garneau, Hardin, Phillips Thompson, Agnes  Macphail, Deacon, Sandwell, Vallieres, and Frere   Untel.   There  are   other   events   and   groups   and   movements:  Imperial Federation,  the   Temperance  league,   parti  pris, and   ethnic  fundamentalism; labour  organizations, the  Couchiching conferences,  and   journals  like  Canadian Forum and  Liberte. There are other  approaches to the study,  and  all the external influences to  be  explored. Focussing  even  briefly,  however,  on  the  flux  of ideas in  Canada, makes  us aware of the solid social  background that  Canadian litera­ ture  draws   upon, and   some  of  the  processes,  too,  that   continue to  lead  to  the
changing and shaping of a diverse culture.
W.II.N.





THE NIGHT  COUNTRY
 


Alfred G. Bailey


The  night enveloped lakes and hillocks of the broken country, night  noises under  their feet or
somewhere in the shadowed nearness that seemed to brush their cheeks,
to rise and sigh like a great breathing of the sky and earth.

5

POEM

They could  not stop their  ears though they tried  to do it.
They could not calm their  hearts in hazard  of the murky gullies
that  loomed  beside  them.
What was this night country through which  they passed?
Their destination they could only guess at. Had they to go this way towards it, Whatever it was at the other  side
to be reached
if they could  reach  it?
If only they had a wand,  the travellers, (like children in the remembered tale of
childhood)
that  held aloft and waved  dispelled  the dark
and  all the earthly sorrows pouring as in a river or lake water disgorging through a stoney gap!
They thought, though  wandless,  their  journey
must  lead  somewhere for  them and  others  who might  come  this way
in time  to come. Not  only wandless were they, but  their
wordlessness
left  them  undone  by time and  time's
task  that  tried  them. And  yet was time's hand  upon  them
of their  own contrivance,
the shadowed  substances  that  seemed  to
crowd  them  as they passed? They  could find no answer  to this question
And so took counsel  together, saying that  unless they could  make  utterance
of the  holy names
there  would be no way out,
and  no end  of the night  country
to be found anywhere, but  that  it would go on and  on in this fashion
for ever and  ever.





6


NATIONALISM, FEMINISM &
CANADIAN  INTELLECTUAL HISTORY
Susan Mann Trofimenko.ff




NATIONAUSM AND  FEMJNISM have  usually   been  in bad odour  in Canada. Hindsight  has conferred  upon the one a potential  for evil that most intellectuals  find distasteful although actual expressions of nationalism in Canada's past  have  been  timid  voices of regret and  concern  quickly silenced by more tangible  signs of progress and  prosperity. Foresight has conferred  upon the other  a similar  potential  for evil that  most conservatives find horrifying although actual  expressions of feminism  in  Canada's past have also been timid  voices of request  and   concern  quickly  silenced  by  more  powerful  signs  of  ridicule  and control.
Is  there  something  more  than  a  fanciful  connection  between  the  two? What role  have  historians  of ideas  played  in shaping  the  images  that  come to  us of nationalism  and  feminism? If one put the two together, might one see both in a different  light,  avoiding  the  intellectual  historian's  greatest  pitfall -presentism (seeing and  judging the past in terms of the present) -and arriving at a role for women in the formation  of ideology and thereby a broader  view of the nature  of intellectual  history?
Origins  of  ideas  are  difficult  to  discern.  Traditionally, intellectual   historians have  contented  themselves with  unravelling  the connections between ideas, trac­ ing the influence of them  and, one suspects, passing moral  judgment  upon them. The  history of ideas thus constituted  more a commentary  upon the  present  than a study of the  past. More  contemporary intellectual historians are obliged to take social stock of their  past concerns, tracking  down the  birth, schooling, class and connections  of the exponents  of various ideas. Rarely in Canada but occasionally elsewhere,  psycho-historians  have  also  tried  their  hand  at  piecing  together  the puzzle of ideas. Even the  computer  can get in on the act  with varying attempts at content  analysis. But the mix remains a mystery; endless playing with variables still leaves one wondering.
My  own  wondering  about   the  possible connection  between  nationalism  and
feminism began with the reading of a poet writing prose about  women. Adrienne Rich's Of Woman Born is a far cry from nationalism. But combining  my own background   of  thinking   about   nationalism   with  a  contemporary  interest  in

7

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

feminism,1   it  occurred   to  me  on  reading  Rich   that   the  intellectual   domains permitted  to women whether in image or reality, are precisely the  underpinnings of  nationalism:  myth,  poetry,  tradition,   inspiration,   continuity,  preservation, morality.
Why  should  that  be so? And  was there  here a  hint  of an  explanation  of the
force  of  nationalism  in  the  contemporary   world?  Had  this  particular ideology been  able  to draw  on mythic  representations  of the male and  the female in the psyche of  the  western  world, combining  la  patrie of authority, strength,  rea..on and  order  with  the maternal  assurances of nurture, emotion, stability,  continuity and even grace? A secular religion indeed.
Historians  of  any  variety  never  proceed  very  far  on  pure  speculation.  The social scientist in them is too highly developed. Some facts for the fancy then. Nationalism  and feminism in French Canada at the tum  of the twentieth  century are  surprisingly  similar.  Whether   one  thinks  of  the  Ligue  Nationaliste  or  the
more  poetic  Action  Fran aise,                                                          Jcan-Baptiste  or
the  more  prosaic  Ligue des Droits  de Ia Femme,  the  ideological  similarities are too  startling   to  be  dismissed. Both  harboured   a  notion  of  "separate spheres," distinct  and  proper  places for  French  Canada and  for  women.  Both  posited special  qualities  to accompany,  perhaps to  justify, the separate  sphere:  a civiliz­ ing  mission,  perpetuating   values, morality  and  the  traditions  of  the  past.  Both therefore  clearly stated  a superiority  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  or male  world  around them. And  both believed these qualitative  differences, this cultural superiority, to be given by birth  and developed by history. Both insisted that theirs was the true path  away  from  the  evils of  contemporary  society, evils  from  which  they  both recoiled  in  the  same  manner:  a  moral   revulsion  to  industrialization,  urban crowding,  unhealthy  living conditions, infant  mortality,  tuberculosis, alcoholism, crime  and  venereal  disease. Both nationalism  and  feminism  promised  to cleanse, purify  and  rectify society of these present plagues. Both flirted  with  religion and politics, neither  ever sure of the sanction  of the religious or the secular sphere but both  anxious  to draw  upon  the  former  and  have  a  place  in the  latter.  In  that light both posited a series of duties and  rights incumbent  upon each. Both insisted unsuccessfully on  French  Canadian and  female  unity  under  the  banner  respec­ tively of nationalism and feminism.
To  account  for such striking similarities is difficult. They  appear  to go beyond mere  chronological,  ideological or social coincidence,  although  that  coincidence is almost  as remarkable.  Both  nationalist  and  feminist spokesmen  can  of course be found earlier in the nineteenth  century, but the initial outburst  of each appears to  arise  as  a  response  to  the  economic  and  social  changes  brought   about  by urbanization and  industrialization  from  the I Bgo's into  the I 92 o's. Nationalists feared  for the survival of the  French  Canadian nation; feminists feared  fot  the survival  of  the  family. Ideological  coincidence  is also quite  apparent, for  both

8

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

nationalism  and feminism can be interpreted  as a redeeming  myth, a justification, a camouflage  or even a  hope  of change for a group  sensing itself a subordinate minority.  There  may even be social similarities, since ideological spokesmen tend to have the same social, economic and professional backgrounds; that they should make similar utterances is perhaps not too surprising.2




Wru.TINGS ON   NATIONALISM  AND  FEMINISM   have  in  fact been few and far between, their authors needless to say never hinting at a possible link.  Indeed  both  have  been  coloured  by a  world  context  which  has  made  of nationalism  a "great  event"  and of feminism, at least until very recently, a "non­ event." So the feeble strains  of Canadian  nationalism and the somewhat stronger ones of  French  Canadian nationalism  have  been  bombarded with  the  hostility reserved  for  the  awful  occurrences  of  the  second  world  war  or  the  snobbery reserved for an  intellectual  anachronism.3  At the same  time, some of  the people have suggested that  the leit motiv of both English and French Canadian historical writing, in itself a domain  of intellectual history, has been the concern for survival, a  nationalist   concern.4    The  fear  aroused  by such  a  suggestion  leads  to  entire articles bitterly denying the argument  that Harold Innis, for example, could have been a nationalist.5   And  the general belief that  nationalism  could or should  be a potent  force in Canadian society is everywhere in evidence from the intentionally  feeble efforts of the  Foreign  Investment  Review Agency to the  precarious  exis­ tence  of  the  Committee for  an  Independent Canada. Of  feminism,  one  need merely note that  had  it been a dominant  force, both our written  history and  our contemporary  society would be vastly different.
The  hint of presentism in the approach  to nationalism in particular  is enhanced by the  relative  youth  and  political orientation  of intellectual  history in Canada. Only  in  the   Ig6o's  did  historians  take  up  Frank  Underhill's challenge  of  the
194o's to write intellectual  history.6  Ramsay Cook in fact followed Underhill's directives  to  the  letter,   virtually  making  of  the  history  of  political  ideas  the mainstay  of intellectual  history in Canada.7  Indeed, by the late I g6o's, the history of  a  specific  political  idea,   nationalism,   had  narrowed   the  field  even  more. Doubtless the  Quiet  Revolution  served as an impetus:  here was a  political idea that  might  well destroy another,  Canada  itself.S In any case the period  produced a number  of studies of aspects of French Canadian nationalism  by Cook and  by people who, although  influenced  by him in their choice of topic, did not always reflect his hostility:  Cook's Canada  and the French Canadian  Question and The Maple   Leaf Forever,  Joe  Levitt's  Henri  Bourassa and  the  Golden  Calf,  Susan Trofimenkoff's   Action   Franfaise,   Phyllis  Sherrin's   "Lionel   Groulx,"   Patricia Dirks' "Union Nationale."


9

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

At the same time intellectual history began to be taught  in the universities, the course outlines surprisingly similar. The  history of political  ideas  predominated, but  the search for the nationalist  contours of those ideas seemed to be the main driving  force.  And  so students  grappled  with  the  possible effect  of an  English Canadian nationalist  group like Canada  First on French  Canadian nationalism,
with  the  similarities  between  the  nationalism  of  Bourassa  and  J. S. Ewart,  of
Groulx  and   Lower.  Behold,  English  Canada   had  its  nationalists  too  and  they even  began  showing   up  on  the  conservative  side  of  the  political  spectrum, historically in  Carl  Berger's imperialists and  in Sid Wise's preachers, contempo­ raneously among George Grant's lamenters.9
The  concern for the present is thus very obvious among  intellectual  historians,
six of  them  appearing in  Peter  Russell's very  present-oriented   Nationalism  in Canada. A Canada threatened  with disruption by a culturally  defined nationalism convinced them of the need to see how previous generations of writers, spokesmen and  journalists had  viewed the destiny of Canada. Conflicting  views of  national­ ism  became  the  very stuff  of  intellectual  history,  their  contemporary  political interest openly admitted.10  In such an arena,  women could scarcely compete since they  rarely  appeared   in  the  ranks of nationalist  spokesmen,  politicians  or even intellectual  historians. Only  when an ideology  concerned  with  women  appeared  on the scene did historians begin noticing. Perhaps  not surprisingly, Ramsay Cook was again one of the earliest to spot feminism as an intriguing  path of intellectual and  contemporary  concern.11  Just as he did so, two younger intellectual  historians turned  away from nationalism and indeed (perhaps as a consequence)  away from a  present  day  focus for  their  interests.  Both Sam  Shortt  and  Carl  Berger  have shunned  the  explicit  political  commentary  of earlier  intellectual  history, Shortt insisting on the inherent  interest of the ideas of his six Search [ers]   for an I deal, Berger now investigating the idea of nature  in the late  nineteenth  century. Intel­ lectual history may be coming of age. Before it does so completely, I would argue, it will have to take women into account.
The  elusive search  for  a  Canadian   identity  has  in  fact  led  historians  to see nationalism-but few women-in  the oddest  of places. Carl  Berger manages to suspend  the  reader's  initial  disbelief and  argue  persuasively that  turn-of-the­ century  imperialists  were really nationalists.  It  was only  a Sense  of  Power that led people like George Denison, George Grant, George  Parkin, Stephen  Leacock and  Andrew  Macphail to see potential  for  Canada in  the  imperial  tie;  the real sustenance   came  from   Canada   itself.  These  "imperialists"  had   a  particular, loyalist, view of Canada's past, a whig notion of  Canadian political development,  an  agriculturalist   ideal  of  the  rural  life, a  conservative  antipathy to  industrial  society, a frontier  lad's delight in militarism and  a moralist's disdain for the social decadence   of  England   and   the  United   States.   Their   nationalism   and   their imperialism  were, however, decidedly  masculine  affairs.  Berger's  first chapter  is

10

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

simply and  pointedly  entitled  "Men." These men saw wheat and soldiers spring­ ing full grown  out  of the  Canadian prairies. It  did  not occur  to them  that  the evolution of liberty  and self-government, so much admired,  might  entail women. Nor did they spot any women among the factories and  the slums of the industrial  order  they so much  despised. Perhaps  there  is more than  the  first  world war to explain the gradual  irrelevance of imperialism in Canada.
Sam Shortt,  on the other  hand,  makes no attempt  to transform  his six turn-of­
the-century  worriers into  nationalists. The  Search  for an Ideal of Andrew Mac­ phail,  Archibald   MacMechan, James  Cappon,  Maurice  Hutton, Adam  Shortt and  James  Mavor  involved excursions into philosophic ideas, none of  which led to  nationalism.  In  an  effort  to explain  their  worries and  their  eventual  ideals, Shortt  does  in  fact  go hack  to family  roots. He  spots  religion  and,  for  once, women,  in  the  form  of  mothers.  The  wives of his worriers  are  less obvious, a half-sentence suggesting their removal from the intellectual lives of  their husbands,  a  half  paragraph on  Elizabeth  Smith  Shortt  hinting  that  much  remains  tn  be seen.  Among  the  six intellectuals  themselves, only one  noticed  the  presence  of women  (as cause or effect?)  in their crumbling world order. Andrew  Macphail's ideal  society  was in  fact  very  much  like that  of Groulx:  women in  the  family held  the  entire  social  fabric  together.12   All of  the  men  grasped  at  philosophic straws,   Shortt   detailing   in   order   the  strains   of   idealism,   romanticism    and empiricism in their thought.  Even though someone like Adam Shortt  contributed to the contemporary critique of imperialism and to the historical bases of a subse­ quent  English  Canadian nationalism,  his grandson Sam  Shortt  shies away from the national  question  as purposely as  Berger and Cook placed it in centre  stage.
Literary  historians  and  critics, often  the sources of much  intellectual  history, have  however  often  abetted   the  historian's  penchant  for  studying  nationalism. Indeed,  they may  even  have shown the way. Much  of their  work is an  attempt to  pin  down  a  "Canadianness" or  a  "French   Canadianness" in  the  texts  they study,  revealing  thereby  the  nationalist  desire  for  differentiation   and  identity. Northrop   Frye,  for  example,  suggests an  optimistic  willing away  of distance  as one  of  the  hall-marks  of  Canadian literature.13   He  finds it among  the  poets. Historically  one  would  find it among  the women. The  men  had  fur  trades  and railroads  to construct,  tangible means of conquering  the distance;  the women had only  their  will to defy the  distance  to family in  France,  in  England,  in eastern Canada, to overcome  the distance  to husband  dans le grand nord, aux chantiers,
aux  Etats,  a la guerre. The  poets may sing, but it is the women who have spun
the fabric  of the nation,  for the critics to admire.  Until very recently however no
one  has raised  the  question,  in  history or literature,  "What about  the  women?" Admittedly  some French  Canadian writers have done so. Both literary  critics and sociologists have, however, limited their enquiry to the mythic mother, 14 their concern  being more  with  the dire effect an omnipresent  and  omnipotent mother


I I

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

has had  on  the  national  psyche than  with  the experiences  of the women  thrm­ selves. These  women  are not  real, they are  images, harboured, one  suspects, in the minds of men, and developed over time through  the institutions of men. But it is precisely of such images that nations are made.




EENCH  CANADIAN  HISTORIANS    are  in  a  more  ambivalent positiOn. Conscious  that  they  have  "played   perhaps  the  largest  single  role  in developing   the  nationalist  ideology,"15    and  often  despairing   of  contemporary expressions  of  such  nationalism,  many  of  the  younger  historians  have  turned deliberately  to  social, economic  and  urban   history.  Others   have  attempted  to investigate  past ideologies with a critical eye, the impulse for their  investigations being  threefold.  A  concern  for  contemporary   French   Canada-a nationalist concern -guides all their studies. And  yet most of them study  the conservative clerical ideology of the latter  half of the nineteenth  century,  painfully aware  that what  they  do so obviously believe to have  been  rank  soil produced  one of the varieties of nationalism  which still nourishes them.  At  the same  time, they tend to  disdain  intellectual  history  per se (one even suggesting  a distinction  between French  Canadian historiography  and  English Canadian historiography  with  the first more socially oriented, the second more political) 16 and investigate ideolcgies in a particular context of social class, power relations and economic change.
It is precisely that social context where French  Canadian intellectual  historians see  ideas  having  their  greatest  impact.   Indeed, the  common  thread   between people  as  diverse  as  Michel  Brunet,  Fernand   Ouellet,   Maurice  Seguin,  Pierre Trudeau, Jean  Hamelin  and  Nadia  Eid is their  tendency  to see past nationalist ideas as a deterrent  to the social and  economic development  of French  Canada. Much  ink  has  been spilled in  both  English  and  French  Canada to  amplify  or attack  Brunet's  "trois  dominantes  de la pensee canadienne-fran<;aise";  the  point here  is simply  that  Brunet  treats  "agriculturalisme," "anti..,etatisme"  and  "mes­ sianisme" as powerful, and damaging,  political ideas. 17  Ramsay  Cook in fact adds another  political idea-that of conquest-to the  trio to enhance  an ideological explanation   of  French   Canada's  present  situation.18   Femand   Ouellet's   wide ranging   synthesis  of  the  economic  underdevelopment  of   Quebec  pinpoints  a conservative   mentalite   as  prime  cause.19    Maurice  Seguin   reinterprets   French  Canada's past in the light of what  he admits regrettably  to have been a minority idea-that  of separatism; while lending  the  weight  of  intellectual  history to a present  political option,  he also hints that  the adoption  of  such an idea long ago would  have  permitted  Quebec  a more natural  development. In  his case, a pan­ Canadian  political  nationalism  has  been  detrimental  to  his  pays.20    Trudeau's intellectual  antipathy to  nationalism,  shared  by Ramsay  Cook, is reinforced  by

12

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

his conviction  that  it has  had  deleterious effects on  present  day  Quebec.  Even Jean   Hamelin's ambitious  attempt   to  chronicle  Ideologies  au  Canada   franfais rests on  the  assumption  that  the developing clerico-nationalism  of the late nine­ teenth  century  stifled something  in the  French  Canadian spirit,  that  the  virtual  ossification of that  nationalism  in the early twentieth  century  prohibited  an ade­  quate  response  to  changing  economic  and  social conditions  and  that  even  the beginnings of doubt  in  the  193o's  had  to be expressed in such  traditional terms that  it could  not  produce  a  thorough  critique  of  the  depression.21   Nadia  Eid scrutinizes  a  particular variety  of  clerico-nationalism,  ultramontanism, to  point out  its  political  purpose  and  its social  results:  power  to  the  Church   and  the politicians, "immobilisme" for society and the mass of  the people.22
French  Canadian historians,  however, have seldom  been  any  more  aware  of the  existence of women  than  their  English Canadian  counterparts. True,   :\S  an adjunct  of religion or the family, two topics that cannot be avoided when studying traditional  nationalism   in   French   Canada,   women   occasionally   do   appear, shadowy  figures at  best. The  essayists in Ideologies au Canada   franr;ais who do record  a  given  newspaper's  views on  the family express  no surprise  at  families which  exist solely for  the  sake of paternal  authority  or  the  father-son  relatic.n­ ship.23 Indeed,  the relatively few mentions of the family in the various studies of newspapers  in the  Ideologies series could lead one to believe that  the nationalist  concern  for  the  family  was  mere  lip  service. If an  individual   such  as  Henri  Bourassa foresaw  immense social evil as a result of feminism,  a  newspaper  such as L'Action Catholique  was far  more troubled  by freemasons, Jews and  Bolshe­ vists.24 Since freemasons  and  Bolshevists were hardly  more numerous  than  femi­ nists in the  Quebec  of the  192o's, the newspaper must  have perceived feminism as being less of a threat.  Had  someone already spotted similarities to nationali<;m? Author  Jones  is silent.  As undoubtedly  will be the forthcoming final volume  of Ideologies. The  period  since 1940 has apparently  room for only two essays con­ cerning  women,  the second  one only hastily  added  in the late summer  of 1979· Even  the most recent study  of an  ideology, written  by a woman,  has only a !ew
pages devoted to the education  of young girls of different classes.25
Intellectual  historians  then  have largely chosen to study  the conservative ideo­ logical past of Canada. Not surprisingly, since most of them are liberal academics,  they  have  given  us a  basically  negative  view of nationalism.  And  by ignoring  women in their studies, they have not only passed over a potentially fruitful  area of  intellectual   and   historical  speculation  and  research,  they  have  abetted   the notion that  women are not important.
Small  wonder  then  that  an  interest  in feminism and  feminist  ideas stemmed from another source. Social history and the women's movement, not intellectual history, gave rise to women's  history.2 6  And one of the first areas of study in that field was feminist organizations, feminist ideas. Like the French Canadian students

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

of nationalism,  the authors  here are also tainted  by the very subject  they study. The  taint  of course colours their  work. Carol  Bacchi laments  the fact  that  early English  Canadian feminists  did  not  take  the  path   to  total  liberation   (in  the
191o's!)    but   settled  for   political  compromise,   respectability   and   the  vote.27
Veronica  Strong-Boag  analyzes somewhat  wistfully the "maternal feminism"  of the  middle-class   National   Council  of  Women,   documenting  how  easily  the women's energies could be diverted  to national,  patriotic  causes during  the first world  war, only to lose their  reform momentum thereby  and,  like other  reform movements, peter out in the 1920's.28
The  same  hint  of disappointment  with their  foremothers  can  be discerned in
French  Canadian historians. Yolande Pinard  remarks  rather  plaintively that some early  feminists in  French  Canada, coloured  already  by nationalism,  imported  a strain  of  feminisme  chretien from France,  and  therefore  developed  an  organiza­ tion  distinct  from  that  of  English  Canadian feminists:   the  Federation   Natio­ nale Saint-Jean-Baptiste in 1907.29  That  organization  itself, although  displaying the  same  fairly  successful search  for  unity  among  various  women's  groups  as evinced  by its Canadian counterpart, the  National  Council  of Women,  lost an early  radical  colouring  under  constant  harassment  from  the  clerico-nationalists, much  to  the  chagrin  of  authors  Micheline  Johnson,  Marie  Lavigne,  Yolande Pinard  and Jennifer  Stoddart.30
That   the  early  feminists  might  share  a  common  outlook  with  the  clerico­
nationalists  did  not  occur  to these authors,  convinced  as they seem  to be  that feminism and  nationalism are opposites. In fact, French  Canada's early feminists, like most of those in the western world, resolutely denied any revolutionary intent, looking  askance  at  the antics as well as the ideas of a  radical  minority  fighting physically for the suffrage in England.  As one of the founders  of the Federation Nationale Saint-Jean-Baptiste expressed in 1907:

On pourra peut-etre se demander si ce n'est pas Ia [Ia FNSJB]  du feminisme? Je reponds oui sans hesiter, mais je me hate d'ajouter  qu'il y a deux sortes de f.eminisme. Le feminisme revolutionnaire qui a pour  but d'eloigner la femme de son  role et  de  son foyer, et  le feminisme chretien  qui  a  pour  but  l'amour  du prochain et le devoir.31

Such sentiments are of course grating to the ears of feminists in the 197o's, amdous as they are to find historical precedents for their own more radical stand. But as historians of ideas their priorities must lie elsewhere. Even if they suspect a tailor­ ing  of feminism  to the  prevailing  winds of orthodoxy  (thereby  one can  draw  a pleasing  parallel  to Laurier's  famous speech  on  liberalism  in  1877),  they  must recognize that  feminists and priests alike thought  the women were engaged in the same activities:  self-help, moral development,  wifely and  maternal duties, philan­ thropic  and  religious works.32   Even if they point  to the  long struggle for female

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

suffrage in Quebec against tremendous clerico-conservative odds, they must acknowledge  that   the  suffrage  constituted  only one  activity  among  many  that fired feminist activity in the early twentieth century. Even a study of the ideas of the  French  Canadian suffragists, a study  yet to be  undertaken,  would still not reveal the full extent of feminist ideas.
Another  aspect  of  the  intellectual  history of feminism has  been  the study  of
images of women. Here  too the impetus for such studies is a present one and  the danger  of both  personal  disappointment and  historical falsification can be great. For  by  seeking  the  intellectual   and  ideological  roots  of  the  segregation  and oppression  of women,  historians  can easily become enraged  by exponents  of the notion  of  "separate spheres."  The  rage  is likely to  blind  them  to the  fact  the notion was very commonly held at the turn of the century, by men and women of most political persuasions. 33
One  of the more intriguing  suggestions for the study of images has been to see the  Canadian nation  itself in sexual  terms. Developing an  analogy  that  can  be found  in early twentieth-century French-Canadian writings about  Confederation, Ralph   Heintzman  toys  with  Henri  Bourassa's  idea  of  a  marriage   between  an "apostolic,   intellectual,   artistic,   rural"    (and   female)   French   Canada  and   a "practical, aggressive, economic,  political"  (and  male)   English  Canada. 34    The contemporary interest  is clear. If abbe  Groulx  in the  Ig2o's  could suggest that Confederation was a mixed marriage and therefore, by Catholic implication, dissoluble, so in the  I 970's a French  Canada, stretching  its limbs along with  rhe women's  movement,  could  reject  a  marriage  based  upon  an  outmoded  image. Perhaps it is not surprising that  the Quiet  Revolution and  the women's liberation movement are contemporaneous occurrences.
Nor should it be surprising that intellectual historians in Canada have anchored their studies to the question of nationalism, for intellectual history dates from the Quiet  Revolution   too. The  image  they  have  given us is that  the  nation  is all important  (even  Ramsay  Cook  by his very denunciation  of nationalism  contri­ butes to that image). At the same time they have implied that women are virtually non-existent.  When  and  where the women do timidly begin to appear, they form but  pale reflections of something  the historians would have preferred  them to be.




E
might  be possible by combining  feminism and  nationalism. A new look at  intel­ lectual history might  emerge from such a union, the role of women in the forma­  tion of ideology might  be explored, the origin and  transmission of ideas might  be plumbed. And one might avoid the greatest danger of existing studies of  national-

IS

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

ism and feminism; the danger of presentism is in fact far greater than the possible perils of the two ideologies themselves.
Needless to say, intellectual  history has  been and  can  be done  without  taking
women into  account.  Most intellectual  historians  have  been men and,  as :;hown above, few of them  have considered the  role of women  in the  thought  of their male  subjects.  Their   primary  concern  has  been  the  study  of  nationalism   ;1.5   a political idea,  again  necessarily excluding  women. In  this, they  are  no different from   any   of  the   more  general  students   of  nationalism:   Cobban,  Deutsch, Kedourie, Kahn, Shafer, and Smith, to name only a few, write about a masculine world. There  is of course some  justification for  their  approach. Until  relatively recently women did not leave tracts for study, did not write, and therefore by implication   did  not  think.  Barren  terrain  indeed  for  an  intellectual   historian, biased  as  he  is  towards  the   written   record.  Moreover,   women's   history  has developed largely as an outgrowth  of social history, therefore in isolation from intellectual  history. And  after  the initial stage of legitimation, a stage few other fields of enquiry have had to go through, the biggest problem confronting women's history has been a methodological  one:  how to unearth  the silent, often  unedu­ cated, illiterate and certainly private women of the past. Here, too, the intellectual historian could easily pay no heed.
However,  another  source of the interest in and  outpouring of women's history
in the  197o's  has been the feminist movement  throughout the  western world in in the  I96o's and 197o's. This has provided a theoretical  base for women's history which should  be of immense concern  to intellectual  historians. Two  major  ideas have  fostered  the  feminist  movement  and   ultimately   the  writing  of  women's history:  the  idea  of patriarchy  and  the idea  of the  relations  between  the sexes. Both  imply  that  the  major  driving  force of history is not  the  struggle  between classes or  the  oppression  of  one  class  by  another   but  rather   the  relationship between  the  sexes whether  that  relationship  be solely one of domination  by the male  (patriarchy) or a more complex web touching  the family, religion, politics, the economy, even, as I am suggesting here, ideas. Here  is surely sustenance  for intellectual  historians whether  they choose to trace the development  of ideas over time or the wider social ramifications of particular ideas in a given context. One suggestion in fact of the measure of a civilization is the status accorded to women at  any  given time.35  And  that  status  is as much  a  mixture  of ideas  about  and images of women as it is a combination  of economic, demographic and  political factors. If intellectual  historians are looking for new fields to conquer,  they might well consider the women.
Once  they  do so, intellectual  historians  may  open  up  another  new  area,  the role of women in the formation  of ideology. For the very strength  of nationalism may lie in its appropriation of what has traditionally been seen as women's sphere. Nationalist  propaganda in any form and any language  has drawn  heavily on the

16

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

female trio of Kinder, Kuche  and Kirche. Early twentieth-century feminist move­ ments  throughout the  western  world, sharing  such  notions, both  contributed  to nationalist  ideology  and  lost  their  own  raison d'etre  as  nationalism  flourished during  and  after  the  first  world  war. A  promising field  indeed  for  intellectual historians:  they may  be able  to assist historians of women in accounting  for the demise  of  feminism  in  the   1g2o's  and  they  may  well  show  that   women  have provided  much  of the intellectual sustenance for an ideology like nationalism.  In attempting the latter,  they will have to take issue, as I am doing, with the many feminist  theoreticians   who  see  the  entire  ideological superstructure as another instance of patriarchy: intellectual  means and  justification for keeping women in a subordinate position.
Combining  the study of nationalism  and feminism could provide some clues to another  problem  of immense  importance  to intellectual  historians,  how and  why ideas are  transmitted across generations. Historians of nationalism  and  feminism have  independently spotted  similar  agents  of transmission:  the  clergy  (notably for French  Canada), the educational  system and the family. Somewhat  ironically many contemporary nationalists  and feminists despair of two of those very agents, the  clergy and  the  family,  both  seen as conservative, inhibiting forces. Perhaps intellectual  historians  can  help  overcome this presentist bias by looking critic.qlly at such institutions. To do so will, however, necessitate their delving more deeply into social history, notably the history of the family, of child rearing and of educa­ tion. Such studies are being done, 36   but not by intellectual historians. Rather  they are  undertaken  as  a  result  of  developments  in  social  history  and  in  women's history-the attempt   to  place  ordinary  folk, notably  women,  in  centre  stage. And  yet the  question  of the  cultivation  and  transmission of ideas  through  such social institutions  is a legitimate  one for intellectual historians. Perhaps  one of the ways to push them  towards it is to suggest, once again, their  potential  interest in the cross-generational link par excellence, women.
Still  another   reason  why  intellectual  historians  should  consider  nationali m
and  feminism together  is the  peculiar  interest such historians tend  to have in the nature  of history itself. For  the  two ideologies both raise fundamental  questions about  the meaning  of history, although  both do so in a different  yet complemen­ tary  way. Nationalism  raises the nineteenth-century  question  asked  by historians and  philosophers  of history  alike:  what  does history mean?  Feminism  rai3es the twentieth-century question  posed  by the same  groups:  how  does history mean? Nationalist  history  posits purpose  and  ultimate  significance  (its  detractors  even suggesting apocalypse) ; feminist  history questions methods, classification, period­ ization and importance. The  combination  of the two may be a particularly  rotent  source for intellectual  history.
Finally, such an approach may lead historians to a reconsideration of national­
ism. For by investigating  the possible connection between feminism and  national-

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

ism, they  may  decide  that  the  link, while  accounting for  the  strength, is also the Achilles'  heel  of  nationalism. If nationalism  truly  is  the  evil that some  of  our historians would  have  us believe, then  the  means  of stamping it out  may  well be to destroy  the  image  of women  upon  which  it is based.  That  nationalism should develop  towards the end of the nineteenth century is not surprising, at a time when the  state   began   taking   over  many  of  the   traditional  functions of  the  family: education, care  of  the  sick and  the  elderly,  philanthropy. Indeed, in some  ways nationalism is the  legitimation of such a take-over.37  But if the image  behind  .such functions ceases to be a female  figure, what  will happen to nationalism? Perhaps nationalism will be with us, wreaking whatever havoc  its proponents or detractors surmise,  just as long as a particular and  peculiar image  of women,  propagated by tum-of-the-century feminists, remains  alive. Contemporary feminists  of the  197o's know  this  instinctively, their  biggest  battle  one  against the  millstones  of images and  attitudes hung  about  the  necks of female  infants. Contemporary nationalists probably do  not.  Perhaps a  path  of relevance without presentism  for  intellectual historians can begin with the question  "What about the women?"


NOTES

1 Eg.,  Abbe  Groulx:  Variations  on  a  Nationalist   theme   (Toronto: Copp  Clark,
1973); Action   franqaise: French  Canadian  Nationalism  in  the  1920s (Toronto: Univ.  of  Toronto Press, 1975); "Henri Bourassa  and  the  'Woman  Question',"
Journal of Canadian Studies, 10 (Nov. 1975),  3-1 I.
2    The  two paragraphs draw upon the conclusions of analysis of the image of women in  the  nationalism  of  Lionel  Groulx:   "Les  femmes  dans  !'oeuvre  de  Groulx," Reuue  d'histoire  de l'Amerique   franqaise, 32, 3  (dec.  1978),  385-98. They  arise from  the  observation  that  a  particular image  of women  constitutes  the  basis of Groulx's  view of society and  hence of Groulx's  nationalism; that  same image of women  was also fostered by the feminist movement  in French  Canada (and else­ where,  one  might  add)   at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth   century.  I  have  of course  considered   the  possible  differences  between  feminism  and   nationalism.  They  are  much  less numerous,  much  less striking,  and  probably  hold  true  more for  the  nationalist  and  feminist  movements  of  the  197o's  than  for  those of  the rgoo's and  rgro's.
3  Pierre  Trudeau and  Ramsay  Cook curiously enough  use another  "anachronism" from  the  nineteenth   century,  Lord  Acton,  in  their  battles  against  nationalism. P.  E.  Trudeau,  Le   fideralisme  et  la  societe  canadienne-franqaise   (Montreal: HMH, 1967; G. R. Cook, Canada and the French Canadian  Question  (Toronto: Macmillan,  rg66)  and  The  Maple  Leaf Foreuer  (Toronto: Macmillan,  1971).
4    G. R. Cook, "La  Suruiuance French Canadian Style" and "La Suruiuance English Canadian Style"  in The  Maple  Leaf Foreuer, pp. 114-40;  141-65. Also Kenneth Windsor,  "Historical  Writing  in Canada   to  1920," in  Carl  Klinck,  ed.,  Literary History of Canada  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press, rg66), p. 250.
6   W.  Christian,  "Inquisition   of  Nationalism,"  Journal  of  Canadian   Studies,    12 (Winter  1977),  pp. 62-72.

18

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM


6  "Some   Reflections on  the  Liberal Tradition  in  Canada," presidential address   to the  Canadian  Historical Association,   I946,  in  In Search  of Canadian  Liberalism (Toronto: Macmillan, I 961), pp. 3-20.
7   G. R. Cook,  The  Politics of John W.  Dafoe and the  Free Press (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I963).
8  William  Kilbourn has  a happy  phrase: "one  is sometimes  left  with  the odd sensa­ tion  that  Canada is nothing but  a figment  of the historical imagination, a concept nurtured in  the  minds  of a small minority of Canadian leaders,  aided  and abetted by a few historians." "The Writing of Canadian History" in Klinck,  p. 497·
9  Carl  Berger,  The  Sense of Power  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I970); S. F. Wise, "Sermon Literature and  Canadian Intellectual History," Bulletin of the Committee  on  Archives, United  Church  of  Canada,  I8   (I965),  3-I8; George Grant, Lament   for a Nation  (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I965).
10  G. R. Cook,  "Nationalist Ideologies  in Canada," text  of a lecture delivered at  the Univ.  of Ottawa, Jan. I9,  I978,  p. 6 or even  the subtitle of his Maple  Leaf  For­ ever: Essays on Nationalism  and Politics in Canada.
11 Cook's   political  interest  remained  foremost. He  edited  and   introduced  a  new edition   of  Catherine  Cleverdon, The   Woman Suffrage   Movement  in  Canada (Toronto:  Univ. of  Toronto Press,  [I 950],   I 974)  and  he  wrote  an  article on  a female   western reformer and  social  gospeller: "Francis Marion Beynon  and   the Crisis  of  Christian  Reformism" in  C.  Berger  and  R. Cook,  eds.,  The  West  and the Nation  (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I976), pp.  I87-208.
12   S. E.  Shortt, The  Search  for an Ideal  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I977), pp.  28-29.
13 The  Bush Garden  (Toronto: Anansi,  I97I),pp.x, IO.
14  Jean LeMoyne, "La femme dans  la  civilisation   canadienne-franc;aise,"  Conver­ gences  (Montreal:  HMH,  I 962), pp.  69- roo;  Guy  Rocher, "Les  modeles  et  le statut  de   la   femme  canadienne-franc;aise," Revue   internationale   des  Sciences Sociales, I4, no.  I  ( I962), pp.  I32-39·
15  R.  Cook,  "The  Historian and  Nationalism," Canada  and  the  French  Canadian
Question,  p.  I 21.
16  F. Ouellet, "Historiographic  canadienne et  nationalisme," Royal Society  of Can­
ada, Proceedings and Transactions, 4th series, I3  (I975), pp. 25-39.
17  The article first  appeared in  Ecrits du Canada  Franfais, 3  ( I957)   and  is  repro­ duced   in  M.  Brunet,  La  Presence anglaise et  les canadiens  (Montreal:   Beau­ chemin, I958), pp. 113-66.
18   "Conquetisme," The  Maple  Leaf Forever, pp. 99-113.
19  Histoire economique  et sociale du Quebec 176o-1Bso (Montreal: Fides,  I966).
20   L'idee  d'independance  au  Quebec,  genese et  historique   (Trois-Rivieres:  Boreal
Express,  I 968) .
21  Ideologies  au  Canada   franfais   1850-1900  first  appeared  as  a  special   issue  of Recherches   sociographiques,   Io,   2-3   (mai-dec., I969);  Ideologies  au  Canada franfais 1900-1929  (Quebec: Presses de  l'Universite Laval, I974); Ideologies au Canada   franfais  1930-1939   (Quebec: PUL,  I978). Hamelin's collaborators in editing the  series are  two sociologists, Fernand Dumont and  Jean-Paul Montminy.
22    Le clerge et le pouvoir  politique au Quebec  (Montreal: HMH, I978).

I9

NATIONALISM, FEMINISM

23  See, for example, Gerard Bouchard, "Apogee  et declin  de l'ideologie ultramontaine
a travers   le  journal Le  Nouveau Monde,"  Ideologies au  Canada   fran ais
1900, p. 26g.
24    J. Levitt,   "Henri Bourassa:   the  Catholic Social   Order and   Canada's  Mission,"
Ideologies au Canada   fran ais
catholique, 1920-192 1," ibid., pp. 332-43.
25  Eid,  pp. 224-26.
26    This development is sketched  in  the  introduction to  S.  M.  Trofimenkoff and  A.
Prentice, eds.,  The Neglected  Majority (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, 1977).
27    "Liberation  Deferred:   The   English   Canadian   Woman's  Suffrage  Movement, I877-1918," unpub. Ph.D.  thesis, McGill  Univ., I976.
28    The  Parliament of Women: the  National Council  of Women of Canada  1893-
1929 (Ottawa:  National Museum of Man, 1976).
28    "Les  debuts  du  mouvement des femmes," in  M.  Lavigne and  Y. Pinard, eds.,  Les femmes  dans  la  societe  quebecoise  (Montl'eal: Boreal  Express, 1977), p. 85. It is difficult  to  discern  which  of the  three  elements dismays  Pinard most; I suspect  it is the  fiminisme chretien.
30    M. Johnson, "Histoire de la condition de  la femme dans  la province de Quebec," in   Tradition  culturelle   et   histoire   politique   de   la   femme   au  Canada,  etudes preparees  pour   la  Commission  royale  d'enquete  sur   la  situation  de  la  femme au  Canada,  #8   (Ottawa:  Information Canada,  I97I),  p.  24;  M.  Lavigne, Y. Pinard, J. Stoddart, "La   Federation Nationale Saint-Jean-Baptiste  et  les  reven­ dications f.eministes au  debut  du  2oe siecle,"  in  Lavigne and  Pinard, pp. 8g-108.
81  Mme  Carolina [Dessaulles] Beique, La Presse, 27 mai  I 907, p. g.
82    Mme   Marie   [Lacoste]  Gerin-Lajoie speaking at  the  first  annual meeting of  the FNSJB,  quoted  in  La  Federation Nationale  Saint-]ean-Baptiste  celebre  le  cin­ quantenaire  de  sa  fondation,  La  Bonne  Parole   (I 956-58), p.  I 8.  Mgr  Bruchesi, Archbishop of  Montreal, speaking  on  the  same  occasion   said  virtually  the  same thing.
38  I think  I avoided both  traps  in my "Henri Bourassa and  the  'Woman Question'," although there  is only the  tiniest  of hints  of what  I am  developing here: on  p. 4 of  that   article I suggest  that  Bourassa  could  not   have   known  his  feminist  pro­ tagonists  very well or he would have recognized  many  common beliefs.
34    "Till Death do  us part," editorial in  the  Journal of Canadian Studies, IO (Nov.
I975)' 68.
85   Joan  Kelly-Gadol, "The Social  Relations of  the  Sexes:   Methodological Implica­
tions of Women's History," Signs,  I (Summer I976), 811.
86    For   example,  in   Canada,  the   studies   of  David  Gagan,  Michael  Katz,  Alison
Prentice, Susan  Houston and  Robert Stamp.
37    Most  French Canadian nationalists, particularly those  of a clerical  hue,  abhorred this shift from  the family to the state,  and  said so. So, I suspect, did most feminists, depriving women  as it  did,  of considerable autonomy, control, and  perhaps even meaning. The   denunciations were,  however,   of  no  avail,   as  Quebec, like  other provinces and  states  in North  America,  moved  towards active  state  intervention in education, adoption, prohibition, social welfare, etc.





20


STRACHAN & RYERSON

Guardians of the Future


Douglas Owram


T.TWO  cAREERs  OF Egerton  Ryef'on, the  "Pope of
Methodism," and  John  Strachan, first Anglican  Bishop of Toronto, span  much
of  the  religious  and  educational  history  of  Upper   Canada   in  the  nineteenth century.  Yet the  two men  are  probably  best known for their  activities in a  rela­ tively few, though  tumultuous, years which preceded the 1837 rebellions. This is not  surprising,  for  it  was  in  this  period  that  the most  active  and  acrimonious  debate  occurred  between  them as to the proper  relationship  between  the church,  education,  and  the state.  In  the positions they took as this debate  unfolded, they helped  to crystallize some of the  basic issues confronting  the  young colony. The controversy of these years is, however, only a part of the story. The common bases which  underlay  their  positions and  the  evolution of their  ideas over time  must also be taken  into account  in order  to understand  the important role they played in  the formation  of an  Upper  Canadian intellectual tradition. It  was a role that was  both  symbolic  and  concrete.  It  was symbolic  in  that  their  arguments  and their  agreements  often  mirrored   the  attitudes  of  the  society around   them  and concrete  in  that  for  more than  half a century  one or both  of them  was directly involved  in  forging  the  educational  and  religious institutions  which  became  the interpreters  and guardians of that tradition.
The  backgrounds of the  two men and  their  general views as developed by the
r82o's  may  be summarized   quickly.  John  Strachan,  the  older  of the  two, had been born in Scotland  but  had  come to Canada  as a young man. Beginning as a tutor  to the  children  of Kingston  merchant  Richard  Cartwright, he soon joined the Church  of England,  assumed a parish in the colonial capita:! of York and had, by r82o, become a noted presence among the small ruling elite of Upper  Canada. 1
In  fact  his appointment to the Executive Council inI 8I 5 and to the Legislative Council inI 820 mark the development  of that elite into the famous, or notorious, "Family  Compact" in the years after the War of r 812.
Whether  as churchman or as politician, Strachan  did not  hesitate to urge the development  of the colony along conservative lines. This  conservatism was prob­ ably  rooted  in  his early  Scottish  education  and  religion  but  it  seems  to  have

21

STRACHAN & RYERSON

developed  fully only after he came  to Canada. Exposed to the hostile American republic or, more accurately, to Upper Canadian perceptions of that republic, Strachan quickly concluded that  the luxury  of dabbling  in reformist ideas could not  be afforded  in  a colony as vulnerably  situated  as Canada. As he  put  it, "I profited  from  my  neighbourhood  to democracy."2   The  result  was a social and political conservatism reminiscent of the eighteenth-century British political philosopher Edmund Burke.
Strachan's attachment to conservative ideals seems to have been reinforced  by a belief that  conservatism was closely linked to loyalty. Continued  attachment to Britain  was,  he  felt,  dependent  on  the  creation  of a  conservative  social  order distinct from the United States. Loyalty and conservatism thus became almost interchangeable terms and  were, together,  Strachan's most basic concern.  Other issues, including  religious and  educational  ones, were thus  viewed in relation  to this larger question. Both the church and the school became, in Strachan's scheme of things, socializing agents to encourage  adherence  to traditional values. Such a relationship  would develop the morality of the people and, equally important, strengthen  their attachment to their government and constitution.
In order to ensure that the institutions of religion, education  and the nation reinforced  rather  than  challenged  one another,  Strachan believed  it imperative that  education  be linked to the church  and that  the church,  in tum, be "wedded to the state."  As it was the church's  role to encourage  loyalty to the state and its values, so it was the state's  role to support  the church  in its mission. Of  course different  nations  would  support  different  denominations and  do so in different ways. In Upper  Canada  in the 182o's, however, such a position meant recognition of the  Church  of England  as the established church  and  advocacy  of the Clergy Reserves  and  a  church-oriented   University  in  order   to  assure  it  a  dominant position. It  was this point, with its attendant implications,  that  more than  any­ thing  else brought  John Strachan into controversy with Egerton  Ryerson.
The   public  debate  between  them  was  triggered  by  a  sermon  of Strachan's marking  the death  of Bishop Jacob  Mountain in 1825. The  sermon  itself, while a clear summary  of Strachan's views, did not bring forth  any new or remarkable ideas.  In  it  he simply reiterated  his long-standing  contention  that  "a  Christian nation  without  a religious establishment  is a contradiction."3  The sermon was, nonetheless,  a  minor  landmark  in  Canadian history, for  when  it was published the following year it caused a twenty-three-year-old  Methodist,  Egerton Ryerson, to publicly attack  Strachan's pretensions for the  Church  of England.  A clash of personalities and  ideals thus  began  which  would  not  end  until  Strachan's death more than forty years later.
Ryerson  was  born  into  a  loyalist family  in  Charlotteville   township,  Upper Canada, in  1803.  Besides their  attachment to the  monarchy,  Ryerson's  parents, and  especially  his mother,  brought  to  British  North  America  a  deep  sense of

22

STRACHAN  & RYERSON

religion. Ryerson  inherited   these traits  and  religion became  for  him  the central focus of his life.4   His quest led him to abandon  the Anglicanism of his father and to turn  instead to the evangelical  Methodists. As a man  who found in Methodism a religious satisfaction  that  he could not find in the Church  of England, it is not surprising  that  Ryerson  found  the idea  of an  established  church  abhorrent. He naturally  saw his chosen denomination  as a major force for spiritual  good in the young colony and  the proposition  that  it be discriminated  against  in favour of a church  he  had  left  thus seemed  both  absurd  and  morally  dubious.  Marriage  of church and state, Ryerson was fond of saying, was "adultery."
If it was politics in the  broadest sense that  shaped Strachan's view of religion,
it was religion that  determined  Ryerson's view of politics. Strachan objected to undirected  religious enthusiasm, such as that  practised by the Methodists, because of the dangers  it implied  for the social order and  the state.  Ryerson objected  to the  formal  linkage of church  and  state  because it degraded  the  true  purpose of religion.  "When   we see  the  heavenly  affection  which  she  [the  church]   infuses into  the  minds  of  men  represented  as nothing  more  than  an  attachment to a particular constitution," Ryerson  complained,  "we  are sensible that  the religion of the  meek Saviour  is being made  to bleed by a wound  more fatal  than  those which are inflicted  by the ravings of infidelity."5  The formalized  view of religion as a social agent collided with the evangelist enthusiasm of North American Methodism.
Underlying  this clash was a commonly held belief that  education  and  religion
were  inextricably   related   to  each  other  and  to  the  creation  of  social  values. Christian  values developed through  a sound school system were seen by both men as the  bedrock  of moral  standards for man  and  governments.  And  as both also realized, the issues were all the more important  because they were concerned not so much  with the present  as with the future.  As Ryerson said, in the school yard "we see, in embryo, our future  Legislators, Ministers, Physicians, Parents."6
The  issues involved  were  so basic to the  development  of the  colony and  so
controversial  that  the initial  debate  soon widened to deal  with other  matters.  In the  process  Ryerson  became  as much  identified  with  political  matters  as  was Strachan. Certainly  both  men  found  themselves associated,  sometimes willingly and  on  occasion  unwillingly,  with issues far  beyond the  realm  of education  and religion.  This  was  perhaps  inevitable.  The  questions of  education  and  religion were  fundamental  expressions  of  developing  colonial  values.  As a  result  their debate  had  implications   not  only  for  the  questions of  church  establishment  or school systems but for the much  more general question of the direction the colony was to take in future  years.
Strachan needed  no  justification  for  involvement  in  political  matters.  It  was central  to his own views. Ryerson, however, with his belief that religion was above politics, was always somewhat  on the defensive about  his political activities. Nor

23

STRACHAN & RYERSON

was his position made easier by recurrent  criticisms that  he was using his post as editor of the Methodist  Christian Guardian  (Toronto) to promote his own views. Ryerson  always  maintained   that  religion  and   related  concerns  lay  behind   his forays into  the  political  issues of  the  day  and  to some  extent  he  was correct. Religious concerns first brought  Ryerson into the arena  of public controversy and these issues continued  to  dominate  in  his assessment of more secular  concerns. Nevertheless, it  must  be noted  that  Ryerson  was as much  a  controversialist  as Strachan  and  once challenged on a topic, any topic, he refused to back down.
For both historical and contemporary reasons Ryerson's widening debate with Strachan   tended  to  draw  him  toward  the  developing  Reform  Party  in  Upper Canada. Historically, Methodism was associated with reform elements in England and it would seem that many members of the church  equally tended to sympathize with  reform  in  the  colony. This  was reinforced  by the generally  hostile attitude of  the  Compact, and  most  notably  Strachan, toward   Methodism,   and  by  the support  found in Reform circles for the Methodist  opposition to church establish­ ment.  In  one sense then,  Egerton  Ryerson  became  a  member  of the opposition because John  Strachan was a  member  of the  government. Whatever  the  exact reasons, Ryerson found  that  in the turbulent  climate  of the late 182o's temporal  and  secular  matters  were inseparable. Before long  he became  almost  as much  a symbol of reform as Strachan  was a symbol of conservatism.




Y.T TO   DEAL   ONLY  with  the  personal  antagonism  between these two men, and  their associations with political movements in the years before
1837, would be to distort their true significance. A closer examination  of their positions and of the way in which these positions evolved, reveals certain cross currents.  Strachan, on occasion, expressed surprisingly  liberal  views and  Ryerson quite  conservative ones. Such an examination  also shows that  beneath  the contro· versy over  an  established  church  and  current   political  topics lay  a  number  of commonly held opinions as to the values necessary for the proper development of Upper  Canada.
The  liberal side of the conservative Strachan may  be shown  by two examples. First, as is well known, his proposed University  for Upper  Canada as set out  in the 1827 charter  was much  more open than  were the  English universities of the time.  It would,  it  was true,  be associated with  the  Church  of England  and  its divinity  school  open only  to students  of that  faith.  In  all other  areas,  however, students  of  any  denomination  were free  to  attend. Second,  Strachan's attitude toward  elementary  education  was very similar  to  Ryerson's.  Drawing  from  his Scottish  heritage  he  rejected  the  class-oriented  English  system in  favour  of an open,  tax-supported school  system  that   would  allow  the  poor  as  well  as  the

STRACHAN & RYERSON

wealthy access to education.7  Intelligence, he believed, should be allowed an opportunity to develop whatever  the social class from which it originated. It was a  position  that   seemed  rather  strongly  to  favour  the  encouragement of social mobility for someone committed  to a conservative society, but then it must be remembered   that  Strachan was the  product  of a working  class family. He  was well aware  that  one did not have to come from the elite to develop the conserva­ tive values which he considered both so important and so proper.
That  Ryerson  was not  quite  as radical  as either his opponents  or some of his supporters   may  have  thought   began  to  become  apparent in  1833.  As  Upper Canadian politics became increasingly polarized, Ryerson found it increasingly uncomfortable to be associated, even casually, with radicals like William Lyon Mackenzie.  His  visit to England  that  year, the attempt  of Canadian  Methodism to work with English Wesleyanism, and English radical Joseph Hume's comments on  the  desirability  of  "independence" for  Canada   all  served  to  emphasize  to Ryerson  his fundamental attachment to the monarchy  and  British constitutional practice.  Ryerson  soon found  himself engaged  in a controversy  with  Mackenzie that  was, in some ways, more bitter than  his long standing  debate with Strachan. In  the  ensuing  months  he  made  it clear  to his readers  that  he had  completely dissociated  himself from  radical  reform. Subsequent  events reinforced  this aver­ sion to Radicalism. By the time he returned  to the editorship  of the Guardian  in
I 838, after  a four  year absence, many of his editorials revealed strong  conserva­
tive tendencies.
The  common  ground   between  Ryerson  and  Strachan continued  to  increase through   the  184o's.  Ryerson,  it  is true,  was more  amenable   to  the  union  of Upper  and  Lower Canada. Also, while Strachan's influence in government  circles decreased with  the collapse of the Family Compact,  Ryerson's grew sharply  with his  appointment as  Superintendent of  Education   in I 844.  Nevertheless,  while differences remained  in positions and  policies, the decade's  tensions tended  to emphasize   their   common   ground   and   common  opponents.   Neither  man   felt comfortable   with   the  political  tendencies  of  these  years  nor  with  their  most powerful expression, the Reform  Party of Robert  Baldwin and  Louis Lafontaine. "Partyism," patronage, secularism,  and  radicalism  often  seemed  to  be the  real meaning  of the  Reform  version of responsible government.  This  was as true  for Ryerson  as for  Strachan and  it simply reinforced  his conservatism. His involve­ ment  in government  in these years came, after all, in defence of the conservative administration of William  Henry  Draper.  Values of "loyalty, order, stability"­ conservative  values -seemed  threatened   by challenges from  the  left  and  both men were led increasingly to similar views as they grew older.
Nothing  better  illustrates  this trend  than  the way in  which  their involvement in  the  tortuous  University  question  developed. Strachan's original  charter,  how­ ever  liberal  by  English  standards, had  been  vehemently  opposed  by all  those,

25

STRACHAN & RYERSON

including  Ryerson, who saw it as an attempt  to establish the Church  of England in  Upper  Canada. That  opposition  had  effectively prevented  any  action  on the charter  for  years. Successive administrations had  altered  the  original  concept  of the  University   until,  by   1849,  Robert   Baldwin   established   a  largely  secular University  of Toronto  to act as the centre of higher education in Canada West.
The  defeat  of Strachan's intentions  may  have  given Ryerson  satisfaction  but the  new  University  of  Toronto  certainly  did  not.  Ryerson's  opposition   to  a University  dominated by the  Church  of England  had  never implied  support  for a secular university. Religion and higher education,  he felt, were best tied together and  this  included  the  presence of denominational colleges. Consistent  with  this attitude was his  involvement  in  the  creation  of  the  Methodist   Upper  Canada Academy  ('later Victoria  College)  and  his willingness to seek government  funds for that institution. In his acceptance of government  support, often to the dismay of other Methodists, and in his support  for denominational universities, Ryerson's views were not that different from those of Strachan. The only basic disagreement was whether  the Church  of England  should  have exclusive or dominant support from the government for its particular  institution.
Even that difference disappeared  with the creation of the University of Toronto.
Strachan had  lost his original  charter  and  was reduced  to following in the foot­ steps of the  Methodists  by setting  up a denominational college. In  fact  his  pleas for support  pointed to the precedents set by Victoria  College and the Presbyterian  Queen's University,  asking simply for "those  privileges that  have been granted  to others."8  Both men were by this time in an  identical  position on  the question  of higher  education.  They supported  the principle  of  government-aided denomina­  tional  colleges and  they were united in their hostility to the "Godless University" that  had been established at Toronto. The similarity could not help but be noticed by contemporaries. As early as 1846 a supporter of non-denominational univer­ sities, smarting  under the combined criticism of two of the most powerful church­  men  in  Canada, complained  of  "two  cheaply  made  Doctors,  till very lately the most  implacable  enemies,"  now  working  in  alliance  to  prevent  the  creation  of the new University.
The  common  views that  Ryerson and  Strachan held on educational and other matters  thus indicates that  they cannot  be used as some sort of statement of thesis and  antithesis within early Upper  Canadian society. For in spite of the often acrimonious  clashes their positions on various issues and  on the basic relationship of  church,  education,  and  society had  many  similarities.  Moreover,  these  simi­ larities were, in many ways, quite  conservative ones. Many  of the  positions taken by Ryerson  as much  as by Strachan  would seem to support  the  contention that  there  existed  within  Upper   Canada   a  strong  conservative  tradition.10   It is a minor,  but interesting, point that  Ryerson, on his trip  to England  in 1834, found his  own  beliefs  reflected  among  that  group   which  he  termed   the  "moderate

STRACHAN & RYERSON

Tories,"  and  that  his opposition  to the Family Compact  was never expressed as opposition  to  conservatism  in  itsel£.11  John  Strachan   may  have  been somewhat more liberal than  his opponents thought  but Egerton Ryerson was certainly more conservative than  the more  radical  reformers had hoped  in those early years.
If it is not  possible to use Strachan  and  Ryerson as examples of two dramati­ cally alternative ideological streams, neither is it possible to use them to prove that  there  was  in  fact  an  incipient   underlying  consensus within   Upper  Canadian thought.12  To do so would  be to ignore two things. First, for all their agreements there remained serious and profound disagreements. Second, and more important, there  was a third  element  present  through  these years. This  element, most obvi­ ously represented  by William  Lyon Mackenzie's supporters  in the 183o's and the Clear Gri·ts in the later  184o's and 185o's, had a different, and more radical view of the proper  course for Canada. In those areas of most interest to Strachan and Ryerson, education  and  religion, the Radicals viewed with suspicion any associa­ tion between church  and state. With the support of other  reform elements, includ­
ing powerful individuals  like George Brown, this group often forced Strachan and Ryerson to take a common stand. The basic and profound  differences that existed were what  made  issues such  as the Clergy Reserves and  the  problem of the Universities so difficult to resolve.
Yet the issues eventually  were resolved and it might  be tempting  therefore  to
argue  that  whatever  clash had  existed in the 183o's and  184o's a consensus was emerging, at  least in  these basic areas, by the 185o's. Even a conclusion such as this  would,  however,  be  premature. These  issues were  resolved not  because an ideal solution was found which could appeal to all but because an acceptable one, sometimes  barely  tolerable,  was  discovered.  The   final  solution  of  the  Clergy Reserves Question or Universities question did not completely satisfy Ryerson, Strachan, nor  for  that  matter  ·the Clear  Grits.  They  were at  best  compromise solutions wrung from often  reluctant  alliances of various groups within Canadian society.
It is in  this process of compromise  that  the relationship  between Ryerson and Strachan and their influence on the development of Upper  Canadian traditions becomes  meaningful.    Where   common   beliefs  were   challenged   they  worked together  or,  more  accurately, worked  separately  toward   the  same  goals. Thus Ryerson  and  Strachan's influence  was  brought  to  bear  jointly  to  ensure  that religion would not be removed from the educational  process and to preserve denominational  universities.   Conversely,  Ryerson  often   worked   with   Reform elements to defeat Strachan's policies on church establishment.  Many of the basic issues confronting  Ryerson and Strachan  were resolved through  such compromises because compromise was the only way to gain the necessary support  from shifting coalitions  of  conservatives,   moderates,  and   radicals.  Answers  were  eventually

STRACHAN & RYERSON

found  after  years of deadlock, only because it  became  increasingly  apparent  to those involved that they would never achieve their ideal solution.
The growing recognition of the necessity for compromise was what put Ryerson into  an  increasingly  powerful position as time  went on. His moderate conserva­ tism  put  him  in  the  middle  of widely ranged  views. It  was an  uncomfortable  position, open  to attack  from  both extremes, but it was also an ideal  place from which to form  alliances in the face of more dreaded alternatives. This is why, in part,  the outsider of the 182o's became the voice of  the government  in the 184o's on questions of education  and remained in that position until he retired from the post of Superintendent of Education  in 1876. Whatever  arguments  Ryerson had with various administrations (and  there were many of them) , he survived for the reason  that  his positions remained  close to  the  compromise  solutions acceptable  to the majority.
In  contrast  John   Strachan  found  himself  with  increasingly  less influence  on successive administrations. In  the  185o's,  at  a  time  when  John  A. Macdonald forged a new moderate conservatism while George Brown worked to absorb the radicalism  of  the  Clear  Grits, Strachan  found  that  his extreme  positions found little support. Like William Lyon Mackenzie,  Strachan found  that  the  polariza­ tion of the 183o's was not acceptable a generation  later. There  is perhaps a certain irony  in  Strachan's warning  to  his clergy  that  the  Church   of  England  should settle the Clergy Reserves on a basis that  would leave it independent of the gov­ ernment. "Till  such  separation  take  place,"  he  warned, "it  is clear  from  past experience that  we can have no peace."13 In the quest for the marriage  of church and  state,  it would seem, even the more ardent suitor finally realized the match was impossible.
Strachan's failure  to achieve his goals does not  mean  that  he is without  long term  significance  in  Canadian   history.  Indeed, his legacy  is in  many  ways as important as that  of Ryerson. First, in practical  terms, in his work on the 1816
Common  School Act and  its subsequent  amendments he developed  much  of the
framework  for  education  in  Upper  Canada. It was a structure which  Ryerson would  complete  years later.  Second, and  more  important, Strachan   provided  a counterweight   to  more  radical  views. His  extreme  positions  were  not  popular enough  to  determine the direction  of religion and  education  in  Upper  Canada. As has been argued,  however, many of his positions appealed  to those with more moderate  views, including  Ryerson. It  is perhaps  an indication  of the  power of such  a combination  that  these two men between  them so dominated  the forma­ tion of educational and religious institutions in Upper  Canada.
Through the  clashes and  compromises of a  half century  the  basic institutions
of the  colony were established. Consensus did  eventually  emerge out of  compro­ mise as those schools and universities became accepted  as the interpreters of social values. It  was a consensus achieved not at the time of their establishment  hut  as

STRACHAN & RYERSON


new  generations went through them. This was  perhaps fitting, for  both Ryerson and Strachan  had always known that it  was  the  future generation which would determine the  nature of Canada.

NOTES

1 For  a  biography of  Strachan see J. L.  H.  Henderson, John  Strachan  r778-1867
(Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press, I969).
2   Strachan to Dr. James Brown  (Oct. 2I,  I8o9). Cited  in J. L. H. Henderson, John
Strachan: Documents and  Opinions (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart,  I969),  26.
3  John Strachan, A  Sermon Preached  at York, Upper Canada, Third of July  1825, on the Death  of the  Late  Bishop of Quebec (Kingston: n.p.,  I826).
4  For  a biography of  Ryerson   see  C.  B.  Sissons,  Egerton   Ryerson   His  Life   and Letters, 2  vols.  (Toronto, I937,  I947). See also Neil  McDonald and  Alf Chaiton, eds., Egerton Ryerson  and  His Times (Toronto: Ryerson, I978).
5  Sissons, vol.  I,  24-2 5·
6   Christian Guardian (Jan. I6, I83o).
1 J.D. Purdy, "John Strachan's Educational Policies,  I8I5-I84I,"  Ontario History,
64, No.  1  (March I972), 45-64.
8   Strachan to  Governor  General  Lord   Elgin   (Jan.  20,   I85 I).  Cited in  Arthur Doughty, ed.,  The  Elgin-Grey Papers,  vol.  2  (Ottawa: Public  Archives  of  Can­ ada, I 937), 802.
9   Toronto Examiner (Feb.  I8,  I846). Cited  in Sissons, vol. 2, ro6.
10  On   the  conservative tradition in  Upper Canada see S. F.  Wise, "Upper Canada and  the Conservative Tradition," Edith  Firth, ed., Profiles of a Province  (Toronto: Ontario Historical Society,  I967), 20-33.
11  Christian Guardian (Oct. 30, I833).
12  See  on  this  question of consensus  and  conflict,  S. F.  Wise, "Liberal Consensus or Ideological  Battleground,"  Canadian  Historical  Association, Historical   Papers, I974,  I-I4.
13  John Strachan: Documents and Opinions, 226.




BISHOP TO KING
 

David Solway


Sir, the  kingdom  is all in turmoil.
The knights refuse to bring  you tribute and  converse only with their  grooms;

the rooks are  unprepared for war and  covet  the center  of the board; and  as for  the queen,  I must  report

POEM

she enjoys the hourly  attentions
of your trusted, praetorian pawn. The pawns themselves are in revolt:

why risk their  precious  lives, they ask, in your hereditary wars
for a speech at the funeral-pyre?

You see what  lack of faith  will do? The bishops, who preach  and  advise, are in despair.  It's  modern times.

And even the bishops themselves
have  been seen without their  vestments in impious communion with  the pawns.

And  this is sufficient reason, sir, why our policy and  design
have grown so indiscriminate.

There is nothing we can do but wait. History  may run in cycles
or a messiah may appear

and  our great  distemper be cured. Until that  time, be reconciled
with appropriate analogies,

as chess, for example: after  years of erratic play, a master  comes
or a prodigy  redeems  the game.




THE POWERS OF THE PJIWN

David Solway

"The pawns are the soul of chess"- PHILIDOR

The king can move a single square without restrictions made
but  once he topples  from  his place, no ransom  to be paid.

go

POEM

The queen, as you might  well expect's a complicated dame;
she does most anything she wants
and  quite  controls the game.

The bishop  is a sly old fox, strategically oblique;
if there  is trouble  on the board
he is not far  to seek.

And some are fascinated by that  most eccentric knight
who gallops  rather awkwardly but  loves a bloody fight.

The stately  rook's  a mighty  piece and  mainstay of t.e
he'll  beat  the bishop anytime and  overwhelm the horse.

But never  underestimate the  powers  of the  pawn
who can  promote into a queen and  put a kingdom on,

or moving  humbly up the board, killing  on the side,
outpriest the priest, and  leave the knight without a horse  to ride,

and  trip  the elevated rook to bring  it crashing down,
and  nudge the psychopathic queen
into  oblivion,

and  stop  before great  Caesar's throne, a tiny  regicide,
and  watch  a cornered monarch fall and  ponder how  he died.


MONTALEMBERT
AU CANADA FRANCAIS
-5

Un Aspect des relations culturelles des deux mondes (I8JO-I9JO)


Pierre Savard





ON NE SAURAIT SE  FAIRE AISRMENT une idee aujourd'hui de Ia place  qu'ont occupe dans  Ia vie culturelle  et  religieuse de notre  long  rge siecle les "illustrations et celebrites" catholiques  de Ia France.1 Les ecrits de Lamennais   premiere  maniere  font  partie  de !'arsenal   des adversaires  du  galli­ canisme souvent entendu  ici comme !'entente du haut  clerge avec !'administration britannique. La  philosophie meme  de  Lamennais suscite des  debats  passionnes. On  utilise aussi son autorite  contre l'enseignement  mutuel. Dans les annees  r83o, les patriotes  repandent les Paroles d'un  Croyant  pour  fouetter  l'ardeur l'evolu­
tionnaire  contre  !'administration britannique. Lamennais disparaitra  ou  a peu
pres ensuite  condamne  par  Rome,  engage  dans  Ia voie d'un  socialisme  qui  dit
peu  aux  leaders  canadiens  tandis  que  s'amenuise   le  cercle  de  ses admirateurs ici.2    Son  frere,  le fondateur  de congregation  sera  le plus connu  des deux  apres r85o. Lacordaire suscite un interet  plus durable.  Les conferences de Notre-Dame ont  leur echo  jusqu'aux  bards du Saint-Laurent ou elles trouvent  des imitateurs. La venue des dominicains dans les annees  x88o qui s'etablissent  dans les grandes villes et se font  un  nom dans l'enseignement  de Ia philosophie et de Ia theologie ravive !'interet pour Ia personne et le nom du fondateur3  qui laisse son empreinte dans   Ia  toponymie   quebecoise:   une  grande   artere   de  Montreal,  et  un  des innombrables lacs du Quebec  portent son nom. Un concours de circonstance  fera
que le nom de Lacoroaire  sera associe pendant  plusieurs decenrries a un florissant
mouvement  d'abstinence  alcoolique  repandu   par  tout  le Canada fran ais.4  Plus connu encore peut-etre fut le nom d'Ozanam createur  de Ia Societe Saint-Vincent
de  Paul  promise  a un  developpement  prodigieux  au  Canada fran  ais  a partir
du  premier  groupe  cree a Quebec  en  1846  par  Ie docteur  Joseph  Painchaud, ancien  etudiant a Paris.5    Ozanam, lui, a droit  au  nom  d'un  hameau  et d'un  lac
dans Ia toponymie sans compter  quelques rues de villes comme Quebec.  D'autres noms aujourd'hui plus oubli.es nourrissent Ia pensee d'ici tels les ev.eques et clercs

32

MONTALEMBERT

Dupanloup, Pie, dom Gueranger,  Rohrbacher, Gerbet, Gaume, Perreyve. Le mouvement  des zouaves fait repandre les biographies de Lamoriciere, de Pimodan, du general de Sonis et d'autres "soldats chvetiens." Les politiques comme Broglie ou  Falloux  se  retrouvent  dans  les bibliotheques  mais sont  mains  Ius parce  que
trop  lies  a Ia structure  politique  fran<;aise. Des ecrivains  mineurs  doublement
recommandables pour !'inspiration religieuse et I'orthodoxie  y occupent  une place
de  choix:   Laprade, Brizeux,  Eugenie  de  Guerin  sans  parler  de  Madame  de
Craven.  Nul  n'atteint Ia celebrite  de Louis Veuillot, maitre  a penser et a ecrire
de  generations   de  Canadiens   fran<;ais depuis  deja  le  milieu  du  siecle.  Cette
influence incalculable  va se maintenir  Iongtemps dans  notre siecle. La faveur  de heros catholiques  de Ia generation  de I87o comme le comte de Mun  ou celle plus tard  de  Fran<;ois Veuillot  n'atteindra jamais  celle de !'auteur des Parfums  de Rome.6

I. Le defenseur de l'Eglise

Claude  Galarneau et Philippe  Sylvain ont raconte  Ia decouverte  du defenseur de l'Ecole libre et de Ia Iiberte religieuse par  un seminariste de Saint-Hyacinthe, Joseph-Sabin   Raymond. Des  I83 I,  Raymond,  Iecteur  de l'Avenir, prend  con­ naissance des ecrits de Montalembert comme sa lettre celebre sur Ia foi du 3 aoO.t
I 83 I  et  le  fameux  discours sur  Ia liberte  de I'enseignement  a Ia  Chambre  des
Pairs.  En  I833  on  repete  au  Seminaire  de Saint-Hyacinthe, Iors des exercices
publics, le "Proces  de !'Ecole  Libre" avec les discours de Montalembert, de Lacordaire et de Coux. En  I844, ce sont les plaidoyers sur Ia Iiberre de l'enseigne­ ment  qui sont en Vedette alors qu'un  ecolier joue avec brio le role de Montalem­ bert.  En  I83g,   Raymond   s'est  enhardit   a  ecrire  au  grand  orateur  catholique. Montalembert lui  adresse son Histoire  de Sainte-Elisabeth  de  Hongrie  parue  en
I836  et lui  fait  expedier  par  son editeur  Lecoffre Ies autres  oeuvres au fur  et a
mesure  de  leur  parution. En  voyage en  Europe  de  novembre  I842  a octobre
I 843,  Ie pretre  canadien   a  l'ame  romantique est re<;u  par  Montalembert et, ii
Iaisse un recit plein d'exaltation de Ia rencontre  de son heros. Raymond  n'est pas le  seul  professeur  de  college  qui  sache  passionner  ses eleves  pour  l'actualite religieuse et politique  de !'Ancien  Monde: un abbe Bouchy au college de Sainte­ Anne-de-Ja Pocatiere  fait de meme. En  I844, Raymond  s'ouvre a son correspon­ dant  des raisons qui l'attirent vers !'oeuvre  de Montalembert et sa  patrie. "Vous  avez contribue  a maintenir Ia Iiberte d'enseignement  dans notre pays" affi.rme-t-il peremptoirement. L'abbe  fait  allusion ici  a !'usage  des ecrits  de Montalembert pour  ceux  qui  Iuttent   pour  Ia  creation  d'une   premiere  universite  canadienne­ fran<;aise et  catholique   dont  Ies fonds  pourraient  venir  des  Biens des Jesuites
confies au  gouvernement a la fin du  I8e siecle a !'extinction  de Ia compagnie  au
Canada. Et  le  clerc  de  rappeler  le reconfort  de Ia France  catholique  pour  ses
compatriotes  qui comme lui s'extasient sur Ies cathedrales gothiques "ces prodiges


33

MONTALEMBERT

de l'art  de la foi de nos peres." Raymond  ne doute  pas "des  esperances que la France,  malgre  !'indifference   qui  ronge  encore  une  partie  de  la  societe,  peut donner  a la  religion." Meme  Paris  offre des consolations  par son archiconfrerie du  Sacre-Coeur  de  Marie, ses conferences de Saint-Vincent-de-Paul et  "!'esprit de foi et de zele qui anime  cette  jeunesse d'intelligence et de coeur" que le clerc canadien a vu au Cercle catholique.7
Quelques  annees  plus tard  la question romaine  defraie  la chronique  des  jour­ naux canadiens. La question du pouvoir temporel  du Pape est aprement debattue dans  la  vallee  du  Saint-Laurent. La  lutte  est  inegale.  D'un   cote  un  earn!de liheraux   avances  autour   du   journal  Le  Pays  denonce  l'etat   arriere  des  Etats pontificaux  sous !'administration papale  et  defend  le droit  du  peuple  italien  de disposer  de  lui-meme.  Le  clerge  et  les autres   journaux   prennent  massivement partie  pour l'inregrite  des Etats  pontificaux s'alimentant au  Monde, ala Civilita cattnlica  et aux  ecrits de Veuillot.  Le discours de  Montalembert a  la Chambre des Pairs ne manque  pas de connaitre la reproduction dans les Melanges religieux, feuille  officieuse de  l'eveche  de  Montreal,  des  le  15  fevrier  1848.  L'orateur y rappelle que "l'independance temporelle du Saint-Pere est le patrimoine  de toutes
les nations chretiennes."8  Le discours celebre de 1849 a I'Assemblee Nationale ou
Montalembert compare  l'Eglise  a une  femme  et  a une  mere  est aussi repandu
au Canada.9
L'oeuvre  de l'historien  religieux semble tot connue au Canada: les vieilles bibliotheques  contiennent   de  nombreuses  et  anciennes  editions  de l'Histoire  de Sainte-Elisabeth  de  Hongrie  et  des Moines  d'Occident acquises  peu  apres  leur
parution.u  Des  revues  litteraires  offrent  a leurs  lecteurs  des  reproductions du
defenseur  de  l'art   chretien,  du  biographe  de  Lacordaire ou  de  l'historien  des
Moines  d'Occident.11  Les biographies du grand  catholique sont aussi nombreuses dans les bibliotheques  paroissiales ou de colleges.12  Le grand  poete canadien  de l'epoque,  Octave  Cremazie  alors en exil en  France  fait  part  de son admiration
pour  le talent  litteraire  de  Montalembert  dans  une  Iettre  de I 867  a son  ami
l'abbe  Casgrain  qui  fait  partie  de  la redaction  du  Foyer  Canadien. Regrettant
l'insipidite   des  reproductions   fran aises
qu'on  y donne  des pages des "beaux  genies catholiques" comme  Montalembert, Gerbet, Ozanam, Veuillot et Brizeux.m 3
D'autres Canadiens  ecrivent  au  grand  ecrivain  catholique pour  lui presenter leurs  oeuvres et 'lui dire leur  admiration. Le directeur  de  la  Revue  canadienne
adresse  un  abonnement   en  hommage  a Montalembert. Le  comte  remercie  en
soulignant  qu'il  a ete frappe  par l'article "Une conclusion  d'histoire  de Fran ois­
Xavier  Garneau." Il conseille aux  Canadiens  de se consoler "d'avoir ete separes par  la fortune  de la guerre de leur mere-patrie,  en songeant  que cette separation leur  a  donne  des  Iibertes et  des droits  que  la  France   n'a  su  ni  pratiquer, ni conserver ni meme regretter."14  Dix ans plus tot, Chauveau presente son premier

34



roman  a Montalembert et i1r oit
 MONTALEMBERT

Guerin.  Regrettant "!'inaction et  l'obscurite"  auxquelles  il  est condamne  pour avoir  refuse de s'associer "aux  palinodies de ses contemporains  et a l'abaissement
de son pays," Monta:lembert  avoue qu'il  forme le voeu d'aller  un  jour visiter les Etats-Unis  et  le Canada. II declare savoir qu'il  retrouvera  dans  ce demier  pays "une image fidele de Ia vieille France dans ce qu'elle a de plus recommandable.m5
II.    Le thuriferaire des Etats-U nis et radversaire de V euillot
L'admiration que  Montalembert nourrit  a l'endroit  de Ia Grande  Republique
americaine  va l'eloigner  des ses amis canadiens. Au milieu du  Ige siecle, apres les
desillusions de  Ia  revolte  de  I837-38  et sous le regime de !'Union qui  favorise l'ex-Haut-Canada, il se trouve des intellectuels et des hommes d'affaires canadiens
pour  rever d'une  annexion  a Ia Republique  du Sud dont Ia prosperite les fascine.
Groupes   autour   de  feuilles  comme  I'Avenir  pus  Le  Pays,  ces  annexionnistes esperent   l'epanouissement  de  Ia  culture  franc;aise sous  Ia  banniere  etoilee  a
l'instar  de  Ia  Louisiane  qui  a  conserve son droit  civil et ou  on  parle  encore Ia langue  franc;aise. Une  forte  reaction  a cette tentation  de fusion du  Canada fran­
c;ais catholique  dans  le grand  tout  americain  anglo-protestant se developpe tant dans  les milieux  politiques  que  religieux. Le  nationalisme  et  l'ultramontanisme
aidant,  on se met  a depeindre  de plus en plus les Etats-Unis comme  une terre
de violence et d'immoralite. Le flot d'immigrants qui deferle du Canada fran(_;ais
vers le Sud ne fait qu'accentuer Ia reaction des journaux et de !'elite canadienne­ franc;aise. Encore  ici, seul un carre  de liberaux  ardemment democrates  defent les institutions   et  le  peuple   americains.   lis  souscrivent  volontiers  aux  paroles  de Lacordaire a I'Academie en I 86 I : "Ia democratie  americaine a fonde un grand peuple religieux, puissant, respecte, libre enfin." 16
Apres avoir  entretenu  des opinions meprisantes sur les Etats-Unis,  Montalem­ bert,  a partir  de  I848,  ne  tarit  pas l'eloge sur Ia republique  americaine  dont  il s'est  forme  une  image  des  plus  fiatteuses  a Ia lecture  d'articles   de  Henry  de
Courcy,  de Lacordaire, d'Ozanam, de Veuillot et de Ravignan. L'opinion  de de
Courcy correspondant de I'Univers a New-York se modifie a Ia suite des emeutes
Bedini qui font  ressortir un fond d'intolerance americaine indeniable. Montalem­
bert  se  detoume alors  de  de  Courcy  pour  s'allier  a Orestes  Brownson,  esprit
liberal  et  nationaliste  americain  vigoureux. Brownson devient  un disciple incon­
ditionnel  de  Montalembert  tandis  que  le  comte  epouse  Ia  vision  idealisee des Etats-Unis   de  son  correspondant.17   L'alliance  qu'il  cherche  en  vain  en Europe entre  l'Eglise  et  Ia liberte,  Montalembert croit Ia trouver  aux  Etats-Unis. Cette position  ne  peut  que  l'eloigner   de  Ia  grande  majorite   de  !'elite  canadienne­
franc;aise de  plus  en  plus critique  a 'l'endroit  des Etats-Unis. En  I8s8, Joseph­
Charles  Tache adresse au  "chef  du  parti  catholique  et notre  general  a tous" un
exemplaire  de Ia brochure  Des Provinces de !'Amerique  du Nord  et d'une  union


35

MONTALEMBERT

federale ensemble  de trente-trois articles deja  pam  dans  le Courrier du Canada. Tout  en remerciant  son correspondant  canadien  de l'avoir  eclaire sur la situation canadienne,    Montalembert   lui   signifie   carrement   qu'il    differe   totalement d'opinion   avec  lui  sur  les affaires  etats-uniennes  sur  lesquelles Tache  suit  de Courcy.18
Plus  spectaculaire est la  polemique  dans  la  presses canadienne en  I86s  a la suite de la publication  de !'article  celebre de Montalembert "Lavictoire du Nord aux Etats-Unis." Apres avoir vante la generosite des vainqueurs  et celebre la suppression  de  l'esclavage,  l'auteur   y vantait  !'Amerique qui  "pratique et  con­ serve la liberte  a un degre qu'aucune nation,  excepre l'Angleterre,  n'a encore  pu atteindre." Tout  au  plus deplorait-il  "la  mdesse de ses allures"  et une "certaine deperdition  du  sens moral qui semble se manifester  chez elle depuis  la  mort  de Washington."
Le Canada franc;ais avait suivi avec passion le grand  duel entre  le Nord et le
Sud.  Des volontaires  canadiens-franc;ais nombreux  avaient  servi dans les armees du  Nord.  Peu sensibles au  probleme de l'esclavage  l'elite canadienne-franc;aise n'eprouve   guere  de  sympathie  pour  le  Nord  dont  la  presse a  manifeste  une arrogance  certaine   a l'endroit  de  la  colonie  britannique durant les hostilites.19
L'article  de  Montalembert a pam  dans le Correspondant  de mai  I865.  Le Pays
de Montreal  qui reste le demier  bastion des liberaux  radicaux  canadiens-franc;ais le reproduit   triomphalement dans ses livraisons du  I I  au  I8  juillet. Le Courier du  Canada  de Quebec  a deja  denonce vigoureusement  !'article  le 30  juin  I86s qualifie  d' "enthousiaste  reclame  aussi maladroite qu'intempestive en faveur  des idees democratiques et des institutions republicaines,  reclame mal deguisee sous le manteau  trouv,e de la philanthropic negrophile."  Le Courrier du Canada du 3 au
Io  juillet se livre a une 11efutation de Montalembert. L'auteur rappelle la cmaure
des armees  nordistes, le sort miserable reserve a Jefferson  Davis president  dechu
de Ia Confederation et la pretendue  "liberte  donnee  aux  noirs  [qui]  n'est  autre
chose que  la  liberte  d'aller  mourir  de  faim  sur  les chemins  publics."  L'auteur anonyme  attire  !'attention sur  la decadence  du  catholicisme  americain,  dont  les gains  numeriques  attribuable  a !'immigration cachent  mal les nombreuses defec­ tions. On  ne pouvait  plus differer d'opinion  sur "la liberte comme en Amerique" pour  employer !'expression chere aux  catholiques  liberaux  de l'Ancien Monde.20
Autant   sinon  plus  que  par  ses positions face  aux  Etats-Unis, c'est  par  son attitude   face  aux  problemes religieux que  Montalembert perd  du  credit  aupres
d'une  fraction  de l'intelligentzia.  Le  joumaliste  du  CourTier du Canada  a la fin
de son article  du  10 juillet I86s  presente le comte comme un "declasse" politique qui "dans  un moment  de mauvaise humeur  ( ... ) a fausse compagnie au grand parti  catholique  franc;ais pour  courir  apres  ce  meteore  trompeur et  dangereux qui s'appelle  indifferemment  I' esprit moderne, l'humanite, le progres, ces niaiseries qui servent  de belier pour battre en breche la verite catholique." Deux ans aupa-

g6

MONTALEMBERT

ravant  avait  eu lieu le Congres de Malines ou les deux discours de Montalembert sur  "l'Eglise  libre  dans l'Etat libre" avaient  aggrave sa reputation  de catholique Iiberal.21   Le  8  decembre   I864,  Pie IX  avait  lance l'encyclique  Quanta  cura et le SyUabus errorum.  Le nom  de Montalembert devient synonyme de liberalisme et de compromission avec l'erreur  dans les milieux de l'ultramontanisme canadien­ fran ais.
mouches  dans la presse. Le Pays radical  parait  lisere de noir le I6 mars  I87o. II
consacre  un editorial  a vanter  "!'illustration  litlleraire," la "gloire  de la tribune"
et  "un   des  plus  nobles caracteres  de cette  epoque  troublee  si fertile  en  defail­ lances."  II en  profite  pour  regretter  les "restrictions  perfides" sur  les  idees de Montalembert qu'a  faites le Nouveau-Monde, organe  ultramontain de Montreal.
Au  meme  moment,  le  Pays  publie  a pleines colonnes les plaidoyers  du  proces
Guibord  ou l'Eglise est malmenee  par les procureurs  de la veuve qui exigent que
le  typographe  excommunie  soit  inhume   en  terre  chretienne.   Le  Courrier  du
Canada, la M inerve et le Nouveau  M onde se scandalisent  de voir le Pays rendre hommage   a  Montalembert. L'organe  radical  rapelle  le  23  mars  qu'il  n'a  fait
qu'imiter ses confreres  liberaux  parisiens. D'ailleurs,  ajoute-t-il  avec  une  pointe de mechancete, le Pape  n'a-t-il  pas fait dire une messe pour l'ame  du grand catholique?   II devient   usuel  d'opposer   Veuillot  et  Montalembert.  Quelques annees  auparavant on  associait leurs noms. En  I862  encore, !'Echo  du Cabinet de lecture  paroissial reproduit   une belle lettre  de remerciements  de Veuillot  au directeur  qui  l'a  felicite de son dernier  livre en la coiffant  d'une  eloge:  "le  lion de  la  polemique  ch11etienne  comme  M. de  Montalembert appelle  saint  Jerome dans les Moines d'Occident." 22  Veuillot est presente par les ultramontains comme: "l'homme de  lettres  le plus  parfait,  le plus complet  de cette  epoque."  On  con­ cede  du  talent  aux  liberaux  mais  on  regrette  leurs tendances  nefastes.  "Quels
beaux  monuments   plusieurs  d'entre  eux ne laisseront-ils pas  a la  posterite  dans
l'histoire,  dans  la  critique,  dans  la politique  chretienne  et, malgre  les tendances
gallicanes et Iiberales de Montalembert et de Falloux, que se sont egares quelque temps avec Mgr  l'Eveque  d'Orleans, quels services eminents  n'ont-ils  pas rendus
a Ia cause  catholique !"  soupire  un  des  jeunes intellectuels  ultramontains. 23  Au
premier  congres  catholique  canadien-fran ais           a Quebec  en  I 88o,  un  chef
de  file  ultramontain, Fran ois-Xavier
journalistes,  liberaux   et   ultramontains  autour   de   I 87o,  alimentes   par   leurs congeneres  fran  ais
Falloux, eux, avaient  bien campe une partie notable de leur existence."24
Les radicaux  n'hesitent  jamais a utiliser Montalembert pour embarrasser  leurs
adversaires   ultramontains. Arthur  Buies  dans  La   Lanterne   du   7  juin   I 86g rappelle  le  mot  que  Montalembert  aurait   attribue   a Veuillot:   "Les  liberaux n'ont  pas le droit  de nous refuser la liberte  puisque c'est leur  doctrine;  quant   a
nous, nous ne  pouvons  pas leur  accorder  parce  que notre  religion s'y oppose."25


37

MONTALEMBERT


Parmi  les joumalistes ultramontains qui semblent  s'etre  donne comme mission de reduire  a neant  le credit de Montalembert, Jules-Paul  Tardivel, veuillotiste inconditionnel  qui dirige la Verite  de Quebec  de  I 88 I  a I 905, OCCUpe une place
de  choix. Passant  sous silences les luttes des Montalembert pour  l'Eglise  et son oeuvre d'historien  religieux, Tardivel  s'attache encore en 1893 a rappeler  la "fin
lamentable" de "ce pauvre Montalembert" qui "avait  la rage au coeur, cette rage qui a entraine  tant d'esprits d'elite, mains orgueilleux, dans le schisme et l'heresie." Il est mort  de conclure le joumaliste  dans des sentiments  qui  ne peuvent qu'ins­ pirer  de graves inquietudes  sur le salut  de son ame.:2 s A l'instar  du  Courrier du Canada  et d'autres feuilles ultramontaines, la Verite  a reproduit avec satisfaction en  I885  la tirade  du cardinal  Pitra  contre les catholiques liberaux  dans laquelle Montalembert est nommement  denonce.27   La  Verite  ouvre aussi bien  larges ses colonnes au cure fran ais                                                                                             28
L'acharnement de Tardivel  s'explique  par  l'usage  que  font  de Montalembert
les liberaux  canadiens-fran($ais. Le chef du  parti  liberal  federal  Wilfrid  Laurier ne  manque   jamais  d'occasion  de se reclamer  du  liberalisme  anglo-saxon  et  de l'ecole de Lacordaire et de Montalembert tout en vilipendant Veuillot et ses thuriferaires  canadiens.29   Pour  Tardivel,  des radicaux  anticlericaux de 1' Avenir des annees  I 840  aux liberaux  de  I 880 en passant  par  les disciples canadiens  de Montalembert il y a filiation et commune  pensee. Voltaire,  ecrit-il dans la Verite du  3I   janvier  1885,  "engendra le philosophisme  impie  repandu   plus OU  mains dans   notre  pays  des  son  apparition   en  Europe,  et  importe   au  Canada  plus specialement  au  Canada  fran  ais
l'ecole  rouge de l'Avenir  et  du  Pays, des Doutre,  des Laflamme, des Dessaules, des Papin,  des Dorion, des Daoust etc.: I'ecole rouge engendra I'ecole des "poseurs au  radicalisme" de  nos  jours dont  la  Patrie  est le  principal  organe,  ecole qui absorbe rapidement la faction des liberaux plus moderes de l'ecole de Montalem­ bert."  Le  directeur  de  la  Verite  fait  trap   d'honneur aux  rouges.  Ce  sont  les liberaux  moderes sous la conduite  de Laurier  qui menent  le  parti  des la fin des
annees I870 et vont neutraliser peu a peu les tendances  radicales.
Au milieu de ces debats on n'en continue pas mains de lire Montalembert dans
les colleges et  les families bourgeoises. Hectorine  Langevin,  fille de sir  Hector, pere de la Confederation  et catholique bien-pensant, s'entretient de Montalembert avec Thomas  Chapais son futur  epoux en I 877 comme elle note dans son journal
intime.30   L'abbe  Napoleon  Bruchesi promis  a un  grand  avenir  episcopal est un liseur  de  Montalembert  au  debut   des  annees   I88o   qu'il   passe  a  Quebec.31
Montalembert reste pendant  longtemps un maitre  de !'eloquence  politique et academique.32  Le nom de Montalembert commande le respect. Quand  le vicomte Alfred  de Meaux  avec sa femme, fille du grand  ecrivain  catholique  et une ving­ taine  d'amis  visitent  Montreal  en  route vers le congres catholique  de  Baltimore de  I8go,  les Soeurs de la  Congregation  Notre-Dame de  Montreal  les  re oivent

MONTALEMBERT


avec  de  grands  egards.33   Dans  son  ouvrage  sur  l'avenir   du  peuple  canadien­ francais  ecrit  dans  les  annees   r89o,  Edmond  de  Nevers  raille  doucement  "Ia moyenne instruction" de !'elite  de son temps faite d'un  maigre bagage de latin et de Iitterature emporte  du college et dont le fin du fin consiste a causer des oeuvres de  Bonald,  de  Maistre,  de  Montalembert, de Veuillot,  de  denoncer  Zola et  de
critiquer  Hugo.84

III.     Un  modele  pour la jeunesse

Au tournant du siecle, le nom de Montalembert  est remis en honneur  dans les milieux  de  collegiens  et  d'etudiants  tant   en  France   qu'au  Canada fran<_;ais. Lionel  Groulx  eleve du  college de  Ste-Therese  decouvre  avec  enthousiasme  les grands  noms  du  catholicisme  frant;ais du  19e siecle a  commencer  par  Veuillot
puis l'abbe  Perreyve, Lacordaire, Ozanam,  Berryer, le pere Gratry,  de Maistre. 85
Le  "seduisant   Charles  de  Montalembert, le "fils des croises" le  jeune  pair  du proces  de !'Ecole  libre,  m'avait litteralement  enrouti:"  confiera-t-il  plus tard.  II va meme se demander s'il ne fera pas, pour mieux servir l'Eglise, carriere d'apatre
laic  plutot  que  de  pretre.86  C'est  dans  Ia biographie  par !'abbe Uon Bouthors
qu'il  a  decouvert  le grand  catholique.37   La correspondance  de  Montalembert et de Comudet le confirme dans son projet de "montalembertisation de Ia jeunesse" c'est-a-dire  de  preparer   un  laicat  apotre  qui  va regenerer  Ie Canada fran<_;ais.38
Pretre-professeur  au college de Valleyfield, il anime de 1903 a 1906 une "croisade d'adolescents" sous le double  signe du  Christ adolescent et du  jeune  Montalem­ bert.39 Groulx  va  ensuite  etudier  a  Fribourg  puis passe des  vacances en France chez le vieil amiral  de Cuverville,  un Breton qui a bien  connu  les grands noms du  catholicisme fran<_;ais de I 830 dont  Montalembert.  Orateur et inspirateur  de jeunes, Groulx  gardera  sa  vie  durant   un  culte  pour  Montalembert qu'il  aime citer comme un auteur  familier.40
Les  idees  Groulx   partagees   par  son  ami  I'abbe  Emile  Chartier   professeur au Seminaire  de Saint-Hyacinthe de 1904 a 1914 vont marquer !'Association catholique  de Ia  jeunesse canadienne ( A.C.J.C.) lanoee  part  des  jesuites  mont­
realais en  1904.41  C'est  le nom  de Montalembert qu'invoque le plus souvent de
1904-1908 le Semeur, organe de l'association.42
Ce nouveau  cours de Ia fortune  de Montalembert  s'est fait sentir des Ia fin des annees  1890.  En   1895,  l'abbe   Gustave  Bourassa  presente  une  conference  au
Cercle Ville-Marie.43  L'avocat Thibaudeau Rinfret,  Ie 9 mars  19oo, prononce  a
son tour  une conference  devant  ce cercle fonde par les Sulpiciens a l'adresse des etudiants   universitaires.44  Les cercles de l'A.C.J.C. proliferent  dans  les colleges. S'ils  adoptent  en   general   des  patronymes   canadiens,   plusieurs  se  mettent   a l'enseigne  de grands  catholiques de France  tel celui de Saint-Hyacinthe, un  des premiers qui  adopte  le nom  de Montalembert.45  C'est sans doute  a cette epoque


39

MONTALEMBERT

que le gouvernement  quebecois donne le nom de Montalembert a un canton  de
I'Abitibi qui s'ouvre a Ia colonisation.
La biographie  de Lecanuet a contribue  a cette renaissance montalembertienne.
Le premier tome paru a Paris en 1895 est salue avec enthousiasme dans Ia Revue canadienne  quelques  mois plus tard.46  Le meme accueil est reserve au deuxieme
tome  tandis  que  le troisieme, controverse en  France  ne fait  pas !'objet  de  men­ tion.47 Reedite  jusqu'en 1927, l'ouvrage  de Lecanuet  sera abondamment repandu  dans les bibliotheques  canadiennes. II ne suscite pas de reactions aussi passionnees au  Canada qu'en  France. Cependant, dans Ia premiere edition  (de 1912)  d'Une  Croisade d'adolescents Groulx rappelle Ia "mefiance" qu'on  peut sfirement entre­ tenir  sur  le compte  de certaines  pages du  volume.  Et !'auteur  de citer  un  juge­ ment tire du tome 4 du Dix-neuvieme  siecle du  jesuite Longaye: "Tout le monde sait  que  le grand  orateur  catholique  a  eu  Ia  rare  fortune  de  trouver  un  digne biographe,  le R. P. Lecanuet. Dans les trois volumes de !'eminent  historien, je ne regretterais  pour  rna  part,  qu'un   Ieger  exces de  complaisance  aux  temerites  de
1' Avenir   (tome  ler) et  une  adhesion  un  peu  trop  complete  aux  ressentiments
personnels de Montalembert pendant ses dernieres annees."'8
Rien  cependant au  Canada   ne  rappelle  des  debats  comparables a ceux  qui
entourent le centenaire  avorte  de Ia naissance  de l'ecrivain  catholique  en 1910.
Les Etudes  publient  un article du pere Leonce de Grandmaison auquelles Cana­ diens eussent volontiers souscrit. Le  jesuite loue l'ami  de college de Leon  Cornu­  det,  le  defenseur  de !'Ecole  libre,  l'auteur de  Sainte  Elisabeth  de  Hongrie,  le defenseur  du  pouvoir  tempore! et  de  la  liberte  de  I'enseignement.  II  propose
ensuite  qu'on   jette  le manteau  de  Noe sur  la  vie du  "solitaire  un  peu  morose de Ia Roche-en Brenil" "l'orateur trop optimiste a Malines" et "l'epistolier  virulent
des  dernieres  annees."  Enfin,  s'il  declare   plus  sage  qu'on   se soit  abstenu  de celebrer  le  centenaire   tout  en  felicitant  les  "jeunes   hommes"  qui  ont  fete  le "jeune  heros" dans  le numero de la revue M ontalembert  qui vient de paraitre.49
Au  Canada franc;ais le centenaire  de Montalembert ne laisse pas de trace  tandis
que  celui  de  Veuillot  en  1913  est  celebre  avec  pompes  dans  les  colleges et l'universite.50
Le nom de Montalembert continue de figurer en bonne place dans les manuels de litterature d'ici  a I'instar  des manuels  de  l'enseignement  libre fran<;ais.51  En
1925  parait  a Lachine  la  premiere  edition  du  Precis d'histoire  des litteratures
franfaises, canadiennes-franfaises, etrangeres et  anciennes des Soeurs  de  Sainte­
Anne.  Ce manuel  sera le plus repandu  dans les couvents et les colleges de jeunes filles jusque  dans  les annees  1950. L'auteur anonyme  y loue le "fervent  catho­
lique"  qui  "fit  a sa foi le sacrifice d'une  grande  et forte  amitie  en brisant  avec
Lamennais,   rebelle  a la  voix de l'Eglise."52   Puis  on  rapelle  que  "comme   Mgr
Dupanloup,  il  croyait  inopportune   Ia  definition   du   dogme  de  l'infaillibilite;
toutefois, il avait le coeur trop catholique pour ne pas l'accepter." 53

MONTALEMBERT


En  I9I6 se place un episode qui revele !'importance des ecrits de Montalembert pour  ses admirateurs. Antonio  Perrault, jeune  avocat  et  premier  president  de
l'A.C.J.C. en  I9o4  fait lire a Ia seance annuelle de Ia Societe Royale du Canada
une  longue  communication  "A  propos  d'une  opinion  de  Montalembert sur  le
Canada."u Familier  de !'oeuvre  du grand  orateur,  le jeune avocat  a trouve  dans "Un debat sur l'Inde au parlement  anglais" paru d'abord  dans Le Correspondant du  25 octobre  I858  un passage sur le Canada  qui lui semble empreint d'exagera­ tion.  L'auteur raconte  longuement  les circonstances  qui  entourent  !'article,  les
services rend us a Ia religion  par  Montalembert, son attachement a I'Angleterre,
son interet  pour  le Canada fran  ais                                          a Chauveau publiee
en  I900  puis en arrive  au debat fameux que rapporte l'ecrivain  catholique. Alors qu'il  est  a celebrer  Ia  politique  coloniale  de  l'Angleterre,  Montalembert ecrit: "Au  Canada, une noble race fran aise                                                                       a notre pays, mais restee fran aise                                                             a I'Angleterre
d'avoir  conserve ou acquis, avec une entiere liberte religieuse, toutes les libertes politiques  et  municipales  que  Ia France  a  repudiees."  Apres  avoir  rapporte  les
peripeties  du  proces  que  valut  a Montalembert Ia critique  du  regime  imperial
dans  son  article,   Perrault  revient  au   jugement  sur  l'histoire  du   Canada.  II
rappelle  que  Ia dette  du  Canada fran ais
fort controversee de l'historiographi.e canadienne, question que l'orateur franc;ais risout  "sans  Ia  moindre  hesitation."55   S'appuyant surtout  sur  Groulx  qui  vient
de donner  une serie  retentissante  de conferences a l'Universite  de Montreal sur
cette periode,  il souligne  que  "Ia liberte  chez nous ne fut  pas un don  mais  une
conquete" puis il rappelle  toutes les tracasseries que !'administration britannique fit aux chefs politiques et religieux du Canada  fran<;ais. "Les expressions conserves et acquis, employees par  Montalembert, se trouvent etre inexactes et son observa­
tion, a ce sujet, contraire  a Ia verite historique."56  L'optimisme  de Montalembert
pourtant   assez au  courant  des chases canadiennes  s'explique  du  fait  que  vivant
"loin  du  theatre  ou grandissaient  ces notions nouvelles, tout  a Ia joie d'acclamer
ces libertes  de l'heure   presente,  il oublia  les luttes, longues et penibles,  par  les­
quelles elles avaient  ete gagnees."57  L'auteur termine par un vibrant  plaidoyer  en faveur des "vaincus de  I 76o" et souhaite que se Ievent des imitateurs  de "!'intelli­ gence si largement  ouverte," du  "coeur  si haut  place''  de "l'ardeur," du  "desin­ teressement de l'homme  admirable" dont il a "voulu rappeler le souvenir." 58
Le  nom  et  l'exemple   de  Montalembert  s'estompent   dans  les  annees   I92o. L'A.C.J.C. valorise les heros nationaux  de Mgr de Laval  a Mgr Bourget en pas­
sant  par  Dollard   des  Ormeaux. A  partir  de  I935,  !'Action  catholique   qui  se repand  comme  une  trainee  de  poudre  sous les formes  de  J.O.C. et  de  J.E.C.
propose d'autres modeles tel Pier Giorgio Frassati. Le scoutisme a son tour  met en
valeur  Guy  de  Larigaudie apres  I 940. Les hommes politiques sont fascines  par
des grands  tenors  nationalistes  d'ici  comme  Bourassa ou,  s'ils sont  attaches   au

MONTALEMBERT

parti  liberal,  Laurier.  Les intellectuels cherchent  leur  inspiration  chez Maritain et  Mounier  qui, il faut  le dire  n'atteignent encore  que des couches fort  minces. La  journaliste Adrienne  Choquette  recueille en 1939 des Confidences  d'ecrivains canadiens-fran  ais.
Bruchesi mentionne  Montalembert alors comme lecture de jeunesse:  les nouvelles idoles litteraires  ant  pour  nom  Leon  Daudet,  Pourrat, Mauriac, Barres, Bazin, Bourget, Bordeaux, Bloy et Maurras. 59    En  1962, le Nouveau   journal  publie 97 reponses d'intellectuels sur leurs nourritures  livresques de taus les ages, de diverses professions et  de  tendances  ideologiques  varices.  Aucun  ne  cite  Montalembert alors que Veuillot  revient cinq fois.60   Les autodafes  qui ant  suivi la "Revolution tranquille" des annees 1960 et les ebranlements  conciliaires ant  acheve d'effacer le nom  de Montalembert des hibliotheques  de colleges et de paroisses. Le declin de  l'art  oratoire  et  le glissement des preoccupations vers le syndicalisme  aident
aussi a comprendre  que le grand ecrivain catholique  de I9e siecle n'interesse guere
aujourd'hui que les historiens.




LA FORTUNE DE  MONTALEMBERT au Canada fran  ais
un siecle apparait riche  d'enseignements  sur  la conjoncture ideologique.  L'astre du  general  des  troupes  catholiques  de  France   brille  d'un   vif  eclat  jusqu'aux
annees  I 86o. Defenseur  de la liberte au sens large,  protagoniste  a 1'occasion des
libertes nationales comme celle de la Pologne, gardien  des droits de la religion et
de  l'Eglise,  defenseur  de  l'Ecole  libre,  ami  des libertes  politiques  a  l'anglaise, defenseur inconditionnel du pouvoir tempore!des Papes, et hiographe  de Sainte Elisabeth de Hongrie  repandu  dans toutes les bibliotheques,  Montalembert a tout pour  edifier  l'intelligentzia  canadienne-fran aise
que chez ses "liberaux."
Les  differends  avec  Veuillot  idolatre   au  Canada qui  prennent,  transportes outre  Atlantique, un  sens  plus abstrait  encore  qu'en   France  c'est-a-dire  mains lie a  la  conjoncture   politique  et  plus philosophicotheologique, l'enthousiasme  et
!'admiration pour  la Republique  americaine  dans  laquelle  les elites canadiennes­
fran<;aises voient  de  plus en  plus comme  une menace  a leur  survie culturelle  et
religieuse, les hardiesses du  liberal  a  Malines  severement  desavouees par  Rome
minent considerablement  son credit. Ce qui n'empeche  pas d'admirer I'auteur des Moines  d'Occident et le jeune catholique  des annees 1830. Les ultramontains des annees  I870  et  r88o  voire ceux des annees 1890 l'opposent  sans cesse a Veuillot a I'avantage  du  directeur  de 1'Univers  et  insistent  lourdement sur  les dernieres annees  de  sa  vie.  Cet  acharnement  s'explique   par  l'usage   de  Montalembert "liberal   a  l'anglaise"   et  des  catholiques  liberaux   comme  Lacordaire que  font liberaux  et anticlericaux  canadiens-fran<;ais "anti-veuillotistes" decides.

42

MONTALEMBERT


A la fin du siecle, la querelle des freres ennemis s'estompe  au Canada fran($ais. Si  Veuillot  continue  d'y  etre  l'objet  d'un  culte  puissant,  Montalembert  devient l'idole  d'une  jeunesse de colleges. Groulx  puis l'A.C.J.C. lancent  des jeunes ala croisade a l'exemple  du  jeune catholique fran4_;ais des annees 1830. Le glissement de cette  mystique  veni un  nationalisme  d'ici  va toutefois eclipser Montalembert au  profit de heros comme  Dollard  et, a partir  de 1920, le nom du grand  catho­ Iique fran4_;ais n'eveille guere plus d'echoes.
Revelateur  sur les structures ideologiques et litteraires  du  Canada fran4_;ais traditionnel   apparait  egalement   l'etude   de  l'image   de  Montalembert.  On   y retrouve   l'influence   inappreciable  des  grands  modeles  fran  ais
peuple  perdu  au  milieu  des Anglo-saxons et confronte  a l'occasion  aux  grands modeles britanniques. Comme il arrive en ce cas, la gloire de Montalembert debarassee des contingences de la vie politique francsaise est comme revetue d'une aura. Les querelles politiques avec le regime imperial, par exemple, ont peu d'interet pour  les Canadiens pas plus que celles qu'entourent sa biographie  par  Lecanuet ou  l'agitation  autour   du   centenaire   manque.   Quant  au   faux   probleme   du catholicisme  social  de  Montalembert, il est sans echo au  Canada fran($aiS dont les elites s'eveillent  tard  a ces questions et vont chercher  leur inspiration  ailleuni que  chez les catholiques  lil:>eraux qu'une  confusion tenace  de l'historiographie a trop voulu rattacher au catholicisme social.
En  des temps  ou l'art  oratoire  occupe la place de choix dans la formation  de
la   jeunesse  des  colleges61    le  nom  de  Montalembert,  aureole   de  son  role  de defenseur de l'Eglise, maitre d'eloquence tant academique que parlementaire, ne pouvait  que briller d'un  vif eclat. L'ecrivain fran($ais avait aussi une place que ne pouvait  etre minime  dans  un monde scolaire ou de 1830 a 1960, "la" litterature c'etait   principalement la  litterature fran4_;aise  et  les grands  modeles,  autant   les grands  auteurs  catholiques  du  19e siecle que les classiques du  17e siecle.
Ce survol nous ramene enfin au probleme fondamental des emprunts  de l'intelligence  canadienne-francsaise. Pendant  le siecle qui  nous occupe ici, chaque generation  et chaque  ecole d'esprit  catholique  s'est nourrie  de l'exterieur  suivant ses besoins propres.  Cette  dialectique  de l'ici et  de l'ailleurs  a rendu  possible non seulement  la survie  mais  l'epanouissement  d'une  culture.  Notre  temps affecte a un fort  degre le mepris  a l'endroit  de ce qui n'est pas tire de notre  propre fonds. Et  les intellectuels  ne sont  pas  de reste. Dans  un article  magistral  sur  l'identite quebecoise  et  celle  de  l'Eglise  catholique   d'ici,  Fernand  Dumont   soupirait: "N'allons-nous  pas,  une  fois  de  plus,  dissoudre  nos  questions  dans  celles des autres."62   Venu  d'un  autre   bord  ideologique, Denis Moniere,  dans  sa  brillante
synthese sur  Le  developpement des ideologies au Quebec  des origines a nos jours
(Montreal, 1977)   discredite  l'ideologie  ultramontaine a cause  de son caractere
essentiel  d'importation.63    La  tache  de  l'historien  est  autre.   C'est  de  montrer pourquoi  telle ideologie  dure  dans  un milieu donne  d'ou  que soient ses sources.

43

MONTALEMBERT

L'illusion de   notre temps   de  se  suffire   a lui-meme vient   peut-etre du   fait   que sources, canaux et  formes d'emprunts s'avouent avec  moins de  candeur qu'autre­ fois  alors   que  l'ailleurs restait pare de  tous   les  prestiges. M ajar  et  longinquo reverentia selon  les temps.


NOTES

1 Sur   l'arriere-plan  France-Canada  fran<:;ais nous   renvoyons   le   lecteur   a  notre chapitre, "Les   Canadiens fran<:;ais  et  la  France de  la  'Cession' a la  'Revolution
tranquille' " dans  Paul  Painchaud ed., Le Canada  et le Quebec  sur la scene inter­
nationale  (Quebec, I977)  pp. 470 a 495· II y aurait aussi beaucoup a ecrire  sur les
catholiques d'ailleurs tel  O'Connell le grand  leader irlandais, Garcia Moreno, le
"president-martyr" de  l'Equateur connu  a travers la  biographie du  redemptoriste
fran<:;ais Berthe   qu'on  a  lu  de  Mercier  au  cardinal Leger,  de  Windthorst le chef
du  Centre allemand. On  retrouve certains de  ces  noms  evoques dans  les sources
cirees plus bas.

2    Voir  entre autres Philippe  Sylvain,  "Un disciple  canadien de  Lamennais,  Louis­ Antoine Dessaules" dans Les Cahiers des Dix  (Montreal, I969)   No 34, pp. 6I  a 83.
3  Elements  pour une sociologic des communautes religieuses au Quebec  de Bernard Denault et  Benoit  Levesque  (Montreal et  Sherbrooke, I975)   porte  sur  la  periode I837-I970. On   y  trouve  des  survols  historiques  bien  informes et  des  refl.exions
intt ressantes 	a I65),
4    Fonde en   I9I I  a Fall  River   (Mass.,  E.-U.)  par  le  dominicain  Joseph-Amedee
Jacquenet  ( I867-I942)  venu  de  France, le  mouvement se repand au  Quebec a
compter de  I935   (Le  mouvement   des cercles Lacordaire  et Sainte-Jeanne   d'Arc
au Canada, Quebec, s.ed. I946).
5   Voir   Robert  Rumilly, La  plus riche  aumone.   Histoire  de  la  Societe  de  Saint­ Vincent de Paul au Canada  (Montreal, I946). Ozanam fait  l'objet d'un  copieux  ouvrage de  plus  de 6oo pages  sous le titre  Frederic Ozanam, Sa vie et ses oeuvres
publie   a Montreal en  I887.  Signe  Pierre  Chauveau, fils de  Pierre-Joseph-Olivier
Chauveau, la compilation, sans grande originalite, "revele la popularite d'Ozanam
au  Canada fran<:;ais" (Maurice Lebel,  art.  Frederic Ozanam dans   Dictionnaire
des oeuvres litteraires du Quebec  ( ... ) Quebec, I978,  tome  I, p. 288).
6  L'etude de  !'influence de  Veuillot   reste  a faire.  On   trouvera beaucoup a glaner dans  les travaux de Philippe Sylvain  depuis  son  Henry  de Courcy  publie en  I955
a Quebec et  dans  ses articles  des Cahiers des Dix. Des ·ecrivains et  penseurs fran­
<:;ais  du  20e siecle  Ius au  Canada tels Barres,  Bazin,  Bordeaux, Maurras, Mauriac,
Maritain, Mounier, seul Bourget  a fait !'objet d'une •etude de Gilles  Dorion  (Paul
Bourget et le Canada, Quebec, I976).
7   Claude  Galarneau,  "L'abbe  Joseph-Sabin Raymond  et  les  grands  romantiques fran<:;ais I834-I857'' dans  le  Rapport  1963 de  la  Societe   historique du  Canada, pp.  8 I -88;   Philippe Sylvain,  "Le   premier  disciple   canadien de  Montalembert: l'abbe  Joseph-Sabin Raymond" dans   Revue   d'histoire  de  ['Amerique   franfaise, juin  I963,  pp.  93-103;  Jean Menard dans  Xavier  Marmier  et le Canada  avec des documents  inedits.  Relations  franco-canadiennes au  X!Xe siecle (Quebec, I967)
PP· 93·96  public   la  lettre   du   I6  juillet   I843,  ou  Raymond raconte sa  vistie  a
Montalembert et  rappelle  la visite  de  Marmier, admirateur de  Montalembert au
seminaire en   I849·  Les  citations sont  tirees  de  Sylvain   p.  IOI. Dans   un  article recent   sur   la  "Conception de  la  litterature chez  Joseph-Sabin Raymond" dans

44

MONTALEMBERT


Revue d'histoire  de  l'Amerique  franr;aise ( vol. 32, no 4, mars  I 979,  pp. s8s-6o2) Guy  Provost  rappe!le laplace importante de Montalembert auteur le plus cite par Raymond apn!s Chateaubriand et de Maistre (p. 6oo, n. 82).

8  Sur  la  question romaine au  Canada voir  les travaux de R. Sylvain,  en particulier "Quelques  aspects   de   l'antagonisme  liberal   ultramontain  au  Canada  franc;ais" dans  Recherches sociographiques, vol. VIII, no 3  (septembre-decembre I967), p.
286   a  289  et   de   Nadia  Fah-Eid,  "Les   Melanges  religieux   et   la  Revolution
romaine" dans  Ideologies au Canada   franr;ais, I8SO·I900  (Quebec, I97I)  qui  cite
cet extrait p. I04.
9  Par  exemple, extraits en appendice (pp.  2I0-2I2) des Conferences de Notre-Dame de Quebec par l'abbe  Jean Holmes, seconde  edition  (Quebec, I875).

10  La  bibliotheque du  Petit  Seminaire de  Quebec, par  exemple,  contenait 6 editions du  premier de  ces ouvrages de meme  que  les autres  livres de Montalembert il y a une  vingtaine d'annees.  (Marc  Lebel,  Pierre  Savard, Raymond V·ezina, Aspects de  l'enseignement  au  Petit   Seminaire  de  Quebec, Quebec,  I968,   p.   I32.)   Le cabinet de  lecture  paroissial   cree  par  les Sulpiciens   pour   le  public   montrealais renferme non  seulement des editions  d'oeuvres compli' tes
de  discours  publies  entre   I844  et  I858.  Cette  collection  fait  aujourd'hui partie de la Bibliotheque Nationale du Quebec (ancien fonds).

11  L'Echo du  Cabinet de lecture   paroissial t. 4  ( I862) : long  passage  sur  Lacordaire et  la  crise  de 1'Avenir;  L'Echo  de la  France  donne  en  I 867  das  ses tomes  4 et  5
de  longs  extraits du  tome  3 des  A1oines qui  vient  de  paraitre a Paris.  L'Echo du
Cabinet, 3  (I86I) pp.  I38·I4I souligne  le succes de librairie des Moines et  repro­
duit   de  longs  extraits du  compte rendu   de  Dupanloup dans  Le  Correspondant.
L'Echo du  Cabinet t. 3  ( I86I)  p.  I93  rappelle le role ·eminent  de  Montalembert dans  la  restauration de  l'art chretien. C'est  Napoleon Bourassa,  disciple  de Fland­ rin  et admirateur de l'ecole  d'Overbeck qui  repr·esente le meilleur  representant de cette  tendance en  faveur au  Canada franc;ais. Voir  Raymond  Vezina,   Napoleon Bourassa, 1827-1916  (Montreal, 1976).
12  Le  cabinet  de  lecture  paroissial   possede  a lui  seul  les  biographies par  Castille (I 856),  Mirecourt  (I 859),  Craven  (I 873),  Fourier    (s.d.),  Bouthors  (I 8g6), Meaux  ( I897), Gibon   ( I9I3)  sans compter Lecanuet, les ·editions de  correspon­ dances  et la brochure de  I 852 de Guizot.

13   Odette Condemine ed.,  Octave Cremazie, Oeuvres   II, p.  89. Dans une  lettre de I856  (op. cit.,  p. 46)   Cremazie de  passage  a Paris  raconte qu'il  a  vu  Montalem­ bert,   Thiers et  Guizot   a 1'Academic   a  !'occasion   du  discours   de  11eception de
Broglie.
14  La  lettre  est du  3 septembre I864 et l'auteur y fait allusion  a sa "carri·ere  publique desormais  terminee."  Chauveau  reproduit  cette   lettre   dans   sa   biographie  de Garneau publiee  en  I 882.

15  Lettre datee du  chateau de  la  Roche-en-Breny, le  I9  octobre I854  et  reproduite par   Ernest  Gagnon en   tete  de  }'.edition  de   I9oo  chez  Beauchemin de  Charles Guerin  de Chauveau.

16  L'Echo du  Cabinet rapporte  le discours  et  le succes de  Lacordaire en  ajoutant: "on  a  pu  reprocher a l'orateur chretien d'avoir juge trop  favorablement les sucres
et les triomphes de la liberte en Amerique" ( t. 2 ( I 86 I ) p. 58) .
17  Dans  La  vie et l'oeuvre de Henry  de Courcy  (1820-1861) ( ... )  (Quebec, I955) Robert Sylvain  a  bien  analyse  !'evolution des catholiques franc;ais et de Brownson.

45

MONTALEMBERT

18   Philippe Sylvain,  "Les  debuts  du  Courrier du Canada"  dans  Les Cahiers des Dix,
32  (I 967)  p. 272·273·
19  Brian   Jenkins dans   Britain  and  the  War   for Union   (Montreal)  p.  52  dit  que les Canadiens fran<;ais auraient vu avec indifference sinon  avec satisfaction l'eclatement de l'Union. Nous avons etudie les 3 journaux francophones de la ville de  Quebec devant la  guerre  et  il en  ressort  nettement de  l'antipathie a l'endroit du  Nord.   ["La press  quebecoise  et  la  guerre de  secession" dans  Mosa"ique  que­ becoise (en collaboration) (Quebec, I96I, pp. I I I-I28) .] Dans  une conference fort  bien  re<;ue a l'Institut canadien de Quebec en  I86I, Rameau de Saint-Pere reduit
le conflit  entre le  Nord  et  le Sud  a une  guerre de  tarifs  entre les 11egions indust­
rialisees  et  agricoles.  Sa  sympathie le  porte   vers  le  Sud  qui  combat  pro aris et
focis. Et  le conferencier de  terminer en  yantant la  superiorite morale des Cana­
diens  franc;ais  loin  de !'opulence factice  des  Etats-Unis (L'Echo du Cabinet,  vol.
3, pp.  I54-I55).
20    La  querelle entre   catholiques sur  le succes  ou  l'echec du  catholicisme americain continue de  faire   rage  jusqu'au debut  du  2oe  siecle.  Voir  sur  la  question notre etude Jules-Paul Tardive{, la France et les Etats-Unis  1851-1905, (Quebec I967), en particulier pp. 3I3 et 3I6.
21  L'Echo  du Cabinet  de lecture  paroissial de  Montreal publie  dans  son  tome  5 de I 863  (pp.  292-297 et  308-3I 2)  le premier discours  de  Malines. Le second  ne sera pas reproduit.
22    Vol. 4 (I862), p.  I48.
23   Adolphe-Basile Routhier dans son tableau de la litterature franc;aise dans Causeries du  Dimanche   ( I87I), cite  dans   Rene   Dionne, La   patrie  litthaire,  (Montreal I978), p. 470.
24    Actes  et  deliberations  du  Premier  congres  catholique   canadien-fran ais 	a
Quebec  les 25, 26  et 27  juin 188o  (Montreal, I88o), p.  95  et  87.  A  un  autre
moment du congves, le jeune comte  de Foucault de Paris fait  l'eloge  de Montalem­
bert  historien de la vie monastique (p. 209).
25   Cite   par   Jean-Guy Genest   dans   "La   Lanterne  I868-I869" dans   Ideologies  au
Canada  fran ais,
parait  du   27  mai  au  23  decembre  I876,  Buies  reproduit encore   des  textes  de
Montalembert.
26   La  verite 26 aout I893· En  I88s,  Tardive! faisait  mourir Montalembert dans  des
"tourments d'esprit et des angoisses indiscibles." (La Verite, 3I  janvier  I885.)
27    Voir  Savard, Jules-Paul Tardivel, la France et les Etats-Unis, 1851-1905, p.  I34·
28  Id.lbid.,p. I6I.
29   Polemiques avec  Tardive! dans  notre  ouvrage cite,  p.  95    (en   I893). Voir  aussi p.  I25·I26.
30   Julienne Barnard, Memoires  Chapais t. 3  (Montreal, I964), p. 48. En  I884,  Mgr Taschereau  archeveque de  Quebec voit  d'un oeil  mefiant la  montee du   jeune joumaliste Chapais "militant ala Montalembert eta la Veuillot" (lac. cit., p. 229) lei comme  en  France, des ,eveques s'inquietent apres   I85o  de  la  place  qu'occupe cette  nouvelle  race de  joumalistes laics qui se melent d'affaires religieuses.
31   Jean Bruchesi, Temoignages  d'hier  (Montreal, I96I), p. 2I 1.
32   Jean Bruchesi   rappelle que  son  pere  lui  fait  lire  etudiant des  discours  de  Mon­ talembert  (Adrienne Choquette, Confidences  d'ecrivains canadiens-franfais, Que­  bec, I 976, p. 44) .

MONTALEMBERT


33  Recit  dans  les annales de  la  communaute a  la  date  du  5  juillet  1890, cite  dans Therese Lambert, Histoire de la Congregation Notre-Dame  de Montreal, tome  10 (Montreal, 1969),  p. 120. Meaux publie  en  1893 L'Eglise  catholique et la liberte aux Etats-Unis  dans  lequel  il reprend les theses de son beau-pere en les etayant.
34   Page  141 de !'edition de  Montreal, 1964 avec  une  preface de Claude Galarneau.
L'edition originale a paru  .a Paris en 1896.
35  A  ces  heros   fran ais
canadiens  Bourget  et   Lafleche. Viendront  s'ajouter  Barres   et  Maurras,  Lionel
Groulx, Memoires, I  (Montreal, 1970),  passim.
36    I d. ibid., p. 70.
31  I d. ibid.,  p. 64. Cette biographie de  237 pages et  illustree a  paru  a Abbeville  en
1896. Elle  ne  figure  pas  aux  bibliographies classiques  de  Montalembert soit celle
de  A.  Trannoy, Le  romantisme   politique  de  Montalembert  avant  1843  (Paris
1942)  ni  dans  la "Bibliographie Montalembert" de E. de  Montalembert et J. Ga­
dille dans  la Revue  d'histoire  de l'Eglise de France, t. 56 (1970),  p. 132 a 137. On
ne la  trouve  pas  non  plus  au  catalogue des imprimes de  la Bibliotheque nationale
de  France. Nous  en  avons   trouve  un  exemplaire a  la  Bibliotheque nationale du
Quebec dans  !'ancien fonds  provenant sans  doute  de  la  bibliotheque du  Cabinet
de lecture  paroissial.
38   L'expression trouv·ee  dans   la  correspondance  inedite   Groulx-Chartier en  1902-
1903  est  citee   par   P.  M.  Sherrin  "Catholicism and   Lionel   Groulx," manuscrit
d'une  communication  presentee au  congres  annuel   de  la  Societe   historique du
Canada en  1974  (p.  39).  L'auteur etablit que  jusqu'a 1914 Montalembert est le heros de Groulx au catholicisme qualifie d'activist."
89  !d. ibid.,  p.  104. Groulx a  raconte dans  Une  croisade d'adolescents  qui  a  connu deux  editions .a Montreal  (1912 et  1938)  cette  aventure. Le  nom  de  Montalem­ bert est cite plusieurs dizaines  de fois dans  le petit livre.
40    Encore en  1942, defendant les droits  des Canadiens fran<;ais il cite  le mot  celebre: "La liberte ne se donne pas, elle se conquiert" (I d. ibid. tome  4, p. 41).
41  Sur   ce   mouvement  voir   Laurier  Renaud,  "La   fondation  de  l'A.C.J.C."  dans
Ideologies au Canada  fran ais 	a 191 et Michael
Behiels,  "L'Association catholique  de  la  jeunesse  canadienne-fran<;aise and  The
Quest for  a  Moral Regeneration, 1903-1914" dans  Journal of Canadian  Studies/ Revue  d'hudes canadiennes,  Vol.  13, no. 3, ere 1978, pp.  27-41. L'auteur montre
que  le mouvement a glisse de la regeneration spirituelle au  nationalisme canadien­
fran ais
42    Renaud, op.  cit., p.  185. La  meme  revue  defend  le  role  des  laics  catholiques et lutte   contre  l'enseignement gratuit  et  obligatoire  preconise  par  les  heritiers des radicaux du  siecle  precedent. Ce  n'est  qu'en 1942 que  la  loi  de  l'enseignement obligatoire sera  adoptee au  Quebec.
43  Publiee   en   brochure  a Montreal en  1895, elle  est  reproduite dans   son  recueil
Conferences et discours (Montreal, 1899).
44    Marcel Lajeunesse, Associations  litteraires  et  bibliotheques   a  Montreal   au  19e siecle et  au  debut   du  20e  siecle: l'apport  sulpicien,  these  de  doctorat  inooite, Universite d'Ottawa,   1977,  p.  301.  Lacordaire  (2  fois)   Ozanam, Dupanloup, Garcia  Moreno, Falloux et  le  general   de  Sonis  figurent au   nombre des  sujets entre  1884 et  1910. Les oeuvres  de Veuillot, Dupanloup, Pie, Freppel, de Maistre, d'Hulst, Gaume, Lacordaire, Falloux   et  Montalembert  figurent largement  (!d.

47

MONTALEMBERT

ibid.,  p.  242)   dans  la  bibliotheque paroissiale   d'alors qui  joue  le  role  de  biblio­
theque publique de Montveal.
' 5  En  I9I6-I9I7 on  releve les noms de Ozanam, Veuillot, Lacordaire, des fondateurs de congregations La  Mennais, Loyola,  La  Salle  et Querbes, des papes  Leon  XIII, Pie  X  et  Benoit  XV,  sans  oublier  Garcia Moreno. Encore en  I924,  Mgr  Louis­ Adolphe Paquet  au  faite  de  la  renommee de  theologien propose  Montalembert comme  modele  aux  grands  cleves  du  Seminaire de  Quebec et  cite  le discours  du jeune   pair   de  France lors  du  proces  de  !'ecole   libre   (Etudes  et  appreciations. Nouveaux  themes  sociaux, Quebec, I922, p.  I I8).
46    Tome 32  ( I896), pp.  I63-I68: article  signe Jean Le Franc  (pseudonyme de N.-E.
Dionne).
47   Tome 34  ( I8g8)   p. 844:  article  signe  "Le  Glaneur"  (pseudonyme de  Alphonse
Leclaire). La  Revue qui  evite la poiemique a sans doute pvefere ignorer  le tome  3·
48    Groulx, Une  croisade d'adolescent  (Montreal, I9I2), p.  I2. C'est  Longhaye qui  a fait  dans  les  Etudes  de  I 899  et  I 902  de  longues   recensions   des  tomes  2 et  3 de
Lecanuet. Dans  les  Etudes  de   I 906  il  compare Montalembert  a Cornudet au
profit  du second.
49   Les Etudes, 48e annee,  tome  I26, janvier-fevrier-mars I9I I, p. I26.
50    La   presse  du   temps  en  particulier le  Devoir  y  fait   largement echo.  Voir   notre etude sur  Jules-Paul Tardive!,  la France et  les Etats-Unis, IBSI-1905,  p.  97· En
I 9 I 7  Fran«;ois Veuillot   passe  au  Canada:  nouveaux concerts de  glorification du
"grand  chretien  et   de   !'admirable  ecrivain."   (Le   Semeur,  I4e   annee,   aout­
septembre I9I7, no I-2, p. 65).
51  Voir  par  exemple, le manuel  repandu au Canada fran«;ais de J.M.J.A., Litterature franfaise au dix-neuvieme  siecle ( ... )  (Paris, I 92 I) pp.  I 33- I 43· 11 s'agit  de  la
I Ie edition publiee  chez  de Gigord. Le  Manuel  illustre d'histoire  de la litterature
franfaise de  Jean Calvet  lance  en  I920  et  qui  domine dans  les colleges  classiques canadiens-fran ais 	a Mon­
talembert.
52    Edition de  I933,  p.  I44.  Montalembert a droit a autant de  place  que  Lacordaire, Veuillot, Ozanam et  Lamennais, Vigny  et  Musset  y sont  traites plus  brievement. L'edition de   I944  presente   de  fa on
tique  et  le chef  du  parti  catholique" sous Louis-Philippe de meme  que  l'historien.
Les  Lectures  litteraires pour  le  primaire superieur par  les Freres  de  l'Instruction chretienne presentent six extraits de  Montalembert dans  leur  volume  II publie  a
La  Prairie en  I96I   (copyright de  I948)  et qui  porte  sur ['art epistolaire, l'histoire, la  poesie  et  [',eloquence.  11 s'agit  d'une lettre a Veuillot apres  la  publication des
Libres Penseurs, de  trois extraits des Moines  d'Occident, d'un extrait du  discours du  I7 octobre   I849 sur la question  romaine, "On ne s'attaque pas au Saint-Siege," et de celui du  I6 avril  I844, "Fils de Voltaire, files des Croises."
53  Ibid.,  p.  I45·
34    Memoires  et  comptes  rendus  de la Societe  Royale  du  Canada,  3e serie,  tome  X (seance  du  I6  mai  I9I6), Toronto et Londres, I9I7, pp.  248-271. Jerrault ( I899- I955)    docteur  en  droit   en   I9I5 sera   jurisconsulte,  professeur et  ecrivain  bien connu en son temps.
55  ld. ibid., p. 266.
56    I d. ibid., p. 269.
57    I d. ibid., p. 270.

MONTALEMBERT


58  ld. ibid., p. 271.
59    Deuxieme edition  (Notre-Dame-des Laurentides, Quebec, 1976). Voir  plus  haut note 32.
6° Cite  dans  Germain Lesage,  Notre  eveil culture[ (Montreal, 1963)' p.  135  a 143· Dans   l'ordre  paraissent Pascal  et  Claude!, Bernanos,  Teilhard, Maritain,  Peguy, Balzac,  Camus, le chanoine Groulx, Mauriac, Freud,  Thomas d'Aquin, Mounier, Proust, Shakespeare, Valery,  Baudelaire, Bergson,  Bloy, Gide,  Joyce,  Montaigne, Saint-Exupery,  Stendhal,  Veuillot,  Moliere,  Montesquieu,  Malraux,  Rabelais, Rimbaud et Sainte-Beuve.

61  Comme vient   de  Ia  rappeler  Claude Galarneau dans  sa  belle  synthese  sur  Les colleges classiques au  Canada   fran ais 	(Montreal, 1978), p.  172  a
175·
62  Relations  (Montreal), aout  1979, no 447, p. 127.
68  I d. ibid.,  p.  225. Le  chef  du  parti  liberal  Wilfrid  Laurier applique avec  efficacite le  procede  dans   les  annees  1870  quand  il  denonce   ses  adversaires  canadiens­ fran ais
d'ici. Et ses adversaires s'appelaient F. X. A. Trudel et Mgr  Lafleche.



R.71MBLE ON WH.71T IN THE WORLD WHY

Ralph Gustafson

Making a meaning out of everything that  has happened, The there-it-is, plainsong,  pitch  and  pinnacle:
All is blanket-plucking otherwise.  My father
Lighted a pipe out  in a rowboat on the lake
When  he fished and  brought up Leviathan on a wormy
Hook,  Ahab's pegleg in the belly, So the watching boy said. Brahms  Percolated coffee, something to fiddle with,
The cup,  the pot, the burner, to escape having
To  write  down  music. Meaning is wearying,  hammers, Level, hacking out hunks of marble to raise Cathedrals. I travel  to duck it and  walk in them­ And run  slambang into gospels of course,
Pegasus  loose and  the barndoor slammed.
Berryman took poems and  jumped  off a bridge.
It all comes down  to the necessity of making oneself
One  with  sea-slime. Knowing what  is OK, It's the  why we've got to, the prehensile toes And all the rest of it, slops, jade and Jesus, Venice, murder, virgins and  music, that counts.

49


GOLDWIN'S MYTH

The Nonconformist as Mugwump



Wayne Roberts



lGOLDWIN   SMITH  HAD   NOT    EXISTED,  it  would  have  been necessary  for  Canadian historians  to  invent  him.  Because  he  was at  one  time
Regius Professor of History at Oxford  and a leading light of British reform in the
185o's  and   I86o's,  his  residence  in  Canada from   I87 I  to  I9II  provided  us simultaneously   with  a  "low-rent  Voltaire  in  the  intellectual   backwater  of  late Victorian  Torontom and an opportunity  to exercise moral superiority on a very prestigious straw-man.
In the mock heroics of Canadian morality-play  history, Smith has been assigned
the  pat  role of promoting  annexation  to the United  States. Taken  as the epitome of hard-headed, cold-hearted  logic and  calculation,  he is a perfect foil for those who  paint  Canadian history as a struggle  to enact  an  impossible dream  against all  the  odds  of  geography  and  economics. Cast  as an  unfeeling  don  inflexibly attached  to the free trade  dogmas of his British experience,  he serves neatly as a counterpoint against  whom the daring  virtues of Canadian survival, such as our emotional  ties to Britain  and  our  duties  to  tariff-protected  manufacturers, were rallied.
Smith  can also be packaged conveniently for the purposes of reform historians. Standard Whig versions of social history focus on the welfare state as the culmina­ tion of social liberty and  divide the world between humanists  who favoured, and callous  men  who  opposed,  state  intervention   in  the  economy.  Smith  was  too quotable   an  opponent  of state  intervention  for  such  chroniclers of  the  welfare state  to pass by. Finally, the dominant  image of Victorians,  a  product of research methods  which  the  English  historian  W. L.  Burns  has  aptly  termed  "selective Victorianism,"2     has  denied  the  anxieties  so  central   to  Smith  and  his contem­ poraries.  In  Canada, the  youthful  generation  that  rebelled  against  Edwardian puritanism  in the  I g2o's, together with handwringing elderly academics who had retreated   "from   the  social  critic  to  the  reminiscent   Victorian,"3    left  us  glib generalizations  about  the optimism and complacency  of Canadian social thought  before World  War  I. Smith and his pithy epigrams can be fitted into this fabrica­  tion of Canadian history as well.

50

GOLDWIN  SMITH


Because  the  standard portrayal of Goldwin  Smith  is woven  into  these versions of Canadian history,  a reassessment  of Smith  necessarily implies  a reassessment  of our  modes  of structuring the  key developments and  problems in Canadian history and   thought. This   article will  try  to  define  Smith   as  a  social  rather than   an economic thinker, to place  Protestant evangelism  and  nonconformity, rather than liberal  economics, at  the  core  of his thought. In  this context Smith's life becomes an   unrequited search for  a  moral   basis  of  community in  a  world   where  pre­ capitalist  props   of  hierarchy  and   cohesion   had  been   obliterated. This  search  turned him  into  one of his generation's most active controversialists, pamphleteers and   journalists, and  in  his  later  years  brought him  into  frequent  contact with leaders  of Canadian farm and  labour movements. As a figure in Canadian litera­ ture,  he is important as an independent journalist; his contemporary, A. V. Dicey, characterized  him   as  the   last  of  the  great  pamphleteers. To  see  that   Smith's concerns evolved  while  he  was  in  Canada  is, however,  further to identify  him: as a representative member of a  transatlantic community of beleaguered liberals, rather  than   as  a  cocksure  disciple  of  Manchester. These   two  reassessments  of Smith require us  to  see  him  in  light  of  the  labour question, not  the  Canadian question:  to situate  his  polemics  on  the  laissez-faire state  and  annexation in the context of  his concerns  about social  order.  From  this  perspective, we can  begin to  grapple with  some  of  the  real  ambiguities characteristic of  both  liberal  and socialist thought in the pre-World War  I era.




SMITH's SECRETARY,  ARNOLD HAULTAIN,   exasperated with the  ranting and   raving that   came  from  the  aged scholar's study,  regretted that "the dear  old  Professor  is  a  don,  was  a  don  and  remains a  Don," and  agreed with  Disraeli's  cutting characterization of Smith  as "a wild man  of the cloister."4
There is truth to this  judgment, though  not  in  the  sense  that  Smith brought to Canada the   mindset  of  a  privatized academic. Smith  came   to  Canada as  a politicized   intellectual as  a  result  of  his  experiences   while  teaching at  Oxford during the  186o's. Smith's formative experiences  at  Oxford were shared  by most university   liberals   of  his  generation, so  much  so  that   one  critic  lumped  them together as "liberals of the Gold win-Smith  type."5
The   liberalism of  this  academic generation gelled  in  the  struggle  against  sec­
tarian  ecclesiastical privilege  enforced  by religious  tests  applied to  university admission. Such  was  the  power  of Oxford's ecclesiastical  faction that  Smith  saw no  prospect  for  reform  within the  university.  University  reformers would  have  to seek  an  alliance with   the  reformers of  Manchester, he  projected. In  this  way, they  could   "liberalize the  national legislature   and  the  national legislature   will liberalize   Oxford."6  As a  result  of Smith's strategy,  the  agitation over sectarian

GOLDWIN SMITH

religious  tests  "necessitated   an  appeal   to  national   politics  and   reinforced  an alignment  with Nonconformist radicalism:  for nine years it linked the universities, Liberal  politics, Nonconformity and the intellectual  world of London."1 Links to the intellectual  world of London were further  strengthened by the upsurge of periodical  literature, in which Smith  and  his colleagues actively  participated. It was doubtless at this time that Smith acquired  his lifelong commitment to an independent   press, aimed  at  a  general  readership. The  periodical,  not  just the academic  journal or monograph, became a legitimate and  necessary outlet for intellectual  opinion.
Smith's  writings against sectarian  religious tests provide us with a clear under­ standing  of  his  nonconformist  evangelical  Protestantism. These  beliefs,  not  the economics of Manchester,  laid the foundations  of his inflexible individualism  and consequent  hostility toward legislative interference  in social and moral issues. His nonconformity   with  regard  to  institutionalized  religion  was  based  on  his belief that  "human morality  is identified  with  the  divine."8   Therefore,  the  "limits  of human   reason  must  be fixed not  by clergy ... but  by  the  will of Providence."g Religion  was not  a dogma,  but  "the  worship and  service of a moral  God and  a God  who  is worshipped  and  served  by virtue.mo  From  this  perspective,  Smith cheered the struggle against rigid theological tests at Oxford  as part of the belated renewal  of the  Reformation  struggle against  the false restraints  that  stood in the way  of  Christian   conscience.11   This  religious  renewal  was  interlocked  with  the social  and  political  transformations  of  the  age.  The  modern  state,  Smith  con­ sidered,  was confronted  with  the  parallel  tasks of "elevating  the labouring  class from their medieval  position of serfdom to that  of full and enfranchised  members of a real community" and "the still more momentous  problem of transferring the basis of religion, on which all society rests, from medieval authority  to conviction, the result of free enquiry and of liberty of conscience.m2
The   basis for  such  a  "real  community"  was the  nub  of the  problem.  The search  haunted   and  inspired  Smith  for the  rest of his life. The  free trade  cam­ paign of the 184o's, focussed on duty-free imports  of cheap  American foodstuffs, managed   to  evade  the  problem  by  posing  an  identity  of  interest  among  con­ sumers,  neglecting   the  conflict  of  interest   between   workers  and   capitalists.13
Smith  had  been an ardent supporter  of free trade,  which he saw as the manifest­ tation  of human  brotherhood, not just as cost-cutting  economics. The laws of free trade,  Smith  believed,  were  "the  most  beautiful  and  wonderful  of  the  natural laws of God,"  since they provided  a world-wide  exchange  of needed  goods and made  "one  heart  as well as one harvest for the world."  Alas, he also recognized that  the  unrestricted  laws governing  the  production  and  distribution  of wealth were not based on affection or duty.14  It was an urgent matter  to find the maxims of  community  in  such  a situation.  Smith's  Christianity   could  not  brook  recent developments  in political economy which erected  "hardness of heart into a social

52

GOLDWIN SMITH

virtue.0015  On  the other  hand,  he suffered  no illusions in the poor meekly accept­ ing  charity,   and  saw  in  them  "the  sans-culottes  who  butchered  with  Robes­ pierre.0016 It was perhaps  this fear  that  led Smith to define his opposition to the construction  of a railway carriage factory at Oxford in I865 as "the  greatest fight of my life.m7   His dread  of social convulsion from below demarked  him irretriev­  ably  from  radicalism   but  spurred  on  his efforts to  reform  the  morality  of  the upper class and instil a moral basis for community.
Once  again,  religion was central  to Smith's  conceptions. Because obedience to the laws of political economy did not coincide with the duties of social obligation, a high sense of religious obligation  was necessary. Religion was the "only lasting spring  of the  unselfish affections and  actions which bind men into a community,
and  save  that  community  from  dissolution.0018  Oxford  had  a special role to play
here, to nerve itself to do its "duty  to the poor ... in coercing firmly the vices of the rich."19  Non-sectarian  religion could "introduce  united  education  among  the upper  classes" and  allow  Oxford  to train  them in their social duty. 20   Guidance would  be especially necessary for  the less obvious duties of accumulated  manu­ facturing, as  distinct  from  inherited, landed  wealth.21  Britain's  modern  gentry must serve the people, "own  its duty to those by whose labour they are fed. They must  be resident,  they must  be well educated,  they must  be  able and  willing to act as the social and moral educators of those below them."22
Goldwin  Smith  tried  to pattern  his own life after these maxims. This accounts
for  the  support   he  frequently   offered  to  plebeian  movements,  support   which included  direct  financial subsidies to such Canadian  projects as the farm-oriented Sun afterI 8g6, and  a Toronto  union-sponsored social centre in I 905. Similarly, his belief in  these  maxims  accounts  for  his lifelong frustration   with  an  amoral and  socially  removed  ruling  class, and  his despair  that  a  rising  working  class movement  was drawing  militant  conclusions from the  hostile indifference  of the ruling class. In  Toronto, the seat of his mature years, where he occupied the munificent  residence on which  the  Toronto  Art  Gallery now stands,  he became not so much  the Sage of the Grange,  a phrase used by many  contemporaries to allude to his detached  scholarly life; he became the Squire of the Grange.
The  rhetoric of religious injunction  and the fear of untutored  plebeian upheaval were also clear  in Smith's  first serious examination  of Canada  and  Empire rela­ tions in I 86g. Characteristically, his book was not a monograph  but  a compila­ tion  of  news  articles  written   to  influence  public  opinion.  Assuredly,  the  anti­ colonial policy of Smith  and  his co-workers was part of a campaign for the cheap administration of British government  but Smith was convinced that "a  truly great policy is generally cheap,  because it has the moral forces on its side."23  Moreover, he  charged,  the  enforced  political  infancy  of colonial status  prevented  Canada from developing "the independent character  ... of a nation."24  This was a serious accusation  indeed, since Smith  believed that  "nations,  like  men, are intended  to

53

GOLDWIN SMITH

form  their  own  character  by self-exertion and  self-control."25   Prolonged  infancy had  resulted  in  the  undue  caution  of a  people  which  "has  learned  to scan her future  without  learning  to face it";26  Canada would miss its destiny by "clinging, like frightened   children,  to  the skirts of  the  Old  World."27   Already  it was in­ sensibly drifting  under  the American  impress, "like  a mass of unfashioned  clay, having  no distinct  figure of her own."28  The  task of creating  a real  community in rough-hewn  and  barbarous  Canada would be arduous,  but "it  was as a scene for such efforts, apparently,  that the world was made,"29   Smith reasoned.
Canada's problems were aggravated  by its imitative  and  colonial ways. There were motes in Canada's eyes, he well recognized, "but  none so much  to be taken away as the beam in ours."30 As a New World country, Canada had to create community  on  a  new foundation.  "We  by long and  hard  effort  have  made the will of  kings subject  to  the  law.  It  is her  task  to make  the  will of the  people subject  to the law of reason."81  Britain's  monarchical and  aristocratic  precedents were both irrelevant and harmful. The monarchy, which in Britain "binds the unenfranchised, ignorant  and  indigent  masses of the  people by a tie of personal loyalty to the constitution," had no roots in Canada.32  The  Canadian aristocracy was as much  different  from American  democracy,  he later  wrote, "as  the  Irish­ man's  ride  in  a sedan  chair  with  the  bottom  out  differed  from  common  walk­ ing.ms Aristocratic  pretensions and monarchical  lavishness in government  expedi­ encies gave  a sense of false security  which  dangerously  masked  "the  want  of a conservative element in their institutions, and makes them feel free to plunge with impunity  into  all the excesses of universal suffrage."34  In the absence of a leisure class devoted  to public service, only strictly limited and simple government  could hold demagogy and  sordid ambition  at bay. This  was also a test of Canada as a community.  Since  government  is  essentially "a  remedy  for  the  bad  passions of mankind  the less of it a nation requires, the greater is the dignity of that nation." 35
Smith  rediscovered the  New World  in a more sympathetic  light as a result of
his  partisanship   for  the  anti-slavery  North  in  the  American  Civil  War.  Smith came to America  to embrace the northern  cause in a conflict which he identified as more  profound  than  that  between  Freedom  and  Slavery. "It was a struggle between  Christianity  and  all that  is most hostile to Christianity." He took heart in America,  not because of its dubious and sometimes destructive  democracy, but because  of its  pervasive Christianity,  the  one spirit  "capable of animating and sustaining a real community."36
In  his  I go2 study  of America's  degeneration  into  a  jingoist, plutocratic  and imperialist state, Smith recalled his high hopes during the I86o's, and revealed something  of the two lifestyles he had  hoped Christianity  could bridge in the New World:    "Nowhere   is English  life  better  or  more  attractive than  in  a  country parish,  with  a  kind  and  conscientious squire,  good  ladies,  an  active  pastor,  a well-to-do  tenantry   and   a  contented   peasantry,"  he  mused.  But  arriving  in

54

GOLDWIN SMITH


America,  "an  observer  felt  that  he had  come to something  which  had  more of the  true  spirit  of  a  community."37   America  projected  "the   essential  unity  of interest  which  underlies all class divisions, which in our onward  progress towards the  attainment  of  a  real  community,  will survive  all  class  distinctions ... by establishing  between  them  mutual  good  will.... "38  He  had  also admired  the relative  absence  of  government   in  America,  though  not  because  he  upheld  a vision of the  unrestrained market  society. Since government  is essentially  com­ pulsion, Smith  reasoned, it decreases where social virtue  and  popular intelligence are  high.  "It is destined  to  decrease  as  Christianity  increases,  and  as force is superseded   by  social  affection,   and  spontaneous  combination   for  the  public good."as
The  controversy which raged in Britain as a result of the government's support of the slave South  also influenced  Smith's social understanding. He  received his first harsh  lesson on  the  conscience of the British ruling  class when he witnessed the  treachery  of Manchester manufacturers who aligned  with  the aristocracy  in support  of slave cotton.  In I 864, Smith  defined British  national  politics as "the balanced  selfishness of the  landowners  and  the commercial  capitalists."40   Smith had  to collaborate   with  working  class and  popular  reformers  like Cobden  and Bright, who  worked "to  convert  the kingdom of the world into the Kingdom  of Christ."41    Smith   also  gained   respect  for  the  morality   of  working-men   who defended  the  North,  despite their reliance on Southern  cotton for employment  in the  textile  mills.  Thus,   Goldwin  Smith  and  other  engaged  anti-slavery  intel­ lectuals  came  in  contact  with  the working class world, which shared  a common alienation  from  British  politics. In  a sense, this distorted  Smith's appreciation  of the  working  class movement,  since, as Harvie  explains, contact  was made  "not  through  the intimacy  of shared  perceptions and sympathies, but in a roundabout way ... by shared enthusiasms and enmities in foreign politics."42
Be that  as it may, the  American  Civil War  seems to  have confirmed  Smith's acceptance  of political democracy, expressed in the campaign for a broadened franchise.  Although  Smith  always suspected mass suffrage  and  tried  to establish restrictive age and  educational requirements  to provide  "securities for reform,"43 by I 862  he  concluded  that  a  broadened  franchise  was an  "indispensible  condi­ tion"  of improvement and  justice.44   He spoke from both  middle class and  work­ ing  class platforms  to  advance  suffrage  extension and  favoured  it  for  allowing government   of  the  nation   rather   than   a  balance  of  classes. In   1863,  Smith contributed   to  Essays on  Reform, a  compilation  of  leading  reformers'  writings designed to refute  philosophical  utilitarian  objections  to  popular  suffrage and  to promote  the incorporation of the working class into the life of the British nation.
Significantly,  Smith   wrote  on  the  basis of  his American   experience.  While
conceding problems in America, like mindless party loyalty and Irish demagogues who flourished in the absence of well-established and  refined cultural  leaders, he

55

GOLDWIN  SMITH

was confident  that  America  was facing up to the challenge.  He considered it an established  fact  that  "Equality has created  in  America  a  nation  great  both  in peace and war, wealthy, intelligent, united, capable of producing statesmen and soldiers," and  "at  least as loyal to the principle on which it was founded  as any nation  ever was to an hereditary  sovereign or an  oligarchy." In America,  a step had  been  taken  "towards  the  realization  of that  ideal  community,  ordered  and bound  together  by affection instead  of force, the desire of which is, in fact,  the spring  of human  progress, though  the worshippers  of intellectual  oligarchy  may be unconscious of such an ideal in the mind  of man." Evidently,  this voluntary, informal   community   was  especially satisfactory  to  a  religious  non-conformist. Smith  also admired  the tendency in American  democracy  which "aids  Nature  in the equal diffusion of wealth," fostered simplicity, and diminished  the "seductive examples" of dangerous and idle wealth.45
Smith  was still optimistic about  the future  when he moved to Toronto. In one
of his first public  functions, he spoke on The  European  Crisis of r87o,  and  the turmoil which was "casting  humanity in a new mould." Beneath all the outbreaks and  campaigns  of the  period,  he sought  the source  "of  all the other  throes and convulsions of humanity-a religious movement  more momentous ... and  more unlimited  than  the Reformation."46  The  theme  was related  to the stated  purpose of the lecture-raising funds  for a Newsboys' Home.  This  too was part  of the movement  that  was uplifting humanity  with  "a  common  pulse of sympathy ... making  one heart  and  one intellect for the world."  Amidst  all the world's strife, "charity, with robe unstained by blood, pursues in confidence her gentle course."47
Shortly thereafter, he delivered a lecture on the labour movement. He reminded the  Montreal  Mechanics  Institute  that  humanity was above all unions and  com­ binations/8   and  that  "the  moral  dangers  of  corporate selfishness are  the  same
... in  all classes."49    He did  not  think  unions could  raise wages short  a£ general
technical  advances,  yet he welcomed the labour  movement  as emancipating the worker  from  feudal   dependence,  placing  him  on  an  equal  footing  with  the employer. Above all, the labour  movement  had  "opened  our eyes to the fact that a nation, and  humanity  at large, is a community, the good things of which all are entitled  to share."50   Poor Smith  even had  to  withstand   public  criticism for  his attacks  on  the  wasteful  luxury  of  the  rich.  Smith  upheld  the  Christian  moral code:   "We   are  every  one  members  one  of  another."51   His  doctrine  that  the wealth  of  the  world  was a  common  store  did  not,  however,  subvert  property rights. He looked to the day when property  was modified  by duty and  "property and duty merged in affection."52
Smith   could  even  be  hopeful  about   Canadian  nationality.   He  had  urged intellectuals  and  professionals to let go of the ostentatious skirts of the wealthy so that  they might  live nobly.53  In  Canada  First, he saw a group  of talented  native Canadians brought   to the fore  by the withdrawal of Old  Country  leaders and

GOLDWIN SMITH

military  officers. 4  His  financing  of several periodicals in  the  187o's  and  188o's was probably  part  of an  effort  to sustain  the influence of independent  men like these against the forces of self-seeking and unthinking partyism.




DESPITE THIS  INITIAL OPTIMISM, the intellectual  basis of Smith's  optimism  was too fragile to be sustained in the world taking shape after the 187o's, a world which would bear the imprints of monopoly capitalism, imperialism  and  rising class conflict. Goldwin Smith  lived long enough  to gaze back on his childhood  as on antiquity.55  By the end of his life, he wondered where events were rushing in the modem  "age of express trains, ocean greyhounds, electricity,  bicycles, globe-trotting,  Evolution,  the Higher  Criticism  and  general excitement  and  restlessness.... "56  He  had  grown  morose over  the many  "little Edens"  his liberal  agitation  had  helped topple.57  When he revisited England  and watched  a  village  militia  drill  under  the  command  of the  local  gentleman,  he realized  that  the  doom  of  the  old  rural  parish  would end  "not  a few ties and relations  which  had  their  value  and  their  charms  as long  as  people  did  their duty."  It  made  him remember  "that movement is not progress, unless it tends to happiness."58   His old-fashioned  liberalism  was as doomed  as the rural  parish of old.  Ideologically,  Smith  came  to  recognize himself as a  "non-descript," as "a political and social mastodon."59
The outlook had indeed become grim by the twentieth century. Social cohesion was threatened  on every side, especially once Toronto  passed from  a  residential to a factory  city at the tum  of the century.60  By then, Smith saw labour's aliena­ tion as virtually complete.

Machinery has added vastly to the wealth, would we could say to the happiness, of the world. Factory hands are human  hammers and spindles; they can feel no interest in their work; they do not even see it in its finished state; their abodes are dismal; their lives are monotonous. They can hardly be blamed either for addic­ tion to sensual enjoyments or for readiness to listen to any Karl  Marx who tells them that  they ought to have more pay. Socially they are quite cut off  from their employers, whose mansions, perhaps, in  their Sunday stroll in  the  suburbs, they see with  no  friendly  eye. Anything  that  could create  a  feeling  of   partnership between employer and  employed would be the greatest of  blessings, but nothing in that way as yet seems to have had much success.61

The  crisis was rendered  more acute by the spread of popular  disbelief in ortho­ dox Christianity,  which he saw as the storm centre of the age, the "most momen­ tous revolution  in  history."62   A man  for  whom Humanity  was "connected  with the  Christian   view  of  the  relations  of  men  to  their  common   Father"63   saw conscience dethroned  and  philanthropy undermined  by new revelations of Evolu-

57

GOLDWIN SMITH

tion and  Higher  Criticism. How could we have the brotherhood  of man  without the paternity  of God?64  By the 188o's, he saw society "in  danger  of an anarchy  of self-interest,  compressed  for  the  purpose  of  political  order,  by a  despotism  of force."65  The  crisis of faith had immediate  repercussions for popular social expectations   leading   to  every  manner   of  false  hopes.  This  soon  became  his agonized refrain :

Classes which have hitherto acquiesced in their lot, believing that it was a divine ordinance and  that  there would be redress and recompense in a future state, are now demanding  that  conditions shall be levelled here. The  nations quake with fear of change. The leaders of humanity, some think, may even find it necessary to make up by an increase in the powers of government for the lost influence of religion.66

In discussing the great reformation  associated with the European crisis of 1870, Smith  made  reference to a conservative process whereby nations  and  individuals recoiled  from  uncertainty.  This  process profoundly  affected  Smith,  along  with the  whole  transatlantic liberal  community.  In  the  United  States,  Radicals  of a previous generation  became liberal mugwumps, forming clubs for "the  best men," in  reaction  to  the  political debauchery  and  social  turbulence  that  followed  the Civil  War.  They  developed  a  programme   based  on  pure  government  against spoils, free trade  against  tariffs, economic orthodoxy  against  reform,  civil service reform  against  ward  bosses and  hostility  to  woman  suffrage.67    In  Britain,  dis­ enchanted    moderns   were  grouping   around   highbrow   journals   that   featured anonymous   writers  striving  to  raise  culture   above  anarchy.68     Philanthropists collaborated   in  the  Charities  Organization Society  to  beat  back  welfare  bums with  the  professional expertise of  "a  new  urban  squirearchy."69   By 1886,  the university liberalism of the 185o's and  186o's was a spent force; its dialogue with democratic  institutions  had  broken  down,  and  its  proponents   were  alienated, pessimistic, and dogmatic.
Smith   was  attuned   to  these  developments.  He  joined  American  liberals  in
repudiating Reconstruction.70  His political programme mirrored  theirs more than it did Manchester liberalism. He funded  journals of high culture  where he wrote as  a  quasi-anonymous   "Bystander." He  watched  the  enfranchised  British  poor "furnish   Reaction  with auxiliaries  in  the shape  of political  Lazzaroni" capable of being organized  by wealth in opposition  to the higher  order  of workmen  and the  middle  class.71   He set up  a Canadian Associated Charities  modelled on the British organization.
James  Mavor,  a  close friend  of Smith's  in  the  18go's  and  after,  never heard him laugh and  rarely saw more than a faint smile cross his lips.72   As Smith saw it, the  world  was  in  the  grips  of  an  evil  trinity  of  plutocracy,   militarism,  and imperialism.  No force had  arisen to counter-balance this thrust.73  The  world was being "painted red, dominated  by bogus Anglo-Saxonism, subjected  to a benevo-

GOLDWIN SMITH


lent feudalism  of multi-millionaires,  jingoized, Morganeered, turned  into a white man's  burden  and  a field of philanthropic rapine."74   America,  once the hope of labour,  a  land  of freedom,  self-help and  self development,  was now under  the thumb  of de-Americanized, inherited, and irresponsible wealth. 75
In  Canada, there  were no forces to restrain Smith's  backlash. In  his effort to
actualize some bond between the well-to-do and poor through charity and philanthropy,  he  was  continually   frustrated   by  the  irresponsibility  of  colonial wealth.  Smith  was  unable  to  prompt  the  Canadian elite's sense of social duty without  resorting to dire threats  that  flaunting  luxury was the anarchistic "dyna­ miter's   best  ally."  The   rich  were  a  "dangerous class in  their  own  right,"  he charged.76  He saw this irresponsibility as a problem of new communities, "where  the  atoms  of society are  very shifting, where there are  no strong family or local ties, or even old firms.0077   Men  made their fortunes and left, sometimes returning  to  England.   Smith  hoped  that  charity  committees  would  offset this  tendency, giving men of wealth and leisure "an opportunity  of  doing something for the good of the community.  Our  rich men must do their social duty if they mean to escape a crash."78   He  came  to realize, however, that  there was "no  use in applying for help  to men  of wealth."79   For  all his goading, it "was  from  people of small or moderate   means,  whose  souls  were  not  enslaved  by  money,  that  most  of  the support  came."80
The  effort  to  guide  Canadian society in  the  absence  of  a  rooted  Canadian social leadership  gave unity to Smith's various reform and  philanthropic projects. His  search  for  a substitute  gentry  led to his call for  businesslike administration of municipalities   by appointed   commissions rather  than  elected officials. In  the villages of old, "the  leading  men kept the power in their own hands, lived among the  people, and  directed  them."  By the  I 8go's, however, as a result of the upper class exodus to the suburbs  and  the time-consuming demands  of business, the elite was  removed  from  influence.81   For  this  reason,  non-partisan   and  high-minded men were required  as proxies. Although Smith often used business metaphors  and allied  with  businessmen in  his campaign  for  commission government,82   he  was trying  to  fill a  social  breach,  not  his  own  pocket.  Moreover,  he  included  the working class as beneficiaries of his campaign.  "None  have a greater  interest  in an improvement of the system than  the working class, whose well-being depends more  on  things  common   to  the  whole  city,  while  that  of  the  wealthier  class depends more on things belonging to themselves."83 Not without insight, Smith unwittingly  pin-pointed  the reasons for the abysmal record of business-inspired municipal  reform.
Smith's  philanthropic activity  was also an exercise in substituting  institutions
for  the  spontaneous   charity  of society's  natural   leaders.  Soon  after  his  I87o speech, Smith discovered that  charity could not pursue its gentle course unstained by social tension. During  the Civil War, Smith believed that  Christianity  "abhors

59

GOLDWIN SMITH

... the  hideous  extremes of wealth  and  destitution," and  he hoped  that  philan­ thropic  Christianity  would triumph  over punishment of the poor.84  By the 18go's, he was lamenting  working class resistance to supposedly  model  communities  like those  established  by the  U.S. capitalist  Pullman, and  fulminated at  the  "stiff­ necked  independence,  by which  the  patience  of  philanthropy is apt  to be very sorely tried."85
His increasingly uncharitable view of the poor led him to initiate the Associated Charities in the 188o's, when he discovered that  the proportion  of people on relief in  Toronto was  larger  than  that  in  London,  England.86   A  co-ordinating  com­ mittee was needed,  a philanthropic equivalent  of Dun  and  Bradstreet,  to investi­ gate  the  moral  credit  rating  of the  poor. This  became  Smith's  first  principle  of modern  charity.  It  would  rationalize  the  welfare  system  and  avoid  overlap  of services while safeguarding the  lower class from  aspiring  to the  lazy  lifestyle of paupers. Because a certain amount  of coercion was necessary here, Smith  argued for government  intervention  and, in fact, even paid  the salary of  Toronto's Relief Officer out of his own pocket.87
For  Smith,  charity  in  the strict sense became  a matter  of relieving the "acci­ dental  distress" of old age and  sickness.88   Here,  his second  principle  of  modern  charity,  adjustment of relief to need, came into  play. In  the context of  Toronto, this  principle  was  quite  humanistic,  and  involved  him  in  heated  controversies with  the  House  of  Industry  and  the  Toronto  magistrate. Smith  was moved  to reactivate  the Associated Charities in the 18go's by the case of  Edward  Winch, an unemployed  widower with four children who was charged  with theft for picking up some fallen  bits of coal. The  magistrate  told  Winch  to  place his children  in an  orphanage  and   turn  himself into  jail  as  a  vagrant.89    Smith  abhorred   this vindictive and  institutional  approach,  because he believed  that  charity  had  to be sustained   by  "the   feelings  that   unite,  not ... the  passions  that   divide  us."90
Shortly  before  his  death,  Smith  authored   his  final  Christmas   appeal  for  the
Children's  Aid Society, urging sponsors to join the Parliament of Pity and  bring promise to slumdom  with love and help.91
Of  all Smith's  causes during  the 188o's and  18go's,  he is most famous for his support  of annexation between Canada  and  the  United  States. Smith's commit­ ment  to  annexation, however,  should  be  understood   primarily  in  terms  of  his views on  Canada's social crisis. It  was Smith's  frustration  with  the Canadian ruling  classes' inability  to  provide social leadership  capable  of  creating  a  high­ minded  and  cohesive community  in Canada that  led him  to favour  annexation to  the   U.S.A.   Smith   became  a  continentalist   because  he   was  a  mugwump  reformer, not because he was a Manchester  liberal devoted to the free play of the market.
Smith himself was partly to blame for the frequent  misconception of his motives here, since he frequently  polemicized about  the natural thrust  of geography and

6o

GOLDWIN SMITH


economics in a north-south, rather  than east-west, direction. His famous statement
-"Few have fought  against  geography  and  prevailed"92 -was more a tribute to  the  glib  Victorian   art  of  epigram  than  a  rounded  expression of his views. Smith  was no geographical  determinist: race and  religion were singularly  more important to him. Still less was he a philosopher schooled in the radical-republican appeal   to  the  first  principles  of  nature.  In  his more  serious comments,  Smith wrote of "the  moral  which the map ... enforces."98  While he parried  with, in his words,  "paper tiger"  imperialism,  by ridiculing  the  possibility that  the Atlantic could  be dried  up  by  jingoism, in dealing  with  reasonable  people Smith  juxta­ posed sentiment  and  the interests of the people. "Sentiment is the flower, but the plant on which the flower grows is the public welfare."94
The  heart  of the  matter  for Smith  was the building  of "a  strong, stable, en­ lightened,  and  impartial government"95  in  a  New World  democracy.  As in  his earlier writings on the Empire, Smith continued to dismiss the colonial connection with  British aristocracy  as a bulwark  against  demagoguism "and  the other  pests of democratic  institutions." Aristocratic  pretensions only added  the sins of flunkey­ ism to demagoguism.  Moreover,  the lack of binding ties in a colonial dependency simply  could  not  prevail  against  the  centrifugal  loyalties  of   province,  sect  or fraternal order.  "So  it must  be while the only antidote  to sectionalism ... is the sentiment  of allegiance  to a  distant  throne."96   Dependency led to a low level of political  self-respect  and  party  behaviour,  in  the "absence  of all that  is bracing ennobling  and  elevating  in the political  influences which are  bound  up with the name  of  nation."97   Finally,  the  colonial  mentality  removed  leaders  from  their true  post  of  duty.  Some  of  the  country's  political  problems  were  the  result of absentee  leaders, because "our social chiefs are apt  to be almost as much  citizens of London as of Toronto."98
The  continentalist Smith  and  the Imperialists  perhaps shared  more  than  they knew,  and  this  is  why  Principal   Grant  read  Smith's  classic Canada  and  the Canadian  Question,  which  made  the  full  case for  annexation  to  the  United States,  with  "mingled  feelings." Smith  found  Imperial  Federationist  dissatisfac­ tion  with  the  petty  localism  and  factionalism  of  Canada's lowly  political  life "well-founded  and  generous."99  His criticisms of schemes for imperial federation  were incidental  and  technical  rather  than  fundamental; after all, continentalism for Smith  was a prelude  to a world-wide Anglo-Saxon moral federation. Like the imperialists, Smith saw Canada's colonial status as an urgent problem from which we could "afford  to drift  no longer."  00  Smith, too, preferred a society based on primary   industries.   Grant's  allegation   that   Smith   was  preoccupied   with  the ignoble economic benefits of continental integration had already been anticipated: "that  would  be a  weak  nationality  indeed  which should  depend  on  a  Customs line,"  01 Smith  countered.  Smith  did  differ from  the imperialists  in several core assumptions.  Most  important probably,  since  Smith  had  once entertained such

61

GOLDWIN SMITH

high  hopes  for  America,  hopes  which  the  Imperialists   never  shared,   he  was prepared  to act on its behalf. It was a priority for him that the "native  American element  in  which  the tradition  of self-government  resides is hard  pressed by the foreign  element ... and  stands  in  need  of  reinforcement."102   The   priorities  of imperialist  racism were different.  On  most points, however, Smith's  views on continentalism  represented a tactical difference with imperial federationists, who shared his fundamental "mugwump" critique of Canada.




WrrH THE  RISE OF ANGLO-AMERICAN imperialist  expansion in  the  18go's,  Smith's  disillusionment  with  ruling  circles on a world scale deep­ ened, perhaps  accounting for his renewal of relations with certain  popular move­ ments. For this reason, the last decades of his life were not uneventful,  as his chief biographer   claims, 103  but  revealed  the  full  dimensions  of  his  intellectual crisis. Noting  French  Canada's solid opposition  to imperialism,  he  strove  to build  an English-Frenoh  Canadian political alliance  based on  peace, economy, free trade,  and   political   purity.  This  led  to  his  prolonged   correspondence   with  French Canadian nationalist  Henri  Bourassa, who, Smith  hoped,  would  not  leave such a  party  leaderless.104   As for  the  relic of sheepish  French-Canadian nationality  which   he  had   once  hoped  to  crush  through   annexation  with  Anglo-Saxon Protestant  America,  he now found "its simplicity, its courtesy, its domesticity, its freedom  from  American  push"  quite  attractive.  "Above  all,  I look  to  French Canada as a conservative power saving us from being swept away by the tide of imperialism  and  jingoism,"105  he wrote. Like many  of his latterday  writings, this hankering  for  a simple  past  revealed  his  fundamental ambivalence  about  capi­ talist social relations.
Smith  also turned  his hopes toward  Canadian farmers,  who  had  been  most receptive  to his annexationist  appeals in  the 188o's  and  18go's.  By 1894, Smith counted   on  Canada's husky farmers  to  "lift  the  wagon"  of factional  partyism "out  of the slough" of politicallife.106  Smith  also envisioned farm life as offering a more human  and cohesive community, and feared the drift of farm boys toward the  excitement  of  the  city,  where  they  would  overcrowd  the  professions with disastrous results. "The  growth of an educated  class of unemployed,  with the sensitiveness that  education  gives, would be the source of much  unhappiness,  and might be the source of danger to the state,mor he projected.
In  I8g6, Smith  purchased  the Canada  Farmers Sun, which until his tenure  as publisher  was  drifting  toward  a  Christian  socialist  and  politically  independent line quite out of keeping with the limited reform aims of Patrons of Industry parliamentary leaders.

GOLDWIN SMITH


Although  Smith  retained  his connection with the Farmers Sun  until his death, it was the labour  question  that  disturbed  and engaged him more than any other. In  his later  years,  Smith  spoke and  wrote  frequently  on  behalf  of  the  labour movement.  A major  benefactor  of the popular  Labor  Temple,  designed to serve as a social and  office centre for Toronto  unionists, he was invited to give the sole speech at its grand  opening.108 He promoted and contributed  financially to several independent  labour  candidates.  To some extent, he saw parliament  as one avenue of social reconciliation.  Parliament should  be the council of a united  nation,  he believed. "Still,  there  are special interests each of which is entitled  to a voice.... The  capitalist is abundantly heard: let the producer ... be heard also.... a class can  hardly  be expected  to look up  with  respect and  confidence  to a governing assembly in which none of its members had a place.m09  Exclusion from the legis­ lature  would  only  aggravate labour's  bitterness. It was  "in  everyone's  interest that   this exclusion  end."110   In  offering  support  to a  Igo8  Independent Labor Party  campaign,  he urged members  to "ever remember  that  we as a community and   that   our   wealth   and   happiness  depend   upon  our   being  a  community indeed."111
The  homilies of community-not, as Carl  Berger has argued,  the homilies of self-help112 -prevented  him  from  identifying  with  most  proposals of the  union movement.  Commenting on  the  I8g6  Labour  Day  Parade,  Smith  pleaded  for workers to view manual and  mental  labour  equally, for both  were "necessary  to the community  and  belong to the same fellowship. The  anniversary  would be an evil if it  served  in  any  degree  to draw  or  perpetuate  a  hard  class line.m13 He hoped  somehow  that   simple  truths  would  prevail:   that  labour  would  see  the capitalist  as mere  paymaster,  and  the community  as the true employer.114  How­ ever, because of his conception  of the iron laws of capitalism and the inevitability  of inequality,  he  could  not  bring  himself to support  such  elementary  reformist legislation as minimum  pay laws. Thus,  he found himself at odds with labour  on most concrete issues affecting the economy.
However, beneath  his hackneyed, reflex fulminations against schemes for social
reconstruction,  large or small, Smith harboured  some fundamental dilemmas. He did not enjoy a principled  rejection of government intervention in the economy. Voluntary   co-operation   was  his  real  preference,  as  an  amused  James   Mavor guessed on seeing how famously Smith  got along with  Kropotkin.  Smith  "never realized how near  he was to philosophical anarchism," Mavor  recalled.115  Smith did  not promote self-help in terms of the individualistic  and  competitive struggle for  economic  advance.  "Self..:help is mutual  help,"  Smith  enjoined,  "because, constituted  as we are, we all, at every moment of our lives, stand  in need of each other's  aid."116  Nor  did  Smith  believe that  the government  governs  best which governs least, except in the religious sense. "The best form of government  is that which doth  actuate and  inspire every part  and member of a state to the common

GOLDWIN SMITH

good,"117   he  argued.  How  far  the  government  should  go  was a  matter  not  of theory  but of the character  and  circumstances of a particular community.118 He favoured  "paternal" legislation for the helpless, and  public  ownership  of certain facilities, but he did not confuse this with socialism.119
"To  sympathize  with the dream  of the socialist is easy for anyone  who medi­ tates on the human  lot," Smith conceded. "But  dynamite  bombs are not heralds of the socialist kingdom of universal love.m2o  It  was the appeal  to class passion, and  to some extent  the fear of social convulsion,121 that  upset Smith.  He defined grasping  envy as "the  main  source  of that  extreme  sort  of Communism  which may be called Satanism.m22   To  this he preferred  the social geniality of  Dickens' Christmas Carol. It "has  done more than  sermons  and  dissertations  to save the heart  of society from being poisoned by social regenerators  who philanthropically preach  class hatred.... "128 In an open letter  attacking Jimmy Simpson and  the strident  socialist Board of Education  manifesto, Smith wondered whether  his fear of  a  collision between  labour  and  the  community  "may  be  only  because  new lights  do  not  easily dawn  upon  the  vision of  old  age."  He  urged  Simpson  to preach  sharply  against  inequality.  "Bid  us instead  of rambling  perpetually  over the world in quest of pleasure, stay at home and  do our duty to the community.
"
The labour  movement felt as ambiguously toward  Smith as he did toward it. Although  rarely  taking  his advice seriously on points  where they differed, labour leaders  paid  him  the highest  of respect. The  1905  Trades and  Labor  Congress convention chose him to deliver the welcoming address and thanked him with a standing  ovation.125   Following his death  in  1910,  labour  leaders  vied  with  one another  in praise of "our  beloved benefactor,m26  whose "heartstrings vibrated  in sympathy" with labour  despite his "conservative  Radicalism.m27  The  Trades  and Labor  Congress  even  passed a  formal  resolution  in  honour  of the  "great  and sincere  friend  of  the  toiler"  who  "always  espoused  the  cause  of  the  common people.m28
What   accounted   for  this  ceremonial   attachment?  In   part,   labour   leaders excused  Smith  for  his age  while respecting  him  for  his earlier  reputation as a reformer.  In  1903,  the Labor  Council-sponsored  Toiler, for  which Smith  occa­ sionally  wrote  on  foreign  policy questions,  handled   him  lightly  in  a  matter  of current  dispute:   "while  a  kindly  and  well-meaning  old  gentleman,  Dr.  Smith should  have  taken  the late  Prof. Huxley's advice,  never to think of  writing after sixty years of age.m29   In  part,  it was because union  leaders appreciated a rebel who would stand  up to the pretensions of Toronto's social elite and lampoon  the flunkeyism of  Canada's would-be  aristocrats.  Toronto  labour  spokesmen  found the  pretensions of the city's elite so grating  that  much  of  labour  rhetoric sounded like a social text from the struggle against feudalism. InI 896, when an imperialist­ sponsored   campaign  of  denunciation   forced   Smith   to  decline   an   honorary

GOLDWIN SMITH

doctorate  from  the University  of Toronto,  the labour council buried  any political differences and sided with him immediately.130
It  is also worth  noting  that  labour  leaders spoke the same language  as Smith. It  was not difficult to interpret his statements  to their liking. Most of them were nurtured in a strong  tradition of community.  Machinist  Lou Gibbons  welcomed Smith's  support  for the  ILP  and  claimed that  if there were more men like him, "we may have legislation for the whole of the community and  not class legislation for  the  plutocracy  as now  enacted."131  Labour  columnist  Tom  Banton  attacked Smith's  view that  the closed shop was hostile to the community,  but followed up with  an  appeal   to  the  community   to  establish  fair  conditions.  Then,  Banton hoped,  neither labour  nor capital  would "vex the souls of Grange  Philosophers in their old age.m 32
As well as sharing  a common symbolic language, unionists and Smith respected some of the same codes. Independence from partyism was a point of honour for both.  So  was  social  independence and  self-reliance. On  two  occasions, Smith made  sizeable donations  to a labor-council sponsored relief distress centre. While grateful  for the money, unemployed  workers left no doubt  as to their humiliation in accepting  charity.  They  knew that  Smith would not find this ungracious, one labour  reporter  noted, because "no-one better understands  their real sentiments in such matters than does the generous giver himself.m33
It should  be remembered  that  the thrust toward state intervention  before 1914 was often associated  with  campaigns  to institutionalize  the feebleminded,  set up labour  camps for the unemployed, and  prohibit a number of working class leisure activities  defined  as vice. The  labour  movement,  bred  on  artisanal  traditions  of mutual   self-help   and   spontaneous   co-operation,   was   as  uneasy  about   these directions  as Smith,  whose credo was summarized  by one close associate as:  "In liberty, enlightenment and  justice lay the hope of human  progress; and  not-as many reformers would have it in these days-in extending the criminal code.m 34
Thus,  Smith  joined labour  in speaking against blue-law Sundays and prohibition, for he did not enjoy the prospect of falling under the "searching  tyranny of crocheteers.m36  Some unsuspecting  and barely literate working class residents who shared  working people's initial reluctance  to embrace the collectivist state as posed by moral and public health reformers, approached  Smith as "a very liberal and broadminded man" who  they thought  would oppose the  painful  and  dangerous introduction of compulsory smallpox vaccination.136  Little did they know that  on this  issue Smith  was  a  "collectivist,"  and  wanted  the  vaccination   controversy settled by trained science, not "elective ignorance.mar
Socialists, who were perhaps  more attuned  to ideological distinctions than mainstream   union  leaders,  were more incisive in their comments  on Smith.  The all-red   Western   Clarion,  in  one  editorial,  challenged  Smith's   baying  against socialism, charging  that  it fostered class hatred.  "Were  the Bystander sincere, he

GOLDWIN SMITH

would indeed  heartily endorse the socialist theory for it would make class hatred impossible by abolishing classes. But he is not sincere, except  that  he is sincerely a  class conscious capitalist  heeler, and  to find  a  notorious  jingoistic labor-hater such as he deploring class hatred is merely another  case of 'Satan  rebuking sin'."138
Other  socialists who collaborated  with Smith  were more subtle in their evalua­ tion of the distance  between them. Jimmy Simpson, the leading Toronto socialist of  the  period  and   a  devotee  of  Christian   socialism  and   community  welfare, responded  to one of Smith's  pamphlets on labour  with this comment:  "while we cannot  agree  on  fundamentals,  we are  one in  purpose."139    Phillips  Thompson, Canada's first  Marxist  and  a  writer  who  had  known  Smith  since  the  187o's, wrote an  obituary  of Smith  which tried to grapple  with Thompson's own "con­  flicting  emotions"   toward  this  "not  over  scrupulous" and  superficial  critic  of socialism.  Thompson   readily  agreed  that  Smith  was  "actuated ... by  the  best motives"  and  showed  the  courage  of  his  convictions  on  many  occasions.  His flailings against  corruption,  partyism and  the like, however,  never  penetrated  to an analysis of these banes as "an  incident  of  capitalist  rule. But Goldwin Smith,  with  all  his wisdom, was one of the  numerous class that  tries to have omelettes without  the  breaking  of eggs."  Moreover,  Thompson   doubted  "whether Cana­  dians would ever have found out his ability if he had not come here with a ready made  reputation and a good social position." Had  Smith  been poor or unknown,  "he  couldn't  have  held down  a $2 a week job in any one of the Toronto  papers that  are  now shedding  hypocritical  tears  over  his coffin." Thompson, who had experienced   just such  a  fate,  held  this  advantage of Smith  to  account  for  his ultimate  limitations. "Such  an  experience  would  have  completed  his education and  given him an insight into the social problem  that he failed to get from books and   had   he  survived  the  ordeal  he  would  probably   have  made  a  first-class Socialist."140
How  then  do  we take  the  measure  of this  man  in  Canadian history? As a
promoter  of the independent  press, he has left us with a variety of journals which we can study  profitably. But he was not addicted  to thought,  as his friend Mavor noted.  Although   he  probably  deserves  recognition   as  a  founder   of  Canadian scientific philanthropy, which eventually led to the creation  of professional social work, he made  no useful contribution  to Canadian social thought.  Although  he could  not  make  up  his mind  about  the legitimacy  of the capitalist  social order, he would not break from its economic premises; nor did this tory touch stimulate a creative dialectic,  just verbose platitudes. As a critic of Canada's colonial status, he  had  some  shrewd  observations,  but  there  is little  in  his quips  that  can  be developed into profound analysis.
Nevertheless,  a  re-examination  of Smith  in  terms  of his social  thought  does allow us to be more sensitive to several intellectual  developments  of his time. He should help us recognize the pre-World War  I roots of the intellectual's  alienation

66

GOLDWIN  SMITH

from the crass materialism  and  narrow political vision of Canada. He should also help  us avoid  wooden  schemas of ''individualism  versus collectivism" as applied to the  rise of the welfare state,  and  "materialist  rationalism  versus high-minded idealism"   as  applied   to  controversies  over  Canadian  nationality.   Thankfully, Canada's  history  was  more  complicated  than   this. Goldwin  Smith  would  be doing well if he helped us appreciate that.





1 Saturday  Night  (Dec. 1977), p. 34·
 NOTES

2    The  Age of Equipoise  (London: Allen & Unwin, 1964).
3  S. Shortt, The  Search For An Ideal (Toronto: Allen & Unwin, 1976),  p. 93·
4  Goldwin  Smith, His Life and Opinions  (London: T. W. Laurie,  1913),  pp. 187-
88, 145·46.
5  Chris Harvie,  The  Lights  of Liberalism, University  Liberals and the Challenge  of
Democracy,  r86o-86  (London: Allen Lane, 1976), p. 66.
6  Cited in Harvie,  p. 14.
7   Harvie,  p. 75·
8   Rational  Religion  and the  Rationalistic Objections  of the Brampton  Lectures  for
1858 (Oxford: Wheeler,  r86r), p. iv.
9  Ibid., p. 59·
10  Ibid.,  p.  20. See also "The Ascent of Man,"  in Lectures  and  Essays (Toronto: Hunter  Rose, r881), p. 101.
11 A Plea For The  Abolition of Religious Tests  (Oxford: Wheeler, 1864),  p. 103.
12  Ibid., p. 102.
13  E. Halevy,  The   Growth  of Philosophical Radicalism  (London: Faber  &  Faber,
1934),  esp. PP· 513-14.
14  Lectures On The  Study  of History (New York: Harper, 1866), p. 34·
15  On   Some   Supposed   Consequences  of  the  Doctrine  of   Historical  Progress, A Lecture  (Oxford: Parker, 1861), p. 40.
16  Study  of History, p. 32.
17  Harvie,  p. 164.
18  A Plea, p. 28.
19  The  Reorganization of the University of Oxford  (Oxford: Parker, 1868),  p. 47·
2o  Ibid., p. 57·
21  Study  of History, p. 13.
22   Ibid., pp. q, 15.
23  The  Empire, A Series of Letters  (Oxford  and  London: Henry  & Parker,  r863), p. vii.
24  Ibid.,  pp. 134-35.
25    Ibid., p. 36.
26  Ibid., p. 136.
27   Ibid., p. g6.
28  Ibid., pp. 134-35.
29    Ibid., p. 136.

GOLDWIN SMITH


30    Ibid.' p. I 38.
31  Ibid., p. I 36.
32    Ibid., p. I42.
33  Cited  in J.  M.  Bumsted, ed. Documentary  Problems in Canadian  History:  Post- Confederation  (Georgetown:  Irwin Dorsey, Ig6g), p. 285.
34  The  Empire, p. 3·
35  Ibid., p. 57·
36    The  Civil War in America (London: Simkin, I866), 4, 28.
37    Commonwealth  or  Empire,  A  Bystander's  View   of the  Question   (New  York: Macmillan,  I 902) , p. 4·
38  England and America  (Manchester: n.p., I865), p. I3.
39  Civil War, p. 27.
40  Harvie,  p. I I I.
41  Smith, Civil War, pp. 4-5.
42  Harvie, p. I 03.
43  Ibid.' p. I 39·
44   Ibid., p. I 20.
45   "The  Experience  of the American Commonwealth," in S. Leslie et a!., Essays on
Reform  (London: Macmillan,  I867).
46   The  European Crisis of 1870, A Lecture  (Toronto: Adam, Stevenson,  I87I), p.  1.
47   Ibid., p. 32.
48   "The Labour  Movement,"  in Lectures and Essays, p. I 46.
9
' Ibid.'  P· I 26.
5o   Ibid., P· I34·
51  "What is Culpable  Luxury," Lectures and Essays, p. I 52.
52  Ibid.,  p. I 59·
53  "The  Labour  Movement,"  p. I36.
54    Canada   First:  A  Memorial   of  the  late   William  A.  Foster,  Q.C.   (Toronto: Hunter Rose, I 8go) .
55    Reminiscences  (New York:  Macmillan,  I9IO),p. II.
56    Ibid., p. 4·
57   Ibid.,  pp. 73-74·
58  A Trip  to England  (Toronto: Williamson, I 8g I), p. 8o.
59  Cited  in E. Wallace, "Goldwin Smith, Liberal,"  University  of Toronto Quarterly,
23 (Jan.  I954), p. I70.
60  See "Toronto: A Turning Point  in its History,"  Canadian  Magazine,  28 (April
I907)' 523-25·
61  Reminiscences, pp. 326-27; see also News (Toronto), June  20, I907.
62  Guesses At The  Riddle  of Existence and Other  Essays on Kindred  Subjects  (New
York:  Macmillan,  I 897) , pp. g6, 204.
63  "The  Proposed Substitutes for Religion," Lectures and Essays, p. I I6.
64    Guesses, p. 204.
65  "Proposed  Substitutes,"  p. I I6.
66    No Refuge  But In Truth (Toronto: Tyrrell,  I goB), p. 3·

68

GOLDWIN SMITH

87  See D.  Montgomery, Beyond Equality, Labor and the  Radical  Republicans  1862-
1872   (New   York:  Knopf,  1967); J. Sproat, "The Best  Men," in  his  Liberal
Reformers in the Gilded  Age (New York: Oxford, 1968) .
8      See  C.  Kent,  "Higher  Journalism and   the  Mid-Victorian  Clerisy," Victorian
Studies, 13  (Dec.  1969), r8r-98.
69   Harvie, pp. 174, 217-18.
70    The   Moral  Crusader, William Lloyd  Garrison, A Biographical Essay (Toronto: Williamson,  r8g2)  ; The   United   States,  An  Outline  of Political  History,  1492-
1891  (New  York: Macmillan, 1907), pp. 294 ff.
71   "The Greatness of England," Lectures and Essays, p. 29.
72    J. Mavor, My Windows On The  Street Of The  World, II (London: Dent, 1923), p. 129.
73    Commonwealth  or  Empire, A  Bystander's  View  of the  Question    (New   York,
1902), 2, 8; The  Early Days of Cornell  (Ithaca:  Andrews & Church, 1904), 17·
74     Weekly Sun  (Toronto), June 18, 1902.
7s  Commonwealth or Empire, pp. 3-4, 12, rg.
76  Social  Problems,  An   Address  delivered  to  the  Conference   of Combined   City
Charities of Toronto (Toronto:  Blacket,  r88g), p. 18.
77    Ibid.,  p. 20.
78   Telegram (May 5, r8g6). See also Globe (Nov. 23, 1907).
79    Smith  to   Robertson, Jan.   r8,    1905   ( ?) ,  Smith-Robertson  Correspondence
(Toronto Public Library).
80    Reminiscences, pp. 556-57.
81 Mail and Empire  (July  11, 1903).
82   Telegram, Jan.  15,  1902;   J.  Weaver, "The  Meaning of  Municipal Reform: Toronto, r8g5," Ontario  History, 66 (June 1974), 8g-roo.
83   Telegram (Jan. 15, 1902).
84  Civil War, pp. 14, 21.
85  A Trip  to England,  p. go.
86   Telegram (Nov.  7, rgor).
87   R.  Splane, Social  Welfare   in  Ontario,  1791-1893  (Toronto:  Univ. of  Toronto
Press, 1965), pp.  114-15; Wallace, p. 105. See also Globe, Nov. 8, 1902.
88  Social Problems, p. 18.
89   Telegram (Jan. 21, r8g6).
90    Social Problems, p. 20.
91   Draft letter, Dec.  r, 1909, Goldwin Smith  papers.
92    The  Political Destiny  of Canada  with  a Reply  by Sir Francis Hincks  (Toronto: Belford,  1977), p. 7·
93  G.  Mercer Adam, ed.,  Handbook  of Commercial Union: A Collection  of Papers
Toronto: Hunter Rose,  1888), p. xiv.
94   Ibid.,  p. 201.
95  The  Political Destiny of Canada, p. 16.
96    Ibid.,  p.  I 7.
97   Adam,  p. 243·
98  Loyalty, Aristocracy and  jingoism  (Toronto: Hunter Rose,  r8gr), p. 58.
99  Ibid.,  p. 62.

6g

GOLDWIN SMITH

1oo  "Loyalty,"  in B. Hodgins and  R. Page, eds., Canadian  History Since Confedera- tion, Essays and Interpretations  (Georgetown: Irwin Dorsey, I972),  p. 242.
101  Canada and the Canadian Question, p. 233; see also p. 2g5.
102  Ibid., P· 2 I 7.
103  E. Wallace, Goldwin Smith, Victorian  Liberal  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,
I957L  p. I29·
104  Smith  to Bourassa  (April  IO, Igo2)  in  W. D. Gregory  Papers  (Queens  Univer-
sity), Correspondence  I900-I909.
105  Smith  to Bourassa (Aug. go, I905).
106  Canada Farmers Sun, Toronto  (Aug. 29, I894).
107  Weekly  Sun  (Oct. 7, I896).
108  Star  (June  I I, I904).
109  Citizen and Country  (May 25, I900).
110  Star  (May  I4, I9o8).
111 Smith to Shipman  (May 25, 1908), Goldwin Smith  Papers.
112  Carl  Berger, Introduction to Canada  and the Canadian  Question, p. ix.
113  Weekly  Sun  (Sept. 2, I896).
114 "Simple  Truths Needed," 51St Annual Convention of the International Typo- graphical Union  held at Toronto, Canada, August 14 to 20th, 1905.
115  Mavor, p. Igg.
116  Reminiscences, p. 2go.
111  "Labour and Socialism," Canadian Magazine, g2 (Jan.  I909), 500.
118  Essays on Questions of the Day (Toronto: Copp Clark,  I89g), p. I2.
119  The  United   Kingdom, a Political History,  II  (Toronto: Copp  Clark,  I899), p.
372;  "Public  Ownership,  The  Natural  Thing," Trade  Union  Guide and Mercan­
tile Directory  (Toronto,  I904); Weekly  Sun  (Nov.  I2,  I902 and  Nov. I9, I896).
120  News (June  20, I907).
121  Weekly Sun  (Dec. gi,  I896).
122  False Hopes, p. g.
123  Keeping Christmas  (Toronto: C. B. Robinson,  I888).
124   Telegram (Jan.  7, I9o6).
125  Trades  and Labor Congress, Proceedings, p. 4·
126  Gibbons to Haultain (June 9, I9IO), Goldwin Smith Papers.
127  Lance, Toronto (June  II,  I9IO).
128  Trades  and Labor Congress, Proceedings, 19 Io, p. 10.
129  Toiler, Toronto (Jan. go, I9og).
130  Globe  (June   11, June  26, I896),  Telegram  (June  I9,  I896), Smith  to Toronto District  Labor  Council,  in  Toronto District  Labor  Council  Minutes   (June   I I, I896)  (Public Archives of Canada).
131  Machinists  Monthly  Journal (July I9o8), p. 632.
132  Star  (Nov. I, I902).
133  Star  (Dec. 7, I907).
184  G. Waldron,  "Goldwin  Smith," University  Monthly, I2  (March   I9I2), 221.
135  E. Wallace, Smith, p.  I68. See also Telegram (May  go, I895),  Star  (August  24, I90I), G. Smith,  Prohibition in Canada  and  the United  States  (London:  Mac­ millan,  I899),  passim.

GOLDWIN SMITH

136  D.  Risk and  H. Douglas to Smith   (Feb.  28, 1903), in Goldwin Smith  Papers.
137  G. Smith, "The Value of Vaccination," Canada  Lancet   (April   rgo6), 6g5.
138    Western Clarion, Vancouver (Aug. 8, r go8).
139   Simpson to Smith (June 13, rgo6), in Goldwin Smith  Papers.
140   Western Clarion (June r8,  rgro).




CEZJINNE'S LJIST YE7tRS
 


Douglas Barbour


& he moved 	he moved 	thru  paint
& canvas  stretcht after  canvas
towards a simplicity


so complex that
it simply  takes our eyes
& then    m 		there sketches 	the
sketches    of a place a world  he knew
& renewd
on the canvas of what  he saw how he saw it
 


out


blocks of colour 	of light     of
the bare  canvas     the bare
page

fewer  gestures say more
he says
in his language

& i repeat repeat it in mine

Paris	summer 	1978


JOHN WATSON AND THE IDEALIST LEGACY


T.






mSTORJAN OF  IDEAS IN CANADA   quickly d covers central  the  philosophy studied  at  Canadian   universities  was in helping  to bring about   the   intellectual   and   spiritual   accommodations  made   necessary  in  the Victorian   era.  Much   of  that  accommodation  involved  the  interplay   between certain  strands  of  religion, science, and  philosophy  that  found  their  way, as a kind  of  intellectual   patchwork  quilt,  into  the  homes,  the  universities, and  the churches of British North Americans in the nineteenth  century.1
Readers  of  the  Literary   History   of Canada will  recognize  immediately  that central  to this process of accommodation,  and  dominating philosophical  inquiry generally  in  Canada  between  1872   (when   he  arrived   from  Scotland   on  the campus  of  Queen's   University  at  the  ripe  old  age  of  twenty-five)   and  1922 (when   he  retired   from  teaching),  was  John   Watson.   John   Irving's   lengthy account  in the Literary  History  of Watson's signal achievements in the field of international philosophical scholarship need not be repeated  here. It might simply be noted  that  the  Garland   publishing  company  in  New York  reminded  Cana­ dians in 1976  that  his scholarship has been of enduring  value:  in a  republication  of the eleven most important studies of Kant  since that  philosopher's death,  two of the volumes selected were by John Watson of Queen's.2
Yet Watson was not significant for his contributions to scholarship alone. More
important  to  consider  is  the  crucial  role he  and  his  philosophy  played  in  the transition  of the overtly Christian  mental and  moral philosophy of the nineteenth century  in  Canada into  a  broadly  secular  moral  outlook  which  has dominated much of English-Canadian thought in the twentieth. When fully examined as part of the general  intellectual  and  cultural  history of English-speaking  Canada, the legacy of nineteenth-century mental  and  moral  philosophy  will perhaps  be seen to have been a profound  one, part of what, in A Disciplined Intelligence, I have called a "moral  imperative" that links the thought  of Thomas McCulloch  to that of Northrop  Frye, and that will allow an historical connection  to be made between moralists such as George Grant,  W. L. Morton,  Hugh  MacLennan, Harold  Innis, and Robertson  Davies and the Victorian  philosophic temperament.

IDEALISM

This  essay provides part  of that  background. To  be explored  here is the influ­ ence of the critical intellect of the speculative idealists, led by John Watson, upon the major  religious phenomenon  of early twentieth-century Canada: the liberaliz­ ing  movement  within  protestantism  known  as the social  gospel. In  the  process, some light  will be shed  on the interrelationship  between  philosophical  and theo­ logical suppositions  at a crucial stage in Canada's history, and some of the shifts and  continuities  in  Canadian intellectual  history  which continue  to affect Cana­ dian cultural  development  will be suggested.
At the end of the nineteenth  century, Anglo-Canadian thought had reached a watershed.  For a half century, those who dominated  religious, scientific, and philosophical  thinking   in  Canada   had  been  intensely suspicious of  the  critical intellect  that   emerged   in  the  popular   realm  during   Victoria's   reign.  Anglo­ Canadian educators  had, in effect, established an orthodoxy  of ideas and assump­ tions in the formative  years of the university curricula  in the country. Yet by the end  of  the  century  that   orthodoxy  was everywhere  under  assault.  In  the  first place,  the  Baconian  scientific ideal  (which  stressed observation  while eschewing speculation),  reflected  in  the  work  of Toronto's   Daniel  Wilson  and  McGill's William  Dawson,   had   proven  inadequate  under  the  onslaught   of  Darwinian  science. Secondly,  the  Scottish  Common  Sense  philosophy, which  pervaded  the teachings of James George at Queen's and William Lyall at Dalhousie in the third quarter of the century,  had  gradually been dismissed by younger minds as inade­ quate  in its psychology to meet the needs and the challenges of an age of inquiry and  analysis. Finally,  the  third  and  to an extent  the most central  element in this triumvirate  of  early  Victorian  orthodoxy,  the  Paleyite  natural theology  given expression  by  James  Beaven  and  James  Bovell at  Toronto   in  the  185o's  and
186o's,  had,  by the  r8go's,  largely been replaced. Originally  utilized as a means
of preserving  the  argument from  design while utilizing the  frameworks  of both faculty  psychology and  Baconian  observation,  it had,  by then,  been supplanted by an  equally  teleological, but  dynamic, Hegelian conception  of social evolution. In  short,  by the  end  of  the  century  the  old orthodoxy  of ideas,  antispeculative by nature, founded on social constraint, and aimed at instilling students with a traditional  Christian   piety,  had  been  shattered.   In  its  place  had  emerged  a Canadian variation  of British speculative idealism.
In  the  twenty  years after  the  arrival  of Watson and  Idealism  in  Canada  in
1872, that  philosophical  creed seemed to have resolved certain  problems critically important for the generation  who had been trained  under  the assumptions of the old  intellectual   orthodoxy   but  who  lived  through   the  Darwinian   revolution. Watson's   confident   philosophy  seemed  to  resolve the  problems  faced  by  the Common Sense school in the decades which explored the intricacies  of the central nervous  system   (or,  as  Richard  Maurice   Bucke  chose  to  call  it,  "the   Great Sympathetic"), for it could maintain  the existence of the "moral nature" of man

73

IDEALISM

while  asserting  the  active powers of  mind.  It constituted  a  new conception  of Design and  Purpose  operating  in the  universe, one that  could encompass  rather than  capitulate to evolutionary science. It  offered  a critique  of empiricism  and put empiricists on the defensive by revealing the limitations  of scientific enterprise without  attacking  science ad hominem. It  cultivated  a  pious disposition, yet did not   belittle  intellectual   inquiry.   It  showed  the  essential   "rationality" of  the universe and placed everything within the perspective of a new and modem interpretation of the Christian  experience, even while defending  the essentials of the faith as it conceived them.
For these basic reasons, the speculative Hegelian  idealism whose British mentor was  Watson's   teacher  Edward   Caird   and   whose  major   Canadian  voice  was Watson  himself found increasing acceptance  among  Canadian professors, clergy­ men, and  students  in the late nineteenth  century.  Yet even though  Watson  was, by  I 8go,  a scholar  of international stature,  idealism  was still a fresh intellectual force, a force for intellectual  change that  was coming  to dominance in a decade when change in the country was everywhere.
The  hegemony  of idealism  had  begun,  but  only  the  first signs of its ultimate
influence  could then  have been discerned. Every epoch is, in its own way, a time of transformation; but  theI 8go's marked  a clear departure from the past in the nature   and   quality   of  Canadian  life.  John   Watson's   Outline   of  Philosophy (I 895)   was put  before a Canadian reading  public  that  witnessed in the decades to come a social and industrial  upheaval  for which there was no precedent  in the history of the  nation.  His Christianity  and  Idealism  (I 897), a series of lectures given before the Philosophical Union of the University of California  at Berkeley, appeared  in the  first flush of the Laurier  boom;  his Gifford  Lectures,  published in  I9I2 as The  Interpretation  of  Religious Experience, were given when the rate of social and industrial  change had reached its height.
This  was,  above  all, a social transformation, and  the  idealist  preached  what was fundamentally a social ethic. Even at the level of intellectual  speculation  the social good  was necessarily to prevail. And  as with  thought,  so lives and  careers were also seen to be meaningful only when regarded  from a universal perspective. Society, it was argued, must be conceived as an organism. The individual  must subordinate private  interests to serve the greater  whole. Watson  had spoken from the  first of  "the  various spheres  of the  universe,"  each  forming  "an  ascending series, in  which  each  higher  realm includes while  it transcends  the lower.... "3
Each  "sphere" could  become a focus of attention for Canadians whose thought
was informed  by this new moral imperative,  articulated in a different  form for a new  age.  One  could  perform  one's social  duties  in  ascending  higher  forms  of service  to  an  ever  greater  good,  whether  at  the  level of  the  church,  the  civil service, or  the  empire.  During  the  thirty  years  that  followed I 8go,  Canadian

74

IDEALISM

intellectual  life was thus suffused with the idealist variant  of the Anglo-Canadian moral imperative.4
Idealism   exerted   its  greatest   influence,  however,  on   Canadian  protestant thought  and  practice. The  full nature  and  extent of this influence  will be deter­ mined  only with  more substantial  historical investigation, yet a brief  examination  of the  thought  of certain  key figures in early twentieth-century  protestant  circles may serve for the  present  purpose to suggest the general  nature of the intrusion  of idealist assumptions upon protestant thought in Canada.


hE LATE NINETEENTH-CENTURY  IDEALIST delighted in using his creed to resolve seemingly irresolvable problems, and in Canada he took great pleasure in  being simultaneously  a force upholding  the essentials of the Christian
experience  while  inaugurating a  profound  transformation in religious life. The result, however, was a reorientation  of Canadian protestantism  that  by the 192o's scarcely  resembled  that  desired by the nineteenth-century clerical advocates  of a reconciliation of science and religion through idealism.
Idealists inspired  by Watson  taught  that  reality consisted of the secular  process of history infused  with a spiritual  principle that  was at once the heart  of  knowl­ edge and  synonymous  with  the  Mind  of God. "In  God  we 'live and  move and have  our  being,'" Watson  told  a  Kingston  meeting  of the  Y.M.C.A.  in  1901;  "we  are spirits  capable  of communion  with the Spirit  of all things;  the meanest as well as the  highest  object  within  our  reach  witnesses of  this universal spirit;  and,  living in it, we may become worthy members of the family, the community,  the state,  the  race.  To  realize this spirit  in all its forms is our  true  life work." 5
So it was, but it was also a quest with a profoundly ambiguous legacy.
Watson's  address  had  been entitled  "The Sadness and  Joy of Knowledge," its text taken  from  Ecclesiastes I :I 8, which said:  "In  much  wisdom is much  grief: and  He  that  lncreaseth knowledge lncreaseth  sorrow." This  was a paradox  such as Watson  delighted  in resolving, for the idealist's universal vision and dialectical mode of argument could show how the "perils and storms of the intellectual  life"
-the sorrow-would be  quelled  by  the  simple  recognition  that  in  this  very
sadness lay the source of joy. Strenuous effort in the search for universal truth  by means of intellectual  inquiry  would gradually  result in a deeper  consciousness of reality, one in which "at  each step we feel we are penetrating a little deeper into the nature  of things, and  learning  to re-think the embodied thoughts  of God."  A generation   earlier,  such  a  statement   would  have  been  roundly  condemned   in Canadian protestant  circles, for it would have been seen as the height of  intellec­ tual  arrogance.  Watson's  large  claim  was an  expression of a  piety  shorn  of the Christian's awareness  that  because of the sinfulness of man  he could never fully

75

IDEALISM

achieve identity  with the Mind of God, however much  he might strive for it. But by the twentieth  century this was a notion that found increasing acceptance  in Canadian churches and protestant denominational colleges.
The   pervasiveness  of  idealist  assumptions  in  Canadian  university  circles is
suggested by even the most cursory of examinations of student  newspapers such as  Queen's  journal or Victoria  College's  Acta Victoriana.  This  is likewise the case with the fledgling academic  journals University of Toronto Quarterly, which began  in   x8g5, and  Queen's  Quarterly, first  published  two  years earlier.  The editors  of  the  latter   proclaimed  solemnly  in  an  opening  statement  that  their quarterly  sought  to keep its readers aware  "of what  Queen's is doing and  think­ ing,"  and  "to  try to throw some rays of light  on the questions that  men's minds must always be most concerned about.... "6
Not surprisingly,  the honour  of making the first statement about  such weighty questions  fell to John  Watson,  who provided  a piece called  "The Middle  Ages and  the Reformation." Luther's  reformation,  Watson stated,  was based upon the simple principle  that  reconciliation  with God was possible only through  "a spiri­ tual  act, an act of faith."  Yet he had  not gone far enough  in assessing the appli­ cation  of his own  principle. Watson insisted that  Luther  had  failed  to take into account  the fact that "the individual's  consciousness of God" transcends individu­  ality  and  "is  conditioned  by the  past  history of the  consciousness of  the  race."  Luther,  that  is to say, had  not, for  Watson,  taken  into  account  the  principle  of development,  since  he had  not  recognized  that  religious  consciousness evolved "with  the growing intelligence and  will of humanity." Once  wedded  to the idea of the  progressive development  of consciousness,  however,  protestantism  would, in Watson's  view, "purify  the state by making it an embodiment  of reason." This was the  "logical  consequence of the Protestant idea," one in which  "the  ideal is the real, and  what contradicts the ideal must ultimately  be annulled." 7
Watson's  Queen's Quarterly essay appeared  in July  1893· In February  of that
year a very important event in the history of university extension in Canada  had occurred.   Initiated   by  Principal   G.  M.  Grant, the  First  Theological  Alumni Conference  took place on the campus of Queen's  University. Lasting for ten days, it  was  attended   by  Presbyterian  ministers  across  the  Dominion.   Others,   not graduates  of Queen's but  attracted by the intellectual  vitality  of the  place, also attended.   There   they  heard  the  Principal  speak  on  a  variety  of doctrinal  and practical   subjects,  and  they  were  also exposed-as  the  alumni   had  been  as undergraduates-to John  Watson's  hermetic  philosophy. A sign of their appre­ ciation  of his views came in their  closing resolutions, for they recommended  the inauguration of a permanent  Lectureship  and stipulated that  it first be held by a professor from  Queen's  and  that  he "should  treat  some subject  bearing  on  the relations of Philosophy and Theology." Any doubt  as to who they wished to hold the  first  lectureship   is  dispelled  by  the  fact   that   when   Chancellor   Fleming

IDEALISM


announced  later  in the year his intention  to sponsor the desired lecture series, he stipulated  that  "no one could better fill the position than  Dr. Watson, who did so much to make the first conference a success."8
Watson  and  his followers were not  without  their  critics, but  there  can  be no
doubt  that  by the  early  twentieth  century  their distinctive  protestant  vision was beginning to have its effect. In February 1906, for example, a correspondent in Montreal  reported  to Albert  Carman, General Superintendent of the Methodist Church in Canada, that

many in  this Conference  [are]  saturated  with what they call "The  new ideas," and it has become a sort of fad-a  pretence of scholarship-to parade radical ideas. I have raised a few conflicts thus far, and expect to have more as I come in contact with these men. When the strife comes I find it is not so much the Higher Criticism ... that  I am forced to combat, but the Hegelian philosophy.... I find that  nearly  every  man  who  has  passed through  "Queen's  University," and  a coterie who follow this set, are preaching Hegelianism. It is a sad plight.9

So  it  was,  indeed,  for   Methodists   or  Presbyterians  who  wished  in  the  early twentieth   century   to  retain   the  fundamentals of  their  faith  as  they  had  been handed  down from earlier generations.
This was no easier at Victoria  College, Toronto, than it was at Queen's. There, idealism was given sustained  expression early in the century by a philosopher only at  the outset of his career: George John  Blewett. In  I897,  Blewett had won the Governor-General's Gold  Medal  at  "Vic," placing  first in  his philosophy class, and,  aided   by  the  George  Paxton  Young  Memorial  Fellowship,  he  then  did graduate work  at  Harvard, in  Germany,  and  finally at  Oxford  under  Edward Caird  (by then  Master  of Balliol). After a stint at Wesley College, Winnipeg,  he returned  to Victoria  College where he taught  and wrote until his untimely death in  I 9 I 2. By then, like Young before him, he had gained disciples-both  through his  brilliant   and  inspiring  lectures  and  through  his two  books, The   Study   of Nature  and  the  Vision  of God  (1907)   and  The  Christian  View  of the World
( I9 Io). In  a  preface  to  the former,  Blewett noted  that  he had  first been  intro­ duced  to philosophy through  T.  H. Green's Prolegomena to Ethics. Yet the book was stamped  with  the mark  of Caird.  He had not been exaggerating when, also in his preface, he had  written  of his "reverence and gratitude" to Caird,  "whose venerable  primacy  in  philosophy  among  English-speaking  men  makes him  'our father  Parmenides.' mo
The  combination  of the views of Blewett (who could write that  "the  nature  of God ... may  be expressed by putting  together the three  words, reason, righteous­ ness, love")    with  the  more  abrasive  and  less spiritualistic  rationalism  of  the Higher  Criticism  was a powerful force for change in Canadian religious thought.  However  much  idealists such as Blewett and  Watson attempted to infuse Reason with  a  Christian  spirituality, the fact  was that  in stressing the  way early Chris-

77

IDEALISM

tianity  "had  inherited  the intellectual spirit  of the Greeks"  they helped clear the path  toward  the application  of an essentially secular version of the Christian revelation.
To the philosophically astute, Blewett's conception of a Reason that transcended
but did  not challenge faith  was distinctly different  from one that simply equated faith  with  irrationality and  therefore  dismissed it.  But  to someone  less initiated into the subtleties and the rhetoric of idealist philosophy, someone who found the argument  persuasive but the logic and  the jargon difficult at times to follow, such distinctions were perhaps never fully clear. For such a person it may have been sufficient simply to remember that  Caird,  Watson,  and Blewett had said that Christianity  was evolving through  the secular process of history; that  this religious progress was essentially a spiritual  one which  nevertheless was everywhere mani­ fested in  concrete  terms;  that  in this  (admittedly vague)   unfolding  of  the  con­ sciousness of  the  race,  religious faith  could  be  better  comprehended  through  rational -even  intellectual -understanding;  that  piety and  intellectual  activity were not  at  odds  since faith  could not  be faith  if it  defied intellectual  inquiry; and   that,   finally,  somehow  in  this  ongoing  cosmic  process  the  old  divisions between the spiritual  and the material,  the sacred  and the secular, God and man, were obliterated.
Perhaps  the  potential  legacy of the idealist's  view of Christianity  is best illus­
trated  in the culmination  of the correspondence  between  Watson  and  one of his lay admirers,  a Mr.  J. M. Grant  of Toronto. The  troubled  Mr. Grant  could not
quite  reconcile Watson's  notion of the Absolute with  the doctrine  of the Trinity, failed to see how Objective  Idealism was not a form of pantheism,  and, between
1911  and   1918,   expressed  to  Watson,  often  in  lengthy   and  tortuous   letters, numerous  other  difficulties. Always Watson  replied, and  at length, in his reassur­ ing and  controlled  hand. Always, Grant  found,  for a time, solace in a  re-reading  of Watson's  Philosophical Basis of Religion;  but only for  a time. Finally, Grant  announced  that  he felt compelled to resign his position as a Presbyterian  Sunday  School superintendent because of his doctrinal  uncertainties. He  had  no choice, he said,  but  to  join  the  Unitarian Church.  "Do   you  think  it  really  matters," Watson  replied in a letter marked "confidential," "from  the point of view of the essence of religion, whether one accepts what  is called the divinity of Christ? ... You will understand," he went on, "that  I cannot  accept  any of the doctrines of any  Church  literally."11  He  then  went on to  dismiss, in  their  traditional forms, each of the doctrines which Grant  found impossible to reconcile with Speculative Idealism.
Like his mentor,  Edward  Caird, Watson desired above all to reassert the moral and  religious dimension of life undermined  by modern scepticism. Yet his method of doing so resulted, ironically, in a form of belief that  bore a distinct resemblance to the  declared  enemy, evolutionary  naturalism. Both  accepted  the  principle  of

IDEALISM

evolutionary  change;   both  asserted  the fundamental unity of nature.  This  con­ vergence between  Hegelian  idealism and the new naturalism,  John Passmore has argued,  was one of the most important and distinctive results of  Darwin's impact on British metaphysics. "It has been said," Passmore wrote, "that pantheism  is a polite form  of atheism: to assert that  everything is God is certainly  to deny that there  is a  God,  as that  word is ordinarily  understood. And  similarly one cannot but  be struck  by the resemblances between naturalism and the Absolute Idealism of philosophers  like  Caird  and  Bosanquet: so  concerned  are  they  to insist that there is nowhere a gap between the spiritual and the material,  between the human  and  the natural, that  one is often inclined to say-Absolute Idealism is the polite
form  of naturalism."12  The  spiritual  agony of Mr. J. M. Grant,  struggling  with
the competing  messages of the Westminster Confession and  Watson's Interpreta­ tion  of Religious  Experience,  is an  illustration  of what  could  result  when  one honestly  attempted  to  follow  speculative  idealism  to  its  apparent  conclusions. Grant  found  Watson's  reply to his own urgent letter "so radical  that  it demands  my most careful  thought." Accordingly, he began the repeated  study of Watson's Interpretation. A couple of years later he became a Christian Scientist.
One  can  only  wonder  about  the  extent  to which other  earnest  Presbyterians and  Methodists  were similarly affected  by the idealists' perception  of the essence of Christianity; their  willingness, in effect, to scrap  much  in order  to "preserve the  essence  of  the  Christian   consciousness-the  unity  of  man  &  God."  The Trinity,  the  divinity  of  Christ,  Original  Sin,  the  Atonement, Eternal  Life,  the Resurrection -each in its generally accepted meaning was an impediment  to an understanding of the union of God, Man,  and Reason. "No  creed of any church can be accepted," Watson  had  written to Grant  at the height of the latter's  crisis, "and   I don't   think  the  Church   be based  upon  any  belief except  that  it  is an organization  for making men better.m 3  How many of the divinity students trained under  Watson  in  the  fifty years from  I872  to  I922  came  to accept  Watson's simple definition of the Church,  and to view traditional  doctrines as impedimenta hindering  the growth of consciousness?




ER SOME, IT IS CLEAR, the idealist philosophy  was a  revela­ tion equal  to that  imparted  to Watson  by the Caird  brothers  in the  I 86o's. The social gospel movement  in Canada  was diverse both in its membership and  in its origins;  men  and  women  drew  their ideas on the social  teachings  of the gospels from  sources  as different  as  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson  and  Albrecht  Ritschl.  But they  also drew,  and  perhaps  in  a  more sustained  and  direct  fashion,  from  the messages of men  such  as John  Watson,  George  Monro  Grant,  George Blewett, and S. D. Chown  (who became General Superintendent of the Methodist  Church


79

IDEALISM

in 1910 and  who continued  in the position until Church  Union  in 1925). These intellectual  and  institutional leaders of Canadian Methodism  and Presbyterianism helped  provide  the  intellectual  foundations  upon  which  the social gospel  move­ ment in Canada was constructed between 18go and 1914.
The  "Queen's spirit" of the  r8go's, led by the contemplative  Watson  and  the
active Grant,  inspired numerous individuals  to engage in different forms of social service and  to strive in their secular pursuits to bring about  the Kingdom  of God on  earth.  Some,  such  as Adam  Shortt   (a  gold  medallist  in  philosophy  under Watson)   and  0. D. Skelton, became  prominent  federal  civil servants;  others, a far greater  proportion  than the population of Queen's  warranted, became teachers throughout the  country and  sought  to live up to the moral example set them  by Grant  and  Watson.  Still others sought  to be instrumental in the reorientation  of the Canadian religious order.  No one more exemplified this ambitious  spirit than the  Methodist   preacher,  Salem  Bland,  who  was to  become  the  most radical  of the social gospellers in Canada.14
Born  in  1859, Bland, the son of a British Wesleyan  Methodist  preacher,  had been present  in Kingston  from 1884 through  the 18go's, and  in every respect he was a "Queen's man,"  proud  to call himself a student  of Watson and  a disciple of Grant. Though never formally enrolled as a student  at Queen's, he nevertheless read   Kant   with  Watson,  attended   political  meetings  and   Sunday   Afternoon Addresses with  Grant,  and  thoroughly  imbibed  the new social and  critical spirit of the nineties. The  novelist Robert E. Knowles, himself a graduate of Queen's  in the 18go's, noted when Bland retired from public life that he had "enlisted and enmeshed and  engaged in all her life and  ferment.  Few faces were more familiar about  her  halls." 5  There,  instructed  by Watson   (and  through  him  Hegel and Caird) and Grant, Bland's life and mind took a new direction. Signs of this could be seen in  his consistent  participation in  the  Queen's Theological  Alumni  con­ ferences, especially  those of 18g8  and  18gg.  By then,  much  of his  voluminous reading  in Kingston  was beginning  to give definite shape  to his thought,  and  he was  nearly  ready  to give it  practical  application. "In  Canada as in all English­ speaking  countries," he told the  r8g8 conference,  "social  questions are engaging increasing  attention. Christianity  is becoming  primarily  sociological, which  is a good deal  better  than  if it should  be regarded  as primarily  ecclesiastical or even theological. . . . mo
The  stamp  of Grant,  \Vatson, and  Queen's  remained  on Salem Bland, and  no doubt  he prized the influence as much as he did the honorary  doctorate  awarded him by the  university in 1900. In the twentieth  century,  the reputations of Bland and  Queen's would diverge radically, for by the 192o's Bland  was best known as a  radical  socialist, whereas Queen's  under  the successors to Grant  was gradually to  assume  an  air  of academic   and  humanistic   detachment from  fundamental social issues, even from Protestantism.  Nevertheless, the connection between Bland

8o

IDEALISM

and the Queen's  spirit of the nineties existed and continued  to give a philosophical basis for  his  evolving social  views. In  1925  he  jotted  down  some  notes on  "A Philosophy of Life," and  they consisted of three propositions:  that  man is funda­ mentally  good;  that  there  must  be fullness of life for  everyone;  and  that  there must  be a  stronger  social consciousness. In  itself this  philosophy  was consistent with  the social gospel in almost  any of its derivations,  but  in  the specific ways Bland  sought  to construct  such a philosophy the legacy of his years in Kingston can distinctly be seen.17
It  would be inaccurate to assume that  Bland came away  from  Kingston with
the social gospel he was later  to preach in full blossom. When in Smiths' Falls in I 8gg,  for  example,  he still  taught  that  the  Kingdom  of God  could  be realized only through  individual  salvation.  At this stage in his career  the traditional con­ ception  of a transcendent Kingdom  held sway, if uneasily. Matters such as mini­ mum  wages, municipal ownership  of  natural  monopolies,  and  more  equitable taxation  were,  in  Bland's  mind,  clearly "within  the  range  of the  gospel, to  be manifestly implied  in  the  Kingdom  of Heaven  which  it  came  to establish. But these,"  he  added  emphatically, "do   not  make  the  Kingdom of  God."  At  this point in  his life, at  the age of forty, the essential distinction between sacred and secular still held some meaning  for him. "Knowledge  of God is not ... minimum wage  of  $1.50  a  day,  not  free schools & free  rides ... not  meat  & drink,  but righteousness & peace & joy in the Holy Ghost." 8  Yet if  these remarks portray a Methodist  committed   to  a  traditional   conception  of  righteousness  as the  main element  in  the  Kingdom  of  God,  they also suggest  one  who  could  not see the coming  about   of  such  a  Kingdom  without  radical  measures  of social  reform. What   he  had  learnt  in  Kingston  suggested  that  righteousness  and  an  earthly Kingdom   were  far  from   being  incompatible,  just   as  reason  and   faith  were entwined.  But  for  his  first  twenty  years  and  more,  those  before  his Queen's  experience,  his  conception   of  the  essence of  Christianity-particularly on  the question of eschatology -had been that of orthodox Methodism.
It  took  the  Kingston   experience  and  its  disturbing  intellectual   adjustments before Bland  was able to confront  the unexamined  convictions of his first twenty years. Late  in his life he noted  that  his career seemed to have fallen neatly into such  twenty  years stages. Of  the second of these, he wrote:  "Those  twenty years to me  were the  first twenty  years of my ministry begun  in  the  devout  and  un­ troubled   acceptance  of  traditional   orthodoxy  in  regard   to  the  message  and methods  of the Evangelical  Churches  and  the slow creeping in in spite of  honest and  resolute  opposition  of  what  at  the  first  were  unwelcome  and  even  sinful doubts.m9  Could  it be that  by the 18go's Bland had come to believe deep within that  he was putting  forward  from the pulpit a conception of the Kingdom he had once accepted,  still thought  he ought  to believe, but no longer  did? Could it be that  he had not yet quite summoned  the courage to give full voice to the range of

81

IDEALISM

radical  social reforms  necessary to bring  about  the earthly  Kingdom  of Watson and  of Grant,  a spiritual domain  manifested in the secular  and  material  reforms brought about  by Christians intent upon a better life for all?
No definitive  answer  can  yet be given to  these questions, but it is likely that
Bland's admission of spiritual turmoil in the 18go's was, if anything,  understated. The  fact  is  that   his insistence on  individual   regeneration   and  a  transcendent Kingdom  in 18gg was antithetical  to his experience  at Queen's.  Secondly, within a very few years Bland was to do a complete about  face on these very theological matters.  In  1903 he moved to Wesley College, Winnipeg,  as Professor of Church History  and  New  Testament  Exegesis, thereby  becoming  for  a few years a  col­ league  of George  Blewett. The  complete  change  of environment, his  reading  of the  works of British and  American  social reformers,  his talks with  Blewett, and the fact  that  life in  the boom city of the west involved daily  confrontation with the "social crisis" in its numerous aspects-each undoubtedly contributed  to his complete "conversion" within a few years of his arrival. "The idea emphasized by Jesus,"  he told an  overflow interdenominational audience  in  the  Winnipeg  City Hall in  1go6, "was  that of the kingdom, not of heaven but the kingdom of God on earth.  Christianity  was not a sort of immigration  society to assist us from  the hurly burly of this world to heaven;  it was to bring  the spirit of heaven to earth.
. . . Christianity," he  went  on,  "meant   the  triumph  of  public  ownership.  He believed in  public  ownership  because it is an  essential  part  of the  kingdom  of God on earth.  It  meant the substitution  of co-operation  for competition."20
The  radicalization of Salem Bland's social views is well known. What  must be noted  is simply  that   the  way  had  been  cleared  for  him  on  the  road  to  his Damascus.  By the  time  he  received  his honorary  degree  from  Queen's  he had been  introduced   to  the idealist's  conception  of the  essence of  Christianity-a religion shorn  of traditional   doctrine  and  based  on  an  organic  and  progressive evolution  of  society. These  assumptions  pervaded   Bland's  writings  in  the  new century.  It  was also a religion which necessarily had  to meet the test of Reason; and  Reason  itself was seen as the manifestation  of the  religious consciousness in thought.  In the third  place, his had become a faith  that separated  the concerns of theology from  those of ethics, and in so doing clearly subordinated the former  to the  latter.  "Theology," Bland  told  the  1914  Methodist   Conference,  "is  a  very secondary  consideration  in the Christian  life, and  it has had  too high a place in the Christian  church from the beginning."21
Like  Watson   and   Grant,   Bland  delighted   in  using  dialectical   methods  to establish dazzling argumentative advantage, and  complaints  about  the alleged "materialistic society" of the  Laurier  years furnished  one such opportunity. We are told  this is a materialistic  age, he declared  in his column  in the 1918 Grain Growers' Guide;  but it is in fact  not materialistic  enough.  In  words that  directly echoed those of Principal  Grant in the 188o's on the relation of religion to secular

IDEALISM


life,  Bland   insisted   that  Christianity could  no  longer  "be   treated as  a  distinct realm   or  department of  life.... It has  no  independent  existence.... It is life itself."  Christianity must   always,  to  be  vital,  be  manifested in  concrete  experi­ ence.  "One hears  sometimes," he  went  on,  "the   phrase  Applied  Christianity. It is only  as  it  is materialized that   it  reveals  itself."  Hence,  neither  doctrines nor sacred  ceremonies constitute part  of true  religious fellowship. That is "to  be found in   the   processes  of  industry  and   commerce.  Co-operation  in  commerce  and  industry is the real Holy Communion."211
Thus was  the  Hegelian dialectic used  to a degree  and  with  a confidence that could  have  been  equalled in  Canada only  by  Watson   himself.  "Let   us not  be afraid of materialism," Bland  concluded in triumph. "We are safe if we material­ ized  everything including  our   religion.  Then  the  long  continued  and   deadly  divorce  between   the  spiritual and  the  material will be brought to an  end.  Spiri­  tuality  will be nowhere because  it will be everywhere."23
The social  thought of J. S.  Woodsworth, perhaps Canada's best known  social
gospeller,  was  shaped -like  Bland's-by  influences  as  diverse  as  his  reading lists;  yet he, too, came  under the influence  of British idealism. Unsettled after  an intellectually disturbing  year  at  Victoria College  in I 8g8,  he  was  persuaded to study  at  Oxford. His  faith  already shaken  by the forms  of "modernism" taught at Victoria, Woodsworth concentrated at Oxford upon  Christian ethics. He found himself  even  more  disturbed with  Canadian  Methodism in  its traditional form, however,   after   he  had   read   philosophy   with  Edward  Caird   and   religion  with Andrew  Fairbairn. While  there,  he  was also in  contact with  George  Blewett,  to whom   he  was  distantly  related. At  one   point   he  puzzled   over  the  fact   that philosophers appeared  to be forging  a radical separation of ethics from  Christian theology,  and, in  a letter   home,  noted  that   "Blewett, one  day  speaking of  this phase of the work, laughingly described  himself as a pagan." Indeed, Woodsworth added, "it is true  we take  no  account of the  Christian revelation.... " ByI g I  r, upon   the  publication of  his study  of  urban   problems,  My  Neighbour, Woods­  worth   had   largely   come   to   grips   with   the   seemingly   pagan   implications  of Blewett's   message,  and   Blewett  could  write  to  him,  upon  receipt  of  his  book: "You  and  Fred  Stephenson and  men like you and  he, are the true light  and  heart of our church in its work for the country."24
In  fact  there  were good reasons why Blewett should  have congratulated Woods­ worth, for  the  latter's new  book  fully  accorded with  Blewett's  own social  teach­ ings. Blewett's The Study  of Nature  and the Vision of God, published four  years before  My  Neighbour, had  stressed  philosophically what Woodsworth's new work stated  in  practical terms.  "And the  truth of the  world," Blewett  had  concluded, "the  truth  both  of  ourselves  and  of  the  world, is God; God,  and   that   'far-off divine  event' which  is the  purpose  of God,  are  the  meaning of the  world.  And  this  means  that   the  citizenship to which  we are  called  is a  heavenly  citizenship;

8g

IDEALISM

but  it  also means  that  that  heavenly citizenship  must  first be fulfilled upon  the earth,  in the life in which our duties are those of the good neighbour,  the honest citizen, the devoted churchman. The  perfection of human  life lies in being at one with  God;  but  to that  oneness with God men  can  come, not by departure from the world into eternal  quietude,  but only by flinging themselves into the labours and  causes of the  history in  which  God  is realizing  His eternal  purpose.... "25
These final passages of Blewett's book might well have served as an epitaph  to the rest of Woodsworth's life.


How  CLOSE WERE THE  VIEWS of the idealists and the social gospellers to the  "mainstream" of opinion  in  the  major  Protestant  churches?  It may  be claimed  by some that  Watson  and  Blewett were,  after  all, merely aca­
demic  philosophers, and  that  Bland and  Woodsworth  represented  the vanguard rather  than  the mainstream  of religious opinion on social questions. To an extent, of  course,  this  claim  is true.  Yet even  those  not  technically  idealists  or  social gospellers gradually  came to bear  the marks of both.  We might,  by way of  con­ clusion,  examine  briefly  the  thought   of  the  man  who  was  to  lead  Canadian Methodists into Church  Union in I925:  S.D. Chown.
Elected  General  Superintendent inI 9I o, a  position  he held with  Albert  Car­ man  until  Carman's retirement  in  I9I4, Chown  exuded  the  new  liberal  and forward-looking  spirit. What  most strikes one about  Chown's  views by the second decade  of the  twentieth  century  is the complete substitution of  sociological con­ cerns  for  theological  ones.  His  thought  suggests  in  what  peculiar  terrains  of Christian  social thought  a man could arrive who began his journey working from the inspiration of Canadian idealists. In I9 I4 Chown gave a lecture on "Socialism and  the  Social  Teachings  of Jesus,"  and  commenced  it  by  acknowledging  his indebtedness  to "Dr.  Watson."  "The  Sermon on the Mount," he went on to say, "which  is the  very charter  of Christianity  and  the  constitution  of the  Kingdom Christianity  came  to  realize, contemplates  society  as reorganized,  inspired,  and upheld  by superficial  brotherly  love. The  sayings of  Christ  therein  contained  are a picture in outline, and a prophecy of the perfect social state which is to be when Christianity  comes into its own."26
For  Chown,  only  the  establishment  of  what  he  described  as  a  "systematic sociology"  would  usher  in  the  perfect  social  state.  Only   "a   perfect  sociology perfectly  applied  will result in  the  establishment  of the  Kingdom  of God,"  he once stated  in  a  lecture  called  "The   Relation  of Sociology  to the  Kingdom  of Heaven." His was the eschatology of a man uncertain  as to whether  he should be a clergyman or a social scientist (but who saw no reason why he could not simultaneously  be both). His lectures on sociology are excellent illustrations  of a

IDEALISM

certain stage in the transmutation of Christian moral philosophy of the nineteenth­ century  variety  into  a  moralistic,  yet essentially secular, study  of  social relation­ ships. The  law  upon  which this sociology must be based, he insisted, was "moral  law," and  the culture  which arises "from a well directed study of sociology is not simply intellectual" but "partakes also of moral discipline.... "27
The  code of conduct  that  was to give substance  to this moral  rigour was one
centred  in the conduct  of Christ, not in his divinity or in the meaning of his blood sacrifice. "One of the most extraordinary signs of the times," noted Chown with obvious approval, "is that,  while many of the doctrines which centre about  Christ have  to great  multitudes almost lost their meaning, his personality and  his social teaching  have  acquired  an  interest  never before felt. This  trend  of events gives direction   to  the  development   of  the  science  of  theology  to-day,  and  is giving immense impetus  to the coming  of the Kingdom."  So it was, and  Chown's  own views  helped  channel   Canadian  protestantism  along  this  direction.  Lacking  a systematic  programme either  in theology or in sociology (in  fact  Chown's soci­ ology was anything  but  "systematic" in any meaningful  sense),  he had been left with a Christ  who was, at least in part,  "Hellenized"-a Christ  who embodied in  his  conduct   not  only  traditional  Christian  morality  but  also  the  standards informing  the  "sweetness and  light" of Matthew  Arnold's  conception of  culture. Why should  the student  of the ministry study sociology? asked  Chown. "I should say, firstly, for the sake of culture.... A sociologist who is true to the ideals of his science  is particularly   inclined  to resist the  utilitarian  and  commercial  spirit  of the times. This is so because he stands for justice; for sweetness and light amongst men rather  than for imposing material achievement."28
Here  was another  point  at  which speculative idealism and  protestant  theology met. Just as the British idealists had seen Kant  through  evolutionary  and progres­ sive Hegelian spectacles, so their  vision of Christ was filtered through  Hellenistic ones-for  after  all, Greek evolution marked  a later and  therefore a higher stage in  the  evolution  of spiritual  and  intellectual  consciousness than  did  the Judaic.  Chown's  conceptions of Christ and of Culture  were similar to those of Arnold  (or for that  matter  Vincent  Massey),  and they were also a direct legacy of  an impor­ tant  element  in British idealism:  the classical ideal. Having  helped strip essential doctrines  of much  of their  traditional  import  and hence  metaphysical  authority,  they substituted   a  code  of  right  conduct,  of citizenship,  which  presumed  to be Christian  but which -at least as Chown gave voice to it-could be reduced to the  proposition  that   "The Golden  Rule"  was "the  sum  and  substance  of  the sociology of Jesus."29
But was that  quite  enough  to satisfy the spiritual  needs and  the social  consci­ ences of Christians  adrift  in a  twentieth-century  world that  was not  only evolu­ tionary  and  much  older  than  eighteenth-century  cosmology admitted but  which also gave rise to a  bewildering  array  of alternatives to traditional religion itself?

Bs

IDEALISM

Those  who in  1925 formed  the  United  Church  of Canada-Methodists, Con­ gregationalists,  and  most Presbyterians -apparently  thought  so, for  no  church leader  more  embodied  the  new ecumenical  and  forward-looking spirit  than  did the popular S.D. Chown. It is commonplace in Canadian religious historiography  to observe that  there was a singular  absence of theological discussion during  the debates  on  Church   Union.  Pressing  problems  in the  West,  it  is said,  created powerful  forces for  protestant  union that  made  churchmen set aside their  theo­ logical  and  doctrinal  differences. Doubtless  this  was so, but  if the  influence  of philosophical  idealism  upon  protestant  thought  in  Canada resembled  that  sug­ gested here,  there  may  not  have  been  many  theological  questions  the advocates  of union would have deemed important enough to debate.
In  1925, as one of the consequences of the creation  of the  United  Church  of Canada, the venerable Methodist  magazine, The Christian  Guardian, passed out of existence. Its place was taken by another  journal  whose very title reflected the profound    re-orientation    of  Anglo-Canadian  social  thought   in   the   previous decades. The  new magazine was called the New  Outlook. Whereas  the Guardian had been a kind of sentry in its protection of inherited  tradition, accepted  wisdom, and   a  closed  Anglo-Canadian  community,   the   New   Outlook   was  more  an advance  scout  in  its  orientation   toward   the  contingencies  made  necessary  by social change, shifts in thought,  and  communities  in flux. A critical balance  had been tipped.


NOTES

1 (Montreal:  MeGill-Queen's Univ. Press, 1979).
2  The series is entitled "The  Philosophy of Immanuel Kant;  A Collection of eleven of  the  most  important  books on  Kant's  philosophy reprinted  in  14  volumes." Selected by Lewis White Beck. The  Watson volumes selected are:  Kant  and  His English   Critics   (New York:  Macmillan,  1881),   and  The  Philosophy of  Kant Explained  (Glasgow: James Maclehose, 1908).
8  John  Watson, "The  Relation of Philosophy to Science" (Kingston, 1872),  p. 18. For social and political context of the transformation of Canada, see R. C. Brown and Ramsay Cook, Canada  I8g6-1921: A Nation Transformed (Toronto, 1974).
4    For the influence of idealism on, for example, a Canadian imperialist and a Cana­ dian  poet, see:  Terry  Cook, "George R.  Parkin  and  the Concept  of  Britannic Idealism,"  in  Journal   of  Canadian Studies,  10   ( 1975); John  Robert  Sorfleet, "Transcendentalist,  Mystic, Evolutionary Idealist;  Bliss  Carman,  1886-1894.''  in George Woodcock, ed., Colony  and  Confederation  (Vancouver:  Univ. of British Columbia Press, 1974).
5  John  Watson, "The  Sadness and Joy of Knowledge," Part  II,  Queen's  Journal
(March  29, 1901),  260.
6   The Editors, "Salutatory," Queen's Quarterly, I   (July 1893),  1-2.
7   John Watson, "The Middle Ages and the Reformation," ibid., pp. 6-11.
8  Ibid., pp. 88-91.

86

IDEALISM


9 ·Albert  Carman  Papers, United Church Archives,  Toronto, vol.  18, no. 123.  Rev. C. T. Scott  to Carman (Feb.  28, 1906).
10  George  John  Blewett, The  Study  of Nature  and the  Vision  of God:  With  other
Essays in Philosophy  (Toronto, 1907), p. viii.
11 John  Watson  Papers, Queen's  University Archives,   Kingston. J. M.  Grant to
John Watson (Nov.  10, 1911); Watson  to Grant (May  17, 1914).
12   John  Passmore, "Darwin's Impact on  British  Metaphysics," Victorian Studies,  3 ( 1959-60), 52-53.
13   Watson Papers; Watson to  Grant  (May   17,  1914); Grant to  Watson  (June  7,
1914). See  also  Watson to  Grant  (March 13,  1917); Grant to  Watson   (March
16, 1917); Grant to Watson (April16, 1916); Watson  to Grant (April22, 1916); Grant to Watson (March 7, 1917); Grant to Watson   (April  6, 1918); Watson to
Grant  (April   10, 19,  1918). By I9I8, Watson's patience had  worn  thin.  His  last letter   to  Grant was  short: "Dear Mr.  Grant, ... I don't think  I care  to say any more   about  Christian  Science,   which   to   my  mind   is  based   upon   indefinite thinking."
14  The scope  of  this  paper   precludes treatment  of many  individuals. Yet  another, very  much   infected  by  the  Queen's spirit  of  the . I 88o's  and   I 89o's,  was  Alfred Fitzpatrick, the  founder of Frontier College.  Fitzpatrick had  taken  a B.A. there  in I88g  and  attended its Theological College  from  I889  to  r8g2. During this time  he became   dedicated  to  the  proposition that   education and  everyday   life,  thought and  action, must  not  be separated; hence  he sought  throughout his life to  make the  sacred  _and the  secular   meet.  G.  M.  Grant was  the  greatest influence   on  his life,  and   when  he  wrote   a  book  (never  published)  entitled  "Schools and  Other Penitentiaries," he dedicated it to "the  memory  of George  Monro Grant, Canada's Greatest  Force   and   Personality in  Education and   Statesmanship.... " Frontier College  Papers, vol. I 94, Public  Archives  of Canada, Ottawa.
15  The Toronto Daily  Star  (June 24, 1930). See  also Salem  Bland,  "Memories  of Old   Kingston," ibid.   (July   30,  Aug.  2,  4,  1938). Bland's notes  from  Watson's courses  are  in  the  Salem  Bland  Papers,  vol. 9, no. 8I I,  United Church Archives, Toronto.
16  Quoted in   Richard  Allen,   "Salem  Bland   and   the  Social   Gospel   in  Canada," unpub. M.A.  thesis  (Univ. of Saskatchewan, I96I), p. 52.
17  Salem  Bland, "A  Philosophy of Life"  (Nov.  26, I925), Salem  Bland  Papers, vol.
2, no. I58.
18  Salem   Bland,  "The  Kingdom of  God  realized  only  in  Individual Regeneration" (Jan. r8,  r899), ibid.,  vol. 4, no. 356. Bland's  early  years are  treated in detail in Richard Allen,  "Salem Bland: The Young  Preacher," The  Bulletin  of the  Com­ mittee  on  Archives of the  United Church of Canada, no. 26 (1977), 75-93·
19  Salem   Bland,   "A   Contribution  to  a  Possible  Sketch   of  My  Life," n.d.  Bland
Papers,  vol. 9, no. 726.
20    Salem   Bland, "The  Place  of  the  Kingdom of God  in  the  Preaching of Today," unidentified  newspaper  clipping, Feb.  I2,  1906,  ibid.,   vol.  3,  no.  235· See  also Richard  Allen,   "Children of  Prophecy:  Wesley  College   Students in  an  Age  of Reform," Red River Valley  Historian (1974), pp. I5-20. 	·
21  See Salem  Bland, "A  Faith Rational But Not Rationalistic," sermon  Oct.  22, I92I, Bland   Papers, Vol.  6, no.  544;  "The Religiousness  of Reason," n.d.,  ibid.,  vol. 9, no.  8Io;  "Pre-eminence of  Christ   and  Theology. Lecture  III"  (May go,  I9I4), ibid.,  vol. 3, no. 232.                                                                                            .

IDEALISM

22    Salem  Bland,  "The   Deeper  Life-Not  Materialistic Enough," Grain  Growers' Guide  (June  5,  I9I8). Bland's statement  echoed  the  I9I3 comment  of a  Presby­ terian  clergyman,  who began  a  Presbyterian  Assembly address  on "The  Messen­ ger"  by saying:  "The  task assigned to a Canadian preacher resembles  nothing  so much  as the general  managership  of a big department store."  Rev. G. B. Wilson, in  Pre-Assembly  Congress; Addresses delivered  at  the  Presbyterian  Pre-Assembly Congress, Held in Massey Hall .... (Toronto, 1913),  p. 32.
23  Bland, "The Deeper Life."
24    Quoted  in  K.  W. McNaught, A  Prophet  in  Politics  (Toronto, 1963),  10,  I4·I6,
48n. See also William H. Brooks, "The  Uniqueness of Western Canadian Method­
ism  I840-I925," The   Bulletin,  no.  26  ( I977), 68-9,  73n;  J. Warren  Caldwell, "The Unification   of  Methodism  in  Canada,  I865-I884,'' The   Bulletin,  no.  I9 (I967); William H. Magney, "The  Methodist  Church  and The  National  Gospel," ibid., no. 20 ( I968); Burkhard  Kiesekamp, "Presbyterian and  Methodist  Divines:
their  Case  for a  national  church  in Canada, I875-I900,'' Studies  in  Religion,  2
(I 973) ·
25    George  John   Blewett,  The   Study   of Nature  and  the  Vision   of God  (Toronto I907), p. 354· For a description of Woodsworth's  view of the nature of religion by I920 see Richard  Allen, The  Social Passion (Toronto, I97I), pp. IOI-2. For a com­ prehensive  summary  of  the  origins and  course of  the  social gospel  movement  in Canada, see George  N.  Emory,  "The   Origins  of  Canadian  Methodist  Involve­ ment  in  the  Social Gospel  Movement   I890-I9I4,'' The  Bulletin,  no. 26  ( I977),
104-I9, or the full treatment  in The  Social Passion.
28    S. D. Chown,  "Socialism & The  Social Teachings  of Jesus, Vane. Feb. I4,  I9I4,'' p. 6. S. D. Chown  Papers, United Church  Archives, Toronto, vol. 2, no. 58b.
27    S. D. Chown,  "Sociological  Course. Lecture  I. Importance of the Study  of Soci­
ology," pp. I-2. Chown Papers, vol. 2, no. sob.
28    S. D. Chown,  "Sociological Course. Lecture  II. The  Relation of Sociology to the
Kingdom of Heaven,"  pp. I-2. ibid., vol. 2, no. 5Ia; "Lecture 1,'' 2.
29   "Sociological  Course.  Lecture  II,"   I 2. For  an  examination of the  classical ideal and  its relationship  to philosophical idealism, see S. E. D. Shortt,  The  Search  for an Ideal  (Toronto: Anansi, I977L  pp. 59-76. See also H. Richard Niebuhr, Christ and Culture  (New York:  I956),  pp. I·I I5, for theological  background  and impli­ cations.



CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T lWS  /228-4741


88




THE GJIRDEN
 POEM




Patrick Lane



praise  the idea
the  disordered care so that  the stone

you have  placed
for beauty  continues with  a studied delight

as if a god
had  dropped it. arrange, arrange

plant within
that  casual  borders your desire.

this is the web and  the  ritual of the web.

what  discipline obtains what  way shall  you stand so that  your eye observes

nothing? the sand raked  into  a sea and  the sea

an  illusion  of sand. this garden, sprung from  a desire

for order, remains a scream. it wants you to want  the

storm. it  prepares for rage,  the sudden irrevocable flood.

8g


THE THOUGHT
OF GEORGE MONRO  GRANT


Allan Smith




GEORGE MONRO  GRANT,  CLERGYMAN,  educator,  patriot, and  controversialist, was one of the most active of the small group of intellectuals who,  in  the  last  years of  the  nineteenth   century,  strove  to  give direction  and content  to  life in  the  new Canadian nation.1  The  result, embodied  in  a steady stream  of books, articles, essays and lectures, was a vision of man, nationality, and the imperial future  action in conformity with which, Grant  firmly believed, would set  Canadians on  the  path  to  greatness  and  salvation  in  the  present  and  for generations  to come. To examine the contours of that  vision is, then, to consider a system of ideas which stood in dynamic relationship  to a particular appreciation of what  was happening  in Canadian society, to a precisely defined assessment of the  direction  events in the  world  at  large  were taking,  and  to a certain  under­ standing  of the  principles structuring the operations  of the universe itself. Unless that   point  is  grasped  at  the  outset,  the  full  meaning  of  what  Grant   tried  to accomplish  will remain unclear.
No small  part  of the precision and insistence with which Grant  spelled out his views derived  from  his belief -rooted  in his early Christian  training,  reinforced by  his seven-year  sojourn  among  the  leading  proponents  of Scottish  idealism, 2 and  sharpened   by  his  association  with  the  distinguished   Queen's   philosopher John  Watson3  -that the nature of reality could be understood  only by those who saw that  the truth  which really mattered  lay far  beyond the realm of the senses. Its beholders must for that  very reason report  what they had seen with force and exactitude, for in an  age already  too much  inclined  to disregard  phenomena for whose existence  no  direct  and  tangible  proof  was available  such  things  were to be spoken  of with special care. Making  clear how one acquired  knowledge was a matter  of particularly great  importance,  for  only if that  were firmly established could the claims of the century's ever more confident empiricists be viewed in the proper   perspective.  In  spite  of  all  the  advances  made  by science  God's  truth could  not, it was  crucial  to see, be fully  understood  by those who  persisted in using nothing  but its method. Beyond a certain  point on the road to understand­ ing -here a  distinctly  Kantian   element  entered   Grant's  thought -"nature's face is veiled," and  once those who sought  to uncover  her secrets using the tech­ nique of science had  reached that  point, they could do no more than  speak of an

go

G. M.  GRANT


"unknown and  unknowable  God." An altogether different approach  was, in consequence,  required  if one  wished to move into  the  realm  of ultimate  truth. Faith  was a necessary element in the journey, and faith,  as Grant  put it, "cometh not of science. Faith  is the vision of the unseen, faith assumes revelation." 4
One  could  not,  however,  conclude  from  this-here  was the  other,  equally important side of the proposition-that intellect had  no role at all to play in the process by which man  came to know God's truth.  It  was, indeed, only through  a Christian  ordering  of man's  mind  and  reason that  the  "nobler  elements" of his nature  could  be  brought  into  play, an  essential step  if he were to comprehend the  Divine  order  in  anything  like its full  range  and  subtlety.  The  church,  the press,  the  school,  and   the  college therefore  had  important responsibilities, for more than  any other  of society's agencies, they had the power to make men free. The  results  to  be  yielded  by  the  exercise of that  power  might  come  slowly­ Grant  was under  no illusions on  that  score -but  "in  the end" what  he called "the  educational method" was, he assured Canadians, bound  to "prevail."
A partisan  of rigour in matters of schooling-he remained  convinced through­ out  his life  that  study  of  the  classics played an  important role in  training  the mind 6  -neither  Grant's enthusiasm  for  traditional   methods  nor  his  belief that scholarship  and  science  could  carry  one  only so far  down  the  road  to  under­ standing  blinded  him  to  the  relevance  new departures  in  the  world of learning might   bear  to   the  search   for  truth.   In  thus  supporting  such  innovations  in scholarship  as textual  criticism7   and in opposing the hand  of  authority  in matters  of the intellect, he made  it clear that, in his view, a refusal to accept change and development   would  militate   against  attainment of  the  very  objectives  it  was supposed to help achieve. "How," as he put it, "can  a  Church  expect to produce great divines if it muzzles the thinker and scholar?"8  Rejecting  the instruments­ linguistic criticism, epigraphy, archaeology-which had done so much to amplify God's truth  would, indeed,  be tantamount to blasphemy, for were not these things gifts  of  the  Creator   Himself?9    Even  Darwin's  work  earned  a  positive response from  Grant,   for  he  found  in  it  a  demonstration   of  the  mystery  and  strange  purposefulness  of God's  ways. In  thus recognizing, as one of his contemporaries observed, "no  conflict between the teachings of true religion, in its broadest sense, and  the discoveries of modern science,mo he gave clear evidence of his belief that all forms of inquiry had a place in the grand search for truth.
If education  had  a signal  role to play in this fundamentally important  enter­
prise, its  part  in  the  determination of secular  affairs  was, thought  Grant,  even more central.  His belief that  there was no real division between spirit and matter
-"the ideal divorced from  the actual," he once put it, "is a mere Chimera"11 -
led  him  to  argue  that  even  as improving  the  mind  brought  society's members closer  to  knowledge  of  God  it  would  lead  to  a  practical strengthening of  the community. He therefore opposed anything that looked like a tax on knowledge, 12

91

G. M.GRANT

and  made  it  clear  that  a  major  requirement   for  Canada's development   was "properly-educated brains."13  Cultivating  the  powers of the intellect  on a broad scale  was,  indeed,  a  sine qua  non of  national  survival.  "Every   country,"  he pointedly remarked, "must  take its share in the common  burden  and  give its contribution   to the solution of these problems, old as the race, which  appear  in new forms of every age, or accept the position of a mere dependent  upon others and sink into spiritual  decrepitude or petrifaction.m4
Grant's emphasis on the relevance education  bore to the country's future  never, of course, involved him in losing sight of its higher  purposes -"universities," he wrote on one occasion, "represent  the spiritual  side of man"15 - and  he made it clear  that  education, even in the service of national  development,  was a serious matter  which could be properly managed  only if it concentrated first on those at the apex of the learning  pyramid. "It is a sound maxim," he informed  those who heard  his inaugural address at Queen's, "that if you would improve the education of a country you must begin at the top."16 The educational edifice had, in sum, to be shaped  by men who realized that education  was important, "not  because of its money value,  but  because -if of the right  kind -it  develops the spirit in man, the spirit  which  values literature,  science, art,  in  a  word,  all truth,  for its own sake."17
Insistence  upon   the  importance   of  spiritual   development   in  its  relation  to national  growth  was, Grant  thought,  particularly  vital, for in the absence of such development   there  could  be  no  national  existence  worthy  of  the  name.  Only those  who had  grasped  the fact  that  the foundations of reality  were moral  and ideal and were able to engage their fellow men at the same high level of discourse and  comprehension   could  be  trusted  to  give the  national  life the  richness and form  it required.  "A  nation  to be great" -the  point  emerged  with naturalness and   inevitability   from  all  that   he  wrote  on  the  subject -"must  have  great thoughts;  must  be inspired with lofty ideals;  must have men and  women willing to work and  wait  and  war  'for  an idea'."  8   Or  again,  at  the end of his life, "a nation  is saved  by ideas;  inspiring  and  formative  ideas."  9  The  structuring of a mature   and   self-reliant   polity  thus  required -it   was  an   observation   which appeared  perhaps  more frequently in Grant's  work than  any other-"not more millions either  in  men  or  money ... but  more  of the  old spirit  in  the  men  we have;  not  a long list of principles, but a clear insight into  those that  are funda­ mental."20
As a man  who considered his own list of principles short and  his insight clear, Grant  thought  himself well-fitted to discharge  the important obligation of  equip­ ping his fellow Canadians with the knowledge they needed if they were to guide their  actions  properly.  Capable  of being succinctly  stated -all  things in  God's universe were directly linked to Him, and to each other, by the indissoluble bonds of the spirit;  there was no real division between matter  and mind, for one was but

G. M.GRANT

an aspect of the other; one could envision no genuine hierarchy of any sort among God's  creatures,  for each  of them stood in the same relation  to the Creator,  and each had its own essential part to play in the shaping of His grand  design21 -the body  of  principle  which  made  up  that  knowledge informed  all of  his writing. And  in  communicating awareness  of  it  to  his  compatriots-here one  gets a particularly   clear  view  of  the  importance   he attached  to  the  preaching  of the word-he intended  far more than that they should simply assimilate its meaning; their grasp  of its significance would be manifest in behaviour  as well as thought, for -he  believed -it  was hardly  possible to understand  the principles in accor­ dance  with  which God intended  the world to be run without  wishing to do one's part  to insure that  it would in fact be regulated by them. The faith Grant placed in  his system's  power  to inspire  right  action  was, then,  one of  his  most telling characteristics.  Nothing  offers more eloquent  testimony to his belief in the force of ideas, and  nothing  explains  more clearly the importance  he attached to speci­ fying the proper  principles of behaviour in all departments  of  human  activity.




bE INSISTENCE ON  THE  EQUALITY of God's creatures  which formed  a central  part  of Grant's system had a particular  relevance for his under­ standing  of the  principles  which ought  to govern human  relations.  One should, he believed, strive to prevent  those relations from coming  to rest on the assump­ tion  that  men were irreducibly  different.  What  appeared  at first sight to be man­ kind's  complicating  and  troublesome  diversity was, in fact,  no  more  than  a veil behind  which  reposed a collection of beings each of whom  had  been created  by God and all of whom were engaged in the same divinely inspired enterprise.
This  was, Grant   thought,  a  lesson his compatriots,  open  to immigration   and exposed by geography  and  membership  in  the Empire  to influences  of a  world­ wide scope, were  particularly fitted to absorb. Canadians, of all peoples, should be able to see "that the life of the world is one, that all men are brothers and that the service of humanity is the most acceptable  form of religion to the  Common Father."22  The  truth  of the  proposition  that  the elements composing reality had within  themselves the stuff of a transcendent  unity was, indeed, being forced on Canadians by what  was happening  at  their very doorstep. The different  strands of the Canadian experience, it  was clear to all who troubled  to look, were being inexorably  knit  together  by the  Canadians' emerging  realization  that  what  they had  in  common  was of far  more  consequence  than  the  elements  by which  they were divided.  One  had  only to  remember  that  "it  takes a long  time  to build  a national  structure; and  the  greater  the  variety  in  the  materials  the  longer  the time  needed,  though   as  a  compensation   the  more  beautiful   will  the  structure eventually be."28


93

G.  M. GRANT

Grant's relegation of diversity to the status  of an element  which would do no more than impart  texture and spice to a national life whose components would otherwise  be united  in support  of a common  body of goals and  principles gave him a conceptual  tool of great utility. Retention  of their culture  by the French Canadians was not, it enabled him to assert, a threat  to the nation's survival. Notwithstanding their attachment to their own ways they had  in war and  peace alike  demonstrated  a  capacity  to serve  the  higher  unity?' The  generous  and accommodating  principles  encased  in  the  Quebec   Act  thus  remained  the  best guide  to the  handling  of the French  Canadians, for applying  them  insured,  not division and  strife, but co-operation  in pursuit  of the highest goals.25  The  lesson all of this taught  was clear:  "The supposition  that  national  unity  requires  uni­ formity  of language  and  race is an  abstract  conception  scarcely worth  refuting.
. . . The  highest  form of national  life does not depend  on identity,  but  rather  on differences   that    are   transcended   by   common   political   interests   and   senti­ ments.... "26
The  country's  experience  as a  whole, Grant   was convinced,  more  than  con­
firmed  the  truth   of this  proposition.  Far  from  impoverishing  the  national  life, weakening its thrust towards unity, or interfering  with the emergence of a national frame   of  reference,  the  existence  of  regional  and   provincial   differences  had enriched  the nation.  In the very act of confronting  their dissimilarities, Canadians were  being  brought  to see how fundamental were  the  possessions they  had  in common.  And  if Grant's  own experience showed  this process to be a  reality - "I ... have,"  he noted in the midst of the growing  provincial  rights agitation  of the  late  188o's,  "learned   to  respect  my  fellow-countrymen   and  to  sympathize with  their  Provincial life, and  to see that  it was not antagonistic  but intended  to be  the  handmaid  to  a  true  national  life"27 -he  believed  that  Canadians in general  were no less touched by it. Indeed,  with Confederation and  the opening of the West, a kind of moral transformation had taken  place among  them. They had  developed  a  broader  field of vision, become  noticeably  less provincial,  and set  themselves  firmly  on  the  path  to  nationhood. In  these  new  and  salutary circumstances,  it  was hardly  surprising  that  "old  religious differences shrivelled into insignificance, and old watchwords once thought sacred lost their meaning."28
As much  of the foregoing implies, Grant's acceptance  of diversity, in principle
unlimited,   was  in  practice  subject  to  one  overriding   condition.  Those  whose attachment to their own ways was being tolerated  must be in process of  demon­ strating   that   their  reverence  for  their  own  culture  and  values  was  compatible  with union  with their fellows in support  of the higher truth  which bound  all men together.  He  distinguished  sharply  between  those  who  held  the  conviction  that movement  towards  this goal was the direction  in which man's destiny was carry­ ing  him  and  those  who still  laboured  under  the  weight  of  their  own  narrow concerns.  And  if  those in  the second  group  could  hardly  be  allowed  to shape

94

G.  M. GRANT


events, it was equally  plain  that  this responsibility must be seized by those in the first. Grant  did  not, accordingly,  hesitate to suggest that,  in some circumstances, movement  towards  the  higher  unity could best be encouraged  by a careful  cur­ tailment  of the  activities of certain  groups. In considering the vexed  question  of oriental  immigration, he thus opposed legislation on the California model, not on the  ground  that  it  would  work  an injustice on a group  which, like the  French Canadians, had  proved  its capacity  to unite with the majority in support  of the higher truth,  but because such legislation would represent a triumph  for the small and  mean  in the  Canadians' own outlook. Men with a  properly developed sense of  the  whole  had  a  duty  to see that  its interests were  fully served,  and  in  the circumstances  created  by  the  anti-oriental  agitators,  that meant  reminding  the collectivity  that  its  most  treasured  beliefs and  ideals  would  be endangered  if it allowed  itself  to  be swayed  by the  arguments  of the  exclusionists. "We  cannot live,"  Grant   forcefully  reminded   his  compatriots,  "where   men  are  treated   as anything  less than  men ... the common  weal is  most promoted  when  the  rights of the meanest are respected.... "29
Grant's  decision to fight the battle on this piece of ground  was of immense significance, for  it  demonstrated his willingness to intervene  in the community's growth  in order  to be sure that  it proceeded in a manner  consistent with move­ ment  towards  the  kind  of  unity  he favoured.  Progress  towards  that  important goal could not  be left to chance. If necessary, steps must  be taken to insure that those who would  interfere  with its achievement  be prevented  from  having  their way. Paradoxically,  then,  the  building of the whole might involve restricting  the activities  of certain  of its parts.  In  one set of circumstances  such  a  proscription might  simply mean -as it did in the case of the British  Columbia  exclusionists
-a refusal to tolerate  racist proposals. But in others-here the logic of Grant's position drew him on to quite another sort of ground -it could entail a much different result.
What  that  result  might  be emerged  with  particular  force  from  the  view he took of prairie settlement. Immigrants to the Canadian west must, he argued, set down  their  roots in soil that  would grow a society of the proper sort. It  was the job of those who oversaw that  settlement to insure this happened. The  surest way to guarantee that  outcome  was to import  the institutional  framework  of the older provinces. The  life of the prairies must replicate that of the East. Alien influences, in short, were to be carefully limited. "The people who go to the North-west from our  older  provinces,"  he argued,  "should  feel that  they  are  going away  neither from  their own  country  nor  their own Church. In the interest of patriotism  and religion it is desirable  that  all the forces that  mould the character of a people to high issues should  be brought  to bear upon the immigrants  who are pouring into the  North-west."30   If a society of the  kind  he envisioned failed  to emerge  as a consequence  of  this  procedure,  Grant  was  prepared   to  go still  further.  Those


95

G. M. GRANT

whose refusal to respond to the imperatives of their  new situation  was complicat­ ing  the  thrust  towards  the  higher  unity  were, quite  simply, to be  turned  away. Men  of low character, whose only interest was in free land,  were certainly  to be viewed with suspicion-"Why," asked Grant, "should  the  country pay men to coax foreigners  to accept from  us free farms?"31 -while  the admission of those whose cultural  and  ethnic heritage made it doubtful  that  they could attune  them­ selves to  the  nation's   higher  purposes  ought  surely  to  be  curtailed.   "Let  our governments,"  he  urged,  "recall  the  agents  who  are  paid  to  bring  us any  and every kind of immigrants.  We have as many  people of  strange  languages  as we can digest. Our  best settlers are our own children,  and  those who come from the south of their own accord ... [along with]  those who have suffered for conscience sake. They are sure to be good stock."32
For  all  his anxiety  lest  precipitate  action  be  taken  in  the  matter of  British
Columbia's Asians, Grant's  overriding  concern  with  creating  conditions  likely to foster the higher  unity led him to reconsider his position even on that  contentious issue. He  remained,  to be sure, unsympathetic  to exclusion. It  would complicate relations  with  China,  be inconsistent with missionary work in that  country,  and, as always, constitute  a denial of the Asians' basic humanity. 33   British Columbia's evolution  as a harmonious  community,  and  its effective integration into Canada and  the Empire  was, nonetheless, the primary  consideration,  and Grant's observa­ tion of affairs in  the American  south led him  to believe that  racial homogeneity would aid  the  achievement  of those goals. While  Canada ought  not  to act arbi­  trarily   in   the   matter,   it  should  seek  an   agreement   with   China   by  which, just  as  the  Chinese  limited  the  sojourn  of  foreigners  there,  so  the  Canadian government  would  be able  to limit  the stay  of the  Chinese  in  Canada. It was above  all else imperative  that  the  thrust  towards  unity  be sustained  and  that  it not  lose its  fundamental  character. "We  intend," Grant  made  clear,  "British Columbia   to  be  Canadian, and  of the  Caucasian, not  the  Mongolian  type."34
The  case of the  French  Canadians,  too, came in for additional scrutiny at the
end of the century.  Here, however, Grant  saw no need to alter his position. Even in the circumstances  created by English Canada's resentment  of the French Cana­ dians'  lack  of  enthusiasm  for  the  imperial  enterprise,  he  thought  it  enough  to insist that  the  French  speakers' loyalty and  support  would  be kept in  the future,  as they had  been secured in the past, by toleration  of their language and culture.  The  French  Canadians' defining  peculiarities  had,  he insisted  anew, long since been emptied  of significance by their proprietors' acceptance of  their duties in the Empire.   Indeed,   he  argued,   the  degree  to  which  French  Canadians showed acceptance  of the  new imperialism  was far  more  remarkable than  the extent  to which they opposed it.35  In  this situation  the point, spelled out clearly enough  in the  past,36  that  toleration  of their language  and  ways was not at all incompatible with the aim of insuring  their assimilation to the truths that  really counted  could

g6

G. M.GRANT

be restated  with special  force. No harm,  he therefore insisted once more, would be  done  the  majority   by  its  concession of  French  Canadian  rights,  while the French  Canadians, assured  again  of its goodwill, would  move  the  more readily to embrace  its principles.  It  was, in fact, only in this way that  the desired result could  be obtained.  "There," as Grant  put  it, "the  habitant  was,  there  he had been  from  the  first, there  he intended  to remain;  and  the  more  generously his rights were recognized the sooner would fusion take place."87
The   goal  towards  which  all  men  must  move was,  then,  acceptance  of  the proposition that  they were bound  together in common service to a set of  transcen­ dent  truths.  Those  who  accepted  this broad  vision could  be left in  possession of their own language, culture,  and local loyalties, for they had seen that these things were not the end-all of existence. Those, on the other hand,  who had  not caught this  vision  were  to  be  denied - so  far  as  was  possible -the  opportunity   to trivialize  and  demean  the  world  with  their small and  narrow  vision of the par­ ticular's  importance. Certainly  no other  approach  would  work for  Canada, for without  this emphasis on the higher unity the nation would dissolve into a claque of squabbling rivals, each  consumed  by its  own self-interest.  Only  by keeping firmly fixed in their mind's eye a vision of the higher truth  could Canadians avoid this fate and in so doing build a nation capable of the great work for which it had been destined.




kERE WAS,  GRANT HELD, A  CLOSE  RELATIONSHIP  between awareness of one's association with all other men and one's sense of the principles which  ought   to  govern  action   in  the  everyday  world.  This   relationship  was founded  on  the  assumption  that  those  principles, like the  reality  of association itself,   derived -here   Grant's  idealism   revealed  its  unmistakably   Protestant character-from the fact that  the spiritual  dimension of man's  being linked him directly with God. As he put it in 1Bg4, the Protestant  reformers had "discovered the  individual  and  gave  him  his rightful  place in the  Church  and  in society ... they taught  that  man as man entered  into union with God by a spiritual  act, and that  every man who did so was a king, a priest, and a prophet." 88 The individual, thus exalted,  was not, of course, free to think of himself as an isolated being, at liberty  to  go his own  way;  on  the  contrary  his relationship  with  God  at  once linked  him  to all other  men  and  defined his life in terms of duties  he could not properly  shirk.  In  giving  him  the  potential  to  understand  something  of  God's nature  and  plans for his universe, it in fact conferred on him the obligation to act in a manner  consistent with that  knowledge. He must, in particular, strive to live a life worthy  in its morality  and  discipline of a being  who  was simultaneously linked  to  the  Divine  and   able  to  comprehend  something  of  its  true  nature.

97

G. M. GRANT

Realizing  what  was best in himself thus  became a personal  duty  and  an obliga­
tion to God.
Throughout  Grant's   work  the  man  who  remained   mindful  of  this  sublime obligation  won high praise.39   Lives of this quality  were not, of course, lived easily. Grant  accordingly  set much  emphasis on the fact  that  the development  of one's capacity  to place himself in harmony with the divine order  was owing to constant and  ceaseless effort. As he put it  near  the end  of his own struggle,  "all  life is a battle,  but  only  in  overcoming  these  is character formed  and  life  made  com­ plete."4'0 What  this life-defining contest might  yield was, Grant  thought, particu­  larly evident  in the case of his fellow Nova Scotian Joseph  Howe, for Howe had seen clearly  that  he who would be a truly successful man  must  learn  restraint,  self-discipline, and  the secret of work. Perhaps,  observed Grant, "the  great lesson that  Howe's earlier years teaches is the one so hard  to learn, that there is no royal road  to success. When a man wakes up some morning  to find himself famous, we may be sure that  he has earned the success by years of  previous toil. ... "41
Grant's insistence on the  centrality  of these truths  was in part  a reflection of
his belief that,  notwithstanding  their importance, society as a whole was far from allowing itself to be guided by them. The speculators  in the east who preyed like "a  brood of barnacles and vultures" on the settlers clearing the land/2  the factory owners  who denied  the  just claims of their  workers/3  the  tariff  legislators who kept  the  farmers  in  thrall/4   and  "the  insane  greed  of  corporations   and  their callousness to the interests of the community"45  alike offered proof that  too many individuals  were prepared  to follow the low road  of greed, immediate  gain, and self-indulgence.  It  was, indeed, in this fact  that  the origins of society's problems lay:  they  were ultimately  to be explained  by the failure  of the individual  to act according   to  his  best lights.  While,  then,  Grant   was at  one  with  reformers  in denouncing  certain  abuses in society -and in this he was far in advance  of most of his colleagues who thought it no business of a clergyman  to be involved in the wages  and  other  questions-he was equally  at  odds  with  progressive  opinion when it came to specifying a cure. Since abuses in society ultimately  derived from a failure  of Christian leadership, it followed that,  once that failure  was repaired, abuses  would  disappear.  "Honest  and  capable  leaders,"46   men  who  understood that  "true leadership  consists not  in  yielding to  the  cries of  the  people,  but  in persuading,  inducing,  and  enabling  them  towards  effort in the right  direction"47 were what was required.
In emphasizing  the results which could be expected  to flow from the moral regeneration  of individuals,  Grant  made a basic distinction  between  the outcome of  the  process  he  envisioned and  the  kind  of  consequences  the  reformers  and radicals  of his day  expected to flow from  their  activities. This  distinction,  in its turn,  rested  on  a quite  different  understanding of the  nature  of the individual's power.  Where  the reformers thought  man's  ability  to understand his world gave

g8

G. M. GRANT

him  the  capability   to  intervene  in  its  operations  and  change  them  at  will in accordance  with their  rationally arrived at sense of how matters ought to operate, Grant  considered  that  this same capacity would lead to the humbling  realization that  reality, complex and  interdependent, was shaped by a host of forces of which man  was only one. To  be sure,  he shared  with some of the  reformers the view that  man was socially defined. "Only  in society," as he put it, "is man understood, and  only in  society does he attain  the  perfection of  his being."48   This  did  not, however,  mean  that  society  was to  be  viewed as a  mechanism  to  be endlessly rebuilt  in  the  hope  of altering  its impact  on  the individuals it enclosed. It  was instead to be seen as a complex, living organism, the production  of a long history, possessed by its own spiritual  character,  an entity on whose being the action of a mere individual  could have little impact. If he were to make effective use of what power  he did  have the individual  must first realize this. Then  he would begin to understand why  the  framework  within  which  he existed  could  be altered  only slowly, and  why  he should  look to self-improvement  rather  than  changes in  his social environment as the source of ameliorative action. While government  could doubtless  do  some  of  what  was  necessary-Grant did  not  hesitate  to call  for legislation  when  he  thought   it  appropriate-in  the  last  analysis  reform  could come only from  a species of inner renewal manifesting itself in a kind of noblesse oblige on the part of society's leadership and in a sense of individual  responsibility on  the  part  of its members.  Those  who advocated  only institutional  and social change  could,  then,  hope  to  touch  no more than  the  externals  of the problem. They  would, in fact, distract  attention  from the real issue which, ,in his view, had to  be  conceived  in  far  subtler  terms.  Socialism and  anarchism   could  thus  be pronounced   "anti-Christian,''49   with  anything  that  looked  like support  for  the idea  that  they would  cure  the ills of society being dismissed out  of hand.  Even the  ideas  of  Henry   George,  at  first -thanks  to  the  tones  of  righteousness  in which  they  were enunciated-in receipt of a  rather  more  careful  and  positive

1
 In Carl Berger's words, Grant's style of improve­

ment  remained  throughout his career "the  kind of reform  which is addressed to the reformation  of character as opposed to the redistribution  of property."52
As individuals  grew  by  taking  positive action,  so,  Grant   believed,  national
character  was built  when  a  people, having discerned  the  nature  of its collective responsibilities, moved  to meet them. But if the nature  of the challenge was clear
-the  country,  like the  individuals  of which it was composed, must  with God's help overcome selfishness and  materialism  in order  to attain  its "great  future"33
-it seemed less obvious to Grant  that  the battle to accomplish  this end had even been  joined.  This  was, of  course, partly  owing  to the  fact  that  the  Dominion, adrift  in an  historical  backwater,  had  had  little opportunity to display the stuff of  which  it  was  made.  "Our national  sentiment,"  as Grant  explained  it, "has never been put  to the test."54  There  was, however, evidence that  this unfortunate

99

G. M.GRANT

situation  was changing.  The  shifting  world order,  the evolution  of Empire,  and Canada's own  growth  were  creating  a  new set  of opportunities which seemed tailor-made  for Canada. The way in which it met them would, indeed, determine whether  or  not it would exist as a nation  worthy  of the name:  "we are,"  Grant warned  his countrymen  in 1887, "nearing that  point in our history when we must assume  the  full  responsibilities of nationhood, or  abandon the experiment  alto­ gether."5By 1894,  in  Grant's   view, that   point   had  been  reached.  Of  equal importance,  the evolution of opinion in Canada  was showing that Canadians had begun to realize that  they as a people could achieve  their destiny only by accept­  ing  the  obligations  that  circumstance  had  placed  on  them. They  must  do their share  in  upholding  the principles upon  which  their  faith  and civilization rested, and that,  they were now seeing, meant nothing less than action, within the frame­  work of the Empire, on the world stage. "The days of isolation," Grant  enthused,  "are  over. Canada  cannot  hold aloof even if she would, and  her young men are too virile to shun the needed strain and conflict if  they could."  6
What  Grant  viewed as Canada's increasingly prominent role in imperial  affairs was, he thought,  proof positive that  the nation  had  come of age. At first inclined towards support  for  the Boers of South  Africa  in  their  struggle  against  Britain, he came  to see the Laurier  government's  despatch  of troops to their  country as a step  of key importance on  Canada's march  towards  nationhood, for it  demon­ strated   beyond   doubt   acceptance   of  the   obligations   and   responsibilities  of maturity.  "The larger  patriotism,  which has now taken  possession of Canadians, cannot," his contemplation  of it  led  him  to  proclaim, "possibly  vanish.... We are  henceforth  a  nation.... "57  Continuing  in  this  track  would,  indeed,  allow Canada   to challenge  the  power of her  New World  rival itself, for  "we shall  be
... equals  [of  the  Americans]  only  when  we share  the  burdens  and  responsi­
bilities as well as the privileges and glory of the Empire." 58
Grant's doctrine  of responsibility thus arose directly  out  of his understanding of the manner  in  which nations and  individuals  alike formed  part  of a compre­ hensive whole. Only  by bearing their share of the burden  that whole had to carry could  they  contribute to its strength  and  integrity,  and  only  by  making  such  a contribution   could  they insure  that  their own  lives were  appropriately rich  and full.  Personal  duty,  public good, and  service to  God  were linked  in a splendid and all-encompassing construct whose true purposes could be served only by those who  understood   the  universal  significance  of  individual action  and  acted  in  a manner  consistent with the demands  that understanding made  upon them.



NoTWITHSTANDING THE POWERFUL  EMPHASIS  he  placed on  its  utility  in  the  development  of  national   character and  strength,  Grant's concern  that  Canada acknowledge  its imperial  obligations  rested on  more  than

100

G. M.GRANT

his belief that  there was a relationship of decisive importance between fulfillment, growth,  and   the  acceptance of  responsibility.  In  shouldering  its  share  of  the imperial  burden  Canada would, he believed, be doing nothing less than demon­ strating  its fitness to act out  the role assigned to it by the historical process. God, it  was  not  to  be doubted, revealed  His  plans for mankind  in  the  dimension of time no less than  the amplitude of space. To contemplate  the flow of  history was, in consequence, to consider yet another  set of divine lessons for the edification of mankind.  "We  should," he therefore  informed  Canadians, "study  the history of the  past for our guidance  in the present. History is indeed that revelation which, as Carlyle says, no one in or out of bedlam can question." 59
The  nature  of the truth  which would be revealed by this quasi-religious scruti­ nizing of the historical  record  was, Grant  believed, clear:  Britain, even  a  casual glance at the evolution of nations made obvious, had been created the first among the world's civilizations. Nowhere had institutions and culture combined over time to produce  a more  perfect mixture  of the elements of true freedom. All that  man required  to  live  a  fulfilled  and  godly existence was  available  to  him  there.  As Grant   put  it,  "Let   the  history  of liberty  and  progress, of  the  development  of human  character in all its rightful issues, testify where liberty and authority  have been more wisely blended than in the British Constitution."60
As the heirs and  benefactors of this triumphant resolution of the central prob­ lem in the organization  of man's  affairs-here, for Grant, was the real lesson - Canadians were obliged to see that  its integrity  was maintained and its influence extended.  The  accomplishment of these goals must, in fact, become  one of the major  impulses informing  their  lives. They  must take as their guiding sentiment  "a faith  that  the British name and British institutions are worth making sacrifices for."  Action  in  the  future  was to  be governed  by  knowledge of what  had  hap­ pened in the past, and -Grant brought the point sharply into focus -"the chief glory of that  past from  the days of Alfred, the barons of Runnymede, Hampden, or Sydney, is the  memory  of ancestors who  have willingly died for the good old cause  of human   freedom."61 The  Canadians' honouring  of that  memory  could best be done by remaining  faithful to the work these great men had sought to do, and  that,  it seemed clear, meant continuing  their struggle. Canadians must, then, do in the  present  what  these illustrious figures had  done in the  past. They  must act to insure that  the forces which had shaped so fruitful  and glorious a tradition  be allowed  to work  their  will in the future.  Any attempt  to interfere  with  those forces was, indeed,  to be vigorously resisted, for it would represent a denial of all that had gone before. Particularly  to be eschewed was anything that  would involve weakening  the  British  tie. "We  believe," as Grant  told  Canadians in  the  early
I 87o's,  "that loyalty  is a  better  guarantee of true  growth  than  restlessness and rebellion  [and] that  building  up is worthier  work than  pulling  down."62   Action

IOI

G. M.GRANT

consistent  with  maintaining   the  integrity  of  the  British  and  imperial  past  was therefore  the only action permissible, for any other kind threatened to disrupt  the measured  pace  of freedom's  unfolding.  The  web  of history  had  been delicately woven, and "every break in the continuity of its life is injurious."63
If Grant's insistence on maintaining  history's even flow gave him a powerful argument in support  of imperial  consolidation,  the  refusal  to accept  disruptive change  that  was its obverse provided  him  with a weapon  he used with no little effect in his continuing  campaign against those-Goldwin Smith was the leading example-who  were  urging  some  form  of  Canadian-American  union.  Such proposals were unsound, he argued,  not because they sought  to associate the two countries,6'  but  because they proposed to do it by violating  the deliberate  march of  historical  development.  Smith's  suggestion  that   union  between  Canada and the United  States would do nothing more than duplicate  the relationship  between Scotland  and  England  was of particularly  dubious  validity, for it overlooked the fact  that  Canada, unlike Scotland,  would  have  to sunder  a pre-existing associa­ tion.65 "We  too," Grant  was at  pains to make clear, "hope  for a reunion  of the English-speaking  race,  but  we seek it  along  historical  and  not  theoretical  lines. It must not begin with further  disunion; and a preliminary sacrifice of the Queen,  the  Prince  of Wales, the House of Lords, the  Established  Churches,  India,  and other trifling possessions ought not to be absolutely necessary."66
The  proper course to follow was, then, plain. Only consolidation of the empire
was consistent with  the movement  of history. Only  "imperial  federation"  would place  "the  capstone  on  that  structure  of  Canadian nationality   which  we have been working at so long." Canadians would as a consequence of such action  not only  find  themselves  getting  "full  citizenship"  in  the  Empire,  and  occupying ground   that  would  make  them  "peers  and  not  the  dependents of their  fellow citizens  in  the  British  Islands."67   They  would  be  attaining  the  sublime  state towards  which everything in their experience from  their most cherished traditions to  their  internal  history  on  the  North  American  continent   had  been impelling them.68   In  doing  that,  moreover-for Grant,  a  hardly  less important point - they  would  be  giving  clear  proof  of  their  understanding that  the  imperatives created  by the  historical  process could  not  be set  aside.  In  thus  demonstrating acceptance of the proposition -again a characteristically vigorous figure of speech
-that "the  nation  cannot be pulled up by the roots,"69  they would be making it clear  that  they saw, as he did,  that  no other  line of action  would  give them  a chance  to carry  their burden  in the world, do so much  to fulfill their individual and  collective potential,  or  provide  them  with  the  opportunity to  maintain  the continuity  of  the  historical  process. They  would, in sum, be showing  their final acceptance  of the fact that they had no option but to follow the course all things in their experience had set before them.

102

G. M. GRANT


If the  unfolding  of the  historical process was impelling Canada in a clear and unmistakable  direction, so too, Grant believed, were the country's geographical circumstances.  To  be sure, its configuration  in space presented certain  problems. As a nation  of sections next to a powerful and seductive neighbour, it had to take firm steps to  insure  that  it  neither  fragmented  nor got  drawn  into  the arms of what lay to the south. Grant's willingness to talk of military installations as part of what  was necessary to  meet  the second of these challenges  was one  measure of
how seriously he viewed it/0 but in the main he relied on the railway and immigra­
tion to do what  was necessary. Canadians  must make good their claim on "half  a continent" by populating it, while the construction of a national  communications system would at once knit the country together and make possible its resistance to American  expansion.71  To  Smith's  argument  that all of this was an artificial and foredoomed  attempt  to set aside the dictates of nature  Grant  found a ready reply in the contention  that  much  of human  history depicted  man's delimitation  of the natural world  by virtue  of his intellect and  technical  prowess. "Man," he noted, "triumphs  continually   over  geography  or  nature   in  any  form.m2     Canadians, whatever  Smith  thought  of the  matter,  were thus doing  what  their  species had done since time  immemorial. What  was more, they were succeeding  at it. "We have  established," Grant  felt  able  to argue  by 1896,  "an  unequalled  system of internal  navigation  from  the Straits  of Belle Isle into  the heart of the continent, and  we have added  to that  an  unparalleled  railway system ... every part of our great   Northern    Confederacy  has  been  linked  together   by  steel  as  well  as sentiment.... ma
In  effectively ending  any likelihood that  the country would be absorbed  by the United  States, consolidation  of its material base did not mean, Grant  was anxious to  point  out,   that   Canada  should  insulate  itself  from  involvement  with  the Republic.   Its  people  must,  of  course, be  watchful  of  their  relations  with  that powerful  state;  but  completely  isolating themselves on the  North  American  con­ tinent  would  be as much  at  variance  with their  national  interest  as it  would be contrary  to the  dictates  of geography.14  The  nation  must,  indeed,  not  only wel­ come  contact  with  the  United  States,  providing such  contact  was  on  the  right terms; it must recognize the fact that it, too, was a community  of the New World, heir to the abundance, resources, and regenerative powers of that fabulous place, and, in the end, even more likely than the United States to play a decisive role in the re-making  of the world. Grant  had, in fact, been struck from  the moment  of his first contact  with  "Greater Canada" by the immensity of its material wealth. Notwithstanding the  contention  in  the  pages of his Ocean  to  Ocean  that  "the  destiny of a country  depends not on its material resources ... [but]  on the charac­ ter  of its  people,"75   that  record  of his  journey across the  new dominion  made clear  his belief that  Canada was a country  of  extraordinary  potential.76 Thanks

G. M.GRANT

to what  geography  had conferred  upon it, the  country  possessed resources suffi·
dent  to underpin  limitless growth.17
If  Grant's satisfaction   in  contemplating   the   physical  endowments   of  the Dominion  was  obvious  enough,  he  was  no  less struck  by  the  opportunity the opening of a new and untouched  world offered for the creation of a better human society. In  a land  uncontaminated by the vices of civilization, men of character, morality  and  determination   would  find  it  possible to create  a  community  un· paralleled  in human  history for its virtue and  justice. Canada's settlers thus had every reason to hope that  they would "found  in the forests of the west a state in which there would be justice for all, fair reward  for labour,  a new home for free· dom, freedom  from  grinding  poverty, freedom  from  the galling chain  of ancient feuds, mutual  confidence and righteousness between man  and  man, flowing from trust in God.ms
Canadians in  fact  occupied  a  uniquely  privileged  position  in  the scheme  of things.  Vitalized   by  the  abundance   and  opportunity  of  the  New  World,  yet mindful  of  all  that   their  position as  heirs  of  the  British  tradition   could  teach them, they enjoyed the best features of the Old  and the New. "We  have ... not," noted Grant, "been  obliged to sacrifice any of the inestimable  treasures accumu· lated  by our fathers, while at the same time we keep our minds and eyes open to receive new teaching  from this new world where everything is possible to man.mo Canada  thus combined -in  Grant's  view the  point  could not be made  strongly enough -"the self-control, reticence, and modesty begotten by conservative train­ ing ... with  that  freedom from routine and  readiness to experiment  that  belongs to a new country."80
For  all that  he allowed himself to be enraptured by geography's  influence in giving Canada an  unmistakable  new world  dimension,  the  country's  location  in space, Grant  made  equally clear, allowed it to be defined in other  terms as well.
Utilizing  a  line  of  argument   being  developed  by the  British  geographer  H.  J.
Mackinder,   Grant   took  the  view  that  Canada was  delineated   not  only  by its position on  the  North  American  continent  but  by its location  between  the  two great oceans of the world. Seen from this perspective, the nation  had a relevance that  was  truly  global.  It  was, indeed,  nothing  less than  "the  natural keystone between  the  old  world  of northern  Europe  and  the  older  world  of China  and Japan  ... the  living  link between  Great  Britain  and  the  sunny  lands  under  the Southern  Cross ... the bridge between East and  West, and  the bond  that  unites the three great self-governing parts of the British Empire."81
What,  in short,  its history demanded,  its geography  made  possible. Equipped with  every conceivable material  advantage, possessing a land  mass that  linked it to all comers of the world, Canada  could do no other  than  take up the work every element of its being and circumstances directed it to perform.

104

G.M.GRANT



IN SPECIFYING THE  NATURE OF  THE  ROLE Canada was fore­ ordained  to play, its geography and history did more, in Grant's view, than simply disclose what  lay in the immediate  future. The securing of a position of influence and  power within  the framework  of the Empire was, of course, a vital short-term  goal. Grant  did  not, however, consider its accomplishment  an end in itself. The nation,  positioned  by its circumstances  to serve the  cause of British  liberty  and Christian  truth,  was destined for nothing less than duty on the most sublime field of action  imaginable. In  association with its imperial  partners,  it  would serve as the  successor  of  the  Old  Testament   Hebrews,  the  agency  which  would  bear witness to God's  presence in  the world. "We  have," Grant  accordingly  told  his countrymen, "a  mission on earth  as truly as ancient Israel had.... "82
What  precisely that  mission was, and  how exactly it was to be fulfilled, could, Grant  thought, be clearly specified. There  was, in fact, an ineluctable  logic about the whole process:  the first stage -aiding in the consolidation of the Empire - was obvious  enough.  That accomplished,  two further  objectives  would  remain. Attaining the first of these would involve the country in exploiting its position as a community  with  roots on  both sides of the Atlantic. It  must  use that  position to bring Britain  and  the United  States together.  Notwithstanding the fact that it was occasionally  a source  of friction  between  the two powers, its place in  their ultimate  reconciliation  was, in  Grant's view, assured.  For  all that  the eventual reunion  of the  two  would  owe to their  common  traditions  and  "high  common ends,"83  that  momentous  event would be materially aided  by the intervention  of Canada. His nation  would,  in fact, function  as nothing  less than  "the  link that shall  unite  the  great  mother  and  her  greatest  daughter, the  United  States  of America."84 So important was this task, and so central was the role Canada would play in accomplishing  it, that  there must be no mistaking the significance of either. "No  greater  boon"-Grant spelled the matter  out in the clearest possible terms
-"can be conferred  on  the  race  than  the  healing of  [the]  schism of  [1776]. That  is the work that  Canada is appointed  by its position and  history to do.... We are  to build  up a North  American  Dominion,  permeated  with the principles of  righteousness,  worthy  to  be  the  living  link,  the  permanent bond  of  union, between Britain and  the United  States."85
The forging of that link-the flow of Grant's  argument  hardly showed -was, in its turn,  of inestimable  importance,  for it would make possible the gaining of the  second  grand  objective.  The  union  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  which  would result  from  Canada's mediation  between  the  two great  nations  to which it  was bound  would  mean  the  creation  of a force  capable  of establishing  world  hege­ mony. One  could, in consequence, anticipate the day when the globe as a whole would be brought  under the sway of Christian  principle and Anglo-Saxon virtue. The solidarity  of the race would, then, function  as much  more than  a vehicle by


105

G. M. GRANT

means of which  Canada  and  Canadians, or even Anglo-Saxons  generally, could achieve their own destiny. It would be an important stage in the process by which the fragmentation of mankind  would be overcome. Under  the auspices of this revitalized  Anglo-Saxon influence the world's people would be bound  together in a  complex  yet  perfectly  integrated   whole  at  the  same  time  that  Christianity's unfolding truth  came to permeate every fibre of their being.
Grant   had  no  doubt  that  this grand  vision, involving  all  the  peoples of the world, was a pluralist one. Although  it would  be the Canadians and  the British, and -once they had seen the light-the Americans  who would take the initia­ tive  "in  the  glorious mission of establishing  freedom,  righteousness,  and  peace upon  earth,"86  his tolerance, humanity,  and  respect for  what  was good in other traditions   led  him  to deal  circumspectly  with  the  precise  weight  Anglo-Saxon influence would have in the character  of the new order  that  would be created  by this action. The  result of it, he suggested on more than  one occasion, would be a kind of grand  synthesis in which each individual  would be united with his fellows in support  of a common  body of principle  to the making of which all had  con­ tributed. "Our  evolution,"  Grant   told  the  World's  Parliament of  Religions in
1893,  "has  taught   us that  ideas  belong  to  no  one  country,  that  they  are  the common  property  of mankind,  and  that  we should  borrow  from  every country that  has found  by experiment  that  they work well."87  He  wrote,  too, of  Tenny­ son's Parliament of Man, that great "Federation of the World" in which its people would come together and yet retain their own character and identity.88  When all, however,  was said  and  done  his  commitment   to  a  world  order  which  would combine elements from different traditions in a grand  pluralistic whole was more apparent than  real.  In  the  end  his tolerance  functioned  essentially as a  tactical device, the  effect of whose operation  would  be -as in the  Canadian case-to insure  final  admission  to  the  inner  circle  only  of  those  who  were  prepared  to assign their own culture and values an inferior  place to those he himself espoused. His rhetoric  left no doubt  that  the truth  in support  of  which  all men must  ulti­ mately  unite  would  be a Christian  truth,  just as his Tennysonian frame  of refer­ ence made  it clear that  the institutional  complex in  which  this unity would find expression would be an Anglo-Saxon one.
Canada, "in  the van of the world's battle,"  would thus come to play a central role in the process by which the peoples of the world, uplifted  by their association with  the  Anglo-Saxons  of the  North  Atlantic,  would  realize  their  potential  for unity by accepting a destiny that  was specifically linked to the religious experience of that  Protestant  civilization. Mankind's "common  humanity," attaining fulfill­ ment in "accomplishing its mission to establish the Kingdom  of God upon earth," would  define its being in the  explicit and  unambiguous language  of  evangelical Protestantism.89   The  vast edifice of universal  peace and  harmony,  in  whose con­ struction  Canada was to play so important a part,  would finally come to rest, not

106

G. M. GRANT

on a genuinely  pluralist  and synthetic foundation,  but on a base provided by one civilization's  view of  what  constituted  man's  purpose  and  destiny on earth.  All men would indeed be bound together, but their unity would derive from their acceptance  of a particular body of truth  whose doctrines would by virtue of that acceptance vanquish  all rivals.




GRANT's SYSTEM  OF  IDEAS can  best be understood  as the construct  of a man  deeply concerned  lest forces of change  and  innovation  sweep away the values and  the leadership he believed essential to a properly functioning Christian  society. More, accordingly, is involved in understanding the genesis and character  of that  system than  a simple application  to its diagnosis of the  propo­ sition  that  ideas  and  interests  are closely linked. Account  must  also be taken  of the  fact  that  concern  to  maintain  and  extend  acceptance  for one's  world  view will be particularly strong if one sees it, and  the social arrangements it validates, being  challenged  by a  rival set of conceptions. In  the  words of  Peter  L. Berger and  Thomas   Luckmann, "the  appearance of  an  alternative  symbolic  universe poses a threat  because its very existence demonstrates empirically  that  one's own universe  is  less  than   inevitable.... The  confrontation  of  alternative   symbolic universes implies  a  problem  of  power-which of the  conflicting  definitions of reality will be 'made  to stick' in the society."90  Grant,  thanks to the emergence of the new and  vastly more complex Canada created  by industrialization, immigra­  tion, and  the shrinking  globe, found  himself in the midst of just such a confron­ tation.  Determined  that  the selfish particularisms  of the new order  and its repre­ sentative  men  should  not  abridge  the  bright  promise of a  vital  and  expansive Christian  community  acting  in fulfillment of a global mission, he sought to insure that  it would  be the definition of reality held by men who thought  as he did that would be "made to stick" in Canadian society.
His anxiety  to contain  the new forces all around  him never, however-and in
this one  can  see the  full  measure  of his intelligence  and  subtlety -led him  to pursue the path  of blind reaction. He believed the challenge the new realities represented  could  best be met  by effecting their  absorption  into  the very system they threatened  to displace. It  is, indeed, a measure of his belief in that system's resilience and flexibility that  he thought its power would be augmented  by the assimilation  of elements  which  at  first sight seemed  to guarantee its destruction.
Yet  the  decision  to attempt the accommodation of the  new forces was not  a
purely  tactical  one.  In  Grant's Hegelian-influenced  view, the Christian  idealism it was his aim  to promote  was to be defined largely in terms of its extraordinary capaciousness.  Doing  one's  duty  to  it  would  involve  an  approach  to  all  the elements of which  reality  consisted, which, with a generosity borne  of the confi-


107

G. M. GRANT

dence that  one understood  the workings of the universe, would recognize the fact that  each of them,  no matter  how fractious and  contrary  it seemed, had a role to play in the total scheme of things.
Fully effective assimilation of the new forces required,  of course, more than  a simple  acceptance by Grant  and  those who saw  the  world  as he did of a  con­ ceptualization   of  the  universe  which  insisted  that   each  of  the  elements  in  it belonged to the Kingdom  of God and, whether  they realized it or not, were con­ tributing  to that  Kingdom's  triumphant onward  march. All of the human agents through  which these forces operated  had to be made conscious of this truth. Only then  would a comprehensive spirit of co-operation  with the acceptance of Chris­ tianity's  imperatives  replace the indifference  and  hostility to  them  which seemed so conspicuous as features of modem life. Here  as well Grant's Christian  idealism was of immense  assistance. By inviting  all men,  no matter what  character  their activities possessed, to conceive of themselves as essentially moral beings linked to each  other  and  to the divine by their common  participation in a spiritual  whole it in fact  provided  a near perfect vehicle for the attainment of this end. In insist­ ing on  the  directness of each  individual's  link  with  God  it simultaneously  com­ mended  itself to him by exalting his importance and  gave him an inducement to think  in  terms  that  transcended  his  immediate  interests.  And,  in  insisting that once he had  accepted  this larger  view of himself he act  in a manner  consistent with  the  dignity  and  responsibility  of a  being  who  was linked  to the  divine,  it provided  a  powerful  argument  in support  of the  contention  that  his behaviour  should  approximate  the standards laid down  by those who -like Grant -had caught  the full vision of what this involved. Such  men would thus, if all went as it should,  be in  a  position to define the elements of good behaviour  in the  new circumstances as they had in the old.
Despite  his appreciation  of his creed's  potential  as an  agency which,  properly
deployed,  could  blunt  the  force  of  the  new  realities,  Grant   was  by  no  means persuaded  that  the values and behaviour it would serve to strengthen  were in fact holding  their  own.  The  end of his life thus saw  him  disposed to argue  that  the forces against which he had fought throughout its length still maintained a global presence. "The nineteenth  century,"  he sadly informed  his readers,  "is closing in moral  gloom  as dense as that  which shrouded  the  closing decade  of the  eight­ eenth."01 What  was happening at home, moreover, made it clear that  the enemies of Christian  truth  and  honourable behaviour  were maintaining themselves on the domestic  front  as well. "What threatens  the  life of Canada  most seriously," he wrote  after  a  lifetime's  effort  to  root  it  out,  " ... [is]  the  uncleanness ... the vulgar and insolent materialism of thought and life ... [and  the]  aggressive com- mercialism which  penetrates to the innermost  courts of the sanctuary.... "02
Too  much  should  not, however, be made  of his disappointment at the failure
of his world view to win a clear triumph  over its adversaries. Far more central to

108

G. M.GRANT


an  understanding of his system,  its character, and  its place in nineteenth-century Canadian life is a sense of the  prodigious effort  he made  on its behalf. In articu­ lating  it with  such  vigour  and  consistency  he at  once  provided  a measure of the extent  to which he  felt  it  threatened and  made  himself a leading spokesman for the  values  it contained. If, in sum,  an  examination of his thought sheds light  on the  way in which  ideas  may  be related  to shifting patterns of status and  influence in  society,  it  also  provides  opportunity for  contact with  a  particularly forceful, clear,  and   comprehensive expression  of  an  important  strain  in  late  nineteenth­ century  Canadian  thought.  In   thus  allowing   a  close  look  at  a  representative expression  of that  strain, in directing attention to the status  of its proponents, and in making possible the  construction of an argument suggesting  how the  two were linked,  it does  much   to  refine  our  grasp  and  extend   our  understanding of  the elements   defining the  English   Canadian  phase  of  the  great   nineteenth-century struggle  between liberal and  conservative modes  of thought. Its  relevance is ulti­  mately   more   than   national, as  Grant  himself  was  much   more  than   merely   a patriot.

NOTES

1 For an  account  of the Canadian formulation  of some of the leading ideas of this period, see A. B. McKillop,  "A Disciplined  Intelligence: Intellectual Inquiry  and the  Moral   Imperative in  Anglo-Canadian Thought  185o-I89o."  Unpub.  Ph.D. thesis, Queen's Univ.,  I976.  [Rev. & pub., McGill-Queens,  I979·1 For an exami­ nation   of  some  representative Canadian  intellectuals  active  in  the  generation  following, see S. E. D. Shortt,  The  Search  for an Ideal: Six Canadian Intellectuals  and  their  Convictions   in  An  Age  of Transition   I890-1930  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I976). For  the  ideas of Canadian  conservatism  in  the late  nine­ teenth century, see Carl Berger, The  Sense of Power: Studies in the Ideas of Cana­ dian  Imperialism  r867-1914   (Toronto:   Univ.  of  Toronto  Press,   I970). The  thought  of Grant's most  implacable  opponent  is summed  up in Goldwin  Smith, Canada and the Canadian  Question, introduction by Carl Berger (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press, 1971).
2   "The Pulpit  in  Scotland  As  It  Is,  And  As It  Was Forty  or  Fifty  Years Ago,"
Queen's  Quarterly, 7 (Jan. I900), I95·
8  The  Scottish born and educated  Watson was an influential figure in late nineteenth­ and  early  twentieth-century idealist  circles on  both sides of the  Atlantic.  For an account  of  his life and  ideas, see J.  M.  MacEachern, "John  Watson,"  in  R.  C. Wallace, ed., Some  Great Men  of Queen's  (Toronto:  Ryerson, I94I), pp. 22-50; and  W. E. McNeill,  "John Watson,"  Proceedings and  Transactions  of the  Royal Society  of Canada,  Series III, 33  (I 939)' I 59-6 I. McKillop  considers Watson  at some length.  Watson's  own  views on  the  relationship  between  Christianity and Idealism  are  set  out  in  his appropriately  titled  Christianity  and  Idealism  (New York:   Macmillan,  I896).  For  a  general  account   of  philosophical   activity  in Canada  in  this  period,  see John  A.  Irving,  "The  Development  of Philosophy in Central   Canada  from   I850  to   I9oo,"  Canadian  Historical  Review, 3I   (Sept.  I95o), 252-87.  T. A.  Goudge,  "A  Century  of  Philosophy  in  English-Speaking  Canada," Dalhousie Review, 47  (Winter  I967-68), 537-49, contains some material  on  Watson  but  is mainly  concerned  with  the  twentieth  century.  For a discussion

109

G. M. GRANT


of idealist  modes of thinking  in  terms of their  relevance  to  the  thought  of men like  Grant,  see Terry  Cook,  "George  R.  Parkin  and  the  Concept  of  Britannic Idealism," Journal of Canadian Studies,   10 (Aug. 1g75), esp. 22-31.
4  Cited   (no  source  given)   in  W.  L. Grant   and   F.  Hamilton,  Principal  Grant
(Toronto: Morang, 1go4), p. 74·
5   "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly, 5 (April 18g8), 332.
6  "Castell  Hopkins'  Life of Mr. Gladstone,"  Canadian  Magazine, 6 (Nov. 18g5), 87.
7   "The Pulpit  in  Scotland  As It  Is, and  As It Was  Forty  or  Fifty  Years  Ago,"
Queen's  Quarterly, 7 (Jan.    goo),  202.
8   "Presbyterian Union  and  Reformation  Principles,"  Queen's   Quarterly,  1  (Jan.
18g4),  181.
9  Principal Grant, p. 486.
10  Author   unknown,   "Distinguished   Canadians.  The   Rev.  George   Munro    [sic] Grant, D.D.," Canadian Methodist  Magazine, 18 (Oct. 1883),  2g3.
11 "Hopkins' Life," p. 86.
12    "Anti-National Features  of the  National  Policy," Canadian  Magazine,  1  (March
18gg),  g-13.
18  "The Jason  of Algoma:  An Account of the Wonderful  Industrial Development  in
New Ontario," Canadian Magazine, 15 (Oct.  xgoo),4go.
14  "The Religious Condition  of Canada," Queen's  Quarterly, 1  (April  18g4),  320.
15   "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly, 5 (Oct. 18g7),  16g.
18  Principal  Grant's  Inaugural  Address Delivered  at  Queen's  University, Kingston, on University  Day (Toronto: Grip, 1885),  p. 11.
17   "The University Question,"  Queen's Quarterly, 8 (Jan. 1go1),  211.
18  Ocean to Ocean  (Toronto: J. Campbell, 1873),  pp. 347-48.
19  "Thanksgiving and  Retrospect,"  Queen's  Quarterly, g (Jan. 1go2),  232.
20    "Our  National   Objects  and  Aims,"  in  Maple   Leaves:  Being  the  Papers  Read Before  the   National  Club   of Toronto  at  the  'National  Evenings'   During  the Winter  IBgo-189I   (Toronto: National Club, 18g1), p. 20.
21  "To   [Grant]," recalled  his  biographers,  "all   the  universe  was  God's  universe; every  truth   was  God's  truth ... [spurning]  the  theory  which  cuts  the  world  in two  with   a  hatchet ... he  believed  that   the   universe   was  an  organic   whole belonging to the Almighty.... " Principal Grant, pp. 77-78.
22    "Response  on  Behalf of Canada   to Address of Welcome, at  the  World's  Parlia­ ment  of  Religions,"  Queen's  Quarterly,  1   (Oct.  18gg),  160. Sometimes  Grant's exposure  to other  currents  of thought  flowing in  the  late  nineteenth  century  led him  to cast  the  same point  in less mystical  terms. Taking a leaf  from  the Spen­ cerians'  notebook,  he noted  in 1 goo that  that  diversity might simply demonstrate the  capaciousness  of a  complex  yet fully integrated  life-form. "The British Em­ pire,"  as he puts  it, "is a ... complicated  and  highly  developed  organism ... and can  therefore  include  the  most widely differing stages of political  life." "Current Events," Queen's  Quarterly, 8  (July 1goo), 77· Occasionally,  too, emphasis on the unity  and  coherence  of experience  yielded to an  unambiguous pluralism.  Grant's concern  to see Queen's  preserved as an independent institution led him to oppose the  creation  of a single agency of  higher  learning  in Ontario, while the polyglot nature  of Winnipeg society in the  188o's seemed  to him an  unmistakable  sign of

110

G. M. GRANT


its vitality  and  exuberance. See Grant's Inaugural Address, p.  ro;  "The University Question,"  p.   220;   and    "The  Northwest: Manitoba"  in   G.   M.   Grant,  ed., Picturesque  Canada:  The   Country   As  It  Was  And  Is  (Toronto: Belden  Bros., r882), I, 288.
23    "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly, 7 (Jan. 1900), 256.
24    They might, he asserted, have  "remained French in appearance and  French to the core,  yet  [they]  fought repeatedly and  are  ready  to fight  again side  by side with the  red-coats of Great Britain.... " "Quebec: Historical Review," in Picturesque Canada, I, p. 2.
25   "Review of  William  Kingford's History," The  Week, 9  (Aug.  12,  r892), 587.
26    "Canada  and   the   Empire:  A  Rejoinder to  Dr.   Goldwin  Smith,"  Canadian
Magazine, 8  (Nov.  r896), 77·
27   "Canada First," Canadian   Leaves  (New  York:   Napoleon Thompson, r887), p.
264.
28     "The  Religious Condition of  Canada," Queen's  Quarterly,  r   (April   r894), 318.
29    "British Columbia," in Picturesque Canada, II, p. 88o.
30    "Churches and  Schools  in  the  North-West," in John  Macoun, ed.,  Manitoba  and the Great North-West (Guelph: World, r882), p. 528.
31    "Current Affairs," Queen's  Quarterly,  I   (Oct. 1893)' rs6.
32    "Thanksgiving and  Retrospect," Queen's  Quarterly, 9  (Jan. 1902), 227.
33  Berger,  Sense of Power, p. 28.
34    "Current Events," Queen's  Quarterly, 4 (Oct. r896), 159, 158.
35   "Instead," Grant suggested   at   one  point,   "of   wondering  that   French-speaking Canadians are  not  as enthusiastic in this  [Boer]  war as their  English-speaking countrymen, the  marvel  is that  their  representative men  have  as a  rule  spoken  so warmly on  behalf  of  the  Empire.... " The  attitude of  the  French Canadians, he argued at  another, has, "on  the  whole," been  "admirable." See "Current Events," (Jan. 1900), p. 256, and  (April  1900), p. 333·
36    Impatience with  the  French Canadians and  their  culture would, he had  argued in r89r, irritate them,  heighten their  self-consciousness,  and  delay  their accommoda­ tion  with  their  fellow  Canadians-results the  more  unfortunate at  a time  when it  was  clear   that   an  essentially   anglo-saxon  nation   based  on  Canada's existing  stock   and   immigrants who   would   assimilate   to  English  Canadian  culture was taking   shape.   See  "Review of  G.  Smith, Canada  and  the  Canadian  Question," The  Week, 8  (May  15, r89r), 382.
37    "Thanksgiving and  Retrospect," p. 224.
38   "Presbyterian Union and  Reformation Principles," p. r8r.
39   Sometimes the  type  was  exemplified by the  Highland Scot  who,  isolated  at  Red River,  had   not  forgotten his  God; sometimes  by the  pioneer farmer engaged in the  shaping of  a  British   and   Christian west;  sometimes   by  the  creative  entre­ preneur whose  energies   were  directed  towards enlarging society's  bounty  rather than   personal gain; sometimes by  the  university  students who,  in  working  their  way  through  college,   "paddle  their   own  canoes ... [thanks to  their]  habits   of industry, economy, and  forethought ... "; and  sometimes  by the ordinary Cana­ dian  who  in his simple  Christian life provided an example of  honour and  integrity as  uplifting as  it  was  modest. See  "Churches and  Schools  in  the  Northwest," p.

III

G. M.GRANT


524;   "The  North-West: Manitoba,"  I,  p.   293;   "The  Jason   of  Algoma:  An Account of  the  Wonderful Industrial  Development in New  Ontario," Canadian Magazine, I5  (Oct. I9oo), 483-94; "Anti-National Features," p. I2; and "Thanks­ giving  and  Retrospect," p. 220.
40    "Thanksgiving and  Retrospect," p. 225.
41  Joseph  Howe  (Halifax:  A. &  W.  MacKinlay, I904), p.  37· Grant's account of Howe's life  was  first  published as a  series  of articles  bearing the  title  "The Late Hon. Joseph Howe," in  the  Canadian  Monthly and  National  Review, 7  (May I875), 377-87; 7  (June  I875), 497-5o8; 8  (July   I875), 20-25;  8  (Aug.   I875),
I I5·22.
42    "The North-West," I, p. 293·
48   "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly,  I  (July  I893), 67.
44    "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly, 4 (April  I897), 3I8.
4       "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly, 5 (Jan. I898), 252.
46    "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly, 2 (Oct. I894), I82.
47     "The Jason  of Algoma," p. 491.
48   "Presbyterian Union  and  Reformation Principles," p. I77.
49    "Religious Condition of Canada," p. 3I9.
60    Sense of Power, pp. I83-84.
51   Ramsay Cook,  "Henry George  and  the  Poverty  of Canadian Progress," Canadian
Historical Association  Historical Papers, I977,  pp.  I 50-51.
62    Sense of Power, p. 185.
68  Ocean to Ocean, p. 358.
64    "Canada First," p. 252.
55   Ibid., p. 251.
56    "The Religious Condition of Canada," p. 320.
57    "Introductory Chapter," in  T. G. Marquis, Canada's  Sons  on Kopje  and Veldt: An  Historical  Account  of the  Canadian  Contingents (Toronto:  Canadian Son's Pub. Co.,  I goo), p. 6.
68   "Thanksgiving and Retrospect," p. 225.
69   "Review of William  Kingsford's History," p. 586.
60    Ocean to Ocean, p. 368.
61  "British Columbia," p. 88o.
62    Ocean to Ocean, p. 358.
63    "Review of  William  Kingsford's History," p.  586. Grant's views on  the  nature of the  historical process were sometimes  cast  in language which  argued the existence of  a parallel between  man's  activities   through time  and  the  character of growth and   development in  the  natural world.  "No living  organism," he  once  wrote  in support  of  his  argument  that   Canada  must   move   steadily towards national maturity within   the  framework of  the  British   Empire, "can continue long  in  a state of arrested development ... it  must  grow  to its full  stature or  petrify." Such imagery  was   particularly  useful   in   stressing   the   evolutionary  and   cumulative character he thought human affairs  must  have.  "I do not look," it allowed him  to

II2

G. M. GRANT


note  at  one  point, "for  any  startling Constitutional change or  any  paper  scheme for  re-organizing the  Empire. That is not  the  way of the  British.  They  build  after the  fashion  of  the  insects  that  construct coral  reefs, atolls,  and  fair  islands  in the Southern seas. They do  the  duty  of  today,  and  that   becomes  precedent, and  so
'freedom slowly  broadens down,'   based  not  on  theories   but  on  necessities."  See Imperial  Federation:   A  Lecture  Delivered  in  Victoria  Hall, Winnipeg, on  Sep­ tember  13th,  1889  (Winnipeg:  Manitoba Free  Press,  18go), p.  1,  and  "Intro­ ductory Chapter,'' in Marquis, p. 6.
64   Grant did  not  share   the  extreme and  negative  views of  the  United States  voiced by  some  of  his  compatriots. For  an  account of  his  feelings  on  the  subject,  see Sense of Power, p.  I7 I. For  the opinions  of others  see Sense of Power, pp.  I 53-76; and   S.  F.  Wise  and   Robert Craig   Brown,  Canada  Views   the  United   States: Nineteenth Century Political Attitudes  (Toronto: Macmillan, 1967).
65   "Review of G. Smith,'' p. 381.
66     "Current Events" (July  IB93),  p. 79·
61  Imperial Federation,  pp. 5, 4·
68   Confederation itself,  thought Grant, was  to  be  viewed   as  part   of  the  process. "Canada,'' he  noted   in   1895,  "took   a  long  step  politically, in  the  direction of Imperial unity,  when  Confederation was affected.... " "Current Events,'' Queen's Quarterly,  2 (Oct. I895), 157.
69  Ocean to Ocean, p. 366.
10   "Quebec: Historical Review,'' Picturesque Canada, I, p. 31.
71  "Quebec,'' p. 31.
72   "Review of G. Smith,'' p. 382.
73   "Canada and  the Empire," p. 76.
14    Grant did  not  hesitate to identify  the United States  as Canada's "natural market," to  suggest   that   "we   desire   to  trade   with  everyone,   and   most  of  all  with   our neighbours,'' and   to  celebrate  the  fact  that   while  "on   this  continent there   are barbarous alien  labour laws  and  hostile  tariffs  between  kindred peoples ... so far these do not extend to free  interchanges of brain,  heart, and  capital." See "Canada First," p. I 3; and  "The Jason  of Algoma,'' p. 494·
75  P. 366.
76   One  reviewer,  struck   by  just  this feature of it, called  it  "a graphic account ... of the  magnificent material  resources  of  the  country." See  the  Canadian  Methodist Magazine, 5 (May IB77), 477·
11   Virtually all  parts of the  country, Grant argued, shared in this bounty.  If what  lay between  Lake  Huron and  Red  River  was endowed  with  minerals "beyond concep­ tion,'' he  was  equally anxious to make  it clear  that  "our western  islands are  rich in  coal ... and   almost   every  variety  of  mineral weath, in  lumber,  fish,  and  soil, and   blessed  with  one  of  the  most  delightful climates  in  the  world." His  view  of the   prairies'  potential  was  expressed   in  particularly  forceful  terms.  There, he wrote,  was  to  be  found "an  immense   tract  of  the  finest  land  in  the  world.... " The fields of Red  River, he  noted  in  1882, "have raised  wheat continuously ever since" their  first cultivation. Indeed, he announced the same  year, the "vast  region" of the  west  was "the true  habitat of the  wheat  plant. Here it attains perfection." One  could,  in  view of these  circumstances, hardly  doubt that the  Northwest "bids  fair   to  be  the  future granary of  the  world." See  Ocean  to  Ocean,  pp.  352-53; "Churches and  Schools,'' p. 527;  and  "The North-West:  Manitoba," p. 2gB.

G.  M. GRANT

78    "Our National Objects and  Aims," p. 34·
79    "Response on Behalf of Canada," p. 159·
80   "The Religious Condition of Canada," p. 321.
81  "Responses on Behalf of Canada," pp. 159-60.
82    "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly, 5 (July  1897), 85.
83   "Current Events," Queen's Quarterly, 7 (July  18gg), So.
84   "Canada First," p. 249·
85   "Our National Objects and  Aims," pp. 22, 26.
86    "Current Events" (July  1897), p. 85.
87    "Response on Behalf of Canada," pp. 159-60.
88    "Current Events" (July  1893), p. 73·
89   "Thanksgiving and  Retrospect," pp. 232-33.
90    The   Social  Construction of Reality:  A  Treatise  in  the  Sociology  of Knowledge (New  York: Anchor,  1967), p. 109. This  confrontation, at  base one  between  the groups  or  classes  that  hold  these  ideas,  may  take  a  variety of forms.  At  its most obvious  in  the  conflict  between  major systems of thought-conservatism, liberal­ ism,  socialism-in clearly  class-conscious  societies,  it  can  also  manifest itself  in the  ideological devices  used  by threatened groups in  the  course  of their  efforts  to maintain their  status  and  influence.  The  distinction drawn between  landed wealth and  wealth   earned in  trade   by  the  defenders of  a  British  aristocracy very  much concerned to  resist  displacement by a class whose  ascendancy was  based  on  com­ merce   and   manufacturing is a  well-known   case  in  point. That  distinction, and  the  special  landed virtue  to whose existence  it was supposed to point,  represented the  making of  a  very  clear  set  of  claims  on  behalf   of  the  aristocracy, "claims which," as F. M.  L. Thompson points  out,  "it  was scarcely necessary  to formulate explicitly   until   the  paramountcy of  landed property  became the  subject of  dis­ pute." Even  societies  not  normally  thought of as characterized by a high  degree  of social  conflict  may  exhibit  tendencies  of this kind. Historians of the United States,  certainly,  have   uncovered   a  number  of   instances  in  which   ideas  professed   by members of certain groups  have  been intimately related to the fact  that  those who  hold  those  ideas  felt their  status, prestige,  and  power  threatened by changes in the nature of  their  society  and  so  sought   to  enforce   dominance of  their  beliefs  and  values  as a means  of limiting the influence  of those  identified as the  agents  of this change. John  Higham has,  for  example, suggested   that   the  patterns of  thought associated   with  American  nativism  may  be best  understood as phenomena arising  out   of  the   reality   of  "status  rivalries" in  American society.  The   importance of preserving  "traditional" ideals  and  behaviour was  emphasized not  only  by  those of  Protestant  Anglo-Saxon stock who saw  these  values,  and  their  own  dominance, being  threatened by European and  Catholic immigrants but  also  by members of some  immigrant groups,  who, having  begun  to acquire status and  position  largely through their  acceptance of these values, saw their  position hardly less endangered by the  newcomers than  that  occupied  by those  who  had  been  in  the  country for generations.  Historians  of   "genteel" culture  in   post-Civil  War   America  have similarly   suggested   that   the  intensity  with  which  its  partisans held  to  their  faith was  a  function of  their  concern   to  resist  displacement by  the  new  mass  culture rooted  in the  vulgar civilization  of the urban, industrial America they saw growing up  all around them.  "In the real world  of cultural conflict," reports Stow  Persons, "the status of  the  high  culture of which  the  gentry were  always  the  patrons and

I 14

G. M. GRANT


practitioners has  been  found by many  observers  to  [have been]   precarious in  the extreme."  Finding  themselves being  shouldered  aside,  they  sought   to  maintain their  influence  by a  vigorous,  if cultivated, insistence  on  the  continuing  relevance of   their   values.   "The  genteel   authors ... ," argues   another  historian of  their thought  and   writing, "were  significant   because  they   were   the   architects of  a culture that   embodied  conservatism  in  a  threatening age."   Partisans of  reform, too,  have  been  identified as no less status-conscious than  their  explicitly conserva­ tive  compatriots. Support for  abolitionism, argues  David   Donald, can  be  linked to  the  declining status  of its advocates:  "Descended from  old  and  socially  promi­ nent   Northeastern  families,   reared    in   a  faith   of  aggressive   piety   and   moral endeavor, educated for  conservative leadership, these young  men  and  women  who reached  maturity  in  the   r83o's   faced   a  strange and   hostile   world.   Social  and economic leadership was  being  transferred from  the country to  the  city, from  the farmer  to  the  manufacturer, from  the  preacher to  the  corporation attorney.... Expecting  to  lead,   these  young  people  found   no  followers.  They were  an  elite without  a  function,  a  displaced  class  in  American   society ... their   appeal  for reform was  a  strident call  for  their  own  class to re-exert its  former  social  domi­ nance." Perhaps the  most familiar attempt to use this construct in the clarification of an  historical situation has  been  made  in relation  to the  American  Progressives. Their concern to  contain, direct, and  regulate the  forces  of  big  business,  argues  Richard Hofstadter in  The Age  of Reform, was a function of  the  fact  that  they as   clergymen,  academics,  journalists,  and   lawyers   felt   that   their   position   in American society  was  being  undermined by  the  new elites  created by  America's emergence as a business civilization. Progressive opposition  to those elites was thus rooted  in  a strong  desire  to limit  the  growth  and  influence of the  new groups  and  so preserve  that  of  the  old.  "Progressivism," contends Hofstadter, "was  to a very considerable extent  led  by  men  who  suffered  from  the  events  of  their  time  not through a shrinkage in  their  means  but  through the  changed pattern in the distri­  bution  of  deference and  power." The group  of  educators, clergymen, journalists, and  intellectuals with  whom  Grant can  be  most  closely associated had  much  in common with  the  men  and  women  described  by these commentators. Their rural or  small  town  backgrounds, their  Christian upbringing, their  humane education, and   their  own  involvement in  the  life of  the  mind  left  them  badly  equipped to respond   in  positive   terms   to  the  new  urban   and  industrial society  growing   up around  them.   Their  ideology   was  not,  to  be  sure,  the  effete   conflict-avoiding construct of  the  genteel  tradition,  nor did  it always-as the  case  of Grant him­  self  makes  clear-manifest itself   in  an  uncomplicated equivalent  of  American nativism. But  if  its  content  frequently differed,   it  was  nonetheless shaped   by  a similar   concern  that   old   values   be  asserted   in  the  face  of  change. Like  other  Canadians of his type and generation-George Denison,  George Parkin, Stephen Leacock,  Andrew   MacPhail,  J.   A.  Cooper,  James   Cappon,  Archibald  Mac­ Mechan, Maurice  Hutton-Grant, deeply  disturbed by  what   the  emergence of the  new  civilization  implied for  the  future of  men  like  him  and   ideas  like  his, sought  to  maintain  the influence  of both  by linking  the  survival of  the  good  and  the  true  to  the  dominance of  men  and  principles  cut  from  the  same  cloth  as he was. See  F. M. L. Thompson, English  Landed  Society  in  the  Nineteenth Century (London:   Routledge,  Kegan  Paul,  I 963), 4;  John   Higham,  Strangers in  the Land:  Patterns of American Nativism r86o-1925  (New  Brunswick, N.J.:  Rutgers Univ.  Press,  1955);  John  Higham, "Another Look  at  Nativism," The  Catholic Historical  Review, 44  (July  1958), 147-58;  Stow  Persons,  The Decline  of Ameri­ can  Gentility  (New   York:  Columbia Univ.  Press, 1973), vii;  John Tomsich, A Genteel Endeavor: American Culture and  Politics in  the  Gilded   Age  (Stanford: Stanford Univ.   Press,  1971), 195;  David  Donald, Lincoln Reconsidered: Essays


115

G. M. GRANT

on  the  Civil   War   Era  (New  York:  Knopf,  I956), 33-34;  Richard  Hofstadter, "The  Status Revolution and   Progressive   Leaders," in  his  The Age  of  Reform (New  York: Vintage, Ig6I),  I35;  and,  for  a discussion  of the  lives and  thought of  some  of  Grant's associates  and  contemporaries, The  Sense  of Power  and  The Search   for an Ideal.
91   "Current Events," Queen's  Quarterly, 8 (Jan. I go I), 234-35.
92    "Thanksgiving and  Retrospect," p. 23 I.






POSTSCRIPT
 


Daryl Hine


I wrote the world and  its reply Arrives in this white envelope, Inevitably self-addressed
And stamped  with its own worldliness, Bleak season's greetings  tendered  by
A winter  who could hope  to cope With  coolly?    Nothing but  the best Wishes of the wilderness.
Beyond this horizontal plain Sealed  by the incessant  snow, A table raised  upon itself, Immaculate of any stain,
Where  distant  stands  of timber grow
Like  bibelots upon a shelf:

Morning's lyrical plateau, A desert by the afternoon,
The waste of time, with one oasis, Comfortable evening,
Nocturnal bottomlands where  flow The frozen rivers of the moon Through unilluminated places. Eventually everything
Caught in earth's magnetic field,
Mountains, forests, valleys, seas, With  their  obscure  inhabitants Sympathetically  yield
To  the rhythm that  decrees
The patterns of diurnal dance.

116

POEM

Day  and  night  and  night  and  day
Sensually alternate
Like  the  pictures on a screen That  represents reality. Tentatively  twilight's grey, Spectral, indeterminate Status hesitates between Brilliance and  obscurity.
Day  is masculine in most
Languages, night  feminine; As opposites they interact. Twilight, as befits a ghost,
Seems  neuter.   Day and  night  begin
To  differ  in the entr'acte.

Like  the climax  of a piece
Divided into  three  or five
Acts and  twice as many scenes, Sunset  falls a little flat.
The denouements of dawn  release
Whole  landscapes which  will not survive
Catastrophe that  intervenes Between  this interval and  that. What is the  primaeval plot?
The rise and  fall of consciousness
Within a given  period. The unity  of time is not Another bit of business, But an attribute of God.

Is that  all it had  to tell,
The world  one thought so voluble
And interesting, is that  all? This formal, formulaic note
To  Occupant, who cannot spell
The seemingly  insoluble Conundrum of the capital Letter kindly  nature wrote? Illegible! how  frequently
One  hears  the tiresome complaint. But are  the characters not fair Despite their  faint  asymmetry, Unmechanically quaint,
Indelible and  plainly  there?


HAROLD INNIS AND
THE WRITING OF HISTORY


Graeme Patterson





tIS GENERALLY AGREED that  the early wo•k of Harold  innis has  had  a  considerable  influence  upon  Canadian  thought.  Indeed,  in  arguing that  a  historiographical "Innis  revolution"  resulted  from  it,  Ramsay  Cook  has asserted:  "The necessary starting  point for any clear understanding of  contempo­ rary  English-Canadian  historians  is Harold   Adams  lnnis."1  No  one,  however, would  argue  that  the  late  work of Innis-which  while  having  interested  the historian Marshall McLuhan, has generally been regarded  as irrelevant to Canadian studies-has had   any  such  influence.  Yet,  while  contemporary  historians  of Canada may certainly  be understood in terms of  Innis,  he  (most  notably  in the last  decade  of  his  life)  cannot  fully  be  understood   without  some  reference  to them.  The  "late  work" is more closely  related  to Canadian studies than  is com­ monly supposed.
In  his last years Innis studied  ideas and  material  commodities  both in relation to each other  and  in relation to the various media  by which they were communi­ cated.  "A  medium  of communication," he wrote  with  respect to ideas, "has  an important influence  upon  the  dissemination  of knowledge  over  space  and  time and  it becomes necessary to study its characteristics  in order  to appraise  its influ­ ence  in  its cultural setting."2   Depending  upon  setting-whether cultural,  geo­ graphic,  economic  or historic-he treated  all  media  as possessing either a "bias of space"  or  a  "bias  of  time,"  terms  which  were  relative,  not  absolute.  Thus  rivers, canals,  oceans, roads, railways and  related  media,  which enabled  central governments  to extend  control over  territories  Innis  termed  "empires," reflected a  bias  of space.  Among  media  reflecting  a  bias  of time  were institutions  with qualities  which  enabled  them  to  endure  over  long  periods  of  time,  and  with interests which were either localized or non-territorial. Here, for example, he had in mind  the priesthoods of  ancient Egypt, the satrapies  of Persia, the provinces of Rome and  the Christian church. Such institutions  were sustained  by power which might  be  related  to  regional  interest  or  to  monopoly  control  of some form  of learning,  such  as literacy, or of some commodity,  such as papyrus.  Sometimes in their  own  interests  these institutions  served  the  central  governments  of empire; and sometimes for the same reason, they opposed them. And central governments,

II8

INNIS

in their interest  in maintaining control over space, sometimes protected  and  used these institutions,  and  sometimes  tried  to limit  or destroy  them.  But  these  rela­ tionships were shaped  by control, or lack of control, of media of  communication.
Quite  apart  from  these institutions, material  media  had a formative  influence upon  their ideal content.  Information  mediated  by clay tablets, for example, was limited in ways that  did not obtain  when it was mediated  by newspapers. Beyond this, material  media,  according  to Innis, had a formative influence upon concepts themselves, such as those of space and time, which were of peculiar interest to him.
Because of this interest in the ideal in relation to the material,  Innis's late work also reflects an interest in idealist philosophers, like Plato and Kant, and in writers of universal  history, like Hegel and  Marx,  who shared  the same interest. But he cannot  be said  to have belonged to any of their schools. He differed from  Hegel and  Marx,  for  example,  in  that  he regarded  "progress"  as a superstition  of the mind  and  struggled  against  his own  determinism.  And  while, like these other students  of  universal  history, he was concerned  with  the  way the  universe  was regarded by physicists, he was primarily interested in the modern, post-Einstein physics of relativity,  rather  than  the mechanical,  Newtonian  physics of the nine­ teenth  century.  It  was perhaps  partly for this reason that  he seems to have been uninterested  in the  epistemology of Kant,  who taught  that  objects of  experience invariably  enter  consciousness in the forms of space and  time, intuitions  prior to all forms of conceptual  knowledge. He read with interest the classical sociologists
-Durkheim,  Weber  and  their  followers-whose notions  of form  were  influ­ enced by the Critique  of Pure Reason;  but he was concerned with changing con­ cepts,  and  he  sought  his epistemology  elsewhere. "Space  and  time,"  he  wrote (citing  F. M. Cornford) , "and  also their space-time product, fall into their places as mere mental  frameworks  of our constitution."3  Cornford,  a classicist interested in the origin of the outmoded  Euclidian concept of space, was quoting Sir Arthur Eddington, the astronomer  and mathematician who held that the true foundation of natural philosophy must  be epistemology. In  this sort of  way, Innis  was inter­  ested in the changing spatial  and temporal  conceptual underpinnings of historical interpretation, which were also structures of the mind. Treating almost everything  as  media  of  communication, Innis  included  himself -who,  he suggested,  was biased with regard to time.
The  world  of the  media  was thus a  place of complex dialectical  oppositions.
And in the modern  world this dialectic, according to Innis, was hastening to a resolution   of   catastrophe.  Technological   innovation   had   upset  a  space-time balance  in favour  of space;  flexible, holistic oral traditions  had  yielded to rigid, fragmenting written  and  mechanical  traditions;  unified learning  had given way to specialized  knowledge;  and  centralized  authority  threatened  to overcome decen­ tralized  decision making.  This  bias of space, he contended,  was reflected even in the present-minded, specialized concerns of contemporary  scholarship.

II9

INNIS

This late work of Innis, it is argued, related to his early studies of the railways, waterways  and  related  staple  commodities which  he viewed as having  patterned the economic, social and  political experience of Canada. But it also contradicted in  many  respects, a set of ideas known in  Canadian history as the  "Laurentian thesis," with  which  the name  of Innis, along with  that  of Donald  Creighton,  is often  associated.4    And  in  many  regards it was scarcely less contradictory of the points of view, modes of thought,  and  historical  theories of other  contemporary historians.



IN THE  BEGINNING, particularly  with respect to The Fur Trade in Canada  ( I930), the work of Innis coincided  with  the interests of other histo­ rians. There,  in a  concluding  chapter,  he treated  fur  in  relation  to other staple commodities-timber, wheat  and  flour-which  succeeded  it in  the commerce
of the St. Lawrence. But he also distinguished between these staples and the system, a  distinction  of form  and  content  which  distinguished  his transportation  theory from  his staple  theory. It  was the former  which related  chiefly to the interest of Creighton,  who by 1930 had  become concerned  with  the commercial  and  politi­ cal interests of Montreal  merchants  oriented  to the St. Lawrence.  While Creigh­ ton, like Innis, knew that  the staple content  of this river system was possessed of value,  and  that  it shaped  the economic, social and  political  life of  communities dependent   upon  it, this interested  him less than  a centralized  mercantile  empire dependent   upon   a   transportation   system.  "The  Laurentian   thesis,"  he  later observed, "has its basis in the fact that  the St. Lawrence  is one great river system that  leads  from  the  Atlantic  seaboard  to  the  heart  of  the  continent   of  North America,"a statement  which suggests a fundamental concern with space. Innis, however,   was  relatively  more  interested   in   commodities.   He  indicated,   for example, the destructive effects of European  trade  goods upon  Indian  societies, a concern  indicative  of an  interest in  time. But  he was slowly  coming  to think  of both  transportation  systems and  commodities  as  media  of  communication, an insight which would later interest Marshall  McLuhan.6  In  the 193o's and 1940's, however, differences of interpretation between Innis  and  other  historians were of no great consequence.
The  problem emerged about  1950 with publication  of Empire and Communi­
cations. Sometimes  thought  to mark  the beginning  of the "late  work,"  this book was  written  one  way  by  Innis  and  read  in  quite  other  ways by many  baffled scholars.  To  Canadian historians  it seemed  mostly  unrelated   to their  discipline and  connected  to the "early  work" chiefly by way of his studies of the pulp and paper industry of the 1940's. In the introduction  to Empire and Communications, however,  Innis  indicated  that  it  was structurally related  to The  Fur Trade  in Canada of 1930.

120

INNIS


"It has seemed to me," he wrote,

that  the  subject of communications offers  possibilities in that  it occupies  a crucial position   in   the  organization  and   administration of  government and   in  turn   of empires and  of Western civilization.
But  I must  confess at this  point  a bias which  has led  me  to give particular atten­ tion  to  this  subject. In  studies of Canadian economic  history,  I  have  been  influ­ enced  by  a  phenomenon  strikingly evident  in  Canada ... Briefly,  North  America is  penetrated  by  three   vast   inlets   from   the  Atlantic-the  Mississippi,   the  St. Lawrence, and  Hudson Bay, and  the rivers of its drainage basin....'

Thus  it was waterways,  not  pulp  and  paper,  which first led to communications studies;  although   Innis  intended  "to  suggest that  the  changing  character  of the British  Empire  during  the  present  century  has been in part  a result of the pulp and paper industry and its influence on public opinion.... "8
The  early  work  of  Innis  has  been closely identified  with  that  of Creighton,
whose view of history, concept of empire, and patterns of thought  more generally, were strikingly  different  from  those of Innis,  whose modes of thought  were less linearly sequential. Paper,  as treated  by Innis, for example,  was at once a basic staple and  a medium  of communication. As such it seems to have unified some of his earlier  thinking  on  the  subject  of staples and  communications systems. Yet Creighton,  in  relating   the  early  and  late  work  perceived  not  a  unification  of interest but a shift of the same.
A shift of interest,  he thought,  had  begun with the study of the Canadian pulp and   paper   industry.   "But   immediately   beyond  the  manufacture of  pulp  and paper," he  wrote,  "lay  the  strange  and  different  world  of  journalism  and  the newspaper; and   obviously  the  main  stage  of  its  modern  development ... had taken  place  not  in  Canada but  in  Britain  and  the  United  States"; and  behind the newspaper  and  the book, he continued,  "were vestiges of earlier forms of communication. And  behind  the civilizations of Western Europe  and America stretched   a  procession  of older  and  vanished  empires."9   This  was  to impose a linear  concept  of history upon  a mind  that  was notoriously not  that.  The  world of  journalism  and  newspapers  was not  imagined  to  be "strange and  different" from  that  of pulp  and  paper  by Innis;  he thought of them as closely related and interdependent. Moreover,  while chronological sequence was not absent from his later  work, he did  not  visualize the civilizations he studied  as merely stretching back in time in the form  of a procession; for he was employing the techniques of the  comparative  historian.  From  Creighton's  point of view, Innis's  new interests must  have  seemed  remote  from  Canadian history; and  from  this same vantage point it was almost impossible to see that he might have been applying and testing ideas derived from Canadian history, and yet relevant to it.
The  idea that  the late work was in an entirely new field of "communications," however, did not  result from  the thought  of Creighton.  Up  until  the publication

121

INNIS

of Empire and Communications it was generally  assumed  that  "transportation" was "communications." Indeed, some four years after the death of Innis,  J. M.S. Careless  referred  to  the  early  work of  both  Innis  and  Creighton  as studies  of
"essentially great  systems of continent  wide  communications.mo  Early  reviewers of Empire and Communications would not allow the word to retain this meaning. "'COMMUNICATIONS' in Professor Innis'  title," observed V. Gordon  Childe in the Canadian  journal of Economics and Political Science, "means  not 'means of  transport'-a rather  hackneyed  theme-but 'communication of ideas'."   11
And Arthur  Maheux,  in the Canadian Historical Review, reached a similar con­
clusion. Observing  that the book's purpose was to suggest the significance of communication  to  modern  civilization,  to  which  end  it  analyzed  a  continual conflict  between  the  oral  tradition  and  the  written  word,  he  added:   "Conse­ quently  the  term  'communications'   in  this  book  does  not  mean  such  physical avenues  of communications  as roads and  rivers, which  have been  considered  by other writers as the chief sources of civilization."12
In  view of the  fact that  Chapter  One  of the  book deals with the river culture
of  the  Nile,  and  Chapter   Two  with  civilization  in  relation  to  the  Tigris  and Euphrates, Maheux  reached an astonishing  conclusion. The  point to be noted is that  either  being ignorant  of, or having forgotten, the context  of the early work and  Innis's own assertion of its continuing  relevance,  neither  Maheux  nor Childe could understand the text before them. Waterways  and  roads were central  to the thesis of Empire and Communication. Being the  means whereby other  media of communication-clay   tablets,   papyrus   rolls,   newspapers,   and   such -were transmitted over space, they imposed  patterns  upon  the spatial dissemination  of ideas.
The  meaning  of the word "communications," however, was now beginning  to shift;  and  with this shift there emerged a conviction  that  Innis  had moved from the fields of economics and history into a new and essentially different field of "communications." This idea, coupled with  the notion  that  Innis  was an author of  the  Laurentian  thesis, then  began  to  inform   historiographical thought.   "If Innis  was  the  first  to  present  a  documented  study  of  the  'Laurentian  thesis'," wrote Ramsay  Cook, "Creighton  first made it intelligible."13  "Innis' most impor­ tant  work,"  he  also observed, "was  in  the  field  of economic  history.  His later work in the nebulous field of communications  may some day be judged his greatest achievement; but for historians of Canada  his early studies ... will always remain the  most  prominent   monument  in  the  Innis   [historiographical]   revolution.on 4
The   "field  of  communications,"  however,  was  not  nebulous;   it  had   become completely befogged.
In  recent years some of this fog has lifted. Noting  that  as early as 1934  (which is to say long  before the pulp and  paper  studies)   Innis  was "outlining the rela­ tionship   between   public  opinion,  politics  and   the  mechanization   of   words  in

122

INNIS

newspapers  and   radio,"  Leslie  A.  Pal  has  concluded   that   "many   of  Innis's substantive  ideas  on  communications  were forming  in the  193o's.m5  He saw no relationship,  however,  between  these  ideas  and  ideas  related  to  transportation and  staples,  a  parallel  which  has  been  partly  perceived  by Carl  Berger.  Innis, wrote the latter,  "looked on technologies of communication in much the same way as he had  looked on the staple.  Technologies of communication -whether  they be stone tablets, newspapers or radios-influenced societies, institutions  and cul­ tures  in  the  same  way that  the  exploitation  of certain  economic  staples shaped them."16
But, in  contrast  to Pal, Berger did  not regard  any of the early work as being studies  in  communications. Because of this  he thought   he discerned  "an  inner logic in  the  development   of  Innis's  thought  from  the  economics  of the staples trades  to  his communications studies."17   No such linear  development  ever took place.  And  the  mode  of thought  relating  the early work to that  which followed it was not logical; it was analogical, as Berger's own discussion of the treatment of staples and other media suggests.
Certainly  it is analogy, and  not logic or any other linear form of thinking, that relates Empire and Communications to the studies of transportation and staples which  preceded  it. "The Nile," began  Innis, "with  its irregularities  of overflow, demanded  a co-ordination of effort. The river created the black land which could only be exploited  with a universally accepted  discipline and  a common good will of the inhabitants. The  Nile acted as a principle of order and centralization, necessitated collective work, created solidarity, imposed organizations upon the people,  and  cemented   them  in  society.ms Reading  this  passage,  Maheux   and others  had  been  unable  to see that  Innis  was again  studying  a  river system in relation  to basic staple  content.  The  basic staple  here was silt, which structured life in ancient Egypt far more radically than had fur in New France or cod in Newfoundland.  Innis   did   not  treat  this  basic  staple  merely  as  content.  The medium was the message; and the message here was mud.
Writing  one  year  after  the  death  of Innis,  McLuhan had  observed:   "If one were  asked  to  state  briefly  the  basic change  which  occurred  in  the  thought  of Innis  in  his last  decade  it could  be said  that  he shifted  his attention  from  the trade-routes  of the external  world to the trade-routes  of the mind."19  There  was truth  in this simplification.  Innis had indeed  turned  to consider different sorts of media,  numbered  among  which  was words. And  words, like rivers-as in  the instance  of  the  word  "communications" -may  change   their  content.  But  he remained  interested  in  the  external  world, particularly  as it related  to the ideo­ logical and  material  structures of empire. And  it was here that  his "late  work" related most closely to that of other Canadian  scholars.
For if during  his lifetime these scholars tended to be bewildered by, or uninter­
ested in,  "communications theory," some shared  his interest  in  written  and  un-


I23

INNIS

written  traditions,  at  least insofar as they  related  to  the  British, American  and Canadian constitutions;  and  many shared  his concern  for the changing  forms of empire,  at  least  insofar  as  they  related  to  the  British  and  Canadian  empires. Indeed,  in  this  latter  regard,  Canadian   history  was  then  concerned  with  little else. Yet if early critics of the "late work" tended  to be blind to the context of the "early  work," they were no less blind to this wider imperial  context of which they, themselves, were a part.




DuRING tNNISJs  LIFETIME, the dominant, non-republican concepts of empire  entertained  in Canada  were those of constitutional  historians concerned  to trace  contemporary  forms of government  within  the British empire from earlier forms. Taking  many of their key ideas from unwritten  conventions of parliamentary government   and  from  explanations for  the  imperial  breakdown that  had attended the American revolution, these scholars were most markedly influenced  by the  political theory  and  rhetoric  that  had  attended  the mid-nine­ teenth  century  triumph   of  the  Canadian  "Baldwinite"  reform  movement,  the leaders  of which  had  derived  many ideas from  Irish  Whigs, or  "Volunteers" as they  termed  themselves, who had  dominated  a theoretically  independent parlia­  ment  existing  in  Dublin  in  the  last  two decades  of  the  eighteenth  century.  As eighteenth-century  mercantile   forms  of  empire   yielded   to  nineteenth-century pressures for  laissez-faire,  these Canadian  reformers sought  to apply  their  Whig ideas,  a  shifting   complex  of  which  became  attached  to  their  party  slogan:  "Responsible   Government   and   the  Voluntary   Principle."20    By  the  twentieth century   the  early  Whig  background   had  been  lost  sight  of;  but  "responsible government," the  idea  of  which  was  then  thought   to  have  originated  in  the
182o's  and  30's,  had  come to be accepted  as a concept  of political science, and indeed  of constitutional  law. Thus  in BaldwinJ  LafontaineJ  Hincks: Responsible Government, which was published in 1907, Stephen  Leacock observed that  in his own  day  Robert  Baldwin  had  frequently  been derided  as a "man  of one idea." "Time has shown,"  he said, "that this one idea  of Robert  Baldwin, -the con­ ception  of responsible government, -has  proved  the  cornerstone  of the  British imperial   system."21     The   term   "responsible  government,"  however,  remained imprecise; for while it signified the right of colonial legislatures to the practice of ministerial  responsibility after  the  model of  unwritten  conventions  prevailing  at Westminster,  it  was  also used  to  denote  what  was  necessarily  implied  by  this practice,  namely complete colonial autonomy. And it was in this latter sense that "responsible government" was perceived to lie at the heart  of the new association of sovereign  states  that  was  emerging  from  older  imperial  structures.  Thus  it became  a matter  of concern  to imperially-oriented  scholars to establish that  this

124

INNIS

form  of autonomy  was complementary  to, rather  than  contradictory of, imperial unity.
It  was within  this context  that  Chester  Martin  published  Empire  and Com­
monwealth: Studies in Governance  and Self-Governance in Canada  in 1929. The development  of the eighteenth-century empire into the modern commonwealth, Martin  argued,  was due to the achievement of "responsible government" which prevented  the empire  from  being further  shattered  by the legislative structure  of the old mercantile  system. Martin,  however, was less interested in this than in the continuity  of political ideas and  attitudes  from the eighteenth  century,  which he took  to be the  very  cement  of empire.  As William  Kilbourn  has  put  it:  "He hearked  back  with  'a  melancholy  interest'  and  longing  to the  undivided  North America of the mid-eighteenth century, when Benjamin Franklin  called the British Empire  the greatest  political structure  that  human wisdom and freedom  had ever yet erected,  and  dared  to  predict  'that  the foundations  of [its]  future  grandeur and  stability ... lie in America'."22  This  was a nostalgic view of empire;  but the point to be noticed is that it was idealist.
To  others  the  Commonwealth of  Nations seemed little  more  than  the  ideo­ logical  husk  of  an  empire  in  the  last stages of decline.  Such  was the  view of Donald   Creighton   whose  "Laurentian  thesis"  was  informed  by  a  concept  of empire  that  was materialist. Empire,  Creighton  contended,  was dependent upon mercantile  systems, upon  centralized  governments and  upon  prescriptive statutes, rather  than  parliamentary traditions.  Such  was the  "commercial empire  of the St.  Lawrence," an  extension  of  which  became  the  Dominion  of  Canada  after
1867  but  which first existed as an integral  part of the British mercantile  empire. Because of the struggle for "responsible government"  within  the colonies and the triumph of the free trade movement in Britain, the larger mercantile  structure collapsed by the 185o's;  but out of its wreckage emerged the expanded  empire of the St. Lawrence known as the Dominion of Canada.23
Of  critical  importance to any  understanding of Creighton  is the fact  that  this new empire  very closely resembled the old which, in most respects, served as its model.  As envisaged  in  1867, for  example,  provinces were to  relate  to the  new federal  government  as colonies had  once related  to the  imperial  government  at London.  The  rights to appoint  and instruct lieutenant-governors to the provinces, to disallow  provincial  legislation, to make laws binding  upon  the  provinces and so  forth   were  given  to  the  central  government;   and  the  imperial   model  was departed  from  only  to strengthen  that  government.  Thus  representatives  to  the federal  parliament  were to be elected and  appointed  from the  provinces, as they had not been from the colonies; the powers of provincial governments were specifically defined, as had  never  been the case with respect  to colonial  govern­ ments;  and   this  whole  federal  structure   was  now  entrenched  in  an  imperial statute,  the  British  North  America  Act. And,  from an  economic  point  of view,

125

INNIS

this structure, like the old, was underpinned by a mercantile  system, the so-called "National Policy" of I878  which was really three  inter-related  policies of  trans­ continental railway building, settlement  of the western  hinterland  tapped  by this communications system, and  a  protective  tariff  policy  calculated   to  unite  that staple  producing region  with  its  eastern  manufacturing  metropolis.  The  Con­ servatives,  observed  Creighton  with  respect  to  these  policies, "had  found  their answers  to  the  riddle  of national  unity;  and  for  the  next  half-dozen  years they plunged  into a wild career of economic and political nationalism."24
The  basic structures  of the old empire and the new dominion indeed  had much in common; and  everything Creighton  has written  may  be viewed as a defence of these forms, or as counter-attacks  upon  their many  enemies. Thus  he assailed the laissez faire
relaxed  the  tariff  structure  of  the  old  empire,25  even  as  he  assailed  the  legal
doctrine  of the  justices of the privy council  which loosened  the language  of the written  Canadian constitution to very nearly the same effect.26
Thus  Creighton  wrote as much from  within  a tradition  as did Martin; for if the latter  hearkened  back to the Whig tradition of "Baldwinite" reform, the former did the same with regard to a Tory tradition of those loyal to a concept of the old united  empire.  In  conflict  with  each  other  since  the  eighteenth  century,  these two  traditions  had  also been in conflict with  a third  which derived  its ideology and   conceptual   models  from  the  American   republic   that   emerged  from  the imperial  breakdown  that so concerned the other two. Essentially oral, all three traditions  structured political attitudes,  interpretations of past  history, and  one's understanding of contemporary  actuality. The  resilience of these traditions to fundamental change,  and  to contradictory  or incompatible evidence of a written nature,  is illustrated  by Foundations of  Canadian Nationhood,  which  was pub­ lished  by  Chester   Martin   in  I 955  after   he  had  considered  the  "Laurentian thesis." In  this last major work, as Kilbourn  has observed, Martin "went so far as to dismiss economic factors such as 'western  oil, Quebec  iron,  the St. Lawrence  Seaway,  prolific  industrial  expansion'  as  'the  more  specious  aspects  of  nation­ hood'."27




1ESE CONFLICTING TRADITIONS, with their varying concepts of empire, afford a context against which Empire and Communications and other late  work  may  be  usefully understood.  Innis  differed  from  the  Whig  school of Martin  in that  he regarded  "the  struggle for responsible government" as "essen­ tially a struggle for jobs for the native born,"28 and  more especially by not treating  economic   factors  as  specious  aspects  of  either   empire  or  "nationhood." But because of his mistrust of written  constitutions,  and  because  of a related  regard

INNIS

for  the  principles  of  laissez-faire, he seems to  have  been  more  fundamentally opposed to the Tory tradition of Creighton.
The   economist   W.   T.   Easterbrook   once  remarked   that   Innis   "remained
throughout [his career]  a disciple of Adam Smith and no name appears more frequently  in his observations on economics past and present."29  Like Smith, Innis was  hostile to  monopolies  of  power;  but,  beyond  this,  he  was opposed  to  the means whereby such power was entrenched and structures of government made resistant  to  change   that   necessarily attended  shifts  in  the  balance  of  political power. It  was not statutory prescription, he contended,  but the flexible traditions of the  common  law  that  enabled  the British constitution  to adapt  itself to such change  in  the  nine eenth                30    and  it was in like fashion  that  he reflected upon  the  federal  structure of  Canada.  "The   British  North  America  Act,"  he wrote,  "had   produced   its own  group  of idolators  and  much  has been done  to interpret   the  views and  sayings of the fathers  of confederation  in a substantial body  of patristic  literature. But  though  interpretations of decisions of the  Privy Council  have  been subjected  to intensive study  and  complaints  have been made about  their inconsistency,  inconsistencies have implied  flexibility and  have offset the  dangers  of  rigidity   characteristic   of  written  constitutions." 31    Canada, he thought,  was dangerously  centralized. "Freedom  in Canada," he wrote, "rests on the  tenuous  support   of  the  Privy  Council  and  on  continued  struggle  between provinces  and  the  Dominion.... The  lack of unity  which  has preserved  Cana­ dian  unity  threatens  to disappear."32  Views of this sort  were completely  contra­ dictory of the constitutional theory that informed the "Laurentian thesis."
Yet the materialist-idealist conflict which we have noticed with regard to the traditions  of Creighton  and  Martin,  informed  also the imperial  theory of Innis. Just  as he  had  once  perceived  that  the shift  in  the  material  culture  of Indian societies occasioned by the fur trade had destroyed those societies, so too he thought that  a shift of the material  culture of Europe occasioned by the industrial revolu­ tion,  and  the  ideas  this  generated,  constituted  a threat   to  civilization  and  the empires which sustained  it. It  was here that he departed  both from Adam Smith and  from  basic  asswnptions  that  sustained  Creighton's  concept  of  empire.  "An interest  in  material  goods,"  he wrote, "which  characterized  the Scottish  people, represented  notably  in Adam  Smith,  has been followed by an  attitude described by Samuel  Butler:   'All  progress is based upon  a universal  innate  desire on the part  of every organism  to live beyond its income.' The concern with specialization and  excess, making  for more  and  better mousetraps, precluded  the  possibility of understanding a preceding  civilization concerned with balance and  proportion.''33
Certainly  it  precluded  a  possibility of understanding Innis  whose concern  for balance and  proportion  was at odds with what he took to be an undue materialist bias  in  both  historical  explanation   and  its social  context.  Here  he stood  with
J. M.  Keynes who, asserting  "that he belonged to the first generation  to throw


I27

INNIS

hedonism  out  the  window  and  to escape from  the  Benthamite   tradition," had contended  that  the  calculus of interest was "the  worm  which has  been gnawing at the insides of modern civilization and is responsible for its present moral decay." It  was this escape from the Benthamite  calculus,  based on an overvaluation  of
the  economic  criterion,  according  to Keynes, which  had  "served  to protect  the whole lot of us from the final reductio ad absurdum  of Benthamism  known as Marxism."34
But  Innis  was not altogether  opposed to Marx.  Indeed,  in defending  what  he termed  "the  living tradition,  which is peculiar  to the oral  as against  the  mecha­ nized tradition," he once remarked, "Much of this will smack of  Marxian  inter­ pretation  but  I have tried  to use the Marxian interpretation  to interpret Marx.  There  has been  no systematic pushing of the  Marxist  conclusion  to its ultimate limit, and  in pushing it to its limit, showing its limitations."35  Yet in many  ways the late work seems to have been an attempt  at  just that.  It was Marx,  not Innis, after  all,  who  first  taught  that  the  fundamental and  determining factor  in  all societies was the mode of economic production,  that  all important changes in the culture  of a  period  were  ultimately  to be explained  in  terms of changes in  the economic substructure. What  Innis had to say about  the effects of staple produc­ tion  in  staple-producing societies was in  no  way  contradictory of  this  doctrine and,  in  all probability,  owed much  to it. But  in his late  work he seems to have pushed  this  doctrine   toward  its  limits  by  treating such  inter-related  media  of communications  as language, writing and printing,  not only as technologies which disrupted   and   transformed  societies at  an  economic  level,  but  also  as  media which, by a process of mental conditioning, altered the human  psyche by imposing literal  mindedness  and  linear  patterns  of thought.  Linear  concepts of time, and related linear  concepts of historical development,  Innis suggested, were a product of this technological conditioning.
Innis  might  have  pushed  this Marxist  doctrine  yet further  by proposing  that what  one  technology  had  accomplished,  new  or  other  technologies  might  yet serve to undo or alter. But he never did;  that  was the work of McLuhan. Instead he insisted that  written  and  oral  traditions  had  to be held  in balance. This  was one of the  least impressive aspects of the late  work in  that  it  boiled down  to a proposal for a sort of stasis in a world in which all things were subject  to change.
I have suggested that the late work may be usefully understood  if referred back to its matrix,  to  that  land  of crumbling  empires  and  of scrambled  signals that was Canada. And I have suggested also that it be referred  to the more immediate matrix  of the mind  that  generated  it, to a mind  reflected by literary style. What Innis  wrote was never drafted  with the rigid precision of a written  constitution; nor  did  it  always  conform  to the  more flexible standards of standard  scholarly reporting.  Indeed  some of the late  work has suggested  to Carl  Berger  "a  mind caught  up in a kind of intellectual  cyclone where everything  impinged all at once

INNIS

and  from  all directions,  and  where there seemed to be no place for stability and contemplation."36   The   mind  of  Innis  might  thus  appear   to  have  been simply distracted.  But  it  is fair  to  remember  that  he  had  come  to  regard  normative literary  forms as so many  fetters of the mind.  And it must  also be remembered that  events  and  ideas  do impinge  all at  once and  from  all directions  in  living reality as they do not, and  can  not, in written  prose of a logical and sequentially ordered  nature.  It is most probably for this reason that the stylistic peculiarities of Innis  bear some resemblance  to the "McLuhanese" employed by the leading interpreter of  the  late  work. Thus  it  well may  be that  these cyclonic  passages reflect the steady  contemplation of an unstable reality by a powerful mind break­ ing the mechanical  shackles that constrained it.
In  this  latter   regard  the  work  of  both  Innis  and  McLuhan  may  yet  have important effects upon  the writing  of history. Writing,  Innis observed, "implied a  decline  in  the  power  of expression and  the  creation  of grooves which  deter­ mined  the  channels  of  thought  of  readers  and  later  writers."37    Understood   in terms of itself, and  not judged by way of preconceived thought patterns,  the prose of Innis and  McLuhan might  well serve to jolt Canadian  historical thought  from the historiographical grooves to which it has been long habituated.


NOTES

1 Ramsay Cook,  "La Survivance English-Canadian Style,"  The Maple Leaf Forever
(Toronto: Macmillan, 197I), p. 144·
2  H.  A. Innis, "The Bias of Communication," The Bias of Communication  (Toron­
to:  Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I95I), p. 33·
8  H.  A.  Innis, "The  Problem of Space," The Bias of Communication, p. 92;  F. M. Cornford,  "The  Invention  of   Space,"  Essays  in   Honour  of  Gilbert   Murray (London: George Allen & Unwin, I926).
4  Cook,  op. cit.
D.  G.  Creighton, "The  Decline   and   Fall  of  the  Empire of  the  St.  Lawrence,"
Towards the  Discovery  of Canada (Toronto:  Macmillan, I972), p. I6o.
6  McLuhan  treats commodities as  media  in  Understanding Media: The  Extension of Man (New  York: Signet,  I962).
7   H.  A.  Innis, Empire and  Communications, rev. ed.  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto
Press,  I972), p. 5·
8  Ibid.,  p. 6.
9  D.  G. Creighton, Harold   Adams  Innis:  Portrait  of a Scholar   (Toronto: Univ. of
Toronto Press,  I957), p. I I2.
10  J. M.  S.  Careless,  "Frontierism, Metropolitanism and  Canadian History,"  Cana­
dian Historical  Review, 25 ( I954), I4.
11 Canadian Journal  of Economics and Political Science, I 7 ( I951), 98.
12    CanadianHistoricalReview,3I  (I950).

129

INNIS

13  Cook, op. cit., p. I 54·
14  Ibid.,  p. I44·
15  Leslie  A.  Pal,  "Scholarship and   the  Later Innis," Journal  of Canadian  Studies,
I2  (I977), 42.
16  Carl   Berger,   The   Writing   of Canadian  History:   Aspects  of English-Canadian
Historical Writing  (Toronto: Oxford, I976), p. I88.
17    Ibid.
18 Empire  and Communications, p. I2.
19   Marshall McLuhan, "The Later Innis," Queen's  Quarterly, 6o  ( I953), 385.
20    G. H.  Patterson, "Whiggery, Nationality and  the Upper Canadian Reform Tradi­ tion,"  Canadian  Historical Review,  56  (I975); "An  Enduring  Canadian  Myth: Responsible Government and  the  Family  Compact," Journal of Canadian  Studies,  I2  ( I977).
21   Stephen Leacock,  Baldwin, Lafontaine, Hincks, Responsible  Government   (Toron­
to:  Morang, I907), p. ix.
22    W.   M.  Kilbourn, "The  Writing of  Canadian  History," in  C.  F.  Klinck, ed.,
Literary History of Canada  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I965), p. 499·
23    D.  G.  Creighton, The  Commercial  Empire  of the  St. Lawrence  (Toronto:  Mac­
millan, I937); Dominion  of the  North  (Toronto:  Macmillan, I944).
24    Dominion  of the North, p. 346.
25  Ibid.,   pp.  223-24;  "The Victorians and  the  Empire," Towards the  Discovery of
Canada.
26    Dominion  of the North, pp. 378-8o;  pp. 466-67.
21  W. M. Kilbourn, op. cit., p. 500.
28  H.  A. Innis,  "Great Britain, the  United States and  Canada," Changing  Concepts of Time  (Toronto: Univ.ofTorontoPress, I952),pp. 115-I6.
29    W. T. Easterbrook, "Innis and  Economics," Canadian  Journal  of Economics  and
Political Science,  I9  ( I953), 291.
30    H.  A. Innis,  "Roman Law  and  the  British  Empire," Changing  Concepts  of Time,
P· 49·
31   "Great Britain, the United States and  Canada," p. I 20.
32    H.  A. Innis,  "Political Economy in  the  Modern State," Political Economy  in the
Modern  State  (Toronto: Ryerson,  I946), pp.  I32-33·
83  H.  A.  Innis,  "Industrialism and  Cultural Values," The  Bias of Communication,
pp.  I39-40.
34    H.  A. Innis,  "A  Plea  for  Time," The  Bias of Communication, pp. 79-80.
35    H.  A. Innis,  "A Critical Review," ibid., p. I90.
86  Carl  Berger,  op. cit., p. I90.
37    H. A. Innis,  "Minerva's Owl," The  Bias of Communication, p. I I.


THE SERVANTS OF CLIO

Notes on Creighton & Groulx



George Woodcock





IT WAS  NOT WITHOUT REASON that  the ancient; placed history under  the  patronage  of the  muses. For  the great  works of the servants  of Clio belong as much  to  the  realm  of literary  art  as they do  to the  realm  of science. There  is, I suggest, an inevitability  in this situation. For history, while its details can  indeed  be assembled  with  all the  patience of a laboratory  worker, can only be conceived in its entirety  through  an  act of the imagination and  can only be brought  to plausible life through  the resources of the literary  craft.  Indeed,  there is a common  realm  where  history and  other  forms of literature, such  as drama and  fiction, come together,  and  essentially it is only a different  way of using the imagination  to arrange  the past that  distinguishes Thucydides  and  Gibbon from, say, the Aeschylus of The Persians or the Shakespeare  of Henry  V. All of them deal  with  history;  all of  them  mingle fact  and  conjecture  in  memorable  forms whose appeal  goes beyond a mere interest in the detail of events to an inspired apprehension  of the shape  of the  past. This, of course, is why research  can  dis­ prove what  a great  historian  may say in terms of factual  detail, and  yet leave a work like The   Decline  and  Fall of  the  Roman  Empire  unassailed  as a  literary masterpiece, as a triumph of tragic vision. It is also why a historian like Spengler can  be  positively  perverse  in  his selection  and  interpretation of  facts  and  yet produce  a vision so compelling  and so fitting for its time that  no degree of criti­ cism can dispel the powerful and gloomy achievement of The  Decline of the West, or greatly reduce its influence.
The  great  historians  are  important in literary  terms  not  only for  the lasting appeal of their  major  works, which continue to irradiate the imaginations of generations  of  readers,  but  also for  the  extent  to which  they  contribute  to the wider pattern  of literature, not only by providing writers directly  with dominant themes, but  perhaps  even more  importantly  by crystallizing collective myths, the myths of nations  and  the  myths of movements. The Tory  and  the Whig view of English  history were essentially mythical  in character,  and  they were given form respectively by Clarendon and  by Macaulay,  to whom we owe respectively much of  our  sense of  the  English  past  as  tradition   and  the  same  past  as  progress.

CREIGHTON & GROULX

Gibbon's  great  panorama   of the  trajectory  of Roman   greatness  helped,  as did Vico's  historical  writings, to create a myth  of cyclicity in the growth  and  decay of civilizations which has not only been echoed in varying ways by later historians like Spengler  and  Toynbee, but  profoundly affects the way western man observes the life processes of his own institutions and may indeed help to produce the phenomena  of cyclic decline because he expects  and  tends therefore  to promote them.
Historians,  in other  words, not only present  history. To  a considerable  degree, they  make  it, especially when  their  visions of past  and  present  affect  our  hopes and  even  our  sense of  what  is practicable   in  the  future.  As  Edmund  Wilson showed so ably in To The  Finland Station, what actually  happened  on the Euro­ pean  continent  in  the late  nineteenth  and  early  twentieth  centuries  was  greatly affected  by historical generalizations of Vico and  Michelet which found their way into political action, filtered through the writings of Karl  Marx and  the actions of Lenin and his associates and predecessors.
In  every culture  that is conscious of itself as a living, and  therefore growing or
declining  entity,  there  are  historians  who  play  the  kind  of  role  I  have  been describing, and  who work beside the more strictly academic  gatherers  and  arran­ gers of facts. They  are the controversial historians whose interpretations are often assailed, but  whose grand  co-ordinating  visions help to shape  the way a people or a  period  will  regard  itself by giving it  a  plausible  past.  The  younger  cultures produce  such  historians as freely as the older  ones;  indeed, their emergence, like the emergence of literary criticism, is one of the signs that a culture is moving into the  kind  of  mature  self-consciousness that   recognizes  the  need  for  conceptual forms, for a vision in which land and  people, place and  past, can be given recog­ nizable  shape  in a  myth  that   both  explains  and  inspires.  Frederick  Jackson Turner's presentation  of the concept  of the frontier  as a dominant influence  on the evolution of American  society and  the American  collective persona  is one of the  best-known  examples from  the New World. Although  the American  frontier culture -in  so far  as it ever existed -is  burning  out  in  the  last  wilderness of Alaska, Turner's theory, filtered through other  historians and through  journalistic representations of the past, continues  to influence  the  way Americans  see them­ selves and  their  society; it is partly  responsible for  the irritable  defence of one's own mental  and  physical living  place that  makes American  society so markedly more violent than Canadian.
Historians  who are active in the creation  of theories that  develop into national
-or even in the case of Spengler and Toynbee  international-myths, are often accused of dealing  cavalierly with the facts, of being dominated  by preconception and -sometimes -by  prejudice. Such  accusations  have often  been  brought­ and   not  without   justification -against  the  two  Canadian  historians,  Donald Creighton  and  the late Lionel Groulx, who are  the subjects of  these notes. Yet it

CREIGHTON & GROULX

can  be argued  that  in the special way they handle factuality,  such historians are presenting  their  own  kind of actuality: the actuality  of the self-images-collec­ tive  and  individual -by  which  a  people act  and  which  ultimately  affect  and modify the mundane facts of their existence.
Here, I suggest, a two-way process operates -a  process which is a specialized
version of Wilde's famous axiom about life imitating art. The mythologist-historian extracts  from  the  past  a chart  of dominant  trends -physical as well as  psycho­ logical, intellectual  as well as technological-and from  this chart  he detects an emergent  current  that  projects itself into the future, so that  he is not only telling us what  we have been, but also foretelling what  we may potentially be, and it is this quasi-prophetic element  that most sharply distinguishes such a historian from others-Creighton, for  example,  from  W. L.  Morton  among  Canadian histo­ rians. And  in so far  as his charting  of the course from  past to future  affects the thoughts  and  actions of people -as the chartings by both Creighton  and Groulx to  varying  extents  have  done -he  becomes  a  self-fulfilling  prophet,  and  life imitates history in what-significantly-is its most artistic form.




DONALD CREIGHTON AND  LIONEL GROULX share a great deal as well as their  inclination  to write history in a way that  changes the present and affects  the  future  through   a myth-making  interpretation of the  past. Both have offered  nationalist   interpretations of  the  past,  Creighton   glorifying  the  trans­ continental   conception  of the  original  Dominion-builders and  Groulx  glorifying the  conception  of  Quebec   as a  nation  destined  to defend  Catholic  values  and verities.
Both are  frankly  partisan  in their approaches,  advocating,  as a result of their historical  analyses, specific courses of action.  Groulx  argued  persistently that  in order  to survive,  French  Canadians must sustain their  Catholic  culture  and  also their  racial  purity;  the dilution  of the race even through  marriage  with  English­ speaking  Catholics  could-as  he suggested in his novel, L' Appel de la  Race­ be fatal  to Quebecois  integrity  and  the purity of the apostolic mission. Creighton,  on the other hand, has argued-perhaps never more strongly than in a Maclean's article  entitled  "No  More  Concessions"  (June  27,  rg77)-that  French  Cana­ dian   particularism  has   prevented   the   Canadian  nation   from   developing   to maturity  through "a  successful determination  to prevent  Canada from  becoming a nation  and  to perpetuate its colonial status," and on the basis of such arguments  has advocated  that in the last resort English Canada  can survive without Quebec  while Quebec  without  English  Canada   will rot in "a  stagnant  economic  back­ water of independence."

I33

CREIGHTON & GROULX

Both writers have created  their  characteristic  myths. Creighton's is that  of the commercial  empire  of the  St.  Lawrence  which  dominated the  development  of New  France  and  which,  before it  expired  in  the  mid-nineteenth century,  had projected into the vast hinterland  of the pays d'en haut the lines of trade and communication and  eventually settlement and  immigration which ensured that  a trans-continental  nation   would  emerge  out  of  the  divided   colonies of  British North  America  and  sustain  a  different  political  and   cultural   existence -less individualist,   more   collectivist  and   traditional  -from   that   of  the  American republic  south  of the border.  Groulx's  myth  was that  of a Catholic  nation  with an inspirational  mission in the American  continent, sustaining  itself against  vastly superior cultural odds to fulfil its splendid spiritual destiny.
In  developing  these myths each of the two historians  had  his predecessor, his intellectual  guru.  Creighton's  master was H. A. Innis, especially the Innis of The Fur Trade  in Canada, which contained  the essential germ out of which-with Innis's   encouragement-Creighton  built  the  scenario   of  his  first  book,  The Commercial  Empire  of  the  St.  Lawrence.  Creighton  differed  from  Innis's  other celebrated  disciple-Marshall McLuhan-in  that  he  put  the  master's  tortu­ ously  expressed  ideas  into  eloquent  prose;  McLuhan,  unfortunately, inherited the obscurities of the Innis style, and  used his master's insights, unlike Creighton, to construct  a continental  and even a cosmopolitan  rather  than  a national  vision. Groulx  developed,  though  with  a more sharply  ultramontanist Catholicism  and a  more  abrasive  consciousness of race, a  theme  of survivance  that  had  already been given eloquent exposition in Fran _;ois-Xavier Garneau's pioneer narrative of the  formation   and  the  continuance  of French  Canada  (written  in  response to Durham's notorious assertion that  the canadiens had  neither  history nor culture), Histoire  du  Canada  depuis  sa decouverte   jusqu'a  nos  jours, published  in  the
I 84o's.  Stressing even more strongly than  Garneau the  continuity  of Quebecois culture,  and  introducing the  theme  of a  constant  struggle  against  a  relentless pressure from English Canada, Groulx extends and elaborates the early historian's task of national  justification in works like La N aissance d'un  race ( I 9 I 9), Notre maitre le passe ( I924-44)  and Histoire du Canada  franfaise depuis la decouverte ( I950-52).
Myths  demand   heroes, and  both  Creighton  and  Groulx  found  heroes fitting
their  requirements.  Groulx  chose, as the  paladin  in  his dream  of the  Canadian past, the  seventeenth-century soldier, Dollard  des Ormeaux, who in  I 66o led a forlorn hope of sixteen Frenchmen  against the Iroquois and died defending an improvised fort at the Long Sault. Other Quebecois historians, notably Gustave Lanctot,  challenged  the  authenticity  of  Groulx's  account  of  the  incident  in  Si Dollard  revient  ( I 9 I 9) , in  which  he sought  to  establish  Dollard  as a model  of courageous  resistance for  contemporary  Quebecois,  but  he continued  defending his position in later  books, like Le Dossier de Dollard  ( I932)  and  as late as I96o

134

CREIGHTON & GROULX

in  Dollard, est-il un  mythe?  In  fact, whatever  the actual  truth  of his portrait  of Dollard,  Groulx's  intent  made  his presentation  a myth, as deliberately  shaped  as those Plato advocated  for the achievement  of a political end, in Groulx's case the raising of the spirit  of resistance to what  he saw as a deliberate  English effort to
stifle Quebecois  Catholic  culture.  In  Paroles a des etudiants  ( I94I) he actually
called on students  to  pray for  the coming of a great leader,  as noble and  dedi­
cated  as the  Dollard  he  portrayed,  who in  the twentieth  century  would  inspire the Quebecois to fulfil the historic and apostolic destiny of their race.
Creighton  chose a less obviously chivalric champion in Sir John  A. Macdonald, and in his two  massive volumes of biography, The  Young  Politician  ( I952)  and The  Old  Chieftain  (I 955), he completed  the first important study  of the  most interesting  political personality Canada has yet produced. It is a book that demonstrates  the  degree of Creighton's  literary artistry, for he shows his recogni­ tion  that  biography  is a quite  different  craft from national  history, and  achieves that  true  balance  between subject  and  background,  between the  private and  the public,  which  is so  difficult  to  sustain  in  a  political  biography.  Yet  he  never attains,  or  even  attempts,   a  total  objectivity.  His  sympathies  are  openly  and honestly expressed, and  the other :figures in the story are in one way  or another diminished,  so that  Macdonald stands  out in high relief, as a :figure symbolic of the development  of Canada, in which he played so active and central a part, and hence as a :figure of mythic  proportions,  embodying on a grand  scale the virtues and  frailties of his people, forming  his nation  with a wayward  intuitive  wisdom, and  in the end,  at  his death,  becoming identified, in the last  words of The  Old Chieftain, with the land itself:

Beyond the  dock lay the harbour  and  the islands which marked  the end of the lowest of the Great  Lakes; and beyond the islands the St. Lawrence River began its long journey to the sea.

The  mythic  and  the  heroic  are intimately  associated with  the  tragic,  and  the vision of Donald  Creighton  at the end of his career, like that of Lionel Groulx in his final years, has been darkened  with a deep pessimism about  the achievement of the  glorious  destiny  as an  independent  nation  that  he once conceived,  under the inspiration  of its geographical  vastness, for his country. And each of the two historians   has  discovered  his  particular   tragic  flaw  in  his  nation's   history  to account   for  the  disaster  he  sees impending.   Groulx,  who  once  declared   that "entre beaucoup  de fa ons
Ia patrie elle-meme, c'est de l'aimer  dans ses inrerets eternels, sa mission providen­
tielle,"  lived  long  enough  to see the  rise in  national  consciousness which  he so passionately  desired  take  on  a secular  form  and  to realize that  the  young, who had  once  supported   him,  were  now  mocking  his  views on  the  necessary link between  being  a  Quebecois  and  being  a devout  Catholic  of the  ultramontanist

I35

CREIGHTON & GROULX

persuasion.  The  disenchantment   which  permeates  Groulx's  late  book, Chemins de l'avenir  ( 1960), is paralleled  in Creighton's  most recent  historical work, The Forked Road  ( 1976), an account  of the Canadian years from  1939 to 1957, in which he sees the vast promise of Confederation  negated  or at least imperilled  by the supine continentalism of the Liberals, by the inroads of provincialism, and  by the  consistent  betrayal  of the ideal of united  Canada by a succession of French Canadian leaders.


As A   FINAL   PARALLEL  between  Creighton   and   Groulx, before I turn  to their essential differences, there is the fact that both of them have
had the urge to overstep the frontiers between literary genres, and have attempted
-Groulx  the  more  successfully -to  express  their  convictions  through  highly tendentious  works of fiction. Groulx  published  his two  novels under  a  nom-de­ plume,  Alonie de Lestres, which  he may have adopted  because of  doubts  about the reception  that  would be given to the first of these books,  L'appel de la race. The  book is in fact  as naively racist as its title suggests. The hero, Jules de Lan­ tagnac,  comes  to  believe in  "les  affinit'es profondes  de  Ia  race  frant;aise et  du catholicisme.  C'est  pourquoi,  sans doute,  on  Ia dit  Ia race  de  l'universel."  His belief is reinforced  by experience, since he marries an English convert to Catholi­  cism, and  goes to live in an  Anglo-saxon environment  where,  despite his wife's acceptance  of his own religion, he finds himself  "effroyablement penetre  par  les infiltrations  protestantes." Eventually  the family  breaks  up, and  Jules,  with  two of his children,  returns to his roots, while his wife and  the other  two remain  with the  English. Beyond the failure of Lantagnac's marriage  there looms, in Groulx's mind,  the  larger  failure  of Confederation,  of  the  marriage  of the  two principal Canadian races. And as a murky under-current  there runs through  the novel the sinister suggestion that  antagonisms  between  nationalities  and  races are  not only inevitable  but  necessary. Groulx's  second  novel,  Au  cap Blomidon, sustains  its nationalist  theme  with much less passion and  animosity than  L'appel de la race; it is a rather simple story of an Acadian  who works as hired man on a farm that  once  belonged to his family but is now owned by English-speakers;  eventually he manages  to buy back the land, and in this way symbolizes the repossession by the French  Canadians of their  material  and  spiritual  heritage,  the  repossession for which Groulx all his lifetime longed.
Donald  Creighton's  novel, Takeover  ( 1978), is a lighter  work than  either  of
Groulx's,   written   with  deliberate   melodrama  and  a  touch  of  tongue-in-cheek gaiety. It is the story of the attempt  by Americans  to take over an old-established Canadian distillery. An aged lady, Aunt  Cecilia, is the only member of the family to  resist  the  sale,  which  all  the  others  in  various  ways see  as  being  to  their

CREIGHTON  & GROULX

advantage; she  is  murdered  by  a  desperate  grand-niece.  At  the  last  moment Hugh  Stuart,  the main shareholder, feels he cannot carry on with the negotiations in view of the dead  woman's  wishes, and  the novel ends on an ambiguous  note. "But  the  past  reached  out  and  clutched  him, and  held him fast."  One  is left to wonder whether  this message of mental and moral enslavement  to dead tradition is all  that  Creighton's nationalism   has in  the  end  to offer.  Or  is this  curious, gloomy,  yet  cynically  amusing  little  fiction  a  measure  of  the  extent  to  which Creighton  now considers his old vision of Canada  a lost cause, a measure of his sense of the  myth  ending -like so many  myths of  great  adventures-in  the triumph  of negation?
Perhaps  one sees the faults of both Creighton and Groulx most clearly in their novels  because  fiction  is  not  their  craft,  and  they  are  not  so  adept  as  other novelists in concealing  the theme within the structure  of the narrative. Too much is left for  the characters to state,  rather  than for action  to suggest and  language to evoke. But essentially the  qualities that spoil L'appel  de la race and Takeover as credible  fiction are  the same  as those that  distinguish  Creighton  and  Groulx, as  historians,  from  other  historians  who are  more closely dominated  by factual rather  than  psychological actuality.
Both of them  in fact  begin from a vision that  has a subjective  reality outside
history  rather  than  an  objective  reality  within  history. In  Creighton's case, the dominant vision is spatial  even more than  temporal;  perhaps only Francis Park­ man  among  North American  historians conveyed so intensely the grandeur of the land,  and  there  are  times,  particularly  in The  Commercial  Empire  of  the  St. Lawrence,  when one feels one is reading a splendid and constantly changing  map of  a  vast  and  sparsely  peopled  land  rather  than  a  narrative  of events in  time.
In  the  case  of  Groulx,  the  dominant  subjective  vision is that  of  the  nation which is a manifestation  of the church  militant,  uniting  the dead  and  the living with  its  ranks  as  it  advances  on  its divinely conferred  mission. In  an  oration delivered at the very beginning of his career, when he was barely nineteen, Groulx declared to an audience  of students:

Messieurs,  vous  etes  catholiques, vous etes catholiques, vous etes  franc;ais:  c'est-a­ dire: lutteurs et  chevaliers. Comme tous  vos aines  dont la  glorieuse  phalange est aujourd'hui devant vous,  un  jour  vous  irez vous aligner comme  soldats  aux  fron­ tieres de la societe. Soldat, il faut  l'etre, il faut  l'etre  a notre  age.

He  never  changed  his view;  Jeanne  d'Arc  was always one of his most  beloved saints.
Inevitably,  there  are  profound  divergences  between  the  visions of  Creighton and  Groulx, quite  apart  from  the fact that  Creighton's  is secular  (only the occa­ sional  orotundity of  utterance   betraying  a  youth  of listening  to  Methodist  ser-

137

CREIGHTON & GROULX

mons)  and  Groulx's  is unalterably  religious. Perhaps  the most important of these differences is that  while Creighton's vision is expansive, Groulx's is defensive.
Creighton  originally conceived Canada in grandiose terms, as an empire of the north;   no longer  a  part  of the  British Empire,  it seemed  destined  to follow its own imperial  destiny which could be fulfilled within  the confines of its own vast territory,  without  the need even to consider colonizing other  lands.  Having cele­ brated  that  destiny in The Empire of the St. Lawrence, in Dominion of the North, in the two volumes of his life of Macdonald, Creighton  in the end saw it aborted by the surrender to continentalism, and  hence to the rival American imperialism,  on  the  part  of  successive Liberal  governments,  particularly   under  the  malign direction  of  William  Lyon  Mackenzie  King,  who  in  Creighton's  myth  became the   villain   balancing   the  heroic  Macdonald.  What   Macdonald   built,  King destroyed.
Groulx's  vision, on  the  other  hand,  is anti-imperial, and  not  merely  in  the political sense. He  did not envision the conquest -by commerce  and  settlement
-of vast territories; as Creighton did. His Quebec  remained enclosed within its traditional frontiers, and gained its significance and its sanctity from its role as one of those lesser nations which Groulx called "des peuples martyrs"; their virtue lay in  a lack  of the opportunity  for material  corruption, and  they were destined  to live as examples on a higher moral and spiritual  level to the more prosperous and powerful  nations,  the great  powers. Canada might  conceivably -Laurier in an exalted  moment  had foreseen it-attain  in the twentieth  century  to great  power status;  no degree of imagination  could confer such  a demoralizing  possibility on Quebec. And, since imperial expansion did not enter into the destiny of French Canada, it must conserve and defend its spiritual  power, its moral testimony.




CoNSIDERED IN  TEMPORAL rather  than in spatial  terms, Groulx's vision is regressive, whereas Creighton's is progressive. Groulx always leads us to the desired future via the past. He originated  a battle cry when he declared :
"Nous  avons a choisir ou de redevenir  maltres  chez nous ou de nous resigner a
jamais aux destinees d'un  peuple de serls," and the operative  word in the sentence I have  just quoted  is surely "redevenir"-to "become  again." What  Groulx  in fact  sought  was  to  recreate  in  Quebec  a  Catholic  community  such  as existed before  the  Conquest  of 1760,  but  purged  of its historic faults  and  prepared  to apply  a  Christian   discipline  to  material   progress  so  that  the  evils of  modern industrial  societies would be mitigated  on the shores of the St. Lawrence.
To  define Creighton's  vision as "progressive" may seem out-of-place in view of
his  strictures  on  the  progressivism which  he  sees as one  of  the  characteristics

CREIGHTON & GROULX


shared  by  the   English   Whig   historians   and   the  Canadian  Liberal  historians, whom  he despises to a man. As he defines it, in the  Whig-Liberal view,

the course of historical  change  could obviously be nothing  but the onward  march of  progress;  and   thus  the  task of  the  historian  was  not  merely  to explain  and account  for the  present,  but also to justify and vindicate  it historically. Everything in  the  past  which  had  the  appearance of an  origin,  anticipation or  promise  of some valued  feature  of contemporary  society was emphasized  by the Whig histo­ rians; and  everything  that  seemed incongruous in the eyes of the twentieth century or  incompatible with  its standards  and  values was treated  briefly or  criticized or explained  away.

In  the same  Introduction to Towards the  Discovery  of Canada ( 1972) in which the  above  passage  occurs, Creighton goes on  to point  out  what  he considers  the basic  flaw  in  the   Canadian  Liberal   view  of  history-a view  he  describes  as "almost a complete inversion  of my own."
In  their eyes, Canada's fundamental purpose was not survival in North America but emancipation from  Europe. The  winning of responsible government  and  what used  to  be  called  "Dominion status"-the  achievement   of  compete  autonomy inside  the  British  Empire-Commonwealth-seemed  to  them  by  far  the  most important theme in Canadian history. They concentrated on constitutional history and   the   changing   nature   of  the  imperial   connection;  they  neglected  military history  and   relations   with  the  United   States.  Gradually   Canada's long  armed struggle  for existence in a continent  dominated  by the United  States receded  into the  dim,  forgotten   past;  and  Canadian-American "good  neighbourhood" along "the  four  thousand   miles  of  undefended  frontier" was accepted  as  the  natural condition   of  peaceful  North  America.  Somehow  Liberal  historians  managed   to ignore  or  forget  the  fact  that  Great  Britain  had  more  often  than  not  taken  the initiative  in  the  growth  of responsible government  and  that,  at  the  time of  Con­ federation, she might  have been readily persuaded to grant  Canada independence. Instead   they   had   converted   the  achievement   of   self-government  into  a  long, acrimonious  struggle  in which every concession had  been extorted  by eager Cana­ dians from an unwilling and obstinate Motherland.

Clearly   what   Creighton is rejecting  is the  idea  that   progress  is inevitable, of which  the  corollary is the  complacent belief that the  present  is always better  than the   past.  Clearly,  to  Creighton, a  present   in  which   Canada's economic and cultural life  has  largely   been  colonized  by  American interests  and  influences is worse than a  past  in  which  Canada's links were strong  with  the  European world and  helped   to sustain a  distinctive  British  North  American civilization. On  the other   hand, Creighton's vision  of  Canada is itself  distinctly progressive,  in  the sense that  he sees a steady  movement to encompass the land, to subject  it first to commerce and  then  to settlement, and  also a steady  movement from  the  condi­ tion  of  a  divided   pattern of  colonial  provinces  to a  Dominion that  could have been  a Kingdom, might have  been  an  empire, and  can  only survive as a strong nation   state. The  principal difference   between   Creighton's  progressivisim   and

139

CREIGHTON & GROULX

that  of the Whig-Liberal  historians is that  he does not see progress as inevitable. It  is not  there  to  be accepted;  it  must  be willed  and  shaped  by a  dominating vision.
But the dominating vision extends to the past as well as the present and future
and, as in all mythological history, tends to shape the past in terms of the desirable present. This explains what one can only describe as a major  distortion in Creigh­ ton's view of Canadian history:  that he treats Confederation as if its intent  were not  Confederation.  More  than   any  other   Canadian  historian,  Creighton   has fostered the fallacy  that  the Fathers  of Confederation did  not intend  to create a genuine federalism,  but a strong central government  to which the provinces would be everlastingly subordinate.  To strengthen  his argument, he  claimed  that  Con­ federation  was not a compact  between the colonies of  British North America, but an arrangement imposed by the imperial government. All this flies in the face of actuality.  Macdonald and  some of his  associates  undoubtedly   desired  a strong central  government,  but not all the Maritimers did;  for them the whole virtue of Confederation  lay in the guarantee  that  local  rights and  interests would be pro­ tected and  not subordinated, while the British North  America  Act was framed  to suit  the  agreed  wishes of  the  provinces  and,  far  from  being  imposed  by  the imperial  power,  was passed as  a formality  by an  indifferent   Mother  of Parlia­  ments, hardly more than a bare quorum  being present.
Creighton's  strong adherence  to governmental  centralism  has not only affected
his view of Canadian political history since Confederation, but has also distorted his presentation  of Canadian historical figures. Thus  the two great  wars become glorious occasions, with the  waste of lives conveniently  minimized,  because they were times when the  central  government  became strong  and  the  provinces were truly subordinated. And in Creighton's  gallery of historical  portraits,  quite  apart from his celebrated inflation of Macdonald and equally celebrated deflation of Mackenzie  King,  we  have  such  interesting  contrasts  as  his  portraits  of  R.  B. Bennett and Oliver Mowat. Bennett, we are told, with a plethora of approving adjectives, "was a tall, robust man, vigorous, vital, dynamic,  with an instinct for command, a monopolizing capacity for work, and an annihilating talent for politi­ cal  attack." Mowat  is dismissed as "a  short,  round,  physically  negligible  man, who had  a lively sense of his own importance  and  a lusty urge towards domina­  tion."  Note how the very same quality  changes from  "an  instinct for command" in the case of the Tory  centralist Bennett to "a lusty urge towards domination" in the case of the passionate defender of provincial rights, Mowat.
Like myth,  prejudice  makes readable  history, and  there is no doubt  that  both
Creighton  and  Groulx  have owed a great  deal of their  influence  to the fact  that their   judgments   are  so often  intemperate,   their   passions strong,  their  visions powerful enough to sweep us, at least temporarily,  into the state of mind in which inconvenient  facts are ignored  and grand  designs become acceptable  even if they

CREIGHTON & GROULX


do not necessarily follow the actual  passage of events. This may explain why, even when  actual  history has diverged from  the ideal patterns  they made  for it, even when  they  themselves  have seen myth  turning  into  tragedy  (with  the  rise of a self-conscious but secular Quebec  in Groulx's case and the reality of American domination  in Creighton's case),  we cannot  dismiss such  historians  as without influence.
They  helped  to shape  the mental  climate of their time, and  in this sense their works acted  as catalysts, even if the results were not what  they had  intended.  It is impossible to detach  events in Quebec over the past twenty years from the sense of unique  nationhood  implanted  by Groulx's  treatment  of history over a writing life of more than  sixty years. And  Creighton's  influence on non-academic  histo­ rians like Pierre  Berton,  on  philosophic nationalists like George Grant, on  poets like  Lee  and   Purdy,   on  novelists like  MacLennan   and  Atwood,  has  been  as immense  as  it  is  incalculable   in  precise  terms,  providing  them  with  a  great imaginative   structure  of  Canadian  geo-history  within  which  their  individual  visions of the  land  and  its fate  could take shape. The  very faults  that  academic historians have found  in the work of Creighton  and Groulx have tended to make them  more faithful  servants of Clio, the muse of history as art and as myth.









THE QUESTION, 15 IT?
 


Alfred G. Bailey


We  the  People
of the great  North  American societal  provenience
await  with  hope
the hazard of high endeavour with  a good  deal of uncertainty, not  to say misgiving.
Especially when  we recall
that  James  Abbott  McNeill  Whistler,
to whom  so many  were in the habit  of deferring in the declining decades  of the last century,
said  that  art  happens, and  how  could  we tell
whether it would  happen to us?

POEM

"Some  of you folks,"
pronounced the learned  sociologist, speaking,  at this year's annual
meeting of the Society, with all the assurance
of an Egyptian soothsayer
at  the court  of Rameses  the Second, "may  find yourselves
in the way of attaining the maximum." All of us, say the nihilists
who go to the taverns
to practice their wit on the waiters
and  proclaim  in voices, artificially loud, their  voluble contraries.
The question  arises, therefore,
whether the dogmatism of the nihilists is or is not preferable to the persistent
ambiguities of the learned academics.
If enlightenment could  not be found
in having  recourse  to the habits of the ant and  the beetle,
or even in the voluminous monographs
of the celebrated anthropologist, Claude Levi-Strauss, then one might  take what  comfort one could
from  the contemplation of Raphael copying  the works of his mentors with  the
frenzy
of a divinity  in the act of making himself visible.
Well, you know, you know, you know, no matter what  age you were born  in, nor how carefully  instructed in the
principles of the dialectics, simple recognition, even belated,
of the inadequacies of the biological  analogy,
might  start  cogitations
that  it would not be well to abandon, (let  us say)
for a trip  to the woods in Spring
to admire the skill of the trailing arbutus in decanting its fragrance.


FRYE IN PLACE




Francis Sparshott







LVITED TO  CONSIDER THE  PLACE of Northrop Frye in Cana­ adian  intellectual  history, one is dumbfounded. Canadian  what? The lesson that cries to mostly deaf  ears from  Creighton's  Empire of the Saint  Lawrence  is that Canada was not until very lately a civilized nation at all, its literate  orders being represented  by a gaggle of drunken  or teetotal  traders. Klinck's  history of Cana­ dian  literature likewise shows that  we have  had  little  to learn  from  each  other. Again,  essays in the history of Canadian philosophy have as yet brought  to light, in addition  to changing  fashions in imports, only one native tradition (a tradition  after which some of us still hanker) , that  of the tweedy or seedy exponent  of this or  that   European line  whose  presence  adds  tone  to  the  tea-parties  or  hospital boards  of  provincial   capitals.  It  is  not  that  Canada   is a  "new" or  "young" country,  appellations  that  Frye among  others  has mocked.  It  is rather  that  the topsoil is thin.  One  year you clear the brush, one year you raise a crop, one year the stone shows through, next year the tax sale. "Where  is here?''  is the question in  which  Frye has definitively  posed the predicament  of orientation in the home of  the  blackfly.1   Frye's  literary  theorizing,  as we will see, has  given  a  sort  of answer. But the shallowness of the soil remains unnerving.
The  significance  of  Frye  in  literary  studies in  the  English-speaking  world is
plain  enough.  Briefly, he redeemed  critical theory from  the neglect earned  for it by the philosophical imbecility of the "new criticism," a movement  made possible by a  determined   refusal to  consider its own presuppositions.  Of  course the new critics  had  no  monopoly:  there  had  been  the  Chicago  Aristotelians,  adept  at packaging  things  so that  they would  not  rattle;  Rene  Wellek, who  had  learned from  history everything  except that  a theory  has to mean something; the astrin­ gent  humanism  or  prissy sentimentalism  of F. R. Leavis;  and  many  more. But criticism  in  their  practice  had  evidently  not been a  discipline.  What  Frye  pro­ vided  was  an  approach to  literary  studies  that  insisted on  first  principles. Even those who thought him a wrong-headed  corrupter  of  consciousness had either  to provide  alternative  principles  or stand  convicted of  intellectual  frivolity. For the decade after  his Anatomy appeared  in 1957 it was not unreasonable to see in him

143

FRYE

the one indispensable  figure in literary studies in the English-speaking  world. In the last decade,  he has been eclipsed by this or that  form of structuralism. But he should  not   have been. He anticipated  what is most crucial in those movements: the insistence that  literary works are preceded  by myths or codes that  shape their meanings, and  the realization that an author  has only limited freedom bceause his medium  (Derrida's writing)  imposes meanings on which he can only perform variations  and  with  which he must  co-operate.  But  Frye adds what  Barthes, for one, misses: a vision of literature  as itself one code  (or code of codes),  a system of understanding. In effect, Frye thinks of literature as writing that  has a certain fixed place in culture,  and  in relation  to this or that  set of features  of which all other  kinds  of formal  discourse must  be defined.  For  lack  of such  articulation almost  all  Frye's  predecessors and  contemporaries seem by comparison  naive or silly. This  strategic  superiority, together  with  the odium  theologicum  aroused  by the  associated  tactics, is one of the things that  has made  Frye a target  of  wide­ spread and intense hostility.
In  the context  of Canadian  culture  generally, the primary significance of Frye
is that  he is, without  doubt or qualification,  a world figure.2  There  are not many. Mordecai  Richler  coined  the  phrase  "world-famous all across Canada" to  pick out  that  uneasy hankering  for centrality  to which denizens of peripheral  nations may succumb.  As one reads the memoirs of Pelham  Edgar  (a figure, and  a text,
crucial  for Frigiologists) ,a one is struck  by his obtrusive modesty:  it never occurs
to Edgar  that  his own thought  and  work should  take an equal  place with that of British  or  American  scholars  of  comparable gifts  and  attainments. This  com­ placent  assumption  of inferiority,  that  those  who make  the intellectual  running  are  necessarily elsewhere  (so that,  for instance,  a  Canadian  university  professor is primarily  a teacher,  because the research is already  being done somewhere more central), an  assumption  that  has amused  or infuriated  immigrant savants  for a century,  cannot  survive a few Fryes who will calmly assume, and  make the world agree, that  where they sit is the head of the table.4  It matters  to all of us that Frye has taken  it for granted  that  Victoria  College, Toronto, is a quite  natural place for a world figure to be.
Frye's more specific significance within the world of Canadian letters has taken two  forms. Directly,  his annual  surveys of Canadian poetry from  1950  to 1959 set a standard of interpretive  insight, pithy judgment,  and impartial responsibility that  according to some observers established a new level for poetry reviewing in a country  where self-indulgent incompetence  has been the rule for reviewers;5 and his "Conclusion" to Klinck's History did what  could be done in a masterly over­ view  to  establish  for  our  literature   a  synthetic  identity.6    Less directly,  by  the example  of his mythopoeic insight and by his insistence on the inner coherence of literatures  he provided a younger generation  of critics  (Jones, Atwood)   with the inspiration  to trace  new patterns  in the  national  heritage, and  encouraged  some

144

FRYE

poets  (Reaney,   Macpherson, Atwood  again)   to speak  with  a  firmer  voice by staking definite claims in what he helped them to see as a total imaginative  world.7
One  must  not forget  that  Frye has played an energetic  public  part  in the life of  his  country,  in  work  for  the  Canadian  Forum  and  the  suitably  short-lived Here  and  Now   (where  he  was an  early  celebrator  of  the  still  underestimated genius  of  David   Milne), in  shadowy  bodies like the  CRTC and  the  Canada Council, and  in the  CCF,8  as well as serving his own College not only as teacher but as Principal  (for seven years)  and now as Chancellor of Victoria  University. What  came of all that  I really cannot say. Some of his causes seem to have been lost  (such  as  the  highly-structured  undergraduate  course  in  the  humanities),9 others for all I know may have been won; but  public affairs and  administration are  infected  with  a  transience  that  afflicts all alike. Meanwhile,  whatever  failed did  not fail for  want  of  him:   his practical  commitments  have  been  continuous and surprisingly extensive, and  Canada's most eminent humanist  stands as an intransigent  reminder  that by liberal things we shall be judged.
Professionally, Frye has been an educator  at least as much  as a writer, and  his writing  has been without  exception didactic, an adjunct  to and  part of his teach­ ing  activity.10   In  the  university  context, his ideal has  been conspicuously  British rather  than  American,  the emphasis not on the Ph.D. but on the intensive under­  graduate course such  as he himself experienced  in the  Scottish-based  University of Toronto: 11 a strict schooling of the imagination, as opposed to vocational train­  ing for  pedants  on the  one  hand  and  a cafeteria for  the  curious on the other.12
This strong orientation is strangely at odds with his career as international figure
and  theorist,  which  has been  unmistakably  American:  it is in the MLA  and  the American  graduate schools that  the theorist in Frye has shone most brightly. To the  British  he  has seemed  an  oddity,  almost a  joke if one could  laugh  off such power and intelligence.
The  theoretical stance of the Anatomy  of Criticism is of a piece with its author's
educational beliefs, and  corresponds  to the longstanding  and  legendary  polarity at  Toronto  between  A. S. P.  Woodhouse and  Frye, between  University  College and  Victoria   College.18    On  the  one  hand,  the  honing  of scholarship  and  the academic   imperialism  of  the  graduate  school;  on  the  other,  the  cultivation  of culture and missionary enterprise.14 Pelham Edgar, that exemplary figure, was Professor of French  as well as of English; and Robins and Pratt,  the other leading figures of  the  Victoria  College English Department as Frye  first knew it, were both  men  in whom  scholarship  was contained  in a larger  life of the mind.  Frye will have been taken on at Victoria,  not so much as an expert in this or that, but as a  contributor to a  civilizing enterprise.15   Strangely, one  might  have  thought, for such a shy mandarin, Frye at a Couchiching Conference  was in his element.16
Millar  MacLure has discerned in Frye the Methodist circuit rider, carrying the gospel to the  people.17  The  image is exact. There is a literal truth  to it too. Some

FRYE

of the sentences  from  Fearful  Symmetry, his first and  seminal  book, come from the time when he was a missionary in Saskatchewan, with the Keynes one-volume Blake in  one saddlebag-and, one would like to think, a Bible in  the other,  to keep the  balance  true.18  One must not overlook in Frye the ordained  minister of the  United  Church, "on  permanent  leave from  the  Maritime  Conference."  Not only is the  preacher's  tone virtually omnipresent/ 9  but  his expositions of literary theory  have  a  way  of  culminating   at  the  "anagogic" level in  an  imperfectly argued  apotheosis  in  which  the imaginative   universe  turns  out  to  be somehow contained  in the body of a God-Man.  The  transition  to this figure, perhaps  more Swedenborgian  than  orthodoxly  Christian,  is seldom  clear  and  sometimes quite bewildering/0  but it is obviously central  to the impulse of his writing. But that  is not to say that literature  yields its autonomy  to theology. The  religious atmosphere is that  of American  protestantism of the thirties,  in which a generalized  earnest­ ness  replaces  doctrine   and   faith.  Religion  is  reduced   to  literature -though "reduced" is not a word Frye would permit.  Frye's thought in this area is deeply equivocal,  a fact  that  comes out sharply  in his insistence on the Bible, which he thinks everyone should learn when very young:  on the one hand, the overt reason for this insistence is partly that  European  literature takes its mythic form thence, but  above all that  the Good Book actually  presents a  uniquely  complete and  all­ embracing  myth  of mankind  from  Creation  to  Apocalyse, taking  in everything else on the way;21  on the other hand,  this claim of universality is surely one that no one would  think  of making  for  whom  the  Bible was not  already  a uniquely sacred book.22



EYE HAS  CLAIMED THAT  HE  HAS  ALWAYS WRITTEN from  a Canadian centre.23  But he has also said that  one's trafficking with literary master­ works should  not  reflect any local standpoint.24  The  terms of reference and  allu­
sion in  his general  writings on literature  are  in fact for the most part  not  Cana­
dian  but generically  North American, and often quite specifically United States.25
-an unmistakable tone that may have contributed to that extraordinary hostility with which  he is regarded  by many self-styled patriots  who have neither illumi­ nated  nor  worked  for  their  country  a  tenth  as  much  as  he.26
Where  is Frye's  Canadian  centre?  Where  is his "here"? His Canada is essen­
tially Sherbrooke,  Moncton,  Toronto-that is, pan-eastern. It is the land  of the U. E. L. "Historically," says Frye, "a Canadian is an American  who rejects the Revolution."27    It  is  a  Canada   from  which  West  and   North  are  emotionally absent.  Though he  is intellectually  aware  of  (and  able  to  capture  in  brilliant phrases)  the radical  diversity of Canadian situations,28  the Canada that  is real for him  represents  a  very specific view and  approach. It is what  happens  if you go

FRYE

up the St. Lawrence  and  turn right.29 At the centre of this experience lies the pilgrimage  from  Moncton  to Toronto.30   Another  Maritimer who has made  this passage has told me of an old myth in which a South Ontario cultural  heartland figures as a  kind  of Shangri-La, and  for all I know he could  be right. Victoria College has proved  to be, in a peculiar way, the end of the line for Frye, the pot of ice-cream  at the end  of the rainbow. Pelham  Edgar  remarked  that  Frye "will be  a  difficult  man  to  hold,  but  I can  also say  that  it  will take  an  immensely powerful tug  to dislodge him"; 31 and  he has certainly been one of these scholars, like Kant  in  Koenigsberg,  whose removal from one particular  spot  would seem like a violation of the natural order.
The   "lonely  time  growing  up"  in  Moncton  is significant,  too. 32     For  all  its potatoes, New Brunswick is agriculturally  rather  low-keyed, and  Frye's persistent image of tamed  earth  is neither farm  nor vineyard, but garden.  He writes always as a townsman  through and  through,  and  is almost unique  among major  Cana­ dian writers as showing  no sense of land. It is odd that this should be so, since his theory  of literary  form  stresses the  cycle of the seasons; but  what  that  cycle has meant  to so many of the writers he considers, by way of changing relations to the earth,  seems  to  touch  no  chord  in  him. The  lack  gives his  writing,  for  all  its stylish suppleness,  its  gaiety  and  wit, its  humane  seriousness,  a  certain  strange  deadness at the centre.
Frye's career starts, so the legend tells, with his discovery of Blake in the public library at Moncton-"Of all places!" says one commentator. No comment could be  less apposite.  Frye's  theory  is based on  the truth  that  you can  read  Blake in Moncton  just as well as you can  read  him anywhere  else. Every writer inhabits and  writes for two worlds:  the imaginative  world in which everyone shares, and the  practical   world  of  the  "myths  of  concern"  that  are  soon  forgotten. 33   For every reader  at every time, says Frye, the world of literature  has a centre, which is the  book he is reading  at  the time. From  which one may infer  that  if one is reading  Blake in Moncton, the centre of the imaginative  world is Moncton. Frye is dead  right  about  this, and  the point is crucial. In  another  mood one feels like muttering that  he is dead  wrong, that  imaginative  worlds fall away and leave us united with the author  in the humanity of his loves and fears, but these are doubt­ less anti-literary  moods. The  world of literature  is envisaged, not asserted, "a body of hypothetical  thought  and  action": the temptation  to attribute to an author  a concern with the "anxieties  of the age" that  his work reflects, and to take account of those anxieties in one's criticism, is to be resisted as drawing one away from the author's  work to the commonplaces of his age.34  To a lad marooned  in Moncton  factuality  may  be a bore at best, but  he can entertain hypotheses as well as any. As for the Public  Library-well, libraries are where books are, especially if you are  raised in a small town and  a not-too-bookish home. And Frye's Canada, like that  of the  rest of nature's good CCF-ers,  is the land  that  Herschel  Hardin has

147

FRYE

described  so welJ35  -the  land  par  excellence of public  and  semi-public  institu­
tions, a land whose literary emblem the Public Library might fitly be.
In  1956,  a  neophyte  teacher  at  Victoria  College concerned  with aesthetics, I sought  and  was generously given permission to sit in on Frye's graduate seminar. In addition  to the intellectual quality of the discourse, which was of overpowering richness and  intimidating brilliance, and  the content,  which included  much  that was soon to appear  as the  Anatomy of Criticism, I  carried  away  two powerful impressions.  One   was  that   Frye  never  once  touched   on  any   book  he  had announced (and  asked us to consult)  as the basis for that  day's class, but always broached some unheralded  topic. The other was that  none of the students  present were able  to challenge  Frye's ideas or to ask searching  questions. To  a student, they were mesmerized and buffaloed. The result was that his most basic principles were  unprobed.  Nobody  knew  (and  most of us did  not  know  that  we did  not know)  what exactly was going on. It has in fact always been a striking fact about Frye's  thought,  and  one that  has often been remarked  on, that  a combination  of intense sophistication with passionate reticence and evasive irony has somehow prevented  any close examination of his theoretical claims. What,  exactly, one used to ask, did  his theory amount  to? Was he describing  literature as such, or anato­ mizing  a specifically Greco-Christian  complex of literary  traditions,  or  what?  If his "archetypes" were purely literary how did they come by their Jungian name and  no  less Jungian air?  If the  cycles were literary  phenomenology,  why  did Spengler's  name  keep turning  up?  Gradually  we have  come  to realize that  it is Frye's  position, and  presumably  was so all along, 36   that  the  writers whose work he drew on, though  they might have believed  themselves to be historians, anthro­ pologists, and  psychologists, were  really  anatomists  of  the  imagination, literary critics of an impure  and  unselfconscious sort. But it remains  true  that  the precise and copious detail and the reiterated schematisms of Frye's theoretical  expositions generate   a  disconcertingly  floating  and  detached   nexus  of  ideas  and  images.37
Frye's students  are not the only questioners who have not known how to get him to come clean. His  repy to his critics in the Krieger  volume, especially to Wim­ satt's  penetrating challenge, are  a case in  point.38  With  frankness,  humility  and generosity of mind,  Frye  turns all questions aside with  a smart  remark.  Nothing  is clarified by his response, and he gives no ground.  In this he is like many another  genius, who  has no interest in explaining  anything  he had  decided  to leave  un­ explained  in  the first place and  may be unwilling even to ask himself a question that goes counter to the natural  flow of his energies.
Frye, then, is a builder, not a debater;  and  not a participant in any continuing discussion of what literature  is.39   But there is also a clear sense in which he is not a theorist  at  all. Like Blake, who in a way remains  his model, and  from  whom the perplexed reader  of Fearful  Symmetry seeks in vain to disentangle him, he is a visionary  and  allegorist. He  sees these patterns  and  relationships,  and  describes

FRYE

what  he sees, as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel, so high that  it is dread­ ful. And in each new work he sees afresh:  what he sees again he will say again, in the same  words if necessary, but in any case what  he says now will be what  he sees now. What  he does is not repeat or elaborate or refine a theory in work after work, but  spontaneously  bring  a growing  repertoire of patterns  and  relations to the  perception  of successive works. The  unity of literature,  on  which  he insists, reflects in his practice  the fitful reliability of the light shed by the schematisms his preferred  thought-patterns endlessly generate. "I don't  know why  it should help," James  Reaney  once remarked  to me of one of Frye's more recondite  assignments of genre,  "but   it  does."  From  which  we may infer that  the  assistance, though solid and  real, does not quite  take whatever  the form of  an explanation may be.
Whether  "theories" is quite the best word for them or not, Frye has given two
separate  accounts  of what  literature  is. The  earlier and  more famous  account  is anchored  in Blake, Spengler  and  Frazer  (the latter names recur obsessively in his occasional writings of the early fifties) ; the later account is not. The  two accounts are partly complementary, the earlier serving as a special case of the later;  but in some respects they are in direct  conflict. According to the earlier account, litera­ ture  as a whole  (the  word  "total" recurs like a hiccup throughout the  Anatomy of Criticism) is a single imaginative  order, as it were a single great work of which particular writings are  parts that  could not have existed without it and cannot  be understood  without  reference to it!0 In the last resort, that is why a critic's value judgment  is otiose: all the critic can do is elucidate the work's actual place within literature, and  acknowledge  the  part  the work actually  can and  does play in the imaginative  lives of its readers. To  suppose that  a critic's summary  opinion  can make  that  part  substantially  greater  or less is merely silly.41   What  the one great work that  is literature does is present to the imagination  a total order  incorporat­ ing the unchanging forms and  conditions of human  life, the range of possibilities for aspiration  and  dread,  the limits of  social order and  anomia,  of incorporation and  exclusion, all held together  within  the seasonal cycle of growth  and decay in the wider context  of an eternal  order in  which all else is fixed;  the presentation  being at the same time a deployment of  the resources possible to human  discourse. The imaginative order itself is fixed and starkly simple. What are endlessly complex are the ways in which these simplicities can be exemplified and veiled. Whether the actual  world  is really like this imaginative  order or  any  part  of it is beside the point, if indeed  the question  has any meaning. The  point is that our imaginations  are humane  insofar as they live easily in this order, in which it is the prime func­ tion of liberal  education  to  acclimatize  us-so  that  the  English  Department is the  central   (and   perhaps  the  only  necessary)  department in  a  true  university.
The  later theory is very different in tone:  it is a theory, not of literature, but of
literatures.  On  this later account, in any society many folk tales are current.  From among  these, a mythology "crystallizes in the centre" of the culture/ 2  articulating

149

FRYE

the shape  of its imaginative  concerns. What  the literature of the culture  does is elaborate  this central mythology and  relate more and  more areas of experience to it, slowly building  up an imaginative  world in which one can live and be at home
-that ever-present Eden from which we can be expelled only by eating that forbidden  fruit, the knowledge of fact and fable. What  makes this a change rather than  a mere generalization of the earlier theory is that  the specific forms of such a mythology are  not fixed by any literary  necessity but only  (if by anything)  by natural   or  psychological  causes  with  which  literary   scholarship   as  such  has nothing  to do. This  really entails the rejection of the old claim  that  unless litera­ ture  has a single determinate  structure  it cannot  be an object of scientific study.43
Fortunately, the claim was wild, and the new pluralism affords  just as firm a base for criticism:  what  makes a science possible is not the  pre-established  unity of its subject  but the functional  coherence of its methods.  In  practice, one might think, new pluralism  and monism come to the same thing. Literature for us must be the "western" literature that embraces all our forefathers  read and defines the imagi­ native world that is the proper home of our civilization. But doubts may creep in. How are cultures and their literatures individuated? Did Homer  and Isaiah really crystallize out of a single body of folklore into a single mythology? In what  does the singleness consist? To most of us it may not matter  (though  jealous classicists wondering  why his colleagues in English are  teaching Sophocles  may have sour thoughts44 ), but for Frye, still apparently committed  to the all-inclusiveness of the Bible and  to the view that each literary work is what  it is only by its relation  to a determinate totality, the question might pose difficulties.
However  that  may  be,  Frye's  vision is  deeply  conservative:   to  educate  the
imagination is not  to free it for ever  new  possibilities, but  to equip  it with  un­ changing  forms  to which new actualities  can  be referred  and  reduced. Freedom is  commensurate   with  knowledge/5    and   knowledge  is of  what  already  exists. Nothing  could  be  more  mistaken  than  to suppose  that  Frye's  relegation  of all extra-literary concerns to the periphery of literary  studies makes him a formalist. On  the contrary,  the practice of referring every work to total literature is designed to  give  the  student   the  freedom  of  an  imaginative  standpoint from  which  a critique  of life and  society will be, as it was for  Blake, inevitable.46   Frye's own talent  as a social critic is immense. In  perceptiveness and in generosity of mind, The  Modern  Century excels many  works in its genre  that  are far  better  known. And  it is the fruit  of a literary  imagination: a mind  free to examine  the actual because it is entrenched  in the  possible, that  knows where  here is because it has walked up and down in the hypothetical elsewhere.


NOTES

1 Northrop Frye,  The  Bush Garden  (Toronto: Anansi,   1971), p.  221-from  his
"Conclusion" to Carl  F. Klinck's Literary History of Canada.

FRYE

2    See  among others   Desmond  Pacey  in  Klinck,  ed.,  Literary  History  of  Canada,
Second  Ed.  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press, I976), III, 25.
3   Pelham Edgar, Across My  Path  (Toronto: Ryerson,  I952). I  do  not  know  who coined   the  word   "Frigian" to  mean  "pertaining to  Northrop Frye"; more  than one contributor to Klinck  uses it.
4  Frye's  assumption of centrality may be contrasted with  E. T. Salmon's remark, in introducing a set of lectures by Frye,  that  it is "cause  for  pride  in his native coun­ try"  that   the  lecturer should   have  been  made  the  subject of a  volume  published by the  Columbia University Press  (Northrop Frye, The  Modern Century  [Toron­ to:  Oxford, I 967], p. 8. The underlying thought is the  same as  Pacey's  (note  2), but  the reference to the New York publisher  strikes an odd note.
5   Malcolm Ross  cites  George Woodcock  to  this  effect  in  Klinck's History,  III, p. I6o,  though Lauriat Lane elsewhere  in the  volume  demurs. The reviews  in ques­ tion  formed part  of "Letters in Canada" in the  University  of Toronto Quarterly.  The  impartiality is  perhaps  not   unqualified:  whereas   in   I 955  Frye  detects   a polarity  in  Canadian  poetry   between   the  formal   and   the  representational, the latter  being   "sophisticated  and   civilized"   and   the  former  "primitive, oracular, close  to  the  riddle and   the  spell,"  in  I957  (with  reference  to  Jay  Macpherson) what  seems  to  be  the  same  polarity  has  become  one  between  the  amateurish and  the  professional, and  the  tone  has  become  rather strident. Towards the genuinely  amateurish Frye  remains gentle,  forbearing to tear  them  for  their  bad  verses.
6  A  single  phrase, "garrison  mentality" (Bush  Garden,  p.  225), made  a  new  per­ spective   part   of  our   permanent  view  of  ourselves.  Frye  is  unlike   many  of   his colleagues in  holding that "The constructs of the imagination tell  us things about human life  that   we  don't get  in  any  other   way.  That's why  it's  important for Canadians  to  pay   particular  attention  to  Canadian literature,  even  when   the imported brands are  better seasoned" (Northrop Frye, The Educated  Imagination  [Toronto: Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, I963], p. 53).
7   In  an  interview in The  Strand  (March I, 1978, p. g)  Frye  says "There is no such thing   as  a  Frye   school   of  poetry.... I  don't   think   a  critic   directly  influences poetry,  that's not  his  job. If it is his  job, he's  a very  dangerous influence." But  it has  seemed   to  some  that there   is a  school  which,  if  it  is  not  a  Frye  school  of poetry,   will  do  until   a  Frye  school  comes  along.  See  Robert D.  Denham,  ed., Northrop   Frye  on  Culture   and  Literature   (Chicago:  Univ.   of  Chicago  Press,
1978), p. 55 and  note  65 with  references.  The  issue is a very sensitive one.
8  Not  perhaps the  NDP (of  which  for  all  I  know  Frye  may  be a loyal  adherent); all is changed, changed utterly, a terrible  banality  is born.  The humane innocence of  the  old  party   was  such  as  to  make  Frye  one  of  nature's CCF-ers, which  he would   have   been  even  if  his  allegiances had  made   him   (what some  idiot  once called  him)  "a Liberal Party  guru."
9  Frye  takes  every  opportunity to  lament or  denounce the  University of Toronto's scrapping of  its  Honours Courses.  Perhaps only a  battle, not  a  war,  was lost  on this issue.
10  I  do  not  mean   to  suggest  by  this  that   Frye's  books are  teaching aids.  Frye  is a didactic writer, but  above  all  a  writer.  His  preface  to  his  Anatomy of Criticism (Princeton:  Princeton Univ. Press,  I957), viii,  says  that   the  book  "forced   itself on"  him,  and  in  a  recent interview he says "My  work  and  my writing does have to  come  first.  There's no  arguing on  that,   because  I  don't run  it-it  runs  me. Everything else has  to get  out  of the  way"  (Vic  Report,  7, 2, Winter I978-79,  6).

FRYE

11  Compare his  veiled  remarks  on  the  Ph.D.  in  his  Spiritus Mundi  (Bloomington: Indiana Univ.  Press, 1976), pp. 3-8.
12  In  the  Strand  interview (see  note  7), p.  7, Frye  makes  the  subtle  and  profound observation  that    the   weakness   of   the   undergraduate  Honours  Course   in   an Ontario context was  that  it  required too  much   maturity in  the  student "because it  was  founded on  the  principle that  wherever you are  is the  centre of all  knowl­ edge." We  shall  see  that   this  is a  very  Frigian principle; that   it  might  be  the underlying principle of such  an  education as  Frye  has  in  mind  is something that  might  not have occurred to one.

13  A University College  graduate from  those  days  told  me  recently that  she and  her contemporaries were  puzzled  by the  superior excellence  her  Department  claimed for  itself.  The basis of  this  claim  was  never  explained; so far  as  they  could  see, there  were  good  scholars  and  good  teachers   (as  well  as bad  ones)  on  both  teams. The  prolonged and  intricate batrachomyomachia of the colleges at Toronto awaits its Homer.
14   "Without the  possibility  of  criticism   as  a structure of  knowledge, culture, and society  with   it,  would  be  forever   condemned  to  a  morbid   antagonism  between the  supercilious refined  and  the  resentful unrefined" (Northrop  Frye,  The  Well­ Tempered Critic  [Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press, 1963], p. 136).

1   Something of  the  tone  of  the  Department under  Edgar may  be  gathered  from Kathleen  Coburn's  account  of  how   she   was   recruited,  in   her   In   Pursuit   of Coleridge (Toronto:  Clarke,  Irwin,  1977). The tone  is of a very laid-back "Come over and  join us."

16  It used  to  be  told  that,  when  some speaker from  the  floor  had  claimed authority for  her  philistine views because  she was herself  a graduate from  a university Arts course,  Frye  retorted: "Madam, if you are  a graduate of an  Arts  programme, we have  failed." Can  that  really be true?  We all believed  it at the time.
17  See  Klinck's History, II, 6r.  The  evangelical impulse in  Frye  is also  discussed  by Geoffrey  Hartman (in  Murray Krieger, ed.,  Northrop Frye in  Modern Criticism [New   York:  Columbia  Univ.   Press,   1966],  II2-J4.),  and   is  avowed   by  Frye himself  (see Spiritus Mundi, p. r8).
18  See Pelham Edgar, Across My  Path, p. 86.
19    To  me  personally, this tone  becomes downright oppressive  when  Frye is discussing writers   whose  intentions are  theological, notably Milton in  The  Return of Eden (Toronto:  Univ. of  Toronto  Press,   1965)   and   especially   Eliot   in  T. S.  Eliot (Edinburgh:  Oliver and  Boyd,  1963), which  strikes  me  as  the  closest  Frye  has come  to  a  pot-boiler. But  literary judgment and  personal anxieties easily  become confused  in these matters.
20   Perhaps the  most  egregious  of these sudden  transfigurations comes at  the very end of his  Address  as  1978 recipient of the  Royal  Bank  Award. In the  circulated text the  transition, though abrupt, is intelligible; but  an  audience replete  with  chicken and   oratory felt  positively  aufgehoben. On   reflection, since  the  thou  art  that  is supposed   to  be  the  "intersection of  the  timeless  with  time," the  abruptness and brevity  are  appropriate.
21  See for instance The Educated Imagination, p. 46.
22    Note  that   this  makes  the  underlying mythology of our  literature very specifically Christian.  Since   many   of  our   finest  and   most   powerful  writers   are  Jewish   by tradition if not  also by faith,  Frye must  hold  either that  their  personal and  literary

FRYE

orientations must  be at  odds, or that  their  work belongs  to an alternative tradition (of the existence of which  he has given no hint), or that  in their  work the common literary mythology takes a special  turn.
28    Bush Garden, p. i.
24    In  his "Introduction" to Pelham Edgar's Across My Path, p. xi.
25    1vlost of Frye's  works, when  not responsive  to specifically Canadian occasions,  have been  published abroad,  with  first  Princeton and  then   Indiana as  the  preferred houses.
26    That Frye  as a critic  "can hardly be described  as a Canadian summing up  Cana­
dian  experience" is remarked by Geoffrey  Hartman in  Krieger's Northrop Frye in
}Jodern Criticism, p. 109.
27    Bush Garden, p. 14.
28  For example, By Liberal  Things (Toronto: Clarke,  Irwin, 1959), p. 5·
29   In   his  "Introduction" to  the  second   edition   of  E.  J. Pratt's Collected   Poems (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1958), p. xxviii,  Frye  speaks  of Canada as "a shambling, awkward,  absurd  country,  groping  and   thrusting  its   way   through  incredible distances into  the  west  and  north." But  unless one started in Montreal the  direct way  to  the  north   might  be through Hudson Bay, and  the  way  to Vancouver was up the coast.
3° Frye's  personal pilgrimage is legendary. In  the version in the Vic Report  interview, the  young   Frye  has  the   highest   standing in  English   in  his  high  school,  and   is rewarded  with  a  scholarship to  the  local  business college,  where  he  becomes  an expert  typist  so that  he  is sent  to Toronto to enter  a competition for speed  typing (which he wins), and  while in Toronto (still only seventeen) he becomes an undergraduate at  Victoria College   (so  that   he  can  study  English  again). As in all  good  legends,   there   is  a  strong   hint  of  the  miraculous here,  and   a  certain shimmering of the  outline of truth. But it is true  that  of all Frye's  gifts his prowess at  the  typewriter is the  one  for which  he is most sincerely  envied  by his colleagues.
31  Across My  Path,  p. 84.
82    Strand  interview, p. 5·
83  See The Well-Tempered Critic, p. 149.
34  See  A Natural Perspective (New  York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1965), p. 4r.
85    Herschel Hardin,  A  Nation Unaware (Vancouver:  J. J. Douglas, 1974). In the third  lecture of The Modern Century, Frye contrasts the CBC with  its commercial rivals in terms  that  surely owe more to ideology than  to experience.
86  I say  "presumably," because   the  late   J. A.  Irving  used  to  claim   that   he  had witnessed  the  very  moment when  Frye discovered  that  this was the  line he had  to take   on   Frazer-and,  by  implication,  on   Spengler  and   the   rest.   Frye   and Edmund  S.  Carpenter, with   others,  were  taking   part in  a  panel   discussion  of
mythology in  general and  J. G.  Frazer  in  particular. Frye,  prepared to expound
Frazer   as  revealing the  universality of  certain patterns of  myth  and  ritual, was
horrified to  hear  Carpenter, an  anthropologist by trade, revealing the  poverty  of
Frazer's methods and  the  unreliability of his results. Shock  and  panic   (so Irving's
story  used  to  go)   pursued  themselves  across  Frye's  features, to  be  followed   by
relief  and   the  well-known grin  of  triumph as Frye  realized  that  what  would  not
pass  muster  as  anthropology  would   do  very  well  as  the  shape   of  the  literary imagination. The rest is history.

153

FRYE

Readers not  acquainted with  the late  J. A. Irving should  note  that  the relation­
ship  between  his anecdotes and  the facts  was sometimes one  of a peculiar subtlety.
31  In  the  reading room  of  the  Pratt Library hangs  a  portrait of Frye  seated  among the  clouds  ("magic realism"?). Frye comments on  this  picture (Strand  interview, p.  g)   that   "There are  jokes about   Frye  having no  visible  means  of  support." I have  several   times  heard   Frye  make  similar  remarks about how  people  associate the  portrayal with  the free-floating nature of Frye's  ideas; but  I have never  heard anyone  actually make  the association,  except  when  quoting Frye  himself.
38  It  must  in fairness be said  that  most  of the  critiques in  Northrop  Frye in Modern Criticism are  trivial,  or irrelevant, or mistaken. In  general, I know  of no criticism of  Frye's   general  position   that   is  at  once  well-informed, seriously  critical, and directly concerned  with  the  heart   of  Frye's   position. It is  not  only  his  students who have been mesmerized  and  buffaloed.
39    Most  references to  Frye's  work,  when  not  expositions by disciples,  take  the  form of general  encomium and  disparagement. Considering his reputation, it is surpris­ ing  how  seldom  other  scholars  cite  his opinions on  specific  points,  either to agree  or to disagree.  On  general  aesthetic  theory he has made almost  no impression at all.
40   This   view  of  literature,  though   singular,  is  not   unique  to  Frye:  Rene  Wellek (History  of Modern  Criticism,  II, 345, n. 6)  finds  it  first  in  Friedrich Schlegel's Lessings Geist.
41   Perhaps the  most  incisive statement of this  position is that  in  Denham, p. 148- a book  review  of  I 959;  the  best-known  is certainly that  in  the  "Polemical  Intro­ duction" to  the   Anatomy  of  Criticism.  Frye's   position   has  often   been  attacked, but  his opponents face a dilemma which  can  be crudely stated as follows:  if value judgments are  subjective they contribute nothing to knowledge, if  they  are  objec­  tive  they  add  nothing to the  facts  they  recognize. Either  way, value  judgments as such   can   add   nothing  to  knowledge.   In  The   Stubborn   Structure    (London: Methuen,I 970),   pp. 66-73, Frye  goes much   further and  denounces value  judg­  ments  as anti-intellectual.
42    The  Critical Path  (Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Press,  I97I), 35·
43    Anatomy  of Criticism,  r6-17. It is a three-step argument. First,  every science  must be  a  self-contained  and   "totally  intelligible body   of  knowledge,"  possessed  of "total coherence." Second,  "criticism cannot be a systematic study  unless  there  is a  quality in   literature  which   enables   it   to  be  so."  Third, this  quality  lies  in literature not  being  "a  piled  aggregate of  works" but  "an   order  of words," this order    being   postulated  rather   than    demonstrated  because    its   demonstration would   be  the  completion of literary study.  The implied model  of a  science  here seems  to be that  of a formal  system;  but  the  completeness of a formal  system  has nothing to do  with  its applicability. The implied epistemology is, in fact,  obscure. Perhaps Frye  is taking  "science" in  Hegelian fashion   (as  in  fact  the  coincidence of  the  completion of a science  with  the  exhaustion of  the  potential development of its subject-matter suggests); but one hardly sees how  the Hegelian theory  of knowledge  can   be  divorced   from   dialectical  development,  which   is  something quite  alien  to Frye's  patterns of thought.
44    In   rg6g,  Frye  became  Chairman of the  University of Toronto's new  Programme in  "Comparative Literature"-a venture  to  which   many   of  his  colleagues   in Departments of Languages and  Literatures were  and  are  bitterly  opposed  and  for which  they profess contempt.
45    "I know   of  no  conception  of  freedom   that   means   anything at   all  except   the promise  held  out  at the  end  of a  learning process" (By  Liberal Things, p.  18).

154

FRYE


46    Abeunt  studia   in  mores,  Victoria College's   official  motto,   catches this  facet  of Frye's  thought and  attitude as precisely as "The truth shall  make  you free," which is carved  over  its front door,  captures the  facet  recorded in note  45· There ought to  be  a  third  term   in  this  series,  which  would  be  the   target   of  one  of  Frye's devastating ironies; I  am  sure  he  has  thought of  it  already, but  I  don't know what  it would  be.














TWO SERMONS
 


Ralph Gustafson


I.


SERMON FOR  OFF-DAYS, A RATHER BAREBONE ONE

Not only compassion but concern. Compassion, a gift, or implication Heartfeltly free, the body
Run  over on the  blacktop,
None of the cars stopping
Having to get home for the TV  news
Of  the body on the  blacktop; The kerosene  soaked  Buddhist Setting himself  alight  on page 6. Time is short, the centres of power Are not available. Concern
Can't stand  it, the spider  she lifted
From  the inside window  sill on the scoop
Of the flap of the envelope  catching the drop
On  his web, placing him safely outside
To  build another; that  girl Running with  napalm on her. Grace of God!
Give me a walk in the winter  wind. Her,  balancing love.

155


GEORGE WOODCOCK
Voyager of Liberty


Dennis Dziffy





How DOES A  cRITic MAKE SENSE  of another  writer and critic who remains at once unsystematic and significant? Even stating that  blazons forth  the  limitations  of my own  way of viewing  the  nature  of intellectual  con­ sciousness. No,  I am  not  reiterating  the  familiar  romantic   dichotomy  between Apollo and Dionysus, nor even insinuating  a denim-dad, oracular conviction  that insight  wins hands-down  over outlook. What  I am attempting to  display appear  to  be  the  rigidities  inherent  in  the  entire  academic  enterprise  of  codification, taxonomy,  and  paradigmatic arrangement of ideas. For  the  reader  privileged to wander   through   the  extensive  oeuvre   of  George  Woodcock  quickly  senses a central  concern  with freedom, individuality  and even eccentricity  and  wayward­ ness that  courses through  that  canon.  This goes quite  beyond a fascination  with bizarrerie; it serves instead as the inevitable and  glowing consequence of a figure who stands  out  not  only as a libertarian  in  philosophy and  outlook,  but also as one in actual  practice. His work, therefore, not only discusses libertarian thinkers and  doers, but figures forth  a libertarian sensibility, one capable  of ranging over widely-disparate  persons, places and  things because that  very ranging  lies at the core of the man's beliefs.
A familiar  instance  of the sort of contradiction Woodcock  escapes lies in the
celebrated  quip  that  Carlyle's life of Cromwell proclaims the virtues of silence in fourteen  volumes. Doctrinaire  invitations  to a looser sex life, shrill  polemics on the  benefits  of  peace,  programmed   guidebooks  to  the  odyssean  lifestyle offer similar  examples  of contradictory  discourse on  our  current  bookshelves.  Wood­ cock's  choice  of subjects-anarchism, Hellenism  in  India,  literary  figures, the native peoples of our west coast, to name a few -follows the lines of  his interests. He  has  written  some of the  best travel  literature of our  time ;I let  this serve to iilustrate   his  wider  selection  of  subjects.  His  non-travel   books  are  themselves products  of intellectual  pilgrimages, of an effort to penetrate  to a region one may have only heard of, or visited once during a stopover. They  may also-as in the superb  biography of Gabriel Dumont, which fuses Woodcock's lifelong libertarian  beliefs and  practices with  his more recent investigations  of the  Canadian fact­ appear  as the  place one has been headed  toward  for a  number  of years. Person

WOODCOCK


and  mind  both  have voyaged on strange seas, bringing back to us news from elsewhere, even that  ultimately  inaccessible elsewhere that is our past.
The  reader  used  to systems must  force  himself to grasp  the  inner  coherence
that  pulls together  the  achievement  of George Woodcock, and  not  envision his non-systematic canon  as a series of lengthy aperfUS. His work is best perceived as lines radiating from  a single dot on  a map,  linking a  number  of seemingly  dis­ parate  locations  into  a  network  deriving  its strength  from  its very  flexibility, its tentacular virtue  enabling  it  to grasp  firmly the  multifoliate  detail  that  eludes rigid systems.
Literary  folk  recall  the  emblematic  Jamesian  figure  (in  the  Introduction  to
James's  own  The  Ambassadors) of a series of lamps  arrayed  in  a  circle, each successively illuminating   the  object  in  the  centre.  In  Woodcock's  case, simply rebuild  the doughnut by turning  it inside out:  his sensibility serves as a lantern, illuminating   the  objects  around   the  periphery,  tying  them  together -like the candle  held up to George Eliot's pier-glass-into a series of unsuspected relation­ ships. Thus  for example  the unlettered  Dumont, the ideologist Proudhon and the potlatching  Indians  of the  West Coast reveal their unsuspected  affinities in their common indifference to the mere accumulations of material  objects. Many further instances  of  this  integrative   result  of reading  Woodcock  could  be listed.  Their importance, in so brief a  treatment of his work as the  present  one, lies in this: any reader of Woodcock will find his imagination,  powers of sympathy  and ability to grasp the other, strengthened in ways that no immersion into a system ever can.
What  a benefit this  has proven to Canada's intellectual  life! Just  as Margaret Laurence's  Mrican works teach us by their very presence that our own experience remains part of a larger continuum  of human experience, so does Woodcock's achievement  demonstrate that  the most enthralling  prospect a Canadian  nation­ alist can provide is one that  looks outward.  The strength, for example, of  Canada and  the  Canadians lies in its grasp of the larger histories and  world  movements that  shape  our  own  doings. Canadians, of course, do well to be wary of "inter­ nationalist" outlooks  that   do  little  more  than  bleach  away  our  own  cultural  peculiarities  and  dilemmas  in an  effort to blend them  more  easily into a patch­ work of cultural  preoccupations that  turns our own space into  nowhere.  "Inter­ national" has so often degenerated  into a synonym for "continental" or "imperial" (outward-looking  becoming  a  rationalization  for  blanking  out  our  own inward­  ness)  that  we can  too easily forget the light that springs from beyond the eastern­ most shore  and  sets well beyond our  own  western one. Again,  I recall the  biog­ raphy  of  Gabriel   Dumont:  its sure  feel  for  the  realities  of  non-technological,  libertarian societies, whose mechanisms for social control  emphasize  the personal at  the  expense  of  the  codified-legal,  strengthens  its  treatment of the  society its subject  embodied  in  a  way  that  no  mastery of the conventional histories of the Canadian West could  have. The  historian  of the Doukhobors  supplied  the tools

157

WOODCOCK

that  granted  a fineness of execution  to the  chronicles of the  Metis. In  a culture where  high  school  students  in  Ontario are  now  presented  with  the  history  of Canada before acquiring  any grasp of the European imperial struggles which our beaver and  codfish industries, our Jesuits and our voyageurs, found their place in, the  network  of candles Woodcock has set about  our  borders  becomes invaluable through its very rarity.
This outward-looking quality places Woodcock within the sort of cultural movement   represented  by such  diverse  works  as  Scott  Symons's  Heritage  and Hugh  Hood's  A  New  Athens.  Both  works strive  movingly  to  present  to us the extent  to  which  our  own  culture  is not  some  parochial  aberration  functioning according  to its own autonomous and disconnected  drives, but a unique develop­ ment of a Judaeo-Christian, Western, world-imperial  structure, one of whose final waves crashed so deafeningly upon these shores. Symons and  Hood call attention  to the historical continuum  from which we sprang.  Woodcock places before us by juxtaposition  and  implication  a continuum  of affinities and  interests marking  the linkages  between  our own culture  and  those elsewhere. The implicit  and  subtle nature  of the project makes it all the more worthy  of  praise in a culture swept by both parochialism  and polemic.
Whatever  the  price paid  for  them  in self-contempt  and  self-sacrifice, the old Imperial ties gave us that sense of belonging to a process global in its reach, cosmic in its moral importance,  and  universal in its strivings. The  political and  material underpinnings of that feeling have long since vanished. If there remains any hope for Canada's recovery of a sense of historic purpose, it lies now in the direction  of Woodcock's  rejection  of politics (as described in  his essay of 1944). That is, the Canadian people's surest pathway  to a distinct  selfhood lies in their  attempts to build community  within the dying husk of the Canadian national state. One need not agree with this vision of Woodcock's to grant  its nobility and  to discover that the  wide-ranging  nature  of his cultural  achievement  offers a paradigm for  crea­ tive and energizing dispersal from a centre.




l:E FACT  THAT  THE   CENTRE  CANNOT  HOLD  appears  as a commonplace  now rather  than  as the anguished  revelation  which Yeats brought us sixty years ago. In a time when all systems appear  destroyed, when  the West lurches  from   crisis  to  crisis, its  rhetoric  of  urgency  and   despair  inflating   as rapidly  as its currency, when the coinage of the marketplace  and the currency  of intellectual  discourse suffer alike from Gresham's  Law, has any thinker  the right to abjure  a system? Does not every man's  duty require him to search for a unified structure of meaning  and  to preach it from  the housetops to a world gripped  by an  energy crisis intellectual  as well as material  in nature?  Does not  Woodcock's

WOODCOCK


diversified  portfolio  represent  the  grandest  effiorescence of  bourgeois  individu­
alism rather  than  a model for collective investment of scarce resources?
The   very  term   "libertarian" -rather than   "anarchist," it  offers  the  best single word  description  of Woodcock's  bias-has taken  on an edgy ambiguity. It  has  come  to  be  almost  a  code-word  for  identifying  the  proponents  of  the individual's   divine  right-under  Capitalism-to  exclude  himself from  every social  obligation  impeding   the  pursuit  of  profit.  "Laissez-faire" having  grown too  laden  with  noisome  connotations  for  employment  in  discourse  designed  to counsel the doubtful, "libertarian" conveys that  convincing ring of righteousness. Liberty  remains-in these days of pro-abortionists  and  health-food  freaks-a stronger catchword  than motherhood  and apple pie.
Yet the misappropriation of a term ought  not to kill its use among  persons of goodwill,  and  liberty  remains  Woodcock's  abiding  concern.  Hence  his  fascina­ tion  with  the  eccentric  and   the  offbeat,  from  Aphra  Behn  to  Henry  Walter Bates,  as  well  as  his  expert  treatment  of  anarchist  theorists  and  practitioners.  Anarchism   offers,  after   all,  a  more  exacting  and  ennobling  model  of  a  free person's behaviour  than  does the liberal model, in  that-hence its resemblance to   classical  conservatism -it   places  the   individual's   freedom   within   a  rich communal  context  of obligation  and  responsibility that  renders  his choice more deliberate  and  exemplary.  Of course, as Woodcock shows repeatedly  in his work on  the  Doukhobors,  conformity  to  peer  pressure stands  as the  direct  threat  to anarchistic ideals of freedom.  Yet, that  danger faced, where else can one locate a polity  in  which   people   possess   the  opportunity   for   freedom's   most  glorious exercise:  a person's free choosing of the laws he determines  to live by?
Recall then  Woodcock's  range of subjects. How many  of them deal with those forgotten  by  history  (and   not  offering,  therefore,  sure-fire  prospects  for  popu­ larity)! And  within  these various subjects, how level-headed  and  honest  Wood­ cock remains  in  his evaluation, refraining  from any emphasis on the sensational, standing hack  from  the  kind of search-and-destroy  criticism  that  will  attract  an audience  out for blood. Here  is the possessor of sufficient sensibility, industry and imagination    to   have  set   himself  up  as  the  literary   dictator   of  Anglophone Canada. Instead,  he founds  a  journal that  irritates every would-be-Torquemada of  our  national  culture,  and  that  attempts  to  include  within  its  pages literary criticism speaking  more passionately and expansively than  the standard academic  fare. This  is why a  reader  of Woodcock in extenso comes to sense the  presence of a spirit behind  the text, and  to note with gratitude the tact and  understanding with  which  it engages  with  personalities as diverse as  those  of George  Orwell and   Thomas   Merton.  Another   way  of  expressing  this  is  to  recall  the  many moments  in  Woodcock's  works when  he  notes his presence  at  some ordinarily off-limits-to-outsiders  experience  to which his subjects  have  welcomed him. The reader  can  easily  pass  this  over, so  common  a  circumstance does  it  become.

159

WOODCOCK

That,   surely,  tells  us something  about  a  linkage  between  text  and  experience, between  book  and  life, arguing  that  an  openness  and  chameleon-like  capacity for  empathy  abides  as the foundation  of intellectual  virtues of free enquiry  and delicacy of comprehension that mark the books.
The  refusal  to  systematize, therefore,  endures  as  Woodcock's  most  engaging system of belief. It  offers to a reader a liberating  sense of a free spirit seeking no more  than  to  understand -and  by  that  very  understanding establish  the  bed­ rock for any meaningful improvement in -the life surrounding it.
Even  to mention  this, however, is to delineate  a strength  of Woodcock's writ­ ing  that  looms as an enemy to its survival.  For  he stands  nakedly, an  historicist and  empiricist,  within  a  culture  whose strongest  analysts  remain  paradoxically mythicists at their utmost core.
A little  explanation  is needed  here. Surely  everyone  would agree  that  among the giants  of our  literary  culture, so far as discursive, non-imaginative literature is  concerned,   stand  such  figures  as  George  Grant,  Marshall   McLuhan  and Northrop  Frye. Others  could be added  to this list  (notably  Donald  Creighton) , but the  trinity  I have selected will serve to make my point as I examine each in turn.
A finer pen than  mine has discussed the mythological  paradigm  of temptation and  fall  that  lies behind  the  best-known  work  of George  Grant.2   To  note  this figure's occurrence  in Grant's  work no more denigrates  his work than  it does that of  the  most  fabular   and  metaphoric  of  philosophers,  Plato.  The  fact  remains that  Lament  For A  Nation acquires its peculiar  resonance  through  its sense of a more  gracious,  continuous  and  integrated  Canada whose  passing is symbolized in the defeat of John  Diefenbaker. This mythic  figure contains  a garden  (British North  America), a tempter  (the  lure of modernity  as embodied  in the fashion­ ably intelligent  of Central  Canada), and  the hero from  Prince  Albert  whose fall involved  a heartbreak  and  repudiation  greater  in extent  than  the tragedy  of one individual.   Frequently in Grant's writing, the  abstraction of "modernity" appears  as a looming Spenserian  monster, a dirigible-sized emblem enfolding within itself a host of philosophic questions and preoccupations.
Let me repeat  that to note such presences is not to downplay  the coherence and sincerity  of  the  philosophic  contexts  in  which  they  appear. For  overriding  the writings  of  Grant   and  of  McLuhan  as  well stands  a  context  including  such literary  titans as Ruskin and T. S. Eliot, with their  vision of a sea-change  having overtaken  ourselves and the universe since that  period  we term  the Renaissance.3
As pervasive  remains  our sense of ourselves and  our  predicament  as unique;  so
widespread our reliance upon the trinitarian division (and  Joachim  of Flora gave us a capital-T version of that  as well)  of the  world into  ancient -medieval - modern, that  we accept as a given the unique nature  of the final phase. When an ultimately  Christian   (in  origin)   pattern  of  progress lands  atop  that  division, a

16o

WOODCOCK

period  of cultural  despair  can  then take that  same process and  reverse its moral import   into  a  sequence  of  decline  rather   than  of  regeneration.  The  habit  of thought  remains  the same, whether  one finds Gutenberg  or Milton  as the princi­ pal  representative   of  the  split.  Grant   and  McLuhan  therefore  offer  to  their readers  not  only a  theory,  a system granting  some sort  of patterning and expla­ nation  to the  experience  of a cruel century,  but one resting  ultimately  upon  the familiar  mythic  pattern  of  the  fall. To  the  quality  of  their  rational  analysis is added  the compelling satisfactions of sensuous, mythical discourse.
That Northrop Frye offers his readers a system proclaims but a commonplace,
though  even the  many  critics lambasting  that  system have  not always noted  its affinities with  the  tetragrammatic system of William  Blake. Perhaps  they  have neglected to do so because the statement  appears so obvious  (my own readers will agree  that  here stands  a  barrier  I  have never balked at), but surely any reader can  note  a  certain  affinity  between  the  powers assigned Blake's Four  Zoas and the  fourfold  literary  divisions thronging  the  pages of the  Anatomy  of Criticism. Detailed  explication  ought  to be avoided here; suffice it to note that  even readers failing  to share  what  would  appear  to be Frye's profound  satisfaction  with  con­ soling, fourfold  symmetry  can  acknowledge  the  hold  that  successful  displays of numerology have on most of us.
These are deeply Romantic intellectual leaders. They depict not a world bathed in the gentle glow of eighteenth-century Hellenism, but a dark forest illuminated by  blinding  shafts  of  interpretive   insight,  a  wood  rocking  perpetually   to  the thunderous denunciations of criticism and controversy. Like Shakesperean  wizards, clutching their staves of power-Grant's talismanic usage of "modernity," McLuhan's gaily oracular  phrases, Frye's anatomy of literature  with scriptures  as backbone,  Milton  as head  and  Blake as guts -they offer to their  readers a key to experience,  a specific way of seeing as well as a progress of picturesque  sights. They are not, any of them, ill-at-ease with the parabolic and the epigrammatic.
Placed against these roaring Wagnerian tempests, Woodcock's gentle, Mozartean strains  fail  to  batter   the  reader's  sensibility into  perpetual   remembrance. Yet, while I esteem highly the three thinkers I have mentioned,  and grant  them their niche in any  Canadian pantheon, the fact remains that  Woodcock-less memo­ rable stylistically, without  a single work of dazzling brilliance, often foregoing the devastating  comment  that  would  earn  him the  ringside audience -adds to our literary and  cultural life a dimension we would sorely miss, however little we may acknowledge  it. Yes, in  reading  Woodcock's sweet  reasonableness  about  George Orwell  I  find  myself  longing  for  the  sheer,  engrossing  bloody-mindedness  its subject  was able  to bring  to bear on nearly  any subject  he chose, yet where can be found  a better  book on Orwell as both  writer and  man? If Mordecai  Richler gives the name of Woodcock to a gentle, reasonable idiot in one of his novels, the reader  might  rather  more en joy a smashing riposte than  the humble  admission of


161

WOODCOCK

human  frailty Woodcock makes to the insult, yet hasn't  our little, bristly republic of letters a sufficiency of street-brawlers?'
One  of Woodcock's signal contributions  to our literature, his widely-reprinted
essay on MacLennan's novels,5  locates in them the pattern  of the Odyssean adven­ ture.  Perhaps  the  piece is as autobiographical as critical,  in that  the figure of the home-seeking hero  seems not  all that  remote  from  Woodcock's lifelong concern with the values of community and with the attempts of men and women over the ages to build a nobler and more decent world. The  parallel need not be pushed to the point of absurdity  for us to recognize the many strange  and  wondrous  places that  get touched  upon  in  Woodcock's writings, from  Evangelical  hymns  to the clipped  elegance  of  the  Hong   Kong  racecourse.6    For  the  reader  taking  that voyage, the ports of call never cease to intrigue, and the captain  remains ever free.

NOTES

1 See especially his Incas and Other  Men:  Travels  in the  Andes  (London: Faber &
Faber, 1959) and Faces of India  (London: Faber & Faber, 1964).
2    R. D. MacDonald, "The  Persuasiveness of Grant's Lament for a Nation," Studies in Canadian Literature, 2 (Summer  1972),  245-46.
8  See my Marshall  McLuhan (Toronto: McClelland  &  Stewart,   rg6g),  20-21, 27.
4   "[A] nd  if our  name  happens  to be shared  by one of  those  [monstrous,  satiric] figures  (as  mine  is)  we ask ourselves whether  there  is more  in common  than  a name."  "Richler's Wheel of Exile," in Woodcock's The  Rejection of Politics and Other  Essays (Toronto: New Press, 1972), p. 144·
5  See  "A  Nation's   Odyssey:  the  Novels  of  Hugh   MacLennan"  (1961),   rpt.  in
Odysseus Ever Returning  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1970), pp. 12-23.
6   The   British  in  the  Far  East  (London:  Weidenfeld  &  Nicholson,  1969); "The English  Hymn,"  in  Woodcock's  The   Writer   and  Politics  (London:  Porcupine Press, 1948), pp. 207-26.




THE BRONZE DOORS JIT PISJI

Ralph Gustafson

Taller  than two monks, the bronze doors at Pisa,
In one oblong the angel of the Lord on Jesus' sepulchre
Swinging his feet. Harnmerwork
Sophisticate  with innocence
More in love with heaven than chapels of rococo
Florid with space. Lord, deliver us!
Anonymity, simpleness and faith.


GEORGE GRANT

Language, Nation, The Silence of God



M





v MOST VIVID  RECOLLECTION OF  FIRST  HEARJNG about George  Grant's political  philosophy  and  his views of modernism  is a lecture  by Dennis  Lee.  Like  most  of my colleagues, I had  some sense in  the  early  197o's that   Grant   was,  if  not  a  deeply  admired,  a  much  respected  philosopher,  an intellectual  of considerable  force, the author  of at least two books that  went some way toward  redefining the terms by which Canada  was to be understood  and the conditions  of contemporary life that  called for  a re-definition.  But  at  the same time, like most of my colleagues, I was aware too of what seemed to me a certain crankiness  in  Grant's style  and  thought  that  made  his best  work  painful  and uneasy reading. A recent tribute to Grant  "as Canada's foremost political philoso­ pher''  qualifies its position  oddly  by remarking  that  "one  cannot  but  think  that George  Grant   has  become  important  without  becoming  influential" and  that "Instead of reading  his own works and participating in his relentless ethical quest, men  of Grant's own generation  have been content  to make him a fellow of the Royal Society."1 Some such qualification  or unease may have been in my mind as Lee began to lecture to a large freshman  class in a Humanities course on "Cana dian  Culture" about  Grant's Lament   for a Nation and  Technology and Empire. Two strong, conflicting emotions possessed me during the lecture : one, embarrass ment  at  Lee's obviously painful  struggle to articulate  a deeply-felt  but somehow complicated  series of arguments; another,  something akin to awe at the degree of conviction  in  his view that  Grant's moral  position was somehow  absolutely and fundamentally right. The  effect of the lecture was quite  extraordinary in its odd mixing of obscure and  hidden  emotions with feelings as immediately  authentic as testimony or religious witness. It was only later, when in fact I read Lee's brilliant "Cadence, Country,  Silence,"2  that  I understood  what it was I was hearing  that day or why it should  have had the effect on me-and I dare say on the class­ that  it did. Later  too I began to understand  the reason for the class's fascination with  a writer  who by all usual standards should  have proved  repellent to them.
Writing  of Grant's political  and  social thought  in  his essay "Loyalism,  Tech
nology, and  Canada's Fate,"3 Ramsay Cook begins by pointing to two unresolved

GEORGE GRANT

paradoxes  which underly Grant's  work:  one is the combining of political polemic and  political  philosophy in  Lament  for a Nation/   perhaps  a  confusion  rather than  a  paradox; the other  is the  development  in  Grant's thought  of two ideas, both  part  of "an  extremely important Canadian tradition," one "the  moral unity of  the  English-speaking  world,"  the  other  "a  desire for  full  Canadian status." 5
The  paradox, at least in its second and more fully formed  version, develops out of both Grant's special view of the philosopher's role and his account or, rather  more accurately,  his interpretation of Canadian history;  but given the history of his intellectual   development,  it  has  its  meaning  as  well in  his sense  of  how  it  is possible at  all to speak of God in history, when it is necessary, and  what sorts of reticence  are  called for. His work, in  other  words, calls at  the  very least for  a theory of language,  a political theory, and religious witness.
Those  philosophers  and  theologians who attempt to write  of his "thought in
process," the  development  of  his ideas and  argument, begin with some apology about  the difficulty, if not the impossibility, of finding points of view from which to  approach  Grant's   work:   "Because  all  Grant's ideas  are  inter-related, it  is almost impossible to divide his thought  into four  categories, and  the very nature of conversation  precludes such simple categorization."6  Having said so much, the writers  proceed to  present Grant  from four  points of view, "Canadian  Politics," "Intellectual Background,"  "Theology  and  History,"  and  "Philosophy." There  is a  certain  symmetry  and  even inevitability  in  the  pattern, as suggested  by  the roughly  similar  divisions indicated  in the  poet  Dennis  Lee's account,  "Cadence, Country,  Silence,"  and  the  historian  Ramsay  Cook's  version, "Loyalism, Tech­ nology, and  Canada's Fate."  Grant's major  argument, changing  as it  develops, revolves  about   the  same  polarities  throughout: history  and  eternity;  time  and revelation;   progress  and  transcendence;  mastery  and   excellence;  ancient   and modern.  Part  of his complexity and even cranky obscurity stems from his willing­ ness to shift the level of the argument  without  necessarily altering  his vocabulary to adapt to the  apparent demands  of, say, polemics as opposed  to theory;  part from  his unexamined  assumption that  vocabularies  hold  at  all levels. The  extent that  it is not possible to speak of "Christ" and  "the second person of the trinity"  interchangeably does not seem to have concerned  Grant. The  point of beginning therefore  seems appropriately the  question  of  language,  if not  indeed  theory  of language.




GRANT "DOES NOT  ENGAGE in merely intellectual  exercises," observes Barry  Cooper  (citing  Lawrence  Lampert's "The Uses of Philosophy  in George  Grant," Queen's Quarterly, 8r   [1974], 495), and  consequently  his "is philosophy in a sense that  would exclude it from most philosophy journals." 7  On

GEORGE GRANT

the one hand,  as Cooper  observes, Grant  goes out of his way to avoid identifying his work as philosophy, saying Lament   for a Nation is "not  based on philosophy but on tradition" while Technology and Empire does "not  presume to be philoso­ phy"  but  is "written out of the study of history of political  philosophy." 8  That is to say, it is not philosophy as we now think of that study, nor as we once thought of it, though  it would aspire to the latter not the former. If it concerns itself with thought  and  reason, it  has to do with the question of the good, with  the idea of nobility,  excellence,  with   truth,   not  linguistic  philosophy  or  logical  analysis. Equally,   then,   Grant   would  say  "his  work  is  essentially  a  practical   affair,"  "addressed   to  specific  questions  of  policy,"  though  it  hopes to  transcend  "the  occasions that  inspired  [it] ."9  Not abstruse, but about  "practical, common, lived experience"  and  therefore  the  real concern of real men,  not the cynical interests of the learned  and  esoteric. It  is with intent  that  Grant  distinguishes "the  condi­ tion common  to the majority  of men" and the concerns of "the  clever" in Lament for a Nation. Philosophy, in its outcome, is addressed to the one;  mere journalism to the other.
But  though  the  noblest ideals of thought  and  imagination are  thus addressed and  genuine illumination may be sought, a question arises, a disturbing  prospect presents itself. It  is one thing  to dismiss as beyond the concern  of the majority of men  the  interests  of  the  linguistic  philosophers, say  Moore  or  Russell and  the whole of the gigantic  enterprise  which is Principia M athematica  and  post-idealist thought.   It  is  quite  another   not  to  address  oneself at  all  to  the  questions  of Wittgenstein  or to find mere cynicism and cleverness in Russell. The  closing pas­ sages of the Tractatus, George Steiner  reminds us in  Language  and  Silence, are among  the  most  austere,  the  noblest, the  most courageous  in  the  language  of philosophy. To  put  them  aside is to open a way not to the best utterance,  or that  worthy  of all men, but mere  confusion. The  questions raised  by Grant's political theory may very well prove to be questions of language, terminology, not attitude. What,   for  example,  is  the  meaning  of  "universal"  in  "universal   homogenous state"?  What  is the  significance  of speaking  of  "Christian man" as "the  finest flower of all western  civilization  has produced"? To  what  sorts of irony are  we invited  to address  ourselves in rhetoric of this sort? "The vast majority  of Cana­ dians are  a product  of western civilization and live entirely within the forms and
assumptions  of  that  enterprise."1° Consider  the  intent  and  the  possibilities one
might  attend  to in the  use of a word like "entirely" in a sentence of such heavy import.  Or  in  this version of contemporary  art, what sort  of critical  precision is being given to the  adjectives:  "Even  the surest accounts of our  technomania­ the  sperm-filled visions of Burroughs-are themselves spoken from  the shallow­ ness they would describe."11
There  are  two large  issues in  Grant's  argument  here,  not small weaknesses of diction or flavour in style. One  has to do with the political subject  Ramsay Cook

GEORGE GRANT

raises when he speaks of one of the two main ideas in the development of Grant's thought,  "the  moral  unity of the English-speaking  world."  The  other  has to do with Grant's view of what has been called post-modern  art, a view related to his argument  about   the  nature   and  significance  of  technology  in  contemporary society and  hence his view of the nationalist state, the Canada of his imagination. Both have to do with linguistic as well as ethical concerns.
As a moral  philosopher, Grant  naturally  assumes the position that  the English­ speaking  British  world of the nineteenth  century  offers a  point  of  departure for his account  of the  nature  of Canadian  society, its history and  development,  and its  present  character as a defeated  country.  I say "naturally" since, as Ramsay Cook  reminds  us, there are  historical and  family  reasons to account  for Grant's position, though  the historical justification offered  by Cook, I think, should  have been open to rather  more rigorous criticism than Cook offers.
The  tradition from  which Grant  derives his argument of the morality  of the
English-speaking  world is, of course, the loyalist  tradition  in Canada. Its family roots lie in the work and thought of both his grandfathers, Principal  G. M. Grant and  Sir  George  Parkin,  both  as  Ramsay  Cook  indicates  "prominent  British­ Canadian intellectuals  in the late  nineteenth  century ... moral  philosophers and theologians ... leading  imperial  federationists"  and  both  as well  are  particularly  "liberal  Christians  who identified the progress of mankind  with  the preservation and spread  of Anglo-Saxon civilization.m2   Grant's identification  with the imperi­ alist, loyalist tradition  is established early in his writing, and  while because of his family background  and history, it comes as no surprise, it early commits him to a series of difficult contradictions  and tensions. The  moral  bias of his thought  is to be  expected  and   remains  a  constant,  but  the  question  of  mankind's progress becomes  a  vexed  one  as  he  increasingly  sees  it  identified  with  technological advance,  a problem  that occupies him more and  more as he turns to the question of the  nature  of technological society. The British character of Canadian society derives,  Grant  argues,  from  its rejection  of  the  American  revolution,  its conse­ quent   conservatism  and  "emphasis  on  social  order  in  contrast  to  the  extreme individualism  of the United States" and its Commonwealth connection.13  Yet the American  roots of Canadianism  remain potent and  indeed irritating to the Cana­  dian  loyalist  in  particular.  A  puzzling  tension  in  Grant's thought   makes itself apparent here. Home itself, a key word in Lee's account  of Grant's influence on poetic possibilities, is an ambiguous place and  therefore in the end indefinable for Canadians: it is at once America  (lost place), Britain  (twice lost),  and  Canada  (undefined) . The paradoxes here we will explore later.
The  moral  defence of the imperial connection  is, in Grant,  the usual, that is to say the traditional and  historical defence, but  that  is not without  its vexations. In
1945  in  a  pamphlet   entitled  Canada Must  Choose: The  Empire Yes  or No?
Grant  wrote,

166

GEORGE GRANT

We cannot  judge the British Commonwealth from our petty interests alone  (how­ ever well these are satisfied) but on the highest criteria of political morality. For today in the modern world, with it more than with any other political institution, lies the hope of Christian man, of ethical man, of man the reasonable moral being who stands before God and history. One can indeed say that ethical man, reason­ able man, is a last remaining fragment of the dark ages, and that the new man is one  ruled  by Marxian  economics or  Freudian  sex -mankind,  in  fact, who is brutal and  unreasonable, unethical and  material, who is ruthlessly dominated  by his appetites. Then  we can disavow the British Commonwealth. But if we believe in Christian  man,  the finest flower of  all western civilization has produced, then there can  be no doubt  that  our chief  hope in the survival of such values is the survival of the British Commonwealth. Canada has a vital responsibility. Canada must choose.14

It is difficult to believe the writer of those lines could have read Conrad's Heart of Darkness  or  that  the  word  "colonial"  could  have had  any  meaning  to him, other than  the institutional context that enables him to speak of political morality in the tenus  he does. In the context of Canadian history, of course, some sense can be made  of this argument, as Cook tries to do. But when  the writer  extends the argument  to  include   the  history  of  the  middle  ages  and  the  development  of modernism in the work of Marx  and Freud, it becomes difficult, if not impossible, to understand the kind of "morality" involved. It is perhaps  no accident that  the only means open to Grant  in his discussion of political philosophy is, finally, then, an  attack  on  the  institution  of "empire," and  that  if the  British could  be sub­ sumed  to a nostalgic  past, the American  empire could become the focal point of contemporary evil. "A  central  aspect of the fate  of being a  Canadian," he  has said, "is that  our  very existing has at all times been bound  up with the interplay  of various world empires."15
To  turn  from the  political and moral questions in Grant's thought  to aesthetic ones may  seem  an  evasive and  peripheral  move, but  indeed  the  ways into  his thought   at  times  are  as  apparently   labyrinthine  as  the  arguments   themselves. Grant  is not an aesthetic  philosopher, any more than  a linguistic one. His position is everywhere moral  and  ethical. But in part, as Dennis Lee's "Cadence, Country, Silence"  makes  clear  and  the  later  Savage  Fields even  more  evident,  Grant's account of modernism  not only says a good deal about his view of modern culture, it suggests key links between  technology, society, and  culture,  and  because these in his argument are linked equally with both language and politics, the topic turns out  after  all to  bear  heavily on some of his major concerns. To  a certain  degree, some of his angularity of argument and style has to do with the oblique  way he chooses to find  his way into  his most passionately held convictions. So it is that Dennis  Lee finds his way  to an account  of his own  poetics by means  of Grant's politics, and  then  from  that  to an odd and deeply moving world-view that  opens out to the  perspective  from  which to offer a critique  of contemporary barbarism

GEORGE GRANT

under  the guise of defending its brilliance  and  courage. Lee is of course profoundly sympathetic to  what  can  be called  Grant's  eschatological methodism, though he would  never  call  it  that  and  something in the  one  character echoes in the  other. Civil  Elegies is the  poetics of Grant's political  lament; Savage  Fields the  critical ground of Technology  and  Empire.  We shall  have  reason to develop  this  point later.
Interestingly, it is in the midst of a discussion of the so-called  fact-value distinc­
tion,  the  closest Grant comes to an analysis  of contemporary language and  its implications, that  he allows  himself  his most  revealing critique of  modernism in art.  There is, as always  in  Grant, a  kind  of sombre grandeur in  his attack, but that  should  not conceal  the real nature of his argument.

The  languages of historicism and  values which were brought  to North  America to be servants  of the  most advanced  liberalism and  pluralism,  now turn  their corro­ sive power on our  only indigenous  roots-the substance  of that  practical  liberal­ ism itself. The  corrosions of nihilism occur  in all  parts  of the community. More­ over,  because  our  roots  have  been  solely practical,   this  nihilism  shares  in  that  shallowness. The  old individualism  of capitalism,  the  frontier  and  Protestantism, becomes  the  demanded   right  to  one's  idiosyncratic  wants  taken  as  outside  any obligation  to the community  which provides them. Buoyed by the restless needs of aflluence, our  art  becomes hectic in its experiments with  style and  violence. Even the surest accounts  of our  technomania-the  sperm-filled  visions of Buroughs­ are  themselves spoken  from  the  shallowness  they  would  describe.  Madness  itself can  only  be  deep  when  it comes forth  from  a  society which  holds  its opposite. Nihilism which  has  no  tradition  of  contemplation to  beat  against  cannot  be the occasion  for  the  amazed  reappearance of  the  "What for?  Whither? and  What then?"  The  tragedy  for  the  young is that  when  they are  forced  by its excesses to leave  the  practical  tradition,  what  other  depth  is present  to  them  in which  they can  find  substance?  The  enormous  reliance  on  and  expectation   from  indigenous music is a sign of  craving  for substance, and  of how  thin  is the earth  where  we would find it. When the cthonic  has been driven  back into  itself by the conquests of our environment, it can only manifest itself beautifully  in sexuality, although  at the same time casting too great a weight upon  that  isolated sexuality.16

There is nothing new here, unless it is the tone. The same  apocalyptic rumblings had   been  heard, in  a  variety  of  ways, from  1945  on.  Mailer's "White Negro," Levin's  "What Was  Modern," Barth's "The Language of Exhaustion," Sontag's "The Aesthetic   of  Silence," Steiner's  Language  and  Silence  all  develop   from different perspectives  accounts of modernism as the  extremity of an  aesthetic and cultural  dilemma intensified   by  a  virtually   psychotic  social  condition. All,  it  is worth  noting,  go far  beyond the crudely worked-out limitations of Grant's account of  the  problem   in  "the languages of  historicism   and   values" and  several  even suggest  there  develops in the direction and  character of contemporary modernism, quite  unlike  anything implied  in Grant's account, a paradoxical resolution to the very barbarism it entails in its "nihilism."

168

GEORGE GRANT

"What is the  nature  of an  experimental action?  It is simply an  action  the  out­ come of which  is not  foreseen. It is therefore  very useful if one has decided  that sounds are  to come  into  their  own, rather  than  being exploited  to express senti­ ments  or ideas of order." "Sound  comes into its own. What  does  that  mean?  For one thing  it means  that  noises are  useful to new music as so-called  musical tones, for   the  simple  reason   that   they  are  sounds.  This  decision  alters   the  view  of history.... "17

John Cage's bold  re-thinking of sound  as musical  value  is not  unlike  Sontag's re-thinking of silence  as poetic  value.  Both offer possibilities closed off by Grant's ethical stance   about sentiment and  ideas  of order.  No  depth  from  shallowness. No substance from  thinness. But yet the  world  does not end.  Nor  does it dose off precisely  where   Grant  would  have  it  closed.  Perhaps the  analysis  of  language could  have  been  carried further than  it seemed  necessary to him. And  indeed  the same  reservation might  be  offered  to  Grant's account of  nationalism and  tech­ nology, the  political  analysis  to which  he resorts when  the cultural after  all proves inadequate.




T.CHNOLOGY, IN   FACT, RECEIVES a far  more  careful  account in  Grant  than  does  language. He   has  read   with  extreme care   those  modern thinkers who  have  given  thought to the  subject, Ellul  and  Strauss in  particular. Ellul's  definition of  technology or  technique is the  one  adopted by Grant,  prob­ ably  because  of  its  comprehensiveness and  its  clear  implication:  "Technique is ourselves."
"By  technology I mean," Grant writes citing  Ellul's  definition from  The Tech­
nological Society  (London,I g65,  p. xxxiii), "the totality of  methods rationally arrived at  and   having  absolute  efficiency  (for  a given  stage  of development) in every  field of human activity."18  The  definition, as Grant indicates in his preface, is "implied throughout 'In  defense  of  North  America'" and  elsewhere,  notably in  "The  University Curriculum" where  it  is given  and  in  "Tyranny and  Wis­ dom," all important essays in Technology and Empire. A curious  addition to the initial defining sentence is  given  in "The University  Curriculum" where  to  the  question of  rationally arrived at  methodology two  other  motives,  and  very  odd ones  indeed, are  added: one  is belief and  the  other  purpose: "the  improvement of  the  race.m:9    "The  dynamism of  technology," Grant  tells  us,  "has  gradually become  the  dominant purpose in western  civilization  because ·the most influential men  in that  civilization have  believed  for  the  last  centuries that  the  mastery  of chance was the chief means of improving the race."20
The kinds  of  question one  might  be tempted to raise in talking about  Grant's account of  an  apparently  inevitable process  moving  to  a given  kind  of  society

169

GEORGE GRANT

differ strikingly if one looks only at an account  of "methods rationally arrived  at and  having absolute efficiency" rather  than if one considers "what the most influ­ ential  men have believed" especially to the end of "the  chief means of  improving  the race." About that last subject men have believed very odd things indeed, some of which appear in Grant's own argument.
In  "Tyranny and  Wisdom" Grant  "attempts to introduce what  is for me the most  important controversy  in  contemporary   political  philosophy,"  presumably what  Strauss  and  Kojive have written about,  "whether the  universal ·and  homo­ genous state  is the  best social order"21 -in  other  words, about  the  controversy between the  ancient  and  the moderns  on the  "battle of books." Much  of Tech­ nology and Empire is an account  of the inevitability  of the "universal  and  homo­ genous state,"  an aspect of that  controversy, and  Grant's own account  of Lament  for a Nation summarized  in "Canadian Fate and Imperialism" tells us the degree to which the earlier book addressed itself to the same questions:

A couple of years ago I  wrote a  book about  the dissolution of Canadian  sover­ eignty. These days when psychologizing is the chief method for  neutralizing dis­ agreeable opinions, my psyche was interpreted  as a harking  back in nostalgia to the British Empire and old fashioned Canada. This was the explanation of why I did not think that the general tendencies of modern society were liable to produce human  excellence. In  this era  when- the  homogenizing  power of technology is almost unlimited, I do regret the disappearance of  indigenous traditions, including my own. It is true that no particularism can adequately incarnate  the good. But is it not also true  that only through some  particular  roots, however partial, can human  beings first grasp What is good ... ? What  I said in that  book was that the  belief that  human excellence is  promoted  by the homogenizing and  univer­ salizing power of technology is the  dominant  doctrine of modern liberalism, and that  the  doctrine  must  undermine  all  particularisms and  that  English-speaking Canada as a particular is wide open to that doctrine.22

The  subtlety  and  power of Grant's argument has  been  fully  evident  in  the degree  to  which  it spoke to Canadian nationalists  and  through  the sixties gave vivid force to their  views. Lee's defence of an  ironic  Canadian poetic voice may be only the best example, particularly  in his expression of the means by which the Canadian writer must learn to speak of our loss and  deprivation. Yet at the same time the  vivid and  curiously ironic defence of particularities is shot through  with a  thoroughly   unpleasant  distrust  of  the  very  rootedness  that   Grant   ostensibly defends, "the  juice of [those]  roots which for most men sustain  their partaking in a more  universal good," while contemporary history itself renders his account  of a raceless and classless society, the universal and homogenous state, as meaningless as the history of the empires whose potency he "defends."
At  the  heart  of Grant's  argument is his assumption  of "universality" in  tech­
nology and  "contemporary" civilization:  "Like  all civilizations the West is based on a great  religion -the religion of progress. This is the belief that  the conquest

GEORGE GRANT


of human  and  non-human nature  will give existence meaning.  Western civiliza­
tion  is  now  universal  so  that   this  religion  is nearly  everywhere  dominant."23
Aside from the curious qualification  in "nearly  everywhere," one notes the confi­ dent language  of Western  dominance  is now qualified (in technological as well as other  terms)   by such  matters as the  so-called energy  crisis and  new  ecological assumptions  about  the  paradoxical  effects of technological  development. It is no longer as easy as it was in theI g6o's to believe, with  respect to Africa and  Asia and  South  America,  that   "non-western   nations  have  taken  on  western means, both technological  and ideological, as the only way to preserve themselves against the West."
Curiously, at the very moment  Grant  speaks of a "raceless and classless" state, nationalist  and  regional particularities manifest themselves in ways presumably rendered  ineffective  by the  barren  positivist cultures he writes of. The  definition of Canada, in its historical  roots, appears  now, for example,  less a matter  of the tension  between   English-Canadian  nationalism  and   American   continentalism than  of the federal-provincial or centralist-regionalist polarities. In fact, the terms in  which  it  is  possible to  speak  of  cultural  identity  and  political  structure  in Canada have  been significantly  altered  from those which Grant  would apply  to the  ones  Professor  Frye  offered  at  about  the  same  time  that  Technology  and Empire  appeared. In  1971, in the  preface to The  Bush Garden,  Frye developed an argument very like Ramsay  Cook's in The  Maple Leaf Forever. Cook depends on a distinction between nation-state and nationalist state, Frye on a distinction between  "the   political  sense of unity  and  the  imaginative  sense of locality,"  a tension  which,   Frye  says,  "is  the  essence of  whatever   the  word  'Canadian' means." Historically, at least, the regional-national  tension makes more sense now than  the loyalism of Grant.
In  the final analysis, Grant's account of nationalism and imperialism is vitiated
by an  odd  kind  of inflexibility  in  thought  which makes  for  intense  drama  but less possibility than  one might  have hoped for from so profound  a thinker. There are harsh judgments of men in this work, unyielding and uncharitable. Consider Grant's  comment  on the question of whether "later  arrivals from Europe have so placed  their stamp  on  North  America as to have changed  in essence what could come  from  that   primal." What  "later" means  soon  becomes  clear:    " ... the obvious facts about  the  power of Catholicism in our politics, or the influence of Jews in  communications and  intellectual  life, or the  unexpected  power for  con­ tinuance  shown  by  ethnic  communities,  mean  only that  recent  traditions  have coloured  the central  current  of the American  dream."25  Whatever  this means, it is clear "North America" means the United  States, not Canada, for  "Catholics" does not  include  the  kind  of French-Canadian politician  of whom  Hugh  Mac­ Lennan  has  written  at  length,  nor  does "Jews"  in "communications and  intel­ lectual  life"  allude  to  Innis,  McLuhan, and  Frye. The  remark,  in short,  is not

GEORGE GRANT

worthy   of  serious  intellectual   discourse.  Elsewhere,   too,  Grant   remarks   that comedy  is an  art  he has  not  mastered,  evident  surely  from  the  bad  joke that follows:  "As for pluralism, differences in the technological  state are able to exist only in  private  activities:  how  we eat;  how  we  mate;   how  we  practise  cere­ monies. Some like pizza; some like steaks; some like girls; some like boys; some like synagogue;  some like the mass. But we all do it in churches,  motels, restau­ rants indistinguishable from the Atlantic to the Pacific."26
And in the end, too, one becomes aware of other kinds of inflexibility in Grant. For all his talk of particularities,  he does not accept  the possibility of rootedness, not in  North  America, for he says we are not "autocthonous," of the earth.  Yet if a man  is not of the earth,  where is he from?  What  is his place? At the  other extreme,  there  is what  Grant  speaks of as "our  only indigenous  roots-the sub­ stance of ... practical  liberalism itself." The difficulty becomes apparent: thought  is rooted,  imperial; feeling is not. And  out  of that  paradox  of rootless emotion and  indigenous  thought  grows the whole web of ideas in which, as Grant would have  it,  modern  man  is entrapped. "The pure  will to technology ... gives sole content to [the]  creating [of the world] ."27




No VERSION OF  GRANT's THOUGHT, of course, is complete if it does not  take into  account  not only that  which is said in his major  works but equally  that  which  is not said.  He is one of those  rare  writers, indeed  "spirits" may  be the best word, whose work finally presents itself through  a series of  reti­ cences and  silences. That  which  is not said  because  it  proves to  be that  which cannot  be said. It is this irony, if that  is the right  word, which adds resonance to his work  and  which  gives it its peculiar  modernity. For  the most  part,  but  not solely, the  silence  has  to  do  with  God.  In  George  Grant  in  Process there  is a "conversation" during  which he addresses himself to some of  the  questions  that can  be raised. He does give an account  of his conversion, his acceptance  of God, during  World  War  II and he puts the point in these terms, describing the experi­ ence of conversion:

Obviously, there is much to think about in such experiences. All the Freudian and Marxian  questions (indeed, most:  the Nietzschian questions) can be asked. But I have never finally doubted the truth of that experience since that moment thirty­ six years ago. If I try to put it into words, I would say it was the recognition that I am not my own. In more academic terms, if modern liberalism is the affirmation that  our  essence is our  freedom,  then  this  experience  was  the  denial  of  that definition, before the fact that we are not our own.28

This,  one recognizes, is the essential George  Grant: his hatred  of modernism and its liberal definition of the self as its own freedom; the powerful resistance to

GEORGE GRANT

technology and its attempt t}o  rationalize the means of mastery of both the external world  and  the  human   being,  man  himself;  the  extension  of  his loyalist  ambi­ valence  about  America  and  its dream  of the self as free and  self-assertive; the American  Empire  as the  embodiment  of modern  liberalism and  technology, and the Canadian surrender to that  self-indulgent southern dominance.  "We  are not our  own."  One  recognizes, in that, the definition not only of "conservatism" but also of the lost Canada he laments.  Its definition is  deprivation  and  the dignity by which one learns to live with that loss.
It  is in  the  same  "conversation" that  Grant's  revealing  words about  Simone
Weil appear. He  responds to the comment  that  "she's a mystic," said with some implication  of lack of academic  respectability.
That  was much later, after her early life in the proletarian movement in France and in the Spanish war. She was taught by a very able Kantian, and then at the end of her short life understood Plato. She had an immediate and direct encounter with the second person of the Trinity. I take her writings as combining the stag­ gering clarity  of  her  French  education  with divine inspiration. I  take  them  as perhaps occasionally mistaken in detail, and as sometimes beyond me, but as the great teaching concerning the eternal in this era.29

5
In  part,  because  of the  great  distance  he feels between  himself and  "the  great thinkers  and  saints"; in  part,  because even to write  as he does of his task as a philosopher is not necessarily to have thought  the good and  certainly  not to have loved the  good. Once,  as David  and  Edwin  Heaven  remind  us, he summarized his position on  this question,  and  in doing so raised with  the kind of rigour  one has come to expect of him, the intolerable question he must live with, the intoler­ able answer he must sustain, and the wisdom with which he is a:ble to do so:
Nevertheless, those who  cannot  live as if time were history are  called, beyond remembering, to desiring and thinking. But this is to say very little. For myself, as probably for most others, remembering only occasionally can pass over into think­ ing and loving what is good. It is for the great thinkers and the saints to do more.32

Even  to  have  said  this  much  is to  have  gained  a  difficult way.  Beyond  that, George Grant  does not propose to go.

173

GEORGE  GRANT


NOTES

1 Larry  Schmidt,  "Introduction" to George Grant  in Process: Essays and Conversa­
tions  (Toronto: Anansi, I978),  p. ix.
2  Dennis Lee, "Cadence,  Country, Silence:  Writing  in Colonial Space," Boundary 2,
3, no. I  (Fall  I974), I5I-68.
3  Ramsay  Cook,  "Loyalism,  Technology,  and  Canada's  Fate,"   The   Maple   Leaf
Forever (Toronto: Macmillan, 1977), 45-67.
4    Ibid., p. 48.
5  Ibid., p. 49·
6   Larry Schmidt  ( ed.), George Grant in Process. See esp. "Part V. A Grant Bibliog­ raphy"   by  Frank  K.  Flinn.  The  bibliography  lists some  50  items  which  Flinn divides  into  three  groups  concerned  with  major  phases  of Grant's  thought:  I) "The Time  of Chastened  Hope"; 2) "An  Era of Retractions"; and 3)  "The Fa{;e of  Moloch"; that  is, an  early  period  of  liberalism;  a  second  phase  of  changes developed  in  Grant's   account  of  modernity; and  a  third  which  with  Time as History examines the dynamic willing of modernism.
1 Barry  Cooper, "A imperio  vsgus ad imperium: The  Political  Thought of George Grant," George Grant in Process, p. 22. "In  a rather  similar way, the study which still uses the  name  of 'philosophy',  has made  itself into a particular science, with its own  particular rigors, concerned  with  the  analysis of language,  methods,  and thought." George Grant,  Technology  and Empire  (Toronto: Anansi,  I969),  I25·
8  Ibid.
9  Ibid., p. 23.
10    Technology and Empire, p. 64.
11  Ibid., p. 39· My italics.
12  "Loyalism, Technology and Canada's Fate,"  p. 49·
13  Ibid., p. 5 r.
14  Cited  in Cook, p. 52. See also Carl  Berger, "The True  North  Strong  and  Free,"
Nationalism  in  Canada, ed. Peter  Russell  (Toronto: McGraw-Hill, I966), 3-25.
15   Technology and Empire, "Canadian Fate and Imperialism," p. 63.
16  George Grant,  "In  Defense of North America," Technology and Empire, pp. 39-40.
It is worth  comparing  here Grant's  remarks on the "present" state of the humani­
ties  in  the  university  in  "The   University  Curriculum," pp.  126-27, an  equally controversial  passage because of its narrowly conceived  version of science and  the
language  of objectivity.
17  John  Cage, "History  of Experimental Music in the United  States," Silence  (Lon- don:  Calder and Boyers, I 968) , pp. 68-69.
18  "The University Curriculum," Technology  and Empire, p.  r 13.
19 Ibid.
20    Ibid.
21   "Tyranny and  Wisdom," Technology and Empire, p. 8r.
22    "Canadian Fate  and  Imperialism," Technology and Empire, pp. 68-69.
23  Ibid.,  p. 77·

•74

GEORGE GRANT

24    Northrop Frye,  "Preface," The Bush  Garden  (Toronto: Anansi,  1971),  p. iii.
25   "In Defense  of North America," p. 26.
26    Ibid.
27    Ibid.,  pp.  39-40.
28  George  Grant, "Conversation:  Intellectual Background," George  Grant  in Process,
P· 6s.
29  Ibid.,  PP· 65-66.
30   Edwin   B. Heaven and   David   R.  Heaven, "Some  Influences of Simone Wei]  on
George  Grant's Silence," George Grant  in Process, p. 68.
31   Ibid.
32    Ibid., p. 6g. On  the question of the "homelessness" of modern man,  it is instructive to  compare the  views  of  particularity, rootedness,  and  "ancestors" in, say, Grant and   Margaret  Atwood. If there  are  no  North   American gods  in  Grant's  world, they do appear in the shamanistic wilderness of Atwood.










TWO SERMONS
 


Ralph Gustafson


2.


SERMON ON  ACCUMULATION, A BRIEF ONE

Growth, not accretion. Quantity Is the fever  of the times, the gross Product, accumulations swamp
The mind,  God and  Gallup, Pericles And  Marx, may the noisy podium Find distinction. Number nothing Except by the heart. Who falls in love
With  people? The earthworm for his antics, Dolphins for their song, each
For love, ears stopped to the sum The mythy  sirens prove,  Odysseus On  his periplum ten years home To  true  Penelope who spun.
Learned scholars  doubt if Adam  could add.

175


E. K. BROWN  (1905-1951)

The Critic and His Writings



David Staines


A cRITic," E. K. BROWN WROTE,  "is a •ensitivc reader who
can explain  his responses and  evaluations.m In a critical  career that  lasted scarcely
twenty-two years,  he illustrated his own  definition as he studied the  literature of Canada, the   United  States,   and   Europe  with   exemplary discernment and intelligence.
Though Brown  was not a theoretical critic,  he did  pause  to define his method:

The  criticism of poetry as of any art  must first interpret. If in the exercise of his interpretative function  a critic  writes chiefly of what  is genuine  in a poem, what is notable,  what  is there, rather  than  of what  is spurious,  what  is negligible, what is  not  there,  his doing  so need  not  mean  that  he  is abandoning another  of  his functions,  the making of judgments. Careful  interpretation, conducted  with insight and a measure of sympathy, must precede judgment, and in writing of recent or contemporary  poets  it  is  much  wiser  to  make  sure  that  one's  interpretation is adequate than  to  press on  to  judgment.  The  history  of criticism  is strewn  with examples of how the slighting of the critic's interpretative function  has led to false and  absurd  judgments.2

Later he elaborated his own practice:

There is a third  kind of study, to which I hope  these lectures  may belong. Isolat­ ing a single element or group of elements in the novel, and considering it in unreal separation from  all  the  other  elements  with  which  it  actually  fuses, is  artificial, but so is all criticism. The  artificiality is justified if when one turns  back from the criticism  to the  novels these appear  more intelligible  and  more delightful. That is the  test. You need a great many lamps, some of them  very powerful,  to find your way through  the labyrinth  of a great  novel. I offer what  is perhaps  only a candle, and I hope it may not go out.8

For  Brown  literary criticism  is interpretation and  judgment, response  and evalua­
tion; criticism   makes  art  "more intelligible and  more  delightful" to  the  reader.
Though I have  outlined elsewhere  Brown's life and  education, it seems desir­ able   to  offer   a  brief  account here."  Edward  Killoran Brown  graduated  from University College in the University of Toronto in 1926  with  his bachelor's degree and  the  Governor-General's Medal in Modern Languages. On  a  Massey  Fellow-

E. K. BROWN

ship he travelled to the University of Paris where he received his Dip!Ome d'etudes superieures in 1927, the Eleve titulaire de !'Ecole de Hautes Etudes in 1928, and the  Docteur-es-Lettres   in  1935;   he  wrote  his  major  thesis in  French,  "Edith Wharton, etude  critique," and  his minor thesis in English, "Studies  in the Text of Matthew  Arnold's  Prose." He  returned  to University College in 1929 to become an  Instructor in  the  Department of  English;  in  1931  he  became  an  Assistant Professor. With  the exception  of two years, 1935-1937, which he spent at the University of Manitoba as the youngest chairman of an English department in Canada, he taught  at University College until  I9.p, when he assumed the chair­ manship  of the  English  department at Cornell  University. In  the following year he  took  a  six-months'  leave  of absence  to serve on the  wartime  staff of Prime Minister  Mackenzie  King.  In  1944 he left Cornell to become Professor of English at  the  University  of Chicago,  a position  he held until  his  untimely  death  from cancer in 195 1.
The  thesis on  Edith   Wharton   illustrates Brown's  primary  field of study,  the
novel, as well as his interest in American Literature.  During  his years on the staff of University  College he  was advocating  the  teaching  of American  literature  in Canadian  universities,  and  his article,  "The   Neglect  of American   Literature," chided  his  countrymen   for  their  ignorance  of  the  literature of  their  southern neighbour. The   minor  thesis  on  Arnold  reflects Brown's  interest  in  Victorian literature. He  published  two critical  volumes on Arnold and  wrote introductions for two volumes of his essays; he also edited a major anthology of Victorian  verse.
Relinquishing  none of his interest in his chosen fields of the novel and Victorian
literature, Brown devoted  much  of his critical attention  to the developing world of Canadian literature and  the  relatively unpopulated  world  of Canadian  criti­ cism.  The  year  after  he  returned   from  Paris  he  accepted   an  appointment as Associate Editor  of the Canadian  Forum, a position he held for three years. His first  published  article  appeared   there,  and  in  the  thirties  alone  he  contributed  more than  fifty articles and  reviews to the Canadian Forum. At the same time he worked on  behalf  of the  University  of Toronto  Quarterly, which  first appeared  in 193 1. He served as its Associate Editor  for a decade, from  1932 to 1941, and he  was  largely  responsible  for  the  creation  of  an  annual   survey  of  Canadian Letters which began  there  in 1936. For Brown, who wrote the first fifteen yearly assessments of Canadian poetry, the survey had a singular importance:

A recognition that  in Canada  we stand in need of a more effective criticism has led the editors of the University  of Toronto  Quarterly  to publish an annual survey of Canadian  literature.  For  three years now in  Letters  in  Canada,  to which we devote the greater  part  of our April issue, we have sought to supply a  compre­ hensive survey of what  is written in this country: in the course of time we hope that  this  undertaking  may  have a modest share in  the  diffusion of  interest in Canadian  literature,  in the raising of aesthetic and intellectual standards in Can-

177

E.  K.BROWN

ada,  and  in the discovery of writers who might  otherwise  pass, for a time at least, neglected  or misunderstood.6

To  his study  of Canadian literature Brown  brought his knowledge of English, French, and  American literatures. In  one  of his earliest  essays, he accounted for the  virtue  of  Arnold's Essays in  Criticism:   "Aside from  their  charming formal qualities, their  urbanity, their lucidity,  their sure  but  graceful structure, the collec­ tion  is  significant  as  a  bridge   thrown   across  the  Channel. With   it,  Matthew Arnold   opened   to  the  island  philistines  new  vistas  of  continental literature and culture."6   Like  Arnold, Brown  refused  to  isolate  his  country's literature. In  his Canadian criticism  he  applied  the  same  standards he  used  in  his study  of other literatures, and   he  placed   Canadian literature in  an  international  context. As Northrop Frye  has commented,

E.  K.  Brown  was  the  first  critic  to  bring  Canadian  literature into  its  proper context. Before him, the main question asked was "Is  there a Canadian literature?" After him, the question was rather  "What is Canadian literature like?'' He started out  with  an  interest  in contemporary  literature which in his generation  marked  a quite  unusual  originality,  and  he  worked  at  first  mainly  on  American  authors, including  Edith   Wharton  and  Willa  Cather. Thus,  when  he came  to  Canadian literature, he  was able  to  see it,  not  simply  as  a  local  product   growing  in  the surrounding woods like a hepatica,  but as a literary  development within,  first, its North  American  context, and, secondly, in its international context.  He was aware of the British and colonial affinities of earlier  Canadian literature, but did not exaggerate  their importance as earlier critics had tended to do.7

In  1950  Brown  delivered  the  Alexander Lectures at the  University of Toronto. Called  upon  to thank  the speaker  for the series, E. J. Pratt paid  tribute to a man
he had  known  and  respected  for nearly thirty  years:

He  has  shown  a  double  capacity-of  probing  into  the  recesses of literary  cup­ boards  and  of following current  affairs. I know  that  he has visited  museums  but mainly  to make sure that  the mummies had left in life something worthy of record for the future.  I know, too, that  he has visited press galleries, but to make certain that  what  was said or written  had, or should  have  had,  a  basis of growth  in  the past. The  former  type of interest and  capacity  brilliantly preserved  his scholarship and his sanity;  the latter saved him from dilettantism.
And as a concluding  remark  I should like to say that  there was a perfect accord between  his own taste and  the selection of his subjects  for this series ["Rhythm in the Novel"]. He  has changed  his postal address  many  times in his career.  Here is the  division  of the last 27 years-4 years as a student  in this university, 3 years in Paris, back  to the University of Toronto as a teacher  for 6 years, 2  years in the University  of Manitoba, 4 years again in Toronto, 3 in Cornell,  then 6 in Chicago, and  in-between-whiles  he had  the habit  of interweaving, through  those itineraries, summer  visits at wayside inns such as Columbia,  and  the Universities of New York and  Minnesota. Now he is back this week in Toronto. That diversity of place and interest,  that  progression,  (shall we say in  the  flesh?)  accompanied by an  intel-

E. K.BROWN

lectual  pilgrimage  which  brought  him  as far  as India,  proceeded  with  a rhythm of repetition  and  variation, seen less in life than  in fiction. And  perhaps  the  best way I can express this appreciation of his lectures is to say that  amongst all of his concrete  and  picturesque  examples  with  which  he has  reinforced  his theme,  the finest illustration  of the expanding symbol is himself.8

In  June 1951,  the  Royal  Society of Canada presented posthumously the Lome Pierce   Medal in  Canadian Letters  to  Edward  Killoran Brown.  In  his  citation A. S. P. Woodhouse spoke  with  sympathetic objectivity of his friend  and  former colleague  at University College:

Such,  in brief, was the career  of a Canadian who won for himself a secure place in the international world of literary scholarship, with his books on Edith Wharton and   Matthew  Arnold,   his  admirable   introductions  to  Arnold's   prose  and   to Victorian  verse, and  his various  articles and  reviews:  to which  we must  add  his most mature critical  work, Rhythm in the  Novel, published  just before his death, and  the almost  completed  official life of Willa Cather,  shortly to be published  by Knopf.  It  is proper  that  these works should  take precedence  in setting  forth  his claim  to  the  Lome   Pierce  medal:   first,  because it  was  his own  principle  that Canadian  writing  must  submit  to  an  international, and  not  to  a  merely  local, judgment,  and  that  it  must  rise to an  international standard of interest  and  of excellence;  and,  secondly,  because  it  was  in  these wider  fields of  study  that  he secured  the  training, the  insight  and  the  perspective  which  gave  his writing  on Canadian literature its peculiar  value and  authority.  That writing  is perhaps  the most  impressive  achievement  of  its  kind  yet  to  appear. Besides his  edition  of Lampman, it  includes  his memoir  (now in  the press)  of Duncan  Campbell  Scott (whom  he knew and  admired,  and  who may perhaps  be reckoned  the last of the moulding   influences  upon  his  mind), secondly,  his  book  On  Canadian  Poetry, with  its definitive  chapter  on the conditions of authorship in Canada, its account of the  development of Canadian poetry  (the  most illuminating  yet written), and its critical  estimate  of three  major  figures; and,  finally, the fifteen annual  surveys which  furnish  by far  the  best account  available  of  poetry in Canada during  the past  decade  and  a  half.  Such  scholarship  and  criticism are  of incalculable  value to Canadian letters. in themselves, and as an example.
Mr.  President,  this is the achievement  of but half a life-time. But it is enough. 9

The bibliography of E. K. Brown's  critical  writings  attests  to the  breadth of his knowledge, the  rigour  of his critical  standards, and  the sensitivity  of his responses and  evaluations. In  compiling the  bibliography, I have  not included second  edi­ tions,  revisions,  or  reprints unless they  have  substantial changes. For  each  "Cau­ serie,"  a  short, informal piece  of  criticism  Brown  contributed to  the  Winnipeg Free Press on an  irregular basis for nearly four years, I have appended in brackets
a brief  description of  its  content; an  asterisk  after  the  description []* indicates
that  the causerie was  printed in the collection,  Causeries, published by the Winni­
peg Free Press.10   The following  abbreviations are  used:   AL:   American  Litera­ ture;  CanB:   Canadian Bookman;  CanF:  Canadian  Forum;  CE:  College Eng­ lish; DalR:   Dalhousie  Review; MLN:  Modern Language  Notes; MP: Modern

179

E. K.BROWN

Philology;  QQ:   Queen's  Quarterly;  SatN:   Saturday Night; SatRL:  Saturday Review   of  Literature;   SR:    Sewanee  Review; UTQ:  University   of Toronto Quarterly;   VaQR: Virginia   Quarterly  Review; WFP:  Winnipeg Free  Press; Y aleR:  Yale Review.

NOTES

1 "Causerie,"  WFP   (Jan.  I g,  I 95 I),  I 7· Rpt. in   E.  K.  Brown,   Responses  and Evaluations:  Essays on Canada, ed.  and  with  an  intra. by David  Staines  (Toron­ to: McClelland & Stewart, I 977), 3I 3·
2    "Letters in Canada: Poetry," UTQ, I8  (April   I949), 255· Rpt. in  Responses and
Evaluations,  274·
8   Rhythm in the Novel  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I 950), 7·
4   Responses and Evaluations, vii-xvi. See also Leon  Edel's Foreword to E. K. Brown,
Willa  Cather:  A Critical Biography  (New  York: Knopf, I953), xvii-xxiv.
5    "The  Contemporary Situation  in  Canadian  Literature,"  Canadian   Literature
Today  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press, I938), 16.
6    "The Critic as Xenophobe," SR, 38 (July-September I 930), go 1.
T   Responses and Evaluations, xiii-xiv.
8   Pratt Manuscripts, Box 9, number 7I,  Victoria College  Library, Univ.  of Toronto.
9  From  the estate  of Mrs. E. K. Brown.
1° Causeries, Winnipeg Free  Press Pamphlet No. 35  (June I95I), consists of twenty causeries  out  of a  total  of, according to  the  Introduction, thirty-eight that  Brown wrote.  My  research,  however,  reveals  that  Brown  wrote  forty-eight causeries.  He once  remarked to a friend  that,  had  he not  been so completely educated, he would have  been strongly  attracted to journalism.





I929
 BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Shall We Adopt the French Doctorate?"

"The Abbe Groulx:  Particularist." CanF,
IO (Oct. I929), Ig-20.
"The Goncourt Award." Rev. of A Man
Scans   His   Past   by   M.   Constantin­
Weyer.  CanF,  IO  (Nov.  I929)' 58·59·

I930
"The Fifteenth Century." Rev. of Science and Thought in the Fifteenth  Century by Lynn  Thorndike. CanF,  IO (Feb. Iggo),  I8o.
"Canon Chartier, Patriot." SatN, 45 (March I5,  I93o), 29.
"Wise  Music." Rev.  of  Collected  Poems
by  Edwin   Arlington  Robinson. CanF,
IO (May  Iggo), 296-g7.
Rev. of Orphan  of Eternity by Carl Hein­
rich.  CanF,  IO (June I930), 341.

ISO
 CanF,  IO (July  1930), 363-64.
"The Critic of Xenophobe." SR, 38 (July­
Sept. 1930), goi-og.
"A  Frenchman on  Humanism." Rev.  of
Le  Mouvement  humaniste  aux  Etats­ Unis  by  Louis  J.-A. Mercier.  SR,  g8
(July-Sept. I 930), 376-77·
"T. S. Eliot: Poet  and  Critic." CanF,  IO
(Sept. 1930) , 448.
"American Expatriates." Rev.  of Portrait
of the  Artist  as American  by Matthew
Josephson. CanF,  IO (Sept.  I930), 449· "The  Claims of  French-Canadian  Poet­ ry."  QQ, 37  (Autumn Iggo),  724-31. Rev.   of   Unpublished   Letters   from  the Collection   of  John   Wild, ed.  R.  N.
Carew Hunt. CanF,  11   (Dec.   I930)
115.

E. K.BROWN


I93I
"Novels and Novelists." Rev. of Five Masters by Joseph Wood Krutch  and Four Contemporary Novelists  by  Wil­ bur  L. Cross.  CanF,  II    (Jan.  I93I),
I 50.
Rev. of Old  Pastures by Padraic  Colum.
CanF, II  (Jan.  I93I), I55·
Rev.  of  The   Art  of Dying,  ed.  Francis
Birrell  and   F.  L.   Lucas.   CanF,   II
(Jan. I93I), I56.
"Fine  Asperity."  Rev. of Certain  People
by  Edith   Wharton.  CanF,   I I   (Feb.
I93I),  I84-85·
Rev. of A Martyr's  Folly by M. Constan­
tin-Weyer. CanF,  I I (Feb.  I93I),  I92· "Hawthorne,   Melville  and    'Ethan
Brand'." AL,  3  (March I93I), 72-74. "Essays   in   Literature."   Rev.   of   The Eighteen-Eighties, ed.  Walter  De  La Mare.  CanF,  I I   (April  I93I), 266-67. Rev.  of  Pages  of  English  Prose,   1390-
1930, sel. by Sir Arthur  Quiller-Couch.
CanF,  II  (April  I93I), 274.
"A   French   Critic   on   Keats."   SR,   39
(April-June I93 I), 240-48.
"The  Taylorian  Lectures." Rev.   of
Studies  in  European   Literature:   The
Taylorian   Lectures.  CanF,   I I  (May
I93 I), 306-07.
Rev.  of  Grand   Hotel   by  Vicki  Baum.
CanF,  II  (May  I93I), 3I6.
Rev. of I Americans  by Salvador  de Ma­
dariaga.  CanF,  I I  (May   I93I), 3I6.
"The Question  of Romantic Egoism: Blake." Transactions of the  Royal  So­ ciety   of   Canada,   Series  3,  vol.   25, (May  I93I), Section  2, 99-I07.
"Hearn:  A  New  Life."   Rev.  of  Blue Ghost:  A Study  of Lafcadio  Hearn  by Jean  Temple.  CanF,  I I   (June   I93I),
345·46.
Rev. of Chaucer  by John  Masefield and
The  Creation  of Character  in  Litera­
ture  by  John   Galsworthy.   CanF,   II
(Aug.  I93 I), 434·
"The  Whiteoaks  Saga."  CanF,  I2  (Oct.
I93 I), 23.
Rev.  of The   Letters  of John  Keats,  ed.
Maurice  Buxton  Forman, and  Studies
in Keats by J. Middleton  Murry. CanF,
I2 (Nov. I93I), 72.
 "The   Neglect  of  American  Literature."
SatN, 47 (Nov. 2I,  I93I), 2-3.
"Three Literary Studies." Rev. of Charles
Reade   by  Malcolm   Edwin,   A   Con­
sideration   of    Thackeray  by  George
Saintsbury,  and  J.  Fenimore  Cooper,
Critic  of  His  Times   by R.  E. Spiller.
CanF,  I2  (Dec. I93I), I09·IO.
Rev. of  Poets and  Playwrights  by E. E.
Stoll. CanF,  I2  (Dec.  I93I),  II4-I5· "The   French   Reputation  of  Matthew Arnold."  Studies  in  English  by Mem­ bers  of  University   College,  Toronto. Toronto: Univ.ofTorontoPress, I93I,
224-54·

I932
"The   Dostoevsky  Myth."  Rev.  of   Dos­ toevsky by E. H. Carr.  CanF,  I2  (Jan. I932)' I45·46.
Rev. of Philosophies of Beauty,  sel. and
ed.  by E.  F. Carritt. CanF,  I2  (Jan.
I932)' I 55·
"An Opinionated Logician."  Rev. of The
Human   Parrot  and  Other   Essays by
Montgomery  Belgian.  SatN, 47  (Feb.
I3, I932),  8-9·
"Cabell  on Cabell."  Rev. of Three  Rest­
less  Heads  by  Branch   Cabell.  SatN,
47 (March  26, I932),  8.
"A  Sexless Literature." Rev.  of   Expres­
sion in America  by Ludwig  Lewisohn.
SatN,  47  (April  9,  I932), Spring  Lit.
Supp., 3, I4.
Rev. of  A  Letter  to  Madam   Blanchard
by E. M. Forster,  A Letter  to A Sister
by Rosamond  Lehmann, and  A Letter
to  W. B. Yeats  by  L.  A. G.  Strong.
CanF,  I2  (April  I932), 274· "Matthew Arnold and  the Elizabethans."
UTQ, 1  (April  I932), 333-51.
"The  Undramatic Genius   of   James."
Rev. of Henry James: Les Annees Dra­
matiques  and  The   Prefaces of Henry
James by Leon  Edel.  CanF,  I2  (May
I 932)'  304-05.
Rev. of Wanderings  by Arthur  Symons.
CanF, I2  (June  I932), 352. "Forgotten,  Far-Off   Things."  Rev.   of
On  Being Creative  and  Other  Essays
by   Irving   Babbitt.   CanF,   12   (July
1932)'  390.

E. K. BROWN


Rev. of Limits and Renewals by Rudyard
Kipling. CanF, 12 (July  I932), 394· "A  Decorous  Rebel."  Rev. of The   Life
of   Emerson   by  Van   Wyck  Brooks.
SatN, 47  (Aug. 20, I932),  6.
"Henri Bourassa." CanF, 12 (Aug. I932),
423-24.
"Headlong Intuition." Rev. of Carlyle by
Emery  Neff. CanF,  I2  (Sept.  I932),
466-67.
"The Man from Missouri." Rev. of Mark
Twain's America by Bernard  DeVoto.
SatN, 47  (Oct. 8, I932),  Autumn  Lit. Supp.,  2, 8.
"The   Mid-Victorians." Rev.   of   The
Eighteen-Sixties, ed.  by  John  Drink­
water. CanF,  I 3 (Oct.  I 932),  27-28. "Heretic and  Prophet." Rev. of Samuel
Butler:  A  Mid-Victorian  Modern   by
Clara   Groening  Stillman.   SatN,  48
(Nov. I2, I932),8.
"Blood  and  Irony." Rev.  of  The  Shel­
tered  Life  by Ellen Glasgow. CanF,  I3
(Nov.  I932),  64-65.
"A  Frenchified   George  Eliot."  Rev.  of
The  Life of George Eliot by Emilie and
Georges  Romieu.  SatN, 48   (Dec.  3, I 932),  Christmas  Lit. Supp., 8-9.
Cazamian,  Louis. Carlyle. Trans. by E. K.
+
ix 	289 pp.

I933
"Another  Swinburne."  Rev.   of   Swin­ burne:  A   Literary   Biography  by Georges  Lafourcade.  CanF,  I3   (Jan.  I933)' I45·
Review  of The  Soul  of America  by  Ar­
thur   Hobson   Quinn   and   American
Literature   and  Culture   by  Grant   C.
Knight.  CanF,  I3  (Jan.  I933), I 56. "George  Moore:  In  Memoriam." CanF,
I3 (March  I933),  220-21.
"A  Tract for  the  Times."  Rev.  of  Ann
Vickers   by  Sinclair  Lewis. CanF,   I 3
(March  I933), 230.
"Some  Literary  Lives." Rev. of The Me­
moirs of Sir Robert  Sibbald, ed. Paget
Hett,  The  Brontes and Other Essays by
G.  F.  Bradby,  Maria  Jane  ]ewsbury:
Occasional  Papers  with  a  memoir  by
Eric  Gillett,   A.B.  by  Pauline   Smith,
 and  Reminiscences  of D. H. Lawrence by   J.   Middleton    Murry.    SatN,  48 (April  8,  I 933),  Spring  Lit. Supp.,  8.
"Arnold   the  Young  Man." Rev. of  Let­
ters  by  Matthew  Arnold   to   Arthur
Hugh  Clough, ed.  by  Howard   Foster
Lowry. CanF,  I3 (April  I933),  270-7I. Review   of   Frank   Norris   by   Franklin
Walker. CanF, 13  (May  I933),  3I8. "Servants  of  the   Poets."   Rev.  of  The
English   Muse   by  Oliver   Elton   and
Crabbe  and  Rossetti  (Poets  in  Brief),
chosen by F. L. Lucas. CanF,  I3 (June
I933)' 349-50·
"Leader  or  Sheep?"   Rev.  of  The   Lost
Leader:   A  Study   of  Wordsworth   by
Hugh  !'Anson  Fausset. SatN, 48  (July
I5, I933)' 7·
"Victorian Rebels." Rev. of John Ruskin
by R. H.  Wilenski and  Poor Splendid
Wings:  The  Rossettis and Their  Circle
by Frances Winwar. SatN, 48 (Oct. 14, I933), Autumn  Lit. Supp.,  3, I2.
"The Craft  of Fiction."  Rev. of The  Art
of the  Novel  by Pelham  Edgar.  SatN,
49 (Nov. I8, I933),5.
"Chatterbox of Genius."  Rev. of Samuel
Pepys:  The   Man   in  the  Making   by
Arthur    Bryant.   SatN,  49   (Dec.   I6,
I933)' 8.
"The Age of Titian." Rev. of The  Man
of the  Renaissance  by Ralph  Roeder.
SatN, 49  (Dec. 30, I933), 8.
"The  Immediate Present   in  Canadian
Literature." SR, 4I  (Oct.-Dec.  I933),
430-42.
"Edith  Wharton." The  Art  of the  Novel
by Pelham  Edgar.  Toronto:  Macmil­
lan, I 933, pp. I 96-205.
"Another   Johnson."   Rev.   of   Samuel
Johnson   by  Hugh   Kingsmill.   SatN,
49 (March Io, I934), 8.
"The Sister."  Rev.  of  Dorothy  Words­
worth  by  Ernest  de  Selincourt.  SatN,
49 (March  3I,  I934), 8.
"Poetic  Form."  Review  of Keats' Crafts­
manship  by  M.  R.  Ridley.  CanF,  I4
(March I 934),  230-3I.
Rev.  of  A  Bibliography  of the  Writings
of Edith  Wharton  by  Lavinia  Davis.
AL,  5  (March   I934), 288-90.
"E.   M.  Forster  and   the  Contemplative
Novel." UTQ, 3 (April  I934), 349-6I.

E. K.BROWN


"The National   Idea  in  American  Criti­ cism."  DalH,  I4  (July  I934),  I33·47· "Magazines  and  Public."  Rev. of  Victo­  rian  Wall flowers by  Malcolm  Elwin. SatN, 49 (Oct. 20, I934), Autumn Lit.
Supp., I ,I 3·
"In Tragic   Life."  Rev.  of  Edgar  Allan
Poe:  A  Critical  Biography  by  Dame
Una  Pope-Hennessey.  SatN, 50  (Dec.
8,  I934),   Christmas   Lit.  Supp.,  4, g.

I935
Review of William Crary Brownell: An Anthology    of  His   Writings  together with  Biographical  Notes  and   Impres­ sions of the  Later  Years  by  Gertrude Hall Brownell. AL, 6 (Jan. I935), 223-
24.
"The  Scholar Gipsy:  An Interpretation."
Revue  Anglo-americaine,  I2   (Feb.
I935)' 2 I9·25·
"A Ch!"istian Humanist:  Thornton  Wild-
er." UTQ, 4 (Apr.  I935L  356-70. Rev. of  A  Backward   Glance  by  Edith
Wharton. AL,  6  (May  I935), 474·75·
Edith  Wharton, etude  critique. Paris:  E.
Droz, I935· 348 pp.
Studies  in the Text  of Matthew  Arnold's
+
I39 pp.
I936
"Letters  in  Canada:  Poetry."  UTQ, 5
(April  I936), 362-67.
"Willa  Cather   and  the  West."  UTQ, 5
(July  I936), 544-66.
"On  Academic Freedom."  DalH, I6
(July  I936),  216-27.
"Nineteenth-Century Thought:  Two
Views." Rev. of Movements of Thought
in  the  Nineteenth Century   by George
H.  Mead  and  The  Concept  of Nature
in  Nineteenth Century   English  Poetry
by  Joseph   Warren    Beach.   UTQ, 6
(Oct.  I936), I4I·47·
Representative  Essays of Matthew Arnold.
Ed.  with  an  Intro. by  E.  K. Brown. Toronto: Macmillan, I936, xlii + 240
pp.
I937
"Swinburne:   A   Centenary   Estimate."
UTQ, 6 (Jan.  I937), 2I5-35·
 Rev.  of  Le  Roman   social en  Angleterre ( r83o-rBso)  by   Louis    Cazamian. Etudes   Anglaises,   1   (March    I 937),
I53•55·
"Letters   in  Canada:  Poetry."  UTQ, 6
(April  I937), 340·47·
"New  England: The  Recent  Past." Rev.
of The  Flowering  of New  England  by
Van   Wyck  Brooks.   UTQ, 7   (Oct.
I937L  I26·3I.
Rev.  of  Le  Canada:   puissance  interna­
tionale by Andre Siegfried. Etudes Ang­
laises, I  (Nov.  I937), 554-56.
"First  of Canadian Poets."  Rev. of The
Fable  of  the   Goats   by  E.   J. Pratt.
CanF, I7 (Dec.  I937), 32I·22.

I938
"Edith   Wharton."  Etudes   Anglaises,  2
(Jan.-March I938), I6-26.
"Prim  and  Proper."  Rev. of  Ladies and
Gentlemen in Victorian Fiction  by E.
M. Delafield. CanF, I7  (March  I938),
43°·
"Letters   in  Canada:  Poetry."  UTQ, 7
(April  I938), 340-48.
Rev.  of  Edna   St.   Vincent  Millay   and
Her Times  by Elizabeth  Atkins. AL,  g
(May  I938), 484-85.
"A  Woman's  Picture  of Keats."  Rev. of
Adonais:  A  Life  of Keats  by Dorothy
Hewlett.  CanB,  20  (June-July   I938),
30.
Rev. of Towards  the  Twentieth Century
by H. V. Routh. MP, 36  (Aug. I938),
93·95·
"Mr.   Eliot  and  Some  Enemies."  UTQ,
8 (Oct. I 938) , 6g-84.
"Miss  de  la  Roche's   Second   Family."
Rev.  of  Growth   of a  Man  by  Mazo de   la  Roche.   CanB,   20   (Oct.-Nov.
I938)'  40•41.
"Assault  upon  Walt  Whitman." Rev.  of
Walt  Whitman's Pose by Esther Shep­
hard. CanB,  20 (Oct.-Nov. I938),  6s-
66.
"The   Contemporary Situation   in  Cana­ dian  Literature." Canadian  Literature Today  (a series of broadcasts sponsored by the Canadian  Broadcasting  Corpo­ ration).  Toronto:  Univ.  of  Toronto
Press, I938, pp. g-I6.

E. K.BROWN


"Heroic    Painter."   Rev.   of   Benjamin
Franklin  by  Carl  Van  Doren.  CanB,
20 (Dec.-Jan. I938-I939), 31.

I939
"The  Coast  Opposite  Humanity." CanF,
I8 (Jan.  I939), 309-IO.
"Books versus Radio  and  Movies." Rev.
of  In  Defence   of Letters  by Georges
Duhamel.  CanB, 20   (Feb.-March
1939)' 53-54·
"Whitman's  Socialism."  Rev.  of  Whit-
man   by   Newton   Arvin.   CanF,   I9
(April  I939),  26.
"Letters   in  Canada:  Poetry."  UTQ, 8
(April  I939), 293-301.
"Robinson   Jeffers:   The  Tower  Beyond
Tragedy."  Manitoba   Arts  Review,   I
(Spring  I 939),  4-17.
"Portrait  of  a  Sensible  Man."   Rev.  of
Matthew  Arnold   by  Lionel  Trilling.
CanF,  I9  (June  I939),  95·
"Anti-Victorian." Rev. of Old Gods Fall­
ing   by   Malcolm    Elwin.   CanF,   19
(Sept.  I939),  I95-g6.
Rev.  of  Carlyle  et  la  pensee latine  by
Alan  Carey  Taylor.  Romanic  Review,
go (Oct.  I 939) , 308-og.
"New Light  on Lionel Johnson." Rev. of
Lionel  Johnson  (1867-1920)  poete et
critique  by Arthur   W. Patrick.  UTQ,
9 (Oct.  I939), I20-2I.

I940
"Matthew Arnold and the Eighteenth Century." UTQ,  9  (Jan.   I94o),  202- I3.
"An  Unhappy Optimist." Rev.  of  Lord
Macaulay, Victorian Liberal  by  Rich­
mond  Croom  Beatty. CanF,  19  (Feb.
I940), 363-64.
"Mr.   Pound's   Conversations."   Rev.  of
Polite Essays by Ezra Pound. CanF, 20 (April  I940), 24.
"Letters   in  Canada:  Poetry."  UTQ  9
(April  I 940) , 283-89.	' Rev.  of Il  Pensiero Religioso ed Estetico
di Walter  Pater by F. Olivero. MP, 37 (May  I940), 437-38.
"Newest in Novels." Rev. of The Voyage
by  Charles   Morgan.  CanF,  20  (Dec.
I 940) ' 288-89.
 I94I
Review   of  Kulturkritik  und   Literatur­ betrachtung    in   Amerika    by   Viktor Lange   and   Hermann   Boeschenstein. AL,  I 2 (Jan.  I94I), 268.
"Thomas Wolfe:  Realist and Symbolist."
UTQ, IO (Jan.  I94I),  I53-66.
"Letters in  Canada:  Poetry."  UTQ, IO
(April  I94I), 283-92.
"The Development  of Poetry in Canada,
I88o-I94o."  Poetry  (Chicago),  58
(April  I94I), 34-47.
"Duncan Campbell  Scott: An Individual
Poet."  A1anitoba   Arts    Review,  2
(Spring  I94I), 51-54.
Rev.  of  As  For  Me  and  My  House  by
Sinclair  Ross. CanF,  2I   (July   I94I),
I24-25·
"Canadian  Nature    Poetry."    Think,  7
(Sept.  I94I), 54, 93·
"The Method  of Edmund Wilson." UTQ,
I I  (Oct.  I94I), IOS·I I.

I942
"Humane  Scholarship   in  the  Humani­ ties."   Rev.   of   Literary   Scholarship:  Its   Aims   and   Methods   by  Norman Foerster,   John   C.  McGalliard,  Rene Wellek, Austin  Warren  and  Wilbur  L.  Schramm. UTQ, II (Jan. 1942),  217-
25.
Rev. of George Eliot and John Chapman
by  Gordon   S.  Haight. MP,  39  (Feb.
I 942),  330-32·
"Letters in  Canada: Poetry."  UTQ, I I
(April  1942),  288-97.
Victorian Poetry. Ed. with an  Intra. and
Notes.  New  York:   Nelson,  1942. xiv
+ 9I2  pp.

I943
"Mackenzie King  of Canada." Harper's Magazine, I86  (Jan.   I943),   I92-200. "Letters in  Canada: Poetry."  UTQ, I2
(April  I943), 305-I4.
At the Long Sault and Other  New Poems
by  Archibald   Lampman. Intro.  by E.
+
xxix 	45 pp.
On  Canadian  Poetry. Toronto: Ryerson,
I943·viii+ I 57 pp.

E. K.BROWN


1944
"To   the  North: A  Wall  Against  Cana­
dian   Poetry."   SatRL,  27   (April   29,
1944),  9-1I.
"Letters  in  Canada: Poetry."  UTQ, 13
(April 1944),  306-16.
"A.   J.  M.   Smith   and   the   Poetry   of
Pride."  Manitoba  Arts   Review,  3
(Spring  1944),  30-32.
"Recent   Poetry  from  Canada." Rev. of
Still  Life  and  Other   Verse   by  E.  J.
Pratt  and  A Little  Anthology  of Cana­
dian  Poets,  ed.  by  Ralph   Gustafson.
Voices,  117  (Spring  1944),44-46. Rev.  of  The   Book  of Canadian  Poetry,
ed.  by A. J. M. Smith.  AL,  15  (May
1944)' 439·42.
"Two   Canadian  Poets:   A  Lecture   by
Archibald   Lampman   ( ed.  from   ms.
with  preface  and   notes)." UTQ,  13
(July 1944),  406-23.
"The Revival  of E. M. Forster."  YaleR,
33 (Summer  1944),  668-81.
"Our Neglect  of  Our  Literature."  Civil
Service  Review, 17 (Sept. 1944),  306-
09.   Rpt.    as   "The  Neglect   of   Our
Literature" in Canadians All (Autumn
1944),  28, 62, and  as "The Neglect of
Canadian Literature" in  Echoes,  176
(Autumn  1944),  12, 48.
"Satirical  Verse."  Rev. of The  Hitleriad
by A.M. Klein.  Poetry  (Chicago), 65
(Oct.  1944),  54-56.
+
enl. Toronto: Ryerson, 1944. ix 	172
 ed.  Philip  Rahv.  Y aleR,  34   (Spring
I 945)' 536-39.
"James  and Conrad." YaleR, 35 (Winter
1945), 265-85.
1946
"Letters in  Canada:  Poetry."  UTQ,   5 (April 1946),  269-80.
"The  Epilogue to Mr. de la Mare's Poet­
ry." Poetry (Chicago), 68 (May 1946),
90-96.
"L'Age  d'or  de  notre  poesie." Gants  du
Ciel, II (Spring  1946),  7-17.
"The  Character and  Poetry of Keats,  by
Archibald   Lampman,  ed.   from   ms.
with  prefatory  note."  UTQ, 15  (July
1946)'  356-72.
"Kipling  and  the Modern  Reader." Rev.
of Rudyard  Kipling  by Hilton  Brown.
YaleR, 35 (Summer  1946),  740-42. "Two Formulas for Fiction: Henry James
and  H. G. Wells." CE, 8  (Oct.  1946),
7·17.
"Homage   to  Willa  Cather." Y aleR,  36
(Autumn  1946),  77-92.
"Scholarship for Canada." Rev. of Schol­
arship  for Canada:  The   Function  of
Graduate Studies by John Bartlet Breb­ ner.  Canadian   Journal  of  Economics and Political Science, 12  (Nov. 1946),
521•24.
Nre Goriot and  Eugenie Grandet.  (Pere
Goriot trans.  by E. K.  Brown) . Intro.
+
House,I 946. xiii      496 pp.

pp.
 

1945
 1947
"Recent  Poetry in Canada." Rev. of Now is Time  by Earle Birney, The Blossom­

Review  of   The   Humanities  After   the
War, ed. Norman  Foerster. Philosophi­
cal Review, 54  (Jan.  1945),  75-76. "Pratt's Collected   Work."  Rev.  of  Col­
lected  Poems by E. J.  Pratt.  UTQ, 14 (Jan.  1945),  21I-I3.
"English  Studies  in  the  Postwar  World."
CE, 6 (April  1945),  380-91.
"Letters   in  Canada: Poetry."  UTQ, 14
(April  1945),  261-67.
"The Fiction  of  Henry  James." Rev. of
Henry  James:  Stories  of Writers  and
Artists, ed. F. 0. Matthiesen, and The
Great  Short   Novels  of Henry  James,
 ing Time  by John  Coulter,  East of the City  by Louis  Dudek,  and  When We Are Young  by Raymond  Souster. Poet­
ry  (Chicago), 69  (March I 947) , 349-
53·
"Letters  in  Canada: Poetry."  UTQ, r6
(April1947), 246-54.
"Now, Take  Ontario."  Maclean's Maga­
zine  (June  15, 1947),  12, 30-32. "Thackeray and  Trollope." Rev. of The
Showman   of  Vanity  Fair  by  Lionel
Stevenson and  Trollope: A  Commen­
tary  by  Michael   Sadleir.   Y aleR,   36
(Summer  1947),  753-55·

E. K.BROWN


"Causerie." WFP  (Sept. 27, I947),  p. I7, cols.  4,  5,  6.   [A  Fine  Novel  of  the West]*
"Causerie." WFP  (Oct. 25, I947), p. 17,
cols. 6,  7,  8.   [A  Masterpiece  of  Icy
Contempt]*
Rev.   of  Selected   Poems  of  Archibald
Lampman, chosen and ed. with  a me­
moir by Duncan Campbell Scott. CanF,
27 (Oct.  I947), 165.
"Modem Literature: Two Surveys." Rev.
of Forces in Modern  British Literature,
I885-1946 by W. Y. Tindall  and  The Novel  and the World's  Dilemma  by E. B. Burgun. VaQR, 2g (Autumn  I947),
6gi-g6.
"Lubbock   Book  on  Wharton." Rev.  of
Portrait  of  Edith  Wharton  by  Percy
Lubbock.   Chicago  Daily  News  (Dec.
g, I947), P· I4, col. 5·
"Causerie." WFP  (Dec. 20, I947),  p. I7,
cols.  6,   7,  8.   [Literary   Revival   of
George Eliot]*
"In   Memoriam:   Duncan  Campbell
Scott."  WFP   (Dec.  29,  I947), p.  11,
cols. 4, 5, 6.
Four Essays on Life and Letters by Mat­
thew  Arnold.  Ed.  with  an  intro.  and
+
I947· ix       I I8 pp.

I948
"Causerie." WFP   (Feb.  7, I948), p.  I7, cols. 5, 6, 7· [The  Second-Hand  Book Store]*
"Causerie." WFP  (Feb. 28, I948), p. I9, cols.  6,   7,  8.   [Ten   Best  Canadian Books]
"Causerie." WFP  (Aprilg, I948), p. 2I, cols.  6,  7,  8.   [Mazo  de  La  Roche's Jalna]
"Causerie." WFP  (April 24, I948), p. I9, cols.  4,  5,  6.   [Lean   Years  for   the Novel]*
"Letters in  Canada: Poetry."  UTQ, I7
(April  I948),  257-65.
"Henry James."  Rev. of The   Notebooks
of Henry  James, ed. F. 0. Matthiesen
and   Kenneth  B.  Murdock,  and  The
James  Family  by  F.  0. Matthiesen.
Y aleR, g7 (Spring  I948), sgo-gg. "David  Copperfield." YaleR, g7  (Spring
I948), 65I-66.

!86
 "Causerie." WFP  (May  I5, I948), p. I9, col. 8. [The Classic by E. M. Forster]*
"A  New  Canadian  Poet."  Rev.  of  The
Wounded  Prince  by Douglas  Le  Pan.
WFP  (May  22, I948), p. Ig, cols. I, 2.
"Causerie." WFP   (July  g,  I948), p.  I5, cols. 7, 8.  [The Novel  Anyone Could
Write]*
"Lack    of	Interpretive   Power   Harms
Book."   Rev.   of   Leading    Canadian
Poets  by  W.  P.  Percival.  WFP   (July
I7, I948), p. IO, cols. I, 2.
"Causerie." WFP  (July  24, I948), p. I5,
cols. 7, 8. [The Country  of the Pointed
Firs]*
"Causerie." WFP  (Aug.  7, I948),  p.  I5, cols.  7,  8.   [A   Pioneer   Historian   of
Canada]*
"Evelyn  Waugh: The  Supreme  Satirist."
Rev.  of  The   Loved   One   by  Evelyn
Waugh.  WFP   (Aug.  2I,  I948), p. IO,
cols. g, 4, 5, 6.
"Causerie." WFP  (Aug. 2I,  I948), p. IS,
cols. 7, 8.  [The revival  of interest  in
Henry  James]
"A  Novel of  Mediaeval   France  and  the
Crusades." Rev.  of The  World  is Not Enough  by Zoe Oldenbourg. WFP (Aug.  I2, I948), p. I2, cols. I, 2, g.
"Causerie." WFP  (Aug. 28, I948),  p. 2I, cols. 6, 7, 8.  [Frederick  Philip  Grove: In  Memoriam]
"Causerie." WFP  (Sept.  25, I948), p. I9, cols. 6, 7, 8.  [Howard's  End]
"Fact   and  Fiction." Rev.  of One  Clear
Call by Upton  Sinclair.  WFP  (Oct.  9,
I948), p. 9, cols. I, 2.
"Encouraging Advances -And  A  Dan­
gerous  Gap." WFP   (Oct.   go,  I948),
p. I 2, cols. g, 4·
"Causerie." WFP  (Oct.  go, I948), p. I9,
cols. 7, 8. [Naming trains]
"A   Novel  About   Toronto   University."
Rev.  of The   Varsity  Story  by Morley
Callaghan. WFP    (Nov.  6,  I948), p.
IO, cols. g, 4, 5, 6.
"Army   and   Democracy."  Rev.  of  The
Orusaders   by   Stefan    Heym.    WFP
(Nov.  Ig,  I948), p.  10, cols. I, 2.
"Causerie." WFP  (Nov. Ig, I948), p. I9, cols. 6, 7, 8. [Edward Augustus  Free­
man]

E. K.BROWN


"Vivid   Tale   of  Exploration."  Rev.  of The  Shining  Mountains by Dale Van Every.  WFP    (Nov.  20,  I948), p.  9, cols. 3, 4, s, 6.
"Survey and Weapon." Rev. of The  Book of   Canadian   Poetry,   ed.   A.  J. M.
Smith. SatRL, 3I  (Nov. 27, I948), 26. "Causerie." WFP   (Dec. 4,  I948), p. I7, cols. 7, 8. [The "Immortal Memory"]* "A Thomas   Mann  Novel  of  Music and Morals."    Rev.    of   Dr.   Faustus   by Thomas  Mann.  WFP  (Dec.  I8, I948),
p. 8, cols. 3, 4, s, 6.
Matthew Arnold-A  Study  in Conflict.
Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, I948.
xiv + 224 pp.
"Arnold,  Matthew" ( 2:  400-40 I ) . "The
Brontes"    ( 4:    243-24S) ,   "Meredith, George"    ( 13:   45S) . The   Ame rican Peoples Encyclopedia.  Chicago:  Spen­
cer Press, 1948.

I949
"Causerie." WFP   (Jan. I,  I949), p.  IS, cols. 6,  7, 8.  [English  Men-of-Letters series]
"Causerie." WFP  (Jan. 22, I949), p. 17, cols. 7, 8.  [The  Achievement  of  Mor­ ley Callaghan]*
Rev.  of  Portrait  of  Edith   Wharton by
Percy  Lubbock.  AL,  20  (Jan.   I949),
231-32·
"Causerie." WFP   (Feb.  s, I949), p.  I7,
cols.  6,   7,  8.   [Lampman's  Literary
Executor]*
"Archibald Lampman 186I-1899: What
We Lost." SatN, 64 (Feb. 8, I949), IS· "A Novelist Indicts  the New Deal." Rev. of  The   Grand   Design  by  John   Dos
Passos.  WFP   (Feb.   19,  I949), p.  8, cols. 3, 4, S·
"Causerie." WFP   (March  I2,  I949), p.
21, cols. 6, 7, 8. [William  Barnes]
"Causerie." WFP   (March 26,  I949), p.
17, cols. 6, 7, 8.  [Browning's  essay on
Chatterton]
"Causerie." WFP  (April  23, I949), p. I7, cols. 6, 7, 8. [In the Land  of Oz]* "Letters  in  Canada: Poetry."  UTQ,  I8
(April  I949), 2s4-63.
"Causerie." WFP   (May  7, 1949),  p. I9, cols. 7, 8. [The Asides of the Novelist]*
"Causerie." WFP  (May  I4, I949), p. 2I,
 cols. 7, 8. [Julian Bell:  Essays, Poems, Letters]
"Embattled Teachers:  A  Novel of  Pro­
test." Rev. of  Lucifer  with  a Book  by
J. H. Burns. WFP  (May  28, I949),  p.
I 2, cols. 3, 4, s, 6.
"Causerie."  W FP (June II, I 949) , p. I 9,
cols. 7, 8. [On  Poetry and  Death]*
"Causerie."  WFP   (July  2, I949), p. I7,
cols. 7,  8.   [Sherwood   Anderson  and
Stephen Leacock]
"Myth  and Snow." Rev. of The  Track  of the Cat by Walter  VanTilburg Clark.
WFP  (July  I6, I949), p. Io, cols. I, 2. "The Mind and  Art of Virginia  Woolf." Rev. of Virginia  Woolf: A Commen­ tary by Bernard  Blackstone. WFP  (July
23, I 949) , p.  I o, cols. 3, 4, s, 6. "Novel of Wit and  Implication." Rev. of
Two  Worlds  and  Their   Ways  by Ivy
Compton-Burnett.   WFP    (Aug.    I3,
I949),  p. I2, cols. I, 2.
"Causerie." WFP  (Aug. I3, I949), p. I9,
cols. 7, 8.  [R.  W. Chapman on  Jane
Austen]
"Prairie  Poems   by  a  Winnipeg   Poet."
Rev. of Scrub  Oak  by Thomas  Saun­
ders. WFP  (Aug. 27, I949), p. I I, cols.
3. 4. S·
Rev.  of  Matthew  Arnold:   A  Study   by
E. K. Chambers. MP, 47 (Aug. I949),
67-69.
"Causerie."  WFP  (Sept. 3, I949), p. I 7, cols. 6, 7, 8. [Teaching literature]
"Hardy's  Novels." Rev. of Thomas Har­
dy:  The  Novels  and  Stories by Albert
J. Guerard. WFP   (Oct.   I,  I949), p.
12, cols. 5, 6.
"Causerie."  WFP  (Oct.  IS, I949), p. 2I, cols. 7, 8. [An  unpoetic  age]
"Canadian Literature." WFP   (Oct.   29,
I949),  p. I2, cols. 3, 4, s, 6.
"English   Critics  on  English   Novelists." Rev. of Trained  For Genius: The  Life and  Writing  of Ford Madox   Ford  by
Douglas Goldring,  Dickens:  His Char­ acter, Comedy, and Career by Hesketh Pearson, and  Virginia  Woolf: A Com­  mentary   by   Bernard    Blackstone. VaQR, 2S (Autumn  I949), 6II-I4.
"A  Novel of Class and  Sex." Rev. of A
Rage  to  Live  by John  O'Hara. WFP
(Nov. I 9, I 949),  p. I 2, cols. 3, 4, s, 6.

E. K.BROWN


"Causerie." WFP  (Nov. I9, I949),  p. I9, cols. 6, 7, 8. [Publishing  poetry]
"Growing   Poetry  and  Arrested  Verse." Rev.  of  The   Canticle   of  the   Rose:
Selected   Poems   Ig:w-1947   by  Edith
Sitwell  and   Songs  of a  Sunlover   by
Robert  Service. WFP  (Dec. 3,  I949), p. I o, cols. 4, 5, 6.
"Causerie." WFP  (Dec. I7, I949),  p. 2 I,
cols. 7, 8. [Appreciating poetry]

I950
"A  Novel  of  Beauty  and   Suggestion." Rev. of Loving  by Henry Green. WFP (Jan.  7, I95o), p. IO, cols. 4, 5, 6.
"Causerie." WFP  (Jan.  28, I950),  p. I9, cols. 7, 8. [Prose and poetry-the dis­ tinction]
"Causerie." WFP   (Feb.  25,  I950),  cols.
7, 8.  [The diminishing importance of
Byron]
Rev. of Matthew Arnold,  poete by Louis Bonnerot. MP, 47 (Feb. I95o),  2I I·If· "Causerie." WFP   (March   I8,  I950),  p. I9,  cols.  7,  8.   [Ernest   Hemingway's
Across the River]
"Causerie." WFP  (April  I,  I95o),  p. II,
cols. 7, 8. [Byron and marriage]
"Causerie."  WFP   (April  22,  I95o),   p.
2I,  cols.  7,  8.   [The   courts  in  Win­
chester, Virginia]
"Letters in Canada: Poetry." UTQ, I9 (April  I95o), 259-64.
"Pater's Appreciations: A Bibliographical
Note."  MLN, 65   (April  I95o),   247·
49·
"Causerie." WFP  (May 20, I950),  p. I7,
cols. 7, 8. [Sir  Walter Scott]
"Causerie." WFP  (June  24, I950),  p. 2I, cols. 7,  8.   [Duncan Campbell  Scott's Via  Borealis]
"Middle  Way Countries." Rev. of The United States and Scandinavia by Franklin D. Scott.  WFP  (July  29, I95o),p. I2,cols. I,2.
"Causerie." WFP   (Aug. 5,  I95o),  p.  I5, cols. 6, 7, 8.  [Duncan Campbell  Scott on Keats]*
"Causerie." WFP  (Aug. I2, I95o),p. 25, cols. 7, 8.  [The centenary  of Balzac's death]

r88
 "A Novelist's Essays on Life and Letters." Rev. of Collected  Impressions by  Eliz­ abeth  Bowen. WFP   (Aug.  26,  I95o), p. 23, cols. 3, 4, 5, 6.
"Two  Studies  of  Fiction."  Rev. of The
House  of  Fiction  by  Allen  Tate   and
Caroline   Gordon  and  The   World   of
Fiction by Bernard  DeVoto. VaQR, 26
(Summer  I950), 469-72.
"Satirist  of Old  New York."  Rev. of An
Edith   Wharton  Treasury, ed.  Arthur
Hobson  Quinn. WFP  (Sept.  9, I95o),
p. I2, cols. 7, 8.
"Causerie." WFP  (Sept.  I6, I95o), p. 2I,
cols. 6,  7, 8.  [The Blackbird  and  the
Nightingale] *
"Balzac:  The Enlightening Past." SatRL,
33 (Oct.  2I,  I95o), 2I, 45·
"Causerie." WFP  (Oct.  2 I,  I 950) , p. 2 I,
cols. 6, 7, 8.  [Biographia Literaria]
"Causerie." WFP  (Nov. 25, I95o), p. I9, cols. 7, 8. [A reading  by T. S. Eliot]
Rev. of The  Poetical Works  of Matthew
Arnold,  ed.  C.  B. Tinker   and  H. F.
Lowry. MP,  48 (Nov.  I95o), I40.
Rev.  of  Tennyson Sixty  Years  After  by
PaullF.Baum.MLN,65 (Nov. I95o),
500.
"Willa   Cather: The  Benjamin  D.  Ritz
Collection." Newberry Library Bulletin,
+
+
House,  I950. xviii 	923 pp. "Canadian literature in English"  (3:  33-
34) , "Carman, William Bliss" ( 3: I 2 I ) , "Haliburton, Thomas   Chandler"  (6 :
697) ,   "Lampman,   Archibald"   ( 8:
3I6), "Leacock,  Stephen   Butler"   (8:
417),  "Pratt, Edwin  John   (II:  I6I), "Roberts, Sir Charles George Douglas"
( I I : 730-3 I ) , "Scott,  Duncan  Camp­ bell"  (I2: 330-3I). Chambers's  Ency­ clopaedia.  London:   George   Newnes, I950.

I95I
"Causerie." WFP  (Jan.  I3, I95I), p. q, cols. 7, 8.  [Is  A Canadian Critic  Pos­ sible?]*

E. K.BROWN


"Causerie." WFP  (Feb.  10, 1951), p. 17, cols. 7, 8.  [Willa  Cather's Tommy the Unsentimental]
"Causerie." WFP   (March 10, 1951),  p.
2I,  cols. 7, 8.  [The Oxford  Professor­
ship of Poetry]
"Causerie." WFP   (March 24,  I951),  p.
2I, cols. 7, 8. [Aubert de Gaspe]
"A  Poet's  Letters." Rev. of New  Letters of  Robert   Browning,  ed.  W.  C.  De­
Vane and K. L. Knickerbocker. YateR,
40 (Spring  I 95 I), 548-50.
"The First  Person  Singular  in  'Caliban
Upon    Setebos'."    MLN,  66 	(June
1951)' 392-95·
 Causeries. Winnipeg  Free  Press  Pamph­
let No. 35· Winnipeg, June  I95I.
Duncan Campbell  Scott:  Selected Poems.
+
I95I. xlii 	I76 pp.
"Bronte   sisters"   ( 99-1oo),   "Tennyson,
Alfred" (655), "Wordsworth, William"
(726).   Nelson's   Encyclopaedia.   New
York: T. Nelson, 1951.

1953
"Willa   Cather's  Canada."  UTQ,   22 (Jan.  I953), I84-96.
Willa Cather:  A Critical Biography. New
York: Knopf,  1953. xxiv + 351 pp.
















Fiddlehead Poetry Books

(from the current  list)

NOVENA TO  ST. JUDE THADDEUS, by M. Lakshmi Gill, $5.00
MOVING INLAND, by Diana  Hayes, $4.00
A SPLIT IN  THE WATER, by Candice  James, $5.00
ON  THE BROKEN MOUNTAIN, by Norman  Newton, $3.00
SYNTAX OF  FERMENT, by Liliane  Welch, $4.50
COUNTRYSIDE CANADA, by James  Wreford,  $5.00

Order  from FRED  COGSWELL P.O. Box 4400
English Department, University of New Brunswick
Fredericton, N.B. E3B 5A3

(CATALOGUE SUPPLIED  ON   REQUEST)



189






FRYE, FREUD & THEORY

ROBERT D.  DENHAM,  Northrop Frye and  Criti­ cal Method.  Pennsylvania   State  University  Press, $12.75·

WHEN    I   FffiST   SET  OUT  to   read   and review  Robert Denham's book on  North­ rop  Frye,  I thought of  myself  as  an  in­ habitant of an enemy  camp -or at least, as   an   outsider  at   the   feast   of   mode, archetype, myth,  and  study  of  the  Bible as  mythology   in   kindergarten, which   I associated   with   Frye   and   his  disciples. But  I was  brought up  short  by a  return of  the   repressed   memory   that   I myself had actually made use of Frye's  theory  of comedy,  as outlined in the  First  Essay of Anatomy   of  Criticism,  in  an  article   of mine   published  in   1969.  This   fact   has two interesting, and  in a way counter, sig­ nificances:  in  spite   of  my  resistance  to Frye's  approach, I had  been  influenced  by  his  work;  but  on  the  other  hand, in the same  paragraph in which  I had  cited Frye's  work,  I had  also  referred   to Lud­ wigJekels' 1926 psychoanalytic essay, "On the  Psychology  of  Comedy," which  puts forward essentially  the same  argument as Frye's with  different terminology.
Indeed,  one   of   the   most   surprising things  to  emerge   from  Denham's survey of  Frye  is the  extent to  which  it  reveals Frye's  debt  to Freud-surprising, be­ cause  of  the  well  known  essay by  Frede­ rick  C.  Crews,  "Anaesthetic  Criticism," which  attacks Frye  for  avoiding the  im­ mediate experience of  literature in  favor of   a   vaguely   Jungian   myth-criticism. Denham  rightly  questions   the  relevance of   most   of   Crews'  complaints  on   the ground that   Frye   is  simply   looking   at literature   from  a   broader  perspective;

190
 yet   Denham  never   really   answers   the objection  that   Frye   is  too   narrow  and restrictive in  his insistence  that  literature must   always   be  looked   at   in   terms   of other   literature.  And   in  fact   that   rule does  not  accurately describe  Frye's  prac­ tice,   because    as  soon   as  one   looks  at themes   and   structural  patterns  in  terms of  generality and  comparison, one  is im­ plicitly  moving  outside  of  literature into  the  realm   of  human  behaviour, even  if one   refuses   to   call   it   that. And   thus, Frye's   generalizations  about  New  Com­  edy, in which  a younger  group  of charac­ ters   are   "blocked"  by  those   of  earlier generations,   but    ultimately   overcome their  absurd elders,  amount to something very  like  Freud's  theory   of  the  oedipus complex, as applied by Jekels  to comedy. In   the  area   of  applied  criticism, Frye's essay on Dickens  ( 1968), though it seems to  operate within   the  framework of  ab­ stractions about literature, and makes use of Frye's  own  theory  of  comedy, is in fact  replete with insights-scattered through­ out  like  raisins  in  a  good  plum  pudding
-which resemble  those arrived at previ­
ously   or   subsequently (and  at  greater length)  by  critics   whose  basic  assump­ tions are  psychoanalytic. In  this essay and  elsewhere, Frye  assumes  the  existence  of unconscious  and   universal  determinants of   behaviour,  without   ever   stating  the assumption quite  that way.
The  essay   on   Dickens    (which   Den­ ham  does  not  discuss)   also  is  typical  of Frye's  approach, whether he is discussing broad    theoretical  questions   or   limiting himself   to  one  author, in  that its  argu­ ment    is  non-linear,  and   in   containing more  than a  few factual  errors,  probably the  result  of  having been  written from  a memory   rather  than  immediate consul­  tation   of  the   works  discussed.   As  exas­ perating as are  these and  other  habits  of Frye's-such  as  using  familiar words  in totally   unfamiliar   ways   ("tropical"  to mean  "figurative"), and  using  the  same

BOOKS IN REVIEW



word  in  three  or  more  different  ways­ I much   prefer  reading Frye  to  reading Denham, something that  the latter would probably not  take  as an  insult.  Northrop Frye and Critical  Method  is misleadingly titled,  for  it  does  not  place  Frye  clearly within  the   context   of   modern  literary theory  but  rather, except  for  the  seventh and  last  chapter, is largely  an  exposition  and  defense  of Frye's  own  method. Fully half  the  book  is devoted to  Anatomy  of Criticism, one chapter to each of Frye's Essays, and  in part this exposition is car­ ried  out  by the  inclusion  of  twenty-three charts and  diagrams, with  titles  such  as "Fictional  modes," "The  phases  of sym­ bolism,"  "Cyclical and dialectical patterns of  the  four   mythoi,"  and   "The genetic  differentiae." It is  possible  to  get  some sense of what  Frye  is all  about from  this book  alone,  but   I  suspect  that   it  would be  extremely  difficult  reading for  some­ one  unfamiliar  with   the   Anatomy. For those   with   prior    knowledge  of   Frye's work,   the   diagrams  and   discussion   can be  very  useful,   as  they  are  more  syste­ matically presented than  the  arguments in  the  Anatomy  itself. At  the  same  time, this  systematic exposition  makes  it  easy to   spot   the   frequent   arbitrariness  and  willful  symmetry of  Frye's  theories.
The  best case Denham makes  for Frye is  that   his   work   makes   it   possible  for readers  to  see  the  relations among  lite­ rary  works in new ways. Yet he is notably  uncritical and   unanalytical in  regard   to the   problematic  points  in   Frye's   work. On    a   specific   level,   for   example,  he simply  lists Frye's  examples of the  fifteen forms   of   prose   fiction,  including  Littl11
Dorrit along  with  The  Way  of All Flesh and  Jane  Austen's works under  the "Novel,"  which    in   Frye's    terminology refers  to works  in which  realistic charac­ ters  exist in  a "stable society"  (Anatomy of   Criticism,   Fourth    Essay) ;   and   yet Little  Dorrit, on  the  basis of  Frye's  later
 

Callaghan
Symposium





A series of papers and  discussions on

MORLEY CALLAGHAN
April  25-27, 1'980


For further information, please write to: David  Staines, Program Chairman THE CALLAGHAN SYMPOSIUM
DEPARTMENT OF  ENGLISH
UNIVERSITY OF  OTTAWA OTTAWA  KIN 6N5

The subject  of the
1981 Symposium will be
Ethel  Wilson.

essay  on   Dickens,  would  seem   to  have	 	

BOOKS IN REVIEW



strong  characteristics of both  "Romance" and  "Anatomy."
A more  fundamental question is the nature of Frye's  concepts  of archetypal imagery    and    anagogic    symbolism.    In regard  to  the  first,  Denham simply  ac­ cepts   Frye's   disavowal    of   a   belief    in Jung's  Collective Unconscious,  although
-as Crews   has   pointed    out-Frye's
entire system depends upon  some such assumption. And  in regard  to the second, while  Denham admits that  Frye's discus­ sion  of  anagogic  vision  approaches "the  limits   of  intelligibility,"  and   that   Frye, despite   his  rejection of  value-judgments in   criticism,    makes   a   "heavily  value­  laden" statement about  this highest  form of  literary experience, Denham backs off from  any attempt to analyze what  Frye is really  saying.  He  retreats to a defense  of the  "prior  assumption" of the  "existence of a total order  among  all literary works,"  and  skirts around the problems  of ineffa­ bility and  the substitution of literary for religious  experience.
It seems  particularly ironic  that  Den­ ham   defends Frye's  beatific  and  raptur­ ous description of anagogy  on the ground that  "the first and  most obvious  basis for Frye's  position  is his  own  literary experi­  ence,  the  feeling  he  has  of  being  at  the centre of  significance  when  in  the  pres­ ence  of  the  greatest works of literature," given  the emphasis Denham places  else­ where on Frye's insistence on the absolute disjunction between experience and knowl  dge.
Frye's   unwillingness  to  trace   the  nature of  his  literary experience to  his own  life experience; but  ultimately, one  may  feel that  he is having  it both ways, in insisting on  the  "scientific" quality  of his theories, and  at  the same  time  reserving  the actual basis  of  the  most  important  (and   most Blakean)  part   of  his vision  of  literature in   the   realm    of   the   ineffable.  Surely Crews,  despite  his polemical  selectivity,  is correct in seeing a strong  element of eva-
 sion of literary experience in Frye's theo­ retical  work. Denham makes little attempt to  consider  the  political   and  ideological bases  of  Frye's   work,  accepting  instead Frye's   characterization   of  himself   as  a romantic and  a  revolutionary. Most  dis­ turbing of all, the lack of consistency  and  the implications of Frye's  use of the word "myth" to characterize social  attitudes­ as  in  the  "myth of  concern"  and  "myth of freedom" -are simply  not questioned. Although   Frye    believes    myths    to   be "true" in  some  ultimate sense,  the  fact that   "myth" can  also  mean   "an   untrue story"   would  once  again   seem  to  allow him  to have  things  both  ways. (It is this, I think,  that  most  enrages Crews.)
The most  interesting chapter in  Den­
ham's book is the last, in which  he finally tries  to  evaluate, rather than   simply  de­ fend,   Frye's   theoretical  work.  The  first question  taken   up  is  Frye's   claim   to  a "scientific" status   for  criticism.  Making use of Thomas Kuhn's work  on  scientific paradigms and revolutions, Denham shows that  Frye's  concept  of  science  as depend­ ing  upon  an  actual  order  in  nature, ana­ logous  to  the order  he  finds in  literature, is  naive,   and   that   his  theories   are   not, according to Karl Popper's criteria, falsi­ fiable,  and  thus  are  neither provable nor disprovable.  But  Denham then  proceeds to   outline  a   criterion  of   falsifiability, based on R.  S. Crane's notion  of the intention  of  a  poem:  one  reasons   back from  the  effect  "demanded" by a  poem, to  its  status   within Frye's  system.  Given the  recent  work  of Iser,  Bleich,  and  Hol­ land   on   the   variability  of   literary   re­ sponse,  this  proposal  seems  naive  in  the extreme. But  evidently  Denham does  not intend it seriously, since he quickly  moves to  the  conclusion that  it  would  be more "fruitful" to  abandon  "all   talk  of  scien­ tific and  empirical  confirmation," and  to recognize  that  Frye's theory  is ultimately a  "metaphysical" one.
After   some   pages  on  Frye's   termino-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


logical   inconsistency  (or   richness -de­ pending on  how  you  look  at  it)  and  his methods   of   argument   (via   "arbitrary assertion" and  linked  series of  analogies), Denham  concludes that   the  real   values of  Frye's   work  lie  in  its  aesthetic excel­ lence,  and  its vision of  art as standing at the  centre of man's  universe. Although I find  the  complex  structures of  the  Ana­ tomy  less  fascinating  than   do   Denham and  others,  I have  to  acknowledge that Frye's speculations have  helped  us to see the   broader patterns  of  literature   more clearly,   and   have   provided  many   new starting points  for  literary interpretation. But  there  is a host of important questions upon  which  Denham does not even touch. What, for  example, are  the  implications of Frye's  vision  of a "complete, classless" society,  and   of  his  proposal  that   a  uni­ form   body  of  literature,  beginning  with biblical  and classical mythology, be taught in the  schools?  Although his vision of the possibilities   of  art   is  a   noble  one,  the
 utopia   he  envisions   (insofar   as  it  is  dis­ cernible)   is  strangely  arid   and   mono­ lithic, even authoritarian. And  this brings us to a  central  fact  about  Frye,  his rela­ tion  to  Blake.  It is  one  of  the  greatest  deficiencies   of   Denham's   book   that    it does  not deal  at  length  with  Frye's  work on   Blake.   To   come   to  some   concrete understanding of  Frye's   utopian  vision, one  would  have   to  look  closely  at  how Frye reads Blake, and how his vision converges  with  his understanding (which is not the only one possible)  of Blake's apocalyptic  vision.
Unfortunately, Denham seems to be unaware of  the  critical implications of treating all  of  Blake's  work  as  one  work (which   is, as  Denham does  see,  related
to Frye's  tendency to see all  of literature as  one) , and   he  does  not  even  mention an  important attack on  Frye's  approach to Blake,  E. D.  Hirsch,  Jr.'s  book,  Inno­ cence  and  Experience. Whether  Hirsch's particular  readings of  Blake  are  correct






The 	Antigonish	Review

A  quarterly


Publishes  stories,  poems,  articles   and   rev1ews of  a  literary and  cultural  nature.

$5.00 per  year


St.  Francis  Xavier   University

Antigonish,  Nova   Scotia




193

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



I  cannot say,  but   the  issue  he  raises  is crucial to an evaluation of Frye:  Hirsch argues  that  Frye's approach is radically unhistorical   and    distorting,  for   Blake lived and wrote in historical time, and changed his attitudes and  poetic methods partly  under the  pressure  of external events,   such   as  the   French   Revolution and   his  own  arrest   for  sedition. Hirsch also,  in  a  footnote to Validity  in  Inter­ pretation,  questions Frye's  system  of  lit­ erary  classification, saying  that  "the pat­  terns   abstracted  from  interpreted  texts cannot  legitimately  be   reimposed   upon the texts as a deeper  and higher  meaning.
... Such   a  reimposed pattern  could   be nothing but  a selective, abstract meaning whose importance belongs to some theory about  man." The issues of historicity, authorial intention, and  reader   response are lurking behind  Denham's book, and because they are never dealt with directly, Northrop  Frye and Critical Method  never really  confronts the  question  of the  place of Frye's work in relation to the ongoing debates that  increasingly engage literary theorists today.
MICHAEL STEIG



MORAL PRESENCE

GILLES   DORION,  Presence  de  Paul  Bourget  au
Canada. Les  Presses  de l'Universire Laval,
$12.00.

IN  1893,  AS   PART   of  a  North   American tour,  the  popular French  writer  Paul Bourget  visited   Canada,  making    brief stops  at  Montreal, Ottawa, and  Quebec City. Bourget (1852-1935) was a prolific belletrist,  critic,  poet,  dramatist, and novelist   who,  in  his  earlier   works,  took the  stance  of a sceptic,  interested himself in  psychological analysis,  and  touched  on the  naturalism of Zola. His first novels­ Un  crime  d'amour   ( 1886)  for  example
-investigated  moral and   philosophical

194
 problems and   generally depicted  cosmo­ politan settings,  high society, kept women,  passionate affairs  and melodramatic situ­  ations. But gradually Bourget  shifted  to a conservative   position.   His   most   widely read   novel,  Le  Disciple   ( 1889),  raised the  question  of  the  responsibility of  the writer   by   describing  an   impressionable young   man   who   brings   tragedy  upon himself  and  others by too literally apply­
ing   the  concepts  of  an   atheist   philoso­
pher.  Objecting  to   the   term   roman   a
these,  Bourget  referred  to  his  novels  as
romans  a idees  because  he  attempted to
give  even  characters whose  ideas  he  felt
were  destructive a  fair  hearing; Le  Dis­
ciple  unfolds   mainly   through  the  view­ point   of  the   philosopher, Adrien  Sixte. By   1902,  Bourget  was  a   monarchist, a staunch Catholic, a  traditionalist, and  an advocate of the sanctity of marriage.
In this scholarly study, Gilles Dorion minutely examines the  presence  of  Bour­ get   in   Quebec-his   physical    presence  for  nineteen days in 1893 and  his literary presence from  1884  to the  present. Bour­  get's   "presence"  in   Quebec  has  always been  a  contradictory  one;  even  after  his "conversion" he  was  not  welcomed   into  the  deeply  conservative fold  of  Quebec. How  could  he  be  when  he  had   not  de­ nounced his early  "pornographic" novels!
In the  Quebec of  the  late  nineteenth and  early  twentieth century, fiction  was considered frivolous and  corrupting; only highly  moral and  didactic novels that properly disseminated religious  ideas were acceptable. Bourget's novels, although moralistic, were far  too realistic  to please the  Church-dominated arbiters of literary taste.  Described as a malfaiteur  litteraire, he  was  to  be  strictly  avoided by  women and   children. Thomas  Chapais, one   of the  most  reactionary critics,  wrote: "Une jeune  fille qui  se nourrit de Paul  Bourget
est a nos yeux  un  phenomene de  perver­
site  et  de  stupidite." Needless  to  say  his
novels were read  avidly.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In I8g8, in the  Catalogue  des livres de la bibliotheque  paroissale de Notre-Dame et  du  Cercle  Ville-Marie, certain  books had  to be specially  requested from the librarian who  had  the right  to refuse to comply.   Five   books   of   Bourget-but none  of his novels! -were on  this list.
When  Bourget visited  Quebec, the journals  and  newspapers which  were  the focal   point   for   literary  discussion   were torn  between  pleasure  at  the  arrival of a famous   French  writer  and   severe   dis­ approbation  of  his   work.   A   rancorous and   petty  debate ensued   that  was  con­ cerned    more   with   moral   than   literary  questions.  Upon  his   return   to   France, Bourget  published an  account of his trip, entitled   Outre-Mer,   but    omitted   any mention   of  his  sojourn  in  Quebec. Que­ bec   was  insulted  and   indignant.  How­  ever, when  Sylva Clapin, a Boston editor, unethically published his own  Sensations de Nouvelle-France  as a sequel  to Outre­ Mer,  Quebeckers were,  once  again,  out­  raged.  In  his book,  Clapin  (and  Dorion, who  has  had   access  to  Bourget's diary,  claims  the  two  men's  views  are  similar)  describes  the  domination and  superiority of   the   English,   denounces  the   Quebec education system, and  decries  the  repres­ sive clerical  influence on  the schools and on  all  realms  of  Quebec  life.  His  warn­ ing, though prophetic, fell on hostile ears and  the  whole  "I'Affaire Clapin" stirred  up  a  storm   in  the   journals,  newspapers and  "cercles" of  the day.
In   his  "avant-propos," Dorion   insists that  a study  such  as Bourget's presence  is a  vital  aspect   of  the  elaboration of  the history  of ideas  in  Quebec. By discussing the   influence   and   reception  of  French writers  and  the literary  relations between Quebec and  France, scholars  can  explore the  moral  and  ideological climate of the past.   I  wholeheartedly agree   with   the need for this kind of scholarship and  wish that     English-Canadian   literary   critics would  also  pursue  detailed analyses  of a
 period,  its ideas,  its culture, its literature instead  of relying  upon  intuition and generalizations derived  second  hand. Do­ rion's   research,  his  appendices,  bibliog­ raphy,   and   index   are  further  testament to   the   meticulous  scholarship   that   has been  emerging  from   Quebec  presses  in this last decade.
However,  Dorion's book  is clearly  for
the  specialist,  a source  book  to be culled for future dissertations. For  his discussion of  Bourget's   reputation  in   Quebec,  his contested   visit,  and  the  critical attitudes to  his  work,  Dorion  has  combed  news­ papers,   journals,  theses,   critical   essays, and   eighteen  French-Canadian   novels. His  chapters are  essentially  composed   of quotations  and   extracts  with  occasional  synthesizing remarks.  This makes for  heavy  reading and  a plague  of footnotes. There is also little space left for any anal­ ysis of the precise nature of technical and  ideological  borrowings from  Bourget.  But if one has the patience to plough  through the   data,   one   is  left   with   no   doubts whatsoever  as  to  the  painfully  conserva­ tive  and  oppressive   rigidity  of  the  intel­  lectual   climate   of  Quebec's  recent   past.

KATHY MEZEI







NEED A LITTLE
DRAMA
IN YOUR LIFE?
We are  the  centre for  Canadian
plays and playwrights.  Write today for our catalogue  and a list of our services.
pLAYWRIGHTS CANADA
8  YORK  STREET   TORONTO   CANADA    MSJ 1R2       (416)  363-1581



I95

BOOKS IN REVIEW



TRIBUTE TO BARKER
Familiar Colloquy:  Essays  Presented to  Arthur
Edward   Barker,  ed.   Patricia  Brockmann. Oberon, $1 7.so.

THIS  OUTSTANDING  COLLECTION of  here­ tofore   unpublished essays is an  eloquent tribute to a remarkable Canadian scholar  and  teacher. Arthur Barker, now officially in  retirement  as Professor  of Renaissance English   literature   at   the   University  of Western   Ontario,  has  had   a  long  and illustrious   career   spanning  more    than forty  years, during which  time-spent chiefly    at    Toronto   and    Illinois-he taught, advised,  or  influenced   many stu­ dents,   some  of  whom   have   joined  here to  celebrate their   teacher in  a  way  that  does credit  to all.
The fifteen   essays  in  the  volume   are
distinguished   by    their    thoughtfulness, balance,  careful  research,    attention   to detail,    and    graceful   presentation,  the qualities that  Arthur Barker  himself most esteems   and   practices,  just  as  if  these several   articles   were   meant   to  be   uni­ formly   written in  the  style  of   "familiar colloquy," a phrase  adapted from Robyn­  son's   translation  of  a  line  from   More's  Utopia, where  good  conversation occurs "emong-e fryndes  in famylier  communica­ tion." The image  is reminiscent, as Patri­ cia  Bruckmann  reminds   us, "of  a  good seminar,  with  its  principles of  openness and   equal  time"; and  we  have  the  im­ pression as we read  through the essays she has   edited   for   this   volume   of  a   good seminar   opening  before   us.   Only    the seminar  leader's  voice  is  silent,  yet  the strength  of his presence  is often  deferred  to and  his views regularly examined. One  envies  Professor  Barker  his  good  fortune in  having such  an  articulate "seminar," which   includes   on  this  occasion  Alistair Fox,  Milton Wilson,  Hugh  Maclean, Sr. Geraldine  Thompson,  Lindsay    Mann, David  Hoeniger, Patricia Vicari,  Camille Slights,  A.  E.  Malloch, William  Blissett,

196
 Douglas Chambers, Hugh MacCallum, Diane McColley, George  Faile,  and  Dr. Bruckmann herself, whose essay on the Utopia  opens  the book.
Unlike the contributions to most "Fest­
schriften," which   are   nearly   always  un­ even   in  quality and   frequently  unread­ able,  the essays that  make  up  this volume  are   of  a  consistently high  standard. All treat   of  some  aspect  of  the  English   Re­ naissance,  from   More   to   Milton   (and  Dryden),  corresponding to  Arthur Bar­ ker's  own  special  interests.  Some  essays, like   Sr.   Geraldine's  discussion    of   the  variety of  styles within Donne's sermons,  or   Lindsay   Mann's  study   of   Donne's literary  view  of  the  body  and   soul,  are hardly "original," but  they  are  resolutely sensible  and  intelligent, and  they serve  to help  readers of good  will  keep  their  bal­ ance   in   the   midst   of  a   world   full   of vertiginous literary criticism.
Particularly   striking  are    the   critical
essays about Milton, especially  by  Doug­ las   Chambers  who,    in   his    "Darkness Visible," deftly  relates  the  fascination of seventeenth-century   painters   with   chia­ roscuro   to  Milton's  own  visual  imagina­ tion  and  imagery, notably  in  the opening of Book III of  Paradise  Lost. Diane Mc­  Colley  also  is  cogent  in  her  "'Daughter of God  and  Man'," for she lucidly  shows how  Eve  is subordinate to Adam  without being   inferior -a   paradox  which   dis­ turbs  many   modern  readers. Several   es­ says   are    fascinating  for    their    special research:	David     Hoeniger   writes    on Kondrad  Gesner    (I 5 I 6-65) , a   remark­ able   Swiss  botanist  who  deserves   to  be better  known   to  English   students,  par­ ticularly in the history  of science. Patricia Vicari   interprets  Robert  Burton's horo­ scope  in  Renaissance  terms,  according to the  design   that  Burton left   (he  directed his  horoscope  to  be  affixed  on  a  tablet  next   to  his   tombstone), and   she  writes with  detailed  and   enthusiastic  elegance. This  is certainly an  essay  that  will  form

BOOKS IN REVIEW



a  standard part of  the  literature on  one of England's most compelling eccentrics and satirists. And as well, A. E. Malloch describes   in  a  way  that   can   hardly   be bettered the extraordinary doctrine called in  English  equivocation, by pointing out its   Continental   antecedents  and   ana­ logues:  intention may be all, and so long as one  holds  the suitable mental  reserva­  tion,  actual lying  is never  possible.
With   these   brief   mentions  of  only  a few  of the  articles-it is not  possible  to describe    them    more    fully   here    or   to notice   now  the  virtues   of  the  others - some  idea  may   be  gathered of  this  un­ usually  interesting collection. What needs further pointing out  is the  spirit  that  lies behind   it.  Many of  the  authors  of  these essays are  already well  known  academic figures   in   English   Renaissance  studies,  and  others  are  likely  to  become  increas­ ingly   so;   almost  all   have   been   closely associated   with  Arthur  Barker  and through  him  in  some  way  with  the  Uni­ versity   of   Toronto.   Evidently,  people,  time, and  place  have  come  together in a fortunate conjunction.
The    English   Renaissance    embraces within  only  about a  century most  of our greatest writers, from  More  and  Hooker to Spenser and  Shakespeare, Donne, Mil­ ton,  and  Dryden. Their study  has always formed  the   staple part  of   curricula  in English  departments everywhere, and  we may   hope   their   basic   importance  will continue  to   be   understood.  The  short­ sighted  fascination  of  so  many   contem­ porary students to look at  their  own  time and  literature as  if  no  other exists  must lead   to  shallow   and   uninformed   obser­ vation; but  such  dangerous pitfalls  may be  avoided  where  a  "familiar  colloquy" can  take  place. Most  of  the  contributors to this present conversation are  Canadian scholars    who    are    concentrating   their energies  in the Renaissance area, and  who are  thus continuing a tradition well estab­ lished  in  our  major  universities.  Perhaps
 the  late  A. S. P. Woodhouse was a  prin­ cipal  figure  (or  even  animating  genius)  of  this  remarkable  flowering of   Renais­ sance  studies  in  Canada; for  as  the  emi­ nence  of  the   University  of  Toronto for years,  many  prominent  Canadian  teach­ ers and  critics  may have been  affected by
his  strong   influence:  Douglas  Bush,   J.
Max  Patrick   (both   originally of  Toron­
to),  the   late   Roy   Daniells,  Northrop Frye,  Malcolm Ross,  and  Arthur  Barker himself.   Many  more    names   might    be added to  this  roll  of gifted   persons  who have  studied  or  who  work  (or  who  have done  both)   in  Canada, initially or  prin­ cipally  centring their  interest in  the Re­  naissance.  Surely   no  other   country  can claim   in  proportion  to  its   numbers  so many   and   so  distinguished  a  group   of specialists  and  critics  in  this  most  crucial and  complex  area  of the  English  Renais­ sance. They  apparently have  been  happy among  friends  in   familiar  communica­ tion,  by helping  to interpret and  describe  one part  of  Canada's heritage, even from
sea to sea.
P. G. STANWOOD



Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS



HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX  685
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request



197

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



INNIS  AS FRIEND

DONALD CREIGHTON,  Harold Adams  Innis: Portrait  of a Scholar. University  of Toronto Press, second ed., $4·95·
I977  MARKED THE  TWENTY-FIFTH   anni­ versary  of  the  death  of  Harold  Adams Innis   and,   appropriately, a   number  of tributes  to his great  work were arranged. Among  them  were  an  Innis  conference at  Simon  Fraser  University,  an  issue of the Journal  of Canadian Studies (Winter  I977, vol.  I2,   no.  5)   devoted  to  Innis studies,   and    the   reissue   of   Professor Creighton's  little  tribute  which  first ap­ peared in  I956.
This book remains the most attractive introduction  to  the  man  Innis.  It  con­ tains many features  common to Professor Creighton's other  works:  a fine  sense of craftsmanship;  a  sweeping,   compelling
style; a strong sense of the interaction  of "character and  circumstance."  Innis  was shaped  by his boyhood in rural  Ontario, by the  farm  and  the local schools, by his strict   Baptist   upbringing   and   his  close family    ties.   A	restless,    independent­ minded  lad, he rejected  the clerical mold designed  for  him,  and  through  devotion to studies and sheer determination  forged
his own  individual  way, as he would  do throughout his life. He even joined the army  during World  War  I partly to escape the pressures calling him to the ministry;  he was  wounded,  invalided home, and thus enabled to continue his studies at Chicago, where his life-long passion for economics and  economic  his­ tory  began  to flower. He  chose a  Cana­  dian  topic for his dissertation, the history of. the   Canadian  Pacific  Railway.  Ap­ pomted  to  the  faculty  of  the  University of   Toronto,  he   rapidly   mastered   the scarcely developed field of  Canadian eco­ nomic  history,  and   over   the  next  two decades  became  its  greatest  practitioner. No  subsequent  scholar  has  approached

198
 the range and scope of the seminal works which began to appear with increasing rapidity.  With  his books on the fur trade, cod fisheries and mining industry, Innis contributed  significantly  to  both  Cana­ dian  and  international  understanding of staple  trades  and  theories of staple  econ­ omies.
At  the same  time  his fertile  mind  was constantly   exploring   beyond   his  estab­ lished field:  book reviews, articles, public lectures  all  became  forums  for  his  un­ ceasingly probing  mind and  his astonish­ ing  intuitive  leaps  of  logic.  Much   was unpolished,  even  outrageous,  but  always stimulating.  The   last  decade  of  his  life was  occupied  in prodigious  reading  on a vast topic:  the relationship  between com­ munication  and  society  throughout  his­ tory. Had  cancer  not  taken  him  prema­ turely,  it  was  probably  in  this  area  that he  would   have  made   his   most  lasting contribution. The  lectures and  papers  he did  leave still constitute  a  deep  mine of ideas on the subject,  ideas which  in turn heavily   influenced   the   thought   of  the young Marshall McLuhan.
Professor  Creighton's portrait of Innis
	. 	'

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



was   not   intended  to   meet    that   need, though    it   was,   as   Professor  Creighton points  out  in  the  preface  of the  new edi­ tion,  originally anticipated  that  it  would be  part  of a  larger work  in  which  other scholars  would attempt to confront Innis's  writings   more  fully.  That  project  unfor­ tunately failed.
This   book,  then,  must   be  appreciated
on  its  own  modest   terms.  It is a  tribute to  the  memory   of  a  friend and  scholar, not a critical study.  Nevertheless, it is fair to   point   out   that    Professor  Creighton emphasizes those  aspects  of  Innis's  work which  most attracted him  and  influenced his own  great  work as an historian. Innis's nationalism   and    anti-Americanism   be­ come   much   more   dominant   themes  in Creighton's book  than  they  appear to be in most  of Innis's own  work. Innis's  will-
 ingness  to  let  his  conclusions be  shaped by  documents  and   facts   while  rejecting or  suspiciously  regarding established  the­ ories  and   models   delights the  historian. It was,  after   all,  Innis   who  flew in  the face of the received  wisdom of  the I g2o's when  his researches led  him  to conclude that   Canada  was  a   nation  because   of geography, not in spite of it. In one sense Professor Creighton's own later work was a vast elaboration of  this  theme.  Needless to say, Creighton  pays scant  attention to those  aspects  of  Innis's work  which  have attracted a   wide  spectrum  of  devotees,  from  Marxians  to  communications the­ orists. Like them,  he has found  what  he wanted  in Innis; but  what  he found  may lie  closer  to  the   essence  of  Innis   than anyone  else has yet come.
D. J· HALL







THE 	CANADIANS

George VVoodcock

lht
CANADIANS
 
This lavishly illustrated  volume combines superb   historical   and   cultural analysis   with in-depth portraiture of Canadians today  as George   Woodcock,   historian, man  of  letters and   wry  observer,   examines  the   Canadian past and  present.


GEORGE WOODCOCK
 Over  300 illustrations
16 pages in full colour
336 pages

Available  at good bookstores  everywhere


Fitzhenry  & Whiteside
 $19.95





199


LJINDFJIRING: SJISKJITCHE\WJIN,FEBRUJIRY1978

Tom Wayman

We took a concession  road due  south  from  Bradwell
onto the prairie.   Ernie at  the wheel of the van headed down  the hard  frozen  gravel
swept clear of snow by the wind.

Around us, in the bright  cold
the crests and  troughs  of that  sea flowed to every horizon.
Ripples  and  eddies swirled
on the backs of the long swells
that  rolled out  to the distant  islands of tree-trunks­
stark  groves rising from  the ocean.

With  the noon sun in our eyes, we drove, lifting  and  falling.    Every few kilometers, a farm  to  port  or starboard:
outbuildings drifted with  the snow
and  a cleared  road in to the house and  barn between  white embankments.
Once Ernie  slowed
and  swung sharply  ninety  degrees
onto a correction line.    We ran  west for a moment, then  again, south.

For fifty kilometers in the beginning of the afternoon
we cut through that  sea
till we picked  up the freeway  at Kenaston, turning onto it like an amphibious craft reaching solid ground at last.
But  this wasn't  earth, more like a causeway
built  across an ocean : even here
we were only centimeters from  the water lapping against  the shoulders of the road
and  extending far back to the sky -the deep sea,
the restless sea, its white sparkles  of spray shining  in the air over the pavement
of Number Eleven, as we steered  for Regina and  land.

200







R. M. BUCKE

IT IS TEMPTING TO BEGIN a note  on Rich­ ard   Maurice  Bucke   (r837-1902) 1 with some cliche  or other about strangely neg­ lected    literary  figures.   A   glance   at   a recently  published bibliography on Bucke, however,  suggests  that   such  a  beginning would  hardly  be  justifiable.  Bucke's  most famous  work, Cosmic  Consciousness, has been  continuously  in  print since  it  first appeared in   Igoi, and  since  Igo2  there have   been   ten   books,  sixty-five  articles, and  five  graduate theses  wholly  or  par­ tially   concerned  with   him.2    Articles  on Bucke have  been  published in  journals  as diverse  as the  Canadian Theosophist, the Canadian   Medical   Association  Journal, the  Dalhousie  Review, Ontario  History, and   the  Walt  Whitman  Review. Theses  on  Bucke  have  been  presented to depart­ ments  of  Religion, History, and  English, and   the  subjects  of  books  in  which   he figures  range  from  East  Indian religious thought   to   the   history   of  medicine  in Ontario. The list of international literary,  artistic,   and    philosophical  figures   who have  acknowledged Bucke's  influence  on them   includes   William   James,   P.   D. Ouspensky, the English  mystic Edward Carpenter, the Gothic novelist Algernon Blackwood, Aldous  Huxley, and  Henry Miller.
All this multi-disciplinary attention  re­ flects  the    extraordinary   diversity   of Bucke's  life and  career. Born in England and  brought to  Canada  as  an  infant, he was privately educated at his father's par­  sonage  near  London, Canada West  (On­ tario), and subsequently at  McGill  Medi­ cal  School.  After   post-graduate study  in England he  established himself  as a  psy-
 chiatrist (or "alienist," in the terminology of  the  time) , first  in  Hamilton and  sub­ sequently  at London, Ontario,  where  he served  as Director of the  Asylum  for  the Insane  until   his  death.   A  tireless   and  prolific  author,  he  published  dozens   of articles  on  psychiatric therapy, literature, and  philosophy, as  well  as  three   books, Man's Moral Nature  ( 1879), Walt Whit­ man  ( r 883) , and  Cosmic  Consciousness. Having developed a  passionate devotion to the writings  of  Whitman in the  I86o's,  he  eventually  met  the  poet,  and  became one   of   \Vhitman's  literary  executors as well  as  the  author of an  approved biog­ raphy.
But   most   of   the   varied   accomplish­ ments   of  Bucke   have  been   well  docu­ mented  and   evaluated.   One   aspect   of Bucke's   life   and    career    which    rather paradoxically  has  not  been  examined in detail,  however, is  his  specific  relevance to  Canadian society  and  culture. In this note,  I propose   to  suggest  some  of  the ways  in  which   Bucke  absorbed and  ex­ pressed  various   physical  and  intellectual influences  from  his national environment.
Bucke himself offers little encourage­ ment  to  the  commentator seeking  to establish   his  "Canadianness." As  might be  expected of  a  devotee  of Walt  Whit­ man,  Bucke was an  admirer of American society   and   culture,  which   he   saw   in terms roughly comparable to Whitman's poetic  visions,  as  embodying an  ideal  of unity and perfectibility on interacting individual and  universal  levels. More  spe­ cifically, his political and social beliefs reflected  what  might  be called  a form  of world federalism, tinged  with familiar nineteenth-century  assumptions about racial   superiority. "I  look   to  see,"   he wrote   his  friend   Charles  Nathan  Elliot in   I goo,  "the English   speaking  peoples practically joined in a world spreading confederacy -dominating   the   globe - playing   the   part   of  Lord   Paramount." 3
Unlike   many   of   his  contemporaries in

20I

OPINIONS &  NOTES



the  late  nineteenth-century Canadian literary  scene, he had  no sympathy  with the imperialist  movement, as is clearly indicated  by one of his few written com­ ments on Canadian politics, a  public let­ ter  criticizing  the  role  of   the  governor­ general  in Canadian  affairs.4  Further, he seems to have  had  little  interest  in con­ temporary   Canadian  literature.   His  li­ brary,  most  of  it  still  preserved  at  the University of Western Ontario, contains only  two  or  three  Canadian books, and nowhere   in   his  voluminous  correspon­ dence  are  there  any  references to Cana­  dian   literature,  or   letters   to  or   from Canadian writers. His taste in literature, like  his  politics,  was  international:  his favourite  authors,  besides Whitman,  in­ cluded Shakespeare,  Tennyson,  Matthew Arnold, Francis  Bacon, and  other  classic figures, as well as various writers on reli­ gious, mystical, and  occult subjects.
Indeed,  Bucke appears  to have delibe­
rately cultivated  an indifference to things Canadian, as has often been done before and  since by intellectual  or artistic aspir­ ants  in  this  country  who insist  on  their loyalty to an international community  of thought  and creativity. But no more than any   other   human   being   could   Bucke escape  the influence  of his  environment.  As a  psychiatrist  who subscribed  to cer­ tain  physiological  theories of personality, furthermore, he must have acknowledged the  importance   of  environment  to  the formation  of  character. In  any  case, his commitment  to  his  country  and  to  the region  of his  childhood  is unequivocally reflected in  his decision, after  a youthful interlude  of  adventure on  the American western frontier  and  a period of study in England, to live all his life in southwestern Ontario.
When   Walt   Whitman   came   to  visit Bucke at London  in the summer of x88o, the  Canadian conducted  his visitor with all the enthusiasm  of a proud host on the standard tourist journey of the day, down

202
 the  St.  Lawrence   to  Montreal,  Quebec, and  the Saguenay  region. From  the latter outpost    Whitman    wrote   a   descriptive article for the London  Advertiser to which Bucke contributed a  "description   of  the Saguenay  by a  Canadian friend" and  a Whitmanesque  poem,  "The  Saguenay." The  description  is heavily spiced with the cliches  of  romanticism,   with  particular reliance  on infernal  and  death  imagery:

In   these   places  the   aspect   of  the  river  is terrible. The  still,  black surface  of the water unenlivened by any movement, for no stream is  visible  in   its  dead   monotony,   the  lofty shores  covered   with   lifeless  trees,  no  signs of  life  either  vegetable or  animal, as far  as the  eye  can   reach   either   in  the  water,  in the  air,  or  on  the  land,  except  only  these lifeless trees  whose ghastly  trunks  and  with­ ered   limbs  show  where  a  stunted  life  has once   been -these   make  a   picture   which Dante  could  have  put  into  his Hell-a  fit companion  picture   for   even   its   horrors. Over   these   lifeless   hills   and   this   lifeless river   the  spirit   of  a  king  damned  for  in­ ordinate ambition  might  find  its fitting  and terrible   doom  if  compelled   there   to  reign alone  forever.

The  poem, with rather  careless disregard for consistency, transforms  the river from a lifeless thing  or a damned  spirit into  a stately  and  ominous  giant  bestirring  it­ self:

There where  the vast and  vehement tides of the mighty  St. Lawrence
Broaden  and  deepen, onward  and  outward
toward  the infinite  sea,
Out  of its rocky and  mountainous solitudes,
Swarthy and  slow, descending, stopping,
receding,  with  stealthy step, issues the
Saguenay.5

Images   of   infernos,   blasted   corpses, doomed  and  solitary monarchs, and peri­ patetic  Titans may  be  romantic  cliches, but  a case could  be  made-indeed, has been   made  many   times-that such  images  of  dark   and  ominous  sublimity have a particular appeal  to the Canadian imagination. One  thinks of the figures of ruined  or isolated  grandeur in Archibald




OXFORD
























EMILY CARR A Biography

Maria Tippett


Maria Tippett has studied  Emily  Carr's unpublished journals, letters  and books, interviewed countless  friends  and acquaintances and travelled  to all the places she visited  or lived, in order to write  this searching, richly detailed  biography
of Emily  Carr.   It recounts  a life  that  was led with  little regard for  the con­
ventions  of time and place, the tensions that resulted, the effort that  Emily
put into developing her skills as a painter, the intrepid journeys, the emotional friendships, the despair and euphoria  that  accompanied  her work- all pro­ viding  engrossing material for a life-size portrait that is enlivened  by the inimitable comments of Emily  herself.  Emily  Carr is a towering subject-
her life  is filled with interest  from  childhood to old age- and Maria Tippett has done full justice to it.
9 1/2  x 6 1/4   352 pp., with 10 colour  reproductions and 100 black  and white  illustrations	Cloth 	$16.95

OPINIONS & NOTES



Lampman's poetry,  such as the "tall  slim priests  of storm" in  "In October" or  the "dark and  strange agony" of the city in "Night of  Storm," or  the  terrible  idol­ like figure  at  the  climax  of "The  City  of the  End of Things." Similarly, Sir Charles G.   D.   Roberts'   "Solitary   Woodsman" haunts a  landscape in  autumnal decline,  and   Wilfred   Campbell's  lake   region   is suffused   with   the   hush   of   impending desolation and death.
But   with    the   possible   exception  of Lampman, English-Canadian poets of the post-Confederation  period   were  not  in­ clined   to  rest  in  tragic  or  desolate  con­ ceptions of life, but  tended  to emphasize  the  cyclical  or  compensatory  aspects  of nature and   human  experience.  Autumn and  winter  are succeeded  by spring; iso­ lation   and   despair   are   counteracted  by reconciliation and   faith.   In  this  respect, poets   like   Bliss  Carman,  Roberts, and Campbell revealed  their affinities with  the idealism  of  Ralph  Waldo   Emerson   and New   England   transcendentalism.  In   a similar  way,  through his devotion to  the poetic  vision of Whitman, Bucke balanced his  recognition  of  the  dark,   mysterious and  monstrous principles in  nature  with a faith  in the  ultimate unity  and  benevo­ lence  of creation. This  faith  is not imme­  diately  apparent in  a fugitive  newspaper piece   like   his   note   and   poem  on   the Saguenay, but  it  forms  the  substance of his  most  substantial  literary   efforts,   the books Man's Moral  Nature  and  the more ambitious Cosmic  Consciousness. In  both these   works   Bucke   was  essentially   con­ cerned   with  the  thorough cultivation of human  mental and  spiritual faculties in order   to   ensure   the   harmonious inter­ action  between  man  and  his physical en­ vironment. In  the  last  half  of  the  nine­ teenth   century,  science   and   literature were  becoming increasingly  infused  with a  sense  of  despair as  man  contemplated his existence  in a cold and alien  world  of matter.  Like   many   other   thinkers and

204
 writers  of his time,  above  all  like his idol
\Vhitman, Bucke  was  anxious  to  bridge the  constantly widening gap  between  the materialistic  conception  of  man   propa­ gated by the natural sciences and modern technology, and   the  various  humanistic traditions which  emphasize the subjective, spiritual, and  imaginative  dimensions of experience. Like  Whitman, Emerson, and  most  thinkers who  can  be  related   to  the tradition of  nineteenth-century idealism,  Bucke   was  an   ameliorative  evolutionist who believed that  the  material world and human consciousness  were  constantly de­ veloping  through   progressively   superior stages   toward  ultimate  perfection. This process   of   evolution   was  to   culminate according to  Bucke  in  the  emergence of a newer  and  higher type of human being, of  which  Walt  Whitman and  other  emi­ nent  sages and  poets from various  periods  of history could  be seen as prophetic rep­ resentatives.
Bucke's  philosophical   system  can
scarcely  be described as distinctively Can­ adian, however significant one might  con­ sider  the influence  of the northern wilder­  ness  in  the  formulation  of  the  author's ideas   on   the   grandeur  and   mystery   of nature.  But   it   does   appear  that  meta­ physical systems  such  as  that  expounded in  Cosmic  Consciousness held  a  particu­ lar  appeal for reflective Canadians in the late   nineteenth  century.  In   his  Conclu­ sion  to  the  Literary  History   of Canada  Northrop Frye  argues  that  "the mystique  of   Canadianism" in  the  late   nineteenth century was characterized by an  intellec­ tual   tendency  stressing  "world-views ... of   a   theosophical or   transcendentalist cast," in  relation to  which  he specifically mentions  Bucke,  along   with  Sir  Charles G.  D.  Roberts  and Bliss Carman.6
It can  be argued further that  the  kind
of philosophical synthesis expounded by Bucke  continued to  appeal to  the  Cana­ dian  imagination well  into  the  twentieth century, long after  American realistic  and

OPINIONS & NOTES













Penum6ra   Press
P.O. Box 340, Moonbeam
Ontario POL lVO




M. T. Kelly

Country You Can't Walk  In

First  collection of poems  by the  author of I  Do  Remember   the  Fall. Here the  poet tries to resolve the  violence  and  solitude of the northern bush. Illustrations by Mary Weymark-Goss.

ISBN 0-920806-oo-7   $3.50


J. D. Carpenter
Swimming  at Twelve Mile

First collection  of poems by a poet widely published in Canadian small  magazines. Includes fine examples of long  poems.

ISBN 0-920806-0I-7    $3.95


Ken  Stange

Nocturnal  Rhythms
A seven  part  book  of poems  in  which  the poet's  persona seeks to discover  his identity while sorting out  the fallacies and  lies of existence.  By the  author of Revenging Language and  editor of Nebula.

ISBN 0-920806-03-I    $5.95
 Duncan Campbell Scott

Untitled Novel, circa 1905
The   only   known    novel   written  by   the author   ( 1862-1947)   of   many   books  of poetry  and  short  stories  including Village of Viger and  Circle of Affection. A tale of Canadian women  in  love  which  combines treachery with  art  and  politics.  Previously unpublished.

ISBN 0-920806-04-X  $6.95


Thoreau MacDonald

Thoreau lvfacDonald's  Notebooks
By Canada's premier book  illustrator and designer,   a   collection  of   material  from diaries   and   journals  kept   by  the  author since 1912. Includes observations about  his
father, J. E.  H.   MacDonald, and   other
members  of the Group of Seven, as well as
about  wildlife and  nature.

ISBN o-92oBo6-os-8  $9.95


C. H. Gervais

Up Country Lines
Poems  about   the  North by  Windsor poet and  playwright. Co-author of Baldoon.

ISBN 0-920806-06-6   $3.95


J. E. H. MacDonald
Sketchbook, 1914-1922
A facsimile edition of  a MacDonald sketchbook   kept   from    1914-1922.  Intro­ duction by Hunter Bishop.

ISBN o-92o!lo6-o7-4  $9.95

OPINIONS &  NOTES



post-realistic artistic movements had  be­ come  dominated by abstractionist  modes of perception. A recent comparative study of  Bucke   and   Lawren   Harris  draws   a persuasive  analogy between  Bucke's  em­ phasis  on  man's sense of his own  immor­ tality and  the  painter's stress on the unity of   terror and  sublimity  in the northern landscape.7   Among  other  Canadian  cre­ ative   figures   who   might   be   profitably compared with  Bucke is Frederick Philip  Grove, whose   A  Search   for America  is particularly  reminiscent  of   Bucke's   ten­ dency  to  move  outward  from  the  North American landscape  towards  an  ideal  re­ conciliation of  nature and  spirit.  Grove,  like   Bucke,   was   heavily   influenced    by early  nineteenth-century American liter­ ature, and   especially  in  his  early  works like   A  Search   for  America  and   Over Prairie Trails he looks for a sense of unity and    optimism  in   the   face   of   hostile images of nature.
A  more  general analogy  could  also  be
drawn between  Bucke and  Grove  as men and  artists. Both  were  haunted  by  gran­ diose  images   of  nature and   the  human spirit,   and   both   struggled   with   mixed success   to   give   literary  form   to   their visions. Grove's vast  but structurally and  dramatically   clumsy  fictions   with   their larger   than    life   heroes    are    generally  reminiscent of  Bucke's encyclopedic com­ pendium  Cosmic  Consciousness, with  its collection  of representative men  and  wo­ men  who  embody  the  author's faith   in the  potential of  the  human spirit.  Both writers,   finally,   like  so  many   Canadian artists,   suffered   relative   neglect  in  their time,  but  have  subsequently attracted to themselves a profuse  and  diffuse group  of commentators who   recognize  something elementally  if  indefinably  Canadian   in their   writings.  Perhaps  Bucke  with   his peripheral and  idiosyncratic relevance to Canadian  literature  is  an   incongruous choice  as  a  representative national man of letters.  But perhaps incongruity is after

206
 all one  of the  main  features of this coun­ try's   literary  and   intellectual   traditions, in  which  case  Richard  Maurice  Bucke  is as likely  a  figure  as  any  to  represent the Canadian imaginative experience.

NOTES

1 I wish to acknowledge the  advice  and assis­ tance  of  Michael   Ballin  in  the  preparation of this article.-
2  Mary  Ann Jameson, ed., Richard  Maurice Bucke: .A Catalogue  Based  upon  the  Col­ lection   of  the   University  of  Western  On­  tario  Libraries   (London, 1978).
a  RMB  to Charles Nathan Elliot,  August  18,
1900,  Bucke  Collection, UWO.
4   RMB,  Letter to the Editor, Saturday Night,
June 5,  1897.
5   "Letter  from    Walt    Whitman,"   London
.Advertiser, August  26, 188o.
6 Frye,  Conclusion to  Literary   History   of Canada, ed.  Carl  F.  Klinck  et  a!.  (Toron­ to:  Univ.  of Toronto Press,  1965), 832.
7 Brian  Lauder, "Two Radicals: Richard Maurice  Bucke  and  Lawren   Harris,"  Dal­ housie  Review, 61,  no.  2  (Summer  1976),
307-18.
JAMES DOYLE


CANADA FIRST &
RED RIVER, 1868-70

AMONG  THE   MANY  SINS   OF    OMISSION conunitted by the  recent  CBC  Television production of Riel was the  complete lack of  any   reference  to  the  small  group of five  or  six  men   who  perhaps did   more than  any others  to provoke  the Red  River Insurrection of  I86g-7o in  the first  place and   then, a  few  months later,  by public incitement  and   other  means,   forced   a harassed  government  to   send   out   the punitive  expedition  under  Colonel  Gar­ net   Wolseley.   Perhaps  one   should   not expect  a   two-part  popular  series  to  be any  more  than  the melodramatic travesty  of history  that  it  was  (Professors Stanley  and   Morton,  among  others, may   have

OPINIONS &  NOTES



been  fascinated  by  the  depiction  of Thomas  Scott  jumping  in and out of the bed   of   Mrs.   John   Schultz   or   of  his attempt on Riel's life).  But when we are informed   that   the   presentation  of  the drama  is to be accompanied by the  dis­ tribution   of  "kits"   and   complementary  material  to schools across  the country­ what  the media call "hype" -there may be  cause  for  concern  among   historians and  educators  in general.  Ironically,  the true  story of  the  whole  episode  is really more  fascinating  than  the  proffered  fic­ tion.
How the small group  of men met, how
they  planned  and,  indeed,  plotted,  how they formed the original nucleus of the Canada   First  Party  has  been  related  by at   least   three   historians   in   the   past decade.  D.  R.  Farrell  and  D.  P. Gagan have   published   articles   on  the  subject and  C.  C.  Berger  devotes  a  chapter   to the  group  in  his study  of  Canadian  im­ perialism.1 But  none of them  gives more than  passing attention to the  Party's role in  Red  River;   Berger,  referring   to  my own  book on  Charles  Mair,  implies, in­ deed, that  this aspect  was not part  of his theme.  But  in  the  spring  of I 868, while unrest  was daily  becoming  more  intense in the tiny settlement, two thousand miles away  in  Ottawa, Charles  Mair,  George Denison, Henry  Morgan, William Foster and  Robert  Haliburton were engaged in discussions  that   not  only,  indirectly   at least, would help to tum that unrest into armed  insurrection  but  also would  influ­ ence the political future  of  Canada.
In brief, Mair,  the aspiring  young poet
from  Lanark, was  in  Ottawa to see his
Dreamland    (appropriate  title)    go   to
press.  Through  his  friend,   Morgan,   a civil  servant,   he  met   the  other   three. They  were all men of varied abilities; all, except Haliburton, were under thirty. Foster, perhaps  the most intellectual,  was a Toronto barrister  who had published articles on  politics and  would soon write
 Canada First, the party's manifesto. Deni­ son,  the  most  militant   of  the  Toronto tory family, was also a lawyer but was in Ottawa  trying  to convince  Georges Car­ tier that  he should be the Adjutant Gen­ eral  of  the  regular  cavalry.  Haliburton, son of the famous  judge, was there  pro­ moting  Nova  Scotian  and  his own coal­ mining interests, but  had  become a close associate of D'Arcy  McGee.  McGee,  in­ deed, had discussed some of  Haliburton's views in the House of Commons the night he was assassinated. Morgan  was becom­ ing important in  the office of the Secre­ tary  of State,  Isaac  Buchanan,  and  had already  published  two books and  numer­  ous  articles.  But  all  their  writings  and speeches reflect the fact that they saw themselves as angry young men with a vision, a vision that  they felt had not yet captured  the mind  and  hearts  of enough Canadians.    Confederation,  they   main­ tained,  had  been  an  arbitrary  joining of vastly separate elements, a rational  agree­ ment   based   upon   highly   practical   de­ mands.  What   was  still  needed  was  an emotional response, a national  sentiment,  a  proud  awareness  of  a  Canadian iden­ tity. Denison  certainly,  and  probably  to varying degrees, the others, regretted  that Confederation had  not  been forged  by a war  of  independence,   a  common  cause to cement together the various rational determinations  that  Confederation in reality was.
The  group  was  not  alone,  of  course. Much   of   their   inspiration   came   from
D'Arcy  McGee's  speeches and  his  edito­ rials  in  the  New   Era.  Several  literary periodicals  of  the  time  also took  up  the cry. But McGee was silenced by an assas­ sin's  bullet and  the  periodicals, as A. R. M.  Lower  has  delightfully  paraphrased Hotspur,  "Could   call  for  the  spirit  of nationalism to come out of the vasty deep of   English   Canada,  but   when   called, come  it  would  not."2    So Denison,  Mair and  company,  calling  themselves at  this

OPINIONS & NOTES



time  "the Corner Room" after  the  place in  which  they  met  in  Morgan's quarters at   the   Revere  Hotel,  considered   them­ selves largely  responsible  for the task they felt  had   to  be  done  if  Canada  were  to grow,  even, in fact,  to live. The apparent inability of the  government to determine a  national policy,  the  unenlightened  in­ difference  of   England,   the   annexation rumblings  to  the  south,   led  them,   they claimed,  to  make   "a  solemn   pledge   to each  other that  we would do all we could to   advance   the   interests   of  our   native land; that  we would  put  our country first before  all personal, or political  or party considerations;  that    we   would   change our  policy affiliations as often  as the  true interests of Canada required  it."3
Most  important as  a  first  step  on  be­
half  of  these  "true interests," said  Mair, was the destruction of the main cause of disunity. "Provincialism ... was  ram­ pant," he   wrote,    "and  the   very   name
'Canadian' was  a  reproach on  both coasts."  So  the  group   was  to search  for every  opportunity "to  speak  and  write  it down" and   to  substitute "for  its  narrow spirit  a  Canadian  sentiment through the operation  of  which  only  could  we  hope to  become  a  nation."4  Also,  he  insisted, was  the  necessity  "to  inculcate  imperial­ ism as our  true  destiny." But imperialism "meant expense,  and  vague perils besides, which    'nobody'  could   define";  it   was, therefore, "not  to  be  thought of,  unless by   men   of   foresight,   and   it   wasn't."5
Other aims reflect  the individuals who proposed them. Denison, the colonel of militia,  insisted  that colonialism  would remain  as  long  as  Canadians were  pre­ vented   from   attaining the  higher  ranks held   by  British   officers  in  Canada   (the  personal bias is most obvious here) . Hali­ burton,  at   that   time   a   lawyer-business man,  was  concerned with  a  tariff  policy more   advantageous  to  Canada.  Foster, perhaps  the  most  disinterested, saw  the group as  "an  intellectual  movement, as

208
 the   revolt   of  educated  and   thoughtful men  against  the  inanity ... of  what   was offered   to  them   as  political   discussion," and   also  as  "a  direct product, in  some measure, of that  higher culture which  the universities and  colleges  of  our  land  are steadily  promoting."6   Nationhood was to mean   a   quickened  intellectual  activity, achievements  in   Canadian   cultural   life
-in science,  music,  art  and  letters. Mor­
gan  had  only  recently written that  "now more than  at  any other  time ought the   literary  life  of  the   New   Dominion develop itself  unitedly. It becomes  every patriotic subject who claims  allegiance to this our  new  northern nation  to extend  a fostering  care   to   the   native   plant,  to guard  it  tenderly, to support and  assist it by the  warmest countenance and encour­ agement,"7  thus   echoing the  urgings   of the  Reverend  E.  H.  Dewart  in  his  not­  able  introduction to Selections from Can­  adian  Poets of  1864.
But  even  at this early  period  in its for­
mation, Canada  First   reveals  the  weak­ nesses that  would  later  lead  to its down­ fall.  "The  Corner Room" decided  not  to work  openly   in  the  sense  of  advertising themselves or  of  proclaiming themselves a  new  party; "to have  vaunted our  opin­ ions  in  the  teeth  of the  bitter  acrimonies of  the   time  would   have   wrecked   us  at the  start," said  Mair. Instead, they  were to  carry   out   their   designs  with  as  little publicity as possible "until manifest occa­ sion  came" and   then   "strike   and  strike hard."8    "Our  opinions,"   however,   be­
come  dubious when  seen  in the  light  of
the  personal limitations of  the  members of the  group. Most  of  them   (Haliburton appears as the  notable exception) were drawn on the one hand  by what  still amounted to a colonial  attachment to Britain and  on the other  by a growing nationalistic attachment to Canada. And the  colonial attachment, of course,  was revealed in "Upper-Canadian" terms. Denison  seems  to be completely unaware

OPINIONS & NOTES



of   the   contradiction,  explicit    in   com­ ments  such  as  the  following, in  an  early letter  to Mair:

we  Kanucks should   resent  any  assumption of  superiority  [by   England]  at   once •.. I never  felt  so  proud   of  Canada as  when  I was  in  England  and  France.... In  France I used  to  tell  them,  "Je   suis  Canadien­ de   Haut  Canada,"  to   which   they   would reply,  "Oui, oui! Colonie  Anglais."D

For   Denison   is  really   pointing  up   the most self-destructive weakness  of Canada First.    While    decrying provincialism it was itself provincial, even  parochial. Cul­ turally   it  was  militantly  anti-Ultramon­ tane  and  anti-French.  Socially  its  mem­ bers  represented the  "respectable," even, as in Denison's case, the  upper class. And with  the  exception  of  Haliburton again,  they  were  all  from  Ontario; Foster  and Denison,   the  two  main  organizers, were both   from  Toronto,  the   focal   point   of English  Canadianism.
The cloak of secrecy they at first felt obliged  to assume stimulates further ques­ tions.  Did  the  group   really  believe  that  undercover plots  and  intrigues followed,  when  "manifest  occasion  came," by sud­ den   decisive   action,  was   conducive  to national   unity?  Or   was  the  cloak,  par­  tially at least, merely  one more  indication of  the   romanticism  so  characteristic of these  youthful  visionaries?  All  of  them were   to  give   an   impression  that   they received   an   almost   melodramatic  thrill from  engaging in intrigue and  subterfuge. At  times  too  they  give  evidence of  both group  and  individual paranoia, by which they  regard  themselves as  the  only  true patriots but are  unappreciated as such. Certainly the  correspondence of Denison, Mair and  Morgan abounds with  instances of wounded sensibilities,  of unattained preferments and  of aggressively  critical denouncements of their  "enemies." And certainly it  is  safe  to  assume   that   these men  did  not appreciate more  than super­ ficially  the  possible  repercussions of their
 meetings  at  Morgan's. They were not together  long enough, indeed, either  to discuss thoroughly their  programme or to evaluate the  mettle  of each  other -and the  consequences were  soon  to appear in tangible  form.
No   one   would   suggest   that   Canada First  caused  the  events  that occurred at the Red  River  settlement in  r86g-7o.  But it  certainly  contributed much  to  precipi­ tate  them  and  eventually to  make  them,  ironically,  a  divisive  influence  upon   the future  of  Canada.  In  the   first  instance the story is primarily that  of Mair. How, within  a  few  months of meeting Denison  and  company   in  Ottawa, he  got  on  the trail  to Fort  Garry  is a  theme  worthy  of that writer  he himself  most  esteemed, Sir Walter   Scott/0   but   it   is  relevant  here only  to  relate   that   by  October  I868,  he had  an ostensible  appointment from Wil­ liam    McDougall,   Minister   of    Public  Works,   as  paymaster  to   a   government road  party  proceeding to the tiny western settlement. Most  significant  is  the  inter­ pretation of the appointment by his Can­ ada  First associates.  "At  once  we saw the opportunity,"  said   Denison,  "of   doing some good work towards helping on the acquisition of the territory."11 And  Foster arranged with  George  Brown  of  the Toronto Globe  that   Mair  should   write first-hand accounts of affairs  in the settle­ ment,  advocating the  western  expansion­ ist  policy  that   Brown,   McDougall  and Canada First  all  had  in common.
Mair's letters  to the Globe, his social conduct  at   Red   River,    his   association with  John   Schultz   and   the  "Canadian" party,   his  activities   with   the   road  gang (the  TV  drama called  him  "Maier") are now  well  documented. The  resentment and   unrest   he   caused   were   metamor­
phosed  by race  and  culture, however,  to an equivalent approval on  the  part  of his friends  and fellow Ontarians. Commented the  Globe of  June II, r86g: "We   hope to see a new Upper Canada in the North-


209

OPINIONS & NOTES



West  Territory-a new  Upper Canada in  its  well-regulated society  and  govern­ ment-in    its   education,   morality  and religion." Wrote   Denison,  after   reading Mair's  early  reports:  "Together we  the Men  of  the  North   (as  Haliburton says) will be able  to teach  the Yankees  that  we will be as our ancestors  always have  been, the  dominant race."12 But such  commen­ tary  reflects no conception of the increas­  ingly   tense   situation  in   the   Northwest that   Mair  and    others   like   him   were generating.
The insurrection that  followed  stimu­
lated  Canada First  to what  it always afterwards considered its greatest achieve­ ment.   Mair had   been  purposely  sent  to Red  River  to express the group's message of  the   necessity   for  an  expanding  and unified  Dominion, but even  Denison  had  hardly envisaged  a  bloody  little  rebellion  from  which  Mair  and  Schultz   (now  also a member of  Canada First)  would  barely escape  with  their  lives. And  the  group's reaction to  this tum of events  only serves to  illuminate,  even   more   perhaps than does  Mair's conduct in the West, the way in which  their  brand  of nationalism was strongly  qualified.  Their   Upper-Cana­ dian  provincialism, their  aggressive  sense of  superiority, their  self-indulgent  con­  cern   for  their   own   unrecognized merit, their   inclination   towards   the   melodra­ matic -all   are   reflected   in   the   action  they   took   almost  immediately after   the return of  Mair to Ontario.
Their most  urgent  concern  was the sending  of   a   military  force   to   restore order in  Red  River  and  to  avenge  what they insisted were grave injustices, even murder, perpetrated against  loyal  Cana­ dians.  No longer  was there  a necessity for working  secretly;  this  was  the  moment "to  strike  and  strike  hard." Denison  or­ ganized  a  committee that, as he  proudly reported, proceeded "to arouse  the indig­  nation of the people, and foment  a public opinion.m3   Foster  wrote  a  series of arti-

210
 des   marked by patriotic fervour and  in­ dignation and   published as  editorials  in the   Daily   Telegraph;  he  even   induced George  Kingsmill, the editor, to print  the paper with  "turned  rules"  as "a  mark  of respect   to  the  memory   of  the  murdered Scott."14 On the evening of April 6, I 87o, a  thousand   people   met   the  refugees   at the station; at  least five thousand tried  to get  into  the  St.  Lawrence Hall   to  hear  them  and  the  Mayor  was forced  to move the meeting to the City  Hall  square. And there Mair, Schultz  and  others  appealed effectively    to   the   crowd's  anti-French, anti-Roman Catholic prejudices-Mair declaiming  at   the   end    "Death  to   the murderers and  tyrants  of  Fort  Garry!"15
Of  the  original five  members of  Can­
ada  First,  all but  Morgan (who  was sensitive  about  his position  as a civil  ser­ vant)  worked  incessantly to make  a hesi­ tant  government take  immediate steps on behalf  of "the people  of  Canada." Leav­  ing  Foster  to continue  his articles,  Mair, Denison   and   Schultz  set  out   to  see  Sir John  A.  Macdonald,  having  had   sym­ pathizers   organize    demonstrations   at Cobourg,  Belleville,   Prescott  and   other places   on   the   way   to   Ottawa.  There, however, they  were  less effective.  When  it   came    to   in-fighting,  the   impetuous Denison   was  no  match for  Sir  John A. and  eventually Canada First  had  to hold off  in  desperate frustration while  Father Richtot  and   Alfred   Scott,   Riel's  Provi­ sional   Government  emissaries,  were  ac­ cepted   as  legal  representatives  from   the West.
There now  remained  the  most  impor­
tant   question of  all-that  of  sending a military  expedition  to   Fort   Garry. To Canada First  this  was  not  only  a matter of  revenge  or  of  the  safety  of "loyalists" still  at  Red  River,  but  also  of  a  possible move   by   the   United  States  at   a   time when   both   the  Canadian  and   Imperial governments seemed   incapable  of   reso­ lute   action.  To   Mair    and   Denison   in

OPINIONS &  NOTES



particular, metis, Fenians, French  Cana­ dians,  and  Yankees were generally tarred with  the  same  disloyal  brush  and  only  a show  of  force  could  save  Canada. And the  outcry   they  both  helped to  generate in  Ontario  was  placing the  government in  an  increasingly difficult   position.  The metis had  the support of Quebec, and  the "loyalists" that   of  Ontario. Ottawa had to satisfy both  and  at  the  same  time keep a wary eye upon  the  United States.
In    its   desperation   the    government found  a clever  compromise. By the Man­ itoba  Act  the  rights  of the  metis were  to be  recognized when  a  new  province was created  on  July   15,  1870.  At  the  same time  a combined force  of  British  regulars  from  Quebec and  Canadian militia from Ontario  was   to   be   despatched  to  Red River,  both  as an appeasement to Ontario and   as  a  warning  to  the  United States.  A. G.  Archibald of Nova  Scotia, the new Lieutenant  Governor, would   assume  of­ fice  in  August,   probably  just  before  the arrival   of   Colonel   Wolseley    and   his troops; until   then   Riel  was  to  continue his  Provisional Government.
But in this delicate balancing of olive branch and  sword  the suspicious  Canada Firsters immediately believed  that  they recognized  deception. It was all very well to   show   the   sword,   but   once   at   Red River  Wolseley should  make use of it; otherwise  Archibald  would   establish   his civil  government and  Riel  and  his  mur­ derers  would  escape  their  rightful punish­ ment.  Canada First,  indeed, did  not  be­ lieve that  the government really intended the   expedition  to  reach   Fort  Garry; it was  sure  that   Riel  would  be  granted an amnesty   and   Wolseley  recalled, Ottawa the  while  maintaining  that troops   were no  longer   necessary  at  Red   River.  How this  bent  for  blood  became mingled  with patriotic concern  for Canada's future in the  Northwest  is  well  illustrated  in  the final   melodramatic   episode   in   Canada
 First's   campaign  for  national unity  and sentiment.
Haliburton, who  until  now  had  taken little   part   in   the   excitement  over  Red River,  about July  18  happened to  be  in Niagara Falls  on  his  way  to  New  York and   England.  Upon  learning  that   Sir John Young,  the  Governor General, was at  the  Clifton House,  he decided to stop over  "and   see  him  about  an  important point    that    had    apparently   not    been thought  of,   viz.,   the   danger  that    the French laws  of  Quebec would  be  intro­ duced  into  the  North-West,"16  but  when he  discovered   that   the  vice-regal   party had  moved  to a smaller, more sequestered hotel,  he "felt  convinced  that  there  must have   been  something at   the   bottom of this  odd  move." The  following morning Haliburton found  Young,  and  "carefully veiling"  his  suspicions  by casual  conver­ sation,  was startled to hear Young remark that   he   expected  Sir   Georges   Cartier, Bishop  Tache and   Governor  Archibald to  arrive  almost   momentarily. At  once, said Haliburton, "the whole  truth flashed upon  me-'His  visitors  will  be on  their way  through  the   United States   to  Fort Garry,  to head  off Colonel Wolseley with an  amnesty.  The place  of  meeting is  a safe one for  them,  as in a minute or  two they  can  skip  over  to  the  United States and   be  out   of  reach   of  the   people   of Canada'." He immediately communicated to  Schultz   that   "mischief   is afloat" and urged  him "to  notify  the Twelve Apostles at  Toronto  (the   leaders of  the  Canada First  party)   to be ready  to strike  a blow" the moment they  confirmed his belief.
The  consequences in Toronto, whether activated  by  an   actual confirmation or not, were almost  immediate. Denison communicated  to  Wolseley,  urging   him to  press  on,  and   Ontario officers  in  the forces were exhorted that  if Wolseley's regulars   should   be  recalled  they  should "take their  boats  and  possessions and  go on at all hazards."17 When it was learned

211

OPINIONS &  NOTES



that    Cartier  and   Tache  were   to   pass through Toronto  on  their  way  to  meet Young  at  Niagara, Denison  informed the Deputy Adjutant  General that   a  hostile demonstration  of   "loyalists"  would   be held,     that     any    ceremonial   reception would  result  in  the  armoury being  taken "and that  we would  have  ten men  to his one,  and  if anyone in Toronto wanted  to fight  it out,  we were  ready  to fight  it out on   the    streets."  Cartier  and  Tache avoided Toronto, but  on  July  22  an  im­ mense  public   rally  was  held  in  the  city to  protest   against  any  possibility  of   the government's recalling the expedition and of  Archibald's travelling via  the  United States. "Shall our  Queen's Representative go  a  thousand   miles  through  a  foreign country to demean himself  to a thief  and a  murderer?"   "Men  of  Ontario! Shall Scott's blood cry in  vain for vengeance?"
-such, according to  Denison,   were  the
cries  of  the  outraged Toronto loyalists.18
And, also according to Denison  and his fellow   Canada  Firsters,   Young   did   not dare   to  send   Archibald  through  to  the United States-although historians (W. L.  Morton,  for   example)   are   dubious about   this  point. Certainly, however,  on the   morning  of  August   24,  I87o,   nine days before Archibald, Wolseley and his troops  reached Fort  Garry,  Riel had  fled; and   the  revenge-thirsty, particularly the Ontario  militia, had   to be satisfied  with several  days of drunkenness and the abuse of metis and  French Canadians alike.
But Canada First,  although deeply dis­ appointed  by  Riel's  escape,  hailed   the "capture"  of   Fort   Garry   as  a  victory. And  in its appraisal of the whole affair  is again   to  be  found   a  mingling  of  incon­  gruities,  a melange of sense and  nonsense. Haliburton, for example, maintained that  if he had  not  acted  promptly that  day in Niagara  Falls,  "the future of half  a con­ tinent    would    have    been    mortgaged; Colonel  Wolseley  would  have  been  made a  laughing stock,  and  might   never  have

212
 won  his peerage; while a race  war  might have  grown  out  of  these  questions,  com­ pared   with   which,   that   in  South  Africa  would    now    seem   a   trifle."  Sir   John Young,   he  added, would  not  even  have ascended  to  the  peers  as  Lord  Lisgar.19
Denison and   Mair  maintained that   but
(
The  despatching of  the  Wolseley  ex­ pedition  undoubtedly created  and   in­  creased   national antipathies, and  a  gov­ ernment more   beleaguered than  that   of Canada at  the  time  could  hardly  be ima­  gined.  But  the  quite monumental  journey  of  the  troops  became a  concrete indica­ tion   to   the   United  States  that   Britain  really  was  supporting Canada in  her  ex­ pansion  westward; as  Donald Creighton affirms, Secretary Fish  reluctantly had  to conclude that   "there was  little   prospect of  getting half  a  continent for  the  Ala­ bama   claims."23    History   may   concede, therefore, that  Canada First,  in  its naive, clumsy,  often  unthinking way, by its role in  assuring that   troops  be sent,  went  far

OPINIONS &  NOTES



to repair  the  breach that  its own precipi­ tancy  had  helped   to  cause. The  tragedy  lies in the fact  that  the expedition should ever  have   been  necessary-or that   an­  other   would   be   necessary   fifteen   years later.  For although both  served  their  pur­ poses,  they  could   not  redeem the  losses that   were   inflicted    upon   the   cause   of national  unity    and  upon    human   life itself.
Canada  First   did   not   live  long  after its finest  hour. As the  movement grew  in
numbers it  felt  the  need  of a  more  defi­
nite   organization  but   was   reluctant  to present   itself  as  a  political   party;  there­ fore  the  North-West Emigration  Aid So­ ciety  was established, not  only  to  further the  cause  of  western  settlement  but  also to  make   publicity  releases  and   to  orga­  nize  meetings.   Mair   became  Manitoba representative    and    his   correspondence with   Denison  reflects   the  society's  early success in  encouraging large  numbers of settlers  to head  for  Red  River  and  points west. Denison embarked on a lecture  tour extolling  "the  Duty    of   Canadians  to Canada"  (a   title   changed  in   Halifax, according to  Denison, because  of  "anti­ Canadianism," to "the  Duty of our Young  Men  to  the  State"), always  consistent in his  theme  of  the  two-fold  necessity  of a greater national spirit  and  of  the  British connection. Haliburton  lectured too,  but his  "Men of  the  North" ideology  began  to disturb the  others, not  so much  by its decidedly  racist emphasis as by its implied recommendation for  Canadian  indepen­ dence.  Foster  published his  highly  rheto­ rical "Canada First: or Our New Nation­ ality"  in  1871 and  in  1874 founded the Nation,   a   weekly   journal   "thoroughly national  and  independent  of  party   and  of  all  interests  opposed   to  the  broadest patriotism."24   He   also  helped   to  found the  National Club  in Toronto and  joined with    Goldwin  Smith,  recently    arrived from  Oxford by way of Cornell, in  writ­ ing  articles  and editorials for  the  Nation
 and  for the Canadian  Monthly, the latter being   almost   an   unofficial   party   organ for the group.
But  one  of  Mair's  published  commen­
taries  of this  time  will again  point  to the cross-purposes   and   contradictions   inhe­ rent    in   the   group.  In  the   Canadian  Monthly, Mair  extolled  Canada as  "the hope  of the  despairing poor  of the world
... , the  haunt of  the  Indian, the  bison,
the  antelope, waiting with   majestic  pa­ tience   for ... the   schools,   the  churches, the  Christian faith  and  love  of  freedom of  the  coming  men."25 The  possibly  op­ posing   connotations  of    "the  despairing poor  of  the  world" and  "the Christian faith," the  cliche   of  the   "majestic  pa­  tience" of  the  Indian,  are  made  explicit by  Mair's  comments  in   later   years.  "If we are  to be a  country it  must  be made so  by  Canadians  of  all  races,"  he  wrote Denison.  But,  "if  others  had  seen  eye  to eye with  us, the machinations of the H.B. Co.  and   Quebec  would   have   been   de­ feated  and  we should   have  had  millions  of  our   own   people ... instead  of   being  submerged by foreigners." And  through­ out   are  to  be  seen  references  to  "semi­ barbarous hordes" of  immigrants and  the  "inundation of  alien  races  with  wild  so­ cialistic  opinions and  bizarre  religions."26
Goldwin Smith had been welcomed enthusiastically by Canada First; his statement of their  aims-"to cultivate Canadian patriotism, to  raise  Canada above   the  rank   of  a  mere   dependency, and   to  give  her  the  first  place  in  Cana­ dian   hearts"27 -could   not   have   been more   apt.   But   the   group's   confidence, indeed, could   not  have  been  more  mis­ placed.    Under   Smith's   influence,   the movement entered the  political arena as a party,  and  under attack by Liberals  and  Tories,    its   divisions   became    apparent. Smith  showed  his  true  colours  as an  ad­ vocate  of  independence, even   of   conti­ nental   union,   and   even  Edward  Blake's  brief  joining  the  party could  not halt  the


213

OPINIONS &  NOTES



ensuing  disintegration.  By  the   end   of
1875  Canada First   had   perished,  even­ tually  suffocated, probably   by,  as  much  as anything, the  ashes of the  kind  of fire that   had   begun   to   glow   first   in   that  "Comer Room" inI 868.

NOTES

1 "The  Canada  First Movement and  Cana­ dian  Political Thought,"  Journal  of  Cana­ dian  Studies, 4  (Nov. 1969),  16-26;  "The Relevance  of   Canada  First,"   Journal   of Canadian Studies, 5   (Nov.   1970),  36-44; The   Sense   of  Power   (Toronto:  Univ. of Toronto Press,  1920), 49-77·
2   Canadians  in  the  Making   (Toronto:  Long­
mans, Green, 1958),  294·
a  George T. Denison, The   Struggle   for  Im­
perial Unity (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1909),
II.
4  Queen's University Library, Mair Papers, MS.,  "Article for  Free Press," ca. 1905.
5   Ibid., Mair to  R.  G.  MacBeth (March  19,
1923).
6   Canada   First:   A   Memorial    of   the   Late William A. Foster, Q.C.  (Toronto: Hunter, Rose,  1890),  77·
7   Bibliotheca  Canadensis  (Ottawa: Desbarats,
1867), viii.
s Mair  Papers, Mair  to   MacBeth  (March
19,  1923).
9  Mair Papers (Dec. 20, 1868).
1o   See  my  Charles  Mair:   Literary  Nationalist
(Toronto:  Univ. of  Toronto Press,  1965),
52   ff.,   and    "Poets  and   Politics:  Charles Mair at Red   River," Canadian   Literature, No.  17  (Summer 1963), 6-21.
n The  Struggle   for Imperial  Unity, pp.  13-14·
12  Mair Papers (March 10, 1869).
1s  The Struggle   for Imperial  Unity, p.  22.
14  Ibid.
15   Toronto Leader  (April 7,  1870).
16   The quotations relevant to  this  episode are from "How a  Cabinet Secret Leaked out and   the  Result," privately printed by  Hali­ burton  in    1899   and  now    in  the   Mair Papers. Denison quoted  the   article  in  full in  an  obituary of  Haliburton,  published in the   Canadian Magazine,  17   (May 1901),
126-30·
17 The  Struggle   for Imperial  Unity, p. 37·
18   Ibid.
19  "How a  Cabinet Secret Leaked out."

214
 2o    Mair Papers, Mair to  J. B. Allen   (Nov.  23,
1923).
21 Ibid., Mair to  R. G.  MacBeth  (March  19,
1923).
22    Ibid., Mair to Allen.
23  Dominion of  the   North    (Toronto:   Mac­ Millan, 1957), 319.
24   Goldwin Smith, intro. to Canada  First:  A Memorial, p.  1 o.
25    8  (July and  August 1873), 2-8 and 156-64.
26   Public Archives of  Canada, Denison Papers (Aug. 13,  1889; Aug.  10,  1903; and Good Friday, 1902  respectively).
27    Canada  First:  A Memorial, p. 3·

NORMAN SHRIVE

LA SOCIETE ROY ALE DU CANADA

L'HOMME MODERNE AIME BEACOUP NIER. Il  se plait  aussi  par  bonheur a retourner aux   sources   et  a  cultiver  les  retrospec­
tives. Conscient de l'acceleration de l'his­
toire,   du   telescopage  des  generations et de   la  fuite   eperdue  du   temps,   dont   il eprouve un  sentiment aigu,  il  prend   un
vi£  plaisir   a  se  pencher  sur  son   passe,
meme  le  plus  recent, et  sur  le quotidien ephemere, voire  a le cerner  de pres avant qu'il  ne  lui  echappe a jamais.  Or,   les
Canadiens, surtout ceux  pour  qui  la  de­ vise "Je  me souviens" n'est  pas une vaine expression,  sont   de   plus   en   plus   nom­
breux   a  partager  ce  courant  de   notre
epoque. Et  pourtant il n'y a rien  de  bien
vieux  au  Canada, si ce  n'est  la  geologie et   la   topographie  du   pays;  en   fait,   le Nouveau-Monde  qu'ils   habitent est  loin d'etre aussi lourd  d'histoire que  le Vieux­ Monde.  Neanmoins,  les   Canadiens  se
plaisent    aujourd'hui  a  parler,    par   ex­
emple,   du   Vieux   Quebec et   du   Vieux
Montl'eal, comme  ils s'ingenient a rebatir
Louisbourg, la Place  royale de Louis XIV et Fort  William, a faire  revivre sur l'ecran l'epopee de  nos  "voyageurn" ou  celle  de
la  construction de  la  voie  ferree  reliant
!'Atlantique  au   Pacifique.  Ils   profitent

OPINIONS & NOTES



rnerne du  rnoindre anniversaire pour faire le   point,    dresser   un   bilan,   prendre  la rnesure  de  leur   taille   et  proclarner leur identite culturelle. Ainsi la Societe  royale du    Canada   elle-merne,  qui    cornptera cent  ans d'age en  1982, est-elle  sensible a ce retour au  passe, puisqu'elle a deja commence des travaux d'approche, non seulernent pour  celebrer dignernent son premier centenaire rnais  aussi  pour  me­ surer  !'impact de sa contribution a la vie intellectuelle du  pays.
Pour   rna  part, je  me  suis  penche sur un   aspect    particulier  du   passe   de   la Societe   royale  du  Canada. Mon   propos est de  vouloir  repondre, dans  cet  essai, a
une   question  que   je   me   suis   souvent posee et qui  rejoint, j'en  suis sur, celle de rnes confreres: quel a ete I'apport de l'Acadernie des Lettres et des Sciences hurnaines a la Societe  royale  dans  le dornaine des hurnanites et des sciences sociales? Qu'a-t-elle contribue a cet egard au  pays, de  1882 .a nos  jours?  Sans doute est-il  plus  facile  et  plus  rapide de  poser la  question que  d'y  repondre, cornrne  il est  plus  aise  et  plus  courant de  dire  du mal   d'une  Academie, sans   la  connaitre de  l'interieur, que  d'y  poser  sa  candida­ ture   et   d'y   etre   elu   par   ses  confreres. C'est   que   le  sujet   est  cornplexe et  im­ mense,   car   il  couvre   l'activite  intellec­ tuelle   d'une   Acadernie,  presque  cente­ naire,  dont  !'influence est  loin  de  sauter  aux  yeux.
Retenons, au depart, qu'il  s'agit  ici uniquernent de  l'Acadernie des Lettres et des Sciences  hurnaines a la Societe  royale,
c'est-a-dire des  rnernoires  ou  des  travaux
soumis  par  les rnernbres  francophones de cette   Acadernie; il  ne  saurait etre  ques­ tion   a  cette   place   ni  de  !'Academy  of Humanities  and   Social   Sciences   ni  de l'Academy   of   Science,   car    la   Societe royale  cornprend ces  trois  Academies. Je rn'en  tiendrai done exclusivernent ,a l'Aca­ dernie   dont  nous  faisons   partie,  laissant
a mes confreres anglophones la  tache  de
 parler  des Academies qui les concernent directernent.
Il   convient  aussi   de   preciser,   avant
d'entrer dans  le  vif  du  sujet,  les  princi­ paux   traits caracteristiques de l'Academie des   Lettres  et   des   Sciences   hurnaines. Ses  membres  forrnent un  groupe homo­  gene;  la plupart sont originaires du  Que­ bec ou  ils habitent;  quelques-uns appar­
tiennent  a l'Acadie,  a !'Ontario et   a
l'Ouest canadien. Non  contents de  tenir
chaque printernps une assernblee  generale dans  le campus d'une universite du  pays, ils procedent regulierernent, depuisI 944, a une presentation publique de leurs nouveaux confreres; celle-ci  a  lieu  deux ou  trois  fois  par  annee, tantot a  Mont­
real  ou  a Quebec, tantot a Ottawa ou  a
Moncton, parfois   a  Trois-Rivieres ou  a
Sherbrooke, par  exception dans  l'Ouest. Les discours  des recipiendaires et de leurs parrains, sans  oublier les  allocutions de circonstances prononcees par  le president de l'Academie, sont publies fidelernent chaque annee sur  les presses de  l'Irnpri­
rnerie  du  Bien  Public, a Trois-Rivieres.
Ils forrnent  aujourd'hui une collection de
33 volumes. Le  33e, paru  a l'autornne de
1978, cornporte 190 pages, le 34e sera presque   aussi   volurnineux.  L'Acadernie des  Lettres et  des  Sciences  hurnaines est la seule a faire  pareille presentation  pub­ lique  et  pareille publication  annuelle.
Ce   qui   la   distingue  aussi   des   deux
autres  Academies,  c'est  la  grande variete des  disciplines   qui   y  sont   representees. Loin   d'etre  la   chasse   gardee  d'erudits universitaires,  cornrne   on   se  plait   trop souvent   a   l'affirrner  a   tort,   on   y  voit figurer  dans ses rangs  des ecrivains d'irna­ gination:   auteurs  drarnatiques,   poetes, romanciers, hommes et femmes, des  jour­  nalistes, des acteurs, des  philosophes, des diplomates, des  educateurs, des  techno­ crates, des administrateurs, voire des gens d'affaires, des archivistes et des bibliothe­ caires,   qui  ont    ecrit    et   publient   des ouvrages  de   qualite.   L'Academie   corn-


215

OPINIONS & NOTES



prend  cette  annee  ( I 979)   I I I  membres, tous elus au scrutin secret.
Outre  l'assemblee annuelle printaniere au cours  de  laquelle  les membres  peuvent lire des communications et des memoires, outre   les seances  publiques de  presenta­ tion de nouveaux confreres tenues chaque annee  en   differentes   villes,  l'Academie
organise depuis  trois ans des reunions regionales, permettant  ainsi  a tous  de  se
rencontrer, de discuter des questions d'interet commun et  de participer meme
a des debats instructifs. Je m'en  voudrais
de   ne   point    mentionner  aussi   les   28
Studia  Varia  et  les 20 Symposia, dont  Ia collection  complete  compte   aujourd'hui
48   volumes.    En   voici   quelques titres: Presence de demain  (1957), Aux sources du  present  (I 960), Les universites  cana­ diennes  d'aujourd-hui  ( r96I),  L'enseig­ nement   superieur   dans  un  Canada   en evolution   (I 966)' Structures  sociales du Canada   franfais   ( 1966),   La   recherche au Canada   franfais  ( 1968), Le  Canada franfais  d'aujourd'hui  ( I970), Le  Rap­ port  Parent,  dix  ans  apres  ( 1975), Les facettes	de   l'identite   amerindienne
( I976). Les Studia  Varia sont ordinaire­
ment   le  fruit   de  Colloques. II  y a  aussi
les colloques proprement  dits;  Ia Societe en  a  tenu  20 depuis  1970, Ia plupart sur des   sujets    scientifiques.  La   distinction n'est  pas toujours tres nette entre  Studia Varia   et   Symposia.   Retenons  que   les
Studia   Varia   remontent  a  I956   tandis
que  les Symposia  datent de  1970.
Quoiqu'il en soit, on le voit par  ce qui precede, l'activite de  l'Academie des Lettres et  des  Sciences   humaines ne  se
limite   pas  a Ia  publication annuelle  des
memoires  presentes  a  l'assemblee   prin­
taniere de Ia Societe.  Elle comprend aussi
Ia   publication   de   Presentation   depuis
I 944, des Studia  Varia depuis  I 956 et des Symposia   depuis    1970.  Ajoutons, pour etre   complet, !'attribution annuelle de Bourses  de  Ia  Societe  royale,  de  prix  et
de  medailles, comme  Ia medaille P. J. 0.

216
 Chauveau et Ia medaille lnnis-Gerin. On aurait mauvaise grace  d'oublier aussi que Ia  Societe   royale  du  Canada, fondee   en
I882,  a un  moment ou  les  revues  et  les
societes   savantes etaient  encore   presque
inexistantes au   pays,  a  ete  et  est  restee I'Alma   Mater,  Ia  mere   nourriciere,  Ia pepiniere  de  creations  de   toutes   sortes, telles   que   le   Conseil   de   recherche  en Humanites, Le  Conseil  de  recherche en Sciences  sociales,  le  Conseil  des  Arts  du Canada, Ia  Bibliotheque nationale,  etc. Que  d'enquetes n'a-t-elle pas  aussi  ap­ puyees  sur  les archives et  les  manuscrits, les  bibliotheques et  !'heritage  du   passe, les humanites et les sciences sociales! Que d'Academies et  d'Associations, de  revues et  de  societes  n'a-t-elle pas  fondees,  par­ ramees  ou   patronnees,   souvent  meme maintenues   par   plus   d'un  membre de I'Academie  des  Lettres  et  des  Sciences humaines!  C'est   surtout depuis   1950  et
1955  qu'on assiste a une  veritable  florai­
son de  revues  et de societes, a Ia creation
desquelles notre  Academie est loin  d'etre restee    indifferente.  Reste    a  ecrire    un
chapitre  inconnu de  notre   histoire  cul­ turelle, qui   est  celui   de  Ia  contribution de  nombreux membres de  notre   Acade­
mie a Ia creation et au developpement de
revues  et de societes d'histoire et de geog­
raphie, de  droit  et de  philosophie, d'eco­ nomique, d'ethnographie et de sociologie, de  folklore, de  linguistique et  de  littera­ ture,  d'archeologie et  d'histoire de  !'art, d'antiquite classique  et  de  langues  mo­ dernes, de  patrologie  et  d'etudes  de  Ia Renaissance.  Meme  I'Academie  canadi­ enne-frant;aise et l'Academie des Sciences morales   et   politiques   n'auraient   jamais  vu   le   jour    sans   Ia   Societe   royale   du Canada. Celle-ci   joue  aussi  un  role  im­ portant au  plan  international, par  exem­
ple,   a  !'UNESCO,  a  !'Union   Acade­
mique  Internationale (UAI), au  Conseil
international de philosophie et de sciences humaines  (CIPSH)  et  a  Ia  Federation
internationale  des    etudes  classiques

OPINIONS & NOTES




(FIEC). Elle a meme  contribue plus que tout  autre organisme culture! canadien a
la  creation  recente, en  fevrier   1979,  du
Centro  Academico Canadese,  a  Rome,
qui  deviendra un  jour  Ia  21e Academie
de Ia Ville Etemelle.
En  bref, !'apport individuel et collectif de 1'Academie des Lettres et  des Sciences humaines est loin d'etre  negligeable. Cela dit  en  guise  d'introduction, je vais main­ tenant aborder les  trois  points  suivants:
1. Les memoires.  2. Les Studia  Varia. 3·
Les volumes de Presentation.

Memoires
C'est  avec  une  regularite que  les  Me­
moires  paraissent  chaque  annee  depuis
1882.   Ils   constituent  aujourd'hui   une serie  imposante de 96  volumes,  mesurant
25c  chacun, massifs  et  solides,  relies  et
souvent omes d'illustrations. Ils  sont  re­ partis  en  quatre series:  Ia premiere et Ia deuxieme  comprennent   chacune    12
volumes  de  1882  a 1894,  puis  de  1895 a
1906  respectivement;  Ia  troisieme  com­
porte   56  volumes,   de   1907  a  1962;   Ia
quatrieme, formee de  I6  volumes,  va de
1963  a 1978.  Pour  les avoir feuilletes  et
parcourus  attentivement  moi-meme,   je
sais  de   certitude  qu'ils   renferment  une riche   documentation qui  ne  peut  laisser indifferents les  chercheurs et  les  specia­ listes de  Ia geographie et  de  l'histoire, de Ia  linguistique et  de  Ia  litterature, de  Ia philosophie et  de  Ia  sociologie,  de  l'eth­ nographie et  du  folklore, du  droit et  de
!'education. Le  lecteur y  trouvera, a sa
grande surprise, bon nombre d'etudes qui
n'auraient  jamais   pu   para!tre dans   une revue,    le   Canada  ne   possedant  guere avant I 920 de  revues  specialisees  qui au­ raient  ete   heureuses  de  les  publier;  les Alfred  Vallette y etaient  encore presque  inexistants. Etaient aussi rares avant 1920 les editeurs qui,  tels les limiers,  recherch­
aient  les oeuvres  pour  les publier a leurs
risques   et   perils.   Les   Albert   Levesque
n'etaient  certes   pas   nombreux  au   pays
 avant la  premiere Grande  Guerre. Aussi n'est-il  pas etonnant de voir, par exemple, Leon  Gerin,  Benjamin Suite,  Ivanhoe Caron, E. Z. Massicotte, le juge L. A. Prudhomme et  Marius Barbeau   profiter
a l'envi  de  Ia genereuse hospitalite de  Ia
Societe  royale  pour  y publier  leurs etudes
particulieres; c'est  meme  en  France que
Leon  Gerin, ancien  president de  Ia  So­ ciete   royale,   finira   par   se   trouver   un editeur.
Tels quels, les Memoires de l'Academie des  lettres  et  des  sciences  humaines  for­
ment  a l'heure presente un  total  de  83o; je les ai comptes moi-meme un  a un,  de I882  a 1978  inclusivement. Une  antho­
logie de cette  vaste production vient de para!tre  en   reimpression   a la   maison
Kraus-Thomson  de   New   York,   a  qui
notre   Academie  est  tres   reconnaissante
pour  ce beau  geste gratuit; cette  meme maison  nous demande de vouloir  bien preparer une Anthologie des Colloques tenus  depuis   I970.  Les  Memoires  consti­ tuent  le temoignage eclectique de groupes  humains importants dans  Ia  cite; ils for­  ment  Ia chrestomathie de  plusieurs  gene­ rations    de    travai1leurs   intellectuels   et traduisent les reactions de  nombre d'esp­ rits   eveilles   en   face   des   problemes   de l'heure.
Ci  qui  frappe aussi  tout  lecteur  atten­ tif,  c'est  que   les  M emoires  sont  loin  de porter  exclusivement sur   le   Canada et
sur  l'histoire du  Canada. Contrairement
a ce que pense d'ordinaire meme le public
cultive,    il   est   question  egalement  de
l'Antiquite classique, du  Moyen  Age et de Ia Renaissance, de droit et de philosophie, de  pays etrangers et de litteratures etran­
geres. Ainsi, pour  me  limiter   a Ia  littera­
ture  franC<aise, le lecteur pourra y lire des
articles   sur  Bossuet  et  Theophraste  Re­
naudot, Beaumarchais et  Louis  Bertrand de   La   Tour,  Diderot, Ernest   Hello   et
J. F.  G.  Reaumur, Hugo   et  Lamartine,
Stendhal, Flaubert et Barbey  d'Aurevilly.
Et   cela   conceme  uniquement  les  Me-

OPINIONS & NOTES



moires  parus  entre   1882  et   1g42.  On aurait done   tort   de  croire  que  les  Me­ moires portent uniquement sur  le  Cana­ da;  la  Societe   royale  a  beau  avoir   son
siege  social  a Ottawa, ses  membres  ont
beau  oeuvrer au  pays,  ils  n'ecrivent  pas
tous  sur  le  Canada. Cependant, les  spe­ cialistes  des  etudes  canadiennes  forment, comme  il se doit,  un fort pourcentage des auteurs de Memoires; les sujets canadiens y sont  sans  doute plus nombreux que  les autres.
L'Academie des  Lettres et des sciences humaines est  bien  connue pour  son  mal­
thusianisme.  De   r882   a  rg52,  elle  n'a
jamais  compris plus  de  40  membres; en
rg52,  elle  en  comptait 43,  en   rg72,  83, et  le  nombre  de  ses  membres   s'eleve  a
1 1 1 en  1g7g. Sans  vouloir  vous marteler le cerveau  de  statistiques, souffrez que  je vous  dise  queUes  furent  les  plus  riches annees   de  production de  Memoires:   r6 en  r885,  rg38 et  rg3g;  15 en  rg37,  rg45 et  rg73; 14 en  1884 et  rgrs; 13 en  rg42 et  rg63;  12 en  rg26,  1g28, 1g32, 1g44 et rg6g;    11  en   1887,   rg27,   1g33,   1g34, Ig35>  Ig4I,  Ig43,   Ig48,   Ig7I   et   Ig78. Les   membres  de   notre   Academie ont publie   en   moyenne  neuf  M emoires  par
annee de  r882 a nos jours.
Pour    faciliter  la   comprehension du
sujet,  j'ai divise les 830 memoires en deux blocs;  le premier, allant de  1882  a rg42,
comprend 520 memoires en 6o ans; le second,  allant de  Ig43  a Ig78,  comporte
310  memoires  en   36  ans.  En   rgo8,  la
Societe  royale  confiait .a l'un  de ses Peres
fondateurs, Benjamin Suite,  la  tache  de
dresser  un  index  general de  tous  les  tra­
vaux  parus de  1882  a rgo6.  Non  seule­
ment   Benjamin  Suite   s'acquitta  de   sa
mission avec competence et celerite,  mais il  publia  aussi,  de   1882  a  sa  mort   en
rg23, 43 Memoires, soit 38 en fram;ais  et
5 en anglais. Unique record  dans  les annales  de   Ia   Societe   royale.   Francis Audet   en  presenta  20,  Marius  Barbeau et   Ivanhoe  Caron  en   presenterent   17

218
 chacun, l'abbe Henri-Raymond Casgrain, Gustave Gosselin  et  Napoleon Legendre en  publierent 16  chacun, Louis  H.  Fre­ chette et Victor Morin 1 5 chacun, I'abbe
Elie  J. Auclair,  Mgr   Emile  Chartier et
E. Z. Massicotte 14 respectivement, Leon
Gerin 13, Albert Ferland et  Mgr  Olivier Maurault 11,  N.  F.  Dionne, Mgr  Ame­ dee Gosselin  et Rodolphe Lemieux 1o chacun. Ajoutons que  178 poemes  furent Ius  et  commentes en  de  nombreuses seances, entre r882 et  rg42, par  les poetes eux-memes et leurs  confreres. Sans  doute la  poesie  y etait-elle en  honneur. En  re­
vanche, a l'exception de ceux de Maurice
Hebert, on   ne  releve   guere   de   poemes
dans  le second  bloc de Memoires, de  rg43
a Ig78.  Autre temps,  autres moeurs.
Les  Memoires  de   1882  a  rg42  com­
prennent  un  bon   nombre  de  monogra­ phies  consacrees, par  exemple, a des seig­ neurs  et  a leurs  seigneuries, :a des parois­ ses,  a des  personnages de  premier  plan  ou a des gens moins connus; j'en ai releve
une   centaine.  Mais   il   est   des   themes favoris sur lesquels on me permettra d'insister. Que  d'etudes-go exactement
-sur les  Indiens  (hurons, algonquins, iroquois et  autres) ! Les  auteurs y analy­ sent  la  langue, les  traites,  les  coutumes, les   legendes   et    les   moeurs.   Voici    le nombre que  l'on  consacre aux sujets  sui­ vants:  le  Canada (52);  Quebec  (32), Montreal  ( 20) , Trois  Rivieres  ( 4) ; les guerres et  les !'evolutions  ( 22) ; I'educa­ tion  ( 22) ; la litterature canadienne ( 21) ; la   France   et   les  Franc;ais   du   Canada ( 21) ; la   langue  et   la   litterature  fran­ aises
et  les  historiens  ( 16) ; Ia  religion   et  la culture 14  respectivement;  Jacques-Gar­ tier  ( 12) ; les E tats-Unis ( 1 2) ; l'industrie ( 1 1 ) ;  1'Acadie    ( 1 1 ) ;   Ia   bibliographie
( 1 o) ; la musique, la peinture et la sculp­
ture  (ro); la colonisation (g)  et le Nord­ Ouest  (g) ; l'artisanat (8)  ; et  7  travaux
sont   consacres a chacun  des  sujets  sui­
vants: Champlain, Economie, Ethnogra-

OPINIONS & NOTES



phie,  Forts   militaires, Philosophie,  Poli­ tique  et  Theatre. Quant au  folklore, a Ia traite des fourrures, et aux Peres Recolets,  ces trois themes ont  fait chacun !'objet de
6 communications. Notons, en passant, de rares  essais sur  le bilinguisme et le  regio­ nalisme,  les archives et  les  bibliotheques. Et  dire  que  I'Academie des lettres  et  des Sciences   humaines n'a   jamais    compte chaque annee dans  ses  rangs  plus  de  40 membres  actifs,   de I 882  a  I 942!  Que  dis-je?  C'est seulement en  I952 qu'elle en comprendra   43   et   depuis  Iors   elle   a presque  triple  cet  effectif   puisque   nous sommes  I I I  aujourd'hui.
De  I943 a  I978 inclusivement,  les membres  de   notre   Academie  ont  com­ pose  et  publie  3 I 0 memoires en  36 ans. Ces demiers sont loin de porter seulement sur  le Canada; il y est  question  aussi de l'Angleterre   et   des   Etats-Unis,  de   Ia Grece  et  du  Mexique. Le recit  de voyage ayant   ete  eleve  a  Ia  dignite d'un genre  Iitteraire,   Ies    communications   sur    ce theme   ne   font   point   defaut.   Sophocle, Denys  d'Halicarnasse et  Plutarque, Guil­ laume Bude,  Montaigne et Sir  Philip Sidney,  Racine et Beaumarchais, Voltaire et  Mirabeau, Alfred   de  Vigny   et  l'his­ torien  Arnold Toynbee: tels sont Ies ecri­  vains  de l'Antiquite, de  Ia  Renaissance et de  l'epoque modeme qui  ont  fait  !'objet d'etudes  particulieres.   D'autre  part,    il n'est   guere   question  de  I'Acadie,  de  Ia petite  histoire  et de folklore  dans  Ies Me­ moires de  I943 a  I978. Les auteurs y ont  traite de   preference surtout  les  themes  suivants:  !'education  (27), les monogra­ phies  (I 9), Ia Ii tterature ( I 7) , Ia geogra­ phie  ( I6), le nationalisme ( I3), le Nord  et le Nord-ouest canadien (I I), les Etats­ Unis (II) , Ia genealogie ( 9) , Ia technique et   Ia   technologie   ( 7) , l'artisanat   ( 6) , l'histoire et  les historiens ( 6) , les  huma­ nites  (6), les beaux-arts (5), le dualisme linguistique et  religieux ( 5), Ia sociologie (5). On   ne  m'en voudra pas  de  relever aussi a cette  place  les nmns des membres
 de   notre   Academie  qui   ont   presente Ie plus grand  nombre de travaux entre  I 943 et  I 978:  Jean  Bruchesi, Pierre  Daviault et Leon Lortie chacun 5; Jean-Charles Bonenfant et Gerard Morisset, Leopold Houle    et   Arthur Maheux, chacun 6; Charles-Marie Boissonnault et Donatien Fvemont   chacun  7;  Jean-Marie   Gauv­ reau,   Gustave   Lanctot et  Guy  Sylvestre
chacun 8;  Gerard  Parizeau et  J. J.  Le­
febvre  chacun 9; Benoit  Brouillette ( 10) ;
Mgr    Olivier    Maurault   (I I); L.   Ph. Audet   (I 9) ; Maurice Lebel   ( 2 I ) .
Tout lecteur  attentif des  Memoires  ne
peut  s'empecher de  remarquer  l'extraor­ dinaire  variete  des   sujets   qui  y   sont abordes par leurs auteurs.Cela est vrai tout  particulierement de Ia periode I943-I978,  au  cours  de  Iaquelle  les  themes  les  plus hetel'OClites qui  soient  font  l'objet   d'une communication. Aussi est-il impossible  de proceder  a  cet   egard   a   un   classement systematique, faute de pouvoir y discerner un   lien,  une  ligne   de  force,   un  centre d'interet, un fil conducteur. On  dirait des Melanges,  des  Varia.  Reste  a  dresser  Ia table  onomastique et  analytique des  tra­ vaux   de   notre    Academie parus  entre I943 et  I978. Peut-etre contribuerait-elle a faire ressortir de fac;on plus Iimpide  Ia contribution des  membres a  l'activite de notre  Academie. Pour  rna  part,  ce survol ne vise qu'a  deblayer le terrain et a frayer Ia voie. D'autant plus qu'il  n'existe pas encore  d'index general de  Ia Societe,  de t882 a nos jours.
Nos  successeurs  ne  manqueront  certes pas  de  creer   un  jour  un  comite  de  spe­ cialistes  chevronnes pour  dresser  un bilan ou  exprimer des  jugements de valeur sur cette  enorme   production.  Dans  l'attente de  cet   heureux  evenement, contentons­ nous  de  dire,  sans  crainte de  contradic­ tion, que  Ia sagesse meme  de Salomon ne pourrait se  prononcer comme  il convient sur  Ia  qualite des  Memoires. Ne  vaut-il pas  mieux  Iaisser  ce  travail d'evaluation aux chercheurs et aux  curieux, aux  histo-


219

OPINIONS &  NOTES



riens et aux sourciers qui, je le sais de certitude, consultent nos M emoires dans
les  bibliotheques? Libre  a eux  d'en   tirer
le  meilleur   patri   et  d'en  separer le  bon
grain  de l'ivraie. N'empeche que  mon aper<;u, si rapide soit-il, reste un point  de depart  en   vue   de   recherches  plus   pro­ fondes   que   celles  que   j'ai  menees  moi­ meme.  D'ailleurs, c'est  ainsi  que  je  con­
<;ois mon  rapport.
II  va   sans   dire,   mais  encore   vaut-il mieux  le  dire,  que,  depuis  I943-I944, la presentation  de   nouveaux confreres en
seance  publique et  la publication de  tra­ vaux  consecutive a cette  ceremonie, nous privent chaque printemps de memoires  a
la  reunion annuelle de  la Societe  royale; fait  bien  connu, bon nombre de membres elus  depuis I 944,  Se contentent de  pro­ noncer   leur   discours   de  circonstance  et ne  presentent  pas  de  memoires.  Ils  n'en continuent pas  mains  pour  autant, il est vrai,   d'ecrire  et   de   publier   dans   leur  propre  discipline.  Quel  dommage qu'ils  ne  viennent  pas,  toutefois,   nous  lire  de temps  en  temps  une  communication de leur  cru!  Les  memoires   ont   leur  raison d'etre  pour   une  Academie, comme   les articles  pour une  revue.
Ce  qui  contribue aussi  a la  reduction
du  nombre des  memoires,   c'est  la  crea­
tion,  surtout depuis   I950-I955, d'un bon nombre de revues specialisees. Nous assis­ terions  meme  de nos jours, pour employer
un  mot  a la mode  en certains organismes culturels d'Etat, a une  "proliferation" de revues,  comme   a une  "proliferation" de
societes  savantes; d'aucun trouvent le terme   inexact ou  pejoratif; ce  qu'il  y a
de  sur,  c'est  que  les revues et  les societes se sont  multipliees a un  rythme effarant,
surtout depuis  une  vingtaine d'annees, et ne  sont   pas  toutes   de  haut   niveau.   De sorte  que  beaucoup de membres de notre Academie se desinteressent des reunions annuelles et  preferent ecrire  dans  les revues de leur specialite, comme si la com­
position    de   memoires  a  !'intention de

220
 confreres et  de  lecteurs eventuels et  la redaction d'articles de revue  pouvaient s'exclure ou  etre  incompatibles. En  tout
cas on pourra essayer de faire  avaler  cette couleuvre a d'autres que  moi.  Tout  tra­
vailleur intellectuel vraiment digne  de ce nom  peut  fort  bien composer a la fois des
memoires et  des  articles de  revue: il n'a que   faire   d'une  distinction aussi  creuse que  sophistique. Cela  dit,  il ne  reste  pas mains   vrai   que   la  creation  recente   de revues  de  qualite, ce dont nous nous rejouissons  les  premiers,  n'est   pas   sans avoir  d'impact sur la production annuelle
des memoires a la Societe  royale.
Mais,  pour  qui  sait  prendre du  champ
pour  voir !'ensemble et  rester  confiant en
!'esprit createur de  l'homme, il sera  tou­ jours  agreable et  loisible  de  publier  des travaux dans   une   Academie  qui  comp­ tera  bientot un  siecle  d'existence et  qui,
a  rna   connaissance  du   mains,   est  loin
d'etre moribonde. Le Journal des Savants
( 1665)   parait  tou jours,   et   pour   cause. En   revanche, qui  sait   la  longevite  mo­ yenne des Revues? Si quelques-unes ont la
vie dure  et  continuent a paraitre bon  an
mal  an,  un  grand nombre vivotent  long­
temps   avant de  mourir. Tandis que  les memoires d'une Academie ont  chance de durer.   Encore  plus    peut-etre  que    les Studia  Varia, dont il va  maintenant etre question et  qui  sont  une  autre forme  de memoires.

Studia  Varia

La  Societe  royale  du  Canada a  publie regulierement  jusqu'ici,  de   1956  a  nos
jours,  une  serie  de  48 Studia  Varia  et de
Symposia,  consacres  a un  theme   precis.
C'est  1'Academy  of Science qui  en  a fait
paraitre le  plus  grand  nombre. La  plu­
part des  volumes sont  si apprecies qu'ils sont   aujourd'hui hors   commerce.  Aussi est-ce   surtout  dans   les  rayons  de   bibli­ otheques qu'on  a  chance de  les  trouver au  complet. Que ces etudes  particulieres soient  le fruit  d'un colloque ou  non,  im-

OPINIONS &  NOTES



porte   peu; ce  qui   compte, c'est   de  les savoir  groupees sous  un  titre  unique. Les
trois Academies a la Societe  royale camp­
tent   des  Studia  Varia  a leur  credit  res­
pectif.
II n'est  pas  rare  de voir  l'un  des notres collaborer en  anglais ou en  franc;ais a un
volume   de  !'Academy of  Science   ou  de
!'Academy  of   Humanities  and    Social
Sciences.  Je  tiens  a souligner le  fait  en
passant, il me parait d'autant plus impor­
tant  que  le contraire n'existe pas;  je n'ai releve   en   96  ans   que   deux   memoires
d'anglophones .a 1'Academie des Lettres et
des Sciences  humaines. Ainsi le volume  I
des Studia  Varia  compared quatre essais dus a la plume  de Pierre  Daviault, "Fran­
c;ais et  anglais   du  Canada," de  Jacques Rousseau, "L'Indien  de  la  foret  boreale, element  de   formation  'ecologique," de Jean-Charles  Falardeau,  "L'importance des  Langues secondes  et  les  sciences  de l'homme," et de Pierre  Dansereau, "Lan­ guage,    Communication and   Culture." Mais,   laissant   de  cote   les  volumes   pre­  pares  et publies  par 1'Academy of Science et  1'Academy   of  Humanities and  Social Sciences,  je veux seulement faire  ressortir
!'apport de l'Academie des Lettres et  des
Sciences  humaines a la  composition et  a
la   publication  des  Studia   Varia   et  des
Symposia   rediges   en  fran ais.
titres  des  six  volumes  qui  ont  paru jusqu'ici: Aux sources du present ( 1960), Structures   sociales  du  Canada   fran(ais ( 1966),    Visages   de   la   civilisation   au Canada   fran(ais    ( 1970) , Le   Canada fran(ais  d'aujourd'hui   ( 1970),   La   re­ cherche  au Canada   fran(ais  ( 1960),  Le Rapport  Parent, dix ans apres  ( 1975).
Voila  autant de  sujets  qui  traitent de
problemes de l'heure et revelent du meme coup  la  participation de  notre  Academie
a la vie courante; loin  de s'isoler  dans  sa
tour  d'ivoire, elle sait  aborder les affaires
culturelles et  sociales  du  jour  et apporter ainsi  une  contribution  collective au  pro­ gres du  pays.
 Le  Rapport  Parent  a fait  couler  tant d'encre et de salive  depuis  sa parution et son implantation dans  le systeme scolaire
du   Quebec  qu'on  serait   mal   venu   de songer a y apporter du  nouveau. Vaste  et
complexe  est le sujet  aborde dans  La recherche  au  Canada  fran(ais.  Aussi n'est-il  pas surprenant qu'il  peche par omission. Sans doute le survol des dix collaborateurs ne manque-t-il pas de sub­ stance. Mais  on  peut   regretter !'absence d'aperc;us  ou  de  notes,  par  exemple, sur
1'Antiquite:  archeologie, histoire,  littera­ ture,  philosophie, sur  le Moyen Age et la Renaissance,  sur   le  folklore  et   la  geo­ graphie, l'histoire  de  l'art,  la  litterature franc;aise et la litterature comparee, voire
!'edition de textes, la linguistique et la traduction litteraire. Or,  au Canada fran­ c;ais,  on   a  poursuivi beaucoup   de   re­ cherches   et   publie   bon   nombre  de  vo­ lumes  en  ces divers  domaines  depuis  un quart de siecle;  les recherches et les pub­  lications  en  cours  ne  manquent pas  non
plus  a l'heure presente en  ces  differents
domaines.   On   ne  doit   jamais   dissocier
recherche et publication.
Le volume  consacre aux  Sources du present (de 1910 a 1935) renferme des essais  tout  a fait   remarquables sur  l'en­
seignement, l'histoire  du  Canada, la  lit­ terature,  le  theatre, les  debuts  de   l'ere scientifique,   la  vie  politique  et  les  pro­ blemes  d'entente. Leon  Lortie y a  cont­  ribue   deux   articles, dont  l'un,  ecrit   en anglais,  a  pour   titre   "The  English  con­ tribution to  Quebec's  cultural life."  Les Structures   sociales  du   Canada   fran(ais comportent des  etudes  de  base  au  point  de   vue  scolaire   et   social,   juridique  et religieux,  economique   et   politique,  qui ont   beau  avoir   sensiblement evolue  de­ puis l'avenement de la revolution, appelee tranquille par  antiphrase, ne  conservent pas moins encore beaucoup d'interet pour l'historien des idees  et  des  institutions.
Je   tiens  Visages  de  la  civilisation  au
Canada   fran(ais,   Le   Canada    fran(ais

22I

OPINIONS & NOTES



aujourd'hui, Le  Rapport  Parent, dix ans apres pour  les trois Studia Varia  les plus etoffes   et   les  mieux   presentes.  Que   de sujets   instructifs et   pratiques  n'y  deve­ loppe-t-on  pas,  par   exemple,   sur   notre  litterature,  l'histoire du  Canada  et  nos historiens, le  joumalisme, la  radio  et  la television,   l'artisanat, les  arts  plastiques et  les beaux  arts,  sur  le financement et  la reforme de !'education, les sciences pures et  appliquees, les sciences de l'homme, la langue  et  les  lettres,  sur !'evolution poli­ tique,  les  perspectives economiques et  la situation   economique!  Tous   ces  divers
sujets forment une excellente  introduction a   notre   culture  et   a  notre   civilisation.
Ecrits   par    des   specialistes   cultives,   ils visent  beaucoup plus a rendre les lecteurs
conscients  de  !'existence  des  problemes qu'a  vouloir    y   apporter  des   solutions immediates; ils decrivent avec  acuite   un etat  present de la situation sans se leurrer sur  les points  faibles.  Ils restent  des essais encore   fort   valables,  qui  meritent d'etre Ius et etudies. A l'instar des autres  Studia Varia,   ils  constituent  une   contribution
dynamique et penetrante a la vie intellec­
tuelle  du  pays  au  plan  des  humanites et
des sciences sociales.
A  ces  Studia  Varia,  je m'en  voudrais
de   ne   point    ajouter,  pour   donner  un aperc;u aussi complet et exact que possible de notre  activite, les colloques de notre Academie  qui   ont   paru   dans   les   me­ moires,   comme  ceux  qui  ont  porte  sur La  technologie   au  service  de  l'homme
( I969), sur  L'infiuence de l'hiver { I970), La langue  franr;aise et la litterature cana­ dienne  d'imagination (I 960),  Les arts et les lettres  ( I 962),  L'enseignement  de la philosophie  { I963), ou  Vues   sur  notre temps   (I 97 I ) . L'Academie  des  Lettres et  des  Sciences   humaines,  !'Academy of Humanities and  Social Sciences  ont  tenu aussi   des   reunions   conjointes  sur   des sujets   tels  que:  Les  etablissements  fran­
r;ais   a l'ouest  du  lac Superieur   ( I954),
Le  Nord-Ouest  canadien   ( I 959),   Res-

222
 ponsabilites  des  universites   canadiennes ( I96o),  Population   ( I96I), Le   jargon scientifique  (I 962),  Refiets de l'enseigne­ ment  de la philosophie sur  notre civilisa­ tion  (I 963),  La conference de Charlotte­  town   ( I964),  L'enseignement  superieur au   Canada:   tendances   et   orientations ( I965), Le  Saint-Laurent  ( I966). Enfin
les  trois  Academies  a la  Societe   royale
ont  tenu  des colloques qui  ont  paru sous
forme   de  Studia  Varia  et  auxquels ont contribue bon  nombre de  nos  membres,
comme  dans  Presence de demain  ( I958), L'evolution:  la  science   et   la   doctrine ( I959), Les universites canadiennes d'au­ jourd'hui   ( I96I), La   population  cana­ dienne  et la  population  du  Grand  Nord
( I962)   et   Les  Pionniers  de  la  science canadienne  ( I966).

Presentation

L'activite de  notre   Academie ne  s'est pas   arretee  aux   Memoires, aux   Studia Varia  et  aux  Colloques. Elle  s'est  portee aussi sur la presentation de ses nouveaux membres au  grand public.  En  effet,  de­
puis   35  ans,  soit  de   I 943  a  I 978,  elle
publie  bon  an  mal  an  un  volume  intituie
Presentation, ou figurent les discours  des recipiendaires et  de  letu11 parrains. Dans
]a serie  complete Je Jecteur  trouvera I 23 travaux de longueur inegale: biographies, essais,   etudes,  memoires,   souvenirs.  Le droit, l'economique, !'education, l'ethno­
logie,  la  geographie, l'histoire, la  langue et  la  litterature, la  philosophie et  la  cul­ ture,  les sciences  sociales,  le  theatre et  la musique y occupent une  place  de  choix; l'artisanat et  le  joumalisme n'y  sont  pas
non  plus  negliges.
Le  point  de  vue  est  a la  fois  regiona­
liste  et  canadien; on  n'y  entend aucune
voix  de  deracine, encore moins  d'emigre de  l'interieur. Tous   les  orateurs  s'expri­
ment   alors   a coeur   ouvert, en   toute  li­
berte,    avec    autant  de   courage  et   de
franchise que  de  competence et  de spon­
taneite.  On    a   !'impression,  a  les  lire,

OPINIONS  & NOTES



qu'ils  eprouvent le vif plaisir  de dire  tout haut ce  qu'ils   pensent. Tel  est  l'un   des merites,  et  non  des  moindres, de  la  col­ lection  des  volumes  de  Presentation; on croirait  y  lire  des  auteurs, on  y entend des  hommes et  des  femmes   penser   tout haut   comme   des   explorateurs  polaires.  La    seule   mention   de   quelques   titres,
choisis  entre une  foule  d'autres, suffit  a
faire  ressortir  l'actualite et  le serieux  des
themes  abordes.
En   voici   quelques-uns,  d'ordre   litte­ raire,  qui  n'ont rien  perdu de  leur  inte­  ret: 1. Le  regionalisme  litteraire dans  le roman. 2. Notre  carence d'ecrivains natu­ ralistes.  3· Evolution de notre litterature;
ecueil  a eviter. 4· Quelques problemes du
romancier canadien-fran<_;ais. 5· De la valeur   de   toute   oeuvre  litteraire. 6.  La
critique: metier  exigeant. 7· Deux aspects du  metier  d'ecrivain. 8.  Le  milieu  physi­ que  dans  notre  roman. g. Marcel  Proust  et  la  critique des createurs. IO. La  jeune poesie.   I I .  La  grandeur de  la  poesie  et ses devoirs.  I2. La  probleme de l'origina­ lite  chez  un  ecrivain de  la  Renaissance: Pontus  de  Tyard.  I 3·  L'iconoclastie en poesie.  I4. Comment  je suis devenu ecri­ vain.   I5.  Emile  Nelligan et  Baudelaire. I6.  La  fonction  de  critique Iitteraire est­ elle  creatrice?   I 7.  La   diplomatie  et   la litterature.
Le   moment   est   tout    indique  pour relever  a cette   place  quatre essais sur  le
theatre respectivement intitules:  I.  L'es­ poir    de   notre    theatre.   2.   L'aventure theatrale. 3· Homme de  theatre et  crea­  teur.  4· Le theatre comme fac;on de vivre. Il va sans dire  que Ies questions de langue  et  de  survivance,  de  culture et  d'educa­ tion   sont   aussi   souvent  traites  par   les recipiendaires.   Le  droit,  Ia  geographie, I'histoire, les sciences  sociales  sont  autant de  disciplines en  faveur. Voici  une  belle
gerbe  de  themes, qui  suffisent  a montrer
que meme  des Academiciens ont  les pieds
sur  Ia  terre: 1.  Necessite   d'organiser la recherche  economique.   2.   Le   role   de
 l'Etat dans  la  planification  economique.
3· Evolution de  Ia  pensee  economique: Ia revolution Keynesienne. 4· Pour  une politique de stabilisation regionale. 5· Le Saint-Laurent, berceau d'une civilisation.
6.   Evolution   de   Ia   pensee   sociale   au
Canada fran<_;ais: Etienne Parent, Leon Gerin, Errol  Bouchette, Edouard  Mont­ petit.  7. Aspects  sociologiques  de Ia revo­ lution  scolaire.  8.  La  doctrine sociale  de l'Eglise.    g.   Introduction    aux   sciences sociales.  Io.  L'implantation  des  sciences
sociales  a I'Universite.  I I.  L'ethnologie du Canada fran<;ais. Un  projet  a realiser.
I 2.  Reflexions   sur   les  sciences   sociales d'hier et d'aujourd-hui. Ig. Le systeme scolaire   et   les  transformations   sociales. I4. Avenement universitaire des sciences sociales.  I 5· L'Universite dans  Ia societe industrielle avancee.  I6.  La  Petite  His­ toire.  I 7. Le  sens de  l'histoire. I 8.  De  Ia distance  en   histoire.  I g.   Comment  je conc;ois  l'histoire.  20.   La   fonction    de l'archiviste: une  vocation. 2 I.  Demogra­ phie.    22.   Le   registre   de   population: laboratoire conteste du  demographe. 23. Le  choix  des  juges.  24. Le  professeur  de droit  et  le  juge.  25. Le  role  du  praticien dans  !'elaboration des  regles de droit. 26. Formation   d'un    droit    canadien.   27. L'avenir  constitutionnel du  Quebec. 28. Le developpement de la culture generale du droit. 2g. Interpretation des structures du mecanisme judiciaire. go. L'approfon­ dissement  de  Ia formule federale de gou­ vernement. 3 I. La  culture et l'Etat.
On   le  voit  par   ce  qui   precede, cette seche  nomenclature, si aride  puisse-t-elle paraitre de  prime abord, fait  ressortir  Ia contribution  non   negligeable  de   notre
Academie a Ia  vie intellectuelle du  pays.
Et   je  n'ai  encore rien  dit  de  Ia  geogra­
phie,  de  Ia  Iinguistique, du  journalisme, de  la  philosophie, voire  de  la musique et de  Ia  recherche, dont  Ies essais  merite­ raient aussi  d'etre montes  en  epingle  au meme   titre   que   ceux   que   je   viens  de relever.   Il   y  aurait  lieu   egalement  de


223

OPINIONS &  NOTES



s'appesantir sur  les  points  de  vue  deve­ loppes  par  les parrains dans  leur  presen­  tation   des  recipiendaires. Mais  je  laisse
cette   tache   a  l'historien  des  idees,  des
courants  d'opinions  et   de   pensees,   au
chercheur litteraire et sociologique, qui auraient  tout   interet  a depouiller a cet
egard   les   33   volumes   de   Presentation parus   jusqu'ici. Ils  y trouveraient, outre une  mine  de  renseignements d'ordre bio­ graphique, bibliographique et  historique, une   plethore  de   points   de  vue,  de  cri­ tiques  et  de  suggestions,  d'aper us
mises au  point. Ce  travail  d'analyse reste a faire.  Ils  ne  perdraient certes  pas leur temps  a le  mener   a terme,  pas  plus  que les auteurs des  exposes  ne  l'ont  perdu   a ecrire   et   a  publier  leurs   travaux   per­
sonnels.
Le  marquis de  Lome, en  fondant  la
Societe   royale   du   Canada  en   1882,  a voulu   inciter  les  Canadiens a travailler
au  progres  de  leur  pays dans  les arts,  les lettres  et  les sciences  par  la  poursuite de recherches en  profondeur et  par  la  pub­ lication  de  travaux de qualite. Les mem­  bres   de   1'Academie  des   lettres   et   des sciences humaines eprouvent un vi£ senti­
ment  de fidelite  a l'ideal poursuivi  par  le
fondateur de leur  Societe; ils ont  prepare
et  compose  des  M emoires et  des Studia Varia,  ils  ont   organise des  colloques  et tenu   des   reunions;  ils  ont   meme   ose,
depuis  I 944,   presenter   chaque   annee leurs nouveaux confreres dans  une seance
academique a laquelle plusieurs  centaines
de  personnes sont  invitees  et publier inte­
gralement sous forme  de volume  les allo­ cutions   et   les  discours   de  circonstance. Non  contents de  se  reunir  chaque prin­  temps   dans   le  campus  d'une  universite canadienne  pour   y  lire  des  communica­ tions,  echanger des  propos  et former  des projets,    ils   poursuivent  des   recherches personnelles,  publient des  etudes  et  ecri­ vent   des   livres   qui   font   honneur  tout
ensemble  a la  Societe  a laquelle  ils sont
fiers d'appartenir, comme  ils sont fiers du

224
 pays dont ils font  partie. Ils sont  tous conscients d'apporter  une  pierre, si  mo­
deste  soit-elle,  a l'avancement des huma­
nites et des sciences sociales.
MAURICE LEBEL

ED. NOTE:  Roy Daniells, at  his death, was preparing a  parallel   essay on  the  Royal  Soci­ ety's  English  language contributions to  Cana­ dian   intellectual history.  Canadian  Literature hopes  sometime   to  publish   a  fuller  commen­  tary.
