$1.25  per copy



CANADIAN
liTERATURE
N°·22






LOUIS DUDEK  )IS M)IN OF LETTERS



Articles

BY WYNNE FRANCIS, MARYA  FIAMENGO, LOUIS DUDEK, NAIM  I TTAN,

Recollections

BY ETHEL WILSON


Reviews

BY THELMA MCCORMACK, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, FRANK DAVEY,
ROBERT  HARLOW, JOHN  F. HULCOOP, F. M.  FRAZER, GORDON  SKILLING, R. E. READ, WALTER YOUNG, JEAN-PAUL  MORISSET




A QUARTERLY  OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







UNCOMMERCIAL VOICES



Two ARTICLES in this issue deal in varying  ways with  the con­ tribution of the small  private presses to the encouragement of Canadian poets and even  occasionally   of  writers  in  prose.  The  tribute which   these  articles  imply  is hardly   sufficient   acknowledgment  of  the   debt   which   Canadian  authors  and readers owe to  the  men  and  women  who have  devoted  their  time,  their skill and their  financial resources,  often  extremely  unobstrusively,  to  providing the  means  by  which  writers  whose  work  do  not  at  first sight  look  commercially profitable can  be tested  out  by the  aficionados  in their art. The  record  of the private presses in  this  kind  of endeavour is more  than  impressive;  Contact Press,  the  most im­ portant and  durable of them  all, has been the first publisher for an extraordinary list of Canadian poets since accepted by the regular  publishers as writers  who will bring  prestige  to an imprint, if not profit  to a publisher's coffers.
Without the  private presses,  with  their  care  for  presentation which  gives  an
added pleasure   to  the  reading of  poetry,  and  without the  mimeographed little mags  which   one  reads  with   the  hope  of  finding  some interesting  new  talent fighting  against   one's  distaste   at  the  smudgy  and  ugly  pages,  Canadian  poetry might  still  be  very  largely  a community of verse-writers  listening  to each  other's voices in clannish  gatherings. At  times poetry  may take  on life from  the voice­ sometimes  a  life that  is not  its own-but  only  on  the  page  does  it  endure real examination and  survive.  Even  the  most fanatical supporters of  poetry  readings are  rightly  anxious to  get  into  print  at  the  first possible  opportunity, since  they know  as well as everyone  else that  reading  a poem from the  printed page is a far truer  test  than  listening  to  it,  muttered, ranted  or even  carefully  elocuted  by its creator, who  all too often  sounds  like its destroyer.
Not  only do  our  private presses print  poetry that  otherwise might  find  no way
to  a  reader, but  they  are  there  as a  constant   reminder to  the  commercial pub-


3

EDITORIAL



lishers of a duty  to literature  which they must expect to fulfil without  profit. To be just, though  some Canadian publishers have cut back severely on poetry since the 195o's, others are maintaining  a respectable record. This Fall at least six new books of verse are  either  just off the press or due to appear  almost immediately from  the large Toronto  houses. This is a far  higher  ratio to the total number  of new  books  published  than  one  would  find  in  London  or  New  York,  while it appears  thatin terms of actual sales of their worksCanadian poets are also proportionately  better  off than  their  British  counterparts. Without   wishing  to suggest that  Canada in 1964 is a poet's paradise,  the fact is that,  thanks mainly to the private presses and the little mags, the verse-writer has a better chance than ever  in  the  past  to see his work published,  either  at  best in elegant  print  or at worst in the uncertain  grey of the mimeographed  leaflet.
In  one  other  field-that  of local historyprivate publishing,  often  by the author  in collaboration  with an interested  printer,  has done a great deal of good work in  recent  years. Every province produces  books of this kind;  most of them are  mediocre,  some are sensationally  bad,  and  a few very good,  but  almost all of  them  make  a  contribution  to  the sum  of historical  knowledge,  even if their literary  merits are  often low. An example of how ambitious  and  useful this kind of undertaking  can  become is given by a massive volume of more than five hun­ dred  pages,  copiously  illustrated  and  entitled   Peace  River   Chronicles  ( $6.50, published   by  Prescott   Publishing  Company,   Vancouver).  This  volume,  col­ lected by G. E. Bowes from the narratives  of 81 travellers extending  over a cen­ tury  and  a  half,  and  flawlessly printed  by Morriss  of  Victoria,  is a remarkably rich source book for students of Western Canadian  history, and  also an example of fine book production  from which some at least  of our commercial  publishers might  learn  a great  deal. It  even has its literary  aspect, though  a rather  melan­ choly  one.  From  the  end  of the  nineteenth  century  onwards,  the  records  and narratives  show a depressing decline in style  and  descriptive  power;  the evident reason  is that  at  this point  professional  journalists  begin to displace  the  miners and  Hudson's  Bay men, the travelling  officers and  the squatters'  wives who felt so directly in their  daily lives the  rough  embrace  of an existence on the edge of the  world.  Perhaps  there is a  lesson in this for those who take  too easily to the idea that  the mass media may be the saviours of literature.
May the private  presses flourish and may the dedicated  amateurs  who operate them  receive from  readers the support  which  they deserve and  need if they are to carry on their indispensable functions in the literary world of modern Canada.



4



A CRITIC OF LIFE

Louis Dudek as
Man of Letters



f17nne Francis





ALL POETRY  NOWADAYS, anyhow, is someone's effort to
save  his soul." So  wrote  Louis  Dudek  in  the  first issue of his magazine Delta  in
October 1957.  The   "nowadays, anyhow," is an  interesting qualification. There were  times  perhaps when  poetry  could  and  did  perform other  functions. There were  times  when  there  were  other  means  of saving  one's  soul.  But  "nowadays" poetry  has  taken  on,  as Arnold  predicted  it would,  the  burden previously  borne by  religion.  Poetry, for  Dudek, has a moral  function to  perform-moral in the Arnoldian sense of "a criticism  of life." "There is not a creed which  is not shaken, not  an  accredited dogma   which  is not shown  to  be questionable, not  a received tradition which  does not  threaten to dissolve," wrote Arnold, "... more and  more mankind will  discover  that  we  have  to turn  to  poetry  to interpret life for  us, to console us, to sustain  us. Without poetry our science will appear incomplete; and most  of  what   now  passes  with  us for  religion  and  philosophy   will  be  replaced by  poetry." Arnold saw  poetry  as the  bulwark, in a  secular  society,  against the degrading commercialism and  industrialism of his day,  against  the  insensitivity, mediocrity and  flabbiness  of Philistinism, against  the effete  aestheticism  of "fart pour   fart,"   and   as  "capable of  wonderfully   helping  us  to  relate  the  results  of modem science  to our  need  for conduct, our  need for  beauty."
These  are  also essentially  the  views held by the  Canadian  humanist poet-critic Louis  Dudek. For   Dudek, as  for  Arnold, poetry  is  a  serious  search   for  moral truth. Therefore Arnold   could  say "For poetry  the  idea  is everything ... poetry

5

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



attaches its  emotion   to  the  idea; the  'idea' is the  fact." And  Dudek  after  him, "... it is what  you say with  language that  really  matters." Arnold  no more  than Dudek   would   have  accepted   the  new-critical dictum  that   poetry  is  primarily words,  or that  of Northrop Frye  that  "in  literature it isn't  what  you say but  how it's said that  matters." In a restatement of editorial policy in Delta recently  Dudek writes somewhat cryptically:

To extend the subject matter of poetry. In line with this, to look for new and necessary treatment and  techniques. Poetry, with symbolism and formalism on the ascendant,  lost almost all relevant content  to prose.... Every resurgence of poetry in the  past has come with a new sense of content.  The  subject  matter  is all here, crying for intelligent  voices: it is simply the  whole problem  of dealing effectively in  poetry  with  our  moral  and  political void....

The  poet,  for  Dudek,  must  constantly  take  account of life as it is being  lived. He  must  use  words  only  to  say  honestly  and  simply  what   he  thinks  and  feels about  that  life, to extract  its essential meaning. His function is not to make decora­ tive verses, forge new metaphors or illustrate myths,  but  rather to record in words the  results of his personal  explorations in the  various  dimensions of  actuality and to share  with  the  world  his search  for new depths of truth and  beauty  in human experience. Specifically,   Dudek  says,  the  modern  poet's  task  is  to  "redeem the actual"-to  find  "a  way  of knowledge  and  vision,  practicable  against  the  evil, unknown  to the absinthe  drinkers  and  the squares...." (better known  to Arnold­ ians  as the  aesthetes  and  the  Philistines.)
Dudek  differs  from  Arnold  in  that  he does  not  share  Arnold's reliance  on  the
residuum of  literary   culture. To  the  respect  for  the  cumulative records  of  the past  Dudek  would   prefer  the  simpler  appeal of  Wordsworth to  nature and  the direct  salute  of Whitman to immediate experience, albeit  with  the  philosophical overtones  of both  these poets. For it is primarily in a  joyous acceptance of nature and  in  a moral  assessment  of experience that the  poet  appears as his own  priest, his  goal  being  moral  wisdom and  each  poem an  "effort" to  save  his  soul. Furthermore, where  Arnold, Dudek  claims, merely  defined  the function of poetry, he  himself  has  pursued   that  definition  in  the  effort  to  discover  the  intellectual and   religious  bearings actually   apprehensible through  poetry. "The  residue  of religion  in  my  work," he  says, "appears as  a  modified   transcendentalism, and the  positivist  scientific  side  of  my  thought appears as concreteness and  realism. The  effort  to reconcile  the two is at the core of all my poetry."
Louis Dudek  at  46, tall, balding,  gaunt, with  a shy smile and  a wistful manner,

6

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



has  acquired over  the  years  a  dignity  of bearing  that   matches  the  soberness  of his thoughts. He  takes  a serious  view of life and  poetry  which  embraces at  once a shining  idealism  and  a flat-footed realism. He is known in literary  and  academic circles  for  his strong   opinions and  soft speech,  for  his warm  generosity  and  his unrelenting stubbornness, and  most of all for his complete  dedication to the  cause of Canadian poetry.  As a  poet,  he is still seeking a way  to successfully  relate  the diaphanous wings of his lyric gift to the clay feet of his empirical philosophy. But in  his  larger   role  as  a  man-of-letters in  mid-twentieth-century Canada  he  has already achieved  a stature of which  at least a temporary assessment may be made.
Dudek  was  born  a  Roman Catholic, of Polish immigrant parents, in  the  east
end  of  Montreal in  1918.  As  a schoolboy,  inspired  by  Poems  of the  Romantic Revival, he  wrote  many  verses in  the  fashion  of Keats  and  Shelley.  So  did  his sister.  In  fact  the  two  saw  themselves  as friendly  rival  poets  and  it  was decided that  a  meistersinger  contest  should  be held  to decide  which  of them  could  write the  better  poems.  Father Bernard, the local  parish  priest,  agreed  to act  as  judge. Each  of the  young  people  submitted twenty-five  poems, the fifty poems  all being written down  by  the  same  hand. Father Bernard  read  the  poems  carefully. He named the  best  poems  and  it  was  revealed  that  fifteen-year-old Louis  was  the author of them.   (His  sister, no doubt  disappointed at the  time,  is today  his most enthusiastic reader.)
Young   Dudek   apparently did  not  doubt  the  Father's wisdom  with  regard   to the  merit  of  his  poems.  He  continued to  write  poetry  through high  school.  But at  some  time  during adolescence  he did  begin  to doubt  the  faith  that  the  priest stood  for.  His  subsequent rejection  of organized  religion  and  his ever-deepening concern   for   poetry   are  closely  related.   Growing   up  in  a  working-class milieu during the  Depression years,  Dudek  came  to believe that  religion  was incapable of measuring the  complexities of modem life, that  it took inadequate account of both  the  beauty   and  the  horror  of  natural existence,  and  that  it  was  restrictive and  inhibiting in  its  view of  mankind. Poetry  on the  other  hand  offered  an  in­ creasingly   appealing way  of  assessing life.  Poetry,  Dudek  began  to  believe,  was not  a matter of words  and  sound  patterns or of literary  allusions but  of  language made  to  render   faithfully man's  response  to  real experience. Life  was  not  to be lived  from  a  book,  not  even  from  The  Book. And  poems  were  to  be  made  not from  other  poems  but  from  life.






7

A  CRITIC OF  LIFE



BY THE  TIME  Dudek  entered   McGill  in  1936  he  already entertained  this  serious view  of  poetry. Reading   Nietzsche,  Ibsen  and  D.  H.
Lawrence  strengthened  him  in  his rejection  of  religion. The  compelling  argu­ ments of these reformers could not, he felt, be accommodated within a dogmatic faith.  Reading   Whitman,  the  Imagists,  Sandburg, Spender  and  C.  Day-Lewis, on  the  other  hand,  convinced  him  that   poetry  could,  without  sacrificing  the actual -indeed, rather  by being saturated  with  actual  experience -say  some­ thing  of  importance   about  reality.  As an  undergraduate he  began  publishing poems of social protest in the McGill  Daily. As an Associate Editor  of the Daily he  also wrote  editorials  which  were  provocative  enough  occasionally  to be  re­ printed  in college papers across the country.  Thus  he was even then engaged in the  dual  activity  of writing  and  editing  which  was to  consume  his interest  in years  to  come. By the end  of his  college years, Dudek  was convinced  that  his vocation was poetry, while as a profession he chose journalism. Upon graduation, therefore, he set out as an apprentice  journalist, getting odd  jobs with advertising agencies  as  a  copywriter  and  doing  free-lance  work  for  The   Montrealer  and other  papers.
Meanwhile,  he  kept  up  his association  with  the  young  men  of literary  per­
suasion at  McGill, spending his lunch  hours and  other free time at the offices of the  student  newspaper  and  continuing  to  publish  poems in  the  Daily. Another poet publishing in the Daily at this time was Irving  Layton. At a Literary Society meeting  in  1940  the  two men  met  and  recognized  each  other  as poets having much  in  common.  Dudek was sufficiently enthusiastic  about  Layton's  poetry to make it the object of his first publishing venture.  Using the facilities and  knowl­ edge  he  had  acquired  at  the Hayhurst  Advertising  Agency,  Dudek set  to work to produce  a book of Layton's  poems. The  job was never completed  but  mean­ while the  poets became close friends. Layton introduced  Dudek  to John  Suther­ land, who in 1941 had begun to edit the Montreal  little magazine First Statement. Dudek  felt an  immediate  affinity with  the aims of the new  magazine.  Within  a short time he was closely engaged in its production.  His name is readily associated with those of Layton and Sutherland in the poetic renaissance of the Forties; but looking  back  he  now  insists "I always felt  myself  'third'.  Sutherland was  the leader  and  editor,  Layton  was  'the  poet'-we  all expected  he would  soon be recognized-and I  was best at  handling  the  mechanics  of the printing  press." The   modesty  of  this  reflection  should  not  obscure  the  significance  of Dudek's experience  with  First  Statement. His  direct  association  with  the  venture  lasted

8

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



only about  two years but  they were crucial  years in his development.
In  the first place,  Dudek's knowledge  of Canadian poetry  was broadened. John Sutherland  had   read   fairly   widely,  especially  in  Canadian  poetry,   and   knew personally  or through correspondence many  poets across the  country even before he  began  First Statement. It was perhaps Sutherland's determination to foster a native   tradition in  poetry   which  served  to  strengthen Dudek's interest  and  to focus  his attention on  Canadian literature.
Secondly,  the existence  of the rival Montreal magazine Preview  and its talented poet-editor  Patrick    Anderson  stimulated  the   First  Statement  writers,   Dudek among them,  to  read  the  British  moderns,  especially  Auden, Barker  and  Dylan Thomas, in order  to follow  and  to attack  Anderson's poetic  theory  and  practice. On  the other  hand  Dudek  read such American moderns as Hart Crane, Williams, Edgar  Lee  Masters, E.  E.  Cummings and   Kenneth  Fearing in  order   to  find models  and  arguments for  First Statement  predilections. Such  intensive  reading and  the ensuing  vigorous  debates  helped  Dudek  to clarify  and substantiate further his own  views of poetry  and  its function. He  became  more  adamant in his belief that  to be vital poetry  must be rooted in experience and  must not become "literary" or  be allowed  to rest in  conventional patterns. Reflections  of his reading and  his views can  be seen in the  poems he was writing  at the time -poems rich in social content   and  personal observation-which vary  from  free  verse to tightly struc­ tured  rhythmic patterns with  many  experiments in  between.
Thirdly, Dudek's share  in the  actual  production of the  magazine deepened his awareness  of  the  dependence of literature upon  the  physical,  material and  eco­ nomic  exigencies  of publication. Watching First Statement grow  from  its mimeo­  graphed form  into  print, learning to operate the rickety,  ancient  handpress, con­ tributing from  his own  pocket  to buy  paper  on which  to print, sharing reluctant decisions  to  cut  size  and  format to suit  financial  means,  these  and  many  other practical  aspects  of  publishing a  literary   magazine   impressed  upon  Dudek  the stringent conditions which  society  imposes on  poets.  It is  typical of him  that  he could  not  accept  these  conditions without  profoundly  questioning them.  Indeed  he was to spend  the  next  twenty  years attempting to understand their  origin  and to overcome  their  pressure  in so far  as he could.
By the end  of  I943,  Dudek, employed  by day as a copywriter in an advertising agency,'  was becoming restless in his  job. He  made  a decision  to leave  Montreal

' The  writer  sitting at  the desk next to him writing French copy was Yves Theriault. Dudek  had  early  contact   with  several  writers  destined  to effect  a  renaissance in French-Canadian letters.


9

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



and  to get  out  of the advertising field. He  and  his wife Stephanie, whom  he had first met  at  a  First Statement "open  meeting", left in  1943  for  New  York where Dudek  was  to spend  the  next seven  years.
His  departure from  Montreal did  not,  however,  signify a loss of interest  in the Canadian  literary scene.  Throughout the  New  York  interlude he  kept  in  close touch  with  Canadian friends.  He  corresponded regularly with  Alan  Crawley  of the  West  Coast  poetry  magazine  Contemporary Verse, with  Raymond Souster  of Toronto, and  with  Irving  Layton  and  others  in  Montreal. He  continued to pub­ lish poems and  articles in First Statement even after  it became amalgamated with Preview  to form  Northern Review.
Furthermore, while  he was in  New  York,  Dudek's recognition as a Canadian poet  grew.  As early  as  1944  he  had  appeared as  one  of the  poets  presented in Unit   of Five,  edited  by Ronald  Hambleton and  published by Ryerson. In  1946
Ryerson  published his first separate book under the title East of the City. In   I94 7 he  was  well  represented  in  Sutherland's Other  Canadians; and  several  of  his poems  were  included, the  following  year,  in  A.  ].  M.  Smith's revision  of  his anthology, The   Book  of Canadian Poetry.
Meanwhile, in  New  York,  Dudek  was  being  exposed  to  new  ideas  and  new literary   associations.  He  had   originally   registered   at  Columbia  University  for courses  in  journalism and  history but  found  himself,  in his second  year,  engaged in  a  Master's programme, taking  lectures  in  literature from  Lionel  Trilling
and  in history  from  Jacques Barzun  and  the  Canadian historian  J. B. Brebner.
Trilling's liberal  ideas served to wrench  Dudek  from  his rather narrow political base  and  to expose  for him  the superficiality of the  brand of socialism  which  he had  favoured while  in  Montreal. The  ensuing  change in  his  political  thinking, and  the  increasing though  grudging respect  he  was  gaining for  academic  intel­ lectuals,  were  reflected  in  his letters  at  the  time,  and  were  at  least  in  part   re­ sponsible  for the  eventual  break in his relations  with  Layton, who remained com­ mitted   to  more  or  less doctrinaire Marxism and  who  thoroughly detested  aca­  demicians of any kind.
Professor   Brebner's influence   on  Dudek   was  more   personal   and  direct  than
Trilling's. The  Canadian poet  A. G. Bailey had  written warmly  of Dudek  to his friend  Brebner   and   as a  result  Brebner  took  a  personal interest  in  his progress. Dudek   had  already conceived  the  plan  of  his  Master's thesis-it  was  to  be  a study  of the  effects of commercialism on writing under  the  title "Thackeray and the  Profession  of Letters" -when  Brebner  persuaded him  to read  A  Revolution in  European Poetry  by Emery  Neff. The  book  made an  impact on  Dudek  and

10

A CRITIC OF LIFE



when  he  later  met  the  author he was even  more strongly  impressed. Neff  was a scholar  in  the  tradition of A. H. Thorndike at Columbia. Thorndike's Literature in  a  Changing  Age  and   Neff's  Carlyle  clearly  provided   the  lead  for  Dudek's growing   interest   in  the  sociology  of  literature. Under  the  influence   of  Emery Neff  he decided to pursue,  beyond  the  Master's level, his interest  in  the  relation of  literature to  technological and  commercial factors  in  civilization. He  at  first proposed   to  study  the  profession  of letters  "from Roman times  to  the  present." But by the time  he was ready  to begin work on the topic, in the form of a doctoral thesis, it had  been  narrowed and  focused  on "The Relations between  Literature and  the Press".
Apart  from   his  academic  associations   Dudek   found   many   new  friends  in
literary   circles  in  New  York.  Among   these  the  most  important for  his  future career  were the poet Paul  Blackburn, the novelist Herbert Gold, and  Cid Corman, editor  of the  literary magazine Origin. He  had  also come  under  the  influence  of the  poetry  of  William Carlos  Williams  and  Ezra  Pound. It was while  he was in New  York,  too,  that  he  began  his correspondence with  Pound at  St.  Elizabeth's Hospital in  Washington, D.C.  Through such  associations  Dudek  kept  in  touch with  current experiments in  writing  in  the  United   States  and  was  able  to find outlets  for  articles  and  for  some of the  poems  which  he continued prolifically  to produce.
Thus  during his years in New York Dudek's academic orientation grew stronger
and  his poetic  development continued. Meanwhile his interest  in  journalism as a career  was abandoned. Though he did some free-lance writing, his studies  and  his poetry  now  absorbed almost  all his time  and  energy. He  was, by the  late  Forties, seriously  preparing himself  for  an  academic career.  Desperate for  money  at  one point,  he  rushed  down  to City  College  of New York  to apply  for  a  job teaching Sociology   to  evening students, since  no  openings   were  available in  literature. As  luck  would   have  it,  the  Sociology  office was closed  by  the  time  he  arrived. "Just as well!" he says now,  "I find it hard  to imagine  myself teaching Sociology! Anyway,  while  I was  standing outside  the  office feeling  at  a loss, someone  told me of a position  open  in the English department and this time I was lucky enough to  get  the  job."  So  it  was  that,  as he  began  work  on  his doctoral thesis  toward the  end  of his  New  York  sojourn, he became  not  a  journalist but  a teacher. He found  the experience not as alien to his taste as he had  thought. He had  previously believed  that   to  be  a  journalist was  to  be  in  close  touch   with  actualities. But journalists,   to  be  successful,  must  too  often  take  on  the  colour  of  their   times. Dudek  wanted very  much  to change  the  colour  of the  times,  to be in a  position


I I

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



to criticize  and  evaluate  contemporary life. It  was  becoming clearer  to him  that for this purpose  there were at least two more fundamental means  than  journalism. One  was certainly poetry;  and  it began  to seem likely that  teaching was another.
At  McGill  University, meanwhile, the  English  Department had  been  attempt­ ing  to  establish  a  policy of  having  "Visiting Poets" on  staff  as  lecturers  for  ex­ tended  periods.  Both  A. M. Klein  and  Patrick Anderson had  previously  enjoyed this  distinction. In  1950,  Dr.  Harold Files, then  Chairman  of  the  Department, wrote  to Louis  Dudek  inviting  him  to apply  for  such  a  position.




bE IDEA   OF   RETURNING  to  Montreal appealed to  Dudek. He was psychologically  ready  to come home. From  the  distance of New York he had
mourned the  lag in poetic activity in Canada which  had  set in after  1947. There were a variety  of reasons for this lag, one being the dispersal  of the leading  writers who  had  supported the little magazines  of the  Forties,  another being  the growing conservatism of John Sutherland and  his gradual disenchantment with  Canadian moderns which,  reflected  in Northern  Review, eventually disqualified  that maga­ zine as an outlet  for  new Canadian writing.  No other  little  magazine of  compar­ able  seriousness  existed  in  Canada until  Tamarack Review  rose from  the  ashes of  Northern  Review  in  1956.  In  the  interim, Canadian  commercial  publishing houses,  traditionally  timid,   had   again   become   reluctant  to  invest  at  a  loss in Canadian writing, especially in poetry.  Even Ryerson, who  had published the new poets  generously  in  the  194o's,  narrowed their  scope  on  the  retirement of Lome Pierce  from  the  firm.
Thus in  1950,  Canadian poetry  was  languishing from  neglect  on  the  part  of publishers.  Dudek   was  convinced   of  this  rather than   of  the  possibility  that  no good  writing   was  being  done.  As for  himself,  he  had  been  pouring out  poetry throughout all  his  years  in  New  York.  He  was  ready  to  publish. He  had  sub­ mitted   a  second   manuscript to  Ryerson  in  1950,   and   it  was  their  decision  to publish  only  a  handful of his poems in chapbook form  (The  Searching  Image)  that   perhaps set  the  spark  to  his discontent. "I  thought a lot  of myself in  those days,"  he says now,  "I  believed  myself to be a good  poet  and  felt that  my work deserved  more  attention that  the  commercial publishers were willing  to give it."  The prospect   of  returning to  Montreal as  a  "Visiting Poet" at  McGill  Uni­  versity  was  no  doubt  a pleasant  boost to his ego. It was  true,  he still harboured

12

A CRITIC OF LIFE



some misgivings  about  the  alliance  of poetry  with academic life. His appointment would  seem  ironic   to  those  who  remembered  his injunctions against   such   an alliance  in  the  pages  of First Statement (August   I 944). But  he had  gained  con­ siderable   respect   for  some  college  professors  since  that   time  and   it  no  longer  seemed  to  him  quite  so inevitable that  vigorous  poetry  could  not  survive  in  the atmosphere of the  university.
So  in  I 95 I he  came   home,   carrying   three  significant   possessions -an   un­ finished   Ph.D. thesis  on  the  relations  of  literature and  the  press,  a  file of   the American magazine Origin, and  a determination to  revitalize  the  poetry  move­  ment  in  Canada by initiating private  publishing  ventures.
Upon  arrival at  McGill  his exuberance was somewhat dulled  by the  discovery that  the  "Visiting Poets"  policy  no longer  obtained. He  found  himself  teaching, instead, English   Composition  and  survey  courses  in  the  daytime, and   a  single course  in  modern poetry  in the  evening  Extension  Department of the  University.
But  being  back  in  Montreal had  other  compensations. He  was  able  to renew many   old  friendships with   writers  and   to  make  contact with  several  younger poets  eager  for  encouragement. And  he  had  not  been  in  town  very  long  when he received  a  phone  call  from  Betty Sutherland, then  married to Irving Layton, urging  him to reopen  his heart  to his old friend.  The  two had ceased to correspond since  about I 947 when  Layton  had  taken  violent  exception, in a series of letters, to  Dudek's changing opinions,  especially  in regard  to political  thought, while  he was  at  Columbia. The   reconciliation  made  in  1951  was  to  prove  fruitful for Canadian letters  throughout the Fifties, though by the end of that  decade the two poets were  to be again  bitterly  estranged.
Layton  had,  of course,  been writing  sparely  but steadily  throughout the Forties. But,  aside  from  his frequent contributions of poems  to  magazines, he had  pub­ lished  only  one  book  (Here and  Now) by  I950. Contrary to the expectations of those  who  had  known  and  liked  his work  in the  early  days,  Layton  had  not  yet been  "discovered" and  acclaimed by either  the  commercial  publishing houses  or
the  critics.  Even   A.  J. M.  Smith,   who  had  given  Dudek's East  of the  City   a
favourable review  in  1947  and  included Dudek's poems  in  the  I948  revision  of his anthology, had  not as yet admitted the talent  of Layton. Thus Layton  himself was  more  than   receptive  in  I95I   to  Dudek's messianic  enthusiasm in  regard to publishing.
Raymond Souster,  "the other  First Statement poet  from  Toronto", had  fared but  little  better  than   Layton. He  had  appeared, along  with  Dudek, in  Unit of Five  ( I 944)  and  in a selection  When We  Were  Young published by First  State-

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



ment  Press in  1946, and  again  in  Go  To Sleep  World    (Ryerson,  I947).  In
195I, when Dudek returned,  Souster was bringing out a little magazine, Contact, from  his Toronto  address,  and  nursing  a  growing  file of his  own  unpublished poems, though  Ryerson was scheduled  to bring  out  a few of them in an eight­ page chapbook  (City Hall Street) that very year.
The  three  poet friends, with their common needs, grievances and dreams, met
together  in the summer of I951 in a house on Dudek's  grandmother's farm near Charlemagne, Quebec.  On  this occasion Dudek  dumped  on  the  table, in front of Layton  and  Souster, the file of Origin  which he had  brought  back from New York. The  three  friends pored over the magazine.  They  spent  many  hours criti­ cally  discussing its merits and  its relevance  to  their  own  ambitions.  Souster,  it seems, was especially impressed by Corman's magazine;  Layton and Dudek were more critical. At any rate, as Dudek was to write ten years later, "The result was a string  of new writers in Souster's Contact, Layton's appearance in Origin, the Layton  discovery  by  William  Carlos  Williams,  and  some  of  the  new  work  in
CIV In, the  magazine  we started  soon after."
The  I95 I meeting at Charlemagne  had other important consequences. Shortly thereafter,  the three  poets, determined  to see their own work published,  as well as  that   of  other  deserving  Canadian  poets,  founded   Contact   Press. Souster's Toronto   home  became  the  headquarters of the  press but  the  editorial  responsi­ bility was shared  equally by all  three. Among  books to come off the  press in its first few years were Cerberus  (poems by Dudek,  Layton  and  Souster), Twenty­ four Poems  (Louis  Dudek), Canadian Poems  1Bso-1952  (edited  by Dudek and Layton), Love  the Conquering Worm (Layton,  I953)  and The Transparent Sea (Dudek,  I 956). The editors were also on the lookout for other worthy candidates  among  contemporary  poets. The  first result of their search  was their  publication of  Trio   (poems  by  Eli  Mandel,  Phyllis Webb,  and  Gael  Turnbull)  in  I954· Later,  Contact   Press was to publish  the  work of  F.  R.  Scott,  W. W.  E. Ross, George  Walton  and  R. G. Everson, from among the older names;  and books by Leonard   Cohen,   Henry   Moscovitch,  George  Ellenbogen,   Daryl  Hine,  D.  G. Jones,  Alfred  Purdy and  Alden Nowlan from  among  the younger  poets.
By the end  of the Fifties the imprint  of Contact  Press had  become a prestige symbol among writers. Today  in  I964 it is thriving,  though  its real success is not to be  measured  in  money. Two  of the founding  editors  remain,  Layton  having
·withdrawn in  I956 to attend  to his own burgeoning  career.  Dudek  and  Souster have  recently  been  joined  by  the  poet  Peter  Miller  who shares  their  idealism and  lends the  practical  aspect of his mind  (and  generously sacrifices his pocket-

A CRITIC OF LIFE



book)  to the  growing  organizational needs of the enterprise.
There seems  no  doubt that  the  concept  of this  publishing venture originated with Dudek.  Contact Press exists today as a concrete expression not only of the enthusiasm  and   zeal  with  which   he  returned to  the  Canadian scene  in  rgsr, but  also of a deeply  ingrained trait  of his character : the  determination to render his ideals  into  effective  action.
Another example of this determination to make good ideas  work is his activity
among   the  younger   poets  of  the  Fifties.  Shortly  after  returning to  Montreal he had  written  an  article  "Ou Sont  les Jeunes?" (in  Souster's Contact)  calling  for young  writers  to  carry  on  the  work  of the  Forties'  generation. And  he, together with   Layton, helped   found a  little  magazine, CIV /n,  edited   by Aileen  Collins in  Montreal, which  was  designed  to stir  up  the local scene. CIV /n ran  for only seven  numbers but  it  had  desirable  effects.  Younger  writers  attracted by it,  or reacting against   it,  have  since  started   little  magazines  of  varying  fortunes  and
merit,  but  all  playing  their  role  of giving  a  public  hearing to new  poets.
One  such  recent  magazine, Cataract, will be remembered perhaps chiefly for its  contribution to  the  final  break  between  Layton  and  Dudek. A  rift  between the  two  older  poets  had  been  growing  since  rgs6  and  in  the  ensuing  years  the younger   poets  in  Montreal tended  to split  into  camps  in  support of one  or  the other.   Hoping to  attract  attention to  their  magazine thereby, the  editors  of Cataract  solicited  an  article  from  Layton  which  appeared in their second  number (Winter,  rg62)   under the  title  "An  Open  Letter  to  Louis  Dudek." It was  a scurrilous  letter  in Layton's practised  style of personal  abuse and  four-letter invec­ tives. It is difficult,  upon  reading it, to decide  just what  Layton  was objecting to, since  his  attack   was  made in  a  confusing  fashion,  on  several  different levels - personal,   literary   and   ideological, to  name   a  few.  But  it  is  clear  that   Layton treated Dudek  as a traitor to a cause;  Dudek  appears as a professed realist turned intellectual, as  a  proletarian  turned bourgeois,  as  a  man  of  the  people  turned academic, and   as  a  poet  turned critic,  among   many  other  "infidelities." Most readers   were  appalled  at  the  violence  and  crudeness  of  the  letter.  In  its  third  and   last  number  (July  rg62)   Cataract   printed   a  spirited   defence  of  Dudek  written   by  George  Ellenbogen. Dudek  himself  did  not  reply  in  print.
Layton  and  Dudek   had  been  growing  apart since  rg56. That year  had  been an  important one  for  each  of  them.  Layton,   having  attracted the  attention of the   public   and   of  commercial  publishing   houses  both   in  Canada and  in  the United States,  decided  to  withdraw from  Contact Press and  to strike  out  on  his own.  He was, indeed, about to embark  on his astonishing, much-publicized career

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



as Canada's best known  and  most controversial poet. In  this phase of his develop­ ment  he has combined a rich  poetic talent  with  a flamboyant campaign in public relations  and  has  emerged  a literary  and  financial  success  unprecedented in  the history of Canadian poetry.
Dudek,   on  the  other   hand,   claimed   his  doctorate from   Columbia in  1955,
advanced gradually to become  Associate Professor  within  the  English  department at  McGill,  and  published  his doctoral thesis as a  book  under  the  title  Literature and  the  Press in  1956. Though he did  not  become  as well known  to the  general public as  Irving  Layton, Dudek, within the   next   few   years, won   respect among literary  and  academic colleagues for his publishing enterprises, his critical articles,  his lectures  and  poetry readings.  He  by no means  gave  up writing poems, nor  his vocation  as a poet. It was rather that his commitment to poetry  as a way of life  had  broadened in  its implications. Like  Ezra  Pound, whom  he so much admired, Dudek  felt  the  need  to spread   the  gospel  of  poetry  and  to  justify  his faith  by works as practical as possible. Thus the encouragement which  he offered to young  poets, for  example,  took the form  not  only of advice  and  criticism  and financial assistance  where needed  but  also of the establishment of further publish­ ing outlets for their  work.
To  this  end  he  embarked towards  the  end  of  the  Fifties,  on  two  significant publishing enterprises. One  was  the  founding of  Delta  magazine and  the  other the  establishment of  the  McGill  Poetry  Series.  The latter is largely  a  personal venture. It receives  no  kind  of support from  McGill  University and  is not  sub­ sidized.   Yet  it  plays  the  important  role  of  stimulating  University  students  to creative  endeavour, and  it has so far  produced a rather impressive array  of young talent   in  the  work  of  Leonard Cohen,   Daryl  Hine, George  Ellenbogen, Sylvia Barnard, Dave  Solway,  Michael  Malus  and  Pierre  Coupey.




TE OTHER   VENTURE,   Delta, is  even  more   personal.   Dudek founded the  magazine in  1957,  and  financially and  editorially it  is a  one-man
show.  The   first  few  numbers were  printed by  hand, Dudek's own,  on  a  press which  he  had  bought  for the  purpose.  The contents are  selected  by Dudek  him­ self and  often  include  his own  articles  and  poems.  The  editorializing is  not  re­ stricted  to  the  "Editorial" page.  Dudek  describes  Delta  as "a  complex  of poetry
... interlarded with  prose that  aims to shake  up  the  conventional subject  matter

16

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



of verse", but  though  Dudek occasionally prints letters from readers and snippets of articles  drawn  from  far  and  wide, he frequently  takes the  prerogative  of  ap­ pending  his personal, often caustic, replies.
Delta by 1964  has run  for twenty-three  numbers, each one unfailingly stimu­ lating.  Dudek  describes  his decision to  launch  the  magazine  as "a  great  relief to  me. At  last  I  was free from  editorial  boards  with  their  indecision  and  com­ promises. I  could  speak  my own  mind."  He  has done  just  that  in  Delta, and, apart  from its value as a repository of new and refreshing poems by many writers, the  magazine  has  revealed  to its readers both  the  remarkable  range  of Dudek's interests and  the peculiarities of his personality as well as the occasional depth  of his thought.
Delta  favours  experimental   poems and  often  deals editorially  with  questions of verse technique.   In  this  respect the  magazine is helpful  to anyone  trying  to follow  Dudek's  own  development  as  a  poet.  Over  the  years  he  has  exhibited widely varying  styles in  his poems and  if readers fail to detect a lasting and  dis­ tinctive "Dudekian" motif, he himself will share their difficulty. He is still search­ ing for style -"metrical structure" is the term he prefers. His predilection of late years has  been  for  a  loose, organic  rhythm -"The  sea is  the only measure  of music",  he says-and  for visually oriented  verse patterns rather  than  rhetorical structures.  His  admiration for  E.  E.  Cummings  is partly  based  on  that  poet's experiments  in  calligraphy; and  he has devoted  many  pages of Delta to poems which  explore  the  possibilities inherent  in  the  distribution  of  black  letters  on white  paper.  Students  of his poetry will also  find "Functional Poetry"  (Delta,  No. 8)  and "Lac  en Coeur" (Delta, No. r o)  of considerable interest. They reveal Dudek's  intense  striving  to  fuse "things"  with  "words",  to eliminate  as far  as possible the  distinction  between  the  experience  and  the  poem, between life and literature.
Implicit  here is a theory which sets Dudek in fundamental opposition to at least three  other  possible \'iews  of  poetry  current  in  Canada-the  literary  allusive traditionalism  of a poet like Roy Daniells, the witty seriousness of George John­ ston,  and  the  myth-structured poetry of James  Reaney.  Dudek  is  especially re­ active  to  the  last  of these. He  has frequently  used the  pages of  Delta to  make forays against  myth, attacking  it with the same fervour he uses to attack  religion. Indeed,  he senses that  the mythic consciousness is an aspect of  the religious con­ sciousness and  berates  the  "myth  critics" for relegating  poetry to the  position of handmaid   just  as  religion  had  done.  Precisely because  for  Dudek  poetry  is a religion-poetry is his way of relating to and evaluating existence-he deplores

17

A CRITIC OF LIFE



what  he feels is a relapse into prescientific orientation. "The obsession with myth and  symbolism is pathological,"  he says without  qualification,  His whole life has been directed  to  the establishment  of "conscious and  enlightened  poetry" as the vehicle for that  dimension of experience which once was embodied  in pagan  and Christian  myth.  His realist aesthetic,  being historical,  empirical  and  sequential, can never come to terms with the a-historical, allusive, symbolic aesthetic derived from  myth.  Dudek  is well aware of this. His antipathy  to the  poetry of Reaney and  others  of  the  "school of  Frye"  is founded  on  his  rejection  of  the  critical archetypal   monism  of  Northrop   Frye  which  Dudek  regards  as  having  strong theistic overtones  (See Delta,  No. 22).
Another  of the themes frequently sounded  in Delta  is the relation of poetry to science. Poetry being Dudek's  word for Arnold's  "culture", the theme is a trans­ position  into  twentieth-century  terms of Arnold's  nineteenth-century  campaign.  Like Arnold,  Dudek  believes that  poetry can  redeem science. Like  Wordsworth, Dudek  believes that  the poet's function  is partly  to stand  at the side of the man of science,  "humanizing and  transfiguring"  the  changes  the  scientist  makes in our  mode of existence. Like his own contemporary, C. P. Snow, Dudek deplores the  existence of two cultures  and  strives to find  a  mode  of union  between  the sciences and the humanities. "By a criticism of science, and a criticism of romantic  atavism,  the  two may be brought  together"  he says. His scientific interests veer, however, to the sciences of Psychology and  Biology, these two  being most likely to free men and  women from the taboos and inhibitions  with which religion has saddled  them  for  centuries. Thus,  frequently  he devotes  pages of Delta  to  dis­ cussion of the ideas of Julian  Huxley, N.J. Berrill, C. P. Martin  and other scien­ tists of an acceptable  philosophic persuasion.
A refreshing aspect of Delta is the frequent inclusion of translations from poetry in other  languages.  Dudek  has Polish, Russian,  Italian, German  and  French  at his command  for such translations  and the result is that  the readers of Delta  are often treated  to insights into the work of contemporary foreign poets. But Dudek's linguistic  ability  is most telling  when  lent  to  the  Canadian scene. He  has  de­ veloped  in  recent  years a  strong  interest  in  the  poetic  renaissance  in  French Canada. His command  of French  permits him to lecture in that language at the University  of Montreal,  to mingle easily with  the  French  writers and  publishers in Quebec,  to engage in co-authorship  of a book  (Montreal, Paris of America) with the French-Canadian poet Michel Regnier, and  to keep his English readers of Delta  informed  of developments in  French-Canadian life and  letters. He has recently  taken  an  interest  in  the  broader implications of  French-Canadian

r8

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



nationalism  and  while on the one hand,  in the pages of Delta  and  elsewhere, he seeks to interpret  French-Canadian thought  to English Canadians, on the other he is cautioning  French  Canada not  to destroy itself by accepting  the  extreme views of Separatists.  Certainly  among literary critics, Dudek is one of the few to be intimately  concerned  with  modem  movements in both  English- and  French­ Canadian writing.
Thus  Delta,  while serving as an organ of opinion for Dudek  himself, provides
readers  with  a rich  awareness  of the Canadian  literary scene and  so constitutes one of his important contributions  to Canadian letters. The  magazine  costs him money, time and energy, and he has often talked of giving it up; but if and when he does, the Canadian literary consciousness will have lost a valuable and perhaps (because it is so personal)  an irreplaceable facet of expression.
Delta,  the McGill Poetry Series, and Contact  Press, are merely the major pub­
lishing activities of Dudek  in  the  past fifteen years. Yet considering  only these, one may well wonder  how and  when all his zeal was generated.  The  inspiration for it came during  his predoctoral  days at Columbia University in the late Forties. Perhaps  the  original  stimulus  even for  that  was his early  publishing  experience in  Montreal  which gave him  his first insight into the  plight of serious literature in  an  industrialized,   commercialized   culture.  At  any  rate,  students  who  are curious will find abundant documentation  of his interest in this topic in his book Literature  and  the  Press. The  book was the  eventual  result of the  "unfinished doctoral  thesis"  he  had  brought  back  to  Montreal  in I 95 I. He  had,  in  other words, been  working  on  the  material  in this book throughout the  period  of his most intensive  preoccupation with  Contact  Press, and  the  policies of the  Press are clearly an application of the principles established in the book. Literature and the  Press is dedicated  to the purpose of "clarifying the condition  of the artist as writer  in a world of mass audiences,"  and it insistently documents  the ill effects of commercial  publishing  on literature  as an art.
It is ironic that as a book, Literature and the Press must be considered a failure. To  many  readers it appears  to be a painful exercise in the methods of graduate school research. But even apart  from its form, the book suffers badly when com­ pared  to the  almost  concurrent   work in a similar field by Marshall  McLuhan. The  topic so laboriously  "researched" by Dudek  was already  being so radically reinterpreted   by  McLuhan  (albeit  in  his own  execrable  jargon)   that  Dudek's concepts  appear  naive,  his methods  pedestrian,  and  his  conclusions out  of date or irrelevant.
Nevertheless, the book stands as an illumination of the prime and fundamental

A CRITIC OF LIFE



concerns  of Dudek  as a  man  of letters  over  a  period  of twenty-five  years.  In  it, he tracks  down  his long-standing conviction  of the  essential  antagonism between literature and  the  conditions  of modern society.  His search  for factual  documen­ tation  of this antagonism led him to retrace  the  history  of publishing from  Guten­ berg  to  the  present.  He  discusses in detail  the  mechanical operations of printing presses  from  the  simplest  to  the  most  modern and  complex; the  economic ad­  vantages of  such  discoveries  as  the  making of   paper   from   pulp;  technological improvements which  facilitated mass publication; the growth and  policy changes  of literary  magazines, reviews and  newspapers; the  emergence of publishing as a commercial enterprise; and  the effects of all these and  many  other  factors  on the writer  and  on  literary  values. The  most  readable chapter in the  book deals  with literary  magazines and shows convincingly-and prophetically-the importance of the  private literary  effort in  the form  of the  "little magazine". Having finished the  book,  the   reader   no  longer  wonders   at  Dudek's zeal  for  publishing. One  clearly  understands his  devotion  to Contact Press,  Delta and  the  McGill  Poetry Series when  one  reads his conviction  that  "within the  machine and  money-profit system,  the  survival  of  civilized  arts  and  literature can  be  maintained only  in areas  where  neither  quantity production nor  money  play  a leading  role."






DUDEK's LITERARY ENERGIES   were  not  entirely  expended m  publishing and  writing  poems.  He  has  also  produced, since I 95 I, a  number of critical  articles. Aside from specific studies of Pratt (Tamarack Review,  No. 6), Klein  (Canadian Forum,  I957), Lampman (Culture, I957)   and  the  exchange
with   A.  J. M.  Smith   in  which   Dudek   defended  Layton's  poetry  (Queen's
Quarterly,  Summer, I 956), he  has  written   general articles  concerning various stages  of  the  history  of  Canadian poetry.  In  such  articles  he  has  naturally  dis­ played  an  intimate knowledge  of both  the  history  and  current activity  of  poetry in  Canada. His  critical  preferences,   being  deeply   rooted  in  his  philosophy   of life, lead  him  to express a  persistent  bias in favour of the  realist  poet.  He  is oc­ casionally  uncritically generous in his praise of poets like Souster, the early Layton, Alfred  Purdy  and  Alden  Nowlan. On  the  other  hand  he gives short  shrift  to the stylistically  more  complex  "literary" poets  of  either   the  classical,  metaphysical or  mythic  varieties.  He  would  like, it would  seem,  to  dispose  of the  rivals  to his favourite  poetic   mode  by  pronouncing them   already  dead   in  one  way  or  an-

20

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



other -characterizing the  traditionalists as the "stiff-jointed older boys", and  the myth  poets  as  the  "young of  yesterday"  and  as  "really  a  digression  or  even  a regression  of  a  kind;  interesting but  not  very  promising." Critically,   his  disen­ chantment with  Layton, reflected  in his Culture article  of rg58  and  in  his Delta (No.   rs) review  "Layton on  the  Carpet", would  seem  to stem  mainly  from  his detection   of  new  mythic  dimensions and  symbolic  overtones in  Layton's  poetry.  The  perceptiveness which  much  of his criticism  displays is, however,  often  nulli­  fied  by  his  tendency to  overstate  his case. The  French  have  a saying: "If you want   to  get  rid  of  your  dog,  accuse  him  of  having  rabies." Dudek  tends,  as  a critic, to do something very much  like this with poets who do not win his approval.
Several  of his most recent  articles  have  revealed  the  broader humanistic range of his interests.  Dudek  is of the  modern  variety  of humanists who  may  be called scientific,  if  this  signifies a  concern  with  cultural matters  in  their  contemporary scientific   milieu   rather  than   the  traditional humanist's orientation towards a literary  and  religious  cultural heritage. Of  the  articles  revealing  Dudek's human­ istic leanings,  "Art, Entertainment and  Religion" ( QueenJs  Quarterly, Autumn, rg6g)   is a sorry  example. In  a galloping survey  of Western  culture, Dudek  seeks to show  that  in  the  modern world  "entertainment", born  of a spurious union  of commercialism  and   "irreligion",  has  usurped   the  place  of   art.  The   article   is murky,  pedantic and  filled  with  windy  and  confused  generalizations. Whatever truth   there  is in  it  (and certainly it reveals some  provocative insights)   is almost wholly obscured  by his rhetorician's trick of  making one word,  religion,  stand  for many  different forces,  all of them  deplorable, against  which  the  artist  is obliged  to struggle.  His  most  obvious  though  perhaps unconscious  rhetorical device  is to identify  religion  with  Puritanism or narrow dogmatism and  then  to beat it for not being  the  "the  beautiful open  question" which  he feels religion  should  be. The  article  is not  to his credit,  either  as a thinker  or as a writer.
He  is on  a much  sounder footing  in "Communication and  the World  Today"
which  appeared in Culture in the summer  of rg62. Here  he is obviously  drawing on the material from  his book and  in his expansion  of it, he is at ease with  telling facts  and  provocative opinions,  especially about  the weaknesses and  shortcomings of the  commercial press. That the  article  found  its mark  is evident  from  the  re­ proof  appearing in  the  editorial column  of the  Montreal Star  under  the heading "Really, Mr.  Dudek!"
As far  as  poetry  is concerned, apart  from  the  experimental poems  appearing in  Delta  and  elsewhere,   Dudek  has  produced three  books in  the  past  ten  years. Europe   ( 1954)  is a long,  loosely-structured poem  which  records  his impressions

21

A CRITIC OF  LIFE



of his travels. The  most successful portions of it deal with the sea in many  different moods. Dudek's  preoccupation with the sea, in this poem and  others, is significant. As an  image  it comes as close to acting  as an archetype for him,  being  the "Crea­ tive Chaos", the source of life, the shape  of meaning. Structurally, "the sea is the only  measure  of  music," and  its loose organic   rhythms are  those  which Dudek attempts to imitate in  his verse.
Laughing  Stalks  (I 958)  is quite  different  in structure and  tone,  being a collec­
tion  of satirical  poems.  En Mexico  (I 958)   is another travelogue but  stylistically at  the  opposite  pole from  Europe. Its form  is tight,  cryptic, laconic,  with  some­ times as few as two lines appearing on a page. Dudek's potentiality as an exquisite lyricist  is revealed  in such  lines as :

Study the way of breaking waves for the shape of ferns,
fire and wind for whatever blows or burns.

while  towards the  end of the  poem,  the  reflective  philosophically-inclined Dudek writes:
Like the virile leaping of goats in a green valley,
love's restorative power
leaps to the heart.

Form is the visible part of being.
We know, the logic of its adaptations­
a signature of individuality,
an integrity, the end of perfect resolution
but not the inner stir.
Rest. 	Rest in that great affair. Therefore  art is everything;
but not as we imagined.
Art is really the way of life.


Dudek  is currently at  work  on  a long  poem  to  be called  Atlantis. He  has  al­ ready  presented some parts  of it on the C.B.C.,  at a Toronto poetry  reading, and also  at  a meeting  of the  Canadian Authors Association. Sections  have  also been

A CRITIC OF LIFE



published  in  various  magazines.  It  appears  so far as a brooding,  religious essay along  the  lines  of  Wordsworth's   Prelude. It is, Dudek  says, "about God  and Politics and  Reality  all at once without  presenting these as a rational  discursive idea."  In  the  parts  read so far, he allows his thoughts to wander  freely through history  and  the  present,  through  all  the  countries  he  has lived  in  and  visited, through  all  the  various  experiences he  has  had. It is a  yearning,  melancholic, meditative   poem  revealing  occasionally  his  anger,  his  laughter,   his  love,  but suffused with a wistful anguished searching for moral truth.
It is a search for form also. The  poet who long ago gave up organized  religion as the  formal  vehicle of moral  truth  and  who today strongly resists the  mythic and  symbolic projections  of this dimension of experience, is still engaged  in the task  he  set  himself as a  young  man:   to find an  alternative  style of expression which will make poetry the mode of redemption.  Whether  he ever finds his new Atlantis, or rediscovers the old, lost, submerged continent, may be mainly a matter of record in his personal spiritual  odyssey, but as a poem Atlantis promises to be an important major work.
Thus  far  then,  Louis  Dudek,  poet,  publicist, critic-a  man  of letters  in Canada  who, though  still young, has already won for himself, through  his many and   varied  contributions,   a  secure  place  in  the  history  of  modem   Canadian literature.










PRIVATE PRESSES IN VANCOUVER


Marya Fiamengo




A NEW  PUBLICATION lwm  Kl=ak P=, s;gnatum by
F. R. Scott, and a group of three brochures of verse from the Periwinkle Press­
Kyoto  Airs by Roy Kiyooka, White  Lunch  by Gerry Gilbert, elephants mothers & others  by  John   Newlove-show  the  continued   vitality  of  private  publishing ventures on the West Coast.
Describing the origins and history of his Klanak  Press in The  Canadian Reader of September  1g6o, William McConnell  writes, "We're only in competition  with ourselves." This is a significant comment, and it applies equally to Takao Tanabe's Periwinkle  Press, the other  concern of a similar  nature  in Vancouver.  There  are other  resemblances, for it is no accident  that  Mr.  Tanabe's publications imme­ diately  remind  one in format  of those of the Klanak  Press. Tanabe has been the designer  and  typographer  for all Klanak  Press publications  but  one,  while both presses maintain  an excellence of production  which is undoubtedly facilitated  by the happy condition  of being "in competition  with oneself."
William   McConnell  has  described  Klanak   Press  as  a  "Cottage  Industry". The epithet is both apt and misleading. Like the best of cottage industries, Klanak Press reflects a care in making, a sense of concern for the workmanship  and craft involved, all aimed  at a final touchstone  of individuality. Unlike  cottage indus­ tries, however, there is nothing  of the homespun  or the rustic in the formats that are  attained. Their  elegance is the reflection of a desire for a  pleasing aesthetic whole, in which format and content shall if possible complement each other. The product   of  this  attitude   has  been  five books of   unquestionable distinction  for design and  typography,  apart  from  their literary  merit.
The  Quality of Halves, a first book of poems by Marya  Fiamengo  and Klanak's first  publication,   received honourable  mention  in  Typography '59·  The  second

PRIVATE PRESSES



publication,   Klanak   Islands,  a  collection  of short  stories,  was  exceptional  on several counts.  First, it  was a venture into  prose publication,  which is relatively expensive, with  a larger  press run  of I ,500 copies as opposed to the 6go copies of The  Quality  of Halves. Secondly, the eight stories chosen were works by eight Western  writers  of  varying  reputation,   ranging  from  Henry   Kreisel,  the  best established, to the relatively new and unknown voices of Margaret  Mills, Marion Smith  and  Raymond   Hull; these stories were accompanied  by illustrations  by artists-also  from  the  West  Coast-such  as Don  Jarvis,  Robert  Steele, Ben Lim  and  Herbert  Gilbert.  Collections of short stories not only cost more to pro­ duce than  verse, but also seem to have a more limited appeal, yet Klanak  Islands continues  to sell steadily  and  to  justify the  publishers' determination to  extend their scope. The  format  of the third  Klanak  volume, Rocky  Mountain Poems by Ralph  Gustafson,  was undertaken by Ben Lim, whose design won an  award  at the Stratford  Festival of Typography in 1g6o. Like its predecessor in verse, The  Quality  of Halves, Rocky  Mountain Poems has sold well; both books, almost sold out,  are  becoming  collectors' items.
F. R. Scott's outstanding volume of translation,  St. Denys Garneau and Anne Hebert,  appeared  with  Klanak  Press in 1962, and  now it is followed by Scott's own volume, Signatures. These poems have the qualities we have learnt to expect from  Mr. Scott -the satirist's wit, the elegance of the civilized man, the serious­ ness of the poet, and  the eloquence of a former Dean of Law. They do not strike one  as supreme  examples  of lyricism, and  they sometimes fall short  of  rapture  when rapture  is intended,  as in "Heart" and "Lips",  but they are invariably  per­ ceptive  and  astute.  They  provide  a welcome relief from  the intense  young men who wear  their  intense  egos on sleeves of basic vernacular.
The  forging  of new identity;  the discovery of the self as "being", expressed in the imagery and  the process of geologic and human evolution;  an ironic sense of the  repetitiveness of human  error;  these are the themes which preoccupy Scott: these and  the  ever  prevalent  Northern  vastness and  solitude  which  broods over the geography of Canada-a "land  so bleak and bare/a single plume of smoke/ is a scroll of history." Signatures is a book whose poems indicate  a sensibility both varied  and  accomplished,  expressed in a verse that is satisfyingly finished, even if on occasion it is neatly eloquent  rather  than  profound.
In  welcoming this latest  production  of the Klanak  Press, it seems appropriate to  comment  on  the  singular  initiative,  imagination and   taste   of  the  Press's founders,  William  and  Alice McConnell.  Not only have they exhibited  a serious concern  for  the  fate  of much  writing  which for commercial  reasons might  not

PRIVATE PRESSES



otherwise have found a publisher, but they have also translated  this concern into the acceptance  of an active personal responsibility. Yet their sense of responsibility to the writer  has been matched  by their trust in the existence of a discriminating audience  which  would respond to their venture.  The  McConnells find that  they have not  been disappointed.  Klanak  Press, while it does not make a profit, does not  lose money.  And  the final financial  concern  of these  publishers is to break even, or at most to make a small profit that  can be used to continue  their work.






l2.rwiNKLE  PRESS is the  private  printing  venture  of Takao Tanabe, who divides his time between the twin obsessions of painting  and typog­ raphy;  he insists that  his obsessional interest  in typography  was the  result of an association  with  Robert  Reid,  the  former  British  Columbian  printer   and  the pioneer in fine typography on the West Coast.
Periwinkle  Press began with the publication  of handsome  broadsheets,  poems
by Phyllis Webb and Robin  Mathews, open letters by the painter  Joseph Plaskett and  the director  of Vancouver's  New Design Gallery, Alvin Balkind. It could be said  of Tanabe's work as a typographer  that  he "touches  nothing  that  he does not  adorn." His  broadsheets  were a  triumph  of taste,  and  the  three  brochures of  poems  which  have  now  appeared  are  equally  impressive. Since  Periwinkle Press is non-commercial,  the books are published  without  profit and  for the cost of materials,  the  printer  in  a sense subsidizing  them  by contributing  freely his time, his experience  and his skill.
The design of all these three books is neat,  unobstrusive and simple, yet in each
case subtly suited  to the tone of the individual  work. In the case of Gerry Gilbert the  tone  is one  of quiet,  personal lyricism. The  poems in Mr.  Gilbert's  White Lunch  are  the  direct  and  tender  minutiae  of  a  private  life. In  the  main  they arise out of the experience of marriage  and  parenthood, as in the case of  "Mar­ riage and  the  Maple Tree",  where the self of a child is juxtaposed  against adult awareness. "I came to my childhood and said/to myself your mother  is a maple tree."
There  is a certain  monotony owing to the evenness of tone which runs through the collection. Yet in the final poem, "The  Man  in the Valley",  poignancy gives way to a sharper  tone, a stronger, more assertive voice. The final image is arrest­ ing;  "the  glow of the fat  burning  in the loose coffin" provides light, the image,

PRIVATE PRESSES



the  imagination through which  the  poet  becomes aware of the vulnerability and fragility  of both  the  creative and  physical self in the face of death. "Paper is not thinner than/1 am  is not  the servant  that  I am/to ink, the shadow  moving  under the  mountain."
Kyoto  Airs, by Roy Kiyooka, are the poems of a painter. They  have the quality
of Japanese art  at  its  best, severe  and  delicate  restraint. There is the  occasional obvious  poem,  where  the subject  defies the simplicity  of approach; "creased with dust/the painted smile  looks  back"  in  "Reclining Buddha" is a descent  into  the commonplace.  Most,   however,   have  the  terse  strength  and  spareness of  "The Warrior". "Did/they  lie  here-her   pale/white face/upturned/to  his/beneath his cherry/tree where  they  lie buried/his brother too."  Sometimes a hint  of  cold­ ness intervenes, as in  the  irony  of "The Guest", but  on  the  whole  it is the exact delicacy  of "the sash you bought/for my ukata  is/firm around my waist/how else tell/of   a  brother and   sister/thirty  years  parted/drawn  together,  again." These  poems  certainly gain  from  the  unity  of theme  suggested  by the title,  Kyoto  Airs. They  are  the  poetic  record  of Kiyooka's visit to Japan,  his family  there,  and  the shrines of his people.
John   Newlove   has  written more  impressive  poems  than   those  which  appear in elephants mothers  & others. The  language and  imagery  of his earlier  volume, Grave  Sirs, strike  one  as fresher  and  sharper than  those  of elephants. The  new collection  is, nonetheless,  interesting in itself. If an almost  too tender vulnerability to  experience  is  the   characteristic of  Gerry   Gilbert's verse,  a  stem and   strict honesty  is explicit   in  John Newlove's.   There is considerable self-appraisal  and self-analysis; there  is also an open  and  compelling  strength, as well as compassion, in  such  lines  as "Smelling your  blood,  dear  friend,/!have more  fear  than  I can use/young and  morbid  and  alive,  and  so/I spare  a  part  of it for  you."  It is this sense of the  validity  of the  "other", a sense of groping toward  the  responsibilities of love that  is most  moving  in  Newlove's  work.  "Half  in love with  the grimacing girl/whose tears  I regret,  is/half  in love with  myself."
Mr.   Newlove's   work  shows  the  intrinsic   attitude  towards experience that   is essential  in  the  making of art,  an  intelligent and  sensitive  awareness as well as a completely  honest  evaluation. He is capable of the purely  lyrical  response: "And as  the  trees,  a  small  girl/said once,  make  the  wind/move, you  the  leafy  trees thusly/make me  move,  and  so move  me."
There are  weak  and  even  unsuccessful  poems in  this  book,  but  these  are  the expected  growing pains  of any  young  poet-and  John  Newlove  shows a power of  poetic  growth that   promises  well for  his future  as a  poet.

PRIVATE PRESSES



It  is something  of a reassurance  to find in Vancouver  the  taste and  venture­ someness displayed  by Klanak  Press and  Periwinkle  Press. One  hopes they will act  as incentives  to other  ventures of a like nature  or even form  a  challenge to commercial  publishers to move in a similar direction.














REFLECTIONS IN A POOL


Ethel Wilson




IAM   OLD   ENOUGH  to  remember  the  older  membe" of the
previous  generation and  the much  older members  of the generation before that­
dwindling  towards  their   close-and, like  large  slow-moving  fairies  in  white beards  or white  caps, the survivors  of a generation before that, who chiefly existed in quotations, or in palely inscribed  ink on brittle  paper,  or on gravestones.
Turning the  binoculars of the living on to the far remembered dead,  I discover
that  although my maternal and  paternal forbears  derived  from stocks which  were similar  in  beliefs, customs,  and  low income  levels, their  very differing character­ istics persisted  through the  three  generations that  I knew-or  nearly  knew.  In our  quite  changed and  mobile  world  of today,  these characteristics are  no longer characteristic.  My   maternal  forbears were   urban,  my  paternal  forbears were rural. They  lived  in  parts  of England then  remote from  one  another. Now  they are  all over the  place  and  in all kinds of  occupations. My Mother's forbears were strict  Dissenters; my Father's were Dissenters but  un-strict. They  were both  better  than  gold,  far  better  than  money, and  when  I speedily  became  an  orphan, both families  held  out  their  hands,  ready  to give loving care  to  a child.  I was  taken into  my  Mother's family  and  was  cared  for  by  them.  That is a great   proof  of goodness -to take  a child  and care  for it.
What has  begun  to interest  me in the  backward look is that, in the three  older generations of my maternal family  which  I can remember, the capacity for being shocked  was highly  developed  and  regarded. It may have been a quite  reasonable preservative and  a reaction  against  certain  bygone dangers which  I do not know. There was not,  of course,  as much  to be shocked  at  as there  is today  but,  taking the  conventional world  as it  then  was, the  capacity  for  experiencing shock,  and the  discussions  involved, were  considerable, and  cherished.  The objects  of shock

29

REFLECTIONS IN A POOL



were confined  to the very small conformities and circumference of the life of those generations, and   included   the  incorrect   uses of  spoons,  the  right  occasions  for boots,  the  silence  or  importunity of  children, caps  or  no  caps,  beards  or  non­ beards, delay  of  christenings, small  religious  discrepancies. Shock  did  not  need to  extend   as  far  as  adultery, of  which  there  was  relatively  little  in  the  middle  classes of  those  times.  As far  as I can  see, there  was  nothing to  be  shocked  at within  the lives of those generations. Shockedness had  become  a kind of domestic  duty  or  fetish  and  perhaps  had  its value,  but  did  not  amuse.  Those generations were  kind,  stern,  sometimes  merry,  but  had  little  humour;  their  workmanship was  sound.  They  were incapable of deceit  or  cruelty.  Come  to  think  of it,  they shared the  characteristics of Jane Austen's Sir Thomas Bertram, but  unlike  him, had  neither  great  income  nor  estate.
My  Father's family,  and  pre-families,  on the  other  hand, seemed  unable to be shocked.  The  spoons  and  boots did  not  matter, nor  the  delay  of christenings, not even  the  fact  that  my Father and  his brothers were  taught in school  by an  un­ principled young  Frenchman whose  name  was  Paul  Verlaine. When, long  after the  death of  my  Father, I  remembered the  name  and  read  about  the goings-on and  poetry  of  Paul  Verlaine,  I found  this  difficult  to  believe,  but  hoped  it  was true. I went  to  see my  half-uncle Herbert  and  said,  "Uncle  Herbert, can  it  be true   that   Paul  Verlaine was  your  schoolmaster and  Father's  too?"  and  to  my surprise Uncle  Herbert said,  "Yes,  he  was."  So I  said,  "Oh Uncle  Herbert, tell me some of the things that  Verlaine said and  did!" and  Uncle  Herbert said, "I'm sorry  my dear,  but  I only remember that  he roared  at  a very snivelling  boy 'Sir! Sweep  your nose!'  and  that's all I remember  of the  words  of the  poet Verlaine." I told  Kildare Dobbs  about  that  and  he  gave me  a little  book  in  which  was
a drawing by Max  Beerbohm  of Paul  Verlaine in a top-hat escorting  a crocodile of little schoolboys  also in top-hats. It looks incongruous. They  all appear vindic­ tive, including Paul  Verlaine.  Verlaine must have  moved  up into  a higher bracket  of schools, because in my Father's village the boys did not wear top-hats. This  was before  the  Rimbaud days  and  those  later  harridan Eugenie   days  in  Paris,  and perhaps before  most of the  poetry  which  must,  however,  have  been brewing.
My  Father's family  and  pre-families  seemed  to have  had  swift perceptions and senses of humours that  made  life amusing whether rural  or urban, but  not com­ mercially  productive. In  the  few years in which  I remember my Father, life was luminous and   merry  and  beloved,  although I was  sometimes whipped  on  my hands with  the  back  of  a  hairbrush. I  always  started to  bellow  while  the  hair­  brush  was  still in  the  air  and  before  it touched megently.  I became  difficult

REFLECTIONS IN A POOL



when,  in  my  reading lessons  I (aged  5)   could  not  understand the  meaning of the  word  "the". I asked "What is a 'the'?" My Father tried  to explain  but  could not  tell me. "But  what  is a 'the'? What  does it do?"  He  could  not say.
It may or may not be because  my Father's county, Lincolnshire, had a mild and milky  name  or because  it is a county  of fells and  a few fens but  chiefly flat  pas­ toral  country, that  boys were adventurous and  wished to leave it and  did leave it. Vikings  and  refugee  French had  arrived  there  and  have  left interesting linguistic remains, but  the  first  departer that  I know  of is Captain John  Smith  whom  we associate with  Pocahontas and  continental wars. There were of course the escapers  to  the  New  World   who  gathered at  the  little  Lincolnshire town  of  Boston and  carried the  name  away  with  them,  and  I have  seen in  village  churches the  me­ morials  of Arctic  explorers. My  Father's eldest  brother Tom  went  to Africa,  full of  gaiety,  and  was  at  last  thought to  be  dead,  for  no  more  was  heard  of him.  The   next  brother went  to Australia, and  then  my Father  after a  year or  two at Trinity College,  Dublin, went  off to Africa  too. Of  the  half-sisters,  one  went  to Russia,  one  went  to South  Africa   (in failed  near-money-less search  for her  half­  brother Tom, I do  believe), returned to  England  and  became  a  journalist  and  Garvin's right-hand  man   on  the  Observer. The  third   sister  who  was  dreamily  and   intensely   musical   went   to  Germany and   became   the  last  pupil  of  Clara  Schumann. She  translated  Schumann's letters  and,  later, Pushkin's poem  The  Tale  of  the  Golden  Cockerel,  published  in  an  elegant  little  yellow book  with  a commentary  by  Raissa   Lomonossova. She  returned to  England prepared for  a brilliant musical  career. She  never  had  it,  as she soon  married a feckless clever character on the staff of The  Times, and  between  them  they translated Spengler's Decline of  The  West.  He  left  her  and  took  up  with  someone  else who  took  to drink.  To  this sad family  my  half-aunt, who was an  agnostic, gave  angelic  care.  She  was  charming; her  tastes  were  musical  and  intellectual, not  domestic.  She had  a sweet fatigued voice, like silk or a lute. Her  middle  name  was Waller  as her step-side  of the  family  was descended  from  Edmund Waller  the erratic poet who wrote  "Go, lovely  rose!  Tell  her  that  wastes  her  time  and  me."  I used  to feel deprived that  it was only my Father's step-side who were descended  from  Waller, as it  struck  me  that  otherwise I  could  claim  an  addiction to writing  from  him. But  no.  I have  long  recovered from  that  desire, and  it does not matter; anyway he  was  not  a  reliable  character.

REFLECTIONS IN  A POOL




UNCLE HERBERT told me a story of a meeting that my Father had  in  Africa  which  I  have  always pictured  vividly in  my mind.  It was in  a bright-coloured  country and there were Zulus there, and some Kaffirs. A very tall Zulu gave my very tall Father  a big Stick of good fortune.  But it brought  no luck to my Father  nor -later -to me. Soon after  he married, his young wife died; then he died; then the stick vanished and practically  all I had of my Father's was his little  ten  volumes of Shakespeare  which  have  brought  me  more  happiness than the stick could have brought to anybody. Missionaries in Africa have only treasure  in Heaven  to leave to their children.
In  this bright-coloured  part  of Africa whose name  I do not know, my Father lived in a rough sort of little bungalow. He had a Kaffir boy and  he had a little horse. One  day  he was riding along an interminable dusty road into the hills to another  village when he saw plodding towards him, raising a small cloud of dust, a man  who-as  he approached-appeared to have been white once and  was now very dirty and  wore shabby and  ragged clothes. My Father  was thinking of something else, yet, as he passed the plodding man and gave him a cursory glance and  the  man  looked up at him, he saw something  familiar  in that  sombre face. The  man  did  not stop, but my Father  stopped.  He turned  his horse and  looked after  the plodding  man with such strange and  conflicting memories-the  family at home, the present scene, the gay departure of the adventurous  Tom, the excite­ ment  of letters,  the  gradual  decline, few  letters,  fewer,  no  letters,  no  word  of Tom,  and  at  last the parents'  buried sorrow.  Was this Tom?
My Father,  very much moved by all this, rode back to the man who now had stopped,  turned,   and  stood  heavily  without  motion.   My  Father   reined  in  his horse, looked into the man's face, exclaimed "Tom?" and  dismounted. Tom said nothing  and  it  was impossible to know  what  his feelings were. Humiliation   of discovery in  this condition?  What  has your life been?  thought  my Father  as he took Tom's  arm  and  they walked slowly together.  My Father  was unable  to say what  he wanted  to say, but because he was still young and  very boyish he spoke quickly  of  home,  and  of  his  luck  in  meeting Tom-and  look!  there  is my bungalow!
When  they  reached  the  bungalow  my Father  tethered  the horse and  took his brother  inside.  My Father  was excited. What  the  past of this man  had  been he did not know, nor the future. He and his young Kaffir boy quickly made a simple meal  and  the  men  sat down.  Tom  wolfed  his food  and  hardly spoke. He  told nothing.  He  is suffering, thought  my Father,  he is thinking  of our  days and  of

32

REFLECTIONS IN A POOL



some  great   change and   of  disappointments. Something makes  him  suffer  very much  and  he does not  want  to tell me anything. He is not glad  that  we have met.
When  Tom   threw  down  his knife  and  fork  and  pushed  back  from  the  table,
my Father said,  "Would you like to go to bed now, Tom, or shall  we go outside and  talk?"
"Bed sounds  all right  to me," said the man.
My  Father took  him  into  the  other  little  room  where  there  was  a bed  and  a chair  and  a box,  a bowl  and  a jug of water.  He went to the box and  took out  his other  nightshirt for Tom.
He  turned  towards the  bed.  The  man  had  pulled  down  the  bedclothes. He said  "Well,  goodnight young  Robert," and  got into the  bed,  heavy  boots and  all, dust  and  all,  dirt  and  all,  pulled  up  the  sheet  and  turned away  on  the  pillow with  his eyes shut.  Just  like sleep. Just  like exclusion.
My  Father stood  and  looked  down  at the stranger in the  bed. But all he could think  was-He  must  have  suffered.  He  has  confusion  and  regrets.  Everything is lost. He  is no longer  Tom. He is a stranger.
When  my Father awoke  from  the mat  on which  he had  slept,  Tom  had  gone. I  think,  vaguely,  that   my  Father found  him  again  some  time  later,  but  I do not know the rest of the story except  that  after my Father had returned to England with  me, Uncle  Tom  wrote  letters,  sometimes,  and  then  he died,  alone, of enteric fever  which  spread   through Africa,  and  that  was  the  end  of the  boy  who  had
left home, so gay.
When   I  mention  the  acquired  addiction to  shock   ("I was  indeed  shocked, Elijah!")  of  the  earlier  generations of  my  maternal family,  I also  remember that  my Father's two  half-sisters,  whom  I loved so much  for  their  unshockability and  funniness and  cleverness and  musicalness, lived and  worked  in London. They combined being  fastidious with  not  being susceptible  to shock. They  wanted  me to  become  an  actress.  They  would  help.  During my holidays  from  the  boarding school  to which  I had  been  sent  from  Canada, I was distributed around to both sides of my family.  But  I saw  my intellectual and  amusing half-aunts less and  less because  my  maternal  Aunt-in-Chief, in  whose  kindly  care  I really  was,  had  a great   fear   that   if  I stayed   with  my  emancipated paternal  half-aunts I  would really  go on  the  stage,  and  the  thought  was so terrible.  Lost!  Forever  lost! Years later,  when  I was  a married Canadian, my husband  came  to know  and  love my half-aunts as I did; but  it was then  too late to go on the stage. I had never wanted to,  anyway.



33



GROUNDHOG AMONG THE STARS

The Poetry of
Raymond Souster


Louis Dudek




Get out your gun  and  call to your dog, Get out  your gun  and  call to your dog, Away to the woods to catch  a groundhog,
Groundhog, groundhog.
AMERICAN FOLK SONG




SousTER's POEM "The Hunte'" is the fi<'t poem of his I
ever read, and it remains for me to this day a key to his poetry:

I carry  the groundhog along  by the tail
all the way back to the farm, with  the  blood
dripping from  his mouth a couple  of drops  at a time, leaving  a perfect  trail for anyone  to follow.

The half-wit  hired-man is blasting  imaginary rabbits
somewhere  on our left. We walk through fields steaming after  rain, jumping the mud: and watching the swing of your girl's hips
ahead  of me, the proud  way your hand  holds the gun,
and  remembering how you held it
up to the hog caught  in the trap  and  blew his head  in wonder  what  fate you have in store for me.
It was in  1942. First Statement, a little mimeographed magazine,  was in its be­ ginning  (later  it became Northern Review)  with John  Sutherland as editor, and Audrey  Aikman   (soon  after,  his wife)  for  associate.  Irving  Layton  and  I  had

34

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



just  joined  the  group. We  were  Sitt:mg in  a  shabby  room  on  Stanley Street  in Montreal-a  street   now  demolished   to  make  room  for  parking lots  and  sub­ ways-deep in  an  old chesterfield  with  horsehair  sticking  out  through the  rents. "This is the  kind  of  poetry  we  want," the  three of  us  agreed as we  read  the Souster   manuscript  together. There was  actually  a  snag  in the  syntax  of  that poem,  toward the  end,  which  we took the liberty  of correcting. It has stood  with this improvement in  almost  all the  Canadian poetry  anthologies since  then.
The  recent  publication of The  Colour  of the  Times: The  Collected  Poems  of Raymond Souster  by  the  Ryerson  Press brings  to an  end  the  period  of Souster's hothouse  fame  with  a few admirers and  makes him known  and  appreciated by a much   larger   audience of  readers.  It is time  for  the  critic  also  to  put  aside  the bugle of the  Town Crier  and  to look at him more closely, more thoughtfully, and with  more  leisure for the shape  and  nuance of his art.
The   Colour   of the  Times contains   256  poems.  It replaces  the  Contact  Press Selected   Poems   which   I edited   and   published   (at  my  own  expense,  let  it  be known) in 1956. The  Selected  Poems only recently went out of print. It contained
1oo poems;  but  only fifty of these are retained in the new Collected  Poems. Thus the  new  book contains 206 uncollected poems, but it omits a good number which have  become  standard Souster  material. For  the reader  who wants  to know  what he is missing,  I will list the  most important poems which  he must still look for in the  old  Selected   Poems:

"The Enemies"
"When  We Are Young" "Apple-blow"
"Phoney War"
"Green,  Wonderful  Things" "Queen Street Serenade" "Ersatz"
"Sunday  Night Walk" "Litter  of the Last Rose" "Girl in the Gumbo" "The  Hospital" "Fredericton"
"Nice People" "Scandal" "Five Dollars"
"The Specialist"
"Breakfast: Old Lady in Hospital" "The Eggshell Blue"

35

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



"First Spring Day in the Canyons"
"Girl at the Corner of Elizabeth and Dundas"

(The economic  pressures of publishing, where  "we  cannot go beyond  r 2 5 pages", is  probably responsible  for  this  catastrophe. In  the  case  of  poetry,  especially  a Collected Poems, surely it is the  poems themselves  which  must  dictate how much space  will be allowed.)
A good  number of the  poems,  also, have  undergone some  revision, in  vocabu­ lary  and  verse arrangement; usually  to the  good,  but  sometimes  losing the  force of  the  original. Polish  is not  always  perfection, and  energy  may  be  better  than  trim  propriety. To take one example:
And our friends of the dance-floor
Guzzling pop, tearing the skins of hot-dogs- has become in the new version -
and our friends of the dance-floor guzzling pop and piercing
the sad skins of hot-dogs.

The  change  loses a violence  which  the original contained, and  replaces  it with  a lethargy of ageing  disillusion. As we shall see, this is an aspect  of the later  Souster, incompatible  with   "limbs   aching   with  desire"   recorded  in  this  poem   ("Cape Breton  Summer Evening").
Let's  go back  to  "The Hunter" to study  Souster's ambivalence about  sex. On the  one  hand, we  have  the  girl,  masterful and  desirable: "watching the  swing of  your  girl's  hips/ahead of  me"  (sexually  ahead of the  speaker,  perhaps). Yet at the same time she is the ruthlessly cruel female.  The poet ruefully  and ironically studies   his strange fear  of  her.  This  mixture of  desire  and  fear  is a  keynote  of Souster's personality; or rather, the opposition  of love and  cruelty,  the twin  poles of  his sensibility,  is the  dramatic centre  of his poetry.  The  "half-wit hired-man" is  a  further  projection of  mindless  violence,   toward  the   weak   and  timid­ "rabbits". But  most significant  of all,  the  groundhog, the  victim  of  ruthlessness (on  the  part  of the woman), and  explicitly  partner-in-fate to the lover, is being dragged by the  tail,  the  blood  "dripping from  his mouth a couple  of drops  at  a time". It is certainly  a trail  to follow.
The  ecstasy of sex is one of the sources of high  lyric delight  in Souster's poetry.
To complicate the  matter, we  have  horror, or  fear,  associated   with  sex.  In  the poem   "Night  Watch" the  unconscious   crowd   is  whooping it  up  "at   Angelo's with  wine  and  spaghetti ... at Joe's,  Mabel's or Tim's Place ..." while the lovers stand

g6

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



here with the lean cold pushing the light from the stars,
here under ghost buildings, here with silence grown too silent,

you and I in this doorway like part of a tomb, kissing the night with bitter cigarettes.

I would  point  out  the simile of the tomb,  the cold, the stars,  and  the ghost build­ ings, in this picture, as providing one side to a three-cornered drama :  the horror of  the  night; the  ignorant  merrymakers who  know  nothing about it;  and  the lovers  who  know  their  love and  desire.  But  to know  love in  this way  is to know also  the  night,   the  cold,  and  the  terrible  silence.  The  linking  here  of  love  and death,   against   the  blind  distractions of the  city  crowd,  is only  one  example of Souster's  fine,  exact,   yet quite   undeliberate imagination. Once   the  relevance of his imagery  is established, there  is hardly  a  poem  which  does  not  contain some such subtlety.
A very fine  poem  of the  early  period,  "Dominion Square," presents  the  lovers as almost  mythical beings,  at  one with  the night,  the cold, the rain  outside,  while the speaker  hurries to escape  into  the warm  tavern  with its human hubbub. (This poem  has  been  drastically revised;  I  do  not  know  whether I  do  not  prefer  the early  version.)   We should  note  the  pattern of thought:

They wouldn't  understand  my haste
in getting out of the rain, in leaving this cold wind-blowing night ...
. . . they seem almost part of the rain
... they seem almost part of the night, these two lovers,
with their slow lingering steps, their total unawareness
of everything in this city but their love ...

The   hard  inhuman features of the  city are  frequently used  by Souster  as  corre­ latives  of human indifference, cruelty,  blindness.  This  is the  shape  of  evil  in his poetic  hell and  heaven:

City, while the night rides high, the filth, the stink, is forgotten, what the sewers run with, what the hospitals throw in the garbage,
what the stockyard breathes, becomes

the dancing neon, the white necks, the glittering encore, the multiplying mirrors ...
("Night-Town")

37

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



Opposite to this,  there  is love and  compassion. For  this reason  the  two lovers in "Dominion Square" with  "their total  unawareness/of everything in this city" are wondrously moving  in a  mythical  space  beyond  our  lesser human evil, and  also beyond  the  greater menace  of "night" and  death: "they  seem almost  part  of the night". (The significance  of that  "almost" emerges  at  once.)   And  the  paradox is  that   the  human world  of  noise  and  unconsciousness -which  is in  fact  "the city" -is  at  the  same  time  a shelter.  In  Souster's poetry  certain  features of city life become  rich  havens of recreation and  pleasure -he loves the  jazz, the lights, the  crowds,  the  eating  places -when these  are  seen  as temporary refuge  from the  cold  of space  (death) or the  inhumanity of man.
In  the  city proper,  with its "black-hearted buildings", life is slowly but  relent­ lessly destroyed. Compassion  is eroded  away  and  cruelty  wins out.  In  the  biog­ raphy  of a criminal, "Court of General Sessions",  the  life story  of a  city-dweller  in  this  mythology  is sketched: street  gangs,  poolrooms, dance-halls, girls in  bor­ rowed  cars,  crap  games,  cops ... culminating in the  "Army  years/learning to be tough, to kill." This  is the essential story;  and  war  in  Souster's poetry  is the  ulti­ mate  shape  of evil. It is killing suddenly  made  plain  as the  reality  and  purpose  of life, while  the  poet stands  against  it, opposed,  as pacifist.
We  can  now  read  a  poem,  another about a  kind  of groundhog, in  the  light of this interpretation of the imagery, and  see how  apt  the simple  details  suddenly
become:
I want to put it down about the animal
that burrowed its way under my back porch,
but there's not really much
to say: simply, some animal fearing winter's approach, the season of death,
has tried to find shelter,
and I, half in my stupid human fear and half
in my pride of possession, have sealed him out
so ingeniously
with my boards and shovel,

then gone inside
to be out of the cold, quite proud of myself.

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



It  is remarkable here  that  Souster  implicates himself in  the  guilt  of cruelty.  We find  this  repeatedly in  his poems,  a moral  equation that  refuses  to  put  the  poet himself  on  the side  of the  untainted, the  arrogant and  free,  and  involves  him in the  common fate,  of  pain   and   guilt.  This  poetry  is essentially  Christian in  its assumption of guilt  and  compassion; and  it is a poetry of the  common people in its  participation on  humble terms  in life.  ( Souster  has  said  in  private that  he is "a  working  class poet", a title  which  no one  will be willing  to contest  with  him in  this  era  of affluence  and  conspicuous  spending.)
For  just as he  is involved  in  guilt  with  mankind, so Souster  bears  the  fate  of suffering   with  average mankind.  Often   in  his poems  he  is a  trapped creature, living  the  life of  a  victim  and  captive  of society. At  the  personal level this may even  appear as  weakness-perhaps it  is;  at  any  rate,  it  is the  voice  of  a poet who  is not  above  the  modem urban  situation, but  who  is entrapped in  it,  and records  its private agonies  with  a personal  accent.
On  this  theme,  the  sense of frustration and  inescapable boredom is conveyed in  such  a  poem  as "Yonge Street  Saturday Night":

and there are some like us,
just walking, making our feet move ahead of us, a little bored, a little lost, a little angry,
walking as though we were really going somewhere,
walking as if there was something to see at Adelaide or maybe on King ...

No  reader   can  fail  to  be struck  by this side of Souster  in  despairing poems like "Bridge Over  the  Don" or  "In Praise  of  Loneliness".  The tone  of  desperation creeps  in  everywhere, and  is projected  often  into  others,  men,  creatures, objects, as in  "Old Man   Leaning on  a  Fence", "Litter", "Sucker Run", "The  Child's Umbrella". Even  such  a poem  as "The Tame Rabbit", with  its naive  correlatives of  entrapment, belongs  in  this  sequence,  as the  closing  lines  of the  poem  make
clear:
So the cage for you
and the swinging by the ears, that's  all there is
for you, little one,

and come to think of it why should you, rabbit, be any better off
than  the rest of us?

39

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



The  entire  poem is extremely significant.
For  after   all,  the  groundhog  (or   rabbit, or  ferret)  is  unquestionably the poet  himself: looking  for spring  in the  middle  of winter, not  finding  any  (as  in the  poem  "Groundhog Day,  1g6o"), getting shot  or  wounded for  his trouble, digging  in to stay holed up through a long bad season. "Groundhog's My Nature" says Souster  in  the  poem with  that  title:

Groundhog's my nature:
hole up deep in winter,
walk cautious above ground in spring and summer:
leave a piece
of arm or leg
and a smear of blood
in the crafty hunter's  trap just to hold his interest.





RRHAPS WE   CAN   GO  back  now  to  the  unresolved  mystery  of the  poem  "The Hunter". Just  as groundhogs, ferrets, rabbits,  squirrels,  rodents, and  captive bears   (they  hibernate) appear in  Souster's poems  as variants on  a single  theme-of   the  secluded  and  beleaguered self,  the  victim,  or  the  canny enduring animal-so the  cat  and  the  cat  family  is the  counterpart female sym­ bol. "The cat comes at me ..." in the poem  titled  "The Cat  at Currie's":

The cat comes at me
slowly, cautiously, one pad before the other, lifting the springing muscles over,

then strikes -to find me ready
and she unready-rolls over on her back, fighting the losing battle with my hands which soon pin her down: ...

Some  critics  would  say the  poem  should  end  here.  The  sexual  overtones and  the man-woman  relation has  been  sufficiently  implied -or  has  emerged   from  the poet's   subconscious. But  Souster  has  a  genius  for  clarion   declaration, and   his privilege  to make  it should  not  be denied  him:

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



... and as I hold her
I remember  your body, more soft, more pulsating than  this sleek animal's, your arms more deadly, lips more engulfing
and I let the cat go ...

The   word   "deadly",  confirming the  metaphor  of  "strike" and   "battle",  may remind  us of the  gun  that  "blew  his head  in"  in the  "Hunter" poem.  Nor is the fear  of woman superficial or particular: it is a profound fear of the sexual  abbyss
-"engulfing" -which is always associated  with death, and  which  like any fear can  only be quieted by a reassuring love.
Paradoxically,  as  we  have  already   perceived,  this  same  source  of  fear,  sex,
becomes  in Souster's poetry  also the greatest  of ecstasies, a kind  of heaven; or in the  groundhog metaphor, the safe hideout  from  all troubles,  the  one  reassurance in  a world  of cruelty  and  indifference.

Deep in the middle of this forest a cave made for only one where I often go
to escape from man
his cruelty
his desolation

A small neat cave always warm always beckoning

To get there I head for two far birches
then slide through  moss to the waiting wide cavern of her love!
("The  Cave")
And  best of all, in "A  Bed Without a Woman": A bed without  a woman
is a thing of wood and springs, a pit to roll in with the Devil.
But let
her body touch its length and it becomes
a place of singing wonders, eager springboard to heaven and higher.

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



And you may join her there in those hours between sleeping and the dawn.

Once  the pattern of the poet's expression, in images as vehicles for recurrent emotions, is established, even  the  most trivial  poems  yield  a nuance of meaning which  adds  to  their  fascination:

... you throw your slippers across the room at me, one, two,
but checking your anger enough so they come at me lightly


I go on loving you.
 which is why I suppose


What the  poem  tells us is that  the  woman's anger  is, in this event,  harmless, dis­ charged  by  love  or  temperamental mildness.  She  is  incapable of  any  ruthless cruelty:  "which is why  I suppose/!go on  loving  you."  The groundhog,  let  us remember,  is  phonetically "hog"  as  well  as  earth-born  creature, and  his  base proclivities  are  humanized as well as domesticated by gentle  exercise in  the insti­ tution  of marriage. Marriage, in fact,  can  be a lair  or cave  in the  middle  of the forest,  where  one  can  escape  "from man/his cruelty /his desolation".
Despite   these   compensations,  however,   the   permanent  ground   of  Souster's poetry  is human deprivation and  loss. Unlike  other  poets  who  find  their  dream of happiness and  fulfilment  in the  future, or  even  in the  present,  he looks back­ ward   to  the  past.  "John warns  me  of nostalgia," carries  the  theme  ("John" is the  late  John  Sutherland, editor  of Northern  Review). Happiness is "a  lost but recovered  joy";  and  all are  "groping for  something lost  they  will  never  find/in the  drab of the  street,  in  the  dirt,  in  the  smoke,  in  the  noise." The imagery of youth   usually  conveys  this  meaning of  loss  in  Souster's  poetry,  as  in  "Young Girls",  where  it is also an  image  of sexual  promise; or in  the  poem  remembering
boyhood-
It's nothing but desire to live again, fresh from the beginning like a child.

Some   of  his  most  moving   and   beautiful  poems  tum on  this  theme: "Not Wholly  Lost,"  "Lagoons, Hanlan's Point," "Lambton  Riding Woods," "The Amusement Park".  But  the  return   to  youth  is only  one  door  to  a  lost  heaven. The  ideal  good  also shines  for  him  in  the  natural world -where  the  epiphany is a total  return -in images of "snow" and  "green", in ecstatic  jazz, in perfected

42

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



love,  or  in  "the great/untroubled/voice of poetry". As  we shall  see, also,  joy is often  the achieved reward of Souster's  patient realistic vision, so that  retrospective nostalgia  is only  a  more  defeated direction  in  an  idealism  that  ends  in  measure and  acceptance.
The sense of loss and  deprivation, the erosion  of time,  the  cruel  impersonality and  brutality of the  city are  nevertheless  the  groundwork of these  poems.  Nor is it  a  private and   personal   condition limited  to  the  poet.  The   bulk  of  Souster's poetry  deals  with  other   people-the  people  of  the  city-and  these  are  truly observed,  not faceless democratic symbols as for example  in Carl  Sandburg. They are actual individuals (not  that  characterization is any aim in poetry)  ; their  pain is real,  and  their  "wasted bitter  years" are specific as their  deaths  and  entrances. A personal  predicament is projected  outward in this human landscape, and  at the same  time  a  truth about  the  general  life is revealed   (since  the  individual is our source  of knowledge about the  universal,  the  mass, and  a single imagination, if it  has  poetic  scope,  sympathy, the  gift  of extension,  becomes  representative for mankind).
If the  groundhog is the  signature of the  poet  in this  book,  there  could  be no better  illustration of the  transfer  of the  personal  to  the  level of objectivity than his use of  this  figure  in  describing  a city-dweller. He  provides  this for  us in the poem "The Quarry":

The  terrified look
on the groundhog's face looking from his hole one instant ahead
of the trap's  deadly spring,

I saw today
in the ferret stare
of the old lady lush
up Bay Street somewhere, wandering  like a child bewildered, crushed,
in and out of the crowds,

waiting, waiting,
for that blow to fall.

Obviously  Souster's verdict  on modern  life is not very cheerful. Whether there  is truth  in this picture of waste, vanity, frustration, poverty and  desperation, we may

43

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



allow  the  reader   to  judge.  The   poetry  is  not  a  sociological  survey  filled  with ideological  jargon,  nor is it a political language about  power or prestige or money; Souster's depiction  of modern life is humble,  human, and  close to the satisfactions and   discomforts   of  the  average   man.  He  shows  people  in  their  intimate  real moments of despair, love, and  pleasure.  And  the  first of these is the ground-tone of his canvas  of life.

IMAGES OF  ESCAPE,  liberation, total self-realization on a plane of pure  fantasy,  will be found  in Souster's  poetry.  These are  important, but  they
should  not  distract us from  the main  direction of his development. There is "The Old  Prospector" who advises him to "get out of here/leave the city ... jMove out, buy  a fruit  farm  ..." There is the  memory  of liberty  and  self-realization in the war  years  ("our  careless/new-found, exploding strength") ;  and  the  memory  of childhood  as the  continuing promise  of such  freedom  ("so  much/in the  warm darkness   around  me  tingled/with the  unknown, the  adventurous"). Even  jazz is for Souster  a realm  of freedom, total  mobility  such  as actual life denies:

all this noisy crew bringing
their Manhattan madness up here where we like it quiet
(but never the death-quiet  our elders have given it!)  ...
("Jazz Concert,  Massey Hall")

But  actually   Souster  never  takes  the  risk of  total  abandon, he  merely  observes and  participates by observation, in  a wishful  fantasy:

The  rain is only the river
grown bored, risking everything on one big splash.

The one  most  revealing   poem  where  this  fantasy of  revolt  and  liberation is explored   is  "Coureurs-de-Bois". Here  the  break   with  moral and  religious  con­ formism comes to a head.  ( Souster,  a true  Protestant, is a kind  of heretical saint,  despising  Church and  State,  and  even  castigating Isaiah and  "the  over-zealous touch/of   Matthew  Mark   Luke  and  John"; yet  he  goes  to  church  on  Sunday night-see  the  poem  "Sunday Night  Walk" in  the  Selected  Poems-and he speaks  the  grace  at  table  in his own  home.) The  coureurs-de-bois "were  glad  to get  away/from  Montreal and  its  whores,  from  Quebec/and the  Great Bishop's lamentations" j; "they'd  wenched, drunk,  played  their  last  louis"  in  the  trading centre, and  then  went  "back   on  the  trail" -to  "hardship, danger, but  as well

44

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



the  rubjof   young  flesh among the  pines,  in  the  drunken wigwams,jsweet sights of torture, dark  flowerings  of blood":
while the whole colony waited their return for a sight, for a breath of that savour
of utter abandonment to Flesh, Food and Finery,
strong, clean as the forest air sweeping into lives
watered  down by the Church  and eviscerated by the State.

What fascinates me in this  poem is the acceptance of cruelty: "sweet  sights of torture, dark   flowerings  of  blood". Since  fear  and  recoil  from  cruelty,  the  im­ passioned   rejection of  cruelty,   is the  mainspring of Souster's poetry-the  city appearing as a  monster  of indifference, and  desire itself a  threat of  violence­ how  astonishing to find  here "the rub of young flesh among  the pines"  combined with  "sweet  sights  of  torture". These   coureurs-de-bois, deeply  buried   and  for­ gotten  in  the  beginnings of Canadian history,  provide  a rich symbol  of primitive  release and  catharsis, an  emotional correlative of that  total orgy of fulfilment and adventure which   actual life  can  never  support.
To  accept   the  limitations of actuality, however,  is Souster's primary  road  of poetic  development. Here  the  fact-at  its worst-must be attested  in the  face of human loss and  failure-"It must  be like this" -so  that  we can  go on and endure. There are  numerous poems  that  illustrate this direction. In  contrast to Souster's early   poems,  which  expressed  their  disillusion  by  means  of  invective,
these  middle poems  are  often  starkly  objective  and  non-committal. Since  they, too,  tum on  a  conflict  between   the  actual and  something lost,  irony  and  ripe humour often  come  into  play;  in  fact,  if the  balance falls heavily  on  the  side of harsh  reality,  cynicism  results  inevitably, as in the  poems "Drunk, on  Crutches," "My First  School," "Another  Day". The  neutral objective  tone,  and   the  idea of fact  remorselessly  there  to be  accepted, may  be illustrated in  the  poem  "Girl with the Face of Sores":

One could get used to this face by looking long enough at it.

Each separate oozing sore
would develop its own character, each red valley of irritation,
each rounded  hill-top of pus.

Even the white skin fighting
a losing battle beneath -one could find here

45

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



the eternal  parallel-beauty slowly crushed by relentless ugliness....

But the eyes are chicken
and  partly  betray you. And so it's much  easier
to tum  away, your shame greater than  her shame.


I find significance in "beauty  slowly crushed/by relentless ugliness" - a general statement or paradigm  of Souster's most pessimistic conclusion;  but even more so in  the first two lines-a statement  of reconciliation  with reality and  of  accept­ ance. "One  could get used to this face/by looking long enough at it." The trouble is, the poet says, that we do not have the courage to do so (and  as usual, he impli­ cates himself in the guilt and failure  to do so).
Souster,  however, does have  this courage,  as numerous  poems attest.  Recon­
ciliation  with  life -with boredom,  with  suffering,  with  defeat  and  death­ is his sad and  constant  achievement  as the book advances. It  brings a  quiet only few can  know. The  following poem defines much  of the same idea  in  terms of a  person  who knows only sorrow and  cannot  come to terms  with it:

She waits
for fortune to come to her like a steeple-chase winner
like a million  to the missing heir.

She goes to see the priest reads her catechism  over then  waits for the miracle to happen.

And I'd  tell her
only she wouldn't believe me, life isn't a matter of luck,
of good fortune, it's whether the heart  can keep singing when there's  really no reason why it should  at all.

Yes, I'd  tell her
but she'd only start  crying,
her with a heart  that  never had the excuse for a single song.

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE STARS



But  having  learned to sing  when  there  is really  no  reason  at  all,  when  there is no  excuse  for  a single  song,  Souster  is surprised  on  occasion  with  the  gift  of inexplicable joy. Renunciation and  acceptance of inevitable tragedy  set the stage for a burst  of song such  as could  only be equalled  or surpassed  by the  first prom­ ise  with  which   life  began. Souster   repeatedly  discovers  poetic  ecstasy  at  the end  of  renunciation and  suffering: as this  pattern is perceived, the  brief  poems at  the  end  of the  book  readily  yield up  their  honey.
I don't  wait for spring spring waits for me

With a snap of the fingers
I can focus the sun
with a turn  of the head bring warm winds on

So the whole world waits eyes me patiently
for something to stir to burst inside me

like the push of a root or the swoop of a bird!

Astonished   himself,  this  poet  of  extreme  and  simple  modesty  will  now  address the Muse:
desiring nothing
and expecting little, living only for your secret, inner praise,
I give thanks
that  you, goddess, from so many should have chosen me
for your cursed and singular blessing.

There is a  delicacy  of arrangement in The  Colour of the Times  that  may  be missed  by the  unwary reader. Again  and  again  poems interpret one  another and add  nuances of meaning by their  placing.  Following  the  poem  just quoted, which does  perhaps contain  a  shade of  self-approval,  we  find  four   lines  entitled
"Thrush":
The  thrush on the farthest-out  bough sings the best song his heart will allow.

47

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



And if we haven't liked what we've heard there's tomorrow and another  bird.

(Don't fool yourself,  this is no country  bumpkin but  "the thrush  on the farthest­
out bough"! And  far-out  is far-out  in any language.)


IF  THE  FIGURE for Souster  the man  is the groundhog, then  the figure  for the  poet  is that  of butterfly  or bird.  On  the last  page  of the book there
is a wild canary, with  "the poisejof  the  high-wire artist" (a  reminder of Ferlin­
ghetti), "who  takes  every  bend/every crazy  sway /indifferently .. .jintent on  his fill"-
then 0
the wind must tire of your insolence for with one great gust he flings
you from your perch, up and over in a sudden yellow flash
that  blinds like the sun.

And  following  this,  in  the  last  poem  of all,  groundhog becomes  "weed-cutter", a plodding efficient  metaphor for the creative  process:

Be the weed-cutter
steaming slowly the lagoons, working quietly, well,
your blades searching out a clearer, deeper channel than has been before.

Surely  this  is  poetry  of  the  highest  order. Apparently casual  and  even  hap­ hazard at  times,  it  has a  sureness  of touch  and  scope  of  vision that  will  amaze  and   delight  futurity. The  best  description of  it,  with  the  larger  implications of the theme  we have followed, appears in a single brief poem,  "I Watched a Bird," which  is one of Souster's  finest pieces, and  one in which  again the  bird speaks for the  poet  (perhaps unawares) yet conveys everything:

I watched a bird blown in the sky
like some poor thing without control, dipping and swerving here and  there with wings spread wide and motionless.

GROUNDHOG AMONG THE  STARS



I watched a bird tossed down  the wind that  never fought  or uttered cry, surrendered to that  boundless air, caught up in that  great  mystery.




























49




cbraaicle



LETTRE  DE MONTREAL
 





Nairn Kattan



LA RENTREE  Ln'TERAmE   est  tellement  lente   cette   annee
qu'elle  risque   de   passer  inaper ue.
energies  des  jeunes  ecrivains.  Les rares  oeuvres  litteraires qui  ont  brise la mono­ tone   succession   d'ouvrages  mediocres   et   anodins  refletent   les   preoccupations politiques  de  l'elite  intellectuelle. Que  la  ministere  des Affaires Culturelles de la
province  de  Quebec accorde  le premier  prix  de  litterature a un  jeune  poete  qui
ne  fait  pas  mystere  de  son  engagement separatiste n'a  rien  de Surprenant. Non pas que le gouvernement quebecois  manifeste  ainsi son appui a l'un  des fondateurs de  la  revue  independantiste, Parti  Pris. 11 est  bien  contraint, cependant, de  re­
connaitre que  la  meilleure  oeuvre  litteraire, publiee  au  cours  de  cette  annee  au
Canada fran  ais,
land  chante son  attachement a sa  patrie  quebecoise et  a la  femme  qu'il   aime.
Michel  van Schendel affirme, lui aussi dans Variations sur la pierre son engage­
ment  et  sa volonte  de  participer pleinement a la  vie canadienne-fran aise.
est significatif  que  l'un  des romans  les plus interessants, publie  ces derniers mois, soit,  Ethel  et  le Terroriste   ou  Claude Jasmin evoque  l'aventure du  F.L.Q.
La  pression  qu'exerce l'evenement sur l'ecrivain, le role que  joue celui-ci  dans
la cite, son engagement envers son groupe, ne se posent  pas theoriquement ou en purs  termes  academiques. Aussi, 1'organisation d'un colloque  sur le theme  de: "Litterature et societe  canadiennes fran  aises",
et  d'anthropologie, de  la  Faculte   des  Sciences  Sociales  de  l'Universite Laval, represente,  a  mon  avis,  le  grand   evenement litteraire  de  l'annee. Les  travaux presentes  a ce colloque,  reuni  du  27 au  29 fevrier,   rg64,  viennent d'etre publics
par  la  revue  Recherches Sociographiques. Cet  ouvrage sera  desormais  un  docu­
ment  essentiel  a !'etude de la litterature canadienne-fran aise.

so

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



Je  ne voudrais  parler  ici ni des essais consacres a l'histoire de Ia critique litte­ raire et aux courants  ideologiques, ni a l'enquete  menee aupres des ecrivains, des editeurs et des libraires sur le statut  de l'ecrivain  et Ia diffusion de  Ia litterature. Les travaux  les plus percutants  de ce colloque sont ceux qui furent consacres aux themes de Ia litterature  recente.
Michel  van  Schendel  a traite  du  theme  de !'amour  dans le roman  canadien­
fran<;ais. "L'amour," dit-il, "est le point de convergence de !'existence sociale et de Ia litterature". Apres avoir  puise dans  Ia litterature  universelle des exemples pour appuyer  cette affirmation, le jeune poete explore le roman canadien-fran<;ais. II constate !'absence  de Ia femme et, par consequent, de !'amour  dans ce roman, particulierement chez les auteurs du dix-neuvieme siecle et du debut du vingtieme.
Dans ces oeuvres, l'homme  n'est pas encore un individu, dit-il, il est le produit
de sa fonction anonyme. II note un autre obstacle a l'eclosion du theme de I'amour dans Ia litterature canadienne-fran<;aise:  celui de Ia conquete et de I'occupation. Au  dix-neuvieme  siecle, !'elite  intellectuelle  vivait en vase clos. "Le  lettre  que­ becois," dit  Michel  van  Schendel,  "n'etait pas  un isole culture! mais,  deja, un monstre au milieu de son peuple."  II aurait  pu, dans ce retranchement, parler au peuple, etre romancier, mais il n'a  pas comble le fosse. La veritable tragedie  qui a frappe  les auteurs  canadiens-franc;ais a Ia naissance du roman fut  le sentiment de Ia depossession. "Ce  sentiment  n'est pas en soi un obstacle a Ia creation.  II est meme plutot  un stimulant, car il provoque  un besoin de compensation.  Mais ce stimulant  n'agit  que  si Ia depossession n'affecte  pas les  moyens grace  auxquels une compensation  creatrice peut etre trouvee. Or, l'un des aspects les plus sordides de Ia colonisation du Quebec  fut  justement que l'on fit main basse sur les instru­ ments intellectuels  qui  sont indispensables a Ia creation".
Le  Canada   franc;ais fut  prive des instruments  de transmission des traditions. La  colonisation  a  empeche  toute  expression d'amour, ce point  de  convergence entre  !'existence  sociale  et  Ia litterature.  C'est  Ia, d'apres  Van  Schendel, !'alie­ nation  essentielle, Ia malediction  initiale.
Certes, van Schendel  ne pretend  pas faire autre chose que formuler  des hypo­ theses. II constate  une coupure  entre  Ia tradition  qui a existe avant  Ia conquete et !'elite qui a persiste a s'exprimer  en franc;ais. II constate que les pays colonises comme  l'lnde, la  Chine  et  les pays arabes,  de  meme que  ceux  de  I'Amerique latine,  ne se sont pas trouves dans le meme cas que le Canada fran<;ais car, dans ces pays, Ia tradition  est demeuree suffisamment homogene pour qu'il fllt possible d'y recourir  dans  les heures decisives.

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



L'auteur passe sous silence deux facteurs qui nous paraissent essentiels. A aucun moment, il  ne  fait  mention   de  la  Revolution Fran aise
meme  mesure  que  la  conquete, a  coupe  les Canadiens fran ais
leurs  traditions. II ne  parle  pas  non  plus de  l'aventure particuliere de la  vie des pionniers car,  tout  colonises  qu'ils  eussent  ete,  les Canadiens fran ais
jamais  cesse d'etre des defricheurs et des conquerants de terres  vierges. Les com­
parer   aux  Arabes,  aux  Indiens,  sans  faire  allusion  a leur  implantation en  terre americaine, fait   pencher   un  peu   trop la  balance  d'un seul  cote.  En  plus  de
!'absence de  la  femme,  !'auteur  mentionne !'inversion sexuelle.  II est inutile  de chercher ici des points de comparaison avec les ecrivains  algeriens  (l'homosexualite est un  theme  persistant dans  la litterature arabe et bien  avant que  Driss Chraibi n'ecrive  Les  Boucs,  Abou   Nawass   chantait les  jeunes  gar  ons
d'Haroun al Rachid). C'est  dans la litterature americaine non  colonisee que nous retrouvons les memes  courants et  les memes  themes.   Le  critique Leslie  Fiedler tente  de  le  demontrer tout  au  long  de  son  volumineux Love  and  Death in the American  Novel.
II ne sera  pas  difficile non  plus de deceler  certaines tendances semblables  chez les  ecrivains   canadiens-anglais.  Ceci   n'infirme  aucunement  les  arguments  de Michel   van  Schendel   mais  permet   d'indiquer d'autres hypotheses  que  celles de
!'alienation et  de  la  colonisation   hypotheses  necessaires  a l'examen du  theme  de l'amour dans le roman  canadien-fran ais.
Gilles  Marcotte a  presente,  au  cours  du  colloque,  une  communication sur  la
religion  dans  la litterature canadienne-fran aise.
semble," affirme-t-il,   "ne   peut   pas  etre  dite  chretienne. Elle  fait  partie   d'une litterature  occidentale qui   s'est   developpee   hors   du   christianisme." L'auteur decele  trois themes  particuliers dans  cette  litterature: la culpabilite, I'absence  du pere et la vocation  sacerdotale. D'apres Marcotte, le religieux,  au Canada fran  ais, a partie  lice avec la culture. Et I'auteur conclut  son article  en disant: "Le  roman canadien-fran ais
pendant  quelque temps  en  chretien   du  dimanche,  c'est-a-dire qu'il   remplissait ses devoirs  religieux  tout  en  vaquant par  ailleurs  a ses petites  affaires,  sans souci de !'experience de la foi. Puis la revolte est venue, qui a balaye sa foi d'honnete paroissien. II s'est  retrouve  disponible  pour  toutes  les experiences, force  a toutes les experiences. Au  niveau  des valeurs  religieuses,  comme  a tous les autres,  il n'a pas a conserver,  mais a inventer."
La  encore,  des comparaisons fructueuses peuvent etre  entreprises avec la litte­
rature americaine. Aux  Etats-Unis, toutes  les eglises organisees  ont  eu partie  liee


52

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



avec  la  culture, et  un  nombre considerable d'oeuvres recentes  le demontrent, le confirment  (C.  F.  Powers,  Bernard Malamud, etc.).
Jean Filiatrault a examine, au cours du colloque, le theme  de la revolte  dans le roman  canadien-fran _;ais. II  tire  la  conclusion  que ce qui  manque vraiment aux Canadiens fran _;ais c'est le sens de l'appartenance au groupe, le sens social. "Nous donnons !'impression de  ne pas etre  une societe, mais une agglutination d'indivi­ dus."
A  ce  sujet,   je voudrais citer  une  phrase  de  Saul  Bellow  dans  les  Aventures d' Augie   March. Le  romancier  americain  parle  de  Chicago:  "C'est  une  chose inhumaine que  d'avoir tant  de gens  reunis  et  dont  le contact ne  donne rien.  Il ne peut  rien  donner: l'ennui engendre sa propre  etincelle,  si bien  que  rienne  se produit jamais."
L'alienation de l'individu, et les sociologues n'ont  pas manque de le souligner, est un phenomene mondial qui est arrive  a son point d'exacerbation en Amerique du Nord.
Dans  ses  conclusions,   le  Pere  Georges  Andre   Vachon   remarque que  "Nous avons  tendance  a  traiter ]'objet   de  nos  recherches   comme   un  phenomene  in­ sulaire." Et  il a joute:  "Une juste interpretation de ces themes  est impossible sans recours  ala  methode comparative."
II me semble  essentiel qu'avant de comparer le Canada fran _;ais avec !'Afrique, l'Inde, la  Chine  ou  meme  la  France, qu'on commence par  ce qui,  malgre  tout, nous  est le  plus  familier  et  le plus  proche: le Canada anglais  et  les Etats-Unis. On  sera  surpris   alors  de  constater que  les Canadiens anglais  et  les Americains souffrent   des  memes  malaises  et  s'insurgent contre  les memes  maux,  bien  qu'ils ne soient point  colonises.



LES  Ecrits  du Canada   fran ais
ans.  Sous  forme   de  "Cahiers libres",  ces Ecrits  publient   des  pieces  de  theatre,
des  romans,  des nouvelles,  des essais, des etudes  litteraires et  de  la  poesie. C'est en  meme  temps  un  bane  d'essai  pour  les jeunes ecrivains  et un forum pour  leurs aines.
Les  Ecrits  se situent   en  dehors  de  tout  engagement politique ou  ideologique. Cela  ne veut  pas  dire  qu'ils  ne  publient que  des textes incolores  qui  ne risquent aucunement de susciter  des controverses. Au contraire, des romanciers, des poetes,

53

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



des essayistes, se situant aux  antipodes sur  le plan  de la pensee,  voisinent  dans les sommaires de cette publication.
La  derniere livraison  des Ecrits (Vol.  18)   nous  fournit un  excellent  exemple de la priorite  donnee  a la liberte d'expression. La  jeune generation est representee
par  deux  des porte-etendard de la nouvelle  gauche separatiste et anti-clericale. 11 s'agit   d'Andre Major   et  de  Paul  Chamberland qui  appartiennent tous  deux  a
l'equipe de  la  revue  Parti Pris. Disons, en  passant, que  si les poemes  de  Major, publies  dans  ce volume,  marquent un  progres  dans !'oeuvre de ce jeune ecrivain, la nouvelle  de Paul  Chamberland est extremement decevante. Brillant  dialecticien et  bon  poete,  Chamberland l'est  indiscutablement. L'insignifiante bleuette senti­ mentale qu'il  fait  paraitre dans  les Ecrits  prouve qu'il  ne  peut  s'aventurer sans risques  dans  toutes  les avenues  de !'expression litteraire.
Nous  trouvons egalement  dans  ce numero les noms d'ecrivains qui sont encore
dans   la  force  de  l'age  mais  qui  apparaissent, injustement, aux  yeux  des  plus jeunes, comme  de vieux croulants. La pensee de Maurice Tremblay est vigoureuse et  nourrie de  connaissances  et  de  reflexions.  11 y a  quelques annees,  il  publiait dans  les Ecrits un  essai ou il s'en  prenait violemment au  nationalisme. C'est  qu'il se situe  aux antipodes des ediles de Parti Pris.
Le  meme   numero contient   un  texte  du  Rev.  Pere  Ernest   Gagnon sur  l'art africain. Professeur  de  litterature,  jesuite,  le  Pere  Gagnon est  un  ecrivain   dont la  pensee  est d'une haute  elevation  morale  et  d'une grande densite.











54



reviev 	





INNOCENT EYE
ON MASS SOCIETY


Thelma McCormack




MARSHALL MCLUHAN,  Understanding Media.  McGraw-Hill. $7.50.


I USED TO THINK   that  Mar­ shall   McLuhan  was   an   innocent   who had    discovered depth   psychology   and called   it  "television."   Since   depth   psy­ chology  is  as  good  an  approach as  any to  the  mass  media,  a  great   deal   better  than  some,  McLuhan,  with  all  his man­  nerisms  was  working   in  the  right  direc­  tion.   This impression is borne out in Understanding  Media  where   what   he has  to say about  the  mass media  of  com­ munication   is   contrived,   autodidactic, amusing, occasionally right and  occasion­ ally  dangerous. But  below  the  surface  of his  comments about   the  media  is an  in­ sight  and   system  which  bear  serious  at­  tention whether one  is  interested in  the media   or  not.  McLuhan  has  now  gone well  beyond   discovering depth  psychol­ ogy;  he  has  discovered mass  society.
The  metaphors he draws upon  are from
preliterate societies.  In  particular, he is entranced  by   the   group    cohesion   and group  consciousness  of an  "oral" culture, a term  which  summarizes a closed, static, tradition-bound  social   structure  where
 relationships are face-to-face, where there is scarcely  any  individual differentiation and    only   a   rudimentary   division    of labour. In urban industrialized societies, consensus on such a scale is an artifact, achieved  by the  sacrifice of critical judge­ ment,  sustained internally by anxiety  and externally    by   manipulation.   To   para­ phrase  McLuhan's most  famous  dictum: the medium  is history:  the message is the mass  movement.
Content of the  media  is irrelevant, ac­
cording  to McLuhan. Thus he refuses to be drawn  into discussions of Kitsch and popular culture that  have  so engaged intellectuals  in   recent   years.   By   "con­ tent",  he  means  the  manifest  content of an,y particular news story, feature article, TV  documentary, etc.  The real  stuff  of the  media   are   not  facts, opinions,   con­ cepts,  but  the  structure of  symbols  that  emerge cumulatively. Imagine the Amer­  ican  constitution rewritten by Joyce and analysed    through   structural   linguistics and   you  have   approximately what  Mc­ Luhan  regards   as  the   substance  of   the

55

REVIEW ARTICLES



media.  Imagine, also, Finnegan's  Wake rewritten  by  Thomas Jefferson   and  an­ alysed  by John  Stuart Mill and  you  have the  mistake   McLuhan  thinks  we  make.
Our  mistake belongs to the age of mechanical technology which produced individualism, scientific detachment, democratic pluralism, nationalism, the sequential  analysis   of  cause  and   effect, the  class  struggle,  competition, the  mar­ ket   mechanism,  critical   intelligence,  a rational approach to social  change  and  a high  degree  of  self  conscious  awareness. All   of   them   divisive.   Electronic  tech­  nology  of the  twentieth century  is unify­ ing,  communal, demanding commitment and  involvement. It submerges individual personality, obliterates social differences and   de-nationalizes  the  world,  restoring the ethos of the oral society. The great modern  revolution  for   McLuhan,,   seen most  clearly  in  the  mass media  of  com­ munication, is the  shift  from  divisive  to unifying   ways  of  perceiving  and  organ­ izing   experience,  from   "explosion"  to "implosion."
No  field  of science  I  know  of has  not
moved  in the direction of configurational concepts,  and  in  that  sense McLuhan  is a popularizer of contemporary science though  he   appears  to   be   unaware  of these developments. His hypothesis, how­ ever,   that   technology  is  responsible   for this  historical   change  is  something  else again.   It is  legitimate   to   regard   tech­ nology as a causal variable, but its weight in  relation to other factors,  material and non-material,  in  the  social  matrix, and the  precise  nature of  its  social  and  psy­ chological   impact,  direct   and   indirect, are  exceedingly complex  problems. For McLuhan,  however,   this  is  not   a   pro­ visional   hypothesis.    Technology   is   the Prime   Mover,   and   everything,  large  or
 small,  becomes  its consequences.  Where­ ever  he  looks,  from   ladies'  hair-does to weapons,   he  finds  corroboration.
The immediate model  for  this is depth
psychology  where  all  behaviour awake  or asleep,   trivial   or   important,  accidental or   planned,  expresses   the   motivational key;  a  key, moreover, which  we do  not, will not,  cannot consciously  recognize. McLuhan draws  upon  this model  further by   locating  the    source   of   technology within  the individual. Technology is nothing more  than  the  externalization of our  feet,  hands, eyes,  brain,  skin,  teeth, etc. The  correspondences he establishes between   body  and   machine  are   cruder and  more  arbitrary than   those  of  a Freudian since  McLuhan  is  not  guided by a  theory  of motivation, least of all by one   based  on  conflict.   For  Oedipus, he offers  Narcissus   who  having   created  his own  image   fails  to  recognize  it.
The  Narcissus    myth    eliminates the
dichotomy  between   consumer  and   pro­ ducer   just  as  the   modern  economy  eli­ minates the  price mechanism. The  "audi­ ence" of the  media  is not  the  consumer; it   is   the   producer.  We   are   not   sold General  Motors cars  in  McLuhan's sys­ tem;  we are shareholders, producers of transportation. Looked  at one way, he is simply  saying  that  audiences are  not passive, that  communication is a  recipro­ cal  process,  and  the  fact  that  communi­ cation   is   now   mediated,   conducted through a technology, does not alter  this. This  is one  of the cornerstones of current media  research, and  it is characteristic of the   older   media   as  well  as  the   newer ones.  We  not  only  select  the   books  we read,   but  read   into   them   and   read  out  anything  that   is  threatening. Looked   at another   way,   this   is  an   argument  for public  ownership of  the  media,  for  it  is,

REVIEW ARTICLES



as  McLuhan  says,  as  absurd   for  us  to "lease"   to   others  the   media    of   com­ munciation  as   it   would   be   to   "lease"  speech.
Either  way,   this   new   producer   role does not solve any better than the old consumer   role   the   problem  -no  prob­ lem  to  primitive societies-of   how  we control  the   media.   Being  told  that   we own  or  produce the  media  of  communi­ cation  can  be  as  politically  disingenuous as Henry  Luce's concept of  "the people's capitalism", as dishonest  as thinking that  letters   to  the   Soviet   press  or,  closer  to home,  open-line radio  where the  house­ wife   and    folksy   disc   jockey   exchange generalities are  genuine forms  of partici­ pation.  McLuhan does  not  suggest  that  these  problems  constitute another area  of inquiry or  that   they  do  not  properly  be­ long  in  a  general theory  of  communica-
 tion.  On   the  contrary, to  raise  them  at all,   he   maintains,  is  to   misunderstand the  media.  This  is not  arrogance on  his part,  for it is inherent in this theory, essentially  an  historical  theory,  that  these and similar questions belong to an earlier epoch.
Much  of McLuhan, including his style
and   his  penchant  for   anthropology,   is reminiscent of  Veblen  who  similarly  be­ gan   his   analysis   with   technology   and  expected   that    its  rational   logic   would spread   to   the   business   class   and   ulti­  mately   throughout social  life.  Engineers were  Veblen's  vanguard  of   the  revolu­  tion.   Instead,  we  got   the   "managerial revolution", for  Veblen,  like  McLuhan, underestimated our  capacity to use tech­  nology  without   being  influenced  by  it. Technological  determinism, like all forms of   determinism,   is  never   able   to  cope





Literary
History
of

Canada
 
CANADIAN LITERATURE IN ENGLISH

GENERAL EDITOR:  Carl  F. Klinck

EDITORIAL BOARD:

Alfred  G. Bailey, Claude T. Bissell, Roy Daniells,  Northrop Frye, Desmond Pacey

A fascinating account, well-written and lively, invaluable as a source of information on authors, genres, and literary  trends  and  influences.

$18.oo



UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS




57

REVIEW ARTICLES



with  discrepancies and  must  rush  in concepts like Ogburn's "cultural lag", Marx's  "false   consciousness",   and   Mc­ Luhan's psychic shock or  "numbness".
Historical determinism is the  mystique
of all  modern ideologies.  However, what distinguishes the ideologies of mass society is their  response  to  alienation, their  dis­ illusionment with  the  democratic  "left", their   idealization  of   provincial   anti­ intellectual and anti-secular values. They
combine,  as   J.  L.   Talmon  says,  two
contradictory   notions:   social   cohesion and   self  expression.  McLuhan and  Mc­ Carthy,  vastly  different  in  every   other respect,    intuitively   grasped    the    same thing.   McLuhan is not  interested  in  re­ storing   the  values  of  a  secular-rational cosmopolitan  Anschauung, for it destroys the  cohesion  of  tribal  life  and  is as  ob­ solete  as  the  assembly  line  in  an  age  of automation.
The more   passive,  alienated  and  un­ committed  we  are,   the  more   we  yearn for,   the   more   strongly   we   respond  to ideologies  of  "effectiveness"  provided they  make  no  demands on  us. The  most successful ideology is the most ambiguous one   which   we  structure  ourselves  with our   infantile  and   wish  fulfillment fan­ tasies.   Applying    this   principle  to   the media, McLuhan  distinguishes between "hot" media,  like  print  and  radio  which are  highly  structured, and  "cold" media, like   TV  which   are   relatively   unstruc­ tured. The   latter, he  claims,  involve  us; the  former,  do  not.
Actually,   they  both  involve  us,  but  in
different  ways,  the  difference   being  the distinction  between   "identification"­ when   you  cry   with   the  martyred  Elsie who  is forced  to  play  the  piano  on  the Sabbath-and  "projection"-when you see  your   mother's  face   in   the   clouds.
 Identification is the mechanism of social learning; it is growth, strengthening and broadening the  ego.  Projection is  regres­ sion, the absence  of controls  and capacity for    problem-solving.  When    McLuhan talks   about    "involvement",  he   means  projection. For   the  alienated  with  their  impoverished  or  damaged  egos,  projec­ tion   is  the  only  means   of   involvement. It  goes  a  long   way   toward   explaining why changes in  a  party line  scarcely  dis­ turb    the   true   adherent,  and   why,   as Lasswell   pointed   out   many   years   ago, logical   consistency   is  not   the   criterion of  ideology.  The   race  is  to  the  vaguest.
McLuhan goes  even  further, equating
projection  or   "participation  in   depth" with   "maturity".  As  he  describes  "par­ ticipation  in   depth"  it   is  the   furthest extreme  from   introspection,   the   latter being  private, inner directed, self critical, leading  to a sense of  apartness, a capacity to  live  comfortably  with  relative   truths, to  resist  group   pressure,   and,   if  neces­ sary    to    endure    isolation.    McLuhan's definition  of  "maturity" is "belief", col­ lective  belief.
All   historical  determinism  faces   the
problem of leadership. According  to Mc­ Luhan, the  group best  qualified  to  lead us into  the  Promised  Land  are the artists  who  "can show  us how  to  'ride  with  the punch".  Taken  at  face  value,   this  is  a puzzling  choice  to  make  since  no  group  has  had  a sorrier  record  in  the  past  cen­ tury  for  its inability to understand or ac­ cept  technology than  artists.  The  explan­ ation  lies, I think,  in  understanding that  McLuhan is  talking not  so much   about  artists   as   about  art.   He   is  attempting here  to develop  an aesthetic theory which abolishes  the   distinctions  usually   made between   ( I ) "highbrow" and "lowbrow" art; and   ( 2)  "lowbrow" and  "folk" art.

REVIEW ARTICLES



In his  system,  folk  art  and   popular art ("lowbrow")   become   the   same,   a   ra­ tionale  that  Marxist writers  used  to give years  ago  for  going  to  Hollywood.  In  a limited    sense,   he   and   they   are   right.  Structurally, popular art  and  folk  art are both    highly    simplified    and   repetitive. They   may  move  us  at  the  level  of  uni­  versal   archetypal  images.   Both   have   a social  function; in  the  case  of  folk  art or  religion,   it  is  to  provide  the  closure of ritual. But,  if in  mass society,  there  is, as  Malraux says,  no  "folk", the  closure is  delusional;  its   function  is  escape   or pseudo-closure,   harmless   enough   under  certain circumstances, even necessary, but disastrous   as  a  fixation   and   dangerous in  a period  of confusion and  rapid  social change which  calls for the highest  degree of political  intelligence.
The   distinction  between   "highbrow"
and  "lowbrow" art is minimized by recog­ nizing  that   great   art,  too,  tells  us  some­ thing  about  the  "human  condition". The
 distinction   becomes   even   more   blurred by  art   styles  which   have   no  cogmtlve content   and   communicate  solely  by  in­ volving  us.  In  McLuhan's system,  then, there   is  no  difference  between  abstract art   and   a  television   screen.   "Pop   art" which  is, on  the  one  hand, a  parody  of folk art, and,  on the other hand, a parody of  what  we  have  traditionally meant   by the   term   "creative"  carries   this  to  its logical  conclusion.  Aesthetic theory  thus becomes  the  science  of  communication. It is as if we were  asked  to  judge  art  by the  same  criteria we would  use in  judg­ ing snapshots  of our  children, and if this sounds  foolish,  it  is no  more  so  than  the reverse fallacy  which intellectuals usually make  in approaching  the  media; that  is, to   judge  family  snapshots  by  the  same criteria   they  would  use  for  judging  art.
When   MeLuhan  turns   to  the  specific
media   of  communication,  he  runs  into difficulty.  First,  because   he  is  forced  to deal  with  "content" in  the same  terms  as anyone else does, e.g. "the success theme". Second,  because  it is almost  impossible  to isolate  what   is unique about   a  medium from  the  policies  of  the  people  who  run it.  For  example, the  diffuseness  of  TV, its  avoidance   of  controversial   subjects, may  have  as  much  to  do  with  the  costs of TV  and  the cautiousness of TV execu­ tives as it  does  with  the  intrinsic  nature of  the  medium.  We  can  be  sure  it  will become even  "cooler" with colour. Radio, he  tells  us,  is  a  "hot"  medium  and   so can deal with  ideas,  personalities  (Hitler, Fred   Allen)    and   empirical   data  (the  weather) .  At  the  same  time,  since  it  is an  electronic  medium, it  is  intimate and tribal,  or,  as  we  are  more  apt  to say, it is  the  intellectuals' ghetto,   just  exactly what   we  have   been   hearing  from   TV  executives.  Is it  because  they  understand

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



the medium and we do not? Finally, whatever distinctions may  be made among   the  different  media,  the  distinc­ tion   between   "hot"  and   "cold"   breaks down.   All  of  the  media,  taken   together or  separately, are  nothing  if not  flexible; radio  and  print  are  as capable  of surreal­ ism  as  realism; the  seven  types  of  am­ biguity   are   as  much  in  poetry   as  they are  in  television.
Still,  McLuhan is  a  God-send   to  the TV   producer  who   because  he  is  often young  wants recognition and who because he  is  an   arriviste   to  the  media   wants status.  In  McLuhan he can  find  a  basis for  claiming that  TV  is unique,  different from   the  older  media; above  all,  differ­ ent  from  print. Long  impatient  with  the psychological  ineptitude of most do-good preachy  broadcasting and  equally   frus­ trated  by  the   complexities   of   modern  thought,  he  finds in   McLuhan  a  man­  date  to experiment without  worrying  too much   about    "content".  His   banner    is television  for  television's  sake.
Watching  TV   is  a  revelation. More and  more  public  affairs  programmes  re­ semble  Rorschach cards, each  one differ­ ent  but  no objective  content  in any;  each one   involving  us,  but   leaving   us  none the  wiser as citizens. One politician  differs from  another in  the way one piece of ab­ stract   art   or  one   page  of  Joyce   differs from   another.  Just   how  cynical   this  is is revealed  by  McLuhan's suggestion  that  had  Jack  Paar  produced Nixon  the elec­ tion   results   might   have   been  different. As it  was, Kennedy with his more diffuse image  was  better  suited  to  the  medium. In  other   words,  McLuhan is saying  that TV  depersonalizes and  de-intellectualizes politics.  The depersonalization of politics could   be   the   hopeful   start   of  politics based   on   issues   in   which   the   elected

6o
 representative is held  accountable for his ideas  rather than  his morals  or character. But  a de-intellectualized politics is its antithesis. Combined, they are the politics of  ideology  in  mass  society,  an  ill  wind that  blows some good  to the young eager TV  producer who thinks that  political theory  is in  the hand-held camera.
TV   producers  are   not   the  only  ones to  welcome  McLuhan. Canadians in general have  become  more  susceptible to the  charms  of  an  intellectual  exploring the   cultural   demi-monde  without  the usual  class biases. It is an  attractive egalitarian avant-garde image for  a country  that   has  not  yet  had   its  Whit­ mans,  Sandburgs, or  Pounds; a  country that  has  only  begun  to face  the fact  that  it is urban  and  industrialized, its quickest and   best  minds  straining at  the  leash  to break   away  from   an  intellectual  Estab­ lishment  which   has  been  singularly   ob­ tuse,   Mandarin-minded  and   peculiarly punitive. Bright young men will find in McLuhan's  enthusiasm for  the  media   a populist   realism,   his  distrust   of  intellec­ tualism  a revolt  against  dead  scholarship and   the   demands  of   specialization,  his approach through  technology  an  unsenti­ mental  toughness, his removal of the issue from  a context of values a liberation from petty  Philistine censors,  his  rejection  of social   criticism    a   long   overdue  break with  the tiresome  futile  leftish  politics  of the  thirties. It is an  ideal  formula for  the
1g6os,  and   to  his  disciples-and  they
are  legion-McLuhan is a prophet. From  a longer  perspective, he is the first, original, genuine Canadian ideologue   of mass society, but  his sense-ratios  were shaped by the irrationalism, determinism, and  folk romanticism of the nineteenth century.



ACADEMICS TO THE BARRICADES
 





George Woodcock



A  Place  of Liberty, edited  by George  Whalley.  Clarke,  Irwin,  &  Co. $4.00.


EVERYONE  BY NOW  has heard of the crisis of the  universities. University administrators, politicians and  newsmen have   made   us  familiar  with   the  likeli­ hood  that   by 1972  more  than  four hun­  dred   thousand  young  Canadians will  be trying   to  enter  colleges  and   universities  which   at   present  have   facilities  for   a third   of   that   number. The first  anxiety has  been  one  of  quantity. How  are  the colleges  to  be  built  and   equipped, how are  professors  to  be  found  to  deal  with this great  army  of searchers after  knowl­ edge  and  professional skills?  During the past  two  years  plans  have  been  made  in almost  every part  of Canada for new institutions and for radical extensions  of those  that   exist,  and   the   process  of  ex­ pansion  has  only  just  begun.
But  around this  question of  quantita­
tive  expansion  there   has  arisen  a  whole cluster  of questions about  the  very nature of  the   universities themselves,   and   in academic circles  none  has  become  more pressing  than   that   of  university  govern­ ment.  We  may  not  be on  the  verge of a revolution   of  the  professors,  but  already  the  banners are  raised  and  the arguments are  being put.  Some  of  them are  put  very strongly  in  A Place of  Liberty. This  book is  edited   by  George   Whalley,  a  distin­  guished   writer   and  head   of  the  English Department at  Queen's  University, and the  irony  of its  title  wlll  become  evident  when  I  add  that  the  book  is written by
 a group  of malcontent professors who are tired of a system by which, in Canadian universities  up  to the  present, the faculty has  had  very little  say in  the formulation of  university   policies.  The   form   of  the book  is  not   immediately  prepossessing; it is one of those collections  of papers  by various  hands  to which  the  academics in our  country  are  particularly partial, and most readers  would doubtless prefer a vigorous and  searching volume by a single writer.  But  A Place of Liberty  is no collection  of pedantic offerings.  It is a volume  which  speaks  with  the  voices of men who have strong feelings and are expressing  them  strongly,  and  when  I say that   these  voices  include  those  of  such men   as  the  poet,   F.  R.  Scott,   and   the historians Frank  Underhill and W. L. Morton, it  will  be evident  that  this book is  the  sign  of  a  sense  of  disturbance at the  present  situation which  runs  through the  whole  academic community.
The   various   contributors  set  out   the
situation   in   historical    terms   and   as  it exists  today.  It becomes  evident   that   in no  real  sense  is the  Canadian  university a  self-governing   community  of  scholars. The  classic examples of such scholarly communities are  Oxford and  Cambridge, where  university   policies  are  laid  down and  university  affairs are administered almost   entirely   by  those  who   teach.   In other  parts  of Europe attempts have been made   by  the  state   and   other   organs   of

6r

REVIEW ARTICLES



the   outer   community  to  influence  uni­ versity   government,  and   this   has   been particularly the  case  under  absolutist  re­ gimes.  Yet  faculties have  defended their rights  so  stoutly   that   one  of  the  contri­ butors   to  A   Place  of   Liberty, the  late
J. Stewart Reid,  was able  to  reveal  that
under  the  intensely   reactionary  govern­ ment   of   the  Austro-Hungarian  empire  "the   scholars" -and  here  I  quote   Dr. Reid-"the  scholars   in  the   University  of  Vienna  enjoyed   a  greater  degree  of self-g;overnment  than has ever  been  per­ mitted  to  develop   at  any  university  in Canada."
As essay after  essay makes clear, the de­ pressing  truth is that  professors in Cana­ dian   universities,  no   matter   how   high their  international reputations as scholars, have   no  power   to  determine  the  policy of the institutions where they teach.  Mat­ ters   of   policy   and   finance   are   in   the hands   of  Boards  of   Governors   who  are not  university  teachers, and  in most cases it  is  specifically laid down in university constitutions that  members  of the faculty cannot become  Governors. Even  the con­ trol  of  academic matters is  theoretically in   the   hands   of  the  Governors   and   is only  delegated to  the  faculties  as an  act of  grace.   It is  the  Board  of  Governors who   appoint the  chief   administrative officer,  the  President, and  he is responsi­ ble  to  the  Board  and  not  to the  faculty,  which   is  powerless   to  vote  him  out   of office.
This   form   of   university   government
was   borrowed  from   the  United  States. In every country of the British Common­ wealth   except  Canada the  faculties  par­  ticipate  in   varying   degrees  in   the   ad­  ministration and  policy-making   of  their institutions.  But   in   North   America   the old   pattern  of   colonial   days,  when   the
 college  was started as a community enter­ prise,   has   persisted.  Now,  as   then,   the local   worthies  form   the   ruling   bodies, and,  since  these  local  worthies  are  likely to  be  business  men,  their   tendency  has been  to try to administer a university  like a   business   combine.  But   the   aims  of scholarship   are   not   those   of   business; they  are  not  aims  that  can  be  judged  in terms  of  immediate practicality. And  the result  is  that   a  gulf  sooner  or  later  ap­  pears   in   the   structure  of  every   North American   university.  In   the   minds   of the professors the we-and-they complex tends  to develop,  we being  the academics and  they  the  administrators.
The  universities of  the  United States are  actually realizing the  dangers of  this situation and  beginning to act  upon  their realization. Today, in almost  half  the universities of the United States, the faculty is consulted before a President  is appointed. To  my  knowledge, this  hap­ pens  in   no  major  Canadian   university,  and   in   only   two   of  our   smallest   uni­ versities  is the  faculty  represented on the Board  of  Governors.  Even  the  most  dis­ tinguished scholars who teach  at our  uni­  versities  seem to be regarded as incapable of  sharing in  their  government.
Those   who   still   support  the   present
system  do  so mainly  on  the  grounds that the  university should  be governed in  the interests of  the  community. No-one  will be inclined to dispute this, but, as the contributors to  A  Place  of Liberty point out, the community which a university should   serve  is the  universal  community of  learning. A  university   does  not  exist to  fulfil  the  professional requirements of a  particular area; it  exists  to search  out and   to  transmit  knowledge   without  re­ gard   to  any  special  interest.
If this  is  the  purpose  of  a  university,

REVIEW ARTICLES



then  it is surely illogical  that  the adminis­ tration, which   ought   merely  to  provide  for  the  needs  of  scholars   in  their   work of  teaching and   research,  should  in  fact dominate  the  pyramid  of   university   life as it does today  through the powers  dele­ gated   to  the   leading  administrator, the President. It is equally illogical  that  ulti­ mate  authority should  rest  with  a wholly non-academic Board  of   Governors. The  authors of A  Place  of  Liberty argue  that  until   such  a  situation  comes  to  an  end the  universities  of  Canada will never  be­ come  mature  institutions. Their  sugg s­ tions  for  reform   cover  a  wide  field,  but they   can   be  summed  up   under  a  few brief   headings.  First   of  all,  the   powers accorded to  Boards  of Governors  should be  sharply   curtailed, and   the   judgment of the  academic staffs  should  be allowed to influence  all university  policy. Second­ ly, everything possible  should  be  done  to eliminate the  division  in  the  universities  between   scholars and   administrators.


EXCESS  OF COMPLETENESS
 Most  of the  contributors urge  that  Pres­ idents  should  be   appointed   only   if accepted by the  faculty,  and  that  repre­  sentatives   of   the   faculty   should   sit  on the  governing boards.
One  cannot   help  being  surprised   that
such an autocratic power system as that which still exists in Canadian universities should  have  survived  so long  in a demo­ cratic   society.   It can   hardly   maintain itself  very  much   longer   in  face  of  the growing   feeling   among   the   academic staffs,  expressed  in  the  rapid   rise of  the Canadian   Association   of   University  Teachers as a powerful  professional asso­ ciation  closely concerned with  matters of university   government.  And   books   like A   Place  of  Liberty, which   present   the case  of  the  scholars   with  such  strength and  reason,  should  help  to  convince   the public  that   reform  of our  institutions of higher  learning is an act of justice and wisdom  long overdue.








Frank Davey


JOHN  PETER, Along  That Coast.  Doubleday. $4-95·


Along   That  Coast   is  a  love story   set  on   the   southeast  coast   of  a racially  uneasy  South Africa,  and  the author  depends  chiefly   on   his  descrip­ tions  of  the   primitive  and   irrational violence of the sea, the presence of which overwhelms the atmosphere of this coast, to inject  into  his  novel  a pervading sense of  the  uncontrollable and  resurgent pri­ meval.
 Right  down   the   coast,   from   the   Tugela to  Algoa   Bay  and   beyond,  the   rhythm  of human  awareness adapts  itself   to  the  thud and   thunder  and   hissing   of  the   surf,   the life   and    flash   of   the    breakers,   the    raw smell  of  the   sea.

The   animate  sea   becomes   horror,   vio­ lence, death, religion,  and  mystery in  the novel,  and  is  responsible  for  the  feeling of impending doom  that  runs  through it. And  when  the  sea and  its  native  cousins

REVIEW ARTICLES



come  together, for  Denton, the  "hero", this  doom  is fulfilled.
Mr.  Peter  gives the  impression  of  hav­
ing  been  very  careful to  make  his work both  a commercial and  a literary  success. The novel  is structured  around a  series of extremely  sensational events: a native being   thrown   from   a  hig,h  bridge;   the heroine    being  saved  by  chance  from drowning by the  hero;  the  heroine  being made  nearly  hysterical  by the  hero's gut­ ting  of  a  live  sand  shark,  a  large  shark ripping a limb from  a bathing white girl, an  elaborately  described  seduction,  and an  equally  graphic  murder-so  that  the reader   is  baited   to  continue  by  nearly every  chapter. At  the same  time  there  is constant  foreshadowing: Denton's fatal impatience grows  from  incident to  inci­ dent,  and  Laura's hopeful  "the  Negroes aren't  going   to   massacre   people   like you"  rings in our  ears in  the  final  pages. Mr.  Peter,  a  Cambridge-educated senior English   professor   at   the   University   of Victoria and  a holder  of a South  African degree  in  law,  is also very careful in  his choice  of characters:  Denton is a South African  lawyer   (who  has  retired   in  dis­ illusionment), Laura is a  junior  English lecturer  whose   home   is   Victoria,  and both  have  attended  Cambridge.
It  is in  fact   Mr.   Peter's  care  to  keep his  reader   interested  that   most  weakens his book. Some of the  bits of  sensational­ ism he does work deeply and satisfactorily into  the  novel's  fabric.  For  example,  the incident  of  the  attack  by  the  shark,  in which  crowds  of  ghoulish  onlookers  im­ pede  the girl's  rescue,  tends  to symbolize the   South   African   racial   scene,   where white  native-sympathizers  by  their   own passivity  do  as much  to harm the  native as do the agents of Nationalist Apartheid. However, other   sensational incidents he
 leaves  completely  inexcusable. The  boy­ meets-girl   incident of  Chapter 2,   where at   a   fairly   unfrequented  spot   on   the river  Laura happens to fall in and  begins to flounder  (although she later claims  to be  an  average swimmer)   just  as Denton is  swimming  coincidentally  by,  is  a  fla­ grant example of literary  wish-fulfilment, especially  with  Laura having  to  take  off her   wet   clothing  and   lie  conveniently nude   for   Denton,  author,  and   reader. True  Romance  could   have   done   only one   thing   more.   And  the  inevitable  se­ duction scene  of  Chapter 8  is  nearly  as bad.
The passage   is  seventeen   pages  long,
has  extraordinary visual  accuracy, and  is definitely  successful  in  presenting  sex-in­ love  as  a  beautiful, natural, and  health­ ful  thing.  I must admit that our literature needs  more  of  such  writing  if  it is ever to   rid   our   country  of  the   over-riding puritanical notion  that  sex is  in  any  cir­ cumstance a  somewhat  tainted and  rep­ rehensible  thing.   And   yet   the   passage seems  distinctly out  of  place  in  this  par­ ticular novel.  I  must  make  clear  that  my objection  is  not   to   the  content  of  the passage; if  the  passage  were  an  equally detailed  account of Denton's clipping his toenails,   my   complaint  would   be  the same:   that  the   passage   seems  there   in all its elaborateness for its own sake only, and makes little  contribution to the  book.
One  can  certainly attempt to rational­
ize the  presence of the  passage.  Denton's first wife,  Maura, was both  a Nationalist and  a frigid  mate -the latter, Denton theorizes,   because   of  a  Calvinistic guilt for   their   pre-marital  affair.   In   Maura Mr.   Peter   seems   to  be  suggesting   that sexual  guilt  and  racial  discrimination go hand   in  hand, as  if  the  personal  resent­ ment  that  can  ruin  a marriage is in some

REVIEW ARTICLES



way   parallel  to   the   general  resentment that can   ruin  the   relationships  between races.    "We  must  love   one   another  or die," said  Auden, in  a statement certainly more applicable to  the  general situation than  to   the   individual,  and  Mr.  Peter seems  to  be  giving us  a  rather  modified echo.  Laura is Maura's replacement and succeeds in  reaching with  Denton a state of  guiltless love,  but  Denton, in  particu­ lar,   can   never  generalize  sufficiently  to rid  himself  of mistrust in any  of his other relationships.
This is  a  flimsy   rationalization, to  be sure, and one  might have to  rewrite the novel   to  make it  stick   solidly.   And   yet without  it,   the   passage  seems   to   exist solely  for   the   sexual education  and  ex­ citement  of   the   reader.  Of   critical  im­ portance in  this  consideration  is  what is the    book's    intention.  The  dust   jacket
 suggests  the  work  to  be "a symbolic novel of  mature  love"; Mr.  Peter  in  conver­ sation  claims   it   to   be  a   novel  of  love rather than of  race.  And   yet  the  novel's setting at  the  explosive edge  of  sea  and  violence,  its   beginning and   ending  in distinctly racial incidents, and  its charac­ ters'    constant   discussion  of    where  the responsibility should be  placed  for  South Africa's racial fiasco,  all suggest the  work to   be   much  more   than   a   simple  love story.  If the   novel  is  only   a love  story,  its   native  chapters   are    digressions,  its conclusion a   fragment  from  the   main stream of events. If, however, the  novel  is a work  underlining the necessary relation­ ship   between  love,   trust,  patience,  in­ nocence, and productive human  relation­ ships   of  all  sorts-something  it  nearly becomes, but   not   quite-many   of   the  aforementioned   passages begin  to  make sense.
Mr.   Peter  does    not    seem    to    have known clearly   what he  wanted from his novel,  and  so  he  tried to  get  everything. He  has  written a  good  novel  well-one must  continually marvel  at  his   aptness of  expression-but has  left  at  least  one rather  ostentatious passage without  an apparent  literary function. In  a   novel by Lawrence the  passage might serve,  in conjunction  with   the   rest   of   the   work, to  dignify human  sexual love,   but   such is   clearly  not    the    major   intention   of Along   That  Coast.   Mr.  Peter  has   un­ fortunately left  his  good  novel  open  to  a comment that I have heard made  about it   several  times  already-"another  sex novel".  And   I  really   don't  think it  de­  serves  it.








PECULIAR PICARESQUE

GEORGE   CUOMO,   Bright   Day,  Dark   Runner.
Doubleday.  $6.gs.

GEORGE  CUOMO is a  native  New  Yorker who has lived in New England, Arizona, Indiana and  now teaches at Victoria. He has  published  poetry,  won  a  prize  for  a short   story  and   has  written  a  textbook on  how  to  become  a  better   reader. His first  novel  Jack  Be  Nimble  is about  big­ time   college   football.    It  was   well   re­ viewed  and  was called  lethally  hilarious, penetrating,  swift-moving,   by  various bookmen.  This  new  novel  is  designed  to be  all  of  these  things  too,  but  I  think  it fails  rather  badly.  The  dust  jacket  sug­ gests it is in the mainstream of picaresque fiction.   However,  the   hero   is  neither rogue  nor adventurer, nor is the  tale told in   the   traditional  episodic   style.   It  is carefully structured to seem episodic,  but in  fact  it  is a  nest  of stacking  stools  be­ tween  which  Mr.  Cuomo  somehow  man­  ages   to  fall.   I   think   the  problem  here arises  from   the  author's  wanting  to  be more  penetrating than  hilarious  and  the publisher, perhaps, wanting the opposite.  At  any  rate,  the  result  is peculiar   rather than  funny and diffuse rather than  mean­  ingful.
The  anti-hero, Judas lscariot   Le­
Blanche  is really  a quite  ordinary guy in most   ways.  He   had  an  unhappy  child­ hood,  he  became   a  cook  by  accident, a

66
 chef   by  design,   a  lover   promiscuously, and   a   husband  and   father  under   per­ fectly  obvious  fictional circumstances. His wife   dies,  he   gives   his   son   up   to  his wife's   domineering  sister,  loses  sight   of him   completely  as   he   travels   around America (and the world during the war) , finally   landing  on   a  little   bit  of  Cape  Cod   real  estate  called   The  Mariner. It is here  in  this  middleclass summer  resort that   the  tangloo   threads of  his  life  be­ come  recognizable, not  as a  knot,  but  as a   positive  pattern. Unfortunately,  the larking  around   that    goes   on   at   The Mariner  tempts  the   reader   to  put   this five pound  novel down long before the regulation "revelation" ending.  Funtime at  The Mariner includes a great  deal  of the  kind  of thing  that  would  be funny  as all-get-out  after   four   rounds   at  one  of our  suburban beer  parlours. Through all this  Judas I. LeBlanche lies  uneasily  in the chequered shade of various trees of knowledge  that   spring   up   around  him until  he is finally  hit  on  the  head  by the apple   of  truth, the  core  of  which  is,  I think,  that  he  may  have  been  christened Judas but  he  will  live  LeBlanche.
And  it  is  a  shame.  There is a  lot  of
good  writing in  this  book.  What it  lacks is the  courage of what  seem  to me to  be the author's real convictions, and  control. It is  two  stories.  It needn't  have  been, but it is. The  first is the foreground, the summer Judas spent  cooking  at  The Mariner  where,   as  anti-hero  and   anti­ rogue,  he  discovers  how  to  live  with  his denial  of life. Cuomo chooses farce   (but  it  is  really  travesty)  as  his  vehicle  here and   he  overplays  it.   Long   passages  of meaningless plot  are  served  up as if they were important. The reader simply wishes he  wouldn't bother. But  interspersed are chapters about   Judas'  early  life  that   are

BOOKS IN REVIEW



written  with  a  sparseness  and   a  direct­ ness  that  prove  out  an  ability  far  in  ex­ cess of  the  average. The  story  of Judas' false apprenticeship to the painter Palad­ ler,  his  relationship  with  his  father, his marriage to  the  deaf  and  dumb  Dolores are  all  excellent   and  meaningful. To  set these  against  the  mindless  antics  of Phil, the  sexually ambidextrous greeter at The  Mariner, and  the  cardboard capering,s of sundry  other   Mariner  employees and  guests is a sad  thing  to witness. The  book could   have   been  a  good  one.   With   re­ straint, with  careful consideration of  the needs of the story, its symbology, its underlying despairing comic-tragedy, Mr. Cuomo's  anti-hero  could   have   pursued his  anti-picaresque career   until  his  right to  shed  Judas as  a  name   and   a  calling would  have   been  powerfully earned.
ROBERT HARLOW
 THE CORE
OF BROWNING

WILLIAM  WHITLA,  The  Central Truth:  The Incarnation in  Browning's Poetry. University of  Toronto Press.  $s.oo.

1957 WAS A  BUMPER  YEAR for  Browning. Langbaum  published  his   study   of   the dramatic monologue; King  his close tex­ tual  analysis of five representative poems, The   Bow  & The Lyre;   and   Northrop Frye  his  Anatomy of Criticism, an  Alia­ din's   cave  of  critical   brilliance  in  ran­  sacking  which  the  collector can  pick  up some   significant   prizes-specifically Frye's relating of  Browning's monodrama to  the  characteristic tendencies of  ironic conflict   and   his   defining    of   melos   in poetry  with  reference to  "The Flight  of the Duchess". Since  1957, and apart from





CLARKE, IRWIN & COMPANY LIMITED




are proud to announce

a new series of quality low-price books for the discriminating  reader both
to give and receive





CLARKE  IRWIN  CANADIAN  PAPERBACKS

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Honan's  extension   of  Kings'   approach, the   market  has  been  steady   but  quiet; the shareholders' annual  dividend  has arrived in  the  form  of an  average  num­ ber  of  articles  of  moderate  interest.
It is encouraging-the need for  a serious  reassessment  of Browning's poetic art   having   been   acknowledged    and   a good  start  made -to find critics  return­ ing  their   attention  to  the  philosophical content  of   Browning's  work. William  Whitla's book,  The  Central  Truth: The Incarnation in  Browning's  Poetry, recon­  siders   the   poet's   religious   beliefs,  their relationship   to  his  ethics,  his  aesthetics and  more general  world-view. The  "cen­ tral  truth" of Whitla's thesis is that  the "Incarnation provided  an adequate solu­ tion  for  what  to Browning  was  the  mys­ tery  of  life."  By way of   justification, he understandably quotes  the  lines from  "A Death in  the  Desert":  "the  acknowledg­ ment  of  God  in  Christ/Accepted by  thy reason,   solves  for   thee/All  questions   in the  earth and  out  of it."
Primary questions  raised in this study concern  the  "spiritual unity"  implied  in the religious  monologues; the "aesthetic unity" of  the   theories   underlying  those on  art   and   music;   the  "physical   unity" aspired  to in the love poems; and  the "composite unity"  of Browning's  master­ work, The Ring  and The  Book, in which "the  whole  complex   pattern  of   Brown­ ing's   use   of   the   Incarnation   becomes clear." Whitla  believes  that  "Browning's poetry ... is  'all,  all  of  a  piece  through­ out'," and  demonstrates this  by showing how,  for  the Christian poet, the Incarna­ tion  is  "the archetype of all  other  kinds of    revelation".  Thus,    when   Browning speaks  of  all  poetry  "being  a  putting of




68
 the  infinite within   the  finite"  he  makes poetic  creation analogous to the Incarna­ tion.  Similarly,  Browning's  metaphor of the  "moment, one  and  infinite", expres­ sive  of  the  sense  of   timelessness  known to  lovers  whose  physical   consummation breaks   the  bar  "between/Life and   life" so that  their  souls meet  and  mix, images "the  absolute  uniqueness of  the  moment  of  God's  revelatory love  in  the  Incarna­ tion".  Of  the  "composite symbol  of ring and  book" -"the  key  to  the  structure" of   The  Ring   and   The  Book- Whitla says, it is "the truth held  in a suspension of fancy  and  fact ... eternity made  tem­ poral,   or ... infinity   fitted   to  the  finite. [It] ... is thus  a symbol for the Incarna­ tion,"   and   synonymous   with  the  "circle  of   experience"  within   which   "burns/  The central truth, Power, Wisdom, Good­  ness,-God."
The most  disturbing element in  Whit­ la's  approach is the  temerity  with  which judgment is passed on Browning's charac­ ters  according to  their success or  failure in   conforming   to   or   exemplifying  the poet's   own   beliefs   in   the   Incarnation. Any  thesis  appearing to  reject   Caliban, Ferrara's   Duke,   St.  Praxed's  Bishop, Andrea,   the   speaker    in   "Two  in   the Campagna" in  favour of David  (in "Saul"), Abt  Vogler,  St  John, the  man in  "By  The Fireside," or  Browning  him­ self in  Christmas-Eve and  Easter-Day, is bound   to  encounter  reservations in  most readers  since   the  first  set  of  characters represents  a   monument  to   Browning's poetic   imagination  more  magnificent than  that of  the  second  set.  In  spite  of which   lack   of   discrimination,  Whitla's book  is a real  bonus for  Browning  scho­ lars.                                   JOHN F.  HULCOOP

BOOKS IN REVIEW



LEGENDS
OLD AND NEW

KAY  HILL,   Glooscap and   His  Magic.  McClel­
land  & Stewart.
DOROTHY  M.    REID,   Tales of  Nanabozho.  Ox­
ford.
CLAUDE  AUBRY,   The  King  of  the   Thousand
Islands, trans.   by  Alice  Kane.   McClelland
& Stewart.

A  VENERABLE CHILDREN's    SONG  insists that  the  Indians of old  were  consistently high-minded and   ("bless my soul!") double-jointed.   Perhaps so,  but   their favourite characters were anything but consistent  in either character or physique. Their variability, the  archaic symbols  in their  stories, and  the anomalies that  crept into   those  stories   through  countless  re­ tellings  are  not  the  least  of the  problems an   adapter  faces   in   preparing  versions for  children that  will  be  comprehensible yet  true  to  the  spirit  and  flavour  of the originals.
One  of  the  very  few  habitually  high­
minded   Indian creations was  the  Waba­ naki's   humorous benevolent   demigod,  Glooscap,  affable  hero  or  final  authority in  scores  of  legends.  Glooscap  created a world-parts of the  Maritimes and  New England-where  the W abanaki, sur­ rounded  by  archetypal   animal  charac­ ters,  contended with  King  Winter, cruel Famine, cannibal   chenoos,  and   cold­ blooded,  wizardly  boooins.  To   the  west, Glooscap's   less  high-minded  Ojibwa counterpart, Nanabozho, gratified, fright­ ened,  and amused  his people  before going to  his  long sleep on  Lake Superior's Thunder Cape. The very different worlds of  these  two  giants   of  North  American mythology  are  now  recreated and  made accessible to children in Kay  Hill's  Gloos-
 cap  and  His  Magic  and  Dorothy Reid's
Tales  of Nanabozho.
Of  the  two,  children will  almost  cer­ tainly   prefer   Glooscap   and   His  Magic. Aside  from   the   advantage  afforded   by Glooscap's  obliging character, Miss Hill's sources are more sophisticated than   Irs. Reid's  and  lend  themselves   to  stories  of more   interesting   form   and   point,   and Miss  Hill   has  modernized  more   freely. As Charles  Leland, a  nineteenth-century scholar  of  Indian lore,  pointed   out,  the Glooscap  legends  are  remarkably similar to the Norse myths  and  may have sprung  from  the  same  source.  And,  as Miss Hill recognizes  in   her   Foreword,  some  also bear  likenesses to agelessly popular  Euro­ pean  fairy  tales.  Nevertheless,  they  pose some  of  the   puzzles   typical   of   Indian tales.   Motivations  are   no   longer   clear, and  the characters are given  to bewilder­  ing  transformations. They slide from  hu­  man   to   animal   form   and  back.   They switch  abruptly from  wisdom  and  good­ ness to shrewd  malice, from  intelligence to gross stupidity, from  dignity  to clown­ ing  bawdry.  Miss  Hill  meets  these  diffi­ culties  with  ingenuity  and   skill.  Where the  sources  are  savagely  cruel  or  erotic she omits, where  they lack motivation she acts on  the  Indian storytellers' precedent and   invents,   and   where   characters and traits   are   hopelessly   confused    she   re­ assigns the  traits.  Lox,  a  Loki-like spirit,  is  associated   variously   in   the   original  legends  with  the  wolf, the  wolverine,  the badger,  and  the  beaver; in  these animals'  shapes   he  is  sometimes   appallingly  vi­ cious, sometimes  quite  likeably  mischiev­ ous.  Miss Hill  abstracts his mischievous­  ness   and   gives it,  untinged  by  real  wickedness,  to   Badger,   an  irrespressible  Indian  for  whom  Glooscap has  a  weak­ ness.  Ableegumooch, the  rabbits' Rabbit,

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



becomes the embodiment of originality, optimism,  and   reckless  generosity.   Un­ mitigated  evil  is  restricted   to  the  wolf, the  wild  cat,   the  vengeful   boooins,  and the  predatory chenoos.  Yet  the  spirit  of the  original  legends  is retained,  although specific  morals   are  mildly  Christianized. The   result   of  Miss  Hill's  moderate  re­ visions  is  that   the   reader  is  often   sur­ prised  by a  deft  working  of the  predict­ able   and   never   irked   by  an   arbitrary conclusion.
Having  sketched   in   her   background
with  the  tales  of  creation and  organiza­ tion  that  are  necessary  to their  successors but  more  likely  to  fascinate  adults  with their  philosophic and anthropological im­ plications than   they  are  to  interest  chil­ dren  with  their  huge concepts  and  plot­ lessness, Miss  Hill   tells seventeen  stories full  of  drama  and  immediacy.   She  uses dialogue   wherever  possible   and   never stultifies  her   readers'  imaginations  with excessive description. The awesome boooins, for instance, are never described, but  their  proper aura  is effectively  con­ veyed:
"Perhaps," said  the  second   [boooin] in  a hard voice,   "perhaps he  is  up  in  that   tree now,  hoping to  hear   more   of  our  secrets!" And   he   suddenly  hurled  a  stone   into   the tree,   knocking  Big   Magwis   to   the   ground and   killing  him   instantly.
Robert Frankenberg's drawings  for Glooscap  and His Magic  are vital, evoca­ tive, and  pleasantly free from the fashion­  able pseudo-primitive ugliness that  adults  are  apt  to  assume  children  will approve because    they    do   themselves.  Donald  Grant's line  drawings for Tales  of Nana­  bozho  seem  to  me  to  lean  toward   such unfortunate   stylishness.   The  dustjacket calls them "original and  witty." Certainly they  contain comic  disproofs  of  the  In­ dians'  alleged  double-jointedness. In  fact
 most  of the  human figures look positively jointless, and one feels for a mammoth Minnehaha  looming   before   a   wigwam she  could  not  possibly  inhabit except  on her  hands and  knees. A few illustrations, those showing  tiny human figures pitted against  immensities of nature, are power­ ful,  and  the  dustjacket picture  of  Nana­ bozho  sitting  stolidly  on  an  eagle's  back off  which   he  is  bound   to  slide  within  seconds   is  arresting,  but   pictorially  the book as a whole suggests that  Nanabozho and  his tribes had terrible cavernous eyes, misplaced  waists,  and   no  armpits.
Mrs. Reid's style also occasionally  lacks
suppleness.   Perhaps echoing   the  unsub­ ordinating,  arbitrary  manner   of   many Indian sources, paragraphs are sometimes  monotonous marches to flat  conclusions: Nokomis   was   glad   when  she   heard  of
N anabozho's  love   and   told   him   that  the
maiden  was   Arrowmaker's daughter. She made  a   beautiful   doeskin  jacket    for   the girl  and  decorated it with  porcupine quills. Nanabozho made a pipe  and  prepared a pouchful  of   kinni-kinnick   to   console    the old  man  for  the  loss  of  his  daughter. Then they   set  out   on  their  journey.
And   the  tales  themselves   are  somewhat flat and  loose. True to their  sources, Mrs. Reid's  stories   concentrate  upon   Nana­ bozho's   capricious  character   and   upon the  origins  of  natural  phenomena as  re­ sults of his anger, gratitude, or considered judgment.  Nanabozho catches   his  hand  between  birch  trees  and  has  to  watch  in helpless fury as wolves eat his kill; birches still  bear the scars of his punitive whip. Nanabozho rewards the red maples  with sweet sap for deceiving  the evil windigoes by seeming  flames. Nanabozho acquires tobacco for  his grateful people  and  their not-so-grateful successors. To  the Ojibwa Nanabozho was  wonderful and  wonder­ fully  funny.   Despite his  comic  blunders and   the   splendid  rages   that   spare   not

BOOKS IN REVIEW







even  his own  back  when  it  offends  him, latter-day children may not find him as hilarious-especially  when he   turns Minnehaha to stone  for  no good  reason. But he is an exciting superman of legend, and  Mrs.  Reid  has  done  children a  ser­ vice  by restoring to  him  his  greatest  ex­ ploits,  stolen  for  the  Iroquois Hiawatha by Longfellow, and  presenting him anew, part  hero,  part  rogue,  part  clown,  as the Indians  conceived him.
Claude Aubry's The King  of the Thou­ sand  Islands,  unlike  Glooscap and  Nana­  bozho,  is newly-hatched  legend.   It  con­ cerns   a   Mound   Builder   monarch  who supposedly  reigned   beside  the  St.  Law­ rence  of  thousands of  years  ago.  As the book   opens,   Maha-Maha  the   Second's  mind is vacant; when  an obsession enters it, it  sinks. This  ironic, rather slight,  but wittily-told story  purports to account for the  existence   of  the   Thousand  Islands, but its emphasis  is upon  the corrupting influence  of power,  boredom, and  bad company and   upon   the  barren  rewards of  selfishness.  The absence  of  much  de­ tailed   information  about  the   Mound
 Builders allows the author to embroider freely, and he does-with threads bor­ rowed  from   Egypt   and   the  Orient. He also  imports  a  golden-haired,  golden­ throated siren for his St. Lawrence shore. The  1g62  French  language "Book of the Year  for  Children" award   of  the  Cana­ dian  Association  of Children's Librarians went  to  this  cool,  clever  though eclectic piece   of  fantasy.   Now  smoothly   trans­ lated  by Alice  Kane and  whimsically  il­ lustrated by Edouard Perret, it  may  well divert   small   readers   of  English.  But   it lacks   the   rich    native   backgrounds  of Glooscap  and  Nanabozho and  Glooscap's  power  to  involve  the  emotions, and   the exotic  Maha-Maha is  unlikely  to  estab­ lish  himself  as an  enduring ghost  of  the Thousand  Islands.
F.M. FRAZER




POLAND AND COMMUNISM

RICHARD HISCOCKS,  Poland, Bridge   for  the Abyss?   An   Interpretation of  Developments in Post-war Poland.  Oxford University Press.   $9.25.

THIS   STUDY of   communist   Poland   is offered   as  a   contribution  to   what   the author  calls  "positive"  peaceful  coexis­ tence,   by  which   he   means   progressive mutual understanding of the  rival  ideol­ ogies,  and   perhaps  even  a  gradual  ap­  proach    to   each   other's   point   of  view. Poland, he says, is not  "totalitarian", but "a  rational and  benevolent dictatorship, directed  by a single-minded idealist", and  with   its  close  contact  with   Russia   and Communism and  its  traditional  contacts with  the  culture of  the  West,  may  serve

BOOKS IN REVIEW



as  a  bridge or  go-between between  Rus­ sia   and    the   West.    Criticizing   what  he calls   the  "rigidity" of  both  western and  communist statesmen and   scholars  to­ wards each other's   societies,   Hiscocks strives  to  achieve a  more   balanced and judicious appraisal   of   postwar  Poland. This  is  not  to  say  that he  is starry-eyed or  naive, or  that  he seeks  to  whitewash Polish  communism,  but  that he  seeks  to understand and explain, to  achieve some degree  of   empathy,  in   his   painstaking and  well-documented  analysis of Poland's postwar travail. No  doubt this  approach will  bring  down upon his  head the  coals of  fiery  criticism  from   those   communist and  western critics who  can   conceive  of peaceful  coexistence only   in  terms of  a bitter  and   ultimately victorious  ideolog­ ical   and  political struggle.   For   serious  students of   communism   and  Eastern Europe, however, his  approach  will  be welcomed   as   a   refreshing  contrast  to much  of   the   literature  on   the   subject, and the  evidence provided to support his original   hypothesis  will  be  studied  with  care.
The book  proceeds on  the  assumption of   the   importance of  ideas   in   political action, and in  particular of  Marxism in communist politics. The appeal of  com­ munism is  limited in  Poland, but  is  de­  rived, he  argues, from   the  humanitarian content of  the  original  doctrine, with  its passion   for  freedom  and  justice,  and the  continuance of  this  in  important strands of  Polish   Marxism,  represented by  Rosa  Luxemburg until   I9I9 and by  the   pre­  sent   leader,  Gomulka. Even during the  worst   Stalinist  days,   he  says,  when   the latter  was  in  prison, Polish   communism had  features that  distinguished it favor­ ably  from communism elsewhere in East­ ern   Europe. But   it  is  to  Gomulka  that
 it owes  the  casting off of Russian overlays on  Marxism and the  evolution of a more liberal and humanist  form. Gomulka himself  is distinguished not only by his "devotion to  communism", but  by his "patriotism, courage,  integrity,  ascetic self-discipline, and  indefatigable   indus­ try", and  by  his  "warm  humanity  and  simple kindliness". This  has   led   him   to an   understanding that   communism  im­  posed  by force on  a  hostile nation would fail,  and that it  must  be adapted to some of the  realities of  Polish life, in  particular its   Catholicism,   the   conservatism  of  its peasants, and  the  love  of  freedom of  its intellectuals.   The  great  achievement of October   I956,  was  "a  humanistic Com­ munism  in  an  independent Poland". Al­ though  most   Poles   are   not   communists, writes   the   author, the   vast   majority  of them   have  given   their  support  to   Go­ mulka, not  only  because of  their sense  of the  geo-political realities of Poland's posi­ tion,   but   also  by  their  willingness  to  ac­ cept    much  of   Gomulka's   programme merging national  and  communist ideals.
GORDON SKILLING


A. 5. P. WOODHOUSE

Essays in  English  Literature  from the  Renais­ sance   to  the   Victorian  Age.  Presented   to A.    S.  P.    Woodhouse,   1964.   Ed.   Millar MacLure  and   F.  W.  Watt.   University   of Toronto  Press.  $7.50.

FoR  A  THIRD OF A  CENTURY the  name  of A. S. P. Woodhouse has  been  well known to   scholars throughout  Canada  as  well as abroad. His  activities have been  many and  his   work    has   been   influential.   As editor of  the   University of Toronto Quarterly, as  shaper and director of  the honours and graduate programs in  Eng­ lish   at   the   University of   Toronto,  as  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



founding member  of the Humanities Re­ search   Council   of  Canada  and   of   the Association  of   Canadian   University Teachers of  English,   and   as  an   inter­ nationally   recognized   authority  in   the field  of  Miltonic  studies,  he  has  created for himself  a great  and  an enviable repu­  tation  in  the academic community. Above all,  as  a  stimulating teacher and  a  wise and  disciplined director of graduate stu­ dents  he  has  left  an  indelible mark  on  a generation of Canadian scholars.  "His office  in  University College   was  an  im­ perial  secretariat, from  which  proconsuls departed  to  Canadian  universities   from coast  to coast,  and  to  universities outside  Canada."
This Caesar  in the realm of Canadian letters has   now   officially  retired, and two  of  his  proconsuls, whose  words  con­ clude  the  paragraph above,  have  edited  this  volume  of  Essays in  English  Litera­  ture  as  a  token  of  sincere  affection   and deep  admiration for  a  remarkable man.  The   gesture   is  excellent, but  the  results are  meagre,  scarcely  justifying  the  effort that   has  obviously   gone  into   the  book.
The collection is made  up of seventeen essays. Of  these  one only, that by Douglas Bush  of Harvard, pays  direct  homage  to Professor   Woodhouse.  This   essay,  by  a fine  scholar   and   a  good  writer,   surveys the  Woodhouse contributions to  scholar­ ship,  and  leaves  the  reader in  no  doubt  as to  their  significance  and  influence.
The remaining works are contributions
by  close  associates  and  former   students. With    the   exception  of   two   or   three pieces,  notably   "The  Correspondence of the  Augustans," by  Herbert Davis,  and "The  Problem of  Spiritual  Authority in the Nineteenth Century," by Northrop Frye,  these  so-called   "Essays  in  English
 Literature" are,  in  reality,  narrowly  fo­ cussed   research   exercises,   written   by highly  trained specialists  for  the  enlight­ enment of other  highly trained specialists. And  few, if any,  of these  tributes to  the master  appear to  have  been  written for the  occasion.
Some are competent, bringing light in­
to darkened corners   (for  example, R.  C. Bald's  "Historical Doubts Respecting Walton's Life  of Donne", or  F. E. L. Priestley's "Pope and  the Great  Chain  of Being")  ; some  remind me  of the  "dark­ ness visible"  in  Milton's Hell;  and  some are  so poorly  written that   I  am  frankly  surprised  at their inclusion  in the volume.
Within  this last group  especially-but by no  means  exclusively-long and  un­ duly complicated sentences  ramble across the  pages;  run-on  sentences  follow  hard upon   one  another; and   hard,  crabbed, and   uncontrolled  diction   grates   upon the ear. All of the principles of style so closely associated  with  freshman  English
-clarity, simplicity,  control,  balance­
have   long  since  been  forgotten  by  too many  of these  most learned writers.  Lest I  be charged  with  surly  exaggeration let me give two brief examples. First  this:

Whether  or   not   Milton  had    or   had   not any   higher-critical  awareness of  the  strati­ fications  in   the    version    of   the    story   in Judges, of its  naturalistic  Paul-Bunyanesque origins,  its   elaboration   in   terms   of  God's Law  for  an  covenant  with his chosen  people  in  whatever  Dead-Sea  scrolls,  and   its  pro­  phetic   overtones,  he   was   certainly  aware that   the   aim   of   conflicting  patristic  and  later   commentary  was   to   get   out   of   the story   the    full    implications  of   what    the author  of  the   Epistle  to  the   Hebrews saw in   it -and in   comparable  illegal  actions by  other Old   Testament  heroe,
favourite   of   the    prose,    David   and    the
shew-bread. (pp.  176-177)




73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Then this:

The  living    scions    were    barren   in   their graves; why  take  great   care  of  the  wither­ ing   stalk?  Meanwhile it  is  at  least  a  nice little  morsel   that   somebody   called   "Spen­ serus"  either  wrote   in,   or   was  felt   to   be obviously connected  with,  the Ovidian  tag which   signified   "my   Luck  is  losse" -on a page    of   a   Russell   manuscript,  one   even signed   by  the  particular almost   last   active  Russell   he   did   finally   dedicate  something to;  it  did  appear  in  r 596  at  last,  and  it  was his   "retraction,"  pretending  at   least   that he  like  more   famous authors  before  him  is apologizing for  something indiscreet written in  the  greener  times  of  his  youth. (pp.  Ig-
20)

So  in  sorrow   I  must  say  that   all  too little   in   this  volume   will  bring   to  the general reader any feeling  of intellectual
 excitement or  aesthetic pleasure, and much   within   it   may   well  dampen  the ardour  of  the  young   and   innocent  stu­ dent   who  still  believes,  naively  perhaps, that   essays  in   literature  are  sources   of joy  and   wonder.
Yet   the  gesture   was  a  good  one.  All honour  to  A.  S.  P.  Woodhouse, scholar and  gentleman!
S.E.READ



NOTE:    This revzew   was  written  before the  recent  death  of A. S.  P. Woodhouse, but   we   have  decided  to  leave   it  un­ changed. A  memoir   of  Dr.   Woodhouse will  appear  in  our  next  issue.          -ED.





C:ziN:ziDI:ziN	LITER:ziTURE
BACK ISSUES

Important back issues of Canadian Literature still available include  the  following:

No. 	8.  Special  Malcolm  Lowry Number.  Original articles,  letters and poems by Malcolm Lowry, articles  by Conrad  Aiken, Earle  Birney,  Robert  Heilman, Max-Pol Fouchet,  etc.

No. 	9.  Contents  include  Eclectic Detachment  by  A. J.  M.  Smith, Preface to a Novel  by Malcolm Lowry,  and  The Princess by Ethel Wilson.
No.  15.  Salute  to  A. J. M. Smith.  Articles  on  A. J.  M.  Smith  by Earle Birney, Roy Fuller and  Milton Wilson, together  with original poems  and  a Self-Review by  A. J. M. Smith.

No.  19.  Special  E. J. Pratt Number. Articles  on E. J. Pratt by  Paul West, Fred Cogswell and  Vincent Sharman, together  with Ethel Wilson's memoir  on Alan Crawley

$1.25  each

ORDER YOUR COPIES  FROM
THE  PUBLICATIONS    CENTRE
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH  COLUMBIA, VANCOUVER 8, B.C.



74

BOOKS IN REVIEW



PEARSON PORTRAYEO

JOHN   R.     BEAL,   The  Pearson    Phenomenon.
Longmans.  $s.oo.
LESTER  B.   PEARSON, The Four  Faces  of Peace and  the  International Outlook, ed. by Sherleigh  B. Pierson.  McClelland & Stewart.
$6.oo.

LESTER PEARSON   must   be,  by  any   ac­ count,   a  flack's  nightmare. Since  he  be­ came  leader  of the  Liberal Party  in 1958 no  effort  has  been  spared   in  building   a Pearson  image.  He  has  been,  at  various  times,   the   boyish,   wise-cracking  intel­  lectual,   the   genial  leader   of  a  youthful  team,  a  humane  man  "who   cares",  and an   iron-willed   leader   of   a  nation.  He has been  so  many  things  because  no one of  them   ever   stuck.   One   of  the   more amusing  aspects  of the  last  election  cam­  paign  was  the  frenzied   attempt  by  the Pearson ad  men  to  find  the  right  image for  their  man.  They   never  did.
The  problem they faced  was and  is in­ superable.  Unlike  the  late   President Kennedy, whose campaign  technique the Liberals  copied  with  the same  na'ive fer­ vor  that  an  art  student  will  copy  an  old master,  Lester  Pearson  utterly lacks style. He is a dull  man.  He cannot be marketed as an intellectual as Adlai  Stevenson  was, because  he is not  an  intellectual, and  his speeches  show  it.  He  is not  a man  of the New  Frontier,  because  he  is fundament­ ally a  bureaucrat and prefers  the shadows of   administration to the  sunlight  of leadership.
John  Beal's book was written primarily
for  Americans to  read.  It is an  attempt by  a  Time  correspondent to  market the Canadian prime  minister to  his  country­ men.  But  it will not succeed  because  it is not   even   good   Time   journalism. It  is trite,   juvenile  and  inaccurate. And  it  is
 too full the pointless  tnv1a that  is the hallmark   of  Time   journalism. Chapter four  begins with  a  paragraph  explaining that   "Mike" was  told  of  his  success in the External Affairs examination after  he had   been  to  the  doctor  for  an  eye  ex­ amination  and   his  pupils   were  dilated  with  belladonna, so  he  had  to  read  the telegram in  the  cellar.  No  doubt this  is a  hell  of a  way  to  read  a  telegram but so what?
The   remarkable feature  of  this  book
is  that   Mr.   Pearson   apparently lent  his support   to  the  effort,   no  doubt   on  the advice  of  his  "image-makers", and  even went  so  far   as  to  allow   Beal  access  to his diary.  The  result  is interesting enough for  the  student of  Canadian politics  but rough  on  the  Prime  Minister. The  diary selections,  written, for  the  most  part,  in London   during the  war,  provide  a  star­ tling  revelation of  a  mind   both  shallow and   na'ive.   More    than    that   they   are downright  juvenile    in   spots.   In    1938
Lester   Pearson    wrote:  "I  have   been
asked by the  Fortnightly Review to write an  article  on  the  significance  of  the  re­ cent  decisions  of  the   Privy  Council. ... I shall have  to do it  under  a pseudonym, as we  civil servants are  not  supposed  to publish  our  ideas  on  such  controversial questions.  On   the  other  hand, we  civil servants  nearly  always  need  a  few  extra pounds,   which   I  shall   hope   to  receive although both  the  editor and   I ... were much  too  genteel   to  bring  up  the  ques­ tion  of  money." The  subsequent entries quoted   by Beal  written during the  early weeks of the  London blitz  are  no better. Indeed   the  diary  is so self-conscious  and tendentious that   the  whole  thing  might well  have   been   written  under  a   pseu­ donym  and  published in  the  Boys  Own Paper.

75

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



As  Beal's   narrative unfolds-or  dis­ integrates-its subject emerges as a man who   has  succeeded   in  diplomacy  more by  the  absence  of  character than  by its strength.  Ever   ready   to  accept  advice, either  good or bad, Lester Pearson moved through  the   world  of   diplomacy  in Washington and  Ottawa, rubbing no one the  wrong  way, creating no enemies  and  mastering  the  machinery   of  diplomatic administration. His  triumph in the estab­  lishment  of  the U.N.  peace force in Gaza is a  tribute  to  his  blandness  rather than  his boldness  and  is, no doubt, as much  a product of   his  ability  to  accept   the  ad­  vice  of   others   as  was  the  fiasco  in  the
1957 parliament when  he moved  his footless motion of censure against the Diefenbaker government.
The selection of  Pearson speeches edited   by  Sherleigh  Pierson  simply  con­ firms  the  impression   made  by  Beal  and simple  observation.  Admittedly  collec­ tions  of  speeches  are  usually  dull,  separ­  ated  from  the men  and  the events  which called  them forth; Mr. Pearson's speeches are  excruciatingly dull  and  not  particu­ larly  useful at  that. If he were not  Prime Minister it is doubtful if they would have been published. They  abound  in such stylistic monsters  as this from his Nobel Laureate  address:   "Certainly  the   idea of an international peace force effective against  a big disturber of the peace seems today   unrealizable  to  the   point   of   ab­ surdity".
It is true   that   these  are,  for  the  most part,   the  speeches  of  a  career  diplomat and  everything that   is said  in  them  has been  said   before   by  others.  Even  those made  during the Suez debate  at the U.N. Assembly have about them an air of monumental dullness  although  they  are far  and  away  the  best in  the  collection.
 They   fail   to  inspire   and   the   reason   is simply  that   Lester  Pearson  is not  an  in­ spiring   man.   And   nothing can   be  done about   it.  No  one  turns  a  more  polished platitude than  he. There are few speech­  writers   who  can  overcome the  cautious determinism  of  the  career   bureaucrat.
Taken  together  these   two   books  ex­ plain  a good  deal  about  the  man  who  is presently   prime  minister of  Canada. He is often  described by colleagues  as a man who is engaging and  witty  in private but stiff and  boring  in  public.  It seems likely, however,  that  his  wit  is more  a function of  his  office  than  his  sense  of  humour, for the  jokes John Beal quotes are frankly  pathetic.  He   is  simply  a  very  ordinary man   and,   one   suspects,   this   was  what the   much   discussed   Ballantyne  exercise in  cinema  verite  demonstrated.
There is no  reason  why ordinary men should  not  be prime ministers; when  they are  it  proves  that  democracy works in at least   that   respect.   But  once  there   they should   not   be  surrounded  by  men  who would    have   us   believe   otherwise.  We should  then  be grateful to  Mr.  Beal and Miss   Pierson   for   helping,   however   un­ wittingly, to  prevent such  a  catastrophe by   presenting   such   overwhelming  evi­ dence.
WALTER YOUNG


QUEBEC TRADITIONAL

JEAN  PALARDY, The Early Furniture  of French
Canada. Macmillan.

DuRING THE  PAST twenty-five   years  the history    of   French   Canada   has    been greatly   enriched  by  the   "discovery"  of its   artistic  aspects,   particularly  for   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



period between 1650 and 18go. In The National Gallery Bulletin I have already noted   the   progress   of  this  discovery  in such fields as architecture, painting and silversmith's work. Recently another con­ siderable   step  has  been  made  toward   a more  comprehensive and accurate knowl­ edge  of Quebec's early  arts  through the publication of Jean Palardy's luxuriously­ presented  400-page  work  on  The   Early Furniture  of French Canada.
This   important  publication comes  at
the  very moment when,  for a  number of reasons,  a  real  interest in  Quebec's early arts   and   crafts   has  begun   to  spread - at  least  among French Canadians-be­ yond   the   usual    specialist   confines.   It should  at  the  same  time  be  pointed   out that,  among  the   English-speaking   mi­ norities  in   Quebec,  a   natural  care  for tradition and  a somewhat detached  view has   long   ago   provoked  an   interest   in early  Quebec  traditions,  so  that   among  them  old  stone  houses,  ecuelles  and  ar­  moires   have   been   family   heirlooms   for generations.
The  590  black-and-white photographs and   ten  full   colour   plates  in  Palardy's book-illustrating buffets,  chests,  beds, seats, doors,  and  even  clocks, chandeliers and   mantelpieces-are  in   themselves sufficient   to  answer   most  of  the  imme­ diate    questions  one   might   ask   about  French-Canadian furniture. What does it look  like?  How  high  is its  quality? How does   it   compare  with   the   products  of similar    traditions  in   France,  England, Ontario, New  England? What degree  of "civilization" does it represent?
The   captions  to   the  illustrations are presented   as   a   catalogue   raisonne,  in
 which  the description of each  piece and information on its provenance and  char­ acter    are   reinforced   by  more   general  notes  on  the  various   types  of   furniture and  by other  relevant  references.
In a field unexplored up  to now, such
an abundance of information would be enough  to prove  the  good  scholarship of a  man  who  has  already  made  a  reputa­ tion   as  a   painter,  an   interior   designer  and   a  film  decorator.  But   Palardy   has also been for decades a collector  who has absorbed  the  secret  life  of his  pine  cup­  boards  and  his na.lve sculptures. For  him they  are  not  mere  objects  of  study,  but the  living and visible aspects  of a certain civilization,   of   a  kind  of  material  phil­  osophy  in  which  tool, hand, wood, form, eye,  imagination,  play   the   role  of  ab­ stract  ideas. In  his Introduction in the chapters on Technical and  Historical Aspects,  and  in  his Conclusion, one  dis­ covers   the   profound   relationships   be­ tween   the  furniture  of  French  Canada and  its wider  traditions.
JEAN-PAUL MORISSET










77








A COUNTERBLAST TO MR. BOWERING

WHAT A SPLENDID FUTURE George Bowering  forecasts  so effusively for Cana­ dian  poetry  in his article, "Poets in Their  Twenties", in  the  last  issue of  Canadian Literature,  and  what  a great  pity  almost all his quotations from  these poets negate this  magnificent  prognosis! Of  the  poets he  mentions, only  Gwendolyn   MacEwen really  seems  to  have  any  genuine poetic ability,  and  the quotation from  her  work is hardly  one  that  would  induce  any real confidence in  her  staying  power.
And   what   of  the  other   poets?  From the  fragments Mr.  Bowering  gives  us, it is evident   that   they  are  much  more  in­ teresting typographically than  poetically.  Does   this  fragmented   typography  show any   real   concern  for   poetry?   Does  it actually help  either   in  understanding or in  reading   these  poems?  Mr.  Bowering quotes   approvingly  from   Warren  Tall­ man's  review   of  Frank   Davey's   poems, in  which Tallman implies that  in some mysterious  way this attempt at a different notation, "helps to re-enact  the poet's voicing".    Mr.   Davey   must   indulge   in some  tremendous dramatic pauses  when he   reads   his  verse,   and   yet   his  verse doesn't  seem  to need  such flourishes.  All those  heavy  dramatic sighs  for  a girl  in black   pedal   pushers!  Is  there   any  sig­ nificant  reason  why this particular quota­ tion  from  Davey  should  be set out on the
 page  m  this  way?  As James  Reaney  re­ marked   in   a   review   of  Frank   Davey's poetry   in   Alphabet   (June   rg62),  "I'm not   too  sure   that   instead  of   projecting himself  through  his  typewriter, his  type­ writer  isn't projecting itself through him." There   is   some   very   woolly  thinking about  the nature of poetry in Mr.  Bower­ ing's article. One  of the  most astonishing statements  is  Lionel   Kearn's  discovery that   poetry  "is  a  vocal  art". Well  now! I  am  sure  we all  agree,  but  it does seem a rather  belated   discovery.  I suppose  it is meant as a  statement  reacting against the   so-called    tyrannny  of   the   printed page  in  much  modern poetry.  But  surely that   tyranny is  strengthened if  the  poet indulges  in   typographical  doodling, whether he calls it "composition by field", "stacked verse"  or "exploded verse".  Mr. Bowering  obviously  disagrees.  He  makes an   even   more   astounding  observation: "Kearns'  poetry,   even   on   the   page,   is noticeably vocal". I  would  say that  Eliot on  the  page  is noticeably vocal,  I would say Browning is, but  I fail to see how this
type-slinging, flying-off-in-all-directions,
poetry   of  Kearns is  "noticeably vocal", on  the  page.
Surely  Cummings is the only poet  who
has made  typography work for him. Even so,  let  Mr.   Bowering   try  reading  aloud a  fairly  straightforward  Cummings lyric (perhaps  "My  father  moved    through doors  of love")  and  then  one  with  frag­ mented typography (perhaps  "Poem, or Beauty  Hurts Mr.  Vinal")  and see which one  he  honestly  feels is more  "noticeably vocal."   It should   be  obvious  that   frag­  mented typography does not really "break through  the   barrier   that   separates  the printed  page  from   the  poetry". In  fact,  it tends  to increase the reader's difficulties.
In   the   poets   Mr.   Bowering   quotes,

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



there   is  no  concession   to  form.   All  the better   practitioners of  free  verse  rely on numerous technical devices-rhyme, as­ sonance, repetition,  parallelism-but there  seems to be little  of this kind of con­ cern  for poetry  in Mr.  Bowering's heroes. However, at  one  point  in the  article  Mr. Bowering   gives   himself   and   his   poets away  in  one  of his  remarks about K.  V. Hertz: "One gets  the  impression that  he wakes  up  in  the  morning and  begins  re­ cording his emotions and  thoughts, keeps doing  this  all  day,  resting  finally  to  cut his  long  roll  of  paper   into  six-inch  seg­ ments,  and  send  the  two  hundred pieces in  all  directions  from   the  corner   mail­  box".   Mr.   Bowering  may  be  right   that  "somewhere in  the  mass  of  paper   there  are  always  surprising  numbers of  keenly sensitive   and   caring    poems",    but   the reader  would  be  more  aware of  them  if they  were  cut  away  from   the  mass,  re­ written, analysed, shaped.  Must the reader   rummage for  these  poems  in  the inchoate and  amorphous pages of Hertz's daily  diary-keeping? Has  Hertz   (or  Mr. Bowering,   for   that   matter)  never   real­ ized  that  there  is a shattering and  almost overwhelming struggle  to produce a real poem?  Very  often   the  struggle  to  shape the  images,  phrases,  words into some kind of  form   helps  define   the   poetic  experi­ ence  itself,  makes   the  poet  re-assess  the importance and   significance  of  his  own reaction  to  the  experience.  There is no evidence   that   this   shaping   process   has gone into  the   poems Mr.   Bowering quotes.
But   then,  Mr.  Bowering has   very
strange views  about  poetry: "As  a result the  poems  produced owe  much  more  to the   image   than   they   do  to  rhythmical interest,   or   to  the   qualities,  and   possi­ bilities  of  sound  in  speech.  The  declara-
 tive prose line is the most common. Statement supersedes music,  and  the poems,  if  they  have   impact, owe  it  to the  vividness  of  the   image."  Now   just where   does  Mr.   Bowering   stand?  Does he  believe  with  Mr.  Kearns that   poetry is a vocal  art  or  does  he  believe  that  we do  not  need  rhythm and  the  possibilities of  speech?  I  may  be  very  old-fashioned but   I  have  always   thought  that   poetry should  have  some  "rhythmical interest", that  it should pay attention to the "quali­ ties of  sound  in speech".
And   what   is  all   this  nonsense   about some  of  this  poetry   making   its  impact by "the  vividness  of  the  image"?  Zoom­ ing through empty  space?  A girl  in black pedal  pushers?  Kids  on  tricycles?  Flash­ ing  of a gull?  Are  these,  then,  the  vivid images that  make  a poetic  impact? There is  nothing   intrinsically  unpoetic  about  these,  but  the manner in  which  they  are presented  in  these  poems  is  not  in  any sense  in  terms  of  a  vivid  imagery.   Mr.  Bowering mentions some of the influences  on these poets-Donne, Dudek, Layton, Ferlinghetti-but   that  remark about "the   vividness  of  the  image" gives  the game  away.  Most  of these  poets  are  bad Imagists.  They  do not  have  the  precision of the Imagists,  and  they rely much  more on  the  superficial   shock  of  broken   lines and  gaps. Thus, instead  of being  daringly avant  garde,  they are  basically forty  years behind   the  times.
I  know   Mr.   Bowering   intended   his
article  to be "an  impressionistic survey ... not  a  critical   estimation of  the  state  of Canadian  poetry".  Nonetheless, he  does make   critical   judgments  on  these  poets and   obviously  feels  that   many   of  them have  already   produced good  poetry.  He seems genuinely  optimistic about   the  fu­ ture   to  be  created for  Canadian  poetry

79

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



by  them,   but  from  the  evidence  offered by most  of the  fragments he quotes  I see no  justification   for  his  optimism.  These  poets seem to be in a state of obsolescence and  futile  wrong-headedness. If they  are "the  most  likely  of  the  newest  batch  of poets   on   the   Canadian  scene",   heaven help  Canadian  poetry!
PETER STEVENS



A MODEST INNOVATION

WITH  SURPRISING UNOBTRUSIVENESS, Macmillans  have   been  edging   into   the paperback field  for  several  years, at  first with   occasional   isolated   volumes.   Now, with  such  an  extraordinary lack of  bally­ hoo  that  editors  actually  had  to send  for review  copies,  they  appear  to  have  de­ cided  on a definite  paperback series, since eight  reprints have  just been issued simul­  taneously,   with   a  uniform  binding   but, like the Canadian University Paperbacks, with  varying format. They  cover a whole spectrum  of   recent   Macmillan  publish­  ing:  biography, with  the  two volumes  of
J. M.  S.  Careless's   definitive   Brown   of
the  Globe   (at  $2.50  each)  ; fiction  with Charles Bruce's   modest  piece  of  region­ alia,   The   Channel   Shore   ($r.g5), and  George    Elliott's   whimsical   but    rather monotonous  volume  of short  stories, The  Kissing    Man    ( $ r.so)  ;  the   occasional  essay   with  Hugh  MacLennan's  urbane Scotchmen's Return  ($r.g5),  which stands  up  extraordinarily well to dipping and  re-reading; two  Pioneer  volumes  of reprints-Samuel  Hearne's fine  narra­ tive of A Journey  to the Northern Ocean, and   Early  Travellers in  the  Canadas, a

8o
 collection of uneven  snippets  gathered to­ gether  by Gerald Craig.  The  one volume which   there   seems  no  reason   at  all  for re-publishing  at   this   time   is  Canadian Art  by Graham Mcinnes ($r.g5), a kind of  guide   book  to  the  visual  arts  which was only  precariously up  to date  when  it originally appeared  in  I 950, and  now  in unrevised   form   is  positively   misleading since  it  gives  no  idea   of  the  enormous changes -and  the  many  new  names - that   have   appeared  in  Canadian  paint­ ing,  sculpture and  the  graphic arts  dur­ ing  the  past  fifteen  years.



REPRINTED BIOGRAPHIES

AMONG THE VARIED   LIST of  titles   now appearing in the  Canadian University Paperbacks, published by  the  University of  Toronto  Press,  are  a  number  of  the classic and  long out-of-print Makers of Canada Series. These include William D. LeSueur's  Count Frontenac ($2.50)   and Abbe  H.  R. Casgrain's Wolfe and  Mont­ calm  ( $ r.g5), both  of them works which have  been  supplemented  but  not  super­  seded  by modem  scholarship.
