$I .oo per copy


CANADIAN
l_iTERATURE N°· 12







POETRY	OFF THE 	P.:ztGE


Articles on Spoken and  Acted Verse

BY JAMES REANEY, ROBERT MCCORMACK, JOHN BILSLAND


Other  Articles

BY ROY DANIELLS, LOUIS DUDEK, F. W. WATT


Reviews
BY PHYLLIS WEBB, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, E. B. OOSE, JEAN-GUY PILON, JOHN PETER, T. C. FAIRLEY,
AND  OTHERS




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








REFLECTIONS IN THE CHARTROOM


THERE  IS NO  customary time for a periodical's  coming of age; perhaps  an  adequate  vitality  at  any time between birth  and  dotage  is sufficient evidence of maturity.  Yet in Canada the infant mortality of even lively magazines has been the rule rather  than  the exception, and that is why we still feel a certain satisfaction  in  being  able  to  point  out  that  with this issue Canadian  Literature comes to the end of its third  year of publication.  No editor should be surprised at success; he  would  not  begin  work if he did  not  expect it. But  he can still be allowed a legitimate  pleasure-even a certain relief-at the absence of failure.
Canadian   Literature  has  not  pleased  everybody;  that  would  have  been  the
worst of failures. But it has created  a place for itself, as a distinctively Canadian critical  magazine,  in  a  literary  world  where  no such  periodical  had  previously existed;  it  has  published  at  one  time or another  a  high  proportion  of the best Canadian writers,  young  and  not  so young;  it has  gained  and  kept  a steadily increasing  list of subscribers. Finally, a recent sign of the seriousness with which
it has been taken from the beginning was given when A. J. M. Smith, in selecting
the essays to include in his anthology of criticism, Masks of Fiction)  picked exactly half  his titles from  the first ten issues of Canadian  Literature.  Canadian  Litera­ ture) we feel, has justified its own existence, and in the process has shown that an informed  criticism  is becoming  an  increasingly necessary  process  as writing  in Canada broadens in volume and in variety.
In  other  directions  also the study of Canadian writers and  writing  progresses. We learn  that  the massive, many-handed history of Canadian literature which is being prepared  under the editorship of Professor Carl F. Klinck is now within measurable  distance  of  completion,  and  we look forward  to its appearance  be­ cause-no  matter  what  we may eventually think of the finished  publication­ it  cannot  fail  to  present  an  imposing  compendium  of views on  what  has been achieved  up to the mid-century. It will also present, by its inevitable gaps, a kind


3

EDITORIAL



of history in negative of what has been lacking so far in our writing and our dis­
cussion of it.
Meanwhile,  in the same field, we welcome the re-issue in revised and enlarged form of Desmond  Pacey's literary history, Creative Writing  in Canada  (Ryerson,
$5.00), first published  a decade  ago. Dr. Pacey  has worked over his old charts, and  has  mapped  out  as well the decade  of the Fifties which  had  hardly  begun when  the  original  edition of his history appeared. His book is a study  in extent rather   than  in  depth,  a guidebook  rather  than  a  detailed  geography,  and  not everyone will accept its critical judgments as easily as its facts and its able sketch­ maps of relationships,  but it remains an extremely  useful work in its delineation of the main currents of writing in Canada.



THOSE WHO  AGREE with  us in  deploring  the series of recent attacks  on  the  freedom of  literature in  Canada will rejoice-but with  due caution-over  the Supreme  Court  decision which reverses the condemnation of Lady  Chatterley's  Lover  as an obscene book and  allows its return  to the  book­ stores. The  general  importance  of such  a  victory cannot  be stressed too  much, but  it would  be unwise to forget  how precarious  it was. A bare  majority of the judges -five  against four-voted in favour  of the decision, and  the attitude  of the  prosecuting  counsel, who can  be regarded  as representing  the  views of the Government  in this instance, was disturbing  in the extreme. The Obscene  Publi­ cations  Act  was  passed  with  the  most  emphatic  undertakings  on  the  part  of the  Minister of  Justice that it  would   be  used  only  against  news-stand  semi­ pornography and  not against serious works of  literature. The  very prosecution of a work of standing  like Lady Chatterley's Lover, and the persistence in that prose­ cution  even  after  the  book had  been  cleared  by British  and  American  courts, suggests that  the Minister's undertaking was given principally  to disarm criticism at the time. Certainly  it has had no perceptible effect on practice, and the recent interference  with  the liberty of Canadians to read  works by Henry  Miller,  pub­ lished  under  the  somewhat  freer  conditions  that  exist-in  this field at  least­ in  the  United  States,  makes one  fear  that  the  attempt to  impose puritanical standards is only at its beginning.
Even  if one  does not  accept  Miller's  work  or  Lady Chatterley's Lover   as great  writing-and we do not-there is no possible doubt that  they are entitled to  be  considered  as serious works of literature. There  is also no doubt  that  the machinery  set up for dealing  with literature  or sub-literature of any kind  under

4

EDITORIAL



the  Act  is primitive and  ambiguous. As we pointed  out  in 1959,  the definition  of obscenity  in  the  Act  is dangerously vague,  and  events  have  proved  us right; it is a happy  hunting ground for moral  bigots. Moreover, the fact  that  the Act, unlike the  British  Act, gives no special standing to expert  witnesses -critics and  writers
-leaves a perilous  amount of power in the hands  of enforcement officers, prose­ cutors  and   magistrates who  may  not  merely  be unexpert in  literature,  but  even positively ignorant.
The  Supreme Court decision  on  Lady Chatterley's  Lover is a battle  won,  not
a campaign ended, and  it does not lessen the need  to obtain the  revision of a law whose vagueness  makes it a constant threat  to the freedom of readers and  writers.



THE  DEATH OF   Lome Pierce last winter  is regretted by all who remember the  long  decades  in  which  he put  into  practice as far  as he could  his belief  that   Canadian writers  should  have  the  chance   to  publish   their  books  in their  own  country. One   may  not  approve  of everything that  Dr.  Pierce  did  as chief editor  of the  Ryerson  Press, for he had  a strain  of often  misplaced  generosity that  led him  to publish  some of the worst as well as some of the best of Canadian books.  One  may  not  agree  with  his personal  theories  on  the links between litera­ ture  and  national-even  nationalistic-spirit. But  his dedication to  literature provides  its own  monument in the fact  that it was through his efforts that so many
of  our  best  poets,  from   E.  J. Pratt to  Earle  Birney  and  Dorothy Livesay,  pub­
lished  their  first  books.  It would  be hard  to think  of any  man  who  individually did more for the dissemination of Canadian writing in Canada.




















5



THE	LONG-ENDURING
SPRING




Roy Daniells








CRITICS OF   CANADIAN  LITERATURE  ,.,]dom   produce  epi­ grams  or  obiter  dicta  and  this fact  makes  all  the  more  memorable  a  phrase provided  by Frank  Scott. To the plea voiced in the Forum of 1928, "Wanted­ Canadian Criticism", Scott  replied,  "As  well  hope  to  hasten  the  harvest  by assembling the harvesters in May." From  that  time on, it must be admitted, our ears have accustomed themselves to the continuous whetting of scythes.
The  most cautious  and  systematic effort  at  distinguishing  the growing  wheat
from  the tares has been made by the University of Toronto Quarterly. A quarter of  a  century  has  passed since the  first of its annual  reports  came  out  and  the long unbroken series now invites our grateful review.
A.  S.  P.  Woodhouse's  introduction   to  "Letters in  Canada" of  April  1936
plunges us immediately into the Canadian cultural  problem. In spite of "excellent quarterly   bibliographies  of Canadian history, economics  and  government", and the annual  lists of the Toronto  Public Library,  there  has existed up to 1936 "no annual  publication  devoted to the cultural  and  literary  life of the Dominion; no bibliography  of books and  articles on that  subject,  and  no account  of the  work done in Canada in a given year, in the different  departments of writing, creative and  critical."  The  very existence of a Canadian literature  as anything  distinctive, or even distinct,  appears  in 1936 to be still in doubt.  "It will not be denied  that letters  in  Canada is a  legitimate  and  important subject  of inquiry,  and  one in which  many  Canadian readers,  and  some outside  Canada, are  interested.  The survey approaches the subject in the spirit of exploration. It eschews every element of  propaganda, and  it  deliberately  avoids  the  premature question,  'Is there  a


6

THE LONG-ENDURING SPRING



homogeneous and  significant Canadian  literature?' If there  is, the  year's  contri­ bution  to it will be found noted  (along with much else)  in the pages that follow."  Woodhouse concludes by promising "a  conspectus,  not merely of  literature in the narrowest sense,  but  of that  culture of which  it forms  a part  and by which  it is (or ought  to be)  nourished."
The  survey  of our  1935  crop  of poetry  is the work of the late  E. K. Brown  (of
grateful memory  to more  than  one generation of Canadian students). He  begins with that  muted note of hopeful disappointment which all consumers of Canadian criticism  have  learned to  anticipate: "At  the  outset  it should  be  admitted that
1935  has  not  been  a  decisive  year  for  Canadian poetry.... A  number of our best  poets  have  published new  works  during 1935;  in  none  of their  volumes  is there  a marked lapse from  their  best previous  achievements: but in none  of them is there  a  marked success in  striking  out  along  new  paths,  or  an  evident   power to do better  what  they  have  done  well already." Brown's  evasion  of the dilemma of  the  surveyor   with  little  to  survey  is both  adroit  and  honest.  He  makes  every effort  to elicit  the  poet's  intentions and  to balance  a spirit  of generous encourage­ ment,   at  the  level  of  reviewing,   with  some  just discriminations on  the  level  of criticism.   Characteristically, he  regards   The  Titanic   as  no  advance  on  Pratt's previous  poetic  performance but  as showing  skills in  the  use of  rhythm, imagery  and   technical  terminology not  previously   recognized. Then,  from   the  modest  plateau of his consideration of this poem  and  The  Green Cloister of D. C. Scott  (a  delayed   effort  of  the  post-confederation world)   he  picks  his  way  down  the declivity  on  the  other  side:   "Only a few of the  books listed ... have  been  men­  tioned. Of  the  remainder a  shockingly  large  number  are  worthless  or,  at  best, have  so little  worth   that  mercy  bids  one  avert  his eyes and  pass by."  In  passing he throws  a stone  at  My  Kitchen  Window. Edna Jacques' "verses  are  an expres­  sion  of  the  ordinary self  of  the  Canadian  middle class, that  is  to say,  of  the immense  majority of Canadians." He closes with the customary and  ritual cadence of  restrained optimism:  "To  scan  the  future with  a  hopeful   eye is  a  national characteristic: it  is  pleasant  to  note  the  excellence  of much  of  the  verse  which  has appeared in undergraduate periodicals during the year."
Fiction  is next  and  falls to E. K. Broadus,  who finds Grey Owl's  Sajo and Her
Beaver People "the best work of the creative  imagination in the field of fiction, produced in  Canada in  1935". He  harbours assorted  doubts  about Morley  Cal­ laghan's They  Shall Inherit the  Earth; Mr.  Callaghan's style  is  uneven, his characters never  become  quite  real, his meaning remains uncertain, his plot con­  tains  improbabilities. The note  of doubt  continues  to sound.  Father  Abraham  is

7

THE LONG-ENDURING SPRING



crudely vigorous, but if  Mr. Hardy  is encouraged  by his success "his characteristic qualities may make him a bull in a china shop." Humphrey Cobb's Paths of Glory has  the  force of Greek  tragedy  but  unhappily  Mr.  Cobb  does not  classify as a Canadian. Young Renny reveals that the Jalna vein is worked out and that  Mazo de la Roche's characterization is not as good as Mr. Broadus  used to think it was. Mrs.  McClung,  Mr.  Niven, Mr. Sullivan have all written  books about  the West,
none  of  them  more  than  mediocre.  "Of  some  remaining   books -none  very significant-brief notice will suffice." Mr. Broadus lays down  his pen, looks out upon  the  stubborn  snows  of  Edmonton and  sees  no sign  of an  approaching summer.
A section on Canadian drama  follows, but  none of the plays named  with the exception of Moon over Mulberry Street is likely to be recalled now.
The  final section, "Remaining Material", is by the editor, with assistance from Alexander  Brady  in  biography,  history and  the social sciences. Essays, together with  descriptive  and  narrative  pieces, are soon disposed of and  we move on  to­ ward  properly  academic  criticism. There  is a noticeable  quickening  of pace  and change  of tone,  as though  a pair  of army  officers sent out  to investigate  a  pro­ gramme  of civilian  public  works had  returned  to  the  mess, to the  proper  con­ ventions and  the familiar faces. The  reason is not far to seek; here precedent and the  assurance  of  tradition  may  be found.  In  this  world  of  serious scholarship, even  a  partial  or  flawed  work  contributes  something  to  the  grand  and  ever­ growing  design. Criticism shows what  this useful and  permanent contribution  is. "Rien  n'est perdu."  Here is none of the uneasiness that the critic must experience in adjudicating upon a flawed poem or a partial realization of fictional character. Biographies of public figures are commented  on  with gratitude. Historical  analy­ ses of national  or regional significance,  economic studies of the  Canadian back­ ground, useful bibliographical  lists:  all  are welcomed.  Then,  in unhappy  return to the main concern of the literary output, there is a glance at some unsatisfactory comments  on  our  prose and  verse,  eliciting  the  cry, "When will an  adequate historian  of  Canadian  letters  appear?" The  final  pages  proceed  to  more stable contributions,   the  work  of   scholars  in  fields  other  than   Canadian -Herbert Davis' edition of Swift's Drapier's  Letters, E. K. Brown's book on Edith Wharton, and  so on. Impossible to resist the conclusion that  they order  these matters  better in  France,  in  England,  in America.  But, as always, the  final  upturn  of hope, a ook
definitely  a   journal   for  the   humanities  in  Canada."  (Italics not  mine.)



8

THE LONG-ENDURING SPRING




l:E SECOND ANNUAL  SURVEY was improved and  expanded, to the  extent  that   reviews  of  French-Canadian works  had  to  appear as  a separate section  in  the  July  issue. The  editor's summary of policy once  more  makes  clear that  lists of publications are  "the foundation of the scheme,  a solid foundation of indisputable fact"; that  the  reviewers  are  offering  a "guide among  the  materials there   collected,  and   a  tentative  judgment of  value"; that   the  whole  survey  is intended to place  the creative effort  "in  its true setting" of the  historical and cui­ ural  background and  of  "writings on  education and  religion  and  the  fine  arts, and  of Canadian scholarship and  criticism,  both  in the  humanities proper and  in the  social  sciences." This hesitation in  conceding any sort  of autonomy to litera­ ture  or  to  criticism  is natural and  inevitable in the  circumstances. There was in
1937  no  corpus  either  of literature or of criticism  out  of which  a new  growth of forms  or ideas  could  spring. Canadian writing, it seemed,  had  to emerge  from  the facts  of Canadian existence  or not at all. It was impossible  to imagine a kingdom of the  imagination or to expect  minds  like those of Blake or  Poe or  Mallarme.
The  poetry  section  is again  the work of E. K. Brown and  he is able to welcome
the  New  Provinces group:  Finch, Kennedy, Klein,  Pratt, Scott  and  Smith. Even so,  the  soil is thin  and  the  quotations in  support of favourable  judgments often fail  to perform their  expected function. A double  standard is never  lost sight  of; "a   poor  thing   but  mine  own". But  Brown's  care  for  Canadian taste  is always apparent: of some  feeble  productions he remarks  that  "they  will probably have  a small   circulation;  but   what   effect  they  have  upon  Canadian taste will  be  a weakening effect."
In  this second  issue James MacGillivray begins his long  run  as a reviewer  of
fiction.  Our first  impression is of an  unobstrusive  academic person  drafted into the  reception line  and   bravely   holding  out  his aching  hand   to  the  long  file of unknown  guests.  But  soon  the  polite,  necessary  remarks are  interspersed with comment that  stays  in  the  memory,  low-pitched, mordant, filled  with  common­ sense.  When L. M.  Montgomery has  her  Anne  writing a  letter-"And it  will be  moonlight in  Lover's  Lane  and  on  the  Lake  of Shining  Waters and  the  old Haunted Wood   and  Violet  Vale.  There should  be fairy  dances  on  the  hills to­ night" -MacGillivray  opines  that  "with such  an imagination Anne  should  be a great   Canadian  poetess."  After   much   effort  to  do  justice  to  the  fiction  of  the year,  he  concludes, "The  idea  that  the  writing of  fiction  is an  art  involving the imposition of  sthetic
significance  from  the  welter  of events,  has not seriously affected  our  sturdy  belief


9

THE  LONG-ENDURING SPRING



that  a novel is a series of incidents which  hold our attention by making us wonder what  will happen next."
It has  been  worth  while to look carefully  at  the  first  two  issues of "Letters in
Canada" because  they  so clearly  present  a  pattern of all that  has followed.  The pattern is one  of  consistency  rather than   progression.   Editorial support for  this feature of  the  Quarterly has  never  wavered, even  during the  regime  of Douglas Grant, from  whom  innovations were  expected. Most  of  the  reviewers  of poetry and   fiction   have  given  continuous service  for  runs  of  between   ten  and  fifteen years  and  the  contributions of Alexander Brady  and  Watson Kirkconnell extend in unbroken order  back to the beginnings of the enterprise.
The  succession   of  works  reviewed   has  also  shown   unexpected  consistency. Brown's remark  in I 943  that  "our   poetry  has  circulated within  a national wall, and  American as well as English  readers  have  not cared  to know  what  was going on inside" may be taken as broadly  applicable to the whole  period. MacGillivray's remark in the same  issue that  few of the creditable and  interesting novels at hand "will  be much  read  ten years from  now, or even five" is of similar  wide relevance. And  the  exceptions  have done  little  more  than  prove  the  rule.  Barometer  Rising, As   for Me  and  My   House,  Brebeuf, The   Loved   and  the  Lost,  Trial   of a City, The Double  Hook   (to  name  without invidiousness the first  half-dozen that  come to  mind)  are  works  of substantial and  enduring merit  which  are  not  permitted by the  nature of our  national culture to point  on  to anything beyond  themselves. It is extraordinary to see young  Canadian poets  looking  to Black  Mountain for their  models,  in  general  disregard of our  native  tradition. It is strange to detect a widespread intuition that our painfully and  beautifully developed  domestic expository novel  (our  equivalent of The  Mill  on the  Floss and  Middlemarch)  has no future, no possibility of further fruitful extension.
Among the  elements  of consistency several  are salient. The Jewish  contribution to  Canadian  literature continues to  be  out  of  all  proportion to  the  size of  the Jewish   element in  our  population. Klein,   Kreisel,  Richler, Wiseman, Mandel, Layton, Cohen  are  among  the first names  to come to mind.  More  mysterious and perhaps more  significant  is the  number of works at  a high  level of significance  of which both  the  material content and  the  informing sensibility  are  derived  from extra-Canadian sources.  During the  past  year,  we have  been  presented with  two books  of  poems  by  Robert   Finch, each  having   as its  starting point  an  English scene  or  event  and  each  exhibiting the  refinement of artifice  which  their  author owes  to  his immersion in  the  culture of  France. At  the  same  time,  Malcolm Lowry's Hear  Us 0' Lord has been posthumously published, to remind  us that  his

IO

THE LONG-ENDURING SPRING



origins  and  sensibility  were,  in  respect  to the  Canadian tradition, quite  atypical. A  final  consistency,   and   an   unhappy one,  is  the  continuing inability of  good writers  to  produce more  than   one  memorable book.  As  for Me  and  My  House and  The  Mountain and the Valley should not stand  alone  as they do.
It is true  that   the  volume  of  reputable writing  in  Canada has  increased, but that  is only to be expected, along  with increased  population, increased educational opportunities, and  increased  public  interest.  Every  year  we  have  a  shelf  full  of books  of interest  and  value.  Each  year  there  is likely to  be one  book  with  some new  promise.  But  the  breakthrough never  occurs,  or  if it  has  occurred has  re­ mained disguised.  We have  come through the Red Sea but  we have not yet passed through Jordan. The true  crisis  of  the  Canadian  psyche,  with  its  incalculable promise for our creative life, is yet to appear.
In  any  assessment  of twenty-five  issues of "Letters in  Canada" we are  bound to be unfair  to certain of the  reviewers, especially to those who with  real devotion committed  themselves  to  objectives   which  the  war  and  other   national  circum­ stances  rendered impossible  of attainment. W. S. Milne  and  V. Tovell were faced not  only  with  the  perennial lack  of stage facilities and  audiences in most  parts  of Canada but  also with  the  deprivations of the  years from  I939  to  I945· Reviews of  French-Canadian letters  in  an  English-language journal suffer  from  the  bald fact  that  few of those  who  read  them  have  any effective command of the  French language. Not  all  the  long  devotion  of W.  E.  Collin  could  make  the  review  of poesie canadienne  seem  other   than   from   the  outside  looking  in.  No  reviewer could  have  induced a resonance between  his materials for  review  and  his readers,  because  there   has  not  been  during the  past  twenty-five  years  any  wholeness  of sensibility  in  the  Canadian public  to which  he could  address  himself.  The  intel­ lectual  membrane between   the  two languages has permitted  only  a kind  of slow osmosis. It remains to  be seen,  now  that  this section  of  "Letters in Canada" has been  taken  over  by  a  team  of  French  reviewers,  whether they  can  deploy  their manifest   skills  to  develop   across  a  period  of  years  something other   than  voices from   the  inside  speaking out.  All  who  care  for  our  Canadian  unity-in-duality must  wish them  well. The  section  which  began in  I939  as "New-Canadian Let­  ters",  now  significantly changed to "Publications in  Other Languages" has been throughout the  work  of  Watson  Kirkconnell. It  is impossible  to guess what  will be  the  ultimate effect  upon   the  Canadian  tradition of  the  writings, mainly  in northern and  eastern European  languages,  produced by immigrant groups  with strong  cultural roots  of  their  own.  In  the  meantime we may  note  with  gratitude that   everything one  man  could  do  to  achieve  liaison  and   understanding of the


I I

THE  LONG-ENDURING SPRING



problem  has  been  done. The  bibliographical  section,  once  the  announced  base of the whole enterprise,  has now had its main  function  taken  over by organized services connected  with the national library system. It continues, however, to per­ form  such  useful functions  as supplying  the  substratum of special  features; for example  the  very  acute  critiques  on  education   written  by  Robin  Harris.  It  is important to the success of this kind of effort that  Canada is still small enough for a bird's  eye view of a year's work in a single field to be within the field of vision of the unspecialized reader.
There   remains  the  curious  problem  (which   perhaps  baffles nobody  but  the
present  writer)   of  the  "Remaining Material",  much  of  which  was  reclassified after  1947  as  "Social Sciences". Here  we owe  a  great  debt  to  the  tactics  of Alexander  Brady, who operated  as a reviewer on the borderland between creative and  critical  writing.  From one point of view this operation  may be regarded  as a valiant  attempt  to carry out on a smaller scale the functions  of other  journals such as the Canadian  Historical Review.  From  another  point of view Brady had the ungrateful task of conducting across the back of the stage a choral  procession composed of characters  from another  play. At all events, Woodhouse's apparently reasonable  expectation,   that  reviews of social  studies  would  reveal  the  matrix from which the poetry and creative fiction came,  was not destined to be fulfilled, or perhaps  to be fulfilled only in some cumulative sense. It  is now perhaps  pos­ sible,  reading  over  the  whole twenty-five issues of "Letters  in  Canada",  to see that  all  the  writings  of Earle  Birney relate  to the social and  political  history of this country,  possible to guess that  Pratt's  preoccupation with the gigantic  corre­ sponds  to  the  mon trousness of  the  Canadian  terrain,   possible  to  believe that Callaghan  and  MacLennan are searching for the same Canadian sense of identity as has hitherto eluded the historians and sociologists.




0NLY  THE  SECTIONS dealing  with poetry and fiction seem to  have  developed  as entities. They  were at  the outset  intended  as the principal
foci. They  have offered an increasingly clear conspectus, which is not to say that their methods  have altered in any fundamental way or that  the materials  at their disposal have become different in kind.
What  is this complex of sensibility developed by the poetry and fiction sections of "Letters  in  Canada"? First, the sense of writing  for a real  public, chiefly be-

I2

THE LONG-ENDURING SPRING



cause here  (and  particularly  in the poetry reviews)  the writer, the reviewer-critic and  the  reader  come  close to  being the same  person. A high  proportion  of the best-known  Canadian poets (Pratt, Watson, Birney, Finch, Reaney,  Mandel  and Macpherson  come to one's mind)  have not merely academic  associations but also make  their  living in  universities. Even Layton's  contempt  for professors has not prevented  him  from  belonging  to  their  ranks.  Among  writers  of fiction,  Mac­ Lennan,  Hardy, Kreisel, Birney, Sheila Watson, McCourt,  Pacey and others have an  academic   background. A  large  number  of  reviewers and  critics  are  in  the same  position.  In  a country  as newly developed  as Canada, it  could  hardly  be otherwise.  And  in  spite of  (let  us face it)   the  highly factitious  elements of the situation, some consistency does accrue. An ideal, homogeneous and reliable audi­ ence is dramatized, corresponding  fairly closely in character,  though  one  hopes not in extent,  to the real audience  the poet, in particular,  is likely to achieve.
As an indication, and  a valuable one, as to how reviewers have seen their own task we have Frye's farewell summation  as he closed a decade of poetry reviews. After  recalling  with  gratitude work by a range of poets from  Pratt  to Margaret Avison,  he  returns  to  the  old  problem  of responsibility to his readers:   "I have spent  a great  deal  of my space in trying to explain  as clearly as I can  what  the poet is saying,  and  what  is characteristic  about  the handwriting, so to speak, in imagery and  rhythm.  I have felt that it is well worth insulting  the intelligence of some readers if one can do anything to breach the barriers of panic and prejudice in others.  . .. I  have  for the most part  discussed Canadian poets as though  no other  contemporary poetry  were available for Canadian readers.... And every genuine  poet  is entitled  to  be  read  with  the  maximum  sympathy  and  concen­ tration." Frye's final phrases are predictable,  teleological, inevitable:  "The  critic to  whom  falls the  enviable  task of studying  Canadian poetry in  the sixties will,
I  trust,  be dealing  with a fully matured  culture,  no longer preoccupied  with the empty  unpoetics of Canadianism, but with the genuine tasks of creative  power." The  fiction review, now in the capable  hands of Frank  Watt,  after classic runs
of more than  a decade each by MacGillivray and Bissell, shows a slightly less clear image  than  the review of poetry but only because fiction as a genre is more dif­ fuse. Bissell, near the end of his term as a reviewer, struck the note of disillusioned cheerful  expectation   with  exactness:   "Despite  the solid  achievement of writers like Ethel  Wilson and  Morley Callaghan,  and  others, too, one feels at times that the novelist has not yet learned  to be completely at  home in Canada, and  that he has difficulty in seeing this country  as a human society. That is the reason why so much  of our fiction splinters into dramatized sociology, or earnest  parable,  or

THE  LONG-ENDURING SPRING



private  narrative.  But that  is the reason, too, why the  writing  of fiction in  this country should be a quest and may ultimately be a discovery."
So Canadian literature,  as Pelham  Edgar  always maintained, is just coming.
No critic can think or believe otherwise, even if on some evenings he awakes like Lamb  to  hear  the  receding  voices of dream  children.  The  bridges built  by the critics  of "Letters  in  Canada" have seemed  to  be from  writer  to  reader,  from culture  to culture, from criticism to creation, but all this is child's play to the real fabrication, that  of a bridge  into  the future.  They  have  maintained a constant alert  for  developing  trends,  for  hopeful  prognostics,  for  unifying  themes.  They have  been eager to mediate  and explain, loath  to judge or condemn.  They  have felt  with  Arnold  "it  is by communicating fresh  knowledge,  and  letting  his own judgment  pass along with it" that the critic serves his readers. The reviewers have performed  many  incidental  and  ancillary services, works of supererogation  from which we benefit. They have saved us from heresies that  haunt  the temple of the arts, from the notion that good writing is no more than  the correct application  of techniques,  from  the  opposite error  that  good  poetry  is no  more  than  free  self­ expression. They  have been patient,  unfailingly competent, frequently brilliant in their bursts of penetration  and in their inducement of synthesis. They have turned  their  dreariest  assignments into labours  of love. In  fact,  the  retrospective  reader of  "Letters  in  Canada" is likely to feel a stronger  bond  of  sympathy  with  the reviewers than  with  the writers themselves. By dramatizing  an ideal public, they have gone a long way toward creating a real one.
Their  most serious lapse has been the failure  to project  an  image, like Whit­
man's American  Poet, of the ideal Canadian creative writer, in not evoking his recognizable likeness from the mists of our cultural  drift, in not insisting upon the autonomy  of  the  imagination   and  the  primacy  of  the  world  which,  being  not seen, is eternal.  And  yet-how  much  has been done of a cumulative  kind. Im­ possible for  the  present  writer  to end  on  any  but  a  hopeful  note  or  to  refrain from  joining the ritual  dance of the harvesters in Maytime.  After such sacrifices, such processions and long marching  about the fields, such symbolic inseminations of  the  furrows,  such  regard  for  all the  rites of fertility,  the  gods  must  act,  the Muse descend and  Urania  show her divine shape. The  powers themselves, seem­ ing  indifferent  through  our  long-enduring  spring,  can  they  now  withhold  their gifts, the cornucopia  of a full and abundant harvest long delayed?






14·



CLIMATE OF UNREST

Periodicals in the
Twenties and Thirties




F. W. Watt





TESPIRIT  OF  PATRI<mSM which arose in Canada during  the
"boom" era  of the  earlier  1goo's  and  culminated in the  wartime jingoism  of the
1914-18  struggle, still  flourished  in  various  forms  during the  192o's.  The  Cana­ dian  Authors' Association, founded in  192 1, drew  together many  who  had  con­ tributed to the  development of a national literature, and  who were eager to equal  in the  cultural sphere  what  had  been  accomplished  in terms  of  political  and  eco­ nomic  nationalism. But  after  1920  patriotism was as often  as  not  likely to  be a more   critical,  and   more  demanding attitude. Not,  "we  must have  a  strong,  prosperous, cultivated nation from sea to sea" but "what really  are  the conditions in this country, what  are its shortcomings and its evils?"
Some  writers  for  whom  the  less smiling  aspects of Canadian nationhood were
not  essential  but  accidental, or whose sympathies were  with  the  past  rather than the future, found  a spiritual home  during the 192o's  in Willison's  Monthly. That magazine carried on  many  of  the  late  Victorian Canadian attitudes as they  had found form  in  The  Week  (in  the  188o's)   and,  more especially,  in the  Canadian Magazine, which  had   joined  forces  with  the  "new" to  the  extent   of  enthusias­ tically  supporting the  advance of free  enterprise business  and  commerce in  the early  twentieth century. Willison's  Monthly was a patriotic  journal   (devoted, as one  contributor put  it,  to "the upbuilding of Canada"),  and it spoke  on  behalf of  the  main  features of John A. Macdonald's National  Policy  of 1879  as it was interpreted in  the  twentieth century: encouragement of  immigration, tariff  pro­ tection,   provincial unity,  Buy  Canadian Goods,  and  lower  taxes  on  capital. At

CLIMATE OF UNREST



the  same  time  the  magazine  displayed  the  well-developed  Canadian  Victorian capacity  for conservative compromise by becoming in the realm of culture virtu­ ally the epitome of the "genteel" tradition.  The  most decorous and refined writers of the I 88o's and  I 8go's would readily have appreciated the tone and atmosphere of Willison's  Monthly: its nostalgic glances at the  (supposed)   calm and order of the Victorian  Age, its aversion to the crass materialism  of industrial  civilization, its  concern  for  "beautiful" art,  its  consistently  elevated  manner -the  slightly formalized  expression and  the  avoidance  of petty  details  and  slang  vocabulary. In  an  article  appearing  in  I927,  "Matter of Taste", C. F. Lloyd expressed with great eloquence the personal and social idealism of the Willison's Monthly milieu:
To be able to appreciate keenly and with a sureness of instinct, akin to the homing instinct of birds, all the finest and grandest production of human genius in every department  or in one or two, and at the same time to be able on all occasions, the most trying as well as the commonest, to act and speak with the dignity and deli­ cacy expected of a courtier in the presence of his sovereign is to tickle the  palate with  the  finest flavor of life, to enjoy the  fragrance  and  beauty of a  rose that does not fade but rather grows sweeter with the wearing.

Repose, conservatism, and stability are what the world desires, wrote the editor in  the first number  of Willison's  Monthly in  I925.  But the pages of the  journal bear  witness to  the  presence of disruptive  forces everywhere:   democracy,  Bol­ shevism  ("Too much pressure cannot  be exerted  to stamp  out Communist activi­ ties in  the  Dominion"), "Jazz  Psychology"  and  the  "pathological  jottings"  of modern  literature, and  most of the other features  of  twentieth-century industrial urban  life. Truly,  wrote a Willison's Monthly contributor, "the  happiest  time for a man  to have lived" was in the days of  "chop-whiskers  and crinolines",  between the years I 81o and  188o; and the solid virtues of that era were fast disappearing. The  intellectual  milieu of Willison's  Monthly  unquestionably looked  backwards in time. The  air of nostalgia, the valetudinarian tone, the shrinking from modern ugliness, the despairing defence of  the Ancients in literature and in social customs,
manners,  and conditions against the barbarous encroachments of the Moderns - all this clearly marks off the "old"  attitudes  from the "new". Already, before the end  of the  war  the  "new"  had  begun  to throw  out  its challenges.  In  19 I7  the University of  Toronto  magazine, The   Rebel- though  the  title  itself is its strongest defiance -had dedicated  itself to "an  honest criticism of things as they are...." The decade which followed brought  an increasing pressure in this direc­ tion  until the balance of mind of the intelligentsia of the 192o's seemed to swing towards a critical temper.

16

CLIMATE OF  UNREST



The  quality  of the patriotic  spirit underwent a change in such public manifes­ tations of it as we see in the Canadian  Forum. In the first issue of that periodical in October,  1920, the editors announced: "'The Canadian Forum' had its origin in  a  desire  to secure  a  freer  and  more informed  discussion of  public  questions and, behind  the strife of parties, to trace and value those developments of art and letters  which  are  distincdy  Canadian." But  this  assertion,  not  so very different from  what  Goldwin  Smith,  for example, might  have made  a generation  earlier, is accompanied  by sharp  critical hits at traditional nationalism: "Real  independ­  ence is not  the product  of tariffs and  treaties. It is a spiritual  thing.  No country has reached  its full stature,  which makes its goods at home, but not its faith and its philosophy."  By the mid-192o's the Canadian  Forum had clearly taken on the temper  of criticism. It  was hopeful rather  than cynical or negative, however, and could scarcely be confused with the wave of cynicism and  pessimism which swept over  other  countries  following  the  war. The  key term  is "progressive",  a word which  the  editorial  board  of  the  192o's  applied  to itself not  in  any specialized political  sense, but  as a  way of  suggesting the spirit  of evolutionary  optimism. "The  majority of us," said one editorial in 1924, "hold in common a belief in the mutability   of  human   nature,  which  is the  fundamental  characteristic that  dis­ tinguishes the progressive from the conservative." The vagueness of the Canadian Forum's  self-attribution  "progressive"  arose from the fact  that  in  1924  the edi­ torial  committee  experienced  the embarrassment  of being  unable  to agree upon a  "Platform"  which  would  express their  political and  social  philosophy. In  the end  the  eighteen  members  of  the  committee  were obliged  to  make  a virtue  of necessity, to fall back on the concept of "Forum". In the public statement  "Forum  Versus  Platform" their  confession was made,  and  the  periodical  was committed to the  principle  displayed  in  its name-in  effect, to the  critical  temper,  rather than to any specific ideology.
The  Canadian  Forum  in  the 192o's reflected a critical  "revolt" which was to
begin with  moral  and  <esthetic in motivation,  and  which found  political associa­ tions only later.  The  sense of the repressive bonds and  inhibitions  of the existing social order  and  the  desire  to shake  them  off found  expression in  many  forms. Margaret   Fairley  put  the  attitude  at  its most general  in  her  Canadian  Forum article  "Creative Evolution", written  in I 92 I : "If man is to rise above himself, the  cramping influences  of wealth  as well as poverty, of arbitrary  custom, and of the audacious  tyranny  of each generation  upon the next must be removed" - lest, she went on to say, "Originality and virtue are destroyed by the fear of being a freak  or  prig,  and  everywhere  initiative is repressed by the  too  rigid bonds of

CLIMATE OF UNREST



social  life."  In  a  lighter  vein,  Douglas  Bush  was  attacking  some  of  the  same enemies when  in  the Canadian  Forum in April,  1922,  he entered  his "Plea  for Original   Sin",  and  argued  that  Canadian literature  was  "amemic"   because "Canada is too moral." Some of the most vigorous creative writing of the 192o's shows a similar  critical spirit at work. It  would be well, perhaps,  to see the early
poetry  of  E.  J. Pratt   in  this  light,  especially  that  whimsical  and  extravagant
Witches'  Brew  ( 1925),  which shatters with comic vitality the conventional  pieties of a religion and  morality too narrowly conceived.  Pratt's  Newfoundland  Verses two years earlier had found favour in the eyes of the Canadian  Forum as a happy departure from  the Canadian  tradition  of romantic  sensibility. Similarly  Merrill Denison's witty and caustic portrayals of the Ontario north  country in the 192o's were, in their own way, critical exposes of regional idyllic sentimentality.
The   revolt  became  explicit and  self-conscious in  the  vigorous  challenge
"Wanted-Canadian Criticism",  flung  down  by that  young champion  of the
"new"  in  Canadian culture,  A. J. M. Smith,  in  the Canadian  Forum  in April,
1928.  Smith's  thesis was essentially that  Canadian  culture  was  lacking  in  the critical  intelligence  (and  in  particular  Canadian culture  as envisaged  and  per­ petrated   by the  Canadian   Author's  Association,  upon  whom  Smith  heaped  his scorn). "One  looks in  vain  through  Canadian  books  and   journals for  that critical  enquiry  into  first principles  which  directs  a  new  literature   as  tradition  guides an old one."  Part  of the critical task as Smith envisaged it was to shatter the  unholy  bonds  between  commercialism  and   art   ("Buy   Canadian  Goods" applied  to literature)  allegedly established  by the  C.A.A.  The  critic  must  help the Canadian writer in his fight against social pressures which make him use the methods  of  low-level Canadianism  endorsed  by  the  "Maple Leaf"  school, and in  his struggle  for  "freedom  in  the  choice  and  treatment of his subject."  The inhibitions  in regard  to realism, irony, cynicism and  so on require  overthrowing.  Above  all  the  need is for intelligence:  "Modernity and  tradition  alike demand that  the  contemporary   artist  who  survives adolescence  shall  be an  intellectual.  Sensibility is no longer enough, intelligence is also required.  Even in Canada."






TowARD THE END of the twenties a new periodical  appeared  in which contributors and editors declared themselves even more emphatically for emancipation  and  the  free  critical  spirit.  The  first  number   of The   Canadian

18

CLIMATE OF  UNREST



Mercury  (December, 1928)   dedicated itself  to "the emancipation of Canadian literature from  the state  of amiable  mediocrity and insipidity in which  it now languishes," and  asserted  its independence: "We  have  no affiliation  whatsoever: we owe no allegiance to the Canadian Author's Association,  the Canadian  Manu­ facturers Association, the  Young  Communist League  of  Canada, the  I.O.D.E., the  Y.M.C.A., the  U.F. of A. or the  C.P.R." The  editors  were  youthful but  un­ ashamed of the  fact: "the editors  are  all well under  thirty  and  intend to remain so. We seek to  ally ourselves  with  all those whose literary schooling  has survived  the  Confederation, and   whose  thought and  verse is  not  afraid of  being  called free." One  of the  Canadian Mercury's first tasks was  to  attempt to destroy  that  quintessence  of  the  old  tradition, "respectability", and  on  the  front   cover  the opening challenge was  hurled   by  the  nearly   naked,  corpulent  Mercury in  the magazine's colophon, thumbing his nose defiantly  at all those to his right.  At one point  in  its short  existence,  the  Canadian Mercury  entrusted to  Marcus Adeney  the   task  of  an   outright  and   explicit  confronting  of  "respectability". In   "The Respectability Myth",  published in  1929,  Adeney  began  with  a cursory  general­ ization   about the  Victorian Age in  Canada:  "there was no  real  social  criticism  and  no  real  quest  of  human values."  The  effort  to carve  out  a way  of life in  a new  country made this  unlikely,  and  Canadians tended   merely  to  "transplant" Victorian England as best they  could. "Unreflective men  and  women  fitted  easily into   the  carried-over  institutions of   more  civilized  lands   and   no  truly  radical  changes  occurred until  a  twentieth-century industrial orgy  threatened to  absorb  not  only  our  natural  resources,  our  institutions, but  our  homes  and  our  lives as well."  The  effect  was not  very salutary, however,  "for  the  respectability of good­  natured  ignorance  was  giving  way  only  to  the  respectability of  money  power." Here,  then,  is the object  of Adeney's attack, as he himself sums it up:

These  two  forms  of  respectability  we have  with  us to-day;  ... they govern  our thoughts,  our  feelings, our  manners  and  customs, our  newspapers  and  our  'litera­ ture',  with  a  rod  of iron.  The  newer form  gradually  supplants  the  old.... The  effect  remains  the  same:   obstruction,  hypocrisy, self-deception,  ignorance,  cant, the  organized   suppression  of  all  effectual  criticism  and   its  counterpart, vital creative work.

The tenor   of  Canadian  Mercury  contributions and   editorials accorded  with Adeney's  eloquent diatribe, and  the  magazine was therefore assured  of its place in the critical  revolt of the I 92o's.
But the  Canadian Mercury was committed no more  than  the Canadian Forum
to  any  political  or social ideology.  The  real  nature of this detachment is perhaps


19

CLIMATE OF UNREST



best expressed by Howe Martyn in "Wanted-a Gospel", an article in the Cana­ dian  Mercury  in  1928  which  points directly  to  the  change  in  political  climate the  thirties  were  to bring  with  them.  In  the  most  general  terms  Martyn  com­ plained  that "We in Canada  are not a nation,  because we are incoherent." What was lacking was a unity of vision, for everywhere  Canadians "are searching and wavering,  losing one ideal  after  another,  waiting  vainly  for  the stimulus  which would  be provided  by initiation  into some combination  of  writers, poets, and  all people with  the vision of a socially progressive Canada." Their  desire and  need is still vague  and  scarcely understood,  according  to  Martyn. "We  have groups of very progressive people in Vancouver,  and  again  in  Montreal, and  there  are isolated individuals  scattered  all over the country. But  that  contact  by which one mind, like steel on flint, strikes the spark of new thought  from another  mind, is for the  most part  impossible." Everywhere,  Martyn  claimed,  writing  in this year of
1929,  people are  listening "for  a new gospel, a gospel which  will send old men out  seeking  young  converts,  which  will link  them  all  by the  completeness  and beauty  of its vision of the future  of Canada  in a passionate  and  consuming love for  her."  A gospel was soon found-in  the radicalism  of the 193o's-and we will turn in a moment  to see how it was received. The  resthetic and  moral  revolt of certain  intellectuals  in  the  192o's  became,  with  the  depression of the  193o's, political.  The  critical  tools of  Marxism  were seized  upon  as answering  a  great need. The  calamity of the Great  Depression made palatable, even desirable, social and economic theories which were once only of interest  to a small minority at the lower  levels of society. In  the  193o's  that  minority  swelled  in  numbers  and  in power and it became, for the first time, of major  literary  and cultural  significance in Canada.
The  emergence  of political  radicalism in  the 193o's in the  wake of the Great Depression  was  not  so sudden  as it  is sometimes  thought. It  had  familiar  pre­ cedents  in  the  disturbances  and  dislocations of the  post-war  decade  which  will now  be  reviewed  briefly, but  its roots also go back  into the  first  years  of the century and earlier. The continuity is readily seen in the far West, where political radicalism  had  early successes and  where some of its individual  champions  re­ mained  in  the  public  eye during  the  greater  advances  of the  thirties. But else­ where, too, it may be inferred,  modern and extreme  radicals alike in more recent years have sown and reaped the better for the reason that  the soil was assiduously cultivated  in advance  by the almost forgotten  left wing active in the earlier days of nation  building  and  national  expansion. At any rate, whatever  its origins and causes, the leftward  movement  of Canadian  intellectuals and  the dialectic it en-

20

CLIMATE OF  UNREST



tailed  make  a striking  contrast to the  conciliatory, conservative inclination of the cultivated milieu  of late  Victorian Canada. Conciliation had  given  way to angry debate, patriotic aspirations to the  cry for social  justice, defence  of moral, social and  spiritual absolutes  to  radical probings  especially  of the  existing  social  order and  its  justification. If this  was what  it meant  to have  achieved  nationhood, the Victorian founding fathers might  well have  felt themselves  fortunate not  to have seen the working  out of this phase in their great  project.
The political  shift  to radicalism was only of major  significance  after  the Depres­
sion, but  in the  I92o's there  had  been forecasts, hints and  prophecies of what  was to come.  Labour and  agrarian unrest  had  grown  during the  I 9 I 4- I 9 I 8 period  of international war  when  for  many  Canada was emerging for  the first  time  in  the eyes of  the  world  as a fully-fledged adult  nation. The  price  and  market  disloca­ tions  which  the  latter  part  of the war  and  its conclusion  brought with  it  were the immediate blows  felt  by  farmers and  urban   workers,  and   their  response  was  a series of strikes  and  protest  movements culminating in the  Winnipeg disorders  of
I 9 I 9 and  the  emergence of the  party  of progressive farmers as a federal power  in
I920.
For   a  time   there   was  a  considerable rise  in  political tension. "All  eyes in
Canada are  turned to the  new  third  party," the  Canadian  Forum  announced in
I92 I,  referring to T. A.  Crerar's farmers' party.  J. S. Woodsworth in  the same year  expressed   his  trust   that   the  interest   and  activity  were  not  only  agrarian:
"The old  leadership rejected, the  workers  of the  West  are  rapidly  accepting the Socialist  analysis  of society. In  the present  distress, they believe they are experienc­ ing  the  birth  pangs  of a new social order." The  political  potency  of  the  farmers' party   was  quickly   exhausted  but  the  conjunction  of  agrarian  and  urban dis­ content was  significant for  two  reasons.  First,  it  was a sign  that  that  traditional safety-valve for  dissatisfaction, the  Western  frontier, by the twenties  had  virtually closed. "Go  West,  young  man" was no longer  a feasible answer  to dissenters  and  malcontents. Second, the  unrest  of  both   Labour   and  Farmer was  in  the  next decade to  throw  these  habitual enemies  into  doubtful but  efficacious  league  with one  another in  the  Cooperative Commonwealth  Federation Party, and  to make  the  concept  of the Third Force  more  meaningful than  ever before in the  political  arena. The  Winnipeg Strike  of I9I9, which for many  (not  without some  justifica­ tion)   was  associated   with  the  recent  Russian  Revolution, was dealt  with  vigor­ ously by civic  and  federal governments, so much  so that  a public  reaction in the electoral campaigns  in  the  years  following  carried   left  wing  candidates to  un­  expected   success.  However, the  most  significant   effect  was  perhaps that   clear

2I

CLIMATE OF  UNREST



differentiation that  took place during the twenties  between  revolutionary and gradualist elements  among  the radicals. The  stream  of gradualism moved  towards the  moderate C.C.F. of  the  thirties  with  its  close ties with  the  Fabians and  the British  Labour Party,  while  the  stream  of  revolutionary fervour went  on  to the formation of the Communist Party, the dedication to forceful  means  of achieving its ends,  the  prolonged   martyrdom of Tim  Buck,  and  the  closer  alignment with Soviet  philosophy  and  precedent.






DURING THE   192o's most  of  the  intellectuals, while  often ready  and  eager  to be critical  of the  status quo, were  not  prepared to  join forces with  the  advocates of a  revolutionary social  change. They remained apart from radical  commitments until  the  cataclysm   of  the  Depression  brought home   to members of  every  class  of  society  a  sense  of  deep-rooted  shortcomings in  the existing  order, the  necessity for  action  of some  kind,  and  the  potentialities of the socialist   and   communist economic arguments  as  expressed   by  the  Fabian-like League for  Social  Reconstruction and  the  Cooperative Commonwealth  Federa­ tion  of  1933,  or  as  pressed  with  greater ruthlessness  by  the  Communist Party. The  dimensions of the  Depression  are  still memorable  enough  not  to require re­ viewing,  but  it  is worthwhile to  emphasize the  extent  to  which  the  middle  and  upper   strata of  society  were  drawn toward the  lower  by  its  pressure.  A  writer  in  the  Canadian  Forum in  1932  commented  upon  the  impact of the  depression  in these terms :

There  is at least one feature of the present depression in Canada which sharply distinguishes it from all previous economic crises, and  that is the manner  in which the professional and intellectual  classes are losing faith in the fundamental features of our existing social system, and are becoming more and more critical of our respectable  and  well-established  institutions.  This  sudden  swing  towards  radical ideas  has so far found  little organized expression, it is not clearly reflected in the daily press, but any clear-sighted  observer will find evidence  that  it is surging and bubbling throughout  the whole of middle-class society.

A sociological  article  by  S.  D.  Clark  in  the  Canadian  Forum  in  1933-"The Proletarian  Intelligentsia" -is significant  independent  evidence supporting  this description. "The large  number of  university  graduates in  the  ranks  of the  un­ employed today  is a  phenomenon which  has  no  parallel  in  any  depression  since

22

CLIMATE OF  UNREST



the  beginning of  modern capitalism." Clark  goes on  to discuss  the  potentialities of the leadership he feels his group will offer the proletariat.
The   same  change could,  of  course,  be interpreted in  a  number of  ways,  and it  is  useful  to  compare the  translation into  Marxist terminology by  the  B.C. Clarion, the voice of the Socialist  Party  of Canada:

With  the  proletariat, even as Marx  predicted,  are aligned  the masses of the shop­ keeping,  professional classes, the  ranks of the lower middle  class thrown  into the fight against Capitalism  by economic distress. These 'white-collar' additions to our ranks are  welcome allies. We need them and  we can show them  the  way to com­ plete emancipation and freedom from oppression.

The Socialist   Party   of  Canada in  British  Columbia looked  upon   itself  as  the cornerstone of the  C.C.F. with  which  it  joined  in  1933,  a truly  socialist  corner­ stone  which  would  keep  the  party  loyal to socialist ideals.  The  S.P.  of  C. had  its roots in the left wing  movement at the turn  of the century, and  hence could  claim that it  carried over  into  the  thirties  the  traditions of an  earlier  radicalism. The  claim  is of  course  far  too  extreme, but  it  does help  to  place  the  "discovery" of Marx, socialism  and   communism by  Canadian  intellectuals  in  the  thirties in  a truer   light -that  is, as in  part  the  emergence of an  old,  minor  and  previously ignored tradition of radicalism in  Canada. While  English  and  American literary  and  political  movements served  as a model  and  stimulus,  the  presence of certain  necessary  factors  in  Canada made  the  literary  and  political  tum to  the  left here possible:   an  organized trade union  movement as a  source  of power; a degree  of class consciousness  and  radicalism among  the lower  orders; highly  active  though  small  socialist  groups  well  versed  in radical  doctrines. The radical culture of the thirties, if  the  term  may  be  used,  is  consciously  or otherwise plainly  indebted to these three  conditions.
The Canadian  Forum  in  the  193o's  became  a ready  vehicle  for  articles  upon
and   news  about   the  Third Force.  During 1930  and   1931  the  activities of the League  for  Social  Reconstruction, the  first significant  organization of Canadian radical intellectuals, were  reported fully. The  movement was charted which  cul­ minated in  the  formal debut of  the  political  party  best  embodying that  force:
J. S.  Woodsworth's introduction in the  House  of Commons in  1933  of a  resolu­
tion   that   "the  Government should   immediately take   measures   looking   to  the setting  up  of a cooperative commonwealth in which  all natural resources  and  the socially  necessary   machinery of  production will  be  used  in  the  interests of  the people  and   not  for  the  benefit  of  the  few."  The   parliamentary  debut of  the

CLIMATE OF UNREST



C.C.F. was  important not  only  because  that  party  threatened, by its endeavour to unite  Farmer and  Labour  interests, to become  a major  political  power,  but also because   it  gave  form  and  expression   to  the  spirit  of  moderate radicalism and assured  it of a lawful  political  existence.  While  it tried  to live up to its name,  the Canadian  Forum  tended  to  be a critical  but  sympathetic supporter of a position not  often  far  from  that  of the  C.C.F. The  relationship became closest for a short period   during the  early  thirties  when  members of the  League  for  Social  Recon­ struction assumed  financial  control  temporarily. But even  at this stage, the Cana­ dian Forum succeeded  in keeping its pages open  to a range  of opinion and  points of view  which  generously  reflects  the  ideological and  intellectual  dialectic of the time.  It may  still  have  been true  in  1931,  as T. W. L. MacDermot complained, that   "the freedom to venture new  theories,  to  re-question old  ones, is suspect  if it is exercised  in any  but  the most intensely respectable form." But it was becom­  ing  much  less so than  before,  and  many were ready  to agree  with  MacDermot on the need for "Radical Thinking in Canada":

Everything  is changing at an enormous  pace. The  body of working prejudices  and assumptions   upon   which  the  Igth  century   proceeded  with  relative  equanimity has  been  assiduously undermined  by the  events  of  the  last quarter  of a century. Queen  Victoria  is at last dead. We are now compelled  to work up new prejudices and  assumptions,  and  in  this  work  the  practical   man  will  have  to  play  a  new listening  role.  Whether  he  likes it  or  not  radical  things  are  happening and  will go on happening.

So,  for  example, in  the  Canadian  Forum  in  1932  Howe   Martyn, little  pleased with  the new gospel of radicalism being propagated, ventured a general  exposition and  critique of "Marxism" in  terms  which-though simple  enough  to show  his relative  innocence in  regard  to  the  history  of left  wing  controversy -suggested that  the  theory  was one of general  pressing  concern. Martyn's attack on  Marxist theory   was  met  early  in  the  following  year  by  Leo  Warshaw in  "Marxism-a Reply", and   so  the  debate   continued. Though  the  internecine quarrels of  the extreme left  did  not  warrant extensive  space,  the  Canadian  Forum was generous in  airing a wide  variety  of opinion  throughout the mid-thirties, and  social, politi­ cal and  a:sthetic battles were fought  with unprecedented vigour.








24

CLIMATE OF UNREST




ER SOME, HOWEVER, the Canadian Forum  was too moderate and  disinterested  in  its  attitude   towards  the contemporary  scene, endeavouring as it did  to maintain  its character  as a "forum" for all views and  opinions. New periodicals emerged in the thirties which took an angrier and more aggressive view of the  times. "The new day when the workers of Canada will pass from defence to counter-attack is slowly approaching", the Marxist monthly Masses proclaimed in 1932. "In  this, and  not in the reformist belly-crawling tactics, lies the salvation of  the  Canadian  working  class." Masses,  organ  of  the  Progressive  Arts  Club, looked  upon itself as spokesman  and leader of the revolutionary  proletariat, and it continued  for the two years of its existence to carry on this belligerent role with all  the  vitality  it  could  muster.  Its  Marxist  successor, New   Frontier   (begun  in
1936), was  somewhat   milder  and  more  cultivated  in  its  manners,  but  it  was equally  distinguishable  in its views from the moderate  Canadian Forum. Masses had  made it a duty  to abuse the Canadian Forum  continually  and  to correct in robust  proletarian language   its bourgeois socialist heresies whenever  space  and time  permitted,   and   New  Frontier took  on  the  burden. "Characteristically enough,"  wrote a contributor in the first number of New  Frontier  in 1936, "the depression-born   Canadian  social-democratic  party  with  its  professional  brain­ trusters  is  a  rather   genteel  sprig  clipped  from  the  suburban  hedge  of  British Fabianism."
New   Frontier, while  less inclined  to a  narrow  dogmatism  than  Masses,  was from  the outset completely engaged: "New Frontier is founded  on the conviction that  the  Canadian middle  class is awakening  to certain  unbearable features  of our  present social system-and willing to provide an audience  for those writers, artists  and  intellectuals  who  have something  relevant  to say about  the troubled times we live in." It  was therefore  typical of the magazine's  policy that it should, in December,  1936, have published its Special  Issue on Spain  which included  the replies of a number  of well-known Canadians  to the problem,  "Where I stand on Spain". The  answers, which  ranged  from W. A. Deacon's  "we should  cut clear
of the Empire  and  the whole continent  of Europe"  to E.  J. Pratt's  "My sympa­
thies in  the  Spanish  situation  are  wholly with  the Popular  Front", give a lively indication   of  the  extent  to  which  Canadian  society was  divided  by the  inter­ national   debate  between  left  and  right  wing ideas  and  attitudes,  the  more  so because the Spanish  Civil War  may be used as a kind  of convenient  touchstone to show  up  political  ideologies, degrees of social commitment, and  concern  for international situations, events and ideas.

25

CLIMATE OF  UNREST



Disappointment and  disillusion following the collapse of the Spanish  Loyalists was felt by liberal Canadians  as by liberals elsewhere. The great moment of world social revolution  desired by some and  feared  by many  had  not come, and  hopes of any dramatic advance faded as the decade  drew to a troubled  close. With  the signing of the Non-Aggression Pact between Soviet Russia and Germany  in 1939, communism  suffered  its most serious reaction.  "Dialectical Contortionism" was too  much,  as one  "Ex  Fellow-Traveller"  announced in  the  Canadian Forum: "Our fellow-traveller  had  come to the parting  of the ways. No longer could he make excuses for Soviet Russia. The  hurt  was too deep.... He was now free, he was no longer  a fellow-traveller." In  due course the Second  World  War arrived to  unravel  in  its own effective way the  tangled  social  problems of the  country which the dialectic of ideas had left unsolved.
A remarkable change had taken place in the temper of Canadian thought  from
the  years following Confederation  to the years of the great  Depression. In  those earlier  days any serious social concerns of the intellectual  were likely to be  asso­ ciated  with  nationalism  in one of its possible forms.  Differences in social  ideals were relatively slight, or if they were not, the pressures were all towards decorously making  them  appear  so. The  conservative tradition  had its work of  nation  build­ ing to do, and it would not encourage, scarcely even tolerate, radical questioning except of the most modest kind. Conciliation  and compromise were the key notes of  public  discussion and  basic principles  were  assumed  rather  than  considered. But in the  192o's  and  193o's, however troubled  by economic  disasters or critical deprecations,  the nation existed securely as a social, political and economic entity. Within  that  entity  and  partly  perhaps  as a  consequence,  a range and  a violence of opinion seemed possible to a degree not imagined  before. Conflicting positions, points  of view, philosophies of art  and  of  life were  thrust  forward  and  argued with urgency and  vehemence. It can scarcely be said that the intellectual  tempests of the  thirties  produced  any great social theorists or thinkers  in Canada, or for that  matter  that  the issues of the  day  were  aired  and  clarified  with  impressive success. A critic was even able to assert with respect to the most "principled" and political  party  in  the  mid-thirties:  "This  is the  basic  weakness of the  C.C.F.
-inaction due  to the fact  that  it has no theories to nourish  it. No vital  discus­
sions are carried on in the party."
Much  of the ideological debate  of the thirties  echoed  the language  and  ideas of other  countries.  Nevertheless, the immediate  significance  and  the  urgency of many  far-reaching issues was seen and felt by Canadians in ways quite different from the responses of late Victorian Canadians. Foreign ideologies and debates on

CLIMATE  OF  UNREST



general  principles were  not  referred  to in  a detached way as the  noise of battles far  off  or  long  ago,  but  were  seized  upon  for  their  relevance to  the  immediate situation. The effect  on  Canadian literature was, naturally enough, very marked, though  today  a generation later it has still to be fully measured.
























27



UNSPEAKABLE
VERSE



Robert McCormack






WTRVRR YOU   MAY   make  of it,  I think  you  have  to admit  that one of the more astonishing features of the literary scene in the last ten
or fifteen years has been the revival of spoken poetry. Across the country-and  up and  down  the continent-the poets have been coming  out of their lairs to read their  works in  all  kinds of likely and  unlikely  places.  University  lecture  halls, libraries,  art  galleries, coffee houses and  night  clubs  have all seen them  reciting their  verses to sizable crowds. They have even invaded  the mass media. It would be a wild exaggeration  to say that  contemporary  poetry occupies a large place in broadcasting.  But increasingly it does occupy a place. And  that  statement  is not just a plug for CBC programmes such as Anthology  which for the past seven years has offered Canadian poets an audience at least ten times larger  than  they could hope to get through  publication in a literary magazine  or a book. I am also think­ ing of the educational radio and  television stations in the United States-whose audiences  may be small in  terms of broadcasting but  are far  from  negligible in terms  of  poetry-and of strictly  commercial enterprises  like the  Caedmon  company   which  specialize  in  recordings  of  the  spoken  word. Time   magazine reports  that  so,ooo  records of Robert  Frost reading  his  poems have been sold in the U.S. alone, and 40o,ooo of Dylan Thomas.
These  are  pretty  startling  figures and  they should  certainly  be heartening  to poets and  their friends. But even when they are not taking advantage of modem technology and are simply reading in art galleries or clubs to audiences that range from,  perhaps,  twenty-five to one or two hundred, poets may reasonably feel that they are reaching many people who would not ordinarily  encounter  modem  verse. It  is easy to  understand  why Irving  Layton  recently  "exulted," as according  to The  Canada  Council  Bulletin he did:  "This  sort of thing would have been incon-

UNSPEAKABLE VERSE



ceivable  15 years ago. When  I first started writing  in 1942 people wrote  poetry  as if it was a secret  vice.... This  takes the  poem out  of the  classroom  and  into  the market   place." It is a long  time  since  poets  have  been  in  the  market place.  No wonder  they exult.
But exultation should  not,  I think,  be confined  to the fact  that  poetry  is reach­
ing a new  and  wider  audience. Surely  it is of some importance that  it is reaching this audience in a new way, a way that  offers distinct  advantages over  the blurrily mimeographed  magazine  or  the  very  limited   edition   laboriously handset  by  a friend.
In  the  case  of readings which  the  public  attends as they  attend a  movie  or  a play,  there  is an  authority and  an  intimacy in  the  presentation which  is absent from  the  poem  on  the  page.  Most  people  are,  or  think  they  are,  rather  baffiled by modern poetry.  And  most  people  think,  rightly  or wrongly,  that  the  writer  is the  final  authority on  what  he writes.  How  satisfying,  then,  to have  him  actually there  reading the  lines  as  they  were  meant   to  be  read.  But  if  in  this  sense  the experience is more  authoritarian, more  directed or "structured" than  the experi­ ence  of reading a  book  of poems,  in  another sense it is much  freer.  Read by the author to attentive listeners  poetry  becomes  a flexible,  fluid,  personal experience quite  different from  the  "literature" of the  classroom.  There is, or can  be, some­  thing   of  that  emotional interaction which   characterizes  the theatre.  The   poet can  alter  his tone,  his intepretation, even  his material to suit what  he senses to be the  mood  of  his audience. And  they  participate in the  poem at  a level of interest beyond even the most careful book reader.
In  the  case  of  broadcast or  recorded   readings,  some  of this  intimacy may  be
lost. But  much  of the  authority remains.  And  to compensate for the loss, there  is, as  I have  indicated, an  enormous expansion of  audience. The   poet  on  the  air may  not  reach  people  with  quite  the same  personal  note  as he does face-to-face, but  he reaches far  more  of them.  I suspect  there is something else. Is it too fanci­ ful  to suggest  that  there  is a kind  of glamour about  these performances,  a sort  of twentieth-century magic?  They  seem, incredibly, to combine myth  and  mass pro­  duction, the  oldest  idea  of the  Poet  and  the  most avant-garde. On  the one hand, they  remind us of the  origins  of all literature, of the  poet  as minstrel, bard,  scop, sacred  vates  chanting to  a  spell-bound audience the  great  epics  which  were  at once  the  history,  the  science,  and  the  religion  of his  people. On  the  other,  they are  themselves part  of  the  evidence  for  those  very  contemporary theories  which announce  the   replacement  of  a  tired   "book  culture" by  a  new  "audio-visual culture" of  the  future. As  we listen,  we think,  perhaps, of Homer's  Demodocos

29

UNSPEAKABLE  VERSE



who  sang  the  stories  of the  gods  to the  court  of Alcinoos  and  concerning whom we  are  told  "in   every  nation   upon   the  earth the  minstrels   have honour  and respect." But  we  think,  too,  of  those  4oo,ooo  records  of  Dylan  Thomas. Is  it possible  that   the  tape-recorder  and   the  hi-fi  set-not  to  mention the  picture tube-are  restoring  the  minstrel  to us, and  to the  minstrel  some of that  ancient honour and  respect?  Modern  engineering seems,  for  a  moment, to  open  for  us a  way  back  to  the  very  well-springs  of poetry.  Through the  double  glass of the recording studio  Irving  Layton  bears  a shadowy  resemblance to Demodocos. The centuries come full circle and  we return to the work of art  made magically, in the words  of W. B. Yeats, "out  of a mouthful of air."
Possibly this is pushing  things  a bit far.  But if I exaggerate a little, it is only to
emphasize a  point  many  others  have  also made-that seldom  have  the  oppor­ tunities open  to  poets  and  to poetry  been so many  and  so various.  Certainly the prospect is an  exciting  one  and  I want  to return to it  later  on.  But  before  I get lost in  these somewhat heady  visions, I have  a feeling  I should back-track a little and   take  a  closer  look  at  the  phenomenon. There  are,  after  all,  limitations to spoken  poetry,  as there  is to any  form  of art; and  its revival  today,  especially  in the  new  ways offered  by the  mass media,  raises  a number of  difficult  questions. I  am  afraid   that   the  limitations are  not  always  recognized,  and  the  questions, although  they  have  been  asked  by  a  number of  perspicacious  critics  (and   even by some poets), do not always get the attention they deserve.



To BEGIN   WITH what  seems to me the  most  obvious  limitation, there  is a fairly  large  body  of the  poetry  of our  time  which  was not intended  to
be  read  or  recited  aloud  and  which  can  only  be damaged by such  presentation. It is, literally,  unspeakable verse. As I say, you might  think  this obvious.  But it is surprising how  many  poets refuse  to recognize  it or react  to the suggestion  as if it were  an  outrageous attack  on Poetry  itself. They  appeal, as I appealed a moment ago,  to its origins.  But  poetry  is a long  way  from  its origins,  and  no  magic,  not even  of  the  electronic variety,  will take  us back  to  them. It is true  enough   that poetry  began  as an oral medium and  that  even as late as the end of the fourteenth century  Chaucer  was  still  making   his  reputation by  reading or  reciting The Canterbury Tales  to  a  court   audience. But  Gutenberg's  revolution did  finally arrive. If  people  encounter The  Canterbury  Tales  today  it  is not  usually  with

30

UNSPEAKABLE VERSE



their  ears.  The   tradition that   poetry  is a  performing art,  something  essentially done  with  the voice, has never died,  but it has been considerably attenuated.  Poets have  continued to  pay  it lip-service,  writing  of their  "songs" and  invoking  a bel canto  Muse,  with  or without musical  accompaniment, at the drop  of a hemistich. But  when,  for  example, in  the  eighteenth century,  Pope  writes of "singing" The Rape   of the   Lock   we  recognize   the  ironic  use of  a  convention. The   villa  at Twickenham was  bought not  with  fees from  recitals  but  with  subscriptions to a book-a   translation  of  the   bardic   Homer into  the  polite  conventions of  the printed page.
Needless  to say,  I am  not  denying  that  there  remains  a strong  oral  or auditory element in all poetry  even  today.  No one doubts  that  a poet in composing "hears" the  lines in  his head,  even  when  he does not say them  aloud  as many  poets do. No  one  doubts that   a  strong and  subtle  sense of  rhythm and  an  acute  ear  for the  sounds  of his language are  as important to a contemporary poet  as they were to  Homer. Many  modem poets  have  written  eminently recitable and  even  sing­ able  verse, and  many  have  had  more  than  a casual interest  in the  musical affilia­ tions  of their  art.  There is a story  that  Yeats composed  his poems  to an old  Irish "chune" he  had  picked  up  somewhere as a boy. There is the  fact  of  his experi­ ments   with   Florence Farr  and  Arnold  Dolmetsch in  speaking  poetry  to  the "psaltery." It is perhaps merely  unkind  to add  that  there  is also a story that  Yeats was  tone  deaf.  Unkind or  not,  it is irrelevant. On  the  evidence  of  his  work  he possessed,  and  in  the  highest  degree,  that  sensitivity  to the  rhythmical and  har­  monic  qualities of language without which  a man  is simply  not  a poet.  I do not question this  sine  qua  non.  But  I  do  claim  that  three or  four  hundred years of writing for the printer's devil have inevitably  had an effect on poetry.
Exactly   when   this  effect  began to  show   itself   is  difficult  to  say.  Marshall McLuhan  has  suggested   it  was  some  time  in  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth century,  when   "there  occurred that   strange   mixture   of  sight  and   sound   later known   as  'metaphysical poetry'   which   has  so  much  in  common  with  modem poetry." Certainly by  the  time  of  Pope  a  tradition of  verse  intended  primarily for  the  eye  was  well  established. In  any  case,  Professor  McLuhan's phrase  "a strange mixture of sight  and  sound" seems a fair  description of the  present situa­ tion  when   the  revival  of  spoken   poetry  is  again  tipping the  balance.  There is plenty  of  poetry  today  which  sings, or  occasionally  howls,  itself  off  the  page  so that   one  is practically forced  to  read  it  aloud.  But  there  is also  a  great  deal  of poetry  in  which  sound  is subordinated to sight.  This  is poetry  meant to be read silently  and   alone  as  one  reads  a  novel  or  the  report   of  a  Royal   Commission.

UNSPEAKABLE  VERSE



It can suffer heavily from oral presentation.
Sight  is not  necessarily superior  to sound.  The  eye may  have no general  ad­ vantage  over the ear.  But it is a different  instrument. Its element  is space  more than  time. On  the printed  page it moves at its own pace, not the author's. It can stop and  absorb, as the ear cannot. It can flick back and  re-examine or compare,  as the ear cannot.  It can appreciate  form and  pattern, can distinguish and  com­ bine  images, in  ways denied  the ear.  For  all these reasons, seeing is generally  a more intellectual and analytical experience than  hearing..
It is not hard  to find evidence for these contentions.  Most obvious is that  kind of poetry  (traceable perhaps, as Professor McLuhan's remark indicates, to poems like George Herbert's "Easter  Wings")  which depends so heavily on typographi­ cal arrangement in the space of the page that  it loses most of its form and  much of its force when  read aloud. The  work of E. E. Cummings provides many con­ temporary  examples. There is also a kind of poetry-much of William Empson's, for  instance -characterized  by  literary  allusion,  multiple  meaning  and  word play which is largely lost on a listener. The  linguist  Mario  Pei says, "It is fairly well established  that  in a normal conversation the hearer  really hears only about fifty per cent of the sounds produced  by the speaker, and supplies the rest out of his sense of the context." Even if we suppose the  percentage  to be higher in the case  of  an  attentive  listener  at  a  reading,  this seems a  pretty  formidable  fact for  the  poet to  contend  with. It  is easy enough  to imagine  what  happens  if the context  is new  and  strange,  as with poetry it frequently  is. I wonder,  too, if this filtering  out or  altering  of sounds between speaker  and  listener has something  to do  with  the  curious  way in  which  the  rhythmic  effects of, say, William  Carlos Williams, which often seem delicate and original on the page, tend to be flattened out  and  made  prosaic by the voice? Unheard melodies may be not only sweeter but  more  subtle  than  those heard.  Finally,  there  is a  cinematographic kind  of poetry where the effect, as in film montage,  depends on the close juxtaposition  of images. Passages in Ezra Pound's  Cantos would exemplify this. Read  aloud, there is considerable danger  that these images merely become a confused blur.
Of  course,  these are examples  chosen to  make  a  point.  Sight  and  sound  are
frequently  more closely mixed within the same  poem than  they suggest. I would have  to agree on the basis of my own experience  with  Anthology  that  it is often difficult  to predict  from  reading  a  poem  in typescript  whether  it  will read  well aloud  or not. The  only test is the empirical  one of having it read.  There  is some of  Dylan  Thomas's poetry  which  does not  look  like very good  material  for  a poetry  reading,  but, once again, we remember  those 4oo,ooo  records. Perhaps  it

UN SPEAKABLE VERSE



should   be  pointed   out,  however,  that  Thomas seldom  read  from  his earlier  and more  surrealistic work  with  its  tough  knots  and  violent  explosions  of  imagery. And  then  he  was,  of  course,  a magnificent performer. There is little  doubt  that his triumphant tours  of the  North  American college circuit in the late  194o's  and early  195o's had  a great  deal  to do with  the current renaissance of spoken  poetry. Listening  to  him  now  on  records,  one  sometimes  suspects  that   he  could  have made  the  telephone directory sound  like an  epic.  Is it  merely  cynical  to wonder how  many  of  the  several  hundred thousand people  who  have  presumably heard him  read,  say "In the  White  Giant's Thigh" really have  any clear  notion  of what it is all about?




BuT THERE  ARE   very  few  Dylan  Thomases, a  fact  which leads  directly   to  another  limitation on  spoken  verse  and   into  some  of  those
questions I  mentioned earlier. Most  contemporary poets  are,  to  put  it  bluntly, bad  readers of their  own  or anybody  else's work. This  is not  their  fault. It is also a  product of the  split  tradition to which  I have  referred. In  the  time  of Homer, or even  of the  Provencal troubadours, one simply did  not  become  a poet without the  voice  and   the  histrionic talents  to  present  one's  work  orally.  But  "book  cul­ ture" introduced the  division  of labour  into  poetry  and  it is relatively  rare  these days to find  a poet  who is also a good performer. In  the case of public readings to small  audiences, this  may  not  matter  very much.  Something  will come  through, and  the  defects  of  the  performance may  be made  up  for  by the  presence  of the author as  a  person  and   by  the  authority and  intimacy I have  described. If the reading is very bad,  especially  if the poet has chosen to read "unspeakable verse,"  we may sometimes wonder  what,  if anything, has been gained. But then  probably not very much  has been  lost. It is in the case of the poet's  attempting to reach  the wider   audience available through  recordings  and  radio   and  television  that   the real problems and  difficulties arise.
There is a fairly  widespread notion  that  the  mass media  simply  record  reality and  "bring it into  our  living-rooms." This  is sometimes  true,  but, generally speak­ ing,  it is a considerable oversimplification. And for good  reasons. It is, of  course, possible simply  to  record  or  photograph a  poet  reading his work  as one  records  or  photographs a  hockey  game.  In  fact,  this is the  course  sometimes followed  by "educational  broadcasters." But  while  one  must  admire  their  restraint and  the

33

UNSPEAKABLE  VERSE



purity of their intentions, it is difficult to admire  the results. Deprived of the social occasion, of the human  intimacy  and immediacy  of the public  reading,  reduced to a nervous disembodied  voice or to a twitching shadow  a foot and  a half high, the  poet  loses nearly  every  advantage  he gains  by  reading  and  his defects  are savagely  magnified.  Most  professional broadcasters   would  feel,  I  think  rightly, that  this is what comes of "ignoring the medium," that  what is needed is to adapt the  performance to the art  of broadcasting,  to make it, in short,  more of a  per­ formance.  Unfortunately, this process can  be even  more  perilous  than  the  first. The  results, at best, often have very little to do with the original aim. At the worst, as with  Charleton   Heston  reading  the Bible on  "The Ed  Sullivan  Show," they have, as the saying goes, "to be seen to be disbelieved."
In  justice, I must quickly add that catastrophes  of this kind do not come about because the people involved in broadcasting are black-hearted  villains with a psychopathic  hatred  of art,  or even because they are  abnormally  stupid,  though there  is obviously greater  chance  of that.  They  occur  because of the very nature of the  medium,  which is just that-that  it is a medium, that  it comes between the writer and  the receiver of what he writes. Faced  with the problem of  present­ ing poetry on the air and with a poet who is not a good reader, the broadcaster's first thought  is to hire an actor.  Many  actors  are  excellent readers of verse, but inevitably  they introduce  between  the poet and  his audience  another  voice and another   personality,  often  a  very high-powered  one.  With  the  best will in  the world,  there  are  bound  to be differences between  what  reaches the listener and what the author  had in mind.
But  of course  the situation  is considerably  more  dangerous  than  this. I  have
never seen it  formulated,  but  I suspect that  there  must  be a kind of First  Law of Communications to the effect that  a message retains  its original  meaning  in inverse ratio to the complexity of the medium which carries it. And broadcasting is a  very  complex medium, more  like theatre  than  poetry  and  more  like an assembly line  than  either.  It not only involves many  people -from  five or six in the case of a radio  recording to perhaps  twenty-odd  in the case of a television programme-each of whom  has some effect on  the  result,  and  a quantity   of machines  each  with its own limitations and  demands, but  it is also aimed,  even in the case of a so-called "minority-audience programme," at very large numbers of people who must  be induced  to give up whatever  they may be doing in their homes and  watch  the programme  through  to the end.  In  these circumstances,  it is surely understandable if the original material,  the "message," sometimes under­ goes a considerable  change before it emerges from loudspeaker  and  picture  tube.

34

UNSPEAKABLE VERSE



Especially if the  material  is not well suited to the medium  in the first place, the producers  will be tempted  to compensate by using all their resources of  presenta­ tion and adding  what are usually called "production values." When this happens, it is fatally easy for the final product, or "package," to be so smoothed down and slicked up,  so tucked  in  and  decked out,  that  any  resemblance  between  it and the original purpose, or idea, or hope, is purely coincidental.
It is, of course,  precisely this kind of result which has led a number  of critics
to question  whether  the  mass media should attempt  to deal with the arts at all. Do they not inevitably  warp  and  debase them, turning  painting  and  poetry and high  drama  into  mere  "consumer  goods" and  reducing  the artist  to the level of the mere entertainer? Do they not by their nature  tend  to make Hamlet the cul­ tural  equivalent   of  My   Fair  Lady?  The  American  critic  Louis  Kronenberger recently observed,  "Culture ... is being dispensed to more and  more people in more and  more  hybrid  forms, with more and  more synthetic flavors, with more and more doubtful  effect...."
Iam afraid  there  is some truth  in this observation. I am afraid,  too, that I do
not  have  handy  answers for  the questions Ihave cited. But this does not  mean there are  no answers. The  observation is only a warning and  the questions strike me as far  too  pessimistic. The  limits they suggest for what  the arts  can  do are much  too  narrow.  Behind  these somewhat  querulous  voices Idetect  faintly  an­ other voice-that of the minstrel lamenting  the invention of moveable type with all it  meant  in  loss of spontaneity  and  warmth  and  in  the enormous  expansion of audience  to include  those  unappreciative  of the old arts. The  mixture  of art and  mass production raises many  problems,  but Ibelieve  they  can  be solved if the artists will give thought  to them.






l:Is IS THE coNCLUSION  Idraw,  then,  from  this somewhat sketchy account  of the revival of spoken verse-that it is in some sense an obli­ gation  on  poets  to study  more consciously than  many of them  have done so far the opportunities it opens up for them. I hope that more often than  they have up to now they  will write "for  the medium", for the ear  and  even for the eye that  watches moving images on a screen. Something along these lines has already been done in radio. One  thinks of John  Reeves' play A Beach  of  Strangers and of the two  programmes-"Message  to  Winnipeg"  and  "Message  to  Stratford"-

35

UNSPEAKABLE  VERSE



which  James  Reaney  has  contributed   to  "CBC   Wednesday  Night".  But  these are only a beginning and they remain curiously isolated. I confess I am somewhat surprised  that  poets, especially younger poets, are  content  to be so conventional and  old-fashioned in the forms they employ. I do not mean  they should abandon them.  But surely they should  begin to explore  and  exploit  the new media,  just as  three  hundred   years  ago  their  ancestors  began  to  explore  and  exploit  the printed  page. There  is nothing  magical about  these media. They  have their limi­ tations as I have tried to show. But they also offer all kinds of  opportunities and, in the end, it is these I want to emphasize. There  is no way  back to the minstrel singing  "the  tale  of the  tribe",  but  there  may  well be a  way forward  to forms of poetry  as vital  and  as important to their  audience. The  prospect is exciting, and  the future  of poetry seems to me, as Matthew  Arnold  said it was long ago, "immense".























g6



AN EVENING WITH BABBLE  AND DOODLE

Presentations of poetry


James Reaney

We   may   call   them,  if   the   terms   are thought dignified  enough, babble  and doodle.
-Northrop Frye, Anatomy of Criticism.





MORE THAN   A YEAR AGO a premiere took place  in Tm­ onto  at  Hart House  Theatre with  which  I was intimately involved  in many ways. The  premiere was that  of John Beckwith's chamber opera  Night Blooming Cereus for  those  libretto I am  responsible,  and  it  was also the  first  time  my  One  Man Masque  had  been  produced. From  my own  point  of view,  the  evening certainly contained revelations as to writing poetry  for music  (babble)  and  writing poetry for  a  masque or  a spectacle (doodle).  Perhaps the  best  way  to go about this is simply  to tell the story, as they say, of it all.
It must  be  ten  or  more  years  ago  that  John Beckwith  asked  me  to write  him the libretto for  a short  chamber opera,  one hour  in length. He  had  set my "Great Lakes  Suite" and  was  rash  enough   to  invite  another experiment. Immediately, having   just got  home  from  another winter  on the  prairies,  I sat  down  beneath a large  elm  tree  and  wrote  out  a  libretto. Up  to  that  moment opera   had  meant Saturday afternoons as a boy scrubbing the  kitchen  floor  (my  Cinderella phase) and  listening  to  the  blast  from  the  DeForrest Crisley as Wagner or  Verdi  came in  from  New  York.  I  also knew  that  if an  opera  was sung  in  English  you never understood the  words.  But  all of this did  not deter  a very rapid  start.
My  first  thought was  double-yolked-to write  something that  would  match what  I thought I heard  at  the heart  of John Beckwith's  music;  also  (sneaking in) to write  something that  I thought I heard  in myself. Since  I can  remember John suggesting   I  might  do  a  satirical libretto on  Penelope  and  her suitors  I used  to

37

BABBLE AND DOODLE



feel rather guilty about this. My greedy eyes were fixed on Night  Blooming Cereus. Now a librettist has awesome responsibilities, since the musical setting of his words demands  a great  deal of sheer hard  slugging on the part  of the composer. All of that  work may go down the drain  if the librettist  has not laid down a framework that  an  audience  will accept  or  rather  can  accept.  Baroque  opera  suffers from libretto  trouble  which  no  amount  of ravishing  music can  ever  quite  save. The librettist  can sterilize the composer;  in the case of Wagner  this might  have been a good thing if you are one of those who regard  his operas as being too long and fertile.
What  was the "Night  Blooming Cereus" idea? From childhood I can remember
reading  now and  again  in  the local newspaper  that  last night  in  the village of Blankville neighbours gathered  to watch  Mrs. So & So's Night  Blooming Cereus come  out,  which  only blooms once a century  and  then  only after  midnight.  In reality, of course, the Cereus plant  blossoms every year and  in Hawaii  they're so big  and  ordinary  that  they're  used for  fence  posts. But  operas  don't  thrive  on fence  posts. Imagine  too-and  this is important-the kind  of world in which the blooming of a flower is important enough  to get into the newspaper. So what I was  really  presenting  to  the  composer  was a  pastoral  village world  in  which people  sing  hymns  while  they're  washing  dishes,  hear  Sam  Slick  Connecticut clocks strike  the  hour,  listen for the  train  whistling  as it goes down  to Toronto and from time to time rock rhythmically in rocking-chairs.
What  was the plot line to be that  led up to the blossoming of the flower? To
some of our opening night critics who were fond of Pagliacci or Cavalliera Rustic­ ana  our  plot  line seemed rather  dull  and  tiny. But  we don't  live in  Italy. The  North  American  story equivalent  to Pagliacci  is Lizzie Borden,  and  the  verbal problems  surrounding the key words "Lizzie"  and  "axe" are  too  much  for this librettist.  To  me  the  plot  that   came  naturally out  of  the  rather  quiet  North American  musical landscape  (hymns,  rocking-chairs  and  clocks)  was something deliberately   untense  and  unpassionate.  From  high  school  memories  I  took  an austere old woman out sickling dandelions in front of  her weather-beaten cottage. She owns the flower. Long ago her daughter quarrelled  with  her and  ran away. The  very night the Cereus blooms her daughter seems to return.  But Mrs. Brown thinks she's a ghost and will have nothing to do with her. At the end of the opera the old lady dares  to accept  her  visitor's reality and  is rewarded  with a mixture of grief and  joy; the visitor  turns out  to be Mrs.  Brown's grand-daughter come with  the news that  the runaway  girl has just died. Throughout half of the opera the grand-daughter Alice stands in the shadows waiting for Mrs. Brown to accept

BABBLE AND DOODLE



her,  to touch  her.  As she  waits,  other  visitors come in,  sing  and  wait  around for the  flower.  So  when  the  girl  eventually  presents  herself  to her  grandmother and is accepted the  image  is that  this  resembles  the  flower blossoming.  For  the  most part  all of the  event  here  is interior  mental event.  Since  it is so rich  a storehouse of  mental patterns and  variously  coloured  moods,  music  should  be  particularly good  at  illustrating this  kind  of story. It does seem to  me  that  there  has  to be a logical  reason  for  inviting music  to  complete  a  story's  effect.  The   libretto's  in­ wardness  was  here  that   justification. And  if the  reader  will start  counting on  his fingers  the  number of  anywhere near  successful  North  American operas  he may also  begin  to  realize   that   there   is some  mysterious problem  here  concerning libretto and  native  musical  landscape. At any rate only  more  opera will make the problem  less mysterious.






l:ERE WERE  STILL  other   difficulties  to  be  overcome  in  the libretto after  one  had  disposed  of main  image  and  plot  line.  Who  were  the  vil­ lagers  to be who  came  to  Mrs.  Brown's  cottage  to see the  flower  come  out? This  problem was solved  by a sort of literary  trigonometry. There is a rule in literature which  says  that   to  any  tea   party, or  gathering of  any  sort,  the  Four Living Creatures of Ezekiel's  vision attend. Actually  at this time  one  of the few sentences of  literary  symbolism   that   had  sunk  through to  me was  Carl  Jung's division  of the  human soul  into  four   parts  represented   by  an  old  woman, an  old  man,  a young  man  and  a young  girl.  The  old woman  is shadowy and  terrifying, the old man  is wise and  helpful; the  young  man  seeks the young  woman but  cannot find her  until  he has come  to terms  with the older pair. From real village life I plucked  a  telephone operator  (not   very  shadowy  she,  but  if  one  pays  attention to  her role  she  is  always  saying   that   the  flower  doesn't   mean   anything), the  village orphan-a  changeling girl,  the  storekeeper's discontented  young  son  and,  last of  all,  an  old  wise nursery  man  who  brought a small  tree  with  him.  All four  of these  have  to  arrive   and  thoroughly express  themselves  before  old  Mrs.  Brown will recognize  Alice or  the  flower bloom.  One  of the  benefits  this  procedure con­  ferred  was an  organized  variety  among  the characters which  the  composer could grab  hold  of and  do  something with.  There is a tendency in opera   (particularly some  of  the  C.B.C.  commissioned radio  operas  I  have  heard) for  the  music  to swallow  everything.  Perhaps it's  the librettist's duty  to give  the  musical  boa  con-

39

BABBLE AND  DOODLE



strictor  a rabbit  that  has angles to swallow. There  are difficulties you should  not put  in  his way,  which  I'll  touch  on later,  but  you surely  are  hired  to give the composer  a work out-a  chance to write black music, red music, purple  music and  green music. The  Magic  Flute's libretto is ideal in this regard: you have the terrifying  older  woman,  the austere old wizard,  and  not only a sweet young girl but two kinds of young men:  one plays a glockenspiel and the other plays a flute.
As a story, what  I have so far  told you needed  an introduction; at this stage I was so ignorant  as not to know that  this is called an exposition scene. My solu­ tion  was a preliminary  scene before the curtain  where Alice the grand-daughter gets off the train  and asks the way to Mrs. Brown's place from two village hoydens who tell her all the village knows about  Mrs. Brown. This solution was criticized on the ground  that  the exposition could have been dovetailed into the later scenes. However,  granted   my solution  was primitive,  perhaps  that  can  be seen as part of the whole piece's simplicity.
After  the  exposition scene snow begins to fall  (stage  snow is an obsession of
mine)  and a vision of the Night Blooming Cereus appears in the sky (John's idea to  balance  its  later  appearance). As Alice walks off the  curtain  rises to  reveal Mrs. Brown in her cottage.
The  next scene is simply Mrs. Brown washing dishes, sweeping floors, rocking and  sewing. This  made fierce demands  on both singer  and  composer but it was worth  the risk. If Wagner  can show you giants  and  dragons  who make sense in music  you ought  to  be able  to manage  the  other  extreme,  the simple  world of the kitchen where the Rhinemaidens  become dishes in a dishpan.
At  the very beginning  I was so incredibly stupid  as to write the libretto  all in
prose with  the lyrics in some rather  wobbly versification. Since my poetic affairs were in a very muddled state at that time I hadn't a very firm grasp of technique or  of  what  constituted  a  technical  problem.  John  Beckwith,  after  coping  with yardfuls  of words in  the exposition, demanded  something  more rhythmic  and  I was galvanized  into,  at  the time and for me, incredible  labours of counting syl­ lables,  making  parallel  lines exactly  the  same  length  and  finding  good  clean, clear  and  sonorous  rhymes. From  those Manitoba fall nights spent in a fantastic  house that  had  mushrooms growing down  from  its ceiling I date  my  birth  as a craftsman  in words. And once you have learnt  how to build up verbal structures,  each one of whose sounds has been weighed and  patterned, you're never quite the same  for  other  people's  poetry  again.  I'm  still constantly  amazed  at  poets who expect you to read something they themselves have not read twice.
Metaphors become a problem in writing  poetry  for music, and  in rewriting  I

BABBLE AND  DOODLE



tried  to take  some  profitable line. Stravinsky  told  Dylan  Thomas not  to have  too many  conceits  in  the  libretto for their  opera,  alas never finished. Since  the libret­ tist  is supposed   to  write  something which  the  music  completes  and  extends, the lines  have  to  be  cleaned and  scraped   until  there  is  nothing to  stop  the  music flowing  around them.  At first Mrs. Brown's  second  hymn  was a  jungle  of private symbols.  They   had  to go until  one  well-tended  public  symbol  remained. Gradu­ ally the  whole  libretto became  a pattern of sounds, some  of  them  repeated many  times,  an  arranged stream of babble  ready  for the composer to use in  his mill;  a stream  in  which  banal words  were  tucked  away,  or were supposed  to be, in  the centres   of  lines  safe  from  sopranos singing  in  High  C  about rats;  a  stream in which  there  were  occasional feminine rhymes,  a good  variety  of long  and  short  lines and  always  rhythmic differences  that  would  head off monotony. Consonants, so far  as I can  see, are  never  really sung;  it is the vowels which  the singer  really sings;  consequently the  libretto becomes  a  chain  of  vowels  outlined  by  a  con­ sonantal murmur and  hiss. My  rhymes  were straight out  of Moody-and-Sankey's hymn  book;  good  old  foursquare  monosyllables. And  accordingly, if I  had  ever felt  any  attraction  to  writing  involved,  complex  intellectual lyrics,  I  absolutely  forgot  about it.  As  a  librettist  you  can't be  what  you  want; you  must  be  what  he  (the  composer) wants  and what it wants.
What can  I  say of John Beckwith's music  except  that  it furthers and  matches
all  the  images   I  have  been  talking  about? During rehearsals I  was  continually amazed at  how  the  music  picked  up  a word,  even a whole  character, and  made it soar,  made it seem gigantic. I guess this is what  opera  is all about. Opera takes grubby Nibelungs, fat  tenors,  Spanish  satyrs,  maniacs  and  shambling Wozzecks, it  takes  them  and  floats  them  like kites, kites  blowing  in  the  winds  of harmony and   counterpoint. All  of  reality-this  old  woman-suddenly shows  itself  as being  acquainted with  things  we thought only the angels of symphonies knew.






SINCE THE  OPERA was  to last  only  an  hour  John suggested that  I read  some  poems  to raise  the curtain. I decided  that  something more  than just a reading was called  for,  and  now  we come  to the  doodle  part  of this story, since  I  ended   up  writing another libretto  for  a  masque -masque  in  the  sense of a  series of  tableaux and  spectacles,  or stage  images.  I had  been  working on a series of poems that presented a subject  in various keys:  you start  out  with Dwarf,

BABBLE AND  DOODLE



modulate  to a poem about a Baby, proceed to one about  a Dauphin  (baby Prince) and  eventually  fly from it all with that  baby among  the  birds-the  humming­ bird.  This  suggested  a  stage  picture  that  started  out  with  a  cradle,  proceeded through  chair,  table, bed, rocking-chair to coffin, turned  back again through  the purgatorial  world  with  rain  barrel,  hall  tree,  dresser  and  mirror,  tree  branch, ladder  and cardboard box. At the beginning of the recital you could put the cradle beside the  coffin and  at  the end of it you could,  as the dead  child  was reborn, take  the cradle  back again.  The  poems could  be read  at  different  points of this big circle since they too moved in a circle through  Life, into the world of Death, coasting  perilously near  Eternity,  then  back into  the world of Death  and so into Life again.  I had  always observed in poetry readings that  the great difficulty was the spaces between  poems. If there  were no spaces at  all the listeners tended  to suffer from  over intake  of image.  Moving  about  from  prop  to prop  would  help here but I decided  also to write a series of comic and  macabre  monologues to be performed  in  between  the  poems. These  ranged  from  children  talking  to  them­ selves to an old scavenger who collected bottles for his living. The  old scavenger found  a  skull in  the  coffin which  he  put  in  the  battered-up old  baby  carriage with  which  he  collected his bottles. Eventually  the  old  man  fell  into  the coffin to  reappear  as a man  with  dark  glasses carrying  a blue  flashlight. The  man  in dark  glasses spoke through  a megaphone  and  recited blood curdling  poems about ghosts  and  the  executioner  of  Mary  Stuart.  Eventually   the  baby's  cradle  was found and Life started again.
Just  in  listing  the  props,  I've  shown  you the  doodles  or designs that  accom­
panied  the poems. There  was the added  problem  here of how to perform  all this. One does not go usually to poetry readings to hear poems well read or well acted; what  one must often be satisfied with is the personality  of the poet and  the fact that  his intonations no matter  how inaudible  or squeaky  can  help  a great  deal in  clarifying  his  poetry since  he does know   what  it  means.  So the  actual  per­ formances  were  going  to  show,  I  hoped,  not  necessarily  the  best  performance but  the  most authoritative performance.  Of  course  I  wasn't  an  actor.  If I  had been I'd  never have written  One  Man  Masque. Since I was playing myself, any fluffs or mistakes could be built into the performance. Even if  I forgot everything, with  the help of the visual props I could improvise it all over  again for the audi­ ence.  Originally  I  had  wanted  mannequins  on stage  with  me who would  float up on wires at the end of everything, because they were enlightened  I guess. This couldn't   be managed,  so I  carried  a garbage  can  lid  of lighted  candles  at  the very end and put it on top of my head.

42

BABBLE AND DOODLE



Since  I  can  never quote  anything,  and  have a recurring  nightmare  in which, after  filling in  unsuccessfully for  a sick actor,  I'm  pursued  by a lion  back  to a dressing room  which  can  only be entered  by a ladder  and  a very small scuttle, opening  night  was  not  the  calmest  evening  I've  lived  through  by any  means. The  masque  turned  out to be ten minutes too long, so I dropped  some poems by the way. Getting  into the coffin, putting on dark glasses and getting out happened all right. At rehearsal  I'd  got stuck. And the candles didn't  set me ablaze. I parti­ cularly enjoyed directly attacking  an audience with my poetry rather  than getting at them privately and secretly in a book.
Naturally   we've  embarked   on  another  opera,  this  time  a  percussion  opera
called Shivaree. It starts off with a church  bell ringing and  we'll have an actual band  of rustic serenaders  with  their  noisemakers on stage. As to more  masques, I'd  like to do something  with acres of gold paper and I or huge newspaper  dolls that  the  poet  converses  with.  But  no  matter how  thrilling the  first  night  of Shivaree  is, if and  when,  it can  never quite  match  the excitement  of that  other night  when  so  many  experiments  with  babble and  doodle, sound  and  sight, were tested.  I  can  remember  leaving for the theatre  that  evening and  seeing on Pamela  Terry's directorial  desk the small slide on which the Cereus blossom was drawn.  It would be projected  twice during  the evening by magic lantern. There
it all was.

























43



THE TWO TRADITIONS

Literature and the ferment in uebec

Louis Dudek


A POWER>"UL MOVEMENT;,; runing  in  Quebec  fo, seces­
sion from  the Confederation.  A recent questionnaire  by the Montreal  newspaper
La  Presse revealed that some fifty per cent of the sampled  population  are already in  favour  of Quebec's  separation  from  the  rest of Canada. Yves Theriault the novelist, after  a tour of Quebec  colleges, reported  that  among  the student  popu­ lation  the idea of secession or separatism  is widespread.  It only awaits a Quebec political party of secession to raise a storm of major proportions.
This  ferment  in Quebec  is largely a concern  of literature, because the literary
men are deeply involved in the new social unrest. The present nationalistic resent­ ments  in  Quebec  present  themselves as "interesting" to an  intellectual  minority which  is at  the  same  time  carrying  out  a  revolt  against  the static  culture  and religious  tradition   of  the  Province.  This  progressive  movement,  which  would seem to be everything  that critics of Quebec  have always hoped for, as the much­  needed reform movement here, is capable at the same time of showing a national­  istic  will to autonomy  and  a  hostility to  English  Canada  that  may  be hard  to understand. But  this is the  inevitable  result  of  the  failure  of  English-speaking Canada-and  I  am thinking  of the most literate  and  conscious part  of it-to come to terms with French culture or to create a truly bilingual  nation.
Our  inability,  after one hundred  years of Confederation, to create a minimum literacy  in  two  languages  throughout   Canada -a  simple  requirement of  ele­ mentary  education -is  in  fact  the  first cause  of our  cultural  division  and  an­ tagonism.  What  could  be the source of untold  cultural  wealth  and  enrichment on both sides of the language  barrier  is considered instead  to be an  obstacle and a handicap in the work of building a nation.

44

THE  TWO TRADITIONS



In  the city of Montreal for example, the choice residential area  of Westmount, on the slopes of Mount Royal,  is occupied  exclusively by English-speaking people, while the  French occupy  the dull tenement flatlands  of the east end,  Ville Emard, and  Verdun. Westmounters do not  bother  to learn  French or to insist on a really effective  programme of teaching French  in  their  schools. They  do  not  bother  to read  French newspapers or French books. They simple ignore their French compatriots.
How   long  can   we  expect   the  French  to  take   this   treatment in  their  own
Province  and  in  Canada as a  whole?  How  long will they  be satisfied  to remain second-class  citizens   in  their   own  country?  (They   constitute one-third  of  the people  of Canada, but  in  our  cultural life they are  treated as a foreign  element, restricted  to  their   Quebec  reservation.) It is little  wonder that   many  of  them now want  to take their  Province into their own hands,  as French-speaking colonies have  done  in  other   parts  of the  world.  There is in fact  an  organized movement for  the  establishment of a  Laurentian Republic, with  offices in  Montreal on  St. Denis Street  (east  of the barricades of Main  Street), where  hotheaded nationalists already hold  their  conclaves  and  manufacture propaganda.  According to  Jean­ Charles Harvey of Le Petit  journal, one part  of this movement is of an extreme rightist, or "fascist", character; another part is of the extreme left.
This  is of course  a complex problem  involving  the  economic interests,  religion and  customs  of  a  whole  people,  as well as their  language. But  language as the organ  of communication contains everything else, and  our  main  failure, sympto­ matic  of our  refusal,  has  been  in  the  sphere  of language and  literature. A basic French-English  literacy   should   long  ago  have  been  our  national  objective. In literature we should  by now  have  a unified  literature with  two great  branches in two  languages. There should   be interpenetration and  exchange between  the  two languages, shared  influences, the  transfer   of  French  mother-country  traditions and   English  literary   traditions, to create  a  rich  bilingual literary  climate. Obvi­ ously, scholars  and  writers  cannot be coerced,  and  should  not  even  be organized to  do  these  things.  They   should  see  the  opportunity  and  take  it.  But  English­  speaking writers  and  critics  in  Canada  have  for  the  most  part  turned a deaf  ear to French language requirements; they have too often failed  to learn  the language
-there  are  authors and  scholars  among  us who "cannot read  French"! -and they  have  simply  not  read  the  books of their  French contemporaries. The  result is  estrangement,  politeness,   and   concealed  animosity.  While   the  majority of French  Canadians  remained  themselves  semi-literate, under  the  tutelage of  a regressive  clergy  (though, mind  you, not  all the  Church is in  reaction, for there

45

THE TWO TRADITIONS



are churchmen in the new movement of reform), the chauvinist  English attitude could continue  under a mere shadow of resentment; but a true cultural awaken­ ing  means  an  awakening  also to the  failures and  condescensions  of English Canada toward  the  realities and  potentialities  of the  French  heritage. It is the French  Canadian literati  who  are  asking our  literati  the  unpleasant   questions. And the answers had better be carefully phrased.






l:E FRENCH   INTELLECTUAL  is  asking  what   French   culture might  have  been,  and  might still be, in  Canada. He  suspects that  he has been frustrated   by English indifference  and  lack  of sympathy  for  these potentialities. As an adventuresome Frenchman  he finds little in the English mind of the sense of adventure; he wants the French spirit to realize a complete  awakening  here.
So I think  the root of the problem of French-English relations in Canada goes
deeper  than  the  matter  of conquest  and  political  differences.  It  has to do with the relation  of French  and English literatures  and  cultures over the centuries and the translation  of these attitudes to this continent. The  problem  of breaking down a deeply inbred  cultural  habit brought over from England,  and  also from France, is one that  has never yet been considered by our critics. But it is this transplanted rigidity of attitude and behaviour  that explains our Two Solitudes and  continues behind the present cultural-political crisis brewing in Quebec.
Chaucer,   who  lived  at  a  time  when  Europe   was one  civilization and  the
modern  language   divisions were  just beginning,  had  his "French Period"  and more;  like all  Middle  English writing, he was soaked in French  influence, since France   was then  actually  the  "mother  country" of writing  men  and  singers in England. We have never got over the benefit. The  jogging, repetitive iambic, replacing  Anglo-Saxon  pattern   and  flux,  has  been  the  bane  of  minor  English poetry ever since, some think its very signature; whereas it is not in fact native to the language  at all, and is contrary  to its true spirit.  (English  is by nature irregu­ lar, and  trochaic.) However, with the growth  of nationalism  and  the coming of the Reformation, we can see England separating itself off from the Continent and becoming  loggy with insularity.  Roger Ascham's  scorn for  "Italianate" English­ men  already  has  the  pride  of  wholesome home-grown  culture  in  it.  And  it  is doubtful   if  Shakespeare knew  much  French:  the  plays  come  out  of  English sources and  translations,  a few out of Italian, but  none  directly out of a French

THE TWO TRADITIONS



source.  Insularity has been the English characteristic ever since.
The  exile  of Charles II in  France, and  then  the  Restoration, brought French Neo-Classicism  as  we  know  into  England. But  the  rationalistic dissociation   of thought and  imagination was  already  a mental  disease  by that  time,  so that  the tinkling  heroic  couplet, the  dry  satire,  the  descent  to society  and  manners, have ever  since  seemed   un-English and  un-poetical. However, France made   possible English  prose,  and  it helped  sweep away  the gloom of English  Puritanism.
But  the  main  retreat of English  culture, one which  has lasted  until  the  present and  which  is contemporary with  the  history  of Canada, begins  with  the  end  of Neo-Classicism  and   the  rise  of  Romanticism. At  this  point,   Germany to  some extent   replaced France as the  land  of foreign  wonders; but  even  this was mini­ mal.  English  Romanticism became  a  home-grown hothouse plant. The  French, since  they  were  the  prime  exponents of witty eighteenth-century  verse  and prose, and  since  their  Romanticism was delayed  a half-century by the  Revolution-a Revolution  that   England greatly   feared-came to  be  avoided  by  the  English with   marked    prejudice.  The   French  were   unromantic,  anti-sentimental,  and dangerous. The  home  of  Voltaire was  antithetical to  English   romantic feeling. (Hence  the  English   Romantic poets  "did   not  know  enough," as  Arnold   later  discovered, about French literature.)  And  when Romanticism decayed  into senti­  mentality  and   rank   idealism, this  repulsion  further took  the  form  of  resistance  to "French immorality".
The   rapprochement  was  further  delayed   (though a  few  intrepid souls,  like
Swinburne  and   Arthur  Symons,   broke  the  sound-barrier)  when   the  Damned Poets,  following  Baudelaire, cut  away  from  foetid  Romanticism and  began  those antics  that  we  recognize  as  Modern Poetry.  England   merely  recoiled  from  such a display  of bad  taste,  and  it never  produced its own  Baudelaire or  Rimbaud­ at least until  the twentieth century. It was only in 1910 that  the work of Lafargue, Corbiere, and  Rimbaud became  the springboard for  the American-English poets Eliot  and  Pound. In  fact,  the  pure  starch  did  not  come  out  of  English  poetry,  despite  Edith Sitwell,  until  Dylan  Thomas hit  it  off  in  1934· Efforts  since  then  to Millerize  and  Surrealize, with  the help of D. H. Lawrence and  French Existen­ tialism,  only  reveal  how  deep-rooted are  the cultural habits  of Imperial conserva­ tism. To  join with  the  French mind is to be enlightened and  to be free, something very  difficult,  perhaps impossible,  for the educated gentlemen of England.
To  come  back  to  Canada, the  literature of  this  country begins  in  rotten  ro­ manticism, and  rotten  romanticism  is  a  benighted  anti-French   movement. Neither   Carman  nor   Lampman  knew  anything about  the  dark  currents then

47

THE TWO TRADITIONS



surging  in French and  European literature. Thus Cappon could  write-

For the poetry of Roberts at this period, like Canadian poetry in general, still holds by the  old  ethical  traditions  of  the  great  English  and  American  schools of  the previous  generation.  It is virtually  unstirred   by the  subtle  reactions  of  thought which  belong to our latest modern schools of verse, by the love of ethical  paradox and  the neurotic  delicacy of sensibility which, for example, characterize  the French Verlaines and Mallarmes of the time.'

Since  then,  Canada has developed  a form  of English  genteel  culture, patterned on that  of England, which is immune to intellectual aliveness, to speculative ideas, to  experimental living,  or  to  exploratory writing. Our   best  English  culture has been  conservative, cautious,  dead-set  on traditional values  and  the  advantages of prestige.  In short,  it has been all-square, or as the Beats say, real cube.
On   the  other   hand, we  cannot blame  the  French  habitant, illiterate, on  the
land, cut  off  from  the  Revolution by  the   clergy, cut  off  from  France by  the English,  for falling  into a backwater and  for refusing  to be enlightened by English culture. He  preferred to refuse all culture -but his own  wonderful folk spirit,  of laughter and  farce-for  about  a century  and  a half.  And  it is the  English  who are to blame,  for not opening  the door to a true  French enlightenment.
We may leave  the  politicians,  the industrialists, and  even  the  people,  out of the
picture. The   educated  minority   in  Canada are  the  ones  who  need  to  become aware of an  historic  opportunity that  has always  been  lying  before  them,  waiting to  be  taken  up.  It is simply  the  possibility of  bringing the  great  French and  the great   English  traditions of  literature face  to  face,  not  in  the  work  of some  one complex  writer, but in an entire  culture.
This  can  be done.  It does not mean  the assimilation of cultures one to another.
It does  not  mean  that  the  French must  lose their  character and  integrity. They must  deepen  their  character and  integrity  as they  are  now  doing,  in  Liberte and Cite  Libre,  and  in  the small  publishing  houses  of Editions du  Jour, Editions de
!'Homme, Hexagone, and  Editions  Quartz, where  they  become  more  thoroughly themselves by close contact with the new literature from  France. French-Canadian culture does  not  consist  of  pea-soup, black  soutane, or  raquetteur's sweater; it consists  of la dolce France reborn  and  forever  living  in  French Quebec.
Dans nos gaietes, dans nos souffrances, Dans nos chansons, on rest' Franc;ais.
Et quand on prie I'Dieu d'nos croyances,


' James Cappon, Robert  and the  Influences of his Time, Toronto, 1905, p. 62.

THE  TWO TRADITIONS



C'est p't-etre  en mots mal prononces;
C'est en vieux mots qui vienn'nt  de France
Et qu'les a.leux nous ont laisses.
Et quand  on entend: "Viv' la France" Nos creurs de gueux sont boul'verses.2

But  to build  our  literature, the literati  must  work to become  thoroughly versed both  in  the  mother-literature of the  other  language and  in  the  current literature of  both  parts  of  contemporary Canada. Is  it  asking  too  much?  It is merely  the minimum, if we want  to survive  very long as a nation.






CANADIAN LITERATURE, if we understand it, becomes  the whole  literature of France and  the  whole  literature of England standing behind the  literature of French Canada and  the  literature of English  Canada. We  must conceive  of it in  this  large,  dramatic frame,  if we are  to escape  from  provincial­ ism  and  if  we  are  to  create  a  new  complex  civilization  in  the  north. This,  and nothing less, must be our aim.
To  make  a fair  beginning, it should  be a requirement of every  college  teacher
of the  humanities that  he be bilingual and  bilingually  educated. This  should  be a permanent criterion for employment and  for  promotion. (Such  a test might  help eliminate  the   pressure   on  publishing  papers   and   books  that   nobody   reads.  It would  put  the  pressure  instead  on reading.) The  same criterion  should  be applied to  English   and   history   teachers in  the  high  schools.  (At  present   not  even  the French teachers can  speak  French.) The  teaching of French should  be reformed in our schools, at  whatever cost, on the pattern of language-teaching in the armed forces,  where   a  speaking fluency  has  been  achieved  in  a  very  short   time.  The objective should  be speaking and  reading ability, not  the  passing of grammatical examinations. If a  large  national programme of this  kind  were  undertaken the results would  be immediate and  permanently beneficial.
The reason  why  we should  emphasize the  learning of French and  familiarity with   French  and   French-Canadian  literature is  that   the  French  intellectuals already know  English.  The pressure  to learn  English in French Canada is already strong, and  it   already presents  a sufficient educational and  economic advantage.

2   Jean Narrache, ]'Parle tout  seul, Les Editions de l'Homme, Montreal, xg61.


49

THE TWO TRADITIONS



Only a freshening-up of the educational  system is needed to make the efficient teaching  of  English  a  natural  result. The  English,  on  the  other  hand,  need  to know the advantage, or rather  the necessity, of learning French. They  must learn now, or never.
The  crisis in Quebec is one in which an intellectual  minority is carrying out a
revolt against  the static traditionalism  of their own people. These reformers want a separation  of Church  and State;  they want schools independent of the Catholic Church  or of any church;  they want democracy  and  justice for minority groups; they  want  a  diversity  of opinions,  honest  journalism,  complex  art;   they  want equal  taxation,  not  based on  religious affiliation  and  church  membership;  they want  civil marriages  to be legalized; they want  the legal oath  to be available  to the  agnostic  and  non-believer, as it is not  at  present;  they want  legal adoption to be free of religious trammels,  so that  a Protestant mother  can  adopt  a child born  illegitimately  to a Catholic  girl;  they want  specific and  general  reforms in education,  in the law, in  journalism, in literature, in the life of French  Canada.
The   programmes  and  directions  of  this  movement  are  to  be found  in  such
books as  the  satirical  best-seller Frere  Untel; in  the  brilliant  work of satire  by Carl  Dubuc,  Les Doleances du N otaire Poupart; in the periodical  Liberte, edited by Jacques  Godbout,  and  in Cite  Libre; in  the newspaper  Le  Devoir  (or  even at times in La Presse, La  Patrie, or the newly-founded  Nouveau journal); in the volumes  of  essays titled  Ecrits du  Canada Franfais; in  the  publications  of Editions  de l'Homme, and  of Editions du  Jour,  under  Jacques  Hebert,  notably the  collection  of  essays in  L'Ecole   Laique, edited  by Robert  Elie;  and  in  the poetry  and  prose writing  of young French  Canada. There  is powerful  writing, exciting reading  here, not of the concocted controversial  kind common to English Canadianism (d. Maclean's "For  the Sake of Argument"), but passionate debate and persuasion, for the sake of justice, for the sake of truth.
This  constructive  and  progressive intellectual  ferment  in French  Canada is a
precious and  admirable  movement of liberation  and  betterment. It  has only one danger.  In  its prickly aggressiveness and  self-assertion, it  has shown  that  it can tum   against  the  old  English strawman-chauvinist as  much  as against  the  real forces of reaction at home. And the attack  on English Canada as the source of all troubles  can  bring  a possible derailing  of all these fine energies, since that  is an old  escape-valve  with  all the ignorant  passions still behind  it. The  massive  ma­ jority of Quebec  have the necessary prejudices,  and  the rebellious elite  have the spark that can set off the proverbial powder keg again.
If that  should happen,  the bright new movement of enlightenment and libera-

THE TWO TRADITIONS



tion  would  be  swallowed  up  in  darkness  and  returning  chaos.  For  one  thing, English  Canada would  perforce  be thrown  on  the side of extreme  reaction,  in the necessity to join with the moneyed powers and the politicos, against secession. Perhaps  the  young  separatists  do  not  realize  that  they  are  playing  with  fire; perhaps  they do.  It  is possible that  they are trying to get a rise out  of us:  they are so tired of snobbery, indifference,  and apathy. Before it is too late, I hope we can  help them  and  join with  them  in a more promising course -the way to a greater  Canada  that  is literary  in  two  languages and  has  a  literature   in  two languages.  It is the only way to a true originality for both these literatures,  and it is also the way to an endless, unexhausted  future of creative effort.














chranicle




FIRST NIGHT
IN EDMONTON


John W. Bilsland


NREADER OF  Friday'' Child  is likely to be smprised  by the  theme  of Wilfred  Watson's new play Cockcrow and  the  Gulls. Given  its first
public   performance in  Edmonton on  March 29,  1962,  the  work  clearly  reveals the  persistence of Watson's concern  with  the  condition of the  human spirit.  The mysterious  process  by  which   man's   fallen   nature can  achieve   a  state  of  grace remains for  Watson  the  essential-and  imaginatively the   most  exciting­ experience of life.
In  Friday's  Child  the human predicament-the soul in darkness  blindly  aspir­
ing  for  the  light  of  grace-was  presented  in  a  succession  of  bewildering,  yet pregnant, paradoxes. Running through these  was  an  intense  awareness of the intimacy of corruption and  purity, of goodness and  evil:

Think  you of the pearl. Its whiteness is all
I sing. And out
Of the murders of the incrusted  heart
Would distil
And give you to know
The white pity of the pearl.

And  even  as  "the white  pity  of  the  pearl" could  emerge  from  "the murders of the  incrusted heart", so, too,  in  some  mysterious fashion   could  the  salvation of man  emerge  from man's evil. In the Canticle of Darkness we were told:
It  was
The  Friday of roses. And there was a rose

FIRST NIGHT IN  EDMONTON



Singing the red song of your blossom. When I came to the rose, there was Gethsemane. When I came to Gethsemane There  was the rose. Stand gentle in my words It was the  Friday of Golgotha, the place
Of skull. 0 cross of petals -
0 crossed petals -
Stand  gentle in my words. For I thought It was the rose of crucifixion, till I knew It was the rose of resurrection. Stand Gentle in my words.

In   Cockcrow  and  the  Gulls  Watson   has  continued  his  probing of  what   he termed  in his Love  Song  for Friday's Child, "the flesh corrupted" and

... the ceremony of love
Beyond the  joining of hands, entire....

In  the  first  act  of  the  play,  laid  in  Nanaimo, one is confronted with  man  in  his corrupted flesh. Here  the  three  focal figures are  Cockcrow, a university  teacher; O'Reilly, a defrocked priest;  and  Higgins,  a socialist with  aspirations far  beyond his achieving. Each  of these  three  in some way suggests the  futility  or viciousness of man's worldly  state: for  daring to speak  the  truth  as he sees it,  Cockcrow has been  notified  of his dismissal from  the university; cast off by the Church, O'Reilly has found  himself  a believer  without belief, a spirit  without moorings; and  hope­ ful  of raising  man's worldly  state-making every man  a king-Higgins is held down  by his hopelessly  middle-class wife who can see no further than  the  joys of some  day owning a cosy motel  at a "beauty spot".  Compositely the  three present  us with  the  ideals  of truth, faith,  and  brotherhood, and  all these ideals have been darkened or frustrated. Seeking  escape from  the harsh  truth, the  three characters come  to a  brothel, but  there  they  find  not  escape,  only a fleeting delusion  of it: in  the  brothel, as in the  world  outside,  the  tormenting sins -pride, wrath, sloth, envy, and  lechery -still pester them. There is no earthly release.
At the end  of the first act all three of the central  figures are dead, as are certain of the  prostitutes and  Higgins' son, Cyril. The  second act is laid in an unidentified region  where  the  spirits  of the  dead  pass through a  purgatorial cleansing. They are  tried  and   judged   by  their  own  sins, and  all but  Higgins, the  most  rational, are  led  to  a  re-enactment of  the  Crucifixion, the  victim  now  being  a scarecrow symbolizing  God.  This  ultimate sacrilege  is no sooner  ended than  the  full horror of their  deed  strikes  all of them  (all  but  Higgins  who  rationally has now gone to

53

FIRST NIGHT IN  EDMONTON



enjoy  the  pleasures  of this purgatorial  state). In  total  despair  they wander  lost. But  then  a mysterious shepherd  gives to Alice, one of the prostitutes,  a pearl  of great  price.  At first Alice does not know what  to do with the pearl,  but  at last, in the words of the Love Song  for Friday's Child,

. . . the thinking heart
Untied its loving thought.

Alice gives the  pearl  to one of the others,  and  each  in  turn  passes it on.  Now loving-kindness, vouchsafed first by the Christ-shepherd, rules in place of pride, wrath,  sloth,  envy,  and  lechery.  Their  sins  defeated,   their  hearts  contrite,  the pilgrims  take  up  the chant  of the  Agnus  Dei)  and  begin the final ascent  to the loving presence of God. The state of nature  has given way to the state of grace.
It is relatively easy to summarize the central  matter of Cockcrow and the Gulls.
It is not, however, easy to assess the value of the work as a play. The performance given in Edmonton  was staged by Studio Theatre, the training  ground  of the University  of  Alberta's   Drama   Division.  The   cast  was  remarkably   good,  the sets  by  Norman   Yates  (of  the  University  Fine  Arts  Department)  were  both functional  and  beautiful,  and the direction by Gordon  Peacock was sensitive and strong.
But the play itself is a curious business. There are exciting moments in it. Wat­ son  obviously has  gifts as a  writer  of effective  dramatic episodes. The  quarrel  between  Higgins  and  his wife in  the first act  is fine comedy,  vital,  direct,  and swift. The  tormented  relationship between Alice and O'Reilly,  both in the brothel and  in  the  after-world,  is suggested in  a series of painfully  vivid  episodes. The  abrupt   intrusions  of an  elegant  James  Boswell-cool,  urbane,  rational-into the  spiritual  agonies of the  piece are  moments  of contrast  as startling  as any  I can  recall ever  having seen on the stage. And  throughout the  play the dialogue has  constantly  the  ring  of living speech:  even  in  its most  imaginative,   allusive passages the text is never academically sterile.
When,  however, one has recognized these strengths-and in a first play they
are  great  and  promising-one must  also recognize that   the  play  has in  the theatre  two  major  flaws. The  more evident  of  these is Watson's  failure  to give flesh and  blood to most of the characters  who move through  his allegory. They endure  agonies, and  they speak vividly, but they remain  distant, symbolic figures, lacking  the  distinctive qualities  necessary if an  audience  is to find any  meaning in  the statement, "I  am Cockcrow",  or "I am  Alice".  Only  one character  takes



54

FIRST NIGHT IN  EDMONTON



on a unique  vitality, and  that  is Mrs. Higgins who -limited though  she is as a human  being -is at least a creature with life.
And there is a weakness which I can describe only as a lack of focus in the play.
In  a  note  on  the  printed  programme  Gordon  Peacock  provides the  comment, "Wilfred   Watson  is a  poet,  and  it is not the function  of the poet to clarify."  I do  not  know  whether  or  not  Watson  would  support  this  comment-Friday's Child  certainly does not bear it out-but I believe his play misfires in the theatre partly  because it does not clarify the experience it treats. It is one of the functions of the poet-whether in or out of the theatre-to clarify experience. Clarifica­ tion  does not  here imply  the reduction  of all elements to a basic simplicity, but it does imply that  an experience  be brought  into focus, that  it be shaped,  that  it reveal what  Coleridge  calls "unity  in multeity". Cockcrow and the Gulls does not reveal this focus. It is easy in the aftermath  to establish the allegorical pattern  of the  piece, but  in  the theatre  I was constantly  plagued with a feeling of bits and pieces. There   was  a  fine  hostility between Higgins and  his wife, there  was a frighteningly  dangerous  innocence in young Cyril Higgins, there was a potentially tragic love between  Alice and  O'Reilly,  there was a conflict of principle between Cockcrow and  his university, there was the love of the shepherd  for the lost souls
-there was all this and  much more, but the total effect for me was chaotic. Had the  play  succeeded  in  suggesting  that  life itself is chaotic  the  effect  could,  of course, have  been quite  legitimate,  but there is a wide gulf between the work of art  which suggests the chaos of life, and  the work which is itself chaotic. For all its riches, for  all its promise,  I cannot  avoid the feeling that  Cockcrow and  the Gulls is chaotic as a work of art.
The  Edmonton performance of Wilfred Watson's play was an important event.
I do not believe the work is a total success, and I doubt  that  it will attract  much attention  beyond  Canadian literary circles. But I am convinced  that  it heralded the  appearance of  a  very considerable  dramatic  talent: any  author  who in  his first play could write a Cockcrow and the Gulls is potentially a great dramatist.













55



review articles





GUESTS AND NATIVES

Phyllis Webb


JOHN  REEVES. A Beach of Strangers. Oxford University Press.  $2.75.
D.  G.  JONES.  The  Sun  Is Axeman. University of Toronto Press.  $3.00.


I SUPPOSE John  Reeves' A Beach    of   Strangers,  a   play   for   radio in  verse and prose, deserved to be published:  it   won   the   Italia  Prize   in
1959, it has been  translated into many languages and  it has been given a stage production. The play  will strike  an inno­ cent  ear  as brilliantly original.  However, it  is difficult  for  one  familiar  with  Dylan Thomas' poetic  technique  and  his  "play  for  voices,"  Under Milk  Wood, to  read A  Beach  of Strangers  without feeling  a jealous  loyalty  for  Thomas' achievement and    a   sense   that   eclectic   guests    (no matter   how    bright   and   witty  and talented)   must   not   be  seated   as  hosts.
Under Milk  Wood begins at  night  and with   dreams, opens   into  morning,  lulls into   afternoon, and, while  Polly  Garter makes  absent-minded love in Milk Wood, drowns dusk  in  dark. A  Beach of Strangers  also  takes   as  its  basic  unit   a day,  a  night  and  dreams, but  triplicates and   complicates it  into  a  musical  struc­ ture.   A  microcosmic  world   gathers  on this  beach,  drawn by  the  returning tide, for  "water is man's first  womb."

Here is a beach. Down from  the  dunes
In the  emerald air  of summer a hundred
 Strangers scramble, in  whose  sundered
Vision there are  a hundred  versions

Of  the  beach and  of each  other, all unreconciled....

We  do  not  find  exactly  a  hundred strangers but  a goodly  pack: the  nymphs and gnomes of the libido, the dwarfs and fairies  of  the  ego,  the  witches  and  giants of  the  superego. Freud would  be pleased with  Mr.  Reeves.
The first  of the  triple  views of the  day introduces  us  to  a  medley  of  malmated pairs   who   are,   on  the  whole,  "in   their habit    of   disharmony  wholly   content": the  MacAndrews, Uncle Alice and  Aunt Henry, Mr.  and  Mrs.  Pycroft,  the Rever­ end  Bunyon  Tredwells. There are others,  including  a   talking  dog   named   Albert  and    an   Eliotic    crab   ("I   should   have been   a   pair    of    ragged   paws") .  Mrs. MacAndrew,   who   is  "neat  as  a   new­ laid    pin,    houseproud   and    death   on germs"    and    Uncle   Alice,  with    her "manacling regime of  swims and  consti­ tutionals" for  her  unrealized  homo  hus­ band,   together  combine  into  a  simula­ crum  of Thomas'  famous  Mrs.  Ogmore­ Pritchard.  But   all   these   strangers  who come  to  this  primal beach  for  the  sub-

REVIEW ARTICLES



versive encounter with their primal selves remain  strangers  to   themselves   and   to each   other,  though  their   tentacles  feast on an air of small messages of need, of irritation, or  of  love.  Reeves  succeeds  in producing the virile fantasy  lives of his characters mainly  through a technique (also used by Thomas) by which the characters  narrate  about  themselves.   It is   a   technique   particularly   suited    to radio,  and  there  is no doubt that  Reeves is a  sure  craftsman in  his  medium. The rapid shifts in viewpoint and  time are achieved  gracefully and  effectively.
The second  view of the  day  focuses on Charlie  Minto,  "ten   next   birthday and old  in  the  mystery  of  grown-up  sloth," but  innocent in his love for Miss Ogilvie, until  Giant Bunyon  Tredwell's reverence for  sin  strips  down   this  Beach  of  Eden to   smoking   serpent  and   rotted   apples.
 The   unhinging  of  Charlie is  concluded by   the   incredible  scene   in   which   the bosom   of   Miss   Ogilvie   is  accidentally bared  to the ten-year  eyes, a scene so incredible I suppose  it  really  could  hap­ pen.  Charlie releases  fully  the  theme  of lost innocence and  the  entry  into human separateness so  that   by  the  end   of  the day  he is a fully-fledged  member of this beach  of strangers.
With   the  third   view,  new  characters
enter  their  broken  psyches  and  their lambent   needs,    and    previously    intro­ duced   characters  count  their   points   in the  incremental  day.  Like  Under   Milk Wood, this  play  ends  with   pure   sex  in the  pure   night,   with  a  Jack  and   a  Jill (like   Polly   Garter)    content  in    their mortality.
These  three  views of the  day  are intro­
duced   by  verse  spoken   by  disembodied




THE GUTENBERG GALAXY:

..!... 	The Making  of
Aypographic Man

by Marshall McLuhan

A book to cause  argument and  make  men  think, this challeng­ ing  interpretation  of  Western   culture shows  the  changes in the  nature of man  and  society since the  coming  of  alphabetic communication, and  suggests that  the translation of  tribal  man  into  his Western form  has occurred by the  agency of phonetic literacy  alone.  300 pages, $5·95·




UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  PRESS




57

REVIEW ARTICLES



female   and   male   voices  which,  chorus­ like, set  scene,  evoke  mood,  philosophize long-windedly on man's estate,  and  work as   very   practical   transitional  servants.  Verse  which   has  such  a  multiplicity of jobs  to  do  can,  and   does  here,   fail  as poetry.   Paradoxically,  Reeves'   prose   is far   more   poetic   in  its  brightness,   con­ creteness, invention, and  rhythm, though this   achievement  is  in  method  so  close to  Thomas as  to  be  embarrassing. We find  the  tranferred epithets, the  wrench­ ing  of  nouns  out  of their  normal syntac­  tic   function  (a   good   enlivener    if  not overdone), puns  with their  jostling levels of    meaning,   and    parody   of    stock  phrases: "his  wedded  knife,"  "holy  pad­ lock,"   ( cf.  Thomas,  "his  awful   wedded  wife") . That  Reeves  often   rises  to  the level of his master  is cause for both  hope and  despair. A verbal trick  that  is almost a  verbal   tic  takes  as  its  model  Thomas' "When  all  my  five  and   country  senses see"  to  register  in  such  phrases  as, "five and   mortal   senses,"   "two   and   private hearts," "new  and  Spanish  castle,"  "first and   fancy   name," etc.  The   concluding lines  of   Thomas' "Ballad   of  the  Long­  leggjed   Bait,"   "He   stands   alone   at   the door  of  his home,/ With  his long-legged  heart   in  his  hand" is echoed  in  Reeves' ". . . and  as  they  trail  homeward, if the truth be known, it is her heart  that  hangs  by a  strap from  her  elbow...." Though Thomas is  the  major  shaping ghost  in this  play,  Eliot,  Auden,  and  Cummings also   spirit   around.  The   problem   is,   I suppose,  one  of identity, which  is lost in more  than  the    invading  influences. English,  American,  and   Canadian   vo­ cabularies  and   phrasing  smack   against  each  other in a disconcerting way, ignor­  ing   the   truth  that    allegorical   writing  usually  ascends   more  quickly  to  symbol
 the more  precisely its reality is defined. Though the reader  is occasionally  invited to  concur  in  an  act  of symbolic  faith, A Beach  of Strangers frequently suceeds  as a  sentimental allegory  of  the  human isolate  reaching out  for  love  at  the  edge of the water.
Both   A  Beach   of  Strangers  and   The Sun  Is  Axeman, by D.  G.  Jones,  are handsomely  produced  books,  a  pleasure to  hand  and   eye.  The poems  in  Jones' book  depend  delicately from   the  top  of the   page,   reminding  me  of  that  excel­ lent   poem  which   opened  his  first  book, Frost  on the  Sun, with  the question, "Do poems    too   have   backbones?"   In   that  book,   D.   G.   Jones   explained  that   his poems were
. . . attempts to  apprehend and understand fragments of experience ... to  capture and suggest the  sense  that the  universe is a  vast pool,    globe,    or  continuum  of   energy­ mysterious and potent-in  which  the  indi­ vidual   thing   or   creature   participates, changes, or  dies.

The dominant sun  of his  poetry  symbol­ izes  that   continuum  of  energy,  with  its creative  and   destructive  potential. The sun  is axeman, "it  crashes in  the  alders," but   it  also  produces  dazzling   protective revelations:

So extensive is the  clarity of this  world
the   bones   of  animals  are   luminous and
dry-
("Death of a  Hornet")

. . . and  all  my  envy  melts like  snow  before the   vast
rhetoric of  the  sun,  to  which   the  earth
listens in silence and  responds.
("Standing in  the  April  Noon")

The sun  and   weather, birds  and  girls are  centring images  in  this  carefully crafted  work.  The  clarity, control,   and music   of  these  poems   reveal   the  bene­ volent  influences of  W.  C. Williams  and

REVIEW ARTICLES



Pound,  influences which   have   been  ab­ sorbed    and    used    towards  a   personal  utterance:

The birds
Nest
Among the  flowers  and  stone.

They have  tiny  claws.

And  when they  light  upon  the  bushes
They are  weightless stone
Bursts  of  rough stone.

The   poem  from   which  these  lines  are taken,  "Snow   Buntings",  is  one  of  the best in the book. These birds, followed through   the    seasons   of   the    sun,   are imaged successively as  "snow", as "earth", as "flowers", as  "stones", as "wood", as "wood  and  stone  becoming something  else,"  as  "little  skeletons", as "mouths, mouths", as  "feathered  seeds", and  finally  as snow  again, as "blizzards". The  poem is played  out  evenly, carefully, to  the  proper depth  for  the  catch, and then   hauled  back  in  a  triumphant  arc. The patient fisherman can  also be found
 at   work  in  "Sketches  for   a  Portrait of F.R.S.", in the  complex "Soliloquy for Absent Friends"-a poem "rich in loneliness" -and   in   "Les   Masques  de
!'arne", where  the  hook  is  not  so  sharp
nor   so   alluringly  baited.   For   a  poet whose imaginative range  is somewhat limited,    Jones    appears  remarkably at home  in these longer  poems.  The  reasons for  this security  are  not  hard  to find,  for his poetic  aims  are  as lucid  as his poetic line:

So let  my mind
be,  like  this  river, thin  as glass
that  thunder, dark clouds, rain,
the  violent winds, may  pass
and   leave   no  lasting darkness in  their wake....
("The River: North of Guelph")

Occasionally the  fear  of  leaving  a "lasting darkness" results  in a dodge  into coyness. "Clotheslines", for   instance, which  begins  with  a  tone  I  can  describe only as a normal nobility, promising Williamsesque truths  from common things,  drops   down  into   coy    self­ consciousness.   The  same   kind   of   thing happens in  "Olympus in  the  Afternoon" which,  for me, is troubled by a too gentle  wit.   The   poetic   direction   suggested   in the   first  part   of   "Clotheslines,"  is  ful­ filled  in  Jones'  poem   "On  the   24th  of May",   in  "Beautiful Creatures  Brief  as These"   and  many   others.    The   overall achievement of  The Sun   Is  Axeman  re­ sults  in  a  distinctive  voice,  a  poetry  of lovely  assonances,   syllabic  grace,  of  in­ sights   glancing  from    a   landscape  "in  which  the  birds  or  trees  / Find  all  their palpable relations with  the  earth."






59



THE CALLAGHAN CASE
 





Cieorge VVoodcock



MORLEY CALLAGHAN. A Passion in Rome. Macmillan. $4-95·


DuRING  THE  PAST year  or  so we have  been witnessing  a minor  tragedy of  the  literary  world  which  contains so many   object   lessons  for  writers   that   it might    be   called    TI:te  Callaghan  Case. Until  about   a  year  ago  Morley  Callag­ han  was  proceeding on  the  even  way of a  moderately  successful  writer.   He  had picked   up  a  certain  celebrity  as  a  radio  and  television "personality"-the Author as  Plain   Man-which  did  no  good   to his   literary   reputation,  though   it   may have  brought other rewards.   In  the sparsely   populated upper  level  of  Cana­ dian    writing    he   enjoyed   an   eminence that  came  partly  from  scarcity of compe­ tition   and   partly from  his  real  achieve­  ments   as  a   novelist   and   a  short   story writer. He  had   even  a  modest  standing abroad  dating  from   the  distant   days  of the  twenties when  he  had  contributed to highbrow   international   magazines,   and he  wore  like a medal  the  repute of hav­  ing  been  a  friend   of  Hemingway in  the good   old   days  of  the  Lost  Generation. A   few   critics   placed   him   high   in   his particular setting.  "Morley Callaghan," said  Robert  Weaver in  an  early  issue of Canadian   Literature, "is   the  most   im­ portant novelist  and  short  story writer  in English  Canada, and  he is the only prose writer  of an  older  generation  who might  have  much  influence on the young writers  of  today." Others  declared  him  a  good

6o
 short   story  writer   who  had   not  enough sense of literary architecture to be a satisfying   novelist,  and   yet  others   found him  a  dull  and  pedestrian sentimentalist with   occasional moments of  fine  crafts­ manship or  sure  insight.  But  nobody,  to my  knowledge, suggested  that  one  of the world's great  writers,  fit  to  be  compared with  the  finest  talents  of  the  past,  dwelt among  us  in  the   modest  obscurity  of Toronto.
It was left to an American critic,  the eloquent  and   eclectic   Edmund   Wilson, to  make  this  astonishing discovery.  Cal­ laghan, Wilson   claimed,  was  an  author fit   to   be   classed   with   Turgenev   and  Chekhov. It is  not  clear  why  he  chose these  two  particular  writers for  compari­ son,  since  there   is  as  little   in  common between     the    urban    misfits   of   whom Callaghan   writes    and    the    intellectual outcasts   whose   predicaments  Turgenev delineates  with  such  sophisticated  pessi­ mism   as   there   is  between   Callaghan's "coarse-grained, serviceable, burlap style" (as  Milton Wilson  has called  it)  and  the subtle  and    evocative   manner,  rich   in suggestive  imagery,  with  which  Chekhov presents  the   frail   agonies   of   a   dying society.  But  the  occasional   irresponsibili­ ties  of  critical   mandarins  are   liable   to have   disconcerting  effects   in   a  literary world   excessively concerned  with   the semblances of prestige. Callaghan's fame

REVIEW ARTICLES



rose like a great  insubstantial balloon; it was quickly  brought to earth, and  by Callaghan himself,  who  published the novel-A  Passion in Rome -which not even his most devoted admirer could compare with  the  masterpieces of the Russian   Golden  Age.
If ever  an  author learnt the  bitter  re­ wards  of an  unjustified elevation, it  was Callaghan  on   this   occasion.   The   hunt  was on,  the  reviewers  a  pack  in full  cry, and   the  incident  reached its  deplorable climax  when  the  author, run  to earth in a  Fighting Words  programme, turned on   his   critics   with    all   the   petulance of a  bitterly  disappointed man.  One  can have   little   sympathy  with   Callaghan's performance   on   this   occasion.   In   pub­  lishing   his  work,  a  writer  automatically places  it  before  the  world  for  judgment, and,  with  as  much   dignity   and   detach-
 ment  as he can  muster, he should  accept both   the  blame   and   the  praise.   In   the long  run,   an   honest   adverse   critic   is  a better   friend   to  an  author than   a  critic who  out  of  some  error   of  judgment or some mistaken  impulse  of good  will finds in  him  the  seeds  of  a  greatness he  does not  really  possess.
But   when   all  is  said,  the  false  fame
created by Edmund Wilson's  indiscretion and   the   reaction  that    followed   so   in­ evitably   are   only  incidents  in  the  kind of   ephemeral  public    career    that   runs  parallel  to an  author's real  career-that exemplified  in his actual works. We have  to   forget   what    was   said   in   the   New Yorker  and   on  Fighting Words, and   to judge  Callaghan's works  for  themselves. Is  A  Passion  in  Rome   a  good  and  con­ vincing  novel?  And  what  relation does it bear  to Callaghan's other  writing? These




Robert  Gihhings: 		A  Bibliography by  Mary   Kirkus and Patience  Empson


For   forty   years   Robert  Gibbings was   an   out­ standing  figure  in   the   world   of   books,   as   he fulfilled    the    functions  of   typographer,   artist, writer  and   book   designer.  He   will   always   be remembered as a  leader in  the  revival  of  wood­  engraving  in   the   twenties,  and   as  director for nine  years  of  the  Golden  Cockerel Press.  Robert Gibbings set   his  seal   upon   his   period,  and   a record   of  his   tremendous  energy   and   creative output  is  contained  in   these   pages,   which   list over  r,soo  of his engravings.
Price  $g.oo


J. M. Dent & Sons (Canada) Limited
!00 SCARSDALE ROAD, DON MILLS, ONTARIO I I 32 ROBSON STREET, VANCOUVER, B.C.

REVIEW ARTICLES



are  the questions a cntic must ask, and particularly when-as  seems  to  me  the case   with   Callaghan-the  author has reached a  turning point  in  his  develop­ ment.
A  Passion  in  Rome differs  from  Cal­ laghan's  earlier    novels   in   one   obvious and   important  respect.   In   the  past   he dealt   with   his  own   country,   and   with people  who were for some reason at vari­ ance  with  the  societies  from  which  they sprang and  in which  they had  remained. There was  an  inevitable dialectical pro­  cess; the  rejection that  innocence or oddity  encountered was itself  a  depriva­ tion  that  intensified the desire for accept­ ance and  deepened the  tragedy  of  aliena­ tion. Harry Lane, in The Many-Coloured Coat) strives to establish  his blamelessness in   the   eyes  of   society;   Kip   Caley,   in More  Joy in  Heaven) lives in an euphoric illusion   of   public   acceptance  until   he realizes  the  hollowness  of his fool's para­ dise  and  is  slaughtered by  the  agents  of the society he sought  to please and  serve;  even  Peggy Sanderson in The Loved  and the   Lost   merely   contracts  out   of  one section  of   her  society  to  seek  her  place in   another-that of   the   Negroes  of Montreal,  and   her   real   tragedy   is  not her   gruesome  death  at   the   hands    of a  sex murderer, but  the  rejection by her chosen   people  that   just  precedes  it  dur­ ing   the    night-club   riot.   Even   Father Dowling   in  Such   is  my   Beloved   never rebels  against  the  Church that condemns him;  he  merely  tries  to put  into  practice according  to   his   own   lights   its   most sacred   injunctions,   and   the   misunder­ standing  of  his  efforts  brings  about   his mental  breakdown.  There is  no  escape, nor  is  there   a  real   longing  for  escape;  each   misfit  plays  out  his  tragedy  within  a  society   that   breeds   him,   rejects   him
 and   then   destroys  him.
In  A  Passion  in  Rome the  sequence  is at  last  broken.  From   the  very  beginning when   the   photographer  Sam   Raymond feels  scared   and   alone  in  a  city  he  had never  seen  before,  the  emphasis is on  the contrast  between   the   environment and the   main    characters,  Sam   and    Anna Connel, whose  love affair  runs  its course in the magnificent but alien  surroundings of   antique  and   papal    Rome.  Both   of them   were   failures  at   home-Sam  an unsuccessful  painter   turned   newspaper photographer and  Anna  a  singer  ruined by  drink  -but both   escape   from   their North American world-the own  world that  had  destroyed  the earlier heroes and heroines -and  seek  new  places  to  find themselves    again.    Sam,   who   had    felt "alone" in  his  own  country, wonders as he drives  into  Rome  from  the  airport "if there  couldn't still  be some  one  place  in the  world  where  a man's life might   take on   meaning";  Anna,  who   has   Italian blood   in   her   veins,  creates   the   fantasy that   she   is  a  "Roman  woman",  when she  in  fact  never  anything more  than   a displaced and  disoriented American.  In­ evitably, both  Sam  and  Anna  fail  to find a   world   which   will  submerge   them  in either  acceptance  or   destruction;  their Rome    is   always    the    false   Rome    of tourists   and   pilgrims,  the  grand   fa ade behind  which  the  little dark  Romans live out   their    inscrutable   lives  beyond   the reach  of transient aliens. They  are  forced to   face   each   other,  to  work   out   their agonies  and  problems in  the  closeness of a   symbolic   single   room   rather  than   in the   forest   of   society,   and   at   last,   re­ generated,  they  are  able  to  part   heroic­ ally  and  face  the  future with  the  exult­  ance  bred   of  self-discovery.   Home  will no   longer    have   the   power   to   destroy

REVIEW ARTICLES



them.  For  once  Callaghan has  written a novel  which  ends,  if not  exactly  happily, at  least  triumphantly, without the  death or moral  destruction of the leading characters. It  is  a   departure  from   an established pattern,  and   any   departure by a  mature author stirs  one's  interest.
Such  an interest is ill-rewarded by A Passion in Rome. It is clumsy,  prolix and dull.   The  structure  is  ramshackle, the characters do not convince, the prose is Callaghan's worst. Let us begin with his people.
There are  two  kinds of literary  plausi­
bility-that which  comes  from  creating a   naturalistic  illusion   of  life,  and   that which   comes   from   creating  a  symbolic pattern so self-consistent that   the  reader will accept it  apart from  any  thought of ordinary  realism. Callaghan,  though  he probably    sees  himself   as  a   naturalistic writer,  had  never  been  strong  on  plausi­ bility  in  this  sense.  His  details  are  slip­ shod,   and   his   characters   often   behave with    the    kind    of    inconsistency   that  springs   from   poor   co-ordination  rather than   from   a  Dostoevskian  sense  of  the supreme   illogicality  of   human  nature. The  fine and  well-poised  lady,  Catherine
 Carver,  in   The   Loved   and   the   Lost, screams  like a fishwife at  a hockey game, and   we  feel   embarrassed,  not   because Catherine's  actions   do   not   fit  logically together,  but   because   there   is  none   of that   strange   appropriateness  which   the outrageous  acts of  Svidrigailoff and Stavrogin  assume   once   they   have   been committed. The only  characters of  Cal­ laghan that  really  succeed  are  those  who are  simple  even  in  their  eventual ambi­ valence,  whose  actions  are  consistent no matter  how  equivocal  their   final  impli­ cations   may  be.  We  pause  in  our   judg­  ment  of  Peggy  Sanderson in  The   Loved and the  Lost, but  we never  feel  there  is a failure  of appropriateness in her actions once  we  have  become  aware  of her  pre­ dicament.  Nevertheless, it  is  impossible to   accept   even   the   best   characters  in Callaghan's novels as plausible  in  a  real­ istic  manner; their   very  simplicity  gives them  a curiously  obsessional  quality, and  they  only  become  plausible  if  we  regard them-as  we  regard   the  characters of Balzac-as  symbolic  figures  within   the structure of  moral  parables. For  Callag­ han   is,  essentially,   a  moralist;  he   uses his   works   to  make   certain  clear   state­ ments   a,bout   the   problems    that    affiict man   once  he  becomes  aware  of  himself as  an  individual,  which   usually  implies the  discovery  that   he  is in  opposition to society. In  such  terms,  and  in such  terms alone,   his  best  earlier   novels,  like  Such is My  Beloved and  More  Joy in Heaven, are  acceptable.
In  A  Passion in  Rome  even  this  kind
of  plausibility   falls  apart. In Rome,   the eternal city  which  suggests  the  cyclic recurrence of every  human problem  and at  the  same  time  the  perennial power  of man  to endure and  to triumph, the  Pope dies  and   the  great   drama is  enacted  of

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  widowhood  of  the  Church and   her re-marriage at  the  moment the new Pope is elected. Parallel with this public drama runs    the   private  drama  of   Sam   and Anna, both  bereaved beings in  the lower depths   of	spiritual    deprivation,    who come together  and  save   each other through the  trials  of  love. Such  mutual salvations  do  happen, even  in  real  life, but   Callaghan  does   not   make   that   of Sam   and   Anna   fictionally   credible.   His gift is not fitted  for  the task of describing exotic  events  and  grandiose backgrounds, and    his   characters,  wandering  in   the stucco  sets  of  a  film-maker's Rome,  are the   intrinsically   lifeless   puppets   of   a deterministic  viewpoint.  Callaghan  has never  dared   to  present,  in  his  novels  at least,   a  character  as  he  merely   is;  the way  he  has  become  so in  the  victimising past  is always  abundantly presented, but never   has  the  curriculum  vitae  been  so uglily  obstrusive   as  in  the  cases  of  Sam and  Anna.  Their triumphant recovery  is a   projection   of   every   psycho-analyst's dream, but  it is the  least believable  event in  the  whole  novel  and  it  is shuffled off so summarily-in comparison with  the spreading laxness  of  the  rest of the  book
-that one  feels  the  author himself  did
not  find  it  very convincing.
The mechanically exemplary nature of Sam  and   Anna  make  them  unsuccessful either  as  straight  realistic   characters or as  the   types  of  effective   parable;  their failure  is  most   clearly   revealed   in   the way   they  speak.   Callaghan's  characters have  always  talked  in a Callaghane:e patois,   unlike   anything  one  is  likely  to hear   in  the  streets,   but  usually  idiosyn­ cratic  enough    to   be   acceptable   in   its pebbly  laconism. Sam and  Anna  talk out their   passion  with  a  prosy  dullness.
 "Well,  that's that," she said flatly. "What do you mean?"
"I don't get  to sing,  do  I?" "Sing  where?"
"Well,   in  one  of  the  spots  around   here. What   was  I supposed   to  be  getting  ready for all this  time?"
"Sing  around here?"
"What's the  matter? I'm  at  home  here."

And  so they  go on.  The passage  is taken out   of  context,  but   it  would   be  wrong in  any  context.
Some   of   the   faults  of   A  Passion  in
Rome may  have  come  from  hasty  writ­ ing;  a feeling of exhaustion  pervades the novel  from  end   to  end.  But  in  a  larger  sense   it   seems   to   prove   what    I  have  always  suspected;   that   Callag,han's is  a gift   best   used   in   portraying  those   mo­ ments  of  revelation  which  result  in good short  stories,  and   that   as  he  proceeds   to more  ambitious  works  it  thins  out   and becomes  inadequate for  the  complexities of large  structures and  sustained  charac­ terization.  The   publishers   call   this   a "major  novel", and   that   is  clearly   what  Callaghan has  attempted  to  write;  it  is as  if  a  proficient   lapidary  had   tried  to carve    a   sculpture   in   the   manner  of Michelangelo.



INNER OR OUTER FLAW?
 




E. B. Gose


GERARD BESSETTE. Not  For Every Eye. Macmillan $g.oo.
MARIE-CLAIRE BLAis. Tete-Blanche. McClelland and  Stewart, Cloth, $3.50.
Paper $2.35.


WHEN   THE  tight world of feudalism  began breaking  up   during the Renaissance, a new literary  form emerged: the novel, in the form of the picaresque  tale.   Its   rogue   hero   existed by  virtue  of  his  opposition  to  outworn moral  and  social codes. If French-Canada can be seen as another tight  world, held rigidly  to  the  past  by its  parochial  struc­ ture,  then  Not   for Every  Eye may  herald another breakup. Unlike the  traditional picaresque  tale,   Mr.   Bessette's   novella does   not   have   a   series  of   adventures (although the  central action is carefully  framed by the  journeys  to  and  from  the provincial  Quebec town  in which  it takes place).  Nor  is  the   hero   a  conventional rogue.   Rather  he   is  that  twentieth­ century  favourite,  the   disengaged hero, the  intellectual who  would   rather drink by himself  than fight  physical  or social battles.  But   like   the   picaresque  hero, M.  Jodoin has  so much   pressure  put  on him  by  the  social  system  and   the  selfish people   who   have   accommodated   them­ selves  to  it  that   he  is  finally  moved   to action, to  an  immoral coup  which  gulls the  guller   (his  former boss) .
The bleak   world   which   Mr.   Bessette
purposefully creates to  characterize  pro­ vincial  life and  the  first-person  hero  who is caught by it is broken  only  once,  when M.  Jodoin is about to  be  forced   to  act. The hero's  reaction brings  to the  surface
 the  principle at  work in  this low-pressure novel.

Once outside, I perceived that the weather  was  fine.  I was  surprised :  ordina­ rily  I pay  no  attention  to  the  temperature unless    it   is   extreme  and    uncomfortable. Even   then  it  is  purely a  sensory  impression which  does  not  penetrate  my  consciousness. But   no   matter.  That   particular   morning the  sun  had   caught the  street on  the  flank and   inflamed  the   shop   windows.  Perhaps it  was  this  dazzling  reflection that  brought me   out   of   my   shell   and    allowed  me   to take   in  the  intense blue   of  the   sky,  which  was  soft  as  silk  and   dotted with  tiny  round clouds  like  puffs  of  pipe  smoke.  The sensa­  tion  was  so  new,  so  powerful, that I paused a   moment in admiration. Those who are frequently touched by  such  a  feeling are fortunate. At  least,   I suppose they  are.  But then  ugliness  must  distress them, too,  so perhaps  the   whole   thing  balances up.   But no  matter.

Picaresque novels  run   the  risk  of  los­ ing  the  reader's interest because  of  their artless  surface.  And,  being  a  reaction to society, they  often  reveal  too  little  of the author's sensibility   to  excite  the  reader. Miss Blais' new  novel  is  therefore a wel­ come  antidote to  Mr.  Bessette's.  Treat­ ing   the  same   ingrown   society,  she  has written   a  poetic  novel  concerned mainly with  the  individual and   the  cosmos.  If the  texture of Tete Blanche  is less dense than   that   of  her   first   novel,   La   Belle Bete   (Mad   Shadows), it  still  has  many virtues.
Like  La  Belle  Bete,  Tete Blanche  por-

REVIEW ARTICLES



trays  the  evolution of a  young  sensibility. Hate and first  love  are  central to both, as are the   protagonists'  ambiguous  feelings toward   their  mothers.  In  making  a  boy, instead  of   a   young  woman,  the   centre of  her  new  novel, Miss  Blais  has  taken a step   away  from  subjectivity, as  is  also indicated by  the  form (three sets  of  let­ ters  and a dairy, as well  as three sections of   direct narration) . The   effort   is  not  entirely  successful, although  the  mixture of  conventions is  as  easy  for  the   reader to  accept in  practice as is  the  diary con­ vention  of  Not    for   Every  Eye.   Because of   her    poetic   temperament,  Miss   Blais finds   it  natural  to  be  universal  but   has difficulty  being   merely objective.  Conse­ quently  the   reader  finds   the  coming  of womanhood  in   Emilie  more  immediate than most  of  the  experience of  her  lover,
Tete  Blanche, the   central  figure. Since
 Miss Blais has  chosen to focus  on  the childhood  and  adolescence of   her   pro­ tagonist, the  novel  is also  weakened  by a certain   precociousness and   sentimental­ ity.   But   as   was  even   more  true of  her  first  novel, Miss  Blais is able  to  rise above these   defects. The  rigour of  her   imagi­ nation  transcends   stock   emotion.  Cap­ able  of  sensitive  feehng, her  imagination yet   looks   beyond   weakness  to   find   the  strength    to    connect  with    the    outside world, to  communicate.
In  fact,  the   theme  of   the   necessity
of   communication  helps  to   justify    the varied  form  of  this   novel. Part  One  is in  the  third person, showing the  thoughts of   a  five-year-old Tete  Blanche who   is tempted  to   harm  a   sick   school   chum, which  he   does   without detection. Part Two  switches to   letters  to   his   mother, ending  with  her   death.  Part  Three  re-







INDEX


An  Index  of issues Nos.  I   to  I 2  of Canadian Literature, covering  the first  three  years  of publication,  will be sent  to  all  subscribers with  the
next issue, No. I3.









66

REVIEW ARTICLES



verts  to  the  interior with  a  diary  of  the boy's  reaction to  death and   his  meeting with  Emilie,  "a  spring, a  resurrection?" Part  Four,  love   letters   exchanged   be­ tween   Tete Blanche   and   Emilie,  consti­ tutes   another  attempt  at   communica­ tion,  culminating in  his  going  to  spend some   of   the   summer   with   her   family (fatherless, as Miss Blais' families  usually are). Part Five  is  third person  narrative, giving   the   thoughts  of   both   lovers.   It concludes  with  Emilie  pulling away from Tete  Blanche. "He knew  that   he  would not   find   Emilie   again   until   later,   that  she  would  be transformed and  as remote  as a woman." Part  Six re-establishes com­ munication  with   another  set  of  letters, this  time  between   Tete Blanche   and  his former  schoolmaster, M. Brenner, who emerges  as both  human and  tough.

I  am   strict  with    the   children  because    I cannot be gentle. These little fellows  are growing  up  amid   all  sorts   of  privations; I know    that  when    they    leave    the    school, they  will  be  hard put   to  it  to  develop into well-balanced men;  but   I cannot repair all the   wrongs done  by  parents, living   or  lost.
.  .  .  I  love   these children;  that  is  all   I
can   do; and   I think I love   them   cruelly.
 Against   the   will  of  Tete  Blanche,   who would like to retain a cloistered  and "mournful  sense  of  security," M.  Bren­ ner  forces  him   to  stop   living  in  school and  to  move  to  the  town,  admonishing, "How   guilty  you  will  feel,  later  on,  for having   preferred  night   and   a  spurious peace  to  the  sun   of   your  fifteen   years, which  should   be  the  sun  of  beauty." In his  last  letter, Tete  Blanche doubts  his ability  to  break  out  of  his  solitary  pride  into   love   (communication) .  In   a  short Epilogue,  we  see him  on  a  street,  strug­  gling  in  a  compelling phantasmagoria of pursuit  and  loss.
Those   who  feel  that   the  novel  ought to  deal  with  society  will  appreciate Mr. Bessette's   uninspired   irony    and    satire more   than   Miss  Blais'  emotional  strug­ gles.  Self-deprecating though  he  is,  Mr.  Bessette's  hero  is finally  content  to  take his  direction from   the   holes  left  in  the social  framework.  Miss   Blais  insists  on what  seems to me a finer  truth for North America,    that    the   important   problems which  face  the  individual must  be taken  as given and  internal, not  blamed on  the system.








MONTREAL IN FICTION

WILLIAM   WEINTRAUB.    Why   Rock   the   Boat?
Little,  Brown. $4-75·
ABRAHAM  STILLMAN.  Mariette.
Burns &  McEachern.

ONE   READS Mariette uttering  exclama­ tions  out   loud.   They   give  the  reader   a little   traction with  which  to  keep  going on  the  slippery  surface  of  this  narrative. Mon Dieu,  quel  cliche!  The book  is set in  Montreal and  concerns the  very  rich Allard   family  watched over  by an  even richer Grandfather Paradis, and  the very rich  Levy  family.  Les  Enfants du  Para­ dis   become   tangled  up   with   the   Levy spawn  when Chance  flings   Mariette Allard into   the  arms   of  Eric  Levy  and the   two   help    the   author  spin   out   a "poignant  story   of   young   love   versus devotion  to  one's  family", as  the  blurb­ writer, neatly  falling in with  the author's style,  puts  it.
The  trouble is,  both   the  author  and the   blurb-writer  are   serious.  Were   this a Harlequin Romance, it  could  probably be  ignored and   good  luck  to  it,  but  its tone  and  presentation forbid  the reviewer any other attitude but  that  of the author. The temptation is to sit down  and  write the  man  a long  letter  and  say, look here, to   begin   with   novels   are   supposed   to have    characters   in    them    and    when they're faced  with  situations that  gravely threaten their  very survival  as the people

68
 they   think   themselves  to  be,  then   they have to react.  Because you say they have shaken  hands  it does not  mean  they  have met, or because you make them throw themselves across  a bed to cry it does not signify    that    they    are    suffering.    You should   not   be  afraid to  create them   so that they  rebel  a  little   when  you  try  to shove  them   around. Like  God  Himself, you can  only go so far  with  creation and then  your  people  are  on their  own.  After that   the  best  you  can  do  is force   them to prove  themselves.  Do  this and  perhaps your   use  of  the  language  will  improve too  because,  instead of writing  a  bookful of  statements which   are  as  tired  as  any plot  quite  naturally is, you  will find  that you  are   writing in  a  way  that   will  be governed by your  characters and,  in  the end,  your  characters will  be  the  plot.  If a  real  French-Canadian Catholic  Mari­ ette   met   a  real   Jewish-Canadian   Eric,  both  of  them  from  old  and  rich  bastion  families   in  their separate cults,  then  all hell should  break  loose. Instead you have created a  couple   of  cultural  wetbacks, cut   from  cardboard, and   placed   at   the mercy   of   a  plot   that   could   easily  have been   fashioned  by   a   sub-committee formed at  the  annual meeting of the Canadian  Authors' Association.  Sorry  to be  so  harsh,  and   probably patronizing too,  but  I think  you've  got  something to say about the  clash of religion  and society in  your   favourite  city.  As  a  reader I'd like   to  feel   it  and   live  it,  rather  than hear  about.
Let's cut  to  camera two.  The scene  is still  Montreal, but  the  picture is clearer. Why  Rock    the   Boat   is   about    a   cub reporter  on  the Montreal Daily Witness; his adventures are  intended to be funny, and   for   the   most   part   they   are.   The book  is written smoothly  and  with  com-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



mand. The point  here  is that  the  village pumps  we call newspapers in this country are   exactly   that.  This   incontrovertible truth  is  large   enough  to   support  Mr. Weintraub's satire  without strain  of  any kind,   and   Harry  Barnes,   the  cub,  is  a large   enough  character  to   sustain   the hyperbole around him.  A small-town boy who  has  come   to  the  city  with  stars  in his  eyes  about  big-time  journalism, he finds   his   paper   is   interested   only   in Names  and   reporting   service  club luncheon speeches  in order to gain circu­ lation  and  not  offend   anyone,  especially an  advertiser. You  would  expect him  to rebel.  Not  Harry. He  isn't  going  to rock the  boat.  Harry, in short,  is every yellow­ blooded   Canadian  boy,  and  his  turning of   Montreal's   newspaper   world   upside down  comes more  from  his backing  away from   its  problems  than   from   facing   up to  them.  What  happens is  that   he  falls in  love,  and   we  all  know  what   an  un­ controllable emotion that  is. And  he falls in love with  a girl rebel  on another news­ paper.   Hence the  conflict:  he  must talk like  a  rebel   while  in  her  company and  act  like a  typical  "Witness  man" around the   paper.  Eventually the  strain   is  too much.  He does rebel, and with the help of a lot of plot  machinery  he brings  ruin  to the Witness, gets a better  job on the rival paper  and  probably  gets  the  girl  too.
There are  a lot of old  newspaper  jokes
in  this book, a lot of stereotype situations and    characters,  but    it   moves   along swiftly  and  it  is genuinely amusing.   Mr. Weintraub  does   not   have   the   coy   or high-school-annual approach  to  humour that   so  many   of  our   would-be  comics have.   He   even   has   a   pretty   grown-up attitude toward sex. Occasionally he gets off   a   memorable  line,   and   always   his parodies  of   after-dinner  speeches,   edi-
 



RABINDRANATB TAGORE
A BIOGRAPHY

BY KRISHNA  KRIPALANI

This  absorbing study of  the  life  and   work  of the    great  Indian   poet    gives    a   memorable picture  of   the   complete man. The   author's wife  is  Tagore's grand-daughter.
$7.00

HARRIETT SHELLEY
FIVE LONG YEARS

BY LOUISE SCHUTZ  BOAS

A   life   of   Shelley's  first   wife   has   long   been needed. This  account of  her   brief   and   tragic life  shows  her  importance in  Shelley's  develop­ ment   from   crime  novelist to  poet.
$6.oo

WASHINGTON IRVING
MODERATION DISPLAYED

EDWARD WAGENKNECHT

A   fresh    view    of   Irving  which    reveals   his urbane and  civilized  qualities and  provides a portrait  of   a   charming  and    attractive  man.
$s.so

OXFORD



6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



torials   and   the   tribal   customs   of  clubs and  convention-holders of all kinds are satisfyingly  vicious.  I must  say  I  began the  book with  the bored and  cynical approach of  a  "Witness   man" scanning the   head   table   at   a  Rotary  luncheon, but  it  was  not  long  before  I was feeling genuine delight. And  after  I had  finished the  book I was ready to hope  that  Mr. Weintraub would  not  try  to  do  this  sort of  thing  again  but  would  go on  and  use his   genuine  talent  to   dig   deeper   and more   surely  among  the  roots  of   Cana­ dian   life.  He  mig;ht even  find  that truly comic  hero:  the  man  who  knows  some­ thing,    who   has   discovered   a   positive truth about   the  world  in  which  he lives. I  have  a feeling  Harry Barnes  was lean­  ing  in  that  direction.
ROBERT HARLOW



ORDINARY PEOPLE

NORMAN   LEVINE.   One   Way   Ticket.  McClel­
land   &  Stewart. $3.50.

CANADIAN   FICTION needs   more   writers like  Norman  Levine   who   will   lift   the short   story  from   its  secondary   place  in Canadian letters  to  a  position  of  promi­ nence.   Callaghan  has  given   some  good short   stories,   and   now   there  is  Levine  who   has   consciously   shaped   his  stories into    compact   pieces    of    construction, economy,   and   apt   characterization.  In them    manner  and   matter  are   closely linked,   and   are   an   end   in   themselves. Levine's  stories  are  not  associated   to  a larger  scheme  as are  those of many  short story   writers    (Katherine  Mansfield's New  Zealand  stories  are  an  example of
 this). Rather, when his  stories are finished,  he has said all that  he feels is necessary.   Finely   wrought, carefully  ex­ plained,  Levine's  stories   are   complete; the  reader  does  not   wonder  what   hap­ pened   before  the  action  began,  or  what  will  occur  in  the  future.  There is never a  vagueness   about  the  stories;   never   is the   reader  left  in   obvious   doubt.   This  certainty, or  lucidity, in  his  work,  is  his most compelling quality, the factor which makes Levine a distinguished writer among the  many  new  Canadian  writers. He  is a sincere  and  simple  teller  of tales; in  an  age  which   boasts  of  being  astute and  knowing  in  experience, Levine's  un­ sophisticated  stories   appeal, if   only   be­ cause  they  are  always  readily  understood and   unequivocal.
Levine   does  not  experiment with  the
story  form, as a novelist  frequently  does. Nor does he develop  and strengthen the theme  as  the  story  progresses; it  is  com­ pletely  thought out  before  he  begins.  In One   Way   Ticket   there   are  eight   short stories  and   one   long   one,  each   dealing with   a   number  of   journeys.   The   long story  is  the  poorest,  where   the  focus  is more  on  character  and the  episodes  are selected  to display  the  character's person­ ality.  In  the  others,  however, the charac­ ter  is  selected   to  point out  a  significant episode.    It  is  hoped    that   Levine   will stay  with  the  story  form,  for  this  collec­ tion  indicates that   if  he  were  to  write  a novel  the  quality  of  sustainment  would be  lacking, as  it  is in  this  book  in  "The Playground".
The   title   of   the   book  is  misleading.
The    publisher  tells   us,   on   the   jacket blurb,   that   these   are   stories  where   the narrator holds  a  return ticket;   it  is  the other people  who  have  to  remain where they  are,  who  have  only  'one  way tickets'

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



that    the   book   is  about.  But   even   the narrator at  times  has  a  'one  way  ticket'. He  seems to want  to leave  what  he finds, but    he   never    does;    he   finds   similar things  each   time.
There is, however, a diversified  picture of life in Levine's stories;  he moves from one  extreme to  another in  attitude and is careful not  to merge  these into an ineffectual medium. On  one  level his stories are complete with strong  realism, ordinary simplicity of common men,  and graphic actual description. On  the  other level  there   are   the  fantasy and  psycho­ logical    studies,    as   in    "Ringa   Ringa Rosie", interspersed with  lyrical  passages and   subtleties  which  are  interesting  in themselves.
Levine  is a  sincere  author who  writes
stories  showing  a  unique ability  to  tell  a complete  tale.  Showing   does  not  neces-



THE VANCOUVER STATIONERS LTD.


Printing
Lithography
Commercial
Stationery





TRINITY  9-5341
3642 COMMERCIAL DRIVE, VANCOUVER 12, B.C.
 sarily  mean   displaying.  Levine's   stories, indeed,  make  little  obvious  display  at  all. That, perhaps is why many  people  would prefer   the   stories   of  a  Lawrence  or  a Huxley.  Levine's work  is free  from affec­ tation. His  full  appeal is not  immediate. The  reward   with  the  stories  of  Norman Levine  lies not  merely  in  the  number of separate  examples of  fine  stories  in  this volume,  but  in  the  way  that   they  go so well  together  to  produce  a  wonderfully rich    and    varied    picture   of   ordinary people. 	DONALD STEPHENS


HERO WITHOUT
A FACE

ROBERT  D.   FERGUSON.  Fur  Trader: The Story of  Alexander Henry. Macmillan. $2.50.

Fur  Trader, most  recent  of  Macmillan's Great   Stories  of  Canada, is  the  second tale  Robert Ferg,uson  has  written for  the series.  His  first  contribution, Man   from St.  Malo, set  a  high  standard  both  for himself and for other contributors. Fur Trader, though a  passably  interesting story,  fails  by a  long  portage to  live  up to  the  promise  of  his  first  book  and  dis­ mally   fails   to   take    advantage  of    his source material, Henry's Travels and  Ad­ ventures    in    Canada    and    the   Indian Territories Between the  Years  1760  and I776.
Mr.   Ferguson   states   in   his  foreword
that   Henry's Travels  and  Adventures is "one  of the best books ever  written about a  trader's experiences". It is  all  of  that and  more.  One  of the  first  traders, after the  fall  of  New  France,  to  travel   into the  Indian Territories, Henry was  cour­ ageous,  shrewd, perceptive,  humorous and   intellectually  curious  as   well  as  a

BOOKS IN REVIEW



writer   of  considerable talent.   It is  diffi­ cult  to   believe that  anyone   reading Henry's narrative could  fail  to  perceive these   qualities  in  the  man.   But  in  Fur Trader:  the  Story   of Alexander  Henry, the  hero  is a  man  without a  face.
Mr.    Ferguson's  failure    to   flesh   the
body  and  delineate the  features appears to  be  due   to  lack  of  sympathy   for  his subject  and/ or  to  a  failure   of   percep­ tion   and   to  an  inability   to  organize   his material into  a  strong  narrative centred around  Henry.  An   obvious  example  of Mr. Ferguson's  failure of  perception occurs    in   his   narration  from   Henry's Travels  and   Adventures  of  a  revealing  and  humorous incident which  took  place when  Henry, after  being captured by the Indians, was adopted by an Indian family and  spent  a winter  with them  in the wilderness. From  some close observations Henry  made  one  day,  while out  hunting, he  believed  a  bear  was  hibernating in  a hole  near  the  top  of a huge  tree.  Henry and  the  Indian family  cut  the tree  down and  Henry   shot  the  bear.  Mr.  Ferguson quotes  from  Henry's narrative that  when the  Indians reached the  dead  bear  they "took   its  head   in  their   hands,   stroking and kissing it several times; begging a thousand  pardons  for  taking   away   her life;  calling  her  their  relation  and  grand­ mother;  and   requesting  her   not  to  lay the  fault upon   them,  since  it  was  truly an   Englishman   that    had   put   her   to death". So far  this is fine but Mr.  Fergu­ son, not  perceiving  Henry's dry  humour, misses  and   omits  the climax   at  the  be­ ginning  of  the   next   paragraph:   "This ceremony was  not  of long  duration and if it  was  I  that  killed  their  grandmother they  were  not themselves  behind  in what  remained to  be  performed." This  is only one  of  innumerable lost opportunities to

72
 fill  in  the  features  of  the  face  with   its ironic  eyes  and  behind them  the  shrewd and   perceptive mind.
Lack  of sympathy with  the subject   (or
a  deadline which   did  not  provide  suffi­ cient    time)     provides   the   most    likely reason,   too,  for  an  episodic   and  poorly organized narrative.  Henry   is left  stand­ ing,  faceless  and  forgotten in  the  wilder­  ness for  over  twenty  pages  while  histori­  cal  background, much   of  it  unnecessary, is  sketched   in,  and   in  only  thirty-eig,ht pages  the   narrative  hurries through  the last  two-thirds of  his  travels  and  adven­ tures.
Nevertheless,  Mr.   Ferguson  has  writ­
ten,  as  I  said  at   the   beginning  of  this review,   a   passably   interesting  story.   If he  has  been  able  to  do  this,  in  spite  of all  the  sins  of  error   and   omission  men­ tioned   here,   we  can   look  optimistically towards the  publication of  his third  book.
INGLIS F. BELL


NO TRUE
LIFE

ROBERT FINCH.  Dover  Beach  Revisited.
Macmillan. $3.00

PARTICULARLY in  a young country, which must  cling  to  its  illusions,  having  as  yet a limited  number of achievements to substitute  for   them,   accuracy  and   can­ dour  will often  be taken  for  malevolence. In  a  radio   programme  years  ago,  when Douglas  Grant   deplored   the   fact   that  there   were  two  kinds  of  book  reviewing in Canada, a specially indulgent standard being  reserved  for Canadian books,  Miss P.  K.  Page  in  turn  deplored his  accept­ ance   of   this   situation,  observing    that  such  dishonesty   was  bound   to  foster  in-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



feriority, and  no doubt inferiority-feelings too.  That Miss  Page  was far  in  advance of her fellow-writers (even, according to Edmund Wilson,  the  Chekhovs among them) a recent  performance by Morley Callaghan in Fighting  Words will have made  painfully clear.   You  may  also  re­ member the  hysterical protests  of  certain Montreal   poets    against  the   criticisms candidly levelled at their  work by Chester Duncan.  With   the  atmosphere  as  hair­ trigger   touchy   as  this  it  may  seem  diffi­ cult  to  agree  with  Miss  Page,  but  agree  with   her   one  surely   must.   Mutual  ad­ miration  societies  don't foster  poets;  they destroy  them.   Candid  criticism   destroys only  poetasters, of whom  we have already  more than  our share.
Mr.  Finch's new volume  of verse has prefixed    to    it    the    text    of   Matthew Arnold's "Dover Beach". It  would  be  a slight  exaggeration, no  more,  to say that this is the  only  poem  in  the  book. If you accept  the   not   wholly  singular  premise that  a  poem  is a  representation, in language with a distinctive and  personal force,  of  a  distinctively  personal  experi­ ence,  mood,  or  idea,  you  will  find  your­ self  reading this  book,  as  I  have,  with  a mounting sense  of  outrage  and   sadness. The response  will not  be  confined  to  the versified    ( ?)   reportage   of   its   second section,    'The   Place   Revisited',   which attempts  to   deal    ('Planes  machine­ gunning    boat-loads   of    nurses   and wounded')    with   Dunkirk;  nor   to   the many   distracting  Swinburnisms in   Mr. Finch's   diction    ('To  worry   and   weary the  lotus  of  creation',  'Piling and   riling the beaches'), the insistent  alliterations (passim),  or   the   rhythmic  debility   of many  lines:

It is the  voice  of law
Without  flaw,
 An alleluia, pure  . . . .

To    account   for    it    one    need   invoke neither   the   author's  threat,  'Never   be­ lieve   a   metaphor   is   dead  / Or   mori­ bund', nor  the  thoroughness with  which his  cliches  have   conformed  to  it:   here, inevitably,    the    cancer   'gnaws',   peace is   inennarable,  and  the   heart,   re­  encountering  'one  once  loved  so much',
'Ref eels the  pulling of a chain  and  ball'. Though  they  offer  their   own  local  wit­ ness  to  it,  the   weakness   in  Mr.  Finch's work  lies deeper than   these  things.  The  truth   is  that    his   poems   have   no   real inner   urgency,   no  true  life,  and  that  in consequence  they   have   clothed    them­  selves,  not   in   the   inevitability  of  their utterance, but  in  pastiche. I  am  not  at the  moment  concerned with  the  specific dependence    of   eleven   of   them  on Arnold's  fine  poem,  a dependence which often  entails quotation and,  when it does, a cruel  kind  of contrast. I  mean  that  the sentiments    throughout   are    derivative,  sometimes   doing   homage  even   to   the worst  of   the  Georgians ('The  Garden') and  the  worst kind of religiosity  ('Both'), and  that the language is therefore equally derivative,  applied   from    outside    with the  falsity  of a cosmetic.  To  substantiate this  judgment further  in  a  short  review seems unnecesary. If after  reading  Dover Beach    Revisited	you    find    it    unjust, further examples will  not  convince   you. If just,  the   evidence  for   it   will  have crowded   upon   you  from   every  page.  A reviewer   has   perhaps  an   obligation  to the   author  of  a  book  he  condemns to suggest   some   directions  in   which    his work  could  profitably move,  but  in  the present  case  that   is an  obligation which I  despair   of  fulfilling. Mr.   Finch   seems to  me  at   his  limited    best  when   he  is

73

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



writing epigrammatically or tersely ('The Gulf'), but  as short  lines are also an undeniable hazard to  him-
The roaring waves  draw  back, Then fling  and, after the slack, Again  begin.  Yau  found
In their  sound
A thought.

-it is  hard   to   tell   him   where   to  go.
'Away'   perhaps gets  it.          JOHN PETER


SHAKESPEARIAN VIEWPOINTS

DAVID  GALLOWAY,    Shakespeare,  Seven   Talks for    C.B.C. Radio. C.B.C.  Publications Branch,  Paper  Cover  $1.oo.   Hard   Cover
$J.7s.
Stratford   Papers  on  Shakespeare, 1960.  Gage.
$2-50.
a.  I.  SISSON.   Shakespeare's    Tragic   Justice.
Gage. $2.50.

BEFORE  THE c.B.c.  began  giVmg to  the talks  in  its  University of  the  Air  Series the   dignity   of   publication,  only  finan­ cially desperate academics could afford  to expend  the  time  and  energy  required  for serious   radio   talks   in   return   for   what the  public  purse  could  afford  to  pay for them.   (There is a  rumour that  one such scholar  conscientiously  acknowledged  his indebtedness  by   pasting    "Courtesy  of C.B.C."  labels   inside   the   doors   of  his new  kitchen  cabinets.)  Publication, how­ ever,   is  both   a   recognition  of   and  an incentive  to  such   thorough   preparation as  lies  behind   David  Galloway's  Shake­ speare.   By  the   nature  of  the   circum­ stances   its  approach  is  general   and   its tone   semi-popular,  but   the   author  as­ sumes an  intelligent and  interested  audi­ ence   and   never   makes   the   mistake   of talking down  to it.  He  does  not  hesitate,

74
 however, to lighten  and frequently to illuminate his academic material with personal reminiscence. Wisely, he begins with  Shakespeare in  the  theatre, and discusses   the   conditions  of   both   Eliza­ bethan  and   modern  stage  presentation. Sections on  Comedy,  Tragedy,  History,  textual problems, and  the  universality of Shakespeare follow,  and while  in  all  this there is  not  much  that   is  new,  there   is much  that    is   sound.  The    chapter  on "The Printers and  the Text" is a triumph of  simplification without  distortion, and the  comments on  the  Comedies, in  par­ ticular,  demonstrate  perceptiveness as well  as  the   thorough  knowledge which is evident throughout  this  volume.
It  is  gratifying  that   Canadian   pub­ lishers   seem   at   last   to  be  losing   their  reluctance  to   publish,  independently  of simultaneous   publication   in   Britain  or the   United  States,   anything other   than  textbooks.  W. J. Gage  pioneered in  this development,  insofar   as  academic  writ­ ing  is concerned, with  the  publication of the  first  Stratford  Shakespeare Seminar Papers. The  Stratford series is especially pleasing  in  its  outstanding readable type on  good  paper  generously margined  and in  the  absence  of any  impression of nig­ gardliness in  matters of format. The volumes  possess dignity  without  dullness. For example, the stiff-paper covers of a subdued, mottled grey prove, on closer examination,  to   be   a   photostat  of  an ancient  rough-cast wall  "with   lime  and hair" visibly "knit  up"  in it.
The  volume   includes   an   account  of the  origins  of the first Shakespeare Semi­ nar    by   Berners   W.   Jackson,   and  five papers,  two   by   Professor   C.   J.   Sisson and  one  each  by John Cook, R. A. Huber and    Roberton   Davies.    Of    these,    the carefully   scientific    analysis   of    Shake-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



speare's  secretary  hand   by  Mr.   Huber, Director of  the  R.C.M.P. Crime  Detec­ tion  Laboratory, is  the  most  interesting, as  Robertson  Davies'  plea   for   "Shake­ speare  with  gusto" in  "Shakespeare Over the   Port" is  the   most   delightful.  John  Cook,  who  is  supervising  the  music  for two   of   the   plays   during  the   current Stratford  season,  makes  a  plea  for  con­ temporary   music  for    contemporary Shakespeare  productions  in   "Shake­ speare   and   Music", and   has  some  good things   to  say  about  the  importance of music  for  a  "sense  of   occasion" in  the theatre.  The  tone   of   Professor   Sisson's "King  John, A  History  Play  for  Eliza­ bethans"  occasionally seems  to  be  level­ led   at   a   backward  Secondary  Modern class,  but   is  redeemed  by  such   bits  of truly	Shakespearean 	wordplay	as, "...  they  sacked  the  houses  and  money of  all  Jews."  "Shakespeare the  Writer", on  the  other   hand, is more  general   but more  scholarly   in  approach, and  makes an   interesting  case  for   an   earlier   date for  the  early  plays.
Professor   Sisson  is  also  the  author of the  second  Gage   publication  on  Shake­ speare,   Shakespeare's Tragic   Justice, which  comprises  essays on  public  justice in  Macbeth, private   justice  in  Othello, the  dilemma of  Hamlet, and  the  quand­ ary  of  King  Lear.  The author sees Mac­  beth  as  a  tragedy of  deep  damnation in which  pity  suffuses  terror, and   sets  the problem   of  supernatural   solicitation  in the context of Jacobean politics. The Spanish  names  in  Othello suggest  to him a  connection  with   the  expulsion   of  the Moors in  1598, while contemporary parallels   are    adduced   to   demonstrate that   Lear's division  of  his  kingdom   was closer  to the  realities  of life than  to fairy­ tale   ritual.  Professor   Sisson's  arguments
 present   some   remarkably  keen   insights and  some equally  remarkable blind  spots. He   denies,   for   example,  the   possibility of  irony  in  the   description  of  Macbeth in  Act  I  Sc.  ii,  and   completely  ignores the charges  of unnaturalness ag nst demona in  his  vehement insistence  that considerations of race  play no part  in the problems  of Othello. On  the  other  hand, his  analysis  of  Hamlet's  dilemma makes sense  according  to   the   whole   play,  as too   few   such    discussions   do.   In    all, Shakespeare's Tragic   Justice  contains as much   thought-provoking material  in   a hundred pages  of personal  interpretation as   many  over-documented   works of scholarship do  in  five hundred.
MARION B. SMITH


HARVEST  HOUSE
Pierre Jerome
BROTHER  ANONYMOUS
Lusty   ferment  in   Quebec   viewed   from the inside. $1.50  paper.
Henry D. Thoreau
A YANKEE  IN  CANADA
Mid-nineteenth century  Canada seen by North   America's  leading    nature  writer and  philosopher. $1.65 paper, $3.50 cloth.
Pierre  Laporte
THE  TRUE FACE  OF  DUPLESSIS Biography   and   PRIMER  OF   POWER.
$1.50  paper,  $3.50  cloth.
E. C. Lindeman
THE  MEANING OF  ADULT EDUCATION
Fundamental work by "father of adult education" in  North America. $2.00 paper,  $3.50  cloth.
A. F. Laidlaw
THE ANTIGONISH MOVEMENT Maritime  university  advances  a Canadian
region  through  economic   education  and
co-operatives (illustrated).  $2.75   paper,
$5.50  cloth.
Box  340  Westmount  Montreal  6,  P.Q.


75

BOOKS IN REVIEW


LE TALENT
DE FRECHETTE

LOUIS FRECHETTE.  Memoires  intimes.  Editions
Fides, Collection  du Nenuphar. $2.00.

lL  EST   ASSEZ  etrange de  constater que nos   celebres    poetes    du   siecle   dernier valent   beaucoup plus  par  leurs  textes  de prose  que  par  leurs  ronflants  poemes qui n'etaient la  plupart du temps que grandi­ loquents  discours   rimes.   Mais   il   faut,  pour  cela,  considerer !'ensemble  de  leur ceuvre  et  de  leurs  travaux et,  bien  sou­ vent,   depouiller  les  journaux  et  revues
de fepoque.
Songeons   un   instant a  Cremazie:  sa
correspondance, ses  pages  de  critique et
son  Journal  du  siege  de Paris, sont  d'un bon ecrivain. Ils  presentent certainement beaucoup plus d'interet que ses poemes pretentieux. Ainsi en est-il de Louis Frechette. Ses drames en vers  sont heureusement oublies,  et La Iegende d'un
peuple  que  nous  lisions, la  larme   a l'ceil
quand nous avions dix ans, nous paralt aujourd'hui etonnamment ridicule.  Par contre, ses Memoirs I ntimes  ( dont  le ton et   le   sujet   n'est   pas   sans   rappeler  la serie  de  contes  du  merne  auteur groupes sous le titre Originaux et Detraques) nous apportent des I'ecits d'un  autre age, des souvenirs d'enfance  d'un  homme   qui  a
\'ecu   une   periode    fort   interessante  de notre  historic.
Dans  ces  I'ecits qui  sont  d'un  ecrivain qui  sait  raconter, Louis  Frechette trace des  portraits d'une grande saveur; des petites  gens:   bucherons, mendiants,  arti­ sans,    representants   des   petits   metiers  d'antan; des hommes  celebres:  Chiniquy
et  Papineau; des  heros  legendaires:  Jos
Montferrand.
 


FI'echette  sait   donner  VIC    a  ses   per­ sonnages   et   il  nous   les  montre  comme  il   les  voyait   quand  il  etait   enfant.  II
raconte  ses  premieres  annees   a  l'ecole
avec  humour, en  accumulant les details, en fon;ant peut-etre le tableau, mais qu'importe apres-tout.
Ces   Memoires  Intimes,  publiees    en I goo  dans   Le  M onde  illustre  nous  per­ mettront  de   mieux   appi'ecier  le   talent de  Frechette, mais  surtout de  l'apprecier
a sa  juste  mesure; d'oublier ses mauvais
poemes   et  de  decouvrir !'excellent  pro­
sateur qu'il  fut.
Nous   avons   ainsi   besoin  de   temps   a
autre  de   secouer   nos   vieilles   1egendes
pour  mieux  voir  de quai  il retourne; tout le monde gagne  a ce  jeu. Ceci  me  parait
etre,  sur le plan  de l'histoire litteraire, un des   avantages  de   la   publication  de  ce livre.
JEAN-GUY PILON



A RIVER'S CENTURY

WILLIAM   E. GREENING.   The Ottawa.  McClel­
land  & Stewart.

The Ottawa begins  well enough.  A fore­ word   by  Merrill Denison   and  an  intro­ duction  by  the  author  suggest  some  of the  age, sweep  and  historical importance of  the  great  river.  Unfortunately, unless most   casual   readers  are   different  from me,   they   will   skip   both   foreword and introduction   and  plunge  right  into Chapter I,  The  First   Settlers   and   the Coming  of  the   Missionaries.  And   very likely   they   will   stop   right   there.   This would  be a pity, since  the  middle section of  the  book,  particularly Chapters Four

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



to  Eight,   are   genuinely  enlightening  as well as entertaining.
I don't   know,  of  course,   the  circum­
stances  leading to the writing of The Ottawa. Presumably someone  at McClel­ land  and  Stewart commissioned the book. And   someone,   either  author   or  editor,  must   have   decided  that   a  brief  history of  the   French  adventures  on   the  river was  required.  As  I   say,  I   don't  know where   to  fix  the   responsibility.  And   I don't care.  But  I  do care  that  this whole section  is executed with  such  a minimum of   stylistic  grace and   such  a  maximum of   speed.   In all   these  chapters  dealing with  the  French period  of  our  history  I found  nothing  that   would   not   be  old hat  to an  average graduate of an average primary school. Not  lightened by the revealing  anecdote, and  rendered almost incomprehensible by a  mad  piling  up  of data   upon   data, these  opening chapters not  only  fail  to  do  justice  to  their  sub­ ject;  they  are  dull,  dull,  dull.
While  in  this  carping mood,  and  be­
fore   moving   on   to  some   more   positive areas,   I  should   like  to  criticize   the  in­ adequacy  of   the   index    and    the   total  uselessness of the  maps.  As for  the wood­ cuts  by Laurence Hyde,  the  correct   des­ criptive  adjective  escapes   me.   Perhaps "appalling" will  do.
But,    reader,  persevere   to   Chapter Four,  Settlement Life and Birth of the Lumber  Industry. If you  do  a  surprise is   waiting.  Suddenly  the   book   comes alive.   The  pace   of   the   writing  has   a decent air  of  leisure.  Little-known but brilliantly perceptive first-hand  observa­ tions  are  quoted. One  feels  the  presence of an  author who  understands  and  loves his subject.
Geographical regions,  like  larger  civil­
izations,  seem  to  have  a  rise and  fall.  If
 this  is  so,  then   the   nineteenth  century was  the  great   historical  period   for   the Ottawa  Valley.   It saw   the   early   per­ manent settlements, the  fantastic  rise  of the  lumber  barons  and  the beginnings of decline  as  the  century  came  to  its  con­ clusion.  Outside of the  National Capital, which  is a special  case, how  little  growth there   has  been  in  the  past  sixty  years!  Commerce now  swirls  around  Montreal and  the  huge manufacturing complex of south-western  Ontario. If the  concluding chapters  of    Mr.    Greening's  book   are  anti-climactic  he  is surely  to  be excused.  The history  of  this  region  is equally  so.
But   what   a   century  the   Valley   did have!   Here    was   the   clash   of   race­ Scottish,  Irish  and  French,  with  the  cor­ responding  religious  antipathies, Metho­ dist   against   Presbyterian;   Protestant against   Roman  Catholic;  the   dreadful rigours  of  Eastern Ontario  winters  in  a land   only   partly   suited   to   cultivation. And   over   the   whole   the   shadow   of  a great   commodity-lumber.  As   Mr. Greening rightly  points out, it is difficult when  one  looks at  the  staid  small  towns of  today  to  imagine the  boisterous, drunken days of the loggers and  the saw-






77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



mills  and   of  the  famous   lumber  barons like  Booth   and   Edwards.
It is immensely   to the  author's  credit
that  he has captured all this so perfectly. One  could  wish only that  the nineteenth­ century  Valley   had   been  the  subject  of the  entire   book  and   that  Mr.  Greening had   not  felt  constrained  to attempt  an upbeat ending.
One   might   just  as  well  expect   opti­ mism   from   William    Faulkner.   And   I believe  that   the  comparison  is  apt.  The  Ottawa  Valley   had   a  longer  and   more genuine  period    of   affluence   than    the American  Deep   South,  but  like   Missis­ sippi  or Alabama, its greatness  exists now primarily  in   memory.   The   quiet   little  towns   along   the   Ottawa  and   its  tribu­ taries   had   their   moment,  and   now   lie waiting    for    their    personal    Faulkner. When  that man  arrives  I am  certain he will  be  grateful to  Mr.  Greening for  his pioneering  research.           BOB PATCHELL


ARCTIC HISTORY

PAUL   FENIMORE  COOPER.  Js[and   of  the   Lost.
Longrnans.  $4-95·

THE  AUTHOR  lives in  Cooperstown, New York,  founded by  his  great-great-grand­ father and  famous  later  as  the  home  of his   great-grandfather,  the    "leather­ stocking" novelist.   Early  in  his  life  this legacy  of  concern  with  history   and   the native  inhabitants of North  America  was directed   northwards  by   the    books   of Nansen,  Peary,   and   others.   Paul   Feni­ more   Cooper  dreamed  of  being  an  ex­ plorer, and  eventually succeeded, at least to  the  extent  of creating opportunities in adulthood  to   fly  over   the   Arctic   and
 alight  here  and   there   on  hallowed   sites which   he  was  able  to  identify   from   his reading   of    polar     narratives;   on    the jacket,    as  evidence  of   this,   there   is  a fine colour  photograph by the author, showing  Crozier's landing-place on the north-west coast  of  King  William Island
-the "Island of  the  Lost"  which  is the hero  of  this  book.
Somewhere along   the  way  Paul  Feni­
more  Cooper, who  evidently loves to tell a   story   and   has   an   engagingly  simple and   direct   way  of  doing   so,  recognized in  King   William  Island  a  subject   that suited   him.   Shunning  the   easier   path which   has   been   thoroughly  trodden  in recent    years-that   of   summarizing a phase  of arctic exploration with  the  help of   the   travellers'  narratives  and    little else -he set out  instead to tell  the  story of   a   single   island   of   the   archipelago, from   the  beginning  to  the  present   day, and  to carry  out arduous, many-sided research   that   a  regional project  of  this kind  requires. The concept is well-suited to  his  object, which  is to  work  off  some of  the  burden of fascination and  wonder for  the  North that   he  has  been  carrying around for  a  great   many  years.  The  re­ sulting   book  is  a   useful   one,  especially  for   Canadian   readers,  even   though  it draws  heavily  on many  of the same polar  narratives  that   are   fully   dealt  with   in other  current  arctic  books.
The secret   lay  in  scrapping  the  tedi­ ous   game   of   hide-and-seek   among   the  islands  that  has  been  played  by so many  writers,  as   though  the  story   of  its  ex­ ploration  by   Europeans   were   the   only history    the    Arctic    possessed.    Instead, Mr.  Cooper  takes  his cue  from  the  well­ known   fact  many   of  the  Arctic   islands have    been   continuously  inhabited   for hundreds, perhaps thousands, of years  by

BOOKS IN REVIEW



successive generations of the same people. Little   as  we  may  ever   know  about   the history   of   the   ancestors  of   those   who today   make    up   the   bulk   of   the   two hundred-odd population of King  William Island, there   is  no  denying that   it,  and not  the  story  of  the  European  travellers who  came   there  from   time  to  time-is the  central, vital  story  of this  island.
Mr.  Cooper sees this clearly.  He  starts us   out    with    an    all-too-short chapter describing  the   geological    birth    of   the island,   and   its  "settlement" by  a  legen­ dary   race   of   strong   but   stupid   giants  who,  some  hundreds of  years  before  the first   Europeans  came,   were   driven   out by  another breed   who  more  than   made  up    in   cunning  what    they   lacked    in stature -the   ancestors  of   our   Eskimo voters  of  today.  Mr.  Cooper's picture of these  people,  the  Kikerktarmiut, in  their natural state,  is  strong   and  affecting. It haunts  us  through  the  rest  of  the  book which  inevitably deals  lengthily with  the various  groups  of European  travellers in the  region.   But  in  the  explorers'  narra­ tives  it  is  always   references to  contacts with  the  Eskimos  that  interest  the author most.   He   exploits   these   references  skil­ fully.   From   the   first   chapter,  we  have been   with   the   Kikerktarmiut  in  spirit,  waiting  for   further  glimpses   of   them.  These  glimpses   are   not   as  frequent  as we  would  like  them   to  be, or  as clearly focused-for we are  getting only  what­ ever  the  explorers chose  to  write  down,
-but they   are   enough  with   the   brief outline of very recent  events on King William Island  at   the  end   of  the  book to give us what  amounts to a valuable addition to  our  library   of  regional  terri­ tory.
Island    of   the   Lost    should   be   read
widely  in  Canada, but  above  all  by  the
 King  William  Islanders themselves  who, like the rest of us, will be happier citizens the clearer  they see themselves in history.
T. C. FAIRLEY



THOREAU'S CANADA

HENRY D.  THOREAU. A Yankee in  Canada.
Harvest House. $r.65.

THE JOURNEY of which  A Yankee in Canada    is   the    record    was   made    by Thoreau and  his friend William Ellery Channing in  September  r85o.  It lasted ten  days,  and   cost,  as  Thoreau  meticu­ lously noted,  twelve  dollars  and  seventy­ five  cents   (including  the   price   of  two guide   books  and   a  map) .  Thoreau and  Channing,  travelling light,  "Knights of the  Umbrella  and   the  Bundle" as  they styled  themselves,  visited  Montreal, Que­ bec City  and  several  neighbouring points of  interest.   What  Channing  thought of the   things   they   saw   cannot   be   even guessed;    tilting    at    several    windmills,  both   Canadian  and   universal, Thoreau is  throughout,  as  always,   his  egocentric self,  Don   Quixote  and   Sancho  Panza  both, acknowledging his fellow-traveller's existence   only   by  the   use   of   the   first person plural.
It  would  be absurd to claim  too much
for  this  book;  it  is  in  fact   the  weakest of all Thoreau's "Excursions". Too  often padded  with   lifeless  information   culled from  the two guide  books with  which  the travellers   had   carefully  provided   them­ selves, it reveals  in what  is left  Thoreau's main  flaws  as  an  artist:  his  inability   to organize  his often  brilliant  single  percep­ tions   into   any   large   pattern,  and   his

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



essential   lack  of interest  in other  human beings.  The  temptation is to extract from it,  as  has  been  done  so assiduously  from his  journals, the  pithy  phrase,  the  strik­ ing  image,  the  sometimes  subtle  medita­ tion,  and   to  dismiss  the  rest  as  clumsy setting  for  the  occasional  jewel. However the   setting   has   some   interest:   scarcely at  all  as  a  picture of  French-Canada in the   eighteen-fifties,  but  as  a  record   of the   reaction   provoked  in  an   eccentric, sardonic  stranger who  finds  any  kind  of constriction, mental   or  physical,  intoler­ able,   by  a   culture  that   strikes   him   as "like   a  man   cased  in  the  heavy  armor of antiquity, with  a  horse-load  of broad­ swords   and   small   arms   slung   to   him, endeavouring to  go  about   his  business." Thoreau's   reaction   reminds  one   a good  deal  of   the  time,  rather oddly,  of that   of  Twain's  Connecticut Yankee   to King  Arthur's  England. It  is, that   is  to say, a  comic  reaction: the comedy  based on  a  ninetenth-century  American's con­ tact   with   a  medieval   culture  (French­ Canada appeared to Thoreau "as  old  as Normandy itself").  This   remains   one's chief  impression  despite   Thoreau's  seri­ ous  discussion  of  such  questions  as  why Canada "wild  and  unsettled  as it  is . . . should   impress   us  as  an   older   country than   the    States"  or   why   "French­ Canadians .  . . should  be  gradually dis­ appearing  in   what   is  called   the  Saxon  current."  From    the   first  sentence: "I fear   that   I have   not  got  much   to  say about  Canada,  not   having   seen  much; what   I got   by  going  to  Canada was  a cold",  this   comic  tone   largely   prevails,  abandoned   only   in   occasional   descrip­  tions  of   nature, such  as  the  description of  the  Falls  of  Ste.   Anne,  and   in  out­  bursts   of   what    Horace  Greeley   called Thoreau's  "flagrant  heresies"  as  in  the

8o
 passages  inspired by the  church of Notre
Dame in  Montreal.
One's  final    impression   is   that    the comic   tone   is  indicative  of   Thoreau's attitude  to  Canada. As  a  civilization, a culture relevant to  his century and  him­ self,  he   just  does   not   take   it   seriously. It does not  strike  him  as real  in  the same sense as does  the  New  England  to which he returned with  such  relief, yearning no doubt, as  he  noted   in  his  journal, "for  one   of  those   old,  meandering, dry   un­ inhabited  roads,  which   lead   away  from towns  . . . where you may forget  in what country you  are  travelling ... where  the guide  board  is  fallen,  and  now  the  hand  points    to    heaven    significantly-to 	a Sudbury and   Marlborough  in  the  skies. That's the  road  I can  travel, that's  the particular Sudbury I am  bound  for  ..." WILLIAM HALL



OFF THE BULLSEYE

ERIC  NICOL  &  PETER  WHALLEY.  Say, Uncle. A Completely   Uncalled  for    History   of   the U.S. Ryerson. $2.75.

ALL RIGHT! UNCLE! I'll  say it  as many times  as  you  like,  only,  please,  no  more of  these  aMAIZing jokes!  Peace  at  any price!
It ought   to  be  possible  to  find  some­
thing  favourable  to   say  about  a   book which  has  as  its  raison   d'etre  the  spoof­ ing of the  Eagle's history. Plucking Eagle  feathers is as Canadian  as  maple  leaves, ice   hockey,   or   the   Calgary  Stampede, and   when   it   is   done   with   surety   and  finesse even  the Eagle  is tickled; clumsily done,   it's  as  bad  as  any  other   story  in

BOOKS IN  REVillW



which   the   raconteur  has   forgotten  the punch-line.
The  authors begin   this   volume   with
an  apology   to  Sellar   and  Yeatman, the
1066-ers   who   launched  this   genre  ori­ ginally,  and   "to   anybody   else  who  feels bad   about   it."   Well,   I feel  bad  about  it,   but   not   for   the   reasons  implied  in their  apologetic dedication.  The primary fault   of   this   volume   is   not   that   it  is "Uncalled-for"-a  well-aimed  pin  can do  wonders   for  the  starred  and  striped balloon-but simply  that  it  isn't  funny.  And    it    isn't    funny    for    very    precise reasons.   In   the  first  place,  there  are  no jokes  in   the  volume;  plenty   of  laughs, all   right,   but   these   are   the   exclusive property of  the  author who  snickers  self­ consciously  to  himself  in  every  chapter, delighted   by   the   acuteness  of   his  wit. But  the fact is that  apart from  TV  audi­  ences,  few  of  us  laugh   on  cue,  because the  reflex  of surprise  is stifled  as soon as we  are  warned  that   we  are  going  to  be tickled.   The    result   is  not   infrequently painful.
An  equally  grievous  fault  in  this grab­
bag   of  American  schoolboy   humour  is the  total  lack of originality. Puns on John Alden,  Paul   Revere,  Abe    Lincoln, General Custer, and   the  Shakers are  as proverbial as the  cradle slats  which  they cause  to  be  kicked  out.   Even   when  the jokes in this book are  not  old  hat  in fact, they  are  pressed  on  the  same  block  and belong    to    the    "Adam-and-Eve-raised­ Cain-after-the-death-of-Abel"  variety that   used  to  be  rewarded with  an  over­ ripe   tomato  before   entertainment  came in  cans.  Maybe   the  scope  of   American history   precludes  the   kind   of   original  pun   that   sprinkled the   pages  of   1066 and   All   That- there   certainly  isn't   a funny   here   to  equal   "the invisible   Ar-
 mada" of  that   volume -but it  rather surprises   me   to   find   American   history quite  so facetiously  unfecund as the  jibes in  this  volume   would  seem  to  indicate. A  belly-laugh    can   indeed   turn   into   a belly-ache,   but   when   the   belly-ache   is the first symptom,  one  begins to feel that it  might  have  been  more  effective,  and more   humane,  to   use  a   petrified   shil­ lelagh   than   a   funny   bone   to   get   the message  across.
The   above   observation  leads   to   my third    point,    for    the    authors  of   this volume  have  flubbed   a  glorious  oppor­ tunity  for satirizing  their  subject.  To  my mind,   Eric   Nicol   would    have   proved more   facile   in   that   area   than   in   the realm  of the  jejune.  His  syndicated arti­ cles   frequently  border   on   that    subtle combination  of   humour   and    criticism which   slices   through  the   social   veneer and   exposes   the   secretive   roots   of  hy­ pocrisy, pride, or  arogance, of which  the surface  flower  is merely   the  decoy.  Un­ fortunately, Nicol  seldom  gives free  rein to  his  satiric   muse.   In   Say,   Uncle   he steers  so clear  of  controversial issues, or even of pointed or directed humour, that the   results   are   often   insipid.   No  John Birches  are  birched   in  this  volume,  and the  nearest  thing  to  trenchancy is a stale reference   to  old  Ike's  golfing,  which  by late  1961 was  already   antediluvian.
But  all is not  lost in Say, Uncle. Peter
Whalley's    cartoons  are   unquestionably the  best thing  in  the  book.  Most  of them are   refreshingly   direct,  gaining  (as  the text   does  not)    by  gainsaying  the   trite and  obvious.  "Lincoln at  Gettysburg"  is one  of  the  best  of  the  singles,  and   the gallery  of "America Today" at  the end poignantly    satirizes   the   cliches   at   the heart  of the  American dream.
W.  E.   FREDEMAN

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



LIFE IN
THE WILDS

FRANKLIN  RUSSELL.    Watchers  at  the   Pond.
McClelland &  Stewart. $s.oo.

DuRING THE nineteenth century   natural history  was  not  merely  a  branch of science;   it  was  also,  in  the  hands  of  its best exponents, a branch  of literature. Darwin's   Voyage  of   the   Beagle   and H.  W.  Bates'  Naturalist   on  the  Amazons are   still   classics   of   descriptive   writing, and  the  amateur field naturalists of  Eng­ land   produced  a  series  of   masterpieces of  fine  observation  and   telling  descrip­  tion  that  stretched  from  Gilbert   White's Selborne   in  the  late  eighteenth  century  to  W.  H.  Hudson's  essays on  the  wild life  of   the   Argentine   pampas  and   the chalkhills   of   southern  England  during the  Georgian era.
Ihave  been  talking as  if  the  days  of good   writing  on   natural  history   were gone,  and  it  is  true  that  there  has  been a  tendency  for   biologists  to  retreat  be­ hind   their   barriers  of  specialist   jargon and   detach  themselves   from   the  world of  general readers. But,  though  we  may have    had    nothing  in   recent   years   to compare with  the  best works of  the nine­ teenth-century  writer  naturalists, a  con­ siderable number of  estimable  and  read­  able   accounts   of    animal  life    have appeared, such  as  Derek  Wragge  Mor­  ley's  The  Ant   World, Gerald   Durrell's whimsically  pleasant accounts  of the  ad­ ventures of  a  collector   for  zoos, and,  in Canada,   Roderick  Haig-Brown's  essays on  the  wild  life  of  British  Columbia.
Franklin   Russell's    Watchers  at   the Pond  is the  most  recent  Canadian  addi­ tion  to  this  field  of writing. Russell  takes
 a   pond   in   the   northern  forest   as  the scene   for   his   account  of   the   cycle   of animal  and   plant   life,  and   the  seasons of the  year  as his temporal frame. With­ in  it  he  describes  the  life cycle  of  many forms  of life, from  the unicellular organ­ isms  of   the   pond's   depths  to  the   rac­  coons   and    ravens   who   form   its   aris­ tocracy  of  intelligence. His  observation is acute  and   his  knowledge  wide;   he  has many   interesting  and   curious   things   to reveal.   But   he  does  not   make   the   best of  his  subject. He  writes  monotonously, on   a   single   level,   so   that    the   extra­ ordinarily  dramatic  quality   of  his  ma­ terial  is never  fully  realized.  And  he  has a   curious  tendency  to  seek   wonder   in the   accumulation  of   statistics   and   lists rather than through  the  power  of  selec­ tive  description.

About  forty   toads had   congregated  .  . . during the early evening, their calls screeching out  monotonously. On  this  night, the  toads collectively ate  more  than one thousand pond creatures-sow  bugs, beetles,   leaf    hoppers,   May    flies,    caddis flies,  midges, and   caterpillars.
A  pair   of  wrens caught  three  thousand small   insects during  the   next   day,   to  feed a   nestful  of   youngsters. Two  other  pairs of  wrens, also  nesting at  the  pond, tripled this  mortality rate so that more than sixty thousand   insects  were    lost   in   the    wrens every  seven  days.

A  little  of  this  kind  of  writing  goes  a long  way even in an article; repeated constantly in a book it dulls rather than stimulating the imagination, so that  one's reading  of   W ate hers   at  the   Pond   be­ comes  a  plodding  progress  in  search  of the    occasional   passage    which    springs  vividly  into  life.  Mr.  Russell  tries  to  tell us  too  much   and   in  doing  so  he  makes  us  experience too  little.
L. T. CORNELIUS

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



OLD CANADIANS RENEWED

THE   MOST WELCOME  of  the  new  titles in  McClelland  &  Stewart's  New  Cana­ dian    Library  is  the   Masks  of   Fiction ($r.5o),  a  collection  of  essays   by  and about  Canadian   writers    edited   by
A. J. M.  Smith. These essays have  been
published in various magazines -half  of them   in  Canadian Literature-and  to have   them   under one  cover  is  valuable to  a  student of  Canadian criticism.  It  is good,  too, to see some fine translations of French-Canadian  writing in Where Nests The    Water  Hen   ( $ r.oo)    by  Gabrielle Roy,  her  second  work  to  appear in  this series, and The Town Below  ($r.25) by Roger   Lemelin. The  latter recreates  in­ terest  in Lemelin's work  particularly now that   he  has   returned  to  writing  fiction after  spending some  time  on  writing  for television.
Two  books  are  particularly notable  in this new group. Ernest Buckler's The Mountain and the Valley ($r.25), first published in  1952, continues to appeal because  of  its  contemporary  psychologi­ cal  interest; the  introduction  by Claude Bissell is one of  the  best statements about  Buckler's    work.    The   other  is   Henry  Kreisel's The Rich  Man  ($1.25), a  book which   revealed    a   refreshing  Canadian talent  in  1948.  It indicates a  novelist  of authority who  will,  it  is hoped, be  pub­ lishing  another novel  soon.
The other   book  to  be  mentioned here is Stephen Leacock's My  Discovery of England   ($r .oo), his  fourth appearance in   the   series.   It is  not   Leacock   at   his best,  though   there   is  more  irony  in  this book   than    in   his   others.    Perhaps  the series  would   be  better   to  have   a  more
 representative  collection  of  authors and to choose either works of Richler, Moore, or  Wisemen,  than  to  appear tied  to loyalties   and    present    Leacock    for   the fourth  time   in   twenty-eight  titles.  The series  is,  however,   a  welcome   addition to  publishing  in  Canada, and   some  of the introductory essays are particularly valuable.
D.  S.


VARIOUS HISTORIES

THE  FIELD  of  Canadian history  is being ploughed    and   re-ploughed  like   prairie wheatland. One   of  the  more   ambitious ventures has  been  the  five-volume Cana­ dian  History  series, edited  by  Thomas B. Costain,  whose very presence suggests the popular  slanting  of   the   volumes.   The standard  has   been   unsteady;  the   final volume-Ordeal by Fire:  Canada  1910-
1945 by Ralph Allen (Doubleday, $6.oo)
-is perhaps  the   best.   Mr.   Allen   has tackled   the  most  difficult   period   of  all, with  none of the  romance of New France or  the  Gold  Rushes,  with  no  characters to compete with Frontenac or Sir John  A. Macdonald. Moreover, the  near  past is always   the   hardest   age   on   which    to write.  Mr.  Allen's  rather lively  combina­ tion  of  the   journalist  and  the  historian hits  the  right   mood.   He  gives  us  good interim  history.

* 	* 	*
Peter  Stursberg's Agreement in  Princi­ ple   (Longmans, $5.50)   combines  auto­ biography-the story  of  post-war assign­ ments  as a  foreign  correspondent-and sharp    journalistic    hindsight   on   inter-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



national political  events  since the  United Nations was formed. It is a shrewd,  vivid book,    conceited,   opinionated,   but    at times so startlingly right that one regrets Canadian  journalism has  so  few  Sturs­ bergs.

* 	* 	*
D.  J. Goodspeed's The  Conspirators:
A Study  of the Coup  d'Etat  (Macmillan,
$5.00)  is a historical curiosity  that  will interest  those   with   a  taste  for  political drama and  dramatics. Major Goodspeed takes six attempts to seize power, some successful,  others   not,  narrates their  his­ tories,  and  analyses  the  reasons  for  their outcome. Finally, he  discusses the  art  of the  coup  d'etat  in  general.   Some  of  his narrations   are    lively   and    interesting; others,   like  that   of  the  Bolshevik  coup of  I9I7, have   been   told   better   before;
 his general analysis is neither sufficiently detailed nor  sufficiently  profound. One expects  more  from  so dynamic a title.

* 	* 	*
White Men  Came  to the St. Lawrence (McGill, $2.25)  is a  series  of  three  lec­ tures   recently    delivered  at   McGill   by Morris Bishop.  They  are  urbane, charm­ ingly   anecdotal,  but   too  slight   to  give more  than   a  slanting  glimpse  of  a great  river's   record.
G.W.



A MIXED
BAG

EvERY YEAR  a  great   many  words  and ideas  are  released in  the  air  over  Cana­ dian  university  towns  where  the Learned Societies   hold   their   annual   gatherings. In    Thought,  rg6o    (Gage,   $5.00),  an attempt has  been  made to  trap   the  best of a  year's  flight  and  to  present  it  as an annual  sampling  of   Canadian   scholar­ ship.  The intention  is good;  the  result  a hopelessly   mixed   bag,  with   no  possible unity   except   the   fact   that   all   the   lec­ turers    were   in   the   same   place   at   the same   time.   No  single   person   will  have the  desire,  knowledge or  staying   power to  read  everything in  this  volume   from "A  Study  of  Freeze-up and  Break-up at Fort   Good   Hope,  N.W.T."  to   "Little Dorrit:    Experience  and    Design". It would   have   been   better   by far  to  have let  all  these  papers take  their  chances in their   proper   journals,  where   many   of them   have  in  fact   been  published.
