$1.00 per copy


CANA	A 
l TERATURE
N°·6



Autumn,  1960




The  Defence of Lady  Chatterley

BY HUGH :'\!ACLENNA."..''"


On  the Pressing of Nlaple Leaves

BY EARLE BlR EY


Klein's  Drowned  Poet

BY :'\fll.TO:s-  \Vll.SON


Recollections  of Malcolm  Lowry

BY WILLIAM MCCONNELL





A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









HONOURS AND AWARDS



UP  TO NOW we have  refrained from  trying  the  patience of our readers by  self-congratulation or  by  printing the  messages  of  appreciation that have  come  to  us from  our  friends.  For  the  latter  we have  been  grateful, but  we have  always  wished  the  contents of our  pages  to be  judged  on  their  own  merits and  to be presented without garlands.
This  time,  however, we  cannot   refrain  from  breaking our  custom  to mention
an  honour which  we value greatly.  In  the annual exhibition of Canadian printing, Typography '6o, the  first  issue of Canadian  Literature  was  granted an  Award of Distinctive Merit; it was one of fifteen exhibits, out of a total of fifteen  hundred entries,   to  be  selected  for  this  honour. This  is an  occasion for  legitimate self­ congratulation, but  even  more  for congratulation-in which  we hope  our readers  will  join-of the  typographer and  the  printer, whose names  appear on  our  con­ tents  page  and  without whom  we would  certainly  have  gone  awardless.

Lady Chatterley's  Lover is not  a piece of Canadian literature. But  what  happens to  Lady  Chatterley's  Lover in the  Canadian courts  may  well become   part  of  our  literary   history.  It  is for  this  reason  that we  publish  Hugh MacLennan's spirited defence of that  masterpiece, whose treatment, incidentally, gives considerable support to the  misgivings  we expressed  on  the  new  censorship law in the editorial, "Areopagitica Re-Written", which  appeared in Canadian Literature  No.2.

IN  ANOTHER  RECENT  EDITORIAL we  discussed  the  question  of literary awards, and   particularly the  Governor-General's Awards. At  that  time we  made   no  reference to  the  prizes  which  are  periodically presented by certain publishers, both  American and  Canadian, to  writers  whose  books  subsequently appear on  their  lists. Our neglect  was not  undeliberate. We were disturbed at the


3

EDITORIAL



time  by the literary  quality of the books which receive such awards; the opinion expressed  by one of our  reviewers in this issue on a recent  prize-winning  novel, plus our  own  reading  of another  which  has been  honoured  by a different  pub­ lisher and  not  yet reviewed in these pages, only reinforces our  misgivings.
We do not  know on what  basis these prizes are granted. Certainly  the best of our  contemporary writers and  novels never seem to receive them, and  a look at the  books which do succeed makes one suspect that  publishers'  prizes are in fact given not for literary  achievement, but for saleability, that  they are aimed at the mass readership  of today rather  than  the discriminating readership  of tomorrow. This  suspicion may be unjust, but if it is, then the case is even worse, because we have  to face  the situation  in which  certain  well-known  publishers  cannot  even tell the difference  between well and  badly written  books.
Either  way, the  result is embarrassing.  It  is embarrassing for editors  and  re­
viewers to feel that  they must expose the pretensions of poor novels which  pub­ lishers  have  found  prizeworthy,  instead  of allowing  them  to go  unnoticed  with the herd. It is embarrassing for readers who wonder if their taste may be at fault when they find nothing worthwhile in a book that  has been launched  with much ballyhoo. And  it should  be embarrassing  to the publishers whose motives, or dis­ crimination, or both,  may be called in question  by such  dubious  awards.
Our  suggestion is that publishers should abandon all such house prizes granted to books in whose success they themselves have an interest, and leave their publi­ cations  to take  a chance  with the rest in competing  for the various prizes which are  granted   by  organisations  whose interest  in  the  publishing  industry  extends only to the excellence or otherwise of its productions.  If they should still wish to benefit  authors,  they would surely gain  more credit  and  do  more good by esta­ blishing  funds  to  be  awarded  in  their  names-but  not  necessarily  to  authors  from whom they profit-by the Governor-General's Awards Board or some similar and wholly independent body of judges.






4



KLEIN'S DROWNED  POET


CANADIAN VARIATIONS ON AN   OLD   THEME


Milton Wilson



RAYMOND KN<STER must be the best-known drowned  poet
in Canadian letters.  Writer of pastorals  and  herald  of imagism, cut off at the age
of  thirty-three and  recovered from  Lake  St.  Clair  after  three  days  of  dragging, he  is Canada's ideal   portrait of  young  Lycidas  waiting for  a  pastoral elegy. He still  seems  to  be  waiting. Dorothy Livesay  describes  his last  swim  in  a  Memoir, her  own  poetry  is haunted by images  of diving  and  drowning, and  she has dedi­ cated   a  long  poem  to  Knister. But  she  provides  us with  no  more  than  elegiac allusions; there  is no full-dress elegy,

Following after Shelley
Or wordcarvers  I knew
( Bouchette; and Raymond, you) .

Even  James Reaney, his successor  as a Southern Ontario farm-poet, when  he introduces Knister as one  of the  minor  geese of A Suit  of Nettles, allows  him  no meed  of  a  melodious tear.   In  the  April  eclogue  Raymond himself  may  sing  of the  land's rebirth out  of the  ice age,  and  also  (by analogy) of the  flood,  the  ark and  the  released  birds,  but  there  is no successor to Reaney's early  poem on Lake St.  Clair. In  October, after  Raymond has finished his superb autumn song  (which is as  appropriate to  Canada's biographer of Keats  as his spring song  was to the author of "Feed"), he  simply  drops  out  of A Suit  of Nettles. All we get in  No­ vember  is a  series  of four  impersonal elegies from  four  different points  of  view. When the  reader turns  the  pastoral wheel of the book for  a second  time,  it is his own  responsibility if  Raymond's first  appearance, with  spring from  the  Flood,  seems somehow fresher  than   before.
Maybe for  a Canadian poet  to be elegized as drowned, he should  either  not  be dead  at all,  or  at  least  not  literally  drowned. Such,  at  any  rate,  seems to be the

5

KLEIN'S  DROWNED POET



moral  of  the  best  recent  examples  I can  think  of:  John Sutherland's poem  on E. J. Pratt, and  its successor, Miriam  Waddington's elegy on Sutherland. I'm  not sure   just  what   moral   to  draw  from  George Johnston's  Edward  (that  remote Canadian  relative   of  Edward King),  who  was  drowned  and  elegized  in  The Cruising  Auk, only  to reappear as large  as life a year or so later  in  The  Atlantic Monthly. But  Raymond  Knister's successful  rivals  have  rarely  been  Canadian. The usual  drowned poet in Canadian poetry  is anonymous or international or archetypal-or Shelley.






HE MAKES an  unmistakable and  substantial appearance in two  familiar showpieces  of  nineteenth-century Canadian  poetry: Charles G.  D. Roberts' "Ave!" and   Duncan Campbell Scott's "The  Piper   of  Arll". Roberts' poem  has  been  called  by Desmond   Pacey  a  pastoral elegy, but  Roberts thought of it as a nativity ode on the centenary of Shelley's  birth. Still, by calling it a  pas­ toral  elegy,  Pacey  quite  properly  draws  our  attention to  the  crucial  importance of the  drowned poet  in "Ave!", and  no one could  fail to observe  how  the  melan­ choly  of "The Scholar Gypsy" and  "Thyrsis" tends  to qualify the essential  vigour of its tone.  It would  be presumptuous to retitle  the  poem  "Hail or Farewell", but I would  be quite  happy  to leave out  the exclamation mark.  Scott's "The Piper  of Arll", on  the  other  hand, is a sort  of Pre-Raphaelite lyrical  ballad,  whose  piper  (poet, singer,  artist,  what  you will, Scott was never  one to separate the arts)  sinks with   his  complete retinue:  audience, palace   of  art,   and  all.  The   tone  may  be elegiac,  but  the  poem's  cycle is closed;  in the  end  there  is nothing to be mourned and  no one  left  to mourn.
"Ave!" has  often  been  praised-for its  parts.  The overwrought brilliance, the verbal  inventiveness and  ingenuity, the  sheer  excess  of the  whole  thing,  are  re­ markable and  exhausting, whatever you  finally  think  of it  alL The   usual  com­ plaint  is that  Roberts has failed  to tie the  piece  together. The Bay of  Fundy set­ ting  with  which  it begins and  ends  fails to connect with  the scenes from  Shelley's  life  (Sussex,  Rome, the  Bay of Spezzia,  and  so on)   which  dominate the  middle of the  poem.  This  complaint mistakes  the  central problem of "Ave!" for its chief fault. Shelley is a poet who binds English  poetry  to its classical and  Mediterranean heritage; in  "Ave!" he takes  a further, posthumous step  and  becomes  the inter­ mediary who  binds  Roberts' work  as a Canadian  and  Maritime poet  to both  its

6

KLEIN's DROWNED  POET



romantic and  its classical  past. "Therefore with  no far flight   .  . .  to thee I turn," says Roberts in Stanza XI, as he turns  from  the Tantramar region  to Sussex and Italy.  Whatever meaning he can give to that  "therefore" is the centre  of his poem, the  real  justification for  hailing Shelley's  birth  among  the  meadows and  marshes of New  Brunswick.
"The awful  shadow of  some  unseen  Power" which  fell  on  Shelley  in  Sussex
falls on  Roberts in  New  Brunswick  and  is "strangely akin" to Shelley  himself.  In the  first  ten  stanzas Roberts tries to paint  the  lost landscape of his childhood in terms  of such  kinship. His  youthful  companionship with  the  racing  elements ob­ viously echoes  the  "Ode to the  West Wind", the star  images  which  dot  the  poem from  first stanza to last  come  (especially)   from  Adonais, and  the  "wide marshes  ever  washed  in  clearest  air" have  unexpected moments of kinship  with the Medi­ terranean  of  Epipsychidion; the  tide  ebbing  and  flowing  in  the  "long reaches" with  "perpetual unrest" is explicitly  made  a symbol  of Shelley's mind,  just as the tumult of the flood is compared to the strife at the centre  of "the great  calm of his celestial  art". And  of course  the nationalist ofI 893 welcomes the  poet of "Desire and  Liberty". If there  is any  doubt  about  the  extent  of  Roberts' literary  allusions in  "Ave!", there  is certainly no  doubt  that  he feels  himself submerged in  the Tantramar like Shelley  in the Bay of Spezzia, so that from  the thought of his own
body,  in whose veins "forever must  abide I The  urge and  fluctuation of the tide",
he  can  later   turn easily  to  the  moment  when  Shelley's  body  emerges  from  the sea and  contemplates its own  funeral pyre on  the beach:

Back from the underworld of whelmiQg change
To the wide-glittering beach thy body came; And thou didst contemplate  with wonder strange
And curious regard thy kindred flame  . . . .

Roberts had  fully prepared the way even for this last phrase  by calling the Tantra­
mar  "untamable and  changeable as flame".
After  the  lines  on  Shelley's  apocalyptic funeral pyre,  where  the drowned body becomes  a  "heart of  fire,  that  fire  might  not  consume", Roberts suddenly turns back  to  Shelley's  strange kinsman. In  perfect  sympathy, the  "wizard flood"  of Tantramar is now  at  the  full  and  includes  within  itself  everything from  "every tribute stream and   brimming creek".  Roberts chooses  this  climactic moment to give the  "sovereign vasts"  their  full  personification. Tantramar

Ponders, possessor of the utmost god, With no more left to seek.


7

KLEIN's DROWNED POET



But  (unfortunately)  the  poem  cannot end  here.  Shelley's  fulfilment may  be out of time,  but  the wizard  flood's is not, and  anyway  Roberts preferred to have some­ thing  left  to seek.  The burning bush  of Shelley's  heart  must  be  reduced  to  just one more  scarlet  dawn. With  the tide waning, and  with  "Dover Beach", "Sohrab and  Rustum" and  "The Scholar  Gypsy"  looming  ominously at  the  back  of  his mind,   Roberts decides  on  an  Arnoldian  conclusion  by  epic  simile.  The   flood pondering its "utmost good" is compared to an embattled "lord  of  men" who has reached his "supreme estate"  and  now "ponders the scrolled  heaven" from  a soli­ tary  tower  at night.  He reads  the signs of his fortune's ebb and, as the stars recede (like  the  tide), he  descends  to  new  war,  while  "scarlet  dawns afar". As usual, Roberts has  given  us  too  much.  After  the  rapid  succession  of  radical images­ drowned and  burning poet, all-inclusive river-god, towered  mage,  embattled lord of  men-we have  little  inclination left  to  guess  that  what  the  Tantramar, risen out  of  a  watery  bed,  sees from  its lofty  place  of vantage may  be yet another of Roberts' visions of Canada's promised  land.




ScOTT's SUBMERGED POET  suffers  from  no  such  anticlimax or  crowding off  the  stage,  and  is the  protagonist of  a far  less pretentious poem. But, simple  as it may  be, "The Piper  of Arll" is the  sort  of work  at which  critics prefer  to  throw   a  wreath of  their  favourite adjectives ("haunting",  "delicate", "musical" and  the  like)   and  then  lapse  into  silence.  Its  simplicity  disarms  and entrances, like the  legendary gaze of a rattlesnake. Only  Ralph  Gustafson seems to  have  found   his tongue  long enough  to call  it "a ballad  of the  fatal  possession by the  world  of the  beauty  which  longs to be one with  it." The  phrase  is apt.  But this fatal  possession works  both  ways:  when  the ship  finally  takes  the siren-piper on  board, the  new  freight  sinks it; yet the  piper  is already dead, and  the siren­ ship  has killed  him. Their mutual possession kills them  both.
Any  such  "allegorical" description is far  less simple  than the  poem  itself. More than   any  other   Canadian poem  I can  recall,  "The Piper  of  Arll"  seems  to  be that  much-discussed  (but  rarely  seen)  thing,  a work  entirely self-contained, liter­ ally  about   itself:   a  part-song about   part-singing. In  it  (and a  very  few  others,  like  "In a  Country Churchyard")  Scott  escapes  from  the  peevish  nostalgia and spasmodic violence  which  are  the  personal  sediment in  his work  as a whole.  No doubt if we looked  hard  enough we might  find "The Piper  of  Arll" resting in the limbo  between  Shalott and  Camelot, which  is where  all good Victorian poems go

8

KLEIN'S  DROWNED POET



when  they die.  But  the less said about  the problem  of the "responsibility  of the artist"  the  better.
The setting,  the characters  and the action are what matters, and, of course, the
music they compose, which is pretty schematic. To  begin with, there's a pastoral cove in sympathy  with the "heart  of the ocean" and a hill with three pines which, in the flaring sunset, look like warriors coming home with plunder from a burning town. But  water  and  hill are  not  kept apart; they even manage  to encircle one
another,  for
A brook hung sparkling on the hill, The hill swept far to ring the bay.
From  cove and  hill the  poem goes on to introduce  the actors:  a piper  (faithful, like the cove, to the "springs  of God's ocean")   and a ship  (arrayed, like the hill, in  the  colours  of  the sunset). The  ship's  "pennon  bickered  red  as blood"  and, while the hills listen, the sailors sing for their lost home. The  piper responds with "a  tranquil melody I Of lonely love and  hoped-for death". The  crew's next tune is more sinister  than  the first:  it mixes with the brook and stirs the "braird" on the hill. When  these musical messages have finished signaling back and forth be­ tween piper  and  sea and  ship and  hill, the piper goes to sleep on the beach and the sailors around the mast. It's a full close.
So much  for the slow introduction and the exposition of the main tunes. I take it, by the way, that  no literary critic's musical analogies  (like his Freudian  ones) can ever be discreet enough,  and  I don't  want to discuss the poetic equivalent  of sonata  form.  But Belle Botsford, the professional violinist whom Scott married  a year or two before he wrote "The  Piper of Arll", would have found it an appro­ priate  wedding  present, even if she couldn't  play it in public. In  its own  way it recalls the two most famous epithalamia  in English, Spenser's and "The Ancient Mariner". Anyway,  with  the  exposition over, the action  begins.  When  the ship leaves at dawn,  the  piper  awakes to despair. His lips violate his thought,  and  he actually  breaks  into  speech.  He casts down  his mantle  and, if  he doesn't  drown his book,  he  at  least  throws  his pipe in  the water.  We are  watching  a kind  of thematic  metamorphosis. Then,  when  his  frenzy  has  subsided,  he  picks up  his broken  pipe  from  the  eddy  and  repairs it.  Now the  antiphonal method  of the previous  night  miraculously  turns into counterpoint, or as close to it as a single voice can get.

Again he tried its varied stops;
The closures answered right and true,
And starting out in piercing drops


9

KLEIN'S  DROWNED POET



A melody began to drip
That  mingled with a ghostly thrill
The vision-spirit of the ship,
The secret of his broken will.

As he continues to pipe this mingled  measure  on his new-found instrument, every­ thing  seems to come  together  for an immortal unison.  "He was his soul and  what  he  played", his will  joins  the  world's  will,  the  depth of song  is at  the  heart  of nature, artifice  and  unconsciousness  are one. The  piper  has now sung his soul out and  from  this point  on is forever  still.
There is a  pause  and  the  music  revives,  but  from  the  opposite direction. The
ship  approaches at  sundown and  sends a boat  ashore,  its sailors  singing  not  their first nostalgic  hymn,  or even their  second alien song, but  the piper's original lonely tune,  now with  its "rhythm throbbing every throat". The  boat  picks up the piper's body  and   the  sailors  row  back.  Their  voices are  silent,  and  all  we  hear  is the elegiac  accompaniment  (water music  and  fireworks  music), with   just  an  echo of  the  ghostly  drops  of the  piper's  last, immortal tune.
Silent they rowed him, dip and drip, The oars beat out an exequy,
They laid him down within the ship,
They loosed a rocket to the sky.

But  there  is no  full  recapitulation of themes,  just  a slow  dying  fall.  The  coda  is absolute  silence.  In  the  last  twelve stanzas,  the  reader and  the  poem  are  all eyes and  no ears.  Nothing in "The Piper  of Arll"  is better   than  the  way Scott  works this last sea-change, as the ship sinks to the bottom.
They saw the salt plain spark and shine, They threw their faces to the sky; Beneath a deepening film of brine
They saw the star-flash blur and die.

Transfixed in their  upward gaze, piper  and  crew  are  "empearled" in the heart  of the  sea,  whose  watery  glow  transmutes their  eyes into  one  precious  stone  after another, from  "ruby in  the  green I Long  shaft  of sun  that  spreads and  rays"  to "starry pits  of  gold" in  the  evening. But  the  last  metamorphosis we see is the ship's: solid gem  and  tree of life in one, "the  lost prince  of a diadem".
A good  many  mythical skeletons  lie below  the  surface of "The Piper  of Arll". I have  tried  to imply  most of them,  without  applying any  of them,  not even  Eden and  all that; nor have I thought that  the many  allusions  to Shakespeare, Coleridge and  others  needed  underlining. Both  "Ave!" and  "The Piper  of Arll"  exemplify
in  our  post-Confederation poets  what  A. J. M.  Smith has  called  their  "belief  in


10

KLEIN'S DROWNED  POET



the Luntinuity  of culture." But each is a pretty hard-won tour de force, and  neither can  be  regarded as a stage  in  the  continuity of Canadian poetry.  In  our  poetry the  next  stage  was anticlimax, and,  whatever the various poets may  have  thought at  the  time,  their  work  in  the  last  two decades  of the  century now  looks like an anthology without a history.
From  a wide  enough perspective, English-Canadian poetry  still looks like that.
The hundred-year landscape beforeI 9I 8 is dotted  with  half  a dozen  nature son­ nets,  a  few  ghostly  lyrics  of the  Canada goose-pimple  school,  a  trace  of  pioneer  or Indian nature myth  (if you look hard  for it)  and  a few longer  poems that  are either  interesting because  they  purport to  be distinctively Canadian  or  good  be­ cause  they  so obviously  are  nothing of the  kind.  Even  between  the  World  Wars  what  emerges  is two  poets  who  are  more  like the poles of Canadian  poetry  than  stages in its history: E. J. Pratt, chronicler of epic, clashes on the frontier between  natural, human and  divine; and  A. M.  Klein,  ornate  master  of  many  traditions, at  the  crossroads  of Jewish-and French-Canadian culture. The chances  of writ­ ing  good  poetry  for  such  an  anthology are  no doubt better  than they  seem. An ancestry  of stray  sports  and  withered shoots is at least  uninhibiting. Since for the English-Canadian poet  the  background of English and American poetry  is just an unearned windfall, he can  discard  or adopt  it with a kind  of timeless detachment. He isn't  reduced to tacking  on a piece or two;  he can rework  or subvert  the whole design.  Since  the  body  isn't  his dead  past,  it can  be buried without ceremony; it can  even  start  to look like a living present.  If the poet  happens to be Irving  Lay­ ton, it may  even  do both  at  once.
But  also if he happens to be Charles G. D. Roberts. In  our anthology the nine­ ties and  the  fifties  refuse  to  be separated by history,  despite  the  surface shifts in diction   and  imagery, despite  the  poetic  wars  and  rumours of wars.  "Ave!" and "The Piper  of Arll" make  themselves  at  home without much  ado,  let us say right next  to Europe  and  The  Boatman.




To CALL  KLEIN  AND   PRATT the  poles of Canadian poetry  is to suggest  something in  common as  well  as a  world  that  holds  them  apart. Their
diction  often  calls for  the same  critical  adjectives: polysyllabic,  technical, erudite, as  well  as  colloquial or  prosaic.  Before  I940 even  their  versification  might  have seemed  equally   traditional: sometimes  neat  and  sometimes expansive, but  never


II

KLEIN'S  DROWNED POET



intricate or  explosive.  The  discontinuous narrative  forms  which  start   with  The Witches'  Brew and  end  with  Toward  the  Last Spike  are  the  natural companions of the lyrical  mosaics of Hath Not a jew. They  are  both  poets of "the beleaguered group". And  no  doubt   in  the  end  Pratt's "apocalyptic dinner" and   Klein's "goodly  eating I Of  roast  leviathan" come  to the  same  thing. But,  in  the  mean­ time,   no  reader   could  possibly  confuse  their   wordplay or  their  quatrains and  couplets,  not  to  mention  the  immediate substance of things  seen  and  hoped  for. And  to turn  from  Pratt's pre-war poems to Klein's is suddenly to leave the sea far behind, almost  to forget  that  it ever  existed.  Hath  Not  a  jew  must  be the  driest book  in  Canadian poetry.  Whatever the swings  of the  pendulum between  Egypt and  Promised Land, the  poet  never  gets his feet  wet.
In  this as in  many  other  ways, Klein's last  book of poetry,  The  Rocking  Chair
and  Other  Poems, differs from  his first. The  obvious  differences-a new and ex­ plicit  French-Canadian setting,  fresh  winds of style blowing  through  Montreal in the  forties--are not  necessarily the  most valuable. We have  been  told that  the in­  fluence  of the  Preview  and  First Statement groups in wartime Montreal served  to release Klein,  that  it allowed  him  to move from  the dead  end of Poems 1944 and the  misstep  of the  Hitleriad to the new vitality  of his fourth  book.  But  this some­ what  factitious shot  in  the  arm  had  its  disadvantages.  More  poems  than  "The Provinces" try  to  compete  with  Patrick  Anderson, and  "Les  Filles  Majeures" is the  sort  of thing  that  P. K.  Page  did  much  better. The  value  of the  new setting  is equally  ambiguous. "The Rocking Chair", "The Snowshoers", "The Spinning Wheel" and  other  poems of the kind are brilliant but very detached; quaint genre­ pieces  by a contemporary and  more  elaborate  Krieghoff. Klein's eye and  ear  are more  alert  than  ever,  and  the  book is full of  superb exercises;  but,  although the places  and  people  of  Quebec (and  occasionally other  provinces)  are  painted in more  detail  than  the  towns and sundry folk of Hath  Not a jew, they are grasped with  less force  and  concern. In  other  words,  Klein's new  regionalism is as much  an inhibition as a release.
The richest  and  probably the  best  are  those  poems  where  Klein's first  world seems  to  interpenetrate his  second.  He  has  never   written anything lovelier  or stronger than  "Grain  Elevator", beside  which   (as  gloss perhaps) I like to place the best stanza  of "Bread":

0 black-bread hemisphere, oblong of rye, Crescent and circle of the seeded bun,
All art is built on your geometry,
All science explosive from your captured sun.


12

KLEIN'S  DROWNED POET



Or   maybe   the  best  companion  poem  might   be  "Quebec  Liquor  Commission Store". The   book  is full  of  such  interesting constructions and   parodies of  con­ structions: the  anti-ark of "Pawnshop", the sound-proof  jungle  of  "Commercial Bank",  the   "grassy   ghetto" of  "Indian  Reservation", and   even   "Frigidaire", which  compresses  within  its "slow sensational and secret sight" a whole Laurentian winter   pastoral. The   interpenetration of  worlds  and  images  is  sometimes  more than   a little  startling. Anyone who  turns  from  Klein's  novel, The  Second Scroll, back  to "Political Meeting" will greet  the  line "a  country  uncle  with  sunflower  seeds in  his pockets" with  a shock of recognition,  and  for  one  awful  moment  see the  shadow of  Uncle   Melech   rising  up  behind  the  Camillien Houde who  is his parody.
The  book  ends  "at  the  bottom  of the sea",  but  it  has gone  under water  a few times before  that. There's a lone bather  who seems to be merman, dolphin, water­ lily and  charioted Neptune all together, although his sea is only a tiled swimming pool.  Another  poem  ends  with  the  rising  "from   their  iced  tomb"  at  break-up
time  of
the pyramided  fish, the unlockered ships, and last year's blue and bloated suicides.

But no  catalogue of  "immersion images" would  prepare anyone for  Klein's Lycidas   when   he  finally   appears at  the  beginning of  "Portrait of  the  Poet  as Landscape", an  Orpheus dismembered into  Bartlett's Quotations, buried  on  the library shore,  unwept even  by our  brief  custodians of fame.
Not an editorial  writer, bereaved with bartlett, mourns  him, the shelved Lycidas.
No actress squeezes a glycerine tear for him.

And  that  beginning hardly prepares us for  his last appearance at  the  end  of the poem,   crowned  and   shining  (however equivocally)  at  the  bottom of  the  sea, another "lost  prince  of a diadem".
Klein  gives us a good  many  alternative portraits to examine on our  way to the
true  one.  First  we must  travel  down  the usual elegiac cul-de-sac and  test the glory and  the  nothing of a  name. But fame's spur  has never  seemed  so blunt; and  the series of unholy  names  (dots,  votes, statistics)   manage to suggest  nothing less than a grim  parody of the  original creative  spirit,  the blasphemy of a nameless  god:
0, he who unrolled our culture from its scroll  . . who under one name made articulate
heaven, and  under another  the seven-circled air,
is, if he is at all, a number, an x,
a Mr. Smith in a hotel register.

KLEIN'S  DROWNED POET



What John Crowe  Ransom  once claimed  for  Milton's elegy  ("a  poem nearly anonymous")  Klein  is claiming  for  Lycidas  himself.
From  the  poet  as name,  Klein's  portrait-album turns  to the  poet  as others  see
him,  and, at  greater length,  as he sees himself-falling and  rising  "just like"  a poet.  His  self-images  range  from  "his  mother's miscarriage" at  the  nadir to "the Count of  Monte Cristo  come  for  his revenges" at  the  zenith,  or  (to  reverse  the cycle)   from  an  adolescent  first exploring the  body  of the  word  to a "convict on parole" (Klein's puns  are  inescapable). Then  he  and  his kind  are  portrayed as social  beings,  scattered about  the  country, cherishing their  esoteric  art,  joining  a political  party, seeking and  repelling  love, multiplying within, alone and  not alone. The next  portrait strikes deep  into  Klein: the  poet  as citizen  manque, exile on a reservation. As if he  were literally  disinherited, cuckolded, displaced by someone else, this  poet  tries to guess his double  outside  the  poetic ghetto, the man  who has come  forward to fill "the  shivering  vacuums his absence  leaves". Then the  album returns to fame  in another form: the public  personality the poet dreams of, which "has its attractions, but  is not  the  thing".
Indeed, none  of these portraits has much  to do with the poet as writer  of poetry, although they may  be a clue to some "stark  infelicity" at the  bottom  of the  poetic process. The  last  portrait, superimposed on the  rest in the sixth  and  last section  of the  poem,  is another matter. This  poet, seeding  his illusions,  is Adam  the  namer and  praiser  and  prophet in one. He  takes a green  inventory, he psalms  the world into existence,  and  then, from a planet  of vantage, he takes "a single camera view" of  the  earth, "its  total  scope  and  each  affiated  tick"-world  enough and   time rolled  in a book,  or  (if one remembers the first section) scroll. By this means,  the drowned poet  breathes and  pulsates.  Each  item  he praises is "air  to his lungs  and pressured blood  to his heart" and  when  the list is complete he has resurrected his own  drowned body  as well as the world's.  Or,  if this seems too lofty a way of  put­ ting  it,  the  next  stanza  speaks  more  simply of  renewing the  craft  of  verse,  of bringing new  forms  and  creeds  to life, and  thereby  of  paying  back  some of  the air  that  is daily  being  stolen from  his lung.
These are not mean ambitions. It is already something merely to entertain  them. Meanwhile,  he
makes of his status as zero a rich garland, a halo of  his anonymity,
and lives alone, and in his secret shines
like phosphorus. At the bottom of the sea.

The  phrasing of  the  last  two  stanzas  is extremely tentative;  the  garland and halo  of  heavenly   fame  share  their  brightness with  the  death-blue shine  of  the

KLEIN'S  DROWNED POET



corpse; and   Lycidas  remains waiting  "meanwhile". The ending will seem  even more   negative   and  ironic  if we  contrast it  with  the  psalm-followed "drowning instant" at  the  end  of Uncle  Melech's  liturgy,  the last gloss of The  Second Scroll. Of  course, between  the poet's  multiple-portrait and  Uncle  Melech's composite photograph lies the establishment of Israel in 1949.  But Klein's  poem is still fundamentally affirmative. The  poet is nobody,  a mere  cipher; but the zero is also the  halo over his drowned head: zero as hero, or "Aught from  Naught", as Uncle Melech  would  have  put  it. And,  although his status  as nobody  may  be his "stark infelicity", it  may  also be the  poet's extinction  of personality, the ultimate anony­ mity  behind  the  ultimate poem. As if to emphasize  the affirmative, Klein changed his tide from  "Portrait of the Poet as Zero" to "Portrait of the Poet as Landscape" and  thereby  gave  his favourite "microcosm-macrocosm" image  pride of place.
Some  of the  details  of the  poem  (the  maps  and  charts, the  images  of  explora­ tion,  the  drowned body  itself)  in combination make it seem likely that Klein  was remembering one of Donne's best-known  hymns. But a reader of  Canadian poetry might  well be reminded of Klein's  own early masterpiece "Out of the  Pulver  and the  Polished  Lens". What comes  out  of Spinoza's lens,  as it  magnifies  one  way and  shrinks  another, is a figure  for  God's  relation  to  man  and nature. Between microcosm and  macrocosm stands  God,  the  imminent lens or  eye, the  focus and  burning glass of  all  creation. Klein's  Spinoza  translates  this  figure  into  theorem  and  into  pantheistic psalm.

I  behold  thee  in  all  things,  and  in all  things:  lo, it  is myself;  I  look into  the pupil of thine eye, it is my very countenance  I see ....
The  flowers of the field, they are kith and  kin to me;  the lily my sister, the rose
is my blood and flesh  .  .  .  .
Even as the stars in the firmament  move, so does my inward  heart, and even as the moon draws the tides in the bay, so does it the blood in my veins ....
Howbeit, even in dust I am resurrected;  and even in decay I live again.


Spinoza can  reach  a similar  conclusion  through Klein's alchemical or Cabbalistic images:  cirque, skull,  crucible, golden   bowl,  hourglass,  planet,  "macrocosm, sinew-shut". The "horrible atheist" proves  "that in  the  crown  of God  we are  all gems". The  title  of this early  poem  might  just as well be "Portrait of Spinoza  as Landscape". One  might  even  justify calling  the later  one  "Portrait of the  Poet  as Lens". Its  poet  portrait is also a poet-photographer. At  first  we are  only  told  of "mirroring lenses  forgotten  on  a  brow I that  shine  with  the  guilt  of  their  un­ noticed  world". But  the  last  picture to be developed  under water  is that "single­
camera view" : man, world,  and  maybe  burning glass, all  at  once.

KLEIN's DROWNED POET


IDOUBT if Irving  Layton  will ever improve  on these  binocu­
lars.  Nevertheless,  more  than  one of his poems  reads  like a redevelopment of
Klein's  "Portrait". Layton  belongs among those not  uncommon  poets who grow by discovering with surprise, delight and  horror  what  their  previous poems really meant  and  then  writing new ones to prove it. The  process can go on forever, as the images and  themes renew themselves in poem  after  poem. At the  beginning of one such series stands "The  Swimmer",  the poem which Layton placed first in his collected edition,  A  Red  Carpet   for the  Sun, and  which  he has described in public as the poem that first persuaded  him he was a poet. It has a lot to answer for if it turned  this narcissus into a trumpet  daffodil.
Layton  has a good many favourite images for the poetic character. Some of his
best poems try to fit them together. In "The  Cold Green  Element", although  the drowned  poet is the Alpha and  Omega of them,  a number  of others are crushed between the two. The  poem begins with the speaker in ignorance  of what  the air and its green satellite have in store for him, but Layton  is at least willing to con­ front  the  undertaker with a vision of a drowned  poet  blown out  of the western sea. He is blown out,  however, only to become one of his alter egos, the hanged
poet:
a great squall in the Pacific blew a dead poet out of the water,
who now hangs from the city's gates.

From  hanged  poet he becomes lightning-blasted  tree  (Layton's vegetable world is usually  more  crucified  than  crucifying) , a  haloed  and  garlanded   hunchback, a reflection in the eyes of the castrating  female, sun-bloody  catalpa  leaves-a  long list of "murdered selves" ripe for devouring,  whose revival is hard  to distinguish from  a  new  murder,  the fruit  from  the spent  seed. Even  the singing worm and crying  boys to  which  the furies clear a path  in  the  last stanza  are  presented  as transitory  and  misleading;  but  from  them  the  series of  parallel  portraits   turns back to the beginning,  as the poet (or some fishy ancestor)   again swims "breath­ less" in "that cold green element".
As a rule, Layton's  poet appears to us in two main settings:  one is golden and bloody, but  also blotched  and  blackened  with shadow;  the other  is a cold green element, fertile or snotty, refreshing or suffocating, depending on which side up. "Whatever Else Poetry is Freedom"  (another set of poet-portraits) ends with the poetic stave of an "aggrieved  king" piercing the heart  of the vampire  shadow of the sun;  his song of lust is an explosive resurrection  of the body ("skin and glycer-

r6

KLEIN'S   DROWNED POET



inc") ; his stave  is ultimately the staff of life, like Klein's bread  and  its captured sun.  But  earlier in  the  poem  the  poet-king  is King  Canute bidding the  waves withdraw and   greeting their  inexorable approach  with  a  clown's   jest. The   jest is no protection against the  water-logged lung  and  equivocal halo of Klein's poet.
It was the mist. It lies inside one like a destiny. A real Jonah  it lies rotting like a lung.
And I know myself undone who am a clown
And wear a wreath of mist for a crown.

If there  were  any  answer  to  that  tubercular Jonah in  the  poet's  belly,  any  link between  Layton's golden  and  airy  world  and  his cold  green  element, any  meta­ morphic lung  at  the  centre  of things,  the obvious image  for  it would  be  the frog or  toad  with  which  Layton has  found  such  unexpected affinities  of  late.  It first appears in "The Poetic Process" of 1955· But its real  home  is Layton's 1958  col­ lection,  A Laughter  in the Mind, as the cover of the  first edition  makes  clear.  In
one  poem  the  poet  identifies  himself  with  "a  huge  toad  I saw,  entire  but  dead,  I
That Time mordantly had  blacked"; in  another a  "frog sits I And  stares  at  my writing  hand" and  he imagines  it transformed before  his eyes to "a  royal  maniac raving, I Whirlwind's tongue, desolation's  lung"; this  frog-prince legend   also forms  the  climax  of  a  more  recent  poem,  "Because   My  Calling Is Such".  Most successful  of all  is "Cain", where  the  frog  (killed  by  the  poet  with  an  air-rifle)
combines with  a whole  group of Layton's most obsessive themes: man  as a mur­ dering animal;  the  levelling  of  the  chain   of  being;   the  brotherhood  and  even identity of murderer and  victim,  poet and  enemy.  In  a whimsical  aside, the death  of the gasping frog is even compared to the fall of empires, including the Roman. If this aside heralds the next step in the history of the drowned poet, we can expect  amphibious and  internecine warfare on  a  large  scale.  But,  of  course,  Canadian poetry  has  had  all  that  before.  And,  if the finality  of Layton's introduction to A Red  Carpet   for the  Sun  really  means  anything, I  doubt  if he  plans  to give  us a succession  of lyrical  footnotes to The  Great Feud.


THE DEFENCE  OF LADY CHATTERLEY



llugh A1acLennan



UNnL   RECENT>.Y  om   Canadian sex  huntern   have   been more   modest   than   their  American brothers:  they  have  seldom  dared attack a
major writer. Usually  their prey has been some young  American whose adolescent musings  on  sex  have  been  over-sold  to the  public  by pictures and  blurbs  on  the jacket in which  they  appear. These  books were defended for one reason  only. Sex hunters must  not  be  allowed  without opposition   to  establish  the  claim  that  the final  judge of literature be the local constable or a fourteen-year-old girl.
The attack on  Lady  Chatterley's Lover  in a Montreal court  was very different, and  to  join in  the  defence  of Lady  Chatterley seemed  to me both  a duty  and  an honour. A variety  of circumstances made  this  the  most important book  trial  ever held in Canada.
The   first  of  these  was  the  stature of  the  author under attack:  not  even  the
prosecution tried  to  argue  that  Lawrence was  not  an  important writer. Another circumstance was  the  conduct of  the  publishers. At  no  time  during their  sales campaign did  they  resort  to the  usual tactics  of some  paper back  salesmen.  There were  no  pictures of  half-dressed  women  on  the  jacket,  no  barker's blurbs  aimed at  the  rubes.  Finally, this  was  the  first book  trial  under the  new  law  which  was intended to  be  more  liberal  than  the  old one  based  on  the  absurd Hicklin  judg­ ment  of the mid-Victorian era.
Under the  new law, "obscenity" is not limited  to sex, nor can  an entire  book be
judged  on  the  basis of an  isolated  passage  read  aloud  in court by a policeman or the  prosecutor. Books which  "unduly exploit" violence  or sadism  may  also come under  the ban of this new law.
Clearly  this  is an  advance in  legislation,  and  it seemed  to all of us concerned with  the  defence of Lady  Chatterley that  it  was essential  to do  what  we could  to facilitate the  court  in  arriving at  a decision  which  would  set a sound  precedent.

THE DEFENCE OF   LADY CHATTERLEY



Of  JH'<Tssity, thr  law is somewhat vague.  In the phrase "undue exploitation", both words  are  open  to subjective interpretation. Yet on the whole  the law seems well­ intended and  sound  decisions  could  go a long way toward making it an excellent  one.
Speaking personally, I have no patience with some liberals  who say there should
be  no  legal  control whatever over  the  printed word.  Having spent  some  time  in Germany before  1933,  I saw  what  monstrous damage can  be done  by men  who incite  to racial  hatred but  dodge  the libel laws by not  naming specific individuals. This  new  Canadian law should  provide  decent  people  with a weapon against  that sort  of thing.  It should  also make it  possible to control  or limit  the  diet  of crime, cruelty  and  violence  fed into  the audiences by some television shows.  I could  have wished  that  the  first trial  under  the new  law had  been  concerned with  something of this sort,  and  not  with  the  old sexual  bogy. However, since sex was again  the target, it  was  best  that  Lawrence was involved,  and  not  some  obscure  writer  of no worth.
For  Lawrence, especially  in  Lady  Chatterley)s   Lover)  was essentially  a moral writer,  a fact  the prosecution did not seem able to comprehend because it was inconceivable to  them  that  any  moral  person  should  use sexual  scenes  to convey his message  and  employ  the  kind  of four-letter words  they naturally (in  the kind of society  Lawrence condemns)  had  only seen  in  print  on  lavatory walls.  Least of  all  could  they  understand that  Lawrence believed  that  the  use of these  four­ letter  words  was  essential  to  the  moral  theory  he sought  to advance, or  that  he was  using  them  in  the  interest   of  his own  genuine   purity. This  point  came  up frequently in  the defence, but it was ignored  in the  judgment, or  dismissed  as the personal opinion of the witnesses.
This  point  must  be  made  again  and  again: Lady  Chatterley is a moral  work or it is nothing. It  is so moral that  in  places it pleads  the  moral  issues at  the  ex­ pense  of  art. I believe  that  several  of  the  passages  containing four-letter  words defeat  Lawrence's purpose; they seem unreal in the context, as though  Lawrence himself, not  Mellors,  were using them  to emphasize  his principle that physical love is pure  so long  as all physical  functions of the body are spoken  of  without shame. Yet  this  artistic defect,  if it  is one,  happens to be one  more  proof  of Lawrence's moral  intention, and  it should  weigh heavily in his favour in a law court.
Consider it,  for example, in  the  connotation of the  clause  "undue exploitation of sex." Though the  word  "exploitation" is not defined  here, I don't see what  else it can mean  but  the exploitation of sex for commercial purposes. Such  exploitation is very common today,  especially  in  the American market, and  it would  be naive

THE DEFENCE OF LADY CHATTERLEY



to pretend that  it does not bolster sales among  a public  whose attitude toward sex is still infantile. It  has certainly  increased the American sale of the current edition of Lady  Chatterley itself, because  the book was persecuted so long  that  thousands of morons  and  odd-balls bought  it in the hope  of finding  pornography in it. Most of  them  were  disappointed, for  whatever else Lady  Chatterley may  be, it is not prurient.
However, when  Lawrence was still alive, it is a proved  fact  that  the  use of the four-letter words  actually  prevented him  from  obtaining a legitimate market for the  novel.  His  publishers  begged  him  to remove  them, or  to tone  them  down  by using  the  Latinized equivalents, and  refused  to publish  the novel  unless he did so. Lawrence's assertion  that  this would  emasculate his book  and  render it dishonest is therefore a  prima  facie proof that  he, so far  from  exploiting sex for commercial purposes, actually   ruined  the  commercial prospects of the  novel  by writing it as he did.  A further proof is the novel's history: the  present  edition is the first one to be offered  across the counter  to an English-speaking public since  Lawrence's death thirty  years ago.




0NCE  IT   IS  RECOGNIZED that   Lady  Chatterley is  a  moral book-a book sincerely  written  by a law-abiding man  advocating a new  attitude
toward social  and  sexual  morality-it follows that  the  principle at stake  in a law case involving Lady  Chatterley is essentially  different from  the  customary one in the trials  of "sex books."  Essentially,  this was a novel of ideas, or at least a modern allegory  akin  to  Pilgrim's  Progress. The  conventional will  be  shocked  by such  a comparison, but  they need not be if they trouble themselves  to discover  the gospel Lawrence preached. It was  merely  this:   that  sex is the  source  and  core  of our existence; that  much  of our  unhappiness, and  most of our  aggressions,  are  caused by our  refusal  or incapacity to understand the  nature of sex in love, and  to come to terms  with it.
According to  Lawrence, our  attitude toward sex  should   be  the  same  as  our attitude toward life.  Life is good  in itself;  so is physical  sex.  But  neither life nor sex  are  unqualifiedly good.  Both  may  be  rendered evil  by  false  attitudes,  false shames,   wrong   use,  degradation,  decadence or  exploitation  for  commercial or social  purposes.  To  dissipate  your  life is manifestly evil;  to  dissipate  your  sexual powers  in futile  promiscuity is equally  so. To subjugate your  life to the crushing

20

THE DEFENCE OF  LADY  CHATTERLEY



force of ahstrartions, to gear it to the impersonality of a machine  age-this is evil according  to Lawrence.  And  akin to this is the modern  practice  of reducing  sex to a matter  of experimentation, of intellectualizing it, of dissecting the emotions connected  with it by artificial language.
It should  be obvious to anyone that if Lawrence had set forth his gospel in the
kind  of language   I  have  used  here,  nobody would  have  censored him.  This language is far too abstract  to influence anyone. But in the allegory of Lady Chat­ terley all the ideas involved with this highly personal subject  were translated  into flesh and  blood, were given the power of poetry and drama, were brought  to life in such  a way that  readers  were not  merely dealing  with  abstractions, but  with living  persons who  might  have  been themselves. Only  in  this way, so Lawrence insisted, could  his morality  achieve sufficient power to influence  mankind.
Therefore it follows that it is obtuse to confine an indictment of Lady Chatter­ leys  Lover  to the kind of evidence used against the books which are occasionally haled  before  the  courts  and  treated  like prostitutes. If this novel is a  moral  alle­ gory-and it  clearly  is--then those who  would deny  it  an  audience  are  in  the position of denying allegiance to the great principle stated by Milton in Areopagi­ tica:  "Let  truth  and  falsehood grapple: who ever knew  truth  to be worsted in a free and open encounter?"
Stripped  of the many  irrelevancies  with which the thoughtless have always in­ vested D. H. Lawrence,  this is the sole issue which ought to count when Lawrence is impeached in a law court. It might be re-phrased a little as follows:  "Is a man to be denied  the  right  to advance  a moral  philosophy simply because  his philo­ sophy is involved with sex?"
And this brings me, as it has brought many other men who have thought  about Lawrence's  history, to the underlying forces which invariably operate  against him. When  his  attackers  insist that  they hate  Lawrence  for  what  they  believe is his prurience  or  dirtiness,  I  simply do not  believe them.  The  society in  which they live has no objection  to prurience.  It  is riddled  with it. The  kind of people who prosecute  Lawrence  never  prosecute  the cosmetic ads,  the  movie come-ons,  the sexy pictures  on  the magazine  covers. Many  a city in America  has tolerated  the strip  tease and  the burlesque  during  the thirty year period when Lady Chatterley was under  the  ban.  No, it is not the so-called dirtiness of Lawrence  that  troubles them;  it is the challenge  of his morality, and  (probably  unconsciously)  they use the so-called dirtiness as an excuse to thrust  aside the moral challenge.
About  the targets of this challenge there can be no doubt  whatever.  The  ethic of Lawrence is the direct opposite of the one which permeates our whole material-


21

THE DEFENCE OF LADY CHATTERLEY



IStJ.c  society,  whether it  be  capitalist or  communist. The   chief  purpose of  that society,  so far  as concerns  the  daily  lives of its members, is to produce, distribute and  consume, to break  records,  to double  and  re-double the external organization for  the  purposes  of power,  production and  consumption. In such  a society human individualism is not  only dangerous, it is a fifth  column. So is the  human spirit, which   must  take  a  secondary   place  to  the  demands of the  IBM   machine and the  assembly  line. The  Laurentian hero is the inevitable antagonist of the Organ­ ization   Man, and  this  Lawrence himself  knew  when  he insisted  that  materialism had  driven underground the primeval forces of the blood.






BuT THE  ACCUSERS of  Lawrence seldom think of  this consciously.  When  they think  consciously  about the  moral  issues involved, invari­ ably  they  fall back  upon  an  ethic  more  venerable than  that  of Adam Smith, Karl Marx or  Henry   Ford.  This  was  the  ethic  of the  Christian Fathers  of  the  third  and  fourth century, as I believe Morley  Callaghan recently  pointed out in a maga­ zine article. As so few people these days remember the old theology on which  their churches were founded, it may be worth  repeating what some of its premises were.
The  basic  premise  of St. Augustine was that  life is evil because  man  is a fallen
creature, and  in  this  belief Augustine was  of  course  a  true  disciple  of St.  Paul. But  he went  far  beyond  St.  Paul  in his denunciation of sex. If life is evil, then  the sexual  act  must  be  the  most evil act  a human being  can  commit because  it  per­ petuates life.  What  Augustine elevated   into   a  cornerstone of  Christian  ethics, Calvin  and   Knox   many  centuries later   translated into  the  everyday  lives  and institutions of their  puritan followers.
What private griefs were Calvin's I know  not, but Augustine has told  us lucidly what his were. "Make me chaste,  0 God,  but  not  yet," this singular African used to pray  when  he was young. He  had  every reason  to loathe both  life and  sex. He pasSed  his days  in  one  of the  most  miserable  and  apocalpytic periods  of human history  and   he  lived  for  76  years. He  was  a  young man when Valens fell at Adrianople and  the  barbarians breached the  Roman frontiers. He  was 57  when Alaric   sacked  Rome, and  he  met  his death when  the  Vandals besieged  Hippo. He  was learned, he was intelligent, he certainly understood enough about external cause  and  effect  to attribute the  Roman catastrophes to the  decadence of Roman institutions. In  few of their  habits  were the  Romans of the decline  more  decadent

22

THE  DEFENCE OF LADY CHATTERLEY



than  in their  use of sex, as Augustine knew from  a long  personal experience. Most of the  patricians were  bi-sexual. They  played  with  girls and  boys for  thrills,  and long  before  the Americans thought of it, they loved the strip-tease. What wonder, then,  that  Augustine should  consider  that sex was the prime  evil in a society which had  become  like a human body dying of diseases incurred by its own vices? What wonder that  he,  being  a genius  of collossal force, should  have  been  able  to give to his personal  hatred and  fear of sex the force of a primitive taboo?
There are  few  clergymen today  who  regard  sex as St.  Augustine did,  but  his basic  theology,   reinforced  by  four centuries of  Calvinism, still  permeates our modern society  and  has  made millions of modern  people  infantile in  their  sexual attitudes. There can  be  no  question  that  much  of our  adolescent silliness on  this subject derives  from  these  buried taboos,  and  no question  that  they  have  become an  increasing embarrassment to thinking  clergymen. Yet there  lingers  the  feeling, also adolescent, that  one  dare  not  publicly  attack  an  ancient church father in the weakest  point  of his theology  without endangering the  Christian faith. I don't see how  anyone  acquainted with  the  teachings and  personality of Jesus  can  believe this,  but  manifestly some  do,  despite  the  fact  that  Jesus  has  outlived  everything these dark  minds  have  done  and  thought of His name.
Now  against D.  H.  Lawrence, who  was also a genius,  this old  taboo-morality of Augustine and  Calvin could  not fail to emerge  as a fighting enemy.  Lawrence intended that  it should. Therefore it follows, since we live in a free  country, that his  morality should   have  a  fair  chance of reaching an  audience. Let  it  grapple with  Augustine's, and  Augustine's with it.
For  all  these  reasons  I insist  that  the  banning of Lady  Chatterley's  Lover was
an  act  more  serious in the  area  of civil liberties  than  the  banners assumed  it was. The attackers sincerely  believed,  at  least on the conscious  level, that  nothing was involved  here  but  pornography, and  exercised their right  to uphold their  opinions against those  of the  defence. But the case was not that  simple  by any means.
It  is because  the  ethical issue involved  in  Lady Chatterley  has  been  obscured
by sensationalism that  I, for one, was not sorry this case was lost in a lower court As it goes up  to appeal, there  will be wider  debate  on the real issue, and  this may result  in  clarity. The issue is not,  as many  believe who  wish  the  book  to go free whether a  scandalous work  should  be sold  or  not.  It  is whether a  moral  work, unavoidably containing material which  scandalizes  some  people,  should  be ban ned for this secondary cause.



RECOLLECTIONS OF MALCOLM LOWRY



William McConnell



0N MAY    14th, 1927,  Malcohn  Lowry  was 17 yean; old. On  that  day  the  Liverpool  Correspondent  for the  London  Evening  News  inter­
viewed him  just before he sailed on the cargo steamer  PYRRHUS as a deckhand at  so/- per  month.  He told the Correspondent: "No  silk-cushion youth  for me. I want  to see the world and  rub shoulders with its oddities, and get some experi­ ence of life before I go back to Cambridge  University." The Correspondent inter­ viewed his rich cotton broker father and  his mother,  too, but only her comments are on record:   "He  is bent on a literary career,  and  his short story writing is all to him,"  said  Mrs. Lowry, when the ship had  left.
On  his return  from Port Said, Shanghai  and Yokohama  Lowry was again interviewed,  this  time  by The   Daily Mail.  With  characteristic candour   he  an­ nounced  he didn't  intend  to go to sea again, since a fourteen  hour day, chipping paint,  scrubbing  decks and  polishing brass was not  to his liking. He said  he in­ tended  to go on to university, compose fox-trots and write fiction.
One  of  his intentions  was realised,  as we know,  for  Malcolm  Lowry  wrote, among  many other works, one of the great novels of the twentieth  century, Under the Volcano. Despite the early experience of his four month  voyage as deckhand, he ·returned to sea,  travelling  to every ocean,  beachcombed in  the South  Seas, settled  for  troubled  spates  in  Mexico,  Haiti,  Germany, until  he finally  found, again close to the sea, a waterfront  shack at Dollarton,  ten miles from Vancouver, where he could write and live in his own peculiar,  uneasy peace.
It  was during  this last period  of his  life  that I  met  Malcolm and  his wife, Margerie,   (who  published  many  fictional  works under  her  maiden  name,  Mar­ gerie Bonner). It was at a cocktail party at the Caulfield  home of Alan Crawley.
A. J. M. Smith  and  the American  poet, Theodore Roethke,  had  persuaded Mal­
colm  to attend.  He  was pathologically shy and  any  group  of more  than  four

24

RECOLLECTIONS  OF MALCOLM LOWRY



usually caused per.-;piration   to  drip from  his face,  but  on  this occasion  there  was no  shyness.  It was  a  gathering of writers,  of like beings,  of natural and  mutual acceptance. He  hated literary  people;  to the same  degree  he accepted and  loved those he felt were dedicated to literature. Quite  often  this blind  acceptance caused him  self-hurt and  disappointment, but  more  often  it created deep  friendship.
Physically,  Lowry  was  a  powerful  man: short,  broad-shouldered, with  a  tre­ mendous chest.  His  gait  was  rolling,  whether   as accommodation to  his  bulk  or the  result  of years  at  sea,  or simply  the acquisition of an  imagined habit, I don't know.  He  was  fair-headed, with  muscular  arms  and  small  feet.  Most  impressive  of all were  his intense  blue  eyes which  looked into  and  through your own,  which  gazed  into  the distance, which  altered  in hue as his mood  varied.
Most  of  his life from  the  time  he left  university  until  he discovered  Dollarton was spent  in  physical  activity  in odd  corners  of the  globe,  but,  like the scattered notes  which  he wrote  on  bus transfers,  cigarette papers  or any other  chance piece of  paper, all  of  his  life  was  lived  for  metamorphosis into  short  story,  poem  or novel.  He  could  discard nothing and,  consequently, writing to him  was not  the usual  casting  for idea,  figure  of speech,  or character portrayal, but  rather a pain­ ful,  tortuous process  of selection  and  arrangement.
He  had  that  rare   (and rather frightening) gift of near  total  recall.  I saw him sometimes   after  intervals of several  months.  For  the  first  five minutes he  would stare   contemplatively across Burrard  Inlet  at  the  evening outline  of  Burnaby Mountain, then   reflectively   at  a  gull  sweeping  low  over  the  water,  then  finally at  me.  Out of  the  air  with  magic,  it  seemed  to one  like  myself  who  had  little memory   whatever, he  would  recount  ward-perfect an  argument we had  had  on our  previous  meeting. He  would  review  exactly  what  each  of us had  said,  then quietly  announce that  he had  been  (or  I had  been, it doesn't matter)  in error  in a particular statement. Accuracy, even on trivial  matters, was an  obsession.
This  accuracy was  one  of  the  strengthening qualities of  his writing. By exact physical  depiction, razor-edged characterization, evocation of mood,  he had some alchemy which  would  make  each  line  true  in  detail,  yet with  layers  of meaning which  could  be  peeled  off by the  reader  without the onion  becoming smaller.  In his great  novel,  Under  the Volcano, this is revealed  in many  pages.  For  example, I recall  Malcolm describing to  me  how,  when  a  young  man  in  Wales,  he  had come  across  an  amusing insertion in  a Visitors'  Book in  a hotel.  He  described  it on several  occasions,  each  time not  really adding anything, yet casting  a different spell  over  the  event   on  each telling. Consider my  delight, then,  when  I  en­ countered it in another guise on pageI 8I:

RECOLLECTIONS OF   MALCOLM LOWRY



"Climbed  the  Parson's  Nose," one  had  written,  in  the  visitors' book at  the  little Welsh  rock-climbing   hotel,  "in  twenty   minutes.  Found the  rocks very  easy." "Came  down  the  Parson's Nose," some immortal  wag had  added  a day later,  "in twenty  seconds.  Found  the  rocks very hard." .... So  now, as I  approach the second half of my life, unheralded,  unsung, and  without  a guitar,  I am going back to sea again:  perhaps  these days of waiting are more like that  droll descent, to be survived  in order  to repeat  the climb. At the  top  of the  Parson's  Nose you could walk home to tea over the hills if you wished, just as the actor  in the Passion Play can get off his cross and go home to his hotel for a Pilsener.

We  walked  along  the  beach  one  late  afternoon-a warm  afternoon when  the tide  was full,  the  salt-chuck quiet  as if it had  been  fed  to satiety  and  didn't want the  never-changing chore  of accommodating itself  to  the  tug  of the  moon.  We were  having  one  of  those intense  and  enjoyable silences  which  can  cement  each to the other  without any mortar of words. We came  across the oil encrusted corpse of a seagull.  I knew,  of course,  how  passionately  fond  of birds  Malcolm was  (a well-marked pocket-size volume of Peterson's Field Guide  was usually beside him) and  I made  some  remark  about  someone's  criminality in  dumping bunker oil in the  harbour. Malcolm nodded, then  pointed  without a word  to the  flares  of the oil  refineries  on  the  other  shore,  his hand  sweeping even  further to indicate the smog  which  sawmills  in Vancouver's False  Creek  were  emitting to soot the land­ scape.  Later, when  we  had  doubled  back  up  the  hillside  and  through  the  ever­ green  forest,  his fingers  felt  the  new sharp green  needles  of the  young  hemlocks and  he contemplatively dug with his toe at the dropped needles which  had  contri­ buted   to  the  forest  loam.  A deep  observer,  he  believed  nothing was or  could  be wasted  in  nature and  that  death  itself was necessary  for  creation.
Was  this  knowledge, perhaps, the reason  for Lowry's bouts  of alcoholism? Un­ like most of his friends  I never saw  him during such  times. He  did  discuss every­ thing  but  the  reason  for  them  with  me  candidly and  simply  (there was no false pride,  no  pantomiming of excuse, but  simple  direct  statement) . On several  occa­  sions  I know  his fear  of groups  triggered  him  off. Once he  arrived  at  an  august  tea  party  staggering and  all  but  speechless,  wanting to  hammer ragtime on  the piano  instead  of  being  listened  to with  respect  and  awe. There were  other  occa­  sions  when  he  was  alone  and  his loneliness simply could  not  be borne.  I suspect  that   sometimes   the  creativity   which   constantly  welled   up  from   within   himself could  not be channelled as he wished it and  had  to be deadened by some anodyne. He  didn't possess the  routine and  familiar  antidotes with  which  the  majority of us are  equipped. During these frightening periods  his understanding and  devoted wife  and  the  few  friends,  such  as Einar  and  Muriel Neilson  of Bowen  Island, to whom  he turned like a child,  carried  him  through and, more  important, beyond,

RECOLLECTIONS OF MALCOLM LOWRY



during the  even  more  hitter  period  of contriteness.
He  told  me  one  day  that  during the long months  when  he had  written Under the Volcano  he had  not  taken  a drink  even of wine, though he had  been  staying with  a  friend   who  had  vineyards  and  made  wine  while  he  wrote.  I mentioned earlier  how  every  tag  end  of event  was of importance to him,  and  somehow in­ corporated into  his  writing. This  was true  even of  his attempts at  forgetfulness, his wild occasional descents  to escape the unbidden imagery he could not momen­ tarily  harness. He  describes  just such  a period  experienced by the  Consul:

...... Why  then  should he be sitting in the bathroom?  Was he asleep?  dead? passed  out?  Was  he  in  the  bathroom  now or  half  an  hour  ago?  Was  it  night? Where  were the others?  But now he heard some of the others' voices on the porch. Some of the  others?  It was just Hugh  and  Yvonne, of course, for the doctor  had gone. Yet for  a moment  he could have sworn the house had  been full of people; why it was still this morning,  or barely afternoon,  only  I 2: I 5 in fact by his watch. At eleven he'd been talking to Mr. Quincey. "Oh  .... Oh." The Consul groaned aloud  .... It came  to him he was supposed to be getting  ready to go to Toma­ lin. But  how  had  he managed  to persuade  anyone he was sober enough  to go to Tomalin? And why, anyhow, Tomalin?
A procession  of  thoughts  like little  elderly  animals  filed through  the  Consul's mind, and  in his mind  too he was steadily crossing the porch again, as he had done an  hour  ago, immediately  after  he'd  seen the insect flying away out  of the  eat's mouth.

Unlike  most of us, Malcolm had  not lost the wise-eyed innocence of childhood. In  fact,  many   of  the  incidents of  his  childhood remained in  his mind  vivid  as current events. He  told  us on several occasions, for example, of a nurse his wealthy family  employed when  he  was very  young.  She  had  loved  his older  brother and to his horror hated him.  Once she had  wheeled  his cart  along  the cliff-edge,  high above  the   rolling   sea.  He   described   with  quiet  exactitude her  features as  she leaned   over  with  a  blanket to smother him,  how  he screamed  (the  exact  key) , and  then  the  saving  running footsteps  of his favoured older  brother which inter­ rupted the  scene.
I used  to steal  glances  at  my seven  year old son when  Malcolm and  Margerie visited  the  cottage by the lake  in which  we were then  living. His features were as mobile  as  Malcolm's when  Malcolm  was  talking,  as intent, and  as unspoiled by conditioned attitudes. Those two  instinctively   understood what  each  other   was feeling  as well as taking  in  the surface  articulation.
Don't let me suggest that  Malcolm was sombre. He had a huge Rabelaisian sense of humour and, oh rare  quality, could laugh  with gusto  at himself. One  afternoon we  were  visiting   Malcolm and   Margerie at  their  shack.  It was  several  months after  he had  injured his leg badly  when  he fell from his wharf  on to lowtide  rocks

27

RECOLLECTIONS OF   MALCOLM LOWRY



(preoccupied  with  dialogue,  so  he  said,  dialogue  to  finish  off  a  discussion  he, Margerie, my wife and  myself had  had  months  before) . He  described the  horror of  the  Catholic hospital   where  he  had  been  taken   (the   cowled  nuns,  for  some reason,  were  the opposite  to Sisters of Charity to his pain-wracked mind) and  the even  greater horror  of later  visiting  his orthopcedic specialist  who sat  examining his leg  and  remarking he might  lose it.  Malcolm   graphically detailed the  whole room,  his utterances of despair  that  he might  lose the leg, then  the asceptic  smile of  the  doctor   who  casually  remarked, as he  reached behind and  brought out  a new  nickel shining  artificial  limb  and  stroked  it,  that  it was as good  as a natural one  for the classical case of amputation on another patient he had.  Desultory  talk followed  this  devilish  recount, then  Malcolm, who  was  always  fascinated by the law,  asked  me whether I had  had  any interesting law  cases recently.  I was young in my profession  then and,  perhaps over enthusiastically, I described  a Motor Manslaughter case  I had  defended. I described  the  difficulties.  The  accused  was on  the  wrong  side  of a straight road,  he had  spent  the  afternoon drinking beer in  a  pub,  and  the  police had  found  a half-finished bottle  of whiskey in his truck after  the  accident. In  recounting all  the  evidence  against my  client,  then  finally the   jury's  acquittal verdict,   I gleefully  remarked,  "It was  a  classical  case!" I looked  up and  there  was Malcolm  stroking  an imaginary artificial steel limb, mur­ muring 'classical  case',  then  he  erupted into  roars  of  gargantuan  laughter. His interesting thesis of 'never  trust  an  expert' probably had  some  merit.
Malcolm  personally   knew  a  number of  great   writers who  admired his  work and  communicated their  admiration to him.  I  think,  from  recalling our  conver­ sation, one  of his special  friends  was Conrad Aiken.  Aiken  recognised  his genius  long  before  the  public  success of Under  the  Volcano. While  still  at  Cambridge some  of  Lowry's  short  stories  were  published in  America, and  in  1932  his first novel  Ultramarine   received  a  rather indifferent public   response. It was  during this  period,  as I recall,  that  Aiken  encouraged and  stimulated  him.
He  had   known   well,  while  in  England, Dylan   Thomas. Upon the  occasion when  Thomas first  came  to  Vancouver for  a  public   poetry  reading, Malcolm, the  shyest  man  I have  ever known,  remarked laconically that  Dylan  Thomas for all  his flamboyant public  personality, was  really  a  very shy  person.  After  Dylan Thomas'  reading a  reception   was  arranged to  which   the  Lowrys  and  ourselves were  invited. Despite   Malcolm's dislike  of  people  in  groups   ('individuals  lose their  most precious  possession-their identity') and  his antipathy towards 'literary people'  ('they don't write, they talk aseptically  about  it as if there  were no bloody birth   pangs  and  the  work  emerges  well-scrubbed')  he wanted to meet  Dylan. In

RECOLLECTIONS OF   MALCOLM LOWRY



the  many-roomed converted old  house  where  the  reception   was  held  both  were for  a  long  time  in  separate rooms,  both  being  lionized  and  hating it. At  length friends  managed to  bring  them  together. They  warmly  clasped  hands and  Mal­ colm  said  simply: "Hullo, Dylan," while  Dylan  Thomas replied  with  equal shy­ ness, "Hullo, Malcolm." In  retrospect I  feel similar  inner  fires  were  burning in each  because  they  could  not  render  the  whole of their  experience into a creative  mould.
In  Malcolm's relaxed  periods  he strummed a huge  repertoire of songs, chanties and  tunes  he  had  composed   (including a lively national anthem)  on  a battered ukulele,  and  he  was  never  so happy as when  he was immersed  in  this  music  of his own  making, whether bawdy  Spanish tunes picked  up in some waterfront bis­ tro in  North Africa, or  plaintive Chinese  rise and  fall he had  heard in Singapore. Hours would  pass delightfully, for he took it for granted you shared his happiness.
After  the  publication of  Under  the  Volcano  Malcolm and  his  wife  travelled
for a year, visiting  Haiti, England and  the Continent. With  his habitual generosity he shared   his royalties  with  the  many  he encountered who  claimed to  be able  to put  words  onto  paper. When  he returned to his beloved shack  at  Dollarton there were  periods  of acute  financial want  and  it was during one of these  periods  there occurred  a  minor   event   which   highlighted  two  of  his  characteristics-naivete and  the  ability  to laugh  at  himself.
About this time  one of our  popular national magazines printed, as an advertise­ ment  for a bank,  a single-page short story headed: "We Printed This Because  We Liked  It". At  its  conclusion there was  an  invitation to other  writers  to  make  submissions.
Many   months later   Malcolm laughingly told  me of  his submission. It started
off as a well-planned anecdote but somehow it became longer and  longer.  Feverish weeks were spent  as the  anecdote dilated  and  expanded into  the  eventually com­ pleted  whole-a piece of work  which  would  have required ten issues of the whole magazine instead of a  single  page.  He  had  waited  patiently for  weeks to  receive the bank's cheque before  he gradually realized  the violent sea-change his creativity had   caused.   Fortunately, about   this  time  royalties  from  some  of  the  translated editions  of Under  the Volcano  began  trickling  in.
Many are  generous, as  he  was, with  material possessions, but  few  extend   the
intellectual generosity   he  was  capable of.  It mattered not  to  Malcolm whether someone   was  famous or  unknown, skilled  in  the  craft  of  writing or  a fumbling tyro. He,  who  knew  how  difficult it was to piece together common words  so they sang  and  wreathed in  rich  meaning, gave  consideration, time,  advice  (but never

RECOLLECTIONS OF  MALCOLM LOWRY



didactically, always subjectively)  and  encouragement to all who  asked  for it. He not  only  loved language and  the individual warp  and  woof rendered by a writer, but  revered  it.  He,  a  master,  considered himself  a tyro  and  anyone  who  tackled the same  task with  love he viewed as a potential genius.
Malcolm's  relationship with  his  wife  was  far  more  than   the  customary one. They  were  partners in everything they did, sharing the successes or the  periods  of actual want  with equal  zest. He was proud  of her attractive gaiety  and  her  theatri­ cal   (she   had  been  an  actress)   manner. More  important, he  was  as  concerned with  her  writing  as he was with  his own-and as proud of it. Margerie's opinion was constantly sought  and considered. Equally, her concern and consideration for his welfare,  her  honest  and  penetrating appraisals of his work supplied Malcolm with  a reserve of strength and  stimulation which  always carried him  through the bleak   non-productive  periods  every  writer   encounters.  Margerie possessed  that  rare   quality-intellectual  honesty   and   forthrightness.  They  admired  and   re­ spected  as well as loved each other.
I recall  Malcolm's delight  when  I introduced him  to T. E.  Lawrence's  Seven
Pillars of Wisdom. I was a bit taken  aback  at  his enthusiasm until  I realised  that Lawrence had  a  similar  quality in  his writing (not  often  encountered), that  of concern with  metaphysics. "I must  write  to  him," he  told  me.  I reminded him that   Lawrence had  been  dead  for  decades.  Malcolm ignored this, for  to  him  a writer   never  died.  He  accepted it  on  the  surface, of course,  so improvised long verbal  letters  instead  which  enlivened our  walks. The  symbolism  in Lowry's  work is  not  confined to  the  work  itself. It was  part  of  his daily  life. His  world  was peopled   with  black  and  white  forces.  His  daily  swim  (even  when  light  skim  ice scummed the surface  of the deep  North  Arm) was not merely  a swim but a meta­ physical  experience. I've  mentioned the gas flares at the cracking plant. For hours he  would  discuss them,  not as hot  crackling  oil flames spurting into  the evening's darkness, but  as living sentient forces which  peopled  his world. In  the same  way the  Consul, towards  the  end  of  Under the  Volcano, symbolically  invests a calendar.


He  saw again  in his mind's eye that  extraordinary picture  on Laruelle's  wall, Los Borrachones,  only  now it  took on  a somewhat  different  aspect.  Mightn't it have another  meaning,  that  picture,  unintentional as its humour,  beyond  the symbolic­ ally obvious? He saw those people like spirits appearing to grow more free, more separate, their  distinctive noble faces more distinctive, more noble the higher they ascended  into  the  light;  those florid  people  resembling  huddled  fiends,  becoming more  like each  other,  more  joined together,  more  as one fiend, the further down they hurled into the darkness.

go

RECOLLECTIONS OF   MALCOLM LOWRY



His  last  novel  (unfortunately the  middle  section  was  taken  out  and  never  re­ placed)  was  typical  of  this.  For  several  years there  had  been  recurrent  rumours that  the  waterfront shacks, including his own, were to be bulldozed and the occu­ pant  squatters forced  out  of the beach  strip.  This  had  a terrible effect  upon  him. Here, as  I said,  he  had  found   his uneasy  peace.  For  a month he  and  Margerie had  searched the Gulf  Islands and  Vancouver Island  for an alternate home. The  novel  was, on  the surface, about  the search  for a home  and  dispossession, but  the recurrent symbolism  of many  facets raced through it contrapuntally. Just  as Under the Volcano had  been written and  rewritten four times  (once  completely rewritten in a month when  the  previous  draft had  perished  in a fire), so did  this final and tremendous work  undergo many  changes and  alterations.
One  afternoon-early,  about 2: 30-he started  to read  the first draft of his last novel  to myself,  Margerie and  my wife. The  typescript  was interlineated with  his spidery  written additions and  changes.  He  would finish a page  and, without drop­ ping  a word,  walk  into  the  bedroom to pick up a scrap  of waste  paper  on  which was  an  inserted paragraph.  We  had  brought a bottle  of gin.  As it  was a  festive and  important occasion  he had  bought  two himself. Margerie, my wife and I had  several  drinks,  but  were  spellbound after  that  by his resonant voice and  the won­ der  of his prose. He  read  on and  on, drinking in sips straight gin, without slurring a syllable  or slighting  a word.  Finally, at  2:30 in the morning, he finished the last paragraph, the  three  bottles  empty. My  wife and  I were  terribly  exhausted, but elated. When we  got  up  to  leave  Malcolm   was immersed in  a  paragraph he wanted to rewrite  again, but  rose to light our  way up the trail  with warmness and  thanks, as if it  had  been  we who  had  performed the favour. "God  bless you,"  he would  always  say,  instead of "Goodbye". This  is the  Malcolm  we'll  remember, and  the one to be seen in his verse and prose.
Last  month we  drove  by  on  the  cliff  road  overlooking   the  former Dollarton shacks.  Bulldozers   were  matting the  underbrush to  make  way  for  a  park.  The squatters' shacks,  Malcolm's included, had  long since  disappeared. We  were sad and  spoke  retrospectively, then  brightened, remembering the  seagull  dead  from oil,  the  dropped needles  which  made  the  forest floor.  He  surpassed all of these, Malcolm did,  for  during his lifetime,  not  after  it,  he created life  from  his own.


THE TRANSMUTATION OF HISTORY
LANDMARKS IN CANADIAN HISTORICAL FICTION FOR   CHILDREN

Joan  Selby

T.cnn.n has an enviable capacity to fall in love with a book.
His  response  is total-intellect, emotion  and  spirit  caught and  held  in  one  great
involution. The outside  world  excluded, the  adult  unheeded, the clock stilled;  his inner   world  becomes  a suspended bubble   (its  growth as magic  and  as sudden) holding a  universe  of depths  unsounded, lengths unmeasured, heights  unsealed. Suspicions are  necessary  and  right  to one  who  gives his heart so completely, and the  child  is wary.  He  is as closed to dulness, to the inept, to the contrived dissemi­ nation  of knowledge, as he is open  to the  play of inventive imagination and, sub­  consciously,  to  the  riches  of style, language and  form,  to  the  intellectual experi­ ment  and  the  mystical  experience. He  cannot analyze  these  things,  for  he is not vocal  in adult  terms  and  concepts.  The  very genius  of  childhood lies not in analy­ sis, but  in response.  This  unlimited capacity for instant and  instinctive response  is the  key  to  children's literature; it  is evoked  by  the  integration of simplicity   of expression  with complexity  of concept.
This integration is  nowhere   more  necessary  than   in  the  very  special  field  of historical fiction  for  children. Especially  is it  necessary  in  the  presentation of Canada's history,  for  that  is largely  a hidden  history,  lacking  in open  struggle; a subtle   history   without decisive  climactic   incident. It is an   unorthodox  history, difficult  to reduce  to the simplifications of liberty  opposed  to tyranny, good to evil, that   have  developed into  the  strong,  familiar tribal   myth  so  popularized in  the United States.  The history of our  southern neighbour lends itself more  easily to a child's understanding; our own  begs modifications and  interpolations.
Considering the  difficulties  of  a  meaningful  presentation to  children, and  re­ membering that  only  within  the  last  thirty  years  have  historians brought a  truly exploratory understanding to Canada's past, it is not  surprising that  juvenile his­ torical  writing has  but  recently  developed  attitudes that  may  truly  be considered

32

THE  TRANSMUTATION OF  HISTORY



Canadian.  Historical non-fiction for children  has indeed attained a certain recog­ nised standard in the series which  Macmillan have been  publishing for some years under  the  title,  Great  Stories of Canada. There is considerable  variation among  the  individual books  in  this  series,  but   an  overall  competence-and in  some instances an  excellence-in historical  comprehension  and  expression  is evident. Historical fiction  for children in Canada, with which  this article  is concerned, has not  yet attained the  same  stature. Its  development has  been  more  hesitant, and  has  only  gained  in  authority in  the  last  twenty  years,  dependent as it was upon  the  initial establishment of a national historiography.
There had  been  earlier attempts, of course,  for  growth is never  a sudden and miraculous full blossoming. Marjorie Pickthall, for example, wrote  three  juveniles in  the  early  r goo's, which  are  now  comparatively scarce. Representative of these is Dick's Desertion:  a boy's adventures in Canadian  forests, a didactic and moral­ istic  tale  in  the  tradition of  the  nineteenth century. For  theme  it  has  the call of the  northlands, luring a  young  lad  from  love and  family  to  roam  the  forests  in the manner of the  coureur-de-bois, but it fails either  to exploit  its historical  setting  satisfactorily or  to  depict a  convincingly Canadian  atmosphere.  Indeed, Miss Pickthall wishes only to teach  the homely truth that selfish inclination should  give way  before  sacred  duty  and  responsibility.  The imaginative writer  is obscured  by the  moralist, and  the  result  is a contrived story with  little  authenticity or interest.



bE APPROACH  to  an  imaginative use  in  juvenile  fiction  of
Canada's history  and  its  physical  character begins later, and  it  becomes  evident
with  the publication in the  rg4o's  of such books as Mary Weekes'  Painted Arrows. The   didactic element that   was  so strong  in  Dick's  Desertion  is still  present,  for Painted  Arrows contains much  instruction in camp  and  Indian lore,  but  gone  is the  compulsion to  moralise. The   plot  concerns  the  survival on  the  prairie, sur­ rounded by hostile  Indian bands, of a young  boy whose  beloved  horse is his only companion. Mrs.  Weekes  took  Robinson  Crusoe for  her  model,  and  she does not hesitate  to interrupt her  narrative on  occasion  to draw  comparisons between  her young  hero  and  the  celebrated castaway. She fails to  parallel  Defoe's careful  de­ tailing  of  the  commonplace that  leads,  inevitably  and  rightly, to the  uncommon disclosure  of a  man's soul.  Yet  there  is an  original  insight  in  the  way she shapes  her  character and  in  her  understanding of the effect of the  Canadian prairie  on

33

THE  TRANSMUTATION OF HISTORY



the  individual who  inhabits it in solitude.
Despite  the shift in approach suggested  by Painted  Arrows, the didactic element in  Canadian  juvenile   historical   fiction  has  remained surprisingly-and  often disastrously-persistent. In   1945  for  instance,  Mary F.  Moore   published her Canadian  Magic,  an  extraordinarily artificial  book  in  which  an  English  school­ girl is visited by a familiar, the Spirit  of Canada, who imparts a tedious amount of information to  his  improbably eager  pupil.  There is no  suggestion  here  of  the creative imagination that  is the  key to historical or  any  other  fiction; it is simply a  disguised   textbook   in  dialogue.   In  the  same  genre, ten  years  later, is Glady  Willison's  Land  of the Chinook  ( 1955), a question-and-answer book on Alberta's early  days  in  which   the  role of  pedantic enlightenment  is  assumed   by an  all­ knowing grandfather.  Miss Willison's  book  has  indeed a  less contrived approach than  Canadian  Magic,  but it is dedicated to the same false premises,  that  instruc­ tion  for children must  be cast in an "entertaining" form,  and  that  entertainment, alone,  has  no  positive  value.  An  even   more  recent example of  this  out-dated approach is The  Young  Surveyor  ( 1956)   by Olive  Knox. Based on the diary  and  field  books of the  C.P.R. surveyor,  Edward  Jarvis, it employs  the obvious  device of a young  tenderfoot, travelling  with  the surveying team, who must be instructed in every  detail  of the  work and  of the countryside. The reader is not even spared  the  appalling irrelevancy of an explanation of the effect of altitude on the  boiling point  of water! On  the other hand,  Richard Lambert has demonstrated effectively in his Trailmaker: the story of Alexander Mackenzie   ( 1957) that  undidactic and  really  creative fiction  can  be  constructed from  an  explorer's journal if it is used imaginatively. Trailmaker has the sharpness of pace  and  the authenticity of situa­ tion  that The  Young  Surveyor lacks;  it involves  the  young  reader in  an exciting  and   inspiring  undertaking  without allowing   its  techniques to  become  obvious,  and  it remains true  to its intent, rigorously suppressing any  temptation to instruct or to digress.
The   advance towards a well-integrated historical fiction  for  children is shown particularly well  in  the  work  of  the  prolific  writer, John Hayes,  whose  achieve­ ments   have  been   publicly acknowledged by  the  granting of  three  Governor­ General's Awards in  the  field  of  juvenile  writing. Hayes' merits  are  evident as soon  as one  begins  to read  his books. He is a competent craftsman, concerned for the  plausibility of  his situations, and  he is adept at  an  easy and  assured  dialogue unimpeded  by  the  kind  of  tiresome  deviations that   halt   the  movement of  the narrative. Most  important, he has a genuine sense of the course and  direction of Canadian history.

34

THE  TRANSMUTATION OF  HISTORY



Yt>t  Hayes   has  his  faults,  as  one  can  St>e  dearly from  an  examination of  his three   prize-winning novels,  A  Land   Divided  ( 1951),  Rebels Ride   at  Night
( 1953)   and  The  Dangerous Cove  ( 1957). His  books  are  often  lacking  in  emo­
tional  warmth, and   they  do  not  always  appeal sufficiently  to  the  child's  inborn dramatic sense.  His  greatest difficulty  lies, however,  in  his inability  to create  an imaginative and  original plot.  He  works to a relatively  unvarying formula which carries  the  story  forward fairly  effectively  and  which  can  be fitted  easily enough into  any  historic  period.  Its ingredients are the teen-aged hero, mettlesome and resourceful, opposed   to  the  utterly   base  and   despicable   villain,  and  the  action consists always  of a series of clashes between  these two  basic characters primarily on a physical  level-fights, captures and  escapes. There is little attempt to develop the  hero's  inner conflicts  or to resolve his personal  difficulties.
I do not  wish to suggest  that  Hayes is incapable of developing his craft; on the contrary, over  the  past  decade he has shown  a steadily  growing  mastery  of style and  content. Yet it is surprising-and indicative of the fact  that  an author's total artistic  achievement does not  necessarily keep  pace  with  his development in tech­ nique-that the  most recent  of the three  books I have  mentioned, The Dangerous Cove,  is at  once  the  most  closely plotted  and  the  least  historically  realised.  The background of this tale  is the struggle  between  the settlers  in  Newfoundland and  the  Devon  captains who  came  each spring  to claim  the island and  its produce  for their  own.  Reversing his usual approach, Hayes  has produced a carefully  detailed plot, and  as an  adventure story The  Dangerous Cove certainly has movement and  involvement, but  it  shows  little  depth  of historical  comprehension.
By contrast, in  both  of the  earlier  books  I  have  mentioned, A Land  Divided
and  Rebels Ride  at Night, Hayes shows a fine sense of the ebb-and-flow of history in  the  making and   of  the  pressures  exercised  upon   those  individuals who  are caught in  an  eventful time  and  place.  A  Land  Divided  in  particular reduces  its central historic  event-the expulsion  of the Acadians-to human, understandably pathetic terms.  The chief impetus of the book lies in the adventure tale of a young half-French, half-English boy  who  braves  all  dangers to  rescue  his father from the  villainous Vaudreuil, but  in the  background, well rendered by the  author, lie the  tragedies of  division   between  friend  and  friend, and,  deeper, more  painful still, division  within  a family.  It is an  interesting treatment for children of one of the  saddest, most  romantic  and  most  easily  impassioned  episodes  of  Canada's story.  True, its  pathos might  have  been  more  strongly  presented, but  one  must consider  that it is intended for  boys, and  a boy's tolerance of any  sentiment that might  be termed mawkish  is thin indeed.


35

THE  TRANSMUTATION OF HISTORY



Rebels Ride  at Night  is a more  adult  presentation of a more  difficult  event  in Canadian history,  the  Rebellion   of  1837.  Such  an  event  raises  the  problem   of how  an  author should  deal  with  the simplification that  is inevitable when  history is presented to  children. In  this  case  the  actual issues at  stake  can  be simplified to democratic movement versus autocratic rule without very serious historical distortion. The  personalities involved,  on the other  hand, demand a deeper analy­ sis. William  Lyon Mackenzie and  those who followed  him  to the tragicomic finale of Montgomery's Tavern are  much  too complex  in their  fatal mixture of idealism  and  political  naivety  to present  in black and  white. Furthermore, the culmination of their  cause in a show of violence is outside  the Canadian tradition. Revolution has  played  no really  decisive part  in our evolution as a nation; radicalism, where  present,  has  usually  been  muted.
Hayes,  then,  was faced  with  a certain  hazard when  he decided  that  his young
hero,  for  good  reasons,  should  support  Mackenzie. Faint-heartedness, or  worse, a faltering and  turning from  a losing cause still held  to be true,  will not  be toler­ ated  in  a hero  by  juvenile  readers. To  solve his difficulty,  Hayes  subtly  plants an uneasiness  in  his young  protagonist's mind  as  he listens  to  Mackenzie's  frenzied  oratory and  his urgings  to ill-considered action. Thus the denouement-the fiasco of  Montgomery's Tavern-is anticipated throughout  the  tale.  This  is  skilfully done,  and,  if the  plot  is once  again  trite,  hinging on  stolen  tax  receipts  and  the forfeiture of  Frank's farm,   the  re-creation of  historical atmosphere is excellent. Hayes  depicts  convincingly the  air of  conspiracy among the  discontented farmers of Upper Canada and  among  the labourers and  longshoremen of the  towns, and  in this, perhaps more  than  in any of his other  books, he realizes  a total  picture of the  times-the social conditions, the political  dilemmas, the corruption and  specu­ lation  which  are  concretely  represented in  the  impassable roads  and  the  church reserves cutting across the fertile  land.
It is interesting to compare Rebels Ride at Night with  another story of the Mac­
kenzie  rebellion, Lyn  Cook's  Rebel  on the Trail. Through the  eyes of an  eleven years' old girl Miss Cook portrays  the dissension and  the precarious balance within a  pioneer  family  of  Upper  Canada, caught  between the  eldest  son's  radical,  pro­ Mackenzie ideas  and   the  grandfather's religious   justification of  the  status  quo. Neither the situation nor  the ideas that  emerge  from  it are easy to express through the mind  of a little girl, and  the author's failure  to do so convincingly is the book's  weakness. The  literary  convention of straining complexities of plot and personality through  a  child's  interpretation has some  value  in  adult books,  where  it is used to  heighten the  poignancy of  the  drama, hidden from  the  child  but  evident to

THE  TRANSMUTATION OF HISTORY



the  reader. Tt is manifestly   more  difficult  to  use such  a device  in  a  child's  book where  the  reader is more dependent on the point of view of the protagonist and  to a great  extent shares it. Rebel on the Trail seems to be written for readers between nine  and  twelve,  which  brings  the  added  limitation that  few children of this age are  equipped to take  the  larger  view of a historical  period.
Basically,  the  difficulty  lies therefore in  achieving  a meaningful integration of story  and  character with  the  particular historical  situation. Hayes  had  the same problem, but  he was helped  by being  able  to utilise actual events  more  fully. His heroes  participate directly  in  the  actions  of  the  time; they  fight  in  the  battle  of Montgomery's Tavern or aid  the Acadians to board  the exile ships.  But Deborah, Miss Cook's heroine, is barred by age and  sex from  such  participation; she must remain  an observer.  It is left to the reader  to make the intellectual effort  to identify with  the  times  and  to  generate an  emotional interest  in  the  historic  event.  This is  not  the  way  of  children. They  absorb  atmosphere almost,  it  would  seem,  by osmosis,  but  not  by a conscious  intellectual process.  Miss Cook's  book  is at  once too  adult   in  concept, too  young  in  presentation to  accomplish her  larger  intent and  give a composite view of Upper Canada during "the troubles".






Two OTHER WAYS of  handling this  problem of integration of plot  and   character with  event  are  offered  in  Marion Greene's Canal  Boy and Wilma   Pitchford Hays'   Drummer  Boy  for Montcalm, both  published in  1959. The first  of  these,  Canal  Boy, is really  a  pseudo-historical novel,  using  the  past incidentally, as the  setting  for  what  is essentially a  timeless mystery  story. A pair of  pistols  are  stolen,  suspicions  are  aroused   against  a  teen-aged boy,  and  he  is finally  vindicated. It all happens in Ottawa and  Montreal of the  182o's and  his­ torical  characters like Colonel  By play their  parts, but  the time might  just as easily be  the  195o's and  Colonel By any  one  of  a  dozen  prominent men,  the  leading citizens  of  modern Ottawa,  Winnipeg or  Vancouver. I  am  not  suggesting  that  Canal  Boy is an  inferior book;  its language is attractive, its plot is closely woven, it  provokes  excitement. Yet  it is not  in  any  true  sense  a  historical  novel,  and  it represents an  evasion  rather than  a solution  of the  problem of integration. The  plot  is simply  imposed on  the  historic  time;  it does  not  evolve out  of it,  nor,  in­  deed,  does it have  any  logical  or  vital  connection  with  it.  The  historical insight the  book  affords  is negligible.

37

THE  TRANSMUTATION OF   HISTORY



Drummer Boy  for Montcalm  exploits its historical  event,  the battle  for Quebec, to the full. The  story is the event, and  the event the story, so close is the integration. It opens  with  the  young  French hero,  Peter  Demo,  coming  to a Quebec already threatened by  the  English,  and  it  closes with  the  city's  fall.  Peter  serves  under Montcalm as a drummer boy, and  the  whole  interest  of the  book is concentrated on  the  defence  of Quebec and  Peter's  part  in it. Despite  this singleness of intent, the  story  is deepened by the  fact  that  Quebec is shown  as a city threatened not only from  without her walls, but  also from  within  by the greed  and  corruption of the  Intendant Bigot  and  his accomplice, Cadet. Drummer  Boy  for Montcalm is not  so stylistically  pleasing as Canal Boy-the lyrical  phrase  is wanting-but it is a competent piece of writing  and  it is, unquestionably, a true  and  well-integrated historical novel.
Nowhere is  the  growth  of  artistic  conception in  Canada's juvenile  historical fiction  more  evident  than  in the changing presentation of the  Indian. From  Peter Many-Names of  Dick's   Desertion, who  is but  a  symbol,  through innumerable Indian  companions to young  heroes-mere shadowy, inarticulate copies of their white   friends-to Edith   Lambert Sharp's vital  realization of  an  Indian  youth in Nkwala  ( 1958), there is a fundamental advance in historical and  psychological insight.
A  glance  at  some  of the  more  ambitious books  in  this field  will help  to chart the  progress.  In  Black Falcon ( 1954)   Olive  Knox  took  as her  basic  material the narrative of John Tanner, who was captured by the Shawnees at the age of eight. Such  true-life  accounts are  obvious  and  legitimate sources  for  children's fiction, but  they  are  too often  told in a flat,  laconic  style and  show little  understanding of the  ways  and  impulses  of  the  Indians. John Tanner's narrative is no  exception; it is an  account more  curious  for  the  things  it does not say than  for the  things  it does.
No such  limitation should  hinder  the creative transmutation of fiction,  yet Miss Knox's re-creation in Black Falcon retains  much  of the flat, elliptical, honed-down approach of the  original. Her  attempts to bring  life to the  narrative are  confined to inventing a  rival,  Cut-nose, who  crosses John's path  on  the  hunt, on  the  war trail,  and  in  the  courtship of a  girl.  What she  does not  do-and here  the  real interest   of  the  narrative lies-is  to develop  what  was  left  unsaid  in the  original, to explore  those  areas  closed to Tanner but  open  to the  creative investigator. As in her  reconstruction from the Jervis  journals  in The  Young Surveyor, Miss Knox shows   that   she  lacks,  not  ordinary inventiveness, but   certainly  imaginative penetration.

g8

THE  TRANSMUTATION OF HISTORY



A far  better  realisation of Indian captivity  is given  in John Craig's The  Long Return. By not basing  his account directly  on any of the captivity narratives, Craig liberates himself from  their  limitations, and for this reason  he is able  to apprehend much  more  fully  the  essential  conflict  between  captive  and  captors, between  the white  and  the  Indian world. This  conflict  is given strength when  we see the cap­ tive hero's  predicament becoming steadily  more  involved  as his determination to return to his white  parents is continually threatened by his growing affection  for his Indian foster-parents. The resolve that  rises above  this conflict  and  motivates  Thad's  constant efforts  to  escape  gives The  Long Return  a  sense of  purposeful continuity, and  within  the  simple  framework of capture,  escape  and  flight,  there is plenty  of latitude for  the  detailing of Indian life  without losing  the  tension  of the main  problem.
But  the  book  that  most  surely  reveals  the  inner  meaning of  Indian life in  its psychological  and  its ceremonial aspects-and also one of the very best of Cana­ dian   books  for  children-is Edith   Lambert Sharp's Nkwala. In  structure it is a simple  book;   its  complexities lie in  language and  imagery   and  an  imaginative penetration of  Indian life.  Nkwala, a boy exceptionally gifted  with  an  awareness of the hidden  rhythms and  impulses of life, makes the long  journey with his people, the Spokane band  of the  Salish,  from  famine  and  death on the coast  to life in the Okanagan. The  reconstruction of the inner  life of the  Indian, so alien  from  our own,  requires  a perceptive and  probing imagination, and  Miss Sharp demonstrates that  she  has  this  rare  gift.  Following  the  emergence of the  youth  from  the child into  a  growing awareness and   acceptance of  the  obligations of  manhood, she brings  us into  the  very centre of the ceremonial drama of Salish  life as it revolves around the  initiation rites.  Miss Sharp has a true  feeling  for the  importance and solemnity of  her  theme,  and  she  enhances it  with  a cadenced prose  that  unifies style  with  intent: "...  the  boy went  alone  into  the  mountains to search  for his guardian spirit,  his song,  and  his name.  This  was as his father, his father's father, and  his father's father before  him,  had  gone.  He went  alone,  but  always  and  for­ ever  with  him  went  the law."




E	of Canadian historical  fiction  for children has been  steady  rather than   brilliant. From  its  beginnings in  an  already outmoded tradition, the  didactic tale,  it  has  progressed  towards  a deeper  realisation of the nature and   the  possibilities  of  Canadian history  as well  as acquiring a growing

39

THE  TRANSMUTATION OF   HISTORY



technical competence. There is, indeed,  a far  greater distance between  Marjorie Pickthall's Dick's  Desertion  and  Edith   Lambert Sharp's  Nkwala than   the  mere passage  of  years  or  the  changes  in  literary   convention  alone  can  explain. The advance has  been  in  many  directions-in historical truth, in  psychological inter­ pretation, in  poetic  intensity.  But of course  there  is more  unevenness in  the over­ all development represented by this evolution than  can be assessed through a com­ parison   of one  of  the  least  and  one  of  the  best  of Canadian  juvenile  historical  novels, of the  beginning and  the end. The  example of John Hayes,  Canada's most prolific  and-judging from  the  recognition accorded  him-most successful  juve­ nile  writer, cannot be ignored.  The  lag in his novels between  a keen historical in­ sight  and  a chronic deficiency in such  a  basic  element of the  novelist's  art  as the construction of  plot,  suggests a lack  of full  maturity. There are several  writers  in this field who, like Hayes,  have shown  their general competence, and  Edith Lam­ bert  Sharp has  revealed  a great  deal  more  than  competence. But enough imper­ fection  remains to  show  that  Canada's  difficult  history  still  presents  a challenge that  requires an  unusual  combination of  complexity in concept and  simplicity  in form  to meet  it imaginatively and  with truth to spirit  as well as to fact.









WOLF	IN THE	SNOW

PART TWO
The House Repossessed


Warren Tallman

In  the  last  issue  of  Canadian   Literature we published the first part of Warren Tall­ man's  Wolf  in  the  Snow,  tracing  a  com­ mon  theme  through  novels   by  Sinclair Ross, W. 0. Mitchell,  Hugh  MacLennan and  Ernest  Buckler.  Now,  in  the  second part,   Mr.  Tallman  draws  his   theme  to­ gether  and  relates  it  to  the urban  fiction of Mordecai  Richler.


TREAD NOVELS  ;, to g,Un ;mp ons
tried  to document in the  first part  of this essay. Now  let the four  windows  of the
fictional   house ·become as  one  view  and  let  the  four  occupants  (Alan   MacNeil from   Each  Man's Son, Philip  Bentley  from  As  For  Me  and  My  House, David Canaan from  The Mountain and the Valley and  Brian  O'Connal from  Who Has Seen  the  Wind) be re-grouped in a scene where  the intangible which  I have  been calling   Self  looks  toward other   intangibles which   most  decisively  influence   its efforts  to come  into  presence.  At  the  back  depth  of  this scene  an  immeasurable extent of snow  is falling  in  a downward motion  that  is without force  through a silence  that  is  without  contrasts to an  earth  that  is "distorted,  intensified, alive with  thin,   cold,  bitter  life".  How  bitter  can  best  be shown   by  lifting  the  snow shroud   to  let  the  sun  shine  momentarily as  Morley Callaghan's  three  hunters (They Shall  Inherit the  Earth) move across "rocky  ridges  and  the desolate  bush" to where  a herd  of deer  whose hooves had  become caught in the snow crust  now lie in bloody  heaps, abandoned where  they have been destroyed by a pack of thin, cold,  bitter   wolves.  As  the  hunters watch,  the  sun sets,  and  "a  vast  shadow  fell over  the  earth, over  the  rocky  ridges  and  the  desolate  bush  and  over  the frozen carcasses." The night  shadows mingle  with  the wolf shadows and  cover  over  the dark  blood of the deer  as the wavering  shroud  of snow again  begins to fall through

WOLF IN THE  SNOW



the "dreadful silence  and coldness" felt everywhere at the back depth of the scene.
Move  now  to the  middle  depth  where  from  the  left  a bleak  expanse of prairie gives way  at  the  centre  to forests  and  mountains which  merge  on  the  right  with the seacoast  looking  toward  Europe where  Alan  stands with  his mother as he did the  day  his novel  began.  That day, Alan  emulated Yeats'  sad shepherd from  the opposite   Irish  shore,   but  in  Alan's shell  the   "inarticulate  moan" which the shepherd heard becomes  that  "oldest  sound  in  the  world", the  remote  waterfall roaring of his own  salt  blood.  When  Yeats'  shepherd grew  and  changed into  an ominous older   man   the  sound  in  the  shell  darkened  and  strengthened into  the beating of a prophetic "frenzied drum" which  later  still became a "blood-dimmed tide" carrying to  the  Europe  of his imagination as to  the  Europe of succeeding years  "the fury  and  the  mire  of human veins". But in  Alan's less tutored ear  on his side  of  the  Atlantic, the  blood  sea  sounds   a  more  innocent summons as his thoughts follow  along  those  unseen  paths  wandered by  his  bright  and   battered highland father. All  Alan  knows is that  this  father is the  "strongest man  in  the world." All that  this strongest  man  knows is the  inner  thrust  of a ceaseless, mind­ less desire  to  prevail  so powerful  that  even  as he stumbles from  defeat  to  defeat  he  follows this  path  down  as though  it were  a way  up to the championship, that  mountain peak  in the mind  from  which  no opposing force could  ever banish  him.  And  so powerful is the son's  consciousness  of his father's destiny  that  even at  the last  when  "the pack  of  muscles  under   the  cloth  of  his  jacket  shifted" and  the "poker shot  up", Alan's immediate thought, far  off from the  murder at hand, is: "So  that  was  what  it meant  to be the strongest  man  in  the world!"
The  desire  to  prevail.  Move  to where  David  Canaan is standing in a field  be­ side the  tracks  as the  train  taking  his friend  Toby back  to Halifax "came in sight thundering nearer and  nearer". But  Toby,  whom   David  had  expected to  wave as  the  train  drew  past,  "didn't glance  once,  not  once,  toward the  house  or the field."  And  as the  thunder on the tracks  diminishes, the  thunder in David's blood takes  over  and  "a blind  hatred of Toby  went  through him.  It  seemed  as if  that  were  part  of his own  life he was seeing-his life stolen  before  his eyes." His  pro­  test at  being  cancelled out  rises from  hatred to rage  and  he "slashed at the  pulpy  turnips blindly  wherever  the  hack fell",  until  he slashes  his way through the  rage  and  discovers  a  deeper  depth  where  "in  his mind  there  was  only  a stillness like the  stillness of snow  sifting  through  the spokes of wagon  wheels or  moonlight on the  frozen  road  or  the dark  brook  at  night."
At the far  left, the  prairies slope away like Shelley's "lone  and  level sands." But there  is no fallen  Ozymandias here where  no Ozymandias has ever stood.  Instead

WOLF IN THE SNOW



there  arc  the  false-front stores  of Horizon, warped   by  the  heat,  sand-blasted  by the  drouth dust,  and  blown  askew by the  prairie  wind.  Here, Mrs.  Bentley walks once  more-as in  her  diary  she so often  mentions-along the  tracks  to the out­ skirts  of  town   where   five  grain   elevators  stand   "aloof   and  imperturbable,  like ancient obelisques", as dust  clouds  "darkening and  thinning and  swaying" in the ominous upper prairie of  the  sky seem  "like  a quivering  backdrop before  which  was about to be enacted some grim,  primeval tragedy." The  swaying  dust  clouds above,  the  darkening prairie beneath, the  ancient-seeming elevators  she huddles against, as well as her  mournful sense of  the grim,  the  primeval, the tragic-these details  speak  for  the  entire  scene  which  I have  been  sketching They  speak  of a tragedy  in  which  the  desire  to prevail  that  drives  self on its strange journeys  to­ ward  fulfillment is brought to an impasse  on northern fields of a continent which  has  remained  profoundly  indifferent to  its  inhabitant, transplanted European man.  The continent  itself-the gray  wolf whose shadow is underneath the snow
-has resisted  the  culture, the  cultivation, the  civilization  which  is indigenous to
Europe but  alien  to North America even though it is dominant in North America.
If Alan, Philip,   Brian  and  David  are  notably  unable to  discover  alternatives to  the  isolation from  which  they suffer,  this  is not  because  they  are  resourceless persons  but  because   the  isolation  is ingrained, inherent, indwelling. One  alter­ native  is much   like  the  next  when  all  the  rooms  are  equally  empty  in  the  vast space-haunted house  they occupy. And  those gods who over-rule  the house toward whom  self quickens in its need to prevail  are such as preside over forests and  open  fields, mountains, prairies and  plains: snow gods, dust  gods, drought gods, wind gods, wolf gods-native to the place and  to the empty  manner born.  These  divini­ ties speak,  if at  all, to all such  as lone it toward the mountain pass and  the hidden lake,  the  rushing river  and  the open  empty  road.  And  the experiential emptiness of the  place  shows on  the faces of such  loners as that weathered yet naive expres­  sionlessness,  the  stamp of the  man  to whom  little  or  nothing has  happened in  a place  where  the  story  reads,  not  here,  not  much, not  yet. Underneath the  Euro­ pean  disguises  North American man  assumes, self too  is such  a loner.  And  the angel  at  his shoulder, met  everywhere in  the  weave  of these  novels  because  it is everywhere and  omnipresent in  the  vast  house we occupy,  is silence.  Out of the weave  of  the  silence  emerges  the shroud  of snow.  But  underneath the snow,  the dark  blood  brightens.
For  self  does  not  readily   accept  separation, isolation   and  silence.  These  are conditions of non-being, and  whether one assumes that  the ground toward which self struggles  in  its search for  completion is divine  and  eternal or only individual


43

WOLF IN   THE SNOW



and   temporal, either   alternative supposes  rebellion  against no  being  at  all. It is from  this  fate  that   Brian  O'Connal flees in  panic   the  night  he  walks  from  his uncle's  farm  to town.  "It was as though  he listened  to the  drearing wind  and  in the spread  darkness of the  prairie  night  was being  drained of his very self."  It is against  this same fate  that  Alan  MacNeil's father beats with  his fists, seeking some eminence from  which  the  physical strength that  is his measure of self cannot  be pulled  down   to defeat. It is against  this fate  that   Philip Bentley  struggles  those evenings  in his study,  seeking to liberate  "some  twisted  stumbling" creative  power locked  up within  him  even though  all he can  create  is sketches  which  reveal  how pervasively  non-being has invaded   his life. And  it is against this fate  that  David Canaan slashes  in  the  field  beside  the  tracks  before  yielding  when  he lies down against  the  flank  of the mountain under  a blanket  of snow  upon  a bed of silence.
But  it  is not  here  that  the scene dims out.  For  the last sound  that  David  hears is  that   North   American  lullaby  which  sings  the  sleeping   self awake  as  a  train "whistled beyond   the  valley"  then  "thundered along   the  rails  and   was  gone." Had  Alan   MacNeil turned   his back  upon  Europe, the  blood  sound  in  the  shell would  have  been  that  rising  up from  the  railroad earth, those  train  sounds hoot­ ing  all  loners  home  to  where,  up  front  in  the  scene,  the  dark  silence  breaks  up into  the  gushing  of the  neon  and  the  noise.




BuT ALONG  St.  Urbain street  in  Montreal, the  marvellous, the  splendid and  the  amazing have  given  way  to  the  commonplace, the  shabby
and   the  unspeakable. And  even  before  thinking of  anything so portentous as  a new  self,  Mordecai Richler  has  been  engaged  in  the  much  more  onerous  task of clearing   away  the  debris  which  has  accumulated in  a world  where  all  disguises have  been  put  in  doubt. His first three  novels are  studies  of ruined lives:  Andre, the guilt-haunted Canadian artist,  who is eventually murdered by the Nazi, Kraus, whose  sister  Theresa then  commits  suicide; the  guilt-ridden  homosexual, Derek, his  equally   guilty  sister,  Jessie,  and  her  equally  guilty husband, the  alcoholic, Barney; the  Wellington College  professor, Theo Hall  and  his wife, Miriam; Nor­ man,  the  American Fifth  Amendment expatriate, whose  brother is  murdered by Ernst,  the  German youth  whom  Sally,  the  Toronto girl,  ruins  her  life  trying  to save. All  of  these  persons  reach  out,  cry out,  for  any  masks  other  than  the  ones they have.

44

WOLF IN   THE  SNOW



.\ml they  testify  tu  Richlcr's affinity  with  that  side  of modern life  where  the misbegotten wander through ruined  Spains  of self-pity,  poisoned  to the  point  of near  and   at  times  actual madness   by self-loathing. However, Richler  does  not seek  out  these  persons  in  order   to  demonstrate several  times  over  that   we  are wrapped up  like so  many  sweating sardines  in world  misery,  world  guilt,  world sorrow. Like  Andre, Norman and   Noah,  the  protaganists of  these  novels,  he  is inside  the  misery  looking  for  a  way  out.  What looks out  is a  courageous intelli­ gence  struggling to  realize   that   the  tormented sleep  of  self  loathing  which   he explores  is just  that-a sleep, a dream, a nightmare: but  not  the  reality.
In  his fourth novel,  The  Apprenticeship of Duddy  Kravitz, the  sleeper  begins to come  awake. The  nightmare is still there,  but it is not the same  nightmare. In The  Acrobats and  A  Choice  of Enemies, Richler  chooses areas  of world  guilt  as the  basis  for  dream terror. The  Spanish war,  the second  world  war,  the  victims of  these  wars  and  of  their  ideologies  make  up  the  manifest content, the  general human failure which  images  and  invites  the  latent  personal failures  represented. People  whose  lives have  gone  smash  drift  into  areas  where  life has  gone  smash and  consort  with  the  ghosts who have survived. In  Duddy Kravitz the scope con­ tracts. Both  the  ghosts  who  make  up  the  nightmare and  the  ideologies  through which  they  wander have  faded  from  mind.  Duddy's father, his  brother  Lenny,  his uncle  and  aunt, his teacher MacPherson, his friend  Virgil,  his enemy  Dingle­  man, and   his shiksa  Yvette  all live tangled   lives in  a  world  where  they  do  not know  themselves.  But they  are caught up by personal  disorders rather than  world disorder, family  strife  rather than  international strife,  individual conflict  rather than   ideological conflict.  And   within   the  localized  dream   we  meet  an  entirely  different dreamer. We  meet the direct  intelligence and colloquial exuberance that  is Duddy's style-and  Richler's.
T. S. Eliot  has said  that  poetry  in our  time  is a mug's  game.  So is fiction, and Richler is one  of the  mugs.  Duddy   has  ceased  to care  for  appearances and  this insouciance releases him  from  the nightmare. All of the other  people  in the  novel cannot possess themselves because their vital energies are devoted full-time  to maintaining the  false  appearances in  terms  of  which   they  identify   themselves. These   appearances-the  cultural, ethical,   communal  pretensions to  which   they cling-mask over  but scarcely conceal  the distinctly  uncultured, unethical, isolated actuality in which  they  participate. Hence the importance in their  lives of  Dingle­ man,  the  Boy Wonder, who  is a  projection of their  actual longings  to be  at ease in  Zion  in  a  Cadillac at  the  same  time  as he is a projection of the limitation of these  longings,  being  hopelessly  crippled. But  Duddy, who has ceased  to care  for

45

WOLF IN THE  SNOW



appearances, sees people for what  they are, himself included.  And  what  he sees, he accepts-himself included.  In  an acquisitive world  he is exuberantly acquisi­ tive.  When  he is tricked,  he weeps. When  threatened, he becomes  dangerous.  When  attacked,   he  bites back.  When  befriended,  he is  generous.  When  hard­  pressed he becomes frantic. When denied, he is filled with wrath. From the weave of this erratic  shuttling,  a self struggles into  presence,  a naive  yet shrewd  latter­  day  Huck  Finn,  floating  on a  battered money  raft  down  a  sleazy neon  river through  a drift of lives, wanting  to light out for somewhere, wanting  somewhere to light out for.






R.To TELLS us  that  when a new music is heard  the walls of the city tremble. The  music in Duddy  Kravitz  is where in  novels it always is, in the style. The groove in which the style runs is that of an exuberance,  shifting into exaggeration, shifting into  those distortions  by which  Richler  achieves his comic vision of Montreal. The  finest parts of the novel are those in which Richler most freely indulges the distortions:  the sequence in which the documentary film direc­ tor Friar  produces  a wedding ceremony masterpiece  which views like the stream of consciousness of a lunatic,  a  fantasia  of the  contemporary mind;  the  entire portrait  of Virgil who wants to organize the epileptics of the world and  be "their  Sister Kenny",  as well as the more sombre  portraits  of Dingleman  and  Duddy's  aunt  Ida.  Because Duddy  has ceased to care for appearances, he  moves past all of the  genteel surfaces of the city and  encounters  an  actuality  in  which all that is characteristically human  has retreated  to small corners of  consciousness and life becomes  a  grotesque  game  played  by  bewildered  grotesques.  The  persons who make  up this gallery not only fail to invoke self  but  can scarcely recognize what it  is to  be a  human  being. They  are  like  uncertain  creatures  in a fabulous  but confusing zoo, not sure why they are there, not even sure what human  forest they once inhabited.
They  testify in the language of the sometimes comic, sometimes grim, distortions Richler  has created  to the oppressive weight of doubt,  guilt,  remorse, shame and regret that  history has imposed upon modem  man,  particularly upon man in the city,  where  the  effects of  history, most closely organized,  are  most acutely  felt. The  greater  the system of threats to self, the more extensive the system of  appear­ ances  needed to  ward  off  those  threats, the  more  marked  the  distortions of

WOLF IN THE  SNOW



charactc.ristic human  nc.nl  and  desire.  And  the  more  marked the  distortions, the more  difficult  the  artist's task.  For  sensibility,  that  active  sum  of the  artist's self, never  does  exist in  relation to itself alone. It exists in relation to what  is-actual persons,  an  actual city,  actual lives. When   the  impact of  accomplished  history imposes  distortions upon   that   actuality, sensibility  must  adjust itself  to  the  dis­ tortions. The  story  of these  adjustments is, I think,  the  most significant feature of North American fiction  in  our  time.  Long  ago and  far  away,  before  World  War  One  o'clock, Theodore Dreiser could look at the world with direct eyes. Character­ istic  human impulses  of love,  sorrow,  hope,  fear,  existed  in  the  actual world  as love,  sorrow, hope,  fear; and   Dreiser  could  direct  his  powerful sensibility  into  representation which  was,  as they  say, "like  life".  But after  World  War  One,  in The Great  Gatsby, possibly the  most significant  of the between-wars novels, there  is open   recognition of  a  distorted actuality  necessitating a  re-ordering of sensi­ bility,  one  which  both  Gatsby  and  Fitzgerald fail to  achieve.
Since  World  War  Two the  need for adjustment has become even more marked, simply  because  the distortions have become  more pronounced. In  Duddy Kravitz, Richler follows closely in  the  groove  of Duddy's exuberance and  on out  into  the exaggerations and  distortions which  make  up his adjustment to actual Montreal. By doing  so he is able  to  achieve  an  authentic relationship to life in  that city­ Duddy's dream of Caliban along  the drear  streets of Zoo. In  this Richler is at one with  the  considerable group of contemporary writers-call them  mugs, call them angry,  call them  beat-who all are seeking in their  art  those re-adjustments which  will  permit them  to  relate  their  sensibilities  to what  actually is. History  has had  and   continues to  have  her  say. These  writers  are  trying  to  answer  back.  If the vision which  Richler achieves  in answer  to history  jars upon  our sensibilities,  that  is  because  we  have  all  heard of  Prospero's cloud  capped towers  and  gorgeous  palaces.  Yet,  if  the  style  which   conveys  the  vision  twangles from  glib  to brash,  from  colloquial to obscene, that  is because  the  true North American tone, at long past  World  War  Two  o'clock,  is much  closer to that  of Caliban than  ever it has been  to  that  of  Prospero whose  magic  was  a  European magic,  long  sunk  from sight,  and  whose  daughter and  her  beau  and  their  world  are  out  of fashion  like old  tunes  or  like  the  lovers  on  Keats'  urn,  maybe  forever  but  address  unknown. The  brave  new  world  toward which Duddy's self quickens is the lake  property he covets  throughout the  novel  and  finally  possesses. When  he  dives  in,  seeking  a rebirth, he scrapes  bottom. But  he doesn't  care,  he doesn't care,  he doesn't care.  Which  is why  the mug  can  make with  the music.
D.  H.  Lawrence contended that  in the  visions of art  a relatively  finer vision is


47

WOLF IN THE  SNOW



substituted for  the  relatively  cruder   visions  extant. But  in  North America, as I hope  this  restricted study  at  least  partially  confirms, finer  is relatively  crude,  be­ cause  frequently untrue, and  crude  can  be relatively  fine. All too often,  in fiction as in  life, those  pretensions which  we seek out  because  they  make  us fine provide  false furnishings for the actual  house in which  we live. This  fine is crude. Duddy, who  would  not know  a pretension  if he met  one, wanders for this reason  by acci­ dent  and  mostly  unaware into  the actual  house.  His crude  is relatively fine. True, there  are  no  gods  hovering  over  Duddy's lake,  no  grandiose hotel,  no  summer camp  for  children. There is only old  mother  North America with  her snow  hair,  her  mountain forehead, her  prairie  eyes, and  her  wolf teeth,  her  wind  songs and her  vague   head  of  old  Indian memories.  And  what   has  she  to  do  with  Duddy Kravitz? A lot,  I think.  For  when  the house  is repossessed  the gods come  back­ snow  gods,  dust  gods,  wind  gods,  wolf  gods-but life  gods  too.  And  life is the value.  When   history  conspires  against  life, ruining the  house,  life will fight  back in  the  only  way  it  can,  by not  caring. Heavy, heavy  doesn't hang  over  Duddy's head.  And  that  is his value.
Snow  melts  away.  Mountains can  be very  beautiful. Wheat is growing on  the prairies. And  in  the  dark  forest  beside  the  hidden lakes  the  deer  are  standing, waiting. So  turn  off the  neon,  tune  out  the  noise, and  place  Duddy in  the  fore­ ground of the  scene.  Since life is the  value,  let blood  melt snow, and  place David  Caanan  beside  him.  Strike  a  match to  light   Mrs.  Bentley  a  path  through the wolf-wind  night  with  its dust-grit teeth  until  she  appears standing  beside  Duddy and   David. Smooth over  that   bashed-in face,  those  cauliftowered  ears,  and   let Highland Archie   MacNeil, strongest  man  in  the  world,  appear.  For this  reader  it  is  these  four  who  emerge  from  the  novels  considered as  crude  with  the  true  crudeness of the place, and  by this token most fine, most worth close consideration by  those  who  take  the  visions of fiction  as a  decisive  mode  of relatedness to the actual house  in  which  we live. And  of these four,  it is  Mrs.  Bentley  in her  utter absence  of pretentiousness and  Duddy  in his utter  absence  of pretentiousness who most  effectively  and   convincingly  come  forward  and  take  their  awkward North American bows. At which  point,  close out  the scene.






NEW CANADIAN PLAYS PRESENTED

Philip  Stratford




IN A  SEASON dedicated  to the young Shakespeare,  the Strat­ ford  Festival  presented two  plays by young Canadian authors, staged  in the Avon Theatre by two  promising Canadian directors,  and  acted  by some of  the younger members of  the  regular  Festival cast. The  plays  were  third  and  fourth   prize­ winners  in  the  Globe  and Mail-Stratford Festival  playwriting contest  of 1959: The  Teacher  by John Gray,  and  Blind Man's  Buff by Fred Euringer. Production was  not  guaranteed for  these  plays in  terms  of the competition, but  the  Festival,  with  that  foresight  and  enlightened sense of risk which  has characterized so much  of  its  planning, extended its  patronage to  the  runners-up, thus  providing them with  the  same  opportunity, on a 'workshop' scale, as will be given Donald Jack's first-place  To  The  Canvas  Barricades when  it  goes into  full-dress  production in the Festival  theatre in 1961.
It would  be  hard   to overestimate the  importance of  this  project  to Canadian
drama. Various amateur groups  have  rightly  encouraged Canadian  playwrights in  the  past,  but  their  performances, while valuable,  labour under  amateur limita­ tions.  Some   professional productions  of  Canadian  plays  have  been  generously  daring, but  such  ventures are  inevitably  dogged  by  the  onus  of  popular success. The  Festival  staging, while  free of pressure  from  the  box office, could  still assure finished  treatment because  of the  professional  status  of actors, directors, designer  and  backer. The  audiences for  these plays, 2,100 acutely  theatre-conscious mem­  bers  of the  Festival's widespread general  public,  were  a  more  representative and  influential group than could   be  assembled  for  most  local  productions, amateur or  professional. As for  the  playwrights, this summer  they  were able to test the old adage  that   the  place  to learn  the  craft  is in  the theatre. In  conference with  the directors, in the  hard  but  illuminating work of  rehearsal, in the agony  and  excite-

49

NEW  CANADIAN PLAYS PRESENTED



ment  of  remodelling the  play-in-the-book to  meet  the  new  creative  demands of the  play-on-the-boards, they gained  professional  experience of great  value.
But  to say much  in favour  of the undertaking is not  to say that  either  play  was an  artistic   triumph. John  Gray's  The  Teacher  was  ambitious but  diffuse; Blind Man)s Buff by Fred  Euringer, a clever exercise in a well-worn  genre.  Productions of  both   plays,  while  competent, showed  signs  of strain, partly  due  to  restricted casting  and  a  cramped  rehearsal schedule   (all  the  principals were  concurrently playing  two  other   roles in  Shakespearean plays), and  partly  to shortcomings in the scripts  which  could  only be glossed over in a limited production period.  Brian Jackson's sets were  unequal: for The  Teacher  schematic but  imaginative, for the Euringer play  over-elaborate in some details,  short  on others,  unexciting in  both.
Yet  the  object   of  the  venture   was  useful  experiment with  certain given  ma­ terials,  not  unlimited public success, and  the critic  must  restrict  himself  to record­ ing  results  and  speculating on the direction of future experiments. In  both  offices his main  concern must  be with  the  plays themselves.
The  Teacher  sets  out  to  tell the  story  of a  progressive  and  self-assured  young
Toronto man, now  principal of  a  school  in  Nova  Scotia, whose  ambition is to reform  the  community of its backward and  superstitious ways;  how  his idealism fails  him  when   he  discovers  his wife's  adultery; how  he  turns  back  to  the  folk wisdom  of the  Maritimers for help  and  that  also fails him; how, at the end,  he is left  alone,  self-banished  to  a  small,  almost  inaccessible school  on  storm-lashed Stone  Island  to learn  painfully  whatever wisdom  he can.
In  these  oversimplified  terms  the theme  is a strong one, but  in actual presenta­ tion its strength is dissipated  in by-play, oversubtlety, and  understatement. Each  of the  elements in  the  play-the creation of Eastcoast  atmosphere, the  treatment of the supernatural, the evocation  of the teacher's Ontario past,  the triangle situation, the  breakdown of domestic  relations-has separately so engrossed  the  author that  he has in tum given  them  all full and sometimes  delicate treatment without realiz­  ing  that  in doing  so he saps the vigour  of his central theme. The result is a mish­ mash  of impressions that  could  only be saved  by the  sacrifice  of some detail  and  intricacy for  the  sake  of  intensity  and   unity.  Oversimplification, in  short,  is an antidote that  Gray  might well apply.
The same  is  true   of  his  treatment of  character. The   teacher's growing  irre­ solution  is not  emphatic enough  to become  dramatic. A stronger lead  than John Horton might  have  bolstered  up  the script,  but  the  essential  weakness  was in the writing. There is a great  deal of talk, of realistically  vague  pondering on the hero's predicament, but  rather than  clarify  and  vitalize  his problem it all tends  to a kind

50

NEW CANADIAN PLAYS PRESENTED



of na1ci  i::.m
background  and   character, is  eminently untheatrical.  Among the  supporting characters the  Maritimers are  rough-hewn enough  to stand  out in good relief;  the others,  like  the  hero,  are  of  the  Chekhovian type   but  without the  underlying abandon and  passion  that  makes Chekhov's characters.
It is easy to see how the  play misses its goal;  it is less easy to see why Gray,  who
has  already   had  two  other  plays  produced professionally,  should  still be prey  to such  a basic  dramatic weakness.  What is it that  makes  him  mistrust  large  effects, the  straight-forward story,  bold  characterization? Is  it  timidity, hypersensitivity, or stubborn fidelity  to his own  experience? I think  the last. It did  not surprize  me to  hear  that  Canadian actors  who  were canvassed  to take  part  in this play were, on  the  whole,  cold,  while  English  actors  were enthusiastic.  Gray  captured  so accurately  the  familiar  half-vacuous, half-pretentious  atmosphere of  domestic wrangling over  mid-morning coffee and  fuzzy philosophizing over  midnight beer that   most  Canadians, who  tend  to  think  of  themselves  as undramatic  anyway, would  have  seen  no  point  in  presenting it  on  the  stage.  John Gray  must  have sensed  this  bashful hostility  to his play even more keenly  after  its public  showing, for  now  he is rewriting it and  hopes for production outside  Canada. The  trouble may  indeed  lie partly  outside  the  play,  but  transplantation to a more  mature or more  curious  climate is only  a  way  to skirt  the  problem. Undoubtedly Gray  is also  concerned  to  remedy   the  trouble   inside  the  play.  Almost  all  of Tennessee Williams' works-or Arnold   Wesker's  Roots-show that the  problems of a  pro­ vincial  conscience can  be  treated dramatically in one's  own  country. Gray's own freer  handling of  the  Maritimers, although he is a Torontonian, shows inventive promise.  If he gives  more  licence  to his imagination and  is less slave  to authen­ ticity,  perhaps his next  will be a first-rate  Canadian play.
Where  The  Teacher  fails, Blind Man's  Buff succeeds,  although Euringer's suc­
cess is less interesting than  Gray's failure. The  play is a conventional mystery with one  indispensible new  twist:   that  the  hero  and  intended murder victim  is blind. A  rich  Canadian author (three of the  first four  prizewinners manage to put  the problems of  Canadian arts  and  artists  on  stage), he  overhears his wife and  her lover  planning to  kill  him  for  his money,  and  singlehanded though sightless  he turns  the  tables.  The  theme  is slight but  Euringer sticks to it and  makes  the com­ plexities of plot and  development of character serve the single purpose of  building suspense.  Also  his story  is conceived  in  terms  of dramatic action  which  does not have  to  be  buoyed  up  like  Gray's  with  split-level staging, simultaneous dialogue, interludes of song  and  anecdote, and  other  devices. Especially  effective in drama-

NEW CANADIAN PLAYS PRESENTED



tic terms is the scene of crisis where the killer deliberately  baits his victim before striking  while the author  waits tensely in darkness for the  just moment  to check­ mate  his tormentor.
This  is not  yet a  perfect exercise  in  the  genre. The main  weakness lies in
characterization. The  lovers, for instance,  are less motivated  by greed or passion than  by the necessities of the plot. The butler, even if only a confidant, could have been allowed a few human  idiosyncracies. The  blind author  himself is a little too smooth,  a little too literary.  Like one of his own characters, I imagine,  he is not unexpected  or extreme enough to become a realistic fictional creation. But despite these limitations  the play remains dramatically  interesting, and  I believe that  Fred Euringer's approach to drama-fidelity to a theatrical form  before fidelity to re­ ceived  experience-is perhaps  more fruitful  for  a  young  playwright  than  John  Gray's  reversal of the process. One  can hope, nonetheless,  that  his next play will show that  he has learnt not only from Hitchcock or Agatha  Christie but also from Brecht or Beckett, O'Neill  or lonesco. Or even Shakespeare.
The  playwriting  contest may not have unearthed works of genius but in Gray and  Euringer  it  has  revealed two writers who should  be followed  with interest, and it will reveal more in the future. It has had one other important result. To all Canadian playwrights it has shown the Stratford  Festival ready to put at the dis­ position  of real  talent,  young  Shakespeares or not,  some of  the  best  dramatic resources of the country.



52




review articles




ON THE PRESSING OF MAPLE LEAYES
 





Earle Birney



Canadian  Short  Stories, selected  and   with   an  introduction by   Robert  Weaver. Oxford University Press.  $1.75·


IT IS  NO SMALL  responsibility to  decide  what  should  go  into  a  volume of Canadian short  stories  for  a series en­ titled   "The  World's Classics".  Have  we indeed   any  world  classics, in  any  genre?  The  Oxford University   Press,  however,  has already issued a similar  anthology for the   Australians   and  one  for   New  Zea­ landers and  another for  Welshmen   and  of  course  several  for  Englishmen, under  the same rubric, so that  no one will blame Robert   Weaver  for   agreeing  to  bestow international laurels  upon Canadians as well.  But  where  should  he  begin?
The short   story,   as  a  conscious art form,  is no older  than  the  nineteenth cen­ tury,  and   its  sophisticated  flowering  has been  largely  in  the  twentieth. An Ameri­  can   anthologist   can   reach   back   to  Poe and   Hawthorne,  the  Founding  Fathers, but   we  cannot   boast  even   ret:ognizable children  of   Poe   or   Hawthorne  in  our nineteenth   century,  any   more   than   we can  of  Ambrose   Bierce  or  Henry  James,  but  only dubious offspring  of Bret  Harte and  other outdated  regionalists. Mr. Weaver, in  his introduction, says that  he has not ventured "very  far  back" into our
 nineteenth century, and   has  "tried  to avoid  including  fiction   for   historical   or sociological   reasons   that    [he   does]   not much   admire on  literary  grounds."  His selections,   however,   suggest  that   he  has not  tried   hard   enough.  I  cannot   really believe that  Robert Weaver, who  has  for so  many  years  been  concerned  with choosing  contemporary Canadian  stories for  presentation on  C.B.C.,  and  who  has been  associated   with  such  a  discriminat­ ing   journal   as  Tamarack   Review, does really  admire  "very  much"  or  at  all,  as literature,  the  three  stories from the
18go's  with  which  he  leads  off his book.
Personally  I  must  summon up  a  good deal  of sociological  and  historical ardour to carry me through the hamhanded juve­ nility  of the humour in E. W. Thomson's "Privilege of the  Limits", or  the  freakish melodrama and   dubious  animal-psycho­ logizing of Charles G.  D.  Roberts' story, "Strayed", or the stereotyped tear-jerking romanticism of  Duncan Campbell Scott's "Paul  Farlotte".  These   are  only  pressed and  faded   maple   leaves.  The trouble   is that  Mr.  Weaver also  wanted, as he  re­ veals in his  introduction, to give  "a  very

53

REVIEW  ARTICLES




general impression of the development of the   short   story  in  Canada", and   to  do that    you   cannot  afford   the   luxury   of literary  discrimination. You  have  to  be­ gin,  as  Desmond  Pacey  did  in  his  Book of  the Can ad ian   Story,  with  Indian leg,ends, and  carry  on relentlessly  through Haliburton  and   Susanna   Moodie   right down   to  Chatelaine, so  that   the   world can  see  how  really  bad  we are.  But  if a compiler really  wants  to steer  a shipload of Canadian stories towards  international waters   today,   he   had   better   first  shove the   whole  nineteenth century   crew  into the   stern   dory   and   cut   the   painter, as Gwyn Jones did in the companion volume  of   Welsh Short   Stories.  Such   an  act  of discriminating  ruthlessness   would   have allowed   Mr.  Weaver to  set  sail  in  I9I2 on  the  good  ship   Mariposa, in  Stephen Leacock's "Marine  Excursion of  the Knights  of  Pythias",  a  selection   which comes  fourth in  this  anthology. Here  at last  is a  story  which  stands  up,  which  is as  peculiarly Canadian as Oka  and Raw­ hide   and   Social  Credit,  but   which  has also some hope of being international and  enduring. It is  a  sustained   mock-heroic of   provinciality,  witty   and   absurd   and  satirically   pointed,  good-humoured  and  observing   and   artfully  constructed,  yet almost   as   free   and   high-spirited  in  its effects  as  Chaucer's Nun's   Priest's  Tale.
What follows  is an  anti-climax, and  a reminder that  the  nineteenth century did not end  with  I9oo,  not in Canada. Frede­ rick   Philip   Grove's "Snow",  thought it has the  power  and  authority which Grove  brought to the depiction of  natural forces on the prairies, especially in their grimmer aspects,  lacks as a short story that  econo­ my  and   particularly  that   understanding of  when   to  stop,  which  are  essential   to

54
 the form.  These are  the typical  failings  of a  rather  ponderous writer  fumbling in  a genre  he  does  not  understand, the  faults into  which  even  Zola  and  other  natural­ istic  novelists   of  the  nineteenth  century fell when  they  tried  to write  short  stories. If Grove's tale  were  to be included at all, it  should   be  placed  with   the  school   of Roberts, though it  was  not  written until  I932;   Mr.   Weaver  has  it  follow  imme­ diately  after  Leacock's more  "contempo­ rary" story of I 9 I 2, merely  because Grove  happened   to  have   been  born   two  years later  than Leacock. This curiously  festive arrangement of stories  by their  authors' birthdays (which could  not have been imposed on Mr.  Weaver by the  traditions of the  series, since  the  companion Welsh Short  Stories  orders  its authors alphabeti­ cally)   results  in  some  bewildering juxta­ positions. Immediately after  Grove  comes a   piece   dated  I952,   by  Ethel   Wilson,  titled  "Mrs. Golightly and  the  First  Con­ vention", a sophisticated little  satire writ­ ten   with   that   very  individual  charm of style and  pseudo-naive drollery which  are  among Mrs. Wilson's many distinguishing and distinguished gifts;  it is  also   as modern  in  subject  as  in  mood, a  New Yorkerish kind  of story,  in  the  best sense. I'm delighted to see it  again, but  it does not   deserve   to  be  sandwiched  between  Frederick  Philip  Grove   and  Thomas H.  Raddall. The  latter  is  represented  by  a piece  which   is  not  so  much   a  classic  as a  classic  example of  how  good  material can   be  destroyed  by  stock  characteriza­ tion, slick  over-writing, and  the  sacrifice of  probability to a Victorian sentimental ending.
I cannot believe  that Mr.  Weaver  likes
this story of Raddall's. I think  it is in  the book  because  he  forgot   at  this  juncture

REVIEW  ARTICLES




tl!at   his }JUl]JuSe was  tu  IJrescnt   the  best Canadian stories, and  thought that  it was his duty  to find  somehow the  least  worst story by one of the best-selling Canadian novelists.   Mr.   Weaver  opens   his   intro­ duction by disclaiming that there  is any editorial tradition   which he  has   been either  required  to  follow   or   to  explain  away,  but  some  of  the  museum  pieces  I have  mentioned seem  to  me  to  be  justi­ fied   in  his   collection  only    on   such grounds. For  it is not  simply  a matter of the inevitable author but of the inevitable illustration.  Pacey  too,  in  his  anthology published   in   1947,   offered    Thomson's "Privilege  of  the   Limits", Scott's   "Paul Farlotte", Grove's "Snow", and  Leo Ken­ nedy's  "A  Priest  in  the  Family". Indeed, if  authors like Kennedy are  to be repre­ sented,  there  is no alternative; their  other tales are much worse. But  knowledge that "A  Priest  in   the  Family" is  the  best  of Kennedy does  not  help  us  to  enjoy  any better   the  phoney   rhetorical fruitiness  of its  two-dimensional  characters. I  wish that  Mr.  Weaver, who did  banish  Gilbert Parker and  Alan Sullivan and  Norman Duncan and  Marjorie Pickthall and  even Mazo  de Ia Roche, had  maintained  his courage long  enough  to  cast  into  limbo all  those  stories  which  have  appeared in earlier anthologies not   because   they  are still  good   but   because   they   were   once briefly   thought  to   be  good   or   because their authors were good about other things.
The  space   Mr.   Weaver  would   have
saved  he could  have  used  to present more examples of the  best writers he has avail­ able.  This  strategem, which  seems  to  me a basic one in anthologizing, Mr. Weaver  has  admitted only  once  into  his  practise. He  allows  Morley  Callaghan  two stories,
 the  sole author so honoured, and  for  the stated   reason   that   Callaghan "has   been for more  than  thirty  years Canada's  most distinguished novelist  and   short   story writer". If this  be true  of Morely Callag­ han,  and  I do  not  dispute it,  why  limit him   to  two?   Mr.   Weaver,  I   am   sure, knows   Callaghan's  work   well,   and   so knows  that   he  could   have  added  a  half dozen  other  tales  as satisfying  as the  two he  has  chosen.   Far  better  to  have   pre­ sented  all  these  to  the  appraising eye of the  searcher  for  our  world's  classics, and  to have dispensed with other writers,  past or  present,  whose  artistry falls  so far  be­ low Callaghan's as to prove  embarrassing to  them  when  they  appear in  the  same book  with  him.  Personally I would  swap W.   0.   Mitchell's "The  Owl   and   the Bens", and  all its windy,  plausible ladies'­ magazine style, its Ersatz  nature-boy, and its  Dickensian  comic   schoolteacher, for another Callaghan, any  Callaghan, or for Leacock's  "Rival Churches of  St.  Asaph and  St. Osaph", or Sinclair Ross's "One's a  Heifer", or  for  something by Dorothy Livesay  (who  is  not  included, despite  a statement  in   the   Preface  that   she   is) . And  I would  throw  in,  or  rather  throw out,  the  Mordecai Richler story,  in  the bargain,  for  Richler,   however  plausible his  claims   to  be  considered  as  a   new Canadian novelist,  has  not  yet learned  to write  a  short  story  that   avoids  sounding like  something  warmed  over   from   the Proletcult  literature  of  the   Thirties. 0
Robert  Weaver,  you  didn't  have   to  be kind  to so  many  people!
I, however,  should  be much kinder  to Robert  Weaver, and   make   clear   that   I think  the majority of his selections-there are  after  all twenty-six  of them-are well chosen  indeed, and   fairly   representative

55

REVIEW  ARTICLES




of  the  contemporary scene.  Certainly  I have found  it  a   delight  to   re-read, through  this   collection, Ralph   Gustaf­ son's   sensitive   "The   Pigeon"  and   Mal­  colm   Lowry's  "The  Bravest   Boat", a rare   piece  of  stylistic  magic,  and   Hugh Garner's  heart-and-mind- breaking tale of  "One,  Two, Three little Indians" (though all have been  previously antholo­ gized) , and   the   tales   of   Ringuet  and  Roger   Lemelin   and   Anne  Hebert-Mr. Weaver    has,   rightly,   I   think,   included these  three  translations from  the  French of  Canada. Ihave  also  been  grateful to encounter  for   the  first  time   the   young writer  Alice Munro and her mordant and  moving  "Time of  Death", and  to read  a richly  sad  and  comic story of Irving Lay­ ton's  I had  somehow missed,  "Vacation
 in   La   Voiselle".  Mr.   Layton  is  shortly to bring  out  a selection  of his own  tales; if  they  prove  to  contain characters  with the convincing quality of Madame Tipue, it  will  be a notable  book.
Ultimately, perhaps, the fundamental service   which   Robert  Weaver   has   ren­ dered  us in this collection is not the fixing of a  tradition, or  the  overcoming of  one, for  he  has  done  neither, but  the awaken­ ing  of readers, in Canada and  elsewhere, to the  existence  of at  least  a  dozen  living short-storyists, both  old  and  young,  who understand their  craft  and  have  achieved their    private  vision   and   voice.   Partly through  the  encouragement  of  such anthologies  as   this,  some   one   of  these writers may yet  produce a world's  classic of his own.




MOVING
BEYOND  BORDERS
 





John Bilsland


The Oxford Book of Canadian Verse. Ed.  A.  J. M.  Smith. Oxford University Press.
$6.oo.


THE  APPEARANCE of any  rep­ resentative anthology of Canadian  poetry  must  be an  event  of some importance in the  Canadian  literary  world:  with  a very few  exceptions our   poets  seldom   en joy the  recognition  of   repeated  publication. When,  moreover,   an   anthology  of  this poetry   appears   under  the  distinguished aegis  of the Oxford University  Press one cannot  avoid an  immediate sense of satis­ faction that  Canadian poetry has broken beyond   its  national  confines  to  take  its place-whatever  that    may   be-in   the
 larger  sphere  of  the  English-speaking world.
The Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse  is a valuable collection. With  cumulative force  it  reminds us of  the  very  consider­ able  worth   of  much   of  our  poetry,   and  of  its  range  in  material,  treatment, and  effect.  And  it renders  accessible-in con­ venient,  pleasing,  and  inexpensive form
-a great    body   of   work   which   would otherwise be  unobtainable outside  libra­ ries.  It is  particularly  noteworthy  for  its inclusion of  a large  number of  poems  by

REVIEW  ARTICLES




French-C.tll.ldian wt iters, and  these works are  not  merely  relegated to  an  appendix
-as rather   awkward  bastard  relatives one  scarcely  cares  to  acknowledge-  but are given full recognition, appearing side­ by-side  with  their   English  chronological cousms.
But  for   all  its  values-and these  are
great   and  several-The  Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse  is  disappointing in  cer­ tain   very  important respects.  The  editor  of  the   collection,  A.  J. M.   Smith,  has
obviously  set  himself  the  task  of offering as  fully  representative a  selection  of Canadian verse as his space  would  allow. In itself  the coverage he has sought seems wholly  admirable. But  that  coverage  has been  purchased only  at  great  expense: it has sometimes cost Professor Smith the judicious  exercise of his critical taste, and it  has  prevented anything like  a  satisfy­ ing  full  treatment of a single worthwhile Canadian  poet.
The  anthologist always, of course, faces
the great  problem of deciding the relative importance  of   inclusiveness  and   taste. The compiler of  a  selected  edition  of Tennyson must inevitably resign himself either  to including Dora because  it repre­ sents   an   important  side   of   Tennyson's nature  as a  poet,  or  rejecting  it  because as  a  poem  it  is  a feeble  thing.  Professor Smith   has   quite   evidently  encountered this problem frequently in selecting  works for   inclusion   in   The  Oxford  Book   of Canadian Verse. One is  particularly aware of this in the early pages of the collection. Here one finds pieces by writers  such  as Standish O'Grady,  Alex­ ander  McLachlan,   and   John   Hunter Duvar.  Historically  these   men   have perhaps some   interest, but   their   value as  poets would  seem-from  Professor
 Smith's examples-- to  be  very  slight indeed. Professor Smith declares of O'Grady  and    McLachlan  that    "Their work has a solidity  and  tang  that  is emphasized    and   sharpened  by  the   ab­ sence  of  polish   and   literary   sophistica­ tion."   Perhaps  so,  but   the  solidity  and  tang   are  scarcely   evident  in  these  dog­ gerel lines of McLachlan:

Old  England is eaten by knaves,
Yet  her  heart is all  right at the  core, May  she  ne'er be the  mother of slaves,
Nor  a foreign foe land  on  her  shore.

I love my own  country and  race,
Nor  lightly I fled from  them  both,
Yet  who  would  remain in  a place
Where  there's  too  many  spoons   for   the
broth?

With  regard  to Duvar, Professor Smith makes  no critical claims  at  all for  him  as a  poet,  and  one  can,  therefore, only  re­ main   in  complete  bewilderment   with regard  to  the  inclusion  of  three  excerpts from   De  Roberval:  a  Drama. The  first of these  begins  thus:

Ha! are   there  wood-ghosts in  this  solitude, Such  as we read  of in  roman de rou?
No, it is Dian, or  Diana's maid,
And  fully  armed with  arrow, belt  and  bow, Though  tricked  out   in   a  somewhat antic
guise.

By heathen Venus, what a shape it has!
If nymph  it  be, and  not  an  airy  form   ..

The  harmful result  of  including  stuff by writers  like these is not so much, how­ ever,  that  it  reflects on  the  critical  judg­  ment   of  the   editor,  as   that   it   further limits  the   already-small  space  available to worthwhile writers.  A poet like Wilfred  Watson   is  scantily   represented  by  two and  a  half  pages,  the  same  space  given over  to Duvar's De  Roberval. Surely  one could  do without  De  Roberval if its sacri-

57

REVIEW  ARTICLES




fice would make room  for Watson's Canticle of Darkness, even  as the  loss of much   of  the  work  of  other  early  Cana­ dians   would   seem   slight   if  it   allowed fuller  treatment of poets  like  Anne  Mar­ riott,   Margaret  Avison,  and   Jay   Mac­  pherson. One  wonders  if  perhaps  the time  has  not  come  for  editors  of  Cana­ dian  poetry  to  recognize that  dead  things are  often  better  left  unresurrected. Most of  the  poems  written by eighteenth and nineteenth  century  Englishmen are  now decently interred; the  great  achievements alone  survive.  Why,  then, continue to un­ earth poetic  corpses  because  they happen to be  Canadian? Even  Canadian  corpses can  take  up valuable living space.
The poems-living and dead-which Professor   Smith   offers  in  his  anthology are   introduced  in   a   lengthy   essay  in which the editor surveys the history of Canadian poetry, both English and French, from  its beginnings to the present time.  Like  the  collection of poems  which follows, this  prefatory essay has the value of  range:  it  moves  competently  over  a vast area of time and work. But like the collection,  too,   it   has   the   weakness   of trying  to cover  too much  ground, and  in its attempt to be all-inclusive it becomes merely  superficial. It often  reads, in fact, like  some  histories   of  English   literature which    do   little   more    than    provide    a student with  convenient epithets.
Nowhere is this superficiality more dis­ turbingly evident  than  in  the  conclusion of  the  essay. Here  Professor  Smith  seeks to  establish   the   "distinctive  quality" of Canadian poetry,   and   he  writes:

... the  Canadian poet  has  one  advantage
-an advantage that derives  from  his  posi­ tion   of  separateness and  semi-isolation. He  can  draw upon French, British, and  Ameri-

ss
 can   sources  in  language  and   literary  con­ vention;  at    the    same    time    he   enjoys  a measure of  detachment that  enables him  to select   and   adapt  what is  relevant and   use­ ful.   This gives   to  contemporary Canadian poetry  in   either   language  a   distinctive quality-its  eclectic  detachment.

The expression eclectic detachment sounds well; it seems to suggest a learned objectivity, the  capacity in  our   poets  to draw   freely  on  diverse  cultures and  tra­ ditions.    But   one   wonders  if   the   very attractiveness of  the  fine  expression  has not  misled  Professor  Smith. Surely  a very marked  quality  of   much    of   the   best Canadian poetry  is its intensely  personal note.  Many of our  poets  are  highly  deri­ vative,  but  writers like A. M. Klein,  Anne Wilkinson, and  Irving   Layton  have achieved a  decidedly  personal utterance, not   particularly  eclectic,   and   not  at  all detached. Klein draws  on a cultural heri­  tage,  it  is  true,  but  it  is his  own  imme­  diate heritage  as a Canadian Jew.  Eclec­  tic  detachment  would  seem  much   more the  mark   of  the  American-British T.  S. Eliot  than  of perhaps any Canadian poet with  the  one  possible exception of James Reaney.
In both  the  introductory essay and  the collection of poems  there  are, therefore, serious  flaws:  The Oxford Book  of Cana­ dian   Verse   is  by  no   means   a   perfect  anthology  of  Canadian   poetry-nor, of course,   would   Professor  Smith   claim   it was.  But  despite   its  weaknesses  the  col­ lection   is an  important landmark in  the  publication   of   Canadian  poetry.  Prob­ ably  the  greatest service  Professor  Smith has   done   the    reader   is   that    he   has brought  together  a  body  of  work  suffi­ ciently   large  and  sufficiently  representa­ tive   that   one    can    see   the  achieve­ ment   of  Canadian  poets   in   some   per-

REVIEW  ARTICLES




spcctin·. 1\1uch   of  our   poetry  is strongly imitative:  one  can  easily  detect   the  in­ fluence  of  the  English  neo-classicists,  of Wordsworth, Keats,  and  Tennyson, and  of  Eliot  and  Dylan  Thomas. But  at  the same  time  one  can  see  the  rise  of  indi­  vidual writers  who-whatever their  cul­ tural    debts    may    be-speak   as   poets deserving  serious   consideration  in  their  own  right.  In  studies  of Canadian litera­ ture   one  often   meets   Professor   Smith's stress   on   the   Canadian   identity:  one hears  much  of  the  isolated  nature of the Canadian, and  the  way in which  his isolation  marks  his poetry; and  one  hears of  the  double  heritage of Canada, Cana-



RECENT  VERSE
 dians  heing  able  to  draw  on  the  hct
the  old  world  and  the  new,  and  to fuse both  into  something unique. Whether or not   these   matters  are   as  important   as some  commentators  would   have   us   be­ lieve is rather a doubtful question. It may probably   be  more  significant that  some of   Canada's  poets   have    clearly   risen above  the level on which  their Canadian­ ism  affects   our   attitude   towards   them.  James   Reaney   is  a  worthwhile poet   by any   standards.  So,   too,   are   Jay   Mac­ pherson,  Irving Layton, and  A.M. Klein,  and  a surprisingly large  number of other poets   represented  in   Professor   Smith's anthology.





Nonnan  Endicott


FRED COGSWELL. Lost  Dimension. Outposts Publications. 50  cents.

KENNETH    MCROBBIE.  Eyes   Without  a   Face.   Gallery  Editions,  the   Isaacs  Gal­
lery.  $2.00.

MARGARET   AVISON.    Winter Sun   and   Other  Poems. University of  Toronto  Press.
$2.50.


A  PAMPHLET  of  poems  is apt to  get  less  than   a  pamphlet share  of  a brief  review,  even  though it  might   be a little   box  of  jewels.  Lost  Dimension,  by Fred  Cogswell, is a collection of smooth, round, and  something less than  precious stones.   But   although  lacking   in  colour they  are  not  without some  interest, and in the  best-for instance the  title poem­ there  is a  little  density.  The  human con­ dition  is seen, genuinely enough, in tradi­ tional  opposition:  "root bestiality" "grop­ ing  though its  lair" that  "the haloed  tree may  bloom  and  be  fair", the  "thistle of sin",   Eden   and   another  garden  with
 closed  gates,   "sweet chastity" a  lamb
"flayed  of its woolly white", and  so on.
In  contrast, the pieces in Eyes Without a Face seem to me often rather showy, sometimes  clever,  and  rarely  poetic.  One of  the  most  characteristic, "Homage to the Coast  and  Rexroth", was "written for jazz  accompaniment  to  vary   an  other­ wise conventional poetry  reading" at  the Isaacs  Gallery  in  Toronto, and  while  the other   poems   are  less  jazz-arty   and   less localized,  the  general  tone  or  convention of the longer ones is apt  to be that  of the familiar and  self-conscious  meditation or soliloquy or  announcement for   one's

59

REVIEW  ARTICLES




friends. Mr.  McRobbie does  not  deserve (either  way   perhaps)   the   rhetoric   he gives   Rexroth  when    he   asks  why   we should  care  what  the  latter  is saying and answers
Because you  go  down on  your  knees  to  the broken  noses
in  the  silent   ring  of  the  Beat  Generation
take  the  count along with  them
and  weep   for   the   cauliflower  ears   of
youth.

He  has  not  gone  far  enough  in  that  di­ rection; but  he sometimes  sounds  as if he wished he could.
Yet  he  is perhaps most  himself  when
exploring his  own   consciousness and attempting  to  come   to  rhetorical  terms with  the new scientific  universe, mechani­ cal  city  life, and  human  consciousness  it­ self.  This   he  does  in  a  plethora of  bio­ logical  and  mechanical metaphors, usu­ ally striking, sometimes  fanciful, but with a  very  mixed  total  effect:  verbal  ingenu­ ity in at best only half-appropriate and drawn-out analogy  and  comparison. A telescopic  figure  becomes

Screw, counterweight, barrel, emulsion, lens aimed at light  years'  millions  of vapour
pick  out  faint characters by  a  cloud
(no  bigger)
stroked from
vision's
guitar
of black  lead

"Blastoff" is typographically  shaped  like a rocket and has a red fume of hair, an incendiary scalp and  Canaveral shoulders roaring from  a  thunder dress. "Serenade to the Queen City"  is a long series of metaphors,  some   of   them  no   doubt mockingly  "forced" by the  poet.  But  is it not   perhaps  after   all  too  easy  to  write lines  like

6o
 where the  oxygen   turbine stands the   night on  its  head
spinning awake physiologies of work
0 rising  skulls  yawn  in  smoke  cloud civilization

where   the    lakeshore   bleeds    autos  along burning veins  of gas
into   the  Bank  of  Commerce, lights come on  floor
by floor  like  a  rising  tide  in  the  standing vessels

"As   I  Start", a  poem   somewhat   remi­ niscent  of  Dylan  Thomas,  suggests  what  a   more   limited    and   personal  (even   if private)   symbolism   might   do;   as  it  is, there  is altogether  too much  mere  juxta­ position   and   exclamation,  too  little   co­ herence   or  pattern. Most  of  the  poems are   in  free  verse,  with   a  good   deal   of parallelism  and  alliteration; the  staccato rhythms  may  have   the  inflections   of  an individual voice.
Winter Sun  and  Other Poems, the  first collection  of poems by Margaret Avison, seems  to  me  very  consistently   poetry,  as well   as   ironic    wit    and    reserved    but strongly   individual feeling.  There is  in­ deed   a   range    of   craftsmanship   which encompasses  various   forms  from  sonnet,  couplet and  quatrain to  irregular  rhyme  and   free  verse.  I do  not  know  whether the  use of free  verse and  older traditional forms   is  a  matter of   chronology,  but   I should  suspect  not,  and also suspect  that  the    occasional   absence  of   consistency within   a  poem,  though  possibly  a  fault, is not  just lack of  care  or energy.
In the second  issue of Canadian Litera­ ture  Professor  Milton Wilson gave a lucid and   partly   thematic  analysis  of  some  of Miss Avison's  poems--quite a number of these  she has  not  included in the  present  volume-but  I  confess  that  I do  not  find her   work   easy   either  to  understand  or

REVIEW  ARTICLES




characteri7f•.   This  collection   is arranged, we are told on the  presumably inspired jacket,    for   readers    who   like   to   skim through a book when  they first take it up, and   would  rather find  their  own  group­ ings than  have  the  poems clearly grouped for  them.  The  two  main  themes  are  said to  be  weather and  the  attempt  to  come to   human  terms   with   our   social   insti­ tutions.
But  "Weather", and other similar words,  have   for  Miss  Avison  a  psycho­ logical  and  cosmic  meaning, even though  many  of her  best lines are very sensuously particular.  She   moves   very   easily   and  rapidly  from  the  confines  of a city  room (where  she   is   often    at   or   near    the window)   to  all  room; her  poem  "Intra­ Political"  is    "an    exercise   in   Political  Astronomy";  "Tennis", though technical in  its  descriptive  vocabulary, ends  with the  "metaphysical" lines

Playing is musicked gravity, the  pair
Score  liquid Euclids in foolscaps of air.

These lines seem rather forced.  Miss Avison's desire to thicken her material, rapidly   draw   out  interconnections,  give it an  overlay  or montage treatment, is naturally not  always successful.  But if she writes some lines that  seem cold-bloodedly complicated, in her best passages the blending of the visual  and  the conceptual is very successful; a simple example might be  the   first   two   stanzas   of  "Civility a Bogey, or Two  Centuries of Canadian Cities":

Chinashop at seaborde a speckled chinashop
in  the  hard-wheat flat-land a  red-sand chinashop
in   pine-scrub:
and   in   between  the   granite  cup   dangled by  the  pump.
 Came big  bull  buildings, sharded and   shoaled
even  the  moustache-cup,
held  a  board  meeting, stood,  or  sat  smoking,
cratered the  moonlight. Mouseholes rustled with  paper
and   by  then  Hallowe'en  was  a   prance  of reeking horses.

For   those   who   prefer   standing  on   the actual ground with  images  of sense, there are  many  vividly  observed   lines:
Sedges  and  wild  rice
Chase   rivery    pewter.  The  astonished  cm­
ders  quake
With  rhizomes
("Snow")
or
All nests,  with  all  moist  downy  young Blinking and  gaping daylight; and  all lambs Four-braced  in   straw,  shivering  and   mild
("Birth  Day")

Miss  Avison  is an  intellectual poet  in that  she demands a constant alertness  of mind.  Her  "philosophy of life",  when she expresses it directly, as in a number of poems,  is for  the  most  part   an  elabora­ tion  of the  positions  expressed  with  con­ centration in  the first lines of  "Snow":
Nobody  stuffs  the  world  in  at  your  eyes,
The optic   heart must  venture: a  jail-break
And  re-creation.

In  "Intra-Political" she ends  (in a very uncommon literary vein)   with
(George Herbert-and he  makes it  plain­ Guest  at this  same  transfiguring  board
Did sit and eat)

but  in  the  poem  the  transfiguring board of the world  is not seen  through the eyes of  revealed   religion   any   more   than   in "The Fallen,  Fallen  World". The human groups  in  the  latter are  the  Revolution­ aries, the Idealists, the Learned. It might  seem  that  the  Learned  are  nearest  to  the author, though sound  and  sense  are  for

6!

REVIEW  ARTICLES




them  "qualities of time/Where meaning mocks   itself  in  many   echoes".   But   the physical  sense  of  the  world  comes  to the poet's  rescue:

Yet   where  the   junco  flits   the   sun   comes still
 Remote and  chilly, but  as gold,
And  all  the  mutinous in  their dungeons stir,
And  sense  the  tropics, and  unwitting wait. Since  Lucifer, waiting is all
A  rebel   can. And   slow   the   south  returns.
A  wintry   sun.   And   Miss  Avison  Is one of  our  most  interesting  poets.





LE  POINT DE VUE ARTISTIQUE
 




Gerard Bessette



GERARD TOUGAS.  Histoire de  Ia Litterature Canadienne-Franfaise. Les  Presses  Uni­
versitaires de  France, Paris. 15 N.F.  {$3.00).


CE VOLUME  marquera une date  dans  l'histoire de  nos lettres. Gerard Tougas est en effet  le premier  critique canadien-fran<_<ais qui,  en  etudiant  !'en­ semble    de   notre    production    litteraire, adopte   franchement   le   point    de   vue artistique,  ne  s'embarrasse  pas   de  con­ siderations  moralisantes   ni-dans  la mesure   du   possible-de  consid·erations historiques pour  apprecier  la  valeur   de nos  ecrivains.  Cela devrait   aller  de  soi, je le sais bien. On  ne song;erait meme  pas a souligner  pareille  "singularite" dans  un milieu   plus   evolue   que   le  notre.   Mais jusqu'a  present  l'historien litteraire cana­ dien-fran,<_<ais s'est toujours double  d'un censeur, d'un moralisateur dont  les  juge­ ments  sont  ipso   facto  sujets a caution. Si, comme  l'aflirme Tougas, "la critique tend a epouser la  courbe  d'une  litterature"' si "plus  une   litterature   s'elE ve,  plus   elle appelle  la  critique  qui   lui  est  compie­
mentaire ..."  (p. 36), la publication de son volume  nous paraitra doublement encourageante.
 Tougas ne  pouvait, de  toute  evidence, negliger  completement le point  de vue historique: c'eut  ete  eliminer de son His­ toire  toute  notre  litrerature d'avant I goo, a  !'exception  de   Garneau  et,  peut-etre, de Cremazie et de Frechette. II lui fallait  done  faire  un  compromis:  bannir de son etude les auteurs qui,  meme pour   l'epo­  que,  paraissent mediocres, mais en retenir d'autres qui, s'ils ecrivaient de  nos  jours, ne  meriteraient pas  qu'on les mentionne. C'est   dans  cet  •eclairage  qu'il   faut   juger le volume  de Tougas: autrement on ne comprendrait  pas   qu'il    •etudie   Arthur Buies  assez  lon,guement   et  passe  Asselin et   Fournier  sous  silence; qu'il   consacre trois  pages  a  Laure Conan et  cinq  !ignes a  Roger   Viau,   deux   pages  a  Pamphile Lemay,  poete,   et  cinq  !ignes  a  Desaul­ niers.   On   s'·etonne  davantage   qu'il   ait juge  bon  de  tirer  Eudore  Eventurel d'un  oubli  bien merite en citant, pour  appuyer ce choix,  un  poeme d'une rare  platitude. Mais  ne  le  chicanons  pas sur  des  details.
Tout  comme les auteurs ·etudies,  c'est

REVIEW  ARTICLES




a partir <.lu   XXicmc sicclc  yue  l'lliJtoire de   Tougas  revet   un   interet  particulier pour  le lecteur contemporain. II faut le feliciter   d'avoir indus dans  son  ouvrage, a cote d'ecrivains deja consacres comme Panneton, Gabrielle Roy,  Theriault et Alain  Grandbois, des auteurs plus  recents comme  Richard, Filiatrault, Boisvert et Pilon,  dont  on ne sait  pas encore  s'ils sur­ vivront.   Son   choix,   naturellement,   ne ralliera pas  tous  Ies  suffrages. Comment s'en etonner?
du  moins, travail de pionnier, et Ia poste­ rite   ne  ratifiera sans  doute pas  tous  ses jugements. Mais  ce triage, ce deblaiement s'imposaient.  IIs  reposent   d'ailleurs  sur une  lecture   attentive  des  ceuvres,  guidee  par   un   jugement d'une   singuliere  per­  spicacite.  Je   ne   saurais   citer   un   seul auteur  de   quelque   envergure  qui   ait echappe a son attention.
Quoiqu'elle  soit  toujours   textuelle,  Ia methode qu'il  emploie pour  analyser  nos romanciers contemporains laisse parfois  a desirer.  II enumere Ies ceuvres de chaque auteur par ordre chronologique, en donne un  resume  succinct et  porte  sur  chacune un  jugement sommaire. C'est  Ia un  pro­ cede  qui   confine,   a  !'occasion, au   jour­ nalisme. On  ne lui  en ferait  pas grief  s'il savait  toujours ramasser ensuite ses com­ mentaires epars en  un  jugement  syntheti­ que  ou il degagerait clairement  Ies !ignes de   force,   Ies  themes   principaux   et   Ies imperfections de   I'ceuvre   dans   son   en­ semble.  Tel  n'est  pas  toujours Ie cas.  II nous  Iaisse  parfois  indecis  sur  Ia concep­  tion  qu'il  se fait  de  telle  ou  telle  ceuvre, ou  meme  sur  Ia valeur  qu'il lui attribue. Par exemple, il parle  des "grands themes" de  Langevin  sans  nous  preciser  leur nature. II  accorde une  place  de  choix  a Robert Elie  et  pourtant sa  critique indi-
 
que  qu'il  le considere coum1c  un  roman­ cier  de deuxieme ordre. Je  ne !'en  bHl.me pas,   mais   dans   ce   cas   il   aurait  fallu releguer   Elie  a  Ia  fin  du  chapitre avec les auteurs qui  figurent  en  petits  carac­ teres. On souhaiterait aussi pour  nos meil­ leurs  romanciers, comme  Gabrielle Roy, Ringuet  et   Theriault,   une  ·etude   plus foui!Iee  ou  figureraient  de  moins  parci­  monieuses   remarques   sur   le  style  et   Ia technique.   Resignons-nous  a   laisser   ce soin  a  des   ouvrages  plus   specialises   et soulignons  que,   par   contre,  Tougas fait figure  de  novateur en  analysant dans son volume  les   principaux romanciers fran­ ais-Bugnet,Ouvrard, Constantin­ Weyer,   Marie le  Franc, etc.-qui,  a l'instar  de  Louis  Hernon, ont  ecrit  sur  le Canada.
Les  reserves  que   je  viens  de  faire  au sujet  des romanciers ne  s'appliquent  pas aux   poetes.  En   poesie,  Ia  tentation   est moins grande d'analyser tel ou tel recueil isolement,   car   ils  ne   forment  pas   des entites  aussi nettement  delimitees, aussi independantes que les romans. Aussi Tougas considere-t-il chaque poete  dans son ensemble,  quitte a etayer  a !'occasion ses jugements  par  de breves citations dont il souligne  les qualites ou  les defauts.
Quant  a  !'importance qu'il   assigne  a
nos   differents  poetes,   elle   ne   s'eloigne
guere  des opinions communement accep­ tees. Grandbois,  Saint-Denys-Garneau, Anne  Hebert et Rina Lasnier  viennent en tete,  suivis  par  ceux  que  Toug,as appelle  les "poetes   de  Ia coupure". C'est  Ia une appellation  hasardeuse, car  il  faudra at­  tendre   quelques  annees   pour   savoir   si Pilon,   Giguere  ou   Boisvert    "coupent" vraiment  et   se   differencient  en   pro­ fondeur de Grandbois ou d'Anne Hebert. Leur supposee  revolte  reste en effet extre-

REVIEW  ARTICLES




mement obscure. Elle est peut-etre moins authentique, moins  radicale  qu'on  ne le suppose;  elle   ressemble  fort   a  celle  des surn alistes
y sera-t-elle sensible?  II est permis d'en douter.
Tougas  ne   change  pas   de   methode pour 'etudier nos historiens: il s'en tient, autant que  possible, a !'aspect litteraire. Apres avoir releve, par exemple, "les deformations,  .  .  .  les  grossissements" que  !'abbe Groulx "fait  subir  aux  faits", il   reconnait  que   "cet   historien   partial
... est   pourtant  grand  par   son  elo­ quence" (p. I 25), et illui accorde autant d'importance qu'a Thomas Chapais, dont  il souligne  le  "conservatisme religieux  et politique"  et   !'eloquence  "un   peu   de­ suete"   (pp.  I20-I2I). Bien  qu'il   recon­ naisse   en   Fregault   l'historien  "le   plus eminent" qui  se soit  "acquis  une  reputa­ tion  depuis  la seconde  Guerre mondiale" (p. 232), il soutient que Rumilly, "le seul artiste  parmi   les   historiens   contempo­ rains"  (p.  238), lui est superieur au  point de  vue  de !'evocation, de l'esthetique. Je n'ai    pas   assez   pratique   Rumilly    pour savoir  si Tougas  a  raison,  mais  ceux  qui tenteront  d'infirmer son  jugement  en  in­ voquant  uniquement la superiorite scien­ tifique   et   methodologique  de   Fregault prouveront qu'ils n'ont pas  compris. Autant  vaudrait  essayer   de   demontrer que  Bonheur d'Occasion, par  exemple, l'emporte sur  Aaron parce  que  Gabrielle Roy  y serre  la realite  de plus pres.
Par   la  force   des  choses,  Tougas  con­ sacre  tres  peu  d'espace a la  philosophie. II se contente d'expliquer  pourquoi chez nous  "elle  reste  a etre  fondee" ( p. 248) ' pourquoi un  "air   de  byzantinisme ... s'attache  aux   etudes   philosophiques  au Canada franc;ais"  ( p.  249) . La  raison  en
 est simple:  nos  soi-disant philosophes ne font  pas de veritables recherches, mais s'attaquent a des  problemes dont  ils con­ naissent   d'avance  la  solution.  Ne   nous etonnons done  pas si "le  thomisme cana­ dien  n'a  aucune chance de deboucher sur l'exterieur ..."  (p.  249).
C'est   lorsqu'il etudie  nos  critiques et
presente des aperc;us generaux sur notre langue, nos relations litteraires avec la France, l'analogie de notre  situation avec celles   de   la   Belgique   et   de   la   Suisse romande que  Tougas nous  donne ses meilleures pages.  Qu'il s'agisse  d'assom­ mer  elegamment  les  nombreux  beotiens  qui,   sous  pretexte  de  critique  litteraire, veulent nous  donner  des  lec;ons de  cate­ chisme; de  nous  presenter  un   jugement lucide  et  nuance  sur  les merites   de  Mgr Camille  Roy;   de   mettre  en   valeur    la finesse  et  la  clairvoyance de  Louis  Dan­ ton,  Tougas  est toujours a la  hauteur de sa  tache. II  est  symptomatique qu'il   ait fallu   un  critique canadien  ne  en  dehors de  la  province  de  Quebec  pour   rendre justice   au   Pere   Seers,   refugie,   lui,  aux Etats-Unis  afin   d'echapper  a   l'etouffe­ ment  qui  le guettait chez nous.
Cependant, les  passages  les plus  origi­ naux,   les  plus  profonds  de  Tougas  sont peut-etre ceux   qu'il  consacre  a  ce  que,  faute  d'un  autre   terme,    j'appellerai  la litterature  comparee. II  ne  s'agit  pas,  en effet,   de   litterature  comparee  au   sens strict,  car   la  litterature  canadienne  ne jouit   pas   encore   vis-a-vis  de  la  France d'assez  d'autonomie pour  que  l'on  puisse parler   "d'inftuence etrangere".  D'autre part,  ni  les ecrivains belges,  ni  ceux  de la  Suisse  romande  n'ont   exerce   d'inftu­ ence sur les notres.  Pourtant, nos relations intellectuelles avec  la  France, notre  atti­ tude  envers  elle, les analogies qui existent

REVIEW  ARTICLES




c11lrc 11ulr e iluc liun
que et de Ia Suisse sont  des questions d'un extreme interet  qui   ont   ete a  peine
effieurees ou totalement negligees  par  nos critiques. Les  trop   breves  considerations de   Tougas  nous   en  paraissent d'autant plus precieuses.  Esperons qu'illes develop­ pera  dans  un  prochain  ouvrage.
Un   mot   enfin   sur   son   style,  qui  est d'une elegance, d'une clarte, d'une soup­ Jesse  qui   ne   se  dementent  a   peu   pres jamais.  II  faudrait vraiment  chercher Ia petite   bete-un   exercice  favori   de   nos critiques, toujours  plus  severes  a  l'egard  de Ia langue de  nos ecrivains que de celle des  Franc;ais-pour  relever  ici et Ia que!-
 qucs  dcfaillances ou  quelques  fautes d'attention. La conclusion de Tougas en particulier,  qui   traite  des   rapports   lit­ teraires   entre  le  Canada  et   Ia   France, contient des pages qui figureront certaine­ ment  dans  nos  futures  anthologies.
Meme si Gerard Tougas declare sans sa
preface  qu'une histoire  comme  Ia sienne ne   peut    rendre  service   qu'un   certain temps,   je  suis  sur   que,   non   seulement "elle contribuera ( 0        0       0)  a faire  connaitre au  Canada et  a  l'etranger  les  meilleurs auteurs canadiens" (p.  13),  mais  qu'elle s'inscrira  dans   l'histoire  de   nos   lettres comme  un  jalon de premiere importance.














or
"0
0
0
0
8




















The Perfect Christmas Gift:
a subscription to
Canadian
Literature









FRAGMENTS
OF PERSONALITY

HUGH  MACLENNAN.  Scotchman's  Return  and
Other Essays.  Macmillan. $4.00.

"A PERSONAL ESSAY",  writes  Hugh Mac­ Lennan in  the  Author's Note  to  Scotch­ man's   Return  and   Other   Essays,  "is  a little   fragment  of   yourself;  a  mood   or cluster   of   ideas   which    somehow   have emerged from  yourself.  It is the  friendli­ est   form   of   writing I  know." By  and  large,  the  essays  in  this  collection   fulfill the    terms    of   the    author's   definition, though   the   "fragments"  are   not   uni­  formly  "friendly". Certainly they  go  far toward   convincing  this   reader  at   least that   the   personal  essay,   as   a   literary genre, is not, contrary to popular belief, extinct.
Mr.  MacLennan's models  may  be  in­ ferred   from   his  confession   that   he  has become    increasingly  addicted   to   "the form  in  which   Lamb excelled  all  others  in  England, and   Thoreau  all  others   in the   United States". It is  not  surprising, therefore, that  the  selections in   this volume   tend   to  fall  into  two  main  cate­  gories:  intimate   essays  of   personal opinion and   reminiscence,  and   serious, less  informal   essays  of  social   comment. To   my   mind   the   essays  according  to Lamb are,  with  one  or  two  exceptions, more  interesting and  more  successful  ex­ amples  of the  form  than those  according
 to Thoreau, but  in  both  categories there is considerable diversity  of subject matter and  of tone  and  in both  the  skills of  the essayist   are   enriched  by   those   of   the novelist.
Particularly noteworthy in this connec­ tion  are  the  vivid  thumb-nail  character­ izations   of  the   taxi-drivers  who  appear briefly  in  a  number of  the  essays, some­ times  serving  as sounding  boards  for  the author's views,  sometimes  as  vehicles  of social comment. They  also serve  as a foil for   the  author's  gnawing  anxiety   about  the future of a society devoted  exclusively to the  "production, distribution and  con­ sumption" of   material goods.  One   can­ not  despair  utterly  of  a  world  in  which  taxi  drivers, with  the  authority conferred by  the  experience of  their   craft, deliver such   downright pronouncements as: "This   TeeVee  ain't  gonna  last   much  longer.   People   all   over   is  getting  very weary  indeed   of  Tee-Vee." Or   "What's history  but  psychology,  and   what's  psy­ chology but  the  ree-searches of Sigmund Freud? Toynbee writes history  like Freud was  not  in  it.  That's what's the  trouble with  Toynbee."
Among  the  personal essays, the  moods of which range from the nostalgia of "Scotchman's Return" and  "Oxford  Re­ visited"    through  the   tongue-in-cheek satire  on gastronomic tastes,  national and  personal,   in  "By  their  Foods", to  a  sor­ rowful  Jeremiad  on  the  divorce  between  youth  and  poetry in "Sunset and  Evening Star",  my  own   preference  is  for  "The Secret   and  Voluptuous Life  of  a  Rose­  Grower".  Here Mr.  MacLennan is most successfully  Lamb-like, while  yet  remain­ ing   completely  himself,  a   delightful combination illustrated by   the  opening paragraph of the essay.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW




This moist,   cool  summer  with   intermittent washes  of  sunshine has  been  poor  for  grain and  vacations,  exasperating  to   tennis players, and  cruel   to mothers who  count on summer  as  a   time   when  the   children are out   of  the   house.   It has  given   the  cicadas little to  sing  about, it  has  sent  snails   to  the lawns  and  slugs to  the lettuce,  it  has darkened  the   moon   and   ruined  the   hay­ stacks  for  country lovers.  But  to one ecies of  lovely   life   this   moist   summer  has  been the   kindest I  ever   remember  in  this   part
of  the  world. Never   have  the  roses  been  so
good.

As a literary  device,  the analogy  between women  and  roses  antedates by centuries even   so  venerable  a  work  as  The   Ro­ mance of the Rose, but Mr. MacLennan's use  of  it  to  talk  of  roses  rather than   of women   is  new.  In   this  brief  memoir  of the  adventures of  a  horticultural Casa­  nova,    he   demonstrates  a   subtlety   of characterization not always evident  in his novels,  powers  of sensuous  evocation and of  <esthetic  discrimination. Though  it  is difficult  to forgive  him  for preferring "Peace"  to   "Helen  Traubel",  no   rose­ grower  can  fail  to  appreciate the  accur­ acy and  the  judiciousness  of such evalua­ tions  as  the  following:

There  are    roses-increasingly  more    of them   every  year- which   resemble   the  big, sun-ripened girls  who  disport themselves on the   beaches  of  Southern  California, drink an  excess  of  orange juice  and  seem  perfect until  you   get   to   know   them:  girls   with faultless bosoms,  waistlines and   thighs, and only   one   limitation:  They  don't  seem   to mean much. Yet   they  are  very  pleasant  to have   around, all  of  them   are  friendly and they   possess  an   advantage  that  great  ones lack; a  man  doesn't mind  giving   them  now and  then  to his friends.

The longest  essay in  the  volume,  "The Classical  Tradition and Education", was originally a public  lecture. In spite of the threadbare topic and  the difficulties of effectively  reshaping the  spoken  into  the

68
 written word,  this is perhaps the most successful   of   the   essays  of  social   com­ ment.  It is   serious  in   purpose,   well argued, and  outspoken but  not  truculent in  expression. It  is  remarkably free  from the   self-deception   and   wishful   thinking which  pervade so many  public  utterances on  the  subject. It  says  forthrightly what  needs  to  be  said  and   usually  isn't-that the  present  emphasis on  popularity and  expediency  in education is  cheating our child1"n  and   that   our   children  are   be­ comirt      increasingly  aware   of  the   fact  and   t'l(Teasingly   frustrated  by  it.   The losses.  =·ncurred in  the  total  abandonment of   h1111anistic  values   in   education are four:  the  loss of  belief  that   life is a  co­ herent  experience;  the   loss of  the  indi­ vidua I and  collective  self-confidence  that  our  £,: refathers  knew;  the  loss of  respect  for  truth  as  something valuable and  un­ assaib1)le  in   itself,  and   the   loss  of  the  belief  lhat education cannot be easy, that  it  doc•  not  lead  to  material security  but to  str 1   ggle,  and   that   at  its  best  it  is  a pilgri11n's progress.
Readers familiar with  other   examples of   M:,-.   MacLennan's  writings    on   the
futun: of literature and  the  rewards  of authorship in  Canada may  be  surprised at  thn  generally optimistic tone  of many of thr: critical essays in  this  book, in  par­ ticular, "Literature in  a  New  Country". No  doubt  this   mellowing  of   attitude is due  in  part to  the  success of  The  Watch that  Rnds  the  Night, the  personal impli­ cations of which  are recorded with charm and    childlike   delight,  insofar    as   such qualities  can   be  expected  from   a  dour  and    self -deprecating   "Scotchman",   in "New  York,  New  York".
It is  a   pity   that   the  editing  of  this volume  falls  so far  below  the  level of its

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW




content auJ  ,tyle. T!Je  Guok is  badly  in need  of cutting. Some of the essays, particularly those on education and on literature, are  not only redundant in con­ tent  but  verbally  repetitious. In addition, the  frequency  of  obvious   typographical errors    indicates   sloppy    proof-reading. Someone, either the author, or  the editor if  Mr.   MacLennan  did   not  do  the   job himself,   should   have   taken   more   pains and   spent   more   time   in   preparing  the manuscript for  publication and  checking the  proofs.  The  book  deserves  it.
MARION  B.    SMITH


IRISHMAN'S
LUCK

BRIAN   MOORE.   The  Luck    of   Ginger    Coffey.
Little, Brown. $4.00.

IN   BRIAN MOORE's  The Luck   of Ginger Coffey another Irish  romantic takes it on the  chin,   goes  down   for  the  count   and comes  up  a  sadder if only  slightly  wiser realist.   The battle takes  place  in  Mont­ real, but as readers of The  Lonely Passion of   Judith  Hearne    and    The   Feast   of Lupercal   might   expect,   when   Ginger  Coffey  hits  the  deck  it  tastes  as  much  of the  ould  sod  as of  the  new  world  and  it might   as  well  be  a  truculent  priest  out of his childhood  counting I-Told-You-So over   him.   As   Yeats'   poems,   O'Casey's autobiography   and   Joyce's   entire  work have   long  since   demonstrated,  there   is no  easy   winning  out   over   the   peculiar bitterness of Irish  childhood. There is no winning  at  all for  Ginger, who  in  defeat  becomes   the   penitent  self-flagellant, al­ most  ready   to  plead   as  many   crimes  as there  are  laws. But  if his bad  luck  begins
 
AMAN POSSESSED
SIDNEY  ll!G 1AN

A  dramatic  novel  set  in  Quebec  city, the   birthplace  of   the   author,   whose first  novel,  Within  These  Boundaries, won wide  critical acclaim.
His  new  novel  is  a  powerful, tragic story of a young man  which  recreates convincingly  the  mood  of   French­ Canadian  society.                             $3.75


POLITICIANS AND THE WAR


LORD  BEAVERBROOK
Re-issue, 2  volumes in  one

The upheaval which  brought Lloyd George  to power  is among the  most dramatic episodes in  British   political annals,  and    the   classic   account  of  it was written by a Canadian who was involved    m   it.   "The  best   stroke  by stroke,  blow  by blow account of British political in-fighting that  has  ever  been written." JOHN   RAYMOND, Sunday Times.  Illustrated.                       $3.50


GEORGE  ELIOT THE WOMAN
MARGARET CROMPTON

From    this   biography,  which   concen­ trates  on  understanding  the  vital   per­  sonality   of   the    woman    behind   the novels,  emerges a  satisfying  portrait of a  truly  outstanding person-a story  to rival  any  Victorian   romance.  Cassell. Illustrated.	$5.7 5

BRITISH  BOOK SERVICE
(CANADA)  LIMITED
1068  BROADVIEW AVENUE TORONTO  6, ONTARIO


6g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW




in  an  Irish   backward of  time,  it  culmi­ nates  in  the  Canadian  present,  and   the opponent  who  flattens   him   (and   many another)  is Montreal.
Let  us say  that  a  novel is an  arrange­ ment  of people,  places  and circumstances designed   to  release  some  corresponding inner arrangement-perceptions, feelings, beliefs-which the  novelist  needs  and wants  to communicate. Here  Moore  gains his force  by an  interplay between  a hard, realistic  head  and  a sympathetic middle. The Montreal in  which  Ginger   puts  up a   losing   fight   for   his  romantic   preten­ sions   is   projected   from   Moore's  hard  head   as  a  reinforced  concrete  cathedral to the  Almighty Dollar. From  the middle, Moore projects  his sympathy  for  all duf­  fers  like  Ginger  who  are  unable   to cope with  the deadly  fact  that  in such a cathe­ dral  pray  usually  means  prey. The  priest of    his    childhood   could    not   convince Ginger that his  personal pretensions would  eventually defeat him, but the priesthood of money spells it out with repeated blows to his self-regard. All fluctuations  in   his   luck   turn    on   this money   pivot   as  one  very  average  Irish­ man's very average humanity is left gasp­ ing in  the  streets,  on  the stairs, in offices, in  elevators, because  it isn't  quite  in  him to   make   it   to  where   the  dollars   flow, keeping  pretensions  afloat.  But   dollars,  mind  you.  For  if Ginger  is  the  poor  fish of  his
the  stream narrows, as a  pal  of  his who has  been  there  tells  him,  to "a  dime  and a dime  and  a dime", and  the  pretensions to none  at  all.
Yet  the  superior force in Moore's arrangement  stems  not  from   this  hard­ headed appraisal of  Montreal  but  from the  over-riding counterforce of  his  sym-
 pathy.   Moore's hard  head   lets  us  know the  discrepancy between  Ginger's  preten­ sions  that   he  is  a  fine  figure  of  a  man  and  the foolish  part  he usually  plays. But his sympathy lets us know  that  those very motions   of  foolishness   move  in   Ginger  from  deeper   than   foolish  levels  of  being which  bring  into  play dignities of loyalty, of self-regard, of  courage, even  along  the downgoing path   he  follows.  His  career  is like a poorly managed, much  thumbed, much  abused text in which  we can  never­  theless  read  our   own   similar   humanity. As  his   luck   goes   down   the   humanity comes  up.  The  nearer  he gets  to the  bot­ tom  (among the Tribune proof  readers), the    closer    he    comes    to    recognisably humane responses.  And  it  is when  he  is most   cruelly   humiliated,  in   court,   that his wife finally  responds with  direct  con­ cern  for him  rather than  for appearances. But   this   doesn't  happen   often   or   help much. Ginger is  too  soft-headed, Mont­ real   too   hard-surfaced  for   a  fair   fight. Mea   culpa,  he   cries   out   finally,   Mea  culpa,   and    another  good   Irishman  is down  the drain.
Moore handles his arrangements with great finesse. One senses that each detail, speech    and    incident  has   been   played back  enough times  to satisfy a scrupulous sensibility.  Incidents are  smoothly   joined, speeches ring right, details are sharply focused-to  a  fault, I  think. Yet   who would   want   to  quarrel with   that,  since The  Luck   of  Ginger   Coffey contains a force  of sympathy unusual in our pinched times  when   the  quality of  mercy  is  not so  much   strained  as  organised.   Shake­ speare  knew   better.  It   droppeth  as  the gentle  rain.    But   that   is   what    Ginger Coffey   wanted  to   believe.   And   he  was wrong.                              WARREN  TALLMAN

BOOKS  IN REVIEW




UNE  POESIE
NON FIGURATIVE

DIANE   PELLETIER    SPIECKER:     Les    affres    du zeste.   MICHELE DROUIN:  La  duegne  accrou­ pie.   KLINE   SAINTE-MARIE:    Les   poemes   de la  sommeil/ante. JEAN-PAUL    MARTINO:   Ob­  jets  de  la  nuit. Editions  Quartz. Montreal.

ALMA DE CHANTAL:   L'etrange saison.  Editions
Beauchemin, Montreal.  $1.50.

LA  POESIE  CONTEMPORAINE   du   Canada Fran<;:ais est  jeune  et audacieuse. Je  n'en veux  pour  preuve que ces recueils  qui me sont  parvenus tout  recemment. Dans  quel autre  genre   que   la   poesie   pourrait-on trouver  des   tentatives  d'expression   ori­ ginale   aussi  nombreuses? En  comparai­ son,   le  roman,  bien   qu'il   soit  pratique par  un  nombre  considerable  d'ecrivains,
 nc semble tenter que des talents conserva­ teurs, tout  heureux de  pouvoir  traiter des sujets   canadiens  par   des   procedes   ro­ manesques traditionnels.
Quatre  des   cinq    recueils    procedent
d'une conception  de   la   poesie  que   la critique  n'est   pas   unanime  a  accepter. Pour   quatre  de   nos   poetes,   la   poesie n'obeit   a aucune regle  precise  de  ven;ifi­ cation   ou  de  rythmique. La  forme  n'est pas   rejetee    pour    autant.   Plutot    cette
forme est   affaire  de   gout  personnel. Chacun des  quatre poetes  en  question  y
arrive   a sa  fa<;:on.  Voyons  ce que  donne
cette  liberte  conditionnee.
Le   plus   :reussi  des  cinq   recueils   me para!t etre Les affres  du zeste de Diane Pelletier  Spiecker. Poete  plein  d'idees  et
de  recherches  verbales,  Diane Pelletier, a
l'encontre  de  tant   d'autres  qui   courent



Arthur (}lfeighen

VOLUME 1:   THE  DOOR OF   OPPORTUNITY
Roger  Graham, B.A., M.A., PH.D.



"Well,  Borden  has   found  himself   a  man," was   the   comment of  Sir   Wilfrid Laurier, then  Prime Minister, after hearing Arthur Meighen's first  major speech. The  young Member for   Portage La   Prairie went  on   to  lead   the  Conservative Party and  become at 46  the  youngest Prime Minister in  the  British   Empire and in  Canada's history.
What  happened  to   make  of   this   brilliant  career  a  political tragedy? Dr. Graham  tells   with   sympathy, perception  and   humour  the   story   of  Meighen's rise  to  power  and sets  the  stage  for  the  tragedy that  inexorably followed. $7.50


Clarke Irwin
TORONTO  -  VANCOUVER

BOOKS IN  REVIEW




vers  un  previsible  echec,  gagne  son  pari. Sa  poesie,  pour  etre  experimentale, n'en reste  pas  moins  structun e.
unite   de   ton   se  fait   sentir   du  premier poeme  jusqu'au dernier. Voici  Laves:

Forteresse vaincue du  chaume de  nos  nuits n'y    aura-t-il   que  violence  excretee du
ventre-feu
qu'innocence   reprochee  sur   rna   paupiere
saine
qui    vaincra   Ia   solitude  multiple  de   nos
jours
que  j'immole l'holocauste sanglant
aux  dunes ensablees de ces chauds desirs et  qu'a l'ivresse du  temple esprit
rna  voix  languisse
et  acrobate vers  une  lourdeur somnolente.

Ce  langage   n'est   pas  si  telegraphique qu'il  ne  se laisse saisir, au moins  dans  un sens ·    large.   Le   procede   qui   consiste   a
donner  aux  substantifs  une  qualite  ver­ bale   ( ici  acrobate)  et  dont  Diane  Pelle­ tier  fait   un  gcnereux usage,  a  le  merite  d'une relative clarte. Dans !'ensemble, ces poemes   sont   d'une  ecriture ferme,   sug­ gestive-et  poetiquc.
Alors   que    l'attrait  de   la   poesie   de Diane Pelletier  sc fait sentir  par  un art elliptique et ordonne, celui de Michele Drouin, resolument experimental aussi, passe   par   !'incantation  et   le  mot   rare. Les pulsations se rapprochent parfois du rythme poetique tel que  nous l'entendons d'habitude; certains vocables, bien places, articulent la pensee:

L'reil a deploye sa robe  et s'etonne aux  mines  alizarines de !'amour
ou  rampent les intermittences de mes paroles en  tenebres

je plains celle  qui  fut  ouverte mais non  habitee
raide sur la  chaise elle enfonce en
courroux ses paumes dans  le temps

porte d'ebene qui  s'ouvre et sc ferme

72
 rien  qui  ne vienne dehors Ia nuit dans l'eau de pluie  decuple Ia rumeur des
males  ferveurs  et   delaie  Ia  songerie dans une  cage  d'ovaires

!'on habite loin  de  chez-elle.
Jean-Paul Martino appartient a cette nombreuse generation de  poetes  qui,  tant au  Canada qu'ailleurs, evoque !'ennui de vivre. Dans  une premiere page de prose poetisee,  ce  leitmotiv apparait des  les premieres !ignes:
Les  heures et  les  jours  passent  ...  Re­ sumer Ia dominance des elements, Ie  voyage  etrange   des    choses,    les   corps    silencieux n'illuminant  meme  plus  les  refuges, le verbe  chair  enseveli, Ia  nuit   universelle,  les  cris dechirants   proferes,  Ies  signes   de  paix   qui  s'annulent; enfin  tout  ce ftot de  realite telle­  ment ecouerant,  qu' il   me    repugne  de I'accompagner.

Lorsque, dans  L'appel du coucou, Mar­ tino  crce  un  paysage  en  demi-teintes, sa poesie  atteint  une  immediatete  indiscut­ able,   qui   fait   de  ce  poeme   une   reuvre tres  reussie:
A Ia berge  les enfants en  maillots courts
S'amusent dans  les quenouilles et les grenouilles
Par  cris  etonnes ils insinuent Ia frayeur
Ce  n'est qu'un signal  respectueux
Pour les  choses  fragiles qu'ils  vont troubler
Soudain dans le  temps bleu  et  le  murmure
Ils  entendent l'appel du  coucou

Il semble s'agir  dans les Poemes de la sommeillante de Kline  Sainte-Marie d'un
'etat  d'ame qui  permet d'apercevoir  cer­
taines verites refusees au commun des mortels.   Non   precisement  a  Ia  maniere des surrealistes, car  la poesie de Kline Sainte-Marie ce  poursuit sur  un  rythme
large  et continu:

!'amant aime  Ia fille aux  yeux  aveugles car  le mystere est  cecite
et   projection  d'antennes  vers   une   seconde lueur

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW




<·ux  tl<'ux ;uuJJH'll<·nt  ·"' <  Y' I('
l'onde du  geste  continu vers  Ia mort
!'invocation incante
Ia syllabe divine du  rien l'endort l'amenuise Ia guerit


Enfin,   les  Poemes   pour  l' haggadah   et le passage emprunte a la psychologic  juive un  ton  a la  fois  plaintif   et  riche  de sug­
gestions  ancestrales. Les  differentes  solu­ tions  techniques que  renferment ces quel­ que  trente pages  annoncent un  talent  qui
apporte a la  poesie  canadienne-franc;aise
contemporaine une  gamme de  sensations inedite.
Alma  de  Chantal, dans  un  tres  mince
recueil  ou  percent le  regret   de  veillir  et sa   tristesse   desabu ee
moderne, trouve  des accents sinceres  pour decrire son Etrange saison:

Qu'importe
Au  jardin clos
Les  fleurs  dolentes
Les  saisons  mortes

Qu'importe
A ceux  qui  s'aiment
Les  visages  d'errance
Les  solitudes lancinantes

Sous  les paupieres prisonnieres Un  gout  de  vent  de  mer  palpite Dans !'arne etrange des  vivants l'espoir toujours renait

Mais  nul  ne sait  comment.


Voici  done  un echantillonnage de Ia poesie qui se fait  actuellement au Canada Franc;ais.  Quatre sur  cinq  des ces recueils
appartiennent a ]'art  non  figuratif-pour
emprunter a Malraux sa terminologie concernant !'art moderne. C'est  dire  que les   poetes   canadiens-fran<_<ais sont   a
l'avant-garde des  ecrivains de  leur  pays et que  leurs experiences, deja  fructueuses,
 constituent  un  exemple   pour   leurs  con­
freres  plus timores.
GERARD  TOUGAS



CHRONICLE
OF TRANSITION

BERE  JOSEPH   GINSBURG.  Generation  Passeth
Generation  Cometh.  Ryerson Press.


THOUGH Generation Passeth .... Gener­ ration  Cometh centres  on  the  hero,  Motl Grossman, the au thor  establishes the  theme  indicated by the  title  in the  open­  ing   section   of   the   novel,   by  extending the   events   back   in   time   through  two earlier   generations.   The  repetition of situations  serves   the   author's   purpose, emphasizing the  inevitability  of  change and  the  tensions  it  generates, and  at  the same  time  indicating the  limits  imposed  on  changby  a  traditionalist society.  A department store in an  eastern European town  is the  unifying element in the story, but  the author fails  to make  of it a force  poetic  or   dramatic  enough  to  seize  on our imagination. The crises in the  history of  the Store,  on  which  the  author dwells at  length-the modernizing of the store's facade  or   later    the   introduction  of   a ladies'   section   or   of   a   ready-to-wear department-not  only   fail  to  move   us, they  fail  even   to   be  mildly   interesting. The  stature of the characters and  the sig­ nificance  of  the events  are  diminished by this  emphasis.
Despite many  knowledgeable and affec­ tionate references to Jewish religious cere­ monies  and  folkways, Generation  Passeth
... Generation Cometh  lacks   authen-


73

BOOKS IN REVIEW




trcrty. The  background of events is too generalized. There are  too few  events  or scenes  that   depict clearly  the  characters in  the  story  or  the  distinctive aspects  of their  society.  When, however,  the author sufficiently forgets  his broad  theme  of change and  continuity, to which  many  of his episodes  are clearly  subordinated, and concentrates  on   his   hero's   inner   crisis, which   develops  first  as  Motl  is torn  be­ tween   the   safe  and   worthy   pattern   of traditional life  represented  by  the  Store and   the   exciting  altruism  of   the  social reformers, and  later  between  the ideal  of service  to which  the  self had  to be sacri­ ficed  and  his own  needs  as  an individual human being,  the  story  not only  becomes dramatic,  but   takes   on  fuller   meaning, reflecting   in  the  individual  the  general  crisis  in  European  Jewish  life  in  a  time of  transition.
The novel  is weakened   by the author's
tendency to present  most of his characters as stereotypes, while his moral  earnestness and  sympathy often  trap  him  into  over­ simplification.  Even   more  serious  is  the fact   that   the   characters  are   presented from   the  outside:  the  author  is  inclined to  tell  us  about  them,   to  report   rather than   present   their   actions  and   sayings. Moreover, his  prose  is  almost  devoid  of verbal  energy  or  subtlety; stock  epithets, trite   images   and   flat   abstractions  fre­ quently  contribute  to  Ginsburg's failure  to  project characters, scenes and  episodes with  clarity  and  force.
Generation  Passeth ... Generation Cometh is  presumably a  first  novel  and as  such   it  is  a   brave   effort,   especially when   one   considers  the   scope   of   the author's endeavours, but it is not a highly successful  one.
M. W. STEINBERG


74
 VARIETIES OF WASTE


PAMELA  FRY.  The Watching Cat. British   Book
Service. $3.50.

MARIAN KEITH.   The Grand   Lady. McClelland
& Stewart. $4.50.

THOMAS H.  RADDALL.   The  Governor's Lady.
Doubleday. $4.95.

THE  CURSE of reviewing bad  books is the temptation to say ill-tempered things which    would   do   no   good   at   all.   The trouble is that  one's  life, during the  time the   books  are   being  read   and   contem­ plated, narrows and  becomes  filled  with insensitivity and  importunity.  The mind  sucks  in  tens  and   hundreds  of  pages  of waste  and  then  regurgitates.
One  fact  unites  the  three  books  I  am now  reviewing; in all their  nine  hundred odd   pages   there   is  not  a  phrase,   not  a word  deployed  with  more  grace  than copybook  grammar, with  more  sensibility than  mere  continuity. Yet  there  is much good  material mis-used  in these books.
Pamela Fry's  The Watching Cat  could
have   been   a  vision  of  evil  and   specific sin, an entertainment with meaning if not true  significance. As  it  stands,   however, it  needs  only  to be shorn  of a chapterful of  sex  and  a  character full  of heroin   to become   Number 47  in  the  Nancy  Drew series.  It has  a  young  lady  "detective", a mystery   house,   a  wicked   uncle,   an   evil housekeeper-wife, a shady  lawyer,  a  jazz­ talking    (sic)    villain   and  a   handsome hero.   The object of  the  hunt  is  Uncle's money   and   they  find  it,  and  true   love, by screwing  off the  top of the newel  post.
Marian Keith's The Grand   Lady  is a waste  in  another way;  it is merely  a  col-

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW




lc cticm
coy observations on  life  in  the  good-old­ days  in  rural Ontario. It  has  no  story;  it  has  only  incident. Its  saving  grace  is that   it  is so sketchily  done that  it seems not   to  be  done   at  all.   Aunt   Flora,   the grand old  lady, deserves  better  treatment, and  maybe someone  will give it to her  in a  better  book  that   will  make  everyone's  Aunt  Flora  come  to life.
Raddall's The  Governor's Lady  is not a  waste  so  much   as  a  shame.   It is  the winner  of Doubleday's $IO,ooo  award  for Canadian fiction.  The novel  would  prob­ ably    have  earned   Raddall    his   ten  thousand  from   the   torn   bodice   crowd anyway.  The shame is  that  it  should  be given  a literary prize.  It  is not  literature, and   those   who   care   will  grieve;   those who don't will be misled.  Let's  be honest;
 The Governor\Lady was given  the  pri;c because it fitted  a formula and  would  pay back   the   publisher    his   money.   It  was given  the  prize  because  that  was the  safe thing   to  do.
The  book  is  history.  It deals  with  the American Revolution  from   the  Loyalist point  of  view.  The  story  is of  Governor Johnnie Wentworth, who was His Majes­ ty's  Representative  in   New   Hampshire when  Sam   Adams   and   his  gang   began throwing  tea  in  the  harbour  at  Boston. Johnnie is a  hard-working man,  incredi­ bly  naive,  with  only  one  thought:  New Hampshire  would  be  the  greatest of  the King's  American  provinces.   He  governs  well  if   not   wisely  and   the1'"e  are   pages upon  dreary   pages  telling   the  reader of his common touch  and  of the huzzahs  he hears  on  all  sides as he  walks  down  any



books from the dent list



CHRISTMAS IN CANADA. edited  by  Flora  McPherson and   M.
J. Barber.  Charmingly  produced, this  book  makes   an  ideal gift.   PRICE-$4.00.

ANERCA. edited  by   Edmund  Carpenter.  A   choice  selection  of  Eskimo poetry  and   drawings.  PRICE:   Paperback  Edition  $2.00. Library Edition  $2.75

AND WHAT DO YOU DO? by  Mavor  Moore. Line   drawings  by Haro Hudson. Twenty-five short  humorous and  satirical verses about occupations to which  modern man  is heir.  PRICE-$1.50.

THE SHAPING OF POST-WAR GERMANY. by   Edgar Mcinnis,  Richard  Hiscock and   Robert Spencer. Here  is  a  significant book  for the  student of contemporary affairs. PRICE-$3.50.


J. M. Dent & Sons (Canada) Limited
!00 SCARSDALE ROAD, DON  MILLS,  ONTARIO
1300 ROBSON STREET,  VANCOUVER 5, B.C.



75

BOOKS IN REVIEW




street.   Comes   the   revolution  and   he  is left  with  only  his  loyalty-poor  clothing in  such  a  harsh  climate.
In the  meantime, however, he  is bedded   by  an  admiring  and   ambitious wench   who  gets  pregnant by  him  while her  husband lies home  dying of galloping consumption. ("Just a minute while I loosen  my  stays.")    From   the  beginning of  their   musket-marriage she  is  at  odds with  convention, and  she spends  a  good deal   of  her   time   being  influenced into bed  by  men   of  influence.  Some  of  this slap  and  tickle  is for  fun,  but  a  lot of it is for  dull  Johnnie who  refuses to believe the  war  will  not  be won  and  who  needs a new posting now that there are thirteen fewer   Colonial  Governors.  In   the  end, after weary years in Nova Scotia, where Johnnie is Surveyor of the King's  Woods, she   reaches   the   pinnacle  of  her  career by entertaining Prince William  royally on his  frequent  visits  to  Halifax. It  is  the Prince who finally makes Governor John­ nie  a  Governor  again, and   on   the  last page  of  the  book  he  returns  triumphant from   England,  his   little   whore   on   his arm,  cuckoldry and  debt  behind  him,  the ladies  and  g,entlemen  of  the  colony  bow­ ing and  curtseying as he makes  his gaudy way up the hill to the governor's mansion.
Those   are  some  of  the   bones  of  the story.  The flesh  is American and  British history,  and   Mr.  Raddall knows  a  good deal  about both.  He  seldom  leaves out  a fact.  And   because  of  this  his  characters have   no   real   life  of   their   own.   They spend   their  time  bowing  to  events.  The only  time  the  novel  comes  alive  is when Prince William  is around. Here,  Raddall seems to have found for a moment a per­ son  he can  love and  laugh  at, sympathize with  and  understand.
 The novel  lacks  sensibility,  sensitivity, a  feeling  for  language. It builds  walls of wooden  narrative and  plaster  dialogue around  the   reader. It  fails  as  a  novel because    it   fails   as   the   work   literature should   be  doing. It  fails  to  create a memorable character, it  fails  to  open  up a  vista,  it  fails  to  illuminate an  era.   It began  by wanting to  do  all  these  things. It ends  by  leaving   the  reader   with  only a sad  memory  of an  author who couldn't quite  cope.                         ROBERT HARLOW


NELSON'S TELESCOPE

Northern Lights, edited by  George E.  Nelson.
Doubleday.  $4-95·

IN I958 Messrs. Doubleday published Cavalcade of the  North, which  they  des­ cribed  on the  title-page as an "Entertain­ ing  Collection  of   Distinguished  Writing by  Canadian   Authors .  . .  Selected  by George   E.   Nelson."  The  collection in­ cluded   Hugh   MacLennan's   Barometer Rising  and  Mazo  de  la Roche's Jalna  in their entirety, stories  by Stephen Leacock, Morley  Callaghan, Ethel  Wilson,  Sir Gil­ bert    Parker,  W.   0. Mitchell,   W.   G. Hardy, Hugh Garner and  others; extracts from   books  by  Bruce  Hutchison,  Lionel  Shapiro and   Gabrielle  Roy;  and  an  ex­ hortation  from   no  less  a  celebrity  than Lord    Beaverbrook.   The  names   are,   in general, those  that  one  would  expect   to see in  a  compilation  of  this sort,  though to be sure there  are some surprising omis­ sions, and  the  collection itself,  while  un­ exciting, probably reflects  the taste of  the average Canadian reader.
The response   was  evidently encourag-

BOOKS  IN   REVIEW




ing enough for Doublcuay's to set Mr. Nelson  to  work  once  more,  and   we are now  offered   Northern Lights, a second "Collection of Distinguished Writing by Canadian Authors", though this one, un­ like  its  predecessor, does  not  promise to be   Entertaining,  with  a   capital  E. Quantitatively   it   outstrips   the    earlier  book,  offering three   complete  novels  in­ stead  of two: 727  pages against  637;  but the  quality of  its  contents is  even  more  variable.
I won't  be rude  about  the titles of these
anthologies, because   the  task  of  picking a  name   that   would  describe   them  accu­ rately  is one  to  tax  far  abler  minds than  mine;  but  I must  register  a slight  wince at   Northern  Lights.  However, Mr.  Nel­ son  starts   off  well  by  offering   us  Adele
 Wiseman's The  Sacrifice and   Judith Hearn by Brian Moore: two novels that surely  deserve  their   place  in  any  repre­ sentative  collection  of   contemporary Canadian literature. The  third novel,  a "whodunit" by  Frances  Shelley  Wees,  is as  bad  a  detective  novel  as  I have  ever read.
Some   of   the   other  selections   in   the book  lead  one  to suppose  that   Mr.  Nel­ son  proceeds,  like  the  eponymous  naval  hero,  by clapping the  wrong  end  of  his telescope   to   a   sightless   eye.   How   else explain  the  inclusion  of an article by Dr.  Marion Hilliard in  a  collection of  "dis­ tinguished Canadian   writing"? In  the pages  of  a  ladies'  magazine  the   breezy commonsense of Dr. Hilliard commanded a   wide   audience,   and   I  am   sure   her


















AN 	ANTHOLOGY

OF 	Canadian  Art

edited by R. H. HUBBARD	$5.50

OXFORD 	UNIVERSITY 	PRESS


77

BOOKS IN  REVIEW




popularity was  well-merited, but  I  can­ not  see that  the  reader  in search  of  "dis­ tinguished  writing"  is  much   better  off for   being   told   that   "quite  a  few  high­  school   boys  have  evolved  zany  methods that  they  are  certain  will  prevent   preg­ nancy".  Nor   can   much   originality  be claimed  for   the  statement,   with   which few  will wish to  quarrel, that  "a  growing  boy   must   learn   to   discipline   his  sex­ drive".
After finding Lord Beaverbrook resting coyly  on   Olympus  in   the   first  of   Mr. Nelson's  harvests,  it comes as no surprise to  find  Lady Eaton represented in Northern Lights  by a piece called "Integ­ rity",  which  reads   like   a    "prestige" advertisement for  the  well-known   chain  of  stores  serving  us,  the  people.  There is this  difference  between  the Lord  and  the Lady,  however:   while  the   Beaverbrook admonition  to  the  young  to  invest  their time  wisely in reading Good Books sounds uncannily like an echo of Dr.  Norman Vincent   Peale,    on    a   ground-bass   of Samuel Smiles, Lady  Eaton  from  time  to time  strikes  a  note  that   is  indistinguish­ able    from    the    stirring   philosophy   of Shagpoke Whipple.
Miss  Mazo  de  la Roche  in her  gossipy little  introduction has this to say:  "After scanning the  table  of contents I find  that I have   not  read   many  of  these  stories. However, this  does  not  much  matter,  as the  names   of  the  authors are  assurance enough  of   the    interest    of   what    they write." I  think   Miss  de  la  Roche's  ap­ proach to literature must  be as infectious as her evident gaiety: it has clearly spread  to Mr.  Nelson, who in his haste  to get the "right" names  in,  appears  to  be satisfied with   some   indifferent  performances by writers  whose reputations  rest  on  better
 work  than  that  which  represents them  in this  anthology.
There is  this  to  be  said,  however,   in
favour  of  this   collection:  it   represents good  value  for  $4.95,  since  the  novels by Brian  Moore  and  Adele  Wiseman  would cost more  than that  if purchased separate­ ly;  it  would  make  a  splendid  Christmas present   for   the   relations to   whom   you usually  send  a year's subscription toM ac­ lean's  or  Chat elaine; it  will go  nicely  on the  shelf  alongside your  enviable collec­ tion  of  Reader's Digest  Condensed Books.
But  I must   remember the  wise words
of  Miss de  la  Roche about critics: "It is so easy  to condemn. To  condemn makes the   critic   appear  clever.   He   is  noticed where  otherwise he might  live or  die un­ noticed. Too  often  the  critic  is one  who has  been  disappointed in  his own  efforts  to make  a name  for  himself  in one of the creative arts.  Sometimes he gives  up  the struggle  and  devotes  his remaining energy  to   disparaging  those who   have   suc­ ceeded."  How    true.    To   condemn  the  volume   under  discussion,  though, must do  less harm  to a critic's reputation than  to  praise  it.
Miss  de  la  Roche ends  her  introduc­
tion   (which   I was  unable, once  started, to  put  down)  by affirming: "No  writing in Canada carries such  influence as journalism. People   who  seldom  or  never read    a   book,   read   the   newspapers.  It seems  to  me  that   among those  who  con­ tribute  articles to  the   press,  the  Rabbi Abraham Feinberg stands out as the most eminent  and   eloquent." I  look  forward to   sampling  the   Rabbi's   work   in   Mr.  Nelson's    next    collection,   which   might  fittingly   be  entitled  Canadian Capers.
TONY  EMERY

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW




FRENCH THOUGHTS ON LOWRY

Les    lettres   nouvelles   5·    (Special   Malcolm
Lowry number).  Julliard,  Paris. 6.70   NF.

SoME  YEARS AGO, in  a  CBC   radio   talk, I  hazarded the   view    that   Malcolm Lowry's  Under  the  Volcano might   well be  the  best  novel  so far  written  in  Can­ ada.   Now,  many   Canadian  novels  later  on  my  reading  list,  I  would  not   be  so tentative in  my  judgment; I have  yet  to meet  its  equal,  and   I  suspect  it  may  be long  before  I do. For  Under the  Volcano is a  book  whose originality of conception and  power of  language take  it far  out  of any  local  context into  the  field of litera­ ture  with  a   world  significance.  Yet Lowry's  significance was local  as well; as
 he caught  the  essential  feel  of the  Mexi­ can  plateau in  Under the  Volcano, so in some of his later  stories he wrote of British Columbia  with   a  lyrical   perceptiveness rare  even among  Canadian  writers  born. Among his other virtues,  he had  the sense of place  exceptionally developed.
For many  Canadians, I suspect,  Lowry
was  disconcerting;  as  a  man   and   as  a writer   he  did   not  compromise, and  one has  to accept  him-as one  should  accept any  artist-on his  own  highly  individual terms.  The effort  is worth  it,  but  it  is an effort   perhaps made more   devotedly   by foreign   readers and   critics   than   by  our­ selves, and  so Lowry  is quickly  becoming  a  prophet outside   the  country  in  which,  if  he  was  not  born,  he  did  most  of  his best  work.  It is an  American  publishing house  that  has  recently   reprinted Under








GERARD TOUGAS
Associate Professor of French in  the  University of British Columbia


HISTOIRE  DE LA LIIIERATURE CANADIENNE  FRANCAISE

A  complete  survey   of  writing in  French Canada  from  I 763   to  the   present day, containing a  pedal
French Canadian literature. Generous bibliographical notes,  together with  an index of all  authors and works  mentioned.

Presses  U niversitaires de  France, I g6o.  286  p. 	Price:  $g.oo


Order  your  copy   from:
UNIVERSITY  BOOK STORE, UNIVERSITY OF  BRITISH  COLUMBIA VANCOUVER  8,  B.C.





79

BOOKS IN REVIEW




the  Volcano, and   now  from  France, in the  series  of  special   numbers   published by the  Paris  review  Les lettres  nouvelles, there  appears a volume  of more than  two hundred pages devoted entirely to Lowry.
It  includes appreciations of  Lowry's work  by such  distinguished French critics as  Maurice  Nadeau  and   Max-Pol  Fou­ chet.   Both   of  them   speak  of   Lowry  in high  terms.  "Since Joyce,  since  the great  Faulkners, nothing as  important, nothing that    goes   farther  or   deeper   has   been offered  to  us by  literature from  abroad." Thus Fouchet speaks.  And Nadeau points out   how,  in  France, in  England and  in America, the admirers of Under the Vol­ cano  are  a steadily  growing  company, as devoted  as   the   admirers  of  Joyce   and Proust   at  comparable  stages  in  the  de­ velopment of their  reputations. Clarisse Francillon  recalls   the   Lowry  she   knew in  Paris.   Anton  Myrer   tells  of  the  in­ fluence   of   Lowry   on   young   American writers.  Stephen Spriel  discusses  the  eso­ teric  aspects   of  Lowry's symbolism,  and Genevieve  Bonnefoi  tells of a pious  jour­ ney  to  Cuernavaca in  which  she  traced  the   parallels  between   the  fictional   and the   actual  worlds   of   the  city   that   lies under   the   volcano.    All   these   are   ex­ tremely  interesting articles  for  those  who



8o
 wish more  than a mere  reading of Under the  Volcano. They are  reinforced  by translations of  poems  and  of  two  stories by Lowry,  together with  a group of letters mostly concerning the period  when Lowry was writing Under the  Volcano.
To  find  this  volume   in  a  Paris  book­ shop   was  a  surprise  and   a  pleasure. It would   be  an   equal   pleasure to  see  a serious  critical study  of Lowry  appearing in  Canada, and  an even  greater pleasure to  welcome  the  publication of the  novel, October   Ferry   to  Gabriola, which   was almost completed at the  time of his death in  1957·                         GEORGE WOODCOCK


LITERATURE OF HISTORY

ROBIN   w.   WINKS.    Recent Trends and   New Literature in  Canadian History. American Historical  Association, Washington.

THis fifty-six  page  bibliographical essay by  Professor   Robin Winks  of  Yale  Uni­ versity  is published by the Service Center for  Teachers of History  of the American Historical  Association, as part  of a series of some  two  dozen  pamphlets on  various  historical problems and  periods  designed  for  the  assistance of high school  teachers. Although the  emphasis is on  the  work  of the  last  two decades  in Canadian studies,  there  is a brief  outline of earlier  develop­ ments    which   makes   clear    the   rapidly rising  rate  of   scholarly productivity. Periodical  literature is  not  included  ex­ cept  for  a  listing  of  some  of  the  leading journals  and   reference to  a  few  of  the most outstanding historical articles  which have  appeared in  their   pages.  If Ameri­  can  high  school  teachers make  extensive

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW




usc  of  this  pamphlet one  must   conclt!UC that   the   teaching  of   Canadian   history south  of the border has advanced well beyond   the   textbook  approach  still   re­ quired by most Canadian Departments of Education.
Whatever high  school  teachers do with this  survey,  there   are  many   others   who should   find   Professor  Winks'   classifica­ tions  and  comments useful  and  provoca­ tive,  including  the   alert  undergraduate, the  graduate  student   beginning  to  "or­ ganize  his field",  and the sceptical general  reader who has always wondered whether there   really  are  patterns  and   trends   in Canadian  historical studies.
A work of this sort  is necessarily  highly selective  and  any  reader familiar with  the subject will  inevitably note  the  omission of some titles which  he considers essential. This  reader  wonders why there  is no mention  of  Everett  C.  Hughes'  French
Canada in Transition or J. G. Falardeau's
Essays   on   Contemporary   Quebec,   al­ though  the   paucity  of  books  on  recent  developments  in   French   Canada  is lamented.
With  the  author's judgments about nearly  all  the  titles  cited  and  his  assess­ ment  of the  most urgently needed further studies   there   can   be  little  quarrel. The  latter  category  includes   more   first-rate biographies, further  investigation  of  the relationships  between  Indian and   white  cultures, and  greater attention to  Cana­ dian    labour   and    business   and   to   do­ minion-provincial relations. Canadian historians are  rightly  chastised for their tardiness  in   appropriating  some   of  the tools  of  the   social   scientists   and  atten­ tion   is  called   to   the   tendency   of   the "Imperial" and   "Laurentian"  schools  of historians to  underemphasize  the  Ameri-
 can  features of Canadian  society.
It is remarkable that  a  pamphlet  pub­ lished   under  such   respectable   auspices  failed  to receive  adequate  attention from  the  proofreader  and   that  several   names  are given incorrectly.
MARGARET PRANG


A FAMOUS EXPLORATION

SIMON   FRASER.   Letters and   Journals, I8o6- I8o8. Edited  with   an   introduction  by  W. Kaye Lamb. Macmillan. $s.oo.

IN 18o8 Simon  Fraser  made his famous exploration to  the Pacific of  British Columbia's main   river.   It is  only  now,
152 years later, that  his Letters and  Jour­ nals are  presented to  the  public  in  any­ thing  like  a  complete or  readable form.  But   there    are   historical   reasons   why Fraser's  writing should  not  have  received  attention  in   the   past.   He   reached  the  Pacific  after  both  Mackenzie in  Canada and    Lewis   and    Clark    in   the   United States,  and  the  only  immediate practical importance  of  his  journey  was  negative; it   proved   that    the   river   discovered  by Mackenzie  was  not   the  Columbia,  and  that   it   was   absolutely   impossible   as   a route  to  and  from  the  Pacific  for  the  fur  trade.
Yet the achievement was in itself extra­
ordinary. Anyone  who has seen the Fraser River  in its canyons  must  find  it  hard  to believe that  any human being  could  have the  hardihood to  descend  it  deliberately in a birchbark canoe,  or could  have suffi­ cient   command over  twenty-three  other men   to  make  them   accompany  him.
Fraser's account of  his  thousand-mile

81

BOOKS IN   REVIEW




journey   to  the  sea  and   back  is  brief,  a bare   fifty-five  foolscap   pages  in   manu­ script,   sixty-seven  pages  in  print.  It has previously  been  available only in a muti­  lated  form,  in  a  book  long  out  of  print,  yet  it  is surprising  how  often  a  number of  its  passages  have  been  quoted. There are  good reasons for  this;  no other  writer  had  ever caught in words so much  of the force  of  the  river  or  the  immensity  of its chasm.   The  power    of   the   description comes,   not   so   much    from   diction   or imagery, as from  the sense of appropriate activity   on  the   part   of  Fraser   and   his men-activity  which   in  its  turn   is  the key to Fraser's character:

Here the channel contracts to about forty yards, and   is  inclosed  by  two  precipices of great heighth, which   bending towards each other make   it  narrower above than  below. It being  absolutely impossible to carry the canoes by land, yet  sooner  than to  abandon them,  all   hands  without  hesitation   em­
barked, as  it  were   a corps  perdu  upon   the
mercy   of  this   Stygian  tide.   Once engaged
the  die was cast, and the great difficulty consisted in  keeping the  canoes in  the medium, or   fil d'eau, that  is  to  say,  clear of  the   precipice  on   one   side,   and of  the gulphs formed by the  waves on the other. However,  thus   skimming along  like  light­ ning,  the   crews   cool   and  determined, fol­ lowed    each    other  in   awful    silence.  And when we arrived at the end  we stood  gazing  on  our  narrow escape  from  perdition. After  breathing a  little, we  continued our  course  to   a   point  where   the   Indians  were   en­ camped

The editor  of the  Letters and Journals, Dr.  W. Kaye  Lamb, has broken  the order of time  in presenting Fraser's papers,  and placed  the  journals and  letters of r 8o6-o7 after   the   journals   of  the  main   voyage. The two years preparatory to the great exploration are  second  in  excitement to the main  event of the navigation of the unnavigable  river,   which   has  become  a
 key part  of the legend of early British Columbia.  Lamb's  unchronological   ar­ rangement is therefore justified,  but  it  is to  be  hoped   that   few  readers  will  fail to go on to the  delayed prologue. It is some­ what    lacking    in   grace,   but   has   both candour and  detail.
On   the  one  hand, Fraser's account of the labor  of establishing a base on the headwaters of  the  Fraser  enhances our admiration for  his conduct of the expedi­ tion  as a  whole.  On   the  other  hand, his objective statement of the  events of each  day  often   plays  hob  with  romantic illu­ sions  about the  fur  trade,  and   his  18o6 journal gives some very frank  glimpses  of the  human  relations in  an  area   new  to the   fur   trade,  where   control  over   the  Indians   is   just    beginning   to   be   esta­  blished:
To prevent others [Beaver Indians] from coming for  women, she  was  taken from  him as  well  as  his  gun,  blanket, axe,  dog,  bow, and   arrows and  etc.   and   he  was  sent   off in  that defenseless manner . . . . However he  did  not  go  without some  reluctance and Mr. Stuart conducting him  out  of the  house and   down the  hill  with  a  kick.  The woman cried most   bitterly after his  departure and we  kept   a  strict  watch over   her   that  she may  not  escape and go  after him.

Dr.  Lamb's treatment of the text has brought out  the  vigor  of Fraser's writing and  the  pace  of his adventures while pre­ serving  an  authentic text.  He  has  inter­ polated  explanatory  notes in   square brackets into   the   literal  text   in  a  way that  clears  up  difficulties of  meaning and  makes  it  read  easily.  Dr.  Lamb has  also written an  introduction to the  text  which adds  very  substantially to  our  knowledge of  Fraser's life  and  family.  The volume  as a whole  is a  work  of real  scholarship, but  the apparatus of learning is concealed rather than paraded, which  is as it should





























Heue is  bistou(Y set to rnasic


------.-.....-
 
Canada's long and lively history has been

/,_....-·-- 	_,.._..}n[Cfrked  by musical milestones ..• songs of a people

/,./·-
:.·.

, 0.:· •.

•.•  ·· \
of a new nat1on w1th rhythm1c  response.
_,  ------··· ..---;:\      / !	Here is a fascinating  insight into vanished days
,. :.. "?      : -· .--'-
. ·$
,:fJ	of their time. Educaters will find this a useful and stimulating collection.
·--	,·I/i
'
{.( :,
.	:\11
E	T  E  X  T  B  0 0	, \
:DIVISION  OF   W. J. GAGE LIJi)TiJD•\
' 	;./\\\ \
Bo><  550, Scarborough. Ontarl<i;, ,
//
' I	\
/ /	1.,	uj

BOOKS IN REVIEW




be.  It is  Fraser   who  occupies  the  centre of the  stage.
In  I8o2 the Edinburgh Review touched very shrewdly  upon  the  power of  Alexan­ der  Mackenzie's  Voyages  to  compel   the interest  of  the   reader.  "There is  some­ thing", it said  "in  the  idea  of  traversing a vast  and  unknown continent, that  gives an   agreeable  expansion  to  our   concep­ tions;   and   the  imagination  is  insensibly engaged   and   inflamed  by  the   spirit   of adventure, and  the  perils  and  the  novel­ ties  that   are  implied in  a  voyage  of  dis­ covery."  I96o  may  be  late  to  recognize the fact,  but Fraser's journals are touched with  that  same  power.
V.  G.   HOPWOOD



LIVING
ON THE EDGE

GUY  BLANCHET.   Search in   the   North.  Mac­
millan.  $s.oo.

MARGARET SHARCOTT.  A Place  of Many Winds.
British  Book Service   (Canada). $s.oo.

IT IS NOT by chance that  these  two books are  bracketed together in one  review,  for they share  at  least one  thing  in common: each  is a contribution to the literature of the  Canadian  frontier. With   Guy  Blan­ chet   the  reader may  soar-usually  in  a one-motor and  perhaps somewhat rickety plane    of   the    I920   vintage-to  snow­ bound outposts beyond  the Arctic  Circle; with   Margaret  Sharcott  he   may   enter  into   the   life  of  an   isolated   fishing  vil­ lage-Kyuquot-on one  of  Canada's most westerly shores, the outer coast of Vancouver Island.
Of  the  two  books  there  is no  question
 which  is the better--Search in the  North. This   is  not   just   because   its  ingredients are  naturally more  exciting, but  also  be­ cause   Mr.   Blanchet  is  a   better   writer  than  Mrs.  Sharcott. He  has a better sense for   the   dramatic  moment,   he  builds   a better   structure, and   he  has  a  richer, a more  controlled, a  more  telling  style.
Search  in  the  North, described on  the jacket  as  "the story  of  the  first  attempt at  prospecting by aeroplane in the  Arctic Barrens," opens  in Halifax in July,  I928, and  ends,  eighteen months later,  in December,  1929. Within these few months the  author led a life of high adventure and  endured severe  hardships. He  also  acquired a  deep  admiration for those  hardy   north-dwellers, the  Eskimos, and  was  obviously  profoundly impressed by the  awesome  beauty of the  land.  For this  book,  written  thirty years  after   the events  it describes,  is a warm  recapturing of  days  long  since  gone; time's   passing has  little  dulled  the  author's  impressions, nor has it taken  the edge off the sense of dramatic urgency  felt especially  in the closing  portions of  the  story.
Nominally  the   account  is  concerned with  a  mining venture in  the  far  north, backed   by Colonel C.  D.  H.  MacAlpine of  Toronto and   his  associates.  Actually Mr.  Blanchet, who  was in  charge of  the expedition that  established an operational base at  Tavani on  the  west coast  of  Hud­ son Bay, says little  or nothing about min­  ing  as  such.  And  at  no  time  does  he go into   any  of  the  technical  aspects  of  the whole   affair.  He   was  apparently much  more  interested  in   the   country  and   its peoples,  and  in  the  actions and  reactions of  men  under the  general stresses  of  the seasons, or when faced  by the particular stresses  encountered  while   travelling  by

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW




water,   by  1.-tnd, :md,  most  PspPcially, by a1r.
Blanchet himself  was  not  a  pilot,  but
of the  pilots  who came  to  him in this far North he writes  with  admiration and affection, tempered  on  occasion   by  irri­ tation   and   amazement  at  their  actions.  They   were  bush  pilots  all,  and  all  flew by  the   seats   of   their   pants.   Over   un­ chartered  lands   and   through   unbeliev­  ably  hazardous  weather  they  took  their small,  single  engine   planes,   and   trusted  to  luck   as  well  as  to  skill  for  survival.  True,  they  wrecked   five  planes,   though loss of life there  was none-either among  the  pilots  or  among those  who  flew with them.  But  most   of  them   died   violently later:

Vance  crashed into   Great Bear  Lake   in a misty  landing; Andy  was found in  the wreckage  of   his   plane  among  the   rocky hills   north  of   Great  Slave   Lake;  Sutton caught a  wing   when   flying  too  low  over  a lake.   Broach, lighthearted,  sometimes  irre­ sponsible   but    an    outstanding   pilot,    was caught in  a  tailspin too  close  to  the  ground when   testing  a   plane; and   Bill,  my  com­  panion  in   so   many  camps   and   flights, always  unselfish and   game,  tried  to  fight his  way   through an  Arctic  storm   once   too often.

Such  is  the  epilogue to  Search  in  the North, a work  written with  modesty, sin­ cerity,  and  authenticity. Though it  deals with  a small  slice of time,  it  nevertheless makes   a   valuable   contribution  to   the story  of Canada's  north.
Mrs.    Sharcott's  A    Place    of   Many Winds stands in sharp contrast to Search in  the  North. In  itself  the  book is not remarkable.  But   what   is  remarkable  is the  fact  that  the  book  was written at  all. Mrs. Sharcott is the wife of a professional fisherman, who  trolls  the  reef-studded Pacific  waters  on  the  west  coast  of Van-
 couvcr  Island. She  is also  the  mother of two lively children and  her  days are filled with  household   duties.  Though  her  for­ mal  education stopped at  Grade Twelve,  she early  resolved  to  be a writer and  the modest   success  already   achieved   is  the result  of her  determination and  courage.  This   is  her  second   book  and   in  it  she continues   the   tranquil  pattern   set   in Troller's   Holiday,  published  a  year   or two  ago.  Basically  she  writes  about  what  she   knows   best-her  daily   life   in   and around  the   isolated    village,    Kyuquot. From  her  we learn  something of the lives of the coastal  fishermen, of housing prob­ lems, of the  passing  of the  seasons, of the bearing    of   children.   Occasionally   she ventures    into   the   historical  past,   and gives  some   evidence   of   study   and   re­ search.   In  her  mild   way  she  is  writing


The
Fiddlehead

a arterly Jlfagazine of Prose and Poetry

For  a subscription to THE  FIDDLEHEAD, or  a sample copy, apply to  THE FIDDLEHEAD,  University of  New Bruns­ wick,  Fredericton, N.B.   1   year,  $2.00;
2  years,  $3.75; 3  years,  $s.oo.

BOOKS IN   REVIEW




her  own  Measure of the  Year, but,  alas, she   is  not   a   female   Haig-Brown. Her materials,  pleasant  enough   in  a  homey sort of a way, are lacking in depth and insight,   and   her   style  is  still  far   from well-formed. True, it is plain  and  simple; but  it  lacks  variety,  richness, vigour, ani­ mation-in short,  life.
Yet  I wish  her  well, for I did  sense  in
the latter part  of this work a definite improvement, both  in  matter and  man­ ner.   She   is  a  woman   of   character  and from  her  hard-earned  typewriter may yet come  writing of  genume  merit,   perhaps even  distinction.                          s. E. READ


BRIEF REVIEWS

Klondike Cattle   Drive   (Mitchell  Press) is the  journal written by the rancher Norman Lee when  he tried to take a herd of two hundred cattle north from the Chilcotin  plateau  to  the  Yukon   during the gold  rush  of I 8g8. Lee has been dead more  than   twenty  years,  and  his  journal was  written  more   than   sixty  years  ago, but  now,  published for  the  first  time,  it opens  out  with  astonishing  freshness.
Lee's venture was Quixotically imprac­ tical;   bogged   down  on  quagmire roads,  with  little  feed,  the cattle died  or starved  to  walking   skeletons,  and   the   freezeup caught  Lee  before  he  could  get  the  sur­  vivors down to Dawson  City. He  was left to make  his way through the  winter,  and almost  penniless into  the bargain, from Telegraph Creek  down  to  Vancouver at a time  when  no regular transport existed. With  an  appealingly rough  irony  he tells his story-the hardships, the  disappoint-

86
 ments,  the  dangers-and it  all  gains strength from  being  recounted by a man who  never  expected that  his diary  and  its sharp little  drawings would  find  the light of publication and  reveal his odd and amiable personality to  posterity.

* 	* 	*
ITs   PUBLISHERS   claim   that   The  True Face  of  Duplessis  by  Pierre  Laporte (Harvest House  $1.50)  is "the first of the critical biographies" of Duplessis. Mr. Laporte's book is certainly critical, but equally   certainly  it  is  not   a  biography, since  it  does  not  even  attempt to  tell  us the  life of its subject. Rather it is a Character, a portrait of Duplessis  as a personality, built up like a pointilliste painting by the accumulation of hundreds of   anecdotes  and   fragmentary   impres­ sions.  There is  almost   no  chronological structure  to  the  book,  and  little  definite­ ness  to  the  lines  of  the  portrait, but  an impression is indeed  created in the  mind,  an   impression  of  a   rather  Protean and shallow    individual   almost    wholly    un­ interesting outside  his  political   life.  Per­  haps   that   is  all  Duplessis   was;  perhaps that   is  all  really  professional politicians ever  are.  But  Mr.  Laporte's book  would certainly  have  been  more  interesting to the  reader  from  outside Quebec if it  had been given at  least some of the  apparatus of real  biography, and  particularly a his­ torical   preface  to  fit  the   portrait  more securely into  the context of those political events    among   which    alone    Duplessis seems  to have  come  alive  as a man.

* 	* 	*
AT  ITS  Ig6o   meeting  Section   Iof   the Royal   Society   of  Canada  chose   for  its subject  a  study  of Quebec between   I9IO

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW




and  l!:J::J.J,   tlw  [Wiiml   during  wl1ich,  in the  view  of  the  conference's  organisers, the  influences   that  shaped modern  Que­ bec  were  formed and  matured. The  dis­ courses  have  been  collected in  a  volume entitled  Aux   Sources   du   Present-The Roots    of	the    Present	(University   of Toronto  Press,   $4.00).   Three of   them are   of   special    interest   to   students  of literature in  Canada. In  a  very  informa­ tive   essay   Leon   Lortie   explores    "The English   Contribution  to  Quebec's  Cul­  tural Life", while Jean  Beraud reminisces interestingly on  the  drama in  his  "Sou­ venirs  de theatre, I910-35". On  the other  hand,  what   might   have   been  the  most interesting  subject    of   all,   "Litterature, I9IO-I935", is  treated  by  Guy  Sylvestre with  disappointingly  generalised  brevity.

* 	* 	*


The Mackenzie King Record VOLUME I, t939-44
BY   J. W.  PICKERSGILL

This volume  is  a  record,   made largely   by  Mackenzie King  him­ self,    of   his   leadership   of   the  Government of  Canada  from  the Declaration of War  by  Canada to the  end  of  May,   I944·  From  Mr.  King's detailed and  meticulously kept  diary,  Mr.  Pickersgill   draws  his amazing record  covering many
 TuE RE-ISSUE of The Bla ted                a paperback edition  (Macmillan, $1.75)  is a welcome event.  For those who do riot already   know  this  amusing volume,  it  is "an  anthology of Satire, Invective and Disrespectful Verse" by Canadian writers (with  one  or  two  visitors  from  over  the border  or the  Atlantic), selected  by F. R.
Scott   and   A.   J. M.  Smith, able  satir­
ists both.  The editors   perhaps go a  little far in describing it as "a  bomb  to blast complacency". Rather, it  is a fusillade of squibs;  some  of  them   are  lively  enough to   make   the   heels   of  conformists  skip with  a  merry   clatter,  but  others   are  as damp  as the  dampest Canadian morning. In   this,   as   in   everything  else  literary, Canada  seems   to   come   of   age  in   the present  century, and  so there  is the same split  evident   here  as  in  all  other   Cana-



of the most exciting  and  important events  of the  war years. He shows, in particular, the  interrelationship between  Mackenzie King and  his Cabinet  ministers,  and    between the governments of Canada, the United States,  and  Britain. "The Literary  Executors of Mackenzie King  made  a knowing decision  in
giving to the care of J. W. Pickers­
gill the story of the war  as the late
Prime   Minister  entered  it  in  his
diary."  - Saturday  Night.  728 pages;  6 x 9;  illustrated; $I 1.50.

University of Toronto Press

BOOKS IN REVIEW




dian   anthologies-some mightily  heavy­ handed  stuff   by  our   pioneers  in   satire  (Standish  O'Grady  and   Alex  Glendin­ ning  and   Judson France and  so forth), and   some  sharp and   rapid  rapier   work by such  modern experts  at  thrust-rather­ than-cut as  Klein,  Page, Reaney, Birney and  the  editors  themselves.


INDIANS
GOOD  AND BAD

ETHEL     BRANT    MONTURE.    Famous Indians: Brant,  Crowfoot,  Orohyatekha. Clarke   Ir­ win.  $2.50.

JESSIE  L. BEATTIE. The Split  in  the  Sky. Ryer­
son  Press.  $4.95.

SARA EATON.  Mocassin and  Cross.  Copp Clark.
$2.95·

THREE  recent   books  on  Indians  reverse the  traditional and  more  interesting idea that  the  only  good  Indian is a dead  one. But,  lo, the  poor  Iroquois! Those  in Famous  Indians and  The  Split  in the Sky are  so  sickeningly  good  that   dead   they are.   Those  in   M ocassin   and   Cross> a novel for juveniles which centres on the Canadian martyrs, are so sketchily drawn at   the   climax,   the   massacre,   that   their badness  is forgiven  and  forgotten.
This   last   book  however   does  at   least
attempt to tell a credible  and interesting story  for  young   readers. Jean   Amyot,  a boy  of  twelve,   goes  to  Huronia,  where he meets such missionaries  as Brebeuf, Lalemant and  Jogues,  and  eventually grows  to be a hunter, a scout, and  the carpenter  who  plans  a  mission  fort.  On his arrival he  becomes  a "brother" of Tondakhra,  also   about   twelve,   and   is given   the   Indian  name   Tawahon. The

88
 boys'  adventures over  fifteen   years  lead the   narrative  to   the   martyrdom.   Miss Eaton attempts to re-create the sense of helplessness, danger and futility  in the missions,  as  well  as  to  give  some  know­ ledge  of  the   Indians  and   of   Canadian history.   But  when   March,  1649  arrives,  and  the Iroquois finally strike, the author, probably   hyper-conscious  of   the   over­ publicised sensitivity  of the present-day juvenile,   hedges;    she   plays   down    the blood-curdling massacres  which  have been  promised, and  thereby  betrays  her readers. Yet,  although the  characters are generally flat  and   indistinct, the  reader is aware of  at  least  some  variety  among the  Indians. Some  are  far  from  good.
In  Famous  Indians, on the other  hand, the    reader   finds   only   good    Indians: Brant, Crowfoot and  Orohyatekha, better known  as Dr.  Peter  Martin, the Canadian physician who  established the  Independ­ ent   Order  of  Foresters in   Canada,  all emerge  as paragons of virtue, as examples of  how-to-be-good-Indians-even-though­ live-ones.   The short   biographies  are   no doubt accurate, but  the  presentation sug­ gests  that   until  Canadian history  is  writ­  ten  with  some style it will not  be read.
The  author  of   Famous   Indians   was
born    on   the    Indian   reservation   esta­ blished  by Joseph Brant, her  great-great­ grandfather, and   is  vaguely  related also to  Orohyatekha. She  apparently had  no blood  ties with  the  Moccasin band  of the Blackfoot tribe,  but  by including  Crow­ foot  she  makes  her  book  partly   western  and   more  "Canadian".  Perhaps because  the author is not  personally  involved  with him, Crowfoot is the  most human  among these   portraits,  but   none   of  them   will excite  the  imagination. Instead, imagina­ tion  may  merely  be staggered  by Brant's

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW




well-composed  deathhl'd   ullcran<'l',  hy the   dying   Crowfoot's  answer   to  "What is Life?", and  by the sentimental doggerel found   in  Dr.   Martin's  pocket   after   his death.
The Brantford birthplace of one author is also  the  birthplace of the  "integrated" Indian  who  visits  his  old  home  in  The Split   in  the  Sky. Alex  Mason   was  born an  Iroquois, but  his father renounced Indian status and  moved  the family to Buffalo where the boy was raised in a conglomerate area  and  then  educated at the  university.   When  his father died  and before   going   to   a   teaching  job,   Alex made  a  pilgrimage to Canada to see the land    of   his   fathers,  just    as   any   red­ blooded,  crew-cut, white  American might  do. Over  one summer, he was introduced to present-day Iroquois customs,  political,  social,  religious  and,  romantically, mari­  tal.
The  author of  The Split   in  the  Sky
hopes  that  "the Great Spirit   [will]  guide us   to   a   better    understanding  of   our Indian brothers." They have  the  same emotions,  the   same   sun   and   sky  and earth, even  though they  treat them  dif-
 fcrently; they usc the same cars and electricity,  send  the  same  post  cards,  eat the   same   succotash :   and   certainly the Longhouse  People  are as religious as their Christian  fellows.   The  author's idea   is no  doubt   valid,   but   Alex  Mason   is  the most  thoughtful, the  most  mannerly, the most    well-spoken,  the    most   mealy­ mouthed  and   the   most   wooden   Indian ever  to  beset  a  page.  This is  fiction,   a "story   built   upon   fact". But  no-one   in fact could  be so colourless  as Alex Mason.
After  reading these  books one  wonders
what  the  poor  Indian, and  especially  the poor   Iroquois,  has   become.   If one  can judge from  them,  in the seventeenth cen­ tury   the   Iroquois  had   some   character, some  individuality, all  formed   by  hard­ ship  and  wrapped in  superstition; he ran hot  and  cold,  like  a  human being.  Over  the  next  two  centuries he  became  trusty,  loyal,  helpful,  brotherly, courteous, kind
-a Rotarian  without gusto.  Now  he  is
an   imitation   paleface.  How   well-inte­ grated  he must  feel as an anthropological, sociological,   historical   (and   Canadian) subject!
GORDON R. ELLIOTT



















8g








ANTHOLOGY ON THE AIR




I THINK that  many of the faithful who  listen,  perhaps often  a little grimly,   to   the   C.B.C.   programme   An­ thology    each    week    during   its   season would  be agreeably surprised  if  they were to  read   the   scripts   they  normally   hear. Transmitted in  this  way,  a great  deal  of the  poetry  and  most  of  the critical  pieces appear of higher  quality than  they do on the  air.  In   the  case  of  the  short  stories and  extracts  from  novels it is more  diffi­ cult   to   judge,   because   for  so e·
the  aura of  presentation  is  more   likely in  these   cases  to  linger.   It is  the  aura that  hangs  around university  writers  and the  idea  of Canadian arts.  Although the reading of  poetry  on  Anthology1   is often awkward,  self-conscious,   or   siinply   ab­ surd,   and   the   critical  articles i. arfre­ quently rushed   through as if the speaker were certain that  his only audience could be deprecating colleagues, embarrassment evaporates more  quickly  than  sham,  and  so one remembers such contributions with a  certain  affection.  Also,  one  gets  more quickly   to   what    is   being   said   in   the material itself  when  it  is not  gilded  with the   tones   of  those   who  have   a  special accent  for  literature.
That  this   material  rarely   appears at

go
 




Chester Duncan


its  best,  of  course,   is  due  partly   to  the failure  to   realize   consistently  that   An­ thology, after   all,  is  broadcast, and  that  articles, stories, and  especially  poems have to be very carefully considered in relation to their  fitness for aural communication. I grant that  sometimes  we make  too much  fuss about what  is or  is not  "good  radio" or   "good   television", forgetting  that quality   itself    has   a   will   and    a   way through  superficial  difficulties,   but   in  a country  where  the  reading of poetry  and  good  prose  is infinitesimal in  comparison with,   say,  the   hearing  of  music,   many mistakes  of assumption can  be made. Not that   broadcast  poetry   need  be  empty  or thin.   It just  has  to  be  particularly  good to   hear,   from    its   sound,    or   wit,   or wisdom.
But  it  is  not  in  individual items  that the   most   interesting  weakness   of   An­ thology is  to  be  found. These  items  are frequently  first-rate, and,  after   all,  this would   be  more   than  adequate  justifica­ tion  for    the   programme's  existence. Nevertheless,  to  seize on  the  quality and  meaning   of    Anthology   in   relation   to Canadian  culture, one  has  to  remember that it  is a  broadcast programme, that  it is  a  kind  of   literary magazine with  edi-

OPINIONS  AND NOTES




tors,  anJ  tl!at,   cunsiJeriug  its  emphasis and  standards, it is bound  to be regarded as "a  good  thing" by those  who  support Canadian arts.
It has always struck  me as strange that Anthology, with  no more  serious  purpose, should   sound   an   altogether  more   for­ bidding  note    than    C.B.C.   Wednesday Night.   Very    experienced    broadcasters and   broadcasting  executives   have   been associated   with  Anthology, but  generally speaking they  have  not  been  able  as yet to  cut  the  knotted  tensions  or  the  heavy atmosphere  of   "the   worthy   effort".  As Anthology moves around the country you can  hear  the  local  editors  lisp  their  self­ consciousness    or   echo    the    sepulchral dead-pan  which  was   for   so  long   the signal  of its  Toronto  emanation. Despite Anthology's many  good  works, it has had,
I think,  an  unfortunate broadcasting per­ sonality,   a  personality  almost  never  en­ thusiastic, witty  or  relaxed.
Secondly,  Anthology is not really an anthology  but  a  weekly  radio   magazine, and   I  think   its  editors   are  forced  by its half-hour length  into  a very  difficult situation. You  cannot really  make  a magazine out  of one  or  two  items  unless it  is  a  special   edition, and   the  intensity of  the  main   piece,  if  it  happens to  be good,   may   seem   excessive   unless   it   is heard  in  the  company of more  than  one less  intense   smaller  items.   I   think   that one  hour  is  the  minimum time  required if a  proper and  natural magazine tone  is to  be established. Even  children's  maga­ zines  on  radio  or  television  usually have an hour.  Lately  the material of Anthology has   taken   a  good   turn  into  interviews, essays and   humorous  writing. All  that  is now  required is  that  the  programme be allowed  to  breathe a  little.  As a  listener
 and  hanger-on, I  would  appreciate hear­ ing  more  radio  editorial comment,  news, and   notes  on  current Canadian  literary  behaviour,  and   I   think   that   the  effect of  the  more   "creative"  items,  heard   in such a setting,  would  be greatly improved on   the  intellectual and   historical   level.
The   third   point   I  have  to  make  will blot   and   spread   to  the  others.   It  con­ cerns  the  obstacle  that  sincere  and  ideal­ istic  Canadian  lovers  of  the  arts  nearly always   find   too   much   for   them   when they  wish  to  witness  to  their  faith.  Per­ haps  it  is  because  so much  of  the  semi­ literary   journalism in  Canada is of  such shoddy  quality  that   people  are  inclined to think  that  there  is a gulf  between  good journalism   and    "serious"   writing,   and  that   being  readable and  straightforward and   gay  is  somehow   a  sign  that   one  is too  simple   to  be  civilized.  Thus   Cana­ dian   magazines  of   artistic   consequence, whether  in  print  or  on  the  air,  have  a tendency   to  gather  to  themselves  a  tone of  self-righteous and  pompous  gravity,  as if  the  business of the Canadian arts  were too  serious  for  any  but  the  most  verbally dexterous  kind  of  frivolity.   There is  no denying   the   merit   and   even   charm   of many   of   the   individual  items   in   the Tamarack  Review  and   in   the   C.B.C.'s M usic...i)iary, to  take  two  cases in  point, but   amid   the   encircling  gJoom  of  the editorial   personality	(not    particularly lightened  by  an   occasional   determined humour)  their   sparkle   is  dimmed.  Per­ haps  the  secret  is to stop  thinking  about  the  elevated  importance of  the  arts,  and to  think   of  them   more   as  a  matter  of course,   our   bread   and   butter.  It is  no use elevating literature if this means  that  you  simply  put  it  on  the  shelf,  unread, unheard.

OPINIONS  AND NOTES




Anthology has  certainly not  been  able to  keep  itself  free  from  a  certain   air  of literary  piety, which, interestingly enough, would  seem very old-fashioned in an approach  to  the  performance of  music, an   art   about   which   we  Canadians are much  less self-conscious.  It is true, of course,   that  many    serious   writers    in Canada are, in their  social  relations, pre­ tentious bores or giggling or hissing hiero­ phants,  and   it  is  difficult at  times  to keep   this   kind   of   disadvantage  out   of their   occasional   writing   and   broadcast­ ing. So it is not  always  Anthology's fault  that  things  go  the  way they  do.
To  speak critically  of a programme usually  means  that  more  time  is devoted to  its  faults   than   to  its  virtues.  Besides, it's  easier  to  do  that. Yet  it  would  be  a serious  mistake   to  leave   the  impression that    Anthology  has  been  only  a  brave try.   It would   be  impractical  to  try  to list  the   successes  it   has  had   in  several years  of  life,  but  they  have  been  many and  definite.  Most  important of all is the fact  of its steady  offer  of encouragement to those Canadian writers  who have  with integrity avoided   the  slick  and  commer-
 cial,  and   its  equally   steady  offer  of  en­ couragement to  those  listeners  who  have found, willingly  or  unwillingly, that  they need  these  writers.


CANADIAN PLAY COMPETITION

Quite recently, the  Canada Council awarded a grant of  $s,ooo to  the  Mani­ toba   Theatre  Centre  towards   the   pro­  duction  of  a   new   play  by  a  Canadian writer.  We   have  not   as   yet  decided exactly   how   we   are   going   to  select   a suitable play,  but  it  appears  certain that  it  will be  either by direct  commission   to a reputable Canadian  writer  or by means  of  a  competition  open  to  Canadians. It is our  intention  to award   $I,ooo to  the playwright,  and   also   produce  the   play by the  end  of  I g6 1.
My  purpose in  writing  to you is to ask if you would be kind enough  to invite interested  writers  to  communicate  with me  at  500-232  Portage Avenue,  Winni­ peg  I, Man.                       STANLEY   MILLAR




