$2.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·49

Summer) 1971



VIEWS OF NOVELISTS


Articles

BY  STANLEY E.  MCMULLIN, ANTOINE SIROIS, HUGH HOOD, FRANK BIRBALSINGH, FRASER SUTHERLAND, ESTHER JAMES

Chronicle

BY  MARGARET ATWOOD

Reviews

BY  RALPH GUSTAFSON, GEORGE WOODCOCK, MARGARET ATWOOD,
DOUGLAS BARBOUR, AUDREY THOMAS, W. F. HALL, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, ROGER  LEMOINE, RICHARD GIGUERE, JACK WARWICK, PHILIP  STRATFORD, C.  J. FOX, L. T. CORNELIUS, FRED COGSWELL, W. H. NEW

Check List
THESES IN ENGLISH CANADIAN LITERATURE,  1969-70


A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









CRITICISM
AND OTHER ARTS




THERE HAS LONG  SEEMED a division between the journeyman critic-the  public  critic  as  Northrop  Frye calls him in  his formidable  master­ piece  Anatomy  of  Criticism-and the  academic  critic. The  academic  critic  is always  tempted  to analyse  the  work of literature  as if it existed in  vacuo, apart  from  life;  this  inclination   was  particularly  strong  among  the  New  Critics  who until recently were so influential  in our universities and who regarded the author's  life and  even his intentions  in writing a poem or a book as irrelevant to the close, enrapt  study  of the  text  itself. Frye's  public  critic, on  the  other  hand,  is more inclined to see the work in total context, relating it not only to the man who makes it, but also to the public that reads it.
On  this subject  let me continue  by quoting  Frye, writing in Anatomy of Criti­
cism as one of Anglosaxony's leading academic critics:

It is the task of the public critic to exemplify how a man of taste uses and evaluates literature  and  thus show how literature is to be absorbed into society.... He has picked up his ideas from  a pragmatic study of literature and does not create or enter into a literary structure.

This  would  be a fair  portrait  of such  excellent practicing  critics as Edmund Wilson and V. S. Pritchett, and I would ask for no better description of the course which  I myself have followed. But Frye has always seemed  to stand  in awesome separation  from such lowly practices, and I know "public  critics" who regard him as The  Enemy  personified  and  see, in  the formidable  intellectual  edifice he has built  up  to  contain   and  categorize  literature,   a  veritable  palace  of  pedantry. Fortunately, as I shall suggest,  Frye's architecture  is not  as consistent as it may seem.


3

EDITORIAL



In  one of the  two books which Frye has recently  published  almost simultane­ ously (The Stubborn Structure: Essays in Criticism and  Society, Cornell  Univer­ sity Press, $8.50)   he shows himself in his customary  guise as the  academic,  the critic  whose  relationship  to  literature  is essentially that  of  the  Mandarin. It is characteristic of  Mandarins  that  they seek precedent,  of  Mandarin critics that they operate  by afterthought; Mandarin criticism  considers literature after it has happened, as a phenomenon  already frozen into the past.  (In  Anatomy of Criti­  cism I found  references-and usually unimportant ones at that-to only eleven poets living at  the  time the  book was  written,  and  all of them  were  poets with reputations formed a generation before.)  Though Frye has disputed the "aesthetic  view  of  the  work  of art  as an  object  of  contemplation''  (see  Herbert   Read's  Poetry  and  Experience for an effective counter-argument) he does tend neverthe­ less-in his academic persona-to observe the works of the past in detachment, and  therefore  as  objects, even though  he may view them  in contexts whose his­ torical,  ethical,  archetypal  or rhetorical  nature  is stressed. The  main  difference here  between  Frye and the aesthetic critic is that  Frye goes a stage  beyond con­ templating  the  object;  he  creates for  contemplation a  critical  ceuvre  that  is as complexly  structured  and as filled with allusive resonances as any poem:  it is an object  in  itself. I have long ceased to view the  Anatomy of Criticism as a hand­  book of  real practical  value to the critic. It is, rather,  a great and  intricate  edifice of  theory and  myth whose true purpose is its own existence; it has the same ulti­ mate effect as buildings like Angkor Wat or the Sainte Chapelle, which were built to exemplify  religious truths  and  which survive, when  their  message is forgotten or  derided,  as objects whose sole meaning  to  modem  man  lies in their  beauty. Though I am sure Frye would shudder  at the company  I here make him keep, he has  exemplified  more  effectively than  Wilde  himself the  latter's  argument that criticism is primarily a creative process, leaving its masterpieces to impress and to move by their skill and grandeur  long after  their subjects  have ceased to interest us.
The  Stubborn Structure, for the most part,  shows this critic-creator  Frye, this maker  of myths for his readers to discover, at somewhat  playful work. The  essays of which  it  consists were either  presented  as papers  at  academic  conferences  or published in scholarly  journals. They fall into two categories. The  first is the kind of  general  and  rather  abstract  measure  which  is stepped  out  in  those  solemn dances where academics show their parts by taking set subjects and elaborating elegantly upon  them.  Frye is a past master at this kind of conferential entertain­ ment, but I confess that I find these tribal exercises as tedious to read as to attend.

4

EDITORIAL



There  are  undoubtedly  profound  and  provocative  thoughts  embedded  in such papers  as  "Elementary Teaching  and  Elemental  Scholarship" and  "On  Value Judgments" (especially  indeed  in  the  latter  piece),  but  I confess preferring  to search  out  my  diamonds  at  muddier  levels, nearer  to  life or,  for  that  matter, nearer to literature as a direct and particular  experience.
One  is admittedly  closer to living literature  in the later essays of The  Stubborn Structure, which  Frye  collectively entitles "Applications", and  which  deal  with aspects of Blake, Milton,  Dickens, Arnold, Yeats, literary  utopias, etc. Yet it is in these  essays that  one  learns  just how  stubborn  Frye's  structures  may  be, even though  they  are  elaborated  with the ease and  lightness of a spider  constructing its web, so that  it is not until the essay ends with some final sentence which com­ pletes the  pattern   (e.g.  "Just  as in  Eliot's  'Burnt  Norton'  the summit  of  vision and  the  depth  of annihilation are the same  point, the still point  of the turning  world, so in Yeats the top of the tower is both the rag-and-bone shop of  the heart and  the translunar Paradise  that  the heart  alone has created.") that  we realize we have  been  trapped   by threads  of what  seems to  be gleaming  gossamer and absorbed mentally into a structure  of invisible adamant.
In  such  categorizing  criticism, no matter  how faithfully  the glitter  of its  con­ structions  creates an illusion of movement and vitality, literature  "lives" rather  as it  does  in  a  museum  of  natural   history -the specimens superbly  stuffed  and classified, arranged in attractive  displays and fitted into families and genuses. But birds in real flight?  Never. For that  one needs the field naturalist, the man  who follows literature   as it  appears,  who submits  himself to  the  biographical  heresy and  the intentional heresy and the aesthetic heresy and  by all these and any other means seeks to stimulate  his empathetic  understanding of the work. In other words, not the Mandarin, not the academic critic, not the structuralist with his beautiful webs and mind-made palaces, but our humble servant, the public critic.
We no sooner  voice that  need, in terms of literature  in Canada, than  the man
himself appears  at our elbow, Northrop  Frye, critic for all seasons, appearing now in a guise that  should  dismiss all apprehensions of unregenerate pedantry.  For in The  Bush Garden  (Anansi,  $7.50), Frye's second book of the year, he presents himself as nothing  more formidable  than an astute and rather  genial public critic. In  the  intervals  of  building  critical  cathedrals  and  pursuing  myths  to  inhabit them,  of cogitating   brilliantly  on  Blake and  Shakespeare  and  Milton,  Frye  has not neglected the literature of his own country, and The  Bush Garden is a collec­ tion  of the essays and  reviews he has written  over the  past quarter of a  century  on Canadian writers and  writing.


5

EDITORIAL



The  first half  of the  book contains  what  Frye  wishes to  preserve as the  best portions  of the annual  surveys of Canadian   poetry  which  he contributed  to the University  of  Toronto   Quarterly  between  1950  and  1959,  a  brilliant  ten  years' examination  of whatever  was new in one of Canada's most vital poetic decades. The  rest is made  up of miscellaneous articles on Canadian writers and  painters; it ends with the powerful analytical survey of the relations between literature  and society in  Canada since colonial times which  Frye  wrote  originally as the  Con­ clusion to the  Literary History of  Canada.  (The same essay makes a somewhat incongruous  appearance at the end of The  Stubborn  Structure, with the avowed intent  of showing to the alien scholar "a glimpse of a new imaginative landscape  which is still relevant to his own".)
As one reads these essays, with a growing awareness of Frye's sensitivity to the developing  progress of writing  in Canada, it becomes evident  that  he is indeed fulfilling all but one of the specifications which he himself laid down for the public critic in the Anatomy  of Criticism. He shows how a man  of taste "uses ... litera­ ture". He shows how literature  is absorbed into society; he goes further and shows how it emerges from society.
The  one thing  he refuses to do is evaluate,  to assess and  compare  degrees of "greatness", and  here, by applying  what  to him is a necessary rule for the  aca­ demic  critic, he is in fact showing himself an effective public critic in  peculiarly Canadian terms. For in  practice  the exercise of evaluating  books, of  comparing  them with the best the language  has produced,  must always be a hopeless task in a country like Canada whose literature  is young and still in the process of forma­ tion. To  use Frye's own pungent  phrase:  "If evaluation  is one's guiding principle, criticisms of Canadian literature  would  become only a  debunking  project.... " But if Frye's critical conscience and -I suspect-his personal kindliness, debar him  from  debunking,  they  also  debar  him from  the  kind  of idiotic  inflation  of the  claims of Canadian writing  which has so often  marred  what in this country passes for criticism. He does not seek greatness or futility  in a work, for these, it seems to  him,  are  irrelevant  to  the  central  task  of  finding  what  the  writer  has sought to do and discussing how well he has done it.
In  a  situation  like that  in  Canada, the  critic's  role is to act  as the  mediator
between the writer  and society, and this idea  Frye is constantly  reiterating  in his notes on specific Canadian writers. Contrary  to the legends which have credited him with being the spiritual father  of a whole school of myth-obsessed poets, Frye claims that  critical encouragement  cannot  bring a literature into being. But it can help to keep it going once it exists, and the poet can best be served by judging his

6

EDITORIAL



work according  to the  standards that  are  proper to it. Apart  from  the  personal elements,  including  intention, these standards  will inevitably  be conditioned  by the time and  place in which the work is produced, by the ambience  considered in historic and geographic  terms as well as by the universal archetypal  base, and out of all these things combined  comes uniqueness where it is made manifest. For such reasons Frye has carefully avoided the comparative  approach in dealing with Canadian writers.  "I have  considered  the  question  carefully,  and  my decision, while it may have been wrong, was deliberate. I have for the most part discussed Canadian poets as though  no other  contemporary  poetry was available to Cana­ dian  readers."
I do not wholly agree  with Frye on this point. I grant  that  the writing of any country  and  even of any region has to be considered first of all in the context of the  local culture  within  which  it emerges. It  is as much  part  of that  particular ecosystem as the heron  is part  of the ecosystem of the marsh  where it hunts and lives. But herons in all marshes share a common nature  outside local systems, and in  the same  way poets exist within the larger unity that  a language  creates. We cannot  stop  influences  from  Britain,  France  and  the  United  States  crossing the oceans and  the borders, and  we cannot avoid seeing Canadian writing in relation to other  writing in English or French,  even if we may legitimately avoid the kind of pointless comparisons  that  might  attempt  to pit  Earle  Birney against  Shake­ speare or Leonard  Cohen against Keats.
But it is the  critic's  practice  rather  than  his theories that  shows the sensitivity to the nuances  of writing  which is his one indispensable possession, and  here we need  have  no doubt  of Frye's validity as a public critic. I could quote for pages the clear, condensed  passages in which he records his penetrating insights into the virtues  (rarely  the vices)  of a generation  of Canadian poets, but  they are much better  read  in  context.  Many  academic  critics are like laboratory  scientists, not much  good in the field, as I have painfully learnt in editing  this journal;  in The Bush Garden Frye shows himself as good a field critic as he is a theoretical  one. He  recognizes the splendour of the bird on the wing as surely as he describes its anatomy  in the lecture hall.



IN A  RECENT ISSUE OF  Canadian Literature, devoted to the frontiers where writing encounters  and interpenetrates  its fellow arts, Peter Stevens wrote on artists  who had  also been writers, and  the first he mentioned  was Paul Kane.  Interest  in Kane  has revived recently with the upsurge of nationalist emo-

7

EDITORIAL



tions, and  it is a versatile and historically timely talent  that  has been resurrected. Recently  Mel  Hurtig  published a facsimile reprint  of Kane's  Wanderings  of  an Artist  Among  the  Indians of  North  America, and  that  was a memorable  enough event.  Yet to read  Kane's  narrative  without  his paintings  and  sketches is rather like hearing  the sound of a film one cannot  see, for a visual record of the Indian cultures  of the  West was Kane's  prime intent  and  in that  his main  achievement
rests. Now  J. Russell Harper,  author  of Painting  In Canada, has given us, so to
speak, the film complete.
In  Paul  Kane's  Frontier,  a  massive volume  published  by the  University  of Toronto  Press at  $27.50 and  not dear  at  the  price, Harper has not  merely  pre­ sented  us the Wanderings  of an Artist in full;  he has illustrated  it with 48 finely coloured  plates and  205 black-and-white  reproductions, which  take  one  beyond the  smooth  surfaces  of Kane's  studio  paintings  to  the  hurried  vividness  of the sketches made on the journey and now published in unprecedented fulness. There  is a  catalogue  raisonne of all Kane's  known  works, an  appendix  containing  the few  letters  and  documents  relating  to  him  that  have  survived,  and  a first-rate biographical   introduction   by  Harper, who  prepared  himself  for  his  task  with characteristic thoroughness;  he followed mile  by  mile the  journey  which  Kane took in the  184os from Toronto  across the prairies to Oregon and New Caledonia. Here,  for  the  first time,  is Kane  complete,  a  better  artist  than  his well-known studio  paintings  had  led  one  to  believe, and  a  superb  chronicler  whose  total achievement  in recording the life of native Canada in its last flourishing provides a quite unique document of our past.
Two other  painters, both very different from  Kane,  are the subjects of current books that  span  the arts. Robert  Harris,  the  Prince  Edward  Island  portraitist,  is best known  for a painting  that  no longer exists, his vast canvas of the Fathers  of Confederation. In  his time  Harris  was a successful academic  painter,  and  some of his portraits  and of his genre paintings  (such as A Meeting  of the School Trus­ tees)  have  their  interest  as documents  of social  history. Undoubtedly he  was a better  studio  painter  than  Kane,  but  delicate  health  and  lack of  enterprise  kept him in  the  eastern  cities, with  France  and  England  his artistic  hinterland, and nothing  he produced  has the direct and  urgent  voice of Kane's sketches made in smoky Indian dwellings of the Canadian west. Yet Moncrieff  Williamson's Robert Harris,   1849-1919   (McClelland   & Stewart)  has  turned  out  to  be  an  unex­ pectedly interesting  as well as a competent  biography, drawing  interest out of its subject  by  relinquishing  any  attempt   to  exaggerate  Harris's  importance as  an artist  and  by reconstructing  instead, from his letters and  the other  documents  of

8

EDITORIAL



his life, an  absorbing and  at  times amusing picture  of the  existence  of a fashion­ able  painter in  Canada of  the  Confederation era.  It is not  art  history,  but  it is social  history,  and  Harris, a bore on canvas,  comes alive as a craftsman observed  in the act of creating and  sustaining his position in a Philistine world.
It   would   be  hard   to  conceive   two  men   more  different, as  personalities or artists,  than mild,  conforming Robert  Harris, and  that  formidable rebel,  Wynd­ ham  Lewis,  with  his life of warfare against  all men  in  the  name of art, and  his ambiguous Canadian links. Regarded by T. S. Eliot  as the  finest prose writer  of his  time,   regarded  by  many   others   as  the   most  remarkable modem   English painter, Lewis  balanced his massive satirical  novels by formidable works of criti­  cism in  both  the  literary and  the  visual  arts.  It  may  be presumptuous for  Cana­ dians  to claim  Lewis, whom  we treated shabbily  when  he lived among us, but  he wrote  here  and  painted here,  and  it would  be pointless to deny a special  interest  in  the  creator of  the  best  paintings commissioned  by the  Canadian government in  two  world   wars  and   the  author of that   novel  which  so  mercilessly  flays  us, Self Condemned. For  long  both  Lewis's  paintings  and  his  writings  on  art  have remained scattered;  it   has   been  impossible   even  to  guess  the   totality   of  his achievement. Now  two  most  important  books,  which  complement each  other, have  appeared. They  will be reviewed  fully in a later  issue of Canadian  Litera­ ture,  but   I would  like  to  note  them  now  as  further  landmarks in  defining  the borderland  where   literature  comes  together  with   the  visual   arts.    Wyndham Lewis:  Drawings  and  Paintings, a splendid treatise  on  Lewis's  work  written by Walter Michel, introduced by the Canadian scholar Hugh Kenner and  illustrated by an  unprecedentedly rich  selection  of almost  Soo  reproductions of Lewis paint­ ings and  drawings, with  a full catalogue, is being  published by the  University of California  Press   (McClelland  & Stewart in  Canada). Its  companion  volume  is  Wyndham Lewis  on  Art:  Collected  Writings  1913-1956),  edited   by  Walter
Michel   in  collaboration with  C.  J. Fox,  a  contributor to  Canadian  Literature.
Together  the   two  books  present,   in  a  completeness   unseen   before,  Lewis  the painter and  Lewis the  philosopher of painting.
GEORGE WOODCOCK










9



GROVE AND
THE PROMISED LAND




Stanley E. McMullin










s<NCE FREDER,CK Pmup  GROVE  had   been  wntmg fo, thirty years before he sold a book, the chronology of his novels is hard to establish. A Search  For  America, the first book conceived, was the fourth  book published. In  the thirty-five years between its birth and  its publication  the  book was revised at  least  seven  times.  Many  of  his  other  books  underwent   extensive  revision. Settlers  of the  Marsh  was cut by a third from its original form  as a trilogy called "Pioneers". That  trilogy  began  to  take shape  in  Grove's  mind  in  1917  and  by
1923 he had completed  the final version. Upon  being informed  that  "no  book of that  kind stood a chance in Canada" he reduced the three volumes to one, which was published  in  1925.  In  1920, Grove  tells us that  he  "simultaneously  ... re­ sketched and  largely rewrote ... four other books."1 These  books were The Turn of the  Year, "Adolescence"  (later  published  as The Yoke of Life), Our  Daily Bread  and  "Pioneers". Fruits  of the  Earth  took forty years to take its final shape, going  back  to  1894 when  Grove  met a man  who  became  a  prototype for Abe Spalding. The Master  of the  Mill  was conceived much earlier than its publication date.  In  1928 Grove made an exhaustive examination  of the flour-milling indus­
try. In 1934 he accepted advance  royalties from J. M. Dent and Sons for the book
which he thought  would  be published in the spring of 1935· When  Over  Prairie Trails was accepted in 1922, Grove explained that he had a number  of manuscripts on hand,  enough  to supply the trade  with one a year for some time. The  point of this discussion is that  the  publication  dates of Grove's  novels have little bearing on when they were conceived or written, and it is almost impossible to establish a

10

GROVE AND  THE PROMISED  LAND



true  chronology based  on  Grove's  own evidence.  In  many  cases it seems that  they were  being  written concurrently. In  this essay I will impose  my own  chronology based on a thematic examination of the novels. Grove  was interested in the nature of life in America. He  came  in search  of a Promised  Land  and  remained to help chart the complexities of the life he found.
In  his  use  of  this  Promised Land   motif,  Grove  was  articulating an  essential myth  of  North   American culture. Professor  Frye  has suggested  that  literature is "conscious mythology". He expands the point:

As society develops, its mystical stories become structural principles of story-telling, its mythical concepts, sun gods and the like, become habits of metaphorical thought. In  a fully mature  literary  tradition  the writer enters into a structure of traditional stories and  images.2

In  his use of the  Promised Land  myth,  Grove  was employing a story  which  has always  had  relevance to  North  American society.  From  the  beginning the  New World  was  viewed  as a  Land of Promise.  Perhaps the  first version  was reflected by  the  Spanish Conquistadors who  left  Spain  to  find  their  fortunes in  the  new land. They  accepted native mythology  about  the existence  of great  wealth  and set out  to  find  the  "Seven   Cities  of  Gold", the  lost  city  of  Cibola, the  wondrous fountain of  youth. While   these  lost  cities  were  never  found, the  Conquistadors did  locate   Aztec  and   Inca gold  and   the  New  World   fulfilled   the  promise  of wealth. Once  the  metaphorical "milk  and  honey"  was found, the  procedure was to  return to Europe and  rejoin  the society from  which  they  had  been  barred for lack of means.  The  New  World  was a place where one could  "make his pile" and then  return to the  more  desirable  milieu  of upper  class life in  Europe. This  view of the  Promised Land has endured and  it is still not  uncommon for  Europeans to come to America with the dream of refurbishing a failing  fortune.
In  Canada and  the  United States,  the promise of quick  wealth  was provided by the fur  trade, plantation crops, fisheries, timber  and  other  raw materials. Thus the first vision of the  Promised Land  was basically economic in nature. The  vision of the  Promised Land as a  "new  Canaan", a place  where  the  new  covenant could be  fulfilled,   developed  with   the  growth   of  immigration. The  immigrant  was attracted by  the  tales  of  the  abundance of the  new  land. The lower-class immi­ grants   were,  like  the  children of  Israel,  living  under severe  conditions  in  their  native  lands. They  were  prey  to a variety  of tyrannies: conscription, unemploy­ ment,  low  wages, loss of farm land,  religious prejudice, depression, famine, popu­ lation  explosion  and  the ills of industrialization. The New  World  promised  a new


II

GROVE  AND  THE  PROMISED LAND



life free of the evils of a constricting society, a new chance to achieve salvation. It was the Promised Land of Moses reaffirmed in the New World.




IN 1892, WHEN Frederick  Philip  Grove arrived  in America, the debate  over the future  of the Promised  Land  was being conducted  by those who favoured  agrarian life against  those who felt that  the  new covenant  could best be  achieved  through  the  advances  of an  industrial  society. Grove felt  that the industrial  vision provided the least opportunity for man to find his soul. In his work he set out to explore the nature of the Promised Land,  and his novels reveal the complexity of his reading of the myth.
In  the United  States, the period from the end of the Indian  wars to 1890 was one of western expansion. Those who rejected a commercial vision of the Promised Land  could still head  out to the western frontier  where free land  was available. By 189o, however, settlement  had  progressed to the  point where the Superinten­ dent of the Census acknowledged that "the  unsettled area has been so broken into by isolated  bodies  of settlement  that  there  can  hardly  be said  to  be a  frontier line".3   The   New  World  was slowly filling up  and  a  dream  of a  new  kind  of Promised  Land  was  usurping  the  old.  While  the  first dream  was still basically oriented  around  life on the land, the ultimate fruits  of the new vision were to be achieved  through  industrial  revolution. The  nature  of the dream  was still essen­ tially  religious  in  its overtones, although  the  symbolism  had  changed  from  the agrarian  to the mechanical.  The machine was the new  Messiah come among men to lead them  to a new salvation in the industrial  cities of America. The  industrial society provided  Grove with little substance for his soul, and soon after his arrival he became  aware  of the inherent  flaws in the materially  oriented  life lived in the cities. His experiences  with "getting  the best" of the  other fellow caused him to question  the  values of American  society. He set out  to discover the America  of Lincoln  and  Thoreau and  spent  the  best  part  of twenty  years in agrarian sur­ roundings.  He  summed  up  his feelings  about  the  industrial  society in an  essay published in 1929:

An industrial society means ... the reorientation of the immigrants' minds towards a religion, if we may call it such, whose god is a jealous god because he denies the human soul the soil in which it can grow according to laws of its own, his name being a Standard  of Living; toward a law which bows before economic obesity; toward  aims  which  exhaust  themselves in  sensual enjoyment  and  the so-called

12

GROVE  AND  THE  PROMISED LAND



conquest  of nature. These  things have  become tools devised by a new, a nascent plutocracy for the enslavement of the mind and the spiriU

Grove  very early  identified the conflict between  the two visions of the  Promised Land. In his fiction  he set out  to explore  the implications of this conflict,  and  his novels  reveal  his deep  understanding of the  problems  involved.  He  explored the imaginative force of North American culture and gave it structure.
The   motif  made its  first  appearance in  A  Search   for America   where  it  had
strong   autobiographical overtones.  The   motif  which   grew  out  of  Grove's own search  for  a  Promised Land   was successfully  transferred to a  fable  in  the  later novels. Briefly stated, the  motif  starts  with  a geographical search  for a  Promised Land  where  the individual soul can grow according to its own innate rules,  but  it ultimately  becomes   a  striving   for  an  ideal  existence  beyond   physical  environ­ ments: the  Promised Land vision becomes an unattainable ideal luring men  on to a new and  better life. Grove expands  the point in A Search  for America:

When  I came  from  Europe,  I came  as an  individual; when  I settled  down  in America, at the end of my wanderings, I was a social man. My view of life ... had been  in  Europe,  historical;  it  had  become in America,  ethical.  We come  indeed from Hell and  climb to Heaven;  the Golden Age stands at the never attainable end of history, not at  man's  origins. Every step forward  is bound  to be a compromise; right  and  wrong are inescapably mixed;  the best we can hope for is to make  right prevail  more  and  more;  to reduce wrong to  a smaller and  smaller fraction  of the whole  till  it  reaches  the  vanishing  point.  Europe  regards  the  past;  America  the future.  America  is an  ideal and  as such has to be striven for; it has to be realized in partial  victories.5

Fruits  of the  Earth  and  Settlers  of the  Marsh  are  novels  concerned with  the taming of  the  land. Abe  Spalding and  Niels  Lindstedt are  economic pioneers, striving  to exist  in an  environment already  tainted with  the  excesses of an indus­ trial  society.  Grove  was well aware  that  it was no longer  possible to escape  from  the  influences of  technology, and  in  his  novels  his  heroes  face  the  problem of living  a  life  based  on  essentials  in  an  environment  bombarded  by  non-essential materialism. For  my  purposes,  I will  refer  to these  men  as  pioneers  of  the  first generation. They  are the starting point for Grove's investigations.
The  next  pair  of novels, Our  Daily Bread and  Two  Generations, deal  with  the conflict  between the  first  generation and  the  second.  In  Settlers  of the  Marsh, Niels Lindstedt is concerned with  the  problem  of continuity between  generations. He feels his destiny  is to set down  roots in the new world  by engendering a family, and   he  and   Ellen  go  forward at  the  end  of  that  novel  to fulfil  that  goal.  The

13

GROVE  AND  THE  PROMISED LAND



continuance  of life is necessary for the preservation of the Promised Land  dream. In  Our  Daily  Bread  and  Two   GenerationsJ the  continuance of  life has  been assured. Both John  Elliot and  Ralph  Patterson  have produced  offspring to carry on after  them. In  these novels Grove examined  the  problem  of transferring indi­ vidual visions from father  to children.
In these two sets of novels the setting is becoming more and more involved with the  problems of materialism.  In The  Yoke  of Life, Grove deals with a hero from the second generation.  He examines the impact of industrial society upon a young and  intuitively  sensitive farm  boy. Len Sterner  is a misfit, unable  to cope with either  the  land  or  the  city. He  moves through  both,  finally rejecting  each  and returning to the wilderness to die.
The  Master of the Mill, is wholly concerned  with life in the industrial  society.
Here  Grove traces the lives of three generations  of men operating in the techno­ logical milieu. The  novel projects Grove's views into the future  of  North Ameri­ can society. In this book he considers the question of whether  the covenant of the Promised  Land  could be obtained  in the here and  now, as the disciples of indus­ trialism  were predicting.  This novel is the logical conclusion  to a series of novels which start  with a consideration  of the first generation, then  move to the second generation's  conflict with the first, then to a study of the second generation  alone, finally projecting  a vision into the future  generations.  I suggest that  an examina­  tion  of  Grove's  total  vision of  life in  America  within  the  framework   of  this chronology gives new insight into his function as a spokesman for North American society. Considered  in  this order,  each novel  gains in impact  as it is viewed as a part of a larger scheme.
Having  examined  the seven novels of Frederick  Philip  Grove according  to the
above  chronology,  we  may  offer  some  conclusions  about   Grove's  use  of  the
Promised  Land  motif.




l:ERE IS  LITTLE DOUBT    that   Grove  was  influenced  by  two archetypal  figures:  Moses and  Prometheus. Both displayed, for Grove, man's essentially tragic  nature: both are embarked  on hopeless struggles against forces they do not understand, knowing they will fail. Each is content  to carry the banner for future  generations.  Moses especially was an important figure in Grove's imagination. Moses knew that  the Children  of Israel  would go on to achieve the Promised  Land.  He  could acquiesce in the knowledge  that  ultimately  his people

GROVE AND  THE  PROMISED LAND



would enjoy a success he would not live to see. Like Moses, Grove's  heroes have epic  stature; they  are  larger  than  life. Like  Moses they  are  the  leaders  in the community.  Moses never reached  the Promised Land  because he was human; he had  the  human  flaw of egotism. Grove's characters  suffer from  the same fault. Abe  Spalding  and  Niels Lindstedt  had  to learn  to identify  themselves with  all that  was not "I". Abe had  to realize that  no personal victory was possible in the battle  against  the forces in the  universe which were trying to overcome him. He had  to accept the fact that  victory came collectively through  the continued  battle fought  by many  men through  the ages. Niels had to learn that  he could not exist in a meaningful  way in isolation. He had to learn to live as a social man  before his dream  of life in  the  Promised  Land  had  validity. In  Our  Daily Bread and Two  Generations a similar  type of egotism is encountered. The  first generation must learn to accept  the fact that  their personal visions of life are not going to be those of their children. John  Elliot must learn to accept the fact that  he will never have  his children  living around  him like the  patriarchs  of old. Ralph  Patterson must learn to allow his children  to work out their own destinies. Each man makes the mistake of living his life through  his children, by this means robbing himself of personal  fulfilment.  Len  Sterner  is guilty of moral  egotism. He  isolates hiinself from other men with the idea that  he is morally superior to them.  Edmund  Clark is guilty of attempting to change  the course of world history single-handedly.  He refuses to become a social man;  he refuses to give birth to future  generations  who might  carry  on  the  chore  he  has set out  to accomplish.  Both  Len  Sterner  and Edmund Clark  die  with  no  hope  for  any  continuance  of their  lives. Each  has denied life to future  generations.
Central   to  the  Promised  Land  motif  is the  importance of  land  itself. The Children  of Israel are in search of a land of milk and honey where a spiritual  life based on the essentials is possible. Grove's characters  are involved  with the land as well. Grove  himself was strongly influenced  by landscape  which was flat, un­ relieved,  uncomplicated   and  vaguely  menacing.  He  felt  most  at  home  on  the prairies and  the sea. On  these flat expanses, man's contest with nature  is reduced to a basic equation: horizontal  nature  and vertical man. Such landscape helps to siinplify life, reducing  it to fundamentals. In such a setting it is easier to find the essentials of life;  to weed out  the  non-essentials. Phil Branden  goes in search of the  real America,  and  in the early stages of the book his search  is geographical.  Abe Spalding  is looking for land  upon which he can carve his own history. Niels Lindstedt  comes from Sweden to the land of a million farmsteads. For John  Elliot there  is no other  occupation than  tilling the soil. The same holds true for Ralph

GROVE AND THE  PROMISED LAND



Patterson.  Len Sterner finally is forced to escape to the wilderness in his search for insight. Only the Clarks in The  Master of the Mill do not reflect a strong affinity to  land,  though  even  in  that  book, Sam  Clark  becomes  a  student  of  botany, creating  world-famous gardens on his estate. The  mill itself is the link, concerned as it is with converting wheat into man's daily bread.
Most  of Grove's  characters  require  the solace of landscape.  They  must  make the  symbolic  trip  to  the wilderness to listen for  truth.  Under  its influence  they become  intuitively  aware  of the value of their  own souls. Phil Branden  was the first to go into the wilderness in the search for personal equilibrium. Len Sterner also makes his last trip into the wilds in search of truth.  Phil and  Alice Patterson experience  transcendent  feelings from  nature  while working at the "Sleepy Hol­ low" farm.  The  wilderness strips man of his conventions  and  enables him  to see into his essential humanity.
While the land fosters the intuitive process which makes people aware that they have souls, it does not act as a deterministic  force. Rather it works as a catalyst, causing spiritual  development without  becoming actively involved in the process. If Grove believed in any kind of determinism  it was a psychological determinism. "We  are  what  we are."  The  individual  must  work  out  his own  destiny  in  the search  for the  Promised Land.  That  destiny is fixed like the image on an  unde­ veloped photographic plate. Life is the developing agent which produces a visible image. Thus  man's  reaction to life determines whether  his destiny will be fulfilled. Central   to  fulfilment  is awareness  of soul.  Awareness  of soul  is the  ability  to identify with all that is outside of self, with all that is not "I". The Promised Land becomes an ideal  of what life could be for mankind  if all men  had  awareness of soul. Grove states that the Golden Age lies at the never attainable end of history. We can approach closer and closer to that  Promised Land as more and more good prevails through  the efforts of an increasing number of aware  people, but we can never fully achieve complete realization.
The  realization  of a goal spells the end  of its value  as an  inspirational  force. Grove believed that if God were known he would be dead. From this view Grove developed  a paradox  basic to his vision of life. Man  must  have a goal in life to give his existence meaning;  he must have a destiny to fulfil. But the completion of that  goal  or destiny spells spiritual  death.  Edmund Clark  points out  that  every culture  is born  with  the seeds of death  in it. So every man's  creative life spawns its own destruction.  For the pioneer this paradox  works out in the taming  of the land.  When  he has successfully cleared and  tamed  the land  he has removed  the very impetus  which  gives his life meaning  and  he finds himself unable  to enjoy

16

GROVE  AND  THE PROMISED  LAND



the fruits of his labour.  The  industrialist,  fighting to free man  from the necessity of working-when and  if he accomplishes this aim-will also destroy the very drive which gives him life. In terms of love, if the complete union of personalitie were accomplished,  the  act  would destroy the individual  longing  which fed the love in the first place. It is always, in Grove's world, the striving for a goal that is most significant.  Thus  it becomes imperative  that  man  choose a goal which will be beyond his abilities to achieve. The  battle for the realization  of the Promised Land is such a goal.
There  is a basic dichotomy  in Grove's vision of life. On one hand  he saw that
man  remains today  what he was in the time of Moses. The essentials of life never change.  Opposed  to,  and  separate  from,  this essential nature  of man  lies man's history. Man's  nature  is timeless; man's cultural experience is within time. Man's history  tends  to  be  cyclic,  with  cultures  rising and  falling.  Each  culture  is an attempt  to realize the Promised Land; each culture gains its impetus through revolution. It finds the old culture stultifying and degenerate. Revolution is neces­ sary to break from the old conventions. The new society, however, never manages to carry its revolution  through  to its logical conclusions. Man  becomes frightened  of the implications  of his revolution and turns reactionary,  reverting eventually to the same state  from  which he had originally revolted. If a revolution could work out to its logical conclusion the Promised Land might be obtainable. Man's history then  would  become  part  of that  timeless force of  nature; his revolution  would become  evolution.  While  it is the nature  of  cultures  to follow a circular  route, Grove did  acknowledge  the existence of  progress. He saw the circular  motion in terms of a wheel. While a point on the wheel always returns to the same point on the circumference  as the wheel revolves, at the same time the wheel moves ahead.  This  slow, spiralling  progress  comes as man  learns  more about  himself and  his relationship  to others around him.
Just  as revolution  is necessary in the overthrow  of societies, it is also a fact  of
family life. Children,  faced with parents who insist upon forcing their own visions of life on them,  must rebel in order to insure the right of fulfilling their own des­ tinies. Fundamental to  this  conflict is the  role of the  wife and  mother.  Grove places the responsibility for maintaining  continuity between the generations firmly on the shoulders  of the woman. It is her  job to mediate  between  the father  and his  children.   In  the  novels  where  there  is  no  mediating   mother,  rebellion  is guaranteed. Such  is the  case in Our  Daily Bread and  The  Master  of  the  Mill.  Where  a mother  is available,  compromise is often achieved. Two  Generations is the  best example  of  this.  Grove  holds that  life proceeds  by  compromises  only.

17

GROVE AND THE  PROMISED LAND



Compromise is the mark of a man who can over-rule his own egotism and identify himself with  others.  This  emphasis on man  as a social creature  is important to Grove. Commitment to the service of mankind  is basic to his view of life. In  A Search   for  America, Phil  Branden  goes forth  to  assist fellow immigrants.  Abe Spalding  commits  himself to public service in  his district.  Niels Lindstedt  must learn  to live as a social man. The  two Clarks, Sam and  Edmund, have idealistic visions of freeing man from toil by supplying them with their  daily bread. Grove himself lived a life of commitment  to mankind.  He  taught, often  using his own funds to establish classes and  equip laboratories.  In  1943 he ran for the Ontario legislature as a C.C.F.  candidate.6  His aim as a writer  reflects his desire to serve mankind:

I, the  cosmopolitan, fitted  myself to be the  spokesman of a race -not necessarily a race  in the ethnographic sense; in fact not  at all in that  sense;  rather in the sense of  a stratum of society  which  cross-sectioned  all  races,  consisting of those  who,  in no matter what  climate, at no matter what  time,  feel the impulse of starting anew from  the  ground up,  to fashion  a  new  world  which  might  serve  as the  breeding place of a civilization to come.7

There  is a strong stoic influence in Grove's vision of life. He stresses the neces­ sity of living in the present rather  than  in the past or future.  He emphasizes stoic endurance in  the  face  of  ultimate  failure,  seeing  this  as  the  heroic stature   of mankind.  Those characters  who live in either the future  or the past find their lives slipping by unlived. Abe Spalding  experiences this problem. He lives for a future  of materialistic  success and  finds that  he has never known  his own family. Sam Clark, on the other  hand,  is bound  to the past, shackled by his father's  unscrupu­  lous practices. Each day must be lived as it comes. Grove's ideal is a life based on the essentials; on the raising of families, the growing of  food, on an awareness of the fellowship of man. The  city, for the most part,  does not promote this kind of life. There  one can  become lost in the rush to acquire the spoils of an industrial  society.  Life  becomes  a  continual  race  to  acquire  material   goods which  once acquired,  quickly lose their  novelty. The  arts, Grove suggests, are eternal.  Great music, art, or literature  never lose their novelty: they remain fresh and significant. Grove feels that  the  fundamental function  of  art is to lead  man  into the recesses of his own soul. Materialism cannot offer any solace to the soul.
For  Grove,  the  conception  of  the  Promised  Land   begins  as a  geographical search for landscape  which will allow his soul to grow according  to its own innate rules.  North  America  offered  him  that  environment  but  he  learned  that   the Promised  Land  was really an unattainable ideal, yet an ideal which all men could

18

GROVE AND THE PROMISED LAND



strive  to achieve. In  The Master  of the  Mill  he raises the  question as to whether that  ideal  could  be achieved through the  Industrial Revolution: he replies in the negative. The  ideal  must  prevail  as a vision to spur  men  on to a better  life. Each generation will  advance its  own  conclusions  about   the  nature of  the  Promised Land, and  it  will matter little  that  their  observations are  at  odds  with  earlier  or later  generations. The  fundamentals of life will remain constant, even though individual visions  change. There will  be  progress;  men  will  gradually  become more  and  more  aware of their  own  souls;  the  Promised  Land  will  draw  closer. Its final attainment will mark  the end of history.


FOOTNOTES

1 Frederick  Philip Grove, In Search  of Myself  (Toronto,  I946), p. 35I-52.
2  Northrop  Frye, The Literary History  of Canada  (Toronto, I965), p. 836.
3 Quoted  by Frederick  Jackson  Turner, "The Significance of the Frontier  in  Ameri­ can History," The Turner Thesis  Concerning the  Role  of the  Frontier  in  American History, ed. George Taylor  (Boston, I956),  p. r.
4 Frederick  Philip Grove, It  Needs To  Be Said  (Toronto,  I929),  p. I45·
5  Frederick  Philip Grove, A Search  For America  (Ottawa, I927), p. 436.
6 Bruce  Nesbitt,  "The Seasons:   Grove's  Unfinished  Novel,"  Canadian  Literature,
No. r8 (Autumn, I963), 48.
7  Quoted  by Desmond Pacey, Frederick  Philip Grove  (Toronto, I945), p. I r.



GROVE ET RINGUET

Temoins d'une epoque





Antoine Sirois







D.ux ROMANS  parus dan' Ia  troisibne deeade  du  2oe siecle, Trente  arpents de Ringuet,  en 1938, et Fruits of the  Earth de Grove, en
1933, venaient  ala fois couronner  et defier une forme de litterature qui semblait bien installee depuis le milieu du 19e siecle, celle du roman du terroir.
Cette bonne litterature,  comme on le sait, depeignait  habituellement une vie idyllique  ou  les protagonistes, a  force  de  volonte  et  de  bras,  atteignaient a  un bonheur  ignore des citadins. Les heros, robustes et vertueux,  vivaient  au  rythme des  jours et  des saisons et  finissaient par  conquerir et  dominer  la  nature  dans l'espace rural qui leur avait ete devolu par I'auteur.
A la suite  de Zola dans la Terre,  Grove et Ringuet,  importants dans leur lit­
teratures  respectives, temoignent  d'un  monde  en  transition,  passant  de l'·epoque agraire  a  l'·epoque technique.  Grove  decrit  une  periode  qui  s'·etend deI goo  a
1921  dans  Fruits of the Earth, et Ringuet  de 1887 a 1930 dans Trente  arpents. La  premiere  histoire se deroule dans l'Ouest, au  Manitoba, l'autre dans l'Est, au Quebec.
Les  auteurs   continuent,  sous  un  aspect,  le  genre  traditionnel, decrivant  des heros enracines dans leur terroir, ala psychologie un peu mince, qui tiennent  plus du  type que de l'individu.  Mais les heros triomphant des forces de la nature sont devenus tragiques, leur regne est passager et illusoire. lls sont esclaves du sol qu'ils croyaient  dominer.
Dans I'etude qui suivra, je me restreindrai  aux deux romans cites plus haut, qui ant  une valeur esthetique  certaine  et qui m'ont  paru significatifs et de l'acoelera­ tion de l'histoire et de la transformation d'un  genre romanesque.

20

GROVE  ET  RINGUET



La composition  meme de l'reuvre exprime Ia transformation  du genre. Trente arpents narre  l'histoire  d'Euchariste Moisan. Ce paysan typique  prend graduelle­ ment possession de ses trente  arpents de terre, les fait  rendre  au point de pouvoir cumuler  chez le notaire  des sommes de plus en plus rondelettes.  A cet  accroisse­ ment de biens correspond  une consideration grandissante qui se manifeste par son
election  comme  marguillier   a l'eglise et  comme commissaire  d',ecole. II se sent
beni en son  fils pretre  qui  vient aureoler sa 11eputation. Jusqu'ici, c'est le destin de Jean  Rivard,  modele bien connu du roman du terroir.  Mais au printemps at a J',ete, succedent  l'automne et l'hiver. L'auteur, par une autre  serie de temps forts decrit le declin du heros:  dissensions dans sa famille, mort du fils pretre, desertion de ses enfants  pour  Ia ville et les usines, depossession par son aine, perte de son argent,  feu  de  sa  grange  et  enfin depart  pour  les Etats-Unis,  ou il finit, lui si attache  a ses animaux,  comme gardien de nuit dans un garage  de machines con­ sideJ1ees  comme  autant   de  betes dangereuses. Abe Spalding,  dans  Fruits  of  the Earth, connait  un destin analogue,  colo11e seulement par le context geographique et social difierent.  II met en valeur graduellement  les lots qu'on  lui a cedes. Sans liarder  comme  Moisan,  il joue surtout  avec son credit  pour  accroitre  ses posses­ sions. Son sucoes commande le respect des fermiers qui l'elisent  comme chef du district et pr.esident de sa "commission scolaire". Apres une recolte extraordinaire en  1912, il ba.tit Ia maison de ses reves, symbole de sa r·eussite. Scenario  jusqu'ici digne  encore  des  meilleurs  romans  idylliques. Mais  le  fils aine  sur  lequel  Abe comptait  meurt.  Les autres  enfants s'eloignent. II connait des difficultes financieres et l'echec  aux  elections. Le deuxieme fils sur Ia succession duquel  il comptait  se desinteresse du  sol,  passionne  par  Ia  mecanique,  Abe  restera  sur  Ia terre,  mais desormais depasse lui aussi par les evenements. Son succes materiel  n'aura pas ete une benediction  dans le sens biblique, car elle a cause et masque un ·echec person­ nel interieur et une faillite familiale.
L'on ne peut s'empecher  de penser a La Terre de Zola ou !'auteur joue aussi sur deux  volets, celui de !'ascension  du  fils et du  declin du  pere, avec Ia diff.erence que Zola conduit  les deux  de front,  alors que Grove et Ringuet  centrent  surtout I'attention  sur Ia montee et Ia chute du meme protagoniste.
Les  paysans-types  de  Grove  et  de  Ringuet  sont  depasses par  leur  temps.  lis avaient   vecu   dans   un  espace  ferm•e, physiquement  et  moralement,  berce  au rythme meme des saisons, axe sur les recoltes, et porteur de valeurs traditionnelles. Voila que, desormais, a Ia suite des innovations  techniques, de !'industrialisation acceleree par  Ia guerre,  une serie de forces nouvelles vont menacer  les traditions conservatrices qui sont propres aux civilisations agraires. Le choc est d'autant plus


21

GROVE  ET  RING UET



sensible que l'espace rural est bien clos, replie sur lui-meme. "Cette  sodete  etroite
... ," dit Ringuet,  "cette societe circonscrite au voisinage et pour qui l'homme  de la  paroisse contigue  est deja  un demi.,Ctranger qui  ne s'agrege  jamais quelqu'un venu du  dehors, ni meme ses fils. Il n'y a vraiment  fusion qu'apres deux genera­ tions".  "La   petite  patrie  restreinte  que  seuls  connaissent  les  paysans"  dira-t-il encore.
L'espace  rural  manitobain,  bien que plus vaste et mains auto-suffisant a cause de sa dependance des marches  exterieurs pour  l'ecoulement de son ble, contient quand   meme  le  paysan  dans  des limites reduites.  Grove  declare  de son  heros: "His  vision had  been  bounded  by the lines of his farm ... ". Il ajoute: "More and  more  the  wind-break  surrounding  his yard  seemed to be a rampart which, without knowing it, he had erected to keep out an hostile world".




DANS Trente arpents l'envahissement de l'"etranger" se produit  de  multiples  fac;ons, prend  differentes  figures.  Il  apparait par  exemple
sous la figure d'Albert,  le Franc;ais engage par  Moisan  pour I'aider sur sa ferme. D'une  autre  origine, il ne parle pas le franc;ais des paysans, il ne se rend  pas a la messe dominicale,  il refuse de se laisser lier a trente  arpents  de terre. On  le con­ sidere  alors  comme  un  etre  "anormal",  "presque inhumain",  "suspect"'  pour employer les termes de l'auteur, et qui ree dans ce monde familier  un "sentiment  d'insecurite''. Il represente pour les campagnards des valeurs differentes et troub­  lantes. Uetranger prend aussi la figure de la science et de la technique.  Les forces du  paysan,  dependant  jusqu'ici  de ses bras, seront  multipHees par  la  machine; dans  le  roman,  l'on  passe de la faucille  a la  faucheuse,  du  rateau  a main  a la lieuse, du  cheval  au  tracteur.  Le rythme  des  communications s'accelere  par  les premieres  automobiles: "On  etait  loin des  dimanches  d'autrefois  ... L'automo­ bile etait   venue  qui  avait  change  tout  cela."  L'agronome, representant   de  la science, commence  a etre consulte par le fils, au  scandale  du  pere. L'espace  qui etait statique  devient dynamique.  Mais ceci ne se fait  pas sans resistance: l'oncle Ephrem  s'oppose  au  passage de la faucille a la faucheuse,  le pere Moisan craint de  passer  de  la  moissonneuse-lieuse  au  "tracteur a gazoline",  comme  il dit,  de l'elevage  des  poules  a  la  culture  des  champignons.  Pourquoi   ces  resistances? Sentiment  de crainte  pour des instruments  qui semblent  malefiques:  le "tracteur
a  gazoline"  a  deja  ruine  une  terre,  dit  Moisan   a son  fils. Un  vieux  paysan


22

GROVE  ET  RINGUET


declarait   a Moisan:  "Si  on  faisait  Ia culture  comme  dans  le vieux  temps,  c;a donnerait   pas  aux   jeunes  le  gout  des  mecaniques  qu'est   bonnes  a  rien  qu'a amener  des  accidents". L'auto que  croise Moisan  "est  lancee  a  une  allure  de demon". Autant  d'attitudes qui demontrent  }'opposition du  milieu qui  voudrait
que  les chases se fassent comme "au  bon vieux temps". Desir de retour au temps sacre parfait,  immobile,  qui n'est que reprise de lui-meme, desir de perpetuer  les valeurs  anciennes,  avec  Ia nostalgic de ce qui  bouscule l'ordre  permanent  et Ia securite.
L'etranger, perturbateur de l'ordre,  prend  encore une autre  figure, celle de Ia
ville. Facteur  exterieur  qui vient deraciner les enfants du sol. Pour le pere Moisan elle revet un visage hostile, cr.ee des sensations d'etouffement, de desarroi, et meme d'epouvante. Mais  pour  plusieurs de ses enfants elle devient  un  p6le d'attirance eblouissant. Trois des enfants finiront par travailler dans les usines ou les filatures. Ephrem  est ravi par  "les grosses gages", et les femmes provocantes; Lucinda,  par "les  douze  dollars  de  gages",  en  argent  liquide,  les fanfreluches,  les robes  de couleur vive. Napoleon  est "leun:;e par l'appeau  de Ia ville, ·ebloui par les facettes des affiches lumineuses, par I'argent facile, facilement gagne, facilement depense". C'est  Ia grande  desertion  du sol, combattue  par tant  de romans du terroir, voues a Ia conservation de Ia tradition, garante du bonheur de l'homme.
L'etranger comme  personne ne  joue pas un role dans le monde  des pionniers de  l'Ouest   qui  viennent   tous  forcement  d'ailleurs  et,  dans  le  cas  present,  de nombreux  pays. Mais il semble que  malgre cette diversite des experiences et des origines,  un  milieu  paysan  se reconstitue  avec des valeurs  determinees  qui  tien­ nent plus au  genre  de vie qu'a  l'origine ethnique. Abe Spalding, qui vient ouvrir des espaces  nouveaux,  apres  avoir  brise avec le monde  paysan  traditionnel en Ontario, se  resigne  seulement   a  !'utilisation   de  Ia  machine  parce  qu'elle  est l'unique  solution  pour conquerir  ces vastes plaines:  "There was only one, power­ farming  as it was called:  machinery  would do the work of  many men. But Abe liked the response of living flesh and  bone to the spoken word and  hated the un­ intelligent  repetition   of ununderstood  activities which  machines  demanded. Yet sooner or later  he must come to that; he would have to run the farm  like a fac­ tory;  that   was  the  modem   trend ... " Les  fermiers  du  district  expriment  leur etonne ent
l'eclairage  des poulaillers  Ia nuit  au !'utilisation  de Ia trayeuse  mecanique.  Eux aussi, comme les paysans de Ringuet,  affichent un mepris pour la science agrono­ mique;  "college  farming" dit  l'un.  Spalding,  comme  nous l'avons  expri,
voit surtout  commande par Ia necessite, car il ne croit pas que Ia technique vienne

GROVE ET RING UET



ameliorer  le sort de l'homme: "Labour-saving devices galore;  and  they did save labour; but did they save time?"
Mais  Spalding   est  bien  lucide  sur  le  phenomene   nouveau   dans  !'evolution humaine.  II comprend  qu'il  est dans l'age  de la machine -"machine age" -, qu'il  y a un esprit correspondant  au "machine age", mais il juge que cette ,epoque
nouvelle contribuerait plus a I'information qu'a la formation  du caractere: "The
imparting of  information   would  be  the  paramount  aim,  not  the  building  of character".  II  constate  surtout   qu'il   n'a   pas  lui-meme   l'esprit   de  cette  ere mecanique:  "What  is needed  is the  mechanical  mentality  and  this he did  not have." Grove comme Ringuet signalent taus les doux ce nouvel aspect qui oppose
les generations:   I'existence  chez  les fils d'une  mentalite   correspondante a I'ere
mecanique qui  envahit  maintenant le Canada de l'est a I'ouest:  Ephrem  et Jim
sont  attires  par  les garages. Grove  insiste pour  nous  montrer  comment  Jim  est doue  de cet esprit : il est un  "born  mechanic", il a le "spirit  of the  machine". C'est lui qui entraine  son pere pour la premiere fois dans une automobile.
La  ville  joue egalement  dans "Fruits of the  Earth"   un  role perturbateur qui corrompt  les  jeunes esprits.  Facteur  d'attirance, elle arrache les enfants  a leur
milieu:  "children  taken from  the farm and  transplanted into the environment  of town  tended  to grow away from  the land  and  the  control  of their  parents". Le
sejour  dans les viBes, pour les etudes par  exemple, donne  encore  naissance a un
"commercial  spirit": "the  boy had the commercial  spirit ... an effect of his stay in town".
Cet  ,eloignement physique et moral  du  monde  agraire  traditionnel  est surtout activ,e pour  Grove  par la  premiere guerre  mondiale.  Le paysan  de Ringuet  s'en souciait peu, il ne vendait que mieux ses recoltes. Grove pen;oit ce grand  tournant au  retour  des militaires.  La guerre  a cree toutes sortes de  besoins, a bouleverse l'esprit  des hommes. L'argent  fait son apparition. Le paragraphe suivant est plus eloquent  que toute  dissertation:  "The  war had unsettled  men's minds. There  was a tremendous  new urge towards immediacy of results; there  was general dissatis­ faction.  Irrespective  of their  economic ability,  people  craved  things  which  they had  never craved  before. Democracy was interpreted as the right of  everybody to everything  that  the  stimulated  inventive  power  of mankind in  the  mass  could furnish in the way of conveniences and luxuries. Amusements became a necessity of daily life. A tendency  to spend recklessly and  to use credit on a scale hitherto unknown  was linked  with  a  pronounced  weakening  of the  moral  fibre.  In  the homes  of the  Hartleys,  McCreas,  Wheeldons,  Topps,  gramophones and  similar knick-knacks made  their appearance; young men  wore flashy clothes, paying or

GROVE  ET  RING UET



owing from  forty  to  a  hundred  dollars for a suit. Girls wore silk stockings, silk underwear, silk dresses; and  nothing  destroys modesty and  sexual  morality  in a girl  more  quickly  than   the  consciousness that  suddenly  she  wears  attractive dessous. This orgy of spending had been enormously stimulated  by the easy money of the flax boom;  and  the rate of expenditure  was hardly  retarded  by the subse­ quent  disaster  of the slump.  A standard of expenditure  once arrived  at is not so easily abandoned as established!" La fille meme de Spalding  est rendue enceinte par  un  ancien  militaire.  Le demier  geste d'Abe  Spalding  aura  une  valeur sym­ bolique  face  aux  valeurs  nouvelles en  gestation. 11 fermera  l'ancienne ecole du
district devenue a ses yeux un endroit de devergondage de la jeunesse.
L'argent, les filles, l'alcool,  les amusements,  autant  d',elements relies a la ville
dont  l'image,  dans  ces deux  romans,  correspond  a celle que  peignait  le roman
paysan  traditionnel. Et le lecteur  n'est  pas certain  que  Grove  et Ringuet,  dans leur  analyse  presque  clinique,  n'endossent  pas taus  deux  la  perception  que  les vieux paysans se font  eux-memes de !'urbanisation et de l'age  nouveau.  lis nous semblent  adopter   une  meme  perspective.  Ringuet  brosse une  image  tres  depri­
mante  de  Montreal   ou  de  White  Falls  a la  fin de son  roman.  Grove  par  son
heros semble prevoir une decadence des valeurs morales.




SI GRoVE ET RINGUET se rencontrent  dans  la  composition de  leur  roman,  s'ils se  rejoignent  dans  leur  temoignage  sur  une  ere  en  pleine mutation,  ils  partagent  aussi  des  conceptions  analogues   dans  leur  vision  de l'homme.  Les romanciers  du  terroir etaient  jusqu'ici assez optimistes, assez ideal­
istes, sur le destin des hommes;  nos deux romanciers s'engagent  a contre-courant
et  en  proposent   une  vision  tragique.   Celui  que  l'on  croyait  un  maitre  est en realite un esclave.
Ringuet,  tout  au long de son roman,  nous fait sentir la condition  dependante du  paysan  par  rapport  a la nature: "Et  cela, dit-il, suivant  l'ordre  ,etabli depuis
des millenaires,  depuis que  l'homme  abdiquant la liberte  que lui permettait  une vie de chasse et de peche, a accepte le joug des saisons et soumis sa vie au rythme
annuel  de  la  terre  a laquelle  il est desormais  accouple."  Moisan  perr;oit "que
toutes les chases de la terre et lui-meme ne dependraient plus rien que de la terre meme  et  du  soleil et  de la  pluie".  Mais ce semble surtout  l'auteur qui  parseme son  recit  de  reflexions sur  le destin  de l'homme  sans  emprunter le truchement d'un  personnage.  Elles :reflechissent un sentiment  d'impuissance  de l'homme  face

GROVE  ET  RINGUET



aux  eLements. Ses decisions sont  "conditionnees par  Ia pluie, le vent,  et Ia neige". II a une "chetive intervention dans  l'ordre des choses"; ses gestes sont  futiles dans "l'immensite indifierente des .elements".  S'il   peut  vaincre  parfois,  il  a  aussi  Ia sensation, et  ici c'est  le cousin  de  Ia ville qui  reftechit,  que  Ia nature champetre est  si  grande qu'il  se sent  "annihile par  son  immensite meme". Quelle  sera  Ia reaction du  paysan  de Ringuet face  a cette  fatalire qui  l'ecrase? Quand les cam­ pagnards virent  Ephrem Moisan,  le fils, se rebeller, ils ne  pouvaient  comprendre qu'on  "n'acceptat  point  J',etat de  choses  eternel   et  fatal   et  qu'on  put  vouloir Iutter  contre; que l'un  d'eux  essayat de prendre le chemin  de traverse des decisions humaines qui  ne sont  pas  imposees  par  Ia nature ou  Ia coutume.  Mais  ils n'en  avaient pas  moins  une  espece  d'admiration etonnee pour  le  rebelle,  pour  cette mauvaise tete  d'Ephrem  Moisan." On  peut  tout  au  plus  ruser,  "apprendre en quoi il faut  obeir a Ia nature et comment profiter  d'elle."
Le paysan  de Trente arpents  accepte done sans 11evolte l'ordre des choses. Cette
attitude semble  meme  normale: le  paysan  developpe une   passivite,  celle  "dont sont  imbus  ceux,  hommes  et betes, dont  les decisions ne sauraient jamais  etre que conditionnelles:  que  conditionnees par  Ia  pluie  et  le  vent  et  Ia  neige  pour  les hommes  ... "
Nous  ne  sommes  pas ·etonnes  que  le  heros  conserve  cette  disposition  passive, lorsqu'il croupit  chez  son  fils aux   Etats-Unis. Void  les  ultimes   reftexions  a  Ia derniere page  de !'oeuvre. "II  n'a  pas renonce  a retourner la-bas  a Saint-Jacques; renoncer  cela  voudrait dire  une  decision  formelle   qu'il   n'a   pas  prise,  qu'il   ne prendra sans  doute  jamais,  qu'il  n'aura jamais  a prendre. Ce sont  les choses qui ont  decide  pour  lui, et les gens, conduits par  les choses."  L'homme passe, Ia terre demeure. Le roman se termine ainsi: " ... a des hommes differents ... une terre toujours Ia meme."
Le  paysan   de  Fruits  of  the   Earth   connait-il  un  destin   analogue?  Comme Moisan,  Spalding est  asservi  par  le sol, et il en  a nette  conscience: "il  lui avait donne  le pouvoir  de Ia faire."
11 se  voit,  comme   Moisan,  soumis  aux  caprices des  elements, a  Ia  pluie,  au
blizzard, a  Ia  secheresse,  au  feu  qui  sont  en  conftit   perpetuel avec  l'homme: "Now he fought  because farm  and  weather ruled  him with  a logic of their  own." Lors de Ia grande inondation, Abe et ses compagnons prennent figure  de heros
et  de  geants   "fighting the  elements". II  se  sent   particulierement  vulnerable a
!'occasion de  Ia  grande recolte  sur  laquelle  i1 a  tout  mise.  "Unless some  major disaster  interfered this  crop  would  place  him  at  the  goal  of  his  ambitions. But could  it be that  no disaster was to come? He felt as though a sacrifice  were needed

GROVE  ET  RINGUET



to  propitiate  the fates. He  caught  himself casting about  for something  he might do to hurt  himself, so as to lessen the provocation  and  challenge his prospect of wealth must be to whatever  power had taken the place of the gods." Abe Spalding a vealise plusieurs de ses grands  reves, surtout  mat·eriels: il a obtenu  les 2  milles car11es de terre  desives, il a mise et gagne sur la grande  recolte de  I g I 2, il a bati la maison qui dominerait la plaine. Mais il a aussi pris conscience "of the futility of it all"'  dans  un  retour  sur lui-meme, car il avait eloigne de lui son epouse et ses enfants.  Cinq  ans  apres  avoir elevee son chateau,  il s'est apeu
se desagregeait  deja.  "The moment  a  work of man  was finished,  nature  set to work to take it down again."
Le pionnier  de Grove est manifestement  lucide face a son sort. Il sait faire des retours sur lui-meme  et  juger de sa situation  tragique.  Peut-etre  est-ce a cause de cela  qu'il  est  plus  actif,  en  aHrontant  sa  destinee. A la  resignation  passive du paysan de Ringuet  qui ne comprenait  pas qu'on  "n'acceptat point l'etat  de chose etemel  et fatal  et qu'on  put  vouloir lutter  contre ... " il oppose une vesignation active. Euchariste  Moisan n'a  pas pris de decisions; les choses ont decide pour lui. Abe Spalding  qui  avait  demissionne  un  temps, decide  lui, d'accepter  consciem­ ment  son sort, et aussi de lutter  contre lui. Promethee  enchaine,  il  ne se rendra  pas aux dieux. L'ecole qu'il  avait fonde est devenue a la fin du roman "an  abode of iniquity". L'esprit  d'apres-guerre envahit  le district.  Il  decide  de  prendre  ou de  reprendre ses  responsabilites,  de  reparer  ses erreurs  avec  sa  famille  "True resignation  meant  accepting  one's destiny; to him, it meant accepting  the burden  of leadership  ... I'll  go on ... To  the end ... Wherever it may be." Il se leve et va fermer  l'ecole.
Conception   analogue   chez  Grove  et  Ringuet  du  destin  de  l'homme-paysan,
livre a la nature,  meme 11esignation, mais reaction plus lucide et active du pionnier de Grove.
Ringuet  et  Grove  se sont  degages des idylles regionalistes en  vogue. Cha:cun a leur  maniere,  dans  des espaces eloignes l'un  de l'autre, ils ont  reflete de fru;on analogue la grande  transition  de l'ere agraire a l'ere technique au Canada.
lls  ont  su aussi et surtout  se degager  des particularismes  ou des regionalismes pour  porter  leurs themes sur  un  plan  plus universe!, celui du destin de l'homme face ala nature. D'origine  ethnique et de milieu differents, a l'interieur d'un  meme pays, ils se rejoignaient  sous des aspects dont !'importance m'a  paru  justifier une comparaison.



SOBER COLOURING

The Ontology of Super-Realism






Hugh Hood









SUPER-REAUSM, yes,  beca= that  ;., how  I thffik of my fiction,  quite  deliberately  and  consciously, very  likely unconsciously  too.  When I started  to write novels and stories about  the  year I 956, I had  no clear idea of what  I was doing.  I  had  had  a literary  education, and  knew something  about critical theory and method as applied to the work of other writers, the classics especially, and  some modems. I got a Ph.D.  in English in late  I955· After that
I did more or less what I wanted. I began to write independently, feeling liberated
from the need to defer to what other people might think. I was glad to get out of the graduate school.
I  had  no  theory  of my own  writing,  and  belonged  to no school, so I  wrote most of a  novel  which  was never  published,  and  a  dozen stories, in I 956  and I957, instinctively,  making  all the important artistic  decisions as I went  along, with  no  theoretical   bias for  one  kind  of  writing  as against  all  the  others.  In­ stinctively,  then,  I turned  out  to be a  moral  realist,  not  a naturalist  nor  a  sur­ realist  nor  a  magic  realist nor  in  any  way  an  experimental or  advance  guard  writer. That was in effect where I began.
All my early  writing  dealt  with  the  affairs  of credible  characters  in  more  or less credible  situations.  As I look back, I see that  this instinctive  moral  realism was tempered   by an  inclination  to show  these  credible  characters, in  perfectly ordinary  situations,  nevertheless doing violent and  unpredictable, and even melodramatic, things.  A brother  and  sister go to visit their  mother's  grave  and are  unable  to find it  in a cemetery of nightmarish proportions; a man  kills his

SOBER COLOURING



newly-baptized  girl friend  thinking  that she will go straight  to Heaven; a young priest  molests  a  child  sexually;  a  young  boy goes mad  under  great  strain.  A yachtsman  runs his boat  on a rock and sinks it, drowning  his wife and her lover, who are trapped  below deck. I would never choose actions like these nowadays, not  because  of  their  violence  but  because of  their  improbability. I  still write about  intense  feeling which leads to impulsive and sometimes violent acts, but  I am better able to locate these feelings in credible occasions.
In  those days, and  for several years afterwards,  I  tried to control  these melo­
dramatic tendencies-murder,  suicide,  hanging  about  in cemeteries, drowning in burst  boats -by  a strong sense of the physical form of stories. I arranged  my pieces according  to complex  numerologies. A novel might  have seven main sec­ tions, one for each day of a specific week in a given year, so that the reader could tell exactly  what  time  it was when something  happened. Or  the book  might  be divided  in three  main  parts,  each with a specific number  of  subdivisions. I once wrote the  rough  draft  of a book in two main sections and  when  I had  finished each  half of the  manuscript was precisely a hundred  and forty-four  pages long:  twelve  twelves  doubled.  This  play  with  numbers  is a  recurrent  feature  of my work.  Around  the  Mountain follows the calendar  very  precisely, with one story for  each  month  from  one Christmas  to the next. I  have always had  a fondness for  the  cycle of the  Christian  liturgical  year.  My  first, unpublished, novel was called God  Rest  You  Merry, and  covered the seven days from Christmas  Night to New Year's Eve, in a most elaborate arrangement.
I still do this. My new novel, which will appear  in the fall of I 972, You  Can't
Get  There   From  Here,  is in  three  parts. The  first and  third  sections have  ten chapters   each;   the  middle   part  has  twenty,  which  gives us:   10I20I 10. The Christian  numerological  symbolism implied is very extensive. It makes a kind of
scaffolding for the imagination.
I  had  then,  and  still  have,  an  acute sense of the  possibilities of close formal organization  of the sentence, syntactically  and  grammatically, and  in its  phone­ mic sequences. I paid  much  attention  to the difficulties of writing long sentences because  I  knew  that  simple-minded  naturalists  wrote short sentences,  using lots of 'ands'.  I did not want  to be a simple-minded  naturalist. I hoped to write syn­ tactically various and  graceful  prose. I took care to vary the number of sentences in succeeding  paragraphs. I rarely used the one-sentence paragraph; when I did so  I  felt  mighty  daring.   I  kept  a careful  eye upon  the  clause-structure  of each sentence.  I  wouldn't use the ellipsis mark  ( ... )  because Arthur  Mizener wrote to me that he considered it a weak, cop-out sort of punctuation.

SOBER COLOURING



I sometimes use the ellipsis now ... and feel guilty.
My interest  in  the sound of sentences, in the  use of colour  words and  of the names  of places, in  practical stylistics, showed  me that  prose fiction might  have an  abstract  element,  a  purely formal  element,  even  though  it  continued  to  be strictly,  morally,  realistic. It might  be possible to think  of prose fiction the  way one thinks  of abstract  elements in representational painting,  or of highly formal music. I  now began  to see affinities between the  art  I was willy-nilly practising and the other arts, first poetry, then painting and music. I have always been passionately attached  to music and  painting -I  have gone so far as to marry  a painter   on  mixed  grounds -and  have  written   many  stories  about   the  arts: film-making,  painting,  music less often because it is on  the surface such  a  non­ narrative art. I find that it is hard to speak about music.
I have also written  some stories about a kind of experience  close to that  of the
artist:   metaphysical  thought.  My stories "A Season of Calm  Weather" (with  its consciously  Wordsworthian  title)   and  "The Hole"  are  about   metaphysicians. The  second of the two tries to show a philosopher's intelligence actually at work, a  hard  thing  to  do.  Like musical thought,  metaphysical  thought  seems to take place in a  non-verbal  region of consciousness, if there  is such  a thing,  and  it is therefore hard to write about, but to me an irresistible challenge.
My novels White   Figure, White  Ground  and  The  Camera  Always  Lies dealt respectively with the  problems of a painter  and  a group  of film-makers. It is the seeing-into-things,  the capacity for meditative  abstraction, that  interests me about philosophy, the  arts and  religious practice. I love most in painting  an art  which exhibits  the  transcendental element  dwelling in  living  things.  I  think  of this as true   super-realism.  And  I  think  of  Vermeer,  or  among   American   artists  of Edward  Hopper,   whose  paintings  of ordinary  places, seaside  cottages,  a  road­ side snack bar and  gasoline station, have touched some level of my own imagina­ tion  which  I  can  only express in fictional images. In  my story  "Getting to Wil­ liamstown"   there  is  a  description  of  a  roadside  refreshment  stand   beside  an abandoned  gas  pump,   which  is  pretty  directly  imitated   from  a  painting   of Hopper's. I see this now, though  I didn't  when  I  wrote  the story. That is what I  mean   by  the  unconscious  elements  in  my  work  which  co-operate  with  my deliberate  intentions.

IHAVE TO  ADMIT   at this point  that  my Ph.D. thesis discussed the  theory  of the  imagination  of the  Romantic  poets and  its background.  The

SOBER COLOURING



argument of  the  thesis was  that  Romantic  imagination-theory was  fundamen­ tally a revision of the theory of abstraction  as it was taught  by Aristotle and  the mediaeval  philosophers. The  kind of knowing which  Wordsworth  called "reason  in its most exalted  mood" and  which Coleridge exalted as creative artistic imagi­ nation,  does the  same thing  as that  power which Saint Thomas  Aquinas thought  of as the active intellect. I do not think of  the imagination and the active intellect as  separate   and  opposed  to  one  another.  No  more  are  emotion  and  thought  lived  distinct  and  apart. The  power  of abstraction,  in  the  terms  of traditional psychology, is not  a  murderous  dissection of living beings;  on the contrary  it is an intimate  penetration into their physical reality. "No  ideas but in things," said William  Carlos  Williams.  I  believe that  Aquinas  would  concur  in  that-the idea lives  in the singular  real being. The  intellect is not set over against emotion, feelings,  instincts,  memory  and  the imagination,  but  intimately  united  to them. The  artist and  the  metaphysician  are  equally  contemplatives;  so are  the saints.
Like Vermeer  or Hopper  or that great creator of musical form, Joseph Haydn, I  am  trying  to concentrate on knowable form  as it lives in the  physical world. These forms are  abstract,  not in the sense of being inhumanly  non-physical,  but in  the  sense  of  communicating the  perfection  of the  essences of  things-the formal  realities  which  create  things  as they  are  in  themselves. A  transcenden­ talist must first study  the things of this world, and get as far inside them  as pos­ sible. My story "The Hole"  tries to show a philosopher working out  this idea in his own experience.  Here,  as everywhere in my writing, I have studied  as closely and  intensely  as I  can  the insides of things which are not  me. The  great  meta­  phor  in  human  experience  for truly apprehending another  being is sexual  prac­ tice. Here,  perhaps  only here, do we get inside another  being. Alas, the entrance is only metaphorical. In  plain fact  no true  penetration  happens  in love-making. It is not possible for one physical being to merge into another,  as D. H. Lawrence finally realized.  Bodies occupy different  places; there is nothing to be done about this. Sex is a metaphor for union, not itself achieved union.
What  we are united to in this world is not physical insides of persons or things,
but  the knowable  principle  in them.  Inside everything  that  exists is essence, not in  physical space  and  time,  but  as forming space and  time and  the  perceptions possible within  them.  What  I  know,  love, and  desire in another   person,  isn't inside him like a nut in its shell, but it is everywhere that  he is, forming  him. My identity  isn't  inside me-it  is how I am. It is hard  to express the way we know the forms of things, but this is the knowing that art exercises.
Art after  all, like every other human  act, implies a philosophical stance: either

SOBER COLOURING



you  think  that   there  is nothing to  things  that  is not  delivered   in  their  appear­ ances,  or you think  that  immaterial forms exist in these things, conferring identity on  them.  These  are  not  the  only  ontological alternatives,  but  they  are  extreme ones,  and   they  state  a  classical  ontological   opposition.  The bias  of  most  con­ temporary thought has  been  towards the  first  alternative, until  the  very  recent past.  But  perhaps we  are  again   beginning to  be  able  to  think   about   the  nou­  menal  element  in things,  their  essential  and  intelligible principles, what  Newman called  the  "illative" aspect  of  being.  The  danger of  this  sort  of  noumenalism is that  you may  dissolve the  hard, substantial shapes  of things,  as they  can  be seen to  be,  into  an  idealistic  mish-mash -something I'm  not  inclined to do.  I'm not a Platonist or a dualist  of any  kind.  I think  with  Aristotle  that  the  body and  the soul  are  one;  the  form  of a thing  is totally  united  to its matter. The  soul is the body.  No ideas but in things.
That is where  I come  out: the  spirit  is totally  in the  flesh. If you  pay  close
enough attention to  things,  stare  at  them,  concentrate on  them  as  hard  as  you can,  not  just  with  your  intelligence,  but  with  your  feelings  and  instincts -with your  prick  too -you  will begin  to apprehend the forms in them. Knowing is not a  matter of sitting  in  an  armchair while  engaged in  some  abstruse conceptual calculus   of  weights   and   measures   and   geometrical  spaces.   Knowing  includes making love, and  making  pieces of art,  and  wanting and  worshipping and  calcu­ lating  (because calculation is also part  of knowing) and  in fact  knowing is what  Wordsworth called  it,  a  "spousal  union" of the  knower  and  the  known, a mar­ riage  full  of flesh.
I want   to  propose  the  Wordsworthian account of  the  marriage of  the  mind
and   the  thing   as  a  model  of  artistic  activity.   I don't think   that  the  Romantic movement failed.  I think  we are  still in the  middle of it. Of  the  Romantic mas­ ters,  Wordsworth seems to me to have understood best how things  move in them­ selves,  how  they  exist  as  they  are  when  they  are  possessing  themselves,  having  their  identities, living.  Wordsworth has an extraordinary grasp  of the movement, the  running motion, of the  physical,  the  roll of water  or sweep  of  wind, changing textures of fog  or  mist,  all that  is impalpable and  yet material.  In  this fleeting,  running  movement  of  physical  existence,  for   Wordsworth  there  is  always  the threat of  an  illumination, "splendour in  the  grass,  glory  in the  flower". Things are full of the visionary gleam.
The illuminations in  things  are  there,  really  and  truly  there,  in  those  things.
They   are  not  run  over  them   by  the  projective intelligence, and   yet  there  is a sense in  which  the  mind,  in  uniting itself to things,  creates  illumination in them.

32

SOBER COLOURING



The clouds that gather round the setting sun
Do take a sober colouring from an eye
That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality;

This  is a triple eye, that  of the setting sun which colours the clouds, and  that  of the sober human  moral imagination, and finally that of God as brooding, creative Father  of all. The  colouring  of the clouds is given to them  by the  Deity in the original  act  of creation.  Every  evening  the sun  re-enacts  the  illumination. The moral  imagination  operates  in the same way, though it is not originally creative; it  projects  colouring  into  things,  true,  but  the  colouring  has already  been  put there  by the divine creation.  The  act of the human  knower is an act of  recipro­ city. It half creates, and half perceives "the mighty world of eye and ear".
"I have at all times endeavoured to look steadily at my subject," said  Words­ worth,  very  justly. His  regard  to things is concentrated  and  accurate;  he insists everywhere  on  the  utter  necessity of the sensory process, of seeing and  hearing, of  taking  in  the  sensible world  and  transforming  it.  He  proposes "to  throw  a certain  colouring  of  the  imagination   over  incidents  and  situations  taken  from common  life."  This  is  the  same  metaphor   as  that  of  the  final  stanza  of  the "Intimations Ode". The  eye in seeing gives colour to things;  but  the  colour is there.
The  poetry of Wordsworth  supplies us again  and  again  with examples of this colouring  of imagination  spread  over incidents and situations  from  common life. The   figure  of  the  old  Leech-Gatherer  in  "Resolution   and   Independence"  is perhaps  the  most overwhelming  example  of this capacity  of very ordinary  per­ sons and  scenes to  yield, on  close inspection, an almost  intolerable significance.

In my mind's eye I seemed to see him pace About the weary moors continually, Wandering about alone and silently.

The   concentrating  eye,  interior j exterior,  giving  to  things  their  sober  hues,  is constant  in  Wordsworth. I  have  imitated  it from  him  in  my work.  In  the  de­ liberately   paired   stories  "Socks"  and   "Boots"  I  have  chosen  incidents  from ordinary  life and  characters such  as may  be met with  everywhere,  and  I  have attempted to  look steadily  at  these  persons in  the  hope  that  something  of  the noumenal  will emerge.




33

SOBER COLOURING




b:ESE STORIES  ARE,  to  begin  with,  political;  they are  about the  ways in  which living in society modifies our  personal  desires, a very  Words­ worthian  theme.  Domenico  Lercaro  in "Socks"  does not  want  to work so hard. Nobody  wants  to work that  hard.  He  doesn't  want  to work on a  garbage  truck or do snow removal,  but he is driven  to it by the need to survive. The  fictional "my  wife" in  the story "Boots"  wants  to  buy a certain  specific kind  of winter footwear,  but the stores simply don't stock the  boots she wants. We can buy only what we are offered, and our range of choice is surprisingly limited.
I have tried to move beyond the fiction of social circumstance  by taking a very attentive  look at  my two main  characters.  In  "Socks"  poor  Domenico  sees the enormous,  noisy, snow-removal machine  tum  before his eyes into a divine beast or Leviathan. Everyone who has seen these machines at work recognizes their intimations  of violence, in their noise and in the sharpness of their rotary  blades. They  have actually  killed and eaten  people. Modem  life is full of these mechani­ cal  beasts.
"My  wife" in "Boots" feels trivialized by fashion;  most women in middle-class
circumstances  do, I think. To  wear high heels and  a girdle is to enslave yourself
-to adopt  the badges of a humiliating  subservience. This story tries to make its readers sense the galling limits on their activities felt by intelligent  women in the face of the clothes which fashion and chic propose for them: the necessary sexual exhibitionism, the silly posturing, the faked little-girlishness.
The  two stories insinuate  larger  issues than  their subjects  would suggest;  they are following  Wordsworth's  prescription. I have at all times endeavoured  to look steadily at my subjects. I hope that my gaze has helped to light them up.


FOOTNOTES

1 This essay also appears as the introduction  to these stories in the forthcoming an­ thology The   Narrative  Voice,  edited  by John  Metcalf  and  to  be  published  by McGraw-Hill of Canada.












34



ETHEL WILSON

Innocent Traveller






Frank Birbalsingh





"D0  WE  ALWAYS LIVE ON   A  BRINK, then, said Nora to her- self, lying there  in  the  dark.  Yes, I  believe we do." This  quotation, from  Ethel
Wilson's novel, Love  and Salt Water, reflects the thoughts  of the heroine's sister, soon after  the  heroine,  Ellen Cuppy,  meets an accident  that  leaves her face  per­ manently   scarred.   Why  should  this  disaster  occur  so  unexpectedly  during an ordinary  outing  in which Ellen takes her nephew to the seaside? Are all ordinary,  everyday actions marked  by unpredictability and filled with the same potentiality of disaster? These  are some of the main questions that  Mrs. Wilson's novels and stories try to answer;  and  altogether,  they brilliantly  project  the luminous  truth  of  Nora's  observation-that we all live continuously on a  brink,  and  that  our commonest  actions  have  the  capacity  constantly to  frustrate, delight  or, at  any rate, surprise  us. Since we live on a brink without knowing the exact outcome of our actions, we are innocent.  It is the underlying purpose of Mrs. Wilson's fiction to  record  the  facts  of  our  innocence  by  illustrating  the  critical  significance  of seemingly trivial events in our lives; and her underlying theme, throughout, is an unpredictable future  which,  by means of  coincidence or  unimportant incidents, asserts an  unfailing  ability  to inflict  apparently  undeserved  grief and  unmerited injury on unsuspecting  individuals.
Although  her first short  story appeared  in 1937 when she was forty-nine  years old,  Ethel  Wilson's  published  fiction adds  up  to no  more  than  six short  novels and  one  collection  of stories.  In  spite  of its unimpressive volume,  however,  or perhaps  because  of  it,  her  work -I  suggest -achieves  a  higher  standard of


35

ETHEL WILSON



literary  excellence  than  that  of  any  other  Canadian  writer  of  fiction  except Stephen  Leacock. Her excellence is due principally  to a fresh and engaging style, the splendid  detachment  and  graceful  poise of which  no other  Canadian, again except Leacock, has been able to rival. Indeed,  even the much-vaunted chronicler of Mariposa  would sometimes be hard pressed to equal the purity of Mrs. Wilson's limpid  prose,  the  accuracy  of  her  dialogue,  and  the  fastidious  delicacy  of the whole tone of her writing.
All  Mrs. Wilson's books illustrate  the sudden  shocks and  abrupt  shifts of for­
tune,  like  Ellen's  accident,  which  can  be  produced   by unforeseen  events.  Mrs. Wilson's  universe is one of complete chaos, where  anything  can  happen  to any­ one  at  any  time;  but  she shows no  willingness  to  question  this  disorder.  She takes her strange  and  haphazard  universe for granted, and  nowhere  reveals the slightest  interest  in  investigating  its  philosophical  foundations. Thus  her  books do not  probe or analyse the action which they describe. Instead,  they impose on this action  a view of life that  is slightly  whimsical  and  which effectively neutral­ izes the  actual  risks and  inherent  dangers  of an  unpredictable future.  The  two essential  features  of  Mrs.  Wilson's  fiction  therefore,  are  her  illustration  of the inimical  capacity  of the future,  and a predilection  for a whimsicality that  evokes the supernatural realities behind everyday appearances.
These  features  can  be seen in  the  first novel,  Hetty  Dorval,  which  consists mostly of fortuitous  episodes contained  within  a  melodramatic plot. The  arbi­ trary  selection and  association of episodes represents only an imperfect  presenta­ tion  of  the  author's consistent subject  of  people  living  innocently  in  a  world where  each  new  experience  brings  them  unsuspectingly  to  the  brink of catas­ trophe.  A prevailing  feeling for fantasy suffuses the  plot and  reinforces a power­ ful sense of indwelling  mystery in ordinary  events. The heroine, Hetty  Dorval, is a  ruthless  "femme  fatale",  a  freakish  creature   of  doubtful   virtue,  who  is sus­ pected  of  dark  dealings  and  sinister  intentions  wherever  she  goes, whether  to Canada, England   or  Europe. Her  capricious  movements  and  implausible  rela­ tionships  are  marked  by a whimsical  fancifulness  that  flavours the entire  narra­ tive.
The   Innocent  Traveller,  Mrs. Wilson's second  book, is a mixture  of fact  and
fiction which  gives, in outline, the one-hundred-year biography  of Topaz  Edge­ worth,  an  English  lady,  who  emigrates  in  the  middle  of the  last  century  and settles in  British Columbia.  The  action  chiefly provides situations  "for  a  house­ hold of women to gather in and  read their letters to each other, drink tea, mend, and  tum  sheets sides-to-middles," though,  we should  add,  these trivial, spinster-

g6

ETHEL WILSON



ish events  are  not  nearly  as claustrophobic as they sound. Touched by Mrs. Wil­
son's humour, they provide a narrative that  is far from  dull.
As in  the  previous  book,  fortuitous coincidence dominates the  action  so  thor­ oughly  that  even  factual incidents from  the  heroine's  biography take  on  almost hallucinatory significance or convey implications that  border  on the supernatural. The opening chapter ends:

Above the  table  the  future  hung  implicit, almost palpable,  around  the family. Above the  table  Mother  sighed, caught  the  adult  eyes, smiled  her sad smile, and arose.
It was the next night that mother died.

And towards the end of the novel, another chapter opens as follows:

Topaz  has  for  the  last  time  left  Vancouver  for  her  summer  holiday,  but,  of course, she does  not  know this. We do not know these things. Henceforward  she will stay at home.

It  is not  that  the  author dabbles in the  occult.  Nothing as extreme as that. But often  she  is on  the  verge  of  prescient  statements momentarily illuminated  by a glimmer of  clairvoyancy, as  when  she  reminds   us  of  unusual connections  be­ tween  apparently unrelated actions,  or when she pauses, suggestively,  to meditate on  the  unknown possibilities  of the future. Yet, she employs  no crude or macabre conceits.   She   hints   quietly  at  unusual   happenings or  comments  knowingly   in passing  when  notable events  take  place;  and  her hints  and comments are always,  as it  were,  accompanied by a gentle  smile that  suggests  wonderment or fascina­ tion.  Her  narratives delicately avoid  eeriness or terror, and  the  tone  of her  writ­  ing  never  betrays  "negative" emotions  such  as fear, or  even  disappointment.
The third  novel, Tuesday  and Wednesday, gives a closely-observed  account of
two  days  in  the  life  of  Mortimer Johnson, a feckless and  irresponsible odd-job man  who, towards the  end  of the story, tries in vain to save a friend  from drown­ ing,  only  himself  to  be  drowned as  well. The  police  assume  that   Mort  and  his friend   were  drunk,  but   luckily,   Mort's cousin,  Victoria, has  seen  him shortly  before  the  accident, and   is able  to  tell  his wife,  Myrtle, that   he  was  not.  The  accident itself  gives  a  totally  unexpected reversal  to  the  former  drab routine of Mort, Myrtle  and  Victoria. Victoria's life, in  particular, is of  withering banality. Describing her,  Mrs. Wilson writes:

However  insipid, or  unimportant, or anonymous  you are,  your  humanity  imposes upon  you certain  conditions  which insist that  you spend  twenty-four  hours  a day somewhere, and  that you spend, somehow, twenty-four hours a day.

37

ETHEL WILSON



But even insignificant Victoria, whose life is a mere filling up of time, proves significant  in the  end  when,  by coincidence, she is able  to vindicate  Mort  post­ humously.  Mrs. Wilson again  exemplifies her theory  that  our lives are largely a collection of commonplace  occurrences any of which  can suddenly assume great and critical importance.
The  realistic aspects of Tuesday  and Wednesday are embodied  in the detailed documentation  of  the  domestic  routine  of  Mort,   Myrtle   and   Victoria.   This realism,  however,  is transfigured  by vivid dreams  and  fantasies  which  produce, in  the end,  a narrative  that  is a subtle blend  of realistic and  fantastic  elements. Ministering  angels attend  Mort  and  Myrtle  on  their  daily  rounds  as well as in their  beds at  night.  But even these bizarre  creatures  are  not  fully bizarre;  cer­ tainly  they  are  not  frightening.   Mort's  angel  is a  friendly,  sympathetic  fellow who  can  be  very  patient  with  his protege,  and  down-to-earth, human,  in  his reactions:

Mort's angel  used  to  kick  him  a  little  when   Mort said  things  like  this;  but  the angel  doesn't kick  anymore,  because  it-the  angel -realizes that  the  two  things Mort  really  loves are  his wife Myrtle  and  himself-the first inconstantly and  the second  with  a  varying  intensity   that  sometimes   includes his  fellow  man  in  some vicarious way identified  with  himself;  and  that  when  Mort makes  these statements (that he  loves  being  a gardener, or a shepherd, or  a  plumber, or a horse-breaker, or  a  plasterer), he  really means  them,  at  the  moment, and  it often  gives his inter­ locutor  a great  deal of pleasure  and a sense of security,  poor thing.

The  passage is typical,  and  it shows that  though  Mrs.  Wilson's characters  are visited by flashes of the supernatural, they themselves are  never ghostly. Nor is the  action  wholly mysterious, though  it has its elements of mystery. Mrs. Wilson is too delicate an artist to yield completely either to the drab  monotony  of  every­ day  life, or  to  the  imaginative  flights of our  best moments.  Hers  is a  fine and subtle  art,  feminine  in  essence, one that  perhaps  no  man  and  few  women  can reproduce  exactly. It is this subtlety that  saves her  portrait  of reality from being dull, and her flights of fancy from being incredible.
Lilly's Story,  the  next novel, tells of a Vancouver woman's  uphill struggle  to conceal her disreputable  past for the sake of her illegitimate  daughter. For thirty­ two years, under  the assumed name of Mrs. Walter  Hughes,  Lilly Waller labours ceaselessly to  acquire  and  maintain  a  conventionally  "respectable"  image.  Her efforts succeed when, in the end, the daughter is suitably  married. Lilly's story is a frank  and  objective account  of her original  waywardness,  her later  iron-willed determination  to  change,  and  her  subsequent  decline  into  dowdy  middle  age.

ETHEL WILSON



The  facts  of  her  career  are  not  idealized,  but  are  presented  successively in  all their irretrievably  mundane detail. At the end, her patient labours are at least temporarily  retrieved  from  total  insignificance when, as she goes about  her  job as cleaning  woman  in an hotel, she meets a widower who proposes marriage.
The  pattern   of  events  is identical  to  that  of the  author's   preceding  works: Lilly uncomprehendingly faces the future  which at first fills her life with  adver­ sity, and,  just as unexpectedly,  brings her prosperity. Throughout, she lives on a brink, for each  of the  unexciting  episodes in which she is involved  takes her un­ knowingly to the verge of happiness or grief. Mrs. Wilson's theme could so easily have been sombre and  grey. After all, Lilly's experiences are scarcely happy ones, except for  the  widower she meets at the end.  But it is the whole purpose of the author's  writing  to avoid gloom and  dejection,  and she  achieves this repeatedly by a  judicious  admixture of whimsicality  that  effectively neutralizes  the  tragic implications in her work.
Lilly is driven  by misfortune from pillar to post; first there is her Chinese lover who  gets  into  trouble  with  the  police;  then  a  Welshman  who  abandons her, pregnant; and  throughout there is the malignant  threat  of "respectable" society. But Lilly faces each episode as it comes. Always, she shows an energetic wanton­ ness that  makes  her  appear  either  extraordinarily   brave  or  utterly  stupid.  The  truth  in fact  is in the middle.  She may sometimes be a little brave  and  at other  times a little stupid.  At all times, she has the capacity  to yield to  romantic  and fanciful instincts deep within her.
Swamp  Angel,  the  fifth novel, relates the story of Maggie  Vardoe,  who flees from  confining  married  security  in  Vancouver  to the  free,  Cariboo  country  of British Columbia. She  takes refuge in  a camp  with  Haldar  Gunnarsen and  his wife Vera,  but  her  happiness  is soon shattered  by Vera's  unexpected   jealousy. The   very  trivial  undertakings  which  make  Maggie  happy-fishing, cooking, and  general  helpfulness  in  the  camp -nourish Vera's  jealousy, thereby  assert­ ing the author's consistent belief in the potentiality of common events to produce  both  happiness  and  grief. In  the first place, it is the dreary  routine  of  marriage  that  drives Maggie  away from  her husband,  and, in the second, it is the routine  of camp  life that  destroys her  relationship  with  her new friends.  In  either  case, the lurking  unpredictability of the future  influences her life critically and  proves that  she too lives on a brink.  But Maggie is no more a tragic  figure  than  either Hetty  Dorval or Lilly Waller. She takes each setback in her stride. She bears her misfortunes  cheerfully  because  she cultivates  deep spiritual  longings,  and  relies

39

ETHEL WILSON



implicitly  on the advice of an old friend  whose life is almost entirely given over to fantasy.
The  esoteric affairs of this seventy-year-old friend,  Nell Severance,  are closely
interwoven  with Maggie's adventures. The frequent  time-shifts between Maggie's adventures  in the woods and  those of her friend in the city can be irritating; but the  main  point  of  the  relationship  is that   Maggie's  substantial, down-to-earth activities  are  inevitably  tinged  by the  mysterious atmosphere surrounding  Nell. The  result,  as always in  Mrs. Wilson's fiction, is a tantalizing description  of a reality that  is not as real as it seems. Nell Severance is a romantic  who dreams of her  former  days in  the  circus, of which  the  gun  "Swamp Angel"  is a  precious souvenir.  In  a  typical  gesture,  reminiscent  of Arthurian romance,  she  commis­ sions Maggie to throw  the gun into a lake when she dies. But Nell is not fooled even by her own fantasies. To prove that  her feet are planted  on the ground,  the author   endows  her  with  piercing  insights  and   uncanny   wisdom.  Of  all  her characters, Nell  provides  Mrs.  Wilson's best illustration  of the  hidden  sapience and discernment  of our intuitions.
Love  and  Salt Water, Mrs. Wilson's last novel and  her  best full-length  work,
furnishes  the  most  comprehensive  treatment  of  her  theme.  The  main  action, dealing  with  domestic relations, family visits and  humdrum social intercourse,  is true to form. After her mother's death,  Ellen Cuppy and  her father  leave Canada for a holiday abroad.  The  father  remarries  and  Ellen returns  to work in Saskat­ chewan.  She keeps in touch  with her family and  regularly visits her sister, Nora, in  Vancouver.  Like  Mort's  cousin, Victoria,  she leads  an  unremarkable life for a young girl;  just her family, tennis, boy friends. Then comes her accident  which is a direct  result of one of the unremarkable, humdrum social activities in which she  normally  engages.  Ellen, no  less than  her  predecessors in  the other  novels, lives on a brink, as her sister Nora clearly realizes.
These  two novels provide insights that  are only hinted  at in the earlier works. Love  and  Salt  Water, in  particular, reveals an  acute  awareness  of unforeseen events linking  up without  warning,  to affect different  sets of people who are far apart   and  who  sometimes  don't  even  know  each  other.  In  a  typical  incident, Ellen  is in  Vancouver  expecting  a  visit from  her  friend,  George  Gordon,  who works in  Montreal,  but  the  manager  of George's  firm,  Prendergast, is abruptly taken  ill and  George has to take his place. The  author  knowingly comments:

The circle of life is extraordinary, and  Miss Cuppy was drawn up into  the circle of Mr.  Prendergast's life when  his secretary  had  to  telephone the  doctor  that  he was ill, and   then   telephone Mrs.  Prendergast, and   the  doctor telephoned and  made

ETHEL WILSON



arrangements  at  the  hospital, and  the lives of George Gordon in  Montreal  and Miss Cuppy  in  Vancouver  were affected, perhaps temporarily, or  perhaps  per­ manently and  fatally.

The  passage points to the inter-relatedness  of human experience which is a direct product  of the unpredictable future,  the actual  agent that  is responsible for link­ ing  up  the  various  people and  bringing  their disparate  roles together  in a single network  of  human   relationships.  Mrs.  Wilson is not  primarily  concerned  with this network,  which  is, after  all, a result;  it is the agent  that  generates  the net­ work which  most interests her-in  this case, the accidental  illness of Mr. Pren­  dergast which neither Ellen nor George could predict.



MosT OF  THE STORIES IN Mrs. Golightly and Other Stories deal  with  familiar  subjects  of routine  domesticity. In  these stories Mrs. Wilson's customary  blend of mild fantasy  and solid reality is very happily  expressed when dreary,  everyday  proceedings  are touched  by almost hallucinatory implications. A  visit  to  the  London   church   where  two  of  Shakespeare's  fellow  actors   are buried,  arouses  not  merely  admiring  nostalgia,  but  also an  enthralling sense of the  past that  seems to bring  us into direct contact  with the ghostly presences of the two men.  Many stories have similar supernatural or quasi-supernatural over­ tones, which  may  astonish  or briefly puzzle, but never frighten  us. We  wonder,  but  do  not  scream.  It is the  characteristic  subtlety  of Mrs.  Wilson's  art  that  it often takes us to the verge of horrifying emotions but never beyond.
In  a  way,  Mrs. Wilson is the feminine  counterpart of the  film-maker  Alfred
Hitchcock,   who  skilfully  exploits  the  hidden  mysteries of  familiar  scenes  and objects  by  simple,  unpretentious techniques  as,  for  example,  when  he  uses a slightly unusual  camera  angle to photograph  the depth  of an ordinary  armchair and  awaken  unsuspecting  terror.  But his trade  is horror,  while  Mrs. Wilson's  is merely  fascination.   It  is  the  fascination   that   Mrs.  Golightly  discovers  in  the mechanical  ring of a common  telephone. Who is it? What should she say? What if she  says the  wrong  thing?  Her  uncertain  approach, cautious  reply and  final relief embrace  a range of feelings that  fascinate without  terrifying her. Like Mrs. Golightly,  many  of the  author's characters  are  able  to  perceive a  possibility  of fantasy,   romance   even,  in  ordinary   day-to-day  incidents.   The   unpredictable future  should  not frighten  us, Mrs. Wilson implies:  the  very uncertainty that  it imposes on us also provides an opportunity  of supplementing  the arid  monotony of everyday  living  with  the  lush excitement  of fantasy;  if living on  a  brink  is

ETHEL WILSON



dangerous,  it can also be thrilling. Innocence  does not exclude us from happiness on our journey through life.
Since  her  novels record the facts of our  innocence  by constantly  stressing our ignorance  of the future,  and  by warning of the possibility of good or ill-fortune in each new experience, we must agTee that  the author  is projecting  a point of view that  is essentially hopeless. If the  future  is a  blank,  and  catastrophe can  take place  at  any  time,  then  men  are  simply  pawns  of God,  and  human  effort  or optimism  is surely  irrelevant.  This,  one supposes,  would  be  the  logical line  of argument  implied  by  the  author's  stress  on  our  innocence.  But  Mrs.  Wilson distinctly  avoids any such logical exploration  of her  themes and  the hopeless or even  tragic  significance  they  may  carry.  Deliberately  she  ignores  implications Even  when  the  future  brings catastrophe,  as it invariably  does, her  books show no  sign  of  regTet. Hetty  Dorval,  Myrtle  Johnson,   Lilly  Waller  and   Maggie Vardoe  are  women to whom the future  is far from kind;  yet in no case does the tone  of  the  novel  become  commiserating  or  plaintive.  On  the  contrary,  each narrative recreates a prevailing mood of splendid fascination  as if to suggest that the  author  actually  enjoys the limitations  imposed  upon  us by our  common  ig­ norance  of the  future.  Mrs. Wilson acknowledges  these limitations,  and  sets her mind  to relieve, not to investigate, their  unpleasantness.  This is why she does not probe  the  philosophical  problems  that  underlie  her  novels for she is not  really interested  in  philosophical inquiry  or intellectual  searching.  She accepts  human experience  as it is, and simply suggests that  we should accommodate to its limita­ tions by invoking the immanent  wisdom of fantasy to relieve its worst restrictions. To accommodate, all we need is faith.
The   author's  thinking   is strongly  influenced   by  the  disillusionment  of  the immediate   post  World  War  I  era  which  the  poetry  of T.  S. Eliot expresses so well. It  may be that  Eliot's poetry itself directly influences Mrs. Wilson, but even if  it does not,  we are  certain  that  both  writers  draw  a substantial  part  of their literary  inspiration  from  a  common  source -the  gloomy philosophical  climate of the 192o's and 3o's:

Hot water at ten
And if it rains, a closed car at four,
And we shall play a game of chess.

The  spirit  of these lines is identical with the spirit of the discussions about  Major
Butler  and  his wife which "went  on and  on and  never arrived." The  difference

ETHEL WILSON



is that Mrs. Wilson sees the meaningless  triviality  of these discussions as a "merit," whereas  Eliot regards  it with  a sense of tragic disillusion :

And what essential joy canst thou expect Here upon earth?  What permanent effect Of transitory  causes?

There is no  such  plaintiveness in  Mrs.  Wilson's  novels.  She  feels as strongly  as Eliot  about the  transience limiting our  lives, but  she  conceals  the  extremity of her  feelinand  sublimates them  in a kind  of bemused  fascination. The  facts  of our  innocence do  not  challenge her  intellectually as they  do  Eliot: she patiently records  them, then  sits  back,  fascinated, but  unwilling to delve  behind  the  facts themselves.
It is revealing to  recall  the  antics  of Mortimer Johnson's cat  in Tuesday  and
Wednesday:

Feral,  wise, with  her  inscrutable  little hunter's  nose and  whiskers she felt and  ex­ plored  and  recorded  each chair  leg, each table leg, each corner.  She prowled  and prowled  on silent paws, and  sometimes she stopped  to wash. When  she was satis­ fied, she  accepted  and  adopted  the  room. Then  she slept fitfully. She  slept  any­ where, lightly yet deeply, waking and moving often. Chiefly she slept on Mort and Myrtle  who  lay  deep  in  sleep, warm  and  approved  by her.  But  sometimes she awoke, remembering  something  pleasant. Then  she jumped  lightly  down and  ran to  her  box. She scrambled  up  the side of her  box and  sat down,  quivering,  still, looking into the transparent dark with bliss.

The  last word of this passage corresponds with the author's own fascinated attitude, and  it  represents the  whimsical view of life that  Mrs.  Wilson's fiction  advocates all along; for  fascination neutralizes and  transcends the  limitations of our  inno­ cence  by exploiting its capacity for fantasy. The  future may  be dark  and fraught with  danger; but  if we  look  into  it  with  the  bliss of  Mort's cat,  we  relieve  the shock  and  hurt  of danger if and  when  it comes. We  know  from  Nell Severance that   the  source  of  bliss  (or  fascination)  is faith,  but  Nell  does  not  reveal  the ultimate source  of faith itself, and  we must  try to trace  it on our  own  by picking  up   what   clues  we  can   from   both   internal  and   external  evidence  within   the author's work.
The  best  internal evidence consists of the  characters who  exemplify Mrs. Wil­ son's  faith. Usually   they  are  imaginative women  who  are  willing,  at  the  right  moment, to yield to an  inbred instinct  for fantasy.  Maggie Vardoe can  flee from  the  security  of  marriage, to  the  freedom  of a  British  Columbian forest  because

43

ETHEL WILSON



she yields readily  to deep, inner  yearnings. Most of the women in the Golightly volume also show similar propensities. And the queen  of them all, the aged, half­ mystic, half-prophetic Nell Severance,  by her  vatic  utterances,  strongly  reminds us of  Mrs.  Wilcox and  Mrs. Moore in the  novels of E. M.  Forster.  Both  Mrs. Wilcox  and   Mrs.  Moore  abjure  what  Forster  calls  the  "life  of  telegrams  and anger",   and  cultivate  instead  the  fertile  intuitions of  the  spirit.  Basically, this means exploiting the possibilities of fantasy  provided  by their immediate  environ­ ment;  for  they  too,  in  their  innocence,  cannot  understand  the  reasons  for  so much  that  goes on  around  them.  Unlike  their  friends  and  relations  who allow themselves  to  be  trapped   by  their  innocence,  Mrs.  Wilcox  and  Mrs.  Moore frankly  accept  their  limitations and  blissfully transcend them  by developing their inner  lives.
Faith  is the  development  of one's inner life, an  activity of the spirit  that  both Mrs.  Wilson  and  E.  M.  Forster  approve  of and  strongly  advocate,  but  which neither  of them  fully understands. The  most they seem able to do is to illustrate it. The  similarity  between  Mrs. \Vilson's outlook  and  Forster's seems conclusive. After all, it does not take much insight to imagine  Nell Severance  in India com­ muning  with the mystic sounds and silences of the Malabar caves. Forster's theme in A  Passage to  India, as well as in his other novels, is the "connection" between what he calls the "prose" and the "passion" of life. His "prose" corresponds to the material  side of our  experience, the  humdrum everyday  events of Mrs.  Wilson, while his "passion"  largely resembles her reliance  on the  intuitions  of the spirit. The fascination  that  Mrs. Wilson advocates makes precisely the "connection" that Forster seeks, since it provides an attitude  to life that  is a compromise between the two  basic elements  of our experience,  the  material  and  the spiritual.  As Forster says at the  beginning of HowardJs End, "Only  connect  the prose and the passion and  both  will be exhausted,  and  human  love will be seen at  its height.  Live in fragments  no  longer."  This  is  exactly  what  Nell  Severance,  Mrs.  Wilcox  and Mrs. Moore do. Nor should we ignore the external  evidence offered by Desmond Pacey  in  his  book on  Ethel  Wilson, where  he quotes  from  one of the  author's letters in  which she  expresses her love for three  of Forster's  novels in particular. There  can  be little  doubt  that  the faith  revealed  in  her own  novels is, to some considerable  extent, the result of Mrs. Wilson's close and  admiring  contact  with the tender  humour  and  cautious idealism of a fine novelist who was also one of the most tolerant, gentle and compassionate of men. So far as we can tell, Forster's novels  are,  if   not  the  ultimate  literary  source,  certainly  a  radically  formative element of  Mrs. Wilson's faith.

ETHEL WILSON



Before  concluding, we  should   mention   some  aspects  of  the  author's writing that  contribute greatly  to her  success although they are  not strictly  related  to her main  theme; for  example, her  nature descriptions  and  dialogue. As illustrations of local colour,  her  books vividly reproduce regional  features of Canada's Pacific coast.  But  there  is no  need  to  give any  of  her  descriptions here,  partly  because they  abound in  her  writing, and   partly  because  they  are  a  merit  shared, to  a greater or  lesser  extent, by other  Canadian writers.  Mrs.  Wilson's  pre-eminence shines  more  brightly in  her  dialogue. She  captures authentic qualities of  Cana­ dian  speech,  whether she  is dealing  with  Chinese  artisans of Vancouver, natura­ lised,  English-born  immigrants  or  native   Canadians. By  exactness   of   diction, rhythm and   intonation, she  expresses subtle  nuances of  feeling  and  illuminates hidden  recesses of character.
We  must   also  briefly  illustrate  the  characteristic  qualities of  Mrs.  Wilson's
general   prose  style,  for  example, its dry  humour, judicious  economy  and  serene detachment. The following quotation, from  Lilly's Story, describes  the gossip in a village store :

The  talk in the store then  resumed the endless discussion of how much older Mrs. Butler was than  Mr.  Butler;  what was they doing in China  anyway; Major  Butler was in the Customs,  why then he wasn't  no soldier;  he was in the Boxer troubles, but he didn't  look like no boxer, too skinny: he was head of the Chinese army, they musta  kicked  him  out:   he was in  the British Ambassador's  office, well, he might be at  that; seemed  a  nice fella:  well, they minded  their  business and  paid  their bills: kinda funny coming way off here, maybe they wasn't married  anyways. Discussions like this  were  pleasant  in the long summer  evenings too and  had  the merit that they went on and on and never arrived.

Provincial  ignorance  and   narrow-mindedness  provide   obvious   humour,  while the  careful  selection  of the  details  that  are  discussed  indicates the spareness  and shrewdness of  the  author's  judgment. But  the  most  outstanding feature of  the passage  is that Mrs.  Wilson  sides  neither   with  the  Butlers  nor  their  detractors, reporting the  failings   of  the  latter   objectively, without  satire  or  venom.  If we were  to single  out  the  most significant  feature of her style, it would  be this placid detachment  which   enables   the  author  to  portray   less  praiseworthy  aspects  of human nature calmly,  without a trace of anger  or bitterness.
For  all  their   entertainment value,  however,  and   despite  their   brilliant  tech­ nique,  Mrs.  Wilson's  novels  cannot  be said  to constitute "major" fiction. Indeed, she  does not  attempt to  produce "major" fiction. She  does not  analyse the  prob­ lem  of an  unpredictable future in  a way  that  significantly increases the  reader's


45

ETHEL WILSON



understanding of it,  or illuminates  its precise moral  characteristics.  Her  writing moves at a level that  deliberately ignores the more profound  aspects of her theme. Her  chief aim is not  to understand  the  philosophical  basis of an  unpredictable future,   but  to  guard   against  the  grief  that   the  future   can  bring;  to  achieve this she instils in her  best characters  a flavour of whimsicality, a gift for fantasy which serves as a protective shield. Thus,  Maggie, Lilly, Nell and Ellen are never made  desperate   by  the  accidental  and   unexpected   miseries  that  afflict them. They  are  either  reconciled to their  unhappiness,  or favoured  with  happiness  in the end.
The  desire to  protect  her characters  from  the  harsher  elements of her theme opens  Mrs.  Wilson to  the  charge  of "escapism". But  if "escapism"  means  that she alters or distorts real dangers and threats  posed by the future,  then the charge cannot  stick.  The   cruel  adversities  endured   by  all  her  chief  characters   prove beyond  doubt  that   Mrs. Wilson does not  evade  or  escape  the  real issues of an unpredictable future. She  advocates  neither  escapism  nor  aggression. She  com­ promises rather  than  opposes, acknowledges  rather  than  investigates.  Hers is a patient  attitude  of ample  compliance  which,  while it  robs her  work  of  intellec­ tual  insight and  moral intensity, blesses it with a compassionate view of life that is essentially Forsterian; for  her  patient  compliance  embraces  most if not  all of that   writer's  tolerance,  gentleness, good  humour   and  simple  faith.  She  is an innocent traveller, but none the worse for that.



THE POETRY
OF RED LANE



Fraser Sutherland




Of those so close beside me, which are you? God bless the ground, I shall walk softly there, And learn by going where  I have to go.
Theodore Roethke, "The  Waking".

LPOEMS Red Lone left when he died in r 964 at the age of
28 are  as direct  and  brave and  manly as any in our literature. They speak from
the depths of pain  but are full of joy. To excel in suffering is the saint's way; the poet must do something  less, and  more:  to blow the pain into a bubble of purity. This is not so much a way of living as a way of making life anew, beyond fashion, swindle and  falsehood.
Blowing  bubbles that  will not burst is the poet's job, and  was Lane's.  He  did it by talking, simply talking, and asking all the right questions at the right times.

A poem is a poet who writes poems for everyone
who is listening

Are you listening?

("What Is A Poem Is A Poem Is A Poem")

This  poem  is one  of  the  first in  "The   Surprise  Sandwich" section  of  Lane's Collected  Poems,  a group  of "children's  poems". They  are of course children's poems for adults.
Lane  will  use a  simple,  child-like question  at  the  end  of a  poem  again  and again.  For one thing,  it disarms the reader.  For another, it puts the poem at the very centre  of his own  concern.  In  one of the  poems  the  boy describes all the

47

THE POETRY OF  RED LANE



games  he's  played,  "the  House  Game", the  "Follow  The  Leader  Game", "the
War Game", then asks:

What if the Games  I play are Really  Real! And  then  I think
Wauld  I still like to play games if they are Really  Real?

And  then  I wonder

But I still play games

Do  you?

("The Games  That Seem")

There  is no moral  here, only a twist that  points up Lane's  superb  pacing. An even  better  use of this skill comes in  a very funny  poem,  "The Lunches  That People."  Here,  the  boy reflects on the weird sandwiches  mothers  make for their hapless sons:

My best friend  always brings Surprise food that  his mother wraps  up for him
and  doesn't  tell him  what  it is
And  one  day
his mother wrapped up a fresh egg for him instead  of  hardboiled
and  when he tried  to peel it he was Really  surprised.

But the poem is not all a play on the phrase, "Really surprised." Near the end, the tap is turned and the flow changes:

Well
I guess if you were to stop and  think  about  it
you would find that  the lunches  kids and  people  have
are only as important as the lunches kids and  people  have not

If you know what  I mean

That is the  first tum  of the  tap,  then  the  other  twist:  "Do  you know  what  I
mean?''
"The Lunches  That People"  has a close rival for sheer fun  in "Breakfast  Is," which tells how the boy's family came to eat their  dog's favourite  breakfast. The fun stops, however, in another  poem that is full of wonder at the world, a wonder that  is mixed  with fear and  pain. There  is also the dignity of living mixed in, of

THE POETRY  OF RED LANE



being  able  to suffer  and, with  luck, survive  intact.  Wonder, dignity  and  waiting
-to see what  happens next:

Wherever  I go whatever  I do
there is one thing that is always happening
and  that  is me.

Each  of the  senses gives something to the  poem, one by one each  a witness to the wonder  of selfhood.  To  slightly  alter  Heraclitus: no  one  ever  is, but  everyone  is
becoming:
And I have tasted blood in a crust of  bread
And I have touched the brow that tells the head And I have smelled the sweat that made the sea And I have thought that Everything must be
("Is Happening It Happens To")

In  his other   poems,  Lane  will use what  might  be called  his active  voice. For we  are  not  just  acted   upon   but  are  forced  by  the  dictates of  life  to  act.  With Lane's poetry, the  act  becomes  a  search,  and  the  search   itself  is what  matters. " ... so  I just  keep  pushing away  at  the  margins  and  searching for  the  truth, whatever," Lane   said  in  a  letter   in   1963  to  his  brother Patrick. The  poet  is amazed at  his own  life, and  his life is the last thing  in the  world  he would  deny.

Ah
how simple to break such  a chain
by simply denying it

But  then
I was the one who forged it and  I hesitate

Hesitate
to deny my own work.

In  a sense, this is the  pride of the  craftsman. It is a pride  founded in  pain.  Pain may  be good  for you,  bad  for  you, but  it must  be dealt  with somehow. One  way is to put it naked  in the harsh light.
The girl  "was  a virgin/and she wanted to be brave," the  boy was drunk and made her stand  undressed in front  of him:

I laughed and  said


49

THE  POETRY OF  RED LANE



Ugh
For  Chrissake
Cover it up

and she raised her hands up to her face
and  covered her eyes
COVERED HER  EYES And  0
the emptiness that racked me
as my soul overflowed
("Margins X")

The same  technique applies  to what,  for  want  of a better term,  one calls stasis in the  midst  of joy. The  poem describes  the  man  and  girl fusing in the act of sex, in the fulness of the moment:

then
my eyelids flickered
and I saw her suddenly

STARING  EYES

and my soul fainted
("Margins  XVI")

Sorrow   is the  other  side  of  callousness.  The poet  recalls  making love  with  a girl  in a  field covered  with snow. She  left him  later  for another boy and  he told his friends that  he had  "laid  her  in a snowbank" and  that  she  had  "come down with a bad  case of bleeding  piles."

Now I hear she is married and has a child
and I cannot stop the bleeding
("Margins II")

There are  two  who  bleed,  then.  It is grim  to think  that  Lane  himseU died  of a cerebral haemorrhage. In another poem he would  remark:
And the feeling is constant
I have
the feeling of nearing now a destination
("Margins XIII")

so

THE POETRY OF  RED  LANE



One   wonders if  he  knew  that   with  that   destination  there   would   be  no  more searching.
The sense  of  being  menaced is always  present  in  Lane. Take  for  instance, a
poem  that  concerns deer-hunting. The  man  shoots what  seems  to be a deer:

Yes
it is a deer
lying dead in the snow

Hell
I knew it
I knew it all the time

Dead

My friend is hunting to the left of me somewhere
in the fog

("Margins  XIX")

Who  is the  hunter, who  the  hunted? Either  way,  there  is menace like  that   in Raymond Souster's "The  Groundhog," in  which   "The half-wit   hired   man   is blasting  imaginary rabbits/somewhere on our left."
Again,  walking   home  at  night  the  poet  meets  a  dog  that  growls. This  is the
black  dog  of  despair, a  pariah dog  like  those  in  Malcolm Lowry's   Under  the
Volcano.  But here, man  bites dog:

I began to whistle softly
brokenly

then
the dog turned  his head relaxed
moved slowly around  me
away from  me
and when it was well away

HYAH YAH

I shouted  at it
and it ran into the night and  I laughed  aloud

THE POETRY OF  RED  LANE



for all mankind
and the night echoed back the laughter
("Margins XVII")

The  sense  here  is not  of that  insipid  ditty,  "I  whistle  a happy tune  ... ," but  of relief like rain on arid  fields.
Ihave  likened  Lane  to Souster  but  there  is one  important difference. Even  in the  sharpest of  Souster's snapshots  there  is something effete.  The  man  with  the camera is not  the  man  of the street.  But  Lane's poetry  is working-class: fighting in the  Army  & Navy  Service Club  in Portage La  Prairie, Manitoba; hitch-hiking to  town;  drinking draught in  the  beer-parlour. This   poetry   may  not  be more "real" than  any  other  sort,  but  it was Lane's choice  of subject. The  poetry  is not anti-bookish but  it is fiercely against  putting thought before  honest  passion.  One poem deals with  the "mistakes" of George Bowering:

you argued with me that
intelligence came before knowledge and  went away
believing you were right
Bowering  has a choice of making further mistakes,  Lane  says: The first mistake will be made
if you go back to university in  the fall
or ever again.

("Big  Benzedrine")

Lane  had  to take  the straight, the direct  way. Sometimes this way would  yield the  clearest  and  most startling results. For  once, I will quote  a poem  entire.

There
in the earth light of sunset
up to his knees in a field of dandelions central to the working hum of bees
the child in golden thought
stands  monument
to the forms of reality
Hey!
Come on home for supper. ("There")

52

THE POETRY  OF RED LANE



There it is, as clear and fixed and final as an Andrew Wyeth painting.
There  are  two kinds of loss in Lane's  poems. Five of his poems deal with the loss of a girl:  one girl dies, another  leaves him. In the wildest sense, these poems deal  with  social loss. There  is another  kind  of loss which  finds its code in the poem beginning:  "Green  pastures now ... " The poem holds the gorgeous image
of

a young girl
riding a brown horse
and her long blonde hair flows out behind
as the horse gallops by

When  they  gallop  away,  "gathering the  distances/heads back  hair  streaming," they leave behind "a path of brown and gold."

they go
and I cannot stop them gone.

At the poem's end Lane says

from the hills beyond
they are indistinguishable

and the hills beyond

("Margins  XXIX")

This  is what  I  have  to call  metaphysical loss, and  contained  in  a symbol more subtle  and  profound  than  anything  in D. H. Lawrence. To  be left behind, look­ ing  at  hills with  the  girl and  her  horse somewhere among  them, is a  matchless vision of loss. The  loss of beauty,  the  loss of God, the loss of hope  that  dwells somewhere in the hills.
The  darkness is closing in. There  is in Lane a sort of moving in the dark. But there  is no fumbling  and  no failure,  only sure  movements  among  the  rocks of despair,  anguish  and  ennui.  By being in the dark, he is made  more  aware. The pain,  though,  is  always  there.  At  times,  Lane's  lines seem  to  ask  along  with
Souster's:

How long before the emptiness will go, or will it always
Go on killing and aching and crying here in the darkness.

Lane's  poetry  does not give an answer-it is too wise for that -but it gives


53

THE POETRY OF  RED LANE



a way of walking over rough terrain.  One  poem does this in the same fashion as Ernest  Hemingway's  story,  "Big  Two-hearted  River."   Both  are  about  fishing trips, and about knowing the limits of the line. It is a kind of courage:

casting out my line watching
the small artificial fly looping out
to the limits of the line

Lane  is always walking, often  at  night.  In  one  of the  best poems  he walks, hears an owl hooting, and is afraid "of what may be in front of me."

I begin to talk aloud asking and answering
in different tones of voice
as if I have companions with me
and we are carrying on a conversation

closer

and I pick up a few stones
and on the strength of my companions throw the stones into darkness

and I no longer hear the hooting on the road I'm walking.

Lane is not as excerptible as some poets because to remove a line is like taking away  a step from  one of his walks. I  have not discussed the  Lane  poems which have failed,  mainly  because there  are so few of them.  Sometimes,  however,  his wit  has  too  much  flash and  shimmer,  and  not  enough  weight.  Sometimes, too, they are  too private,  as in the "Acknowledgements" section of Collected  Poems. The   poems  addressed  to  Bowering,  Irving  Layton,  Lionel  Kearns  and  Milton Acorn are in places less poet to reader  than  poet to poet. But when Lane is truly walking he never stumbles.
The   last  poem  in  the  collected edition  is a  fable,  "for  Milton  Acorn,  ulti­ mately,"  about  the  plight of a sponge who must absorb life with his whole being, unlike the lucky sieves who just let life run through  them.  It is not easy to absorb life,  and  wait  to  be squeezed  by God.  The  squeezing  yields "All  seed  womb breath   dust  tears."  To  protest  about  being  a  sponge  in a  last  great  shout  of courage is futile, and fatal :

54

THE POETRY  OF RED LANE



And God changed the sponge in to a grain of sand
And turned  and walked away from the beach. ("Death  of a Poet")
This is a  God  who  walked   away.  Lane  was  a  poet  who  had  a  sure  and  total knowledge of his own  life  and  gave  this  vision away  for  nothing more  than  the solace of your walking by his side.


FOOTNOTES

1 All  the  Lane  poems  are  from  Collected  Poems, eds.  Patrick  Lane  and  Seymour Mayne  (Vancouver: Very Stone, 1968.)  Because they are wisely arranged,  I have discussed them in roughly the same order as they appear in the book.
2  Quoted  in  Louis Dudek,  "Groundhog Among the Stars",  A Choice  of Critics, ed. George Woodcock  (Toronto: Oxford, 1966), p. 16g.
3 Raymond   Souster,  "Ersatz" in  Canadian  Verse,  ed.  Ralph   Gustafson   (London: Penguin, 1958),  p. 222-23.

































55



CRIME
AND NO PUNISHMENT






Esther James









JAMES REANEY  has chosen to construct The K;udeer as a social drama  in which  the  values of our  age are  examined  and  contrasted  with  those values  which  Reaney  believes to  be  of  an  eternal   and  universal  nature.  The compact  three-act  formula  of the  play, however,  is suggestive of  an  externally applied  technique.  Reaney has structured  the plot of The  Killdeer, with its all but hidden hint of melodrama, largely after the fashion of the well-made play and, in tenns  of a theatrical  style, he has chosen to combine  elements of both  naturalism and  symbolism  in  order  to  carry  the  wide-ranging  themes  contained   in  The Killdeer.
It  was the French  dramatist  Eugene Scribe who, in  the first half of the nine­
teenth  century, laid down the formula  for the construction  of the well-made  play
-a formula  which  many later dramatists  (Ibsen,  Shaw,  Wilde, Pinero,  Arthur Miller, and others)  used to their advantage.  Structurally, the form demands  that the  play be the culminating  point of a story  that  had  been going on  before  the play begins. The  preceding events of the story are  then  brought  to the attention of the audience  by means of exposition which occupies a considerable  part of the first act,  whereupon   the action  of the  play  proper  begins. A  pattern  of  action and suspense is then  built up in which the hero's fortunes  see-saw up and  down until  the  climactic  moment  of  revelation  or  recognition,  which  is immediately followed by the denouement  or  logical outcome  of the  action  and  which,  itself, concludes  the  play.
The  first act of Reaney's play opens with  a scene between  Mrs. Gardner  and

CRIME AND  NO  PUNISHMENT



Madam  Fay, each  of whom  has a son-Harry  and  Eli respectively. The  audi­ ence  is informed   of  the  background   and  history  of  each  family,  and  of  the relationship  that  exists between  each  mother  and  son  as  the  play  opens.  More exposition  follows concerning  Rebecca,  a  girl  in  whom  Harry  is  beginning  to show  an  interest.  This  in  turn  is followed  by  a  short  scene  which  introduces Clifford,  the  somewhat   sinister  and  melodramatic   villain  whose  machinations with respect to the marriage  of Rebecca and Eli are the cause of the beginning of the action in the  play. Harry  too, gets married-but  not  to Rebecca  whom  he loves.
Although  the first act  ends with  the separation  of the  two lovers, it is logical to assume that  their  paths  will again  cross. At the beginning  of the second  act, therefore,  we  learn   what  has  happened   to  them  in  the  five  years  following their  separation. Now  they  meet  again,  although   the  circumstances  of  their meeting are somewhat  macabre.  Rebecca is to be tried for a murder  which Harry is convinced  she  did  not  commit.  As  Rebecca's  defence  lawyer,  Harry  searches for the evidence which will prevent a verdict of capital  punishment  for Rebecca.
In  the  traditional well-made  play  there  is usually  a  missing document  or  a
misdelivered letter  which is the source of complication  in the action,  and  which the audience knows about.  In The  Killdeer there is a missing document  which complicates  the  action,  but  the audience  is left unaware  of this until  the  docu­ ment-a legal certificate of death -is produced  in what  becomes the climactic moment   of  revelation   in  the  play.  The   climactic  moment   in  The   Killdeer,  however, is contrived  and  is not the logical outcome of the plot as is  usually the case in the well-made  play. But Reaney's vision of reality cannot  be totally con­ tained within  the form of the well-made play and, at the point  where it becomes dramatically, aesthetically  and  ethically most necessary to do  so, he breaks with the form.
The  form  demands  that  events follow each  other  logically within  a  chain  of
causality, but logic and causality at the naturalistic level are not Reaney's prime concern. What  does concern  him is the presentation  of a reality that  stands  over and against  the pattern  wherein logic and causality have meaning simply because events are  seen  to  occur  within  a  linear  progression of  time.  In  other  words, throughout the play Reaney has presented two levels of reality. One has been presented  at  the  naturalistic level which  gives us a  "slice  of life"  as we  know it in our  present  age. At  this level, through  his characters, Reaney  reveals and comments  on  the  values  that  people live by-the  social  and  legal  values,  for example. The  other  level he must present to us symbolically. At this level, linear

57

CRIME AND  NO  PUNISHMENT



time, causality, and logic have no place. This  is a level of reality where good and evil, light and  darkness, innocence  and  guilt exist in  eternal  antithesis.
The climactic moment in The Killdeer, although  it takes place in a courtroom,
rises beyond  the  level of social and  legal values and  is not  so much  concerned with  establishing  legal  proof  of  innocence  or  guilt  as  with  establishing  their eternal  relationship.  It  is  this  reality  that  Reaney  wishes  to  show,  the  reality of the  forces of light  and  of darkness  that  stands  over  against  the  naturalistic world.
In  the naturalistic  world, events that  take place in  time  have  a way of being replaced  by other  events in time. It is true  that  these facts can  be recorded,  but facts in themselves are meaningless. They  become significant  only when  they are seen as manifestations of a cosmology wherein everything exists because of, and in terms  of its eternal  opposite.  The  innocent  are  therefore  guilty  and  the  guilty innocent,  and  out  of destruction  and  evil there  yet arises creation  and  beauty: "flowers and butterflies, grass/Growing from the dead horse's body in the ditch." I have suggested above that  Reaney has chosen to construct  The  Killdeer as a social drama  in  which the values of our  age are  examined  and  contrasted  with those values which Reaney believes to be of an eternal  and  universal nature.  The play opens  on  the  interior  of  Mrs. Gardner's cottage.  The  living-room  itself is cluttered  with  objects  which, as we learn  later,  represent  the sum  total  of  Mrs. Gardner's life. Outside  the cottage  a car is parked.  This  car  belongs to Madam Fay  who,  like a  modern-day  Mother  Courage,  travels  around   the  country-side
selling her wares.
What  emerges in the first act is a picture of our society set in economic terms. The  opening  situation  between  Mrs.  Gardner   and   Madam  Fay,  for  instance, takes  place  entirely  as a  buying  and  selling transaction. As the  act  progresses, tension  is developed.  On  the  one  hand,  we  are  shown  forces  at  work  in  our society which  tend  to reduce everything  to a  purely  monetary  value.  Marriages are arranged  because of economic considerations,  and  people  themselves become dehumanized  objects reducible to a cash value. For most people in such a society, the  acquisition  of money, things, property  becomes all important. On  the other hand,  there  are  those  to  whom  these  values  do  not  apply.  There  is  Rebecca whose impulses are directed towards love and the preservation  of human  relation­ ships, and  who stands  in opposition  to the others.
Whereas the setting of the first act had been highly detailed  and  particularized, the set directions for the second act call for the "simplest  possible suggestion of a courtroom." In the first act, life has been presented  almost as a social document.

ss

CRIME AND  NO  PUNISHMENT



In  the second  act, life is revealed in fuller  terms. Once  again  we are  given the facts  of  the  situation,   but  the  facts  this  time  are  not  those  which  deal  with monetary  values. Now, the action has been shifted to a court of law and to an examination of  that  value  system over  which  our  society states  the  law  holds sway:  namely,  the  determining  of the innocent  and  the  guilty. The  first scene, however, with its setting  that  barely suggests a courtroom,  opens and  closes with references to time and  the river of time, and to the transitory  nature  of the world we see around  us. What  is happening, therefore, is that  the  naturalistic  level is beginning  to fade  into  the  background  and,  as it does so, the  question  of guilt and  of innocence  takes on  a  new dimension, as does also the  search  for  truth. In short, the dramatic action must now be understood at the higher level of metaphysics.
With this in mind it becomes necessary to look more closely at the ending of the play. Although  the play has been concerned  with violence and  with  death,  with forces of  evil as well as with  forces of love, there  is at  the  finish  no scene  of retribution. Clifford,  whose villainy had  caused so much  of the suffering,  dies a natural death.  Madam  Fay, a dark force of mischief and of evil, escapes from the courtroom  and  whirls off in her car. The  inevitable question is then: why, if evil exists, does it go unchecked?  The  play makes no answer  to this question  except to say that  evil does exist and  that  to understand  this much  is all that  we can hope for in this life. Speaking  of Madam  Fay, it is Dr. Ballad  who hints at  the possibility of further  knowledge-but not in this world:

In after life you will realize that she is
And why she had to be part of your lives ...

The  mystery with which the plot has been concerned  at the legalistic level has been  resolved, but  the  play ends  on  a  note of metaphysical  mystery. The  play has attempted to establish the incontrovertible  fact that  evidence of the forces of good  and  evil surrounds us in our everyday lives. Through  its symbolism it  has attempted to convince us of the reality of those forces and of their eternal  nature which, although  they cannot  be apprehended directly at a naturalistic  level, must nevertheless be reckoned  with, within  the limits of our  human  experiences.









59







ELEVEN YEARS
0F  II ALPHABET"
 





Margaret Atwood



Now  the  young  intellectual living in  this country, having gone  perhaps to a  Wordsworth high  school  and  a T. S. Eliot  college,  quite  often  ends  up thinking he  lives in  a waste  of surplus   USA  technology, a muskeg  of  in­ difference spotted   with   colonies  of  inherited,  somehow stale,  tradition. What our  poets should  be doing  is to show  us how  to identify our  society out of this depressing situation.
James  Reaney, "Editorial", Alphabet  ;#:8.

Searchers for a Canadian identity have  failed  to realize  that  you can  only have  an  identification with  something you can  see or recognize.  You need, if  nothing else,  an  image  in  a  mirror. No  other country cares  enough about   us to give us back  an  image  of ourselves  that  we can  even  resent. And  apparently we can't do  it  for  ourselves,  because  so far  our  attempts to  do  so  have  resembled   those  of  the  three   blind  men   to  describe   the elephant. Some  of the  descriptions have  been  worth  something, but  what they  add  up  to is fragmented, indecipherable. With  what  are  we to iden­ tify  ourselves?
Germain Warkentin, "An  Image in a Mirror," Alphabet  ;#:8.

All this is connected together, by the way.
James  Reaney, "Editorial," Alphabet  # 16.



WH THEAPPEARANCE  this year of its combined  eight­
eenth  and  nineteenth   issues, Alphabet  will be  over,  and  its small  but  faithful
audience  can only mourn and collect back issues.1  While it lasted, it was perhaps the  most  remarkable little magazine  Canada has  yet  produced. Many  literary

6o

ELEVEN YEARS OF  ALPHABET



magazines  are  group  or movement  oriented:  they publish certain  people or cer­ tain styles. Others,  if they have "professional"  pretensions, are greyish collections of goodish writing.  Alphabet  was different;  its editorial decisions were  based not on last names  or idiosyncracies of punctuation, or even on "literary" standards, but  on  a  set  of  premises  about  literature-or  rather   art  of  any  kind -and therefore about life that was in application  all-inclusive.
The  premises themselves were set forth in the initial issues. The  first Alphabet was subtitled   "A  semiannual devoted  to the  iconography  of the  imagination." Each  issue was  to  concern  itself with  a  "myth," the  first being  Narcissus, the second  the  child  Dionysos,  the  third  Prometheus,  and  so forth.  To  those  un­ familiar  with  Alphabet's  actual  methods, the terms "iconography" and  "myth" may suggest  rigidity  and  a  tendency  to collect and  categorize.  But  the  editor's faith  in  the  correspondences  between  everyday reality  (life, or  what  Alphabet calls "documentary")  and  man-made  symbolic patterns  (art,  or what  Alphabet calls "myth")  was so strong  that  in practice  he left interpretation and  pattern­ finding to the  reader.  He  merely gathered  pieces of writing,  both  "literary" and "non-literary," and  other  subjects  (an  article on Narcissus, a  real-life account  of what  it was like to  be a  twin,  the Tarot  card  of the  Fool)  and  let the  echoes speak  for  themselves;  coincidences  were  there,  he  insisted,  not  because  he put them  there  but  because  they  occur.  The  "myth"  provided  for  each  issue was only a kind of key:

... Actually the same thing happens if  you take the face cards out of a card deck; then put a circular piece of cardboard near them. Curves and circles appear even in the Queen of Diamonds and the Knave of Spades. But place a triangular shape close by and the eye picks up corners and angularities in even the Queen of Clubs. What every issue of Alphabet involves, then, is the placing of a definite geometric shape near some face cards.2

The  reader  never  knew when  he picked up an issue of Alphabet  what  would be inside. It might  be anything,  and the announced  "myth" for the issue was not always an  obvious clue. In  eleven years and  nineteen  issues Alphabet  published or mentioned, among  other  things, an article on Aztec poetry, a list of the Kings of  England   reaching   back  to  the  Old  Testament,  Indian   rock  paintings,  an article on Christabel  which identified Geraldine as Wordsworth,  James  Mcintyre the  Mammoth Cheese  poet,  the  Nihilist Spasm  Band,  an  early  review  by Bill Bissett in the form of a poem, the music of the Doukhobors, schoolboy slang and hand  puppetry, the Black Donnellys, and a cantata  about  Jonah. Academic  and

61

ELEVEN YEARS OF  ALPHABET



pop, "traditional" and "modem," verbal and visual, "local" and "international":
Alphabet  had no snobberies.
Because Reaney  cheerfully acknowledged  an  interest  in  Frye,  hasty  codifiers stuck him in a Myth  School of their own creation  and  accused him of the sin of "being  influenced," without  pausing to consider  that  for an  artist  as original  as Reaney "influence" is taking what you need because it corresponds  to something already  within  you. Others,  who preferred a glossier, more  Cream-of-Wheat-like "professional"  consistency of texture in their  magazines, found  it easy to sneer at Alphabet  for  being  one man's  magazine  (which  it  was),  eccentric  and  eclectic (which  it  also  was),  and  provincial,  which  it  wasn't.  Surely  it's  much  more provincial  to  tum   out  second-rate  copies of  the  art  forms  of  another   culture (what  price a TV  variety show with Canadian tap  dancers instead of American ones),  than it is to create an indigenous form, and  Alphabet  had something much more important than  "Canadian Content"; though  it was catholic in content,  it was Canadian in  form, in how the magazine was put together.
What  follows is  hypothetical  generalization,   but  it  is of such  that  national
identities  are  composed.  Saying  that  Alphabet   is Canadian in  form  leads  one also to say that  there  seem to be important differences  between  the way  Cana­ dians  think -about  literature,   or  anything-and  the  way  Englishmen  and Americans  do. The  English habit of mind, with its preoccupation with precedent and  the system,  might  be called empirical;  reality  for  it is the social hierarchy and  its dominant literary  forms are  evaluative  criticism  and  the social novel. It values  "taste". The  American  habit  of mind,  with  its background   of intricate  Puritan    theologizing,   French   Enlightenment   political   theory   and   German  scholarship  and  its foreground  of technology, is abstract  and  analytical; it values "technique," and  for it reality is how things work. The  dominant mode of criti­ cism for some years has been "New  Criticism", picking  works of art  apart  into component   wheels  and  springs;  its  "novel"  is quite  different  from  the  English novel, which  leans heavily towards comedy of manners  and  a dwindled  George Eliot  realism;  the  American  novel,  closer to  the  Romance,   plays to  a  greater extent  with symbolic characters  and  allegorical  patterns.  The  Canadian habit  of mind,  for  whatever   reason -perhaps  a  history  and  a social  geography  which both  seem  to  lack  coherent  shape-is synthetic.  "Taste" and  "technique" are both  of less concern  to it  than  is the  ever-failing  but  ever-renewed  attempt   to pull  all  the  pieces  together,  to  discover the  whole of which  one  can  only trust one  is a  part.  The  most central  Canadian literary  products,  then,  tend  to  be large-scope  works  like The   Anatomy  of  Criticism  and  The Gutenberg  Galaxy

ELEVEN YEARS OF  ALPHABET



which  propose  all-embracing systems within  which  any  particular bit  of  data may be placed. Give the same poem to a model American, a model English and a model  Canadian  critic:   the  American  will say  "This   is  how  it  works";  the Englishman   "How   good,  how  true  to  Life"   (or,  "How   boring,  tasteless  and trite"); the  Canadian will say "This  is where it fits into the entire  universe." It is in its love for synthesis that  Alphabet shows itself peculiarly Canadian.
"Let  us make a form  out of this," Reaney says in the Alphabet  #I Editorial.
"Documentary on one side and  myth on the other: Life & Art. In this form we can  put  anything  and  the  magnet  we have set  up  will arrange  it for  us." The "documentary" aspects  of  Alphabet  are  as important as the  "myth" ones, and equally  Canadian. Canadian  preoccupation   with  and  sometimes  excellence  in documentaries of all kinds-film, TV,  radio, poetic-is well known. Alphabet was  addicted   to  publishing  transcriptions  from  life:  accounts  of  dreams,  con­ versations  overheard   in  buses, Cumoe's   Coke  Book, a  collage  of letters  from poets, known and  unknown  across the country. The documentarist's (and  Alpha­ bet's)  stance  towards  such  raw material,  and  thus towards  everyday life, is that it  is intrinsically  meaningful   but  the  meaning  is hidden; it  will  only manifest itself if the  observer  makes the effort to connect. Give our  model  Englishman  a hamburger  and  he  will  tell  amusing  anecdotes  about  it  (his  great  aunt  once tripped  over  a hamburger, hamburgers  remind  him of Winston  Churchill) ; the American  will make  it into  a symbol by encasing it in plastic  or sculpting  it in plaster.  The  Canadian will be puzzled  by it.  For  a while  he  will say nothing.  Then  he will say:  "I don't  know what this hamburger means or what it's doing in  this  particular place-where  is this,  anyway?-but if I  concentrate  on  it long  enough  the  meaning  of  the  hamburger, which  is not  in  the  hamburger exactly, nor  in the  hamburger's history, nor in the mind  of  the onlooker, but  in the  exchange   between  the  observing  and  the  observed -the meaning  of  the hamburger will reveal itself to me." The Canadian, one notes, is less sure of him­ self and  more verbose about  it than  the other two, but  he is also more interested in the actual  hamburger.
Such  theories,  like  all  theories,  are  questionable,  but  the  joys and  graces  of Alphabet, luckily,  are  not:   its variety,  its enthusiasms,  the  innocent  delight  it took  in  almost  everything.  Above all, one is amazed  by its uncanny  ability  to anticipate, sometimes  by five or ten years, trends which later  became fashionable, Canadian cultural  nationalism  among  them.  "Who  would  have  thought  seven years  ago,"  says  Reaney   in  Alphabet   #I 4  ( I967)   "that pop  culture  would catch up to Alphabet?''

ELEVEN YEARS OF ALPHABET



The   reasons  for   Alphabet's   demise  are  partly   personal -"In   ten  years," comments  Reaney,  "you say what  you have to say" -and partly financial.  The first ten issues were handset by the editor who taught  himself typesetting for this purpose;  the last five needed grants to help pay the spiralling  printing  costs. But it's ironic that  Alphabet, never in any way commercial,  should  fold just when a potential  market  for  it is appearing  in  the  form  of large  Canadian Literature classes at  universities. If every serious student  of Canlit  acquires  (as he should) a set,  Alphabet, like beavers and  outlaws, may soon  be worth  more dead  than alive.  Searchers  for  the  great  Canadian identity  might  do  well to  divert  time from studying  what  also occurs here, like Ford  motor  cars, and  pay some atten­ tion  to  what,  like  Alphabet,  occurs only here.  Alphabet's  light  is done;  we can only  hope  that  someone  else with  an  equally  powerful  third  eye,  coupled  with the desire to start a little magazine, will happen along soon.


FOOTNOTES

1 Back  issues and  facsimiles:  Walter  Johnson Reprint  Company, I I I Fifth  Avenue, New York  10003, New York, U.S.A.
2   Alphabet  #2.















RlchaRb asel & company, 1nc.

Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



review articles



EVERSON'S HALF CENTURY

Ralph Gustafson


R.   o.  EVERsoN, Selected Poems    1920/r970. Drawing by  Colin  Haworth.  Delta
Canada, 1970, $2.50  paperback, $5.00  hard cover.


ONE CAN WELL  START, as this book  does,  with  some  thoughts of James Dickey, the American poet. He claims Everson  as a good Canadian poet. It is startling  enough  to  have   an   American poet  reading a Canadian poet  and  saying so.  Canadian  critical coteries   must  find it even more startling that  Dickey reads Everson  of  all  people.  Out   of  ignorance and   sectarianism  they   have   kept  Ever­ son in limbo  these many  years.
Dickey  uses  Everson   for  some  further
conclusions.   He  says, "Reading Everson, one   declares  eternal   war    against    the weeping-willow-haired  type  of  poet  full of  vague  fantasies and   admirable  senti­ ments,  like  Shelley,  and   thinks  of   prac­  ticality   as   one   of   the   greatest   of   the artistic virtues,  and  as underlying all real imagination." As in  Mr.  Dickey's  recent  novel,  one  can  only  reach  deliverance by killing   off  critical   hillbillies   with   bows and  arrows  and  paddling canoes  between  whirlpools and   boulders. Deliverance  is a  very  practical  matter. So,  in  poetry.  I prefer  the  word  "actuality", however,  to Mr.  Dickey's  "practicality" as one  of the greatest of   the  artistic virtues.  This  still leaves   poor   Shelley   nowhere.  I   don't  much   mind  about that.   What I  mind  is the  turning of rubies  into  hammer-heads,
 as Ruskin  would  say. "Practicality" sug­ gests  that   poetry  can  wind   clocks  when it  can  only  tell  the  time.  Though  if  any­ one wrongly  deduces thereby  that  poetry  is gamesmanship, that  it is only a way  of happening, whereas   it  is  a  way  of  con­ cluding,  he can  go and  jump in bed  with Auden.
Which    brings    us   to   a   very   good
poet ...
Everson   has   been   writing  these   how many  years ... quietly  minding his poetic business at  Montreal; making forays  like Daniel into the prides of Canadian poets wherever   gathered  to  decide   the  world and  to read each  other's latest; quietly publishing  his  poems  in  books  published by  the  littler  presses  without what   he  is expert   in  and   has   always   been   retired from,  fanfare.
Here,   now,  is  the  chance to  get  him
straight in our  minds: his Selected  Poems of  exactly   fifty   years.  Good   grief!   We haven't acknowledged him  in half  a cen­ tury,   when   he  has  been  going  so  well, leading  us into  all sorts of  actuality?

When I'm   going well
as now at Westmount Glen  and  CPR
in wet  October dusk,  the  winds taste  firecrackery. Loud sparks
jump  up  laughing like  a Breughel bride. Crayoned in  phosphorus, the  station agent

REVIEW ARTICLES



vibrates.  He's  electrocuted.

That  poem   (called   by  its  first  line) goes  way   back   to  the   second   book  of Everson's I was familiar with  (I see that I ticked  eight  poems in its index  that  had Everson   going  very  well  indeed) . That was  1958 and  A Lattice  for Momus-a window  for  real  thoughts to  be  revealed to  the  carping god.  But  already   I  had read  Three  Dozen  Poems by this  author and   was  willingly   persuaded  to  devote some  time  to  this  voice  up  north   (I was then  living  in  New  York  City). Everson had   been  asked  by  the  Library   of  Con­ gress  to  make   a  long-playing  record   of his  poems.  Some  American in  Washing­ ton  was  aware   of  a  Canadian  poet.  Or  did  he  think  Everson,  like Carman, was American?  The only comparable request  I can   think   of  is  Harvard  asking   Ned Pratt   to   put   some   poems  down   on  78 rpms.  Canada never  did.  I was  suitably impressed    by  the   Congressional   invita­ tion.  I spent  hours  regulating into a con­ sequence  of  moods  Everson's  poems  so that  two sides of an LP  would  be witness of   his   good   work.   Everson   never   got around  to   doing   the  record.   I  remind  him  each   time  I  see  him.  Still  and  all, for  my  pains  he  did  take  me and  Dudek  and  assorted  wives to Sherry's  for dinner at   the  old   Metropolitan  Opera  House.  The opera  was Il Trovatore.  A plot  that  Everson   with   his   imagism   could   even sum  up.  Not  that  he'd  want  to. He  likes his  dramatics actual. Like  a child  scrap­ ing the inside of a shell:

The  child  scrapes scrapes away at  the  shell -
always the same swirling colour shown·
it won't  come off. 	'
A waste of time, child. It's  in the bone like tides and  love. 	'

Whoever  reads   this  poet   is  going   to

66
 have  to face  up to it: the world  is affirm­ ative.  The one great  thing  wrong with  it besides  our  own  stupidity and  the  occa sional  hunchback, is that  our time in it is too  brief   for  us  to  get  our  fill  of  love. Everson   is very  out  of  fashion.  He  does not  use the  state  of the  world  to exoner­ ate  his follies.
He   just   validates   actual   experience with  significance; take  it  or  leave  it.  He takes it with  love.  Plumed rhubarb blazes above  his  head; he  suffers  an  apprehen­ sion  of  petals   lest  the  mind  open   with intuitions and  imaginings.
You   can   tell,  leafing   it  through  this
book, that  something vital is going on; something gay-like those wrinkled Chinese sitting  looking  at  the  lapis  lazuli world;  also  something  as  dark   as  that light  under   that   closed  closet  door.  Like his housefly set free, he is blustering alive.
So  filled  with  incidents is it,  there   is danger  that   the   book  will  be  judged   a scrappy diary.   I  mind   me  of  what   Van Gogh  told  Gauguin when  Gauguin  com­ plained that  Van  Gogh  painted  too fast:  "You  look too fast."
There are  many   ways  to  get  our  in­ scapes.   This   is  a   poet   who   thinks   in images.  They   are  terse,  hard,  with  their colloquial  adjectives  full   tilt.  No   little  "whimperings  of  wind".  Their  satisfac­ tion   is   that    of   turning   a   nut    neatly threaded on its bolt.
The  imagery    ranges   from   Hannibal and   his  elephant  failure  and   Macbeth murdering for  high-plumed sons, all  the way  from   that   to  quasars   and   Iceland. But   by  and   large    (mostly   large),  the images  concern farmland  near  Oshawa Ontario, or  dictaphone incantations and other urban exercises  in  Montreal.  Ever­ son  is  a  sophisticate  who  knows  about  evening  milking   and   spring   ploughing.

REVIEW ARTICLES



His  rustic  stuff  is in  a straight line  from Raymond Knister's poetry. Everson,  too, in  his  ploughing  pauses   to   judge  what he's   done.   You   won't  follow   his  rural history   without  ending  up   with   some grand  significances.   He   has  his  "Letter from    Underground."   Electrified  fences cut off sire and dam and colt from land beyond,  but,  Everson  notes,

Bright with gilts
of horsedung, underprivileged  beetles stroll flat  through muddy land
and  under the  awful  fence and  over  the
world

The poems  are  all short. Switches  of inconsequence  occur,   the   space   of  the poem  being  too  short   for  what   Everson wants  to  put  in  it.  Cloggings occur.  But no  matter for   that. Only   the  mediocre are always at their  best, as Maugham told me.  Rural or  city,  two  images  per  poem or  six,  what   you  will  get   is  delight   at Everson   being   delighted  at  being  alive. The   secret   of  that   is  that   Everson   has comedy  up his sleeve, even though he is hurried among the generations.

Here comes  a French girl everything waving
but  she  waves  at some  other fellow.
 The old  wait  their  customary  predica­ ment.   But  Everson   doesn't  grieve.  The seasons  turn  cartwheels   and   he  laughs  while   huge    reality,    a   mindless    lout,  somersaults  for  his  pleasure. Oh,  he  has an observation or two, this poet.

Remember the  rape outside Drumheller at fifty   below?
Canadians are  hardy.

I   don't   suppose   he   minds,   knowing him  as Ido;  but  Canadians ought  to be abashed that they have kept this poet in obscurity  for so long.
There are  far  too  many  words around already,  he  says. Any  poet  who says that is worth   reading. Certainly, Canada's present   nests  of  singing   birds  ought   to listen.
Here is his Credo:

Passionate human love,  the  scenes  of nature, agony  of bringing into  life
child  or  thought or  shaped color-
these  triumph over  our  lives'  horror. Power and  vanity  go raging out  of mind

Even  science, Paul of our  age, circuit-riding among gentile suns, is no lord  of  this  blotpage cheerfully ballpointing nine  lines



CRITICS AND CREATORS

George Woodcock

DAVID s. THATCHER,  Nietzsche  in England, rBgo-1914. University of Toronto  Press,
$15.00
TOM MARSHALL, The  Psychic Mariner:  A Reading  of the Poems of D. H. Lawrence.
Macmillan, $15-50.
GEOFFREY DURRANT,  Wordsworth and the  Great  System. Macmillan, $5-75-


THESE ARE THREE  CRITICAL studies by  Canadian  scholars which  all, in  their  various  ways, are  momentous. In
 Nietzsche in  England,  1890-1914, David S.  Thatcher surveys  an  area  of  literary and    intellectual cross-fertilization that

REVIEW ARTICLES



has  never  yet  been  thoroughly explored. In  The   Psychic Mariner:  A'  Reading  of the Poems of D. H. Lawrence, Tom Marshall reveals  how  surprisingly  recent
-in comparison with  the elaborate work that  has been  done  on Lawrence's novels
-is any  serious  study  of  his  poetry; in fact,  as  far  as  I  know,  Marshall's is the first treatment in depth of all the  poems. Finally,  in Wordsworth and the Great System, Geoffrey  Durrant is likely to add to   a   growing   reputation  as  a   Words­ worthian  by  revealing  new  prospects - and  forgotten graces -in  his poet.
Nietzsche  in  England  links  a  number
of vital aspects of the fin-de-siecle period which includes both the last fling of romanticism in the  decadence of the Nineties  and  the  emergence -suggested in  the  appearance of  names  like  Wynd­ ham   Lewis,   Herbert  Read   and   T.  S. Eliot  in  Dr.  Thatcher's  final  chapter­ of the  movement we generally  refer  to as "modern"  in  literature and  art; Nietzs­ chean   ideas   are   one   of  the  continuing elements in   this   transition  which   now seems less abrupt than  we once imagined.
As Dr. Thatcher suggests, the influence of Nietzsche  among professional  philoso­ phers  in  England at  this time was slight;  it came  later,  where  it came at all. It was the   literary  men   with   a   taste  for   the philosophical, and  a  touch  of  versatility  which    made  them   controversialists  as well as creators, who  were  most  affected  by the  spread  of  Nietzsche's  writings  and of his influence to England in the Nineties. The names  of  the  writers  which form  the titles  of  chapters are  significant  enough: John  Davidson, Havelock Ellis,  William Butler  Yeats,  George   Bernard   Shaw,  A. R.  Orage. All  men  of  flamboyant indi­ viduality,  with   a  desire   to  reshape   the world  and  strong  views about  the degen-

68
 eracy   of  eXIstmg  society,  and   in   every case -even   when   wasted   as  happened with  John Davidson-great  literary  tal­ ent  and  originative mental vigour.
Dr.   Thatcher's book  is especially  use­
ful  in  tracing  how   the  order   in  which Nietzsche's  books   were   translated-in itself  largely  a  matter of  accident-de­ termined  British   reactions  to  his  ideas, and   prevented the  appearance of  a  real Nietzschean  cult.   In   its  way  the   latter was  a  good   thing,   since  it  meant that Nietzsche  tended  to stimulate the  writers who   were   too  strong   to  be  dominated rather  than  those   who   would   become mere   disciples.   However,  it   is  unlikely that  a  real  Nietzsche  cult  of any  impor­ tance   could   have  arisen  in  Britain even under  the most favourable circumstances, since,  as  some  of  Dr.  Thatcher's quota­ tions  clearly   reveal,  the  English   of  that  proud time  felt  no need  to be told  of the desirability of  developing the  "overman" ("superman"  was Bernard Shaw's adap­ tation of the Nietzschean term) ; they felt that  in  them  the  "overman" had  already  arrived.
The chapters of  Nietzsche  in  England
likely to be most  useful are  those on John Davidson  and   A.  R.  Orage.  Those   on Shaw,   Yeats   and   Havelock  Ellis  merely confirm  one's  existing  view of these writ­ ers  from   a  new  angle,  but  so  little has been  written on  Orage or  on  that  sadly underestimated poet  John Davidson as to make   any  new  discussion  of  them   valu­  able.   (It is  amazing  indeed   that   a  man  so  influential   as   Orage  in   the   literary world  of England  from  the  early  days of the   century  down  to  the  193o's  should  still   be   uncelebrated   by  a  serious   bio­ graphical   and    critical  study.)   But    it would   be  unfair to  limit  one's  praise  of such    a   book    to   individual  chapters.

REVIEW  ARTICLES



Nietzsche  in  England  is uniformly  inter­ esting  as  the  account of  the  penetration of   a   literary  milieu   by   a   potent   and hitherto barely  recognized  intellectual in­ fluence.
There are  a few  textual slips in  Nietz­ sche in England that  better editing might have   eliminated.  Andre   Gide,   for   ex­ ample,    appears  as   Guide,  and   in   the bibliography there  is  a  mysterious  Henry Read  to  whom  are  attributed  one  book actually by  Henry  Reed  and  another by Herbert Read.
Tom   Marshall, who  has  himself  writ­ ten  interesting poetry and,  in  Canadian Literature,  an  excellent essay  on  A. M. Klein,    has   provided,   in    The   Psychic Mariner,  a  very  useful  study   of  D.  H. Lawrence's poetry,  explicatory and  criti­  cal   at   the   same   time.   All  Lawrence's poems  are  discussed  and, since  Marshall is  an   obvious   enthusiast,  a   defence   is made, but  usually  a reasoned  one.
Undoubtedly it  is time  that  Lawrence, very  much   underestimated as  a  poet  by the   critics   of  the   Thirties  and   for   too long afterwards, should  be treated in this comprehensive and  sympathetic way. The best  defence  of  Lawrence's poetry  up  to now   had    been    tl1e  long   introduction which   Kenneth  Rexroth  wrote   to   the New Directions Selected  Poems of D. H. Lawrence, but  that  was  too  brief  and  in any  case  was  written  twenty   years  ago. The   Psychic  Mariner   fills  a   gap,   and does so well; Ido not think any reader interested in Lawrence will go away with­ out  gleaning enlightening ideas  on  indi­  vidual   poems  and   on  the  magnitude of Lawrence's total achievement.
The great  virtue of Lawrence-as a writer in any genre-was that the rhetorician, however   noisy,  never  over­
 


Thackeray


THE MAJOR NOVELS JULIET MCMASTER
Concentrating  on  his  best  work,  Juliet
McMaster  approaches Thackeray's novels through his  use of irony  and  ambiguity. She  contends  that   he  is  a  brilliant and subtle  writer   and  a  highly  sophisticated ironist   and  she  reveals  the  dramatic  co­ herene
$7·5°


"Naturalisme pas mort "

LETTRES INEDITES
DE  PAUL ALEXIS A EMILE ZOLA

1871-1900

B. H. BAKER

Over  200 letters from  Alexis to Zola pro­ vide  a rich  source  of information  on  the naturaliste movement and  the  history  of the press in France during the nineteenth century. They  are   intimate,  lacking   all pretensions to elegance and  stylistic  c n­ straints; taken    together    they    descnbe vividly  the  private  life  and  thoughts of this  fervent naturaliste. $I7.50

UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO PRESS

whelmed   the   sentient   man.   Lawrence	 	

6g

REVffiW ARTICLES



never  developed   that  elaborate structure of  form   which   other   poets -even the best -have  on  occasion  used  to conceal the   lapse   of  inspiration,  and   in  conse­ quence, having little in the way of  a tech­ nique  of  concealment, he  never  fails  to appear bogus  when   he  is so, as  in  The Plumed  Serpent. Perhaps the lack  of any desire   to  conceal   was  less a  product of honesty  than  of his extraordinary English conceit  and  of the sense of total  rectitude which   he   retained   as  a  vestige  of  the Midland  chapel culture out  of which  he emerged,  but   at   least   we  always  know where   we   stand   with   him.   When   his writing  is  artificial or  bad  this  alerts  us to  some  extremity  of  thought in  which he  has  really  lost  faith, but  about  which he  is still  shouting because  his pride  will not  allow   him  to  forget   it.  Marshall is not   always   sensitive   to  those   moments when the lines cease to ring true; he fails, for   examrJle,   to   detect   the   completely false sound  of those  pretentious pieces of poetastery, invoking the  ancient Mexican gods, which are inserted into The Plumed Serpent, and  treats  them  seriously, and inevitably unsuccessfully,  as poetry.
In  general   there  is a  distinct  weaken­ ing  of  the  critical element   as  Marshall continues  on   his  chronological  progres­  sion  through Lawrence's  poems. In  deal­ ing  with  the  early  volumes  he  evaluates  quite  freely  and  well, and  analyses  tech­ niques  in some detail; in the  later  poems both  these  functions tend  to give way to explication and -too often -adulation. Is   it   that   Marshall  believes   Lawrence progressed into  the kind of excellence that  makes  criticism   inappropriate?  Or   is  it that   Lawrence's  retreat  from   accepted formal  patterns in  poetry   defeats  Mar­ shall's  power  of technical analysis?
When    Marshall  rashly   wanders  off
 from  Lawrence, of whom  his knowledge appears to be intensive  and  virtually com­ plete,   he   is  liable   to  errors   of   fact   or assumption. It is quaint, to say  the least, to refer  to the  Imagists as "Miss  Lowell's  group"; even  the  formidable Amy would not  have  demanded  such  homage. It  is derogatory  to  refer   to  Denise   Levertov and   Kenneth  Rexroth  as "followers" of William   Carlos   Williams  and   as  Black Mountain  poets,  as  if  they  belonged   in the  same  pack  of  dull  howlers  as Olson,  Greeley,  et  al.  Rexroth is  an  important originative   poet;   he   was   writing  long before  the gathering on Black  Mountain, and   his  home  ground as  a  poet  has  al­ ways  been  San  Francisco; Denise  Lever­  tov  learnt her  art   among the  New  Ro­ mantics  in   England  during  the   1940s, and  has developed individually from  that point.   It is also  inexact to  say,  as  Mar­ shall  does,  that  in  "In the  White Giant's Thigh" Dylan  Thomas "writes  with com­ plete   directness  of   the   chalk   hill   as  a giant"; he  does  not,  for  what  he is talk­  ing about is not  the  hill, but one of those gigantic  figures   cut   into  the  surface   of the  English   downs   which  are  attributed to prehistoric men.  Such errors  obviously  do   not   disqualify Mr.   Marshall  as   a critic.   They    do   reflect   the   difficulties  which   critics   have   in  discussing  writers  with   backgrounds  they  themselves  know only sketchily.
Geoffrey   Durrant's  Wordsworth   and
the  Great  System is really a development of  a  specific  theme already adumbrated in  his  excellent short  introduction,  Wil­ liam    Wordsworth,  in   the   Cambridge British   Authors   series.   Durrant's  basic thesis  is  that   the  customary  assumption that   Wordsworth  was  naively  hostile  to physical  science  is far  from  correct: that, on   the    contrary,   his   strong    scientific

REVIEW ARTICLES



interests  and   particularly his  admiration for  the  Newtoniaa ystem,  profoundly affected   the  content and  even  the  struc­ ture  of  his  poetry. It is a  thesis  likely to revive   the   flagging   general   interest   in Wordsworth, and   Durrant  states  it  very plausibly  in  general  terms, and  then  goes on  to  turn the  plausible  into  the  almost convincing by closely  examining in  indi­  vidual   chapters a  series  of  Wordsworth poems in search  of  the influence  of scien­ tific elements on tht>ir imagery and  struc­  ture.
I  preface   almost   to  convincing, since
this  kind  of  close  analysis  always  leaves a shadow  of doubt in the  mind. It seems to be based on the assumption that  poems are  deliberately constructed artifacts, in which  every  phrase  and  word  is weighed and  placed  carefully in order  to produce a  perfect   intellectual structure, or  alter­ natively  to evoke  carefully  planned  emo­ tional  reactions in  the  reader. In  fact,  it is  critics,   not   poets,   who   work   in  this way.   Much  in   poetry   comes   into   the
 mind   without  conscious   thought;  most poets  have  had  the  experience of  whole verses, whole  poems  even,  emerging into consciousness  fully  formed   and  clamour­ ing,  as it  were,  to be put  on  paper. And every  poet  also  knows  that  the  meaning he  puts  into   a  poem  inot  always  that  which   the   reader    takes   out,   and   that  different readers  take out different mean­ ings,  and   that   somehow   this  is  in   the nature of  poetry:  to  be created out  of  a curious amalgam of unconscious impulse and   conscious  effort,   and   to  retain   an essential  ambiguity  which   is  most  com­ plex in the best poems.
I am sure that  Professor  Durrant,  by finding  something within  himself,  has found  something in Wordsworth. But I doubt whether it  was  placed  there  quite so deliberately by the poet as the critic appears  to   insist.   Its   isolation    in   the crystal  of  an  intellectual form   is  surely the  work  of  the  critic -not  of the  poet
-as artist.







LOVE IS AMBIGUOUS SEX IS A BULLY
 





Margaret Atwood



A.  w. PURDY, Love in a burning  building.  McClelland & Stewart. $4·95·


AT   FIRST  SIGHT  I  was   pre­ pared    to   dislike   this   book.   Perhaps  it was  the  presentation: on  the cover some pleasant photos  of two  teenies embracing (a   middle-aged  man    and    a   scowling
 woman   hitting each   other  with   brooms or  tied  together with   lengths   of  barbed wire or staring out  a window  in opposite directions would  fit the  contents better) ; or  the  nine  pages  of flame  drawings be-

REVIEW ARTICLES



fore   we  get   to   the   poetry   (design  is design,  but  nine  pages?) ;  or  the  peek­ behind-the-scenes-at-McClelland-&-Stew­ art  author's introduction. Or  the  title (meant  to suggest a context of social desperation,  riots, wars, The Bomb and such?  But  Purdy's  desperations,  here  at any rate, are domestic and cosmic rather than  social).  Or  the fact  that  few of the poems are  new:  though  most of the  old ones have been revised, it's like eating leftovers -they've  been warmed  up  but you know you've had  them  before.
Buried   under   all   the   floss,  though,
there's  a real book with  real poems in it and  some very valid reasons for existing. As  always,  one  has  to  swallow  Purdy whole, take the horsing around and the hyperbole  along with   the   painfully­ arrived-at honesties and  the moments  of transcendently good poetry. Purdy writes like  a  cross between  Shakespeare  and  a vaudeville  comedian   (so  did   Shake­ speare)  and  that's  not such a flip remark as  it   may   seem:  note   those   Shake­ spearean double "and"-linked adjectives ("my  faint  and  yapping  cry,"  "the  sad and much emancipated world," "the unctuous   and   uneasy  self  I  glimpse"), the  way iambic  pentameter  keeps  creep­ ing  in;  and  on  the  vaudeville  end  the patter   acts,  sad  clown   laughing   at   us laughing at him, telling awful jokes while knowing  full  well  how  awful  they  are. Purdy   too  is   inherently   dramatic;  as­ sumed   by  all   his  poems  are  a  human speaking  voice  or  voices and  a  respond­ ing  audience,  and  his sense of timing  is often superb. But these poems have been chosen   according   to   subject-"sexual love  and   its  mental   counterpart," says Purdy-and  it's  matter  rather  than manner   that  deserves attention   here.
In  his introduction, Purdy recounts an
 incident   in  which   he's  told  his  poems aren't  "romantic" but  are instead  "hard­ boiled":     a   slightly   archaic   adjective, redolent   of   rock-jowled,   mush-hearted
'thirties newspapermen and Humphrey Bogart private detectives. "Hard-boiled" and  "romantic" are  not  mutually  exclu­ sive, and  Purdy  is both;  certainly  he's  a semi-Romantic.  He   can   hardly   write Love without  writing Death  on  the same page;  his  brand  of  immortality  (see his introduction and "Archeology of  Snow") is  reminiscent  of   Shelley's;  Byronic swashbuckle  and  Don  Juanesque  under­ cutting   of  one's  own   heroics,  both  are there.  He's  filled  with  yearnings  for  the ideal,  the  absolute,  the  eternal,  with  no unshakeable   conviction   they  exist  and with   a   consequent   awareness   of   loss, transience and imperfection. What  may have  been  meant  is that  Purdy's  poems aren't   pretty  or  foggy-eyed:  the  women in   them   are   often,   to   Purdy's   credit, solid flesh and  blood,  with  a  good  deal of the latter. They do things the Blessed Damozel wouldn't: they sweat under  the arms,  menstruate, argue,  sulk, have  mis­ carriages,  V.D.,  operations  and  orgasms (though  not babies, oddly enough) . They move  in  accurately  observed  surround­ ings  full  of  what  in   a  woman   writer would   be   classed   as   typically   female domestic  imagery:   Purdy   is  not  above having   insights   in   kitchens.   They   get bedraggled   in  the  rain  and  have  colds, and   Purdy  can  be  generous  enough   to comment,  "When  you sniff the acoustics of  your  nose are  delightful." But  Purdy has   little   trouble   recognizing   both   his realism  and   his   romanticism   for  what they  are:   "I can  be  two men  if I have to," he says, and is.
Purdy's   love  poems  demonstrate   the
self  divided  against  itself  to  perhaps  an

REVIEW ARTICLES



even  greater extent  than do his poems on other subjects. Here the freedom-loving adventurer  pulls   against    the   husband, that  "greyish  drunkish largeish  anguished man", and  the female  landscape (Purdy's metaphor)   separates  itself   into   corres­ ponding territories of  Others  and  Wife. From  Wife-country, viewed sometimes  as a   prison   and   sometimes  as  a   place   of refuge,  Purdy makes  brief  excursions  into  Otherland, alluring but also threatening: he'd  leave  for  good,  he  claims  in  "Song  of   the   Impermanent   Husband",  if   he weren't afraid  to.  The  Others, whether memories of   youth,  exotic   fantasies  of "brown girls"  or  "white and  lily girls",  a low-comedy   "waggling  fanny"  pursued  through a supermarket or a young girl in a   poignant  hotel-room interlude, are escapes   or  weapons  to  be  used  against Wife.   Like   Odysseus   or   a   boomerang Purdy   always   returns,  because   Wife   is where  the  action is and  the  action  is not a tourist-trip but a battle.
It is  this  interaction which   is  central to the  book, a constant unavoidable even when   it  is  being   denied   and   attacked. Like all crucial  relationships it involves  a number of  emotions:  Purdy, faced  with the   stubborn  actuality  of   Wife,   reacts with lust, anger, false pride, grudging admiration, claustrophobia, sadism, laughter, alienation, joy, fear  of growing older  and   dying,  and   even  a  love  "that can  never  be freedom exactly". But he doesn't make  many  guesses about  the possible reciprocal feelings of  Wife: either   he  doesn't  know,   thinks   he  can't know,  or doesn't want  to know. Thus the celebrated   skirmish    in    "Home   Made Beer" -"Whereupon  my  wife  appeared
from  the  bathroom I where she had  been
brooding for  days I over  the  injustice of being  a  woman and  I attacked me  with
 a  broom" -is  made to  seem  both  un­ provoked   (either being  a woman isn't an injustice,  or it is but  why blame  Purdy?) and  funny,  a  sort  of  Edwardian  seaside­ postcard   surly-wife   gag;  though   an  in­  depth   interview  conducted on  the  other  side of the  bathroom door  would  doubt­ less have  been  revealing. Wife,  however,  except  for  occasional  mutterings of "you bastard," remains silent,  and  is ultimately ungraspable, inscrutable, "neutral  as  na­ ture".  From   this   war-torn   relationship emerge two of the consistently best poems in the  book:  "Love Poem", totally  brutal and  totally convincing, in which  the  poet identifies  himself  with  the  knife  used  to perform    a   painful   and    possibly   fatal operation, and  "Poem":

You are ill and  so I lead  you away
and  put you to sleep in the dark  room
-you lie breathing softly and  I hold your
hand
feeling the fingertips relax as sleep comes
You will not sleep more than  a few hours and  the illness is less serious  than  my anger
or  cruelty
and  the dark  bedroom  is like a foretaste
of other  darknesses
to come later  which all of us must endure
alone
but here I am permitted to be with you
After a while in sleep your fingers clutch tightly
and  I know that  whatever  may be happening
the fear coiled in dreams  or the bright
trespass  of pain
there is nothing at all I can do except  hold
your  hand and  not go away

This is simple  and  so good.
It's also  about as  close  as  Purdy  gets to tenderness, and  it's perhaps noteworthy that   it  chronicles  a  sickness:   Purdy   is more  likely  to  express  this  kind  of  love in  connection with  the  woman's  possible or fantasized death than  in her here-and­ now,  awake  and   healthy  presence.   (See

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



also "Necropsy of Love"  and  "The Widower", even  the  poem  in  which  he says "so I hell it  must  be love I guess" is
titled  "Engraved on a Tomb". Sex is another  thing  though,  as   Purdy   well knows.   Some   of   his   metaphors  for   it
evoke  war  and  aggression: "I ... I hold
my  separate madness like a  sword I and plunge   it  in  your  body  all  night  long;"
"the  exaggerated zone  I and   bomb­
bursting  place  that I fucking  is ... " Others change humans to animals; the wonderful "werewolf metamorphosis" passage   at   the   end   of  "For   Norma  in
Lieu   of  an   Orgasm", for  instance,   and the  slapstick  "vulgar elephant" equation in  "Love at  Roblin   Lake". But  Purdy's verbal  orgies are  counterpointed by a certain amount  of  hysteria.   His  interest in  sex  tends   to  be  metaphysical rather than   sensual:  sexual   attraction may  be
a  "comic  disease"   (" ... this  chemical  I
formula  is   emotional I cancer   even guinea  pigs can't stand"), love may be "ambiguous" and  sex "a  bully",  but  still
he  can   use  it  to  convince   himself  he's alive   and   vital   and   (perhaps)  to  keep himself  from   dissolving  into   the  cosmic soup,   the   flux   of  nature or   the  outer­ space   landscape  that   so   repeatedly  in­ vades  his bedrooms. Many times  we find
 him  recalling or  memorializing old  epi­ sodes  and   indulging in  new  ones  in  an attempt to  banish  his real  enemies, pain,  sorrow    and -especially -time.   "That you  are  here  it  all,"  he  says  in  "Idiot's
Song",  "delays   my  own   death I an   in­
stant  longer." It is the  fear  of death and of  vanishing, we realize,  that  underlies a lot of the Victory Burlesque joke-man routines ("The Muse has thighs of  moon­
light  and  silver I her  cunt  is frozen  gold
I and   that   is why  if  any  mortal  woman need  ask I my  hands are  always  cold") : as   in   war,   the   wisecracks   sustain   the illusion  of sanity  in  the  face  of an other­ wise  intolerable anxiety. Purdy  does  in­  deed  "take women  serious", but he needs
his   laughter  at   times   to   keep   himself from  screaming.
Love in a burning  building  raises a lot
of  extra-poetic,  even   extra-Purdy  ques­ tions.  Is  it  possible  for  men  and  women  to stop  mythologizing,  manipulating and  attacking one another? Do all men divide  women   into   Wife   and   Others, do  they all  share   Purdy's   tendency  to  think   of women   in  terms  of  separate anatomical features -for    Purdy    usually    ass   and  breasts,  he's  not  much  of a leg man  and  there's  only  one  fully-described  face   in the  book -like cut-up  chickens? Is




.   Write or Phone

THE  UNIVERSITY  BOOK STORE
Vancouver 8, B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS


74
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back

REVIEW ARTICLES



Purdy's  attitude towards women  that  of his  sex,  his  country,  his  generation   (in which   case  Love  can  be  a  handy   guide for   women    who   want    to   know   what really  goes on in the  male  skull, the Canadian male  skull, etc.)   or is it strictly personal?
 Personal    it   certainly  is.   It  may   be more, but it's also one man's reflections, experiences and  emotions, recorded  so honestly  that   even  the  lies, the  cruelties, the   bathos   and   the   trivialities  are   in­ cluded.



CRITICAL LIMITATIONS

Douglas Barbour

ROBERT H.   COCKBURN, The   Novels  of Hugh   MacLennan. Harvest  House, $2.95 paper.
ROBERTSON   DAVIES,  Stephen Leacock.  McClelland &  Stewart  (Canadian  Writers
?), $ ·95·
ALEC  LUCAs,   Hugh   MacLennan. McClelland  &  Stewart  (Canadian  Writers 8),
$ ·95·
MICHAEL  ONDAATJE,  Leonard  Cohen.  McClelland &  Stewart (Canadian Writers),
$ ·95·


THIS YEAR'S ADDITIONS to Canadian  criticism   of  Canadian   litera­ ture   are   not   the   novelty   the  first  four McClelland & Stewart monographs were. All  told,   there   are   now   three   series  of monographs, plus  Ryerson's series  of es­ say  collections,  and the  interested reader  can  afford   to  approach each  work  with a  critical  attitude. In  these  new  circum­ stances,   a   sloppy   work   of   criticism   is almost worse than no criticism  at all.
This point  is amply  borne  out  by Alec Lucas's  study  of Hugh MacLennan. One indication of MacLennan's position in Canadian  letters   today   is  the  fact   that he  is the  only  writer to  be  treated by all three  series,  Copp Clark, Forum House, and  McClelland & Stewart, as well as in a  separate, long  study   by  Robert  Cock­ burn. In   such   a  case,  for   his   book  to have  any  value,  a critic must  have some­ thing new  and  interesting to say. Profes­ sor  Lucas  has  tried  a  different approach, it  is  true,   giving   a  chapter  to  each   of
 
MacLennan's major  themes   (as  he  sees them)   rather than  to each  of his novels. It's  an intriguing idea,  but  lends itself all too   easily   to   chaos.   In  every   chapter, each  novel gets a paragraph or a sentence to  itself,  but  there  is no  room  for  a  sus­ tained  argument about   its  formal  quali­ ties  because   the  author  must  willy-nilly turn   to  another  example of   the  theme. This  is not  to say  there  is  nothing inter­ esting  in  the   book,  but  since  the  space allotted   by  McClelland  &  Stewart is so small   to  begin   with,  very  little   can   be done   with   the   few   interesting  lines   of thought  that   do  occur.   Professor   Lucas  begins  to  mount  a  rather interesting at­  tack   on  George  Woodcock's  "Odysseus Ever   Returning",  suggesting   that   other  Greek   myths   are   of  far   greater  impor­ tance   to   MacLennan  than    Woodcock suggests,   but    he   simply    doesn't   take enough   space   to  develop   a  convincing argument.  And   the   fact   that    he   and Woodcock   may   share   the   truth  doesn't

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



appear  to   have   occurred  to   him,   al­ though such  an  idea  is far  more exciting  than  his attack on Woodcock.
It  is  instructive  to  compare  Lucas's
too  short  study  with  Robert   Cockburn's book   length    critique  of   MacLennan's work. Woodcock's short  book for Copp Clark  was valuable, but also suffered somewhat from  the  limitations of space: this   cannot  be  said   of  The   Novels  of Hugh MacLennan. Cockburn believes MacLennan deserves  as  much  attention as he  has  received,  but  also believes that some   hard-nosed  criticism   of   MacLen­ nan's  novels, as novels, is needed.  This  he sets  out  to  do,  returning  to  a  novel-by­ novel  approach,  correctly   believing  that those  themes   and   concerns   which   have haunted  MacLennan  all  his  writing  life will naturally emerge  where  they should, under  such an approach. He states his purpose   clearly  at  the  end  of  his  Intro­ duction,  after   quoting   MacLennan  on the art of the novel:

In  evaluating Hugh  MacLennan's novels, I  shall  apply   the   criteria   he  himself  sets forth.  It  is my contention that  he has never achieved  in  any  one  of his novels "a  whole which  is harmonious". And  the  major  rea­ son for  this is that  he, perhaps unconscious­ ly,   perhaps    not,   relies   too   heavily   upon techniques  which   properly  belong  to  non­ fiction.

I think  Cockburn does  prove  his conten­ tion,  and  he does so by the  use of exten­ sive   quotation,  and    well   thought  out arguments,  both   of   which   require  the space   that   his  163  full  pages  give  him. After  a slow start  his style picks up, and at  times  becomes  quite  witty  and  ironic,  which  in  no  way  hurts his  presentation.
Cockburn   early    attacks   Woodcock's
mythological  thesis,  too,  but  he  does  so in  a   much   stronger  fashion   than   does Lucas.
 I suggest  that  there  are  no symbolic charac­ ters  outside   Barometer   Rising,  and  I do  so for  two  reasons:   first,  because  MacLennan himself  says,  "I  don't use  symbols  in  my writing,  at  least   not  consciously"; second, because  I attribute  the  recurrence of char­ acter    types   not   to   any   intricate  master­ pian,  but  rather  to a poverty  of imagination on  MacLennan's  part.

Cockburn  doesn't  then   drop   this  argu­ ment,   but   reinforces  it   with   examples and  further arguments in  every  chapter of his book.  It is in such  development of all  his  criticisms  of   MacLennan's  work that  the  value  of his study  lies. To  argue with   him,   you   would  have   to   do   an equal   amount  of   hard   work   and   hard  thinking, and   that   is  what   criticism   is about.
Surprisingly, despite the  argument with  Woodcock I have  mentioned, Cock­ burn's evaluation of   MacLennan's  work is remarkably similar to the older  critic's. Both   men   say  that   Each  Man's  Son  is MacLennan's  best  novel,  and   their   rea­ sons  for  liking  this  novel  are  nearly  the same.  But  Cockburn is  not  merely  pad­  ding  out  Woodcock's essay. He  has much  more  to  say, and  many  specific  points  to make  which   have  not  been  brought out so clearly  before.  Along  with  many  other critics  he attacks the "half-embarrassed, half-sly  references to  sex"  which  he says are  a "MacLennan trade mark", and  he sustains that  attack with sensitivity and intelligence throughout  his  treatment of all the  novels.
Nor  does  he  neglect   the  valuable  as­ pects  of  MacLennan's work;  indeed,  he brings  them   clearly  to  light,  and  specifi­ cally   notes   how   some   of   MacLennan's finest  qualities  as   a   writer  mitigate against  his success as a  novelist. Anybody who  has  read  and  enjoyed   MacLennan's essays  will   understand  and   sympathize

REVIEW ARTICLES



with  Cockburn's arguments in  this  area, for  MacLennan is a superb  personal essayist. But  essays do interrupt the natu­ ral   flow  of  a  novel   and,   as  Cockburn shows,  MacLennan has  never  been  able to   resist   slipping  some   in,  except    ( al­ most)    in   Each   Man's   Son.  And   yet, Cockburn's  final   paragraph,  while  con­ taining  real   truth,  sounds   just   like   a MacLennan ending:

Hugh    MacLennan  has   come   to   terms with  Canada more  fully  and  in  some ways more  meaningfully  than   any  other   writer. His achievement in  this  respect  is in a class by  itself,  and   his  novels  are  sure  to  stand for a very long  time as landmarks of the Canadian  experience.

Robertson Davies's study  of Stephen Leacock suffers from exactly the opposite affliction  of Lucas's  study  of MacLennan in  the  same  series. He  is competing with a  shorter  study,   not   a  longer   one,  and even  worse,  that  shorter study  is his own, by now  deservedly  famous, lecture on Leacock,  published in Our  Living Tradi­ tion. There can  be no doubt  in the minds  of readers  of that  lecture that Davies  has a  fine   understanding  of  his  man.   But, within   the  lecture length, he  was forced to  express  his  ideas  in  a sharp  and  witty manner.   Now    the   Canadian   Writers monographs are not  very long, but Davies didn't want   to  merely  repeat himself  (I think) and  so he has given  us an interest­ ing examination of Leacock, the man  and writer, that  does not say enough about individual works,  yet  does  not  add  any­ thing  vital  to what  he has already told  us about   Leacock's personality. Why  didn't he  spend   a  full  chapter  analysing  Sun­  shine Sketches  and  Arcadian  Adventures, instead  of just a few pages?  It's  really too bad,  because   I  think   more   needs  to  be said  about  Leacock and  his work,  and  I
 still  believe  Davies  could  be the  man  to say  it. But  he  hasn't  done  so  this  time around.
Leonard Cohen   is a  different kind  of
writer   than   either   Leacock   or  MacLen­ nan,  a pop  phenomenon of  the sixties, a weird  cult  figure  all  over  the  world   as well  as  a  Canadian  poet   and   novelist, and  Michael  Ondaatje's  book  on  Cohen  is  also  unlike   the   other   books   in   the Canadian Writers series. Ondaatje is the only  poet  thus  far  to  offer  a  critique of a  fellow  poet  in  these  monographs, and any  reader  of his poetry  will immediately understand  his sympathy with  Cohen. As to  the  success  of  his study,  every  reader  will have  to make  up his own  mind. The reasons   for   this   are   not   hard   to  find. Cohen,   especially   in   his   recent    work, Beautiful   Losers, the   two   albums,  etc., has entered  a world  largely  foreign  to the ordinary  writer,   and   has  created  works which  call  forth   weirdly  divergent  reac­ tions.  People who agree  about the beauty  of Spice Box of Earth might  not speak  to each  other  about Beautiful  Losers.
Nevertheless,    I  think    Ondaatje   has
done  a  very  fine  job  within   his  limited space.  His  little  book  is  full  of  exciting critical  insights  into  Cohen's work,  and, given   the   fact   that   he  obviously   loves both  novels,  he  make  a  pretty good  de­ fence of them.  His discussion of  Beautiful Losers is especially  intriguing, and  should  interest  even  those  people  who hate  the novel.  I'm   not  sure  if I  agree  with  what  he says there  (and  it is interesting to note how  another  defence  of  the  novel  as  a work  of  art,  D.  G.  Jones's in  Butterfly On  Rock,  argues  the  novel's  worth   for completely  different, and   almost   oppos­  ing,  reasons), but  he  certainly made me think  about   the  novel  and  decide  that I must  read it again.

77





THE SMELL
OF RECOGNITION

DAVE   GODFREY,  The  New  Ancestors. new  press,
$10.

IN  ONE OF   DURRELL's  Quartets, Mount­ olive crosses the  entrance hall  of  a house and   smells   Mansion  Polish   in   the   air. The   words  struck  at  me  at  the  time  be­ cause   (a)   it  was  such  a  fantastic name for   a   floor   wax   (think   of  Shinola, in comparison)  and   (b)   it implied  a whole colonial  mentality with  which  I was  un­ familiar, and   the  snobbery  it  was  based on   was   staggering.   I  wondered   at   the time  if  Mansion Polish  smelled  any  dif­ ferent,   and   if  they  still   used  it  in  the mansions of Alexandria. Thus  it was with a   shock   of  amused  recognition  that   I saw on  the  shelves of the Kumasi Kings­ way  in  1964  in  liberated,  socialist,  "re­ deemed" Ghana, a  row  of  flat  green  or red    tins    labelled    Mansion    Polish.    It turned out  "everybody" used  it-when they  could  get  it-and  I know  if  I go back   to   that  book   now   I'll   smell   the Mansion  Polish  too.
So it is with  Dave  Godfrey's book; and as a reviewer  I must  admit  to a very real "shock   of  recognition." When   he  men­ tions garri,  kenkey, highlife,  dark  glasses, pawpaw trees,  the  dust  of laterite  roads, Club   Beer   (or   the   lack  of   it),   Fanta Orange, fans,  the  dam  project, Mercedes  cars  and  fat  politicians I'm  right back in that   incredible  heat,   that  violent   land­  scape,  that  surreal  world of  rumours and  counter-rumours  that   was  the  last  year
 and  a  half  before  Nkrumah was toppled by a  military coup.  I was there  at  about the  same  time  Godfrey was:  in  a sense I have  privileged   information and   my  re­ actions   to   the   book   are   bound   to   be coloured by my personal reactions to  the country and   culture whereof   he  speaks. But  I think  in the  end  it would  not have  made   any  difference-the  book  is  bril­ liant  and  it doesn't matter if  you've  never been  to  "Lost   Coast"  just  as  it  doesn't matter if  you've   never  been  to  Patusan. Godfrey   is  interested  in  the  conflicts  of the  human heart  and  the  fact  that  I can hear  his  characters  talking,  or  see  and  smell  the  "real"  places  is irrelevant. The words  speak   for   themselves;  Ama   Bur­ dener,    as   schoolgirl    Ama,    pampered, contemptuous, sizing  up  her  new teacher in  his  mismatched  socks -"And  where is this  failure from?" Eden,   the  bigman Minister,  explaining  to   First   Samuels, "We  are  all  in  a  bus and  Kruman is the driver-when  he  sways, we sway."  The local  politician  who  confesses,  "I  spend my  day  in  beg  and  dash   [bribe]. Aman is  a  man   so  what   can  he  do.  I do  not complain of  them; if a  job is all  a  man owns   then   a man   must   earn   from   it. Socialism   means   self-help,   we  have   all heard   it,  we  have   all  seen  it.  All  joke aside,  my  brother, what   do  you  want?" "Did   you  have  any  money  with  Laing?" First   Samuels  asks   another  character. "Money? Or  Lost  Coast  Pounds?", Kry replies.
The story  is complicated and  at  times,
particularly in  the  section  called  In  the Fifth    City,    hallucinatory,   at   least   in effect;   but   it  is  essentially   the  story  of lost people  living  in an  aptly  named  Lost Coast,   who   attempt  to  find  or   redeem themselves    through   commitment  to   a new  revolution (First Samuels,   Michael

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Burdener,  a  host   of  lesser  characters), Mother Africa  and  the  "Kruman" myth (Gamaliel Harding)  or  love  ( Ama  Bur­ dener). Interestingly  enough Godfrey does   better   with   the   Africans  than   he does   with   Michael,  who   is  English   or Ama,  who  has definitely  been  Anglicized. Michael's  history  is  a  little   too  compli­ cated    and   his  character   not   fully   de­ veloped;  Ama's   story   too   much   just  a long  rumination and  she seems to possess almost  total   verbal  recall,  which  is hard  to  believe.  But  First  Samuels is tremen­ dous,  and  the  climax  of  the  book, when he  and   a  group of  market  women   kill Gamaliel  Harding in  a  scene  of  intense poetry  and  black  comedy  and  increasing horror is the  best thing in the  book. First Samuels  understands the  market  women as  Gamaliel does  not;  he  inflames  them and   then  steps  forward in  the  crowd  to deliver  the final, anonymous blow against false   prophets  and   broken   promises.  It becomes  not  only an  act  of personal fury against    a   man   who   may   well   be   his brother; it is also a symbol  of the  collec­ tive  frustration of  the  people.  There are things  wrong  with  this book, some minor, some  not.  Godfrey   has  chosen   to  begin the  first  forty-odd  sections   of  the  book with  an  untranslated  proverb or  aphor­ ism. This  seems  unfair to  the reader  and somewhat arrogant  on  his  part.   In   the same   way   he   uses  many   native  words which   are   left   untranslated   and   whose meaning cannot  always  be deduced from the  context. On  p.  I 36  alone  I see sun­ sum, abrabo, owura, akoa; and  there  are several others, such  as obosomfo, okomfo,  kra, nmeda, etc.  I can't help  thinking of The  Beautyful Ones  Are  Not  Yet  Born, Armah's novel  about Ghana,  which  con­ cerns  many  of the  same  issues, where the writer   uses  as  few  native  words as  pos-
 sible,  not,  I think, from  any  "Angliciza­ tion"  or  neocolonialist  attitude, but  be­ cause  he  wants   to  be  clear   and  simple and   understood  by  his  English-speaking readers.
A more major problem: the American,
Rusk, is a silly caricature, as is the  Peace Corps   worker   Ricky  Goldman. Godfrey was  with   CUSO   and   one   admires   his "radical and  nationalist" bias (to quote Robert  Weaver's Maclean's  review), but were  the  Peace  Corps   kids  all so much more   awful   than   their   counterparts  in CUSO  or   the   VSO    or   whatever the British  group  was  called?   And  linked  to this is the  author's handling of the affair between    Ama    and    Kruman,  the   Re­ deemer.   The  fetish   scene,   which   Ama remembers  and   which   involves  Ama,  a Russian girl, a Senegalese  and  a girl from Jamaica  may   or  may   not   be  based  on actual   fact.   Big  time  politicians  are  big time   politicians   anywhere  anytime  and  there   were  lots  of   rumours  about   Kru­ man's  protoype  and  his girl  friends.  But the  incident  doesn't come  off, seems un­ necessary  and   very  stereotyped  and   the awful suspicion  occurs  that  maybe it was included   just  to  titillate the  white  read­ er's  appetite. As  a  political  caricaturist, in  other   words,  Dave  Godfrey   is  really crude.
But  on  the  whole  a  big,  complex,  in­
telligent,  poetic,  book  so  unlike  the  ma­ jority   of  what   claims   to   be  Canadian literature  (whatever  that   means)    that  it's  exciting  just  to contemplate what  he might  do  next.  On  the  back  of the  book Margaret   Laurence   has   made  a   long statement  which  ends  "Dave Godfrey  is, to  my  mind,  the   most   talented  young writer   now    writing  in   Anglophone Canada." I'm   not  sure   this  man   needs the  qualifying word.  I can't think  of any

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"old" writers   (writing fiction)  that  she could  set against  him.
AUDREY THOMAS



THE REAL AND THE MARVELLOUS

ROBERTSON   DAVlES,   Fifth   Business.  MacMil­
lan.  $6.gs.

Why  do  people  all  over  the  world ... want marvels   that   defy  all  verifiable  fact?   And are   marvels   brought    into   being   by  their desire,  or  is their  desire  an assurance  rising from  some  deep  knowledge,  not  to  be directly   experienced  and   questioned,   that the  marvellous   is  indeed  an  aspect  of  the real?

THESE QUESTIONs  and  others  like  them are   voiced   quite   often   in  one  form   or another by several  of  the  more  interest­ ing   characters  in   Fifth   Business.  The  action  explores  those areas, suggested  by the  questions, in  the  form  of  a  memoir  written   by   Dunstable   Ramsey,   retired schoolmaster. The memoir  is an apologia in  which  Ramsey's effort  is to  project a true  image  of his self and  his experience (as  marvellous but  real)   in  angry  reac­ tion  against the  public  version  of  himself as  "typical  old  schoolmaster,  doddering into  retirement armed   only  with  a  shal­ low   Boy's  Book  of   Battles   concept  of history   and   a   bee  in  his  bonnet   about  myth."   Ramsey's   memoir   moves   from
1go6, his childhood in a small Western Ontario town  and  his involvement there with  two  other  boys, Percy Staunton and Paul Dempster and  with Paul's mother, through his traumatic experiences  of the first  World  War  (in which  he loses a leg, wins  a  VC,  and  feels himself reborn)  to
1g68  and   the  bizarre   death  of Staunton

8o
 in  which   both  Ramsey  and  Paul  Demp­
ster have  been involved.
The strength of the  novel lies in  its projection of Ramsey's self and  in that  of a number of other characters, (Mrs. Dempster, Joel  Surgeoner, the  old  Jesuit Padre Blazon,  Liesl  Vitazliputali), all  of whom   inhabit  psychically,   more  consis­ tently    than  does   Ramsey   himself,   the border  areas   between   the  real   and   the marvellous.  These   characters,  as   they appear and reappear, open  up to Ramsey  what   he  calls,  at  his  first  view  of  it,  "a  particular    kind    of   reality,    which    my religion, my upbringing, and  the callowly romantic  cast  of  my  mind  had  declared obscene."  The  prevailing tone  is  comic and  another of the  novel's  strengths is in isolated comic scenes (like that between Ramsey and  the  Padre  Blazon  in the hospital)  in  which  the  comedy  functions to  suggest  the  peculiar kind  of  reality  in which  Mr.  Davies  is most interested. The major  weakness   lies,  in  my  opinion, in the   patterns  of  incident  and   action   in terms    of   which    these   characters  and others  interact. This  particular  weakness reflects  the  major problem  that  confronts any  artist, no  matter what   his  medium, who  is exploring the  "real" and  the "marvellous" in  this  way. Thus the  same kinds  of  weakness   of  pattern are   to  be found  (to  confine  oneself  to  contempo­ rary  examples)  in  some  of  the novels of Iris  Murdoch, in Hugh McLennan's The
Watch that  Ends  the  Night,  in  some  of
lngmar  Bergman's films, and  in  some  of
Harold Pinter's plays.
Two  examples from  Fifth  Business will indicate precisely   what   the  difficulty  is. The initial prosaic  village  world  of 1908 explodes  when    Mrs.   Dempster  is   dis­ covered   by  a  group   of  village  men  and boys  (led  by Ramsey and  his father)  "in

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  act  of  copulation" with  a  tramp. In
1924 Ramsey  meets Joel  Surgeoner, main force   in  the   Lifeline  Mission,   Toronto, recognizes  him  as that tramp, and  learns that  the experience had  transformed him. It is  in   the   twenties   also  that   Ramsey becomes  interested in  hagiography. This takes  him  to  both   Europe and   Mexico. Quite by chance he meets  Paul  Dempster on one of these  journeys.  First  in France, in  1919, he finds  Paul  as part  of a small travelling   circus    under   the    name    of Faustus Legrand. After  the  second  world war he meets him again  in Mexico. Paul's name  is now  Magnus  Eisengrim and  he has   his  own   troupe.  Ramsey   becomes, during a leave  of absence  from  his teach­ ing,   a  member  of  Paul's   troupe.  They meet  again,  and  for  the last time, in 1968 when  Paul  brings  his  troupe  to Toronto.
Clearly, in terms of experience as "marvellous" these   coincidences are  ac­ ceptable as  part of  a  pattern that  is  (if its  premises  be  granted)  both  ingenious  and  "logical". In this  pattern  the  names adopted  by  Paul   have   real  significance  as do  his tricks  and  his role as magician. This  significance would  be fully  revealed in  the  context  of  Jungian  symbols,  the Tarot  pack    (for   Paul   and   his  mother "the  Magician" and  "The High   Priest­ ess"  are   clearly   relevant)  the   study   of magic  and  witchcraft, as  well  as  in  the context  of  the  varieties of  interpretation to which Christianity is open.
If the  two  levels  of  reality -the  real and   marvellous -are  seen  as  two,  and they  are  so seen  by Ramsey   (and, one imagines,  by  most   people   most   of  the time), then,  just  as clearly,  these  coinci­ dences,  in  terms  of  experience  as  "real", appear  arbitrary  and   unconvincing.  At this   level   of   understanding  we  expect,  impose,   see,   (whichever  is  the   correct
 word!)   another   kind    of   pattern,  of "logic".  Ideally  some   kind    of   double vision   would   succeed   in   presenting  as single  (as D. H. Lawrence does on  occa­ sion)  the total  reality.
I take  it  that   part  of  the  significance
of Mr.  Davies'  title  is to suggest  that  we are  all "Fifth Business" in some plot.  We are  each  of  us  the  man   without  whom "you   cannot  make   a  plot   work ... the odd   man   out,   the   person   who   has   no opposite  of  the  other   sex ... who  knows the  secret of the  hero's  birth, or comes to the  assistance   of  the  heroine when   she thinks  all is lost ... may even be the cause of somebody's death if that  is part  of the plot". We are all, like Ramsey,  more than the  public   version  of  ourselves  that   the world   sees.  That  Mr.   Davies   does   not succeed   completely  in   projecting "the marvellous    [as]  . . . indeed   an  aspect   of the  real"   is  an  indication  not  so  much of  a  lack  of  ability  on  his  part  as of  his ambition in  this  novel  and  of  the  fasci­ nating difficulty  of  the  particular  prob­  lem he there  confronts.
W. F. HALL


A MATTER OF LOYALTY

BRIAN  MOORE,  Fergus.  McClelland &  Stewart.
$5·95·

lT  IS A  CURIOUS  MATTER of loyalty,  that in Canada we are inclined  to welcome writers   as  part   of  our  literary life  after they  have  been  here  only  a  short  while, but are extraordinarily reluctant to aban­ don  them  to  whatever country  they  may have  chosen   in  preference  to  our  own. Perhaps  it   is   understandable   that    we should  regard  in  this way Canadian-born

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



writers   like  Mordecai Richler and  Nor­ man   Levine,   who   stay   for   decades   in England, yet  who  find  it  hard to  avoid writing    about    the   Canadian  past   that  still  grips  their  imagination and  colours their   very   language  and   their   tone   of writing.  But   Brian   Moore,   surely,  is  a bird of another feather.
Arriving  in   Canada,  he   writes   two novels  that  are  pure  nostalgic  Belfast, as Irish  as Dubliners. Then, in The Luck  of Ginger  Coffey, for  the  only  time  in  his career, he  takes  a  Canadian setting,  but Ginger   remains   inveterately  Irish.   The only  other   among his  seven  novels  that has  a  smell  of  Canada  is  I  am  Mary Dunne,   for   Mary   is   echt    Canadian, though of true  Irish  descent,  and  a clutch of comic  Canadians are  brought down  to New  York  to play  on  the stage of  neuro­ sis. A'n Answer  from Limbo takes us back to  Ireland in  memory   and  through the intrusion of old  Mrs. Tierney, fresh from Belfast,  into   the   hell  of  her  son's  gro­ tesque   marriage.  The   Emperor  of  Ice­ Cream   leaps   back  over   the   years  into  Irish    youth   again,  into   that    Catholic Belfast  which  today   so  explosively  dogs the headlines.
And   now,  in   Ferfus,   its  very   name suggestive of   those  blundering  misty heroes    whom    Yeats    evoked    as   twilit Celtic  counterparts of Achilles  and  Aga­ memnon, the   Irish   past  comes  flooding back  again   with   compelling  and  obses­ sive  power.  After  reading it  one  can  no longer  claim  Moore as Canadian or con­ sider  him  a good  man lost to the Yanks; he  was  never  either. Ireland-Ireland alone -made and  marred him.
The   adjectives to   describe    Moore's
novels slip off  the  tongue  with  a kind  of glib  inevitability. They  are  the  works  of one   of   the   few   impeccable  stylists  we
 have   left   among  us,  and   even   in  their tone-if   we   did    not   have   the   extra­ ordinary plot  of Fergus to convince us of the   fact-they    represent   a   sensitivity  that   responds acutely to  the  present   but is  not  of  it.  Brian  Moore,  in  fact  is the last -perhaps   the   very   last -of    the  tradition of  fine  Irish  writers  of  English  prose  and, like  so  many  of  his predeces­ sors, he lives  as  a physical  exile from  the land  which  mentally he cannot leave.
This,   mirroring  his  author's  predica­
ment,   is  precisely   the   plight   of  Fergus Fadden. Like  so many  other Moore anti­ heroes,  he  was  born  into  the professional class and  the Catholic minority of Ulster.  He  has  left  Ireland to live and  make  his writing career in  the  United  States.   In the   elusive   present   time   of   the   novel, which   keeps  shifting  under   his  feet  like quicksand, he is  nearing forty,  with  loos­ ening   teeth   and   a   morale  rotted  -as Spender  once  said -"by  a  modicum of success". The mania for writing has made him  skirt  without  involving himself   the causes in  which   he  believed,  but  he  has not  been  able  to  escape  the  major  luna­ cies of American life, and  so we find him stranded in  a  rented house  on  a Califor­ nian   beach,   trying   to save  his  already tattered  integrity from   being  completely ruined by the demands of the film-makers to  whom   he  is  under  contract. His  wife has    divorced   him    and   is   demanding enormous alimony,  and  in  the  meantime he is living  with  a girl of twenty-one who looks younger.
It is  at this   point   that   he  begins  to
experience hallucinations. At  the  begin­ ning  of  the  book  he  goes into  the  living room   and   sees  his  long-dead  father sit­ ting,  as solid  as in  life, on  the sofa.  The visions  multiply until  his  whole  past  life intrudes upon  the  present. And  they  are

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



more  than  visions, for  the apparitions are solid enough to eat  plums  and  drop  their chewed  stones, strong  enough for their viewer  to touch  and  grapple with,  but nobody else can see or feel them, and so Fergus  lives a  curious  double  life,  partly in  the  vacuity of  contemporary  Califor­ nia   with   his   mistress   and   her   absurd  mother, partly in  the  passion of the  Irish  past.  Sometimes he  talks  to  people  from both  worlds  at  once,  which  gives him­ to  outsiders-the  appearance of  incipi­  ent  dottiness.
It is not  merely  the  dead  he  sees and feels;  there  are  also living  people  as they were  at  certain points  in  the  past, so that he  sees a  sister  at  two  different times  as two  different people,  and  is attacked  by his  own   young   self  from   the   betrayals into  which   the  years  have  led  him.  For these   phantoms   are    conscious    of   the present  into  which  they  have  erupted.
Moore,   in   fact,   outKafkas  Kafka  in
making  the   ghosts   not  strange  visitants but   people   many   of  whom   Fergus   has lost  to  memory but  who,  as ruthlessly  as the  accusers   in  The   Trial, arraign  him for  his covert  desires,  his secret  betrayals, and  judge  him  on  the  beach  or inside his house  in  family  conclaves  or  in  the  kan­ garoo  courts  of his contemporaries.
These solid guests present Fergus with himself, his past rising up to accuse and enlighten. Here   are  the  relationships he has  used  as  steps  on  that   journey  which has  brought him  where  he  is, to  a hired house in a land and an age that deny the extravagances of  individuality which  the repressed   world   of  his  Irish   youth  bred and   fostered.  For   perhaps  the   message that   the  company of  apparitions  brings to  him  is that  even  a  narrow and  preju­ diced   life,  lived  with   passion,  can  have meaning.  Stranded  on  the  far  edge  of
 the land,  in  his hired  house  with  his easy girl,   Fergus   realizes   the   truth  of   his father's  ghostly   parting  statement.  "If you have not  found  a meaning then  your life is meaningless."
It is at  this  point   that   he  knows  the
ghosts  have  not  come  of  their   own  ac­ cord.  He  has  commanded them; he  can release  them.   And   the   book  ends  with the  solid phantoms driving off into obli­ vion  in  their  creaking Morris  Minor   as Fergus  walks into  a present  that is at  last real.
Let   us  not  speculate  on   the  esoteric meaning   of  this  strange vision.  Perhaps it  is  Brian   Moore's   last  farewell   to  his own  Irish  ghosts.  Perhaps it is something quite    different.  The    speculation  is   as fruitless  as  it  is  to  wonder  what   is  the real  meaning of,  say,  Kafka's  Amerika. It is  the  inner   conviction  of  the  vision that  matters, and  in all its literal  absurd­ ity, Fergus's  nightmare is never  less than  convincing.  The    novel   that   bears   his name  is a masterpiece of the best kind  of fantasy-that which  succeeds because  it presents  impossible  happenings with  im­ peccable verisimilitude.
GEORGE WOODCOCK



GENTLE QUEBEC

GABRIELLE   ROY,    Windflower.  McClelland &
Stewart,  $s.gs.

TERRORISM, kidnapping, murder-these are  our  immediate  associations with  the Quebec of  this  moment. How  paradoxi­ cal, then,  that  Gabrielle Roy should  pub­  lish  another gentle  book  at  this  troubled moment  in our  history!
I was,  frankly,   surprised  when   I first heard  that  she was writing another book.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The  Road  Past Altamont  seemed  to end on  a  note  of quiet  finality. Then when  I read   her  new  novel,  Windflower, I  was greatly  disappointed because I cannot believe that  it will add anything to her distinguished career; indeed,  if anything, it  may  diminish it.  Her  writing   has  ap­ parently ceased  to  be  an  act  of  creative  discovery   and   has   become   a   ritual   of self-resuscitation.
As   I  suggested   in   an   article  in   an earlier issue of  this  journal,  in  her  books Gabrielle Roy  has  been  concerned  with one  over-riding theme-motherhood. I went  so far  as  to suggest  that  the  theme was so obsessional  with her that  it tended to  affect  the  structure of her  novels and the   range   of  freedom   permitted  to  the characters. Windflower  would  appear to be a paradigm of my hypothesis.
The central character, Elsa, is an Eski­ mo  girl  who  is  raped   in  a  moment  of desperate lust by a soldier from  the  near­  by  American  base.  All  she  ever  remem­  bers of him  are  the  vivid  blue of his eyes and  the  fast  beating  of his heart. Again, it  is  characteristic of  Mile  Roy  that   the father  is  a  shadowy,  secondary   figure. This time  he is completely  disposable, necessary  only  to impregnate the  female.
Jimmy, the child  of this momentary coupling,  with   his  fair   colouring  is  re­ garded   by   the   Eskimos   as   a   miracle  dropped from  the  skies. Elsa  knows  that  she   has   produced  something  extraordi­ nary.  The friendly, carefree girl  becomes fiercely  solitary  in  her  possessiveness. She works   long   hours  for   the   discontented wife   of   a   French-Canadian  official  in order    to   provide  her   child   with    the tempting  gewgaws  of  the  Hudson's Bay catalogue.
However, while she is working, it is necessary  to leave  the child  with  his rela-
 tives;  and  it  is a  torment to  Elsa  to  see Jimmy acquiring slovenly  Eskimo  habits, and  more  bitter  still,  preferring the  com­ pany  of his permissive grandmother.
For  Windflower also  has  a  secondary
theme: the problems of a society in transition. Elsa's  family   has  moved  into a  settlement dominated  by the  Hudson's Bay  Company  and   the   American   mili­ tary.  They  are fast forgetting their  native  traditions and   are   uncomfortably  trying  to ape an unfamiliar culture.
One  uncle  has fiercely  held out  against
the white man's encroaching civilization. For   reasons   which    are   not   altogether clear   (Mile   Roy  has  never  probed   very deeply  into  the  psychological  motivations of her  characters), Elsa suddenly decides to  take  Jimmy to  live  with  his  uncle  in order   to  re-capture his  Eskimo  heritage. For  a time  Jimmy becomes  almost  a true Eskimo   child   but   serious   illness  forces them   back  to  the  settlement. This  time Elsa tries  to provide Jimmy with  a dupli­ cate  of a white  household, slaving over a sewing  machine to  provide her  son with everything he  desires.
As  Jimmy  grows   older,   he  begins  to
realize   that    he  is  a  different  order   of being from  the  Eskimos.  He  becomes un­ communicative and   withdrawn  from  his mother, and   disappears for  longer   and  longer  periods  of time  until he eventually stows  away  on  an  American  plane  and  is never  seen  again.  Some  years  later  in  a rather  incredible   episode   an   American plane   swoops  down  over  the  settlement and   a   somewhat  familiar  voice   radios greetings  to   many   of   the   Eskimos   by name,   as  well   as  a  final   unintelligible message  which  seems  to  be  addressed   to Elsa.  Ironically, Elsa  has  not  been  listen­ ing   to   the   radio   at   the   time,  but   her belief  that   it  really  was  Jimmy  provides

BOOKS IN REVIEW



her  with  a  faint   raison  d' etre  in  a  life that   had  otherwise lost  all  its  meaning. Still   chronologically  young,  she  has  de­ generated into  an  Ancient  of Days as she wanders  aimlessly   about,  more   to  be pitied  than   her  own  mother who  had  at least  the  traditional role of  grandmother. The  book   is  touching,   delicate,  and  sentimental.  Dear    Mile   Roy,   I regret very  deeply  that   you  felt  it  necessary  to write  it  again. 	PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH


LES THEMES  DU ROMAN HISTORIQUE

MAURICE LEMIRE,  Les  grands   themes  nationa­ listes  du    roman  historique    canadien­ franfais. Les  Presses  de  L'Universite Laval. Paper $7.50, hard cover  $10.00.

LA PUBLICATION d'une etude d'ensemble sur  le  roman  historique quebecois  s'im­ posait  depuis  longtemps deja. Ce  genre, plus   pratique  que   la   critique   l'a   cru, n'avait suscire  jusqu'a  maintenant  que  la redaction  de   quelques  etudes  fragmen­ taires.  De  sorte  que  l'ouvrage de  l'abbe  Maurice  Lemire intitule  Les   grands themes  nationalistes du  roman historique canadien-fran ais
L'auteur  aurait  pu  aborder son  sujet de   bien  des  fa ons,
par   exemple,   du  travail deja   ancien   de Louis Maigron (Le roman  historique a l'epoque  romantique)  ou  de  celui,  plus
recent  et  actuel, de  Georges  Lukacs   (Le roman   historique) .  Mais   il  a  heureuse­ ment  opre  pour  une  methode d'approche qui    permet   de   degager    l'essentiel    de cette   production  en   la   situant  dans   le contexte  politique  et   ideologique de l'epoque.
Dans  cette  optique, les themes  les plus
souvent  exploires,  qui  sont  la  tegende  de
 l'lroquoise,  les   mzsszons,  les   pionniers, les soldats, la  Deportation des  Acadiens, la  trahison   de   Bigot,   la   France   ou   le Canada, la  victoire  morale, les guerres canado americaines
1837, prennent un  relief  nouveau, car  ils permettent   de   saisir   !'evolution  de   la mentalite  quebecoise  depuis   la  Revolu­ tion  de  r837,  avec  tout  ce que cela com­ prend  d'aspirations et  de  deceptions. Ce petit  peuple,  victime  de  tant  de lacheres, d'abandons,  d'incomprehensions, n'a connu  qu'un  Papineau pour  combien  de Wilfrid   Laurier  et  d'Hector   Langevin! Comme  on  s'en   doute,   des  romans   his­
toriques   destines   a  illustrer  les  grands
exploits   guerriers  du    regime    fran  ais, nous  apparaissent surtout revelateurs d'un   passe  plus  immediat.  L'oppression y a provoque, comme  partout ailleurs, l'eclosion d'une litterature revendicat­ rice.   Le   roman   historique  canadien­ fran  ais
dix-neuvieme siecle surtout.
Comment ne pas signaler, dans !'intro­
duction, les  pages  consacrees  a ce  "di­
vorce   entre   la   pensee   o:fficielle qui  ex­
prime   des  sentiments  de  convenance et la   pensee    nationaliste   qui    cultive    les aspirations fondamentales de liberte." L'abbe Lemire  a mis le doigt  sur la cause de   ce  facheux  malentendu   qui   devait engendrer  une  sorte  d'agressivire. On   le voit  bien  aujourd'hui que  les  politiciens ne  peuvent   plus  guere   tolerer   les  intel­
lectuels!  Et  les pages  consacrees .a Fran­
ois-Xavier
a sa vocation, comptent  parmi les  meil­
leures  qui  aient  ere ecrites sur  le  person­
nage.  La  destinee  du  grand  historien, replacee  dans   le  contexte social  et  poli­ tique-ce dont  la critique traditionnelle
l'a  iso1e bien  a tort  en  en  faisant   ou  un
timor6  ou  un  misanthrope-prend une

ss

BOOKS IN REVIEW



dimension nouvelle.  Avec l'abbe  Lemire, on est loin des hypotheses plus ou moins folkloriques servies  regulierement depuis la publication du Centenaire de l'Histoire du  Canada   de  Garneau   et  qui  font  re­
monter la  vocation du  personnage a un
bien hypothetique defi lance  un  jour chez le  notaire  Campbell.  Nous  osons  croire
que  les editeurs des oeuvres completes  de Garneau recourront a des documents de premiere  main   et   non  a ces  vagues  ra­
contars. Bref,  nous  ne formulerons qu'un seul  reproche  a  l'adresse  de  l'auteur de cet excellent essai, celui de n'avoir pas toujours tenu  compte, dans  !'explication des faits,  du  rigorisme moral  de l'epoque. Sans   doute    l'auteur   craignait-il  de   se laisser  entra.lner  trop  loin de son sujet.
ROGER LE  MOINE

LA REALITE COMPLEXE DE MONTREAL

ANTOINE   SIROis,    Montreal    dans   le   roman canadien. Marde   Didier.

TENTER DE  CERNER   la  realite   complexe d'une ville comme  Montreal, qui a connu dans les trente dernieres annees un rythme de  croissance  acoeiere,  et  cela  a tous   les  points   de   vue,   releve   presque d'une  gageure. C'est   pourtant  la  tache que  s'est  assigne  M.  Antoine  Sirois  dans son ouvrage Montreal dans le roman canadien, s'appuyant sur  les donnees fournies   par  29  romans  en  langue  fran­ c;aise ( canadiens-franc;ais) et  I 2 en langue anglaise   ( canadiens-anglais et  canadiens­ juifs), publies  entre  I942 et 1965.
M.  Sirois  approche d'abord  le  prob­
leme   par   le  biais  de  l'histoire  et   nous donne un  resume  succinct  mais  complet de !'evolution de  Montreal depuis  sa fondation  en   I 535,   du   developpement

86
 urbain  et  industriel  du   Quebec  ( I891-
1941), des principales valeurs  de la socie­ te  canadienne-franc;aise.  Ce   court   essai sociologique  est   bien   mene,   solidement
documente, nous aide  a situer  Montreal,
mais   n'en   est   pas  moins   superflu   a  la
these  elle-meme. Cette  derniere  s'ouvre sur   Montreal  et  ses  groupes  ethniques, tels  que   vus  par   les  romanciers.  Il  est done  question du  dynamisme et  du  cos­ mopolitisme  de   la   ville,   de   la   grande division  est-ouest,  les Franc;ais d'un cote, les Anglais  de l'autre, les Juifs au  milieu. A   ce   sujet,   la   carte  de   la   repartition ethnique   des   quartiers  de   Montreal/ datant  de   I94I,  est  interessante  a  con­ sulter,  mais  la configuration generale est­ elle  la  meme  en  1965?  De  I940  a  1965, il  y  a   un  ecart  de   vingt-cinq  annees: quelles  sont les traces  laissees par  !'evolu­ tion?
De  loin  le chapitre le plus  dense  et  le plus  revelateur du  livre  est  celui  portant sur  les classes sociales. L'interet principal des romanciers franc;ais pour  le milieu ouvrier,  les  problemes elementaires de survivance  et  d'adaptation, des  roman­ ciers  anglais  pour  la   couche   socio­ economique  superieure,   la   transmission du  pouvoir et  la  purere  de  la  race,  des ecrivains juifs  pour  la  classe  bourgeoise,
1'ambition  et  1' ascension  sociales  des
nouveaux riches, ces caracreristiques nous disent  deja  l'essentiel.  M. Sirois n'emploie pas le mot, mais nous avons la les grandes coordonnees d'une  "mythologie"  mont­ realaise  qui, malgre l'instabilite des classes sociales  en  milieu   nord-americain,  n'est pas pres d'etre dementie.
Comment  se  fait-il   que   notre   interet pour   les etudes sur  la  famille  et  la  reli­ gion  aille  en  diminuant?  L'enquete  sur la famille canadienne-franc;aise se termine en   queue   de   poisson:    l'auteur  note   le

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sentiment de revolte  dans les domaines religieux,  intellectuels et ethniques, mais n'approfondit pas le sujet, se demandant plutot si cette  revolte  a  "toute l'ampleur quantitative  que   nous   revelent  les   ro-­ mans".  Les   recherches  sur   la   famille canadienne-anglaise   aboutissent   a   une contradiction  qui   manque d'etre  nuan­ cee:  la  jeunesse  anglaise p:n fere
dans   les  cadres   etablis"'  mais   marque quand  meme une  "reaction".  Seule
!'etude sur  la  famille   juive  parait  satis­
faisante. Quant a l'essai  sur  la  religion,
M.   Sirois   degage   les  traits   dominants,
sans  plus.  La  conclusion se  veut  simple­ ment   un   sythese   de   ce   qui   a  ete   dit, n'apporte  aucun  eclairage  nouveau   sur les donnees  accumulees.
Pendant toute  la lecture de la these, et surtout des  derniers chapitres, une ques­ tion  se pose au  lecteur: pourquoi  n'est-il jamais   question  du   domaine   politique, alors que tous les autres (social, religieux, economique) sont  traites? Dans une soci­ ete, dans  une litterature ( autant fran"aise qu'anglaise)  ou  ont  toujours ete  intime­  ment   lies les trois  themes  famille-patrie­ religion,   comment   se   fait-il    que   l'un  d'eux   soit   constamment  absent   de   ce travail? On  peut  penser  que !'auteur a prefere  etre   prudent  sur   une   matiere aussi  brulante, mais   peut-on  l'etre  dans un domaine aussi essentiel, dans une these qui  se  veut  le  reflet  fidele  d'une  societe et  d'une litrerature?
Ce   manque  est   sans   doute    ce   qui explique !'utilisation  relative des  romans etudies.   Si  on   ne  considere que   les  ro­ mans  d'expression fran  aise
certains  sont   constamment  cites   (Bon­
heur  d'occasion,  L'argent   est  odeur  de nuit,  Les vivants, les morts et les autres), d'autres  trop   peu   (La   bagarre,  La   ju­ ment   des  Mongols,   Le  couteau   sur   la
 table),  quelques-uns  pas   du   tout    ( Le casse, Prochain  episode,  La  ville  inhu­ maine). Sauf  pour  le troisieme  chapitre, il  se  degage  du  livre  de  M.  Sirois  !'im­ pression generale qu'une enorme et  riche matiere, par  certains cores si minutieuse­ ment    fouillee,   ni   tient   pas   toutes   ses
promesses,  ni  dit  pas  tout  ce qu'elle  a  a
dire. On  interroge des romans  d'un fa on
trop   methodiquement  et   sysrematique­ ment   sociologique,   sans   tirer   toutes   les conclusions  qui s'imposent.
Cela dit, il reste que la litterature canadienne comparee est un domaine nouveau,   relativement  peu  etudie. C'est le  principal  merite   de  l'ouvrage de  M.
Sirois  que  de  commencer a deblayer   un
terrain vierge,  un  champ de  recherches
presque inepuisable. Montreal dans le roman  canadien  fera  date,  deviendra et est deja  un livre de reference obligatoire; sans  doute  aussi  qu'il   suscitera   de  nom­ breux  autres   travaux du  genre.  C'est  la une des valeurs les plus sures d'une these.
RICHARD GIGUERE
1 Precisions   qu'il    ne   s'agit    pas   du   grand Montreal,  que  des  municipalites comme Pointe-Claire, Dorval et Ville de Laval par exemple   n'entrent  pas  dans   les  cadres   de
!'etude de  M. Sirois.


VECRIRE

JACQUES   GODBOUT,   Hail    Galarneau!   Trans­
lated  by Alan Brown, Longman. $2.95.

WHEN THE Wagner III  went down with father on board, it was the end of a great romantic dream. Mother remained, with her  boxes of Black  Magic,  and  an  odour of  quiet  comfort, which  seemed  like  the only  magic  left  for  the  three  Galarneau boys. Jacques and  Arthur made  good  by becoming,  one  a  priest,  the other  a  Pari­ sian   sceptic.    But    Fran"ois   could    not

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



adopt these traditional French-Canadian solutions   to  the  problem  of  living  with­ out   the   spiritual   patrimony   that   had foundered. He  saw too clearly  the extent of  his  alienation from  the  world  around him. Rather than  continue to be a victim of compulsory  education, he dropped out of school  to withdraw into a world  of his own,  a  world  he  was  willing  to  protect  with   a   wall   of   silence   against   all   the forces   of   indoctrination,  priestly,   Pari­  sian or anglo-commercial, which  threaten the development of an authentic French­ Canadian self. Isolation was, of course, a failure, and   Franc;ois  Galarneau  has  to emerge,  to  greet   the  sun  and  his fellow men.  His experience is fantasmagorically convincing,  and   the   outcome  of   it   is a  new  word  to  denote,  if not  an  entirely new  concept, a  new  depth  of conviction and  a  new  application  to  French-Cana­
dian  realities.  vecrire, composed  of vivre
(past   participle, vecu)   and   ecrire, does
not   denote   the   pseudo-engage cop-out, and  the author avoids  all direct  reference to  Sartrean  apologetics. What   he  does quote  is Andre  Breton,  on the substantia­ tion  of dreams.
Young  Galarneau is driven  to invent vecrire,  because   when   he  has   dropped out  of  school,  he  finds  it  is not  possible just  simply  to  live.  One  precise  problem runs  through the  whole  adventure:  hav­ ing  decided   he  can  make  a  quiet  living by  running an  honest  hot-dog  stand, he has   to   write   a   sign   on   what   he   has chosen.  The  peculiarly  French-Canadian problem   of  language  and   culture  in  a society  where   people  speak  French  and things  speak  English  is  thus  presented  as part   of  a  living  experience, and  not  an ingenious  elucubration of  intellectual revolutionaries. The  hero-narrator lives and    writes    a   Canadian  French    right

88
 down  to the seat of his culottesbritcheuses. The  result   is  racy  and   entertaining,  as well as really moving. This  is a profound cultural problem, we feel, and  it reminds us that  cultural problems  are  profoundly real.  It is a trifle larger  than  life, as artis,­ tic  presentations should   be.  Galarneau's style  is, in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  an    imitation   of   that   notorious   joual which  Laurent Girouard copied  so exact­  ly  as  to  be  a  bore,  and  which   Claude Jasmin  successfully  launched into  litera­ ture   without   really   identifying  it   with the theme  of  his novel.
The translator faces a most  exacting challenge. As the title, Hail Galarneau! shows,  he  stumbles at  the  outset  on  the details  of  cultural  difference. The  greet­ ing,  "Hail brother" is heard  again  these days,  but  the  connotations  are  not  those of  the   familiar "Salut."   "Vecrire" will simply   not  translate, and  so  it  goes  on. But  Allen  Brown  is aware of these  prob­  lems.  In  fact,  he  seems  to  think  that   he discovered  them,   and  his foreword  says he  invented the  procedure of  enquiring among  native  speakers   about   words   he could  not  find in  dictionaries. Such  vani­  ties  are   to  be  excused,   for  he  has  pro­ vided   us   with   a  good   translation  that  captures   much    of   the   humour  of   the original.
JACK WARWICK

CIRCLE, STRAIGHT LINE, ELLIPSE

JOHN  GLAssco,  Poetry  of French  in  Transla­
tion.  Oxford. $4.00.
FRED   COGSWELL,    One    Hundred    Poems   of
Modern Gaelic.  Fiddlehead.

Do You BELIEVE in signs? Here are three groups of  translations on   a  common

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



subject,-French-Canadian    poetry,­ whose  different characters  are described by  the  geometric figures  that   the  typog­ rapher has chosen  to present  the contents in  each  case.
The  back  cover  of John Glassco's  The Poetry  of French  Canada  in Translation shows  the  names  of 47  French poets  cir­ cumscribed  by  the   names  of  22   English translators;  Fred    Cogswell   is  presented  in  straight  line  relationship to  the  One  Hundred Poems  of Modern  Quebec that  he has translated, title  and  author drawn  up  flush  to  the  righthand  margin; while in  Doug   Jones's   quarterly  of  writers  in translation,  subject  and   translator  are represented   as   the   twin   centres   of  an Ellipse.
But before  plunging into  mathematical speculation,  let's   lOQk   at   the   total   ac­ complishment. Taking these three sources together,  never    has   so   much   French­ Canadian  poetry   been  so  readily   acces­ sible   to   the   unilingual   reader.  In   the past,   as  John  Glassco  mentions  in   his preface,   translation  in   Canada  was  al­ most  an   underground  art,  circulated  in mimeographed  pamphlets, in little  maga­  zines,  or  in   limited   editions. Now  over
300  poems   by   6o   poets   are   available,
translated  by  two  dozen   English-Cana­ dians,  most  of  them  skilled  poets  them­ selves.  That's  not   much    compared  to what  remains to  be  done,  but  compared to what  we  had  last  year,  it's  riches.
I have  already named  the  three  prime movers.   Each   has  played   a  slightly  dif­ ferent role,  the  most  composite  going  to John Glassco. Besides editing the volume,  he  has  supplied a  fine  preface, as inter­ esting  for  its  insights  into   the  nature of French-Canadian verse as for its seasoned reflections  on  the art  of translation. It's  a pity  it  isn't  longer, for  Mr.  Glassco  is a
 master  of both  subjects,  but  as a classicist he  has  also  mastered the  art  of  brevity. So we must be content.
He  has,  in  addition, translated  about
one-third of  the  book  himself,  trying  his hand  at thirty-eight different poets. Such versatility   has  its  price;  all  translations are   not  equally  happy,   though  none  is exactly  sad.  He  excels at  the  urbane and witty  couplet, as in  this  variation on  the carpe  diem  theme   (from   Paul  Morin):

do not insist on gathering  roses it leads to arteriosclerosis

But   he  also   has   lyric   sweep   and   can deliver  a solid  surrealistic wallop.  Occa­ sionally,  in   order   to   produce a   repre­ sentative  anthology, he has had to include  samples   of   high   banality,   but   this   is rapidly  and  blandly  done.
His electicism  makes  it  difficult  to  dis­
tinguish  his true  voice.  I  seem  to  hear  it best   in   his   new   translations  of   Saint­ Denys-Garneau, or  in  some  of  the light verse,  for  example, in  his  translations of
de Grandmont and  Godin  (with  A. J. M.
Smith). But do I think  I detect him here,
in the faultless ease of this verse, because, as Glassco says, "poetry marked by clarity of thought and  expression,  spare  and striking imagery and a simple internal movement" lends  itself  better   to transla­ tion,  or is it simply  because  I  am  partial to these  poets?  One  thing certain: it is a real  tour  de  force  to  be  able  to  change into  half-a-dozen poetic idioms  as grace­  fully  as a  well-dressed  man  casually  dis­ playing  his wardrobe.
Personally,  I prefer  translations where the translator's own frame shows through the  cloth.  And  other   members of  Glass­ co's team, freer  to choose only what  suits them,  come  through with  their own  tone and   idiosyncrasies   intact. The  Horatian

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW


irony  of A. J. M. Smith,  the dark roman­ ticism of  Eldon Grier, the  controlled  colloquialisms of  George  Johnston,  the fragmented melancholy of  R. A. D. Ford,  the  linguistic  intricacies of  Ralph Gustaf­ son -all  these  survive  a  close rendering of  the  originals.   In  some  translations  (I
am  thinking of A. J. M.  Smith's version
of the  ballad  "Right You Are, My Briga­ dier," -of most   of   his  work   for   that  matter), the  question of  authorship be­ comes   inverted,  and   one   finds   oneself wondering, "How in  the devil  could  you ever   turn   that   into  French?"  All   this contradicts the  theory that  the  translator should   be  some  kind  of  invisible,  taste­  less,  odourless   medium,  and   backs   up Glassco's   claim   that   his  book  is  not  so much  a collection of poems-in-translation as  one  of  translations that  are  poems  in themselves.
In this  connection, special  recognition is given  to  F.  R.  Scott  as pilot  and  pio­ neer  in  the  translation of  Quebec  verse. His  own  spareness  and  deftness  are  well adjusted, as  we  know,  to  the  lean  stride  of Saint-Denys-Garneau and  the  surgical  swiftness  of Anne  Hebert.1  But  it is good to  see collected   here  his  translations of Henault  and   Trottier,  and   to  find   the same style applied as successfully to trans­  lations    of    younger   poets   like   Brault, Giguere, Pilon and  Ouellette.
There is no space  to comment on the performance of  all  the  other  poet-trans­ lators who  complete the  circle.  At  any rate,  the  last  word  must  by  rights  come back  to  John   Glassco  who has  so  profi­ ciently marshalled this round-up of talent. Three-quarters of  these translations have never  before  appeared in  print  and  were solicited   or  hunted  down  by  this  indus­  trious    and    self-effacing    editor.  Typo­ graphically,    his   name    should    appear

go
 
where   it   really   belongs,-right  in   the centre of the circle.
Fred  Cogswell's  single-handed  transla­ tion  of  One  Hundred  Poems of  Modern Quebec  is a  much   more  straightforward affair. The  verse,  too,  is   plainer,  more direct,  often    less   mannered,   but    less spectacular, too, less  rich in allusion, and sometimes  lacking  in syntactic sinew.
Four   of  Cogswell's   poems   appear  in Glassco's  collection; of the  rest, only six­ teen  overlap, and  he  has  added a  dozen new  poets.  So  this  volume  is a  valuable complement to the  other. In quality, too, it stands  up  well.  From  one  poem  to the next  Cogswell's  translations are  less even; some  of  the  more   abstract  originals   are almost   unintelligible in  his  versions,  but whenever simplicity is required, or native  strength and,   yes,  let's  say  it,  a  kind  of prosaic   humility  in  expression,  his  verse is  better. In  the  two  cases  where  Cogs­ well  translations  coincide  with   ones   by F. R. Scott  for instance-in Saint-Denys­ Garneau's  famous "Birdcage" poem  and  in   "The   Time  Corrected"  by   Pierre Trottier-I prefer  Cogswell.  The differ­ ences  are  small.  Cogswell  is a little  more explicit,  a   little    more    personal,  more homely.    Scott   is   more   formal,  stiffer, more    enigmatic.  He   makes   calculated use  of  certain   French-type constructions which   give  his  translation  a  somewhat eccentric gait,  while  Cogswell's  rhythms are  more  natural.
One   can't be  categorical; it  would  be
possible   to  prefer   Scott   for   almost   the same   reasons.   Whatever  the   result,    I recommend the game  of comparing trans­ lations   as  a  fast  and   fascinating way  to get   into   the   heart    of   the   poetry,   the French  as   well   as   the   English.    With poems   repeated  in   the   two  collections, and  using  Cogswell  as yardstick, one  can

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



also  compare the  inspirations and  tech­ niques of Colombo, Downes,  Ford, Glass­ co,   Grier,    Gustafson, Johnston,   Smith  and Sparshott.
One  can  even  attempt the  subtle  sport
of  comparing Fred   Cogswell   with  him­ self, for  the  same  poem   (e.g.  Rina  Las­ nier's  "The Body  of  Christ")  sometimes  appears in  the  two  collections  with  mys­ terious  variations.  As  a  rule,  one  Cogs­ well   seems   to   be   more    polished    and well-rounded, while the other, when con­ fronted  with   a   problem   in   translation, takes  the  shortest   distance  between   two points.
An  objection that  could  be levelled  at both  books  is  that   they  contain so little verse  by  really  young  poets.  Generations now  in  their  thirties and  forties  are liberally  represented, and  the first quarter of Glassco's anthology is given over to French-Canadian classics. But Glassco includes only two poets in their twenties, Cogswell   only   four.    Another   sign   of typical  Canadian conservatism is the long publishers' parturition  period  for both books:   Fred   Cogswell   did   most   of  his work   on   these   poems   in I 967-68,   and John   Glassco's  preface   is dated October rg68.
Both   objections  and   some  others   are
countered by Doug  Jones's quarterly Ellipse which  for  the  past  year  has  been presenting translations of two Canadian writers,-one  French and   one  English,
-in each  issue.  Until now  the  emphasis has   been   on   poetry,   though  the   latest number, Ellipse 4, was  devoted   to short stories  by Roch   Carrier and  Dave  God­ frey.   The   twin-centred  elliptical   prin­  ciple  is  followed   throughout  the  book:  the   original  poem   appears  on   the  left, the  translation on  the  right; an article  or
 interview in English introduces the French writer,  one in French the English, and so on.
To  illustrate how it works, take Ellipse
3  which   double-bills  Michele  Lalonde and  Margaret  Atwood. A bilingual  Edi­ torial/ Avant-propos situates and  relates the  two  centres.  Then  come  translations of  nine  Lalonde poems  (four  by Jones) , a   poetic   tribute   by   Raymond   Souster,  "Michele Lalonde, Reading," and  a long interview   with   her  conducted  by  Doug  Jones.  In  the  back  half  of the book Mar­ garet  Atwood  gets  equivalent  treatment (fourteen   poems   and    one   prose   text translated,  plus  an  article by Tom  Mar­ shall.)
Such  thorough consideration is usually
beyond  the  scope  of an  anthology, but  it represents   the   kind   of  deep   study   that any translator worth  his salt is ready to undertake.  As  a  result,   Jones's   transla­ tions   of  Lalonde  are   supple   and   new, with  a rhetoric of their  own  but one  that  does not betray  his model.
Ellipse is a  kind  of  running continua­
tion of the two collections reviewed. Its regular  appearance and  flexible format permits  it  to  be  more  experimental and to feature younger  writers.  It is an excel­ lent   sign   to   see   writers   like   Jacques Brault,  Roch    Carrier,   Gilles   Marcotte and  Guy Robert (all of whom  translated Atwood  poems)   discovering  for  the  first time   in  its   pages   the   stimulation  and challenge  of the  art  of  translation.

PHILIP STRATFORD


1 Scott's    exchange   of   correspondence  with Anne Hebert over difficulties experienced in translating  Le   tombeau    des   rois  has   just been republished  in book form by HMH in Montreal.



91

BOOKS IN REVIEW



CANADA PORTRAYEO

GEORGE   WOODCOCK,    Canada  and   the   Cana­
dians.  Oxford  University  Press, $8.so.

GEORGE   wooncocK,  born  in   Winnipeg but  raised  in  England, had  already achieved   prominence as a left-wing  man of letters  when  in  1949 he took his leave of Britain and headed for  remotest Canada. He  did  not,  however,  bother  to cover   his  tracks   once  clear  of  the  Old Country.  Instead,  by  way   of   keeping literary   London  informed   of  his  where­ abouts,  he  has  poured forth  a  wealth  of books  on  subjects   ranging  from  George  Orwell  to the  Incas  and  the Doukhobors, from  Proudhon and the  history of anarch­ ism to the  face of  contemporary India. If it seems puzzling why such a prolific per­ sonality    should    have    quit    the    I940S protest  scene  represented in  England by Conway   Hall  and   his  own  Now  maga­  zine,  some  explanation may  be garnered from  Mr.  Woodcock's most  recent  book, Canada   and   the   Canadians, which   be­ gins  with a  brief  autobiographical  foray before  plunging into  the main  body of its enormous subject.
Mr.  Woodcock's father was an English
immigrant whose stay in Canada ended with   a  return  to  Shropshire  forced   by ill  health;  he  regaled   his  son  with  ac­ counts f
eyes of  a  frustrated  pioneer  deeply  nos­ talgic  for  the  new  country. And  at  the age  of  37, George  Woodcock  set  out  for Canada  where,    except   for   a   spate   of university   teaching in  the  United States and   roamings  in   distant   areas   of   the globe,   he   has   resided  ever   since.   This  new  book  stands   as  an  excellent  memo­  rial  to  his  father,  besides  being  a  salute  to  Canada  well  beyond  the  capacity, in
 terms  of  knowledge and  patriotic  enthu­
siasm, of any other  Canadian writer.
As a  prodigious example of dedication to  Canada,  this  coast-to-coast  compen­ dium    of   social,   political   and   cultural observation bears  comparison to  an  ear­  lier    book    written    by   an    enthusiastic Canadian  who  also spent  his  youth  out­  side Canada. That other  volume,  Finding a  Father  by Graham Mcinnes, was  pub­ lished  as  a  tribute to  Canada in  its  cen­ tennial  year.   In   telling   the   story  of  a crucial   phase  in  the  author's life,  it  too was suffused  with  a passionate dedication to  the  Canadian land  and  to  the  people  and  the  arts  to be found  there. "The true  north   strong   and   free   (and  deceptively simple, stood opposed  to the muddles and tyrannies, to the interminable fractricides of the Old  World," wrote  Mcinnes of his definitive   journey  to  Canada from  Eur­ ope in the ominous year of 1938. Finding  a   Father, the  author of  which   died   in
1970   at   his   diplomatic  post   in   Paris, forms   part   of  a  remarkable  autobiogra­ phical   tetralogy linking Canada, Austra­ lia and  Britain, but  it was for some inex­  plicable  reason  omitted  from   this   jour­  nal's   r 967  checklist   of significant Cana­ dian  writings. Yet  it  expressed  the  same sense of eloquent exhilaration at  the idea of  association with a vast new land as is discernible in Mr.  Woodcock's book, although this  latest  account of Canadian society   in   all  its  aspects   is,  even   more than   Finding   a  Father,   far  from   being an  uncritical hymn  of  patriotic praise.
As might be expected, the  typographi­ cal gremlins have  not spared Canada and the   Canadians  from   the   kind   of  mis­ fortune they  inflict  on  most  books. Lord  Thomson of Fleet, whose Times Literary  Supplement in  London reacted cordially to   this   volume,   will   perhaps  wince   at

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



seeing  his  name   mis-spelled. And  on  p.
258   occurs   a   reference  to   the   author himself  which   is  almost   eerie  in  its  im­ personal   tone.   But  beyond   such  minus­  cule   flaws   the   book   suffers   somewhat from  having   been  written  before  the  re­ surgence, beginning in  October 1970, of political   violence   in  Quebec.  After   the murder of Pierre Laporte and  the frantic machinations  on   all   sides   which   sur­ rounded  it,  can  any  writer   still  say,  as Mr.    Woodcock    does   on   p.   95,   that  "Canadians are  less inclined to the  emo­ tional  and  cruel extremes of politics than Americans?"
On   the  contrary, it  seems  that,  given the  appropriate  occasion   and   with  due allowance   made  for   the   lower  level  of stridency  possible among  2o,ooo,ooo people  compared  with   2oo,ooo,ooo,  Ca­ nadians as  a  political crowd   are  hardly  an improvement on  their  neighbours. For Canadians  to   think    otherwise  merely perpetuates the  cardinal sin  of  both  left and    right    in   Canada,  that    smugness which,  along with  the "drab and  snooty,"  impressed   Wyndham  Lewis   as   largely typical  of  Anglo-Canada during his three­  year  incarceration in  Toronto three  dec­ ades  ago.  In fact,   well  before  the  latest round   of  conflict   in  Quebec, Canadians had  shown  signs  of  sharing the  destruc­ tive  New  World  energies  usually  attrib­ uted to the U.S. alone. Aggrieved  Indians, ravaged landscapes,   the   international notoriety    (deserved  or  not)   of  the  east coast  seal  hunt, the  Black  Power  asper­  sions on  Canadian  commercial activities  in  the Caribbean-these are  among  the long   standing   justifications  for   second thoughts  about   the    supposedly  placid people  who  inhabit the  Dominion of the North.
Nevertheless,  Mr.   Woodcock appears
 well satisfied at being a North American without being  that  disreputable thing,  an American.  He dutifully records what  to outsiders may  seem  the excruciating anguish   which   has  gone  into   the  cele­ brated    Canadian  search   for   "national identity". It naturally  would   pain   him and  many  of his  compatriots  to  contem­ plate  the  possibility  that  Canada, or  that  part  of it outside Quebec, might  one  day be absorbed  into the U.S.A.  Yet he makes  little  allowance  for  the  likelihood  that  a portion  of  the  economic stake  now  held in Canada by the disturbingly expansion­ ist  U.S.  commercial  czars  was  actually sold  to  the  much-abused   interlopers  by Canadians, certainly no  proof  of  zeal  in the cause of national independence. It deserves  mention too  that   part,  at  least, of   the   development  of   Canadian   re­ sources   would   never   have   come   about  but  for  American enterprise, the  latter­ day   natives   being   notoriously   loath   to take  risks  for  the  sake  of   patriotism  or out of any other  motive.
Still  the  quest  for  "national identity"
goes  on  and   Mr.   Woodcock,   though  a man  of European background and  there­ fore  in  a  position  to  know  better,  seems to share  the  delusion common in Canada that  such  "identity"  can  be  achieved   in a matter  of decades rather than  centuries. The  fallacy  of Expo 67, that  costly public  relations   puff  which  seemingly  was  sup­  posed   to   bolster   national  maturity  in some  miraculous and  "instant" way,  lin­ gers  on  in  the  pages  of Canada  and  the Canadians. Time, lots of it, and  even,  in the Yeatsian  phrase,  "our  own  red blood" go  into   the   making   of  a   nation.   And history  has  yet  to show  whether Canada as  it  exists  at  present   is  simply  another abortive    British    attempt  at   foisting   a federation  on   a  multi-racial society,  or

93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



will prove  an  adjunct of the  U.S.A., doomed  eventually to shed its separate status, or whether indeed  the perilously capacious and  under-populated country north  of the 49th  Parallel has the stuff of independent nationhood despite the deafening  siren   songs  issuing  from   the south.
Mr. Woodcock for his part gives the impression of measured confidence  about Canada's survival  chances.  He  writes  on p.   320,   for   instance,  of  the   country's possible  role as a  "larger and  more  posi­ tive"  Switzerland, although recent White  Paper    statements  from    Ottawa   about  future foreign  policy indicate that  Pierre Elliott  Trudeau may have different ideas. Barring  some   reservations, Mr.   Wood­ cock  places  great  faith  in  Mr.  Trudeau, to  the  point  almost  of  naivete.  He  con­ siders  the  federal  prime minister a genu­ inely   liberal    (small   "1")   politician,  a point   on   which   other   observers   would demur. He  also  portrays Mr.  Trudeau as representative  of  French Canada. Quite apart from  the  fact   (much  exploited   by Quebec independantistes) that  the  prime minister   is  only   half   French-Canadian and   a   millionaire  in   the   bargain, Mr. Woodcock's  evaluation   of   him   might have  been  altered   to  some  extent   if,  as appears not  to be the  case, the author of Canada   and  the  Candians had  lived  for a  considerable time  in  even  the  "Anglo­ phone"  section   of   that   profoundly  di­ vided   city,  Montreal,  instead  of  having  chosen  Vancouver as his permanent  base.
Such  an experience might  also have altered  his approach to the Quebec ques­ tion  in  general. As it  is, Mr.  Woodcock is  a   model   specimen  of   that   Ottawa­ oriented  ideal,   the   bilingual    federalist  from English  Canada  conscientiously



94
 sympathetic towards the  social  and  cul­ tural   aspirations of  Quebecers. But  this does  not  necessarily  enable  him  to  com­ prehend  or   communicate  the   doctrine which,  in  its moderate form, won  almost
25 per  cent  of  the  Quebec popular  vote in  April   I970.   For   Mr.   Woodcock, the history  of  Quebec is an  inherent part  of Canadian development as a whole. How­ ever,  for    the   independantistes,   the  English-speaking  Canadians impinge up­ on  the  past  and   present   of  Quebec not in  any  positive  way  but  only  as  an  "op­ pressive"   front  for   the   more   powerful English-speaking "exploiters" to the south and  elsewhere.   Not  even  the  great  fund of  fair-mindedness  deployed  by  Mr. Woodcock  will  recommend  itself  to  the independantistes unless  he  concedes   this central tenet  of  their  ideology,  or  at  any rate   takes   note   of  the   extra   gravity   it lends  to  inter-racial friction   in  Canada. But   Canada   and   the  Canadians  is  a memorable work of synthesis  by a scholar who,   in   the   adventurous  tradition  of Harold  A.   Innis,  insists  on   seeing   the country for  himself  before  writing about it.   If Mr.   Woodcock's pronouncements on the Quebec problem  occasionally  have the  musty  air  of  a  "B.  and   B."  report, other    parts    of   his   wide-ranging   book pulsate   with   an   authentic feel   for   the
75,000  miles  of  Canada he  has  covered in  person.  This  flavour  of the  real  coun­ try  is enhanced by Ingeborg  Woodcock's photographs. And  there is a  refreshingly iconoclastic bite  to Mr. Woodcock's com­ ments  on  Canadian  art,  at  a  time  when the   painting   community  in   Europe  as well  as  in   Canada is  caught  up  in  an insidious rush  to keep abreast  of the  New York-based "demon of  progress."
C.J.FOX

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



NO NIGHTINGALES SINGING

BERTRAM  WARR,   Acknowledgment to  Life, edited    by   Len   Gasparini.  Ryerson,   soft­ cover $3.95,  hardcover, $5-95·
LEN   GASPARINI,   Gutty   Sark.   Quarry    Press,
$2.00.

THERE  is  a  curious minor   shock  when one  opens Bertram Warr's collected poems,  Acknowledgment to  Life  and,  on the first page  after  Earle  Birney's  Preface and  Len  Gasparini's biographical  Intro­ duction,  reads   the  opening  lines  of  the opening poem,  "Working Class":

We have  heard  no nightingales singing in cool, dim lanes, where evening
comes like a procession  through the aisles at  passion-tide,
filling the church with quiet  prayer  dressed in  white ...

It is  the  double   familiarity of  the  lines that stirs one, lines themselves recognized after   they  have  lain  a  quarter of  a  cen­ tury  in a forgotten broadsheet (for  Warr  never  published an  actual volume  in  his lifetime), but  also  reminiscent of a  great  deal  of  poetry  that  was  being  written in the  early   Forties,   bathed  in  the  minor­ keyed  romanticism  that  was  one  of  the decade's reactions against the didacticism of the Thirties.
Warr did not reject  the vision of the Thirties   completely,  and    here   he   re­ sembled more the Twentieth-Century Verse group  (Fuller, Symons  et al), with whom   I  believe  he  was  not  acquainted during  his  brief  time  in  England, rather than the Grey Walls group with whom  he did  associate.  One  gets  the  sense of  this in the last lines of "Working Class"; here Warr  gives his own  version  of the  dream of  a  world   renewed   which   provided   an
 ending  for so many  famous  poems of the age of the Spanish  Civil War:

Though  the cities straddle the land  like giants,  holding  us away,
we know they will topple  some day,
and  will lie over the  land,  dissolving and
giving  off gases.
But a wind will spring  up to carry  the
smells away
and  the earth  will suck off the liquids and
the  crumbling  flesh,
and  on the bleached  bones, when the sun shines,
we shall begin to build.

There are  earlier  echoes  too -that  of James  Thomson, for  example -and,  in the  undigested  abstractions of some hith­ erto   unpublished   poems,    a   brimstone whiff   of   Rationalist    Press   Association materialism. All of this helps to mark  out Warr's  terrain,  in   his   time,  as  a  self­ educated  worker   who   read   widely  and  preserved  his residual individuality large­ ly because he had  no place  in the literary world  of his time. The best of his poems are  glosses on  experience, expressions  of direct  feeling, honest,  limpid, often  melo­ dious,   seldom   experimental. I  do   not think  it  would  be appropriate to  use the old  talk  about  promise.  Like  many  other poets  who  were  young  with   him,  Warr might have fallen  silent  after  the war and its  peculiar  conditions of living  and  feel­ ing  had  come  to  an  end; we cannot say he   might   have   matured  into   a  major poet.  But  what   he  wrote   is worth  pre­ serving  as  a  true  voice  of  its  time,  and  we must  be grateful to Len Gasparini for his  dedication  in   preparing  the  volume  and  making  sure  that  it  achieved   publi­ cation.
By  coincidence,  Mr.   Gasparini's  own first  collection,  Gutty Sark, has  also  just appeared. Again,  there  is no need  to pre­ sume  on  the  future. Mr.  Gasparini  may go a good way beyond what  he has writ-

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ten  here,  and  I hope  he does, but  he has still  produced  a  creditable first  volume, and -this time  perhaps  not  by  coinci­ dence-a    volume    which   appeals  for similar   reasons;   there   is  a  clear  affinity that  may  explain the  attraction between  the  two  poets  which  leaps  a  generation.
Gasparini, of course, does not have a period   flavour   to  anyone  who  reads  his book  now,  yet  there  is a  sense  in  which he is more  genuinely  contemporary, more a  child  of  this  year I 97 I, than   most  of the  versifiers  who  are  following  the  par­ ticularly   lifeless  fashions  that  were  born
-or rather  resuscitated  -in the  later
Sixties.  He  is  not  re-enacting what   was good  theatre when  the  Dadaists  thought it  up fifty years ago.  He is not  under  the illusion  that  chunks of semi-literate prose cut   into   very  short   lines  and   delivered with    grunting   inarticulation   comprise poetry.  But  he does have a clear, idiosyn­ cratic  ear  and  eye, he  has  learnt  the  les­ sons  of  the  imagists  without needing   to imitate them,  and one has the impression  of a mind  in which a natural tendency  to write   concretely   is  supported-though not  overwhelmed -by  the  kind  of rich, omnivorous reading which  in  these  days only  the  dwindling company   of  genuine autodidacts  seems   to   possess.   Add    a tempting touch  of  the  macabre, a  deep sense  of  poetic  craft   as  a  responsibility, and   one   has  the   basic  equipment  of  a true  poet.  One  hopes  Mr.  Gasparini can use  it  to  overcome the  tentative quality which  makes some of the poems in Gutty Sark   initially  interesting  but   ultimately unsatisfying. An individual voice is speak­ ing  all  right,  but  it  needs  strengthening. A total  poetic  personality,  one  feels, has not  yet  crystallized.
L. T. CORNELIUS


g6
 NEARER THE BONE

EARLE  BIRNEY,   rag   & boneshop.  McClelland
&  Stewart.  $6.gs.

ONE OF   THE  POEMS in  rag & boneshop is  entitled  "for   maister   geoffrey". After doing  Chaucer the  honour of skilfully imitating  him,   Birney   ends   this   poem with  a  statement ("In  Chauceres  basel­ wood  I walke  always  / And  never thynke  out   of   hise   shawes   to   streye")    which would   certainly  have   caused  Plato,  had he   read   it,   to  boot   Birney   out   of  his republic  for   the   usual   reason.  No  one poet's   "shawe"  can   ever   content  Earle  Birney.  In this  book,  he  poaches  on  the preserves   of  writers  as  various   in   time and  style  as  the  author of  Beowulf  and bp nichol,  adding little  new in the way of thought  or   form,   but   redeeming  every borrowed  mode   by   a   combination  of technical  proficiency, particularly  of  ex­ perience,  and  the  flavour  of a downright attractive personality.
Earle  Birney, more  than  any other  poet
I know,  is typical  in thought and  outlook of the  average liberal-minded Canadian. His  responses  to  life  in  Canada and   his tourist  impressions abroad are predictable and  our  own.  But  if  he  is the  "average man" in  this  respect,   he  is  rare   among our   writers   in   his  ability   to  use  forms derived    from    the    whole    tradition   of poetry  to express brilliantly and  freshly whatever  insight    he   does   have.   More­ over,  he  has  an  intelligent  dedication to his   craft  that    only   a   professional    can possess. He  can  always  be trusted   to  put old   wine    (which   looks   like   new   wine because  it is made today) into  old bottles (which   look  like  new  bottles  because  no one  has  seen  them  in  a  long  time  and  because   he  has  subtly   adapted  them   to

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the styles of our  time)   in such  a way that every draft we take  in is to us a new and heady  experience.
Having said  this  much   about  Birney's work  in  general  as continued in  this vol­ ume, I should  like now to comment some­ what  haphazardly about  particular poems or  groups   of  poems  that   to  me  appear, for   good   or   bad,   worthy   of   particular mention.
First,  with  respect  to  the  concrete poems,  I shall  only  comment on  a  few, but  what  I say of these  is typical  of  Bir­ ney's use of the concrete poem  in general.  It  is always interesting, but  the failures,  I feel,  tend  to  outnumber the  successes.
"campus  theatre  steps"   attracted  me by  its  striking format, but  after   turning the book around and  reading it, I was disappointed. It  is  a  kind   of  "in-joke", which  one is not apt  to understand  unless he  comes  from  Eugene, Oregon. I come from  Fredericton, New  Brunswick. Once its typography has been unscrambled "Alaska    Passage"    is,   one   discovers,   a typical  Birney  "wilderness" poem, made more  difficult,  not  more  understandable, by  its  author's attempt to  make  it  look like a  typographical wilderness. There  is more  organic justification for  the formats of "Buildings" and "Outdoor Zoo", which fail,  it seems  to  me,  not  because  of their form   but   because  they  are  "cute"  only, and  a  poem  ought certainly to  be  more than  "cute".
"in   the   mammoth   corridor"   Birney pits   his  poetic   prose   against  that   of  a tourist  "blurb"; not surprisingly he wins, but his strength might  have been more impressive  had  he  merely  flexed  his muscles by himself.  "in  the  night  jet" is a brilliantly apt  imagistic poem, and  the printing of inverted black  and  white  is annoying  in   that   it   is  too   crude    and
 unimaginative a  device  to  be  worthy  of the  brilliance of  the  poem's   actual  lan­ guage.
"up  her  can  nada" is Birney's  master­
piece in  the  concrete mode -clever, in­ triguing, economical, yet  imaginative, it presents  a  map  of  limitation and  preju­ dice   in   an   ugly,   inimitable  way.   The clever  "canada  council" only  suffers  by comparison -one wonders,  though, why Birney  does   not  incorporate "oui"   into the  Council's vocabulary. It has  not  al­ ways said "non" to him.
Of   the  more   orthodox  poems,  "once high on the hill" is the longest and most ambitious.   This poem,  Birney's  reminis­ cences of San  Francisco forty  years ago, is a  successful  and  moving  work,  giving a sense that, however men  disagree  over tl1e meaning and  value  of  life, the excite­ ment  and  flavour of  its  flow  is of  itself value  enough   to  justify  existence.
"kiwis,"   "christchurch,  n.z.",   "strine
authors meet" are  the  usual  swipes  that a   creative    giant    delivers   against   non­ creative   academic  pygmies.  Birney,  like Pope,  has  not  discovered  that  these skil­ fully  delivered   blows  are   all  that   keep such   beings   alive.   If   poets   left   them alone,  they  would   die  of  their   own  in­  significance.
Birney,   the   liberal,  is  at   his  best  in
"four  feet between", a poem  that  reminds me  of  Wordsworth's  encounter  with   a leech  gatherer in  "Resolution and  Inde­ pendence"   and    more    than   challenges  comparison with  the latter poem.
"Oil   refinery",  Anglo-Saxon  in  form and imaginatively mythopoiec in  the best sense, is a  masterpiece, and  for  it  I forgive  Birney  the  kind  of  practical  jok­ ing  that  "poet-tree 1"  is, and  his  print­ ing  of  "found  prose  from   the  Leacock centenniel", which  he  certainly  ought  to

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



have left where he found it, in Orillia, Ontario. For  me, "song  for sunsets"  and "if  you were  here", redeem  their schmal­ ziness  by the  aptness  of their  particulars and   the   beauty   of   their   rhythms   and make  totally  irrelevant all I  have said  by way  of  criticism   and  praise:  "Beauty is its own  excuse  for  being."  I  am  grateful to Earle  Birney for this book, and  I hope that,   for   many  more   years,  he  will  be spared   to  ask  his  interminable questions,  that   he   will   continue  to  mix  up   and write  down  his  answers  in  what,  despite all his gifts of imitation and  parody,  ulti­ mately  becomes  his own  inimitable way.
FRED  COGSWELL

CALLAGHAN REVISITED

WILLIAM  WALSH,  A  Manifold   Voice:   Studies in  Commonwealth Literature. Clarke  Irwin.
$7.00.

THis SERIES  of  nine  disparate essays on the    nine   Commonwealth  writers   who "have made   a  significant   use of  the  re­ sources   of   the   language"  is   absolutely  certain in  its  judgments,  which  it  takes to   be   objective,  yet   it   couches   those assertions   in  a  rhetoric  that   constantly loses its  subject in  abstraction. The  lan­  guage's   "resources"   and   the   resources' "significance" are  both  unclear.  Though the  essays  quote   liberally  from  the  nine authors-Narayan,  Chaudhuri,  Schrei­ ner, Achebe, Naipaul, White, Hope, Mansfield, and   Callaghan-only on Hope   (the  one  poet  examined)  does the author consistently demonstrate the  rela­ tionship   between   style  and   art  that  he takes  as his task. Callaghan,  we  are  told, is  sometimes  "unaccountable"  in  his characters'  motivation, sometimes  "lack-

g8
 ing  in  abstract logic",  oppressed  "by  the powerful tradition of the  United States", "plain to the  point  of drabness and  often painfully  clumsy". Apparently  his  "un­ fashionable  conscience"  and   the  "flexi­ bility    and    versatility"   of   The   Many  Colored Coat  redeem  him,  but  given  the option   of   writing   instead    about   the stylistic   subtleties  of  Ethel   Wilson,   the dense  intellectualism of  Margaret Avison, the   baroque   magnificence  of   Malcolm Lowry,  or  the  versatility of a  number of other  writers,  Callaghan  seems  an   odd choice   to  show  off  Canadian  linguistic significance.  Indeed,   the    omission    of Wole Soyinka, Wilson Harris, Janet Frame,  Francis Webb  and   others   seems only  accountable by  positing  a  taste  for the  classical  rather than   the  romantic  as the   critic's  underlying criterion  for   the judgments he makes. It is this that  makes the  Hope  essay so good  and  the  pieces on Schreiner and  White so out  of tune. Be­ cause   Professor   Walsh   brings   a   sound intelligence to  the  critical  task,  this  is a good    book   to   read,    but   because    the literatures of  the  Commonwealth are  so insistently   romantic,  it   is  also   a   good
book with  which  to disagree.   w. H. NEW


*** 	Guide   Bibliographique   des   theses   lit­
teraires   canadiennes    de   1921   a   1969.   Ed.
ANTOINE    NAAMAN.    Editions    Cosmos    (Sher­
brooke,   P.Q.),  $10.00.  A  detailed   listing   of
M.A.  and  Ph.D.  theses  written in  Canada on
all   literary    topics,   in   English   and   French,
organized   by  subject, and   indexed   by  author
and  director. The  sections  on Canadian  litera­
ture   are   welcome,  but  must  be  used  exceed­
ingly   cautiously.   There  are   occasional  omis­
sions but  the  faults  of commission  are  greater,
forM. Naaman unwisely has chosen to include
(as  if  they  were  complete)  all  those  topics  in
progress    (some   of  them   already   disbanded)
which  appear in  the  mimeographed  lists  that
Professor   Carl   Klinck   has   for  several   years
circulated among  Canadian academics.
W.N.


THESES IN ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE, 1969-70


Compiled  by Carl F. Klinck


This  list  includes   only  theses  in  English-Canadian  Literature  because  theses  in French-Canadian  Literature   are  now  recorded  by  Professor  Antoine   Naaman   of the  Universite  de  Sherbrooke   in  his  Guide   bibliographique  des  theses  litteraires canadiennes.



1969
ATKINS, ELIZABETH.  Aspects  of the  Absurd  in
Modern  Fiction, with   special   reference   to
'Under  the  Volcano'  and  'Catch	.' M.A.,  University of British  Columbia,  (Pro­ fessor D.  G.  Stephens).
BENHAM,  DAVID. A  Liverpool  of Self:  A Study of Lowry's  Fiction  other than 'Under the Volcano.'  For M.A., University of British Columbia,  (Professor   W.  H.  New).
BOYLAN,   CHARLES   ROBERT.   The  Social   and Lyric Voices  of Dorothy  Livesay. For M.A., University   of  British   Columbia,   (Professor W.  H.  New).
BYSCOP,  PAUL.  'The  Looking   Game'   (a  short novel  submitted in  lieu  of M.A.  thesis, McGill, I g68),  (Professor   Louis  Dudek).
DAWSON,  JEREMY  ORME.  The Search  theme  in the  Early Novels  of John  Buchan. For M.A., University  of Manitoba, (Professor G. L. Brodersen) .
DUNPHY, JOHN  w. The  Technique of Fiction in  the   Novels   of  F.  P.   Grove.   For  M.A., Dalhousie  University,  (Professor  M.  G. Parks).
EDWARDS, MARY   JANE.   "Fiction and  Montreal,
1769-1885"- English.   For   Ph.D.,  Univer­
sity of Toronto,  (Professor   G.  H.  Roper).
HALL,  CHIPMAN.   A   Survey    of   the   Indians' Role    in    English-Canadian  Literature   to
1900. For M.A., Dalhousie University,  (Pro­
fessors M.  G.  Parks  and  R.  L.  Raymond). JOHNSONN,   CARELL. The   Making  of 'Under the   Volcano':  An   Examination  of  lyrical
 Structure, with   Reference   to  Textual   Re­ visions.   For    M.A.,   University    of    British Columbia,   (Professor   W. H.  New).
KNELSEN, RICHARD JOHN.  Flesh and  Spirit  in the  Writings of Leonard  Cohen. For  M.A., University   of  Manitoba,  (Professor   Walter E. Swayze).
MACLURE, EVELYN JOYCE.  The  Short Story in Canada:   Development   from  1935  to  1955 with Attached  Bibliography. For M.A., University   of  British   Columbia,   (Professor D. G. Stephens).
ORANGE, JOHN   c. "Ernest Buckler:  The Masks of  the   Artist."   For   Phil.M.,   University   of Toronto,  (Professor  F.  W.  Watt).
PARKER, GEORGE LAWRENCE.  A History of a Canadian   Publishing   House:   A   Study    of the Relation Between Publishing and the Profession of Writing, rBgo-1940. For Ph.D., University of Toronto, (Professor Gordon Roper).
RAMSEY, ROBIN.  The  Impact of Time  and Memory   in  Malcolm  Lowry's   Fiction.  For M.A., University of British  Columbia,  (Pro­ fessor W. H.  New).
RIDDELL, JOHN   ARCHIBALD. Malcolm   Lowry: The Voyage That Never Ends. For M.A., Dalhousie University, (Professor Malcolm Ross).
RIDEOUT, E. CHRISTOPHER.   The  Woman in  the Novels of Frederick  Philip Grove.  For M.A., University   of  Alberta,  (Professor   H.  Har­ greaves).
RINGROSE, CHRISTOPHER.   'Preview':  Anatomy

99

THESES



of  a   Group. For   M.A.,   University   of   Al­
berta,   (Professor   Dorothy   Livesay).
ROGERS,   LINDA.   Environment  and   the    Quest Motif 	in   Selected   Works  of    Canadian Prairie  Fiction. For  M.A.,  University  of British  Columbia,  (Professor  W.  H.  New) .
ROSS,   G.     ARTHUR.     Three  Minor   Canadian Poets:   Louis   Alexander Mackay, Leo  Ken­ nedy,  and    Raymond   Knister.   For   M.A., University   of  Alberta,   (Professor   Dorothy  Livesay).
SHERMAN, JOSEPH.  Poems; and  Notes  Towards a   Jewish    Poem.  For   M.A.,   University   of New  Brunswick,   (Professor  K.  Thompson).
THOMPSON,   JOYCE  LESLEY.  Structural   Tech­ nique  in   the   Fiction  of   Frederick    Philip  Grove. For   M.A.,   University   of   Manitoba, (Professor  Walter E.  Swayze).
WING,  TED.  Puritan Ethic and  Social  Response in Novels of Sinclair Ross, Robertson Davies, and   Hugh MacLennan. For  M.A.,  Univer­ sity  of  Alberta,   (Professor  Diane  Bessai).
YEO, MARGARET ELIZABETH. "The Living Land­ scape;    Nature  Imagery  in   the   Poetry    of Margaret  Atwood  and   other  Modern Can­  adian  Lyric    Poets."   For   M.A.,   Carleton  University,    (Professor   R.   L.   McDougall).

1970

BOLSTER, CHARLES G.  Shakespeare in  French Canada. For  M.A.,  University  of New Brunswick,   (Professor   David   Galloway).
BURNETT,  RONALD FRANK.  Le  juge, c'est   VOUS. For  M.A.,  McGill  University,   (Professor William  W ees).
COLE,  YOLANDA. journey to  Water Motif  in Canadian Prairie  Novel. For  M.A.,  Univer­ sity of Alberta,   (Professor  R.  Harrison).
CORBETT, NANCY JEAN. "Sexual Provinciality" and  Characterization: A  Study of  Some Recent  Canadian  Fiction. For  M.A.,  Uni­ venity  of  British   Columbia,   (Professor  D. G.  Stephens).
DAVIES,  BARRIE.  The  Alien Mind:  A  Study of the    Poetry    of   Archibald   Lampman.   For Ph.D.,  University of  New Brunswick,  (Pro­ fessor Desmond  Pacey).





100
 DRAGLAND, STANLEY  LOUIS.  Duncan Campbell Scott. For  Ph.D.,  Queen's University,  (Pro­ fessor John   P. Matthews).
FREDERICKS,     CARRIE   MACMILLAN.    The   De­ velopment  of  Sam Slick: Twenty  Years of Change  in   a   Character,   r83s-rBss.  For M.A.,  Dalhousie  University,   (Professor   M. G.  Parks).
GIBBS,  ROBERT.  Aspects of Irony in  the  Poetry of   E.    f. Pratt. For   Ph.D.,   University   of New Brunswick, (Professor Desmond Pacey).
HAUGHTON,  KATHRYN  M.   PARKER.  john  Fred­ eric   Herbin and   Charles Tory  Bruce:  Two Generations  of    Regional    Literature.   For M.A.,  University   of  New  Brunswick,   (Pro­ fessor  Fred  Cogswell) .
JONES, ALEXANDER HENRY.  Martha Ostenso's Novels- A    Study  of   Three  Dominant Themes. For  M.A.,  University  of British Columbia, (Professor  D.  G. Stephens).
MCCALLUM,    MAUREEN   FAY.  A.   j. M. Smith. For   M.A.,   Queen's  University,   (Professor D. 0. Spettigue).
MILLER,   JUDITH.    Towards a  Canadian   Aes­ thetic: Descriptive Colour in the  Landscape Poetry    of  Duncan   Campbell   Scott,  Archi­ bald  Lampman, and  William Wilfred Camp­ bell.    For   M.A.,   University   of   Waterloo,  (Professor  C. F. MacRae) .
NEELY,  MARY    ANN.   Sources of  Energy  in  the jalna  Novels   of  Mazo   de   la   Roche.   For M.A., The  University of Western Ontario, (Professor  Carl  F. Klinck).
RICOU,  LAURENCE  RODGER. Canadian Prairie Fiction: The Significance of the  Landscape. For  Ph.D.,  University  of Toronto.
SHOULDICE,  LARRY.   Translation  into  English of    Contes  Anglais   et   Autres   by   Jacques Ferron, with   a  Critical Introduction  of  the Complete  Works of  the   Author. For  M.A., Universite de Sherbrooke, (Professor D. G. Jones).
STOCKS,   WILLIAM.  Images of Outrage: The English-Canadian Prose Documentary. For M.A., University of Alberta,  (Professor  W. Watson).
