Sr .25 per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·24


Spring, 1965



LITERJIRY HISTORY  IN CJINJIDJI



Articles
BY A.  J. M.  SMITH, DONALD  STEPHENS, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, WARREN TALLMAN, WILLIAM H. MAGEE, L.A. A. HARDING

Chronicles and  Opinions

BY  NAIM KATTAN, FRANK DAVEY, WAYNE BURNS, NATHAN COHEN


Reviews
BY  JOHN ROBERT COLOMBO, DONALD  STEPHENS, ROBIN  SKELTON, HELEN SONTHOFF, A. W.  WAINMAN, ELLIOTT GOSE, ROBERT HARLOW, JOAN LOWNDES, PETER STEVENS





A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








CANADIAN
BIOGRAPHY



WE  ARE   PLEASED TO   ANNOUNCE  that  the  British  Columbia Medal for  Popular  Biography, which  is  administered by  Canadian Literature, has  been  awarded to  Phyllis  Grosskurth for  her   fohn   Addington Symonds: A Biography, which  the  judges  unanimously regarded as by far  the  best biography published in  1964  by  a  Canadian writer.  Mrs.  Grosskurth's book  is a lucid  and penetrating study  of  her  subject. She  considers  carefully  and  delicately  the  ten­ sions  that   afflicted  Symonds as an  upper-middle-class Victorian  who  spent  half his life resisting  and  the other  half guiltily accepting his homosexual inclinations; she suggests  with  appropriate obliqueness  the  reasons  for  the  great  gap  between  Symonds'  evident promise  as a writer  and  his actual  literary achievement; above  all,  the  architecture of her  book  is beautifully balanced,  and  the  writing  admir­ ably  sensitive   and   clear.    fohn   Addington Symonds,  published   in  Canada  by Longmans, stands  so  far   above  any  other  biographical  work   published  by  a Canadian during 1964  that  there  was no  moment  of doubt  that  it deserved  the award.
This  is the  first  time  in  many  years that  the  U.B.C. Medal  for  Popular  Biog­ raphy  has  been  awarded for  a work  on  a non-Canadian subject. This  does  not mean   that   the   judges  in  the  past  were  unduly   chauvinistic. During  the  years following  the  end  of the  last war  there  was a great  burst  of  biographical activity  directed   at  Canadian figures  of historical  importance, for  the simple  reason  that  few  good  Lives  of  the  fathers of Canada actually  existed.  Now  that  the  major part  of this  task  is done,  it is perhaps a sign of  cultural maturity that  Canadian scholars   are  showing  an  increasing tendency  to  look  for  subjects   beyond   our  boundaries and  in this way  to re-assert continuity with  the  common Anglo-Saxon tradition.

3

EDITORIAL



"I FEEL, LIKE MOST OTHER VERSE WRITERS of my generatiOn, that  I do  not  know  how  much  of my mind  he invented, let alone  how  much  of it  is a reaction  against  him  or indeed  a consequence of misreading him.  He  had a very  penetrating influence,  perhaps not unlike  an east  wind."
So,  seventeen   years  ago,  William  Empson   wrote  of  T. S. Eliot.  In  this  year
of Eliot's  death  the  same  might  be said,  and  not  only  by verse  writers,  wherever English  is used  as  a  literary  language. Even  the  youngest  generation of  writers belongs,  by  inheritance or  derivation, to  the  revolution in  creative   and  critical attitudes which  Eliot  and  Pound, Joyce  and  Wyndham Lewis, Hulme and  Ford, set going  in  the  years  between   I 9 I 4 and   I 9 2 2.
Revolutions usually develop  in ways which  surprise their  originators, and  there
are  many   younger   writers,  in  reaction   against all  preceding  generations,  who would  deny  Eliot's  poetics as fervently  as most modern writers  deny  those  mani­ festations of  religious   and   political   conservatism  which-in   Eliot's  case­ illustrate how  carefully  we  must  avoid  being  influenced by  a  writer's  opinions  when  we set out  to  judge him as a literary  artist.  But the fact  remains that poetry and   criticism  in  English,  and   to  a  less extent   even  drama, are  different from what  they  might  have  been-in  Canada and  India as much  as in  Britain  and  the  United States-because  of that  extraordinarily penetrative influence  which Eliot  began  to wield in the crucial  year of I9I7, when  he published both  Prufrock and  his first critical  writings  on  Pound, and  which  persists even  after  his death.
Within the  wider   tradition of  writing  in  English,   the  common elements   are
more  important than   those  that  mark  the  individuality of  national or  regional strains.  Eliot,  like James, stands  as a symbol  of the  fact  that, no matter how  far writing in  North   America  may  become  differentiated from  that  in  Britain,  im­ passable  gulfs are  never  created, and  influences  that  are  vital still flow from land to  land  on  the  sea  of a  common  language. What  unites  is as  precious  as  what  sets apart, and  so we  join in the  tribute to T. S. Eliot,  whose  ultimate influence is  perhaps incalculable, but  without   whom  few  of  us-in  Canada  as  well  as elsewhere-would  have  written quite   as  we  have   done.   Leaving  to  posterity the  judgment of comparative greatness,  it can  still be said  that  Eliot, like Shake­  speare  and  Wordsworth, like Dante and  Gogol,  was one of those artists  who erect weirs  across  the  stream   of  literature, making   of  what   goes  before  them  a  past to  which  we  cannot return, and  forcing  writers  who  follow  them  to  choose  the forms  of expression  that  are  proper  to their  times  and  places  as well as to their own  natures.



4

EDITORIAL



CONTINUING  THE COMMON  STRAIN,  we  may  welcome,   as  an event  of interest  to anyone  concerned with  the circumstances under  which  writers work,  the  appearance of a fascinating study,  The  Profession  of Letters (Toronto,
$5.75), by J. W. Saunders of the University of Leeds. Mr.  Saunders is concerned
with  the  development of  a  profession  of  writing in  Britain from  the  time  of Chaucer up  to the  present  day. In  the strict  sense, professional  writing for  publi­ cation  is no  older  even  in  England than  the  earlier  part  of the  eighteenth cen­  tury,  and  it appeared in Canada little more  than  a century  afterwards. However, Canadian  professional writers  have  relied  very  largely  on  publication in  Britain  and  the  United States,  and  it is only in comparatively recent  years that the  kind of  responsible   publishing which  might  be  the  foundation for  a  real  local  pro­  fession of letters  has begun  to appear in Canada. In the sense that  every Canadian writer  still  hopes  for  London  publication, both  to make  his royalties  worthwhile and  also to gain  something  more  than  a local  accolade,  what  Mr.  Saunders has to say is very much  our business.  Moreover, as Canadian publishing and  a Cana­ dian  profession  of  letters  develop  and  interact, there  will undoubtedly be a great  deal  to  learn  from  the  experience of Britain, where  the  back  lane  to  Parnassus is called  Grub Street.


















5



A REJECTED
PREFACE


A.]. M. Smith




In  1936  appeared   the  historic  anthology> New  Provinces> which has always  been  re­ garded  as  one   of  the   most   important events   in   the   history   of   English   poetry.
A.  f. .M. Smith was  one  of the  six  contri­
butors> together   with   Finch> Klein>  Ken­ nedy,   Pratt   and   Scott. Smith  wrote   the original   preface  to  New  Provinces.   E.  f.
Pratt objected  to its contents and it was withdrawn in   favour  of a  preface  written by  F.  R. Scott. Now, almost  thirty   years later> we   print   that   original   preface   for the  first time.
LBULK  OF   CANADIAN VERSE  i' mmantic m conception  and
conventional  in  form.   Its  two  great  themes are   Nature  and   Love-nature
humanized, endowed with  feeling,  and  made  sentimental; love idealized, sancti­ fied,  and   inflated. Its  characteristic type  is  the  lyric.  Its  rhythms are  definite, mechanically correct, and  obvious;  its rhymes  are  commonplace.
The exigencies  of  rhyme  and  rhythm are  allowed  to  determine the  choice  of a  word  so often  that  a  sensible  reader  is compelled to  conclude that  the  plain sense of the  matter is of only minor  importance. It is the  arbitrarily chosen  verse pattern  that   counts. One   has  the  uncomfortable feeling in  reading such  an
anthology as W.  W.  Campbell's The  Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse  or  J. W.
Garvin's Canadian Poets  that  the  writers  included are  not  interested in  saying anything in particular; they merely wish to show  that they  are capable of turning out  a number of regular  stanzas  in which  statements are  made about the  writer's emotions, say  "In  Winter", or  "At  Montmorenci Falls", or  "In A  Birch  Bark

6

A REJECTED PREFACE



Canoe". Other  exercises  are  concerned  with   pine  trees,  the  open   road,  God, snowshoes  or  Pan.  The most  popular experience is to  be pained, hurt, stabbed or  seared  by Beauty-preferably by the  yellow flame  of a crocus  in  the  spring or the  red flame  of a maple  leaf in autumn.
There would  be less objection to these  poems if the  observation were  accurate
and  its expression  vivid,  or if we could  feel that  the emotion  was a genuine and intense  one.  We  could  then  go on  to  ask if it  were  a valuable one.  But,  with  a negligible  number of exceptions, the  observation  is general  in  these  poems  and the  descriptions are  vague.  The  poet's  emotions  are  unbounded, and  are  conse­ quently   lacking  in  the  intensity  which  results  from  discipline  and  compression; his  thinking is of  a  transcendental or  theosophical sort  that  has  to  be  taken  on faith.  The fundamental criticism  that  must  be brought against  Canadian poetry as a whole  is that  it ignores  the intelligence. And  as a result  it is dead.
Our grievance, however,  against  the great  dead  body of poetry  laid  out  in the mortuary of the  Oxford  Book or interred under  Garvin's florid  epitaphs is not so much  that  it is dead  but  that its sponsors  in Canada pretend that it is alive. Yet it should  be obvious  to  any  person  of taste  that  this  poetry  cannot now,  and  in most  cases never  could,  give  the  impression  of being  vitally  concerned with  real experience. The Canadian poet,  if this kind  of thing  truly  represents his feelings and  his thoughts, is a half-baked, hyper-sensitive, poorly  adjusted, and  frequently neurotic individual that  no  one  in  his senses would  trust  to drive  a car  or light a furnace. He  is the  victim  of his feelings  and  fancies,  or of what  he fancies  his feelings  ought   to  be,  and  his emotional aberrations are  out  of  all  proportion to the  experience that  brings  them  into  being.  He  has a soft  heart  and  a soft soul; and  a soft  head.  No  wonder  nobody  respects  him,  and  few show  even  the  most casual  interest  in his poetry.  A few patriotic professors, one or two hack  journalist critics,  and  a  handful of earnest  anthologists-these have  tried  to  put  the  idea across  that   there  exists  a  healthy   national Canadian poetry  which  expresses  the vigorous  hope  of this young  Dominion in a characteristically Canadian  style, etc., etc.,  but  the  idea  is so demonstrably false that  no one  but  the  interested parties has  been  taken  in.
We  do  not  pretend that   this volume  contains  any  verse that   might  not  have been  written in the  United States  or in Great  Britain. There is certainly nothing specially  Canadian about more  than   one  or  two  poems.  Why  should   there  be? Poetry  today  is written for  the  most  part  by people  whose  emotional and  intel­ lectual  heritage is not  a national one;  it is either  cosmopolitan or provincial, and,  for  good  or  evil,  the  forces  of  civilization   are  rapidly  making  the  latter  scarce.

7

A REJECTED PREFACE



A  large  number of the  verses in  this  book  were  written at  a  time  when  the contributors were  inclined   to  dwell  too  exclusively  on  the  fact  that   the  chief thing  wrong  with  Canadian poetry was its conventional and  insensitive  technique. Consequently, we sometimes  thought we  had  produced a good  poem  when  all we  had  done  in  reality  was  not  produce a  conventional one.  In  Canada this  is a deed  of some merit.
In   attempting to  get  rid  of  the  facile  word,  the  stereotyped phrase  and  the mechanical rhythm, and in seeking, as the poet today  must, to combine colloquial­ ism  and  rhetoric, we were  of course  only  following  in  the  path  of  the  more  sig­ nificant poets  in  England   and  the  United   States.  And  it  led,  for  a  time,  to the creation of what,  for the sake of brevity,  I will call  "pure  poetry."
A theory  of pure  poetry  might  be constructed on  the  assumption that  a poem exists as a thing  in itself. It is not a copy of anything or an expression  of anything, but  is an  individuality as unique  as a flower,  an  elephant or  a man  on a flying trapeze. Archibald MacLeish expressed  the  idea  in  Ars Poetica when  he wrote,

A poem should not mean, but be.

Such   poetry  is objective,  impersonal, and  in  a  sense  timeless  and   absolute. It
stands by itself,  unconcerned with  anything save  its own  existence.
Not  unconnected  with  the  disinterested  motives  that   produce "pure"  poetry are  those  which  give rise to imagist  poetry.  The  imagist  seeks with  perfect objec­ tivity  and  impersonality to  recreate  a  thing  or  arrest  an  experience as  precisely and  vividly  and  simply as possible. Mr.  Kennedy's Shore, Mr.  Scott's trees in ice, my  own  Creek  are  examples  of the  simpler  kind  of imagist  verse;  Mr.  Finch's Teacher, tiny  as it is, of the  more  complex.  In  Shore and  Creek  the reader may notice  that  the development of the  poem depends upon  metrical devices as much  as on images; the  music is harsh  and  the rhythm difficult.
Most  of the  verses in this book are  not,  however,  so unconcerned with  thought as  those  mentioned. In  poems  like  Epithalamium, the  Five  Kine,  Words   for a Resurrection  and  Like  An  Old  Proud  King  an  attempt has  been  made  to  fuse thought and  feeling.  Such  a fusion  is characteristic of the  kind  of poetry  usually called  metaphysical. Good  metaphysical verse is not,  it must  be understood, con­ cerned  with  the  communication of ideas. It is far  removed  from  didactic  poetry.  What it  is concerned with  is the  emotional effect  of ideas  that   have  entered so deeply  into  the  blood  as never  to be questioned. Such  poetry  is primarily lyrical; it  should  seem  spontaneous. Something of the  quality I am  suggesting  is to  be found  in such  lines as

8

A REJECTED PREFACE



The  wall was there, oh perilous blade of glass or
This Man  of April walks again

In  the  poems  just mentioned thought is the  root, but  it flowers  in  the feeling.
They  are  essentially  poems  of the  sensibility,  a little  bit  melancholy, perhaps a little  too  musical. A  healthier robustness  is found  in satirical verse, such  as Mr. Scott's  much  needed   counterblast against  the  Canadian Authors Association,  or in the  anti-romanticism of Mr.  Klein's
And  my true  love,
She combs and combs, The  lice from off
My children's  domes.

The   appearance of  satire,  and  also  of  didactic   poetry  that   does  not  depend upon  wit, would  be a healthy sign in Canadian poetry. For it would  indicate that our  poets  are  realizing,  even  if in  an  elementary way,  that poetry  is more  con­ cerned   with  expressing  exact  ideas  than  wishy-washy  "dreams." It would  indi­  cate,  too,  that  the  poet's  lofty isolation  from  events  that  are  of vital significance  to everybody  was  coming  to an  end.
Detachment, indeed, or self-absorption is (for  a time  only,  I hope)   becoming impossible.  The era  of individual liberty  is in  eclipse. Capitalism can  hardly  be expected to survive  the cataclysm  its most interested  adherents are blindly steering towards, and   the  artist  who  is concerned with  the  most  intense  of  experiences must  be concerned with  the  world  situation in which,  whether he likes it or not, he  finds  himself.  For  the  moment at  least  he  has something more  important to do  than  to record  his private emotions.  He  must  try  to perfect  a technique that will  combine power  with  simplicity  and  sympathy with  intelligence so  that   he may play his part  in developing mental  and emotional attitudes that  will facilitate the  creation of a  more  practical social system.
Of  poetry  such  as this,  there  is here  only  the faintest foreshadowing-a f ct that   is not  unconnected with  the  backwardness politically   and  economically of Canada-but  that  Canadian poetry  in  the  future must   become   increasingly aware  of its duty  to  take  cognizance of what  is going  on  in  the  world  of affairs we are sure.
That the  poet  is not  a dreamer, but  a man  of sense;  that  poetry  is a discipline because  it is an art; and  that  it is further a useful art; these are  propositions which it  is intended this  volume  shall  suggest.  We  are  not  deceiving ourselves  that  it has  proved  them.

9








I. Its Modest Successes

Donald Stephens


so




ENDS DESMOND PACEY's  C"atiN w,itinK in Canada, and  so is stated  the  reason  why he wrote  it. Apparently, too, this is the reason for the  Literary  History  of Canada, a massive work which  will prove  an indispensable reference   book  to  students of  Canadian literature in  Canada, and  around  the world.  This  collection   of essays on  the  whole  growth of  Canadian  literature is of major importance. It answers countless questions, and  will be extremely useful to  authors,  teachers, and  general   readers.  Desmond  Pacey  did  a  great  service to Canadian letters  by compiling  his book;  Carl  Klinck  and  his editors  have  ex­ tended the  whole  direction and  brought forth  a commendable work.
Up  to now  there  has been  little  real criticism  of Canadian literature available to the student in comprehensive form. There is a plethora of short  essays, articles, and  monographs on  specific authors, numerous in  number but  restricted  in  sub­ ject  matter. There is the  rare  book dealing  with  a specific  author. But  until the last  ten  years, books focusing on the  history  and  criticism  of Canadian  literature have  been  uninspiring.
There were  few studies  done  before  the  First  World  War,  but  major  criticism came  after  it,  thriving on  the  new  nationalism that   was  a  product of the  war. Vigorous  as  the  nationalism may  have  been,  the  identity of Canadian literature was left somewhat vague.  Logan  and  French's Highways of Canadian Literature,

10



THE LITERARY HISTORY OF CANADA

Editorial Views


















published   in   I924,  seemed   to  apologize  for  its  existence,   for  "however  insig­ nificant,  from  the  point  of view of world  literature, Canadian literature  may  be, it is important to Canadians themselves."  The  book was focused on new national­ ism  and  was  strongly   didactic in  style and  tone. It was  directed   to  people  who were  only  semi-aware that  a Canadian literature in  itself did  exist. The  criteria for  admitting the  existence  of Canadian literature was:

That   verse  and  prose  rise to  the  dignity  of literature   when  they  express and promote  existence  ideally -by  delighting  the   sthetic
heart,  by inspiring  the  moral  imagination,  by exalting  or  transporting   the spirit.

With  these aims  and  ideas,  and  a large  dose of flagrant exaggeration, Logan  and French were  often  capable of insipid  moralizing and  pompous grandiloquence. They  considered Canadian  literature to  start  with  John Richardson; for  them Frances Brooke  was an  incidental visitor. For  them,  the birthright was important in  determining the  Canadianness of the  product they  were  selling.  Kirby's The Golden   Dog  belonged to  emigre  literature; Sir  Gilbert  Parker is the  best  that Canada has  produced because  of his Canadian spirit.
The  next  historical study  was Lome  Pierce's  Outline of Canadian Literature,
published in  I927,  and  here  Kirby  takes  his place  as  part  of  the  country, but


I I

LITERARY HISTORY



Frances Brooke is still an  outsider.  But Pierce  is not  sure  of the  quality of Cana dian  literature, and  concludes  that  "by  every  token  we surely  have  at  hand  the elements  out of which  may evolve a great  people and  a splendid literature". A biographical sketch  of  an  author, a  list  of  books,  and   short   comments on  the author's major   works,  make  up  in  each  case  his  history  and   criticism.  And  in
1927, Pierce,  the  friend  of Carman, the  man  bred  in the  strictures of Victorian
ism,  can  say about  Gilbert  Parker  that  "there are  many  elevated  moral  passages in  his book,  as well as a fine use of the  Scriptures. Parker is also free from  mor bidity,  sombre  psychology  and  sex;  he is wholesome  and  yet virile". This  is not good  criticism,  but  Pierce  is very  certain  of his authority and  his opinions seem not  to ask for either  doubt  or criticism.
Pierce set the  method  and  plan  that  were to follow in much  Canadian criticism
after  his  time.  V.  B.  Rhodenizer's Handbook  of  Canadian Literature,  pub­ lished  in  1930, shows  the  Pierce  influence  of short  biographical  sketches,  lists of books and  short  criticism,  but  with detailed  studies  of Kirby  and  Parker; Kirby's  The   Golden   Dog  he  considered  to  be  the  best  work  produced  in  Canada, with Grove  closely  following.  But  Rhodenizer  was  moved   by  the  spirit  of  his  time and  could  question   the  "vicious  prudery" of Grove's  Settlers  of the  Marsh. His criticism  seems more  reasonable and  contemporary in spirit, though he is not sure "whether there  is a  Canadian  national sentiment of  which  Canadian men  and women  of letters  are  the  voice".  There followed  for  almost  twenty  years a repe­ tition  of Pierce's  direction: the  sketches of  individual authors.
Pacey's  Creative Writing in Canada, first published in 1952, revised in 1961, is unquestionably  the  best  and   most  definitive   work  of  criticism   concerning the whole  of Canadian writing  until  the Literary  History  of Canada. He still qualifies his  statements when  he  feels that   Callaghan, Moore,   and   Richler are  the  best writers  that  Canada has produced, yet they are  "at the  most  charitable estimate, secondary figures  on  the  world  literary  stage". But  if  Pacey's critical  statements may  be  questioned, his  pattern study  of  Canadian  literature cannot. His  book sets the  patterns of Canadian prose:  the historical  romance and  the regional  idyll of the  old  past,  the  prairie  realism  of the near  past,  and  the  urban realism  of the present.  He  explains  the  causes  for  these  trends  cogently  and  clearly  in  his  con­ clusion.  He  argues  that   Canadian fiction  has  been  held  back  by  the  slow  and  unspectacular growth of our society,  by the  complexity of that society which  has forced  authors back  into  the  past  or  into  romanticism and   by  "our  distrust   of abstract thought and  our lingering puritanism". His thought and writing through­ out  the  book are  quick  moving  and  perceptive. Admittedly he glosses over  many

12

LITERARY HISTORY



things,  but  his is a great, if not  the  greatest, contribution to Canadian criticism. He  unlocked  a door. The editors  of the Literary History of Canada have opened it.




cANADIAN LITERATURE  is definitely   in  a  state   of  spirited movement, particularly in  poetry. With  this new literature will come  a new  criti­ cism, for  criticism  needs  a vital  source  if it is to be vibrant itself. It is surprising that  the most vigorous  decades  of Canadian literature, the last thirty years, are  the most  poorly  treated in this  new volume.  Before that,  however,  the writers  in  this volume  have  done  an  excellent  job.  Many  gaps  have  been  filled;  there  are  the studies  of the  animal stories,  the  travel  works, of minor  novelists in  the  last  part of the  nineteenth century. When  the  writers  feel that  they should stress the  work of  a  certain author they  do  so with  little  or  no  apology.  There  is  a  wonderful kind of astringency to most of the writing  that  invigorates, but does not overpraise the literature being  discussed. The  writing  for the most part  is extremely interest­ ing  and  lively.  No  writer  of any  quality is ignored; Frances Brooke  is included, as are  Brian  Moore  and  Malcolm   Lowry,  the  famous  visitors.
This  book  serves  a  great  need  of the  student of Canadian letters; it  is often
well  written, and  shows  some  amazing perceptions. The  conclusion   is brilliant, as  one  could   expect  from   Northrop Frye.  The  work  of  the  editors,   Alfred   G. Bailey, Claude Bissell, Roy Daniells,  Northrop Frye, Desmond  Pacey,  is extremely good.  The index  is precise and  clear,  yet the  book is more  than  a mere  catalogue of the  historical growth of English  literature in Canada. Carl  Klinck  has  put  to­ gether   a  series  of  essays  which  notably   present  an  historical   but  also  a  critical examination of  writing in  Canada. The book  is far  too expensive  for  a  general reader, however, and,  because  of its size and  poor  binding, easily falls  apart­ something one  does  not  expect  from  a  book  priced  at  $18.  There  are  some  in­ teresting   omissions;   Evelyn  Richardson  and   Lord  Beaverbrook   (his  biography of  R.  B.  Bennett, surely,  should  be  included here)   for  instance,  but  these  are bound   to  happen and   the  care  with  which  others  are  included shows  that the  editors  were  not  often  forgetful.
Canadian literature has  needed  a  book  like this for  over  a  hundred years.  It is easy to  disregard it because  it is often  necessarily superfluous, and  some  of the criticism  makes  one  wonder  if the  specific  works  mentioned were  read  with  any care.  But  these  surely,  are  minor  points.  Most  important, I think,  the  Literary History of Canada establishes  once  and  for  all that  there  is good  writing in  our

LITERARY HISTORY



country, not  wntmg that  has  to  be  praised  because  of  nationalism, or  wntmg that  reveals the author as the last champion of the individual mind  and  sensibility against an  intrusive  society, but  writing  that  is here, and  has been  here,  and con­ tinues  to be here. The book is long,  but it is never  completely dull,  and often  the perception revealed  by established  critics shows a refinement of taste and attitude, and  supports Frye's  vision that  "the  writers  featured in  this book  have identified the  habits   and  attitudes of  the  country, ... they  have  also  left  an  imaginative legacy  of  dignity  and  of high  courage."





2. The Long Day's Task

(;eorge VVoodcock
Srx YEARS  AGO,   when  Canadian Litnatu" came  into being,  work  had  already  started on  the  Literary   History   of Canada. Now  the
long-expected work  has at last appeared, a massive volume  of 945  pages, written and  edited  by a team  of thirty-three Canadian scholars. A vast  common  labour of so many  hands  cannot be considered lightly;  the  very  activity  which  the  pre­ paration of  the  work  had  generated marks  a stage  in  the  development of  Cana­ dian  studies,  and  the finished work will inevitably influence our views of Canadian literature and  sub-literature for  long  in the  future.
Before  considering how far  the  Literary  History  of Canada has succeeded, one must   consider   the  objective   which   the  editors  set  themselves.   Wisely,  and  ap­ parently  deliberately, the  title  of  A  History   of  Canadian  Literature  was  not chosen.  The  word  literature  carries  a qualitative connotation, and  if we take this seriously,  the  proportion of books  published  in  Canada or  by  Canadians  which it  might  cover  is slight  indeed.  To  give only one  example, the  first  r88  pages  of the  Literary  History  deal  with  the  period  up  to  r88o,  and  mention  several  hun­  dred  titles;  it is doubtful whether-apart from  the  narrations of  explorers  and  travellers which  Dr.  Victor  Hopwood describes  so  ably-there  are  more  than
a  score  of  books  from  this  period   which  would   pass  muster   either   as  notable examples of good  writing  or  even  as acceptable entertainment for  the  common reader.

14

LITERARY HISTORY



The  editors  of the  Literary  History  have in some degree  anticipated this objec­ tion  in the  introduction which  Professor  Carl  Klinck  has written on their behalf; this tells us that  they  have chosen the title of A Literary  History  of Canada, rather than  calling  their  volume  "a  history of literature" because:

... the  latter  carries  too  limited  a  suggestion of a  review  of  books. Each  term indicates  that  temporal  sequence is not to be neglected;  but  the latter  would not have conveyed fully the  purpose of noting whatever germinates,  grows, continues, recurs, or becomes distinctive, perhaps unique. This volume represents a positive attempt to give a  history of Canada  in terms of  writings  which  deserve more or less attention because  of significant  thought,  form  and  use of  language.  It also aims  to  contribute to criticism  by offering  reasons for  singling  out  those  works regarded  as best.

This   statement  justifies  one  aspect   of  the   Literary   History- the  compre­ hensiveness  that  brings  in  not  only the  works of poetry,  fiction, criticism, drama, etc.,  which  one  would  normally expect  in a history of  literature, but  also philo­ sophic,  scientific,   religious  and   theological writings  with  neither literary   intent  nor  literary merit.
At  the  same  time,  the  editors,  according to  Professor   Klinck's introduction, at  least  began  with  the  intention of seeking out  whatever deserved  "more or less attention because  of significant thought, form  and  use of language" and  of  mak­ ing some selective  and  critical  judgments on the works which  were  mentioned in the  Literary  History. Presumably this intention was transmitted to  the  contribu­ tors,  and  their  work  can  therefore be  judged  fairly on  this basis.
It is difficult,  in  fact,  to make  a comprehensive judgment of the  Literary  His­ tory  since  there  is much  variety  of  approach, and  an  equal variety  of  quality, between  the  various  chapters. Critics  of the  project  as it was originally  presented pointed  out  the  dangers of committing a work of this nature to so many different  hands -some of them  untried  -and in the event these doubts have been largely justified. One  of the  principal faults  of the  Literary  History  is the evident  division among its  authors between   those who  consider  that  they  are  writing sections  of a mere  reference  book,  and  who  painstakingly list every  publication within  their period,  and  those who  consider  that  their  function  is a  more selective  and  critical  one -to show  the spirit  of a period  as revealed  in its best or most typical  books.
Since  the  output of Canadian writers  has inevitably  grown  more  prolific  from
decade to decade over the  past  two centuries, there  is a tendency for this division of approach to  be complicated by the  actual  period  with  which  a contributor is dealing.  Fred   Cogswell   and   Carl   Klinck,   discussing  the  eighteenth  and   early

LITERARY HISTORY



nineteenth  centuries, have  little  difficulty  in  naming almost   all  the  works  with literary   pretensions that  appeared during their   period; they  even  comment  on many  of  them  individually. By the  end  of  the  nineteenth century the  flood  of publications had   become  too  great  for  this  kind of  treatment to  be  feasible. Gordon Roper, for  example,  found   that   Canadian writers   between   I 88o  and I920  published I,4oo  volumes of fiction,  and  in his chapter, "New Forces: New Fiction" he claims  the  unenviable achievement of having  read  "only  about  two­ thirds  of the  volumes  published  in those years, all that  is at the  moment available in Canadian and  American libraries." Though Professor  Roper's discussion  of the novelists  of this period  assumes at  times the aspect  of a catalogue, with  names  of books  flowing  out  in  virtually  meaningless  sequence, he still does  not  succeed  in mentioning, let alone  commenting on, all the goo  or so  novels  which  he actually  read.
All this, of course,  does not mean  that  reference  books, catalogues and bibliog­ raphies are not necessary tools of literary  scholarship. But we have  to be extremely careful  how  far  the  scholarly  mechanic is allowed  to  usurp  the  functions of the perceptive critic;  there  is no  doubt   that   the  proportion of   uncritical listing  of titles  in  A  Literary   History  of Canada  detracts from  its  value as a  work  based on  writings   distinguished by  "significant thought, form  and   use  of  language". Obviously only a small  proportion of the works whose names  are  mentioned and then  passed  by in various  chapters of the  Literary  History  have  the smallest  pre­ tensions  to lasting  significance.
Some   contributors, it  is  true,   have   not   only  written  good   literary   h1story, drawing out  the  meaningful trends  of the  times  they  discuss, but  have  also  criti­ cized  and  evaluated  judiciously.  I have  already remarked on  the  excellence  of the  two early  chapters by Victor  G. Hopwood on "Explorers by Land  (to  I 86o)" and  "Explorers by Sea:  The  West  Coast". Not  only  does  Dr.  Hopwood admir­ ably  re-create the spirit  of the narratives he discusses;  he also makes  good  critical  appraisals, and   his  defence  of  his  admiration for  David  Thompson is in  itself admirable.
Fred  Cogswell  on the early writers  of the  Maritimes shows a curiously  divided attitude which  sometimes  has  its  rewards. He  is  constantly warning  us  not  to make  too  much  of  the  works  he  discusses. The   writing of  this  time  and  place, he  tells  us,  "is  more  significant  when  considered  as  history  and  sociology  than it  is  when   considered  as  literature." It  adopts forms   "already out  of  date   in England"; it is "exclusively  the province  of the  amateur"; it is "the vicarious fulfilment of frustrated hopes".  Yet, having  made  these reservations, he can often

LITERARY HISTORY



enter  into  the  spirit  of the  times  he  discusses to such  an  extent   that   he  praises for  their  charm such  works  as Cartwright's Labrador:

So cutting  cold, so blust'ring  Boreas blows, None can with  naked Face, his blasts oppose. But  well wrapp'd up, we travel out secure, And find Health's  blessings, in an Air so pure.

Occasionally, as  in  his  brief  section  on  Henry  Alline,  he  even  transmits to  us some  of the  sympathy which  he  himself  has developed  towards these  deservedly half-forgotten authors.  But   Cogswell,   unlike   most  of  the   contributors  to  the Literary  History, is a practicing writer,  a poet, and  this has enabled him to reach a kind  of understanding which  accepts  the  author he discusses-no matter how inferior-as a human being  reacting as best he can  to his situation and  perhaps showing  some  grain  of originality or  mental courage  in  doing  so. This  is one of the  ways of dealing interestingly with work  which one  knows would  crumble like a mummy before  the  first  breath of a direct  critical  judgment.
Carl  F.  Klinck,  who  also, in discussing  the earlier  writers  of the  Canadas, has to  deal  with  material equally   vulnerable to  criticism,  contrives   often  to  arouse interest  in  work  whose  merits  hardly  deserve  it  by his sheer  enthusiasm for  the peculiar, out-of-the-way or  hidden  fact.  His style reflects  his enthusiasm, and  he delights  in sentences crammed to bursting point  with descriptive phrases.
. . . The  term  "Canadian" was equivalent  to "canadien", that  is North  American French,  and  the  image  of  Canada   was made  up  of seigneurs,  habitants,  black­ clothed  clergy, advocates,  coureurs  de bois, voyageurs,  French  Hurons  at  Lorette, Gallic  gaiety,  rides  in  caleches  or  sleighs, folk singing, farm  labour,  lumbering, church-going,   and  villages scattered  along  the  banks of  the  St.  Lawrence.  The  English image,  significant  of power  but also picturesque,  included  vice-regal dis­ play, military  colour  and  bustle, polite sport,  harbours  full of transatlantic ships, vast stores for continental trade  and  development,  political  quarrelling, and  high social life.

So it goes on,  the  portmanteau sentences  exuberantly spilling  their  miscellaneous contents  one  beside the  other. Dr.  Klinck  is nothing  if not devoted  to his subject, and  at  times-for  example in  his  advocacy  of the  claims  to  "priority among the  poets  of  the  Canada" of  the  Montreal versifier Levi  Adams -he  takes one up  in  the  quest  rather as  a  detective  story  writer  might  do.  We  remain  uncon­ vinced   of  the  literary   worth   of  anything Levi  Adams  ever  wrote,   but  for  the time  being  his defender's zeal  has  made  the  question  of Who  First? seem  worth following  to  a  solution.

LITERARY HISTORY




WILE WRITERS LIKE Cogswell  and  Klinck  can  sometimes succeed -by  their  sympathetically understanding  or  scholarly   enthusiastic  ap­ proaches-in giving  a certain  bloom  of interest  to works  which  are intrinsically dull,  concentrating on men  and  facts  where  the  works  themselves  will not  bear close examination, it is disappointing to find  that  the  contributors to the  Literary  History  who  have  at their  command the  much  richer  fields of  Canadian writing  in  the  present  century  are  so often  unable  to  win,  let  alone  hold  our  attention.
This  failure  to produce  a really adequate critical  as well as informational survey of  modern Canadian  literature is  emphasised  by  the  presence  of  an  excellent bridge  between  the  proto-literature before  188o  and  the  literature after  1920  in the  form  of the  three  chapters by  Roy  Daniells  on  the  so-called  Confederation poets  and  their  contemporaries. I  do  not  think  anyone   has stated   more  clearly or  with  a  closer,  more  searching insight  than Dr.  Daniells  the  limitations and the  real  achievements of  Lampman, Carman,  Roberts and   Duncan  Campbell Scott.  He  is at  once  critical  and  appreciative; he  presents  the  most  convincing case  I  have  yet  read  for  the  serious  consideration  of  these  writers  within   the context  of a  developing Canadian literature. Here  at  least  the  avowed  intent of the  Literary  History  is admirably fulfilled,  as it is in a number of the  more  peri­ pheral   essays,  such  as Jay   Macpherson's short   but  sensitive  chapter  on  Auto­  biography and  F.  W.  Watt's fine survey  of  the  Literature of Protest  considered in  the  context  of a  rapidly  changing Canadian  society.
It is, unfortunately, a downward slope to the  six chapters which  deal  with  the most  fruitful period  of Canadian writing-most fruitful in  qualitative  achieve­ ment   as  well  as  in  the  actual   amount of  literary production.  Desmond  Pacey describes  fiction  from  1920  to  1940  and  Hugo McPherson  from  1940  to  1960. In  the  four  succeeding chapters Munro  Beattie   discusses  Poetry  from   1920  to
1935,  E. J. Pratt, Poetry  from  1935  to  1950,  and   Poetry  from  1950  to  1960.
Dr.  Pacey,  who has always been a literary  historian rather than  a literary  critic, tends,  as ever,  towards a much  too level plane  of appreciation, which  makes  him devote  excessive  attention to  minor  and   justifiably  dated   figures.  He  gives,  for example, twice  as much  space  to the  short  stories  of Jessie  G. Sime  as to  those which  Morley  Callaghan wrote  during his best  period. It is true  that  Pacey  de­ votes  much   more   attention  to  Callaghan's novels,  but   here,  though  one  must agree  with  his final  judgment of this author -that "he  most fully succeeded ... in the  three  novels of the  mid-thirties" -he does not  penetrate very deeply  into  the  complexities behind  the  apparent simplicity  of Callaghan's fiction.  Similarly,

18

LITERARY HISTORY



while  the section  on  Frederick Philip  Grove  is probably the  best part  of Pacey's chapter, it does much  less than  full justice to that  impressive  failure,  The  Master of the  Mill, and  so avoids  the  real  problem  of Grove-the  problem   of why  a writer  so large  in  texture, so gigantic  in his fumblings, never  wrote  a book  that seemed  completely to  fulfil his possibilities. At  times  Pacey  shows  an  astounding failure  to grasp what  is essential  and  what  is completely  inessential  in  the  study of literature. For  example, in  discussing  Mazo  de la  Roche,  he breaks  off all at once  to remark that,  "One of the  most dramatic events in  the literary  history  of Canada between  the  wars  was the 1927  award  of the  Atlantic Monthly's $10,ooo prize  to Miss de la Roche's ]alna as the best novel submitted for its contest." He then  goes on  to devote  a whole  page, out of the three  and  a half pages he spends on  discussing  this  writer,  to a  description, culled  from  a  periodical of  the  time, of the  civic celebrations by  which  Toronto welcomed  the  award. Two  sentences suffice to show  the  nature of this document of literary  history.
In addition  to the tea service from the City, Miss de la Roche received a beauti­
ful  basket of flowers from  the Canadian  Literature  Club  of Toronto.
During  the  evening  music was provided  by Cassar  George  Finn,  pianist,  and
Mrs. Fenton  Box, soloist, accompanied  by Mr.  D'Alton  McLaughlin.

I would  like to think  Dr.  Pacey  included this item  with  tongue  in cheek;  I have, alas,  no reason  for so believing.
Hugo McPherson moves  on  a  higher  level  of sensibility  in  his study  of  the
fiction  published  between   1940  and  1960.  He  refuses  resolutely  to  pay  undue attention  to  what   he  calls  "the verbose  and   deciduous many",  and   generally speaking his  judgments are  shrewd  and  good.  Yet this chapter is not  McPherson at  his best.  I have  read  much  more  capable individual studies  by  him  of some of the  writers  he  deals  with  here,  such  as Robertson Davies  and  Gabrielle Roy, and  I feel that  he excels in  the  discursive  critical  examination and  does not  take very  well to  the  condensed form  of the  historical  survey.  He  wisely stresses the importance of  visiting  and  immigrant novelists  in  the  recent  broadening of  the scope  of Canadian fiction,  but  he feels constrained to allow only brief  considera­ tion  to writers  of such  importance-for their influence  as well as for their  actual works-as  Malcolm Lowry  and  Brian  Moore,  and  thus  he fails  to  convey  the range  and  complexity of  the  achievement of these  novelists  who  have  produced some  of the  best  and  most sophisticated fiction  written  in  Canada. Yet  McPher­ son's  chapter, for  its  general sense of  what  the  critical  historian   should  seek in literature and  for  its occasional penetrating and  pleasingly  expressed  insights,  is by far  the best of the six chapters on the contemporary period.

19

LITERARY HISTORY



One  is at  a  loss to explain  why,  after  deciding to  produce a  work  by  many hands, the  editors  of the  Literary  History  of Canada should  have  taken  the  risk of allotting  all the  four  chapters dealing  with  Canadian poetry  since  I920- the crucial  chapters in the whole book-to a writer  whose only  previous  publication in the field of Canadian literature was-if one  can  judge  from  the  Notes on Contributors at  the  end  of the  volume -a single  article  on  Lampman. This  is a field in which  there  is no shortage of able  young  critics,  many  of them  practicing poets,  and  one  would  have  thought an  excellent   team  of  three  or  four  writers could  have  been  assembled  who would  have  dealt  brilliantly and  sensitively  with the  various  aspects  and  trends  of contemporary Canadian  poetry.
Professor  Beattie's remarks  on modem Canadian poets  are  rarely  brilliant and not  often  sensitive.  His dark  horse, no Pegasus,  is at  best a plodding and service­ able  ambler. It is not  that  Professor  Beattie  is lacking  in  knowledge,  at  least  of the  scholastic  kind.  He  has  obviously  read  the  poets  he  discusses;  he  is familiar with  their  biographies and  with  the background out  of which  they emerge  and  in which  they  work.  He  talks with  professorial  gusto  about  movements and  trends.  Yet  his  approach lacks  imagination as his  writing  lacks  the  proper  clarity  of  a critic  dealing  with  poetry -the  clarity  of  the  lens  that  looks  into  a  poem  and reveals  its layers  of inner  meaning.
There are in fact  no revelations  and  no surprises in what  Professor  Beattie  has to  tell  us about   Canadian poets;  we know  everything already. He  recites  facts, often  with  little  sense of their  relevance,  and  he presents  documents; three  pages at  one  point  are  devoted  to a  paraphrase of  a forgotten series of articles  in  the Canadian Forum  to make  a point  that  needed  a mere  paragraph of direct state­ ment.  But, above  all, Professor  Beattie  describes, and  the character of his descrip­  tion  can  be  seen  from  this  typical  paragraph taken   from   his  discussion  of  the poetry  of Earle  Birney.

"Trial of a City"  (originally a radio drama  entitled  "The Damnation of  Van­ couver")   is  a  fantasy-drama in  mingled  verse  and   prose  of  both  present  and future  idiom. The  situation  is a hearing  to determine whether  Vancouver  should be annihilated. Witnesses are materialized  from among  the dead: Captain George Vancouver,  the  headman  of  the  Indian  nation  that  formerly  occupied  the  site, Gassy Jack  Deighton,  and  the  author  of Piers  Plowman.  Living  witnesses are  a professor of geology and  a Vancouver housewife. There is much excellent fooling, a great  deal of good sense, and  a thorough  treatment of two of Birney's principal themes:  the squalor of contemporary  urban  life and  the need for hopeful decisive­ ness about  the  next stage of human  history. His versatility  as a prosodist is strik­ ingly  demonstrated.  The   professor couches  his  geological  erudition   in  a  bleak


20

LITERARY HISTORY



four-stress  rhythm  with  deep  caesuras  and  emphatic  alliteration; the  housewife speaks in  lyric stanzas;  and  Langland  utters  his condemnation   in  a version of a fourteenth-century  alliterative   poetry.  The  superb  achievement   of  "Trial  of  a City" is the sequence of passages spoken by the Salish chief summoned  to describe for the officials "a way of life that died for yours to live". These sturdy and shapely lines, abounding  in vividly realized details, are as splendid as any of Birney's.

We  are  told  the  subject  of Birney's  poem,  the  characters are  named, and  some­ thing  is said  of  the  mechanics of the  verse. But  at  no  point are   we  given an  inkling  of the special  nature of "Trial of a City",  of what  makes it a  unique and personal  work,  of its poetic  essence, nor  is there  any suggestive insight expressed that  is likely to send  us to the  bookshelf for another reading. For the  reader who does not know  Birney's  work,  Professor Beattie might be describing a closet drama of some  modem  Heavysege, and  Birney  is far  from  that.
The  Literary History is saved  from  an ending  of grand  bathos by the efforts of
Northrop Frye,  whose  Conclusion magnificently lifts the  tone  as it  draws  in  all the  trends  that   have  emerged in  the  preceding chapters and  establishes in  the reader's mind  a synthesis of the  Canadian literary  arts,  united  by a series of  strik­ ing generalizations on Canadian myths and  heroes, on the Canadian intellectual's attitude towards nature, and  on the  foreshortening of Canadian  history,  with  its possible effects on Canadian culture -"its fixation with its own past, its penchant for old-fashioned literary techniques, its preoccupation with the theme of strangled articulateness". But  perhaps the  most  important point  that  Frye  makes,  almost in  passing,  is  an  admission   of  the  need  for  something  more than   the  present  Literary  History-for   "another book:    A  Literary  Criticism   of  Canada,   let
us say."



0NE  OF THE VIRTUES of the  Literary History is that  it has cleared  the  air  for  a real  work  of literary  criticism  blended  with  literary history.
At least the  present  work  has done  all the listing, all the cataloguing and  most of the  general  charting of the  terrain that  are  likely to  be  needed  for  a long  time ahead. Students will use the  Literary History as a reference  book,  and  if all they are seeking is information on a primary level, they will find  their  needs well met. Some  few  chapters, and  a  handful of assessments of individual writers  will take their  due  place  in our  critical  literature, but  on the whole  it cannot be said  that the  Literary  History  advances notably  this  particular field of Canadian  writing.

21

LITERARY HISTORY



On  the other  hand,  by getting out of the way so many of the basic tasks, and  by showing the fields still to be explored, its appearance may well have a fecundating effect on Canadian literary studies in general. One  can see it as the starting  point for  many  a  notable  monograph.  Few such  massive efforts in  fact  pass without leaving  their  permanent  effect on the world  of letters  and  scholarship,  and  few of them  are  faultless. We complain  of their  imperfections  but  we accept  them, much  as Johnson's  contemporaries accepted  his Dictionary,  because, as yet, there is nothing  else of their kind.











22



POET IN PROGRESS

Notes on Frank Davey




Warren Tallman











BACK  OF  WHATEVER  SKIU.s  a  poet  acquires stands   the flesh  and   blood  man, and   all  the  skill in  the  world  cannot eventuate in  a  dis­ tinctive   poetry   unless  the   man   is  himself  distinctive -perhaps  by   reason   of superior   nerve  in  the  face  of experience, a superior  capacity for  perception, or some  personal  quality which  makes  for inner  magic.  I  believe  that  Frank  Davey is one  of  the  few  obviously   distinctive  young  Canadian  poets  and that  in  his second  volume  of poems,  City  of the Gulls and  Sea  (Morriss Printing Company, Victoria)  he  demonstrates an  equally  obvious  increase  in  the skill necessary  to handle the  inner   push  of the  distinction   as it struggles  to  find  place,  by way of the  writing,  on  the  essentially  cold  because  complacent  shores  of  the  Canadian world.
Certain men  are like Stendhal's mirror  dawdling down  a road. Whatever is perceived  registers  and  is retained in the mind  even after  the mirror  has dawdled on.  In  his first,  1962  volumeD-Day and  After, Davey  speaks  of some dishes and
wonders,


who
 

can  let  me  hurl them

toast  crumbs and  tea
at  that face  which makes the  air


fetters
 


around me?

POET IN PROGRESS



And  there  is small doubt  but that  the dishes, toast crumbs,  tea, and  face of the girl  with  whom  he  was in  love are  heavily  tangible  to  him  as he writes. The poems in  that  book are markedly  disturbed,  a man  gyrating  through  violences. But  more  important still, the  gyrations  are  in  terms  of  an  exceptionally  high frequency  of tangible  perceptions, instances in which  his thoughts  all but collide with the objects  of thought  because the object  is so heavily present.  I stress this tangibility  as one  source of Davey's  distinction  and  promise  as a  poet.  Writers who feel that  they are about  to be run down  by the truck  they are  thinking  of, or the girl, are  prompted  to more energetic efforts to cope and  consequently  to create.
In  City  of the  Gulls  and  Sea  the disturbance  has disappeared  to be replaced by a strong  sense of isolation. The  people around  him in Victoria  are  more  in­ formationally  than  substantially present and his perceptions drift  with a different set of tangibles:  the  wind, rain, sea, coastline-all of which  ring out  the ways in which  Victoria  is for him a lonesome old  town. His efforts to cope lead him to searching  about  for original  facts, events,  persons,  places,  which  search  cul­ minates  in  the  seven-page  "Victoria   V",  one  of  the  finest  poems  Davey  has written -very  beautiful,  I  think.  He  seeks an  original  city  beneath  the tourist overlay  because  he  must, because the  tangibles get  at  him,  and  no man  wants to be always walking in the rain, looking at the sea,  knowing  that  in the heart of the  city he is out  of town. And  he writes because  Davey  has at least inter­ mittent  knowledge of the high importance  of  articulation, knows that if Victoria is to be a weave of something  more than  just  the elements the weaving will de­ pend upon  the man of words.
But at this stage of Davey's progress there is less need to inquire  into what he
makes  of Victoria -or  of his own life-more need to take note of his increas­ ing skill as word spinner.  Fortunately,  through  his association  with Tish, which he edited  through  its first twenty issues, two stages are discernible. The  first, the one that  made  his poetry possible, began  with  the February   196I  visit to  Van­ couver  of  the  San  Francisco  poet  and  word-alchemist,  Robert   Duncan.  Most of the young poets in Vancouver  were present when Duncan  read and  discussed his poetry at the  University of British Columbia  Festival of  Contemporary Arts. Some twenty  of them,  led by Davey, Fred  Wah,  George  Bowering, Jamie  Reid and  Dave Dawson  (who were to become the editors of  Tish) invited  Duncan  to Vancouver  that  summer  of I g6 I to give, as it turned  out, three  three-hour  "lec­ tures"  on  contemporary American  poetry.  Duncan,  a  walking  and  talking  uni­ versity of  verse lore,  filled the  air  with  his most  influential   predecessors  (Ezra

POET IN  PROGRESS



Pound, William Carlos  Williams,  H. D.)  and  his closest contemporaries (Charles Olson,   Robert  Greeley,   Larry   Eigner,   Denise  Levertov). The gain  for  Davey and  the  others  was not  simply  in the  names  but  in the  keys, clues and  comments on  the  art   of  articulation. Tone   leading, rhyme,  sound   resemblances and  dis­ resemblances, the  musical   phrase,  composition   by  field  and  correspondences, as well  as  linguistic, musical,  dramatic and  choreographic  analogies   to  writing­ all these  began   to  buzz  about  like bees. From  which  hive Tish was immediately born  and  for  the  next  twenty  months  and  issues kept  up a steady  hum.






IT IS  HERE Davey's  nerve  is important. Given  their  previous ignorance of  the   writing world  Duncan  introduced, the  Tish  poets  were  very
much  like the  fools who  rush in where  more  cautious  men  fear  to tread. And  did rush  in,  managing to  create   a  wonderfully garbled, goofy,  and  in  many   ways ludicrous Vancouver version  of the  poetics  Duncan had  turned loose. But  great energy   and   liveliness  were  exerted,   interesting poems  were  written, and  talent had  a  favourable milieu  in  which  to  gain  footing  and  grow.  They   all  jumped in and  the  water  was fine. Certainly, free movement of the  articulation -a kind of  open  form   dance of  the  words-was  a  major  emphasis. When  this  hither and  thither movement of the  line is dominant the capacity  to carry  and  cadence
-to start   the  line  up,  keep  it  going,  bring it  to  rest-becomes  central. In Davey's   D-Day   and   After, the  opening   passage  of  "The  Guitar-Girls" reveals natural talent   with  its  quick  but  light-footed and  delicate  movement that  falls away   (with  "flowers" occurring as  both  a  word  and  a  period)   before  the  last line  quoted   picks  up  the  more  subdued next  movement  of the  poem:

Little grown up girl
-with quick singing voice­ bouncing on your precise velvet-pointed
arching high-spirited  doll shoes,
was it yesterday you shone your tiny guitar and flashed your high-strung eyes unintentionally

POET IN PROGRESS



into my presence or was it months ago
among spring flowers?

was it dim teen years back ...

However, the  D-Day  poems are  mostly on the  beginner's side of the  word-dance floor.  Carry  and  cadence  Davey  obviously can,  but  what  is carried  along  and  put to  rest  is often  sentimental, semi-satiric,  flattened out,  with  his mind  taking  up objects   that   defeat   the  potential of  the  movement. When  you  can  dance   well and  feel like dancing it is a mistake  to choose a wrong  partner.
The  next  phase  in  the  development of the  Tish  poets  generally  and  of Davey
particularly began  in the summer of rg62  when  Robert Greeley  arrived  to teach (for  the  next  year)   at  the  University  of British  Columbia.1   A  long-time  friend of  Duncan,  Greeley  is  temperamentally  an  opposite   writer,  indwelling where Duncan  is  outgoing  and   compact  where  Duncan is  expansive.  More,   a  New England strictness  causes Greeley  to resist sham  and  sloppiness  in all forms.  The buzzing  of  the  bees became  noticeably  more  subdued. Davey,  who  had  been  in the  thick  of the  writing  and  talking,  began  to move toward the  edge. His interest in  Tish   diminished  markedly, as  did  his interest  in  discussions,  as did  the  flow of  poems.  Of  the  Tish  poets  he was the  only  one  who  passed  up  the  University of British  Columbia poetry seminar conducted in the summer of 1963 by Margaret Avison, Greeley, Duncan, Allan  Ginsberg,  Denise Levertov and  Charles Olson, although  he  did  attend   their  evening  readings. Throughout  the  year  he  talked mostly  about   getting  out  of  town;   as, in  September, he  did.
That this  withdrawal was  a going  underground rather than   a  running away
becomes  plain  in  City  of the  Gulls  and  Sea  in  the  form  of indwelling,  margin­ hugging   line  he  practices throughout.  Formerly he  permitted  his  carry   and cadence talent  free  rein  to  move  out  into  open,  almost  marginless space  with  a consequent loss of potential-the sin that  Charles Olson  calls "sprawling." Now he confines himself most often  to three,  four  and  five word  movements out  before turning, returning to  the  margin, always  close  to  home.  This   certainly  inhibits  the  earlier, romantic  reaching "away  away  in  search   of  deeper   blues."  But  it forces  increased  concentration and  accuracy as well as fuller  use of the  potential that  is at  hand. Greeley's  great  point  was full  use of  the  potential of the  given writing moment. Note, in this passage from  "Victoria V,"  how,  by holding  on to "man", "has" and  "her" Davey  gains  a fuller  use of  both  the  movement and  the potential on  hand:

POET IN PROGRESS



man  the transformer, man  born  old
and  man  born  bitter and  man
born shielding his face with spade  and  spear, has been here :
has sailed across the sea
in a running
battle with  the waves

has sailed across the sea to turn Camosun's trees into  one
reproducing house, her fish in to the rattle of silver for the hand, her forest grasses
into  pavement

Realizing that  the   margin is simply   the  point   of  concentration, it  is  clear   that Davey is  holding each object of  thought more   closely  and   longer than  he  was capable of formerly.
Yet  I would guess  that this stay-at-home movement is only  temporary. Temper­ amentally  Davey is  nearer  to  an   outreaching Duncan  than  to  an  indwelling Greeley, his intelligence of things being  essentially  meteoric, devil-may-care, even show-off. Confidence  in  his  ability  to  move   at  close  quarters is  likely  to  carry him  back   to  more   open-spaced poems  in  order to  accommodate a  penchant for reaching out.











' Louis  Dudek  conducted a  poetry  course  at  the  University of British  Columbia the same  summer  and   provided important  encouragement with  the  subsequent  Van­ couver   issue  of  Delta,  for  which  Davey  provided   the  introduction, and  with  the more  recent   publication of George  Bowering's  Points  on  the  Grid.


PHILIP CHILD

11 e-aj}j}raisal




William H. Magee














STRONG THOUGH THE coMPETmoN MAY BE, the  mast neg­ lected  of good  Canadian authors is probably Philip  Child. Desmond  Pacey  de­ votes  three  pages  of Creative  Writing in  Canada to  this  "man of  good  will, of considerable learning and  of a fine sense of common humanity"  (Toronto, I g6 I, p.  2 I 7), but  no  study  or  other  short  sketch  of  him  exists.  The reason  for  this neglect  is simple  enough; it  is  unfortunate timing. Like  E.  ].  Pratt,  Frederick Philip Grove,  and  Morley  Callaghan, Child  began  publishing between  the  Wars,  when  serious  writers  were not in demand in  Canada. All interest  among readers and   most  critical   attention  was  going  to  surviving  writers  in  older  modes:  to storytellers like Ralph Connor, L. M.  Montgomery  and  Mazo  de  Ia Roche, and  poetesses  like  Marjorie  Pickthall. Stephen Leacock  was a  more  justifiable  pride  of  the  twenties  and  thirties,  but  even  he  was  not  prized  as superior to  the  tra­ ditionalists. Ignoring the  older  styles of  current  Canadians, Philip  Child  strove like  Pratt, Grove  and  Callaghan to  make  Canadian  literature modern. Unlike  them   he  also  strove  to  make  it  cosmopolitan. Unlike   them  he  aligned   himself with  no  regional  outlook  in  subject matter or closely borrowed technique.
Although Child's work  shows  his familiarity with  the  more  advanced  British novels  of the  times,  from  the first it was as original as Pratt's was to become.  In those  days,  originality doomed  Canadians to oblivion. Unfortunately for  his popularity abroad, his first novel came  out  at  the  height  of the  Depression, when

PHILIP  CHILD



even  well-established writers  like Leacock lost ground. Unfortunately for his repu­ tation  at home,  he  published in England, and  quietly.  His first and  best book, the historical novel  The Village   of Souls  ( 1933), received   no  critical  attention in Canada when  it appeared. By the time of his second book, God's Sparrows ( 1937)  the  "Letters in  Canada" chronicle   had  begun in  the  University  of Toronto Quarterly, and  in  it  Dr.  J. R.  MacGillivray briefly  hailed  the  novel.  Canadians at  large  scarcely  heard of these novels, but  it is on  them  that  Child's fame  must ultimately rest.
The  Village  of Souls succeeds  remarkably often in the difficult task of  external­ izing  three  separate spiritual struggles,  all of them  struggles  with  loneliness  and  love.  Yet  the  plot  which  provides  the framework for  this spiritual drama is trite,  and   even  melodramatic.  A  seventeenth-century voyageur,  Bertrand Jomay, is beset  by  savage   and   treacherous Indians  and  half-breeds  in  the  course  of  his efforts first to protect his white  bride,  a  fille du roi named Lys, and  later  to accept  an  Indian wife,  Anne,  who  is really  a lost white  girl.  All  three  are  thwarted by the  treachery of  the  villainous  Titange, Bertrand's  half-breed companion. The adventures include Anne's slaughter of an  Iroquois  prisoner  and  Titange's firing of  a  hut  with  the  women  inside.  As handled,  however,  scenes  like these  are  not melodramatic in effect; nor,  on the other hand, are  they  particularly memorable. Much more  vivid  are  the  lonely  canoe  trips  through the  primeval forest,  which  open  and  close the  novel.  On  the  opening  trip,  up  river  towards Lake  Ontario, Bertrand forces  himself  to  expose  his loneliness  and  longing  to  Lys. Then after  they  have  been  separated for  most  of the  novel, she  comes  to  terms  with  herself as they paddle through a burnt-out wilderness west of Lake Superior. Child  brings out  well the  relief  from  degradation  which  both  Bertrand and  Lys feel after  this escape  from  miserable  upbringings in  Paris.  As each  in  tum  gains  spiritual dig­ nity  for  the  first  time  in  his life, each  successively realizes  a loneliness  as intense as  the  primeval  countryside, though   by  then  Lys  is  hopelessly  separated from Bertrand. Anne  goes  through a  similar  struggle  to  break  through to  Bertrand's love  while  retaining her  inner  dignity.  In  the  course  of  her  struggle, Anne  be­ comes  the  more  dynamic woman, as she broods  over  her  vision of her  hopes ful­ filled,  as  she  thinks   about   Christianity in  a  Quebec convent, as  she  confronts Bertrand  at  a western  mission after  his violent  seduction of her.  Scenes like these show  Child's unusual talent   for  dramatizing  emotions. They   are  the  most  dis­ tinctive   and   the  most  successful  in  his  novels.
God's   Sparrows achieves-though   much   less  often-a  similar   success  in dramatizing mental turbulence. It also contains  the  most  effective  scenes  of the

PHILIP CHILD



First  World  War  in  Canadian fiction. The  War  becomes  the test for the intellec­ tual  conflict  which  opposes two family  groups  to each  other. The Thatchers from New  England  question   the  moral  implications of  everything  they  do,  whereas  the  Burnets  of Southern Ontario look for immediate action, and  pleasure. Penuel  Thatcher has married a Burnet  and  is living in the old  Burnet  mansion  with  two sons  who  are  similarly  at odds  with  one  another. The  First  World  War  provides  the  test supreme for the intellectual opposition. When war  breaks out,  Pen  refuses to  pay  taxes  to  support it, at  least  until  he has  thought out  whether or  not  it is just,  which  he  never  finishes doing.  In  contrast  Uncle  Charles Burnet  rushes off to the  excitement of the front  line,  and  so does Pen's  son Alistair.  His other  son, Dan, agonizes  with  his doubts  just as his father  does, but  eventually he  joins up and  fights  at  the  front. His cousin  Quentin  Thatcher, though fighting  bravely  at first,  continues in  a similar  mental  agony  and  becomes  a conscientious objector  in  revulsion  against the  brutality at  the  front.  The scenes  which  dramatize these spiritual dilemmas are  memorable:  Pen's refusal  to pay taxes,  Quentin's humilia­ tion,  and  Dan's final  vision of  judgment as to who  were  right.  With  the  notable exception of descriptions of the front  line,  the scenes which  are  not  based  on the inner  torment of the Thatchers seem ephemeral. None of the Burnets  on the other  hand, is a  solid  character, and  their  adventures with  the  War  and  with  women do  nothing to strengthen them.  Nor  are  the scenes in  the  Burnet  mansion  vivid, as  they  should  be  in  a family  novel,  although in  a  later  narrative poem  Child was  to  visualize  well  the  life  of  a great  house.  The slight  falling  off in  Child's second  novel  is the  result  of  the  comparative failure to  visualize  one  of the  two families   solidly  enough  in  the  process  of  externalizing  the  central conflict   of ideas.



LIKE PRATT,  Grove  and  Callaghan, Philip  Child  continued publishing in  the   I 940's,  and  later  too,  but  unlike  them  he  made  no  effort  to
adjust to the  literary times in Canada, and  he remained cosmopolitan in themes and   techniques. His  two  novels  of  the  decade, Day  of Wrath ( I945)  and  Mr. Ames  Against  Time   ( I949), won  the  two  most  deserved   Ryerson   Awards in Fiction, but  they  both  look a little  pallid  in intensity beside  Grove's The  Master of the  Mill  or  Callaghan's later  novels. And  although The  Village  of Souls was reissued in  I 948 in a Canadian edition  and  reviewed  by Malcolm Ross in "Letters in  Canada", it was out  of the spirit  of the  times.  It seemed  a little  remote,  like a

PHILIP CHILD



message from  a strange generation. Philip  Child once described  the feeling exactly in  a  lyric  of  Quentin's in  GodJs Sparrows:

The clouds  are vanishing, to form
Some other  way,
But it was thus I painted
In  my day.

Child's collected  poetry,  Victorian House  and  Other  Poems  ( 1951), which  is his  last  publication  to  date,   was  hailed by  Northrop Frye  as  one  of  the  few volumes  to  give  new  merit  to Canadian poetry  in the  fifties,'  but  it too  was  not in either  of the  chief  vogues of the  times, the sensuous or the  visionary.  Since  the Second  World  War,  Child  has made  no attempt to follow the new custom  among Canadian writers  of  adopting recent  British  or  American techniques, as  Grove for  example did  in The  Master  of the  Mill. He showed  no interest  in coming  to grips  with  social  issues in  a  recognizably  Canadian society  as Callaghan was to do  in  the  fifties.  And  he  ignored  the  renewed  interest  in  Canadian  nationalism which  has  directed so much  attention to Pratt's later  poetry.
Neither of Child's novels  of the  forties  resembles  in  type  either  of the  earlier ones. One  is a story  of racial  discrimination, the other  an  unusual mystery  story. Both  develop  a theme  of love, but  on a more  ethereal level than  The  Village  of Souls;   this  larger   theme   recurs  in  the  Victorian House  poems.  Day  of Wrath, the  first of the  forties'  novels, develops  the  conflict  in a Jew  of Hitler's Germany between  principled devotion  to Love and  the sore temptation to hate.  After  losing both  wife and  daughter to the  brutal regime, Simon  Froben faces first the  chance of  killing  the  Nazi  stormtrooper responsible,  and  later  the  challenge of rescuing a  German orphan. Mr.  Ames   Against   Time  describes  the  struggle   of  a  very common   man,   devoted   to  Love,  against  organized   evil  in  the  modem city.  By practicing and   reiterating this  Love,  Mr.  Ames  sets out  to save  his falsely  con­ demned son  by  unmasking a gang  murderer and  persuading him  to  confess.
Both  novels  exploit  Child's distinctive  ability  to externalize spiritual problems.
In  the crises noted  in Day of Wrath, Simon  Froben  learns  what  true  Love means, what  he  must  and  must  not  do.  In  Mr. Ames  Against  Time, the  cowardly old Mr.  Avery  shows  the  depths of  spiritual  despondence both  in  his  memory   of having  surrendered military  secrets in the  First  World  War  and  in his quavering fright  at  Mr.  Ames'  investigations. The  themes  are  more  uncommon than  those in the earlier  novel,  but  the scenes that  portray  them  are less credible.
Victorian  House, the   main   piece  in  Child's collected   poems,  is  a  narrative

PHILIP CHILD



developed in  reverie  rather  than  dramatically. A modern man  comes to long for the  security  of the  last generation as he sees an  estate  agent  evaluating in baldly materialistic  terms   what  is  in  his  own  view  a  spiritual treasure. A  secondary theme  examines once again  abstract Love, which,  the  poem  notes,  must  be large enough  to  encompass even  a  Judas. The   poem  as  a  whole  is melancholy and static   rather than   optimistic  and  energetic, as  the  novels  are.  The   melancholy also  dominates the  lyrics  which  conclude   the  volume  of  poetry.   Most  of  them are  reflections   on  death, the  last  one  returning to  the  theme   of  a  Love  large enough to forgive Judas.
With   such   an   emphasis   on  introspection,  the  characters who  linger  in  the readers' memory  are  those who ruminate. In  The  Village of Souls,  lengthy  loneli­ ness has  left Bertrand Jornay in a turmoil  of conflicting urges. On  the  one hand he  has  gained   human dignity  by  himself  in  the  forests,  and  so for  him  hell  is absence  of inner  privacy.  On  the other  hand  the ambition of his love is the meet­ ing  of two  souls, his and  his woman's and  so he  also feels that  hell is something inescapable within  himself. Because Anne's ideas  closely resemble these, although she  feels rather than  formulates them,  she emerges  more forcefully than  does the would-be light-hearted  Lys. Both  Bertrand and   Anne  look  appealingly human through their  sensitivity  about  revelations even  to  persons  they  love, and  so does Quentin Thatcher in  God)s  Sparrows. Possessive  friendship gives  Quentin  the vigour  necessary  for  the  dramatization of his ideas. The  moral struggle  between  right  and  wrong  is convincing in  Child's  novels,  particularly at  a  personal  level. Bertrand's remorse  over  his violation  of  Anne,  Simon  Froben's strangling of his Nazi  enemy,  Mr.  Ames'  testimony  against  his son,  provide  the  memorable mo­ ments,  when  ideas  and  characters come  to life together.
Child's success  is limited,  however,  even  in  the  most  memorable characters, and   the   minor   characters succeed   even  less  completely. Although  his  sombre thinkers can  be vivid in static  scenes, they show  no convincing development. Lys' love is said  to become  more  and  more spiritual during her  progress  through The Village   of Souls,  but  in the  process her  character fades.  Nor  are  Child's  person­ ages  necessarily  made  more  remarkable by  the  peculiar traits  which  the  author stresses. Bertrand is repeatedly said  to be motivated by pride  in  his  ancestry,  but this attitude affects  neither  his actions  nor the  plot.  Pen  Thatcher's idiosyncracies lack  credibility   because  Child   finds  it  difficult  to  make  convincing  the  larger  moral  issues with  which  they  are  linked.  In  fact,  the  considerations of right  and  wrong stemming from  the First  World  War in GodJs Sparrows never emerge  from abstraction. A  similar  degree  of  abstraction,  without a  compensating vigour  in

PHILIP  CHILD



the  presentation of  the  heroes,  may  explain  the  comparative failures  of Child's two  most  recent  novels.  Among   his  heroines,  Anne  alone  rivals  the  men  as an individual made  vivid  by inner  problems.  Most  of the  minor  characters  likewise suffer somewhat from  a lack of introspection, or from lack of space to develop their ideas,  although there  are exceptions. The  bizarre  Russian  Dolughoff  for instance, who  stands   naked   between   the  front   lines  in  God's  Sparrows, dramatizes the thematic opposition of  human dignity  to  war.  In  Mr. Ames  Against  Time, the frightened  old   Mr.   Avery,   with   his  bitter   memory  of  cowardice in the  War, shows  the  abject   servility  against   which  Mr.  Ames  is fighting   in  his  battle  for love  among men.




As WITH  CHARACTERS, so with plot; Child can create vivid scenes of static  interplay between  brooding men and  women.  Individual vignettes
are  often   haunting. The  day-long   canoe  trip  through burnt-out  forest  in  The Village  of Souls,  as Jornay watches  Lys die, crystallizes admirably their  spiritual crisis.  The   dead   land   has  the  atmosphere of  another-world, the  jealous  Anne threatens the hope  for harmony in the canoe,  and  the prospect of a much-needed cache  at the  end  of the  burnt stretch  suggests a faint  hope. God's  Sparrows shows the  horror  of the  First  World  War  in  the  vivid descriptions of the  "raped  land­ scape"   at  the  front:

Men  had  gone  to earth  there, earth  to mud,  and  trees to splintered  stumps. The only living things visible were the guns scattered everywhere, barely discernible in the conquering  monotony, and inhabiting  the waste like lost spirits in hell. The landscape  was significant of nothing, and the significance of mere emptiness was appalling.

Scenes  like these  are  necessary  to dramatize the inner  agony  of thinkers like Dan and  Quentin, and  the  indignity of life in  wartime. In  contrast, the  larger  chal­ lenge of building a conflict  and  an atmosphere which  would  serve a whole novel always  baffled  Child. Even  in  his best  novels  the  plots  lack  at  times  credibility. The   trite  discovery  of  Anne's white  ancestry  makes  The Village   of  Souls  seem fantastic; so  does  the  vision  of  judgment at  the  end  of  the  generally   realistic God's  Sparrows. Nor  is Child  always  successful even  in  scenes  of smaller  scope. Crowd  scenes are  often  vague,  like the celebration for a V.C.  in  God's  Sparrows,

33

PHILIP CHILD



in  which  Dan  and  his crippled  sister are  caught, or the  court  room scene  in Mr. Ames  Against  Time. The   memorable  moments  in  these  novels,  and   they  are many,  come  in scenes with  a few characters thinking in isolation  from society­ in  a canoe,  a clearing,  a room.
A  rare   objectivity, which   always  dominates Child's  point   of  view,  helps  to crystallize   these  scenes  of  small  scope.  It provides   a  realism  which   contrasts sharply with  some  of the  fantastic general  plotting. Because  the  burning of  Mo­ hawks  in  Montreal is not  told  melodramatically, it is as helpful  to the  historical  atmosphere as the  hard  pioneering of habitant  farmers out  in  the  neighbouring forest.  Another result  is that  evil seems  real  in  these  novels.  Child  draws  con­ vincing   bad   men,  from  the  treacherous Titange  of  the  first  novel  to  the  Nazi stormtrooper and   the  young  gangsters  of the  last  novels.  Hate is real  too.  The  reader   accepts   Titange's hate  for  Bertrand,  Anne's  hate  for  Lys,  because  the reasons  for  these  feelings are  so clear.
The control of emotions  which  this objectivity produces also characterizes the style in both  the  novels and  the poems. Cool  rather than  impassioned, it provides a useful perspective for the scenes of brooding characters. It runs smoothly  enough for  storytelling, although it lacks the  customary loose flow of easy narration. For moments of emotional intensity,  however,  it adds  little  to the  mood.  Perhaps for this  reason  Child's lyric poems seem somewhat pallid.  Only  emotions  demanding understatement really  benefit  from  the  style,  like  the  reaction to  the  battlefront in God's Sparrows. It is rather a style which  lends  itself to epigram and  humour.
The unity  in  outlook  is provided   not  so much  by  the  objective  point-of-view or  by  the  style,  however,  as  by  themes.  Ideals are   what interest the  central characters, and  the  struggle  to understand and  preserve  ideals  consumes  most of their   energy.   Loneliness  and   the  search   for  love  are  the  motivating  urges  for both  Bertrand and  Anne  in The  Village of Souls, and  under  Bertrand's direction they  become  Lys'  as well. God's Sparrows,  which  stands  a little  apart from  the rest in theme,  stresses the moral  issues of heroism  in war  and  in doubt about  war, particularly when  theories are carried  to extremes. The  resultant attitudes towards war  make  the  novel  tighter  in structure than most war  novels are,  or most family novels. Child's last two novels return to the theme  of love. In  them  a larger,  more ethereal love  than   Bertrand's provides  a  closer  unity,  although a  more  abstract one.  Extravagance of  theme,  not  disunity,  is  their  difficulty.  And  in  Victorian House  the  recurring idea  of  a  love  to  encompass even  Judas provides  the  one distinction in the  overriding nostalgia  of the  poem.
Child  tells  us  that  only  love breaks  down  the  hell of individual isolation  and


34

PHILIP CHILD



so  makes  the  individual truly  human. The  extreme  isolation  of  Bertrand,  Lys, and  Anne  as  they  paddle through the  primeval  forest  reinforces  the  even  more thorough  isolation   of  each  of  their  souls.  Love  is the  only  humanizing outlet. Although Lys rejects  this  view at  first, calling  life a  jest and  longing  for  the  city life of Paris,  she recognizes  the  truth  before she dies. Even  if "humans are always alone"," love is an  expanding and  creative  force.  Privacy, night  and  self are  the most  unbearable things  in life, and  love is the one alternative, a love that  is built on  faith.  And   so  faith   is  described   as  the  prerequisite for  membership in  the human race.3  In  this  perspective, the  Nazi  treatment of Jews  in  Day  of Wrath becomes  a  study  in  inhumanity due  to  lack  of love,  and  Simon  Froben's near tragedy  is that   he  will  be  corrupted too.  Mr.  Ames  is presumably irresistible  in the  long  run  because  his lifelong  love has made  him  ideally  human. In  these last two novels, however, the  plight  of the  hero  battling for  Love is partly  submerged in the  welter  of city society,  which  Child  does not find  easily malleable for story­ telling.  In  contrast the  utter   loneliness  of men,  and  the  union  possible  through love, are  unforgettably set off in The Village of Souls  as Bertrand, Lys, and  Anne pursue  their  spiritual loves against  the  atmosphere of disease-ridden  villages and  the  fire-destroyed forest  west of Lake  Superior.
In  all the  novels  the  plot  brings  about a triumph for the  theme,  but  the  mood is never  joyous.  Melancholy pervades  the  view of life which  Child  presents.  The happy endings  come as hard-earned rewards  only to a struggling few. No one, not even  Charles Burnet, is  convincingly gay.  Pathetic minor   characters appear in every  novel,  from   Bertrand's tribeless  Indian follower,  a  man  with  no  hope  of anyone  to love  him,  to the  cowardly  Mr.  Avery. A cause  that  contributes to the melancholy  mood  is  materialism which  to  Child,   as  to  Grove  and   others,  ap­ parently goes  with   North  American civilization.  "We are  pioneers  still,  really;  and  that   means   materialists", he  declares  of twentieth-century Ontario.4   When  the fighting  optimism of the novels is lacking,  in Victorian House, the materialism seems  to  overwhelm every  hope  for  spiritual comfort. The result  is  a  haunting despair   with  the  modem world,  and  a less haunting nostalgia  for  the  good  old days.
When   vitality   is  missing,  Child's weaknesses  are  the  most  obvious,  and   the
scenes involving large  scope  or  rapid  movement, usually  lack  vitality.  As a result there  is neither a  continuous awareness  of the  historic  period  in The Village of Souls   nor  a  convincing recreation of  city life in  the  last  two  novels.  Adventure too seldom  moves easily in these novels. This  lack of movement applies  to charac­ ters  too,  particularly the  women; they  seldom  come  fully  to life.  Child  has  an

35

PHILIP CHILD



extraordinary grasp  of the types and  techniques of modern fiction,  as the extreme variety  in  his novels  shows. He  understands all  the  conventions and  knows  how to use them  unconventionally. He not only wrote  a pseudonymous mystery novel,5 but  also  used  the  convention  with  intriguing originality in  Mr.  Ames  Against Time. Yet the  ambitious themes  and  large  scopes seem  to defeat  him  and  rarely achieve  credibility. His  characters, like his novels  and  poems,  seem  to belong  to no  recognizable culture.
Both  as novelist  and  poet  Philip  Child  is hard  to fit into  Canadian literature as it  is customarily viewed.  Other   writers  of his generation with  no  more  talent have  grown  out  of regional  or foreign  themes  and  traditions to become  distinctly Canadian since  the  Second  World   War.  Child   has  not  tried  to  do  so, and  in retrospect his  novels  have  that   air  of  being  foreign   to  modern Canada  which Hugh  MacLennan  attributes to  his  dynamic  Canadian  hero   of  the   thirties, Jerome Martel, in The  Watch  That  Ends the Night.  Child's cosmopolitanism has marred both   the  general   and  the  critical reception of  his  novels  in  Canada, but  it  has  no  bearing on  their  ultimate worth. As  an  historical novelist  he saw first and  exploited  before Pratt  the drama of the  jesuit Relations. From twentieth­ century   Canada he  has  produced the  one  noteworthy novel  of the  First  World  War.  Whether dealing  with  past  or  present,  he sought  -like  Pratt-to isolate and  praise  examples of human dignity  in a world  of  materialism which  so many other  modern writers  have  called  spiritually  hopeless.



NOTES

•   "Poetry",   "Letters  in  Canada   1959",  University  of  Toronto  Quarterly, XXIX (July  I96o),  458.  ( Cf.  the corresponding  article  for  I95 I  for Northrop  Frye's full review of the volume, in XXI  (April  I952),  252).
2   p. I57·
3  pp. 47-48.
4   God's  Sparrows, London,  I937, p. I8r.
5  Blow  Wind-Come  Wrack, London,  I945  (published   under  the  pseudonym  of
"John  Wentworth").










36



FOLK LANGUAGE  IN HALIBURTON'S HUMOUR




L. A. A. Harding








A GREAT  nEAL   OF    THE  >"RESHNESS of  Halibmton's
comic  VIew of  life  comes  from  his  tum of  phrase   and  imagery describing the
world  of  Sam  Slick,  as  the  latter  sees it,  in  earthy, colloquial language which comes  from  the  farm, the  workshops,  the  kitchens  and  the  wharves. It smells of the farm,  the  workshops, the kitchens  and  the wharves,  and  provides  much  of the reason  for  the  enormous Sam  Slick  vogue,  which  made   Haliburton a  notable rival  of Dickens.  It is no  longer  the  imagery  of today,  which  may  explain why few read  Sam  Slick now. It is the common  language of not-so-ordinary men; men who  had  had  to  struggle   with  the  unpromising soil in  an  unpromising climate and  who  enjoyed their  own  salty, free-and-easy form  of conversation and  words for  their  own  sake.  It is  the  folk  language of  the  time,  strong, apt  and  often beautifully bathetic. It rarely  tells a round, unvarnished tale,  but  it often  delivers a  character  neatly   and   humorously  revealed.   Sam's   character  and   attitude  is plain,  for  instance, in  "... Britishers  won't stay  in  a  house,  unless  every  feller gets  a  separate bed, ..." Haliburton's New  Englanders and  Nova  Scotians had their  own  (very  similar) idiom  just as distinctively  as Synge's  Irishmen or Bums' Scotsmen.  Consider, for  instance, Sam's  approach to  a  professor  from  whom  he wishes  a  quick  summary of  a learned  work: "... now  lamed men  in  a general way are  all as stupid  as owls, they keep a devil of a thinkin', but  they  don't talk. So  I stirs  up  old  Hieroglyphic with  a long  pole;  for  it's  after  dark, lights  is lit, and  it's  time  for  owls  to wake  up  and  gaze."

37

FOLK LANGUAGE IN   HALIBURTON



One  sees the comic force of this idiom,  when  Sam  says to the  Reverend  Hope­ well,  who  has  been  shocked  at  Sam's  typically  materialistic reaction  on  his first sight  of the grandeur and  majesty of Niagara Falls which  to the minister represent the  voice of Nature and  the  power  of God :

... it  does  seem  kinder  grandlike-that 'are  great  big  lake  does seem like an everlastin'  large milk-pan  with a lip for pourin'  at  the falls, and  when it does fall head  over  heels,  all  white  froth  and  spray  like  Phoebe's  syllabub,  it  does  look grand,  no doubt,  and it's nateral  for a minister  to think  on it as you do; but still, for  all that,  for  them  that  ain't  preachers, I defy most any man  to see it without thinkin' of a cotton mill.

Haliburton here  uses with  great  effect the  language of the  farm, the kitchen  and the  workshop,  when  he  makes  Sam  talk  of  "an  everlastin' large  milk  pan  with a  lip for  pourin' ",  "Phoebe's syllabub", and  observes  the  obvious  connection to an  industrially-minded  Yankee  of  "that voice  of  Nature in  the  wilderness", as the  Reverend Hopewell had  called  it, with  a "cotton mill". Each  man  thinks  in terms  of his character and  experience. Commonsense furthermore says that  a roar is a roar  and  that  Niagara and  a cotton  mill have  at least that in common. Hali­ burton knew  very  well the  value  of contrast to  communicate his comic  view of life,  and  the  above  example  illustrates  the  part  played  in it  by his use of  down­ to-earth  folk  language and  imagery   (in  dialect   of  course) . The  total  result  is more  than  mere  amusement at  the  unexpected comparisons of Niagara with  "an  everlastin' large  milk-pan" and  "Phoebe's syllabub", and  at  the  idea  suggested by the  awe-inspiring power  in front  of Sam's  eyes flowering into  a  "cotton mill".  A cotton  mill roaring with  all its machinery going  at full speed  is the  poetry  and song  of the  industrialist, the  practical, cynical  and  acquisitive  man.
It is  however  far  more  comprehensive than   that. The characters of  the  two men  are  also  thrown into  relief;  the  spiritual old  man   with  a  sense  of  beauty who  sees the  power  of God  in all Nature, and  the  Yankee materialist who imme­ diately  sees industry and  profits.  By means  of such  imagery one  sees in  a  flash, in the exchange between  Sam  and  the Reverend Hopewell, two types of humanity, both  of  which  have  had  a  great  part  in  the  founding and  development of the United States   (not   to  mention Canada)  and  without  either  of which  it  would have  been  a  very  different country. One  feels  that  these  two  kinds  of American had  a greater effect  upon  the national character than any  two similar  representa­ tive  types  from   the  South. These   are  both  strong   and   influential  characters, frequently met  with  in the  early  days. One sees also that both  are  basically  good

FOLK LANGUAGE IN HALIBURTON



men,   though  their  views  and   opm10ns  and   characters are   widely   divergent, if not  opposite. One is interested in  this  world, the  other in  the  next. There is in fact   a  thumbnail  sketch here  of  the  whole  early  history of  the  United States in the   language,  reactions, and  characters of  these  two   men. Furthermore  there is  undoubtedly  a  touch of  satire on  both humanity  in  general and the   New England character in  particular.







hE EFFECT  OF   THE   HOMELY  SIMILE,  which in  Sam's  lan­ guage often involves animals, either farm  or  wild,  is  well  illustrated  by  Sam's indignation at  Dr. Abernethy, the  fashionable doctor at  the  court of St. James in London. The latter had been   too  outspoken at the  expense of  the  Hon. Alden Gobble, the   American  Secretary to  the   Legation  in   London,  when  the   latter went   to  the  doctor for  a  cure  for  indigestion, or  bolting his  "vittles". One notes  the  skilful, humorous build-up which shows  Alden Gobble  as  a very  wide-awake Yankee diplomat,  almost sharp enough to  cut  himself. He  could   "hide his  trail  like  an  Indian".  Sam angrily tells  the  tale:

The Hon.   Alden   Gobble   was  dyspeptic, and   he  suffered  great   oneasiness   arter eatin', so  he  goes  to  Abernethy for  advice.  "What's the  matter with  you?"  said the  doctor, jist that  way, without even  passing  the time o' day with  him:   "What's the  matter with  you,"  said  he. "Why," says Alden,  "I presume  I  have  dyspepsy." "Ah!" said  he,  "I see;  a  Yankee  swallered   more  dollars  and  cents  than   he  can dig,est ?"   "I am   an   American  citizen,"  says  Alden,  with  great   dignity:  "I  am Secretary to  our  Legation at  the  Court of St.  James". "The devil  you  are,"  said Abernethy; "then  you'll  soon  get  rid  of  your  dyspepsy."  "I  don't see  that   'are inference," said  Alden.  "It don't   faller  from  what  you  predicate at  all-it  an't a natural  consequence, I  guess,  that  a  man  should  cease  to  be  ill  because  he  is called  by  the  voice  of  a  free  and  enlightened people  to fill an  important office."
(The truth  is  you  could  no  more trap  Alden  than   you  could  an  Indian. He
could  see other folks'  trail,  and  made  none  himself;  he was a raal  diplomatist, and I  believe  our  diplomatists are  allowed  to be the  best in the world.)   "But  I tell you it  does  foller," said  the  doctor; "for  in  the  company   you'll  have  to  keep,  you'll have  to eat  like a Christian."

Sam's indignation at  this  slight  to  one  of  his fellow, free-and-enlightened  citizens is expressed in  the  strong farm imagery of a dog  and hog:

39

FOLK  LANGUAGE IN HALIBURTON



... I'd  a fixed his flint for him, so that he'd think twice afore he'd fire such another shot  as that  'are  again.  I'd  a made  him make  tracks, I guess, as quick as a dog does a hog from  a  potato  field. He'd  a found  his way of the  hole in the fence a plaguy sight quicker than he came in, I reckon.

This  farm  imagery,  even  though   the  joke is on  the  Hon. Alden  Gobble  and Sam  Slick  rather than  on  the  rude  and  vitriolic  Dr.  Abernethy, nevertheless  re­ duces  the fashionable London  doctor,  in Sam's  bruised  Yankee  soul at least, and to some  extent  in  ours,  to  the  undignified and  even  grotesque image  of a  horri­  fied  hog  scuttling squealing from   a  forbidden potato field  with  the  farm   dog snapping at  his heels. The  doctor  pictured as a panicking pig trying to get back out  through a hole in the farmer's fence is a strong  comic image. The Hon. Alden Gobble  has  been  made  to look  like a loutish  lumberjack and  therefore Sam,  in patriotic and  purely  imaginary revenge,  makes  Dr.  Abernethy  look  like the  dis­ appearing rearend of a  pig,  caught  in  the  potatoes  and  conscious  of error.
Sam's imagery  is powerful  and,  though   his triumph is purely  imaginary,  his point  well  made; but  his anger  at  the  insolence  of Abernethy inadvertently  be­ trays  his comic  character when  one  of the  much  despised  but  secretly somewhat respected  English  (with  regard  to superficial  savoir faire at least - they quibbled, for  instance, about  spitting  in the sawdust  and  took  an  hour  to eat  a  ten-minute meal)   gets in  a wicked  thrust  and  an  unsporting one,  at  an important, dignified  and   highly  respected  "free-and-enlightened citizen" of  the  greatest   republic  the sun  even shone  on. Sam is surprised  and  angry,  and  when we see a man surprised  and   angry   about   a  small  point,  then  there  is one  of  the  unfailing elements  of comedy.  As  a  result  all  three men   involved,  Sam,  the Hon. Gobble  and  Dr. Abernethy, are  comically  transmogrified into  the small boys they  once  were;  we see them  in a new light;  there  is something incongruous, and  they  become  figures of fun.   We  look  down  upon  them  from  the  godlike  height  of  comedy  as three  little  quarrelling human beings,  with  their  quirks  and  their  pride  and  their  tem­  pers. Sam,  who  almost  always is the master  of every situation, who  always scores off  everybody   else  and  gets  the  last  laugh,  is ruffled  and   riled,  and  the  reader sees  him  for  once  unable  to  do  much but  nurse  his  damaged national dignity  and   invent   revenges-a  schoolboy  again.   He  then   adds  darkly, his  mind  still running on  pigs, that  the Hon.  Alden  Gobble  would  "a  'taken the  bristles off his hide  as clean  as  the  skin  of a spring  shote  of a  pig  killed  at  Christmas", if the doctor   had  not  slipped  out  of the  door  as he fired  such  a skilful  Parthian shot. However, the  doctor  had scored  his point; unsportingly perhaps, he has, with  no more  than  his  periscope  showing,  torpedoed the  elusive Gobble. He  has told  him

FOLK LANGUAGE IN  HALIBURTON



that  he is a  pig,  but  that  he is safe  now  that  he is free  of his old  associates  and then  he  makes  an  agile  exit-chuckling.
One   comic  element in  this  exchange is undoubtedly that   of  the  biter  being
bit.  The  famous doctor  is undeniably rude  (though we see Sam  frequently being rude,   or  offensively  nationalistic, or  both)  ;  he is furthermore rude  to  a  clever man  who is in a high  diplomatic position  and,  what is worse to Sam,  the smartest of smart  Yankees,  who could  "catch a weasel asleep"  any  day  in the  week;  then, to add  insult  to injury, the  doctor,  slipping  away  betimes from  fields where  glory does  not  stay,  deprives  the  Hon.  Alden  Gobble,  and  therefore Sam,  vicariously, of the  opportunity of retaliation. There is nothing  so irritating as being  deprived of the  last  word.  Both  these outraged Americans are open-mouthed with  surprise at  this  rudeness  coming  from  so unexpected, so unfair  a quarter, as a fashionable society  doctor, to  such  an  elevated, dignified  and  wide-awake personage as  the Honourable Secretary to the  American Legation  at  the  Court of St.  James.
Rudeness is  often  funny,  probably because  of  the  unexpectedness of  it  in  a
world  where  we  cannot afford  to  be  rude  and  also where  we  are  trained from childhood  to  be  polite,  frequently against  our  real  feelings.  Politeness,  in  fact, is  often   a  necessary   hypocrisy.  This  is  well  illustrated  by  the  great   success  of that  rather over-rated comedy,  The  Man  Who  Came  to Dinner,  where  the  con­ sistent  rudeness,  so startling in  our  society,  defeats  itself in  the  end  because  it is so consistent  that   there  is no surprise  left.  Children of course  are  naturally and  honestly  rude.  "Kiss  the  lady, Tommy," says Mother. "No, she's prickly", replies the  young  citizen  of the  future, with  a complete  honesty  which  he  will learn  to hide  in  his  next  ten  years.  In  fact  in  one  sense a  child  is not  rude  at  all, since he  does  not  mean  to  be,  but  merely  honest; however,  when  a  full-grown man, like  Sam  Slick,  or  the  Hon. Gobble,  or  Dr.  Abernethy, acts like  a child,  that  is funny.
Another instance of farm  language used for satirical  effect  is seen  where  Sam, still  smarting  patriotically from   the  slight  to  the  Honourable  Secretary to  the Legation at  the  Court  of St.  James, turns  for  revenge  on  the  nearest  Britishers, the   lacksadaisical  Bluenoses   with   their   country   ways  and   their   contemptible horseflesh:

... the  nasty yo'-necked, cat-hammed, heavy-headed,  flat-eared,  crooked-shanked, long-legged, narrow-chested, good-for-nothing  brutes;  they ain't  worth  their  keep one  winter.  I vow I wish one of those blue-noses, with  his go-to-meetin' clothes on, coat  tails pinned  up behind  like a leather  blind of a shay, an old spur on one heel,  and  a  pipe  stuck  through  his hat-band,  mounted  on  one  of  those limber-

FOLK  LANGUAGE IN  HALIBURTON



timbered  critters,  that  moves its hind  legs like a hen  a-scratchin' gravel,  was sot down in Broadway, in New York, for a sight. Lord!  I think I hear the West Point Cadets  a-larfin'  at  him:  "Who  brought  that  'are  scarecrow  out  of standin'  corn and stuck him here?"

The  description of scrub stock in the way of horseflesh  is good,  cumulative invec­ tive-suggestive of Prince  Hal  telling Falstaff  what  he thinks of him or Kent  giv­ ing  Oswald a thumbnail sketch  of himself -and,  mounted  contentedly on such an  inferior steed,  poor  farmer Bluenose  seems  to  lose caste  by  mere  association.  The  man  takes  on  the quality of the  "cat-hammed",  "heavy-headed'' Rosinante he  is  riding; he  after  all  chose  it  and  sits  contentedly on  the  unfortunate and dejected  animal. The  man  appears  something of  a  donkey.  To  underline this, Sam  adds  the  reference  to  the  coat-tails  pinned   up  behind  "like  a leather  blind of  a shay", the  old  and  solitary  spur,  the  pipe  in  the  hat-band, and  the  ignoble animal with  the  action  (at  least of the  hind  legs)  of "a hen  a-scratchin' gravel". This  is a sufficiently  graphic  picture  of a simple  countryman in  any  age, at least until  the  nineteen-ten  era  of the  first flivvers;  but  then  the  final  rural  image,  of Bluenose  being  brought out  of "standin' com" like a scarecrow, and  "sot  down in  Broadway", clinches  it, with  the  additional nice contrast of Broadway and  the farm, and  the  neat  and  shining  West  Point  cadets  and  the shabby, happy, Blue­ nose  farmer on  his tottering Dobbin.






LE EQUINE  METAPHOR  is  varied   in  the  mordant  description of  Marm  Pugwash, the  bad-tempered but  beautiful hostess  of  the  inn  at  Am­ herst,  who  is brought to us in  flesh and  blood  colours  by means  of typical  Hali­ burton farm imagery.
Sam  and  the  Squire  reach  the  inn  late;  so late  that  Marm Pugwash is not at all  pleased.  She  is irritably sweeping  up  the  ashes  and  banking up  the  coals for the  night  and  would  just as soon  not see them, or  their  money  either. Sam,  just before  they get there,  forewams the Squire  of the erratic service they may expect:

... Marm  Pugwash  is onsartin  in  her  temper  as a mornin'  in April;  it's all  sun­ shine or all clouds with her, and if she's in one of her tantrums,  she'll stretch out her  neck  and  hiss like a goose with  a flock of goslings. I wonder  what  on earth Pugwash  was a-thinkin'  on when he signed articles  of partnership  with  that  'are woman;  she's not a bad-lookin'  piece of furniture, neither, ...

FOLK LANGUAGE IN HALIBURTON



This  kind  of Medusan shock-effect  is achieved  by the simultaneous double  image of  a  beautiful woman and  a  hissing  goose. It is vivid  comic  imagery. One  sees Sam  and  the  Squire jumping back  in alarm  at this hostility  from  an  unexpected quarter. The goose,  though  comparatively harmless,  has  a  startling approach, like a snake.  It is a touch  which  one  might  find in Twain but  would  not find in Dickens,  the  latter's early  experience of humanity, from  which  he mainly  wrote, being  confined  mostly  to urban life.
Sam  carries  this imagery a little  further in a typical,  mixed  comparison of the beautiful Marm  Pugwash to sour  apples,  and  a horse,  or  rather, in  her  case, a mare.  The mare  metaphor, like the  heifer  metaphor, is exactly  the  kind  of farm imagery   in   Haliburton's  humour  which   shocked   our   great-grandfathers, but which  seems  mild  enough   to  the  average  reader  now.  Sam  continues:

Now,  Mann  Pugwash is like the  minister's apples,  very  temptin' fruit   to look at, but  desperate sour.  If Pugwash  had  a watery  mouth  when  he married, I guess it's pretty  puckery  by this  time.  However  if she goes for  to act  ugly, I give her  a dose of soft  sawder, ... it's  a  pity she's such  a kickin' devil,  too, for she has good points
-good eye, good  feet,  neat  pastern, fine chest,  a clean  set of  limbs,  and  carries a good-But  here  we are; now you'll  see what  soft sawder  will do.

The  missing  word  is of course  weight. Perhaps this offended too.
The  appropriateness of   the   comparison  of  a  beautiful  but   bad-tempered woman  to a kicking  and  temperamental mare is evident  from  the humorous point of  view,  and   is  perhaps more  amusing   when  one  remembers Sam's advice  on managing a  wife  in  just  the  same  way  as he  manages  a fractious horse,  which needs  kindness,   infinite   patience  and   a  firm  hand. Both  are  tricky  "critters", though   the  parallel  must  have  been  both  more  discernible and  more  forceful  to our  horse-conscious forbears  than   to  ourselves.
Sam's farm  imagery  again  clearly presents a character-this time the feminine one  of  Mann  Pugwash discontentedly ruling  the  small  and  frustrating world  of an  Amherst  inn  in  uneasy   harness  with  Mr.   Pugwash, whose  weaknesses  she probably came  to recognize  early,  but  after  marriage. One  feels, in the  words of the  old folk saying  that  the  grey mare  was the better  horse,  and  that  she knew it. There she stands, like Browning's Duchess, looking as though she were alive;  the effect  is achieved by  a goose, sour  apples  and  a skittish,  temperamental mare.
Another  instance of  farm   imagery,   which  is masterly   in  its  combination of humour  and   pathos, occurs   in  Sam's   account   of  the  broken   heart   of  a  New England Paul   Bunyan, one  Washington Banks. This  W.  Banks  was  tall,  so tall

43

FOLK LANGUAGE IN  HALIBURTON



that  he could  spit down on the heads of British  Grenadiers, or nearly  wade  across the  Charleston river,  and  he  was furthermore as strong  as a  towboat. Sam  lets us know  just how  tall  he was:  "I guess he was somewhat less than  a foot  longer than   the  moral law  and  catechism  too."  He  was  the  observed  of  all  observers, particularly  the  feminine   ones,  who  would   rush   to  the  "winders"  exclaiming "bean't he lovely!" Well, poor  Banks died  of a broken  heart, the  only poor  soul Sam  had  ever  heard   of who  had  actually  succumbed to  this  romantic malady. Women, of  whom  Haliburton took  a strongly  unromantic view,  never  did:

The  female  heart,  as far  as my experience  goes, is  just like a  new india-rubber shoe;  you may  pull  and  pull at  it until  it stretches  out  a yard  long, and  then  let go, and it will fly right back to its old shape. Their  hearts are made of stout leather, I tell you; there is a plaguy sight of wear in 'em.

However, men  have  died, and  worms  have  eaten  them  too, but  not for love, says Sam.  Nor  did  W.  Banks die for love;  he died  from  lifting  the  heaviest  anchor of the  Constitution on  a bet, of all the foolish things  to do, with  his prospects.  Sam meets  this huge,  long-legged, sad-eyed  hero a month or two before  his death, and finds  him  quite,  quite  down,  in fact  "teetotally defleshed":

"I am  dreadfully  sorry," says I, "to  see you Banks, lookin' so peecked:  Why, you look like a sick turkey hen, all legs; what on airth  ails you?"

Now  probably the  only sick, wild  bird  which  might  convey  the  impression  of a very  tall,  powerful, Bunyanesque figure  in  his  decline  would  be  a  heron, crane or  stork,  but  the  farm image  of the  "sick  turkey  hen"  is far  better.  It combines the  pathetic and  ridiculous  in such  a way as to surprise the  reader into  a rueful smile at  humanity, which  will lightly lift frigate anchors for  no very good  reason.
In  another typical  passage  Sam  Slick describes  conditions in  the  States  in  the
183o's,  by  the  use of  an  extraordinary cluster  of seven  farm  or  animal images. (The italics are Haliburton's.)

The  Blacks  and  the   Whites in  the  States  show  their  teeth  and  snarl,  they  are jist ready to fall to. The Protestants  and Catholics begin to lay back their ears, and turn  tail  for  kickin'.  The  Abolitionists and  Planters  are  at  it  like two bulls in a pastur'.  Mob-law  and  Lynch-law are  workin'  like yeast in  a  barrel  and  frothin' at  the  bunghole.  Nullification and  Tariff   are  like a charcoal  pit, all covered  up, but burnin'  inside, and sendin' out smoke at every crack enough to stifle a horse .... Surplus Revenue is another  bone of contention; like a shin of beef thrown  among a pack of dogs, it will set the whole on 'em by the ears.

44

FOLK LANGUAGE IN HALIBURTON



These  terms  and  this  imagery  are so essential  to Haliburton that  one  wonders how  he  would   have   written  without them.  And  if  this  imagery succeeds  with us in  making his characters and  incidents  and  anecdotes vivid,  how  much  more effective   must  it  have  been  in  his  day,  when  the  farm   and  the  country  were much  closer to every  man  and  everyone  was at least familiar with  the  ubiquitous cab-horse? With  Haliburton, as this passage shows, the  animal imagery  comes naturally. Men  are  interpreted through the  animals, usually  to describe  disorder satirically in  the  supposedly ordered  world  of men,  or  at  least  to show  conduct which  falls below  the  rational level. If there  is something amiss Sam  immediately thinks  of a dog or  a rat  or a pig, or a bull, or a heifer,  or a mare,  or a weasel, or a lobster,  or a frog,  or  a sick turkey  hen.  His animal  images  come  pouring out  as "thick   as  toads  arter rain".
A  good  example of  proliferating bucolic  metaphors occurs  in The   Letter  Bag of The   Great  Western, when  Sam  makes  his satiric  point  to the  Squire on these eloquent Britons who were "doing" the States at high speed  and once-over-lightly, and  does it with  a nice flow of scornful  animal  and  farm  imagery  which  includes a  monkey,  hogshead of  molasses, flies, cockroaches  and  a "Varginey goose".  He concludes with:

I  shot  a  wild goose at  River  Philip  last year, with  the  rice of Varginey  fresh in his crop;   he  must  have  cracked  on  near  about  as fast  as them  other  geese, the British travellers.  Which  know'd  the most of the country  they passed over, do you suppose?

One  last  instance of  rural   metaphor must  suffice. The fine  ladies  of  London parading up  and  down  the  Park,  clad in their  silks and  satins,  without much  to do  and   with   no  visible  husbands, draw   Haliburton's Victorian fire,  this  time through the  mouth of  old  Slick,  Sam's  farmer father:

There's  a great  many  lazy, idle, extravagant  women here, that's  a fact. The  Park is chock full of 'em  all the time, ridin' and  gallavantin'  about,  tricked out in silks and  satins, a-doin'  of nothin'.  Every day in the week can't  be Thanksgivin'  day, nor  Independence day  nother. ... Who  the  plague  looks after  their  helps  when they are off frolickin'?  Who does the presarvin' or makes the pies and  apple sarce and  doughnuts? Who does the spinnin'  and cardin',  and  bleachin', or mends their husband's  shirts or darns  their stockin's? Tell you what,  old Eve fell into mischief when she had  nothin'  to do;  and  I guess some o'them  flauntin'  birds, if they was follered, and well watched, would be found a-scratchin'  up other folks' gardens sometimes. If I had  one on 'em  I'd  cut  her  wings and  keep  her inside her own palin',  I  know. Every hen ought  to be kept within hearin'  of her own rooster, for fear of the foxes, that's  a fact.
45

FOLK LANGUAGE IN HALIBURTON



It would  be hard  to find another writer  who  expresses  his view of life with  such a  debt  as  Haliburton to  the  farm,  the  wharf, the   kitchen and Noah's ark  in general   (though Joyce  Cary  is one  notable  modem exception -one  remembers Sara  Monday as the  "old  crawfish", and  her fierce, little  husband, Mr.  Wilshire, the  mus  ferocissimus, and  Professor  Alabaster who  had  a walk  like the  front  legs of a horse). Sam  talks, for instance, in farm  and  kitchen  terms  of another young lady  at  an  inn  where  he  was staying  who  was  "as  blooming as  a  rose  and  as chipper as a canary bird," but  who was also, he quickly  discovered  on attempting a  kiss, "as  smart as  a  fox-trap and  as  wicked  as  a  meat-axe," in  fending off Yankee  boarders. He  finds however  that  it is all a feminine bluff  and  he gets his kiss in the  end,  which  causes him  to ruminate: "... if you haven't turned out  as rosy  a  rompin', larkin', light-hearted a  heifer  as ever  I  see'd  afore,  it's  a  pity." Shakespeare, originally  a country  boy, sometimes uses similar  feminine imagery. One   thinks,   for  instance, of  one  of  the  supreme  comic images of  literature, which  gives  the  very  subjective  view of an  old  soldier,  who  was  not  at  all  im­ pressed with  her, of one of history's most interesting women. Scarus,  liking Antony  and   blaming  Cleopatra  for  Antony's downfall,  describes   her  flight,  from   the famous  sea-battle where  she left her navy  gazing,  as being  like that  of  a "cow  in
June", across the  meadow,  thundering hooves, tail  erect-with a horse-fly after her.  Antony   might   have  preferred   a  kinder  simile,  but  the  anti-romantic  Hali­ burton, like Scarus,  was a  heifer  man  at  heart, with  a touch  of the  meat-axe in his  nature.




chra icle 	



LETTRE DE MONTREAL

Une Nouvelle Litterature?


NaimKattan



Al1eluia Royal  Bank  pour  tes colombes  de Claude Neon,  pour  tes saintes  images d'Elizabeth, vertes,  roses, bleues, canam!ennes; alleluia  pour  tes hommes  de  bonne volonte,   ceux   de  Brink's,   ceux-la   aussi  qui  calculent  derriere  tes  guichets, qui ternissent leur  ceil et  leur  propre  richesse;  aUeluia pour  la caisse de  noel,  pour  les chomeurs toast  and  beans and  vomissures de rage a taverne, and  bonjour monsieur l'cure, and   toujours pas  d'travail, and  c'est  du  sentimentalisme ton  affaire, and mon  vieux  tu  perds  ton  temps,  and  on ecrit  pas comme  c;a, and  on  attend pour
'ecrire,  and  on  attend la  permission,  and  vous m'faites  chier  pis  j'continue, gagne
d'egosses,  aUeluia  Royal   Bank  pour   tes  coffres-forts  viragos  vierges  sans  joie  ni foi,  pour   ta  confrerie instruite, ceux  qui  savent  compter plus  loin  que  10o,ooo, ceux  qui  disent  moa,  ceux  qui  disent  we,  I  and  So  what,  ceux  qui  mettent  des
"S"  a salaire, ceux  qui   mettent des  "H" a  amour, ceux  qui  ont   mis  la  hache
dedans, ceux  qui  m'ont fait  charrier, ceux  qui  m'ont   fait  sacrer; alleluia White
Christmas, en  Floride avec  la  secretaire she's  so french, plante-la  pour   la  plus grande gloire  du  Canada, de  sa  goderie  et  de  nos  bonyeuseries,   des  trusts,  des
vices  a  cinq   cennes,   de  nos  perversites   a rabais; al1eluia  pour   les  indulgences
salvatrices  de  nos  frustrations  d'invertis, alleluia   pour   la  fraternite  humaine  in the  life insurance company, and  on earth peace -tu  veux  rire: alleluia pour  nos hernies,   nos  conscrits,  nos  pendus,   nos  prisonniers,  nos  ahenes,   nos  cures,   nos imbeciles,  nos stoules,  peace.  At  any  price,  Avec la  taxe,  c;a fait....

Arnsr SE  TERMINE Ia description d'une  milt de •Cveillon
a  Montreal. Jacques Renaud, l'auteur de  ce  texte,  est  un  ecrivain de  vingt ans.
Il est Canadien fran<;ais, il est pauvre, il veut  hurler sa colere.  Dans queUe langue? En  fran<_;ais? Oui, a  condition qu'on ne  continue pas  "a fourrer une  grammaire


47

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



Grevisse  ou  l'ostensoire   des  puristes  ou  le  tricolore   des  francophylitiques, entre la vie et  les hommes,  entre  les ecrivains  et la vie, entre  les ,ecrivains et leur  vie." Il  y a  dix  ans,  ceux  qui  avaient son  age  et  qui  voulaient dire  son  fait  a  une societe  ignoble,  ecrivaient des poemes.  Mots  et  images  avaient pour  fonction   de soustraire le feu  qui  couve  a  la  vigilence  d'une societe  peu  habituee a  de  tels hurlements et qui  etait  suffisamment solide pour  eteindre toute  voix franchissant les homes  des audaces permises. Les etincelles eclataient. On  les croyait ephemeres.
Il s'agissait,  en verite,  de chuchotements, precurseurs de grands eclats.
L'un de ces poetes,  Gaston  Miron, raconte comment le mot  "colonise" fut  la grande revelation  pour  lui. Quand il a decouvert que !'alienation dont  il souffrait et  dont  souffrait tout  le peuple  canadien-fran<;ais ne se limitait pas  a la langue, il s'est rendu  compte "que  l'etat  d'une langue  reflete  tous les problemes sociaux." Il  fut  tente  de  choisir  le silence  total  qui  lui  apparaissait comme  la  forme  de protestation absolue.  Ainsi il aurait signifie son  refus  de pactiser  avec un systeme qui  le reduisait a l'etat  de colonise. Mais le silence  devant la deshumanisation ne peut  durer sans que  le poete ne soit amene  a composer avec les forces qui l'etouf­ fent.  Aussi, Miron  a-t-il decide  de recuperer sa culture perdue. Des lors, il n'etait plus  question de  redecouvrir la  langue  matemelle car  c'est  d'une  langue natale  qu'il  avait  besoin.  Il  devenait  urgent  de publier afin  de  depasser !'alienation. Sa demarche tortueuse et douloureuse etait  parallele a celle suivie par le groupe qui, voici un  peu plus d'un an, decidait de fonder  la revue  Parti Pris, organe  a la fois separatiste, lai:que et socialiste.  Parti  Pris portrait a la  connaissance d'un public  forme  surtout de  jeunes  un  cri  de  colere  et  indiquait  les  jalons  d'une demarche originale. Ces jeunes poetes, romanciers ideologues  ne se contentaient pas de leur enthousiasme et  de  leur  refus. Ils voulaient, eux  aussi, depasser  !'alienation et la litterature etait  pour  eux  collective  et  engagee.  Il  n'y  aurait rien  eu  la  de  bien nouveau  si  ces  ecrivains   n'etaient  pas  canadiens-fran<;ais, si  leur  instrument d'expression lui-meme n'etait  pas  mine,  appauvri, affaibli   par  cette  alienation. Fallait-il prendre acte  de la  langue  telle que  la  denatme le parler quotidien et, apres   tant   d'autres,  lancer  un  appel   a  la  refrancisation?  C'eut ere  accepter, consciemment ou  inconsciemment, de  se ranger dans  les rangs  de !'elite,  parmi ceux  qui  vont  aux  colleges, aux  seminaires, aux  universites,  ceux  qui  habitent de belles  maisons  dans  de  beaux  quartiers et  qui  s'efforcent tant bien  que  mal  de s'exprimer  dans une  langue  correcte  sinon  chatiee.
Pour  faire  partie  du  peuple,  pour  donner une  voix aux  masses inexprimees, la sociologie,  !'action  politique, le  conflit  des  generations se  fondent dans  un  en­ semble  heteroclite   pour  jeter  les bases d'une nouvelle  litterature.

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



Laurent Girouard, l'un   des  membres   de  l'equipe de  Parti  Pris, auteur d'un roman, La vie inhumaine, le dit sans ambages:

Qu'on   le veuille  ou  non  une  nouvelle  litt< rature
franc;aise, elle  n'est  plus   canadienne ... elle  ne  sera  pas  joual. ... Ce  qu'elle sera ... importe peu.   Nous  sommes   sortis  du  mimetisme  litN raire
utile qu'aux critiques.  Ca  leur permettrait de porter des jugements de valeur sans risquer  de  se tromper.  La  culture  imperialiste  de France  leur  fournissait  a tout coup  de modele de l'ceuvre qu'ils  jugeaient ici.

Les ceuvres produites par  les membres  de ce groupe  sont encore  peu nombreuses pour  qu'on puisse porter  un  jugement  sur  toutle  mouvement, d'autant  plus que les debuts  lit(;eraires de ces ideologues  furent  td:s hesitants  et parfois,  comme  c'est le cas de Paul  Chamberland, bien eloignes de leurs positions  presentes.
Dans  Terre  Quebec,  Paul  Chamberland etait  encore au stade  du lyrisme.  Mais
deja  l'amour de  la  femme  se confondait avec  celui de  la  terre  natale. Il  fallait, avant de liberer  cette  terre,  accepter  d'en  etre, dire tout  haut qu'on en fait  partie. Cette  premiere prise  de  position  ouvrait la porte  a un  enracinement qui,  tout  en cherchant des  assises et  des  raisons  d'etre, contribuait a la  transformation  des
conditions faites  aux  Quebecois.
Dans  son  roman, La  vie inhumaine, Laurent Girouard posait  un  autre   jalon dans  cette  voie de !'elaboration d'une nouvelle  litterature. Son  heros est un faible qui  s'enfonce dans  la  degradation, qui  se laisse engloutir dans  sa  condition de colonise.  Girouard dessinait  les traits  du  visage de l'homme actuel.  Dans  l'esprit de l'auteur ce visage devrait susciter  tant  d'horreur et de degout  qu'il  ouvrirait la voie  a  une  revolte.  Avant   de  surmonter !'alienation, il  fallait   en  prendre acte. Girouard a adopte les techniques du nouveau roman  ce qui  a reduit  cette descente aux  enfers  a un simple  exercice  de style. La distorsion  entre  la forme  et le contenu etait  telle que  l'ceuvre s'annihilait dans  la  confusion.
Jacques Renaud  adopte  le  style  qui  correspond  au  climat   qu'il   cherche   a
evoquer. Et  dans  son  demier recueil,  "L'afficheur hurle", Chamberland change, lui aussi, de langage, ce qui  donne  des poemes comme  celui-ci:

oh  Toi  cede  Toi  big  brother  connard  anonyme  deux  cents  millions  d'anglo­ saxons hydre  yankee canadian maree  polymorphe imberbe  a serres nickelees Stan­ dard  Oil General  Motors  je suis cubain  yankee no je suis negre je lave les planchers dans  un  borde! du  Texas  je suis quebecois je me fais manger  la  Iaine sur les dos
je suis l'agneau  si doux  je m'endimanche du  red enseign  et  je creve  a la  petite
semaine  je suis une  ftaque  une  bavure  dans les marges de rna Bank of Montreal
de  Toronto.


49

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



On   peut  deceler  dans  cette  profusion   de  noirceur et  de  points  sombres  une volonte  achamee de detruire une certaine forme  de vie. Il peut  y entrer une  part de masochisme dans  ce desir, mais le fait de l'exprimer, de le reveler a la face du monde indique  une  volonte  de  renaissance. En   attendant, cette  revolte  qui  a pour  objet  la  transformation de  la  societe,  voire  de  l'homme tout  entier,  com­ mence   par  s'en   prendre   a  l'intellectualisme,  a  une  certaine  forme   de  culture raffinee  transmise par  la  France  ou  dispensee  dans  les colleges et  les seminaires. Cet  acharnement  contre une  mere  patrie   tutelaire, est-ce  autre  chose  qu'un voeu,  bien  qu'inexprime, de  s'affirmer   comme   nord-americain?  En  fait,  l'anti­ intellectualisme litteraire de  Parti  Pris  correspond  a  un  courant  puissant   dans la  litterature americaine. Dans  tout  mouvement  de  refus et  de  renovation, l'absence de  tradition permet   une  grande  liberte.  Malheureusement, on  a  deja vu  aux  Etats-Unis  l'anti-intellectualisme des  beatniks  se  resorber  soit  dans  une sentimentalite sirupeuse,  soit dans  des spectacles de cabaret ou les audaces pueriles ont  pour  objet  d'amuser les bourgeois apathiques.
Certes,  il  ne  faut   pas  pousser  trop  loin  la  comparaison. Car  les adeptes de Parti  Pris equilibrent leur  refus  d'une certaine forme  d'intellectualisme par  un bagage  ideologique emprunte aux  neo-marxistes et aux  sociologues  de la colonisa­ tion,  notamment Jacques Berque.  Renaud lui-meme le confirme:

Lire  Trotsky  jusqu'au  bout.  Ca  donne  des envies, a lire ce gars-la,  de  refaire le monde,  oui, mais sans t'arreter,  avec un fusil, jusqu'a  temps que  t'en  rencontre un qui vise mieux que toe. Un coup mort,  tu t'en sacres.
y est surtout  pas question de juger quelqu'un. y faut  fesser a bonne place. y a
des miseres humaines  qui  tuent  comme  Ia nounounerie des artisses ou des riches. Pauvre  cave d'idealiste qu'on  est des fois. Le monde  y veut pas changer,  le chien! C'est  toi qui changes. Le monde y t'assume.

Dans  une  perspective  revolutionnaire, cette  litterature se condamne elle-meme. Au  lieu  de  se depasser  elle s'annihile. Elle  est  le produit et  elle  temoigne  d'une periode  qu'on voudrait transitoire.
Si  les  ecrivains   de  Parti  Pris assumaient le  parler   joual  et  en  faisaient une langue   revolutionnaire, leur  cheminement n'aboutirait  pas  a  l'impasse. La  n'est point  leur intention. Ils exhibent  cette langue  honteuse, cette image  de la degrada­ tion  afin  de  la  faire  disparaftre. ll s'agit en  quelque sorte d'une  phase  pre­ litteraire. Or,   la  langue   fran<;aise universelle  existe.  Elle  existe  meme  dans  les joumaux du  Quebec. Elle  charrie   parfois  des  scories,  elle est  entachee d'angli­ cismes,  mais  c'est  un  instrument qui  est  mis  a  la  disposition  de  tous  ceux  qui veulent  s'exprimer.

so

LETTRE DE  MONTREAL



Un   premier  pas  dans   cette   voie  de  liberation  n'est-ce   pas  d'accepter  cette langue de  l'elite  et  d'en  faire  la langue  du  peuple?  Mais  comment oublier  qu'il s'agit  aussi du  cri que  font  retentir des  jeunes encore  mal  degages  de leur  adole­ scence,  qui  veulent  transformer la societe  afin que le monde les adultes soit plus acceptable. Ce  monde est  domine   par  les elites traditionnelles, vit  sous l'ombre tutelaire de  la  culture et  de  la  puissance  economique  canadienne-anglaise. Il se degage  a peine  des structures etablies  depuis  des generations. Et  puis ne sommes­ nous  pas ala frontiere d'une Amerique dont  la presence est d'autant plus inquiet­ ante  qu'elle informe la  vie  quotidienne,  ignorant totalement  les  barrieres geo­ graphiques et  linguistiques?  On  comprend que  ces  jeunes  soient  impatients et qu'ils   soient   animes   d'une  volonte de  transformation  qui  oscille  entre   l'action revolutionnaire et le  nihilisme destructeur. Aussi cette litterature n'est-elle  qu'une etape. Il  en  restera  sans  doute   des  bribes  dans la  mesure ou  les temoignages attestent de  ce qui est durable chez cet homme  canadien-fran<;ais et de ce qui le rattache au  mouvement universe!  de  renouveau.








TRIBUTE TO
THE PRINTER


Frank Davey




(As  one  way  of celebrating  our termination of six years of  publication, we  present the following  tribute   to  Charles  Morriss,  our  printer, whose  excellent  workmanship  has contributed so much to the  success of Canadian Literature. While doing  so we would point  out  that, in addition to the  books mentioned in this article, two  books reviewed in  the  present  issue, The  World of W. B. Yeats and  City of the Gulls and Sea, both fine pieces of design  and workmanship, were  printed  by Morriss.)

H.s•s A •••msnoP two-thi<d' of whooe wo<k;,; in 'mall
commercial  advertising, in  handbills, receipts,   cheque blanks,  order  forms,  sta­
tionery   and   flyers,  yet it  has  earned   the  reputation of  doing   the  best  creative printing in British  Columbia. Charles Morriss,  the  printer of Canadian Literature, has  made  a  determined  attempt  to  raise  the  standards of  printing in  British Columbia and   to  influence   printing throughout Canada.  While  other   printers made   money  as easily  as  they  could,  Morriss  amassed  the  equipment  necessary for  fine  printing and  began  doing  creative  work,  at little  or no profit,  as his only kind  of  advertising. Gradually  he  has  done   his  share   to  change the   Western Canadian  public's opinion  of  fine  printing, and   readers of  the  magazines that come  off  his  presses, Canadian Literature, Prism,  and  the  British  Columbia  Li­ brary  Quarterly, have  come  to  expect  Morriss's use of  fine  papers,  black  inks, clean  design  and  general  craftsmanship and   care.
Charles Morriss  has succeeded  in  this  because  he  has  always  been  concerned with the graphic possibilities of book and  paper design and  has gained  personal satisfaction from  creating fine work.  As a boy,  he  experimented with  a gelatine press, and  later  developed  this interest  through apprenticeship and  private  study into  his life's  work.  His  profession  has  taken   him  through positions  in  over  two hundred  printshops in  the  United  States  and  Canada and  to  a  period  of study m  the  library of  the  St.  Bride's  Institute in  London. When   in  1950  he  opened

52

TRIBUTE TO  THE  PRINTER



his  own  shop  in  Victoria, he  knew  that   his  original   handpress was  not  going to  be  adequate for  all  the  possibilities  he wished  to embody in  print.  He  began purchasing good  equipment whenever  he could,  and  in  1957  bought out  another printer to get  a superior building and  location.  But so meticulous was  his choice of  equipment that   he  sold  or  threw  out  most  of that   in  the  new  shop  as  sub­ standard, and   slowly  refurbished it  with  machinery  which   he  knew  he  could trust.  His  present  equipment includes  over thirty  type faces;  he has several offset presses, one of which  is equipped to do complete  colour  reproduction of a quality adequate to  produce illustrated catalogues  for local art  shows,  and  a  number of letter  presses.  Careful in  his  choice  of equipment, Morriss  is also  careful  in  his selection  of employees,  all of whom  can work without  direction at their  particular tasks, leaving  Morriss  relatively  free to work  at design.
The  same  care  is reflected  in the  production of the many  books which  Morriss has  added   to  our  libraries, and  which  have  greatly  stimulated the  printing arts in  Western  Canada. Since  he started  work in Victoria, the  productions of British Columbia  printers as  a  whole  have  shown  a  marked   improvement in  overall design  and  finish,  while  his high standards have contributed greatly  to the success of the  literary   magazines he  prints  and  to the  development of the  Klanak  Press.
Morriss  shows  great   versatility  at  printing multi-lingual works,  for  which  he
arranges his own  proofreading. He  prints  annually The  Canadian Yearbook of International  Law   in  a  bilingual  French-English edition.  He   printed  for  the University  of British  Columbia (which  now has almost  all of its important  print­ ing done  by Morriss) and  Sopron  University  Papers Commemorating  One  Hun­ dred  and  Fifty  Years  of Forestry  Education in Hungary, a work in six languages. And  in  literature he did  a most  attractive collection  of poems  by  St-Denys  Gar­ neau  and  Anne  Hebert, with  translations by F.  R.  Scott,  for  the  Klanak Press; here  the  side-by-side   originals and  traftslations   are  skilfully  reproduced in  blue and  black  inks respectively.
Three of the most  beautiful books in a visual sense which  Morriss has produced, The   Inaugural  Speech  of  U.B.C.   President   Macdonald,  An   Academic   Sym­ posium,  and  Dr.  Macdonald's President's  Report, are  notable for the  bold  use of decorative colour  and  large  type  faces, while Morriss's  design  of Robin Skelton's A Valedictory Poem  grows  right  out of the traditional form and voice of the poem.
Two   recent   welcome   additions  to  Canadiana  which   Morriss   has   printed, George   Nicholson's Vancouver  Island's  West  Coast  and   Gordon Bowes'  Peace River  Chronicles, are  proving not  only  that   fine  printing is  possible,  but  also that  the  public  is willing  to  pay  for it. These  combine  a high  quality of produc-

53

TRIBUTE TO THE PRINTER



tion,  the  utmost  cleanness in  design  and  marked   historical  interest;  they  are necessarily high priced (Nicholson's book, 356 pages, costs $ 1o), and yet they are selling as fast as Morriss can reprint  them.
It  is the remarkable  achievement  of Charles  Morriss that  he has helped  raise our  tastes to the  point  where  we are  willing to  pay extra  for  printing  of good quality.  It  was always theoretically  possible to  produce  such  printing,  with  the paper,  the  time,  and  the  talent,  but  many  printers  have  thought  and  continue to think  that  the effort required for fine printing  was not worth its reward. Con­ tent  at  first with  only the artistic  reward,  Charles  Morriss  is now  receiving the more tangible  reward  of watching  his fine books sell. Readers  of  such magazines as Canadian  Literature can  be thankful  that  Mr.  Morriss  has  never  neglected his art.







54



review articles





POETIC AMBASSADOR
 


John Robert Colombo




EARLE   BIRNEY,   Near   False   Creek    Mouth.  McClelland  &   Stewart,  $4.50  cloth,
$2.50  paper.


LET  ME    START  with   a  few sentences   from   the   Revised   Edition   of Desmond  Pacey's   Creative Writing  in Canada. Concerning the  poetry  of Earle Birney,  Professor  Pacey  has  this  to  say: "Next  to  Pratt, he  is  the  most  original poet  of Canada.... Unlike most contem­ porary    Canadian  poets,   Birney   is  not given  to  echoing Eliot,  Auden  or  Dylan Thomas.  He  is  not  always  successful  as a   poet,   but   he   is   always  himself .... Birney's   tendency   to  root   his  poems  in the  present  ... frequently betrays  him,  as it also has betrayed Pratt in  recent  years, into  writing  not  only  of  but  merely  for the  moment." Agreed-but since  writ­ ing   this,  Birney   broke   his  ten  years  of silence   and   published  two   totally   new books  two  years  apart.
I am certain Birney's  latest,  Near False
Creek   Mouth, his  sixth  book  of  poems, is his most striking, and  perhaps his most accomplished collection. The  way  I  see him,  Earle   Birney  is  neither young  nor old.  He  seems  to have  discovered the fountain of  youth   late  in  life,  he  drank from  it  but  broke  all  the  rules  by  retain­ ing   the   wisdom   of   his   previous   years. The   poetry   is  like  the  man -youthful
 without  being young, mature without being  mellow,  formal   and   fluid   at   the same   time,   neither  academic  nor   beat, not entireJ.y mannered yet not completely natural, neither totally  ironic  nor totally mythic-somehow a human (and some­ what  haphazard)  arrangement of  work­ able  incompatibles.  The  standard  cate­  gories  collapse  at  his  feet.  Birney  is  his own  poet.
"His  own  poet" finds himself  a tourist.
He   is  knocking   out   travel    poems   for Near   False  Creek   Mouth  on   his   type­ writer  in South  America and  the  Carib­ bean.   As  a  rule,   I  don't  go  for   travel poems,  but   these  are   not   the  standard picture-postcard variety. The vile  phrase  usually  conjures up scenic views of moun­ tains   and   matadors,   usually    expresses evocations   of  timeless   beauty   from   the mouths  of  harried  tourists,  usually  com­  municates    weak    liberalistic   sentiments about   oppression,   sickness and  death. Birney's  travel  poems  are  decidedly dif­  ferent.  If anything, touristy  poems  are  to Birney's  what   coloured  slides  are  to  16 mm.  colour   movies.  Birney's   poems  are not  still  pictures but  motion   pictures, in sound  and  colour.   It is  true   they  verge

55

REVIEW ARTICLES



on   the   picturesque  and   the   anecdotal, but  they  are  dramatic and often demand­ ing  of  the  reader.  There   is  nothing  in them  of  the  well-heeled  traveller's mini­  mizing   of  danger,  discomfort   and   dark friendships. Instead Birney is, as a tourist  and   writer,  aggressively  engaging,  with an  eye for  action.  He  describes  only sig­ nificant  scenery,  and  the  presence  of the poet  only  when   there   is  a  purpose   be­ hind  it.
Offsetting the  colour   and  clamour of the exotic backgrounds, Birney places himself  in the foreground, for dramatic relief,  somewhat seriously, as a  Prufrock. Throughout the  poems  he  catches  him­ self  in  a  phrase   peeping  over  the  heads  of  crowds,  as  surprised   as  the  reader   to be  there.  In  "For  George  Lamming," he turns  towards a mirror and  is stunned to see   himself  among   the   "black  tulip faces":

like  a white snail
in  the  supple dark  flowers.

An   Alfred    Hitchcock,   playing    cameo roles in  his own films, Birney turns  up as a  gossiping  tourist  in  "Machu Picchu":

coffeeplanter from  Surinam womanizing Rhodesian pitboss American missionary-doctor baldheaded professor   (Canada).

A number of poems  are  the  author's  re­ actions   to  the  sights  and  sounds  around him.  When  he  spies a girl  on  the  beach,  he  laments his  lack  of  speed-to  chase after   her   ("On  the  Beach").  "Professor of  Middle  English  Confronts  Monster" finds him  laughing at a miniature dragon the   way  St.   George  would   laugh   at  a large  lizard.
Birney's   success  stems  from   the  open mind   he  maintains while  travelling and composmg. It  is  open   to  the   ordinary
 and   the   extraordinary  indiscriminately, but   the   two  are   impossible   to  separate in  his  successful  poems.  This   is obvious in two  linked  poems  "Cartagena de Indias" and   "On   Cartagena de  Indias, His  Native  City."  The first  (sustained  in free   form   for  a  hundred  and   sixty-odd lines)   is a  scenario  of  the  senses, rich  in detail, remarkable in rhythm, crammed with details from everyday life in the Columbian city  of Cartagena. Humanity and  history  are  compressed, then,  as if by chance, the  poet  contrives to come across a  concrete  "shoe ... ten  feet  long"  and beside  it  a  plaque:

En  homenaje de la memoria de
LUIS  LOPEZ
se erigi6  este  monumento
a los zapatos viejos
el dia  10  febrero  de  1957.

Peasants  inform    Birney   that   their   na­ tional   poet   Luis   Lopez   wrote   lovingly, though   grudgingly,  of   their   city   as   a worn-out shoe.  This  leads  Birney  to  end his  poem:

-and him  I envy
I who  am  seldom read  by my townsmen

Descendants of pirates    grandees galleyslaves and  cannibals
I love  the  whole  starved cheating
poetry-reading lot  of you
for  throwing me  the  shoes  of deadman Luis to  walk  me  back  into  brotherhood.

The poem  that  follows is a very fine translation of the Lopez poem, which in Birney's   free  rendering  concludes:

... Still,  full   of  your   own   familiar  rancid disarray
you  manage to win,  even  from  me,  that
love
a   man  finds   he   has   for   his   shoes   when
they  are  old.

The   reader    realizes   at   this   point   that the   poems   have   ceased   to  be  separate,

REVIEW ARTICLES



that   the   collection  of  poems  is  a  con­ tinuum of  experience, that   when  Birney travels  going  is better  than  getting  there.  Not  every  day  is  palmy.   Beneath  the excitement  of   everyday    life,   there   are sinister   and   sacred   moments. The  dra­ matic  poem  "Meeting of  Strangers" finds the   poet  in   Trinidad   confronting an armed thief.  The  dark-skinned hoodlum  is attracted by the poet's  "frayed jacket," but  by executing  "a  nice ... jump" into the  street,   the  poet is able  to  elude  the stranger. "Frayed" suggests Birney's often
 DISTINGUISHED WORKS IN PAPERBACK


The Infinite Moment
and  Other Essays  in  Robert Browning,
2nd  ed.
W.  0. RAYMOND

"... long included  within  the mam body  of Browning scholarship." Times Literary Supplement. $2.50

sleazy   subject-matter,   and   "jump"   the	 	
technical  virtuosity  that   keeps  the  poet

out    of   depths  he   does   not   want    to explore.
Birney gives the impression he can do anything he wants.  This  is the  success of style. His remarkable ability  to arrange surface  sensations   results  in  a  poetry  oc­ casionally overwritten,  too  high-key,  but verse  that   is  compulsively readable.  His control   of  the  vernacular, his  choice  of the   exact   adjective and   powerful   verb, keep  the  tone  taut   and  muscular. Tex­ ture  quickens every line:  a dramatic ten­ sion   (throughout   the   book   and   within individual  poems)   between   the  swirl  of outward  action  and  the  "one  g;reywhite Vancouver    me"    (in    "Saltfish   and Akee"),  between  the often-violent action  and   the  amazed   observer.   Birney  is  the still  point; "I will follow  in  a  small  trot only,"  he  says in  "On the  Beach".
But   beneath  the   greying    (or   going)
hair, there  is a profounder man than Prufrock, someone  moved  by the sacred moments, someone:

stirred
by quite nameless excitement.
 The Gutenberg Galaxy
The Making of Typographic Man
MARSHALL MC LURAN

"A   wholly   indispensable  book."  Uni­
versity of Toronto Quarterly.  $2.25.



The Enemy Joy
New  and  Selected Poems

BEN  BELITT

"Belitt is  an   impressionist  in  the   best sense-warm, distinct, and original." New  Yorker.  $ 1.95·


The Novel and the Modern World, rev.  ed. DAVID DAICHES

"One of the  most  helpful introductions to   the   20th  century  British    novel." South  Atlantic  Quarterly.  $1.75


This Birney,   the   "believer  in  myth,"  is
the  man  who  is moved.  The phrases  are 	University of Toronto Press


57

REVIEW ARTICLES



taken  from  a fine poem "Machu Picchu," which  merges  two  points  in  history  into a  single   psychological   event-the   dis­ covery   of   the   Machu  Picchu   ruins   by Hiram  Bingham, and   their   present-day rediscovery by tourists.  The  "quite name­ less excitement" is studied  more  secretly in  "Letters to  a  Cuzco  Priest."  A  name­  less padre has incited  the poverty-stricken peasants  to  protest  their  lot,  and   some of  them  are  murdered during their  pro­ test.  Birney  asks the  padre  to redirect his prayers:

Do  not  forgive your  god
who  cannot change   being  perfect.

Instead:

Pray  to yourself  above  all for  men  like  me that we do  not  quench
the  man
in  each  of us.

There should  be more poems of this intensity in Near  False Creek Mouth to replace such  interminable (though enter­ taining)  pages  of  conversation  as  "Most of  a  Dialogue  in  Cuzco."   Like  Hiram Bingham,   the    man   who   discovered Machu Picchu,  Birney  is an  explorer   of technique. The  technique  that interests  him  at  the moment isn't  so much  stream­ of-consciousness as it  is  Pop  Poems.  Pop Art   undercuts  the   conventions  of   the framed  canvas   by  incorporating  "real" elements into  the  painting-road signs, Campbell's  Soup   labels,  etc.  Not  being a  painter,  Birney  takes  overhead   gutter conversations  and  incorporates them holus-bolus into some of his poems. When  they  function as  asides,  there  for  colour  or  dramatic relief,  they  work,  but  when they function as  the  full  poem,  they fail. Other  poems   which   are   meant    to   be heard, not  read,  like radio  plays, are "Toronto Board  of Trade Goes Abroad"
 and   "Billboards  Build  Freedom  of
Choice."
Among  the  poets  of Canada, Birney  is unique in  another way.  A unique stylist, he  also  has  a  unique stance. He  is close to  poets  like  George   Barker   and  Theo­ dore  Roethke, for  he seems to have found  a way of being  poetic  without  being self­ conscious   about  it.  He   has   learned    to write  about   the  beautiful  without blink­ ing,  without avoiding it,  apologizing for it, finding  subterfuges or suffering  it. His eyes  revel  in  colours,  contrasts and  con­ tours.  Like  D. H.  Lawrence, he has sud­ den  sympathies  for  flowers,  animals and peasants,  without  the  aching   feeling   he has  to  justify  such  enthusiasm. He  can write   an  old-fashioned  poem  about flowers    ("Caribbean   Kingdoms")   and make  it  modern and   masculine. He  has written his own  motto for style and  sym­ pathy  in  "Fine Arts":

Beware of  the  poet who's  fine-
ly bound

For  the  art  to  be lauded as finest     see  Ovid.

He  maintains the  novelty  of  experience and   expression   by  using,  in  his  touring poems,  a  hand-held camera-a  moving montage, a sort  of  poetic-verite.
By contrast, the few poems with Cana­ dian  settings  in Near  False Creek  Mouth are  ironic   and   less than  generous.  "Ad­ vice  to  a  Hamilton  ( Ont.)  Lady   About to   Travel  Again"   travesties  the   Cana­ dian   scene  delightfully, but  at  Canada's expense,  and  to  the  benefit  of  a  Carib­ bean city.  (The last line, which  dissipates the  effect  of  the  poem,  was  added   since the   poem   first  appeared  in  The  Tam­ arack  Review.)  "Arrivals," set  in  Nova Scotia,   is  effective,   but   it   is  a  typical

"


REVIEW ARTICLES



Maritime   poem  with   an    overload   of guilt. "Can. Hist." is an  able  companion to  Birney's "Can. Lit." in  Ice  Cod  Bell or  Stone   and   a  candidate for   a  revised The Blasted  Pine. Finally, when he writes about that haven of  poets, the  Canadian academy, Birney is smug and sarcastic, as in  "Candidate's  Prayer before Master's Oral" and "Testimony of  a  Canadian Educational Leader." I wish  these  poems were   better-at least   as  moving as  the travel poems.
I also  wish  the   Canadian  government
 would    appoint  Earle  Birney its   first Poetic  Ambassador at  Large. Ottawa should direct him  to  travel to  all  foreign countries and  order  him    to   transcribe their fauna  and  flora, describe ways  of life   in   faraway  places.  He   Inight  then write  about Canada with  the  same  aban­ don  he  takes  to  cities  in  South  America. In  any  case, he would permit his country­ men  to  share his  memorable  impressions of   Germany,   Italy,  Iceland,  India, Greece....








THE UNIVERSAL CONTEXT


Donald Stephens



Poetry    of   Mid-Century,   1940-Ig6o, edited    by   Milton   Wilson.  New   Canadian
Library  Original,  McClelland &  Stewart, $2.35.


ADDED RECENTLY  to  that  use­ ful   and   much  needed  series,   The  New Canadian  Library,  is   an   "original" volume of  poetry which  provides a good,  though somewhat  biased, introduction to the   poetry   written   in   English Canada during  the   past   two   decades.  This  an­ thology  is   edited  by   Milton  Wilson, a critic   whose   taste  and  selection usually demands respect.
Mr.  Wilson    has   chosen  ten   poets   to
represent  the    time  between   1940   and
1g6o.   Five   of  these   ten   he  considers to be  predominant poets  of the  two decades: Earle  Birney, Irving  Layton,  Margaret Avison,  Raymond   Souster,  and  James
 Reaney.  Of   the   five  other  poets, P.  K. Page  is  chosen  because she  represents a dominant position in  the  poetry of  the forties;  the   other  four  are   poets   of  the so called  "younger generation":  Leonard Cohen, Jay  Macpherson,  Alden Nowlan, and   Kenneth McRobbie.
Some   readers may   feel  that Mr.   Wil­
son  would   have  done a  better, and  more representative,  job   if   he   had   included other poets.  Ten writers to  represent the most   active  twenty  years   in   Canadian poetry is a  small number. The limitation of  the   number of  poets   reveals, instead of the  general development of the  twenty years,  a  development of  the  poets   them-

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



selves. This  consideration is perhaps the best  thing   about   this  small  volume; the growth   of  the  poets  is obviously  under­ lined.   The changes   in  the  twenty  years are  partly  satisfied  in  the selection  of the minor  group; P. K.  Page serves as a link between   the  major  voices  Wilson  selects and   the   younger   poets   concluding  the volume  who  began  to  write in  the  fifties and  are  writing today.
Of   course,   the   anthologist  can  never satisfy  all   his   readers;  tastes  and   atti­ tudes  about Canadian poetry  of  the  last twenty  years range  considerably. Perhaps
A.  J. M.  Smith   can  be omitted   because
he   belongs   to   an   "earlier  generation", but   his  academic  refinements   and   pre­ cision   relate   him   quite   directly   to   the intellectualized stream  of   present-day Canadian poetry.  F. R. Scott, too, should be   included  in   this  volume;  his  satire relates   to   the   attack   on  the   parochial which  is another  trend  in modern Cana­ dian  verse. As for A. M. Klein, his poetry is a  positive  voice  in  the  poetry  of Can­ ada  in  the  forties; he  represents  forever  the   typical    crying-out  into   which    all writers  in  the forties  dissolve. Klein,  des­ pite  his  disappearance from  the  scene in recent   years,   is  surely   one  of  the   pre­ dominant echoes  on  the Canadian scene.
There  are   younger    poets,   too,   who
should   be  presented.  Phyllis  Webb   be­ longs  to  the  trends  of  the fifties and  is a product  of   the   forties   in  attitude   and  tone.   She   cannot  be  excluded   because her  better   poetry  is in  the  sixties,  which perhaps is why AI Purdy  is  not included. And  where  are  Daryl  Hine  and  Douglas  Le   Pan?   How   about   Eli   Mandel  and  Wilfred    Watson?  Who,   a   reader   may ask,  is  Kenneth   McRobbie?  Interesting as McRobbie's  poetry  may  be, at  least to Wilson,  the  inclusion of  his  verse  is not

6o
 warranted here.  This  volume  pretends to be representative of twenty years; it is, instead, selective,  and  often  the  selection appears almost   off  hand.
This  impression is strengthened by the
skimpy    introduction.   Mr.    Wilson    ex­ plains   the   short   selection   of   poets   by saying  that  his model is an earlier volume  in   the   New    Canadian   Library  series, Ross's  Poets  of  Confederation. But where  four    poets   can   present    that    era,   ten poets  cannot   do  so  for  the   last  twenty years.  The whole   time   is  different;  the country has changed in texture and qual­ ity.  Where four   represented an  age  one hundred years  ago,  ten  do  not  today.
A  reader   of  Canadian literature  can­
not forget  easily the brilliant essay Mr. Wilson wrote a few years ago, "Other Canadians and   After" -a  study  of  the poets  of  the  forties  and   fifties.  Frankly, I  expected an introduction of this quality, and   I  was  disappointed in  the  one  pro­ duced  here.  The earlier  essay might  have been  presented  here;   Mr.   Wilson  could have   revised  it  for  the  volume,  or  even presented  it  in  its  original   form  with  a note  added to  explain   his  choice,  or  his omissions.   Instead  he  backs  away  from his  position.
Yet   when   he  gets   to   the   individual
poets,  Mr.   Wilson  has  not  shrugged  off his  responsibility  to  show  their   work  as it develops.  Without exception, the selec­ tion  of the  poetry  of the  dominant five is without  equal.    There  is  the   range   of Birney,  the  paradox of  Layton,  the  am­  biguity   of  Avison,  the  variating  texture of  Souster, the  complexities  of  Reaney. The   guide   has  been  a  chronological ar­  rangement,   which   works  in   every   case but   that   of   Reaney, a  poet  famous   for unknowingly  deceiving  his  public   when it comes  to publication of his work;  often

REVIEW ARTICLES



a  poem  published is one  written four,  if not more, years before.  (If anything, this points  out  Reaney's fine  capacity  for working  over  his poetry,  and  waiting  for the  right  moment for  its  publication.)
The  publication  of   poetry    today   is such  that  often  a  poet  permits   things  to be published that  he should  perhaps wait over,  cull  into   finer  poetry   through the objectivity  given   by  time.   Birney,  Lay­ ton,  Avison,  and  Souster  are  often  guilty of this;  there  are  always  poems-except perhaps with  Avison-which should  not be  published,  which   often   seem  merely to fill the pages.  For  this  reason,  Wilson's anthology   presents   a  better, and  conse­ quently  fuller,   picture of  the  poets  than  one  might gain from their  actual volumes.
The  occasional lapses into stilted  forms and fragmented thought that mark minor  notes  in  Birney's  volumes  are  mis-
 sing  here.   Birney's   best   poetry   reaches great  heights,  as presented by this volume. "David" is Birney  at  his best, but  is only part  of a developing Birney;  look at "Bushed" and  "A  Walk  in Kyoto". Then there is the delightful aspect of Birney's mien:   his  humour. It has,  paradoxically
-a blatant irony.  There is the  "Mam­
morial   Stunzas  for   Aimee   Simple   Mc­ Farcin".  But   the   whole   of    Birney   is caught,  perhaps,  in   "The   Bear  on  the Delhi  Road". Here  is his range,  his grace  in  diction,  his  underestimated controlled theme:

It is no more  joyous  for  them in  this hot  dust  to prance
out  of reach of the  praying claws
sharpened to paw  for  ants in  the shadows of deodars. It  is not  easy  to free
myth  from   reality
or  rear  this  fellow  up





Canada 	zn World Affairs
VOLUME XI:  1959-1961

by

Richard A. Preston

The Canada   in  World   Affazrs  series  is issued  under   the  auspices  of the  Canadian Institute of  International Affairs.  In  this  volume  Can­ ada's role  as  a  "middle power"  in  the  Cold  War  is examined  in  the light   of  Canadian  defence   policy;   economic  policy;   relations   with individual Communist states  and  with  the  United  States, Britain  and other  allies;   the  policy  towards   emerging and  uncommitted nations; and  Canadian attempts to strengthen  international  organizations.

$6.oo

OXFORD

REVIEW ARTICLES



to lurch, lurch with  them
in  the  tranced dancing of men.

The  volume,   too,   shows  Layton   for his  best.  And  it  is  about   time  that   the real  Mr.  Layton stood  up! The  reading public,    I   think,   is  tired   of  the   masks which   Layton   puts   on,  if  only  because they are so obvious.  Layton  has many directions, and  most  of  them  are  shown in this volume, but shown with subtle direction. "The  Swimmer", "The Cold Green   Element",  and   "Whom I  Write For"    are   Layton  at   his  best.  But   the exercises  in  erotics could  be removed now from  a  collection of  Layton's poetry; he is  now   too  good   for   that.   He  is  older now-though  I  am   sure  that   age  has only  dulled  slightly  his sexual  interest­ and  I, as one of his admirers,  would  pre­ fer   a  Yeats   attitude  here,  rather  than  the  cry  of a man  who  perhaps has cried too  much   about   his  "back's sunburnt/ from  so much  love-making/ in  the open air''.
But   where   Layton    has   a  reputation based  on  his  social  and   sexual   themes, Margaret  Avison  demands appreciation for  many   things,   but   especially  for  the form  of her  poetry.  Critics  have  labelled her  an  Imagist, and  that  she probably  is, but  the  key to  her  poetry  lies not  in  her control  of  form.   She   does  with   poetry what   few  other   Canadian  poets   try  to do -except  for  A.  G.  Bailey  and   Roy Daniells-and that   is to  bring  a  subtle consciousness   of   form  to   the   organic wholeness  of  the  poem.  Admittedly, the younger  poets-the Tish  Group   es­ pecially-are   conscious    of   form,   but only   in   the   dimension  of  the   rhythm associated  to   form.  Avison carefully shakes  her  reader  out  of a lethargy  about free   and   blank   verse;   she  does  not  do this  by  fooling  around with  the  appear-
 ance  on the  printed page,  but  by a subtle infusion   of  form  into  matter.
The careful  chronological   arrange­ ment  continues with the poetry of Souster  and  Reaney. Their work  is  well selected,  their  growth obvious.  But I would  debate their   inclusion  here  as  dominant voices, especially  when  P. K.  Page-and  others
I have  mentioned-is  delegated  to  the role  of  a  minor   voice.  Page's  voice  will forever    represent  the    temper  of   the forties.  Her  pictures of  psychological  ill­ ness, the  dominated child,  the  dreams of adolescence, belong in this pre-sixties  pic­ ture.   Her   comment  about  the  conform­ ism of society  will  remain an  outstanding example  of   the   universal  within  the local, a too often obvious  stumbling block to  many  poets  in  Canada. The "Stenog­ raphers"  presents  this  quality   best:

In  the  felt  of  the  morning the  calico minded,
sufficiently starched, insert papers, hit  keys, efficient and  sure  as  their adding machines; yet   they   weep   in   the   vault,  they   are   taut
as  net  curtains
stretched upon frames. In their eyes  I have seen
the  pin  men  of madness in marathon trim
race   round the   track   of  the  stadium  pupil.

The  other  four   poets   in   this   group are  interesting, and   Wilson  again  shows his  taste   in  his  selection   of  their   work. There is, too, a good  representative qual­ ity  about them   in  their  "Canadianness" and    their    connection    to    the    various  streams of Canadian  poetry.  Cohen,  who wiU produce  amazing  things,  I  am  sure, belongs  in  part   to  the  stream   of  Klein,  but  he  reproduces exile  theme.'>  of much Canadian poetry,  and  is influenced by at least  one   of  Layton's masks.  Jay   Mac­ pherson  echoes  the  often  silent  stream  of Imagism,  and   holds   high   a  respect   for form.  Alden  Nowlan has  a  hard  road  to

REVffiW ARTICLES



follow-he lives in the  "cradle of  Cana­ dian   poetry,   New  Brunswick"-but he has   been   able   to  discard   the  parochial influences of  his  environment, yet  none of its natural habitat, its colour  and  clear sound.  Fortunately, Wilson  is not  guided  by  local  loyalties -since  he has a minor poet  from   New  Brunswick,   he  does  not feel  he  has  to  include   one  from  British Columbia,  or   the   prairies nor   is  he influenced  by   any   other  taste   but   his own.
But   the   most   agreeable  thing   about
Poetry of Mid Century
 word  "Canadian" in  the  title.  At last, it has  happened! The  apology  is over;  the very  title  indicates this  fact.  It is poetry that  is written in English,  in  direct  asso­ ciation  with  poetry  written  elsewhere.  Of course  there  is often  a  Canadian frame­ work  to  the  poems,  but  it  usually  plays a  minor   role.   These   poets   are   writing  poetry   that   is   universal   in   theme   and context. At  times the  voice is minor.  For the  most  part,  however,  it  is as good  as poetry  being  written in  Britain and  the United  States.   Even   a  skim  reading of this  anthology proves  that.









THE HOUSE THAT FRYE BUILT


Robin Skelton




NORTHROP    FRYE,   Fables   of   Identity:   Studies  in   Poetic    Mythology.  Harcourt, Brace &  World.


NoRTHROP FRYE,  in  this  col­ lection   of  his  critical  essays,  makes  use of  F.  H.  Underhill's term  "metahistory" to  refer  to  that   kind  of  historical   study which   presents a   philosophical  scheme, and  which  reaches  a  point  where  it  be­ comes  "mythical  in  shape,   and   so  ap­ proaches    the   poetic    in   its   structure." Fables   of  Identity could   well  be  called "metacriticism",  and   it  both   gains  and suffers  from   its  author's  desire   to  per­ ceive  a  unifying grammar  of  structures underlying all  literature.
 Metacriticism, like  metahistory,  tends to  deal  in  vast  and   suspect  generaliza­ tions,  and   to  present   us   with   specious arguments  which   fit  so  neatly   into   the scheme   that   we  accept  them   out   of  a desire   for  order,   and   rygard   their   ap­  proximations as permissible  because made  in  the  service  of  a  unifying vision.  Thus  we accept  critical   fantasy   in  the  way  in which  we accept  the fantasy  of the poem, feeling   that  the   process   of   perception which  is presented is of more  significance  than  the degree  to which  it is objectively

REVIEW ARTICLES



accurate.  When   Frye   tells  us  that   the work  of  Blake  lacks  "sentimentality and irony", he  is indicating an  affective,  not a   precise,   truth,  as  was  Blake   himself when  he stated  that  the Black Boy's skin was  black  but  his soul  white.  Both  state­ ments   are  false,  but  helpful,  simplifica­  tions.  When   Frye  in  his  essay  Towards Defining  an  Age of  Sensibility  states  that  the   reason   for   "intensified  sound   pat­  terns" is "an  interest   in  the  poetic  pro­ cess as  distinct from  the  product", he  is making   a  dangerously  specious   distinc­  tion, but guiding us in a rewarding direc­ tion.  When   he  says Spenser  "is  not  the kind  of  poet   who  depends   on  anything that  a Romantic would  call inspiration", we may  be dubious,  but are willing  to go along   with   him  for  the  ride.  When   he adds   that    "He  is  a   professional   poet, learned in rhetoric, who approaches his sublime   passages   with   the  nonchalance of a car-driver shifting  into second gear", I,  for   one,   am   incredulous.  I  concede that   Spenser's  Faerie  Queene   is  organ­ ized  with  such  complexity and  with such dependence  upon   established   rhetorical manceuvres that  it  looks as if  this  is the case,   but   twenty-five   years   of   writing  poetry    and   ten   years   of   studying   the psychology  of the  process  have  led me  to treat   such  matters with  more  caution. I don't know  with  what  ease  or  difficulty Spenser  wrote  any  more  than  Frye  does, but   bland   assertions  of  the  unprovable are  part  of  the  tools  of  the  metacritical trade.
Of   course,   the  metacritic  uses  words
like Inspiration as metaphors rather than definitions. Even though Frye frequently attempts  definition of  crucial   terms,  his definitions always end  up by being analo­ gies  or   assertions   of  belief   rather  than  analyses   of  phenomena,  and  significant
 



because of the connotations they sugg st rather  than    the   denotations  they   ex­ plicitly  supply.  The   result  is a  combina­ tion   of  strategic   oversimplification  and brilliant   suggestiveness,  as   in   the   "at­ tempt  to set forth  the  central patterns of the comic  and  tragic  visions."  One  para­ graph resulting  from  this attempt reads:

In the  comic   vision   the   vegetable  world   is a  garden, grove   or  park, or  a  tree  of  life, or  a  rose  or  lotus.   The archetype of  Arca­ dian images, such  as that of  Marvell's  green  world   or  of  Shakespeare's  forest   comedies. In  the   tragic  vision   it  is   a  sinister  forest  like   the   one   in   Comus  or   at   the   opening of   the   Inferno, or   a   heath  or   wilderness, or  a  tree   of  death.

This  is  both   perceptive  and   absurd, and   though   Frye   qualifies    (and   some­ what   undermines)  his  analysis  with  the statement that  "it  is, of course, only  the general  comic    or   tragic   context    that  determines  the   interpretation  of  any symbol",  we are  still  left  with  a  number of  ambiguous   landscapes.  We  are   also left  with  the feeling  that  some sleight-of­  hand  is being practised; of course a "tree of  death" is part   of  the  tragic  vision­ this  is,  as  Frye  says  himself,  "obvious"; it   is  also,   however,    disingenuous.  The

REVIEW ARTICLES



mine   has   been   salted;  unwary   readers must   beware  of buying  too  many  shares.
This, I  suppose,   points   to  my  funda­
mental quarrel with  Frye.  He  is, in  this book,  too concerned to create a structure which   pleases  his  own  sense  of  <esthetic order  to worry  about  whether or not  the structure will comfortably accommodate any    intelligence   other    than    his   own. Thus he  is, at  times,  wantonly  perverse. He   i nores             "Blake's only  fictions are  in  his  Prophetic Books"  he  says blandly.  I'd  like to know how the word "fiction" can  be manipulated so as not  to refer   to  The  Island   in  the  Moon, The Mental Traveller, and  the  early  ballads. Inconsistencies abound.  We  are  told  on page  I39 that  Blake lacked  irony,  and  on page  147  that  The Marriage   of Heaven and  Hell  is  "based   on  a  sense  of  ironic contrast between  the fallen and  unfallen worlds".  Both   statements  can   only   be true in the world of Metacriticism where inconsistencies can  be explained by refer­ ence  to the  dynamic ambiguities  resident in  highly  philosophical  terminologies.
It  is significant   that  the  most  valuable
essay  in   this   book   is  that   on   Wallace Stevens,  for  Steven's world  is that  of the near-solipsistic creator  delighting in, and exploring, a series of ideal  relationships which  derive  their  validity  from  the premise   that   the  fictive   universe   is  the only  truly  ordered one,  and   (by  a  kind of  Platonic   gear-shift)  that   it  therefore both  explains   and   inheres   the  world  of so-called  reality.  Frye's  profound and complex   description  of  Steven's  themes is the best guide we have yet had to the "message"   (if  not  the  structural  proce­ dures)   of  this  truly  great  poet.  It  is also the  only  one  of  these  essays  which  ad­  duces  an  adequate amount  of  evidence  to  support   its  argument and  its  conclu-
 sions. Moreover, the evidence adduced appears, for once, to have been chosen because of its relevance to Steven's work rather than  to  Frye's  schema.   This  essay alone  makes  the  book  worth  having.
Metacriticism,  like  metahistory, is  al­ ways    challenging,  and,   because   its method  is to arrangliterature in a  per­ spective   conforming  to   some   religious, psychological,  or  historical  conviction, it results in powerful  insights whenever the metacritic's  schema   chances  to   corre­ spond  with  the  all-informing vision of a particular   writer   under    discussion.   On the   other   hand,  it   also   leads,   like  all dogma,  to  a good  many  blinkered judg­ ments. "The Vision of Judgement", says Frye, "is Byron's  most  original poem and therefore  his   most   conventional  one." The  desire for  paradoxical  brilliance has led  to a strange use of  the  word  "there­ fore"  and   to  a  very  questionable asser­ tion.   The   Bible,  Frye  tells  us,  "is  one long  folk  tale  from   beginning  to  end". I  have  difficulty   in  seeing   the  work  of Saint   Paul   in   this   light,    and   cannot  agree  about   either   The Song   of  Songs or   Proverbs   unless   I  enlarge  the   term "folk  tale" into  meaningless inclusiveness.
This is my final quarrel with Frye's metacriticism. He  ends  up  by so altering the  connotative possibilities  of  the  terms he  uses  that   they  become   words  which can  only be used for communicative pur­ poses  within   the  framework  he  himself supplies,  and   then   only  in  an  approxi­ mate  manner. To  attempt to live, for 26o pages,  within   the  House  that   Frye  has Built is, however,  an invigorating experi­ ence.  Nothing is quite  what  it appears to be  at  first.  One  emerges  into   the  street having   had   a   totally   new   and   strange  experience of  the  meaning of  literature, the  nature   of  mythology, and   the  func-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tion  of  cntrCism.  F abies of Identity is a challenging, enlivening book; some of its notions   are  so  immediately attractive  as to  intoxicate  the  enthusiastic  reader   to the  point   of  disablement. If it  is some-
 times, as I have  hinted, disingenuous and irresponsible,  we  must   not   condemn it. Northrop Frye  is a metacritic, and  meta­ critics,   like  poets,  are  licensed  fabulists.









DARKNESS AND EXPERIENCE


H. W. Sonthoff




ELI  MANDEL, Black  and  Secret   Man. Ryerson. $3.50.


THE  POEMS IN   ELI  MANDEL's new   book,  Black   and  Secret   Man,  are about darkness in a human  spirit  and experience. It  is  an   almost   unrelieved darkness of fear  and  guilt.  Occasionally, as in  "Thief  Hanging in  Baptist  Halls", the   terror,  the  guilty   knowledge,   come
into   an   ordinary  daily  experience with
an effect like that  of the dark lines in a Rouault painting. More  often  the horror swallows everything;  the   darkness  is brutal  and    final.   "In  the   Beginning" opens
And  so  at  last   I too  have  come To  where that  body  by  the  shore  Lies   in   the   twilight,  where   the   sun Drops like   a  pear-shaped groan
Into the   consonantal  surf.

There's  an   image   of  fallen   star,   "The word  as blood", and  the close

Now   like   a  mouth  the  opening dark. Now  the  wet,  mouthing idiot,   Night.

The   negation  in   this   poem   comes

66
 partly from  the suggestions  which are cancelled out, of the dismembered god image    of   fruitfulness,  of   the   creative word,  of mouth and  opening dark.  So in the poem "On the Death of Dr. Tom Dooley" the  rhythms, the  slow  progres­ sion,  the  painful accuracy and  accumu­ lating weight  recall  Eliot  enough  so that  the   last   two  lines   ("in   the   beginning/ is  the   murderous end")   are   the   more  bitter.
The title  poem  calls on our  experience of  Macbeth. A  mundane  attitude  given in   the  first  lines  is  quickly  invaded  by an  obscure  horror   of family  history.

These are  the  pictures that I took: you  see The garden here  outside my  home.  You  see The roots  which  hung my  father, mother's Tangled hedge, this  runnel1ed  creeper vine.

The stresses  in  line  one  and   the  effect of "you  see ... you see" prepare us some­ what  for  the  point  of  view  expressed  in the  curious sequence of  roots, hedge  and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



vme. Through lines from Macbeth the speaker    points    out    two    trees   in   the garden, one observed  innocently, one guiltily.   After   a  passage   whose   tone  is both    cruel   and    requiring,  other    lines from  Macbeth are  used,  transformed so that   although  they  keep  Macbeth's  an­ guish   and    guilt,    the    "secret   man   of blood"  presents  a different sort of  threat.

Why,   once   when  brains  were   out   a  man would   die
But  now  like  maggot-pies and  choughs and rooks
A black  and  secret man  of  blood  walks
In the  garden.

"I  never    go   there    now,"    says  the
 speaker   in  a  return  to  the  tone  of  the opening  lines.  And  then,  in  irritable mindless  rhythms, the  ending  jerks  out.

But  go  there, go  there, go  there, Snaps  the  hanging snapshot bird.

The  invasion  of the rational by the irrational, of the  lunatic by the  ordinary is  like  the   shifting  mood   of  Macbeth when  he sees Banquo's g;host. The  poem gives  very   strongly   both   a   fascination with  and  a fear  of "the  garden  here out­ side  my  home".
Many  of these  poems  work  from  great dark   tales   or   implied  tradition,  from myths  or  by  mythical  means,  by  riddle,




CIINIIDIIIN	LITERIITURE
BACK  ISSUES

Important back issues of Canadian Literature still available include  the  following:

No. 	6.  A   Defence   of   Lady   Chatterley   by   Hugh Maclennan, Articles by  Milton Wilson, Earle  Birney and Warren Tallman, together with William McConnell's Recollections of Malcolm Lowry.
No. 	7.  Articles   by   Jack   Ludwig  on   Brian  Moore   and  M.   W.
Steinberg on  Robertson Davies, together with Paul West's study  of   Newfoundland   Folk Songs, The  Unwitting Elegiac.
No.   1 0.  Views   of  Hugh  Maclennan by   George Woodcock and Paul  Goetsch, articles by  Paul  Wyczynski on  Emile Nelli­ gan  and Patricia Purcell  on  Anne  Hebert,  together with A.  J. M.  Smith  memorial essay  on  Anne  Wilkinson.
No.   23.   Articles  by  AI Purdy  on Leonard Cohen, Donald Stephens on  Sinclair  Ross and Peter  Stevens  on  Raymond  Knister, together  with  Dorothy  Livesay's recollections of   Mazo de  Ia  Roche
$1.25   each

ORDER YOUR COPIES  FROM
THE  PUBLICATIONS CENTRE
UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH  COLUMBIA, VANCOUVER 8, B.C.

REVIEW ARTICLES



paradox, or an ironic  inversion  of  experi­
ence,  as at  the  end  of "David".

The world   turns like  a  murderous  stone my  forehead aching with  stars

There are  quick  flashes of a kind  of  lan­ guage   gaiety.   More   frequently  the  wit, like  the  inversion   of  experience,  intensi­  fies pain  and  bitterness.  In  Saul's poem, from   "Four  Songs   from   The   Book  of Samuel"  The    Witch   of   Endor    "casts down   her  spears/  she  waters  my  heart  with  ice".
These   poems  make  rich  an,d  interest­ ing  demands  of  all  sorts.  They  call  on many   resources,   but   they   don't   always unite  them.  This  is where  they fail, for a reader,  when   they  fail.  Often   one  gets both  a sense of  lurking  narrative and  an indication  that   the  narrative is  not  the point,   that   one  shouldn't need  to  know it,  that   what   is  being  given  is only  the attitude  or   emotion   engendered  by  an experience    or    a   coming    together    of several  experiences.  But  when  the  emo­ tion  shifts  or  evolves  without   apparent cause,  its  power  is reduced. The  impres­ sion  is of a mood  out  of  control,  erratic. At  the  end  of  "Secret  Flower", for  ex­ ample,  one doesn't know why the speaker lifts himself  from  the floor, why the door is suddenly open. Something in the  poem has   led   us   deeper   and   darker   into   a nightmare of  guilt  and  victimization. Be­ cause  of  the  moving  power  of that  jour­ ney,   the   sudden  tidying   of   a  Sunday  living  room,  the  sudden  openness  of  the door  seem  to  break   not  only  the  mood but  also  the  validity  of  the  previous  ex­ perience.  In  "Orpheus and  Eurydice" there's   a  similar   mood  shift,  though   in reverse.
The  movement is organized  perfectly clearly  in "Orpheus in the  Underworld".

68
 In  the  first section  a traditional Orpheus speaks  of  his  difficult  silent   journey  be­ fore   he  sings   to  death. The   transition section,  about   the  terrible  required path, uses  no  first   person   pronoun,  giving   a sense  of  limbo.  In  the  third  section,  the speaker is  like  Orpheus, but  the  expen­ ence   now  is  really   personal.

I  watch their faces  for  the  gleam
Which  tells  me  that the  end   begins
that  ecstacy in  which   they   burn   my  lies
and   tear   from me  the  poems  which   I can·
not   write

The trouble with  some of these  poems  is that even when one can understand the structure  it   doesn't  work   emotionally. One  can  understand the organization of mood  in  "Black  and  Secret  Man", given the  clear   lead   to  Macbeth. But  in  this as in  other  poems,  there's violence  whose cause  is not  given;   there's a  fear  which is suddenly cut off and one doesn't  quite know   why,  by  what   power.   The   effect is not  of  powerfully conflicting emotions but  of  inexplicable  moods.
Eli    Mandel   is   consciously    dealing,
here,  with   unspeakable terror;  many  of his  poems   are   almost   as  secret   as  they are  black.







DOUKHOBOR PROBLEMS

SIMMA   HOLT,    Terror in   the   Name  of  God. The Story  of the  Sons  of Freedom  Doukho­ bors.  McClelland  &  Stewart.  $7.50.

MRs.   HOLT's  BOOK   is  the   latest   in   a series written on  the Doukhobor problem since  the  turn  of  the  century when  that sect came  to Canada from  Tsarist  Russia in  the  hope  of finding a  more  congenial way of life. It is an  attempt to bring  the record   up  to  date  and  in  many  respects
resembles  Slaua  Bohu  by J. F. C. Wright,
another journalist who  developed a great interest  in the Doukhobor problem  a generation ago.  Surprisingly enough,  re­ ference   to  this   work   has  been  omitted from  an   otherwise rather   complete bibliography.
Mrs.   Holt   has  graphically  illustrated her book with  a large  collection of  photo­ graphs  from    the    R.C.M.P.   files   and many    other  sources.    It    is   perhaps  a measure  of the changing attitude of non­ Doukhobor Canadians that  these pictures  are   now  able   to  be  published,  whereas in  I 950  the  writer  of   this  review,  hav­ ing  exposed  a  roll  of film illustrating the stripping  ritual  for  the  Doukhobor Re­ search  Committee,  was  unable   to  have it    returned by  the  developers until authorization  had   been   obtained  from the   Attorney-General's Department.  In the present case the photo coverage alone should  make  the  book  a  best seller.
Mrs.  Holt   has  obviously  worked  most
 assiduously  in  collecting her  material  al­ though,  perhaps  owing   to  her   lack   of background  in   things   Russian,   certain  errors  are  apparent in  her  facts.
For  example  (p.   IO),  in  referring to
the  Great  Schism  of the  seventeenth century,  she mentions: "the  mass suicides of   the   RASKOLNIKI,   followers of RASKOL". It so happens that  the  word "RASKOL"  merely  means  SCHISM and  is  not  the  name  of  a  person,  while the   "RASKOLNIKI"  are   SCHISMA­ TICS, i.e.  those  who  disagreed with  the reformed   rituals  of  the  official Orthodox Church. Mrs.  Holt  is in  good  company here,  for was it not  the  late  David  Lloyd George  who thought  "KHARKOV" was the   name   of   a  Russian   general   rather than   of  a   Ukrainian  city?   Or   perhaps the    author    had    been    reading   about RASKOLNIKOV, the  hero  of  Dostoev­ ski's   "Crime  and    Punishment"!  The name  "KRESTOVA",  the  main   settle­ ment  of the  Sons  of Freedom, is derived  from  the Russian  word  "KREST", cross, and   not   from    "KHRISTOS",   Christ. Fred   N.  Davidoff   makes   this   clear   in his  autobiography (p.  233). The  trans­ literation   of   Russian    words    into    the Roman script  is a  little  baffling. For  ex­ ample,  "VARENIKI", a  kind  of  dump­ ling,   comes   out   as   "VERENYEKES", while   "PIROG!",   a   sort   of  patty,   is virtually  unrecognizable in  the  form  of "PEREHEE".
In  this  connection Mrs.  Holt   has  ad­ mittedly   been  set  the  worst  possible  ex­ ample   by  the  immigration  officials  who admitted the Doukhobors  to Canada, for no  consistent   transliteration system  was used  and   the  surnames  of  many   have been  hopelessly  corrupted in  the  process.
Apart   from   all  these  points  of  detail one  of my main  criticisms  would  be that

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Mrs.  Holt  at  times  writes  as  though  she were composing a novel. It is hard  to separate hard  facts  from  embellishments. Despite    the    copious    bibliography    ap­ pended   to  the  work,  the  author  seldom quotes  the sources  of her  individual facts and   it   is  difficult   to  sort  out   what   is documented  from   what   is  hearsay,   or even   the   result   of   her   own   flight   of imagination.
One  experiences the  feeling  that  Mrs. Holt  has  made  up  her  mind  in  advance and  that  she then  adduces facts  and  data to   prove   her   point.   When   events   run against   the  current of  her  own  convic­ tions, such as the dismissal  by  Magistrate Evans  of the case against  the members  of the  Fraternal Council  charged with  con­ spiracy,   she   is   unable  to   conceal   her annoyance.
The   author  concludes   by  advocating a radical solution  to the problem  of  inte­ grating  the  Sons   of  Freedom   into   the community as  a  whole:   "There  can   be only  one  answer.   That  is  to  break   the chain. The  only  way  the  chain   can   be broken  is  by  removing  the  new  links - the  children."
Mrs.  Holt   may  or  may  not  be  right. But  it  should  be clearly  understood that a   temporary  removal   of   the   children, such  as occurred when  many  adult  Sons of  Freedom  were  confined   on  Piers  Is­ land   in  the  early   I 930's,  and   their  sons and   daughters  were  cared   for  privately  or  in  institutions, would  do  more  harm  than   good.   Many   of  these  children  of the  193o's  have  become  the  bombers  of the  rgso's  and  rg6o's. Similarly the years in   the   New  Denver   School   proved   no solution  in  the  case  of  Harry Kootnikoff and  others.
On    the    other    hand,   a   permanent
separation  of   the   children    from   their
 parents  would   belie  all  the  basic  tenets of our  society and  would  scarcely be tolerated by many  Canadians, even  those outside the ranks of "the professors, the charlatans, and  the   skidroad  drunks" (note  the  presence  of the second comma) who, one gathers from  Mrs. Holt,  are  the only  people  at  present prepared to  toler­ ate  the Sons of Freedom and  their way of life.  Is  it  not,  indeed,  the  clash  of  this to  us  outdated  way  of  life  which  is the crux  of  the  matter? "I am  not  here  be­ cause  I  want   to  be here,  but  conflicts  of life  and   my  sincerity   to serve  God  have brought me  here," writes  Fred  Davidoff from  his  prison  cell.
It is  the  same  old  problem, the  same
unwillingness  to   recognize   change that we find among the Afrikaners and  the conservative whites of the  southern United  States.   And  it  would  seem  that no  one  act,  however   radical,  could  solve the problem. Only  time can change  the outlook   and   ideas  of  the  Sons  of   Free­ dom,   as   it   already  has   that    of   other  Doukhobors, and  bring  with  it a gradual recognition of  the  need  to  adapt  them­  selves  to  the  ways  of  the  modern   world.
A, W. WAINMAN


BRIGHT BUT POWDERY
DOUGLAS LEPAN,  The  Deserter. McClelland &
Stewart.

IN AN  ARTICLE  oN "The Dilemma of the Canadian Author," (Atlantic Monthly, Nov. 1964), Douglas LePan contrasts the writer    who    works    through   "what   is special  in  the  Canadian scene"  with  the novelist   who  will  "dive   so  deeply" that his  vision  will  be  of  "what  happens in





11Henry Kelsey came down with a good fleet of Indians; and hath travelled and endeavoured  to keep the Peace among them according to my Order."
Governor George Geyer, York Fort, wrote this in 1692 of Company explorer Henry Kelsey, renowned for his expeditions  to the prairie country. He was the first
man of his time in Western Canada to master the difficult but essential technique of living and travelling like
an Indian, to work seriously on the native languages and,most important of all, to act as peacemaker between the various tribes.
Great men-past and present-build a great Company.

l}u'h.s-onl)af! <lnmpanu.
INCORPOR:AT£0 2'"•    MA.V   1670..

BOOKS IN REVIEW



an  anonynwus setting  to an  anonymous, or   virtually anonymous hero." This second   way,  which   he  favours,   at  least "for   the   time   being,"   can   produce an "almost  universal   luminosity   which  can be understood anywhere."
Mr.   LePan  is  describing   the  concep­
tion  behind  his novel  The Deserter, which  is about  a soldier who deserts after "the   war"  to  take  up  a  virtually  anony­ mous  existence  in  a  large  city  which  is never  named. As suggested  in  his article, Mr.   LePan  uses  "myth   and  symbol"  in an  attempt to give "universal luminosity" to  his  novel.  What   I  take  to  be the cen­ tral   symbol   is  "a   large  crystal   sphere,  banded  by  the  zodiac.... Silently  mark­ ing  the  passage of time,  it  also drew  to­ gether   the   architecture of  the  eye  and  the  architecture of space,  fusing  them  in a  radiance that  was bright  and  blue  and powdery." Although the author attempts to  ground  some   of   the  animal   figures from   the   zodiac   in   brute   reality,   the novel  is not  a  successful  embodiment of the  theory.
The  central character, Rusty,  has  had a  taste  of  the  ideal  world  in  a  brief  en­ counter  with  a  woman.   He  deserts  the army,  hoping to recapture  the ideal  (not the   woman),  needing   to   have   his  life mean   more  than   the  kind  of  routine  he knows   he   will   sink   into   if   he   is  dis­ charged  and   goes  home.  The   novel  is about  his life in the underside of London (as  I  take  the  city  to be more  than  any other),  and   what   he  finally   comes   to realize.  I hope   this  very  brief  summary makes  the  reader feel  that this is a worth­ while  subject  for  a  novel  to  investigate. I  think   it  is.  But   I  also  know,  as  Mr.  LePan must,  that  it  has been  done  often and   in   depth   by   the   French  existen­  tialists.    There   are    certainly    hints    of
 Camus'  novels  throughout this  one.
But  where   Camus, Sartre  and   Genet push  the  questions of engagement, man's essence, society's  dishonesty  right  through the  wall,  Mr.   LePan  does  an  end   run. His  deserter  is essentially   honourable, is
!:>Utraged  when  the  underworld in  which he  lives  tries  to  involve  him  in  robbery, is  obliged   to  help  a  persecuted  refugee get  out  from  under  Communist pressure, is  finally  forced   to  admit  that   his  own desertion  of  society  is egoism,  and   ends up  Doing   the  Right   Thing. Surely   not so  simple   as  that?  No,  not   before   the refugee   is  brutally  slain   by  the   under­ world  mob  because  he is a confederate of Rusty,   whom   they   are   out  to  get   (in the  very  melodramatic  but  only  exciting  part   of   the   novel.)    Not   before-but why continue? There is more  melodrama and  some sentimentality, but  these quali­ ties  are   the   hallmark  of  a   novelist   as great   as  Dickens.   The real  problem   lies elsewhere.
Why  is The Deserter  not  convincing?
When   a   writer   uses  a  number  of  pat events  and  characters in  succession,  they must   be  highly   charged  in   some   way with   his  energy   or  the  reader  will  lose his ability  to suspend  disbelief.  Language is the  obvious  medium for  conveying energy,  but  Mr.  LePan's poetic  style fails to render enough and  is interspersed with abstractions.  All  but  a  tiny  part   of  the novel is given  from  Rusty's  point  of view. He  claims  to be uneducated, so what  are we   to   make   of   the   following?    "They might  have  been  hemmed in, he fancied, by a more  powerful orthodoxy and forced to defend these narrow limits against persecution." This  type of intellectual analysis is in harmony neither with the poetic   flights   nor   with   the   attempt  to show  a soldier's  view of reality,  complete

BOOKS IN REVIEW



with  four-letter words.  The latter  would obviously be appropriate to the kind of underworld  in  which   the   novel  moves. But  Mr.  LePan's handling of  the  verna­ cular   is not  well  sustained and  is often forced.   For   instance, here   is  a  deserter  trying   to   define   what   it   is   about   the army   that   still   attracts  him.   "I mean the  real  tradition, the  tradition  that  runs all   the    way   back,  the   tradition  you carry   in  your  guts.   What   did  we  care whether  we  supported  one  king  or  an­  other  or  none?  It didn't matter to us so long  as we  got  paid and  fed,  so long  as we  were   kept   kennelled  and   ready  for danger  wherever it  came  from,  ready  to wrestle   down    catastrophe.  That's  our tradition, to stave  off judgment day." Although we may understand what the author is getting at  here,  and  even  if we remind    ourselves    that    the    speaker    is drunk, I  find  there   is  too  much  Hous­ man   and   too  little   common   speech  or thought.
In  sum, I believe  that  the final impres­
sion left  on  the  reader of any  sophistica­ tion  will  be  slight.  Partly  the  nature of the  central character  is  responsible,   but mainly  the  author is at  fault   because  he worked  from   a  theoretical  notion,   used hackneyed   plot  devices  and   let  a  super­  ficially  colourful spray  of  language make do  for   the   deeper  insight   which   is  as­ serted   but    not    communicated   to   the reader.	ELLIOTT GOSE


A WORLD OF THE PROPHETS
ABRAHAM  L.   FEINBERG,   Storm the   Gates   of
Jericho. McClelland   &  Stewart.

THIS  IS A  GOOD BOOK,  much  in  the  way
Isaiah, say,  is  a  good  book.  And  like  a
 book  of one  of  the  Prophets, it  is about being  a  Jew  in  a  world  where   there  is only  the  faith   of  one's  fathers to  guide and   sustain,   a  world   where   false  gods threaten and  enemies  press in, and  where only   occasionally    is  there    a   deliverer. Jews  since  the  beginning have  been  ask­ ing   "why"  of   their   God,   and   in   this book Rabbi Feinberg is asking  "why" of the  gentile.  Reading him  in  the  shadow  of  the  Vatican's  greathearted  absolution of  the Jews  from  Deicide  it  would  seem a  proper   question.
Cast as a spiritual biography beginning
with  his roots in a tiny shtetl in Lithuania from  which  his parents emigrated and ending  in Toronto where he is Rabbi Emeritus of Holy  Blossom Temple, Dr. Feinberg  chronicles his battles  with  him­ self, the  Jewish  faith  and  that  world  he never  made: Christendom. In  prose  that  can  only  be described  as by  Yahweh out of  pulpit,   we  are  exhorted  to  hold  and read  the tablets  of our time-capitalism, totalitarianism, racial  bestiality,  growing  up,   living,   dying,   sex,   the   cult   of  the teenager,  ghettoism,  and  the  suburbs.

'Christ-killer  Jew   bastard!'
The   triune   obscenity  bubbled   like    a
witches' cauldron  on  the  pendulous lips  of Bellaire's prize  derelict-a scrofulous scare­ crow   who   foraged  a  doughnut  and   coffee for   physical  sustenance,  'a   cuppla'   drinks to  feel  alive  and   a  shred of  ego-satisfaction by cursing every  Jew  with  enough olfactory endurance  to  venture  near   him.
The  last  noun, being  a shop-worn epithet of the  streets, had  long  before  ceased  to denigrate mom's virtue; the  penultimate reference  to  my  faith and   people   I  would not  deny; 'Christ-killer' stabbed my  heart, though  I should   have  been  accustomed to  it.

I suspect  this  is the centre  of the  book (as well as a good example of its style), because  time  and   again  Rabbi Feinberg

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



comes   back   to   the   charge   of  Deicide against  the  Jews.  It is still central to the problem. Every  spring  since Peter's  Rock became   patron  to  what  must  be  to  the Jews  a festival  of hate,  Christendom has celebrated at  Easter  the scabrous  untruth that   a  whole  people   killed   (and   go  on killing,  evidently)   God.   And  from   this stem   the   still-happening  forced   migra­ tions,  slaughters  and   gas  chambers,  the real   estate   and   country  club   rules,  the petty   indignities and   soul-searing   pre­ judices.   If we  think   these  things   have ceased   to  exist,   that   prejudice  and   in­ tolerance  are   on   the   wane,   then   some serious  attention  should   be  paid  to  this book.
But  this  volume   is  about  a  man   too, and   a   quite   remarkable  one.   He   was born  to  poverty   in  an  Ohio  steel  town. He  emerged  early  as a debater and  later as an orator. After going to Rabbinical College  in Cincinnati, his first pulpit  was in  Niagara Falls.  Almost  immediately he was  called   to   New   York   City  where the weight of institutional bureaucracy eventually forced   him  out.  He  went  to Europe to  study   to  be  an  opera  singer, only   to   wind    up   on   NBC    radio    as Anthony  Frome,   the  Poet  Prince,  spon­ sored  by Pepto-Mangan. In  the last days of  vaudeville he  played  show  biz's  Holy of Holies,  The  Paramount, and  topped  a bill  that   included  Lillian  Roth   and  Pat O'Brien.  A  nonentity  by   the   name   of Arthur   Godfrey   announced   his   radio  programmes. With  the  rise of Fascism he returned  to  the  synagogue.   In   1943,  he was   called   to   Toronto  where   he  still makes  his  home.
If, as it  seems  to me, it is a Canadian
trait   to  get   into   any   fight   that   comes along,   with   or   without  an   invitation, from  a  world  war  to  a  "peace-keeping"

74
 mission,  then  Rabbi Feinberg has earned his  citizenship. Throughout  the  years  he has  practically lived  on  the  K-rations of committee  luncheons  while  fighting for and   against   most   of  the  social  and  re­ ligious   causes   known   to  man.   He   has been   praised   and   damned  by  his  own people  as well as on  most editorial  pages in  Canada.  And   what   has  he  learned? That  the  good  citizens   of   Christendom speak   of  love:   it  is  easier   than   doing anything constructive. If  you  are  on  his side,  you  will  speak  of   justice.  For  him, this  must   come   first.   Not,   perhaps,  an original thought, but  a  practical one.
ROBERT HARLOW


CANADA
OBSERVED
PETER   VARLEY  and   KILDARE  DOBBS,   Canada.
Macmillan. $1 2 .50.

PERHAPS THIS SHOULD  HAVE been called "Two Canadas: Life and  Landscape." Certainly Kildare Dobbs,  who  writes  the introduction and  Peter Varley,  whose photographs  comprise  the   bulk   of   the book,   see  us  with   completely different eyes. Kildare Dobbs  is a perspicacious outsider who shares  with  most Canadians the   experience  of   urban    living,.  Peter Varley   represents the  Canadian Dream. He  is passionately in  love  with  the  land itself,   with    the   grandeur  of   its   rocky shores, mountains and overpowering prairie  skies.
Kildare Dobbs   is at  least  refreshingly
unsolemn  in   his  analysis   of  the   myths that  unite  our  society.  Nearly  everything he says is true and often amusing,  his paradoxes  are   not   strained  and   yet,  in the  end,  one  feels  that   he  has  been  in­ adequate.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A case  in  point  in  his underestimation of the myth  of the  Frontier (stressed  also by   Edmund  Wilson   in   his   trilogy   on Canadian culture in  The New  Yorker). The   Frontier, says  Dobbs,   is  as  remote from   the  experience of  ordinary  Cana­ dians  as "from the  experience of  a  bank­ clerk in the  Bronx  or a Stevenage typist."  Not  quite, for  many  Canadians have known   hermits of  the  bush;   superhigh­ ways  now  take  us  to  former   lonely  fast­ nesses  while   books,  magazines  and   TV  flood  our   imagination  with   a  constant and   powerful  image   of   the   beautiful, empty   wilderness. Psychologically   the
Frontier is  always  close.
Peter   Varley   understands this.  He  is, to borrow  the expression  coined  by Ansel Adams,   a  true   "photo-poet." Now  that most of our  painters have turned to the abstract  idiom,   he  carries   on  our  land­ scape  tradition.
But   there    are   no   Group  of   Seven cliches,   no   pine    trees   in   centre   fore­ ground.  Instead  Varley   prefers  an   en­ tirely  open  foreground,  brilliantly  lit and  so  immediate  that   it  draws   us  into  the picture  like  a   good   abstract.  Thus   we seem  to   be  standing   right   in   the  field of yellow  rape in Saskatchewan, or poised on   the   rocks   of    Mahone  Bay,   Nova Scotia,   with   the   water   lapping  at   our very  feet.
In  other arrangements Varley  lets bare
trees  or  bushes  form   a  diagonal  screen beyond which we glimpse a city on the opposite  riverbank, thus escaping, for Quebec, Montreal and  Edmonton,  stock post-cardish  views.
There  are   some   magnificent   panor­ amic   shots   taken   from   high   buildings,  like  that  of  Horseshoe Falls  at  Niagara, but   Varley    can   also  focus   on   the   ex­ quisite  detail of  a fern  in  the  rain  forest
 of British Columbia. In  the Badlands of Alberta,   by  enlarging  an   area   only  six feet  by  nine,  he  creates   an  effect  as  of carved    Egyptian  temples    on   the   Nile near  Aswan. Here his work recalls  the dramatic  touch   of  Roloff  Beny.
Since he is a romantic at heart, Varley
responds   to  the   old  streets   of  Quebec, the   Gothic   towers   of  Ottawa  and   the elegiac   quality    of   a   single   small   boat heading    back   towards  Vancouver  at dusk.  But  he  has  missed  the  vivacity  of our  most fascinating city, Montreal.  Per­ haps  this  called   for  some  indoor  scenes with  people.
Notes  on  the  plates   are  furnished  by
James W. Bacque, who ornaments his statistics   with   a   pleasant   knowledge  of our  novelists,  poets  and   painters.
JOAN LOWNDES


THE SERIOUSNESS OF WIT
Penguin Modern  Poets  4·  Penguin Books. 65¢.

IN Penguin  Modern Poets 4 the first Canadian poet  makes  his  appearance  in this   series.  His   name   is  David   Wevill, and  he is by no  means  overshadowed by the other two poets in the volume, David Holbrook and  Christopher  Middleton.
Wevill is a poet  who is already mature.
His  senses are  alert,  and  his  poetry abounds in dynamic images which often ming1e two senses, particularly sound  and sight,  as  in  "a  quarrel of  pigeons/ Col­ lapsing   off  the  eaves,  clattered  into  the night".  There  is  precision   of   language here   that    reminds  me   of   the   best   of Dylan  Thomas,  without the  bluster  and  rambunctious  posturings   that   too  often mar  Thomas' work.  His  linking  of  sense impressions   is   reminiscent  of   the   "in-

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



scape"  Hopkins was always striving to achieve   in   an   attempt  to  give  an   im­ pression  of  simultaneity.
Wevill's  world,  which  he views with an
unflinching look, contains animate and inanimate in one huge restlessness and constant activity, emphasized in  his poems by a very telling use of verbs and verbals.  Wevill  himself  seems to be  look­ ing  for  some  quiet   point,   some  resting place  for  himself  in  relation to  this  rest­ less  world   and   its  inhabitants.
The  last poem  in this volume  indicates a  life  dependent on  instinctive reaction, "life  at  the  core",  not a life in which  the senses  are  "blunt as  dead   tools",  but  a life lived  in  "time of blood".  This  might sound  close to Lawrence, but in his latest poem  (published in The Observer  July 5, r g64)   there  is a  calm  and  dignified  ac­ ceptance of death:

The earth is great with  death
This  beginning to  be  quiet   and   alone   is  a preparation
And  a last  dignity.

Yet  Wevill  has  caught something of  the Lawrentian  vision-it   can   be  seen  in those  poems  dealing  with  birds  and  ani­ mals,   particularly  "Body   of   a   Rook", perhaps  the  finest  poem  in  the  volume. Through  his   reaction   to   animals    and  birds  he  recognizes  the  duplicity of  hu­ manity  but   he  is  not   naive  enough   to exclude  himself  from  that  duplicity:

I watched
Those last  sufferings leave  her  body  too,
Twitching black  and  rook-supple before
I kicked  my damaged violence into  the
wood.

He   has  also  learned   something  from Au den:  the  use  of  place  and  landscape as the starting point of a poem. Wevill's description of these  landscapes is part  of his  VISion of  the   restless  world,   which
 becomes  a kind  of mirror to view and  fix himself  in  that   world.  However, the  re­ flection   never   holds:    "In   me/ All  time has   its   place    but    nothing   survives". Nonetheless, he  wishes to be  placed  firm­ ly,  but   recognizes   the  danger  of  being static   in   the   constant  flux  of  the   uni­ verse.   Thus,  the   poet   is  caught  adrift, continually groping  for  firmness,  trying to   grasp   permanence   in   the   changing world,   his  poetic   world   which  abounds in  images  of  change, such  as  water  and  clouds.   It  is  as  if  a  long  hard   look  at the  world,  and  an  attempt to express  its immediacy  will  somehow  give  the  world and   its   inhabitants  some   permanence; yet  at   the  same   time   Wevill  seems   to realize  that   this  attempt will be doomed  to  failure:

I see everything plainly because  I know Nothing once,  but  it  must  be confirmed By this  perpetual reappraisal. And  yet The roots  of my eyes resist. 	I am  blind,
I think.

All  this  might  suggest  that   Wevil!  is deadly   serious,   but   the   whole   tone   of some poems is lightened by a certain Metaphysical wit. There is a poem,  "The Poets",   which   starts   as  a  strict   parody of  Eliot  and  becomes  a  statement about the  poet's  situation in  the  modern world.
Wevil! is not  already a complete poet. Sometimes  the   descriptions and   land­ scapes  simply  do  not  work.  In  "Spiders", for   instance,  there   is  an   uneasy   com­ promise  between  highly  wrought phrases and   mundane   realism.  Sometimes  the language is too heavily  laden  with image.  Nonetheless,  when   Wevill  selects  an  ob­ ject  and  writes  precisely  his  own  imme­  diate  identity of  mood  with  that  object,  he  achieves  a  directness of  vision  and  a power  of  expression   which  it  is difficult to  underestimate.             PETER STEVENS









VOICES IN
LIMBO


Limbo  is a  new  "little magazine" edited from    Vancouver  by   Murray   Morton. Volume  I, Number  I, is a  manifesto, or rather a series of manifestos. On  the very first   page   Morton  "gives   notice   of  the coming    appearance  of   a   paraliterary journal  of  survivalism  to  be  known   as Limbo and   to  be  published through the courtesy   of  the  Neo-Surrealist  Research Foundation." This  notice  is obviously in­ tended    to   be  funny,  playful,   or   zany. And  many  of the  suggestions  that  follow (in  which   Morton suggests  what  Limbo  will  be,  what   it  will  publish,  and  what it  believes)   are   intended  to  be  equally  funny,  playful  or zany-as, for example, the   suggestion   that   "Limbo  intends  to publish  works which cultivate ... a desire to bring  the  waltz tempo  into  literature."
But is Morton being serious (or funny, playful, or zany)  when he proclaims that "Literature  must not  take itself  too seriously"   and   that   "criticism  must   not take itself seriously at all"? And if he is serious,   what   about   his  own   criticism? What  about  the   first   issue  of   Limbo, which consists of nothing but his own criticism? In these, as in so many other instances,    it   is  difficult   to   know   what Morton intends (presuming that  he him­ self knows) ; and  in some instances -as, for   example,  when    he   interrupts   his
 literary-social  criticism   to   observe   that "The  world    needs    large    undeveloped forest  areas  untouched even  by the  hand of  the  national  park   authorities",  there is  no  possible  way  to  discover   what   he has  in  mind.  Possibly he  just  likes trees, or   dislikes   "the   hand    of   the   national park  authorities." Or  possibly  he has  in­ serted  this and  similar  observations in an effort  to  achieve  "neo-surrealist" effects.
But whatever Morton's intention there
is  nothing  surrealist  about   his   "neo­ surrealism". It  is  just   another   way  of spelling  Murray Morton. And  so with  all the  other   labels  or  disguises  he  assumes (Limbo, Pushmi-Pullyu, etc.,  etc.); they are   all  euphemisms  for   "I",  and   non­ functional euphemisms at that, since they merely serve to introduce  variant expres­ sions of the  same  likes  and  dislikes.
Under   one  or  another of  his editorial
headings Morton repeatedly denounces authorianism,  academicism,  the   avant­ garde,   serious   fiction    (unless   it   tells  a story),  all  forms   of  systematic   thought (including  ;esthetics),  the   beats,    "the  masses who  nightly  crave  blood  in  their television   viewing."   At   the  same   time, under   the  same  headings,  he  repeatedly proclaims  his belief in "freedom", "works  which  cultivate a  desire  to give  pleasure  to  ordinary people,  not  merely  <esthetes, fellow  writers,   scholars,   etc.",   a  "desire to cultivate the creative, positive moods", "Love", "short  stories with  interesting plots",   "enthusiasm  for   causes."   Then, by  way  of  summing  up  his  pronounce­ ments, :Morton declares  that  what  Limbo finally   proposes   is  "a   totally  new   ap­  proach    to   literature,   not   a   technique, not   a  movement   BUT   A  GENERAL OPENNESS."
"The way ahead" [to  "General Open­
ness"]  Morton goes on  to proclaim, "has

77

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



already  been   illuminated  by  many   au­ thors  of our  time, although unfortunately they  have  not  been  given  proper   recog­ nition.   Indeed  they  have  too  frequently been   pushed   to  one   side  in  favour   of certain  unmentionable   and  inferior figures  referred to elsewhere in the mani­ festo.  The  reason  for  this  is  that   many critics,  teachers and other camp-followers like to imagine themselves  to be troubled  by  the  modern  world  but  do  not  really want  to  face  the  precise  truth about  our times. These  circuit-breakers of literature who  seek  out   pessimistic  authors  whose works express a vague, general sense of futility, are disturbed by and  therefore ignore,  neglect and dismiss such truly perceptive writers  as  Aldous  Huxley, Robert Musil,  Ortega Y. Gasset,  ]. B. Priestley,  Osbert  Sitwell."
The  name  of  ]. B. Priestley,  whatever one   may   think   of  the   remaining  four writers,   lets   the   unmistakeable   middle­ brow  cat  out   of  Morton's  nco-surrealist grab-bag  of   "truly   perceptive  writers", a grab-bag which also includes  the names of Somerset  Maugham, Christopher Fry, Sinclair   Lewis, Upton  Sinclair,  and Thornton  Wilder. And  in  later  issues of Limbo  Morton has endeavoured to make good   his   claims   for   these   writers,   his charges against  "the unmentionables" for whom   they   "have  been  pushed   to  one side".
T.   S.   Eliot,   the   prime   "unmention­
able",  he   seeks  to   discredit    (February
1g64)  on  grounds that  are,  for  the  most part,   merely  foolish,  although  now  and again, as in the  following lines, his foolishness   becomes   a   bit   frightening: "Ezra  Pound  has  mentioned  that   Eliot wrote  The Wasteland while convalescing from  a  breakdown. Surely  this  informa­ tion,   although  heightening   certain    im-
 pressions  about  the  poem's  reception, should  limit  its  general significance  con­ siderably."
There can   be  no  excuse  for  this  sort of  vilification,  or   for   the   ineptness  of such  statements  as  the  following   in  his ten-page   diatribe   against    Hemingway (Vol.  I, Nos.  6 and  7):

Hemingway's dialogue generally sounds like Noel  Coward  with  webbed feet ... Heming­ way's    style   suggests  nothing   so   much    as that   he  must   have   had   a  prefrontal  lobot­ omy  at  an  extremely  early  age ... His  style is  so  simple   a   child   could  read   it.   That he   is   taken    so   seriously  is  significant,  in that it   marks  the  stage  of  our   civilization in  which   the  superficial mass  mind, fright­ ened    of   all   profundity,  began    to   act   as arbiter  of    taste.    Which  creates  a   vicious  circle    so   that  to   someone  who   has   read  widely,  is  interested in  ideas  and  indifferent to  stereotypes, Hemingway  has  no  point, to a   conventional  mind    Hemingway  is  star­ tling.   Then  he   begins  to  be  studied  as  a modern classic  and  thus  the  lowering of educational  standards  and   the   mass   mind is   less   able    than   ever    to   exercise    good judgment.

Morton's concern for "the  mass mind" might  be more  understandable if it  were possible  to figure  out  what, in  any  given instance,  he  means   by  the  terms  "mass mind",  "superficial mass   mind",   "con­ ventional mind".  As it  is, about  all  one can  infer  is that  "the   mass  mind  (what­ ever   that    is)    has   been   corrupted  by Hemingway's   "stereotypes"  (whatever they  are).
One   of  the  few  passages  in  Heming­ way's   novels   that    Morton   discusses   is the  stereotyped and  sentimental  ending  of  Farewell   to   Arms;  and   this  passage, he   pronounces  "magnificent":

Some  things are so magnificent that even someone  like   Hemingway,   determined   as he  was  to  be  an  uncouth, brash  ignoramus, cannot  spoil   such   moments  when   he  puts his  filthy   literary  paws   on  them. Thus the

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



moving ending of  Farewell to  Arms. One regrets that  we   have   lost   the   even   more moving  passage  it  would  have   been  had   a great and sensitive master written it.

What  this  means,   presumably, is that the   passage   is  great    (despite   Heming­ way)  because  Murray Morton  has found  it "moving", although it would be greater
still   if,   say,   J. B.   Priestley   or   Upton
Sinclair   had   written it.
Such,  in  brief,  are   the  critical  conse­ quences  of  "the   totally  new  approach to literature", the "General  Openness", that  Morton announced in  Volume I.
Nevertheless  Limbo   is   not    a   total failure.  Although  Morton's  own  contri­ butions   must    fill   more    than   half   the printed pages  of  the  magazine  (through Vol.   I, No.   g), his  efforts  are  not  all literary, or critical, and  some of his social and  political  observations,  notably  in  the first half  of his essay on  the Assassination of  Kennedy, are  in  many respects  quite  perceptive. And,  even   more   important, Morton  (in  his  role  as  editor)  has  been willing  to  accept   work   that   ignores,  or denies,  or   contradicts  his   "new  ap­ proach".  Perhaps the  most  distinguished essays  that  have  appeared in  the  journal  are  George  Woodcock's "Elegy  For  Fur­ Covered  Motor Horns" (February 1g64) and   John  Doheny's  "Alex   Comfort  as Novelist"  (Vol.   I, No.  g), and  the  first of  these   provides   a  quietly  devastating comment   (even   if   unintended  by   the author)  on  "Neo-Surrealism", while  the second   denies   or   contradicts  Morton's "new  approach" at  every  turn.
There are  some good  poems  in Limbo,
by Bonnie  Parker, Ewart Milne,  Joan Finnegan,   Anne    Lewis-Smith,  Robert Bly,  Roy  Fuller, and   others.   There are also   intelligent  interviews  with   Fuller, and  Herbert Read. And  there  are  a few
 good  stories  (e.g.  Emilie  Glen,  "Old Silents")   as well as a number of  interest­ ing  short   pieces,  some  of   them  by  well known  writers   like  Kenneth  Burke.
But  it   is  Morton's  intention  to  edit Limbo, not   a  magazine  that   might   be called  Morton's Miscellany, and  these contributions  do  not   in  any  sense  con­ nect   up   with    his   "new   approach"­ except in so far  as they deny or negate  it.
WAYNE BURNS





INS, OUTS AND OTHERS


Sir,
I read John  Robert Colombo's Toronto letter,  especially  the  portion of it dealing with   the  entertainment  departments of the  three  newspapers, with  interest, and, I  think,   some   profit.   Since   to  a  large extent  his arguments are  based on the proposition  that  mass  newspapers should be run for the benefit of subscribers to journals  of opinion and  quarterlies, there is no  point  in  taking   general issue  with him  in  his  judgment  of  the  quality   of these   entertainment  departments.   Any­ way, he is fairly  flattering to the Toronto Star.   And   besides,   I  have   relinquished my  position   as  entertainment editor   of that   newspaper,  and   at   the  moment   a debate  on the subject doesn't interest  me.
But  may  I,  in  the  interests   of  accur­ acy, correct  one  of Mr. Colombo's errors?  True, I  am  a  fervent  admirer  of  Miss Elizabeth  Taylor, but  not so fervent  that  I  have  ever  called  her  a  "great actress".  I   have   said   that   she   is  an   authentic

79

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



movie    star,    the    other   being   Garbo (among women) , and  that  she is a better actress   than    Garbo.  That  I   certainly stand   by.
I   was   amused    to  see  Mr.   Colombo
refer   querulously  to  an   article   carried as a  New  Year's eve special  by the  Star, dealing  with  people  who are  either  "in" or "out" culturally. The  feature was pre­ pared   by  me  in  collaboration  with  the rest  of  the   entertainment  staff,  and   it seemed  obvious  to all of us  that  it was a joke.  It  was  fascinating to  me,  as  I  said in   a   television   interview   a   few   weeks later,   to  discover   how  seriously  it   was taken   by  three   groups  of  people:  those who   were   rated    as   "in"    (they   were pleased)  ; those  who were declared "out" (they  were  angry,  and imputed the  most malign   motives  to  myself  and  the  news­ paper); and  those  who  were  not  men­  tioned   (they  were  incensed) .
I  would  like to  add  that  I  think  it's  a fine idea  to sec the  inside pages  of  news­ papers  being  analyzed, and  I hope Cana­  dian  Literature  will  perhaps  establish  a regular department looking at  the  Cana­ dian  press. Heaven knows we need  it.
NATHAN COHEN



NEW PAPERBACK SERIES

THE  LATEST  AMONG the growing  number of  Canadian  paperback  series  has   just been  launched  in  the  first  ten  titles  of the Clarke Irwin Canadian Paperbacks. This   series,   unusually  attractively   pro­ duced,  aims  to present  a  cross-section,  in subject   matter  and   literary   quality,  of the  successful  books  which  Clarke  Irwin

So
 have  published in recent  years. The  most welcome    of   all   is   Robertson   Davies' piquant story  of provincial Ontario town life,  Leaven  of  Malice    ($1.25), one  of the few first-rate examples of Canadian satirical fiction  published in  recent  years. Biography is represented by William Kil­ bourn's The Firebrand   ($1 .go),  the only satisfactory record   up  to  the  present   of the   life  and   activities of   William   Lyon Mackenzie,   while   in   autobiography  a particularly pleasing   choice  is  A.  Y. Jackson's  A  Painter's  Country  ($1.go), the   simple   yet   profound  record   of  the life   and   thoughts  of  one   of  our   most influential painters. Finally,  for  those whose interest in the  lives of the  pioneers is   yet   unsatisfied,   there    is  A    Gentle­ woman in  Upper Canada: The  Journals  of Ann   Langton ($1.50).
The growing  list of the Canadian Uni­
versity Paperbacks, published by the University of Toronto Press, presents  two new  titles  of  important books  by  Cana­ dian   authors. One  is The Bias  of  Com­ munication  ($2.50),  a  series   of  essays by Harold A. Innis on  the  links  between  techniques  of   communication   and   the character of  cultures, with  an  introduc­ tion  by Marshall McLuhan;  the  style of Innis, like  that  of  McLuhan,  is at  times turgid   and   somewhat  impenetrable, but his  insights  into  the  influence   of  chang­ ing  forms  of  written  and  oral  communi­ cation   are   often  extremely  valuable. Aspects    of   Racinian  Tragedy  ($2.25), by  John  C.  Lapp, author of  the  recent  important    study    of   Zola    before    the Rougon-M acquart, is an  extremely valu­  able   discussion   of   the   originality  with which  Racine used  and  adapted the con­ ventions of  French  neo-classic  dramatic theory  to his own  highly individual artis­  tic  aims.
