$1.00   per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·14







J]ICOBE]IN POETS IN NEWFOUNDL]IND




Articles

BY ALLAN PRITCHARD, WYNNE FRANCIS, V. L. 0. CHITTICK, KEllCHI HIRANO, PATRICIA BARCLAY


Reviews
BY MARGARET LAURENCE, PAUL WEST, TONY EMERY, ROBERT  HARLOW, WILLIAM TOYE, ROBERT   J. GREGG


Special  Bibliography Supplement

THEATRE IN  CANADA




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










CAUTIOUS INEVITABILITY





PROFESSOR   DESMOND  PACEY  has  rendered  many  serviCeS to writing in Canada, and  particularly as the only considerable historian of literature in  English-speaking Canada. To  these we can  now add  another service,  less sub­ stantial, but   no  less satisfying in  its  own  way-that of  persuading the  Times Literary Supplement  to admit, after  having  implicitly  denied  it twelve years ago, that  something which  can  be called a "Canadian literature" has at last come into  being.   The   new  edition  of  Professor  Pacey's  Creative Writing  in  Canada­ recently   released   in  England-was  the  subject   not  merely  of  a  review,  but  of an  editorial in  the  TLS   which  has  some  salutary things  to say  about both  the  character of Canadians and  that  character's relation  to their literary  productions.

No one need  mistake a Canadian for other  than what  he is; and  if "character" is given a more  particular interpretation, the Canadian is as resolute as any other national  in asserting  his identity,  in the face of considerable  odds. England  on the one  hand  and  the  United   States  on  the  other  are  set  to  lure  him  off his  inde­ pendent  track.  But whether  it is that  the caution needed  for such a difficult navi­ gation  spoils  with  self-consciousness the  free  expression  of  his  identity,  or  that  his character in its realization  on a national scale does not insist upon being imagi­ natively interpreted, it is certain  that  he has fallen  behind  other  Commonwealth  countries  in arousing  curiosity abroad  and  establishing a sympathetic  image.

Yet,  with  what  the  TLS  notes  to be a cautious  inevitability, a literature that can  be  called  Canadian and  nothing else has struggled   into  recognizable being during the  past decade or so, and,  as the commentator again  notes shrewdly,  this is largely because  self-conscious  nationalism has ceased to be an issue of importance

3

EDITORIAL



in  Canada, at  least  as far  as literature and  the  other  arts  are  concerned. Of  the writers  now emerging, he remarks:
They are not required  to debate, as their predecessors were, whether  or not they are or in what ways they should be Canadian. The  lengthy argument  over nation­ ality  has  been  talked  out.  However  he is defined,  the  Canadian exists,  and  the writer  can concentrate on what interests him, in the calm assurance  that by being himself he best expresses the nation.

The  editorial ends  with  an  assurance  which  repeats what  we have  realized  for a  long  time,  but  are  nevertheless  pleased  to see appreciated by a viewer  looking at Canada from the other direction and  a long way off:
While  our  attention   has  been  turned  to  more  flamboyant  developments  else­ where,  Canadian literature  has come  modestly  into  existence  and  must  now  be taken as a fact.

The   only  fault   we  have  to  find  with  this  pronouncement is  that   Canadian literature is a much  larger  fact than  one might be inclined to assume from  an examination  of  the  TLS  editorial, which  mentions Brian   Moore   but  not  Yves Theriault, James Reaney   and  Jay   Macpherson  but  not  Jacques Godbout and Anne   Hebert, or  from  a  comparison of  Professor   Pacey's   comprehensive title, Creative Writing  in  Canada,  with  his  book's   index,   which   contains hardly a French name.
Despite  the  pioneering example  of A.  ]. M. Smith's bilingual Oxford Book of
Canadian Verse, those  who  speak  English,  whether in  Canada or  abroad, are still  too  much   inclined   to  take for  granted that Canadians-and  Canadian writers -live either  in the  Maritimes or west of Montreal. By doing  so they  not only  exacerbate, as  Louis  Dudek  emphasized recently  in  our  pages,  the  sense of division between  Canadians who speak English  and  Canadians who speak French; they  also fail  to  take  into  their  own  vision  and  to  transmit to others  an  area  of Canadian  literature at  least  as  rich  and   original as  that   with  which   they  are familiar. We  appreciate the  acknowledgment which  the  Times  Literary Supple­ ment has  made  of Canadian literature's coming  of age,  but  we are disinclined to accept  it for writing in English alone.









4



FROM  THESE UNCOUTH  SHORES

Seventeenth-centu
Literature of Newfoundland

Allan Pritchard




Behold, e'en  from these uncouth shores, among
Unpeopled  woods, and hills, these straines were sung.
(George Wither  on Hayman's  Quodlibets)



IN THE cuSTOMARY VIEW, the colonial English poetry of Can­
ada  begins with  the work of Nova Scotian contemporaries  of Cowper  and Gold­
smith;  yet a  volume  of  verse written  in  Newfoundland   and  taking  that  island in  part  as its subject,  Robert  Hayman's Quodlibets,  was published  in  London in 1628, when  Milton  was a youth of twenty, when Drayton,  Donne  and Jonson were  still  alive,  and  Shakespeare  had  been  dead  only  twelve  years.'  In  truth, Quodlibets   can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  a  part  of  the  indigenous  literature of Newfoundland. Hayman came to the colony in mature  years, with literary ideals formed in Oxford  and  London,  and  he did not remain  there long. His verse has not  exercised  any  influence  upon  later  poets of Newfoundland  and  Canada. It has, indeed,  been unknown  to them, for Quodlibets has never been reprinted  and exists today  only in  a  few copies. Nor  does it possess sufficient literary  merit  to deserve  revival,  but  it  has  at  least  the  claim  to remembrance which  Hayman states in his dedicatory  address to Charles I. He writes there of his poems (which include  translations  as well as original  works) : "Meane and  unworthy  though they  are,  yet  because  some  of  them  were  borne,  and  the  rest  did  first speake English, in  that  Land  whereof your gracious Majestie is the ... Soveraigne  ... and  being  the  first fruits  of  this kind,  that  ever visited  this  Land,  out  of that Dominion  of yours; I  thought  it my duty, to present and  to prostrate  these with my selfe at your Royall feet."

5

FROM THESE  UNCOUTH SHORES



Surprising  although  its appearance at  so early  a date  may  seem, Quodlibets does not stand  altogether  alone.  Hayman  was, if his claim  is accepted,  the first to publish  poetry  written in Newfoundland, but  he was by no means the first to write  about  Newfoundland,3  and  his work is part  of a small  body of literature which sprang  from a series of attempts  between  I6IO and  I63o  to plant  colonies on the island. A company of London  and  Bristol merchants,  with which Francis Bacon  was  associated,  established  the  first  official settlement  in  I 6 I o;  other colonies were sponsored  by a  separate  group  of Bristol merchants, by William Vaughan, and  by Sir George Calvert,  afterwards  Lord  Baltimore;  and  still  an­ other  was planned  by Lord Falkland,  although  never realized. None of the  pro­ jects met  with  much  success, but  they did  not  fail  until  they  had  inspired a number  of writings. Captain  John  Mason, who succeeded John  Guy as governor of the first colony, published A  Briefe  Discourse  of the  New-found-land in  I62o, and  Richard  Whitbourne, who was for a time Vaughan's governor  and  later an advocate  of Falkland's  scheme, quickly followed in  I622  with  A  Discourse  and Discovery   of  New-found-land.  Vaughan  published  several  volumes  relating  in appearance or actuality  to  Newfoundland,  notably  The   Golden Fleece  (I 626). Like  Mason  and  Whitbourne, Hayman  was the  governor  of a colony, the  one established by the group exclusively from Bristol, and Quodlibets is, in fact, nearly the  last  of  the  works prompted  by these  early  attempts  at  colonization  of the island, for by the time it was published fatal  or near-fatal difficulties had already fallen upon them.4
Mason  and  Whitbourne  do not aspire toward  so distinctively a literary  status
as Hayman does. Writing  as men of practical  affairs, they profess to give in  un­ adorned   prose an  accurate  description  of the island,  and  to present  soberly  the arguments for its colonization. They are concerned  to show that permanent settle­ ment  would  give  England  a  great  advantage   in  the  fisheries,  which  had  long been  exploited  by  Europeans,5   to  demonstrate   the  existence  of other  valuable resources, and  to give evidence of the suitability of  the land and climate for agri­ culture.  Despite  their  desire for  accuracy,  they  are sometimes  betrayed  by limi­ tations  in  their  knowledge, and  sometimes  carried  away  by their  zeal as propa­ gandists,  particularly  when 'they attempt  to  argue  that  Newfoundland offers as great  advantages  for colonial endeavour  as the  rival areas of Virginia  and  New England.
But, if their works are occasionally less than fully accurate,  they are occasionally more  than  narrowly  factual,  for they record  the imaginative  impact  of the new land  upon  the Englishman  of the earlier seventeenth  century.  Mason  and  Whit-

6

FROM THESE  UNCOUTH SHORES



bourne see  Newfoundland through different  eyes from  those  of later  writers  be­ cause   their   view  is  coloured  by  characteristically Renaissance  experiences  and conceptions. On  one  level,  this  means  that  Whitbourne, seeking  analogies in  the familiar for the  unfamiliar, sees the "Cannowes" of the natives  as being  "in shape  like  the  Wherries on  the  River  of Thames" in  Jacobean London, and  that  he compares the  Newfoundland winter   to  recent  severe  winters  in  England  when the  ladies of the  court  at  Whitehall made  sport  on the ice of the same  river.6   On  another, it  means  that  his  mind  and  Mason's  move  naturally  from  observation and  experience toward  the  mythological. While  their  aim  is  utilitarian, the  two men  belong  to an  age  which  did  not exclude  the poetic  from its prose,  and  their writings  lack neither imaginative qualities nor artistry.
Mason,  whose  practical merits  were sufficient to win him  high  appointment in the  navy  and  later  recognition as the  founder of New  Hampshire,? declares  that concerning Newfoundland in  his Briefe  Discourse  he has "set  downe  in  few and plain   tearmes out  of that  experience I have  gained  in  three  yeares  and  seventh monthes residence there,  the  trueth." His work, he says, is "unpolished and  rude, bearing the  countries badge  where  it was hatched, onely  clothed  with  plainnesse and  trueth" ( sigs. A-Av). In  fact,  his account is more  sober  and  restrained than Whitbourne's, as well as much  briefer,  but it is not always  clothed  with  plainness. In  connection with  his discussion  of the climate,  for example, he describes  the ice floes  (which were  to  figure  in  the  work  of  Newfoundland's greatest poet  three hundred years later) by means  of a series of images which  stop  just short  of  con­ verting  the  factual into  the  mythological, before his long sentence reaches  a more prosaic conclusion:

... the  chiefest  reason  of the  coldnesse in New-foundland  in  the  Winter  season is the  Yce which  beeing congealed  into great  firme Lands,  Even from  the North Pole, all alongst  the Coast  of Gronland, Grenland, The  Northwest  passage Terra de  laberador  & so towardes  the Grand  bay, all that  tract  having  many  Inlets  and broken Lands apt  as unnaturall wombes to breede and  bring foorth  such Monsters, which  being nursed  in  their  ruder  annes,  till the Winter  season past, are  turnde foorth  of doores in  the  Spring  to shift for  themselves, and  being  weary of their imprisonments  in those angrie  Climes with one accord  as if they had  agreed  with winde  and  streame  take  Ferrie  into  Newfoundland,  which  immuring   us in  the months  of Febru.  and  March,  both which are subject to northeast  winds &  blow­ ing from this Yce causeth it very cold.

Like Mason, Whitbourne opens his Discourse  and  Discovery by stating his qualification  to  give  an  informed  and   accurate account  of  Newfoundland: a

7

FROM THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



knowledge  of  the  country  built  up over a  period  of forty years.8  And  much  in his work is severely practical  and  factual.  Thus  he lists the supplies necessary for outfitting  a ship of colonists to the last bushel of peas and  itemizes the cost to a penny. It is a practical  concern too which causes him to utter  what  must be the first unheeded  cry of the conservationist in Canada, a protest at the wanton destruction  of timber  by fishermen.  Yet he  has an eye also for less commercial resources, and  he thinks it worth  while to report  that  there grow in  Newfound­ land  "flowers, as the  red and  white Damaske  Rose, with other kinds;  which are most  beautifull  and  delightfull,  both  to  the  sight  and  smell"  (p.  7). When  he comes to describe a less pleasant  aspect of the land,  the mosquitoes which infest the  woods, he abandons  his concern  for simple  precision,  just as Mason  does in his account  of the ice floes, in order  to indulge in a vein of humorous  moralizing and  to  develop  an  unexpected  analogy  with  the system of law  enforcement  in Jacobean England:

Neither are  there  any  Snakes,  Toads,  Serpents, or  any  other  venemous Wormes, that   ever  were  knowne  to  hurt  any  man  in  that  Countrey, but  onely  a very  little nimble Fly,  (the  least  of  all  other   Flies)   which  is called  a  Muskeito; those  flies seeme   to  have  a  great   power  and   authority  upon  all  loytering and  idle  people that   come  to  the  New-found-land:  for  they  have  this  property, that   when  they finde  any  such  lying lazily, or sleeping  in the  Woods,  they  will presently  bee more nimble to  seize  on  them,  then  any  Sargeant will  bee  to  arrest a  man  for  debt: Neither will  they  leave stinging  or sucking  out  the  blood  of such  sluggards, until!, like  a  Beadle,  they  bring  him  to  his  Master, where  hee  should  labour: in  which time  of  loytering, those  Flies  will so  brand such  idle  persons  in  their  faces,  that they may be knowne from  others, as the Turkes doe their  slaves.

Such  was the  hold of myth  over Whitbourne's mind  that  he found  in  New­ foundland  a more remarkable  being than  the mosquito. He describes very circum­ stantially  his sighting  (shared,  he assures us, by other  witnesses)  in  St. John's  harbour early in a morning  of I 6I o a creature  "which  very swiftly came swim­ ming  towards  mee, looking cheerfully on my face, as it had  been a  woman:  by the face, eyes, nose, mouth, chin, eares, necke, and  forehead,  it seemed to bee so beautifull,  and  in those parts so well proportioned, having round about  the head many  blue streakes, resembling haire, but certainly it was no haire ...." Gaining a different  view, he tells his reader:  "I beheld the shoulders & back down  to the middle,  to be so square,  white and smooth as the backe of a man;  and from the middle  to the hinder  part,  it was poynting  in  proportion  something  like a broad hooked  Arrow."   Unfortunately  Whitbourne-who had  commanded  his own

8

FROM THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



ship in the fight  with  the Spanish  Armada -lost  nerve and  retreated  from the shore  as it  came  toward  him,  while his servant  and  others  who  were out  in  a boat  repelled it violently when it approached  them:  "the  same Creature  did put both  his hands  upon  the side of the Boat, and did strive much  to come in to him and  divers then  in  the same  Boat;  whereat  they were afraid,  and  one of them strucke it a full blow on the head, whereby it fell off from them:  and afterwards it came to two other Boates in the said Harbour, where they lay by the shore:  the men in them, for feare fled to land and beheld it." With a commendable concern for  accuracy,  Whitbourne concludes his account  of the  remarkable  event at St. John's: "This   (I  suppose)   was a Maremaid, or Mareman. Now because divers have writ much  of Maremaids, I have presumed to relate what  is most certaine, of such a strange  Creature that  was thus then seene at New-found-land, whether it were a Maremaid  or no, I leave it for others to judge".







WILE MASON  AND  WHITBOURNE   were  only  incidentally men of letters, Hayman had  one contemporary  among the early writers on New­ foundland who shared  his more decidedly literary aspirations.  William Vaughan  declared  in  1630:  "The truth  is, I am  addicted  both  to the  Muses, and  New­  found Land."9 In  contrast  to Whitbourne, who was of obscure birth and went to sea at  the age of fifteen, Vaughan was the younger son of an  aristocratic  Welsh family, the uncle of that  Earl of Carbery  who is remembered  as Jeremy Taylor's  patron,  and he spent his youth in studies at Oxford and Vienna, taking the degree of Doctor of Laws. He had  written  works in prose and  verse on a variety of sub­ jects before he acquired  his interest in Newfoundland  through  the purchase of a large tract  of land  there for colonization in 1616. He sent out settlers in the next year,  but  his project  did  not  prosper, and  he was  obliged  to abandon  it within fifteen years. While he retained  hope, however, he took every means in his writ­ ings, as he once put, "to  stirre up our !landers Mindes to assist and support for a time our New-found Ile." 10  Sometimes one may suspect that  his purpose was not so much  to stimulate  interest  in  Newfoundland  as to advertise  his own work by claiming  for it  a  novelty  of  association. The  New-found   Politicke  ( 1626)  and The  Newlanders  Cure  (1630)  are connected with Newfoundland by little more than  their  titles and  prefaces:   the  former  is a  translation  from  the  Italian   (in


9

FROM THESE  UNCOUTH SHORES



which  Florio  had  a hand)  of a political treatise cast in fictitious form,  the  Rag­ guagli di  Parnaso of Traiano Boccalini, and  the  latter  is a  medical  handbook.  However, Cambrensium Caroleia ( r625), a volume of Latin  verse commemorat­ ing  the marriage  of Charles I and  Henrietta Maria,  includes poems in praise of Newfoundland, as well as a map of the island drawn  by Mason; and The  Golden Fleece ( 1626), a prose work containing  intermittent passages of verse, ostensibly takes Newfoundland as its subject, although much else gets in.
As  one  would  expect,  The   Golden  Fleece is shaped  much  more  fully  than Mason's and Whitbourne's works by classical learning  and reading in Renaissance literature, and much less by practical knowledge of Newfoundland. Classical myth informs  Vaughan's whole view of the island,  and  he describes the  rich fisheries as "our  Colchos, where the Golden Fleece ftourisheth  on the backes of Neptunes sheeps, continually  to be shorne"  (III, 9). Ironically  in view of his own failure, he considered  the legend of Jason so relevant  that  he actually gave his colony the name "Cambriol Colchos," combining allusion to it with compliment  to his native Wales. Similarly,  he saw his  role in  his writing  as that  of an  Orpheus singing the charms  of Newfoundland  to the hard-hearted English. Hence in The  Golden Fleece he employs the pseudonym "Orpheus Junior," in imitation  of the "Demo­ critus  Junior" of Robert  Burton,  whose Anatomy of Melancholy  had  appeared  five years earlier.
The  Golden  Fleece opens with a dialogue on the question  how best to employ
the muses in the service of Newfoundland, for which Vaughan, with a character­ istic concern  for literary  tradition,  cites Plato's  Republic  and  More's  Utopia  as his  precedents.  The participants are  Vaughan  himself,  the  courtier  William Elveston,  and  Sir  William  Alexander,  the  proprietor  of Nova  Scotia,  who had written  a colonizing  tract,  An  Encouragement  to Colonies  ( 1624). Elveston and Alexander  caution  Vaughan  that  "unlesse a Booke containe light matters  as well as serious, it cannot  flourish nor live  jovially, but like leaden Saturne  stand  still in  the  stall,"  and  they recommend  some surprising  models for  his discourse on Newfoundland: "Excellent  in this Art  of Cookerie  were those Spaniards,  which wrot  the  life of Guzman  the  Rogue,  and  the  Adventures  of Don  Quixot  de la Mancha"   (l, IO-II ). Following their  counsel,  Vaughan devises what  he terms "a  Poeticall stile not too much  degenerating  from  the Evangelicall gravitie"  (I,  I 3). His fiction  for  the  remainder  of the  book  (which  owes more  to Boccalini than  to Cervantes) is a court or assizes presided over by Apollo, before whom a
number  of causes are tried and  various witnesses summoned.  With  a  digressive­
ness worthy  of Burton,  Vaughan  deals at length  with  the condition  of England


IO

FROM  THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



in general  and  religious issues in particular,  introducing  as his witnesses a curious assortment  of  figures,  Democritus Junior,  John  Florio,  and  the  inexplicably knighted Sir Geoffrey Chaucer,  among others."
Although  the tendency of the whole is to suggest that  Newfoundland  may pro­
vide the cure  to all that  ails England,  it is only in the last third  of The Golden Fleece  that  Vaughan comes to the subject  of the island  itself. There  he makes Apollo deliver  a verdict  in favour  of its colonization, following the testimony of a  number  of explorers  and  colonizers, including  Mason,  John  and  Humphrey Slaney  (officials of the  London  and  Bristol company), and  Sir Thomas  Button (who had sailed into Hudson's  Bay in quest of the Northwest Passage).  Vaughan no  doubt  derives the information  which he attributes  to them  partly  from  con­ versations and  partly  from  written sources. The  comment  which he gives Mason is clearly taken from the Briefe  Discourse. It is likely, indeed, that he had the best of  reasons  for  calling  on  the  evidence  of  persons other  than  himself.  He  was
credited  later  in  the seventeenth  century  by Anthony  a Wood with  residence in
Newfoundland,  and   more   recently by  D.  L. Thomas   in  The   Dictionary  of National  Biography  with   having  composed Cambrensium Caroleia   and  The Golden  Fleece there.12  But, although  the former work is described on its title page as "Reportata a Colchide  Cambriola" and the latter on its as "Transported from Cambrioll  Colchos,"  Vaughan does not in his writings themselves make any clear claim  to first-hand  knowledge  of Newfoundland, as he surely would  have done if he had  possessed it. Hayman, whose word carries some authority,  indicates  in
1627-28  that  Vaughan had  not  yet visited Cambriol  Colchos, although  he  in­ tended  to do so. 13  He seems to have been kept in England  first by the complexity of his affairs  and  later  by illness, and  he probably never saw the land  which he advertised in his writings and into which he poured much of his fortune.
Hayman  knew the works of Vaughan, Whitbourne and Mason, and he was conscious of following to a degree in their footsteps. In  Quodlibets he commends Whitbourne's "wise,  well-pend  Booke"  (p.  33),   and  compliments  Mason.  He praises Vaughan (whom he may first have met at Oxford, where they were contemporaries during  the I 59o's)  both  as colonial proprietor  and  as author  of The  Golden Fleece, and Vaughan  provides a commendatory  verse for his volume. In an appeal  to Charles I to interest himself in the colonization of Newfoundland, which he wrote  about  the time of the publication of Quodlibets, "A  Proposition of Profitt and  Honor," 14  he indicates that  he would like to have produced  a sub­ stantial  prose treatise on Newfoundland  himself but was deterred  by the number already  in  print  and  by their  poor reception.  In  practice,  he makes  Quodlibets


II

FROM THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



serve the purpose which such a work might have done.
Hayman combines some of the practical experience of Mason  and Whitbourne with  the  addiction   to  the  muses of  Vaughan. His  interest  in  the  New  World probably  dates  from  his childhood.  Born in  I575  (at  least,  baptized  in August of that  year),  he was a native of Devon, a county which has long taken a leading part  in  the  English  fisheries in  Newfoundland   and  which  had  given  birth  to many  of the great  Elizabethan  sailors. To  one of the latter  he was probably  re­ lated,  for  his mother  appears  to  have  been  the  illegitimate  daughter   of  John  Raleigh, Sir Walter Raleigh's half-brother.  During  his childhood at Totnes, where his father  had  established  himself as a  merchant, Hayman  received by  way of inducement to adventure  on the seas an orange  and  a blessing from Sir  Francis Drake.  He  describes the episode in  an  artless poem in  Quodlibets  entitled  "Of  the  Great  and  Famous, ever to  bee honoured  Knight, Sir Francis Drake, and  of my little-little  selfe":


This man when I was little, I did meete, As he was walking up T otnes long Street, He ask'd me whose I was? I answer'd him. He ask'd me if his good friend were within? A faire red Orange in his hand he had,
He gave it me, whereof I was right glad,
Takes and kist me, and prayes, God blesse my boy:
Which I record with  comfort  to this day.


After  studies  at  Oxford  and  Lincoln's  Inn,  and  apparently a brief period  at the University of Poitiers, he married inI 604 the daughter of a prominent  family of Bristol merchants.  As a result probably of this connection  and of a similar one established through  a sister's marriage,  he was some years later sent to Newfound­ land  as governor  of  the  colony of  Bristol-Hope,  which  was  planted by  Bristol interests  at Harbour Grace in  I6I7-I8. How soon he went out and  exactly how much  time he spent  there are both  uncertain,  and  little is known of his activities as governor, but he states in his "Proposition," which is dated no later thanI 628:  "In  this lland   [Newfoundland] at one tyme I Lived  fifteene Monethes  together, and  since  I  have  spent  allmost  every sommer  in  it."'5  By 1628  he was disap­ pointed  by the Bristol company's lack of support for the colony, and  he evidently did  not  return  to it  after  the  publication  of  Quodlibets. Instead,  he turned  his attention   to  the  establishment  of  a  settlement in  Guiana, an  enterprise  which

I2

FROM THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



may have cost him his life. The  time and manner of his death  have not been determined,  but  his will was proved on January 24, I632-33.





IN NEWFOUNDLAND, Hayman  tells us in his "Proposition," "haveing  onely had the overseeing others hard  Labour to distract  me, I had tyme to see, to confer,  to enquire,  to observe, and to discover ...."'6  No doubt  it was this leisure which gave him the opportunity  to compose Quodlibets, but the volume is the  belated  outcome  of literary  interests  which  had  developed  years earlier. They can be traced  back to his time at Oxford, where he seems to have made friendships  with  Robert   Burton  and  with  the  minor  poet  Charles  Fitzgeffrey, during   his  residence  at  Exeter  College from  I 590 to  I 596.'7   His  entrance  to Lincoln's  Inn,  in  October,   I5g6, brought  him  to  London  at  the finest moment of Elizabethan literary  achievement. He tells us in Quodlibets, "I knew the Court
well in the old Queenes  dayes"  ( p. 38),  and, according to Anthony  a Wood, he
was more dedicated  to poetry than  to the law:  he "studied  for a time the muni­ cipal Law,  but  his  Genie being well known to be poetical, fell into acquaintance with, and  received encouragement to proceed in his studies from, Mich. Drayton,  Ben.  johnson,   john  Owen   the  Epigrammatist, George  Wither  the  puritanical Satirist,  john Vicars of Ch. Ch. Hospital, &c. and at length writing several speci­ mens of his  wit, which  I  think  are quite lost, had, tho  phantastical, the general vogue of a poet."'8
In Quodlibets Hayman makes little allusion to the great drama  which was flourishing during  his time in London  (although there is nothing  to show that  he shared  the opinion  of Vaughan, who wrote at the height of Shakespeare's  career, "Stageplayes   are  the  very  mockery  of the  word of God,  and  the  toyes of our life") .'9   The   volume,  however,  includes  complimentary verse  to  Jonson   (as non-dramatic poet),  to  Drayton,  Donne,  and  a host of minor  contemporaries, including  Owen,  many of whose Latin epigrams Hayman  translates,  and Wither, who reciprocates  with  a commendatory  verse for Quodlibets. Hayman addresses "the Reverend  and divinely  witty, John  Dun,"  primarily as Dean of Saint  Paul's and preacher,  but shows also that he knows him as a poet:

As my John Owen Seneca did praise, So might I for you a like piller raise,
His Epigrams did nothing want but verse;

FROM THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



You can yours (if you list) that way rehearse: His were neat, fine, divine morality;
But yours, pure, faithfull, true Divinity.


His  verse to Drayton,  whom  he addresses more  familiarly  as "my right worthy friend," shows that  he has followed the  poet's  long career  since youth.  Feeling his own  age  upon  him, he  pays tribute  to  Drayton's undiminished   ability  dis­ played in the composition of The  Battle of  Agincourt  after  his sixtieth year:

When I was young, I did delight  your lines,
I have admyr'd  them since my judging times: Your younger muse plai'd many a dainty fit, And your old muse doth hold out stoutly yet.
Though my old muse durst passe through frost and snow, In warres your old muse dares her Colours shew.


As Hayman set about  writing  Quodlibets  his mind  evidently  dwelt much  on his earlier literary  associations and  on his long unfulfilled aspirations  as a poet.
In  the  full  title  of his volume,  Hayman   advertises  both  its contents  and  the
circumstance  of its composition in Newfoundland (which he preferred to call "Britaniola," as he makes sufficiently clear): "QUODLIBETS,/LATELY COME OVER/FROM  NEW   BRITANIOLA,/OLD NEWFOUND-LAND./ Epigrams   and  other small   parcels,  both/M orall and  Divine./The first  foure Bookes being  the  Authors  owne:  the/rest translated  out  of that  Excellent  Epi­ grammatist,/Mr. fohn Owen, and  other  rare authors./With two Epistles of  that excellently wittie Doctor,/Francis  Rablais:  Translated out of his French  at large./ All  of  them/Composed  and   done  at  Harbour-Grace in/Britaniola, anciently called Newfound-Land./By R. H./Sometimes Govemour of the Plantation there."  In  addition  to  the  translations  from  Owen,  Rabelais,  and  a  few other  authors, Quodlibets   contains  some three  hundred   and  fifty  "Epigrams and  other  small parcels,"  many  of them  being no more than  a  couplet  in length.  Most have  as their  subject  general  reflections, morality, and satire,  following themes long con­ ventional in the epigram,  but a number  have special reference to Newfoundland, and in these the kinship of Hayman's work with that  of Mason, Whitboume, and Vaughan appears.
Hayman writes, like his contemporaries,  as a propagandist of the colonization of Newfoundland, and  all their arguments  recur in Quodlibets. He is conscious, however,  that  by the time  of his work  the  earliest  colonizers had  already  been

FROM THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



disappointed in  their   high  hopes.  In  a  verse  which  summarizes all  the  motives behind   the   endeavours  to  establish   settlements,  he  reproves   the   London and Bristol company for failing  to support its colony:

What ayme you at in your Plantation?
Sought you the Honour  of our Nat ion?
Or did you hope to raise your owne renowne?
Or else to adde a Kingdome to a Crowne? Or Christs  true Doctrine  for to propagate? Or drawe Salvages to a blessed state?
Or our o're peopled Kingdome to relieve?
Or shew poore men  where  they may richly live?
Or poore mens children godly to maintaine?
Or aym'd  you at your owne sweete  private  gaine?
All these you had atchiv'd  before this day, And all these you have balk't by your delay.

Similarly, he urges  Falkland, Vaughan, and  Willoughby to persist in their  efforts despite  setbacks which   they  have  received,  and  holds  up  Lord  Baltimore as the good  example of a colonial  proprietor who has actually  settled  in Newfoundland. He  entreats Oxford and  Cambridge to  "send  forth  your  Sannes unto  our  New Plantation" in order  to spread  the gospel  ( p. 38), praises  the  Reverend Erasmus Sturton who  had  already ministered there,  and,  in a verse dedicated particularly to "Mistris Mason, wife  to  Captaine Mason,  who  lived  there  divers  yeeres,"  he attempts to persuade women  of the joys of life in the new land:

Sweet  Creatures, did you truely understand
The  pleasant  life you'd live in Newfound-land,
You would with teares desire to be brought thither: I wish you, when you goe, faire wind, faire weather: For if you with the passage can dispence,
When you are there, I know you'll ne'r come thence.

In  his zeal to overcome the  current decline in interest, he urges the merits of Newfoundland even  upon  Henrietta Maria, asking her to make  herself a "second Isabell"    (p.   51), while  in  the  prefatory epistle  he  makes  implicitly a  similar attempt to gain  Charles' support, as he does more  directly  in  his "Proposition".
Concerning his  experience in  Newfoundland and  the  conditions of  life there Hayman  provides   disappointingly little  detail,   usually  contenting  himself  with general  assertions  of the  suitability of the  island  for settlement. He  is anxious,  as Mason  and  Whitbourne had  been, to demonstrate that  the climate is quite  toler-

FROM THESE  UNCOUTH SHORES



able  for  Englishmen, and   he  argues  that   it  compares favourably with  that   of England itself, in  a verse addressed  "To a worthy Friend, who  often  objects  the coldnesse of the Winter in Newfound-Land":

You say that you would live in Newfound-land, Did not this one thing your conceit  withstand; You feare the Winters cold, sharp, piercing ayre. They love it best, that have once wintered  there.
Winter is there, short, wholesome, constant,  deare,
Not thicke, unwholesome, shuffling, as 'tis here.

He  draws  a  similar   contrast  between  the  healthfulness of  the  new  country and the  disease-ridden Old  World  (addressing his lines this time "To the  right  worthy Mistres, Anne  Vaughan, wife to Doctor Vaughan, who  hath  an honourable desire to live in that  Land") :

Those that live here, how young, or old soever, Were never vext with Cough, nor Aguish Feaver, Nor ever was the Plague, nor small Pox heere; The  Aire is so salubrious, constant,  deere:
Yet scurvy Death stalks heere with theevish pace,
Knocks one downe here, two in an other place.

The  punning allusion  to scurvy, which  somewhat weakens  Hayman's case, is sufficiently  accounted for, perhaps, by a verse on  Newfoundland diet,  written for a friend  in Bristol:

You askt me once, What here was our chiefe dish? In Winter, Fowle, in Summer choyce of Fish.
But wee should need good Stomackes, you may thinke, To eate such kind of things which with you stinke,
As Ravens, Crowes, Kytes, Otters, Foxes, Beares,
Dogs, Cats, and Soyles, Eaglets, Hawks, Hounds, & Hares:
Yet we have Partriges, and store of Deare, And that  (I thinke)  with you is pretty cheere. Yet let me tell you, Sir, what I love best,
Its a Poore- fohn thats deane, and  neatly drest:
There's  not a meat found in the Land, or Seas, Can Stomacks better please, or lesse displease, It is a fish of profit, and of pleasure,
Ile write more of it, when I have more leisure: There  and much more are here the ancient  store: Since we came hither, we have added  more. o

FROM THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



Despite  the  eulogy  of the  "Poore-John" (or  cod), the  picture which  emerges  of Newfoundland is scarcely  that  of an  earthly  paradise. Hayman is both  too naive and   too  honest   to  be  a  very  effective  propagandist, as  the  rather  unflattering imagery  which  he  applies  to  the virgin  land  in the following  lines illustrates:

'Tis said, wise Socrates look'd like an Asse; Yet he with wondrous sapience filled was;
So though our Newfound-Land looke wild, salvage,
She hath much wealth penn'd  in her rustie Cage. So have I seene a leane-cheekes, bare, and ragged, Who of his private thousands could have bragged. Indeed  she now lookes rude, untowardly;
She must be decked with neat husbandry.
So have I seene a plaine swarth, sluttish ]one,
Looke pretty pert, and neat with good cloathes on.

Hayman displays  great  faith  in the  potentiality of Newfoundland, but  he recog­ nizes  that   his  vision  of  its  future is not  to  be  achieved  without labour,  and  he seldom  confuses the vision with the actuality.
Writing  with   the   enthusiasm  customary  in  commendatory   verses, George Wither professed  to see in  Quodlibets evidence  that  the  muses could  flourish  in a new world,  far from  their  traditional haunts:

Why doe so many fondly dote upon Parnassus, Tempe, and that  Helicon Renowned  by the Greeks? why praise they so The Muses  haunting Tiber, Thame, and Po; As if no other Hill, or Grove, or Spring,
Should yeeld such Raptures, as these forth did bring? Behold, e'en from these uncouth shores, among Unpeopled  woods, and hills, these straines were sung: And most of theirs they seeme to paralell,
Who boast to drinke of Aganippe's well. Despaire not therefore, you that love the Muses, If any Tyrant, you, or yours abuses:
For these will follow you, and make you mirth, Ev'n at the furthest  Angles of the Earth,
And those contentments which at home yee Ieese, They shall restore you among Beasts and Trese.

Wither's claim  anticipates many  that  were  to  be made for  the  literature of the
New  World   during the  following  centuries, but  unfortunately, as  the  examples

FROM THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



which  have  been  given sufficiently demonstrate, Hayman's verse is of  a  quite uninspired  kind, and  Quodlibets bears better testimony to his zeal for Newfound­ land  than  to his imaginative  power or literary  ability. There  is less evidence  in it than  in the prose of Mason and  Whitbourne of an imaginative response to the new  environment, no trace  of that  poetic skill  which,  according  to Wood,  won Hayman in his youth the encouragement  of Drayton  and Jonson, or of that  wit, so essential to the epigram,  which he was reputed  to possess in  his earlier  years, and  if  there  is humour  it  is of an  unconscious  variety.  He  makes it  apparent, indeed,  that  he  considers solidity of content  more  important  than  wit,  and  he tends to confuse the function of the epigram  with that  of the sermon, as the fol­ lowing lines imply:
Sermons and Epigrams have a like end, To improve, to reprove, and to amend:
Some passe without this use, 'cause they are witty; And so doe many Sermons, more's the pitty.
Concerned  with matter  more than manner,  he defends his work thus: Though my best lines no dainty things affords,
My  worst have in them some thing else than words.

Hayman is quite  aware, however, of the deficiencies of his verse, and  he does not  himself make so great  a claim for it as Wither.  Rather, he laments,  with a modesty which is surely more than merely conventional:

When I doe read others neate, dainty lines, I almost doe despaire of my rude rimes.

He recognizes in his address to "Master Benjamin Johnson,  Witty Epigrammatist, and  most  excellent   Poet"  that  his great  contemporary far  surpasses him  in  the genre in which he writes:

My Epigrams come after yours in time;
So doe they in conceipt, in forme, in Ryme.

The same modesty appears in his prefatory epistle to the king, where he describes his work as "some  unripe eares of come,  brought  by me from  the cold Country of Newfound-land," and himself as "dull  and  aged,"  walking "with  short tumes, leaning sometimes on others inventions." He states that he has attempted  only "to testifie that the Aire there is not so dull, or malevolent, but that if better wits were transplanted  thither,   neither  the  Summers  heat  would   dilate  them, nor  the Winters  cold benumme  them, but that  they might in full vigour flourish to good

18

FROM  THESE UNCOUTH SHORES



purpose," and   he  declares that  his  proof  is  "rather in  hopes of  others, than in any   actuated  performance of  mine  owne"  ( sigs.  A2-A2 v) .  His  own   verse  sug­ gests  that the   muses   were   no  more   easily  persuaded that  the   climate of   New­ foundland  was  salubrious than the  potential settlers to whom he  addressed him­ self,  but  perhaps Quodlibets  is  best   regarded as  a  declaration  of  faith in  the  literary destiny of the  new  land or as a challenge to the  future. Hayman's humility gives way  to pride when he sees himself  as the earliest in a long succession of poets,  which he believes will include those far greater than himself.


NOTES

' Quodlibets has  received  one  recognition from  a Canadian literary historian: It IS the  earliest  volume  catalogued by R. E. Watters in his A Check  List  of Canadian Literature and Background Materials, r62B-1950  (Toronto, I 959).
2    In  quotations from  the  work  of Hayman, Mason,  Whitbourne and  Vaughan the use of "u", "v", "i",  and  "j" has  been modernized, but  otherwise the  spelling  and punctuation  of  the   originals  have   been  retained.  References given  in  brackets are  to  the  first  editions, all  published   in  London   except   Mason's A  Briefe  Dis­ course, which  bears  an Edinburgh imprint.
3   The first book published about  Newfoundland appears to be Sir George  Peckham's A  True  Reporte, of the  Late  Discoveries,  and  Possession ... of the  New-found Landes    ( I583), which   relates   to  Sir  Humphrey Gilbert's voyage.  Several   early accounts of Newfoundland were included by Hakluyt in his Principal  Navigations
( I589)  and  by Purchas in Purchas his Pilgrimage  ( r625).
4   For  accounts of  these  early  colonies  see D.  W.  Prowse,  A  History  of  Newfound­
land   (I 896) ;  A.  P.  Newton, "Newfoundland, to  I 783,"  The  Cambridge History of  the  British  Empire, ed.   J. H.  Rose  et al., VI  (Cambridge, I93o),  II9-45, and J. D.  Rogers,  A  Historical  Geography of Newfoundland (Oxford, 1931).
5   In   fact,   however,  the  early   settlements met  with  considerable opposition from fishermen   based  on  the  West  Country of England, who  regarded them,  not  with­ out  some  cause,  as  attempts to  monopolize  the  trade. See  R.  G. Lounsbury, The British  Fishery at Newfoundland (New Haven, I934), pp.  I9-54·
6   A Discourse  and Discovery  (I622), sig. R3v,  pp. 55-56.
7   See C.  W.  Tuttle and  J. W.  Dean's Captain fohn  Mason, The  Founder  of New Hampshire  (Boston, I887),  which  includes  a  reprint of   A  Briefe   Discourse (pp.  I43-58).
8  See  the  autobiographical preface  of  A  Discourse  and  Discovery, sigs. C-0{v, and cf.  the  article on  Whitbourne by  E.  I. Carlyle  in  The  Dictionary of  National Biography, LXI  ( I9oo), 23-24.
9   The N ewlanders Cure   ( 163o), sig. A6V. The  "Epistle Dedicatory" of this volume contains some autobiographical  passages.
10  The Newlanders Cure, sig. A5v.
" This   Chaucer  reference appears to  have  been  overlooked   by Caroline Spurgeon in  her  Five  Hundred Years  of Chaucer Criticism and  Allusion, but  the  poet's  role

FROM THESE  UNCOUTH SHORES



in Vaughan's work is the one which she shows was commonly assigned to him in the  earlier  seventeenth  century,  that  of Protestant reformer  and  supposed  author of The  Plowman's Tale. See The  Golden Fleece, I, 110-31.
· See
184-85.
13 See  Hayman's  Quodlibets,  pp.  32-33,   and   his  "A   Proposition  of  Profitt  and Honor," to which  reference is made below. Cf. Vaughan's The  Newlanders  Cure, sigs. A5-A8.
14   Remaining long  in  manuscript, this  work  was  published  for  the  first  time  by G. C. Moore Smith in his "Robert  Hayman  and  the Plantation of Newfoundland, The   English  Historical  Review,  XXXIII  (1918), pp.  21-36. Moore  Smith  pro­ vides also some important biographical  information, supplementing and  correct­ ing  the  lives of Hayman  by Wood in  Athenae  Oxoniensis  (I,  494)  and  by T.  E. Jacob  in  The   Dictionary  of National  Biography   (XXV   [1891],  297-98, and  I have  drawn  upon  his work in the  two paragraphs below for  details of Hayman's birth, parentage,  and Bristol connections.
•s Ed.  Moore Smith,  EHR, XXXIII, 31. Moore Smith seems to establish that Bristol Hope was distinct from the older Guy's colony, not a part of it, as historians of Newfoundland have usually assumed.
16  Loc. cit.
17   See Quodlibets, pp. 18, 43·
rB   Athenae  Oxoniensis, I, 494·
19   The  Golden Grove ( 16oo), sig. K.
o In  a marginal  note Hayman  gives a little  reassurance  to his readers,  explaining: "Dogs and  Cats are fishes so call'd, and Hounds  a kind of Fowle." "These" should probably  be read for "There" in the penultimate line of the verse. Quodlibets  is a carelessly printed  volume.










20



MONTREAL  POETS
OF THE FORTIES





H)nne Francis







DURING THE  WAR YEARs  Stanley  Street  was the  centre of Montreal's  "little  bohemia". In the section of Stanley between Sherbrooke and
St.  Catherine Streets  stood  a  row of disreputable  old  tenements.  Cheap  rooms, blind  pigs, private  gambling  clubs, bookies and  numerous  other  nefarious enter­ prises thrived  here.  It  used to be said  that  if you pushed  the  right  buzzer  and knew  the  password  you could  get anything  illegal that  you wanted  at any time of day  or  night  in  that  block. Shuttered  and  draped,  the  upper  windows gave away  no  secrets.  At  street  level shoe shine  parlours,  cheap  restaurants, Jewish tailors  and  Chinese  laundries  crowded  together,  each  blistering  with  bilingual signs. And  up  and  down  the  sidewalk, catching  soldiers and  tourists  like flies, strolled  the girls, ignoring  the complaints of the  Y.M.C.A.  authorities  across the street.  Painters  and  writers  were to be found  spotted  through  the tenements,  in attics,  in  basements  and  in  the  back  rooms  of  shops. The  rent  was cheap,  the location   central,   the  bookstores,  art  galleries  and  universities  within   walking distance.
This  setting  provided  the backdrop  for the activities of the young writers and
artists  later  called  the  "First   Statement   Group". The   notorious  location  lent atmosphere  to the public image of these writers as "Montreal's Bohemians"; and talent  and  poverty,  brash  youthfulness, vociferous belligerence,  their  dishevelled personal appearance and irregular living habits gave the description further credibility.
The  central  figure, if not the leader, of the "First  Statement Group" was John
Sutherland. John  came  to Montreal  from Saint  John,  New Brunswick, in  1941


21

MONTREAL POETS



to attend  McGill University after a three year bout  with tuberculosis. During  his illness he had  spent  much  time reading, writing  poems, and  corresponding  with writers and editors of literary magazines both in Canada and abroad.  By the time he  arrived  in  Montreal,   he  was  well  acquainted with  the  Canadian  literary scene and with modem American and British poetry. Shortly after arriving, he determined  to launch  a little magazine of his own and to this end he engaged the help  of several  undergraduates including  R.  G.  Simpson  and  Mary  Margaret Miller, and Audrey Aikman who later became  his wife. Together, in  1942, these few friends turned  out the first six or seven issues of an eight-paged  mimeographed sheet which they named First Statement.
Sutherland's own  talent  lay not in  creative  writing   (though  he wrote  poems and  sketches)  but  rather  in editorializing  and  criticism.  He  had  a mission -to set  Canadian  writing  on  the  right  track-to  provide an  outlet for  young talent  whose  work  was fresh,  close to experience  and  above  all free  from  any kind  of  colonialism.  He  inspired  in  his colleagues  a  firm  belief that  no  other magazine  in Canada was thus oriented and  their  missionary zeal supported  them throughout the first arduous  year. But John  soon found  that  he had no time left for  classes at  McGill;  and  unlike  most "little  mag"  editors,  he  put  the  "little mag"  first. He  abandoned his formal  studies  within  the  year and  concentrated his whole effort on the magazine. He was to spend  the remainder  of his life-a short  fifteen  years-at  this chosen task and  related  publishing  ventures.
It is doubtful,  however, despite such zeal and  dedication, that  he and  his ori­
ginal  editorial  board  could  have  sustained  their  intentions  for  longer  than  the usual brief lifetime of a "little  mag"  had not a hat-check  girl told a friend about her brother's  venture  into publishing. The  hat-check  girl was John's  sister, Betty; the friend was the sister-in-law of Irving Layton.
Layton and his friend Louis Dudek had been writing and swapping ideas about poetry  for  a  year  or  two. They  had  each  had  poems  published  in  the  McGill Daily  and  were seeking broader  outlets. On  a night  that  must be memorable  for both,  they  walked  together  through  the  darkness  over  the  long  and  beautiful Jacques   Cartier   bridge  which  stretches  from  east  end  Montreal   across the  St. Lawrence  to  the  South  Shore. The  two young  men  talked  poetry  all the  way, excited  and  tense, as if there might not be a next  time soon enough.  Irving  was in uniform,  billeted, for the time being, on the South Shore at Longueuil. Shortly after  this, he was sent to Brockville and while there,  heard  from his sister-in-law about  the new magazine  in Montreal.  The  first poems of Layton's  appearing in First  Statement  were  sent  from  Brockville and  appear   in  the  gth  issue. Soon

22

MONTREAL POETS



after, on a trip  to Montreal, Irving met Betty Sutherland whom he later married. And,  upon  Layton's  discharge from the army, he and  Louis Dudek  joined forces with John  Sutherland in the editing of First Statement magazine.
These  three,  Sutherland, Layton  and  Dudek, different  as they were in many ways, formed  the  hard  core  of the  "First  Statement  Group". They  held  some ideas in common  about  poetry in Canada  and  they dedicated  themselves to pro­ moting  these views and  their  own talents in  the pages of their  magazine. They soon  were  publishing  contributions  from such  important  newcomers  as  Miriam Waddington and  Raymond  Souster. By 1943, the end of their first year of  publi­ cation,  First Statement had attracted  writers from coast to coast and was making a distinctive  contribution to modem  poetry in Canada. By that  time also, it had been threatened with a libel suit, attacked for its extreme views and violent verse, and  become inextricably  entangled  with a rival Montreal magazine.
This  rivalry  was  important. The  tension set  up  between  the  two  magazines generated  much  of the  poetic activity that  went on in  Montreal  and  made  the
'Forties Canada's most exciting literary decade.






E  MAGAZINE,  of course, was Preview. And  if I  were a scene-shifter  now,  I would  replace the Stanley Street  backdrop  with a view of the  McGill  gates,  the  campus  and  stately buildings, with  a shot of swank  Sher­ brooke Street,  perhaps,  and  then  one of the spacious lawns and  lovely  homes of Westmount.   This   would  suggest  the  contrast  in  the  backgrounds of   the  two magazines,  but  it  wouldn't be  exactly  right.  To  get  closer  to  the  truth, there should  be a shot, also, of rooms over a garage  on a squalid  side street  below St. Catherine   where  Preview  was conceived. Here, shedding  their  academic  gowns along with  many  of their  middle class conventions, the Preview  editors gathered  around  Patrick  Anderson,  proletarian  by choice, Canadian by  desire,  and  poet aflame with purpose.
Out   of  this  unlikely  pastiche  of settings,  the  polished,  avant-garde  Preview
emerged,  intermittently, over a period of five years, offering Canadian readers  a sophisticated  combination   of modem  poetry,  party  politics and  editorial  advice as to how we might shake off our colonial impotence and lethargy  and claim our place in the cosmopolitan sun.
Preview  was a year older than  First Statement. From  its beginning it had had


23

MONTREAL POETS



a confident, competent air about it, lacking the rawness and naivete of the typical "little  mag".  It  shared  with Contemporary Verse, its Western  counterpart, a conscious commitment  to modern  poetry but it had a distinguished,  sophisticated
tone  of its own. It  cultivated  what  A. J. M. Smith  was to call  (and  what  John
Sutherland was to denounce)  the Cosmopolitan Tradition. It had, too, an impres­
sive roster of contributors.  Names like Frank  Scott,  Neufville Shaw,  Bruce  Rud­ dick, P. K. Page, and later, A. J. M. Smith and A.M. Klein give some notion of the  power  and  prestige that  Preview  commanded. These  writers  together  with
Anderson  and  some few others became known  as the "Preview  Group".
Despite  the  name,  most of the  "Preview  Group" were  not  newcomers  to the Canadian literary  scene. Many  of them  had  already,  by 1941, gained  consider­ able  recognition.  As far  back  as  1925,  A.  ].  M.  Smith  and  Frank  Scott  had founded  the McGill Fortnightly Review which, though  it lasted a bare two years, had devoted itself to introducing  Canadian readers to the "new poetry". In  1936, the work of the "Montreal Poets"  (Scott, Smith,  Kennedy  and Klein)  was pub­
lished  together  with  poems by E. J. Pratt,  L. A. Mackay  and  Robert  Finch  in
the  refreshing  anthology  New   Provinces.  Smith  was  well known,  also,  by the Forties, as a critic who had been calling for maturity and modernism in Canadian poetry for over a decade. And most of the other  poets on the Preview  roster had published frequently  in such magazines as Poetry  Chicago, Canadian Forum  and Queen's Quarterly.
Apart  from  their  achievements in poetry,  the  Preview  poets were older, some by  half  a  generation,  than  most of  the  First  Statement  writers.  Most  of them were well-educated,  widely read, well-travelled;  and  by the early Forties, several of them  were comfortably  established professionally in the fields of teaching,  law and  medicine. They  had status in the community,  even dignity as public figures. Their  accomplishments,  age,  prestige, sophistication  and  talent  all combined  to present an irresistible target for the raw, impecunious  parvenus  of Stanley Street.
It was the clear intention  of the "First Statement Group", from the beginning, to challenge  Preview  and all it stood for. Indeed, it is claimed  by some that  First Statement  magazine  was conceived  on  the  day  that  Preview   rejected  a  poem submitted   by John  Sutherland. Be that  as it  may,  the  compulsion  to challenge Preview  had  deeper  causes and was much  more complex than  it first appeared.
The  Preview  elders in many  cases represented  father  images. Several of them
were  McGill  professors. Some  members  of  the  "First  Statement Group" had literally gone to school to them. Irving Layton  regarded  A. M. Klein as a beloved mentor-and Dudek's  respect for Scott was deep and  lasting. Individually, like

24

MONTREAL POETS



indulgent  fathers,  members  of the "Preview  Group"  showed a kindly interest in
First Statement and gave encouragement, advice and support  on many occasions.
Yet these overtures  of friendship  had an air of condescension. First  Statement writers  could  not  rid  themselves of the  belief that  they  were  being  patronized, that  their  Preview  elders did  not really take them seriously. Furthermore, while awed  by  Preview's sophistication,  First  Statement  people  were suspicious of it. They  detected  an  artificiality,  an  effete quality,  in  Preview  verse which  struck them  as precious,  like an  exotic forced  growth,  lacking  indigenous  roots. With such convictions,  they became  acutely conscious of their own lack of polish; but such  awareness  only strengthened their compulsion to challenge. They  set out to sharpen  the distinctions  between themselves and  Preview  wherever  possible. Per­ haps  they  even  exaggerated  their  gaucheries  both  personal  and  literary  by  way of  contrast,   turning   their  lack  of sophistication  into  virtues  of  simplicity  and directness.  Certainly   they  were  driven  to  clarify  and   justify  their own  critical views and  poetic practice  to a degree which they might not have attempted, had Preview  not existed.
The pages of First Statement reverberate for four years with attacks on and denouncements of  Preview's  position.  But,  reading  the  pages  of  Preview,  one could not have guessed it. For Preview  was otherwise preoccupied. Editor Anderson,  writing  in  the  February,  1943, issue, declared  "Two  events  of great importance to the writer have occurred in recent weeks. One is the Russian offen­ sive, the  other  the  conference  at  Casablanca  . . ."  and,  he claimed,  "Our task is clear:  not only to help in the winning of the war by our literary work ... but also to supply something of the personal, the graceful and the heroic to the atmos­ phere  of this  half-empty  Dominion."  The  rude snorts from  Stanley  Street  could not  have  reached  his ears  or  if they  did  he would  have  shrugged  them  off as further  evidence to support  his point.
They  did  not,  of course,  meet  each  other  with daggers  in the street.  On  the
contrary,  more  than  cordial  relations  were  maintained,  on  the surface  at  least; and  in  several  instances  lasting  friendships  cut  across these lines of contention. The  two groups  occasionally  joined forces to entertain  a literary figure from out of town or from abroad.  They sometimes held readings in each other's homes­ sometimes  in  the  large  private  houses of Preview  supporters,  sometimes  in  the humbler  rented  rooms and small apartments of First Statement  people.
But  in  the  pages  of  First  Statement magazine,  the  attack  went  on.  Looking back almost twenty years, it is difficult to sort out the real issues from the imagined ones. They  were confused  even then  perhaps  and  certainly  they were a mixture

25

MONTREAL POETS



of personal, literary, social and  political.
Both  groups,  for  instance,  were  politically  conscious.  The Preview  poets  were more  doctrinaire, and  more  markedly committed to the  Left  in  varying  degrees. Many of  them   displayed  strong  sympathies with  a  continental  communism of the  Auden-Spender-MacNeice variety.  Anderson's orientation was for a time thoroughly Marxist; and  Scott  was  committed to  the  less revolutionary  socialist ideals  of  the  C.C.F.  Much  of the  poetry  that  appeared in  Preview  had  a clear political intention and  a strong  Leftist flavour.
First Statement writers objected not so much  to the political  ideas as to the subservience of  poetry  to  politics.  Yet  their  confusion  on  this  point  is illustrated by the following  buck-shot  blast from  Dudek-

First Statement does not  deny  that  poetry  may express matters  which  are  not in  themselves  essentially poetry:  matters  geographical,   sociological, etc.  It  even encourages  literature  which will reflect the atmosphere  and  currents  of Canadian life.... But it underlines  the "reacting  honestly ... first hand", as the chief  con­ cern of the poet.

and, he  claims  that  much  modem poetry   (i.e.,  especially  the  Preview  brand) rs suffering from  the following corruptions-

( r)  a clever aptitude for exploiting  the unreal  universe of language; ( 2)  a pedan­ tic absorption  in the second-hand  universe of books, literature and erudition; and (3)   a  falsified  devotion  to  a  special  universe  of  ideas,  chiefly  sociological  and political ones ...
By way of correctives, First Statement  can  suggest three  slogans for  the  poet's
masthead.  No polyglot displays. No poetry about  poets and  poetry. No high party politics.

Dudek was speaking  for the editorial board  but  it should  be noted  that  in these days Sutherland showed  little interest  in politics,  and  Dudek's own  political  views were  mild.  It was  Layton  who  held  the  most  doctrinaire socialist  views among First Statement writers.
"No polyglot   displays.  No  poetry   about  poets." These   grim  injunctions are directed against  two interrelated characteristics of Preview  poets-their technical virtuosity and  their  devotion  to the British  modems. Much of their  poetry  was in the  tradition of  Eliot,  or  after  the  manner of  Sitwell,  of Auden, and  of  Dylan Thomas. Preview  poets excelled in tightly-structured metaphysical exercises, in sophisticated, witty satiric  pieces of social  comment, in  highly  metaphoric poems rich   in  Marxist  and   Freudian allusions.  The cold,  intricate  brilliance of  their

MONTREAL POETS



intellectual  gymnastics  and  verbal  legerdemain  dazzled,  awed  and  exasperated First  Statement  people.  In  their  eyes, it  was "precious",  artificial.  Moreover,  it was imported; it was English. Which is not to say that Preview  poets did not write of  Canadian subjects,  or  use Canadian images. On  the  contrary,  some of their most successful works do just this. But the manner  was English and their masters were the modern British poets.
This  is  partly  explained   by  the  fact  that  several  members  of  the  "Preview Group" had  been educated  in  England  or had  come to Canada  comparatively recently and  were quite  naturally  steeped in modern British poetry;  while others, like Smith,  had long maintained a predilection for Eliotian,  metaphysical  poetry, terse, elliptical, intellectual,  literary.
By contrast,  First  Statement poets prided  themselves on  writing  a masculine, virile  "poetry  of experience" -their own experience. They  would  not  write of the  phoenix  and  the  hyacinth  but of Berri Street and  De Bullion. Scorning  the artifice  of metaphor and  symbol, they  preferred  to shout  huzzahs  and  hurl  in­ sults, to fight, spit, sweat,  urinate  and make love in their  poems, and  did so in a deliberate  defiance  of  Preview. They  eschewed all  abstractions  and  swore  that "words"  would  not  come  between  their  poetry and  life. "Celebration, not  cere­ bration"  as Layton was later to phrase it.
They  chose, as models, not the British poets, but the Americans,  and sang the
praises  of  Whitman,  Masters,  Frost,  Sandburg and  Hart   Crane,   writers  who "reacted  honestly ... first hand". In a poem "On  a bridge at Point St. Charles" (a near-slum district in Montreal) Dudek writes

Well,  well -Venice ... and  The Bridge of Sighs ... Shall  I batten on the moors
Of a foreign  culture? Hah!
Here's the true germ
Of a European renascence! ...

The   real  bull's-eye  of  the  Preview   target,  as  First  Statement saw  it-was Patrick  Anderson.  Whatever  degree of application  there  was, in  the  First  State­ ment  attacks,  to other  members  of the Preview  roster, it was certainly Anderson who was in the most direct line of fire.
Audenesque  in  appearance  and  mannerisms,  Anderson  also  owed  much  to Auden  in terms of poetic techniques and in the use he made of poetry to further socialistic ideals.  His  verbal  facility  and  metaphoric  pyrotechnics  derived  more from  Dylan  Thomas. If this were all, he would not  have  meant  much  more to

MONTREAL POETS



us than  a transplanted Englishman of considerable poetic  talent and  sophisticated eccentricity.
But  the  fact  is,  that  Anderson   fell in  love  with  Canada, and  the  heat  of  his
passion  glowed  in  his poetry.  Not  before,  and  not  since,  has  he  written as  bril­ liantly   as  he  did  during his sojourn  here.  "Fell in  love"  is not  quite  the  term.  Canada fascinated him and  if he loved it, he also feared  it. He  described it as "a  great, white,  empty  prison"  and  saw it as a beautiful monstrous challenge which  he must  somehow  meet. He felt towards  the  end  that  he had  failed,  that Canada had  somehow   won.  His  leave-taking was  more  like  a  baffled  retreat  and  he  re­ tained   the  hope  that  he  would  return  some  day  to  the  land   that  he  wanted to call his own.
But  while  he was here the  physical aspects  of this country appealed to his ima­
gination. Native-born readers  of his poems  are  delighted and  amazed in turn  as they  encounter in Anderson's imagery  his vivid  treatment of aspects  of Canada's physical  environment which  we take  for  granted. Snow  and  ice,  Mount Royal, skiers,  skating and   hockey,  our  great  empty  spaces,  our  lakes,  have  never  been so brilliantly-exploited.
Exploited is the word. Anderson was not a nature poet. His Montreal mountain
is a political  symbol; snow is our chloroform and  ice our state  of social amesthesia;
skiers are  capitalist entrepreneurs, or sometimes  Leftist  propagandists.
Anderson's influence  on the Preview  poets is clear.  He  acted, as is well known, like a catalyst among them.  Under his influence, both  personal and  literary, they were  stirred   to  experiment. Their   poetry  takes  on  a new  depth of insight,  new breadth of subject, a new intricacy  of construction and  new verbal  textures.
Though  Anderson himself  and   P.  K. Page  supplied  the  bulk  of  the  poetry
appearing  in   Preview,   the  remainder  of  the   "Preview Group" contributed a creditable number of very good  poems, indeed. To  First Statement eyes, Preview presented a  veritable galaxy  of accomplished writers. They  were  more  than  im­ pressed;  they  were  also  influenced   more  than   they  would   admit at  the  time.  Irving Layton had  confided  recently-

Not  that  we wanted  to be like them but we wanted  to be as good as they were in our  own  way.  It made  us tougher  than  we  would  have  been  and  provoked  us into  working  harder  than  ever. I secretly read  and  studied  Anderson's  style and went  back  beyond it to his sources and  models and  I gained  a great  deal for  my­ self in the process.

But  at the  time, frustration and  envy too often  reduced First Statement attacks

MONTREAL POETS



to the  personal  level. In  Vol.  I, No. I 9, Sutherland  independently  goes straight for  the  bull's-eye.  In  a  lengthy  criticism  of  Anderson's  poems,  he  ignores  the political  dimension   and  concentrates  on  an  analysis of  Anderson's  images  of Freudian   terms  which  make  libellous suggestions about  Anderson's  private  life. It was  an  illuminating study  at  many  points,  but  intemperate and  callous. If Anderson  had  been dead, Sutherland might have got away with it. But Anderson was far from  dead.  First Statement  found itself threatened  with a libel suit;  and the  very  next  issue-a  delayed  publication -carries  a  front  page  retraction, made,  no  doubt,  grudgingly.  John  Sutherland was stubborn  enough,  but  First Statement  was not rich enough, to risk going to court.
By this  time,  as might  be expected,  the  paternal  interest  shown  by Preview
members  in  the  First  Statement   venture  had  cooled  considerably,  had  turned indeed into a wary watchfulness. These snapping puppies had sharp  teeth as well as loud  barks. Furthermore, they now had something  that  Preview did not have.
In  the  very same  issue that  bore  the retraction,  Sutherland  announced exul­ tantly:   "We  Go  To  Press." -"The  first printed  issues of First Statement will appear  within  a few weeks ... the new magazine will be issued as a monthly ... new features  will be added,  including  a  review of Canadian books and  literary magazines."






E           had  important  consequences. The  magazine  took on some dignity, attracted  new subscribers, and  new  contri­ butions,  some even from  Preview poets. Its  policy, however, remained  the same and  it  kept  its  favourite  set  of opponents  clearly in  view. But  apart  from  the magazine  itself  the  press was  used  to  begin  an  important  publishing  venture.  Early  in  I945 announcement was made of the first chapbook  in a  New  Writers Series to  be published  by First  Statement  Press. The  book was  Irving  Layton's  first published  volume  Here and Now, redolent even in its title of  his First State­ ment alliance.
But the choice of the second title for the series is a tribute  to John  Sutherland's devotion  to  literature. Patrick  Anderson's  A  Tent  For  April  was published  by First  Statement Press in  I946.  It  was followed, over  the  next  few  years, with Miriam  Waddington's Green  World, Raymond  Souster's When We  are Young, Anne  Wilkinson's  Counterpoint  to  Sleep,  Kay  Smith's  Footnote  to  the  Lord's

MONTREAL POETS



Prayer and  a second volume  by Layton,  Now  is the  Place. Only  now, looking back,  can  we appreciate  the  perspicacity and  courage  it  took to claim for these writers  a  public  hearing  at  a  time  when  no  commercial  publisher  would  take the risk.
One other book published by First Statement  Press has a significance of its own.
Other  Canadians,  subtitled  "An  Anthology of the New Poetry in Canada 1940-
46", is edited, with polemical introduction, by John Sutherland.
The  book is puzzling to students of the period who are not familiar with its background.  The  title, of course, is a defiant  reaction  to another  recently  pub­ lished anthology, A. J. M. Smith's The  Book of Canadian  Poetry. The poets that
Sutherland chose to represent are the younger  poets whom  Smith  overlooked or gave scant notice. Apart from a few new names, the seventeen poets in Other Canadians  fall quite readily into two groups-Preview and  First Statement. To this  degree  at  least,  Sutherland's acumen  as an  editor  and  publisher  overrode his partisan  interests. But he is quite clear, in Part  II  of his Introduction, about where his sympathies and hopes for the future  of Canadian poetry lie. With poets like  Layton,  Dudek  and  Souster  active,  "The future  in  this country  is already beginning to move."
What  is different  about  the  Introduction is Sutherland's championing of the cause  of  socialism-a socialism  which   will  be  truly national  as  opposed  to colonial  and  which  will be furthered  most effectively by the  "social realism"  of the poetry of "proletarian" poets like Dudek,  Layton  and Souster.
This  is a  new  note in Sutherland's criticism and  if it does not  ring true  it is
because Sutherland was not  a socialist. He  was at  this period  very closely  asso­ ciated  with  Irving  Layton  who was at  the  height  of his  Marxist  phase;  and  it seems likely that  Sutherland simply assumed the guise of a socialist as he  under­  stood  it, the  better  to badger  Bishop Smith.  Having  laid  aside the disguise very soon after  this, Sutherland was to look back on his Introduction  with increasing embarrassment. It is probably the one critical article which he sincerely regretted having  written  and  by 1950  he would  have  recalled  all  copies from  circulation  if he could have had his way.
John  Sutherland, in private  life, as a man,  as a brother,  husband,  friend,  was a  kind,  warm-hearted, rather  shy, soft-spoken  person.  In  appearance he might have  been  taken  for a  timid  accountant. As a member  of the literary  world  he made  quite  a  different  impression.  Not  an  accountant in  any  sense, his  book­ keeping  was  hopeless, he  never  made  any  money,  his accounts  were  never  in order  and  his files were in  a  perpetual  state  of confusion.  His soft-spoken mild

MONTREAL POETS



manner  was disarming  and  left one unprepared for the frequently  caustic import of his remarks.  When  you had  blinked  and  taken  a second look you discovered that  the set of his jaw was stubborn  and  his eyes mocking. What  could be taken for a blush of shyness was more often the flush of anger. He was hot-headed  and quick-tempered. He lived to argue  and  he gave no quarter. He had  an  astonish­ range  of profanity; he loved beer and  cigars and could be quite  a  wild man  at a party.
As an editor  and  publisher, he was courageous and dedicated  but also ruthless,
opinionated   and  high-handed. As a  critic he was perceptive  and  analytical  but too often  brutally  frank  and  intemperate. These very qualities,  which fitted him well as the  aggressive leader  of the "First  Statement  Group", incurred  the  ani­ mosity of  many  others,  and,  combined  with  certain  changes  that  took  place in his thinking, eventually alienated even his closest confreres.
It is well to keep John  Sutherland's personality in mind when trying  to under­ stand  the next significant development  in Montreal's literary world of the Forties. First Statement magazine,  in its printed  form, had appeared  for two years, from
1943  to 1945.  Preview, meanwhile,  was issued sporadically in mimeograph, but its  impetus  had  flagged  noticeably.  The  war  being  over,  political  issues which had   absorbed   Preview   editors  were  fading.  Patrick  Anderson's   influence  was dwindling,  the  initial  shock  of his techniques  having  been  absorbed.  But  most important, Preview   poets  were  increasingly  preoccupied  with  their  professions, and  with  publishing  projects  of their  own,  which  left  them  little  time  for  the magazine.  Smith had  published  News  of the Phoenix  and The Book  of Canadian Poetry  in  1943;  A.  M.  Klein,  Poems  and  The   Hitleriad  in  1944;  F. R.  Scott, Overture in 1945;  and  P. K.  Page, As Ten as Twenty in 1946.
In  view of all this, a merger of the two little magazines seemed most practical.
As the  Preview  people  were likely to state it "We  had  the  talent,  and  they had the press!" But it was a while before negotiations were concluded.  Neither little magazine  wishing to give up its identity,  a new title had  to be chosen. Northern Review was a neutral  enough name and it presented to the public a deceptive impression  of  unity.  One  would  not  have  guessed how  carefully  the  editorial board  was chosen to give equal  representation  to the same old constituencies  of First Statement and Preview.
This  equality,   however,  was  rendered  unreal  from  the  outset  by  two  signi­ ficant  facts-the  new  magazine  was  published  by First Statement Press  ( oper­ ating  now  as an  independent organization)  and  its managing  editor  was John  Sutherland.

MONTREAL POETS



Northern  Review  was an  ambitious project. It  ran  an  average of forty  pages, had  a  handsome format  and  carried   poems,  stories,  articles,  reviews  and  repro­ ductions, accompanied by  criticism  of  works  by  contemporary  painters.  Its  list of contributors was a catalogue of Canada's best talents and  during the ten years of  its  existence  it  won  a  reading audience that  no literary magazine  in  Canada had so far been able to command.
The first  issue appeared in January, 1946,  and  for  four  issues, thereafter,  de­ spite  stormy  editorial sessions, the  uneasy alliance of Preview and  First Statement factions  was  maintained. But  in  the  sixth   issue,  managing  editor  Sutherland shattered it.  In  defiance  of his editorial board, and  without  his  regional  editors' knowledge, John  Sutherland printed his own  review  of  Robert  Finch's Poems, winner of  the  Governor-General's Award   for  1946.  The  review  was  at  once  a withering and  bitter  denunciation of the  judges who gave the  award and  a harsh  criticism   of  Finch's work.  It should  be  remembered that  Robert Finch  was  an early  colleague of  members  of  the  "Preview Group" and  still commanded their respect   and   loyalty.  Thus   the  attack on  Finch,  combined  with  the  caustic,  in­  temperate tone  of  the  whole  review,  aroused  the ire  of  the  entire  Preview  bloc of Northern  Review's editorial board.
The very  next  issue of Northern  Review  carries  a drastically reduced editorial
roster and, on the last page, this notice:


Certain   changes  have taken  place in  the  editorial  board  of Northern  Review, effective from the last issue. The  following editors have resigned:  Neufville Shaw, Patrick  Anderson,  A. M.  Klein,  F. R.  Scott  and  A. J.  M.  Smith.  Two  regional editors, P. K. Page and Ralph  Gustafson, have also resigned ...
The  present editors are John Sutherland, R. G. Simpson, Mary Margaret Miller, John  Harrison,   Irving  Layton  and  Audrey  Aikman  . . . We intend  to carry  on Northern  Review  in its present form.

In  other  words,  by January 1948,  the original "Preview Group" had  virtually withdrawn from  the merger,  leaving Sutherland and  the "First Statement Group" in control of Northern  Review.



Lis WAS THE  CLIMAX of the  drama of poetry  in  Montreal in the  Forties. The  crisis over the Finch  issue accelerated the decline  of forces which

MONTREAL POETS



for seven or eight years had generated  the most exciting and prolific poetic activity in Canada's history. Within  two years, by 1950, the poets of both groups had dispersed,  taking  the  divergent  paths  which  private  circumstance  dictated.  For some,  like  Patrick  Anderson  and  P.  K.  Page,  this meant  leaving  Canada;  for others, poetic oblivion since they simply ceased to publish;  others, continuing  to write, were individually  to achieve considerable recognition  and  success.
Meanwhile  Northern  Review  continued  to appear  and  for a  year or two  re­
tained  the interest of a growing list of subscribers and contributors. But it became increasingly  the  reflection of the tastes, opinions and  radically  changing  ideas of one man.
About  1948,  a certain  souring  had  begun, in John  Sutherland's views, which was to spread  like a stain  through  all his thinking during  the next few years, transforming his hopes  for  the  future  of Canadian  letters  into  a complete  and bitter  disillusionment.  The   process was  gradual,  but  as early  as  1950  he  had turned  so far  away from  the  beliefs with which he had  begun his literary  career that  he had  alienated  even his First Statement  friends. Irving  Layton  was among the last to go.
These changes in the editor's  thinking are expressed, issue by issue, in Northern Review. In  Vol.  4,  No.  2, which  appeared  in  January '51,  Sutherland has an article  entitled  "The   Past  Decade  in  Canadian Poetry".  It is perhaps  the  best of his critical  essays; but  the  early Sutherland  is barely  recognizable  in it. The tone  is sombre,  almost  sad.  He  sums up  the  period  to  1947  and  then  remarks "How  suddenly it all changed! ... What  were the causes? Not Other  Canadians, or  my introduction to  it: it  went  deeper  than  that." He  explores some of the reasons for  the  decline  in  the late Forties, expresses his disappointment in what he considers the collapse of the movement, points to the new religious dimensions he senses in current  poetry and says, with astonishing humility-

I criticized  Mr.  Smith  ... [in  Other Canadians] ... for  his religious  emphasis  ... Well,  I take  it back  ... the  event  has shown  that  he was substantially right.

Later in the same essay he says:


It is generally  better   for  the  poet  to  accept   than  oppose  the  values  inherent in his  society  .  .  . and  for  the  Canadian poet  not  to  completely ignore  his  relation to  the  tradition of  poetry  in  Canada ... The  question  is whether the  poet  can find  a  new  point  of  stability  and  re-discover  the  basic  moral  and  religious  values of our society.

33

MONTREAL POETS



This  is a new Sutherland,  one so changed  as to baffle his closest friends. Rela­ tions  with  Irving  Layton, strained  for some years on several levels, were  at  this point broken off completely. It is significant that in this issue of Northern Review, Layton's  name does not appear  on the masthead.  Nor, in his otherwise balanced,  perceptive  review of the Forties and  predictions  for the Fifties, does Sutherland so much  as mention  Layton's  name -a  lamentable omission, to  say  the  least, in view of Layton's early connection and subsequent success.
The   ensuing  issues of  Northern   Review   turned   away  from  contemporary Canadian writing, from political radicalism,  from experimental modernism. The magazine  became  increasingly international, conservative,  traditional, as Suther­ land  the man  moved steadily towards  disillusionment, orthodoxy  and death.
The  mid-Fifties found John Sutherland a lonely, embittered  man. He had long lost his belief in his own creative powers. His efforts to establish Northern  Review on  a sound  economic basis had  failed miserably.  First Statement Press had  had to be shut  down  for lack of funds. His old friends in Montreal  had  been driven away  one  by one. And  when he left for Toronto in  1954, in a desperate  effort to make  a fresh start,  he was already  physically ill with  the disease from  which he was to suffer so much.
In  the  year of his death,  he was sustained  mainly  by three  things -his devo­
tion  to  the  poetry  of E. J. Pratt,  the love of Audrey  Aikman,  his wife, and  his new-found  peace  in  a very old  religious faith.  The  magazine  died  with  him  in
1956. It was his own  wish that  Northern  Review  should  not survive  him.
The  demise of John  Sutherland  and  the  extinction  of Northern  Review  pro­ vide a  tragic  anti-climax  to the story of poetry  in  Montreal  in the  Forties. One should,  perhaps,  backtrack,  to 1945 to discover the true significance of the move­ ment  at  its  peak.  The  fact  is that  the  interaction   of  the  two  magazines had created  a milieu in which good writing was able to thrive. Close communication, diverse  views, a  variety  of talents,  sharp  criticism,  and  publishing  outlets  com­ bined  to produce  an  unprecedented  volume of good  poetry and  gave us, by the Fifties, at least one poet of considerable stature.  The emergence of Irving  Layton as  Canada's most  significant,  and  most  controversial,   poet,  is best  understood against   this  background.  The   Forties  were  Layton's   formative   years.  "I was lucky",  he says now, "to  have known  them  all-so many  exciting personalities, living poetry twenty-four hours a day, thinking,  talking, analyzing, arguing,  read­ ing and  above all writing. I learned something from every one of them."




34



THE HYBRID COMIC

Origins of Sam Slick





V.L. 0.Chittick





LSPEECH of Haliburton's clockmaker, Sam  Slick, far from being the "genuine Yankee"  it has often been held to be, is as palpably synthetic
as his person.  Not  that  Haliburton could  not have heard  the real thing  spoken in  his  native  environment. His  forebears  on  the  parental  side, with  whom  he lived in  close contact,  were "tolerable  pure"  New Englanders,  "about one  half apple sauce, and  t'oher  half molasses". Since they came, however, from what Haliburton  termed   "the   gentry"  class in  contrast  to  "the  mob"  in  their  pre­ Revolutionary homeland, it is doubtful if much more than  an occasional Yankee phrase  was  heard  in  even  their  most intimate  family  circle,  though  their  ears were  surely  well  attuned   to  the  idiom  of "down  East"  country  folk.  But  that Haliburton himself  had  plentiful  opportunity  to listen to  that  type of  drawling loquacity  we know from his account in The  Old  judge of the annual spring-time arrival on the South  Shore of Nova Scotia of a miscellaneous assortment of itiner­ ant  Yankees,  including,   besides circus  performers  and  crews, quacks,  and  pro­ moters,  pedlars  with  their  usual  stocks of  "notions".  And  he  could  also  have listened  to  it  closer  to  home,  in  the  talk  of  the  sailors on  board  the  Yankee "hookers",   that  were  often  obliged  to  lay-up  at  Windsor  just across  the street from  the  house  where  he was born,  while  awaiting  their  tum  to sail up-stream to take  on  their  loads of "plaister" from  the still-worked quarries  along  the St. Croix river.
The  subjects  toward   which  the  moral  of  Sam  Slick's  long-winded  yamings was most persistently  pointed  Haliburton found  readily at hand  and  everywhere about  him. These  were, in his earlier satirical-humorous  works, the rising tide of


35

THE  HYBRID COMIC



colonial  complaint   against  the  unrepresentative   form  of  government   in  Nova Scotia  and  the  poverty-stricken  condition  of the shiftless Jack-of-all-trades Blue­ noses, as he depicted them, who habitually voiced that complaint.  His later works, the  provincial  government  having  been  reformed,  were  confined  chiefly  to  the second of these topics.  (During  his middle period  he departed from this pattern  to consider current  affairs in both the United  States and  Great  Britain.)  In  pre­ senting the more steadily recurring  half of his double theme of what he vigorously maintained   were  the  ruinous  faults  of  the  "lower  orders"  among  his fellow colonists, Haliburton had  a distinguished  predecessor  who could, and  did, show him  a  gentler,  though  unheeded,  way of correcting  those  faults.  This  was the Rev. Dr. Thomas  McCulloch  in his series of Stepsure  Letters, contributed  to the Halifax   Acadian  Recorder  intermittently   from  1821  to  1823.  McCulloch,  like Haliburton, employed for his principal spokesman -the biblically named  cripple Mephibosheth-a comic dialect. But it was a dialect  common  in Nova Scotia, not  a pretended  imitation  of one spoken by transient  visitors there. Haliburton's choice  of a  clock-peddling  Yankee, with a  well-established  reputation for long­ headed  "cuteness"  in driving a bargain, to lampoon  the down-in-the-mouth, out­ at-heels Bluenoses into some awareness of  the ridiculous figure they cut by always blaming  everyone but themselves for their economic plight was a stroke of genius. Yet it can hardly be regarded as original.
Sam Slick, save for his clockmaking skills, was obviously modelled closely after
Jack  Downing,  the  creation  of a  State  of  Maine   journalist,  Seba  Smith.  Jack Downing made his first appearance in print as a gawky-looking  country bumpkin sent  into  town  to  peddle  a  load  of farmer's  wooden  by-products,  axe-handles, hoop-poles,  and  the  like. After proving himself no fool in a trade,  he wandered into  the  locally  sited  legislative  halls,  and  observing  the  amazing   amount   of political stupidity  being enacted  there,  wrote a letter  about  it to the folks "back home."  It  was by means  of this letter  that  Smith,  early  in  1830,  undertook  to regale the readers of his newspaper, the Portland  Daily Courier, who by then had become completely disgusted with their lawmakers'  indifference  to civic welfare. Its  success was  instantaneous.  All Portland  laughed,  and  clamoured  to  be still further  diverted.  Other  letters followed in  response to this demand. As they  in­ creased in number  their fame spread.
Jack  Downing's  social status heightened  with his reputation. Commissioned  in turn  captain  and  major  in the Downingville militia,  he was sent to the disputed territory   between  Maine  and  New  Brunswick  to  report  on  the  progress  (and futility)  of events there. Later he became the private adviser of President Jackson,

THE HYBRID COMIC



and  in that  capacity  accompanied  the Chief Executive on his once much chroni­ cled  hand-shaking tour  "up   North."  By that  time in  spite,  or  because, of his creator's  using him  to ridicule  the Jacksonian  administration, he had  attained  a truly  national   celebrity,  and  shortly  afterward  his popularity  having  led to an unwarranted reprinting  of  his opinions,  his Life  and  Writings  was issued as a protection  against the altogether  too complimentary circulation of Smith's  uncopy­ righted  "down   East"  wisdom.  To  quote  the  publishers'  Preface  to  the second edition of this work, the letters of Jack Downing "were copied into every paper all over the land,  and  his name  was in everybody's mouth. Next to General  Jackson he was decidedly the most popular man in the United States."
Imitations  of  the  original  Jack  Downing  letters appear  to  have  been  legion. Most  conspicuous  among  these  spurious  communications,  and  rivalling  if  not equalling  the successes of the genuine, were those contributed  by Charles A. Davis, a  New York iron  and  steel merchant, to the New York Daily  Advertiser during
1833-34,  and  in  the latter  year collected and  published under  the title of Letters of  ].  Downing, Major,  Downingville Militia. While  in  Attic cleverness they were but slightly inferior to their prototypes, the undoubted  favour which these simulated  epistles of a  secondary  Jack  Downing  enjoyed  was perhaps  as much due  to lucky accident  as to merit.  Living where he did,  Davis found  it possible to get  his satires  on  the  passing parade  of political and  other  events of interest before  the  metropolitan  public  several days in  advance  of those of his State  of Maine inspirer,  with which they seem to have been indiscriminately  confused and praised.  But  though  both  Smith  and  his publishers protested  with  much  resent­ ment  against  the  unfair  use of the  name  "Downing" by others,  it  had  no dis­ cernible effect in checking the outpouring  of Davis's "rascally conterfeits".
With two streams of this distinctly new brand of Yankee humour  thus combined in full flood, not to mention  the countless trickles from various unknown  sources helping  to swell the tide, it is no wonder  that  the merry  torrent  of literary  pro­ duction   emanating  from   "Downingville"  suddenly  broke  through   its  former bounds and overflowed from the United States into the British American colonies and  Great  Britain, and  that  as a consequence from r833 on Jack Downing letters were copied and  read in both these countries with as much avidity as in the land of their origin.







37

THE  HYBRID COMIC




HALIBURTON's  OBLIGATIONS  to  the  epistolary  humours  of the Jack Downing vogue constitute the most obvious of his literary indebtednesses. However consistently ignored in recent years, they were well enough known among his contemporaries to be freely and frequently  made the subject of comment. Moreover there is evidence to show that not only was Haliburton not unfamiliar  to his fellow Nova Scotians as "the  Jack  Downing  of British America,"  but that  he was also commonly believed to have endeavoured to become such. And he himself, though   perhaps  with  quite  other  intentions,  pointed  pretty  clearly  to the  most likely source of a much favoured  part  of his Yankee entertainment, when at the testimonial dinner  ostensibly given him by his Haligonian admirers in 1838 as the Historian   of  Nova  Scotia  (but  in  actuality  a  vain  attempt   to stem  the  raging torrent  of local  newspaper  abuse  directed  against  him  for  his indiscreet  attacks on  Lord  Durham, the vice-regal advocate  of reform in colonial government)  he
responded  to  the  toast  to Sam  Slick by proposing  one  to  "J. Davies,  Esq., the
author   of  Major   Jack  Downing,"  who,  he  explained,  was  a  "friend" of Sam Slick's that  the Americans were "considerable proud  of," "most  popular  in Eng­ land," and  "highly  esteemed in  the co,lonies". Whether  this seemingly  generous reference to "J. Davies" may be interpreted as an acknowledgment of his depend­  ence  for either  inspiration  or material  in  the shaping  of Sam  Slick  upon  any or none  of  the  numerous  exponents  of the  Downingesque  style in  humorous  com­ position, the fact  remains, as the publishers of Jack  Downing's Letters  remarked,  that  "had   Major  Downing  never written  the  public  would  never have heard  of Sam  Slick." And, in spite of his apparently  meaning  to pay tribute  to Charles A.
Davies  when  he named  the otherwise unidentifiable  "J. Davies", it is not to the
skilful copyist but  to the true originator  of Jack  Downing  that  Haliburton owed his chief debt in creating Sam Slick.
From  Seba  Smith,  in  the first place, came  the suggestion of a "live"  Yankee among  the Bluenoses, imparting  for their guidance  much needed advice in politics and  still more useful concerns, just as Jack  Downing  was doing for his state and nation.  It was from  Seba Smith  also that  many  of the comic devices employed by Haliburton for the amusement of his readers in the Clockmaker series were derived.  Jack  Downing's  father,  for instance,  never  wearies of telling over and over  his Revolutionary  War  experiences at  the "fatigue  of Burgwine,"  while the elder Slick never tires of recounting his exploits at the Battle of Bunker Hill. Jack Downing  attempts  to trace  his ancestry from  Sir George  Downing  of England, and  Sam  Slick's  father  visits England  for  the  express  purpose  of  proving  his

THE HYBRID COMIC



descent  from  the  "Airl"  of Tunbridge. Jack  Downing  indulges  in  the  hope of getting an opportunity to "flog the whole British nation," and Sam Slick cherishes no illusions about  a good American's  ability to "lick" his full share, if not more, of that  "consaited" people. Both Yankees aspire to the Presidency of the United States,  and  both  raise  themselves  to  positions that  justify  that  ambition,  Jack Downing  becoming  the  confidant  of General Jackson,  and  Sam  Slick accepting the  appointment of "attachy" to the American  minister at  London.  Again from Seba  Smith  there  were  often  extracted  the  various stray  items  of information which Haliburton called into requisition in his discussions of, or allusions to, such definitely American  topics as the threat of nullification, the expected failure of the United  States  Bank,  the  political aspirations  and  oratorical eloquence  of Daniel Webster,  the terrors  of May  Day moving in New York City, and  the conditions prevalent  among  the manufactories  and factory "gals" "to  Lowell."
Had  Haliburton followed  Seba  Smith  in  the  art  of  transcribing   the  Yankee dialect,  the  hearing  of which,  as we have seen, must have  been a happening  of almost every day occurence  in  Nova Scotia, as carefully as he did in these other respects, it would have  been the better for Sam Slick's credibility, for Smith had an  undoubtedly  well-deserved  reputation  for fidelity to the speech of his "down East"  countrymen, and  depended  upon  his genuine  Yankee  wit rather  than  on ludicrous  misspellings to  provoke  the smiles of his readers.  Unfortunately from the point of view of realism, Haliburton, who was prone  to laying his colours on thickly, chose the  easier  method  of caricature  and  grotesqueness, and  fashioned his recording  of Sam  Slick's language, in so far as it was tolerable Yankee at all, upon what he presumably  found in the Jack Downing letters of Charles A. Davis, who to a much  greater  degree than  Smith resorted to perversions and  distortions of  New England   pronunciation in pursuit  of his comic effects. Apart  from  this probable  borrowing of some slight share of his dialect humours,  Haliburton seems to have been beholden  to Davis for practically nothing.
Haliburton's ill-assimilated  borrowings  give substance  to  the  angry  rejection
by Professor (later  President) C. C. Felton of Harvard  of Sam Slick as a passably representative  Yankee.  Felton,  to be sure, was prejudiced  against  Haliburton for mercilessly exposing the hollowness of the far-famed omniscient sounding  rhetoric of Edward   Everett,  the  American  ambassador  at the  Court  of St. James  (and Felton's friend)   as that  of the "Sockdolager"  in The  Attache. Still, angry though he was, he had too high a reputation  as a discerning critic of Yankee mannerisms to  warrant   one's  brushing  aside   his  opinions regarding  their   genuineness. Nevertheless he  went  on  to  admit  that  Sam  Slick was "widely  circulated" and

39

THE  HYBRID COMIC



"praised" in the United  States. James Russell Lowell, than  whom there was then no better  authority  on New England  characterization, stated in the Introduction to his Biglow Papers that  he "had  always thought  'Sam  Slick' a libel on Yankee character, and   a  complete  falsification of  Yankee  modes  of  speech."  And G. W. Curtis in one of his "Easy Chair"  essays placed Sam Slick in the category of "extravaganzas and  caricature" of American  character-types "seen without imagination  and drawn  without skill".






ODDLY ENOUGH, none  of these repudiators of Sam  Slick's authenticity  puts a finger on the one ingredient  in his make-up  that  most empha­ tically  proclaims  him  as no true  Yankee. This  was the  ever recurrent  intrusion
into  his speech of the western "ring-tailed  roarer's" lusty idiom. The  archtypical roarer  was, of course, Davy Crockett,  whether  actual  or mythical.  (Given  time, Davy was both.)  The  ring-tailed "half  horse, half alligator" Kentucky  river-man brawler  when  genuine  would  rather  fight  than  eat;   when  spurious  he  merely boasted  that  he would. Both sorts announced  themselves as ready for a fistic (or any  other  kind  of  rough-and-tumble)  encounter  by going  through   a  ritual  of neighing  like  a  stallion,  or  crowing  like a  rooster,  and  flapping  their  "wings." The  roarers'  bravado,  too, often fell into the ritualistic  mode. Mock or real dire threats of bodily injury and vaunts of physical prowess were phrased  to terminate in some variant  of the formula  "I hope I may be shot  [or  meet with an equally horrendous  fate]  if I don't  [or  if  I  can't]   ..." Crockett  made  his initial  entry into extended  print in the anonymous and partly apocryphal Sketches and  Eccen­ tricities of 1833, and his next in the Narrative of his life, allegedly written by him­ self, 1834· (Whoever  wrote the former almost certainly  wrote the latter, in each case with the help of a "ghost".) Within a year of the publication of these books, Haliburton in  Nova  Scotia  was familiar  with  the  first, and  perhaps  with  both, and  was drawing  upon their common store of Crockett  yams and  jests before the serialization  of Sam  Slick's soon to be famous  "Sayings  and  Doings"  was more than barely begun.
From the first Clockmaker on through The  Season-Ticket  the trail of Crockett's influence  can  be  plainly  traced  in  every one  of  Haliburton's humorous  works, with  the  exception  of The  Letter-Bag.  No  later  than  the  third  chapter  of the

THE  HYBRID COMIC



earliest Clockmaker  Sam  Slick refers to "Col.  Crockett  as the greatest  hand  at  a flam  in our  nation." Davy's  valediction  to his constituents  after  they had  failed to  return  him  to  Congress,  concluding  with  "You  may  all go to Hell,  and  I'll go  to  Texas,"  is summarized   and  praised  in  The  Attache. His  insistent  motto "Go  ahead" is urged  by Sam  Slick on anyone  who will listen to him, no fewer than  sixteen  times  each  in  three  of his creator's  volumes.  Davy's  addiction   to stump  oratory,  or  to "speakin'  off a whiskey barrel,"  is recalled  in two of Sam Slick's allusions to "politickin'," and  once he reminds  his hearers that  Davy was as  physically formidable as  he  was forensically eloquent.  "Lord   bless you,"  he said,  while bragging  of  how  "we  [Americans]  licked the  British when  we had only three  millions of people,"  "we have fellows like Crockett  that  would sneeze a man-of-war  right out of the water."
Of  Sam  Slick's  employment  of the  ring-tailed  roarers'  boast formula  the  in­
stances  are  innumerable. (The  unexplained  referents  in  the following examples are  of no significance  in  the  present context.)  "I'll  teach  him  the road  to good manners)  if he can save eyesight to see it-hang me if I don't." "I'll put you on trial  so sure  as you  are  born;  I  hope  I  may  be skinned  alive by wild cats if I don't." "I am a pickaxe, and  will dig you out of your hole like a badger,  I hope I may be gouged, if I don't." And, slightly varied, "If they had dared  to venture that  sort of work in Old  Hickory's time, I hope I may be skinned alive ... if he wouldn't  have  blowed  every cursed craft  they have clean out  of the water." "I hope I may be darned  to all darnation, if I would n't chaw up your ugly mummi­ fied corpse, hair, hide, and  hoofs this blessed minute as quick as I would mother's dough  nuts."  Sam  Slick himself was once called a  "very  ring-tail roarer  . . . a rigular  sneezer."  Though he denied the charge  as spoken ironically, he was cap­  able  to asseverating  on  his own:  "We  can  out-talk  thunder,  out-run  a flash of lightning,  and  out-reach  all the world-we can  whip our  weight in wild cats."  And  in the  third  Clockmaker he introduced  a full-scale specimen of the roaring  breed   (though   a  phony  one),  symbolically  labelled Lucifer  Wolfe,  bragging  ". . . you will find  me  just a leetle the  ugliest  colt you ever undertook  to brake [sic], there is no back out in me, for I'm a snappin'  turtle, so you'll fight or play, that's  a fact,  and  no  two ways about  it, so take your choice, for I feel intirely wolfish and savagerous,  and  have half a mind to give you a tickler [bowie knife] in the ribs that  will make  you feel monstrous amiable,  and set you a considerin', I  tell  you."  To  that  extended  display of ill-natured  belligerency Sam  Slick's
tongue-in-the-cheek  comment   was,  "Only   thinkin'  of  fightin'  such  a  ring-tail
roarer as that,  nearly broke two of my ribs short off."

THE  HYBRID COMIC



Eventually Sam  Slick,  as  might  be  predicted from  what we  have  seen  of  his evolution, or  rather of the  multiple  changes  in  his line  of  talk,  approached the standing of  a  fully  accepted   "out   West"  folk-hero. Witness  the  broadside Sam Slick, the Yankee  Pedlar, hawked  about  the streets  of London in the early  186os, its verse, sung  to the tune  of "Yankee Doodle," alternating with spoken  prose pas­ sages. Two  brief excerpts  from  the latter  will serve to illustrate its special quality:

... Now look at  me. I'm  cast iron all over, and  pieced  with rock. One  of my blows is either  sudden  death,  or  long sickness. If I was to  hit a fellow it would knock  him  into  mortal  smash, and  it  'ud  take  about  eternity  to pick  up  all  the pieces-it would,  I reckon! We Yankees are  a  tarnation 'cute  race;  we make  a fortune  with  the  right hand,  and  lose it with the left. I'm  half fire, half love, and a little  touch  of  the  thunderbolt! ... I -Sam  Slick  the  Yankee  Pedlar-can ride  on a flash of lightning  and  catch  a thunderbolt in my fist. I've  the  prettiest sister and  the  best shooting  rifle in  all Virginia.  I'm  the  most glorious, original,
and   never-to-be-forgotten, smash-biler-bu'sting,  free  and   enlightened   nigger­
whipping  Pedlar  as ever was raised, and  no soft-sawder. So, go-ahead.

A comparison of these samplings with  two fragments of Davy  Crockett "flyting" at  his ring-tailed best shows how closely the  popular version  of Sam  Slick merged with its exemplar:

I'm  that  same David  Crockett,  fresh from  the  backwoods, half horse, half  alli­ gator,  a  little  touched  with  the  snapping-turtle; can  ... ride  upon  a  streak  of lightning  and  slip without  a scratch  down a honey locust; can whip my weight in wild  cats, ... hug  a  bear  too close for  comfort,  and  eat  any  man  opposed to Jackson... .

Ain't  I the yaller flower of the forest? And I am all brimstone but the head and ears, and  that's  aqua-fortis....  [Now]  you know what  I'm  made of. I've got the closest shootin'  rifle, the best coon dog, the  biggest ticlur,  and  the ruffest racking horse in the district.  I can kill more lickur, fool more varmints,  and cool out more men than any man you can find in all Kentucky.

Sam  Slick,  as  Haliburton said  of  him,  was  indeed   "quite a  character." But even  so, and  long  before  the  folk took  him  over,  his manner of speaking clearly reveals that  he was no genuine, "down East", Yankee comic.







42



THE ABORIGENE IN CANADIAN LITERATURE

Notes by a Japanese




Keiichi Hirano




IREMEMBER READ<NG  with intmst and even with fascination
the following remarks of Marius Barbeau:

A rich  vein  for  poetic  inspiration lies within  native  themes  and  surroundings. The writer,   the  painter, and   the  musician   may  discover  treasures in  this  virgin  field of  human endeavour, so far  untrodden. In  the  conflict  between   aboriginal races and   the  white   conquerors, thinkers   and  moralists   will  find  wide  vistas  on  every side.  The door  is wide  open  for  all  to  enter  who  would  rather venture into  new avenues than  blindly  follow the herd  in beaten  trails.
(The Downfall  of Temlaham, 1928.)

Another remark which caught my  attention at  about the  same time  was  that  of Diamond Jenness, another  noted Canadian  anthropologist. After surveymg m detail the  interaction of Indians and  whites, he had  this to say:

Culturally they  [the Indians] have  already  contributed everything that  was valu­ able  for  our   own   civilization  beyond  what   knowledge   we  may  still  glean  from  their  histories concerning man's ceaseless struggle  to control his environment.
(Indians of Canada, Fifth  edition, 1g6o.)

This, of course, does  not  mean that  literature has  nothing more to gain from the Indians. Yet  there does  seem  a  considerable difference in  emphasis between the remarks of these  two  writers. One appears to be saying that there are still treasures to  be  discovered, the  other to  be  denying it.  Not  only  here, but  in  many other cases  these   anthropologists have shown that  their   approaches differ somewhat.

43

THE ABORlGENE



Barbeau is the  more  literary  and  romantic, Jenness the more  scientific  and  sober. (The  latter's article,  "Indian  Background of  Canadian  History", seems  to  me one  of the  best antidotes against  the "noble-savage" concept of Indians.)
Even  when  reading books  on  Indians by  other   writers   I have  found   myself constantly falling   back  on  Barbeau   and  Jenness. Perhaps  no-one  will  disagree with  me  when  I say  that  Canadian Indians seem  to be far  better  treated in  the works  of  anthropologists than  in  literature. I would  certainly refer  anyone  who is  curious  about the  aborigenes of  this  country to  the  works  of  Barbeau and Jenness rather than  to the  writings  of Richardson or  Mair. Yet an anthropologist can  write  as a creative  writer,  as in the  case with  Barbeau ( cf. The  Downfall of Temlaham,  Pathfinders of the  North   Pacific,  etc.)   and   a  novelist  may  not  in­ frequently write  like  an  anthropologist  as,  for  example, is  the  case  with  John Richardson ( cf. A  Trip  to  Walpole Island  and  Port  Sarnia, written 1848, pub­  lished  1924). So  we should   not  be  too  particular about the  distinction.  There certainly seems  to  be little  sense in  excluding the  works  of Barbeau  from  Cana­ dian  literature.
Indeed, if  we  insist  on  excluding the  anthropologists from  our  treatment of Indians in  Canadian literature, what  have  we left?  One  can  think  of Canadian writers  who  have  in  one way or  another dealt  with  the  Indians - Mrs.  Frances Brooke in her  History of Emily  Montague, Howe  in his Acadia, Mair's Tecumseh, A  Drama, Richardson's W acousta,  Hunter Duvar's De  Roberval, D.  C. Scott's numerous Indian poems,  Pratt's monumental Brebeuf and  His Brethren, Birney's The   Trial  of a City, to give the  names  of  the  few  which  I can  recall  instantly. Indians do have a place in Canadian literature. But when  one considers  the whole current of that  literature, one  must  admit  that  it is a secondary place.  They  be­ long  to  the  peripheral or  the  merely  ornamental; their  chief  function  seems  to be  that  of adding colour  and  flavour  to the  central theme, whatever it  may  be.
When, after  some wandering around in search  of "treasures" I did not discover,
I turned to  D.  C.  Scott,  I realized  that  after  all  his  Indian poems  remain  un­ surpassed,  at  least  in  Canadian  literature.  Beginning as  a  temporary  copying  clerk,  D.  C. Scott  worked  with  the  Department of Indian Affairs  for  more  than  fifty  years  and  served  the  last  eighteen   years  as  the  administrative  head  of  the department. Thus he was able to know  the Indians in a way few other Canadian writers  could.
"The  Forsaken", which  is  usually  and   with   justice  regarded  as  the  best  of Scott's Indian  poems,  is  really  a  small  masterpiece. The  contrast between   the Indian woman's youth  and  old  age, and  that  between  the  cruel  mores  of society

44

THE ABORIGENE



and  her  warm  human  affection, add  up to a moving and  haunting piece of art. But perhaps  the reason the poem particularly  caught my attention  was the fami­ liarity  of the theme  itself-the  deserting of old and  useless members of  society. This custom, which was formerly not unusual among the Eskimoes, was also pre­ valent  in Japan centuries  ago. In  central  Japan  we still have a  mountain called "Oba-sute-yama"  (literally:   Old-woman-deserting-hill).  There  are  folk-stories dealing  with  filial sons who  just could not face the problem  of  having  to desert their mothers. A few years ago a Japanese guitarist-and-writer, Fukazawa  Shichiro published  a short  novel titled  The   Song  of Narayama  dealing  with  this theme; it instantly  became  a sensational  best-seller. Though  the  parent-deserting custom was abolished  long  ago  (people  even pretended  the  custom  had  never existed) , the  story  shook  our  Japanese   complacency.  I  myself  remember  the  weird  and uneasy feeling it evoked in me when  I first  read the story-more  piercing and more  haunting  than  Scott's  "The  Forsaken"  because it  dealt with   our  own latent  mores.  I  have  at  hand  neither the original  Japanese  text nor  its English translation   (by D. Keene)  so I cannot  quote from it, but the similarity of Scott's poem  with  The Song   of   Narayama  in  spirit  and  evocation  is astonishing.  In Scott's  poem towards the end, that is on the third night after the woman has been left to die alone, we have the following description:

Then on the third great night there came thronging and  thronging
Millions of snowflakes out of a windless cloud,
They covered her close with a beautiful crystal shroud, Covered her deep and silent.

In The  Song  of Narayama, when the son finally carries his old mother  to the hills to forsake  her,  it  begins to snow heavily. The  heavy white snowfall,  contrasted with the black of the carrion  crows, was one of the most haunting and impressive descriptions  of  the  Japanese  version. Fukazawa  did  not  know  Scott's  poem (Scott  is practically  unknown  in Japan), so of course this is mere  coincidence. But sometimes when  comparing  Indian  customs with those of rural  (or ancient) Japan I am  often  made  to realize that  there is something more than  mere coin­ cidence. After all the Indians  are supposed to be of Asiatic origin, so this is nothing to wonder at.
To  return  to Scott's  poem. The  part  of the poem I felt unnecessary-or  un­
necessarily Christian  -was the ending:

Then all light was gathered up by the hand of God and hid in His breast.


45

THE ABORIGENE



Here  Scott  was  apparently   not  thinking  of  a  pagan  Indian   Manitou. I  know that  many  aborigines were converted  to Christianity  and  also that  Scott himself was  a devout  man  of faith.  However,  Christian  moralizing  sometimes seems to spoil Scott's poetry. In "The  Forsaken",  God was uncalled for.
What  about  Scott's  general  attitude  towards  the  Indians?  There  is no doubt
that  Scott  understood  the  Indians  well. But  on  the  whole  his attitude  does not seem to have gone much beyond that of a well-meaning and conscientious govern­ ment  official. (Or  should I say white man official?)  The  Indians,  if  not  inferior to  the  white  race,  were of "a  weird  and  waning  race"  ("The  Onondaga Ma­ donna")  with  "the  tragic savage" lurking  in their faces. In  The  Administration  of  Indian   Affairs  in  Canada,  the  paper  he  prepared  for  the  Fourth  Bi-Annual Conference  of The  Institute  of Pacific Relations  (held  at Hangchow from Octo­ ber   I 8th-November  3rd,  I 93 I), as  deputy  Superintendent General  of  Indian  Affairs,  Scott  gives a concise and  well-balanced  description  of the  present  and former  situation  of  Canadian  Indians.  However,  as is to be fully expected,  the paper  is after  all  written  in  defense  and  justification  of the  British  and  subse­ quently   the  Canadian  way  of  Indian   administration  which  has  proved  to  be much  more humane  than the Spanish or French  way. For example:

... to Britain alone belongs the credit, if credit there be, of recognizing an inherent aboriginal interest in the soil whence arose what we now call the Indian  title.

He  also believes that  the  Canadian management of Indians  may  be deemed  a
"success" and that

all [Indians]  have had their needs provided for and the [Canadian] Government has more than fulfilled the letter of its obligations.

Here  is a touch  of complacency  which one  might  expect  from  a government official but  not  from  a poet. Scott is also aware  of the  dark  side of the  picture and offers some solutions for the plight of the hunting  and fishing Indians,  but sometimes he is able to say that  "these conditions, needless to say, are not within the  control  of  this  department." One  must  not  confuse  Scott  the  government official with  Scott  the poet, but  there is no evidence  that  privately  as a poet he took  a  completely  different  view. In  an earlier  article  "The Last of the  Indian Treaties"  (Scribners'   Magazine,   December   Igo6), referring   to  the  status  of Indians  dealing  with  the  fur-traders,  Scott  is perceptive  enough  to declare  that "it  is evident  that  he [the  Indian] is but  a slave, used by all traders  alike as a tool  to  provide  wealth,  and  therefore  to  be  kept  in  good  condition  as cheaply

THE ABORIGENE



as  possible."  But  Scott   is  never  aroused   to  a  humanistic or  crusading kind  of anger  for  the  Indians. He  seems  to have  remained  throughout his life a believer in  the  Canadian or  the  white  man's  way  of administering the  Indians and  the general approach  to  Indians inherent in  that  kind  of  administration. He  never doubted  that   his  department  was  working   for  the  well-being   of  the  Indians. There is nothing wrong  in  this attitude and  I am by no means  criticizing Scott's stand. (It would   be  like  criticizing Charles Lamb  for  not  opposing the  British Indian policy when  he worked  at East India House.)   I am  just saying  that  Scott's approach to the  Indians was fundamentally an aloof one;  be kind  and  take good care  of  them-a  "humane society"  attitude; one  might  say.  It also  seems  to lack  critical  insight. That the  present  established  way of treating Indians  (allot­ ting  them   a  reservation to  live  on)   leads  inevitably   to  a  kind  of  ghettoization never seems to have entered Scott's  mind.
Yet,  say  what  one  will,  one  cannot deny  the  fact  that  Scott's Indian  poems have  charm,  dignity, music  and  evocative   power.  And   what   more  does  poetry need?   Scott's  official  complacency  and   aloofness,  his  lack   of  anthropological insight   (if such  an  expression  may  be used)  do not in  the  least  detract from  the intrinsic value  of  the  poems.  At  least  not  as  much  as  the  occasional Christian overtone for which  he seems to have a certain  weakness.




IwouLD  NEXT  LIKE  to look  briefly into  the  works  of a  poet. named Wallace Havelock Robb. W. H. Robb  is the  author of Indian  Christmas
Carol  (I 940), Thunderbird ( 1949), Tecumtha (I 958)   (all  published by Abbey Dawn  Press,  Kingston, Ontario)  and  others.  I came  upon  this  poet  by accident, wandering about  the  stacks  of  the  library.  To  give  the  conclusion first,  it  was only  after  reading Robb's works  that  I came  to realize  how  good  Scott's poems are.  In  contrast to Scott's aloofness  from  the  Indians, here  we have  Robb's self­ glorifying   identification  (he   has  been  initiated  into  the  Mohawk  Indians  and given  the  sacred   name  Gon-rah-gon  0-don-yoh Go-wa,  meaning  "Great White  Eagle"). In  contrast to  Scott's classical  restraint, we have  Robb's  ebullient dis­ order-one  may  even  go  as far  as to say that  in contrast to  Scott's poetry,  we have  here sheer  bombast.
Nevertheless, Robb's poetry   (or  whatever it is)  is not  without interest. It is a heroic  attempt to  interpret and   restore  to  life  the  mythology and  spirit  of  the

47

THE ABORIGENE



Indians. His works are based on years of strenuous  research  (seventeen  years for Thunderbird  and  thirty  years for Tecumtha, so he says).  His good intent  and seriousness none can doubt.
Thunderbird is "a  historical novel inspired by the author's original discovery of
hitherto  hidden  Mohawk  lore on  the  Kente  (Bay  of Quinte) ." It is a story of a  Viking  youth,  Ron-wa-ya-na,  captured  by the  Mohawks,  his escape with  his Indian lover,  and  the  return  of their  son 0-do-ne-o years later  to  become  the leader of the Mohawks. According to the author  the legend of pre-historic Vikings on the Great  Lakes is an authentic  one. Thunderbird is no mere fantastic  fiction. The  story itself is not too complicated  and  the  reader  with  a little patience  will be able  to follow it. But the author  seems to aim  too much  at authenticity. He wants  to  make  the  mood  as genuinely  Indian as  possible, thus   putting in  a plethora  of Indian characters  all with Indian  names  (fifty-five in all)  and  many unnecessary  (so it seems) Indian  expressions.
Robb's  description  and  presentation  of  Indian   (or  rather   Mohawk)   oratory is probably  authentic-he at least seems to be well-versed in the Mohawk  tongue. But his English, or rather  his English rendering  of the Mohawk  tongue, seems to be far from faultless. For example, look at the following lines:

What more  fitting  to a life growing  old in the fames  of peace,  than  that  its flaming glory,  merged as  a  leaf  in  this  great  fire, should  fall,  forever  a  part  of it,  that  it might be lived and loved, worshipped and  possessed in Kente's wonted  peace forevermore!    (Thunderbird, p. 64).
or
Oh! Sagonaska,  lovely Sagonaska!
And 0-no-wa-la-go-na-my canoe
Like swan awing, farewell, 0 Sagonaska!
To  Sunset  flying-Love, I'll  wait  for  you. 	(ibid, p.  II 6) .

No matter  how faithful  they may be to the original  Mohawk  way of expression they do not seem to be worthy examples of the English language.  If the original were in Japanese, I would not hesitate to brand  these lines as extremely poor translations.  Overflowing  ebullience does not  guarantee a work of art.  The  fact that Thunderbird has been hailed as "a modem  Odyssey" and Robb praised as "Canada's Homer-and-Yeats-in-one"  (according to  Tecumtha's  dust-jacket blurb)  is something  that baffles me.
Nevertheless  Thunderbird  is still  readable   and  one  does  manage to  get  a glimpse of a primitive unsophisticated  way of life. But what can we say about Tecumtha, the product of thirty years of research?

THE ABORIGENE



Tecumseh  (which is the  usually  accepted  form)   is one  of the  most  colourful and   greatest Indian  figures.   One  may  recall  that  John  Richardson was  made prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Thames ( 1812)   where  Tecumseh fell.  Richardson had nothing but respect for this Indian hero.
Robb's work  is not  a  mere  biography  of Tecumseh but  a eulogium-and  a
very  ambitious one  at  that. He  even  declares his  work   to  be  a  "revelation" (Tecumtha, p.1). Yet  the  faults  and  defects  which  were  apparent in  Thunder­ bird are magnified to an almost  unbearable degree in Tecumtha.
The   self-importance, the  Messiah-complex, of  the  author is also  astonishing. He   urges  the  reader  to  read   his  poetry  aloud  or  at  least  attempt  "the  rolling and   majestic   pauses"   ( ! )   of  recital  in  his  mind.  He  is trying  to  communicate "the obscure, poetical beauty  of native  words-a single  word  hinting at a whole burst  of  beauty!" (p.  3).  Tecumseh who  was  after  all  a shrewd   and  practical warrior is romanticized and  sentimentalized to the utmost  degree.  Referring to Tecumseh's achievement the author has this to say:

He did  it as an  immortal  Swan Song for the passing of a beautiful  way of  life­ the  departure, in bewilderment, of a people of light and  peace-a mortal cry of anguish in remonstrance to the gods.
Robb's rendering of one of Tecumseh's songs runs as follows: Ah, Beloved, trillium purple are the Eagle's wings
Wake-robin  red!
The  fulgent  passion of the Plumed Star! The  orichalcum couch of love Untrammelled in the Evening Sky!

This   also  may   be  a  faithful word-for-word  rendering of  the  original   tongue (Shawnee and  not  Mohawk this time), but it does not seem to make much  sense. Or  take another passage which  is not a rendering:
When  fell  the  Shawnee  Star,  the  Universe  was shuddered   with  reverberation! The  incense of Tecumtha's fire permeated  Heaven-and, lo! it has come to pass: the  influence  and  culture  of the Redman  orders much  we are and  do;  more and more his blood courses through  our veins, his idealism leavens our lives.

Throughout the  work  Robb indulges  in  the  use of polysyllables  and  seems  to be  intoxicated  with   his  own   poetic  flights.  (One may  recall  I. V.  Crawford's riotous  imagery, but  in  her  case  the  images  are  kept  well  under  control and  do not give the reader a sense of disorder.  So with  D. C. Scott.)
The   reason   I  have  bothered with  Robb  is that,  in  a  sense,  he seemed  to  be


49

THE ABORIGENE



responding to Barbeau's invitation which I quoted in the beginning. Robb has apparently struck  "a  rich vein" and  has "discovered  treasures".  But what counts is the resulting  product-if  it is not a work of art  (and  Robb's  poetry seems to be a far cry from it), it means little.
Before I came  upon Robb  I was, it seems, unconsciously looking for someone who  could  catch   the  Indian   spirit-not  from  the  outside  but  from   within (Pauline  Johnson  was not a real insider),  not as an anthropologist  but as a poet­ and  give expression  to it, thus adding  a new  dimension  to Canadian  literature. Robb,   however  ambitious,  ebullient,  and   well-meaning   he  may  be,  does  not measure up to the required standard  -at least, so it seems to me.




AT PRESENT  we do  not  appear   to  have  genuine  Indian poetry  of high  quality.  One  cannot  say in fact  that  the  Indians  are  more  than
a  peripheral   part  of the  contemporary  literary  scene. Their   presence is hardly felt,  and  no one  seems to miss them.  Perhaps  the  problem  lies not so much  in the  poet  or in  the  presentation  (the  competence  of the  poet)  as in  the subject­ matter   (the  Indian spirit, or imagination,  or approach to life, or  whatever  you may call it)  itself. That  the North  American  aborigines  had  (or still have)  their own  mythology,  their  own  thought-patterns,  their  own  way  of   responding  to outer  reality,  their  heritage  of animal  lares  and  folk  lares-one  cannot  deny. Barbeau's Indian Days on the  Western Prairies  (1959)  and  Jenness's The  Corn  Goddess   ( 1955), to  take  at  random  two  recent  examples,  are  both  extremely charming and  readable  collections of  Indian  stories, and  far  surpass in  quality Robb's  works. Likewise in E. E. Clark's  Indian Legends  of Canada  ( r96o)   we can enjoy a wide variety of  Indian myths (creation, culture,  nature  &c) covering most  of  the  tribes  in  Canada. The  traditional Indian legends are  not  without charm  (one does not have to condescend to say so),  but  on the whole one must admit  that  they  are  neither  profound  nor  rich.  The  impression  the  reader  gets on  reading  one  story  after  another  is that  of monotonous  repetition,  a lack  of depth  and  insight.  In  Barbeau's  The  Downfall of T emlaham, for example,  the chief  Neetuh  is shot down  by his rival Kamamalmuk, who seeks to avenge the death of his son. Neetuh moans feebly in his death  agony:




so

THE ABORIGENE



Here  am  I,  still alive,  yet nearly dead.....  Robin-woman,  my immortal  friend of spirit-land, Robin-woman will cure me, will heal my wound in my breast, heal the wound  in my loin, the wound that  drips streams of blood, will lead my shade on her wings to the abode of the Sun. Robin-woman,  my immortal  friend!

This  is Neetuh's spirit  song,  the song which  had  hitherto proved  to be an  unfail­ ing  aid  in  his critical  hours  of life. One  can  say that  it is charming oratory, but page  after  page  of this kind  of chanting can  be extremely monotonous.
The  proportion of  what   one  may  call  "stereotype" in  the  Indians' ways  of
reaction   and   description is  coruiderable. The   first  contact with  the  white  man is one  of  the  interesting themes  of  Indian folk-lores,  but  the  white  man's ships are  almost  without exception described  as "the floating  island" (e.g. in Micmac and  Nootka   legends)  or  the  "white-winged canoes"   (in  Cowichan and  Nootka legends) and  one seeks in vain  the individual or the unstereotyped note.
The  nature-worship of the  Indians, charming as it is sometimes, never  reached the  speculative or spiritual depth  of a religion.  It is not something you can  take really  seriously.  Spiritually and  culturally the  Indians lacked  the  wherewithal to withstand the  onslaught of  the  white  man's civilization. I  am  not  trying  to  dis­ parage the  heritage of the  Indians, but  there  seems to be little sense in idealizing or  glorifying  it.  One  must  admit  that  it offers no alternative (much  less a chal­  lenge)   to  Western  civilization in  the  way  the  Arabic, Hebrew or  Far   Eastern civilizations do. It is simply not of that  calibre.
The  Indians undeniably form  a part  of the  Canadian literary  landscape. They are,  as  it  were,  part   of  the  Canadian  "experience". However, any  attempt to incorporate their   heritage into  Canadian literature-not as  a  mere  ornament but  as  an  integral part-seems  more  likely  to fail  than to  succeed.  Trying to adopt the  Indian's approach to life uncritically and  wholeheartedly would  be for a writer  rather a sign of "retrogression". We already  have the case of W. H. Robb.
Admitting that the  Indian's approach to life is primitive and  backward, may it still not  serve  as a soothing antidote to the sophisticated Western  approach? I do not  agree.  Western  civilization  is not in need  of a primitive or naive  antidote. What it  needs  is a  deeper  and  more  religious,  in some  seru;e more  sophisticated, antidote-something that  will shatter its self-righteous complacency. We cannot expect  this kind  of antidote from the Indians.
This  is not  to  say that  the study  of the Indians and  their  ways of life would  be
useless. A study  of any  primitive people will help us understand the various "pat­ terns  of culture" we have  (or  had) on earth. Anything that  deepens  our  under­ standing of  mankind  cannot  be  deemed   useless. To   read,   for  example, Ruth

THE ABORIGENE



Benedict's  description  of  the  Kwakiutl  Indians   of Vancouver Island   (see  Pat­ terns  of Culture, Ch. VI)  can be an extremely  revealing and stimulating literary experience.  Likewise  the  work  of  Barbeau  and  Jenness  deserve  our  attention  and  deepest respect. However,  the state  (or  level)  of the Indian  world-view  (or thought-pattern) being what it is, we cannot expect it to make any strong impact on  Canadian literature. It cannot  re-orientate  or add  any  new  dimension  to the existing and prevalent thought-patterns.
This  brings  us back to the sentimental  or "noble-savage" view of Indians  as
seen in  Canadian literature.  It  seems hard  for  a  Westerner  to escape from  this "noble-savage" illusion. Though  the Japanese  have  experienced  a long struggle with  the  Japanese   aborigenes  (the  Ainus),   there is  not  one  example of  the "noble-savage" concept  in Japanese  literature. It  is surprising,  but it shows how European   the  "noble  savage"  idea  is.  (Likewise,  Japanese literature  lacks  the pastoral  tradition,  another  product  of European sentimentalism). Even Barbeau is not wholly free from the golden-age-noble-savage approach. He not infrequently shows a tendency to beautify and lyricize: for example:

For a millenium, their ancestors long ago thrived in pristine innocence and peace. The  tribes of men lived side by side in Arcadian friendliness. (The  Downfall of Temleham.)

Perhaps  a comparative  study of English-Canadian and  French-Canadian literat­ ture  in  this  respect  may  prove interesting.  Concerning the  aborigenes  I  have a suspicion  that  the  French-Canadians may have  been more  realistic. After  all, is not their term for the Indians "les  sauvages"?




chrdaicle



REGIONALISM AND THE WRITER

A Talk with W.0. Mitchell


Patricia Barclay





TE SENSE OF ENVJRONMENT, vast, challenging and  relatively unexplored, still  dominates the  Canadian consciousness,  and   a  panoramic  view of the  history  of our  arts  could  aptly  be depicted in a series of bas-reliefs in which the  figures  are  seen  gradually emerging from,  yet still supported by  their  back­ grounds. The   greatest artists  stand   freest.  They  have  resisted  the  pull  of  their surroundings enough to use them  for  their  own ends;  to use them  in the creation of  universal statements, true  not  just for  one  man,  region  or  nation,  but for  all men.  Through Emily  Carr's brush,  for  example,  the  forests  of British  Columbia become  an expression  of the innate spirit of living things; with comparable artistry
E.  J. Pratt has  used  his knowledge of the  sea  to reach  an  understanding of the
deeper  currents beneath the  course  of human action.  To  the  truly  gifted  artist, the  particular character of his environment is secondary; it is the  use he is able to make of it that  counts.
But  persons  of  such  gifts  are  rare.  They   are  individualists, untypical of  an artistic  community that  spends  much  of its time  interpreting the  Laurentians to the  prairies,  the  hamlet  to the  city, French Canada to everyone. The  interpreters, indeed, are  performing a vital  task, for  without  self-knowledge we will never  be­ come  culturally mature. And  the  interpreters are  themselves  interpreted by  the critics,  who  seek  by  analysis  and   classification  to  uncover   the   patterns in  our ambiguous cultural landscapes.
Yet  art   resists  analysis  and   classification,   and  the  artist  resists  it  even  more.


53

REGIONALISM AND THE WRITER



Perhaps,  to  return  to  the  question  of environment, one  can  best illustrate  this difficulty by considering  the position of the so-called "regionalist" writer. We all know him. He is the man who knows, and  understands, a certain  district,  a way of life, an ethnic group;  and who writes about  it in a way that  brings his subject to life for those who have never known it or awakes nostalgic recognition in those who  have.  He  is an  interpreter  of his own  particular corner  to the  rest of the world, and hence his title, "regionalist".
But  what  if  the  writer  himself rejects  the  title?  Consider  the  case of W.  0.
Mitchell.  Mitchell is probably best known for his novel, Who  Has Seen the Wind, which  appeared  in  1947, but  he has also written  other  novels and  many shorter pieces, for  print,  radio  and  television. His humorous  and  often  moving  descrip­ tions of small town  prairie life have gained  him a recognized place in Canadian literature; he is often cited as an example of the successful regionalist writer. This, however, is not how W. 0. Mitchell sees himself.
I  met  Mr.  Mitchell  one warm  Alberta  day last summer  at his home in High River,  a small  ranching  town about  thirty  miles south  of Calgary.  We talked in his study,  a  bright,  spacious room  divided  into  areas  for  work  and  relaxation. Filing  cabinets  and  tall  bookshelves stood  within  easy reach  of a  broad  book­ keeper's  desk "such  as Dickensian characters  used to slave over";  beyond  these a brightly-covered  chesterfield sat  before an  open  fireplace  and  beside a  window looking out on to the neat garden.
When  I asked him what he thought  of the "regionalist" label, Mitchell's  reply was prompt: "I think labels are all right-for beef, and even for judging orchids, fancy  diving, horse shows; they don't  apply to art." Later,  he expressed his con­ victions  more  specifically:  "I can't  go to  work  on  a  piece  unless I  have  some essentially  human   truth  that  I  believe very  passionately  and  that  I  hope  shall transcend  time  and  region. For instance,  Galsworthy  or Shaw  or Wells certainly were not considered  regionalists. To  me they were much  more regional in regard to time-because  they were platform  novelists-than was Hardy,  for instance. Hardy   had  a  core  of philosophic, timeless truth  in  everything  he  wrote,  which stopped him from being a regionalist. Already, Wells and Shaw have lived beyond their region in time, but Hardy never will."
Mitchell  works  with  a strong  sense of  purpose  and  continuity.  He  has  been writing  steadily  from  the age of eighteen,  largely in the field of fiction. His first published short stories appeared  in 1942, among  them the first "Jake and the Kid" story. As he continued  to add  to the Jake series, Mitchell wrote only one in five of the stories about  the boy and  the old man;  other  inhabitants of the mythical

54

REGIONALISM AND THE  WRITER



community  of Crocus were created with the intention  of providing  "semi-polished material" from which he could draw future novels. So far, besides Who  Has Seen the Wind, Mitchell  has published in Maclean's during  1953 a third  of a second novel, The  Alien,  while  yet another  novel, The  Kite: has  just appeared, and  a fourth,  Roses Are Difficult  Here, has been completed and  awaits  publication.
In  discussing  The   Kite,   Mitchell remarked that  its  central  figure,  Daddy Sherry, had  his genesis in Daddy Johnson, a familiar "Jake  and the Kid" charac­ ter. In  this novel, a journalist  comes to the West for a brief interview with Daddy Sherry, the world's oldest known living human  being, and finds himself so deeply affected by his contact  with the old man that he remains long past the appointed  time  so as  to  reconstruct   Daddy  Sherry's  past  life. The  theme  of the  novel is symbolized by the pervading  figure of a kite. In Mitchell's own words:  "The  idea of a kite, a lively thing  held  by a thin  thread  of life, is comparable to man and his mortality,  and the novel is a study in mortality, and awareness of the shortness of man's  days upon  the earth-it's quite a serious novel with a picaresque sur­ face. Any novel will probably  involve a search, and  a questioning-and in most cases, an  answer.  When  I  wrote  Who   Has  Seen  the  Wind, I  didn't   have  an answer. It was just a question, which is a perfectly fine reason for writing a novel. In  The  Kite,  there  is an  answer, in The  Alien there is an  answer, and  in Roses Are Difficult Here I try to make an answer-three answers to things I believe in."  The  writers  whom  W.  0.  Mitchell  recognizes as having  had  some influence
on his own work are not other "regionalists". Rather,  he points to Joseph Conrad, for his handling  of serious theme  and  the articulation  of universal  truth,  and  to Virginia  Woolf  and  Katherine Mansfield  for  their skill in  capturing the  exact expression for sense experience. He mentions Tolstoy, E. M. Forster, J. M. Barrie, Galsworthy,  Wallace  Stegner  and  John  Steinbeck. It is with  the eye of a crafts­ man  that  Mitchell  evaluates  a  writer's  importance  to him.  When  I  mentioned Hemingway, he replied,  "If Hemingway  were more of a stylist  perhaps  I might have  gone  to  him.  But  I  think  of fishing-I'm a great  believer in  the  proper pattern  of fly and a properly balanced rod and a beautifully tapered  line, and that the  fly shall drop  right  and  the hatch  shall be matched,  and  this is style, grace, care  and  patience.  I  do  not  find  Hemingway  a stylist at  all. I  can't  see it. An­ other  man  that  didn't help  me  any,  too,  was Thomas   Wolfe-or  Theodore Dreiser, for  the  same  reasons  again.  I can  appreciate  their  power  and  passion, but I don't  think a writer can learn too much if he has the power and passion and

' The Kite  will be reviewed by Margaret Laurence in the next issue of Canadian
Literature.


55

REGIONALISM AND  THE WRITER



appetite  for life himself. He won't learn it from  any other man,  and then there is nothing  else too  much  to  learn  from  Hemingway, or  Dreiser, or  Wolfe, since there's  not  evident  style and  polish and  control  and  discipline."
We spoke of Canadian writers, of Frederick  Philip  Grove,  and  Mitchell said:
"I can  recall  discovering  Grove  when  I  was  beginning  work on  my own  first novel, and  being terribly excited with The  Master  of the  Mill, and  I said, 'Here is a fellow that's  going to be Conrad  of the prairies and  is going to write another Lord Jim!'"
Mitchell  is keenly interested  in  poetry.  He  even  wishes he were a  poet,  and says that  he often  scans his lines for atmospheric  or lyrical effect. He is also in­ terested  in  the  formal  resemblances between  music  and  prose in such  areas as motif, repetition  and  pattern: though he does not describe himself as musical, he feels that  an appreciation  of music can be of benefit to the writer.
Mitchell,  who follows a regular  regimen of work from  November  to May and
tends to ease up during  the hunting season and  during  the season for conducting writers'  workshops,  lives in  comparative  isolation  from  the  literary  community, and,  in  keeping  with  his general  individualism,  he is convinced  that  the  writer himself is his own best critic. He has no interest in writing what he terms "pulpit novels";  it is the "essentially human  truth" that  he wishes to reveal in his serious work, whether  his subject is a boy in search of the meaning  of life, or a man face to face with the fact of his own morality.
The  questions  that  arise in  one's  mind  about  W.  0. Mitchell-how far  he
has succeeded in his declared aim, how far he remains a "regional  writer"  in the narrow  sense, and  perhaps  also a hint of the eventual  standing  of this writer still in his 'forties-will be revealed much more clearly when all the novels on which he has been working in recent years are finally made available  to the reader.



review articles





ILLUSIONS OF SIMPLICITY

Margaret  Laurence



RALPH  ALLEN. Ask the  Name  of the  Lion. Doubleday.


"A MODERN NOVEL OF THE CONGo", the dust-jacket says. But Ralph Allen's   latest   novel   really  tells  us  more about the dilemma of a western  liberal whose  lifelong  attitudes of tolerance and goodwill no longer seem to have much relevance  in   the   midst   of   the   horrors and  irrationalities of the  Congo  situation.
Richard  Grant,  a   Canadian   doctor and   a  man   of  intelligence and  compas­ sion,   goes   to   the   Congo   for   the   Red Cross,  having sacrificed  a  brilliant career  (in  a somewhat overly noble  fashion) for the  sake  of  working  where   he  feels  his work  is most  needed.  When   the  political situation   explodes   after    Independence, some  Congolese  soldiers   attack  the  iso­ lated   hospital.   Grant  escapes,   with   the others   who  happen to  be  there-Mary Kelvin, a   Canadian  nurse;  Sierra,  the U.N.  representative; Songolo,  an African evolue   and   a   cabinet  minister;  Chart­ rand, a  Belgian   plantation  owner; and Astrid    Mahamba,   Chartrand's  African mistress.   They   are   pursued  by  the  sol­ diers,  led  by  Sergeant Albert  Tshibangu, who  calls  himself   Nkosi,  the   Lion,  and who  has  proclaimed himself  president of Mgonga  province.
 Sierra   directs  the   escape.   He   is  all hero -the    man    of   steel,   veteran   of many   wars,  putting his  faith   in  action, but  acutely  sensitive  as well  (an  art  lover and   once  a  talented  musician).  Always with   Sierra   there   is  the   twisted   inner grin -he knows he is dominated by the hungry "I".  But   he   dares   and   dares again,  and  finally manages to wrest a pirogue  away  from  an  evil  old  witch  of a  Congolese  bush  woman.  There follows a   short   and   puzzling   triumphal  scene. " 'M on  Dieu,  monsieur,'   Chartrand  said in total  homage." The  others  gaze at him in  adulation, and   even  Dr.  Grant  mur­ murs  "You   are   a  great   man,  Monsieur Sierra." Whether  we  are  meant  to  take this   hail-Caesar   sequence   seriously   or not,  I was unable  to decide.
When  the  rampaging soldiers  catch  up with the party, Astrid, who is portrayed appealingly   as   a   mixture   of   naivete and  cunning, saves the situation by offer­ ing  herself  to  the  Sergeant and  his  men.  Ultimately the drunken renegade soldiers are   captured  by  U.N.   forces,   but   not before  they have  killed  the  two men  who could   most   have  helped  the   Congolese  people-Sierra  and  Songolo.   The  bit-

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



ter  irony  of these  deaths is movingly  and convincingly shown.
The effect,  unfortunately, is marred by
the  subsequent arrival of the  Fourth Nigerians to  the  rescue,  led  by a  British major who says "Dr. Grant, I presume?", quickly   followed   by  "Sandwiches  in   a jiffy"   and   brandy  in   silver   cups.   The staunch major, unlike the Congplese soldiers,   can   hold   his  liquor   and   keep his head.  Thank God  for  the  English.
But  these occasionally   jarring  notes  do
not   represent  the   essence  of  the   book. The  real   journey   is  not   the  outer   one through the  jungle  but  the  inner  one  of Dr.   Grant, a  journey   away  from  inno­ cence.  In  the  beginning, when  a  reporter tells  him  ". . . even  if these  people  were white,   yellow  or   God-damned  emerald green,  they'd  still only be one step  ahead  of  the  baboons",  Grant is  shocked.  But gradually he  discovers  the  Congolese  are not  what  he  thought they would  be. The Congolese  soldiers  really  are  "drunk and doped  and  illiterate and  crazy  and   full of  hate". He  has wanted to think  the best of   Africans,   and   now  can  no  longer  do so. His  sense of despair and futility  grows, until   he  comes   to   the   conclusion that the   reporter  was   right.   He   knows   the standard  reasons   for   the  country's  col­ lapse-the Belgians'  past  brutalities,  the cruel  exploitation of  the Congolese, their total   lack   of   political   and   educational preparation  for   independence.  But   do these factors adequately explain  the atro­ cities  committed  by  such  men  as  Tshi­ bangu? Grant feels they do  not.


I never   cut   off  anybody's hands
None  of us ever  ran  a slave  ship  ... We've all   tried   a   little  bit   to  repair  the   sins  of the  past,  sins  not  our  own,  and   here's how our   grateful black  brothers  reply.  The black    brothers  have  just   killed    Sierra,  a
 good    brave  man,  for   trying  to   lend    his services  to the  brotherhood. They've killed Songolo, another  good   brave   man, for  try­ ing    to    rise    above   their   chapter   of    the brotherhood and   lift  the  chapter with  him.

Disillusioned, angry at himself for his former idealism, Grant  decides   to  leave the  country.  At  the  last  moment,  how­ ever,   he  changes  his  mind.   As  he  con­ templates  an   African  ivory  carving,  he makes  his  decision.   "The  human figure, with   its  short   spear  poised  for  combat, was  unlike  any  living  Congolese   he  had  ever   seen;   it   bore   no   relation  to   the weak,    diseased,    braggartly,   and    half­ starved  tribesmen  he   had   known,   and yet  it  was  as  relevant to  their  condition and   their   dreams  as  is  the  hidden  god that   dwells  in  every  man." He  will  stay and  do  what  he  can  in  his miserably  in­ adequate hospital. Fair  enough. Or  is it?
For   Dr.   Grant  to  have   lost  the  first fine careless  rapture of the  essentially patronizing do-gooder is unquestionably, one  feels,  a  step  in  the  right   direction. And   for   the   author  to  have   expressed very  clearly   the  fact   that   we  need   not feel   hag-ridden  with   guilt   or   menaced by the spectre of racial  prejudice if we happen to find  some Africans repulsive­ this,  too,  is a good  thing  to  have  stated, if only as an  antidote to the false liberal­ ism of those who conscientiously condemn Dr.  Verwoerd for silencing  his opposition but   are   quite   prepared  to   excuse   Dr. Nkrumah   for    doing    the    same    thing.  Most  of all,  this  novel  is worthwhile be­ cause    it    frankly   points    out    that    for Europeans  or  Americans going  to  work in  such  countries as  the  Congo,  goodwill  is  a  very flimsy defense against  the be­ wilderment,  revulsion   and   anger   which they   will  inevitably  experience  at  some time  or  other.




BETWEEN  ARAB  AND  ISRAELI
BY LT.-GEN. E. L. M. BURNS, D.S.O., O.B.E., M.C.

Dedicated to the memory of Dag Hammarskjold, this authoritative account of the Palestine dispute is by the Canadian Chief of Staff of the U.N. Truce Supervision Organization, from   I 954  to   I 956.  General  Burns  cur­ rently  represents Canada at the Disarmament Conference in Geneva. Photographs, maps.         $6.5o



THE  TIGER  OF  CANADA WEST
BY W. H. GRAHAM

A fabulous character of the  Canadian  backwoods comes to lusty life in this vivid biography of William  Dunlop, Warden  of  the   Woods   and   Forests   with   John  Galt's Canada   Company.  Decorations  by   Margot   Lovejoy.
$6.oo



McGILLIVRAY,  LORD OF  THE  NORTHWEST
BY MARJORIE WILKINS  CAMPBELL

A  richly  documented story  of  the  colourful and   heroic era  when  the  North   West  Company, through men  like William   McGillivray, who  was trader, explorer, pioneer and   businessman,  was  establishing  its  famous   empire.
$6.so


CANADIAN  NATIONAL  RAILWAYS
BY G. R. STEVENS,  O.B.E.

"... solid, careful, documented history,  and  at  the  same time,  highly  readable and  entertaining for the general reader."-D. Kermode Parr,  The  Atlantic  Advocate.
VOLUME ONE: SIXTY YEARS OF TRIAL AND ERROR     $8.00
VOLUME TWO:  TOWARDS THE  INEVITABLE $8.oo
BOXED SET $I2.50

At all book and  department  stores

CLARKE IRWIN
TORONTO     VANCOUVER



59

REVIEW ARTICLES



Nevertheless, there  is a  glibness  about this  book  which  disturbs  me.  Dr.  Grant is  too  ready  to  take  things  at  their  face value,   too  ready   to  accuse  the  Africans of   ingratitude   without  determining whether or  not  they  feel  they  have  any­ thing   to  be  grateful for,  and  apparently without recognizing   that  his  own  cry  of outraged  justice   ("...  here's how  our grateful black  brothers reply") is at  least partly  the  cry  of  someone  who  has  hun­  gered   for   the   Africans'   gratitude  more than   he   could   have   realized   when   he started out  and  who  is almost  childishly piqued when  it  isn't  there.
Only   once,   it  seems  to  me,  does  he touch  upon  what  may  be  the  true  diag­ nosis.   "I'm  beg nning
least  some  of  the  problem  out  here  isn't a psychiatric problem.... They're scared, always    have    been,    always   had    good reason   to  be  . . ."  Iwish   this  line  of enquiry  had   been   followed   further. In the   main,   however,   the   Congolese  sol­ diers are  shown  only as they undoubtedly appeared  on   the  surface-drunken, stupid,   irresponsible,   murderous.  Tshi­  bangu   is  a  sadistic   ape-man,  snatching eagerly at  power,  but clownishly  unaware of   what   power   means.   He   boasts  con­ stantly  of his physical strength, of his courage, of his education (which  has actually been  pathetically slight), but where  the author might have  used this boasting   to   reveal   inner   stresses,  I  get the impression instead  that  he views Tshibangu's   pretensions only   with   dis­ approval   and    distaste,    as   though    he really  did  not  suspect  at  all  the  vulner­ ability  that  might  lie behind  them.  Tshi­  bangu's men are portrayed as dangerously cruel  children, gleefully fondling the  toys of  war.  They   are  all  motivated only  by lust-for  drink,   for  women,  for  power.

6o
 I wonder   if  they  can   really  have   been so  uncomplex  and   so  easily  explained? I have   known   a  number  of  tribal   and semi-tribal   people    in   East    and    West Africa,    and   while   I  certainly do   not claim   to  have  understood them,  I know at  least  that  not  one  of them  could  have been  called  simple.
It  is,  of  course,   exceedingly   difficult for  us to comprehend the  motivations of tribal   and   semi-tribal  people.   By  semi­ tribal   I mean   those  who  no  longer live within    their   tribes   but   whose  concepts and   values  are  still  largely  those  of  the tribe.   The  Congolese  soldiers  appear  to be in this group. Tribal man  differs from individual  man   in  needs  and   values  as much   as   it   is  possible   for   humans  to differ  one  from   another. This   is  not,  I need  hardly say,  a  racial   difference; on the  contrary, it  explains  why  many  edu­ cated  and de-tribalized Africans are so lonely-their   wide   educational   differ­ ences  from   their   own   people  are  slight when  compared with  their  psychological differences.
The  best   outline  of   the   tribal   per­ sonality  which  I have  seen is to be found  in  0. Mannoni's Prospera  And  Caliban: The   Psychology  Of   Colonization, in which,   incidentally,   the  description  of the   Madagascar  uprising   in  1947  bears an   uncanny   resemblance  to  the  Congo  situation.   "When  faced   with   a  serious difficulty,"  Dr.  Mannoni says, "the typi­ cal  European tends to rely on his self­ confidence   or   his   technical   skill.   His main   concern  is  not   to  prove   inferior either   to  his  own  idea  of  himself  or  to the  situation.  But   the  main   concern   of the  Malagasy, when his  security is threatened, is not  to feel  abandoned. He has  practically  no  confidence in  himself and   very  little   in   technique,  but   relies

REVIEW ARTICLES



on   certain   protective  powers    without which  he  would  be  utterly lost."
The same  could  be said  of most  parts of   Africa,   although  anything  which   is said  in  a  general way  wiii  obviously  be an  over-simplification. Tribal  man  never stands    alone.   He    is   guided  from   his earliest   childhood  by  the  tribal   customs and  by the  tribal  elders,  who  in  turn  are guided   by  what   they  consider   to  be  the voices of the ancestors. Past, present  and future  are   thus   seen   as   a   continuum. The individual has  little   or  no  sense  of his separate identity, and  cannot even contemplate a  life  apart from   the  tribe. He  depends for  his  sense  of  security  on the observance of rituals and on the essentially  magical or spiritual power of protectors, the  elders  and  chief,  the  an­ cestors  and  the  gods. When  the European enters   the   picture,  breaks   all   the   local taboos  and  apparently gets  away  with  it, he  frequently  takes  on  the  role  of  pro­  tector. This dependence  relationship has nothing  whatsoever to  do  with  personal likes or  dislikes. To  the  tribal  man,  what  matters is  not  whether  he  likes  his  pro­  tector, but  the  degree  of  power  that   the protector  is  believed   to  possess.  Signifi­ cantly,  as  Dr.   Mannoni  points   out   in regard to  the  Malagasy uprising, and  as subsequently  happened in  the  Congo,  it is  not   when   the   European  is  the  most stern  that  the  revolt  occurs,  but  when  he has  suddenly  decided to  be more  liberal.  In giving   a  greater degree   of  responsi­  bility  to  people   who  are   utterly  unpre­ pared  for  it,  he  thrusts those  with  tribal concepts  into   a  state   of  abandonment, the   appalling  uncertainties of  which will   be  felt   most   keenly   by  those   who have   already  once   been   uprooted from their   birth-tribes  and   who   have   found
 substitute tribes  within, say, the  police  or the army.
Many   of  the  Congolese  soldiers   had
been recruited forcibly,  tom from  their ancient  protections and  put  into  an army which   must   to  some  extent  have   taken the place of the tribe.  Although they probably   detested  their   Belgian   officers, the officers were self-assured and  capable of   maintaining  an   order    which    must have  had  more   ritual than   military  sig­ nificance   to  the   tribal   mind.  With   the  arrival  of   independence,  the   order   of things,  the  patterns of   propitiation, the most  basic  guarantees  of  inner security,  must  for the Congolese soldier  have quite  literally  fallen  apart.
I have  no  doubt  that  the  soldiers  were "drunk and  doped  and  crazy  and  full  of hate". But  I also  think  it  is possible  that they  were  men  filled  with  terrors  which they   did   not   begin   to   understand  but which  compelled   them  towards the  false

REVIEW ARTICLES



buoyancy  of  bottled  courage   or   empty boasting   and    towards    the   momentary release    found    in   violence,   a   violence which   conveniently  provided   them   with scapegoats for  their  own  turmoil. I may be quite  mistaken, and  the  true explana­ tion   may   lie  along   other  lines  entirely.  But  whatever the  explanation may  be, I do  not  believe  it  is  likely to  be a  simple one.   A   statement   such  as  Dr.   Grant's, "By  God, they  are   just  down  from   the trees", tells us nothing about  the  Congo­ lese,  although  it  does  tell  a  good  deal about   a  western  observer  who  is bitterly  disappointed at  what  he  takes  to  be  the


SLUICES  OF LITERACY
 ignoble   savage.   In   fact,   of  course,  both noble  savage  and  ignoble  savage  are equally  myths,  creatures of our own imaginations. The   reality   of  tribal   men is not to be found  in such subjective judgments as  these.
As   Dr.   Grant  in   the   end   sets   out stoically   on   his  round   of  the  wards,   I have the feeling that  unless he somehow begins  to  see  the  Congolese   in  terms  of their own  concepts and background, rather  than    his  own,   "the  hidden god that  dwells in every man" will very likely remain permanently hidden.









Paul West


The  Arts   as  Communication. The   President's  Lectures,    Summer    1961:  Albert Trueman; Robertson   Davies;   Pierre   Berton.   Edited   by  D.   C.  Williams.  Uni­ versity of Toronto Press. $2.50.


HERE  ARE THREE EXPERTS with   something  of   the   amateur  about them.  A pedagogue-administrator, an all­ round  man  of   letters  cum   Principal­ designate, and  a  columnist-panelist, they talk  as  reasonable, unsolemn  men  whose true   expertise  is  in   the   space   between  man   and  man.  I  would have  been happier if  the  title  had  read  Communi­ cation as  Art-upgrading  Communica­ tion   rather  than  downgrading  art.   But all  three  speakers,  with  their   respective emphases,   dispel   the   apprehensions  of the  reader who  has  seen too  many  pom­ pously  dogmatic uses of the  word  "com­ munication".  Flair,   not   methodology, IS   their   touchstone; and  in contact  with
 it the sacred cows of this identity-seeking country  disintegrate  into   sacred   ham­ burger.
Dr.   Trueman  considers   communica­ tion  "as  it  is related to  the  work  of  the Canada  Council".   The   arts    and    the humanities, he  unexceptionably declares,  are  "our   most  effective,   subtle,  and   en­ during  means  of  communication"; and  the  most  exhilarating part   of his exposi­  tion  is  his  onslaught on  "the cheap, the illiterate,  the   glib   vulg,arity   that   com­ municates  nothing  of   consequence   and  degrades taste  and  judgment by stupefy­  ing  volume   and  unabashed  persistence". Alongside  the Canada Council Dr.  True­ man   sets   the  C.B.C.  and   the   National

REVIEW ARTICLES



Film  Board: these  are  "among the finest achievements".  Of  course   they  are   ( al­ though it  seems  to  me  that   the  Council is   putting   too   much    power   into    the hands  of  university   presidents). The  C.B.C.,   like  the   presence   of  oxygen,  is all  right,  especially  in  comparison  with the  hebetating rubbish   put  out  by radio  and  TV  stations whose  only  criterion is the  fast   buck.  The blank   TV   screen  is a   promised   land   needing  survey   in  the Pilkington manner. And  the Film Board: some   good   things,   yes;   but   surely   its output  is  for   the  most   part   either  raw or   gimmicky,  lacking   in   genuine  style and  handicapped by poor  scripts.  All in all,   however,   Dr.   Trueman's silk  purse does  exist;  so too  does  the  swinish  taste­ lessness  of  the   advertisers and   sponsors whose  omnipresence he notes with  digni­ fied  distaste  while  he advances by means  of  quotations   (Gibbon, Crane  Brinton,  Samuel  Johnson, F. L. Lucas and  Shake­  speare)   towards an  affirmation which  I find    particularly   appealing: 	"we    all have", he says, "a  personal, private, indi­ vidual   life  to  lead,  and  . . .  we  should make    it   as   interesting,   as   warm,    as coloured, and  as  passionate as  possible." Such  statements make  you want to cheer.  The    Canada   Council  is   in   safe,   very human hands here; its  job  is to  minister  to   privacies   and,   I   suggest,  by  taking  risks,  to  link  itself  to  the  world   of  arts and   humanities at  large rather  than   to homebodies and  diligent young  foresters  who  can  guarantee to  cut  safe  wood.  If we  interpret Dr.  Trueman in  the  fullest sense,  he  surely   means   that,  ultimately, creative  ability    will   out;   masterpieces will  arrive.   But  people  are  queer   things, and   hard   to  fit  into   the  localized   light industry  the  Canada  Council  could  be­ come   unless   the   Truemans  keep   ham-
 mering   away   on   behalf   of  the   private and  even irresponsible nature of creative intuition. Dr.  Trueman's listeners  at  the Toronto summer school  must  surely have heard him with some relief and much gratification. An urbane trust  in unruly individuality  is  always  welcome.
Robertson  Davies's  address  on   "The Theatre" exemplifies  what  Dr.  Trueman wants.   Davies   stands   for   style;   indeed, takes   his  stand   on   it,   thank   God.   He offers  a  quotation in  keeping: "When a monkey  looks in a mirror, no apostle  can look  out".    (Take  that,  Mr.   and   Mrs. Viewer!)  With  owlish  hyperbole he  des­ cribes  the  theatre as  "a   temple   of  feel­ ing"  and,  in  the  course  of  his  eloquent and  wide-ranging lecture, hits at modern plays  ( "bepoxed  by  sentimentality" and  not  a  patch   on  Restoration drama,  not to  mention   the   Elizabethan  and   Jaco­ bean),  modern  timidity, as well  as Can­ adian  "national  nervousness  and   hyper­ sensitivity"  and  obsession with  "the national image". He   asks  for  some  na­ tional  iconoclasts  and  anti-utopians.  And I bet,  when   he  sees  the   vacuous  antic  which  is the  Shirley  Harmer show or  the Country Hoe-Down which  Dr.  Trueman derides,   he  asks  for  a  hammer.  I have not  the  space  here  to quote  Mr.  Davies's  longer  assaults:  he writes  in short,  upper­ cutting  paragraphs  which   reflect  a  full, darting  mind.  Where Dr.  Trueman con­ centrates on  communication between  in­ dividual   and    individual,  Mr.    Davies brings all  his subtlety  to  bear  on  the  real truth about   audiences:  people  respond­ ing  in  concert   are   easily   beguiled   into  simplistic  atitudes-and  the playwright must  safeguard  us  against  this.  The theatregoer should  be  as  much   an  indi­ vidual    as   a   person   in   church;  being utterly   yourself   is  a  strenuous   business

REVIEW ARTICLES



because    conformity  consoles   and   pre­ fabricated  'national'  attitudes   spare  us the  burden of self-definition. Mr. Davies's  final   question,  "Dare   we   look?"    also implies   judging  and  damning.
Mr.   Berton   offers  a  fascinating  piece on the press and periodicals. He thinks newspapers are becoming more  like magazines and  vice  versa. Carefully enu­ merating the  factors  which  are changing our  society -comic  books,  pocket  books and   TV-he  speaks  not  without affec­ tion  of  the  old  thrillers  (Dr.  Death and Wu  Fang  evoked)   and  the  more  recent  Sweat    and    Confession   mags    ("I    was Luke's Wife  and  Barney's Mistress  But  I Never  Stopped  being  Tragedy's Child") and    identifies   a   new   reading    public: young   men  with  university   background and   spare  money   (Playboy)  and  "teen­ agers  ... more  sophisticated today  than
... twenty  years  ago"  (Mad). He  also
discusses  the   fact-fetichism created  and encouraged by quiz programmes and pre­ dicts   a   boom   in   specialized   magazines  ("the  'mass'   is  a   much   more   compli­ cated   structure than   it  used  to  be")   as well as the  rise of the specialist  writer­ the  educated  columnist who  is a  master  of   "background   knowledge". He   closes with  a  lament  for   the  two-paper  town and  a  rebuke   to  the  chains  which,  keen on   that    buck,   want   to  offend   no-one. "If we  get  conformity in  the  press",  he says,   "we   will   certainly  get   it   in   the public,  and   there    lies  a   threat  to   all of us."
These lectures  hang  together  pointedly
well.  Messrs.  Trueman  and   Davies  ex­ press  misgivings  about  blinkered  experts,  especially   the   mass-media   experts   who may  or  may  not  have  taste,  but  usually fail  to  exercise  it.  (A  smug  society  loves experts because   they  flatter  it  into  feel-
 ing    knowledgeable   and    efficient.)     As these   two  speakers   remind  us,  the  indi­ vidual  is   always   a   spiritual   amateur, making his own  rules  for  self-fulfilment. And  Dr.  Trueman's  plea  for  individual richness  of  experience  (at  times  echoing  Pater)   and   Mr.   Davies's   invitation  to brave   honesty   (echoing  Ibsen)    coincide in  cautioning us against  the  rising  expert  spotted by  Mr.  Berton.
The danger to  communication  is triple:  experts   will   ( 1)  fit  us  out   with ready-made  attitudes  which    stereotype us, ( 2)  claim  to be honest  on our  behalf, thus  relieving  us of the pains of even stereotyped awareness,  and   (3)   finally disqualify  us  from   mental initiative at all-except  for  thinking about pipes  if we are  plumbers and  pedagogy  if we are teachers. The  real  humanist is always  an oddball:  fascinated, fumbling, rather unsystematic, always  eclectic,   mostly  his own  man,   and   liberal.   He  is  in  danger of disappearing, and  even  the  best efforts of  the  Truemans, Davieses  and   Bertons will be unavailing if efficiency-minded modern man  elects  to let experts do his judging for  him.  These lectures, the  first to  be  given,  were  meant, as Dr.  Claude Bissell says in  his Foreword, "to  broaden the   context  within   which   the  members of the  summer University community pursue  their   studies". They   must  surely have   done   that. And   in  a  short  Intro­ duction Mr.  D. C.  Williams observes that  each   lecture is  concerned  with  "the in­  escapability  of   artistic   judgment".  Yes indeed; and  the  more  "communication" multiplies its media  and volume  the more judging we must  do for  ourselves.  These  lectures challenge  and  blame; challenge us to  do our  own  challenging and  blame  us for  not  doing  it  often  enough.



REVOLUTIONS IN COMMUNICATION
 





Tony Emery



MARSHALL MCLUHAN.  The  Gutenberg  Galaxy. University of Toronto. $5·95·


IT  IS  TEN YEARS  since  Mar­ shall   McLuhan  examined, in  The  Me­ chanical  Bride,  the  impact of  advertising, journalism, movies  and  comic  books  on the  North  American  public, and  held  up for   scrutiny    "the   folklore   of  industrial man".  Since   then   he  has  widened   and deepened his  study  of  the  effects  of  the invention of  typography and   the  photo­ engraving process  to include all  the mass media  of  communication. Interim reports  of his progress  and  that  of his co-adjutor, E.  S.  Carpenter,  have   appeared in  the magazine Explorations, and  in a book, Explorations in  Communication  ( 1g6o). In  The Gutenberg Galaxy  Dr.  McLuhan offers  us  the   first  full-length  exposition of  the  conclusions to  which  these  studies have  led.
In  his   preface   to   The   Mechanical
Bride  McLuhan warned the  reader   that he  had  adopted  a  "circulating point  of view",  and  that   there  was  therefore "no need   for   it   to   be   read   in   any   special order". The  Gutenberg Galaxy   also  car­ ries   a   note   on   its  flyleaf   advising   the reader   of  the   method  employed  in  the pages  that  follow.  The book, we are told, "develops a  mosaic  or  field  approach to its   problems.    Such   a   mosaic   image   of numerous  data    and   quotations  in   evi­ dence  offers  the  only  practical means  of revealing  causal   operations  in   history. The  alternative  procedure would   be  to
 offer  a  series  of  views  of  fixed  relation­ ships   in   pictorial   space."   This    lively challenge to  deep-rooted  academic con­ vention  and  habits  of  mind  sets the  pace for   a   vital,   breathless,  searching  and  most  important  book.
The   main   argument of  the  book  can be  stated   briefly  enough. Primitive,  illi­ terate   man   lives  in   an   "audile-tactile" world    until    he   reaches   that    stage   of development  at   which   he  settles   down to  a  sedentary  life,  begins  to  specialize,  and  starts  "on   the  way  to  the  discovery of  the  visual  mode  of  experience". This mode   becomes   the  dominant  one   with the  invention  of   the   phonetic alphabet which  "gives  the barbarian or  tribal  man  an  eye  for  an  ear":  but  in  a  world  in which  few  people  are  literate the  effects of  this  revolution are  kept  within  fairly narrow   limits.  Then comes   the  Guten­ berg  "breakthrough",  which changes everything for  everybody  in  the  civilized i.e.   literate,   world.    "The   difference", says  McLuhan,   "between  the   man   of print and   the  man   of  scribal   culture  is nearly    as   great    as   that    between    the literate and  the  non-literate."
Print   culture  leads   to  the   separation of functions, the fixed point of view, homogeneity and  uniformity, nationalism, polyphony,   the  discovery  of  perspective, a  new  "consumer world", the  possibility of "bad  grammar" and  "wrong spelling",

REVIEW ARTICLES



a  "market economy" and  a "market society",  to name a few of the more important  results.   I  have   reeled   them off in a catalogue, not to make fun of McLuhan's thesis,  which  I find  at  most points   persuasive    and   everywhere   pro­ vocative   of  thought,  but   to  give  some idea   of  the  wide   range   that   he  covers. What he  is dealing with,  he  insists, is a great   configuration, a  galaxy:   it  would be quite  inappropriate,  as well  as waste­ ful  of  time,  space  and  energy,  to treat  it in a sequential, linear fashion: the whole trap  of  print culture,  he  points  out,  has been   to  inculcate  all  but  indelibly   that  "notion  of   moving   steadily   along    on single   planes    of    narrative  awareness  (which)  is totally  alien  to  the  nature of language and  of  consciousness.  But  it  is highly  consistent  with  the  nature of  the printed  word."
There is a sense of urgency  behind McLuhan's words.  He  locates  man  today at  "a  moment of interplay of contrasting cultures"; the  Gutenberg-galactic  world










,
,
I
I
l•,...,




66
 was shivered by the invention of the telegraph and  fragmented further by the advent of moving  pictures, radio and photofacsimile procedures; it should  have come   to   an   end   with   the  discovery   of curved    space,   but   it   has   tottered   on until   the  mass  media   of  communication made    possible    by   electronic   progress have  finally  dissolved  it.  The new  world now  taking   shape   is  the  result  of  these new   media.    Just   as  the   monk   reading aloud   from   a  manuscript  was  replaced by   the    man    reading  silently   from    a printed book,  so  the  visual  world  of  the print-reader now  gives way  to  the "mosaic" of the  television  screen  and  the astringent forces  of mass communication which  have  shrunk   the  world  to  the  size of a large  village,  and,  making  man  oral once  more,  have  re-tribalized him.
The  McLuhan approach in  The  Me­
chanical   Bride  was   by  means   of  large photographic  reproductions  of  the   ad­ vertisements,  book   jackets,    and   comic strips   which   he  called   in  evidence; the present   work  makes  considerable use  of quotations  culled   from  a  staggering variety    of   works.   By  this   means   Mc­  Luhan is enabled  to come  as close to his aim   of   "simultaneous  presentation"  as the nature of the  printed book will allow, and  though  the  effect  on  the  reader   is at   first   bewildering  the   technique   be­ comes   easily   acceptable  after    a   short period  of familiarization. And  the quota­ tions  are  from   books  of  the  utmost   im­ portance  which    do   not   seem   to   have had   the   attention   in  general  that   they deserve.   From   this  point  of  view,  John  Wain's   description   of   The   Gutenberg Galaxy   as  "one   of   the  great   panoptic books of our  time" is  no more  than   just.
In  particular, McLuhan has  focussed attention on  Lord's The  Singer of Tales,

REVIEW ARTICLES



Harold Innis's The  Bias of  Communica­ tions,  Ivin's Art  and  Geometry:  A Study in   Space   Intuitions,  and  the    same author's  Prints  and  Visual Communica­ tion,   Tobias    Dantzig's Number:  The Language   of   Science,  Chaytor's  From Script   to  Print, Mellers's Music  and  So­ ciety,  and  Gombrich's Art  and  Illusion. And   he  has  placed   in  an  entirely   new light   what   he   calls   "the   four   massive myths   of  the  Gutenberg  transformation of    society",    namely    Gargantua,  Don Quixote, The   Dunciad,  and   Finnegans Wake.
Readers of The Mechanical Bride  will recall   that   the  aim  of  that   book  was  to "use  the  new  commercial education as a means to enlightening its intended prey", and  "to  assist  the  public  to observe  con­ sciously  the  drama which  is  intended to operate  upon   its  unconsciously",  in  the spirit  of Poe's sailor scrutinizing the flot­ sam  in  the  maelstrom. The present  work is  less  didactic in  its  aim.  "Value judg­ ments  have  long  been  allowed   to  create  a moral fog around technological change such   as   renders  understanding  impos­ sible,"  says the  author in one  place; and "But   lest  it  be  inferred  that   this  effect of  print   culture is  a  'bad   thing'  ..." elsewhere.  However, towards the  end  of the  book,  the  author points  the  way out of   the   maelstrom  of   twentieth-century mass  media   which   is  already  beginning to  engulf   our   society   with   a  daily  in­ creased  momentum. "Is  it  not  possible," he  asks,  "to   emancipate  ourselves  from the   subliminal  operation   of   our   tech­ nologies?  Is  not  the essence of education civil   defence   against   media    fall-out?" And  elsewhere,  "The point   is  ... how do   we  become  aware  of  the  effects  of alphabet or  print  or  telegraph in  shap­  ing  our  behaviour? For  it  is absurd  and
 ignoble  to be shaped by such  means." Again   the   answer   lies  in   education.
"Knowledge does  not  extend  but  restrict
the   areas   of  determinism.  And   the  in­ fluence  of  unexamined  assumptions  de­ rived   from   technology  leads   quite   un­ necessarily   to  maximal   determinism   in human life. Emancipation  from  that  trap  is the goal of  all education." If we do not heed   this  warning  we  shall   be  headed straight   for   Orwell's  1984;   that   is  the implicit  message of  this vital  and  electri­ fying  book.  For  a  deep  scrutiny   of  the electronic age  in  which  we live  now,  we must  wait  until  McLuhan's Understand­ ing  Media  is published. If it  comes  near  to his examination of the Gutenberg era  in  scope   and   range   it   will  be  a  book worth   waiting   for.






THE VANCOUVER STATIONERS LTD.

Printing Lithography Commercial
Stationery





TRINITY  9-5341

3642 COMMERCIAL DRIVE, VANCOUVER 12, B.C.

CANADIAN LEXICOGRAPHY
 





Robert]. Gregg



Dictionnaire    canadien-The  Canadian Dictionary. Universite   de   Montreal, McClelland and  Stewart. $5·95·


LEXICOGRAPHICALLY CANADA seems to be coming  of age. A year or two ago we had  Belisle's Dictionnaire GewJral
de  la  Langue   Franfaise   au  Canada;  we
are  awaiting a Canadian English diction­ ary  from   the   Oxford   University   Press; the  first  volume  of  Gage's  Dictionary of Canadian English  has just appeared; and  now  we  have  the  first fruits  of the  work done  at  the Centre  de recherches  lexico­ graphiques  de  l'Universite de  Montreal: the  bilingual French-English, English­ French dictionary entitled Dictionnaire canadien or The Canadian Dictionary. The editorial team  responsible  for this "Concise edition" (a  term  which  we  as­ sume implies  larger,  more comprehensive volumes  yet to come)   is headed by Jean­ Paul   Vinay,  Director  of   the  Linguistics Department   at   the  University  of  Mon­  treal, and  includes Pierre Daviault, Henry  Alexander, Jean  Darbelnet  (who   colla­ borated  with   Vinay   on   the   Stylistique comparee  du    franfais  et   de   L'anglais, Beauchemin,   Montreal, I 958),  R.   W. Jeanes, and,  as  special  editors,  F.  E. L.  Priestley, D. E. Hamilton, G.-R. Lefebvre and  G.  des  Marchais.
Behind all this lexicographical activity lies obviously  a  recognition of  the  separ­ ate   identity  of  both   Canadian   English and   Canadian  French and   of   the  need for  their  special  treatment  vis-a-vis other  varieties  of  the  two  languages.  The vol-

68
 ume  under  review  underlines the  further necessity of matching Canada's two official languages in sets  of bilingual equivalences.
The solid  linguistic basis of  this  work and   the  editors' interest and  experience in  the  field  of  translation, or  we  might say  more  accurately comparative  seman­ tics,  are  everywhere in  evidence.  As the  editor-in-chief stresses  in  his preface, the  placing  of words  in  their  context and  the clear   indication  of   levels  of  usage  give those   who   resort   to   the   dictionary  the power  to  utilize  its  store  of words  in  the most   effective  way,  whether  translating English  or French, especially  if they study carefully  all the  introductory material in which  the  dictionary's underlying princi­ ples are  set out.
The inside  covers, front  and  back, pro­ vide   keys   to   the   French  and   English  phonetic  transcriptions which  are  given for  each  word.  These keys set  up  a  basic
36   items   for   the   French  phonological
system  and  45  (plus  2  stress  marks)  for the English,  which seems to cover all requirements adequately.
Some   introductory  notes  on  the  idio­ syncrasies  of Canadian French  pronunci­ ation  will prove  informative to those who wish  to interpret the  phonetic transcrip­ tions in more  precise Canadian terms  and  will certainly help  to  bridge  the gap  per­  ceived   by  English-speaking  Canadians

REVIEW ARTICLES



who -exposed  exclusively   in  school  to
French a la  parisienne-find themselves
at  a loss when  they first visit Montreal or
Quebec. The notes  on  diphthongization, and  on  the  lengthening due  to secondary stress, cover  points  not  always sufficiently recognized. Important  general  innova­ tions  in  the  transcriptions are  the  recog­ nition   of  post-Passy trends  in  current French  towards  the   neutralization  or phonetic fusion  of  /a/  and  /a/, both  of which  are  represented by  /a/, especially in  pretonic  position,  and  of  /e/  and/t:/ whose opposition often  fails to function in final open  syllables where  only lei occurs.
The consistent indication of the supra­ segmental feature of vowel length  (which  is  admittedly  for   the   most  part  a sub­ phonemic matter)   will  also  be  a  useful reminder to the  English-speaking student that  his allophonic habits  with vowels are often  in conflict  with  French practice. In this  connection it seems  rather confusing  that  in the  French table given on the end papers  one heading reads:  (Vowels)   Fol­ lowed   by  a   LONG   consonant   and   an­  other:  (Vowels)   Followed  by a SHORT consonant, when  what  is actually short  or long   is  the   vowel   itself.   The  so-called LONG consonants might better have been termed LENGTHENING. One particularly  useful   feature  of  the  tran­ scriptions  is  the   treatment  of   [a]   (the  misnamed  "e-muet")   which   is   printed between   parentheses whenever  it  may  be elided,   is  omitted  altogether  when  It  IS normally  silent    (e.g.   in   medecin)  and printed  without   parentheses  when   it  is compulsory to  sound  it  (e.g.  in  the  first syllable of  crevette) .
Special  features  found in   the   pro­
nunciation of Canadian English are also treated in the preliminary notes. Those conversant  with   the   problems  involved
 here  are  well aware  of  the  tricky  nature of  the  terrain   and  of  our  frequent  lack of  definite  statistical information  cover­ ing  the  whole  of Canada when  it  comes to deciding  which  of two or more current forms is the preferred one among English­ speaking  Canadians. In  general it  often boils  down   to  an   impressionistic  judg­ ment,  and  for  the  most  part   the  editors  of  this  dictionary   have   made   judicious  decisions.
The   spelling  of  French in  Canada­ or elsewhere -raises no particular prob­  lems,  and   certainly   none   of  a  regional  nature. With  English,  since  the  innova­ tions  adopted  by Noah  Webster  in  1828, the situation is different.
English-speaking Canadians, because of their  continuing traditional links  with Britain  and of their  geographical proxim-




Cbt Hiddtn mountain
GABRIELLE ROY

Blinded  with his obsession of a perfect beauty, the artist  Pierre aimlessly wanders  northward­ only  to  find   disillusionment  and finally  self-destruction  awaiting him.

Thus in  her  inimitable style, Gabrielle  Roy  succeeds  in  unfold­ ing a dramatic story  in  which  she candidly   oboerves  the  inner   spirit  of  a man -of  a  life  passionately dedicated to  creation.

$4·95

McCLELLAND & STEWART



6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



ity  to  the  United States,  have  for  a long time been exposed to conflicting spelling practices and have characteristically made their   own  choice,   sometimes  sticking   to the  traditional form and sometimes adopting the  new. The  editors  have once again  acted  judiciously in this area by retaining -II- in  words  such  as traveller;
-ce  in  licence, etc; ae-  in  aesthetic and the like (although with encyclopaedia the
-ae- seems less well-founded, cp. Encyclo­ pedia  Canadiana); -re  in centre; -ize in recognize. The  opposition   between   -ize and   -ise  is  not   strictly   an   American­ British  conflict  as -ize finds support every­ where,  in the OED as well as in Webster. The main  disagreement lies rather with spellings  such  as analyze  versus  analyse. The  Dictionnaire  canadien fluctuates here,  giving  analyse  as the  translation of French analyser and  later  analyze as an English  entry  word. Here,   of  course, etymology-for what  it is worth-backs the  -s-  spelling.  The   preference of  -our over   -or   may,   however,   not   meet   with general approval. Many may feel that  the W ebsterian -or  should  have  priority.
The various   symbols  used  throughout the dictionary merit  careful  preliminary study.  They   have  been  well  thought out and  are  consistently used to convey essen­ tial   information  in   as  brief   a   form   as possible,  e.g.  the  use  of  special  signs  to indicate when  we are  dealing  with  trans­  lations  on the same or on different seman­  tic levels; familiar usage ( avachi, gueule) ;
archaisms ( futaille, ambages) ; neologisms
( alunir, autoroute, stylo a bille) ; adstra­
tum   influences  (char  usage,   realiser) ;
brackets  to   enclose   grammar  or   usage notes  (achever  [souvent rendu  par  UP], aussi  [followed by inversion  and  meaning "therefore"] ) ; deceptive cognates,  better known  perhaps as les faux amis; a circled
 C to mark  Canadianisms, both  French (achaler, to bother)  and  English   ( to be elected  by  acclamation, i.e.,  unopposed). A skilfully  devised  table  of  French  verbs is provided which is referred to by num­ bers  from  the  body  of  the  book.  All  ir­ regular or difficult  verb forms are listed separately  in   the   dictionary  and   the reader is cross-referred to the  main  entry word.  The  pronunciation of  such  forms is generally indicated but  it  has  not  been given   in   at   least   two  cases  where   the student  might   easily  need   it,  viz.,  with the  "ai" and  "eu" forms  of avoir  (pp.   I I and   I65).
With   regard to  the  main   body  of  the
book its most striking characteristic is the thoroughness  with   which,   under  entries requiring several  equivalents in  the other language,  the  various  semantic  equiva­ lents  have  been  classified  and  placed  in a rational order. This  self-evident frame­ work makes  it easy for the student to find with  minimum  delay  the  subdivision   he requires and  a wealth of well-chosen  illus­ trative phrases and  sentences provide  him with  working  models  in  his task of trans­ lation. Thus  under tirer   we  have  seven numbered subdivisions  ranging from con­ crete  equivalents  (pull; shoot;  print) through figurative uses   (draw-a  con­ clusion)   and  idiomatic  phrases   (be  hard  up;    come   out   even)    to   Canadianisms ( tirer   les  vaches,   milk   the   cows) ;  and under end  we have eight, cla sified [conclusion], [place where a thing stops], [remote section  of town], [purpose], [ re­ sult], [death],  [fragment], and   various  idioms including the Canadianism end  of steel  translated as bout  m.  de la ligne.
A detailed comparison of the first part of  the  dictionary with  the  second  shows that in general cross-references have  been adequately  checked   from   one  language

REVIEW ARTICLES



to  the  other. Thus abattu is rendered by de pressed   (which  shows typically  the priority   given   to  contemporary  equiva­ lents,   dejected    and   downhearted   being relegated to second and  third place)   and  depressed is  translated by abattu (as well as  deprime)   in  the  English-French sec­ tion.  There  are  a  few  oversights in  this respect:  aboiteau is listed  in  the  French­ English  part  but  its not  very helpful  ren­ dering, aboiteau, is missing in the English­ French  lists  although the  word  is  used among English  speakers  in the Maritimes; noix  d'acajou is translated by cashew-nut but   the  latter word  is  missing  from  the
 English  entries; accrocher in one sense means  to sideswipe  (a car)  but sideswipe is not  listed.
The  editors  would  undoubtedly regard it  as a  useful  service  if  users  of  the  dic­ tionary   were  to   note  and  list   minor  blemishes  of  this   type   along   with   any mistakes  or  misprints, for  the  first  print­ ing  of this very  valuable  work is already  exhausted and  there  will  certainly be an opportunity to  correct  such  small  points in  future  editions. In  any  case  all  such information  will  feed   into   the   archives  for  the  larger   volumes  of  the  dictionary to which  we now look forward.













OTHER  SIDES OF MOONS

GEORGE ELLIOTT.   The  Kissing  Man.  Macmil­
lan.  $3.50.

ETHEL WILSON,  W.  0. Mitchell, Irving Layton  have   each   published   collections of  short   stories  in  the  past  little  while, and  it is good  to see a new collection  by a   new   author  join   them.   Volumes   of short  stories,  like books of poetry,  seldom ring  up  sales which  even  remotely  justify them    as   worthwhile  business   ventures, but   publishers  continue  to  print   occa­ sional  collections with  the result  that  the reputations  of  some   very  good   authors rest   partially,  if   not   wholly,   on   their abilities  as   writers    of   short   fiction­ Angus   Wilson,   William   Sansom,   John
Updike, and  J. D.  Salinger  come  imme­
diately   to  mind. I would  hope  that   this collection by George  Elliott  is the  begin­ ning   of  a  literary  career   which   might  allow  a reviewer   some  time  to  call  out  his  name in  the  same  breath   with  those I've   just  mentioned.
Certainly, the  man  can  write.  He  is a
very conscious artist. He does not waste words.   He   knows   how   the   real   world around us looks and smells and feels. He senses   strongly    the   other    side   of   the moon   of  human  personality. And  he  is sensitive: I  mean    he   knows   when   to chop  and  when  to add.  He  knows about time  and  its  limitations and  its elasticity


j2
 
within  a story.  He  is not  academic about point   of  view,  nor   tyrannized  by  place and  scene  and  transition. What he lacks, most  of the  time,  is the  secure  knowledge that    his   characters  can   tell   the   story better   than   he  can.  When  he  learns  this I  predict a   fine   talent   will   be   loosed among  us.
The stories in this volume called The Kissing  Man, then,  are  not  short  stories in the usual sense. Some are prose poems; others    are   simple   allegory;  others   are bits  of fantasy; and  one  or  two are  such colossal  failures  as  to  be  unidentifiable. The  title   story,   perhaps, falls  into   this latter category. But  before  going  any farther it should  be said that  these eleven pieces  were  written as a book. They  have a single setting-a small,   anonymous, Ontario  town-and  a  group of   recur­ ring   names,   which,   while   they   do   not connect  the   stories,   contribute   to   the author's strong  sense of place. The whole work,  without much   change  of  pace  or direction  and   with   the   addition  of   a unifying central  agency,  could   be  made  in to  a  novel.
Writing about small towns in North America most  often  turns  out  to be writ­ ing  about grotesques. Perhaps  Southern Gothic is to  blame  for  this,  but  I doubt it.  In  a  small  town,  the  bare facts  of  a man's life  hang  out  farther and  authors tend   to  pounce   on  them   like  gulls  on  a fish  barge.   Mr.  Elliott   does  not  pounce. For  him,  people are situations, sometimes  carriers,   sometimes   simply   exhibit  "A" submitted in evidence for or against  the human condition, and  he works among them,  stringing allegorical webs  to catch the   moral   fly.  Thus,  the   Kissing   Man enters the  store  where  young  aQd pretty Froody works and  kisses lonely,  unhappy women,  making  them   feel   that    some-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



thing  kind  and  pitying and  perhaps magi­ cal   has   come  into  their    lives.   When  Froody   asks  him,  as  he  is  escaping  out through  the   back  of  the  store,  why  he doesn't  kiss  her   he  calls  back,  "You've been  one  of the  lucky  ones. You  haven't needed   me  yet."  Or,  in  the  piece  called "The  Way   Back",  Dan's  mother  gives birth  to him  without  the  grinder man  in the    street    beneath    her    window.    The  grinder man  has  attended every  birth  in town  for a long, long  time-in fact,  he is always  called   with  the  doctor-and be­ cause  he  was  not  called   when  Dan   was born  the  boy  is  a  kind  of  outcast.  Other  children  will  have  little  to  do  with  him. He   finds  girls  shy  away   from   him  and  when  he  marries he  must  choose  a bride from  out  in the country where  the grinder man  does  not  attend births.  In  the  end, Dan   appeases  the   grinder  man   at   the birth  of  his  first  child   by  taking   knives and  axes  and  scythes  out  to  the  street  to be  sharpened by  the  grinder man  while the  baby   is  being   born.   In   "What Do The  Children  Mean?"  a  real   old  man  walks  down  a  real  road  and  into  a  real bank  and  demands three  infants to give to  three   families   in  order   to  save  them from    Pride    and    Lost    Principles  (the capitals  are    mine) .  Finn, the    young dreamer   in    "A    Leaf    for    Everything Good"  finds   a  wise  philosopher  sitting under   the   willow   tree   near   the   village pond.  Everyone knows  there  are  no trout left  in  the  pond.   The old  man   tells  the boy   there    are    if   you    have    patience enough  to  fish  for  them.   The old  man dies.  Finn   fishes,  trying   to  think   what the  old  man   was  really   saying   to  him. The town  wonders at  him  and  his father is very stern  and  angry. In  the end  Finn's father  finds  a  fishing   pole   and   an  old gray   trout  under  the   willow   tree,   and
 hears   that   Finn   has   left   on   the   one­ twenty  flag-down. Charming tales, warm,  sentimental; but  they  are  told  in  a  style that   does  not   fit   the   telling   of   them.  There  are   no  fairies   at  the  bottom   of Mr.  Eliott's garden, and   no  Thurber at the  top  of it. The disparity  between  that  he  is  saying  and   how  he  is  saying  it  is too  great.
Yet,   there    are   good   stories   in   this
volume  too.  Any    reader   might  ask for   more   like  "A   Room,  A  Light   For Love",  where   the  characters come  alive and    do   not    talk    exclusively    for   the author but  react  as individuals. The  two pieces about  Dr. Fletcher are good, too, because  here  the  whole  town  is involved in  a way that  makes  Mr.  Elliott  free  his people  to  think   and   feel  a  bit.  Beyond this your  own  taste  must  guide  you.  My own  hope  is that   you  will  buy  the  book and   judge  for  yourself:  there  is enough in it  to be rewarding to any  reader: and there  is more  than  enough in it  to make me   hope    George  Elliott   will   publish again  soon.
ROBERT HARLOW


ACTING OUT HISTORY

JOHN   COULTER. Riel.  Ryerson.  Cloth,  $4-95· Paper, $3.00

BoOKS ABOUT LOUIS  RIEL  and  the  rebel­ lions  of  r86g-7o   and   1885  are  not  rare; this, however,  is the  first  attempt  to raise him   from    the   contradictory  pages   of history  to  the  stature of  drama. It must be said that Riel's  career  has  all the stuff of   which   drama  is  made:  he   was  an intelligent,  wilful  man,  a  reluctant revo­ lutionary,  inspired  by  a  sense  of  divine

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW










THE FOREHEAD'S LYRE
BY LARS VON HAARTMAN TRANSLATED BY
DORIS HUESTIS  SPEIRS

Poetry  at once vigorous and delicate, forceful and urbane, exuberant and  sad, rich  in Norse and  other mythologies.
64  pages, $3.50



PAN TADEUSZ or THE LAST FORAY IN LITHUANIA
BY ADAM MICKIEWICZ TRANSLATED  BY WATSON KIRKCONNELL

The greatest  epic poem of Poland's greatest poet, here translated for  the first time into English   rhymed  verse.
408  pages,  $6.so




UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO PRESS





74
 m1sswn  and   profoundly  aware   that   he alone  stood  between  his people,  the  half­ breed   Metis   of  the  western  plains,  and  their  fate-dispersal  and  absorption into  an   English-speaking   and  Protestant Western Canada. In  the end,  he set him­  self  against  the   westward  expansion  of the   Canadian   nation  and   lost.  He   was bound   to  lose,  so  it  seemed   then   as  it does now;  but the cause he at first fought for  was  not  a  dishonourable one.  It was nothing  more   than   a  demand  that   the land  rights  of  the Metis-who had  been hunters and  freighters for  the  Hudson's Bay   Company  for  generations-be  re­ spected  by the new Dominion of Canada, and   it  is  not  a  very  partisan  view  that holds    that    the    bitterness   of	I86g-7o would   have   been   avoided   had   Canada shown  greater wisdom  in  feeling  out  the attitude of  the  Metis   before  sending its survey  parties  into  the  Red  River.
Riel,   whose  character bears  a  passing resemblance to that  of Patrice Lumumba, like   him   emerged  as  a   natural  leader when  he  could  influence  but  not  control the  rush   of  events.   Like  Lumumba,  he was  a  megalomaniac  whose  frustrations deepened his  mental instability, and  like Lumumba   his   life   became    a   drama played  out  against   a  host  of  enemies,  as satisfying   in   their   personal  diversity   as any   dramatist  could   wish   for:    among them,    the   odious   Dr.    Schultz    of   the Canadian party   at  Red  River,  antagon­ izing  the  halfbreeds and  laying  the  seeds of   the   conflict   to   come;   the   arrogant McDougall,  sent   by   Macdonald  to   be the  first  Lieutenant-Governor of the  new province    but-in	a   master-stroke    of political judgement-prevented  by Riel from  setting  foot  on  it; and  the  brutish, fanatic,  and   doomed  Orangeman, Thomas  Scott,   executed  by  Riel   when

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Riel  knew  he could  no longer  control  his own  men  if  Scott   were  to  remain  alive, and   as  a  defiant   sign  to  Ottawa of  his personal authority. It  was  Scott,  cursing Riel   to  the   end,   whose   death  brought down  the  rage  of Orange Ontario on  to Riel's head, and arguably terminated his usefulness  as  a  political leader, as  some­ one   with   whom   the  Canadian  Govern­ ment  might  honourably treat.
Much of Riel's  political work was enshrined in  the  new  Manitoba Act,  but Riel   himself   went   into   exile.  While   his Metis   were  scattering  before   the  waves of  immigrants  that   came   from   Ontario into   the  West,  Riel  lived  in  the  United States  and  imagined himself  the  prophet of  a  new  Catholic Church, with  Bishop Bourget   of  Montreal  as  its  Pope.   Yet, when    he   answered  the   call   from   his people   in   I 884,  he  came   to  Saskatche­ wan  and  spoke  in  terms  of  such  modera­ tion    that    Macdonald    wrote    to   Lord Lansdowne, "There  is,  I  think, nothing to  be  feared   from  Riel  .  .  . I think  we shall  deal   liberally   with  him  and   make him  a good  subject again." A few months  later,   Riel   was  whipping up  Metis  and Indians  in   a   new   revolt    against    the government,  dreaming of  a  great   Metis nation  in  the  northwest, and  Macdonald had   no  choice  but  to  put  down   the  in­ surrection. The  half-breeds made   their last stand  at Batoche, the Indian chiefs Poundmaker and   Big  Bear  surrendered, Riel  was  captured and -after  pleading his  own  sanity  in  defiance of  counsel­ was executed.
The play  by John Coulter was written
in I 950,  and   was  given   a  performance that   year  in  Toronto, and   a  revival   in Regina  in   I g6o.   It  was   produced  for television  in  Ig6I. My  feeling is  that   it works  better  as a play  for  television  than
 for the stage.  The  numerous short  scenes, some  of  them   only  a  page  or  two  long, are  compatible with  television's ability  to move  around in  space  and  time  without interrupting  the  flow  of  narrative; and the  close-up,  that  sometimes  overworked device,  helped   to  knit   together an  his­ torical   drama  in  which   the  motives  of men  were of paramount  importance. But I   am   not   here  criticizing  the   method, which  Mr.  Coulter describes  as  "a  con­ tinuous  flow  of  scenes  on  a  bare  stage with  the  aid  of  no  more  than  indicative settings and  properties and  modern stage lighting." Rather I think  he has unwisely forfeited   the   aid   of  some   narrative  or choral  device  which  would  have  enabled him  to  set  his  drama more  richly  in  its historical   context. His  scenes  have  thus had   to  be  both   foreground  and   back-




75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ground; his characters are acting  out history,    one   feels,   rather   than    acting under  the stress of history. The effect is unfocussed,     and     the    characterization, which  I can  only  describe  as simple  and worthy  (everyone  has a dialect  according to his national origin) does not  help  very much  to sharpen it. Most disappointingly, though Riel  himself  is given  passionate utterance, I can't help  feeling  that   the essential   ambiguity of  the  man,  an  am­ biguity   felt  by  everyone   with  whom  he came   in   contact,  and   still  a   cause   of argument  after   his    death,   is   hardly  reached  in   this   creditable   and  honest dramatization.
GEORGE ROBERTSON


ROOTS OF SEPARATISM

HELEN  TAFT MANNING.  The  Revolt of French
Canada,  IBoo-1835·  Macmillan.  $7.50.

THE  CURRENT   SOCIAL  and   political  fer­ ment  in Quebec has encouraged  English­ Canadians,  even   isolationist   British Columbians, to  take  a more  serious  look at   the  sources  of  French-Canadian  na­ tionalism   than  they  have  given  it  since the   conscription   controversy   of   World  War  II. In  shaping the French-Canadian  will  to  survive  no  period   in  our  history has  been  more  important than   the  first three  decades of  the  nineteenth-century. The author of this  account of these decisive years is Emeritus Professor of History   at  Bryn   Mawr   and   a  life-long student  of  British   colonial   history.  Her father, President William  Howard Taft, was one of that group of prominent Americans and  Canadians who had sum­ mer   homes   at   Murray  Bay,  and   from
 childhood Mrs.  Manning has  had  a  per­ sonal   interest  in   the   people   who   live beside  "the noblest   river  in  the  world".
In  spite  of  its  considerable merit   this
book   is  unlikely   to  find   many   readers outside of specialists  in colonial  or Cana­ dian   history   and   students  to   whom   it will be assigned  by grateful professors  for essay  writing,  since   much  of  it  is  con­ stitutional history  in  a  narrow sense, and  the  style  is often  forbidding. This  is re­ grettable, for  Mrs. Manning's work  will reward the  persevering general reader  as well as the scholar  with  valuable insights  into  the  social  history  of Lower  Canada. The fir:st chapter provides  a good  picture of   the   structure  of   the   society   of   the province  in  the  first  decade of  the  cen­ tury.  There is  also  ample  illustration of the    energy  which   French-Canadian leaders devoted to  the  study  of  English  constitutional   history   and   of   the   skill with   which  they learned  to  use  the  re­ presentative   institutions   established  by the  Constitutional Act-among other weapons  derived  by   the   French  party from  their  historical studies was the knowledge  that    the   barons   of   Runny­ mede   spoke   French, a  fact   which   they used  to  refute   the  contention  of  English  members of the Assembly  that  the British constitution  could  only   be   properly studied and   understood  in  Eng)ish!  Re­  lations  betwen   Irish  and  French in  their mutual  hostility   to  the  English   are   ex­ plored,  and    the   impact   of   large-scale immigration and  the cholera  epidemic of the    early    183o's   on   French  fears    is rightly  emphasized. In  her  treatment of matters  such  as  these  Mrs.   Manning is at  her  most  readable.
Many earlier versions  of  the  constitu­ tional  struggle in Lower Canada obscured the   under!ying  social   and  economic

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



causes  of  the  conflict  by excessive  atten­ tion  to  the  details   of  the  disagreements between   governors and  assemblies.  The  result   was   that    the   personality  of  the governor often   seemed  to  be  the  most important   factor   in   the   situation.  The  "good"  governors, of  whom  Sir.  George Prevost   was   pre-eminent,   liked  the  French   and   there    were   no   regrettable incidents; the  "bad"  governors, like  Sir James   Craig,   were  anti-French and   the "Reign  of   Terror"  was   the   inevitable result.  While  the  character of the gover­ nor  was undoubtedly significant on many occasions,   Mrs.   Manning   draws   atten­ tion  to the limitations of  this exaggerated emphasis and  her  book  shows  how much  more  there  is to the story. Yet  the longest of  the  five main  divisions  of this  volume is largely  a recapitulation of the governor  us.  assembly  theme; although its  exten-
 sive and  skilful  use of official  documents is  impressive   it   adds   more   detail   than depth  to   the   standard picture. If  the material in   this  section   had   been  inte­ grated   with  l:he rest of the  book  to make  clearer    the   relation  between    the   basic social and  economic issues and  the politi­  cal  struggle   the  result  would  be  a  more original contribution to scholarship. Mrs. Manning  does   show   that    the   contro­ versies  over   land   tenure,  taxation, and  union   with   Upper   Canada  arose   from the  conflict  between  the  interests of  an agrarian   society  represented   by   the French majority in  the  Assembly and  the commercial ambitions of the  English merchants who dominated the executive and   legislative  councils,  but  the  bearing of these sources of tension on the actual course   of   the   constitutional  battle   re­ quires  further  clarification.



CASSELL'S ENGLISH  DICTIONARY
A special  feature of this completely revised and  up-to-date edition of Cassell's  famous ENGLISH DICTIONARY  is  the  inclusion   of  words  and   expressions   peculiar to the Commonwealth countries.

1360  pages
More   than   130,ooo words  and  phrases
 Cloth Edition $ 8.oo
Thumb Index Edition   $  g.50
Half-leather Thumb  Index Edition $16.75


CASSELL'S NEW  FRENCH DICTIONARY

The first  French-English English-French dictionary to  include  specifically  Canadian words,  this valuable reference work contains more  than  1 2g,ooo words in 1400 pages.
$6.75

CASSELL'S NEW  ATLAS OF  THE WORLD
A Philip  Atlas
Years  of research and  planning have  resulted  in an  entirely  new and  completely  up­ to-date atlas.  The latest  techniques in cartography give superbly  clear detail  of outline and   lettering, and   the  page  size  has  been  designed   to  give  the  largest  scale  maps  compatible with  ease  of  handling. Diagrams,  charts,  photographs, explanatory text,
83  maps.  Index to 66,ooo  names. 	$25.00

CASSELL AND  COMPANY  LIMITED
1068 BROADVIEW AVENUE, TORONTO 6, ONTARIO

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The    termination  of   this   account at I835  is unfortunate, for some  character­ istics   of   the   revolt   of   French-Canada only became  clear  after  that  time. In particular, the  break   between   Papineau and  his English-speaking lieutenant, John Neilson, revealed that Papineau, unlike Neilson, had little concern for British constitutional  practices as  such;   he  saw self-government as a means  to an  end­ the   preservation  of  a  distinct   French­ Canadian society. In  their  uncompromis­ ing   devotion  to  this  end   lies  the   con­ tinuity    between    Papineau's   movement and  French-Canadian  nationalism today.
MARGARET PRANG


TWO DOMINIONS

J. P.   MATTHEWS.   Tradition  in   Exile.  Uni­
versity  of Toronto.  $5.00.

EVER SINCE THE  BEGINNING,  critics   of "colonial"   literature   have    commented fully   on   the   derivative  quality   of   the verse   they   examine.  Only   rarely   have they suggested  other influences  on the poetry,   and   when   they  do  it  is  usually vague  talk about  environment and social forces.  Tradition in Exile attempts to examine,   not    always   with    meticulous care,  the common roots of Canadian and Australian creative writing, mainly poetry,  and  to  understand the  social settings   of  writers   in  these  countries in the  nineteenth-century.
But  social  influences   are  not  enough, and    Mr.    Matthews  moves   on   into   a study   of  influences   from   abroad, for  a new country is in everything constantly stimulated by foreign ideas. This seems particularly  true   of   poetry.   Mr.   Mat-
 thews gives a careful insight  into the traditions  which   influenced  the   writers in   the   new   countries  he   discusses.  He points,  as all critics  do, to the  Romantics and   Victorians who  influenced much   of the    character  of   the   poetry    in   both Canada  and   Australia.
The study  of influences, particularly in poetry,  is at  any  time  a dangerous thing, for   all   poets   are   consciously   or   uncon­ sciously   influenced  by  earlier   poets.   A poet   in   the   act   of  creation   may   con­ sciously imitate the  verse of  another poet, or his poem  may  be unconsciously  shaped  by his  previous  reading. When  the  poem is finished,   the  most  obvious  borrowings and   surface  similarities  may   be  noted.  The  conscious  influences -the  form   of a   poem,   a  way  of  shifting   accents, a preponderance of certain vowel sounds­ are  easily  discovered. These  may  be bor­ rowed   and   then   absorbed   into   what   is generally   a  quite  different  <esthetic. The profound influence which one can  hardly note,  however,  may  work  indirectly, and  possibly in  ways the  borrowing poet  does not  fully  understand  or  acknowledge to himself.  A  particular  ascendancy is diffi­ cult  to  assess  because  it is all  but  impos­ sible   to   follow   it   through  the   unique  and  subtle  transformations it  undergoes in  a  poet's   mind.  An  influence   may  go through many  phases and may be shelved in   the   poet's   sub-conscious  only   to   re­ appear  in  a  different  context  from  the original.  It may   fuse   with   another   in­ fluence  to  manifest itself  in  a  new  form.  With   the   creation  of  a  new   poem   the obvious  influences are  lost and  it  is diffi­ cult  to  trace  a  new  form  back  to its ori­ ginal  impetus. The  prevalence of certain images,    vowel   sounds,    peculiarities   of syntax,  verse  forms,  and   particular sub­ ject   matter   may   indicate  an   obviously

BOOKS IN REVIEW



recognizable influence, but in the shadows   of  a  poem  there   may  be  remi­ niscences  of other po  ts
to trace  back  to a definite source.  At first these  overtones seem  to  be  naturally evident, but   when  one  attempts to  find their   roots   they   become   more   obscure and  the general problem  of influences becomes  more   difficult.
Mr.  Matthews recognizes  this,  and largely  as a consequence he has done an admirable  job.  But  the  most  rewarding facet  of his book is that  the author moves at   times   beyond   his  study   of  influences into  a comparative study of the two literatures;  more    is  discovered,  as   the jacket  blurb  promises,  about both  litera­ tures  when  they  are  discussed  together.
There is one weakness in the book, however,   and   that   lies  in  the  stress  on the  work of Charles Mair  in Canada. Although   both    Roberts   and    Carman started to write in the 188o's they both categorically  and   historically  belong   to the   nineteenth  century  and   mention  of them  in  passing  is not  enough for  a full study  of  nineteenth-century Canadian poetry.  The quality of Roberts'  "Tantra­ mar    Revisited"  and    Carman's   "Low  Tide  on  Grand  Pre"  was  produced  by poetic  influences from  England and  na­  tural  influences from  the  environment of the  Maritimes. The whole  literary milieu of   the    late   nineteenth  century,  the  steeped  tradition  of  the  United Empire Loyalists, the  cultural influence of the Maritimes, Fredericton in particular, and the  whole  cultural climate of Upper Canada-these demand a more  thorough investigation when nineteenth-century Canadian literature is examined,  especi­ ally   when    "social    influences"   are   the focus  of  the  book.
All  this  does  not  render valueless  the
 main   thesis  of  Mr.  Matthew's  book, though it does seem to qualify  it. Mr. Matthews  does   do   for   the   most   part what  he sets out  to  do,  and  does it  well. He gives a well-balanced study of both literatures,  and   examines  their   quality ably. He does nothing so foolish as to speculate or interpret, as most  academics do when studying influences. And  it is refreshing   that   he  also  does  not  attempt to assign literary merit  to the writers  he examines  in  a  time  when  there  is an  on­ slaught    of   appraisals  and   reappraisals from    antholog  sts,    surveyists,    and,    in Canada, a  multitude  of  hacks.
DONALD STEPHENS



LIBRARIANS
AND PUBLISHERS

RONALD  A.   HAGLER.  The   Selection  and  Acqui­ sition  of   Books  in  Six   Ontario   Public   Li­ braries  in  Relation  to  the   Canadian  Pub­ lishing   System.  Occasional   Paper   No.   29. Canadian Library  Association.

THE   TITLE OF THIS  Ph.D   thesis  refers to  the  public  libraries of  Chatham,  Fort William,    Kingston,   Kitchener,    Peter­ borough, and  St.  Catherines.  The  thesis itself   takes   the    form    of   a    statistical analysis of their  newly  published  acquisi­ tions-disappointingly  without  reference to  actual   titles-between   October the rst,  1958 and  May  the  31st,  1959  (3,755 titles,  of  which   fifty-five  per   cent   were American  and  forty  per  cent  British). It also   contains  background   information about  Canadian publishing-the agency system and  the  problems of original pub­ lishing   in   Canada  are    concisely   out­  lined -and   discussions   of    purchasing, jobbers,  rights,    and   the   significance   of

79

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



price,   format,  availability, and   content in   British   and   American   books  and   of the promotional material and reviews depended on  in  actual  selection.
It is a  detached, knowledgeable  com­ pilation of statistics  and  information. Its data reveal  no  startling information, but Mr.  Hagler does say  among  other  things that   selections   vary  widely  from  library  to  library and   that  library  purchases re­ flect,  as  might   be  expected, the  unique wonderful  situation   that   enables   Cana­ dian  publishers to  supply  and  buyers  to procure  virtually any  book  published   in the  English-speaking world.  As it  is  pos­ sible  for  libraries in  Canada to  acquire, given   the   funds,   a  richer   collection   of English-language books than  those in the United  States  and   Britain,  and   as  lib­ raries   rather  than   bookshops   not   only reflect  the  demands  for  books, "but also in  a  very  real  way  guide  those  demands, and   therefore  set   the  patterns  of  book use   among    those   which    the    libraries  serve",  any  inquiry  into  their  procedures and  problems and  scope must  have  great  value  not  only for librarians but for their suppliers   (for    whom    they    form    the largest  trade  market) -the  publishers.
Even-though not  in  this  case-for users.  Mr.   Hagler  says  that   a  study  of "the  actual results   of  selection   [i.e.   in terms  of generalized statistics  on  country of  origin,  average price,  &c.]  ... is  in­ evitably more  revealing   than  an  investi­ gation of  principles and  policies  of book selection, which   are   necessarily  phrased  in  intangible generalities." Yet  as  an  in­ veterate library   user  I  wondered  at  the exclusion  of any  qualitative discussion  of the   books   acquired -to   me   the   most interesting,  and   surely  revealing, aspect of  book  selection,  which  Mr.  Hagler ad­  mits  is an  art.  How  this art  was practised

8o
 in   the   six  libraries  seems  to  me  to  be an  inherent part  of his subject. Standards of  book  selection  appear to be those  laid down   by  American  library   schools  and text-books and  regularly published guides to  book  selection. In  Canada they  have to   undergo  more   than   the   usual   local modifications because  of the greater flood of   books   to  draw   on.   What  are   these standards and  how  were  they  adapted  to the   community  needs   of   each   library under examination with  regard  to  speci­ fic  titles-those   available   versus   those purchased?  How    are   these   needs   and interests  gauged?   Is   it   desirable  that  medium-sized  collections  should   vary  so much? What criteria are  used  in  build­  ing  up  a stock  of books of  lasting  value?  It   is  not   unknown for  a  patron  of  an adult  library   who   has  noticed   the  lack of  a  book  that   seems  a  natural, worth­ while   (and   not   necessarily   specialized) library   choice   to  suggest  its  acquisition, giving  reasons, and be told  that  the  book was  undoubtedly  considered by  the  sys­ tem,  rejected,  and   that   any  further   re­ course  is   impossible.  Dismissed,   the  patron is  left  to  feel  that   the  "system" represented by this  library  (supported by public  funds)  is a  hierarchical in-group, some  of  whose  members seem  to  see  a basic   antipathy   between   the   idea   of  a well-ordered    library,  planned,   stocked, and    operated    according   to    clear-cut modern  methods, and   the  fullest   public use  of it.  These are  ungrateful  thoughts
-unfair, perhaps-but they  might   be dispelled   by  an   open   discussion   of  the subject,  an   extension  of   Mr.   Hagler's own -"The   Selection  an,d  Acquisition of  Books  ... in  Relation to  the  Library User".
Facts   and   figures   have   been   notori­
ously lacking  in  the Canadian book field;

BOOKS IN REVIEW



public  information has been kept to a minimum and  for  this  publishers are  in great   part   to  blame.   A  significant step was  taken   towards an  exhaustive  survey not   only  of  libraries  but   of  publishing itself  and   bookselling -the  whole  com­ plicated,  expanding  book  industry­ when  these  six libraries  cooperated with Mr.  Hagler in  providing  information for his  thesis.  The   result  is  a  commendable p1ece  of  research, an   admirable  begin­ ning.
WILLIAM  TOYE




DIPLOMATS AT WORK

Documents  on   Canadian  Foreign  Policy
1917-39,  selected  and   edited   by   Walter
Riddell, Oxford. $13.50.

THE  FOREIGN  POLICY  of Canada has  de­ veloped   pari   passu   with   the  growth  to nationhood inside  Canada  and  the  gra­  dual  emancipation from the apron-strings of  the  British  mother-country. Demands for  the  separate and  independent deter­ mination of  Canadian policy  abroad  be­ gan  with  the  First  World  War.  The great  efforts  and  sacrifices  made  by  Canadians resulted in pressure  being brought to bear on  Sir  Robert  Borden's  government for a  specifically  Canadian  policy,  which  led in   19 I 9  to  the  separate  signing   of  the Versailles    Peace   Treaty.  In  the   next twenty   years,   both   the   scope   of  policy and   the   machinery  to  execute  it  were greatly   extended,  facts  which  were  marked  by Canada's separate declaration of war on September 10th,  1939·
The  documents in   this   handsomely­
produced  reference  work-the first  of
 its  kind-illustrate  various   aspects   of this  embryonic  period  of  a  separate Canadian foreign   policy.  However, they are   not   the   equivalent  of  the   current British  and  German series of documents, since  they  do  not  contain  any  material from  files of the  Department of External Affairs.  These  documents are  all  part  of the  public  record,   and   hence  almost  all have  already   appeared in  print,  includ­ ing,  of course,  the  important  sections  of Hansard.  Nevertheless Mr.  Riddell  has rendered all  those  interested  in Canada's foreign   policy  an  inestimable  service  in collating clearly  and   reliably   the   signi­ ficant    documents,  drawn   from    many sources  not  easily  obtainable. His  intro­ ductory  essay is also  sprightly and  infor­ mative,   while  written  from   a  Canadian nationalist point  of view.  Students, espe­ cially  those  aspiring to  Canada's Foreign  Service,  will  find  this  volume  indispens­ able   in  drawing   their   attention  to  the problems   which   Canada  faced,   and   in some  cases  still  is  facing,  in  attempting to project  her own national image  abroad in  her  foreign  policy.
JOHNS. CONWAY




GROVE COLLECTION

The  University of Manitoba announces that  it has acquired the  manuscripts and papers  of the  late Frederick Philip Grove, from  the author's widow,  Mrs.  Catherine Grove  of  Simcoe,  Ontario. Included among   the  manuscripts are   several  un­ published  or unfinished novels, a  number of   unpublished   short    stories,    and    a volume  of poems.

81






LITTLE
MAGAZINES

Sir:
I  have  just  read  with  considerable interest Mr. Davey's article in Canadian Literature, Number  13,   "Anything but Reluctant",  in   which   a   great   deal   of loose   and   charged  language  is  thrown about  and   in  which   innuendo is  indis­ criminately employed  -all  to create  un­ substantiated  and   false  impressions.
The   history  of  the  "little mag"  in  the United States from   1912 to  the  present is   sufficiently    impressive    to    breed    a healthy   respect    for    that    medium    of literary publication, and  the  knowledge­ able  reader   (and   writer)   ought   thereby  to  be  moved   to  investigate  the  offerings in  this  area  with  humility.  Your  journal  is  an   eminently  suitable  place  for  such an  investigation  of  the  current  "renais­ sance" which  in  the  past  three  years has spawned a   number  of  "little   mags"  in Canada, and  I am  happy  to see that  the process  has  begun,  though   I  deplore  the manner  of  Mr.  Davey's   article.   Admit­  tedly,  its  tactics   are  highly  provocative, but  its  implications and  conclusions  fall so  far  short   of  usefulness  and   accuracy that  I   must   reply   to   Mr.   Davey   and challenge his contemptuous references  to "the Prisms"  and   his  implied   contempt for  the  "parasitic" editors  of  such  pub­ lications.
Mr.   Davey   has   a   right   to   his   con­
tempt;  I   do  not   resent   it  so  much   as
 
regret  it.  He  has  not,  however,  the  right to  communicate that  contempt to others in  slovenly  language and   with  disreput­ able    devices-and    without    providing the    necessary    substantial   critical  base which  justifies the contempt. Nowhere in his   article  does   Mr.   Davey   deal   with literature  as  literature.
Let  me  make  clear  at  the outset  that  I am  not influenced in my remarks by a retaliatory contempt either for  Mr. Davey  or his magazine Tish.  I approve wholeheartedly  of  the  current   manifes­ tation  of  creative  expression  evident   in the   emergence  of   "little   mags".  I   ap­  prove  of  "energy", of  "enthusiasm", and  of "anything but reluctance" even though I   do   not   necessarily   equate  these   with high  quality in  literature.
I    must    quarrel   initially    with    Mr. Davey's   definition   of   a   "little  mag". From   his  article  one  is forced  to  deduce that a "little mag" is a mimeographed publication  edited   by  writers   united  by their    similar   views   on   literature. The term  has  never  to my knowledge been  so restricted or interpreted. Historically, the term   has   been  applied   to   magazines which   appeal  to  a  limited   group of  in­ telligent  readers.'   To    suggest    that Tamarack Review  and  Prism fall outside this   concept,  and   then   to   characterize them  with adjectives; "semi-professional", "commercial",   "glossy-paged",  is  child­ ishly   naive.   Prism  does  not   depend  on "name"  writers   in  order   to  develop   "a sensible  commercial policy".  We  are  not publishing  for   commercial  reasons   any more  than  Tish  is. Prism's "limited group of intelligent readers", its normally shaky financial  eire umstances,  its   energetic


•  The   Little   Magazine, Princeton U.P.,  1946,
p. 3·

LITTLE MAGAZINES



struggle   merely   to  exist,  and   its  eager­ ness   to   publish    writing  which   is  un­ acceptable to   commercially   oriented markets  stamp  it   unequivocally   as   a typical   "little  mag".
"Some  of the  semi-professional literary quarterlies, such  as  Canada's  Tamarack Review, tend   to  become   coterie  maga­ zines depending for  almost  fifty  per  cent of  their   material  on   a   particular  fixed circle  of writers ... ," writes  Mr. Davey. Surely  only  to hoist  himself  with  his own petard! An  examination of  Tish   reveals a  very  pronounced  coterie  -in  propor­ tion  far  higher   than  the  fifty  per  cent Tamarack  (and   by  implication,  Prism) is   accused   of.   The  difference lies,  of course,  in  the  fact   that, in  the  opinion of  Mr.  Davey,  the  Tamarack and  Prism coteries   are   "safe"  established  writers, whereas  the Tishists are,  in his view, neg­ lected  poets  of high  talent. This  suggests that   Mr.   Davey   considers   "safe",  esta­ blished  writers   to  be  inferior ipso   facto to  the  energ,etic,  enthusiastic  newcomer. The   illogic   of   this  assumption  is  self­ evident. Some  day,  possibly  the  Tishists will  be "name"  poets;  one  assumes  their anxiety   to  burst  into  print is  motivated by their  desire  for  recognition. Similarly,  the  so-called  "name" writers   were  once in   the  present   position   of  the  Tishists, struggling to  be  heard.
Mr.   Davey   regards  with   horror    the fact  that   "the editors of  the  Tamaracks and   the   Prisms   seldom   have   any   new work  of their  own  to exhibit." The con­ demnatory  implications  of  this  suggest, with  similar  illogicality, that   if  you can­  not   write   poetry   or  fiction   you  cannot read  it discriminatingly either.
Further,  Mr.   Davey's  article  fulmin­ ates   against   " a  large   number  of  very low-energy  mags  with  no  particular  edi-
 torial   policy"   and   cites  as  an  example "Prism's  often   nondescript  collections". The  error   Mr.  Davey   has  fallen   into  is to consider  a magazine which  determines to be eclectic  as  "low-energy" and  with­ out  conscious  direction. This  is of  course quite   invalid.   Prism's   editorial  policy  is clearly  set forth  in  its first-issue  editorial, and   the  mere   assertion   that  its  content is  "low-energy" does  not  take  the  place of  a  critical examination  of  the  writing  which  Prism  publishes.  The   fact   that   a magazine   does  not  subscribe   to  or  em­ phasize  a  particular  "school" of  writers  does  not  in  itself  suggest  that  its content is   valueless   as   literature.  The   eclectic "little  mag",   though   indeed    it   may, generally  speaking, be more  conservative in  taste,  can  and   does  make  a  valuable contribution to writers and readers.  Prism has   faithfully  adhered   to   its   editorial policy  including  "responsibility to  young people  seriously interested in writing  and with  gifts  of  mind  and  sensitivity  which give  value  to  their   work."• In  our  cur­ rent   issue,  for   example,  ten   poets   are represented.  Four    of   these   are   "high­ energy"   poets  who  have  sufficiently  ap­  pealed  to  Mr.  Davey  to  find  a  place  in Tish;  two   are   newcomers   whose  work we  liked  and  wished   to  encourage, an­  other  is a  New York  poet  whose  work  I think   Mr.  Davey   would  like  to  publish,  and  yet  another is a  poet  who  has  pub­  lished  sporadically  in  various   Canadian periodicals,    and,   finally,   only   one   is  a poet of "safe" established (and  deserved) reputation. Moreover, Prism  has actively searched    for   and    published   new   and experimental writing   to which  it  has de­ voted  two  special  issues:  one  ( 2 : 3)   was a  collection   of   outstanding   writing   by

>  Editorial,  Prism, 1 : r.

LITTLE MAGAZINES



university   students throughout Canada; the    other 	(3:2) 	brought  together    a range  of  experimental writing   in  prose, drama, and   poetry  in  which  Mr.  Davey himself   was  represented. This   generous willingness    to   represent   contemporary experiment  in  writing  does  not  suggest staid   conservatism,  nor   does  it  suggest the   closed-shop  coterie.   What    it   does suggest   is   adherence  to   the   policy   of eclecticism which  we  originally   pro­ claimed    as   our   intention.   Surely   Mr.  Davey  would  not  persist in being  so fool­ hardy   as  to  suggest  that  only  the  litera­ ture   produced in  the  energetic   beehives of  literary  "schools"  is  worthy  of  publi­  cation? Where, if he maintains this view, is the  talented writer  who  does  not  buzz with   the  others to  go  to  have  his  work published? For  such  writers,  particularly
 in   fiction,    the   eclectic   "little  mag"   is essential.
If the  contribution of Canada's "little mags" is  to  be  examined and  evaluated (in   my   view   a   highly   worthwhile   en­ deavour),  let   us  at   least   begin  with  a recognization   of   what    we   are   talking about, and  of the  variety  of  contributions that   can   be  made. The  radical   innova­ tion,  the  courageous attack on  restrictive literary  tastes,   the   experiment  in  word and    sound,    the   shifting  emphases   in points  of  view-all  are  stimulating and  desirable  manifestations of  good  health. Let   us   also   remember  that    values   in literature  are  not  solely  dependent  upon such   indications  of   "energy".  Fashions and  novelties  come  and  go, but  the  word goes  on  forever.
J. DEBRUYN
Editor, Prism







THEIITRE 	IN 	CfiNfiDfl







THE   PURPOSE  OF THIS BIBLIOGRAPHY   is  to  give   a  list   of materials outlining theatre history  in  Canada from  the  earliest  recorded performance in  16o6  to  the  end  of 1959. A general  survey  of the  subject has  so far   been  lacking, the  nearest  approach being  Jean  Beraud's "350 ans  de  theatre au  Canada fran<_;ais",  a  section  of  the  Encyclopedie  du Canada   franfais.
With  a wide  field  to cover,  the entries  in the  present  bibliography have been  selected   on  fairly  strict  criteria. Ballet,  music  and  opera  have  been excluded. No  attempt has  been  made  to list Canadian plays, although a number of  sources  are  mentioned in  the  appendix. It was originally  in­ tended    to   exclude  references    to  Canadian  dramatists  from   a   purely literary point  of  view,  but  such  references have  proved  to be so few  that  they  have  been  included. Reviews of plays, Canadian or otherwise, simply as dramatic art,  were  also thought to be borderline material, but  in  most cases reviewers  relate  their  comments to the general state  of the Canadian theatre, and  as much of such  material as possible has  been  listed.  Section  C.I   deals   with   the  cultural  background of  the  Canadian  theatre with general comment on  both  quality  and  quantity,  for  many  years  a widely discussed  topic among those interested in the subject.
The arrangement of the  entries  is chronological as far  as possible both in  the  general classification   and  in  the  individual sections,  in  order   to show  the  historical  development of  the  theatre. In section  B  the  chro­ nology  relates   to  subject matter and  in  section  C  to  date  of  publication. However, there  has been some compromise with  the secondary adjustment by  place,  and  some  adjustments to  strict  chronological order  have  been made,   to  group  together material  related   by  place.  Sections  A  and   D, which   are   not  susceptible of  chronological or  topical  arrangement, are arranged alphabetically.







Jl  BIBLIOGRJIPHY  PREPJIRED BY J. L.  BJILL

THEATRE  IN CANADA



A. GENERAL SURVEYS

1.  ANGUs, WILLIAM. Theatre.  In   Encyclo­ pedia    Canadiana. Ottawa,   Grolier  So­ ciety   of   Canada,   1958.  v.w, p.  61-67. illus.
2.  BERAUD, JEAN.  350   ans   de   theatre  au Canada franc;ais.  In Encyclopedie du Canada  franr;ais.   Montreal,  Le   Cercle du   Livre   de   France,  1958.  v.I, 321   p. illus.,  ports.,  facsims., bibl.
3·  BULLOCK-WEBSTER, LLEWELYN.    Trans­
cript   of  an  address on  the   development of   Canadian  drama,  given   at  Loretto
Hall,   Victoria.   February   23rd     1943· Victoria, B.C.,  Department of Education,
1943·  I7P·
4·  GLASSTONE, VICTOR. Canada - teatro
drammatico. In  Enciclopedia della  spet­
tacolo. Rome,   Casa  editrice le maschere,
1954·  V.2, p.   !6!2·16!8. bibl.
5·  HARTNOLL, PHYLLIS, ed.  Canada. In her
Oxford Companion to  the  Theatre. Lon­ don,     Oxford    University    Press,     1957.  I 13-115.
6.  LEONARD,  AGATHA. Theatre. In  Encyclo­
pedia    of   Canada.  Toronto,  University
Associates of  Canada, 1948.  v.6,  p.  I 32·
135· bibl.
7·  MIDDLETON, JESSE   EDGAR.    Theatre   in
Canada.  In    Adam    Shortt  and    A.   G.
Doughty, eds.  Canada and  Its  Provinces.
Toronto,   Glasgow  Brook,     1914.   v.12,
p.  65 1-66!.
8.  RHODENIZER, VERNON BLAIR. Canadian
drama.  In   his   Hand book   of   Canadian literature.  Ottawa,   Graphic,   1930.    p.
152-159·
g.  WHITTAKER, HERBERT.  Canada-Thea­
ter.   In  Encyclopedia Americana.   Cana­
dian    edition.  Toronto,  Americana   Cor­
poration  of  Canada,  Ig58.   v.s,   p.  436-
440.


B. HISTORY TO 1900

I. EARLY THEATRE TO  I 700

10.  BONENFANT,  JEAN CHARLES. Theatre au college. Revue dominicaine 52:  27-32, January 1946.   (Jesuits and   the  theatre.)
I I. BULLOCK-WEBSTER,   LLEWELYN.   Early
Drama in  Canada. Drama   I8:11-12,  30. October I927.
12.  CAMERON,   MARGARET  M.  Play   acting  in
Canada during the  French regime. Cana­
dian    historical   revzew    II :g-Ig.   I 930. bibl.  f.

86
 13.   jesuit    relations   and    allied    documents, ed.   by   Reuben  Gold   Thwaites.   Cleve­ land,   Burrows   1894-1901.  73v.    (Items in  index v. 72-73.)
14·  journal   des   ]esuites.   2.   ed.   Montreal,
Valois,   18g2.    References   to    dramatic performances:    fevrier   164 7,   decembre
1651,   avril    1652,   janvier   1657,   juillet
1658,    aoO.t   1659,    fevrier,   1668,   mars
!668.
15.  PAQUET, ANDRE.  Les  origines  du   theatre au   Canada.  Canadien Franr;ais  32: gg­ I 18, October 1944.
16.  WALDO,  LEWIS  PATRICK. French drama
in  Canada in  the  seventeenth and  eigh­ teenth  centuries.  In   his   French   drama in   America   in   the    eighteenth   century and  its  influence on  the  American  drama of    that    period,    I70I-J8oo.   Baltimore,
Johns  Hopkins  Press,    1942.   p.    19-49. bibl.  f.
I 7· BOND,  FRANK FRASER.  America's premier
"first-night"-1606.   Dalhousie  Review
36: 392-398, winter 195 7.
18.  HICKS,  RIVERS  KEITH.   Le    theatre   de
Neptune. Queen's Quarterly 34:215-223, October 1926.
19.  LESCARBOT,  MARC. Marc Lescarbot's Theatre of  Neptune, tr.  by  Rivers Keith Hicks  with    an   introduction  by   W.   L. Grant. Lower Granville, N.S.,  Abanaki Press,    I 947.     1 2   p.     (Reprinted    from Queen's  Quarterly  1926.)
20.  LESCARBOT,  MARC. The Theatre of  Nep­ tune   in   New   France   with   a   translation and    introduction    by    Harriette   Taber Richardson.  Boston,   Houghton   Mifflin,
1927,  xxii,  28 p.
21. MACDOUGALL,  ANGUS J.  An  historical sidelight-Quebec   1658.    Culture   1 1:
15-28,   January  1950.    (Performance  to welcome governor of New  France 1658.)
22. Reception de Monseigneur le  vicomte d'Argenson   par    toutes  les   nations  du
pays     de     Canada   a    son     entree     au
gouvernement   de    la   Nouvelle   France.
Publiee par   Pierre-Georges Roy.  Quebec, Brousseau, 18go. 23 p.
23.  ROY,  JOSEPH    EDMOND. Le    Baron   de Lahontan. Transactions of Royal   Society of Canada. 1.  ser.,  v. 1 3., sect.  1 : 63-192,
1894.    (References  to   performances   in
1691-2.)
24. GOSSELIN, AUGUSTE. Un   episode  de l'histoire  de   theatre  au   Canada.  Trans­ actions  of  Royal  Society  of   Canada. 2. ser.,   v.4,   sect.    1 :55-72,   18g8.   (Episode of  Tartuffe-1694.)

THEATRE IN CANADA



25.  MARION,  SERAPHIN. Le  Tartufe et  Mgr. de  Saint Vallier. In  his  Les  lettres  cana­ diennes  d'autrefois.  Ottawa,    L'Eclair, I 954· V.8, p.  I 5-37·
26.  ROQUEBRUNE,  ROBERT  DE. Le  theatre au
Canada en  1694; )'affaire du  "Tartuffe".
Revue   de    l'histoire  des   colonies   fran­
faises  24: I81-194, mars/avril  1931.
27.  SAINT  VALLIER, JEAN  BAPTISTE DE  LA CROIX CHEVRIERES   DE,  BP.  OF  QUEBEC.
Mandement  au   sujet  des   comedies. In Mandements des Eveques de Qwfbec. Quebec, Cote, 1887,   v.1,  p.  302-4.


2. FRENCH CANADA I 700-I900

MONTREAL
28.  ATHERTON, WILLIAM HENRY. History   of Montreal.  Montreal,  Clarke,  1914.   3v. (See     especially:   v.2    Chap.   29.    and chapters  headed:  "Supplemental Annals and   Sidelights of  Social   Progress.")
29.  BERTHELOT,   HECTOR.   Le     bon     vieux temps;   Compile,  revue  et   annote  par E-Z Massicote. 2. serie.  Montreal, Beau· chemin,  1916.   (Articles  from   La   Patrie
!884-5-l
30.  GRAHAM,  FRANKLIN THOMAS. Histrionic
Montreal; annals   of  the   Montreal  stage with   biographical  and   critical   notices   of the   plays  and   players  of a century 1804-
1898  2.  ed.  Montreal, Lovell, 1902.  306, viii  p. front. illus.
3 I.  GRAHAM,  FRANKLIN THOMAS. Histrionic
Montreal: annals  of the Montreal stage together with  biographical and  critical notices  of   the   plays    and   players    of   a
century.  n.p.     1897.    179   p.    index    in
MSS.
32.  MASSICOTE,   EDOUARD  ZOTIQUE.   Re­ cherches  historiques  sur   les  spectacles  a Montreal de   1760   a 1800.  Transactions
of Royal Society of Canada. 3· ser.,  v.26,
sect  1: 113-122, 1932.
33· MORLEY, MALCOLM. Theatre Royal, Montreal. The Dickensian 45:39-44, winter 1948-9.

QUEBEC
34·  ROY, PIERRE-GEORGES.  Le   Cirque  Royal ou   Theatre   Royal  (Quebec).   Bulletin des  recherches historiques 42:641-66, November 1936.
35·  ROY, PIERRE-GEORGES.  L'H6tel  Union ou
Saint-George   a   Quebec.   Bulletin   des
recherches  historiques  43: 3-17,   January
1937·
 36.  RoY,    PIERRE-GEORGEs.     Le     Theatre
Champlain  a Pres-de-Ville,  rue  Champ­
lain,  Quebec. Bulletin des  recherches  his­
toriques 42:705-9,  December  1936.
37·  RoY,   PIERRE-GEORGEs.   Le    Theatre   du
Marche  a  foin   a  Quebec.  Bulletin  des
recherches  historiques  43:33-45,  Febru­
ary   1937.   65-70,  March   1937.   97-IOI, April  1937.
38.  RoY, PIERRE-GEORGEs.  Le  Theatre  Pata­
gon   a  Quebec.  Bulletin  des   recherches
historiques 42:300-303,  May   1936.
39·  ROY, PIERRE-GEORGEs.   Le  Theatre  Saint­ Louis  a Quebec. Bulletin des  recherches
historiques 42:174-188,  March   1936.
40.  ROY, PIERRE-GEORGES.   Une  tragedie  de
Voltaire a Quebec en  1839.   Bulletin des
recherches historiques 42:640,   October
1936.
41.  SULTE,   BENJAMIN.   The    miscellaneous
and     historical   literature    of    Quebec.
Transactions of Royal   Society of Canada
2.  ser.,  v.3,  sect.  2:269-278, 1897.   (Re­ ferences  to   Quesnel  and   performances in Quebec 1790-92.)
42.  Vaudeville  de   l'Hon.  F-G.    Marchand.
Bulletin  des   recherches historiques 42:
488-489,   August    1936.     (Member   of
Quebec Parliament.  Presented in  1872.)

3· MARITIME PROVINCES I7oo-Igoo

43·  BLAKELEY,  PHYLLIS R. The  theatre and music  in  Halifax. Dalhousie Review 29:
8-20,  April   1949  bibl.  f.
44·  FERGUSON, C.  BRUCE. The  rise   of   the theatre in  Halifax. Dalhousie Review 29:
419-427, January  1950.
45·  JEWITT, ARTHUR  RUSSELL. Early Halifax
theatres.  Dalhousie Review   5:444-459, January  1926.
46.  HARPER,  J.    RUSSELL.  The   theatre   in
Saint John 1789-1817. Dalhousie Review
34: 260-269, autumn  1954.

4· ONTARIO I800-I900

47·  BRAULT,  LUCIEN. [Theatre]
I8o0-1950. Ottawa, Universite d'Ottawa,
1950.  p. 163-164.
48.  BRAULT,  LUCIEN.  [Theatres] In  his  Ot­
tawa   old   and   new.  Ottawa,  Historical
Information Institute,  1946.   p.  92,  291-
292.
49·  CAMPBELL,  MRS. WILLIAM. Toronto  thea­
tres  in  old  days.  York   Pioneer and   His-

THEATRE IN CANADA



torical Society  -Annual  Report for  the year    I930.   Toronto,  I931.   p.   I3-I5·
50.  COLGATE,   WILLIAM G.  Toronto  theatres
in  the   eighties. Canadian  Magazine  57:
279-282, August  I921.
5 I.  GUILLET, EDWIN CLARENCE.  Theatre. In
his   Toronto  from   trading    post  to   great city.   Toronto,   Ontario  Publishing  Co.,
I 934·  p. 400-414, 420-425, 442-444, 459-
464.  illus.
52.   HARRINGTON,  CEORCE M. Toronto and  its early  theatrical entertainments. Canadian Monthly  8:6oo-6 I 3,  June  I 882.
53·  MIDDLETON,  JESSE  EDGAR.   [Theatre] In his  Municipality of Toronto, a  history. Toronto,  Dominion Publishing Co.,  I923. v.2,  p. 579-68r.
54·  MIDDLETON,  JESSE  EDGAR.   [Theatre]  In his   Toronto's  100   years.  Toronto   Cen­ tennial  Committee,  I934·   p.   I07·Iog.
55·  ROBERTSON, JOHN   ROSS.  The  theatres of   the    town;   theatrical   reminiscences from     I 793    to    I 893;     the    plays    and players. In  his   Landmarks  of  Toronto; a  collection  of  historical  sketches  .. Toronto,  Robertson,  I894·    r.   series,   p.
47 8-49 r. illus.

5· MANITOBA

56. CRAIG, IRENE.  Grease-paint on  the prairies; an   account of  the  theatres, the plays   and   the   players   of  Winnipeg from I 866- I 92 r.  Historical  and  Scientific  So­ ciety  of Manitoba. Papers.  3· ser.,  no.  3:
38-55, I947·
57·  HARVEY,  RUTH  WALKER.  Curtain Time.
Boston, Houghton  Mifflin,   I 949·  3 I o  p. (Walker  theatre,  Winnipeg.)

6. TOURS AND VISITS

58.   BERNHARDT, SARAH.  [Canada and  Amer­ ica.] In her  Memories of my  life;  being my   personal, professional   and   social  re­ collections  as   woman   and    artist.  New York,    Appleton,   I907.    p.   402-456.
59· COLOMBIER, MARIE. [Canada] In her Le voyage   de  Sarah Bernhardt en Amerique. Paris, Dreyfous,  r88 r.  p.   I 65- I 78.
60.  DISHER,  MAURICE WILLSON  (ed.)  The Cowells in   America:  being   the   diary   of Mrs. Sam  Cowell, during  her  husband's concert   tour   in  the   years  186o-61.  Lon­ don,     Oxford    University   Press,     I934·
426  p.

88
 6r. DUNBAR,   MOIRA.  The Royal   Arctic  thea­ tre.    Canadian  Art     I5:IIO-II3,   spring I 958  ill us.
62.   MARTIN-HARVEY,   SIR  JOHN.   The  auto­
biography  of   Sir   John    Martin-Harvey.
London,   Sampson    Low,    I933·   xix,
563   p.   (Material  on   his   popular  tours
in  Canada.)
63.  HILLEBRAND,  HAROLD  NEWCOMB.  [Mont­
real  and   Quebec] In his  Edmund Kean.
N.Y.    Columbia  University  Press,    I933·
p.  27 I-278.
64.   HUTCHISON,  PERCY. Masquerade.  Lon­
don,    Harrap,   1936.    286    p.    Includes account  of  his   tours   in   Canada.
65.  [MCCREA, WALTER JACKSON] Pauline Johnson  and   her   friends  by  Walter  Mc­ Raye, pseud. Toronto, Ryerson [c  I947]. I 82  p. illus.
66.   [MCCREA, WALTER  JACKSON] Town  hall tonight  by  Walter  McRaye,  pseud.  To­ ronto,  Ryerson,  I929-   xiv,   256   p.  illus.
67.  MARKS, KITTY 8t  CROFT, FRANK. My  life with   the   original  Marks  brothers.  Mac­ lean's 7I: I6-I7,  58-62, June   2I,   I958 ill us.
68.   [RHYS,  CHARLES HORTON] A  theatrical tour    for    a   wager    through  the    United States   and    Canada   by    Horton   Price pseud. London, Dudley, I86r.  iv,  I28  p.
6g.  TAVERNER,   ALBERT. The  Taverner   col­ lection   of   scrapbooks   in   the    Toronto reference library   by  Albert and  Ida van Cortland Taverner.
70.  WEBLING, PEGGY. Peggy.  London,   Har­ rap    I 924.   3 I 3  p.   (Includes  account  of tours  in  Canada.)


C. TWENTIETH  CENTURY

I. GENERAL COMMENT  AND   SUR­ VEYS AT  PARTICULAR  PERIODS. THE CULTURAL  BACKGROUND

ENGLISH  SPEAKING CANADA
71.  HALE,  KATHERINE.   Some prominent players.  Canadian   Magazine   I 7:35-43, May   Igor.
72.  SANDWELL, BERNARD KEBLE.  Hard   on judges   and    audience.   Saturday   Night
67:4,  July 5,   I952.  (Earl  Grey   trophy competition I907-I r.)
73·  ROBSON, FREDERIC.  The  drama in  Can­ ada.  Canadian Magazine 3I :58-6I, May Igo8.

THEATRE IN CANADA



74·   [ROBSON, FREDERIC). The  romance  of the  theatre in Canada by Robson Black, pseud.  Canada  West  Monthly  6: 12-20, May  1 gog,  ill us., ports.
75·  HARDY,  HELEN AVERY.  Successful  Cana­
dian   players. Canada West  Monthly  6:
1 6g- 1 78,  July 1 gog  ports.
76.  HOARE,  JOHN   EDWARD. A   plea    for   a
Canadian  theatre.   University  Magazine
10:23g-253,  April   Igii..
77·  SANDWELL, BERNARD KEBLE.  The   an­
nexation  of  our   stage.  Canadian  Maga­
zine   38:22-6,  November  191 1.
78.   Canada's   theatrical   ambitions.  Literary
Digest   45:622-623, October 12,  1g12.
79·  "All-red"   theatre.  Literary  Digest    48:
493,  March 7, 1g14.
80.   MARTIN-HARVEY,    SIR   JOHN.    Canadian
theatres.   University  Magazine   13 : 2 12-
2Ig, April  1914.
81.   MASSEY, VINCENT. Prospects of  a  Cana­
dian drama. Queen's Quarterly 30:1g4-
212,  December 1g22.
82.  DENISON, MERRILL.  The  theatre  in  Can­
ada.  Canadian Bookman 5:8,  January
lg23.
83.  LOGAN, JOHN  DANIEL. National  stage drama. In   Highways of Canadian  litera­
ture   by  John  Daniel Logan and   Donald
G.    French.   Toronto,   McClelland  and
Stewart, 1g24.  p. 333-336.
84.   STEVENSON, LIONEL.  What   about   the
Canadian drama?  In  his   Appraisals  of
Canadian literature. Toronto, Macmillan, I g26.  p. 138- I 46.
85.   LANG, MATHESON. Opportunities  for   a
career;  Canadian   stage  progressing.
Canadian  Magazine   67: 18,    February
Ig27.
86.   POWELL, MORGAN.   Stage  and    film;   in­ fluence  of  the   United  States;  school  for Canadian actors. Times  (London). Can­  ada   Number. xxii,   July    1,  1927.
87.  VOADEN,   HERMAN A. A   national  drama league.  Canadian   Forum  g: 105-1 o6, December 1g28.
88.  CAPLAN,  RUPERT. The  ultimate  national theatre. Canadian Forum 9:143-144, January 1g2g.
8g.  DENISON, MERRILL. Nationalism  and drama.  In   Brooker,  Bertram  ed.   Year­ book   of  the   arts  in  Canada  1928-9. To­ ronto,  Macmillan,  1g2g.   p.  49-55·
go.   AYRE, ROBERT. A   national  theatre  with roots.  Canadian Forum 10:344-346, June lg30.
g1.  SMITH,  E.  CECIL. The  worker's theatre.
Canadian  Forum  14:3g,  October  1933.
 g2.  SMITH,  E.  CECIL. The  worker's theatre in Canada. Canadian Forum 14:68-70, November 1933·
g3.  CLARK,  BARRETT  H.  When is  the  drama
national? Curtain  Call   6:1-2,  December
15,  Ig34·
g4.  Canadian  national  theatre:   symposium
of  views  on  the  form  which   it  shall  take.
Curtain  Call    7: 1-2,   back    cover,    June
Ig36.
g5.  GRANVILLE-BARKER,  HARLEY.  The  Cana­
dian   theatre. Queen's Quarterly 43: 256-
267, autumn 1g36.
g6.  SANDWELL,   BERNARD  KEBLE.   Better
Canadian plays.  In  Brooker, Bertram ed. Yearbook of the  arts in Canada 1936. Toronto,  Macmillan,  1936.   p.   218-221.
g7.  CLARK,  BARRETT   H.  As  I see  the  Cana­
dian   theatre.  Curtain Call   g: 4-5,  April
Ig38.
g8.  COULTER, JOHN.  The  Canadian  theatre
and    the    Irish    exemplar.  Theatre  Arts
Monthly 22:503-5og, July   1g38.
gg.  PHELPS,  ARTHUR L.  Drama.  In   Cana­
dian   literature  today.  Canadian   Broad­ casting   Corporation,  publications  no.  6. Toronto,  University   of   Toronto   Press,
Ig38.  p.  17-23.
100.  BUCHANAN,  DONALD W. Drama and  films.
In  Times (London). Reprinted from   the Canada  number of  the  Times  published on  May   15,  1g3g.  London, Times, 1g3g.
p. 245-247·
101.   PHELPS,  ARTHUR L.   Canadian  drama.
University  of   Toronto Quarterly 9:82-
g4, October  1g39·
102.  PHELPS, ARTHUR  L. Drama in  Canada­
the  audience. Curtain  Call   I I :5-6,  Sep­
tember/October  1g39.
103.  PHELPS, ARTHUR  L. Drama in  Canada­
the stuff  for  the  drama. Curtain Call  1 1 :
7-8, November 193g.
104.  PHELPS, ARTHUR  L. Drama in  Canada­ play    making.   Curtain    Call    11: 17-18, December 1g39.
105.  CAMPBELL, LOUGHLIN.  War  and  the theatre.  Curtain  Call    11 :g-10,  March Ig40.
106.  PHELPS, ARTHUR L.  Festivals  and   the national theatre. Curtain Call  11:11-12, May/June  1940.
107.  COXWELL, MONA.  What   the    publisher requires of  the  playwright.  Canadian author    and   bookman  1 7:6-7,  February Ig4I.
108.  DUNN, MURISON. Today  and    tomorrow in   drama.  Canadian  author  and   book­ man   17:8-9,  February  1941.

8g

THEATRE IN  CANADA



I09. COULTER, JOHN.  Why  sabotage the  thea­ tre?  Canadian review   of  music   and   art I:5-6, I8,  May  1942.
I 10.  FIRKINS, YVONNE.  Towards  a  Canadian
theatre.  Canadian author  and   bookman
I8:8, December 1942.
II I. FARQUAHARSON,   RICA MCLEAN.   Wartime
drama  in   the   British   Empire:  Canada. In   Theatre  Annual  (N.Y.)   p.    I I-I8,
1944·
I I 2.  WATSON, FREDA.  Reconstruction and   the
arts;  can   we   have   a   national theatre?
Saturday Night 6o: 38-4o,  November  25, I944·
I I3.  couLTER,    JOHN.   Towards  a   Canadian
theatre.  Canadian review   of  music   and
art  4:17, 20,  August   I945·
II4. ROWE-SLEEMAN,   ALICE.  National theatre
for   Canada.  Canadians all  3: 24,  72-73,
77, autumn, I945·
I I5.   VOADEN, HERMAN  A.   Theatre    record
I945· Canadian Forum 25: r84-I87,  No­
vember I 945·
I I6.   Canadian  supplement. Theatre  Arts  30:
42I-422, July 1946.
I I 7.  DICKSON-KENWIN,  G. The Canadian thea­
tre;  the    need    for   training,   discipline,
and   purpose.  Canadian review   of  music and    art   5:20,  30,   October/November
1946.
I I8.   MARSH, D. G. Professional  theatre  reviv­
ing   this  year.   Saturday Night  62: 24-25,
October 26,  I946.
119.  VOADEN,  HERMAN.  The  theatre in  Can­
ada;  a   national  theatre?  Theatre  Arts
30:  389-391, July   I 946.
I 20.  ANGUS, WILLIAM.  Make   national theatre
fulfil   all   needs.   Saturday Night  63: I6,
November I5,   I947·
I 2 I.  BRODERSON,  GEORGE. Towards  a   Cana­
dian  theatre.  Manitoba Arts   Review 5:
r8-23, spring I947·
122.  COULTER,  JOHN.  Some  festival   visions  of
a  national theatre. Saturday Night 62:
20-2I, May  17,  I947·
I23.   JOHNSTONE,  KENNETH.  The  season   in
Canada:   Eastern. Theatre  Arts   3 I: 7 I-
73, July   I947·
I24.   JONES,   EMRYS  MALDWYN.   The   season in  Canada-Western. Theatre Arts  3 I:
73-74,  July I947·
I 25.  TOVELL, VINCENT. Theatre  in   Canada.
Here  and  Now   1 : 8o-8 I, December  I 94 7. I26.   ALFORD, WALTER.  When   Canada   has theatres,  plays   will  soon   follow.   Satur­
day   Night  64: I8-Ig,  October  I6,   I948 ill us.
I 2 7.  MORLEY,  MALCOLM. Amateurs and  actors.

go
 Saturday  Night   64:32-33,  October  9, I948.
I 28.  TOVELL, VINCENT. Native  theatre.   Here
and   Now   2:8I-84, May   I948.
I29.   GALLOWAY,    MYRON. Scene:    Canada­
time:  present. Northern Review 3:35-
37,   October/November   I949·
130.  GALLOWAY,  MYRON.  The  Canadian   play
and   playwright. Northern Review 3:38-
40,  December/]anuary  I 949-50.
I3I. KING, J. CLIFFORD.  Dominion  theatres­ Canada.  In  Campbell,   Andrew,  ed.
International   theatre,  ed.  by   John
Andrew,  pseud. and  Ossia  Trilling.  Lon­
don,   Sampson Low,   I949· p.   I32-I33· I32.   MOORE,  JAMES MAYOR.  Theatre in  Can­
ada.  Canadian Life    I: I7,   32,   March/
April   I949·
I 33.  ALLEN, TED.  Profile   of   a   bilingual   cul­
ture.   United  Nations  World  4:56-58,
July  1950.
I34·  GALLOWAY,  MYRON.  Robert  Speaight on
Canadian  theatre,  Northern  Review  3:
48-50, February/March   I950.
I35· MOORE, JAMES  MAYOR.  The  Canadian theatre.   Canadian  Forum  30: ro8-I  ro, August  1950.
I36. COULTER,  JOHN.  More than a  pat  on  the head.  Saturday  Night  66: I 2,  28,   Sep­
tember   4,    I95I.   (Estimate of   Massey
Report.)
I37·  DAVIES,  ROBERTSON.  The theatre; a  dia­ logue    on    the    state  of   the    theatre   in Canada.   Royal  commission   studies. Ot­ tawa,  King's  Printer,  I 951.  p.  369-392.
138.  Theatre  in   Canada. Royal    Commission
on    national   development  in   the    arts, letters  and   sciences    1949- I 951.   Report. Ottawa,  King's  Printer,  I95I.  p.    192-
20o.   (Massey Report.)
I39·  WHITTAKER, HERBERT. Our  theatre;  a youthful bloom. Saturday Night 66:8,
January 30,  195 r. ill us.
I40. ANGUS, WILLIAM. The  theatre  at  Athens
-Ontario. Food   for  thought  I 2:20-23, April   I952.
I 4 I. BENNETT, ERNEST STERNDALE. Canadian theatre. Canadian Life  2: II, May/June I952·
I42. NESS,    MARGARET.  Summer theatre;
bumper  straw  hat   crop. Saturday  Night
67:13, 36,  August  r6,   I952.  illus.
I43·  PACEY, DESMOND.  [Drama] In his  Crea­ tive   writing  in   Canada. Toronto,  Ryer­ son,   [I952]. p.  I94-I95·
I44·   WHITTAKER, HERBERT. Canada  wants its own  theatre. Theatre Arts  36:43, 95, August I 952.  illus.

THEATRE  IN CANADA



145·  GUTHRIE, TYRONE. The  development of live   drama  in   Canada.  Saturday  Night
68:7-8, June 6,  1953,   ill us.
146.  WHITTAKER,  HERBERT. Canada on  stage.
Queen's  Quarterly   6o: 495-500,  winter
1953·
147·  GARD, ROBERT   EDWARD.  Frontier in  Can­
ada. In   his  Grassroots theatre;  a  search for   regional    arts   in   America.  Madison,
University   of    Wisconsin   Press,     1955.
p. 46-71.
148.   Theatre-going  in   Canada:  a   new  pros­
pect.    Times   (London)   16,   April    27,
1955·
149.  BEAULNE,  GUY. World reviews: Canada.
World Theatre  5:244-247, summer 1956.
150.  COHEN,    NATHAN.    Summer  theatre
troubles. Saturday Night  71:15-16, July
2 1, 1956  ill us.
151.   MOORE, JAMES   MAYOR. A   theatre  for
Canada. University of Toronto Quarterly
26:1-16, October 1956.
152.  SPEAIGHT,  ROBERT. The theatre and  bal­
let    in    Canada.   Journal  of   the    Royal
Society   of   Arts    104:940-950,  October
26,  1956.
153·  WILLIAMS, NORMAN. Prospects  for   the
Canadian  dramatist.  University of   To­
ronto  Quarterly 26:273-283, April  1956.
154·  BIRNEY, EARLE. North  American drama today;  a   popular  art?  Transactions of
the  Royal  Society of Canada 3 ser., v.51, sect.  2:31-42,  1957.
155·  COHEN,   NATHAN.  Television   and    the
Canadian  theatre;  another  treadmill to futility.  Queen's  Quarterly  64: I-II,
spring 195 7.
156.  WHITTAKER, HERBERT. The  theatre.  In
Park, Julian  ed.   Culture  in  contempor­
ary  Canada.  Ithaca,   Cornell  University
Press,  1957.  p.  163-180.
15 7.  MOORE, JAMES  MA VOR. The  theatre  in English speaking Canada. In  Ross,  Mal­ colm   ed.   The  arts  in   Canada; a  stock­ taking   at   mid-century.  Toronto,   Mac­ millan, 1958.  p.  77-82.  illus.
158.  Reviving  a   theatrical  life   destroyed   by the  films: the  task  before the  Canada Council. Times  (London):   3,  January
15,  1958.
159.  ALLEN, JOHN.  Dominion  drama.  Drama
52:32-35, spring 1959.
160.  COHEN, NATHAN. Theatre  today; English Canada. Tamarack Review 13:24-37, autumn 1959.
161.   FULFORD,  ROBERT. The yearning for  pro­ fessionalism. Tamarack Review 13:24-37, autumn 1959.
 162.  GARDNER,  DAVID. Canada's theatre; climb­
ing  in  second gear. Saturday  Night   74:
12-13,  40,  May   9,  1959,  illus.
163.  MICHENER, WENDY.  Popular  theatre.
Canadian  Forum  39:146-147,   October
1959·
164.  MICHENER, WENDY. Towards  a  popular
theatre.   Tamarack   Review	13:63-79,
autumn, 1959.
165.  MOORE, JAMES  MAYOR. Theatre;   some
backsliding.  Saturday  Night   74:32-33,
August  29,  1959.
166.  New  approach to  the   problem of theatre art  in  Canada. Toronto, Theatre centre, [1959?]  21  p.   (mimeographed).
167.  TOVELL, VINCENT. A   conversation  [on Canadian   theatre J     by   Vincent  Tovell and   George  McGowan.  Tamarack   Re­
view    13:5-23,  autumn   1959.
168.  WHITTAKER, HERBERT. The  audience  is there. Saturday  Review  42:25,  October
24, I959·

FRENCH  CANADA
169.  Parisian  scorn  of  the   French  theatre  in
Canada. Literary Digest  8o: 34,  February
23, 1924,  illus.
170.   MONTIGNY,  LOUVIGNY  DE. Theatre  cana­ dien.  In  his  Les  boules  de neige; comedie en   trois    actes,  precede     d'un   lever    de ride au:   "/ e vous  aime". Montreal, Deom Frere,  1935.   p.  vii-xxiv.
171.  BERA uD, JEAN. Pour   un  theatre national.
In    his    Initiation   a    l'art    dramatique.
Montreal,  Dussault and   Peladeau,  1936.
p.  !83-227-
172-  HOULE, LEOPOLD. Notre  theatre  et   Ia critique.  Transactions  of  the   Royal   So­ ciety   of   Canada  3   ser.,   v.35,  sect.    1 :
77-90,  194 I.
I 73·  HOULE, LEOPOLD.  Retour aux  classiques.
Transactions of Royal  Society of Canada
3 ser.,  v.36,  sect.  1:59-69,  1942.
174.  HOULE, LEOPOLD. L'histoire   du   theatre au  Canada;  pour   un   retour   aux   classi­ ques.  Montreal, Fides,   1945.  170  p.  bib!.
175.  LAURENT, EDOUARD. Refiexions   sur    le theatre. Culture 6: 39-54, January  1945.
I76.   BERAUD,  JEAN. Le  theatre. In Variations sur  trois   themes  par  Jean  Beraud, Leon Franque,  Marcel  Valois. Montreal,  Edi­ tions  Fernand  Pilon,  1946.   p.  9-183.
I 77· DUHAMEL,  ROGER. Le  feuil!eton  des  spec­
tacles.   Relations 6: 311,   October  I 946.
178.  MULLIGAN,  LOUIS. Shakespeare and  !'en­ tente  cordiale. Canadian review  of  music  and   art  5: 17-I8,  February  I946.

gr

THEATRE IN CANADA



I!JO. AMPLEMAN, JEAN.  Le   theatre;  theatre canadien.   Nouvelle   releve    6: 273-276, February I948.
I8I. PELLASCIO-MORIN,  ERNEST. Theatre  can­
adien.  Revue   dominicaine  54: 230-234, November I948.
I82.   GELINAS, GRATIEN.  Un   theatre  national
et   populaire.  L' Action  universitaire  IS:
30-39, April   I 949·
I83.   JASMIN, JUDITH. Problemes du  spectacle
au   Canada.  Nouvelle  revue   canadienne
I: 77-8o,  February/March   I95I.   I: 72-
76, April/May, I95I.
I84.   BOUCHER, PIERRE. Nos  publics   de  thea­
tre.   Revue  de   l'universite  Laval   8: 3SI-
357,  December I 953·
I85.   D'AUTEUIL,  GEORGES HENRI. Situation de
notre    theatre.    Relations	I6: 290-293, October I956.
I86.   BEAULNE, GUY.  Le    theatre  de   langue
fran<;ais  au   Canada; son evolution depuis Ia fin  de  Ia deuxieme grande guerre. Vie franyaise  I 2:223-238, March/April  I958.
I87.   BERAUD, JEAN.  Le   theatre  au   Canada
fran<;ais.  In Ross,  Malcolm ed.  The  arts in    Canada:    a    stock-taking    at     mid­
century. Toronto,  Macmillan, I 958. p. 67-76. illus.
I88.   WHITTAKER, HERBERT.  French Canada's success  story.  Theatre Arts  42:22-23,  72-
75, March  I958. illus.
I8g.   HAMELIN, JEAN. Theatre  today:  French Canada.   Tamarack  Review   I3:38-47, autumn  I959·
I go.   SABBATH,  LAWRENCE.  French theatre in
Quebec (province). Canadian  Commen­
tator   3:IO-I2,  October I959·


2. LITTLE THEATRE

I9I. AIKINS, CARROLL  ed.  Survey of Canadian amateur   stage.  Canadian  Forum  g:si-
62, November Ig28.
Ig2.   BURTON, JEAN. The little theatre in  the country.  Canadian Forum  7:2I I-2I2, April   Ig28.
I 93·  Canadian little theatre. Canadian Forum
g:4I,  November Ig28.
I94·  TAYLOR, DOROTHY G.   What  about  the little theatres? Canadian Forum g: 42-43, November Ig28.
I95·  AIKINS,  CARROLL.   The   amateur  theatre in    Canada.   In   Brooker,  Bertram  ed. Year book  of the  arts  in  Canada, I 928-g. Toronto,  Macmillan,  I929,  p.   43-48.
Ig6.   BISHOP, GEORGE  WALTER  ed.  Some  pro­
minent  societies in  Canada. In  Amateur

92
 dramatic  yearbook   and  community  thea­ tre   handbook   I 928-29.  London,   Black,  Ig2g. p.  I83-I93·
I97·   LERNER, GERTRUDE.   Footlights  in   Can­
ada;  an    estimate  of   the    little  theatre movement  in  Canada.  Drama Magazine
2 I : I 7- I 8,   24,  June  I 93 I.
I g8.   KEY, ARCHIBALD. The theatre on  wheels.
Canadian Forum I 3:462-463, September
I933·
Igg.   Little  theatre  should  be   a   community
project.  Canadian Bookman IS: I3, January  I933·
200.   ALLAN,  MARTHA.  The   future   of    the
Canadian  little theatre. Curtain Call  6:
I-2,   I3-I4,  November I7,   I934·
20I. BESSBOROUGH, VERE  BRABAZON    PON­ SONBY, 9TH  EARL  OF. Community  drama sweeps    Canada.  Curtain  Call   7: 3,   I 4, December I935·
202.  CAMPBELL, LOUGHLIN.  Reflections on  the decline of  the  little theatre. Curtain Call I I: Ig-20, November I939·
203.   HOARE,  JOHN  EDWARD. Community  thea­
tre   to  Canadian  theatre. Saturday Night
59: I4,   February 5,  1944.
204.   SOMERSET,  DOROTHY. The amateur  thea­ tre  takes  stock; how  does  the  emergence of  professional theatre  in  Canada  affect amateur  groups?  Food    for   thought  8:
20-25,   May   1948.  illus.
205.  Canada's lively  "little theatre". Food   for thought  17: 175-I8I,  January  I957·

MARITIME PROVINCES
206.   LOOMER, L. s. Chocolate cove  playhouse.
Atlantic  Advocate  50: 95-99, September
I 959·  illus.
207. ROBERTSON, J.  L.  The  little  theatre movement in  Nova   Scotia. Canadian  re­ view  of music  and  arts: I4-I6,  February
I 946.  illus.
208.   SOPER,   P.   LLOYD.  St.    John's   players.
Atlantic  Guardian  I : I g-20,   3 I,  Septem­
ber  1945.
209.  WETMORE,  DONALD. Nova  Scotians enjoy learning  drama.  Food    for  thought   I 3:
27-29, March  I953·
2IO.  WICH,   SYLVIA. Theatre  in   Newfound­ land.  Atlantic  Advocate   48: 55-59,  May  I 958.  illus.
2 I I.  DENISON, MERRILL.  The little  theatres­ the     community   players   of    Montreal. Canadian   Bookman   6:32,   February I923.
2 I 2.  Students on  stage. Canadian stage, screen and   studio  I : 4-6,  March  I 936.  ill us.

THEATRE IN CANADA



21 3·  Meet    Mr.    Atterbury.   Canadian  stage, screen   and   studio  1 :4-5, January  I 93 7· (Corona Barn   theatre,  Montreal.)
2 I 4· BOLTON,  MADA     GAGE.  The   Lakeshore summer   theatre    (Montreal).    Curtain Call  12:5-6,0ctober  1940.
215.  Brae    Manor Theatre  (Montreal);   suc­
cess story.  Curtain Call   I2:6, April  1941.

ONTARIO
2 I6.  COVENTRY,  ALAN FREETH. The  technical work  of  a  little theatre. Canadian Forum
1: I08-109, January 1921.   (Players Club, Toronto.)
2 I 7· DENISON, MERRILL.  The Arts  and   letters players  (Toronto).   Canadian  Bookman
5:31-32, February 1923.
2 I 8.  DENISON, MERRILL.  Hart  House theatre.
Canadian   Bookman   5:61-63,  March
1923.
219.   Hart   House theatre, Toronto. A  descrip­
tion  of  the   theatre and   the  record of  its
first   nine    seasons,    1919-1928. Toronto. n.d.  22  p. illus.  plan.
220.  Toronto  masquers' club; a  pictorial  his­
tory.  Canadian stage, screen, and  studio.
2:7-I2,  December 1937.
221.  Trinity   players   (Toronto).    Canadian
stage, screen  and  studio  I : 18-19,  March
1937.   2:13, 16,  December  1937.
222.   KELLY,  DONALD   G.  Once-upon-a-time
there  was   a   Canadian  theatre.   Cana­
dians    All    3: 28,   48,   6o,   spring   1945. (University College Players' Guild, Toronto.)
223.   Next   rehearsal Tuesday. Varsity  Gradu­
ate   (Toronto) I: II-13, June 1948.  illus.
224.  Play     season     at    Hart   House  theatre.
Varsity Graduate 3: 2-5, December 1 949·
illus.
225.  SMILLIE, ELEANOR  ANNA. Ottawa drama league. Canadian Bookman 5:151-152, June 1923.
226.  DENISON, MERRILL. The  little  theatres; Ottawa  drama  league.  Canadian   Book­ man  5:32,  February 1923.
227.   HARDY, ALISON  TAYLOR. The   Ottawa little theatre-past  and  present. Curtain Call  I2:3-4, January I941.
228.   FARQUHARSON, RICA   MCLEAN.    Inter­ national  seasoning of  Ottawa  little thea­ tre.  Curtain  Call12:3-4,May/June  I941.
229.  Ottawa   little   theatre.   Theatre   Canada
no.   37:2-4,  November/December   1957.
230.   SKINNER, ALAN.  The  London little  thea­
tre-past  and  present. Curtain Call  12:
5-6,  December 1940.
 23 I.  SKINNER,  ALAN.  A    theatre   grows    in London.  Canadian  review   of  music   and art  5:3I,   33-34, February 1946.
232.  Tryout Town. Time  55:22-23,  February
6,  1950.   (London Little Theatre.)
233·  RICHARDS, STANLEY.  Black  ink-and  no black    magic.   Theatre   Arts    37:64-65, June 1953.  illus.
234·  DENISON, MERRILL. A   backwoods   com­
media   dell' arte.  Theatre  Arts   Monthly
12:682-685,  September  1928.   illus.
235·  PATTON, G.  E.  Drama  in   the   country.
Echoes   no.   129:15,  December  I932.
236.  FLEMING, HELEN  M. The  players   guild
of Hamilton. Canadian Forum 29:87-88,
July  1949.
237·  Players guild  of Hamilton. Canadian Life
I :31, 39,  winter 195 1. ill us.
238.  Up   with   the   big  ones.   Saturday  Night
66:19,  January  23,    1951.    (Woodstock
Little Theatre.)

PRAIRIE PROVINCES
239· Little  theatre in   Manitoba;  dramatic festivals  organized. Canadian Bookman I4:6o, May   I932.
240.  Manitoba's stage. Canadian stage,  screen and   studio  1 :4-5,  October  1936.
241.  CRAIG,  IRENE. The  first  quarter of a  cen­ tury   of  the   Manitoba  drama   league  by Irene Craig and  A.  G.  Smith.  Winnipeg, Manitoba Drama League,  1956. (mimeo­ graphed.)
242.  HESSON, HILDA.  The  community players of  Winnipeg. Canadian  Bookman 5: 121, May  1923.   5:152, June  1923.
243·  YOUNG, LANDON. The  little  theatre  of Winnipeg. Canadian  Forum  7:370-372, September I927.
244·  HESSON,  HILDA. John   Craig  and    the little  theatre. Curtain Call  8: I I-I2, April I937·   (Winnipeg Little Theatre.)
245·  DOUGLAS, FRANCIS.  Some   notes   on  Mas­ quers' overseas tour.   Canadian  review   of music   and   art  5: 39-42,  February  I 946.  illus.    (Winnipeg   Masquers'   Club    with  Toronto and  Montreal Masquers' Clubs.)
246.  PRENDERGAST,   TANNIS.  "WLT"   origins and    influence.  Food    for    thought  18:
267-274, March  1958.   (Winnipeg Little
Theatre.)
247.  HENDERSON, ROY D.  The  theatre  in Saskatchewan. Canadian review  of music and  art  5:32-33,  February 1946.
248.  GOWAN, ELSIE PARK. The Edmonton little theatre-past  and   present. Curtain Cat'l
I 2 : 7, March I 941.

93

THEATRE  IN CANADA



249.  Workshop   14.   Saturday Night 65:25,
February  7,   1950.  illus.  Calgary.
250.  Theatre golden rule  days. Saturday Night
66: 11,    May    1,    1951.   (Workshop   14· Betty  Mitchell.)
25 I. MCGURK,   JOHN.    Nights    without  end.
Commonwealth   20: I50-151,  June  8,
'934·   (North-West Canada.)

BRITISH COLUMBIA
252.  KERR,  RUTH   H.   The  Home  theatre  of the  Canadian players.  Theatre Arts Magazine 6:67-72,  January  1922.
253·  BEAUFORT, AILEEN. Carroll Aikins: Home
producer.   Canadian  Magazine  60:557-
562, April  1923. illus.
254· Theatre   in   the    wilderness.   Living    age
316: 549-550,   March  3,    1923.   (Home
Theatre.)
255·   FIRKINS,  YVONNE. Community drama  in British  Columbia.  Curtain  Call   12:7-8, October 1940.
256.  FIRKINS,   YVONNE.  A  Canadian  theatre
comes  of age.  Curtain Call  13:8,  Novem­
ber   1941. (Vancouver Little Theatre.)
257. PARKES, J. DELISLE. The little theatre movement  in   British    Columbia.   Cana­ dian   review   of  music   and   arts  5: 25-26,
34,  February 1946. illus.

3· DOMINION  DRAMA FESTIVAL

258. Dominion drama festival; little theatre news from  the  different Canadian cities. Canadian Bookman  14:126,   November
1932.
259.  Drama league festivals; news of  the  little
theatres.   Canadian  Bookman  15: 39-40,
March 1933.
260. BRUCE, HERBERT A. The  national drama
league  of  Canada.  Address   at   the  con­
clusion  of   the   performance  in   the   do­ minion   drama   festival    finals    at    Hart House theatre,  March  26,   1934.   In  his Our   heritage  and   other   addresses.   To­
ronto, Macmillan, 1934:200-202.
261.  ALEXANDER, HENRY. The  drama festival and  the  little theatre. Curtain Call  6: 1-2,
15,  February, '935·
262.  (GREIN,  ALICE AUGUSTA GREEVEN].  Do­ minion   drama   destival.  In    her   f.  T. Grein, the   story  of a  pioneer  1862-1935
by    his    wife,     Michael   Orme,   pseud.
London, Murray, 1936. p.  329-339. illus.
263. COULTER,  JOHN.  Time  for   dusting  off
the   drama  festival. Saturday  Night  62:
20,  March 22,  1947.
264.  COULTER,  JOHN.  A  festival    adjudicator

94
 should  wear   two  masks.   Saturday  Night
62: 18-Ig, April   26,   1947.
265.  TOVELL,   VINCENT.    Festival   postscript.
Canadian Forum 27:64,  June  1947.
266.  (SANDWELL,   BERNARD  KEBLE].    Drama
festival  exhibits  many  fine  offerings.  By
Lucy   van   Gogh,  pseud. Saturday  Night
63: 2-3,   28,   May    15,   1948. ill us.
267.  Dominion  drama   festival.  Illustrations.
Saturday Night 64:2-3,   May   24,    1949·
268.  MILNE, WILLIAM S.  Drama  festival  after­
thoughts.  Canadian Forum  30:82-83,
July  1950.
26g.  Drama festival, Saint John. Illustrations.
Saturday Night 67:12,   April   26,    1952.
270.  Whisky    Angel. Newsweek 39:45,   April
28,   1952.  (Dominion Drama  Festival­ Calvert Trophy.)
271. WHITTAKER,  HERBERT.  Drama  festival enters  new   era.   Saturday Night 67: 16,
June 7,  1952.
272.  FOWKE,    HELEN    SHIRLEY.    A    national
occasion;   A    report   of    the    dominion
drama festival in  Halifax. Atlantic Advo­
cate   48:55-59,  June  1958. ill us.
273.  HATFIELD, G. H.  D. The dominion drama
festival   comes    to   Nova     Scotia.  Nova
Scotia Teachers'  Bulletin  34: 28-g,  April
1958.
274. WEST,   RICHARD. Maritime adventure;  a
report  on   the   regional  drama  festivals.
Atlantic   Advocate   48:79-81,   March
1958. illus.

4· OTHER THEATRICAL  ACTIVITY­ BEGINNING  OF   PROFESSIONAL THEATRE

MARITIME PROVINCES
275. CROSBY,  LAUREL.  Atlantic  tour    of   the
Canadian  players. Atlantic Advocate 47:
43-46, January  1957. illus.
276. GOLDING, JACK.  The story of the  Imperial
Capitol   Theatre    [Saint   John,   N.B.].
Atlantic Advocate 48:25-31, March 1958.
277·   WARRINGTON,  IRMA.  Magic  at   Tatama­
gouche.  Food    for   thought  17:182-185,
January 1957.

QUEBEC
278. ROBERT, GEORGE H.  ed.  L'annuaire  thea­ tra[e,  1908-9. Montreal.  1909.  (no  more published)  260  p. illus.
279· GUTHRIE,  TYRONE.  From   the   theatrical notebooks of  Tyrone Guthrie. Maclean's
7: 20-2 1,  76-82, December 5,  1959. ill us. (Montreal, 1929.)

THEATRE  IN CANADA



280.  GUTHRIE, TYRONE. Montreal. In  his   A life   in   the   theatre.  N.Y.,   McGraw-Hill, I 959·   p.  71-79·   (Visit  in   I 929.)
281.  RITTENHOUSE,   CHARLES   B.    Montreal
experiences theatre renaissance. Saturday
Night  62:23,   September  14,   1946.
282.  DUHAMEL,  ROGER. Notre  grand  Frido)in.
Relations 5:I37-I38,  May    1945·
283.  WHITTAKER,  HERBERT. FridoJin our  star.
Canadian  revzew   of   music    and   art   5:
11-13, February  1946.   illus.
284.   LAURENT,  EDOUARD. Tit-coq, un  conscrit qui   passera  a  l'histoire. Culture 9:378-
383,   December   1948.
285.   LEGAULT, EMILE. Le   theatre  qu'i)   nOUS
faut.  Amerique  franfais 2:27-35,  June
1943·
286.   HOULE,  JEAN  PIERRE. Les   compagnons.
Action universitaire 12:20-22,  December
1945·
287.   LEGAULT, EMILE.   Perspectives   sur    les
compagnons. Relations 5:272-273,  Octo­
ber  1945·
288.  COLEMAN, FRANCIS A.  The  theatre  Ill
Canada; Les  Compagnons. Theatre  Arts
30:391-392, July  1946.
289.  Troupe from   Canada.  Newsweek 28: 84,
December   23,    1946.   illus.    (Les   Com­
pagnons.)
290.  AMPLEMAN,  JEAN. L'aventure des  Com­
pagnons.   Nouvelle    releve     5: 844-848,
August/September I 947.
291.   LEGAULT,  EMILE. Confidences. Montreal,
Fides,     I955   illus.    Autobiography  of founder  of  Compagnons.
292. Auditoria, professional  theatre,  CIVIC theatre. In  The arts  in  Montreal. Report of   a   survey    of   Montreal's  artistic   re­ sources.     Montreal,   Junior   League    of Montreal  [c  1956]  p.  27-44.
293·  ROUX, JEAN  LOUIS. Le   theatre du   nou­ veau  monde. Theatre  Canada no. 36:2-3, September/October   1957.
294·  MOON, BARBARA.   Why   the   world   wants more     of    the     "Theatre   du     nouveau monde".  Maclean's  71: I9,   62-66,  May
24,   r 958.   ill us.
295.  TRUEMAN, ALBERT WILLIAM. Le   theatre du   nouveau  monde.  Food    for   thought
19:76-78,  November 1958.
296.  BAXTER,  c. Theatre du   nouveau monde; Montreal players truly  international. Financial Post  (Toronto) 53:51-52, February 7, 1959.
297·  SABBATH, LAWRENCE.   Theatre  du   nou­ veau    monde's   ninth   season.   Saturday Night 74:20-22, December 5,  r 959· ill us.
298.  D'AUTEUIL, GEORGE   HENRI. A  J'enseigne
 du   theatre  national  populaire.  Relations
no.  215:287-298,  November  1958.
299·  HOOS, PETER. A  multilingual theatre for Montreal.  Theatre  Arts    42:58-59,   De­ cember  1958.  illus.
300.   Comedie canadienne.   Architecture­
Batiment  - Construction  13:404-409, December 1958.  illus.  plans.
30!. GELINAS, GRATIEN. Credo of  the  Comedie
-Canadienne;    the    faith   behind   the little miracle. Queen's Quarterly 66: r8-
25, spring 1959.

ONTARIO
302.   Some   Canadian  theatres.  The  Builder
109:275-6, October    15,    1915.    illus. (Toronto.)
303. JOHNSTON,  FORREST. All   Canadian drama   plan     makes     hit     at    Kingston. Saturday  Night   63: 19,   September   25,
1947·
304   (SANDWELL, BERNARD KEBLE]   A   new
quality on  the   Canadian  stage. By Lucy van   Gogh, pseud. Saturday Night  64:
2-3,  March  22,   1948.   illus.   (New   Play
Society.)
305.   LUCOW, MAURICE.  $75,000  gamble  pays off  for   Toronto   angels.  Financial  Post
(Toronto)   46:7,   August  9,    1952. (Melody Fair.)
306.  Shakespeare   festivals   m    Canada;   the
Earle  Grey    players.  Food    for   thought
13:8-12,  May/June,   1953.
307.   [LYLE-SMITH,  ALAN]  The   Shakespeare
festival;     a   short    history   of   the   initial
five  years  of  Canada's  first  Shakespeare
festival,  1949-1954 by Alan  Caillou pseud. Arnold  M. Walter and  Frank Chappell. Toronto,  Ryerson,  1954.   46   p.  illus.
308.  CAMPBELL,   DOUGLAS. Canadian  players
on  the  snowplough circuit. Theatre  Arts
39:71-73,  88,  April    1955.   illus.
309.   Persona grata man of many   parts.  Satur­
day   Night   70: 12,    14   July    23,    1955· (Douglas Campbell-Canadian  players.)
310.   MOON,  BARBARA.  Canadian theatre's fiery
godmother. Maclean's 71: I8-19, 52-55, February 15, 1958.  illus.  (Dora Mavor Moore   and   New  Play  Society.)

BRITISH COLUMBIA
31 I. COMMUNITY   ARTS  SURVEY COMMITTEE, VANCOUVER.  The arts  and  our  town; Vancouver, Canada. Vancouver, Junior League  of  Vancouver,  1946.   201  p.
312.  CRICHTON,   DOROTHY   V.  U.S.   actors lead in  Victoria festival. Saturday Night 62:
12, September 28,  1946.

95

THEATRE IN  CANADA



313.   FRANCIS,   MARGARET.    Bernhardts of   the West  Coast  in Vancouver spotlight (by Margaret and  Robert Francis). Saturday Night  63: 18,  September  11,  1948.
314. GARDNER,  RAY. Vancouver's enchanted evenings under  the  stars.  Maclean's 70:
18-19,  40-41,  August   3,  1957,   illus.
315.   GOLDSCHMIDT,    NICHOLAS.    A    Salzburg
for   Canada?  Food   for  thought  17: 189,
192-194, January   1957.

5· STRATFORD FESTIVAL

316.   GUTHRIE,  TYRONE. My  part  in  the  Strat­
ford  adventure. Maclean's 72: 13-15,  84-
94,  November  21,   1959.  ill us.
3 I 7·  GUTHRIE,    TYRONE.   Stratford,  Ontario.
In  his   A    life  tn   the  theatre. N.Y.,
McGraw-Hill, 1959.  p.  314-338.
318.   SMITH,   ROBERT DENNIS  HILTON.    Strat­
ford    Shakespearean   festival.  In   Encyc­
lopedia Canadiana. Ottawa,  Grolier  So­
ciety   of  Canada, 1958.   v.9,  p.  420-421. ill us.
319.   MARQUIS,   LEONARD.  The Stratford  story by    Leonard    Marquis   and     Margaret Rowe. Stratford,  Shakespeare Festival Foundation of  Canada, 1954.  48  p. il!us.
320.   STRATFORD, PHILIP.   Stratford  after  six
years;  a   miracle  reconsidered.  Queen's
Quarterly  66: 2-17,  spring  1959.
321.   Stratford   festival     1953-1957;  a   record in  pictures and  text  of the Shakespearean festival  in  Canada with  a foreword by the Rt.   Hon. Vincent  Massey  and   an  intro­ duction by  Herbert  Whittaker.  Toronto, Clarke Irwin, 1958.   xxxii,  72  p.  illus.
32 2.  STRATFORD     SHAKESPEAREAN     FESTIVAL
FOUNDATION   OF   CANADA. The Stratford
Shakespearean  festival  of  Canada  1953-
1959·  Stratford,  1959.   28  p.  illus.

1953
323.   Annual affair. Time  62:28,  August   31,
1953·
324.   DAVIES,   ROBERTSON.   Through  ritual  to
romance. Saturday Night  68: 7-8, August
1, 1 953· ill us.
325.   First     Shakespeare   festival    in    Canada.
Vogue. 121:80-81, May   15,  1953.   illus.
326.  GUTHRIE, TYRONE. Problems of the  next Stratford  festival. Saturday Night 69: 7-8, December 12,  1953.  illus.
327.   GUTHRIE,  TYRONE. Renown at  Stratford; a record  of the  Shakespeare festival in Canada   I 953    by    Tyrone  Guthrie, Robertson Davies and  Grant Macdonald.

g6
 Toronto, Clarke Irwin, 1953.  viii,  128  p. ill us.
328.   GUTHRIE,   TYRONE.  Shakespeare  finds   a
new   Stratford.  Theatre  Arts    37:76-77, September 1953.  illus.
329.   HOUSE,   A.  w.  The  miracle of  Stratford.
Industrial  Canada  54: 6o-65, September
1 953· illus.
330.   JOHNSTON,    JAMES.   "Sea of   troubles"
ended   for     Stratford?   Financial    Post
(Toronto)  47:15, May   30,  1953.
331.   PILDITCH,   JAMES  The  Stratford   Shake­
spearean festival. Canadian Geographical
journal	47:242-247.    December   1953. ill us.
332.   REANEY,  JAMES.   The  Stratford   festival.
Canadian   Forum   33: 1 12-113,   August
1953·
333·  SCHEFF,   AIMEE.  Shakespeare arrives in
Canada. Theatre Arts  37:83, July 1953.
334·  SCOTT,    MARGERIE.     Theatre   adventure;
second   thoughts after first nights at Strat­
ford, Ontario. Theatre World 49:24-26, October 1 953· ill us.
335·  Shakespeare at  Stratford, Ontario. Food
for  thought   13: 1 2,  May/June I 953·
336.   STRATFORD    SHAKESPEAREAN      FESTIVAL FOUNDATION   OF   CANADA.  The  Stratford
festival    1953.   Stratford, 1953.   26  p.
337·  THISTLE,   LAURETTA. Stratford,  Ontario.
Saturday   Review   36:25-26,   August   1,
1953·

1954
338.   BARKWAY,   MICHAEL.    The bard    will   be back    again.   Financial  Post    (Toronto)
48:7,  August  14,   '954·
339·  BRADY,   LLOYD.   Three  miracles at  Strat­
ford. Rotarian 85: 24-25,  50-52, October
1954.  illus.
340.   DAVIES,  ROBERTSON.   Simplicity and  arti­
fice combine at  Stratford. Saturday Night
69:5, 9-10,   July   31,   1954.   illus.
341.  DAVIES,   ROBERTSON.    Stratford:  second
year.  An  air  of certainty. Saturday Night
69:5, 7-9, July   I 7, 1954.  ill us.
342.   GUTHRIE,   TYRONE.   Twice  have  the trumpets sounded; a record  of the  Strat­
ford    Shakespearean  festival    m  Canada
1954  by  Tyrone  Guthrie,  Robertson Davies  and   Grant  Macdonald. Toronto, Clarke  Irwin,  1954.   xiv,   193   p.   front. illus.
343·   HEWES,    HENRY.   Triple  "en  tente".
Saturday   Review   37:33-34,   July   31,
1954·
344·  STRATFORD    SHAKESPEAREAN     FESTIVAL
FOUNDATION   OF   CANADA.  The Stratford

THEATRE  IN CANADA



festival,  I 954·   Stratford,  I 954·  24  p.
345· THOMAS, EUGENIE. Shakespeare and Sophocles  in   a   tent.  Saskatchewan   Bul­ letin   20: 22-24,   October  I 954·

1955
BORTH, CHRISTY. Will Shakespeare comes to   Canada.  M ontrealer  29: 24-25,   Sep­ tember I 955· illus.
347·  BORTH, CHRISTY. Will Shakespeare comes to   Canada.   Reader's  Digest    67 :4I-44,
September   I955·  (Condensed  from   the
M ontrealer September  I 955·)
CLARKE, CECIL. Stratford, Ontario.  (Can­
ada).   World  Theatre   5:42-50,  winter
I 955/I 956.  illus.
349· COHEN, NATHAN. Tyrone Guthrie, a minority report. Queen's Quarterly 62:
423-426, autumn  I 955·
350. DAVIES, ROBERTSON. Stratford: firm and permanent growth. Saturday Night 70:
7-8, July  23,  I 955· illus.
351.  DAVIES,  ROBERTSON.  Thrice the   brindled cat   hath  mew' d; a  record   of  the  Strat­
ford    Shakespearean  festival     in   Canada I 955    by   Robertson  Davies,  Tyrone Guthrie,  Boyd   Nee)   and   Tanya   Moisei­ witsch, Toronto, Clarke Irwin,  I955· xii.
I 79 p. illus.
352.   EDINBOROUGH,  ARNOLD. Shakespeare con­
firmed    at    Canadian  Stratford.   Shake­
speare   Quarterly 6:435-440,  fall   I955·
353·  FULFORD,  ROBERT. The  backstage star  of
Stratford. Mayfair 29:25-32, July   I955·
ill us.
354·  HEWES, HENRY. Astringency in  Ontario.
Saturday  Review 38: 26,  June 4,  I 955·
355·  MCVICAR,  LEONARD  H.  From little  acorns
.  .  .  Stratford's    Shakespeare   festival.
Recreation   48:  I I o- I 1 I,    March   I 955·
ill us.
MOON, BARBARA.  Why   Guthrie  outdraws
Shakespeare. Maclean's 6: I8-I9,  50-52, August 6,  1955·  illus.
357·  OSMAN,   MARY.  Other   adventures  at
Stratford.  Food    for   thought   15:27-30,
May/June  I955·
Stratford  festival. Canadian Geographical
 don,    Cassell,   I 958.   xix,    134   p.   front, ill us.
1956
Architect's plan   for  proposed permanent
Stratford,  Ontario  Shakespearean   festi­ val   theatre.   Shakespeare    Quarterly  7: frontispiece, fall  1956.
BAXTER,  SIR ARTHUR BEVERLEY.  Canada
showed  the  Old   Vic  how.  Maclean's 69:
4, 66-67,  March 17,  I 956.
Bickell  fund aids   theatre.  Financial Post
(Toronto)  50:5,  January  28,   I956. CALLWOOD,   JUNE.   How   Stratford  went to  Broadway. Maclean's 69:8-I I,  50·53, March 3,  I 956.  ill us.
COHEN, NATHAN. TamburJaine:   shadow
over  Stratford.  Saturday Night 7I :9-Io,
March 17,  1956.
DAVIES,  ROBERTSON.   Stratford  revisited:
amazing festival. Saturday  Night  71: I4-
I5, September r,  I956.
EDINBOROUGH,   ARNOLD. Consolidation at
Stratford,  Ontario.  Shakespeare    Quar­
terly   7: 403-406, fall   1956.
GUTHRIE,  TYRONE. Shakespeare comes  to
Stratford,   Ontario.   New     York  Times
magazine: 26-27, June 10, 1956. illus. MCGEACHY,  J. B. Fourth Stratford  festi­ val   ready  to   go;   Shakespeare,   Moliere, music   and    swans.   Financial   Post    (To­ ronto) so:?,  June  I6,  1956.
370.  Moliere  at   Stratford. Time  68: 12,  July
I6,  I956. illus.
Start   permanent   theatre   at    Stratford
next    week.    Financial   Post    (Toronto)
50:4,  August 18,  I956.
372.   STRATFORD SHAKESPEAREAN FESTIVAL FOUNDATION OF   CANADA. The   I 956
Stratford   Shakespearean  festival.    Strat­
ford,  1956.  40 p. illus.
1957
373·  ALLEN, ROBERT THOMAS. How   a   teen­
ager's  dream   came    true  at    Stratford.
Maclean's 70:28-29,  75-79,   October  12, I957·  illus.
374·  Canada's  Shakespeare capital:   Theatre
Arts  41:78, July  1957,  illus.

Journal  50: ix-xi,   April  I 955·  ill us.
 375·  DAVIES,  ROBERTSON.
 Stratford    I 957:

359·  STRATFORD SHAKESPEAREAN  FESTIVAL FOUNDATION OF   CANADA. The   annual
 magnificent,  masterful.  Saturday
72:8-9,  35,  July  20,   1957·  ill us.
 Night

Stratford   Shakespearean  festival  of
drama  and   music   1955. Stratford,  I955·
48  p. illus.
VALK,  DIANA  QUIRK. Shylock  for  a  sum­ mer; the   story  of one   year  ( 1954-55) in the  life  of Frederick Valk,  with  notes  by Tyrone Guthrie and  Donald Davis.  Lon-
 Doing     Shakespeare  proud:    fine    new
theatre   instead   of    tent     at    Stratford, Ontario. Times  (London) :6, August I9,
I957·
377- DRIVER,  TOM F.  Shakespeare in  Ontario.
Christian  Century   74: 1138-1  I39·   Sep­
tember I957·


97

THEATRE IN  CANADA



378.   EDINBOROUGH, ARNOLD. Canada's   per­ manent  Elizabethan  house.  Shakespeare Quarterly  8:5II-5I4, fall   I957·
379·   FAIRFIELD, ROBERT. The new   theatre at
Stratford. Food   for thought  I7: 173-174,
188, January 1957. illus.
380.  KIRSTEIN,  LINCOLN.  Letter from  Canada.
The  Nation 185:288-290, October 1957. MOORE,   JAMES    MAYOR.  Snobs   at   Strat­ ford. Canadian Commentator 1 : 7-8, Sep­  tember 1957.
PHILLIPS,    ALAN.     What    Shakespeare's
doing to  Stratford.  Maclean's 70:28-29,
7I-72, June 22,  1957. illus.
SANGSTER,   DOROTHY.   The   designing
woman of  Stratford. Maclean's 70: I6-I9,
54-56,    July  20,    I957·   illus.     (Tanya
Moiseiwitsch.)
Stratford  festival theatre, Stratford,  On­
tario.  Architects Rounthwaite and  Fair­ field.  Journal  of the  Royal  Architectural Institute   of  Canada  34:    267-274,   July
I 957. illus.  diagrs.
STRATFORD SHAKESPEAREAN  FESTIVAL FOUNDATION  OF   CANADA. The 1957 Strat­ ford   festival  of Canada. Stratford,    I957·
48 p.
386. STRATFORD   SHAKESPEAREAN    FESTIVAL FOUNDATION  OF    CANADA.  Stratford   festi­ val  permanent  theatre;  general  informa­ tion. Stratford,  I 957.  I 2   p.  illus.

1958
Audiences biggest   ever;   Stratford  bonds a  hit,  too.  Financial Post  (Toronto)  52:
4,  October 4, I958.
388. BARKWAY,   MICHAEL.   Stratford  magic   is still    strong.   Financial  Post    (Toronto)
58: I4, July  I9,  I958.
389-  DAVIES,  ROBERTSON.   The  Stratford   sea­
son;  a   great  poetic    theatre.   Saturday
Night  73: 14-I5,  36-37, July    I9,  I958.
390. Drama, music   and   mime  for  you  at  our
Stratford.  Financial Post  (Toronto)  52:
12, July   19, I958.
391.  EDINBOROUGH,   ARNOLD.  A  lively   season
at  Canada's  Stratford.  Shakespeare
Quarterly 9:535-538, fall   I 958, ill us.
392-  PLUNKETT, PATRICK   MARY.   Shakespeare in  Ontario.  America 100:44-45, October
I I, 1958.
393· STRATFORD    SHAKESPEAREAN    FESTIVAL FOUNDATION  OF   CANADA. The  Stratford festival    Canada  1958.   Stratford,  1958.
56 p. illus.
394·  Theatre IS     world  first.   Financial   Post (Toronto)   58:68,  February  22,   1958. diagr.
 395· WEALES,   GERALD.  The  bard   in   Ontario.
The  Reporter  19:42-43,  September  4,
1958.
396.  WHITTAKER,  HERBERT. Handsome drama prize.  Canadian Commentator 2:8, June
1 958.
397·  WYATT,   EUPHEMIA   VAN      RENSSELAER.
The   Stratford   Shakespearean  festival.
Catholic World  r88: 156-158, November
1 958.

1959
398. EDINBOROUGH,  ARNOLD. Shakespeare fights    for   recognition.  Saturday   Night I4:7-9, July  18,  1959.
399·  OKLOPKOV, NIKOLAI P.   l  was   in   Strat­
ford.  U.S.S.R.  Illustrated  News    no.   8
(54): 22-24,  August   I959·  ill us.
400.  Sales  higher for  Stratford. Financial  Post
(Toronto)  53:21, June  20,  1959.
40 I.  STRATFORD,  PHILIP.  Shakespearean  festi­
val:  a   pre-season  inventory.  Canadian
Forum 39:81, July 1959-
402.   STRATFORD, PHILIP.    Stratford   1959·
Canadian   Forum   39: I05·I07,   August
1959·
403.   Stratford sets   record   as    I959   festival
ends.  Financial  Post   (Toronto)  53: II,
September 26,  1959-
404. STRATFORD   SHAKESPEAREAN    FESTIVAL FOUNDATION OF   CANADA. The Stratford festival  1959. Stratford,   1959· 48 p. illus.

6. THEATRE EDUCATION

405.   GOWAN, ELSIE PARK. There's drama in them    there  hills:  being   an   account  of the    summer   drama   course     at   Banff. Curtain  Call   7: 14,  October 1935.
406.  School  of  the   theatre in  British  Colum­
bia.  Curtain Call   10:9, May/June 1939.
407. New  theatre in  the  Rockies. Curtain  Call
11 :4-5,   March 1940.   Banff    School  of
Fine  Art.
408.  Summer  school    of   the    theatre  on   the
Pacific coast. Curtain Call  11 : 9-1o, April
1940.  (University of  British   Columbia.)
409.   Summer theatre for   Queen's.  Curtain
Call   11:7, May/June  1940.
410.  MACCORKINDALE,  ARCHIE.  Drama course
in   heaven. Curtain  Call   12: 8-9,   March
1941.  (Smithers,  B.C.)
41 1.  GORDON, K.  w.   Place   of  drama in  adult
education.  Food    for   thought  3: 18-23,
May   1943.
412.  JONES,  EMRYS  MALDWYN.  The   uni­
versity's duty towards Canadian drama.
Culture 7:31 I-324, September  1946.


g8

THEATRE IN  CANADA



4I3. VOADEN,  HERMAN.   Dramatic art  in  Can­ adian higher education. In  Kirkconnell, Watson.  The   humanities  in   Canada  by Watson Kirkconnell and   A.  S.  P.  Wood­ house.     Ottawa,    Humanities   Research Council  I947· p.  228-236.
4I4. PATTERSON,  TOM.  Stratford  and   educa­
tion.     Food     for     thought   I7: I69-I73,
January   I957· illus.   p.   I89.


D. PERIODICALS

4I5.  B.C.  Drama Newsletter. British  Columbia
Drama  Association. Vol.   I, no.   I,  Dec. I959   + (mimeographed)
4I6.  Cahiers des   compagnons.  Bulletin  d'art
dramatique. Compagnons de St. Laurent. v.   I,  no.   I,  September/October  I944-
v.    3,    no.    2,    March/May,   I947·    bi­
monthly.
4I7.  Cahiers des  Dix. Montreal, v.I,  I936   +
Historical  review   containing information
on  theatres and   performances in  Quebec and   Montreal in  seventeenth, eighteenth and   nineteenth  centuries.  See   index in each  volume.
4I8. Call  Board. Halifax, Nova  Scotia Adult Education  Division. December I949- January  I 960.   38  issues.   Publication  to be   continued   by   Nova    Scotia    Drama League  for   members  only.
419.   Call    Sheet.  Toronto,  Central  Ontario Drama  League.  no.    I,   November  I949 (no   more  published} .   (mimeographed.)
420.  CANADA  COUNCIL.    Annual    report.
Ottawa  I957/8  +.
42 r.  Canadian  Annual  Review  of  Public   af­
fairs.  Toronto. I90I-I937138 ed.  John Castell-Hopkins.  Volumes for   I 92 2- I 932 contain   surveys  of   little  theatre   move­ ment.
422.   Canadian   Forum.   Toronto.    1920    +.
Monthly   review    of   the    little   theatre.
January  I 929 -News of  little theatres; February  I 929  -February   I 93 I -The little  theatre;  March  I93I- November
I 932 -Stage   and    Screen;   Irregularly from    1932-Footlights.
423.   Canadian Stage, Screen and  Studio.  To­
ronto,  Canadian   Stage  Publishing  Co.
v.I,  March  I936   - v.2,  no.   I,  Decem­
ber  1937.
424.   Central  Ontario  Drama  League   News­
letter.  Toronto.  v.I,  October  I950    +
(mimeographed.)
425.  Cue. Montreal Repertory Theatre. No.  1,
December  I,  1930   + Now  published as
 programme for  each  M.R.T. production.
426.  Curtain  Call. Toronto.  I929-I941.  v. r.,
no.   r,  November  29-v.4,  no.  8,  May
12,   1933.   Published fortnightly (later monthly)   by   permission  of   the   syndics of  Hart  House Theatre.  Devoted to  all the   arts,   especially  in  Toronto. v.s, no. r,  October 1933-v.I3, 194I   monthly. Official    publication   of    the    Dominion Drama Festival.
427.   Letters   in   Canada.  Toronto.   I935    +.
Reprinted  from    the   University  of   To­
ronto     Quarterly.  Annual    review   of
drama;  criticism of  Canadian  plays,  ex­ cept    for    I947-I952,  when    articles   in­  cluded  general  comment  on   Canadian theatre.
428.   Livre     de    l'annee.   Montreal,   Grolier,
I 950+.  Contains annual review  of  thea­ tre.  Later numbers give  survey  of  theatre in  Canada.
429.  Masks  and   Faces.  Regina Little Theatre
Society.   I 942   + 5  times  a  year.   ( r 942-
I 945  mimeographed.)
430.   Masses.  Toronto,  Progressive Arts   Club.
I 932 - 34  (published irregularly). (Thea­ tre   reviews    and    articles,   especially  on the   Workers theatre  in  Toronto in  each  issue.}




99

THEATRE  IN CANADA



431.   Nouvelle  Revue  Canadienne. Montreal. v.r, no.  r,  February/March, 1951 -v.3, no. 3, April/May, 1954.  Le Theatre - review  of theatre in Montreal every  two months.
432.  On    Stage.  Vancouver  Little  Theatre
Association.  1958   +. Five   times   a  year
(mimeographed.)
433·  Theatre 	Canada.    Ottawa,     Dominion
Drama  Festival. no.  r,  February 1951-
no.   45,    May/June   1959.   July/August
1959   v.8,   no.   4   + (nos.    1-35  as   Do­
minion Drama  Festival Newsletter.)


TITLES NOT CONFIRMED

434·  Call   Boy.   London Little Theatre   Asso­
ciation.
435·  Community    Playhouse   News.     Sarnia
Drama League.
436.   Play  Bill.  Winnipeg  Community  Players. ed.  Robert Ayre.
437·   Vancouver   Little   Theatre   News.   ed.
A.  P.  Crocker, published in  193o's.


APPENDIX

CANADIAN PLAYS,  DRAMATISTS, ACTORS AND ACTRESSES­
BIO-BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL

438.   BELLERIVE,  GEORGES. Nos  auteurs  drama­ tiques.    Canada   frant;ais     20:748-757, April    1933.    (List    of   French-Canadian plays  up  to  1933,  including date of  first performance and   publication.)
439·  CANADIAN  ASSOCIATION   FOR  ADULT    EDU­ CATION. Canadian plays and  playwrights; a   selective   bibliography    of     Canadian plays.  Toronto  C.A.A.E.,  1957.    (English language only.)
440.   Presentable   plays    for    use   in    Canada.
Ontario  Library  Review   13: 14-46,












IOO
 August  1928,   p.  44-46   Canadian   plays.
441.   ROBERT, GEORGE H.  Nos  auteurs  drama­
tiques  by  George  H.   Robert  and   P.  E.
Senay.    Canada   frant;ais     2 I: 23 7-243, November  1933.    (Completes list  of   Bel­ lerive  above.)
442.   WATTERS,   REGINALD  EYRE.  Drama: stage and    radio   plays.    In    his    Checklist   of Canadian literature. Toronto,  University of  Toronto Press,   I 959·  p.  303-32 1.
443·  BAILLARGEON,   SAMUEL.   Le   theatre.  Jn his    Litterature  canadienne-frant;aise.
Montreal,   Fides,      1957.    p.    429- 437· (French-Canadian  dramatists since  1945)
444·  BELLERIVE, GEORGES.  Nos  auteurs  drama­
tiques  anciens  et  contemporains:   reper­ toire  analytique. Quebec,  Garneau, 1933. (List  of  French-Canadian  dramatists and  their work   with   analyses  of  plots.)
445·  BRODERSEN,     GEORGE.    Gwen    Pharis­ Canadian dramatist.  Manitoba  Arts   Re­  view  4: 3-20,  spring  1 944·
446.   PIERCE,   LORNE  ALBERT.  The  dramatists.
In   his   Outline  of   Canadian  Literature
(French  and   English).  Toronto,   Ryer­
son,  1927.  p.  I13-121.
447·  ROY, CAMILLE.  Le  theatre. In his Tableau frant;aise.  Quebec,  Action sociale,  1911. p. 79-80.  (List of French-Canadian dramatists.)
448.   LINDLEY,     BARRY.    Merely  players.    To­ ronto, Toronto  News   Co.,   1 86o.  12 1  p. ill us.
449·   MORGAN, HENRY  JAMES.   Types of  Cana­ dian     women.   Toronto,    Briggs,     1903.  Short  biographies  of   Canadian-born actresses and    of   those   who   have   acted extensively in  Canada.
450.   NESS, 	MARGARET.   On     stage     abroad.
Saturday  Night  68:41-42,  November 15,
1952.   illus.    (Canadian   actresses.)
45 I. PREVOST,  ROBERT.  Que   sont-ils  devenus?
Montreal,  Princeps,  1939.   123  p.   Que sont-ils    devenus,    ces     artists    de     Ia scene  ... ? Voici dix-sept entrevus  .  . .  . qui  vous  reveleront ce que  sont  devenues
des  celebrites aujourdhui  a leur   retraite.
