lr.25 per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·43

Winter,1970


)IRTS IN  THE  POLITICI)IN'S EYE



Articles

BY CHRISTOPHER XERXES RINGROSE, GEORGE BOWERING, ANTOINE SIROIS, G. K. FISHER, FRANK DAVEY,  FRANK BIRBALSINGH



Chronicle

BY  NAIM  KATIAN



Review Articles and Reviews

BY D. G. STEPHENS, WILLIAM H. NEW, DOUGLAS  BARBOUR,
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, AUDREY THOMAS, LEILA  VENNEWITZ, W. F. HALL, NORMAN NEWTON, GERARD  TOUGAS, ROBERT  HUNTER, MARYA  FIAMENGO




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW






ARTS IN THE POLITICIAN'S EYE



THESE THOUGHTS  were provoked by receiving a copy of an American  magazine-Cultural  Affairs-devoted surprisingly  to  the  arts  in Canada. Cultural Affairs is the organ  of the Associated Councils of the Arts in the United  States. The  particular issue I am discussing was brought  out  to  cele­ brate  a seminar  held in  May  last year at Ste. Adele in Quebec-a seminar  to which,  apparently,  two  hundred   and  fifty of  the  most  distinguished  cultural  leaders from  both  sides of  the  border  were invited. There  was no  provision in its agenda  for  the  discussion of the creative  process;  far  from  it,  the  aim  was specifically stated  as to discuss "the  political  realities of government  support  of the arts."
The  issue of Cultural Affairs was conceived as an  adjunct  to this seminar;  its
contributors  were all Canadians, and all, in one way or another,  non-creating members of the  cultural  establishment.  Two  were members  of the government, Mr.  Trudeau himself and  the Secretary  of State,  Mr.  Gerard  Pelletier. Several were high officials of public bodies devoted to the organization  of the arts. Only one  was an  independent-the journalist  and  editor  Robert  Fulford.  And  not a single one was a practicing  artist. In other words, here was a composite official view of the directions  public  policies for fostering the arts should  follow. It  was a view some of whose implications  I found no less than  chilling.
It is true  that  the  Prime  Minister opened the issue by remarking  that  the arts
are  "an  essential grace  in  the life of civilized people",  and  that  he ended  with what was clearly meant  as a statement  of reassurance.

I do not think  that  modern  society, or the artist as a member of that  society, need fear  a generous  policy of subsidy to the  arts from  governments  as long as  these governments  have  the  courage  to  permit  free expression and  experimentation­ and, for that  matter, to take it in good  part  if the mirror held up  to their  nature is not always a flattering one.


3

ARTS  IN  THE  POLITICIAN'S EYE



Fair enough. Yet Mr. Trudeau admits in an unguarded moment  that  the govern­ ment "sets a general course for development"  in its aid for the arts, and  even so vague a policy can materially accept the situation  of the artist. How, we can only estimate by gauging  the attitudes  of those who shape  it.
Here, it seemed to me, two articles in Cultural  Affairs  were of special signifi­ cance,  partly  because they were written  by men  who  hold  key posts in terms of public  programmes  for the arts, and  partly  because  they  display  various  aspects of what  might  be defined as an  official approach. They  were  by  Mr.  Pelletier, and  by Mr.  Duncan  Cameron,  National  Director  of the  Canadian Conference of the  Arts. Mr.  Pelletier speaks for  public  and  state-supported intervention  in the  arts. The   Canadian Conference  of  Arts,  for  which  Mr.  Cameron  speaks, represents what in current  jargon is called the private sector. It is a heterogenous federation  of many  organizations  in various  ways interested  in  the  arts-some as practitioners,  some as organizers, some as spectators.  One  at least of its main functions  is to serve as a liaison between  the  government  and  the artists.
However,  not  all  artists are  represented  in  the  Canadian Conference  of  the Arts. To my knowledge, few professional writers belong to any organization  that is a  member  of  the  Canadian Conference,  and  the  same  may  apply  in  other fields. I think it likely, in fact, that  the  performers  are  more heavily represented than  the  creating  artists, while those whom  Mr.  Cameron   calls "arts  adminis­ trators"  are  also strongly present.
These  preponderances  doubtless influence  the  policies of the Conference,  and they may well be reflected in Mr. Cameron's  essay, whose tone is set by the first sentence, in which he tells us that "national organization of the arts ... is a rela­ tively new phenomenon  in  North American  society,"  that  it is "an experimental  means of achieving the goals essential to the health  of the arts and the flourishing of creative  expression",  and  that  it  is the experiment of the  moment.  Note  the last fashionable  touch;  the implication is that  because it is the experiment  of the moment  we have to go through  with it!
Now it is clear from  the rest of his article  that  Mr.  Cameron  believes in  the organization  of the  arts, and  that  he sees himself as a spokesman  for  the "total arts  community,  or  arts  industry,  as it  is more  commonly  now  being  called". Those  are  Mr.  Cameron's  words. Personally,  I  do  not  believe in  the  existence of a "total  arts community". I find the word  total  itself a  particularly  ominous one;  it  suggests something  monolithic,  something   on  the  edge  of  totalitarian. But a healthy arts community, if one can call it a community  at all, is surely the

4

ARTS  IN  THE POLITICIAN'S EYE



most anarchic  community  that  could ever exist, based as it must be on the indi­
viduality  of each  creative  artist.
Perhaps  the  other  equally  jarring  phrase-"arts industry" -gives  a clue to what  Mr.  Cameron   may  actually  envisage. To  talk  of an  arts industry  means that  one  sees the  products  of  art  as  primarily  commodities;  such  a  view, of course, reverses the true  situation.  Real works of art  are commodities  only in  a secondary  way.  In  order  to continue  creating,  the  artist  must sell what  he  has produced  so that  he may buy materials and  food. Once  the work of art  has left his hands,  it survives as an object of contemplation,  an  icon, and  only becomes a  commodity  again  when  it  passes from  hand  to hand.  This  natural  situation has in  recent  years  been  disturbed,  especially in  the  visual  arts,  by  the  rise of dealers  to  positions of  unprecedented   prominence,  and  the  deliberate  creation and  planned  obsolescence  (the  art  museum  directors  in  this  process acting  as accomplices of the dealers)  of fashions in painting  and  sculpture,  some of them as ephemeral  as fashions in feminine clothes, to feed what  has become largely an investment  market.  Because of the  different  physical nature  of  the  product  of writing,  books have  become  no more "industrialised" than  they  ever were,  but the  building   and   destruction   of  reputations   on  the   poetry-reading   circuit  is analogous to that  in  painting.  This situation-art taking  on the outward  shape of moderately  big business-has actually led some of the organizers  of the arts to conceive the  possibility of a liaison in depth  with the  business world, and  the author  of  a  minor  article  in  the  magazine  I  am  discussing goes a  great  deal farther  than  Mr. Cameron  in remarking  that  "more  and  more business and  the arts will come  together  to build a better society."
One has to grant  that,  in a country like Canada especially, some degree of organization  may be necessary in some of the arts. The  performing  arts in  parti­ cular  depend  on it. Urban  areas are widely scattered,  and  where  they  exist the tradition  of support  for  the  theatre  or  the concert  hall  is even  now  not  nearly so deeply established  as in Continental Europe.  While a European city of I oo,ooo inhabitants may  support   a  theatre  or  an  opera  house,  an  urban  complex  like Vancouver,  with  nearly  a  million residents, finds it impossible to  do so without federal  patronage. Both the attendance  at  performances  and  the  private  patron­  age of theatres  are growing impressively, but operas and symphony concerts and what  we call serious drama  can  be made  available  to a  large  number  of Cana­ dians  in  the  cities and  smaller  towns only by    planned  public subsidy.  Where subsidies are given, the framework of a national organization  of the arts obviously exists and,  even  in  selecting  the  theatrical  or  musical groups  that  will be sub-

5

ARTS  IN  THE POUTICIAN'S EYE



sidized, the state -or  the  corporation  that  represents  it -will  be establishing the criteria  on which its support  is to be based. Nothing  so crude  as an  attempt at  censorship  need  ever be tried.  The  power  to  influence  the  choice  of  what may be performed  will be there, even if it is not  exercised. "I fear the  Greeks," said Virgil, "even  when they offer gifts." The  help of the state  must be accepted only with the greatest  vigilance.
The  creative artist-with the possible exception  of the musical composer and
the  obvious exception  of  the  choreographer -is  much  less dependent  on  this kind  of  organization. He  does not  have  to  face  the  vast  expense  involved  in putting  on  the  most  modest  show  on  a  professional  level  of  excellence,  and, unlike the performing  artist who usually has to work full time in order  to sustain a  professional standard, the  writer  or  the  painter  can  survive  by  taking  some job that  will leave  time and  energy for  artistic  production. I can  think  imme­ diately  of two  notable  examples:  the  American  poet  Wallace  Stevens  and  the English poet Roy Fuller, both of whom became major  writers in their field while spending  their  working  lives as corporate  executives.  I have  yet  to  hear  of  a great  actor, or a notable conductor,  or even a good first violin, who  doubled  as a businessman. There  is a clear division between  the good  professional and  the good  amateur in  the  performing  arts;  the  boundary  is  much  more nebulous in a field like writing,  or even painting.  This  situation  has  two consequences. The  performing  artist is much more inclined to demand  organization than  the writer or the painter,  who is a solitary worker. On  a  professional level this can  be seen by comparing  the power and solidity of  organizations like the  Musicians'  Union and  Equity,  which embrace  virtually all  the artists in their  respective fields, and the  weakness of an  organization  like the  Canadian Authors'  Association, which professional writers are inclined  to regard  with  lofty disdain.  Secondly, the  pro­ ductions in which  performing  artists take  part  are  much  more vulnerable  to the perils that  come from  lack of support,  whereas  the  writer,  with  his typewriter and  his pad  of paper,  is much  better equipped  to weather  such conditions.
But even the writer is involved when the state  decides to organize support  for
the  arts.  The  actual  sum  of money devoted  to  writing  in  the  Canada Council budget forI g68-6g was small in comparative  terms;  it totalled  only one fifteenth of all grants  to the arts and  was less than  a quarter of that  devoted to the thea­ tre, but even this relatively small sum of $6oo,ooo  meant  help to a considerable number  of writers in the form of awards to enable them to spend time on writing or subsidies to  bring  out  books which  publishers  might  not  otherwise  consider commercially  practicable.

6

ARTS  IN  THE POLITICIAN'S EYE



This means that  creative artists, like performing artists, are likely to be affected by the  philosophies that  motivate  those who control whatever  programmes  exist for what  Mr. Cameron  calls "the  national organization  of the arts".  This is why Mr.  Pelletier's article in Cultural  Affairs is so crucially important; as Secretary of State  he is responsible for all federal support  for the arts,  and  his views may therefore be taken as an indication  of the line likely to be followed by those who direct such support. I found  his statement  ominous, pardy  because it applied  to cultural  matters  criteria  that  were essentially political, and  pardy  because it sub­ scribed  to a  modish  and  undoubtedly  ephemeral  inclination  to equate  with  art the more mechanical  ways of filling in leisure time.
One  of  the  points  Mr.  Pelletier  is particularly  intent  on  emphasizing  is the
need to "democratize culture". He has already told us of the vast spread of active as  well as spectator   participation in  cultural   activities so  that   there  are  now more  than  400 amateur   theatrical  companies  performing  regularly  in  Canada. He might have referred  also to the proliferation of potters and  Sunday  painters, to  the  vast  increase  in  private  presses and  in  mimeographed   little  magazines publishing  the  work of  a  whole swarm  of new poets. But  this  is evidently  not enough  for  Mr.  Pelletier.  Perhaps  with  an  eye to voter support, and  certainly with a politician's literalist view of democracy, he does not merely want to make culture  available  to as many  as may wish to partake  of it;  he also hopes to sell it  to the unwilling.

Many identify the  uses of theatres, concert halls, museums, art  galleries and libraries with the middle class and conclude that culture has nothing to do with them.  The  problem of winning ov.er this non-audience is not  merely financial. Above all, it is a question of ideas, of concepts. If we are to democratize culture, without debasing standards of quality, we must not only open the doors to much larger numbers of people, we must also induce them to enter.

One  feels an initial  reassurance,  hearing  that  phrase, "without debasing stan­ dards", but  this  is dispelled  immediately  when  one  turns  the  page  and  finds embedded  there  an extract  from a speech which the Secretary  of State made last year in Lethbridge,  Alberta.

It  may be necessary to  transform completely the notion of culture, to replace the notion of a middle class culture with that of a mass culture. Why should the theatre  and  the  opera  have  a  monopoly on  culture?  Why should  not  movies, jazz, popular songs and  psychedelic happenings also be a  means of culture  ex­ pression? ... When  culture   has  become  a  source  of  alienation-and   this  1s

7

ARTS IN  THE POLmCIAN'S EYE



increasingly the  case with  middle-class culture -it  is high  time for  us to  re­
examine it. The  democratization of culture will not otherwise be achieved.
This  statement, coming  from  the  federal  minister  responsible  for  organizing aid to cultural  activities, begs a whole series of questions. To  begin, there  is the use of the  term  alienation, the great  crybaby  word  available  to any  group  that cares to lay a claim  to special attention.  In  this context  I fail  to see how  alien­ ation  enters in at  all. The  arts are there for anyone  who  knocks at  their  doors; indeed,  they are  becoming increasingly available  to those who are temperament­ ally inclined  to  respond. But there  is no spectacular way  in  which  one  can­ without  debasing standards,  create a sudden  flood of that  interest  which  in any case, at  the  present  time, is growing with  unspectacular steadiness. The  number of amateurs and  participants  in all the high  arts is several  times greater  than  it was  in  Canada twenty  years ago;  it  is especially  obvious -despite  Marshall McLuhan -that  the  paperback  revolution  in  publishing,  coupled  with  current  educational trends,  has brought  about  a  phenomenal  growth  in  the  buying  of the kind of books that  half a generation  ago only a tiny minority  of Canadians would have wished to read, let alone possess.
I have used the term "high  arts" because I do not accept  Mr. Pelletier's term
"middle  class arts".  There  is nothing  intrinsically  middle  class about  the opera, which in  Italy  is an intensely popular  art,  or  about  ballet,  which in  Russia  has exchanged  an aristocratic for a working class following, or, for that  matter,  about any art.  Such  sociological labels have  no relevance  in cultural  matters; Mozart wrote  for  a  long-dead  aristocracy,  but  today  his  appeal  is classless, as  is the appeal  of all art  that  survives its immediate  time.  And  political  tenns  such  as democracy   are  equally  irrelevant,  since  democracy   means  the  rule  of  all  the people, and  all the people never like the same  thing. The  high arts-and  there is no reason  to exclude good movies or good ceramics from  among  them -are those  that  display  the  potentialities of  a  civilization  at  its  highest  and  most generous levels. For that  reason they have special demands  on our consideration, and  on our  support,  and  when we equate  them  with  the  trivialities of  commer­ cialized popular  entertainment we are not only belittling our  own  humanity; we are also robbing  the people who will live in a far more leisured and far less class­ conscious world a generation  ahead  of some of the  means  to  develop theinselves spiritually,  aesthetically and intellectually to the full.
Perhaps  the  most serious matter  of speculation  is how  far  the  public  bodies
which, under  the government, are responsible for aiding  the arts in Canada have been  infected   by  the  philosophy  which  Mr.  Pelletier  projects  and   which  his

8

ARTS  IN  THE  POLITICIAN'S EYE



fellows in the government  presumably  approve.  Certainly  there is no sign  what­ ever  that  the  Canada Council  has been as yet in any  way  affected;  its  choices and  its policies have  been warped  by no political motivations  and  by no  vulgar seeking after  popularity.  The  case of  the  Canadian  Broadcasting  Corporation, once so important as a patron  of the literary, dramatic  and  musical  arts in this country,  is far  different.  During  the past five years a steady  turning  away from its duty  to foster  the  high  arts  has  been  evident in  the  programmes  presented both on  radio  and  television, and  this year has seen a drastic  commercialization and  popularization  of programming which makes one fear  that,  as a responsible cultural  influence,  the CBC  will soon cease to exist. What  the state  gives to the arts  with one hand,  it appears  to be taking away  with  the  other.






































9


PATRICK	ANDERSON AND THE CRITICS




Christopher Xerxes Ringrose





A.J· "· SMITH's REMARKS on Patrick  Andcrson  in th•
Autumn   I968  Canadian  Literature may serve as a timely reminder  that  Ander­
son not only earned  his page in the literary  histories of Canada as the editor of Preview during  the  war,  but  that  he is himself a fine poet. This  fact  seems in need of reassertion in view of the treatment  afforded  him by Canadian  criticism since his departure from Canada in  I949·
Anderson's  critical reputation  reached its zenith  around  I 947, with  the publi­
cation  of his second volume, The  White  Centre,  by Ryerson.  A Tent   for April had  been  published  in  I945,  and The  Colour  as Naked  was to follow in  I954· The  fact  that  P. K.  Page, who had  also been  a member  of the  Preview  group in Montreal, published her two volumes As Ten  as Twenty and  The  Metal  and the  Flower in  1946  and  I954  meant  that  the  two  poets  were  often  reviewed simultaneously,  and  their similarities commented  upon.  In  view of P. K.  Page's continued   high  reputation   throughout   the  'fifties and  'sixties,  the  similarity  of the adulation  afforded  both  her and  Anderson  in  I947  is illuminating in  retro­ spect. Both poets had  published in Poetry, Chicago  during  the war  (P. K. Page had  been awarded  a prize by the magazine inI944) , and  the reviews of  the two I946  volumes in Poetry were most favourable.  In  February   I947, Jessica  Nelson North's   review1  of  The  White   Centre  praised  Anderson  for  his  metaphorical vividness and  arresting  technique,  as well as his original  treatment of the Cana­  dian  winter  scene.  In  the  July  issue of  I947   the  title  of   William  Meredith's  review of As Ten  As Twenty proclaimed  his approval: "A  Good  Modern  Poet and  a Modern  Tradition".2   Miss Page, he thought,  was one of a new generation of poets for whom the idiom forged by Eliot was completely  natural; he refused

IO

PATRICK ANDERSON



to  apply  the  adjective  "promising" -he  felt  Miss Page  had  already  arrived. Like many first reviews, these were brief and not given to extensive critical analy­ sis. But  they  were agreed  that  here  were two good  volumes  of  poetry  by  two poets  whose  names  had  been  linked,  and  that  their  finest  quality  was  their linguistic vitality.
A.  J. M.  Smith  himself  reviewed the  same  two  volumes  in  The   Canadian
Forum, opening with  the too-familiar claim that  the poetry  was as good as any­ thing  produced  in  England   or  the  States,  a  literary  line-up  of  sides  that  the Poetry  reviews  had  avoided,  and  which  Milton  Wilson  almost  unconsciously imitates  eleven years later  in  his article "Other Canadians  and  After":

Since Anderson's Canadian  interlude came to an end in  196o  and  he has never returned  (although  he has  continued  to write and  publish) ,  our  belief in  the anticlimax  of the  younger writers in  the  Preview group  will likely depend  on what we think of the later poetry of P. K.  Page. 3

As if Canadian poetry  were in competition  with all other  literature  in English, and Anderson had  been transferred  from "our  team"  to another.  In  passing, this attitude may explain the strange neglect afforded The  Colour as Naked in both anthologies  and  Anderson  criticism.  Nevertheless, Smith  had  great  respect  for the  poetry:   it  is "serious,  witty  and  intense"  verse, with  "a  tightly  controlled fonnal   elegance",  "bold,  illuminating,   convincing  conceits"  and   "precise  and dignified language".4    He  foreshadows later  opinions by finding  P. K. Page  the more intense of the  two, though  he does not say that  this makes her  necessarily the  better.  He  does however  object  to some aspects of The   White  Centre:   the poems  where  the  social  implications  rest  uneasily alongside  the  more  "purely poetic"  lines, especially when  the  "moral" seems to  be  tacked  arbitrarily  on  to the end  of the  poem.  Later  critics were to take Smith's  cautious  objection  and apply it wholesale to Anderson's work. Even within Smith's  review one can see reservations encroaching  on unqualified  praise of Anderson;  both in person and in  his poetic  "voice",  Anderson  seems to  have  enraptured  many  of  his  poetic
colleagues at  first sight. On  the first publication  of Poem in  Canada,  A.  J. M.
Smith  had  written  to The  Canadian  Forum:

Here we have a serious and  exuberant writer coming to grips with  the  funda­ mental  task of the Canadian  poet-the  examination of our  cultural  traditions and the definition of our selfhood -and doing so with an intensity and  an ima­ ginative insight that  is commensurate with the subject.
But on seeing it  reprinted  in The  White  Centre,  reviewing  it in  I947  with  the


I I

PATRICK ANDERSON



war  over,  and  that  particular  Montreal  wartime  "exuberance" being  replaced by something  much  less potentially  revolutionary,  Smith  has  doubts:   he  finds the  conclusion  of  the  "Cold  Colloquy"  section  facile  in  its  recommendations, and  regrets  its  inclusion,  believing that  Anderson  should  have  restricted  him­ self to what  he is capable of mastering-definition and  diagnosis.
"Definition  and  diagnosis"-on a personal level this is what  P. K.  Page had been  achieving  in  poems like "The   Stenographers" and  "Offices",  where  the wartime motifs end on a definite but unresolved note, and it is what gives the conclusion of Page's  poems on wartime emotions  and  hopes a harder  note than Anderson's,  when  he is drawn  into  abstract  plans:

Yet now the derricks race upon Glamorgan's hills
and the wheel of our heads
draw up the loaded veins of once blind power
and dredge for the long dark
and  waiting monuments of the people's dead:
firing these histories, we forge from shadows weapons.


"Miners" was  one  of  the  27  of  the  40  poems  Anderson  first  published  in Preview  that  he never collected into  any of his books. Of  the  rest, he  put  five in  A  Tent   for April) seven in  The  White  Centre, and  one  in  The   Colour  as Naked. It is not difficult to see why he was not concerned  to make it more public. The  tone  of the  "we",  as it  joins mental  activity  to  the  work of the  miners  of Glamorgan   in  an  extended  conceit,  is too  much  of  an  exhortation; and  with the  abstract  concepts  of "the  people's  dead"  and  "those  histories"  the  imme­ diacy of the identification  with  the miners seems to dissolve, and  there  is more hope than  certainty  in the last line.
But the difficulties of raising a passionate cry of expectation  or affirmation  in
poetry  are  immense-how  to  avoid shrillness or  glibness? And  in  Anderson's case doubly difficult:  writing "Poem  on Canada" when one is obviously English, and  "Miners" and  "Soldier"  when one's every poetic utterance  denies one's pro­ letarianism   and  one's  presence  in  Montreal   ensures  one's  physical  safety.  He was too open  to  jibes like that  from  Wynne  Francis: "Patrick  Anderson,  pro­ letarian  by choice, Canadian by desire, and  poet aflame  with  purpose." 6

12

PATRICK ANDERSON



Smith's  phrase  "description   and  diagnosis" could  be applied  more easily too to  the  poetry  of  F.  R.  Scott,  who  was associated  with  Preview  throughout  its existence. It seems strange  to compare the two during this period and realize that it was Anderson  who leapt  most often from diagnosis to impassioned prefiguring of "cure", since Scott was the longer-established socialist, and  certainly  remained a socialist far  longer  than  Anderson. By 1957 Anderson's  memories of socialism were rather  dim  (self -consciously so, indeed) :
No, I do not want to go on much about politics. For one thing, I find it difficult to resurrect that  particular  world, although it is only fair to say that  my friends in the Popular  Party seemed to be completely sincere, if often neurotic, and  my affiliation with them helped me to see more of the city than  I should otherwise have done.7

But Scott was able to work with objective irony and  a muted  tone to diagnose social evils and  imply  the  correct  response without  having  to state  it  directly. Anderson  too  is capable  of irony,  but  of  a  self-deprecating  kind  far  removed from Scott's  terse "Social  Notes".
To some extent,  while his satire is more ferocious, Scott is a safer  poet  emo­ tionally  than  Anderson -he will not  lead  the  reader  into  dangerously  fraught emotional situations  and  personal depths as the latter  is prone  to do, and it was
partly this tendency  which evoked A. J. M. Smith's cave in the generally favour­
able review in the Forum.  Nevertheless, this review, and  Northrop  Frye's  review of  The  Colour  as  Naked8 , are  virtually  the  last  really  complimentary critical studies  of  Patrick  Anderson  in  Canada. P.  K.  Page's  reputation   has  remained virtually intact  through  a long period of "silence"  to her Cry  Ararat!  in  1967: a reputation  sustained  for thirteen  years virtually by The  Metal  and the  Flower, which  Northrop Frye  pronounced   the  most  enjoyable  book  of  poetry  he  had read in 1954.9  An illustration  of the way in  which her  poetry  has "weathered" better  in  Canada is  her  inclusion  by  Milton  Wilson  in  his  1964  "Canadian Library"   anthology   Poetry  of   the  Mid-Century  194o-6o,   from   which   Louis Dudek  was excluded,  and  in  which one could  by no stretch  of the imagination expect  to find  Patrick  Anderson.



SoMETHING HAPPENED  to  Anderson's   reputation  between
1947 and  the  present;  or  to be more precise, several things happened  to  affect the  reception  of  his  poetry  in  Canada. Firstly, he  was  no  longer  here  when The  Colour as Naked  appeared, but back in England, so the book does not seem

PATRICK ANDERSON



to  have  got  the  recogmtlon  it  deserved;  certainly  writers  on  Anderson  in  the late  'fifties  and  'sixties treat  his work  as if it  ended  with  The  White  Centre. Secondly,  his departure in  1949  made  him  appear  a  rather  bizarre,  mysterious figure  who  had  appeared  in  Canada   at  the  start  of  the  war,  taken  a  leading part  in a most exciting decade of poetry and  magazine  production  in  Montreal, been married  and divorced, and had suddenly left for Singapore.  In other  words, he was ripe for  type-casting, and  in  reviews of Canadian literature  and  studies of the 'forties he is seldom mentioned  without  the qualification  of the magazine he ran for three years:  "Patrick  Anderson of Preview". And  to make clear what being  Patrick  Anderson  of  Preview meant,  two  editorial  sentences  are  usually extracted  from  the  magazine:

Two  events of great  importance  to  the  writer  have occurred  in  recent  weeks. One is the Russian offensive, the other the conference at Casablanca.10   All  anti­ fascists, w:e feel that  the existence of a war between democratic culture  and  the paralysing forces of dictatorship only intensifies the writer's obligation to work.11

There  is no denying  the  pomposity of these sentences,  taken  out  of context, but  it  may  be  worth  noting  that  while Desmond  Pacey  sees the  first  as cant; "one  would  have  thought  the  whole Canadian war  effort ... depended  on  the continued  existence  of this little  mimeographed   monthly"/ 2    he  omits  to  quote the  previous sentence:   "... we have  lived long  enough  in  Montreal  to  realise the frustrating  and  inhibiting  effects of isolation." It  is important to see Preview as a reaction  to this sensation of isolation and socialist ambitions,  and  that  when its tone became  pompous or shrill it was not  because it  was absurdly sure of its own  efficacy, but  simply  because  that  efficacy must  have  seemed  dubious  at times. Admittedly  Desmond  Pacey first  published  Creative Writing  in Canada in  1952,  before  Anderson's  third  volume,  but  there  is  less excuse for  Milton Wilson's  brief  passage on  Anderson  in "Other Canadians and  After",  written in  1958,  which  is a  compendium  of cliches  about   the  Anderson  "type", and quotes  from  the  inevitable  skiing  passage  from  "Winter  in  Montreal"  which Wynne   Francis   too  battens  on  in  disapproval.   Anderson   is  "a   tea-drinking Dylan  Thomas"; his "Winter  Landscape" (as  if he  wrote  of nothing  else!)  is "oppressive ... white ... anaesthetic". Wilson talks of Anderson's  "Marxism ... his self-conscious Canadianism", in  a  derogatory  manner, as if  these  were  the only ingredients  of an Anderson  poem. The  "Canadianism" taunt  seems wholly off  the  mark;   "self-conscious  non-Canadianism" is  more  appropriate, since  it suggests the honesty  with  which Anderson  accepts  his  non-Canadian sensibility

PATRICK ANDERSON



and  applies  it  to  Montreal  and  to  the  Canadian  scene generally.  In  Poem  on Canada  he seems to see himself as the interpreter,  the immigrant, close enough to Canada to observe it, and  detached  enough  to see it as a unique  land still in the  process of  being  populated,   rather  than  as a  factual  "My   Country."  His affection  for  Montreal  is honest  and  understandable:

There  was so much to write about, so much that  has  never been written about before; one couldn't  dislike a city which gave one so much, and which one had the sense of recreatingY

But in Wilson's  article  the  myth  has started  to  harden: Patrick  Anderson  of Preview is an  anaesthetic  white  Marxist. From  this portrait  who could imagine the variety of his work, or recognize him as the author  of the bitter little dialogue
in "Sand"?
It's  not just that there's so much of it, he said, nor the bitter heat of it nor its blinding glare but it's the shiftlessness, that there's no
purpose here
nothing but a blanket warming a blanket, or a sum multiplying and dividing itself forever, a sum
adding and subtracting itself for ever and ever.

There  is of course another  ingredient  of the Anderson myth, which has served so  efficiently in  the  'sixties to prevent serious and  objective study  of his poetry, and  that is the existence, alongside Preview and  the Preview group, of First State­ ment  and  its  supporters,   notably  John   Sutherland,  Louis  Dudek  and   Irving Layton.  Raymond  Souster  was also associated with  First Statement,  though  he did  publish  in  Preview. The  contrast  between  these two groups  is striking,  and has been stressed often enough  not to need emphasis at  this point. It seems cer­ tain that John  Sutherland conceived First Statement  at least in part as a counter­ weight  to  Preview  and  the  English  background  of  P. K.  Page,  Anderson  and James  Wreford.   Louis  Dudek  coined  the  phrases  "meticulous   moderns"   and "lumpen  intellectuals" to express the  contrast  he  and  Sutherland felt  between the two magazines,  and  they wrote editorials which  were obviously aimed at the other  magazine,  and  which  provoked  one  response in  Preview  II    (February
1943).14  Wynne  Francis's  article on "Montreal Poets of the  Forties",  published
in  xg62, and  lavishly decked with reflections and  recollections from  Irving  Lay­ ton, creates  from  the conflict  between  the  two magazines  a full-scale  war,  with First Statement  as  patriotic  guerillas  assaulting  the  establishment  in  the  form of Preview:

PATRICK ANDERSON



Their  accomplishments,  age, prestige, sophistication,  and  talent  all  combined  to present  an irresistable target  for the raw impecunious  parvenus  of Stanley  Street.

We shall  see that  this is a very misleading picture; and  of  course,  the  "loser" in  this  poetic  and  critical  battle  is Patrick  Anderson: he  was an  exploiter  of the Canadian landscape, says Wynne  Francis:

Exploited  is the  word. Anderson was not  a nature  poet.  His Montreal mountain is a  political  symbol; snow is our  chloroform  and  ice our  state  of social  anaes­ thesia;  skiers are  capitalist  entrepreneurs, or sometimes  leftist  propagandists.

"Winter  in   Montreal"  again!  Anderson might   be  forgiven   for   wondering whether anyone   had  read  beyond   Page  24  of  The   White Centre.  The  article completed the  process  of suggesting  that  Anderson is unreadable or  not  worth reading by suggesting  that  his role,  and  Preview's,  was  to stimulate Irving  Lay­ ton.  Mr.  Layton is quoted  as saying  that  it did.
I am  not concerned here to deprecate the achievements of Souster  and  Layton, or to deny  that  they seem to have emerged  as the  major figures  who moved  from the  promising 'forties  to  the  established  'fifties.  It is rather the  melodrama  pre­ sented  by Wynne  Francis  which  deserves to be questioned, as well as the factual accuracy of her  remarks  about  Preview.
F.  R.  Scott  has  confined  himself  to saying  that  Preview "stimulated and  kept
alive"  First Statement 15 ;  P. K.  Page  is even  less conscious  of  there  having  been any  out-and-out rivalry  between  the  two groups:
I remember  on one occasion a room was taken  at  the Ritz, for  Preview and  First Statement to argue out something ... whether  it was nationalism  or international­ ism, or what  it was, I know it was a very emotion-fraught  evening!

My memory  of it  is that  the groups  were pretty  well separate.  One  saw Layton occasionally,  because Layton  wasn't  the  sort  of  person  you  didn't  see, and  one saw Dudek  occasionally, and  I didn't  have  very much  to do with  them  after  the First Statement thing  got  going.16

Francis' statements about   the  respective   ages  and   social  standing of  the   two groups could  be misleading  too:

Several of them were comfortably  established  professionally in the fields of  teach­ ing,  law  and  medicine ... the  Preview  elders  in  many  cases  represented  father  images. Several  of them were McGill  professors.

P  K. Page  has  stressed  that   F.  R.  Scott  had   a  life  independent of  Preview
during the  war; that  he  was  not  as  completely absorbed in  the  group as  were

16

PATRICK ANDERSON



Anderson, herself, Ruddick  and Shaw, and that Klein joined the group  quite late in  the  magazine's  life. Bruce  Ruddick  was not  at  that  time  even  a student  in medicine, and so he was far from being "established  professionally in medicine", though  he was later  to achieve  this status.  Patrick  Anderson  was teaching  at  a boys' school in  Montreal, and  P. K.  Page was a stenographer. The  ages of the members of the respective groups in 1942 were much more evenly matched  than "Montreal Poets of the Forties" would suggest. F. R. Scott was 43 and Klein 33, but Layton  himself was 30;  though  Dudek was 24, and  Souster only  21, Ander­ son and Page were only 27 and  26 respectively.




BuT POETS  CAN   SURVIVE  classification, even  misrepresenta­ tion,  if they  are  read  and  appreciated   by  reasonable  numbers  of  people;  and after  pointing  to the difficulty of obtaining  copies of Anderson  volumes, and  the poor  state  of  criticism,  and  to  Anderson's  departure  from  Canada, one  must finally admit  that  there are qualities in the poetry itself which have left it washed up  on  the  bank  of the  Canadian poetic tradition  while  the  stream  flowed on; we have P. K. Page's high reputation  as proof that  this cannot be blamed on to circumstance  entirely. This  is not to say that  the poetry is poor, and  deserves to be forgotten; on  the  contrary,  a  unique  experience  awaits  anyone  who is pre­ pared  to read through  the three volumes of poetry, and  if possible the uncollected poems in Preview. The  poetry is certainly  most  un-American, but  it differs from anything  published  in  England  this century  both in its choice of subject  matter  (which seems Canadian) and in the peculiar isolated intensity of the tone, which manages somehow to convey also a faintly amused sense of irony at  the frenzied attempt   to  communicate. It  stands  out  in  a  Canadian anthology   through  its wordiness, and  density  of  metaphor, and  its debt  to  Dylan  Thomas.  But it is Dylan Thomas  with  a  taste of irony;  a  taste, in fact,  of T. S. Eliot.
T. S. Eliot,  but  not  Pound. Perhaps  here  we can  find  some  of  the  reasons
at  least for Anderson's  decline in popularity  in the 'fifties and  'sixties. It  would not  be too  adventurous to  claim  that  Imagism,  along  with  several  American poets directly  or  indirectly  influenced  by Pound,  such  as Cummings  and  Wil­ liams, has exerted  a tremendous  influence on Canadian poetry in the last twenty years. Anderson  is not  prepared  to give you an object in  the Imagist  manner - he  will process it,  masticate  it,  turn  it  inside out  and  offer  it  to  you with  his fingerprints  all over it. His complete antithesis to the Imagists  not  only separates

17

PATRICK ANDERSON



him from  the  laconics of Souster, and  the  cultivated  directness  of  Layton,  but is in complete  contrast  also to the low-keyed musings of the  younger  Margaret
Atwood:

Who can tell what clothes may suffer doomed to be hollow, to be thin, unable to speak except by the gestures of those who inhabit them.H

This  is not  itself an  Imagist  poem, but  it  does have  that  air  of inviting  the reader  to fill out its spareness:  imagining  various "gestures", or the exact  nature of the  "suffering"  involved, which  one associates with  that  tradition.  Beside it, Anderson's  poems  seem  tyrannical-each  image's  effect  has  been  calculated, and  each  image  or  adjective is startling  or  precise enough  to  direct  the  reader into  the desired  response. This  is a far  cry from  Pound's  vision of an  "austere, direct  poetry"  and  from most Canadian poetry  of the  'fifties and  'sixties. It is interesting  to note that  Imagism as a movement  never really exerted  a profound influence  on  English  poetry  of  the  twentieth  century:  Kingsley  Amis's  poem "Against  Romanticism", written  in 1956, re-phrases  much  of what  Hulme  and Pound  were saying  forty years before, and  Pound  does not  seem  to  have  had as many  disciples in  England  as in America.  Certainly  a  poem like "Summer's Joe" stands  out in a Canadian  anthology for the self-conscious, almost intrusive, linguistic cleverness of its alliteration  and  epithets:

Then sudden in the scope of sea with the delight of found
he saw his treasure island,
he saw his milkwhite fathom.

Desmond  Pacey  says in  Creative Writing  in  Canada  that   though  "Summer's Joe"  is an  attractive  and  evocative poem, there seems a lot of poem to a small amount  of theme or thought. This is in fact true of much of Anderson's poetry­ almost inevitable  in view of his love of stunning phrases, figures and  adjectives. But the way to read  Anderson  is not  to hope  for  a final "knotting  line"  which will  tie  the  whole  poem  together  or  supply  a  moral,  something  like  Birney's
"Can. Lit":

It's  only by our lack of ghosts we're haunted.

On  the  contrary, in  Anderson,  it  seems  that  each  local  effect  has  a  semi­
autonomous  importance-many of his poems have  a  kind  of molecular  struc-

PATRICK ANDERSON



ture, a conglomeration. He puts great stress on the shocking, immediate  portrayal of single experiences, often attacking a scene or mood from all angles; his images are  always packed  with  emotion,  and  his overall  aim  is emotional.  Poems  like "Bathroom", "Song  of Intense  Cold" and  "The  Self is Steep" seem intellectual in nature,  but the intellectual  cleverness always has some motivation  on an emo­ tional  level-Anderson  is  doing  intellectual  allusive  contortions   to   push  the reader  into sharing  his emotions.
There  are many such poems, as well as similarly intended  lines in poems other­ wise more  intellectual,   which  conspire  to  demand  the  reader's  compliance,  to direct  him to a  reflective, despairing, lost  (though  not  often  excited)  emotional state.  It  is particularly cleverly done  in section  three  of  the  series The   Self is Steep,  in  A  Tent    for  April,  where  the  poet's  emotional  state  is  described  in physical terms:  a collection of details about  a depressing,  claustrophobic  room; he then puts the emotion  to more intellectual uses. The emotion

... goes in rooms
has buttons on it, or hairs.	It  is to touch self-hood or boredom or the furniture
which fingers travel until they trench or snap.
The  litter of that dump is sourly lit
by a great unmade bed -a place of tears and fingernails, or things kept in a box ...

We are convinced,  and appropriate the mental state as we read. But Anderson quite  brilliantly  moves  the  stagnant   room  into  visions of  desperate  action:   a cripple hurling  his crutches  from the room's window at  children  in  the sun;  the window suggesting a sniper  or assassin. But it is the concepts of the sniper's  and murderer's   motives  which  are  psychologically acute,  and   which  are  built  on the whole movement  of the  poem.

The sniper knows it, shooting to be loved, and the murderer who hacks into a dream the opposite body which will not approve

knows it, and  the impacted bric-a-brac
of Germany, like a third-rate sitting room
grows dark and lonely with  such love, such hate.

Anderson  is at  his best in  this poem:  the emotion  generated  is being  put  to use intellectually;  there is none of that conscious "political  verse" posing we saw in "Miners"; image is skilfully built on image, within the basic metaphor  of the

19

PATRICK ANDERSON



room. The  haunted  atmosphere  and  the isolated feeling of Germany  at  the end of the war is presented with acuteness and integrity. Furthermore, this poem represents some of the best characteristics of Preview, its view of Europe  is Cana­ dian  in its lack of hysteria, and  can be read  alongside  F. R.  Scott's "Enemies", from  Preview  No.  16 (October  1943), to  illustrate  how  the  group  at  its best could  cross-fertilize  and   treat   its  avowed  subject   matter   with   restraint   and accuracy.
But is it not unfair to see emotion as the basis of Anderson's  earlier work? One
wonders  how  far  this desire  to  convey emotional  states  corresponds  to  P.  K. Page's  picture  of him  as one  who loved  to  be  the  centre  of  activity,  and  the leader of a group,  an orator/8  and one is reminded  of Anderson's  own confession in  the  first part  of The  Self is Steep  that  "Between  these  passionate  acts  I  do not live- j shaping  before me the declarant  one,  the orator ..."
It would  be a mistake, in view of this and  other  candid  hints  in  the  poems, to see Anderson  as an  egotist without  insight  into  his own  poetic extravagance or  the emotional  forces at  work in  his verse. In  fact  it is easy to see the  blase tone of his Canadian reminiscences in Search Me  as a personal reaction  to Cana­ dian  critical  essays which cast  him  as a self-important,  word-intoxicated, pom­ ous, militant  Marxist.  In  this connection,  there  is an  interesting  poem  in  The  Colour as Naked, entitled  "Ballad  of the Young  Man" which  treats  Anderson's particular  poetic  problem in  an  ironic  and  sophisticated  manner  and  expresses a mature  attitude  towards  the  relationship  between  poet  and  poem.  He  did  in fact  place it as the last poem in the book,  where  it  comments  on  much  of his poetry of the  previous decade.
"Ballad  of the  Young  Man"  is for most of its length  a description  in ballad
metre  of  a  young  man  walking in  the  October   countryside,  of  his  precocious sensitive nature  feeding on images the countryside  supplies,  and  of two visions, of  love and  death,  that  he sees in  the  waters  of  a  stream.  The   presentation of the young man's  vision is dramatic  and  colourful,  and  we can  understand  his emotions, self-absorbed as they are:
The  young man rose from his dreaming, he turned and he walked away:
'At last I have had my vision all this has happened  to me.

Nevertheless, we are a little disturbed  by the  undisciplined  emotional  tone of these words. Then  in the last four stanzas, Anderson  produces a surprise. An unexpected sceptical voice expresses misgivings:

20

PATRICK ANDERSON



Oh,  I have  had  my  moment­ Love on his golden throne, Death  in his marble  basement!'
'Yes, but  you were alone.'

Intriguingly, Anderson uses this voice to question  the  usefulness  and  universal meaning of  a  moment of  understanding and  vision.  How   far  is it possible  to communicate such  moments, and  how  can  it  be done?  The voice seems  to say that   there   must   be  some   binding  force  of  intellectual meaning  to  unify  the "vision" and  make  it  meaningful for others,  that  all the  stunning detail  remains locked  in oneself:   "Yes,  but  you were alone", without  this,

0 I shall write about  it,
tell wife and friend of my walk',
'Do you think  you're Proust-that they will trust such vague aesthetic talk?'

This  is a voice attacking descriptive verse-and so much  of Anderson's verse is descriptive! But  the  intricacy of  the  poem  does not  end  here.

I saw a young man  walking,
he talked  to himself by the way - the great  red sun was sinking,
rooks collapsed the sky.

So the  voice represented an  inward dialogue  in the  poet's  mind,  and  we share in  his  disappointment through that  final  strong  verbal  metaphor, as  the  rooks collapse  the sky. But in  doing  so, we are  jerked into  the  realization that  we have already  shared, dramatically, simultaneously, in the young  man's experience, and can  share  his delight, and  opposition   to  the  sceptical  voice. So  in  attacking the idea  of  the  primacy of  emotion and  description in  poetry,  Anderson has  vindi­ cated  it in an  interesting way. But the  poem depends  for its effect  on  an infusion of intellect: it is not  purely  descriptive, and  in this it seems to me superior to the much  anthologized "Drinker".
Anderson wrote  in  Preview of his poem  "Winter in  Montreal":

In  this poem  I have  tried  to express a social statement  about  Canada in  terms that  allow my essentially emotional  and  romantic  nature  free  play ...19

This  is reminiscent of  the  Preview manifesto's aims  of  fusing  "the lyric  and didactic elements  in  modern verse"/ 0  and  using it as a yardstick  one  can  divide

21

PATRICK ANDERSON



Anderson's  verse into three main groups. The  first group  contains  poems which exercise the descriptive, "emotional  and  romantic" nature  of Anderson,  whether seriously as in "Children", or in a deliberately  "precious" manner  as in "Bath­ room".  There   are  many  such  poems in  Preview  and   A  Tent    for   April.  The second  category  comprises those poems of  the  "traditional  Preview  Anderson" which  approach   social or  political  themes  through   description  and  definition. Poem  on  Canada  falls into  this category,  as does  "Winter  in  Montreal" and many other  poems from The  White  Centre. This  is the form  most fraught  with dangers,  and  there are several uncollected poems in Preview  which link emotion and  description  to specific events of the  war in  a  way  which must  seem senti­ mental,  since  the  "humanity" is yoked to  the  "comment" in  a  facile  manner  which  suggests  a  manipulation   of  feeling  for  its  own  sake.  The  last  lines  of "Death of an Animal Man",  which conclude the celebration  of the  joyous senses of an anonymous  man -his breathing, loving, running,  dancing,  whistling and laughing,  read:

the  precipice  hand
gives back  no  more  the  rose as  a  soft  echo nor  does the  arm  defend  the  cottage brain
nor  shoulders  wear  the  massive  past  as muslin for all, all, all
lies now dissected  on  the  battlefield.21

Because the death  in war has no integral  significance in the poem -the  man as described  could  have lost his life in  any  time  or  place-the  poem  comes close to obtaining  cheap  "significance" from  the mere mentioning  of the  battle­ field.
But this was not Anderson's only approach  to social subject-matter. The  third category,  which  is found  most often in The  Colour  as Naked,  holds the  "emo­ tional  and  romantic  nature"  in  a  productive  tension  against  more  intellectual considerations.  We have seen how this technique  works in "Ballad  of  the Young Man", and  how it is used to present an image of Germany,  guilt, and  the nature  of violence in The  Self is Steep from  the  early  volume  A Tent   For  April.  The  Colour  as Naked  is full of such  verse, where the  meaning is  not  diffuse  or tacked  on  arbitrarily,  but  welded to the  emotional  content:  "Houses  Burning: Quebec" balances the physical fascination of fire with its revolutionary  and slum­ cleansing  implications;   "Leaving   Canada"  measures  feelings  of  achievement against  concrete  memories of  Montreal; "Eden  Town"  contrasts  the  sense  of belonging  to a city and wanting  to change  it  to  the isolation of bringing  a  new

22

PATRICK ANDERSON



mentality into  it.  In this work  one  feels a  deeper  involvement in  the  materials of the  poems,  a greater sense of responsibility  towards the imagery  and  its effects. There is, in  fact,  a  capacity to  be  hurt  which  the  easy  facility  of some  of  the earlier  work  lacks.
But  these  poems  are  not  well known,  either  in  England, where  Anderson  is hardly  known   except  for  his  travel  books,  or  in  Canada, where  all  manner of difficulties  prevent them  getting the  hearing they  deserve.  Indeed, the  pattern of criticism  here  has been  misleading: praising  the earlier  work  and  ignoring the mature; ignoring much  of what  is mature in that  early  work;  pouncing on over­ emphasised  aspects  of  his  work,  and  on  a  handful of  lines  from  half  a  dozen poems;  even  misrepresenting the  facts  of  his  career.  If Patrick  Anderson  ever does  return to  Canada, he  would  be  justified  in  demanding a  reassessment  of his poetry,  or  at  least  that  we abandon the  current cliches  about  his work.

FOOTNOTES
1 Jessica Nelson  North,  "Mercurial": Poetry (Chicago)  69; 284-6 (February  1947).
2    William  Meredith, "A  Good  Modern   Poet  and  a  Modern   Tradition",  Poetry
(Chicago)   70:208-211   (July  1947).
3  Milton  Wilson, "Other Canadians  and  After"  in Masks  of Poetry, ed. A.  J. M.
Smith  (Toronto 1968).
4   A. J. M.  Smith  "New  Canadian Poetry"  Can.  Forum  26:252   (February   1947).
5    Printed  in  Preview  I4 (July  1943)  Never collected.
6    Wynne  Francis,  "Montreal Poets of the  Forties",  Can  Lit:   14  (Autumn   1962).
7   Patrick  Anderson,  Search  Me.  Autobiography-The  Black Country  and  Spain.
(London: Chatto & Windus,  1957),  p. 152.
8   In  UTQ 23, April  1954·
9  In  "Letters  in Canada 1954" UTQ 24 (April  1955).
10  Preview  II (February 1943).  Quoted  by Desmond  Pacey in his Creative  Writing in Canada  and  by Wynne  Francis in "Montreal Poets of the  Forties."
11 Preview  I (March 1942)  quoted  in  A  Literary  History  of Canada,  ed.  Carl  F.
Klink  (University  of Toronto   Press, 1966),  p. 489.
12  Creative  Writing  in  Canada,  p. 155.
15  Search  Me,  p.  149.
14  "What  is the  writer  going to do?  [about  attempts  to discredit  the  Labour  move­ ment]. Is he, like the First Statement  group, going to content  himself  with  study circles to ponder  the  platitudes  of Lampman  and Carman?"
15  In  his review of Search  Me  in Tamarack  Review  (Winter  1958).
16  P. K.  Page in a recorded  conversation  with Dorothy  Livesay, December  1968.
17   Margaret Atwood, "Closet",  Pluck 3  (Fall  1968).
18  "Patrick  liked disciples, and  liked to be a centre, and  it would have been difficult
for him  to play the role necessary in a merger  [with  First Statement] ... Patrick loved the role of poet. He adores it." With D. L. December  1968.
19  Preview 2I    (September 1944) .
20    Preview  I (March 1942) .
21  "Death  of an  Animal  Man", Preview 8,  (Actober  1942).


PURDY: MAN AND POET




George Bowering





IN   ms  INTRODUCTION  to  another  pods book,'  AI  Purdy
speaks of some possible superficial descriptions of Canadian writers. He says that
he himself might be thought of in that  mode as "a  cynical Canadian nationalist, a lyrical Farley  Mowat  maybe."  It's  a disarming  suggestion,  and  a  useful one. We should  always remember  that  any single tack  we take on  a  large  writer  is going  to  be at  least somewhat  superficial,  and  we should  especially remember such a thing in Purdy's  case, because he makes a habit  of surprising  a reader  or critic with unexpected  resources or interests. So I ask you to be careful, too, with my superficialities, such as this one I'll  have to begin with:
AI Purdy is the world's most Canadian poet. Doug Fetherling, a young Ameri­
can  refugee who  has written  that  "AI  Purdy  knows more  about  writing  poetry than  anyone  else I have  ever  met,  heard  or  read  about," 2   goes on  to  remark on something  I once told him in  conversation:  "Purdy cannot  help  but  take  a lot of Canada with him. He is even so typical looking, as George Bowering points out, that  everybody in the interior of British Columbia  looks exactly like Purdy." I would like to tell you what  Purdy looks like, at least the way this B.C. boy first saw him,  but  I'll  have to begin with an event  a half-year  before  I pressed flesh with him the first time.
It  was a day or two before Christmas  1962. Along with another  young poet I
was visiting the fine old bookstore of Doug and  Hannah Kaye,  across the street from  the  Vancouver   Public  Library,  when  the  mailman   arrived.  Among  the letters  and  packages  of books there  was a long  cardboard box  with  the  words "Books" written  all over it. But when it was opened  (and  it was opened  before anything  else)  it was seen not  to  contain  books but  rather,  in  a Seagram's  83 bottle, some dark  purple fluid with  heavy sediment  swaying  at  the bottom.  We

PURDY



novices were informed  that  this was a famous Canadian literary  libation, Alfred W.  Purdy's  home-made   wild  grape  wine. With  perhaps  assumed  alacrity,  the Kayes  drank  some,  and  with  some trepidation  the  novices did  too. The  taste was our first of Prince  Edward  County, and  the purple-stained  mouth  lasted for a couple of days.
The  following summer  I somehow convinced the University of British Colum­
bia English  department to invite  Purdy  to give a reading,  and  I was finally to meet the robust poet I had  been reading for a few years. Once  again  I was with the Kayes. Purdy  stepped  out  of Doug's funny little car,  all height  and  elbows, hand  extended  for mighty  grip. There  he was, the small-town  Canadian, about six feet two inches, hair  shaved  up  the sides, slightly grey  and  combed  straight back by fingers, or sticking out  to the sides, sleeves of an  unstarched  white shirt roiled up above the elbows, an old tie in a tight four-in-hand, but  loosened and bent  to one side, and  funny  old-fashioned  sunglasses, in  the  days  before funny old sunglasses were fashionable.
With  him  he  had  two  ramshackle  suitcases. One  contained   a few  bottles of home-made  Purdy  wine  (it had  been full when he got on the train  in Ontario), and  the other  was stuffed  with  underwear,  socks, a portable  typewriter,  an elec­ tric frying pan,  and  five hundred  sheets of paper  with  unknown  letterhead. He was planning  to stay in  a  tiny  house he had  tide  to east of  the  city along  the railroad  tracks,  and  write  a  novel about  his days in  Montreal  among  the  poets and  mattress-makers of the Fifties.
During  the  train  ride  across  the  country,  he  had  experienced  one  of  those Purdy  experiences,  half-alarming,  half-humourous,   that   ineluctably   find  their way into  his poems. He  had  been surprised  by a  woman  who  sat  beside him, her mouth  chewing on nothing,  and  asked him over and  over again  whether he took drugs. It  turned  out  that  she was a madwoman  being taken  to Vancouver against  her  wiii, and  frantically  attended  by her sister,  who  also  tried  to  take care of the madwoman's frightened  children. The  most meaningful  miles passed while the woman  slept with  her head on the poet's large shoulder,  and  he slept
too, but

the madwoman shakes me softly awake again and, "Yes, I  do take drugs,"
I say to her and myself. "I  get high on hemp and peyote biting at scraps of existence I've lost all the smoky limitless marbles
I found in my life once lost long before Vancouver-" I've forgotten that child, his frantic scratching and  biting

PURDY



for something he wanted and lost -but it wasn't marbles. I remember the Mountie waiting, then the conductor's
"Vancouver next! Vancouver!"
(The Cariboo   Horses)

That afternoon  was much  taken  up  with  the  drinking  and  spilling  of  wine, and  talk about  the poetry scene. Purdy's first full-size volume of poems had  come out in 1962, and my review in Tish would be among its generally hospitable welcomes. It was the first of many meetings with the man,  all of them character­ ized by the presence of booze and cheap cigars, and  lots of loud  raillery.
He was born forty-five years earlier, in 1918, in the village of Wooler, Ont. It is hard  to find the village now, though  there is a sign on the 401 highway  indi­ cating  the  Wooler  Road,  the settlement  having  nearly  disappeared   as so  many little  Canadian birthplaces  do, as Ameliasburgh,  where  the  Purdys  now  live, is trying  to. He  was born on December  3oth,  which sees him  a son of  Capricorn, the  half-goat,  half-fish, four  days  after  the  rebirth  of  the  sun,  Sol  invictus,  a fertile influence. He was also the son of Alfred Purdy  and  Eleanor Louise Purdy, descended  from  United  Empire  Loyalists, those American  refugees  who became the  most Canadian of Canadians.
He  went  to school at Dufferin  Public School in Trenton, Albert  Collegiate in Belleville, and  Trenton Collegiate  Institute.  He  says  that  he  has  been  writing poems since he was thirteen, and on the dust  jacket of Poems  for all the Annettes ( 1962)  he is quoted  as remembering  "Wilson  MacDonald coming  to the Tren­ ton Collegiate to read poetry and  being solemnly conducted  into his  presence as the school poet."
Like several  other  Canadian poets he spent  some  time in  the  R.C.A.F., and while in  the service wrote lots of poems. It was while stationed  in  Vancouver that  he got  together  $2oo  and  had  five hundred   copies of  his first book, The Enchanted  Echo  ( 194-4-)  printed for him by the Clarke-Stuart printing  company. Three  hundred  and fifty of them were later  destroyed by a company  warehouse­ man,  and  Purdy  has said that  he hopes the other  one hundred  and  fifty will be lost  eventually.   Unfortunately   there  are  some  copies  in   Canadian   university libraries.  In  an  interview  by Raymond  Fraser  published  in  the  latter's  mimeo­ graphed  magazine,3   Purdy  refers to his verse of  the  Forties  as "crap." He  says further,  "I thought  it was a combination  of  Shakespeare  and  Francis  Bacon and Christopher   Marlowe."  The  same  interview  presents  the  largest  view  we have yet of  Purdy  during  his twenties.  It is a  picture  of  the  non-com  being  busted periodically  for  his recurrent  misadventures  with  women.  However  it is during

PURDY



this  time  that  he  married  one  of  the strongest subjects  of  his  poetry,  Eurithe Mary Jane  Parkhurst. They  were married  in the home country,  Belleville, Ont., on November  I,  I941.  They  have one son, Alfred.
In  Vancouver   the  young  poet  was working in a vacuum  as far  as the  craft
went. He tried out the Canadian Authors' Association, but then as now that organization  had  precious few real authors  in it. He got  a dollar each for more than  forty  poems  published  on  the  poetry  page of  the  Vancouver  Sun,  edited by Joan  Buckley. Also during  these years of  war,  when  a  married  airman  re­ ceived no great stipend  from the government, he earned  movie tickets by winning advertising  jingle contests in the Vancouver  Province. But he was still a  decade away  from  his first real  poetry.




kE TEN   YEARS  between  the  end  of  the  war  and  Purdy's second  book,  Pressed  on  Sand, were  the stuff  literary  legends  and  much  of Purdy's  later  poetry  are  made  of. There  are  many  references  to  periods  when the  man  rode  freights  across the  country,  ran  a  little  taxi  business  (and  pre­ sumably bootlegging)  in Belleville, and worked in mattress factories on the Coast and in the garment  district of Montreal:

The  days fled into smoky weeks and  he learned  to operate
one  machine  after  another
learned  them  all
how to  gauge the  "spock"  of a needle plunging hard  thru  cloth  beside his hand adjusting the varied rhythms of flesh with  the  balanced  shifting stance of
a  boxer  anticipating
his steel opponent
(The Cariboo  Horses)

The  poems that  deal  with  the mattress factories reveal the main  "politics"  in Purdy's  poetry. One  story goes that  he was bounced  from  the  factory in Van­ couver  because he was involved in trying to introduce  a  union,  the Vancouver Upholsterers  Union,  there. One  of his best-known poems, "Percy Lawson," deals with  that  scene inI 954,  and  makes the connection  between  Lawson  the honest

PURDY



fighting man  of the gold-toothed grin, and  Purdy,  the man  who wants to make poems with the same honest tenacity:
And what's the contract news from Watt who
if I said what I thought he was would
sue me for damn near everything
would sue me right now in a poem and get a judgement for one lying lyric
I can't write
(I'll  be damned if I write)
in praise of Watt in praise of
practically nothing
(The Cariboo  Horses)
Purdy  is not  a "labour  poet," and  he is not sentimental  in  the  bourgeois sense about  the  working  class. (He  is listed as politically connected  with  the NDP  in The  Canadian Who's  Who  of 1964-1966.)   He  is deeply  and  habitually  allied with  the  underdogs  in  a  country  and  a  world  that  allows  bosses to  ignore  or suppress the underdogs. So Purdy is seen with the mattress  workers, with the Tsimshian  Indians  of the B.C. interior, with  the Sons of Freedom  on their  free­ dom march  to Agassiz prison, with the  Eskimo hunters  of Baffin Island. Along with Milton Acorn he has kept at least some of the nation's  poetry at the service of  the  working  man  and  in  the  lists against  middleclass  meatballism.  While Purdy  has supplied  the  robust  humour  without  which  the  prole  would  be  un­ recognized as the authentic  Canadian item.
But Canadian as he may be, Purdy does not go along with the idea that mind­ less work in itself builds strong character  or a godly nation.  All during  the  post­ war time he was looking for a way to get away from hiring  his muscles out, and a chance  to  be first of all  a  writer.  Mter   a  long  litigation  he  received  a  dis­ appointingly small inheritance from his mother's  estate. He built his own A-frame house from scrap lumber, and he set to work, writing words for money. He wrote radio  and  television plays  (and  read  other  people's  plays for  the fees from  the CBC) , short stories, articles for magazines such as  North and The  Beaver. Since his acclaim of recent years, appearances  in the Canadian edition of Time  and  the rotogravures,  he  has  had  poems  commissioned  for  the  popular   magazines,  a rareity  in  this country.  A recent  example is his "Lament for  Robert  Kennedy"  in the Star Weekly. Today  Purdy  describes himself as writer,  without  any self­ consciOusness. He  hasn't  done  any  physical work  for  pay since  the  end  of  the Fifties.

PURDY



Meanwhile  his reputation has grown steadily since the  middle  of the  Fifties, so  that  he  is generally  considered  top  man  in  the  popular  or  public  areas  of Canadian  (read  Toronto)  writing circles, having  taken  over  that  position from Irving  Layton,  who  held  it from  Red Carpet  for  the  Sun  till  just a few years ago. The  reviews of his three thin books of the Fifties were generally favourable, and  most of them  welcomed a new talent  to the scene. This  was the time when Raymond  Souster in Toronto  and  Louis Dudek in Montreal  were bringing about great  changes  in  Canadian poetry,  principally  through  their  publications  that let the readers in the rest of the country know that there were poets here listening to each other and  to voices from the United  States.
In 1960 Purdy received his first Canada  Council fellowship, and typically he decided not to live off the money in Spain or France, but rather  to head for the Cariboo,  which he had  visited while he was in the air force. He had  all kinds of grandiose ideas about  his project, such as writing an opera  about  the life of the Indians,  and it was around  that  time that he was often reported  to be writing an epic  based on  Haida  myths  as described in the works of  Marius  Barbeau  pub­ lished by the Canadian government. Very Canadian  stuff. All that  has surfaced from  that  time are  Purdy's  poems about  the northern  interior  of British  Colum­ bia, but they are enough  to pay off the Canada  Council investment.
After  that  he  returned   to  Montreal,  which  by this  time  was  crawling  with
poets of every persuasion. A long line of magazines, mainly mimeographed, introduced  such  newcomers  as Milton  Acorn,  Seymour  Mayne,  Henry  Mosco­ vitch  and  dozens of  younger  bards,  to a  city  that  already  had  to  make  room for Layton,  Dudek, Scott, and  many others who had  already  come  to  the atten­ tion of readers in other  parts of the country. Dudek had  started  a series of books by young  Montreal   poets, the  first of whom  was a  McGill student  from  West­ mount,  Leonard   Cohen.  Poets  were  even  reading  from  greasy  pages  in  bars and  coffee shops.
Purdy himself is a little confused about his various sojourns in Montreal, may­ be because of the heady  atmosphere  full of poets. In  his introduction to Acorn's selected poems, he says that  he first met Acorn in 1958 in  Montreal, and  three paragraphs later says that  they talked and partied together  all through the winter of 1956-1957.  In  any case the two poets, brought  together  by  Layton, hit it off, and  spent  a  lot of  time  arguing,  sometimes in  poems such  as  Purdy's  "House Guest."  In  1959 they used some of Purdy's  wages from the mattress factory, and a  mimeo  machine  that  Acorn  rescued from  anonymity  somewhere,  to  produce the  first issue of  a soon-to-be-forgotten   poetry  magazine  called  Moment.  Soon

PURDY



thereafter Acorn  took  the  magazine to Toronto with  him,  and  began  editing  it with  the  young  Toronto poet, Gwendolyn MacEwen.
In  1962  Purdy published  two  books  of  poetry. The  first  was  Poems  for all
the  Annettes, published  by  the  Contact Press,  the  most  important publisher   of poetry  in  Canada at  that  time.  The  Contact Press,  which  died  a  couple  years ago, did  not  print  books in great  numbers of copies,  but  it  produced the  largest early  collections  of such  poets as its founders, Layton, Dudek, and  Souster,  and others  such  as D. G. Jones,  Milton  Acorn,  Margaret Atwood, Gwendolyn  Mac­ Ewen,  John   Newlove,  and  Alden   Nowlan. The   list  is  too  long  to  do  it  credit  here,  but  Canadian university  libraries  that  did  not  sign  up  for  a  complete run are  now  kicking  themselves  in  the  PR8ooo stacks.  Being  added  to  the  Contact list did  nothing for  Purdy's  plans  to live off  his  writing, but  it  did  signify  that  he would  be among the poets given serious  attention in  this country.
The  other   1962  book  was  perhaps not  as significant, not  as interesting, and
certainly not  as successful.  One  suspects  that  the  poems,  at  least  some  of  them, may  be  pieces  left  after  paring  of  the  Contact book.  The  Blur in  Between  was set  by  hand, illustrated with  cuts  by  R.  V.  Rosewarne, and   published  by  Jay Macpherson's short-lived   Emblem   Books  of  Toronto.  Emblem  Books  printed eight  titles,  Purdy's being  the  eighth.  The  only  other  spoken  of much  these  days is number seven,  Alden  Nowlan's Wind  in a Rocky  Country.
But  Poems  for all the  Annettes  had   done  its  job.  If Purdy was  not  now  a
household word  it is only because  poetry  is not  spoken  of enough  in  most  house­ holds.  His  poeins  were  now  being  heard   often  on  radio  shows  such  as  "CBC Wednesday Night." In  1963 he won  the  President's Medal of  the  University of Western  Ontario for the best poem  by a Canadian printed in  a  Canadian maga­ zine the  previous  year. That in itself was a kind  of  breakthrough because  it is sel­ dom  that  the  medal  goes to any  poet outside  the academic tradition beloved of the three  old  Ontario universities.  Not  that  Purdy  had  ever  been  an  "underground" poet.  But  he  had  been  unusually,  bullheadedly  individualistic-he knows  just about every  poet  and  every  poet's  work  in  the  country, but  he  would  hesitate  about  getting too close to one other  writer,  for fear  of starting a coterie.  He  was a long  way from  his days in Vancouver when  he  went  to the  CAA  to try  to find another ear.  Now  he  was,  as  the  wide  open   verses  in  his  new  poetry  say,  his own  man. He  began  to  read  poeins in front  of university  audiences, and  he still wore  his sleeves rolled  up above  his elbows.
Those years of the early Sixties were fertile  ones for  Purdy; he  was publishing widely  and  the  poems  were  taking  on  a quality that  is necessary  for  public  sue-

PURDY



cess-a reader familiar  with the Canadian  poetry scene could recognize a Purdy poem as surely as he could a Layton poem or a Souster poem. It  was almost as if some uncanny  principle  were in operation,  providing  a sunburst  in the poet's energies to make  up for  the late and sometimes false start  he had  made.
In  any case,  rg65 saw the  publication  of The  Cariboo  Horses by McClelland
& Stewart.  This  was Purdy's  first professionally published  book, and  a sure sign that  he had  arrived.  At this time M&S was the only big house in Canada distri­ buting  books of poems widely. Ryerson Press was between early and  later  poetry policies, and  Oxford  and  Macmillan  didn't  have very exciting lists. Alfred  Purdy was now  pretty  sure  of a  major  place in  Canadian  literature, and  would  now be one of McClelland  & Stewart's  big four, Leonard  Cohen  having been entered into  the  lists. As a  kind  of  confirmation  of  this idea,  the  Governor-General's award  went  to The  Cariboo  Horses.
In  The  Canadian  Who's Who  Purdy  lists his recreation  as "travelling," and while that  has always been  true, it now became highly operative  in  the  poems. The  Cariboo  Horses contains  poems set in such  Canadian locales as  roo-Mile House, Agassiz, Stanley  Park,  Roblin  Lake, Sioux Lookout,  Piapot,  and  Grow's Nest.  When  asked  in  an  interview 4    if  he  traveled  for  his  poems  because it  is "easier  to control  the elements of a newer, smaller area," Purdy  replied, "unless one is a stone one doesn't sit still. And perhaps new areas of landscape  awake old areas of one's self. One  has seen the familiar landscape  (perhaps) so many times that  one ceases to really see it. Maybe it's like the expatriate writers, Joyce and so on, who went  to foreign  countries in order  to see their own."
That is surely what  happened in Purdy's  poems in  the summer  of  rg65.  He received his second Canada Council fellowship, and once again  characteristically turned  away from the traditional European  holiday to spend  his time among the Eskimos of Baffin Island,  collecting the  lyrics that  make  up  his most successful book,  North  of Summer. Purdy  had  always  been  interested  in  the  Canadian Arctic as something  like an  emblem of the whole particular Canadian ethos, or of his ideal for the particulars of the Canadian experience, much in the way that the  painters  of the  Group  of Seven went  north  to find  visual experiences  that would make images for  a Canadian art  and  Canadian character  different  from the European  springs.  In  fact,  North  of Summer  also contains  colour  reproduc­ tions of  eight  A. Y. Jackson  oil sketches of  the  eastern  Arctic  made  in  that  summer  of  rg65.
So Purdy  rummaged   through  his library  of Canadiana, one  of the  most in­
teresting collections of books in  the shelves of any Canadian writer,  reading  all

PURDY



about  his territory  before jumping into bush plane and fishing boat with portable typewriter,  to make poems filled with  the details of a Canadian life usually lost in the vague notions of long afternoons over barren  and  unmarked  land  beyond the imaginations  of readers in  a Toronto  dining  room.  Purdy  says in  his  post­ script  to the  book:  "Queerly  enough  I didn't have  the sense of vast and  lonely barren  distance in the Arctic, even tho it certainly  is vast and lonely. Why didn't  I? I'm  not sure. Perhaps  because I looked at  things close up, flowers, rivers and people:  above all, people. Besides, you'd have a helluva  time shoving vast lonely distance into  poems."
That is one  of  the sources of strength  for  the  book,  the  close-up detail  that
offers some  confluence  of  imagination  between  the  poet  and  the  reader  who hasn't  been  there. The  other source is the  book's structure.  It  is made  up  only of the Arctic poems, and not all the poems Purdy  wrote about  the Arctic, either. It is in all ways a book, not just a collection of recent  poems.
But the  poet  does write  recent  poems, occasional  lyrics, and  if they  are  any good they should  be collected into a volume. So in  1g68 Purdy's  third  McClel­ land  & Stewart  book in  four  years, Wild  Grape Wine.  Once  again  the  image of the  poet  on  the  move is important to  the  collection.  In  this case  there  are signs that  North  of Summer  offered to the poet the best kind of  design for mar­ shalling the power of his imagination.  In  the new book we find smaller "books" of poems wherein  the poet may be seen alighting  in some comer  of the land  or elsewhere,  and   joining  detailed  observations  to  lyrical  reflections  in  order   to provide longer looks at the places and  people that  make  up our  land  and  ima­ ginations.  So there  are series about  Purdy's  visits to  Cuba,  Newfoundland, and the Ottawa parliament, as well as the inevitable lyrics about  history and  present family drama  in his home territory by Roblin  Lake.
The  domestic scene, if it may be called that  in this instance,  has always been a counterpoint to  the traveling  in Purdy's  poems. Prince  Edward  County  must be one  of the least "progressive" counties in  Ontario, or in the  whole country. It reminds me of certain  half-abandoned farm  valleys of eastern  British  Colum­ bia. I like those places with their crumpled  old gray barns,  and I think  I see why Purdy  likes the country  around  Ameliasburgh.  You get  there  by  going  through Belleville, the  closest city, an  ugly little place  whose only grace seems to be that it  contains  liquor  and  beer  stores. You  drive  over  narrow  roads  of  crumbled pavement  or  rutted  dirt,  flanked by ancient  split-rail  fences  bordering  fields of no great  agricultural promise, and  none of this time  are  you  aware  that  you're

32

PURDY



on what the map shows to be a sloppy kind of peninsula  poking out at the edge of Lake Ontario.

Old fences drift vaguely among the trees
a pile of moss-covered stones gathered for some ghost purpose
has lost meaning under the meaningless sky
-they are like cities under water and the undulating green waves of time are
laid on them -
(The Cariboo  Horses)

If you are not delayed  by wandering  cows, you get to Ameliasburgh  in about fifteen  minutes,  but  the  burgh  is not  a  grand  monument   to  Amelia,  whoever she was. It is perhaps  a block and  a half long, but most of the  buildings appear to  be  unused,  save  to  support   the  tin  signs that  advertise  the  products  of  an earlier age. There  is a wooden general store that seems to be a post office as well, and  that's  where  you buy  a  licorice pipe  and  ask where  the  Purdys  live. You are  told  about  a  road  up  the  way  that  is entirely  unmarked   because  everyone here who can read is already  relevant. The  last dirt road rides up on a hill over­ looking an outsize pond  that  you suspect is Roblin Lake, and below you is a pair of mud-formed  ruts descending to what could be a home-made  A-frame. Check­ ing around, you decide this is it when  the materials  of the  Roblin  Lake  poems settle into their  proper  places:

Across Roblin Lake, two shores away, they are sheathing the church spire
with new metal. Someone hangs in the sky over there from a piece of rope,
hammering and fitting God's belly-scratcher.
(Wild Grape  Wine)

Yes, there's  the spire, reflecting the dull Ontario  sun, and  if  you have  the nerve you nose your car down the hill and park it next to the amateurish wooden privy half-obscured  by a bush.
There is an expanse  of uncut  grass and  very tall dandelions  leading  down  to the shallow  water,  and  there seem to be objects such  as picnic  tables or  pieces of wharf.  It's  an emblem of Purdy's  disdain for the House & Garden  Canadian way of life, you might  be tempted  to say. You remember  the  rolled-up  sleeves and  the five-cent cigar, and  you just can't  help getting comfortable, at least not


33

PURDY



if you're a Canadian of enough age to have been brought  up rural before getting into the city poetry embroglio.
So you know  that  inside the slapping  screen door  the house will be like that,
comfortable,  and made with straightened  nails, a stove that  takes up its share of visible space  and  consumes  a  woodpile  topped   with  snow  during  the  winter. Purdy  taught  himself to  build  as  he  taught  himself  to  make  poems,  and  the effects are similar -lots of inexpert finishings made  up for by the sense of talent and  energy,  and  honest usefulness. The  shack,  as he  calls it, gets more storied visits from  other  poets than  most poets'  homes.  Inside  it,  Purdy  looks exactly like the  pictures  in his poems or the  pictures  in Time  magazine,  or the  picture on the dust jacket of North of Summer-he is typing with forefingers at a small home-made  table of visible nails, hair sticking outward  in every direction, wear­ ing  nothing  but  bush-pants  with  the  cuffs  turned   down,  and  unlaced  canvas shoes, surrounded  by a  disorder  of  little  objects  including  snap-on  sunglasses, cigarette  papers, empty glass lying on  the floor, and  a Toronto  telephone  book.
In  1968, Purdy  became a very busy man  of letters around  the country.  While Wild  Grape Wine  was published  by  M&S, across  town  the  House  of  Anansi printed  a new version of Poems for all the Annettes, but for this edition  the poet revised most of the poems, added some, dropped  some, and applied  his later  rules of punctuation. He also had a number  of broadsheets  produced,  and  engaged in a  large  number  of  typically  robust  and  anecdotal   book  reviews.  Further,  he entered  into  a  busy career  as editor.  Starting   with  a  selection  of  West  Coast poetry for Tamarack  Review, he went on to supplying  advice and  introductions to  poets such  as  young  Doug  Fetherling,  and  edited   (with  introduction)  the selected  poems  of  Milton  Acorn  for  the  Ryerson  Press. He  edited  one  of  the most newsworthy  books of the year, The  New  Romans, a collection of writings by forty-nine  Canadians  expressing their views on  the United  States. In  connec­ tion with that  anthology he made personal appearances all over the country  and in  the  U.S.,  traveling  in  better style than  he  had  in  the  Thirties. At  the same time he was editing another anthology of poems, this time for high schools, called Fifteen Winds. He is also still providing scripts, dramatic and  otherwise, for the CBC.
At  the end  of the year he and  Eurithe  locked  up  the shack  and  went  off 'to Europe,  Purdy's  first trip  over there since  1955.  While  there  he  was of course filling his small looseleaf notebook with poems to fill the travel sections of future volumes. He was also beginning to write a book about  Earle  Birney, and  as soon as he  arrived  home  in  Eastern  Ontario   the  news came  that  he  was collecting

34

PURDY



poems for  a  special  Dominion  Day  radio  programme.  Any  book  on  Purdy  is going  to be in some  way  obsolete because he is not  a  man  to  wait  while you catch  up.

And I walk home thru  the night invisible to them  now
following  damp  furrows across someone's  cornfield holding in my head
a small bright  area that  speaks man
along with  a voice that says
"so what?"
while the dead  underfoot whisper and  the land  stirs to  life
and  nothing  is impossible
(Wild  Grape Wine)


NOTES

1 Milton  Acorn,  I've  Tasted  my  Blood  (Toronto: Ryerson,  rg6g),  xi.
2   Doug  Fetherling,  "AI  Purdy's  Recent  Poetry," Quarry,  XVIII, 2   (Winter  rg6g),
42-43·
3   "Purdy at  25,"  Intercourse, g  (October   rg68),  g-11. Interview   with  Raymond
Fraser.
4    Gary  Geddes,  "An  Interview   with Alfred  Purdy,"  in  Twentieth Century  Poetry and  Poetics, ed. Gary  Geddes  (Toronto: Oxford,  rg6g).






















35



DEUX
,
LITTERATURES


Antoine Sirois








D.ux ROMANS PAYSANS  relatifs a Ia
 
vie de  la  seconde

moitie  du  dix-neuvieme  siecle ont  connu,  entre  autres,  une  grande  popularire: jean Rivard,  d'Antoine  Gerin-Lajoie, paru d'abord dans les "Soirees canadiennes" en  I862  et   I864,  et  The   Man   from Glengarry,  de  Ralph   Connor   (Charles Gordon) , paru  en  I go 1.
Ces deux  recits sur  la  vie des defricheurs  recouvrent   relativement  la  meme
epoque.  Connor  nait lui-meme a Glengarry, comte qui s'ouvre a l'est de l'Ontario, en  I86o,  et il y demeure  pendant  dix ans. La  premiere  partie  de l'histoire  rap­ pelle son enfance. Gerin-Lajoie, ne en I824, raconte  l'histoire de Jean Rivard qui vient  coloniser les Cantons  de l'Est  en  I 844,  et  en  I 86o,  moment  ou  I'auteur dit  faire connaissance  de son heros, celui-ci est dans  la force de  l'age. Le temps des deux  romans  se recoupe. Historiquement nous nous  trouvons  a l'epoque  ou deux  regions s'ouvrent  ala colonisation, Glengarry  en Ontario et les Cantons  de l'Est  au  Quebec,  a  des dates  qui  correspondent  globalement   a  celles des recits fictifs. Meme  si les annees de  publication  sont  eloignees  de  trente-neuf   ans,  la distance  "litteraire" elle-meme est restreinte. Les deux  litreratures  a cette epoque sont encore enfermees dans la gangue  paysanne et les mutations sont peu sensibles.
Ces deux oeuvres typiques de leur genre, fruits de deux litteratures  differentes, decrivant  une vie paysanne qui se deroule  dans  deux  regions eloignees, reftetant des milieux religieux et ethniques  distincts, expriment-elles  des valeurs litreraires et  morales  ,etrangeres les unes  aux  autres,  ou  se  ressentent-elles  de  l'inftuence d'un  meme pays, a une epoque  donnee, qui les englobe toutes deux?
Les caracteristiques suivantes se retrouvent  dans le roman  paysan canadien d'expression  franc;aise:  but  para-litteraire  de 1'auteur'  etude  sociologique  agre­ mentee  d'elements  fictifs, description  des moeurs  rurales,  glorification  du  passe,

DEUX  LITTERATURES


plaidoyer  pour Ia vie paysanne  opposee a Ia vie citadine,  peinture  de heros sans densite  psychologique  qui sont  des types plutot  que des etres  individualises. Les deux  oeuvres precitees sont-elles marquees  par  ces caracteristiques?
Un  texte liminaire  de Jean Rivard  nous avertit que !'auteur n'a  pas !'intention d'ecrire  un roman  mais de rediger un plaidoyer pour encourager  les jeunes Cana­
diens fran ais a poursuivre  une carriere  agricole dans un interet  national.  Ralph
Connor,  dans  sa  preface,  affiche son  desir de  nous rememorer  les  heros-defri­
cheurs, offerts en exemple a taus, et de nous rappeler qu'on  ne peut ba.tir le pays
qu'avec  des hommes  qui  ant  Ia crainte  de Dieu. Dans  les deux  oeuvres, des  re­
marques,  de caractere   purement  didactique,  mains  nombreuses  cependant  dans
Ia seconde,  viennent  encourager  le lecteur  a poursuivre  l'ideal  national  et  reli­
gieux propose.
Les deux  livres, en  plus de  chanter  les beautes  de  Ia region  ou  evoluent  les heros,  s'attachent  a decrire  minutieusement  les us et  coutumes  des  ruraux  de
l'epoque  dans une serie de tableaux, souvent les memes, que vient relier Ia trame plus ou mains Iache de l'histoire;  certains titres de chapitres  comme:  Seed-time,
The  Sugaring-off,  The   Logging  Bee dans  Connor  s'apparentent  bien  a ceux
trouv,es dans Gerin-Lajoie: Les semailles, La sucrerie, La corvee. Connor accorde cependant  plus d'importance a Ia fiction qui integre mieux ces tableaux.
Si les references explicites au  passe sont limirees dans  Jean  Rivard,  il ne fait pas de doute que les defricheurs sont appeles a transmettre intactes  "aux genera­ tions a venir, Ia langue  et les institutions qu'ils ant  rec;ues de leurs peres".1  "Les fils de  nobles guerriers"  sont  invites  a ne  pas fuir  le sol de  leurs  peres.2    Jean
Rivard  est propose  d'ailleurs  comme !'archetype aux  jeunes gens. Les Ecossais dans  The   Man   from Glengarry  sont  les fils de courageux  pionniers  venus  des
"Highlands" d'Ecosse  et  ils sont  invites  a etre  "worthy  of  their  ancestry  and
worthy  of their  heritage".3  Et  Ranald  Macdonald,  le heros principal,  devient  a
son tour  "le"  modele de vertus  a imiter. Les deux heros sont  des chainons  dans
l'histoire  de leur  race.
Dans The  Man   from Glengarry, ou Ia morale est plus inregree  a l'histoire, on
ne trouve pas de references aussi explicites que dans Jean Rivard  aux valeurs superieures  de  Ia  vie  paysanne,  telles celle-d:   "... Ia  carriere   que  vous  allez parcourir  est plus propre qu'aucune autre  pour assurer le bonheur  de l'homme".4
Mais !'auteur assode  les joies les plus pures a Ia vie rurale.  Et  quand  Ranald
Macdonald  doit affronter  les tentations  de Ia ville, il est appele  a se souvenir du
pays de son enfance.  C'est  dans  Ia tristesse qu'il  quitte  son  milieu,  parce  qu'il ne se sent pas Ia vocation  de defricheur.  II est evident,  par  l'expose que l'auteur

37

DEUX LITTERATURES



fait  des dangers  moraux  de la  ville, que  la  campagne est le lieu  choisi de  la pratique   vertueuse.  Le sermon  que  Ranald   resoit  de  son  oncle:   "against   the dangers  of  the  city"/ est un  abrege  des  longues  dissertations  de  Gerin-Lajoie sur les perils de l'alcool, des femmes, de l'argent, des affaires. "La  vie des villes
expose a toutes sortes de dangers" 6   dit  le cure  a Jean  Rivard.  "It is a  wicked
place and  the pitfalls are many" 7  dit  l'oncle  a Ranald.
Le heros dans les deux oeuvres est le type ideal  produit  par la paysannerie.  11 est ou devient  le paradigme  de toutes les vertus  physiques et  morales. Ses  di:ffi­ cultes interieures sont resolues par la force de sa volonte. Sa densitie psychologique
est cependant tres mince  et ses problemes  ne sont  pas  individualises.  Dans  un
but didactique les auteurs schematisent le personnage  qui servira de modele aux lecteurs.
Quand   Desmond   Pacey  decrit  le  genre  de  1' "idylle  regionaliste" 8  dans  les romans  d'expression   anglaise, il  rejoint  les caracreristiques   exposees ci-haut   a
la suite de Robidoux-Renaud 9  pour les romans  d'expression  fran aise.
est volontairement didactique; il tend  a perpetuer les vertus rurales;  il eveille la
fierte du  passe; il donne l'amour  de la region decrite;  il oppose les valeurs  pay­
sannes aux valeurs nouvelles nees de la nouvelle societe industrielle.



SuR UN   PLAN plus universe!, ces deux oeuvres se rattachent a une  veine  idealiste  ou 1' "art" est moyen  d'exposer  ses sentiments,  idees  ou theses, ou l'auteur tend a idealiser ses personnages, a embellir la realire. Les heros
sont  pleins de sentiments  nobles et leur volonre sait  triompher  des passions. Cet idealisme est cependant  situe ici de fa on
a un pays qui s'ouvre. Quoique  ces romans  appartiennent a deux litteratures,  ils
se rejoignent  ,etroitement  dans  le but  poursuivi,  dans  l'ideal  propose,  dans  la matiere  decrite, dans la technique  utilisee, dans la conception  du heros. Ne pour­ raient-ils  pas aussi etre  le fruit  d'une  culture,  au  sens sociologique  assez  carac­
terisee, qui  repond  a unsociete  donnee,  dans  un  pays determine,     a un  temps
precis de l'histoire.
En d'autres termes, les elements composants  de cette societe, malgre les diffe­ rences ethniques  et religieuses, ne se rejoignent-ils pas dans un sysreme de valeurs relativement  semblables?
Les circonstances  historiques qui  ant  declanche  l'ecriture  de  l'oeuvre  ne sont pas les memes:  Gerin-Lajoie  voulait combattre l'exode  de ses compatriotes  vers

DEUX LITTERATURES



les Etats-Unis. Connor  desirait,  autour  de la  Confederation,  glorifier les  batis­
seurs d' "Empire" qui, apres avoir investi Glengarry,  ouvriront  la Colombie.
Mais tous deux expriment  un systeme de valeurs qui  paraissent  profondement liees  a la  societe  rurale  sur  laquelle  ils  promenent   leur  miroir.  Gerin-Lajoie
entend  decrire  un  milieu  paysan et l'avertissement  dans  l'edition  de  1935  nous montre qu'il  ne voulait  rien dire "qui  ne ftlt strictement  conforme a la vealite".10
Le  prefacier   de  l'edition   du   New  Canadian  Library   rapporte   que  Connor declarait lui-meme que le livre "grew out of Glengarry soil, out of Glengarry humanity". L'auteur rappelle  en fait des souvenirs d'enfance.11
Autant  que  ces avertissements explicites, un examen  interne  des oeuvres  nous revele quant  a l'espace  et au  temps des analogies profondes.
Le temps est celui de la nature,  cyclique, marque  par  le retour  des saisons, la
11epetition  annuelle  des gestes rituels du  monde  paysan,  semailles, recoltes,  par­ ticularises  par  des operations  typiques comme le defrichement  et  la  production du sucre  d'erable. "Les  travaux  de la ferme se succedent  regulierement  comme les quatre  saisons de 1' annee".12
La vie, forcement  subordonnee  a la nature  et a une nature  americaine, deter­
minee ici par  l'ensemencement  de terres arrachees  a la foret que  l'on  conquiert soit a Glengarry  ou  dans  les Cantons  de l'Est, obeira  a l'etemel  retour.  Elle est
aussi, dans les deux groupes, scandee par des normes d'un  autre ordre, religieuses. Comme  nous  le verrons  ci-apres, la  vie religieuse des  deux  groupes,  l'un  pres­ byterien,  I'autre  catholique, est  intense:   les  dimanches   et  les  fetes  annuelles  viennent  eux aussi par leur importance  aux yeux de tous marquer  profondement
le  retour  des  choses. Les  2   groupes,  en  definitive,  se soumettent   a un  temps
cyclique,  rythmes  par  des gestes saisonniers quasi-identiques  et  des oelebrations religieuses hebdomadaires ou annuelles quasi-identiques propres  au  monde chretien.
L'espace  aussi offre de grandes  ressemblances. Dans  les 2  romans, il est croe
a meme la foret  qui enveloppe les defricheurs. Par leur travail il font  reculer  ses
limites. Une fois la petite societe constituee dans  jean Rivard, la paroisse devient le cercle vital.  On  parle  peu  de village, c'est la paroisse qui  polarise. Au  coeur de la paroisse c'est l'eglise, dont  les clochers dominent,  et le presbytere.  Le cure joue un role dominant dans cette societe, totalement  pratiquante: il pveside aux ceremonies, il conseille et juge dans les importantes  affaires de la famille et de la paroisse.13  Celle-d  est une grande  famille ou se deroulent une vie sociale pratique­ ment  sans  classes et  une  vie autonome,  autosuffisante.  "Chaque  paroisse  peut former  une petite  vepublique ou non seulement les ressources naturelles  et  mate-


39

DEUX LITTERATURES



rielles, mais aussi les ressources morales du  pays seront  exploirees dans  l'inreret de  notre  future  existence comme  peuple.  La  paroisse  sera  notre  chateau  fort. Quant meme toute autre  ressource nous ferait  defaut,  il me semble que nous trouverions  Ia  un  rempart  inexpugnable  contre  les agressions  du  dehors.14   Ce milieu retourne  sur  lui-meme  est done clos et oppose  aux  agressions du  dehors, i.e. de Ia ville.
Que  trouve-t-on  au centre de Glengarry?  L'eglise, le presbytere  (the  manse), le ministre et son epouse, plus instruits que les autres, qui  jouent le role a Ia fois de chefs spirituels et temporels.15  lis connaissent aussi l'histoire de chaque  famille de leur  communaute. Tous  se rendent  a  l'eglise  le dimanche et  le sermon  est l'·evenement central  non seulement  du  jour  mais de  Ia semaine. Si les pionniers montent  dans les chantiers  l'hiver,  ou descendent  leur  bois a Quebec,  ils  revien­ nent-et  c'est  Ia fete-a  leur  point  de depart. La  encore  c'est  egalement   Ia grande  famille sans classes, mefiante elle aussi des dangers  de la  ville. Le milieu se referme sur lui-meme.
Si les 2  groupes veulent developper les richesses naturelles  du pays, s'ils veulent s'implanter dans le pays pour perpetuer Ia race, ils veulent aussi se perpetuer religieusement.  La  famille Rivard se  rejouit  d'avoir des  pretres  et  des  reli­ gieuses, l'epouse du  ministre annonce  fierement  que  Glengarry  a produit  "seven preachers".
Les romans  nous  presentent  done  deux  groupes,  differents  au  point  de  vue ethnique  et  religieux, mais dont  Ia vie se deroule  dans  un  meme  pays, a  une
meme epoque,  face  a une  meme nature  et  qui,  finalement,  vivent  a un  meme
rythme, desireux de s'enraciner  dans le sol, soucieux de se perpetuer,  tres sensibles aux valeurs ethniques  et religieuses, soumis, dans  le cadre  restreint  auto-suffisant de leur vie quotidienne,  a un meme gouvemement tempore] et religieux.
Et les deux  groupes, marques  des valeurs de  meme  ordre,  offrent  un  produit litteraire  analogue.
L'echantillonnage des oeuvres qui fondent  cet article est tres restreint. Celui-ci
pourrait  servir d'hypothese  de travail.  La  connaissance  d'un  certain  nombre  de romans de Ia terre dans les deux langues nous amene  a soupconner  serieusement que  le Canada nous  a  impose  peut-etre  plus  de  valeurs  communes  que  nous l'avons suppose, si nous croyons que Ia litterature reftete Ia societe.


FOOTNOTES

1 A.  Gerin-Lajoie,  jean Rivard, Beauchemin (Montreal,  1924),  p. 247.
2   Ibid.

DEUX LITTERATURES



8   R. Connor,  The  Man  from Glengarry, McClelland  & Stewart,  N.C.L.  (Toronto,
1967), P· 78.
4  A. Gerin-Lajoie, Jean  Rivard,  p. 141.
5   R. Connor,  The  Man   from Glengarry, p. 195·
6   A. Gerin-Lajoie, Jean Rivard,  p. 20.
7   R.  Connor,  The  Man  from Glengarry, p. 195·
8  D.  Pacey, Creative  Writing  in Canada,  The  Ryerson  Press  (Toronto, 1961)   pp.
102-103.
9  R.  Robidoux  et  A. Renaud,   Le  Roman   canadien-fran ais
Editions de l'Universire  d'Ottawa (Ottawa, 1966), pp. 26-2g.
10  A.  Gerin-Lajoie, Jean  Richard,  p. 10.
11 R. Connor,  The  Man   from Glengarry, p. IX.
12  A. Gerin-Lajoie, Jean  Rivard,  p.  10.
18   Ibid.,  pp.  14-17-166.
a A.  Gerin-Lajoie, Jean  Rivard,  p.  286.
15  R. Connor,  The  Man  from Glengarry, pp. 23-25.



A.M. KLEIN'S
FORGOTTEN PLAY.



G. K. Fischer





A."·KLEIN has always been a writer  with a mission;
and  students  of his work know  that  one  of its salient  features  is found  in  his
effort to wake in the Canadian  reader a sympathetic  understanding of the world of the Shtetl of Eastern Europe which lives on in the memory and  basic attitudes of Yiddish immigrants.  His writings attest  to his desire to transmit,  to  recreate, to interpret  the  traditions  which his parents  brought  from  the  provincial  towns of Poland,  traditions  which he views with scholarly and compassionate  eyes, with the intellect of an educated  Canadian, and  with  the insight of a Jew who recog­ nizes in  fading  customs  and  half-forgotten   legends  the  eternal   verities  which once gave rise to them.
Among the works which show most clearly Klein's  determination to instil new
vitality into  Yiddish folklore is a short  verse play,  Hershel  of Ostropol. It is an interesting play but, at present, quite unknown, unlisted in most bibliographies, unmentioned in  critical  essays on  Klein's  work,  completely  forgotten,  it  seems, even by his most devoted readers. There  are at least two reasons for this neglect. First,  there  is the  date  of publication.  The  play  was  printed  in  The  Canadian jewish Chronicle in March and in September 1939, at a time when Canadians, particularly   Jewish  Canadians,   had  more  pressing  problems  on  their  minds. Secondly,  the  manner  of  publication  almost  guaranteed  that   any  impact   the play might  have  made should  be lost. Act One  appeared  in  March; Acts Two and  Three   appeared   more  than  five months  later.1   To  my  knowledge,  there has been no performance  of the  play. It  is not of the kind  that  Inight fit easily into  the  repertoire  of a modem  stage, even in  an  avant  garde coffee house. In character it is reininiscent of the drama  of John  Heywood  and  Nicholas Udall.

KLEIN'S FORGOTTEN  PLAY



There  is about  it some of the naivete of these early sixteenth-century writers, but there appears  to be more depth  in its ultimate intent.
The  metre  used  by  Klein  is, in  part,  strongly  Chaucerian  and  was chosen,
probably, because the theme contains elements of a marriage  debate.  Like Chau­ cer, Klein also makes use in his verse of the proverb, the  familiar saying.2   Klein has a formidable  knowledge  of English literature,  but  most  of it  was acquired through  independent study,  and  it may  be of interest  here  to  note  that  one of the  two formal  courses in  English he took as an  undergraduate  at  McGill  was on Chaucer,  given by Professor G. W. Latham. 3   We find echoes of Chaucer  in other  of Klein's  early  writings, for instance,  in  the short  story "The   Parliament  of Fowls"; 4   but it is here, in some of the dialogue of Hershel  of Ostropol, that Chaucer's influence seems to have had its most fructifying  effect.
The  technique  of the play is rooted in early English literature, but  the setting
and  theme  are those of the Yiddish Shtetl  and, more particularly, of the Chassi­ dic world. As the play opens, we find ourselves in a house of worship. It belongs to a famous Tsaddik, the  Rabbi  Boruch of Miedzboz. A considerable literature  concerned  with  Chassidic  philosophy and  sociology is available  in  English, and much  has  been  written  about  the  role of  the  Chassidic  leaders,  the  Tsaddiks, many  of whom  were  descendants  of  the  Baal  Shem  Tov,  the  founder  of  the Chassidic movement,  and  of his disciples.5   The  Tsaddik's task  was to  hear  the complaints  of the people, to offer them advice and comfort. Through meditation  and  prayer  and  love of God  and  man  he was to  reach  the  "level"  of an inter­  mediary  between God and ordinary  human  beings. He did  not perform miracles, but  his followers believed that  he could, and, in any  case, that  his blessings had special powers.  There  were Tsaddikim  who were learned  and  honest and  wise, and  whose reputation reached  far beyond the Shtetl  in  which  they lived. There were many  who were ignoramuses,  pompous and  parasitical.
The  historical Rabbi  Boruch was a Tsaddik  of indifferent  reputation. Accord­ ing  to  Nathan   Ausubel,S  he  reigned  as  the  hereditary   Tsaddik   of   Miedziboz between  1770 and  1810, a vain, self-indulgent  nonentity,  given  to  melancholia. Trying  to  ape  the  Polish  nobility, he  decided  to acquire  a  jester  and  engaged for this purpose the down-at-the-heels  Hershel from Balta in the Ukraine,  a man who, having had  no opportunity to learn a trade, had  learned  to live by his wits. Ausubel  describes  him  as  "endowed   with  an  unusual  capacity  for  self-irony, a  rueful  comicality  in  facing  disaster, and  a  philosophy  of disenchantment un­ marred  by a shred  of defeatism.... He  was an  impish,  likable  schimazl  whose misfortunes did not, by any means, arise from  his own personal  character  weak-

43

KLEIN'S FORGOTTEN  PLAY



nesses but  rather  from  the  topsy-turvy world he lived in." 7   Hershel  Ostropoljer used to tell droll stories about himself, and became  the Tyl Eulenspiegel, the Nasreddin  of Yiddish folklore. As such he is both  the  prankster  who will outwit his host and  get  away  with  a free drink,  and  the  wise fool who,  according  to tradition, can boast greater learning than his pretentious employer. Such is the historical and  folkloric background  of Klein's  play.
In  1927,  a  tragi-comedy,  Hershele Ostropoljer by  Iacob  Botoschansky, was published  in  Yiddish  prose. In  Botoschansky's  play,  the  character   of  Hershel follows closely the  traditional  pattern. The  schlimazl aspect  is strongly  empha­ sized.  In  his  preface,  Botoschansky  describes  Hershele   as  a  man   who  never attains: when  he  reaches for  bread,  it  never  reaches  his  mouth.  His  Hershele meets  his  end  when  he says something  so  outrageous to  his  employer, Reb Baruch'l   (what   it  is  we  never  find  out), that   Baruch'l's  followers  push  him down a flight of stairs. Hershele reflects bitterly:  he has never reached  the sum­ mit, and  yet he dies from falling down. But the  schlimazl motif does not  elimi­ nate  that  of  the  imperturbable   jester, and   here  Botoschansky's  Hershele  has retained  all the earthy, naive humour of the folktale. In the end, though mortally injured,  he continues  in his usual vein, and in his last moments  looks forward  to being a  jester in Heaven,  where he hopes  to eat  wild ox and  Leviathan  and  to drink  wine.



KLEIN's PLAY  broadly follows the  tradition.  The  emphasis on the schlimazl motif is retained, and so are some of the traditional, naive jokes. But  Klein's  Hershel  emerges  much  refined.  His  wit,  upon   occasion,  is  more subtle than  in earlier versions. He is endowed  with  a more sparkling  personality. But most of all, Klein's Hershel appears ennobled  because Klein is able to convey more clearly  the  philosophical essence that  underlies  Hershel's  familiar  traits.
As the curtain  rises, we find the followers of Reb  Baruch'l  engrossed in  con­ versation. It is night. The candles flicker. The  atmosphere is one of  mystery. We have  entered  a  place  of learning  and  piety, of worship  and  study.  This  is the house of Reb Baruch'l.  His Gabbai  (warden) admonishes  the  Chassidim  not  to disturb  their  rabbi  who has retired  to his chamber to  meditate. Needless to say, Klein's  Reb  Baruch'l differs greatly  from  his  historical  antecedent. He  too is a wealthy  man  and   plagued  by  melancholia.  But  while  the  historical  Boruch, according  to Ausubel, was ignorant  and  pretentious,  Reb  Baruch'l in Hershel of Ostropol is a man  who studies day and  night,  reads  Kabala, reaches out  toward

44

KLEIN'S FORGO'I"I'EN  PLAY



the  spirits  of  angels  and   the  Baal  Shem  Tov,  and  obviously  enjoys  great   love and  respect  among his employees  and  his guests. This  is how  he is described:

Shamash:   The  whole world  knows
He lacks not worldly goods. His coach is drawn
By chargers  champing  golden bits. Upon
His throne  he sits, and at his thumb's  behest Servants  trot forth  in most obsequious haste To  bring  him  delicates, or  hot or cold.
His spoon  is silver and  his plate  is gold.
His shtreimel  is of samite, trimmed  with fur; And for his caftan,  pious silkworms were Industrious in the sun;  and sheep were fleeced9
To  make a girdle for God's worthiest priest.
(Lyrical)  White  are his stockings, and his slippers red, Broidered  and  buckled:  flowers near his bed!
The  rebbe's holy slippers, holy beyond surmise- Chassid 2:  They could themselves mount  up to Paradise! Chassid 1 : Yet on his brow, beneath  phylacteries
Sits sorrow in a wrinkle, gloom in a crease!

The unfortunate Reb  Baruch'l has fallen  into  deep  despondency. We  hear  that Hershel  from  Ostropol/0  a famous  man  reputed  to  be  a  doctor, has  been  sum­ moned   to  help  him.  Hershel, it  is rumoured, uses "most curious  therapeutics." He  makes  people  laugh. He  can

With  jokes, pranks, larks, puns, riddles cure
The  constipated  rich and starving  poor.

The Chassidim, worried  as  they  are  about  the  health   of  their  Tsaddik, are  yet full  of hope.  Hershel  is a  "gift  from  Heaven" or, as one  Chassid  puts  it,  a "pill apothecaried by  the  Lord." Suddenly, while  they  are  still  debating the  "bright spell"  Hershel is likely to cast  upon  the rabbi,  Hershel  himself appears. He comes in, climbing  through the  window.
Cantor:  Whence  did  you come? Hershel:   The  window!
Cantor:   Wherefore?
Hershel: Cantor
The  same  way I depart,  I always enter.

This  remark  concerning his manner of entry  is noteworthy. It gives  us a clue  to Hershel's nature.  One   may   recall  a  scene  in  Goethe's Faust.  Mephistopheles, who, in the shape of a poodle,  has entered Faust's  study,  cannot leave  it because

45

KLEIN'S  FORGOTIEN PLAY



of a magic sign that is drawn in front of the door. Faust  asks him why he doesn't use the window.  Mephistopheles answers:

... 't is a law of devils and phantoms
Where they slipped in, there they have to leave.11

Hershel, in his reply to the cantor,  reverses the old superstition concerning demons and phantoms.  This may merely be an example of his wit; it proves him a rather sophisticated  joker. But it may also suggest much  more. This,  perhaps,  is Klein's way to indicate  that  Hershel is not to be considered  an  ordinary  human  being, that  he is, indeed,  an essence, a spirit. There  is a good deal of impishness in the lines immediately  following his entry. He takes acid  pleasure in baiting  the  Can­ tor for not having recognized him at once and  flaunts  a stick which, he declares, is a magic wand  that  discloses every foible of those whom his soul spurns. Again, this may  be just a  jester's way to  amuse  his audience.  But  it  could  also be the words of a spirit  revealing his character. Klein  did  not insist  on  this interpreta­ tion of Hershel. There  are no more references to the  supernatural. But  the sug­ gestion, ambiguous  as it is, remains in our  consciousness, and  when  we look at the  play  as a  whole, it seems to strengthen  the  impression  that  Hershel's  main significance is to be found  on the symbolist  level, that  Klein's  Hershel  is a per­ sonification  rather  than  a person. He is, by  the  way, by no means  a  Mephisto­ pheles. He  has all but lost his traditional  propensity  to playing tricks on  people. He  may  brag  of his tricks,12  but  we  don't  witness them.  Whatever  influence  he attempts to wield over others, for all  his impish  talk, is entirely  benevolent,  and over his own  destiny he holds no sway at  all. While  Mephisto  (in  Marlowe  as well as in Goethe)  is able to conjure  various goodies, Hershel, in the  traditional folktale,  has  to use his wits  to  scrounge food  and  wine,  and  in  Klein's  play he is content  to  rummage  for  bread,  herring,  and  liquor.
Hershel's  politics are  those of the  oppressed  Jew,  his  philosophy  that  of the Chassid  par excellence. He enumerates  wrongs that  have been done to Israel and catalogues  various oppressors. He can  be bitter:

Sport have we been for them, lugubrious sport, Jesters who had a continent for court.... Performing sorry antics for the scum
That  giggled at the gags of martyrdom ...

But  Hershel  reproaches  the  Chassidim  for  their  despondency:  "Too   long  has
Israel  been three-quarters tears."  Moaning  is no remedy:

KLEIN'S FORGOTTEN PLAY



An end! No more! Never let melancholy Again perch on our brows, and caw our folly! Never let tears again give solace to
The  heathen gloating over the glum Jew.... The cantor, there, well may he look askance, Clutching his tallis/3  hitching up his pants,
Preparing to show off his well-combed voice, Fearing that  my song be the Jewry's choice, For singing is my livelihood; my song Gathers  the jubilant and  jocund throng.

What  Hershel is preaching  is Chassidic doctrine. To  experience  joy, to  be grate­ ful  for life, for  consciousness, is the  duty  of human  beings. "Through  joy the spirit  becomes settled,  but  through  sadness it goes into  exile," is a saying of the great  Chassidic  teacher,  Rabbi  Nachman.14  According  to  the  Baal  Shem  Tov, "Joy  alone is true service of God." 15
The  Chassidim's  enthusiasm  is socin kindled by Hershel's speech. Their  gloom
gradually  evaporates.  They  begin to  sing. They  are looking forward  now to the days of the  Messiah  when  the Tsarist conscription will cease, when  all foes and apostates  will perish,  including  the hated  Reb  Shneyer  Zalman,  a rival of their beloved Reb  Baruch'l.  Zalman,  we already heard in previous conversation,  is an ignoramus,  a son of Belial who would "Barter  the law  / for goatskin on  which it  is written"  and  who  has  the  audacity  to  come into  Reb  Baruch'l's domain to  preach  his false  doctrine.  The  Gabbai's  hatred  of  Reb  Shneyer  Zalman  is profound  and  unyielding.  But Hershel checks him:

No!
Even to him, to that wretch, we will throw Not meat from the wild ox, nor heavenly bran But maybe a fishbone of leviathan.
Then  when Messiah will come
On  holy land we'll pray,
And all our foes, their tails between
Their legs, will slink away.

He is without  malice;  he doesn't  want to see anyone  perish;  and  the Chassidim remark  to each  other  how  Hershel  has already  changed  the  atmosphere.
In  the following  passage, more is revealed of Hershel's  character. His clothes
are elegant in front  where he must see them, but the back of his coat is patched. He  brags of his many  exploits and  successes. As the  greatest  of  jesters, he was

47

KLEIN'S FORGOTTEN PLAY



made   mayor   of  Chelm    (a   city  proverbially inhabited  by  fools-the Jewish
Abdera) . He  has seen the world.  Once  he came  to a country so cold

Even the sun was frozen and  the stars
Were frost  upon  God's window  panes, ...
But  trust  Hershel: one  "good   breathless  swig"  out  of  his bottle,  and   he  was warmed.
A  new  character arrives: Reb  Chaikal Chak.ran   who,  according to  the  Sha­
mash,
grows fat
On  metaphysics, gets a double chin
From skim-philosophy, and pads his skin
With  ologies interred  and  isms dead.
Science -is herring  that  he eats  with  bread, And for dessert, truisms

The conversation, very brisk  and  amusing at  this  point, turns  to marriage. Her­
shel  has no wife;  but  oh! his eyes once  apprized the  most  perfect  of maidens:

Hershel:  ... Her  brilliance spoiled my eyes for others;  she
Proved sweet Queen  Esther a monstrosity; Judith a hag;  Bathsheba  ugly bones;
The  Shumanite  cold meat,  and  Solomon's
Nine hundred  concubines, nine hundred  witches. Chassid:   You saw her in a dream.
Hershel:  This  full palm itches
To  wake you out  of yours! A dream! Chassid:   It was
Indeed  a maid  with  arms, legs, bosom, face
And  other  items feminine? Hershel:   Indeed,
For her a rabbi would abjure  his creed,
She was so beautiful!  Her  lips are  two
Rose petals upon  cream. Her  eyes were blue, Blue as the sky upon a clear cool day
And down her neck and on her shoulders lay
Two  flaxen braids  making  the  fair  more  fair.
0 bind me, bind me halter  of such hair! ... Had  God
Created  man from flowers, and  not from sod
She would be as she is; lilies .each cheek,
Her  mouth  a rose that  sings when  it should  speak, Her  eyes forget-me-nots.

KLEIN'S FORGOTI'EN PLAY



Thus  he proceeds. The  girl  is a paragon  among  women;  but, alas, she does not care for him.  When  he spoke to her, she turned  her head  away.

Coy as a bird, as pure as a white flower, As fresh as dewdrops at the sunrise hour Modest as violets.

Hershel's audience  gets more and  more animated  until Reb Baruch'l  issues from his study, furious at the disturbance; but Hershel soon succeeds in dispelling the thunder  clouds and  the Chassidim bless him for making their rabbi smile.
Meanwhile,  someone  has  arrived  to speak  with  Rabbi  Baruch'l  on  business.
It is Reb Sendor, a wealthy  man,  with his daughter,  Naomi. Apparently,  one of the  hated  Shneyer  Zalman's  men  wishes to  marry  the girl, and  it  is rumoured that  Zalman  himself is behind  the scheme. He  hopes that  a  marriage  between children from these rival factions will restore peace among the Chassidim. Reb Baruch'l's  permission  is sought  so that  the  wedding  may  take  place.  As  might be expected, the beautiful  Naomi is none other  than  the girl with whom Hershel is in love.
Nothing  can  be done  to avert  the impending  catastrophe. Reb  Baruch'l  gives his consent for the sake of peace and looks forward  to the ceremony. He himself will intone  the liturgy and  Rabbi  Shneyer Zalman  will bless the bridegroom  and the bride. Hershel  is in despair:

Give
This gem some uncouth fool? Some unweaned calf
This flower to lip? Indeed, it is to laugh! The  Rebbe calls it triumph. 	Ignominy Were a much better word.

But Hershel knows that  there is no help, and, true to his essential self, he decides to be a  jester at  Naomi's  wedding.  As Act One  closes, Hershel  reminds  one  of Pagliacci, the laughing  clown who performs his antics while his heart is breaking; but  this resemblance  is temporary  and  superficial. There  are,  as one  realizes in the end, fundamental differences between Pagliacci and  Hershel of Ostropol.
The  second  act  begins amidst  great  bustle:  the  Chassidim  are  preparing  for the  wedding.  The   musicians  are  trying  out  their  instruments; guests, in  their finery, are  already  arriving,  and  beggars  mingle with  the  crowd.  Hershel  pre­ pares to  get drunk  and,  waxing lyrical about  the food, makes himself a  nuisance to  the  cooks. But  the  Gabbai,  gloomy  as ever, has  a  secret  word  with   Reb

49

KLEIN'S FORGOTTEN PLAY



Baruch'!. Something in the air speaks no good. All sorts of omens have predicted disaster:   a  prayer-book  fell from  his hand; the  cat  washed  his chest  although no guests were expected at his home.16  The  rabbi  rebukes him for his heathenry. But a few minutes later, while the guests are listening to Hershel's drolleries, a messenger arrives  and  announces  that  fire has swept  away  Reb  Sendor's  mill. Naomi's  dowry  is destroyed.  Not  long  after,  amidst  general  lamentations,   the Cantor   discovers  that  the  bridegroom  is  missing;  seeing  the  dowry  gone,  he decided  to bolt. Zalman's  men, the groom's  relatives, cough  and  rise and  sneak away;  the  bride  faints;  Reb  Baruch'!,  his  melancholy  darkening,   threatens   to die of the disgrace. Chaikal  finds him in such  distress and  so confused : "One would  think  him  the bride so cheaply  used." There  is great  outcry.  What  is to be done?  How  can  this humiliation  ever be washed  away?  Well, the remedy is, of course, at  hand.  The  Chassidim  adjourn  to discuss how  another  bridegroom is to  be found  for  Naomi.  Hershel,  jubilant,  orders  the  musicians  to  play  the wedding  march,  and  while the others are still worrying  and  debating,  he walks toward  the  bride,  admonishing  her  to dry  her  tears  lest they  should  spoil  the starch  in her veil.
The  third  act  has two scenes. The  first is pure  farce.  When  the curtain  rises, Hershel staggers onto  the stage and  sings vigorously. He  is horribly  drunk,  and with good reason too. His beautiful  Naomi,  this paragon  among  women  whom he so chivalrously wedded, has turned  out to be a dragon,  an unmitigated  shrew. Klein  here  follows the folktale  in  which  Hershel's  wife, scarcely  less illustrious than  her husband,  is known as a woman with a shrewish  disposition. Botoschan­ sky too followed this tradition,  but in his play, Hershele and  his spouse, Gnendel, are already  married  at  the beginning.
Hershel's  boon-companion,  Chaikal,  has accompanied him  home. While  they
are talking in front  of the house, Naomi appears  on the balcony.


Chaikal: Hershel:




Naomi: Chaikal:
 Quit  verse. You're home!
And now no crescent, no slim moon! Behold
Over the balcony a full moon. Cold
And wan it stares at me. It gloats. It walks
Across the sky.	It stops. Hershel!
It  talks!

Hershel:  My spouse, my dove.	The moon has soured. Naomi:
Hershel:  Alas, precisely that which I am not!
I shall not answer.
 
Sot!

KLEIN'S  FORGOTIEN PLAY



Naomi: 	Husband, drunken scum
Are you below? Speak, or God strike you dumb! Hershel:  I'm  here!
Naomi: 	You're there! 	You need not tell
Me that as long as beer stinks and I smell.

She chases Chai.kal away offering  to throw  a flower pot  at  him  and  then  con­
tinues to berate  poor Hershel  who, in vain,  tries to humour  her. He  pleads, he cajoles:
And as for our six brats, why fret and foam? Do they not prove that I am sometimes home?

He  promises to  be a  good  husband,  to  teach  the children,  to  g1ve her  all  the money he earns.  But it is no use. His overtures are answered  with  derision. All he  wants  is peace,  to  drown  his sorrow  with  a  flask. He  is weary.  He  would like to rest a while. Naomi  accuses him of always raising contention  and  orders him upstairs. When  he does not obey, she pours a pail of cold water  over him.
In  Scene  2  we find  Hershel  in  bed surrounded  with  a veritable  apothecary's store of boxes, bottles and flasks. The cold shower has done him no good;  he has caught  a cold. Naomi,  now miraculously transformed  and  much  to the astonish­ ment of her son, speaks softly to him and tells the rest of the children  to be quiet. The  Cantor  and  the Gabbai,  who have always been rather  inimical  to Hershel, now come to his bedside. Hershel, who expects to die, indulges in macabre  jokes. Here,  Klein  keeps quite  close to tradition.  We find some of the  familiar  witti­ cisms. Hershel, for instance,  asks the Gabbai  to see to it that, when they wash his corpse, no one touches his arm pits. He is ticklish there. This anecdote  is included in  Ausubel's  A  Treasury  of  jewish  Folklore. When  Naomi  comes  to  Hershel's bedside, he asks her to dress in Sabbath  clothes so that  the Angel of Death,  find­ ing  her  handsomer  than  himself, may take  her. This  joke, somewhat  more ela­ borated,  occurs  also in  Botoschansky's play. When  all  are  gathered   around  his bed, Hershel  bequeathes  his belongings, still  joking. At  last,  his mood  changes, and,  as in  a  delirium,   he  imagines  himself  once  more  a  bridegroom.   In  his greatest  extremity,   he  remembers  the  happiest  day  of  his  life,  the  wine,  the music, the dance,  and  all the guests  wishing him well. And  as his  thoughts  tum to heaven, he is confident that there too he will continue, a jester.



l:us ENDS Klein's  Hershel  of Ostropol.  I Pagliacci  goes on laughing  while  his heart  breaks;  but  Hershel's  heart  is not  breaking.  He is not

KLEIN's FORGOTI'EN  PLAY



showing  the world a mask which hides secret suffering. Hershel  is the man  who, within  himself, genuinely overcomes disaster.  Even  within  his  most secret  self, he is able  to smile at  adversity. He  directs  his eyes toward  the  bright  side;  he enjoys what  is enjoyable;  he wrests from  life whatever  good  it has to offer. He is the eternal  optimist whose confidence is unshakeable.  His last thoughts, as they appear  in  Klein's  play, reflect an  attitude   which  is deeply  anchored  in  Jewish thinking,  particularly  in  Chassidic  philosophy.
But  the  spirit  which  is capable  of focusing  its  attention on  happy  circum­ stances,  no  matter  how  remote,  and  capable  of  indomitable trust  in  a  future  Good,  no matter  how bitter the  present, is not confined  to Judaism. It is a uni­ versal human  trait,  part  of the sustaining  power  of the  Life-force  itself. It  can manifest itself anywhere. It appeared, in especially pronounced form, in  pioneer­ ing  North  America  and later  remained  part  of the  magnetism  of its rough  and ugly towns. Hershel  of Ostropol  crystallizes ingredients  that  are  very much  part of the culture  of this continent.  Without  this zest and  trust,  the  prairies of Can­  ada  would  not  have been turned  into  the  "rug  of thick  and  golden  thread" of which Klein speaks in his poem "Grain  Elevator."  There  is a passage in Sinclair Ross's novel, As  for Me  and  My  House,  where  the heroine  describes the "poor tumbledown,  shabby  little towns"  that  sprang  up  across the  width  of the land, parched  settlements  where  year  after  year  the  crops  withered  in  the  drought. She  remembers  a town "where  once it rained  all June,  and  that  fall the grain lay in piles outside full granaries. It's  an old town  now," she says, "shabby  and decrepit  like the others, but it too persists. It  knows only two years:  the year it rained  all June,  and  next year." 17 This town's  way is the way of life, of survival. It  will overcome.  It  is in  places like this that  the  essential Hershel  of Ostropol is at  home.

FOOTNOTES
1 A. M. Klein,  Hershel of  Ostropol,  Canadian  Jewish  Chronicle,  XXVI  (March
31, 1939),  19-27;  XXVII (September  13, 1939),  19-26.
2   E.g.,".. . never  show a  fool  unfinished  work."  Hershel  of Ostropol,  (March), p.  21.  This  is  a  saying widely  used  in  Central   Europe.   Cf.  German:   Einem Narren  dar£ man  kein  ungebautes  Haus  zeigen.  (One  must  not  show  a  fool  a house before it is built.)
3  Eliah   Ezekiel  Palnick,  A.  M.   Klein;   a  Biographical  Study  (Thesis),  Hebrew
Union  College  (Cincinnati,  Ohio), 1959, I.
4   A.M. Klein, "The Parliament  of Fowls," McGilliad, II  (November  1930),  9-11.
5   An excellent brief survey may be found in Mark  Zborowski and  Elizabeth Herzog, Life  is With People; the  Jewish  Little-Town of Eastern  Europe,  pre£. Margaret Mead   (New  York, 1952).

52

KLEIN'S FORGOITEN PLAY



6    Nathan   Ausubel, ed.,  A  Treasury  of Jewish  Folklore,  (New  York), 1948),  pp.
286-7.
7   Ibid.
8  Iacob  Botoschansky, Hershele  Ostropoljer  (Buenos Aires, 1927).  I am  indebted to  Mrs.  Miriam  Nichols, who, with  summaries  and  translations,  made  the  con­ tent of this play accessible to me.
9  Shamash  is a  synogogue sexton.  A  shtreimel  is a  hat  and,  in  accordance   with
Chassidic custom,  usually  trimmed  with fur.
10  Ostropol  apparently, means  only "an  eastern  city." I have  not  discovered a  real city of  this  name.
11 Faust:  Doch  warum  gehst du  nicht  durch's  Fenster?
Mephisto:  's ist ein Gesetz der Teufel  und Gespenster:
Wo sie hereingeschliipft,  da  mlissen sie hinaus.
Faust, I, Studierzimmer   (study), lines 1407-1411.
12  Hershel of Ostropol,  (March  31, 1939),  p. 20.
13  Prayer shawl.
14  Martin   Buber,  The   Tales  of Rabbi  Nachman   ( 1956),   (Bloomington,   Indiana,
1962),  p. g8.
15  Ibid.,  p. 15.
16  Klein  here refers to a popular  saying of the Yiddish Shtetl: when  the cat washes himself, guests will shortly  arrive  at  the house. A reference  to this may be found also in Klein's  short  story, "Kapusitchka," Canadian  Jewish Chronicle,  XXXVI (October  1948),  4;  and  in Sholom  Aleichem's "Schprintze," Tevye's   Daughters; Collected  Stories  (New  York, 1949),  p. 150.
17  Sinclair  Ross, As  for Me  and  My  House  (1941)   (Toronto, 1957),  p. 97·


























53



E.  J. PRATT


Apostle of Corporate Man



Frank Davey



T.VISION  of E. J. Pratt  has so far  provided  the  major  area of  dispute  for  his critics. To  early  commentators,   John  Sutherland/  Desmond
Pacey/ and  Northrop  Frye,3   Pratt  was a Christian  humanist; to Vincent  Shar­ man in  rg64  he seems to have been an atheist; 4   and  to Peter  Buitenhuis, editor of the recent Selected Poems, both of these views represent  misreadings of  Pratt's  work. In  Buitenhuis's mind Pratt  is a man drawn  "toward relativism and  agnos­ ticism." 5    In  the  general  concern  for  Pratt's religious  views the  importance of Frye's  observation  that  Pratt   is a  "spokesman   rather   than   a  critic  of  public opinion  and  generally  accepted  social  reactions" 6    has  been  mostly  overlooked. True,  it  was reiterated  by Fred  Cogswell in rg64,  but  hardly  as  pointing  the direction  to  the  key aspects of Pratt's  world-view. "The  conception  of heroism in Pratt  is of the kind that belongs to our  age, to an industrial  democracy," said Frye.7   Continued  Cogswell, "he  [Pratt] is the  poet ... of mass action  over indi­ vidual  action." 8
Stated  bluntly,  the  problems which  have  so far  bewildered  Pratt  critics  are two:  the first, what  is his poetry about,  and  the second,  what  world-view  does this poetry project? The convolutions of some of the early critics, notably John Sutherland, to get the "right" answer to the first question  have been adequately exposed and  documented  by Earle Birney.9  But even Peter Buitenhuis shies from the obvious answers that  Pratt's  subject  matter  may be no more than  the stories he tells and  that  his vision may be no more than the values which his protagonists embody.  A careful  reading  of Pratt's  work, in fact,  suggests very strongly  that Pratt  was much  more straightforward as an artist  than  most of his sophisticated critics would care  to admit.  He seems seldom  to have been concerned  with such profound  questions as can easily be raised by too analytical  an  approach to his

54

PRATT  AND  CORPORATE MAN



work.  Is  a  whale  ("The  Cachalot") more  to be  admired   than   Pratt's   brave fellow Newfoundlanders who die pursuing it? Is "the  great  Panjandrum" ("The Truant") also the god that  awaits  Pratt's  mother  behind  The  Iron  Door? Can the ship  Titanic  be an  instance  of hubris when the  locomotive  "The 6ooo"  is not? Are the priest of the Roosevelt and the saintly Brebeuf both  "truants"? Can the  K-r 48  ("The Submarine") be  eulogized for  its  "mechanic  power"  while German  armoured   vehicles are  declared  "crueller  than  the  hordes  of  Tambur­ laine" ? 10
Although  these and  other  ambiguities  in  Pratt's  work  can  be  easily resolved if considered  as peripheral  to one simple and  pervasive idea in  Pratt,  his critics have been thrown by them into great confusion. Not only are such ambiguities responsible for the Christian  humanist-atheist-agnostic  controversy, but for his "Tyrannosaurus  Rex"   ("The Great   Feud")  being  Christ  to  Sutherland   and "mere  instinctive  physical courage"  to  Desmond  Pacey,  for  his  cachalot  being "heroic  energy" 11 to  Pacey  but  thoroughly  a  whale  to  Earle  Birney/2   and  for The  Iron Door being pessimistic to Vincent Sharman13 but optimistic to Peter Buitenhuis.14   And  while Frye  can  call  Pratt  a defender  of "generally  accepted social reactions" 15  Pacey can state, "Pratt obviously believes that  all worthwhile human   achievement   rests  not  on  conformity  but  on  non-conformity." 16     No wonder  Pacey is led to declare,  "I suspect that  a good deal of the ambiguity  in Pratt  is  not  deliberate  but  involuntary,  and  that  there  is  not  only  confusion among critics but  also confusion in the poet." 11
Once  one gets past  the confusions of the critics, from  John  Sutherland's  fan­ tastic system-building  to Vincent  Sharman's humourously  perverse interpretation of  Brebeuf and  his Brethren/  8   and  begins an  open-minded  reading  of  Pratt's  poems, one can see that  Pacey was indeed  correct in  terming  these  poems "de­ ceptively  simple." 19  But,  unfortunately   for  Mr.  Pacey  and   his  brethren,   this simplicity  is deceptive  not  in  masking something  more  complex  but  merely in being disappointingly  no  more  than  itself. Pratt's  shark  ("The Shark") is only a shark,  admirable for  its latent  and  impersonal  power.  Pratt's cachalot  is an aggressive and  virile whale,  stunning  in  its  inherited  energy  and  strength,  but referential  to no symbolic meaning  outside itself. His Brebeuf is not  remarkable either  as a Christian  or as a Christ-figure, but only as an  instance  of the power to be gained  by an individual  through allegiance to the ideals of a human  group. The  Jesuits  are  more impressive to  Pratt  as power-figures than  are  the  Indians  because the  odds are  higher  against  them  and  thus more  demanding of power. Similarly, in Dunkirk  the strength  of  the British infantry  is more admirable  than


55

PRATT AND  CORPORATE MAN



that  of  the  German   Panzers, and  in  Behind  the  Log  the  strength   of  the  be­
leagured  convoy is more admirable  than  that  of the  relatively secure U-boats.




PowER, then, is one of the keys to Pratt's uncomplicated  vision. He  is fascinated  by power much  the  way the  teenager  can  be fascinated  by a powerful  automobile  and  be  tempted  to  identify  vicariously  with  it.  Further, Pratt  displays our  culture's  love of the underdog,  believing along  with  this  cul­ ture  that   the  underdog  somehow  marshals  more  impressive  power  in  either victory or  defeat  than  any favourite  can. Thus  Pratt's  sympathy  for  the  dying cachalot,  for the  tortured  Brebeuf and  Lalement,  for  the  battered  sailors  of the Roosevelt and  the  Antinoe, for the Orillia in Behind the Log, for the  harrassed John  A. Macdonald  in Towards the Last Spike, for "the  truant," or  again,  for the  British rear-guard  at  Dunkirk.  And  thus  too  Pratt's  scorn  for the  crew and passengers of the Titanic,  who  would,  had  they  managed   themselves  properly, have had  all in their favor, and conversely his reverent  awe for that "grey shape with  the  palaeolithic  face".
Unlike the vision of Brebeuf, Pratt's  vision is unashamedly  worldly. The  power he respects and  eulogizes is nearly always power  wielded  or shared  in  the  here and now by material inhabitants  of this world. Divine power is contrastingly unimpressive  to Pratt.  He  has only the  vaguest  sense of what  stretches  beyond "the  iron  door"; he sees the power of the  Roosevelt's priest as completely  over­ shadowed  by that  of her sailors, the power of "the  great  Panjandrum" as com­ pletely overshadowed  by that  audacious  and  worldly "traunt". Only in  the very moving opening  pages of Brebeuf and his Brethren does the Protestant  Pratt  ex­ hibit  any  sensitivity  to  the  mysteries of  the  divine,  and  here  only  because  his common  sense attitudes  have been forced  to yield before the artistic  necessity of identifying  with  the  Catholic  hero.
Werner  Sombare0   and  R. H.  Tawnei 1 have  convincingly  documented   how modern  capitalism  had its birth in medieval scholasticism and  Protestant secular­ ization  of the scholastic method.  Tawney,  in  particular, has  demonstrated   how Protestantism  has in Western culture  been  the  prerequisite  for  a common  sense handling  of reality,  a  respect for  worldly  power,  and  a  high  valuation  of  the ability  to  manipulate material  objects. It is this  complex  of characteristics  that we see in  the attitudes  of E. J. Pratt: a respect for  raw  material  power  ("The Shark," "The Submarine," "The  6ooo"), a complete  and disciplined  attention

PRATT AND CORPORATE  MAN



to things of this world  (Behind  the  Log, Toward  the  Last Spike), and,  except briefly, in  Brebeuf,  a blind  eye for mystery and  eternity.  From  the  Renaissance through   the  eighteenth   century  such  a  world-view  energized  the  mercantilist sensibility so well recorded  by Defoe. In  the  nineteenth  century  it  allied itself with  Spencer's  distortions  of  Darwinian   theory  and  secured  prolonged  life for laissez faire economics. In  the twentieth  century it seeks yet more worldly power for the "truant" human  race through  the mechanical excesses of corporate enter­ prise. As  Marshall  McLuhan reported  in The  Mechanical  Bride,

The  puritan  both retained the scholastic method in theology and gave it  expres­ sion in the precision and  austerity of his secular existence. So that  it  is  scarcely fantastic to say that  a great modern business is a secular adaptation  of  the most striking features of medieval scholastic culture. Confronted  with  the  clockwork precision of scholastic method, Lewis Mumford could think only of  the mechan­ ical parallel  of a smoothly working textile plant. The  object  of  this systematic process is now production and finance rather than God.22

And with corporate enterprise  we have entered deeply into the world of E.  J. Pratt. What   are  the  gods  of  this  world  but  organization,  planning,  efficiency, regimentation, discipline,  and  order?  To  Pratt  nature  has  this order  and  effic­ iency. Such  is implicit  in  the fish analogy  of "The  Submarine," in  his  account of the  architecture of the  cachalot,  in  the  "metallic  teeth"  of "The  Shark,"  in the  very  waves  which  "crashed  down  in  volleys flush  against  the  hull"  of the Roosevelt;  such, in fact, is inscribed deep within the iceberg's "palaeolithic face." Men, in Pratt's  view, can acquire such order and efficiency not as individuals but as  members  of  corporate  groups.  Such,  as we shall see,  is  the  message of The  Titanic, Brebeuf and  his Brethren, Toward  the  Last  Spike,  and  many others of the poet's  works.
Pratt  seems to have  the  unique  distinction  among  modern  poets of being an enemy of individual   action.  One  of the  few characters  in  Pratt   who  happens to act not as an agent of society or member of a social order  is the seaman  Uno Wertanen of the  Roosevelt.  Granted, this  momentary  action  is both  unwitting and  unwanted.

The crew could see him grab and plunge and cling, Using his legs as a rudder so to swing
Her head around to the wreck and with sheer
Abandon of his youth to try to steer
His open, wilful, single-handed craft ...

57

PRATT AND  CORPORATE MAN



Markedly isolated, even exiled, by storm and accident from his social group, Wertanen  drowns.  Other   individualists  in  Pratt   are  the  seal-hunters   of  The Eagle  who are cut  off from their social order  by a blizzard  which  catches  them out upon  the ice. Here, deprived  of the structure  and  power of society, the indi­ vidual human  being is incapable  of surviving.

. . . . like sheep we huddled and broke
Here one would fall as hunger took hold
Of his step; here one would sleep as the cold Crept into his blood, and another  would kneel Athwart the body of some dead seal,
And with knife and nails would tear it apart
To flesh his teeth in its frozen heart,
And another dreamed that  the storm was past
And raved of his bunk and brandy and food, ...
(The  Ice-Floes)

The  most blatant  individualist  in all of Pratt's  work is, of course, "The Brawler in  Who's  Who."  Acknowledged  for  individual   heroism  by  "two  DSO's," the brawler  has come to this achievement  through  murdering  his infant  brother  and his mother,  through  making "a  Bedlam" of his schools, and  through  fighting in war  like  the  Tyrannosaurus  Rex  of  "The   Great   Feud." In   this  poem  Pratt clearly  links  individual   heroism  both  with  seriously  anti-social   behavior   and, once  again,  with  diminished  chances  for  survival.  The   brawler,  who  has  dis­ sociated himself from the protection of the social order, dies in the middle of  life, murdered.
In  contrast  to  the  people above,  individual   men  in  Pratt   who  act  as loyal
members of a group  can acquire  the  possibility not  only of survival  but  also of participating in  great  and  laudable  deeds. To  the  modern  reader,  schooled  to resent all oppression of the individual  by "bureaucracies" or "establishments" of any sort,  Pratt's  quotation  from  the  seamen's  contract   at  the  opening  of The Roosevelt and  the  Antinoe is both  humourous  and  quaint.

. . . they, the crew, Should pledge themselves to conduct,  faithful, true, And  orderly, in  honest, sober manner;
At  all times in their duties diligent;
To  the master's lawful word obedient, In everything relating to the vessel- Safety  of passengers, cargo, and store,
Whether  on board, in boats, or on the shore.

PRATT AND  CORPORATE  MAN



Yet to Pratt  this passage underlines a cast of mind essential to the heroism which is later  to be displayed  by the crew. In  this poem even  the  radio  stations  have an almost sentimentalized  social responsibility.

Thousands of dials in studio and station
Were "off the air" by an ungrudged consent­ That  the six-hundred-metre wave might keep Upon the sea that night its high conunand.

Throughout Pratt's   work  there  is a  pervasive theme  of  collective  action,  of strength  to be gained  by identification  with  a group  or  cause.  In  "The   Great Feud"  disaster befalls the land  dwellers when they ignore  the  ape's  command,

But as their allies, ye shall spend, In one grand conswnmating blow Of death against the common foe,
Your strength  to a triwnphant  end,

and  fall into  lethal internecine  struggle. This calamity is precipitated  by another of Pratt's  unfortunate individualists,  Tyrannosaurus  Rex,  whose folly is that  he will affiliate  with  neither  side  but  instead  battles  both  groups  on  his own.  In "The Cachalot" all of the individuals  involved in the final struggle  can identify with an order  larger  than  themselves. The  whalers, of course, form  a traditional sea-going social  unit,  and  the cachalot,  Pratt  is eager  to tell us, can  trace  back his ancestry  "a  thousand  years." The  whale's particular  greatness is informed  by ancestors  that  had  followed  Lief  Ericsson,  Marco  Polo,  Columbus,  da  Gama, "Cortez,  Cavendish, and Drake,"  that had sunk a Dutch  battleship in the English Channel  and  a British one at Trafalgar. Dunkirk is similarly a poem not about individuals  but  also a social group,  a nation, extending  both  in numbers like the whaler's crew and in history like the cachalot's ancestors.

Milleniwns it  has taken to make their stock. Piltdown hung on the frontals of their fathers. They had lain as sacrifices
Upon the mortuary slabs of Stonehenge.... They had signed up with Frobisher,
Had stifled cries in the cockpits of Trafalgar.
They had emptied their veins into the Marne.

In  Behind the Log and Toward  the Last Spike Pratt's emphasis on the collec­
tive nature  of the great  successes of man is already well known,  being noted  by


59

PRATT AND  CORPORATE MAN



both  Frye23  and  Buitenhuis.24   From  the  Commodore's  warning  that  in  the  con­ voy "there  is but  little room  I For  rugged  individualists"  to  the  poet's  obser­ vation  that the  battle was  fought by  "men   with  surnames   blotted  by  their jobs  I into  a scrawl  of anonymity",  Behind  the  Log  is a story  of  ships rather than  of  men,  of  corporate  heroism  rather   than   of  individual  bravery. The Commodore   himself  does little  more  than   co-operate   in  the  general  flow  of events. In  Toward  the  Last Spike  Pratt  celebrates  another  instance  of collective action.  Here,  in  a  superficial  reading,  either   Macdonald  or  Van   Horne   can appear  as a  hero.  Yet once again  Pratt  makes  the  network  of interaction   and interdependency abundantly  clear. Van  Horne  supports  Macdonald, and  Mac­ donald  reciprocates.  Both men  are further  supported   by Tupper, Stephen,  and
Smith, and  all five are in turn  reliant on the loyalty, sweat, and  ingenuity  of the thousands  of workers who, in dedication  to  their  task,

lost their identity;  as groups, As gangs, they massed, divided, subdivided,
Like numerals only -

Even  Brebeuf  and  his  Brethren  loses much  of  the  complexity  which  has puzzled critics from John Sutherland  to Vincent  Sharman when it is regarded  as merely another  Prattian eulogy of the power gained  by men  when  they unite in a common  belief to a common purpose. The  Christianity  and  the Catholicism  of Brebeuf  and  his brothers  are both  essentially peripheral   to the  central  meaning of the  poem. These  are  merely parts  of the  vision which  binds the  participants to their  tasks, and,  as such, are parallel  to  the goal of the sea-to-sea railway  in Toward  the  Last Spike or the goal of convoy survival  in Behind  the  Log. Thus both  Sharman's questioning of Pratt's  attitude  to Christianity  in  the  poem  and Sutherland's desire  to show  the  poem  as optimistically  Christian   are  relatively unimportant. What  is important  in considering  Brebeuf and  his Brethren  is the fact  that  Pratt  admires  any  kind  of heroic  collective  action  against  long  odds, whether  it be  against  the sea,  the  Nazis,  the  mountains, or  the  heathen-or even, as in "The Truant," against  "the  great  Panjandrum"  himself.
Throughout Brebeuf and his Brethren what seems most striking to Pratt  is that Brebeuf does not  act  as an individual.  He  is before all else a member  of a  cor­ porate  body,  the Jesuit order,  and  as such  is informed  by "the  winds of  God"  which  are  blowing  into  the  hearts  of  any  men  at  this  time  all  over  Europe. Further, he is directly informed by divine presence, a "Real  Presence" -by his
vision of "a  bleeding  form  I Falling  beneath   the  instrument   of death". Thus

6o

PRATT AND  CORPORATE MAN



he is more  than  the  agent  of  a  holy order;  he is the  agent  of  divine  will as well. Knowing  that  he may face martyrdom  in the  New World,  Brebeuf studies the temptations  that  such  a fate can offer. What is the chief temptation?-that of "the  brawler,"  individual glory. Here Brebeuf learns the lesson of Eliot's Becket, that  martyrdom   must  not  be sought  for  its  own  sake   but  only  encountered through  performing  "the  will of God".
The  theme  of "French imperialism in  North  America"  noted  by Buitenhuis25
seems to be present  in  the  poem only to heighten  the  impression  that  Brebeuf is no more than  a participant in a complex of events much  larger  than  himself. Note how his name here is only one on a list of ma..\ers in a great  enterprise.

New  France  restored!	Champlain, Masse,  Brebeuf
Were  in  Quebec, hopes  riding  high  as ever. Davost  and  Daniel  soon arrived  to  join
The expedition west. 	Midswnmer tide, The busiest  the  Colony  had  ever known, Was over: forty-three canoes  to meet The hazards of return; ...

And as Brebeuf is carried  by these events he is admired  by Pratt  largely because he is worthy of them, because he is loyal to the vast movements which are giving to his life its significance. As the Commodore  and  the sailors serve the  convoy, and  as  Macdonald  and  the  navvies serve  the  building  of  the  CPR,   Brebeuf serves  the  tide  of  French   Christianity   to  which  he  has  pledged  himself.  He suffers in  smoky  hovels, he  tricks the  Indians  with  predictions  of  eclipses and rainfall,  he faces death  at  the  hands  of the  Neutrals, eats  the filthy food of the Hurons,  all for  the  enlargement  of  the  Catholic  community.  Says  Pratt,

But  never  could  the  Indians infer
Self-gain or  anything but  simple  courage
Inspired by a zeal  beyond  reproof, ...

This is the loyalty which  Pratt  admires in men, the loyalty of "simple" cour­ age, the submission of individual  will to group  projects significantly  greater than oneself. And  the  glory that  Pratt  admires  is not  that  of  the  defiant individual but  that  of the defiant  group  (his "truant," after  all, is  generic)   which can  be vicariously enjoyed  by  the  individual  either  in  a  sacrificial  death  or  a  partici­ patory  triumph. The  cachalot  fights and  dies for  the glory of his race;  Brebeuf fights and  dies for  the  glory  of his faith;  the  weekend sailors  at  Dunkirk  fight and  win for  the glory of England.  Today  this  kind of glory is the  kind offered

6r

PRATT AND  CORPORATE MAN



by  large  corporations to  their  loyal  employees.   Again   Marshall McLuhan  can describe  the  process:

Great  physical and  industrial  power rests on a multitude of powerless individuals, many  of whom  are  deeply resentful of their  condition.  The  smaller  and  meaner the  man,  the  more  he craves to  possess not  limited  human  powers, with  all  the effort of cultivation  and all the responsibility that  implies, but superhuman power. (That is the  meaning  of  the  Squinky  comic  books, and  of  "Superman.")  The sadistic  craving   for  enormous  physical  powers   to  revenge  or  compensate   for human  futility  will always drive such people to link themselves to vast impersonal enterprises. They will follow automatically  any road  which promises to bring them to that  goal. So that  to be a switch thrower  in  a  big  plant  looks better  to them than  any lonely task, however human.  Such  is also the  attraction of bureaucratic jobs, whether  in  great  corporations  or in government. It is by fantasy  identifica­ tion with the very big power unit that  the very small man  obtains  his self-realiza­ tion as a superman.  The key to Superman  is Clark  Kent  the useless. Therefore the more we create  and  centralize  physical power, the  more  we  suppress our  human nature; and  then  that  human  nature  queues  up  all the  more  to support  the  big physical power that  crushes it.

This  is the fate  of Brebeuf, of the nameless sailors  of Convoy  SC42, of the  masses who  built  the  CPR, even of the  cachalot: to  be  great  only  as agents  of  oppres­ sively vast  powers,  forces, traditions. It is a fate  based  on  a way of  thought very similar  to that  "old  lie" of Wilfrid  Owen's "Dulce at  Decorum  Est." It is a fate which  McLuhan terms  "a  nightmare dream" 26    but  which  Pratt extols.
Pratt's story of the  Titanic  is the story of the  consequences of man's failing  to
live  up  to  tradition and  duty,  of  his failing  to  exhibit   Conradian restraint and solidarity  upon   the  sea.  Machinery requires  for  its  management in  Pratt  the utmost  in  disciplined  civilized  values.  Men   welded   together as  a  unit   operate the  successful  K-148   ("The Submarine"), row  the  Roosev.elt's lifeboats   to  the Antinoe, lay  the  rails of the  CPR, and  save  convoy  SC42. On  the  Titanic  men have  become  so dazzled  by  the  qualities  of  the  machine with  which  they  have been  entrusted that  they  fail  to be worthy  of  this  trust.  They over-estimate this machine's capabilities much  as  Ulysses'  men  over-estimated human  capabilities when  they  "would  have  slain  the  cattle  of  the  sun." Thus the  Titanic's   crew believe that  "caution was absurd" and  disregard the  disciplined and  efficient management necessary  for any ship's  safety.
Throughout the  poem  the  Titanic's  crew's  aloofness  and  difference from  the
crews of other  ships  are clearly developed. While  the  Caronia, Mesaba,  Amerika, Baltic, Touraine, and  Californian  pick  their  ways  gingerly  through the  ice-field,

PRATT AND  CORPORATE MAN



the Titanic increases speed  as it approaches.  And  while these ships, particularly the Californian, fulfill their  social duties  by warning  all other  ships at sea,  the Titanic declares itself superciliously above this moral solidarity of all good sailors.

Say, «Californian,"  shut up, keep out,
You're   jamming all my signals with  Cape  Race.

The  Titanic's passengers share  in  this divorce  between  human   responsibility and  the demands  of machine  and sea. The  tread  of the passenger's feet, we are told,  is  "rivalling   the  engines."  The  diners  approach   the  ship's  dining  room "like storm  troops  before a citadel".  So remote are  the  passengers from  the  re­ quirements  of discipline,  attention,  and  duty  at sea  that  some of  them  suggest the crew to be superfluous.

For all the  hard work there's to do Aboard  this liner up on deck, the  crew Might   just as well have stopped ashore.

Even  less concern  for  solidarity  and  for  human  action  m  a  co-operating,  cor­ porate body is shown by the passengers in their relationships with fellow humans.  Physical  violence  is  latent  in  the  wrestling  and  boxing  displays  in  the  ship's gymnasium.  Animosity  and  rapaciousness only  just below  the  level  of  physical violence are continually  evident in Cabin  D's poker game. Meanwhile the "grey­ templed  Caesars  of the  world's  Exchange"  have  gathered  in  the  lounge  to  use their  collective wisdom  not  for social good  but  to  "rock   j  the  pillared  dollars of  a  railroad  stock".  Representative  of  this  general  non-observance  of  obliga­ tion  to  the  social  order  is  the  Egyptian  mummy  in  the  hold.  Stolen  from  a tomb  in  the  Valley  of  the  Kings  in  direct  contravention   not  only  of  respect for  the human  dead  but  also of the  mores of another  civilization, this mummy may well carry  with it "an  ancient curse" on all violators of the necessary mores which  bind  men  together  and  make  possible their survival  on earth.  It  is note­ worthy that Pratt  does not ridicule the very vulnerable credulity of the passengers who discuss this mummy,  but  presents their  dialogue  with  the same  profound fascination  as he presents  the other  events of the poem.
Once  the iceberg  has  punctured   the illusion of the  crew  and  passengers that
social irresponsibility  is a  condition  possible for  man,  there  is a  marked  return among  these people  to  the old loyalties. Captain  Smith  regains  a captain's  wis­ dom in his managing  of the ship's abandonment so that  panic  and  violence do

PRATT AND  CORPORATE MAN



not  interfere  with  the  orderly  evacuation  of  women  and  children.  In  playing until  the  sea  silences their  instruments,  the  seven  musicians  exhibit  a  fidelity which, in the ship's officers, could earlier have saved  the entire ship. Among  the passengers also a selfless heroism takes hold,  not  only  among  those  anonymous masses "of  unknown  name / and  race" so respected by Pratt  in Behind  the Log and Toward  the  Last Spike, but also among those tyrants  of the stock exchange, Guggenheim  and  Astor. Thus  the story of the Titanic is, like Pratt's other  major narrative  poems, a story of the necessity of social responsibility, of group  action and  group heroism, of men uniting in a common cause and gaining strength  and inspiration  from their own communality.
This  theme  of The  Titanic   is clearly  the  single  most  powerful  constant  of Pratt's  poetry. It surpasses in importance  both  his theme  of power and  his inter­ mittent  theme  of Christian  love in that  it subsumes  both  of these. It  is  through corporate  action that  power, both effective power  and  individual  power, is real­ ized.  Christianity  itself, especially in  Brebeuf and  his  Brethren,  is  merely  one more  means  of binding  men  together  and  giving  to  the  individual   totemistic or institutional  support.
The  question of whether  this philosophy of Pratt's was felt by him to be rele­
vant only to crisis situations or to all of human  life has been raised by Northrop Frye, who, in suggesting the former, observed that  Pratt  "is almost always deal­ ing  with  a society in  a state  of emergency." 27    This  observation  seems  both  in­ sufficient for  the  conclusion  and  an  over-statement   of  the  case. The  everyday building  of  the  CPR   certainly  did  not  constitute a  "crisis"  to  the  ordinary  labourer,   and  yet  Pratt  definitely  expects  a  continuing   loyalty  and  efficiency from  him. In  the case of the Titanic, the  time  period  in  which  communality  is lacking is that  immediately  preceding  the crisis. Here  Pratt's implication  would seem to be that  society-oriented or corporate  action  in  everyday life is necessary to  prevent  states  of emergency  as much  as  to  cope  with  them.  Further, Pratt  sometimes pointedly  neglects to  compartmentalize crisis behaviour  from ordinary  duties, and  thus writes as if society-centred  behaviour  were no more than  should be expected  at  any time from any man. Such  is clearly the  message of the con­ cluding passage of The  Roosevelt and  the Antinoe, where both the mundane  and the heroic are merely parts of the "day's work."

The  nation gave its thanks on board;  and she [the  Roosevelt],
Soon ready for completion of her run,
Swung out the sound, with her day's work well done, And in an hour was on the Channel sea.

PRATT AND CORPORATE  MAN



One  might easily conclude  from Pratt's  selection and  treatment  of subjects  that to him society always lives under  threat  of imminent  crisis.
In  E. J. Pratt  we quite  plainly have  a committed  and  somewhat  uncritical
spokesman for the values of industrial  man. He has frequently been acknowledged as a humanist.  To  be more specific, Pratt  is actually  a Pelagian  liberal, not only casting original sin out  on  a torrent  of words from  his "truant" but  continually presenting  both  the machinery  of technology and the machinery  of social organ­ ization  as man's  best way  to salvation.  Just  as human  muscle  successfully sup­ plants  the  Priest's  prayers  in The  Roosevelt  and the  Antinoe, submarines,  loco­ motives, and  convoys supplant the  early  mystery behind  "the  iron  door,"  and the truant's brash  optimism  supplants  the  poet's early but  frail  humility.  Pratt's  own frequent  use of the personal pronoun  we by itself spells out his position. Like the  brain-washed   D-503  of  Zarniatin's  anti-utopia  We,  Pratt   typically  cannot help but  present  himself as the voice of his society  rather  than  as an  individual
man. The  world  of E. J. Pratt  is a world where the  individual  voice, the lyric
voice, is obligated  to  be silent,  where gangs,  crews, religions, and  nations  suc­ ceed,  and  private  men  die.  It  is a world  where ships outlive successive  crews, where the  CPR  outlives the individuals  who participated  in its building. It is a world  where  the  Victory, the  Constellation,  the  Arizona,  the  Missouri  rest  in veneration  while  the  names  of  their  crewmen  are  inevitably  forgotten.  It  is a world where it is dulce et decorum  to die for one's faith,  patria, ship, or  family of whales. Pratt  may be a contemporary  of Owen,  Zamiatin,  Orwell, and  Hux­ ley, but his poetry reads strangely like a celebration of the possibility of a "brave  new world."


FOOTNOTES

1 The  Poetry of E.]. Pratt:  A New  Interpretation   (Toronto, 1956).
2   Ten  Canadian  Poets  (Toronto, 1958).
3   "Editor's Introduction," The  Collected  Poems of E.  ]. Pratt, 2nd. ed. (Toronto,
1958).
4    "E. J. Pratt  and  Christianity," Canadian  Literature  19 (1964),  21-32.
5   "Introduction," Selected  Poems by E. ]. Pratt  (Toronto, 1968),  p. xvi.
6    "Editor's Introduction," p. xvii.
7   p. xviii.
8    "E. J. Pratt's Literary  Reputation," Canadian  Literature  19  (1964),  p. g.
9  "E.  J. Pratt  and  his Critics,"  in R.  L.  McDougall  ( ed.), Our  Living  Tradition
(Toronto, 1959),  pp.  123-147·
10   "Dunkirk," in Northrop Frye  ( ed.), The  Collected Poems of E. ]. Pratt, 2nd. ed. (Toronto, 1958).

PRATT AND  CORPORATE MAN


11 Ten  Canadian  Poets, p. 177.
12  "E. J. Pratt  and  his Critics," p. 136.
18  "E.  J. Pratt  and  Christianity,"  p. 24.
14   "Introduction," Selected  Poems of E.  f. Pratt, p. xv.
15   "Editor's Introduction," p. xvii.
16  Ten  Canadian  Poets, p. 169.
11 p. 167.
18  "E. J. Pratt  and  Christianity," pp. 26-29.
19  Ten  Canadian  Poets, p. 166.
20    Quintessence  of Capitalism,  tr.  M. Epstein  (New  York, 1967  [1915]).
21  Religion and the  Rise of Capitalism  (New York, 1926).
22     (New  York, 1951),  p. 33·
23   "Editor's Introduction," p. xx.
24    "Introduction," p.  xxiv.
25    "Introduction," p. xix.
26    The  Mechanical  Bride, p. 128.
27    "Editor's Introduction," p. xvii.

































66



GROVE
AND EXISTENTIALISM



Frank Birbalsingh






BORN    IN  1871  of   mixed  paren1> (Swedish  father  and
Scottish mother), Frederick  Philip  Grove spent some of his early, most  impres­
sionable  years  in Paris,  Rome  and  Munich   where  he  acquired   interests  and attitudes  that  influenced  him throughout his life; but in 1892 he came to North America  where,  except for  brief absences, he remained  until  his death  in  1948. His published  work, consisting of eight  novels, three volumes of essays, sketches and  addresses, some short stories and an autobiography, has been regarded  as predominantly of Canadian interest. In  spite of their author's long  residence in North  America,  however,  and  their  predominantly  Canadian settings,  Grove's writings suggest that  his preoccupations  are  primarily  European.  The  treatment of his principal  themes, free-will and  humanism,  reveals insights that  are similar in kind,  though  neither  in cogency nor intensity, to those of well known  Euro­ pean  writers.
The  theme of free-will is introduced  in the first published novel, Settlers of the
Marsh,  which describes the everyday routine of pioneer Canadian prairie  home­ steaders  during  the  early  years of  this  century.  The  Swedish  iminigrant  hero, Niels Lindstedt,  is puzzled by the apparently  ineffectual nature of his own wishes and  desires, and  is consequently  drawn   into  frequent  speculation   about  God. The  sudden  death  of a fellow iminigrant  homesteader  prompts  Niels to question the significance of events around  him:

What was life anyway? A dumb shifting of forces. Grass grew and  was  trodden down; and  it  knew not why. He himself-this very afternoon  there  had  been in him the  joy of grass growing, twigs budding, blossoms opening to  the air of spring. The  grass had been stepped on; the twig had  been broken; the blossoms nipped by frost ...
He, Niels, a workman in God's garden? Who was God anyway?

GROVE  AND EXISTENTIALISM



Such questions come instinctively and with special urgency to the lonely pioneers of  Grove's  four  novels set  in  the  Canadian  West.  So  often  is patient   toil  on the  land   made  fruitless  by  natural   disaster,  or  careful   plans  ruined   by  mis­ fortune,  that  they feel an  acute sense of mortality  and  show  a morbid  curiosity in  the  unseen  agency  which  treats  their  most  determined   efforts  with  neutral indifference.
A similar curiosity is evinced by urban  characters  in The  Master  of the  Mill,
in  which  the  mill owned  by the  Clark  family  makes  persistent  mechanical  de­ mands  on its workers and  is just as indifferent  to their  wishes as God is  to  the plans  and  labours  of  Niels  Lindstedt  and  other  homesteaders.  Yet  the  exact nature  of God  or of the mill remains  mysterious:  all that  the  homesteaders  or the mill workers can glean is the inexorable logic by which  God, at least, func­ tions;  they  are  vouchsafed  no  really  satisfactory  explanation. Their   common ignorance,  with which all the author's  characters perforce  play the game of life, is expressed by Samuel  Clark's  son, Edmund:

We are sitting at a table playing a game of chance the laws of which we don't understand  and somewhere around the board sits an invisible player whom nobody knows and  who takes all the  tricks; that  player is destiny, or God  if you like, or the future.

But Grove's  characters  do not  respond  passively. Although  they  acknowledge domination  by mysterious and  hostile forces, they summon  up  all possible inner resources in  a show  of fierce resistance, even  when  they  realize  that  resistance is futile. John  Elliott of Our  Daily Bread, Abe Spalding  of Fruits of the  Earth and  Len Sterner  of The  Yoke  of Life  all succumb,  or  are  likely to succumb  to dominant  extra-human  influences;  but   not  without,   initially,  waging  valiant and  resolute struggle. John  Elliott's whole life is dedicated  to settling his children on  farms  around  him,  each  doggedly  ploughing  a  successful  living  out  of  the reluctant  soil;  while Spalding,  exercising enormous  strength   of  will  and  body, strives unavailingly  to dominate  the land  that  can  yield him  sustenance,  wealth even;  and  Len  Sterner  tries  persistently to  acquire  education   in  circmnstances that  scarcely permit  him to subsist, much  less to read.  Ralph  Patterson  of Two Generations  (a novel set in Ontario) , although  more successful than  his Western counterparts, is equally  prepared  to subdue  the  recalcitrance either  of his land or family. Not in one instance does the author  counsel supine fatalism or facile optimism; for,  while his characters  acknowledge  the  ultimate  futility  of human aspirations,  they nevertheless enjoin  unremitting  struggle,  not instant  submission.

68

GROVE AND EXISTENTIALISM



Since  they  are  capable  of  independent   decision  these  characters   cannot   be correctly  regarded  as mere  pawns or  as impersonal  beings responding  mechan­ ically to external  stimuli.  Implicitly  they exercise a certain  measure  of  free-will even if its exact  degree and  moral implication  remain  vague. At the  same  time their  actions  lack  adequate   self-consciousness and  appear  automatic:   defiance is so instinctive  as to be almost  reflex, which  has led  to  the  belief that  Grove's characters  are, in fact,  mechanically  determined  by local factors.
Yet  Grove  was  no  naturalist.   His  characters  are  anything   but  impersonal beings reacting  mechanically  to outside influences, nor do they transmit  inherited traits  and  behaviour  patterns  from  one generation  to the next like the  Rougon­ Macquarts in Zola's great  twenty-novel sequence. More  often  than  not  younger characters   are  at  loggerheads  with  their  elders  precisely because  they  wish  to assert contrasting  individual  concerns and  interests. If their rather quick, retalia­ tory  actions  lack  sufficient  premeditation   and  due  self-consciousness, it  is  not because they represent  a consciously naturalistic outlook, but  because the author  fails to provide his characters  with a satisfactory intellectual  framework  to define the  moral significance of their  actions.
The  stress on  the  distinctive  individuality  of each  character  is in  fact  incor­ porated  in a separate  theme -humanism. Humanism  in Grove's  novels is con­ cerned  with  the sanctity  of human  personality  and  with  respect for  the  homely virtues of a Wordsworthian life close to Nature; it emphasizes the  pre-eminence of  fundamental human   values  over  artificial,  technologically-inspired  ones.  In the prairie  novels the simplicities of rural, family life are reverenced, and  patient tilling  of  the  soil for  one's  daily  bread  is  regarded  as  sufficient  for  complete satisfaction.  On  the  other  hand,  urban  industrialism  denies satisfaction  by in­ ducing  servility, as in the following illustration  given by Bruce Rogers, foreman of the Clark mill:

Suppose a  new hand  starts  work with  us. He's an  ordinary  human  being:  he laughs and  jokes as he goes to work. But within less than a year something comes over him. Whatever  he does, he seems to  do automatically; in reality, the pace forces him to be constantly on the watch; it isn't that he becomes a machine; that would be tolerable if undesirable. What  he becomes is the slave of a  machine which punishes him whenever he is at fault.

Rogers asserts a belief that the influence of machines can be evil, that their uncontrolled   power  can  dehumanize, and  what  he  implies  is  that   true  value resides in  the  farmer,  the  lone  individual  who  makes  life with  his  own  heart and  hands.

6g

GROVE AND EXISTENTIALISM



In  stressing the  pre-eminence of personal values, Grove's novels in fact counter­ act the naturalistic  overtones which some have found in his writing. His charac­  ters stoutly  defend  their basic humanity  from  threatened  domination  either  by natural  adversaries or by artificial ones present  in  industrial connurbations. In­  stinctively they reject the mechanical determination of their  lives by any agency, and  their  motives are not  narrowly social or  political  like those of the  author's  American   contemporaries;  for   example,   Sherwood   Anderson   and   Theodore  Dreiser, who also warn against  the sacrifice of human  rights and  liberties to the God  of  industrial   Mammon.  The   Americans  speak  mostly  from   Marxist  or quasi-Marxist  convictions, whereas Grove's view is certainly  non-Marxist. As will be shown  later,  his chief  characters  may  often  be  taken  as spokesmen  for  the author  himself and  it is  the  author's  view  that  Edmund Clark  expresses when he tells his father: "Let  all men be equal  in  an economic sense and  one incite­ ment  to live is gone."  Grove's  anti-industrialism  is not  narrowly  political.  Pas­ sionate  support  for  individual  integrity  and  unyielding  belief in  the sovereignty of fundamental spiritual  values derive from  a  wider if not  deeper  philosophical outlook  that  is  neither  socialist nor  naturalistic  but  existentialist.




EXISTENTIALISM  not  only  contradicts naturalism; it  belies the fatalism and determinism  which are sometimes attributed to Grove. Fatalism signifies weak-kneed  acceptance,  an  abdication   of  human   responsibility;  deter­ minism, likewise, implies that  all our  actions even those involving  moral  judge­ ments,  are  wholly determined  by  previously existing  causes.  Existentialism,  by stressing the  value  of independent, personal  choice in  defiant  action,  both  ac­ knowledges human  responsibility and  affinns  man's  ability to  live without  panic or  hysteria in a world of growing uncertainty  and  seeming  hopelessness. Grove's protagonists  voluntarily  oppose cosmic odds  whether  in  the  form  of inexorable Fate  or of suffocating industrial  organization,  and  although  they fail in  the end, they never flinch from the struggle or give way to despair. Theirs  is an enforced, sisyphean  way  of  life that  is  resigned  without  being  defeatist,  combative  but not  aggressive. To  them  neither  despair  nor  hope,  pessimism nor  optimism,  are practical  alternatives.  Samuel  Clark sums up  their  approach when  he says with impassive finality:  "Life is a concatenation  of  events  beyond  praise or  blame."  However  diffuse it may  be as a systematic  philosophy,  existentialism  usually advocates  vigorous protest against  policies of  action  in  which  human  beings are

70

GROVE  AND  EXISTENTIALISM



regarded  as helpless pawns or as wholly determined  by the  regular  operation  of natural  processes:  as already  shown, all Grove's heroes vividly demonstrate  this type of protest. These heroes are caught in situations similar to those in the plays and  novels of Jean-Paul Sartre  and Albert Camus, who usually portray  ostensibly helpless people trapped  by ordinary  and  natural  processes. Indeed,  the characters of Sartre and Camus feel a more intense and pervasive awareness of human inadequacy   than   Grove's  protagonists.  Circumscribed   by  hostile  forces  which all but  annihilate him,  Roquentin, the hero of Sartre's  La Nausee, faces a  pre­ dicament  familar  to all Grove's heroes; only he experiences such an intense form of spiritual  impotence  that  for much of the time he is incapable  of either  protest or defiance;  certainly  he does not  react  quickly or instinctively. Unlike  Grove's heroes, whose sole interest  is to get  out  of their  predicament,  Roquentin is as much  concerned  with  investigating  his as with  getting  out  of  it.  He  therefore gains a fuller understanding of his predicament; and so does the reader.
Camus  also writes about  people with a strong, almost hypnotic  sense of  crip­ pling limitation  and  total  helplessness; nor do they always achieve  that  defiant act of will that  comes so readily to Grove's characters. Although  he goes through distressing experiences, Meursault,  hero of Camus's l'Etranger, manages no more positive emotional  reaction  than  a sort of dazed bafflement:  he commits murder and is condemned  and  his most visible reaction is listless detachment. Roquentin  and  Meursault  desire  "engagement" -the existentialist term  for  defiant  act  of will-more  desperately  than  Grove's  heroes, but  they  encounter  greater  diffi­ culty in achieving it. Instead  they transcend their pressing need for "engagement" by finding salvation  in  thorough  analysis and  understanding of  their  problems. Mathieu  Delarue,  hero of Sartre's  three-volume  Les Chemis de  la Liberte, fails to commit  himself to any  positive action  until the end of the  third  volume, but during   his  lengthy  period  of  indecision  he  searchingly  probes  the  apparently  absurd  circumstances  of his concrete situation,  thus laying  bare  its precise moral characteristics. Since self-knowledge is gained during the time that he is perplexed and  undecided,  indecision  itself proves as much  a  part  of  his salvation  as the positive  commitment  he  finally  makes.  In  existentialist  terms  salvation  is  the fulness of being which he gains by self-conscious probing of his whole experience.
The  basic assertion of Sartre  and Camus, as well as Grove, is that  in an absurd
or  irrationally  organized   world  men  have  liberty  of  personal  choice  to  make what  they want  of their  lives. All three writers present characters  in roughly the same predicament  and all three prescribe roughly the same remedy-the achievement  of salvation  by a self-conscious act of will  (which  may or may  not

GROVE  AND  EXISTENTIALISM



be defiant  in  Camus). Where  the comparison  breaks  down  is in  the  process of achieving salvation: Roquentin,  Meursault  and  Delarue  take a long time investi­ gating  the  moral  imperatives  open  to  them  and  in  so  doing  they  clarify  and illuminate  their  predicament,  while Grove's  heroes are  instandy  defiant  and  so achieve  the  required  act  of will almost  automatically, thus  avoiding  the  intro­ spective  probing  and  analysis which  might  have  illuminated   their  actions  and given  them  moral  significance. The  result  is that  the  reader  comes  to  see the existentialist  situations  in  the  French  writers  more  clearly  and  to  understand their  perceptions  and  intuitions with greater  intelligence,  whereas  Grove's situa­ tions remain  largely obscure and  his  existentialist  insights  appear  inchoate  and stunted.
Parallels  between  Sartre  and  Camus  on  one  hand  and  Grove  on  the  other come from  their  common  ideological background -the  ferment  in  Europe  at the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Two   major   influences  at  this  time  were Kierkegaard  and  Nietzsche. Kierkegaardian futility  within  a  Christian  universe jostled with an insatiable Nietzschean will to live and the intellectual flux thus produced  contained   the  essential  elements  out  of  which  existentialism  was  to emerge. Under  the influence of Jaspers, Heidegger  and  others existentialist ideas gradually  took coherent shape in the early decade  of the  twentieth  century  until they were moulded  into a more or less consistent system of thought  principally by Sartre  in the  World War  II  era. One  reason why the intellectual  framework of Grove's novels is fragmented  is that he was not open, in Canada, to the direct cultural  associations of constructive  comment,  analysis and  discussion available to Europeans  like Sartre  and  Camus. The  philosophical  ideas which  he brought from  Europe  in  1892  and  which  remained  largely  stagnant   in  his mind  more accurately  represent  an earlier  nascent existentialism out  of which  the  coherent theories of Sartre  and  Camus  later evolved.
The  influence of this earlier, unstable existentialism is to be found in the work
of Europeans  such  as Ibsen, Strindberg,  and  even-earlier-Dostoevsky.  Like Grove,  these  writers  portray  tormented  and  strong-willed  protagonists  opposed to either a moral or a social order which is contradictory if not incomprehensible. Yet the struggles of Ibsen's heroes and  heroines against a stifling bourgeois social order  are  carefully  analysed,  the sexual  conflicts in  Strindberg's characters   are brilliantly  illuminated,   and  the  crises encountered   by  Dostoevsky's  heroes  are searchingly  investigated  so as to bring  out  and  clarify  the  moral  problems  in­ volved. Ibsen,  Strindberg  and  Dostoevsky may  offer  different  solutions  to  their underlying  problem  of reconciling harsh  human  reality  with  the  dominion  of a

GROVE AND EXISTENTIALISM



supposedly loving Christian  God, but they explore the  problem  comprehensively and  their  reputation rests on  this inspired  exploration  rather  than  on  the  solu­ tions  they  offer.  Ibsen  and  Strindberg  lean  towards  Nietzsche  in  asserting  a powerful will to survive, while Dostoevsky tends towards Kierkegaard in stressing human  fulfilment by deeds of love and  compassion;  together  these  three  writers may  be said  to  anticipate twentieth-century   existentialism. Their  philosophical sources were also volatile and  unstable, but they were able to  marshal  them into sustained, whole and  original  perceptions.






GROVE's WORK suffers by comparison  either  with  his suc­ cessors, the  mature  existentialists, or with  his immediate  European  predecessors whose plays and novels anticipate existentialism. The immature or stunted  quality of  his  thought  cannot   therefore  be  wholly attributed   to  deficient  historical  or cultural  influences. Since  they do not enlarge  the reader's  perceptions,  the arbi­ trary constraints  and  harassments  visited upon his protagonists  appear  gratuitous,  and  the gratuitous  presentation  of a whole series of  characters  who are physically persecuted  and spiritually  tortured  only to be destroyed conveys a strong  flavour of sado-masochism.  When  the  unmistakably  masochistic overtones  of his novels are set against  the author's own extremely  harsh experiences in  North  America, it becomes clear that  his art  does not serve simply as a vehicle of objective views and   judgements,  but  also vicariously  as  a  means  of  projecting  subjective  dis­ satisfactions  that   are  exclusively  of   personal  interest.  The   ragged  intellectual framework  of his novels comes out  of  the  unstable  contact  between  his mixed European  inheritance  and  his unhappy  life in Canada.  This  contact  engendered irrepressible tensions in Grove, and fiction provided him with a convenient  means of release. This explains why  he re-states identical themes in seven novels without ever probing  them, for constant  re-statement satisfies urgent  psychological need; that it ignores purely aesthetic criteria  was apparently  of less moment.
From  his arrival  in  North  America,  Grove endured  poverty,  illness, bereave­
ment  and  what  he, at  any rate,  thought  was shameful  neglect. In  his treatment of  free-will,  the  dogged  but  vain  resistance of  his  heroes  partly  registers  self­ pitying  disappointment  with  his own  untiring  but  largely  unsuccessful  literary efforts. His  attitude to failure  is clearly stated  in  his autobiography In  Search of Myself:


73

GROVE  AND EXISTENTIALISM



Perhaps, very likely even, I was foredoomed to failure in my [literary]  endeavour; in fact, I seemed to see even then, that  I was bound  to fail;  but  the attempt had to be made.

Unwavering  dedication  to literature  sublimates  what  really is an intolerable  dis­ appointment in himself as a writer, and  it is partly  to stabilize himself  psychol­ logically for  renewed  efforts that  he wishfully projects  a dedicated  but  assumed fighting spirit  in  all his chief characters.
Similarly limiting  personal motives enter  into  his representation  of humanism
as well. Concern  for  the mill workers in The  Master of  the  Mill is not  closely integrated   into  the  novel's unwieldly  plot;  it  is  prompted, it would  seem,  by strong prejudice  rather  than by artistic considerations. The  suspicion of prejudice is reinforced  when  we discover the author's  expressed animus  against  American industrial  social organization.  In In Search of Myself he deplores the ascendancy of  purely  acquisitive  instincts  over  more  genuinely  creative  ones  in  America, and  American  subservience to a morality based on credit  elicits contempt:

It  is the peculiarly American philosophy of life that  to have is more important than to be or to do; in fact, that to be is dependent  on to  have. America's chief contribution to the so-called civilization of mankind, so far, consists in the instal­ ment  plan;  and  that  plan  imposes a  slavery  vastly more  galling,  vastly  more wasteful than  any autocracy, any tyranny  has ever imposed. A  free  life is im­ possible under its rule except for the rich who can dispense with it.

These obviously exaggerated  feelings become especially significant when we realize that  it was principally  his anti-Americanism  that  drove  the  author   to a  miser­ able existence on  a bleak and  inhospitable  Canadian prairie.  Like dogged  resis­ tance in his treatment of free-will, Grove's humanistic belief inindividual integrity largely expresses a  narrowly idiosyncratic resentment.  In  the former  case resent­ ment is directed  against the failure of his writing  while in the latter  it is pointed at American  social values.
The  sexual  attitudes  revealed in Grove's novels also underline  the  undue sub­ jectivity of his art.  In The  Yoke  of  Life Len  Sterner  plainly states  his  expecta­ tions of Lydia Hausmann:
He saw Lydia etherealised, de-carnalised ... She stood before his mental  vision, untouched, all the more desirable for having been tempted, white in immaculate innocence. In order to justify his condemnation of the world, he needed to idealise her;  and  he did so with the facility of youth.
When   Lydia,  without  convincing  psychological  pretext,  suddenly   turns  from virgin  innocence   to  besmirching  promiscuity,  Sterner's   ethereal   illusions  are

74

GROVE AND EXISTENTIALISM



shattered and he "cursed the world and all the facts of life." He then endures prolonged  self-torture   which  is  finally  relieved  only  by  suicide.  Grove's  own sexual attitudes  are not much  different;  he writes in his autobiography:

Woman as such remained a mystery to me. Even the prostitute whom I had seen through the open door of the brothel seemed a superior being to me, something almost divine because it was different from myseH.

Although  we may not know for certain  that  Grove experienced  consequent frus­ tration similar  to Sterner's,  we can be reasonably certain  that  his rather innocent idealization  of women was contradicted  by actual experience,  and  if  the  passion he shows in his reaction  to literary  failure  and  American  society is  genuine, he is likely to  have  responded  to sexual  frustration  with  the  same  intensity  as he shows in his main  themes. This  would explain why there  are scarcely any happy sexual relationships in the novels or why his women are drawn  without  subtlety, either as wicked and  promiscuous like Clara  Vogel and  Lydia  Hausmann, or as saintly and  virginal like Ellen Amundsen and Alice Patterson; for, as in his main themes,  Grove  is not  so much  giving an  objective  portrait   of  credible  human relations as expressing unbalanced, unstable and  probably  uncontrollable  retalia­ tory feelings born of his own frustrations.
Sterner's  reaction  when  disillusioned by Lydia is revealing,  because it  clearly illustrates  the masochistic, self-pitying spirit of grievance  common  to all Grove's heroes. Their  pathological  outlook makes them retaliate  blindly  and  irrationally against life itself, not simply against specific sources of irritation  or dissatisfaction. In psychological terms Grove's themes are undeveloped because his heroes are too overcome by emotion  to keep the bare minimum of moral  equipoise necessary to any successful character  in fiction. Sterner  and  his spiritual  kindred  in the other novels are  not  ultimately  convincing  as human  beings in  whom  both  emotional and  cerebral  impulses  co-operate  to  maintain  some form  of  equilibrium  as in normal  experience. All that  they do is either to inflict or to endure  punishment, and  in  the  end  their  sadomasochistic  activities are  too  non-cerebral  and  there­ fore too unbalanced to sustain moral examination. Their  real value is not artistic but  psychological-in  providing  the  author   with  a  means   of  airing  strong grievances or prejudices  and  thus relieving powerful inner  tensions.
No  assessment of  Grove's  novels that  ignores either  his existentialism  or  his
psychological dependence  on his writing can arrive at a fair  estimate of his achievement  as a novelist, for these two are essential factors  of his art.  The evi­ dence  already  presented  suggests  that   his  purely  artistic  intention,  namely  to

75

GROVE  AND  EXISTENTIALISM



represent  a view of life that  is basically existentialist,  is corrupted   by an  extra­ literary  motive, that  of fulfilling wholly personal  psychological needs and  expec­ tations.  The  aesthetic  content  of  his  work  is thus  undermined   and  his  novels are of inconsiderable  value as art;  their  most successful feature  is  patient  docu­ mentation  of pioneer  homestead routine  which is both solid and  authentic. The  best of Grove's  writings are, in fact,  not the  novels, but  the  autobiography, the sketches  and  essays, in  which  compelling,  idiosyncratic  dissatisfactions  can  be freely expressed  without  much  regard  for  aesthetic  form  or  objectivity.  On  the whole we do not  much admire  the man's  writing,  but  we  do not fail to admire the man  himself-his astonishing singlemindedness, his  tenacity  and  his courage in the face of great  adversity.







DOUZE NOUVELLES


NaimKattan



LA REVUE  Liberti  consacre son  numiro   62   (maiS-avril
zg6g)  a douze  nouvelles  que  Ia Societe Radio-Canada commanda en  1967 a
douze ecrivains canadiens,  six de langue anglaise et six de langue franc;aise. On  a

choisit des ecrivains  reconnus.  Dans ce choix Ia Societe Radio-Canada n'a  opre ni  pour  l'aventure, ni  pour  Ia decouverte.  Elle a  prefere  faire  connaitre   a un
vaste public des noms deja consaCiis dans les milieux litteraires. L'on  ne souhaite point  que  l'un  ou !'autre des ecrivains qui figurent sur  cette  liste ne le fllt  pas, bien que l'on  aurait  aime  y avoir d'autres  noms.
La  premiere  remarque que  Ia lecture de ces nouvelles suscite c'est que le Canada sert  de cadre,  d'arriere-plan, a  des drames  et  a des petites  tragedies  qu'evoque
chacun  des nouvellistes. Hubert Aquin  relate Ia fin d'un  amour  qui  conduit  un homme  au suicide. Jean  Basile evoque  le souvenir d'une  amitie  de  jeunesse, et Ia tristresse d'un  homme  qui  constate Ia distance qui  le separe  de l'amitie  et de Ia jeunesse a Ia fois, tristesse qui se situe au  bord du  desespoir.
A travers un compte-rendu clinique d'une grossesse, Gerard  Bessette nous rend sensible le bouleversement  que suscite une  nouvelle naissance  chez  une  femme. Tout   changement   profond   n'annonce  pas  seulement  un  nouveau   commence­ ment, mais le terme d'une  periode de vie.
On  retrouve  dans  Ia  nouvelle  de  Marie-Claire  Blais les memes  personnages et Ia meme  atmosphere  qu'ont rendus  familiers Une  Saison dans la Vie  d'Em­ manuel  et  Les manuscrits de  Pauline Archange. C'est  avec  joie  et  avec  une intense curiosite que I'on retrouve  Andre Langevin. Depuis Le Temps des hommes ce romancier  n'a  publie  que  des articles. Sa  nouvelle nous  rassure:  il n'a  rien perdu  de sa vigueur. Le mysrere qui entoure ses personnages  indique  une  tragi­ que  quete  d'un   rapport   avec  le reel. Une  femme s'introduit dans  Ia vie d'un

77

DOUZE NOUVELLES



homme,  fortuitement, brievement. Celui-ci ne connait  meme  pas son nom, mais sa presence restera  vive en lui. 11 voudra  la  p11eserver  en  depit  du  mari  qui  en dotant   cette  femme  d'une  identitie lui  enleve  toute  realite.  Dans  sa  nouvelle Andree  Maillet  nous rappelle que  dans  le monde  de  l'enfance  les petits secrets sont parfois synonymes de grands drames.
Le  monde  exterieur  fait  irruption   dans  deux  nouvelles  de  langue  anglaise.
Austin  C. Clarke  nous fait  mesurer la distance  entre  les espoirs des immigrants noirs et la realite le leur vie au Canada. Le heros-narrateur de la nouvelle de Mordecai  Richler  est un Juif canadien  en visite pour  la  premiere  fois en Israel. Ses sentiments  pour ce pays sont contradictoires. 11 est dechire entre les exigences de l'absolu et les contraintes  du reel. 11 ne peut  laisser libre cours a son  admira­ tion ou a ses 11eserves sans un sentiment de culpabilire.
Pour  echapper  a la souffrance, au  malheur  et a la laideur  du  monde  le  per­ sonnage  de  Hugh   Gamer  n'a  d'autre issue que  la  folie  ou  la  mort.  Dans  la nouvelle  de  Hugh  Hood  nous sommes  assaillis par  la  cruaute   et  l'avidire  des enfants  qui  ne  desirent  qu'accaparer les biens  de  leurs  parents  mourants. En evoquant   l'attachement d'une   petite  fille pour  son  chien,  Margaret  Laurence nous  raconte  sans  le  dire  l'histoire  d'un  adolescent  qui  en  harcelant   ce  chien essaie de se liberer  de la douleur  qu'il  subit.  Sinclair  Ross  constate  combien  la violence de  l'age   jeune  trouve  un  exutoire  dans  la  violence  generalisee  d'une  civilisation.
Dans  quelle  mesure  ces  nouvelles sont-elles  canadiennes?   Y-a-t-il  un  esprit commun  qui les anime,  un fil conducteur  qui leslie? 11 est impossible, et a mon avis inutile, de 11epondre a cette question. Ces ecrivains sont canadiens  par les circonstances de leur vie. Ils n'ont  pas besoin de l'affirmer. J'ajouterais qu'aucun d'eux  ne domine  par  une originalire qui  frappe. Sans  doute  aurait-on  souhaite deceler  ce  qui  fait  leur  particularisme.  Aucun   d'eux  cependant  n'invente   des formes  nouvelles. On  retrouve  dans  chaque  nouvelle  les qualites  et  les limites que nous ont deja  revelees leurs oeuvres anrerieures.  Chez Hubert  Aquin  c'est la liquefaction  du  personnage  par  des evenements  dont  la  suite  echappe   a  toute logique.  Le mystere qui en  vesulte est celui de !'existence  elle-meme. On  decele chez Gerard  Bessette !'influence  du  nouveau  roman  fran ais.
apprehende le reel a coup d'anedoctes.
Ce qui est sans doute le plus surprenant dans ce recueil c'est l'impossibilire d',etablir  une  frontiere  entre  les ecrivains  de  langue  anglaise  et ceux  de langue fran<;aise, non pas qu'ils ne soient pas differents les uns des autres.  Mais, ici cette difference appara.lt comme etant  le fait d'individus et  non celui de groupes.



review articles



NEW  CRITICISM

D. G. Stephens



DENNis DUFFY. Marshall McLuhan.  New Canadian Library, McClelland & Stewart, (Canadian Writers   I),$ ·95·
MILTON   WILSON,   E.  ].  Pratt,  New  Canadian  Library,  McClelland   &  Stewart, (Canadian Writers  2),  $ ·95·
CLARA THOMAS,  Margaret Laurence, New Canadian Library, McClelland & Stewart, (Canadian Writers  3), $ ·95·
RONALD suTHERLAND,  Frederick Philip Grove, New Canadian Library, McClelland
& Stewart, (Canadian Writers  4), $ ·95·
w. 1· KEITH, Charles G. D. Roberts, Studies  in Canadian Literature I, Copp  Clark,
$I.95·


AT THE  MOMENT, two  pub­ lishers have  taken  it  upon  themselves to augment  the  field of  Canadian criticism with    monographs   about  writers  in Canada.   McClelland   &   Stewart,   and Copp  Clark,  are  to  be  congratulated in their efforts to supply the reading public, and  students,  with  up-to-date  examina­ tions of these writers. It is hoped that the direction  which  these  series have  taken will  point  the  way for  other  publishers. Here  is a  good  beginning,  for  the main thing these series do is to point out, quite dramatically at that,  the need for many books of the kind that  condense and arti­ culate   the  whole  quality   of  a  writer's work. Before, such criticism was available only  in   articles   or   in   general   surveys about   Canadian  writing;  specific  infor­ mation  about  one author  is rarely avail­ able under a single cover.
Canadian Writers, the  new series  de­
signed  to  be part  of  the  New Canadian
 Library of McClelland and Stewart, is, according to the frontispiece,

a  series of  handbooks designed   to  provide the  student   and  general   reader   with  com­ pact  and  inexpensive  introductions to signi­ ficant   figures   on   the    Canadian   literary  scene.  Each   book  is  written   expressly  for the series by an outstanding Canadian critic  or  scholar  and  provides,  besides  a compre­  hensive critical  approach  to a given  author, useful  biographical and   bibliographical in­ formation.

There   are  two  words  here  which  may bother a reader: "handbook" and "intro­ duction".  Students   may  shy  away  from a  "handbook", for  the  word  implies  a guide or a manual, that which supplies direction;  and  since the  books will  usu­ ally be read  after  at  least  one  work  by the  author  is read,  an  "introduction" is not what is needed. Readers do not want handbooks  and   introductions  to  litera­ ture;  rather  they  want  information that enriches their original experience of read-

79

REVIEW ARTICLES



ing  an  author's work.  And, in fact,  these are  anything but  handbooks or introduc­ tions;  instead, they  are written by people who   assume,   and   correctly,   that   their readers have   read   the  primary  sources, and   are   reading the  criticism  to  widen their   understanding   of   the  authors  in­ volved.
This  is particularly true  in  the Dennis
Duffy   book,   Marshall  M cLuhan;   here the author has related  McLuhan theories in  an  understandable way, to enlarge on McLuhan himself, but also he has related the  theory  of McLuhan to the world  that the  McLuhan message attempts to define. For   the   first   time   McLuhan's  position has  been  made clear  to me;  I  have  been anti-McLuhan mainly because I did not completely understand his approach. The Duffy  book has helped  me immeasurably to  understand McLuhan, and  I  am  sure it  will  do  the  same  for  others.  I  am  not pro-McLuhan now, but, instead,  have a fuller  understanding of what  he has done with   the   mediums  of  our   time.   I  like Duffy's   approach, and  his  sense  of   hu­ mour   in  approaching his subject;  in  his introduction he can say:

That a Canadian, a professor of English, should  attain New  Yorker  cartoon-status is no more astonishing than that the city of Montreal should  host  one  of  the  most  ex­ citing  international exhibitions  of  this  cen­ tury.   Viewed   in   perspective,   both   events indicate  that    Canada  has,   for   better    or worse, abandoned its former adversary  posi­ tion  in  North  American  culture.

It is amusing, too,  that  when  words  are going   out   of  fashion-or  the   written word,  at  least-the very man  who  talks about it  is  the  man   who  is making   the most  money  out  of  print.  The   age  that McLuhan  speaks   about   has   McLuhan himself as its last prophet.
The  second   book   in   the   Canadian

8o
 Writers   is  Milton Wilson's,   E. f. Pratt. Pratt is  a  major Canadian poet  and   to have   Milton  Wilson   do  this  book  is  a great  coup for McClelland and Stewart. Wilson  is one  of  the  few  real  critics  in Canada.  What  interests him  automati­ cally  attracts the  reader's  attention with  his  first  page,  and   then  gives  full  value  for  every   bit  of   attention  he  gets.  The anecdotes prod the reader on, and  by the time  we  reach  the  little  dull  stretches  of repeated plot from  the epic poems, or the reminders   that   Pratt  loved   to   concoct  good  menus  because  he  liked  food  him­  self,  we are  so interested in  what  Wilson will  say  next  about  Pratt  that   we  con­ tinue to  read  steadfastly, determined to miss  nothing. The  organization of  this book is particularly good.  The first two chapters discuss  the  shorter poems,  from all  parts  of Pratt's career; it is not an organization based  on  historical develop­ ment  but  rather a discussion  of  the whole Pratt   canon,  written  by   someone   who knew  the  poet  well,  admired him,  yet is able  to stand  in a strong  position  as critic  of  the   work  involved. The  'big'   poems are  the subject of the  last  chapter; I was sorry  that Wilson  dismissed  The  Titanic  so quickly,  for  I would  like to have  read more  by  someone  who  says he  liked  the poem; to use Wilson's  words,  it is a "sometimes  brilliant   poem   that    I  am rarely   tempted  to  go  back  to."  I  really would  like to know  why, if it is brilliant. But   this   is   nothing,  really,   when   the whole  book is examined; it is the most satisfying   criticism   on  Pratt that   I  have ever  read.
Not   so  satisfying   is  Clara  Thomas's book on  Margaret  Laurence. I really was looking forward to  this  book,  for  I have liked  Clara Thomas's work  before,  and  I was  interested to see what  she  would  do

REVIEW ARTICLES



with  Margaret Laurence, whose last book, The Fire   Dwellers, disappointed   me greatly.   Some   writers  work   too  quickly once they get going,  and  I feel that  Mar­ garet  Laurence has  fallen  into  this  cate­ gory. Her  African books and  Stone Angel have a sustained quality that  her last two books   lack.   Perhaps  she   is   trying   too hard,  but  the structures of A Jest of God and   The   Fire  Dwellers  are  superficial; what   she   needs   is  control   in   plot  and characterization. Clara  Thomas does not deal  with  the  finer  points  of style in  her comments on  Laurence; neither does she face  the  problems of  plot  and  character. Instead,  she  comments in  each  case  on the conflict,  almost  to a point  of retelling  the plot, and  examines the reasons for the conflict.  I sense that  Clara Thomas comes more  to  Margaret Laurence's work  as a woman   rather  than   as  a  critic.  This  is not  bad,  and   cannot be  avoided, but  a greater objectivity towards the   ethic examined  in   the   novels  would   show  a firmer understanding  of   Margaret Laurence's art   as  a  novelist.  I look  for greater  things   in   both   women,   one   as writer  and  the  other as critic,  but  at  the moment the  fusion  in  this one  book does not  work.
Ronald Sutherland does  approach Frederick  Philip   Grove   with   the  objec­ tivity   of   a   well   disciplined   critic.  His comments are   astute, and  his  ability  to place  Grove  within a  proper  perspective  is quite  refreshing. Desmond Pacey's book on  Grove  is very  different, and  informa­ tive, and  is still  the  best detailed study of Grove  the  man  and  Grove  the  novelist. What  Sutherland  has  done  is to  narrow  the  whole  of  Grove   into   a  proper and fitting   framework.  His  ability   to  do  so may  explain   why  these  books  are  called
'introductions'; he does more  than  intro-
 







CINDERELLA by  Alan  Suddon One  of the  most beautiful   books  for children  ever  published in Canada. Twenty-nine breath-taking collages in full  colour.  "The  best  picture  book ever produced in Canada" (In  Review). Bilingual
text.  Cloth  only  5.75

SO FAR SO GOOD  by  Raymond  Souster For twenty  years  Souster  has  spoken  with  the authentic voice of the  big city. This is
an  impressive  collection  of old  and  new  poems, his best work  to date. One  of the five
best  Canadian books of 1 969:
Toronto Public Library. Cloth 4.00/paper  2.50

THE STREETS  OF SUMMER by David Helwig "'Sometimes  a  book will appear, so good  it is hard  to review  it intel'ligibly.  What  can  you say that  will convey  your  sense  of  having  dis· covered  something very  beautiful and  wanting to share it?''   (Vancouver  Province).  Fourteen stories.  Cover  by Greg  Curnoe.  Cloth only 4.95

JOHN  TORONTO  by  John Robert Colombo  A beautiful:ly cool  and  ambiguous collection  of found  poems  based  on the  work  of John Strachan, Bishop of Toronto 1839-67.  lntroduc· tion  by William  Kilbourn. Cloth  only  3.75

THE SIGN OF THE GUNMAN by David  Helwig A revised  and  enlarged edition  of Figures in a Landscape, considered by Fred Cogswell  the best book of  poems  published in Canada in
1968. Cover  by Kazuo  Nakamura. Cloth  4.00 I paper   2.00

NOTES FOR A NATIVE  LAND  An exciting  new encounter  with  Canada by forty  Canadian writers  and  artists. "Every  18-year-old in the land  should  be given  a copy  at government expense" (Winnipeg  Free Press). "I  l'ike this book"  (AI Purdy). "Should   be on every Canadian bookshelf" (Montreal   Star).  Paper only  2.95



6 new books by five Canadian writers from OBERON  PRESS

REVIEW ARTICLES



duce  Grove,  however. Sutherland  takes the  whole  of Grove's  work, and  tries­ very  successfully-to place  it  within  a larger  scheme.  He  studies  Grove  as  a novelist  within  the  whole  stream  of fic­ tion, and gives insights that any reader of him  will  appreciate.  Grove  was  a  full naturalist,  and  his  ability to capture  the environment   is his  forte.  Sutherland re­ cords all this with care, and I recommend his book to  anyone  interested  in  Grove. The only fault may lie in that Sutherland  makes  Grove  more  interesting  than   he really  was, or  is;  he  is, after  all,  quite dull,   probably   because  his  work  is  so slowly paced.
I hope  that  W.  J. Keith  will write  a
larger  work  on  Charles  G.  D.  Roberts,
for his Copp  Clark  monograph -which is what it really is-shows a control and ability  to  understand  Roberts  that  criti­ cism needs. Mr. Keith obviously has more insights  into   Roberts's   poetry,   insights that  would  trace  the  sources  and  influ­ ences  affecting  both  the  poetry  and  the stories. I kept  wanting  him to say more, and  felt  that  he could  do so. Obviously, the  lyrics In  Divers  Tones  need  a more careful   appraisal,  and   Mr.  Keith   sug­ gests  what  could   be  done.  The  impor­ tance of Roberts and his influence on the verse  in   Canada   which  followed  him needs  a  more  careful  examination; his was the beginning of a desire to create a special metaphor within Canadian poetry.
 But, limited by space, Mr. Keith cut short the discussion of the poetry. Right  now Roberts seems to be taken more seriously as  a  writer   of  animal   and  other  short stories than as a poet. The stories are important, but  I doubt  if they should  be praised beyond the poetry. Mr. Keith's examination  of the stories is acute and carefully  presented,  yet here again, I felt that  he could  say more.  His book is not superficial,  however;  it  seems  rather   to be  an  outline   for  something  larger.  At least,  I  hope  it  is, for  I  sense that  Mr. Keith   could  do  something  for  Roberts that few other critics in Canada  could.
Some   years  ago,  someone  said   that what  we  needed  in  Canadian  literature was some good Canadian criticism. This has been remedied  by a number  of good magazines and  other  collections of essays about Canadian writers. Now, the student of Canadian literature has secondary sources that can be used to enlarge his appreciation of the work he may be studying. But more has to be done for criticism   in  Canada.  These  five  books point  a  direction.  They  go only  part  of the way. But with them as a background, one would hope that  the time is near for more careful statements, more detailed examinations  of  the  creators  and   pur­ veyors of the  Canadian literary  heritage. Until  then,  however, thanks  are due  not only to the writers of these books but also to  the  publishers  who created  the series.


LOWRY, THE CABBALA
AND CHARLES JONES

William H. New



PERLE EPSTEIN,  The Private  Labyrinth of Malcolm  Lowry:  Under  the Volcano  and the  Cabbala. Holt, Rinehart, and  Winston. $6.g5.


As   WE  ARE  REMINDED  by Stephen   Leacock's  pointed  satire  "The Yahi-Bahi  Oriental  Society of  Mrs. Rasselyer-Brown", the Theosophist move­ ment attracted charlatans as well as seri­ ous students, particularly when it became a fad. Considering  the  number  of people involved  in  theosophy  from  the  188o's into  the 193o's-or into  the  196o's, for that   matter,   with   occultism   becoming fashionable   again-this  can  hardly  be unexpected.    Good,   wealthy,    uncertain people  are  often  persuaded  out  of their money by the strong-willed, and al'e often coincidentally   attracted  to  philosophies that offer them "answers". Conditions are thus  ripe  for  the  con  artist.  The  "con­ verts" accept  him, abandon their  homes, and   enter   communities  of  the  "elect", whose sole function  seeins to be to await Armageddon  and  in the meantime praise their  self-styled   prophet/priest. One  of the  most blatant  examples  in Canada  of this particular  variety of the con game is recorded  in  a  curious  1967  memoir  by Herbert   Emmerson  Wilson,  entitled Canada's  False Prophet.  It concerns  the career  of   the  author's brother,   Edward Arthur  Wilson,  alias  "Brother Twelve", who  attracted  people from   all  over Europe and  North  America-generally former   theosophists-to follow  him  in
1927  to   the   Pacific   Coast.   There   he
 bought Valdez Island and  additional thousands of acres with his community's funds, and his "Aquarian Foundation" flourished.  The   Eleven  Brothers  in  the Void spoke irregularly  to Brother Twelve on  matters  of  faith,  and  the  "prophet" led his flock to believe what  he chose. At least  for  a  time.  Wilson  goes on  in  his book to describe the bizarre sexual  prac­ tices  of  the   group   and   the  increasing sadism of Brother  Twelve's cohort, Mad­ ame   Zee,  which   ultimately   led   to   its disintegration.
My point  here  is simply to  emphasize
that  in Vancouver  in the late 192o's and
193o's, interest in this strange society, and in hermeticism  and  the occult  generally, was particularly  strong.  Not all of it was eccentric,  of  course,  nor   were  all   the writers and  teachers in the field  mounte­ banks. Some were serious thinkers, whose search   into   the   signs   and  symbols  of black  and  white  magic  was for  them  a way  of  trying  to  fathom  the  unknown. One   of  these   was   "Frater  Achad" - Charles Robert Stansfeld  Jones-a por­ trait   painter   from   1899  to   1910,  the author  of six  books, a  resident  of  Van­ couver for many  years, and  undoubtedly  one of Canada's least known writers.
Unlisted  at  the  Vancouver  Public  Li­
brary, Jones' virtually  unobtainable work seems recorded  only in a brief article  (3

REVIEW ARTICLES



October 1936)  in  the  now defunct Van­ couver  News  Herald.  All  of  it  is  con­ cerned  with  the  occult-from  the  early Crystal  Vision   through  Crystal   Gazing and   XXXI Hymns  to  the  Star  Goddess (a  volume   of  poems),  through  a  com­ mentary on the cabbalistic numerology  of Wagner's  Parsifal, called  The  Chalice of Ecstasy, to the three  commentaries on the Cabbala   itself,   all   written    during  the
192o's, on which his reputation among metaphysical societies  now rests:  Q.B.L., or The  Bride's Reception,  The  Egyptian Reuiual, and  The   Anatomy  of the  Body of  God.  In  them  are  to  be found  a  de­ tailed   analysis   of  the   numerical,  chro­ matic,    and    alphabetic   correspondences associated   with   the  states  of  mind   de­ picted  by the Cabbalistic "Tree of Life",  and  an exploration of the theory  that  the universe  is constantly progressing  or  ex­ panding "while still  in  accord   with  the  One  Order which  prevails  from  its  most minute  atom   to   its   inconceivable   vast circumference".  Both   ideas  were  to  at­ tract  the   attention  of  Malcolm   Lowry and   (therefore)  to  be absorbed  into  his fiction.
In  her   recent   book,  The  Priuate
Labyrinth  of Malcolm  Lowry, Dr.  Perle Epstein  of New York  University  makes  a great  deal of Lowry's  meeting  with Jones, as being  a  turning point  in  the  creation of Under  the Volcano, the moment when Lowry   had    the   mysteries   of   Cabbala opened   to  him  and  thus  acquired a  pat­ tern  for  the  novel's  symbolism.  To stress this diminishes the  importance of  Lowry's previous  reading, however-in Melville, Ortega,  Poe  and   other   literary   figures whose   romantic  imagination  stimulated his own -and  in  the  rhetoric of Charles Fort, and  in  the expository  works  of  P.
D.  Ouspensky and  J. W. Dunne. It also
 overlooks  the  general climate of  interest in the  occult  that  was already  established in  Vancouver by the  time  Lowry  arrived in   1939.  It is  not   that   on   moving   to Dollarton he  joined  any  psychic  associa­ tions,  but   rather that he  was  interested in  and   (to  some  extent, at  least)   knowl­ edgeable about  hermeticism by the  time he  actually met  Charles Jones.  In  1941, Jones  was  a census  enumerator in  North Vancouver  who   called   at   the   Lowrys' cabin   in  Dollarton as  part   of  his  route. The chance meeting was followed  up  by a series of arranged ones, as Lowry subse­ quently  became   one  of  Jones'   pupils  in the  symbology  of the  Cabbala. Obviously Lowry  found   in  Jones'  work  a  structure on which  to hang  some of his more nebu­ lous feelings  about coincidence  and  fate; the  diagram of  the  Tree of  Life  at  the end  of  Q.B.L., for  example,  could  serve as a  key  to  a  number of  the  symbols in Under  the Volcano -more illuminative, in fact,  than  the  Zohar itself, which Jones  was interpreting, and  which Lowry  never read.  But  in other cases, the discovery  of Jones'    work   merely   supplied   an   addi­ tional  rationale for  a  design  that  he  had already basically worked  out.
Miss Epstein's thesis, quite simply, pro­ poses that  the  Consul  is a black magician (misusing  his  cabbalistic  powers  and  so doomed   to  perdition), and  that the  con­ sistent  way  in  which  the  novel's  symbol­ ism is based on cabbalistic motifs supports her  contention.  She  gains  some  justifica­ tion for  her  position  from  Lowry  himself. Writing  in   1950   to  Derek   Pethick, he points  out  certain features of Geoffrey Firmin:

The Consul  has  been  a  Cabbalist.... Mys­ tically  speaking,   the  abuse  of  wine  is  con­ nected   with   the  abuse  of  mystical  powers. Has  the  Consul  perhaps  been  a  black  magi-

REVIEW ARTICLES



cian   at   one   time?   We   don't    know ... a black  magician   is  a  man  who  has  all  the elements ... against  him-this  is what  the Consul   meant   in  Chapter  X   (written  in
I 942)    enumerating  the   elements.... The implication is that  an  analogy  is drawn between   Man   today  on  this  planet   and  a black  magician.

But   Lowry's   emphasis  is  constantly  on the  analogy, the  possibility of the identi­ fication,  rather than  on the identification itself.  As he  specified  in  his  1946  letter  to  Jonathan Cape, the  number of chap­ ters in the novel-twelve-is significant  partly   because   of  its  cabbalistic impor­ tance. He adds:

The  Cabbala is used for poetical  purposes because  it  represents  man's  spiritual  aspira­ tion. The  Tree  of Life, which  is its emblem, is a kind  of complicated ladder with Kether, or  Light,  at  the  top  and  an  extremely  un­ pleasant  abyss some way  above  the  middle. The   Consul's   spiritual  domain   in  this  re­ gard  is probably  the  Qliphoth, the world  of shells and  demons,  represented by the  Tree of Life  upside  down....

But  then  he says further:

all  this is not important at  all to the  under­ standing of  the  book;  I  just  mention  it in passing  to  hint   that,  as  Henry  James  says,
'There are  depths.'

There  are   indeed,  and   Miss   Epstein's book  patiently explores  one of them.  She is conscious, moreover, that  it is only one approach, and   thus   her   position   is  dis­ torted   when   the  book  jacket  announces that    "Once  and   for   all,   The  Private Labyrinth  ... clarifies   Lowry's  intention in  his  masterpiece."  To have  attempted that    would    have   been   to   narrow  the book,   to  deprive  it   of  depth,  however  much  intricate fretwork it might  add,  but final    answers   are    not    Miss   Epstein's intention.
The   Private  Labyrinth   opens   with   a
 


ANNOUNCING VOLUME II  OF THE

Dictionary of Canadian Biography


EDITED BY

DAVID M. HAYNE AND ANDRE VACHON


The  first volume, covering  the years from 1100 to  1700,  met  with  immediate and  unanimous acceptance  from  scholars  and  general  readers alike. This  volume follows on from the first and contains   biographies   of  Canadians  who  died between 1701 and  1740.  Its subjects are drawn from   all   walks  of  life -from   governors   to coureurs  de  bois,  seigneurs  to  sea-captains­ and   include   well-known  figures  in  Canadian history  as well as  scores  of less renowned  but intriguing characters. Volume  II maintains  the high  level of  scholarship evident  in  Volume I; it contains   a   complete   index,   a  glossary  of Indian  tribes, and  an  essay on  the  administra- tion  of  New France.  $15.00

"Most  libraries  should  acquire this major con­ tribution to North  American  biography  which might run  to twenty  volumes."  Choice

Laurentian edition   (limited, deluxe)   $50.00
Volume  I is still  available

University of Toronto Press
TORONTO I BUFFALO

history of  the Cabbala from  Jewish  mys-	 	

REVIEW ARTICLES



t1c1sm through   to  the  present,  but  un­ fortunately    (though   for  the  layman   it will   prove  a  quick  guide   to  mystic  thought)   this   part   of  the   book  reads rather  like a chapter  from a dissertation;  it  is  factual,  earnest,  and  flat.  What  it does most clearly is demonstrate the force that  the  Cabbala  exerted  not only upon the  Hasidic  movement  (Miss Epstein  is herself  descended  from the 18th century Hasidic   philosopher   Baal  Shem   Tov) and   upon   Christian   philosophers   like Cornelius  Agrippa   and  Jakob  Boehme, but  also  upon  such  movements as  Rosi­ crucianism,   Freemasonry,  Romanticism, and   Theosophy.   Along   the  way  many other  influences were  absorbed  until  the Cabbala  becomes,  in   Miss  Epstein's phrase, "unrecognizable  amid  the bric-a­ brac   of   Oriental  philosophy",  but   its importance  (however intangible)  can hardly  be denied.
Among  the  literary  works, other  than Under  the  Volcano, in which  the influ­ ence can be perceived, are Faust, Parsifal, and  The  Magic  Flute. Partly  because of the  Faustian  association, it is  curious  to discover that  Miss Epstein's  bibliography omits  such  critical  studies  as  A. R.  Kil­ gallin's essay on the Faust motif in Under the  Volcano, or  Jack  Hirschman's  idio­ syncratic  note on Lowry and the Cabbala in  Prairie  Schooner.  The  exact  basis for the   bibliography,   in  fact,  is  somewhat unclear.  As a guide to Lowry criticism it is  erratically   selective;   as  a   guide   to studies  of  the  occult  it  is similarly  un­ even.  Jung's   Psyche  and  Symbol  is  in­ cluded,  for example, but  Psychology and Alchemy left   out;  Mme. Blavatsky's Secret  Doctrine  is  in,  but  none  of  the works  of  Annie  Besant   (which   Lowry read)   are mentioned.
Yet for all this, the main body of The

86
 Private Labyrinth  provides a good example  of an exegesis carried  out in industrious   (if  often  subjective)   detail. The  cabbalistic correspondences  of  num­ bers, colours, animals, and  names are all explained; the sexual implications of the Cabbala  are examined  in relation  to the novel; and  the  author  goes on to  associ­ ate   various  of  the   symbols-animals, wheels, gardens, elements, beverages, etc.
-with the Consul's progress as an adept.
If by meditating   on  his "spiritual  self', that  is, Geoffrey  may  at  one  time  have hoped   to  "transcend   his  condition  and become  divine",  it  becomes increasingly obvious that  possessing the mystic powers not  only  promises  the  hope  for  equa­ nimity  but poses a threat  to his existence as  well. "Heaven" and  "Hell" are  thus the   same   place,   perceived   by  persons either   in  harmony   with   their  environ­ ment  or  not. As the  tarot  "fool"  is actu­ ally the  "supreme  intelligence",  so para­ doxically  is  the  abyss  of  hell  also  the height   of  understanding  and   illumina­ tion. A "white magician"-Sigbjorn Wilderness,   for   example,   or   Kennish Drumgold  Cosnahan-can emerge from his  contact   with   the  occult  forces  not simply unscathed  but with a new percep­ tion of harmony.  (Lowry's previously un­ published   notes  to  "Ghostkeeper" and the "Outward Bound" section of October Ferry to  Gabriola-attached  as appen­ dices  to The   Private  Labyrinth-make his awareness of this process quite clear.) But from  the same encounter  a so-called "black  magician", for  reasons of ego or whatever,  will emerge misusing his pow­ ers, and  he is ultimately  overcome by his knowledge.  The   alchemical   and  mystic balance  which  would  allow  harmony  is for   him -for   a  man   like  Geoffrey - impossible any longer to achieve.

REVIEW ARTICLES



If the  specific identification  of the Consul as a black magician does not quite convince, the sense of the  unknown  that is evoked by such a consideration  is absolutely faithful  to the tone of Lowry's own   perception   of   the   world.   As  he pointed  out  to David  Markson  in 1951 :

you could  with some justice  'rationalize' the
Cabbala itself ... but  you  can't  rationalize
... the   unknown depths  of  the   human
psyche.... More   or   less  popular  and   dry half-gobbledegookery though   [Jung's "Man
in  search  of  his  soul"]  is-... you  none­ theless   might   find   it soundly   full   of  the wisest kind  of speculation....
In  his own  later  reading,  he  moved on from  "Frater  Achad"   (even  though  in
1956 he  was writing  to  Harvey  Burt  to have  Q.B.L. and   Anatomy   of the  Body of  God  sent  to  him  in  England)    and back  to  other   works  that   bear  on  the occult  and   that   continued   to  influence
him:  J. W. Dunne's  An Experiment  with
Time, for example,  which  caused such a stir  in  the  late  1920's,  influenced  J. B.
Priestley  among   others,   and   is  felt  in
Dark as the Grave. Or  P. D. Ouspensky's
 Tertium Organum, which influenced  La Mordida. Or Charles Fort's Wild  Talents (like the other two, recommended to Margerie   Lowry's   mother   as  early   as
1940 as books concerned  "with enlarging the  frontiers  of  the   mind") , which  is central  to at  least one of the episodes of October  Ferry.  Or   the  Tao  and  the  I Ching.
It is impossible,  however,  to  separate out  individual  strands  without  doing  in­ justice  to  the   whole;   what   influenced Lowry was really life itself, with its com­ plexity,  its  fatefulness,  its  coincidences, and  its hidden  potential.  If  in  his later novels he was heading acutely consciously in  a  metaphysical  direction,  it is a  path for which his earlier reading and  writing prepared   him.   Under   the  V oleano  ex­ presses  one  stage  along  the  way. It re­ mains his greatest  book, and in exploring one of  the  dimensions  that  makes it  so, Perle  Epstein makes us even more aware of   the   centrality   of   the   metaphysical vision to all  he  wrote, and  the  intricacy of his craftsmanship.




ECLECTIC PUBLISHING
 


Douglas Barbour



RAYMOND FRASER.   i've  laughed  and  sung  the  whole  night  long  seen  the  summer sunrise in  the  morning. Delta  Canada. $1.oo.
MICHAEL  GNAROWSKI.   The   Gentlemen  Are  Also  Lexicographers. Delta   Canada.
$1.00.
GERALD ROBITAILLE.  Images. Delta  Canada. $1.00.
GLEN SIEBRASSE. Man: Unman. Delta  Canada. $2.00.
RICHARD SOMMER.  Homage  to Mr. MacMullin. Delta  Canada. $1.oo.
PETER STEVENS. Nothing But Spoons. Delta  Canada. $r.oo.


DuRING THE  LATE 195o's and early  1g6o's, Louis  Dudek  published Delta,  an  original   and   intriguing  little
 magazine, in Montreal. Delta printed letters from  Ezra  Pound,  "notes on  met­ rics" by Dudek,  and  poems by  many  of

REVIEW ARTICLES



the  newer  Canadian poets such  as D. G. Jones.  At  the  same  time  he continued to work with  Contact Press, which  he and Raymond  Souster   founded. Both   Delta and  Contact  Press  are  gone,  but  Dudek is  still  working   hard   to  promote   young poets  through Delta  Canada, his own publishing house.  Already  Delta  Canada has  an  impressively   long  book  list, even if  the  books  on  that   list  are  uneven  in quality. Whatever one  thinks  of  individ­ ual  books, however, Mr.  Dudek  deserves praise  for  continuing  his  enterprise. The  little  presses of Canada  are  as important now as they ever were, and, while Toron­ to  and  Vancouver  have  their  fair  share,  Delta  Canada  is Montreal's only English language entry in the field. The  six latest titles  from   Delta   Canada   perfectly demonstrate  Mr.  Dudek's eclectic  tastes as  an  editor,  ranging as they  do  from  a very  loose  Bohemian poetry  to the  bilin­ gual prose of Gerald Robitaille.
At  best  Raymond Fraser  has  just  one thing in  his favour and  that's a hwnour­ ous and  slightly  ironic awareness  of him­ self that  occasionally gets into  his poems, and,   when   it  does,  makes  them  fun   to read.   Unfortunately,  this  self-awareness  is all  too  infrequent in i've laughed  and sung  etc., and  we are  more often  treated  to the adolescent posturings of an egotist whose poems fail to convince me that he deserves  the  attention they give him.  His dedication  to  Alden   Nowlan   is  particu­ larly  ironic,  since  Nowlan  possesses those very  qualities  of  insight  and   awareness which  Fraser  so obviously lacks. Nowlan's  poems appear simple  but are not. Fraser's poems   appear   simple-minded  and   are. Moreover, Fraser has  a tin  ear.  He  lacks the  ability  to  handle language with  the subtle  skill  and awareness of  rhythm

88
 which, to  my  mind,  are  the  marks  of  a good  poet.
Michael Gnarowski is careful with words,  and   with   his  own  character. He thinks   hard, and   when   he  talks  about "The History  of Auschwitz", for example, he  uses a clear,  chiseled  language which, sadly, fails to engage  the emotions. Never­ theless,  a  few  of  its  exact  lines  do  sting the   mind.   Gnarowski,  though   not   as clearly  as  Dennis Lee, grapples  with  the problems of  living  in  today's   polis, and  tries  to approach the  concept  of civiliza­ tion  through his poems.
"Amethyst Harbour", perhaps the  best poem  in the  book, makes  a coherent statement  via  the  image  of  winter   in  a way  that   "Portrait  of  a  Man   Come   to Say Farewell", a poem on much  the same theme,  does  not.  The one  is a successful fusion  of image  and  idea, the other mere­ ly a piece of rhetoric, despite  the obvious care  taken  in creating it.
At his best, as in "Amethyst Harbour",
Gnarowski can  create a  powerful   poem, which  speaks  to  the  mind  and  emotions, out  of  the  wintry   landscape of  Canada. But  he  can,  and  does,  fall  into  the  trap of rhetoric, of scholarliness perhaps. And the    final  two   poems, attempts  at  a comedy  of manners in bibliography, were better   left  undone. Hwnour is not  Gna­ rowski's  strong   point.  There is,  however,  enough interesting work here to make  the book worth  the buck it costs.
Delta is  the  first  publisher  to  offer  a book  by  Peter   Stevens,  a  talented  con­ tributor to  just  about every  periodical in Canada  during  the   '6o's.   Nothing   But Spoons  contains some  of   his best  work, especially   two   very  funny,  very  human poems  about his  family  life. Stevens  has a wideawake  sense  of  humour, and   this quality   is   especially   winning  when    it

REVIEW ARTICLES



appears in  such  poems  as "Happy  Anni­ versary" and  "Before the  Ice  Carnival". There are  also  some  fine  evocations on the  prairie landscape  around  Saskatoon, the  poet's  home  at  the  time  these  poems were  written.  Stevens  is  a  quite prolific poet,  and  many fine  poems  have  already  appeared  in  periodicals, so  we  can  look forward to more  books by him soon.
Like  Nothing  But  Spoons,  Homage  to
Mr. MacMullin contains some  delightful poems.  Richard Sommer has  an  interest­ ing  and  flexible  mind. He  handles  tradi­ tional  forms with  a certain ease, although he is better  in more open  forms,  and  tries his hand  at  many  moods.  But  I like him best   in   the   poems   where   his   unusual  imagination  and  his sense of humour are combined.  "The  Meaning of  the  Mean­ ing of  Poetry" is good fun:

I wouldn't know,  being  a  tummy  man  my­
self

and  dwelling  here quietly  with  a girl named Wife and  a deflowered  skunk  called  Minor­ ity  and  a  silver  flute  by the  name  of Tube

not  to  mention  our  tropical fish  which  eat each  other  so fast it seems a waste of names to call them  anything at all

except  stop  it you

And anyone who writes lines like the following   commands the  reader's  atten­ tion:

The  sunbeam,  like  a  wet  "flurry" of kisses, is essentially  plural:

the  singular  is "sunboom" and  measureless.

Sommer's imagination is not tied down to  bare  realities; he  allows  it  plenty  of scope   with   the   result   that   the   best  of these  poems refuse  to sit still on the page. His   rhythms are  strong, and   his  poems are   full   of   words   chosen   lovingly   for effect.  I expect  to  see  more  of  his work
 soon, and  if it  fulfills  the  promise  of this first book, I know  I'll enjoy it.
The  inside  cover  of I mages informs  us
that  Gerald  Robitaille "is perhaps one of the  most  significant Canadian  writers  of his generation, though as yet hardly recognized  in  his  own  country."  It goes on  to  tell of Robitaille's publications, in­ cluding  "the  sensational short  novel, The  Book  of Knowledge,"   and  suggests  that  he  is the  "only  Canadian writer  of  note who  writes  literary French and  English  with equal ease."
"Montreal - Paris, I 949 - I 967''  is  the last line in the  book and  it explains  it all. This  is a notebook, the  writer's thoughts jotted  down  at  various  times  over an I 8- year  period.   If you're   interested  in  the writer  then  you'll  find  the  notes interest­ ing. Robitaille has certain basic concerns: art,   the   soul   imprisoned in   the   body,



Fine Books
* FffiST EDITIONS
* PRIVATE PRESS
* FICTION & POETRY
* MANUSCRIPTS


Wanted by

Literature Dept.
BLUE HERON BOOKS
BOX 247, STATION F TORONTO,CANADA



Bg

REVIEW ARTICLES



God,   the   realities   of   life,   music,   and truth,  to   which   he   returns   again   and again. Often  his  jottings  are  completely uninspired and  lack  originality, but  there are  times  when  he strikes off a near epi­ gram  of real  charm:

Sartre dit:   "L'enfer, c'est   les  autres." Les autres,  c'est  moi, un vieux moi que  j'ai laisse  tomber   quelque  part   dans  le  passe. Un  vieux moi surmonte, oublie, ou  neglige. L'autre c'est   ou  ce  que  j'etais,  ou  ce  que j'aurais pu etre,  ou ce que  je suis ou ce que je serai.

Le  corps  est  un   petit   univers  qui  lutte toute  sa vie contre  le grande  et  la mort  est un acte d'amour avec le grand qui dure etemellement.

No color is as full  of unfulfilled  promises as black.

These  afford  glimpses of an eccentric and intriguing mind, if a repetitious one. Robitaille, the  genial   and  egotistic  host at this literary Smorgasbord, fails to offer quite  enough   variety.  But  the  book  isn't too  long,  so  he  just  escapes  boring  one. He had  better  stick to prose, however, for his few  attempts at  poetry  reveal  a  pau­ city of invention.
Nevertheless, Delta Canada is doing  us all a favour by publishing him, and,  as a Montreal press, it  is uniquely  situated to present   the  works  of  this writer   to  the nation. Their  publication later  this  year of  his critical work,  A Savage in Search of Art, may  prove  to  be of lasting  value as his publishers claim.
Glen  Siebrasse  has perhaps the most powerful  imagination of any of these writers. He surprises with the ferocity and violence  of his vision, which  is evident throughout his book. Perhaps this is what separates him  from   the  others   here:   in every  poem  one  can  recognize  the  same



go
 concerns,  the   same   wild  horror  at   the human condition. Siebrasse  does  not  see the  world  as a beautiful place. It is harsh, and  the  animals in it, especially  men,  are predators.
Certain  themes and   images recur
throughout the book, cementing it, giving the  reader a sense of coherence as he wanders through what  is essentially  the ruined battlefield of a mind. Siebrasse handles his language well, and  his harsh rhythms perfectly match  his stark  evoca­ tion   of  the   world   he  perceives  around him.   This   is  not  to  say  he  is  the only person   in  his  poems.  Many   of   the  l>E:st ones  are   presentations of  other  charac­ ters:   he  has  a  large  dramatis  personae. But  there  is a central persona who speaks in    the    long    sequence,    "The   Walled  Cities",  which   is  the  showpiece  of  the book.
Siebrasse's  poems   do   not  lend   them­
selves  to short  quotations: it is necessary to read  them  through. But, as an example of the way he handles language, I'll quote the  following:

Linda of the  curls
reads  from  her  uncle's  letter
... of   the   village   in   the  delta   where   my
enemy  seduced   the  people.  I set  bombs  in skins  of  houses;  lungs  flamed  in  my  sight.
I saw  children  run   to  the  ruined   laps  of mothers.   Yet  I will  survive  tree  and  snow peak  of  rabbit,   will  come  home  to  regain my  act  of  love  where  it has  flown  before
me over  the  water.

Perhaps one  could  claim  that  we need other writers to  match  Siebrasse's vision of   horror   with    visions   of   something better, but  his deserves  to be read.  Man: Unman is a powerful book, a myth  of modern cruelty inside  The  Walled  Cities where  we try to survive.





WISE AND GENTLE

MARGARET LAURENCE,   The  Fire-Dwellers. Mc- Clelland & Stewart.  $5·95·
STACEY MAcAINDRA,  the heroine of  Mar­ garet  Laurence's  latest  novel,  The  Fire­ Dwellers, is one of the most likeable losers in modern  fiction. Vital statistics:  thirty­ nine years old, broad in the beam, under­ educated,  married  to a laconic salesman, mother  of  four  squabbling   brats,  chate­ laine  of a  shabby  Vancouver home. But who  is  Stacey, what  is she?  Lonely, be­ wildered, frustrated, desperately  trying to find the person she once thought  she was
-in  other  words,  a  waif  caught  up  in
the universal search for identity.
Aspects of Women might serve as a general title to Mrs. Laurence's  three ex­ plorations of female problems. There was the  unforgettable Hagar,   the  bitter  old woman of The  Stone  Angel;  Rachel, the unrealized spinster of A Jest of God; and now in The  Fire-Dwellers the most com­ plex  of  these  women,  Rachel's  married sister Stacey. In each of these novels Mrs. Laurence has managed  to scratch through the cutaneous  layers to  the essential core of a human  being.
Mrs.  Laurence   realizes that  there  are
millions of other Staceys sorting dirty laundry  and  wiping  dripping noses, but she never condescends to her frowzy housewife.  Stacey  is  no  tragic  heroine, but she is a person worthy  of respect for her  valiant  fight  simply  in  coping  from day to day. She is too honest  to indulge in self-pity or self-delusion. She views herself with ironical  contempt,  but under
 the defence is a frightened  little girl who got lost somewhere along the way.
The  heart  of Stacey's  problem  is that
society forces so many roles upon her that she can  find  no  clear  line of  continuity connecting  one  posture   to  another.   By turns  wife, mistress, mother,  neighbour, all she  knows is that  she is expected  to be beautiful,  efficient, radiantly  cheerful, and   she  is  an   abject   failure   in  every department. It  is significant  that  she  is thirty-nine,  that  portentous  dividing-line between  playing  at  being grown-up  and actually  living  with  the  consequences of adulthood.   Her   favourite   day-dream   is of   herself   as   a   teenager   jiving   with joyous abandonment.  In   one  poignant scene,   in   outrageously    unconventional garb she dances  by herself in the  recrea­ tion  room  while  the  children  are  nap­ ping.  The  pathetic   vulgarity  of  her  be­ haviour later strikes her when she catches a glimpse of her lovely fourteen-year-old  daughter swaying gracefully to the music.
Stacey's relationship  with her husband
is one  of  the  most  remarkable  achieve­ ments  of  the  book. Mac  seems  to  have something  to  say  to  her  only  when  he reproaches  her  for  spoiling  the children.  He seems to notice her only when he re­ minds her to get her hair done before an office party.  He  seems to  be forever  on the  defensive  with  her  in  his awareness of her  contempt  for his job. Stacey's im­ pulsive bluntness  with  his phony  boss is a constant source of embarrassment to husband  and  wife. The  final  impression of Mac is of a man more lost than Stacey because he dare not look into the lower depths.
Their  lovemaking  is a swift, ritualistic act  of  necessity. When  Mac  appears  to be attracted  to a young girl in the office, Stacey cannot  feel any  real  jealousy be-

gr

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cause  she  understands his frustrations which  are so similar  to her own. Circum­ stances   lead   her   into   a  horrible sexual encounter with  a  warped  buddy  of  her husband's. More  meaningful, she  has  a brief  affair  with  a sensitive young writer,  but  the  abortive  nature of  the  relation­ ship   intensifies   the   desperation  of  her situation. She  is  caught this side of utter  humiliation at the age difference  between them   only  because  of  the  young  man's understanding of her  predicament.
The affair  is an  attempt to find  some
small personal area of her own. Increased guilt  is  the  inevitable price  Stacey  pays for  neglecting her  children. By turns em­ pathizing passionately with  them,  raging  in exasperation at  them,  followed  by tor­ mented    self-reproaches-this   recurrent pattern of  Stacey's  relationship  with  her children is movingly  credible.  Moreover,  each   of  the  children  emerges  as  a  dis­ tinct,  disturbing force  in  Stacey's  life.
Stacey's  struggles  might  have  been  de­ scribed   as  disembodied  states   of   mind.  Margaret  Laurence's major  accomplish­ ment   in  this  novel  is  to  make  Stacey's inner   and  outer  lives  inextricably inter­ connected. As a  physical  presence, Stacey is undeniably there  in her rumpled slacks, her  nagging anxieties  imaged  in the glass of gin  and  tonic  on  the  kitchen  counter.
The  novel   ends   in   unresolved   com­ promise.  Some  of  the  old  problems  dis­ appear, others  emerge  to take their  place. If there has been any progress in Stacey's  development it  has  been  an  enlargement of  understanding  as  she  begins  to  com­ prehend  that   all  the  people  around her are  also living  in  burning houses, in per­ sistent  states  of  emergency. If this wider  view seems somewhat arbitrarily imposed as an  artistic solution  it is because Stacey has so completely dominated our  interest

92
 from  beginning to end of this wise, gentle book.
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH



BITTERSWEET AND BEAUTY

RUTH  NICHOLs,   A  Walk   Out   of the  World.
Langmans. $4-95·

IF  You   HAVE READ The   Lord  of the Rings,  The   Thirteen Clocks,  some  Ice­ landic sagas,  a Celtic   fairy  tale  or  two, and  perhaps some Old  or Middle English  poetry  (The Wanderer, The Seafarer, Sir Gawain  and  the  Green  Knight) and  en­ joyed any or all of  them, then  the chances  are  that   you  will  enjoy  this  book.  Whe­  ther  Miss  Nichols  had,  at eighteen, read any of the above,  whether in other  words she   was    "influenced"  by   Tolkien   or Thurber   if   not   the   older,   less  known works,  is  unimportant if  not  exactly  ir­ relevant,   although  one   must   point   out that   her  knowledge of  the  "machinery" of  Germanic-Celtic folklore  and  fairy  tale  is  certainly impressive.  The point  is that this  tale,   if  one  attempts to  "place" it, belongs  in  one  of  its  aspects  or  another to  the  type  of  literature  represented by the   short    and   very   scanty   list   above. There  is  an   exiled   king   named   Brand, with   a   younger   brother  named   Thorn ("Lady," said  the  boy, "I am  Thorn of the   House   of   Wanderer'') ;  there   is  a beautiful  and  royal  great-great-grand­ mother  with    silvery   eyes,   the   gift   of second  sight  and  the  appropriate Welsh­ sounding  name  of    the   Lady    Iorwen; there  is Auger,  the dwarf,  and  Helm,  the chief  officer.  There  are  Water Folk  with royal  purple hair  and   Forest   Folk  with

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



hair   of  green,   and   nasty  grey  creatures called   "kobolds",  somehow  reminiscent of  Thurber's "Todal",  who   have  small sharp teeth  and  leave  a nasty,  nauseating smell   behind    them.   There  is  also   the usurper king  Ha rrak,
of  the  Lady  Iorwen and  along  with  the
kobolds,   the   moral  "negative"  of   the story. Against  him are  placed  the courage and  purity  of  the  hero  and  heroine,  the brother and  sister  Tobit and  Judith.
Judith and  Tobit are,  indeed, the  real difference  between   this  and   most  other fairy   tales.   They    come   to   the   exiled House  of  Wanderer  not  from  the  usual vague  "across  the  sea"  or  "far away"  or "another  part   of  the   forest", but  from another   space-time  dimension,  existing parallel to that  of the people  in the wood. They   live  in  a  bustling,   ugly  metropolis and  in  a  dreary apartment  block  in  the modern  here  and   now.   (Judith is  even given  the  very "now" tranquilizer at one point  in the story.)  But Judith's hair  and eyes -"hair  as  pale  as  silver  and   gray eyes" -link her  to the  Lady  Iorwen and indicate to  the  exiles  that   somehow  she is to be the saviour of the  nation as surely as  if  she  had  showed   up  with  a  procla­ mation from  the  gods. The main  part  of the  story  is  the  narrative of  the  adven­  tures   of   Toby    and   Judith   after   they wander into  the  woods  near  their  home and   through  accident  or  fate  step  into another time and  space.
But  this  is no  mere  Connecticut  Y an­
kee in King  Arthur's Court. Judith and Tobit are  established as different and unhappy in their  "real" world  right  from the outset  and  they-particularly Judith
-are  happier in  their  new  environment
than  they  were  in the  modern city where they were born. Things are strange and sometimes  frightening, but  they  have,  in
 fact,   found   themselves    as   well   as   re­ established   the  rightful king  by  the  end of their  adventure. And  there  is no truly  happy  ending; the  marriage which  takes place  is between  Helm  and  the  Princess Angwen,  not  between  Judith  and  Thorn
-another difference from  the traditional
tale  of faery.  And  there  is no dim  battle in   the   West,   however   much   Ha rrak might  resemble  the  Arthurian  Mordred. Yet   Miss   Nichols   has   captured  the Celtic   sense  of   bittersweet  and   beauty very  well  indeed. Also something of  the darker  strain   of  the  Northern tales  and poems. And the  cadence of the speech - "Five  hundred years  ago  I was queen  of this  land.  The southern kings  live long; it  is  a  sorrow   to   them" -is   not   only suggestive of the  Bible, but  of a first-rate translation  of  something  very  old   and
very  beautiful. The speech,  the  pictorial effects  (torches, carven benches,  glowing caves  beneath  the  mountain, huge  cats with  glass claws,  the  tapestries and  rich embroidered  dresses)    all   contribute to this sense of beauty  and  wonder.  And  the illustrations (unfortunately we are told nothing about  the  illustrator except  her name)    are   brilliant-always   beautiful and often  terrifying and  completely faith­ ful  to  the  text.  To  the  literary  guidelist  at  the  beginning I might  add  that if you like Beardsley or Burne-Jones you will be delighted  by these drawings.
One  either  likes this kind  of writing  or
one   doesn't.  Those  who   are   presently concerned  with literature as social protest may find this precious and  maybe slightly decadent. Children  who  expect  a simple fairy   tale  may  find  it  too  verbal  or  too complex.  (And  whoever heard  of a "chil­ dren's" villain who committed suicide?) I think  therefore it will best appeal  to chil­ dren  ten  to fourteen and  to  adults  (I say

93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



this because it was being advertised  as a children's  book on one of  our local radio stations) . Miss Nichols sees it as a "fairy tale which verges on science fiction." I would be more inclined to leave the mis­ leading   word   "science"   out  of  it   and simply call it a romance. A fine romance. I wonder  where  the author  will go from here.
AUDREY THOMAS


EVERYMAN'S POEMS

WALTER BAUER, The  Price of Morning,  trans­
lated  by Henry  Beissel. Prism international.
$4·75·
THESE  POEMS by  Walter  Bauer   (the original German  appearing  with the Eng­ lish versions en face) have an "everyman"  quality  setting  them  apart  from  today's hyperpersonal  poetry. Yet we cannot  call them  "impersonal"; for  if   to be  utterly committed  is to be personally involved at the  deepest  level,  then  these  poems are uniquely Bauer's in a suprapersonal sense that  transcends  the devices and manner­  isms often  resorted  to by lesser poets to hallmark  their  work.
Walter Bauer, who emigrated to Canada  from Germany in  I952, seems to write by just opening  his lips and  speak­ ing  poetically.  He  does not  discuss with us:  he  looks us straight  in  the  eye and tells us how  it  was then,  how it is now. His  former   life  in  Nazi  Germany,  his present life as a Canadian, are the themes besetting his poetic consciousness. Recon­ dite allusion, ambiguous imagery, are not for him:  imagery there is, and immensely evocative,  but  its thrust  is so direct  that our response is immediate.

94
 The  magnificent  series of twenty-six poems entitled  "Fragment vom  Hahnen­ schrei"  grows  out  of  the  concept  of  the cockcrow that  galvanizes the sleeper into awareness:

The  cock was awake. He  was  like
A brilliant cloud  from  which
His morning-crow came like a flash.

Bauer does not merely imply: This is how I hear a cock crow, this is how I see him erect in the dawn:  he tells us that  this is how a cock is:

Magnificently
His  white  feathers rustled
In  the  first  wind....

and  having  read  this we cannot  imagine ever  receiving a clearer  image of a cock. In   Henry   Beissel's sensitive  translation this  is one  of  the  many  instances  where his English  not only conveys the essence of   the   original   German   but   is  highly poetic in its own right.
Predictably,   many  poems  display  the
middle-aged emigre's nostalgia: "The knock on the door is/no longer for me" (from  "Leaving  the  Apartment").  But this is balanced  by "From  Seven at Night till Four in the Morning":

At two I hardly  remember  anything And  wipe the leftovers of my life Into the garbage can....
At four  I step into  the sharp  lonely wind
And  before  the  Milky Way fades
I drink  from it my freedom.

Morning   is this  poet's  time of  day­ either   as  the  ending  of  "a  long  night­ shift"   ("Dawn Came  Grey  as an  Owl's Wing")  or as the beginning of a new day seen existentially  as a constant  "now",  as in "The Paper-boy":

In the first morning light the  paper-boy threw

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  news of the  world
Against  closed  doors....
Whistling, the  boy rode  his cycle home.
The  morning  ran  alongside,
A golden,  barking  dog.
Compassion for the nameless and a realistic  sense  of  death   pervade   poem after   poem.  In   "One   Evening   I  Was King"  Bauer  obliterates   all  sentimenta­ lity:

I knew how to die,
How  to die well, not everybody  can do that-...
Sinking  down  the way a branch  bends, suddenly  collapsing  with  a crash
Like  a stone
And  silence -then  the  curtain....
Death  is quite  different, I have learnt  that
By dying.

The  reason the poem "Canada" affects us  so  powerfully  is  not  because  Bauer offers  his subjective  impressions  but  be­ cause Canada  speaks:

Here  you receive another kind  of wisdom, Bitter  and  icy and  not  to everybody's
taste....
The  wind blows cold from  Labrador:
I have a message for you from the ice age.

Occasionally he speaks from the battle­ field, as in "This  Was Not the Way Men Screamed"; and  at  times  bitterness  and irony come welling up:
 To sing in old measures
and  pretend  that  still there  are  harps­
where do people find the courage?
And  yet:   it  is  the  poem  "And  Yet" that  contains  the quintessential  Bauer in the quintessentially faithful English of Beissel:

Somewhere shots ring out  every night, laws stop up  the breath  of freedom, ... And yet we awake every morning,
we two, in perfect  harmony.

LEILA VENNEWITZ


A VIEW  OF HAWTHORNE

HUGO  MCPHERSON,   Hawthorne  as  Myth- Maker  (University of Toronto Press). $6.so.
HEMINGWAY, IN  A  misguided but typical moment, described  Hawthorne as one of those:

who wrote like exiled  English colonials from an   England   of  which   they  were  never  a part.... Very   good   men   with   the   small dried  and  excellent   wisdom  of  Unitarians; men    of    letters  ... gentlemen  ... all   very respectable.... Nor  would  you  gather   that they had  bodies. They  had  minds,  yes. Nice dry,  clean  minds.   This   is  all  very  dull,  I would not state  it except  that  you ask for it.





Write  or Phone

THE   UNIVERSITY BOOK  STORE
Vancouver  8, B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

whenever  you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back



95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Although the  statement is typically exaggerated-as Hemingway at his worst usually  did  exaggerate -it  is essentially an   image   of  Hawthorne and   his  work that  even the recent  "golden age of  Haw­ thorne criticism", to which Professor Mc­ Pherson   refers   in   his  preface,   has   not done  much  to shake.  And  Hawthorne  as Myth-Maker   does   not    substantially change the image either. The  Hawthorne who dropped  "germinous seeds" into  the soul  of  Melville  and  exerted   a  powerful influence on  not only Henry  James  and George   Eliot   but  Hardy too;  the  Haw­ thorne who  projected both  the  complex  quality of  American culture for  the  first time,  as  well  as  some  of  the  most  deli­ cately  complex  studies  of  human charac­ ter  and  relationships in  American fiction
-this  Hawthorne  does  not  emerge   in the book. One does not blame Professor McPherson. His ambitious intention is to present   an  image   of  Hawthorne as  fas­ cinating and  meaningful as this:

The  essays which  follow will attempt to define, ... the   nature  of   Hawthorne's ... inward   vision  or  drama  ... the  myth-mak­ ing  nature of Hawthorne's imagination

Unfortunately the intention is not as fully realized  as one might have hoped.  And it is not, largely  because  Professor McPher­ son  is  not  altogether able  to  escape  the danger that   he  is  clearly  aware  of:   the imposition   of   "an   external  frame  of ideas"   on  the   novels  and   tales.  This  is most clear, I think, in his final chapter in which  he  constructs  an ingenious  wheel pattern (that  reminds one in many  ways of Yeats' wheel of  personality types in  A Vision), in  terms  of which  he then  cate­  gorizes the  main  character types in Haw­ thorne's fiction.   But   the  danger haunts and  at  times  (incubus-like)  stifles inten­ tion   in   the   earlier  chapters  too,  which

g6
 examine the way in which Hawthorne conceived and  handled, in his own  pecu­ liar  fashion, classical  myth  and  the facts of New England history  to create his own "'personal  mythology'-the personae and  conflicts of his inward drama."
Another weakness  is not  connected  so
much  with  intention as with  an apparent uncertainty about the  nature of the audi­ ence  to  which   the  book  is addressed.  A good  deal  of  the  discussion  of the  major romances -the   core   of   the   book -is taken   up   with   plot  summaries  that   do not seem essential  to an  understanding of Professor   McPherson's  interpretations­ if  one  has  oneself  read  the  books.  (One would  assume  that readers  of a volume  in "The  University of  Toronto Department of  English  Studies  and  Texts" had  done so.)   And   this  confirms   one's  sense  that  Professor  McPherson is  not  prepared to take  risks  or  to  follow  his insights  as far as they might legitimately take him. Thus in   his   discussion   of   A  Blithedale   Ro­ mance  he  points  out  some of the  ways in which Hawthorne has made  use of Greek myth.   It  is  clearly   the   case   that   Old Moodie is a Zeus figure  but surely  just as significant  that    Hollingsworth  is  to   be related to  Hephaestus, and  while  a  part of the  pattern follows the Greek  myths  it is  overlaid  by,   interlocks  with   others, Christian and   Faustian, in  a  very  com­ plicated way  that   Professor  McPherson's purpose  prevents  him   from   pursuing. The  same   kind   of   limitation  occurs   in the  discussion  of  The House of the Seven Gables where Hawthorne's quite  detailed use of the Eden myth  interlocks with  that  of  the  Greek   myths   to  which   Professor McPherson  draws   our   attention.  One would   have   wished   also  that   the  com­ plexity of  Judge  Pyncheon's  self, as  pro­  jected  in  terms  of  "the  sunny  image  of

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



his  ancestor" might have  been  .explored and   made   clear.   "Endowed  with  com­ mon-sense,  as massive and  hard as blocks of   granite,  fastened    together   by   stern rigidity  of purpose ... " he certainly  was but in even the most casual of encounters with   the   innocent   Phoebe,  Hawthorne speaks  of him  in  terms  of the  cloud  that  embraced Ixion  and   adds,  with  charac­ teristic  explicitness:

although Judge Pyncheon's glowing benign­ ity  might   not  be  absolutely   unpleasant  to the  feminine   beholder   with  the  width  of a street,  or  even  an  ordinary-sized  room,  in­ terposed   between,  yet  it  became  quite   too intense   when   this   dark,   full-fed   physiog­ nomy ... sought   to  bring  itself  into  actual contact  with  the  object  of its regards.

The most  rewarding part  of  Professor McPherson's book is that  in which  he examines  seriously  and   at   length  Haw­ thorne's treatment of  Greek  myths  in  A Wonder  Book  and   T anglewood    Tales. This  is new,  interesting  and  useful.  Too  often  in  the  rest  of  the  book  one  is tan­  talized   by  the   suggestion   of  interpreta­ tions  that are  never  fully developed. This  does lead one  back to the  books, which  is one of the things,  one assumes, that  criti­ cism should  do. However one wishes that Professor   McPherson  had    been   either more  or  less ambitious in  his  pursuit   of that imagination that  appeared to Haw­ thorne's contemporary Melville  to  be  as powerful  and  comprehensive as  Shakes­ peare's.
W. F. HALL
 INDIAN
FESTIVALS


GEORGE CLUTESI,   Potlatch. Gray's  Publishing.
$5·95·

THIS BOOK  is a simplified  account of the Tloo-qwah-nah feast,  a  Nootkan version of those pan-Coastal ceremonial feasts which   Canadians  of   European  descent have  come  to  call  "potlatches." Most  of the   ceremonial  and   social   life   of   the Coastal peoples was regulated and ordered at such gatherings. They were  banned  by the  government between  1884 and  195•1, a ruthless  blow  at  the  heart of Coast  In­ dian   culture  which   is  still   remembered with  bitterness.
Clutesi,  besides being  a carver  and painter, is an  expert on  the  dance  and music of the  Nootka. As a member  of the nobility of the Tse-shaht Nootka  (this is implied, at least, in his book)  he owns a number  of impressive dances.  He  is him­ self a singer,  a  dancer, and  a  teacher  of Indian dance.  He  is  thus  a  man  of  the theatre, who is here describing a form  of ritual  art which  he  knows  intimately.
He has obvious  deficiencies  as a writer;
his style is all  too similar  to that  of those British Columbian writers, from  George Griffin and  Isabel  Ecclestone Mackay  to Christie  Harris, who  have  written  popu­ lar  accounts of  the  mythology  and  cus­ toms  of  pre-Christian  British  Columbia. As   to   his   versifications   of   traditional speeches,  the   less  said   about  them   the  better-
... The  dance,  the  play  of great  import  to us  all.  This  inheritance   we  must   not  let fall.
When   one   gets   beneath  this   rather sticky surface,  though, one sees that  there

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



is an  interesting  mind  at  work.  Clutesi also shows real acuteness of observation outside  his  immediate   area  of  concern. The descriptions  of nature,  though stylis­ tically gelatinous,  are vivid and  accurate  in detail.
As an example of the precision of Clu­
tesi's description  of the music and dances
I quote  the following two sentences.

The  song  was slower  in  tempo  but  with  a more  intricate beat.  The  basic  three  beats were discernible but at frequent  intervals it rambled   to five faster  beats  in  a  row  with­ out  a rest.

This  description  is about as concise as a verbal  description  of  music can  be and still avoid  technical   jargon. Another  ex­ ample,  describing  part  of  a  sea-serpent dance:

On   the   third   round   of  the  song  the  sea­ serpent    was   livelier   and   when   the   song leader  intoned the  words  of  the  chorus  he seemed  more  alert,   more  expressive  in  his movements     and    when    the    chorus    was reached    he   danced   with   renewed   vigor, prancing,   gyrating,   moving   next   to   the earthen floor  on  his  haunches,  ending  the dance  with  a burst  of  whirls  on his bended knees  to  dart   behind  on  the  last  boom  of the  very loud  drum.

The  faded  prose produces an impression of  romantic   vagueness;  but  I  can  say, having  seen  the  dance  in  question,  that the description  is as precise as a choreog­ rapher's  diagram.
This  book shows that  the Wolf Ritual of  the  Nootka   was,  like  the  Cannibal Dance  of  the  Kwakiutl,  concerned  with the  taming  of  the  barbaric  element  in man. Civilization is, after all, a state of mind,   not  of  technology.  Many   of  its various  dances   depicted   anti-social   be­ haviour  only  to  show  it  brought  under control  by reason, self-restraint, consider­ ation  for  others,   respect  for   legitimate

g8
 authority, and  the other social virtues. Various frightening creatures of the forest (the   wolves,  the  sad  wanderer   of  the woods  who  has  lost his soul, the  brutal dog-eater)   represented   that  savagery  of the  instincts  which  must  be  understood and  conquered,  as did  various images of lust,  both   beguiling   (the   sirens  of  the woods)   and  comic  (the  mink,  and  the stupid though amiable "Yellow Cedar Face"). True,  there is an ambiguity  here which perceptive readers will sense; but nevertheless  the  dance  is seen  primarily as an image of order and reason, an interesting contrast to the "Dionysian" image   of   Northwest   Coast   ritual   pre­ sented  by Ruth  Benedict and some other anthropologists.   The  lesser dances  often had  charm  and  a  simple elegance,  or  a good-natured rustic humour.
Because this is a book intended  for the ordinary  reader, perhaps even for older juveniles, the greatest  emphasis is placed on the external colour of the ceremonies. The  meaning  of the rituals is expounded by  Clutesi  on  two  levels, that  of  social order   and   that   of  individual   morality. There is much  moral  beauty  in  this  ex­ position.  Though  there   are  indications  that  these rituals once symbolized cosmo­ logical  .events as  well,  Clutesi  does  no more than  hint  at this aspect of the sym­ bolism. It is not  clear  whether  this level of  meaning  has  been forgotten  over  the years, or  whether  the author  is aware  of it  but  has  chosen  not  to  reveal it  to  the profane.
On  the surface this is simply another "colourful" book about  Indians.  Beneath the  surface  it  is something  rather   more than  that.  It should  be read  by any  per­ son  interested   in  the  pre-Christian  cul­ tures of Canada. British Columbia  in this context  is still  in  a  stage  comparable to

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



that  of Mexico  and  Peru  a century or so after  the Conquest. At that  time  Indians, most  of  them   of  noble  birth, were  still writing, though  often   in  inadequate Spanish, accounts  of  the   older  civiliza­ tions.  For all its deficiencies  of style, Clu­  tesi's  book  might   ultimately  prove  to  be as   important  as  those   of    Ixtlilxochitl, Tezozomoc and  Garcilaso de la Vega.
NORMAN NEWTON



UNE MOJSSON POUR LE  SPECJAUSTE

DAVID  HAYNE ET  MARCEL TIROL, Bibliographie critique  du roman canadien-franyais 1837- Igoo. University  of Toronto  Press.

A  MESURE  QUE  LE    roman  canadien­ fran-:rais occupe une  place  de plus en plus importante dans  la  production litteraire
du  Canada Fran ais,
sentir  de  remonter a ses sources  pour  en
decouvrir les composantes psychologiques. David  Hayne et le regrette Marcel Tirol, en   publiant  leur   bibliographie  critique du   roman canadien-fran ais neuvieme siecle, viennent  combler le voeux  des chercheurs qui  trouveront par­ mi  les onze cent  cinquante  references  de
la  bibliographie bien  des  reponses  a des
questions restees controversees.
La  liste des auteurs est  precedee d'une enumeration  de   tous   les  ouvrages qui
6clairent, d'une fa on
roman canadien. Parmi les 239  titres  on trouvera des theses importantes comme celle  de  Tuchmaier sur  !'evolution de  la technique du  roman  canadien-fran-:rais et l'ouvrage, peu  connu au  Canada, de Virgile Rosse!, critique suisse, sur  la  lit­ terature fran  aise
 Suit  la liste des auteurs, qui sont au nombre  d'un millier.  C'est  ici que l'appa­ reil critique se revele  d'un  grand  secours pour  completer l'histoire litteraire.
Dans  quelle  mesure   Aubert de  Gaspe a-t-il   ere  redevable  a  l'abbe  Casgrain
pour  la  redaction de  ses  Anciens  Cana­ diens, restes  un  des  classiques  de  la  lit­ terature  canadienne-fran aise?  Par   un choix  judicieux   de  citations, tirees  de  la correspondance  d'Aubert de Gaspe  et  de
l'abbe  Casgrain, Hayne et  Tirol  permet­
tent  au  lecteur   d'arriver a la  conclusion
que  Les anciens  Canadiens  doivent   peu
a celui qui  s'est  pique  de  tenir  la littera­
ture   canadienne--fran aise
baptismaux.  En   effet,   selon   l'aveu   de l'abbe  Casgrain, il se serait  borne  a sug­ gerer   a  Aubert   de  Gaspe   des  modifica­
tions  concernant  les  premieres pages  et la conclusion.  A l'avenir, les critiques qui se pencheront sur le dix-neuvieme siecle canadien devront tenir  compte de ces revelations,   qui   les  dispenseront  d'attri­
buer a !'abbe Casgrain une influence  qu'il
n'a  pas exercee.
Les   notes   ne   sont   pas   toutes   de   ce poids. D'habitude elles viennent completer ce que l'on  sait sur les romanciers peu importants de l'epoque. Au No g67, con­
sacre a Joseph  Marmette, on lira !'analyse
des   ambitions  litteraires  de   celui   qui, inspire   par   l'exemple  de   Walter   Scott, eut  desire doter  la litrerature canadienne­ fran-:raise de  grandes fresques historiques. Bref,  la  bibliographie  de  Hayne et  de Tirol   contient  une   abondante  moisson pour   le  specialiste. L'epithete  critique,
abusivement employee  par  tant  de  com­
pilateurs,  est ici  justifiee et garantit a cet
ouvrage  de  reference une  place  de choix sur les rayons de toutes  nos bibliotheques.
GERARD  TOUGAS

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



LYRIC SPECTRUM

PETER    TROWER    and    JACK    WISE,     Moving
Through the  Mystery. Talon  Books, $5·95·

In  Patagonia once so legend  has it,
the giant  sloth was domesticated, stabled  in caves
and  ridden
like a grotesque  elephant.

Apocryphal perhaps but  a brave  tale
and  I see the shaggy tribesmen prodding their  behemoths toward  Tierra Del Fuego
in the drafty daybreak  of the world.

"The Sloth  Riders" -from Peter Tro­ wer's  Moving  Through The  Mystery. It manages -and  so do many other  poems in  this  collection -to  capsulate   a  very large  consciousness   in  a  flashing  image, like a spark  flaring  in a colored sky. It is almost  a haiku.
This   is  Trower's  second   book.   The first, Poems  for a Dark Sunday, was pub­ lished  privately. This  second  is  the  next best  thing   to  private  publication; only r,ooo  copies have  been printed. Too  bad. This   is  good   poetry.  Open,   clean,  rich, properly brooding,  and  appropriately melancholy. These,  too, are  really  poems for  a  dark  Sunday.  Some,  like  the  title itself, are too artful. They  are too patent­ ly   "good   poems",  good,   well-scrubbed, well-behaved  poems  with  excellent  pos­ ture,  clean  teeth  and  their  shoes  on  the right    feet.   Cliches.    (The  april   voice; entreats/  from   april   years,/   plaintive,/ sadarrogant,/   earlypurefas  all   her  gar­  denias.)
Others are  too  Profound. (There is no defense  in dogma  ... f there  is no escape m  history ... )  And  finally,  to  be  done

roo
 with   the   eviscerating,  there   are   a  few which  can  be dismissed  as beautiful head poetry,  great  to read  if one is stoned  and velvet  moths  are  crawling about in  your brain,  but   otherwise  too  far   out   to  be worth the  effort  of  spooling  in  one lysergic-soaked image or peyote-peppered line at a time.
As for  the  rest -the  bulk -they  are crystal.  They  are  a lyric spectrum emerg­ ing  like  the  passage  of light  through the prism    of   Trower's  senses.   Tender  as three-day bruises.  Fragile.  And yet some contain lava and  spices. The temperature varies,  and  so do  the seasons. The mood.s are sharply  etched. Trower has good con­ trol,  lots of  power, lots of  perception.
And  Jack  Wise, of course, has kaleides­ copes   in   his   head.    He   is   somewhere between   an   archaeologist  obsessed  with Quezalcoatl and  a Gestalt  therapist, Paul Goodman for  instance,  working   out  his conception of the whole and  interrelated­ ness and  ecology. Excellent!
The matching of  Trower and  Wise  is a  happy one,  and   not  coincidental since they  are  functioning on  the  same  wave­ length.  How   do   you  illustrate,  for   in­ stance,  a   poem    called    "the   sea   runs diagonally"?  Well,  Wise's  illustration is pure  Wise  and  yet perfect  for  the  poem.
Much  of the  material will strike  urban
readers as falling  hopelessly  into  the nos­ talgia   trap. Trower seems  to  be  writing between   dips  in  Walden  Pond.  Yet  the moods  of  the  poems-Tom  Thompson, Thoreau;  Trower's cadences  reach   back deep into these  heroes -are not artificial. He  has  been  living  for  years on  the  Sun­  shine  Coast, between Robert's Creek  and Gibson's, and  the  background is all  real. It is for  this reason that  one is tempted to describe the  poems  as  being  aboriginal; they  are connected to their  environment;

BOOKS IN REVIEW



everything is  alive,  and   Trower  himself is open  to  the  flow every  bit  as much  as the  Patagonians on  whose sunken  star  he takes  his bearing.
But   lest   one   assume   from   this   that
Trower is  nothing more  than   a  hermit, cut   off  from   whatever  the  mainstream might   be,  it  needs  to  be  added that   he pays his political  dues. "A New Anarchy" is  as  fine  a  manifesto of  the  New  Left­ hippie-dope-Zen-ecological-group-grope­ anti-war "movement" as can  be found anywhere. No accident that  The  Georgia Straight  used  Wise's  illustration of it for the cover of one edition.
All  dawn  will  detonate in  a  phoenix  reas­ sessment ... the  chrysalis  will split  and  the butterflies  of us burst  forth
Even   the  politics  is  not  bad.  Apocry­
phal  perhaps, but  brave.
ROBERT HUNTER

NEWTON'S VARJATJONS

NORMAN  NEWTON,   The  Big  Stuffed  Hand  of Friendship. McClelland & Stewart, $5-95· NORMAN  NEWTON,    Thomas Gage  in  Spanish
America.  Queenswood House,  $6.oo.

THIS  IS NORMAN NEWTON'S  third  novel. Two  previous  books, The  House of Gods and    The   One   True   Man, dealt   with Mexico's  archaic past.  Both  these  novels had   the  curious charm  of   the   prose romance  rather  than   the   characteristic psychological complexities of   contempo­ rary  fiction.  In  each,  character was sub­ ordinated  to  the  much   richer   mosaic  of history  and  archeology that  informs the background    to   these   books.   The   Big Stuffed   Hand   of   Friendship,   while   a radical  departure in treatment, is not  so in theme; for all three books examine the
 dilemma   of  the  moral   man  in  a  society whose extensive corruption makes him ineffectual  and   leaves   him   to  a  lonely pursuit of personal virtue.
The  Big Stuffed  Hand  of Friendship is
satirical  in  intent, and  like satire  it  may vex as much  as it diverts.  It will certainly vex  all   those   who   wish   to  escape   the relentless   morality  of  the   book  and   its total  lack  of  radical sentimentality in dealing  with  the  character of  native  In­ dians   or  the   social-moral  quagmires  of small  town  life.  In  commenting on  these Mr.   Newton   makes  his  point   with   the moral  precision of a medieval  theologian combined   with  the  tragic  perspective of a  poet.
The  novel  opens with  a  Coast  Indian
version  of  the   Great  Flood.   We  move from  this account of destruction by water, the  elemental and  tragic  consequence of evil on a cosmic scale, to the grimy seduc­ tion  of  a  young  Chinese girl,  evil  on  a petty   human  scale.   Mount  Simms,   the Mt.  Ararat of  the  Indian  myth,  broods over  the  sleeping   town  of  Port  Charles. Port  Charles  is obviously  both  a compo­ site  portrait  of   many   small  British Columbian towns   and   a  microcosm   of society.
It should  be pointed  out  that  the scope of  Mr.  Newton's satire   extends   beyond the limitations of the purely social. The satirical  sweep  of his novel goes beyond a Main Street or a Babbitt. To fail to grasp this is to misunderstand the entire  book. From   the   beginning  to  the  final   para­ graph  in the epilogue which describes  the lesser and  therefore  symbolically  meaner animals'  attempt to overthrow the  kingly Lion,  the  novel  works  with   the  themes  and   images   of    destructive  corruption, damnation and  precarious salvation.Thus the   characters,   while   they   might   seem

101

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



exaggerated fantastics, and  therefore  un­ believable, are so only if viewed from the perspective of a limited  realism. They  are in fact  grotesques, images of a cumulative debris  of  petty  vices which  coalesce  into moral  monstrosities. The Reverend Mor­  timer  Grubb, the  with-it Anglican  clergy­ man,  a latent  homosexual, hag-ridden by lust  for  both  sexes, seems incredible and unconvincing  when  in  fact  he is but  the logical extension of a spiritual and  intel­ lectual bankruptcy. Bertram Rawlins, more   repugnant  because   more   pivotal, and  prestigious in his society, is an equally powerful grotesque.
Rawlins is the completely  secularized man,  a complex snarl of conventional attitudes without any vestige of moral conviction, yet possessed of an ominous private megalomania and  a ferocious bigotry  that  exudes,  "from  his very pores, the mindless  and  savage determination of a small,  bad-tempered dog".
Where the  Reverend Grubb, ludicrous
as  he  is,  inspires   some  compassion   be­ cause  Grubb despite   his  bathos  suffers, Rawlins inspires  only  repulsion. The  lust for power  animates Rawlins.  A desperate need for spiritual revitalization, no matter how dangerously spurious  and  bizarre the means, drives  Grubb.
Nor does the satiric thrust stop here. A conference of Canadian poets held in Jefferson  High  School,  of which  Rawlins is principal, affords a sharp  commentary on   the   cliche   flabbiness   of  much   that passes for contemporary verse. This is a series  of  burlesqued vignette  portraits of poetic  ego-maniacs. An  amusing tour  de force  in itself, it is perhaps less impressive than  those sections of the novel which describe  the  struggle and  defeat  of  Stan­ ley Maxwell  and  his sister Mercy in their attempt to find  a way to live with dignity

102
 and   honour  among the  citizens  of  Port
Charles.
Stanley  and  Mercy, along  with Wounded Knee,  the  Indian slum  district, form   the  impressive pivotal   core  of  the novel.   The  native    Indians  are   drawn with  a scrupulosity that  allows for neither easy sentiment nor  palliative idealization. Thus  Stanley   in   particular  emerges   as totally  and  believably  human. We see the slow subtle  warping of his character into bigotry   and   hate.   He  and   his  sister  are native  aristocrats and  Stanley  is not with­ out   aristocratic  hauteur.  In   plain   lan­  guage  he is sometimes  a snob. What other salve  does  he  have  to soothe  the  wounds  that   either   bare   sufferance  or  outright indignity had   inflicted? He  and   Mercy  were,  "destroyed in the gentler Canadian way   which   cripples   but   does   not   dis­ patch". Stanley  is  unjustly  dismissed  and  humiliated  by  Rawlins. He  gets drunk as a  result   and  ends   up  in   jail.  Mercy   is seduced    by   the   town's   salesman-Lo­ thario Ben  McTavish, who  has  already seduced  and  abandoned Shirley  Chang, a young Chinese  girl.
The  brother and  sister  retreat to  their
village.  On  the small  cluttered gill netter that  takes  them  there  Stanley  indulges  in the    bitter    ruminations  that    form    the moral   norms   for  the  novel,  "the  chiefs were  men  of  taste  and  generosity-but the whites hated  all   this generosity, authority,  legitimacy. They   were   devils eaten  by avarice and  hatred of nobility."
Only Simon Green, the ineffectual
best-intentioned character in the  novel, is even  dimly   aware   of  these  values.  And Simon   can   do   little   but   cultivate   his garden, a thesis on the thirteenth century Majorcan  theologian Felix  Lull.  Simon, the  representative of  a limited  virtue,  is besieged   by   the   crude  forces   of   Port

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Charles' moral  shabbiness. A  teacher in Rawlin's school,  Simon  is bullied  by Rawlins,   almost   seduced   by  the  preten­ tious  and   vulgar Jennifer  Connell, and  teased  by  the  Chinese girl  for  whom  he suffers a callow infatuation.
But  while  incapable of active  heroism,
Simon  is stubbornly upright. He  cannot be  bought,   seduced   or   coerced.  He   is guilty of a sentimental mawkish  lust for Shirley   but   he  comes   to  recognize   and resolve  this.  In   the  end   he  remains   his own  man.  In the  final  holocaust of  the Indian  riot    Simon    sees   Rawlins    and Maud Grubb his mistress caught in a ludicrously  compromising   position   that will   destroy    his   power    in   the   town, restore   Stanley's  job  and   vindicate  his and   Simon's  opinions  of  Rawlins. The forces of decency  appear to triumph momentarily in the genuinely hilarious apocalypse of the finale.
The novel  might strike   an  impatient
reader   as  contrived and   wooden.   It has a  certain  inelasticity. But  this  is only be­ cause  the  various  parts  tend  to  juxtapose  rather  than   flow  into  one  another. The  final  effect is, therefore, that of a mosaic, of  something  architectural  rather  than  fluidly organic in form.
Thomas Gage  in  Spanish   America  is
 Mr.  Newton's contribution to  the  Great Travellers Series,  whose general  editor  is George  Woodcock. It is an absorbing and eminently  readable retelling  of Thomas Gage,  a seventeenth century Dominican's travels throughout Spanish Mexico  and central  America.  Thomas Gage was an English  Roman Catholic, whose family suffered  during the  catholic persecutions in England and  who  sent  their  son, Thomas, aged about thirteen, to the Jesuit College   for   English   boys  at   St.   Orner near  Calais.  From   St.  Orner   the  young Gage  went   to  Vallodolid  where   he  be­ came acquainted with  the world of Span­ ish   monasticism,  a   strange   world   that  combined   rigid  discipline  and  self-sacri­ fice with  the subtlest forms of intrigue.
Gage  found  himself   eventually disin­
herited  by his father, and  persuaded  by Father  Antonio Melendez, a  fellow  Do­ minican, to  join  a  missionary  expedition to the Philippines. The  English American His Travel  by Sea and  Land, or a New Survey of the West  Indies  was the  result of this mission.
Gage,  Mr.  Newton   writes,  "was  not  a very  good  writer: his  evangelical  mora­ lizing sits oddly  in  a  literary  style  which tends  toward  a dusty  Baroque floridity." Neither   dust   nor  Baroque flourishes  en-






n1chanb asel &  company, 1nc.

Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN FRANCISCO, LOS ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW  YORK





103

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cumber Mr.  Newton's style. His book simplifies  and  chastens the original  with­ out  losing any of its exotic vividness.
A curious  and little known fact emerges
from  Thomas Gage's  account of Mexican life  in  seventeenth  century   New  Spain. It appears that   the  Spanish  Church, far from being the vehicle of oppression it is generally  assumed  to be, was, to the con­ trary,  as enlightened as any church of its time.   Nor  was  Spanish  rule  in  Mexico particularly oppressive. It was considered  a  point  of  doctrine, "that  Indians were, as much  as the  Spaniards rational men". Rather, it  was  the  conquistadores, moti­  vated   by   rapacity   and   greed,  who   set aside   this   doctrine.  Later    the   Creoles broke   the  laws  of  the  Spanish   Crown,  which  fixed  the  wages  and  attempted to regulate the working  conditions of the Indians. The  Spanish  Crown  attempted enlightened  feudalism,  the   Creoles   en­ forced  a system approaching slavery.
The   richness,   diversity   and   Baroque
opulence of life in  New Spain  is meticu­ lously detailed in  this  little  known  work. Not   only   the   brilliant   landscape  and luxuriant vegetation, but Gage's  peculiar and    extraordinary   adventures  are   re­ corded, adventures  that   ended   with  his death  during  the   English   invasion   of Jamaica. Before  he  died,  Gage  had   es­ caped  from  Mexico, returned to England where   he  recanted,  abjured  his  religion and   turned  spy   and   informer  for   the Puritan  cause.
Norman Newton  has produced a care­ ful  and  thoroughly well-documented ver­ sion of the  travels,  bringing the  qualities  of his own mind  and  style to help  leaven the heavy prose of the original.
MARYA  FIAMENGO
 ON THE VERGE

****  HELGE   INGSTAD,   Westward to  Vinland. Macmillan.   $8.75.  For    the    many    who    are fascinated by  the  story  of  the  Norse  discovery of   North  America,  this   is  the   indispensable book.    It  tells   how    lngstad,  after  searching from   Labrador  to  Rhode  Island  for   the   site of  Vinland,  finally discovered the   remains of the  Viking settlement of L'Anse aux  Meadows on  Newfoundland, and   thus  brought  archaeo­ logical   corroboration to  the  sagas.  This is  the  popular  account  which  Ingstad   promises  to follow   by   a   version  for   the  scholars,  but   it contains  all   the   information   needed  to   de­  mote Columbus.
****  G.P.V. It  HELEN  B.  AKRIGG, IOOI   British Columbia Place  Names.  Discovery Press,  P.O. Box   6295,  Postal  Station  G,   Vancouver 8,
$5.70. A  much  needed book,  and   a model of its   kind,  with    an   excellent  introduction  on the  way  places are  named, and  sound, often fascinating information regarding the  places whose   names have been  selected. The authors write with a  wit   unexpected  in  such   a  con­ text,   and  with   a fine   eye  to  incongruity  and irony    in    naming.   Everyone    will    miss    the  names of  a  few  favourite  places, and   one  sees gaps    even    in    the   knowledge   of   two    such assiduous  searchers  for   information. But,   all in  all,  the   book  is  first-rate, and   one  hopes  it is only   the  precursor of  a  massive  and   defini­ tive  reference book  by  the  same  hands on  the place  names of  the  Pacific Coastal region.
*** GEORGE   ALLAN   ENGLAND,   The  Greatest
Hunt    in   the   World. Tundra  Books.   Paper,
$2.95. This is a reprint (and also  a retitling) of   George  Allan   England's   Vikings of   the lee, published in  1924, probably  the   best  ac­ count ever   written of  the  Newfoundland  seal hunt, that  "carnival of  blood"  which  was­ and   to   a  minor extent still   is -the   nearest thing in   the   Anglo-Saxon  world   to  the   bull­ fight.   With  admirable  fortitude  England  en­  dured the  hardships  of  the  voyage  into the ice, watched  the  bloody  slaughter with   a growing equanitnity,  and   returned  to   write about it with   the   kind   of   skill   and   detachment  that showed  how   human, and   in  some   ways  how adtnirably   so,   were    these   men    who   on   the ice  could   live   like   demons. An   interesting­ if   somewhat journalistic-study  in  the   com­ plexities  of  even   the   most  simple men.
o.w.
