$5.00 per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·91


TIMOTHY FINDLEY & THE  WJIR NOVEL

Articles ancl  Interviews
BY  'l !\!< IT!l\ l  1.:\!JLEY, JUlll'; L li l;LCOUl', ALISON S l':'ID1ERS, l'l Tl
Poen1s

BY  PIER CI<1RCIO DICICCO,  JOHN  BARTON, RON CHARACH, Rl'SSELL  TJ!ORYI'(JN, lRYll';G LAYTON
Reviews

BY  GEORGE WOODCOCK,  \\'. J. KEITH,  IAN SOWTON, DIANA COOPER-CLARK, JERRY \\'ASSER\1:\N,  PATRICIA .'110RLI·:Y, DAVID   JEFFREY,  MARY JANE ED\\'ARDS,  t;IC\ZIA 2\lFRLI·.R, DA\'ID S. \\'F.ST,  HANS  R.  RCNTE,  EVA-MARIE KROT.LLR, JOHN J. o'cONNOR, NEIL BESNER,  LORRAINE \\'F.IR, ANNELIESE KRA:\!I'R-DAHL, :\fARlAN FRASFR, ANTHONY DA\\'SON,  ;\IICHAEL THORPE, DAVID \\'AT:'IfOCGH, J. A.  \L>\IN\\'RIGHT, SL\10NE P. KNUTSON, VALERIE RAOl'L, P.\TRICTA .'IIERIVALE, C\fACRICE LEBEL, ALLISON  C\fiTCHAM, DOCGLAS llARBOl:R, LOCIS K. :\L\CKENDRICK, CAROLE GERSON, CAMILLE R. LA BUSSIERE,  RAOCL BOCDREAC, PATRICIA ;>,tONK, BRl'CE \VHITEMAN
Opinions and Notes

BY  \\'ILLIAC\I C. J A2\IES, MARY LU ;\IACDONALD

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW






BENEATH THE PEACEABLE KJNGDOM



CANADA  LONG AGO designed itself as the "peaceable kingdom," and   as  Laurie   Ricou  observes, in  his  essay  on  Tim   Findley's  The   Wars   in Violence  in  the  Canadian  Novel  since  zg6o (Memorial University), the  myth still holds its grasp on Canadian imaginations.  Violence seems a world apart, or at  least  a border  away-lodged most formally  in foreign  wars  and  television. But as the  book and  the essay both go on to make clear,  while the  myth  exerts its own impact  on Canadian realities, there are fiercer and more violent kingdoms which always lie beneath the placid  (other commentaries read  provincial, puritan, tedious, cold)  surfaces of Canadian life. We might  bewail such disruptive poten­ tial;  or alternatively  we might embrace  the  promise it carries of a stirring,  vital energy. Either  way, the stance is aloof, full of categorizing detachment or wishful thinking  and  therefore vulnerable  to the power of the violence itself. As Sandra Djwa  in the same volume astutely observes about  Alice  Munro,  everyone  might at some point want to show a savage face, but  no-one chooses the time;  it's only at the unexpected  time, in the special, lurid, unreal  place, that  the hallucinatory presence of the Enemy appears.
Munro's characters  find out  their  vulnerability  the  way  everyone  else does, after  the fact;  hence they can be wounded  from  within  as well as from  without, at war with  themselves as well as with the world they guard  themselves against. This distinction runs all the way through Violence  in the Canadian  Novel. Edited by Virginia  Harger-Grinling and  Terry  Goldie, the book collects a set of papers that  were destined for delivery at a Newfoundland conference,  but  which  were never given, because fog invaded  St. John's.  One  speculates  a little  on  the  dis­ cussions that  might have taken place had the contributors managed  to reach their destination, for there is an implicit dialogue going on in the papers by themselves, between  the  critics  (like Linda  Hutcheon  and  Patricia  Smart)  who  accept  vio­ lence as a psychological manifestation,  those  (like Kim  MacKendrick and  Jack Warwick,  writing  on humour  and  joual)  who write  about  the formal  shapes it takes,  and  those  (like  Robin  Mathews)   who  probe  the  concrete  and  political realities of contemporary  warfare. Patricia Smart  talks about  violence as a feminist

2

EDITORIAL

metaphor, about  invasion and territoriality  as revelations of women's understand­ ing of male notions  about  relations between the sexes. What  she says about  the work of Louky Bersianik  applies to a number  of other  contemporary writers as well, as diverse as Marie-Claire Blais and Susan  Musgrave;  and  what  Mathews says about  the politics of Buller and Rohmer  and what  he calls "the  Corporation  novel"  applies  forcefully  to  certain  relations  among  institutional   groups  both within  the country  and  between countries. But  therein  lies the difference in em­ phasis: Smart focusses internally, taking life as the shaping  force behind the forms of fiction, and  Mathews  externally,  taking fiction as a commentary  on political realities. She probes the forms that literature enacts, he the issues that  literature  is about,  and  for all the  overlap  between the two positions, for  all the  political fervour  they share,  there  is little  resolution  to  the  essential  difference  between them,  nor  any reason  why one should seek any. Ricou,  who finds The  Wars  to be less about  World  War  I than about  how the reader is required  to think about war,  less about  the  obscenity  of  violence than  about  the  "storymaking  of  the reader," explains the interrupted syntax of Findley's novel by the implicit message it enacts:  "confronted by willful violence the mind stammers." In  the peaceable kingdom  it is a way of  acknowledging  the broken surfaces.  Mathews,  impatient  because a commitment  to a  political cause, to political  action,  does not follow, dismisses the novel as self-indulgent. Accepting a loser's role is self-indulgent,  he says; "floating through slaughter" is self-indulgent;  anarchy  is self-indulgent. Yet can one ask writers to chart  a more positive course? Explicitly  Mathews says yes: not  by  condemning   violence,  but  by  condemning   violence-as-a-private-indul­ gence: the "discipline" of a public cause has, by this view, a greater worth, which literature should  serve, and  presumably  by which the  worth  of literature  should itself be measured.
Those  critics  who  disagree  do  not  spell out  in  detail  their  disagreement.  A phrase from  Frantz  Fanon's The  Wretched  of the Earth articulates  the challenge they  face:   declaring   the  need  for  revolutionary  measures  and  dismissing  the degree to which establishments  call upon tradition  and  order,  Fanon  writes that "the  man of culture,  instead  of setting out to find" the "fundamental substance" of his society, "which  itself is continually  being renewed," "will  let  himself be hypnotized  by ... mummified  fragments which because they are static are in fact symbols  of  negation   and  outworn   contrivances."  The   trick  is  to  prevent  the attraction to "constant renewal"  from opening up a greater  vulnerability; if one system proves static,  the charms of a new one do not guarantee it will not prove equally  static  and  perhaps  even  more  confining-which has  always  been  the dilemma  the liberal  faces and  one of the chief reasons that  conservative philoso­ phers like George Grant  have challenged the liberal position. Espousing change,  the liberal seeks meaning  in change. But what if meaning  proves elusive? "When there is no language," Ricou writes, "there is violence and  void." By which means

3

EDITORIAL

The  Wars becomes a kind of cautionary  training  in the politics of epistemological argument  and so a book with meaning after all.
As  though  in  commentary,   Robert  Kroetsch   in  the  same  volume  observes
another  feature  of the relation  between Canadian literature and  Canadian  soci­ ety:  "The  theory of answers, for us, is a dangerous  one. We must resist  endings, violently. And so we turn  from content  to the container; we turn  from  the tale to the  telling.  It  is form itself, traditional   form,  that  forces  resolution.  In  our most ambitious  writing, we do violence by doing  violence to form."  At one level this  comment  can  be taken  to  reiterate  the  justification  of  joual  as a  political written  medium  as well as an  idiomatic  spoken  form.  At  another,  it  refers  to something far more general, not to the way language  communicates politics but to the way politics shapes language  and  gives to a writer  the cultural  resonances of his  (or  her)   separate  voice. Silence, that  apparent  denial  of  language   which Ricou  equates  in  Findley's  work with  violence  and  void,  Kroetsch  sees as  the probable  outcome  of any system (like that  which  Fanon  observes in  a colonial society)  where the language of the social structure is in conflict with the realities of the people, but  he does not accept it as the  final step in the  process of change. To any true creator,  silence is not a resolution, Kroetsch writes, but an invitation,  a provocation  to speech and therefore to storytelling. Violence done to form thus becomes not a witless or malicious act of annihilation but a deliberate  contrivance  to enforce fresh seeing. Yet even the language  here begs the issue:  how creative can  forced sight be? For the silence is never so complete  that  language  enters  it without  trailing  associations;  here the  metaphor  of violence  carries  with  it  the knowledge of violent realities, and  the obscenity of violence-in-reality  confounds the  metaphor.  Commitment to  causes  perhaps   justifies for  some  a  de-creative process. Perhaps  a commitment  to the continuing, renewing  dream  of the peace­ able kingdom-sans the discriminatory politics of corporate accountsmanship - justifies for others their inability to separate  violence from obscenity.
In  another   context,  Mosaic's   fine  "Beyond   Nationalism" issue  ( 14,  no.  2,
subtitled  "The Canadian Literary  Scene  in  a  Global  Perspective"),  Kroetsch tacitly acknowledges the attractions  of the Canada he attaches  himself to, if not the Imperial notion of Canada  that  historians for generations  purveyed as objec­ tive fact.  Observing  that  complex genealogies constitute  a  narrative  pattern  of
197o's fiction in Canada, he writes: "Our genealogies are the narratives  of a discontent  with a history that  lied to us, violated  us, erased us even. We wish to locate our dislocation, and  to do so we must confront  the impossible sum of our traditions." Fanon  in the  xg6o's was a spur  to  many  Third World  Nations  to release themselves  from  their  imperial  masters  and  the  biases of  the  imperial tongue that  their own new literature  inevitably,  perhaps  unconsciously, was using. Kroetsch's  call to articulate  the "impossible sum"  of Canada is a comparable challenge  to resist the biases of a single tradition and  to explore  the  possibilities

4

EDITORIAL

that a multiple heritage bequeaths to literary convention. "Locating a dislocation" is, in  the  context  of  violence ... perhaps  a  "violent"  act,  at  least  metaphori­ cally; it uncreates  a notion  of "English" Canada so that  a creative notion rooted in  the  actualities  of  Canadian  pluralism  might  find  suitable  expression.  Pre­ sumably  an expression, rather  than  expression alone, and  presumably  not  nec­ essarily violent  in  either  its idiom  or  its subject-because  if there  is only one expression for the new society to discover, only one "sum" for the writer to master, then  the  dislocation  has  restricted  more  than  freed  the  creative  act,  and  the much-vaunted plurality  proved  culturally  empty.  In  a  way it  is to  clarify  the plurality  that  Mosaic's  "Beyond  Nationalism" issue has come  together,  though there  are  two  quite  different  notions lying  behind  the  articles:   an  impatience  with an acceptance of any single line of literary  inheritance  governing Canadian tradition, and  an  irritation  with  criticism  which  deals  with  Canadian texts  in isolation from  literature outside  Canada. The  results vary. Though  there  are  to be found  here some  conventional  retellings of certain  Canadian literary  myths, there are also several important articles:  Barbara  Godard  connecting  As For Me and My  House, by French critical method, to British literary movements;  Sherrill Grace  contrasting  Pynchon  with  Kroetsch,  in  an  analysis at  once  textual  and contextual; Janet Giltrow contrasting  Mrs. Moodie in Canada with Mrs. Trollope  in America,  and  distinguishing  between the language  of the settler  and  the lan­ guage of the genteel onlooker: "Where  Traill's  prose stops at small  particulars, Moodie's  rides  on,  along  an  abstract  plane  of diffuse  enthusiasm." Curiously, however, "beyond  nationalism" seems in practice to mean that  Canadian writing should involve comparison  with American  texts; the few exceptions seek British and French influences, and  no-one seeks Asian sources, Commonwealth parallels, or  Third   World  influences  and  analogues.  As Kroetsch   implies,  the  sum  is greater  and the genealogy more complex than  the British-French-American triad implies. John   Matthews' exploration  of the  Canadian-Commonwealth  connec­ tion,  which  appeared in  the  Humanities   Association Review  in  1979  (vol.  30, no. 4) , is the sort of article one has to read in tandem  with this issue of  Mosaic. It also offers some degree of perspective on Kroetsch's argument, though indirectly
-for  Matthews expresses a clear regret that  the "stability  of a central  national
idea" should  in the twentieth  century  have dissipated. Yet he goes on to find  in the literatures  of the Commonwealth examples of cultures  neither  retreating nor despairing  in  the  knowledge  that  the centre  cannot  hold,  but  experimenting in the "new" and  the "flexible"  instead,  which is the conclusion  that,  by different routes, Kroetsch  and  Margaret Laurence  have also come to, declaring  Canada's attitudinal if not economic Third  World status.
In  the same  issue of the  Humanities  Association Review, there  appear  other perspectives  on  nationalism: on  Quebec's   rejection  of  both  English-Canadian and  European  French  social  models;  on  distinctions  between  the  sacred  and

5

EDITORIAL

profane as they affect definitions of social identity;  and  on the historical connec­
tions between the U.S.A. and Canada  which underlie the literary  attitudes  of the
197o's. About Canadian cultural  plurality, moreover,  George Rawlyk writes that over time Canadians have learned  "to  integrate  two quite  different,  but  not  in­ compatible  levels of identity  and  to move easily back  and  forth  between  these positions." This  point is one to keep in mind  when  reading  George  Woodcock's recent  The  Meeting  of  Time   and  Space:  Regionalism  in  Canadian  Literature (NeWest), which dismisses the idea of a centralist  government  in  Canada, de­ clares that all the important innovative tendencies of  English-Canadian literature  originated  in the regions, and argues that  for  these reasons Canada should insti­ tute  a Swiss canton  system, which is a true  confederation. This  argument goes awry  at  two points,  I think: first in its  notion  of "region," which  presumes  a centre  to be a  region of, and  second in  its failure  to take  account  of the  dual allegiance  that  is built into  Canadians'  notion  of their  political  culture,  which makes the canton  system as foreign to  Canadian notions  of Confederation as is the Centralist  notion of American  or  French  politics. The  dualism  is part  of the indirectness that  Canadian literature so recurrently  employs, the subsurface  irra­ tionality it appeals to; and part of  the curious state of the national  health  derives from the fact that  Canadians use their access to, and  control over, two different governments,  federal  and  provincial, to balance  the two. For  both governments, complete with opposition  parties, represent the  people. Citizens do not elect their regional,  provincial  government  to  be their  representative at  the  federal  level; they elect federal officials for that  purpose. And  they do not elect a federal gov­ ernment  to centralize authority,  but to co-ordinate federal  matters, so that  in any one  province or region  (and  most provinces have many  regions, in both  strictly literary  and  more largely cultural  terms)  citizens will have  access to the shared culture and the rights of the whole.
There  is a difference, in other words, between a notion of region which implies
a central  authority  over the whole, and  a notion  of region  which implies a  par­ allel access to  the  whole. The  difference  shows  up  in  other  forms  in  Fanon's rejection  of the  biases of European languages,  because  they  constitute  (or  pre­ sume)  an authority  he cannot  accept, and  in John  Matthews' comments on the flexibility of Commonwealth literary  forms,  as  demonstrations  of  the  separate  development  of English literatures  around  the  world,  which  have access to but need not declare  obeisance to a notion  of a solitary  great  tradition. In  another  form still, the distinction appears  as the basis for Andrew  Gurr's Writers  in Exile (Harvester) which coincidentally has two different subtitles on the cover and the title page-either "The  Identity  of  Home" or "The Creative  Use of Home"  in Modern  Literature. Concerned  to explain  why some writers have  become "crea­  tive  exiles" in  the  prose they  write in  the  twentieth   century,  Gurr  traces  in  a series of biocritical  essays the growing sense of exile and  the  growing  admission

6

EDITORIAL


of the  importance of the  childhood  home in  the lives and  work of  Mansfield, Naipaul,  Ngugi, and  others.  Far  and  away strongest on  Mansfield,  and  weakest in some throwaway  references to Wiebe and Gordimer in a concluding  postscript, the book explores the paradox  that  exile becomes for these writers. The  products of "Gemeinschaft"-the closeknit but  colonial,  provincial  community-they seek to experience  "Gesellschaft"-the urban,  impersonal,  individualistic,  and "metropolitan" culture  that  represents  artistic  vitality  to  them.  Inevitably  dis­ appointed because they cannot  belong, they increasingly explore their  own exile, creating  out  of it a realistic  prose world more preoccupied  with social concerns than  with the aesthetics of writing. Though  Mansfield and Joyce are a little hard to fit into  this last generalization, it is interesting  nonetheless,  not  the least for how it relates to the distinction in Canadian letters between those concerned with formal  process and  those concerned  with social referents. The  Gesellschaft-born, Gurr  writes, are typically poets -more concerned with aesthetic form than  with social  function,   that  is, and  less concerned  than  the  Gemeinschaft-born  with trying  to represent  concretely  the shape of a society that  lies outside  the  metro­ politan  norm.  What  greater   reference  to  Canadian   and  Australian  examples would  have done  in this book is to illustrate  how notions of region  and centre, or province and  metropolis,  have been in constant  flux during  the last hundred  and  more years. Perhaps  poets-in-prose emerge when  a region  becomes its own metropolis, when a society no longer seeks (or  needs)  to ratify its own existence against  another  people's  norms, or  when  (in  Kroetsch's  terms)  a "dislocation" has been found and told.
Gurr  adds that  the detachment such exiles seek from  their  native  community, as an  escape from solipsism, does not guarantee them  freedom,  if only because it is also a pose. But it  takes a peculiarly twentieth  century  and  peculiarly  pro­ vincial  form  because  the  writers  who seek detachment seem  to  worry  so  per­ vasively about  it. That is always the colonial's dilemma. Of posing and subjectiv­ ity, by contrast,  there is plenty in the British traveller  abroad-as  Paul  Fussell makes both  vivid and  clear in Abroad,  his account  of British  travelling  between
1918  and  1939· Though  the  book  looks at  the  work  of  Douglas,  Lawrence, Waugh,  Isherwood, Orwell, and others, the centrepiece is Robert  Byron, traveller, author  of The  Road to Oxiana, Blimpish poseur, quintessential  Englishman, and neo-Wildean  anecdotalist  who dismissed other people's nationalisms  with the insularity  born  of his own "Gemeinschaft" birth: "There is something  absurd about  a land  frontier." As  Fussell argues,  the  perspective  was  also  one  made possible by the  isolation  of the  lands  that  travellers  visited  during  these  years, and engendered  by the dislocating experience of World War I. In the post-World War  II years, relative isolation  no longer exists in the world,  Fussell says. From an  age  of exploration, when  the  aim  of  the  voyager  was  to  risk  the  formless and  the unknown,  we have come through  the age of the  traveller  to the age of

7

EDITORIAL

the tourist, whose aim is only to move to "the security of pure cliche." In a telling distinction,  Fussell adds another  impediment: "One who  has hotel  reservations and speaks no French is a tourist." But in a way it is the fact of war which makes the travel  book, that  "trope  of a generation," no longer  possible for the  British. The  end  of one  war  may have sprung  them  into  movement-away from  an England  that shaped them but which they no longer trusted, motivated by "the compensatory  principle  by which the trench  sensibility finds itself propelled  vig­ orously toward  the tropics." But the next war robbed  them also of their distance. Journeys  abroad  became journeys into combat,  and  another  kind of  literary  age began.
In  The  Great  War  and  Modern  Memory, Fussell has  also argued   that  the
twentieth  century  made  the  truly  realistic  war  novel  possible because  changes in taste and time  (which allowed obscenities to appear  openly on the page)  made it  thereby  possible to render  directly  the  larger  obscenity  of  war  itself. It  is a relative  argument. Given taste and  time, the  rendered  obscenities lose much  of the shock force that suppression accords them. Perhaps  that,  more than  any other single reason, is why in books or on film or in daily life, violence becomes more grotesque,  more open, less restrained,  more  obscene. The  more difficult it  is to shock, the more outrageous will be the attempts to do so. And will do so. For true obscenity does not lie in language,  but  in behaviour.  To  comprehend  this is to begin to  understand not only why literary  violence has  become so prevalent  in recent years, but also why in its various guises it should have such different effects. The  violence of language  is an  artifice  of mind,  which  engages  and  convinces another  mind only as long as it also argues and  creates;  the detached  observation of violence is a neutral  act-disenchanted,  perhaps,  but  also disengaging;  but the vision of violence that surrenders  to violence is full of the millenarian  power to persuade  irrationally.  It is a gospel of destruction, and  in that  there  is danger
-for it makes of all human  contacts  violent engagements,  it removes creativity
from the gallery of human skills, and it undermines  the social contract  that  keeps us a people.
"The acute sense of place that attended  travel between the wars has atrophied," Fussell writes. The  sense of a  whole society and  the  belief in  the  worth  of the shared space that  is worth preserving to share  with another  generation : these aspirations  for  a  peaceable  kingdom,  these,  too,  can  atrophy.  An  adequate  re­ newal  will not emerge from any falsification of a society's flaws, but  neither  will it emerge from a lame acceptance, literary or otherwise, that  violence -far from being  merely  the  stuff of entertainment or  the  projection  of  troubled  lives­ constitutes the only norm that gives meaning  to the life we say we want to live.
W.H.N.




8


QUOTIDDIN
 


Pier Giorgio Di Cicco


I walk  through your life, as if it mattered less to either of us.
As if we had  read  this in the paper.  So and  so likes tea,
is predisposed to early Dylan,  likes horror movies, thinks Europe is on the decline.  Voila! Signor  Kaboom likes the TLS, and  his consort,  Vanessa,  loves mansions, high, overlooking the sea. This is marvellous, this flax of air. Someone makes
firms out  of it. Others, doggerel  for  the cramped.

Who  is it, in you? All these Agatha Christie thrillers digested, all these wars gone by, armies  of advertisers having looted  the comedic.
Will you go to heaven, shy one? And who, by degrees,  will love
you as you love yourself?
You say good-bye  to yourself with everyone  who comes and leaves your  house. You give them  news of you and  return to bed  with  pieces of what couldn't go.
If you'd  get  together all those whom
you'd  ever  talked  to, you'd  get them  crying  your  name
in unison.  Perhaps your eyes will tell. People  must  be good at eyes; this is a good shorthand to understand,
subtracting, adding, the calculus  of how we look, as we would  be seen  by others.  The  lessons are  no good  or, learned, forgotten; maybe  the failure  shows. Piecing two and  two together
is the  benefit  we doubt  the world can  give us, but  we try.
We are  the  braille of ourselves. Hats  will help, some kind of clothes,  the way we touch,  though  we don't think  of that. We can  go on, hoping the world  catches up to us
with  that  understanding that  says: from  here on in we walk like children, hand  in hand.  It was uneven, starting as we did. The terror of dying, of course, is that  we can't tell
anything, stoned  beyond sense; too weak  for hand  signals
we pray  for psychics, angels of death or otherwise, unless we find we never were misunderstood; the air was listening,
and  now  we lie still and  return the favour.








9

ALICE DROPS HER CIGARETTE ON THE FLOOR ...

(William Whitehead looking over Timothy
Findley's shoulder)


Timothy Findley


LHARDEST THING OF  ALL to write about is you=lf.
For one thing-if  you're a fiction writer-most of you is already out  there,
somewhere;  chopped  up in little bits and  hidden  (or not hidden) in your books. Fragments.  Not  that  you've  put  yourself there  consciously. But  your  energy  is there. Something  of your own character-something of your own makeup  goes into the  character  and  makeup  of everyone  you  write.  And  the  rest  of you  is private. Mostly. So obliquely private that it's very hard  to get at. Especially if you yourself are the questioner.
The thing is, everything you ask yourself-or very nearly everything-already has an answer that  doesn't interest you. It would interest  you about  someone else
-but not about yourself. "When  were you born?" "1930." "Where?" "Toronto. What a stupid question.... I mean, you already know all this." "Are you happy?" "Don't be silly. If I was happy,  would I be sitting  here worried  to death  about how to write this article? It's already  two months overdue  and  you're  asking me when I was born. What a twit you are."
So it goes.
In  the end,  you lose your respect:  both for yourself as a character  worthy  of interest and as an interviewer. And who needs that?  No one. But when I put the problem to my friend  Bill Whitehead, his answer  was both  succinct  and  a  god­ send. "You don't  know how to ask yourself the right questions,"  he said. "Let  me do it for you." "You  mean the way Gertrude Stein  wrote  the  Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas?"  "No," he said. "I mean  the  way you write  all your  books. I will be you -and ask the questions:  and you will be a character-and give the answers."
Oh.
Which  is how  I  discovered  the  Art  of  Writing   Fiction.  You  ask  the  right questions. But, in order to ask the right questions, you have to be asking them of

10

FINDLEY

someone who inherently  interests you more than you can possibly interest yourself. And thus -what follows.




bE INTERVIEW TOOK  PLACE in a sunny room on a cold, bright autumn   afternoon.  The  Interviewer  was William  Whitehead-a documentary writer  for  television.  The  person  being  interviewed  was Timothy   Findley -a fiction writer  and  playwright.  The  Interviewer  had a touch  of the 'flu-so the questions  were interspersed  with  coughs and  wheezes. Out  in  the  larger  world beyond the room, the President of Egypt had been shot:  and in the smaller world beyond the room, the fiction writer was about  to publish the fourth  of his novels. As a consequence of both these events-and of the 'flu and of the golden leaves that  blew across the fading lawn, there was an over-riding sense of tension in the room  and  an  undercurrent of wonder  that  horror  and  discomfort  are  always walking hand-in-hand through  a beautiful landscape.

w.w.     Somewhere  up  in a cupboard, locked away, we have a number  of your paintings.  This is something  you've dabbled  with from  time to time:  something you seem to be drawn  to. How is it, then, you've never tried  to be a professional painter?

T.F.    Because I'm  not  accomplished  enough  to do with  painting  what  I  would like to do with painting.  And  I haven't  the facility -even  with  a great  deal of study-to do that.

w.w.     What is it you would like to do with painting?

T.F.	Something  enormous.  I have visions of huge canvases-not murals-but Stanley Spencer's  type of stuff-where there are masses of people in the picture. And they're  very colourful. They would be stylized. They  would be recordings of events. Or  of moments. The  visions in my mind  are  very graphic  in that  sense. And, when I sit down to paint,  I inevitably paint something  that  is in my mind, rather  than  something  out  the window.  I'm  not inclined  to sit down  and  paint that  which is right  in front  of me. Maybe because what's  in front  of me satisfies my curiosity: satisfies my sense of wonder in itself. The  only time I would paint that  which is in front  of me  would  be  when  I  wanted  to  catch  a  person  in a particular moment of their life-or their day:  an attitude. I've tried to paint my mother -I've tried to paint my brother-I've tried to paint you. Lots of people. And  each of these paintings  shows the  person in repose of some kind:  occupied with something private. And, in each of the paintings, it was not the person's face that  attracted my  attention -but the  attitude  of  the  person  who  was sitting there.  But  I'm  really not  accomplished  in this area.  Perhaps  I have a talent  to


I I

FINDLEY

see -but  I haven't  the talent  to translate  what  I see into something  on canvas. Or whatever.

w.w. 	Would  you say it  was "character"-your interest  in  character-that drew you to the theatre as an actor?

T.F.    Yes. Interest in attitude. And by that  I mean  the physical attitude as much as the intellectual attitude. That's why I got to the theatre through  dance: through the gesture:  through  the way people present  themselves. The  thing  that  always moves me most-whether you see a person by himself or people in huge groups
-is the concentration of emotion : or lack of it. The attitude. And, in the theatre, that  has as much  to do with what you see as with what  you hear.  I guess that's why I like Chekhov : because of the famous  pauses -which he provides so that people can fill out or complete what has been begun with words.

w.w. 	Is this why you find it so hard to resist the creation of stage directions when you write a play? Because you see so vividly?

T.F.	Yes. Even though I know it's dangerous to write too many stage directions: because they can  be very limiting so far as the director  and  the  actors  are  con­ cerned.  The  first thing  Robin  Phillips does, for instance,  is remove  every  single stage direction. Nonetheless, I provide them. Because I am always seeing what the people are doing, when I write:  as well as hearing  what  they're  saying. I see and hear in  tandem.  Whereas, a lot  of playwrights -and  a lot of novelists,  too - really only seem to hear their people. The  answer, of course, with plays is to put it down for yourself-you know -put down all the stage directions as you write and  then excise them from the final draft.  Which  leaves the movement  inherent in the body of the dialogue. This way, the actors will be impelled to move, without knowing why. And, also, be impelled to the moments of stillness. But, in  novels, when I'm  reading -I find so often the curious sense that  what is seen  has been written  after  what  has been heard  and  sort of "tacked  on"  or  pasted  into  the fabric of the book. As if the writer couldn't see and hear at the same time.

w.w. 	But how do you sort it out? I mean-if it's simultaneous.  Come on, Tiff. You can only put one set of words on paper at a time....

T.F.	Well. All right. Look at it this way. In a sense, the writer is a voyeur:  while, in  another  sense, he's  eavesdropping.  He  is  watching   with  fascination   and - equally -listening or overhearing  with fascination. Yes? Now-imagine a scene with a number  of people in it and  there  you are  watching  it  unfold.  Watching and listening. And your eyes are sweeping over the whole roomful of people.... Yes? You keep track of everyone who is in the scene. Let's say the scene is set at a table  and  the  people are eating  a meal.  And-you  know  what  it's  like when you're at a dinner  party and everyone leans out toward  the person who is leading

12

FINDLEY

the conversation  when suddenly ... (SNAP) ••• someone at  the other  end of the table will do something that  draws your attention to them. Maybe all they've done is take a sip of wine : but you catch it and you see it from the comer of your eye and  the sipping  of the wine is there as part  of the conversation.  So this is what writing is like: for me. Your eye and your ear-your inner eye and your inner ear
-are always poised upon the moment. So that whenever there is speech, you hear
it  and  whenever  there  is gesture,  you see it: no matter  where it  occurs in  the room:  no matter  who it comes from-even if it comes from the mice in the wall or the spider up in the comer over the plate rail. ...

w.w.   Now there's a plate rail. Where did the plate rail come from?

T.F.    Well-it's in the scene. But how weird! You seize upon the plate rail when
I thought-because you're an entomologist-you'd seize upon the spider.

w.w.   What-and throw it out the window?

T.F.    No. And talk about  it....

w.w.   No. I gave all that  up years ago.

T.F.    Now-you see? We all know a little more about  you.

w.w.   What about this scene we were in?

T.F.    What scene?

w.w.    Weren't we at a dinner  party?

T.F.	Well:   we were-but  they've  gone,  now. What  were  we talking  about? Plate rails?

w.w. 	You -as  a  writer -being  able  to see and  hear  at  the  same  time.  Be specific.

T.F.	Well:  specifically-when I'm  writing a scene in which there is more than one person -however  many  more there  may be -I  will find  myself ... let us say when George and  Brenda  are talking: having a terrible  argument.... I find myself sitting  there  watching  them:  listening to them-trying  not  to interrupt them-fascinated ... when, all at once, Alice drops  her  cigarette  on the  floor. But  the focus of the scene -the point of the scene -is the argument  between George and  Brenda.  Now-I don't  know how it is that  I witnessed Alice drop­ ping her cigarette on the floor. And I don't  know why I did. I only know I saw it fall and  I saw when she let it go-so I make a record  of it:  ALICE DROPS HER CIGARETTE ON  THE  FLOOR. Does it matter?  Is it an important gesture? Does it tell us anything?  Was it a comment  on the fact that George  was right in the middle of telling Brenda  about  that  thing he's found in the drawer  upstairs ... ? I don't

FINDLEY

know. All I know is-the gesture was there and  I saw it and  I put it down on the paper.  But only time and more writing: only the continuation of the writing process is going to tell me whether  Alice dropping her  cigarette  is meaningful. I mean -you know -it could  turn  out  (LAUGHTER)  that  Alice doesn't  even smoke, for God's sake. So what's she doing with this cigarette  in the first place?

w.w.    Could I ask you something?

T.F.    Fire away.

w.w.    Who the hell are George and Brenda and Alice?

T.F.    I don't  know.

W.W.     (LAUGHTER)

T.F.	Well, I don't. They just arrived. I don't even know their last names. George, Brenda, Alice-this is Bill Whitehead.

w.w.    How come you assume they don't need an introduction to you?

T.F.	Yes. A very good question.  (siLENCE) Uhmmm.... The  only answer  that occurs  to me  is that -they  were in  my mind.  Sort  of like houseguests.  So,  I assume we know each other. Unless, of course, they're  burglars. People very often are, you know-and you have to kick them out.

w.w.    Have  they gone yet?

T.F.    Yes.

w.w.    May I continue?

T.F.    Yes.

w.w.    You don't  want to mislead people, you know, about  the process of  eaves­ dropping.  You make it all sound as if it's terribly easy. As if the process of  writing fiction were easy, whereas ...

T.F.    It's not.

w.w. 	I mean: how do you explain-in terms of "eavesdropping" and  voyeur­ ism -having to re-write scenes-having to discard  chapters-having to create whole new passages? A minute  ago you were talking  as if all you had  to do was "take  notes" -and  as if the characters  were in control of everything.  But don't you have to exert some control over them?

T.F.    Oh, indeed.

w.w. 	Well-give me a sense of this:  as effort. Because I know how hard  you work-and I know how much you re-write -and  I know how dissatisfied you

FINDLEY

always seem to be with what you do. So how do you account  for this, in the face of the other: of the characters  being in control?

T.F.	Well-the effort:  the effort on the writer's part is to fulfill the character: to fulfill the story. You know-to do it justice and to get it all right. For instance, the writing of the play, "Can You See Me, Yet?" I wrote it all first as a straight­ forward  play about  a family: the family of Cassandra  Wakelin. And  the play all took place in the garden  of the Wakelin home. And the family were all there­ and  the people came and  went and  the story unfolded and,  to some degree, the play succeeded.  On  the  other  hand-in  the  mode  of  the  conversation  we're having-the character   inside  my  head,  to  whom  I  had  been  listening:   the character  of Cassandra  Wakelin was unhappy  with the way I'd handled  her story. It was as if I had not provided  the means by which she could tell it all. I had  not resolved her situation.  So I thought  and  thought  and  thought -and  I tried this and  that  and  the other-and, finally, I  hit on the idea  that  Cassandra's story somehow needed to unfold backwards. Well ... in the original version, Cass ends up in an insane asylum : driven there by her perception of the real world being a madhouse.... But-what if I were to begin the play in the asylum? What if I were to show the "madhouse" as the world? Then  the  perceptions of Cassandra  Wakelin  would  be crystal  clear  to  everyone. Her  view of the  world  would  fall into  place for  the  rest of us, and  her story could unfold  in a way that  made  it easier for her to tell and for us to receive. She pretended  the garden of the asylum was the garden  in which she had grown-turned the inmates of the asylum into the "inmates" of her home -added  to which, an asylum is the perfect place to act  out  a  story  whose  parts are  joined  by emotional  chronology,  rather   than  timeology....

w.w.    There's no such word as "timeology...."

T.F.    There  is now. Don't  you see what  I mean?  In  asylums-time flashes on and off-and, in between the flashes, there's nothing: greyness, stillness, silence. Waiting.  But  the  things  that  are  seen in  the  flashes are  astonishing.  Riveting: vivid and  stark  and  absolutely  unadorned  with the grace of soft edges. All this, to say nothing of the fact that  Cass's life needed to be set in a frame of fire. Every episode is a kind of burning....
w.w.    She sounds like Robert  Ross in The  Wars.

T.F.    Well:  they have a lot in common.

w.w.    Outside of fire?

T.F.	Yes. Photographs, for one thing.  I  think  that  maybe  the  photographs in Cass's album  may  have  been  the  basis for  the  photographic technique  of The Wars.

FINDLEY

w.w.     Cassandra  Wakelin enters the asylum with nothing but a photo-album.

T.F.    Yes. And The  Wars unfolds as a series of pictures. Pictures  and interviews. Anyway-I think the subject of this part of the conversation  had to do with the effort involved with writing and finding Cass's place was the effort in her case.
w.w.     And The Wars?

T.F.	The effort there was to find the right pictures and find the right characters to interview. Also-as with everything-to pay attention  to what it is the char­ acter really wants to tell you. What the character requires of you. And you don't know any of that until after the fact. Before the fact, you're lost. And-you know, that,  too, is a good analogy for the work, for the effort involved. Being lost. What you have to do is go with your characters into the void -and help them find their way home. Does this make you think of lost animals?  It  does me. And  the  first thing you have to do with a lost animal is discover a mutual language.  Mter  the language -the  problem  can be revealed -after  the revelation,  the search  can begin  and  after  the  search:   maybe  the solution.  Maybe.  Maybe.  Only  maybe. But that's what it is. You try to get the character  all the way home.
w.w. 	What  about  your last book? You had so many  people to get home. How many was it? Twenty? Thirty  major characters?
T.F.    Something like that. Yes. Famous Last Words  ... good heavens ... writing Famous  Last  Words  I  went  through  five whole  modes  before  I  hit  upon  the character   of  Mauberley.   Ezra  Pound's   Hugh   Selwyn  Mauberley.   Five  whole modes. I don't  mean  drafts.  The  draft  work was endless:  on  each  of them ... but,  in the end,  I  came upon  Mauberley  and  realized  I  had  found  the  perfect voice to narrate the story. And it was really through  him -through  Mauberley
-that all the other characters found their way home. For which I was profoundly
grateful.  Believe me. I never fancied  myself as a Tour  Guide.  And  I  think  he maybe got me home, too. (LAUGHTER)

w.w.     Yes. I've noticed you've been around  a little more, recently.

T.F.	Maybe  that's  where George  and  Brenda  come from.  And  Alice....  You know : maybe they sort of tagged along on the return  trip.

w.w. 	Well-I'm here to tell you, you'd  better  do something  about  that  Alice. Dropping  cigarettes  on the floor ... burning  up the rugs.... Can't  she learn  to use an ashtray, like anyone else?

T.F.    I'm sure it was an accident.

w.w.     Didn't  sound like an accident to me. Not the way you've got it written in there: ALICE DROPS HER  CIGARETTE ON  THE  FLOOR. What  does she do about  it? Leave it there -watching it eat its way through  to the floor boards?

16

FINDLEY


T.F.	Maybe it's a stone  floor....

w.w. 	Somehow, I doubt it. Given the fires in all your  books. Oh, God-I hope that  Alice leaves!

T.F.	Maybe in a puff of smoke?

w.w. 	It would  be a great  relief.

T.F. 	I take it you and  Alice don't get along....

w.w. 	You're damned right  we don't.

T.F.	What about George  and  Brenda?

w.w. 	It remains to be seen. Are they loud? Do they argue all the time? And what are they arguing about?

T.F.	Something George  has found  in a drawer upstairs....

w.w. 	What?

T.F. 	I don't know. Something rather sinister, I should  think.

w.w. 	Maybe one of Alice's cigarette butts.

T.F.	Kept  in an old lacquer box from  Japan....

(AT  THIS  MOMENT, THE  TELEPHONE  RINGS AND W.W.  ANSWERS.  A  FRIEND HAS CALLED TO  TELL  US PRESIDENT  SADAT HAS DIED AND   PERHAPS  WE  SHOULD TURN ON   THE  RADIO. WE  ELECT  NOT TO   LISTEN. WE DO,  HOWEVER, PAUSE  FOR   A  VERY LONG WHILE  TO  THINK  ABOUT HIS DEATH AND  THE SCENE OF HIS DEATH AND THE WORLD IN   WHICH  IT  HAPPENED.  LATER ON, W.W.  STARTS THE  QUESTIONS AGAIN. OUT ON   THE  LAWN, ONE WHOLE  TREE  HAS  BEEN STRIPPED  OF ITS  LEAVES AND, AS  IF ITS JOB  HAD BEEN DONE FOR THE DAY, THE  WIND HAS DROPPED. THE  OTHER TREES ARE   NOT YET BARE.)
w.w. 	One  of  the  themes that  is threaded through your  work  more  than   any other  is a particular view of insanity-be it insanity  by itself or drug  or alcohol induced insanity.... You  do  have  all these  people  who  either  see and  deal  with the  world  as if it were insane : or as if they were insane.  Can  you tell me why this is and  where  it comes from?

T.F.	Yes. It comes  from  a perception of insanity  which  was  introduced to  me very early  on in my life through someone  close to me  who  had  to be placed  in a mental institution. And  the  effect that  had-primarily, of course,  on the  person involved -but  also  on  all  the  people  who surrounded her -the  effect  of this was  the  first  truly  profound experience of  my  consciousness.  By which  I mean, I was old enough to  watch  and  listen and  see what  was happening and  to make

FINDLEY

concise deductions  and  come to precise conclusions. I  was seven. Maybe  six. I know it was about  that age because of the house we lived in and the rooms where some of the scenes I remember took place. And my perception  of this person was that  she  was  brilliant-that she had  incredible  insights  into  what  was  really going on in  the world around  us:  but  that  she was ... odd.  This  is to say that the conversations I had with her as a child were basically not "conversations" - but they were monologues : monologues of hers ... not unlike this monologue of mine. And, in the course of delivering one of these monologues, she would reveal things about  reality and portray things in a way that  the so-called "sane"  people around me-and around her-did not understand. Which is only to say-they did not or could not see the aspects of reality that  she saw and  could deliver to other  people, if only they would listen. And  it struck  me-or,  I should  say, it must  have struck  me-because, of course, I didn't have  the ... what?  What  is
it you have as a child? You have the intelligence as a child to perceive things and take things in - but you haven't  the intellect -yet-to deal with whatever it is you're  receiving.  Nonetheless, whatever  you're  receiving is going down  into  the makings of the ultimate  person you're going to be:  the person who will have the intellect to deal  with these things. Anyway ... it struck  me that  I should  listen. To this person who was close to me, who was sitting in the room  with me. And everything I heard -all of my experience with this person went down very deep into  me. And  I  remember  that  one of the  most  vivid  things  was that  she saw things very sharply. Her perception of the world  was clarified through  a route  of her own  that  was special :  that  was unique ... and  maybe  dangerous  to other people. No. Not physically dangerous. But-you see-her  clarity of vision was something  that   endangered   the  unclarified -perhaps  the  muddied -or   the muddled  perceptions  of other people. She could see the heart  of things. Of hurt, for instance. Of where the hurt truly lay:  and of what  had caused the hurt. And, sometimes, the hard  core hurt  of an accusation  might  issue from  her mind,  you see. And once it had reached her mind -how could she prevent it from reaching her lips? And  this was dangerous. Because it ... well, it tampered  with  the  pro­ tective walls thrown  up by other people to keep the hurt of reality out. So this was dangerous.  Very dangerous.  How do we live with reality? Once  all the walls are in place.... And now, I turn to thinking of someone else : much later in my life. And  with  this  other  person -the  accusations  became  unbearably  harsh.  U n­ bearably  harsh. And the harshness-with this other  person -could  be violent:  the truth! The truth! The  truth! And, of course, the truth! The truth! The truth! became  unendurable for  other  people to  bear.  So ... do  you see?  When  these people exist -when there are these people-then other  people must look across the room and say:  "that  person over there is mad." You see? "That  person over there is crazy." Because it is too disturbing to be told the truth, the truth, the truth. And this is not to lay blame at any particular doorstep :  because -I  mean,  my

r8

FINDLEY


God -there's  nothing  more  exhausting  a person can  think  of than  the  truth. So-what can you do? You turn it off -like a radio.
w.w. 	Yes.

T.F.	Or ... you hide it in a drawer somewhere. In a lacquer  box from Japan. w.w. 		Called "asylum"?
T.F.	Precisely.

w.w. 	Well: now we know about George and Brenda. Any clues about Alice yet?

T.F.    Nope. But I'd  like to say one more thing about the so-called "mad." I hope you understand I'm  not in any way talking about the truth  with a capital T when I talk about  these people. I only mean the truth  about  matters  as perceived in a given situation.  One  thing  about  the "mad," you see, is they don't  like lies. So this is why I seize so often  upon  these people as the heroes of my work. It's  only because they have this straight-flung out connection  through  the mind to some kind of absolute clarity. And this is what fiction is all about: achieving the clarity obscured by facts.

w.w. 	So what are facts?

T.F. 	Walls.

w.w. 	All right. Talk  about  the writer  as "madman." And writing  as therapy:
something of value for the rest of us to eavesdrop on, from time to time.

T.F.	Writing  isn't  therapy.  Writing may be cathartic, but it certainly  isn't  ther­ apy. On the other  hand,  if you're talking about  the reader-and only about  the reader-maybe the "therapeutic" value for those of us who read lies in the fact that  we don't  have to pass through  whatever it is in a particular book, or play or whatever-we don't  have to pass through  whatever  territory  it explores, except vicariously. This  has  been  said-and  best  said-by  Adele  Wiseman.  Adele Wiseman said the writer  goes down into  the other  world of  hell for a few years and comes back up and tries to articulate  the experience for everyone else.

w.w. 	It sort of saves you the busfare.

T.F.	Sort of. But the main thing to remember is that  the writer has a round-trip ticket. The  writer comes back. Do you see? And this information  -the informa­ tion that  everyone  doesn't  have to perish down  there is marvellous.  Marvellous. And so maybe this is the therapeutic value:  the therapeutic spin-off for the reader.  Hell can be survived. And since everyone, at some point, goes through  hell-this news is extremely  valuable.  But  everyone  can't  articulate  this  news. Everyone can't  tell what it is they've survived-and how it is they're still alive. But a good writer can. Have you read Old Woman At Play?

19

FINDLEY

w.w. 	Yes, of course. The  book about  Adele Wiseman's mother....

T.F.     Then you  know  what  I mean.  Here  was a  woman living  in  hell who  was telling  us it didn't have  to be hell at all. So Adele  Wiseman went  down  in  there, where her mother was living, and she asked the  right  questions and  she got terrific answers  and  she  came  back  up  and  she  passed  the  answers  on  to  us. And  the answer   was:   to  make  of hell  a  better   place. Dear God! This  book  should   be handed out with every birth  certificate.

w.w. 	Talk  about genius, now. Is genius a kind of "madness"?

T.F.    No. I don't think  so. No. Though I see why you're asking.  People  think  it has to be a kind  of madness  the same  way they  think  the  people  I talked  about before  are  "mad." Put  it this way. A genius  is someone  you cannot avoid  seeing. I mean-how  could  you  walk  into  a  room  and   not  see  Margot  Fonteyn? If Margot Fonteyn is there-there's no  way she  can  hide.  Is  there    (LAUGHTER) •
. . . Even  if you've  never seen her before. Even  if she's  wearing the most ordinary,
everyday  dress-even if she's standing behind  a  man  who's  six feet  tall: you're going to see her. And  what you see is really the thing  that  drove  her to be a genius of dance ... the  unavoidable: the  ultimate. The   clarity   of  gesture.  Bam! And Mozart must  have been the same. Can  you hear  him  and  avoid  him?  Never....

w.w. 	But you may not like him.

T.F.	No.  But  that's not  the  point  here, is it. The point  is-you  cannot remain unaware that  something extraordinary is happening through that  person.  Some­ thing  that  no one can explain. And yet-if  you're reading Shakespeare -listen­ ing to Mozart or  watching Margot Fonteyn-there doesn't have  to  be an  "ex­  planation." The  thing  is-you  come away  different. Changed. Put  it this  way:  the audience that  sits down  to Lear is not the  audience that rises at the end.  And that  is Shakespeare's genius. If this is "madness" -more! More!

w.w. 	All right.  Here  we are back, more  or less where  we began. In  the theatre. And you've  just been  talking  about  Margot Fonteyn and  you, yourself, began  as a dancer. So -what  you  wanted   to  express  as  a  dancer-as  an  actor-as  a painter-you now  express as a  writer.  Words. Words on  paper  ... which  is a little different from  these other  forms of expression  you began  with... .

T.F.	Yes. Yes. Words. Well, now.... Take  dance. What the dancer does is mal\:e a series of statements. And  the statements are  made up of gestures: gestures  in a sequence. So words-words are  the  vocabulary of literate gesture.  And  the combinations of your words  have  to be as precise  as the  combinations of gestures used by a dancer to make an articulate statement in dance. And  there's something else, I think,  to be said  about this. You  know,  when  you learn  to dance -when you learn  to move -you learn  to move -you  learn  to make  each  gesture  from

20

FINDLEY

the centre of your body : from the solar plexus -from the diaphragm. You learn that everything  must originate  there and grow outward  towards the conclusion of the gesture: the formation  of the statement.  And, as an  actor,  when you learn how to "speak" -you learn  to speak from  there:  from  the  centre -from the diaphragm. And, oddly enough -and  here we come to writing -when  a sen­ tence hits-or when a paragraph hits-that's where it hits. In the solar  plexus.

w.w.    But-

T.F.	Now, wait a minute.  Be patient.  I'm  making a point.  You know how you and I, in the theatre,  will so often say: "Isn't it strange. Isn't it really too bad.... Everything  about that  person is right -except : they don't  know how to use their hands."  Or-they carry  their  heads too high. Or  the shoulders  are stiff. Okay? Now:   think of that  marvellous,  wonderful  moment  when Lynn Seymour  dances onto the stage. Yes? Glorious. Because the whole of her presence is unfolding from the  centre.  Toller  Cranston  is the same. Every single gesture  is totally fulfilled. Their  fingertips-you know?-they flick the last cadence from the ends of their fingers. And  you cannot  breathe until it is over. They hold you enthralled  to the very last nuance. Yes?

w.w.    Yes.

T.F.    Well:  words are the same. Words in a sentence are a written  gesture. And if the cadence  is wrong -if  the rhythm  is wrong -if  a single syllable is out of place -the sentence  fails. And if the sentence fails:  the paragraph fails. And if the paragraph fails ... the book fails. Why? Because you have failed to impel the reader forward  with every gesture ... right to the "fingertips" -all the way from the solar plexus. That's where books are written. That's where readers read.

w.w.    You know what?

T.F.    No. What?

w.w.    I think our friend Alice just dropped  another cigarette....

T.F.    Aren't  you going to pick it up?

w.w.    No. (A PAUSE) I want to see what happens.



w

21

"LOOK! LISTEN! MARK MY WORDS!"

Paying Attention to Timothy  Findley's Fictions

John F. Hulcoop

"It's all an attempt  not to say what  you don't want to say. You've  achieved art when  you cannot be misconstrued."
(TIMOTHY FINDLEY, in Conversation  with Graeme Gibson)


LAN AGE OF  STRUCTURALIST and  deconstructive  criticism it may  be salutary  for  the critic to begin by reminding  himself of the  dangers  of misconstruction -despite  that  cunning  cartographer Harold  Bloom  (author of A Map of Misreading) who insists that  "[t]here are  no interpretations but only misinterpretations." Susan Sontag, in a famous essay, inveighs "against  interpre­
tation," wittily dismissing it as "the  revenge of the intellect  upon  art." She calls upon commentators to recover their  senses: "to  see more, to hear  more, to  feel more."  The  function  of criticism, says Sontag,  should  be "to  show how  [art]  is what  it is, even that  it is what  it is, rather  than  to show what  it  means."  Having defined "the aims of interpretation" and demonstrated its "validity," E. D. Hirsch reasons that  "[u]nderstanding  (and  therefore interpretation, in the strict sense of the word)  is both logically and psychologically prior to criticism."  Interpretation is "the  construction  of textual  meaning  as such;  it explicates ... those meanings and only those meanings which the text explicitly or implicitly represents."2
Conceding  that  "nothing in the nature  of the text itself ... requires  the reader
to set up the  author's meaning  as his normative  ideal,"  and  that  the  reader  of any text may easily "construe  meanings ... different  from  the  author's," Hirsch nevertheless believes -and he professes his "simple belief" in the sometimes over­ zealous accents of an academic Savonarola-that "a  text means what its author  means"  and  that  the  "interpreter's job is to  reconstruct   a  determinate  actual meaning"-namely, the  "verbal   meaning" which  the  author   "has  willed  to convey by a  particular  sequence  of linguistic signs and  which  can  be  conveyed (shared) by means of those linguistic signs." Verbal  meaning Hirsch  defines as "the  content  of the author's  intention  ... the author's verbal intention," a some­ what slippery definition compelling him to reticulate  a casuistical net in order  to keep  what  he's  caught  in  his critical  hold.  To  fulfill  his  proper  function,   the interpreter must be able to reconstruct "the  author's subjective stance"  (meaning "his disposition to engage in particular kinds of  intentional acts"), must be able

22

FINDLEY's  FICTIONS


to describe the horizon which defines the author's  intention as a whole (meaning the boundary which separates  "meanings  of which he was explicitly conscious" as he wrote from meanings of which he was only implicitly conscious. Hirsch rejects as a contradiction in terms meanings of which an author was unconscious) .3
That Hirsch  should  look with disfavour on a large  number  of current  critics and  critical schools is not surprising.  His commendation  of Frye is cautious;  his condemnation of Barthes is peremptory. Barthes' expansive outlook on writer, text and  reader  is antithetical to  Hirsch's  strait  and  narrow  view  of the  reader  as reconstructor  of the author's verbal intentions. The  "goal  of literary  work," says Barthes in S jZ, "is to make the reader no longer a consumer,  but  a producer  of the text.... This  new operation is inte pretation
word). To interpret a text is not to give it a  (more or less justified, more or less free)  meaning,  but on the contrary  to appreciate  what  plural constitutes it." The "text  is a galaxy of signifiers, not a structure  of signifieds," and  "the  more plural the text, the less it is written  before I read it.... If we want  to remain  attentive to the plural  of a text ... we must renounce structuring this text in large masses
... no construction  of the text: everything signifies ceaselessly and  several times,
but without  being delegated  to a great final ensemble, to an ultimate  structure."4
Bloom, Sontag,  Hirsch  and  Barthes  can  be  taken  to  represent  the  cardinal points on the  critical  compass  I shall carry  with me on  my expedition  into  the relatively  unexplored   territory   of  Timothy   Findley's  fictions.  Findley  himself would obviously acknowledge  the validity of Hirsch's viewpoint,  not only because he believes that  art, in order  to be art, must be invulnerable  to misconstruction,5 but  also because he admits  that  his "biggest  problem"  as a writer  is the fear  of not  having  made  himself clear:  "I'll  write the same thing  into  a  novel several times so that  by the  time  I've  got it said, I've  said it eight  different  ways ... I don't  trust enough-either myself or the reader." 6  One result of Findley's anxiety is that  the  critic  coming  fresh  to his work will, almost  inevitably,  respond  like Tzvetan  Todorov   who  begins  his essay on  Artaud  by  wondering  "if  it  is not superfluous  to  interpose  an  exegesis between  [Artaud's] text  and  his readers," since "Artaud said what he 'meant' so well and so abundantly." If we agree with Todorov that a "docile commentary, whose limit is paraphrase, is scarcely justified with regard  to a text  [or texts]  whose initial  comprehension  does [do]  not  raise excessive difficulties,"7    then   we  must  align  ourselves  with  Susan  Sontag   and against interpretation. On  the other hand, if, like Barthes, we want to remain "attentive to the plural  of a text" -and attention  is a key to, a crucial term  in any attempt  to understand (or interpret) Findley's work -we are bound to offer readings which were not necessarily a part of the author's conscious verbal inten­ tions (explicit or implicit)  as he wrote, and which  (as Bloom explains)  are likely to be misreadings  or misinterpretations of the author's intentions, though  not  of the text as it stands  (or is plurally constituted).

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

The  plurality of Findley's texts, as in all texts, derives not only from the galaxy of verbal signifiers which "signifies ceaselessly and  several times," and  so creates the complexities  of mythos, ethos, and  dianoia  (to  borrow  from  Aristotle  those terms Frye has proved so useful); the plurality  derives equally from those aspects of the signifiers which  (Sontag would say)  appeal  less to the intellect than  to the senses : namely,  melos (the  element of sound  analagous  to the  music in opera) , opsis (the element of spectacle analagous to sets, costumes, lighting and the mould­ ing of movement  on stage in opera) , and  lexis  (the  element  of texture, diction, or literary  style which is analagous  to the tessitura of a particular role in opera,  or to the singing style-say bel canto as distinct  from verismo or music-drama). The  importance of sound, spectacle, and style to a full  appreciation of Findley's fictions, whether  they be scripts intended  to be  listened  to on  the  radio,  scripts intended   to  be  seen  on  television,  the  movie-screen,  or  the  theatre-stage,  or whether  they be the texts of short-stories and  novels, cannot  be overemphasized.  His work compels the critic to recover his senses (see more, hear more)  by making direct appeals  to the viewer-listener-reader through sight, sound and style:  these are what force us to pay attention -to look and  listen and  mark  his words. And the need to pay attention,  together with the learning  how and why we need to pay attention, is an important theme in all Findley's fictions.8



T.:EN THE  CURTAIN RISES  on  the  garden  of the  old  Insane Asylum at  Britton,  Ontario-the setting  of Findley's  first stage-play,  Can  You See Me Yet?-the audience is forced to look and  listen:
The gard,en is empty. The sound  of a radio  rises in  the  wings; someone  is singing "Where or When," by Rodgers  and  Hart. Thwack! A  large  wooden croquet   ball rolls across the  stage. A dog barks off stage.

The  first character  to enter is Doberman, a  patient  who thinks  he's  a dog and, like man's  best friend, is dumb  (until  the last minute  of the play when  he utters a single word  twice  and  stops the  central  character from  killing  herself) . The second entrance is Enid's. Hearing  the dog barking  off stage she says, "Yap-yap­ yap.  Morning,  noon and  night.  Listen to 'im.  YAP-YAP-YAP-YAP! Wouldn't you think  he'd  lose his voice?"  (italics  mine).  Having  commanded   Doberman  (and,  by implication, the audience since it, like the dog, cannot  speak)  to listen, she says, "You  shouldn't  stare at the sun.... That's how people go blind. Mark my words:  blind as a bat"  (italics mine). Edward and  Clare  enter and sit down to play  cards.  Instantly,  Enid  interrupts:  "Stop! I  want  attention!" The  men ignore her. In  the distance, "the sound  of  a  fire engine is heard  approaching." Enid shouts, "THE SKY IS FALLING!" Edward tells Clare  to "Pay  no atten­  tion," but Enid  persists: "Listen  to me. Listen-there's something  terrible  hap-

FINDLEY's  FICTIONS


pening." Other  patients  join the group;  a scene breaks out and their nurse, Alma, enters, trying to calm things down by promising a surprise. "Watch out!"  Frank­ lin exclaims. "Miss  Alma is going to surprise  us" (italics mine). At  which point Enid  resumes her  bid for attention,  screaming  "FIRE! FIRE!  FIRE! FIRE!" Alma strikes her. Moments later, Annie enters and announces that something has happened,  down  by the gate : a dog  has been killed. Enid  says, "I told you ! I warned you! But-oh, no, no. No one listened."
Long before the significantly named  central  character  enters at  the beginning
of Scene Two,  Findley  has already  made  his point. He  has made  us look at  an empty stage, listen to various sound effects, and to Enid's imitating  a yapping dog and then shouting. We have heard the repeated imperatives; seen a number of characters  behaving  oddly and,  presumably,  tried  to figure them  out,  just as we have  tried  to follow the  non-sequential  conversation  of the  madhouse  inmates. Finally, we have been given the explicit warning, "I told you! ... But ... No one listened."  The  fact  that  Findley  withholds  Cassandra's  name  for  five or  more minutes  after  she first appears  makes its ultimate  revelation  even more pointed. If we have been listening to what Enid tells us, marking her words, watching  out, taking  her  warning  seriously, then  we shall certainly  not  need  to have  the  sig­ nificance of Cassandra's name spelled out for us.9
Edward, who plays Cassandra's  father  in the psychodrama  she acts out  with the other inmates,  and  with Alma, says to his daughter, "You  haven't  changed, Cassandra. Still a question. Still a riddle." The question she embodies is the same as the  play's  title,  a question  she asks three  times in  the  course of the drama's fifteen scenes. It is a question  Findley poses in all his fictions, from "About  Effie" to The  Wars.  It must, therefore, be crucial. So is the riddle. Like the play, which unfolds  on  two  levels  (Cassandra's recognition  and  acceptance  of  and  by  her fellow inmates; the  psychodrama  in which she re-enacts her family relationships from childhood  on), the riddle is twofold : Who is the "me" of the  play's  title­ question? or, from the subjective view-point compelled by the psychodrama, Who am I? And,  Is anyone there to see me? or, from the personal point of view, Who is there to see me? Both question and riddle clearly relate to a central concern in Findley's work : Does anyone  care enough  to pay me any attention?  And  if so, Who  cares enough?  And, Do they care enough to see me and accept me as I am?
Ontological  insecurity10 -together  with the sometimes desperate search for a
loveable and  therefore  acceptable  identity -is a constant  feature  in the variable worlds of Findley fictions. In his first short-story, "About  Effie," the insecurity of the young narrator, Neil Cable, is displaced by his acute anxiety about  his ability to make the reader identity Effie if and when he meets her:

I don't know  how  to begin  about  Effie, but  I've  got  to because  I  think  you  ought to kinow about her.  Maybe you'll meet  her  one day, and  then  you'll  be glad  I told you all this. If I didn't, then  maybe  you wouldn't know  what  to do.

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

The  "main thing," Neil continues, "is to watch  out  for  her." If the  reader  meets an  Effie  (and the  name  is uncommon), "take a good  look  because  it  might  be her." She  lacks  easily  identifiable physical  characteristics, "but  the  way  you'll know  her  is this: she'll  look at  you as if she  thought you  were someone  she  was waiting  for,  and  it  will  probably scare  you."   (Waiting, which   creates  suspense and  heightens anxiety, is another recurrent feature of Findley's fictional  world.) The  best  way to  "introduce" Effie so as we shall  not  forget  her  is obviously  to tell her story; but  even  when  he's  finished  telling  it,  Neil  is still  uncertain about his achievement. "So you can see what  I mean.  It still worries  me. And  that's why I want  you to be sure-to be sure-to recognize  her  when  you see her."
Similarly, in  his second-written story,  "Harper's Bazaar,"11  the  insecurity is again  displaced from  the  main  character, eight-year-old Harper  Dewey,  to  his beautiful, alcoholic  mother   whom  he  comes  to  identify with  her  jewels, which she sells for liquor, and  whom  he tries to pin  into  place  forever by selling liquor­ laced lemonade in order  to make enough  money  to replace his mother's jewellery. He  has  been  told  in a letter  from  his father (killed  in  World   War  II)  that "his
'Duty' [is] to obey  his mother and  always  'to  love  her  more  dearly  than  all  the earth, dearer  still than your  own  dear  life."' But  she  dies anyway, even  though Harper runs  away  from  home  and  spends  the  night   in  a  tree  "'to make  my mother take  attention.'" Says  Bertha Millroy,  the  Dewey's maid, "'I guess  we just didn't pray enough.... We went and  lost her,  Harper.... We went  and  lost her to the Lord."' Gradually overwhelmed by "the deep quiet of loneliness," "the loneliness  of an  adult, the  loneliness  defined  by  remembrance," Harper is  con­ fronted by

Nothing.
That was  all  he  could  grasp.  Nothing. Everything was  over-everyone  went away-and finally  you went  away  yourself.

"Nothing, as experience," according to R.  D.  Laing, "arises as an  absence  of someone  or something. No friends, no relationships, no  pleasure, no  meaning in life.... The  list is, in principle, endless. Take anything and  imagine its absence.m2
Laing  distinguishes very carefully  between  "the absence  of relationships, and  the experience of every  relationship as an  absence" : the  difference is that "between loneliness and  a perpetual solitude, between  provisional hope  or hopelessness  and a permanent state  of despair." He  goes on to  point  out  that, in  a world  without meanings, values,  sources  of sustenance or  help,  "man, as creator, must  invent, conjure up  meanings and  values,  sustenance and  succour out  of  nothing." But the fate of the creator, says Laing, "after being ignored, neglected, despised,  is ... to be discovered  by the non-creative."

There are  sudden, apparently inexplicable suicides  that  must  be understood as the dawn  of a hope  so horrible and  harrowing that  it is unendurable.

FINDLEY'S  FICTIONS


In The  Last of the Crazy  People, as the title suggests, Findley moves closer than in the two preceding stories to the characters and setting of Can You  See Me Yet? What  "pleases me most about  my work as a novelist," Findley  has stated  in the Gibson interview, "is my own awareness of having that special twisted view which is a dependence  on the insane people to do sane things. The  ultimate sanity comes from  the insane,  I believe. Now-be  careful!  What  I mean  is-we  call the sane 'insane.'  In fiction you have to heighten this, treat it symbolically." In Crazy People, Findley moves closer to his own confrontation with the kind of  nothing­ ness that  Harper Dewey glimpses, that  R. D. Laing sees as a symptom of onto­ logical insecurity, and that  Hooker Winslow, eleven-year-old protagonist  of Find­ ley's first novel, faces in the novel's Prologue and obliterates in its Epilogue.
The structure of this first novel is clearly significant : from the Prologue to the Epilogue,  Hooker  is waiting,  alone-"a perpetual  solitude." The  intervening chapters  form  a  single,  extended   flashback,  a  "loneliness  defined  by  remem­ brance." The dawn  described in the Prologue does what Findley says fiction must do;  it heightens,  by symbolizing,  "the  dawn  of a  hope so horrible ... that  it is unendurable." The  light  (and  maybe what "we"  call sanity)  begins to break in Hooker's  mind  when  he hears  his aunt  talking  to  his father  about  his brother, Gilbert : "'They're going to hold a shotgun over your son, and you just sit there!'" This  prompts  Hooker  to steal the pistol that  belonged to John Harris  (killed in World  War  I): "When Gilbert  needed a gun, it would  be there ... for him to use when he got in trouble. Then Gilbert would know that he had thought of him kindly." Gilbert,  however, commits suicide (a "sudden, apparently inexplicable"  suicide), and  Hooker,  attending the  inquest,  hears the  verdict: "Death by his own  hand"-presumably "while  of  unsound  mind."  His  father   is  mortally shamed  by Gilbert's suicide : '"One of us has killed  himself .... It's like having a bloody gun at your head  all the time.'" By which point in the novel, Hooker has already seen the light  (his mother  is a  psychopathic  recluse;  his father  is figura­ tively impotent; his aunt  lives in the  past;  his brother  is mentally  handicapped; and  Hooker suspects that  he himself  is homosexual) : "'I think  that  we are crazy people,' said Hooker.  'Like those crazies in the asylum. We have a crazy mother, don't  we? ... It's  like a whole list of crazy people, and  we're  the last of them."' His brother's suicide is all the confirmation  he needs. He  holes up in the loft of the stable  (which is where we leave him waiting in the Prologue)  : "Somehow, in the stable, they would have to come to him"  (italics mine). His family will have to search for Hooker.  When they do, in the Epilogue, he guns them  down and  is committed  to an  insane  asylum.  Iris,  the  Winslow's maid  and  Hooker's  closest companion, is told  it's  best to  think  of him  dead -another  of those "sudden,  apparently inexplicable suicides that must be understood as the dawn of a hope so horrible ... it is unendurable." As Findley explained to Gibson, with reference to a story he heard of a child  who killed one of his parents,  his sister and someone

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

else staying in the  house: "I was thunderstruck by what  I considered the  beauty
... of his statement when someone ... said to him: Can  you tell me why you did it? He said,  Because  I loved them  so. And  for me, that's all he needed  to say."
Any attempt to reconstruct Findley's  "subjective stance" in  relation to a  num­ ber of given texts returns the attentive reader  to his preoccupation with loneliness. As a child,  he confesses to Cameron,

I had  no interest  in other  children,  maybe because  I was often  sick and  had  no tie with what other kids were doing.... I spent a lot of time with the maid, or just plain  by myself, so it got that  I sort of feared  other  kids....  Nothing  but surface communication. I was sent to boarding school during  the worst part of the war ... my brother  got sick ... I was left there all by myself and  my mother  could  hardly ever come to see me. Dad was at war and  I just felt -abandoned.

But the loneliness  was not confined to his childhood. Asked by Gibson  if he en joys writing, Findley  replied that  he loves it but hates "all  the other stuff that  goes with it,"  meaning loneliness.  Though he  alludes  to  Mann's Death  in Venice  because it  shows  that  loneliness  has  its  positive  side,  Findley   concludes that   "loneliness perverts" :

I wouldn't attempt to say anything  more than  loneliness perverts, and  this is very disturbing,  very upsetting and  you have to go through  that  to be a writer ... the way you live very often  cuts you off from  people  that  you shouldn't be cut  off from.... You're  intellectually lonely:  no one-hardly anyone "understands" you, because your whole life-maybe I should say your whole existence is an intensified searching-not for your own identity-but for your work's identityY



LIKE HARPER DEWEY and  Hooker Winslow, James Reid Tay­ lor,  principal character in The  Paper People, a film-script written for  television in  rg67, has an unhappy childhood, was "a lonely boy"  born  about "eight friends  behind  everyone  else."14  Taylor, a  contemporary artist  who  expresses  "with in­ creasing  violence ... his distaste  for  contemporary life,"  is  the  subject of  a  TV  documentary being  researched  and  written by Janet  Webb,  a fictional  TV  pro­ ducer.  Janet's "filmic inquiry"-the containing subject of The  Paper People­ is a quest  for  the  identity of Jamie Taylor as  revealed in  his work: his "work's identity." Jamie's  current mode  is  to  make  life-size  and   lifelike  models  of  his friends  out  of  papier-mache, and  then  to burn them  ritualistically, reducing both  his  art   and   his  paper people  "to  ashes-the ultimate symbol  of  emptiness." Janet, in the course of compiling  her documentary, uncovers important aspects  of Taylor's life  he  would  prefer  to  keep  secret  but  which  she  insists  on  including. He  reacts  by calling  her a killer:  "I knew  you  were  a  killer  the  moment I laid eyes on  those cold,  cold hips of  yours."  Like  Hooker, and  "[l]ike to the  Egyptian thief at  point  of death," both Jamie and  Janet "kill" what  they love. The  search

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS


for and  assertion  of identity -even the work's identity-results in its extermina­ tion: self-consciousness paralyses  the self. The  quester  is left feeling unattended to in  innominate  loneliness; or,  if  the  critic  is quester, he  is left  to  face  his  own  failure  and  the fact  that, as Wordsworth warns,  "We murder to dissect."
Not  coincidentally, one  of the  major  sequences  (entitled "BANG-BANG") in
The  Paper People includes a discussion of the sniper  in the  tower  on the  Univer­ sity of Texas campus who  shot  fifteen  and  wounded thirty  other  people.  Janet asks  why  anyone must  be  killed,  "Why kill  at  all?"  "To make  a  statement," answers one of Jamie's friends,"... what  other  new way is there  to express some­  thing?"
TONYA:         You're setting up killers as artists.
MARCO :     Or  artists as killers ...
WILFRID:     •.• Suicide and assassination are the new art forms....
MARCO:         ... All you have to do is look at In Cold Blood.
HAROLD:       (DREAMILY)  Yes, -and those nurses in Chicago, -and Austin, -and
Dallas! They're all sort of pointless, unless the point is to say something.
1AMIE:             With style.

When  Janet objects, reminding them  that  human lives are  at  issue here,  Marco, who  has seen  one  of Janet's documentaries in which  she exposes  a distinguished neuro-surgeon as an  alcoholic, says, "I've seen you assassinate  in your quiet lady­ like  way!" Suicide, homicide andjor  assassination, real  or  figurative,  are  not uncommon events  in  Findley's fictional  world  over  which  hangs  the  "allure of violence" which   is also  seen  to  hang  in  the  air  over  Cheeverland,  his  satirical model  of  the  United States.15  After  he  has  seen  Lee  Harvey  Oswald shot, on television, Hooker asks Gilbert what  "assassinate" means. "'Usually it's killing  for a bigger  reason  than  plain  ordinary murder,'"  Gilbert explains. "'Like  Kennedy and  Abe  Lincoln and  the  Archduke Ferdinand....  [T]hey decided  ... if they
killed  the  Archduke, that  would  make  something happen. Cause  attention and
division."' James Reid  Taylor burns  his  paper   people  in  public; the  "fires  are what  draw  public  attention to him and,  thus, Janet's interest  in putting his world on film."
Of  the  many  images  people  use to describe  "ways  in  which  identity is  threat­ ened" -being  buried,  drowned, dragged  down  into  quicksand -that   which  "recurs repeatedly" (according to Laing) is fire :

Fire may be the uncertain  fliclrering of the individual's  own inner aliveness. It may be a destructive  alien power which will devastate  him. Some psychotics say in  the acute phase that  they are on fire, that  their bodies are being burned  up. A patient describes himself as cold and  dry. Yet he dreads  any warmth  or  wet. He  will  be engulfed  by the fire or the water, and either way be destroyed.

This  last sentence is immediately relevant  to Robert Ross in The  Wars,  who  first

29

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

fears death  by drowning  and  finally dies as a result of injuries  sustained in fire; but Laing's observation illuminates more generally the recurrence  of fire as event, image and symbol in Findley's fictions.
Gilbert  Winslow  slams  his Jaguar into  a  tree  and  is instantly  immolated: "Gilbert, on fire, lay back like Peter crucified, hooked  by his feet to the cross of the motor  car, his arms spread  out in a hopeless gesture."  The  first sequence  in The  Paper People (described  entirely in terms of visuals without  any dialogue) is a junkyard in which James Reid Taylor's  papier-mache doll of Tonya  is being burned; fire is what draws the public's attention to his work;  with fire he reduces both art  and  life to ashes, "the  ultimate symbol of emptiness" -of  nothingness. For Ruth  Damorosch,  in The  Butterfly  Plague, 1938 "had  been a year of fires. Real  fires, imaginary  fires, symbolic fires. All  burning -all  eating -most  of them conjuring  death." The first fire is a small fire on Topanga Beach, where she lives. By the time she finds it, it is only embers:  "There was nothing  sinister in the fire at all." But she removes from the ashes "a  small  piece of blue material" which turns out  to be a memento  mori, the remains  of a bathing  suit  belonging to  a  girl  whose naked  body is later  washed  ashore : the  first  of many  deaths, violent and pacific, in Findley's second novel. The second fire provides the climax and  conclusion to the novel's first book:  the  fire in Alvarez  Canyon,  due  north of Santa   Monica,  a  tourist  beauty-spot  "known   around   the  globe,"  and  pro­ claimed  "'Paradise'" by the visiting public.  Approximately forty  acres in  area, Alvarez  Canyon  is a  cunning  mixture  of  natural and  artificial: "In  order  to preserve the  atmosphere  of Paradise  in  all  weathers,  some  portions  of  Alvarez were  quite  unreal.  The  plants  in  these  places  were  made  of  specially  treated fabrics and  rubber.  Thus  when elsewhere the acacia  leaves were falling they did not fall down  in Alvarez."  But Paradise  is lost at  the  end  of Book One,  totally destroyed  by fire:  "The sanctuary  was to  become  a  charnel   house."  Standing outside  the  gates  of  Paradise-their poses a  "[s]tillness  in  the  holocaust"­ Ruth,  her  mother,  father,  brother,  and  several  other  characters, turn  back  to watch  the terror,  panic and suffering of  all the animals  trapped inside the sanc­ tuary,  "fleeing  mindlessly in concerted directions,  not  knowing  what  death  was, but smelling death -not knowing what fire was, but being burned.  Some turned  back into the furnace.  Some others crept into the flaming  trees. Some attempted impossible flight into the sky" :

Naomi said, "They will all die."
And Ruth said, "Pay attention." ...
"Pay attention. Listen. Watch. Attention....
In the ghettos of Paradise, four thousand creatures had perished. Against a wall....
Surely someone was there to see it and to pay attention.

Clearly, the fire in Alvarez Canyon is proleptic;  in its flames Findley prefigures go

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS


the fate of the Jews in the German  crematoria  (the dream  of a pure and  perfect Aryan  race  and  the  evils of  Naziism being, of course, a  central  subject  in this novel). Near the end of The  Butterfly Plague, Ruth sets fire to her dead brother's house  wanting   to  raze  to  the  ground  the  softly seductive,  sweetly  dangerous dreams of impossible perfection her brother's life has housed. And the final chron­ icle in this novel composed of seventeen separate  chronicles is entitled "The Fire Chronicle." "We  know that  history repeats itself." In September  of  rg68, Ruth's  orphaned  daughter, Lisa, meets the son of another  character  on Topanga Beach. They smell smoke. "'Fire is dangerous,'" says Lisa. They go to look for it. "This  makes an  interesting  conclusion,"  says the narrator. "As always. And  thus,  this chronicle is over -the last of the chronicles of the Butterfly Plague.  The first of the  Fire Plague.  And ..." [Findley's  ellipsis]. Though  the  novel stops after  one more sentence  (which  tells that  Lisa and  the boy don't  find the fire),  the ellipsis after the additive  conjunction invites the reader to anticipate another  story chron­ icling the Fire Plague,  which is  precisely what  Findley's third  novel is and  does. But  between  The   Butterfly  Plague  and  The  Wars  comes the  long  short-story, "Hello  Cheeverland, Goodbye," which has little directly to do with fire until the very last sentence.
Two epigraphs  precede "Hello  Cheeverland, Goodbye," one from John Cheev­ er's Bullet Park (in response to which this story was written) 16  and another  from Nicholas  Fagan's Essays and  Conversations.  Fagan  suggests that  Cheever's  fic­ tional world is so true-to-life and all-absorbing that people have started  forsaking New York, New Jersey and  Connecticut  in order to "take  up residence inside his books ... they've  foundered   in  this  place  called  Cheeverland." Findley's  story (which cannot  be summarized  because it has no plot)  creates a Lilliputian  model of Cheeverland  located  somewhere  on  Long  Island,  with  a  view of the  Sound and  the sight of William  F. Buckley Junior's home on the far shore. The cast of characters  is extensive, including another in the significant series of Findley maids, and  a  young  man  "innocent of  all  experience  save imagination. . . .  Call  him Ishmael. ... He  has come a long  way to Cheeverland,  from  Toronto." He  has come to the house of Arthur  and Alicia Anderson  ("on  their way up in the world of  television")   because  they  want  to  turn  his novel,  Blackwater  Falls, into  a "'Film of the  Week'  (not  the same as a FILM)." Ishmael  stays in the  maid's old room.  "After  the events in  Memphis  [in  rg68]  a  meeting  was held [of the blacks in Cheeverland  regarding  those who worked as live-in servants  in  white folks' houses] and  the decision was made to move out.  It  was one thing to work there and to eat there, but quite another  to sleep there, and so their bedrooms ... were abandoned." Clyde, lover of Rosetta, the Anderson maid, is a leader of "this movement"  among  the  blacks, and  he  persuades  Rosetta  to  carry  a  gun.  On Saturday  morning,  his second  day in  Cheeverland,  Ishmael  wakes and  hears a "distant  narrative of fire and  lemonade": Rosetta  is telling Alicia about  "a  fire

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

in the  night,  downtown,  and  even now the soldiers and  the firemen  are  sifting through  the ashes for the victims." Apart  from  references to Professor Dinstitch, another  character  who, as a younger  man,  helped  to invent  the  atomic  bomb, Findley lets fire drop until the final sentence which reads : "On Monday  Rosetta comes up coatless in the morning,  but  the  fires have  moved  up  before  her  and these pages already  bum." The  revolution, it seems, has already  started,  and  the illusory pseudo-liberal world of Cheeverland  browns and  crumbles in the reader's hands.  Feeling the heat, he drops it, watching  it  (Findley's  art,  and  life itself) reduced to ashes, ultimate symbol of nothingness.



b:E WARS  begins and  ends with fire (even though  it is also full of images of water, earth  and  air, a fact  to which the inscription  on Robert Ross's gravestone alerts readers) :

Robert  Ross comes  riding  straight  towards  the  camera. His  hat  has  fallen off. His hands  are knotted to the  r.eins. They bleed. The horse is black  and  wet and  falling. Robert's lips are parted. He leans along the  horse's neck.  His eyes are blank.  There is mud  on his cheeks and  forehead and  his uniform is burning -long, bright  tails of  flame are streaming  out  behind  him. He  leaps  through the  memory  without  a sound.  The archivist   sighs. Her  eyes  are  lowered   above   some  book.  There is  a strand  of hair in  her mouth. She  brushes  it  aside  and  turns  the  page. You  lay the fiery image  back in  your mind  and  let it rest. You know  it will  obtrude again  and again  until  you  find its meaning- here.

The  "fiery image"  of Robert  burning on horseback,  "tails of flame ... streaming out  behind  him,"  is carefully paralleled  by a  watery  image  of Robert,  after  he has nearly drowned,  swimming on horseback, "almost  submerged  with his clothes flowing back. ... Pegasus.m7  Both images are simultaneously elemental and myth­ ical; and attention  is drawn, directly or indirectly, to both aspects of both images; directly, in the single-word sentence "Pegasus"; indirectly,  with  reference  to the "fiery image"  of Robert,  which has to be seen in its chronological context  at the end of the novel, the four final sections of Part  Five  beginning,  "Here is where the  mythology  is muddled."  What  is  important,  quite  apart   from  what  these images signify in  relation  to the  plot  ( mythos), to  Robert's  character   (ethos), and to the thematic  content of the novel ( dianoia) , is the fact that  in both cases the narrator compels the reader to look at the image  ( opsis), and to hear how the image sounds (melos), and carefully to mark his words ( lexis). From first to last, the unspecified  narrator  of  The  Wars makes  his presence  felt/8  addressing  the reader,  directing  the  reader's attention,  compelling  him  to  mark  the  narrator's words in a particular way (one may even wonder, at moments, if the unspecified narrator is not  a  personification of Findley's  anxiety  about  being misconstrued, about  not  making himself clear, about  trusting-or  not trusting-the reader).

32

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

"You  lay the  fiery image back in your mind and let it rest. You  know it will obtrude again and again until  you  find its meaning- here." The   deictics  are tricky  since  we cannot be sure  if the  "you" is really  reflexive -the  narrator  as fictional  researcher hypothesizing someone engaged  in the same  process as himself
-or  whether he  is  addressing the  reader   directly   and   casting   him  in  a  role parallel  to the  narrator's own. Similarly, the adverb  "here" may  refer specifically to an imaginary photograph (since, so far as we know, no photographer is present to take  pictures when  Robert breaks  out  of the fired  barn) which  the  narrator is describing; or, if the "you" is addressed  to the reader, "here" could  mean  "in  this image,  in this passage  of this novel" -or "in  this image, in its proper context in this  novel." The shades  of difference in meaning are  complementary rather  than contradictory. Clearly, the  attentive reader  now knows that  whatever "meaning" (the   "author's verbal  intention")  he  is to  take  from  the  novel  inheres  in  this "fiery image" -even though the reader  must  remain  attentive to the  plurality of the  text,  aware that  everything signifies  ceaselessly and  several  times,  that   the "fiery  image" is only  one  of  the  several  ways  in  which   the  same  story  is told, simultaneously and   sequentially; and   is itself  a  microcosm  of  the  single  story which  is projected in other elements  and  mythoi, severally  and  at the same time.
When  Robert tries to save the horses at the end of The Wars (an  action  which
involves  the  killing  of Captain Leather which,  in turn, compels  him  to become  a deserter, to shoot  Private Cassles and,  in some eyes, to become  a renegade horse­ thief) he fulfills the  proper function of a soldier  which  he  wrongly  attributes to the  unnamed soldier  in the  early scene in which  Teddy Budge  is called  in to kill Rowena's rabbits after  her  death. When  Robert sees Budge,  it  takes  him  "thirty seconds  to  emerge  from  his  pain  and  to  realize  why  Teddy  Budge  was  there." Robert turns   to  the  soldier  and   yells "something like : 'you  bastard !  Bastard ! What are soldiers for?'" The  young  man's question  obviously expects  the answer,  "To protect the defenceless," not "To kill." That answer  is something Robert has to  learn   ("What he  wanted was  a  model.  Someone   who  could  teach  him,  by example, how  to kill"). Ironically, his action  at  the  end  of  the  novel  repeats  the unknown soldier's  in  the  very attempt to do  what  the latter  did  not  do: protect  the defenceless  (horses). Robert's final acts are, therefore, open  to interpretation, both  negative and  positive.  As the  researcher-narrator discovers,  when  he inter­ views World  War  I veterans, and  asks about Robert, "they look  away." Others weep  when   he  says  "'Tell  me  about   the  horses."' And   yet  others  say  '"that bastard!'" Marian Turner states simply: "'My opinion  was-he was a hero ... he did  the  thing  that  no one else would  dare  to think  of doing."' Juliet  d'Orsey, who  falls in love  with  Robert  when  she is only twelve,  and  who  looks after  him after  he's wounded until  he dies, asserts neither  hero nor  bastard. She says:
"So  wh,at it  was  we  were  denied  [in  the  war]   was  to  be  ordinary.19   All  our ordinary  credos and  expectations  vanished. Vanished. There was so much  death.


33

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

No one can imagine. These were not accidents-or the quiet, expected  deaths  of the  old.  These  were  murders.  By the  thousands.  All  your  friends  were ... mur­ dered."

The  death of Captain Leather is, then,  no different from  that of Clive  d'Orsey, died  July  1st, 1916,  in  the  Battle  of the  Somme; or  of Rodwell who  walks  out into  No Man's Land  and  blows his brains out; or of Clifford  Purchas, shot  in the back  as a deserter; or of the  friendly  German sniper  whom  Robert shoots  in  a moment of panic; or of Robert himself who dies of wounds sustained while  per­ forming what  he has thought the duty of a soldier  ought  to be.
In  the same  way, the "fiery image" is open  to both  positive  and  negative inter­ pretations. For the disinterested reader  of fiction, it is striking evidence of  Findley's imagination; for  those who enjoy  projecting themselves into  fictional worlds,  the "fiery  image" is a beautiful, Phoenix-like metaphor for  the  spirit  of  self-sacrifice embodied in Robert (and  all those like him)  ; and  for  the  hope  of  a  whole  gen­ eration that  believed  it was fighting  the  war  to  end  all  wars,  a  hope  reduced to ashes in the prolonged and senseless front-line slaughter but resurrected repeatedly in the  human heart  because it is human. For  those  whose view of human nature is less optimistic (and  Findley's  view, as revealed in  interviews if not  in  fictions, inclines  to be less optimistic),20  the  "fiery  image" may  well suggest  what   Laing  sees as  the  recurring image  for  the  threatened  identity of  the  psychotic  in  the acute  stage.  This  negative interpretation  is  certainly supported by  other  aspects  of the text, quite  apart from  the fact  that,  just before  he shoots  Leather, Robert's anger  rises to  such  a  pitch  that  he fears  he is "going over  into  madness"; and  Major Mickle,  responsible  for  arresting  Robert, decides  that   he  is "plainly ... dealing  with  a man  gone mad." Juliet  d'Orsey links  Robert with  Eugene Taffier and  Jamie Villiers: all three  become the  lover  of Barbara d'Orsey who  "'had a taste  for  heroes  and  athletes.  She enjoyed  the  spectacle of winning.'" Ironically, Taffier,  Villiers  and  Robert  are  all  losers;  all suffer  extensive injuries in  battle. Taffier,  the  David-like stone-thrower, loses both  his arms  and  tries to kill himself in hospital. Jamie, like Robert, dies of his burns. Robert first sees Barbara when,  with  Taffier on her arm, she visits Villiers in the  hospital where  Robert is keeping  vigil at Harris's bedside. The  visit is brief.

When  they'd  gone Robert  could feel the  man  in  bandages  [Villiers]   'screaming' and  the sensation  of this silent agony at  the other  end  of the room was so strong that  Robert  had  to go and  get one of the  nurses.... She  told  him  the  man  had been  trapped   in  a  fire and  his vocal cords  destroyed  when  he'd  swallowed  the flames.

Later, Juliet  comments on her sister's visit to Villiers:

"Her  silence in Jamie's  presence. Was it cruel?  Of  course it  was. Not  to let him hear  her voice. Nothing  was left of him, you know. Nothing  but  nerves and  pain

34

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS


and his mind. No voice-no flesh. Nothing. Just his self. Later, as you'll see, this forms a sort of pattern ... well-a very definite pattern."  [Findley's ellipsis]

(Here,  again,  the narrator through  Juliet  directs reader-attention, compelling us to mark  these words in a particular way:  to look for a specific pattern.) Robert, like Villiers, is reduced  to nothing,  to nerve, pain, mind-his  self, essenced in two  words "'Not yet'": "according to the  medical  testimony -there was  vir­ tually no hope that  he would ever walk or see or be capable of judgement again." The  narrator describes  another   photo  of him,  "taken  about  a  year  before  his death.  He  wears a dose-fitting  cap  rather  like a toque -pulled  down over  his ears. He has no eyebrows -his nose is disfigured and bent and  his face is a mass of scar tissue.... Robert  is looking directly at the camera."
"Robert comes riding straight towards the camera":   here, near  the beginning of the book, the circle is opened.  By the end,  "Robert  is looking directly at  the camera": here the circle is almost closed. "'These are the  circles-all  drawing inward  to the thing Robert  did.'" Robert  died, his life

obscured by violence. Lawrence was hurled against a wall -Scott entombed in ice and wind-Mallory blasted on the face of Everest. Lost. We're told Euripides was killed by dogs-and this is all we know. The flesh was torn and scattered-eaten. Ross was consumed by fire. These are like statements: 'pay attention!' [First two italics mine.]

The  narrator instructs   the  reader  how  to  pay  attention:  "You   begin  at  the archives with photographs. Robert and Rowena.... Boxes and boxes of snapshots and  portraits; maps  and  letters;  cablegrams  and  clippings  from  the  papers.  All you have to do is sign them  out and  carry them across the room ... a whole age lies in fragments  underneath the lamps. The  war to end  all wars.... You hold your breath." You look at the images and listen to the narrator. A series of  pic­ tures of 19 15 : the "year  itself looks sepia and soiled.'' Then  comes April, Ypres and six thousand  dead. "This is where the pictures alter -fill up with soldiers­ horses-wagons. Everyone is waving either at the soldiers or the cameras. More and  more people want to be seen ... want to be remembered." Troops  marching  down  Yonge Street,  Sir Sam  Hughes  taking  the salute. Then  the "fiery image" of Robert  (imagined, in italics); then  a series of family  photographs: "Thomas Ross and Family ... Rowena  ... Mother  and Miss  Davenport  ... Meg-a  Pa­ triotic Pony ... Peggy Ross with  Clinton  Brown."  A picture  of the ocean,  taken on  a trip  to England, with  a small  white  dot  which is "clearly ... an  iceberg" (conjuring thoughts  of I 9 I 2 and that archetypal Canadian image, the Titanic).
Two  more  photos, one early, one late, and  the circle is completed.  The  early
one was obviously taken  at the end of Robert's  training,  before he embarked  for
England:

Robert  Raymond Ross-Second Lieutenant, C.F.A.

35

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

He is wearing his uniform. Nothing yet is broken down....
Dead  men  are serious-that's what  this photograph is striving  to say. Survival
is precluded.  Death  is romantic-got from silent images. I lived-was young­
and  died. But not real death,  of course, because I'm  standing  here alive with all these lights that shine so brightly in my eyes.... He  died  for King  and  Country­ fighting the war to end all wars.
5 x g and framed  in silver.

The  last  picture was taken  even  earlier  and  returns us to the  beginning : "begin at  the archives with  photographs. Robert and  Rowena" :
The  archivist  closes her  book....  It  is  time to tell us all  to go.... You begin  to arrange  your research in bundles -letters-photos -telegrams. This  is the  last thing you see before you put on your overcoat:
Robert  and  Rowena with  Meg:  Rowena seated astride the pony-Robert hold­
ing her in place. On the back is written, 'Look! You can see our  breath.'  And you can.

Just  as early  and  late are  transposed (the last  thing  you see is what  you began with), so are life and death (Robert standing there  alive in his uniform long after he has died) ; but  Robert's death is "not real" because, of course,  his life is only imagined (as  a novel by Findley). What never  really  lived  can  never  really  die. He  exists in a continuous fictional  present  and  only in  a series of images-some fiery, some watery, some earthy (Robert in the whore-house, in the dugout), some airy: "'Look! You can see our  breath."' And  the  attentive reader can, if he uses his imagination (Pegasus); if he  remains attentive  to  the  text's   plurality, has marked the  narrator's words  with  care,  he  will  also  understand that the  visible breath of Robert and  Rowena, which  makes  them  appear so lifelike,  is simulta­ neously  an  image  of death. "'Be quiet,'" says Robert to his men,  trapped in the crater under the  eye of the  German sniper, "and as he said  it, he saw  in front  of them   the  dreadful  phenomenon that   could  give  them   all  away.  His  breath." "'Birth I can  give you -but life I cannot,'" his mother  tells Robert just before he joins up. "'I can't keep anyone  alive. Not any more.' ... This  was the last time they  breathed  in  one  another's presence."21    "Rowena  and   his  father and   his mother and  the whole of his past life-birth and  death and  childhood. He could breathe them  in and  breathe them  out."
Harris, dying  of pneumonia, "said  the  strangest things.... Strange and  pro­ vocative.   Robert didn't know,  sometimes, what   to  do  with  Harris's  sentences: where  to fit them  in his mind,  or how  to use them." Having drawn  attention to Harris's strange sentences,  the narrator makes the reader listen more carefully:

'Then  I'd  slide. Like a seal. Out  of the air  and  into  the  water.  Out  of my world and into theirs. And I'd  stay there hours. Or so it seemed. I'd  think: I never  have to  breathe   again.  I've  changed.  It changes  you.' ... And  in  his sleep  his hands would  move ... as if  he  dreamt  of  swinuning-or of  'breathing' in  the  other element. . . .  'In  that  place -there-in  that  element-somehow I was safe -

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

even from choking.... But once I'd landed on the shore ... I nearly died. In the air.... in the air ...'Z 2

Lying  in  his  bunk,  in  the  dugout,  listening  to  his  batman's harsh  breathing, Robert  is reminded  of Harris,"-and that  was the last thing  he needed remind­ ing of" (since Harris  has died). "All he wanted was a dream. Escape.... Dreams and  distance  are the same. If he could run  away ... Like Longboat" [Findley's ellipsis]. Longboat, the Indian marathon runner, is Robert's  childhood  hero, and he  himself is really  "a  long  distance  runner." During  training at  Lethbridge, Robert  runs every night  by himself. Running,  he loses all sense of time. "There was nothing to be won but distance."  "Distance  was safety. Space  was asylum."
From the Prologue until the antepenultimate section of the novel, Robert  is on
the run  (just  as Hooker  is waiting) , trying to put a safe space  between  himself (his self) and all that  threatens  destruction. Dreaming of distance, he runs toward asylum;  but, like Cassandra's, in the final scene of Can  You  See Me  Yet?, Rob­ ert's airy dream is dashed or drowned in the mud, destroyed by fire:

Brothers and sisters: there should be a place to go for safety: asylum, and there's not. There is no safety -none for love, or for the mind.... I've failed. I couldn't make a place for safety. I should be asylum, and I'm  not....  Why can't  I help? Why can't  I get beyond the fire? ... The world is ending all around  us, and  we need each other  now. And yet there is no sanctuary. Nowhere. None. In  all the world. In all the width and breadth and depth of the human heart-where there is room for sanctuary -there is none. I know, because there is none in mine.

In  order  to  know  what  nothingness  is, says Laing,  take  anything-distance, safety,  sanctuary, asylum-and imagine  its absence.  Even  the  old  asylum  at Britton offers no sanctuary. As Alma informs us, in September  of 1939  (ominous and symbolic date), it "was  destroyed by fire. Cassandra  Wakelin  died. But ... she did  not  die alone.  As she had  lived."  Equally  ironic  is the  fact  that,  when Robert,  near the end of the book, goes to the Asile Desole, where mad Van Gogh was once an inmate and where, in the war, the officers are allowed to take a bath, he is raped  by a gang  of men  he assumes are "crazies"  but  who turn  out  to be "his fellow soldiers."
Cassandra  cries out that she cannot get beyond the fire. Earlier in the play, like a  psychotic in  the  acute  phase,  she has declared  "I am  fire."  At  Verdun,  the Germans  used a new weapon, the flame-thrower : "Men ... carrying tanks of fire on their backs ... spread  the fire with hoses. Water  burned  and snow went up in smoke. Nothing  remained." A silent image, Robert leaps through  the memory as a human  torch on horseback. Beyond the fire, he is nothing.  He is made one with the elements  (like the  tormented  Empedocles  whose final leap  takes him  under the  volcano) ; but  the  elements  themselves, in  the  infernal  world  of  the  wars, suffer  unnatural changes  and  become  one:  the  air  is "filled  with  a  fine,  grey powder" that  turns  into  mud; men  and  horses "drowned in  mud"; the  only

37

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

water  lies "out  in  the marsh  beyond  the  flaming  hedgerows"; gasoline spreads
"through the town in rivers of fire."

Fire  storms  raged  along  the front.  Men  were  exploded where  they  stood -blown apart by the combustion.... Wells and  springs  of water were  plugged and  stopped by the  bodies  of men ... who had  gone  there  for safety.  The storms  might  last  for hours-until the clay was baked  and  the earth was seared  and  sealed  with  fire.



EE, ASSERTS  GASTON BACHELARD,  is "a  privileged  phenom­ enon which can explain anything"-and everything; "it is one of the principles of universal  explanation."23   Certainly,  a  reading  of The  Psychoanalysis of Fire provides a most provocative commentary  not only on  the  "fiery image"  in The Wars, but  also on the phenomenon  of fire in  all Findley's  work.  In  addition  to making the predictable  examination  of "Sexualized Fire"-"the connecting  link for  all symbols"-Bachelard comes in  his  "Conclusion" to  identify  fire  with imagination which "works at the summit of  the mind like a flame." "You lay the fiery image back in your mind ... until you  find its meaning-here" in the mind, in  the imagination, that  realm  to  which  the  winged-horse,  Pegasus,  transports  us.24  And it is here, in the imagination-with its creative and destructive  powers, its complex  processes  and  seemingly simple  productions,  its  instrumentality in enabling  the individual to perceive and comprehend, or to distort  and  run  away from, reality-that we confront  the  primary  concern  of Findley's  imagination, just as  (in  the  works of the greatest  writers)  narrative is the  ultimate  theme  of narrative,  and literature  is the first (but  not only)  context in which to understand the nature  of literature.25
What  Frye says of "the dislocations of narrative" in Tristram Shandy is equally true  of those in The  Wars:  "they  take our  attention away from  looking at the external  situation"-i.e.,  the story-"to listening to the  process of its coming into  being in the  author's  mind"26 -i.e.,  the  imaginative process or  discourse. In  other  words, the almost continuous  presence of the  narrator in The  Wars - even  in  Part  Three  in  which  the sections are  dated  and  clocked,  rather   than simply  numbered,  so that  we are  made  to  feel  the  narrator was also  an  eye­ witness to these events, documenting  or logging them  as they occurred -keeps pulling  the  reader's  attention  away from  what  Frye  calls "the  internal  fiction" which is of "primary interest"  in  the fictional  modes, and  making  him  refocus on the external  fiction, the relationship  established  by writer  with  reader, which "cuts  across the story" and is of primary  interest in thematic modes of  literature. But Findley's  "writer" or "narrator" demands  a great  deal from  his relationship with the reader,  commanding  him to look and listen simultaneously: the story of Robert  Ross is shown as a series of photographs or pictures  (with  which we can do  nothing,  if not look at  them); but,  at  the  same  time,  the  narrator is busy

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS


telling us about the Archives, the archivist, his progress as a researcher, his methodology,  his interviews  with  Marian  Turner   and  his taping  sessions with Juliet  d'Orsey,  all of which we must listen to.
Findley  and  his  narrators are,  in  some  ways, reminiscent  of  Woolf  and  at
least one of her characters: Bernard  in The  Waves.  (Allusions to Woolf appear in "Hello  Cheeverland, Goodbye."  In  The  Wars  she appears  as a character, a friend of Clive d'Orsey. Juliet  records in her diary that  "Mrs.  Woolf is my idol.") Bernard,  who  distrusts  "'neat designs of life,'"speculates on  his  problems  as a would-be novelist:  "'But if there are no stories, what end  can  there  be, or what beginning?  Life is not susceptible perhaps  to the treatment we give it when  we try to tell it."' Findley's  story, "Losers, Finders:  Strangers at  the  Door,"  opens with  what  appears  to be a lyric poem  (and  Woolf's fictions, in  particular The Waves, have frequently  been called "poems" or "lyrical novels") :

Some lives are only seen through windows beyond which
the appearance
of laughter
and of screaming
is the same.

The second section continues: "2 ... there are no beginnings,  not even to stories. There  are  only  places where  you make an  entrance ... and  either  stay or  turn and  go away."  The  final section reads:  "18 ... nor  are  there  endings.  Even  to stories. There  are  only  places where  you exit from  another  life. Or  turn  again and stay. Not knowing why"  (Findley's ellipses).
Beginning  his summing  up  in The  Waves, Bernard  says, "'in order  to make
you understand, to give you my life, I must tell you a story.'" But, tired of stories and  neat  designs of life,  he  looks for  some  new  form  of  narrative "'more  in accordance  with those moments of humiliation  and  triumph that  come now and then."' What  delights  him  is the confusion of cloud-formations, ever changing, always in motion :
"Of story, of design, I do not see a trace then.
But, meanwhile, while we eat let us turn over these scenes as children turn over
the pages of a picture-book ... and  I will add, for your amusement, a comment in the margin."

Findley's fascination  with stories told in the form of pictures  (as in picture-books and films) is obvious. Much  of his own story-telling has been done in the medium of television, and  a great  part  of the TV script  consists quite  literally of visuals, instructions  as to how a "scene"  or sequence" should  be shot, from  what  angle, what  distance,  what  the  individual  "frame" (or  picture)   should  include,  what


39

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

objects  should  be  prominent,  how  the  sequence  should   be separated   from  or attached  to what follows, and so on. In fact, he won more recognition in Canada for his work on Whiteoaks of ]alna and The National Dream than  he did for his first two  novels. That  The   Paper  People,  one  of  his most important TV  film­ scripts, should  be a TV  film about  the making  of a TV  film only  intensifies by dramatizing Findley's  profound  interest in the  pictorial  modes of  narrative. He has also written  a film-script for the  National  Film  Board,  worked  as a script­ writer  in Hollywood,  and  is currently  engaged  in  translating The  Wars into  a film-script. The   Butterfly Plague,  set in  Hollywood  in the  first three  decades of this century,  is very much  a  novel  about  movie-making  and  the  impact  of the "talking  pictures" on people's private lives and political dreams. 27
But The Butterfly Plague  is cast in the form  of "chronicles" by a chronicler who is anything  but unobtrusive and effects a reader-response  very similar to that effected by Part  Three  of The  Wars. The  fourth  chronicle  of Book Two  is  en­ titled "The Chronicle of Evelyn de Foe," one of the new-wave Hollywood starlets. Even the minimally  attentive  reader  is bound  to think  at once of the  Diaries of John  Evelyn, and  of Daniel Defoe's Journal  of the  Plague  Year, a literary  fore­ runner  of the  year of the  butterfly  plague  recounted  in  Findley's second  novel. Like Bernard,  Findley's narrator   (and  Findley  himself as author  of  TV  scripts) turns over scenes like the pages of a book and  directs  his audience's  attention  to the pictures by providing comments in the margin.  These comments pull attention away from  the story-which every picture  tells-and  redirects it to the imag­ inative  process by which  that  story comes into  being  in  the  story-teller's  mind. Even in his plays, which have strongly literary  texts,·zs Findley's thematic  concern is largely with looking, as the title Can  You See  Me  Yet? indicates.  fohn  A.­ Himself!, the title of his second play,2'9 is equally indicative  of Findley's  preoccu­ pation: namely, the desire to rescue Sir John  A. Macdonald, first Prime  Minister of Canada, from  the great  mound  of public  myths, legends and  stories beneath  which the  private  individual  has been buried -a  passionate  desire to make the audience  look  at  and  see the  man  himself.  And  he  accomplishes  this  aim  by resorting to many more spectacular  theatrical effects than  he employs in Can  You See Me  Yet?



LIKE WOOLF, AND LIKE oscAR WILDE (alluded  to in The  Last of the Crazy  People, where he is also quoted, and in The Wars), Timothy  Findley is a stylist in the same way that  Sheila Watson  (The Double  Hook) and  Marian Engel  (Bear) are stylists, but that  Robertson  Davies  (Fifth Business)   and  Mar­ garet  Atwood  (Lady Oracle) are not. "In  all important matters,  style,  not sin­ cerity,  is the  essential.  In  all  unimportant  matters,   style,  not  sincerity,  is  the
essential."3° Frivolous though  Wilde's epigrams  may often  appear,  their  truthful-

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS


ness is taken seriously and fruitfully  applied  to literary issues by perceptive  critics like Frye and  Sontag.31  Wilde, a true  descendant  of another  great  aesthetician, Schiller,  believed  that  "Art  begins with  abstract  decoration,"32   which  explains why he declares that  "art is at once surface and symbol. Those  who go beneath the surface  do so at  their  own  peril."  Only  "the  superficial  qualities  last";  and "only shallow people ... do not judge by appearances.  The  mystery of the world is the  visible, not  the  invisible."  Style is surface  and  surface  is symbol;  style is what  makes the  imagined  world visible in  Findley's fictions, enabling  us to see and  therefore  understand. Style is what  Frye calls "ornamental speech"  (as dis­ tinct  from  "persuasive  speech,"  the  other  arm  of  rhetoric)   which  "acts  on  its hearers statically, leading  them  to admire  its own beauty  or wit." Developing  a mature  style takes time;  and  the chances are that, in risking the venture  of style, a writer  (like Wilde and  Woolf)  may well be accused by hostile critics of literary affectation,  of sacrificing  profound  substance  to superficial  artifice.  Findley  has inevitably suffered this fate. Arguing that some subjects "have a built-in intransi­  gence to literary  treatment," Michael Taylor, reviewing The  Wars, reasons that, because  Findley  "realizes  he's  dealing  with  intractable   material, ... he  camou­ flages the fiction of his story by pretending that  the novel is a species of historical document."32   At  the same  time  that  he  accuses Findley  of disguising fiction as history, Taylor  illogically explains  Findley's  failure in The  Wars by referring  us to "the  clipped,  portentous  style" and  the fact that  this "Hemingwayesque style pitches over into sentimentality."
Nice work if you can get it-but  few of us can, both  have our  critical  cake and eat it. In the first place, Findley's style is not like Hemingway's,  which may be "clipped" but,  if  clipped,  is not  "portentous." In  the  second,  Findley's  very conscious development  and  deployment  of style draws  attention  to the fact  that what we are reading  is fiction,  just as his narrative  dislocations compel acknowl­ edgement  of the imaginative  process by which the fiction is brought  into  being. From  his  earliest  story  to  his  most  recent  novel, Findley  has  worked  toward perfecting  a style that  is unmistakably  his own -a  marvellous  mixture  of the lyric and  dramatic that  can be put to narrative  purposes. A simple example from "About  Effie" comes at  the  end  of a scene in  which  the  mysterious  maid  tells Neil Cable about the man she's waiting for to come and carry her off. A thunder­ storm  is in  progress, which  precipitates  Effie's telling  about  the  man :  "'There has to be thunder, or he won't  come."' The scene ends as follows:
And it rained and it rained and it rained. But there was no more thunder.
That  was over.
The short sentences and abbreviated  paragraphs are characteristic. They function in a number  of ways:  they isolate actions, events, thoughts,  emotions, images, or whatever  Findley  wants  to focus on;  by isolating  an  "object" and  forcing  the

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS

reader  to  focus  on  it  in  a  single  sentence   (which   may  be  a  single  word - "Pegasus"), in a single paragraph, the reading  process is slowed down  and  be­ comes like  a  replay  (in  reverse)  of  the  writing  process. When  the  process  is slowed  down,  the  reader's  attention  is intensified  (as  in  the  crucial  scenes of Wagner's  music-drama,  as in arias in general). The  movement  is clearly toward that  stillness (or  status as Kenneth  Burke calls it in  his Grammar  of  Motives) which characterizes  the lyric poem. This is one reason  why Findley, at  his most characteristic, is less like Hemingway  than like Woolf.
At  its  most exaggerated   (as  in  "Losers,  Finders: Strangers at  the  Door"), Findley's style may well prove off-putting  (or even offensive)  to those who pride themselves on plain-speaking,  who prefer Bacon to Lamb,  Austen  to C. Bronte, Huxley  to  Carlyle.  The  concentrated   passages of  repetition,   alliteration,  com­ pound  epithets,  self-conscious puns  (often  very  funny), internal  rhymes,  line­ breaks, and diverse typographical  devices are all guaranteed to draw  a great deal of attention to themselves. In  "Losers, Finders,"  published  in  1975, Findley was undoubtedly  testing himself, stretching  his style to extremes to see just how much strain  it could take, before embarking  on The  Wars.  At its  most effective, as in The  W ars,a4 it still draws attention  to itself, but  this is  precisely what  Findley wants since his major  thematic  concern is the  necessity of  getting  attention and the dangers of both getting and failing to get it. In The Wars, the stylistic devices are  less obtrusive  because more subtly  paced  and  varied,  and  because  the style itself wholly absorbs narrative  and dramatic purposes as well as achieving a lyric intensity in the expression of moods, emotions and states of mind.
Speaking  of style, Frye states that  in "all  literary structures we are aware  of a quality  that  we may call the quality of a verbal  personality  or a speaking  voice." Sometimes,  when  this quality  is felt to be "the  voice of the  author  himself, we call it style:  le style c'est l'homme." In  the  novel, however,  the  author  has "to speak  with  the  voice of the internal  characters ... and  sometimes  dialogue  and narrative are so far apart  as to divide the book into two different languages." The suiting  of style to  "internal characters  or  subject" Frye  calls "decorum";  and drama  he defines as "epos or fiction absorbed  by decorum" -or a suitable style. Much  about  Findley's style may fairly be called dramatic;  it has been shaped  by his writing of many  dramas for radio and  television, as well as for the stage;  by his dramatization of both  fiction  (the  W hiteoaks  series)  and  non-fiction  (The National  Dream); and  by his early career  as an  actor.  But  Findley's  theatrical and dramatic talents tend toward  the operatic,  toward  music-drama, a combina­ tion of words  (or lyrics)  and music-and spectacle  on a grand  scale  which, in terms of writing, is style. Even suicide and assassination, the new art forms accord­ ing to Jamie Taylor  and his friends, should be undertaken "with style." Certainly, opera  goes in  for  life, love and,  above  all,  death,  on  a  grand  scale  (the  fiery

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS


finales of Die W alkilre and Gotterdammerung have a certain  Findleyesque quality about  them).
The  ultimate  irony  of Findley's operatic  style, his dramatic and  often violent
stories, his preference  for what  Browning calls "the  dangerous  of things" -that borderland between  sanity  and  insanity, between  the  beautiful  and  sinister,  be­ tween  political  issues and  private  problems,  between  social satire  and  psycho­ logical exploration, between  dramatic  spectacles and  lyrical revelations, between story-telling pictures and silent images, between prose and  poetry-is that,  while Browning  believed the lad  astride  the chimney-stack was a sure  attention-getter whom  we "must  watch" (in  contrast  to  lads  who "walk  the  street / Sixty  the minute") , Findley  has rarely  (if ever)  received the kind  of  attention he merits. He has, rather,  been largely ignored  by reviewers and  critics alike. He has, like the Cassandra  of Canadian novelists, too often spoken  without  being listened to. This is a sad irony since, again and again, his fictions display the disastrous con­ sequences  of  not  paying  attention -consequences  that  involve  not  only  those who, like lonely children,  are never loved enough to be seen and  heard,  but  also those (like the Trojans) who have never cared enough  to look or listen or mark Cassandra's words. Iris  Pengelli, the  psychiatrist  in  0ther  People's Children  (a TV  drama  written  in  1978) ,35   works  with  autistic  children  who live alone  "in their  ultra-ordered private  worlds" : "'These are  all  "my  children." . . . All of them -look -are wearing masks. Anger. Fear. Hatred. Single emotions dom­ inate  their  whole  lives'"   (italics  mine). Dr.  Pengelli  has  a  favourite,  Jeremy, whom she cannot reach; he starves himself to death.  But, as a favour to a friend,  she also works with Erin  Foley, a teen-ager whose mother  has died, who has been raped  by her father,  and  lived most of her young life in foster-homes.  In  one of the last  sequences  in  the  drama, Pengelli confronts  Erin: "'Look at  me,'" she says.  "'Tell me  what  you  see."'   Erin  answers,  '"An old  woman."'  Pengelli presses, "'But who?'" "'You,'" says Erin, refusing to name names. Two sequences are superimposed  in the  final minutes of the teleplay. Erin,  looking in a mirror as she makes up her face, recalls the first sequence in which she was arrested.  A policeman is asking her name, age, address, and demanding identification :

ERIN:   (VOICE OFF)

Me. Okay? I'm  here ain't  I?  You got to know where I come from? I was  found in a brown paper bag.
FREEZE FRAME.
HOLD.



Tell me what you see.
 PENGELLI:

The FREEZE FRAME MELTS  and becomes the PHOTOGRAPH of EILEEN  MARY   [Erin's mother] holding ERIN as a BABY- with FOLEY  [Erin's father]  standing with them.
SMILING.


43

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS




Me.
HOLD.
 ERIN:  (v.o.)
 



FADE OUT.


The prerequisite for  any  answer to  the  question, "Can you  see  me  yet?" is that the  asker  know  and be able  to acknowledge self.  The prerequisite for  any  answer to  the  question, "Can we see  Findley yet?" is that the  asker   be  able  to  see and hear  Findley, and be willing  to mark  his words. And name names.

NOTES

1 Since  Findley's work has been paid  little serious  attention and  is less known  than  it deserves  to  be, it seems  reasonable to provide the  following basic  checklist  of  his writings  to date. Unfortunately, even  after  consulting with  Mr.  Findley   (who  has been  most  generous in  taking  time  to  answer  my  questions and  furnish me  with information) , and  with  the CBC, it has not  been  possible  to track  down  details  of all the scripts  written for radio.  Major scripts  for  television  are  listed since  Findley insists that  "television scripts  are  important to me  as a writer-especially if  I am given  freedom in  subject  matter and  style  (as  opposed   to  being  commissioned to write  a particular story for  a particular series). I look  upon  Other People's  Chil­ dren  and  a  mini-series  of three  ninety-minute dramas called  Songs  (currently in progress)   as  [as]   important as any  of my fiction  work" (letter to  John Hulcoop, June 4th,   I 980). The article  itself  reveals  the  importance of  Findley's work  for radio   (audiences who  listen)   and  for  television   (audiences  who look)   in  relation to his plays  (audiences who look and  listen)   and  to  his  prose works  (readers who mark  his words). The list is in chronological order, each item  briefly classified  in terms  of form.
"About  Effie"   (short   story),  Tamarack  Review,  I   (Autumn I956); "War" (short   story)   CBC   Anthology  ( I957 /58?) ;  "T. E.  Lawrence" and   "Sherwood Anderson" (scripts  for radio), CBC  (early  I96o's); The Last  of the  Crazy  People (novel)  (London:  Macdonald, I967); The  Paper  People   (film  script  for  TV), CBC  (I967); The People on the Shore  (drama script  for radio) CBC  (late  I96o's or early  I970's); The Butterfly Plague  (novel)    (New  York: Viking,  I969); Don't Let  the  Angels  Fall  (film  script), NFB  (I969); "ERA"  (short story), Cavalier,
'20,  No.  6   (April   I970);  "Gold," "River Through  Time," and   "Missionaries" (scripts  for radio), CBC  I deas (I 97 I -73) ; "The Journey" (script for radio,  winner of  the  Armstrong Award), CBC  (I97I); Whiteoaks of ]alna  (7 scripts  for  TV), CBC  ( I97I-72); "Sometime, Later, Not Now"  (short story), New  Orleans  Review,
3,  No.  I    (I972); Eleven  Canadian  Novelists   (interview  with   Graeme  Gibson) (Toronto: Anansi,  I973);  Conversations with  Canadian Novelists (interview with Donald Cameron)  (Toronto: Macmillan, I973);  "Hello Cheeverland, Goodbye"
·(short story), Tamarack Review, 64  (November I974); "The Book of Pins"  (short story), New  Canadian Stories 74  (Ottawa: Oberon, I974); "Losers,  Finders: Strangers at  the Door" (short  story), New  Canadian Stories  75  (Ottawa: Oberon, I975); The National Dream  (8 scripts  for TV, with  William Whitehead; winner of an  Actra  Award), CBC  (I975); Can  You See  Me   Yet?  (play), produced at the  National Arts  Centre  (I976)   (Vancouver:  TalonbookiS,   I977);  The  Wars (novel,  winner of  the  Governor-General's Award and   the  City  of  Toronto  Book Award)  (Toronto:  Clarke,   Irwin, I977);  The  Newcomers, 1832  and   I9II    (2 drama scripts  for  TV), CBC   ( I978-79); John A.-Himself!   (play),  produced at  Theatre London ( 1979); Dieppe  1942  (script for  TV documentary, with  Wil-

44

FINDLEY's  FICTIONS


liam  Whitehead), CBC   (1979); "Harper's Bazaar" (short  story), Exile,  7,  Nos.
1 & 2  (Autumn 1980); Other People's  Children (drama script   for  TV),  CBC
( 1980) ;  Songs   ( 3  drama scripts  for  TV) ,  CBC   ( 1 980) ; Famous   Last  Words
(novel)   (Toronto: Clarke Irwin,  1981).
2   Bloom,  The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry  (London and  New  York: Oxford, 1973)   p.  95;  Sontag,  Against   Interpretation  and   Other  Essays   (New York: Dell,  1966), pp.  3-14;  Hirsch,  Validity in Interpretation (New  Haven  and London:  Yale  Univ. Press,  1967), pp.  209-10.  See  also  Hirsch's The  Aims   of Interpretation (Chicago and  London: Univ.  of Chicago Press, 1976).
3 The  narrowness of Hirsch's "subjective stance" on  this  issue is perhaps best  illus­ trated by reference to the  interdisciplinary conference held  in 1981 at  the  Univer­ sity  of  California at  Davis  on  "The  Literary Unconscious," at  which  Jonathan Culler delivered a  paper on  "Textual  Self-Consciousness and   the  Textual  Un­ conscious.''
4  Translated by Richard Miller   (New  York: Hill  and  Wang,  1974), pp. 4-5. Com­ pare   Barthes' "everything signifies  ceaselessly  and   several   times"   with   Michael Riffaterre's discussion  of  parallelism,  "the basic relationship underlying poetry.  Of course,  since  language is a system made  up  of several  levels superimposed one  on top of  the  other ... parallelism manifests itself on any  level: so then, a  poem  is a verbal  sequence wherein   the  same  relations  between  constituents are  repeated at various  levels and  the  same  story  is told  in several  ways at  the  same  time  and  at several  times in the same way." "Describing Poetic Structures: Two Approaches to Baudeliare's les Chats,"  in  Structuralism, edited  with  an  Introduction by Jacques Ehrmann (New  York: Doubleday, 1970), p. 189.
5   See Graeme Gibson,  Eleven  Canadian Novelists  (Toronto: Anansi  [ 1973]), p. 130.
6  Donald Cameron, Conversations with  Canadian Novelists   (To onto:
1973)' p. 54·
7  The Poetics  of Prose, translated by Richard Howard (Ithaca:  Comell Univ.  Press,
1977)' p. 205.
8  Though  pure speculation, it  is  possible  that   Findley's   preoccupation  with   the necessity of paying  attention may  have  been  reinforced in  the  course  of his career as both  actor  and  dramatist by the  remembrance (conscious  or unconscious) of the most  famous line  in  Arthur Miller's 1949  play,  Death  of a Salesman: "Attention must  be paid."
9  In  view  of  Cassandra  Wakelin's failed  dream of  going  to  China and  becoming a missionary, it  may  be relevant to remember that  her  Greek  prototype broke  her word  to Apollo.  When  he  tried  to seduce  her,  Cassandra asked  Apollo  for  the  gift of prophecy as the price of her sexual favours.  Having received  the gift, she refused her  favours.   Apollo  spat  in  her  mouth  (or  licked  her  lips)   and  so  rendered her gift a curse: no one  would  listen to her or pay her any  attention.
10 SeeR. D.  Laing, The Divided  Self:  An  Existential Study in  Sanity and  Madness
1  ( 1960;  rpt.  Harmondsworth:  Penguin, 1 965) , pp. 39-61.
11 But  not  published until  1980.
12  The Politics  of Experience & The Bird  of Paradise  (Harmondsworth:  Penguin,
1967)' p. 32.
13  See  also  Cameron, pp.  52-53: "The lack  of  security  is that   you're  sitting  alone and  you can't verify  anything that  you feel with  anyone.... You can  only consult yourself  on  these  matters. No one  in  the  whole  world  understands you  as you are in the  process of creation. There's no way anyone  can understand, because  you can barely  understand yourself."


45

FINDLEY'S  FICTIONS


14 The   Paper  People  was  telecast  on  December 6th,   I967.  I have   worked   with  a photocopy of the  author's own script,  for which  I thank him.
15  "Hello Cheeverland, Goodbye," Tamarack  Review, 64  (November I974),  26.
16  "What Cheever should  you  read?  All of him! Or,  more  practically, Bullet  Park.
My story's  epigraph is taken  from  it, and  the  story  is a response  to it.  Cheever is the  American writer  I most  admire, next  to Thornton  Wilder." Timothy Findley,
in a letter  to John  Hulcoop ( 4 June I g8o) .
17  Earth and  air are similarly  paralleled. While men  die in the  mud-"Their graves, it seemed,  just dug  themselves  and  pulled  them  down" -an  officer is killed  when he steps  outside "'for a breath of air.'  The  breath of air  had  blown  his head  off.''
18  Christopher Scott   provides  a  splendid  example of  the  reader who  does  not  read carefully enough  (or  pay  the  text close enough attention)  but  who  is allowed   (by his  editors)  to  sit  in  judgment on  current Canadian writers. In  his  review  of The   Wars,  Scott   informs   us  that   the  narrative is "arranged   by  a  present   day
'archivist' (she is never  named, and  is unimportant to  the  story  as such)" Books
in Canada, 6, No.8  (October I977), 8-g.
19   "Robert looked  along  at Captain Rodwell.  He  too was strange. (We're all strange, Robert thought. Everyone  is strange in a war  I  guess. Ordinary  is a  myth.)"  See also  what  Marian Turner says:  "'Well. It was  the  war  that   was  crazy,  I  guess. Not  Robert Ross or what  he did ... we all went  mad....  I've  been  through it  all, you  know ... -the whole  of  this  extraordinary century-and it's  not  the  ex­ traordinary people  who've  prevailed  upon  its madness.  Quite the  opposite. Oh­ far   from  it!  It's   the  ordinary  men  and   women   who've made  us  what  we  are.
·Monstrous,  complacent and  mad.'"
20   See  the  interview with  Gibson,  pp.  I25-26,  I42-46; and  the  interview with  Cam­
eron, pp. 50-5I, 57-59, 60-62.
21  Note  the  ambiguity of  the  two  verbs  here:  to  breathe  followed   by an  adverbial phrase; to breathe in followed  by a noun-phrase, object  of the  verb.
22   This whole  passage, describing Harris's progress  towards death, is worth  comparing with  Pratt's seminal  poem,  "Silences," with  Margaret Atwood's "This is a  photo­ graph of  Me," Phyllis  Webb's  "A  Tall   Tale" and   the  section   of  D.  G.  Jones'  Butterfly on Rock entitled  "The Sleeping Giant," partie. pp.  I g-22.
23   The   Psychoanalysis of Fire, translated by  Alan  C.  Ross,  and  with  a  Preface   by Northrop  Frye   (I g64;  Boston:   Beacon,   I g6g),  p.  7.  This book  was  originally published in France in  I938, at  which  time, as Etienne Gilson  points  out,  it caused quite  a stir among scholars.  It was the first of Bachelard's many  famous  books, the "ultimate import" of which  had  not, in  I963,  "been fully  realized.'' See Gilson,  in
·the  "Foreword" to  Gaston   Bachelard, The   Poetics  of Space   (Boston:  Beacon, I g6g) , pp. xiii-xix.
24   Significantly, Pegasus,  meaning "of  the  wells"  (and   alluded to  in  a  single-word
sentence-The Wars, p. 82 -in a  passage  quoted above,  the  passage  that  pro­
,vides the  water   parallel  to  Findley's "fiery  image")  was  fathered by Poseidon  on
the  Medusa. The  Medusa, in  turning people  to stone  with  her  terrible  stare,  is a dramatization of what  Laing, in his chapter on  "Ontological insecurity," calls "petrification," one of the "three forms of anxiety  encountered by the ontologically insecure" -the other  two being  "engulfment" and  "implosion." Laing defines  the term  as a "particular form of terror, whereby  one is petrified.'' Fire  reduces  art  and life itself  to ashes.  Ashes are,  for  Findley,  the  ultimate symbol  of emptiness (The Paper People,  Introduction), and  an  overwhelming feeling  of  emptiness is what those  who suffer implosion  experience.

FINDLEY'S FICTIONS


25  "Ultimately, the  narrative has  no  object;   the  narrative  concerns only  itself:   the narrative  tells itself"   (Barthes, in SJZ, p. 213).  "The theme of the  Odyssey  is the narrative forming the Odyssey, it is the Odyssey itself"  (Todorov, in The Poetics of Prose, p. 63. See also  pp.  72-73). "In all literary  verbal  structures the  final  direc­ tion of meaning is inward.... Whenever we have an autonomous verbal structure, we  have   literature"  (Frye,   in  Anatomy  of  Criticism:  Four   Essays,  Princeton: Princeton Univ.  Press,  1957,  p. 74). "Literature shapes  itself,  and  is  not  shaped  externally:  the  forms  of  literature can  no  more  exist  outside  literature  than   the forms  of sonata and  fugue  and  rondo  can exist outside  music"  (Frye,  p. 97) .
26  Anatomy of Criticism, p. 267. Italics  mine.
27  For  a more  extensive analysis  of The Butterfly Plague see my entry  on  Findley  in the  Dictionary of Literary   Biography, to  be published   by B.C.  Research and  the Gale  Publishing Company.
28  The distinction alluded to above  is that  made  by Artaud between  theatre based on a written text, in which  the director and  actors feel it their  obligation to reconstruct the dramatist's text,  and  theatre not based on such a text: what  Artaud envisaged as  "the theatre of  cruelty." See  The Theatre and  Its  Double   (London:  Caldar
& Boyars,  1970) .
29   Written for  William Hutt who  played  the  title  role  in  the  London Theatre  pro­ duction, directed  by  Peter   Moss,  which  opened  on  January 31st,   1979.  I  have worked  from  a photocopy of the  "sCRIPT AS  PERFORMED ON OPENING  NIGHT."
3° Complete Works of Oscar  Wilde, with  an  Introduction by Vyvyan  Holland (Lon­
don: Collins,  1966), p. 1205.
31 Frye,  Creation and  Recreation (Toronto:  Univ. of Toronto Press, 1980) ; Sontag, "On Style" and  "Notes on  'Camp,'" in Against  Intapretation.
32   See also, On  the  Aesthetic Education of Man, translated with  an  Introduction by
Reginald Snell  (New  York: Frederick Ungar, 1965), pp. 124 ff.
33  Fiddlehead, 118  (Summer 1978), pp. 172-74.
34 See, for example, the  first  forty  pages of Part  One; the  first  twenty  pages  of  Part Three, which   recount Robert's  attempt  to  establish  a  gun-emplacement  in  the crater; and  Section   Five  in  Part   Five,  which  describes  Robert's traumatized  re­ action  to the gang  rape.
35 I worked  from  a photocopy of the  "sECOND DRAFT-SEPT.  25, 1978."





]IT THE 8]1CK OF OUR MINDS

John Barton

This is for  those  who are at  peace with  failure


incompleteness
 who have  achieved  a complete

and  live without form

47

POEM


They  melt through walls
we have built  to contain them flicker across mirrors
in our  brains   while we sleep

they slip through even  the most
skin-tight of dreams

And  this is for  the fear of losing myself
in the glass while I shave my razor cutting
deeper 	deeper
How  can  I watch  my features unravel  under  the bright
edge  of the blade
When  will my skin peel back reveal  nothing
 




As we wake


And  this is for those who refuse the absence that  stares
out  of the mirror at  them
for  those who clothe  its transparent
skeleton  in taffeta
manners stored  in cellophane at  the  back of their  minds
As I disappear into  the grasp of my mirror their  harlequin colours are  trapped
in it and  jar me awake

Each  poem is a layer of skin shed  the moment istop probing what  is in me
that  wants

to escape  judgment.


INTERVIEW
WITH TIMOTHY FINDLEY

Alison Summers



AS  :  Readers  will be  interested  in the  fact  that  you  began  your  career  as an actor. When  was that?

TF:    I  began  professionally  about  1949.  I  was part  of a  generation  of actors who  have  all  done  pretty  well.  Bill Hutt,   Charmion   King,  Kate  Reid,  and emerging at the same time, Chris Plummer  and  Barry Morse. It was a very live period in theatre  because all this energy came back to it from the war. The  war handed  us new definitions.
There   was  a  great  resurgence  of  creative  playwriting-particularly  in  the States,  with  Tennessee  Williams  and  Arthur   Miller.  Here  theatre   manifested itself mainly  at  an  amateur level. Hart   House  Theatre was  doing  marvellous things  under  Robert  Gill, who  had  access to all the  extraordinary people  I've just mentioned. He  gave  them  a showcase situation  where they  could shine. It was the Golden  Age of Canadian radio. Andrew  Allen had  a series called CBC stage which produced  a whole flock of playwrights and actors. In the early fifties, you felt that  a  new  generation  of actors  had  bang  arrived,  and  there  was an excitement to it. Then  television happened  in 1952/53, and then Stratford.

AS:    Were you involved with Stratford?

TF :  Yes. Cecil Clark, who was one of Guthrie's  deputies, came over here before Guthrie  arrived  to cast. Cecil Clark saw me playing  Marchbanks on  television. That  was when I got lucky. I'll never forget that  first meeting at Stratford, when about 85 actors, drawn  from across the country, sat down in a room with Tyrone Guthrie,  Alec Guinness,  and  Irene  Worth,  and  read  through   Richard  III, the first play done there. The  feeling was absolutely electric. It  was as though  in one moment  we realized that a new kind of theatre  was being born. And it was going to happen  because  we were ready;  we had  done  our  work.  At  the  time,  Alec Guinness, who became  my mentor,  gave me a book. In  the flyleaf was written: "The readiness is all." Later  I went to England  with Guinness-as his protege - and worked there for several years.

AS  :  In  England  I believe that  you toured  with The  Matchmaker.

TF:	Yes. Tyrone  Guthrie  directed that, too. It was a great  romp, a masterpiece of  crazy,  written   by  Thornton  Wilder.  The  other  bonus  was  watching  Ruth

49

INTERVIEW

Gordon,  as Dolly Levi, perform. She had a speech  at the end  of the play which is a summing  up, which she did alone on the stage. I watched  her virtually every night for two and  a half years, and  it was never the same twice. She has a true genius.
That  was really when I began writing seriously. I left the  production  to play
Osric in the Scofield Hamlet directed by Peter Brook, which went to Russia, and then I rejoined The  Matchmaker after that.

AS:    Didn't  Ruth  Gordon influence your decision to become a writer?

TF:   Yes. I wrote something specifically for Ruth. We had been to an exhibition of paintings  in Manchester,  all done by people under  thirty  years of age.  I  was in my twenties then. When  we came out, Ruth  asked me "Why  are  you people so damned  negative  about  everything? All those pictures  were black, depressing, ugly. Can't  you say yes to anything?" Aloud  I said  to her, "I don't  think  we're negative, Ruth." I had an argument, or rather  a pleasant conversation,  with her. Secretly  I  decided,  "I'll   prove that  we're  not."  I  went  back  to my digs and  I wrote a story. I didn't  have a typewriter,  so I  wrote  it out  again  by hand  and gave it to her. It was a story called "About  Effie," about  one of the maids  who worked at our  house when  I was a kid. The  next  day  I got  word from  Ruth's dresser to go and  see her. Ruth  was sitting  in  the  room  crying, and  she threw her arms around  me and said, "Oh  Tiffy, you really shouldn't be acting  at  all; you should be writing."  (Which  is a lovely thing to be told when you want to be an actor.)  But anyway, that  was the beginning. Ruth  gave me an old typewriter that  she and  Garson  had. They  had  my story typed,  and  they asked me to give them anything  else I had written. Then  they showed it to Thornton Wilder.

AS:    What  was his reaction?

TF:	He  had  me up  to his Savoy hotel  room.  I  was very  poor  in  those  days. I think I got about seven pounds a week, and being a very nerve-ridden  person, I spent  all my money on drink  and  cigarettes, instead  of food.  I  had  one frayed blue  suit  which  I  used  to  wear  everywhere.  I  must  have  looked  pretty  bad, because Thornton Wilder felt he had to feed me. He  ordered  up this incredible meal.  I  sat  eating  this  meal  while  Wilder,  who  had  astonishing  eyes behind glasses, paced  the  room. He said:  "Findley,  you're  the  real  thing.  There  aren't many, so I feel obliged to do something  about  you. On  the  assumption  that  we both  know that  you're  the  real thing,  I'm  going  to  talk  to  you as an  absolute professional. That  was the worst story I have ever read  in my life." He tore it to shreds.  Ultimately   I  wrote  a  play,  which  he  also  tore  to  shreds:   "pompous," "stop  preaching," "you're  not old enough  to write these things, you haven't  had enough  experience."  He was always very tough-as tough  as they come-but always very encouraging.   We  would  talk  for  hours  and  destroy  things  in  the

so

INTERVIEW


fireplace. I'd  think: "Why  does he keep telling me that  I can write, if he destroys everything  I  do?"  But he was right.  He  made  me very conscious that  if I  had the real gift, then I had no right not to fulfill it. I never really lost touch with him.
Ultimately,  he became so ill he didn't  move out of his home. Towards  the end of his life I remember  two or three times when I had  arranged  to visit him, and his sister would call and say:  "Thorny says 'don't  come.'  He  just can't  face it.'' It was partly psychological, too. The end of his life was awful. He felt that  he had been  forgotten   and  that   nobody  gave  a  damn.  Someone  had   just  written  a biography  which tore him to shreds. That  was the last thing he was aware of.
AS :     How  many  years after  that  first meeting  with  Wilder  did  you decide  to leave acting, and give your full attention  to writing?
TF :   Well, it  seemed  like  a long  time  afterwards,  but  it  really  wasn't.  I  met
Thornton Wilder in I 955, and in I 962 I gave up my acting career.
AS:    You stayed  in Hollywood  after  the  North  American  tour  of The  Match­
maker finished?

TF:    Yes, that  was in  I957· I decided to stay in Hollywood,  to try my luck at anything.  Ruth  wanted  me to go on  writing. After the  opening  night  of Anne Frank, which Garson  Kanin  was directing, we all went off to dinner.  I sat beside Ruth, who said "Now  dear,  we'll be leaving soon, so you and  I won't  be seeing each other  for a while. I know that  you haven't  any work at  the  moment,  and because I want  you to go on writing,  I'd  like you to take this.''  She gave me an envelope.  Inside  were five cheques,  all post-dated -one  a  month,  $100  each. And in those days that  was money you could really live on. I said, "What do I do? How do I ...?" I literally meant  "how  do I repay you?" It worried me ter­ ribly, because  this was Hollywood,  and  I desperately  wanted  to  make  my  own way. There  was a moral  edge to the  profession; it was wrong  to accept  money that  wasn't a salary. So Ruth  said, "Accept it on this basis: I have taken an option on the first good thing you write." So that is the basis on which it was done.
AS :   Do you think that  your experiences as an actor proved  valuable  when you began to write for the stage?
TF:	Yes, and  valuable  for  prose, too. The  major  things I got from  acting that are  pertinent   to  writing  are  a  sense of  rhythm  and  a  sense  of  cadence-an awareness of what the tongue can and cannot  cope with. About  two months ago I was reading  Albee's A Delicate Balance, and it came to me in a blinding  flash that  all dialogue  that  works, all the best dialogue, has a similar  ring -the way in which words are combined  sinks them into the listener's ear. The  curtain  goes up, and  you hear  people speaking, and  immediately there seems to be a kind of confidence to the delivery. A Euripidean messenger starts talking,  and  you know from  the rhythm  of the speech  that  you're  hearing  the  real  thing,  not someone

51

INTERVIEW

fumbling  for  words. That  follows all the  way  through   Shakespeare  and  other great writers.
When  plays don't  work, it is very often  because the actors  couldn't find their
way through  the  words which the  writer  had  put  on  the  page. When  I  watch rehearsals of something  I've  written,  I can tell if the dialogue  is right  or wrong through  watching  the actors-what they do with it, how they take off on it or respond  to it, what  rhythms have been given. When  my writing  is right,  that's how I know it's right-through watching  the actors take off. Rhythm  falls from actors instinctively, as if it's the most natural  thing  in the world. It may be that they simply sense the natural  time to breathe.
That's one thing  about dialogue that  I've  learned  from  my experiences in the theatre.  The other thing I've learned was expressed one day when I was listening to Robin  Phillips talk about  an adaptation of Camille  which he was directing  at Theatre London.  He said, "If the stage business and  the moves aren't implicit in the  dialogue,  there  is no way  that  they  can  ever  be  done  right."  That's true. You cannot  make me pick up that  cup in the right way if it isn't in the dialogue, if you haven't  built in the moment.  There  will be no way that  I  can  pick it up without  knocking it over, or having to cross the stage awry, or having to manipu­ late something  to one side. It can never be made  graceful  or right. Those  things all have  to flow through  a single line. A  play is a  total  unfolding  of one  line. Screen writing and television are the same. That's also what  makes fiction work:  when it all flows along without  jarring you.
I was a very clumsy person on the stage. Directors and actors were always complaining:  "you're  so clumsy."  So  I  became  supersensitive  to  the  flow  of things:  how you manage  a line so that  it  really does deliver you to that  cup  at exactly the right moment.

AS :  Do you find it an advantage  that  through  writing  television plays you are able to reach more people than you could otherwise do in the theatre?

TF :  Outside  the prose, my strongest bid is for the theatre.  In  television I think that  the most people I've ever been seen by as a playwright  is about  two million. That's very gratifying, but  I don't  feel any different  about  touching  two million people  through  television than  I  do  about  touching  eighty  in  a  small  theatre. Touching those  eighty  has the  additional   bonus  that  they  were  there  when  it happened; they were part of it. I can't  believe that  isn't  important. I once heard a singer say, "I used to only be able to sing to soo  people at a time. Now I can sing to millions on just one occasion." And I thought, "How  disappointing."

AS:    To have only that one occasion?

TF :   Yes. Contact  is what  performers are  really about.  That's the  value of the theatre,  and  what  keeps it  alive.  Part  of  the  excitement   of the  live  theatre  is

INTERVIEW

taking that  chance.  No matter  how long a play has run,  or how many different productions  it  has  been  given, there  is this marvellous feeling of the  daring of being there.  What  can go wrong? What  can go right? What  magic can happen? Well, forget it in television. The  magic is all calculated. Sometimes it's calculated out  of existence. Another  thing  about  television is that  once it's  done, it's done forever. I don't  like that  either.
These  are  the  things  I  don't  like about  television and  film. I would  rather reach my five million piece by piece in the theatre than  in one fell swoop through television. There's something  magical about  that  damned  curtain  going up, that feeling in your stomach  as you wonder  what is going to happen  here. One  can­ not  make  that  happen  anywhere  else. It's  this daring  I've  been  talking  about.  The danger  of failure is built into a theatrical  situation -it's real in the theatre.  In television and film it isn't and can't  be real. You've got to trick it somehow.
AS:    Some of the critics gave you rather a hard time with Can You  See Me Yet?, when it was performed  at the National  Arts Centre  in 1976. Perhaps  because it is rather  a unique  play in Canadian drama.
TF:    The  three  Ottawa newspaper  critics  hated  it.  It  was  not  just  that  they didn't   think  it  was a good  play;  they really couldn't  cope  with  it. They  were rebelling against  what  they could not understand  and  yet should  have been able to understand. But the audiences got it. They  understood  that  Cassandra  comes in and hands out lives to people who have lost certain aspects of life while gaining others. She gives them  another  person to be, another  aspect of themselves, or she reminds them  of that  aspect of themselves. Each  person  plays two people. The critics couldn't   cope  with  that.  And  yet down  the  hall  and  up  the stairs,  they coped  with  Lily Tomlin,  who would walk out  on to  the stage and  without  any more indication  than  turning  upstage  before she turned   back  and  faced  them, she was twenty  people.
The  world  of criticism  is one of the  realities you have  to learn  to live with.
From that experience  I took a big step forward  in being able to cope with it.
AS:    Did you work in collaboration  with the actors and director?
TF:    Yes. In fact I had the classic situation of not knowing how to end the play. Edward  Atienza's  marvellous  and  creative  performance  as Doberman  gave  me the suggestion of what  to do : Cass running  to the edge of the stage, and Dober­ man, who has been silent throughout, crying "Don't."
Actually  I have  the  reverse problem  to most playwrights,  who  can't  write  a second or third  act.  My  problem  is that  I  can't  write  a first act.  I  don't  know why. I  remember  thinking  after  I  had  finished writing  this play, "The first act is terrific."  I didn't know  about  the second  act. Then   I gave  the  play  to  the actors, and  the second act, except for the very end as I mentioned,  played like a dream. The first act was the one they had difficulty with.

53

INTERVIEW

AS:    Another  play,  fohn A.- Himself, was produced  in 1978 at Theatre Lon­
don. How did you structure  that play? Tell us something  about  it.

TF:	It's  about  the  first prime minister of this country.  I presented  his life as if it had  taken place in the Victorian  theatre.  The  first act is a series of turns: the opposition party is presented as a bunch of acrobats,  the  press comes across as a ventriloquist's  act,  and  there are  numerous  other  people  who  come out  looking like John  A. Macdonald. The  final tum-the  confrontation with  Riel-is  a pantomime-cum-circus act. Acrobats  are  constructing  a  railroad.  Riel is a man with a pea-shooter  who is on a trapeze;  he stops all this. John  A. Macdonald is flown up  on  his harness, and  he confronts  Riel  up  in  the  air  over  the  map  of Canada, knocking  him down. This seems merely a theatrical gesture,  then  sud­ denly  Riel  rises back  up  again  swinging  from  the  noose,  and  it  all  becomes horrifyingly real.
The second act then becomes an acknowledged  melodrama, which is what  the second part  of an evening of Victorian  theatre  always  was. Everybody  had  sep­ arate stages. Downstage from Macdonald's stage, which was the largest, was total reality, where Macdonald walked in front of a cloth and  talked  to the audience. Then  he would return  to his platform and do his other  numbers.

As :  Is Tennessee Williams a playwright who has influenced  you?

TF:    Oh yes.

AS :  I  asked  that  question  because Cassandra  seems very much  to follow  the Williams tradition  of heroines-damaged and  delicate  people, like Blanche Du­ bois and Laura  Wingfield, who retreat inwards from the brutality  of the world.

TF :   Yes, and  I think whatever hardness Cass has too, the ironic, cynical side of her, is also like that  in some of Tennessee Williams'  women. There  is a very good reason for that.  I first became aware of what  the theatre really meant  to me at the same moment  that  Williams was emerging  as a playwright.  That particular play Streetcar had  an enormous  impact  on  me. The  other  playwright  who  has been a tremendous  influence is Thornton Wilder.  I  did  two of his plays when they were new. I also did  Our  Town, and  I had  long  conversations  with  him. I learned  a lot about  writing under his tutelage.  He, too, has that  master  rhythm I was talking about. There is a scene in Our Town where two women sit stringing
beans  with  their  hands  into  a bowl. They're talking  about  the  most  mundane things, and  by the  time  that  scene is over,  the  audience  is inevitably  in  tears. Just two women sitting on the back porch of a house somewhere. How did he do that?  The  book I'm  finishing now is greatly influenced  by the way he deals with historical  material  in  his book The Ides  of March, which  is his version of the assassination of Julius Caesar.

54

INTERVIEW


AS:    What  other dramatic material  have you been working on recently?

TF:    I've  done  a television drama  called  Other  People's Children. I like it so much that  I've  thought  about  turning  it into a play. It's  about  aI 5-year-old girl who has spent all her life in foster homes, and it concerns those totally unscrupu­ lous people who make a business out of what is in essence renting children  from the  Children's Aid Society. They  treat  these children  like  commodities.  A mar­ vellous young actress was found to play the part.
At the moment  I'm  working on three  ninety-minute  dramas  which really con­
stitute one long  play. It's  set between the years 1914 and  1919, so it covers the same  period  as my book The  Wars,  although  it is unrelated  to it. It's  about  a family living in Toronto, and  what  the consequences of having  passed through that  period  of time does to them as a family. When you first meet them  they're very happy,  and  the future  looks good. Then  the war begins. The  father  decides that  he can  make  money out  of the  war,  but  in so doing  he moves against  his own integrity;  this ultimately  destroys him. The  mother  doesn't  want  her son to go to war. She becomes protective  in a new way, and  that  relationship  drifts in a bad direction. The theme basically revolves around  how people use one another
-as well as events and  crises-to get what they  want. That is inevitably destructive for everyone.

AS:     Do you have any regrets about giving up your acting career?

TF:	Oh  yes, very  much.  My  biggest  regret  is that  Ididn't  play  enough  of Chekhov. Also, I think  that  knowing the kind of actor  that  I was-and I think it's  dumb  not  to acknowledge  that  Iwas  a good actor-Icould  have  had  a career.  I'd  never have been a star,  not in a thousand  years, but  I would  always have been a useful actor, a good second string-which in a sense is the best thing to be, because  you do go on forever-not being dependent   on star  stuff,  you can play anything.
The  playwrights  I missed out on altogether  were Pinter  and  Albee. I have an
instinct for that  kind of playwriting. I know I had the talent  to deliver something of what they're  writing about. I would have loved to play George in Who's Afraid of Virginia  Woolf?  I'd  love to be able to do plays like No Man's Land  when I'm older. The  other  aspect  of my acting  career is that  Ihad  just  begun  to flower. If I had continued  acting, it would have been the next ten years-between fifty and sixty-that I would  really have hit what  was naturally  mine. That's when you're  learning,  building  in  terms of who you  are.  And  Iregret  that  terribly. But I don't  regret having made the choice to write at all. There's nothing negative about  that  decision. I'm  not big enough  to encompass both  things. I don't  know how Coward  managed  to do it.




55

Jl 0% CHJINCE
(A Refuge in the crawlspace)
 




Ron Charach


Early  morning wakening
with  the cat still fading in the  frame,
-climb down  to face  the sink, then to slaver and  nick till smooth, the wife still deep  in cotton,
-it climbs down  through her  bronchial tubes,
till she sputters.
This is a day with  a 0%  chance of rain, a weekend-day with a summer cold
and  ambition iced like some kid's crazy plans. The  darkest  part  of the  house
is always the crawlspace under  the  basement stairs;
find an early-morning spider  there, refugee  from  the  brightness;
sit there  quiet  as a secret, rehearsing my next infidelity.

8 : oo. Manhattan. Sardi's. will be wearing an  orange top. not  for long.
How  could she, sleeping  up  the stairs
and  fanning her  nails in her  dreams, suspect
that  Captain Hubby  is growing  like a morning mould;
even  the summer-sky  of Westchester won't subdue  him  this time
with  reasons.




RESTJIURJINT JIUSTERITY POEM

Ron Charach

An early morning greeting tips  the  hotel, the hotel smiles,
taking stock in the  too-crowded room:
suede  napkins on a leather table,
the  thick brown  pile climbing up the  waitresses who  never showed,

POEM

And  the  bearded man  from  the manor has to do it all myself!
I approach my deep  black  jacket with  tan  pants softening the shock for  this relief  crew,
nervous as a part  of me;
I shut  them  out  and  hit  the eggs.
-Two, please,
-Waiter, Where are  my eggs! Not  on my plate.
The fat  woman moans
her  breasts  independent as she says
-Shut up, you electrolyte schoolteacher! He  has  too much  conscience for the  job.





IF I POKED THIS ]IIR



If I poked  this air with  my finger molecules
almost  visible to the eye might spread like a pillow under a royal  head

Stars  might slip
out  of fixed positions and  fall
into  my brain's cup, gathering there  lie

And  I might keep for  a few
endless  distances away
who leaned at  windows and  wondered,
word  of fortune, news of love
 


Russell Thornton






























57

IIBRIGHT AND GOOD"

Findley's "The Wars"
 





Peter Klovan



IN A  '97' n<TERvmw with Donald Cameron, Timothy Find­
ley attempted to articulate  the theme which obsessed him in his first two novels.
"There's always someone," he reflected, "who  must  do insane things in order  to clarify  what,  for  want  of better  words, is bright   and  good."1   This  same  idea receives its most powerful treatment  in his 1977 novel, The  Wars.  Here the device of a story-within-a-story is used to illustrate how a personality transcends elemental forces even while being destroyed by them, and  how the value of past experience is a function  of the skill with  which  we recreate  it  imaginatively,  transcending the chaos of time and history. As Findley's narrator realizes, "People  can only be found  in what  they do." His problem in The  Wars  is to understand the  actions of Robert  Ross, a young Canadian officer, who  when  caught  up  in  a German offensive during  the  Great  War,  tries and  fails to save one  hundred  and  thirty horses from  being  killed. Robert's  failure  leaves  him  horribly  burned, and  in many  ways is simply the inevitable outcome  of the  pattern  of futility  which characterized  his brief life. But if the narrator tends to view his subject in natural­ istic terms,  as a  helpless child  overwhelmed  by  a  world  charged  with  sinister forces, he simultaneously  reveals a conflicting tendency  to see Robert as a tragic hero  who  dares  to  challenge the  dark  necessity of  his fate.  Almost  in  spite  of himself, the narrator, through  his poetic imagination, transcends  the limits of his bleak deterministic vision. In  the  process, Robert's struggle  is raised  to mytho­ logical proportions  as a metaphor  of fate and man's place in the universe, so that  an apparent defeat is turned  into a triumph. Indeed, "tragic" is not too strong a term  to describe The  Wars,  for, as Richard  Chase  explains,  in  The   American Novel and Its Tradition:
What generates significance in a tragedy is the resistance which a culture and  the hero who is its type are able to offer to forces finally beyond human control. And the resistance must be active; it must bring the contradictions of experience to rest, even if at the moment of defeat, in a newly confirmed awareness of man's power of universally significant moral action.

By his positive efforts to save the horses, Robert  Ross is able to offer a significant resistance to the horrors around  him-so  much  so that,  some sixty years later, people are still alarmed  and fascinated by his actions. In the words of one charac­ ter, he is "un  homme unique": "Not  your everyday Sergeant  York or Billy Bishop.

THE  WARS

... But a hero nonetheless. You see, he did the thing that  no one else would even dare to think of doing."
It  is the tension  between  what  I will call "naturalism" and  "tragedy" which
gives The Wars its disturbing  power, both as the poignant  history of an  individ­ ual, and as a metaphor of man's conflict with his fate. To show how the narrator resolves this dialectic,  it will be useful to examine the opposing tendencies within the novel, beginning  with its naturalistic  aspects. I will argue that  the narrator, haunted  by Robert's fiery sacrifice, finally comes to perceive  his life as a tragic journey marked  by his progressive refinement  and  destruction  by the  basic ele­ ments:  earth,  water, air, and fire.



frNDLEY  USES THE PERSONA of an intrusive narrator  to convey his story to the  reader.  Living long after  Robert's  death,  the  narrator must  re­ construct  the  past  out  of  the  raw  data  of  history -letters, clippings,  reports, interviews,  and   photographs. It is the  photographs   which  reveal  the  human  dimensions behind  the mere facts, and which the narrator finds most deeply mov­ ing. The mass of written  records at his disposal is simply words. The photographs show people, the  particular moments  of their lives captured  forever, "5 x g and framed  in silver."  Thus,  the  narrator begins his search  for  Robert  Ross at  the archives  with  "Boxes  and  boxes of snapshots  and  portraits;  maps  and  letters; cablegrams  and  clippings from  the newspapers." "All  you have to do,"  he com­ ments, "is sign them out and  carry them across the room. Spread  over table tops, a whole age lies in fragments  underneath the lamps."  Out  of these fragments  he must reconstruct  the story of Robert Ross, and then make that story imaginatively accessible to his readers. Occasionally a particular  event eludes him, and  he gains our confidence  by admitting his limitations-"There is no good picture  of this except  the one you can make in  your mind."  In general,  however,  he does per­ ceive a pattern emerging  from  the fragments,  which  he implies by the  circular structure of his history.  He  begins his account  with  the  events  just  preceding Robert's  final  act  of  defiance, and  then  later  repeats  these same  events  almost exactly, shortly  before  his conclusion. This  circular structure parallels his efforts to  discover  the  real  Robert  Ross out  of the  circle of events surrounding him : "These  are  the  circles-all drawing  inward   to  the  thing  that   Robert   did."  Moreover, the structure suggests his conflicting perceptions of Robert,  the circular pattern implying  not only that  no progress is made, but  also that  Robert's  life is part of a continuum including  the eternal, cyclic processes of nature.
A cyclic structure precluding  progress is characteristic of determinism,  a  ma­ terialistic view of life implicitly denying freedom of choice. This concept of  nature  as a vast, aimless machine  is one that  obviously disturbs  Findley, for it  appears conspicuously in his first two novels. A passage in his first novel, The  Last of the

59

THE WARS

Crazy People  (I g67), foreshadows his concerns in The  Wars, written  ten  years later: "As far as heaven was concerned,  it was cold and  clear,  and  in Hooker's brain, the stars there made a noise like the humming  of electrical  machines, and in the whole sky, everything  whirled in circles but drifted  without  plan."  In  this cold, mechanistic  universe, individuals are perceived as mere puppets,  their  lives bleak and  meaningless episodes in the equally meaningless spectacle of Fate. The inevitable effect of this conception on fictional characters has been expressed best by Emile  Zola, in  his preface  (I 868)  to Therese  Raquin : "I chose characters completely  dominated by  their  nerves  and  their  blood,  deprived   of  free-will, pushed to each action of their lives by the fatality  of their  flesh."2    Often  Robert Ross does seem  to  be simply  a  creature  of "nerves  and  blood,"  as  he shuffles through  his daily routine in an almost catatonic  stupor.  Thus,  we can understand the prostitute's exasperation  when he becomes incapable  of even speaking to her: "'You're the most serious person I ever met,' said Ella. 'In  my whole life I never met a man who didn't  say nothin'.  'Cept  acourse the Swede. But his tongue  was cut out by the ln'ians."' The scene of Robert's  departure for the army is an even more  tiresome  example  of  the  more  lifeless aspects  of  his character. Standing before a large puddle in a pouring rain, he is unable to decide what to do :
Staring down expressionless, he watched as his reflection was beaten into submis­ sion by the rain.... Then Robert closed his eyes and made his choice. He stepped down into the puddle and stood there.
How could he move?
Rowena [his sister] had been buried the day before.
This  scene is also typical  of  Robert  in  that  he  is frequently   strait-jacketed  by the oppressive liinitations  of his family, even when  they  are  an  ocean  away.  In this he could  be any one of Zola's characters-pawns to the  multiple  compul­ sions of heredity, environment, and the pressures of the moment.
In  the Darwinized  universe of The  Wars, heredity  becomes a variant  on  evo­ lution  within  the human  realm. The  narrator emphasizes that  Robert's family is the determining  influence on his life:  "Shuffle these cards and  lay them out: this is the hand  that  Robert Ross was born with. Mister and  Mrs. Ross -Peggy and Stuart-- rabbits  and  Rowena." Certainly,  the  deck  is  heavily  stacked  against Robert, for the Ross family is in the tradition  of what  Findley has called "South­ ern Ontario  Gothic"3 -a family in a state of decline  reminiscent  of Faulkner's  Compsons  and  Bundrens.  An  ineffectual  father, a  brooding,  alcoholic  mother, and  a  hydrocephalic  sister all  combine  to  limit  Robert's potential.   Mrs.  Ross recalls Robert's  habit  of falling down as a child, foreshadowing  his more serious falls during  the war, and his inability to save Rowena's rabbits  from his mother's  death  sentence  anticipates  his later  failure  to save the  horses. Although  mother and son are alienated,  a peculiar symbiotic  relationship  exists between  them,  for she alone understands what the war will do to her son. In  a brilliant  scene early

6o

THE WARS

in  the  novel, she enters  the  bathroom  while Robert  is bathing : "Mrs.  Ross­ closing the  toilet  seat-sat  down.  She  used  the  sink  as  an  ashtray,  carefully rolling the  ashes off along  its edge and  watching  them  fall down  the  porcelain slopes like mountain climbers tumbling  to their death.  She shivered." As Robert approaches   his confrontation with  fire and  death  in  the  war,  Mrs.  Ross pro­ gressively deteriorates,  until  she is being  pushed  about  in  her  dead  daughter's wheelchair.  The  dark  bedroom  where she sits brooding  parallels  the dark  room where Robert  is raped; she is blinded  by alcohol, he by fire. Even if  Mrs. Ross is unable  to affect her son's decision to enlist, she does have a profound influence on  his view of human  relationships.  She tells him, "no  one  belongs to anyone. We're  all cut  off at  birth  with  a knife and  left at  the  mercy  of strangers.  You hear  that?  Strangers."  Reflecting  the mother's  words, there  are  no happy  male­ female  relationships  in Robert's world, and sex is  always depressing,  when it is not actually  disgusting.  The  characters  are isolated, cut-off from  each other,  as suggested  by  the  imagery  of  windows.  When  Robert  leaves  for  overseas, Mrs. Ross does not say good-bye: "Instead, she waved from  behind  the glass and she watched  her boy depart...." Similarly, when Robert  leaves England  for France, Barbara  does not speak  to  him:  "Instead, she stood at  the top of the stairs and watched  him from behind the glass."
These lonely characters exist in equally bleak environments,  of which London in I 9I 6 is typical : "It was like a tunnel  through  which you walked not knowing your destination.  Everyone  remained  a stranger. At night-the Zeppelins came. There  was a sense of silent  menace."  The  numerous  parallels  between  Canada and  war-ravaged  Europe  emphasize  that  the war is merely  the occasion, rather  than  the  cause of Robert's destruction.  Everywhere,  it  seems  to be raining-a heavy,  unwholesome  rain  that  brings  no promise of  renewal.  Everywhere,  too, there are terrible fires : the fires burning  in the Ross factories, the fires destroying the Parliament Buildings, the fires turning  Flanders into a holocaust. "Horses fell with their bones on fire. Men  went blind in the heat."  As Robert  moves through this fearful  world, his immediate  environment  becomes increasingly  claustropho­ bic, changing  from  the relative freedom  he enjoys on the  prairies  (as shown by his run with the coyote) , to the oppressive squalor of the voyage overseas, to the deadly enclosure of the trenches. Eventually he can no longer even dream,  much less run  free : "All  he wanted  was a dream.  Escape.  But  nobody  dreams  on  a battle field. There  isn't  any sleep that long. Dreams and distances are the same." It is not  surprising  that  people  remain  "strangers" in  these  circumstances,  for even the simplest action becomes difficult.
Like a child,  Robert  usually  is shown  responding  to  physical forces and  the pressures of the moment,  rather  than  acting  on the basis of any elaborate  plan. Thus,  his visit to the  brothel  is not a success:  "Robert had  ejaculated   coming up  the stairs.  His  body  hadn't waited  for  his mind.  It  did  things  on its own."

6I

THE WARS

In a much  more important  episode, Robert  manages  to kill a German  in spite of his paralyzing inertia:
What happened next was all so jumbled and fast that Robert was never to sort it out. He fell. He turned. He saw the German reaching over the lip of the crater. Something exploded [Robert's pistol]. The  German  gave a startled cry and  was suddenly dead, with his arms dangling down.
Here, Robert  doesn't  "do"  anything.  "Something" explodes, and  a man is dead. The  narrator further  emphasizes Robert's  child-like  qualities  with  the  motif  of boys' books which  appear  frequently  throughout the  novel. Robert  is unable  to kill a wounded  horse until  "he  remembered  that  somewhere  in Chums-as  a boy-he'd seen a picture of a cowboy shooting  his horse behind  the ear."  Later, at Harris's  funeral,  he doesn't quite  know how to behave,  being unable  to recall a precedent-"not even in Chums or Joseph  Conrad."
Robert's  childish helplessness is stressed further  by his affinity and even identity with  animals,  which  are  presented  throughout  The  Wars  as  the  passive  and innocent  victims of man's  fury. Two  of Findley's  comments  from  his interview with Donald  Cameron  help to illuminate  this motif: "I have  a motto,  which is
'Make  peace  with  nature,  now.'  I really believe that  we're  at  war  with  nature, and  we have  declared  war  on a defenceless enemy....  Perhaps  man  is almost done  evolving. And  this in  fact  is the  subject  of  my  next  novel.'' 4     (The   next novel  Findley  published  after  this  interview  was  The  Wars.)   Unfortunately, Findley  allows his narrator  to belabour  these two  points.  Rampant animal  im­ agery seems to appear  on every other page, and the human  characters are hustled up and  down  the evolutionary  ladder  with  rather  excessive haste. The  dog and the horse on the first page, the rabbits in Rowena's cages, the mystic communion  with the coyote, and  the terrified horses on the ship  (to  name  only a few of the early  references to animals), all prepare the way for the introduction of the gentle Captain Rodwell, whom Robert meets in the trenches. An illustrator of children's  books in his civilian life, Rodwell now operates a miniature "hospital" for injured animals, keeping a bird, a rabbit, a hedgehog and a toad in cages under his bunk. Only  the  toad  manages  to survive,  but  not  until  numerous parallels  are  made between  Rodwell's  animals  and  Rowena's  rabbits,  and  between  frightened  ani­ mals in general and  the soldiers cowering in their trenches. The  whole message is pounded  home by Rodwell's sketchbooks:  "In  all of them -on every page, the drawings  were of animals.  Of maybe a hundred  sketches, Robert's  was the only human  form. Modified and mutated -he was one with the others.''  The  affinity between  animal  and  human  becomes most  pronounced   in  times  of  crisis, and particularly  under  the stress of sexual  desire,  as the  novel's  various  violent and unpleasant  sex scenes attest.  Animals  also inevitably  appear in the  photographs which  the  narrator examines.  In  one  of these,  Robert  is holding  a  frail  white object -the  skull of some small  creature.  This  skull  may  well symbolize  his

THE WARS


destiny,  for it is one of several similar  images  of the frail  and  the delicate. Devlin, for  example, collects  fragments of  stained   glass.  "The fact  is,  I'm   devoted   to fragility. Glass  has  a  certain fineness and  brittleness  that  a  man  with  my  bones appreciates."
But  although there  are  many  delicate  objects,  animals, and  people  destroyed
in  the  novel,  there  are,  at  the  same  time, others  who  endure and  even  flourish. Lady  Juliet, for one,  is a survivor: some sixty  years after  the  war  she still enjoys her gin and  cigarettes. There is also the cat which  Marian Turner remembers:
I remember  the strangest  sight when  the raid  was over. I'd  been  hiding  under  a bed and  when  I crawled  out  and  stood up  I looked down  the rows of platforms where  the tents had  been and  there, at  the edge of the step, sat a pure white  cat we'd had  as mascot.  It  was cleaning its paws! Serenely cleaning  it paws. Well ... life goes on-and  a cat will clean its paws no matter  what.

This  image  of serenity amidst  holocaust  is suggestive  of the  narrator's tendency to take  a transcendent view of Robert's life, a view that  co-exists with  his bleak, deterministic vision.



DETERMINISM  IS   A  distinctive   feature  of  the   naturalistic novel,  which  chronicles the  disintegration of character under the  overwhelming pressures  of  heredity and  environment. In  Zola's  view,  the  narrator of  such  a novel should  approach the role of a scientist  rather than  that  of an  artist: "I am simply an observer  who sets down  facts."5 Yet even Zola was forced  to admit that such  an ideal  condition was impossible,  for, unfortunately, the  narrator could  not be eliminated readily. "Certainly," he wrote  gruffiy, "a work  will never  be more than  a comer of nature seen through a temperament" 6   (emphasis mine). In  their critical introduction  to  naturalism, Lilian   Furst   and   Peter   Skrine   summarize Zola's  dilemma: "Certain aspects  of Naturalist theory,  notably the  ideal  of total objectivity and  the  'determined' view of man,  quickly  proved  untenable in  prac­ tice. The  eye of the  observer  was that  of an artist,  and  his experimental  material was the human being  in all his irrationality." 7  Thus, as the narrator of  The  Wars ponders his photographs and  sifts through his facts, he allows  his imagination to intrude and  to create new pictures and  events beyond  those actually existing :
Robert  Ross comes riding straight  towards the camera. His hat  has fallen off. His hands are  knotted  to the reins. They  bleed.... He leaps through  memory without a sound.... You lay the fiery image back in your mind  and  let it rest. You know it will obtrude again and again until you find its meaning-here.

"Here" is the  imagination, where  the  "truth" of  Robert's life -if  it  is  to  be found  at  all-will  be discovered. The  narrator's imagination tends  to insinuate mythical and   poetical images   into  what   would  otherwise  be  a  matter-of-fact history.  Moreover, as  shown   by  the  five-part structure  of  The  Wars,  and   the

THE WARS

allusions to Euripides  and  Greek mythology, his imagination is inclined  towards tragedy,  and  this predisposition is strengthened by what  his sources tell him  of Robert.  Lady  Juliet,  his most important informant, remarks,  "The thing  is not to make excuses for the way you behaved -not to take refuge in tragedy-but to clarify who you are through  your response to when you lived." Following Lady Juliet's  cue, the narrator  comes to see Robert  not  as a  puppet  who merely  dis­ integrates,  but  as a man  who exercises his mind  and  will in a heroic  but losing struggle against overwhelming  circumstances. These circumstances,  or forces, are embodied in the four elements-earth, water, air and fire.
Robert's   heroic  stature  is emphasized  by  the  contrast   between  himself  and Rodwell, Levitt, and TaBler, three officers who all succumb  without  a struggle to the same forces which Robert  attempts  to defy. Rodwell  kills himself when he is unable  to prevent shell-shocked soldiers from  roasting little animals  alive. Levitt, who  places pathetic  faith  in  Clausewitz  to  see him  safely  through   the  war­ "the  whole war  can  be carried  out  as a serious, formal  minuet" -goes  insane during  a massive artillery bombardment. Robert  is quite  obviously different from these two characters, but his relationship  with Captain TaBler is more complex, and more interesting. Resembling "a  Boy's Own  Annual  hero," Taffier is already wounded  in France  and returned  to Canada before Robert even enlists. It is not surprising,  therefore,  that  Robert  makes Taffier  his idol,  "the  model  he  could emulate." The  two men first meet on the Alberta  prairie, where TaBler, accom­ panied by his horse and dog, is throwing stones at a row of  bottles. The encounter  ends  when  Taffier leaves to kill rattlesnakes.  This  seemingly  innocuous  episode haunts Robert  for the rest of his life, for it often appears that  he will be compelled by fate  simply  to  relive Taffier's  experiences.  Horses  and  dogs  follow  Robert everywhere, and he breaks china and glass in times of stress. When he is forced to shoot  a  crippled  horse  during  the  voyage  overseas,  he  begins  to  hallucinate: "Snakes. Snakes. Rattlesnakes. Its mane was a tangle  of rattlesnakes." Similarly, both men are involved in violent homosexual encounters; both  have affairs with Lady Barbara. But when the two men are badly wounded,  the pattern  is broken. Taffier loses both  arms and  tries to kill  himself by rubbing  the stumps  to make them bleed. Although Robert  is horribly burned,  however, he develops a peculiar serenity,  refusing  Marian   Turner's  offer  of  death.   As  she  remembers,   "He  might've said 'Yes.' But he said 'Not yet.' Not  yet. There,  in those two words, in a  nutshell -you  have the  essence of  Robert  Ross. And  perhaps  the essence of what it is to be alive. Not  yet has been my motto  ever since ... and  here I am." The  distinctive quality  which enables Robert  to attempt to save the horses, and to endure  his resultant suffering, is something  Findley calls "moral momentum." This  phrase appears  in  his first novel, The  Last of the Crazy  People, in a scene where a character knows something is dreadfully  wrong,  but is unable  to correct it:

THE WARS


She heard  the crash upstairs and  the voices, but she could  not gain the moral momentum to intervene.
Years, and ancestors, leaned in against her.
She thought, "Maybe we should all die. Maybe we should all just be satisfied to
die."

In  contrast  to  Rodwell,  Levitt,  and  Taffier, Robert  has  the  moral  momentum within himself to overcome  his inertia and resist the cumulative  pressures around him.
Robert's  latent  power  is evident  from his earliest childhood,  for although  the narrator's world-view  is thoroughly  Darwinized,  his  imaginative   recreation  of Robert's  family life includes an underlying myth of Adam and the fall from Eden. As one reviewer has commented,  Robert's  relationship with his sister is an impor­ tant  key to his character: "Though we have only brief glimpses of her, they are deftly arranged  to suggest that  a special, world-excluding  innocence  is shared by the  two,  an  innocence  symbolized  by  the  animals  they  cherish."8    Thus,  even during  one of his worst moments in the trenches, Robert  takes pains to save a rat from  drowning -a  meaningless gesture perhaps -but  he cannot  help marvel­ ling, "here  is someone still alive. And the word alive was amazing." In  addition to sharing  his sister's compassion, Robert  has another, more mysterious strength,  as symbolized by his long-distance  running. Instinctively  as a child  he heads for the open spaces of the horizon,  and  his last act as a soldier is to leave the battle­ field, release the horses, and  ride for freedom. He justifies this action  by claiming its essential sanity: "'[Captain]  Leather  is insane,' said Robert  flatly. 'It cannot be  called  disobedience  to  save  these animals.'" His  ability  to  see through  the bogus  morality  which  would  demand  the  animals'  destruction   is a  quality  he inherits  from  his mother,  whose  point-of-view, in  Findley's  phrase,  is "hyper­  realistic."9  Like  Robert,  Mrs.  Ross is associated with  the  elements-she takes pleasure in rain  and snow-and  like Robert,  she rejects the mindless optimism which  prolonged  the war  and  produced  men like Captain Leather.  "What does it mean," she wonders, "to  kill your children? Kill them  and then ... go in there [church]   and  sing  about  it! What  does that  mean?"  Mrs.  Ross's insight,  Ro­ wena's compassion, and  Robert's  running  are all signs of the power which even­ tually  enables  him  to  reveal  who  he  is by  his resistance  to  the  war  and  his endurance  of his wounds.  Before he can make his testament, however, he must first be refined by a ritual  confrontation with the elements,  concluding  with  his ordeal by fire.



bE ELEMENTAL   NATURE of Robert's journey  through  the war is emphasized  by the  inscription  on his gravestone -"EARTH  AND   AIR  AND FIRE AND  WATER." Corresponding to the hierarchy  associated  with  the four  ele-

THE WARS

ments, Robert's  major  ordeals occur in distinct stages. First, he almost drowns in the mud at Ypres-trial by earth  and  water.  Next, he barely survives an attack of poison gas-trial by air. Finally, he is horribly  disfigured in the burning  barn
-ordeal by fire. The significance of this progression can be understood  if we consider the traditional symbolism of the elements. As explained  by J. E. Cirlot,
the elements correspond to the three states of matter, plus the agent which enables them to change  states:  "Earth (or solids),  water  (or liquids), air  (or gas)  and fire  (the  temperature which  brings about  the  transformations of matter)  have been  conceived  in  the  West from  pre-Socratic  days  onward   as  the  'Cardinal Points' of material  existence, and,  by a close parallel,  also of spiritual  life." 10  In this hierarchy  earth  and water are regarded  as passive, and  air and fire as active. Thus,  just before Shakespeare's Cleopatra  dies, she declares, "I am fire and  air; my other  elements/ I  give to baser  life."  The  true  hero,  and  particularly   the tragic  hero,  tends to transcend  even air, and  to approach the condition  of fire, the symbol of the life-process, where, as in a vast conflagration, the whole forever consumes and  renews itself. St. Paul suggests this latter  idea in a striking image in his epistle to the  Hebrews-"our God is a consuming  fire."  Fire,  therefore, is the agent  of transformation and  regeneration, the  ultimate  stage of the hero's quest. Before it can be reached, however, a sacrificial purification  is the necessary intermediate stage. This is why Robert  Ross must first undergo  his ordeal  by the lesser elements.
Robert's  first two ordeals are anticipated by earlier events in his life. His near drowning  at Ypres is foreshadowed by his run  in Alberta  with the coyote, which ends  (harmlessly)   in  "a  rendezvous  with  water," and  by  his voyage  overseas, where drowning  is an ever-present threat: "In the wind it was minus forty. The only thing  they  were  told  about  the  boats  was not  to  fall  out.  There  was  no survival  in  the  water.  You  died  as soon  as it  reached  your  skin."  These  two episodes imply the contrasting  connotations  of water  as a symbol. In  its positive characteristics  water  is the  necessary life-force,  as emphasized  by  Harris,  who reminds  Robert,  "We  are  the ocean-walking on  land." Thus,  Harris  thinks that  water is man's  proper element, and  of all Rodwell's  animals,  only the toad survives, safe in its pail of water. But when water stands revealed in its destructive aspects it becomes the biblical "water  of affliction"  (1 Kings 22:27) -a force of death  and  annihilation. At Ypres earth  and  water  combine  to trap  the unwary, and  Robert  almost drowns in a sea of mud.  In  this realm  of the  dead  and  the sinister crows who feed on them,  immersion  in  water  brings  no renewal-men simply disappear  into the earth.  When Robert  is rescued at the last moment,  the description  implies that  the experience has somehow stripped  him of some of his human  qualities: "A hand fell on his shoulder.  Robert  yelled and  grabbed  at it. Bones and claws. It drew away. Robert shuddered. Birds." We are not surprised, therefore,  when  he  reaches the  place  of his next  ordeal  by swimming  "on  his

66

THE WARS


belly through  the mud," signifying that  he is, indeed, approaching a more primi­ tive state. His ordeal  by air occurs when he is caught in a gas attack  while setting up a forward  mortar  position. By this point, the narrator  has already made clear that  even the air at  Flanders  is not to be taken for granted. Introducing Poole, Robert's   batman, he  remarks,  "He'd been  assigned  to  Robert   two  days  after Robert's   arrival-his  previous  officer having  been  killed  when  he'd  stepped outside one evening  'for a breath  of air.' The  breath of air  had  blown his head off." The  air becomes still more threatening  during the gas attack,  which Robert  survives by covering  his face  with  a  urine-soaked  handkerchief, and  lying face down  in  the  mud.  The  episode  is filled with  imagery  of  childhood,  suggesting that Robert  is continuing  to regress from his adult state. When the attack is over, he lies completely motionless for three hours. "Then  he rolled over with his arms stuck out above his head. He looked like a child about  to make 'an  angel' in the snow.''
By the time Robert  is ready to disobey orders the process of reversion and refinement  is almost  complete: "His  body was completely  numb  and  his mind had shrunk  to a small, protective shell in which he hoarded  the barest essentials of reason."  He shoots Captain Leather  for preventing  his attempts to free horses from a bombardment, tears the lapels from his uniform, and leaves the battlefield. It is only now that  he is ready for his final ordeal, the confrontation with fire.
The  events occurring  between  Captain Leather's  death  and  Robert's  capture are the most difficult for the narrator (and  for the reader)   to accept,  for if it is understandable that  Robert  shoots his insane superior  officer, it is quite  another matter  for  him  to  kill Private  Cassles, the soldier  who  attempts  to  prevent  his escape with  the  horses. This second killing involves Robert  in a terrible  contra­ diction -in  the very act of defying violence he himself commits  a murder.  His actions  ironically  "prove" the  novel's epigraph,  Clausewitz's  assertion  that  "In such dangerous  things as wars the errors which proceed from a spirit of benevo­ lence are the  worst."  Robert's  decision to save the horses is an "error," because in  the  unreal  context  of the  war,  horses simply exist to  be  killed, and  no  one should  be surprised  when  they die. Robert's  first error  leads  to  his second,  the killing of Cassles. Yet as Lady  Juliet  observes, it is a terrible  thing  to be unsur­ prised. She  quotes  a  statement by Siegfried  Sassoon,  "I still maintain   that  an ordinary  human  being has a right to be horrified by a mangled  body seen on an afternoon  walk,"  and  comments,  "So  what  it  was we were  denied  was to  be ordinary.  All our  ordinary credos and  expectations  vanished.  Vanished. There  was so much  death.'' Robert's  efforts  to save the horses are  his declaration on behalf of the ordinary, but  an insane gesture given the war's  logic. Thus,  when Robert  and  the  horses are  finally  surrounded in a  barn,  Major  Mickle  decides that because Robert  must be mad, he must dispense with both mercy and reason. "That he did  so,"  the  narrator  comments,  "puts  the  state  of his own  mind  m

THE WARS

question-for what he did cannot  be interpreted as being less 'mad'  than  what Robert  had  done in taking  the horses and  deserting  the  battle." Mickle sets the barn  on fire, destroying the horses and  badly burning Robert.  It  is Robert's  last words which seal his fate. "We shall not be taken," he says, indicating to Mickle that  he has an  accomplice. To  the reader,  however,  Robert  reveals that  he has passed beyond  the  boundaries  of the  human,  and  is at  last  ready  for  his final ordeal.
Three  earlier events in Robert's  life foreshadow  his fiery sacrifice. When  he is
in Kingston, Ontario, on his way to enlist, he is both fascinated  and  terrified  by the locomotive of his train: "The fire horse : that's  what  the  Indians  called  it. Robert  looked to one side from  under  the  peak of his cap,  hoping  that  no one had seen him flinch from the steam or stepping back from the fire." Symbolically, fire is an  instrument  of testing-"the fire shall  try  every  man's  work of what sort it is" (1 Corinthians  3:13) -and at this early stage of his journey Robert is not yet prepared  to be tested by the flames. But as he moves closer to his fate, he meets Devlin, the collector of fragments  of stained  glass. One  of these  frag­ ments  depicts St. Eloi, the  patron  saint  of smiths  and  metalworkers :  "He  was working at a forge and held a gigantic 'butterfly' in a pair of tongs. The butterfly was rather  grotesque  and  one had  to assume that  it was such. It was shown  as having  just been recovered from the flames, in a white hot state." This grotesque butterfly  is the  poignant  image  of what  Robert  will become  when  he  is pulled from  the  burning  barn,  blind  and  crippled  and  disfigured  beyond  recognition. Shortly after the stained glass episode, Robert  meets Captain Villiers, who is the human  symbol  of  his fate.  Villiers  was trapped   in  a  fire  and  his  vocal  cords destroyed when he swallowed the flames. As Lady Juliet  tells the narrator, "Noth­ ing was left of him, you know. Nothing  but  nerves and  pain  and  his mind.  No voice-no flesh. Nothing. Just his self." Fire, then, reduces Villiers to his essen­ tial self, suggesting  Aristotle's  belief that  "the  soul  is a  kind  of fire or  heat."11
Similarly,  fire sears  away Robert's  flesh, leaving  little  more  than  his "self"  or
"soul."  After  surviving  his elemental  ordeals  he  reaches  a  plateau   beyond  the stress and  conflict of life, for the  last  picture  taken  of him  shows him  horribly scarred,  yet "smiling."  He  appears  to  have  arrived  at  what  Yeats  called  "the condition of fire," where "is all music and all rest." 12 Thus  the narrator's history of Robert's  journey ends quietly,  with one last snapshot  from  an  extraordinary life: "Robert and Rowena  with Meg: Rowena seated  astride  the pony-Robert holding  her in place. On  the  back is written : 'Look!  you can  see our  breath!' And you can."
Robert's  triumph is paralleled  by the narrator's. Out  of his piles of documents and  conflicting  testimonies he clarifies the  meaning  of Robert's self-destruction and  reshapes his life into a coherent  whole. In  doing so, he transcends  a purely mechanized  account of his subjects as some crippled  animal, for he is most deeply

68

THE  WARS


moved  not  by abstract Heredities and  Environments, but  by  people  in  the  daily tragedies of their  lives. Thus, he comes to see Robert as a  man  whose  yearning for  what  is "bright and  good" conflicted  with  all  the  dark  and  destructive  im­ pulses of which  the  Great War  was a most ignoble emblem. More  visionary than  historian, he  imaginatively  recreates the  life  behind   the  facts  of  history,  and fashions  out of his material a prayer  against  despair.

NOTES

1 Donald  Cameron,  "Timothy Findley:  Make  Peace with  Nature,  Now," in  Con­
versations  with  Canadian Novelists, Part One  (Toronto: Macmillan,  1973), p. 55·
2   Emile Zola, "Preface" ( 1868)  to Therese Raquin, quoted  by George J. Becker, ed.,
Documents of Literary Realism (Princeton: Princeton  Univ.  Press, 1963),  p. 159·
3 Graeme  Gibson, "Interview with Timothy  Findley," in Eleven  Canadian Novelists
(Toronto: House of Anansi, 1972), p. 138.
4  Cameron,  pp. 50-51.
5   Zola, "Naturalism in the Theatre" (r88o), in Becker, p. 197.
6  Zola, p. rg8.
7  Lilian  R. Furst  and  Peter  N. Skrine, Naturalism  ( 1971;  rpt.  London:  Methuen,
1978),  p. 53·
8 Michael  Peterman,   "English   Canadian  Fiction  in  1977,"  Journal   of  Canadian
Studies, 14, No. 1 (Spring  1979), 95·
9 Gibson, p. 140.
10 J. E. Cirlot,  A  Dictionary of Symbols, trans. Jack Sage  (New  York:  Philosophical
Library,  rg62),  p. gr.
11 Aristotle, De anima  (i.2.404), quoted by John  Mansley Robinson,  An  Introduction to Early Greek  Philosophy (Boston: Houghton  Miffi.in, 1968),  p. 207.
12 "Per  Arnica Silentia  Lunae" (1917),  in Mythologies (1959;  rpt.  New York:  Col­
lier, 196g),  p. 357·




CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS
available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C.  V6T 1W5 /228-4741



6g

THE DRAGON IN THE FOG

"Displaced Mythology" in "The Wars"


Bruce Pirie


IN TIMOTHY TINDLEY's   novel The  wa,, Robert  R=, roon after  arnvmg in  Europe,  finds  himself leading  a  line  of  horses  through   thick green fog. The  foul smell of the air  puzzles him,  but  Poole, his batman, detects
the odour of chlorine that has soaked into the ground.

The  smell was unnerving -as  if some presence were lurking in  the fog like a dragon in a story. Poole was quite correct;  the ground  was saturated  with gas. Chlorine and phosgene were currently both in use. Mustard gas was still to come.

This  matter-of-fact chemical information  is typical  of the novel's verisimilitude. An almost documentary realism seems to seduce the reader  into accepting  the authenticity of the account. By mentioning  "a dragon  in a story,"  however,  the narrator teases  us  with  a  glimpse of  another, more  truly  seductive  influence. Behind the elaborate  realism of The  Wars  hides the beguiling shape of myth and legend -the dragon  that lurks in the fog.
Northrop  Frye finds the essential principles of story-telling in mythology;  those structural principles  are  "displaced" from  mythology  to  literature. What   kind of displaced  mythology would  we expect  to find  in  Findley's  novel? The  Wars is a work of irony; in it we see the attempt, as Frye says in Anatomy of Criticism, "to  give form  to  the shifting  ambiguities  and  complexities  of unidealized  exis­ tence."  He goes on to say, "As structure,  the  central  principle  of ironic  myth is best approached as a parody of romance : the  application of romantic  mythical forms to a more realistic content which fits them in unexpected  ways." A dragon's proper  home, of course, is the world of romance; if he can be displaced into  the world of "unidealized existence,"  perhaps  other  aspects of his  homeworld  have made  their  way with  him. Following this lead,  I  intend  to  examine  The  Wars as a  "parody of romance."  Readers  of  Frye's  Anatomy of  Criticism  and  The  Secular Scripture  will recognize my enormous  indebtedness to those texts, which I use as handbooks  to romantic convention.
Adventure  is the  essential element  of plot  in  romance,  and  in  a  naive  form romance  can  be the story of a  hero  who  dies in  the  glory of combat  or  who undergoes a series of exciting adventures  and  always comes back for more, like a comic book hero. There are plenty of children  in the novel who see war this way.

70

MYTHOLOGY IN  "THE WARS"


They  range  from  Robert's  younger brother,  thrilled  to announce  at school that Robert would receive the Victoria  Cross, to boys arriving  at the front, exhilarated by the "heaven-sent chance" to become  men.  A picture  of Robert  in  his new uniform seems to say that  "death is romantic" : "I'll  fade away in glory hearing music and my name." But Robert's  actual death  is not heralded  by music and all these innocents  will find  a  world  of  "unidealized   existence"  confronting their naive romantic expectations. Exciting storms at sea described in the Boy's Own Annual  must meet the stomach-churning reality of an Atlantic  crossing.
The  true  romantic hero begins in innocence  and  journeys in quest  of  knowl­ edge. A wise old guardian may supervise the initiation,  as do Arthur's Merlin  and Dante's  Virgil.  Robert's  innocence  lies in the fact that  killing is "a foreign state of mind"  for him.  He  needs "someone  who could teach  him,  by  example,  how to kill" and  thinks  he has found such a person in the legendary Eugene  Taffier, an older man  who has already  journeyed to war and  back; ironically, this nearly mythic figure turns  out  to practise sexual perversions and  later  attempts suicide. Another  guardian spirit  for Robert's  innocence  is the  "ablest  man" on  the S.S. Massanabie, the decent and  understanding Battery Sergeant-Major Joyce. When Robert  must  destroy  an  injured   horse,  the  B.S.M. leads  Robert   through   the darkness down to the hold of the ship, like Virgil leading Dante  into hell. Finally, however, both  Virgil  and  the B.S.M. can  only step aside and  let their  proteges stand alone.
Robert's  initiations  and loss of innocence remind us that  we expect life to have four seasons-youth, maturity,  age, and death-but part  of the horror  of The Wars  is the  realization  that  this natural  cycle has been  drastically  accelerated. We expect young men in romances to face challenging ordeals and  life-changing epiphanies,  but  in this novel too many men face dead-end  ordeals  and learn  too much  too soon. We see this in the constant  emphasis on the  childishness of the characters: "men" whose average age is nineteen, some of whom do not yet shave and  whose voices still waver,  who promise their  mothers  not to drink  and  who soil their pants in moments  of crisis. The experience of the twelve-year-old Juliet d'Orsey  reflects all these men-children  facing  too much  too soon. She  discovers Robert  and  her sister making violent love:  "I know things now I didn't want  to know."  Juliet's  trauma symbolizes the whole world's experience  of the war,  and the profound  loss of innocence  delicately colours all her recollections, just as the recovery of a lost Golden  Age typically haunts  romance.




IN ONE PHASE  OF ROMANCE we may see experience assaulting the integrity  of the innocent  world, symbolized by a "beleaguered castle." In  the midst of the unfathomable horror of the trenches, there is in fact a "beleaguered

MYTHOLOGY IN "THE WARS"

castle" -the  "Stained   Glass Dugout," an  "inordinately  civilized  place"  with books, a plaster  angel surrounded  by candles, an  animal  hospital,  and  pieces of stained  glass. Devlin, the "gentle  as a lamb"  man  who collects the glass, does so because he is "devoted  to fragility,"  the real  fragility  being,  of course,  not  the glass but rather  sanity, decency, and innocence.
A  variation  of  the  innocence  theme  appears   in  the  hero's  pure  love  for  a damsel -love,  like adventure,  being one  of  the  keynotes of  romance.  In  one version, the hero leaves a chaste lady, his adventures, and  returns  to  marriage. In  another  form, often focusing on a sister or daughter figure, the  journey ends in virginity. The  chastity of the latter  quest may thinly  disguise a latently  inces­ tuous relationship; the chaste love of brother for sister may represent a lost Golden Age but may also hover near a moral taboo  (virtue  being most  admirable when closely pressed by temptation) .
In  the case of Robert  Ross, the catalyst for the story is his love for  his sister Rowena; "Rowena," we may remember,  is the  name  of one of the  heroines in Ivanhoe.   Robert   often  remembers  her  in  critical   moments   of  the  war.  She represents a lost happy  time:  he remembers  her  with  her  rabbits,  or the idyllic sound of lapping  water as they vacationed at Jackson's  Point.  When she dies, it is because she falls out of her chair, and the words "fell" and "fallen" occur so often after her death  that  it is hard  not to hear a suggestion of the biblical Fall of Man from innocence. Robert feels responsible for the fall because he was locked in his bedroom "making love to his pillows" instead of caring for Rowena.  Perhaps here we see the sense of being close to a moral taboo in the brother-sister  relationship. In  any  case, it  is his responsibility for  the  fall  that   drives  Robert  out  of  his "innocent" Golden  Age, forcing  his perilous  journey  through   the  world  of  ex­ perience.
Just as the young man of the quest has an older man guiding  his journey, there
may also be a mother-figure  who waits at home for the hero to finish his wander­ ings. Where  there are both a young and an older woman,  the older may become polarized  into  the  sinister stepmother  of folktale  who  may  also  dimly  suggest incest. In such figures, we see the outline of Robert's alcoholic mother, irrationally and  cruelly insisting that  Robert  should  kill Rowena's  rabbits because he loved Rowena.  We may even detect  the incest theme  as she  comes into the  bathroom  while Robert  bathes. There is a hag-like description of  her as she sits on the toilet and  uses Robert's  childhood  as a weapon against  him. It  is partly she who turns the Golden World of this novel into a kind of  prison-paradise from which Robert has to escape.
The  mention  of incest reminds  us that  loving  relations  can  be  twisted  into demonic form. Robert  may be trying to recover the  remembered  Golden  World with  his sister, but  the world of experience  twists this  urge  into sinister shapes. One of his first adventures  occurs in the brothel  at Lousetown,  where the  prosti-

72

MYTHOLOGY IN  "THE WARS"


tute  is a death-image : "Her shoulders  were naked  bones and  her  eyelids were painted  black."  It  is appropriate that  Robert  takes a deathly  prostitute,  for the sister whom he truly loved has died and he now heads in quest of romantic  death. In  the next  room is more demonic  eroticism:  Eugene  Taffier engages in brutal homosexuality, foreshadowing  the rape scene later in the novel and the agonized sexuality that  Juliet  d'Orsey  stumbles  upon. Barbara  d'Orsey,  on one level, is a witch/harlot figure, going from man to man, leaving each as he becomes disabled, but  her  character is also  tangled  up  in  another  romantic   convention.  As her brother  Clive explains,  Barbara  acts out  of obsessive fear  because everyone she has loved has died. Thus  her behaviour symptomizes not promiscuity but despera­ tion.  In  a way, Barbara  is the  princess terrorized  by the  dragon-war-who keeps devouring  the princes. Until  the right prince comes along and ends the rule of the dragon, she is under its spell.
Figures of romance  polarize themselves into opposites. Just as the heroine finds her opposite in the siren or witch, so also the dragon finds his opposite in friendly animals,  particularly the faithful  and  devoted  horse and  hounds.  As makers of old cowboy movies well knew, the horse who gets the hero to his quest naturally has a special  role. The  most  cursory reading  of The  Wars  reveals the  intimate link between Robert  and  horses. His true companions on ship are the horses and as he rides along the collapsing dike in the fog, he trusts his horse to find its own way, endangering himself only when he leaves the horse. Of  course, one of the most riveting scenes is the climactic episode, previewed on the opening  pages of the novel, in which the knight  (Robert) meets with his trusty  horse and  hound (maybe  a Labrador retriever)   and  rides off : "It  was as if both  dog and  horse had been waiting for Robert  to come for them." Animals conventionally  help the hero, but  in The  Wars  one measure  of a man's  compassion is his willingness to help animals;  thus  Rodwell  shelters animals  and  Robert's  act  of defiance  takes the form of releasing endangered horses.
Romances  often  begin with  a knight  riding off into  a forest after  an  animal, an image which is never very far from metamorphosis, the changing  of the hunter into an animal.  Near the beginning of the book, Robert  goes for a long run with a coyote. The  two enjoy a special communion,  both drinking  from  a river in the prairie.  Robert  becomes oddly identified with the animal  as he crouches "on  his haunches" watching  it. When  confined to barracks for two weeks, he sits like a caged and lonely animal  on the roof and stares across the  prairie,  "wishing  that someone would howl." Metamorphosis, or the union of human  and  animal iden­ tities, is an important theme  in The  Wars. Taffier plays at  being a horse  in the brothel, a demonic version of Robert's identification with horses. Rodwell's sketch­ book includes  mostly animals,  but  also Robert's  form,  "modified  and  mutated" to look like the others. When  trapped  in a barn  with runaway  horses, he identifies himself as one of them,  and  this dooms him, for when  he calls, '"We shall not

73

MYTHOLOGY IN "THE WARS"

be taken,'" Major  Mickle thinks Robert  has an accomplice  and authorizes  a full attack.  Metamorphosis in romance often indicates  a lowering of human  identity as the  hero  obscures  the signs of original  identity  and  joins a  lower  world  of animals. In The  Wars, it is a lowering in the sense that  the humans  are  trapped and  frightened  like the animals, but  the fellow-feeling with  animals  is also part of the  human  largeness and  generosity of characters like Rodwell  and  Robert. To  recognize oneself as an  animal  is to  recognize  one's  kinship  with  and  duty towards all life, a recognition threatened  by the "ethics" of war.
The changing of humans into animals occurs specifically in those romances concerned with the descent of the hero, and The  Wars  is primarily  the story of a journey  into  a  lower  world,  although   there   are  points  of  ascent.  Ascents  in romance  typically  involve an  epiphany  at  a  mountaintop, tower,  or  staircase. Since the ascent reverses the Fall of Man, it is not surprising that  the goal is often a new Eden, a locus amoenus or "beautiful green world." In The  Wars, the ironic ascent  is up  the  stairs of the  whorehouse  in  Lousetown.  It is indeed  a  "green world,"  with a potted fern on the landing,  "sweet  rose perfumes"  (to  mask the smell of horse manure), and  lilac wallpaper  in the bedroom.  Robert  indeed  has an epiphany, but  it is a vision of depravity; through  a hole in the  wall he sees the  bestiality of Eugene Taffier, reminding  us that  this ironic  ascent  is really a descent.
A more subtle image of ascent occurs when Robert  and  his men climb into a giant crater to cut gun beds. It is hard to find images of upward  movement  in the flatlands  of Europe,  and  the crater  is most obviously an  image  of descent,  but Findley gets double  service from this crater  by making  it an  ironically  inverted mountain. Robert  crawls around  the crater  "like  a mountain climber,"  heading for an object  that  turns out  to be a ski pole. We are  never told  why a ski pole would  be there;  ski poles belong on mountains and  there  are  no mountains for miles around  -that  is, unless the  crater  itself is a symbolic  mountain. As the men clamber  out  of the crater,  they might  as well be mountain climbing,  with the "sound  of falling debris" and the treacherous slipping  backwards,  "sliding in the snow."  At the top of this climb is a vestigial locus amoenus, for in the midst of all the  mud  is a singing bird  and  an  enemy  soldier  who  has  laid  aside  his weapon  in order  to watch the bird.  At the  peak,  Robert  shoots the soldier and then  has  a  devastating  epiphany: the  man  he  has  killed  had  no  intention   of killing him.

IMAGES OF  DESCENT  ARE, of course, richly elaborated  and  to prepare  for descent, one needs a talisman, such as a golden bough. For Robert  it
is his pistol, which gives him the "ritual edge  in authority," not so much  from the enemy as from his own men in the nightmare world they enter.

74

MYTHOLOGY IN  "THE WARS"


The  hero on  his way to the  underworld  must follow a special "path" which may become subverted  into  an image of lost direction,  such as the labyrinth  or maze, often  with a monster at its centre like the Minotaur. Thus, in the passage cited earlier,  Robert  loses his way, finds himself on a crumbling  dike, and senses a "presence" in the fog "like a dragon  in a story." Another  maze image occurs as he returns  to Bailleul for the final catastrophe  under  "a  daze of blazing light and  sweat,"  realizing  he  has  gone  "over  two  hundred   miles in  circles to  get there"  when  it  "should  have  been about  a quarter  of that." This  late stage  of the quest may also be characterized  by the ravaged waste land, abandoned build­ ings, and  the  town  deserted  in fear  of  the  monster.  Appropriately,  Bailleul  is called "the  last place in civilization."  Around  it are "a  great  many  ruined  farm houses," one of which becomes the refuge of Robert  and  the horses. It  also has an  asylum  called  "Asile  Desole, which  means  desolated  or  devastated  refuge,"  where the traumatic rape scene occurs.
The lower world is dark and wintry. As Robert embarks in the dead of winter, he sees figures outside the train  window, "frozen in their places," "ghosts through the frosted glass." Passing through  Toronto  for the last time, he realizes that  his world is changing; in the dark  he cannot  find the "uncomforting shapes"  of his memory and  he asks, "Where, in his dark, was the world he'd  known and  where was he being taken to so fast there wasn't even time to stop?"
The lower world is a form of hell, a night world, a subterranean world where the shapes  of animals  swarm  upon  the hero. Thus  we see the  hellish S.S.  Mas­ sanabie, hot, dark,  and airless, divided into levels like Dante's  Inferno, officers at the  top  and,  at  the  bottom,  the  grotesque  hold  full  of manure,  flies,  rats,  the pounding  hooves of  rearing  horses, and  an  injured  horse  with  a  mane like  a "tangle  of rattlesnakes"; when Robert shoots it, "all  hell" breaks loose. Similarly, Flanders  is a  plain  of  contaminated  mud  and  water,  "dung  and  debris  and decaying  bodies," where breezes carry the infernal  "smells of  smoke and  ashes." The  thick,  evil-smelling  fog is "full  of shapes  that  waved  their  arms."  At  the bottom  of the  night  world  we find a parody  of  communion,  the cannibal  feast. When  Rodwell,  who  knows  the  identity  of   human   and  animal   natures,  sees soldiers eating  rats and  killing a cat,  he knows he has reached  the cannibalistic  bottom of the night world and he commits suicide. More than  anything  else, hell is full of dead  people, and  surely our main  impression of the  battlefront  is that it is a world full of corpses. At  times this vision of hell frankly  becomes a vision of the Apocalypse, as when flame-throwers unleash fire storms, men explode from combustion,  horses rear  "with  their bones on fire," and  the earth  is "seared  and sealed with fire."
Earth  and  air  are  man's  natural  elements. The  romantic  hero  journeying  to another  world must pass ordeals of the other two elements, fire and water,  just as Dante  must  pass through  a ring of fire and  the river of Eden.  Once  one passes

75

MYTHOLOGY IN  "THE WARS"

the ordeals of the two alien elements, one deserves Robert's epitaph: "Earth and Air and Fire and Water." (Incidentally, it may also be that  the twentieth  century has added  ordeal  by air, in the form of gas attack,  and  ordeal  by earth,  in the form of collapsing dugouts.)
The whole area of the battlefield is "well below sea level" and  the men fight in
"a shallow sea of stinking grey from end to end"  where men  and  horses drown in  mud.  Robert's  ordeal  by  water  comes when  he  slips off a  dike  and  nearly drowns. It becomes important to find ways of living with  water.  Robert  appears to love Harris,  who tells stories about  feeling at  home  in  water,  and  Rodwell's toad survives a gas attack  by staying in a pail of water: "It was a matter, Rod­ well had said, of your element. The toad has a choice."
The  world of fire can be a destructive world of malignant demons, such as the enemy's fire storms, but it can also be a cleansing purgatorial fire. Both connota­ tions apply  to Robert's  ordeal  by fire in  the  burning  barn.  It shows  the stupid destructiveness of the war world; it is also a gateway  by which Robert  rises to a higher level of heroism.
The  journey to the underworld  is a journey to the land  of death.  When Robert magnificently  bursts out of the  barn,  clothing  on fire, "bright tails of flame ... streaming  out  behind  him,"  we may  recognize the  solar  myth  of the  god  who travels through  darkness and death  but returns  like the sun in the morning.  The important point about  this kind of mimic death  is that  the hero does go on living afterwards,  having  come close to or through  the chasm.  Robert's  exaltation  as a sun-god  may  be ironic -after  all,  he finally dies of  his burns -but  the  life­ assertive  statements   that  appear   throughout  the  book  insist  that   there  is  still triumph  in Robert's  end:  the epigraph  from  Euripides,  for  example-"Never that which is shall die" -or Rodwell's last letter to his daughter-"Everything lives forever" -or  Robert's  reply to the nurse who, "ashamed of life," offers to help him die:

'Not yet.' Not  yet. Do you see? He might have said 'No.' He might've said 'never.' He rnight've said 'Yes.' But he said 'not  yet.' There,  in  those two words, in  a nutshell -you have the essence of Robert Ross. And perhaps the essence of what it is to be alive.

"Not  yet" are  the words of a man  who has been  profoundly  educated  by his journey to the lower world. He fully knows the  presence of death  and  he holds onto life. Knowledge  of death  feeds this human  impulse  to survive. When  the hero fights the  dragon  to get at  the secret treasure  hoard,  the  real  wealth  is a wealth of wisdom, which is often wisdom about  death,  which is to say it is about the fertility of the land, as in the Grail legends. Robert,  near the end of the novel, sees himself as an  (ironic)  fertility god. In dragon-ravaged Europe, he looks into a mirror: "He'd thought  he would stand and see himself like a god in the glass."

MYTHOLOGY IN  "THE WARS"

Instead,  he sees a death-image, a "scare crow" with "shadows  round  the sockets of his eyes." Then,  with "a sudden  vision of obliteration," he lies down and masturbates, thus becoming a futile fertility god, "the  cold, wet blooming of four hundred  thousand  possibilities -of  all those lives that  would never be -on  his fingertips."  Despite  this futility,  Robert  is in some way a  fertility  god,  for  his "not  yet" epitomizes the human  will to survive. As Nurse Turner says, "Not yet has been my motto ever since ... and  here I am,"  to which her sister adds, "No dear . . . here we all are."



DEATH THREATENS  human  identity.  Thus,  an  alternative way of seeing  this quest  to  understand   death  is as a  "fable  of identity."  The original fall from Eden fractures  human  identity apart  from what it should have been.  From  that  point  the  hero  must  descend into  a  world  of alienation  until ready to ascend to a reintegrated  harmony. The opening scenes of romance often show the hero becoming  a different  person, as is the case with Robert  when  he stands in a daze at  the Kingston  train  station  a few days after  Rowena's  death, making the fateful decision to join the army and leave the Golden World. (Symbolically, of course, he has no choice:  his link with the innocent  world died with Rowena  and  he stands  at the station  on Good Friday,  a day for descents.) When  Lewis Carroll's  Alice leaves  behind  one  identity,  she  exchanges  it  for a looking-glass reflection of herself, mirrors and pictures that  alter identity being common  romantic  motifs.  (We  may  remember  the  mirror-smashing  scene that begins Francis  Ford  Coppola's Apocalypse Now.)  Similarly,  Robert  looks down into a puddle  which foreshadows  the watery world of the trenches  but is also a mirror  that  shows his new military identity: "his reflection was beaten  into sub­ mission by the rain."  The  decisive moment  arrives when he steps into the puddle and  stands  there.  Identity-distorting mirrors  appear  again,  along  with  pictures, in that  other  place of initiation, the brothel: "Directly  opposite  the  door, there was a wall that  was covered with paintings of Odalisques and mirrors, so the first thing  you  saw  was  yourself,  intermingled   with  a  lot  of   pink  arms  and   pale breasts."
Although there may be a metamorphosis, a change of name, and a change of costume,  the  hero  never  completely  forgets  his original  identity.   Robert   gets a  uniform   and  a  new  name,  "Robert Raymond   Ross-Second  Lieutenant, C.F.A.," but this new man  will be haunted  at climactic moments by the memory of the Robert  Ross who listened to the lapping  water at Jackson's  Point  with his sister. The  quest of the hero is to reintegrate  his identity,  to become like the Old Testament God,  who can say, "I am that  I am."  There  is hope for salvation  as long as there is a thread  which connects him to his earlier identity,  as in the myth of Theseus, whose return  from the labyrinth  is made possible by the thread  which

77

MYTHOLOGY IN  "THE WARS"

connects him  to the outside.  Indeed, Robert's trick  of involuntarily remembering his earlier  life at  key moments  literally  saves his life during the  gas attack, when an  image  of a science  experiment comes "unbidden into  Robert's mind  from  a dull winter  classroom  long ago."
In  the final ascent, the hero's identity is re-established by removing the costume
that  concealed it.  In  Robert's case, this is his officer's  uniform; after  the  radical step  of  freeing  the  horses, he  tears  the  lapels  from  his  uniform and  leaves  the battlefield. Freeing  the  horses  (like  Moses  leading his  people  out  of  Egypt)  is truly radical because it returns Robert to his roots. No longer  the man  who follows Captain Leather's foolish  orders,  he  returns to  the  kind  of  fellow-feeling   with nature that  Rowena and  her  rabbits exemplified. Rodwell kills himself  because he finds that  those feelings cannot survive  in  war,  since  war  is based  on  destruc­ tion of one's fellow creatures. Robert, however,  finds a way out of the underworld, a  way  to survive: a  radical  act  of individuality. The act  leaves  him physically scarred, of  course,  but  heroes  from  Oedipus on  have  known  that  mutilation is often  the  price  of  great  wisdom.  Although the  individualizing act,  saving  the horses, returns Robert to a full compassion  for life, it necessitates  the  destruction of  life -the  killing  of  Captain Leather.  This  paradox is  what   Frye  calls  "a return that  achieves  its recreation by  a  creatively negative act."  Nurse  Marian Turner sees this paradox:
You see, he did  the  thing  that  no one else would  even  dare  to  think  of doing. And that  to me's as good a definition of a 'hero'  as you get. Even when the thing that's  done is something of which you disapprove.  He was un homme  unique. ...

Unfortunately, "creatively negative" acts do not stand up well in the  courts.  One of  the  motifs  of  romance is the  trial  founded on  a  mistaken or  narrow-minded charge or a  wrong  identity; the  hero  escapes  by revealing his true  identity. The Robert who shot  Captain Leather was a man  making a desperate last  gesture  to pull  himself  out  of the lower  world  of war  in order  to recreate his own  identity. Once  that identity is recreated, he  is no  longer  the  same  man. Thus, Robert's trial is, in fact,  the trial of a "wrong identity" and  it is poetically appropriate that he  be  tried  "in absentia"  and  allowed  to  return to  St  Aubyn's for  convalescent treatment.
The  return to St  Aubyn's is, of course,  a return to  Eden. As romance moves to a world  of original identity, the  symbolism  of the  garden of Eden  reappears; a  few  excerpts from  the  first  description of  St.  Aubyn's countryside will  easily show its Edenic quality:
The  countryside is the most beautiful  in the world.... Spring,  in this region, has no equal  anywhere.  The  fields are  filled with  black and  white  cows-the river­ banks are spread with yellow flowers -larks fly up in endless song-and  the rain, when  it falls, is soft and  warm.  [Roads  wind]   past  the  naked  swimmers  in  the ponds and  deposit you at  inn yards where  the smell of ale and  apples  makes you

MYTHOLOGY IN  "THE WARS"

drunk  before you've passed the gate. It is an old world-comforting and safe....
St Aubyn's itself is an abbey and  has been the family seat of the  d'Orseys since
the year 1070.... It sits in the middle of a park, surrounded  by lawns, and ... deer would come out of the nearby forest and wander through  the flower beds... .

Robert can  never  return to  his first  Eden:  Rowena and   her  rabbits are  dead. The  last picture taken  during his life shows, however,  that  Robert has achieved  a new  Eden. Juliet d'Orsey loves him;  they  are  together  in  St  Aubyn's; he  holds her  hand   and  "he  is smiling." Juliet, who  even  as  an  old  woman maintains a child's  wisdom,  becomes  a substitute for Rowena.
This  identification is made even more clearly in the epilogue. We see one  more
picture which  echoes  the  earlier   picture of Robert linked  to  Juliet, and   this  is
"the last thing you see before  you put  on your overcoat" :

Robert  and Rowena  and Meg:  Rowena seated astride the pony-Robert holding her in place. On the back is written: 'Look! you can see our breath!' And you can.

The  hero  brings  the end  of his quest  in line with  the  beginning; the  circle closes.
By  this  point, the  reader may  be  wondering to  what   extent   we  need  to  be consciously  aware of  this  romantic quest  pattern. Frye  answers  this  question in the  Anatomy of Criticism, when  he  discusses the  cycle  of  the  solar  myth  as  it appears in literature:

The  hero does something  which we may or may not, as we like, associate with the myth of the sun returning at dawn. If we are reading  the story as critics, with an eye to structural principles, we shall make the association, because the solar analogy explains  why  the  hero's  act  is an  effective and  conventional  incident.  If we are reading  the story for fun, we need not bother:  that is, some murky "subconscious" factor in our response will take care of the association.

In  any  case, it is clear  that  while  The  Wars'  realistic  details  generate part  of its appeal and  effectiveness,  the  way  in  which  those  details  are  given  imaginative impact goes  beyond  the  effects  of verisimilitude. We  demand that historic  and geographic "facts" be  given  a  "shape" to  contain   them. The situation of  the narrator in this novel mirrors this fundamental issue in fiction: he has only a few photographic images  which,  by themselves,  say little.  His  task-"your'' task­ is to take  those few facts  and  pictures and  find their  meaning. To  find the  mean­ ing  of  the  pictures, to  discover  the  imaginative impact  of  realistic  details,  the story-teller must  be a  master  of the  basic  principles  of  story-telling-principles which  give shape to human experience, and  which are as old as myth  and  legend.







79

LYING LOW
 


Pier Giorgio Di Cicco


There are no happier methods of behaving;
the blue bull-finch  sings in the attic of his loneliest  thought; the little  girl  you
saw yesterday  was growing  into  four  more  feet of bone and  was crying her eyes out  for it,
and  she'll get it, the whole  battalion of
corpuscles,  the arms  that  will go around someone and  rot;  take  too the blades  of grass  that  are viewing  the warheads zinging  by at only half
the cost of the federal budget; and  my bed floats up in the night,  imitating young  clouds; lord,
how the simple furniture wants  out; there  are  ways of singing of behaving happily, like walking
to the refrigerator in the night,  like downing
coffee like the last good  thing; and  I am  preparing a grave  where marionettes sing, propped around it, call  them  mama  and  papa  and  screen  bad
movies against the north  wall of it; or I will dive  into it as into a swimming  pool and  come out  holding
gin martinis to bewildering suns;  I sing only
half as well as I did last year about methods
of being happily. Today I will try a word  or two about a woman, of how she'll stay around like a human thing reminding me of a lengthy  dream; .then I will put  away my fingers for the night,  put  them  into  my eyes
as if to pluck out maps  of all  the godforsaken places
I would have been innocent in. But  having seen
the  world try to consume  itself  like a would-be fireball it is better  that  I play black-jack with  my heart;
it is better  that  I lie still and  sing of detective stories where  the murderer is himself, and  loved for it.












8o


CANADIAN FICTION OF THE GREAT WAR


ric


EMORE  THAN  SIXTY YEARS John  McCrae's "In Fland= Fields" has been memorized  by Canadian schoolchildren or declaimed  reverently
at  Remembrance Day  ceremonies  in  Canada   and  around   the  world.  It  is  al­ most the  only  Canadian poem,  of whatever  theme  or  type,  that  has  achieved genuine  fame or  recognition.  Practically  unknown,  by contrast,  both in  Canada and  abroad,  are several war novels which constitute the best fiction by Canadian writers about  the experiences of Canadian fighting soldiers in the Great  War  of
I 9 I 4- I 8. These  novels and  their authors-All  Else is Fally; a tale of War  and
Passion (I 929)   by Peregrine  Acland,  Generals  Die in  Bed  (I 930)   by Charles Yale  Harrison,   and  God's  Sparrows  (I 937)   by Philip  Child-deserve to  be better known. For since the publication  of Timothy  Findley's The  Wars  (I 977), readers have  begun  to realize that  the war novel is a significant genre of  Cana­ dian fiction.
It is one of the ironies of modern history that the I 9 I 4- I 8 conflict -depending
on how one sees it, either the last nineteenth-century or the first twentieth-century war-has been called by various names. First it was the "Great  War,"  then  the "World War"; since   I945, it has  been  dubbed the  "First World   War." This  last  name  is both  innocuous  and  foreboding,  conveying  both  a  colourless statistic and  the suggestion of a series of ever more dangerous  conflicts. The  fact remains  that  it  was a  war  fought  primarily  among  European states  and  their allies, and  was by no means  universal in scope. Still, in terms of the  casualties and devastation  it involved it came to be regarded as the worst calamity mankind had  ever committed  against  itself. Some hoped  it would  prove to  be the  final, ignoble  cauldron  of  human  madness  which  at  last  would  teach  man  that   his civilization must  be strengthened or else he would be doomed  forever. This  was the sentiment  expressed in H. G. Wells' The  War  That  Will  End  War  (I9I4) and  Mr.  Britling  Sees It  Through (I9I6),  among  other  works of the  period.1
A later, more cautious observer, B. H. Liddell Hart,  writing a history of the war
in I 930, noted: "The historian's rightful task is to distil experience as a medicinal warning  for future  generations.... He  would  be a rash optimist  if he believed that the next generation  would trouble to absorb the warning."2

81

THE WAR  NOVEL

Yet, if few could discern the "warning," it was clear in the aftermath of war that  the  clock could  not  be turned  back, that  the  world  was launched  into  an uncertain  future.  For Canada, as for a number of the smaller nations, the prospect of  genuine  independence,  free  from  the  imperial   demands of  larger  powers, seemed bright.  Marshall  McLuhan may be right  when  he says, "Canadian  par­ ticipation  in past  wars, whether  in 1812 or 1914  or after,  has never  been  on a scale to enable  Canadians to identify  with  the  total  operation"3 ; but  surely his comment begs many questions, and overlooks many realities, concerning Canada's role during  and  after the Great  War. One  historian  has described  Canadians as an "unmilitary people" who have always gone to war reluctantly, and  have "as quickly discarded  the skills of war to return  to the farms and factories of peace."4
But in fact,  although  the Canadian Expeditionary Force  was small in  numbers compared  to its British, French,  and  American  allies, its record  in  battle-at Ypres, Mount Sorrel, Courcelette, and Vimy Ridge -attested to the valour of its citizen-soldiers and the often inspired leadership of its officers. No one would deny that  such gallantry  played an important, if not decisive, part  in the victory, nor that  the  achievement   was not  fully  recognized  proudly  at  home  and  abroad. Clearly it was the nation's  military contribution which earned  it the right to be a signatory  at  the Versailles conferences, and  thereby  to  become  accepted  in  the international community  as the maker  of its own foreign  policy. Moreover,  the dramatic industrialization the  nation  had  undergone   during   the  war  years­ which in itself had contributed  significantly to the victory -meant  that Canada could confidently accept its post-war  reputation as an  emerging  economic  force in world affairs.
Nevertheless, it does even now seem surprising  that  Canadians in  the  192o's chose very quickly  to put  the sacrifices of war  behind  them.  An official history of the C.E.F.  was commissioned soon after  the end of hostilities, but  it was not felt  to  be important enough  to  complete  until  after  the  Second  World  War. By and large people seemed resigned to accept British and  American  political and military  assessments of the  conflict as sufficient. For  a  brief  period  there  was a flurry of public interest in an investigation  of General  Sir Arthur  Currie's alleg­ edly delinquent  leadership  of the  army  during  the  war-he  was subsequently cleared of the charges-but it soon became the common  view that the war was something  one  remembered   ritualistically  once  a  year  and   then  forgot.  This peculiar kind of reticence is a Canadian characteristic, one suspects. Actually, in terms of serious evaluation  of the war, the situation  in other  countries  was not much  different.  In  England,  in the early 192o's,  there  was a  flood of memoirs, apologia,  and  diatribes  by generals  and  politicians,  each  seeking  to  justify his wartime  conduct.  The  tide of appraisal  and  revisionism  was begun then and  has scarcely  abated. But  as far  as the  emergence  of  a  serious  war  literature was concerned,  especially the  novel, there  was a  delay  of  several  years. As  Walter

THE WAR   NOVEL


Allen  puts  it,  "it  still seems  as though in the  years immediately after  the  end  of the  war  there  was a general conspiracy of silence between  writers,  publishers  and readers; as  though by  common consent,  memories  of  the  war   were  to  be  re­ pressed."5  In   view  of  what is  now  known   about   wartime censorship   and  the activities of the  propagandists, it  could  hardly  have  been  otherwise. The  official lid was kept  on as long as possible.
In  retrospect, of course,  it is important to make  distinctions between  different kinds  of  war  writing. One   broad  distinction is between   works   (published and unpublished)  by  civilians  and  soldiers.  The  former  group, no  matter how  en­ lightened they  might   have  been  about   the  course  of  events,  were  seldom  in  a position  to know  about the  war  at first hand; the latter, by virtue of their experi­  ence  on  the  front  lines,  were  bound  to  have  a  very  different  perspective. It is just such  distinctions as these  which  Paul  Fussell examines in  his literary study,  The  Great War  and Modern  Memory  (I 975). Brilliantly, he links "The Matter of Flanders" in the reader's mind  with the previous "Matters" of Western  literary  history-of  Troy, Rome, Britain, and  France. And,   just  as  those  ancient and  medieval  battles spawned chansons de geste, legends,  and  myths,  so, too,  Fussell contends, did  the  writings of the  Great  War.  In  his survey  of both  the  popular and  serious -verse and  poetry, music hall songs and sketches, slogans and  letters,  memoirs  and  fiction -he seeks to demythologize the war: in  brief,  to discover in  what  ways  the  writings preserve  an  illusion  or  distort  the  reality  of war,  and  in  what  ways  they  may  be seen  as genuine  examples of war  art. He  concludes,  "The greatest irony  is that it is only now, when  those  who  remember the  events are  almost  dead, that the  literary   means for  adequate remembering and  inter­ preting are  finally  accessible."6   Unfortunately, Fussell's study  is limited chiefly to British  writing and  he does not discuss the war novel at any length.
To  understand the  emergence of the  war  novel in  the  twenties it is necessary to consider  the mentality of both the wartime generation and  the  post-war  writers. Herbert Read, whose literary career  began  during the war, later  sought  to explain his generation's naivete:
It must be remembered  that in 1914 our conception of war was completely unreal. We had childish memories of the Boer War, and from these and from a general confusion  of Kiplingesque sentiments,  we managed  to infuse into  war  a decided element of adventurous romance.  War still appealed  to the imagination.7
It is in this light  that  Rupert Brooke's shocked  response in 1914 and Other  Poems ( 1915)  must  be  judged.  An  Edwardian man-of-letters, Brooke  led  a life  before the  war  that furnished him  with  no accurate view of battlefield realities  or  ade­ quate language in which  to portray them.  Nevertheless, to thousands of his readers  he seemed  a genuine hero,  a  modern knight-errant able  to  articulate  the  noble aims  of  his  countrymen. It was  not  until  the  casualty   figures  mounted  with sickening  rapidity during the last two years of the war that the public  mood began

THE WAR  NOVEL

to change, and  this  change  was  brought about in  no small  part  by  the  incisive realism  in  the  language and  themes  of poems  by Siegfried  Sassoon  and  Wilfred Owen. Notably, these poets had served  at the  front.
So,  too,  had   Henri Barbusse,  whose  Le  Feu  (I 9I 6) , little  regarded at  the
time  of  its  publication in  France, exercised  an  influence on  post-war   novelists. Throughout the  twenties,  novels by Dos  Passos,  Ford, and Zweig,  and  memoirs by Graves, Blunden, and  Sassoon, showed  the  extent to which  the  raw  truths of war  could  be molded  into  a literature of sensibility. Theirs are  realistic  accounts of what  happened from  the  recruit's or  junior  officer's  point  of view. All of their works  appeared before  I929.  But  I929  seems  to have  been  the  key year; despite the  fact  the  war  had  been over for more  than ten  years,  the  public  appetite for sensational exposes was far from  whetted. In  that  year,  All Quiet  on the Western Front,  published a year earlier  in Germany, appeared in  a faulty  English  trans­ lation; it  became an  overnight  best-seller.  It was  soon   joined  on  the  lists  by another hit,  A Farewell to Arms. No two accounts of similar terrible events could be  more   unlike,  yet  each  registered  a  sobering  blow  to  readers.  Erich   Maria Remarque's savage,  obsessional descriptions of  war  alternate with  lyrical  evoca­  tions of man's brotherhood under  arms,  while  Ernest Hemingway's moody,  solip­ sistic hero  is a fugitive  from  both  human conflict and passion.
All of these  writers  had  had  first-hand experience of combat. What they  had seen and  done  left  them  embittered; they  were  not  in  the  mood  to romanticize. They  were part  of what Stein  had called a "lost  generation." Years later, Malcolm Cowley,  writing of  Second  World   War   American  novelists,  made   a  comment which  is applicable to the earlier  writers :

War  novelists are  not sociologists or historians,  and  neither  are  they average  sol­ diers. The  special  training  and  talent  of  novelists lead  them  to  express  rather special moods. They are usually critical in temper  and often they are self-critical to the  point  of  being  burdened  with  feelings  of  guilt.  They  are  sensitive-about themselves in the beginning; but if they have imagination   (and  they need it)  they learn  to be sensitive for others.... In military service many future  writers ... were rebels against  discipline when  they thought  it was illogical-which they  usually did-and rebels against the system that divides officers from enlisted men. 8

The  experiences of Canadian soldier-novelists were not dissimilar to those of other nations. War, it  seems, is "another country," which   makes  all  soldiers-even foes -brothers.



l:E FIRST  CANADIAN WAR  NOVELS  were,  typically,   cliched romances by authors more interested in jingoistic  patriotism than  honest  portrayal
of  life  at  the  front. Captain S.  N.  Dancey, C.E.F.,  published The   Faith  of  a
Belgian; a romance  of the Great War   (I 9 I 6), a strident roman a clef condemn-

THE WAR  NOVEL


ing Germany's violation of Belgian  neutrality. The  next  year,  Robert Stead  used the  closing  pages  of The  Cowpuncher  (I 9 I 7)  to make  an  opportunistic appeal to the moral fibre of young Canadians (then caught  up in the passions of the conscription  crisis) : Dave   Eldon,   the  cowpuncher-cum-Calgary   businessman hero,  enlists in the  cause  only  to die in  Flanders in the  arms  of his nursing-sister beloved.  And  Ralph Connor exploited   the  sentimental idealism  shown  towards the  War  still  further by  having  his  young  Protestant chaplain die  a sacrificial death in The Sky Pilot in No Man's Land ( I9I9).
The  patriotic emotions of the  times  spurred the  sales of  these  novels;  but,  a decade later, in  the  wash  of excitement surrounding the  Remarque-Hemingway successes, few  noticed  the  work  of Acland  or  Harrison. Certainly Child's work, appearing in  I937, was  all  but  ignored. Yet  what  made  these  post-war  novels significant was not  just their  hard-hitting realism  but  even  more  their  pursuit of themes  deeply  embedded in the Canadian experience of modern life. For Acland, the strain  of war brings man's divided  nature, his animal instincts  and  his spiritual being,  into  sharp conflict.  Acland's hero  may  also be seen  as emblematic of  the Canadian  male's struggle to rid  himself of his frontier  identity (necessary  in  the conquest of the  northern wilderness) so as to adapt himself to the social responsi­ bilities  of  urban society.  For  Harrison, however,  the  ordeal of  fear  and  killing serves but to emphasize the  brutish  environment his hero is forced  to accept. Thus Harrison's vision  runs  counter to Acland's, and  in seeing  it we are  made  aware of an  existential absurdity in  the  modem world.  For  Child, finally,  the  relation between  the  Great War  and  the Anglo-Saxon-Protestant heritage of  his heroes is the  central issue:  the scourge  of guilt  is what  drives  them  on  in a  futile  attempt to find  peace  of mind  on the  field of battle.  Of  course  there  are various  common elements  in these  novels,  but  perhaps the  most striking  are  the  way each  novelist perceives that  the  bravery of the fighting  Canadian soldier  is founded on stoicism and  an  almost  inarticulate  commitment to  endure, and  the  way  each  novelist reveals  the  unresolved conflicts  within  the hero's  mind and spirit.  These  elements  later  recur  in  The  Wars, which  is preoccupied with  similar   themes  but  which presents  the  hero's conflicts  in a more  profound and convincing manner.
Acland, formerly a major in the C.E.F., drew  his title from  Nietzsche's cynical epigram, "Man shall  be  trained for  war,  and  women  for  the  recreation of  the warrior; all else is folly."  Among  other  things,  the phrase  suggests the chauvinism bred  in  young   men  who  are  perforce   cut  off  from  normal  relationships with women  and   who  must  also  live  in  uneasy  society  with  their  own  sex.  Acland, employing a tradition as hoary  as Homer, alternates scenes of war  with scenes of peace  as  he  chronicles the   adventures of  Alexander  Falcon    (the   pun  on  the author's first  name is surely  deliberate)  from  his enlistment in  Alberta through his service in France and  furloughs in England.
In a preface to the novel, Ford  Madox Ford  praises it as a "convincing, mourn-

as

THE WAR  NOVEL

ful  and  unrelieved account of  a  simple  soul's  sufferings in  the  late  War."9   He goes on to cite "wonderfully rendered" scenes of "Canadians going  through their jobs, with  stoicism,  without apparent enthusiasm, with  orderliness, discipline and with  what  endurance!" He  concludes (speaking of  Acland's style): "I  wish  I could  have  done  it  as well  myself."  Considering Ford's own  achievements as a war  novelist  in the  Parade's End  tetralogy ( 1924-28), this  is highly  complimen­ tary-if  too  generous.  Still,  Acland  does  portray, convincingly,  the  stoicism  of Canadian troops,  an  attitude they  reveal  both  during the  interminable foul-ups preceding offensives  as well  as in  the  hot  fury  of  battle.  Indeed, the  fact  that  Falcon  is able  to keep his sanity-and even  a kind  of  innocence -in  the  midst of the  maelstrom is testimony  to the  real-life  bravery of  the  soldiers on  whom  he is modelled.
Acland's drama of passions, of  war-  and  sex-lust,  however, is almost  marred irretrievably by sentimentality and  a  hackneyed love-plot. After  his  training  on the Salisbury Plain  and  his initiation to war  on  the  front  near  Festubert, Falcon is invalided back  to England with  a slight  leg wound. While  convalescing on  the estate  of Lady  Bendip  (who  tries to seduce  him), he falls  in  love  with  a  young American beauty, Adair  Hollister,  whose  husband is a prisoner of  war  in  Ger­ many.  It is in these  chapters of the  first part  of the  novel  that Acland  develops  his "sex" theme,  but  his descriptions of society  women  as "demi-mondaines" and  as "column[s] of white marble crowned  with fire" seem little  more  than  contrived pastiches  of  Decadent diction.  Moreover, teasing  passages  such  as  "With light touches  of  deft  hands   the  lovers  fashioned  moments that   were  undying," are unintentionally  embarrassing both  in  sound  and   context.  Disappointed  in  his unrequited pursuit  of Adair   (who,  in  the  fashion   of  a  cruel  mistress,  tells  him she will not  accept  him  until  "after the War"), Falcon  has  a  brief  affair  with  a hardened  Russian emigree  before  returning to  the  field  of  honour. His  treat­ ment  of heterosexual sex in a wartime setting, then,  leaves  us with  the  conviction that  the  author has nothing  fresh  to say on  the  matter, and  certainly nothing of consequence to his war theme.
The  novel  achieves  more  success when  Acland concentrates on  characterizing his  hero   in  relation  to   (what  Fussell  calls)   the   "Troglodyte  World" of  the trenches. As his tours of duty  drag  on, in weeks of fear,  cold,  and  fatigue, Falcon becomes  increasingly despondent about  the  "gigantic futility" and  "world-em­ bracing insanity" he is engaged in. His responsibilities as an officer weigh heavily: in the  words  of the  narrator,

When  you are  nearly crazy, when  the men  around you were  nearly crazy, when crazy men with gray faces and staring  eyes were crawling  past your feet, you had to make  jokes, however rotten  they were, to keep yourself sane. And  you had  to keep sane when you were in command. When, if the enemy attacked,  you were responsible for holding  that  hard-won  bit of front-line  trench  at all costs.... You

86

THE WAR  NOVEL


might let a  private, a  non-com., even a  junior officer, crawl out  shell-shocked, but you, the company commander, had to keep sane.
As a subaltern, Falcon  had  felt "war  lust" surge through  him as the thirst for a great  adventure. Now, as a major,  with the memory of a dozen hopeless raiding attacks  in  mind,  he is obsessed with  his own-and  his company's-survival. During   the  Somme  battles,  when  Canadians were  continuously  in  action,  he begins to feel like a "hollow" man.  He  has long since lost faith  in  the tactical decisions of senior officers. To  his weary eyes, the battlefields  have  become "an undulating waste," where, to his historical sense, knocked-out tanks lie "like dead elephants  [at]  Cannae." Gradually,  as attack  and  counter-attack are  played out with senseless regularity and bombardments take a grim toll day and night, Falcon feels something  new within  himself:  a "state  of such  intense  exhilaration-an exhilaration not of delight  in killing, but of cold terror  that  if he did not kill he would be killed-that he had no thought  of safety." Shortly after this, during an advance,  Falcon receives a severe chest wound, and is sent back to England  until the armistice. But even some years after the war, recovered from  his wound and back in Canada, he still experiences occasional bouts of war lust. Plaintively  he wonders:  "Does man fight only because he hasn't yet learned  to love?"
Charles  Yale Harrison's Generals Die in Bed presents a strong  contrast  to the unresolved  romanticism  of Acland's  novel. The  narrator  speaks from  the  begin­ ning of his story with the cynical wisdom of someone who was born old  and  for whom  neither  the  butchery  of war  nor  the  dullness of ordinary  life  holds any surprises.  Like Acland,  the  American-born Harrison  served  in  the  C.E.F.,  but as a private soldier rather  than  as a junior officer.10  This fact  alone explains why his approach to war is different.  For Acland's hero, leaves in England are possible and  offer welcome relief from  war;  not so for Harrison's hero  who is forced  to endure  months  of filth as one of the war's  typically second-class citizens. When he does get a chance for a furlough,  his week-long liaison with an English shop­ clerk is not a hearts and  flowers affair but  rather the simple pleasures of healthy sex.
The most interesting aspect of Harrison's novel is its resemblance to Remarque's
book.  There  is no  flag-waving  patriotism; each  soldier-narrator lives his own hellish existence.  Each  is aware  that  he and  his mates  are  regarded  as cannon fodder  by mindless military  establishments on either side. One  begins to wonder why such intelligent  protagonists  continue  to put  up  with  their  lot. To  answer that  they have no choice-to desert would be to risk summary  trial  and  execu­ tion  by firing squad-is  an  obvious but  hardly satisfying  answer.  Why  would battle-hardened veterans  fear  such a relatively "clean" death  in the  face of the far more horrible ways of dying they experience every day? In fact they don't  fear the  consequences of desertion,  no matter  how ardently  they  wish  to have  done with war. Clearly, Remarque and  Harrison  are anti-war  novelists:  preoccupied

THE WAR  NOVEL

with giving as accurate  and  damning  a portrait  of war  as possible, they deliber­ ately  use their  narrators  as  personae  for  the  millions  of  poilus  who  could  not speak in their own defence. To these authors  Militarism  is the real enemy of the common  soldiers;  rather  than   have  their  heroes  submit   with  indignity  to  an unjust  system,  they  ask us to accept  their  silent  protest  against  it.  Each  novel echoes  with  the  roar  of  bombardments, the  cut  and  thrust  of  raids,  and  the unbelievable  squalor  of the trenches. The  effect on the sensibilities after  reading page  after  page  of  harsh  description,  presented  with  l-am-here immediacy,  is unforgettable. Such  strong meat  is not  to everyone's taste.  But,  to  dismiss it  as merely intended  for shock-value or  as only  anti-war  propaganda, and  to deny that  these books have literary quality, is surely shortsighted.
Harrison's hero is certainly  plebeian, but  he is not soul-less. He is concerned about  self-preservation,  but  he is no coward  and  he does care about  the lives of his comrades.  He is heroic, really, not in deeds  (for  he is entirely  typical  in the performance of  his duties)   but  in  mentality.  It  is the  sheer  toughness  of  his outlook,  his  honesty  about  himself and  his situation,   and  the  intensity  of  his sensory  responses that  characterize   him.  In  these  respects  he  is like  Camus's characters  in  La  Peste  ( 1947), whose collective suffering  in  the  plague-infested streets of Oran  is an absurdist statement of human  dignity.
Many  passages illustrate  Harrison's   ability  to  portray   his  unnamed  soldier­ narrator, a man whose matter-of-fact  exterior cannot  quite mask a sensitive spirit. Early in his experience of the trenches, he encounters a rat in his dugout,  scarcely three feet from his face:  "There is still a little light from  the stars and  this light shines faintly on its sleek skin. With a darting  movement  it disappears.  I remem­ ber with a cold feeling that  it was fat, and  why."11 The narrator's recognition  of "why" the rat is sleek and fat is typical of the author's effective use of meiosis in handling  character, creating a point of view, and establishing mood. Beneath  the ironic  underplaying  of  the  incident  lies  a  pattern of  symbolism  which  runs through  the novel, as the ambiguous world of  "light" (above  the trenches,  where man  is exposed  both  to death  in  No Man's  Land  and  life in  the  open  air)   is contrasted  to the subterranean obscenity of  enforced  co-existence with rats  (who prey on man  as man preys on his kind) . Similar scenes and images -a bloodied nose caused  by the  force of shells  bursting,  daily  battles  with  lice, the  smell of putrid  corpses, the  sight of a  wounded  lorry  driver  being  kicked  to  death   by terrified horses, the screams of  the dying-crowd upon  each  other  as Harrison  develops his narrator's  consciousness of war. There is no  plot as such,  only the relentless alternation between trenches and rest camps across muddy and bombed­ out fields from month to month and year to year. Boredom, anxiety, constipation, and a thousand other minor discomforts become normal.  Yet, the narrator's per­ sonal struggle to survive does not deaden  him to the suffering of others. When  he tries to extricate  his bayonet from the chest of a dying German  -and it will not

88

THE WANOVEL

come out, being wedged between the man's ribs-he shoots the man, thus free­ ing the weapon,  relieving his own anguish, and  ending  his enemy's  pain.  Later, he kicks off the attempts of a fallen comrade to grasp his legs, so as to be able to run  back  to the safety of his own lines;  but on this occasion  his guilty feelings are not assuaged by the knowledge he has obeyed orders in not stopping  to help the wounded.  There  is no heroism in these actions, but  there  is frank  exposition in recording them. Words that  journalists use, such as "camaraderie" and "esprit de corps,"  are  not  part  of the soldier's vocabulary.  Rather: "We  fight  among ourselves" -for bread, for protection, for existence. "Who can comfort whom in war?"  he asks. "Who can  care for  us, we who are set loose at  each  other  and tear at each other's entrails ... ?" Who, indeed?
Harrison's subject is the brutalization of man by war. Despite their well-earned record as "shock troops" -or,  perhaps, because of it -Canadian soldiers were not immune  from  the  disease. Whether  he is describing  a long queue  outside  a brothel  in Bethune,  a food riot and internecine  fighting  between  fed-up  soldiers and  MPs  in  Arras  in  the spring  of I 9I 8, or  Canadians firing  on  surrendering Germans  at  Amiens,  Harrison   unsparingly  attacks  violence.  From  his  worm's eye view of such  events  the  narrator suggests the  hopelessness of lonely,  bitter men: "Our lives are stolen-taken from us unawares." Or,  as Remarque put it (speaking  also for  both  sides) : "And  all men of my age, here  and  over there, throughout the whole world see these things with me.... Our  knowledge of life is limited to death."u



PuBLISHED A GENEMTION  AFTER the Great  War and in the gathering shadows of World War II, Philip Child's God's Sparrows is also a novel deeply concerned  about  the effects of so much death on the lives of its protagon­ ists. Though it lacks the passionate intensity of Acland's  and Harrison's accounts, it is more ambitious  and  reflective in theme. Described  by  an  early reviewer as "a synthesis of the family saga and the war novel,"13  it attempts to do for Cana­  dian social history what  Ford's  epical Parade's End  had  done for British society, that is, to chronicle a family's pre-war and war-time experiences in the light of the general  ordeal  of  Western   civilization.  But,  for  such  a  Tolstoyan   enterprise, Child's  smaller-scale  narrative proves inadequate.  Despite  the fact  that  the first third of the novel is devoted  to a description of the two old Ontario families, the Burnets and  the Thatchers (from  whose homes spring the soldier-heroes, Daniel Thatcher and  his cousin Quentin), the reader never gains a coherent  impression of the totality of "Upper Canadian civilization and its discontents"14 because the necessary links between family and filial experience are either missing or diffused. There  is some confusion,  for instance, about  Daniel's  motive  for enlisting.  Is it because he feels ashamed  he has not  followed Quentin's example  earlier?  Is  it

8g

THE WAR  NOVEL

because he is finally able to overcome his father's pacifist objections?  Is it because his guilt  in  being  the  accidental  cause of his sister's  handicapped condition  is assuaged by her? Aside from these and other  personal  pressures to act, there  are perhaps altruistic  reasons, such as the persuasiveness of a speaker  at a recruiting meeting  or  his sense of duty.  That   there  exist  a  multitude of  motives  is not surprising, and  even plausible, given Daniel's  phlegmatic  nature.  But one of the chief flaws of God's  Sparrows  is Child's failure  to integrate his family saga with the characterization of Daniel at war, in such a way as to illuminate  more clearly the crises within  him and the socio-cultural  milieu of the time.  (In  comparison, Robertson  Davies's briefer mention  of the  pressures in war-time  society in  Fifth Business  is far  more  penetrating; and  Findley's  The Wars is a  more successful exploration of this larger theme.)
Undoubtedly, Daniel and Quentin  manifest in part the author's own tormented recollections of front-line experience. They  may even  (as Dennis Duffy believes) illustrate  a "typical  pattern" of Child's  fiction and  poetry:  the way he  manipu­ lates his unhappy characters  "from  a motif of  suffering-as-expiation-for-crimes­ and-guilt  to a  practice ... of  suffering-for-its-own-sake....m5   Seen  in  this light they are, perhaps, to be pitied as unconscious victims of masochistic guilt feelings, bred  into  them  by centuries  of Puritanism.  Alternatively,  they  may  be seen  as actors in a romanticized, mythic drama,  which assumes that  sensitive, WASP-ish, fair-haired  lads of the  Canadian aristocracy  shall  rise like Parsifal  to smite  the vicious Hun  and  win  redemption  for a society morally  incompetent to acknowl­ edge its part in initiating enmity between the nations.  Once again, then, problems exist as to  how  to interpret  the novel : is its meaning  to  be found  in  terms  of disguised  autobiography, or psychology, or religious fiction? There  is no reason, of course,  to suppose any or all of these aspects of form  and  meaning  may  not cohere in a narrative; it is simply that, in God's Sparrows, they do not.
But  there  is a  way out  of these difficulties, and  that  is to  respond  to  it  as essentially a war book, which, in the view of one critic, "contains the most effec­ tive scenes of the  First  World  War  in  Canadian  fiction.m6   While  this  view is arguable,  it is nevertheless true  that  it is in  their  internal and  external struggles with the antagonistic  forces produced  by the  War  that  the spiritual dilemmas  of Daniel  and  Quentin are  revealed most clearly. A good  example  of  this occurs when Quentin, in a letter  to Daniel from  France,  writes that  he  has  been dec­ orated  for bravery  in bayonnetting  German  prisoners during  a  trench  raid.  Far from boasting of the incident, he is, rather, shocked by the irony of a deed whose horror  has haunted him since;  but in his anguished  need to  confess his feelings, he bluntly accuses his cousin of pacifism for refusing to become involved in "this  whole dirty business.m 7  Daniel is, naturally,  angered  by Quentin's charge, though ultimately  it is one of the factors contributing to  his decision to enlist. Yet two points need to be made about the passage. First, it is unlikely that  such a detailed,

go

THE WAR  NOVEL

frankly  contemptuous and,  in the eyes of some, defeatist  letter  would ever have been cleared by the military censors. But, even granting  dramatic license, a more serious objection  can  be made  concerning  Child's  point  of view in setting  the scene for the incident:

To  have  set up  one's  puny  ego against  the atmosphere of excitement, of desperate sacrifice,  of  bravely  supported fear,  of stoic  grief,  of fearful hope-to have  pin­ nacled  oneself,  for instance, as a "conscientious objector" (that new sort of martyr, or  of  coward, or  of  crank, view  it  how  you  would)    would  have  seemed  an  in­ sufferable presumption to the battalions of eager and  earnest young men of  twenty,  who  were  not  at  all  presumptuous for  all  their  swagger,  but  conventionally and  rather  humbly anxious to  "do   the  right  thing" even  as  their  fathers and   elder brothers were  doing  it.

Not only is this overbearing in tone  and specious in logic, it also has the effect of undermining the credibility of his characters. As a result of the incident, Quen­ tin does become a conscientious objector, and for reasons fully consistent with his concept of human  honour  and dignity. He tells Daniel:

"I'm  not  afraid  of  death. . . . Only   thing   I'm   afraid  of-and   hate-is   this damned  unreality we live  in  here  and  now:   not  knowing what  we  are,  or  what we are  here  for; desiring,-and  not knowing  why we have  to;  wanting life, more and  more  life,  and  getting death; wanting some  law behind  it  all  of  form,  and style,  and  beauty, and  always  bumping up  in  the  end  against the  God-forgotten machine."

Quentin  is imprisoned  for his beliefs, maltreated  by his fellow soldiers, and  sent back to the lines to die a broken man. As for Daniel, his initiation  to war comes in the I gI 7 battles on the Somme salient, as a subaltern  serving with a Canadian siege battery.  Predictably, he undergoes  a similar  process of  demoralization   as his cousin  and  others  had  before him : "Somehow  many  of  them  existed  and survived;  but  they  were  not the same men afterwards,  for  they  had  seen more than  death,  they  had  faced  corruption  of the soul, and  despair." Finally,  there was for him "no  longer  any horror  [in the sight of  bloated  corpses in No Man's  Land]; it had become simply an accepted part of one's environment, like insanity, slums, and  prostitution in civil life." Daniel survives the War,  but with no more understanding of himself, of his society, or life, than if he had stayed at home.
In  sum,  in  presenting  Quentin, Child  has  created  an  amorphous spirit  into which he has poured  all of the angst of a man  bent  upon  a metaphysical  quest; by contrast,  in presenting  Daniel,  he expresses the worldly dilemmas  of a much more ordinary  individual. But neither characterization is fully successful in terms of Child's  conception.  Part  of the problem  may lie with a style which is remote in its omniscience, and sometimes irritatingly  Anglophilic in tone. Still, for all its faults, God's Sparrows  remains an honest novel by an author  whose compassion­ ate understanding of his subject cannot  be gainsaid.

THE WAR  NOVEL




MORE THAN  A  GENERATION  was  to  pass before  another novelist made  a substantial  attempt  to deal  with  the  Great  War  and  Canadian experience.18   Yet  Findley's  The  Wars  is firmly in  the  "tradition" of the  genre inaugurated by Acland  and  Harrison  and  developed  by Child : he employs its characteristic  motifs-such as gritty  descriptions  of batde  and  the  love affair in England-which had become almost requisite conventions. But he does more with  the  form  than  his predecessors, in  particular by  creating   an  enormously poignant  drama  of personal heroism in the midst of war.
Perhaps some of Findley's attraction to his theme may be understood  from two interviews  he gave  before  the  book  was  published.  In  the  first,  with  Graeme Gibson, he reflected on the lack of an aristocracy in Canada: '"We've never had a chance to have that  happen  in this country, because the rise [of an upper class] came at a moment  of cataclysmic change : the tum  of the century. War  brought it down;  we then  became,  after  the  First  World  War,  a  cultural  eunuch;  we were neither male nor female, but we had the propensity  of feeling one thing and of being another."'19  Robert  Ross, the  protagonist  of the  novel, belongs to that doomed class; however, in a very special sense, his true class is of the spirit rather than of earthly  power structures  built on wealth and  breeding.  The second inter­ view, with Donald  Cameron, is even more revealing  of what  the novelist  might have  been  preoccupied  with  in  writing  the  novel.  In  speaking  of man's  "'war with nature'" -our seemingly inexhaustible capacity  to destroy the environment
-Findley went on to say:  "'But you see, unknown  to me, and  unliked  by me,
in myself, I'm  sure  there is a fascination  with  violence. And  I'm  a very violent person myself, inside. I'm sure that  I'm  more violent in my heart  and  mind than half the  people I  criticize for  being overtly  violent,  and  that  makes me  hyper­
sensitive to what violence is all about."'2° Certainly  we as readers are made aware
of Robert's  hypersensitivity  to the latent  violence within  himself. His attempt  to master his aggressiveness, and  to save something  of value  in himself and  in  the living world around  him from senseless destruction,  constitutes  the theme  of the novel.
(In  passing, it is also of interest to note that  about  the time of the interviews
-the early 197o's-Findley co-scripted the television adaptation of Mazo de la Roche's  ]alna series which, in part, told of the inter-linked  adventures of Ontario gentry during the 1914-18 period. And, himself the scion of a once-prominent Toronto  family,  the  author  apparendy modelled  some  of  the  mise-en-scene  of The  Wars on the real experiences of his relatives.)
But  however  personal  or  biographical  the  sources  were,  it  is clear  that  the strength of the novel derives chiefly from Findley's inspiration  and craftsmanship in bringing  Robert's  story to life on the page. As narrator, he functions as archi-

92

THE WAR  NOVEL


vist-interpreter: selecting and arranging imaginary  tape-recorded interviews, memorabilia, clippings,  maps,  and  other  souvenirs, he reconstructs  the age and its troubled  people. The  character  of Robert  takes shape  slowly from  the dusty records.  Externally,  the  characterization seems typical  of the  genre;  we follow Robert through  his initial training  to his experiences at the front, and his growing hatred  and  fear  of war appear  to be no different  from  those of the earlier  pro­ tagonists. But the reality is different:  not so much because Robert is more sensitive or morally  aware  than  others,  but  rather  because Findley  probes  his  inner  life more deeply than  Acland  et  al had  done in developing  their  heroes.  Moreover, in linking Robert's  psychological dis-ease with the separate tragedies-the Wars
-of  other  characters, the author  is able to show the  progression of madness in
him which ultimately  explodes in an act of fury.
To  illustrate  this rising tide of violent  passion, it is necessary to focus on  at least seven episodes and  relationships which occur sequentially  in the novel. The death  of his hydrocephalic sister, Rowena,  the killing of her pet rabbits,  and  the strain of parting  from his mother, are the first steps in the pattern  of circumstances which culminates  in Robert's  courageous, foolhardy, and  mad  attempt  to save a herd  of frightened   horses from  bombardment. (Those  first events  take  place, symbolically, during  the Easter weekend in April 1915, immediately  before Rob­ ert enlists. The  latter  incident  occurs the following year in mid-June, at a  place called Magdalene Wood  in  France.)   During  training  in Alberta,  Robert  meets the  convalescing  war  hero,  Captain  Eugene  TafHer, which  initiates  the  second stage of his psychic development.  "What he wanted  was a model. Someone who could teach  him, by example,  how to kill." 21   But the only lessons he learns from Taffier are negative, and  the scars of the latter's impotent homosexuality cast long shadows over Robert's  subsequent  relationships with men and  women. Similarly, the episode on  board  the  troopship  when  Robert  is forced  to shoot  an  injured horse, serves  both  to  intensify  his loathing  of  violence and  to  foreshadow  his motivation  for his later act of mercy. Experiences at the front-narrow escapes from death  in a flooded field and from a sniper's bullets; and  Captain Rodwell's suicide after  he learns crazed soldiers had eaten  rats he tried to protect  (notably,  Rodwell's  animal  drawings  contain  facial  features  which  bear  an  uncanny  re­ semblance to Robert's)  -add to the anguish in the hero's mind. Robert's  savage love-making with the callous Lady Barbara  d'Orsey-here, and elsewhere in the novel, Findley  echoes similar  situations  in Acland  and  Child -and  the  brutal  sexual assault made upon  him by unknown soldiers at Desole (symbolically,  just after he has bathed himself)  are the final key episodes in this pattern  of violence.
Paradoxically, when  it seems his psyche can  no longer  absorb  the guilt,  the cruelty, and  the violation of war, Robert finds the mental strength  to strike back. In seeking to save the horses, he sets in motion his private war against a collective insanity  that  respects no creature's right  to live in peace and  dignity.  His action

93

THE  WAR NOVEL

is inevitable;  it is foreshadowed  and  reinforced  by bird  and  animal  symbolism throughout the narrative  which underlines  Robert's  own strong  desire to live as well as to protect the innocent. However, equally inevitable,  his heroic deed degenerates  into  a  murderous  rampage.  Horribly   burned, Robert  is captured, court-martialled, and officially disgraced.
In  trying  to assess the  rightness of his conduct  and  the  meaning  of  his life, the reader  is wise to note the  narrator's cautionary remark  in  the closing pages that  Robert's  "mythology is muddled." To  most of his contemporaries, Robert's defiance of orders is the act of a maniac.  Yet, when  asked to speak about  him, they say they don't  remember,  look away, or change  the subject,  suggesting  by their discomfort  the mixed feelings they harbour about  him.  But to Lady  Juliet d'Orsey,  whose childhood  diary provides vivid recollections of his personality, he is remembered  fondly as a man  who craved  love and  strove for  perfection.  She also remembers, however, the words of one of Robert's  friends who, when speak­ ing about his generation's  responsibility for waging the War, said: "'I doubt we'll ever  be forgiven.  All I  hope  is -they'll  remember  we  were  human  beings.'" These  words do not  refer specifically to Robert,  but  they  do offer a  perspective within  which we can gauge his actions. There  is also the  recollection of Marian  Turner, the nurse who cared for him after the incident  in  Magdalene Wood;  she believes he was a hero because "'he did the one thing that no one else would even dare  to think  of doing.... It's  the  ordinary  men  and  women  who've  made  us what  we are."' Set against  her view, though,  is  Robert's  attitude: "(We're all strange,  Robert  thought.  Everyone  is strange  in  a  war  I  guess. Ordinary  is a myth.)"
Unsuspectingly,  perhaps,  Robert  provides us with  the  answer. To  agree  with him that "ordinary" is a myth, we are only acceding to the noncritical  meaning of the word myth and thereby accepting the notion that war makes ordinary people experience  extraordinary sensations and  perform  in  extraordinary ways. At  the same time, the novelist permits us to interpret his phrase  in the  critical sense of myth,  and  thereby  to see the deeper significance of human  life. In  either  sense, then,  the meaning  is clear and  persuasive. Moreover,  Robert  is a representative figure  of  his  time  and  of  his  people,  and  in  this  he  is  not  unlike  the  other protagonists  I have been discussing. Each is representative not because he is like everyone  else, but  rather  because  he  contains  within  himself  so  many  of  the virtues and vices of common humanity.
Military  historians of the War, such as Colonel  Nicholson,  have written  enor­ mously detailed  descriptions of actual  events. From  such "factual" material  it is not difficult to conclude that  Canadian soldiers earned their  fine reputation. And probably  most readers of Nicholson's account  would  agree  with one of his con­ clusions:  "They   fought  as  Canadians, and  those  who  returned  brought   back with  them  a  pride  of nationhood  that  they had  not  known  before.m 2   But  war

94

THE WAR  NOVEL


novelists, who  are   not  so  constrained by  "fact," and who  in  any   case  want to create "fictional" accounts, lay  particular emphasis on  individual experience. For them, character becomes the  datum point for  measuring the  human  response to one  of the  great mysteries of existence. In Canadian war  novels, the  initial naivete of  the  citizen soldier, the  shock of  combat on  foreign soil,  and the   manner in which the  soldier learns to cope  with  his personal conflicts and  dilemmas, are the areas of  concern for  the  writer. And, just  as  in  actuality the  War proved to be the  remorseless enemy of human hopes-precisely because it  was  the  product of human hatred -so in  fiction it came to represent the  great antagonist which the soldier protagonist had  to confront, and  seek to conquer.

NOTES

1 Peter  Buitenhuis, in a  recent  article-"Writers at  War: Propaganda and  Fiction in  the  Great War," UTQ, 45  (Summer I976), 277-94-revealed  the  manner in which   Wells  and   other   famous  authors  (Bennett, Galsworthy, Kipling, Buchan, and   the  Canadian-born  Gilbert  Parker, among others)  were   recruited  by  the British  Department of  Information to  write  pro-  and   anti-war propaganda,  spe­ cifically  to blacken  German militarism or  to whitewash  Allied  policies.  It is  neces­ sary  to  distinguish, of  course,  between   the  personal   motives  of  a  writer  and   the political  use to which  his work could  be put: Wells's Mr. Britling  is clearly patriotic tand seeks to  justify  British  participation in  the  War  on  religious  grounds; on  the other hand, writers  such as Bennett and  Kipling were willing  to exaggerate, distort, lie or use half-truths in  their  fictional  and  non-fictional  accounts of campaigns on the  Western  front. Hilaire Belloc was perhaps more honest  than  some in confessing  in a letter  to Chesterton in  I g I 7 that  he had  found  it "necessary sometimes  to lie damnably in  the interests of the  nation...."
2   From  the  original preface to  The Real  War, 1914-1918,  in  B.  H.  Liddell Hart,
History  of the  First World  War   (London: Pan,  I970), p. ix.
3  "Canada: The Borderline Case,"  in The Canadian Imagination, ed. David  Staines
(Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard Univ.  Press,  I977), p. 242.
4  George  F. G. Stanley, Canada's Soldiers:  The Military History  of an  Unmilitary
People, rev. ed. (Toronto: Macmillan, Ig6o), p. 4I7.
5   Tradition and  Dream  (London: Phoenix  House,  I964), p.  I40.
6  The Great  War  and  Modern Memory  (New  York:   Oxford Univ.   Press,  I975), p.  334· This comment has  particular  relevance to our  understanding of Findley's The  Wars. Stanley Cooperman's World   War  I  and  the   American  Novel   (Balti­ more: Johns Hopkins, I967)   also provides  an excellent,  detailed  discussion of war literature and  its socio-literary effects.
7   From   Annals   of  Innocence  and  Experience   ( I940), quoted in  J. M.  Gregson,
Poetry  of the  First World  War  (London: Edward Arnold, I976), p. g.
8 From  The Literary Situation ( I954), quoted  in Allen, p. 293·
9  Preface   to  Peregrine Acland's All  Else is Folly;  a tale  of war  and   passion  (New
York: Coward-McCann, I 929), p. vii.
10  Humphrey Cobb,  also  an  American, enlisted  in  the  Canadian army in  Igi6 and was  later  wounded and  gassed  in  the  fighting. His  Paths  of Glory   ( I935),  based on  events  involving the French army,  probably influenced  William  Faulkner when

95

THE WAR  NOVEL

he wrote  A Fable ( 1954). Faulkner enlisted  in  the  Royal  Flying  Corps  in Canada but did not see action overseas because the War  was over before his training was completed.
11  Charles Yale Harrison, Generals Die in Bed ( r 930;  rpt.  Hamilton, Ont.: Potlatch,
1 975)•
12 All  Quiet  on  the  Western  Front,  trans.  of  Im  Westen   nichts  Neues,  by  A.  W. Wheen   (r929; Frogmore, St. Albans,  Herts; Triad/Mayflower, 1977), p.  I73·
13 J. R. McGillivray, "Letters in Canada: I937· Fiction," UTQ, 7 (April  1938), 351.
14 The phrase  is Dennis  Duffy's  in "Memory= Pain: The Haunted World  of Philip
Child's Fiction," Canadian Literature, 84  (Spring r98o), p. 45·
15 Duffy,  p. 43·
16  William H.   Magee,   "Philip  Child:  A  Re-appraisal," Canadian   Literature,  24 (Spring r965), pp. 29-30.
17 Philip  Child, God's Sparrows (1937; rpt.  Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1978).
18 In  saying  this,  I am  not  overlooking the  achievement of  Hugh  MacLennan  in Barometer  Rising  ( 1941). But  MacLennan's character Neil  MacRae is a returned soldier,  and  notwithstanding the  dramatic use of the  explosion  in Halifax harbour (which  undoubtedly is an  image  of  the  War  brought home  to  native  shores)   the novel  is not  directly  concerned with  the  experience of  a fighting soldier  at   the Front.
19 In  Eleven Canadian Novelists (Toronto: Anansi,  1973), p.  I34·
20  In Conversations with Canadian Novelists, Part One (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1973),
p. 6r.
21  Timothy Findley,  The  Wars  (Toronto: Clarke, Irwin, 1977).
22  Col.  G. W. L. Nicholson,  Canadian  Expeditionary  Force, 1914-1919   (official  His­ tory  of  the  Canadian Army  in  the  First  World  War)  (Ottawa:  Queen's  Printer, r964), P· 535·





FOR THE WIFE OF JOHN MILTON

Irving Layton

To  go with genius
the whole distance
is to walk straight in to Thanatos with a greeting smile
to match  his own.

Hard to come that  near  to death;
harder still
not to frown.

g6






NOTHING TO LOVE OR  BE LOVED BY

STEPHEN  SCOBIE, McAlmon's Chinese  Opera.
Quadrant  Editions, by subscription.

THE  PHOTOGRAPH  THAT FACES  the  title page  of  McAlmon's Chinese  Opera  is a cropped version  of that  which  faces page
51 of the first edition of Memoirs  of Montparnasse.  The author of  the  Mem­ oirs sits in  the  centre, pathetically  youth­
ful yet completely recognizable to those who  knew  him  only  as  an  elderly  per­ sonification of artistic integrity and classic decadence in our midst.  And on each side of Buffy Glassco, who persisted to become a  true  and  exemplary artist, stand   those who  did  not:  on  the  right  side  a  kind of  corrupted  Anglican  deacon who  was Graeme Taylor, and  on  the   left  side  a dark  and  saturnine figure  who  looks like the  Satanic counterpart of his Presbyter­ ian  preacher of a father. The saturnine Calvinist manque is Robert McAlmon, perhaps the most lost of all the Lost Gen­ eration, the  writer   we have  all  heard  of and  rarely  read,  "the famous footnote on other  people's lives,"  the  friend  of Joyce and  Pound, the enemy of Hemingway and Gertrude Stein,  the shorttime husband  of Bryher    whose    profitable   release    from marriage  earned  him  the  Montparnasse  nickrname of McAlimony!
McAlmon's Chinese  Opera  is  in  one
sense a footnote on  the footnote, a poetic reconstruction  of   the   drama  of  failure that   is so  close  to  every  poet's  heart­ perhaps to every  true  writer's  heart. For all  of  us,  in   the   measures of   our  own dreams, have  failed, and  must  hear   an echo  in  the  lines  where  Stephen  Scobie
 tells us of McAlmon's encounter with that devotee of the doomed, Kay Boyle.

One  evening out  at Crosby's mill she started quoting my old  poetry as if she could  create me whole.
Nothing, I told  her,  there is nothing here, nothing to love or be loved  by:
a void, a failure, an  apology.
In   the  excellent afterword  to  MeAl­ man's Chinese Opera,  where  he sketches out McAlmon's pathetic life and in doing so tells us how we should  read the poem a second  time,  Scobie  also  gives  us  more than  a  hint  of what  he  is  setting  out  to do, when he tells us that:

The  relationship between the historic Rob­ ert   McAlmon, whose  biography  is  outlined above,  and  the  Robert McAlmon who speaks in  these  poems  is best  described  by Dorothy Livesay   in   her   essay   on   the   documentary poem  in  Canada, when  she  talks  of  'a con­ scious  attempt to  create a  dialectic between the   objective facts and  the  subjective feel­  ings  of the  poet.' It is  hard, even  for  me,  to disentangle what   I  know  of  McAlmon from  what  I have imagined about him.

Scobie  in  fact  knows  a  good  deal  about McAlmon. He  has  read   virtually  every­ thing  that  was  written-and  there is a great   deal   of  it-about   McAlmon  by survivors   from   the   192o's  in  Montpar­ nasse. Though he does not say it, one may reasonably   conjecture  from  his  grateful references  to John Glassco that  he talked to  him  at  length  about  tl1e real  events which underlay the Memoirs of Montpar­  nasse. And  though  he  does  not  mention  this either,  he went off to Paris for a fairly long  period  during  which  he  traced  out the  physical  terrain  of  McAlmon's Pari­  sian  pilgrimage.
One  of the  results  of that   journey  was a curious and  interesting essay Scobie sent me just before I finished editing Canadian Literature, entitled "His  Legend  a Jungle Sleep: Michael Ondaatje and Henri Rousseau." (It  was  printed  in  No.  76, Spring 1978.)  McAlmon does not appear in  this piece,  though a great  deal  is said

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of that  international Parisian  world of the arts  into  which  McAimon  somewhat  un­ graciously fitted; he despised French poets and  only  recognized  the expatriates, and few  of  them.   But  Scobie's  discussion  of Ondaatje includes a number of statements which   acquire a  special  interest   in  the light of  McAlmon's Chinese Opera. He is talking  of  The  Collected  Works  of Billy the Kid.

The relationship between Ondaatje and  his persona in  this  book  is a very  complex one : although  Ondaatje  has   to  stand  back   at times  in  his  familiar ironic  pose,  he  cannot totally separate himself  from the  outlaw personality.  Ondaatje  as  artist  moves   to­ IWards Billy as outlaw, and  vice versa ...
The image of the  artist projected in many of the  poems  in  'The White  Dwarfs' section of  Rat  Jelly  is a self-destructive one.... The artists are  'those who  disappear,' those  who
'die   in  the  other  peripheries,' the  outcasts who  'sail  to that perfect edge  I where  there is no social  fuel.' ...
Ondaatje  understands this   type   of   self­ destructive artist,  or   beautiful  loser   (as  is shown, in  fact, by  his  interest  in  Cohen); but  he is not  himself  one  of them.

In a curious way, Scobie is here setting the  stage  for  McAlmon's Chinese Opera. The link  he makes  between  Henri  Rous­ seau  and  Michael Ondaatje  parallels  the link between  French  bohemian  Paris  and McAimon who detests the  French  ambi­  ence  in  which  he  nevertheless  must  seek his harrowed  self. As Ondaatje the  poet moved towards Billy the outlaw,  so Scobie the  poet in  control   of his life moves  to­ wards McAlmon the rogue poet, the dedi­ cated  failure,  understanding yet not iden­ tifying  with  him.   (Scobie  also,  we  must remember,  was  interested  enough in Leonard  Cohen  to  write  a  boolo about  him. )1   And  finally  there  is the  odd  clue dropped on  page  77 of McAlmon's Chi­ nese Opera:

William Carlos
Williams told  me
I should have  been  Billy the  Kid.

g8
 For  generically, even  if it is not  its direct descendant, McAlmon's Chinese Opera must   be  regarded  as  closely  related  to The  Collected Works  of Billy the  Kid; Scobie  is trying  for the same creative liai­ son  as  Ondaatje  achieved with  a  figure out of real  life.
The curiosity  that  Scobie's  title arouses is satisfied in a key verse of the poem.

1The only  thing that stopped them  dead at  any  party, any  bar,  was always McAlmon's Chinese Opera, a long
high  wordless toneless  wail
that filled  the  empty sky inside my head and  got  me  thrown out  on  the  street
to seek  the  perfect audience of dawn.

It is to giving articulate expression  to that "long/ high wordless toneless wail" within McAimon's head  that  Scobie devotes him­ self, and,  whether or  not  he  has  contrib­ uted  biographically to our  understanding of  McAimon, he  has  certainly created a haunting  imaginative   reconstruction  of this   strange   figure -a   reconstruction which  suggests that while subjectively our sense of failure is always  true,  in  the  eye of art  and  the  ear of history  we need  not be forgotten.
My only misgiving arises from the very accomplishment of Scobie's  verse.  In  my view,  it  is his best  yet, and  a  great  deal better than   any  writing of McAimon's I have  read.  Yet  in  this  making of the  in­ articulate articulate, something of  essen­ tial  actuality has  been  lost, something of the roughness and  the anger that  were the real McAlmon.
Montparnasse in  the  first  light  of dawn has  still  that hard-edged honesty
it  makes  all  judgments  lies.

Still, McAlmon's Chines.e Opera is cer­ tainly  the  most  interesting book  of  verse, with  the exception of Margaret Atwood's True   Stories  and   Phyllis   Webb's    Wil­  son's  Bowl, to  appear in  rg8o, and it probably deserved  the Governor-General's Award   it  received.  Much   of  the  anger  that award aroused in the  envious  hearts

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of  the  literary establishment arose,  I  be­ lieve, from  the unorthodox circumstances in which  the book was published. For this is one  of  the  first  batch  of titles  brought out  by the  poet  Gary  Geddes  in  his ex­ cellent  venture,  Quadrant Books,  which seeks to overcome the growing  limitations of the ordinary book  trade  by publishing  good   books  with   limited   appeal,  to  be sold  by  subscription, as  Alexander Pope long ago sold  his own  poems. Quadrant's list is a fine one, and  those who are inter­ ested  may  write   to  Gary   Geddes  at  the English  Department, Concordia  Univer­ sity,   I455  de   Maisonneuve   Blvd  West, Montreal, Quebec H3G 1M8.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


STRUGGLES WITH SILENCE

PHYLLIS  WEBB,  Wilson's  Bowl. Coach House,
$7·50.
"THIS  BOOK HAS BEEN LONG in coming," Phyllis Webb  writes in her foreword. Yes, indeed. If we discount the  two new com­ positions    included   in   Selected    Poems (I 97 I), this is her first collection  of  origi­ nal  verse  since  Naked   Poems  ( I965). It contains remnants of the never completed "Kropotkin   Poems"   at   which   she  was known  to be at  work some years ago, but these   have   now   been   integrated - or, rather,  re-integrated -into  various  sec­ tions  of  a volume which,  though  mani­ festing  a  rich   variety   of  subject-matter, tone  and  even  stanza-form, maintains an impressive  unity as a single work.
Admirers of  Naked   Poems  must  often
have  wondered where  Phyllis Webb could go from  there.  She  had,  as it were, pared down  her verse to the bare  bone; the only development seemed   to  be  into  total  si­ lence.  These were  poems  so private  and fragile  that  one  almost  felt  that  one  was
 committing an act of desecration in read­ ing them.  Impressively assured  yet deeply disturbing, they  provoked   a  number of uneasy  questions:  how  private  (or  how naked)    can  a  poet  afford   to  be?  Does there  come  a  time  when  private associa­ tions become incommunicable and  there­ fore   pointless?    There  may,   as   Yeats thought, be more  enterprise in walking naked,  but  what  if a  poem's  acutely  per­ sonal centre cannot hold?
At  one  extreme, a  poem  may  be little more  than  a learned treatise,  while at  the other  it is barely  distinguishable from  an anguished cry.  Phyllis  Webb,  though tempted on  occasions,  I suspect,  towards both extremes,  is careful to succumb to neither, though an observation she makes in   "Letters  to   Margaret   Atwood"­ "Peggy: Sometimes I hear you screaming between   the  paragraphs  and   poems" -­ applies equally   well  to  herself.  Between the  paragraphs and  poems,  however,  not in  them.  Phyllis Webb's  respect  for  tech­ nique and her verbal dexterity (her "pain­ song" is also "plain-song") save her  here. A  connoisseur of chaos, she knows that, although it may contain intimations of meaninglessness, a poem must itself reveal a form.
Poetry  is ultimately a public  statement (Webb's reluctance to  publish  her  work is  indicative  of  a  characteristic  unease with  this hard  fact  of poetic  life), but  it can paradoxically embody  an intensely individual response: it can assert a poetic order  heroically  against   the  flux.  At  this point   I  remember that   one  of  her  best poems, "Breaking," from The Sea Is Also A Garden   ( I962), is a magnificent  crea­ tive  expression  of  the  condition of  being "absolutely broken." In  the present  book, she  tells us how she hoards  her  poems  in the hope  that  they  will become "satisfac­ tory  failures." She  is  a  mistress of  oxy­ moron.
Nonetheless, while Webb doubtless considers   herself  a modernist (the   "di-

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



vine   paranoids"  she   celebrates  include Dostoyevsky,  Pound,  Rilke),  Eliot's   fa­ mous  modernist dictum, "the   more  per­ fect  the  artist,   the  more  completely sep­ arate in  him  will be the man  who suffers and  the  mind  which  creates," in  no way applies to her. She would see it, I imagine, as a characteristically masculine  response. Her   mind   creates  by  brooding  almost obsessively over the woman who suffers - or over others,  men  or women,  who have suffered.  She  may  concentrate her atten­ tion on  the  lives and  dilemmas of  others,  but   the  personal  voice,  however  varied  and   modulated, always  reveals  the  per­  sonal   strain.  Even   a   poem-series    like "Wilson's Bowl," a meditation in memory  of a  friend   who committed suicide  after  her friend  had committed suicide,  though finely  controlled  and   ostensibly  directed outwards   (an   example  of   the   "tight­ lipped    treasure"  she   promises   to   be­ queath), gives the impression of  being at the same time frighteningly subjective.
I am reminded of the popular question of yesteryear: who's afraid  of Virginia Woolf?  Well,  I am  for  one,  and  I'm   a little afraid of Phyllis Webb for similar reasons.  In  both  writers  I detect a  mind desperately trying  to maintain balance  as the earth moves  threateningly underfoot, a mind  pushing towards  the extremes into areas  of  perception both  fascinating and dangerous, a mind  never far from  the end of its tether. The title of one of her earlier poems, again from The Sea Is Also A Garden,  is "To Friends Who  Have  Also Considered Suicide." One  gets  the  sense of an  almost  unbearable loneliness.  That the language of her  poems  (and  this is at least as true of Wilson's Bowl as of her previous  books)  is limpid,  restrained, and serene  makes  the effect  no less chilling.
,The tension  between  the lucidity  of her tone and the desperation of the conscious­ ness behind  it is perhaps the most remark­ able  quality of  her  poetry. Like  D.  H. Lawrence, she  may  be said  to  shed  her

100
 sicknesses in  books,  but  she  does so  ( un­ like  Lawrence)  by concentrating  on  the interconnecting sounds  of words, the ther­ apeutic challenge of  their  rhythms, and the  possible  structures that  can  be made  out of them.  "I am absorbed," she says in one  poem,  "in   the  fitting   together /  of pieces," and  this is less a concern  to unify her fragments or "remnants" (the  recalci­  trant  "Kropotkin  Poems," for  instance) as  to find  the  necessary  connections, the reassurance of form,  through  words. The poem  in  question is at  one  and  the same time  a  statement  and   demonstration  of her method:
1Shall I tell  you  what I do  to pass  the  time here  on  the  island at night?
There is red  velvet  and  purple velvet.
I cut  out  diamonds from  a pattern piece
by piece.  I sew  two  pieces,  one  purple one  red, together, attach another making
designs as I go.
The result  is an  intricate verbal  tapestry;
her  words echo  thus, in our  minds.
There are  some  remarkably fine poems here,  and  they gain  a cumulative impres­ siveness from  their  place  in the volume  as a whole.  "Rilke," for  example,  first  ap­  peared in  Selected  Poems;  it  is  the  one poem   to  be   reprinted  from   an   earlier book,  and  although  it  appears  without alteration it has become  a different poem because  it appears in a different context. Words  like  "lace," "Russia," "France," "shadowed,"   "echoes,"  which    carried little  special   significance  on   the  poem's original  publication,  are  now  lit  up  by previous usages  in  the  poems  that   now precede it.  We  gradually become  aware as we read  of key terms  which  recur  and gather   associations  about    them.    The pieces,  red  velvet   or  purple velvet,  are seen  to cohere; each  poem  takes its place in  a  larger design-first  in  the  poem­ series  to  which   it  belongs,   then   in   the ultimate form  of Webb's  complete poetry.
I  have    already   mentioned   Virginia
Woolf,   and   Lily  Briscoe's   requirements

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



for   her   pamtmg expressed   towards the end  of  To  the  Lighthouse   are,  I  think, relevant here:  "Beautiful and  bright  it should  be on  the  surface, feathery and evanescent, one  colour   melting into  an­ other  like   the   colours   of  a   butterfly's wing;   but   beneath  the   fabric  must   be clamped together with bolts of iron." The  bolts, in  this case, are  words  and  sounds. Sometimes the effect  as word  bounces  off word   is  almost   Joycean-or    at   least Kleinian:

Syllables disintegrate ingrate alphabets
lines  decline into futures and  limbos....

On  other occasions,  internal rhyme  pro­
vides the riveting connection:

It is a cell  like any other cell 	barred
hard	very 	principled and  guarded.

Though most of her  poems are  written in what  we quaintly call  "free" verse,  there is  an   astonishing  range   of  short   lines, long   lines,   occasional    rhyming  stanzas, and  even  an  "Imperfect Sestina." There is also a sound  poem -a form  I don't usually care for, but this one seems more skilful   and   effective   than   most.  Every­ where  we are  conscious  of  a  firm  poetic discipline.
But above all, there is the consummate clarity of  tone.  Here is  the  opening of "The Bowl,"  explaining the  image   that gives the title  to both  poem and  book:

1This is not  a bowl  you drink from not  a loving cup.
,This  is meditation's place cold  rapture's.

The apparent simplicity here  is the  har­ vest of a long apprenticeship, the product of an  extended struggle with  words  and meanings -and also  (as she notes in her foreword)  with   silence.   It  finds  its  su­ preme  expression  in  the last poem  in  the book,  "The Day  of the Unicorns." What in  a  lesser  poet  might  result  in  just  an­  other myth-poem is here a profound evo-
 
Letters
In
canada
1980


Edited by
WJ. Keith and 8.-Z. Shek

In this comprehensive review of Canadian literature more than sixty contributors assess the best works published in French and English by Canadians or on Canada in 1980. Available in previous years only as part of
the summer issue of the Univer­ sity of Toronto Quarterly,  this annual review reflects the coun­ try through an appreciation of its literature, evaluating the year's output of fiction, poetry, drama, translations, religion, and the humanities. Letters in Canada
1980 is a valuable and provoca­ tive resource for anyone inter­ ested in the state of Canadian letters. $25.00 cloth,
$7.50 paper

University of Toronto Press




101

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cation  of all  that  is lost with  the  passing of time,  together with  a realization  of the necessity  of  such  loss. The  unicorns,  she claims,  used  to  live  in  the  wood  behind her  cabin; they  shared   "the   tensions  of private  property  j  and   the  need  to  be alone."  These  symbols (inadequate word!)   of a glittering past  are  beautiful, but time has overtaken them:

they moved on with the courtly  sun grazing  peacefully  beyond the story
horns  lowering and  lifting and lowering.

I know this is scarcely credible now as we cabin  ourselves in cold
and  the motions of panic
and  our cells destroy  each other perfonning music and  extinction
and  the great  dreams  pass on to the common  good.

The balance in the last two lines is beyond praise.  The smooth  assurance  of such poetry   is  rare   in  any  culture. There  is nothing escapist  or factitious about it; the implications are  as  much  socio-political as  aesthetic. It  is  a  supreme  elegy  in which  the  beauty  represented by the van­ ished unicorns flickers palpably  in a verse that  both   laments and  accepts  their  ex­ tinction. Wilson's Bowl  is  full  of  "dark sounds"  but   it   ends   with   a   hard-won serenity  that  is both  impressive and exalt-
mg.
 clearer here: short  sojourns, many  jour­ neys. He  is but  a little  mad  north-north­ west;  but  whichever  direction  the  wind sits  that   blows  through so  many  of  his poems,   he  has  a  bracing body  of  work and  calloused  hands to show  for  his and his persona's travels.  In  the common way of  fine  poems  in  fine  collections, "CPR Station -Winnipeg" does  a  lot  of sum­ ming up  in few words; Winnipeg is right in   the   middle  of   our   place,   and   the speaker thinkis toward a derelict fellow waiting-roomer, "This country has / trav­ elled  through you."
:As in a lot of our poetry,  outer topogra­ phy of The Measure's place  is mountains, the  edge  between  prairie and  mountain, trees,  stones,  and  the  lineaments of win­ ter. So what's new? Well, in most of these poems  .the sense is of  a looker  really  see­ ing, a hearer who really listens  (especially to stories or to what asks to be turned into  a story) , a toucher who actually feels and  is touched. That is always new. As for the human   figure -inner   map   and   all - who completes any  topography if only in the sense of giving  it a fragile,  temporary voice,  the  teller  of these  poems  is in  full touch  with  those  mountains, edges, trees, and   stones.   Especially   with   the   stones. Metaphor and  symbol  are  noble,  service­ able  creations but  we're  so apt  at conjur­

W. J. KEITH


NORTH-NORTHWEST
 ing   them   into   often   trivialized,  merely
psychological states. Lane  doesn't do this. Just  as his  teller  consciously  resists  senti­ mentality,


PATRICK LANE,  The  Measure. Black Moss.

IT SEEMS TO   ME  that  Patrick  Lane  is one of our  better contemporary poets when  it comes to telling us about  the place they inhabit with  us. The Measure  is a recent milestone/signpost of  his  being  there­ particularly West  and  Northwest. A con­ trolling pattern  of  his  earlier  books  like Beware  the  Months  of Fire  ( 1974)   and  Poems  New  and  Selected   (1978)   IS  even

102
 I
could  have  wished to be less of an enemy but  that  is the dreamer singing  again ... ,
("Marmot")

so he remains skeptical of indulging in
a parallel between  the horse and  the car not that  damned symbolism
lit all being far  more complicated than that. . . .  ,( "Certs")

He  tries to stay on the edge between  inner and  outer landscapes. The magus  word-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



maker   inside   remains  in  difficult  com­ merce  with  what's out   there,  which  in­ cludes  other people  and  other  forms  of life wild and  domestic:  lovers, bums, fel­ low  poets,  teenaged  girls  devoted   to  the flavoury   nuances of  certs  though not  of copulation, dead  dogs,  or  frozen  horses. He  is  not  interested  in  transmogrifying this  intractable outside   into   humid   pri­ vacies of the confessional.
Earlier  I  echoed   Hamlet  deliberately
and  only  half  facetiously. This not  only because  some  of  the   verbal   rhythms   in Lane's  opening,  title   poem   put   me   in mind  of Hamlet but  also  because  he has been  for  so  long  an   archetype  of   per­ plexed  civility  thinking about its predica­ ment.  In  The Measure the  predicament, strongly sounded in its title page, is to find the measure, take the measure, of being in this place. "The Long Coyote  Line" has a scrupulous  geometry of  lines  and  curves
 declining  a momentary theorem, a "small disturbance" of snowshoe  hare, coyote, observer and  locates them

three  by three, coyote, hare and  the howl where the  true  prairie  begins.

There is also the perplexity of the storyteller's need to tell true,  to find meas­ ure  for  measure-make  right  words  for a  trustworthy fit of  outer  occurrences to inner  consequences. The  elements  of the fit  are  doing  or  thinking,  seeing,  saying. In  Poems  New  and  Selected   there's  one poem,  "A  Beautiful Woman," explicitly about  the  trick'}' gap  between   idea  and  speech:

A beautiful woman
is what you know before you speak it.
tThe shade your skull casts on your brain.
The  space in a stone before you break it.

A number of poems  in  this collection ad­
dress   the   perplexities  of   breaking  the











This magnificent volum   IS  a lavish presentation  of the work of Winnipeg artist Ivan Eyre. His immense paintings are a celebration of life: fragile, luminous landscapes, often with haunting, surrealistic elements in  stark  contrast  to  the  delicate  backgrounds.   A major   exhibition  of   his  work   currently   touring Canada,  will go to London and Paris, and finally to Saskatchewan,  where  he  was  born.  Through   150 reproductions  and a text  by noted  Canadian  writer George  Woodcock,  the  artist's   background,   work and contribution  to Canadian  painting are explored.
$40.00 available is a limited edition of the book. Larger format,  a beautiful  box and
first-quality  binding combine  to make this truly a collector's  item.  A signed and
numbered  silk screen print  is included,  suitable as an investment or for  hanging. Print  run limited to 150 copies.
Fitzhenry  & Whiteside 	$500.00


103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



stones  of  deed,  thought, and  sight  into telling  speech; or of making  the "stone inside the stone sing." This seems no less problematical  or  risky  than   a  diamond cutter taking   his  hammer to  a  stone  in hopes of producing a gem. "Fragments" gives  us  the  predicament of  a  memory­ haunted teller  trying  to tap  the past into  reliable  present speech.
The   Measure  ends  on  a  discouraged note.   To   other  perplexities have   been added  deeper ones:   the  dark   suspicion that  it may not be worth  going on telling, or even living, is compounded by the compulsion to go on nevertheless  in spite of all the waste, violence, trivia, and zorn­ byism.  We're even  taken  into  one of the deepest  nightmares of any thinking poet:

they'd  ride with  me as far as they could go if i'd  provide  them with enough of a dream
,tired of all those poets who keep trying
to invent  a language  their own being
finally corrupt. . . . 	( "Certs")

I find  Lane's rendition of  being  in  this place  a moving  one. I hope  he is not  too tired.  I hope  he  goes on  journeying and telling us.
IAN SOWTON


AUDREY & RACHEL

AUDREY THOMAS,   Latakia.  Talonbooks,  $7·95·

AuDREY   THOMAS  DARES to  defy  at  least two  spectres that  haunt book  reviews  of books written by women.  First,  the hero­ ine   of  Latakia,   Rachel,   is  dangerously close  in   profile   to  Thomas.  She  is  an American-born    Canadian  writer     (like Thomas   herself),   who   is   a   divorced  mother   of   three    daughters   (also   like Thomas). Writers today, like John Chee­ ver and  John  Irving,  assiduously disavow any "crypto-autobiography" in their writ­  ing.  They feel  it  is a  failure  of imagina­ tion.  Women, in particular, are criticized  for  being  too  "inner," unable  to surpass

I04
 their  "ego" to  the  larger,  more  universal vision  of the  world. It has been said  that novels produced by North American wo­ men   lately  seem  to  have  only  one  real character in  them: Me.  A  procession  of erotic    Dorotheas,  without   the   rest   of Middlemarch.
Secondly, Thomas structures her  novel around what  she has  called  "the  terrible gap  between  men  and  women," the  war between    the   sexes,   the   only   war,   she adds, "where one sleeps with  the enemy." Again,  she  tempts   the  critical   gods  who bellow   and   snort   each   time   a  woman who   writes   trots   out   this  (they   would say)    tired   old   theme.   Erica   Jong  has never   critically  recovered  from   the  on­ slaught against Fear of Flying and  How To  Save  Your  Own  Life. What is it that  saves  Margaret  Drabble,  who  continu­ ally  returns to this theme? Is it her  clear erudition that  renders the subject ration­ ally  acceptable  or  her  Englishness   that  elicits  only  plaudits  from her  reviewers?
So Thomas has taken  a chance. She writes  of a woman, questing for love and knowledge, in  no  way  certain  that   she will  find  this  Holy  Grail  or  that  it  even exists.
A skeleton  outline of the  novel  has  the same effect of a synopsis of Jane Eyre. Reduce it  to  plot  and  it  sounds  absurd at  best  and  adolescent at  worst: Rachel meets  Michael, another  writer,   younger than  she, who  deserts  his wife, Hester, to live  with   Rachel; Rachel and   Michael travel   to  Crete, Greece,  and  to  Latakia, a  port  in  Syria; he  keeps  in  touch  with Hester  (he  masturbates when  he  writes a  letter to  her) ,  the   three   attempt a
menage  a  trois  that fails;  and   Michael
goes back  to his wife.
!But the  novel  is a rich  compendium of flashbacks, dreams, narrative, description and  sharp images: a raw  octopus drying on  a clothesline, a scarlet  hibiscus  flower behind  a fishmonger's ear,  the rocks of Greece. This   is  a  world  of  history  and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



definition, alien  to  those  who  are  trying to   discover   the   present,  let   alone   the past. But Michael becomes  Rachel's past, her  archaeology.
The major questions of the  book, how­ ever,  remain, for  me, 'Why  do Rachel  or Hester   want   Michael? If  Rachel is this masochistic, can  she  ever  truly  discover herself?  Discover   how  to  live?'  Michael  is  one  of  the  most  unsophisticated  men that   Rachel  has  ever   met; he  is  rude,  egotistical,  jealous,  and  above  all, child­  ish and chauvinistic. Can  we believe that  a  woman as intelligent, gifted, aware and analytical as  Rachel would  want  such  a man?  Michael is in love with  a distorted image  of Rachel, a woman without three children. He  does  not  think  Rachel is a "good  wife":

"You  aren't a  good  wife  to  me,"  you said. And   I   exasperated,  asked,   "Well,   what's your definition  of a good wife then."
"A   good  wife   is  someone   who  is  always there  when  you need  her."
"No," I  said.  "that's the  mother  of a child under  five."

Even    though  Rachel   needs    Michael's love,  is insecure, and   is sexually  depen­ dent  on him,  it stretches credibility some­ what   to  suppose that  Rachel, given  the kind  of woman she  is,  would  desire  Mi­ chael.   The   dissension   here   is  not   that  such a man exists, but  rather that  women like  Rachel  have   other  choices.  Never­ theless,  Thomas could  be  illustrating the terrible   dichotomy  between   ideological  strength  and   emotional need.   It is per­ haps only  possible  to  be invincible if you are a single woman.
The novel is occasionally embarrassing in  its depiction of  their  menage  a trois:
Michael mustn't  buy  presents  for  Hester
on   Rachel's  birthday.  Rachel  mustn't have  a  child  before  Hester has  a  child. And  all  this  in  twin  beds,  with  Michael on  the  floor  between them. Perhaps this is  not  a  limitation of  the  writer's craft but   one   inherent  in   the   situation and
 

Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS




HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX  685
ALLISTON, ONTARlO  LOM lAO

Catalogues  free on  request







Le mythe de Maria Chapdelaine N. Deschamps, R. Heroux
•

•


105

BOOKS IN REVIEW



personalities of these  characters. Perhaps Thomas is showing  us that  talent,  reason, and  perception are  not insurance against the ineptitudes of life that  render us fool­ ish. Rachel says as if in answer, "It seems to  take  a whole  lifetime to learn  how  to live,  and   then   we  need  another  one  to put  it all into practice."
Unlike many of her predecessors m literature,  Rachel  does   not   die   or   go mad   when   Michael  leaves  her,  because "Life  calls."
Most   importantly,  her   writing  calls. This  is a novel  about  writing, communi­ cation,   and   language. Just  as  Michael feels  diminished  by Rachel's  talent   and  wishes  only  to  plunder and   possess, so does    language  rape    communication: "The  first   letter   of   the   'most   ancient alphabet'  seemed   to   me   always   to  be greed,  acquisitiveness, the desire  to plun­  der and  possess." Rachel queries  near  the end  of  the  book:   "Why   didn't we  just stick to gestures  and  grunts.... Once  you get  beyond  letters,  into  words, into  emo­ tions and  ideas, it doesn't help at all." However,  this  is  not  a  descent  into  si­ lence;   it   is  a   novel   that   assaults   that  which   we  cannot  know,  that  which  we cannot articulate, that  which  we cannot change. Rachel and  Audrey Thomas will continue, and  survive because, as Rachel says, "the best  revenge  is writing well."

DIANA COOPER-CLARK


FANTASY  LIVES

w.  P.  KINSELLA, Shoeless  Joe  Jackson  Comes to Iowa. Oberon, $6.95.
LEON ROOKE,  Cry Evil. Oberon, $6.95·

THE  FUNDAMENTAL  differences between these  two  fine  short  story  collections  are suggested   by  their   titles.  Leon   Rooke's Cry  Evil  is  mostly   unremitting  in   its sense  of  life  as  nasty  and   brutish. His stories  are  stocked  with  characters  who,

106
 if  they  aren't mad   or  paranoid or  per­ verse,  are  victims  of  the  madness,  para­ noia,  or  perversity of others. Rooke tem­  pers  all   this  with   hard-edged, self-con­  scious  black  humour, and  even  allows  a few  tentative  affirmations ("The process is  painful but  what   the  hell.  Life  is A­ okay").  With   rare   exceptions, though, the cry "evil" finds only further echoes in the labyrinth of the self.
In  contrast  W.  P.  Kinsella's Shoeless
Joe   Jackson    Comes   to   Iowa    evokes worlds  of innocence and dreams realized :
the  legendary baseball   hero  in the  pas­ toral  heartland of America, his nickname a  nostalgic symbol  of  the  Great Ameri­  can  Pastime stripped of  its  corrupt con­ temporary trappings.  But  there  is a  ser­
pent in this garden-Shoeless Joe's involvement  in  baseball's greatest  scan­ dal,   the   throwing  of  the   1919  World Series.   In   the   title   story   the  failure of one  man's dream becomes  raw  material for   the    realization  of    another's.  And while   not   all   Kinsella's   characters  are successful  either in  accepting the  world  as it  is or  in  trying  to change it,  on  the whole   they   succeed   about  as  often   as they  fail; the  creative force  is at  least  as strong   as  the  corruptive; and  even  mir­  acles are possible.
Since most of the stories in Kinsella's volume   are   about  time   and   the  games people   play  trying   to  beat  it,  his choice of  baseball   as  metaphor is  appropriate. In  The   Summer  Game,   Roger   Angell has  written elegiacally about   baseball's illusory  timelessness: "Since baseball time is measured only  in  outs, all  you have  to do  is succeed   utterly, keep  hitting, keep the   rally   alive,   and   you  have   defeated time.  You  remain forever   young."  Kin­
.;ella  rings  a  variety of  glorious  changes on  this  theme. In "Grecian Urn" a pair of  lovers  with   the  extraordinary  power to inhabit inanimate objects  choose what they  think  is Keats's famous  urn  as their final  resting   place,  only  to  discover  that

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



it   is  a  seventeenth-century  fraud. The fantasy  of escape  from  time fails, too, for the   protagonist  of   "First  Names    and Empty   Pockets"   who    imagines  what might  have   been   had   he   saved   Janis Joplin  from   her   early   death.  Time  in these   stories   represents  not   only  defeat and  disillusionment but also banality, the tyranny of the  all-too-real  against which the  protagonist pitches his exotic  dream.
The best  of  Kinsella's stories  in  this vein  is  "Fiona the  First." The narrator
is  a  professional   pick-up   artist eternally on  the  lookout  for  girls who  know  "how to  play   the   game." Against   the   tacky, cliche-ridden backdrop of Southern Cali­ fornia,  he  opposes   time   and   reality   by continually replaying his own  slick erotic  fiction   in   which   only   the   girl's   name changes.  But   in   Fiona    he   comes   up against  a   genuine  first:   a   joy  for   life more    fantastic  than   anything  he   can dream up.  His  love  for  her  is a  fact  he can   neither   transcend  nor   ignore,   and when  she  finally  leaves  him-according to  his  own  rules -his  gamesmanship is itself   revealed    as   just   another  shabby cliche.  The  distancing devices  he sets up to  protect  himself   from   time   and   love and   pain   fail   him   in  the  end,   leaving him  so terribly naked  that  we hurt  with him.
Counterbalancing  the  failed   fantasies
are   Kinsella's  success  stories.   "Waiting for   the   Call"  is  a   hilariously  raunchy portrait of the  artist  as a young  man.  Its adolescent  narrator's   aching   alienation from    the   polymorphous,  multicultural life  seething around  him  does  not  pre­ vent  him  from  amassing "a great dream­ vision"  from  the  world   he  observes.  He knows   that   time   is  his  ally; rich   with his own  vitality, he sets out  in  pursuit of his  vision  with  only  $8.14  in  his  pocket but   "several   thousand  dollars worth   of adrenalin coursing through my body." If this   story   is  Kinsella's  Portrait,   "The Blacksmith  Shop   Caper" is  his  Ulysses.
 

But This Is Our War













GRACE MORRIS CRAIG

At the age of ninety, Grace Craig looks back to her youth  and tells the  story  of  the  impact  of  the Great War on her family and friends. Letters  from  the young men  on  the  Western  Front,  re­ vealing   their   reactions  to  the horrors  of the drama surround­ ing  them,  are  interwoven with her own memories. 'An account that gains both depth and power from  the  passage of  time . . . a challenge laid down without apology,  to pay attention to the past lest we have no future.' Timothy  Findley $14.95

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO  PRESS




107

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



A   hard-boiled   middle-aged  writer   as­ signed  to do an  article on the singles bar scene  discovers  a  subterranean  world  of would-be  swingers   who  inspire  in  him feelings   of   gentle   ridicule  mixed   with some slight  envy. He understands that  he has   always   been   one   of   the   sexually second-rate and  realizes that  he is getting old.  But  he  accepts his straight self and  his straight  life with  all  their  limitations. He  has  no need  to try to live such  fanta­ sies;  his  wit  suffices.  Life  is simply  too interesting  and   too   funny   a  game   for him  to want  to change its rules.
Kinsella's dreamers greatly  outnumber
his   realists   but   the   extraordinary can fully   succeed,    it   seems,  only   if   it   is dreamed in the setvice of an intensely ordinary reality.  The narrator of  "Shoe­ less Joe  Jackson Comes  to  Iowa" knows that   if  he   painstakingly   reconstructs  a baseball  field on  his Iowa farm,  his long­ dead   sports   idol   will  appear  there,   as pure  in  his  passion  for  the  game  as  the narrator is in  his love  for  Iowa,  his wife and   daughter.  And   so  he  does.   "This must  be heaven," says Joe  as  he  patrols  the   dream  outfield.  "No,"  answers   the narrator.  "It's Iowa." There is no  irony in  this  remark  and   to  Kinsella's  great  credit the story is in no way corny either. That spiritual harmony can  be achieved, and   with   such   style  and   grace   out   of such   disparate  fictional   resources,   is  a tribute to  the  author's eclectic  imagina­ tive sympathies.
Fairy  tale  endings are  more  Kinsella's
metier than Leon Rooke's, but both these collections are  distinguished by their  in­ telligence,  versatility, and  craftsmanship.
The  stories  in Cry Evil are more baroque
and  make  greater demands on  the read­ er,  echoing Barth   and  Borges,  Dostoev­  sky,   Kafka,  and    Poe.   They   are   not recommended for chronic depressives.  In theme   and  mood   there  is  a  dark  same­  ness about them   that is  almost  claustro­ phobic. However, the  very  extremity of

108
 Rooke's gloomy  vision  somewhat  under­ mines   its  seriousness.   With  what  seems like  an  authorial wink,  he  has  the  nag­ ging  wife of the writer-protagonist in his opening   story,   "The  Deacon's  Tale," complain of  his  work: "It  won't   make any  of us feel  any  better. It won't make anyone  want   to   rejoice   that    they   are alive.  So  what  if  people  like  your  ugly hero   do  exist,  you  think   that's any  ex­ cuse?"
Rejoicing in life is about the last thing the  characters in  this  book  are  likely  to do.  Although the  psychiatric detective in "Fromm  Investigations" insists  that   life is beautiful and   that  loneliness  does  not spell  out  the  human condition, his  own life  denies  his  insistence.  He  sets  out  to track   down   the   meaning  of  a  client's dream but  plunges  instead  into  the heart of  his  own   dark   subconscious, "a  ram­ paging  mole" that  digs away  at  his confi­ dence  and    sanity.   The  Mole   appears again, this  time  as  a  character  of  that  name,   in   "Adolpho's  Disappeared  and  We Haven't a Clue Where  to Find Him," a   gothic   nightmare   whose   narrator  is probably  guilty  of Adolpho's murder. In the  end  he,  too,  is  trapped  by  his  own impotent   guilt,   "shrieking  that    I  was innoc.ent, innocent!  while  all  the  evil  of a thousand days licked  at  my heels." The madwoman whose  diary  comprises  "The End of  the Revolution and Other Stories"  actually  succeeds   in  becoming the  fortunate Other Woman whom  she pursues  obsessively  throughout the  story, but  only in the depths of her  paranoid delirium. She  is so repellent and  so obvi­ ously mad  that  her final, desperate cry of "satisfied,  satisfied"  is little  more  than a grim  joke.
The best  story  in  the  book  is also  the
only  one  that  offers a genuinely  redemp­ tive   vision,  although  it   too  is  severely qualified. The narrator of  "Biographical Notes" is a  pornographic  filmmaker ac­ cused  of  a  rape   which  he probably did

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



not  commit. In   his  effort   to  exonerate himself  he  presents  us with  biographical sketches   of  the  cast   of  characters  who make   up  his  life.  As  usual   there  is evil almost   everywhere, except   here  there  is also   a   supportive  wife,   "an    innocent child," and   the  films  themselves which, he argues,  prove  "that filth  remains filth until  someone  with  a  humanist  perspec­ tive comes along  and  transforms it, often through art,  into  a  thing   that   takes  the measure    of   the   beauty   and    depth  of human life."  This  seems  a  specious  de­ fense   until   it  is  confirmed  by  the  one positive  review  of  his  work -part  Pau­  line  Kael   parody  but   also,  we  suspect, part-truth-and by the  scenario for  his next  film.  In it  the  innocent child,  pur­ sued  by evil, is saved  by the  film director and   his  wife,  and   the  evil  world  is  re­ duced  to harmlessness by cinematic tech­ nique.  Even  though life remains intransi­ gent,  we can  at  least  cheer   his  attempt to make  it work  and  transform its sordid reality  through the aesthetic imagination.

JERRY WASSERMAN



A CLASSICIST'S CELEBRATION

FRED COGSWELL,  A Long  Apprenticeship: Col- lected  Poems. Fiddlehead.

FRED COGSWELL is not a flamboyant man. His  talent   is quiet, his  worth solid  and indisputable. A thoroughly Canadian talent, one might say, consistently under­ rated   by  his  fellow   citizens.  Cogswell's Collected   Poems  witness   not   only  to  a long  apprenticeship but   to  an  excellent  command  of  craft,  a  strong  emotional sensitivity,  and  a keen intellect.
Frederick  William  Cogswell    (the  in­ formal   Fred  is  typical  of  the  man's  un­ pretentious quality)  is a  Maritimer hom
 and  bred.  He  has  spent  much  of his life in  Fredericton,  teaching  English  at  the University   of  New  Brunswick.  He  is an anthologizer and  a  translator, an  editor (of  The  Fiddlehead, I 952-66,  and  pub­ lisher  of Fiddlehead Poetry  Books, I 96o-
8o) .  This  series  of  chapbooks  provided encouragement and opportunity for many
new   poets.  His   translations  of  modem
Quebec poets   ( I970,   I97I)  indicate his empathy for  modern Quebecois and  his sensitivity  towards language.
Born in I 9I 7, Cogswell is young enough to have been influenced by the 'Montreal group'  (Smith,  Scott,  Kennedy and Klein) ,  yet  old  enough  to  have   had  a respect   for   traditional  metre   and   verse forms   bred   into   his  bones.  A  basically conservative  poet,  he  walks  a  fine  line between  the  old-fashioned and  the  new­ fangled. He  uses  many   traditional verse forms, especially the sonnet, but uses them freely, not slavishly. In I93I, Frank  Scott advised Canadian Forum  readers that  the
'new   poetry'   called   for  the  adaptation, not the rejection, of traditional forms. Cogswell's convictions are obviously simi­
lar.
:The individual poems in this collection are  undated, just  to frustrate the scholar. There are  no  apparent radical   shifts  in this poetic  career, and  no subdivisions  in the  collection,   but   the  arrangement  has its own easy rhythms, as when  "Futility" (a  poem  about the  paper  world  of  aca­ demics  among whom  Cogswell  has spent  his life)  is followed  by a poem about the "acid  act" which  is, inescapably, "scar or star."
Several groupings consist of sonnet sequences  on  the  poet's  Maritime  neigh­ bours  in the  Sa:int John River  valley, an intimate, inbred world  of loves and  hates.  Cogswell   celebrates  a   proud,   sensitive and    eccentric   people.    The  collection  opens  with  a sonnet, "Valley-Folk":
0 narrow  are  the hates with which we thorn

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Each other's  flesh by gossip of the Grundies, And narrow  are our roads to church  on
Sundays,
And narrow  too the vows of love we've
sworn.

In the sestet, the river's course to the sea becomes  an  image  for  an  inevitable pro­ cess  which   links   these   people   to   the wider  world.
Many  of  the  poems  are  about  poetry, and  art.  "A  poem  is a watch  designed  I
To   tick   for   ever  in   the   mind"  ("A Poem").   "A   Poet"  acknowledges    the ambivalence,  even   desperation,  in   the artist's life. "Behind the Blood" contrasts the  poet  and  the  universe  he  celebrates, the   order   he   seeks,  the   power   of  the images that  give him  ease from  pain  and death. "The  End   of  Poetry"  (an   ano maly)   juxtaposes an  idealized  beginning
("Forever always  is the  Word  I and  the
Word   is   servant   unto   men")  with   a
blackly  comic,  surreal portrait  of  Muse as   Woman.  "Making  poems   is  like I
making  love," where  desire and perform­ ance   are   occasionally, and   felicitously, joined.  In "A  Classicist's Lament," Cogs­ well's  measured  couplets, after  the  man­  ner of Pope, mock  modern  freedom from toil and rules :

A youth,  new bitten  by the flea to write, Can scratch  himself  to poet overnight! Pebbles that  lurk  beneath  the selPs dark
sea
Can  win acclaim  as pearls of poetry,
Provided  that  the ropes on which they're strung
Are twisted  dreams  by Freud or myths by
Jung; ...
rJ'he modern  critic  gives his best reviews
To work that's esoteric  and  abstruse, ...
0 for an honest  child  to cry halloo
For naked  truths that  Burke and Johnson knew....
Cogswell's typical themes are  con­ cerned   with   love   and   hate,   time   and aging,  sadism,  human  folly,  and  beauty.  His semi-urban world  has  a  small-town aura.   William   Toye  wrote,  in  I973,  of Cogswell's   "sense   of   fallen   man." This

I I 0
 sensibility  is found in many of the sonnets on  the  people  of the  valley, and  in  mini­ ature  psych dramas  such   as   "Lefty," "Paul,"  "Pros and Cons,"   or   "The  Event." The latter, a story in verse form, tells of a  rape  and  its effect  on  the  lives of four  people:

In  itself an event  is nothing. It dies in the  acting.
But its ghost  walks and  rocks the minds of all it  touches
as a stone  vibrates  in water rippling  far  and  thin
to the shores of time....
What  if the  myriads  moving  through
each  one of several billion lives clash and  jostle as this one did
tangling us in a bloody web
til we have  neither sight to see I nor strength to fly?
The spider-god  of history/ thrives on ghosts

Some  of the  short  poems  have  a finely chiselled, epigrammatic quality ("Bigot," "Two  Fears").  Others  ("The  Golden Lure," "A  Farmer Views  the  Harvest") develop metaphysical conceits,  after   the seventeenth-century  manner   which    so fascinated  Leo  Kennedy and   his  fellow Montreal poets.  Still  others  reveal  a sar­ donic  wit  ("Overheard on  the Metro"), a   quiet    humour,  or    (surprisingly)   a hilarious  gift  for  parody, as  in  "Spiv's Innisfree," which begins,

I will arise and  go to a pub in Picadilly and  six quick ones will I down there, of
scotch  and  soda made.

We  are  left,  finally,  with  a  paradoxi­ cally Canadian mixture of Canada Coun­ cil  mandarin,  eminence   grise,  and   fine poet.  As Robert McDougall reminded us in  the   Ig6o's,  many   of  our   poets  have  been    scholars.   Cogswell's   ambition  as poet  is  suggested  in  the  poem  he  places last:

for  an artist it is better
to be a well·placed
candle

BOOKS IN REVIEW



than a blazing sun to illuminate without distortion the  empty  spaces
between and around what is normally seen

His  poems  do illuminate, and  we are grateful for their  light.
PATRICIA MORLEY


CREATJON &
RECREATJON

NORTHROP    FRYE,    Creation  and    Recreation.
Univ. of Toronto Press.

NoRTHROP FRYE's CONTRIBUTION  to the field  of  criticism  has  been  both  extra­ ordinary and   extraordinarily  influential. Indeed,   his   stature   has   grown    great enough  that  it  must  seem  almost  hereti­ cal   to  express   a  reservation  concerning his  work.  For  all  that, Frye's  latest  vol­ ume demonstrates that  accustomed rever­ ence  (no  rnatter how  deserved) can generate excessive  promotion: some  lec­ tures  by  great   Professors  should  remain  unprinted.
Creation and  Re,creation,  a kind of review, by Frye, of himself, was delivered as  three  Larkin-Stuart  Lectures early  in Ig8o  at Trinity College  in the University of  Toronto. The  series  is  quasi-confes­ sional, marked by a self-conscious  replay­ ing   of  earlier   notes,   and   exhibits   too much  awkward  self-justification. Beyond their  collective  title   (there are  no  indi­  vidual  essay  titles)   it is finally difficult  to say  otherwise   precisely   what   the  essays are  meant to  be  about -except,  as  ac­ knowledged, that  they "draw on earlier material," and  involve  more  than  a  few "glimpses  of  charted  territory." Yet  the volume  raises  serious  questions about Frye's general  doctrine.
The first of the  present essays concerns
 tion. As rhetorical foil, Frye adduces two opposing   views  of  Creation. First   there is  the  sometime   protestant view,  which he  identifies  with  Karl   Barth,  in  which God   is  sole  Creator, man   merely  crea­ ture.  The   other is  the  liberal  humanist position (presumably  represented for Frye   by   figures   such   as   Feuerbach), which  argues  that  the  notion  of a creat­ ing  God   is  merely   projected  from   the observation that  man  is a  maker, homo  faber. Frye's  own  dialectic  depends  on this  binary  opposition of  possible  hypo­ theses as well as upon  his evident  prefer­ ence  for the  second  theory.  (Some  read­  ers may find  Frye's  one-choice argument to   be   somewhat  disadvantaged   by   its omission   of  other   theories   which   have long played  a dominant role in literature and  criticism,  an example of which would be  the  "creation-subcreation" view  rep­ resented  by modern writers  as diverse  as
J. R.  R. Tolkien, C.  S.  Lewis,  Dorothy
Sayers and  Paul  Ricoeur.)



"A Better  Way to Buy  Books"

The Academic Book Club has ex­ panded  the  idea  of  a  traditional book  club  into  a  completely new and  unique concept.
Save  20-40% on  any  book  in  print! Save  up  to  80% on  selected  titles. NO GIMMICKS
NO HIDDEN CHARGES
AND NO HARD SELL
Just low,  low  prices  every  day  of  the year; unlimited  choice of  books;  and fast,  efficient, personal service  on every order.

ACADEMIC BOOK  CLUB
Canada: 105  Wellington St., Kingston, Ont. K7L 5C7
U.S.A.: Cape Vincent, New  York,
13618-0399
Europe: Postbus 1891,  1005  AP Amsterdam, The Netherlands

itself  primarily  with  the concept  of  crea-	 	

I I I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Frye's literary guide through the first essay of this collection is not Blake, but Oscar   Wilde.   In   his  own   essay,  "The Decay  of Lying," Wilde  had  argued that the  creative arts  are  essentially  forms  of
'lying,'  or  turning away  from  the  exter­ nal   world.   Frye   applies   Wilde's  attack on  realism   as  a  principle -that  which in  art   is  recognizable  "Creation"  is  in fact  discreative: for  Frye,  "the  function of   the   recognizable  in the   arts  is  not aesthetic"; creation is their  "non-creative element." This  assertion  leads  Frye  ( al­ though it might have  led him elsewhere)  to a kind of Nietzschean dictum:

the  humanly  creative  is whatever  profound­ ly  disturbs   our   sense  of  'the'  creation,  a reversing   or   neutralizing  of   it.   The   en­ counter  of God  and  man  in  creation  seems to  be  rather  like  what  some  of  the  great poets  of  nuclear   physics  have  described  as the  encounter of  matter  with  anti-matter: each  annihilates the  other. What  seems one of   the   few   admirable  forms   of   human achievement,  the  creation  of the  arts,  turns out   to  be  a  kind  of  decreation:  I  might have  called  my  lectures  'Creation and  De­ creation'....

rrhe   relationship  between   recreation and   decreation, in  any  normal sense  of these  words,  is oblique  enough  that  their virtual  equation  is  jarring.   Vandalism, for  example,  is  sure   to  be  adduced  by some  sociologist  or  other  as  a  species  of play,  but  even  a sociologist  is unlikely  to regard  child's play  and  vandalism in  his own  household with  the same loving eye. Something has  gone  wrong   with  Frye's language  here,   and   I   point   to  it  only because   it  is  indicative of  premise   and method, both  as  they  apply   to  his  gen­ eralized   hermeneuticism and   to  his  spe­ cific recapitulation in this group of essays. C.  S.  Lewis,  dealing  with  similar  in­ sights into  the  nature of  creative process, could   almost   agree  with   Frye   that   the psyche of the  artist  is more central to his art   than    is  the   (ostensibly)    objective  reality  with  which  his art  must  conjure.

112
 Lewis suggested, however,  that  there  are various  degrees  of intention in  the  artist, occupying a spectrum between  the "real­ ity"  (i.e., Creation) outside,  and  the self, (i.e.,  creation)   inside.   Points   of   inten­ tion   have   a  significant  valence  for   the way  in  which   we  "read" art,  since,  by definition, there  are real differences along  this  spectrum  with   respect   to  commit­ ment   to  conversation  with   the   reader. And   there  are  differences between authors in  the  degree of  overt  commit­ ment   they   have   to   'lying,'  either  with story,  or  with   language.  In  The   Great Divorce   Lewis   postulates,   whimsically, that  early  in an  artist's career  he may  be utterly attracted  to  the  beauty   or  form of  external   "reality,"  and   try  to  paint that  reality as a way of coming  to 'know' it.  (That this drive  could  forcefully moti­  vate  the young  Albrecht Durer or G. M. Hopkins  is  inadequately  accounted  for in Frye's theory.) Then, says Lewis, there  comes  a  stage  at  which  the  artist is less concerned with  external reality,  the "otherness" of his ostensible  subject mat­ ter,   than    he   is  with   the   light   which reveals   it,   or   even   the   shadow   which frames   the   light.   Next   the  artist  might  become  interested in  the  means and  pro­  cesses of his own  perception, about which he may  elaborate theories. Or,  in quite  a different way  than  at  first,  he  could  be­ gin  to  become  concerned with  the  way that   others see  his  art as  finished  "pro­ duct," as a kind of new and  independent external   reality.    Finally,    the   artist   so inclined   may    become    concerned  only with   himself,    and   above   all   with   his reputation. It  is  in the  last  stage,  pre­ sumably,    that    the   artist   is  most   self­ consciously   aware of  his  art   as  menda­ cious,   and    Wilde,   presumably,   under­ stood  this.
From  this perspective the first sentence
of Frye's  present book  could  seem  disin­
genuous.
I   am   a   literary  critic,   mainly   concerned

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



with  English literature, and  I have  recently developed a special interest in  the  way  that the  Bible  has  affected the  structure and imagery of that literature.

One    must   otherwise  imagine  a   joke. Frye's   interest,  in  fact,   is  far   from  re­ cent; indeed, in  one  form  of  expression or  another, from   his  book  on  Blake,  A Fearful   Symmetry   ( 1947),   to   Secular Scripture   ( 1976)    he   has   been   almost continuously occupied with  this  subject.
On  this  occasion,  whether as critic  or as artist,  Frye seems at  first to be looking at the  Bible as an  external cultural  sym­ bol  (rather than   as  a  literary  text) , re­ lating  symbol   rather  than   text   to   the  language  and   thought  of   his  aesthetic enterprise.  But  in  so  doing  he  'paints a picture' of  the  Bible as literary text  that  should  shock< us into  a renewed apprecia­ tion  for  naive  realism, or at  the  least  for the  humble  advantages of  new-criticism. To   be  blunt  about  it,  Frye  does  not evidence   in   these   essays  a   very   good grasp  of  his subject. At the  most elemen­ tary  level,  it  should   be  obvious  that   the Bible   cannot  be   treated  literarily as though  it  were  a  single  document:  de­ spite  a  remarkable coherence in  respect of governing ideas,  the  Bible  is an  anth­ ology,  written  by  many  authors over  a considerable number of centuries in three  languages.  Casual    generalizations   are likely  to  do  violence  to  any  number of specific  texts. To  say, as  Frye  does here, that    "The   garden  is  a  symbol   of  the female   body  in  the   Bible,"   even  when
citing  Song  of Songs  as an example, is to
ignore  rather than   read   the  whole  text. (Even   in  Song, the  very  opposite might more  credibly   be said -that  the  female body   is  a  symbol   of  the   Garden.)  In Genesis,  or  Isaiah, or  even  in  John   20 (where  Magdalene  mistakes    the   risen Christ   for  a  gardener) ,  the  garden is a primary symbol  for  Creation, which,  we may  remember, is  Frye's  ostensible  sub­ ject. But  the garden can  also be a symbol
 for  human   arrogance and  perversion, as in   the  Garden  of  Adonis   (Isaiah, I 7 :
10-11). Frye's  generalization, in short,  is hopelessly misleading.
Moreover, to  sustain such  generaliza­
tions  about  the  text,  Frye  can be drawn into  wilder misrepresentations of its prin­ cipal  artistic  traditions of  interpretation. Thus, by way  of example, Dante is mis­ translated  by  Frye-legato  con  amore in  un  volume,  according to  Frye,  reads  "bound into  a  single  Word  by  love"­ whereas  Dante's word  is  volume   (mass, volume, book or tome). The point  is not incidental;  the  mistranslation  misrepre­ sents ascription to  the  idea  of  a monistic  biblical  utterance which,  if it  were  valid, would  simply obliterate the various  texts as  text -something  we   hope   Frye   no less than  Dante would  be reluctant to do. Frye  is already   nototious  among lite­ rary  critics  for  avoiding  the  actual texts of  the  secular  literature  he  schematizes. In  this  volume  his  subsumed discussion of   Shakespeare's   Winter's  Tale    under  categories  of  generalization drawn  from his  view  of   The  Tempest exemplifies  a general tendency. For  Frye  the wondrous transformation  at   the   end   of  Winter's Tale  is, like the  conclusion of The Tem­
pest, "a  vision  of  a  reintegrated  past  in which  dead  things  come  to life under the spell of art."  But  by eschewing the care­ ful language of Acts IV  and V he misses the  play's  key  point  of  reference  for  his ostensible subject: it is the explicit  juxta­  position  of  Ovidian language  (art)  and  specifically    Pauline    language    (grace) that   lend  to  this  romance its  particular source   of   "future  hope." Here,   we  re­ member, it is actually Paulina who tutors  the  metamorphosis, giving   it  both   lan­ guage  and  life,  because  it  is she  who in­ duces  in  Leontes the  moral  transforma­ tion  which  alone   could  produce in  the old  king  a  reconciliation  with  that "na­ ture"  which   is  his   "nature"  too.  The  music  which  plays at  Hermione's unveil-

I I3

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ing is for Shakespeare's time no more certainly a  figure  for  art  than   for  spiri­ tual   harmony;  indeed,   Leontes'   initial  sense  that   he  could  be less  transformed than   "mocked with  art"   (V.  iii.  68)   is confirmed  by  Paulina.  What she  says is
"-nay, come  away, I Bequeath to death numbness,  for from him I Dear life redeems   you."   (V.  iii.  101-03).  Hermi­ one's  'resurrection' from  dead  art to liv­ ing  wife, from  silence  to conversation, is
actually seen to transform the old Pygma­ lion  story,  and  to image  in  Leontes,  too, a  familiar  biblical   prospect  on  creation and   recreation. It  is  Paulina, with   her biblical   language,  who  orchestrates and  makes  possible the retrospective interpre­ tation, and  it  is  she  who is able  to sug­ gest   to   us   in   which   way   we   are   to understand that  "Our Perdita is found" (V.  iii.  r 20).  It  is  unfair  to  both  plays to   treat  them   as  though  they   were two  jellies  from  the  same  mold,  or,  in­  deed,   to  suggest  as  Frye  does  that   each certifies  his  precept that  in  approaching Shakespeare's romances   "the  Bible ... is deficient as a guide  to human creative perspectives" and  that  only  the  classical tradition affords  us much  help with  their interpretation.
What  one  begins  to discern  in Frye, as he  relates   to  biblical   text,  is  that   it  is difficult  for  him  not  to express a polemic against the  text,  rather than  actually to "read" it,  and   this  is most  disquieting. To  say  "The Bible  has little  or  nothing to say about man's cultural past" or even that  in  the Bible "the beginning is postu­ lated, as  something superior   to  all  that  follows"  seems indefensibly inventive   (or deconstructive)  of  biblical  literature, at least  as  we  might   be  concerned  with  it from   any  point   of  view  which   respects the   actual  text.  One is  forced   to  con­ clude,  then,  that  it  is not  text  but  some narrower    aspect    of   tradition   against which Frye, with  Blake at his elbow still, is poised.
 I hope  that   my  resistance  to  this  vol­ ume   will   not   be   misconstrued.   Disap­  proval  of what  Frye  regards as bad  criti­  cism  is certainly his  critic's  prerogative. Confusing or  identifying  one  species  of criticism  with  the  text,  as though it were itself  the  text  on  which  it comments is, I think,  far  less defensible. For  one  thing,  the  confusion introduces  a  risky  confla­ tion  of  historical and  eccentric interpre­ tation.  Whether one  construes the  doc­ trine  of the  Trinity, for example, as "de­ signed   primarily   to  prevent  man   from  slipping out  of   the grip  of  the  church"
-historically, c'est  a rire-or, perhaps,
sees it  as a  metaphor designed   to  expli­
cate  distinct  yet unified  faculties of mind integral  to  'recreation' or  thought itself (memory, intellect, will, as in Augustine, Dante, .Jung), may  be largely  a question of  whether one  is willing  to  deform the various   texts  at  issue  or  else  to  engage them  and   their  traditions of criticism  in such   imaginative  conversation  as  could lead   to  a  responsible interpretation.   If Frye  really  wishes to discuss western cre­ ation   myth  or  biblical   cosmogony,  then  to make  much  of the curious seventeenth­ century 'chronology' which  attempted to
'date'  creation in  4004  B.C.,   adducing poor  Bishop  Ussher  as a prime example
of   a   general "Christian ... paranoia"
about beginnings and  endings is, as Frye must  realize, at best to go fishing  for  red herring. Even  if interpretation is itself merely  another species of fiction,  literary critics   should   aspire   to   "plausible   fic­ tions." It  is a relatively easy thing  to find fault  with   bad   and   dead   exegetes,  ap­ parently much   more difficult  to deal with the  complex historical  dialogue  between  Sacred    and    Secular   Scripture-even when  that  dialogue is germinal to one of the    most    interesting   of   contemporary literary  questions,   that   concerning  our  stance   as  readers  with  respect  to  begin­ nings and endings.
This is not  to blame Frye overly much:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



anyone   who  has  struggled with  any  as­ pect  of  the  task  he  advertises must  have some sympathy. But  one has  to wish that  the  Professor  would  refrain from  claim­ ing  as  a  major source  what   is  evidently  a   short   punt.  To   adapt  an   incensed Blakean response   to  the  Bible  is  not  to deal  effectively  with  its literary  and  aes­ thetic   implications  for   western  culture. Merely  to express  impatience with  God's rhetorical questions of Job about whether he was present  at  creation  or  could  have affected it  (Frye: "God  seems  to regard  this as a triumphant argument in favour  of  the  wisdom  of his  ways  and  the  folly of  Job's")  is,  however  emotionally sym­ pathetic  we  might   feel  toward Blake  or Frye,  nonetheless to  rob  criticism  of any valid voice of the text. The Job-narrator's  own evident  interest in the situation is as a significant apprehension  of man's  exis­ tential   limitations,   his    'middleness' - and   thus   of  his  motivation  for  a  keen imaginative enquiry into  the  issue of  be­ ginnings and  endings, creation and recre­ ation. In  short,   the  Book  of  Job  offers promising terrain for  Frye's  subject,  but his    emotional   disaffection    from    one species  of  travelogue (or  emotional alle­ giance  to another  journey) prevents him from  seeing  any  fruitfulness in  the  land.
There  remain a  number of  points  in these essays at  which  Frye  verges on plausible commentary concerning the dialogue  between    Sacred  and    Secular
Scripture. Art,  he  says  promisingly, has to do with  an  "idealized vision  of society projected on  the  future." By this reckon­ ing,  Biblical  narrative is art.  Myth,  Frye says further, is about what has happened, while  faith   is  about  what  will  happen. Yet  one  feels  the  approach  of  another false dichotomy here: surely  myth  is also about  future   vision,  and,  as  historians and  philosophers (March  Bloch,  David Carr, Paul  Ricoeur) have  argued, we are also  obliged   to  exercise  faith   in  respect to  various   myths   concerning  what   has
 happened.  In   this  sense,  past,   present, and  future are  all  aspects  of  our  inter­ pretation, whether it  be  as  'translation' (vide  George  Steiner) or  some less kind of  'recreation.' Our   present   activity   is intellectual, into  which vortex  we  place in  imaginative  tension   our  remembered dream of  the  past   (the  texts,  the  myths of   'innocence'   and   'experience'  which  have  shaped  our  vision)   and  the  future we  intend  or  hope  for   (the   unwritten, the  dreams  and  visions which  shape  our growing  imagination). Frye's  apologetic suggests that  when  we do this, whether as artists  or,  here,  as  critics,  we  are  aware of  two  possible  attitudes with  respect  to our   activity:  either  there   is  reality,   a creation   'outside'  (e.g.,   a   text)   which calls  us to  knowing,  depiction, and  crea­ tive translation, or,  there  is only one real creation, our  own,  which  must  decreate the  first to  find  its  own  recreative voice and  vision.  This  position  may  represent something   more  than a  restatement  of Frye's   earlier   formulations:  in  Secular Scripture    he   was   clear   about   the   dis­ tinction, but   less  comfortable  with   the negation:

The  secular scripture  tells  us  that we  are the   creators;  other  scriptures tell   us  that we  are  actors in   a  drama of  divine  crea­ tion  and  redemption. Even  Alice is troubled by   the   thought  that  her   dream   may   not have   been  hers   but   the  Red  King's. Iden­ tity    and    self-recognition   begin    when    we realize   that  this   is  not   an  either-or  ques­ tion,  when   the   great  twins  of  divine   crea­ tion   and   human   recreation  have   merged into  one,   and   we   can   see   that  the   same  shape is upon both.

We  see  that  a  continuing problem   with Frye  is that  in  his fascination with  rela­ tionships  between   myth  and  religion  he often seems to confound rather than  con­ nect   the   two.  If  biblical   text  is  to  be treated  as  literature,  then   it  must   also be granted  status  as  myth,  as text  about "what  has  happened," reaching back  to beginnings  (and  creation) , motivated by

I 15

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the   desire   for   "an    idealized   vision  of society  projected on  the future." If Frye wishes to grant to secular  literature the status of religious  myth, then, like all religious  text,  it  too  must  be held  to  be about  the inexplicable, the mystery of presentness, and   our  longing  for  a  clo­ sure more  fullsome  than  we can  yet fore­ see. If I  may  paraphrase a senior  mem­ ber of our  national academy: we usually think   of  myth   as  fiction  that  wants  to explain; religion  as wanting to celebrate the inexplicable. (In  this sense, of course, religion  is not  the same thing  as dogma.) But   it  seems   that,  despite   his  protest, Frye   may   in   this   book   be  explicating neither  species  of  recreation -myth  or religion.  What he clearly  sees as distaste­  ful  about  Sacred Scripture, for example, is its ordinary claim  to status as a text  to be  read  and  interpreted. What his view of  both   Sacred  and   Secular  Scripture threatens  to do is to reject  outright what  his own  early  teachers felt  to be a neces­ sary  relationship of  secular  literature to its criticism,  that  the  received text, rather than   any   species   of  its  interpretation, should  retain critical authority.
The selling  advantage of Frye's  theory
of secular  scripture is that   the  reader  is the authority-or at least the 'divinely inspired' reader, the Super-Critic, is authority.  In   the   Frigian  cosmos,   the critic  as Authority provides  the key to all mythologies; his  decreation is the  Crea­ tion  that   is  real,  and  presumably  suffi­ cient  for  our  recreation. That  this  Au­ thority   has  been  generously   received  in Canada  is  well  enough   attested  by  the curious  determination of  Canadian cre­ ative writers to explicate Frye  with  their work, to use poetry  to interpret criticism  rather  than   to  expect criticism  to  inter­ pret poetry.
Yet in such  a circle game  there  is tacit acceptance of  an  unusual order  of  pre­ eminence. What  the   re-ordering  means  for  the  present exercise  is that  on  Frye's

II6
 own   terms   we  are   finally  compelled to evaluate his ostensibly  "critical" work  as imaginative literature rather than   as criticism, or,  perhaps, de   facto,  as  reli­ gious  manifesto rather than  exegesis. In such  a light  the  complaint of  this  review
-that the  Frye  of Creation and  Recre­
ation  is not  a particularly fruitful or reliable reader of  texts -must seem  not only  heretical but  vain.  Frye celebrates a contemporary French and  American  re­ conception of  the  critics  calling  as  com­ petitor  and   ultimately  successor   to  the artist. Thus, as  the  culminating  reflec­ tion  on  his own  career, it seems  that  he, too,  heralds a  new  stage  for  criticism: Enter  dogma:  Exeunt,   literature  and  interpretation.
Especially   in   a   gifted    writer    with
Frye's  genuine depth of culture, the  dis­ placement of literary criticism  by another species  of  writing would  not  be  a  cause for  complaint if it  were  more  accurately advertised. Frye's  actual subjects  are  not secular  literature  and   the   literature  of the  Bible,  neither is the  relationship he explicates  that   between   the   Bible  and secular literature. Rather  Frye  responds to  a  debate amongst both   religious  and literary  interpreters  in   the   liberal,  hu­ mane and  other traditions since  at  least the   nineteenth   century   (as   yet   unre­ solved)    concerning  authority  in   inter­ pretation. In  the  nineteenth  century the authority no longer  placed confidently in the  text  of  Sacred  Scripture was  placed  hopefully in secular literature -the best that  was said or thought. It may  not  un­ fairly  be  said  that   the  Frye  of  Anatomy of  Criticism was  still  within  this  tradi­ tion.   Whether  from   Feuerbach,  Arnold and   G.  Eliot   then,   or   their   twentieth­ century counterparts, Frye seems in Cre­ ation  and  Recreation to have  moved  for­  ward   along an arc of logic self-consciously  anticipated by his actual author of occa­  sion,    the    candidly   misleading   Oscar Wilde.  It  is  in  the  text  of  Wilde's clear

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



self-advertisement that  we see how apt  is Frye's  early  remark, that  Wilde was "fifty years ahead of his time":

[This] is  what  the  highest  criticism  really is, the record of one's own soul. It is more fascinating than  history as it is concerned simply  with   oneself.  It is  more  delightful than   philosophy, as  its  subject  is  concrete and  not  abstract, real  and  not  vague.  It is the only civilised  form  of autobiography, as it deals  not  with  the  events,  but  with  the thoughts of one's  life:  not  with  life's  physi­ cal  accidents   of  deed  or  circumstance, but with  the   spiritual   moods  and   imaginative  passions of the mind.

I  think   that   Wilde   (as  usual,  wagging his  text  behind him)  offers in these words a  fair  and   relevant comment on  Frye's latest  book.  It may  also,  and  somewhat more  faithfully, advertise its appropriate conclusion.
The  idea   that   everyone's  theory   of
almost  anything is finally  autobiographi­ cal   is,  of  course,   hardly   original  with Oscar  Wilde.  For  this  reason  alone,  any suggestion   that  universal  dogma   should be   generated   from   one   peculiar  auto­ biography,  however   carefully  hidden   in fair   words,   is  a   presumption  that   we expect  a great critic  to refute rather than  to model.
DAVID  JEFFREY



BESSETTE RE-VIEWED

GERARD BESSETTE,   Le  Cycle.  Quebec/Ameri­
que, $g.gs.
GERARD  BESSETTE, La Garden-Party de Chris- tophine. Quebec/Amerique, $6.gs.

GERARD BESSETTE  has  been  writing and publishing  short   stories   and   novels  for over   twenty   years.   Four   recent   events have stimulated critical  interest in, and encouraged the  reading of, his works. He was  awarded  the  Government of  Que­ bec's  Prix Athanase-David  for  Ig8o, and  Queen's University held  a "Bessette  Col-
 loquiurn" to honour his retirement. Que­ bec/Amerique Press  issued  La  Garden­ Party de Christophine, a collection of six short   stories,   five  of   which   had   been previously   published.  Finally,   the  same press  reissued  Le  Cycle,  the  novel  first published  in I97 I, for which Bessette  won his   second   Governor-General's  Award. Because only  one short story, "La garden­ party  de  Christophine" is new,  and   the most   recent   of   the   older   works   dates  from  the  early  seventies,  this  review  of Le Cycle and  La Garden-Party de Chris­ tophine necessarily involves a re-view of Gerard Bessette's fiction.
"L'accident," "L'emplihre," and "L'ex­ treme-onction" date   from  the  early  six­ ties. "L'accident" and "L'emplatre" were first published  in Ecrits du Canada  fran­ fais in March  rg62; "L'extreme-onction," in  Liberte in  May-June 1963. This short story,  however, had  already appeared in English  as   "The  Conversion" in   the Queen's  Quarterly  in   rg6o.  It remains today the only one of these seven works available  in English.
"L'accident," "L'emplatre," and "L'ex­ treme-onction" are   not  only  contempo­ rary  with Bessette's  four early novels, but they also share  with  them  similarities of content   and    style.    Like    La   Bagarre
( I958),  Le  Libraire  ( rg6o),   Les  Peda­
gogues   ( 1961),  and    La   Commensale
( 1975,  though   written in  the  early  six­ ties) , the  three  short  stories  are all  set at least partly  in Montreal after  the Second  World  War. Thanase, the chief character of  "L'accident," is "un  ancien  combat­ tant."   In   "L'emplatre,"   M.   Denaud's daughter-in-law is an  English  war-bride. With  the  partial exception of the  lawyer and   his  family   in  "L'extreme-onction," the  characters in  those  early  stories,  like most  of the  characters in the early novels, belong   to   the   working    class.   Thanase works  in  the  garage   that   he  eventually burns   down;  Leon   Denaud  is  a   bank teller.   In   both    the   short    stories   and

II7

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



novels, moreover, Bessette uses his setting and  characters to  help  create  the  atmo­ sphere  of realism  through which he satir­ izes  French-Canadian   society.  With   its ineffective   priest,   hypocritical   croyants, and  exploitation of a young child,  "L'ex­ treme-onction" summarizes the criticisms  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  which Bessette  makes  at  greater  length   in  Le Libraire,  Les  Pedagogues, and  La Com­ mensale.
The style of both  the early short  stories and   the  early   novels  is  also  similar   in that, although it  is  fairly  traditional, it shows Bessette's  awareness of the  impor­ tance  of  point-of-view in  fiction  and  his fascination  with  levels,  kinds,  and tones of  language. Thanase's  line  "Right . .. t'as   jamais   dit  plus   vrai"  provides  the mixture  of   English,   ungrammatical  French, colloquialisms, and  italicized  em­ phasis  that   allows  the  reader   to  feel  his uneducated,    exaggerating,  careless, cliche-ridden,  "accidental" character. Etienne  Beaulieu's repeated "Non" both unifies  "L'extreme-onction" and   acts  as a  kind  of  cosmic  chorus  on  the  silliness of his "conversion." From  the mid-sixties  on, of  course, Bessette's experiments with optique  and   language  are   one   of  the most  exciting  aspects  of his fiction.
La Garden-Party  de Christophine con­ tains    two    other    previously    published short  stories,  "Grossesse," which  first  ap­  peared  in  I969, in the March-April issue of  Liberte,  and  "Romance," which  also
appeared in I969, in the September-· October issue of  La Barre du  jour. Both these works bear resemblances to their contemporary   novels,  L'Incubation
(I965), and  Le Cycle  (I97I).
Although "Grossesse"  is written in the third   person,   its  lone  character is  Syl­ vaine,   the  six-months pregnant  wife  of Ghislain; she  is depicted one  day  in  the hour   or  so  she  waits  for  her  morning­ sickness. The pregnancy  and  the  passage of time  are  objectified by  repeated refer-

118
 ences to Sylvaine's brassiere, clock, and medical  dictionary.  The   emphasis  on inner  feelings  rather than  on outward actions,  the differences suggested between biological  and  chronological time,  the exploration of a woman's pregnancy, and the  use of repeated physical  objects to connote  physiological and   psychological states   are   typical   of  Bessette's  later  fic­ tion.   Bessette's   presentation  of  a   preg­  nant  woman  waiting to vomit,  in  fact,  is a  short   step   from   Le  Cycle's  Gaetane, Vitaline,  Berthe,  and   Anita   and   their  preoccupations with  such  phenomena as menstruation, copulation, and  urination. At  the  end  of "Grossesse," however,  Syl­ vaine,  having finally  been sick, looks for­ ward    both   to   her   shopping  and    "un  enfant,  un   enfant,   un   enfant.... " By contrast, in Le Cycle, the women  literally  stand  around a corpse  and  a coffin, while they  figuratively  circle  around events  in their  past   which,   Bessette  suggests,  box them    in    a   destructive,   even    deadly, present.
An  amusing prose-poem on  the  life of a fifty-year-old man,  at  first glance  "Ro­ mance"  is  totally   different  from  either L'Incubation or  Le  Cycle.  Yet,  Norbert Allaire-Ducal  drowns  himself   and   thus  commits  suicide   like  Nea   in   L'Incuba­ tion.   And   Norbert  has   the   same   first name  as  Norbert Barre, the  corpse  who in  some  ways  is the  central  character of Le Cycle.
In  Mes  Romans  et  moi  ( I979),  Bes­ sette   analyses   both   the  relationship  be­ tween   the   two   Norberts  and   his  own father, and   the  variations on  the  Oedi­ pus  complex  which   the  dead   husband­
father-grandfather  represents for each  of the   seven   first-person  narrators  of   Le Cycle.  In   "The  Unending Cycle,"   an article   on  the  novel  which  appeared  in Canadian   Literature    (No.   63,   I975), Leonard W.  Sugden identifies   Le  Cycle with  what   he  calls  "the  Quebec myth." Although the  psychological and  political

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



implications of this work  are undoubted­ ly  very  important,  Le   Cycle  is  also  a brilliant exploration of  first-person narra­ tion,   stream-of-consciousness  technique, and  complexities and  levels  of language. The   five-year-old Jacot's unspoken ex­ planation of the  meaning of his mother's statement "'Ton  grand-pere est  mort'" includes,  for example, images  of colour, references to  "la  grande boite" in  which his  grandfather  lies,  a   series   of  short, simple statements, and  an observation of, and  conclusion about, his mother's grief: "elle  avait  les yeux rouges  elle faisait  une moue  elle  etait  laide." The high  propor­ tion  of  monosyllabic, concrete  words  is typical   of   the   vocabulary  of    a  young child   who   is  not   yet  able   to  think   in abstract terms.  At  the  same  time,  how­ ever, Jacot's style provides a dramatically precise  opening for  this  novel  about  not only  physical  death but  also  the  equally  ugly,  imprisoning, and  destructive spiri­  tual   death  which   individuals,  families, and  societies  are  all sometimes heir  to.
Since  Le Cycle, Bessette  has  published two  novels  written during the  seventies,
Les  Anthropozdes  ( 1977), in  which  the characters  are  anthropoids,  and  Le Semestre    ( 1979).  And   he   is  presently (March r98r)  working on two more.  "La Garden-party de Christophine," the final work   in   his  collection  of  short   stories, will  eventually be  a  prologue to  one  of these  novels.  "La garden-party" focusses on  two  characters, Lupien and   Yanette Leraleux, as  they  sit  talking and  drink­ ing  wine  on  the  night  of  their  wedding anniversary. Their  conversation  centres on  an  invitation to  a  garden  party  they have  received  from  Christophine Harni­ nette,    the    recently-reconciled   wife   of Jeremie.  Although Lupien  and   Yanette spend   much   time   arguing  about  their attendance at  the  party and  their friend­ ship   with    the    Haminettes,   ultimately their   talk   reveals   the  complexities  and  ambiguities  of   their   own   marital  rela-
 tionship,  one  not dissimilar in some ways to  that  of  the  quarrelling couple  in Edward Albee's  Who's Afraid  of Virginia Woolf? ( 1962).
The   originality  of  "La  Garden-party
de Christophine," in fact,  lies more in its form   than   its  content. It is a  dialogue. Thus,  although a narrator describes occa­ sionally   the   characters'   physical   move­ ments,  the  reader   is  mostly  nnaware of his   presence.    This    attempt   to   reveal characters through what  they  say  seems a startling departure from  Bessette's pre­ vious   concentration   on   portraying  the inner   feelings -both  physical  and   psy­ chological -of  his characters through a stream-of-consciousness technique.  The conversation of Lupien and Yanette, however-often dirty   and   always  pro­ gressively   more    drunken -allows   the reader  to participate directly in the struc­  ture  and  tones  of  their  spoken  language and  therefore, in  so far  as  we are  what we  speak,  in  their  physical  and  psycho­ logical  states.  In   this  latest   work,  then, Bessette  explores   the  posssibilities  of speech.
At   the   end   of   Le   Semestre,  Orner Marin,  its  chief   character,  sets  out   to write   a  "roman-bilan," a   novel   which
will be the  balance-sheet of his life as an author, critic,  and   professor  at  Princess University, Narcotown,  Ontario.   Simi­ larities  between  Orner  Marin and Gerard Bessette  actually  make   Le   Semestre  a work of autobiographical  fiction  and  the summing  up that  of the life and  works of Gerard Bessette.  Le  Semestre, however,  as  a  self-portrait of   the  artist, provides  only  one  view.   Le   Cycle, because   it  is probably  Bessette's most successful  novel, and   La  Garden-party  de  Christophine, because   it   includes    stories   written  at various  points   in   Bessette's   career,  to­ gether  allow  for  another view  of his fic­ tion.   What   this   re-view   ultimately  re­ veals,   I think,   is  a  portrait  of  a  very creative  artist  skilled  in  the  craft  of fie-

II9

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tion  and  fascinated with  the  potential of language as object  and  symbol.

MARY  JANE EDWARDS


FANTASIA

suzANNE PARADIS, Miss Charlie. Lemeac.

SINCE I 959  Suzanne  Paradis   has  pub­ lished   some   twenty-one  books:   poems, novels,   collections  of  short  stories  and  two   monographs   dedicated   to   women  writers. One   of  these  monographs  is  a reading of  Adrienne  Choquette (I 978) , a writer and  journalist who died  in  I973 and  whose  work  is, as yet, little  known.  The other,  Femme   fictive, femme  reelle
( I 966) , examines the  principal feminine
characters created by French-Canadian women  writers  between   I884  and   I966; this  study  is an  illuminating portrayal of how fiction  can  indeed  foreshadow social and  intellectual changes.
It is surprising that  despite  the numer­ ous   publications,   despite    the    literary prizes   won    (among  them   the   France­ Quebec prize  in  1965 and  the  du  Mau­ rier prize in  I 970) , despite  her awareness  of   and    attentiveness to   contemporary preoccupations, trends and styles, despite  the   fact   that   Suzanne   Paradis   is  well known  and  well  read, she  has never  en­  joyed   the   meteoric   best-seller's   success that    other  Quebec   writers    (men   and  women)  have  known  in  the  last  twenty years,  and   many   of  her  works  are  now out  of  print. The  principal merit  of Su­ zanne   Paradis is  a  continuous commit­ ment  to the craft of writing  and  the slow revelation  of   the  self  through  the  mas­ tery  of   her art.   Her   writing  is  rigorous  and  restrained, as is the sensitivity  it un­ covers.   It  is  perhaps  this   moderation, this  lack  of  sudden changes   and  sensa­ tionalism   that   has   won  her   the  steady recognition  and   respect  of   readers  and  literary critics,  but  not fame.

120
 Miss  Charlie  is  a  complex novel,  or­ chestrating three  independent but associ­ ated   narrative voices. This  trio, in  tum, develops    its   themes    around   a   fourth source  of fiction: a theatrical representa­ tion   (L'Etrangere)  by an  author whose identity is not  revealed  until shortly  be­ fore  the opening-night performance. The plot   of  the   play,  although never  given, echoes   the   key   elements  of   the   other three   narrations:   the   subjugation  of  a woman by a man,  an  accident, intermit­ tent  bouts  with  madness,  the  reconstruc­ tion  of a new identity through final  puri­ fication (fire or death) .
Although the three intertwined novels have  only two characters in common (Charlie and  Chinchilla)  and   although it  is  tempting to  consider Chinchilla  as the  darker,  uncontrolled, turbulent  side of Charlie, the  fiction-making process seems to be more  important than psycho­
logical   analysis   throughout most  of  the novel.
!Narration r opens and  closes the  book. Miss  Charlie is the  first-person narrator. Hers  is an  active  voice  in  the  sense  that self-revelation is gradually achieved. Marie-Charles Craig (Charlie)  is  thirty­ three,  widowed   after  only  a  few  months of  marriage; she  lives  in  a  large  house which    she   has   turned   into   the   local library.   Both    her    brother   (the    local schoolmaster)  and    her    brother-in-law (the  local  doctor)  watch  over  her. They  both   comer   Miss   Charlie  into   taking under her  roof  Chinchilla, a difficult  and  unstable  niece  who,  Charlie believes,  is partly    responsible   for    her    husband's death.  The sudden arrival of the  Morti­ mers   sparks   the   curiosity   both   of   the usually indifferent  tourist   resort   village, and   of  Miss  Charlie, who  is the  Morti­ mers'   neighbour and   who  becomes  pro­ gressively    involved    with   them:   as   a French tutor for  Gloria, as a casual  mis­ tress  for  Gordon and  as  a  translator of his  latest   novel,  The  Snowman. As  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



seasons  pass  and   the  mysterious trees in the   garden    separating  the   two   houses mark  both  continuity and  change, we see Gloria  attempting suicide and  recovering, Chinchilla progressively retreating into madness,   while  we  witness  the  prepara­ tions  for  the  first  and  only  performance of   L'Etrangere. This  play   (written  by Chinchilla's  mother)   portrays,  possibly, the  life  of Gloria (an  ex-actress)  as she exiles  herself  in  the  small   tourist   resort with  her husband, a cruel  and  indifferent man.   Gloria   will,  in  fact,  play  the  role portraying her  own  life.  After   the  per­  formance, the   Mortimers  leave:    their mystery  has  been   unveiled, their   power to  set  imaginations in  motion has  been neutralized,  even   their   mysterious trees (Les olibrius: named after  a cruel and capricious governor of Gaul in the fourth century)  have  burned to the ground.The book  closes  with   Miss  Charlie going  to New York  for  the  publication of Gordon Mortimer's twenty-second novel, entitled Miss Charlie.
Throughout Narration 1 Miss Charlie and  Gordon compete for  the role of main sorcerer. Chinchilla and  Gloria  are  the puppets who can,  and  even  need to be manipulated in  order to  come  alive. Marie-Charles  Craig  disapproves of  the manipulation  even   though  she   partici­ pates  in it. As a narrator she is, therefore, quite  "unreliable."
Narration 2  starts at  first  as  the  more intimate   recording   of   Miss    Charlie's
secret   fantasies;  thus   at   first  glance   it appears as  a  more   reliable, certainly a more  truthful narration; but  as the voice of  Narration 3  (the   novel  that   Gordon Mortimer  writes)    becomes   more  insis­ tent,  the  diary-like entries of Miss Char­ lie's   grey   notebook  acquire   almost   an independent  life.   In  other   words,   they become   a  narrative   voice  in  their  own right,   a  parallel fiction.   In  Narration  2 we find  the same  characters but  the roles have  been  inverted. It is Charlie  (again
 the   first-person  narrator)    who   is   the young  girl.  She  is entrusted to  the  care of Chinchilla, who will help  her find her memory after a long coma. The accident causing  the  coma  was  the  work  of  Gor­ don   Mortimer  who   had   fathered   the child  that  Charlie  was  carrying but  lost. It is around the  aborted maternity that  the  fantasies of  Charlie blossom;  fanta­ sies that  are recorded also in a grey note­ book  which  Gloria   (Gordon's  deranged wife)   burns   shortly   before   the  couple's departure.
,The  pattern of  the  two  narrations  is
similar  to that  of a fairy  tale:   the  hero­ ine  is  surprised   by  and   attracted   to  a hidden   malevolent  force,   coming   from  outside  her  realm.  She  is  helped  in  her state  of  disorder by  two  adjuvants, one of whom  is also involved  with  the  male­  volent   force,  the   other  standing strong  like  a  type  of  priestess.  After  a  series  of tests  where   allegiances  shift,   the  male­  volent force  leaves the realm  of the hero­  ine and  relative order is established. Un­ like  the  fairy  tales,  however,  there  is no victory, simply continuation and a slight regeneration.
Narration 3 is The Snowman, the  novel
Gordon Mortimer is writing  and  Charlie is translating into  French. A third-person narrator begins  to  tell  what  sounds  like a trite  romance between  a skiing instruc­ tor,  Charlie  (now   a  man) ,  and  a  star  student,  Chinchilla.  As  the  novel   pro­  gresses, however,  the  plot  is  replaced by a surreal  scenario where  each protagonist alternately leads  and  is led  by  the other. This   dance   takes  place  against   a  back­  ground  of snowstorms and  dangerous ex­ cursions   through   unknown  mountains. An Eskimo woman,  Nova, serves as their  guide  through the  snows  and  serves also as a spiritual guide.  The separation from their mentor-of-the-snow is celebrated by fire  (the  death of  Nova) . In  turn,  how­ ever,  the  two  protagonists are  found   by

121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the rescue party, buried under a giant snowman.
The  three  juxtaposed narrative voices echo  one another in a network  of  associ­ ations  and  of  transfers.  The  novel reads well;  the  progressive  symmetrical  stylisa­ tion,  both  in  the  three  narrations as well as within  each  narration, leads the reader  to  search   for  common themes   (perhaps separation,  perhaps survival  in  the  face of   intrusion).  On   the  other   hand,   the elaborate weaving  of dubious  renderings of similar  situations leads the reader  to concentrate on  the  levels of  fiction-mak­ ing  and   the  multiplicity,  as  well  as  the simultaneity,   of   perceptions  controlling the making  of a plot.  Finally, in the light of Suzanne  Paradis's previous  works  the reader   might   be   led   to   see   in   Miss Charlie  the portrait of the psychological contradictions and  ambivalence of the human psyche. Or  perhaps is it the buoy­ ancy  of  the  quest   for  dependence and independence of a  woman  writer? None of   these   possibilities  is   pursued  far enough. This  unfinished  and short-of-the­ mark  quality is perhaps at  the  heart   of Suzanne Paradis' conception of the writer as a patient, tireless builder.

GRAZIA  MERLER


WRESTLING THE ALPHA-BET BEAST

ROBERT  KROETSCH,   The Sad   Phoenician.
Coach  House,  1979.  $s.so. 75 pp.
A  POEM  SHOULD  BE  economic and  pre­ cise. It should   be  free  of  too  strong  an authorial presence.  Objectivity  is  a  vir­ tue  that   lends  shapeliness and   focus  to the   finished   product.  But   Kroetsch  is writing about  writing, and  that  changes  the  rules.  There is always,  here,  a  sense of    the   author   lurking  behind  the language,  manipulating, contriving, and

122
 interjecting at  will.  There is much  will­ fullness,  but  little  restraint, little attempt at  control or discipline. In  some way this is a  disadvantage, but  it  does  reflect  the subject.
In  a  book  concerned with  basic  com­ munication, these  characteristics illustrate the  struggle of  the  individual  to  express publicly   his  emotions and   responses   to the  external world.  The inner  and  outer  worlds   meet   on  the  plain   of  language, where  poetry  is the  struggle  to share  ex­ perience and  perception. And during the life-long  conflict,  an author must develop  a sense  of  what  language and  communi­ cation mean  to him  both  as the means  of expression  and  as an  objective phenome­ non -the   whole   range   of   the   sounds  and  shapes  of  letters and  words  and  all that   they  can  be  made  to  mean.  What­ ever   the   penalties  for  being  a  poet,  at least  the satisfaction of  putting words  on paper  rewards  the   author;  no   matter what  else goes  wrong  in  life,  he  has  his
'poetry to protect' him: "I have my work to  sustain   me,   my  poetry,   the  satisfac­
tion  I of a job well done.... "
But  the  poetry  alone  is never  enough.
The  poet   lives  in   a  living  world;  life rushes  on  about him,  he  responds   to  it, he  makes  it  part of  his  living  changing craft. The poet  is a  life-junkie;  hooked on   it,  harmed  by  it,  he  is  beyond   the reach   of  any  sedative except   the  act  of writing, which   relieves  the  aches  of  life even  as  it  dredges them  from  the  inner deeps.  The poet  becomes  dependent  on language and  life but  remains as human as  any  bricklayers: "I do  have  feelings,
just  because  I'm  a  poet  doesn't mean  I I
have   no  feelings   of  my  own,  poets  are human; I am,  you I might  say, a kind  of Phoenician,  with   reference, that   is, I to
my trading in language, even in, to stretch a point,  I ha,  my being  at  sea."
Kroetsch is always  present,  reminding the   reader  that   yes  there   is  a  real  live person  behind the  poetry,  that  yes poets

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



are  fallible  and  human-that they want to  be  recognized as  people  just as much as   they   desire   fame   as   poets.   We  are aware of  the  poet:  "the dreamer,  him­
self:  I lurching,  leaping, flying;  o  to  be mere  gerund; no past,  I no future: what
do  you  do  in  life:   I ing."  Yet  there  is
no  room  for  complacency. Life  is full  of surprises:  "once a  year  a  rubber  breaks and  we I learn  to count"; no matter how we try,  we always  face  uncertainty.
Love  and  its  uncertainties are  part  of living, and  often  the poet  retreats from emotion  in   wounded  confusion;  he   is "The Sad  Phoenician of  Love  I slighted by  the  woman." But,  as  with  language and   life,  the  poet  is drawn mothlike to the  flame  of  love.  Singed,  he  writes  an­ other  poem  and  survives: "lonely  is only
lonely,  it  has  no  other   name  like I hand or  hope  or  trust,   or  pissing  against   the
wind,  I it  has  no  habit   of  upside-down, it  slams  no  doors,  I it  does  not  fly south
in  autumn." The urgent demands of sexuality as a means of expression and fulfillment are as loud and  raucous as the insistent   call   of  art,   of  the  addition  to life and  love. One  is forced  to venture continually into  the outer  world  for one's needs:   love,  comfort, reassurance. And, as with  any  voyage  or quest,  the  journey is   fraught  with    peril:   "keep  an   ear cocked  for sirens,  you one-eyed  mariner'' in  the  voyage  of life  where  communica­ tion   requires  as  much  skill  as  sailing  a ship.
The Sad  Phoenician is an  ambitious undertaking;  an   existential  portrait  of tbe  plight  of sensitive  individuals, it is an excursion into  the turbulent waters of communication  that   it  attempts  to  de­ scribe  and  chart even  as it traverses them for  the  first  time.  It  is a  reminder  that  each  day  is capable of  presenting a  new world,  a  new-beginning as  life-affirming as  the  tree  in  the  garden,  and   as  dan­ gerous:
 you're out of it, the lady said, she was very polite,  she   wore  a  chair   on   her  head,   a basket  between  her  knees  full  of salmon; a butterfly  almost   the  shade   of  a  Baltimore oriole   licked   its   perfect   proboscis   to  her right  nipple:  she  was  the  guardian of  the tree, that  was clear ...
the  tree  itself  stood  in  the  distance  behind her,  possibly  green,   possibly  not  a  tree  at all, a sail

A  complex   poem,  The  Sad   Phoenician defies  full  analysis  in  the  space  of  a  re­ view:   its  fuller   significance the  reader himself must determine.
As if to  confirm   that   the  first  section of  the  book is about the  JXl'Ct as  human being as well as creative artist, the second part, "The Silent   Poet  Sequence,"  pre­ sents   the   poet    more    objectively.   The poems employ  a schizoid splitting of  per­  sonality;  two   characters   emerge:  The Poet   and   The   Professor.  Both   are   the same.  Any poet  lives a d uble
lives  for  his  writing,  he  must  still  earn
bread.   If he  lives  for   his  teaching,  he must  still  answer   to  his  compulsion to write.  Sometimes the  two  urges  conflict:

and   Earache the  Red,  at  coffee, for  god's sake  hit  the  sack  early,  he  says,  you look like you never sleep
but   watch  those dirty  dreams; he winks and   shakes his spoon in my direction
but    I don't  let on that  I understand

but   Earache,  there's   a  new  law,  he  says, you're legally responsible for all your dreams
and   I buy his coffee
but    just last  night,  while  he snored  in  her
arms,  I pitched   black  dirt  at  his win­
dow
and   walled him in
but   he doesn't  let on ...
("The Silent  Poet  Finds  Out")

As may  be seen  from  this excerpt, the form of the poems is an experiment, separating   conjunctions   from    clauses. The  sequence  ends  with  a  further  devo­ lution    of   words    into    shapes -letters divided  by appearance rather than sense. The  last   page,   once   one   deciphers  it,

123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



affirms the thirst for life and love and experience apparent  from  the  first.  The humour  found   throughout  the   book  is hard   to  describe,  yet  it  has  a  good  deal to do with  the final  willingness to under­ go the frustrations, failures, and  imbecili­  ties of  life encountered during  the  quest for ways of expression.
DAVIDS. WEST


DOING TIME

ROBERT GURIK, ]eune Delinquant. Lemeac, n.p.
LOUIS   CARON,  The   Draft   Dodger,   trans.   by
David  Toby  Home!.  Anansi, $8.gs.
ANDRE  MAJOR,  Inspector   Therrien, trans.  by
Mark  Czarnecki. Porcepic,  $g.gs.

WHETHER WE ARE ADOLESCENTS,  young adults or senior  citizens, we cannot escape the  prisons  of our  sociality, of our  selves, of our  times, or of time. This  triptych of survival   texts  eludes  triteness  with  vary­ ing degrees  of success.
Robert  Gurik's  city-as-prison-scape is
well known: decrepit tenements where overworked,  divorced   or  alcoholic  par­ ents   are   sentenced  for  life;  game  par­  lours,  greasy  diners   and  topless  bars  to which  their  children  try   to  escape; crowded Health  and   Welfare  corridors and   fenced-in  training  schools  through which    pass,   mostly   unchanged,   petty thieves,    drug   pushers,   juvenile    prosti­ tutes,  shoplifters and  armed   robbers.
Society's  inability to eradicate  juvenile delinquency is equally  well known:  par­ ents who have  given  up all hope, helpless lawyers   and   judges,  disillusioned   social workers,  and  rarely successful instructors. Little, indeed, is new in Gurik's written  version  of  five  Radio-Canada  television broadcasts. The  story  of  young  Richard, for   example,   whom   an   understanding grocer  once allowed  to keep a stolen  can of   caviar  as   a  birthday gift for   his mother,  and  who   now  owns  a  service

124
 station, is too  saccharine to  represent a solution. Problem-solving, left  to legisla­ tors  and  the  Young  Offenders  Act,  was clearly   not   Gurik's  aim   in   putting  to­ gether this  human  rather  than   judicial dossier  on  a  dozen  juvenile  delinquents. His concern was with "the raw  material, life,  voices,  sounds,  human beings"  pre­  sented  "without  interpretation, ... with­ out  analysis, ... almost   without medita­ tion."
Fortunately,  Gurik  has   not   entirely
eschewed  the  attractions and  benefits  of literary   transposition,   which    explains why his book has appeared in Lemeac's "Roman  quebecois" series.  Reproducing identification  cards   in  typewriter script and   transcribing recorded interviews in italics  would  have  resulted, without the mediating  artifice  of   description,   dia­ logue  and   structuration, in  yet  another report  destined    to   gather   dust.   As   a docu-novel, Gurik's  book  should  have  a fair  chance to escape  that  fate.
Louis  Caron's L'Emmitoufle, first pub­
lished   and   acclaimed  in   Paris   ( I 977) , deals  less with  draft dodging in the sense Vietnam gave the word  than  with the Conscription   Crisis   of   I9I7-I8.   Jean­ Fran ois
he had  heard  about the Quiet Civil  War in the Quebec of those years and  his recreation of a family  reunion in the francophone Vermont of the  Igso's may have  exerted  a certain amount of exotic attraction on  the   European reader. To North-American eyes, a multiple-page picnic  with  all  the  trimmings, from  hot dogs "smothered in  mustard and  relish" to "cans of Schlitz  and  Old  Milwaukee" and   "watching the   show  What's My Line?"  has considerably less appeal.
However,  Jean-Franc;ois, the  Franco­ American draft dodger, remembers more. He   remembers above  all  his  uncle   Na­ zaire,  the  deserter from  Nicolet,  Quebec, who    fought   less   against   fighting  the European war than against

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Time.... The  breathing  of   time. The breath  of   time.   The  taste   of  time   in  my mouth. I tasted time   but   I couldn't choke it down. I tasted time  and   I didn't like  it.
... It's  because you  never accepted it.  You always   rebelled. You  always fought against what  was   stronger  than  you.   When  they told   you  to  go  to  war,   you  answered No!
... You  rebelled against what was  stronger
than you : time.

This  incantation, the strongest passage in the   book,   forms   the   climax    of   what should  have  been  Jean-Franc;ois' gradual identification with  Nazaire. As it  is, the last sixteen  pages  (Part Three) seem too brusquely    superimposed  on   what   pre­ cedes  them,  possibly  because  Caron  did not  carry  through with  his chosen  genre : the  frame narrative. Not only has he left the  series  of  embedded  flashbacks open­  ended, but  he  has  also  neglected  to  ex­ ploit  fully  the  narrative  potential inhe­  rent  in   Jean-Franc;ois'  recalling  his father's   memories  of   Nazaire. It  may be,  of   course,   that   we  are   here   in  the presence of  some  structural  symbolism: just  as  Nazaire attempts to  break  out  of his  prisons  of  time,  so  the  text  tries  to cast  off  the  shackles  of  generic  conven­ tion.
For   comparatists  it  should   be  noted that   David   T.  Home! has  translated a revised  version  of the  1977 edition.
Ex-Inspector Paul-Emile Therrien  has left  L'Epouvantail (1974; trans.  The Scarecrows  of  Saint-Emmanuel,   1977) and  entered  L'Epidemie  ( 1975)  a  pris­ oner   of  his  past,   of  his  retirement, of time:

The  pendulum on   the   cuckoo  clock  was still; he  had   avoided  setting  it  in  motion again,  preferring  uncertainty  to   that  nib­ bling   away  of  time  which was  as  obstinate and    obsessive   as   the   pulsing   of   his   own blood.

The English  title of this second volume of  Andre   Major's  "Histoires de  deser­ teurs" trilogy   is  rather  too  bland. For time  and  life are  here  indeed  an  uncon-
 trollable    epidemic  which    ravages   not only Therrien, but  the entire village of Saint-Emmanuel,  including Therrien's mistress Emerence, his short-term  wife Julienne, and   the  few   neighbours  who have  loot everything, even  the  strength and   courage   to  flee  to  the  city.  Saint­ Emmanuel is an  incubator in  which  the bacteria  of regret, despair, boredom  and defeatism  grow  unchecked.  The  victims'  feeble  attempts to  stave  off  contamina­ tion  bring  out  in  them  deadly  streaks  of alcoholism,  suicidal  and  homicidal rage, cruelty  intended to  humiliate, voyeurism and  sexual aberration.
1The psycho-bacteriologist, Major,  is only   surpassed    by   Andre  Major,  the writer,  who  has  long  since  demonstrated that  we can expect  the  best Quebec writ­ ing  from   him.   Mark   Czarnecki's  good translation contributes further to Major's stature  as  a  Canadian  writer  in  whose "Human  Comedy"  countless   non-Que­
becers will recognize  themselves.
Prisoners   of  the   urban ghetto,  cross­ country  deserters,  victims   of  the   rural  exodus,  all  are  reduced to doing  time  in an  era  which  is seen  to  have  no  future. Will   there   be  survivors?   Uneasily,  we grasp   for  Andre  Major's  next   volume, Les Survivants,  which  seems to hold  out an answer.
HANS R. RUNTE


BUBBLE-AND-SQUEAK

JOHN  MILLS, Lizard  in the  Grass. ECW  Press.

"REGIONALISM  has  never   attracted  me very   much   and   naturalism,  in   all   its aridity,  even less," says John Mills in one of the  reviews included in this volume  of mixed  criticism  and  autobiography, and in doing  so he  defines  by implication his own practice as a novelist and  his own criteria for  judging other writers.
Mills'  novels-The Land  of Is, The

125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



October  Man, Skevington's  Daughter­ are   never   less  than  interesting in their satirical  presentations  of  a  world  crum­  bling over  the burden of fear. They never quite fit in with  the  pattern of Canadian fiction  as  seen   by  the  thematic  critics, and    Lizard    in   the    Grass   emphasizes Mills' detachment from the Canadian literary world  in general.
The book is a mixture of views of life and   literature in  which   the  two  realins are   in   constant  interaction,  and   that makes  for  lively  reading even  if  it  does not  always  make  for  critical  understand­ ing.  For   Mills  is  very  emphatic in his likes and  dislikes,  and one  quickly  learns  the  patterns of his literary  affinities.
There  is,  of   course,   Alex   Comfort, whose The Novel  and Our Time Mills founded a  press  ( Pendejo Press)   to  re­ publish,   and   whose  hit-and-run  kind  of anarchism  runs  like  a  submerged  motif right  through Lizard  in  the  Grass  (as  it does   through   Mills's   novels),  though, oddly  enough,  Comfort's name  is  never mentioned.
There is Celine  with his "manic, collo"" quial, phantasmagoric prose";  three books about him  are  reviewed, and  there is no doubt at all that Mills thinks he understands le grand  merdeur  more  than his  biographers,  as  indeed   he  may,  for the  three  autobiographical essays that begin Lizard in the Grass, with their descriptions of  malingering in  the  army, of old  women   (and   the author's mother in   particular)  dying   in  lonely  poverty, and  of running a decrepit laundry in Montreal,  are   very   much   the   kind   of thing  Celine  might   have  written had  he been  born  an   Englishman  and   brought up   on   bubble-and-squeak. By  which   I mean   that   their   bitter  is always  on  the edge  of  turning to sour  and  their  invec­ tive  is always  on  the  edge lapsing into  a Cockney  whine.
It is unfortunate that  Mills  borrowed
the  title  for  his  second  autobiographical
 piece,   for  "How  the   Poor   Die"  makes one  think   of  Orwell's splendid piece  of the same  name  on the  Hopital Cochin in Paris,  and  Orwell did  this  kind  of thing with  more  panache and  in better prose. Mentioning Orwell reminds one  how far, despite  his  self-conscious  rejection of writers   like   Auden   as   being   less  than modern, Mills  seems  like a  refugee  from a lost  England. For  his memoirs  are  just the   kind   of  reportages -part  fictiona­ lized   autobiography  and   part   oblique  social  observation -that  became   popu­ lar  at  the end  of the thirties in the  hands  of  Orwell,  Isherwood, and  others.   Even the  self-conscious proletarianism  is  part  of  the period  package.
But  almost  two-thirds of Lizard  in the
Grass is made  up of literary essays and reviews,  and  here  it  is very evident that Mills  is far  more  at  home  with  English writers  and   with   Europeans  of  special kinds  like  Nabokov and  Celine   than   he is   with    Canadian  or   even    American writers. "A  Book  for  the  Shelter" is an excellent and very entertainingly written vindication of  that  good  but  almost  for­ gotten writer, Jerome K. Jerome; I  read  it   with   particular  relish,   since   Jerome was  the   first   writer   I ever  knew.  And "The Horse's  Mouth and  Stanley  Spen­ cer" is a fascinating illustrated discussion of  the  differences  between   Joyce  Cary's Gully  Jimson and  the  painter on  whom he  is said  to  have been  modelled; Spen­ cer  in real  life was far  more  bizarre  than  Jimson in fiction.
In the  shorter pieces  Mills  writes  very well on Anthony Burgess and  Graham Greene and  John Le Carre, and  presents an   effective   and   necessary   rejection  of Jerzy Kozinski. He  is also very perceptive in  discussing  Brian  Moore  and  John Metcalf, but  this is because, like his, their roots   are   British,   and   they  inhabit  the same  mental continuum as he does.
With  Canadian writers  one always had the   feeling   that    the   Mills   ear   is  not

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tuned   to  their   resonances,  and   perhaps this is because  so often  they veer  towards either   the  regionalism or  the  naturalism that  he rejects.  I am  not  referring merely to  the  instances when   he  is  condemna­ tory, as he is towards Morley Callaghan, or   patronizing,  as   he   is  towards   Jane Rule  and  Joyce  Carol Oates, or  justifi­
ably    faint-praising,   as   he   is   with   J.
Michael Yates.  Even  when  he  approves,
he does not always seem to know exactly why, and  too often  we are let go with something  so  obvious   that   we  already know   it  to  the   point   of  banality.  E.g., "Irving Layton  is one of the few genuine poets this rather prosaic  country has yet produced and  has secured this reputation with  a  considerable body  of  work,  some of  it  magnificent, some  of  it  indifferent, and  some  of it  incredibly bad." A lot  of us have  said  that, and  some  have  said  it better. Similarly, when  Mills is writing  in praise  of novelists  like Margaret Atwood, Hugh  Hood,  Matt Cohen, one feels he is searching  for   something  in   himself   to find  in  them,  and  uneasy  because  it isn't there.   Yet   his  views  are   always  stated with   such  an   air   of  conviction  that   at their   most   wrong-headed  they  momen­ tarily  shake one's  own view and send one back   to  the   book  itself  to  see  whether Mills  is right  after  all.  Sometimes he is; not always.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


UNA'S STORY

VICTOR-LEVY  BEAULIEU,   Una.  V.L.B.  editeur,
$Io.gs.
IN  ONE OF HER numerous reviews  of Beaulieu's novels,  Gabrielle Poulin  com­ pared   her  feeling  about them   to  that  of a  season-ticket holder who  attends per­ formances compulsively,  without remem­  bering why exactly  he bought  the ticket in the  first  place.  Indeed, Beaulieu's novels
 appear with  predictable regularity almost every year (like Marie-Claire Blais's), and since  he  tends   to  write   romans-fleuves, the  nature of each  novel  is also  to some extent   predictable. Since  he  started  his own   publishing  house   and    book-club, V.L.B. editeur, Beaulieu  has  increasingly made  use of book design to alleviate some of the monotony his novels display in both content and technique. The three  volumes of  Monsieur  Melville,  for  instance,   are heavily   illustrated  with    (mostly   unac­ knowledged) pictorial material; Una, the book under  review,  contains drawings by Beaulieu's  two young daughters. Like  the previous  volumes  of  the V oyageries, Una  discusses the  problems  of writing  and  its inadequacy in rendering truth. The  draw­
ings,  says Job  J, Una's father, "c'est   ce
qu'il   y  a  de  plus  important";  pictures,
unlike writing,  are unequivocal, especially if they are a child's spontaneous products. As  a  result,   Job   J makes  a  present   of stacks of paper, crayons,  and  an eraser  to
seven-year-old Una who sits on the stairs to "la  chambre mauve," waiting  for Abel and  his Amerindian muse Samm  to com­ plete  their  book on Melville,  so that Una  herself can  begin  to create her story.
Once again  it becomes  obvious  that Beaulieu's  cycle  is less a  diachronic than a synchronic enterprise; part  of the  "ac­ tion" of Una-if such it can  be called­ is  simultaneous  with   that   of   Monsieur Melville and, through a precocious child's  eyes, applies  an ironic perspective to Abel Beauchemin's  narcissistic   ravings   in  the previous  book. Thus, Una  describes  Her­ man  Melville's  arrival in  the  Habitana­ serie  as  that   of  a  mute   old  man.  Food passes straight through his body  (he  is a ghost  after  all)   and  emerges  at  his  feet where Abel is eager  to lick it all up again: a somewhat revolting image  of Abel's in­ feriority  complex vis-a-vis the giant  Mel­  ville, but  also  a  vicious  parody  of  Abel's dream of inspiring Quebec literature with Melville  as  a  model.  Beaulieu   obviously

BOOKS IN REVIEW



conceives of his novels in general  as never­ completed  and   eternally in  need  of  re­ vision, an attitude reflected in the way he reworks his older  novels while at the same time  publishing new ones.
Una, besides being  another example of famous   brats   in  Quebec  fiction,  is very
much  an  allegory  of  Quebec itself.  Her name  is as much  a curse as a hope; with disgust   she  has   turned  away  from   her mother France who sits, disabled  and  an alcoholic,  a veritable feast for Freudian critics, in her  wheel-chair. Una  has more respect and  love for her father, the ocean­ ographer  and    whale   specialist   Job   J, partly   because  he  is  a  humane  scientist and   not  an  egomaniac like  Abel  Beau­ chemin   in  search   of   chimeras. Job   en­ courages   his  daughter  in  her  search  for her own story but  warns her  that,  despite her  contempt  for  Abel,  Job  J  and  Una  themselves  are chimeras of Abel's making  and  at  his mercy.  In a phantasmagorical tour  de  force,  very  similar  to  that  found toward  the  end  of  Don Quichotte  de la demanche, Una experiences just how lim­ ited  her  freedom is. Because  Abel,  pre­ occupied as he  is with  Melville, does not pay enough  attention to her existence, she is in  turn  strung up  in an  iron  cage  like "Lady Corriveau" and abused by Le Bon­ homme    de   Sept-Heures,  a   loup-garou creature  representing death  and  corrup­ tion. Thus she lives through the fate  that  the  book  describes   as  "le   paradoxe  du Quebec": "Il nous  faut  sortir  de  notre invisibilite  tout  en sachant que  ce sera seulement pour  entrer dans  un monde  de fous   furieux,  pollue   jusqu'aux   moelles dans  sa mauvaise viande."
Una,  who  had  hoped  to return in  the stomach   of  a whale   to the  times  before her birth, herself gives birth  to a monster: a  black  sow with  Job's  face.  The  sow is the  inevitable heritage of Le  Bonhomme de Sept-Heures-death-but Job's face signals  hope.  Despite her  loneliness  and pain,   Una's  energy   remains   unbroken.
 She removes  her "lunettes bioniques" and warily  faces her  monstrous child,  "Je  sais pas encore ce que  je vais faire  avec,  pas plus  que   je sais  ce  qu'elle  va  faire  avec moi."
With  Una, Beaulieu  has  published the last volume  in the Voyageries. Now, Abel is  presumably  free   to  write   "La   Vraie Saga  du  grande tribu," a cycle his char­ acters  have   been   pestering  him   about  throughout the  composition of the V oya­ geries.  It  remains to   be  seen   whether Beaulieu's project of writing  a grand  epic (which, according to him,  is the  only lit­ erary  form  that  will give national dignity to Quebec)  will correct  Una's invention.

EVA-MARIE KROLLER


ECHOES, REFLECTIONS

MARIE-JOSE  THERIAULT,  The Ceremony, trans. David Lobdell. Oberon, $1 2·95;  paper
$5·95·
GILLES   ARCHAMBAULT,  The   Umbrella  Pines, trans. David Lobdell. Oberon, $r2.95; paper  $5-95·
THE  BEST TRANSLATIONS, like a flawless mirror, reflect   an   undistorted  image  of the   subject.  When  this   happens,  the echoes  of  the  original voice  are  also  re­ turned in  clear  and   forceful  tones,  and  the   translation  becomes   a   trustworthy medium for  conveying the  meaning and sound  of  the  source  text. By interpreting Quebec fiction  in  a  thorough and  com­ petent way, English-Canadian translators permit  ready  access by anglophone read­ ers  to  works  from   our  other "solitude." In every  attempt to bridge  this linguistic and   cultural   distance,  the   translator's implicit obligation is to  duplicate, in  so far  as  possible  within the  limitations of the   target  language, the  experience  of reading the  text in French. The objective must   always   be   to   produce  a   reliable English  counterpart to the  French  origi-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



nal,  to ensure that, together, they will constitute  one   work   in   two   languages rather than   two similar  works.  Although the   French  and    English    versions   can never  be  identical  twins,  their  relation­ ship  ought   to  be  at  least  fraternal, sug­ gesting  very strong resemblances in char­ acter  if not in manner.
Such  exacting  responsibility  faces David    Lobdell  when   he   renders    into English  Marie-Jose Theriault's La Cere­ monie  ( 1978)   and  Gilles  Archambault's Les Pins parasols ( 1976). Given  the sub­ stantial  differences in  tone  and   theme, point   of  view  and   locale,  there   is  very little  similarity between Theriault's twenty-three  stories   and   Archambault's novel  apart from  their  common transla­ tor.   Readers  of   Quebec  fiction   in   the past  decade will already be familiar with David  Lobdell's work as the  translator of Marie-Claire  Blais's   play   (The   Execu­ tion)  and  novels  (David  Sterne,  Durer's Angel, The  Fugitive)  as well as works of fiction  by Jacques Benoit  (The  Princes) and   Wilfrid   Lemoine    (The   Rope­ Dancer).  For  the  most  part   these  books are  muted  English  echoes  of the  original French voices because  Lobdell  habitually inserts  and  deletes  words,  phrases, clauses,  and  even  full  sentences. If, how­ ever,  the  francophone authors are  to be heard   without impediment, the  transla­ tor must correct such habits and acknowl­  edge  the  imperative need  to  restrain   his own creative outbursts and interventions. Gratuitous  additions and  deletions can­  not  be countenanced  when   they  distort  the  substance and  meaning of  the  origi­ nal,  and  approximations must  never  be considered  adequate or  acceptable as  a general   practice. Still,  while  the  preced­ ing  objections do  not  apply  in  a  major way  to another of Lobdell's recent  trans­ lations     (Negovan  Rajic's   The   Mole Men), and  apply  only somewhat  to The  Ceremony  and  The  Umbrella  Pines, the
 latter do  represent  significant  improve­
ments  over  Lobdell's earlier  work.
rln the bizarre and  violent  stories of La
Ceremonie,   Theriault  demonstrates an original  and  imaginative vision in her treatment of the  themes  of revenge,  lust,
and  metamorphosis; her  wit  is revealed in   the  comic   vignettes   she  bases  upon scenes in four  Renaissance paintings. Her range   of  viewpoints, tones,  and   themes in  the  stories   makes   her   work  particu­ larly   challenging  for   a   translator;  but Lobdell  regularly succeeds simply because he   takes   his   cue   from   Theriault  and strives  to  convey  the  substance and  sig­ nificance  of  her  work.  For  these  reasons, his competent and  creditable translations of  "Sirix" and  "Elsa  Joachim" in  Part  I of The  Ceremony  often  achieve  the ideal of  accurate detail  and  nuance written in literate and   idiomatic  English.  Of   con­ siderable  merit, too, is Lobdell's handling
of  puns  and   word-plays, particularly  in  , the  final  story,  where  aspects  of  French culture  are   intelligently transposed  to English  equivalents ("Maurice Grevisse" becomes    "Noah   Webster,"  "Le   Petit Robert" is adjusted to the "Oxford  Eng­ lish  Dictionary,"   etc.).  Here,   then,    is clear    evidence    of   Lobdell's  skill   and ability as a translator.
Nevertheless,  there   are   many   short­ comings in The  Ceremony  to qualify  any praise   we  might  offer   for  his  achieve­ ment.   His  errors are  those  of  omission and    commission    as   he  continues  the practice of  careless  and   arbitrary  addi­ tion  and  deletion  of  words,  phrases,  and full  sentences.  At  the same  time, we find translations that  vary in degree  from  the original in a way  that  produces  unneces­  sary  imprecision:  thus,  mordre  (to  bite) is   translated  as   "nibble";  fuit  encore (still running) is given as "escaped"; and musique is interpreted as merely "sound." On   the   other  hand,  too  rigorous   and literal   an  adherence to  the  phrasing of the  original  results  in  awkwardness ("It

I29

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



rejoined   its  fellow"; "tired  my  eyes"). Inaccuracy enters  when  Lobdell  misuses "presently" as  a  synonym  for  "at  pres­ ent," and   when   he  translates  luxurieux (lustful)   as   "exquisite" and   vociferait (yelled   and    shouted)   as   "broke  into  sobs."  At  the  end  of  "The  Visitor," he confuses   the   speaker   and   the   lady   he loves, and  in  the final story misinterprets Pour  cette   belle  enfant   crue  parmi  les
betes  et a l'abri  (For  this beautiful child
raised  in  a  sheltered  life  with  animals)
as "For this attractive girl, believing her­ self alone  on the earth  with the animals." The  omissions,  too, are  numerous: The­ riault's dedication; the  reference  to Vic­ tor Hugo following the title "She Crossed Over  Toledo Bridge  in a Black  Corset"; footnotes   that   occur  intermittently throughout the  text; and  all details  iden­ tifying  the  four   reproductions of  paint­ ings in  Part II. None  of these,  however,  is so substantial an  oversight  as Lobdell's unwitting omission  of  an  entire  story  in Part  I, "La  Commodire," which  should precede "Rollon." More  careful  translat­ ing and  editing are  clearly required here in  order  to make  The  Ceremony a com­ plete,  competent  echo  and   reflection   of La Ceremonie.
Lobdell's work  in The  Umbrella  Pines
is  more  careful  and   consistent,   perhaps because    Archambault's  novel   is   more even  in  tone,  departing from  the  reflec­ tive and  introspective mood of its middle­  aged   protagonist,  Serge   Gaucher,  only when  his daughter is  brutally  murdered. In   the   English   version  of  Serge's   story we  encounter  the best  translation  Lob­ dell  has produced to date-on the whole, an  articulate and   reliable   text,  particu­ larly  in its presentation of dialogue  (con­ sistently   well  done   by  this   translator), and  in its handling of the descriptive and reflective   sections  at   the  end   of  Part   I and  the  beginning of Part III. While  the superior quality of this translation under­ scores  the  inadequacies of Lobdell's pre-

130
 vious  endeavours, it  might  also  be taken as  a  positive  sign  of  a  higher  calibre  of work  to  come.   This is  not   to  say  that The Umbrella Pines is the ideal, reflected image   and   clear   echo.   Distortions do occur,  some  of  them   caused  by  careless­ ness, others   by a  misreading of  the  text. Because   Lobdell  takes   certain   liberties  with  Les  Pins  parasols, the  English  ver­ sion  is  too  often   inexact,  only  approxi­ mate.   Insufficient   attention  to   antece­ dents   repeatedly   obscures   or   misrepre­ sents   Archambault's  meaning,  while   a literal  rendering of the  French also poses difficulties   and   produces a  clumsy  prose style;    for   instance,   "paying  me   little attentions"; "doing his father a service"; "lived  on  social  welfare"; "for  the  form of  it"; "One day,  they  threw  the nselves on  you;  the  next,  they  crossed  your  path with   scarcely   a   glance."  This  kind   of awkrwardness  gives way to misinterpreta­ tion   when   Lobdell   translates deception (disappointment)  as  "deception," le soir (every   evening)  as   "one   night,"  cam­  pagne   (female  companion)   as  "natural  world"   (i.e.,  campagne), and   quelques (a  few)   as "several." On  occasion,  simi­ lar  errors  directly contradict  the  French version;  thus,   for   example,  ]'t'en   veux pas  (I  don't hold  it  against  you)  is ren­  dered as "I don't want  you"  (p. 52) ; son
inquietude a elle  (her  concern)  is given
instead   as  "he'd  begun   to  worry  about
her" (p.  78); the  meaning of ne  s'epui­
sent   plus   a  Lutter  is  reversed   in   "still
struggling" (p.  72) ; and  the  description
of Serge's wife,  secouee  par une  crise de larmes,   is  mistakenly  translated  as  "his voice shaken  with  sobs" (p. I27), thereby ignoring the clue  provided in the past participle.
If we  balance the  assets of The  Cere­
mony  and  particularly The Umbrella Pines against their  liabilities,  we must conclude that   Lobdell's work  is  undeni­ ably  getting  better,  although   there   are  still significant improvements to be made.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



But, gradually, Lobdell is making them, and   we  can   now  attend  to  his  future work  with  interest and  expectation.  His task,   of  course,   is  to  attend  diligently and  respectfully to  the  nuances of voice and   vision   in   the   French  texts.   Only then   will  the  reflection come   to  us  un­ clouded, the  echo  unmuffi.ed. Only  then will  his  crucial intermediate  function as the   transmitter of  these  works  bring   to life English  "twins" that retain the requi­  site familiarity with their French siblings.

JOHN J. o'CONNOR


REGIONALISM, REALISM

ROCH CARRIER, The Hockey Sweater and  other stories,  trans  Sheila  Fischman. Anansi,  n.p.
PAUL  CAMERON BROWNE,  The  Land   of  Look
Behind. Three Trees  Press, $4.-95.
SHELDON   CURRIE,   The  Glace    Bay   Miner's
Museum. Deluge  Press, $4.50.
DOUGLAS   DAYMOND,   ed.,   Selected  Stories  of
Mazo de  la  Roche. Univ.  of Ottawa  Press,
$6.oo.

RocH CARRIER's Quebec  village, like Richler's  Saint-Urbain  Street,  has   be­ come   familiar  territory  in   the   literary  imagination.  In   these   twenty   journeys back  to his homeground, Carrier reclaims  it  from   a  warmer,  more   personal  per­ spective  than   he  has  taken to  date.  The  voice  and  vision  are  a  child's, tempered with  the gentle ironies of an  older  narra­ tor  looking over  his younger  self's shoul­  der,   and   haunted  by  familiar  Carrier shadows, darkest among them  the shroud  of  the  Catholic church. Rumours of  the larger   world    are   marvels  or   dreams, reaching the  young  narrator as glimpses of a foreign landscape, discussed  by his elders   smo  ing
front  "galleries." Against  the indistinct outlines of  that  larger world -the  war,
 the  English,  the  Americans, the  Protes­ tants  in the  next  village,  the photograph of Duplessis  on  the  wall-Carrier looks back   on  a   childhood  lived   in  a  more faithful time and  place.
In the  opening story,  "The Nun  Who
Returned  to   Ireland," the   village  chil­ dren   are  taught  to  read   French  by  an Irish  nun  with  an  English  accent. Sister Brigitte   is  the   first  of  a   procession  of nuns   who  "don't  do  anything  the  way other   people  do:   they  didn't dress  like everybody  else,  they didn't  get  married, they  didn't  have  children and   they  al­ ways lived in hiding." To  serve the Lord,  she  has  had  to  cut   herself  off  from  all earthly  homes: she  tells  the  narrator "I left  my  family  and  I forgot   Ireland and  my   village."   The story   closes  with   the Sister losing her memory  and  fleeing barefooted into a winter storm: "she was going   home,   to  Ireland." The   nun   in "The Day  I Became   an  Apostate"  tells the  children "if  the  good  Lord   put  the moon  so far  from  the  earth it's  because in His wisdom  He didn't want  men  to go anywhere except on  earth." Denied   the moon,   the  narrator  and   his  pal   Lapin decide   to  fly  to   Rome   with   the   holy church bells  to receive  the  Pope's  Easter blessing. When  the bells stay put, faith dissolves:  "After this," says the young apostate, "I  can   never   believe   in   the Catholic religion  again." In  "Pierrette's Bumps,"  what   goes  bump under  preco­ cious  Pierrette's sweater, says the  nun,  is the  Devil's   work:  "You'd  be  better   off praying   to  God,   Pierrette, to  chase  the evil thoughts from  your  possessed body."  When   American  girlie  magazines show the  bumps  in  a  different  light,  the  apos­ tate concludes:

The   United    States   was   a   truly   amazing country   because   they   knew  how   to  print such  beautiful magazines,  while  in  Quebec the  newspapers  only  knew  how to  take pic­ tures  of  Cardinal  Villeneuve or   Maurice  Duplessis in his old hat.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



1The closing   piece,  "A  Secret   Lost  in the  Water," defines once for all Carrier's attitude toward his past. Carrier's father passes  on   the  family  inheritance  to  his son,  teaching him   to  divine  water   with an  alder   branch chosen   "with   religious care." Carrier grows up, leaves home, becomes a writer, and  returns  with a film crew   "to   capture  the  image   of  a  sad man: his children didn't want  to receive the inheritance he'd  spent his whole life preparing for  them -the  finest  farm  in the  area." When the  farmer  gives  Car­ rier  one  of his father's old alder branches, Carrier discovers  that in leaving he's "for­ gotten    [his]   father's  knowledge." Here  and  throughout, Carrier writes about  his past  with  warm, sure evocations  of all its ambiguities,  never lapsing  into  nostalgia  or codifying his memories  into  detached, objective   reports on   lost   innocence. Everything is remembered with  fondness, humour,  and a  wry,  gentle  sense of  loss
-and touched with  the  grace  of  imagi­
nation, making  memories  into live and engaging vignettes. The Hockey  Sweater is a lovely  collection  of stories.
I  wish  that   I  could  be as enthusiastic about  Paul  Cameron Browne's The Land of Look   Behind. But  each  time  I come back   to   the   "Foreword,"  I   am   fore­ warned:

The  Land  of Look Behind hopes to be something   of  a   rearview   mirror,   at   once cocked to reveal our innermost dimensions while transporting that, which by necessity, must  lie beyond.  Involving  ourselves in any interplay with flickering images, of course, must  be  more  than  fireside watching....

Images flic}Qer because  the mirror is half­ cocked; what  vision  there  is gets blurred between   the  portentous and   the  preten­ tious.  It's   difficult   to  describe  the  con­ tents of the volume : Browne tells us that  "Satire, 'beast   fables,'  and  texts   (single page   entries)   mingle  casually  with   the longer  tales." Unfortunately, the  style of the  "Foreword" is everywhere,  standing
 between the  reader and  characters, plots, or meaning. In  a story like "The Wager," the idea  is a familiar one:  two characters argue whether writing should   come  out of one's  own  experience, or from "scena­ rios imbedded in  the  innermost  recesses" of  the   psyche.  But  it's  very  hard for  a discussion  to  breathe in  the stranglehold of portentous pronouncements.
Too much   of  the  time,  Browne is  in­ fatuated  with   elixirs,  shifting  sands  of mood,  box  canyons,   roped  spirits,  signal furies;  the   result   is   overblown  writing  and   an  abstract  obscurity  which  cannot be  explained  away   as  intentional-the kind   of   obscurity  which   makes   me  re­ lieved  I  don't quite  understand.
!In  The  Glace   Bay  Miner's lvfuseum,
Sheldon Currie takes a base of stark  kill­ ing  work  world,   cut  with   the  fantastic, the  mad,  the  grotesque, the  surreal; one part   fine   regionalism;  one   part   pitch­ black   humour;  adds   a   narrative  twist and  a  generous dash  of  Catholic bitters  and  brews  up  nine  potent fictions,  mad­ cap  nightmares  that hit,  hurt, and  force you to laugh. No place  here for  the lugu­  brious,   the   sombre,   the   earnestly  pro­ found:   Currie's  perspective brings   the sane  and  ordinary into  a  focus  so sharp that   they   distort  toward   the   mad   and surreal.  Dialogue is either faithfully  re­ produced or  chillingly artificial; settings  are    either  gritty  with   reality-harsh mining  towns,  caf,es,    coal pits-or touched alive  with incongruities and  gro­ tesqueries: motel rooms occupied by God with  a  typewriter  and   television  screen; churches  with    baskets    of   consecrated hamburgers; apple orchards that  are and aren't in the middle of the Saskatchewan prairie.
Currie's most powerful "regional" piece is the  title  story.  "Regional," because  he starts  with  local characters speaking local
idioms,  evoking  the  grainy  feel  of a  dis­ tinctive place -coal  miners'   talk,  Cape Breton  mining country, mining  cripples,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



mmmg deaths in  every  generation. But the   most   important  voice   is  Margaret MacNeil's,  who   speaks   from   her   own region   of  loneliness,   ostracized  for  her runny nose  and   because,  as  she  puts  it, "for  another thing  I screwed  a couple  of boys  when   I was  a  little   girl.  I didn't know   you  weren't  supposed   to."  Glace Bay,  Reserve   Mines,  the  interior of  the White Rose  Cafe,   where   she  meets  her temporary  saviour,  Neil  Currie -these are   settings   that  kill   people   and   their traditions  indiscriminately. Her   grand­ father is a  mute  consumptive,  his  lungs choked  up with  fluid; her father and  one of  her  brothers have  been  killed  in  the coalpits;  two   burly   Chinese  toss  Neil Currie  out   of  the  cafe   when   he  starts  playing  his  bagpipes. Fired  from  his pre­ vious   job    because    he   wouldn't  speak English   to   the   foreman,  Curries  does speak  and  play  a  language that   revives the  grandfather  and   charms  Margaret, who marries  him.  Currie's bagpipes  tem­ porarily recall  the  immigrant's lost  lega­ cy:   a  sense  of  the   past,   of  a  life  and  language older  than  but severed from the mindless,   brutal,  day-to-day   oppression  in  the  mines.  Inevitably,  Neil  and  Mar­ garet's brother Ian  are  killed  in  the  pit, and  the harsh  surface of  realism distends.  Margaret's   appropriately   mad   response to unbearable loss is to make  a gruesome museum, and  transforms the  reader  into the  first tape-recorder-toting tourist.  She pickles   her   grandfather's  lungs    ( unat­ tended, he  chokes  to  death  when  Mar­ garet   goes  to  collect   her   men);   Neil's lungs,  because she "thought of them  con­ nected  to  his  pipes  and  they show,  com­ pared  to grandfather's, what lungs should look  like";  Neil's  tongue, "since   he  al­ ways  said  he  was  the   only  one  around still   had   one";   his   fingers;  and   Ian's dick,   because   "he   always   said   to   Neil that   was  his  substitute  for   religion   to keep  him  from   being  a  pit  pony  when he  wasn't  drinking rum  or  playing  forty-
 five." Released  from  the local mental in­ stitution, Margaret returns to Glace  Bay to   take   up   her   self-appointed   role   as curator of  her  Glace   Bay  Miner's Mu­ seum.   ''You're  the   first,"  she   tells  the reader; "I  guess  not   too  many   people know  about  it  yet.... Perhaps you could give  us  a  copy  of  your  tape  when   you get  it  done." Glace  Bay is a  region  that  kills tradition, voice, language, and  men,  leaving   a  girl-woman-curator  to  testify in  a  voice  flat  with  a  matter-of-factness that  betrays  too  much  grief  for  conven­ tional   tone  of  voice  to  articulate. This first story and  the closing "Pomp and Circumstances" are   the  most  powerful, but  there  isn't  one  in  the  collection  that doesn't surprise,  shock, or chill;  and  they aren't cheap  thrills.
Douglas   Daymond's introduction to Selected  Stories  of Mazo  de la Roche provides  us  with  a  balanced overview  of de la Roche's typical concerns in these thirteen   stories -"instinct,   repression, freedom  and  love." Daymond's succinct discussions  of  each   story  explore   de  la Roche's variations on those themes; more importantly, he  suggests  that   her  stories are  "most  often ... a  mixture of  realism with  romance, sentimentalism and melo­ drama." Not  that   romance, sentimental­ ism  and   melodrama are  qualities  likely to  recommend her  to us,  but  Daymond's intention is  to  clarify  de  la  Roche's use of realistic  settings  as points  of departure for  characters who "tend to expand  into  symbolic  or  psychological  archetypes."
His  point   is  a  good  one.  Realism   in these stories  (with  the exception of  "Ca­ nadian  Ida   and   English   Nell")   is   the means,   not  the  end:  varied   as  her  set­ tings  are,  de  la  Roche's consistent aim  is to  set  a  series  of  natural  individual im­ pulses  over  against a  variety of  societal  constraints. When  impulses  are governed, individuals  suffer   themselves   to  be  ac­ commodated, but  they  sacrifice  fuller lives;  when  impulse is freed,  individuals

133

BOOKS IN REVIEW



suffer   for   violating  civilized  norms.  So Noel Caron ("The Son of a Miser") is condemned  by  church and  townspeople for his profligacy with his dead father's wealth,   but   sacrifices   vitality   when   he returns to  the  fold.  As Daymond  points out,  the  ambiguous nature   of  his  refor­ mation  is signaled   by the  closing  image, which  juxtaposes "the reddening branches of a  wild cherry-tree" with  "the head  of the  thin  gray  Christ." In  "The Spirit  of the   Dance,"  artistic   passion   and   good sense, natural, spiritual, erotic  fervor  and civilized,  decent  comportment are   irre­ concilable. Louis  de  Valleau is driven  to play his Stradivarius, inspiring  the "spirit of  the  dance" in  his daughter Gabrielle. Artistic  expression  brings  on  his physical and  psychological   collapse  and  awakens his  daughter  to  her   erotic   nature.  His doctor   and   housekeeper  try   to  civilize and  save  him  by  taking  away  his  violin and   feeding   him   with  good  solid  bour­ geois fare,  but  the cure  is worse than  the disease.   He   must    play   his   "music   of motion"  and   he  dies  "pouring out   his soul   through  the   Stradivarius,"  while Gabrielle "had  never  danced  so well be­ fore." Daymond aptly  describes  the story as  "a  gothic   tale  of  fatal   possession  by the artistic  imagination"; more  than  this, it  sets  up  a  series  of  unresolvable con­ flicts  between   destructive artistic  imagi­ nation   and   benevolent proper  conduct, natural sexuality  and  civilized  decorum, passion  for  expression and  reverence  for propriety.
The stories,  which  are  chronologically arranged, are rich reading; Dorothy Livesay's foreword, "Remembering Mazo," provides a  personal   recollection of  the  author; and  Daymond's introduc­ tion  and  comprehensive  bibliography of works   by  and   about  de  la  Roche are good starting points  for further study. De la Roche  deserves it.
NEIL BESNER
 BEAUTY OF BONES

ANNE HEBERT, Heloise. Seuil.

THIS   IS THE  BITTERLY  ironic   epigraph to  Anne  Hebert's most  recent  novel, Helozse, an  allegory  of evil in the modern world:

Le  monde est  en  ordre
Les  morts dessous
Les  vivants dessus

Taken from  "En  guise de  fete," a  poem in the  sequence published as Le tombea:u des rois, these  lines  indicate Hebert's de­ sire  to  integrate more  fully  into  her  fic­ tion  the  symbol  system  presented in  her second  volume   of  poems. It  is a  system in   which   the  single letter   dividing  the two  poles  of   existence    ( dessous / dessus) becomes  a sign of the interpenetration of life  and  death, and, accordingly, of  the false  or  illusory  'order' of a world  which relentlessly  asserts  their  separation. Thus, in  Helozse, to become involved  in one of these   spheres   is  to  become  involved   in both,   though  the  living  are  hardly  pre­ pared  for the consequences.
Increasingly anxious to  stress  the  op­ tions  for  evil  within   the  ordinary  world,  Hebert structures her  novel  around the central symbol of the Parisian M etro,
very banality of this obvious image  of the interpenetration   of   upper    and    lower worlds   being   essential   to   her   allegory. Once  again in  Hebert's work,  allegory  is rooted   in  a  determinist  insistence   upon inevitability, the  relentless  descent  of  de­ sire through blood  to death. The triangu­ lar  plot,  too,  is a familiar one. Christine and   Bernard,  newly  engaged,  return  to Paris   from   a   brief   holiday.   She   is  a dancer at  the  Opera, he  a  law  student. They are ordinary young people,  the nar­  rator stresses,  though  the reader may  be surprised that  Hebert has them  terminate their    journey   by   going   their   separate ways   to   their   separate  lodgings.   This

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



anachronism is,  however, central  to  the plot,  for it is when  Bernard is without Christine that  he sees Heloise,  the ghost­ ly femme  fatale, for the first time. Hence­ forward,  he  is  possessed  by her  and,  as we  soon   learn,  by  the   satanic   Xavier  Bottereau  who   directs  Heloise   (among other  belles  captives in  his  control)  in the execution of "the law." Heloise's  task is, of course,  herself  to captivate the  in­ nocent   Bernard but,  when  Christine in­ terferes   and   attempts  to  save   Bernard from  his fate  by foiling  the  first  murder attempt,   Christine  too   must   be  elimi­ nated.  This  murder  falls   to  Bottereau himself  while  Heloise  completes her  ini­ tial   mission,  enslaving  Bernard  forever.
The resemblance of  Heloise  to  Lia  of
Les Chambres de bois will be obvious. In both  cases, the femme fatale insinuates herself  in  the  place  of  the  relatively  un­ complicated  spouse,   and   the  symptoms  of the men  in question are also strikingly similar:  aversion to  the  smells  of  cook­ ing   and   to  all   but   the   blandest   food;  sexual   enervation   occasionally  punctu­ ated   by  violent   desire   the   satiation  of which   brings  guilt, lassitude,   and   aver­  sion  to  the  previously  beloved; revulsion toward  the  life  and  tasks of the  day and  compulsive need of the darkness and soli­ tude  of  night,   and  so on.  But  where  in the earlier novel  Catherine escapes,  leav­ ing  Michel  and   Lia  to  their  sado-maso­ chistic  darkness, the  cast  of  Helozse can no  more  escape  from   their  condition of enslavement to death than they can from the  omnipresence of  its  central symbol. Beneath  the city lies the land  of the dead  to which  the  vampires, Heloise  and  Bot­ tereau, must  return  before  dawn, having  drunk the  blood  of  their  victims.
Evil  triumphs easily  in  a  world  where goodness  consists  largely   of  good  inten­ tions  coupled with  the  simplistic  vulner­  ability   of  a  character  like  Christine or her symbolic  equivalents, the barren sim­ plicity  of modern  clothing (the  androgy-
 nous  uniform  of  jeans and  sweater  char­ acteristic of Christine, Bernard, and their friends)  and   modern  architecture  (the  simple,  unfurnished,  modern apartment which  the  two  lovers  have  rented in  an­  ticipation of their marriage). Against  the elegance   and   opulence  of  fin-de-siecle  clothing  (Heloise's splendid wardrobe of white,   red   and    black   garments)  and architecture   (the   elaborate  apartment, decorated   in   Heloise's    colours,   which Bottereau  finds   for   the   young   couple after    Bernard    has   been    possessed   by If,eloise),  modernity clearly  stands   little chance. As the  narrator observes,  in  the contemporary world  even  the  dictates of fashion  are  deemed   irrelevant. A  world without  binding  prohibitions-even those  of  guilt-must  capitulate  to  the mysterious  and  binding strictures of evil, Bottereau's  laws.   Not   confined   to   the human world,  these laws cast their power over  animals too as we see when Heloise undertakes ritual  preparation for the cut­ ting  of  Bernard's throat by  sacrificing  a fawn  in  the  Jardin  des  Plantes,  sending waves  of  fear   through   the   other occu­ pants  of the  zoo.  Later,  when  Bottereau comes  to rape and  murder Christine, he finds  her  in  the act  of  dismembering a freshly  killed  rabbit in  preparation for  a feast  to  celebrate Bernard's return from hospital.  Severing the  arms  from  Chris­ tine's  corpse,   he  returns  to  the   under­ world with them,  there  to encounter Ber­ nard  and  Heloise  in the  ritual  posture of "Pieta  sauvage," her   arms   around  his reclining    body.   Ironically,   during  the shopping expedition in   preparation  for the  feast,  the  narrator  had  asserted   the power  of man  over  all  nature, discount­ ing  for  the  moment  the  major tenet   of Hebert's allegory: the power  of the dead  over  the living.
For  Hebert, love is an occasion  for  the eruption of  a  world  beyond  the  visible, the   ordinary,  though  contained  always as  a  possibility  within   that   more   mun-

135

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



dane  world.  As surely  as  the  balance  of the   world   above   and   the  world   below creates  what   order   there  is, so  the  bal­ ance   of   love   and   death -desire   and destruction, sexuality   and   decay-cre­ ates the constant revelation of the beauty  of  bones  and  their  terrible  fragility.  For Hebert, as  always,  that  revelation is the point.
LORRAINE WEIR


CANADIAN LANGUAGES

J. K. CHAMBERS, ed. & intro.,  The  Languages of Canada. Didier.

As  R.   c.  GAGNE,  one  of the  contributors to  this volume,  admits,  "without making the   school   the   centre  to  stimulate  the native  sociodynamics and  using the mother tongue  as  its  nerve  centre   there is a grave  danger that  the native  teachers may  unwittingly lead   their   own  people ever so gently  into  the maw of the never­ sleeping   French or  English  giant." The  average teacher is not  the  only one  who may  be  tempted  to  give  a  dangerously simplifying picture of the linguistic  diver­  sity   of   Canada.   Professional    linguists could  quite  easily make  the same mistake and  have  done  so  repeatedly in  the  past
-by reducing the discussion  of this sub­ ject to a study  of the  problems involving  French-English  bilingualism,  thereby
ignoring the languages of native  cultures and  of immigrants altogether, or describ­ ing  them  in vacuo, just in  terms of their internal structures.
'Fortunately, the  most recent  history  of linguistics  has  been  one of greater and greater refinement of the social context within  which language is spoken and, important in  the  case of Canada,  modi­ fied  or  entirely   suppressed.  Linguists   of late   are   less  concerned   with   yielding structurally  balanced,  detached  descrip-

136
 tions  of "exotic" languages or with  using the  data these  provide as support for  or against   a  certain  theoretical position,  as they   did  in the   past  with   most  of  the native Indian language material studied. With  the advancement of sociolinguistics, that  is, the  socially sensitive study of language  and   its  varieties,   linguists   are becoming more  concerned with what implications the  speaking of a  particular dialect  or  language has  for  the  speaker's place in society,
Not  that   Canadian linguists  have  dis­ missed sociodynamics, but  when they did give  it  attention, it  was  reserved  for  the two   "giant"   languages.   It  is  precisely
this   dangerous  exclusivity    that    J. K.
Chambers' project tries to modify.  In  the
light  of  this  task  one  should  not  be sur­ prised  to  find  the  book  pose  more  ques­ tions  than  it  answers,  and  Chambers, in his editorial comments, frankly  admits its incompleteness and  tentativeness. Inter­ esting  to  note,  and  in a way emblematic of  the   situation  of   Canadian  multilin­ gualism  at  large,  is another aspect  of the collection: Chambers initially  hoped  that  it  would  reflect  its  subject   matter in  its formal   presentation,  and   he   therefore invited all the  authors to contribute their chapters in  the  language of their  choice. Optimists of multilingualism may  be dis­ appointed  to  discover   that   all  the  con­ tributions  are    written  in   English.   As Chambers   himself    comments    on    the monolingual outcome,

If one were  to make a guess beforehand ... , one  might   have  thought that   perhaps   two or  three   or  even  four  of  them   [the  con­ tributors]  would   have  chosen  French.  But they   did   not.   Linguistic   diversity   is  not something   that   will  be  served  by  prescrip­  tion.  Certainly  not  by  predetermining  the languages  in  which  the  following  chapters are  written, and  not  by  forcing  one  or  an­ other   language onto  the  affairs  of  the  na­ tion  either. Today's  linguistic  diversity  may be the foundation  for  tomorrow's Canadian mosaic,  or  it  may  tum  out  not  to  be. The  diversity  is  described below  (in  English,  as

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



it  turns out),  and described as  thoroughly as  any  single volume has   managed  to  de­ scribe it  so  far. It will  require a  sequel to this   book,   prepared at  least   a  gener tion from  now   to  determine whether  the  diver­ sity   has   'shaped   up    into  the   mosaic   we envision.

This  collection  is certainly an  important step   toward   such   a   mosaic    linguistic future, particularly since  it  provides  lin­ guists  with  valuable reports on  rese rch completed  and    in   progress   and   giVes them   sound   advice   for   new   areas   of investigation.
Chambers,  in   his   critical   foreword,
discusses  .the  attitudes  Canadians  have toward multilingualism and  takes a com­ parative   look	at    Canada's   so thern neighbour. He   also  draws  attention  to the   often   neglected   languages  of   our original inhabitants  and  our  most  recent immigrants,   vital    contributors  to   our uniquely  diversified linguistic  reality. The  importance of the diversity  which  Cham­ bers  stresses  turns  out   to  be  more  than the  customary  verbal   tribute of  a  fore­ word,  for  it  decisively  shapes   the  selec­ tion  of  the  papers that   follow  the  fore­ word,  their  order,  arrangement  and  the relative  space   allotted  to  each   of   the language   groups   discussed    (I.  Nati_ve Languages,   1go pp.;  II.  The  Offic1al Languages, 70 pp.;  and  III. Other Lan-
guages, 55 PP·) · 	. The section   on  Native Languages IS
divided   into   three   major  parts,   one  on Indian  languages, one  on  Eskimo,  and the   third   on   the  maintenance of  these native  languages. Besides giving a statisti­ cal survey o£ the various language groups and  the  number of  their  speakers,  J. D. Kaye   repeatedly  emphasizes  the  impor­ tance  of  early  missionary language work and  of  the  studies  conducted by  two  of the most prominent American structural­
ists, Edward  Sapir   and   Franz   Boas. H. e
then  proceeds  to describe  the Algonqman
languages, including Cree,  Ojibwa, Mic-
 
mac    Malecite   Abnaki    and   Blackfoot. In  th' e followin'g  section',  Eung-Do Cook
	'	.
What   characterizes  all  three  descrip­ tions   as well  as  Jean-Pierre  Paillet's  on Eski o,
they  are  based  abstracts languages from the  social  forces  that  influence the  ways the  languages  develop   and   that  deter­ mine  their  very  survival.   By  conductii:g such   context-independent   studies,    lin­ guists  have  been  able  to construct inter­ nally  autonomous  systems  of  each   lan­  guage, see  important symmetries emerge, and   make  meaningful  comparisons  be­ tween  distant  and   unrelated  languages. However,    much    recent    sociolinguistic research  has  pointed to the shortcomings of   such   exclusive   treatments  and   has stressed  the  study  of language as  both  a grammatical system  and  a  part  of a  cul­ tural   fabric.   With   R.  C.  Gagne's  "The Maintenance of  the  Native  Languages," we find  an  example of such  broader en­ quiry,  for  here  interest   is  taken  in  how such    behaviour   changes    when    these minority  speakers  find  themselves   over­ burdened by the  weight of a more  pres­ tigious   culture   and   language.  Only   if there  is a  fairly  healthy sociodynamic in the   minority   culture  can   its  language retain   its   normal  vitality   and   growth. Although  such  health is obviously  men­ aced,  Gagne  can  report on  various  lines of  conscious  action  being  taken  in recent years  by  the   Indians themselves,  in  co-

137

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



operation with  school  officials, to  make the  survival   of  their  languages  possible. The   section   devoted   to  the  "Official Languages"   begins    with    Douglas    C. Walker's discussion  of Canadian French. With   regard  to   the   necessary   balance between  purely  grammatical analysis and wider  cultural analysis,  we are  in  much
better  territory here,  for, as Wall er
self  outlines, "one   should   in  fact  argue that  Canadian French linguistics  has al­ ways been interdisciplinary in nature, and  that   major  (perhaps the  major)   contri­ butions  have  come  from  areas that  were not  in  the  mainstream of  structural lin­ guistics,    viz.,    phonology,    morphology, syntax, semantics, but  rather in the allied areas  of  phonetics, lexicon,  dialectology, and external history." As Walker's report shows,  Canadian  French studies  are rapidly  growing, thanks  to a blending  of a  solid  philological foundation  with  the new  insights  from  more  theoretically oriented  scholarship.  Furthermore,  they can  be seen to have  a broad  influence  on such  issues as bilingual  education and language policy,  and on public awareness in general.
J. K.  Chambers' discussion  of  "Cana­ dian   English"  draws   from   this  healthy  blend  of traditional dialectology and  new theoretical  insight   as  well,  although  it limits  itself intentionally to an area  much smaller   in  scope   than   the  one  Walker  chooses   to  cover.   With   particular  em­ phasis  on  the  phonetic  phenomenon of "Canadian Raising," Chambers describes both  usage surveys and  structuralist pho­  nological investigations and  then  outlines  the value of the two for the resolution of more  abstract  questions in  current  lin­ guistic theory.
1The third   and   final  section  is  by far the  most  tentative, since it deals with  an area  until  recently ignored  not only by linguistics  but  also  by legislation,  namely the   languages  of   new   immigrants. Its major   rhetorical stance  is one  of  giving
 advice  for future investigations and legis­ lative  policies. As Bernard Saint-Jacques, in  his  report on  "Sociolinguistic Aspects of  Immigration  in  Canada," points  out, language and culture are so closely inter­ twined   that   the  loss  of  one  fosters  the disappearance of the  other. This mutual dependence makes  any  governmental effort   toward the  preservation of  immi­ grant   cultures  and    languages    almost  bound to  fail,  since  most  newcomers to Canada are  socially  pressured  to  "iden­ tify  with  the  prestige group,   the  Anglo­ phone  community." This  creates   an  al­ most  classical  "double-bind" situation in that ethnic groups  can  only contribute to the  social,  cultural, and  economic envi­ ronment of  the  country if  they  are  not totally  assimilated linguistically, yet  it  is precisely  this total  assimilation which is expected of  them   if they  want   to  gain social acceptance.
In  order to  achieve any  insight   into
the   delicate  interplay  of   the  forces   at work here, solid socio-psycho-linguistic research is indispensable. Walburga von Raffier  Engel's commentary on  "The Language of Immigrant Children" -an outstanding  piece   of  linguistic  scholar­ ship  and  critical  reflection-makes this point  convincingly. Despite a rather dim past,  the  future, von  Raffier  Engel  con­ cludes,   is  extremely  promising  for   lin­ guists, for more  third languages are being taught in  school,   the   rate   of   language retention  among immigrant  children  is being   more    closely   observed,   and    re­ searchers are  undertaking studies  which compare  family   with   peer  influence on children's language.
Readers who  are linguists  will find themselves rather  breathless, for  this col­ lection    does   not   merely   point   to   the problems of  traditional  context-interde­ pendent research, but  also  challenges its audience to  face  the  sociolinguistic con­ cerns   that   will   have  to  be  met   in  the near   time  ahead.  Thus, most  positively,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



it  holds  out  the  promise  for  an  interest­ ing  future for  research  on  the languages of Canada.
One  shortcoming of this collection has to  be  pointed out   to  potential readers: there  are  far  too many  typographical errors-unnecessary blemishes  on a val­ uable  document.
ANNELIESE KRAMER-DAHL



FORGETTABLE PLAYS GAETAN  CHARLEBOIS,   AUola.  Talonbooks. RON   CHUDLEY, After  Abraham. Talonbooks. DAVID   FRENCH, Jitters. TaJonbooks.
GEORGE  HULME,    The    Lionel   Touch.  Talon­
books.
JAMES  w.  NICHOL,  Sainte-Marie  Among   the
Hurons. Talonbooks.

THE FIVE PLAYS RECENTLY published by Talonbooks do not reveal much about contemporary Canadian drama-I hope.  Until now  and  I think  subsequent to  this  group under review,  the  Talon­ books playlist  has been one reliable  index of  good  work  in  Canadian  theatre. But not   one   of  these  plays  is  either  main­ stream   or  innovative  or,  again   I hope, representative  of  trends in  playwriting; two are lightheaded transients that  pass quickly   from   the   stage   and   the  mind; two are  heavyhanded monuments to his­ torical   subjects,  assembled   with   trowel and   mortar; and   one  is  drama  in  em­ bryo,  uncertain and  unformed.
,As a group, these  plays  raise  questions
about the publication of plays in Canada. When   is  a  play  ready   to  be  published; what   apparatus such  as  introduction  or commentary might be appropriate? when should    a   play   receive    some   editorial attention? It  is  impossible   to  discern   a consistent editorial policy in this selection of   plays,   and   there   is  wild   variety   in their    readiness    for   publication.  David
 French's Jitters deserves exactly  to have appeared, but  George  Hulme's The  Lio­ nel Touch need  not  have  been published here  at  all and  is fortunate to have  been so attractively presented. The other  plays need  editorial intervention,  or  rewriting in workshop  or  production, and  publish­ ing  them  in  their   present  state  is a  ser­ vice  neither   to   the   playwrights  nor   to Canadian theatre.
Jitters   is   bitchy    fun,   once.   In  this harshly  drawn  cartoon of a theatre com­ pany  in  rehearsal French confirms all  of one's  worst  suspicions:  actors   are  catty  manic-depressives, playwrights are  para­ noiac  and  critics  are  naive,  humourless people  who write  badly.  In  the  first act,  a  scene  is rehearsed several  times  while the   actors   complain about   their   shoes, wigs,  lines,  blocking,   and   one   another. The wit is sharp, but though the rehear­ sals  are  cleverly  engineered  with  subtle variations each  time,  there  is no progress,  either   for  the  rehearsed  play  or  for  the frame   play.  Once the  prickly,  hysterical  atmosphere  is  established, nothing  hap­ pens.  French  has  assembled   his  charac­ ters  to  tell  us a  few  smart truths about Canadian theatre, but the actors remain caricatures,  and   the   irrepressible   wise­ cracking does  not  flower  into comedy.
The   second  act  takes  place  backstage just  before  opening. The actors  are  still squabbling  about   their    wigs   and   one another, while  coping  histrionically with a  sequence  of  truly  awful   disasters   that French  has  thrown  brilliantly together. In  the third  act, the company must  come to   terms   with   the   critics'   responses­ mixed  of course.  The  star of the show  is panned in a clever  parodic  review;  what  rankles  is not  the critic's  judgment-the actress  knows  that she went  over  the  top  in her performance-but the  damnation in  print, in  ponderous, adjectival  prose. French   also    pulls    malicious  humour from   the   fact   that   the   critic   mistakes ineptitude for  craft; thus  the  actor   who

I39

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



regularly  forgets   lines  is  described   en­ thusiastically as "vulnerable in an almost painfully childlike manner, fumbling for words  that   seem  constantly  to  elude  his grasp.... " The joke also tacitly acknowl­  edges    something  else :    the    magic    of theatre -the  fact   that  actor  and   char­ acter  sometimes  merge.
But  it doesn't always happen. French's piece  is  clever,   well-crafted, and  some­ times  funny,   but   it  is also  peevish  and  forgettable; I  think   I   might  leave   the tl1eatre  with  an  odd  sense of  having  yet to see a play.
The Lionel   Touch  was  produced in London's West  End  in Ig6g starring Rex Harrison. The fact  that  George  Hulme's
mother happened  to  be in  Orillia,  On­ tario,   at   the  time  of  his  birth  does  not make   this  a  Canadian  play  nor  one  of any  interest, I hope,  to  Canadian thea­  tres.   There  is  no   reason   for   this   play not  to  have  remained in oblivion; it is a not  very good example of the tacky com­ mercial vehicles regularly  driven  to death  in one season by West End producers and popular actors.  Hulme is certainly  cap­ able  of the  high-pitched,  relentless patter and  mildly  salacious  humour characteris­ tic  of  the  genre,   and  comfortable  with the  farcical tricks  and  inexpensive moral  trappings that  keep such  plays clattering along  to their invariably sentimental con­ clusions. But if Talonbooks is looking  for this  sort  of   thing,   there  are   better   bad plays, and ones not so thoroughly rusted.
After Abraham and  Sa'inte-Marie Among the Hurons are hung  over with anachronisms of another kind. Both play­
wrights  have  attempted impossible histo­ rical   plays   surprisingly   reminiscent   of early   eighteenth-century   efforts   in   the same  vein,  and  both  have  failed  as  their predecessors did; the  plays, despite  their mildly   avant-garde   trappings,  are   pon­  derous,  fortified with Extreme Reverence for  their  subjects, and  laden   with  com­ plicated  effects  and  a creaky  staginess.
 In   After   Abraham, set  in  Quebec in I 759,  Ron   Chudley  toys  with   the  idea that, while  Wolfe  and   Montcalm  never met   while   alive,   they   might  have   had conversation in  "after" or  "out of time" as (and  Chudley is clearly uncertain about this)   "spirit, shade,   alter-ego, what  you will."   Wolfe   and    Montcalm  exchange aphorisms-"It begins." "The end  must begin 	somewhere."   "Precisely!"-be­ tween  flashbacks   to  the  days  before  the battle on the Plains of Abrallam, in which scenes  the  same  characters "in  life" con­ verse solemnly  with  their  respective  aides, both   of  whom   are   Scots  given   to  long reminiscences about  the  Battle  of Cullo­ den.    There  are   other  undistinguished supernumaries, one  French tart  "with an underlying crudity of manner," an  over­ fed   French  governor,  and    an   under­ nourished  Acadian;  there   were   thirty­ eight   actors   in   the   first   production  in
I 977  at  the  Bastion  Theatre in Victoria. There are  twenty   scene  changes, and directions for  effects  such  as  "an   agony of church bells" and, in one scene, a col­ lection  of noises including guns, mortars, muskets,   thunder,  lightning,   rain,   and  "from somewhere, from   the  distance or out   of  time, ... the   sound   of   bagpipes  playing   'Lovat's March.'"  The   pace   is understandably somewhat slow.
Sainte-Marie  Among  the  Hurons, set in Huronia between   I634 and  1649, is essentially  a  pageant, a series of tableaux and   addresses  to  the  audience  wherein the  primitive rituals   of  Huron and  Iro­ quois    are    exploited   to   create    cheap pathos. James   W.  NichoJ  has  used  gro­  tesque   props,   bloodstopping  howls  and  explicit   descriptions  of   torture  as  spec­ tacle  to  disgust  rather  than   to  generate understanding, to horrify but  not  to illu­  minate; the  effect  is to  make  us stop  up our  ears  and  close  our  eyes  because  we are  little more  than captive voyeurs. This  is   imitation   theatre-of-cruelty  on   one hand, and  on  the  other a curiously  non-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



dramatic, static  demonstration of the rhetoric of conversion. We  are  meant to fid
pnests   to be as reprehensible as barbaric
customs, but how can a chiming clock compete theatrically with "the partially decomposed corpse  of an  old  woman" or a human heart  held  in a hand  streaming with   blood?   The  three   central  charac­ ters, a Jesuit  priest  and  two Hurons, talk in  a  childish, falsely  archaic  diction and  play  at  breaking down  cultural barriers.  There  are   two  interesting  moments in the  play;  the first  is strictly  poetic,  when the  Christian  and  Indian myths  of crea­  tion  are sung out  against one another; in the  second,  when   the  priests  attempt  to
use  their  tricks  to  convert a  Huron  the human  interplay  is  dramatically  ive.
Otherw e,                                      J. Pratt.
For hrs first play, Aleola,Gaetan Charle­
bois has  wisely written a two-bander  set in  the  present, in  his  home  in  Mon eal. Two  old, forgotten, dispossessed  people elebrate
Illness, then  die.  Charlebois has  unfortu­
nately   not  avoided  the  mires  of  bathos into  which  such  a situation can  so easily slide;   the  inevitabilities of  the  play  are too common  and  too dreadful and  too predictable. I also  feel  that, having cre­ ated  life-affirming characters, he  should have  sustained  them   thus;  their  deaths seem theatrically contrived, not the natu­ ral   c lmina.tion  of   their   strength  and  affection. Krtoune and  Barne, moreover, are  in  themselves,  in  their   self-enclosed world   of  memories  and  rituals, not  in­ trinsically  dramatic;  I would  like  to see another  character enter   that   world  and  alt:r   this   from   a  collection of   nicely wntten,  teary hugs-and-kisses  mono­ chromes into   the  substantial  drama for which   I  suspect   that   Charlebois  may have  the potential.
MARIAN FRASER
 REQUIRED: BOLDNESS

Aurora  1980,  ed.  Morris   Wolfe:    Doubleday
Canada,   $9·95·
80:   Best  Canadian   Stories,  ed.  Clark   Blaise and John  Metcalf. Oberon, n.p.
First  Impressions, ed.  John Metcalf.  Oberon, n.p.

THE THREE BOOKS  under review  focus a problem,  even  a crisis, in Canadian writ­ ing  and  publishing today,  one  that  their editors   are  very  much   alert  to:  reader­ ship.  Writers  are  still  out  there   in  ever increasing   numbers it  would s em.
:--vhere  are   the   readers,   especially   those mterested  and  committed enough  to buy collections   of  new  work?   In the  intro­ duction to  First  Impressions, John  Met­  calf  raises  the  question  by  tracing, in  a rather arch  way,  the  demise  of a  myth, formerly    cherished    by    young    writers (Metcalf   uses  himself   as  an   example) , but   now  no  longer   tenable. The  myth describes  how  the writer  is discovered  by a ?iscerning older  novelist  or  sharp-eyed edrtor,   gradually   becomes   famous   and  goes  on  in  his  turn to  encourage  some new   young    aspirant.   Nowadays,  says Metcalf,  publishers are   no  longer  likely to  take  a chance on  an  unknown writer  and  are unwilling to let him or her slowl; build  up  a  readership over  a  number of books.  Thus   the  reality   is  that   a  lot  of young  writers   will  simply   not  get  pub­  lished  at all-writers like Jack  Hodgins who,  were  he  to come  along  now,  might ever
m a arsher
Morns Wolfe,  in  his introduction to Aurora  1980,  quotes  Hodgins' publisher to exactly  that   effect.  Wolfe's  pessimism and  bitterness  are  evident. He  is elegiac regretful, occasionally angry. In  the  fac
of dec!ining  sales  (from  2,200 in 1978 to
I ,500 m I 979) , he announces that  he has decided  to suspend  publication of  Aurora
indefinitely,   despite   Doubleday's admir-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



able   willingness   to  continue.  He   notes the  irony  of raising  false hopes:  "What's the  point  of being  published  in Aurora  if the  chances of ever  being  published in a book  of  one's  own  are  almost  non-exis­ tent  and   Aurora  itself  is  having  trouble  getting into  bookstores?"
People   like  Ron   Besse at  Gage/Mac­ millan   are  now,  according  to Wolfe,  in­ sisting  that  every  book  (the very word  is outdated in  the  trade  these  days,  which prefers  to speak of "products" or "units") should   be  a   "profit  centre." Gone,   or going,  is  the  idea  that   publishers  might  underwrite   serious   writing    with   some well-placed   best   sellers.   Macmillan  no longer  thinks  of  poetry  as profitable and has therefore given it up. Hence,  it seems miraculous, perhaps even foolhardy, that Metcalf   and  Oberon, buoyed  up  by the continuing success of Best Canadian Stories, have embarked on another series, of which  the aptly  titled First Impressions is the  opener. Their confidence is balanced by Wolfe's pessimism. Where exactly   realism   lies  remains   to  be  seen, but  my suspicion  is that  second  thoughts may  well  precede the  appearance of Second  Impressions.
I have   dwelt   on   the  economic   issue because   it  is  potentially  so  devastating, and  because,  although this  is not  exam­ ined  by the editors,  there  is embedded in the economic question an ideological  one as  well.  Anthologies do  not  simply  re­ spond   to  what's  going   on,   they  aren't merely   repositories.  They  help  to  shape  a  national culture,  to  formulate a  sense of what  can or should  be done by collect­  ing  the  best  of  what  has been  done.  But this  brings  up   the  issue  of  choice,  and  the  responsibility  for  their  choices   that  the  editors   must  assume.  And  related   to this  is the  problem of  context   and  pur­ pose.  Bringing  together  diverse  pieces needs   to  be  done   with   an  eye  on  the context so  created, which  in  turn   raises the  question of why such a context should
 be  created. If anthologies are  to  be  cul­ turally as  well  as  commercially  success­ ful,  their  editors have  to  face  this  prob­  lem  boldly,  and   not,  as  seems  the  case with  the  books  under  review,  just gather material that  they happen to like; rather, they  have  to use the material to reflect, if not a vision, at least more  than  a glimpse of cultural reality.
Hence  the  concern  for   the  plight   of new  writers voiced  by Metcalf  and  Wolfe is not  the only, nor  even  the most funda­ mental,  concern.  Underneath   it   lies  a question of  the  shape  of  Canadian lite­ rary  culture as a whole, and  this involves established writers as much  as new  ones. Such  writers  are  of  course  represented in these   anthologies-people   like   Mavis Gallant, Joyce  Carol   Oates, Alice  Mun­ ro, George Woodcock-but for the most part  with   rather   undistinguished  work. The exception is our  foremost  expatriate writer,  Mavis  Gallant,  whose  contribu­ tion   to   Best    Canadian  Stories    is   the centrepiece of  the collection and  the  best single  work  in  any  of the  three  antholo­ gies.  Gallant's  novella,   "Speck's  Idea," gives  us  the  shape   of  exile  in  the  very local  and  ironic  habitation of one  Lydia Cruche,  blunt    lady   of   the   prairie,   as straight  as   the   borders  of   her   native Saskatchewan and  as impenetrable as its landscape. Mme. Cruche,  unaffected by her   long   sojourn  in   the   dismal   Paris suburbs as wife and  widow of a forgotten artist,  meets   and   subdues   sophisticated Parisian  art-dealer  Sandor  Speck   in   a delightful  twist   on   the   old   Jamesian theme  of innocent North American meets wily  European. It  is  the   sort   of  work which  belongs  in such  an  anthology, not just  because  it  is very good,  but  because it casts  a cool eye, from  an  international, expatriate  perspective (what better  van­ tage  point is  there?), on  the  Canadian scene.
Wolfe,  in  Aurora   1980,  implies  some­
thing  of the  cultural role of the  antholo-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



gist  by  including a  transcript of  a  con­ versation  between    Robert  Fulford   and  Northrop Frye  on  the  subject of  Cana­ dian culture, its growth and  maturation, its  regionalism and  diversification.  Un­ fortunately, the discussion  remains rather thin  and  shallow. Wolfe  also  includes  a piece  in French, by Yvette Naubert, sug­ gesting   the   need   on   the   part    of   the Canadian  anthologist to  represent that aspect  of our  diversity. But  despite  such efforts,  despite  excellent stories  by W. P. Kinsella   and   Guy   Vanderhaege, and   a few   other   good   ones,   and   despite   fine poems  by Doug  Barbour, Stephen Scobie and   Alistair   Macleod  (the   poetry  selec­ tion  as  a  whole   exhibits  more  compla­ cency   than   insight,   more  timidity  than  passion of language or theme) , the over­  all colour  of Aurora is much  grayer  than  the  title  promises.  The  anthology seems plagued by the Canadian vice of caution rather  than  informed  by  the  energy  of diversity.   Perhaps  it   seeks   to   do   too much   and   ends   up   not   doing   enough. There  is  some   good   reading in  it  cer­ tainly,  more   so  than in   the  other   two volumes,  but   no   real   centre; we  may wonder  as we read  why these pieces have been   called   together.  What  context   do they  create? Despite the  references to regionalism,  there   is  little   regional    feel, little  distinctive tonality.
80:  Best Canadian  Stories has  at  least the  unity  provided by its exhibition of a single  genre,  and  the  influence the series has   had   on   the   development  of   that
genre   over   the   past   ro   years   has   un­
doubtedly  been   significant, although it may not have been entirely beneficial. Judging by  the  present, anniversary  vol­ ume,  the  boundaries of the  genre do not seem  to  have   been  extensively  tested  or expanded. Excepting "Speck's Idea," the selection  is rather drab, predictable, cau­  tious,  though there  is some  deft  work  by newcomers Martin  Avery,  Linda Svend­ sen, and  Guy  Vanderhaege. As a  whole,
 the volume  has not been sufficiently  built
around its impressive centrepiece.
First Impressions has a narrower focus than either  of the other  two books. Its purpose  is to introduce us to the work of
three  new writers,  Martin Avery, Isabel Huggan, and   Mike  Mason,  and  because there  are only three,  there is room for a reasonably  generous selection  from  each. We  thus  get  to  know  the  writers  better than  we are  able  to in  more  wide  rang­ ing  anthologies (although the  lack  of  a table  of contents and  of clear headings is an  annoying, if  minor,  impediment to  a smooth  relationship).
Avery  is a  miniaturist, rather  charm­ ing   and   offbeat,  folksy  in  the  style  of Richard Brautigan, though sharper. He is represented  by  eleven  little   pieces,   the best  and   funniest  of   which   tend   to  be the  shortest. After  two or  three  pages  he weakens,  most  evidently  in  the  longest  piece,  a  rather  dreary  and   meandering story  about  rugger. "Five  Cent   Photo­ graph,"  on   the   other  hand,  where   the poet  presses  his  nose  to  the  glass  for  a xerox copy of  his own face, captures in a concise, lively, and  original  metaphor the ambiguous relationship between  art  and machine.
Huggan is another in an increasingly long  line  of  women   writing   about  girl­ hood: the cruelty of the school  yard,  the discovery of sex in derelict  bread  wagons
or  the  backs  of  butcher shops,  the  sha­ dowy   reality   hidden  behind   the   bland propriety  of   the   adult  world,   and   re­ vealed  through the  presence  of  a slightly disreputable,	unmarried     aunt     (or  boarder). This  last  motif  seems  an  al­ most  inescapable feature of the  genre  in Canada these  days,  as witness  A Bird in the  House,  Lady  Oracle,  Lives  of Girls and  Women, and  now  Huggan's "Jack of Hearts." In the introduction, Huggan, to  her   credit,   raises   the  very  question that   was  on   my  mind   as  I read   these stories:   do  we  "really need  yet  another

143

BOOKS IN REVIEW



series  of  semi-autobiographical  stories about  growing  up in a small Ontario [or Manitoba or  Nova  Scotia]  town?"  De­ spite  Metcalf's explicitly  affirmative  an­  swer,   I  remain   unconvinced.  We   can hope,  however, that  Huggan's self-doubt  will lead  her  not  to  silence  but  to some­ thing   new,  more  imaginative and  risky.
,Mike Mason,   though coarser,  less  dis­ ciplined, and  less polished  than  Huggan, is nevertheless more  interesting.  Though he leans  toward sentimental heaviness  on occasion,   he  always  seems  able   to  pull himself  and  the  reader  back  with  a  pre­  cise, often  painful  image.  He  thus allows for  the  lyrical  while  holding   it  at  bay. His  long   piece,  "Mondrian Skin,"   is  a novella  told in  short,  self-contained frag­ ments,   each  separately  titled,   and   each focussing   on   a   different  feature  of   a rather  random,  disconnected but  never­ theless touching, love affair.  The story chronicles the  beginning, middle,  and in­ evitable  end   of  that   affair   against  the backdrop of the  passing  of an eloquently  evoked   prairie  year.   The   title  derives from  the  unconventional  tattoos  that  the narrator and  his girlfriend "george" have etched  on  their  bodies,  signs which  pro­ vide   an   image   for    the   geometrically arranged  fragments of  colour  and  light of which  the story is made,  as well as for the  patterned, graceful way the  relation­ ship between the lovers progresses and declines. Mason seems to have found an authentic, if as yet  not  fully  disciplined, voice.
A singular value of such collections as these  is that  they  afford  the opportunity of  hearing just  such  a  distinctive  inflec­ tion.  Besides  Mason,   the  new  voice  that  appeals most  to  me  is that  of  Guy  Van­ derhaege,  whose   pieces  in   Aurora   and Best   Canadian  Stories   reveal    a   solid achievement of  form  and  an  admirable gift  for  uncovering character. Simply  on the  grounds of  introducing such  writers (and  others like  Martin Avery and Linda
 Svendsen), these anthologies justify them­ selves and  deserve  a wider audience than  they  will likely get. But  to  really  make  a mark, to  achieve the  sort  of  importance that   they  seem  to  aspire  to,  the  editors  need  to provide a bolder, more  definitely  etched conception than  they  have  so far been inclined to do.
ANTHONY DAWSON



COMPANION IN
BOWLER HAT

ROBERT FINCH,  Variations & Theme. The  Por- cupine's Quill,  $16.oo; paper  $5·95·

THIS  POET (B.  I goo)   probably deplores the   contemporary  fad   for   selling   the writer's personal image.  Nevertheless, he appears  in   singular  style  on   the   back cover: attired in a three-piece pinstriped suit,  emblematic white  handkerchief  pro­ truding  from   pocket,    dark    tie   and­ bowler  hat.  In the  background:  a  regu­  lar   brick   wall,   a   pale   light   falling   in patches upon  it and  the  poet's  left shoul­  der.  The  effect: a  London City  man  or retired   brigadier-but why  not  a  poet after   all?   At  all   events,   a  dated  poet, scarcely  our  contempo,rary....
What appeal is  Robert Finch's  tradi­ tional   lyricism  likely  to  hold  for  today's  poetry-consumer? He  is no  angst-ridden free-verser, using  Western  gunslingers or New  Orleans  jazz-men   as  mask  for  his alienated artist's  personality,  no  exhibi­  tionist  of sex or  race,  no  wallowing  self­ confessor   or   zealot   of  lower   case.  The collection  opens  with  a  graceful sonnet­ celebration of the falling  attitudes  of autumn leaves,  closes with  "Theme," where   the   "hiding heart" peers  in  dis­ ciplined couplets after  a unity behind the flux.
'In  the  first  four  of five  sections  there are  no  less than   thirty-four sonnets,  over

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



two-thirds of the  total.  These  adhere closely to the Shakespearian type, whose clinching final  couplet is especially  con­ genial  to Finch's urge for definitive state­ ment.  Within these  strict  limits  there  is, however,   a  wide  range   of   subject   and tone:

Some poems are  the staff of life, good bread
Attention butters. Grain  that  feeds was fed.
("Anthology")

-Herbert  recalled, but  in  tactfully  up­
dated  diction;

How should  Pindar reckon  to crash  the dailies
When  there  is neither  hide  nor hair for
Phidias?
("Sports")

-from a witty,  colloquial/classical han­ dling  of  a  public   theme,  gross  commer­ cialized sport;

Any antique may prove a source of gain
But our old age not even rates  disdain.
("Antique")

-while the collection contains only four epigrams, so entitled, there  is a constant movement toward that  form's  quality  of unarguable assertion.
The sonnet  is used rather to embellish and   elaborate  than  to  develop  Shake­ spearian or  Donnesque  complexity. Ele­ gance  and    control,   with    considerable flexibility   of   language,  are   the  virtues: "At  a  Playing of Chopin's Second  Piano  Concerto" asks  two  rhetorical questions,  implying  through controlling metaphors centred   upon    diver    and    climber    the artist's daring of execution; "Colleagues" neatly  demonstrates  how   youth   merges into  age   and   assumes   its  fading  role; "Well-Tempered Clavier" 'composes' na­ ture,    by   musical    analogies;   "Prelate" wittily  apostrophizes the cardinal bird  by analogy  with   his  ecclesiastical counter­ part; "The Climb," if hackneyed in sub­ ject, is a  taut  extended metaphor of life's
 process; "Cannes" is wittily  imaged  in its own  terms:

A yacht at anchor  in a sea of yachts.... Hostessed by Venuses, a non-stop  cruise.

The  word  that  insists upon  being writ­ ten  is  'civilized.'   The personal  life  and  its  allegiances,   natural  observation  and celebration,  delight   in   music's   wordless art,   less an  avoidance  of  public  themes  than   their   implicit  exclusion   from   the range   of  lyric   art-though   the   occa­ sional  exception, typically distanced, "David   Hume   ( 1711-76)    and    Phillis Wheatley   ( 1753?-85)"  pleads    for   the brotherhood of man  with a quiet human­ ity alien to today's  postures.
Robert   Finch's  constant  ground   is  a
faith  voiced  in  a  manner akin  rather to a Vaughan than  the  more  troubled note of  a  Donne   or  even  an  R.  S.  Thomas, resting  often  in  a  graceful, sure  celebra­ tion   of  the   natural   processes,  in   such poems  as  "The  Autumn  Leaves," "The Fountains," "The Stars" (with  a personi­  fied  "first   Astronomer"),  "The  Water­ fall,"  'The Secret." The  envelope qua­ train -which he  favours -closing  the last  of four  sonnets  at  the  end  of section IV  is a  fitting,   affirmative signature  to some fifty lyrics that  have  explored time and  mutability, place, change and  decay, human and  spiritual love:

Experience  is not touchstone, no, nor  token, Salvation  is divine and from without,
Our  sole assurance. The  angel on his route
Reads on the sill the word  that  Love has
spoken.

The  final  section,  which  gives the col­ lection   its  title,   contains  fifteen   poems each  of  thirteen  rhyming, chiefly  penta­ meter  couplets,  the  last  as with  the  son­ nets clinching  the mood,  phase of feeling or  viewpoint. The  "Variations" explore  the   poet's   time   past,   in  search   of  the
'timeless  unity'  apprehended by glimpses throughout. The sequence  moves, with  a flexible  diction  and   pace -successfully

I45

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



varying  the  potentially monotonous form
-through a series of antitheses or coun­ terpoised   elements, present/past,  space/ time,  sound/silence, voicejsong,  arrival/ departure, the  antiphony of  Masyas  and  Apollo,  question/answer, to  be  resolved in  these  three  couplets  from  "Theme":

From learning  towers of the pensive mind Each  fresh horizon  speeds a Golden  Hind; The  hidden  loophole of the hiding  heart Looks for another  cloud to break apart; Well may the proferred  word begin to
tremble
Before the answer it will make assemble.

At   the   very  least   Robert   Finch   is  a serene, not  complacent, poetic companion
-and more,   an  artist   who  grants  the reader  scope for the detached, aesthetic appreciation that   does  not  exclude  feel­ ing. This is largely  facilitated, it must  be admitted, by his  very  conservatism. The cover  image  is a  dependable guide  to an integrity the  reader  will find  within.

MICHAEL THORPE



WORDS & REWARDS

IRVING   LAYTON,   The   Love   Poems  of  Irving
Layton. McClelland & Stewart.
STANLEY COOPERMAN, Greco's Last  Book, edited  and  with an introduction by Fred Candelaria. Intermedia Press, $12.95; paper,
$5-95·
WHEN   ADOPTING ONE  OF    HIS  extreme rhetorical stances  to distance  his Hebraic, poetic,  male  self  from  the  more  prosaic realms  of his readers, Irving  Layton  may well  qualify   as  Canada's silliest   major poet.  But   Gentile,  prose-oriented,  non­ macho  me   has   to   testify   to  an   over­  whelming delight in  the  Layton  who  is indubitably Canada's  most  alive,  vigor­ ously fleshly poet: the Layton who moves with  an  ease  of  assurance in  his  poetic  role  that recalls  D.  H.  Lawrence in  its high   sense  of  vocation -and  radically
 differentiates the  Montreal-raised poet from  his  predecessors, peers,  and  follow­ ers, in  this  hesitant land  of ours.
All   such   thoughts  and   opinions   re­ ceived  fresh  liberation in  me  when  con­  fronting  his  latest   volume.  Layton  tells us who we are.  The  Manichean-minded, god-fearing  politicians of sexual  equality will  likely  be  so  blinded  by  their   own bile  as to  be  quite unable   to see beyond Layton's lachrymose self-pity  and  heavy­  handed   songs  of  woman-as-object. But the truth for the remainder of his readers is to forgive  the  poet  where  he least  de­ mands it   (because of  his  old  man's  in­ souciance)  and  to enjoy  the  artist  whose verbal   wand-not   the   phallic  one,  he thinks -brings  magic   to  evocations  of men  and   women,   to  the  copulative act, and   to  the  world   in  which   he  conjures up its enactment.
It is this overwhelming power,  so con­
trolled,  so  poetically accurate as  well  as concise, which silences all Apollonian opposition  and   which   turns   page  after page  of  this  volume   into  a  life-enhanc­ ing,  esthetic  experience.  Poems  such  as "For Artemis" with its Laytonic marriage of  the   female   and  the  sea,  sad  ballads  like "Two Songs for Sweet  Voices,"  ban­ ish  all  treasonous  thoughts of  the  poet's  occasional flaccidity of language:

It was a late  November  day
Or  so I dreamed a dream;
The  fog descending on the banks,
The  sun a frozen gleam.

No living  thing  survived  except
That like a frightened  thief
There quivered on a barren bough
A single, wind-torn leaf.

And only you and  I, my love, Remained to see it fall
And you were very beautiful
And  I was straight and  tall.

And as sunlight ebbed  away We danced  around the tree, Until  the snows came  burying The  leaf and  you and  me.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



:Another  aspect  of his power,  the range of  his  poetic   matter allied   to  that  un­ wavering  technique,   is   highlighted   in poems such as "Strange Turn" which  not only  brings  out  the aspect  of middle-age melancholy   in   conjunction  with   love­ making,   but  also a  nice  wryness  as wel­ come self-mockery to counterbalance the dangers of  solipsism  in  the  poet's  work. But  Layton can  also  be,  reassuringly, just  plain  funny. My  own  candidate for the  most  humorous poem   in  the  whole literary pantheon of Canadian verse is his well-known    "Misunderstanding," which must  be deliciously  pertinent to all Can­ Lit   lecturers  and   students, but  also  to those of us who live far  from  the domain  of cramped desks  in  campus  classrooms. The Love  Poems  of Irving  Layton  cer­ tainly   contain  some  Layton  samples   of excellence  but  even  so there  is a  paucity  of that   splendid fusion  of  anecdote and vision as in  the  much anthologized "The Bull  Calf" or,  indeed, in  so many  of his nature  poems -if    such    a   pedestrian label  may  be applied  to the  work of such a turbulent artist. And I  was also mildly surprised   by  a  few  omissions -such  as "Winter Light"  ("With you, Aviva, I am
negated  and   fulfilled I In  you    and through   you I I   am    perpetuated  and
destroyed  ... ") which   appeared  in  his
1964 volume,  The  Laughing Rooster.
,These  'Love   Poems'  carry  a  foreword
by the  poet  that   I  personally thought as pompous  and   vain   as  it  was  unmemo­ rable.  Then Layton invariably writes best when   responding  to  his  poetic  daemon  rather than   when  insisting upon  one  of these flatulent apologias.
Stanley  Cooperman, the  author of the posthumous poems  in Greco's  Last Book, edited   by  Fred  Candelaria, shared  Jew­ ishness  and  a  stint  in  Canada  with  Lay­ ton  but,  sadly,  not  too  much  else. Cer­  tainly   not  in  the  possession  of  a  major poetic   talent. The  mighty   ego  is  there,  but  too  often  accompanied only  by heat
 without poetry's illumination. Put against a Layton   (or  a  Purdy,  too, for  that mat­ ter)   Cooperman suffers  in  consequence.
,I think  that  Fred  Candelaria, in his introduction, puts  his finger  deftly on the poet's  limitation, even though he makes considerable effort  to  be fair  to his  sub­ ject:  "Much of his  [Cooperman's]  work is indeed  explosive.  The imagery  is  vio­ lent.  The  stance is aggressive  in the hec­ toring,  overtly  didactic verses that are  all too  prominent  in  Cappelbaum's  Dance especially."  And  a: little  later  Candelaria adds:  "It  is  the   apparent   dynamicism [sic] of the other works that creates  diffi­ culties   because   the  energy  is  frequently more  of a  tantrum than  of  a  jeremiad." Here,  Cooperman's editor  is  referring to poems  omitted  from   the  collection,   but my own feeling  is that even  within  what has  been salvaged  for Greco's  Last Book,  there   is  too   much  bombast,  too  much  firing   of   massive   salvoes   at   miniscule targets.
But  that   is  not   the  whole  tsory.  For
the persistent reader there  are  rewards  to discern within the tiny print. But not, surprisingly, among the  distinctly  Jewish poems  (and  surely  all  poets  would  enjoy the  bonus  of  distinctive identity such  as Jewry confers for material on which  to work). Instead it is the  more  relaxed, sometimes   wry   'poems    of   place'    that work best in this collection. Not verses grouped   under such  headings as  Ances­ tors   &  Heritage, but   poems   such   as "Brooklyn,  My  Betrothed," with  its deli­ cious   line:    "the  delphic  underwear  of Mrs  Levin  turned Sunday into  wind  and  heavy  prophecy." Or "Persepolis, I Love  You"  with  its  restlessness  over  suburban, sabbath conformity:

Now  beyond  my window neighbors suffer Sunday
Where every  lawn must  go to church;
daffodils are  Methodist, and  these  unshaven fingers outrage  all weedless women•...

147

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



And two other poems, because they are relaxed  and  replete with  an ease of  com­ mand   over   material,  are  probably  the best  in  the  book.  "Near  Grouse   Moun­ tain"   belongs  in  any  superior   westcoast anthology,  with   its   lines  "There  is  no burning bush  in  this  garden, only spirits
made   of  bamboo,  cursing   the  winter  I
that   comes  down   from   the  mountain I
with  a  smell  of  rain.... " "Vancouver,
I Love  You"  is, in its way, a poetic sum­ mation   of  experience  that   could   come only from  the pen of Stanley Cooperman. With   its  authenticity of   evocation  and personal    testament it   reveals   a  minor  poet   capable  of   distinctive   verse   that  should  not  be left  to sink below our  col­ lective  memory.  We  have  Fred  Cande­ laria   to  thank  for   that   now  being  un­ likely to happen.
DAVID WATMOUGH


TO REVELATIONS

NANCY  SENIOR,   The   Mushroom  jar.  Thistle­
down Press.
MONA  ELAINE   ADILMAN,  Piece Work. Borealis
Press.
MARY DI   MICHELLE, Bread  and  Chocolate j BRONWEN  WALLACE, Marrying  Jnto the  Fa­ mily. Oberon.

ROBERT  FROST  ONCE  SAID,   "Poetry  pro­ vides  the  one  permissible  way  of  saying one  thing   and   meaning  another."  Frost does  not  suggest  that  there  are  two  dif­ ferent  poems  when  one  poem  is written; he asserts that  a poem  is a poem  because it  is not  only  what is written. Language used   poetically  provides   not   just  a  de­ scription of or  reaction to experience but a new experience as well, an integral transformation of the old. Thus, the poet means  what  he says, but  in a more subtle and  profound way he means what  he reveals.   The  four   poets   under   review here  say and  reveal  with  varying  degrees of success.
 In The Mushroom Jar,  Nancy  Senior does  not  often  move  beyond  a sentimen­ tal   response   to   experience   and   a  very matter-of-fact-way   of    using    language. This  is especially  true  when  she  remains an observer of what goes on immediately around her. She writes  rather prosaically about  the  death  of  her  cats,  a misty  day in  a  Swiss  village, and  a  long-lost  lover. She  has  certain things  to say  about the cats,  the  village,  and  the  lover,  but  she reveals   nothing out   of  the  ordinary  in terms  of   language or  experience. After  the death of the cats, "We trembled with
excitement I while our parents made sympathetic  remarks I pretending not  to enjoy  it I as much  as we did." The Swiss
village   (in  ten  lines)   is "a little  outpost of   Saskatchewan"  and   the   poet,   as  a result,   is  "homesick." Relationships  be­ tween  the sexes have  been described over and   over   again   in   art.   The   following  lines add  nothing new:
I wanted to call  you and  tell  you  I miss you
But  you would have  put  a smile  in your
voice
and   told  me
about the  few  things you are  doing
and after hanging up
you would have  wondered what I was  trying to get
The  essential   reason   such   lines   dis­ appoint is  because   Nancy  Senior  shows elsewhere in  her  collection   that  she  can do  much   more  than   flatly  relate  experi­ ence-she   can   make   it   new,  make   it matter to the  reader. This happens espe­ cially  when  she  travels,  not  just  to Swiss villages   but   to   places  behind   the  post­ cards   where   the  observing  eye  is  itself transformed. At  Karlsaue, Senior watches a  nun   walking  alone   in  a  park   and   is disturbed  by  possibilities.  At  the  Lipton Jewish  cemetery she  reads  the  names  of strangers, her  grandmother's name  on  a tombstone at  Bethebera, and   her   own fears  and   doubts in  the  space  and   time that  surround. At  the  monastery of Heil-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



genkreuz, Senior  has her own days of "retreat," and   they  draw   from   her  the final   concise   and   ironic   self-comment:
"your    paperback   books   of   devotion I
mocking    you I from    the    ivory   inlaid
table." If Senior would  consistently  move
beyond   the  mere   relation of  experience to a  re-evaluation and  renewal of it, she would  be a formidable poet.
In the  title  poem  of her  collection she writes  of  a  mushroom  jar,  housing  fra­ gile  northern moss, broken   by a  dusting janitor. Yet  it  is not  the  act  of  destruc­ tion  itself  that  matters but  what the  act signifies.  It is one  thing  to  be sorry  that  the   jar  is  broken,  the  moss  dead; it  is quite   another  to  transform  the  broken jar  into  a  revelation about  human con­ nections,  the  value  of words,  those  writ­  ten and  those  absent. Instead of explain­ ing  the obvious  to the  repentant  janitor, Senior  leaves  "the paper blank":

I go to the  shelf
pour  a few  drops of water
onto the  dried-out  moss and  cover  the  jar
with  an  unopened envelope from  this
morning's mail.

The problem with  Mona Elaine Adil­ man   is  that    her   highly-charged,   even frenetic use  of  language  obscures  mean­  ing. She seems  to insist  that  revelation is in  the  saying; and  what  a saying  it is­ replete    with    metaphorical   explosions, auditory  and    visual    assaults    on    the reader, a piling on of The Word,  a mak­  ing  new  that  blinds  us to the  old. In  the first   section   of   Piece    Work,  subtitled "Love  Play," the  poet  overstates a sexual orgasm, striving for  the  word  equivalent of an  extraordinary physical,  emotional, and spiritual experience:

Prepare for  moon  landing
-jets of cataclysmic sensation.
My  psyche  explodes ... subsides.

Spaced out  in  space,
we fuse  with the  universe,
rub  flesh  with  tumescent stars.
 Certainly this is no mere  description, nor is it a glib equation of experience with image.  But  neither in  these  lines  (nor  in the  poem  from  which  they  are  taken)  is there  an  achievement of  unity  or  mean­ ing,  because  the  compilation of  individ­ ual images overwhelms.
,Jn her  love  poems,  Adilman writes  in
short  bursts of word-fire (indicated espe­ cially  by  recurrent short  lines  and  stan­  zas) , bursts  that   explode  inward in  the poem   against    each   other.   Her    vision seems  to  be  contained  in  lists of  images that  only  occasionally   cohere  into  some­ thing   more.   In   "Bedmates,"  the   poet contrasts  the   flesh   and   Ininds   of   the lovers;   but   this   legitimate  contrast  is obscured  by the several  and  distinct met­ aphors   employed.  Thus   "flesh   touches
flesh ignites I burns  high  voltage  in mag­
netic   fields";    then    "minds  are   wheel tracks I rutted in  descending snow"; meanwhile "emotions fall  like lost stars"
as  "bodies   blend  and   merge  I plasticine
puppets fused." Such  lines are  not  taken
out  of context; they  are the  context.
In the second and third sections of her book,   in   which   Adilman  looks  at   the world around her-at factory  workers, artists,  relatives,  social and cultural forces
-the images and  metaphors continue to pile  up.  But  outside   of  Adilman's  love affairs   (and   those  of  others)  there   is a great   enough   space  of  sound   and   sense to  absorb   them.   The  poems  are   much more  "message" verse, yet not obtrusively so. In  "Montreal," Adilman's high-energy vision  and   language  do   unite   and   co­ here,  and  the  result  is redolent of  A. M. Klein's transformation of  two languages and  experiences in his poem  of  the same title:

I've watched skyscrapers scar  your  soul, joined  the  human cargo of your  freighted streets, obsessed  with  technology.
Once radiant clear, the  St. Lawrence flows a sluggish odyssey,
and  money  moguls  throng

149

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



in cesspool  galaxies to  batten on  your  beauty and  your  past.

,The  poems  of  Mary  di  Michele   and Bronwen  Wallace  have  been  collected  in one  volume  with  two  titles-Bread  and Chocolate and  Marrying into the Family. Both poets are concerned with  the family as  motive  for  metaphor, their  respective family   histories,   especially   as   revealed through photographs, and  with  the mys­ terious,    astonishing, and   homage-filled revelation  of  self  through  a 'saying'  of others.
In "A  Streetcar Named  Nostalgia," di Michele  writes  of  her  thirty-year-old great-grandfather  emigrating to Canada in 1903. He "slipped  to work each winter
day, I missed  Christmas  waiting   for   an
epiphany, I lived  alone   choking   on   tea and  English  I biscuits.... " Then he left
this   "frigid    paradise" and   returned  to Italy.  The poet is fascinated by this jour­ ney,  its  connection  to  the  great-grand­ father's  subsequent  marriage, the  even­ tual  birth  of   her   mother,  and  her  mother's   marriage:  "and   in  1954,  my
father,  then  30 I sailed to Canada's
Toronto.... " Meanwhile,  di   Michele
herself   emerges   from   this  history   in   a moving tribute to her father entitled "Waiting for Babbo":

I am  four, a year  to you, babbo, is twenty to me,  twenty years and I am  five, I have  grown  old
without you.  I have  dressed  as a gypsy
for  Carnevale. The sacrifice in the  bonfire was  my  rocking horse  for  the  end  of winter. In a few  days,  babbo, we pack
the  smiles  that are  destined for  you.

The family, with  parent and grandparent love and  gifts  of experience, is the  heart of  the  matter for  di  Michele.  However, given  this and  her  North  American edu­ cation   ("in   another  world,  wearing the black academic  gown")   the   poet  is caught between  her  Italian  heritage and her   Canadian,  liberated   consciousness. Speaking of her  father, she writes,  "
 you will surrender I and  visit him in hos­ pital  I where   you   will   be   accused I of wishing  his death I in wanting a life I for
yourself." If there is  an  overwhelming
sense of love and  need  generated for  and by di  Michele's family,  past  and  present, there  is also a muted sense of loss, of the self caught in  its most  beautiful moment in  a  black  and  white  photograph of  the child   forever    fled   from   the   promised land.
Bronwen   Wallace  studies   the  photo­ graphs of her  family  much  as di  Michele  does hers-not as ends in themselves  but as  starting points   for   investigation  and speculation.  There   is   the   surface,  the "merely  technical"  effect   in   "the  way the   children   seem   starched -like the
dresses  they  wear  for  the  occasion  I the
adults behind  them  rigid and  unsmiling."
But,  Wallace writes,  "that does  not  ex­ plain   the   eyes I how   the  calm   there  is repeated I in  the  sure  tilt  of  a  chin  I in the  way  the  hands lie I loosely  folded  in
the   lap"; nor   does  such   surface   detail
reveal  the  photograph behind  the photo­
graph:

but  I keep  holding the  negatives at different angles to the  light squinting my eyes
for  a glimpse of our  white figures
galloping toward each other
over  the  dark fields.

Examination of different photos at dif­ ferent  angles   leads   Wallace to  "sifting  the stories"  that  have  been handed down about her  relatives.  There is remarkable strength in  the  women  of  her  past.  One  great   aunt, still  alive  at  93,  pitched   hay along   with   the   men   or   baked   twenty loaves  of  bread   in  a  morning. A  great­ grandmother, to  embarrass her  husband in  his excessive drinking, flouted  conven­ tion  in I 895  when  she  marched into  the local  bar  to  order   drinks   on  the  house. Was   it   the   same    "great-grandmother
who  refused  I to  go  to  hospital   for  the tumour I and  had  two  doctors  come  in I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



to  remove  it while she lay chloroformed f
on her  own  dining-room table"?
Wallace  is certain that  in  heredity she will  find   herself.  Her   injured  knee  be­ comes  that  of her grandmother, the bones of this stranger mending under the poet's  "familiar skin." Yet  the  tenuous  nature of the  search  is admitted as her  heritage remains "as  silent  as  the  bones/ I can't see  in  the  photographs." Soon  Wallace,  her  husband, and  son  begin  to appear in their   own   snapshots  "slightly blurred." In one photo  they dress up in the clothes  of  their  ancestors,  and   the   poet  senses that   they   are   already  ancestors  them­ selves, are  already eluding interpretation and  claims.  But  there is revelation:

daily  we grow  less familiar our faces  vaguely reminiscent
of faces  we think we remember but  assumed were  dead
faces  we have  never  seen
emerging at  last
from  the  bone  camera
behind our  eyes.

J. A.  WAINWRIGHT



RIEL IN REVIEW

LOUIS  "DAVID" RIEL,  Poesies  re[igieuses  et  poli­
tiques. Editions des Plaines.
AUGUSTE-HENRI DE  TREMAUDAN,  Histoire de [a nation  metisse   dans  !'Ouest  canadien.  Edi­ tions  des  Plaines.
MARY   JORDAN, De ta Soeur, Sara  Riel. Editions des Plaines.
CLAUDE DORGE, Le  Roitelet. Editions du  Ble. Association of Metis and  Non-status Indians of
Saskatchewan, Louis  Riel- justice Must be
Done. Manitoba Metis Federation  Press.

THE  FIVE BOOKS UNDER REVIEW, all  pub­ lished   in   Saint-Boniface/Winnipeg,  are concerned with the rehabilitation of Louis "David"  Riel  and   form   part of  a  fast­ growing  body  of works  dealing with  this still controversial figure.
 The  collection  of religious and  political poems  by Riel  himself  is a facsimile  edi­ tion originally  published by the Montreal newspaper    L'Etendard    a   few   months  after  Riel's  execution.  Signed and  dated  August  1879,  they  were  written in  what  was  then   known  as  Dakota  where   the exiled  Riel  was  teaching at  St.  Joseph's mission  school.  Three documents signed by various  members of  Riel's  immediate family  attesting to  their  authenticity are appended to the volume.  The poems, cast in the conventional lyrical  forms of the French  nineteenth century, are of  histori­ cal  rather than  literary  importance. The  first seven, religious  in  nature, are  grate­ ful homilies dedicated  to men  of religion while the last long poem  addressed  to Sir John  A. Macdonald is full  of bitter  acri­  mony alternating with  braggadocio.
This   little  volume   is  a microcosm   of what  Thomas Flanagan so aptly  terms "Riel's baffiing personality ... full of  con­ tradiction  and   ambivalence."   Still,   the poems  are coherent and  highly  readable, obviously  the  work  of  an  educated man intimately acquainted, moreover, with the machinations of  the  political arena. The  eyes of the  Western  world  were  focussed on Riel  during his  lengthy trial  when  he was  pronounced  sane  except  on  matters relating to  politics and  religion.  Perhaps in  1886  the  poems  were  meant to speak for  themselves; in 1981 they still evoke powerfully the  smouldering political mood of French-Canadians a century ago.

Tremaudan's Histoire -also a facsim­ ile I979 edition  originally  published  post­ humously  in  1935 -is  the  first  work  of any   dimension   devoted   entirely   to  the Metis people and  Riel's role among them.  A sizeable appendix  by the  Historical So­ ciety  of  L'Union   nationale  metisse  St. Joseph refuting  accusations  levelled against  Riel  (and  the  Metis)  during his trial  reinforces  the  justificatory  tone  in Histoire, a work which ethnologist Marcel

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Giraud  surrunarizes   as  "an   apology   of
Louis Riel."
Having emigrated from  France  to Sas­ katchewan  as  a   youth,   Tremaudan,  a lawyer   and   a  man   of  letters,   was  very close to his subject. He was privy  to first­ hand  information about events of the last half   of   the   I 8oo's.   His  history   lacks  a footnote  apparatus, but  its  detailed  ac­ counts of  a by-gone era are referred  to by Giraud himself as well as George  F. Stan­ ley and   other   historians.  Given  the vast scholarly output  on  Riel  and  the M,etis people  since  it  was  first  published,  Tre­ maudan's Histoire stands today as a livre­ temoin:   the   first   attempt   to   present  events  from  the standpoint of a despoli­  ated,  humiliated  and,   until   then,   silent people. It has  recently  appeared in  Eng­ lish edited by Howard Adams.
Mary  Jordan's I98o De ta Soeur  is es­ sentially a translation, with minor changes  and  an  additional chapter, of  her prize­ winning To Louis  from Your Sister Who Loves  You   Sara  Riel, published  in  I974 by Griffin  House, Toronto. It purports to be the  story  of  Louis  and  Sara  based  for the most part on her letters  to her brother and  family. Unfortunately, many essential features of   the   I974  volume  have  been deleted  from  De ta Soeur:   the  useful  In­ dex,  the  very  interesting Map   and  Itin­ erary  of Sara's 68-day  trek  by ox-cart  to the  far-off   mission  from  which  she  was never   to  return, and,   unaccountably,  a five-verse  song allegedly  written by Louis which  had  been  published  in  translation in the English  version. More  serious is the omission  of an  appendix containing, in chronological order  and in the original French, 38 of Sara's dated  and  undated letters,  a reference source  which  becomes of paramount importance as one reads De ta Soeur.
After   two  expository  chapters, Jordan provides extensive  excerpts  from Sara's letters linked  together by historical  com­ mentary and   brief  transitional  passages.
 The letters  cover roughly  the period  I 868- I 883  and   are   the  substance of  most  of Jordan's book. They  contain many inter­ esting   details   about  missionary  life:   its hardships, its sometime  joys, the  desper­ ate  plight   of  the  natives; but  their  leit­ motif is Sara's anxiety and finally despair over   the    scarcity   of    letters    from   her brother Louis   (only  two are  included in this volume) .
Jordan's approach is informal and an­ ecdotal. Unfortunately, this leads to short,  choppy paragraphs couching a  rambling train   of  thought  that   often   leaves   the reader bewildered as she  jumps from  one geographical  area   and,  even   more   dis­ concertingly, from  one time-frame to an­  other. A  hawk-eyed,  flint-hearted editor would have stood her in good stead. How­  ever,  the  most serious defect  is her  some­ what  cavalier treatment of historical  fact.  A letter  allegedly  written by Sara  "assise sur   les  bards   de  Ia  riviere   Assiniboine" was in fact  written six months later, as we learn  from  the  I974  appendix. Likewise, we  are  told  that   Louis  is  riding   in  the countryside where  "L'herbe est  verte,  le
vent  souffle  librement  ,a   travers  les
branches touffues  et  les feuilles  en  pleine
veg,etation  frolent l'abondante chevelure noire  et  boudee du  jeune  cavalier." This is the same land which Jordan correctly describes on the next page as parched and devastated by the   I868  plague   of  grass­ hoppers. Such   flights  of  fancy  may  be­ come  the  fiction  writer-Jordan has  a novel  to  her  credit-but  they  have   no place  in an historical work.
H this  book  is indeed  history  and  not historical fiction,  we should  expect  better use  of existing  scholarship. Jordan is  ac­ quainted with Stanley's classic  I 963 biog­ raphy of Riel; yet inaccuracies abound in her  work.  She  tells  us, for  instance, that  "Louis Riel rec;oit d'Ottawa le pouvoir  de diriger le  gouvernement  provisoire  ..."; Stanley in Louis  Riel attributes the source of  authority to  the  ailing  Hudson's  Bay

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Company Governor Mactavish who, while   Riel's   prisoner,  was   reported  to have given his blessing to any form of government  which   might  maintain  law and  order during this sensitive transitional period of I87o. Even more confusing is Jordan's account of the death of Parisien, a  young  Metis:  her  French version   (p.
48)  is different from  her  English  one  (p.
2 I ) ,  and   both    are   incompatible  with
Stanley   (p.   106) .  Especially curious   is Jordan's reticence in discussing  the execu­ tion  of  Thomas Scott,   the  turning  point in  Riel's  life and  an  episode  exhaustively treated  by  Stanley  as  well  as  by  many other  historians.
Many Riel scholars  today  are  trying  to unravel  the   tangled skein  of  history  in which  Riel  has  been  trapped, and  since the  I 974 To  Louis  from Your Sister much first-rate material has  appeared, such  as Thomas Flanagan's edition of Riel's dia­ ries  (I 976)   and   his  excellent  I 979  bio­ graphical study.  None  of this  recent  ma­ terial   appears  to  have   been   utilized   in De ta Soeur. Nor  do Jordan's comments stringing together  Sara's letters offer many  insights  into the lives of her  fascin­ ating  subjects. Nevertheless, despite  these reservations,  we  owe  Jordan  a  debt   of gratitude  for  bringing out   of  the  dusty archives   a  fertile   source   of  documenta­ tion.  It is  to be hoped   that  Sara's entire correspondence will  soon  be made avail­ able  in an  accurate,  well annotated criti­  cal edition.

Many plays have been written about Louis  Riel  since  he first  stepped into  the public  arena in  I87o,  but   until  Le  Roi­ telet  ( I98o)   none  had  tried  to deal  with his  perspective of  the   world  and  of  his role in it. First performed in I 976, Dorge's  play is an  interesting creative pendant to Flanagan's   prize-winning    study    Louis
'David'  Riel: Prophet of the New World, both works highlighting as they do the millenarian aspect  of Riel.
 Most  plays are  written from  a precon­ ceived  notion  of  plot  and  character; Le Roitelet,  explains Dorge,  grew  out  of  a gestation period  of  rehearsals,   the  char­ acters  shaping  themselves  to given  situa­  tions, and  to each  other,  according to the perception  of  actors,  director, and  play­ wright.  The play  opens  as  Riel  is being admitted to a mental institution under  an assumed  name.  The  set -which remains unchanged  throughout-is  a  bare  hos­ pital  room,  circwnscribed by lighting ef­ fects designed  to create a mood  of  claus­ trophobic confinement. But Riel, the only "real" person  in  the  play,  soon  finds  an escape in the visions who people his mind. Called  forth  out  of time and space as one thought leads to another, these visions are the characters who fill  the stage.
Bereft of both freedom and  identity, assailed by voices pulling  him in all direc­ tions, Riel  lives on  intense emotional ex­ perience.   Characters and   events   merge and  blend  into one another. Significantly, the women  glide from  one identity to an­  other:  Riel's  mother Julie   becomes  the Virgin Mother; the ghost of his sister Sara  blurs into that  of his first love Marie, then  into  that   of  his  wife  Marguerite. These internal ambiguities in Riel's  persona  are reflected  in the language; stark  simplicity alternates with  liturgical chant in  incan­ tory rhythms.
The end   especially   captures  his   tor­ tured   religiosity  and   desperate  sense  of mission. The tempo accelerates, and  amid shouts of "crucify him" and strains of "La  Marseillaise," Death  appears in  the  role of  a   taunting   prostitute.  This   stylized madness  finally  explodes  into  a  salvo  of shots  (Scott's execution). In  the  ensuing  silence, Riel entones one last  hymn  to his "douce contree ...rna blonde  ado!'ee...." The  title,   which   means   both   "small
wren" and  "petty king,"  is well  chosen, embodying as it does the contradictory aspects   of  Riel's   character:  his  vulner­ ability  and  his overweening  pride.  Dorge

153

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



downplays the  hubris, however,  to focus on the Sartrian en-soi point  of view.
The playwright seems well acquainted with  primary materials relating to the personal side of his subject.  His transfor­ mation of  fact  into  fiction  captures not only  the  intimate Riel  but  the  man  as a metaphor of our  time. The metamorpho­ sis of  Thomas Scott,  for  instance,   from bitterest enemy  to most trusted  friend  and  ally  is  strikingly  effective   when   viewed from   today's   historical    vantage  point.  However, the   characterizations  tend   to become simplistic and  naive;  I fail  to see moreover why Parisien  was given such a disproportionately  large   role.   In   short, there  are  longueurs  which,  compounded by the absence of intermissions, could pose problems  for the director.
Nevertheless, this play is dynamic, rich in paradox and, in a strange  way, remark­ ably   faithful  to  the  Riel   who  emerges from  his  letters  and  diaries.  It  goes fur­  ther,  for  it  transcends the  particular to touch  upon  the  universal: guilt, fear and  self doubt, as well as dreams  and  aspira­ tions  are,  after  all,  the  legacy  of  Every­ man.  In  the  hands of an  imaginative di­ rector,   Le   Roitelet   could   be   excellent theatre and, as such, deserves to be trans­  lated  in order  to reach  a wider  public.

The last book under  review, Louis Riel
-Justice Must  be Done, is a study  by the
Association  of  Metis  and  Non-status  In­
dians  of  Saskatchewan submitted to  the Federal Government in 1978 requesting a posthumous pardon for  Riel.  It must  be noted  that,   unlike  their  Indian brothers, the   Metis   were   never   granted   special status  under the  law of the land,  and  the opprobrium of Riel's  disgrace  fell heavily upon   them   and   their  children. For  the past century the many  Metis  who did  not join  the  white   man's ways  were  forced into an ever more  precarious and degrad­ ing  existence-as  Marcel   Giraud  tell­ ingly describes  in his exhaustive  Le M his

154
 Canadien  (Paris, 1945) ."justice  Must  be Done is tangible evidence that  the  Metis people  are   taking their  first  courageous step  toward rehabilitation.
This submission   attempts to  bring  to­ gether  "all  relevant material, both histori­  cal and  legal,  about Riel and  his involve­  ment   in   the   Red   River   Resistance  of
1869-70  and   the  Northwest Uprising in
1885  [with the  purpose of showing] that a  grave   miscarriage  of  justice   resulted.
. .." Information  is  gathered  from  Ses­ sional   Papers, House   of  Commons  De­ bates,  correspondence and  archival  ma­  terial,   but  especially   from  three   histori­  ans:   Tremaudan and  Stanley   as  well  as Dr.  Peter  Charlebois who  makes  no pre­  tense  of  presenting  an  unbiased view  in his well illustrated The  Life of Louis Riel
( 1 975)·
Needless  to say, the  85-page composite
brief  lacks  the  depth and  cohesion  of  a
single-authored monograph. A detailed chronology of  the events  of 1869-70  does little   to  emphasize Riel's  finest  achieve­ ment:  his  forging of  the  List  of  Rights which    became  the   foundation   of   the Manitoba  Act.  Attention is focussed  in­ stead   on  the  case  of  Thomas Scott,   on the  unfulfilled  promise  of  amnesty,   and on details of the  1885 uprising which  are not always significant and sometimes con­ tradictory; e.g., the Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest Territories is reported as having "provided important (and  alarm­ ing)  information all  during 1884,''  while on  the next  page  he is said  to have  "mis­ led Macdonald into  believing  that every­ thing in the Northwest was under control.
... " The scholarly apparatus is somewhat unconventional and  disconcerting.
Nevertheless this manifesto, in  re­ markably restrained and  sober  language, gets  its  message  across.  The  reader   may be astonished to learn  that  the 1885  Re­  bellion  was manned by an "army" of goo Metis-a generous  estimate  by  all  ac­ counts available today-armed with buf-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



falo guns  and  a limited supply  of  ammu­ nition,  against which  had  been mobilized upward of 5000 troops equipped with  the latest  materiel including the Gatling gun. Surprisingly the authors of this polemical  document do not capitalize on such a flag­ rant  disproportion; they  make  it  abun­ dantly clear,   however, that   in  order   to muster   the Canadian army-and simul­ taneously the funds to complete the trans­  continental railway-Macdonald had in­ flated  the Duck  Lake  incident out  of all proportion. Quotations from  his own cor­ respondence  reveal   that, a  few  months later, hoist  on  his  own  petard,  he  was forced  to scale down  the  term "rebellion" in order  to prevent Riel's  plea for  mercy from  reaching the Queen.
Grave doubts   have  been  expressed   in many  quarters regarding the  propriety of the  proceedings  of  Riel's   trial   and   the failure  to  implement  the   jury's   recom­ mendation of  mercy.  Although  this  cru­  cial  matter is discussed   in  the  brief,  its presentation  regrettably  lacks  coherence and  forcefulness. On  the other hand, the well   chosen   photographs   ranging  from early  drawings to pictures of the recent commemorative statue, cairn,  and  stamp tell their  own story.
,The  anger and  frustration  betrayed by
the  defensive  tone  of the  book is not sur­ prising  given  the  bewildering stand  of a government  prepared  to   heap  honours upon  a national hero  who is still officially a traitor.
SIMONE P. KNUTSON


FERRON'S APPEAL

JACQUES  FERRON,  L'Amelanchier. V.L.B. edi­
teur.
PIERRE   L'HERAULT,    Jacques    Ferron,   Carto­ graphe  de l'imaginaire. Les Presses de l'Uni­ versite  de  Montreal.

L'AMELANCHIER  by Jacques Ferron, which   appeared  in   1977   (V.L.B.   edi-
 teur),  is  a   second edition,  without changes, of the novel published under  the same   title  in   1970   (Editions  du   Jour, "Romanciers du   jour").  Ferron had  al­ ready  written six  novels,  as  well  as  the Contes  and   the  plays  which   first  estab­  lished  his reputation in  Quebec, and  has since produced four more.  Apart from  the Contes,  L'Amelanchier is his  only  single work to have had a book-length study  de­ voted to it: Jean-Pierre Boucher's Jacques Ferron au   pays des  amelanchiers,  pub­  lished  by  the  Presses  de  l'Universire de Montreal  in   1 973·  Jean  Ethier-Blais greeted  the  first  edition   of  the  novel  in Le  Devoir   (March  21st,   1970)   with   a
sigh of relief:   "Ni  .a droite, ni a gauche,
un  livre  naturel." R·eginald  Martel's  re­
action  to the  second  edition, in the  same paper, proclaimed: "Vous n'avez  pas change, Tinamer de  Portanqueu" (June
I 7th,I 978) . What  are  the reasons for the initial  success and  continuing fascination
of this particular novel, amidst  the diver­
sity of Ferron's prolific  output?
The "amelanchier" (saskatoon tree)  of the title grows in the wood behind the childhood  home  of  Tinamer de  Portan­ queu,  the narrator. Now twenty years old and  an  orphan, Tinamer  is  undertaking the  narration of her childhood in  an  at­ tempt to establish her identity and  "orien­ tation" in the world. "Orientation" in the sense of  "orienteering": she  must  redis­ cover  her  point  of origin,  before  she  can decide where  she is going. The saskatoon flowers magnificently and  precociously; it is the first sign of spring  in her childhood universe,  the symbolic  tree in a lost para­ dise,  but  also  a  lighthouse  marking her port   of  departure. The   major part  of Tinamer's  retrospective   account  is  de­  voted   to  the  time  when  she  was  about five years old, and her world  was divided into a "good  side" and  a "bad side," gov­ erned  by a dualism evoked  and  sustained by  her  father,  the   eccentric "Leon  de Portanqueu esquire." The "good  side"  is

155

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



behind  the house and belongs to the weekends.  It is the wonderland where Tinamer sees  Monsieur Northrop, an Englishman  who  carries  a  compass  and was the original owner of the land; also Signor   Petroni,  the   present   owner,   an exile  from  Italy   (Tinamer lives in  Lon­ gueil), and  Hubert Robson, a nineteenth­ century priest forever  in search of a small, blond  girl  of Tinamer's  age  called  Mary  Mahon.  These figures,  which  hover  be­ tween  dream and reality, are described  in terms of animals. M. Northrop used to be a rabbit, one of  many allusions to Alice in Wonderland. Tinamer herself,  when  she escapes into her fantasy  world,  becomes a "petite  becasse du  Canada," the  equiva­ lent  of  "a silly  little   goose."  The   shifts from human to animal and  back are rem­ iniscent  of  Ferron's Contes, as is  North­ rop's exclamation,  "ouhonnedeurfou­ le-de!" However, the realm in which such characters, metamorphoses and  dialogues  exist is counterbalanced in L' Amelanchier by  the  "bad side  of  things," beginning with   the  concrete  road  in  front   of  the house   and   encompassing  Etna    (Tina­ mer's mother), school, and 1\font Thabor, the home for retarded children where  her father works. These elements  are  associ­ ated   with  the  "banalire  urbaine,  subur­ baine,   petroliere  et   americaine"  which suppresses  "le burlesque, le saugrenu et la fantaisie."
Tinamer's  emergence from   childhood to adult consciousness  is accomplished  by memory.   She  discovers  a sense  of   con­ tinuing  identity  on   a  precise  occasion, when  she  "lives  through" the  night  and  realizes  that  she is the same  person  from day  to day.  This  event  is paralleled by a similar   one   in   her   father's  childhood. Leon's   search   for   his  origins   takes  the form  of gazing through a telescope  at his own  lost  paradise,  the  county   of  Mas­ kinonge  to which  he longs to return. He also has a written acount which  preserves his identity, the de Portanqueu Bible con-
 taining the genealogy  and history of the family  (some  of them  called  Ferron)  go­ ing back to the Flood  (the forty-day cross­ ing  of  the  Atlantic) . A  mythical  history of  Quebec is incorporated into  the  nar­  rative  as a "mise  en abyme" of Tinamer's own   search   for   her   past.   It   illustrates Leon's role, relayed  by Tinamer, of "con­ teur":  "... les  Ferron ... se firent  fabu­
leux  pour  donner regain  a un  vieil  heri­
tage,  relancer le conte  et  la chanson qui
font  partie des necessites de la vie." Ferron's political leanings   are  present
not  only  in  references to  the  history  of
Quebec as part  of the good side of things, but  also  in  topical allusions  to  Vietnam and  napalm as part of the bad side. These contribute to the  puzzle which  the reader must  put  together from  the  interweaving of fragmented narrative sequences.  As Boucher points out,  the reader, like Tina­ mer and Uon, must  structure the "recit" by means of his memory. The "bad side"  is dominant in the present of  narration, at the time when  Tinamer is recounting her past.  The "good  side"  is  lost, except  for Jean-Louis  Maurice,   the   blind   boy  to whom Uon promises the  keys of Heaven and  Hell,  and   who  is  last  seen  standing guard   at  the  entrance  to  the  enchanted wood   (since  destroyed  by  "les  bouledo­ zeurs") . Tinamer herself is pulled  towards the future, although it  is an  extension of the past since she plans to study "la psy­ chopedagogie," to  work  like  her  father with  mentally  handicapped  children. As she says, "l'enfance est avant tout  une aventure intellectuelle ou seules importent la  conquete et  la  sauvegarde de  l'iden­ tite." Having reaffirmed her own identity through reliving  and  narrating her child­ hood  she can  now  forgive  her  father for having  banished  her   "du  conte   qu'en­ semble nous avions invente."
L'Amelanchier  is rich  in mythical and literary allusions. It is typical  of Ferron in the   verve   of  the   narration,  the   joy  of playing  with  words  and  names  ("un car-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



dinalleger"), the  use of fantasy and  par­ ody as forms of self-conscious fiction, and the interweaving of  dream-like sequences with   political  awareness. Tinamer,  like her  father, is "dans la lune" (miles away, in  the  other  world  revealed   by  the  tele­ scope), but  she  is also,  like him  and  her literary   progenitor,   Ferron,   historically and  politically firmly  anchored  in  Que­ bec:   "... un  pays,  c'est  le  secret   de  la premiere  enfance ... un  pays  double   et dissemblable comme  le mien."
Pierre  L'Herault's study  of all  of  Fer­ ron's  literary work shows how  L'Amelan­ chier   embodies  many   of   his   recurring themes,  ideas  and  techniques. The   title, Jacques  Ferron, Cartographe  de  l'imag­  inaire, emphasizes   the  central aspects  of this  particular novel:   the  fusion  of  the precise, the identifiable, with  the fantastic and  dream-like. The  concept of  "demo­ centrism," the  point  of  departure as cen­ tre  of  the  individual  universe,   is also  a key to a better understanding of Ferron's theatre,  his  other   novels,  his  numerous articles  and essays. Many  of the headings  under  which  L'Herault groups  his anal­ yses   illustrate the representativeness of L'Amelanchier, and  the way in which ref­ erence to  Ferron's other works  can  cast light  on this one: "La carte du Quebec,"
"De  l'histoire in quarto  a l'histoire racon­
tee,"  "Les  voix pastiches," "La nuit, sur­
face  et  profondeur," "Le voyage  initia­ tique,"  "Le  salut   par   l',ecriture."  The  broader  thematic   approach,  combined  with  a wealth  of  biographical and  biblio­ graphical  information, make  this critical  work  complementary to  Boucher's struc­ tural  analysis   of  L'Amelanchier  in   the same  series.  Far  from   being  primarily a doctor, who  is  incidentally a  humorous writer    (the   performing flea  of  Quebec literature) , or the founder of the Rhinoc­ eros Party  who  just happens to be a Que­ bec nationalist, Ferron is above all one of the most stimulating and original creators of  fiction  in  Quebec  today.   L'Herault's
 study  of the  reworking of La N uit in  Les Confitures   de  coings  is  particularly  in­ teresting,  and   indicates  that   Ferron  has probably  not finished surprising us.

VALERIE  RAOUL


CONSPIRATORIAL

JACQUES   RENAUD,   Clandestine(s) ou  La  tra- dition  du couchant. Le  biocreux, $1g.8o.

jACQUES   RENAUD,  Quebec author   best­ known  for  his  novel  Le  Casse  ( 1964), a major  breakthrough in the use of  joual in fiction,  has  in  Clandestine ( s)  ou  la  tra­ dition du couchant ( xg8o)  written  a book of huge  scope  and  multiple intent. It is partly a metaphysical thriller  of the school of  Conrad and  Chesterton, with  evident
debts  to Aquin,  partly a  political  novel  a
la Malraux, partly  a set of visionary medi­
tations  employing the eclectic  vocabulary
of every occultism available to the coun­ ter-culture, held  together by  a  heretical and   fevered   Christian   mysticism.   The  book seems to  hope  to  point  Quebec to­ wards  its  political  destiny  by  improving its spiritual  nature:  "cette sorte  de  mai­ son   magique  ... dans   laquelle    [Gilles] esperait faire voler toute la collectivite quebecoise."
The  first  part   (nearly two   hundred pages)   of  this  five-hundred  page   book alternates   rather   abstract   conversations and  meditations on  the  nature of  terror­ ism with  occult  inserts  of  various  kinds:  numerological,    cabbalistic,   astrological. Seances of a sexual  religiosity provide the occasions  and Tarot  cards   the  illustra­ tions. This is all held  together by a rather lethargic plot  about the slow building-up of  a  "clandestine" terrorist group,  spiri­ tually  oriented and, not  surprisingly, un­ known  to the  F.L.Q. The group  becomes strongly interrelated; all its members  have overlapping identities, and  all are aspects of the consciousness of the narrator, whose

157

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



"Bildung" we are,  in a manner of  speak­ ing,  witnessing. The  several  characters, whether  men   or  women,   are   not   very clearly   distinguished  from  one  another. Gilles,  a  sort  of  Magus  figure,  haggard and   well-versed   in  magic   (for  a  comic version  of such  a  character, see Le  Car­ dinal  in  Victor-Levy Beaulieu's  Race de monde) is the focus of the narrator's emo­ tions in the first part  of the book;  Julien, a  sort  of  occult  Christ-figure, dominates the second.  The narrator, Rejean, is evi­ dently  the artist  of the group.  The women have various  anima roles, in which  they merge sexuality and the occult somewhat better  than  the men merge revolution and sexuality. The  gaps   between   revolution and   the  occult  are  the  hardest   of all  to bridge.
After   this  very  long  opening  comes  a much   more   imaginatively  eventful   sec­ tion,  unfortunately brief, about  a wealthy  capitalist  (another  Magus  figure)   who wishes  to  "faire  collaborer ... le  capital  aveugle  et  le  terrorisme  aveugle." He  is in  charge of  the  giant  spider  computer­ brain  which  controls "le Reseau  absolu":

peut..etre ce chef  de  reseau dandestin etait-il !'agent
d'un autre Reseau, du  Reseau absolu ... plus  grand encore, avec  d'autres chefs,  d'autres
visions,  visions  dont l'etagement depassait le notre?

This  scheme   suggests  a  sort  of  Chester­ tonian or  Pynchonesque  God-game, full of horror and  possibility, in which  Gilles, Julien and   the  others  are simply  acting  out  the  designs  of the real Network.  But Renaud abandons this promising  idea  (as he does  so many  others in  the  course  of the  book)   and  drifts  back  to his charac­ ters'  mental  and  conversational struggles with the overlapping of sex and  terrorism.
Suddenly the group bursts  into  action, of  which   there   is too  much  for  a  while instead   of  too  little.  Conversation  gives way  to  endlessly   repeated  drives   from
 Quebec City  to Montreal and  back,  to explosions, hold-ups and shoot-outs, a des­ perate escape  into snowy woods  (this epi­  sode  is well-told), a  hostage-taking, and  finally  a  hiding-out  over  the  winter in  a hunting-lodge, at  which  point   conversa­ tion resumes.
fThis lodge,  like the capitalists' chateau of the spider  episode,  is one of the never­ never  lands  of Quebec romance in which  sex-and-spiritualism seem  much  more  at home    than    they   did   in   revolutionary Montreal.  But   spring   comes,   and   our group drives   off  into  a  police  ambush, leaving the  narrator to write  this book as their  memorial.
Renaud employs  the  Aquinian themes of  sex,  revolution, art  and   mystery,  but lacks, unfortunately, the Aquinian style. Aquin  only approaches the emotive mysti­ cal  abstraction of  Renaud  once,  in  the conclusion  of   Neige   noire,  which,    al­ though hard enough to account for novel­ istically,  is at  least a splendid prose  poem and   probably an  effective   statement  of
faith. But  Renaud writes  many  pages  as
difficult  to render in plain  prose as this:

II  y a  une  pure puissance qui   juge.  Et  une impure  puissance qui   juge.  L'une est  faite de  silence ou  de  parole profonde. L'autre de bruit et  de  fureur imprecatoire. Le  monde doit etre juge  d'une fa on
doit  etre juge.  Mais   qui   juge  selon  Ia  pure
puissance  ne  condamne  pas   )'impure   puis­
sance   et il est  le  seul  a y voir  Dieu   et  tout
son etre est  comme du  feu.

It is hard to disengage Renaud's more effective  scenes  from  this very  un-Aquin­ ian   long-windedness.  A  firm  editor,  or even   a  shorter  word   limit,  might   have persuaded him to knot the various  threads of  theme and  story-line  more  closely  to­ gether and  make  sure  that  none  of them got lost en route.
The book  concludes with  some  extra­
textual pseudo-editorial gimmicks,  in  the Aquin  manner. At several  points  its  nor­ mal   French  is  interrupted   by  linguistic

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



experiments based  largely  on  mirror-lan­ guage and  Rousselian-Lacanian  puns ("Une partie demon etre  voulait  racon­  ter  l'histoire"  j "V ne  est  partie  demo­ netre,   vous  les  rats  contes   lisse-toi"  etc. See  especially  pp.  79-89), somewhat  ex­ plicated by "Clandestine" at  the  end  of the book  (p. 496). Like  Renaud's ingeni­ ous   erudition  throughout,   these   games serve no clear novelistic purpose. A reader  with  a taste  for  god-games and  terrorist camp  would  be much  better  served by the new  Robbe-Grillet  novel,   Djinn, which with commendable brevity  and  wit sends up  the notion  of  a  pseudo-terrorist con­ spiracy  caught in the  meshes of a Greater Conspiracy. Robbe-Grillet is by no means a faultless writer, but  Renaud could learn a great  deal  from  him.

PATRICIA MERIVALE


LA FRANCOPHONIE

Rencontres  des   peuples   francophones   1979.
Lemeac,  $9-95·
CE VOLUME, le No. 3 de Ia collection Re­ tour aux sources, est un recueil  des allocu­  tions   et   des   conferences   prononcees  a Quebec, en  juillet   I979,  lors  de  Ia  pre­  miere  rencontre des francophones de taus les continents. Ils ne s'etaient jamais  reu­ nis jusque-la pour discuter un theme  cher
a taus: Ia langue fran<;;aise. Aussi l'evene­
ment   en  fut-il   un  d'importance. Le  lec­
teur  trouvera dans  ces pages  une  serie de
I6  textes,  dont  sept  sont  tout   a fait  re
marquables et  meritent d'etre Ius, analy­
ses  et  assimiles.  ]'ignore le  responsable, pour  me  servir  d'un mot  a Ia  mode,  de cette  publication a Ia  fois elegante,  lim­
pide et bien reussie. Ce que  je sais de cer­ titude, cependant, c'est  qu'une Table des matieres lui fait  defaut. Que!dommage!
Le livre comprend, outre le Programme, Ia  presentation par  Marcel Dube,  direc­ teur  general du  comite  organisateur  des
 Rencontres francophones de Quebec, puis les allocations de MM. Camille  Laurin et Pierre  de Bellefeuille.  Les textes  suivants sont  majeurs,  fourmillent  d'apen;us,  de faits  et  d'idees:  L'Acadie, sa langue, sa situation  sociale et son avenir  par  Michel Bastarche; Pour une  politique  de la  fran­ cite,  par   Andre    Patris;   Conference   de Jean-Marc Leger; La galaxie du creole et le   franfais,  par  Marie-Magdeleine Car­ bet; Interrogation sur la langue  franfaise comme   figuration  de la communaute hai­ tienne, par  Roger  Gaillard;  Le   franfais,  langue  de la  fraternite  entre  les  peuples, par   Edgar   Faure,  de  I'Academic   fran­ pise;  La  langue    franfaise   en   Afrique noire  post-coloniale, par  Ambroise  Kom. Suivent les allocutions de cloture de MM. Camille  Laurin et Rene  Levesque.  Le volume  se termine sur  un fort  beau  texte du poete acadien Hermenegilde Chiasson, Ce reve qui ne prendra  jamais  fin, auteur du spectacle, Acadie, mon trop bel amour, qui fut presente  au Grand Theatre de Quebec pour feter  le 375" anniversaire de Ia fondation de I'Acadie.
Cette rencontre "de  style plutot infor­
mel"  portait sur Ia langue  fran  aise, visagee  a la  lumiere de  ses multiples  in­
candescences" et consideree comme  un "outil de communication universelle." Ce fut  aussi une  fete  du  coeur,  de !'esprit et de   Ia  reconnaissance,  pour   ceiebrer   le
375" anniversaire de !'existence de I'Aca­ die. A noter  que cette  rencontre eut lieu a Quebec, et  non  a Paris,  et  que I'Afrique
blanche y brillait par  son absence.  L'ini­ tiative   est  venue   du   gouvernement  du Quebec, et  il y fut  question de I'Afrique noire seulement. Ce double  fait meriterait
a lui seul  un  long  commentaire. Je  tiens cependant a  le  relever  en  qualite  d'ob­
servateur independant.
L'article de Michel  Bastarache sur l'Acadie, dont   les  paragraphes sont  sou­ vent   aussi   longs   que   ceux   de   Marcel Proust,   ne  manque  ni  de  donnees   his­ franchise vigoureuse; le bilan  qu'il  dresse

159

BOOKS IN REVIEW



toriques,   ni  de   realite   politique,  ni  de est  positif  et  l'avenir est loin  d'etre  som­ bre, mais "Ia separation du Quebec serait  un coup dur" pour  l'Acadie. Andre Patris
de  Bruxelles,  nous  invite  a une  nouvelle
lecture de l'histoire, parle desI 50 millions
de locuteurs francophones de I'U.N.E.S.­ C.O.,  de Ia francite comme politique  cul­ turelle; "il n'y a plus de frontiere entre  Ia politique, l'economique  et  le  culture!." Pericles  pensait   de  meme  et  agissait  en
consequence  au   v• siecle  avant  Jesus­
Christ. Mais  Andre   Patris  a  bien  raison
de   nous   rappeler  cette   dure   verite   de
!'existence,  comme   il  definit   fort   bien
l'enjeu, Ie  terrain  d'operation des  com­ munautes francophones et  !'importance du   secteur,   du   role   et  de  !'impact  de
chacune d'elles  a l'interieur de !'ensemble
de Ia question. Jean-Marc Leger voit dans
Ia connaissance du  fran  ais
bution indispensable a I'humanisme ... II
y va meme  du salut  de l'homme"; il faut
oeuvrer pour  le singulier contre  Ia montee de l'uniformisation, contre  le peril  d'une langue  internationale unique; il analyse avec acuite Ia situation presente  du  fran­ pis, s'eleve contre Ie nouvel imperialisme technocratique parce  que  deshumanisant et contre  l'emploi abusif  de I'anglais  dans certains  milieux   scientifiques,   dans   les revues et les congres  ... "les francophones d'Occident    prennent   davantage   cons­ cience   de   l'extraordinaire  richesse   des grandes civilisations." L'important  est de redecouvrir le spirituel.
Le  grand   historien  Michelet a  ecrit: "La  France  noire."  L'epithete  est   de trop,  car  celle-ci  n'a  jamais  existe.  II est aussi absurde de parler de !'Afrique noire francophone ou de !'Afrique noire anglo­ phone; l'une  et !'autre sont  inexistantes. C'est  que les locuteurs francophones dans chacune des anciennes colonies de l'Ang­  Ieterre  ou  de  Ia  France ne depassent pas
10%  de  Ia  population autochtone.  Ces­ sans  done  de  nous  gargariser de  mots  et de  nous  leurrer.  L'Afrique  est  une  im-

160
 mense mosaique d'Etats ou Ie bilinguisme est  generalise;I o%   des  gens  y sont  des bilingues,   go%   des  unilingues.  C'est   ce qui ressort  nettement des communications fort Iimpides, de Madame Carbet, de Monsieur Gaillard et  de Monsieur Kom.
Ambroise Kom,   a l'instar de  Jean-Marc
Leger,   parle de  l'humanisme.  II   n'em­
peche  qu'une  vingtaine de  pays  de  I'A­ frique noire ont adopte le fran<_;ais comme  langue officielle. En fait, Ie locuteur fran­
<;ais  ( ou   anglais)  en   Afrique   noire   se
trouve,  sur  la  terre  de ses ancetres, dans la  situation d'un  deporte, d'un  deracine, d'un exile  de  l'interieur; le  fran($ais  ( ou I'anglais)  y  est  "une langue   de  depen­ dance  et  une  negation de l'etre originel." Mais  les  Iangues  africaines  sont  si nom­  breuses  et  si variees  qu'elles sont  incapa­ bles de vehiculer  tout  ce qui  concerne Ia technologie  moderne dont  leurs  pays res­ pectifs  eprouvent  un  si  pressant   besoin. Tout cela dit, combien d'institutions fran­
<;aises dispensent-elles  des  cours   de  lit­
terature negro-africaine?
La  conference magistrale d'Edgar Faure, de 1' Academie fran<_;aise, porte  sur les trois  points  suivants: !'auteur y parle d'abord de Ia langue fran<_;aise comme langue universelle de culture, selon Ia con­ ception qu'on se faisait  de Ia culture aux  XVII•, XVIII• et  XIX•  siecles,  puis  il trace   une  esquisse  d'une  approche, non semantique,  mais  semiotique, fort  eclai­ rante et  instructive, enfin  il  tient  Ia lan­  gue fran($aise pour  Ia langue  de Ia liberte,  de   la   democratie,  de  Ia  fraternite.  Sa peroraison est si belle, si eloquente et si profondement vraie  qu'elle figure en exergue au  debut du  volume.
Ce   livre,   comme   Ia   Rencontre   elle­ meme,  est une action  positive  et pratique. Je  ne  saurais  trop   en  recommander  Ia lecture et !'etude.
MAURICE LEBEL

BOOKS IN REVIEW



COUREUR DE BOIS

suzANNE    MARTEL,  Menfou   Carcajou    Pre­ miere   partie:   Ville-Marie·   Deuxiempar­ tie:  La baie du Nord.  Lem ac.

MENFOU CARCAJOU, an historical novel in two  volumes,   treats  that   elusive   heroic figure of Canadian history  and  literature, the courew- de bois. From  the earliest  oral tales to contemporary fiction, the coureur de  bois has  captivated Canadian  franca­ phone  audiences in  particular.  For  Que­ beckers, past  and  present,  no other  figure has so impinged on the collective  imagina­ tion   of  a  people.   Adventure,  glamour, oura e,
mtang1bles  are  assumed   to  be  his  prov­
ince.
While  the  early  pioneer  slugged  away on  a  rude  farm   trying  to  wrest  a  living from  the  stump-studded land  or endeav­ ouring to launch a primitive  commercial venture behind  the  stockades of a muddy  town,  the  coureur de  bois  moved  lightly by canoe  or  on  snowshoes  from  camp  to c.amp, feasting easily  on  the  bounty  of a nch  new land.  And, whereas the pioneers  lived in constant terror of being murdered by  hostile  Indians  descending on  them from  the  forest,  the  coureur de  bois hur­  ried  out  to  the  forest   to  encounter  the Indians,  to  emulate their   ways,  and   to embrace  them  in  friendship. No  two lots of people  of the  same  race  and  language have  ever lived  more  disparate lives than  the early settlers  and  the  coureur de bois. It is  the  contrast  and   conflict   between these  two  groups  of  people  which  dom­  inates  the novel Menfou Carcajou. As the title  indicates, Menfou  Carcajou  is  the figure around whom  the book revolves.
Menfou is a coureur de bois who is imbued with all the romantic and abrasive characteristics of his prototype. However, because  of  the  author's extraordinary ability  to breathe life into  her  characters he remains an  original and  touching fig
 ure.  Although tough  and  daring like the stereotyped coureur de  bois,  Menfou  es­ capes  the stereotype and  endears  himself to the reader  particularly by his touching friendship with  a small  girl, Sophie,  and an old woman,  Dosithee.
It is ten-year-old Sophie   who,  though she is almost blind, sees most clearly Men­ fou's  charm and  goodness,  even  when  all the  'decent' citizenry  have  punished him for  his nonconfonnity  by  placing  him  in the  pillory on a platform in the centre  of Ville-Marie. Only  she dares  to ascend  the platform to wipe off  the remains  of rotten  eggs which  have  been  hurled at  his  de­ fenceless  face.  Menfou  responds   to  her concern   by  rewarding Sophie,   not  only with  a priceless friendship, but  with  spe­ cial   tokens -ranging   from   an   Indian totem designed especially for her to a cow and  calf which  Menfou has exacted  from a spiteful  opponent whom  he, at Sophie's behest,  has  rescued  from  drowning; and finally, on his last expedition to the North, a pair of glasses which he wins gambling with an officer of the English  garrison.
Comparable to Menfou's tenderness for Sophie,  is  his  feeling  for  Dosithee, who was  once  a  fellow-prisoner  of  the   Iro­ quois.  Dosith·ee had  first  cared   for  him when  he  was  a  child-captive of  the  In­  dians,  and  so, years  later,  he  rescues  her and  returns  her to her native Ville-Marie (M  ntreal)
she 1s  no longer  welcome  because  of her
"Indianization."
In  this instance, as in many  others,  the author depicts  a prevalent attitude of narrow-mindedness and  prejudice among the  majority of  the  inhabitants of  Ville­ Marie. Although they are not shown to be as  joyless or  as  spiteful   as  Hawthorne's New  England puritans of   the  same  era (the   seventeenth century),   there   is  an echo of the same sort of  mentality. Their acquisitiveness and  their  moral  certainty linked  with  the  desire  to punish  all  those who fail to conform to their  standards is


161

BOOKS IN REVIEW



strongly  reminiscent of Hawthorne's  New
Englanders.
Thus it  happens that  Martel's sympa­ thies are most frequently with the coureur de   bois,  Menfou,  and   with   the   clear­  sighted    and   unconventional   little   girl, Sophie.  Neither of  them  can  understand or  sympathize with  edicts  such  as  tl1ose which  call for public punishment of indi­  viduals  who  do  not  marry   by  tl1e time they are  twenty  or  who eat  meat  on Fri­  day! The freshness,  joie de vivre, common sense,   and   independence  of   these   two represents for Martel hope in this new society  despite  the  fact  that  it  is domin­ ated  by bourgeois  principles, foppish  dilet­  tantes  and  a  sometimes limited  and  nar­  row-minded clergy.
:Martel's perspective, then, is enhanced
rather than  limited  by the centuries which intervene between   the  time  of  the  story and  the  present-much as Hawthorne's was in The Scarlet  Lett.er. Less harsh  than Hawthorne with  the  seventeenth-century settlers,   Martel  understands their   hopes and  fears and  appreciates their courage  in living  and  coping   with  difficult  circum­ stances.
All the daily drudgeries of the pioneers' lives-from candle-making to moving from  Ville-Marie to La Chine-are  de­ picted  step  by step  with  all  their  prob­  lems.  We  are  made   to  appreciate  every move and  to comprehend the basic prem­  ises of  such  a  life.  Suzanne   Martel has undoubtedly done  a masterful job in  re­ searching  this  book.   Not   only   has  she checked   all  her  sources  in  libraries,  but she   has   tried   all   the   domestic   chores (such as candle-making)  which were rou­  tine for  the settlers,  as well as attempting to  live  the  usual  life  of  the  coureur de bois!  To  complete this  last  undertaking she  has  shot  rapids and  camped out  in still remote stretches of  the North.
Menfou  Carcajou is a  book  which should   appear in  high  school  and  col­ lege libraries across Canada as an adjunct
 to the study of early Canadian history. No book  I have  read  breathes more  anima­ tion  into  the  life  and  attitudes  of seven­ teenth-century  New   France - and   no book  deals  in  a  more  balanced  fashion with   the   various  conflicting  factions­ the settlers  (farmers and  merchants) , the Indians, the military, the church, and  the coureur de bois.
ALLISON MITCHAM


TOUR-DE-FARCE
ROBERT ALLEN,  The Hawryliw  Process. Porcu-
pine's  Quill,  $8.gs.

ONE  OF   THE MANY  epigraphs scattered throughout Robert Allen's  massive philo­ sophical    tour-de-farce,  The  H awryliw Process,   is  William  Gass's   "Characters are   those   primary   substances  to  which everything else  is  attached." In   Fiction and  the  Figures  of  Life, where  he  found  that    aper u,   Allen   would   have   come across  many  others,  of  which   two  espe­ cially speak to his fictional project in this, his first novel. Gass, a true  believer  in the purity  of  fiction,  tells  us, first,  that   "the novelist  now  better  understands his  me­ dium; he  is ceasing   to  pretend  that  his business is to render the world; he knows, more  often   now,  that  his  business  is  to make  one, and  to make  one from  the only medium of  which  he  is a  master -lan­ guage." Later, he adds this:  "The nature of the  novel will not  be understood at  all until  this is:   from  any  given  body  of  fic­ tional   text,  nothing   necessarily   follows, and  anything  plausibly may."  One  thing  Gass's statements clearly  imply  is the  de­ mise of traditional narrative and  plot.  As someone  who  still enjoys  traditional  nar­ ratives,  especially  of  the  science  fictional  and  thriller variety, I would  not  want  to go  all  the  way  with  Gass,  but  there  can be little  doubt that  much  of  the most ex­ citing  and  innovative  fiction of  the  past few  years  has  been  the kind  Gass  pro-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



motes. Certainly, The  Hawryliw  Process is  a self-reflexive, narratively discordant text, and those who, like  the  reviewer in Books in Canada, don't even like the kind, should be warned away from it.
Readers who  enjoy a challenge, delight in  wicked and  occasionally blasphemous wit,  and like  to  see  a writer testing the limits of  his  imagination  and  craft, will find  much to entertain them in The Haw­ ryliw Process, for  Allen, who has  already displayed his  intelligence and  wit  in  his books  of  poetry, has  a real  flair  for  black  comedy which he indulges throughout his novel.  But  hold  on,  there  is a story  here, and  it  engages all   the   basic   themes of fiction from the  beginning: good  vs evil, process vs stasis, freedom vs tyranny, love vs hate, and all the  rest.  Imbedded in the  very  structure  of   the   novel, however, is the  realization  that, today, it's  no  longer that  simple to  differentiate  between the two sides of any of these  sets. His  "heroes"
are   therefore  a  grimy,  grunchy,  weird bunch of  fol s.
"villains."
The major confrontation takes place between Dr. Sandor  Hawryliw,  Psycho­ technochretician, and  Minden  Sills,  one of  the  good  Doctor's  laboratory  subjects in his attempt to create a consensus reality  based  on  "Christian and Empirical Prin­ ciples." This battle occurs not  just  in the "story"  of   Minden's  escape  and  travels with   a  strange crew   made up   of  Jesuit Fathers Robert and Arthur, Oblong Cas­ sidy,  a  straightshooter from out   the  Old
West,  and   plain J, more than likely  the
Only Begotten Son  come back  for  another try  at saving humanity, but  is also  in  the very  narration of the  novel-in  the  vari­ ous attempts of Hawryliw and his minions to wrest  control of the narration from Sills and  tell   the    story    according  to   those abovementioned principles they  so deter­ ministically  believe  will   make a   better world for  us all  (if  the  good Doctor could
 only  get  us  all   into his  "Hawryliw  Box
(patent pending)" for  an  hour).
As can  be  seen, there is  room  enough among these characters for a great deal  to be  attached, and Allen  is  nothing if  not willing to  drag in  everything he  can   lay his  hands on.   Indeed, since   one  of  the questions the  novel   raises  is "just  whose reality is  this  anyway," part of  the  fun of   reading  The    Hawryliw    Process  is watching Allen   conflate a variety of  lit­ erary "realities"  (various genre  modes). Thus we  have the   paranoid  thriller, the  cowboy  story,   the   fable   (especially  J's  parables), the  scientific  article, the  Bibli­ cal    story,    the    realistic    "kitchen-sink" story,   and   many  others  all   jostling  for position.  The interaction of  the   various kinds  of  discourse continually reminds us that this is just  a novel  we're reading, but  Allen  doesn't stop   there. Almost all  the characters have an  opportunity to  com­ ment on   the   narration,  to  complain  to Sills  about how  he's  handling them, and to tell a few  chapters  in  their own  voices.  As well,  there's "A  Brief  Review," which is negatively positive, as it turns out  to be by Hawryliw's second in  command. Quo­ tations,  like   the    following  from    Flann O'Brien, remind us that as active readers we  are   not   to  give   ourselves up   to  the novel   as  if  it were rendered  reality but should constantly question it as if it were, in fact,  what it is-a  novel: "In reply  to an  inquiry, it was  explained that a  satis­ factory  novel  should  be   a   self-evident sham  to  which the  reader could   regulate at will the degree of his credulity."
Nevertheless, Allen   does  give  us  char­ acters of  some   paradoxical  depth.  Even  as  he   reminds  us  that   they  are   simply  words  on   a  page, he   so  contextualizes them as to invite us to care  what happens to them. Sills is the most  important figure from this  point  of  view,  for  Allen   gives him   more  memories  and  more   connec­ tions  to other characters than he  does  to anyone  else   in   the   book.    Interestingly,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



however, he also gives a fairly detailed history of feeling  to Hawryliw,  one which helps to explain why the good Doctor has gone  so  wrong   in  opting for  "science" over  some  k nd
others,  especially  Sills' cousin Asa McRat, an    earlier    subject   of   Hawryliw's   re­ searches,  also  have  their  moments  of  in­ trospection and  memory.  At  such  times, there   is  a  thickening of  texture  in  the characters which  we can  see  happening, for  in  this  kind  of  fiction  as  in  certain  kinds  of  modern dance   the  creators  are more interested in revealing the structural aspects  of  craft   than   in  developing illu­ sions of some other  reality.  Although the real pleasure comes when  they manage  to do both.
1l haven't even  mentioned all the Aunts Moodie, only  one  of  which  can  be  the real   thing,   the   revolt   of  the   rats,   the attacks on  dry  academicism, and   many other   things  which  energize  this  volume, only  the  first  half  of  the complete   novel
(although able  to stand  on its own). The H awryliw Process has its flaws:  there  are places where Allen's  wit flags, where his erudition becomes a boring burden rather than  a  joyful  game.  But  I  can  forgive  a writer   quite   a  lot  when  he  gives  me  a replay  of Christ turfing the moneylenders out of the temple  with blasphemies. If anything  was  likely  to  happen  next,   I tended  to find  myself chuckling  as I hur­ ried   on   to   whatever  the   next   slice  of discourse  might  tum out to be.
Towards the end of the volume, J offers
us his "First Principle of Political Aware­
ness":  "The most flagrant breach  of  seri­ ousness is taking  yourself too seriously by an    overliteral    interpretation   of   rules, dogma,  and  commandments, rather than  by  the  realization  that   true  system  lib­ erates  rather than   confines."  This  might also be taken  as Allen's  First  Principle  of Fictional Awareness, one which,  on the whole,  he follows  with  admirable elan in The  H awryliw Process. I look forward to
 Volume Two, due  out  any  day  now  as I write  this, and  bound  to be full of further revelations concerning the  epic  battle be­ tween  true  process and  the Hawryliw ver­ sion.  If it's   up   to  the   standard   set  by Volume One,  it's going  to be a lot of fun.

DOUGLAS BARBOUR



SNEARTHS & OTHERS

PAUL HIEBERT, For the Birds. Peguis, $5.50.

IN  HUMOUR AND  HUMANITY  (1937)  Ste­ phen   Leacockl saw  the  highest  evolution of  humour  as  a  mingling  of   tears   and  laughter which  recognized the incongrui­ ties of the  human condition.  In  A Voice from the  Attic  (rg6o)  Robertson Davies pronounced,  not   dissimilarly,  upon   the mature humourist's "climacteric," when a sense of  tragedy  and  transience comes  to balance outright comic  expression. These notions   suggest   the   autumnal  mellow­ ness  of   Paul   Hiebert's For  the  Birds, a collection of pieces done for the various media   over   the   years.   In   Sarah  Binks (I 947)  his comedy  sprang from biograph­ ical and  critical parody, and from a splen­  didly   realized    (and   only  nominally  ob­ jective)    tone   of  fervent   hyperbole;  in Willows   Revisited   (I g67)   the   bathetic perspective was  more  scholarly   and   lit­ erary,  dealing with  less than  sublime  po­ etic effusions and personalities. In For the Birds  the  process  is  further  advanced : Hiebert's essential  goodwill  and generosity  are  apparent. Here   his  fun  has  no  pro­ grammatic basis, and  individual chapters are   marked  by  uncomplicated  and   un­ emphatic  pleasantry, quiet   amusements which  sometimes take  the form  of nostal­  gia   and   sentiment.   Prefatorily  Hiebert affirms  his belief in  the value  of chuckles  and  nonsense  in  a  time  when  he sees art  and  comic  writing as often  serious,  cruel,  and  joyless.

BOOKS IN  REVlliW



Hiebert's essay, "What Makes  People Laugh?" is in  part  a fantasy  on  a scien­ tific,   government-directed   approach  to humour, removed from  its sphere of "hap­ hazard and  uncontrolled  free enterprise." He  explores  a  notion  of  Chesterton's, on laughter as emerging from  "an  idea  con­ tradicted by the reality  of experience"; he himself  insists  on  the   human  return  to ground and  the  disabuse of  conceit,  for "always  it is this earthiness of man  set up against   his  essential   greatness, which   is humour; it  is  the  sense  of  his  intrinsic  dignity  and worth in  the  face  of his own mortality."  Not  unusually,  then,  several chapters in   For  the   Birds  are  autobio­ graphical revisitations: on teaching school in Saskatchewan, the chores  and  tricks of his small-town prairie boyhood. "Flections and  Reflections on  Ham" is a small  en­ chanting parable of a  younger  Hiebert's unsuccess  in  a word  contest  which  none­ theless  taught him  of  "human weakness and   fallibility,"  sharpened  his  "cultural discernment," and  developed his "literary perceptions." This is a tenderly self-mock­ ing  recollection, pseudo-serious in  its de­ liberate overstatement of lessons learned. "Diet and  Doctrine," an outstanding and witty  whimsy,  recalls  the  Fowl  Supper of a prairie parish, with  the  ecumenical tur­ key and  "a  marked tendency for  the  pies to assume  a kind  of deathly pallor, a pale and  'corpsey' appearance to remind  man of  his  mortality." Here  Hiebert  wields burlesque metaphor  as  skillfully  as  ever did "the  Author" in Sarah  Binks.
Several   chapters are   devoted  to  aca­ demic activities at St. Midget's, an institu­ tion  already familiar as the home of Pro­ fessor  Baalam  Bedfellow,  the  "Piltdown Man" of Willows  Revisited  and  member  of the post-Binksian School  of Seven. Hie­ bert's genial  skepticism about academe, implicit  in  his  earlier  humour,  appears in  glances  at  this  "modern slum  teeming with  activity  and  accomplishment." One sketch  is  a  biography of  the  innovative
 Naphthali Smith-John (pron. "Smid­ geon") , specialist  in  Osmotic  Psychology and    expander  of   the   curriculum  into  brick-laying  and,  in  particular, the multi­ disciplined  graduate study  of  posts.  His luncheon  musings,  prompted by herring, wander  entertainingly through art,  diet, and  philosophy: "'The  stuff  of life  may be  basically  spiritual,  but   it  has   to  be stuff."' Smith-John realizes  that  a  pros­ pective  course  in  snake  charming  is im­ paired  by the absence  and unco-operation of Canadian snakes, but that  one in Prac­ tical  Poetry-"'getting  away   from   the old structured forms and  meanings, which might  inhibit artistic effort'" -will fare better.  "Poetry at St. Midget's" continues Hiebert's gentle,  forgiving, but  heart-felt satire   of  forms   of  unrestrained   self-ex­ pression, in touches equally obvious. How­  ever,   a   related  literary   parody,  "Out Where the  West  Begins," is a splendidly relaxed,  punning, and  high-spirited take­  off of a  stereotypical  Western  which  be­ moans   Canadian   unsuitabilities  for   the genre; it  recalls  Leacock's many  gleeful debunkings of  models  of popular literary culture.
Not unexpectedly, Hiebert also presents some excruciating new literary properties. The  Manitoba and Dominion celebrations are  documented in "Poems of the Peren­ nial Centennials," while the long-awaited "The  Snearth  in   Saskatchewan  Litera­ ture" both describes  a possible sighting of the elusive Binksian  bird and  chronicles a related  poetic   revival,   or  "outpouring." "L'Envoi" is a sampler of the later  efforts of the surviving, or recently  deceased, School  of Seven  bards,  with  the  comfor­ table assurance that  "The present poets of Saskatchewan-and   they   are   many­ with  their  concern  for  success, and  their  preoccupation with  bodily  functions and  psychiatric  states,   will   also   have   their day."  The  dramatic anouncement of ad­ ditional Binksiana discovered in a Fletch-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



er's Castoria box has, of course, quickly fuelled  graduate study at St. Midget's.
For the Birds shows the wannth and humane thrust of Hiebert's volumes  of spiritual  reflections,    Tower  in   Siloam ( Ig66)  and  Doubting Castle  ( I976). We often  hear  a wistful regret for the ravages of  the  mechanical and  the  institutional, and  for  the  growing  away  from  the  na­ tural   and   the   essential.   Yet   these  are sketches  of  modest   cheer   which  do  not try   to   emulate  the   concentration   and
straight-faced literary delights of Hiebert's
earlier successes. If his subjects  and  tones are sometimes  broad  or slightly forced  he may  be  properly unrepentant:  he  is  in­ vitingly  bemused  and  at ease, and  a gtn­ uine  good  humour is everywhere  appar­ ent.
LOUIS K. MAC KENDRICK

MORE FROM MOSS

JOHN MOss, ed.,  The Canadian Novel, vol. II, Beginnings. NC  Press,  n.p.

THOSE OF us  who like to teach  early Ca­ nadian literature usually face a dearth of suitable  primary  and   critical   texts.   In recent  years  there  have appeared several volumes  of criticism, each  focussing  on a major  nineteenth-century writer  (usually a  poet), but  to my knowledge  the only available collection  of diversified  articles has   been   Lorraine   McMullen's  handy little  book, Twentieth Century Essays on Confederation Literature  ( I976). In  his latest  critical venture, John Moss has sought  to fill one of the many  gaps in this area  by presenting fourteen articles,  two on each of seven bool•s which  he identifies as early Canadian prose classics.
:Any disagreement with  Moss's choice would have to focus not on the books he includes, but on those he omits. He has singled  out The History  of Emily Monta­ gue, The Clockmaker, W acousta, Rough­ ing It in the  Bush,  A Strange  Manuscript

I66
 Found   in  a  Copper Cylinder, The  Im­ perialist,  and   Sunshine Sketches as  "the best  works  in  our   early  literature,"  and  "classics" "from  our   own   perspective." He  omits  The  Golden Dog, revered  as a classic for  many  decades, Catharine Parr  Traill, the   fiction   of  D.  C.   Scott   and  Charles G.  D.  Roberts,  arguably two  of the  best Canadian writers at  work  before I920,  The  Stepsure  Letters, and   Antoi­ nette  de  Mirecourt, as well as  the  many interesting early   works  which   have   not had  the  good  fortune to be reprinted in NCL   editions. It  is  impossible   for   an anthologist to please everybody; yet, given the  shortness  of  this  book  (less than   200 pages)  and  Moss's partiality for brief arti­ cles  (six are  less than ten  pages long,  in­ cluding  footnotes) ,  one   wonders,  why only seven "best  works"? Why not  ten, or an even dozen?
The subjects of the essays may safely be described as classics;  unfortunately, the same cannot be said of all the essays them­ selves. Moss's  acknowledgements  obscure  the sources of the articles.  None are given dates,  but  about half appear to have been commissioned for  this  book,  and  the  re­ mainder are reprints, all but one from  the Journal   of  Canadian   Fiction.  In   some cases, publication in  this periodical (with  which John Moss has long been associated  and   to  which   the  publisher  has   "gra­ ciously"   assigned   royal ties) , appears to have   been   the   criterion  for   selection.  Thomas  Raddall's  three-page discussion of  Haliburton, while  pleasant enough   to read,  hardly qualifies as literary criticism. Much  of   what   Woodcock  had   to  say about De  Mille  in  I973  has  been  super­ seded  by M.  G. Parks's superb  I976  arti­ cle  (as Moss acknowledges in an editorial footnote) , yet Parks does not appear here. Instead, Woodcock's piece  is paired  with Kenneth J. Hughes's eccentric attempt to flout  prevailing  critical  opinion  by  pre­ senting  :Adam   More  as  a   Renaissance prophet  bringing knowledge and  enlight-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



enment to  the  benighted Kosekin.   With De Mille, it is at least apparent that  Moss has  brought together two  contrasting points of view. Several  other selections are less   justifiable.   While   Mary   Jane   Ed­ wards's  article on  Emily Montague  adds to our  understanding of Brooke's politics, Linda Shohet's just meanders.
The author best served by new essays is Susanna  Moodie, with  Marian  Fowler's valuable analysis  of  Roughing It  in  the Bush  as a sentimental novel  and  Sherrill Grace's  regrettably  brief   notes   on   At­ wood's  use  of  Moodie.  Worst   served  is Haliburton.  Taken  together,  the   1962 date   of   Northrop  Frye's   classic   piece, "Haliburton: Mask  and  Ego"  (reprinted as  well  by  R.  A. Davies  in  On  Thomas Chandler  Haliburton  [ 1979])  and   the brevity  and  generality of  Raddall's later comments imply  that  there  is nothing new to be said about one of our  more  complex writers. The  essays  on   Sara  Jeannette Duncan are  nicely  balanced, Alfred  Bai­ ley's "The Historical Setting of  The  Im­ perialist"    (selected   also  by   McMullen) and   Joseph   Zezulka's  essay  complemen­ tarily explaining both  the context  and  the contents  of   this  important   turn-of-the­ century novel. The two  critiques of W a­ cousta  are  perceptive, but  reinforce each other  to  the point  of overlapping. Of  the pieces  on  Leacock,  I  prefer   Tom  Mar­ shall's  cogent summary of  Leacock's themes and  techniques to Douglas Mantz's interesting but  rather inflated  account of the national significance of "L'Envoi."
The inconsistencies in both the quality of the essays and  their  pairing raise the question of  the  critical principles  under­ lying  their  selection. If Moss  wanted   to reprint the best of current criticism,  surely he  could   have   looked   beyond   his  own journal; if new  essays were  his major in­ terest,  then  those available in recent  peri­ odicals  could  have  been  listed  in a bibli­ ography, a feature this book  sorely lacks. His introduction, alas,  provides few clues
 beyond asserting  that  "there are fourteen critics  here,  representing fourteen points of view and fourteen different approaches to literature." The bulk  of  the introduc­ tion is less a commentary on  these partic­ ular books and  essays than  a manifesto in which  Moss announces his rejection of a number  of   "critical   myths,"  some   of which,   he  admits,  he   has   helped   per­  petuate. In   his  eagerness   to  align  him­  self  with   the  current  trend   away   from thematic criticism,  Moss shapes  many  of these  myths  in  phrases   too  crude   to  be acceptable to any serious literary  critic, present or past. Simplistically rendered as "Nature is monstrous," "The  mood  is bleak, pessimistic, humourless," "The writing  is disengaged, dated, and  irrele­ vant," "No one belongs here," and "There is no first-rate Canadian  writing to speak of," they serve merely  as straw men  to be gleefully demolished.  I  fully  support Moss's  view  that   we  need  to  rediscover  and re-evaluate our early literature; what I  question  here  is his  rhetorical method, which  courts  the  danger of throwing out more than  the bathwater.
Where,  then,  is the  place  of  this  book on  the  Canadian  critical bookshelf?   As the  first  collection of  critical articles  on our  early  prose,  Beginnings will certainly be useful;  my regret  is that  it could  have been essential.
CAROLE GERSON


TOUT SEUL

ANTONINE  MAILLET,  La  Sagouine, trans.  Luis de Cespedes. Simon and  Pierre.
Monologues quebecois, I890-198o, comp. Lau­ rent  Mailhot   and  Doris-Michel  Montpetit, with  an  introduction  by  Laurent  Mailhot. Lemeac.

JACQUES   CELLARD  OBSERVES   of  La  Sa­ gouine  in  his preface   to  the  1976  Paris edition: "Elle n'A  rien.  Elle  EST." And what  she is is "!'essence  de 1'Acadie, 1'A-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cadiennere," BIUno Drolet  paraphrases in Entre   Dune   et   aboiteux ... un   peuple ( I975)'.   La   Sagouine  herself   describes that  essence in "Le  Recensement," a  rec­ ollection   of  identity and   legal  naming:
"J'avons pus  autchune terra  a nous  au­
tres;  je sons pas surs de notre  arligion; et
je connaissons pas  notre  natiounalite.... Je suis peut-etre rien." What  the govern­ ment  fails to recognize  is her  very  being. But,  in  fact,  she  has  more  than   just  her person. Three of her twelve children have survived   infancy;  Gapi,  her  husband   of more  than  a half-century, has made her a gift  of  his sardonic  wisdom;  and,  before all else, she has the quotidian language of her  forefathers,  inherited  "de   goule  en oreille." Of that speaker and speech which Viola  Leger  has  acted  and  sounded   out on  the  stage-"j'avons  jamais  vu  une graine  d'allirerature de  notre   vie,"  says the character-Professor Antonine Mail­  let   writes:  "Elle   ne  parle   ni   joual,   ni chiac,  ni fran<;ais international. Elle parle la langue populaire de ses peres descend us
a CIU du XVIe siecle."
Luis  de Cespedes's translation from  the
second edition (I 973)  deletes this passage from   Maillet's  foreword  of  7  January
I 97 I, thereby  prefiguring la translation of
La   Sagouine  to  another  place.   There,
international illiterate English  is spoken. Such daring is not matched in the English work  itself,  however,   which   rarely  ven­ tures  far  from  the  original's literal  signs. Such   fidelity  can  occasionally  make for clear  sailing.  The fact  that  most  of  La Sagouine's malapropisms are latinate, for example, makes  that  part  of  the  transla­ tion  both  easy and  exact, as in her substi­ tution of   "circumscribed" for   "con­ scripted," "conformation" for "confirma­ tion,"   and   "presumptuous"  for    "pre­ sumed." The translator is also faithful to such  a significant transformation of sense as  in   "La  Loterie," where   he   has  La Sagouine say of a government form, "Well written  it  was,  English   on  one  side  'n

168
 English   on  the  other, so  that   a  person didn' need  no  glasses to read  it."  This  is good-an ironic  reminder. The second edition provides the same script,  "en ang­ lais d'un bord  pis en  anglais de !'autre." But  the  first  edition  (I 97 I)   says  differ­  ently: "en  anglais d'un bord  pis en fran­
ais
"Christmas," does  Gespedes  work  in  the manner of La Sagouine: she speaks "eten­ tion" for "intention"; he writes "tension" for "etention." "Tension" is  precise  here, expressing the  effect  of  an  evil  born  of charity.  The   well-intentioned   bourgeois  receive   no  thanks  for   their   small   and  shoddy Christmas gifts to the poor.
English and  Latin do  not  always  coin­ cide,  however. It is at  such  moments of divergence or  difference  that  the  trans­  lation   most   obviously   deprives    La  Sa­ gouine  of  part   of  her  inheritance. "In­ cense" for "encens," a gift from  the Magi,  suppresses    the    sense   and    humour   of "chewing gum," for example, while "call" for "caler" in "La Mort," the final mono­  logue, misses what is perhaps a significant equivocation.  And   when   "caboche"  be­ comes  "head," and   "jonglerie,"  "think­ ing," it is as though Cespedes were work­ ing  from   the   lexicon  appended  to  the original. The  translator's difficult  labour is  thankless:   when   he  does  adventure, however  briefly,  as in  "Everything in  its place" for  "Un mal  pour  chaque potte" in  "Le  Metier," La  Sagouine's loss is no less  diminished. She  is a  "glossaire," in the language of the  foreword.
Like  Maillet, the  compilers of  Mana­ logues  quebecois, r8go-rg8o,  as  the  title suggests, emphasize the  local  and  histori­  cal  dynamics of spoken  language. Devel­  oped  from  an  article  published in I 973, Laurent Mailhot's introductory stiUctural analysis  proposes  that,  in  the  monologue, "le  personnage est ... seul, mais il est seul avec  d'autres, solitaire-solidaire, puisqu'il jongle devant un public  et qu'on organise sa   jonglerie."  The  anthology, also  "die-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tionnaire" and  "repertoire," would record "la  langue  populaire" as it evolves in this broad  kind of public  and  private playing.
The first five divisions  of the anthology are  intended to outline the  chronological development  of  the   varieties  of   mono­ logue.   Part   I,  "Choses a  dire:   fables, declamations, gazettes rimees   (I 89o­ Ig2o) ," with  pieces from  Regis Roy and Auguste  Charbonnier, for  example, pro­ vides  a service  to  the student of that  pe­ riod;  and    "Revues,   sketches,    varietes ( I920-45)" is valuable for  its  reprinting of six fine  monologues by  Paul  Coutlee, among   them    "Le   Recensement"  and "L'Ouvrier canadien." This  second  part also contains the best and  longest of the individual introductions, on  Gratien  Ge­ linas, where  it is observed  of his Fridolin: "Le   personnage se decouvre a  lui-meme  en meme  temps  qu'il  s'ouvre aux autres." Most   of   the   other   introductions   seem
merely  pro  forma.  The selections  in  Part
III, "Du   Cabaret  a  la   radio   ( et   vice versa)   ( I945-I96o) ," show  a  falling  off in  the  art,  as in Jean Guida's gag,  Allo:
... Coco?  Problems in  the  chronological
division   become   apparent  in   Part   IV, "Entre la  politique et  la  poesie   ( I96o­ I 970) ": there   is  nothing of  Yvon  Des­ champs after  I 969, for example. The  next grouping, "Nouvelles voix, nouvelles voies (I 970- I 980) ," with  representation by fif­ teen   authors, the  widest   in  any  of  the periods,  is  misnamed, since  it  offers  not
much  that  is distinctly worthwhile or new in  language or  form.  Jacques  Antonin's work,  for  instance, shows  a  "retour aux sources   ( ou   a  Gilles   Vigneault)";  "Le Marchand  d'alcool," from   Antane  Ka­ pesh's   Je  suis  une   maudite   sauvagesse ( I976), is an  unimaginative recitation of the  evils  the  White Man  has  visited  on her  people; the  trio  of  Paul et  Paul  echo Les  Cyniques  ( I 962- I 97 2)  ; and  "Lettre a Pierre," by Azade Harvey (b.  I925), is tired  in  word  and  spirit.  The final  part,  "Le   Monologue   au   theatre,"   including
 excerpts  from   Les  Belles-Soeurs,  La  Sa­ gouine,   and   La   Nef  des  sorcieres,  sets aside history,  to group  by variety within  a sub-type.
CAMILLE R. LABOSSIERE


EN ACADIE

JACQUES    SAVOIE,   Raconte-Moi  Massabielle.
Editions d'Acadie.
CLAUDE LEBOUTHILLIER,  Isabelle-sur-mer. Edi­
tions  d'Acadie.

LE  PREMIER  ROMAN  de  Jacques  Savoie, deja  connu  comme  poete  en  Acadie,  de­ routera sans doute  le lecteur non initie  a la  litterature  moderne puisqu'il  n'a  rien du  recit  classique  et  que  c'est  plutot du cote  de  la  descendance du  Nouveau  ro­ man  qu'il  faut  lui chercher une parente.
Massabielle, c'est  un village  vide de ses habitants par  le gouvernement. Toutes les maisons ont ete detruites. Seul Pacifique Hache, le fou  du  village,  resiste en  occu­ pant  l'eglise  de  l'endroit.  L'intrigue a  la fois tres simple et tres Iache est constituee par  les  arrivees  successives  de  trois  ele­ ments exrerieurs a l'univers de Pacifique: d'abord, l'avocat dont  la rationalite se heurte vainement a la folie de  Pacifique, puis,  la  femme,  Stella,   que  le  heros  in­ tegrera a son monde  et finalement la tele­ vision  qui  a  presque  raison  de  Pacifique mais dont  il triomphe au dernier instant.
Au  fur  et  a  mesure   que   l'on  avance dans  le recit,  il devient evident  que  l'es­ sentiel ne se situe  pas du cote de !'intrigue dans  laquelle  les entrees  et  les sorties  de personnage  sont   tres   peu  motivees.   Le dialogue  et  le  recit  sont  le  plus  souvent
!'occasion de   jouer  avec  les  mots  et  de creer   des  images.   On   en  arrive   ainsi   a une litterature a l'etat pur,  affranchie des contraintes du  realisme.  Les intrusions discretes   mais   neanmoins  intempestives du  narrateur dans  le champ de la  narra­ tion   achevent  de  detruire  !'illusion   ro­ manesque.

I6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Ce plaisir  d'ecrire, de faire  des images qui  se manifeste des  les premieres   pages est sans doute  le cote  le plus attachant de ce  roman. Dans  ces  images,  !'animation de  l'inanime a  la  maniere de  Boris Vian occupe une large place. Citons, a titre d'exemple, ce "chemin de  fer  rouille  qui n'a  plus vraiment envie  d'etre parallele," ou encore cette eglise :

"Une  belle   petite  'eglise  d'ailleurs. On   ne peut   pas   lui  en   vouloir.  Assez  grande,  en bois  franc  verni   et   puis   surtout  blanche, parce qu'une ,eglise, c'est  pas  salissant.


,Ca fait  presque beau comme  c;a de  raconter une 'eglise qui  s'ennuie. Comme on  parlerait d'une veuve, ou  d'un enfant seul ..."

Et  encore,  "ces  commencements de  mai­ sons qui ont mal fini," ces "petits murs de ciment" qui "font les durs," etc., etc. II y a  la  tout   a  la  fois  une   tendresse,   une finesse,  une  totale  absence  de  lourdeur, une vivacite  qui constituent des sons tout neufs dans  le  jeune  litterature acadienne.
Finalement, il  faut  souligner  ce  para­ doxe  qui  fait  que  l'on  retrouve  des  allu­ sions  tres  directes a  la  realite  acadienne contemporaine  dans   un  roman  qui   par ailleurs  s'eloigne  du  rcalisme  au  point  de faire   alterner  le  reve  et  la  realite   sans solution   de  continuite. De  ce  point   de vue,  le  roman prend parfois  des  allures d'allegorie et risquerait de tomber  dans la lourdeur didactique si ce n'etait des joyeuses  irreverences,  de  !'esprit  et   de
!'humour dont  il est parseme.
On  avait   pu  pardonner a  Claude  Le­ Bouthillier un  certain nombre  de defauts de  son  premier roman L' Acadie  reprend son  pays. C'etait, entre   autres,  des  per­ sonnages    extremement   stereotypes  -le vieillard   a  barbe  blanche  exhalant la sa­ gesse,  la  ravissante  et  naive   jeune  fille, etc. -mais surtout des incoherences par rapport a son propre projet  tel qu'on pou­ vait  le deduire du  texte meme  du  roman, une absence  de direction, un melange,  au sein  du   roman  d'anticipation, de  recits

1]0
 tantot utopiques, tantot parodiques,  tan­
tot realistes.
Malheureusement, le deuxieme roman, Isabelle-sur-mer, aggrave ces  defauts  en ne les corrigeant pas. Les personnages y restent   caricaturaux parce  qu'ils  parlent tous avec  un air sentencieux depourvu de toute  vraisemblance. Le  pire,  cependant, c'est  que  tous ces personnages ont attrape la  maladie de  !'introspection  et  recitent les cliches confus  d'une psychologic  a bon marche.
On  retrouve dans Isabelle-sur-mer la meme  hesitation entre differents types de discours  qu'on avait  note dans  le premier roman. La  vision  du  futur de  ce roman d'anticipation deborde parfois  nettement dans  la  parodie alors  que  ce recit  semble la  plupart  du   temps  se  prendre  tout   a fait  au  serieux.  La  parodie ne  peut  alors jouer   qu'au  detriment de  !'oeuvre  elle­ meme.
Paradoxalcment, ce  roman  d'anticipa­ tion  fait  une  large  place,  a  cote  des gad­  gets  futuristes, aux  traditions et  au  folk­ lore  acadiens a  tel  point   qu'on  croirait lire   un   traite   d'ethnographie  tradition­ nelle.  Ce  parti  pris  tend  a imposer  l'idee qu'on  ne  peut  entrevoir un  avenir   pour
1'Acadie  que  dans  le retour  au  passe ... D'autre  part, Isabelle-sur-mer presente
ni plus ni moins 1'Acadie comme  la nation
qui doit sauver  le monde.  II y ala quelque chose qui ressemble fort aux discours triomphants d'il  y a quelques generations dont   on  denonce aujourd'hui  le  peu  de rapports avec la realite.
Finalement, on doit  constater que pour faire  de  la  litterature, meme  en  Acadie, il  ne  suffit  pas  de  puiser  abondamment dans  le folklore; il faut  aussi  une  inten­ tion,  un  projet coherent.

RAOUL BOUDREAU


·m-0

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



PSYCHOCOSMOS

RAYMOND  GARIEPY,   Voice  Storm.  Longspoon.
ALEXANDRE    L.     AMPRIMOZ,     Other   Realities.
Three Trees.
KEN  NORRis,  Report on the  Second Half of the
Twentieth Century. CrossCountry.
KEN NORRIS, The Perfect  Accident. V•ehicule.
KEN   NORRIS,  Autokinesis. CrossCountry.
ENDRE  FARKAs,  Romantic at  Heart and   other
Faults. Cross  Country, $3:00.

SOME  POEMS  COULD  HAVE BEEN  written by  almost   anybody,   others only  by  the person    who   actually  did   write    them. What  distinguishes the  two  sorts  is  the ability  of  the  poets  who  write  the  latter sort  to animate a psychocosmos with a distinct  and   individual  ambience:   one into which  the responsive reader can enter fully.
Raymond  Gari•epy's volume, Voice Storm, is an  excellent example of the psychocosmos  which  can  be entered fully. The poems  reveal  an imagination domin­ ated  by the  nocturnal and  primitive ele­ ments  of  human nature,  revealed   in  re­ current  images   of   masks   and   animals, madness   and   violence,   stone   and   flesh. The language  (whether Gariepy is writ­ ing  in  French  or in English)  is emotion­ ally heightened by rhythms often  close to the   hieratic chant,  by  a   stripped  and sometimes  fragmentary syntax, and  by a simple   but   charged  vocabulary. In   the love poems, particularly, the results are dramatic (not  to mention erotic) : "The
shore   of  her   body  I tastes  of  salt  and
stone  I Her  landlocked belly  I is salmon
rich" ("The Shore of  Her  Body"). Else­
where,  the same  language can  be used to convey  a  macabre, necrophiliac mystery ("You Seek  the  Comforts") , or  a vivid and    dramatic  self-image ("I   am   the Maimed  Beast") •.    Occasionally the  lan­ guage  escapes  Gariepy's control, and  top­ ples into mere rhetoric  ("Beyond the Two Thousand Years").  For   the   most  part,
 however, Voice Storm is a solid and satis­
fying volume.
Alexandre  Amprimoz has much  in common  with  Gariepy-at least  on  the evidence of the  poems in Other  Realities. But his imagination, although similarly primed  by the  darker side of human  ex­ perience   (mortality, madness,   pain,  and violence) , operates much  less concretely; there  is a  continuous  reference  back  to art  ("A Caraveggio Lament"), literature ("Miniwake  for   Nuncsum"),   myth ("Cadmus",    "Daedalus"),  and    music ("I") . The  energy  of  the  poems  is not dissipated  by such reference, which is per­ haps  what  enables   him   to  handle long poems   ("The  Woman and   the  Sun") without  losing  control. The  same  return  to tradition produces the marked  surreal­ ism of many  of the  poems,  for  what  ap­ pears  to  be  a  loss of  control, an  indul­ gence  in  images,  word-play, and  an  ex­ tremely    loose   paratactic   structure  for their  own sakes, is  nevertheless governed  by the  ambience of  the  Surrealist move­ ment    to   which   he   implicitly  appeals.  Moreover,   in   appealing  to  that   move­ ment,  he justifies his formidable preoccu­ pation  with  madness  in  one  form  or  an­  other, by a direct  reference to the  notion (clearly in  the  Surrealist tradition) that
"madness begins  I with  communication"
("I oo"). Amprimoz's psychocosmos  is in
some ways easier  to enter  than  Gariepy's because  of  these  familiar  landmarks  of the  tradition, but  it  is one  that  is at  the same time less tangible, less easily compre­ hended  because of its allusive, illusive na­  ture.
Ken  Norris's  three  volumes,  Report  on the  Second  Half  of the  Twentieth  Cen­ tury  ( I977),  The  Perfect   Accident ( 978) , and   Autokinesis  (I g8o) , show the  poet  in  the  process  of  developing a
fully  realized  psychocosmos.   The  poems in  Report   are  sprawling and  colloquial: they  lack  both  imaginative intensity  and any kind of rhythmic tension.  The  reader

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



cannot enter  the  poems fully because  the ambience  is   too   thin:    the   voice   that speaks here is loosely identifiable as North American (rather  than  European), and mumbling about  the  contents of   news­ papers,   and   that   is  all.  In  The  Perfect Accident, the  psychocosmos  begins  to be more  fully  realized :  the  poetic  persona  is more  individual as  the  poet  turns  to re­ flect  upon  himself  rather than  upon  the world.  The   poems  which  help  to  shape  this  individuality  are mostly  love-poems ("au  hasard,"  "Six  for  Barbara," "You reeled  me in"), as if concentration on the other  person somehow  helps him to shape  himself,  and  hence   to shape  the  poems. The language is still colloquial,  but  Nor­ ris  has  lost his  tendency  to mumble, and there  are  flashes  of genuine  humour  (as opposed  to the facetiousness of the earlier volume) . The  development between  Re­ port and   Accident is considerable,  but  it is not  complete; in  Autokinesis it  is ex­ tended  further. The poet here articulates clearly   and   unmistakably,   especially   in the  "January  Sonnets."  The  poems  are controlled and  shapely,  sharply  focussed upon   tl1eir  subject,   and   rhythmic  and direct  in  their  language. It will be inter­ esting to see where  Norris goes from here.
Like  Norris,  Endre Farkas  has written three  volumes of poems, and  Romantic at Heart  and Other Faults is his third.  In  a footnote to  the  title  of his poem  "What You Should  Know  to be a Poet,"  Farkas writes:  "This is the  original  title  of Gary Snyder's poem  in his regarding wave and which  I have augmented in this poem." Obviously, someone  who  cannot put  to­ gether   a   sentence  without   including  a constructional error  is going to have prob­  lems putting poems together,  and  he does. Like  Norris's  poems  in  R.eport,  Farkas's poems  for  the  most  part  sprawl  all  over the  place  ("The Vegetarian Ear  Eater," "What You Should Know to be a Poet"), although there are one or two neat and interesting exceptions ("Bounty Hunt-
 ing,"  "Sunday Drive"), in  one  case ("That")  achieved by the use of a purely artificial form.  Farkas is also inclined   to mumble: for  example, he backs into  one poem   ("Mao Tse  Tung as Hero")  with the line "what I think  he's saying,"  rather than tackling it head  on;  and  he fumbles the opening line of another ("Lyric"), writing "It's the kind of six o'clock  morn­ ing"  and   failing   to  recognize  that "the  kind  of"  is pure  flab.  Moreover, his eye, like  Norris's   in  Report, is  still  fixed  on externals; he needs to reflect and intensify his  understanding of  himself  in  order  to intensify the  psychocosmos  he presents.

PATRICIA MONK



FRAGMENTS OF A VISION

LEN  GASPARINI,  Breaking  and  Entering:  New and  Selected  Poems.  Mosaic Press/Valley Editions, $6.gs.
DAVID  ARNASON,   Marsh   Burning. Turnstone,
$7.00.

THE  TITLE OF Len  Gasparini's new  book gives a clue  to his poetic  concerns. Many of his poems are socially oriented (in the broadest sense) , and  the  "I" in  his work is  a  horny,   divorced, sometimes drunk poet,  frequently on  the  road,  a  softy  at heart beneath a  brusque   exterior. He  is the man who loves poetry  but likes to complain of its hold on him.
Whether   persona   or   heart-on-sleeve fact,  this  image  of  the  poet  is a  contri­ vance   into   which   only   the  most  gifted writer can   breathe  life.  Gasparini's use of  it  is ultimately rather  tiring,   because his poems  are  loose and  wordy  and  only rarely  come into  a language that  is better  than  mediocre. In fairness, it is the earlier  poems  which seem weakest,  and  the  book gets   progressively   better.  Many  of  the early  poems  work  well  when  read  aloud

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and    almost   seem   intended  as   crowd­ pleasers   with   which    to  open   a   poetry reading (e.g., "Cold-Water Flat Blues" or "I Was  a  Poet  For  the  Mafia"), but  a single  reading exhausts one's  interest.
Though some  of  the  later   poems  lack the superficiality of the  earlier ones, they are  often  marred  by  ineffective or  cute
comparisons ("When  she  touches  me,  I
my skin I is the sound  I I a hummingbird makes   I in  the  mouth  I of  a  flower") .
For all the toughness of its title,  Breaking and  Entering exhibits too  little  toughness
of language. A remark which  David  Hel­
wig made  almost  a decade ago in Quarry
-that there  are lines and  parts  of a Gas­ parini  poem  which  please,  but  rarely  an entire poem -still seems largely  true.
David  Arnason's Marsh  Burning  is a wholly  different kind  of book.  Amason  is interested primarily in  history  and  myth­ ology, and  in  investigating his own place in the prairie landscape. Like many recent  books of Canadian  poetry,  Marsh   Burn­ ing  is  essentially   a  "roots"  book.  Docu­  ments,  in the form of letters  found  in the Manitoba Provincial Archives,  relating to Gimli  (where Amason was born) occupy much  of the  book's  last  section,  and  ele­ ments  of  Scandinavian  mythology come into  play in the  opening section.
Arnason's materials are  coherent, and the book moves with consistent direction towards  an   exegesis   of   place   and   one man's part  in  it.  The poetry  itself,  how­ ever, is not very satisfying,  with  the result that  one soon  loses sympathy with  Ama­ son's  concerns. As a scholar and  teacher, he knows  well enough what  elements  go to make  up  the  book  of  personal history, but  clearly  that  knowledge is insufficient to the task of  writing good  poetry.  Marsh  Burning, for  all  its earnestness, lacks po­ etry's passion.
BRUCE WHITEMAN
 ****  RODERICK HAIG-BROWN, The Master and his Fish. McClelland & Stewart, $14-95·     Like virtually everything that Haig-Brown did,  these essays  on  various aspects of fishing  are  written with  the  craftsmanship of  a  writer who  never fell  into  the  trap of pretentiousness and  whose clear  prose  was  adapted admirably not  only  to describing the  techniques of fishing  but  also  to evoking the   natural  setting where the   angler encounters his  quarry; they   also   rather  poig­ nantly reveal  the  division  in  the  heart of  every hunter, between his  desire  to conquer  and his urge  to  identify with   his  prey.   There  are   23 pieces,  scattered over  the  quarter of a  century from  1952  to  1976, the  year  of  Haig-Brown's death, and  the  best,  in  my view,  are  the  early  ones,  though there is  none   that  is  not  work­  manlike.	G.W.

***   JEAN   EWEN,    China  Nurse   1932-1939. McClelland &  Stewart, $r6.95.   If she  hadn't stayed   alive,  and   if  she'd  become one  of  the party faithful, Jean Ewen  might   have  been  as famous today  as her  former colleague, Norman Bethune.  For   Jean  Ewen   started   nursing  in China in  1932,   six  years   before  Bethune  ar­ rived  there, and   when   Bethune did   reach  the  country she  accompanied  him  because   of  her past  experience of  nursing there and  her speak­ ing  knowledge of  Chinese. They did  not  work together for long; she found Bethune's political priggishness and  male  chauvinism unendurable, and    fairly   soon   parted   company   with    "the bloody  missionary," as she once  called  him.  But she   remained   in   the   Communist-dominated area   of  China for  two  years,   until   she  left  in
1939,  and   China  Nurse  1932-1939 is  a  fresh and   interesting  look   at   a   crucial  period  in world   history and   at  the  men  who  dominated it,  for  Chou  En-lai and  Mao  Tse-tung and  the other Communist leaders are  all  portrayed. It is also a welcome antidote to  the  recent  stream
of Bethune hagiography.                              o.w.

**  PADDY  SHERMAN, Expeditions to Nowhere. McClelland & Stewart, $16.95.     Paddy  Sher­ man  is a newspaperman, publisher of  the  Van­ couver   Province, whose  avocation is  mountain climbing, which he  had   done   in  many   ranges and   on  many   famous and   formidable  peaks,  and  which  he  has  already  written about in  an earlier  book,  Cloud   Walkers.  Expeditions  to Nowhere tells  of  climbs not  only  near  home  in Canada and  Alaska, but  also in South America and   in  Africa.  Sherman,  when   he   writes   of mountains, has  a  simple and  serviceable prose that  describes the  setting well  and  evokes  the excitement of the  experience.                   o.w.


173




ATWOOD'S IISURFACING"

THE CRITICISM AND  REVIEWS dealing  with Surfacing have exhibited a continuing dis­ agreement as to whether or not the novel, especially  in its concluding resolution,  can be said  to be affirmative. A  review in  the Queen's Quarterly claims that  the  merg­ ing of survival and acceptance in the last chapter comes too late: "It is not easy to credit  after having been confronted for so long with nothing but  the evidence  of dis­ integration."1  Moreover,  the   same   re­ viewer charges that  "the  grace implied in the  water   vision  [which]  has  shot  light through the  torment" has  not  been  wit­ nessed   by  the   reader.  Even   more   out­  spokenly   critical  is  Linda   Rogers   who, writing  in Canadian Literature, speaks of the "pervasive chill" in Atwood's imagery,  a chill  which  lacks  "a  warming counter­ point."  Rogers  continues:  "There  is  no life-giving   warmth  in  her   metaphorical water  either. The ascent  from  drowning is  no  resurrection,  just  a  return to  con­ ventional reality."2    Similarly,   Rosemary Sullivan  argues  that  Surfacing ends in an unbroken  narcissistic  circle  game   which provides  no release  for  the  narrator, and no commitment of the self to an other  or to the human community.3 The other  side of  the  debate is seen  in  M'argaret  Lau­ rence's    contention   that    the   narrator's inner  journey  is a  "breakthrough" rather than  a breakdown  or  breakup. Although conceding that  the note of hope on which the  novel ends  is qualified, Laurence dis­ agrees  with   the  pronouncement  on  the dust  jacket  that it is unexpected.4  George  Woodcock, like  Laurence, refers  to  Sur­  facing as the account of a rite de passage, stating: "It  is a  novel  of self-realization,

I74
 
hence  of life-realization."5 The debate summarized in  these opposing views is of crucial importance for understanding and assessing  the  relevance of  Atwood's  Sur­ facing.    If  I  side   with   Laurence   and  Woodcock in  finding the  novel  to be  af­ firmative, it  is not  only  because  they  are  allies  of such  stature as anyone would  be glad  to have,  nor  because  my own  views as  to  what  constitutes  an  "affirmation" may be somewhat modest  in terms of their expectations, but  because  it seems  to me that    this   position  can   be  further   sub­ stantiated.
The  narrator's external quest   for  her missing  father has  its  inner counterpart in  her  search for  insight  into  her  present difficulties, which  include (or  so it seems at  the outset) a failed  marriage and sub­ sequent divorce, and  an  unwanted  child.  Later the marriage and  the baby prove  to be fabrications, disguises for an affair  with a  married teacher by whom  she  has  be­ come  pregnant, and  for an abortion. The abortion was so traumatic  an  event,  and  remains so  painful a  memory,   that   the narrator cannot accept it as a reality.  An initial  resolution   occurs   when   she   dis­ covers  the   body  of  her  drowned father while  diving near  a cliff in search  of  In­ dian   rock  paintings. This  discovery  pre­  cipitates  the   admission,  both   to  herself and  to us, of the fact  of the abortion. The acceptance of responsibility does not, however, resolve  her  difficulties,  for there are   two  further  consequences following from   the  discovery  and  admission:  first, she can  now no longer  claim  to be "inno­ cent" since  she  must  see  the  destruction of her fetus as having made her a "killer," like the "Americans" who have been serv­ ing as a handy caricatured personification of evil for herself and  her friends; second,  since  there  are  no  rock  paintings to  be found at the cliff as her father's maps  had indicated, she  is forced  to conclude that he had,  before  his death, gone  mad.
The  narrator's quest   for  her   missing

OPINIONS & NOTES



father as related to  her  inner quest  sug­ gests  the  limitations of  rationality.  Her  botanist father has retreated to the wilder­  ness to escape  from  the  irrationalities of humanity and   of   civilization:  "animals, he  said,  were  more consistent, their  be­ haviour at   least   was   predictable."  In retrospect the narrator concludes that  her father's insistence that  God  is a supersti­  tion   (he  had  refused   to  allow  her  to go to Sunday School)  necessitated her deifi­ cation of him: "If you tell  your  children God  doesn't exist  they  will  be  forced  to believe  you  are  the  god,  but  what  hap­ pens  when  they  find  out  you  are  human after  all, you have  to grow old and  die?"  What if, as he  insisted,  there  is no resur­ rection? For  people,  he had  claimed, are not  onions: they  stay  under. Her  father's death, then-a death from which  he has literally  not  "surfaced"-brings about  a new crisis for  the  narrator.
Initially,  the   narrator proceeds  logic­ ally  to  consider the  possible  alternatives capable  of  explaining  his  absence.   She employs  a  kind  of  dyadic  system,  like  a botanist's classificatory scheme, using vari­  ous pairs  of binary opposites to assist her in her  search  for him.  In  fact,  the search is  seen  by  her  as  a  kind   of  game   for which   her   father  earlier  provided the governing  rules  and  proper training and has now, perhaps, left the necessary clues. "There's only  two  places  he can  be," she states, "on the  island  or  in  the  lake."  An exploration  of   the   island   proves   futile, "like  searching for  a ring  lost on a beach or in the snow." Almost having decided  to give up, the  narrator comes  upon some drawings in  the  cabin which  later  prove to be of Indian petroglyphs. Finding them at first unrecognizable, she is puzzled and disturbed  by  the  drawings because   they raise   a   "forgotten   possibility,"  namely, that   her  father might   be  insane   rather than  simply  dead  or  alive.  In  that  case, she realizes,  "none of the  rules  would  be the  same."
 The   whole  of  Part   One   of  the  novel reflects  the presence  of this  binary  vision right from her childhood. Upon  seeing a leech in the water  she decides  that  since it has  red  dots  on  its  back  it  must  be  the good  kind,  since  the  bad  kind  is mottled with grey and yellow. Her  brother, she recalls,  had  "made up  these  moral  dis­ tinctions": "There had  to be a good  kind and  a bad kind  of everything." The nar­ rator sees her  father as  having  split  his family   between    "two   anonymities,  the city  and  the  bush," thereby  avoiding the happy  middle  of the company town  half­  way  between: "in  the  city  we lived  in  a succession of  apartments and  in the  bush he picked  the most  remote lake  he could find." Again,  she  recalls  that  at  birthday parties  "there were  only  two  things  you could  be, a  winner or  a loser  [though] the mothers  tried  to rig it so everyone  got a  prize."  Significantly, the  narrator tells us that  at first she had  refused  to play the games  at  all.  Surfacing may  be seen,  in part,  as about the  discovery  of new  rules for the revision of the prevailing "game." Subjected  in   the   schoolyard  to   a   tor­ menting rhyme  which  goes,  "Adam  and
Eve and  Pinch  Me,  I Went down  to  the
river  to bathe; I Adam  and  Eve fell in,  I
So  who  do  you  think   was  saved?" the
narrator at first declined  to answer.  When her  schoolmates explained  that   the  rules were that  you had to answer, the narrator with great craftiness responded that Adam  and  Eve were saved. This response shows her attempt to escape  the inevitable pinch, and  also, as one of my students has suggested, that she knew even from her childhood  that   you  could   not   be  saved unless you first fell in.
There is a good  deal  which  is autobio­
graphical in this bifurcated vision of  Sur­ facing. Atwood,  in  an  interview,  reveals that  at  the age of sixteen  she had become  convinced   that   she  could   not  both   get married  and    have   children   and   be   a writer  too:  "It seemed  to me that  getting

175

OPINIONS &  NOTES



married would be a kind of death. Society didn't  provide   alternatives  then.   There was no Women's Lib  telling you that  you could  do  both."6   Similarly,   the  narrator of Surfacing looks for a way of escaping or  transcending or  reconciling the  given alternatives. "My  brother," she says, "saw the   danger  early.   To   immerse   oneself, join   in   the   war,   or   to   be   destroyed. Though there  ought  to be other  choices." The sight  of  a  heron   gratuitously  killed and  hung  up in the sunlight  especially dis­ turbs   her   because   its  "causeless,   undi­  luted" death is entirely   senseless:   "The only  relation they  could  have  to a  thing  like that  was to destroy  it. Food, slave, or corpse,  limited  choices."
Structuralism has  been  criticized  pre­
cisely at this point,  for assuming  that rela­ tions can be reduced to binary oppositions as firefwater, rawfcooked,  pure/impure, sunfmoon. And,  as Rubert de Vent6s has recently  pointed  out,  "our religious  tradi­ tion,  our  competitive  economy,  and  our mass culture all conspire  to encourage the simplification   and    polarization  of   our moral  sensitivity."7   The  terms  which  we use   provide    ready-made   guidelines  to delineate  various> aspects   of  life  either positively   or   negative!y: 	virtue    versus vice, quality versus  price, freedom versus bureaucracy, new  versus obsolete,  and  so on.  Rubert suggests  the  need  for  an  ap­ preciation of those  values  rejected or de­ nied  by our  clinging  to one of two polari­ ties.   He   finds   in  Kierkegaard,   Hegel,  Marx, and   Mao  instructive  instances of how one might  criticize  paths chosen and appreciate paths  rejected. Atwood's hero ine  implies  a slightly  different procedure by  which   the  limitations  of  a  dualistic mode  of  perception are  transcended.
E. F. Schumacher, in his very  influen­ tial  book  Small   is Beautiful,  comments upon  this  human propensity  to  think  in opposites,  and  the continual task of recon­  ciling  oppositions which  cannot logically be reconciled. He  uses the terms "conver-
 gent"   and    "divergent"  to   distinguish problems  which    are   capable  of   being solved  by  the  application of  logic  from those  which   are   not.   An  executive, for example, wearied with  his  daily  attempt to  bring  to  convergence the  "divergent" problems encountered  within   his  office, might seek the  satisfaction of working  on a  "convergent" problem such  as a  cross­ word   puzzle  as  he  rides  the  commuter train home.  The solution   to  a  divergent problem is to raise the problem to a higher level   of  being   where   the  opposition  is transcended. The  procedure  of Atwood's narrator,  then,  could   be  seen  as  her  at­  tempt to solve  divergent  problems-the death of her  father, her  lack  of  love  for Joe,  the guilt  resulting from  her abortion
-by the logical means appropriate to problems  of  convergence.  Such   an   at­ tempt, Schumacher would  say, involves  a process  of "reduction" capable  of  bring­  ing  about only  a  spurious  solution. The divergent problems entailed  in coming  to grips   with  love  and  death  demand  not just the use of reason  but the commitment of the  whole personality. Atwood's fiction
argues  for  the  displacement of logic and of the scientific  method as effective means of dealing with  the essential  human prob­ lems. And  its religious  significance lies in its  raising  problems to  a  higher  level  of being.
The movement of  the  tripartite  struc­ ture  of Surfacing suggests  the affirmative reconciliation of  oppositions,  and  echoes the  surfacing pattern -going  down,  be­ ing under, and coming up. Part  One  con­ cludes:  "Finally being  in  the  air  is more painful  than being   in  the  water   and   I bend   and   push   myself   reluctantly  into  the lake." The opening lines of Part  Two with  their  more  analytical and  objective tone are strikingly different from what  has preceded. With  new discernment the nar­ rator analyses  the  shortcoming of  her ap­  proach: "The  trouble is all  in  the  knob at  the  top  of our  bodies.  I'm  not against

OPINIONS &  NOTES



the  body under the  head  either: only the neck, which  creates the  illusion  that  they are  separate." If people   were  built  like worms  or  frogs,  she  reflects,   with   their heads  extending directly  into  their shoul­ ders, the illusion of the st"paration of head and  body could  not be maintained: "they  wouldn't be  able  to  look  down  at  their bodies  and  move  them  around as if they were  robots  or  puppets." Here, then,  the dualistic  vision   is  perceived  by  her   as standing  in   the   way   of   integrity  and wholeness.  Later the  fish,  referred to  as "neckless  headbody," becomes  a  kind  of icon or protecting spirit,  the more so per­ haps  because  she  sees in  its  jumping (a passage  from   water to air  and   back  to water  again) an inverted mirror-image of her own immersion and  surfacing.
,Within   Part   Two  the   separation  of head   from  body  becomes  a  special  pre­ occupation of the  narrator. She sees  this separation  as   enabling  the   mechanical and  detached use of the body, whether  in killing  (as in the case of her abortion) , or in violence directed towards nature (as in the death of the heron) , or in sexual rela­  tions   (Joe   is  impressed  with   the  "cool" way she  took off her clothes  during their first encounter-"as if I were  feeling  no emotion").   When   David    attempts  his seduction  he  argues  that   the   narrator's duty  is retaliation  since  at  that   moment  Joe,  her  current lover,  is off with  David's wife, Anna.  She reflects that  David's argu­ ment    favours    "geometrical   sex":   "it would  be  enough  for  him  if our  genitals  could  be detached like two kitchen  appli­ ances and  copulate in mid-air, that  would complete his  equation." Later she  men­ tally compares Anna  to a Playboy centre­ fold  who  "copulates ... with  the man's  torso   while   his  brain   watches  from   its glassed-in  control cubicle."
The narrator discovers the  separation
of the head from the body to be her own particular problem as well. She has been, so it seems, living  in  the  wrong half,  that
 is  her  head,  which   has  become  severed from  her  body  at  some  time  in  the  past. In the interval she imagines that  her neck has  closed  over  like  a  frozen  pond, shutting her  into  her  head  and  resulting in her inability  to feel or to love. This de­ tachment or  apathy has  made  the  abor­  tion   possible,  and   is  presently  creating difficulties  in  her  relationship  with  Joe. The  head-body dualism of Part Two  may be seen, therefore, as a consequence of her father's rationalism, dwelt  upon so exten­  sively in Part  One. Moreover, as the quest for   her   disappeared   parent   continues, bound  up with  its resolution is the resolu­ tion  of  her  personal problems.
The  apparently meaningless and  ran­
dom  drawings,  previously   taken  as  evi­ dence  of his insanity, she  discovers  to be sketches  of  petroglyphs. In  terms  of  her most  recent  binary  hypothesis concerning his absence -insane or  dead -she feels that  now  she  has  conclusive  proof  of his sanity,  and   therefore,  of  his  death. In order  to establish this  conclusion  she  or­ ganizes a trip  with  her  three  friends to a nearby  lake where  she  hopes  to find  rock paintings   at  the  location marked  on  his map.  The  trip  proves lf:o be inconclusive. Having   returned  to  the  main   lake,  she makes  a  final   attempt   to  establish   her father's fate.  Because  the level of the lake has   been   raised,   she   reasons   that   the paintings  he  charted  may  well  be  under  water  now.  She  begins  to  dive at  one  of the  places  marked  nearby. Beneath   the surface  she sees, not  the  painting, but  his body,  weighed   down   by  the  camera he had  been carrying. A new  and  unaccept­ able conclusion is borne  in upon  her,  for since  there  are  no  paintings to be found she must  recognize  that  he  had  gone  in­ sane   before   his  death.  In  charting  the petroglyphs where   there   were  none,  he had  been seeing  with  "true vision; at  the end, after  the failure of logic." The  mutu­ ally  exclusive  alternatives of  insanity   or

177

OPINIONS &  NOTES



death  which  she had earlier  devised  have been shattered.
Although the  discovery  of her  father's
body brings  her  ostensible quest  to a con­ clusion,  it  is  some  time  before  she  can acknowledge the  reality  of her discovery. Furthermore, her dive into the depths and her emergence with  the discov-ery initiates the   reintegration  of    head   and   body: "feeling  was  beginning to seep  back  into  me,   I  tingled    like   a   foot   that's  been asleep."  Her  father's puzzle had  provided  a mediation, but since (in her words)   his gods are  only  those  of the  head,  she still lacks  the  means  for  a  total  integration. The  criticism that   the  water  vision  does not afford  a complete resolution  is in this respect legitimate. The resolution  must be completed  by  a   legacy  from   her   dead mother, and  it is for this second gift which she now  hunts. Again,  a picture  provides the mediation, this time a drawing which the  narrator herself  had  done  as a child and which she finds on a loose page in a scrapbook. The picture is of a baby in its mother's womb, gazing out  through the stomach  at   a   man   with   horns   and   a barbed  tail.  The   baby  is herself  and  the man   is  God,   who  she  felt   needed   the Devil's  advantages. Perhaps in  this crea­ tion  of a more  Dionysian  and  less  Apol­ lonian  deity  she  recognizes  the  failure  of the  traditional  conception of  the  Chris­  tian  God  to embody  evil as well as good, thereby   reflecting an  incomplete version of reality.  Her childhood picture has now a new meaning which  she must  seek out. Perhaps that  new meaning is that  the nar­ rator,   having  failed   in  her   attempt  to retreat to  the  innocence of  childhood in avoidance of  the  abortion  and  its after­ math, must  emerge into  the  adult world of evil and  of power;  she  must  confront, as Rollo  May  would put it, her particular daimon   and   absorb  it  into  herself.  Part  Two  of the  novel ends, then, with "every­  thing  ... waiting to become alive."
In an  act  reminiscent of some ancient
 rite  which  recalls  the  connections among the moon, woman, fertility  and  initiation, and  with  great  urgency,  she compels  Joe to  follow  her  out  of the  cabin  that  night and  to  impregnate her  as she lies on  the cold,  damp ground, carefully keeping the moon on her left hand. Immediately she feels,  in  her  words,  her  "lost  child  sur­ facing" as  "the two  halves  clasp"   (one supposes   the  two  halves  to  be  her  head  and  body). Her  father's mediation having taken her  beyond  logic, now her mother's legacy  elicits  from  her  a  commitment to the  generation of  new  life  in  atonement for  her  aborted fetus.
Her  temporary descent  into madness, detailed in  the  next  five chapters, is  per­ haps  most  difficult  to account for  within the  novel.  In  a significant  realization the narrator states: "Logic is a wall,  I built  it, on the other side is  terror." The resulting terror after the  crumbling of  the  logical wall  might be explained in  a  number of ways.   First,   she  may,   as   her   father's daughter,  be  tracing the  same  path   into the depths of insanity which  he had  taken  before  her. Second,  as an  overcompensa­ tion for living so long out of her head,  she must  now  live  at   the  animal  level  and integrate herself with  the natural world, refusing all food,  clothing and  shelter except  for  that  which  nature can  provide her.  Third, her  insanity may  result  from too violently bringing together her "head­ line" and   "heartline," for  as  Anna,   the amateur palm  reader has  told  her,  when those   two   lines   come   together   you're  either a  criminal, an  idiot,  or  a  saint.  A fourth  possibility   is  that   insofar   as  she retains her characteristically dualistic way of   construing things,  she sees the  only alternatives for  herself  as  being  flight  or fight.  Aware  of her  previous abuse  of her power  over  life,  a  power  which  she  had not  been  willing  to  admit having in  her possession, the only safe route,  she thinks, is to decline  totally  to use it  by engaging in a retreat from  civilized  life. Her  newly

OPINIONS  & NOTES



conceived  embryo, which  she hopes to see "covered with shining fur, a god," she intends to  keep  from  the  confusions and failures  and  classifications which language affords; she vows, therefore, not  to teach it any  words.  Whatever may  be the  rea­ son  for   her   madness,   the  narrator  de­ clares: "There are  no longer  any rational points  of view."
The descent  into  madness,  the counter­ part   of  her  earlier  descent  into  watery depths, underlines the  title's significance,  that  you have  to  fall  in  or  go under  be­ fore  you  can  come  up  or  be saved.  Fur­ thermore, during  this  period   her  avoid­  ance  of the confinements and  restrictions of  language  has  a  more  literal   counter­ part  as  well,  for  the  narrator avoids  any kind  of   enclosure. In  the  midst  of  her underwater vision  the  young  woman  had seen her  fetus  as having been  placed  in a bottle,  similar to  the   jars  in  which  her brother had entrapped frogs  (and  from which  she had  released  them) . "The bot­ tle,"  she had  said  at  the  time,  "had  been logical,  pure   logic,  . . . enclosure,  some­ thing  to keep  the  death away  from  me."  Similarly,   the   narrator  had   thought  to provide release  to  the  "hundreds of  tiny naked  Annas  ... bottled and  shelved'' by unravelling into  the  lake  the  film which David   and   Joe  had   made   of  her  after  brutally  forcing  her   to  strip   for   them.  Later she  reflects  that  she ought to have broken   a   different   container,  the   gold compact in  which  she feels Anna's soul is imprisoned. Now the cabin  is a "cage, wooden  rectangle" which  she is forbidden to enter. Her  food  must  come  from  else­ where  than  the glass and  metal enclosures of  jars  and   tin  cans.  Her  briefcase  must be opened and  her manuscripts and  illus­ trations destroyed. Her  clothes  and  shoes are   now   husks   to  be  abandoned. The fenced-in garden  is out   of  bounds.  She must discard  the ring given to her by her pretended husband. For  these are the new rules :  "they  are  against borders."
 The  narrator  returns to  sanity   when she  perceives  her  mother and   father  in successive  visions,  and   discovering them to  be  but  projections of  herself  and   not gods as she had  thought, she finally allows them   to  "dwindle, grow,  become   what they  are,   human." Going   to  the   fence where she has seen her  father, she locates what  she  believes  to  be  his footprints - "I place  my  feet  in  them  and  find  that they   are   my   own."   Atwood   has   com­ mented  that  Surfacing is a ghost story  of the  kind  in  which  the  "ghost"  is  found  to be a facet  of yourself  which  has  split off and  been projected upon someone else. This  dimension and  more  is present  here. In  the initiation rituals  of  the Winnebago Indians the  neophyte,  after having   been ritually  "killed," spends  the  night  in  the lodge   of  his   ancestors  and   then,   upon leaving,  finds "footprints of light." These footprints are  those of his ancestors, now reborn, and   if   the   neophyte  steps   into  them,  he  too  will  gain   a  new  life.  The rebirth   in  Surfacing  brilliantly combines  with  the  features of archaic Amerindian ritual   the  insights  of  contemporary psy­ chology.
In the final two chapters all of the gods, including those of the recently  sacred  lake and cliff, have receded  and  become as "theoretical as  Jesus." "From now  on," she realizes, "I'll have  to live in the  usual way, defining  them  [that is, the gods]  by their  absence." The  modern individual, if he or she experiences reality as ultimate, finds  that  ultimacy to  be conditioned  by a horizon  of  negation or  absence.  Lang­ don  Gilkey, summing up  the testimony  of
recent    scholars  of   religion,  finds   that
whether one  consults  Heidegger or  Bult­ mann  or  Ebeling or  (perhaps  most not­  ably)    Tillich  ("We are  aware   of   the power of being  through  the experience of the shock of  non-being"), the unanimous declaration of these thinkers is that  "even  the   most   positive   apprehension  of   the divine  comes   to   us  from   the   sense   of

I79

OPINIONS &  NOTES



negation, limit,   or  insufficiency   on   the level of the finite."8  Gilkey affirms that  it is only when  threatened by a sense of the emptiness of the void, by an experience of nothingness, that  we are  in  a  position  to begin to take notice of the more positive aspects  of  ultimacy, those "gifts  of  exist­ ence"  conveying  the  power  of life and  of meaning.
rThe narrator's descent and  rebirth  have brought her  to  the  place  where  she can be open  to such  positive gifts as existence tenders   us.  For  her,  love  is  now  to  be defined  by its  failures, and  power  by its loss and  renunciations. "The intercession of words" she sees as necessary too, even though  attempts at  communication  will probably  fail.  "From now on I'll have  to live in the  usual  way," she  states  simply. At  the  end  Joe,  having   returned  to  the island, calls to her and  waits. Though the novel  closes with  the  narrator poised  on the  brink  of  a  response  but  not  yet  re­ sponding, we are given  to believe that she will  return to  the  city  with  Joe,  for  she has  realized   that   beyond  flight  or  fight there  is the  possibility  of trusting him.  In the presence  of this possibility of trust and commitment she has transcended the pre­  vious  oppositions  and   elevated   what   is problematic in her life to a higher  level of being. The decision  "to live in  the  usual way"  may   be  characterized,  as  Rogers does, as no resurrection, but  just a return to  conventional  reality.   It is  a  return, though, only after  a rebirth to some hard­ earned   insights  and   only  after   it  is  dis­ covered  that  no "total salvation, resurrec­ tion"  is available. Atwood's  discovery  of tenacity  beyond  truth (to paraphrase her poetry)    suggests  her  familiar  theme   of survival,  of  commitment to endurance as a  necessity  even   as  one  bears  an  acute consciousness of possible  (and  perhaps probable)  failure. This  kind   of  heroic stance  I  find  to  be realistic,  but affirma­ tive as well.
Atwood's solution  lies in  some  Iniddle

180
 ground  beyond   the  liinited   choices  sug­ gested   in  such   alternatives  as   fight  or flight,  the  city or the bush, sane or insane,  winning or losing, victor  or victim.  In  an interview she  has  made  more  precise  the nature of  the  affirmative  ideal  which   is held up as a possibility  at  the end  of Sur­  facing:    "The ideal  would   be  somebody  who  would  be  neither a  killer  nor  a  vic­ time, who  could  achieve some  kind  of harmony with  the  world,  which  is a pro­ ductive or  creative harmony rather  than  a   destructive  relationship   towards   the world."9
Contrary to Rosemary Sullivan, I think that  there  is here  the  basis for a radically revised  relation to the  world  of culture as well as to  the  world  of nature, a relation which   includes  the   human  community. The ironic   distancing at  the  conclusion of Surfacing appropriately  precludes, in typical  Canadian  fashion, taking  oneself too  seriously,  yet  it  is not  a  detachment which  results  in  a complete alienation, a situation  in.  which    the   protagonist    is totally  disengaged or  unrelated. Such  a condition for  Atwood   would  entail   "the old  belief  that   I  am   powerless  and  be­ cause  of  it  nothing I  can   do  will  ever hurt  anyone," a  modern  belief  in  one's innocence which  she  suggests  is  the  suc­ cessor to the  old  belief in  original sin.
In  Surfacing the  "jail-break" and  "re­ creation" to  which  Atwood  looks  at  the end  of Survival has  occurred. In  Marian Engel's   Bear,  Lou,   the  questing  female  protagonist, is taken  a little  further from the   scene   of   her   island   transformation along  the  road  that  leads back  to the city. But  to overlook  the affirmative resolution of   Surfacing   is   perhaps  to   have   suc­ cumbed  to  the  mentality of  losing  and  victimization to  a  degree   even   beyond anything  Atwood  herself  could  have  im­ agined.
NOTES
1 Joan  Harcourt, "Atwood  Country," Queen's
Quarterly, So  ( 1973), 28 r.

OPINIONS &  NOTES



2  "Margaret the  Magician," Canadian  Liter­
ature, No.  6o  (Spring 1974), p. 85.
a   "Breaking the  Circle," Malahat Review, No.
41  (January 1977), p. 41.
4  Review of Surfacing in  Quarry, 22  (Spring
1973), 63.
5   "Margaret  Atwood: Poet  as  Novelist," The Canadian Novel in  the  Twentieth Century (Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, 1975), p.
325·
6   Valerie Miner, "Atwood in  Metamorphosis: An  Authentic Canadian Fairy Tale," in Myrna Kostash et  a!., Her  Own Woman: Profiles  of Ten Canadian Women (Toronto: Macmillan of  Canada, 1975), p.  r8r.
7  Xavier  Rubert  de   Vent6s,   Self-Defeated Man: Personal  Identity and Beyond   (New York: Harper &  Row,  1975), p.  58.
B  Naming  the    Whirlwind: The  Renewal of God-Language (Indianapolis and  New York: Bobbs-Merrill Company,  r 969), p.  309   n. Speaking of  Surfacing,  Atwood states: "The  assumption of  the   book,   if  there  is one,   is  that  there are   gods   that   do  exist here,  but  nobody knows  about them." She continues: "I  think that the   authentic  re­ ligion   that  was   here   has   been   destroyed; you  have to  discover it  in  some  other way. How    that  fits   in   with   the   book   I  don't know,  but  I'm sure  it  has  something to  do with  it" (in  Graeme  Gibson, Eleven Cana­ dian   Novelists    [Toronto:   Anansi,  1973], p. 31 ).
9  Eleven Canadian Novelists, p. 27. Through­ out   the   conversation with  Gibson, Atwood repeatedly   emphasizes  the   necessity    of   a third choice in situations where  it is assumed there are  only  two alternatives.

WILLIAM C. JAMES

"MATILDA"

Matilda;  or  the   Indian's   Captive   is  a "new" Canadian novel  that  has just come to light  in the library of the Quebec Seminary.1  Its  publication date,   I833, would make  it the second  novel published in the Canadas-coming between  St. Ursula's Convent  of I824 and £'Influence d'un Livre of I837·
With   regard  to  the  author, it  is  not known  whether "James Russell" lived at, or   near,   Three  Rivers  (a   District  for
 which  there  is a paucity of surviving records), or whether "James Russell" was even the author's real  name.  The  only contemporary mention of the work  that  I have found  was a brief notice in the Que­ bec Gazette of May  I7, I833, announcing that  the book was for sale at  Neilson and Cowan's bookstore.   There  are  no  other  known  works  of  the  period  by  a  James  Russell,   although a   "J.R."  of   Three Rivers did  write a few items  in the  Liter­ ary Garland. M. M. Brown  has, however,  noted  that  this was probably a John Ram­ sey. The author's preface gives some hints  as to his background, but  there  is no way of  establishing whether  these  comments are  based on fact,  or  whether they  are  a form of conventional apology:
the  Author renounces every  claim  to literary information, having a  mind   both   cramped and   treacherous,  which,  added  to   his   ex­ cluded life   (for  many   years,  and  at an  age when  the  human mind  is most susceptible of improvement) among Indian   tribes,  wilds and  woods,  where  nothing  is  heard, but  the ruthless  blast   or   the   howl   of   the   savage, without  even   books   to  derive  information from....
,The printer, George  Stobbs,  is listed  in
Beaulieu  and  Hamelin, La Presse Qw§be­
coise des origines a nos jours, as publisher
of La Gazette  de Trois  Rivieres  in  I832,
and also as publisher of later  Three Rivers publications.
The novel itself is definitely  Canadian, although the  final  "rich-and-happy-ever­ after" apotheosis is set, appropriately per­  haps,  in  England. It begins  on  the  banks of   the   St.   Lawrence  River   in   Lower  Canada on  June  6, I768, when  the  four­ year-old Matilda is kidnapped by Indians. She  is  rescued  a  few  months later   by  a trader on  the  American side  of  the Niagara River   who   buys  her   from   her captors and raises her as his own daughter. Our  heroine  grows up  beautiful and charming, and  conveniently ignorant  of any  life she  led  before  becoming the daughter of Mr. and  Mrs.  Wilson. At the


I8I

OPINIONS &  NOTES



age of fourteen, while  taking  a walk,  the son  of  her  Indian captors   tries  to  seize her,  but  is thwarted by the  timely arrival of Captain Clifford, a British officer taken prisoner   at   Bunker   Hill   and   now   on parole  awaiting the end of hostilities. The Captain is smitten.
To protect Matilda from  further  In­
dian  attempts at kidnapping, and  to settle in the British  territories where they feel politically  more at ease, the Wilsons move secretly  to Kingston. They  are  soon  hav­ ing to protect her from  the notice of vari­  ous officers of the  Kingston garrison, one of whom,  having been refused  her  hand, attempts to  kidnap  her.  She  is saved  by the  timely  arrival  of   a  heavily  cloaked swordsman, who turns  out  to be Captain Clifford  again.   Because   he   has   been ordered to New  York, he has crossed  the lines into Canada, breaking  his parole,  to say  goodbye   to  Matilda. After  restoring her  to her  parents, he returns undetected to  fulfil  the  terms  of his parole.
At war's end,  the  Wilsons cross  to  the
American side on a visit to Mr.  Wilson's widowed  mother. A horse runs away with a wagon in which  Mrs. Wilson and Matil­ da  are  riding.   Matilda, her  dress  caught in  a  wheel,  is  being  dragged   to  certain death   when  rescued -by  Captain Clif­  ford  again. When  she  recovers  from  her injuries  he,  having  learned   her   history from   Mr.   Wilson,  nonetheless  proposes and  is accepted. The two men decide  that  Matilda must  be told  her own story. Her shock at  this revelation is extreme. Nobly she  refuses Clifford, on  the  grounds that  she  is   now   penniless   and   of  unknown parentage. Wilson offers a  £1000 dowry, as  he   considers  her   his  heir,   and   the wedding takes  place.
Several weeks later the original Indian captor  is  seen  in  the  area   and   is  per­ suaded, by  Captain  Clifford's  impressive  uniform, to  give  information  about   the place  from  whence  he abducted her.  He also  gives  them   the  picture book  which
 Matilda had   been  looking   at   when  she was  kidnapped. The title  page  gives  her name,   Matilda  Milford, and   her  birth­ date. Before  these  leads  can  be  followed up  Clifford  and  his bride  are summoned to  England  to  take   up   the  vast  family estate   he   has   inherited at   his  father's death.
Once in England, we learn  rapidly  that a Sir William Milford lives almost  as a recluse   in   the   neighbourhood,  but   the author teases  us  by  delaying the  inevit­ able  meeting with  accounts of  social obli­ gations  and  descriptions of  the estate  and  its   management.   Finally    Sir   William  comes  to dinner. Afterwards he  picks  up the  picture  book  from   a  table  and   the recognition scene  is under  way.
The final  paragraphs point  the moral:

Witness reader,  the   once   poor   and  for­ lorn   Indian's Captive has  now  become  the  adored wife of a gentleman of  the first stand­ ing  in society, both  for  personal accomplish­ ments and wealth,  and is  likewise   the  sole heiress  to an immense property by her father, all  of  which  blessings, we  hope  she  will  be grateful for,  and  appreciate their value in  a true  light.
They are  now  enjoying all  the  happiness which this  transitory world  can  afford; therefore it would  be the  next  thing to sacri­ lege   to  again  break in   upon   their   repose, consequently, we shall   bid  them  farewell.

In  all  honesty  it  cannot be  said  that this  latest   addition  to  Canadian  litera­ ture  is  a  national  treasure -except  for rare  book  dealers. For  the  most  part the writing style  is plain,  although on  occa­  sion it enters into  the convoluted sentence structure  and  flowery  description of  the period. The   plot,   while   reflecting  the literary conventions of the time in the role played by chance, in the relations between  the young  lovers, and  in the final recogni­ tion  scene,  complete with  a  brief  history of  Sir  William's activities since  we  last saw him in the opening chapters, does nonetheless have enough North American flavour   to  make  it  difficult   to  translate

OPINIONS &  NOTES



into   any   other  setting.  Heiresses   kid­ napped  by  gypsies  or  bandits  were  not uncommon in  the  literature of  the  time, but  such  abductors would   not  have  be­ haved  in the same manner as the Indians. These  Indians, while not to be trusted,  do not  appear to be inherently  vicious.  Ma­  tilda's parents had,  in fact,  left  her  alone on  the  banks  of  the  St.  Lawrence while they  went   to  greet  guests.  The  Indians had  come  upon her  playing  alone,  they had  not  stalked  and  seized her  with  pre­ meditation. In selling  her  to  Mr.  Wilson they  strike  a  hard  bargain, claiming that they had  intended her as a bride  for their young son, and  also perceiving that  Mr. Wilson  was determined to  have  her. The son  who  returns to  attempt her  capture ten  years  later says  that   he  has  merely come to claim  his bride. The father, inter­ rogated five years later, is intimidated by the military uniform, and quite co-opera­ tively hands over  the picture book, which he has  kept  for fifteen years.
There is little  scenic description per se, but a strong  sense of time  and  place per­ vades   the  North  American  part  of   the narrative. The  English   scenes,  by  con­ trast,   have  an  aura of  being  developed  from  books and  imagination. Mr.  Wilson and   the   Indians  seem  more  alive   than  Matilda and  Captain  Clifford  and  their upper class families.
A very few comments refer  specifically to life in British North America. Again, these  seem  to  relate  more  to  life  as seen by a merchant and  trader than  to life as
seen  by an  officer in  the  British  army,  or by a young girl. Matilda  may  be founded on fact as the subtitle says, but  the  reality conveyed  to a twentieth-century reader  is that  of an adult male  resident of the Can­ adian colonies. Even  this aspect would  be lost  to  most  general readers  absorbed  in a tale of repeated abductions and  rescues, complete with  the  improbable arrival of Captain Clifford in every moment of dis­ tress.
 Matilda is a conventional tale in many ways, set in  what  is unmistakably  Cana­ da. If the  text  did  not  supply  dates  and place names, it would  be relatively simple for   a  knowledgeable   reader  to  deduce  them.  It is this  blend  of the  real in  time and  place,  with   the  conventions of  the abducted-heiress and  true-love-triumph­ ant   genre,   which   gives   the   novel   its charm.
NOTES
1 Matilda; or, the  Indian's Captive; A Cana­ dian  Tale, founded on  fact, by  James Rus­ sell.   Printed  for    the    author,   by   George Stobbs,  Three-Rivers, and  sold  by the  book­ sellers  of  Montreal and  Quebec, 1833·  204 pp.  A facsimile edition  of  Matilda  has  been  produced  by  the  Garland  Publishing Com­ pany,  New  York  and  London. It is Volume
51  in  the  Garland Library of  Narratives of
North American Indian Captivities.

MARY LU  MACDONALD


ON THE VERGE

***     JACK   L.    SUMMERS   and    RENE    CHAR­ TRAND,   Military   Uniforms in   Canada   r66s-
1970, illus.  by  R.  J. Marrion. Canadian War
Museum Historical Publication No. 16, $29·95·
Military buffs   will   find   this   handsome,  full­
colour book irresistible. A gallery of forty  regi­
mental uniforms, complete with  clear  descrip­ tive   commentaries   and   brief   regimental  his­ tories,    the   book   selectively   charts  Canada's military engagements both  within the  country and   outside   it.  One  could  wish  for  more  pre­ cise illustration of the details of insignia which  the   text   refers    to,   but  Marrion  chooses   to convey  something  more   general and   probably more   culturally   evocative:  the   uniforms  are  not  static, but  "worn"; hence the  illustrations constitute   "portraits"  of   Gentlemen-soldiers, hired  ruffians,   and   martinets. Yet   this  is  not primarily a glimpse of  army life,  nor  a  history of  warfare. A  trifle  tendentious in  its  preface ("Although Canadians are not   a  warlike people, our  entire history has  been  marked by armed  conflict"),   the    book    only    indirectly traces   the  nation's  changing  political  involve­ ments.   Its  value  lies  in  its  visual  design   and  in  the  corroborative detail of  the  text.  There is a useful  glossary  and  a  bibliography. It is a sign   of  the   times,  however,  that   the   editors

ON  THE  VERGE



should deem it necessary to explain why measurements are   not  expressed metrically.
W.N.

*** GUILLAUME  CHARETTE,  Vanishing Spaces: Memoirs of Louis Goulet, tr. Ray Ellenwood.   Editions Bois-Brule, $5·95·    Louis Goulet was  a  Metis   hunter, trader and scout. Born  in   I85g, he  died   in   I 936,  and   saw  the destruction of  the   Old   West  and   the  decline of  the   Metis way  of  life  on  the  open   plains. He   was   a  boy  with  his  father  following the buffalo hunt and trading in  the  western  prair­ ies when  the  Red  River Rising  took  place.  He  worked   for  years  as  a  scout  for  the  American army,  riding as far  south as the  Texas border. He    was   present   at   one   historic  encounter between  Walsh  of   the   Mounted  Police   and  Sitting Bull,  and  at the meeting in  I884 when  the  Metis decided to  send  Gabriel Dumont to fetch   Louis   Riel   from  Montana to  be  their  leader.  When  the    1885   rebellion  began    he happened  to  be  at  Frog Lake,   witnessed  the massacre and  followed  Big  Bear's   wanderings as  a  prisoner.  Blind   in   old  age,  he  dictated his recollections to Guillaume Charette. Garru­ lous  at  times  and  somewhat repetitious, they have   the   naturalness  of  oral   narrative,  and  there is a  poignant vividness  to  the  way  Gou­  let    remembers   his   childhood   in   the    open prairie, the  plants and  animals, the  self-reliant way  in  which the  Metis  hunters made so much they  needed out  of what  the  land  offered. Sometimes, as  in  his  description of  a  narrow escape  from  a prairie fire  sweeping over dried­ out   muskeg, he   involves  one   with   an  extra­ ordinary   sense    of    being    there.    Vanishing Spaces  is  published  by  a  Metis  group,  Edi­ tions    Bois-Brules,  which   also   published   the French original, L'Espace  de  Louis Goulet.
G.W.
***  EDITH   THOMAS,   Louise  Michel,  trans­ lated     by    Penelope     Williams.    Black    Rose Books,   $Ig.g5;  pa.    $g.g5.     For    some   time now  Black  Rose  Books of Montreal has  turned entirely   to   publishing  anarchist  and    near­ anarchist books; it  may  well  by  now  be  the most    important   English-language    anarchist publishing house. Among the  books  it  has  re­ cently   issued   have   been Abel  Paz's  biography of  the  legendary anarchist leader in  the  Span­ ish  Civil   War,  Durruti: The  People  Armed, Ida   Mett's The  Kronstadt Uprising, translated by   Murray   Bookchin,   and  Bookchin's  own important recent  collection of essays, Towards an Ecological  Society. All are  likely  to become basic  books  for  anyone seriously  interested  in the   history   of   anarchism,  and  so  is   Edith
 Thomas's Louise  Michel, translated  by  Pene­ lope  Williams. Louise Michel was  the  demure poet    and   schoolteacher  who    blossomed   in action  into  the    "Red  Virgin   of   the   Com­ mune" and in  later  years  became one  of  the most   active  of   anarchist  orators  and  propa­ gandists. Louise, as   the  copious extracts  re­ produced  from   her  poems,   novels   and   essays show,  was  far  from  being  a writer in  the  same league as Kropotkin  or  Proudhon, but  she  was a  compelling  speaker   and   a  kind   of  secular saint   who  lived  by  choice in  extreme poverty and   gave   away   almost everything that  came  to  her;  her  way  of  life  won  her   the  devotion of   the   masses   and    some   bizarre  friendships. Edith   Thomas   delved  well    in   the    French police  records as well  as in  libraries and  insti­ tutes  and  has  produced a lively  biography full  of   new   facts,  about  Michel  and   about  the other side  of  la  belle  epoque,  its  poverty and discontent.
o.w.
