$r .25  per copy


CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·40

Spring, 1969

COLONIJILISM JIND POST-COLONIJILISM

Articles

BY ROY DANIELLS, ROBERT  J. GIDBS,  WU.LIAM H. NEW, DOROTHY LIVESAY, NAIM  KATTAN, ESTHER JAMES Chronicle
BY DONALD  CAMERON
Review Articles and Reviews

BY CLARA THOMAS, JULIAN SYMONSW. F. HALL, D. G. JONES,
FRED  COGSWELL, MICK BURRS, DONALD  STEPHENS, PETER STEVENS, DONALD  STAINSBY, WILLIAM F. HOLLAND, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, HERBERT ROSENGARTEN, CARL  F. KLINCK, MARGUERITE PRIMEAU, RONALD  SUTHERLAND, GARY GEDDES, JOAN LOWNDES, LEN GASPARINI, DESMOND PACEY, S. E. READ
Opinions

BY  JOHN  HULCOOP, NORMAN NEWTON, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, LOUIS DUDEK
Annual Supplement

CANADIAN LITERATURE CHECKLIST, Ig68

A QUARTERLY OF CR1T1C1SM AND REVIEW










SPARROWS AND EAGLES






A GREATER CONTRAST could hardly exist than between the two periodicals  that  lie at  this moment  beside the  editorial  typewriter. One  is a  com­ plete  reprint, with  an  admirable introduction by  W.  H.  New,  of The  Victoria
.Magazine, which  Mrs.  Susanna Moodie  and  her  husband edited  from  Belleville,
Ontario, in  the  years I 847  to I 848.  (The reprint  is published  by the  University of British Columbia.) The  other  is an enormously fat issue of the Mala hat Review of Victoria ( 266  pages  and  possibly the largest  single issue of a  journal ever  pub­  lished  in  Canada)  which  is dedicated to  the  memory  of the  British  poet,  critic and  anarchist, Herbert Read.
It is impossible  to  make  a  direct  comparison between  the  two  journals. The
Moodies  set  out  with  the  "hope of inducing a  taste  for  polite  literature among the  working  classes",  while  I am sure  Robin  Skelton of the M alahat Review  had no didactic intent at all in his mind,  but merely the wish to create  the best possible tribute   to  a  writer   he  admired, through a  group  of serious  essays by  his peers.
Is  this  placing   the  eagle  beside the  sparrow? I suppose  it  is, for  what   the Moodies  present   to  "the working   classes"  is, except  for  a  few  execrable  jokes, the  dregs  of  early   Victorian  genteel  writing,   the  low  colonialism,   if  one  may adapt an  expression  of Roy  Daniells.  Its interest,  as Mr.  New suggests, is in what it tells us of Canadian taste  in its day,  and  what  it tells is not inspiring.
The  real point  is that  in theI 84o's  periodicals  like The  Victoria  Magazine  and
the slightly superior Literary Garland were all that  could  be expected in Canada. That a journal of the  calibre  of the great  English  quarterlies, the Quarterly  itself or the  Edinburgh, should  appear in Canada was unthinkable.
That a  review  which   can  compete   with  any  other  in  the  English  language should   appear  in  Canada is  now  not  merely  thinkable. It happens-and zn

3

EDITORIAL



Victoria. This  issue of the Malahat  Review  is proof of it, and  more  than  any­ thing  else I  have seen recently in literature   (the  situation  is somewhat  different in  painting)   it  shows that  at  last  we  have   created  an  atmosphere  in  which writing  and  publishing on an international level can be attempted  and  can suc­ ceed in more than  the rare and exceptional instances of the past. We have passed from  colonial  imitativeness  into  national  assertiveness,  and  now,  it  seems, we may be ready for the next step when Canada  becomes the place where one works, with  all that  means and  nothing  more.
















Subscribe before August!

For  the first time in six and  a half years, we are  bowing to the logic of rising costs, and increasing our subscription  rates.
From  August 1st, 1969,  there  will be  a  uniform  subscription
rate for Canadian  Literature, as follows:

1  year, 	4  numbers
$ 4.25
2  years,	8  numbers
$ 7.75
3  years, 12  numbers
$11.00
Single copies will remain at $1.25 each

Subscriptions at the existing rate of $3.50
will be accepted up to the 31st  July


HASTEN AND SAVE!




4



HIGH COLONIALISM

IN  CANADA



Roy Daniells





TERE ARE    CANADIANS  who  regord  om   colonial  beginnings
with  distaste  and  who  consider  filial gratitude from  a young  culture to an  older
one  as sentimental at  best  and  at  worst  degrading. I should  like to advocate an entirely  opposite  view.
An  examination of literary and  critical  writings in Canada between, say, 1870 and   1920   reveals  a  widespread belief  in  the  value  of continuing tradition to  a nation   beginning its  independent course.  The  limits  of  this  paper   allow  me  to refer  only  to  work  in  English.  How  deep  Quebec's  colonial  roots  reached down
has  recently  been shown  in  W.  J. Eccles'  penetrating study,  Canada  under Louis
XIV.
High  colonial  aspirations looked  forward to political  freedom  but  did  not seek instantaneous total  independence. Even  the  act of founding a new  nation was in fact  compatible with  concern for  tradition and  loyalty  to  the  Crown. Graeme Mercer   Adam, editor   of  the  Canadian  Monthly  and  ardent  nationalist, writes in  1872: "It is possible  that   the  hour  of Canadian nationality may  be drawing near.  If so,  let  us  prepare to  found   the  nation, not in ingratitude but  in  truth and  honour." Truth and  honour are  words  not  much  in  current use but  in this remote  context  they stir  the  heart, as Sidney said of the  ballad  of Chevy  Chase.
In  contending for the reality  of a high colonial culture  in Canada, let us quickly look for  the  image  of it  in  the  works  of  two  poets, a novelist,  an  anthologist, a periodical editor  and  the compiler  of a school reader.  My examples are necessarily brief  but  not,  I hope,  inconclusive. A single stanza  of Blake  or  Bums, a single paragraph of  Addison  or  Arnold, may  give  us an  insight  into  the  man  and  his outlook  on  the  world.  Is not  this also true  of Canadian writers?  The  old  notion of touchstones still has its uses.

5

HIGH  COLONIALISM IN CANADA



Among   high  colonial  poets,  Roberts and   Lampman  are,  I think,   the  most impressive:  the  first  fur  his historical,  representative and  seminal qualities, the second  for  the  intrinsic  :esthetic  quality  of his verse. Let  us confine  ourselves  for the  moment to  landscape; Roberts and  Lampman are  in  the  forefront of those who  have  tried  to compose the Canadian scene. There is, of course, no landscape until  we look  at  it.  We choose what  to  regard  and  from  what  point  of view, at what   time  and  in  what  context.   We  import our  own  emphases, emotions   and criteria. Roberts and  Lampman proffer  their  help  in this operation.
Could   we  reopen  Roberts' Orion?  You  recall  how  Lampman was  enchanted
by  the  poem,  like  Keats  looking  into  Chapman's Homer. I never  walk  up  be­ tween   Trinity College  and  the  Royal  Ontario  Museum without seeing  Lamp­ man's shadowy  form  a little ahead, the small square volume  of Orion in his hand  and  his heart  full  of rapture, that  Canada at  last had  its own  poetry. Orion,  he said,  "written by  a  Canadian, by  a  young  man, one  of ourselves ... was like a voice  from  some  new  paradise  of  art,  calling  us to  be  up  and  doing." He  was about nineteen at  the  time and  Roberts a year  or so older.
The actual texture of descriptive  passages in  the  poem  is of great  interest.

Where the slow swirls were swallowed in the tide,
Some stone-throws from the stream's mouth,  there the sward
Stretched  thick and starry from the ridge's foot Down to the waves' wet limits, scattering off Across the red sand level stunted  tufts
Of yellow beach-grass, whose brown panicles
Wore garlands of blown foam. Amidst the slope
Three sacred laurels drooped their dark-green  boughs
About a high-piled altar. There  the king, CEnopion, to whose sceptre bowed with awe The  people dwellers in the steep-shored Chios, Stood praying westward.

Now  it is clear  that  King  CEnopion, for  all his vineyards and  olive-groves  (else­ where  described  in  the  poem), his sacred  laurels  and  his altar, is furnished with a New  Brunswick  beach.  The  thick sward  down  to the  tidal  limit, the  red earth: I need  not  labour the  point.  You  recall  how  the  old  photographers put  their clients  before  a backdrop of distant  castellation framed  in flowery  meadows, the hither edge of which  neatly  accommodated itself to the fur  rug underfoot.
Let  us see how, in a more subtle way, Lampman himself works, how in a poem like "April" Canada and  Keats  combine.  If we listen  to such  lines as these:

6

HIGH COLONIALISM IN CANADA



Pale season, watcher  in unvexed  suspense, Still  priestess of the patient  middle  day....

Dreaming of summer  and fruit-laden mirth.

. . . the brown  bees
Murmur faint  dreams  of summer  harvestries.

The faces of sweet flowers, and  easeful dreams....

we hear  the  echo,  line  after  line,  of well known  harmonies from  the  great  odes of  Keats:

Dance, and  Provencal  song, and sun-burnt mirth. For Summer has o'er-brimmed their clammy  cells. I have  been half in love with easeful death.

In   the  midst  of  these  recollections,   the  authentic Canadian  scene  nevertheless appears:

The old year's cloaking  of brown leaves, that  bind The  forest floor-ways, plated  close and  true - The  last love's labour  of the autumn wind-
Is broken  with curled  flower buds white and  blue In  all the matted hollows, and speared  through With  thousand serpent-spotted blades up-sprung, Yet bloomless, of the slender adder-tongue.

In  the warm  noon the south  wind creeps and  cools, Where the red-budded stems of maples throw
Still  tangled  etchings  on the amber  pools, Quite silent  now, forgetful  of the slow
Drip  of the taps, the troughs,  and  trampled snow.

But  even  here,  among the  Ontario sugar  maples,  there  is heard the  clear  echo of a known  ode of Keats:

Or  by a cider-press,  with patient look,
Thou watchest the last oozings, hours  by hours.

It is both  surprising and  delightful to see how, in  another familiar poem,  "At the  Ferry", Matthew Arnold   is in  attendance. To  look  again  at  some  detached passages:

7

HIGH  COLONIALISM IN CANADA



But under  all to one quiet  tune,
A spirit  in cool depths  withdrawn, With  logs, and  dust, and  wrack  bestrewn,
The  stately river  journeys on.

Faint  films of smoke that  curl and  wreathe; And upward  with the like desire
The vast grey church  that  seems to breathe
In  heaven  with its dreaming spire.

And still my thought goes on, and  yields
New vision and  new joy to me, Far  peopled  hills, and  ancient fields,
And cities by the crested sea.

Beyond the tumult of the mills,
And all the city's sound  and  strife, Beyond the waste, beyond the hills,
I look far out and dream  of life.

Arnold is with  us,  joining in, line  after  line:

But the majestic  river floated on....

And that  sweet City, with her dreaming spires. Roam  on! the light we sought  is shining still.
Then through the great  town's  harsh  heart-wearying roar, Let in thy voice a whisper often  come,
To  chase fatigue  and fear....

But,  again, the  authentic Canadian scene  appears, this  time   as  an  old  sawmill, and  we  hear the  saw,  engaging a log, change its tone:

At moments  from  the distant glare
The  murmur of a railway  steals, Round  yonder  jutting  points  the air
Is beaten  with the puff of wheels;
And here at hand  an open mill,
Strong  clamour  at perpetual drive,
With  changing chant, now hoarse,  now shrill
Keeps dinning like a mighty  hive.

Lampman, then, in a  subtle and   quiet masterly way,  is  using  the  viewpoint and  technique of Keats (with whom he had  a secret natural affinity), and  Arnold,

8

HIGH COLONIALISM IN  CANADA



and   others  in  the  English   poetic  tradition in  order  to  interpret the  Canadian scene. What helps us to identify  it as high colonialism is that  it is done  consciously and  with  great  delight.
Our  concern  is at  the  moment with  the  literary  image  of high  colonialism  but a passing  reference to painting may  be allowed. In  our  National Gallery  hangs  a painting by Lucius  O'Brien, called "Sunrise on the Saguenay". O'Brien was born in  Canada, the  son  of  an  army  officer.  He  attended Upper  Canada  College, found a  patron in  the  Marquis of  Lome and  became  President of  the  Royal Canadian  Academy. The   amateur who  enjoys  his picture, knowing  nothing of the  immediate influences   on  his  style,  can  nevertheless  enter   pretty   fully  into O'Brien's sensibility.  Across  those  calm waters  and  through those  rising mists can be seen the smiling  wraiths of many  traditions. The  fallen  pine in the foreground barely  conceals  Salvator Rosa.  It is a  romantic view, giving  a  chance to  every device  of  aerial   perspective. The   immense   cliffs flanking   the  bay  loom  out  of cloud  with  towering grandeur. Here  is the  real substance  of the  Canadian scene, harmonized by  a  carefully  chosen  atmosphere. The  Saguenay "doth like a  gar­ ment  wear/The beauty  of  the  morning...."  Not only  harmonized, the scene  is humanized, by  the  addition of  a  vessel in  the  offing,  ready  to sail,  and  in  the middle   distance a  small  craft   near  which  a  boat  is  being  rowed.  The   human scale  is preserved, against   the  stupendous background; this  width  of  water  and height  of  wooded   cliff  are  neither  strange nor  inimical; they  invite the  viewer, like  the  landscape openings in  "L'Allegro". I personally  en joy  this  picture, as a record  of high  colonial  sensibility,  because  it brings  traditional  techniques to the service  of  an  undistorted  record  of  a  locus  classicus of   Canadian scenery  and because  it breathes a cheerful  confidence  in man's  ability  to live in this our land­ scape.  It is not  in  any  sense a dull  or superficial performance; it  achieves  assur­ ance  and  serenity  without forcing  or  falsifying  the  donne of  the  locale;  it is a picture which  the  Marquis of Lome, whose own portrait was painted by Millais, must  have  enjoyed, and  the  Canadian who  cannot  enjoy  it today  must  be either  totally  insensitive  or  else in  total  rebellion  against  the  past  or  else  possessed by horrid  antagonisms which  vent  theinselves on whatever they encounter.




E      of a wine derives  not  only  from  its dat­ able  vintage  but  also from  the  location  of  the  vineyard, sometimes  within  very narrow limits.  Charles Gordon  (hereinafter referred  to  as Ralph Connor)  was

9

HIGH  COLONIALISM IN  CANADA



born  within  a  few  months  of  Lampman and  knew  the  Ottawa River  with  the same   loving  familiarity.  "A   perfume   and   a  wintry chill," wrote   Lampman, "Breathe from  the  yellow lumber  piles".  It is a world  familiar to  the  man  from Glengarry.
Lampman, as we have seen, employs a mechanism of apprehension and expres­ sion  derived  from  English  poetry  to encompass and  record  the  Canadian scene. Connor, greatly   aided  by memories  of childhood, projects with  triumphant ease the  perfect  image  of a Scottish  colony. Glengarry, the most easterly of the Ontario counties,  is  peopled   by Scots,  not  only  from  the  patronymic Glengarry district just  north  of  Pitlochry  but  from  the  Highlands and  Islands  generally. The  Man from Glengarry  embodies  a whole  ethos which  takes in region,  race  and  religion. The Ontario forest  is made  to serve  this  ethos  by  transformation into  a magic,  enclosed  world  as  filled with  absorption and  emanation as Grimm's Schwartz­ wald.   It  opens  to  disclose  a  scene  of  woodcutters and   children, of  giants   and gentle   princesses,  of  perils  and   deliverances. "The  solid  forests  of  Glengarry have  vanished", begins  Connor's  preface,  but  in  another sense  they  are  as  en­ during as Sherwood   or Arden.
The   perfection of  the  colonial  spirit  in  this  Scottish  Presbyterian community is shown  by its refusal  to adulterate the  heritage. French, English,  Irish,  Ameri­ ans  and  at  least one  Mexican  appear, together  with  some account of  Methodists, Baptists,  Roman Catholics  and  atheists.  These  are  not  despised  or  rejected; they simply  cannot meet  the Scottish  standards. If an  Englishman has his leg crushed in  the  fury  of a communal barn-raising, it gives an  opportunity for the skill of a Scottish   medical student. If  Methodists unwisely  agree   to  a  public  debate on theology,   they   retire   after   the   Presbyterian  minister's  first  denunciation. This  question of an element  of comedy in the high  colonial  record, of a mild  absurdity so endearing that  it must  be the product of a retrospect upon what  has been well loved, -this  we must  return  to  before  leaving  the  subject.
The   Canadian West  is a  good  touchstone for  true  high  colonialism.  Connor shows  us his hero  making  a speech in New  Westminster at  a moment when  there is a wave  of resentment against  Confederation. "It was Ranald's speech, everyone said, that  turned  the tide. His calm logic made  clear the folly of even considering separation; his  knowledge  of,  and  his  unbounded faith  in,  the  resources  of  the province, and  more  than  all, his impassioned picturing of the  future of the great Dominion reaching from ocean  to ocean,  knit  together  by ties of common interest, and  a  common loyalty that  would  become  more  vividly  real  when  the  provinces had   been   brought  more  closely  together   by  the  promised   railway.   'Send   him

IO

HIGH COLONIALISM IN CANADA



East',  cried  a vmce.  'Yes,  yes, that's it. Send  him  to  Ottawa to John A. It's  the same  clan!' "
The  neatness  with  which  the  novelist links moral  and  political  issues, expands the  ethos  of  Glengarry to  cover  and  preserve  the  entire  community, and  leaves us indebted to Scottish  virtue for our very existence is beyond all praise. Added posthumously to Connor's autobiography is the line from  Bunyan, "The trumpets sounded  for  him  on  the  other  side!" It  is my belief that  these were, in fact, bag­ pipes.




bE MOST  EXPLICIT  SPOKESMAN  for  high  colonialism  I have yet  encountered is  W. D.  Lighthall, chiefly  memorable as the  editor  of  an  an­ thology,  Songs  of the  Great  Dominion, which  first  appeared in  r88g.  Lighthall was  then  about thirty-two years  of  age,  a lawyer  living  in  Montreal.  His  intro­ duction affects  this  reader,  at  least,  as some  Renaissance  cartographical view, in  perspective, of  an  Italian ducal  city beside its rolling  river,  Apennines in  the background, the four  winds  blowing vitality  upon it from  the cardinal points  and  a band  of angels  with  their  trumpets spreading wide its fame.
Lighthall's sentences have  the  true  heroic quality  of rhetoric; what  sounds  like hyperbole   has  a  direct   relation to  fact.  He  speaks  of  Canada as  having  in  her hands  the solution  of those  problems  of Empire  which  concern  every true  Briton, "proud and  careful  of the  acquisitions of British discovery  and  conquest".

She is Imperial in herself, we sons of her think, as the number, the extent and  the lavish natural  wealth  of her  Provinces, each not less than some empire of Europe, rise in  our  minds;  as we picture  her coasts and  gulfs and  kingdoms and  islands, on the  Atlantic  on one side, and  the Pacific on the other;  her four-thousand-mile panorama   of  noble  rivers,  wild  forests, ocean-like  priaries;  her  towering  snow­ capped  Rockies waking  to the tints of sunrise in the  West; in the  East  her  hoary Laurentians, oldest  of  hills. She has by far  the  richest extent  of  fisheries, forests, wheat  lands,  and  fur  regions in  the  world;  some of  the  greatest  public  works; some of  the  loftiest  mountain-ranges, the  vastest rivers,  the  healthiest  and  most beautifully  varied  seasons.... In  losing the United  States,  Britain  lost the smaller half  of  her  American  possessions: -the Colony  of  the  Maple  Leaf  is about  as large as Europe.

"But  what," Lighthall continues, "would  material resources  be without a corre­
sponding greatness in  man?" He  finds it in  a concept  of loyalty. The  French in


I I

HIGH COLONIALISM IN  CANADA



Quebec are loyal to their own imperial  tradition. The Loyalists  withdrawing from the  rebel  Colonies  have  accomplished "the noblest  epic  migration the  world  has ever seen: -more loftily epic than  the  retirement of Pius  lEneas from  Ilion....
'Why  did you come here?' was asked of one of the first settlers of St. John, New Brunswick,  a  man  whose  life was  without a stain;-'Why  did  you come  here, when  you  and  your  associates  were  almost  certain to  endure the  sufferings  and absolute  want  of shelter  and  food which  you have  narrated?' 'Why did we come here?' replied  he,  with  emotion  which  brought tears: -'For our loyalty.'"
If greatness  is equated to loyalty,  we must  ask, Loyalty  to what  or to whom? The  primary answer  is, of course,  to  the  Crown, but  for  Lighthall this  has im­ mense  and  all  encompassing implications, like  Tennyson's concept  of  loyalty to Arthur. Lighthall's expansion of British loyalty does not stop  at the level of Cana­ dian  patriotism but  broadens  out  to take in  the  world.  The Empire will last only if it  upholds   an  ideal  that  men  will suffer  and   die  for  and   "such  an  Ideal­ worthy  of long and  patient  endeavour-may be found in broad-minded advance toward the  voluntary Federation of Mankind." It is  difficult  to match  Lighthall for  a  buoyant, fresh,  engaging  confidence  in  our  future; for  the  candour of his idealism; for  the  breadth of his historic  and  geographic grasp; for  the  clarity  of his  crystallization of  high  colonial  faith  and  hope.
His  limitations  are  also  apparent, especially   the   one  he  shares   with  Ralph Connor, an inability  to see the actual  ideals of French Canadians in full perspec­ tive. It is, in the circumstances, venial. Connor can get as far as a cordial symbolic reconciliation between  leaders  of opposed  gangs  of Scottish  and  French  or  Irish loggers.  Lighthall can  produce  a finely turned exemplary tale, The  Young  Seig­ neur, extolling  the  virtues  of the  habitant and  of  those  of  his  countrymen who combine  the old  heroic  qualities  of authority with  progressive ideas,  and  begging the  French in  Quebec to  provide  front-rank  leadership for  the  whole  country. But  that  is as far  as they can  go, in the  closing  years  of the  nineteenth century. We cannot ask more of them; their sin is one of omission  rather than  commission.  For  the  latter  we must  await  the  report on  Bilingualism and  Biculturalism.

w.MUST  INCLUDE IN   OUR SURVEY  a quick glance  at Some pages  of  Rose-Belford's  Canadian  Monthly, Volume I,  published in  1878.   It
succeeded   the  Canadian  Monthly   and  National  Review  which  had   just  ceased publication and  it  retained   the same  remarkable editor, Graeme Mercer  Adam.

12

HIGH COLONIALISM IN CANADA



Rose  Belford rescued the  operation and  it went  on into  the  r 88o's. I have always seen   her   as  a  striking and   for  some   reason   dark-haired girl,  with   financial  re­ sources of  her   own, a  taste   in  literature  ranging from   Homer and  Horace  to Wilkie    Collins,  a   charmingly  forthright  manner,  and-somewhat  literally   I admit-with  a  red  rose  in  her  raven tresses. Although further  research  revealed that these  virtues, on  the  cultural side  at  least,  appertained  rather to  Mr. Rose  and  Mr.   Belford, two   publishers who   jointly  supported the  journal, the  image of my own  Rose  Belford is still with  me, more  living  than, say, Kathleen ni Houli­ han or  Laura Secord.
From this  volume I  choose one   article, entitled "Canadian  Nationality",  by William  Norris,  of  Toronto.  Norris believed   that   Canada  might shortly sever the  "slight link" binding her  to Britain and  the  prospect did  not  trouble him.

It,  therefore, behoves  all  true  Canadians to be prepared for  whatever may  occur. There is but  little  to  be  done.  A Governor elected  every  seven  years  by both  our houses  of  Parliament, the  appointment of a small diplomatic body, and  the adop­ tion  of  a  flag  are  all  that   is needful.  Surely,  a  people  who  have  an  independent and  final  Supreme Court is equal  to  this.  The  flag may  cause  some difficulty,  but not  necessarily.  We  have  the  colours  already-it  is only  necessary  to  place  them. The  red  first,  representing  Englishmen and  Scotchmen; the  white, representing the  French who  first colonized  Quebec and  the French-Canadian people  who  now inhabit it; and  the  green,  though questioned  by  some,  is acknowledged by all  to represent the  Irish.  These  colours,  placed  vertically,  with  the  Union in  the  upper  corner   as  now,  would   make  a  good  Canadian flag  and   attract the  regard of  a majority of the  people  who  inhabit  the Dominion. The green,  especially,  would  be worth   roo,ooo  men  to the  Dominion in case of any difficulty  with  our  neighbours, and  would  effectually Canadianize the Irish.

Norris  foresaw,  also,   the   disintegration of  the   United  States  and   the  thought afforded him  considerable satisfaction.

Already   she  shows  signs  of  dissolution.... A  hot-bed   progress  among alien   and half-assimilated  people   will  surely  accelerate  the  end.   They   are   in  a  dilemma either  horn  of  which  is fatal. They  must  either  submit  to  the  mob  and  the  com­ mune,  and  see their  cities  blaze as they  did  three  years ago, or to a standing army  and   a  general   who  will  destroy   their  institutions and  make  himself  dictator. In either  event,  disintegration is sure  to follow.  As power  steps from  the disorganized grasp  of the  United States,  it  will fall  to Canada as her  natural right, making her the  first  nation   on  this  continent, as she is now the  second.  United  closely, as we shall  be  from   the  Atlantic to  the  Pacific  by a  common  nationality,  our  country will  go  on,  increasing from  age  to  age  in  wealth,  in  power  and  in  glory;  and  it may  not  be too much  of a stretch  of the imagination to think, that  as it is the latest

HIGH  COLONIALISM IN CANADA



developed  portion  of  a  new world ... it  may  be the  country  where  a last great, and  fully developed  humanity  may find its fitting habitation and  abode.
Norris  was  not  an  altogether  accurate prophet but  he  did  put  his finger  on  two problems  that  today  trouble every thoughtful American; he did foresee in Canada independence, national growth  and,  as a condition for  these,  the  need  for unity; and  he  knew  that  we should  have  vertical  red  and  white  segments  in  our  new flag.  Like  Lighthall he can  rise into  rhetoric without losing contact with  the firm ground of  fact  and,  again  like Lighthall, he  envisages  wealth, power  and  glory in  the  context  of  a humane ideal.  That he is genuinely high  colonial  in  his sup­ positions  one  further sentence  will demonstrate. "And, lastly, we shall  have the good  will  of  England   and  possibly her  guarantee for  our  independence, as she guarantees that  of Belgium, in starting our national career."
Our   final  reference,  which  I will  make  as succinct  as possible,  is to  a school reader published in Toronto in  rgor   and  in  use, at least  as late  as  rgr6, in high school  classes in  Victoria. It was a magnificent assemblage  of great  names,  going back  to  Plato  and  coming  down  to  Macdonald and  Laurier. It had  a range  of
material from  Thomas a Kempis  to  Oliver   Wendell Holmes. It dealt  with  the
death   of  Socrates and  with  the  Union  Jack. It introduced one  to  the  Ancient Mariner  and   to  the  Canadian Song  Sparrow. In   an  appendix, the  unnamed editor  explained what  he was attempting. The five and  a half  pages of small type cannot be summarized, they  are so thronged with  implications. But  may  I quote a few of the  closing sentences,  concerning his choice  of patriotic  pieces?
Tennyson's  "Hands all Round" belongs to the period of the revolution  which left Napoleon   III Emperor  of  France.  The  line "We  likewise have  our  evil things" suggests comparison  with Kipling's  "Recessional",  which was written  on the occa­ sion  of Queen  Victoria's  Jubilee  in  r8g7. The  first two stanzas  will be found  in fac-simile on  p.8 of this anthology;  the  remaining  three  are  as follows ...

He  then  quotes  them,  to  their  conclusion, "For  frantic boast  and  foolish  word, Thy  mercy  on  Thy  people,  Lord!" and  he  continues,
If "that man's  the best cosmopolite who loves his native country  best", this group of selections should,  in  the  hands  of intelligent  and  patriotic  teachers,  prove  an effective means of inculcating incidentally  a spirit of rational  patriotism.  Its most striking  characteristic  is the  absence of  the  glorification  so common  in  this  kind of literature.
The  last group  is intended  to bring pointedly into view the magnanimous  spirit
in  which,  during  the  past two and  a half centuries,  Great  Britain  has dealt  with her colonies, especially in the way of conceding  to them-"frankly" as Mr. Glad­ stone  says-the  right  to manage  their  own  domestic affairs. The  latest outcome

HIGH COLONIALISM IN CANADA



of this  policy is the  formation  of the "Commonwealth  of Australia"  in imitation of  the  "Dominion   of  Canada"; neither  Canadians  nor  Australians  would  have taken  part  in  the  war  in  South  Africa but for their  belief that  it would speedily lead to the establishment of a similar nationality there.

So  we  pass from  Plato  to  a Kempis,  to Tennyson  and  Mr.  Gladstone, to  Cana­ dian  volunteers in  South  Africa  and  to loving one's  native  country best, without  frantic boast  or  foolish  word.   It is literature and  appreciated as such,  but  it  is also life and  as such  to  be lived.  It has the  unmistakable accent of  greatness,  for all its simplicity,   like  Arthur among  his knights  though  many  of  them  in  richer arms  than  he. It is Canadian colonialism  in its high  and  palmy days.
What creates  the  <esthetic effect of organic unity in  this ideology of high colonialism?  It  is the  power  of imagination to project  a vision of Canada having its own  logic  and  consistency.  As in  a time  of miserable  civil strife  Milton  could see  England  as  a  giant   roused  from  sleep, or  as  Blake,  among   the  dark  mines and  mills could  view the rising walls of Jerusalem in England's green and  pleasant land,  so mutatis  mutandis  these Canadians attained a vision of their  own country. In   historical   fact   there   were  grave  doubts   and   dangerous  dissensions.  In   the pageant  presented  by  Lighthall or  Connor, these  are   performers  of  the  anti­ masque, soon  driven  into  the  wings by personifications of faith, hope and loyalty.
Appreciation and  some  laughter often  mingle  in a retrospect of colonial  Can­
ada.   "Truth and   honour", "the  trumpets sounded  for  him", "a  life  without   a stain": is it  that   we  can  no  longer  believe in such  possibilities?  Or  do  we smile as we would  at  a photograph of grandparents? Such  outmoded clothes and  con­ scious  character; yet essential  to our  own  existence  and  remembered  with  affec­ tion.  This  laughter can  be salutary, self-revealing,  free  from  denigration.
The  end  of  high  colonialism   may  conveniently  be placed  at  the  beginning of this  century's third  decade. Canadian veterans  of the  First  World  War  had  just returned; the  Canadian   Forum  commenced publication in  I 92 o;  the  old  U ni­ versity  Magazine   ended   the   next  year.  Yet  it  goes  without saying   that  high colonial  emotions  were  not  instantly extinguished  in  I92 I. A few years ago  there arose  in  my  own  home  a  slight  problem  of  identification as  the  name  of  one Louis  St.  Laurent  came   up  in  conversation  with  my  mother. St.  Laurent  is the  prime  minister, my  wife explained. But  my mother, who  had  not set foot  in England for  thirty  years,  replied  very simply,  "Winston Churchill will  always  be my prime  minister."
In  conclusion,  here  are  eight  lines of Lampman. They  are  sapphics; we know from  one of his letters  they  pleased  him. They  show the chain  of connection from

HIGH COLONIALISM IN  CANADA



Sappho, to   the   metrical   practice   of  English  schoolboys,  to  Trinity College  in Toronto and  to  the  flowers of the  Ottawa  countryside which  Lampman  loved. And  they  tell  us  that,  in  spite  of change  and  decay,  the  fragrance of  what  has once  been  loved  remains.

Brief the span is, counting the years of mortals, Strange and sad; it passes, and  then the bright earth, Careless mother, gleaming with gold and azure,
Lovely with blossoms-
Shining white anemones, mixed with roses, Daisies mild-eyed, grasses and honeyed clover, You and me, and all of us, met and equal
Softly shall cover.















A Birthday Issue!

To  celebrate the tenth anniversary of Canadian Literature's first appearance, we announce a special enlarged issue to
which many of Canada's  finest writers will
contribute. Leading critics examine Canadian writing over the decade. Novelists and poets produce special and unique articles and  poems.

Do not miss this unusual issue, priced,as usual,$1.25
 HUGH MacLENNAN MARGARET  LAURENCE MORDECAI    RICHLER
P. K.  PAGE EARLE  BIRNEY DOROTHY  LIVESAY A. J. M. SMITH
MIRIAM WADDINGTON A. W. PURDY
NORMAN LEVINE JAMES REANEY ALAN CRAWLEY LOUIS  DUDEK
GEORGE  WOODCOCK
D. G. STEPHENS GEORGE  ROBERTSON W. H. NEW
GERARD  TOUGAS
PETER  STEVENS



THE  LIVING CONTOUR

The Whale Symbol in
Melville and Pratt



Robert]. Gibbs





IT   TAXES A   UVELY  EYE    to  catch  leviathan  in the  act  of swallowing  his  tail.  Yet such  agility seems necessary to  the  reader  of  Pratt  or
Melville who  wishes to cope with the great  whale as a symbol. The  question  is largely one of limits.  Where  does significance begin and  end?  Or  does it begin and end at all?
James Baird in his intricate  study of Melville appears  at one point to set limits. "Great   art ... endures  because  it  lends itself to  the  hues on  any  passing  sensi­ bility. It goes on  meaning  all things to  all men. The  responsibility of  criticism remains fixed:  to establish the facts of what it meant to its maker." •  The value of the statement  lies in its defining not only the critic's role as compared  to that  of any  "passing  sensibility,"  but  also the limits between which  meaning  in  art  can exist:  "all  things  to  all  men"  and  "what  it meant  to  its maker."  The  trouble lies, of course, in  the  word  "meaning" itself. How  much,  one is bound  to ask, of the "all  things to all men"  may lie within "what  it meant  to its maker."?
Critical comment  on Melville's Moby  Dick  justifiably outweighs in bulk and elaboration  what  is available  on  Pratt's  The  Cachalot. Yet the criticism of each seems to me to lie between the same extremities:  that  which sees no justification for a symbolistic approach  to what it regards as self-contained narrative,  and that which finds the work open-ended,  allowing for, if not inviting, countless varieties of interpretation. In  Melville's case the balance  tips towards  the latter,  while for Pratt  it  appears  to  favour  the  former.  The  reasons for  this difference lie  obvi­ ously in  differences of size, design and  complexity in  the  two works.  What  the two  narratives   offer,  taken  together,  is  a  common  image,  the  great  whale;  a

THE  LIVING CONTOUR



common  action,  a clash of titanic  forces;  and  a common conclusion,  mutual des­ truction. The  opposition   between  these  common elements in  the  narratives  and the vast disparity  of scope and  design may prove  useful to my purpose  of examin­ ing the limits of significance.
The  white  whale  in Moby  Dick is given size by the size of the book. All of the
whale  and  whaling  matter  in the book goes into  the making of the central  image. In  the  "Etymology" and  "Extracts", a further extension  occurs. The  story proper and  the individual whale  are set in a larger  context, which  aims to encompass all the  literature and  lore of  whales.  Pratt's five-hundred and  twenty-five  lines  are a  minnow   by  comparison, and  yet the  sense of size in  the  central  image  is not wanting, and  the effect is no less a cumulative one. The  opening lines in establish­ ing  the  whale's  lineage  have  somewhat  the  effect  of Melville's preliminaries, but Pratt   does  not  reach  as far  out  or  backward, and  his  "cetacean  lore"  must  bear a tremendous charge  to equal  in effect the  amount of  such  lore  actually  present in  Moby  Dick. In  this  matter, there  may  be  just  no  comparison, but  there  is, I think,  for  Pratt a  compensating factor,  which  is the  medium of verse itself.
Keats'  sonnet,  "On Looking  into  Chapman's Homer", is remarkable for  the
degree  to which  a  sense of Homer's expanse  is contained within  fourteen  lines. Imagery, vowel  sounds  and  control  of  the  iambic line  are  all  factors  in  Keats' success,  but  equally  important is the  confinement of the  sonnet  form  itself. The pressure  of matter against  form  has a great  deal  to do with  the  poem's effective­ ness. Similarly,  in  Pratt's octosyllabics,  the  pressure  of  matter against  form,  the play  of multisyllabic roll on monosyllabic  strength, and  the cumulative effect of a sustained   rhythm  are  built-in   amplifiers.  For  all  that, no  one  would  claim  for Keats'   sonnet   equality   of  magnitude with  Homer, and   no  one  would  pretend  for The  Cachalot the measurements of Moby  Dick. Within the limits of the poem itself,  however,   the  sense  of  magnitude in  the  whale  is  similar. In  either  case, it is not  just a matter of creating a life-sized impression of  physical immensity, but of making  a  mythic  or epic image,  larger  even  than  life.
Melville's  prose  medium  is as fluid  as the  sea  in  which  his whale  swims.  It is firmly  responsive  to  the  action  depicted.  Rhythmic expressiveness  becomes  par­ ticularly  impressive  in the final chapters of the  book  when  the white  whale enters  the  story  physically: "... far  out  on  the  soft  Turkish-rugged  waters,  went  the glistening  white  shadow  from  his broad,  milky forehead, a musical rippling play­ fully   accompanying  the  shade,   and   behind,  the   blue   waters  interchangeably flowed  over into  the moving  valley of his steady  wake; and  on either  hand  bright  bubbles  arose  and  danced  by his side. But  these  were  broken  again  by the  light

18

THE LIVING CONTOUR



toes of hundreds of gay  fowl softly featuring the sea." The  responsiveness  of this prose involves sound  and  texture as well as rhythm. Pratt's medium would appear to be more  confining :

Over his back, the running seas Cascaded, while the morning sun Rising in gold and beryl, spun
Over the cachalot's streaming gloss,
And from the foam, a fiery floss
Of multitudinous fashionings,
And dipping downward from the blue, The sea-gulls from Comore flew,
And brushed him with their silver wings.

This   passage   illustrates  the   maximum  departure  from   the   normal  pulsations of  the  tetrameter. It is not  my  purpose  to compare  the  effectiveness  of the  two passages,  both   of  which   I consider   remarkably good,  but   to  illustrate Pratt's success in the more confining medium. The  very regularity  of the rhythm through­ out  the  poem  serves  the  poet  here,  since  variations  within  a rigid  medium  have stronger effects  than  those  within  a more  fluid medium.
Elsewhere  in The  Cachalot,  Pratt  is able to use the regular pulse of his rhythm
to make  the  whale's  movement physically  palpable in  the  verse:

No febrile stirring as might spring
From a puny barracuda lunging
At a tuna's  leap, some minor thing, A tarpon  or a dolphin plunging­ But a deep consonant that  rides Below the measured beat of tides With that vast, undulating rhythm
A sounding sperm whale carries with him.

The  faltering and  steadying of the beat  are locally expressive,  but  more significant is  the  discovery  that  the  "vast, undulating rhythm" is the  rhythm of the  poem. The   "deep consonant" is felt  everywhere underlaying the  surface fluctuations. Melville has other  means  of making his whale's  presence felt throughout the book, but  the sense of it as a thing  always there,  a thing swimming continuously under the  surface   phenomena is  similar. "... the  great  floodgates of  the  underworld swung  open   and  in  the  wild  conceits  that  swayed  me  to  my  purpose, two  and two  there  floated  into  my  inmost  soul, endless processions of the whale,  and  mid most of them  all, one grand hooded  phantom like a snow hill in the air."

I9

THE  LIVING CONTOUR



The white  whale  is at  first  a  phantom in  the  book  but  gathers body  in  the course  of  the  pursuit.  All of  the  physical  details  associated  with  the  killing  and processing  of  whales  serve  to solidify  the  image. The final  chapters, in  a sense, recapitulate the total development. On  his first physical entrance, the whale  is still a shadowy   thing,  merging  with  the  fluid  sea.  In  the  course  of the  three  days of chase,  he  assumes  stronger  and  stronger  bodily  presence.  In  his "breaching" on the  second   day,  Moby  Dick,  himself,  breaks  the  surface  of  the  novel  with  tre­ mendous force.  The larger  movement  is an  aspect  of the  total  design.  The white whale,  as an  image,  cannot  be localized.  He  is the  phantom pull seaward  at  the beginning, the  motive  of the  voyage,  and  the  end.  The  process of his  realization is the process of the book.
There is nothing in Pratt's poem  to match this larger  rhythm, in  which  every pause  is felt  as  a gathering of force  for  the  final  assault.  There is not  the  same sense of growth and  gradual emergence in the  whale  itself, which  appears in full strength at the outset of the poem. Of the three  sections of The  Cachalot, the first two  make  up  less than  half  of the  poem.  The chief  narrative interest  lies in  the third   part,   for  which  the  other  parts  may  be  regarded as  preparatory. Section one  is occupied   by  the cachalot  himself,  his lineage,  his legendary feats,  and  his anatomy. Section   two  opens  with  a  description of  the  kraken's lair  and  of  the kraken   himself.  The encounter between  the  monsters  follows with  no  suspense, and  titanic as  the struggle  is, the  issue is quickly  decided. In  the  final section  of the  poem,  the  alternation of head-on  attack  with  temporary pause  is not  unlike the  action  depicted in the final  chapters of Moby  Dick. The dramatic powers  of both  novelist  and  poet are summoned for  the  last lunge: "... in spite  of all that mortal man   could  do,  the  solid  white  buttress  of  his  forehead smote  the  ship's starboard  bow,  till  men  and  timbers  reeled."

Ten feet above and ten below
The water-line his forehead caught  her. The capstan and the anchor fled,
When bolts and stanchions swept asunder,
For what was iron to that head,
And oak-in that hydraulic  thunder?

Although, as  I have  said,  there  is not  in  Pratt's whale  the  quality of growth found   in  Melville's,  there  is development of  a  kind.  The second  section  of the poem  has  to  be  accounted for.  How  does  the  cachalot's battle  with  the  kraken affect  our  notion  of him?  There are,  of course,  certain purely  dramatic  effects. The right  of the cachalot  to the title of monarch is proved  in that  second  section,

20

THE  LIVING CONTOUR



and  the  lower  extent  of his kingdom  is measured  there.  The  whale's  triumph in the deep lends irony to the outcome of the surface  battle.
The  symbolistic  approach to  Pratt's poetry  dates  from  John Sutherland's long article  in  Northern Review2   and  the  book  he  developed  from  it.3  Much  subse­ quent criticism  of  Pratt has  been  endorsement or  modification of  Sutherland's views,  or  violent   reaction  against   them.4   While  I  am   not  prepared  to  follow Sutherland all  the  way,  I  do  think  that  en  route  he  proves  a  perceptive  guide. Particularly  helpful   are  some  of  his  comments   on  the  second  section  of  The Cachalot  and  the  image  of the  kraken: "... when  we  tum to the poem,  we dis­ cover  the  curious  fact  that most  of  the  key  words  employed   to  describe  him
-'antennae,'   'coil,'   'vibrate,'  'cable,'  'socket,'   'tensile,'   and   'suction   cup' -
have  an  electrical or  a  mechanical reference  as well as  an  anatomical one.... The  kraken  is half  monster  and  half  a superb  machine." 5  Sutherland goes on to assert that  the  cachalot in devouring the kraken  assumes something of his charac­ ter.6   He  concludes with  a significant  statement: "... there  is never  a firm distinc­  tion  in  Pratt's narratives between  the  'here'  and  the  'demon.' ... There may  be an ambivalence of this kind  in part  two ofT he Cachalot: if the whale and  kraken  are  not actually 'kin,' they are  related  in a way that  militates against  a rigid inter­ pretation of their  significance." 7
Pratt gives the  impression  that  both  his monsters are  fearfully and  wonderfully made.  The  kraken, of a more  primitive,  cold-blooded  order, less conscious and  less mobile  than  that  of  whales,  is more  alien  and  repellent.  The  struggle  itself does not  appear to  be one of hero  against  villain, or good against evil, but of cetacean with  cephalopod, a confrontation of two blindly  amoral forces.  When  the cacha­ lot,  who  has  "gorged" upon   the  kraken's  "fibrous  jelly-Until  finding  that  six tons lay-Like  Vulcan's anvil  in his belly," appears again  in Part  III, the sinis­ ter associations  remain  with  him:

In a white cloud of mist emerged Terror  of head and hump and brawn, Silent and sinister and grey

Swimming blandly  on the  surface,  he carries  the depths  and  that  grim  encounter in the  depths  with  him.
A giant  squid  appears briefly in Moby  Dick. It brings with it a sense of unutter­
able  and  alien  mystery  similar  to that  conjured with  the  kraken  in Pratt's poem; "A  vast  pulpy  mass,  furlongs in  length  and  breadth, lay  floating on  the  water, innumerable long  arms  radiating from  its centre,  and  curling and  twisting  like a

21

THE  LIVING CONTOUR



nest of anacondas, ... No perceptible  face  or front  did  it have;  no conceivable token of either  sensation or instinct;  but  undulated there on  the billows, an  un­ earthly,  formless,  chance-like  apparition." Starbuck   establishes  the  association between this kraken and the white whale: " 'Almost rather  had I seen Moby Dick and  fought  him  than  to  have seen  thee,  thou  white  ghost!'"  Like  all the sea phenomena  in  the  book, the  squid  serves to  emphasize  certain  qualities  in  the central symbol.
The  cachalot's  colour is grey, grey seen through  white  mist. Grey is to Pratt as white is to Melville. Grey is appropriate in its neutrality  to the ambivalence of attitudes   established.  One  recalls the  steely greyness of  Pratt's  shark,8  and  his iceberg  of The  Titanic,  "the  grey shape  with  the  paleolithic  face." 9   Whiteness is Melville implies a starker, antinomian  ambivalence: "Is it that  by its indefinite­ ness it shadows forth the heartless voids and immensities of the universe, and thus stabs us from  behind  with the thought of annihilation, when beholding the white depths of the milky way? Or is it, that in essence whiteness is not so much a colour as the visible absence of colour, and  at the same time the concrete of all colours; is it for these reasons that  there is such a dumb blankness, full of meaning ... ?" Even  the least symbolistic of Moby Dick's  critics, one  who denies the novel's power  to  bear  the  weight of interpretative  criticism  loaded  upon  it, admits  the presence in  the  novel of qualities  that seem  to invite such  treatment: "Of  am­
biguity, to be sure, there is plenty-contradiction and paradox,  dualism and antinomy.  Ahab  is,  according  to  Captain   Peleg,  'a  grandly  ungodly,  god-like man'   ( ch. I 6) ; the  whiteness of the whale  is dubious-fair or foul  ( ch. 42) . And  to the  ambiguous  or paradoxical  the symbolist critics particularly  take, for latitude  much  eases the  path  of interpretation." 10  The  latitude  that  appears  to Mr.  Stoll  to  ease  the  path,  in  fact,  erases it  altogether  and  makes almost  any individual  reading,  apart  from the book itself, a misreading,  in the sense of  con­ taining  something  less than  the  truth.  John  Sutherland, as we have  seen,  dis­ covered  that   the  ambivalence  established  in  Pratt's poem  "militates  against  a rigid interpretation."" This discovery did not prevent  the critic from  proceeding toward  a  highly  individualistic  interpretation, that  of seeing Pratt's  whale  as a Christ-symbol.12    Similar  discoveries followed  by similar  courses are  not  hard  to come by among  Melville's critics.
The  limits of meaning in both Melville and  Pratt  are set in part by the points of view. Melville, through  the eye of his beholder,  Ishmael,  can peer into meta­ physical  depths  denied  to  Pratt.  On  the  other  hand,  Pratt  is able  to  look into physical depths,  within  the  living whale  and  in  the  ocean,  denied  to  Melville.

22

THE  LIVING CONTOUR



Through Ishmael's eye, the  vision of other  characters in the  novel is filtered,  and Ishmael himself  is the  one who learns  that  the final meaning of things  is past our finding  out: "Dissect  him  how  I may, then,  I but go skin deep; I know  him  not, and  never  will. But if I know  not even the  tail of this whale,  how  understand  his head?  much  more,  how comprehend his face, when face he has none?" Ishmael's place in the novel as a character and  as author-narrator is not constant. At times, he  disappears into  his vision;  at  times,  he  assumes omniscience. In  one  respect, he shares Ahab's burden and  his guilt;  in another, he remains  essentially detached from  the  moral issues. He  is saved  in  the  end  not  only  for  the  act  of  creation; that  is, come  back  and  tell;  but  by the act of creation,  which  includes  his behold­ ing,  his recording and  his ordering of the  vision.
In The  Cachalot,  the point of view shifts more freely. We begin with  the author
omniscient beholding the  great  whale  inside  and  out.  In  the  second  section,  the whale  is perceived   as a vibration in  the squid's  antennae:

The  kraken  felt that  as the flow
Beat on his lair with plangent power,
It was the challenge  of his foe, The  prelude to a fatal  hour.

The  fatality of  the  encounter is sensed  through the  kraken.  In  the  third  section, the  whale  is spotted  first from  the  cross-trees of the royal  mast  of The  Albatross. His sinister  and  immovable greyness appears in the eyes of the crew. In  the
struggle  itself,  the  view shifts significantly  to the whale:

He swung  his bulk round  to pursue This  arrogant and impious  crew.... An acrid  torture in his soul
Growing with  the tragic  hurry
Of  the  bloodstream e1rough  t 11e widening hole
Presaged  a sperm-whale's dying flurry.

In  the  final  lines  of  the  poem,  the  view  returns to that  of  the  outside beholder.
Pratt has  freely  shifted  points  of  view, not  to establish  moral grounds, nor  to cause  the  reader   to  identify   finally  with  one  protagonist. His  moving   eye  has allowed  for  the  fullest  dramatic participation. Northrop Frye  points  out  how  the movements of  the  all-seeing  eye  effect  a  complexity  in  the  image:  "When we look  from  the  outside  ... we  see only  the  endless struggle  to survive  which  has been  practically all  pain  and  cruelty.  But  when  we shift  the  view  to the  inside,

23

THE  LIVING CONTOUR



we see the exuberant,  unquenchable  force of life, which fights to maintain  itself, but  can  find its fulfilment also in defeat and  death." 13 The  blend of awe, terror and  exuberance,  found  in  Pratt,  is found  in  Melville as well. It  is a matter  of tone as much  as of point of view.
Melville's white  whale, then,  would seem to have multiple significance, and  a single interpretation is more likely to be partial,  less than  true  to  Melville's  in­ tention,  than  outside  it  altogether.  Most  critics  I  have  read  are  aware  of  this limit  and  set  their  individual  interpretations on  this side of it. Such  character­
izations  of  the  whale  as "a  comprehensive,  dynamic  symbol for  the  whole im­

4
 are not uncommon  nor far-fetched,  for they

simply state in other  words what the book itself finds out.  Pratt's  cachalot offers probably  less latitude,  and  a  single interpretation is in  greater  danger  of  tres­ passing  outside  the  limits of  conscious or  unconscious  intentions.  Nevertheless, the nature  of the whale and the conflicts he is caught in seem, as in  Moby Dick's case, to encompass Pratt's  notion of the way things are, and  any arbitrary  mean­ ing is likely to be a meaning without being the meaning.
Pratt  had  not  read  Melville before publishing The  Cachalot  in  1925,  but in I929  he edited  a condensed version of Moby  Dick for Macmillan's St. Martin's series.  (How  much  of a hand  Pratt  had  in  this  cutting  up of Melville's whale I have not been able to find out.)  Commenting  on the novel's significance in his brief  introduction, Pratt  remains  well within  the  limits set by the  book:  "The appraisal  of Moby  Dick as an  immensity in  our  English literature  springs from the underlying feeling of mystery, the sense of clash between vague, titanic forces
-the  feud  which,  as Melville says, 'Time  has with  the sons of men.' " 15 More interesting  is his remark  that  "the  great  achievement  is the final impression left on  the  reader's  mind  that  chaos itself is subject  to  architectural treatment.'' ' 6
Here is the novel's meaning for an artificer who, like Melville himself, is engaged in finding means for bodying out and giving significant shape to what is essentially shadowy  and  shapeless. The  significance lies in the architectural process itself.
At this point, it is interesting to note that  E. E. Stoll's attack  on the symbolistic
approach to Moby  Dick is really an attack  on the book itself. It is not the failure of  the  critics  to  understand  the  book that  concerns  him,  but  the failure  of the book, in his view, to stand  up to such understanding.'' Other  critics, like Charles Feidelson Jr.  have emphasized the solidity of the book as the ground for symbolis­ tic interpretation: "The  whale is simultaneously the most solid of  physical things and  the most meaningful of symbols. The  voyaging intellect of  Ishmael interacts with the material  world to generate symbolic meaning." 18

24

THE  LIVING CONTOUR



Substance and  process, it seems to me, suggest the limits of symbolic  meaning in the work  of both  Melville  and  Pratt. The  whale symbols created  by both  are not static  or  arbitrary but  organic, each  having  its growth  not  only in the individual work  but  in  the  writer's ocuvre as a whole. Symbolistic  interpretation may  justi­ fiably  proceed  in  two  directions: outward from  the individual work  and inward from  the  total  development. Symbolistic  meaning is inherent in  the  artistic  pro­ cess  itself,  the   "architectural  treatment" of  materials that  without  it hold  no meaningful shape in  the  mind.  A critic  who  flies easily into speculation runs the risk of leaving  the  book  which  is his ground  far  below. He  will end  by creating  his own  book,  if he is good,  and  we shall  not quarrel with  his right  to do so, as long  as  he  doesn't   try  to  make  us forget  the  book  he  started   from.   Individual interpretations may  enrich  the  book for us, but  what counts  is the architecture of the  book  itself,  the  great   arches  of  bone  and  muscle  that   compose  the  image. We  end  as we began  somewhat equivocally  in saying  that  the  book itself is what  the  book is about. "And the  only mode  in which  you can  divine  even  a tolerable  idea  of his living  contour, is by going a-whaling yourself."  (Moby Dick)


FOOTNOTES

1    James  Baird,  Ishmael: A Study of the Symbolic  Mode  in  Primitivism.
•  "E.   J.   Pratt:  A  Major  Contemporary Poet,"   Northern Review, V   (April-May
I 952),  36-64.
3   The Poetry of E. f. Pratt:  A New  Interpretation, (Toronto, I956).
4   See  Earle   Birney,  "E.  J. Pratt and  His  Critics,"  Masks   of Poetry,  ed.  A.  J.  M. Smith,  (Toronto, I962), pp. 72-95.
5   The Poetry of E. f. Pratt,  p. 6o.
6  Ibid.
7   Ibid.,  p. 6r.
8   Collected  Poems, p. 5·
9   Ibid., p. 242.
10  E.  E.  Stoll,  "Symbolism  m  Moby  Dick,"  Journal  of  the   History   of Ideas,  XII (June 195 I)  450.
" The Poetry of E. f. Pratt, p. 61.
·Ibid., p. 79·
'3 "Introduction," E. J. Pratt, Collected  Poems, p. xxi.
'4  John Parke,  "Seven  Moby  Dicks,"  Interpretations of  American Literature, edd.
Feidelson  and  Brodtkarb, (New  York,  I959),  p. 87.
'5 "Introduction," Herman Melville,  Moby  I)ick, (Toronto, I929), p. xiv.
,6  Ibid., p. xvi.
'7 Stoll, p. 452.
'8  Symbolism and  American Literature, (Chicago, 1953), p.  I84.



SINCLAIR ROSS'S AMBIVALENT WORLD




William H. New







ONK OF  THE  MOST HAUNHNG ph'as"in all of Canadian
fiction  has  to  me always been  the last line of Sinclair  Ross's  As For Me  and My
House. The  ambivalence of  it  puzzles,  irritates, confuses.  When Philip  Bentley at  that   time  protests  that  to  name  his illegitimate son  Philip  would  be  to  raise the  possibility  of  not  knowing  which  of  them  is which,   his  wife -the  central character-narrator-writes in  her  diary:  "That's  right,   Philip.   I  want   it  so." And  so  the  novel  closes. At  first  that  "I want  it" seems  to reveal  a great  deal; it speaks  the  voice of the  manipulating woman who has already  almost  destroyed her  husband by confining  his artistic  talents,  and  who  even  now  does not  let up. For  Philip  in  such  a climate  to leave Horizon and  the  ministry  and  run  a  book shop  somewhere appears  still to be his wife's decision,  and  the future seems bleak indeed.
The   picture's other  side-for  it  has  one-is,  though not  exactly  rosy,  cer­
tainly  less bleak.  If we can  accept  that  Mrs.  Bentley's  final  remark is a sign of a new-found humility -'I  want it so" -and this is certainly the received interpre­ tation'-then  she  and  Philip  have  some  hope  of  escaping  their  hyprocrisy  to­ wards  themselves,  towards  each  other,  and  towards the  towns to which  they have been  inadequately  ministering. Both  views are  reasonable. This one  is supported by the  climactic scene in which  the storm  in  Horizon blows down  the  building's false fronts  and  Mrs.  Bentley  angrily  reveals  to  Philip  that  she  knows  that  their adopted baby  is really  illegitimately  his own.  The  other  view  acquires  its  credi­ bility  from  the  book  as a  whole,  from  the  character  we  see self-revealed in  the

SINCLAIR ROSS'S  AMBIVALENT WORLD



pages of her  admirably constructed diary.  For Ross has consciously constructed it after  all;  the  calendar system  itself is enough  to  tell  us that. But  what  does  he really  want   us  to  think   at  the  end  then?  Which  view  of his  character does  he want  us to  accept?  There is a third  possibility:  that  it is neither  the  one  nor  the other  view, but  the ambivalence itself which is desired  aim-not based on an indecisiveness  about  who  his character really is, but  emerging out  of a carefully constructed web  of  viewpoints,  Mrs.  Bentley's  and  ours,  pitted  ironically  against each  other  so that  we  come  to  appreciate not only the  depth  and  complexity of the narrator and  her situation, but also the control in which  Ross artistically  holds his words.
The  scene  which  gives us some indication of this lies between  the storm  scene and  the  final  words  of  the  novel.  It is their  last  Sunday in  Horizon, and   Mrs. Bentley writes:

After three  or four  years it's easy to leave a little town.  After  just one it's hard.
It  turns  out  now that  all along they've liked us.... Last Friday  they had a fare­ well supper  for  us in  the  basement  of the  Church,  made  speeches, sang  God  Be With You Till  We  Meet  Again,  presented us with a handsome silver flower basket. It's  the  way of a little  l\1ain Street  town-sometimes  a rather  nice  way.
It's  blowing  tonight,  and  there's  dust  again,  and  the  room  sways slowly in  a
yellow smoky  haze.  The  bare,  rain-stained  walls remind  me of our  first Sunday here, just a little over a year ago, and in a sentimental  mood I keep thinking what an eventful  year it's  been, what  a wide wheel it's run.

It is the  first time  she has ever  complimented the townspeople or found  anything attractive about   the  small  town  way  of life. But  is she  sincere  now  or  has  she, since the storm, learned another hypocrisy? That ambivalence again.
The  importance of this episode for the novel as a whole is not  just the revelation of the  new  attitude, but  the  image  which  follows it, that  of dust  and  rain,  for  if the  imagery   is structured  as  well  as the  events  of  the  novel,  it  should  serve  to support the themes  and  to confirm our interpretation. The simple "polar opposites" view of  Mrs.  Bentley,  that  is, as being  either  success or failure  at  the  end  of the novel, would  be supported if a strand of "polar opposites" imagery  ran  through the  book,  distinguishing truth from  falsehood,  good  from  bad.  The  false-fronted stores  come  at  once  to  mind -yet  after  they  have  fallen  we  are  still  left  with ambivalent scenes. The  dust  and  rain,  then,  would seem  to fulfill the function of delineating  opposites,   but   they  are  even  more  deceptive than   the  falsefronted stores,  and   to force  them  into  this  technical  role would  be  to distort  what  Ross intends.  To  illuminate this question,  however,  forces us back  into  the  novel.

SINCLAIR ROSS'S AMBIVALENT WORLD






hE OVERALL IMPRESSION   left by the  book is certainly one of aridity:  of dust and  heat, the Depression on the prairies and  the drought  which went with it."' And accompanying  the unproductivity of the land is the dryness of the people:  Mrs. Bentley, who cannot  bear a child;  Philip, who does not believe in his church  and cannot comfort the people; the people themselves, who in Mrs. Bentley's eyes cannot  appreciate  anything  or anyone  beyond their own restricted world. Yet this directly conflicts with the view of them she gives us at the end of the  book, so obviously "in  Mrs. Bentley's eyes" is the operative  phrase here. By extension, we suspect all of her  affirmations, finding  in  them  partial  truths  that ring ironically  against the complex realities Ross ultimately  allows us to glimpse.
So it is with the dust and rain, which reveal the complexity that several separate points of view create. The image becomes one not of affirming polarities of good and  bad,  but of exploring what is real in the world.  Mrs. Bentley's view is thus not the only one we are conscious of, for the technique  of the book, Ross's words in  Mrs. Bentley's diary, establishes a linguistic tension  that  allows us to view the narrator with  distance,  objectivity,  dispassion:   and  so  perceive  the  irony  and ambivalencethe   "jests  of  God",  in  a  sense, if  we  can  anticipate   Margaret Laurencewhich characterize  reality in Ross's world.
Although  from  the very beginning, that  is, we come up against  Mrs. Bentley's explanation  of things,  the  false fronts  and  social attitudes  of Horizon,  the  first detail  of weather  we see is not one of dryness but one of a "soft steady swish of rain  on  the  roof,  and  a  gurgle of eave troughs  running  over".  April  rains  are usually a symbol of hope, of nurture for new growth, of Christian sacrifice and forgiveness, but here in this "disordered  house", they (ostensibly for the first time) leak through  the roof and  stain  the walls. Obviously  the rain  in reality does not serve to  refresh,  just as the "Christianity" hypocritically  uttered  by Philip or by Mrs. Bentley's townspeople is powerless to affect the environments through  which they move.
We see this most clearly in  the  Partridge  Hill  episodes. In  this little  country
town, beyond Horizon, the people are experiencing  their fifth straight  year with­ out  a harvest,  yet they continue  to place faith  in the ministerings of the Church. Sardonically,  in  June,  Mrs. Bentley writes, "This was the  day  out  at  Partridge  Hill we prayed for rain." The  Church  ceremony is thus reduced  to  pagan ritual, and  she  and  Paul  Kirby,  the  equally  sardonic  schoolteacher,  "tie" in  their  re­ action:  "Surely it must be a very great faith that such indifference on the part of

SINCLAIR ROSS's  AMBIVALENT WORLD



its deity cannot weaken-a  very great  faith,  or a very foolish one." It is just this ambivalence, explicitly   enunciated  here,  expressing  at  once  the  impossibility  of taking  sides and  the  human inclination to do so, which  the  book  communicates throughout.
Paul's  continuing habit   of  uttering  etymological   facts,  which   seems  almost gratuitous in  the  novel  at  times,  is  not  thematically unrelated. He  has  already told  us, for  example, "pagan, you know, originally  that's what  it meant, country dweller", and  in  June in  Partridge Hill  this  echoes  through the  scenes  we see. Paul's problem is that  he cannot live outside  his world  of arid  facts.  Whereas he thinks he knows what's around him and withholds himself from it, others are encountering, experiencing whatever is there.  The  problems that  others  (like the farmers) do  have,  however,  emerge  not  just physically from  that  encounter (the drought, the  land), but  from  a state  of mind  in  relation to the  experience that is not  unlike  Mrs.  Bentley's  or  Paul's own.  Mrs. Bentley  later  wonders if she is "the one  who's  never  grown  up,  who  can't see life for illusions"; the  farmers for their  part  live in one sense in a dream  world  that  does not  recognize  the present, for  it acknowledges only  two  times, the  good  harvest  and  the  possibility  for  one, "the year  it rained  all June, and  next  year".
April  rains,  for  the  Bentleys,  then,  had  been  destructive; June rains  do  not exist.  The persistent  faith  in  rain  seems ironic,  therefore, and  with  this in  mind we move  back  to  Mrs. Bentley  herself. She likes water,  wants  it, apparently needs to go walking  in  the  rain,  for  example,  and  so heads  out  in it whenever possible. Even  snow  will  do,  though then  reality  gives way  "to   the  white  lineless  blend of  sky  and   earth". "Horizon" seems  itself  to  be  reality,  therefore,  just  as  the present  is reality,  and  like the  farmers with  their  belief in June rains,  she comes headlong into   conflict  with  it.  Once   in  a  recital  she  played  Debussy's  Garden in the  Rain; now she tries to build  one, but  water is scarce  and  all that  blooms is a  single  poppy-while she  is  away.
Similarly, her  view of her  husband is founded  in  this dream of fruition. That he is an  artist  is what  she says, but  whether or not he indeed  has  talent, he lacks the  milieu  that   might  foster  greatness.  She  sees his artistry, moreover, in  terms of her own  image,  just as he  (with  his "sons",  Steve and  young  Philip,  as well as with his God) creates in his:

It's  always been my way to comfort myself thinking that  water finds its own level, that  if there's  anything  great  or good in a man it will eventually  find its way out. But I've  never taken  hold  of the thought  and analyzed it before, never seen how false it  really is. Water  gets dammed  sometimes; and  sometimes, seeking its level,

29

SINCLAIR ROSS's AMBIVALENT WORLD



it seeps away in dry, barren earth. Just as he's seeping away among the false fronts of these little towns.

When  Philip  is ill, too, it is she who says he has nausea  -causing Paul  to flinch, because  his etymological sensibility is outraged. Nausea "is from  a Greek word meaning ship and  is, therefore,  etymologically  speaking, an  impossibility  on  dry land".
That Philip  needs a change  of environment is true,  but  again  it is Mrs. Bentley who  voices the  desire, even acts it out  when  she walks  recurrently down  the rail­ way  track  as far  as the  ravine.  When  Philip  goes with  her,  she locates  her  wish in  his  eyes,  and   finds  the  possibility  of  escape-the possibility of  a  fruitful, ordered future -in the  train  to  an  outside  world.

At  last  we heard  a distant  whistle-blade,  then  a single point  of sound,  like one drop  of water  in a whole sky. It  dilated,  spread.  The  sky and  silence began  im­ perceptibly  to fill with it. We steeled ourselves a little, feeling the pounding onrush in  the  trestle  of the  bridge.  It  quickened,  gathered,  shook  the  earth,  then  swept in an iron roar above us, thundering and dark.

Paradoxically the  train  comes  from,  passes  through, and  heads  for  "Horizons", which  are  realities,  not dreams,  and  must  be faced. The  "water sickness"  is in a sense  Mrs.  Bentley's,  not  Philip's; therefore, a  function of  her  perhaps  uncon­ scious dream  and  a further  indication of her  imposition of her  own  point of view onto  the  world  around her.






A ROSS  DOES  to  communicate these ironies  and  am­ biguities  is to blur  the edges of his images. Absolutes  do not exist. For all that the recurrent water images  seem  to  accompany an  inability  to come  to  terms  with reality,  that  is, the  water  is not itself "bad"-it only  becomes  so  when in  a per­  son's  viewpoint the  dream  it  represents  stands  in  the way of  altering the  present.  When the dream and  the reality come into  conflict,  the water takes on the charac­ teristics of the desert, the arid land.  At the ravine, thinking of Judith, Mrs. Bentley writes:

Philip  and  I sat in the snowstorm watching  the  water  rush through  the stones­
so swift that  sometimes as we watched, it seemed still, solid like glass.

go

SINCLAIR ROss's AMBTVALENT WORLD



Later, knowing  of  the  affair  between  Judith and  Philip,  she  notes:

The  rain's  so sharp  and  strong  it crackles on the windows  just like sand.

The  similes  work  in  the  opposite  direction  as well. At  Partridge Hill,  "There was  a  bright  fall  of sunshine that  made  the  dingy  landscape radiant. Right  to the  horizon  it winked  with  little  lakes of spring-thaw water." But we also hear  of "dust clouds lapping at  the sky", of "dense,  rigid heat" and  "planks of sunlight". We're   told  that   the  August   heat  "was  heavy  and  suffocating. We  seemed  im­ bedded   in  it,  like insects  in  a  fluid  that  has  congealed." This  last  image  recurs again  when  Philip  seduces  Judith, and  Mrs.  Bentley wakes,  listens,  and  knows:  "like  a live fly struggling in  a block of ice".  For  her, during the  winter  that  fol­ lows,  "The sun  seems  cold". These  are  not  all working  to say  exactly  the same  thing.  There are  times,  apparently, when  the  dream  serves  a  useful  function  in the  mind  of  a  people,  but  again,  when  the  reality-"Horizon" -is obscured,  the  dream  is frozen, becomes  as hard  and  apparently sterile  as the dust  and sand.
The   ambivalence we  are  left  with  at  the  end  of  the  book  is  not  absolutely
resolved by these observations, but they bring us closer to understanding it. In presenting and  exploring a single  point  of view, As For Me  and  My  House  runs the  danger of seeming  shallow,  of allowing  no aesthetic  distance from  which  we can  respond  to  the  narrator as well as participate in  her  verbal  reactions  to the world.  Fortunately Ross's  technique, his control  over  the  words  he  allows  Mrs. Bentley  to  use,  creates  the  ironic  tension  which  raises the  book  from  a  piece of "regional realism" to  a  complex  study  of human responses.  Mrs.  Bentley  herself is all too  prone  to  approve or  condemn, but  Ross would  have  his readers  avoid this.  By his images  and  through the  other  characters, he shows  us, in  fact,  how Mrs.  Bentley's  polarization of  Horizon   (this  world,  arid,  sterile,  bad)  and  the Bookstore   (dream, water,  fruitful, good)   is invalid  and  gradually breaks  down. That she and  Philip  ultimately do leave to try to set up  the  bookstore  is perhaps cause,  therefore, for  us to see her  as a failure,  continuing as the  manipulator she has been before.
But  then  we still have  her  compliment about  Horizon's townspeople to contend
with,  and  her  acknowledgment in the same  breath  of both  the  dust  and  the  rain stains.  Here  she seems  to be  aware  of reality  at last;  if so, her future might  hold at  least  some  success.  But  reality  to  Ross is still not  clearcut, and  that  the  book should  end  so  ambivalently seems  ultimately   part  of  his plan.  The ambivalence is founded in  his imagery, founded in  the  lives of the  characters and  the  nature of  their  world,  germane to  the  whole  novel,  magnificently distilling  what  it  has

SINCLAIR ROss's AMBIVALENT WORLD



tried  to  say.  When   we become  conscious  of  this,  we  become  not  only  involved in  the  book,  but  like the  people  of Horizon, no  matter how  apparently sure  of themselves,  still sensitive to doubt  and  so to reality  as well.


FOOTNOTES

' See  Roy  Daniells,  "Introduction" to  As  For  Me  and  My  House,  1957, v-x, Cf. Warren   Tallman, "Wolf  in  the  Snow",  in  George  Woodcock,  ed.,  A  Choice  of Critics (Toronto: Oxford, 1966), 53-76.
2   See Donald  Stephens, "Wind, Sun and Dust", Canadian  Literature, no. 23 (Winter
1965)' 17-24.



SEARCH FOR	A STYLE


The Poetry of Milton Acorn




Dorothy Livesay




..n

kTRY FETTER'D  FETTERS  THE  HUMAN  RACE."  These  lines of  Blake  still  retain   their  freshness,  their  significance,   as  a  source  from  which twentieth-century poetry  may  draw  its vigour.  For a time  it seemed  that  lyricism such  as that  of Blake or Shelley  had  gone out of fashion: passionate  song seemed out  of  key with  the  tone  of The  Wasteland.  Yet  Pound   valued  "music" above all  else;  Williams   established  the  importance of  rhythm as  opposed   to  metre, with   his  "Down  with   the  iambic   pentameter!" On   the  ideological   side  there were  many  echoes  of Shelley's  revolutionary utopian  vision in  the  poetry  of the nineteen  thirties.  Now  in  the  sixties we seem to be becoming somewhat fatigued by cerebral  and  mythopoeic poetry.  There is a return  to Imagism; and  with  that return lyricism  inevitably canters   alongside.  "The consciousness  of  necessity"  is not  far  behind.
Of  all contemporary Canadian poets, Milton  Acorn  is most at  home  as a part of this development. A small town boy on Prince  Edward Island, a building  trades worker  in  the  industrial east,  a  recruit  for  the  Second  World  War,  he  is now, in  his forties,  devoting all his time  to poetry  and  politics.  His interest  in writing began  early,  but  he had  no access to modem poetic directions. As he describes it, he grew  into  poetry  the  hard, unschooled  way:

I started  to write in iambic patterns,  taught  by my brother  who went  to college. Iambic  was theoretically  based on the 'natural' rhythms o£ the  English language, and  I guess in  the district  where I lived this was more or less true. But among the great  majority  of people  living on the North  American  continent  the speech  pat­ terns (stress and rhythm)  have changed. Iambic no longer fits.'


33

SEARCH  FOR A  STYLE



Acorn  first  began  to break  with  the  iambic  pattern from  listening  to seamen talk:
The way they used words, the way they condensed sentences, the way they dropped conjunctions,  the way they used 'will' and 'should'  in their elliptic form.... When I started  writing  I  used the  iambic metre  because  I  thought  it  was popular,  it would  reach  people;  but  I became  uninterested  in  reaching  people if I had  to present my work in terms such as they didn't  use themselves, in their own speech?

His  aim  was "a line that  flowed  more  in  terms  of their  own  natural idiom". In the  light  of  that  aim,  it  would  seem  worthwhile to  examine in detail  poems  by Milton  Acorn  that  reveal how  he began  to grow  away  from  the iambic  pattern, while  yet maintaining a  unity  of structure based  essentially  on strong-stress  (bal­ lad)   rhythms.
Linguists  like Trager and  Smith  have  described   the  English  accentual system of speech  as  being  based  on  four  degrees of stress;  but  the  average  person's  ear probably detects  only  three  levels of syllable  stress. In analyzing the  poetic  line, it is the  position  of the strong  stress that  counts; secondary or  "weak" stresses do not  give the  line its beat.  This  is because  there  is always  (in  speech  as well as in poetry) one strong  stress between  pauses  (or  junctures, as they  are  now  called) . Bearing  this in mind,  it will be convenient  to look at one of Milton  Acorn's poems on the  basis of a three-level stress pattern. Here  is a sample, "Charlottetown Har­ bour", from an early collection:

An old docker with gutted cheeks,
Time arrested in the used-up knuckled hands
Crossed in his lap, sits
In a spell of the glinting water.
He dreams of times in the cider sunlight
When masts stood up like stubble; But now a gull cries, lights,
Flounces its wings ornately, folds them,
And the waves slop among the weed-grown piles.

In  this  poem  of  nine  lines we can  reckon  that  each  contains two strong  stresses per  line.  These   stresses  occur  isochronically;  that   is,  the  intervening  syllables, whether  secondary or  weak,  occur  within   the  same   time-beat,  emphasized  by juncture. Sometimes there is an "outrider", as Hopkins called  it: an extra  syllable or  group   of  syllab1es, as  in  line  two.  Further  variation is achieved   in  this  line by the  use of internal juncture (Time arrested/). In  stanza one,  the  most effec­ tive  juncture occurs  in the line:

34

SEARCH  FOR A STYLE


'	.._,	.._,       /	/
Crossed in his lap,jsitsjf

and  in the second  stanza  we have  a somewhat parallel  third  line:
.....,	' .._,       /	' 	,
But now a gull cries,/lights

A long  rounded effect  is achieved  in  the  last  two lines with  a  juncture on  each side  of  "folds   them"; followed   by  onomatopoeic rhythm  as,  "the waves  slop among  the weed-grown piles".
What  other  elements  besides rhythmic stress and  juncture are characteristic of
this early  poem?  It is not  a  poem  of action,  loaded  with  verbs,  but  a "picture" poem;  therefore the  nominals (modifiers  and  nouns)   are  dominant. Notice  how almost  every  noun   has  a  qualifier: old  docker; gutted   cheeks;  glinting  water; cider sunlight;  weed-grown piles;  and  that  rhythmically these  follow  a trochaic "falling" pattern which   emphasizes  the  depressed,  ironic  mood.  The few  finite verbs, on the  contrary, are single-syllabled,  forceful,  progressing  from  transitive to intransitive; from  "sits", "dreams" and  "stood" to the  more  active  verbs "cries", "lights",  "flounces";  with   a  sudden   transitive   descent,   "folds   them". As  that action  is completed the  continuity of nature is insisted on: the waves "slop".
Notable in this poem  is the lack of overt emotion  and  the  absence  of metaphor or  symbol.  We  are  presented with  a  still-life  painting in  the  Imagist   tradition. Generally  Acorn's  early  work  seems  to  follow  this  Imagist pattern  of  minute detail,  enclosing   an  internal  movement which  is created   by  the  use of  phrasal rather than   clausal  utterances. Yet  Acorn  is a  poet  unable to sit still  for  long: man  interacting on  scene  is  what  really  interests  him.  In  a  recent  unpublished poem,  for  instance, he states:

Description  isn't for poets:
Poetry demands an exactitude that defies description, liken the soul to an electron.
When you say 'like' that implies 'not quite'. Or drop that word! But then
you're speaking of something else entirely
going on in the nucleus.

Even  in his first book it is apparent that  Acorn's  poetry  is beginning to eschew description, or even simile and  metaphor, in favour  of a more  dramatic presenta­ tion. The  landscape is now acted  upon,  as in the  poem, "Old  Property":

past that frost-cracked rock step twist yourself thru
skewjee trunks and old coat-hook branches;


35

SEARCH FOR A STYLE



ground once dug and thought of and never intended for those toadstools.

in the shade past the cracked robin's nest, past that spilt sunlight, see
his grainy grip on
a hatchet  keened to a leaf, a man in murky denims whispering curses at the weeds.

The  sentence  structure here is still phrasal  but  the  arrangement of the  two finite verbs -"twist"  and  "see" -emhasizes  their  imperative nature, stresses  action. There is no internal juncture and  even end-juncture is disguised  by run-on  lines:

twist yourself thru skew-jee trunks

or

his grainy grip on a hatchet

The   effect  is to  emphasize   word  or  phrase  at  the  beginning  of  the  line.  From now  on,  this  will  be  one  of  Acorn's chief  technical devices.  With  "whispering curses"  he extends  himself farther than  imagism,  into  symbolism.  And  from  there on he questions, questions. An example in the early volume of this leap from the declarative statement ("Charlottetown Harbour")   to  the  imperative ("Old Property")  and  on into  the  interrogative, is found in  the  poem  "Islanders."

Would you guess from their broad greeting witty tuck of eyelids,
how they putt-putt out with lunch cans on seas liable to tangle
and dim out the land between two glances?
Tho their dads toed the decks of schooners, dodging the blustery rush of capes,
and rum-runner uncles used wit-grease
against the shoot-first Yankee cutters,
they couldn't  be the kind to sail their lobster
boats around  the world for anything less than a dollar-ninety  an hour.

This  poem  shows  a significant  development from  the  two  previous  ones  (and whether it  antedated them  or  postdated them  is not  the  point)  because  of  its

g6

SEARCH FOR A STYLE



dialectic.  The   utterance   pattern   is  no  longer  dominantly   phrasal.  There  is a balance  now between nominals and verbals, with strong, vivid verbs taking over: putt-putt, dim out, toed, used, sail. After the first five lines, in a rhythmic pattern of three strong stresses to the line (all ending in a trochee), the rhythm suddenly gets stronger  and  tighter  with four beats to  the line, for four lines. The  last two lines, however, open out into an expanded  iambic speech rhythm,  long and sinu­ ous and  hard-hitting. The  exciting element in this poem is the way that the de­ veloping  rhythmic  pattern   corresponds  to  the  developing  content  pattern.  The first five lines carry straight  description  (though  couched in a laconic question); the  next  four  lines are  dramatic narrative,  a  reference  to  the past  behind  the present;  and  the final breakthrough is more than ironic comment, it is the dialec­ tic "jump" to a  new synthesis. Acorn's  mind works in  lightning  flashes.
Several deductions  can  be made from the above analysis. The  first one is that there  are  three  aspects  to  Acorn's  style, evident in  both  his early  and  his late poems. These  are:  vivid imagery,  rhythmic progression, and  the ability to create a synthesis of what  has gone before.

But similarly  I liken a soul to an electron: give it a charge and  it jumps to a new orbit.  Therefore I praise the jump before it happens - which makes  the kids say I tell lies
and  so I do
but my lies make  things happen.

Said  another  way,  the  poet  works on his material,  activates  it and  re-creates it into a new synthesis. He successfully integrates form and  content.  What  he him­ self has  to say about  this process is worth  noting. I  quote  here from  a  conver­ sation:

My  work   since   1960  has   been  greatly   influenced   by  Olson-not   his  'formal' theories,  but  theories  on  voice.  I do  not agree  with  him  that  form  must  always  be nothing but  an  extension of content. I think  there  is a continuous dialectic inter­ play  between  form  and  content; that  anything is conceived   as a form  in  the  first place.3

Again, he says

My  favorite painter is Picasso.  I  love him  because  he is conscious  of form,  of the approach. Like  him  I am  very deeply  interested in various  methods of presenting the  content of  my  poetry-I find  myself almost  incapable of writing two  poems with  the  same  formal idea.  I'm  always  looking  for  new forms.  Each  new poem  is an experiment in form  to me.

37

SEARCH FOR A STYLE



It is as  an  experimentation with  form that Milton Acorn's poems  are  particu­ larly  satisfying. In his great  variety of presentation (well over  one hundred poems already published) there  is no repetition; neither is there an amateur dilettantism. Rather, soaring through a  variety of approaches a  human search is evident: the  search for  enduring life. "The Fights" is a good  example: 4


What  an elusive target the  brain is!    Set up
like a coconut  on a flexible stem it has 101 evasions.
A twisted nod slues a punch a thin gillette's  width
past a brain, or
a rude  brush-cut to the chin
tucks one brain safe under  another. Two of these targets  are
set up to be knocked down for  25 dollars or a million.

In that TV  picture  in the parlor the men who linked to move
in a chancy dance
are abstractions only.
Come to ringside, with  two experts in there! 	See
each step or blow pivoted balanced  and sudden  as gunfire. See muscles wriggle, shine
in sweat like windshield  rain.

In  stinking dancehalls, in the forums of small towns, punches are cheaper  but still pieces of death.
For  the brain's  the target
with its hungers
and  code of honor. 	See
in those stinking little  towns,
with long counts, swindling  judges,

how fury ends with the last gong. No matter  who's the cheated one they hug like girl and man.

SEARCH FOR A STYLE



It's craft and
the body rhythmic and terrible, the game of struggle.
We need something of its nature
but not this:
for the brain's  the target
and round  by round it's whittled till nothing's left of a man
but a jerky bum, humming
with a gentleness less than human.

This  poem  depends more  than  most in its rhythm, to create  unity  and strength. The natural speech  units,  the  breath  groups,  have  been  "distorted" so as to lay strong  stress  beats  on  each  line.  This  creates  the  over-all  rhythmic pattern. To illustrate how  it  works,  we  have  only  to  arrange the  same  poem  in  its  normal phrasal   pattern on  the  page.  Here,  as in  all straightforward prose,  the  phono­ logical  elements   (breath groups) coincide  with  the syntactical  arrangement. Let us look at  the  first paragraph:

What  an elusive target  the brain is! Set up like a coconut on a flexible stem, it has
101 evasions. A twisted  nod slues a punch  a thin gillette's  width  past a brain, or a  rude  brush-cut   to  the  chin  tucks the  brain  safe  under  another.  Two  of  these targets are set up to be knocked down for twenty-five dol)ars or a million.

In  this version  it will be felt at once that  the impression  is prosaic, communicative rather than   expressive.   It lacks  the  excitement created  when  the  poet  distorts the  natural utterance to  obtain rhythmic effects. In  the  original version,  strong stresses occur  in  every  line of the first and  second stanzas. The  rhythmic pattern is  compulsively    (almost  convulsively)   established.   In   the  third  stanza there   is some  variation. The  first  five lines have  two strong  stresses each,  but  in line  six we have  a shortened line with one  strong beat, "with its hungers", thereby heightening the  tension.  Similarly  there  is dramatic effect in the delayed  juncture between  "honor" and  "see", followed  by a  contrived   juncture at  the  end  of the line  (it  is contrived because  it goes against  the  syntax) . The  last  two  lines have an  odd  effect  because  they  revert  to iambic:

No matter  who's the cheated one they hug like girl and man.

The  last  stanza of  "The Fights"  reverts  to strong-stress isochronic  beat.  The imposed   junctures effected   by  end-stopping must,  together with  the  intonation

39

SEARCH FOR A STYLE



pattern, set up  a  counterpoint to the  normal stress  pattern. This  again  heightens the  effect,  intensifies  the  meaning of the  poem,  which  is more  metaphorical and symbolical  than  the  other  poems we have  been  considering.
There are  further elements  in  "The Fights" which  create tension.  True, the paucity   of  verbals  as  opposed  to  nominals   (nineteen verbs  to  forty  adjectives) would  be  a weakness,  but  the  nature of these  noun  modifiers  is worth  attention. Eleven   of  these  modifiers  are  past  participles. Thus,  although  the  poem  lacks clausal  balance, its phrasal  proportions are  heavily  weighted  and  they  are  rooted in  action.  The  tone  of the  poem  is not  "sublime" (as  so often  in  Shelley), but classical,  balanced, vigorously ironic.  It  could  be  a commentary upon  our  whole way  of  life  in  the   twentieth   century.   About   man's  aggressiveness  it  says  little explicitly; yet it says all.
More  Blakeian  in style is the poem "For  a Singer".5 Here  is a poem  that  carries to  completion  the  process  begun  in  "The  Fights" and   developed in  "I  Shout Love". Although far from  being  the end of Acorn's development, "For a Singer" seems  to mark  a phase  complete  in itself:  the  phase  of the  conscious, social revo­ lutionary poet  defying  the  sickness of  capitalist society.  Of  its  shape-that of four-line  stanzas  in  a four-beat, strong-stress  measure, Acorn  has  remarked:

Tonally  it  is a  unique  experience for me in  that  it is a chant,  an  invocation.  It depends  not  upon  the  natural  flow of  the  voice, but  upon  the  distortion  of the stresses and  intonation. And  you'll notice the  distortion  in my voice as I read  it.
The poem  sets a strong  rhythm going  at  the  outset: Let me be the mane that swings
(clouds tossing, lightning shot) about the singer's muscled face, caressing and letting it go wild

Or let me be the oar's pulse throbbing through  that figurehead
to the heroic Argo, that woman alive
who sang against the crash of spray

over her nipples, her chin,
and every love-wrought pore of her, against the flattening calm, visions washing up and down her spine.

From   these images,  startling  in  their  unexpectedness, yet objectively  viewed,  the poet  turns  the  camera inward to reveal  his own  feelings: the  effect  the singer  is

SEARCH FOR A STYLE



having  on  him.  Then he moves, more strongly,  to show  the effect she has on  the audience:

She sings in a crowded coffee shop smoke curling amongst tenuous ghosts of the living. 	"Love!" she cries.
They scratch at love with palsied hands.

But  at  each  emotional cry  (almost  a  beseeching  prayer)  for  "Sorrow!" "Cour­
age ! ", the  audience fails to respond; for they are the  people  who

feeling nothing but death for themselves desire the death of the entire world, because even the imagination  of life
is forbidden  by all their teachers.

The   vision  of  what  she  is saying  passes back  then  from  audience to  poet.  "Let me be the song!" he cries. "Take me.... like/  a firebird  above  the last cloud/ of the  last/ dark  planet." Finally  the  vision ends with  his complete  identification of himself  with  the  singer  "with her  guitar/ crossed like  a shield  over  her  heart/, perched  on  this  bomb  of a world,  every instant/ ticking ... ticking ..." His  final identification is with  "the men  and  women  of  her  song"  who stood  up  against oppression. The last stanza, a synthesis, is one of passionate  personal  conviction:

.... This  heart
is necessary; even in the shadow of Mount  Death, it's necessary

:for the standing  up brave and hopeful way, the way of asserting the truth  of our lives,
we ought to die
is the only way we might live.

Although  the  syntax  here  might  be  criticized  as being  too  elliptical,  the  lines pound  their  way home.  Indeed, the most interesting  aspect of this poem is the fact that  its dialectical development, moving  from  a sense of post-Hiroshima despair towards  a  Utopian  revolutionary optimism, is bound  together structurally  by unrhymed tetrameters, a  free-flowing  ballad  rhythm. It is a  poem  built  up,  not on finite  verbs  and  clausal  structures, but on phrases;  therefore we expect  neither metaphysical intricacy nor  classical balance, but fervour,  incantation, excitement. What  verbs  there  are  are  not  verbs of action  but of being,  feeling, seeming, exist-

41

SEARCH FOR  A STYLE



zng. Yet  movement is created by the  rock-a-bye effect of participles used as descriptive modifiers. Even to itemize them is interesting: clouds tossing; lightning shot;   caressing;  throbbing   through. These   and  many   other   "ing" verbals  rock out  the  rhythm   of  the  poem.  They  are  ongoing   and  lend  themselves  to  chant, declamation,  prophecy. Whilst  they  give  an  impression of  motion, they  do  not move  except  as the  ocean's  floor  may  be said  to  move.  The  singer  does not  act, she seems  to  be caught  up  in  the  poet's  vision, singing  eternally on  the  brink  of destruction. She  is not  a metaphor, but  a symbol,  proclaiming life.
This   poem,  "The  Singer", a  poem  of  affirmation  and   belief  in  humanity's struggle, is in the  tradition of Blake and  Whitman. Its  metaphors of the  Moloch worshippers "teetering on the last rung" in  juxtaposition with  the "firebird on the last  cloud" emphasize  the  prophetic tone. That tone,  though Marxist  by implica­ tion,  avoids  didacticism and  sentimentality. As the  poet  himself  warns,  in  a  re­ corded  conversation :

Don't   congratulate yourself on  detecting  the  nai:vete of  this  poem,  because  the naivete is deliberate.

Acorn's aim  is to  bring  objects,  life itself, back  into  perspective so that  we  may look  on  them  freshly,  not  cynically.  Obscurity and  mystification   are  not  a  part of  this  method.
From   the  foregoing  examination of  Milton   Acorn's work,  however  arbitrary having  been  the  selections, it should  be clear  that  he is a poet  who  never stands still.  Perilously  near  as he seems  to  come,  sometimes, to  a  precipice  of emotion too  dizzying  to be borne,  miraculously he swings around. He  marches on, laugh­ ing and  crying,  turning his back on clouds of glory to consider  the internal, mental life of the  dreaming man.

FOOTNOTES

' From a tape recording made by the author,  Vancouver, I g64.
2   Ibid.
3   Ibid.
4   Milton  Acorn, The  Brain's The  Target. Toronto: The Ryerson Press, rg6o.
5   The   Literary  Review,  Canada   Number,  Summer   rg65,  Vol.  VIII, 4· Fairleigh
Dickinson University, Teaneck,  N.J., U.S.A.



LE  THEATRE ET LES DRAMATURGES A MONTREAL




NaimKattan








COMMENT SE  PORTE le th<iitre a Montreal? L'on  peut dresser un bilan tres optimiste comme on a tout le loisir de faire un diagnostic qui traduirait un  tres mauvais  etat  de sante.  Ainsi, depuis que  le Theatre du  Nou­ veau  Monde  s'est  installe  dans  Ia nouvelle salle du  Port-Royal   a  Ia  Place  des
Arts il a pu accroitre  le nombre  de ses spectateurs. Le Theatre du Rideau  Vert fete son vingtieme anniversaire  et il fait souvent salle comble. Les jeunes auteurs disposent d'un  centre  d'essai ou des comediens professionnels font  des lectures publiques de leurs reuvres. Une  revue, TheaJre  Vivant, est publiee par ce centre et  fait  connaitre  a  un  plus grand  public les ,ecrits des  jeunes dramaturges. De leur cote plusieurs groupes d'amateurs qui faisaient montre  d'une  grande  audace dans  le choix de leur  repertoire,  mais qui  n'attiraient pas un public suffisant, se sont  groupes  sous  une  seule  enseigne et  ces efforts conjugues  semblent  devoir donner  des 11esultats. Alors, tout va bien, pourrait-on  dire.
II  y a  malheureusement  un  revers a  Ia medaille.  Le  Theatre de l'Egregore, qui, au cours de ces dernieres annees, a presente au public mont11ealais des pieces canadiennes  et etrangeres  parmi  les plus interessantes ferme ses partes  pour  une annee.  Esperons qu'il  reprendra ses activites l'an  prochain.  Le Theatre de Quat­ sous eprouve
l'on  pourrait  dire qu'il  en a toujours ete ainsi. Des troupes se forment, renouvel­ lent  Ia  vie  theatrale,   d'autres prennent   de I'age  et  disparaissent.  Mais  voila! Tant que  l'on  ne  peut  fonder  des  troupes 11egulieres,  stables  et  les  comediens et les dramaturges vivront  dans  I',ephemere; on sera arnene  a  recommencer  tou­
jours et a attendre  les enthousiasmes vierges.

43

LE  THEATRE A MONTREAL



Et  puis, Ia vie theatrale  ne  peut  avoir  de continuite  et de consequence si les troupes  ne s'appuient  pas sur les dramaturges du  cru. Le public souhaite  que les horizons qui lui sont ouverts soient vastes mais aussi ne pas se sentir toujours depourvu  de porte-parole.  II veut, ne fut-ce  par  moments,  se sentir  present  non pas seulement  dans  Ia salle mais, par  personne interposee, sur Ia scene.
II  est evident  que  Ia television a  absorbe  un  nombre  incalculable  de  textes. Les te1eromans fournissent tous les jours Ia matiere  d'une  ou de plusieurs pieces, mais ces feuilletons sont ecrits rapidement,  au fil de !'imagination et des besoins techniques,  sans que !'auteur ait le temps de s'arreter  sur les personnages, !'intri­ gue  et  sans  qu'il  puisse depeindre  d'une  maniere  adequate Ia situation  sociale. II y eut des exceptions bien sur:  Germaine  Guevremont, Roger Lemelin, Marcel Dube  et  dans  une  certaine  mesure,  Robert   Choquette, Franc;ois  Loranger   et Jean  Filiatrault. Mais les textes de tous ces auteurs  se sont  eparpilles  et l'on  ne peut  pas dire  qu'ils  aient  constitue  une ocuvre durable.
Cas  rare,  c'est  Ia  television qui  donne  au  theatre   un  auteur  dramatique. II s'agit de Guy Dufresne. Pendant plusieurs annees Dufresne a depeint dans des te1eromans  certaines  realites  canadiennes-franc;aises.  Ses  personnages   apparte­ naient  d'abord  au milieu des marins. Ensuite il a planre sa scene dans un hopital et ce sont des medecins, des infirmieres et des malades qu'il faisait 'evoluer devant les te1espectateurs. Et  voila qu'il  a eprouVIe  le  besoin  de  quitter  le petit ecran pour  Ia grande  scene. C'est  Gratien  Gelinas  qui  a  accueilli sa  premiere  piece, Docile, a son  theatre: Ia Comedie  Canadienne. II est difficile  de  dire si Ia col­ laboration  entre Dufresne et Gelinas ait ete fructueuse.  En effet, Gelinas, homme de  theatre   lui-meme,  auteur  dramatique,  comedien,  metteur  en  scene,  a  joue le premier  role dans Ia piece de Dufresne  qu'il  a  mise  en scene aussi. "Docile"  est une  farce  paysanne.  Le personnage  principal  sait lire l'avenir,  non  pas dans les !ignes de Ia main,  mais dans  le bout  des  orteils. L'on  peut  imaginer  les res­ sources  d'une   telle  trouvaille.  Hommes  et   femmes  se  mettent   devant   lui,  se dechaussent.  Les jeunes filles lui offrent le spectacle  de leurs belles jambes et  de leurs  cuisses aliechantes  et les hommes ne  lui offrent  que  Ia mauvaise  odeur  de leurs  pieds. II  y avait  sans  doute  dans !'esprit  de  Dufresne  un  drame  humain qui  se  jouait  a  travers  cette  farce.  Ces  hommes  et   ces femmes  qui  rev,elaient leurs  desirs secrets, leurs craintes, leurs soucis, se mettaient  a nu  non seulement devant  cet homme  quelque peu  roublard,  mais aussi devant  le public. Cet aspect de Ia piece a ,ete perdu dans Ia  mise en scene de Gelinas. Celui-ci a mis !'accent sur  Ia farce  et  a fait  graviter  tous les autres  personnages  autour  de  celui qu'il interp  etait

44

LE  THEATRE A MONTREAL



un  auteur. Meme  si  Dufresne continuera a ·ecrire pour  la  television  il sait  que ce qu'il  fera  de  plus durable sera  joue sur la scene;  d'ailleurs, on  attend avec un grand   interet  sa  deuxieme  piece   Les  Traitants  que   le  Theatre du   Nouveau Monde montera cet  hiver.
Avec  Michel  Tremblay on  ne  quitte   pas  le milieu  populaire, ni  la  farce.  Et
pourtant  le  monde   qu'il   nous  revele  est  aux  antipodes de  celui  de  Dufresne. Tremblay est  un  jeune  auteur et  Les  Belles-Soeurs  est  sa  premiere piece.  Il  a imagine une  intrigue  plausible,   mais  qu'il   a  etin e.
un   prix:    un   million   de   timbres-primes.  Certaines  ·epiceries  ont   entre-temps cesse d'accorder a  leurs  clients  ces faux  cadeaux. C'est  dire  que  la  piece  date deja  un  peu.  Mais  la  n'est  pas la question.  La situation a existe et !'auteur avait taus  les droits  de  !'exploiter. Pour  caller  le million  de  timbres qu'elle a gagnes le personnage principal de Ia piece veunit ses belles-soeurs et ses voisines chez elle.
Et  chacune des  femmes   revele  dans  un  monologue,  son  drame secret.  Elles sont  toutes  malheureuses, frustrees,  sans  espoir.  Rien  ne  rachete   leur  vulgarire et  leur  gout  pour  le  clinquant. Tremblay depeint  une  humanite  degradee. Ces femmes  choisissent  de  hurler,  de  parler  mal,  de s'injurier les unes  les autres,  de blasphemer. On   ne  croit  pas  toujours   a  leurs  malheurs. On   n'•eprouve  aucune sympathie  pour   leurs  souffrances. Tremblay  a  sans  doute   voulu  traduire  avec
£erocite !'alienation d'une certaine couche  de la population canadienne-fran aise. La   publicite   fait   miroiter  devant   des  femmes  qui  vivent   dans   des  conditions sordides  des  reves  de  bonheur, mais  ce bonheur est  artificiel,  fausse  au  depart. Leur  malheur c'est  de  ne  pas  en  vouloir  d'autre. Et  pourtant parmi   toutes  ces femmes  il devrait  en  exister  une  qui  voudrait autre  chose,  reverait   d'un   autre bonheur,  serait   satisfaite   de  certains   moments   de  sa  vie.  Et  parce   que   cette humanite est  toute  d'une piece,  parce  qu'il  n'y  a pas  de  rachat a sa  condition, elle nous semble  caricaturale et manquant d'une certaine v·erite.
Deux  autres  dramaturges, deja  chevronnes,  Marcel  Dube  et Fran  oise
ger,  ont  presente  de  nouvelles  ceuvres. Pendant plusieurs  annees  Dube  a travaille pour  la  television.  Il  a  rehausse  par  sa  presence  la  qualite des  te1eromans.  Et, malgre   tout,  son  ceuvre  souffrait  de  ce  que  l'on   peut   maintenant appeler   un exil.  Car   pour   Dube  la  television  aura  •ete, dans  une  certaine mesure,  un  exil.
Je fais exception, bien  silr, des pieces qu'il  a ecrites  pour  la teLevision, dont  l'une,
Bilan,  fut  offerte   aux   spectateurs de  theatre   cette  annee. Les  dimensions   en etaient restees  limitees   malgve  tout.  Surtout que  Dube  reprend l'un  des  themes qu'il  n'a  cesse d'exploiter comme  s'il en etait  obsede: la  juxtaposition entre  deux generations, celle  des  adultes  deja  decadents, defaits,  resignes,  corrompus et  des

45

LE  THEATRE A MONTREAL



adolescents, purs, innocents qui ne parviennent  pas a se revolter parce qu'ils n'en ont  pas la force, ni non plus, sans doute, le gout. Ils sont corrompus d'avance et on les voit deja se joindre au rang de ces adultes demolis. Mais je voudrais parler de sa nouvelle piece mantee au Theatre  de la Comedie  Canadienne, car la Dube se renouvelle. Certes, i1 nous pi'esente encore les deux generations, mais i1 a quel­ que  peu renverse les roles. Ce sont les jeunes qui sont corrompus.  Une  jeune fille s'associe a un  gar on.
du  plus vil, en exploitant  les autres. Ils se presenteront  dans  les endroits  de vil­ legiature  et les grands  hotels europeens comme frere  et soeur, s'infiltreront  dans la vie de couples plus ages, profiteront de leurs reves, de ce qu'illeur reste d'inno­  cence pour  se faire  entretenir.  Ils font la connaissance  de deux  Canadiens; leur mariage  n'a  pas ete heureux. Ils n'ont  pas eu d'enfants. Leur amour  s'est epuise. Ils s'ennuient  l'un  avec l'autre.  Ils n'ont  plus rien a se dire. Existe-t-il pour  eux une possibilite de recommencement? L'homme, un joumaliste, utilise ses ,economies pour aller faire un voyage en Europe afin de se retrouver  et peut-etre de retrouver sa  femme.  Et  ils font  la connaissance des deux  jeunes  gens. On  peut  imaginer
!'intrigue. La  jeune fille fait croire a l'homme,  qui a plus ou mains l'age de son pere, qu'elle est amoureuse de lui, et le gan;on  joue au gigolo avec la femme. Les deux couples se reforment avec des partenaires  differents. Pour les jeunes gens ce n'etait  qu'un  passe-temps, un  jeu. Ils ont vendu  de l'espoir, du reve a leurs aines moyennant   des  vacances  luxueuses en  contre-partie. A  un  certain  moment  les jeunes gens se prennent  a leur propre  jeu. La  jeune fille a des v,elleites sentiment­ ales.  Le  garn
aventuriers  reprennent  le fil de leur existence dans l'attente d'autres  aventures et
les adultes se resignent au vide de leur vie.
Souvent  on  a !'impression  que  cette  piece constitue  une  version attenuee  de Qui  a  peur de Virginia  Woolf?  d'Edward Albee. Mais, on  ne peut  pas pousser trop  loin  la  comparaison  sans  commettre  une  injustice  envers  Dube,  car  son esprit est tres eloigne de celui d'Albee. Son attitude  envers la famille n'est  point negative. Il a du mariage une idee quelque peu triste, mais c'est surtout  la decep­ tion et la pitie pour  un bonheur  detruit  que ses personnages  nous font entrevoir. Dube ne croit plus en la vertu de la jeunesse. La corruption n'est pas une question d'age  et l'on  peut  toute sa vie garder  une part  d'innocence et  d'esperance.  Ainsi l'on peut dire que Dube a quitte ses propres sentiers. Si ses personnages se compli­ quent, si ses situations sont mains pi'evisibles I'esprit qui animait ses autres reuvres, une certaine  enthousiasme et une revolte juvenile, s'est  attenue  et l'on a !'impres­ sion que son ressort dramatique a faibli mais il a gagne  en technique  ce qu'il  a

LE  THEATRE A MONTREAL



peut-etre perdu  en  force  dramatique brute.  Dube  sait  maintenant  amenager les coups  de  theatre, les surprises.  11 sait  varier  l'action, rendre la  complexire   des personnages.
Je   voudrais  parler   de  la  piece  de  Fran oise
S'agit-il vraiment d'une piece?  Fran  oise
la  visite  memorable du  General de  Gaulle.   Heureusement  que  le  metteur  en soene,  Paul  Buissonneau, a su donner  un  cadre  a son texte.
11 a imagine que  les Canadiens anglais  et les Canadiens fran ais
au  spectacle de  cette  grande visite  qui  a  bouleverse  des  esprits  et  provoque  les passions  se  trouvaient face  a face,  mais  ils n'·etaient que  des  joueurs  de  hockey.
11s gagnaient ou  perdaient des points. Spectacle de metteur en scene-interessant, avec  des trouvailles, mais l'on  sortait  de la quelque  peu de  u.
un  texte?  Pourtant, le theme  pouvait  donner  suite  a de  grands developpements. Mettons que  ce fut  une  pochade qui  se rapprochait plus d'un esprit  de collegien qu'une veritable piece.  L'on  attend l'ceuvre suivante  de Fran  oise
La   grande  decouverte dramatique  cette  annee  fut   sans nul   doute  Rejean
Ducharme. On   a  donne   de  lui  coup  sur  coup  deux  pieces:   Le Cid  magane  et
Ines Peree et !nat  tendue.  On  a donne  ces pieces dans  un  theatre d',ete a Sainte­
Agathe. Le  Cid  magane  est  une  ceuvre  pleine  d'inventions. Ducharme reprend la  celebre  ceuvre classique  de Corneille,  il la situe dans  un Canada actuel  et con­
temporain. Cette  situation inusitee  donne  lieu  a des trouvailles poetiques et  lin­
guistiques   de  grande  portee.   Ducharme alterne  le  bon   parler   fran<_;ais  avec  le
langage populaire, le "joual". Et dans une dialectique senie, dans cette alternance entre  !'expression et la  parole,  entre  ce que  l'on  a a dire  et la maniere dont  on le
dit,   entre   l'ame   et  le  defroque,  permet   a  Ducharme  de   rev·eler  l'ambiguite existentielle  du  Canadien fran  ais.
d'expression mais  la  defaite  le guette  et  il •eprouve J',echec quand il tente  d'ex­ rerioriser sa vitalite. Curieusement ce n'est  pas quand il parle  bien qu'il s'exprime vraiment. "Le  bon  parler" semble  dire  Ducharme, peut  etre  le  mensonge  le plus colossal parce  qu'il  est ridiule et derisoire. Une scene dans  Le Cid  magane demeure inoubliable. C'est  celle  ou  la  comedienne oublie  son  texte.  Elle  vient  devant le public  et  elle dit  qu'elle  va improviser, qu'elle  va parler  son  langage propre. Sa diction  est tellement exageree, son langage  est tellement  travail1e que  l'on  ressent le  malaise   de  voir  un  personnage abimer   ses  ressources  vitales  en  esseyant  de fabriquer, non  pas  une  mediation par  le langage, mais  un ecran entre  ce qu'il a a communiquer et ce qu'il  communique vraiment. Comme dans  toutes  les ceuvres de  Ducharme le langage, les jeux de  mots, les trouvailles  de style ne sont  qu'une

47

LE  THEATRE A MONTREAL


maniere  d'atteindre un reel qui echappe. Il echappe  d'autant plus a un Canadien fran  ais
le metteur  en scene de la piece, Yvan Canuel,  n'ait  pas saisi toutes les ressources de cette a:uvre. Ill'a souvent eduite a une revue de college, ce qu'elle n'est point.
J'ai  lu une version de la deuxieme piece Ines Peree et /nat  tendue  et elle m'a semblee  encore  un  brouillon.  Il  serait  injuste   par  consequent  que   j'en  parle, d'autant plus que je n'ai pas eu !'occasion de voir la presentation  qu'on  en a faite
cet ,ete a Sainte-Agathe.



LUDWIG'S "CONFUSIONS"




Esther James






ANAUTHOR's  THEME is both defined and  limited by the viewpoint  through  which it is expressed. Jack  Ludwig in Confusions presents us
with a view of twentieth-century North American society as seen through  the eyes of Joseph GillisjJoe Galsky, his protagonist-narrator. Underneath the thin veneer of a morality  based on our Judaic-Christian  heritage to which  we pay only  lip­
service,  we  find  sham,  hyprocrisy,  weakness, viciousness and  stupidity.  Naked and  exposed,  twentieth-century  North  American society is thus  examined  and found  wanting.  But  Ludwig,  like other satirists before him, cannot  ridicule and expose the evils of an age without  revealing the didactic  purpose of his message. Let  us reform,  he says;  change  is possible. How?  We are  not  told and,  in  any case, that could be another  novel. In the meantime, what we are left with is Confusions, a  novel in  which  the protagonist-narrator delivers a satirical  expose of society as seen by him but which, he concludes at the end of the novel, is open to the  possibility of change.
As a positive sentiment  this conclusion is admirable.  As an ending  to a novel
which has poked a satirical  and destructive finger into every comer  of our twen­ tieth  century  value  system such  a  conclusion is a  positive necessity.  Over  and above these positive, admirable and  necessary qualities, however, such an ending is not  valid,  I  would  suggest, in  terms of Ludwig's  novel as a  whole.  For  the major  part  of the  book  we have  been shown  the world  through  the  jaundiced eye of GillisjGalsky.  A  change  of persona,  however, invalidates  the  viewpoint through   which  he  has  originally  presented  the  world  to  us.  Gillis/Galsky  has looked about  him one fine day and, lo and behold, things are not really as black as  he  thought   they  were.  But  where  has  the  change  occurred? Obviously  in him.  Now  he gives us a glimpse of a different  world,  a  world  that  contains  a

49

LUDWIG's  CONFUSIONS



society  for  whom  salvation   is  possible.  The  reader, therefore, is left  with  two pictures nf twentieth-century North  American society, one black and  one hopeful. GillisjGal ky
then  he  changes  and  life becomes  full  of golden  possibilities.  But  the  confusions which,  for  GillisjGalsky all  through the  novel,  were  so portentous are  now  left with  the  reader. What  is more,  the  reader   has  the  feeling  that  some  sleight  of hand has  been  practised.  The   protagonist-narrator has  shifted  his  position  but has  steered   us  towards  the  belief  that,  basically,  he is still where  he was  except that  now  his eyes are  more  widely  opened. It is at  this  point,  however,  that  we become  conscious  of the  author's presence.  He  has known  all along  that  human weakness  and  hypocrisy  were  not  here  to  stay.  He  has  known  all  along  that   a narrow, limited, self-centred  view  of society  does  not  tell  the  whole  story. Sud­ denly  Ludwig's persona  becomes more  than the  vehicle for his story;  he  becomes Ludwig himself,  and  it  is  this  inconsistency   in  the  novel  that   I  would  suggest mars  what  is, undoubtedly, a necessary  conclusion in other  respects.
The limitations imposed on an author using persona  are great. The protagonist­ narrator presents  only  his  own  thoughts, feelings  and  perceptions  of  the  world around  him.  Thus, he  becomes  the  fixed  centre   around  which  everything else revolves,  and   through  which  everything else  is sieved.  The  reader   receives  no picture  of  the   world  other   than   that   which   touches   the  protagonist-narrator. Restrictions of  this sort are  often  worth  the  sacrifice  of a  more  omniscient view­ point  if  the  author wishes to gain  a  particular kind  of  authenticity both  for  his theme   and   his  point  of  view.  Each,  in  reinforcing the  other, is constant to  the same   principle. Thus  Gillis/Galsky, confused   and   narrow  and   limited   in  his viewpoint as each  of us necessarily is, gives us his self-centred view of the  society into  which  he has  been born.  Because of this subjective approach his involvement in  that   society  is  established   whilst  through  allusion,   pun,  irony  and  satire  he convinces  us of  his  objectivity.  Society  out  there  is the  thing  he  examines,  and he views it this  way:


My course was Nineteenth-Century Literature, on stage, Cardinal Newman:   I, Roxbury Jewish boy, scrupulously differentiated  consubstantiation and transubstan­ tiation  for  these nominal  Christians  who wouldn't  have set foot in  church  except that  chapel  at Royce was compulsory, a policy of Royce's logical positivistic dean, who  wanted  the  kids back early from  San  Francisco  on  Sundays.
For  two  hours  my ebullience  battled  the  students'  wariness. Caritas, caritas,  I
calmed  my aspiring heart:   nine-tenths of these kids don't  want to be in college in the  first  place.  They're  only fulfilling social  necessity which  says "College (s)  at-

50

LUDWIG'S CONFUSIONS



tended"  is  an  essential  category  in  newspaper  Engagement   and  Wedding  An­ nouncements.  If there  had  been a shorter path to the Alumni Club, these students would, of course,  have  eliminated  college altogether.  Their  parents'  conversation needed the "my son (or daughter) in college" gambit, but other topics for bragging and bitching might conceivably be found.

One  of  the  interesting aspects  about  the  passage  just  quoted  is that  it  points up  a  clever  device  by  means  of which  Ludwig  has  expanded the  limitations of persona.  He  has  made the  "I" of his story  a "Roxbury Jewish  boy",  from  which viewpoint  he may  comment on those Judaic elements  which  go to make  up a part of  North  American society.  But  this is only  a  part-there is another side. The persona  is  a  split  persona, and  almost  in  the  same  breath as Joseph   Gillis  an­ nounces  his Jewish  origins he tells us that  he changed  his family  name  "to prevent the sacrilege  of 'Galsky' appearing on a Harvard degree  in Latin."  As a  physical type,  he  is  unlike  his  Semitic  mother  or  swarthy,  squat father who  burns  with "Hasidic joy and  fervour". He,  Gillis, is "tall, slim, gray-eyed, a  typical  washed­ out  paleface...." So much,  therefore, for  a persona  who serves the  double  func­ tion  of presenting an  outlook  and  a yardstick  for our J udaic-Christian culture in either  its combined or separate state.  For  good  measure, and  as a counterbalance to  his Galsky  side,  Gillis  gains  a  Puritan  wife.  Nevertheless,  as a  persona  figure Gillis/Galsky remains  fixed  at  centre  and,   as  a consequence, the  narrow  and personal  angle  of vision  through which  the  work  is presented  remains  unaltered.




W,TH THIS IN MIND let us examine the  plot in Con fusions. Writing from  a  specific  point  in time,  there  are  two  aspects  of  time  which   the protagonist-narrator can  deal  with: the  present ... and  the  past.  When he  deals with  the past, however, he is restricted,  again  on two counts. To  begin  with,  what he  reveals  of  the  past  will, obviously,  be limited  by its  relevancy  to  the  present situation in the  novel.  Furthermore, no story which  uses persona  can  begin  before the  character  reaches   what   we  would  consider  a  reasonable age  for  conscious awareness with  respect  to experience to be retained  and  recorded. Events  which happened before such  an age is reached  can only be reported as having  happened by virtue  of another party's verification. Birth is an obvious  example. Childhood, however,   may   be  experienced  and  the  experience   retained by  the  narrator­ ready  to be  written down  later  as part  of his past.  Any  experience,  therefore, of persona's past  must  be handled by the author in terms  of flashback  when  he has

LUDWIG'S CONFUSIONS



chosen as his theme  the confusion of the  present  and  he  wishes to present  this confusion  as seen  through  the  viewpoint of  a man  who  lives and  works in its midst.
GillisjGalsky,  then, begins his story in medias res, since the device of persona
demands  it. Dramatically  speaking, flashback  creates a tension in the  novel  be­ tween past and  present which can be turned  to good account.  As I have pointed out,  in  terms  of  technique -that  is, using  the  particular  protagonist-narrator he did use in Confusions- Ludwig had no other choice than to offer the past in flashback.  What  he wanted  to say, therefore,  in  terms  of  his theme  was limited by the point of view in his novel. He wished to show a breakdown  in our culture of those positive values which  were once embodied  in  our  Western  heritage­ values to which we give only a passing thought  in  the  present since more of our lives are  spent  in  jungle  tactics and,  thus,  we  expend  our  energies wastefully. Ludwig,  then, has turned  a technical necessity to good dramatic effect. By means of flashback  he is able to advance  the  background  of his hero  to show his boy­ hood, his adolescence, his young manhood, so that it is interspersed with narrative  of the present. In this way, the past becomes a valid comparison with the present. Two scenes illustrate  this.  Writing  as an adult,  GillisjGalsky  relates an anecdote concerning  a sexual  adventure  at  the age of thirteen  with  his aunt's  maid.  His mother,  unswerving  in her  loyalty and  totally supportive  of her son, denies his guilt in  this incident  to her sister, Gillis' aunt  Bess. Recalling  the event in flash­ back, GillisjGalsky  writes:

Vindicated by a mother's faith, I ran outside to join the other children play kick­
the-can.

The  story then  continues in the present again  and,  as the  plot unfolds, the high value placed on family faith  and  loyalty, established  and  recalled from  the past, is contrasted  with  the values of contemporary  society. A second scene illustrates this. The  immensely wealthy father  of a mentally ill student  has left the campus without  desiring  to see his son, whose enforced  withdrawal from  university has necessitated  the  father's  visit in  the  first  place.  Not  believing  that  any  father could  be so callous, GillisjGalsky,  the  boy's tutor,  tells us that  he  watches  the Petersons' limousine pull away and slowly realizes that  the father is indeed  leav­ ing  without  seeing his son.  We  then  get  an  image of "a  toppling  of  walls, a staving-in  of  abutments", and  a  comparison  is made  between  the  present  and the past-a  past in which values of love and  loyalty have  been  carefully estab­ lished-and Gillis/Galsky  writes:   "Maybe   the  root  of  my  simple-mindedness

LUDWIG's CONFUSIONS



lay here: my father Simon  was incapable of abandoning me, no matter what crime,  crack-up, illness."  Past  and  present,  therefore,  juxtaposed for  comparison and  interspersed in narrative for reasons of technical  necessity, are used effectively as polarities  to maintain dramatic tension.
Having left  the  question  of consistency in Ludwig's  novel hanging, as it  were, I should  like to  pick it up again  at  this pont.  As I have  said,  persona  presents  us with  his view of  the  world  and,  as a  product of the Judaic-Christian world,  he both  embodies   the  culture of  his society  and  is the  yardstick  of  it.  What he is, so is his society -cynical  of  its  values,  wasteful  of its  energies,  and   myopic  in tenns of  its  future. In  terms  of  the  future what  function can  persona perform other   than   to  present   this  condition of  myopia?  Obviously   none.  A  Victorian novel,  guided   by  the  hand  of an  omniscient author, used  to end  with  a chapter summing up  the  subsequent  careers,  marriages, deaths,  of  its  main   characters. By its  very  nature persona  is prevented from  taking  even  a  peep  at  the  future and   Ludwig's persona commits no  fault  in  this  respect.  Gillis/Galsky, however, as I have  suggested  above,  does surrender to his author as he  attempts to reveal to  us that  change is possible;  that,  in fact,  there  is no end  to the  possibilities that are  open  to all of us in  this  world,  even  to those despairing graduate students in English  literature who imagine that  the last word  has already  been written about everything that   has  ever  been  published. GillisjGalsky tells us that  the  world  is not  as black  as he had  pictured it for  us. However,  previous  to this in the  novel what  has  happened is that  the  author had  relied on  Gillis/Galsky's view of the world  to carry  his theme.
Standing confused   in  the  midst  of twentieth-century moral  confusion,  Gillis/ Galsky  became  the  vehicle  which  carried  Ludwig's  novel.  Diagrammatically,  we can  picture him  as  the  fixed  centre  of a  circle. Suddenly, however,  Ludwig  re­ quires  two focal  points.  He  wants  another persona  who is no longer  confused-­ he  wants  a  persona whose  view is clarified,  who  may  still see the  world  as con­ fused  but  he,  persona, is no  longer  confused. What  Ludwig  wants, at  this point,  is not a circle with one fixed point  but an ellipse with two foci. The  problem here, of  course,  is how  to  arrange for  an  ellipse with  two  foci.  Ludwig's way  out,  in view of the way his novel has been structured, was difficult. He solved his problem  by  dropping the  second  focal  point  into  the  circle  whose  one  fixed  point   was already  occupied by his protagonist-narrator, Gillis/Galsky. Technically speaking, Gillis/Galsky had  no right  to change. His change  is a miracle,  a deus ex machina, brought about by a hand  external to  the situation.



53





THE UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA  MEDAL FOR POPULAR BIOGRAPHY 1968

By  and  large,  1968  was  a  poor  year  for  popular  biography   in  Canada. A  good  number of  biographies  were  written, but  too  many  showed  signs of inadequate editing  and  too  much  haste  in  getting  the  books into  the  hands of  the   public.  Many   books- such  as  the   one  on  Pearson- should   have been   drastically   cut   to   make   them   readable;  and   others-such   as  that about  Trudeau- should  have  been  thought out  more  thoroughly.
Some   books  were  better  than  others,  but   for various  reasons were  not  of medal   quality. Malcolm Fosters   book,  Joyce  Cary   is  well  conceived, but hampered  by  too  turgid  a style. Some  opportunity should  have  been  taken to  examine Cary's  works  with  care, and  instead  only  a very  regular  critical opinion   is  presented.  Mr. Foster  calls  Cary  "Joyce"  too   often, and   the chummy tone  often  leads  to  confusion with   James  Joyce.  Richard   Gwyn's book, Smallwood: the Unlikely  Revolutionary is the  best of the contemporary political  works;  it  begins  well,  and  presents  a  nice  sense  of the  man.  The lucid   prose captures  the  elusive  spirit  of Newfoundland  exceptionally well, but  the  latter   half  which   concerns  Newfoundland  more  than   Smallwood, weakens  the  book's total  effect  measurably. T. P. Slattery's The Assassination of  d'Arcy   McGee   makes   a  good  story  about   McGee's  personality, much more  than  history  books usually  afford, but  the  book is over long and  would have stood some  judicious editing.
The best  book  to  come  to  the  award  committee this  year was  G.  P. V. Akrigg's  Shakespeare and   the  Earl  of Southampton, but  it  cannot   be  con­ sidered  in  the  "popular' biography   category.  The book  is  readable  to  the general,  but  literate,  reader, and is not  popularized  to a point  of being  over­ general  at the  expense  of being  accurate.  A  new  biography of Southampton was needed, and this is very useful.  The final third  of the  book is guesswork, but  it  is intelligent guesswork,  and  has great  bearing  on  the  first two-thirds. It  offers  an intelligent surmise  about  a personality  conflict, which  the  major portion  of the  book, the  analysis of the  verifiable   facts, suggests. It   fills out,
in  ,an interesting though  not  indisputable way,  the  character of a  man  the way  a  good  biography  should.  Akrigg's  book  is a  fine example of how  facts can  be  made  interesting, and  how  details  add  enormously to  a work. The committee commend it highly.                                                                     o.s.




54








LETTER FROM HALIFAX



Donald Cameron





TE STATUE  OF JosEPH  HowR stands m the  gmnnds  of the
Legislature, staring determinedly at  the  head  office of the  Bank  of  Nova  Scotia.
A few blocks away,  in  an old stone  building  near  the docks,  are the offices of the Acadian  Recorder.  An  hour's drive  brings  one  to  Windsor, where  Haliburton House  is open  to  the  public  as one of Canada's few authentic literary shrines.
Canadian writing  in  English  began  here, nearly a century and  a half  ago. This tough  old city of trade and  warfare saw good  writers come  and  go when  the site of  Vancouver was  hardly known; Lord  Selkirk's  little  cluster  of  farms  on  the Red  River  was twenty  years old when  Halifax was the  centre  of an  astonishingly fertile  intellectual circle.  What about  our  own  day,  when  clusters  of writers  lurk in every Canadian university  town, when little presses in twenty  cities pour out chapbooks and  quarterlies of experimental writing  at  a bewildering rate?
No  little  magazines.  No  basement   publishers.  No  poet  of  any  consequence, unless one  cheats  by claiming a slice of John Newlove,  who  spent  last  winter  in Nova  Scotia. A flourishing branch of the Canadian Authors' Association,  but  no special  interest  in  writing at  any  of the  city's five degree-granting institutions. A depressing   scene.
Yet  everything seems  to  stand   ready,  waiting  to crystallize.  The CBC  has  an important  operation in   Halifax, with  an  endless  appetite especially  for  radio scripts.  Radio drama is currently having  a special  boom.  The Neptune Theatre, Canada's first  professional  repertory company, is now  an  established part  of the city's  life, and  it is crying for  new  plays. According  to Heinar Piller,  the  theatre's artistic  director, the  lack  of  new  plays is a "burning problem", one  which  can't

55

LETTER FROM HALIFAX



be  resolved   easily  because  the  prerequisites for   good  playwrights  have  been absent:

Most  Canadian playwrights are not familiar  enough  with  the  theatrical  medium. They  haven't   been subjected  to  theatre  ever  since  their  childhood,  they've  seen maybe five to ten  productions  in their  lives, perhaps  the usual  cliches of touring Broadway  productions.  They  haven't  had  the opportunity to observe and  explore and  experiment  in their own work, to find out  what is effective on a stage.

Nevertheless, Neptune has  produced a  number of  original plays.  Dr.  Arthur Murphy, a  Halifax surgeon  who  served  his  apprenticeship in  radio  drama, has written two  of them; Gavin  Douglas,  formerly  a Neptune actor,  wrote  the script for  The   Wooden World,  an  anthology  of  Nova  Scotian history,  and  is now  in London on  a  Canada Council  grant, turning himself  into  a  playwright. More recently  Henry  Whittier, a Dalhousie  English  professor,  has written two dramatic anthologies which  the  Neptune has  presented in  high  schools  all  over  the  prov­ ince,  and  he  hopes  to write  original  plays in  the  future.
Dr. Whittier aside, the universities are curiously  uninvolved in contemporary Canadian writing. Will R. Bird, a novelist absorbed by Maritime history,  lives in Halifax, but  he has been honoured in Alberta rather than Nova Scotia. The Dal­ housie  Review  sandwiches some  poetry  between   its  learned   articles,  but  prints  practically no  fiction.  The general  atmosphere suggests  a belief that  a  man  who is going  to write  will write  whatever the obstacles,  but  the  man  who really  needs encouragement and  stimulation probably  should  do something  else in  which  his interest   is self-generating.
Writers have  emerged  from  this austere  academic tradition, of course,  the  best
known  being  Hugh MacLennan. More  recently  Simon  Gray  followed  a  pattern similar  to  MacLennan's: after  graduation he left for Cambridge and  Vancouver before  coming  to rest as a lecturer  in English  at  the  University of London. Asked if  he  received  any  encouragement as an  undergraduate when  he  was  beginning to  write,  he  gave  the  answer  that  perhaps typifies  the  kind  of writer  one  would expect  to bud  in Halifax: "I never thought that  I particularly needed encourage­ ment,  of an  official sort anyway."
The city  itself  is fascinating, and   MacLennan has  written often  and   affec- tionately about it:
All the proportions of Halifax are strange. She sits there on her ironstone, generally in  the  wet,  with  all  her  faults  exposed.... The smell  of  tar, fish-meal,  bilge, ozone, salt  water,  spruce forests and  her  own slums are  rich  in her  nostrils. She

s6

LETTER FROM HALIFAX



is like an  old  trollop,  lying in wait for weary seamen, if that  is how you choose to regard  her. She is like an  old lady living in genteel poverty amid  the disorder of her own  past, if you think  of her more gently.... She possesses the same kind of beauty  Rembrandt discovered in the battered  faces of the old men and women he loved best to paint.'

Interestingly, Simon  Gray  also  remembers the  rich character and  atmosphere of the  city with  pleasure, even  down  to the pungent smells which  are  an integral part  of  the  Halifax experience:

I loved Halifax  in many  ways; I still do feel immensely nostalgic about it. I think it's one of the most beautiful  places I've been. I'm one of the few people who liked Barrington  Street  as it  was then, a very dilapidated,  very seedy street indeed,  but the odour of stale fish and  fog was one of the most romantic  I've  ever smelt, and I still hunger for it.

The  attitude that writing is a solitary  art  which  is generated only from  within is by no means  limited  to Halifax, however,  and  it accounts for the  most curious phenomenon of Nova  Scotian writing: in the chief city of Atlantic Canada, t..l-tere is no  literary  community at  all, and  the  most successful  and  prominent authors live in small  towns  far  away.




EN
his native  province,  he will probably refer you to one of Thomas Raddall's books. Probably the  topic  will be historical,  for in part  Raddall both  feeds and  is fed by the  passionate interest  of the  ordinary Nova  Scotian  in his own  colourful  history. (Will  Bird,  who  has  an  analogous though  much  less intense  relationship with  his readers,  gave  me  a  revealing fact:  his historical  novels  of  Yorkshiremen in  the Amherst area  have  about two-thirds of their  considerable sale  within  the  Mari­ times.)   I doubt if  there  can  be  another writer  in  Canada who  has so  intimate a  relationship with  his  public   as  Thomas Raddall, or  one  who  is so  nearly  a spokesman for  the  inarticulate attitudes of  a  community the  extent  and  nature of which  he knows  exactly.  Sailors  and  teachers,  businessmen  and  students, they all  read  Raddall; the  mayor  of Halifax gives copies of Raddall's fine  history  of the  city, Halifax, Warden of the  North, to his distinguished  visitors.
Raddall makes  his  home  in  Liverpool,  down  the  South  Shore  from  Halifax,
a  town  that  has  figured  prominently in  more  than  one  of  his novels.  Originally


57

LETTER  FROM HALIFAX



a Yankee trading  settlement, Liverpool now lives on its mills, and Raddall  moved there  after  he left  the sea originally to take  a  job as a mill accountant. In  his mid-sixties, he is a muscular sun-browned  man  with a dramatically  white ruff of hair  around  the  crown of his head.  One  might  mistake  him for a senior  naval officer off duty. He has known few writers. "Once or twice a wandering  American writer  drifted  along  the  coast,"  he  recalls, speaking  of  his  early   years,  "and stopped  in to see me because he'd  read one of my stories. But other  than  that  I had  no contact  with writers at all." He has no regrets about  living in a country town.  "The way  to learn  to write is to write -work it out  yourself. And  you can't  do that  in a crowd. A writer's business is to stay away from  any organized group."
Writing  in isolation has its disadvantages-for Raddall, "the  main  regret has been  the  lack of live theatre.  I've  always loved  that  when  I  could  get it. But other than  that  I've missed nothing." Books, movies and TV  are readily available in Liverpool;  informal contacts with other writers are enjoyable when they come along,  but  too much  of that  kind of thing  would  be a bore. "Authors  are  not meant to be gregarious," Raddall  argues, "I'm more interested in people generally than  people  who  write  about  them."  The  life  and  history  of his fellow  Nova Scotians  provide  his real  stimulation.  Remembering his first days  as a  writer, Raddall  remarks  that  "I found  that  right where I was, in this part  of the  Mari­ time Provinces,  I had  all the material  that  any writer  could wish for."
One  might  enumerate  endless contrasts  between  Raddall  and  Ernest  Buckler. Raddall, who  is  curiously ignored  by  academic   criticism,  is  beloved  in  Nova Scotia,  while Buckler, far less celebrated in his native  province, is widely agreed to  be  among  the  most important  of Canadian novelists. Raddall  specializes in history and  action,  Buckler in philosophy and  contemporary psychology. Buckler is dedicated  to fiction as art;  Raddall  is the  romancer  and  story-teller.  On  the afternoon  I visited him, Raddall  was going  golfing with  his wife, and  he gives an  impression  of settled  contentment; Buckler,  a bachelor,  in  uncertain  health, half-shy, half-rebel, accepts that  the wound is implied  in the bow. "It is the sick whale that  produces the ambergris,"  he insists, "it is the irritated  oyster that pro­ duces the pearl."
Yet in  discussing their styles of life, the two  Nova  Scotians  offer remarkably parallel  ideas.  For  Buckler too, isolation is a positive value:  the writer  must  be alone, cannot  be distracted, even though the cost of solitude is the most appalling loneliness. And country life "lets you know who you are. You have to be plugged into  the  arteries  of life as well as the veins."  Buckler  has travelled: he worked

LETTER FROM HALIFAX



in  New  York  when  he  was  a  Dalhousie  undergraduate, and  for  some  years  he lived  in  Toronto. But  he  finds  the  arteries  of  Bridgetown, Nova  Scotia,  richer than  most.

In  the  Nova  Scotia  country,  almost specifically in the  country  where  I live, you get  the  universals  more  than  you do  almost  anywhere  else. You  don't  have  to wander  all over the bloody world and explore every nook and  cranny in it to find out  how people behave. This  is the whole tenor of my present  book, Oxbells and Fireflies,  that  in  a small  community  like this even, you have  a representation of every kind of action,  of every kind of psychological mode. The  whole macrocosm is here in microcosm.

As for contact with other writers,

Writers  by and  large  are  the  dreariest  people  you  can  possibly know.  Because they're  just stuffed  with  words like dry bread  dressing up a Christmas  goose's ass. You subsist on  people who really live, who are not looking at what  they're  doing all the  time. You have  to observe people who act simply, and  who are  not intro­ spective in the least;  and  draw  your conclusions from them.

Books come  to  Buckler  through the  mobile  library; painting is "a blind  spot  of mine". Music  and  plays  are  available on  records: "You  can  get  almost  every­ body  in  better  form  than   when  they're performing on  the  stage.  You  miss  the magic  of the  curtain, though."
As one might  expect,  Buckler shares with  many  another Maritime writer  a real
gratitude to the  CBC,  especially  the  radio  network,  for  providing both stimula­ tion  and  outlet.  He  has written many  talks, stories and  plays for radio, and  listens regularly. "I  love  the  CBC," he  says, "I think  it's  the  thing  that  Canada has most  to  be  proud of.  It gets  kind  of  precious  sometimes,  and  they  get  this - thing,  about this,  well,  just  discovered  twelfth-century music,  for  the  unaccom­ panied  lute.  But  never  mind  that; when they're good they're goddam good,  aren't they?  and  they're almost  induplicable." (Arthur Murphy, as a dramatist, is even more forceful: "Without the  CBC,  I don't think  there'd be any significant Cana­ dian  theatre today.")
Acadia University, up  the  Annapolis Valley  at  Wolfville,  has  been  interested in  Buckler.  He  has  friends on  the  faculty   there,  and   Professor  Gregory   Cook, himself  a  poet,  recently  completed the  first thesis on  Buckler's  work.  Some  time ago Buckler  was persuaded to sit in on Acadia's creative  writing workshop, and  to his surprise  he enjoyed  it. "If you've been through the mill yourself, you can show them  all  kinds  of  short   cuts,"  he  admits.  "You  can  show  them  where  they're going  wrong, where  they  have  to  tighten  this  up.  Actually I had  a  fine  time."

59

LETTER FROM HALIFAX



He's  been  invited  to give the  course  himself,  but  he worries  that  it might  be pre­ tentious. On  the other  hand, "Real hard  cash  just for this.  Everybody thinks I'm crazy  to  turn  it down." Buckler  is no more  affluent  than  other writers, and  it is hard to see how anyone could lose if he took up the invitation. Next year, perhaps.
To  spend  a summer afternoon talking  with  Ernest  Buckler  is to focus many  of the  experiences  both  of Nova  Scotia  and  of his own  novels. He  lives in a serene white  farmhouse outside  Bridgetown, a  century-old house  filled  with  well-worn family  furniture. The  talk is leisurely  and  careful, words  are  weighed  before  they are  spoken -and  weighed,  as often  as not,  for  comic  effect.  Buckler's  criticism of  another  novelist -that  he  doesn't   take  enough  time  with  his  writing-is revealing; for on the lush floor of the Annapolis Valley,  shut  in by its two moun­ tains,  traditional rhythms  and  tested  values quietly  control the  pace. There is no hustle,  and  conversation turns  easily towards  love, destiny,  comedy. Buckler  has no doubt  paid  for  his choice of venue,  but  he has gained  from  it a rare  perspec­  tive, much  the way other  Nova Scotian  writers have  gained  perspective in history. Visions  of this quality are  not  easy to find in swinging  urban Canada, and  driv­  ing home  through the warm  evening  one is grateful that  Nova  Scotians  and  their  writers  are  saltily  individual. Fads  wither; empires  have  dashed and  fallen; the rocks  and   the  sea  endure. Nova  Scotians  know  in  their  bones  the  indifference of  history,  and  they  live intimately with  the  naked  conditions of life. Ironstone and  brine: history: the  farms  and  the  woods. In  Nova  Scotia, one feels himself to have  a  better  than  even  chance  of laying  hands on something permanent.

FOOTNOTE

•   "Portrait of a  City",  from  Cross Country  (Toronto, 1949), reprinted  in  Will R. Bird, ed., Atlantic Anthology (Toronto, 1959).  All other  quotations  are from tape­ recorded  interviews,  and  Iwant  to  express my  gratitude to  the  many  people  I spoke with for their  courtesy and  their  universal generosity with their  time.















6o




review articles



NOURISHING THE 	ADDICT

Clara Thomas


DOUGAL Me LEISH,   The Traitor  Game. Macmillan. $5.95. MARGARET BRIGGs,   Lost   Identity.  McClelland &   Stewart.  $5·95· NIGEL  FOXELL,   Carnival. Oberon Press.  $2.50
JOHN  CORNISH, Sherbourne Street, Clarke Irwin. $4-75·


"THERE  IS  NOTHING," said Toad, "absolutely nothing, like messing about  in boats". The  mystery-story bibber feels  exactly   the  same   about  the   books which  satisfy  and   nourish   his  addiction. For  addiction  it  is,  and   beside  and  be­ yond  both  reach  and  grasp  of the articles  which   explicate  the  genre's  characteris­ tics and  analyse  its  attractions, there  re­ main,  as  every  addict knows,  two  awful necessities:   there  must   be  more;  there  will  never  be  enough.
Certain  and   constant  components of
the appeal are  carry-overs from  childish simplicities-mixtures of  the  novel  and the  familiar, danger and  security,  the blackly  wicked  and  the  snowy  good.  The path   of  adventure and   pleasurable,  be­ cause  vicarious, concern  and   fear  is  the same   path,  whether  guided   by   Winnie  the  Pooh  or  by Lord  Peter  Wimsey. The goal and  the  satisfactions are the same­ through  darkness and   disorder  to  light and   the  righting of  the  rocking  balance  of  things.
The habitual "found-in" of the mystery
story expects  virtuoso  variations on the theme,  however,   and  quite  often   he  be-
 comes  a  demanding  connoisseur of  the runs   and   trills  of  the   production. The best writers in the genre have created characters who  are  dazzling   performers; they have also created believable worlds, memorable talk,  tones  and  moods  of dizzying variety-and always, good yarns.   Dougal   McLeish  may   well   join their  hierarchy.
The   Traitor  Game   is  Buchan   in  its
derivation and Canadian in its plot and setting.  Its suspense  accumulates to a wonderfully    unlikely   but   satisfying   cli­ max    featuring   a   fragile   and    heroic Governor-General   as   a   Super-hero,  a Canadian  St.  George,  and   a  villainous Premier  of  Ontario  as  the  Super-villain Dragon. The  characters  are  predictable in  their  types:  shaggy  Max,  the  everlast­ ing  boy  adventurer, sniffing  out  evil  to test his strength against  it; his adversary, Captain  Mittelhorn, who  is, in  fact,  an­ other   projection  of  the   Max  character, his  strengths  given   to  darkness,  not   to light;  John  Lane,  the  doomed  loser  who turns    winner    after    all.   So   far,    The Traitor Game  is all  old-formula, though competently  handled.

61

REVIEW ARTICLES



Its distinction lies in Mr. McLeish's command of  the  settings.  He  knows  ex­ actly  what  Thunder Bay looks like  from the   cockpit   of  a  small  aircraft  and   he communicates  his  knowing.   He   knows, and   he  shows,  how  strange  it  would  be to  see  the   Armouries   at  Port  Arthur in a   sudden   crisis,  handing  out   live  am­ munition,  or   to   crawl   on   hands    and knees  across  a  beaver   dam  and   almost prefer,   like  one   of  the  fugitives,   to  be captured  by   the   villains   than    "to   be bitten   by a  beaver."
I hope  that  Dougal  McLeish  will write
more  Canadian set mysteries. I wish that this  one  were  published   in  paper-back; it's   a  "good   read"  at   any   age  and   it would  be a fine choice for the indoctrina­ tion  of  High   School  students  to  the  de­ lights  of the  genre  at  about  the Grade X level.
Lost  Identity, by Margaret Briggs, be­ longs  to  the  psychological  division  of  the mystery   genre,   the  shelf  where  some  of the  works  of J. I. M.  Stewart  and  Nigel Balchin  are  prominent prizes. Set in con­ temporary  England, it  tells  the  story  of John Finneker who  has lost  his memory,  ostensibly   through  accident,  but  in  fact because  he cannot bear to remember and  so  to  face  his  war  and  post-war  guilt.
It  is a thoroughly well-constructed tale and   believable   within   its  chosen  frame, but  that  frame contains  much  that  seems curiously   dated.  Finneker, whether  lost or  found,  walks  among   the  stereotypes of "old school tie" literature: humane psychiatrist, understanding headmaster, scowling  villain,  sadistic  bully and,  above all,  the   fiancee   who  is  clever,  brave­ and   far   more   a   "good   chap"  than   a woman. When  the  book  ends and  Finne­ ker  has  navigated the  path  back  to  true  self  and   a   new   beginning   he  has   be-
 come  convincing enough, but  the  people around  him  and   the  England he  moves in  are  less credible than  we have  reason to  expect   in  this  kind  of  "adventure of the  mind."
Carnival, by Nigel Foxell,  has much  of the  mysterious in  it,  though it  does  not move  in  any  of  the  traditional  mystery­ story  paths.  In  it, we follow the conscious­ ness  of   its   narrator,   Walter   Phalts,   a young    academic   of    German    ancestry  from   an   English   Department  in   Plain City,   Western  Canada. Walter is  trying to establish  himself  and  some dependable sense  of   mature  identity  in  an   English Department in  Glommenheim, Germany
-I  think.  On  the  other hand, he could
be  suffering an  identity-crisis  simply through a switch from  the University of Saskatchewan to  York -or vice  versa. Awash   on   beakers   of  academic  sherry, one  needs only to be slightly  sensitized  to find  a  departmental  gathering anywhere in  the  world   taking   on  the  grotesquerie that the Glommenheim Carnival Ball assumes.
Walter narrates events  as  he  sees and
shares  them,  brooding, anxious  or  elated about their  significance  to him,  from  the early  evening of  the  Carnival Ball  when the  Head's son challenges him  to a duel, to   the   next   morning.  Throughout  the night  his mind  and  emotions are battered by a  number of encounters, chief  among them  his  recurrent  conversations with Hermann,  a   Mephistophelean,   self­ appointed   mentor.   Walter's    problems  seem   superficially    and   artificially    im­ posed;   his   dilemma   does   not   convince  and   his  self-exploration is often  tedious, sometimes   banal. But  Mr.  Foxell  writes well   of   the   strange,  surrealist,   dream­ distorted   atmosphere  of   the   Carnival Ball.   It is  well   worth   reading   on   to

REVIEW  ARTICLES



Walter's  decision    in   the   dawn    when, finally,  "the  mist   had   thinned  and   the sky was trying  to be blue"  and  Lulu,  the beautiful temptress-daughter of the Head was   forlornly  dancing  solo   "amid    the miniature  devastation of  the  ballroom." For  Sherbourne Street, John   Cornish dreamed  large   dreams,  of  a   novel   big with   life  and   energy   and   teeming   with characters who  are  as beguiling a gallery of  eccentrics as  have  ever  flourished   in our  fiction.  God's  plenty  indeed:  Ronald Napier,  an  old, forgotten Canadian  com­ poser,   living   with   memories  of   minor musical  successes in a crazy  broken-down mansion    on   Sherbourne   Street   in  To­ ronto; his aged,  dirty,  taciturn, frail  and stubborn   Scottish   housekeeper,  Emmy; lsobel,   Napier's   England-bred  daughter who  lives  down  the  street   in  a  trailer­ camp,    wife    of    a   hard-up  musician,  warmly   material,   both   to   her   speedily increasing family  and to several strangely­ assorted    male   admirers.   These   people
are  at  the  centre of  the  plot-the dreaming and  scheming of Napier's ram­ shackle   house   back   to  glory   as  a  con­ servatory   by  Isobel  and   her  group,   and the  resistance  offered  them  by  Napier.
But  this is skeletal,  for  these characters
and   their   lives  are  involved   with  many others.  Mr.  Cornish  spins  a  wide  web­ strange, sometimes  fantastic, often  funny,  finally  sad,  and  sometimes  his  novel  has not the spaciousness to contain it all easily. The  real   writer   does   live   here,   how­ ever.  Of  the  four  books  reviewed  Sher­  bourne Street  best demonstrates the crea­ tivity  that  is the  most  precious  "mystery" of  all:   its  characters, major and  minor, walk  off  its  pages,  persuading  us  for  a little  while  that, "once  upon  a time"  they did indeed live the lives that  Mr. Cornish imagined for  them.
 


Editing
Eighteenth-C:entu
Texts




edited   by
D. I. B. SMITH

This  is the  third   publication to come  from  the  Editorial Problems  Conference held  at the  University of Toronto
each  year. It includes  essays by
Theodore Besterman and Joyce  Hemlow on  editing Voltaire and  Fanny  Burney,  a paper  by G. E.  Bentley  on
the  editorial problems   raised
by Blake's illuminated printing, an  introduction to the  ledgers of William   Strachan by
0. M.  Brack,  a discussion  by W. J. Howard on  copyright between  1770  and  1800,
and  a paper  by Donald Greene on the  Yale  Edition of the works  of Samuel Johnson. This  volume  is an  invaluable
addition  to  eighteenth-century
scholarship.

$6.00

UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO PRESS

Toronto/Buffalo


WORDS THAT  DON'T
MAKE PICTURES


Julian Symons


ROBIN  SKELTON,  Selected  Poems, 1947-67.  McClelland &  Stewart,  $3-95·


RoBIN  SKELTON   is  a   pretty good  anthologist  and   editor,   a  very  in­ different  poet.  The   qualities  that  make him   a  good   editor    (of  selections  from the  Thirties and  Forties  poets in  Britain,  as  well   as  of  a   magazine)    are   a  no­ nonsense  attitude and  an  ability  to select and  organize  material. The  introduction to  his  Poetry  of the  Thirties, in  particu­ lar, shows a remarkable sympathy  for the tone  and  temperament of young  poets in a  time  when,   younger   still,  he  did  not share  their  concerns. He  writes  approv­ ingly  of the  "radical distrust  of anything worn   out,   evasive,   shoddy,   or  meretri­ cious"  that   marked  English  criticism  in the  period.   He  might  have  added  a  dis­ trust    of   breast-beating   poetic   egotism and  of rhetoric that  did not proceed from actual  observation of   objects  or  events. Unfortunately, these  characteristics show up   with   disastrous   clarity   in   his  own poems.
Here are  a  few  examples  for  the  Bad
Verse of Our Time  scrapbook:

I, this  ventriloquial  pillar in  the  wordy   desert

I have   made poems-good,  bad, indifferent,  mystical  obscene ...
And   what's ahead? Poems till  I drop, and   words,  words, Words.	It's my  trade.

Ghosts, stand   by this   poet   of  your   family.
 Such   huffing   and   puffing   about    the idea  of being a poet is joined to a striking lack  of care  for  what  the  poems  actually say, a  readiness  to  use any  old  meaning­ less bit  of rhetoric:

He   knocked  upon   the  door   of  all the  old  eternities

what  will  survive?	The  stars may   tell  in   time,  at least
will   sieve   away   the   worst
and   probe with  practised hand the  desolate remainder.

Confronted with  such  writing I think it is fair  to be uncomfortably literal.  Why should   the  stars,  rather than   the  moon or  Old   Moore,  tell  what   survives   (the subject  is Skelton's verse of course), and why  are   they  equipped  with   hands   for the  purpose? What are  those  old  eterni­ ties  upon   whose  door  Johnny  Question knocks,  and  if  eternities have  doors  why don't they  open  them  instead  of answer­  ing  his  knocking with  phrases  like  "To give  to  all  that   asked  would   ruin   all"?  It is  no  surprise   that  a  poet  so  careless with  phrases  takes for his images  the first cliches  that  come  to hand  so that  lips are red   as  blood,   eyes  green   as  grass,  the yellow  sun  turns  dull as gold  and  a cave is black  as your  hat.  William  Morris  said of Swinburne that  his  poems  used words which    didn't   make    pictures,   and    the phrase    is   devastatingly  true   of   Robin  Skelton. Swinburne survives for us, rather

REVIEW ARTICLES



precariously, because  of his interest  in metrics  and  immense skill in  using  tech­ nical   devices,   and   because   particularly in  Poems  and   Ballads  the  emphasis   on blood  and  cruelty  genuinely  expresses his deepest  feelings. The things that  he could not  say openly  in  Victorian  society force their  way  through the  permanent waves of  his  verse  and   give  a  strange   sort  of reality    to    those    implacable   beautiful tyrants    holding   death  in   their   hands.  Skelton's   work,  however,  is  not  rhythm­ ically  or  metrically exciting, although at times   he  shows  skill   in  organizing  the structure  of poems,  and  he  seems less to be expressing  deep  personal feelings than saying  the   sort   of  things   which   he  be­ lieves  poets  really  ought   to  feel.  Three­ quarters of this selection  offers us Skelton the    Poet,    a    star-crossed    ventriloquist desperately invoking the   Muse,  and  eventually  assaulting   her   in   "A   First Ballad  of  the  Muse":

I put   your   word   into   my  mouth
And   spell   your   sentence bare.
A  bright  bone   button  winks  at  you up   from   the   bedroom  floor.
The creased cloth  grins.	The hot  sheets
shifts.
We  meet   in  one  wide   bed.
The blowfly  crawls   the  knocking wall
and  the   great  word   is  said.

But  he  is  mistaken.  Great   words  are not  being  said,  only  loud  ones.
The   poems  in  the  last  section  of  the
book,  most  of  them   written in  Canada, are more interesting chiefly because the ventriloquial pillar  is less in evidence  and the  rhetoric is used to some  purpose.  "At Walden  Pond",  the   best   poem   in   the book,   compares  skilfully   and   with   re­ straint the  contrast  between  generations as  the  poet  takes  his  children  out  on  to the  frozen  pond:
 They seem  so young to risk the  ice, though it's  more  like to
hold
their  weight  than my bear's tread.   They can  afford
the  gestures I can't make,  run  far,  and slide:
slowly we near  the  shore  and the  farther wood.

The  scene is blended  with  recollections of  the  past,  childhood and  school,  other boys and   girls  running on  the  ice  long ago,  "a herd/stampeding through the failing   light,   some  dead,jsome  twisted, from  a war they didn't start/and couldn't end."  The  poem itself closes with success­ ful  sobriety  as father and  children care­ fully cross the  darkening pond.  There are other   poems   in  this   part  of  the   book, "The  Come-Back"  which   describes   the search  for  a basement room  lived in dur­ ing  youth,  a  revived   memory   of  seeing Tod  Slaughter play  The  Demon   Barber,  and  a straightforward account of a soldier rehabilitated   at    Esquimault   on   Van­ couver   Island   after   spending  years  as  a prisoner  of  the  Japanese in  a  camp  near  Nagasaki,   which   have   a   good  deal   of dramatic impact on  their  own  level.
A  feeling   for   drama  is,  indeed,   the quality   that   comes  through most  clearly and  genuinely  from  this  collection.  "Re­ membering Esquimault" shows the bones of what  might  be a good short  radio play, and  this is true  of some other  pieces  like "The Reliquary" which describes  the  ap­  proach   to  mutual  understanding of  the sons of English  and  German artillerymen both  of whom  fought at  Ypres.  I don't see any sign  here that  Robin  Skelton  wi!I ever  be  more  than  an  energetic versifier, but   a   man   with   so  strong   a  dramatic sense might  well become a very successful writer  for  radio  or  television.


NEW INTEREST IN REALITY


W.F.Hall



HUGH  GARNER, Cabbagetown. Ryerson  Press,  $7·95· Storm   Below.  Ryerson  Press,
$2.50.  Silence  on the Shore. Ryerson  Press. $2.95.


THE  sURFACE   LAYER of  Gar­ ner's  fiction  has  been  defined  more  than  once.   It is,  as  Robert  Fulford   puts  it, "how    modern   Canadian  society   has looked   to   the   people   who  live  on  the bottom   and   the  edge  of  it."  This   is  a world  of  oppressed   workers  and  oppres­  sive  bosses, of  lonely  frustrated  drifting misfits;  a  drab   world,   by  and  large,  in which  sometimes  the  sociological  interest of  both  writer   and  reader  seems to out­ weigh  that   of  any  other   kind.  In  these terms  Mr.  Garner is a  part  of  a  recog­ nizable   literary    tradition:  that   of   the naturalistic novel.  And  as one  reads  one is frequently reminded of other novelists; of Zola  or  of Frank   Norris  in Silence  on the  Shore; of Kipling and  of  London in Storm Below;   of  Dreiser   and  James  T. Farrell and,  in  certain  episodes  in  Cab­ bagetown, of  the  James Joyce  of  Dub­ liners.  This   is  not  to  suggest  that   Mr.  Garner  is   derivative. It  suggests  some­ thing  more  interesting than  that.
The  major focus  of  his  novels  is  the
society   of  the   urban  lower-middle and working  classes, as it  is the  focus  in  the work  of  the  other   novelists  I have  men­ tioned.   Thus   what   one  notes  is  not  so much  a repetition from  novelist to novel­ ist of material and  treatment of  material, but a re-examination by a series of novel­ ists of an experience of a section of society in   which    various   stages   have   become ritualized,   predictable.   The   conclusion

66
 one  draws   then   is  not  that   Mr.  Garner is  indebted  necessarily   to  Zola   for   the basic  idea  of  Silence   on  the  Shore  and for  much  of  its  development, but  rather that  such  a situation, a common  one in a large  city, will produce certain inevitable and   predictable  patterns  and   problems, no matter what  the  city or  where  it may be:  Garner's Toronto, Dreiser's Chicago or New York, Zola's  Paris. The further conclusion  one  would   draw   then   would be  that   to  consider  Mr.  Garner too  ex­ clusively in  terms  of his "Canadian-ness" is to  do  him  as  much  of  an  injustice as to   consider   him   only   in   terms   of   his "naturalism". The   reader    who   knows Cabbagetown (then  and  now)  will enjoy the   added   pleasure  of  recognition, pos­ sibly at  times  the peculiar satisfaction, in Silence   on  the  Shore, of  checking  Mr.  Garner's urban  geography. Mr.  Garner's success  does  not,  however,   reside  in  his nationality  any more  than  it  does  in  his experiences   recorded,   misleadingly,  on the  dust   jacket  of  Cabbagetown. It  lies in  his  talent and   an  unexpected quality of his  imagination.
One does  not  expect  of  Mr.  Garner's
style  in  his  novels,  any  more  than in  his short stories, that it should be rich with imagery, that  it should  dazzle with its brilliance of either phrase  or insight,  that it  should   tease  us  out   of  thought  with its  complexity. At  its  worst  the  style  is flat  and  dull  and  much  given  to  cliche:

REVIEW ARTICLES



tears  of self pity  "roll  down  the sides" of noses;  a  woman  feels  "doomed  to  her aloneness"; the  captain of  the  Riverford thinks:  "It  was   remarkable  how   the news got  around the  ship". At  its best it produces an   impression  of  effort,   a  re­ cognizable  effort  to produce, as a charac­ ter  in  Cabbagetown remarks, an  art  that  is "the  delineation of things", by an artist  who is attempting to "transcribe his senses
. . . with  the greatest degree  of accuracy".
And  this effort  results, as in Dreiser,  in a fictional   world   in   which   the   slow   ac­ cumulation  of  minute accurate  physical detail  is a  necessary  part  of  total  under­ standing. This  kind  of  effort  (which  calls for    a   corresponding   effort    from    the reader) I find  most  clear  and   most  re­ warding  in   Silence   on   the   Shore,  in which  Mr.  Gamer  shows,  with  consider­  able  unobtrusive  skill in  the  handling of a   complex  plot,   the   interrelationships among a  number  of  people  (some  immi­  grant,    some    native    Canadian)	in    a shabby   boarding house   (soon  to  be sold for   property  development)  in  Northern Toronto. The  effort   is  wasted,  it  seems to  me,  in  Storm Below.  Here  one  clam­ bers over  one  detailed   description  of the ship   to  another  and   finds,  in   the  little space  remaining, crew  members  explain­ ing to each  other the  meanings of certain  nautical terms   (as  in  a  bad  play  not  so much  for their  benefit as for ours)  or else acting   in   predictable and   grossly  melo­ dramatic  terms.    Mr.   Garner  here   at­  tempts  symbolic  "significance"; the  body of  a  young  sailor,   who  has  died  in  an accidental  fall,  is  preserved  on  the  last leg  of  the  return  to  port   in  the  ship's frozen  food  locker.  Projected in  the ima­ gination of  a  Katherine Anne  Porter  or a  Budin   such  "significance" might  con­ vince.  Projected in  Mr.  Garner's,  which
 does  not  appear to  move  at  all  in  this way,  it  does  not; it  does  not  even  pro­ duce  the  grotesque comedy   that  such  a situation might well create. Disorder and confusion  most  certainly  spread   through the  ship  but  they  have  little  to  do  with disturbing  emanations   from    the    food locker.   As   one   of    Monsarrat's  officer types  might   remark:   "just   a  damn bad ship".
This   novel   does   illustrate  a   curious fact    about    Mr.    Garner's  talent    that, given some of  his qualities, is at  first surprising.  To  examine the  fact  is to discover  what  is to me the  most fascinat­ ing  layer of  his talent. It is very clear  in Storm  Below  that  in the  description of a man's  world,  in  the  approach to  a  sub­ ject  from  what one  might call  a  sociol­ ogical  stance,   Mr.  Garner is  frequently as   wooden,   dull   and   fictionally  unin­  volved as he is when  attempting symbolic projection. He  is rarely  so, the  effort  he demands is  more  worthwhile, when  he is exploring the relationships between  adult  men  and  women  and  the  inner world  of a  woman.  It is in  fact  in  the  projection of  a  world  as  seen  by  women   (in  most of   Silence on the Shore and parts of Cabbagetown)   that   Mr.   Garner  is,  in my opinion,  at  his very  best.  It is in  the scenes  that  involve  them -such women as Mabel  Tilling and  Myrla  Patson  in Cabbagetown or Aileen,  Sophia or Grace Hill  in  Silence   on  the   Shore   that   Mr. Garner's  talent,  which   seems  otherwise so predictable, is transformed. The effort
-of the  style,  of  movement-dissolves
into  a  clear  unsentimental lucidity. The life Mr. Garner is concerned with at such times is rarely  pretty, is often  downright ugly.  These   women   are   all  in  one  way or another outcast and  yet what  is shown about  them  is central to  the  understand-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ing  of  the  novels  in  which  they  appear. The treatment of Myrla's  career,  from employer's mistress   to  bellhop's   callgirl, is   not   only   more   successfully   realized but it makes, without any explicit  com­ ment,   a  more  valuable statement about Mr.  Garner's society than  does the rather predictable and, on  the  whole,  self­ righteous career  of Ken  Tilling.  Here,  as in  his short  stories,  Mr.  Garner is much more   concerned  with   the  victims   than with   the   victors,   but   his   anger    (that makes    the    tone    of   "One-Two-Three Little Indians" so bitter)  no  longer  dis­ torts   his  concern. The   projection of  his world  from  the  woman's  point  of  view, of a world  principally conceived  in  their terms, results, when he has a complete imaginative grasp  of  his situations, in  a point    of   view   which   is  not,   as  Ken Tilling  remarks, that   of  "socialism,  .. . communism ... Christian  radicalism .. . Social   Credit ... Technocracy" but  that "of  an interested sceptic."
At  his  best -a  best  I  find  sustained most    successfully    in    Silence    on   the
 Shore- Mr.     Garner   is   on    nobody's "side".  He   is  not   disgusted   by  Grace Hill's   prurience; he  does  not  sentimen­ talize  Sophia's unhappy  existence  in  the hospital,  any   more   than   he   does   her efforts  to cope  with  her  frustrated sexual life.  It is  true,   as  Michael  Hornyansky has put  it, that  Mr. Garner is "a  sensible
blunt   man   who  knows  what   real  life is
and   he  gives  it to  us  straight." But  he is  much   more  than   merely  sensible  and blunt, and  his reality  extends beyond  the detailed  physical   surface  that   ev.eryone can   touch.  It extends  into   an   area   in which   motive,   desire,  lust,  personal  in­ tegrity,   sense   of   purpose  and   even   of identity are  all  tangled and  obscured  be­ cause  of  the   need  to  engage   with   that  "real life"  that  is the surface. What sur­  prises  and  intrigues  me  in  two,  at  least, of  Mr.   Garner's   novels  is  the   delicacy and   sureness,   the   unsentimental  direct­ ness   with    which   he   demonstrates  his ability   to   project   a   reality   clearly   not that  of his own  self, a reality  that  is new and  interesting.




THE CONQUEST OF MEDUSA

D. G. Jones

ALVIN H.  LEE, James Reaney.  Burns and  MacEachern Limited. $5.25.


Is REANEY A   SMART   PRESTI­ digitator or  a real  magician?  Alvin  Lee's book  on  James  Reaney  would  appear to suggest  that  he is both, even perhaps that  they  are  the  same  thing.
The book  gives  a  running explication of The   Red  Heart,  A Suit  of Nettles,  A Message   to   Winnipeg, The    Dance  of Death  in  London,  Ontario, Twelve   Let-

68
 ters to a Small Town and  the various dramatic  works.   It  has   the   immediate value of placing before us the whole of Reaney's achievement and  of  calling  at­ tention  to   the   need   for   some   kind   of collected   edition  of  his  work,  which   is scattered,  out   of   print    or   simply   not available except  from  the author.
Lee's   method  has  the  further  advan-

REVIEW ARTICLES



tage  of sticking  close to  the  text,  provid­ ing   immediately  practical   information, and   revealing   the   organic  development of  what   the  author  calls  "Reaneyland." It has the  inherent  disadvantage of mak­  ing a somewhat pedestrian progress. Only at  the  end  of  the  detailed discussion  can the  reader   lift  his  eye from   the  trail  to take  in  the  larger  view.  Then, the  world that   spins  out  from  the  dark  farmhouse in rural Ontario is revealed  as a particu­ lar  province  in  the  Frydgean kingdom  of Western  culture, "This culture based  on Classical  and  Christian mythologies ... intermittently breaking through in the achievements  of  its  visionary   artists,   to the  timeless,  ideal   pattern of  itself."
Does  it  break  through, or  is it  merely
applied? More  important, does Mr.  Lee's exposition  of the  timeless  patterns in Reaney's  work   reveal   the   roots   of  its vitality  or its final  significance?
In   the   case  of  A  Suit   of  Nettles, I would   answer   no  to   both   questions.   I am  still  bothered by  the  strangely hobbled  or goosegaited  rhythms. More seriously,  the  grab-bag of  Canadian  his­ tory  continues to  strike  me  as  arbitrary, obscure  and  superficial. I'm  supposed   to see  "Defense de  Furner"  as  emblematic of   Laurier's  combined   politesse   and hauteur. I  don't. A  blonde  corpse  lying, against  all  history,  at  Port  Moody,  B.C., is supposed   to evoke  the  Vikings'  failure  to  penetrate a  fell  continent. It doesn't. I'm  grateful to  Mr.  Lee  for  his explana­ tion  of the allusions  to Spenser's eclogue, Frazer's  Golden  Bough, Frye's   seasonal quaternity, and  the  Christian vision  of a New Jerusalem. Yet  I am  impressed  only by an  increasing sense of absurdity as all this  is piled  on  the  back  of  a  few  geese. And  it's  not  just the geese, gabbling their cliches,  who  sound  absurd, but  the  critic
 as  well  as  he  explains   the   presumably profound   spiritual drama  that   controls the   overall   development  of  the   poem. "The poem  ends,"   says  Mr.   Lee,  "with a   vision   of   the   imagination   breaking through  the   world  of   nature  until, through  the   agency   of  divine   love,  the chaos  of water   begins  to  fuse  with  fire." Yet this awesome epiphany depends  upon two   italicized   lines   apparently  relating to  Peter  and  Anne  as they  retire  for  the night  following   their  Christmas dinner:

Drowning  in  the  waterflames of Love
They lay in  the  straw  with  it  snowing  in the  loft  window.

Frankly,   I  haven't felt   the   agency   of divine  love  and   I  find  it  absurd   to  rest the  whole  Christian vision  of  Grace  on a few  italics.  The   timeless,  ideal  pattern that  is supposed  to break  through at  this point,  strikes me as just as much  a cliche as  any  other  idea  in  the  anserine  reper­ toire.  It is  not  reborn   in  the  work,  but applied.
The   controlling structural  element   in
Reaney's   work  is  the  antithetical  vision of a dark  world  of  nature and  death and a  bright  world   that   is  nature  redeemed by  the  imagination  and   the  word.   Mr. Lee's   exposition   of   this   vision   clarifies the  poems  and,  more  especially  perhaps, the  plays,  where  the  vision  becomes  dy­ namic   and   where   it   affects   the   whole conception of  the  play. It is not,  as  Mr.  Lee  warns,  to  be  read   as  a  comedy  of manners.   Yet,  in  reaction to  the  critics who    emphasized    the    local    colour    in Reaney's  writing, and  in  the  interests  of "universality,"  Mr.   Lee  exaggerates  the importance  of   the   academically  more prestigious  archetypal   patterns. He   im­ plies, mistakenly  I  believe,  that  the  vital­ ity  and  significance of  Reaney's work  IS

6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



revealed   when   such  timeless,  ideal   pat­ terns  are  revealed. ln fact,  it  may  only reveal   the  prestidigitator's  manipulation of the  Complete  Magician's Set of West­ ern   Archetypes.  The   real  magic  occurs when  such  archetypal patterns or literary conventions reveal, not themselves, but Reaney's world.
Reaney's  orthodox  Christian   symbol­ ism doesn't interest  me one little  bit. His fascination with  the  unorthodox children of   W uthering   Heights   does.  Why   this fascination on  the  part  of  writers  going through  the   University   of  Toronto  for the   nineteenth-century   world of  the Brontes,   Lewis  Carroll,  H.  Rider  Hag­ gard?  What  does   it   reveal   about   the imaginative  world   of  the  Upper   Cana­ dian?  Where   exactly   is  Heathcliff    and the  mature Catherine in  Reaney's  work? These   are   questions  Mr.   Lee  provokes but   does  not  answer.
Generally,  the   conventions   of   litera­ ture  and  myth  serve  Reaney  as  Athena's shield   served   Perseus   in   his   encounter with   Medusa. It  is  Medusa,   the   local element,  and   Reaney's   conquest  of  it, that  is, his articulation of  it, that  interests  me and  deserves  more emphasis.  It  is not the  shield,  but  the  two farmwomen tight on  elderberry wine  and  scandal,  dancing with   their   cutout  paper  men;   it  is  the two  black  brothers  who seduce  the  lady­ evangelists  crusading on  behalf  of  pure copulation  and  who  turn  the  ladies  into machines; these  remain  alive, ambiguous and  uproariously funny.  I  want  to  know more  about   the   fascination  and   horror of  the  old  Ontario  farmhouse, with  its combination of boredom  and violence, puritanism and sex,  perversion and vitality.
It is not  the  theme  of making  a dumb
 

STUDIES IN CANADIAN LITERATURE

General Editors: HUGO  McPHERSON GARY GEDDES

THE COPP ClARK  PUBLISHING CO.
517  Wellington Street West
Toronto  2B, Ontario

nature   articulate   but   the   actual   doing	 	

REVIEW ARTICLES



so that  is significant. It is Reaney's deci­ sion  to  accept   his  native  experience, his willingness,  up  to a point, to be possessed by it  and  allow  it  to  transform the  con­ ventions  he  inherits.   It is  the  voice  of the  Thames  river,  of Pierre  Falcon  come back   from   the   graveyard  of  forgotten verse,    of    Isabella   Valancy   Crawford, Raymond  Knister and  Duncan Campbell Scott  articulating a  native   tradition. It is  the   corduroy  road   beyond   Stratford playing    scales   through   the    layers   of asphalt and  mud.  It is not  the  revelation of  the  timeless,  ideal  pattern that  is sig-
 nificant, but the revelation of a buried, inarticulate world that,  ideal or awful, provides  the  pattern of  so many  of  our lives in time.  Like  the magician Schmen­ drick   in  Peter   Beagle's  The   Last  Uni­ corn,  Reaney   is often  absurd,  but  when the  power  comes  to  him  now  and  again, he   performs  the   real,  the    essential miracle.
Mr.  Lee  exposes  one  side  of Reaney's work  very  thoroughly. More   remains  to be done  to explore  that  side Mr.  Lee only touches  in  passing.



ONE TOUCH  OF NATURE

Fred Cogswell


JOE  ROSENBLATT,  Winter of the   Luna   Moth. House of  Anansi. $2.50. AL PURDY, Poems   for all the  Annettes. House  of Anansi. $2.50.


THE   FIRST FOUR PARTS of Winter  of  the   Luna   Moth  demonstrate the   truth  of  the   adage, "one   touch   of nature makes  the  whole  world  kin."  The similarity  between fish, birds, bats, pigs, insects,  etc.,  and   human beings  with  re­ spect  to  alimentation,  reproduction, growth, and   death   is   used   to   transfer human values  and attributes to the world of   our   finned,   furred,  feathered,  and scaled   partners   in  life   on   this   planet.  Such   a   transfer   possesses  two   poetical advantages.  It  enables   the   poet  to  sup­ port  his belief  in  the  one-ness  of all  life, however   ugly  or  beautiful; and   it  pro­ vides  him  with  a  fresh   vocabulary and an  original  set  of  irr;J.ages  with  which  to adorn   his  work.
The poet's   world   is  the  familiar  one
of the  disillusioned idealist-a world  in
 which  beauty  and  nobility  are  threatened or  ruined  by the  greed  of  predators, but the  expression  is  anything but  familiar; at  its most  extreme  form  it  is  Browning­ esque  grotesque:

Molecules miracle midas to  glands; hands antelope. verb   errogemusics. Eros  is termite cones  lamp  eeled­ coulomb senses:    lovers weightless. Death  is  weepers in  vulvachurches.

At its best, it is fine-textured verse that moves  with  effortless  ease:

On   a  Christmas tree,  they  hang,
hang  like  bat   men   with   TV  antennaed
hands.
Rooster feet   rotate the  Mayan bat  gods
of sleepers  with  seeing  eye ears.
Then, slowly,   the   mausoleum  skin   flaps
back
to  apron the  small   bashful faces
with   membranes of  darkness.

7I

REVIEW ARTICLES



Part   Five,  "A   Hall   of  Mirrors" is  a longish   poem  which   begins  with  a  pro­ tagonist  dancing in a hall of mirrors  (the  silicate   kings)    and   which   goes   on   to speculate on  the  nature of  both  dancer  and  dance as  the  hall  becomes  the  uni­ verse, the  dancer a  puppet, and  the  mir­ rors  puppet-masters. This  is  Joe Rosen­ blatt's most ambitious poem, and a credit­ able  one  at  that. But,  to  me, it  does  not succeed  so  well  as  "The  Bee  Hive   (An elegy  to  Che   Guevera) ".  As  one  reads this  minor  masterpiece,  one  realizes  that  all  the  cleverness   and   the  amalgam  of fish, moth,   bat,  pig,  etc.,  with  human in the   work   which   had   gone   before   had been  apprentice  work,  leading  up  to this apparently  effortless  fusion  in  which  an event   in  contemporary  history  takes  its place  in  the  perspective of the twin  hives of  religious  symbol  and  human   society.
Winter of the  Lunar  Moth, while sometimes    jarring   with   too  heavy   rhy­ thyms,  too  obvious   alliteration,  and  too Joycean attempts  at  punning,  is  all  the same  an  original, ambitious, and  impres­  sive  book  of  poems,  and   a  reviewer   is quite   safe  in  saying  that  Joe  Rosenblatt has in  this work  found himself  as a poet. Whether  he   keeps   and   improves   upon what   he  has  found  here,  time  only  will tell.
Al Purdy's reissue of Poems  for all the Annettes is not  really a reissue. It is a selection and revision made from those volumes   published  up  to  and  including the  original Poems   for all  the  Annettes. It contains   all  the  earlier   poems  which Purdy    thinks   will   support    his   current image  as  a  poet;   in  other  words,  it  is a Selected   Earlier  Poems.
Purdy's ability  as a poet  has depended upon   two   principal  factors.   These   are,


72
 firstly,  his  ability   to  stamp  upon   every thing   he  has  written  the  impact of  an oral  personality that  is alive, engaging, apparently frank, and  fresh and initially exciting   in  its  moral   and   linguistic  ap­ proach  to  experience.  Less  immediately observable but   perhaps  more  important for  his  poetic  reputation  in  the  long  run  is  Purdy's   second   poetic  talent. This   is the  genuine and  original  "intellectuality" that   his  poems  display.  By "intellectual­ ity"  I mean  his "soul-hydroptic" curiosity and  his  imaginative power  to  fuse seem­ ingly  unfusable elements.  This  quality is rarely  found   in  other   than   the  greatest poets.
It seems  to  me,  however,  that  Purdy's
poetic    development   has   been   uneven. That is  to  say,  there   was  a  time  when the  two qualities I have  mentioned came and  went  in  flashes  but  were  never satis­ factorily   present     throughout  a   single poem.  Now  the  Purdean  monologue per­  sists  brilliantly   throughout  nearly   every poem   Purdy   writes   or   revises,  but   the corresponding  development of  "intellec­ tuality"   has   not    kept   pace   with    the development  of  style  and   voice.
I  can  easily  mention poems  from  this
book:  "After the  Rats" with  its exquisite irony; "The  Death of  Animals", which carries the irony forward to metaphysical speculation; or at least ten other  poems, which  as I re-read them  now almost persuade me  that  my previous character­ ization    of   Purdy's   development  is  too harsh.   But  it  is  enough  to  say  that   the Purdy   of   this   book   is  as  good   as  the Purdy  of The  Cariboo  Horses and  better  than  the  Purdy of North  of Summer and  better still  than the  Purdy  of Wild  Grape Wine.





IN  THE OLD FOLKS' HOME

DARYL HINE,   Minutes. Atheneum.  $1.95.

I CANNOT  READ Daryl Hine's poetry without  saying   Yes   and   No   simultan­ eously.
In his  fifth  book  of  verse,  his voice  is more  his  own,  heard   more  directly  here than   it   was  in   his   previous   collection, The Wooden Horse,  where  he  wore  the masks  of  Sir   Walter  Raleigh  and   Don Juan,  where   he  wrote   about  Patroclus putting on  Achilles'   armour  and   about one of Bluebeard's wives. But in Minutes, when  not  writing in  his own first  person, he  still  takes  on  an  already-created  per­ sona,  such   as  the  mythical  Daphnis or Tolstoy's  Natasha. There is even  a poem containing the  memorable  line,  "I nego­ tiate  the  steps  of  paradise". But  the  line would   be  even  more  memorable-if  it weren't uttered  by a  trout.
I  don't question Hine's craftsmanship, particularly his mastery  of iambic  penta­ meter,  both  blank  and  rhymed  verse. His poem   "Tristan" in  The  Wooden Horse is,  I believe,  one  of  the  most  beautiful poems  ever  written  in   the  English   lan­  guage.
There  is  no   poem   of  the   stature  of
"Tristan" in  Minutes. There are  a  few poems,  however,  worth   quoting, such  as this  sonnet:
Movement alone gives meaning to the view According to which obnoxious planets tum Round an  incandescent axis.     Is  it  you
Or  me for  whom   the  other must  rotate and
bum?
 Earth and   sun,  we  used  to  be  the  centre
Each  of his own  universe, a pivot
Nothing could  make  wobble.   Disorder could  not  enter
Our too  formal gardens, moribund and private.

But  experience flat  theory disproved. Now we live in a reciprocal emotion, Our  harmony an   interrupted   silence,
Our  pattern  not   a  treadmill  but   a  dance,
Our  being  that   eternal  revolution
By  which   the  sun  and   other stars   are
moved.

But even this example, "A Conceit", illustrates   something   that    bothers    me about  Hine's poetic  idiom-and  it's  the same thing  that  bothered me in his previ­ ous collection.
It's   as  if  every  stanza   was  composed with  quill on parchment, perhaps to be displayed  behind  museum  glass. Hine is definitely  not  a  coffee  house  poet-and
I am not saying he should be. But he has considerably and  purposely  limited  his audience,  excluding  from   it   especially the young,  by writing  compositions I can best  imagine   being  recited   to  the  tinkle of tea  cups in someone's  Victorian draw­ ing  room.
Actually  made  to be antique, most of Hine's poems cannot be read without blowing   the   dust   off  them   first.   Take "Lady Sara  Bunbury Sacrificing to the Graces, by Reynolds". Even  though the poem  itself  is a  barbed   commentary on an   artificial   scene,  why   does  Hine  de­ velop   such   a   subject, without   making even  an  implicit reference   to  himself  or his audience or to the twentieth century? The  poem  is as much  a  work  of artifice  as the  painting it  describes.
Hine   has  probably  been  reminded  so
many   times  of  his  preference  for   non­ contemporariety and  of  his love  of  arti­ fice  that  he  even  sat  down   to  write   an "Apology". At least  (thank the Graces?)

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



he   is   able   to   mock   himself,   but   not happily:

Many mouth obscenities in  hope
That  thereby the   parts of  speech   will mate.
The muse  washed   out  this  poet's mouth with  soap;
Now  when  I speak  out  of my frothy lips
Portentous  bubbles float,   and   in  my wake,
Like  obiter  dicta  in  the  comic  strips. The air  is burdened with  them; as they
break
They glitter, worlds  within  words  and without  weight,
The  nightingale's mechanical refrain.

In   "Dans  le  Marais"  these  revealing lines appear:

I have  sat  in  a  darkened room, My  interest  else-and-every-where.
An  adolescent in  an  Old  Folks'  Home
Is  not  more  ill at ease  than I am  here

Hine,  in  making  this  choice  of  compari­ son, may see himself  as "an  adolescent  in an   Old   Folks'   Home",   surrounded  by countless   reproductions  of   "Lady  Bun­ bury  Sacrificing to  the  Graces" by Rey­ nolds.  I find  such  a  situation not  funny,  however,  but  sad.
Yet  there  are  some  hopeful  signs  that Hine, who is only 34 years old, is secretly planning to  break  loose -that  he  really wants   to   break   loose-from   his   self­ confinement in  the  Old  Folks'  Home.   I would   like  to  see  more   poems  like  his boldly  confessional   "A  Visit",  his  excel­ lent  "Untitled" which  is  the  only  thing close  to  a  raw,  spontaneous  prose  poem in   all   of  Minutes,  his   mixture  of  the sardonic, sacred,  and sensual in "Le  Ren­  dezvous   de   Gourmets",  and   his   short poem   "The   Survivors"  which   I  quote  here  in  its  entirety because  it is the  only poem  in Minutes  that  is without question wholly  contemporary in  subject, idiom, and  tone:

74
 Nowadays  the   mess  is  everywhere
And   getting worse.     Earth after all
Is   a   battlefield.   Through  the   static
We  used  to  call  the  music  of  the
spheres

Someone, a  survivor, sends  this message:
"When it  happened I was  reading Homer. Sing-will  nobody sing?-the  wrath, Rats and   tanks   and   radioactive rain."
That was  before   rationing was  enforced
On  words,  of course.    Particles went first,
Then  substantives.  Now  only  verbs abide
The law,  and   the  odd  anarchistic scrawl
How  above the  crumbling horizon
Brightly shine   our   neighbours, Venus, Mars.

Perhaps  some   day   Daryl   Hine  will escape   the   Old   Folks'   Home;  perhaps he'll  let "Disorder" enter  the  "too  formal gardens" of  his  poetry.  I hope  his  work will not continue to belong primarily to yesterday.
MICK BURRS


NO  LONGER CANADIAN

Canadian Short  Stories,  (Second Series),  se­ lected  by  Robert  Weaver, Oxford   Univer­ sity  Press,  1968.  $6.50 cloth,  $2.95  paper.

THIS   SECOND SERIES of   short   stories is  devoted    to  Canadian  writers   of  the Igso's and   Ig6o's.   Robert  Weaver   feels that  the  first series handled the historical growth    of   the   short   story   in   English Canada, and   obviously   selects  what   he feels are  main  trends  within  the  past  two decades.  His  concept is a good  one,  and the  book  can  be  recommended highly  to anyone  who  recognizes  that   the  book  in no  way  pretends to  give  a  study  of  the development of the short story in Canada.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In  fact,  what  the  book  rather  empha­ tically   proves   is  that   Canadian   writers cannot be  labelled  "Canadian". Instead, what   is  most   noticeable  about   this  col­ lection  is  the  contemporaneity of  recent writers   in   Canada.  No   longer   do   the stories  concern themselves  with  concepts  within  the  Canadian myth,  stories  which stress  the   dramatic  changes in  climate,  the ice and  snow,  the  prairies  during the depression, or other  obvious  underlinings of the landscape and  influence  of the en­ vironment.  The   recent   Canadian  writer  is writing in  a world  wide  contemporary vein,   and   the   stories   are   psychological in  orientation and  development.
There is, too, an  obvious  concern  with the Canadian short  story writer  to be sophisticated and  urbane, to show  to the reading public  that  the  writer  in Canada is as not grey and  colourless  as the image that  the word "Canadian" frequently presents  to  the  outside  world.  This  kind of sophistication comes off very well with someone like Mavis Gallant, whose "Bernadette" is marked by Miss Gallant's association  with  publication in  The  New Yorker,   and   her   cleverness   which   may arise partly from her residence in France. Mordecai Richler, too, has lived outside Canada for some time, and  this has made his  work  less  Canadian in  context, though he still reverts frequently to his childhood and  is stamped  by its  Jewish­ ness,  and   influenced  by  his  early   years spent  in  Montreal.
While   the   sophistication  of   Gallant and   Richler can   be  partly explained by their   own   natural  sensibilities,   and   the time  they  have  spent abroad, other writers have moved beyond the Canadian framework mainly  because  they  are writ­ ing  in  opposition  to  authors  writing   in the   English   language   elsewhere. Hugh
 Hood   and  Jack   Ludwig have   not  been laced   by   the    Canadian   environment; neither    has   David    Helwig.    But   Dave Godfrey  and  Hugh Garner seem to pack unfortunate Canadian flavours  into  their short   pieces  of  fiction;  it  is  as  though they  do  not  want   to  move   beyond  the limitations  of   their   own   horizons,   and deliberately  seek out  experiences and  lan­ guage  that   speak  directly   of   Canada. I do  not  think  it  is wrong  for  a  writer  to be Canadian, but  these  two  writers  seem too deliberate at  it, too  obvious  is almost crying  out  to  the  world:  "Look,   this  is Canadian  writing". This  is an  axe that  is perhaps  too  old-fashioned  to  grind,   but at a time when  the majority of Canadian writers-· especially   the   poets-are be­ yond   any   serious Canadian  identity search,  and  are  moving  into  world-wide problems  as themes  and  are  using widely contemporary techniques, it is a pity that some  writers  still  hope   to  capture that indefinable concept of  what  a  Canadian writer  is. I like  to  think  that  we are  be­ yond  all  that.
Two  Canadian writers  moved  beyond
their  Canadian identity many  years  ago, and  it is refreshing to see that  their  work has   not   been   marred  by  a   pursuit   of meaning of  roots  that  so often  comes  to older  writers.  Ethel Wilson  and   Morley Callaghan still are  beyond  the  search  for Canadianness  in   their   writing. Though both  stories that  represent them  here  are not  of  the   1950's   and   196o's,   they  do have  a  modern ring; they  do  show  the facet  on  which   their  strength lies:  that rarely   achieved   quality  of  a  Canadian writer -repose.   Their  strength  lies  in the  very  careful  way  in  which   they  ex­ press themselves.  There is no  dilly-dally­  ing at  all;  instead, the strength is that  of assured   and   mature  hands.  Fortunately

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



for  us  all,  the  stories  of  Morley  Callag­ han   and   Ethel   Wilson   will   always   be with  us;  they  do  not  age. And  I  thought to  myself  as  I  reread   the  stories  in  this new  selection   that   both  of  them  handle the  short   story  form  much   better   than  they  handle the  concept of the  novel.
Weaver's  book  is  not  a  collection   of
"Canadian" short  stories;  instead,  it  is a selection   of  stories  by Canadian  writers. No one  would  discover  anything about Canada, in  any  particular way, by  read­ ing this volume.  What he would discover, however,  would  be an awareness that  the writer   of  contemporary  short  fiction  in Canada need  not,  in  any  way,  hide  his light  under  a  bushel,  a bushel  that  is the term   "Canadian".  The  short   story  has come    a    long    way    in    Canada,   and Weaver's  book  proves it.
DONALD STEPHENS



IDEAS AND ICONS

DOROTHY  LIVESAY,  The Documentaries.  Ryer­
son.  $4.50.
STANLEY   COOPERMAN,   The Owl   Behind   The
Door. McClelland  &  Stewart. $3.95.

IN RECENT  YEARS it has been fashionable for   poets   to   disclaim   responsibility   for the  political   poetry  they  wrote  earlier  in their   careers.   But   now  we  seem  to  be moving   into   an  age  when  political   and social  poetry  is once  more  acceptable, so it   is   appropriate  that    a   collection   of Dorothy Livesay's  longer  social and  poli­ tical  poems, The Documentaries, has  just been  published.
It is  a  remarkably honest   book.  The poet  has  not  attempted  to  mask  the  at times  hortatory and  perhaps  naive  state­ ments   of   political    action   and   solution
 from  the Thirties. The attitudes expressed through  these   poems   were   honourable then   and   are  nothing to  be ashamed of now.  The most  avowedly  political  poems in   the   volume,    "Day   and   Night"  and "The  Outrider",   perhaps  over-simplify political    positions-indeed,   the   black­ and-white  positions  of  worker  and  boss expressed   in  the   poem  make  it  for  me an   inferior    poem   to   "The   Outrider", which   I   consider   the   best   of   Dorothy Livesay's    longer   political   poems-but within   the  context   of  persuasion, exhor­  tation and  cajolery these poems obviously succeed  at  that  polemical   level.  Further, I   would   suggest   that    "The  Outrider" convinces   at   a   poetic   as  well  as  at   a political  level.
The   poet   introduces  the   poems   with honest  statements about   the  sources  and the   purposes   of  her  poetry   at  the  time they  were  written and  she  tempers   these remarks  by  admitting her   "social  inno­ cence"  without once  denying  or  retract­ ing  the  validity  of  her  political  position.  "West   Coast   ( 1943)" is  the  weakest poem   in  the   book,  as  it  hovers  on  the brink  of an  uneasy  and  simplified  accep­  tance   of  the   rightness   of  the   war,   al­ though the  poet  tries  to write her  uneasi­  ness into  the  poem  in  the figure  of "The Outsider". I  sense  that  the poet  is even more  dissatisfied  with  the poem  now,  as she   has   shortened it   from   its   original  version.   Nevertheless,  the   fact   that   she has  retained it is further evidence of the honesty  of mind  which  has gone  into  the gathering of   her  committed  poems  and the  documentation  of  the  attitudes  be­ hind  them.   And,  in  fact,   the   tendency towards a kind  of self-righteous optimism in  this  poem  is immediately undercut by her    deeply-felt  poem-for-voices, "Call My   People   Home",  an   indictment  of

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Canadian  treatment  of  the  Japanese  in this   country  during  World   War   II,  a poem    which    gains    dramatic   strength from  its  low-keyed  language and  its  em­ phasis  on  spoken  language, a  dominant interest   of  the  poet  during  the  last  few years.
This  collection  is framed by two more
recent  poems,  "Ontario Story", a  nostal­ gic  look  at  early  days  that  never  drops into sentimentality, and "Roots", the  best poem   in   the   book,  in   which   the   poet describes   her   return  to   places  she  has known  to search  for  the  basis  of her  life and   personality that   gave   rise   to   the poems   in   the   central   portion  of   this volume.
In all,  this   book  seems  to  me  to  be
essential   reading  firstly,  for   those  who, like  me,  feel  that   Dorothy  Livesay  has never  quite  been  given  her  due  as a  sig­ nificant   writer    in   the   development   of modern Canadian poetry in English,  and secondly,   for   those   who   perhaps  decry the  poetry  of  the  Thirties  as  jejune  and uninteresting.   The   Documentaries  with its  inclusion   of   two   recent   poems  is  a kind  of  summation of  Dorothy Livesay's honesty  of  mind   and   feeling   and   helps to  gather  together principal facets  of her poetic character which  has made  a real contribution to  Canadian  poetry.
The   surface   of  Stanley  Cooperman's
poetry   is  simple   but   it  is  not  the  sim­ plicity   of  the   rational  mind.   To  enter his  imaginative world   is  to  step  outside  reality   into   a   world   with   little   or   no causality.   Brightly-lit, isolated,  clear-cut  fragments appear in  succession,  and  the reader    has   to   catch    their   resonances. Often  a  Cooperman  poem   proceeds   by images  which  apparently define: in "The Three  Mouths  of   God",   for   instance,  each  mouth   is  defined   in  three  separate
 stanzas before a final stanza defines them compositely-and that is all. The meta­ phors in the poems extend into worlds of magic  and make-believe and at times Cooperman's poetry  is like a melange of child-like   conundrums,  for   the   poems also contain  a good many questions which are  not  always  answered   and  which  do not  always  open  up  possibilities.
The  simplicity  of tone,  the  unexpected
juxtapositions  within   the   visual  content of  the  images   and   the   use  of  paradox remind   me  of  Cummings without the broken  typography and  as in Cummings, at  times  the  garish  imagery  gives way to what might be termed  almost traditional language  in  some  personal   poems  about the  nature of  human  love.
His  poetry  reminds   me  of  nothing so
much   as  the   paintings  of  Chagall, the figures  in  themselves accurately observed but   placed   in  contexts   that   take   them beyond rationality. Perhaps this is why Cooperman creates  by questions  and by definitions  which  seem  to  beg questions. For   him,   a   poem   is  "an   act/like  my hands  touching/your lips."   (In   context, this is framed as a question.) We must extend   the   poems   for   ourselves,   for   a poem  opens  the  mind  to  "convolutions/ of peculiar  tastes."  Like Cummings, Cooperman celebrates love and  an  act of creation   like  poetry   reveals   the  dimen­ sions of love in  the  world:

To   have   poemed
is  a  kind   of  loving
when   there   is  nothing to  love
but   the  fog
that you  breathe, the   echo
when   you  look  at a  window
and   whisper against the   glass.

But in search for revelation the poet, encountering sources of his love, "waving

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



a  magic  condom", may  be  buffeted  and wrecked,  becoming   "Odysseus  with  a broken  face".
Cooperman has  chosen  an  individual­ istic  path to  follow  in  trying to  create  his own iconography and often  his poems collapse  with   the  weight   of  the  effort. Yet  this  volume  contains   some  isolated images full  of life and  on some occasions whole  poems  of  revelation and  light.
PETER STEVENS


MINORITY  HISTORY

GEORGE   WOODCOCK    and  IVAN   AVAKUMOVIC,
The   Doukhobors. Oxford   University  Press.
$7-50.

WHATEVER  BECAME of the Doukhobors? Just  a few years ago the newspapers were full  of  reports  of  bombings,   arson  and nude  parades, and  the  Sons of Freedom terrorist sect  waged   its  seemingly  sense­ less  war   against   society.  Yet   now,   just five  years  later,   they  seem  to  have  van­ ished.  Certainly,  they  are  no  longer  in the  news.
The plain  fact  is that  they  have  taken their  place  as ordinary citizens,  differing from   the  rest  of  us  only  in  the  private affairs  of  their  pacifist  religion  and  their daily lives. This  seems almost  miraculous, in  view of  the  reign  of terror that  swept the  Kootenays and  the  disturbances that stretched  westward  even   to  Vancouver just  five  years  ago.
Very  few  in  British  Columbia  under­
stood  what   it  was  all  about   then,  or  in the   many    decades    leading   up   to   the major and-we  hope-final  outbreak in  the   early   196o's.  We  did  not  know what     these    strange,   Russian-speaking people   were    after;  we   did   not   fully understand   the    divisions   within    their
 group -between  the  so-called  Orthodox Doukhobors and  the Sons of Freedom. Perhaps  the   whole   ugly   period    could have  been  avoided, or  the  social  pain  of it  eased   considerably, if  we  had  under­ stood.
We  would  have  a much  better  chance to  cope  with  the  Doukhobor problem   if there  had  been  any solid literature avail­ able   to   tell   us  something  of   them:  a book,    for   instance,  like   the   one   just published-The Doukhobors, by George  Woodcock and  Ivan  Avakumovic.
Both   the   authors are  associated   with the  University of  British  Columbia. Mr. Avakumovic is a professor of political science.  Mr.   Woodcock   is  a  member of the  English  department and  editor  of the university's quarterly,  Canadian   Litera­ ture.  He  is  also  well  known   as  a  poet, critic   and   writer   who   has  in   the   past twenty  years  produced a  number  of out­ standing  biographies  and   travel   books.
It is perhaps inevitable that  Mr. Wood­ cock  should  have  turned his  attention to the    Doukhobors.  Among   his   previous  books  was   Ravens   and   Prophets,  often described  as  a  travel  book  dealing   with British   Columbia, but  which   is  at  least as  much   a  study   of   various   individuals and  groups around  the province seeking  their    own   utopias -among   them    the Doukhobors.
Mr.   Woodcock  has  given  fuller   rein to  his  abiding interest  in  the  role  of  the idealist   within   society  in  his  biography of  Peter  Kropotkin called  The  Anarchist Prince,  and   more   recently   in  a  volume entitled  Anarchism:  A  History  of  Liber­ tarian  Ideas and Movements. This back­  ground   is   important   because   it   fore­  shadows  the  sympathy   with   which   the present  volume approaches the  Doukho­ bor  movement.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



It is a history  of the  Doukhobors from the   beginnings  in  the   shadows   of  I 8th century   Russia  to  their  troubled  days  in Canada. Through it  all  the  writers  dis­ play   an   obvious   urge   to  find   the   real reasons,  to  seek  out   the  causes  for  the Doukhobors'   actions   and   the   frictions  that  have always in the past  risen around them.
There  is  also  a  welcome   willingness,
even an eagerness, to understand. And understanding has always been in short supply  where  the  Doukhobors have  been concerned, whether in Russia, in Cyprus (where  they  tried  to  establish  their  Uto­ pia   before   coming   to  Canada)   and   in Saskatchewan and   British  Columbia.
The writers   avoid   the   sensationalism that  has seriously  marred previous  books on  the  subject.  But   they  do  not  avoid Doukhoborism's  warts-the  extremism, the  curious   leadership, the  internal  fric­ tions that  have  always marked the group.  Neither   do   they   omit   the  steadfastness that   enabled    the   Doukhobors  to  with­  stand  the  enforced  migrations across  the face  of   Holy  Russia   and   eventually on to  the   new  world.   There is  something compelling-even epic-about  the  ac­ count  of the  sect's emergence, of its trials and   scandals  and   considerable   accom­ plishments within  Russia.
The    epic   quality  unfortunately   dis­
appears  when   the   Doukhobors in   r8g8 come at last to the supposedly free and democratic  new  land   of  Canada. It  is true that in Saskatchewan and, a decade later,  in British Columbia as well, the Doukhobor  society  continued  to  be  be­ devilled  by its  own  indecisions and  divi­ sions.  But   Canadian   governments  have not  been  very  helpful or,  at  times  even honest -waffling  on  their   word,  apply­  ing  different  interpretations  of   the  ori-
 ginal  agreement  by  which   the  Doukho­ bors  entered   Canada, and  even  devising  special  laws  aimed  at  them.
And  if the  rise of the  militant Sons of
Freedom  could  not be condoned by our society, it  was  not  condoned by the Orthodox Doukhobors, either. Nor  must we forget that some of the actions of our governments directed towards the Douk­ hobors   have   not   been   defensible, par­ ticularly  the  enforced  separation of their  children   in   a   special   school.   Effective  that  separation may  have  been, but  ideo­ logically it  remains  unpalatable.
If at   last   the   so-called   Doukhobor
problem   seems   to   have   evaf>orated,   it has  only  been  at  the  cost  of  their  sur­ rendering their  own  visions. Their utopia of a self-contained communal society  has been denied  them,  and  they seem for  the first  time  to  have  given  up  the  attempt to  achieve  it.
It is  entirely   possible  that   the  whole
story   of   the    Doukhobors   in   Canada would    have   been   much    happier  had there  been  available to  government and public    a   book   such    as   this   one.    It might   have  swept  away  the  misconcep­ tions,  the  doubts and   the  fears  bred  of ignorance-attitudes    which    prompted many   of  our   actions  and   reactions  to­ ward   the  Doukhobors.
DONALD STAINSBY


CELEBRJTJES  ABROAD

JACQUES   HEBERT   and  PIERRE   ELLIOTT    TRU­ DEAU, Two Innocents in  Red  China. Oxford.
$s.so.

THIS  TRANSLATION  of  a  book  published in French  in  1961 is an  agreeable, some­ times   witty   and   perceptive but  seldom  profound travelogue. It compares favour-

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ably with a dozen other similar books on contemporary China by Western  journal­ ists and   casual  visitors  but  it  adds  little to   our   understanding  of   China's  poli­ tical,  economic or  cultural  development under   Communist  rule  up  to  1960  (the  year  of the  "two  innocents'" visit). One must  assume  that  the  book would  prob­ ably  not  have  been  published  in  English had   not   the   second   author  become   a political celebrity.  It would  be interesting to  discover  that  the  book revealed  some­ thing  of  Mr.  Trudeau's  personality or attitudes  but   the   reader   often   finds  it difficult  to distinguish between  the  views of  the   two  authors.  In  a  few  passages Hebert  gives  amusing accounts   of  Tru­ deau's  mild  escapades and  his  occasional puncturing  of  the   pompous   half-truths uttered    by   Chinese   interpretors  and officials.
Neither   author was  such  an  innocent as  the  title  suggests;   both  had  travelled widely  and   Trudeau  had  visited  China just at the beginning of the Communist takeover in  1949.  Their writing  displays a pleasant  combination of enthusiasm for the  achievements of  the  Chinese   people in the ensuing decade with an ironical scepticism  for  some  of the  naive  and  in­ flated  claims  of their  humourless inform­ ants.    They    occasionally   include   some perceptive allusion   to  the  Quebec scene (some  of these  are  explained for English readers    in   a   Translator's Note);  thus at  one  point  Mr.  Trudeau remarks  that  "Chinese  Marxists are  like  Quebec col­ legians. On  questions  of religion  and  sex they  lose their  sang-froid."
The   two  travellers  followed  a  routine
conducted tour  of China, visiting schools, factories,    communes,  amusement   halls and  witnessing  the October 1st procession m  Peking.  They  seldom  escape  from  the

8o
 appointed rounds but  occasionally  catch a glimpse  of a grim  underside of Chinese society  (as in their  abortive effort  to interview  a  Catholic  priest  who  reveals that  he speaks  impeccable French).  In  a discussion  on hunger in China they make the   astonishing remark:   "Who  was  it that  vanquished this implacable enemy? Mao." But  such  examples of naivete  are rare,   and   the   two   authors  disarm   cri­ ticism  by  their   comment: "We  had  the naivete  to believe  that  what  we saw  with our  own  eyes did  exist;  and  the  further naivete   to  think   our  readers  capable of making  the  necessary  adjustments in  the often   outrageous   claims   made   by   our Chinese  informants." In  a  pleasant   but unnecessarily apologetic preface  (dated August   1968)   Mr.   Trudeau  adds  what he  calls  an   all-purpose  disclaimer:  "If there   are   any   statements  in   the   book which   can   be   used   to  prove   that   the authors are agents  of the international Communist conspiracy, or alternatively fascist  exploiters of  the  working   classes, I  am   sure   that   my  co-author,  Jacques Hebert,  who   remains  a  private  citizen, will  be willing  to  accept  entire  responsi­ bility  for  them."
The   book  is  charmingly written  and
Mr.  Owen   has  captured  this  quality in his admirable translation. The   publisher has regrettably failed  to provide an index.
WILLIAM L. HOLLAND

PLAYBOYS AND BUNNIES

ROBERT  FULFORD,   Crisis at  the  Victory  Bur- lesk. Oxford.  $5·95·
RoBERT  FuLFORD is one  of  the  best literary  journalists in  Canada. This  does not  mean  that  he shares either  the stature

BOOKS IN REVIEW



or  the  writing  power  of such  masters  of the  profession  (and  one gathers of Mr. Fulford) as George Orwell and Dwight Macdonald,  Norman   Mailer  and   Ed­ mund   Wilson,  but  it  does  mean  that he is an  interesting man  with  a  live,  roving mind   and   a  sharp way  of   revealing   it. Crisis at the  Victory  Burlesk  is not  high criticism   nor  is it,  in  any  serious  way,  a book.  It is a sampling, culled  from  news­ papers and  periodicals  ranging from  the  Toronto  Star  to  the  Tamarack   Review,  of   the   occasional    pieces   of  a  working journalist.
What  gives   a   touch    of   lasting   re­ levance  even  to  the  more  faded  of  these pieces  is  Mr.   Fulford's  eye  to  what   is important in  the  ambiance of   literature and  art  in our  time. Though he has writ­  ten   many   reviews   of   individual  books, many   comments on   painters  and   films, he  includes   none  of   these.  It is  not  as the  critic  but  as  the  social  commentator on  the  background  of   the  arts   that   he sees himself,  and  at  times  he  is good  in the   role:    when,   for   instance,  he   talks about   the  social  compulsions  which  are the   driving  furies   of  art   collectors,   or discusses   the   difficulties   of   creating  a system of  censorship  effective  even  in the terms   of   those   who   think   it   necessary. But  he is  at  his best when  he is not  talk­  ing  about   what-even   at   the  greatest stretch   of   the   term-might   be  called art,   but   about   the  seedier   edges  of  the entertainment world.  There is a piece on Playboys  and   Bunnies  that   looks  with  a devastating  eye   into   the   Late   Roman decay  of  our  society,  and  another -the title  piece on strippers losing their  pasties at    the    Victory  Burlesk-which 	cuts pretty  deeply  into  the hypocrisy  by which we  still  try  to  sustain  a  shoddy  and  ob­ solete  morality.
 I  am   sure   that   the   Victory  Burlesk does  spell  its  name   that   way,  yet  I do not  think  I am  wrong  in  assuming  that its  use in  the  title  of  the  book  is meant as a  manifesto by  Mr.  Fulford. For  one of  the   burdens of  his  collection  is  that many  Canadians are  inclined  to be nasty to Americans  and that  he is not. To the contrary, in fact.  One  of his sentences expresses  succinctly    what    Mr.   Fulford says at  greater length   in  the  rest  of  his book:   "But   an  American I am,  and  so is  every   other  English-speaking   Cana­ dian."
This   may   be  true   in  a  geographical sense, in that  we all share  in  the  Ameri­ can  continent,  but   Mr.  Fulford   clearly means   it  in  a  much  wider   sense:   that  culturally  also,  we   are   Americans,  and that   even  politically  we  might   conceiv­ ably   be   no  worse   off  if   we  were.  Of course,   on   the   next   page   Mr.   Fulford  tempers  his statement with  the  qualifica­ tion  that "there is  no  Canadian who  is not   in  some   way   anti-American."   A paradox of Orwellian proportions, which completely  misses  the  point.
For   there   is  a   position   outside   the
artificial  polarity of  American and  anti­ American,  and  this is where  a good many of   us  in   Canada-though    apparently not Mr.  Fulford -stand. I am conscious of  not  being an  American,  though I am a  Canadian  by  birth   and   have   grown securely  into   the  Canadian  background during the  twenty  years since I returned. Neither   am   I   anti-American. I  detest American  politics as it is displayed in the present   decade; I  loathe   some   of  the products  of  American mass  culture. But I also detest Russian and  Chinese politics in  this  decade, and   loathe   some  of  the products   of  Russian  and   Chinese   mass culture. Yet  I still  find  many  of  my  in-

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tellectual roots in  American  thought and American literature and  American  radi­ cal action. But  this does not make me an American, since I slip other  roots behind the  appalling facades  of modern  France and  Russia.  It does  however  make  me  a modern   Canadian,   citizen   of    a   land where  immigration has always been vital in  ideas  as  well  as  people.  I  suspect - and   may  be  wrong-that this  is what  Mr.   Fulford  also  is.  He  prefers  to  give it   a   name   that   will  annoy   his  fellow literati.
But, having  made  my point,  I still find Mr.  Fulford a civilized and  usually sensi­ ble  journalist, as  down-to-earth  and  ap­  parently  as  crochety   as  Orwell,  and   I could  wish that  he would find the time to write  a  book  on  our  world  and  his part  in  it  at  once  more  substantial and  more personal.
GEORGE WOODCOCK


ENJOYABLE PESSIMISM

ALDEN   NOWLAN,    Miracle   at   Indian    River.
Clarke,  Irwin.  $3-95·

IN  THIS  COLLECTION  of  eighteen   short stories,  Alden  Nowlan  turns  a  sympathe­ tic  but  unsentimental eye on  the  rigours of   life   in   a   small   Canadian   province.  The  settings  are various: a fundamental­ ist community, a lumber  camp, a hospital  ward;   but   underneath  the   variety   of scene  or  character is the  unifying  vision of a complete world.  Though local refer­ ences give the stories a Canadian flavour, Nowlan's Canada is no Weekend  Maga­ zine  stereotype; it  is neither  friendly  nor promising, and  its  people  are  lonely and frustrated. The effect is to give the stories
 a meaning that  stretches beyond  national boundaries.
Many   of  the  stories  are  built  around the tension between dream and reality, between   the  urge  to  escape  and  the  im­ penetrable barrier of daily  routine. "The songs  spoke  of dreams," reflects  a  young woman   whose   husband  is  away  in  the army,  "but in  dreams  tricks  were  played on  you:  you  reached for  a rose  and  you were   handed ·a   dirty   diaper."   Dreams are  fragile,  like the  glass roses that recall the   irretrievable  happiness of   youth   to an   exiled    Pole   working    in   a   lumber camp.
Nowlan's characters are fragile  too, gentle  people  with  small  desires  but  with less hope. They  are trapped by the drab environment of home or job, and  their feelings are numbed or distorted by the constant repulses they must suffer. The process begins in childhood; Nowlan's children  are   imaginative and   alert,   but their  sensibilities  are  warped by drunken or  oppressive   parents, and  their  impulse to love and  be loved  gives way to fear  or guilt.   The  loss  of  feeling   in   the   child becomes the loss of personal  values and identity in  the  adult; so  that   the  young wife   in   "Love  Letter,"  writing  to  her absent   husband, can  see  herself  only  in terms of movie characters: "She wrote slowly, imagining that  each  word  was flashed  on  a  luminous screen.  Each  day I grow more  lonesome for you, my sweet­ est.  Here  the  camera would  zoom  in  for a   close-up    of   her   face.   Tearful,  but dauntless.  Like   William   Holden's  wife in   that   film  about the  war  in  Korea." Here,  as  elsewhere,   Nowlan's  vision  is tinged   with   irony;  but it  is  marked   by compassion also.
In  a world  that  seems bent  on robbing the  individual of  his  humanity and  im-

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



prisoning his spirit, the only alternatives would  seem  to be withdrawal, either through  madness or  through death. The mad   act  out   their   dreams, create   their own  world,  like  the  nineteen-year-old in "The  Gunfighter" who  thinks  he  is the Wichita Kid  and   dresses  like  a  cowboy. The   Kid's   delusions  give  him  some  im­ munity,   and   make   him  seem  more  real than   the  televised  image  of  a  politician,  seen in a shop  window  nearby, mouthing unfelt  platitudes about  brotherhood and the  Canadian  mosaic. Yet  even  madness is vulnerable; the Wichita Kid  is haunted by  the   ghosts  of   the   men   he  kills;  he shoots  passers-by  with  his  toy  guns,  but they   refuse   to  be  dead.   When   Nowlan touches  on death  itself, he sees it as more than   a  means   of   release; in  "Notes   to­ ward    a   Plot   for   an   Unwritten  Short  Story,"   death   becomes   the   moment   of affirmation,  of    man's  assertion    of   his humanity: a supremely personal moment that   can  give  meaning to  all  that   went before.
This   is  a  sombre   view   of  life;   and though some  of  the  stories  are  informed by humour, it  is a grim  kind  of humour, more  sad  than   funny.  In   plot  or  struc­ ture,   the  stories  are   simple  enough   for the  most  part:  at  least,  they  have  that  appearance  of  simplicity   which   usually marks  the  well-made  story.  What makes them   carry   such   a   weight   of  meaning is the  author's fine eye for  the significant  detail.  The  character is created as much by  his  surroundings as  by  his  words  or actions;  and  sometimes, in  the  close  re­ lationship  that   is  developed   between  a character and  his  environment, physical objects  take  on  a malevolent life of their own.    In     "A    Day's     Work,"   George Mosher  is a  fireman whose life is domin­  ated  by the boiler  he operates; the  boiler
 is  an   "old   bitch,"  more   important  to George,  and   more  demanding, than   his wife.  The  romantic  daydreams of  Edith in  "Anointed  with   Oils,"  of  being  dis­ covered  by a movie producer, are haunted by the  smell of  the  chip  plant  where  she works:  "She  could   bathe  herself  a  hun­ dred  times  a  day  and  drench herself  in perfumes,  but  so  long  as she  worked  at the  chip  plant that  smell  would  not  go away."
Nowlan's   background  as  a   poet   has
served  him  well  in  the  transition to  fic­ tion,  for  as  in  a  good  poem,  experience is made  concrete in his stories by sharply­ defined   images.    The   morbid   tone   of Miracle  at Indian  River  may  not  appeal to all readers; but  it is a good  book, and  despite  its  pessimism,  even  enjoyable.
HERBERT ROSENGARTEN



SHOCK OF RECOGNITION

SAMUEL THOMPSON,  Reminiscences of a  Can­ adian   Pioneer   for  the  Last  Fifty  Years: An  Autobiography. McClelland  &  Stewart.
$7-50-

REPRINTS  OF    EARLY  Canadian books are becoming  numerous, and  are now regain­ ing  the  dignity  of  hard   covers,  probably as  a   result   of   the   Centennial   revival.  Samuel  Thompson's  Reminiscences, first published    in  I 884,   re-appears  without apology  or  editorial  excuses,  in  full  Vic­ torian   dress.   It   has  the  flavour   of  the yearsI 833  to I 883,  while  it  conveys  the feeling   that   our   characteristic  business and   politics   began    generations  earlier  than  we had supposed. The  general  effect is a mild, but  wholesome,  shock of recog­ nition:  people  long  dead  are  seen acting

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



and    responding   to   one   another   very much  as we do,  under  conditions  differ­ ing  from   our  own  chiefly  in  superficial  aspects.
Samuel   Thompson was  born  in  Lon­
don,   England,  in    I8Io,   emigrated  to Upper  Canada  in   1833,  published   his Reminiscences in  I884, and  died in  I886. When   he   left   England,  emigrant  and travel    literature  about  British   North America    was   approaching  its   heydey; when   he   wrote   his   Reminiscences, the period   of  his  emigration seemed  an  old story even  to the  Toronto publishers.  For this  reason   perhaps, Thompson did  not dwell  upon  his early  life in the Canadian bush,   as  the   Moodies   and   Traills   did; he  devoted  himself  largely  to his  experi­ ence   of   civic   events   in   Toronto,  be­ ginning  with   the  spectacular  action   of the   rebellion    of    I837·   Thus   he   gives comfort  to   readers   for   whom   pioneer farming  is  not  the  only pioneering  in old Ontario.
The  private, social  and   civic  life  of
our  early  towns  has  not yet been revealed in its true  complexity, and, one may dare to say, sophistication. Those  immigrants who  had   "class,"   education and  intelli­ gence,  or all of these, or even a trade,  or possibly  some  money,   were  attracted  to the  towns  and  provided  leadership. The  number of these  is rarely appreciated al­ though  they   were   then   conspicuous   in every   centre:  army   officers,  "younger" sons  and   daughters,  business men,  jour­ nalists,    politicians,    lawyers,    builders, clerks,  and,   soon,  clergy,  teachers,  even professors  in  the  colleges.
Samuel    Thompson's  book   is   not   a
rounded  account;  it  yields  chiefly  poli­ tical  reminiscences. This  is not  a  literary "discovery";   the    gentleman's   verse   is atrocious. Nor,  as an  autobiography is it
 the  intimate revelation of an  extraordin­ ary   man.    Thompson   seems   rather  an uncomplicated   person   with   a  keen   in­  terest   in  public  relationships.  After  five years   of   pioneer   farms,   which   he   de­ veloped   (with   the  help  of  choppers)  in Sunnidale  and   Nottawasaga,  he   found his true  vocation in  journalism.
His  description of "Mackenzie's move­
ments while in the neighbourhood of Gallow's Hill" shows an appreciation of vivid  reporting and  an  editor's ingenuity in collecting and  filing  useful documents. In  I 838 he became  manager of the Palla­ dium, a  Toronto  newspaper,  and,  after  its   collapse,   he   published   successively, until  the  late  185o's,  the Herald, Patriot, News    of   the    Week,  Atlas    and   Daily Colonist;  in   I 859- I 86o  he  spent   hectic  days in Quebec City as editor  and  printer of the  Advertiser.
Thompson's  Reminiscences, therefore,
cover   many   municipal events  and  poli­ tical   affairs   of  which   he  was  a  profes­ sional  observer,  and  frequently a  partici­ pant;  in   his  candid  account   he  drops many   well-known  names.  Equally open and  interesting are  his reports  of his own misfortunes in  business,  whether in  pub­  lishing  or  in  the  collapse  of  the  Beaver Insurance  Company (I86o-I876).
Although he  became  "the recipient of
nearly  every  honorary  distinction  which it  was  in  the  power  of  [his]   fellow  citi­ zens  to  confer," he  was generally  a  sup­  porter rather than  a top official. His book closes with  a brief account of the Toronto Mechanics' Institute   (established  in I 83 I)  and   the   transfer  of  its  property to  the   Free   Public  Library in  Toronto in   I883.   This   was  a  great   moment for the   man   who   had,  forty   years  earlier, made   "the  first  effort" to  establish  such an   institution   in   that   city.   "From   log

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cabin   to  public  library" might  stand   as more than an idle cliche for this book reflecting  the first to last stages of pioneer­ ing  in Ontario.
CARL F. KLINCK


NOUVELLE VAGUE

I ACQUES  GODBOUT,  Le  Couteau sur  la  Table.
Editions du  Seuil.

CE  DEUXIEME  ROMAN  de  Jacques  God­
bout    (il   en   a   maintenant  trois   a  son
actif,  ainsi  que  quatre recueils  de  poesie et  huit  films)  se  place  entierement dans les cadres  de  Ia  nouvelle  vague.  Au  lieu de !'intrigue traditionnelle, un monologue interieur achemine une seule personnalite,
celle  du  narrateur, a travers   les  remini­
scences d'un passe recent  et les fragments epars  du  present. Les  deux   jeunes  filles qui  partagent Ia  vie  de  l'etudiant-aven­ turier   ne  servent   qu'a  mettre en  valeur  le   conflit   qui   le   divise.   Trois   niveaux  s'etablissent:  Ia  vie  personnelle du  nar­  rateur   en    rapport   avec    Patricia   et Madeleine,   le   manque  d'appartenance du  Canadien  franc;ais  dans  un  continent
anglais,   l'homme  face   a  Ia  misere   du
monde. L'action  est   a  deux   temps:    le
passe  et   le   present.  Le   passe,   c'est   Ia
rencontre  avec   Patricia  Ia  riche  Anglo­ Saxonne,  leur   amour  ponctue  de  jeux, Ia  liaison  avec  Madeleine, issue  du  pro­ letariat  canadien  franc;ais.   Le   present,  c'est  le  retour vers  Patricia  et  Montreal apres  une  absence  de  trois ans. Le meme dilemme marque les deux epoques: celui de  vivre  lorsque   l'on   se  sent  inutile   et que  le  dollar   est  roi.  Alors pourquoi ne
pas voler, faire le trafic des narcotiques, suivre   les  routes   d'Amerique  "a Ia  re­
cherche de son travesti", se laisser acheter par   Patricia, redevenir enfant  et  jouer?
 Cependant, le  plaisir  et  le  jeu  ne  font pas oublier  les catastrophes, les petits Chinois  qui meurent de faim,  Hiroshima et  Nagasaki,   en  somme,   tous  les  maux qui  affligent  l'homme d'aujourd'hui.  Le fait   qu'il   est  "celui   qui   parle   franc;ais" dans   un  continent anglais  exacerbe  son
sentiment d'inutilite, le laisse flotter  a Ia
surface  sans qu'il  reussisse a se polariser.
Viendra un  temps  ou  il  faudra choisir:
ce sera  grace  a une  comptine bretonne:
"I,  Ni, Mi,/Ni, Mai,  Ni, Mo ..."
Jacques  Godbout ne preconise aucun remede,  le  narrateur accepte Ia vie sans discuter  son  absurdite. L'auteur  souligne plutot  !'effervescence de  Ia jeunesse canadienne franc;aise d'aujourd'hui, Ia necessite  ou   elle  se  trouve   de   choisir, comme   le  narrateur,  et   aussi  de   faire face  au  monde  du  vingtieme siecle  avec tous  ses problemes.
Le  style  retient   !'attention. Des  pans
de   memoire    numerotes  alternent   avec les fragments du  present,  numerotes, eux aussi.  Ces  chiffres  evoquent Ia  predomi­ nance   des  affaires   et  Ia  mecanique  in­ diff,erente  de  notre  epoque ou  tout   est classe,   catalogue.   Bref,   l'homme  n'est plus  qu'un  chiffre   au   hasard    dans   un
univers  de chiffres. La comptine bretonne mise en exergue  fait  echo  a ce sentiment.
Les  flash-backs appartiennent au  cinema ainsi   que   le  langage   vif  et   image.   Le debit est parfois  trop  rapide pour  une ponctuation veguliere;  parfois  aussi Ia phrase   reste  en  suspens,  remplacee par une autre pensee qui vient de jaillir simultanement. Parce  que  le livre  de Jacques Godbout reflete  le tempo  febrile de   Ia  vie  actuelle,  ses  images   brutales, sa  publicitle  tapageuse, et  aussi  ses  mo­ ments    de   tendresse,    il   vaut    Ia   peine d'etre ]u et medite.
La    traduction   de    Penny    Williams,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Knife   on  the  Table   (McClelland & Stewart, Toronto,  Ig68),  rend   bien  la prose   poetique  de   la  version   originale. La   traductrice  a  su  se  mettre  dans   la peau  de !'auteur, de sorte  que  la version anglaise  a !'accent de la verite. Cette tra­
duction est  a recommander a tous  ceux
de  langue   anglaise  qui  s'inreressent   a la
nouvelle  litterature canadienne franc;aise.
MARGUERITE PRIMEAU


FAULKNERIAN QUEBEC

ROCH   CARRIER,   La   guerre,  yes  sir!  Editions du  Jour.

THREE CANADIAN  NOVELISTS   have  writ­ ten  books which  take  the  William  Faulk­ ner   approach  to  characters  in   a   rural  setting.  George  Ryga's  Ballad  of  a  Stone Picker  and  Sheila  Watson's  The  Double Hook  both  effectively  dramatize  the gro­ tesque  consequences   of  clinging  to  false values,   of   inverted  or   perverted  ideas which  have  become  life  forces.  It is the French-Canadian   writer   Roch   Carrier, however,  who  comes  closest to the  signi­ ficance,  power  and  artistry  of  Faulkner at  his best.
There  are,  of  course,  many   contrasts
between  rural  Quebec and  the American Deep  South, especially  when  the  former is pictured under several feet of snow; but despite   these   contrasts  and   despite   the book's  striking  originality, La  guerre,  yes sir! has much in common with As I Lay Dying.  It has an  atmosphere and  flavour peculiar to Quebec, but  it  offers  insight into   the  quirks  and  crudities of  human nature with the subtle penetration charac­ teristic   of  Faulkner's  work.   It   has  the same kind of black humour and devastat-

86
 ing  irony,  and  it  also focuses on  the cen­
tral  image  of a coffin.
In   Carrier's  story  the  coffin  contains the body of a soldier, Corriveau, who was killed in action  and  has been returned to his home  village for  burial. Complicating the   situation,  the   Canadian  Army   has sent along  a seven-man contingent of English-speaking soldiers  to provide Cor­ riveau  with  an   appropriate  military send-off.   The railway  station  is  quite   a distance  from   the   tiny,  totally   French­ speaking village,  and  the soldiers  have  to carry  the  coffin  the  whole  way along  an unploughed road.  On the  same  road  at the  same  time,  a  local  soldier  on  leave  is carrying his  new  bride,   a  former   New­ foundland   whore   called   Molly,  on   his shoulders  through the  snow.
Roch  Carrier has the capacity to bring
extraordinary and  convincing characters to life with a minimum of description. Besides those already  mentioned, several others  end  up  in  the  Corriveau house  to sit   through  the   night   with   the   corpse. There is Amelie, whose husband  Henri deserts  from  the  Army  when  he discovers that  his wife is sheltering a draft dodger. A   simple   soul,   Henri  nevertheless   be­ comes    disturbed   upon     learning    that  Amelie   has  given   birth   to  two  sets  of twins   since   his  departure   years   before. She   carefully   explains   to  him  how  the twins  had  simply  developed  inside  of her "et   puis,  ils  sont  sortis."  "Ce  qui  m'in­ teresse,"   Henri  replies,  "c'est   de  savoir comment ils sont  entres." Then there  is Joseph,  who  has  calmly  chopped off  his hand   in  order  to  avoid   the  draft, thus inadvertently   providing  the   local   boys with  something  to  use as a  puck  in  their hockey games.
The story proceeds  in a series of scenes,
each  seemingly   more  fantastic than   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



previous  one.  The English-Canadian  sol­ diers,  like creatures from  another  planet,  sit   stone-faced  while   the   villagers   get drunk on  cider  and  eat  "tortieres."
Speaking  about    La   guerre,   Carrier
once   remarked  that    the   events   of  the book  take   place  in  the  Middle Ages - the  Middle Ages of French Canada. The novel   examines  a   variety   of   attitudes, prejudices   and   superstitions  which warped  the   lives  of   the   characters  in­ volved,   just  as   they   have   warped   and continue to warp  the  lives of many Que­  beckers.  The influence  of  the  Church in every   aspect   of   life   is   underlined  re­ peatedly. Throughout  the  wake,  chanted prayers   alternate  with   blasphemies  and curses    based    upon    the   prayers.    The reader  witnesses a society  turned in upon itself,  a society seething with  frustrations and  inhibitions,  ready  to  explode at  any moment.   Traditional  outlets    for   these frustrations, in Carrier's novel  as in Que­ bec  itself,  are  in  the  process  of  breaking down.
With   regard   to   French-English   rela­
tions,  Carrier's main   point,  of  course,  is that  the  language barrier, the  absence  of communication, constitutes a  formidable obstacle.  Despite prejudices and  fears  on both  sides, the Corriveaus want  to be hospitable to the  English-Canadians who have   come   to   bury   their   son,  and   the soldiers  want  simply  to  fulfill  their  duty to a fallen  comrade, but  because effective communication  is  impossible,   the  situa­ tion  deteriorates and   the  old  prejudices are  heightened rather than weakened.
If at  all  possible,  Carrier's La  guerre
should   be  read   in  the   original French. The distinctive style is likely to lose a lot in  translation. In  fact,  if the  superb colloquial language of  the  book  were  to be  rendered in  the  same  way  as  similar
 diction  in Gabrielle Roy's  Bonheur  d'oc­ casion was rendered in the  English trans­  lation,  then  a  major part  of  La  guerre's appeal  and   virtuosity could   be  lost  en­ tirely.  But  whatever happens  in  transla­ tion,  Roch  Carrier is a young writer  with remarkable   skill    and    originality.   He might   well  be  able   to   do   for   French Canada   what    Faulkner    did    for    the American  South.  La  guerre,  yes sir! is certainly  an impressive  start.
RONALD SUTHERLAND

NO BREW
LIKE HOME-BREW

A.   w.  PURDY,   Wild   Grape  Wine. McClelland
&  Stewart. $3.95.

FIELDING   once   said   that    "every   book ought  to be read  with  the same spirit  and in  the  same  manner  as  it  is  writ."   So I  can  be forgiven   for  sitting   with  Wild Grape Wine  in  one  hand   and  a glass of sherry  in the other  and  ruminating about the  many  different  brews  which   Purdy has  served  up  since  his  first  volume  of poetry   was   published   twenty-five  years ago. That was 1944. Since then he has published  several  chap-books and  a num­ ber  of  rna jor  volumes,  one  of  which  re­ ceived   the   Governor   General's award. I  come  to  Purdy's  latest   book  with  the taste of his earlier work still in my mouth and   with   great   enthusiasm,  because   I think  he is the most  refreshing poet  now writing  in  Canada.
Wild   Grape   Wine   begins   with    the
familiar Purdy  of  Poems  for All the Annettes  and   The   Cariboo  Horses, the poet  with  a  rich  sense of humour and  a delightful capacity for self-mockery. "The Winemaker's Beat-Etude" is a hilarious account of a confrontation with  Bacchus

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in  the   grape-vines  and   with  a  herd   of lustful   and  inquisitive cows.  By the  end of  the  poem  the  poet  has come  to terms with   the   entire   feminine   principle and cries:  "0 my sisters / I give purple milk!" Familiar also is the  more  restrained  des­ criptive   and    meditative   Purdy,    who emerged    fully   in   North   of    Summer.  Purdy's landscapes are most often  rugged and   bleak,  characterized by  vividness  of outline rather than   by  colour  and  shad­  ing;  but  in  "Roblin  Mills  (circa I 842)" and   "Dark   Landscape"  he  conveys  an amazing   awareness    of   the   "gear    and tackle  of  living"  that  his landscapes sup­ port.
Another Purdy  we have come to recog­
nize  is  Purdy   the   journalist-the  un­ acknowledged  poet  laureate who  writes on  request   for  the  dailies  on  such  sub­ jects  as  the   death   of  Robert  Kennedy and   Armistice   Day.   This   is  the  Purdy  who   will  try  any  subject   for   the  chal­  lenge  or  just  for  the  hell  of  it.  I  do  not like  Purdy's   Ottawa  poems.  They  seem contrived,  barely   honest   in   expression and  sentiment. Purdy  is not political; and it  takes  more   than   a  trip  to  Ottawa to come   to  terms  imaginatively  with   per­ sonalities  and  institutions that  direct  our larger  destinies.
For  my money,  the best poems in Wild
Grape Wine  are  meditations upon  things historical.  Purdy,  like  Philip   Larkin,  is unusually sensitive  to the passing of time, to   manifestations  of  change.   There   is something  about   events   and   characters out  of  the  past  that  releases his  imagin­ ation   in   new   and   exciting   ways.  One  felt   this  in  North  of  Summer. Now,  in "Lament  for   the   Dorsets"    and    "The Runners",  he   achieves   a   rare   beauty and  strength, an escape from  the dangers  of a  too-easy  subjectivity.

88
 For  the  most  part,   Purdy  has  left  be­ hind   his  early  influences:  Creeley,  Lay­ ton  and,  generally, the "Beats" and "pro­ jectivists".  He  still  prefers  the  short  line, the  Black  Mountain  column  verse,  but will  dispense  with  this  for  a  longer  line occasionally. His recent influences  are the modern   English    and   European   poets who  are  more descriptive and  philosoph­ ical.   Wild   Grape   Wine   owes  most   to Earle   Birney,  to  whom   it  is  dedicated. Purdy   has   long   been   an   admirer  of Birney   and   is  presently   engaged   on   a critical   study   of   Birney's   poetry.   One recognizes  in  Purdy's travel-poems a  per­ sona   (that of  a  twentieth-century  Gulli­ ver)   like  that  of Birney's  "Cartagena de Indias"  and    "A   Walk   in   Kyoto".  In "Hombre",  Purdy   seems   to   have   used very  consciously  the  image  of  the  hand, which  is so striking in Birney's "Arrivals". As  Eliot   says,  poor  poets  imitate; good poets  steal.  In  "Hombre" the  image  of the   hand   assumes   a  much   greater  sig­ nificance in terms  of the overall  structure of  the  poem.   Ultimately, Purdy   absorbs his   influences   and   moves   on   to  some­ thing   new;   his   poems,   whatever  their debts,  are  persistently original.
If I   have   one   objection  to   Purdy's
present   volume,  it  is in  the  overworking of  certain characteristics in  his speaking voice.  He  developed a  certain  chattiness in   his  earlier   volumes   which,   by  now, has  become   a  kind   of  rhetorical  cliche. In  "Elegy   for   a  Grandfather", for  ex­ ample,   he   slips   too   easily  into   redun­ dancy:

Well, he died,  I guess.    They  said he did. His  wide  whalebone   hips  will make  a  pre­
historic  barrow
men  of  the  future  may  find  and   perhaps
may  not....

The  trouble with   this  device   is  that   it

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



may  encourage the  poet  to be less precise than   is  desirable   at  crucial  moments in the  poem.
Wild  Grape Wine  is a superb  achieve­
ment.  What few limitations it has are not significant; they settle  quickly  to the bot­ tom  of  the  vat.  A  mean   brew -yes,  a mean   brew.
GARY GEDDES


TRUTH AND TEMPERAMENT

JACK    SHADBOLT,   In    Search  of   Form.   Mc­
Clelland & Stewart.  $rs.oo.

In Search of Form is the  most  important analysis of his own  work ever  undertaken by a  Canadian artist. Although it  is not an   autobiography,  it   reveals   the   total man:  eloquent, intellectual, romantic, at times  didactic, but  always  facing  himself with  complete honesty. And  delivering a body of drawings done  over thirty  years which, with a few exceptions, would command respect  anywhere.
These   drawings  are   not  illustrations:
they  are   the   book.  They   number  more than  two hundred with  a text  fitted alongside  them,  so that  we are spared  the usual  irritation of flicking  the  pages back and  forth   between   object   and  commen­ tary.
Shadbolt construes as drawing anything
primarily graphic in impact. Thus  the medium may  be  the  traditional conte  or pencil; or india  ink, ink and  gouache, watercolour,  acrylic   and   india   ink,   or other   combinations blending into  paint­ ing.  All  are  vibrant, however,  with  that  excitement  which   comes   from   the  first capturing of  a  concept.
Around   each    Shadbolt   has    recon-
 structed, with seemingly  total  recall and sustained  intensity,  his mood  at  the  time, what  he was  reading and  the  artistic in­ fluences  playing   upon   him.  He  can  be­ come   intoxicated  with   his   own   words, but  at  least  he  conveys  to  us  vividly  the drama of his  creative life.
The  drawings  are  not  arranged  chron­ ologically   but   so  as  to   illustrate  some aspect   of   the    search   for   form.    This method   allowed   the  artist   to  see  more clearly  into  himself,  to  note  for  example the   deeper   understanding  of   counter­ rhythms   in   a   drawing  done   in   I939, where   they   are   purely   decorative,  and  one  done  in  1959,  where  they  are  boldly integrated  into  the  composition ("Gothic Head,  Chartres"; "Battered Head").
For  the reader  such  juxtapositions only enhance the already remarkable variety. The    range   is  from    the   skeletal   birds which  translate Shadbolt's horror  of the wartime death camps; to the clean  prows of fishing boats at Collioure on the Mediterranean;  to   the   densely   massed ritual  presences  in  Edge  of  the  Dark; to the   magical    improvised   owls   of   four years  ago.
Underlying  them    all,   nonetheless,   is
the   continuity  of   the   artist's   tempera­ ment.  In  Shadbolt's case  it  is  character­ ized   by  two   tendencies   which   he   had always  considered  contradictory: a  free­ flowing  lyricism  and   a  "rigid   will"  to­ wards architectonic structure.
In   the  movingly   direct   Postscript, he realizes that  this duality can also be complementary: "Reflection has told me that,  in fact,  it  is me,  I should  accept  it; and  insight  has  suggested  that  it may  be my strength, not my weakness, if I can contain  it in  a form."
He   further  acknowledges that   he   is
basically  a   landscapist.  His   line  is  the

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



organic    line.   Identifying  himself   with the   cosmic   force   he   declares:  "I  am nature.  Nature   is   me .... I  am   both anonymous and  very precious  since I belong  to  all  growth   which  is life."
This  is Shadbolt's truth. If he  cleaves to it, he will continue to produce authen­ tic  works,  untrammeled by the  fear  that  they  do  not  conform to current styles.
JOAN LOWNDES


PARTISAN  POEMS

DOUG FETHERLING,  The  United  States  of Heaven/Gwendolyn  Papers/That   Chain­ letter  Hiway.  Anansi.  $1.95.

I  PICK  UP  his  book  from  where  it  rubs shoulders with  Ferlinghetti and  Ginsberg on  my  shelf,  smell  the  pages  (a  nervous olfactory   habit   of  mine), and  study  his photograph on  the  back  cover.  He  looks like  a   nineteenth-century   sybarite,   sar­ torially  rakish.  This  aspect  of his  person probably  accounts for  the  partisanism in his   poetry,    and    I  would   compare  its intensity    to   a   laser   beam.   Fetherling single-handedly  launches an  amphibious assault    on    bourgeois    strongholds;   he calls   his   native   U.S.A.   a  myth,   a  wet dream    of   heaven;  it's   no  wonder   the tradition-bound   flunkeys   croak   in   his wake.   He    denudes  the   Establishment, humiliates  them.   In his  poem,  "Mortal Ally, Trusted Enemy", he says ironically: "It's  frightening, for  I could  have  been arrested for  carrying a  concealed  tooth­ brush." And  he  gambols  away.  The  first part  of  his  trilogy  deals  with  the States.  The  titles  of his  poems in  this  particular section   are   indicative  of   malaise   and disorder,  the   very   symptoms  which threaten peace  of mind  in America.  Here  are   some  of  them:   "A  Resumption  of

go
 the Bombing  in the North", "Dead on Arrival  at  the  Other Location", "WOB", "Bad  Neighborhood", "Unmerciful", and so   on   ad   rem.   The  writing is   a   bit choppy, but  the  message  is there.
The Gwendolyn Papers:  Most  of these
poems   are   comic   aspersions,   Orwellian in the  crude certainties they deliver.  This is  the  grotesque  record   of  a  love  affair where  innuendoes run  amuck. "Ours was the  Vietnam of  love  affairs-"  Fether­ ling  confesses. "Everything  about  Gwen­  dolyn   was   butterscotch."   Intellectual love  romps  of  the   Sixties.   Hippie  con­ formity.   Fetherling's  love  poems  sound like  Bob  Dylan's sore  throat. One  might  call   them   folk-rock   acid   !-Happenings and get away with  it. After  reading about  poor   paranoid  Gwendolyn   I   can   only say  with   equanimity:  In   the  long   run, women  are  infinitely  more  compassionate than   men; look  what   they  have  to  put up   with.    Perhaps  love   should    be   re­ invented   overnight.  Philosophical   exis­ tentialism  is  quite   useless  in   bed,   and  Fetherling errs  loudly  in  that  respect  be­ cause  he tends  to masculinize the  female,  indoctrinate his subject  by superimposing the   will   on   sweet   instinct.   All  women  (Gwendolyn  too)    want    three    things: marriage, security,  and  children. Fether­ ling  gives  a great  deal  more,  but  he goes on   writing  about   them.   This   axiom   is conceivably  Freudian.  Id   is.
Who  else  but   AI  Purdy   would   pen  a
Prefatory  Note  to  That   Chainletter  Hi­ way:   Fetherling's soul  discovery  of   the New   Canada?  Like   Purdy,   22-year-old Fetherling  has   seen  and    felt   the   prov­  inces;   he  has  hitchhiked   through  them
... he   knows   what   he's   talking   about. Unlike laundromat  romances he  stands on safer  ground ... tearing up the terrain with    his   typewriter.   His   wild    poem,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



"Transcanadienne' ',  deserves to   be quoted  in full,  but  for  spatial reasons I'll only use this one stanza for its ironic significance.

red  river  adieu to conditions beyond  our control
like  Winnipeg  sinister on  the  horizon its   queen   victoria  lost   on   the   prairies homeless   on  the  courthouse lawn
looking for  other serious statues like  herself

Young  Doug  Fetherling is an  ex-Yankee. He  moved  here  two  years  ago.  Whether or  not  he  decides   to  make  this  country his permanent home  only the little maga­ zines  will  know.   Americans are   begin­ ning  to know  what  real  freedom is. They  have  Canada.
LEN GASPARINI



EARTHY IDYLL

ERNEST BUCKLER, Ox  Bells and  Fireflies.
McClelland  &  Stewart. $7·95·

THE  REGIONAL  IDYLL  has a long  and,  On the  whole,  honourable history  in  Cana­ dian   writing.  In   the   first   and   second decades  of  this  century, it  was  the  chief of  our   prose  forms,   and   included  such distinguished  examples  as  L. M.  Mont­ gomery's    Anne    of    Green   Gables   and Stephen Leacock's  Sunshine  Sketches of a   Little    Town.   In   the    twenties    and thirties it lingered  on chiefly in the  Jalna novels   of   Mazo   de   le  Roche.  In   the  last  thirty   years  it  has  been  virtually ex­ tinct   (although  it  might   be argued   that  W.   0.   Mitchell's Who  Has   Seen   the Wind   was   a   rare   outcropping).   Now
Ernest  Buckler,   in  this  "fictional  mem­
oir",  has produced a book which seems destined   to  take  its  place  as  one  of  the classics of its kind.
 The   persistence   of  the  genre   in  our literature   indicates  that    it   expresses   a permanent  and   to   some   extent   distin­ guishing   characteristic of  our  collective  psyche.  I  think   it  could  be  argued   that  one of the most  pervasive features of the Canadian  sensibility   is  our  tendency  to alternate  between    the   dream    and   the nightmare, between   the  hope  of  an  im­ possible heaven  and  the  dread  of an  all­ destructive   hell.   Certainly  this   bifocal vision  is to  be  found  in  our  literature of travel  and  exploration, in  the  poetry  of Lampman,   Carman  and   D.   C.   Scott,  and  the more recent  verse of Pratt, Scott,  and  Reaney.   In  our  prose  fiction,  how­ ever,  the two  reactions  exist  not so much side by side in  the  same author as in two parallel   but   antagonistic traditions:  the tradition  of  pessimistic   realism   best  ex­ hibited   by  the  novels  of  Grove  and  the early  novels  on  Callaghan, and   the  tra­ dition  of the  regional  idyll  on  the  other. The   regional   idyll  lives  by  the  faith that  there  is or at least was somewhere­ in  some  Canadian small  town  or  village or  outport -a   way  of   life  which   was finer,  simpler,   purer,   more   kindly   and  more  honourable than the rat  race  which  prevails  in  most  parts  of  our  industrial civilization.   If this  faith  is  pushed   too far  the  work  which  results  is incredible in its thematic optimism and  saccharinely sentimental  in  its  setting  and  character­ ization; but  if   the   writer   is  sufficiently skilful  and  honest  to weave  into  his pre­ dominantly  bright-coloured fabric a  few contrasting  threads   of   ironic    grey   or sombre  black,  the  resulting tapestry   can be convincing and  memorable. This  feat is accomplished in Ox  Bells and  Fireflies. Buckler  seeks  to  bring   back  into   col­ lective  memory  the  life of a Nova  Scotia farming community as  it  existed  in  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



early  decades  of the  present  century, and he accomplishes his aim with  almost complete success. It is an idyllic, at  times a   frankly   sentimental,  picture  that   he gives us, but  most  of the time  it  is saved from   vapidity  by  the   author's   scrupu­ lous   fidelity   of  detail,   by  his  frequent touches  of subtle  or  coarse  humour, and by  his  skill  in  interpolating  patches   of earthy realism  without spoiling  the  over­ all  idyllic  effect.  The characters are  for the most part  more independent, honour­ able, industrious and  vivacious  than  they probably were  in  fact,  but  they  are  pre­ sented   with   just  enough   ironic  shading to  seem  credible in  the  total  context  of the  book.
It is, in  fact,  the  anecdotes of  charac­
ter which seem to me the best part of the book.  The passages  which  describe  rural scenery  are  evocative enough,  but  to my taste   they   are   somewhat   over-written: one  is too  conscious  of the  author trying to find the exact, the unusual word. For example, Buckler  describes a snowfall as follows:

The  snow   eyelashes  the   tufts   of  brown grass  lingering friendless in  the  fields and comforts  them   like  a  blanket. The  plowed land   is  smoothed  white,   and   each   twig  on every   bush   is  a  white pipe   cleaner. There is  not   a  breath of  wind.  The snow  shawls the   spruces  and   ridges   the   bare   branches of  the  chestnut trees  with  a  white   piping.

There the  metaphors and  similes are  laid on   too   thickly,   and   distract    attention from    what    is   really   being   described; while  the  pathetic fallacy in the first sentence pushes the tone past  honest sentiment into  false  sentimentality.
Fortunately, when Buckler turns from such   set-pieces   of  nature description to the  telling  of anecdotes about  people,  his style   loses  it   self-consciousness   and   be-
 comes  lithely   idiomatic  or  earthily  col­
loquial:

It  was   Aunt  Lena's  double  distinction that she  played   the  fiddle  and  was  violently allergic  to   horse    farts.  She   would   arrive, wheezing  like   a   bellows   from   her   twenty­ mile   drive-but   brave   soul  that  she  was, she  never   failed  to  oblige   us  with  "Beauti­ ful   Isle   of  Somewhere"  before  getting  her head   down   on   the   squawweed   pillow   that was   the   only   real,   or  fancied,  remedy  for her    condition.   Each   fall    we    youngsters scoured  the   pasture  for   a  fresh   supply   of the    knobby    squawweed    blossoms    against just  this  emergency.

Indeed,  an   ear   for   the   rich   idioms   of folk  speech  is one  of the  best features of Buckler's  book.
DESMOND PACEY


A WESTERN REALM

E.  G.  PERRAULT,  The  Kingdom Carver.
Doubleday. $6.gs.

E. G. PERRAULT KNows  and  loves British Columbia-its  cities  and  villages,  its lakes,  rivers  and  ocean  inlets,  its forests, and  its people.  The Kingdom Carver  re­ flects  this  knowledge and  affection.  It is from  cover  to  cover,  a  West  Coast  tale.
The time  is clearly  stated-the tough
years    from    I9I5  to    I920-and  the places   are   indicated  with   almost   map­ like  precision -the forests  near  the  Al­ bernis;  Stella  Creek  and  Klahosat  (thinly veiled    fictional    names)    on    the    west coast  of   Vancouver  Island, "well  inside Clayquot  Sound" and  not  far  from  To­ fino;  and  Vancouver  itself.
The  action,  loosely   episodic,   centres on  the growth of David  Laird  from  early adolescence to beginning manhood. Big beyond   his  years  and   physically   tough-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



fibred,  he has  been expelled  from  a Van­ couver  school  because  of  an  extra-curri­ cular  indiscretion, and, at fourteen, works beside  his  father  as  an  axeman  in  the deep  forests  of  the  Alberni region.  The senior  Laird,  discharged from  the  Cana­ dian  Army  Forestry  Corps  because  of ill health, is  rich  in  experience and  ideals, short  of  cash,  and  tired  of always  work­ ing  for  others.   But  he  is  not  averse  to taking chances,  and,  gaining some timber  rights   for   himself,   he   moves   his   two great  horses,  his son,  and  himself  to  the vast  but  isolated  forest  area  that  runs  to the  ocean   rim  of  Clayquot Sound. And it  is  here,  at  Stella  Creek  near  Klahosat (an  Indian  village), that   he  and  Dave, with   minimum  equipment,  little   help, slight  credit, and  unlimited courage, be­ gin  to carve  their  kingdom.
But  the   tale   of  how   the   kingdom   is
 carved,  though  not  lacking   in  moments of dramatic suspense  because  of setbacks, frustrations,  and   double   dealing,   is  not the  central   theme  of  the  novel.  That is found  in  the  journey  of  young  Laird  to­ wards   manhood -his   ever   deepening awareness   of  the  complexities  and   ten­ sions of life. He  learns  how  to work  with men,   and   eventually  how   to  lead   and control   men.  Through  harsh  experience he  is  taught survival   in  the  unrelenting struggle   between   man   and   the   natural elements -in  the  darkness  of  the  woods or on the  rough  and  treacherous lanes of the   sea.  In   his   affair   with   Sylvia,   the somewhat   sentimental   and  pathetic daughter of  the  Mercers, missionaries  to the  Indians  of  Klahosat, he  experiences  the  tenderness, the  pain,  and  the  frailty  of  young  love.  And  he  meets  the  horror and  finality  of  death-in  the  death of




There's a wonderful summer ahead with good Canadian books from CLARKE IRWIN TORONTO/VANCOUVER


M.E.: A PORTRAYAL OF EMILY CARR
by  Edythe  Hembroff-Schleicher A fresh  and  intimate look  at Canada's incomparable Emily,  the brilliant and  outrageous genius who  remains one  of this  country's most  interesting figures.
$5.50
MONTREAL  UNDER  MAISONNEUVE,
1642-1665
by Gustave Lanctot, L.  en  D., D. de  l'U., LL.D.
The meticulously researched and grippingly told  history of Montreal's beginnings-by  one  of Canada's most eminent historians.
$8.50
 
LAST VOYAGE   OF THE  UNICORN
by Delbert A. Young
Written primarily for  younger
readers, this  adventure story  is an authentic reconstruction of  Captain
Jens  Eriksen Munck's voyage in search  of the  Northwest Passage in 1619.  Winner of the  Hudson's Bay Company Beaver Award.
$5.50
A SCOTSMAN  IN UPPER  CANADA The Narrative of Gordon Sellar by Robert Sellar
A classic story  of life  in  Upper
Canada written by an  early
19th-century pioneer.  $2.25
Clarke Irwin Canadian  Paperback.


AT  YOUR  BOOKSELLER



93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the  great   horse,  Charlie, in  the  drown­ ings of the  Chinese  labourers, and  in  the death  of   his  close  friend,   the   Indian, Johnny George.  At  the  end  of the  novel he  is self-assured  and  mature-a young man  capable of carving his own kingdom.
The style of the  work is generally  firm and   precise,  and   much   of  the  dialogue is  excellent.  Perrault,  as  I  have   said, knows  and  loves his land, and his descrip­ tions   of  forest   and   water   are  sensitive, poetic,    and   effective.   Memorable,  too, is  his   handling  of   some  of   the   more dramatic  moments -the   death   of  the great   Clydesdale,  the  events  leading   to the  death of  Johnny George,  the  quarrel between   young   Laird   and   the   Chinese labourers, and  the massive forest fire that almost   brings   destruction  to   the   cabin and  the mill on the shores of Stella Creek.
Few  novels, of course, are perfect.  The
Kingdom  Carver  is no exception. It  has been   faulted  by  at   least  one  critic   for anachronisms and  historical  inaccuracies, but  these  are  of small  matter; a novel  is not  a  history.  More  serious, I believe,  is the  structural flaw that  occurs in the last fifty  or  so pages.  As a reader, I was  un­ prepared  for   the   sudden   shift  of   scene from  the  untamed forests of  Clayquot to


















94
 the   rough-edged  Vancouver  of   I920.  I also felt  that  the  sudden  reappearance of Teresa, the  widow  of Johnny George,  as a voluptuous prostitute in Vancouver's most  elegant bawdy  house was both melodramatic and  unconvincing.
On   the   West   Coast,   The   Kingdom
Carver has been greeted  with  gossip. The word   is  that   a  local   lumber  king  and erstwhile politician, a man still very much alive,   was  the   prototype  of  the   novel's hero,   the   young,   dashing,  and   at  times obstreperous David  Laird. Perhaps in  all this   there   is  an   element  of   truth,  for novelists   have   always   drawn  from   the world    around  them,    have    used   their acquaintances,  their   friends,   and   their enemies   as  models   (or  seed-germs)  for the    fictional    creations  of   their    pages. Fielding  did  it  superbly   when   he  fash­ ioned   Squire   Allworthy, in  Tom  Jones, in  a  likeness  of  Ralph Allen,  the  great  philanthropist   of   Bath.    Perrault   may well be in  the  Fielding tradition, though he    himself	says-emphatically-that The  Kingdom  Carver  is a  novel,  a work of  fiction,  and  is  to  be  judged   as  such. So, in conclusion, I say, it is a good novel
-and  a very  good  first  novel.
S.E.READ



11 ini,nts



POETS AND CRITICS



A Poet Protests


SrR,
Since  I wrote one  of the  eleven books receipt of  which   Norman  Newton uses  as  "an   excuse for  writing [his]  essay  on  the   state of   Cana­ dian   poetry"   (in    Canadian   Literature,  38, Autumn  rg68, 58-7o),  my  motives are  bound  to  be  suspect   when   I  express  disapproval  of Mr.    Newton's  critical    method.   (His    essay implies    more    about   the   state  of   Canadian criticism than it  says  about Canadian  poetry.)
I am,  however, prepared  to  be  told   that  this letter is  evidence of  a  desire to  justify  myself rather  than  take   Mr.   Newton  to  task.  "Self­ interest  speaks   all   sorts   of  languages  and   all sorts   of  roles,  even   that of   disinterestedness." I do  not  pretend to  disinterest, not  in  the face of  Mr.  Newton's  personal attacks on  the  indi­ viduals he  names  in  his  essay.  That they  are  personal  attacks is  clear from his  own  admis­ sion   that    the    poets    he    discusses    have    no individuality as  poets,  only  as  "human  souls". Thus, when   he  singles   out   Bowering, Bonnie Day,  Freedman, Gustafson, McFadden, Helen Rosenthal  and   myself,   he  is  singling out   not the   poet   but   the   person.  As  a  critic  and   a teacher of  literature, I admit a  vested  interest in   repudiating  Mr.   Newton's  critical   princi­ ples.  Whatever  motives may  later  be  ascribed to  me,  I write   as  critic  (not   poet)   to  protest the  failure of  both  yourself   and  Mr.  Newton to  fulfil   your   critical  responsibilities.
To   begin   with, I cannot imagine why  you,
as  editor, would   ask  anyone to  undertake  the impossible  task   of  dealing  with   eleven   books of  poetry  in   one   review   or   essay.  You   must know  from   your   own  experience how  difficult it  is  to  write   a  good   review   of  a  single  book of   poetry.  By   "good"   I  mean  illuminating, agreeing with   Helen Gardner that  "Elucida­ tion,   or   illumination,  is   the   critic's   primary task."   I   urge    Mr.    Newton    to    reflect    on Gardner's assertion that  a  critic's function is "to   assist  his  readers to  find  the   value  which
 he  believes   the   work   to  have.   To   attempt  to measure  the   amount  of  value,   to  declare or attempt  to   demonstrate  that   this    poem    is more  valuable than that, or  to range writers in an   order of  merit   does   not   seem   to  me  the true   purpose  of  criticism." The  poets   whose work   Mr.   Newton  uses   as   examples  of   the state of  Canadian  poetry are   (as  I'm sure  the majority of them  would  admit) beginners: unknown writers, for  the  most  part, who  have not   yet   established   their    claim    to   be   con­ sidered  as  even   minor  Canadian  poets.  They certainly can't be said  to represent the  current state  of  Canadian poetry. And  to  use  them  as excuse   for   a  discussion  of  that   subject  is  as absurd as  discussing  the  state of   literature in any   decade  on  the   basis  of   anything but   the best   work   being   produced   at   that   time.   To  compare  the   work   of  the   poets   in   Newton's essay   to   that  of   Homer,   Pindar,  Coleridge, Mallarme, Claude!,   Whitman,  Yeats,  Pound, Eliot,  Auden, etc.,  is  very silly. To  base critical evaluations on  such  comparisons is  to  declare oneself   as  inhabitant   of  that  "lunar  sphere" where    one   may    buy    "cages  for   gnats    and  chains to  yoke  a  flea." But,  Mr.  Newton  may ask,  how  can   I assist  readers to  find  value   in poetry    in   which    I  myself   find   none?  You can't.  But  you  can   take   Helen Gardner's ad­ vice  to  critics   when she  says,  they   "are wise to   leave   alone  those   works   which    they   feel a  crusading itch   to  attack and   whose  reputa­ tions  they  feel  a  call   to  deflate."
No  critic   with   a  sense  of  responsibility  to
literature would, I think, ever  agree  to  review or   discuss    eleven    books    of   poetry  in    one article,  let   alone  use  them   as  an   excuse   for another  kind   of  critical activity. If he  didn't want   to  talk  about  the  books  he  received for review  because he  didn't like  them, Mr.  New­ ton    should    have    returned   to   you;   if    you agreed  with   Mr.   Newton  that  none  of   them  was   worth    reviewing  then,    obviously,   they  should    not   have   been   reviewed  in   Canadian Literature. If Mr.  Newton wanted to write  an  article  on   the   state  of  Canadian  poetry,  he should   have  done so  and   submitted it  to  you

95

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



for  your   consideration. To   turn   personal  dis­ taste   for   specific   volumes  into   an  excuse  for some   pretty  dreary  generalizations  on   Cana­ dian   poetry seems  to  me  inexcusable.
With   a  modesty that   mocks  any  sincere  ad­ mission  of  critical  humility, Mr.  Newton  asks us   to   blame   on   his   "literal  mind"  what   he says  may  appear to  be  a  "bizarre"  exegesis  of part   of  a  poem  by  Helene  Rosenthal. Having proved   in   nine   paragraphs   that    his   literal mind    is  certainly   not   programmed  to  make  sense  of metaphor,  Mr.  Newton  has  the  temer­ ity  to  admit, as  if  with  compassion, "It  would be   cruel    to   continue further."  A  single   ex­ ample will  have  to  serve  as illustration of Mr. Newton's  extraordinary  blindness to the  mean­ ing  of   metaphor. Of   two  lines  in  Rosenthal's poem-"Snow   logged the   days./   Wind thinned  the   hours" -Newton says,  "I  trans­ late   [them]  roughly as  'there  was  snow  and  wind'." It's astonishing to  me  that  Mr.  New­ ton  should  believe  the   critic's job  is  to  trans­  late   metaphor  into, presumably,  the  language of   logical   discourse.  As   Ushenko   pe>ints out,  "the  logic   of   art,  with   the   display    of  am­  bivalence as  an  essential  part   of  it,  is  not  to be  judged   by  standards  of  elementary  logic."  Mr.   Newton  finds   it   difficult    to   understand "how  wind    thinned   the  hours,    since,   on   a sailing  ship,   a   wind   would   increase  activity, and   thus   'fill  out'   the  hours." Mr.   Newton's elementary  logic  fails  to  lead  him  to  the  con­ clusion    which    Iago  arrives    at  in   Othello: "Pleasure and   action  make   the   hours   seem short."    Time   goes   quicker,  the   hours    seem shorter   (thinner)  when   we  are  busy.  Time is thinned  like  the   canvas of  the  sails  stretched tight   by  the   wind   that makes   both   ship   and  time   pass  quickly.
Though I might cite other  examples of Mr. Newton's  literal  mindedness, and   of   his  cri­ tical    arrogance   and    condescension,   I    shall restrict  myself   to  one   further  point:  his   ob­ servations  on   the   subject  of  form   in   poetry  which   he  describes  as  "something  which  has the   coherent,  self-contained,  living   beauty of an  apple or  a  new-born child."  Poems  do  not grow  on  trees,  or  in  the  womb  of  the  artist's imagination (though  I  am  familiar with   that  metaphor) ;  they   are  made.  Art   may   imitate nature,  may   strive    to   create  the   illusion   of having come  into  being  as  naturally as  leaves come  on  to  a  tree  (to  paraphrase Keats); but in  fact  art  is the  antithesis of nature. Schwarz­ kopf  may  appear  to sing  like a bird,  naturally; but   she  has   to  work   very  hard  to  make   her voice   sound    like   that    and   the   bird   doesn't even  know  about trying.
Yeats  provides us with  a  more  telling  image

g6
 to  serve  in   place   of  Newton's apple  (no   pun intended)  or   new-born  baby.   It is  the   bird, "of  hammered gold  and   gold  enameling,"  set upon "a  golden bough   to  sing/ To  lords  and ladies  of   Byzantium."  And    it   is,   as   Yeats makes   quite clear, an  artifice to  be  found not in   but    only    "out  of   nature."  Mr.    Newton denies, without  argument  or  evidence, the achievement  of   "formal  beauty"  to   Auden, to  the  early  Eliot, the  early  Thomas, to  Pound early   and   late.   Whatever  Mr.   Newton means by  the   word    form  is  obviously   something  ex­ clusive   and   imprisoning; and  what  Blackmur says  of "wholeness" (in  a discussion of  Pound's Mauberley)  seems  applicable to  Newton's pre­  conception of form:  "wholeness, preconceived, is  a  prison   into  which  the   mind   is  not  com­  pelled   to  thrust  itself; the parts, taken seriatim, establish  parallels, sequences, connections, and conspire,  in   spite   of  the   prejudiced mind, to produce    an   aggregate  better,  that  is   more  useful,  than a  prison." Similarly, what   James says   about   Besant's  definition  of   the   novel applies, mutatis  mutandis, to  Newton's  com­ ments   on  form   in   poetry:  "He  seems  to  me to  mistake  in  attempting  to  say  so  definitely before hand what sort  of affair the  good  novel will  be."
Perhaps I  am   being   unfair  in   comparing
Mr.    Newton's   criticism  with    that    of   Yeats,
Blackmur and   James. To  be  fair  to  Mr.  New­ ton,  I'm   sure   I should quote  Aristotelean and Thomistic  definitions of  form.  They, I  think, are   closer   to  what  he  is  fumbling for   in  his circumlocution  of   the   subject. It  ought    not to   be   my   responsibility  as  would-be  poet   to provide  the   critic  with  his  tools;   but   since   I write  as  a  critic I  cannot  resist  recommending to  Mr.  Newton's  attention all  the  good  things already  said   on   the   subject  of  form   by  Aris­ totle,   Aquinas,   Joyce,  Maritain,   Crane  and  Frye.  It is  the  critic's  responsibility to  employ only  the  best  critical instruments because only they    will    enable   him    to   perform   his   task efficiently  and   meaningfuily.
He   has   to  start  by  learning not   to  bite  off
more   than he  can  reasonably chew; and   you, as  the  editor, can  aid   him  by  refraining from
piling his  plate too  high.
JOHN F. HULCOOP


A Reviewer Replies


MR.  HULCOOP  writes  "as  critic, not  poet". Perhaps I should say  I wrote   my  article, not as   a   professional  critic,  but   as   a   poet   con-

OPINIONS AND  NOTES



cerned  with    the    state  of   the   art.  (I  have published  some   verse   here    and   in   England, and   even  my  first  two  published  novels  were, in   intention,  much  influenced by  the  roman­ tic  narrative poem.)
I  am    sorry    Mr.   Hulcoop's  feelings    have been  hurt. But  every  serious  writer must face unfavourable reviews. I  have   had   far   worse (one    in   the    pages    of   this   magazine) ,   and have   submitted  without  a  murmur.  Courage, Mr.   Hulcoop.
Mr.  Hulcoop  makes   certain   statements
about  your   adequacy  as  an   editor, and   mine as  a   reviewer.  You   can   defend  yourself.   For my   part,  I  must    state    my   belief    that  the reviewing of  a  number of  bad   books  of  verse as   indicative  of   a   trend  is   at  times   quite justified.   This   is   because   the    unfortunate aspects of  a  decadent or  ossified  style  are  best illustrated in  bad  poems.  Poets  of  great talent can   do   something  even   in   a   bad   period - look   at  Collins, Gray   and  Crabbe. But   bad poems   are    like   stagnant  pools,   which    have the   marvellous  property  of   concentrating  in their    murky  depths   all    the    silty   materials which    more    vigorous  waters   bear    along  in suspension.
J\1r.  Hulcoop  must   surely   have   realized   by now  that  what he  calls   my  "admission" that the    poets    discussed   had    individual  human souls   was   a   disclaimer that  I  was  attacking them   as  persons.  Bad   poets   can   be  sensitive and  admirable  human beings: good  poets  can be   scoundrels. I  was   saying,    and    this   was clear   in   my   first   paragraph,  that  the   poems had   no  individuality. How  could   I attack the poets as individuals when  they  did  not reveal themselves  as  such?
Mr.   Hulcoop  has   collected  all   the   names of   "famous  poets"  contained  in   my   article (and mentioned, incidentally, in  highly  varied contexts) ,  and  has  accused  me  of  comparing his   unfortunately  "beginners"  to   them.   Cer­ tainly, one  must   not  expect from   a  reputable journal   the    charity  of   the    remedial   class. However, I  do   point  out   in   the   article that such   comparisons  cannot   be   made.  Does   he suggest   that, when   reviewing   bad   poets,   one should   be  careful  to  mention  only   the  names  of other bad  poets, so as  not  to  embarrass? In any   case,   Bowering and   Gustafson  are   well­ known; Helene  Rosenthal's book  comes  in  to the   world   with   an   enthusiastic  recommenda­ tion  from  Earle  Birney; and  Harris and  Freed­ man   preface  their collection with   a  sexy,  two­ fisted  commercial from   Irving Layton.
I have   not   met   Helene  Rosenthal;  I  have
no  desire   to   cause   her   pain; and   I  honestly do  not  wish  to  go  beyond what   I said  of  her
 verse   in   the   article.  But   since   Mr.   Hulcoop has  chosen  to  stand his  ground on  my  analysis of   her    poem,    I  must    point  out   that   time "thinned" is  necessarily  time   diluted, not shortened  or   concentrated.
Mr.  Hulcoop ends   with   an  attack on  what he  conceives  to  be  my  theory of form.   I don't know   how   he   comes   to   the   conclusion that I am   a  Thomist:  Thomism is  not,  after  all, the  only Christian philosophy with  esthetic relevance. I  have   not   read   a   great  deal   of Thomas Aquinas, though I  have  a  good  deal of  respect   for   what   little I have   read. I  like his   definition  of   beauty   as   "involving  the three   conditions of  integrity, proportion and splendour". But,  for  that matter, I also  like Swedenborg's statement  that  "form is  the essence  of  a  thing, but  aspect is  the  existence thence derived." Since  the  producing of  iden­ tity  papers seems  to  be in  order, I  should say that   I am   probably  more   of  an   Augustinian than a  Thomist, and   more  of a  Platonist than an   Aristotelian.
I certainly do  not  agree with   the  somewhat
Wildean  statement  that    art   is  the   antithesis of  nature. But  then, neither did  Yeats. Yeats' phrase "out of  nature" must  be  understood in terms   of  his  cosmology:  he  does,  in  the  same poem,  talk  of  "the  artifice of  eternity". What is  above   nature is  not  what is  antithetical  to nature. In  any  case,  my  admiration of  Yeats' poetry   does   not    compel    me   to   accept   his magical view  of  things.
Blackmur I  have   always   found boring. I prefer  to  read   poets  on  their art, rather than critics,  and   I  find   his   style   rather  pompous and   unpleasant. I  do   not,   however,  see  the relevance of  the  passage   Mr.   Hulcoop quotes, which    refers   to   a   very   distinguished, artful and finely-worked poem by Ezra Pound (as Blackmur  says   in   that  same   essay,   which    I largely  agree    with,    "Mr.   Pound  is   at   his best   a   maker    of   great  verse   rather  than  a great   poet").   Since    Mr.     Hulcoop's   point seems  to  be  that   I am  the  sort  of  person who would  find  the  competent handling of  a  triolet evidence  of   superior  formal  genius,  I  must protest  that    I  entirely agree  with   the   state­ ments    he    has    quoted   from    Ushenko    and  James, and   even,   to  a  great  extent, with   the quotation from   Blackmur.  But  I take  it these statements were  intended  to  apply to  work  on a  fairly  high   level  of   proficiency.
To  conclude, I must  protest the  accusation
of  arrogance. I  really   consider  myself  a  kind of  janitor, or  street-sweeper. The only "crusad­ ing  itch" (gorgeous phrase!) I feel  is a  desire  to  do  my  part in  clearing away  the  decaying, dust-covered or  petrified   remnants of  a  long-

97

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



dead "modern" tradition, so that someday, somewhere, somebody can  do  something really alive.
NURMAN NEWTON


An Editor Answers


I DO     NOT   PROPOSE   to   defend    Mr.   Newton. He  has  defended himself  ably,  and   I will  add merely   that his  article has  aroused great attention, and   more  of it  favourable than unfavourable. Miriam   Waddington's   unso­ licited  reaction  is  typical of  those  who   think  differently from  Mr. Hulcoop. "I liked  Norman Newton's   article   on    the    young    Canadian poets   in   Canadian   Literature.  It was  sharp but  very  good.  He's  a  good  writer ..."
Since   Mr.  Hulcoop has  chosen   to  implicate
me  as  an   accessory  before   the  fact,   I restrict myself   to  dealing  with   his  letter  so  far   as  it attacks the  editorial policies  of Canadian Literature.
In the  White Russian restaurants of Hong Kong, they  produce a  dessert  of the  most glittering  visual   appeal,  crowned  by  a   tower of  spun   sugar   in  a  flickering blue  nimbus  ol flaming brandy. The  splendid structure  burns and   melts   away,   and what   is  left   to  eat   is  a little  brown, toffee-like substance covering a very  humble kind  of  millet  porridge.
Mr.  Hulcoop's is a  performance of the  same kind,    decorative,   entertaining,   but    burning down, if  one   waits   long  enough,  to  a  couple of simple  and  quite unacceptable propositions: (a)  that the  quality of  criticism is  related  to word  count;
(b)    that  the   critic  should   devote  himself   to
the   appreciation  of  what   he  finds  good,   and should ignore  whatever  he  finds  bad.
In    defending   the    first    proposition,  Mr.
Hulcoop remarks:  "You  must  know  from  your own   experience  how   difficult   it  is  to  write   a good    review    of   a   single   book    of   poetry." Difficult indeed  it  is,  and   even   more  difficult to  write   a  good  condensed review;  but  by  no means  impossible.  If it were,   many    of   the established critical  magazines, and   most  of  the best    critics,   would    stand   condemned.  Mr. Newton  was  indeed asked   to  review   rr books in   a  single   essay.   The  essay  was   more   than s,ooo  words   in  length, which   means  he  had between 450  and   soo words  for  each   book  of verse,  and   a  critic   who  cannot say  the  gist  of what  he   thinks  in   that  space   is  a   wretched craftsman. I have  glanced through  representa­ tive  issues  of  the  Times  Literary  Supplement

g8
 and  the  New  Statesman; I find  it customary in these  respected  journals for four  to six books of verse   to  be  reviewed  in  articles varying from r ,soo  to   2,ooo    words,    an   average  wordage rather less  than Mr.  Newton was  allowed and accepted. To   turn   to  Canada, the  same  prac­ tice  was  followed  by  Northrop  Frye  when   he wrote   omnibus reviews   of  the  year's  poetry in the  University of Toronto  Quarterly's  annual "Letters in  Canada"  feature. I even  find  that the   Canadian   Forum   recently  dealt   with   no less   than   sixteen   books   of   verse,   including some  reviewed by  Mr.  Newton, in  about  I,200 words,   a   quarter  of   the   space   Mr.   Newton took   to   review    I I   books.   That,  perhaps, is carrying brevity rather  too  far,   but   it  devas­ tatingly  proves   my   point  so  far   as  accepted critical  practice  is   concerned. Mr.   Hulcoop was   merely  mentioned   in    Canadian   Forum
(in   terms   he   himself    will   doubtless   remem­ ber), whereas he  received almost  nine  lines  in Canadian Literature.
I  contend that  there is  in  fact   no  relation
between the  length of a  review  and  the  insight it   displays.  Aphoristic  criticism  exists   and   is often    just.    Some    critics  have    made   single­ sentence   judgments   of    books    or    even    of authors  which    strike  readers    seventy   years afterwards  with    their   justice   and   adequacy. I  do   not   mean  to   imply   that   the   lingering, luxuriating   kind    of   study  of   a   single   work affected by  academics of  a  passing  generation is   to   be   condemned.   All   kinds   of   criticism have   their  place.  But   in   a  literary  magazine which   sets  as  its  aim   to  give  a  balanced  pic­  ture    of   what   is   happening  year   by  year   in the   literary  activity  of  a  single   country, con­  densation   will  always   be  necessary and,  pace Mr.  Hulcoop,  responsible, and   will  always   be practiced.
Let   Mr.   Hulcoop remember that  the  situa­
tion   of   which  he   complains  is  not   initially
caused  by editors or critics who seek to give attention to a fair  sample of the work that is published. It  is  caused  by  writers  who   rush into   print  when   they   should  perhaps  still   be merely circulating their poems among their friends,  and    by   publishers  who   have    little editorial  judgment   or   fail   to   exercise    what they have. Since  Canadian Literature began publication ten  years  ago,  the  number of books of  verse   published  annually  has   quadrupled; the   number  of  good   books   among  them   has not   increased appreciably. It  is  the   lack   of self-criticism among  poets   that often   leads   to brief  and  adverse criticism on  the  part of reviewers.
This brings  us to  Mr.  Hulcoop's other point,
derived   from    a   somewhat  free    reading   of

OPINIONS  AND NOTES



Helen Gardner:  that  it is adequate enough criticism  to   leave   bad    books   unreviewed.  I respect Dame Helen as  a  scholar in  a  limited field,  but  I do  not  regard her  as authorized to speak   for   critics in   general, nor   do   I accept the   conclusions  Mr.   Hulcoop  draws from   her words.   Again, I  make   the   point that the  aim of  Canadian  Literature  is  not   to  present  ap­ preciation  of  approved works; I  would  never  have   consented  to  edit   a  magazine with  that  purpose.  Its   intention  is  to   present,  through many   viewpoints, a  picture of  what  is  being  done   by  writers  in   Canada  today,   the   poor as  well  as  the  good,  the  ephemeral  as  well  as the  enduring. In  such  an  effort, Mr.  Newton's viewpoint  has  its  place   and   so-as  the  pub­ lication  of   his   letter  shows -has   Mr.   Hul­  coop's.  Mr.   Newton  speaks   for  himself.   That is   the   only   condition  on   which   any   writer speaks  in  Canadian  Literature;  judgments are  independent, and  writers are  free  to  say  what they  wish  of  the work  of other writers, so long as  what   they  say  is  to  the  point.
Mr.  Hulcoop may  now  pretend to condemn this   liberty,  but   he   has   used   it  in   the   past. Let me mention a review  which  appeared in Canadian Literature  No.   20.   Dealing with Edward McCourt's Fasting  Friar, the reviewer remarked that  the   novel  stood   condemned as "a trivial thing", that   its  "action is conducted by a collection of faculty cliches", that  it represented  a   brand  of   realism    "suffocating in   its   rigidity"  and   that   its   issues   were   "so absurdly   over-simplified  that   they    are    not worth   bothering  about."   This   review,    the reader will  have  surmised, was  written neither by Norman Newton nor  by George Woodcock. It is  interesting  to  reflect   that   on   that  occa­ sion  Mr.  Hulcoop did  not  return to me  a  book whose  issues  he  thought "not worth  bothering about";   he    went    sturdily  ahead    and    con­  demned it,  and   was  right to  do  so.
Canadian  Literature   will   persist    in   what Mr.  Hulcoop now-some  years  later-re­ gards  as  its   bad   ways.   It will  give  readers a picture of  Canadian  writing as it  is,  and   not as  reflected in  selected good  examples. At  the same  time  it  wiii  present even  briefer  reviews of  books   which   do   not   deserve  longer  treat­ ment.
Finally,  one   should  perhaps  remark  that when    poets   or   other  writers  have   presented their   work   to  the  forum of  public  opinion  by the    act    of   publication,   they    have    exposed it   to   any    criticism  other   writers  may   feel necessary. There  are   wounds  in   this   process. It is  part   of  the   life   of  a   writer  to  receive them  -as   we  all   have   done-and   to   turn them   to   his   own   good.   Stoicism  is  a   useful
 acquiSitiOn  for   those   who   practice any  art.   I can   say-and    I  think    many  other    writers would   agree -that  in  the   long   run   it  is  not the  favourable reviews  that have  really  helped me.   It is  those   which,  made  in   all  honesty, have  shown  me  flaws  in  my  work   that   might be  set  right.  Therefore I do  not  apologize for printing  adverse    reviews.    Their  final   results are    incalculable,  and    can    be   beneficial,  at least   as  far   as  a  writer's craft is  concerned. As for  the  ultimate sources   of  his  art,  I doubt if   criticism    or   any   other  peripheral   circum­ stance   can  affect  them.
GEORGE WOODCOCK

(Having  argued   so  lengthily  on  the  merits   of brevity, we   will   now   put   it   into    practice   by declaring   this   correspondence  closed.)


DIRTY LINEN?

Sir,
Having now  read   the  two  parts of A.  J. M.
Smith's  comprehensive essay   on   "The  Cana­
dian    Poet"   (Canadian  Literature,  Nos.   37 and   38)   I would   like  to  make  a  small  critical comment on  its  conclusion, also   to  point out a   striking  flaw   which    occurs   in   the   second part, and   then   to  raise  some  prickly questions about     Canadian   criticism   which   this    and other examples I  will  cite   bring to  mind.
Professor  Smith's essay follows  a chain of reasoning, tracing the  doubtful forms  of  Cana­ dian   nationalism in  poetry from   the  beginning to    the     present,   which     parallel    my    own thoughts in  an   essay  on  the  subject,  recently published in  Queen's  Quarterly. We  both  end  on    the    theme    of    "universality"    (Professor Smith's closing  word  in   the   essay), but   with  very  different  implications.
Professor   Smith, in   what I would   consider to  be  a  not  unusual  case  of  "bandwagonism" (the   chief  vice  of  Canadian  critics, according to  M.   Gnarowski), sees  universality in   terms of  the  current  turning  to  world   issues-Bel­ sen,  Dresden, Hiroshima,  and   Viet  Nam; whereas I see  it  in  terms   of  observed human experience,  local   experience, presented in universal  terms.    This  is   the   great  issue,   "a local   pride"  (Williams  to   Souster)  or   intel­ lectual internationalism.
Professor  Smith's main   objective was  to get away   from   spurious   nationalism-"journal­ istic   verse" -to   "the  poetry ... the   spiritual
reality which  make  a  nation." His  essay,  how­ ever,  is truncated in  this  search, since  he never  adequately   explains   the     meaning   of     this

99

OPINIONS AND NOTES



"poetry" or  "spiritual reality" in  terms  of Canadian  consciousness. His  conclusion slumps into  personal recollection-implying    what?
-and  the  example of  poets  who  have  moved from  native grounds ("to be Canadian is not enough")  to  an  obsession  with  global  politics. I wish  he  had   probed further  into   the  needs of poetry grounded in Canadian life and experience.
Now   for   the   fatal  flaw.   On   page   42,   in Part  II,  Professor Smith remarks that   Patrick Anderson  edited  Preview   "along  with   F.  R. Scott, P.  K.   Page,   and   others, among   whom for  a  time  were  Irving Layton and  John Sutherland."  (This major gaffe  occurs  also  in The   Oxford  Book    of   Canadian  Verse,  p. xlvii:  "Anderson ... in  association with  F.  R. Scott, P. K.  Page, Irving Layton, Louis  Dudek and others edited the  experimental journal Preview.")   Really, how  could   so  flagrant an error occur   in  a  critic of  high  reputation?
As  we  know,   neither John  Sutherland  nor Irving Layton  (nor  myself)   was  ever   part   of the  editorial group of  Preview   magazine. The point is important because  they were actually ranged in  conscious opposition  to  Preview, in a  significant  way,   and   were  also  engaged  in editing an  opposition magazine named First Statement.   The   contrast  between     the    two schools,   as  illustrated in  the  criticism of  John
Sutherland directed at  A.  J. M.  Smith  him­
self  in   the   Preface  to  Other   Canadians, has
constituted  a  major  critical division   in  Cana­
dian poetry which  continues to  this  day.  (It is perhaps  illustrated  in   this  very  letter!)  The story  is fully  documented and  available to everyone in  articles by  Wynne  Francis in Canadian Literature, in  various special  studies by   Michael  Gnarowski  in   Culture, and   also in  the   book  edited  by  Gnarowski and   myself, The  Making of Modern Poetry  in  Canada.
That book  is  a  collection  of  literary  docu­ ments. One  wonders, indeed, why  it  is  being  disgracefully  misinterpreted  and    misunder­ stood;  or   why   a   prominent   critic   ignores  a glaring  fact  of   literary   history,  which    that book  clearly documents.  Is  there  something at stake    that  our   reputable   critics    are    simply unable  to   take  into   account? I will  consider
 an  example from  another critic of  unquestion­
able   reputation.
Desmond  Pacey, reviewing The  }.faking of Modern  Poetry    in   Canada  in   Wascana   Re­ view    (Vol.  3,  No.    1),  complains about   the "complete  absence"  of   W.   E.   Collin, E.   K. Brown,  and   Irving  Layton  in   the   book.  Yet he   who   runs    (not  too  fast)  may   read  about W.   E.   Collin  in   pages    127-128,  170,   131; and about E.  K.  Brown  on  pages  53,  83,  105,
128,  165,  170,  and   231.  In  fact, on  page  231 we  refer to  W.  E.  Collin and   E.  K.  Brown  as "the  first   scholarly  critics  of  the   new  litera­ ture"; but   the   book   itself   is  not   a   compila­ tion   of   scholarly  criticism,  it   is  a   collection of    "documents   intimately    involved    in    the literary   history  of   the   period,"  so   that  no articles  by  Collin   and  Brown   are   included.
Most  shocking of all,  however, is Professor Pacey's failure  to   catch at  least   one   of   the forty-three  separate  references to  Irving  Lay­ ton    (average,  one   in   every   seven   pages), or the  two  articles by  Irving Layton  in  the  book, or   the   article  about  him   by   William  Carlos Williams, "A  Note  on  Layton".  Has  Professor Pacey   at  least   read   the  Table  of  Contents, where Layton  occurs  three  times?
How,  then, are  we  to  take  Professor Pacey's
strictures  on   the   book,   that it  adopts  a   pre­ judice  against  Bliss   Carman  and   Archibald Lampman, that  it  promotes a  theory  of  "pro­ gress"    in   poetry,  or   that   it   works    from    a meaningless myth  of  "enemies and  obstacles"? I  leave   it   to   the   reader  to   decide  whether these    obstacles are   imaginary,  and    whether the  recording of  literary history through liter­ ary    documents   is   more    objective  than   ill­ assorted  opinion.
I have   the  greatest  regard and  admiration for  both  A.  J. M.  Smith and  Desmond  Pacey. We  are  all  deeply   indebted  to  them  for  their
work  in  Canadian literature, the  one as an anthologist and  poet,  the other as a literary historian.   No   one   has    done    more    for   our literature. But  now  that we  are  moving ahead toward   scholarly  respectability,   can    we   let them  get   away   with   dirty collars?-in  fact, who  knows  what   the  state   of  their underwear might  be?

LOUIS DUDEK









roo


C:zJN:zJDI:zJN	LITERJITURE -1968

















fl CHECKLIST  EDITED BY RITfl BUTTERFIELD



ENGLISH-CANADIAN

LITERATURE


Compiled  by Rita Butterfield




FICTION

BRIGGS,  MARGARET. Lost  identity. Toronto, Montreal,   McClelland  &   Stewart,   1 g68.
223   p.
CAVAICK, WEMYSS   (pseud.) Uprooted heather: a  story  of the  Selkirk  settlers. Vancouver, Mitchell  Press   [cxg67]  221  p.
CHILDERHOSE,  R.    J.  Winter   racehorse.   [To­
ronto]   Peter   Martin   Associates     [cxg68]
430   p.
CLARKSON, ADRIENNE. A lover  more  condoling.
Toronto,   McClelland  &   Stewart   [cxg68]
158  p.
coRNISH,  JOHN. Sherbourne Street. Toronto, Vancouver,  Clarke,  Irwin,   xg68.  234  p. CRAIG, JOHN.  The pro.  [Toronto]  Peter  Mar­
tin  Associates [Cig68]  302  p.
ENGEL,    MARIAN.   No    clouds    of   glory.   Don Mills,  Ontario,  Longmans Canada,  xg68. Also:   New  York,  Harcourt, Brace  & World, xg68.   r8r   p.
FANCOTT,   EDMUND.   The  shell    game.    [To­
ronto]   Peter     Martin  Associates     [c1 g67]
233  p.
GALBRAITH, JOHN   KENNETH.   The triumph; a novel  of modern diplomacy. Boston, Hough­ ton,  Miffiin,  1g68.  239  p.
GARNER,  HUGH.   Best   stories.  Toronto,  Ryer·
son  Press  [xg68]  (Ryerson paperbacks, 26).
254   p.   (First  published 1963).
GARNER, HUGH.   Cabbagetown. Toronto,  Ryer­ son   Press,    1g68.   415   p.    (First   published xgso).
GIBSON,  JOHN.   File   on   Helen   Morgan.  To­
ronto,  Geoffrey Bles,  Ltd.,  xg68.  248  p.
GREEN, ROBERT. The great  leap  backward. Toronto,   McClelland  &   Stewart   [1 g68] x8g  p.

102
 HAILEY,  ARTHUR.  Airport. Garden City,  N.Y., Doubleday,  1g68.   440   p.
HALIBURTON,  THOMAS  CHANDLER.  The old judge,  or  life   in   a  colony;  a  selectio_n  of sketches. Edited and  introduced by Regmald Eyre   Watters. Toronto, Vancouver, Clarke, Irwin,  xg68.   247   p.   (Clarke  Irwin   Cana­ dian  paperback).
HUNTER,  ROBERT.   Erebus. Toronto,   McClel­
land &  Stewart,  1968.
KAUFFMAN,  LANE. Another Helen. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,   xg68.
I.E VINE,    NORMAN     ( ed.)    Canadian  winter's tales. Toronto, Macmillan  of  Canada [cxg68]  172  p.
LOWRY,  MALCOLM. Dark  as  the  grave  wherein my  friend  is laid. Toronto, General Pub. [cxg68]  255  P·
LUDWIG,  JACK.  Above    ground; a  novel.  Bos­
ton,   Little,  Brown, [cxg68]  364  p.
MACKENZIE, DONALD. The quiet  killer, a novel.
Boston, Houghton,  Mifflin,   xg68.   !US   p.
MCNAMEE,    STEPHEN.    Seven for    the    road.
Don   Mills,   Ont., Longrnans Canada,  1 g68.
154   p.
MOORE,  BRIAN.   I  am   Mary  Dunne; a  novel.
Toronto,   McClelland  &   Stewart   [cxg68]
217   p.
MUNRo,   ALICE.  Dance    of   the   happy  shades, stories by Alice  Munro. Foreword by Hugh Garner.    Toronto,   Ryerson   Press,     xg68.
224   p.
New   Canadian writing, 1968, stories by David Lewis   Stein   Clark  Blaise,  and   Dave  God­ frey.    Toro;to,   Vancouver,  Clarke,   Irwin,
1968.
NOWLAN,   ALDEN  A.   Miracle  at  Indian River.
Toronto,  Vancouver,  Clarke,  Irwin,   xg68.
132   p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



PALMER, MARIAN, The   white  boar,   Garden
City,   N.Y.,   Doubleday,  I968.  373  p. PERRAULT, E. G. The  kingdom carver; a novel.
Toronto, Doubleday Canada;  Garden City,
N.Y.,  Doubleday, 1968.   450  p.
POWE, BRUCE. Killing  ground; the   Canadian civil  war  by  Ellis   Portal  [pseud.]  Toronto, Peter  Martin   Associates  [cr968]   248   p.
RADDALL,  THOMAS H.  Footsteps on  old   floors; true tales of mystery. Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday, I968. 239  p.
REID,  JOHN.    Horses     with     blindfolds.   Don
Mills,    Ont.,  Longmans Canada,  [ci968]
222   p.   Also:    London,  J.  M.   Dent,  I968.
RICHLER, MORDECAI.   Cocksure;  a   novel.  To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I968.  250  p. Also:     London,  Weidenfeld    &   Nicolson [c1968]  207   p.   and   New   York,  Simon   & Schuster,  I968.
ROBERTS,  THEODORE.  The  harbor   master.  In­ troduction   by   Desmond   Pacey.   Toronto, McClelland &   Stewart,  1968.   (New   Cana­ dian Library no.  63)    (First  published  Bos­ ton,   1913).
Ross, SINCLAIR. The lamp  at noon  and  other stories. Introduction by Margaret Laurence. Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart, 1968.   134 p.   (New   Canadian  library  no.  62).
ROSS,  WILLIAM EDWARD   DANIEL. The   castle on   the   cliff, by  Dan  Ross.   New   York,   T. Bouregy [ci967]   I92   p.
ROSS,  WILLIAM EDWARD   DANIEL. Down    cast nurse, by Rose Dana (pseud.) New York, Arcadia House [ci967]   188  p.
ROSS, WILLIAM EDWARD   DANIEL. Journey to love,  by   Ellen    Randolph   (pseud.).   New York,  T.  Bouregy,  1967.   I92  p.
ROSS,  WILLIAM EDWARD   DANIEL. Love    must not   waver. London,  R.  Hale,  I967.    I90  p. ROSS, WILLIAM  EDWARD DANIEL,  Nurse   in  the
tropics, by Ann  Gilmer (pseud.)  New  York,
T.  Bouregy  [c1967]  192   p.
 SHELLEY,  SIDNEY. Bowmanville   break,   To­ ronto, Fitzhenry &  Whiteside [I968]  242  p. SHULMAN, MILTON. Kill   three. London,  Col­
lins   [ 1967]    192  p.
SPENCER, ELIZABETH.  No   place   for an  angel; a novel. New York, Toronto, McGraw-Hill [ci967] 305  p.
STILMAN, ABRAM.   Doctor   in   court;  a   novel.
New  York,  Fountainhead Publishers [cr967]
318  p.
VERMANDEL,  JANET GREGORY.  So  long   at  the fair. New  York,  Dodd,  Mead  [c1968]    186 p.   (Red  badge  mystery) .
WALKER,  DAVID HARRY. CAB-Intersec. Boston, Houghton,  Mifflin,   1968.  312  p.  Also  pub­ lished  as:  Devil's plunge. London, Toronto, Collins,   I968. 288  p.
WEAVER, ROBERT  (ed.)  Canadian short  stories, second series. Toronto, Oxford University Press,   1968.   400   p.
WINTERS,  COLE   (pseud.)   The   money  line affair.  [Toronto,  Metropolitan  pub., 1967]
164   p.
YOUNG, SCOTT.  We   won't be  needing  you,  Al.
Toronto, Ryerson Press,  1968.  153  p.


POETRY

ATWOOD, MARGARET.    The   animals  in    that country. Toronto,  Oxford  University Press,
1968.   8o  p.
BALL,  NELSON.  Sparrows. Toronto,  Weed/
flower  Press,  I968. 40  p.  ( 250  copies). DATES,  RONALD.  Changes. Toronto, Macmillan
of  Canada,  r 968.   68   p.
BELFORD, KEN.   Fireweed.  Vancouver,   Very
Stone House, [1967]  [57]  p.
BENNETT, CLIF. Bronze   man  breathing;  poems.
[Toronto,  Mayabook, c1967]  41   p. BIRNEY, EARLE. Memory no  servant. Trumans­
bery,  N.Y.,  New  Books,   I968. 52  p.

ROSS, WILLIAM EDWARD   DANIEL. The  third spectre. New  York,  Arcadia House [ci967] I9I   p.
 BISSETT,  BILL.
Weed/flower copies).
 Lebanon voices. Toronto, Press,     1967.     28    p. 	(300

ROSS,  WILLIAM EDWARD DANIEL.  Winslow's daughter,  by  Jane  Rossiter  (pseud.)  New York,   T.   Bouregy [ci967]   I90   p.
SCHULL, JOSEPH.  The  jinker. Toronto,  Mac­
millan of  Canada, I 968.  172  p.
 BISSETT, BILL. Of  th  land   divine  seruice. To­
ronto, Weed/flower Press,  1968.  36  p.  (300 copies).
DOWERING,  GEORGE.  Baseball;  a  poem   in   the magic   number  g.  Toronto,  printed  at   the

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



Coach  House  Press,   ci967. [2I]  p.   (500 copies).
BRAIDWOOD,  TOM. The journey   of  Terion Cariate Guilda.  [Vancouver, Lighthouse Press]    I968. unpaged.
CHARLES, BARRY.  Magic  from  my  lungs.  To­ ronto,  House  of   Anansi,  CI967.    [36]   p. (The  House of  Anansi younger  poets,   I ) .
COCKBURN,  ROBERT  H. Friday  night, Frederic­ ton   poems.  Fredericton,  N.B.,  University of New  Brunswick, I968. 250  p.  (New  Bruns­ wick  poetry chapbooks).
COGSWELL, FRED. Star-people.  Fredericton, N.B.,  Fiddlehead Books,  Ig68. 48 p.  (soo copies).
COHEN, LEONARD.  Selected  poems, 1956-1968.
Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,   I 968.
245   p.
COLEMAN, VICTOR. One    eye   love.  Toronto, Coach  House  Press,    I967.  [74]  p.    (soo copies).
COLOMBO, JOHN   ROBERT. Miraculous   mon­ tages.   Drawings  by   Don   Jean-Louis,   De­ signed  and    hand-printed   by   Peter  Dorn. Don    Mills,    Ont.,   Heinrich   Heine   Press, I967.  [2o]  sheets.   (ISO  copies).
COOPERMAN,   STANLEY. The  owl   behind  the door.     Toronto,    McClelland   &    Stewart,
1968.   I 28  p.
COUPEY, PIERRE. Circle   without  center;  poems
& collage.   Vancouver,  Very   Stone  House, CI967.   [44] p.  (A  Talon book).
CULL, DAVID.  3 x 4  Is.  Toronto,  Weed/flower
Press,   Ig68. 44  p.   (First published 1966). DAY, BONNIE. Pilgrims   of   peace    and    other
poems.  Toronto, Coach House   Press,   I968.
38   p.
DOUGLAs, GILEAN. Seascape with   figures. Iowa
City, Iowa, Prairie  Press,   I967. 32  p. DUDEK,  LOUIS. Atlantis. Montreal, Delta  Can­
ada,  I967.  I5I    p.
FARMILOE,  DOROTHY.  The  lost   island.  Wind­
sor,  Ont.,  Gryphon Press,   I 968.  51  p.
FARMILOE, DOROTHY; GASPARINI, LEN;   and MCNAMARA, EUGENE. 21 X  3·  Windsor, Ont., Gryphon  Press,   I967.  [24]  p.
FINNIGAN,  JOAN. Entrance  to  the   greenhouse.
Toronto,  Ryerson Press,   Ig68.   39  p. FREEMAN,  ELAINE.   Spaces     of	dissolution.

104
 Fredericton, N.B.,  Fiddlehead Poetry  Books, I968.  32  p.
GIBBS,  ROBERT.  The road   from  here. Frederic­
ton,    N.B.,    University  of   New   Brunswick,
1968.    (New   Brunswick poetry chapbook). GRANT, RON. The drowning song.  Philadelphia,
Dorrance [czg67]  46  p.
GREIG, HUGH.   Canadian  street    scene.   Van­
couver, published by Frank T. Coan [ zg68]
32   p.
GROL, LIN!.  Silent  thoughts  and   silhouettes.
Weiland, Ont., Holland House Pub., cig67.
57  p.  (soo copies).
GUTTERIDGE,  DON. Riel; a  poem  for  voices. [Fredericton,   N.B.,  Fiddlehead Books, ci968]  52   p.
HARRIS, MICHAEL. Poems   from   ritual,  by Michael Harris. Through the  telemeter by Michael   Freedman.    [Montreal,   Ransack,
1967]  41   p.
HELWIG, DAVID.   Figures  in   a  landscape.  Ot­
tawa, Oberon  Press   [e1967]  217  p. HULCOOP,  JOHN.    Three  ring    circus    songs.
Vancouver, Talon  Books,  I968. 86  p.
KIYOOKA,  ROY. Nevertheless  these   eyes.   [To­ ronto, printed at  the   Coach  House   Press, I967]  [62]  p.  (soo copies).
LANE, RED. Collected  poems. Vancouver, Very
Stone House [czg68]  I05  p.
LAYTON, IRVING. The   shattered  plinths.   To­
ronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,  [ci968]
95  p.
LEE, DENNIS. Civil   elegies. Toronto,  House of
Anansi,  1968.   unpaged.
LEE, DENNIS (ed.) T. 0. now  the   young  To­
ronto  poets.    Toronto,  House    of   Anansi,
1968.   101   p.
LIVESAY, DOROTHY. The   documentaries.  To­
ronto,  Ryerson  Press,   1968.   56  p. LOWTHER, PAT. This  difficult  flowring.  Van­
couver,  Very   Stone  House  [c1968]  42   p.
MAC DONALD,  GREGG.  Poems. Cover design and three prints by  Peter Rice-Jones. Two  prints by Rick  Cuff.  Montage by  Ian  Wallace. Vancouver, Very   Stone  House, 1967.    [35] p.  (Cover title:  How   hot  does  the   sun   feel to   you?).
MCFADDEN,   DAVID. The  saladmaker; a  humil­
ity  cycle.  Montreal,  I968. 36  p.  (Imago g).

ENGLISH -CANADIAN LITEI<ATURE



MCINNES,  GEORGE   L.  The  saga   of  the   West coast   loggers.   Vancouver,  I968.  Io8   p.
MAC PHERSON,  JAY.  The  boatman and   other poems.    Toronto,   Oxford  University  Press, I968. 86  p.  (Oxford in  Canada  paperback, no.   I]).
MANNY, LOUISE  and  WILSON, JAMES REGINALD (ed.).   Songs  of   Miramichi.   Fredericton, N.B.,  Brunswick  Press,    I968.
MARLATT, DAPHNE. Frames. Toronto,  Ryerson
Press,   I968. 63  p.
NEWLOVE, JOHN.   Black    night    window.   To­
ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I 968.   I I 2  p. NICHOL, B. P.  journeying  & the   returns. To·
ronto,  Coach  House  Press,  CI967.  [52]  p.
(Accompanied by  I9  pieces  of miscellaneous material  and   phonodisc in  slipcase.)
ONDAATJE, MICHAEL. The  dainty  monsters. Toronto,  Coach  House  Press,   [ci967]. 77 p.  ( soo copies).
PARSONS, R. A. The village   and  wayside. Don Mills,  Ont., Ontario Pub.  Co.,  I967. I I I  p. PHILLIPS, DAVID. The  dream outside. Toronto,
Coach House Press  [ci967].  [30] p.
PRATT,  E.  J.  Selected  poems.  Edited and  with an   introduction,  bibliography and   notes   by Peter Buitenhuis. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada,  I968. 22 I  p.
PURDY, ALFRED. Poems    for  all   the   Annettes.
2nd    ed.   rev.    Toronto,  House  of   Anansi, I968.  IOI  p.   (First published I962).
PURDY, ALFRED. Wild  grape    wine.  Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart, I968.
RAPOPORT, JAMES.  Within  the   whirling   mo­ ment, Toronto, House of  Anansi,   [ci967]. [39]  p.    (The   House  of   Anansi   younger poets,  2).
ROSENBLATT, JOE.   The  LSD  Leacock.   To­ ronto,   Coach   House  Press,    I968.   48   p. (First published I 966).
ROSENBLATT,  JOE.   Winter  of  the   luna   moth.
Toronto,  House of  Anansi,  I968. 78  p. ROSENTHAL, HELENE.  Peace   is   an   unknown
continent. Vancouver,  I968. 70  p.  (Talon­
books)    (soo  copies).
Ross,  w.  w.  E.  Shapes  and   sounds;  poems. Edited  by  John  Robert Colombo and  Ray­ mond    Souster,  with    a   memoir   by   Barry Callaghan.   Don     Mills,     Ont.,    Longmans Canada,  I968.  I46  p.
 RUTLEDGE,  DONALD  (comp.) The  blue  guitar; a   selection    of   modern   verse,    by   Donald Rutledge  and   John M.  Bassett. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  [ci968]  244  p,
SCOTT, F.  R.  Trouvailles;  poems    from   prose.
Introduction  by   Louis    Dudek.  Montreal, Delta Canada,  I967. 43  p.
SKELTON, ROBIN. Selected  poems: 1947-1967. Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,   I968. I28  p.
SMITH,  A.    J.   M.   ( comp.)   Oxford  Book   of Canadian verse. Rev. ed. Toronto, Oxford University Press,   I968.
SOUSTER, RAYMOND.   Lost   and    found,  uncol­ lected   poems,  1945-65. Toronto, Vancouver, Clarke, Irwin,  I 968.
SWAYZE, FRED. Remember  now.  Toronto, Ryerson  Press,   I968. 26  p.
THOMPsoN,  MAC. A  centennial  concoction of verse,  fact,  fiction.  [Toronto,  Ryerson Press, ci967] 40  p.
WEISSTUB,  DAVID. Heaven, take   my  hand,  To­
ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I968. I 28  p. WILKINSON, ANNE.  The   collected  poems    of
Anne Wilkinson and  a prose memoir. Edited
with   an   introduction  by   A.  J. M.   Smith.
Toronto,    Macmillan   of    Canada,    I968.
2I2   p.

DRAMA
COULTER, JOHN. The trial  of Louis  Riel. With French translations  by  Raynald  Desmeules. [Ottawa] Oberon Press,  1968.  66  p.
DAVIES, ROBERTSON.   At    my    heart's  core   I Overlaid.  Toronto,   Clarke,   Irwin,   I 966. (Clarke Irwin Canadian paperback).
DAVIES, ROBERTSON.  Four   favourite  plays. To­ ronto, Clarke,  Irwin,   I 968.    (Clarke   Irwin Canadian paperback)   (First   published I949)·  I57   p.
HELWIG, DAVID.   Figures   in   a  landscape. Ot­
tawa,  Oberon  Press   [ci967]  2I7 p. PETERSON,  LEONARD. The great  hunger. Agin­
court, Ont., Book  Society of  Canada, I967.
II2  p.   (First  published  I958).

ESSAYS
BRUCE,  HARRY. The short  happy walks  of Max MacPherson. Toronto,  Macmillan  of   Can­ ada,  I968. 167  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



DAVIES,   ROBERTSON.    Marchbank's  almanack.
Introduction by Gordon Roper. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1967.  206 p.  (New Canadian  library no.  6 r ) .
DOBBS,  KILDARE.  Reading the  time. Toronto, Macmillan  of  Canada, 1968.  202  p.
FULFORD,   ROBERT.  Crisis  at  the  Victory  Bur­ lesk, culture, politics   and   other   diversions. Toronto,   Oxford   University    Press,    1968.
264  p.


HUMOUR

BOCK,  BILLY.  The  best  of Billy  Bock.  Selected and edited by John H. Archer and  Robert Peterson. [Saskatoon] Modern Press  [1967] r85  p.
CLARK,  GREGORY.  The  best  of Gregory Clark.
Foreword  by  Craig Ballantyne. Toronto, Ryerson  Press,   1968.  174  p.  (Ryerson paperback, 22)    (First published 1959).
CLARK,  GREGORY.  Hi  there!   Toronto,  Ryerson
Press   [ 1968]. 228   p.   (Ryerson paperback,
24)    (First  published 1963).
LEACOCK, STEPHEN.  Further foolishness. Intro­ duction  by  D.  W.  Cole.  Toronto,  McClel­ land   &  Stewart, 1968.   164  p.   (New   Cana­ dian  Library no.  6o).
NEEDHAM,   RICHARD  J.  The  garden   of   Need­
ham. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1968.
207  p.
NICOL, ERIC.  A  scar is  born.  Toronto, Ryerson
Press,   1968.   91  p.
TAMES,  JOHN.   Abreast    of   our   times,   [To­
ronto, 1967] 88  p.
TRUEMAN,  STUART.  You're only  as  old  as  you act.  Toronto,  Montreal, McClelland &  Ste­ wart,   1968.

BIOGRAPHY

BEATTIE,   1 ESSIE.   A   season   passed,   remmts­ cences   of  a  rural  Canadian  childhood. To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart, 1968.  153  p.
BUCKLER,    ERNEST.    Ox    bells    and    fireflies, a  memoir. Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,
1968.   302   p.
DONNELLY,  MURRAY. 'Dafoe   of the  Free  Press.
Toronto,    Macmillan   of    Canada,    1968.
207   p.

106
 EGGLESTON,  WILFRED.   While I  still  remember.
Toronto,  Ryerson Press,   1968.   329   p.
MCLEISH, DOUGAL, The traitor  game, Toronto, Macmillan, 1968.   2 r 2  p.
MARTIN, CLAIRE. In  an  iron glove. Toronto, Ryerson  Press,  1968.   327  p.
SISSONS,  JACK H.  judge of the   far north; the memoirs  of  jack  Sissons. Toronto,  McClel­ land  &  Stewart, 1968.  190  p.
SLATTERY,   T.   P.   The  assassination of  D'Arcy McGee.   Illustrations  by   the    author.   To­ ronto,   Doubleday   Canada;    New     York,  Doubleday, 1968.  527   p.
SWEETENHAM,   JOHN.    McNaughton: vol.   I, IBB7-I939·  Toronto,  Ryerson  Press,    1968.
370   p.
VAN     STEEN,    MARCUS.   Governor Simcoe and his    lady.  London,   Hodder   &   Stoughan,
1968.

JUVENILE
CAMPBELL,  MARJORIE  WILKINS.   Savage   river. Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1968.  146 p. CLARK,  JOAN.   Girl   of  the   Rockies. Toronto,
Ryerson  Press,  1968. 142  p.
COSGROVE,  EDMUND.   The  terror    of   the    tar sands.  Illustrated   by   Don    Morrison. Don Mills,    Ont.,  Burns    &   MacEachern,   1968.
135   p.  (A   Burns   &  MacEachern Canadian juvenile).
DESBARATS,   PETER.   Gabrielle and   Selena. Pictures  by   Nancy  Grossman.  Don    Mills, Ont.,  Longmans Canada,  1968.   32  p.
DOWNIE,   MARY     ALICE   and  ROBERTSON,    BAR­ BARA    (comp.) The  wind   has  wings,  poems  from  Canada. Illustrated by Elizabeth  Clea­ ver.     Toronto,   Oxford   University    Press,
1968.  96  p.
FAULKNOR, CLIFF. The smoke  horse,  Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 1968.   r87  p.
FLAHERTY,   ROBERT.  History of  Comock the Eskimo. Edited by  Edmund Carpenter. Illustrated with  Eskimo sketches and  line drawings.  New    York,    Simon    &   Schuster,
1968.  95  p.
FRASER,  FRANCES.  The  wind   along   the   river.
Toronto, Macmillan of Canada, 1968.  83  p. HARRIS,  CHRISTIE.  Forbidden   frontier. Draw­ ings    by    E.   Carey   Kenney.   New    York,
Atheneum,  1968.   210   p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



HAYEs,   JOHN   F.   The  nation    builders.  To­
ronto, Copp  Clark,  1g68.
HILL, KAY. And  tomorrow   the  stars. Toronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  1g68.
HOUSTON, JAMES. Akavik, an Eskimo  journey. Illustrated  by   the   author. Toronto,  Long­ mans  Canada, 1968.  So  p.
KLINCK, GEORGE   A. Down   to  the  sea.   [Rich­ mond   Hill,   Ont.,   Simon  &   Schuster   of Canada,  1g68,   c1g67]. 143   p.
LITTLE, JEAN. Take   wing.  Toronto,  McClel­
land &  Stewart, 1968.   176  p.
LITTLE, JEAN. When the  pie was opened. To­
ronto,  McClelland  &  Stewart,   1g68. LOWER, THELMA REID and  COGSWELL,  FRED­
ERICK  WILLIAM  (comp.)    The   enchanted
land,  Canadian    poetry   for  young   readers.
Designed  and   illustrated  by   Peggy   Steele. Scarborough,  Ont.,   W.    J.   Gage,   1967.
150  p.
LUNN,   I ANET.  Double    spell.   Illustrated    by A.  M.  Calder. Toronto, Peter Martin  Asso­ ciates,  1968.   134  p.
MCCLELLAND, HUGH.   The    bold,   bad    buc­ caneers.   Toronto,   MacMillan  of    Canada [c1g68]  [59]  p.
MACDONALD,  MARGARET   (ed.)  The   magic  fife; and  other  stories. Illustrated by  Maria  Jur­ sic  and   Louise Sheppard. Toronto,  Ryerson Press   [c1968]  130  p.
MACKENZIE, JEAN.  Storm  Island.   Toronto, Macmillan of  Canada,  1968. 1 15  p.
MCLAUGHLIN,  LORRIE. Days  and  days of  darl­
ing  Sam.  Nashville, Abingdon  Press,   1968.
44  p.
MELZACK, RONALD.   The  day  Tuk  became   a hunter   and   other  Eskimo   stories  retold  by Ronald Melzack. Illustrated  by Carol Jones. London, Macmillan, 1968. 92  p.  (First published Toronto,  1967).
PACEY, DESMOND. The cat, the crow and the kangaroo, the  collected children's verse of Desmond  Pacey. Fredericton,  N.B.,  Bruns­ wick  Press,  1968.  62  p.
READ, ELFREIDA.  Twin  Rivers.  Illustrated  by
Louise    Sheppard.  Don   Mills,  Ont.,  Burns
&  MacEachern,  1968.   128  p.
REEKIE,  ISABEL  M.   The  red   paddle.   Van­
couver, Mitchell  Press,    1968.   99   p.
 STAVRAKOV, MARION. At  the  end of the garden with  Shrew  and  Pig and  others.  Illustrated by the author. Vancouver, Mitchell Press, [c1g67]  63  p.
SWAYZE,  BEULAH. The  man   with   the   pitch­ fork;  a  story  about  the  Rebellion   of  r837. Toronto,   W.    J.  Gage     [C1967]    123   p. (Frontier  books).
SWAYZE,  FRED.  Fire  over  Huronia. Illustrated by Fred  Oakley. Toronto, McClelland & Stewart,  1968.   144  p.
wooD,  KERRY. The   medicine   man.  Red  Deer, Alta.,  1968.
WOODWARD,  LUCY BERTON.  Kidnapped  in  the Yukon. Illustrated   by   Maria  Jursic.  Don Mills,   Ont.,  Burns  &   MacEachern,   1968. r 1 2  p.  (A  Burns &  MacEachern Canadian juvenile).
WUORIO, EVA-LIS.  Kali  and  the  golden  mirror.
Cleveland, World  Pub.  [c1967]  64  p. wuoRio,   EVA-LIS.  Venture  at    midsummer.
New   York,    Holt,  Rinehart  and    Winston,
[c1g67]  181  p.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

BROWN, MARY   M. S.   (comp.) "Canada" [In "Annual bibliography of Commonwealth literature,   1966"]   Journal    of     Common­ wealth  literature   4:46-62,  December  1967.
"Canadiana  accumulates, an  editorial  Miche­ lin."    Canadian   literature   37:84-86,   Sum­ mer    1968.
RHODENIZER,  VERNON BLAIR. At   the   sign  of the   hand   and   pen;   Nova   Scotia   authors. Toronto,  Canadiana   House,   1968.   42   p. (50  copies)   (First published Halifax, 1948)


BOOKS AND  READING
CANADIAN AUTHORS  ASSOCIATION.  The  writers' guide;   a   comprehensive  Canadian   market list. 3rd  ed.  Toronto,  c1968. 55  I.
MITCHELL, HOWARD. "The   Mitchell  Press."
Canadian   Author   and  Bookman. 44:9,  1 I-
12,  Winter I968.
SPENCER, GEOF.  and  BREARLEY,   NEIL.  "The Alcuin   Society."  Canadian  Author   and Bookman   44:9-10,  I2,   Winter   1968.


107

ENGLISH -CANADIAN LITERATURE



PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES
Bust. No.  1, Spring 1968.  Edited by D. Fether­ ling.  Bust   Press,  671   Spadina  Avenue, To­ ronto   4,  Ontario.   (Quarterly).
The  far  point. Edited  by  Myron   Turner and George Amabile. Fletcher Argue  Bldg., Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Haiku. Vol.    r,   May    1967.   Box  866,  Station
F,  Toronto 5,  Ontario.  (Quarterly).
Innovator.  Vol.    r,   July    1967.   New   Writing
Club, Box  173,  Dartmouth,  N.S.
Luv    (for    poemz)  No.   r,  March  1967.   Fleye Press,    73    Bernard   Avenue,    Toronto   5, Ontario.
Mainline; a  magazine  of  poetry. Vol.   r,  Feb­ ruary 1968.   179 Hanna  Street East,  Wind­ sor,  Ontario.
Makar.  Vol.    r,    1967.   English  Department, Simon  Fraser  University, Burnaby 2,  B.C.
Mandala 1967/68.  University of  Manitoba Students'  Association, 216-515   Portage Avenue,  Winnipeg  2,  Manitoba.

HISTORY AND CRITICISM
EDWARDS,  MARY  JANE.   "Contact [a  review article]".  Canadian Literature 37:76-79, Summer  1968.
 PEEL,    BRUCE.    "English writers in   the   early West".   Alberta   Historical   review    r6: 1-4, Spring  1968.
REANEY, JAMES.  "A  hut  in  the  global  village". Royal  Society  of  Canada  Proceedings  4th series  5:51-56, June  rg67.
SUTHERLAND,   RONALD.  "The body-odour of race." Canadian Literature 37:46-67,  Sum­ mer   1968.
WISEMAN,    ADELE.   "English  writing  in   Can­ ada: the  future."  Royal Society of  Canada Proceedings 4th   Series  5:45-51,  June  1967.

FICTION

ROSENGARTEN, H.   I. "Innocence confused [a review    article]."  Canadian Literature 36:
77-8o, Spring 1968.

POETRY

DUDEK,  Lours.  "Nationalism in  Canadian poetry." Queen's Quarterly 75:557-567, Spring  1 968.
FRITCH,  JUNE  L.  "39   years  of  poetry."  Cana­
dian   Author  and   Bookman 43: 12,  Spring
1968.
KEARNS,   LIONEL.   "If  there's anything I hate its poetry [a review  article]." Canadian Literature  36:67-70,  Spring  1968.
NEWTON,  NORMAN.  "The old  age  of  the  new."

GNAROWSKI, MICHAEL. note on its origins". December   1968.
 "Contact   Press:   a
Culture  29: 356-366,
 Canadian   Literature	38: 58-70     Autumn
rg68.
PURDY,  ALFRED.  "Achievement and   monument
[a  review    article]".   Canadian  Literature
37:72-74,  Summer  1968.

LITERARY HISTORY  AND CRITICISM

GENERAL
BISSELL,     CLAUDE   T.    "Edmund Wilson's 0
Canada   revisited."  Journal     of    Canadian studies;  revue    d'etudes   canadiennes  3: rr­
r 6,  August  1968.
HAYNE,   DAVID  M.   (ed.)  "Letters in  Canada:
1967."   University   of    Toronto   Quarterly
37:359-390, July  1 968.
MATTHEWS,  JOHN.    "The inner    logic   of   a people: Canadian writing and  Canadian values".  Mosaic   I :40-50,  April    1 968.
PACEY,  DESMOND.   "The outlook for  Canadian literature".   Canadian Literature 36: 14-25, Spring   1968.

108
 
PURDY,   ALFRED.    "Other  Vancouverites [a  re­
view    article]".   Canadian Literature  35:
83-85,  Winter  1968.
ROBERTSON,   GEORGE.  "Voices of  poets   [a  re­
view  article]". Canadian Literature 36:70-
]4.,   Spring   1968.
ROBBINS,  R.  CYNEWULF.   "Jack, baby ... what about  the   little  poets?"  Canadian  Author and   Bookman 43:6-7,  Spring 1968.
SMITH, A. J.  M.  "The Canadian poet.   Part I.
To     Confederation."    Canadian  Literature
37:6-14,  Summer 1968.
SMITH, A. J.  M.  "The Canadian poet.  Part   II. After   Confederation."  Canadian Literature
38:41-49,  Autumn 1968.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



SYMONS,  JULIAN.   "A   national  style?    [a   re­
view  article]". Canadian Literature 36:58-
6r,  Spring  1968.

JUVENILE

FRAZER,   FRANCES.    "Uncreeping flesh   (a   re­
view  article]". Canadian Literature 35:79-
82,  Winter  r 968.


INDIVIDUAL  AUTHORS

AVISON, MARGARET
JONES,  LAWRENCE M. "A  core  of brilliance, Margaret  Avison's achievement."  Canadian
Literature 38: so-s 7. Autumn  I g68.

BALLANTYNE, R.  M.
QUAYLE,  ERIC.  "R. M.  Ballantyne in  Rupert's
Land." Queen's Quarterly 75:63-7r, Spring
1968.

BOWERING, GEORGE
WOODCOCK,  GEORGE.   "Mod murders (a  review article]".  Canadian Literature 36:74-77, Spring  rg68.

CLARKE, AUSTIN C.
WADDINGTON,    MIRIAM.    "No   meeting   points
[a  review    article]".   Canadian  Literature
35:74-78, Winter 1968.

FRYE, NORTHROP
BOWERING,  GEORGE.  "Why James Reaney is a better  poet     r)   than  any   Northrop   Frye poet  2)  than he  used  to be." Canadian Literature 36:40-49,  Spring   1 g68.
DUDEK,  LOUIS.   "The Kant of  criticism [a  re­
view    article]".   Canadian Literature  38:
77-Sr,  Autumn   rg68.

HEARNE, SAMUEL
HODGSON,    MAURICE.    "Initiation  and    quest, early   Canadian  journals." Canadian  Litera­ ture   38:29-40,  Autumn  1968.

JACKSON, JAMES
DOOLEY,  D.    J. "Flight from   liberation."  Cana­
dian   Literature  36:34-39,   Spring  1968.

JEWITT, JOHN
HODGSON,    MAURICE.    "Initiation  and    quest, early  Canadian  journals." Canadian  Litera­ ture   s8: 29-40,   Autumn I 968.
 JOHNSTON,  GEORGE
WHALLEY   GEORGE.   "George Johnston [a   re­
view    article]".  Canadian Literature 35:
85-90, Winter  1968.

KIRKCONNELL, WATSON
THOMPSON,    MEREDITH.   "Poet and   polymath
[a  review    article]".   Canadian  Literature
38:84-87,  Autumn  1968.

KUPER, JACK
MORRISON,   MARION.   "Jack Kuper, messenger from   the   holocaust." Quill  and   Quire 34:
12,  32,  December  1968.

LOWRY, MALCOLM
WILD, BERNADETTE.  "Malcolm Lowry: a  study of   the   sea   metaphor  in   'Under  the   Vol­ cano'."  University of   Windsor   Review 4:
46-6o, Fall   1968.

LUDWIG, JACK
GODFREY,   DAVE.   "Starved in   the   hour   of  our hoarding,   the    conglomerate  as   fiction    [a review   article]". Tamarack Review 48:73-
79,  1968.
MACKENZIE,  ALEXANDER
DANIELLS,    ROY.    "The  literary relevance of Alexander   Mackenzie."   Canadian   Litera­ ture   38: rg-28,  Autumn   1968.
MACLENNAN, HUGH
NEW,   WILLIAM  H.    "Winter and    the   night­ people."    Canadian   Literature     36:26-33, Spring  1968.
O'DONNELL,    KATHLEEN.     "The  wanderer  in
'Barometer  rising'."  University  of  Windsor review    3:12-18,  Spring  1968.
MOORE, BRIAN
"Brian  Moore:  an   interview." Tamarack   Re­
view  46:7-29, Winter 1968.
DAHLIE,   HALLVARD.  "Moore's new  perspective
[a   review    article]".   Canadian  Literature
38:81-84,  Autumn  1968.

PRATT, E. J.
WILSON,    MILTON.   "Pratt's comedy,"  journal of   Canadian  studies;  revue    d'etude   cana­ diennes. 3: 21-30   May   1968.
RADDALL, THOMAS H.
HAWKINS,  w.    J.  "Thomas H.  Raddall,  the man   and   his  work." Queens Quarterly 75:
137-146, Spring  1968.

109

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



REANEY, JAMES
BOWERING, GEORGE. "Why James Reaney is a better    poet   I )  than   any   Northrop   Frye poet   11)    than   he   used   to  be."   Canadian  Literature   s6:40-49, Spring   I 968.
LEE,   ALVIN  A.   fames   Reaney.  New  York, Twayne,     I968.    (Twayne  world    authors series:  Canada, 49) .

SCOTT, DUNCAN CAMPBELL
GEDDEs,  GARY.  "Piper of many  tunes, Duncan Campbell Scott."  Canadian   Literature   37: I5-117, Summer   I968.

THOMPSON, DAVID
HOPWOOD, v. G.  "David Thompson, mapmaker and  mythmaker." Canadian   Literature   38:
5-I7, Autumn   I968.
 WEST, PAUL
WOODCOCK, GEORGE.  "Mod  murders  [a review article]".  Canadian Literature   36:74-77, Spring   I 968.

WILSON, ETHEL
NEW,  WILLIAM H.  "The 'genius'  of place  and time: the  fiction  of  Ethel  Wilson".  Journal of  Canadian  studies;  revue  d'etudes  cana­ diennes.   3:39-48, November   I 968.
PACEY, DESMOND. Ethel  Wilson. New York, Twayne  Pub!.,   [I968,  CI967]  I94   p. (Twayne   world    authors  series:    Canada,
33).
WOODCOCK, GEORGE
SYMONS,  JULIAN.   "Man of  the  thirties   [a  re­
view  article]". Canadian   Literature   37:75-
76.  Summer   I968.


LITTERJITURE


CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie par Susan Port


ANTHOLOGIES

Adam   international  review,  val.  311,  nos  3I3-
3I5,  I967. Numero  special  sur  Ia litterature canadienne.
BESSETTE,   GERARD, ed.   De  Quebec   a Saint­
Boniface. Toronto, Macmillan, I968. 1185 p.
BESSETTE,  GERARD, LUCIEN GESL!N et CHARLES PARENT, eds. Histoire de la litterature canadienne-franr;aise   par  les  textes.  Mont­ real,   Centre    Educatif    et   Culture!,    I968.
704  p.
Ecrits  du  Canada   franr;ais, no  114.  Montreal,
I968.
MALOUIN,  REINE,   La   poesie  il  y  a  cent  ans;
essai et anthologie. Quebec,  Garneau, I968.
109  p.
SMITH, A.   J.  M., ed.  Modern  Canadian  verse, in English and French. Toronto, Oxford University   Press,  I 967.  4116 p.
THERIO,  ADRIEN, ed. L'humour au Canada franr;ais; anthologie. Montreal, Cercle du Livre  de  France, I968. 1185 p.

I 10
 ROMANS ET NOUVELLES
ANGERS,  FELICITE  voir  CONAN, LAURE.
AQUIN,  HUBERT.   Trou de  memoire.  Montreal, Cercle   du   Livre   de  France,   I968.  1104 p. AUBERT  DE   GASPE, PHILIPPE.  Le  chercheur  de
tresors,   ou  l'influence  d'un   livre.  s.l.,  Re­
edition-Quebec, I968.  98  p.  Ed.  originale: Quebec,   I837·
BEAUGRAND-GHAMPAGNE,    LOUISE,      Kathman­ dou;   capriccio.  Montreal,  Editions   Esrerel, I968. I47  p.
BEAULIEU,    VICTOR-LEVY.   Memoires    d'outre­ tonneau. Montreal,  Editions  Esterel,    I968. I9I   p.
BENOIT,  REAL.  La  saison  des  artichauts, suivi de  Mes  voisins.  Montreal, Cercle  du  Livre de  France, I968. 89  p.
BESSETTE,   GERARD, ed.   De  Quebec   a  Saint­
Boniface.  Toronto, Macmillan, I968. 1185 p.
BLAIS,    MARIE-CLAIRE.    Manuscrits de   Pauline Archange.   Montreal,   Editions    du    Jour, I968. Ill7  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE·FRANCAISE



BOSSUS, FRANCIS. Beautricourt. Montreal, Cercle  du   Livre  de   France,  I g68.   I 30   p.
BRASSARD, ROLAND. L'enclume de  crista[. Que­
bec,  Editions du  Soc,   rg68. 303  p. CARRIER,  ROCH. La  guerre, yes  sir!  Montr,eal,
Editions du   Jour,  Ig68.  I 24  p.
CHAMPAGNE,  MONIQUE.  Sous     l'ecorce     des jours;     nouvelles.  Montreal,  HMH,   Ig68. I7I   p.
CLARI, JEAN-CLAUDE. L'appartenance.   Mont­
real,    Cercle   du    Livre   de   France,   Ig68.
206   p.
-. Les   grandes  filles.  Montreal,  Editions  du
Jour,  Ig68.  I5I    p.
coNAN,  LAURE. Angeline  de   Montbrun.   Pre­ cede  d'une chronologie, d'une  bibliographie et  de   jugements critiques.  Montreal, Fides,
1g68.   I87   p.
DUBE, RODOLPHE voir    HERTEL,  FRANCOIS, pseud.
DUCHARME,  REJEAN. L'oceantume. Paris,  Gal­
limard,  1g68,   I 8g  p.
ELIE, ROBERT. La  fin des  songes.  Precede d'une chronologie, d'une  bibliographie et  de  juge­ ments   critiques.   Montreal,   Fides,    Ig68.
2 I I   p.
ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN. Mater Europa. Montreal, Cercle du   Livre de   France,  Paris, Grasset, Ig68. I70  p.
FERRoN, JACQUES. La   charrette. Montreal, HMH,  Ig68. 207  p.
FOURNIER,   ROGER.  La   voix. Montreal, Cercle du   Livre   de  France,  1968.   230   p.
 extraits de  Adagio, Allegro, Andante. Mont­
real,  Fides,   rg68. 216  p.
LEVEILLE,  J. R. Tombeau.  Winnipeg, Printed by  Canadian  Publishers,  rg68.  101  p.
LOSIQUE, SERGE. De   Zenith  a  Azimut;  un
scribomatic.  Montreal,   Editions  du    Jour,
1968.  157  p.
NADEAU,  JEAN. Bien   v8tre. Montreal,  Cercle du  Livre  de  France,  rg68. 158  p.
NAUBERT,  YVETTE. L'ete  de  la  cigale.  Mont­
real,    Cercle  du    Livre    de   France,   rg68.
209  p.
OUELLETTE-MICHALSKI,   MADELEINE. Le  d8me.
Montreal, Editions  utopiques,  1g68.   g6  p. PARADIS,   suzANNE.   Les    cormorans. Quebec,
Garneau,  I967. 243  p.
PONTAUT,  ALAIN. La tutelle. Montreal, Lemeac, rg68.  I4I   p.
POUPART,  JEAN-MARIE.   Angoisse  play.   Mont­
real,  Editions du  Jour, rg68. I I o p. ROBIDOUX,  NORMAND.  Hippie de  coeur. Mont·
real,   Ig68.   I24   p.
SAINT-ONGE,  PAULE. La  saison   de  l'inconfort. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre  de  France, Ig68. I83  p.
SOUCY, CHARLES. Le    voyage    a  l'imparfait.
Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France, Ig68. I58   p.
STEENHOUT, IVAN. La   geste.   Montreal,  Edi­
tions  de  l'Esterel, Ig67. 14I   p.
TESSIER, THEODORE.  De  l'aube au  crepuscule.
Sherbrooke, Editions Paulines, I967. I03  p.
TETREAU,  JEAN. Volupte  de  l'amour  et  de  la mort; histoires   fantastiques. Montreal,  Edi­

GAGNON,  PIERRE 0. A   [a   mort   de   mes ans.    Montreal,   Editions   du    Jour, I34   p.
 vingt
Ig68.
 tions  du  Jour,  1968.   247  p.
THERIAULT,  YVES. Cul-de-sac. Montreal, Edi­
tions  de  !'Homme, Ig68. I9I   p.

HERTEL, FRANCOIS,  pseud. Louis   Prefontaine, apostat; autobiographie approximative. Montreal, Editions du  Jour,  I967. I53   p.
LAMIRANDE,  CLAIRE  DE. Aldebaran  OU   la {leur.
Montreal, Editions du   Jour, 1g68.   128  p.
LECLERC, FELIX. Dialogues  d'hommes  et   de b2tes.   Precede d'une  chronologie, d'une bibliographie et de jugements critiques. Montreal, Fides, 1967.   223  p.
-. Le   hamac  dans   les  voiles. Precede d'une chronologie  et   d'une  bibliographie. Contes
 -. L'ile   introuuable. Montreal,  Editions du
Jour,  Ig68.   I73   p.
-.Kesten. Montreal, Editions du  Jour,  Ig68.
I23  p.
-.La  mort    d'eau.   Montl'eal,  Editions  de
!'Homme,  Ig68.  I16   p.
-. N'Tsuk.  Montreal, Editions de   !'Homme, rg68.   Io6   p.
THERIO, ADRIEN. Soliloque en  hommage  a une
femme.   Montreal,    Cercle   du    Livre   de
France, Ig68. r6I   p.


I I I

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



POESIE
AUDET,  NOEL.  La  tete  barbare.  Montreal   Edi- tions  du  Jour,   1968.  77  p.                   '
BOITEAU,  GEORGES.  La  vision  des  genies. Ancienne-Lorette, Que., Editions du Vieux Chene,   1967.  57  p.
BROSSARD,  NICOLE,  L'echo bouge  beau. Mont­
real,  Editions  Esterel,  1968. 50 p.
CHAMPAGNE,     MAURICE.   Suite   pour    amour. Montreal, Editions  du  Jour,  1968.  113  p. CHANTAL,   ALMA  DE.  Miroirs fauves.  Quebec,
Garneau, 1968.  61  p.
CHAPMAN,  WILLIAM.  William Chapman; textes presentes  et  annates par  Jean  Menard. Montreal, Fides,  1968. 95  p.
CHATILLON,  PIERRE.  Les  cris.  Montreal,  Edi­
tions  du  Jour,  1968.  96 p.
DOR, GEORGES.  Poemes   et  chansons. Montreal, Editions   de  l'Hexagone,  1968.
Ecole Philippe-Aubert-de-Gaspe. Recueil de poemes. Montreal, 1966. 17 f.
GOLMANN, STEPHANE. Premieres  armes  sans musique. Quebec,   Editions  de !'Arc,   1967.
6o  p.
GRANDBOis,  ALAIN.  Alain  Grandbois.  Presenta­ tion   par   Jacques  Brault.   Choix   de  textes, portraits,   bibliographie,    fac-simile.    Paris, Seghers,  1968.  190  p.
GUIMONT,    MADELEINE.   Les    temps   miscib/es.
Quebec,   Garneau,  1968.  155  p.
LABELLE,  JACQUES.   Les  yeux   et  [a  memoire.
Montreal, Deom,  1968. 89  p.
LABERGE,    MARIE,   L'hiver  a  brufer.  Quebec,
Garneau, 1968.  91  p.
LAFOND, GUY.  Poemes   de  l'un.  Montreal,  Edi­
tions  Voltaire, 1968. 89  p.
LEBRUN,  DENIS.   Le   temps  d'entre  deux    pas.
Montreal, Editions  sans le sou, 1968.  99  p.
LECLERC,    FELIX.     Chansons pour     tes   yeux.
Montreal,   Paris,    Robert    Laffont,     1968.
120  p.
LEVESQUE,   RAYMOND.  Quand [es  hommes vivront d'amour. Quebec   Editions  de !'Arc
1967.  147  p. 	,	,
MARSOLAIS, GILLES. La  caravelfe  incendiee; precede  de  S ouillures et  traces  et  de  L'acte revolte.  Montreal, Editions  du  Jour,  1968.
6o  p.


112
 MARTEL, CLEMENT.  Pauvre   memoire,,, Mont­
real,  Editions   Sans  le  Sou,  1968.  57  p.
MARVILLE,  CLAUDE.   Chaconne. Trois  Rivieres
Editions  du  Bien Public,  1968. 63 p. 	'
MORENCY,  PIERRE.   Poemes   de   fa    froide   mer­
veil/e   de   vivre. Quebec,  Editions   de  !'Arc,
1967.  106  p.
MORIN,  LORENzo.   L'il   d'elle.  Montreal   Edi- tions  de  l'Hexagone, 1968.  89  p.        '
PAGEAU,  RENE.  Pays  intlrieur. Joliette, Que.,
1967.  139  p.
PALLASCIO-MORIN,  ERNEST.   Pour   [es  enfants du  monde. Quebec,  Garneau, 1968. 130  p. PARADIS,  LOUIS-ROLAND.  Silhouette d'un  cou­
rant  marin. Trois-Rivieres, Editions  du  Bien
Public,  1968.  83  p.
PARADIS,  SUZANNE.   L'amvre de   pierre.  Que­
bec,  Garneau, 1968.  72  p.
PREFONTAINE,   YVES.  Pays  sans  parole. Mont­ real,  Editions   de  l'Hexagone,   1967.  77  p. PROULX,    DANIEL.    Pactes.    Montreal,   Deom,
1968.  75  p.
PROULX, LUGE.  Solei[  brule. Quebec,  Garneau,
1968.  62  p.
REGNIER, MICHEL. Les noces  dures. Montreal, Deom,  1968.  89  p.
ROBERT,   GUY.    Un    memoire   deja;   poemes,
1959-1967. Quebec,   Garneau,  1968.  99  p.
SICOTTE, SYLVIE. Pour  appartenir. Montreal, Deom  1968.   1 12  p.
SMITH, A.   J.  M., ed.  Modern  Canadian  verse, in English and  French. Toronto, Oxford University   Press, 1967. 426  p.
VALIQUETTE, JEAN-MICHEL.  Un  poete  nous est mort.  Numero  special  de  La  barre  du   jour, no   15,  aofit-sept.  1968.
VERNAL,  FRANCOIS DE.  D'amour et  de  douleur. Honfleur,  Que.,   Editions   Pierre   Jean   Os­ wald,  1967.  6o  p.

THEATRE
BLAis,   MARIE-CLAIRE. L'execution. Montl'eal, Editions  du  Jours,  1968.  118  p.
DUBE,   MARCEL.  Les   beaux   dimanches.  Mont­
l'eal, Lemeac,  1968.  185  p.
-. Bilan. Montreal, Lemeac,  1968.  187  p.
-. Virginie.   Ecrits    du   Canada   fran(ais   24:
7-87,  1968.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



DUCHESNE, I ACQUES.   Le  quadrille.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France, 1968.  2 I 3  p. DUMAS,  ROGER. Les    millionnaires.    Theatre
vivant   2:5 I- I 2 I, fev.   I 967.
FERRON,  JACQUES.  Theatre r:   Les   grands soleils, Tante Elise,  Le  Don   juan  chretien. Montreal, Deom, 1968.   229  p.
FOUCHE,   FRANC.  Trou   de    dieu.   Theatre vivant   4:45-8o, fev.    I 968.
GELINAS, GRATIEN. Hier, les enfants  dansaient.
Montreal, Lemeac, 1968. I59  p.
GELINAS, MARC-F. Qu'on l'ecoute; piece  en  un acte. Theatre vivant  3:24-46, juin   I967. GURIK, ROBERT. Hamlet,  prince   du   Quebec.
Montreal, Editions de !'Homme, I968.  95  p.
-. Les  louis   d'or.  Theatre vivant    I: I I-6o, nov.   I966.
HERBIET, JEAN. Job's  kit.  Theatre  vivant   3:
5I-95,  juin   I967.
MAILLET, ANTONINE. Les    crasseux.  Theatre vivant  5: I I-69,    I968.
MORIN,  JEAN. Vive  l'empereur. Theatre vivant
1:61-103, nov.   1966.
PHELPS,  ANTHONY.  Le  conditionneJ.  Theatre vivant  4: 7-44,  fev.  I 968.
Roux, JEAN-LOUIS. Bois brulls.  Montreal, Edi­
tions   du   jour,   1968.   219  p.
SAINT-DENIS,  DENIS.  Le   monde  est   une   ma­
chine  qui   marche  bien.  Thlatre  vivant   2:
13-51,   fev.   I967.
THERIAULT,  YVES. Le  marcheur. Presentation par     Renald   Berube.   Montreal,   Lemeac,
1968.   110  p.
TREMBLAY, MICHEL. Les  belles-soeurs. Theatre vivant  6:7-70,  1968

ESSAIS, LETTRES, MELANGES LITTERAlRES
DANTIN, LoUis, pseud.  Louis   Dantin. Textes choisis  et  presentes par   Yves  Garon.  Mont­ real,  Fides,   I968. 96  p.
DUHARMEL,  ROGER. L'air  du  temps. Montreal, Cercle  du   Livre  de   France,  I 968.   203   p.
GARNEAU, FRANCOIS·XAVIER.  Voyages en Angle­ terre   et  en  France   dans  les   annees   r83r, IB32   et  1833-   Texte etabli,  annote et  pre­ sente  par   Paul  Wyczynski. Ottawa, Editions de  l'Universite d'Ottawa,  1968.  375  p.
 HEMON, LOUIS. Lettres   a  sa  famille, ed.  par Nicole  Deschamps. Montreal, Presses de l'Universite de  Montreal,  I968. 219  p.
SEERS, FERDINAND  JOSEPH  EUGENE  voir  DAN­ TIN, LOUIS.

LITTERATURE DE JEUNESSE
BER, JANE, pseud.  Gerbe  de  contes  de  Noel; recits veridiques d'hier et d'aujourd'hui. Hauterive,   Que.,   Imprimerie   Hauterive,
1967.   46  p.
BERUBE,  JEANNE voir   BER, JANE.
GAGNON, MAURICE. Alerte    dans   [e   Pacific.
Montreal, Lidec,  I967.  155  p.
-. Servax   a   la   rescousse.  Montreal,  Lidec,
1968.   15I   p.
-. Un   complot    a    Washington. Montreal,
Lidec,  1968.   150   p.
LACERTE, ROLANDE.  Le  solei[ des  profondeurs. Montreal,   Centre   de    Psychologie et   de Pedagogie,   1968.   96   p.
MAJOR,  HENRIETTE. Le    Club   des   Curieux.
Montl'eal, Fides,  1967.   119  p.
-. Un  dr8le de  petit  cheval.  Montreal, Centre de  Psychologie et  de  Pedagogie, 1968.  56  p. PALLASCIO·MORIN,   ERNEST. Pour  les   enfants
du  monde.  Quebec, Garneau,  I968. 130  p. THERIAULT,  YVES. La  bete  a 300 tetes. Mont­
real,  Lidec, 1967 0        I 18  p.
-. Les pieuvres. Montreal, Lidec, I968. I27  p.
-. Les   vampires    de   la   rue   M.-Le-Prince.
Montreal,  Lidec,  I968.  143  p.

BIBLIOGRAPHIES
HARE,  JOHN   et    JEAN-PIERRE WALLOT. Les imprimis dans le bas-Canada, r8or-r84o; bibliographie analytique. I.  rBor-rBro. Montreal, Presses  de  l'Universite de  Mont­ real,   1967.  38I   p.
Letters in  Canada:  I 967.  Livres en  fran ais.
University    of   Toronto  quarterly   37:552-
588,   July    1968.
Livres et auteurs 1967: panorama de l'annee litteraire.    Montreal,   Editions   Jumonville, I 968.  206   p.  Bibliographie  gent1rale    1967,
p.   21-30.    Etudes  de   Ia   litrerature   cana­ dienne-fran aise   publiees au    cours   de l'annee dans nos  revues, p.  30-32.

113

LITTERATtTRE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



NEW, w H., comp. Index to  numbers 25 to  36 of  Canadian literature. Canadian literature
37:99-108,  Summer   1968.
PORT, SUSAN. Canadian  literature  1967.  Lit­ terature canadienne-franc;aise.   Canadian literature  36: 110-118, Spring  1968.
STRATFORD,   PHILIP.   French-Canadian   litera­
ture   in  translation.  Meta  13:18o-187, dec.
1968.
UNIVERSITE  MCGILL. CENTRE  D'ETUDES  CANA­ DIENNES FRANCAISES.   BIBLIOTHEQUE.  Bibli­  ographie preliminaire de  poesie  canadienne­ franfaise. Montreal,  1968.  26  f.

OUVRAGES  CONSACRES A L'EDITION

HARE,  JOHN   et  JEAN-PIERRE WALLOT. Les imprimis  dans   le   bas-Canada, rBor-1840; bibliographie analytique.   I.   rBor-rBro. Montreal, Presses  de  l'Universite de  Mont­ real,    1967.   381  p.
VALOIS, JOCELYNE.  La  presse  feminine  [Revue mod erne  et  Chatelaine]  et  Ie role  social  de Ia   femme.  Recherches  sociographiques  8:
351-375, sept.-dec. 1967.

LINGUISTIQUE

ANJOU,  JOSEPH  D'.  Au   service   du   franc;ais.
Voir  chaque numero de  Relations.
BEAULIEU, MAURICE. Reactions pratiques [!'Office de  Ia  langue franc;aise] Culture vivante 7/8:61-62,  1968.
BOUDREAULT,    MARCEL. Rythme   et    melodie dans  la  phrase  parlee  en  France  et  au  Que­ bec.  Paris, Klincksieck, Quebec,  Presses  de l'Universite Laval, 1968.  273  p.  (Bibliothe­ que  franc;aise  et  romane. Ser.  E.  Langue et Iitterature franc;aises  au  Canada, 4).
BRAULT, GERARD   J.  La   locution  canadienne
"avoir  de   Ia   jarnigoine."   Romance   notes
8:305-309,  1967.
CHARBONNEAU,  RENE. Le  fran<;ais  dans  Je monde  du   travail ... en   court-circuit   per­ manent. Culture uiuante 7/8:27-30,  1968.
DARBELNET, JEAN. La  traduction, voie ouverte
a  l'anglicisation.  Culture  uivante  7/8:39-
45,   1968.
DESROSIERS,  PIERRE  R. JouaJ  populi, jouaJ  dei.
Culture  vivante  7/8:2 1-26,  1968.

I  14
 DULONG, GASTON. Dictionnaire  correctif    du franfais  au  Canada. Quebec, Presses  de l'Universite Laval, 1968.  255  p.
Les  emissions  radio-television  consacrees  a  Ia
langue  franc;aise. Culture  uivante  7/8:50-
54,   1968.
L'enseignement  de   Ia   litterature  en   rapport avec  l'etat de  Ia langue. Liberte 57:87-102, mai-juin 1968.
FALARDEAU, CLAUDE. Le    dictionnaire  d'un quebecois  ou  le  maudit  mot   dit. Montreal, Editions de  !'Homme, 1967.  143  p.
FORTIN,  DAVID. Evolution du  language agricole franco-canadien. Quebec,  Presses   de  l'Uni­ versite Laval,  I968. 241   p.
GENDRON,  JEAN-DENIS. Contribution  a ]'etude
du   franc;ais   rural  parte au   Canada.  Stras­
bourg.  Universite.  Centre  de   philologie et de  Iitteratures romanes. Trauaux de  linguis­ tique  et   de   litterature  4,  i    (Melanges  de Iinguistique et  de  philologie  romanes offerts
a Monseigneur Pierre Gardette)  p. 173-189.
La  langue de  travail dans l'industrie au  Que­ bec.    Numero   special  de   Relations   indus­ trielles, v.23,  no  3,  1968.
LEFEBVRE, GILLES. Telle  langue,  teJ   peupJe.
Culture uivante 7/8:7-14,  1968.
LEON, PIERRE R.,  ERIC F.  JAMES et  GEORGES SEVIGNY.  Observations  sur   une   forme  pro­ gressive     en     canadien-franc;ais.     Canadian journal   of  linguistics/Revue  canadienne  de linguistique 13:94-98,   printemps  1968.
POISSON,  JACQUES. Aux   confins   de   J'ininteJ­ JigibJe;  Ia  langue de  !'information  au  Que­ bec.  Culture viuante 7/8:15-19,  1968.
RAT, MAURICE.  La  langue franc;aise  au  Quebec.
Revue  des   deux   mondes,  15   nov.    1967:
292-293·
-.La langue franc;aise   en  Acadie. Revue  des deux mondes, 15  mai   I968: 273-277.
-. "Parlure" de  Saintonge et  parler  franc;ais de    Quebec.  Revue   des   deux  mondes I5 sept.   1967:292-295.
WATIER, MAURICE. En    publicire,  Ie   franc;ais n'est-il  qu'accessoire. Culture  vivante  7/8:
3I-37, I968.

REVUES

Etudes  litthaires.  v. I- 	avril    I 968- Quebec, Presses   de  l'Universite  Laval.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE·FRANCAISE



SATIRE  ET HUMOUR
DUBUC, CARL. Lettre    a  un   fran(ais  qui  veut lmigrer  au  Quebec. Montreal, Editions du Jour, 1968.   158  p.
TARD, LOUIS-MARTIN.   Si  VOUS  saisissez l'astuce. Montreal, Editions du  Jour, 1968.   122  p. THERIO,  ADRIEN, ed.   L'humour   au   Canada
franrais;   anthologie.  Montreal, Cercle du
Livre de  France, 1968.   285  p.

BIOGRAPHIES
ALLAIRE, EMILIA B.   Profils   {Cminins;   trente figures de  proue  canadiennes. Quebec, Gar­ neau, 1967.   283  p.
CARRIERE, GASTON.  L'apOtre    des   prairies, Joseph  Hugonnard, o.m.i.  I848·1917. Mont­ real,  Rayonnement,  I g67.   I 70  p.
FREGAULT,  GUY. Pierre  Le  Moyne   d'Iberville.
Montreal,  Fides, 1968.   300   p.
MORIN, RENEE. Un  bourgeois  d'une  lpoque rlvolue: Victor  Morin   (1865-196o)  Mont­ real,   Editions du  Jour, 1967.   159  p.
PELLETIER·DLAMINI,    LOUIS.  Pomme-de-Pin.
Montreal,   Editions   de    !'Homme,    1968.
134  p.
ROQUEBRUNE, ROBERT  DE.   Cherchant     mes souvenirs,     1911-1940.   Montreal,   Fides,
I g68.    243   p.   Fait  suite   a  Testament   de
mon   enfance   et   Quartier   Saint-Louis.

HISTOIRE  ET CRITIQUE  LITTERAIRES

OUVRAGES ET  ARTICLES GENERAUX
BARBERis, ROBERT. Litterature   quebecoise et religion.   Maintenant   74:57-6o,    fev.-mars
1968.
BESSETTE,  GERARD. La    creation  !itteraire  a
l'universite. Livres  et  auteurs  1967:16-18.
BESSETTE,  GERARD, LUCIEN  GESLIN et CHARLES PARENT. Histoire   de  la  litthature  par  les textes. Montreal,  Centre  Educatif  et   Cul­ ture!, 1968.  704  p.
-. Une   littlrature  en   ebullition. Montreal
Editions du  Jour, 1968.  315  p. 	' BISSELL,  CLAUDE  T.   Edmund    Wilson's   0
Canada    revisited.   Journal     of	Canadian
studies/Revue  d'etudes    canadiennes   3: 11-
16,  aoilt   1968.
 COSTISELLA, JOSEPH. L'esprit revolutionnaire dans  la litterature  canadienne-fran(aise,  de
1837  tl  la   fin  du   XIX•  siecle.   Montreal, Beauchemin, Ig68. 316  p.
DIONNE, RENE.  Avons-nous   une    litterature.
Relations  325:81-85, mars  1968.
DUHAMEL, ROGER. Lettres   canadiennes-fran­ c;aises; les  grands departs  d'une seule  annee [Groulx,  Desrosiers,   Charbonneau,  S.   D.  Garneau}  Revue    des   deux   mondes, janv. Ig68:237·244·
-.Manuel   de    litthature    canadienne-fran­ faise.   Montreal,    Editions    du    Renouveau Pedagogique,  1967.   159  p.
L'enseignement  de   Ia   litterature  en   rapport avec  l'etat de  Ia langue. Liberte  57:87-I02, mai-juin  1968.
Ephemerides   de    l'annee.  Livres   et   auteurs
1967; 186-18g.
GRANDPRE,    PIERRE  DE.   Histoire    de   la    lit­ terature   franfaise    du   Quebec.  v.1    I534· Igoo.  Montreal, Beauchemin, 1967.
HAMELIN, JEAN et   ANDRE  BEAULIEU.   Aperc;u du   journalisme quebecois d'expression  fran­ c;aise, I et  II.  Quebec   10: 35•59.  mai   I g67 et   12:43-6g, fev.   1g68.
HOOG, ARMAND.  Du   mythe d'hier  au   reel d'aujourd-hui. Etudes  fran(aises 4:349-360, aoilt   1968.
KATTAN,  NAIM. Canada; une  litterature  d'in­
terrogation. Preuves   193 : 76-81,   1 967. LEVESQUE, CLAUDE. La    region    de    !'attrait
[l'erotismeJ  Liberti    54: 8-2 g,    nov.-dec.
1967.
Les   prix   litteraires   1 g67.   Livres   et   auteurs canadiens   1967:1 g.
Prix   litteraires  Ig67-1968.  Vient  de   para'itre
4:28-29, juin  1 g68.
Quelle  part   doit-on  reserver  a  Ia  litterature
quebecoise  dans  l'enseignement  de   Ia   lit­
terature.  Liberte   57: 73-86,   mai-juin   1968. STRATFORD,   PHILIP.   French-Canadian   litera­
ture   in  translation. Meta   13: 1 8o-187, dec.
1968.
SUTHERLAND, RONALD. The   body-odour   of race.   Canadian   literature   37:46-67,   Sum­ mer  1968.
TOUGAS,  GERARD. The future for  French writ-

I 15

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



ing  in  Canada.  Societe Royale du  Canada.
Memoires. 4e  ser.,  v.5:57-67,  juin   1967.
-. Histoire   de    la    litterature    canadienne­ fran,aise. 4e ed.  Paris, Presses  Universitaires de  France, I 967.  3 I 2  p.
TREMBLAY, JEAN  NOEL.  L'ame  du    Quebec dans    Ia   litterature.  Vie   et   langage    194:
242-255,  mai   1968.
VACHON, G.-ANDRE. Primitifs canadiens. Etudes fran,aises  4:57-65,   fev.   1968.
-. Une  tradition   a   inventer.  Montreal,
Faculte  des  Lettres de  l'Universite de Montreal,   1968.     (Conferences   J.  A.   de Seve,   10).
VIATTE, AUGUSTE.  Chateaubriand  et   ses   pre­
curseurs franc;ais   d'Amerique. Etudes   fran­
!iaises 4:253-346, aout   1968.
WARWICK, JACK.  The  long    journey;  literary themes  of  French   Canada.  Toronto,   Uni­ versity   of  Toronto Press,  1968.  172  p.

LE  ROMAN

FALARDEAU, JEAN-CHARLES. £'evolution   du heros   dans   le   roman   quebecois. Montreal, Presses   de  l'Universite de   Montreal,  Ig68.
36  p.   (Conferences J. A. de  Seve,  9).
LEMIRE, MAURICE.  La   trahison  de  Bigot  dans le  roman  historique canadien. Revue  d'his­ toire     de    !'Amerique   fran,ais     22:65-88, juin    I 968.    ( Chapitre  d'une   these  de   doc­  tarat es  lettres, Les  grands  themes national­ istes  du  roman  historiques canadien-fran,ais, Laval  1966).
PARIZEAU,  ALICE. L'erotisme  a ]a  canadienne.
Liberti  54:94-100, nov.-dec.  I 967. ROBIDoux, R. Letters in  Canada:  1967.  Livres
en  franc;ais.  Romans et  nouvelles.  University
of    Toronto   Quarterly  37=571-577, July
1968.

LA  POESIE

DUDEK, LOUIS. Nationalism in   Canadian poetry. Queen's quarterly 75:557-567,  Win­ ter   I968.
MALOUIN,  REINE. La   poesie  il   y  a  cent   ans; essai et  anthologie. Quebec, Garneau, 1968. I09   p.
MOISAN, CLEMENT. L'age  de   Ja  poesie   cana·
dienne.  Culture  vivante 9:3-8,  I 968.

rr6
 MORA,  EDITH. Trois  poetes   quebecois  [Pilon, Prefontaine, Hebert]  Nouvelles litteraires 1 I mai:9,   1967.
SYLVESTRE, GUY.  Letters  in   Canada:   I967. Livres en franc;ais.  La  poesie.  University of Toronto  Quarterly 37:578-s88,  July    I968.

LE  THEATRE

GELINAS, MARC   F.  Orientations de  Ja  drama­ turgie  nouvelle.  Culture  vivante   9: I I-I6, I968.
PIAzzA,  FRANcms.   Presence  du   theatre   que­ becois.  Theatre  vivant  3:3-8,  juin   I 967. Theatre-Quebec;  numero special de  La  barre
du   jour,  v.1,  nos  3-4-5,   juillet-dec. 1965.


OUVRAGES  CONSACRES  AUX ECRIVAINS

BELANGER, MARCEL
PAGEAU,  RENE. Prelude  a Ia  parole  de  Marcel
Belanger. Culture  29:35-41,  mars   I968.

BERNIER, HECTOR
THERIO, ADRIEN. Un   cas   de   masochisme   ex­ emplaire;  Au    large    de   l'ecueil    d'Hector Bernier. Livres et  auteurs  1967: I 97-204.
BLAIS, MARIE-CLAIRE
BOIVIN,  GERARD-MARIE.  Le   monde etrange de Marie-Claire Blais, au  La cage  aux fauves. Culture 29:3-I7,  mars   I968.
DOURDET,  DENISE. Marie-Claire  Blais.   Revue de   Paris   74: I29-136, fev.   I967.
CARRIER, ROCH
DIONNE, RENE. La   guerre,  yes  sir!  Relations
331: 279-28I, oct.    I968.

CHAPMAN, WILLIAM
Sources a consulter, 1-11. Fiches   bibliographi­
ques    de    litterature   canadienne   463-464,
sept. Ig68.

CHOQUETTE, ROBERT
FONDA, CARLO. Le  privilege de  vivre; reflexions sur   Robert  Choquette.  Canadian literature
37:28-39, Summer I968.

DEGAGNE, ABBE NARCISSE
DESGAGNE, RAYMOND. Litterateurs sagueneens; Abbe Narcisse Degagne (I865-1942). Saguenayensia 9:34-38,  mars-avril 1967.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE



DESROSIERS, LEO-PAUL
Sources a consulter. Nord-Sud;  sources  a con­
sulter.   Les    engages    du    Grand     Portage;
sources   a consulter. Fiches   bibliographiques
de    litterature   canadienne   422-424,   ma1
I968.

DUBE, MARCEL
Textes   et    documents.   Montreal,    Lemeac, I968. 8o  p.
DUCHARME, REJEAN
BARBERIS,  ROBERT.  Rejean Ducharme;  l'avale de   Dieu.  Maintenant  75: 8o-83,  mars-avril
 GRANDBOIS, ALAIN
BRAULT, JACQUES.  Alain Grandbois. Presenta­ tion   par   Jacques  Brault  choix   de   textes,  portraits, bibliographie fac-simile.  Montreal­ Paris,   L'Hexagone-Seghers,   I968.  r86   p.
Sources a consulter I-III.  Fiches  bibliographi­
ques    de    litterature   canadienne   454-456, juin  1968.

GROULX, LIONEL
Numero   special   de   L'action nationale 57:
83I-I115,  juin    1968.

GUEVREMONT, GERMAINE

I968.
-. L'avalee  des  a vales;   affrontement  avec   le mal.    Maintenant   76: I2I-I24,    avril-mai I968.
LAURION, GASTON. L'avalee  des   avalJs   et   le refus   d'etre  adulte.  Revue  de   l'Universite
 MOLLICA, ANTHONY. monologue    in    Le modern   language
1968.

HEBERT, ANNE
 Imagery   and    internal survenant.    Canadian revzew     25:5-11,   oct.

d'Ottawa 38: 524-54I,  juillet-sept. I 968.

ELIE, ROBERT
GAGNON, MARC. Robert Elie. Montreal, Fides, I968.  I88   p.
Sources a consulter. La   fin des  songes;  sources
a  consulter. Fiches   bibliographiques  de  lit­
terature  canadienne  538-539,  dec.   I968.

ETHIER-BLAIS, JEAN
FRECHETTE,  JEAN. Les  Signets I  et  II  de  Jean Ethier-Blais. Action nationale 57:569-576, janv.   I968.

GARNEAU, SAINT-DENYS
BOURNEUF,  ROLAND. Saint-Denys-Garneau, lec­
ture   de  Baudelaire. Etudes litteraires I : 83-
112,  avril   1968.
BRAULT, JACQUES.  Saint-Denys  Garneau  1968. Etudes  fran,aises 4:403-406,  nov.    I968. DEBIEN, LEON. Saint-Denys Garneau  et  Fran­
<;ois Mauriac.  Liberte 55:20-28,  janv.-fev.
1968,  et  dans   Quebec I4:  67-75. oct.   I968. HUOT, GISELE. A  propos du  Saint-Denis-Gar­ neau   d'Eva  Kushner.   Culture  29: I 33-141,
mars   1968.

GIGUERE, ROLAND
GIMON, RENEE. Bibliographie  de Roland Giguere. La  barre  du   jour   rr-13:  173-196, dec.-mai   1968.
Connaissance  de   Giguere.  La   barre   du   jour
nos  I I -13,  dec.-mai 1968.  196  p.
 HOUDE, GILLES. Les  symboles  et  Ia  structure
mythique  du   Torrent.  La   barre  du   jour r6:22·46,  oct.-dec.  1968.    (a  suivre).
LE  GRAND,    ALBERT. De    l'exil    au    royaume.
Etudes  fran,aises 4:3-29,  fev.  I968.

HEMON, LOUIS
DESCHAMPS,  NICOLE. Lecture de  Maria  Chap­
delaine.  Etudes   franfaises  4: 15r-r67,  mai
1968.
MALETTE,  YVON. M enaud,   maltre-draveur et Marie    Chapdelaine.  Incidences   I 3:20-28, hiver   1968.

JASMIN,  CLAUDE
GALLAYS,  FRANCOIS.  Claude  Jasmin et  Je  re­
tour   a !'innocence.  Livres et  auteurs I967:
I9I-I97·

LEVAC, CLAUDE
Levac,    Loranger;  theatre ... evenement  vecu par   Ia  collectivite.  Parti   pris  5:53-57, fev. I968.

LORANGER, FRANCOISE
Levac,   Loranger;  theatre ... evenement  vecu par   Ia  collectivite. Parti   pris  5:53-57, fev.
1968.

MARMETTE, JOSEPH
LE  MOINE, ROGER.  Joseph Marmette,  sa  vie, son  ceuvre,  suivi  de   A  travers la  vie. Que­ bec,   Presses   de   l'Universire  Laval,    I968.
250  p.

117

THESES



NELLIGAN, EMILE
SAMSON, JEAN-NOEL  et  ROLAND-M. CHARLAND. Emile  Nelligan. Montreal, Fides,   1968. (Dossiers  de   documentation  sur   Ia  littera­ ture  canadienne-franctaise, 3) .
WYCZYNSKI,  PAUL. Emile  Nelligan.  Montreal, Fides, 1967.   188  p.
PANNETON,  PHILIPPE voir  RINGUET.

RINGUET
DIONNE, RENE. La   terre dans   Trente  arpents
de  Ringuet. College  et  famille 25:133-157,
1968

ROY, GABRIELLE
JONES,  MME R. et  F.  G. HOWLETT. Rue  Des­ chambault;  une   analyse.  Canadian  modern language  review  24:58-63, March  Ig68.
ROBIDOUX,  R.  Introduction  a  )'etude  de   Rue
Deschambault  de  Gabrielle  Roy.  Canadian
modern    language    review   24:6o-6I,  Oct. I967.
THORNE, w.  B. Povery   and  wrath; a  study  of The tin   flute.  journal  of Canadian  studies/ Revue    d'etudes  canadiennes   3: 3-IO,   aout
1g68.
 SAVARD, FELIX ANTOINE
ETHIER-BLAis,   JEAN.   Felix-Antoine Savard;
extrait de  Signets. Quebec   I 2:8o-8g, Ig68. LAPRISE, MARYO.  Menaud  et  le  nationalisme.
Incidences  I3: I I-I2, hiver   Ig68.
MAJOR, ANDRE.  Felix-Antoine Savard.  Mont­
real,  Fides,   1968.   Igo  p.
MALETTE, YVON. Menaud, maitre  draveur   et Maria    Chapdelaine.  Incidences    I3: 20-28, hiver  Ig68.
MONFILs, GERARD. Le  personnage de  Menaud et Ia  fatalite  dans Menaud, mattre-draveur. Incidences  I3:I3-I9, hiver   Ig68.
ROCHON,  CLAUDE. La  Dalle-des-Morts; Je pays ou    Ia   femme.  Incidences     I3:6-Io,   hiver
1968.

THERIAULT, YVES
Sources  a  consulter.  Fiches   bibliographiques
de  litterature  canadienne  386,  mars   Ig68.

VIGNEAULT, GILLES
GABOURY, PLACIDE. Vigneault,  prophete  du revolu?  Maintenant  8I: 28 I-284,  nov.-dec. Ig68.
ROBITAILLE, ALINE. Gilles Vigneault. Montreal, Editions de  l'Hexagone,  Ig68.  148  p.




THESES

Compiled  by Carl F. Klinck


IN  ENGLISH
BALCUINAs, INA. The   Small  Ontario  Town as a  Fictional  Element, 1895-1914.  For   M.A., University  of  Toronto  (Professor Roper).
BELANGER, REYNALD. Canadian    Humorists: Leacock, Haliburton, Earle  Birney,  W. 0. Mitchell. For   M.A,   Universite Laval   (Pro­ fessor  J. C.  Stockdale).
BISCOP, PAUL. The   Looking  Game  (a  novel). For   M.A., McGill  University (Professor L. Dudek).
BOND, WILLIAM  ROSS. A  Changing  way of life as  seen  in  the   principal  novels  of Ringuet. For   M.A., McMaster  University  (Professor H.  A. Freeman).
BOYD, BONITA. Patterns  and   Parallels  in  the

118
 
Fiction   of  Margaret   Laurence. For   M.A., Acadia  University  (Professor Jack   Sheriff).
CODERE, ANNETTE. The   Evolving    Role   of Woman in  Canadian  Fiction  in  English  and French.    For    M.A.,   Universite   de    Sher­ brooke   (Professor  D.  G.   Jones).
COOK, GREGORY  MORTON.  Ernest  Buckler:   His Creed  and His Craft. For  M.A., Acadia University  (Professor Jack  Sheriff).   (Com­ pleted  in   I g67).
DJWA,  SANDRA ANN.  Metaphor,  world   view and   the   continuity   of   Canadian    poetry: a   study    of   the   major   English    Canadian poets with  a computer concordance  to meta­ phor.    For     Ph.D.,   University   of    British  Columbia  (Professor D.  G.   Stephens).

THESES



DORSINVILLE,  MAX. A  Comparative Analysis  of the  Protest  Novel in American Negro  and French-Canadian	Literature.    For    M.A., Universite de Sherbrooke (Professor R. Sutherland).
GRAHAM, NEIL.  Theme and  Form  in  the  Novels of  Edward A.  McCourt.  For   M.A.,   Uni­ versity  of  Windsor   (Dr.  K.  O'Donnell).
JOHNSTON,   HELEN.   Literary and   Cultural Soundings:  regional study  of "South Shore" (Nova Scotia) Literature. For  M.A., Acadia University   (Professor   Jack   Sheriff).
MAC GREGOR,  ROBERT   GRANT.   A   Comparative Study of the  Short Stories of Morley Callag­ han    and    Ernest   Hemingway.   For   M.A., University    of   New   Brunswick    (Professor W.  C.  D.  Pacey).
MACKIE, RICHARD GEORGE. Three Seventeenth Century  Newfoundland   Propagandists. For M.A.,  University   of  New  Brunswick   (Pro­ fessors D.  R.  Galloway  and  D. F. Rowan).
MAC  LEOD,  DOUGLAS  E.   A   Critical  Biography of James  DeMille. For M.A., Dalhousie University   (Professor   M.  G.  Parks).
MCKELLAR,  lAIN   HOWELL.   The  Innocents of Morley Callaghan. For  M.A., Carleton  Uni­ versity  (Professor   R.  L.  MacDougall).
MCMULLIN,  STANLEY EDWARD. The Promised Land     Motif     in    the    Works  of   Frederick Philip  Grove. For  M.A., Carleton University (Professor  R.  L.  MacDougall).
MORRIS, MARGARET. The  Image of the  Family: its Nature and  Function in three  Canadian novels.  For M.A., University  of Toronto (Professor  Roper) .
 MURPHY,   SHARON   MARY. Self-Discovery: The Search for Values in  the  Work of Robertson Davies. For M.A., Carleton University  (Pro­ fessor  R.  L. MacDougall).
OPALA, BEATRICE.  Matthew  Arnold in  Canada. For M.A., McGill University  (Professor A. Lucas).
REIF,   ERIC      ANTHONY.  Irving Layton: The Role   of  the   Poet.  For  M.A.,  University   of Toronto  (Professor   Milton   Wilson)    (com­ pleted  in  rg67).
SHARMAN, VINCENT DOUGLAS. The Satiric Tradition  in   the   Works  of  Seven   English­ Canadian Satirists. For  Ph.D.,  University  of Alberta   (Professor   Henry   Kreisel).
STANKO,  STANLEY c. Image, Theme, and  Pat­ tern  in  the  Works of  Martha  Ostenso. For M.A.,  the  University   of   Alberta  (Professor Diane  E. Bessai) .
STEVENs,   PETER.  The  Development of  Cana­ dian   Poetry   between  the  Wars  and  its  Re­ flection    of   Social    Awareness.   For   Ph.D.,  University   of  Saskatchewan    (Dean   C.  A. King).
STEVENSON,     LAURA   ALICE.    The   Image   of Canada in  Canadian Children's Literature. For   M.A.,   University   of  Western   Ontario
(Professor  J. Reaney).
TIESSEN,   PAUL.   Under the   Volcano: Lowry and  the  Cinema. For M.A., University  of Alberta   (Professor  Sheila  Watson).
WILSON,   JEAN   L.   The  Sense    of  Place    and History   in  the   Poetry   of  A.  W.  Purdy. For M.A.,  University   of  Saskatchewan (Dr. Carlyle  A. King).






RJChaub asel & company, 1nc.

Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences



PORTLAND, SAN   FRANCISCO, LOS  ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



119

THESES



IN FRENCH
(Incomplete  information)
FOLEY, KATHERINE.  La Presence Anglaise dans le  Roman   Canadien-francais. For  M.A., McGill    University     (Professor    J.   Ethier­ Blais).
FRECHETTE,     JEAN.    Themes et   Style    dans
!'Oeuvre  de Marie-Claire  Blais. For M.A., McGill    University     (Professor    J.   Ethier­ Blais).
GELINAS-BENOIT, MICHELLE.  Les  paradoxes de
!'action   romanesque   dans  l'reuvre  de   Leo­ Paul  Desrosiers. For   M.A.,  the  University of  Montreal  (Professor  Andre  Brochu).
LAFERRIERE,  ROLAND, Saint-Denys-Garneau. lecteur  de  Baudelaire. For  D.E.S.,  the  Uni­ versity  of  Montreal  (Professor  Nicole  Des­ champs).
MARCOTTE, GILLES.  Description  critique  de  Ia
"poesie   nouvelle"   au  Canada   francais. For


































120
 D.U., Universire Laval   (Professor  C. Lock­
quell).
PAPEN, JEAN. Georges Bugnet, l'homme et l'reuvre.  For  D.U., Universite   Laval   (Pro­ fessor  F.  A. Savard).
RACINE, CLAUDE. Le regionalisme chez Henri Pourrat et Damase Potvin. For D.E.S., the University of Montreal (Professor Nicole Deschamps) .
RENY, ROGER. Le personnage de Denis Boucher dans  l'univers   romanesque   de  Roger  Leme­ lin.  For  D.E.S.,  Universite  Laval  (Professor H. Tuchmaier).
RICARD, F.  L'art  de Felix-Antoine Savard  dans
"Menaud, Maitre-Draveur."  For   M.A., McGill    University   (Professor    J.   Ethier­ Blais).
RODRIGUE, S.   DENISE.   La   civilisation   cana­ dienne-francaise  retracee   dans   l'reuvre   de E.   -Z.  Massicotte.  For   D.E.S.,   Universire Laval   (Professor  L.  Lacourciere).
