$1.25  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·42




THE  LIVING  MOSJIIC


Articles
BY PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, JOHN OWER, MAX  DORSINVILLE, SUSAN JACKEL, MARGARET  MORRISS

Special Feature

COMPILED BY  JOHN  REEVES, WITH POEMS BY YAR SLAVUTYCH, HENRIKAS  NAGYS, WALTER BAUER, Y. Y. SEGAL, ZOFJA BOHDANOWICZ, ROBERT  ZEND, ARVED VllRLAID, INGRIDE VIKSNA, LUIGI ROMEO,
PADRAIG 0 BROIN


Reviews

BY RALPH GUSTAFSON, WARREN TALLMAN, JACK WARWICK,
GEORGE  BOWERING, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, VICTOR  HOAR, KEATH  FRASER, CLARA THOMAS, GARY GEDDES, ANN  SADDLEMYER, GEORGE  WOODCOCK, YAR SLAVUTYCH, W. F. HALL



A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW









AN ABSENCE OF UTOPIAS






LITERATURES are defined "-' much  by their lacks as by theU abundances,  and  it is obviously significant that in the whole of Canadian writing there has appeared  only one utopian  novel of any real interest;  it is significant in terms of our society as much as of our literature.
The  book in question is A Strange Manuscript  Found in a Copper Cylinder. It
was written in the 187o's and  published in 1888, eight years after the death of its author,  James de Mille, a professor of English at Dalhousie, who combined  teach­ ing with the compulsive production  of popular  novels; by the time of his death  at the age of 46 he had already thirty volumes to his credit, but only A Strange Manuscript  has any lasting interest. It has been revived as one of the reprints  in the New Canadian Library  (McClelland  & Stewart, $2.75), with an introduction by R. E. Watters.  One  cannot  go quite as far as Dr. Watters in his arguments  for the great originality  of A Strange Manuscript. As even he admilts, the conception of the work, with its presentation  of an imaginary society -that of the Kosekins at  the South  Pole-whose  values are the opposite of those we sustain, owes an obvious debt  to Samuel  Butler and  Erewhon;  there are also perceptible echoes of Lord Lytton's underground Utopia, The  Coming  Race, which, like Erewhon, was published at  the beginning of the I 87os, a few years before de Mille began work on  his novel. Yet one  can  grant  Dr.  Watters -and  de  Mille posthumously - that  his combination  of elements from  old books of antarctic exploration,  from palaeontological treatises, and from a range of earlier utopian romances does result in a book which  holds together,  cemented by a moral vision that  is perhaps  not peculiar to the author so much as characteristic of Canada.
Yet in  terms of our  culture  as a whole the interesting fact  about  this solitary
successful Canadian utopian  novel is that  it is really not utopian  at all. It is not


3

EDITORIAL



even-at least in the manner of Brave New World or 1984-anti-utopian, since it  is not concerned  with either the defence or  the refutation  of the idea that  men can live in a planned,  "ideal"  society. De Mille's purpose, like that  of Swift and Butler, is not to polemicize for or against a society that does not exist, but to present a satirical view of our own world by the simple and oft-used process of inversion. Where  we love wealth, the Kosekin love poverty;  where we regard  happiness as the greatest goal, they strive after misery; where we love light, they yearn towards darkness;  where we long for life, they desire deaJth. In the process De Mille -like so many satirists-manages to have the best of both worlds, for the selflessness of the Kosekin reflects on the selfishness of our own world, and  at the same time we realize that even virtue and self-sacrifice carried to an extreme can be repulsive, so thaJt we see the man of aggressive virtue pilloried at the same time as the man of good-natured vice. If there  is any  moral  to  A Strange Manuscript  Found in a Copper Cylinder, it is surely that  of the middle way-moderation in all things.
But the fact that our one good utopian romance turns out to be no utopia at all,
but  a tract  for the  times, merely emphasizes the fact  that  the genuine  utopia­ positive or negative- is not a Canadian or, indeed, a North American genre, for the examples emanating from south of the border are so rare -Bellamy's Looking Backward is the only one that  comes immediately  to mind-as to emphasize the slight interest  in  the New World  (at  least until  the  advent  of science fiction)  in this kind of fantasy.
The  lack is not due to the absence of utopian  inclinations  in either the United States  or  Canada. The  great  number  of practical  experiments  in utopian  living from  the early  rgth  to the early 2oth century is a proof to the contrary. But here again  there is an interesting point to be observed. The celebrated  North American communities-and the list of them runs into  hundreds -were either groups of religious zealots following millenarian  doctrines  which  had  their early origins in the Catharist  teachings of medieval Europe, or secular groups inspired by socialist visions which originated -also in Europe-in  the wake of the French  Revolu­ tion.  Brooke Farm  sprang  from  the bizarre  dreams of the French  phalansterian, Charles  Fourier,  and  many  communities  were inspired  by a novel-Voyage  en
I carie-by  the  French  socialist Etienne  Cabet.  Neither  Fourier  nor  Cabet  set
foot in the New World, but Robert Owen did, and a considerable communitarian movement  sprang  from his efforts. Possibly the most important secular utopia in Canada was that of the Finns who established a settlement at Sointula -the Place of Harmony-on Malcolm Island  off the Pacific Coast;  they too were respond­ ing to ideas formulated  already in Europe.

4

EDITORIAL



In other words, in Europe men dreamed  of utopias, but in North America they set about creating them as concrete entities, and often succeeded in sustaining them for generations,  which did not happen  in the urban pressures of Europe. It is the same relationship  between imaginary and practical creation as one encounters everywhere  in  pioneer societies. Pioneers did  not produce  original  works of art, because they were creating  original  human  environments;  they did  not imagine utopias because they were shaping them. The peculiar conditions of the frontier allowed a great variety of experimentation, though the later advance  of settlement brought  in restrictive influences; one can see this in the fate of utopian  sects like the Doukhobors, who were allowed to experiment in communal organization  when they settled in the empty prairies, but were quite ruthlessly dispossessed as soon as land-abundance changed  into  land-scarcity.  Even  then,  there  were  still  places farther  on  to which one could emigrate,  and  the westward  shift of utopias  con­ tinued-Sointula was founded in the Edwardian decade-until, by World War
I,  the  positive utopian  ideal  had  run  out of steam. By the time Canadians had become  urbanized  enough  to lose the spaciousness and  freedom  of frontier  life, which  in itself constituted  a kind of unacknowledged  utopia,  the literary  utopia had  lost  its  meaning  in  the  recognition  that  rigid  planning  produces  only  the utopia  of  a  nightmare. But  Canada   was never  near  enough  to  the  totalitarian world of the gos and  4os to make even that a meaningful vision, and so we have gone entirely  without  a  utopian  literature.  Perhaps in  that  we are fortunate  as, in other respects, are those lucky lands that have no history.























5



GABRIELLE ROY
AND THE SILKEN NOOSE




Phyllis Grosskurth




IHAVE   BEEN  so  DEPRESSED  by the  self-indulgent  writing that  has been coming out of Quebec in the past few years that  I recently turned
back to Gabrielle Roy for reassurance. I re-read all her books and I think I found what I was looking for: a delicate, vibrant prose; an understanding of the longings of the heart;  and  a warm compassion for human  beings. These simple attributes comforted  me after  the plethora of neurotic anti-heroes  raging about  the universe from   psychotic  wards  or   prison  cells  once  they  had   made   their  supremely gratuitous  gesture of igniting bombs which probably injured innocent  people.
But  I  must  confess, at  the  risk of sounding  hopelessly impressionable,  that  I experienced  a further  reaction. As a reviewer my reading  is riotously catholic in its  comprehensiveness.  Immediately   after  finishing  the  last  of  Gabrielle  Roy's books I picked up The  Brighton Belle, a collection of short stories by Francis King, a  writer  I  have  long admired  who is not sufficiently known  on this side of the Atlantic.  These stories are an attempt  to capture  genius loci; no travel book could more successfully convey the Utrillo-like effect of Brighton on a summer day:  the stark   white  Regency  buildings  outlined   against   a  dazzling  sky,  the  fanciful absurdity   of  the  Pavilion,  and   the  quaintness  of  the  meandering   Lanes.  But Francis  King  is interested  in something  far  more  profound  than  writing  pictur­ esque travel vignettes for Britain Today. Behind the elegant  Regency fac;adcs he reveals the dual  nature  of man. As Rebecca West once remarked,  only part of us is sane. "The other  hall of us is nearly mad,"  she went on to say. "It prefers the disagreeable to the agreeable, loves pain and its darker  night despair, and wants to die in a catastrophe that  will set back life to its beginnings and leave nothing of our house save its blackened foundations."
What  Francis King and Rebecca West are talking about is evil, no matter  what

6

GABRIELLE  ROY



esoteric psychological terminology we apply to it in order not to appear  hopelessly old-fashioned or a trifle naive. And it is precisely this aspect of reality from which Gabrielle Roy firmly averts her eyes. I found her attitude  noble because her books told me that  stoical man  would not be defeated by the forces ranged  against him so long as he possessed courage.  I found them charming  because they assured me that  love and  gentleness could create an oasis sufficient unto itself. They allowed me  to indulge  a  pleasant  wistfulness in  the reflection that  death  is followed by renewal. As Plato said, "Everything that deceives may be said to enchant."
What  in effect she was telling me was a fairy-tale. In a fairy tale all manner of misfortunes may  befall the  protagonists, but we know that  they are protected  by magic talismans. They  are essentially good at heart, so while they may be sadder and  wiser at  the end,  nothing  very terrible has happened  to them.  The  witches and ogres slink off ignominiously or are punished in some particularly  revolting fashion.  This  is the sort  of  distortion  that  is implied  in  the  view of reality we present to our children.  But I am an adult and I know that  this is a half-truth, a bulwark  we set  up  to shield  our  children  from a knowledge  we hopelessly pray will never confront  them.  Whether  we view evil as a force possessing permanent reality, or whether  we regard  it as an inconvenience to be handled  pragmatically, an unfortunate aspect of contingent  circumstances, few adults would deny that its disorderly presence forces itself upon our horrified attention  from time to time. Gabrielle Roy will not admit  this. Her characters are shielded from the encounter with the stalking familiar. They  are treated as children not yet capable  of  ventur­ ing into the more sombre areas of existence.
Essentially Gabrielle  Roy possesses a mother's-eye view of the world. The  area of action in which her characters  move is limited and  conditioned  both spatially and  psychologically by the  imposition such a focus places upon  them. The  pre­ dominant  figure of her books is the earth-mother. In relation  to her own charac­  ters, in  her  loving and  protective  concern  Gabrielle Roy is an  extension of this earth-mother. It is this weltanschauung which gives her  novels their distinctively "feminine" quality.
The settings of her novels are Montreal, St. Boniface, and the wilds of northern Canada. An extensive arena,  admittedly.  But if one examines her  novels closely, are her characters  free to range  within as wide a region as appears  at first sight?
Montreal  is the  background  for her first and  third  novels, The Tin  Flute and
The  Cashier. A large,  pulsating  city throbs behind  the  action:   but  how does it function  in the lives of the characters?  The  major point Gabrielle Roy is making about  the  Lacasse family is the inhibiting  confinement of their  lives. The  riches

7

GABRIELLE ROY



and  the excitement  of Montreal  might as well be on the moon so far as they are available to the slum-dwellers of Saint-Henri. In a bitter harangue the unemployed Alphonse protests against being choked off from life's feast:


Have any of you guys ever walked on St. Catherine Street without a cent in your pocket and looked at all the stuff in the shop-windows? I guess so. Well, I have too. And I've seen some fine things, boys, as fine as you can see anywhere. I can hardly describe all the fine things I've seen while tramping  up and down St. Catherine Street! Packards, Buicks, racing cars, sports cars. I've seen mannequins in beautiful evening dresses, and others without a stitch on ... But that's  not all, my friends. Society spreads everything out before us, all the finest things in the world. But don't get the idea that's  all. Ah no! They urge us to buy too. You'd think they were scared we weren't tempted enough ...


In  The  Tin  Flute poverty assumes a terrifying  presence that  conditions  lives and  shapes character. Zola described his characters  as subject  to the same forces as the stone  on  the  road-that  is, helpless objects  crushed  by vast impersonal forces over which they have no control. A similar strain  of fatalism runs through The  Tin  Flute. There  are  constant  references  to  the  feeling  of imprisonment experienced  by the inhabitants  of Saint-Henri. Their  only outlet is helpless rage, distorted   ambitions,   foolish  day-dreams,   or  grim   resignation.   As  Florentine, expecting  her illegitimate baby, reflects: "She had  made her choice, knowing full well that  she could  no more have done anything  different  than  stop breathing." Desperation  to flee Saint-Henri only drives the characters into further imprison­ ment.  By  joining  the  army,  young  men  escape  destitution  for  probable  death. When Azarius realizes that he can no longer regain self-respect as the wage-earner of his family, he too goes off to war, but it will mean the break-up of family unity., Florentine,  with her frivolous day-dreams of luxury and romance, allows herself to be seduced  by an  ambitious mechanic  who deserts her lest he be trapped  into  a life in Saint-Henri which an  involvement  with such  a girl would imply.  Conse­ quently for the sake of her unknown baby, she marries Emmanuel who is thereby condemned  to a loveless marriage  with a capricious, sullen wife. There  is no exit
from this imprisoning circle of contingency.
Like a steady, gentle flame, the figure of Rose-Anna  glows at the heart  of the Lacasse family. Her  tenacious strength  and  devotion  provide  the little ones with the only security  they know. Yet she too represents  imprisonment.  When  Floren­ tine  reacts  in  horror  to the realization  that  her  mother  is expecting  her  twelfth child,  Rose-Anna  murmurs,  "One  can  only do one's  best."  Additional  children

8

GABRIELLE ROY



mean  a continuing  round  of poverty, yet Florentine herself perpetuates  the cycle and  it is significant that  at the end of the book she returns  to share a home with her mother.
Rose-Anna is able to resign herself to the fact that Eug,ene has joined the army
because of what  his allowance  will mean  to  the younger children.  (It  is grimly ironical that  Eugene takes the money away from her to spend on a trollop). For many  years Azarius  has  regarded  his role as father  as a failure  to  provide  for hungry  mouths.  Unless he enlists there will be further  babies. Rose-Anna  repre­ sents  a  continuation  of  his  sense of  imprisonment.   Incidentally,   her  attitude  towards the war is revelatory of the narrow encompassment of her view: she sees it essentially as a host of suffering mothers like herself.
The  question  is, does  Gabrielle  Roy  understand  these  implications  in  Rose­ Anna?  She  depicts  her  as a  figure of fortitude,  an  earth-mother  whose  natural  habitat  is in  the country  with growing things. Fecund  and  vigorous, her  natural  role is to produce  children,  but she is thwarted  in her need for happy fulfilment.
Gabrielle  Roy  seems to  accept  the  traditional  French-Canadian view of the mother  as the strong  centrifugal  force in the home. Rose-Anna  is planted  firmly at the centre of the novel. Florentine  works in the dime store, a Inicrocosm of the larger  world  perhaps,  yet her  mother  is able  to visit her  there.  Daniel  is taken away  from  her  to die in  the remote  hospital on the mountain, and  at the same time she gives birth  to another  child who will take his place. Azarius goes off to war-more  as  her  son  than  her  husband -but at  this point  the  book ends. There  is to be no consideration of a world beyond Rose-Anna's orbit. Finally, one must not forget that  Jean  Levesque's drive to impel himself into the world of the city transports  him beyond the scope of the novel. An unencumbered  orphan, he possesses a lever of freedom that transcends his skills as a machinist.
Now what  is the situation  in The  Cashier? Alexandre  Chenevert  works in the
heart  of  the  heart  of  the  city-the  Savings Bank of  the  City  and  Island  of Montreal.  He  feels completely  trapped  in his Kafka-like cell within  the vault of a  building  into  which  a sudden  shaft  of sunlight  arouses startled  heads. On  the streets and in the bus, he finds only further forms of imprisonment.  He is incapable of handling  a bewildering  urban  environment.  Unable  to sleep, he stands  help­ lessly before  the  cold  impersonality  of  the  refrigerator:   "Alexandre  sensed  his utter inferiority as a man, with all his little stomach troubles, his endless colds, his confused problems."  He has never managed  to function outside the protection of the womb. His continual  self-pampering  is an extension of the  uterine  embrace. In  the dream-fantasy that  finally sends him off to sleep, "A feeling of restfulness

9

GABRIELLE ROY



overwhelmed his soul  as it found  ease in  the  absence  of  all  but  vegetable  life." Again,  when  he falls asleep at  Lac  Vert,  the  Freudian imagery  is unmistakable:

The  intoxication  of sinking  between  secret  shores, more  thickly  green  than  the night!  How  ravishing  the  blue  fronds  which  curled  about  his  limbs  and  then slipped by! The quality of the silence in this muffled land! The  unutterable absence of all life, except for the water's even and continuous  murmur.

The memory  of his strong-minded mother threads in  and  out  of his thoughts. He  remembers her  perpetual lament about  what  would  become  of him  when she was  gone.  She  too  had  been  wracked   by  nagging ailments; is it  too  much   to speculate  that   in  the  robustly  healthy   Edmondine he  finds  the  mother he  had always craved?

He  had  turned   toward  Edmondine's  kindly  countenance. It was to  her  he was furnishing  his explanation.  For if Edmondine  was awesome in her commands, she was not in the least so in her face, which was moon-shaped,  open, and smiling.

The  two  books set in the wide open spaces might seem exceptions to the theme of enclosure. The  structure of Where  Nests the Water  Hen, however,  is revealing. The first  section,  "Luzina Takes  a  Holiday," is an  account of  Luzina's annual pilgrimage from  her  lonely island  to the  comparative civilization  of Sainte  Rose duLac to give birth  to another addition to her enormous family. The  next section, "The School  on  the  Little  Water Hen," is concerned with  Luzina's attempts to bring  learning to  their  isolation.  The  final section,  "The Capuchin from  Toutes Aides," while  it centres  on  the  activities  of Father Joseph-Marie, is linked struc­ turally  and  thematically to the earlier  episodes.
The first section opens with a sense of remote  isolation, of an immensity  beyond the  beyond.  Yet  note  the  pattern of  development: we  move  progressively  from open  space  to the  inner  island  to our  final destination, the enveloping warmth of the Tousignants' cabin.
When Luzina leaves for  her annual delivery,  her final  view of her family  is an image  of desolation: "All five of them  were  huddled together, so that  they made one  minute spot  against  the  widest  and  most  deserted  of  the  world's  horiwns." When  she returns the heart of the home is restored.
In  establishing a school on  Little  Water Hen, Luzina brings  the outside  world
within  her  orbit.  By the end  of Part  II we see Luzina almost  alone  now  that  her children are turning their faces gradually but inexorably toward the outside  world. But  we  are  never  shown  the  children coping  with  the  world  beyond  the  Little

10

GABRIELLE  ROY



Water Hen. The last lines of Part II emphasize the ties that still hold them to their mother through  her letters:

And Luzina's educated children momentarily felt their hearts contract, as though their childhood back there, on the island in the Little Water Hen, had reproached them for their high estate.

. Part  III  focuses on the activities of Father Joseph-Marie. But note that chrono­ logical time is abandoned in this final section, in which the priest's visit to  Little Water  Hen  occurs while Luzina is still surrounded  by her chldren. When Luzina comes to him for confession, he has an impulse to touch her cheek:

Yet to this paternal emotion was added man's old hunger to be coddled, fondled, protected  by a  woman's  wholly motherly affection. And  it  was at  once to  his daughter and to the woman's protective soul that he spoke: "Yes, my child!"

The earth-mother is the centrifugal force, the centre of a loving radius, embracing all those whose lives she touches.
Incidentally,  after  the unrelieved bleakness of The  Tin Flute, Where  Nests the
Water  Hen  exhibits a genuinely humourous  vein. The  type of humour  is signifi­ cant. Gabrielle  Roy laughs affectionately at the child-like qualities of  Luzina and Father  Joseph-Marie. The  laugh  has the ring of a  parent's indulgent  tolerance of a child's solemnity.
The  Hidden  Mountain is one book by Gabrielle Roy in which we do not find the figure of the protective strong woman. Here she is concerned with man alone in the freest possible environment. But it is only through contact  with other people that character  can be revealed and developed. Even in novels in which the interior monologue  technique   is  employed,  the  character   reveals  himself  through   his reactions  to the external  populated  world. Pierre remains  a cipher  because there are no other characters  on whom he can hone himself.
The  last part  of the book, the account of Pierre's life in Paris, is a lamentable failure. It is a disaster precisely because there has been no opportunity in the major part of the book for his character  to be established. His friendship with the young artist Stanislas is inadequate artistically, entirely unconvincing  emotionally, since it is simply hero-worship on the younger man's part.
Pierre is completely  incapable  of adapting  himself to an  urban  environment. His only response is to create in his flat a replica of an enclosed cabin on the Mackenzie  River.  He  can  paint  Paris only as though it were transplanted  to the banks of the  Mackenzie.  In  sum, there is a failure of nerve on his creator's  part.


I I

GABRIELLE ROY



She  cannot  trust  him to  launch  out  into  the  world  with  a complex  personality and independent life of his own.
The  two  recollections of her childhood,  Street  of Riches  and  The  Road  Past
Altamont, contain  Gabrielle Roy's most overt  treatment of dominant, protective motherhood. Although it is never named, one assumes that  the town in the back­ ground  is St. Boniface. Yet what a shadowy place it is! Christine's  family live on the edge of town. In "The  Move," one of the stories in The  Road Past Altamont, Christine  only on  this single occasion passes through  the town, but  from the top of the cart it has the appearance  of a mirage:  "All the houses seemed to be still asleep, bathed  in a curious and  peaceful atmosphere of  withdrawal. I had  never seen our little town wearing this absent, gentle air of  remoteness."
All the action  radiates from the house on Rue Deschambault  in which Maman plays the  central  role. In  The  Road  Past Altamont   Christine  talks of  breaking away  to the wider world. In Street of Riches she moves only as far as Cardinal, but in The  Road  Past Altamont she speaks of having  journeyed as far as Europe. However, we have never seen her leave and we have no idea what life on her own would be like. Before she leaves she battles Maman for her freedom. Maman struggles  to  keep her  because she knows that  once she has lost Christine,  life is effectively over  for  her. "My  mother  failed  very quickly. No doubt  she died of illness, but, as so many people do fundamentally, of grief too, a little." In this book for  the  first time  Gabrielle  Roy faces the imprisoning  noose of motherhood. In part she is endeavouring  to understand  and  perhaps to forgive. Yet her attitude  is ambiguous for home also means the security to which we all look back nostalgically from  time to time. The  Road  Past Altamont  is written  in retrospect;  we assume that  Christine  has already lived far away, yet the writing of the book is a pilgrim­ age to her past, to the roots that bind and cling.
There  are other aspects of this circumscribed world which should be considered.
Repeatedly  Gabrielle Roy explores the illusion of individual  freedom. Her charac­ ters are frequently  torn between a longing for a more expansive existence and the undeniable  circumstances which restrict them. This dichotomy is particularly  true of Maman  in the two St. Boniface books. Sometimes man  is depicted as engaged in a struggle  for existence which sets daily bounds on the opportunities  available to him. Rose-Anna  has mutely accepted the toil and the responsibility, the burdens that  will accompany  her as far  as the grave.  In  The  Hidden  Mountain Pierre seems the freest of Gabrielle Roy's characters  yet he is forced to accept the cruel fact that he must kill in order to survive.
In  a  sense Gabrielle  Roy  maintains  the same  loving  yet firm control  on  her


12

GABRIELLE ROY



characters  as  her  vanous  earth-mothers  exert  over  their  offspring.  The  virtues which she extols are fortitude,  endurance,  concern for others;  these are the nega­ tive virtues, those necessary in a world in which man is at the mercy of forces be­ yond  his  control.  Her  characters  act intuitively;  they do not  engage in  rational or irrational  analysis;  they are not torn by mental conflict;  they are uninterested  in ideas. We find obsession in Pierre's creative urge and in Maman's eagerness to embrace  a  life she  has  not  yet comprehended.  But  we never  see  any  of  them devastated  by sexual  desire,  exalted  by religious ardour,  excited  by  intellectual  passion or stirred  by the darker  passions. Gabrielle Roy's is not an easy world for her characters; yet its challenges are comparatively straightforward.
I have  emphasized  that  they are  never faced with agonizing moral  problems; like Faulkner's Dilsey, they "endure." Her characters are lovable, gentle creatures, but they are simple and childlike. Gabrielle Roy totally ignores the darker spectres that  inhabit  men's  souls;  only occasionally, as with  Florentine's  pregnancy,  she allows her  characters  to experience one of those sudden  revelations which  unex­ pectedly opens a precipice at our feet. Alexandre Chenevert  frets about the death  of Gandhi; yet there  is some justification for Eugenie's remonstrance, "After  all, he was no relative of ours!"
It  is for  these  limitations  that  we must  deny  her  a  place  with  the  greatest novelists. Tolstoi gives us the illusion that Anna Karenina  is activated  by a vitality of her own, that she exists in her own right. She must make real moral decisions; in her impellent drive to self-destruction, she is permitted  to wreck her own life.
One  cannot  say that  Gabrielle  Roy's is a vision of the world  before the  Fall,
even  in  what  critics  have  described  as her  "pastoral" novels. Man  is not  in  a garden  where all good  things are simply within reach. Her  characters  have been banished from Eden, but the most important step in the process has been ignored. These childlike creatures  have never tasted the forbidden  fruit of the Knowledge of Good and  Evil. They  are bewildered, innocent exiles banished  by a capricious God.












13



BLACK  AND SECRET POET


Notes on Eli Mandel


John Ower






TE PIECES IN Eli M=del's !om majo' oollections, (in Trio,
1954;  Fuseli Poems, 1g6o; Black and Secret Man, 1964;  An Idiot  joy, 1967)  are as strange  and as knotty as anything in Canadian poetry. Given the difficulty and singularity  of his work, it seems wise first of all to place it in some sort of  mean­ ingful context. Three  lines of analysis seem particularly  useful in this connection. The  first is that  Mandel's  ethnic  background  appears  significant  not  only with regard  to those poems containing specifically Jewish allusions, but may also serve as a major formative  influence upon both the poet's vision and his style. Secondly, Mandel  is a poet of spiritual upset and  rebellion, and can be appreciated  only in the  atmosphere  of crisis that  gave birth  to romanticism, existentialism and  con­ temporary  anarchism.  Thirdly, he is a myth-maker, and his work cannot  be com­ prehended  without  some understanding  of  mythopoeia. In  particular, his poetry shows both the radical imaginative re-arrangement of reality and the plumbing of the  unconscious  mind  which  are  characteristically  interrelated   facets  of  myth­ making  poetry. A discussion ceilltred upon the three  points just mentioned  should help to account  for the tonality of Mandel's  work, as well as providing an oppor­  tunity  to touch  upon at least some of his more important themes and  techniques.


IN THE  FIRST CHAPTER of Mimesis,  Erich Auerbach  plays his own variation  on Matthew  Arnold's distinction between Hebraism  and Hellenism as polar mentalities and major forces in Western civilization. That Mandel is him­
self aware of such a distinction in personal and artistic terms is shown in "Charles
Isaac Mandel":

Those uplands of the suburban  mind, sunlit, where dwell the lithe ironists,

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



athletic as greeks, boy-lovers, mathematical  in love as in science. Formalists. What have I to do with them? I gather  the few relics of my father:
his soiled Tallis, his Tefillin,
the strict black leather of his dark faith.

His  poetry  in  fact  provides  almost  a  text-book  example  of  the  vision and  the literary  "style"  which  Auerbach   finds  in  Old  Testament   literature.  Auerbach observes that the Homeric  preoccupation with a clearly articulated, uniformly illuminated  sensory surface, in which everything is externalized and accounted for, is largely absent from the Biblical stories.' The empirical foreground  yields prece­ dence to spiritual  and  psychological matters  running far beneath  the surface, and only such aspects of a story as bear on these are narrated. These episodes derive their  significance  and  coherence  not from  a  "horizontal" linkage  in  the  pheno­ menal, but  rather  from a "vertical"  or symbolic connection 1to the secret purposes of God and  to man's  unexpressed responses. Both the impact  and the difficulty of a poem like "Black and Secret Man"  arises from just such a "Biblical" style:

These are the pictures that  I  took: you see The garden here outside my home. You see The  roots which hung my father, mother's Tangled  hedge, this runnelled creeper vine. Here is the tree where in the summer hung
The  guest of summer, temple-haunting martlet.
And here the tree with twenty mortal murders
On its crown.

This sort of poetry, characterized  like the Old Testament  by "centain parts brought into high  relief, others  left obscure, abruptness,  suggestive influence of the unex­ pressed, 'background' quality,  multiplicity of meanings and  need for  interpreta­ tion",g is also characteristically  "modem". However, Mandel's Jewish background may account at least in part for the sensibility underlying the method.
In  his discussion of the  Old  Testament  narratives,  Auerbach  also stresses the
relative depth  of their characterizations, and their concern with the developmental and problematic  aspects of human  existence.a Although these are again typical of modem  literature, the  almost  obsessive self-exploration  in  Mandel's  poetry,  his preoccupation  with evil and madness, and his search for a viable spiritual and psychological stance,  could  perhaps  be  classified as  Hebraic.  In  particular, his concern  with disintegration  and  degradation  as a prelude to integrity follows the

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



pattern  of humiliation  and  exaltation  in the careers of the Biblical heroes.4 The macabre  treatment  of familial relationships in such poems as "Joy  of Conquest", "Estevan  Saskatchewan", "Black  and  Secret  Man" and  "Pictures in an  institu­ tion"  recalls Auerbach's  observation  that  in Jewish  life the  connection  between "the  domestic  and  the spiritual,  between  the  paternal   blessings and  the  divine blessing, lead to daily life being permeated  with  the stuff of conflict, often with poison."5  This saturation  of day to day existence wiJth a profound  and  mysterious significance  until  it  becomes supercharged  with  the  "sublime,  tragic  and  prob­ lematic"6  may  also explain why in Mandel's  poetry even the  commonplace  and the insignificant  become charged  with a strange  and  sometimes terrible mana.
All of the above comments can of course be summarized  by saying that  Mandel is a romantic.  His, moreover, is a romanticism  which is "decadent" in Tindall's sense of a late  efflorescence of a  particular  movement  which  pushes its implica­ tions to the limits of e.'l:tremity or elaboration.7  His first three volumes in particu­  lar  can  be seen as providing a Canadian counterpart to .the late nineteenth  and early twentieth  century  writers in whom romanticism  reaches its logical or illogi­ cal conclusions.
Romanticism,  and  late  romanticism  in  particular, is intimately  related  to the spiritual  crisis which  has been brewing since the end  of the  eighteenth  century, and it is not surprising that spiritual upset and rebellion should form two major ingredients in Mandel's poetry. Like those of many of the romantics and the existentialists, his troubles may centre in the fact that  something  has gone wrong either  with  God  or  with  man's  relationship  to  Him.  In  "Day  of Atonement: Standing", Mandel  in a state  of semi-rebellion confronts  a "fierce"  God, and  it is obvious 1that only drastic measures can mend the relationship.  In  An Idiot  joy there  are  murmurings  that  God,  if not  uncaring  or  absent,  has at  least "failed to be unambiguous" in matters deeply concerning  the poet. In this type of  situa­ tion, the old values based on religious faith, which traditionally substantiated  and regulated  almost  every aspect of civilized life, inevitably  become either dead  or oppressive. As "Hebraism" suggests negatively  through  its  irony, this particular crisis will  be  felt  with  special  acuteness  by  an  individual   from  a  background which was saturated  with religion:

The law is the law and is terribly Hebrew which is as you know mostly poems about cooking and meat to be cured in water and salt and children to  be counted

16

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



for  pages of generation amid clean and  also unclean women
If God is still present in this world of sterile regulation, it is in the form of Joyce's deo boia, and  the law and  order  which He sanctions have a punitive rather  than a saving  force. The  whole of the  present dispensation in fact  becomes demonic
and  destructive:

When the echo of the last footstep dies
and on the empty street you turn empty eyes, what do you think that  you will see?
A hangman and a hanging tree.
Such  a  v1Slon  quite  na;turally promotes  an  attitude  of rebelliousness which  can affect  every  aspect  of  the  life of  the  afflicted individual.  It is seen  as morally imperative  to break  with  the  old covenant  in all its manifestations  in search  of new values. In  Mandel's  poetry this drama  of multiple rebellion is acted out particularly  in  An  Idiot  Joy. Thus,  in  "Psalm  24" modem  Judaism  is seen as being  no  longer  an  intimately  lived  experience  like the  religion of  David,  but rather  a  rabbinical  bookishness which  does violence to life and  must  therefore be cast off. "The madness  of our  polity" rejects the present  political and social order as the systematized sadism of bloodthirsty savages:

On the prairies where I lived
a boy who put a needle in a gopher's eye knew more of civil law than all my friends,

The  logical answer  to such  an  establishment is the militant  anarchism  of "The burning  man"  and "\Vhence  cometh our help?".
In  Mandel's  poetry even the workaday world can become a Kafkaesque night­ mare  in which  the individual  is imprisoned  and  destroyed by a demonic power­ structure.  In  the first of the poems in Trio, an office-building becomes a labyrinth in which the poet, after hours of bemused wandering, is finally confronted  by the Minotaur  of authority.  "Pictures in an institution" similarly  portrays  the univer­ sity campus  in  terms  of  an  insane  authoritarianism  which  can  only provoke a violent reply. Finally, it should  be mentioned  that  Mandel's rebellion includes a psychological revolt against  consciousness. If it is the reason and  morality which we consciously accept,  that  have created the hangman's  world, then it is only in the dark  recesses of the Freudian or Jungian  unconscious, however  terrible these may seem initially,  that  we can  possibly find  salvation.  This explains  the poet's emphasis  in  An  Idiot  Joy  upon  the  irrational as a  force  which  is capable  of

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



sweeping away the old, dead order. Idiots and  barbarians provide at least a "kind of solution" to the problems of the modem world.
Mandel's  poetry not only documents  the various facets of existential rebellion,
but  also illustrates  the danger inherent  in cutting  the umbilical cord of tradirtion. Urizen is expiring, but he is still alive enough to condemn  to death,  and the rebel Atlas-like  assumes  a  terrible  burden   of  guilt   and   anxiety.  Thus,   in  "Thief Hanging in Baptist Halls", the poet's rejection of "polite vegetation, deans, a presbyterian  sun,jbrick minds  quaintly  shaped  in  Gothic  and  glass" is  accom­ panied by a feeling of humiliating public condemnation:

I wish he would  not shrug and  smile weakly at  me
as if ashamed  that  he is hanging there, his dean's  suit  fallen  off, his leg cocked as if to run
or  (too weak, too tired,  too  undone)
to do what  can  be done about  his nakedness.

Nor  is  this sense  of  reprobation  unwarranted. Black  and  Secret  Man  was, its author  tells us, "written  so that  I could confront  and  recognize whatever is dark in  human   nature,  and  to discover how much  of it is a  reflection of self". Such pieces as  "Secret  Flower",  "The  burning  man"  and  "The front  lines" suggest that  there  is in fact  as much evil to be exorcised from  the rebel himself as there is in  the  world  which  he attacks. "To  a friend  who sued  the  mayor  and  lost" stresses  this  point  by means  of  Camus'  paradox  of  the  altruistic  revolutionary falling to the same moral level as his opponents.
The  existential  rebel is not  only burdened   with  his personal  albatross  of evil and  guilt, but  is ultimately threatened  with the disill!tegration of both  his psyche and  his world-order.  His revolt brings with it  alienation  and  a lack of spiritual guidelines. A new self and  a new world must somehow  be forged out  of  empti­ ness and  chaos in a terrible isolation. For Mandel,  as we have said, the only hope seems to lie in a surrender  to the black and turbulent forces of the unconscious in the hope  that  they carry within themselves the seeds of a new dispensation. The ever-present  possibility of  madness  which  this gamble  involves  is a  significant theme in his work. In the early piece "Orpheus", the act of poetic creation, which for  Mandel  is part  and  parcel  of  the revolt  against  consciousness, leads to  the sparagmos  of  the  personality. On  the  other  hand,  "Crusoe" in  An  Idiot  ]oy suggests that  the  poet has written  "in  order  not 'to  go mad". That his art  may

18

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



indeed serve as a prophylaxis,  releasing and objectifying his inner  tensions, IS suggested by the fact  that  many of his poems are permeated  with what "Manner of Suicide"  terms  "the  archaic  symbolism of the psychotic". Thus,  the macabre methods of self-extermination  catalogued in that poem are really the grotesque projections  of  derangement. The  poet  evidently feels that  there  is a  very  real danger of suicide or insanity forestalling a spiritual rebirth.
However,  there  is in  fact  method  behind  much  of  the  apparent madness of
Mandel's  imagery.  Like Crawford,  Jay  Macpherson  and  Reaney,  he is a  myth­ making poet, and some grasp of the theory and practice of mythopoeia is essential to an  understanding of  his work. Historically speaking,  Mandel's  myth-making proclivity  is another   aspect  of  his  romanticism,  being  traceable  through  such twentieth-century visionaries as Pound,  Yeats and Edith  Sitwell to  the climate of sensibility which  produced  the  poetry of Shelley and  Blake. It should,  however, be noted  that  besides the influence of esoteric romanticism,  the technique  of the early poetry in particular shows a good deal of the more deliberate  intellectuality of such modern  "metaphysicals" as T. S. Eliot and  Robert  Lowell. This is espe­ cially true of the imagery,  in  which  Mandel often  achieves a powerful fusion of the  romantic  visionary  metaphor with the  metaphysical  conceit.  In some of the poems in An Idiot  joy  there is a much freer association of images, but these pieces are closer to surrealism than  to anything in English romanticism.
Speaking  in  rather  crude  generalities, we can say that  romantic  myth-making originates  with a vision of the universe as being substantiated by a metaphysical principle by which it is rendered  both one and alive. In  the early poem "Aspects in a Mirror" Mandel  expresses this sense of the fundamental unity of the cosmos in  terms of  the  Platonism  which  has contributed  so much  to  the  myth-making
tradition:
Delight me  no longer  with  this glass,
There are  many  things  I should  have done.
All images grow dimmer, pass.
The  many  are  sustained  in one.

Because of the ultimate  oneness of the world, the distinctions  made  by empirical consciousness between  different  places, times and material  phenomena are in the last  analysis  meaningless.  One  mark  of the  myth-making  poet  is accordingly  a radical  vision  which  telescopes space  and  history and  breaks  down  the logical compartments  into which post-Aristotelian man has increasingly tended  to divide his experience.  Thus  in  the  series of  pieces which  open  his selection  of Trio, Mandel  the  poet  lost in  the office building  becomes the  ancient  Greek Theseus

19

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



braving   the  labyrinth;  an  amateur   aviator,   a  combination   of  Daedalus   and Icarus:   a  mining  accident,  the dismemberment  of  Orpheus.  Just  as the  myth­ making  poet plays tricks with place and time, so he violates at will such "reason­  able" distinctions  as those normally drawn  between  man  and  nature, or  between the animal, the vegetable, and the mineral:
But parrots bring in sleep only the surly shape
Of images of men turned into beasts
Carrying their loads of shame upon their backs, That  forest where the trees are shapes of girls And every stone an image of a face, and eyes Are in the flowers, and I could weep for all Those lost and stoned and silent faces.

Ultimately,  these lines suggest a  poetic world in  which, subject  to the artist's intentions,  anything  is equatable  with anything  else. The  poet's vision of faces in stone is especially characteristic of the mythopoeic  sensibility. On  the one  hand, Mandel's  image  shows the  proclivity of the  myth-maker  for  representing  every­ thing in terms of life, and of human  life in particular. On  the other, it illustrates the characteristic belief that  man can descend spiritually  down the scale of being even  as far  as  the  inanimate.  In  "Leda  and  the  Swan"  and  "Rapunzel" such downward  transformations  become part  of a nightmare sexual fantasy,  while in "Entomology" the vicious sterility of a Urizenic society is expressed in images of insect-life. However, in "The  apology", a passage into the inanimate is associated with a process resembling the samana techniques for escaping the ego:

I want the table to appreciate my delight in its leaves: I will stand on four legs and try hard to be wooden and brown with folding leaves
I will fold and unfold my leaves
like a wooden butterfly
and birthday cards can be put on me

Both  this passage and  the one quoted  immediately  before it imply that  not only are categories which carve up space, time and  matter  in the last analysis unreal, but  also  that  the  dynamic  unity  of  the  universe  finds expression in  the  meta­ morphosis  of  one  form  into  another.  In  imagining   himself a  table,  Mandel  is participating  in  the  activity  of  an  "esemplastic   power"   which   drives  matter  through  an  endless succession of changes. The  next logical step is for the myth­ maker  to see metamorphosis  in terms of a series of interlocking cycles of organic

20

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



growth and  decay, evolution and atavism which are manifested in every aspect of existence. That  Mandel  is at least aware of such a possibility is suggested in "The moon in all her phases":

I'd say, in the old manner:
she [the moon] imagines our existence,
its changes, illusions

However, such a vision is yet to appear in his poetry in a systematically elaborated form.
It has  been  a standard assumption  of romanticism  that  man  is linked  to the One   which  underlies  the  universe  through  his  unconscious  mind.  With  some apparent  reinforcement   from  the  psychology of Jung,   this  has  obviously been adopted  as a basic tenet of Mandel's  poetic faith. Traditional symbols of the unconscious, including  the cave, the labyrinthine  building, and enveloping water, recur frequently  in his work. His mythopoeia thus belongs to the world of  arche­ typal symbolism which  finds expression in dreams,  hallucinations  and  madness, in  primitive  myth  and  legend,  in folk and  fairy-tales, and  in  the  literary  mode which  Northrop  Frye terms  romance.8  It shares with these diverse  phenomena  a logic of symbolic  association  very different  from  the  processes of  the conscious reason,  and  an  emotional   pitch  more  intense  than  that  considered  proper  to mimetic fiction.
As Jung  quite properly emphasizes, the archetypes of the unconscious are ambivalent,9   and  in linking himself to the weltgeist  through  the unconscious, the poet  becomes  possessed by a  Dionysian energy which is at  the same  time good and   evil,  joyous  and   painful,   beautiful  and  fearful,  creative  and  destructive. From  its very beginning  romanticism  was impelled to stress the negative side of the equation,  and in its later phases a possession by and obsession with its demonic elements  leads  to  the   phenomenon   of  "the   romantic   agony".   As  the  poem "Orpheus" clearly shows, Mandel  is very much a poet of the romantic  agony. In order  to gain the divine inspiration  which is necessary for his art,  the singer must venture  into  the  black  "mine" of  the  unconscious. However,  the  "daemonic, chthonic  powers"'0    are  terrible  and  destructive  as well as creative, and  the poet undergoes destruction  at their hands:

Who found his body and who found his head
And who wiped god from off his eyes and face?

It is  accordingly  not  surprising  that  mythopoeia  should  in  Mandel's  work  be


21

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



associated  with  the  nightmare  world  of  madness,  perversion,  evil  and  violent crime. The  poet is in fact "a black and secret man of blood" and, as "Manner of suicide" suggests, his act of creation is a form of self-destruction.  In "Thief  Hang­ ing in Baptist Halls",  the artist is represented as both immolated  and condemned,  thus  powerfully  combining  two  motifs  of  the  romantic   agony  which  recur  a number of times in Mandel's poetry.
However,  although  the world of mythopoeia  becomes one of satanism,  horror and  dissolution, it is paradoxically necessary for man's salvation. The  poet, by submitting  himself to the Dionysian through  his unconscious, obtains the spiritual power to sweep away  the sterile and demonic  world of the hangman  god. As is the case with  the destruction wrought  by the revolutionary,  this negative process becomes a terrible  but  necessary first step in  the recreation  of a new order  both externally  and  within.  Through   madness,  perversion  and  evil, the  individual's old spiritually  dead order of conscience and consciousness will be shattered. Moreover,  as Joseph  Campbell  suggests with  regard  to the hero-quest,  the  pain and   disintegration   which  must  be  undergone   are  really  the  negative  face  of ambivalent  archetypes, which if boldly approached, will show themselves to be propitious. 11    Through his  very evil and  agony,  the  poet  returns  to  the  radical innocence of "an  idiot joy" in which true creativity and a "singular  love" become possible. The  imagination,  in addition  to being a power of vision, is thus one of recreation  and  redemption.  The  condemned  and  tormented  artist  is really  ana­ logous to  the  crucified  Christ,  whose act  of sacrifice  has  regenerated  both  man and  the  world.  Significantly  enough,  the  poet's  passion in  "Thief  Hanging  in Baptist Halls" is followed by a personal apocalypse:
He dangles while the city bursts in green and steel, black flower in the mouth of my speech:
The proud halls reel,
gothic and steel melt in the spinning sun.
Similarly,  in  "Manner of suicide",    Mandel's  contemplation of the  most  grue­ some  methods  of  self-destruction  leads in  the  end  to the  revelation  of  "a new heaven  and  a  new  earth"  in  which  man  is in  the  loving  care  of  a  beneficent Divinity. Such glimpses of illumination may perhaps foreshadow a more sustained visionary ecstasy such as we encounter in the poetry of Blake or Edith Sitwell.



HAVING ATTEMPTED  to  place  Mandel's   poetry  in  context while touching  upon  some of his major  themes  and  techniques,  I will venture  a


22

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



brief appraisal of his work. On  the credit side of the ledger  can certainly  be placed the  toughness  and  power  of  his intellect.  Some  of his poems  display  a steadiness and   clarity  of  insight  into  the  depths  of  the  self which  is worthy  of  a  trained analyst.  The same  keen-edged   hardness  characterizes his poetic  technique at  its best,  and  is  particularly  noticeable in  the  punch  of  some  of  his  imagery. The following  lines  from  "Estevan Saskatchewan" illustrate the  kick which  Mandel's mind  can deliver  when it is in top poetic form:
A small town bears the mark of Cain,
Or  the oldest brother with the dead king's wife
In a foul relation as viewed by sons, Lies on the land, squat, producing Love's queer offspring only,
Which issue drives the young
To feign a summer madness, consort with skulls, While the farmer's  chorus, a Greek harbinger, Forecasts by frost or rings about the moon
How ill and  black the seeds will grow.
This  passage  exemplifies   another feature of  Mandel's best  poetry:  an  emotion which,  like hot  iron,  glows and  bums  and  yet is forged  into  hard, definite  forms.
The   forcefulness of  thought and  feeling  in  much  of  Mandel's verse  is  con­ nected  with  the spiritual and  moral  accomplishment of a penetrating insight into the  perversions  of  a  sick soul  in  a sick world.  This  is only  made  possible by the poet's  terrible  honesty,  which  confronts the  worst of which  man is capable while carefully  analyzing and  exposing  his own involvement. Also to  Mandel's credit  is the  spiritual  vitality   which   can  not  only  face  degradation,  but  also find  in  it materials for creative self-expression  and even "an  idiot  joy":
Lord, Lord,  pollution everywhere
But I breathe still
and breathless, sweet woodbine, colour of honey, touches my skin
as if my unbelieving eyes made no difference at all
Finally,  Mandel must  be praised  for the ironic  detachment and  wry humor which prove that  he has maintained his sanity on the edge of the abyss:
Notice:   the library is closed to all who read any student  carrying a gun
registers first, exempt from fines,
is given thirteen  books per month, one course in science, one in math, two options

23

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



campus police will see to co-eds' underwear

Despite  his  evident   virtues,  Mandel seems  to  me  to  remain a  promising rather than   a  mature or  a  major  artist.  One  of the  biggest  deficiencies  of at  least  the work  before  An  Idiot  joy is the  relative  narrowness of its emotional range.  This is to be connected with the fact  that  the besetting  sin which  the  poet reveals to us is perhaps not  the  Oedipus complex  or  a desire  for  violence  but  rather an inor­ dinate fixation  of a too, too sensitive self upon  the negative. However, a piece like "Messages" shows   that   Mandel is  capable of  breaking  out   of  his  emotional straightjacket, and  it is to be hoped  that  time  will bring  a more complete  vision­ ary conversion  from  the romantic agony to a divine comedy.
Mandel's  poetry   also seems  to  lack  the  all-embracing,  precisely  articulated
world-picture and  poetic structure which  characterize the  great  visionaries.  The backbone of  the  artistic  stature of Dante,   Milton, Blake  and  Yeats  is that  all of them  managed to order  a wide range of experience around a spiritual centre, and also to develop  a syntax  of ideas  and  images.  Something of this sort  would  pro­ vide  Mandel with  a  basis for  more  ambitious poetic  structures than  his  present  brief  pieces,  or  at  least  give  a greater degree  of  coherence and  direction  to  his future output.
There are also a number of technical  flaws in the fabric of Mandel's poetry.  In the  earlier  volumes,  his intellect  occasionally  escapes  from   the  control  necessary for artistic success, and  blemishes his work with  preciosity, artificiality or obscurity:

What  he was skulled in and  built, the frame of, The  grain and shelter of his house and  place,
Bone's trust of jointure and contract, all claims have
Yielded in him who is separate  and vagrant  in flesh and place.

The   typographical doodling  of  many  of  the  poems  in  An  Idiot   joy,  although currendy fashionable, also seems at times a bit contrived for comfort.
It is very much  to Mandel's credit  that  his intellectual control  prevents  the melodramatic pitch  which  is proper  to his world  of  romance from  rising  to the shrillness  of  Yeats'  "hysterical women". However, in  some  of  the  poems  in  An Idiot  Joy, his  voice  does descend  to the  quaver of sentimentality. Such  concep­ tions  as  "dreaming beasts  with  huge  unhurt eyes"  and  "walnut-coloured men" who  in  "far-off  wind-swept voices/revolve their  prayers as if they were wheels or stars" hover  on  the  verge  of  whimsical  pathos. The  following   passage  has  un­ doubtedly crossed  the  border-line:

BLACK AND  SECRET POET



Tonight in the sky's filing-cabinet
I discover my unwritten letters,
xerox of the last mss
by an unnamed, doubtless poor, scholar.

In  his future  poetry, Mandel  should definitely eschew the Charlie-Chaplinesque.
Moreover, even at its best, his work seldom rises beyond a rhetorical  utterance to  the  lyricism which  is the  mark  of the fully integrated  poetic sensibility. The technical  toughness  of the  early  volumes precludes the singing  voice, and  even the more flexible verse of An Idiot  joy is rarely lyrical. Only on a few occasions, as in "The Speaking  Earth", does he approach  the fusion of intellect, emotion, and  music which  we find, for example, in Herbert's  "Virtue". Perhaps  Mandel should experiment  more with the formal disciplines exemplified in the great lyric tradition of Spenser, Keats and Tennyson.
By way of conclusion, it should be stressed that Mandel's  poetry shows develop­ ment  as well as continuity.  If nothing  else, the pieces in  An  Idiot  joy display a gain  in  technical  suavity.  Mandel's  further  growth  as  an  artist  is  only  to  be expected, and  it will be interesting  to see what lines it will take. In particular, the future  will tell whether  he belongs to the company of what  Frye calls unfolding artists, or  whether  he is a  poet of metamorphic  growth  like  Yeats. His work to date  appears  to be the expression of the  metamorphic spiritual  pattern  of crisis and  conversion. If this  is indeed  the  case, his  art  may  show some spectacular  developments.  As  happened   with  Edith  Sitwell,  a  relatively  sudden  onset  of visionary ecstasy may  be accompanied  by an  efflorescence of technique.  Should this happen,  Mandel  may  produce  poetry  which bears the same  relationship  to his  present  work as a butterfly  to the chrysalis from which it painfully emerged.

' Erich Auerbach, Mimesis  (Princeton:  Princeton University Press, I953), I I-I2.
•  Ibid.,  23.
3  Ibid.,  I 7-20.
4  Ibid.,  I8.
.'i   Ibid.,  22.
6  Ibid.,  22.
7   William York Tindall,  Forces in  Modern  British Literature   (New York:  Alfred
A.  Knopf,  I947), I8-I9.
8  Northrop  Frye,  Anatomy   of Criticism    (Princeton:   Princeton  University  Press,
I957), 33·
9  C. G. Jung,  "Aion," The  Collected  Works  of C. G.  jung,  Vol. 9, Pt. II (New
York:  Pantheon  Books, I 959) , 68-69.
10  T. S. Eliot, "The  Dry Salvages", V.  II, 40-41.
" Joseph Campbell,  The   Hero  with  a Thousand   Faces  (Cleveland:  World  Pub­
lishing Co., I956), 97-I7I.

25



LA NEGRITUDE ET
LA LITTERATURE  QUEBECOISE



Max Dorsinville





(,EST UN   POSTULAT  RECONNU dans  ]a critique  littirain que le social soit contenu  dans le litteraire,  c'est-a-dire que la litterature, en tant qu'acte specifique  issu de !'imagination creatrice  de  l'artiste,   necessite pour  sa matiere  un contenu issu du contingent  reconnu et souvent 'eprouve par !'ensemble des  hommes.  C'est  ainsi que  pour  Aristote  Mimesis,  ou  "representation de  Ia Nature", n'est pas autre chose que l'action  bonne ou mauvaise  des hommes, pris tels qu'ils  ont  ete,  tels qu'ils  sont,  ou  tels qu'ils  devraient   etre.I   Cette  fonction sociale, en effet, est si fondamentale  ala poesie, ou a l'art,  que Platon y voyait une
activite indesirable  dans sa Republique,  ne meritant  que l'anatheme.Malgre les
nouvelles interpretations, tendances  et approches,  depuis le recours aux  modeles de Horace,  l'insistance sur le lyrisme personnel de Longin,  jusqu'aux  New Critics americains  et anglais de l'epoque moderne, en passant par l'arbitraire de la "Belle nature" du dix-septieme siecle-il n'en demeure  pas moins que la critique, fidele
a  !'intuition  premiere  d'Aristote,   reconnait   l'inherente   v erite postulat.
Le fait  qu'il  y ait  constante  inter-action  entre  le litteraire  et le social, le lieu
imagine,  ou  recree,  et  le lieu  tel  qu'il  est  dans  la  realitJe conventionnelle,  est demontre  de plus a travers l'histoire litteraire.  Que  ce soit chez les Decadents  de la  fin  et  du  tournant du  siecle, ou  un  Gide  et  un  Wilde  se 11eclament d'un esthetisme  liant  l'art  et la  vie, ou  chez les Romantiques, avec  un  Goethe,  par exemple,  qui  puise  a  meme  la  chronique  des faits  divers  pour  la  matiere  de Werther, qui une fois devenu oeuvre d'art  suscite par contre la consequence sociale du  Weltschmerz.  On  pourrait  aussi citer les appels  repetes  d'Andre  Breton,  de Tristan  Tzara, de  Guillaume  Apollinaire  pour  la  rencontre  des pales vie et art dans  l'oeuvre  surrealiste,  dadaiste  ou  futuriste ... C'est  done  dire qu'il  y a lieu de croire, avec Northrop  Frye,3 que l'une des avenues les plus prometteuses pour la critique  litteraire  modeme soit !'investigation  dans la litterature de !'experience

LA  NEGRITUDE



collective de l'homme,  en se prevalant  des donnees des sciences humaines  telles que  Ia  psychologic, l'anthropologie, etc. De Ia Ia connaissance  des mythes, des archetypes,  des symboles nous  foumit   un  instrument  fort  utile  et  meme  indis­ pensable  pour  Ia critique,  etant  donne  que  ces echaffaudages  culturels soutien­ nent et le social et le litteraire.
II n'est pas etonnant, par consequent, que Ia critique quebecoise contemporaine,
delaissant l'historicisme suranne,  l'impressionisme facile et le recours au potinage dogmatise s'attache de plus en plus a analyser Ia Iitterature  du  Quebec,  partant de neuves approches. Deja, il y a quelques annees, Jean  Le Moyne avait fait l'inventaire des  mythes  et  de  certains  archetypes  bien  quebecois.4 II est repris, rajeuni  et  precise  maintenant par  Gerard  Bessette.5   Et  surtout,  les themes, les images, les symboles du  Pays, de  Ia Parole,  de l'Appartenance, de l'Exil,  de Ia Mere,  sont  approfondis   dans  les revues  comme  Parti-Pris, ou  Liberte,  par  Ia critique  universitaire  etablie ou en voie de s'etablir  (les theses de  Maitrise ou de Doctorat).
Dans  cette  'litterature en ,ebullition", il me semble qu'  il y a un mythe qui se fait  de  plus en  plus frequent  et merite  qu'on  y porte  une  attention  critique.  II s'agit, on l'aura  devine, du mythe Negre, sous-tendant le concept de Ia Negritude.



GILLES HENAULT est peut-etre  l'un  des premiers ecrivains du  Quebec  a  faire  utilisation  du  mythe  lorsque  pour  signifier le mal  de  vivre ancestral  il s'exclame:

Avons-nous assez joue les Crusoe les negres blancs, les insulaires qui n'avaient  jamais navigue
sauf pour la chasse a la chimere!6

II est repris par Jacques  Brault qui specifie encore plus, lorsqu'il fait ressortir que
!'alienation historique des siens est, en partie, fondee sur Ia "chimere" entretenue:

Nous
les seuls negres aux belles certitudes blanches
o caravelles et grands appareillages des enfants-messies
nous les sauvages cravates
nous attendons depuis trois siecles pele-mele la revanche de l'histoire
Ia fee de 1'occident
la fonte des glaciers7

LA  NEGRITUDE



Paul  Chamberland poursuit  un  meme  cheminement, et la hantise  de nommer le "mal"  quebecois s'incarne dans  l'Afficheur  hurle.  Reconnaissant  son  apparte­ nance  au  tragique visoeral et senti,  l'afficheur hurle,  "je  suis  negre  negre  blanc  quebecois".8  Plutot  que  de se toumer vers l'ancestrale France et !'heritage tradi­ tionnel,   l'afficheur,  instruit   d'une  neuve   comprehension du   soi  individuel  et collectif,   trace   un   nouvel   itineraire  historique;   celui   du   Tiers    Monde  des opprimes:
(quand  j'irai a New-York c'est vers Harlem  que j'appareillerai et non par exotisme j'ai trop le souci de parentes precises je connais le gout de la matraque a Alabama il y a des fraternires dans le malheur que vos libertes civiles savent mal dissimuler) 9

Chez  les  romanciers, il  y a  une  semblable appropriation  du  mythe.  Jacques Godbout, par  exemple,  place en epigraphe a son roman, Le Couteau  sur la table, comme  "signifiant" le protagoniste a la recherche de son identite la comptine:

I, Ni, Mi. I Ni, Mai, Ni, Mo Catch  a nigger by the toe If he hollers let him go
I, Ni, Mi. I Ni, Mai, Ni, Mo' 0

Wilfrid  Lemoine, pour sa part,  dans  Le Funambule, fait  dialoguer un Americain et  son   heros   Canadien  franc;ais;  et  Sebastien  identifie   les  siens  de  la  fac;on suivante:

-Isn't that  funny!  I  can't  understand. All the  world  seems to speak  English nowadays,  but   up  there,  with  the  British  Queen   and   everything,  you're  still French!
-Let's say it's like the colour of the skin, you can't  change it. Let's say we are what you would call the Canadian  Niggers!"

Enfin, il y a cette apostrophe par  un personnage du  roman de Carrier, LaGuerre, Yes Sir! a l'egard des soldats  anglo-canadiens qui  ramenent la depouille  du  jeune
Corriveau:

On  voit  par  la que les maudits  Anglais ont !'habitude d'avoir  des negres ou  des Canadiens  franc;:ais pour fermer leurs portes. C'est  ce qu'il  devait faire Corriveau: ouvrir  et fermer  les portes des Anglais.12

Pour  conclure, Claude Jasmin illustre  l'antinomie Negre-Noir, Mythe-Fait, dont il sera  question   plus  loin. Un  des principaux personnages d'Ethel  et le terroriste
est   Slide,   un   Noir  Americain, identifie   et  participant  a  !'intrigue  comme   un
humain  tout   court,   son  caractere racial  etant  absolument accidentel. Paul,   le

LA NEGRITUDE



terroriste  Canadien fran ais,
ce negre qui balbutie  un dialecte, nu et masque, et avec cette pagaie authentique, je promene Ethel sur le Zambeze. Je suis un primitif". 13
Il  faudrait  de   plus  mentionner   le  mysterieux  Ivoirien   d'Aquin,  Olympe Ghezzo-Quenum, 14   le climat  interne  et exteme  dans  lequel  baigne 1' Aquarium de Jacques  Godbout, et j'en passe, qui sont des caracteristiques  indiquant a tout le moins une  prise de conscience de la Negritude,  dans son essence (a voir plus loin).
Il n'importe pas a notre  propos de retracer la fortune  du terme Negre dans la litrerature   quebecoise,  c'est  evident.  Plutot,   apres  avoir  souligne  la  presence probante  du  mythe, il s'agit de s'entendre  sur sa signification dans la perspective du  concept general  de la Negritude.  Qu'est-ce  que c'est que "Negre"? Qu'est-ce qu'est la "Negritude"? Aussitot que ces questions auront  ete
reprendre le fil de la discussion.

UN"NEGRE", ce n'est pas un Noir. Il y a une race Noire, mais il n'y  a pas de race "Negre", et bien malin le scientifique qui de nos jours
utilise la notion  meme  de race comme hypothese de travail.15  Mais, au point de vue "social"  on  nomme  certains individus, ou groupes d'individus,  "Negres",  et ce dans  certains  pays a passe ou present raciste.16  La distinction entre le "social" et le "scientifique"  est d'importance, car Ia repose les bases mythiques du  terme Negre. Le "Negre" done a ete nomme par autrui, il ne s'est pas nomme lui-meme tel.17  Premier  element
ment  un individu  de race  Noire, a ete nomme tel pour signifier son absence d'humanite, de dignire et d'individualite. Ce qui veut dire que c'est plus ou moins une  brute,  mi-animale,   rni-humaine,  bonne  a  accomplir  des taches  de  bete  de somme et  nullement  penetree,  va sans dire, des "lumieres"  de l'esprit,  de !'ima­ gination,  de  la  raison,  qui  font  la  gloire de l'homme  civilise, bref de  celui qui "nomme" les choses. ( Ce qui  fait  dire  a  Cesaire, "les  pulsations  de  l'humanite s'arretent aux portes de la negrerie".) 18
En verite, toujours  dans une perspective historique ( et j'entends par la l'histoire du  colonialisme, bien entendu), le "Negre" est une creature  des tenebres, c'est-a­ dire  une creature  penetree  de forces et d'instincts  primitifs, done barbares,  qu'il faut  maitriser,  subjuguer,  et  a tout prix tenir au loin, car il est aux antipodes de l'homme   eclaire,                                                         est  une  menace  constante,  un danger  pour sa culture  et sa civilisation. Le "Negre" repi"esente les tenebres et le

29

LA  NEGRITUDE



primitivisme auxquels l'homme civilise ne tient  pas  a retoumer. Pas besoin d'etre grand clerc  pour  savoir  ce qu'une telle negation de Soi entraine, car  si l'homme complet  est celui qui sait  reconnaitre et  assumer  et ses renebres  et ses lumieres,  la negation d'un  des  termes  de  cette  dualite   entraine la  deshumanisation et  ses horreurs. La  est  tout  le drame de  Kurtz  et  le  genie  de  Conrad dans  Heart of Darkness:

This is the "horror" that  Conrad's  Marlowe came  to confront  in his journey in search  of  Kurtz,  when,  upon  seeing  the  fundamental  inhumanity of  what  the European  has done to the Mrican,  he understood  that  in reality the world of  dark­ ness that  was categorized  as existing there  was really  the  darkness  that  all  indi­ viduals  carry  within  themselves. The  darkness  that   the  European  systematically and  institutionally  shut  himself  from,  in  his  psychology  and  in  his  social  and political institutions.19

En effet:

In  naming  a man  "negre,"  the European  was trying  to exorcise himself of his demons;  in categorizing a whole body of people  as inferior  and  of brutish  char­ acter  there was, albeit unconsciously, a deliberate  and  systematic projection of the European's irrational  destructive  forces that  could  not be recognized in a civiliza­ tion of "light." Thus  slavery is the institutional  projection  of the European's irra­  tional  unknown  destructive forces.0°

Et  c'est  ainsi  qu'a partir  d'un tel mythe  social  que  l'histoire connait toujours les apartheids sud-africains et rhodesiens, et leurs paralleles.
Est-ce  que,   consequemment, d'un  point  de  vue  litteraire, nous  n'avons  pas
dans  pareille  mythologie  les seves de toute  la question moderne de 1'Absurde, des preoccupations existentialistes   de  Sartre, Camus, Genet, et  bien  d'autres? C'est que,   dans   son  essence,  le  mythe   Negre  est  peut-etre  l'un   des  grands  mythes modemes en litterature ( quant au  point  de vue social ... ) . 11 n'est  pas etonnant que  lorsque  ceci fut  compris  tout  artiste  preoccupe par  les problemes  de !'aliena­ tion,  de  la  deshumanisation, les questions  de  situation pour  l'individu  dans  une societe  qui  le  "nomme" sans  lui  demander  comment lui se  nomme  dira  apres Rimbaud, "Je suis  Negre".••  C'est  ainsi que  William  Blake, bien-pensant, s'ever­ tuera   a  desamorcer le contenu social  du  mythe  en  proclamant la  blancheur de l'ame du  jeune  Noir  ("And I am  black,  but  0! my soul  is white")."" Plus pres de  nous,  Jean-Paul  Sartre  (l'Orphee Noir)    et  Jean Genet   (Les  Negres)  ont compris  la dimension absurde du  mythe,  et, fort  de cette  conscience,  ont  indique les  possibilites  nevolutionnaires de  la  Negritude.  Ce  que  ne  manquera pas  d'ex­ ploiter  Frantz Fanon, par  exemple,  lorsqu'il  proclame dans   Les Damnes de la

LA  NEGRITUDE



Terre:   "Retrouver son  peuple, c'est quelquefois dans  cette periode  vouloir  etre negre, non  un  negre  pas comme les autres  mais un veritable  negre, un chien de negre, tel que  le veut le Blanc".•s Des lors, la Negritude est a la fois un concept culturel  et  une  anne  11evolutionnaire. Cette  dualite  s'avere  constante  dans  les ecrits  d'Aime  Cesaire  (Cahier  d'un  Retour  au Pays Natal,  les Armes  Miracu­ leuses) et de Leopold Senghor. Ce dernier peut bien tenter de definir la Negritude  comme etant  "!'ensemble  des valeurs culturelles du  monde  noir","4  mais on sent bien  qu'il  est conscient  d'une  certaine  contradiction  dans  les  termes  ( "Ce  n'est pas  nous  qui  avons  invente  les expressions 'art  negre''  'musique  negre''  'danse
negre' ... ) •s, puisqu'il  est question "d'assumer".ti  la Negritude, c-est-a-dire, dans
l'optique  existentialiste  de s'armer  de l'Absurde  pour  mieux en  triompher,  pour faire  dans  le littieraire, en s'armant du  mythe,  ce que  Fanon  recherche  dans  la praxis:  "Le  concept  de  negritude,  par  exemple, etait  l'antithese  affective sinon logique de cette insulte  que l'homme  blanc faisait a l'humanite. Cette  negritude mee contre le mepris du blanc s'est rev,elee dans certains secteurs seule capable de lever interdictions  et maledictions".•1
La  Negritude,  en 11ealite, demeure  un concept,  un effort rationnel  pour  com­ prendre  et de la depasser  un mythe, ou un bagage mythique, impose par l'autre, dans  un  dessein destructeur. Mais, traitee comme moyen ou artifice littieraire, la Negritude est mythe litteraire.
Aux Etats-Unis, des ecrivains  comme Norman  Mailer  (The White  Negro)  et Jack  Kerouac  (On the Road)  ont pris conscience de la Negritude, malheureuse­ ment selon la conception  Hipster  de la fin des annees cinquante. Le "Negre" est le mythe  de  l'anti-conformisme de la  Beat Generation,  il est  l'exemple  du sup­ l'eme Hipster,  tenu  en dehors de la societe et qui fait la nique aux bien-pensants: a lui le Jazz,  les drogues,  le sexe, le plaisir ... c'est le poete  visionnaire sans sa plume.  Richard   Wright    (Native   Son), Ralph   Ellison   (Invisible   Man) ,  Jean Toomer   (Cane), pour  ne  nommer  que  ceux-la,  representent  bien ces ecrivains Noirs  Americains,  qui,  a  l'instar  de  Gesaire et  de  Senghor,  ont  approfondi la Negritude  comme  concept  et  comme  mythe  pour  situer  le drame  de  l'homme  modeme,  pour  ne pas dire celui du  Noir Americain. Ellison est celui qui a peut­ etre le mieux  "signifie"  le potentiel  destructeur  du  mythe  Negre, a la fa on Conrad,  lorsqu'il  fait dire  a son homme invisible:  "Who  knows but that,  on the lower  frequencies,  Ispeak  for  you?"211   Comme  quoi  il  n'y  a  pas  d'Objet  (le "nomme"  ) sans  Sujet   ( celui  qui   "nomme"), et  vice-versa;  en  "nommant"
!'Objet, le  Sujet  est  inevitablement   compromis  das  le  rapport   dialectique  qui s'etablit: autrement dit,  selon  Ellison, Ia negation  de l'homme   Noir Americain

31

LA  NEGRITUDE



constitue inimediablement la negation du Blanc Arnericain. Les deux s'eliminant, l'Homme est assassine.


LA NEGRITUDE est done un mythe litteraire  qui repose sur le mythe social du  Negre. Elle l'assume, l'approfondit, et, puisque le medium  choisi
pour  en  traiter  est celui de l'art,  la Negritude  est !'affirmation d'un  humanisme. Partout, ses chantres,  Gesaire ou  Senghor,  Fanon   ou  Ellison,  diront  que  dire Negre  c'est  dire  l'homme  aliene, l'homme  partout  depossede  dans  sa personne, dans son Soi individuel ou collectif. De dire Cesaire:

Comme il y a des hommes-hyenes et des hommes­
pantheres, je serais un homme-juif
un homme-cafre
un homme-hindou-de-Calcutta
un homme-de-Harlem-qui-ne-vote-pas29
Conjuguant le social au litteraire, la politique au poetique, la negation a !'affirma­ tion, la Negritude  n'est pas autre  chose que la condition  de l'homme moderne en quete  de son  humanite  perdue.  Tant  est-il que  le combat  pour  n'importe quel groupe opprime est le combat pour l'Homme, et la poete, pour Cesaire, Chamber­ land, Miron devient combattant:

[ mon coeur] ne faites point de moi cet horrune de haine pour qui  je n'ai que haine
car pour me cantonner en cette unique race vous savez pourtant mon amour tyrannique
vous savez que ce n'est point par haine des autres races
que je m'exige becheur de cette unique race
que ce que Je veux
c'est pour la faim univers.elle
pour la soif universelle30

Est-il surprenant, par  consequent,  qu'au   Quebec,   pays ou  se bousculent  les hommes et les idees dans une quete exacerbee pour !'affirmation du Soi, le mythe de  la  Negritude  soit de  plus en  plus  utilise comme  levure  littJeraire ( et slogan
social)?  11 a semble a certains  jeunes critiques Quebecois  qu'en  effet circonscrire
l'histoire  de l'homme  d'ici  c'est dire !'alienation, la  ctepossession. Ainsi on  a pu dire:

32

LA NEGRITUDE



Calling  himself "Negre,"  the  French  Canadian assumes a term  that  expresses his sense of alienation  and  dispossession. As the  term means something  "other" than what  is presumably  identified, as it is basically founded  on a misconception  and  a historical  and  psychological  delusion,  the  French  Canadian modern   writers  say indeed  that  the  understanding of what  it means to be a  French  Canadian is to understand what  a Negre is.31

Mais  qu'entend-t-on par  "alienation",  "depossession" quebecoise?  A d'autres, je  laisse  le  soin  de  politiser  la  question.   Mais,  puisqu'ici le fait  litteraire  nous preoccupe d'abord,  et  avant tout,  comment la  Negritude en  tant  que symbole­ archetype s'incarne-t-elle dans  la litterature du  Quebec? Si on s'autorise, comme  point  de depart, de la  position  des critiques  de Parti-Pris tels que  Paul  Chamber­ land.

Notre fuite dans le passe, dans la h gende,
contre l'envahissement  du present anglo-saxon. lncapables  de nous faire le sujet de notre propre  histoire, nous nous sommes livres en objet de l'histoire des autres. 32

ou des accents  dechirants d'un Gaston  Miron

Je  dis que  je suis atteint  dans  mon  arne, mon  etre,  je dis que  l'alterioo pese sur nous comme un glacier qui fond sur nous, qui nous destructure, nous englue, nous dilue.  Je  dis  que  cette  atteinte  est  la  derniere  phase  d'une   depossession de  soi comme etre,  ce qui suppose qu'elle  a ete  precedee par !'alienation du  politique  et de l'economique.33

il est fort  possible de  considerer (puisque c'est semblable prise de  conscience  qui soutient les themes  du  Pays,  de  la  Parole,  chez  les Pilon,  Prefontaine, Giguere, etc.)   l'histoire litteraire  ( et  culturelle, qui  entendrait au  moins  une  part  d'ideo­ logie sociale)   du  Quebec dans  une  perspective  qui  demontrerait precisement que le sentiment d'Exil, la  recherche du  Soi, inclividuel et collectif, la soif de l'enra­ cinement sont  des constantes, symptomatiques de la Negritude quebecoise.
Des lors,  un  des  premiers   themes   a  s'inscrire dans   une  telle  perspective  est
celui  de  la  mystique messianique, louangee  par  l'abbe Casgrain ( "Quelle action la Providence nous reserve-t-elle  en Amerique? Quel role nous appelle-t-elle a y exercer?  Representants de  la  race  latine  en  face  de  l'e1ement  anglo-saxon, dont
!'expansion  excessive,  !'influence  anormales  doivent   etre   balanoees,   de  meme
qu'en  Europe, pour   le  progres   de  Ia  civilisation ... ")34  En  consacrant  et  en oelebrant  comme  dogme   des  notions  aussi  a1eatoires  que   celles  de  Race,   Sol, Vertus  Traditionnelles,  unies,   comme   le  concept   marital,  dans   une   allegorie mystico-religieuse, le  Messianisme a  ere  pendant de  longues  annees   (jusqu'a la

33

LA  NEGRITUDE



demiere  guerre, a vrai dire, ou il devait ceder sous la pression du demembrement rural  et l'essor de la vie citadine;  que l'on relise Bonheur  d'Occasion de Gabrielle Roy)   le  principal  element-moteur  symbolisant  le sentiment  d'Exil,  de  drracine­ ment,  de depossession du Quebecois en terre d'Amerique. Partant, les caracreris­ tiques  principales  de la litrerature  traditionnelle,  1'Anglophobie, la  enophobie, les  pi'eoccupations  pour  la  survivance  s'axant   sur  la  mystique  messianique,  la question  du   terroir,  de  la  race,  que  l'on  retrouve   dans  Maria  Chapdelaine, L'Appel de la Race,  Menaud  Mattre-Draveur, Trente  Arpents,  etc. sont autant  d'aspects, sinon de consequences decoulant  d'une fondamentale negritude.
Ainsi  done,  la  litrerature  de  revendication,  de  "contestation"35  de  l'epoque
modeme  s'elevant  contre la mystique messianique et ses consequences, que ce soit chez un  Aquin  (Prochain  Episode), ou chez Renaud   (Le  Casse),  Bessette (Le Librairie)  ou Jasmin  (Ethel  et le T erroriste) temoigne elle aussi dans la perspec­ tive de la Negritude. Car  chez Aquin  comme chez Renaud,  et  d'autres, la prise de conscience lucide d'une fa on
du Messianisme: les Clercs et les "elites" formees par eux), la necessite d'assumer les egarements  passes pour  mieux affirmer le present seculier sont similaires aux constantes   d'un   Cesaire  ou  d'un   Ellison.  Les  uns  et  les  autres  revendiquent l'identite  de l'individu  ou du groupe dont il est issu, ils desirent "nommer" plutot que  "d'etre nomme",  "dire"  plutot  que  "d'etre dit".  C'est  ainsi que  Chamber­ land,  Miron,  Brault  peuvent dire, a l'instar  de Cesaire, "je  pousserai d'une  telle raideur  le grand  cri negre que les assises du monde en seront ebranLees". 36

Auss1 INTERESSANTE qu'elle  puisse sembler il est fort pos­
sible  que  la  perspective  de  la  Negritude,  appliquee   en  tant  qu'interpretation
historico-litteraire,   peut  ne pas convaincre  entierement.  Qu'a cela ne tienne!  11 n'appartient pas ala critique de cemer la litterature dans ce qui prendrait  forme de  gangue,  pour  une satisfaction  dilettantiste,  ou  dogmatique quelconque.   ( Et Dieu sait  comment  une telle attitude  avait  trop  dure  au  Quebec.)   Non, il faut dire  avec simplicite  qu'en  tant  que  concept  critique  la  Negritude  faut  pour  le Quebec, dans ses gineralites  (alienation,  recherche d'identi.tie, etc.)  autant  qu'elle vaut  pour  toute  oeuvre litteraire,  ou  toute  litterature, demontrant de telles  pre­ occupations.  ( Mais on voit d'ici  comment  pourrait  s'etendre le concept,  jusqu'a perte  de  signification).  Je  crois qu'a  ce stade-ci  il appartient a  la  creation  de sauver  la  critique,  si l'on  peut  ainsi dire. Afin d'eviter  a la critique  de sombrer dans le nominalisme, danger  toujours present, il appartient  aux poetes et roman-

34

LA NEGRITUDE



ciers du  Quebec, qui s'autorisent d'un mythe  r u,
en  la  "quebecisant" en  sorte.  Il  s'agirait pour  eux  de  differencier la  part  pure­

ment  sociale  du  mythe  (en  soi argument essentiellement politique qui  identifie  le lot  du  Quebecois-citoyen a celui  du  Nair  historiquement defini,  comme  c'est  le
cas  chez  un  Vallieres)37 de  la  part  litreraire (qui  n'exclue pas  le social,  comme nous  avons  vu, mais  qui  privilegie le medium de !'imagination creatrice, puisque l'on  presume que  faire  acte littieraire ce n'est pas faire acte d'orateur). Autrement dit,   il  appartient  aux   createurs  quebecois   de  "dire" partant  de  leur  champ
d'action, a la fa on
quebecoise,  d'explorer les  renebres  de  se savoir  Fran ais
et Religieux,  Provincial et Continental, Reveur  et Pragmatique.
Carne nous leurrons pas, comme  dans un premier  temps  chez Cesaire,  Fanon, Wright et meme  Ellison,  il est clair que !'utilisation dans  la littJerature quebecoise du  mythe  social  Negre  dans  une  symbolique souvent  plus  sociale  que  litreraire (n'est-ce   pas  Chamberland qui  p11eface son  Afficheur  en  prevenant, "je  ne sais plus  parler j je ne sais plus que  dire/ la poCsie n'existe  plus") 38 est faite  en fonc­ tion d'un but  politique bien defini. Faudra-t-il attendre sa 11ealisation pour appro­ fondir  le mythe?
A  tout  evenement, il  n'en   demeure pas  mains  que  !'apparition d'un  mythe nouveau, dans  la litterature quebecoise,  permettant aux  Aquin, Godbout, Jasmin, Chamberland de  se  tenir  en  compagnie des  Ellison  Cesaire,  Wright, Rimbaud est d'une augure qui  devrait rasserener  ceux qui se demandent encore si la littera­ ture  quebecoise est de teneur universelle.


' Introduction to  Aristotle, Richard   McKeon  ed.  (New  York:   The   Modern  Li­
brary, 1947),  pp. 624-637.
2   Great   Dialogues   of  Plato,  Wh.  D.  Rouse,  trans.   (New  York:   Mentor, I 956), pp. 393-404.
3  Anatomy of Criticism  (Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press, 1957).
4   Convergences (Montreal:  HMH,  rg6r).
5  Une  Litterature en  Ebullition (Montreal: Ed. du  Jour,  rg68).
6  "Notre  Jeunesse," in Alain Bosquet ed. La  Poesie Canadienne (Montreal: HMH, rg66),  p. 105.
7   "Suite   Fraternelle,"  in  Alain  Bosquet  ed.  La  Poesie   Canadienne  (Montreal: HMH, rg66), p.  218.
B L'Afficheur Hurle   (Montreal: Parti  Pris, 1964),  p. 71.
9   Ibid., p. 59·
10  Le  Couteau sur  la Table (Paris:   Editions  du  Seuil, 1965).
" Le Funambule (Montreal: Cercle du Livre de France, 1965), p. 125.

35

LA  NEGRITUDE



10    LaGuerre, Yes  Sir!  (Montreal: Ed. du Jour,  rg68), p. 28.
13 Ethel  et le Terroriste  (Montreal: Deom,  Ig64), p.  I I 1.
14  Hubert  Aquin, Trou  de Memoire  (Montveal:  Cercle  du  Livre de France,  Ig68).
15  Gunnar  Myrdal,  An  American  Dilemma  (New  York:  Harper and  Row,  Ig62), p.  I I5.
16   Juan  Comas, "Racial  Myths, Unesco ed., The  Race  Question  in Modern  Science
(New York:  Whiteside,  Ig56),  p. 26.
17   Kenneth  Little,  "Race  and  Society," Ibid.,  p. 20I,  2IO.
18 Aime  Gesaire,  Cahier  d'un  Retour  au  Pays  Natal   (Paris:  Presence  Africaine, Ig56), pp. 6I-62.
19  Max  Dorsinville,  Black Negroes and White  Negroes:  A Comparative   Analysis of the  Black American  and the  French Canadian  Novel  of Protest, These  de  Mait­ rise en Litterature Canadienne  Comparee  (Inedite), p. 232.
oo   Ibid.,  232-233.
01   "U ne Saison en Enter,"  in Oeuvres  Poetiques d' Arthur Rimbaud  (Paris: Garnier­ Flammarion  I g64)  p. I 2 I.
oo   "The Little  Black Boy," in  Poems ,and Prophecies  (London:  J. M.  Dent  and
Sons, Ig34), p.  IO.
o3   Les Damnes  de la Terre  (Paris:  Franc;ois Maspero,  Ig6I), p.  I65.
04  Negritude  et Humanisme, Liberte  I (Paris:   Editions  du  Seuil,  Ig64),  p. g.
05  Ibid.
06   Ibid.
07  Fanon,  Ibid.,  p. 15g.
os   Invisible  Man   (New  York:  Signet,  Ig64),   p. 503.
og   Cesaire, Ibid.,  p. 3g.
30   Gesaire, Ibid.,  p. 75·
3'  Dorsinville, Ibid.,  p. 235·
3"   Paul  Chamberland, "De la Damnation  a la Liberte,"  Parti Pris  (ere Ig64),  70.
33   Gaston  Miron,  "Notes  sur  le  Non-Poeme  et   le  Poeme,"  Parti  Pris, II   (Juin- Juillet  Ig6s), go-g1.
34   H.  D.  Casgrain,  Oeuvres  Completes   (Montreal: Beauchemin,   I8g6), p.  370.
35   Voir  Marcel   Rioux,  "Alienation   Culturelle   et  Roman   Canadien,"  Recherches
Sociographiques,  V  ( Ig64),  I45·
36  Aime Cesaire,  "Et  les Chiens  se Taisaient", in  Les  Armes  Miraculeuses  (Paris: Gallimard,   I g46) ' p.  I 56.
37   Pierre  Vallieres,  Negres Blancs d'Amerique   (Montreal: Parti  Pris,  Ig68).
38   Chamberland, L' Afficheur  Hurle,  p. g.



THE VARIOUS VOICES

Poems of the Unojjicial Cultures



Compiled and
Introduced by John Reeves




CANADIAN FOETRY is almost  always thought of as being in
English or French. The  bulk of it is. But not all. Not all our poets have been born
here:   some  have  immigrated,  and  have  continued  to  write  in  their  mother tongues. And so poetry, like many other traditions, has been part of the Canadian scene in other  than  the two official cultures. Its publication  has been various: sometimes  the  poet  is  published  in  his  native  land,  either  out  of  nostalgia  or necessity; sometimes his books are put out here in Canada or in other  countries with  a thriving  emigre community; and  sometimes he publishes in the so called ethnic  press. The  quality  of this work, as in any literature,  varies much. But the best is very good and well worth sharing.
I've  long  thought  something  should  be  done about sharing  this achievement.
An enterprising  publisher  with lots of money to lose would do us all a great ser­ vice if he'd  put  out  a poetry series of French  and  English translations from our other  languages  and  of translations  into  those other languages  from  our English and  French  ve.
ago to cover at least a small section of this territory on radio. Philip Lanthier  was available  at  the  time  to  undertake  the  main  research, which  was  both  difficult and  extensive:  he had  to trace  the poems from all over the country,  find a con­ sultant  in each  language  to advise him on their quality,  and  then  skim off the cream.  This  took  a  long  time:  years, not  months. But  in  the  end  we  found  a respectable  body of evidently good verse in twelve languages:  Estonian, German,  Hungarian,  Irish  Gaelic,  Italian,  Latvian,   Lithuanian,  Low  German,  Polish, Serbian,  Ukranian, and  Yiddish. That  list is perhaps  not  comprehensive.  There  may well have been good poems written in Canada  in other languages. But, if so, we failed to tum  them up.

37

THE  VARIOUS VOICES



The   most  noticeable  absentees, of  course,  are  poems in  the  indigenous  lan­ guages. So far  as we could discover, none of the Indian  cultures  has a tradition  of verse apart  from song, and  there seems to have  been no modern  recourse to verse. We did find one Eskimo poet of impressive quality; but to our great regret she declined to contribute.
Eventually  we  chose twenty-three  poems  which  seemed  to  go well together. Good  translations  already existed in some cases. For the rest, we had to commis­ sion  translations.  When  they were  done,  I was at  last  ready  to go  on  the air:  bilingually:   each  poem  was  read  first in  English  translation   and  then  in  the original.  The   programmes   (three   half-hours)   were  broadcast   on  the  C.B.C. radio network in February  rg68, and the response from listeners was enthusiastic:  it is worth  noting,  by the way, that  the programmes  seem to have pleased many listeners whose only language is English; in other words, the project had a general appeal beyond its obvious built-in audience.
Some of this success was due, no doubt,  to the work of pioneers who were in the field before us. Miriam Waddington, for instance, has done much for Yiddish poetry in Canada, both as a critic and as a translator. John  Robert Colombo and George Jonas  have  been active, with Hungarian poetry. And  the large German output   of  Walter   Bauer  has  been  well  served,  in  translation,   by  Humphrey Milnes. Others,  in  various ways, have done  what  they can  to promote  this part of our  literature. Bringing  the several strands  of it together  into  one place was merely an obvious piece of anthologising. But it was also overdue, and it deserved the  acceptance  it  won. So I am  glad  that  at  least some of the  translations  are being printed  here and preserved, and will not pass into the limbo that  waits for radio progTammes as soon as they're off the air.
I've  chosen  ten  poems for  this  publication.  The  first four  have  to do  with
emigration: variously they concern exile and  nostalgia, adaptation to a new land, and  the sense here of roots elsewhere. The  fifth poem is simply a nature  poem. The  sixth  and seventh lightly and seriously, touch on the writer's  craft.  And the last three are love lyrics. All, in my view, are the work of true poets.

THE  VARIOUS VOICES




THE HOUSE
 

translated by Myra Haas from the Ukrainian of Yar Slavutych


ON A suMMIT ascending the banks of the Dnieper's
Far  reaching  blue
Where the ripening wheat in the sun's heat breaks foam
A house once stood. Immeasurably blessed, its sovereign circle grew
Like the white crown of a poppy in the poplared  wood.

The sea-foaming sound of the rain swells the river's
High rising banks.
The field with its huge yield of bread, grows, swells
Momentously. Abundant in their praise, man, woman, swell with thanks
Boasting the good seed of a fruitful family.

Who came then? Who came by the soft stealth of midnight
To trouble the dust
Of the ancient ones? Daughters and sons: for the evil of others
Who shall atone? In exile enduring, the blameless, the innocent must,
Until their waiting wanes the spirit and the bone.

Without  touch or direction the children of exile
Blindly go,
Redeeming  the past, they re-live the last measure of home
Brimming memory and sight. Do they labour the truth, seeking causes or knowing it so
Make real the dream prophetic as their fathers might?

From a summit descending smoke ruins, black fires
That  rend the sky
Sounds and voices in one chanting unison, shiver the house
Like a prayer. The dried poplars crackle. The silence snaps,
barren  and  dry, And the wind thins in a wall-howl, holding nothing there.




39

THE  VARIOUS VOICES




TERRJI INCOGNITJI
 

translated by Robert and Aldona Page from the Lithuanian of H enrikas Nagys


IN THE LAND of blue snow there are no trees: only the shadows of trees and the names of trees written by a sombre hermit in the writing of the blind.

In the hall of mirrors not a single person is left:
only profiles cut out by the cutter of Tilsit fair,
and silhouettes traced on the dusty glass by the fingers of the dead violinist late in the evening of All Souls.

In the valley of the ebbing rivers there is no birthplace:
only long rows of barracks, wooden sphinxes with their sooty heads on their paws, dreaming of flags, summer, sun and sand.

In the land of blue snow only names remain, lines and drawings and letters remain on ashes.
In the land of blue snow there is no land.





COME, SAYS THIS LJIND




CoME, says this land,
 

translated by Humphrey Milnes from the German of Walter  Bauer

Come, all of you, I can hold you,
I can satisfy your wishes, great or small, No one will be left out-
Wage earners, gamblers, tough guys, dreamers - Each will get what's coming to him.
But you won't belong to me, you are foreigners. I can't adopt you.
Don't complain that I'm  unfriendly. I am just indifferent.
Don't say that you are lonely; what prize did you expect
For leaving to come here?

THE V ARlOUS VOICES



And what were you willing to give?
I will grant  you what you want and no more. Europe's echo will gradually fade in your children. I will gradually draw them to me.
And then you will experience an even bitterer loneliness.
It will be left to one of your children's children
To sing the song of my boundless horizons
And to be at home here.
He will understand  the melody of my rivers and not be afraid, He will understand  the great language of my silence that
frightened  you.
For him, love will find its reward, I will tell him who I am.





LJITE JIUTUMN  IN MONTREJIL

translated by Miriam  Waddington from the Yiddish  of Y. Y. Segal

THE WORM CRAWLS into the dark earth, The wind glitters and sharpens his sword, And where did all the coloured leaves fly to?
The branches are lost in their hard grey sleep, The skies seem high and lift up higher.
Their  clear light drips blue over the roof tops,
And the stillness assures us that all is well. Our churchy  city becomes even more pious,
And on Sundays the golden crosses gleam brightly,
The  big bells ring out hallelujahs
And the little bells answer with an amen.
The tidy peaceful streets dream in broad daylight And smile serenely at me who am such a Jewish Jew That even in my way of walking everyone can hear The music of my ancestral song
And the rhythm of my Hebrew prayer.


41

THE  VARIOUS VOICES




M74Y
 

translated by Janina Gembicka from the Polish of Zofja Bohdanowicz

How MANY varying emerging shades
<lissipate like filmy images
pink greenness looks into the eyes of golden green

The black greenness pins its thorny wind-swept comb gently
into the braid of the emerald green

The grey green enfolds in her hands featherless newborn greenness trembling with dew and immaturity green greenness




PENCIL
 




SoMEONE WRITES with me his fingers clutch my waist
 

translated by  john  Robert Colombo from the Hungarian of Robert Zend

he holds me tight leads me on holds me tight again

The  poem done he drops me
I feel diminished with surprise I read
the part of me he wore away



74ND SO WH74T



AND SO WHAT if poetry
 

translated by Astrid lvask from the Estonian of Arved Viirlaid

is the thread in the needle's eye, stitching the patterns of a shroud into the bridal gown.

42

THE VARIOUS VOICES



And so what

Even towards silence all roads run with the happy yapping of puppies.

Trickles and  worms
knot the fringes of the garment, and the Bride's arms
are always open for embraces,

for thought  carries fire into the earth - roots full of dynamite.
With every heartbeat  the earth pumps fire
to sleep in granite.





NOW
 





Now IS the time when silenced are sea,
birds,
and wind,
and even the voices of men.

I tell you: -there is nothing - no love,
no doomsday, no death-
but you trembled. Did you guess
the final secret :

under this sun we will never quench
our deepest thirst?
 

translated by lngride  Viksna from her own Latvian original



43

THE  VARIOUS VOICES




PURITJIN REFLECTION




"No", you said "I  beg you". But
the faint prayer begged with your eyes "Come  back".

And my throbbing heart lifted its sail
prowed across waves then
tired it paused
before a harbour still closed.

So
it will always be so.

You call me
with eyes of dawn
and then you reject me at the last glimmer of
light.
 

translated by Elio Costa from the Italian of Luigi Romeo



FEJIRGUS THE RED DISREMEMBERS
translated by Padraig 0 Broin from his own Irish Gaelic original
I REMEMBER her name -the music of pipes. I have forgotten her hair-
And the butterfly
That  lighted on it.
I have forgotten her face,


44

THE VARIOUS VOICES



And her mouth - Meant for kissing.

I have forgotten the sound of her voice, That  night, that night;
I have forgotten her two hands
Holding  me, shyly, eagerly;
I have forgotten the very shape of her body, That  night, that night.

I do not remember anything at all; Except,
The living warmth of her mouth on my mouth
In our first kiss; And
Light as a tress, as a feather, as breath itself,
Curve of her maiden's exquisite breast
Touching my breast, That  night, that night.

Wife to another, she, This  night.

























45



THE HOUSE

ON THE PRAIRIES



Susan Jackel





GIVEN THE RELATIVELv RAPID SE'ITLEMENT of Canada's prame   region  and  the  opportunities   open  to  individual   enterprise  during  the formative  years of Western society, the frequent  moral examination  of  material­ ism in  prairie  fiction  up  to  1935  is understandable; so is the  altered  mood  of prairie  novelists after  the economic and spiritual  trials of  drought  and depression in the Thirties. The  broad outlines of this shift from social commentary  to charac­ ter study  can  be indicated  in  a few paragraphs. What  will be noted  at greater length  in  the  following  pages is the  consistency with  which  one symbol-the house-speaks for the changing  attitudes of Western writers over half a century, from  Nellie McClung  in 1908 to Margaret  Laurence in 1964. In brief, the signi­ ficance  of  the  word  "house"  begins from  a  straight-forward  reference  to the physical  structure   which  provides  shelter,  and  by  association  extends  to  the money needed to build and support  it, and  develops into the broader  concept of a family establishment,  a continuing  blood  line which inherits  both material  and cultural  acquisitions. This  development  reflects a  recurring  theme in the fiction of rural  Western  Canada: that  of the  family as the  basis of social organization  and the source of moral values.
The  fiction of "settlement", i.e., those novels which  concern  themselves with
the  development  of  rural  society in  the  Canadian prairies,  falls into  two main phases:  the  morally-directed  fiction of writers up to and  including  F. P. Grove; and  the  psychological enquiry  of novels which  followed  Ross's As For Me  and My  House.  ( 1941). Until  the late 192o's  the  rural  West built  up a social ideal that   was  rampantly   acquisitive,  to   which  many  prairie  writers  responded  by insisting on the superiority of spiritual resources over material  ones. Ralph  Connor and   Nellie  McClung  pictured  the  spiritual   poverty  of  the  material  life, while showing how those who were poor but selfless-the Sky Pilot, Shock McGregor, Pearl  Watson,  Maggie Corbett -could lead their  misguided neighbours back to

THE HOUSE ON  THE  PRAIRIES



the  true  path.  In  Martha Ostenso's  Wild   Geese  the  curse of  Mammon  is less explicit;  nevertheless, the  novel is constructed  in such  a way that  Caleb  Gare's death  could easily be interpreted as retribution for his perverse search for wealth and  power.  In  the  novels of  Grove,  the  corrupting  influence  of  wealth  is an inescapable  theme, particularly  evident in the two novels of the southern  prairies, Fruits  of the  Earth  and  Two  Generations. Abe Spalding  is the materialist  who comes to see the futility of his possessions; John  Elliot, Spalding's  moral opposite, subordinates financial success to his ideal of family life. This ideal is undermined by Elliot's inability  to  arouse  love and  respect in his children,  but  also by what Grove saw as the spirit of the age-financial  and moral irresponsibility.
To  this tradition  of moral  writing in prairie fiction R. J. C. Stead  contributes an   interesting   variation.   He  too  warns  against  the  dangers  of  dedication   to material  success: see, for example, John  Harris  and Hiram  Riles in The  Home­ steaders  and  Dave  Eldon in The  Cowpuncher. However, Stead sees ambition  as a  danger  only if allowed  to crowd  out  the  more important task  of  "widening one's  horizons",   Stead's   shorthand  formula   for  increased   mental, social  and cultural   activity  of  all  descriptions.  For  Stead,  full  participation in  life is th moral good;  he values material  ambitions in so far as they lead outward  to wider horizons.  Dennison   Grant,   the   philanthropic  idealist,  represents  Stead's   only unabashed  indulgence  in Utopian moralizing; in his other  novels Stead  points up the  restrictions  of poverty, leading  his heroes  through  the temptations  of Mam­ mon  to the appreciation  of the finer life which financial security permits.
In  the novels published  after  Grove, however, this insistence on the moral use of Mammon  has faded  into  the  background,  to be replaced  by greater  emphasis on character  study. The  West had grown up during the thirties; the rapid expan­ sion of  the century's  first three decades and  the questions which  this  phase pre­ sented  belonged  to a by-gone age of adolescence. The  concern  of  fiction writers became  not, how should  the young sensibility be guided,  but, in  what  form has the  adult  Western  character emerged?  Grove had spoken  (in  In  Search  of My­ self,  pp.  224-7)  of  the  pioneer  "race", made  up  of certain  types of men  and women who were particularly  attracted  by the challenge of  pioneering;  in Fruits of the  Earth  he  referred  to the  "distinct  local character  and  mentality" of the residents of Spalding  District.  With  Ross's As For Me  and  My  House, Grove's generalized  interest  in  prairie  psychology became  the  primary  concern  of most Western writers.
The  two phases of rural  prairie fiction here distinguished, the preceptive social
fiction up to Grove  and  the  analytic  psychological fiction of 1940 and  after, are


47

THE HOUSE ON  THE PRAIRIES



intended  only as broad  categories; however, their over-all accuracy  is illustrated by a  survey  of  the  various uses by  Western  writers  of one  major  symbol,  the house. The  presence of the house as symbol is surprising only in its ubiquity,  for a moment's  reflection on the nature of settlement on the plains will indicate  how natural is the symbolic use of this physical object  as a means of expressing  cer­ tain themes. As Stead and Grove show more explicitly, the provision of shelter on the  prairies  was equivalent  to proclaiming  one's social status:  the settler  could initially  build  a sod hut  at no expense, progress to a lumber  shack  with  lean-to additions  at  a cost of perhaps forty dollars, and  finally, should  he prove to be a financial success, announce  his wealth with  the building  of a "New House".
The erection of the New House became more than a question of comfortable housing  in  almost  all the pre-World  War  II novels, for it was to reflect as well the state  of the  soul:  a moral  wrong  was committed  when  a settler  demanded from  the soil wealth  and grandeur, in  the form  of extravagant housing, instead of a modest living for himself and his family. This view, while again most evident in the writing  of Stead and Grove, can be traced  back to Nellie McClung's first novel in  the  first decade of the century.  After  1940,  with  the shift from  social concerns  to  individual   characterization,  the  house/home  theme  reflects  more closely relations  within  the  family  group.  It  is a  truism  that  Canadian  writers prefer  to  examine  the  relations  between  generations  rather  than  between  indi­ viduals of the same generation, and  this preference is particularly  marked among prairie  novelists. In  the  Western  fiction  of  the  past  quarter-century the  house frequently  symbolizes the  dmninant  power  within  the  household,  the  character  who asserts, implicitly or (as is more often the case) explicitly, "This is my house." This  tendency  culminates  in Sheila  Watson's  The   Double  Hook  and  Margaret  Laurence's  The  Stone  Angel, where the house is seen to be expressive of the very existence of  the  central  characters.  In  these novels the  "new  place"  takes on  a more clearly symbolic aspect, representing the human need of hope for the future.  The  word  "house"  thus  progresses in  meaning  from  the  moral  significance  of absorption  in material  possessions to an inquiry into the rights and  responsibilities of individuals within the family.



NELLIE MCCLUNG first employs the  house as a symbol of spiritual  values in  Sowing Seeds in Danny  ( 1908). The  Motherwells live in "a large  stone house, square  and  gray, lonely and  bare".  Mrs.  Motherwell  protests when  the  visiting  Pearl  Watson  opens a  window,  saying, "There hasn't  been a

THE HOUSE ON  THE PRAIRIES



window open  in this house since it was built."  Mrs. Motherwell  did  not always have a soul of "dull drab dryness", for her avarice developed only after she had become  mistress of  the  big  stone  house. Late  in  the  story  Mrs.  Motherwell  is made  to feel remorse for her selfishness, and,  making more explicit the equation of  Mrs.  Motherwell  and  her  house,  Mrs.  McClung  entitles  the  chapter  which deals  with  this  temporary   reformation,  "A  Crack  in  the  Granite". Mrs.  Mc­ Clung's symbolism is never subtle  (cf. the poppies in the same book); we can see her use of the house as evidence that it is a symbol which comes readily to hand.
R. J. C. Stead makes more extensive use of the house as an indication  of moral
health.  In  The  Homesteaders,  Stead's second novel, the Harrises'  first house is a sod hut, humble perhaps, but "absolutely the product of their own labour." The Harrises  prosper,  as do  their  neighbours;  yet amid  the  advance  of "civilization and prosperity",
There were those, too, who thought that perhaps the country had lost something in all its gaining; that perhaps there was less idealism and less unreckoning hospi­ tality in the brick house on the hill than there once had been in the sod  shack in the hollow.
Idealism is a virtue in Stead's  novels: Dennison Grant, in the novel of that name, plans and  builds his house to express his own ideals. The  house is modest in size, yet sun-lit,  airy  and  gracious,  with  a  whim-room  to  allow  for  the  exercise of impulse and imagination.
Although  Stead's  moral framework is essentially romantic,  his eye for everyday
facts of life on the prairies has given him a considerable reputation as a realistic writer. One  commonplace  in Western life which Stead deals with in Grain is the fact  that  the farm  wife often  has to wait for a decent  house until  the debts on land  and  machinery  are  paid  off-an  eventuality  which  might  be postponed until her children  have grown  up and left home. The  most persistent disappoint­ ment in Susie Stake's life is the house which Jackson promises will be built "next year, if the crop comes off."
There was a cheerful virility about [Jackson], and when he had promised Susan Harden  a frame  house with  lathed and plastered walls and  an  upstairs she had said yes, not for the house, but for himself. But that was before he left the East, when he and his hopes were young. Gander was driving a four-horse team before the ribs of his father's frame house at last rose stark against the prairie sky.

By the time the New House is built, when Susie Stake is forty-five, she has "ceased to  be an  optimist."  However,  as Jackson  Stake  points out  to his rebellious son, who sneers at "that log shack  we eat and sleep in", "Lath an'  plaster don' make

49

THE HOUSE ON  THE PRAIRIES



a home, an' sometimes poplar logs do." It is not the house itself that is important, but the spirit of contentment  and family unity within.
In  Martha Ostenso's Wild  Geese the New House exists only in Martin  Gare's dream,  a dream  which will continue to be frustrated as long as his father  lives:

Martin loved the land, but there was something else in him that craved expression. It had been represented by the dream of the new house, the dream of the thing that was to be made by his own hands, guided by his own will. Now that, too, was gone. Nothing to do now but toil on without a dream. It might have been kinder of Caleb to have deceived him until the end of the harvest-there would then have been a vision to ease the burden. A false vision was better than none.

Here  the New House in its very absence symbolizes Caleb's  maniacal determina­ tion  to  chain  his  family to  the soil, his conviction  that  thinking  is  a threat  to having  and  therefore  must  be  rooted  out  as one  would  root  out  a  dangerous weed. In  other  novels of this period the New House is an outward  manifestation  of wealth  and  power;  in Miss Ostenso's novel its denial  is a symptom of avarice and  tyranny.
With  F. P. Grove we return  to a more conventional use of the house as repre­ sentative of the moral condition of the novel's characters. Grove seems to  be par­ ticularly  conscious of the symbolic expressiveness of the  house. Pacey  notes, for instance,  how in  Our  Daily  Bread Grove equates  the disintegration  of  the house with John  Elliot's gradual  decay;  when  Elliot's  children  gather  at his  deathbed, they are "horrified" at the condition of the house and of the aged man within, as if only the sight of the physical structure of their former home can make them see clearly the  man  they have  treated  as a thing.  In  Fruits  of the  Earth  the house becomes the  dominant  symbol. Grove explains  that  his  conception  of the  novel took shape  after  he had  come across a  huge  farmhouse  which  had  been aban­  doned  by its owners. This  house, in  the  back of  Grove's  mind  while he wrote, represents the tragic experience of Abe Spalding, heroic pioneer.
To  Abe the  building of the New House means  the culmination  of his labours, to  be not  just a  house but  a mansion. The  contrast  between  Abe's longing for pre-eminence  in  the district and  his wife's more moderate  aims is shown in their attitudes  to  the  proposed  house:   "When   Abe  said  that ... one  day  he  would build her a house which was to be the envy of everybody, she could not summon any  enthusiasm; she wanted  comfort,  not splendour; convenience,  not luxury." The  house also represents Abe's patriarchal ambitions.  In answer to  Ruth's ques­ tion, "What is it all for?" he says, "To  build up a place any man  can  be proud of,  a  place  to  leave  to  my  children  for  them  to  be  proud  of."  However, the

THE HOUSE ON  THE PRAIRIES



building  of  the  house  is put  off until  twelve  years after  the  Spaldings' marriage, leaving  Ruth to cope  with  four  small  children  in a two-room  shack.  By the  time the  house  is built  Abe  can  no  longer  give her  a home; he  can  only  give her  all the labour-saving devices money  can buy. As far  as the neighbours are concerned, moreover, the  huge  edifice  that  Abe erects is "Spalding Hall", the  ancestral seat of the great  lord.
After  the  death of his favourite son, Abe questions  the  meaning of his achieve­ ment.  He  looks at  his brick  house  and  notes that  already  nature is reclaiming her own. His attitude to the house changes:

When, these days, he approached  his place, the place built to dominate  the prairie, he  succumbed  to  the  illusion  that  he  who  had  built  it  was  essentially different from  him  who had  to live in it.  More and  more the wind-break  surrounding  his yard  seemed to  be a  rampart which, without  knowing it, he had  erected  to keep out  a  hostile  world.  Occasionally  the  great  house  seemed  nothing  less than   a mausoleum  to enshrine  the memory of a child.

Because  the  house  serves  to emphasize Abe's  isolation  from  the  rest of the  com­ munity, his pride  in it as a status  symbol becomes meaningless  and  empty; so too does his patriarchal ambition when  the child who was meant to inherit  the house dies.
Abe  Spalding's desire  for  a  house  of  which  he  can  be proud, as  a  material
possession  signifying   his  success  to  the  world,  and   which   he  can  leave  to  his children, as  a  tangible  representation of  the  family  line  he  hopes  to  establish, combines   the  two  symbolic   meanings of  the  house  earlier   distinguished. Ross's As For Me  and My  House is typical  of prairie  novels since 1940  in its use of the house  in  relation to  the  family  group. Certainly Ross employs  the  confining  and depressing  aspects  of  the  Bentley's  house in  Horizon  to emphasize the  repression of  their  lives  there,  but  these  details  are  used  realistically  rather than  with  pri­ marily  symbolic  intent. 'The house  of  Bentley", however,  is a semi-ironic  refer­  ence  to  the  internal tensions  which  exist behind  the  false  front  Mrs. Bentley  ro painstakingly erects.  The title  itself suggests  the  domestic  conflict  around which  the  novel  centres, for  although the  text  ("As  for me and  my house we will serve the  Lord") is Philip's introduction to his professed  creed,  he is unable  to believe in it  himself.  Mrs.  Bentley,  on  the other  hand, is the speaking voice in the novel, and  the logical  referent in  the reader's mind  of the pronoun "my". Finally,  when one  considers   that   Mrs.  Bentley  rather   than  her  husband  makes  all  the  major decisions,  the  controlling power  in  "the house  of Bentley" is left in little  doubt.

THE HOUSE ON  THE PRAIRIES



Like  Greta  Potter  and  Hagar  Shipley  after  her,  Mrs.  Bentley tells the  reader, "This is my house," although not in so many words.
Nellie McClung's inclusion of the house among  her  few symbols was, it was suggested,  a  sign-post  that  such  an  object  formed  obvious  associations in  the reader's  mind, for Mrs. McClung desired above all that her message be clear. Similarly, although  for different reasons, its prominent  use in Edward  McCourt's Home  is the Stranger is a sign that  the concept of the house as representing  the establishment  of family roots is a congenial one to Western  fiction. Published in
1949,  two  years  after  McCourt's   critical  study  of  Canadian  Western  fiction, Home  is the Stranger offers its own commentary  on what  McCourt  found  to be the prominent features of prairie fiction to that date.
McCourt  first considers the house as home. When  Norah  Armstrong  first sees the  prairie  house that  is to be such a pain-filled home  to her, she is amused  by the  figure  her  imagination   makes  of it: " 'Jim,   it's  human! It's  alive' " she laughs,  thinking  that  it  looks like a funny  old  man.  Moving  in, she  feels that "fear  and insecurity were at last vanquished." Norah  has to learn to be at home with fear and insecurity, for they accompany her to this house and invest its "aliveness" with a terrible malignity.
In  the Armstrongs' future  there is also a New House, which they plan to build some day. This  plan  represents Jim  Armstrong's  fundamental ambition,  that  of establishing  roots in  the  West. Jim  and  Norah  are  the second generation; Jim envisions sons  and  grandsons  to  carry  on.  Then,  with  the  existence of family traditions,  there  may  come  the  spiritual  traditions  which  constitute  a  culture: " 'The  house of Armstrong,'  Jim said. 'And  maybe, if we stay long enough,  the gods will come.'"
Brian  Malory is the advocate of 'culture'  in its more obvious forms. He insists
that  Armstrong  House  be built facing  the  river, so that  it will have  a view of something  besides  unrelieved  prairie.  But  "he  was  not  just  arguing  about  the proposed site  of  a  house. Some principle  was involved,  for  the  time  being  ob­ scured  by irrelevancies."  The  principle is that  of the  North  American  contribu­  tion  to  the  cultural  heritage  of the western  world,  and  according  to  Brian  this contribution   can  be  represented  by the sound  of  that  great  material  invention,  "water   flushing  down  a  toilet  bowl."  The  modern  North  American  house be­ comes for  him  the symbol of all that  is lacking  in  our  spiritual  life.  " 'We're  a people without  anything  to  pass on  to the  next generation,' " he says. " 'Not  a book or a picture or a symphony. Or a faith!'" Only indoor plumbing.

52

THE HOUSE ON  THE  PRAIRIES



In  Home  is the  Stranger  McCourt  brings together several familiar  themes to form  a new synthesis. Cultural  traditions-the coming of the gods-are  made the  moral  good;  North  American  materialism  is detrimental  to this process  be­ cause it concentrates  on bodily comfort  rather  than  intellectual  creativity;  there­ fore the house as a physical structure is of doubtful  value in society. On the other hand,  the house as representative  of a family heritage, of a continuing blood line, contributes  to the stability and  traditionalism  of society, and is therefore of prime importance to the cultural  maturation of the West.



Two WESTERN   NOVELS  of  the  past  decade,  Sheila  Watson's The   Double  Hook'  and  Margaret   Laurence's  The  Stone  Angel, carry  this  pro­ cess one step further  by analyzing relations between successive generations within a family  in  terms of the  houses they occupy. The  struggle  between  generations expresses itself in  a fight  for  possession of the  house, a fight  embittered  by the reluctance of the older generation  to give way to the newer one.
In  the novels referred  to so far, the house has had  both a realistic and  a sym­ bolic role; for  that  matter,  the symbolic role has often been merely to suggest a readily-recognizable  pattern  of life, as when  Nellie McClung,  Stead  and  Grove question  the rewards  of material  success. In The  Double Hook  the house, as we might expect, takes on a predominantly  symbolic value. The control of the house and its inhabitants lies at the root of the Potters' "trouble". For one thing, control of  the  house  means  privacy,  protection  from  Mrs.  Potter's  prying  eyes. Greta snaps  at  Ara,  "You've  got  your own house. I  want  this  house to myself. Every living being has a right to something."
For  Greta  the  house  also  represents  the  thin  rope of  power  she wields over
James. Greta  announces  their mother's death by claiming possession of the house: "Get  out, she said. Go way. This is my house. Now Ma's lying dead in her bed I give the orders  here."  But it is a "rebellious house", doomed  to destruction.  To James,  the  house  is a  curse,  as he  dwells under  the successive tyranny  of  his mother  and  his  sister. Knowing  that  her  rope  of  power  over  James  has  been broken  by Lenchen,  Greta  burns the house with herself inside, and  when James sees the charred  ruins, his relief is instantaneous:

He felt as he stood with his eyes closed on the destruction of what his heart had wished destroyed that  by some generous gesture he had  been turned  once more into the first pasture of things.
I will build the new house further down the creek, he thought. All on one floor.


53

THE HOUSE ON  THE PRAIRIES



In  the  new  house  will live  the  new  generation,  born  of  Lenchen  and  James.
Margaret   Laurence's  use of the  house as symbol  in The  Stone  Angel is  fre­ quent  and  expressive. Hagar's house comes at  last to represent  as does no other object  the spiritual  revelations of the dying woman.  Hagar  recounts  her  life in terms of  the houses in which she has lived:  the Currie  place, solid and  preten­ tious, as befits the town's leading merchant; the Shipley place, gray, unpainted, the  scene of  her  greatest  pleasures and  her  greatest  sorrows;  the  Oadey  place, "like  a stone  barn", where she worked as a  housekeeper, although  as a girl she had  pitied  her  Aunt  Doll, thinking,  "how  sad  to spend  one's  life caring for the houses of others."
The  first  half  of  the  narrative  is given  the  nominal  setting  of Hagar's  own house in Vancouver.  That  it is more than  just another  house to Hagar  is made clear when she realizes that  her son and daughter-in-law want  to sell it. " 'You'll never sell this house, Marvin. It's my house. It's my house, Doris. Mine.' " Think­ ing of her house and of the "shreds and  remnants  of years ... scattered  through it visibly" in the form of furniture  and  personal  possessions, she tells the reader, "If I  am  not  somehow  contained  in  them  and  in  this house, something  of all change  caught  and  fixed here,  eternal  enough  for  my  purposes,  then  I  do  not know  where  I  am  to be found  at  all." The  house and  its contents  become the external  manifestation of all that  her experience has made  her. She declares that she is "unreconciled  to this question of the house, my house, mine"; however, she bows to the inevitable, saying, "We  drive ... back to Marvin  and Doris's house." Shorn  of  the  home she feels she has earned,  Hagar  hides in an  old cannery with  an  adjacent  house. Remembering  the Shipley  farmhouse,  she notes, "This house of mine is gray, too.... I find a certain  reassurance in this fact, and  think I'll feel quite at home here." Her  reaction to her new dwelling contains the same intention  of starting  over which  James  had  felt in The  Double  Hook,  but  with
sadly ironic overtones:

To move to a new place-that's the greatest excitement. For a while you believe you carry nothing with you-all is cancelled from before, or cauterized, and you begin again and nothing will go wrong this time.

The  house as symbol has been effectively used by a number  of major  writers of English and  American fiction:  one thinks of Dickens, Poe, Hawthorne, Henry James and Virginia Woolf among others. However, these writers have used the physical structure  of the house to express highly individual  themes. Poe's import and  technique,  in "The  Fall of the House of Usher",  for example, can be readily

54

THE HOUSE ON  THE PRAIRIES



d..iBtinguished  from  Virginia Woolf's  in  To  the  Lighthouse;  the  houses  in  Bleak House, Great Expectations  and  David Copperfield represent  a variety  of themes. The  unanimity with  which  prairie writers  interpret this symbol  is one element  of the  "regionalism" of  their  fiction,  inasmuch as the  house  seems  to  represent  in­ evitable  associations  in  the  minds  of both  Western  writers  and  Western  readers.  To  them  the  house stands first for material security and  later  for cultural security,  in  a  land   where  both  have  been  hard  won.  In two  writers  of  the  past  decade,  however,  there  has  been  an  extension  of previous symbolic  patterns:  both  Sheila Watson  and   Margaret  Laurence associate  the  New  House  with  the  unknown  future rather than  with  the  social  realities of the  past  and  present. Hagar Ship­  ley's  consciousness  that  we  are  never  "turned once  more  into the first pasture  of things" exhibits   Mrs.  Laurence's more  conservative  and   (for  this  reader)  more satisfying  attitude to life.

NOTE

' Because the setting for  this novel originated  in Mrs. Watson's  experiences  in  the Cariboo  District  of  British  Columbia,  this  cannot  properly  be  called  a  prairie novel;  nor,  since  it  is, by  the  author's   own  definition,  an  anti-regional   novel, should  it be classified under  the slightly vaguer heading  of  Western  novels. (See John  Grube's  introduction to  the  NCL  edition.)   In  atmosphere,  however,  it  is closer to  the  prairie  provinces  during  the  drought  years than  to  the  mountains, forest or sea-coast more typical of British Columbia; and if parody of the regional novel was intended,  it  is offset by the  naturalistic  details on which  Mrs. Watson insists of creek, hill  and  drought-parched land.























55



THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED


Margaret Morriss



TE UNIVERSE which  Sheila  Waoon creates in The  Double
Hook  is one of dust  and  rock, rutted  roads and  receding streams.  With its "flat
ribs" it is a starving animal, ruled by a deified beast held responsible for its aridity and  barrenness. The  pervasive fear of Coyote is related  to the repression imposed by the Old  Lady, and is intensified by an awareness of isolation from God.
The  opening  lines of the novel define the limits of its universe by a literal list
of  its  inhabitants, and  by a  visual  typography  that  abruptly  circumscribes  the personal  relationship  it contains. This created  world is characterized  by isolation, visually presented in the suddenness of its syntax, and  shown in the narrative  by the presentation  of characters  either alone or reacting to one another  rather  than responding.  The  only unity  present  is  animalistic:   "You  can  always hide  in  a herd".
Along  with  the  stark  physical  and   psychological  isolation  is  the  prevailing passivity of the characters.  Felix Prosper fishes and fiddles, refusing both physical activity  and  the spiritual  suffering imposed on  him  by Angel's departure. Com­ bined  with  this passivity is a voluntary  ignorance  embraced  in order  to  protect the   negative,  self-defensive  peace  which  suffocates  rather   than   activates  the wasteland. "I hear nothing. I see nothing."
Inhering in every aspect of this world is repression, embodied  psychologically
in  the  Old  Lady, sexually in Greta,  and  supernaturally in Coyote. Ignorance  is not  only passively accepted, it is actively imposed. Coyote says, "In  my mouth  is forgetting / In  my darkness is rest". James  meditates on this world, realizing that his destruction of his mother has left things essentially unchanged:

This was the way they'd lived. Suspended in silence....
They'd  lived waiting.  Waiting  to come together  at  the  same  lake  as dogs creep out of the night  to the same fire. Moving their  lips when  they moved them  at  all

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



as hunters talk smelling the deer. Edged closer wiping plates and forks while the old lady sat in her corner. Moved her lips saying: She'll live forever. And when they'd raised their eyes their mother was watching as a deer watches.
Now Greta'd  sat in  the old lady's chair. Eyes everywhere.... Eyes multiplied.
Eyes. Eyes and padded feet. Coyote moving in rank-smelling.
Nothing had changed. The old lady was there in every fold of the country.

The image of life as a silent suspension, waiting for the end of a factor seen as immortal; the implications  of disease and  distortion, primitive animalism,  and  a repressive  dictatorship;  the  fear  of  vision,  knowledge  and   immortality; the relation of eyes, Coyote, Greta, the Old Lady, death and decay; all these elements are  integral   to  the  wasteland  of The   Double  Hook.  Most  of  all,  this  passage reveals James  as a native inhabitant of the wasteland.  His act of revolt was not an affirmation  of the  new life, but  just an impulsive, essentially irrational  rejec­ tion of the old.
Irrationality as such is an important  part of this world. There is no logical basis
for the tyranny  of the Old  Lady, Greta or Coyote, and most actions are basically purposeless. Ara  unconsciously wanders to the Potter home;  Felix lives according to the moment; no immediate aim lay behind James'  revolt. Underlying this illogicality is the  confusion of nature,  illusion and  the supernatural that  informs the  superstitious  belief in  Coyote  and  the  various  appearances  of  Mrs.  Potter. But  just as irrationality maintains  the  wasteland's  status  quo  of fear,  so too it offers the only opportunity for achieving the glory of a redeemed world. The irrationality  of superstition  must be conquered by the faith which imaginatively transcends the logic of the intellect.
The mythic structure  of The  Double Hook is the archetypal  pattern  of  redemp­ tion  through  death  and  rebirth,  the  religious ritual  celebrating  the  re-entry  of love into  the  wasteland.' But  not  just the inhabitants are  transformed. The  ele­ mental  symbolic  structure  underlying  the  narrative   is  metamorphosed   into  a transcendental symbolic  structure,  which  surpasses the  unredeemed  state  while yet incorporating it into human  experience.
In  keeping  with  the setting's  primitive starkness, the initial symbolic structure of the novel is elemental,  incorporating  earth,  air, fire and  water. In  the waste­ land  water is not creative, but is drying away. It is basically powerless, its motion controlled by the land: "the  creek flowed this way and that  at the land's whim".  Water is even incapable  of destruction.  In the town, James  longs to destroy him­ self, but is prevented  by the water's association with his mother. In turn, the earth

57

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



produces  only  death.  "Ara  felt  death  leaking  through  from  the  centre  of  the earth. Death rising to the knee. Death rising to the loin."
These aspects of the elemental universe are associated with fear, darkness, and the  primitive force of Coyote, who offers the  relief of passivity to those who are only  living  and  partly  living.  He  is usually  associated  with  Mrs.  Potter,  and between  them they  pervade the world with negation.  But at  the same time, Ara notices  the  ability  of water  to  transform  and  give life:   "She  saw  the  shallow water  plocking over  the roots of the  cottonwood,  transfiguring bark  and  stone. She bent towards the water. Her fingers divided it. A stone breathed  in her hand. Then life drained  to its centre."
For  Felix, the rain of the storm  merges with  remembrance of past events, an essential factor in his contribution  to the redemptive  process. Felix and  Ara seem to accept their premonitions with little immediate  awareness of their implications. But  the  most  ironic  note of significant interaction   between  water  and  earth  is sounded  by Greta.  At the height of her rage against  Lenchen,  motivated  by her repressive instincts,  she  justifies herself by a  contrast  with  the  elements:  "The pot-holes are  filled with rain from  time to time. I've  seen them stiff with  thirst. Ashed white and  bitter at the edge. But the rain or the run-off fills them at last. The  bitterness licked up."
Greta's self-insulation from her environment prevents earth and water from providing  a comparative  analogy for human  experience.  Until  denial gives way to affirmation,  nature  must remain  destructive  and  earth  and  water are  in  con­ stant  conflict.  For  most of  the  characters  the  storm  is a  manifestation  of  evil, lashing  the  earth   "with   adder   tongues.  With  lariats.   With  bull-whips." This conflict contains within itself the potential to annihilate the wilderness, as William foresees: "The day will come, he'd say, when the land  will swallow the last drop. The  creek'll  be  as  dry  as a  parched  mouth.  The  earth,  he'd  say, won't  have enough spit left to smack its lips."
The  elements of air and  fire are associated with the images of light and  glory,
and  to this extent they are opposed to the fear and darkness related  to earth  and water.  But  these elements still have  their  negative  aspects. Greta  sees the air as a  rope stretched  between  people, uniting  them  only partially.  The  ambiguity  of fire is related  to  the  precarious  balance  of fear  and  glory. "The  curious  thing about fire ... is you need it and fear it at once."
Heinrich  Wagner  establishes a relation between  the four  elements that is basic
to the symbolic structure  of the novel:

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



He stood there thinking of the light he had known. Of pitch fires lit on the hills. Of leaning out of the black wind into the light of a small flame. Stood thinking how a horse can stand in the sunlight and know nothing but the saddle and  the sting of sweat on the side and the salt line fanning under the saddle's edge. Stood thinking of sweat and heat and the pain of living, the pain of fire in the middle of a haystack. Stood thinking of light burning free on the hills and  flashing like the glory against the hides of things.

The  elements  are here related  to both the pain of living and  to the glory, which exist in opposition.  But the stallion is a recurring image for James  and  his rebel­ lion. Thus  there is the implication  that if glory and pain are integrated, redemp­ tion is achieved  through  the  pain of living, that  the heat and  the sweat and  the pain can transform  the hills.
This  suggestion  is reinforced  by the storm,  the conflict of the four  elements. The  storm  is  cataclysmic  rather  than  creative  because Greta's  spirit  of  denial dominates  the  wasteland.  Darkness is preferred  to  light,  which  is feared  rather than   welcomed,  as  Heinrich   demonstrates:  "In   the  sky  above  darkness  had overlaid light.  But the  boy knew as well as he knew anything  that  until the hills fell on  him  or  the ground  sucked  him in  the light  would  come again.  He  had tried to hold darkness to him, but it grew thin and formless and took shape as something  else." The  individual  embraces  the darkness and  fear of the passivity offered  by Coyote  to  protect  himself from  the active responsibility of the light. But the elusive darkness he desires escapes his grasp and takes shape as something he fean;, like the vision of Mrs. Potter or the tyranny of Coyote.
The  redemption of  the  wasteland  is associated with  no single figure, for  the entire  community   must  participate   to  some  degree  in  its own  salvation.  This rebirth  is achieved  by the transformation of the elemental structure  of earth,  air, fire  and  water  into  a  transcendental one  of  seeing, knowing,  communication and  unity. But the redeemed  world does not abandon  the elemental  universe, for the rebirth  process is within,  affecting not the exterior environment but the atti­ tude to it and use of it by its inhabitants.
In  the  elemental  symbolic structure  there  is a  hierarchy  of power;  the  light and  glory of the  flame must conquer  the pain of living, integrating it with indi­ vidual  experience,  so  that  water  may  renew  the  earth.  In  the  transcendental symbolic structure an analogous order exists. Sight gives knowledge, motivating  the impulse for communication which is necessary for the social and spiritual integra­ tion of the  community. The  theme of sight and  blindness is related  to the ideas of light  and  darkness, fear  and  glory, desire for knowledge and  voluntary  igno-


59

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



ranee.  It is Kip who is associated with sight, knowledge and the glory, but just as Mrs. Potter  is incapable  of significant action in the elemental  world, so too Kip, either unaware  of or exploiting his perceptive power, dissipates his potential by becoming a go-between, a tale bearer. It is Ara  who is granted  the vision which is the glory of physical sight, and her insight, significantly, is in terms of a trans­ figured  environment:
Now her tired eyes saw water issuing from under  the burned  threshold. Welling up and flowing down to fill the dry creek. Until  dry lips drank.  Until  the trees stood knee-deep in water.
Everything shall live where the river comes, she said out loud. And she saw a great multitude of fish, each fish springing arched  through  the slanting light.

The  physical starkness has been replaced  by a vision of abundance. The  process of salvation  has  clarified the  confusion of nature,  illusion and  the supernatural that   resulted  from   the  passive  ignorance   of  the  characters. The   knowledge inherent  in  this illumination  has  replaced  the sight  of  Mrs.  Potter,  whose  con­ centrated  ferocity brought fear, darkness and  death,  with a vision of life, integra­ tion and  abundance. The  Old  Lady is seen last by Felix. "But  she wasn't fishing, he said. Just standing like a tree with its roots reaching out to water." The  power of  Mrs.  Potter  has  been broken  by a vision in  which she  can never share;  her death  is a spiritual  terminal rather  than a redemption,  and the water cannot help her.
The old lady, lost like Jonah perhaps, in the cleft belly of the rock
the water washing over her.
The  only  knowledge in  the  wilderness is the  secret  knowledge of Greta  and the Old  Lady. "You don't  know what  I know." For the rest, passive ignorance is embraced   in  protective  self-defence  against  both  humanity  and  environment. But  after  Ara's  vision of rebirth,  sight  enables  knowledge  and  Coyote is really seen for fhe first time. His voice still preaches the relief of negation: "Happy are the dead / For their eyes see no more",  but knowledge by this time is blessing the characters  with  the  courage  to  really "see".  Coyote  can  no longer  enthral,  but must take his place in the new order of things.
The   idea  of  communication  is not  totally  absent  from  the  wasteland.  Ara wanders  to the  Potter  farm  because of a need  to talk;  Heinrich  feels he should have  been  able  to  tell  Lenchen  something; Angel  warns  the  utterly  passive Theophil, "A  man  can't  peg himself in so tight  that  nothing  can creep through the cracks."  But  ruled by Greta  and  Mrs.  Potter,  individuals  refuse to hear, see

6o

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



or  listen  to  each  other.  Through the  regenerative  process an  awareness  of the necessity of communication gradually  replaces the impulse to isolation. Heinrich says: "Can  a man speak to no one because he's a man? Who says so? Those who want  to be sheltered  by his silence. I've  held my tongue ... when  I should have used my voice like an axe to cut down the wall between us."
In  the stagnating wasteland  unity is feared  or ignored.  Widow  Wagner  tells
Lenchen  to  leave  if she  wishes;  Mrs.  Potter  rejects all society;  Lenchen  wants only  to  escape,  from  James  if  necessary. The  sight  of  another  results only in rejection.  When  Ara  sees Mrs.  Potter  she is aware  of isolation.  Felix wants  to chase  her  off, but  sinks into  physical indifference. Heinrich  wants  to fence her out,  Lenchen  sees her  as the image of her own frustration,  and  the Widow sees a  reflection  of her  own  despair.  The  first gathering  at  the  Potter  farm  is  acci­ dental.   Such  a  meeting  is  instinctive  rather   than  unitive,  and  any  sympathy present  is overpowered  by  the  self-destructive violence of Greta's  expression of hate.
Angel Prosper talks to Felix about isolation and union in the individual,  lovers
and the community, in a passage that represents the wasteland's attitudes while attempting  to question  them, as she pounds Felix's shoulder  asking for a denial:

But if loneliness is being one's own skin and flesh, there's only more lonely people there than here.
. . . One man is one man and two men or ten men aren't  something else. One
board is one board. Nailed together they might be a pig-pen or a hen-house. But
I never knew men could nail together like boards....
Take a man and a woman, she said. There's no word to tell that when they get together in bed they're still anything but two people.

When  Angel  arrives  back  at  Prosper's  home,  she  realizes  that   "no  word"  is necessary. Practical  action  is required,  and  through  that  action  Angel helps to achieve the unity she desires.
The  final gathering  at  Felix's  mirrors  the new integration of the community. Lenchen and Kip have come out of need; Angel has returned  to her proper responsibilities after  her  previous escape; for  Felix it is a triumphant  restoration of  appropriate order.  Mrs.  Potter  and  Greta  withheld  themselves and  rejected others;  here another  mother  and daughter,  Widow Wagner  and Ara, come offer­ ing forgiveness and  aid. The  return  of James includes all these motives; he wants human  support; he is  assuming  his proper  obligations;  he is  coming  to restore order   to  the  wilderness;  and  he  comes offering  a  tenderness  and  compassion whose  potency  can  regenerate  his world. This  new human  inter-dependence is

6r

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



seen in terms of a proper  relation  to one's physical environment. "A  man  needs living  things  about  him",  William says, "to  remind  him  he's  not  a stone  or  a stick."
Thus  the  world  is reborn from  passivity into  purposeful significance. Yet this redemption  does not mean entry into a world of peaceful  perfection;  suffering is still a large  part  of its universe. Ara says, "We  don't  choose what  we will suffer. We can't  even see how suffering will come." The  pain  of living is unavoidable, and  in a narrow  world results in negative endurance or violence. But the regen­ erated  world is based on the qualitative  equation  of fear  and glory; the enlarged consciousness accepts the inevitable suffering and incorporates  it into a meaning­ ful   pattern   including   the  transcendent   glory  of  human   existence.  Thus   the regenerative  process is cyclic rather  than singular; it consists in a conscious main­ tenance  of perspective between resignation to the uncontrollable, and  recognition of its constancy.  This  duality  is expressed as  well in  Mrs.  Watson's  short  story "Antigone", significantly enough in a water image.
See how quickly the water flows. However agile a man is, however nimbly he swims, or runs, or flies, the water slips away before him....
But after all, Antigone says, one must admit that it is the same kind of water.
. . . The  gulls cry above the same banks. Boats drift  toward  the Delta and circle back against the current to gather up the catch.2

Thus  regeneration  consists in a constant awareness of one's environment, physical and  social, and  one's relation to  it. Defiance of the uncontrollable  is ineffectual; passivity  is  even  worse. It  is spiritual  compromise  that  enables  integration   to replace inactivity or exploitation.




T.IE REGENERATION of the wasteland  from  an  elemental  to a transcendental universe is accomplished in tenns  of a quest for value initiated  by James  and  accomplished by community  participation. But before examining  the process of rebirth, it is interesting to consider the attempt  to deal with the wilder­ ness by defiance.
The  idea  of  defiance is inseparable  from  the  figure of  Mrs.  Potter  and  her fishing. She fishes "with  a concentrated  ferocity",  "upstream to the source",  and "it's  not for fish she fishes". Her fishing, associated with the quest for significance in both  the religious sense and in terms of the maimed  Fisher King of "The Wasteland", is an act of defiance against both God and nature:

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



Still the old lady had fished. If the reeds had dried up and the banks folded and crumbled  down she  would  have fished still. If God  had  come into  the  valley, come holding out the long finger of salvation ... asking where, asking why, defy­ ing an  answer, she would have thrown her line against  the  rebuke; she  would have caught a piece of mud and looked it over; she would have drawn a line with the barb when the fire of righteousness baked the bottom.

Mrs.  Potter's  defiance  is demonstrated   as well in  her  holding  up  the  lamp  in broad  daylight  "looking  where there's nothing  to be found", for "something  hid from every living thing".  In each case Mrs. Potter is abusing the natural elements and attempting to assume divine prerogatives. Using the wrong methods and approach, the Old  Lady's quest is inevitably sterile, distortive, and self-destructive.
Mrs. Potter  is more of a force than  a character  in the novel, and her figure is comparable  to  that  of  Addie  Bundren  in  William Faulkner's As I  Lay  Dying. Addie is essentially selfish, refusing the ties of love and  family responsibility. Her temperamental isolation  imposes itself on  others physically and  psychologically. Her  adultery  with  the  Reverend  Whitfield is an act of defiance, a quest for sin so  that  she  might  be  condemned   rather  than  forgotten  by God.3  So  too Mrs. Potter  turns  her  flesh from  all living flesh and  pursues a course of concentrated defiance.
Addie Bundren dominates and shapes her children's complex psychological reactions,  for she  is the source  of latent  tension and  violence each  of them  ex­ presses.4 A similar  relationship  exists between mother  and  child in The  Double Hook; Mrs. Potter's  influence over her children is a matter  of blood as well as of power. James'  murder  of his mother  is an act  worthy of the Old  Lady  herself; the ferocious interaction  of will, words and hands in a deed that  is ineffectual in an immediate  sense because it is without definite aim. Similarly, when he blinds Kip, James says, "If you were God Almighty, if you had as many eyes as a spider I'd  get them  all."  In  the exact manner  of the Old Lady, James defies both God and  nature.  His  final  act  of  violent  rejection  and  defiance  is  the  whipping  of Lenchen  and  Greta.  This  act  demonstrates  the flaw inherent  in  the  method  of defiance;  James  is  punishing   these people  because he  had  relied  on  them,  on forces  outside  himself,  to  effect  a  transformation  of  his  world.  Now  James  is ready to learn that regeneration  must come from within.
Greta  is the sterile  figure who replaces her mother  in the unredeemed  waste­ land.  She embodies the same defiance of nature  and humanity as the Old  Lady, but is even more negative than  her mother. The scene of her self-destruction is a complex  one,  mirroring  the  ultimate  inefficacy of rebellion  alone. Greta  rejects

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



the  human   companionship  of  her  family;  she  abuses  the  nature,   already  dis­ torted, symbolized in her flowered housecoat;  she thirsts for revenge  against  the life-force of Lenchen  and the potentiality for salvation  of James; finally, all these challenges are consumed in her defiance of the vision of her  mother,  forbidding  her to handle  the matches. And Greta's  reward  is not escape or oblivion, but the embrace of Coyote in his darkness and fear.
In  this  way  the  children  are  deeply  related  to  the  mother.  Her  death  is a longed-for event, finally precipitated  by James'  violent action. Her death is a fundamental necessity for the survival of the community.  As Daedalus  learns in Sheila Watson's  "The Black Farm", some must die so that  others may live more abundantly.5   Furthermore, James  must utterly  reject  his mother  and  temper  the qualities  that  relate  her to him. Like Mrs.  Watson's  Oedipus  in "Brother  Oedi­ pus", James  must learn that "We  are her children. She is not our mother." 6
The  whole concept of defiance, like most of the elements in The  Double Hook, is an  ambiguous  one. Ara  provides some justification for violence when she says there are some things "that  can't  be straightened  out. They  have to be pulled and wrenched  and  torn."  But such  action  is necessarily limited,  since  man  cannot "hold  and shape  the world."  William, discussing rebellious horses, points out the final  uselessness of  defiance:  "Some,  he said,  are  pure  outlaw.  But  there's  the torment  of loneliness and  the will of snow and  heat  they can't  escape, and  the likelihood that some stranger will put a rope on them at last."
The  narrator of Sheila Watson's "Antigone" discusses, in  a different  context, the ideas of escape and defiance. Antigone lives in a world of sensory experience:
Yet she defies what she sees with a defiance which is ahnost denial. Like Atlas she tries to keep the vaulted sky from crushing the flat earth. Like Hermes she brings a message that there is life if one can escape to it in the brush and bulrushes in some dim Hades beyond the river. It is defiance not belief and I tell her that this time we walk the bridge to a walled cave where we can deny death no longer. 7

Defiance is a  denial  that  leads ultimately  to death; escape is possible only to a dim  Hades  next  door  to death.  To  regenerate  the  wilderness, affirmation  and belief, awareness  and  submission, must  unite in a  transcendent compromise  for the good of the community.




l:E PATTERN of rebirth  in The   Double  Hook is that  which
Sheila  Watson's  Oedipus  voices:  "recognition, rejection,  redemption."8  Kip  is

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



most closely associated  with  the power of perception  and  one of his meditations provides the  novel's epigraph  and the core of its interior symbolic pattern:

Kip's mind was on James....
He's like his old lady, Kip thought. There's a thing he doesn't know. He doesn't
know you can't  catch the glory on a hook and hold on to it. That  when you fish for the glory you catch  the darkness too. That  if  you hook twice the glory you
hook twice the fear. That  Coyote plotting to catch the glory for himself is fooled and  every day fools others. He doesn't know, Kip  thought, how much mischief Coyote can make.
Coyote reaching out  reflected glory. Like a  fire to  warm.  Then  shoving the brand between a man's teeth right into his belly's pit. Fear making mischief. ... Fear walking round in the living shape of the dead. No stone was big enough, no pile of stones, to weigh down fear.
His mind awake floated on the tide of objects about him. Was swirled in a pool. Caught in the fork of a tangle. Diverted from its course.

This  passage  demonstrates   the  nature   of  the  wasteland,  dominated   by  fear, Coyote  and  the  living  dead.  Kip  perceives that  no  heap  of  broken  images  is large  enough  to bury  fear,  that  no fragments  can  be shored  against  the ruin of the wilderness. Kip  is also aware of Coyote's basic inadequacy. Coyote, like Kip himself,  like  Mrs.  Potter,  reaches  for  the  glory  and  is deceived.  And  Coyote deceives others  with  "reflected  glory";  the glory he reflects is that  of the human consciousness that  has been subjected to  his potent darkness. Knowing  this, Kip can see the pattern that will change the world; the power of knowledge over ignorance, and the integral relation between fear and glory.
For  all  his  perception,  Kip  is unable  to initiate  the  rebirth  process, for  his
consciousness, though  heightened, is essentially passive, "diverted  from its course". Coyote calls Kip  his servant, and in this relationship Kip's abuse of his perceptive power  is made  evident.  As  Coyote's  servant,  as a  messenger,  Kip's  awareness leads to no discovery of new life, but rather  to an increase in the paralyzing fear and  passivity of the characters. Kip becomes a true inhabitant of the unredeemed world in his attempt to seduce Lenchen and in his refusal to deliver James' mes­ sage to her. Above all, the limits of his perception  become plain when he errs in assessing James; Kip  assumes James  is habitually  docile and  therefore not  to be feared.
It is appropriate that  Kip  be blinded, "because  Kip had been playing around with the glory of the world." The  power he had abused must be taken from him. But in the  community's rebirth  through  its own efforts Kip  too is saved, for he admits  his  blame.  In  the  redeemed  world  that  integrates  glory  and  fear,  Kip

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



deserves his  place,  for  by  his constant  antagonizing  of  the  other  characters  he assists the purgatorial process by which suffering transforms  the earth.
James  is the catalytic figure who instigates the pattern  of renewal. He  has no heightened  awareness  to help  him in  his progress from  recognition  to rejection and  redemption,  but  rather  achieves perception in his individual  participation in the collective experience. In the beginning, James is a native of the wasteland, conditioned  by environment.  His affair with Lenchen  and  the conception  of his child  are  initially  without  meaning,  part  of  the  inarticulate and  ultimately  in­ effectual defiance of circumstance. The  murder  of his mother  is an almost ironic symbol; will, words and  hands  meet in an action  that  is ferocious but  meaning­ less because  rejection  has preceded  recognition.  Thus  action  leads only to stasis and  fear,  which  James  had  tried  to  conquer  rather   than  incorporate  into  his experience.  "Since  the  fury  of  the  morning  he'd   not  been  able  to  act.  He'd thrown  fear  as  a  horse balks. Then  he'd  frozen  on  the  trail.  He  was  afraid.  Afraid  what  Greta  might do."  Thus  violence leads only to further  violence, the blinding  of  Kip  and  the  whipping  of Lenchen  and  Greta.  These  actions are  a logical  working  out  of  his initial  deed,  but  they  signify  a  decreasing  scale  of ferocity. They  also  represent  the  infliction  of  the  purgatorial process on  other members  of the  community. James'  final act  of  rejection  is the  most passive of all;  that  of escape. "He  wanted only one thing. To get away. To bolt noisily and violently out of the present. To leave the valley. To  attach  himself to another  life which  moved  at  a  different  rhythm."  James'  search  for  value  is still parasitic and  materialistic,  just like his mother's questing defiance. He still does not realize that  the transformation of the life-rhythm  has its source  within  man  rather  than in external  circumstances.
In  the town James no longer defies his environment, but rather  moves parallel to it. Its nature  is basically that of the wilderness. The  hotel, like his home, has a "hanging  and  a waiting look". The  brothel smells of "bodies  and kerosene burn­ ing away",  recalling Greta's self-destruction of which James is unaware. It smells of mud  and  dead  fish, thus  including  Coyote's  bed-hole  and  Mrs. Potter  in its desolation. In  effect, James has merely escaped to another wasteland. James sees his mother as he enters the town, continuing  to envelop him in fear and darkness. He  sees her  for  the  first time  since  the  murder;  his  departure has  thus  only brought  him  closer to the  atmosphere  of the  unredeemed  world. James  cannot escape his mother. He cannot escape himself.
Confronted  with a wilderness even more barren  than  that  he had escaped, for

66

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



the  first time  James  asks "what  he'd  really intended  to do  when  he defied his mother at the head of the stairs." Coyote replies,
To gather briars and thorns,
To go down in the holes of the rock
and into the caves of the earth. In my fear is peace.
In  Coyote's  terms the result of the murder  is suffering, the confrontation  of fear in  a handful  of dust. This  is of course true,  and an essential part  of the rebirth process. But Coyote would have the pattern suspended at this point, offering only the peace of surrender to fear, the abdication of the glory inherent in responsible human   existence.  Here  James   achieves  recognition;   Coyote's  bed-hole  is  not enough.  "This   bed  is too short  for a man  to stretch  himself in. The  covering's too narrow  for a man  to wrap himself  in."  Moreover, James  realizes the  inade­ quacy  of his defiant  attempts  to  change  things. "All he'd  done  was scum rolled up to the top of a pot by the boiling motion beneath. Now the fire was out." The  fire of violence James  discovers, burns without  cleansing. James' encounter  with the hotel parrot  who has the rights of a dumb  beast and  a speaking man adds to his growing  awareness  of his  true situation.  Its  uniqueness  provides a low-keyed analogy for  Coyote.  Perhaps  unconsciously  James  recognizes that  so far he him­ self has acted as a dumb  beast, motivated by fear; it is time to assert the rights of a speaking man, and  affirm the individual and collective glory of humanity.
The  process of recognition  enables James to reject the brothel and its symbolic embodiment  of  the  wasteland.  As he leaves it he stands  in  the  cool air  by the earthy  bank of the flowing river, and he finally experiences the freedom from his mother  he  had  so desperately  desired. James  exists here in  a  peaceful isolation which contains the potentiality of his redemption;  the elements are converging for his salvation.  But  the pattern  is not complete. Lilly comes to him and  the fire of her simulated  passion recalls the nature  of James' initial attachment to Lenchen. Here James  experiences the fire which, ironically, can cleanse without destroying. Lilly  steals  James'   newly  purchased   wallet,  thereby  exacting  the  price  of  his escape,  his escape  not  from  the  wasteland,  but  from  the  inherited  materialistic attitude  to it which rendered  it sterile.
James'  thought   now  naturally  turns  to "Lenchen   and  the  child  who  would wear his face",  and  he realizes that there lies his "simple hope".  His town experi­ ences have "freed  him from freedom"; that is, he now recognizes the necessity of assuming  his  new  responsibilities. Freed  from  its stable,  James'  horse  naturally  turns  toward  home  and  James  moves with it in unified  rhythm. Coyote tries to

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



deny James' quickening spirit of hope, but his purposeful  activity creates a tempo more significant than Coyote's advice to rest in the dust. In a microcosm of the regenerative  pattern, James  moves from  dead  grass  and  spraying  dust  into  a meadow of wild hay watered by a hidden spring,  upon  a stallion that  draws life with every breath.
As he nears  home, light defines the world for James,  validating  his rejection
of the desolate town. He is uncertain  about  what he will find, expecting a cry of hate. His perception is still limited, yet from the distanced  heights James is aware of the  ordered  regularity  of the  terrain  to which  he  returns.  He  comes with  a question  and  a  resolution;  he asks if the water  must  dry  up forever, and  deter­ mines to find  Lenchen  and  transform  their  relationship.  "Out of  corruption  life had  leafed  and  he'd  stepped  on it carelessly as a man  steps on  spring shoots." And in the fulfilment of his resolution, James  answers his own question.
The  final step  in  the  pattern  of recognition,  rejection  and  redemption  is  ac­ complished when James confronts the ruin of the Potter farm. Here he recognizes and  rejects the  fire that  bums  and  only destroys, but  he sees that such  a flame enables  redemption.  He  sees the "bare  hot  cinder  of a still  unpeopled  world",  and  feels that  "by some generous gesture he had  been turned  once more into the first pasture  of  things".  The  implication  here is not  of a  newly created  world, but of one recreated  by a combination  of man's effort and some inexplicable  but benevolent gift from beyond man's power. And in planning the reconstruction  of the  reborn  world  and  embracing  his child,  James  fulfils his major  role in  the redemption  of the wasteland.
The  child is called Felix, Happy; he is born,  not  to redeem the world, but  to
figure forth  its redemption.  Physically the child  of James  and  Lenchen,  he will participate  in  their  regenerative  activity;  spiritually  the  child  of  Felix Prosper, who brings him into the world, he will share the supernatural milieu which Felix contributes to the rebirth of the community.
Felix's initial  passivity is seen in  his indifference  to the storm  and  his refusal
to  accept suffering.  His earlier  association with  Angel, like that  between  James and   Lenchen,   had   come  about   "by  chance.   By  necessity.  By  indifference". Felix's gradual  awakening  to his role as spiritual  leader is rooted in this passivity. When  Lenchen  comes to  him  for  help,  his first reaction  is to chase  her  away. This desire, unlike his response to Mrs. Potter, does not sink into indifference, but moves to  the  half-forgotten  ritual  of religion and  hospitality.  This  scene, intro­ ducing Part II of the novel, adapts the Visitation of the Virgin Mary to her cousin Elizabeth,  the  joyous salute, "Blessed is the fruit  of thy womb".  But Felix is still

68

THE  ELEMENTS  TRANSCENDED



gripped  by inactivity.  "He'd had his say. Come to the end of his saying. He put a stick on the fire. There  was nothing else he could do."
Felix ends  Part  II with  a dream  vision which conceals James'  escape with  a symbolic fantasy  of Angel's  return.  This  vision involves the entry  of the Virgin into Bethlehem, and  that of Christ into Jerusalem, the ideas of death  and life and the deceptive nature of mere appearances.  In the dream, Felix asswnes his priestly garments  in  the  dawn,  stressing the  need of remembrance.  He feels the  pull of Coyote, but  rejects him for Angel's return,  and  he welcomes her with the words that  begin  the  Canon  of the  Mass, suggesting the mysteries of the  Incarnation and  the  redemption  of  mankind.  This  dream,  superimposed  on James'  escape, seems to  imply  that  Felix's  passivity has given way to a vision that  transcends physical activity. But when confronted  by the needs of Kip, Felix undertakes  his pilgrimage  of  hwnility   to  Angel.  His  return   home  undercuts  his  vision  with gentle irony, for she comes with him, not on a sleek ass, but  "on  her two feet, her  children  tagging  behind  her."  Felix's spiritual  perception  must  be modified by the actuality of practical  activity.
The  invasion  of his indifferent  isolation by the needs of others  enables Felix to achieve both spiritual  and  practical wisdom, symbolized by the classioal image of the owl. It is his assistance at the Nativity that  results in his own rebirth,  and his contribution to the salvation of his world. "It was not until the girl had come battering  at  his peace  that  he'd  wondered  at  all about  the  pain  of a growing root.... His eyelids dropped. His flesh  melted. He rose from  the bed on soft owl wings. And below he saw his old body crouched down like an ox by the manger." Recognition,  rejection,  redemption.  Kip, James, Felix. Each is associated with
a particular part  of the rebirth  pattern,  but James, because of his activity, is the main figure who initiates its process. Each of the other characters  is caught  up in the collective experience,  contributing  to it in varying degrees. Lenchen, initially marked by fear and frustration, is a passive participant. Her awareness is limited; just  before  the  birth  of  her  child, she fears she has wrecked  the  world,  while, ironically,  she  is assisting its salvation.  But  Lenchen's  association  with  the  fire image  and  her  natural oneness with  her  environment  make  her  a fruitful  life­ force. When  she rode,  "she  was part  of the horse. Its crest and  the  edge of its fire."
Her  mother,  Widow  Wagner,  embodies the fatalistic despair,  the fear of God and  His Judgment, which  have  turned  the  terrain  into  a wilderness of waiting women. Cornered  by circumstance  at last, her waiting gives way to practical  aid, and  prompted  by Angel, she is able to give of herself spiritually,  to offer the con-

6g

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



cern, help and  forgiveness that  are the true maternal virtues. Ara has greater perception.  She is aware of their passive isolation, and  tries to fit the pieces into a pattern. She admits her own blindness, but rejects love as a unifying force and thus fails to find the pattern  she is seeking. So Ara embodies the suffering of her world,  aware  of and  experiencing  it. She  was "made to walk on  roads and  to climb  cliffs. Made  to bear  her  hands  against  rock faces and  to set her foot on sliding shale."
Angel  possesses a  unique  curiosity and  tolerance,  and  the  ability to articulate her thoughts. Felix's recollection of her encounter  with the imaginary  bear implies that she has conquered  the fear of mere illusion and so enjoys a relative freedom and  sense of realism. Angel has a saving  adaptability to circumstances  and  the art  of recognizing and  achieving what is needful. She  too is associated with the flame, in a personal and redemptive sense, in a passage that deftly reveals her mild superstition,  her valid spiritual function, and her human  practicality.  Felix recalls her:  "He'd seen Angel light a lamp  against the storm.  Not a wax candle to the Virgin,  but  the  light  she'd  said  her  father  kept  burning  against  the  mist  that brought  death."
Heinrich  Wagner  acts as a dormant  parallel  to  the  activity  of James  Potter. At  first  his impulse  to isolation  is manifest  in  his fence-building.  He  fears  the light, prefers the darkness, procrastinates in his purpose to confront James about Lenchen,  and  is inarticulate  in  his desire to  communicate with  his sister. But Heinrich  offers hope to his mother and goes out to search for Lenchen. Heinrich halts at the destroyed farmhouse, for his role is not of achievement,  but the reflec­ tion of the  potentiality of redemption.  His ignorance  of love thwarts  his activity but not his perception. " ... he thought of light blazed into a branch of  fire. How could  he say that  the earth  scorched his foot. That he must  become ash and  be born into a light which burned but did not destroy."
William  Potter  is the character  who is caught  up in the rebirth  process, with­ out  contributing  much  more than  proof of its efficacy. His irrelevant  anecdotes and   too-ready  explanations  give  way  gradually   to  more  perceptive  comments pertinent  to the situation. His goal is physical comfort  and  peace, the completion of his daily chores. His only impulse to unity is a limited familial instinct, against which  the  final communal  integrity  can  be seen as  transcendental. William sees his limitations,  but  refers only to his own household  and  not the world at large. Yet  William  is redeemed  by the concerted  efforts  of  others,  and  aptly finds his task in waiting  for James  to return,  not the passive suspension of the wasteland, but positive waiting with a social purpose.

THE ELEMENTS TRANSCENDED



Thus  the  wasteland inhabitants undergo  a rebirth  into  a spiritually and  physi­ cally  ordered world,  in  which  fear  and  glory are  both  incorporated into  human experience. In  the  redeemed universe,  each  has  his place,  even  Coyote. He  has played  his  part  of  imposing fear  on  his subjects.  Recognition of his inadequacy enables  a  realization of  the  function of suffering,  and  hope  for a  wider  world  of transformed  values.  So  it  is fitting  that  Coyote  should  have  the  last  word,  an­  nouncing man's triumph:

I have set his feet on soft ground;
I have set his feet on the sloping shoulders of the world.



NOTES

' Don  Summerhaves,  "Glory  and  Fear,"  Alphabet  3  (Dec.  Ig6I), p. 50  (Review article).
2   Sheila  Watson,  "Antigone," Tamarack  Review,  II (Spring,  I959), p. 6.
3  Peter Swiggart,  The  Art  of Faulkner's  Novels  (University  of Texas  Press, I962), p. 118.
4   Olga  W. Vickery,  The  Novels  of  William  Faulkner  (Louisiana  State  University
Press, I959), p. 52.
::.    Sheila  Watson,  "Black  Farm," Queen's  Quarterly,  65  (Summer,   I956), p.  209.
6  Sheila  Watson,   "Brother   Oedipus,"   Queen's   Quarterly,   6I     (Summer,   I 954), p. 227.
7   Sheila Watson,  "Antigone," p. 8-g.
8   Sheila  Watson,  "Brother  Oedipus,"  p.  226.


review articles


VIRTUE IS NOT  ENOUGH


Ralph Gustafson


SANDRA KOLBER,  All  There   Is of Love.  McClelland &  Stewart. $4·95·
EUZABETH  BREWSTER, Passage of Summer. Ryerson.  $4·95·
DAVID   WEISSTUB, Heaven  Take  my  Hand. McClelland & Stewart. $3·95·
GEORGE  DOWERING,  Rocky  Mountain Foot. McClelland & Stewart. $3·95·
IRVING  LAYTON,  The  Whole  Bloody  Bird. McClelland & Stewart. $5.95.


ONE  TRIES TO  SKIP the blurbs and  hand-outs  and  public-relations  jobs and shed preconceptions. It is hard when the  author   is  a  pretty   housewife  who loves her children  and  husband  and  yet has  two  books of  poems  published,  one of which, "in  its first season," went into a  second edition.  The  extraneous  is  dis­ concerting  and  confusing. If the  poet is on  television and  pretty  to  boot  (I am not speaking of Irving  Layton)  is it  not certain  that she writes bad poetry? If the blurbist   tells  me  that   "her   poems  are addressed  directly  to  the  modem  man," am  I not  naturally  hooked?  Why, then, do  I feel  guilty  in  lodging  my  verdict that  All  There Is  of  Love  is one of the worst  books  of   poetry   that   a  Toronto  publisher   has  offered  in  a  long  time? (Would  it  be  different  if  the  editorial office were in  Lime  Ridge, say, or Bella Bella?)  Mind  you, I say that  this book is one  of  the  worst  as  poetry  (I am  still
chivalrous, God grant). A book of poetry
 
Sandra Kolber  is pretty  and  a  house­ wife and  I wish her well and  I  wish her new  book  were  a  thumping  poetic  ex­ plosion and  she our  Emily  Dickinson  or whoever  Sandra  Kolber   wishes  herself poetically to be. But it isn't and she isn't. The  trouble  is the  book  isn't  even  good prose -which  at  the  least poetry  has to be, as Uncle Ezra long ago pointed out.

If you were  full and  I were whole we should   not  need  this  love
that  fleshes in the  core  of me and heals  your  breach  somehow.
("Grateful  Omissions")

When  feminine   wit   (and   Mrs.  Kolber has that)  turns to honest earnestness, the result is always in need of a sense of comedy. Why  is that?  Why  don't  males take such  pratfalls   (even  when their  wit is male, of course, and  life is earnest) ?

Tomorrow is a dream
that  rarely,  if ever, comes true.
So  drink  the  rum  that  makes  the  dreams
that  make  tomorrow  now.

can  adhere   to  the  Ptolemaic  system or liken love to a red, red rose; I don't  care, as long as the author  knows what a poem is. Not what  a  thought  is; what  a poem is.
 ("Flight")

The   publishers  of  Mrs.  Kolber's  first book of poetry, Bitter Sweet Lemons  and Love,  tell  us  that   her  poetry  while  (at times)   "sugary"   nevertheless  is  "under-

REVIEW ARTICLES



standable"  (that's  a  give-away   of   Can­ ada's degree   of  sophistication). I  am  a little  worried  that  I am  stupid  (or  tired,  or bored  with  poetry?):

Except  no one  would  ever  cry  public when  loving  is even  alone,
and  sex is redressed  unto  neuter and  self is a  thing  to disown
from  the  backlash  they  promise austerely­
rerigid  and  stolid  anon - emancipate fellows refuse  being  squared
by-
who know how  to tum themselves off.

These   lines  are   about   the   "Generation Gap." That  is  the  title.  But  they  flum­ mox me. Perhaps, if I am stupid, I could, with   concentration,  win   through.   But there   is  nothing  to  make   me   want   to make    the   effort:  neither   the   possible rhythm,   the   lethal   precision,  nor   the glorious  music  of  the  English  language.
One  can  read   through  the I 29  pages of quiet  verse  by Elizabeth Brewster,  re­ main   unengaged, undisturbed, and   yet prefer  this quiet, unpretentious verse that  knows  about   the  Passage of  Summer  to the  stridence that  persists  that  this is All There   Is  of Love.  One  can   prefer; yet also, alas, disclaim  both.
Neither is poetry. The verses  of  Eliza­ beth  Brewster,   a  retrospective  collection that  looks back  toI 95 I, sometimes  hover on  the  edge  of a  passionate commitment to content and  language, then  withdraw themselves  and  continue to  tell  us about  life,  never   showing   us.  The  rhythm is banal   or  non-existent; the  language un­ exceptional; no  irony  brings  the  roman­ ticism  into  accord  with  fact; no emotion disturbs  the  sincerity. Once  or  twice  her Maritime  small-town   portraits   impress the  reader  in  the  way  that the  emotional geography of  Cogswell  or  Nowlan  does;  once  does  the  section   "Songs and   Son­  nets"  conjure even  the  name  of  Dickin-
 son.  Then   all  is  peaceful; memories  an­ nihilate   time  and   death  (this   book  can speak   of   "death's  kiss"!) ;  the   author withdraws and   looks  on   remotely   and with  all she says we are  in sympathy, un­  moved.   Life   undoubtedly   has   touched  the  author  and deeply  and  cruelly.  But life is not art.  And  here is no art.

My cousin, having survived Five  years of active  service As a wartime  pilot,
Smashed  into  a  freight  train.
With  his car  and  two small  children.
I do not know if he was drunk  or not.
("Deaths")
David   Weisstub  is  a  Canadian of  25 years,   born   in   Port   Arthur,  raised   in Winnipeg,    now   studying  at   Yale   Law School.  He  is  new   to  Canadian  poetic circles, and  Heaven Take  my Hand is his first  book of  verse.  Again  alas,  I do  not like the  book. Saying  so in  this case, puts me   under   special   obligation  to  explain myself. The  subject  matter of the  book is deeply   based  on  Hebraic  theology   and culture. This  is a  particularly rich  area for a poet  to draw  on.  I remember once, over  a  lunch   with  A.  M.  Klein,   telling him  that  I envied  him  the  possibility  to draw   on   Hebraic  culture  for   moving, fresh image and  metaphor. He  looked  up at   me  as  if  I was  crazy,  struck   dumb with   astonishment. It  was  the   time   of Hitler;  just  before   Klein   published   his The   Hitleriad.  I was  fed   up   with   the Christian apparatus  as  a  metaphor  for poetry; it  was  cliche;   it  was  a  wobbling organum.  Unless   the   poet  could   be  as concentric  as  Hopkins  or   Eliot,   Chris­ tianity   as  a  poetic  metaphor  was  about  as  good  as  June and   a  moon-though the moon, of course, now that  it has been landed    on,   is  once   more   good   poetic cheese.  After  that  first  incredulous, suf­ ferable  moment, Klein  realized  what  we

73

REVIEW ARTICLES



both  meant and  were  talking  about,   the
art of poetry.
It is the art  of poetry  that  is lacking  in these first three volumes before us. In Weisstub's  book  I find  no, or  very  little, sign  that  this  author is a poet. Emphati­ cally,   Weisstub's    heart   is  in   the   right place.  But  a blood  pump  doesn't make  a poet.
Weisstub  is deeply  dedicated religiously and  is deeply aware (of course, alas)  of suffering. I have  forgotten, pretty  much, who  Miriam was, and  am hopeless in re­ membering  what   exactly   was  the  rela­ tionship between  Leah  and  Laban. Thus, I disqualify  myself. But only up  to a cer­ tain  point.  I looked  the  relationship up. I  consulted the  glossary  in  the  back  of Heaven Take My  Hand  when  I came  on phrases  I could  not  be expected  to know. But  I got  irritated.  There came  a  point when  I knew  the  author was aware  that  the  Hebraic  phrases  were  necessary  only to  him.  They  could  not  possibly  convey their   connotations  beyond.    As   Henry  James   cracked    about   Walt   Whitman: "He  knew  too  many  foreign  languages." As   Berlioz   said   of   Sain t-Saens :  "He knows  everything but  he  lacks  inexperi­ ence."   The   erudition is  the  sort  of  hu­ miliation   (or   condescension)    we  occa­ sionally  get  from   Eliot  and  Joyce.  Why not:

master  of Israel's  palm  groves ascend  to the  gates  of heaven

rather than:

rebbe  of  Israel's  palm  groves ascend  to the  shearim.

(Mr. Weisstub  does  not  like punctuation or capitals like so many  lower-case Cana­ dians  who  don't know  a  rhythm  from  a riot). A.  M.  Klein   never  got  recondite.

74
 (Weisstub has a poem  to Klein). Neither does  Layton   (vide   infra).
But  let  all  this  be  necessary  to  convey the  ambience of  the  book.  I  should  edu­ cate  myself. The fatal flaw is that  Weiss­ tub  does not  convey  the  passion  he feels; nor  does he hear  what  he  writes:

embrace  my mind,  dialogicize my daemonia
playing  on dead  corpses eyes the  aetemitatis wincing  at  my modality
jesting  with  my  determinacy
("discovery")

There is much prose  of this  nature. It
is a relief  to come  on  such  prose  as this:

he met her
in  a  west side laundry  room
("encounter")

Let  us go  west.  Look  at  the  last  page of  George   Bowering's Rocky  Mountain Foot:

nobody
belongs  anywhere,

even  the
Rocky  Mountains

are  still moving

Even  the  comma in there  doesn't hold us  up.  Yea,  verily.  We  all  are   moving gravely.   Our   "small durance," as  Hop­ kins  says,  naught  availeth much.  Move from  one  end  of  the  book  to  the  other.  Look   at   page   I I now,  where   the  epi­ graph/epitaph says "all/ Life death does end  and  each  day  dies  with  sleep."  Are you out  of breath? Dead  sure? Yup,  I'm  dead  sure,  as George Bowering  might  say
-and  does.  And   because   he  does,  his book  is  full  of  life.  Paradox? Figure it

REVIEW ARTICLES



out  for  yourself.  Many  people can't. I too am  always  being  accused   of  seeing  the skull   beneath  the   skin,   and   answer   to know  you are  dead  is a sure  way to keep yourself quick. As Kirkegaard says, "Man must   live  his  contradiction."  And   this present  book is one  that  does. Look, now, if you aren't completely out  of breath, at the  bottoms  of  the  pages   (all  of  them) . Here   you   will   find   some   pretty  nasty counterpoint  (usually   in  prose;  counter­ point   to  Bowering's poetry  which  some­ times  is, alas,  prose).  Counterpoint (not  petitpoint)  is what  makes  music  rise up and   hit  you  where  you  live;  it  is  what makes   poetry.  Counterpoint  is  wisdom;  on  the  one  hand, you  have  experience, on  the  other   hand, you  have  illumina­ tion.   The   Word   was   made  Flesh.   As pretty a  piece  of counterpoint as you are likely  to  find -or  as  pretty a  piece  of irony, or comedy,  or  tragedy-whatever your  poet  naked    (foot   to  brain)  has  a conviction  of. Yeats has a word  for it  (he usually  has) : "Sex  and  the  dead  are  the only   things   that   can   interest  a  serious mind."
Bowering   has   a   serious   mind.  Take that  frivolous  bit of counterpoint he puts on page 17 (tired  looking  up?)   about the Reverend John   McDougall who  ran  up and  down  a  valley  in  the  Rocky  Moun­ tains  faster  than  any man  alive; "not  be­ cause  I  was a  good  runner,  but  because a  big  buffalo  was after  me." That bit of fugue  punctures pretension. Fugues  gen­  erally   do.  They   are   as  pragmatic  as  a bagpipe. I am  reminded  of why  the  key­ board   is  as  long   as  it   is.  Answer:  to accommodate  the   hoop  skirts   of  Eliza­ bethan ladies  who liked  to play  duets.

People  write  names in mountains
&  come down
 where the wind  blows around  things,

as George  Bowering  says.
Now, go right  back  to  the  last page of the  book (got  your  second  wind?)  where he says nobody  belongs  anywhere. Apart from this slippery foothold on today, Bowering   certainly  does;   smack   in   Al­ berta   (too  bad  it  has  to  be  a  smack  in­ volving   Queen  Victoria;   why   couldn't the  province  be named  Minnewissawata­ gan  or some such?) . The book celebrates  Alberta  as it seldom  has  been  celebrated
-and in a way that  provincial Albertans won't  much  care  for.
It's  an  elegy, in  essence;  an  elegy with wit. Bowering  mourns the  blight  of  civi­ lization,  "this   present   enormity" ;  shows us how humanity pollutes  mountains.

Video  people!  Calgarians, hopeless automobile  graveyard contractions squasht  into  steel  cubes ... somebody save  them!
("above calgary")

His elegiac stance is mighty  precarious, however.  With   nostalgia and   neuralgia, the poet would wipe out everything, everything but  irradiating wild  flowers; his realistic grasp of the horrible present yearns  itself  into   the  impossibility   of  a longing  for the "untouchable blue moun­ tain."   The   attitude  is  inverse  romanti­ cism.  Bowering's  saving  grace  is that  he knows  that   in   dreams   begins   responsi­ bility.
His  verse  is  an  easy-going,   projective
verse, with an occasional wit-clinching rhyme.  There  are  several   descents   into self-conscious rhetoric (that poem partly quoted   above) ; and   the  stenographic syntax   and   blunt   line   eventually  make one  long for  the grand style. But  (as you have  gathered)_  this  is an  accomplished,

75

REVIEW ARTICLES



jolting, entertaining book of Canadian poetry.
Earlier in this Canadian literary  racket,
still  breaking up  into  self-righteous  cote­ ries and  nasty  firing-squads ultimately re­ vealing   themselves  as  toothed   specimens that  eat  their  own  kind,  in  turn  disinte­ grating into self-appointed foremasts  con­ signing  the  hindmosts to  oblivion   (that gets  at  the  truth of  it)  -earlier in  this racket, as I say, who would  have  thought that  Irving Layton would  tum  out  to be self-competitive? Yet,  now  that  we have The  Whole  Bloody Bird, here  he is:  the poet  competing with  the writer  of prose; the   sober   thinker  upstaging   the   clown with   the  red  nose  and   umbrella   on  his low wire;  the  passionate  man  outrivalling the  "prowling satyr   in  suburbia,"  exor­ cizing   the   "unaging   lover-boy."  Layton finally  reveals  himself.  Out   of  all  those
22  books of posturing pages and  resplen­ dent   poems,  exhibitionism and  universal  praise,  assertion   and  compassion, out  of all   this   the   celebrant  of  screwing   and  heaven,  hyperbole and  truth, aggression and  gentleness  emerges  now  as complete man   to   whom   ripeness   is  all,   around whom, in  his ageing,  wisdom  (though he will have  none  of it)   gathers. Out  of all the  fiddle faddle of the past,  his own and
 his commentators', emerges  a writer  of primacy, the man of letters  that  Canada deserves  or  doesn't.
Read  The  Whole  Bloody Bird without
preconception. Good  Lord! this  man  lis­ tens!  He  listens. Is  there  any  other  poet in Canada who  does?  Try  talking  to one, if  you  think   so.  Layton   knows  what  is said.  What is more  important artistically, he hears  what  he writes. He  is one of the three  poets  in  Canada who command the  grand style:   the  great  memorable music, the  linguistic   line  no  longer   words   but meaning. What  a  relief   to  pass  to  this from   the  upcoming  pages  of  Canadian poets  who see no  reason  to listen  to any­ one  but  themselves  and  who  do not  hear what  they say.
None  of  the  great,  sweeping,  resonant
poems  Layton  is capable of is to be found in this present  book, though one or two ("Climbing Hills,"  "Holocaust")  come close;  Layton himself  is aware of this, he calls  its  poems  "pomes." The poetic  evi­ dence  here  is of less tense a cast, an easy­ going   pliancy.   But,   as  with   all   Layton  writes,  what   there  is is vital  with  death and  sex.
The prose sections,  the  Obs  and  Aphs, as Layton calls them, are the ones which display  the  man  of letters-observations





Rlchanb asel & company, 1nc.


Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND,  SAN   FRANCISCO, LOS ANGELES,  DENVER,  CHICAGO, NEW  YORK

REVIEW ARTICLES



as  arrogant and  observant, aphorisms as glib  and   as  memorably cogent,  as  ever. The sections answer  their author's own question: "Where has  the  man  of  inde­ pendent mind  disappeared to?  Who  saw him   last?"   Judicious and   sober-headed are   the  comments on  Israel, India,  the Hippies, whatever.  And  what  a  salutary gust it is to find a Canadian writer  prais­  ing  the   United   States. It  will  perhaps now  shake   up  AI  Purdy   to  supervise   a book  of  protests  against   the  rape  of  Es­ thonia.
 The Whole Bloody Bird is not  Layton's best book but  it is a book  by Layton  and as such it is "open-eyed, courageous, truthful.  And   humane,"  as   he   wishes man   to  be.  Layton   helps  make   it  "no longer possible to believe in saviours that neither laugh  nor screw."  His is the  right prescription:

I want  nothing  in  my hand but  water and  sunlight
-a  fist cannot hold  them

Why should  I contend  with  anyone? Surely  death  is his enemy
as he is mine






BEYOND CAMELOT

Warren Tallman


MORDECAI RICHLER,   Hunting Tigers  Under  Glass. McClelland &  Stewart.


AT FIRST GLANCE there  would seem  to be two of him  during the  I g6o's, Mordecai Richler the  traveller and  com­ mentator in Hunting  Tigers Under Glass, and  Mordecai Richler the novelist in The  Incomparable   Atuk   and  Cocksure. The  one  in  Hunting  Tigers  brings  matter-of­ fact  attention to  bear,  the  direct  if droll eyes of  the  trained  observer.  The  one  in the  novels  calls  on  whatever spirit   rules over  the  truth of  exaggeration as his eyes go  madcap and  every  day  is  crazy  day for  me.  However,  it  would  be  wrong  to diagnose  a slight  case  of  literary schizo­ phrenia, Dr.  Mordecai meet  Mr. Richler. The  way  of  looking  differs  but  the  trav­ eller's eye is on the same  beam  as the novelist's  and  the  motes  are  the  same  for
 both: lowbrow  Jewishness,  lowbrow  Ca­ nadiana, lowbrow  culture. More, whether he  looks  through his  direct   or  his  mad­ cap  eyes  the   ruling   spirit   is  a  kind   of gentle  melancholy and  the  guardian an­  gel, if there  is one, a  justifiable  pride  that  he   has   remained   his   own   writer,  own visionary,  own  man.
The   two  "literary" essays in  Hunting
Tigers   reveal   his   independence  as   he takes Norman Mailer  and  Bernard Mala­ mud  to task. Though he admires Mailer's personal   charm,  circa    I965,  Richler  is put  off by the  jackass egotism that  erupts whenever  Mailer  gets into proximity to a theatre stage,  a  literary  reputation  like Hemingway's or  an  even  more  looming one  like  Kennedy's. One  wonders  how

77

REVIEW ARTICLES



Richler feels now that  Mailer  has refined his genius  for  self-publicity  so that  how­ ever  many  hom.o:es he puts into  his mouth he  comes  up  roses, not  to  mention  rich. The contrast can  be seen in Richler's self­ effacement in "Writing For The  Movies"  and  in  the  1962  journal  account, "That Year  in  Jerusalem," the  two  longest  es­ says in  Hunting  Tigers. In both  he stays on  the  matter-of-fact side.  Not  the  dis­ tinguished young  Canadian writer swing­ ing   high   among   the   sweet   starlets   of
London, a la  Fellini  or  Antonioni, but
hired-hand Richler learning how to com­
pose minimal dialogue followed  by "with a far-off  wondering look," followed  by appalling  conferences with   cretin   pro­ ducers, followed  by movies that  are often­  enough   likewise.  And  not  the  celebrated Jewish-Canadian    novelist    winging    his way  into   the  heartland of   the  Talmud and   Torah  in   promised   Tel  Aviv,  but plain   Mordecai Richler  visiting  relatives  and   friends   of  friends   and   noticing  a quality of  life  remarkably  similar  to  the quality he  notices  in  "The Catskills",  his superb  account of a sentimental  journey to  the  Borscht   Belt  vacation  resorts  in upstate New York. In Israel  he talks with a   good   many   intelligent  people,   high­  brows,  but  he  tends  to record  these con­ versations perfunctorily, with a certain embarrassment (keeping the wives' names straight)  and  to  feel much  more  at  ease and   observant  in   chance   conversations with  persons  who  could  be interchanged with  those at Grossinger's resort in the Catskills.  Only  at Grossinger's  the quality of the  place  is more  relaxed  because  out in  the  open.  And  so is Richler, almost  at home,  enjoying himself.
The essay  on  Malamud  helps  clarify what   is  at  stake.  In  accepting the  Na­ tional  Book Award  for The  Fixer, Mala-
 mud   quotes   Herman  Melville,  "to  pro­ duce  a  mighty   book  you  must  choose  a mighty  theme." But he goes on to wonder  whether one  couldn't write  a  great   and  enduring novel  about the  life  of  a  flea. Richler finds  The   Fixer  "curiously with­  out  an  inner  life, a will  of its own,"  and concludes the  essay  by  hoping that   hav­  ing "done his duty  to the  mighty  theme" Malamud  will   "return  to  chronicles  of the  'fleas' of his time,  a form  in which  he is more  likely to leave  us with  an endur­ ing work." Notice  that Malamud's "great and  enduring''  becomes   simply  "endur­ ing." And  surely, "chronicles of the fleas" chimes  directly  into  Richler's  preoccupa­ tion  with  lowbrow  life, general mankind's overwhelming taste  for  buffoonery,   vul­ garity,   corn,   never   a  super-subtle  soul around but  instead  a more  or less endless procession  of  schlemiels.  Ever  since  The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz  in 1959 it has  been  to  a  high   comedy   of  these lowlifers  that  Richler has  turned and  re­ turned.  It  seems   fair   to   assume   that  "low" is the  level  at  which  his  imagina­ tion  discovers   the  "inner  life,  a  will  of its  own"  which   he  misses in  Malamud's work.   Which    assumption   makes   for   a puzzle.
For  Richler is  himself  a  highbrow in the sense that  he possesses exceptionally independent intelligence and  bases his judgement of  Mailer and   Malamud on their  writing talent, their  ability  to write well. What he scores against  them  are deviations from  this  strict  standard,  Ma­ lamud   for  moving  outside  sphere  of  his talent by attempting to write  in  "a  mid­ dlebrow   form," Mailer for  letting inept  writing  move   in   as   his   ego   looms   up larger  than his  typewriter. This  stance  is aristocratic, that a good writer  has a duty to write well every  time  out.  Yet  his high

REVIEW ARTICLES



view  twists  when  one  turns to  his  predi­ lection  for  lowlife  protagonists,  the fleas of  the  world.   Mind   you  these  fleas  are not  arranged  on  some  social  scale,  the wrong  side  of  the  dog's  back.  His  most extravagant   comedy    usually    concerns  middlebrows, establishment   people   who have   not  so  much   a  low  as  a  severely limited  view of life,  through  a glass with enormous  anxiety -and   not   very   far.  See it, for  the moment, as a battle of the brows:    that   Richler's  is   high,    aristo­  cratic; that  middle impresses  him  as low and   becomes the target for his comic exaggerations; but that low, the real schlemiels,  have  something like  his  spe­ cial   affection   because    their   wackiness provides   the  "inner life"  the  responsive energy   that   lends   shaping  force   to  his imagination. Or,   as he  puts  it  in  "The Catskills,"  speaking  of   Grossinger's  re­ sort,

here  too are  the  big TV  comics, only this is their  real  audience and  they  appreciate it. They  reveal  the  authentic joke  behind  the bland  story  they  had  to  tell  on  TV.

Note    "real    audience"  and    "authentic joke"  and   remember  that   in  the  196o's Richler  has   been   almost   exclusively   a comic  writer. Small  wonder that  he feels more  at  ease  at  Grossinger's than   in  Is­ rael.
Granted, this  high-middle-low formula is  too  pat.  However, it  does  point   up  a split  in  Richler's art.  He  for  instance is too aristocratic as writer  to take  the  kind of  low  road  present-day Norman Mailer has  elected. Mailer   in I g6g  is the  same as the  one  Richler takes  to  task in  1965, only  more  so. In Armies  of the  Night  he negotiates his penchant for self-advertise­ ment   beyond  mania into  an  institution. The  self  he  chooses  to  advertise is  the  one  that   turns   jackass  on   public   occa-
 sions -all the  world  a drunken stage - particularly when  he  comes  into  contact with   such   highbrows  as  Dwight   Mac­ donald,    Bert    Lowell,    Paul   Goodman, arms  linked,  we're  all  pals  together. One  suspects that  their  reaction  to  this cama­ raderie  must   be  extreme   consternation since the more  he plays the fool the more inept  they  seem  as leaders  of  the  march  on the pentagon, we're  all stwnbling over our   own   feet   together.  The  difference here   is  between   Richler   writing   about  lowlifers,  and   Mailer   becoming   one,  a kind  of  literary  Duddy  Kravitz  scram­  bling   every  step   of   the   way   down   to Washington in order  to make  it up to the top  of  reputation, bring  your  own  cam­ eraman. Yet  the  more  overtly  Mailer in­ dulges  his desire  to  be  Number One  the  better  the  writing becomes.  Rather  than  abandon his  egotism   Mailer  indulges  it, putting his hooves into everyone's  mouth. But  his  typewriter  sings.  Which   on  the face  of it  would  seem  to  disprov.e Rich­  ler's criticisms.
Yet there  is good  writing, and  good writing. However well Mailer  writes in Armies  of the  Night, his  achievement  is negative,  a brilliantly narrated  confession of  questionable motives  all  around. The honesty  helps  wash  Mailer clean  so that his humanity shines  through the  sly  cor­ rosion  of  his  confessions.  But  the  nega­ tivism shows in form  of his basic asswnp­ tion,   which   is  approximately   the   one  Charles  Olson  identifies  in  criticizing the existentialists,  a belief "that the  pigs have won."  There are  more  searching artists than  Mailer  who  believe  with  Whitman, Blake,  Shelley,  Yeats,  Lawrence, Pound, Williams   and   Hart  Crane, to  name   a few,  that   human  life   is  still   ruled   by angels, gods and  demons rather than  the Pentagon,  Daly,   Yorty,   or   New  York's

79

REVffiW ARTICLES



finest, or Montreal's. Thus  Mailer march­ ing  his image  of himself against  the  pen­ tagon  may  be a rose, sweet  Norman. But an   Allen   Ginsberg  trying   to   convince  mankind that  "heaven exists and  is every­ where  around us" is a far more  profound public    artist.   And   however   admirable Mailer's attempts to stay on  his feet  and  out  front in  Pigsville they are  less signifi­ cant   than   a  Ginsberg chanting  mantras in  the  midst  of  the  Chicago  police  riots, exorcising   Mayor   Daly's   mob   spirit   in convention  hall,  singing  Blake  songs  to maligned   flower   children   or   raising   a clawed   prophetic  hand   in   Witchita  to cry down the bad  language of our  leaders all  around  the  world,  their  black  magic lies. Soul  of Allen.
Yet  just  as  Richler's  aristocratic  view
of  writing prevents him  from  taking  the
 kind   of   low   road   Mailer  chooses,   his commitment to  lowlife  comedy  prevents him  from  taking the  kind  of  high  road an  Allen  Ginsberg walks. However, these limitations seem  to  me  self-elected,  de­ liberate, and  subject to  change.  The  es­ says  on   Mailer  and   Malamud   can   be read  not  only  as criticism,  one  artist  ap­  praising a  couple   of  others,  but  as  ges­ tures,  a  way  of warding off  writers with whom  it  would  be a mistake  to  identify. Similarly, his opting for  the chronicles of fleas,  the  goofy  trials  and  tribulations of lowlifers,  can  be construed  as a  warding off,  go  in  fear  of   "mighty  themes." In "Writing For  The  Movies,"  "That Year In  Israel" and "The Catskills" one senses how  thoroughly  Richler is  not  a  public personality. This  rules  out  Mailer's kind of  writing which   assumes  me   first, then



Dictionary of Canadian Biography

VOLUME  I    1100-1700
Editors:   George W. Brown, Marcel  Trudel, Andre  Vachon

VOLUME II   1701-1740
Editors:  David M. Hayne,  Andre  Vachon

The  first volume of this major  publishing endeavor  met with immediate and  unanimous acceptance from scholars and general  readers alike.
" ... as fresh as the morning. There is no better  introduction to Canada." Library Journal.  " ... at one stroke it has given us a past richer  than  we have ever held between two covers before." Tamarack  Review. " ... it is impossible  to imagine  a better  book
on Canadian shelves." Saturday  Night.  " ..• a pretty  fascinating bit of reading." New
York  Times.
Volume n, published  this fall, continues  the story of the struggle  for survival  of New France.  The  biographies maintain  the same readable style and  high level of scholarship evident  in Volume I.
Regular  Edition  $15.00
Laurentian edition  (limited,  deluxe)  $50.00

UNIVERSITY OF  TORONTO PRESS



8o

REVIEW ARTICLES



art, a process of more or less throwing yourself off cliffs and  hoping that  your typewriter  will  catch   up  down.   Richler isn't  the  type,  but  any  writer  of  reputa­ tion  can  be  tempted.  Likewise  with  the mighty  themes,  witness some of  the more disastrous   writing of  Hugh  MacLennan and   Morley  Callaghan. Richler must  be aware that   both  of  these  men  write  best when  they  stay  close to direct  experience and   most  mechanically  when   they  tum to   mighty   themes.   Yet   I  suspect   that  there   is  a  further motive   having to  do with  a  patient sense on  Richler's part  of his  past, present  and  future as an  artist.
From   the  first  he's  been  a  wanderer. During  the   1950's,  starting from   Mon­ treal  he moves  to Spain  to England then  back  to  Montreal. During  the  I96o's  its Toronto,  England,  Israel,  and   back   to Montreal. I  find   the  stopover  in  "The Catskills" the  most  revealing, particularly the passage from which  he draws  the title for  Hunting  Tigers  Under  Glass. He  is writing  of  Arthur Winarick, the  "Doctor Strangelove" of  the  Catskills,   owner   of the  Concord, largest  of the  resort  hotels:

A  guest  intruded; he  wore  a  baseball  cap with    sunglasses    fastened     to    the    peak. "What's the matter, Winarick, you only put up one  new  building   this  year?" "Three." One  of them  is that  "exciting new sno-time rendezvous,"  King   Arthur's  Court   'where every  boy  is  a  Galahad or  a  Lancelot and every  damsel  a Guinevere or  a fair  Elaine.' Winarick, an  obsessive  builder, once  asked comedian   Zero  Mostel,   "What  else  can   I do?  What  more  can  I add?"
"An   indoor    jungle,   Arthur.   Hunting  for tigers  under  glass."
 The  cast  of  the  early  work  is  Roman­ tic, protagonists who  seek for  subtler  ex­ perience  than   their  surroundings afford,  with  no  great  success  its  true  but  none­ theless   with   considerable  ardour.   The  cast of his work in the  I96o's  is, as noted,  madcap experiences of lowlifers. All roads lead  to the Catskills,  and  Camelot at  the Concord, or,   better   still,   just  over   the way  to where   "Grossinger's Has  Every­ thing," the grand  hotel  of the world.  See Galahad  and   Guinevere  descending  the great    stairway,    to   bingo.   Or  possibly something more  apropos, perhaps Grail,  Grail,   who's   got   the   Grail?  My  guess would  be  that  when  you  finally  make  it to  lowlife  Camelot it's  time  to  move  on. But as of  the moment, I969, Richler is in Montreal  at  work  on  a  novel  with  that  town  as setting.  So  another guess  would be that  this  novel  will conclude the  low­ life  phase.  And  a  final  guess  would   be t:1at after  the early  romantic cycle of the
195o's, and  after  the  present  lowlife cycle of the  I96o's,  a music  and  a melancholy are  due to start, a slow movement, will it be grim?  will it  be sad?  will it  be senti­ mental? in  which  the  voice of  Zeyda  will be heard  again,  as at  the  first.  But  these are only guesses. The present  fact  is that  across   two   decades,   and   still   a   young man,   Richler   has  written  his  way  to  a position  that   none  of  his  predecessors  in Canada   attained.   A   young    writer    or reader  can  think  he's the greatest  or  hate  his  guts.  But  he's  here, like  a  city  you will eventually  have  to  visit  if you  want  to get into  the country.


TRANSLATING BRILLIANCE


Jack Warwick


CLAIRE  MARTIN,  In  an Iron  Glove. Ryerson.


CLAIRE MARTIN's claim to fame  in  Canadian literature rests  princi­ pally  on  her  brilliant French  style. So it is quite  natural that   a  serious  translator should   take  up  the  challenge of  render­ ing this uncommon commodity into  Eng­  lish. Philip Stratford's version of Dans un gant  de   fer  is a  very  good  one;  it  reads like   English   and   it   reads   almost   like Claire Martin, which  is no mean  feat  for an   author  whose   brio   is  so  intimately bound   to  the  syntax   and   idiom   of  her own  language. The  reader  whose French is  too   labouring  to   take   the   polished original  at   its   own   effervescent    pace would  have less to lose by reading it in Stratford's English.
Because  this is an  important matter in an  age  threatened by ersatz  culture, it is still necessary to insist that no translation equals  the original. This one has a few gallicisms,  and  a few  phrases  which  give the  right  meaning but  the  wrong  colour. Yet  the author's urbane wit, so important in  her  treatment of  this  the  lugubrious story of her life, is far from  perishable; witness  this  remark on  her  father's  end­ less warnings about the  danger of  young men:

The  fact  remains  that  it's  a  real  disservice to girls  to lead  them  to think  that  men  are so ardent. They  can't be anything but  dis­ appointed.

The  intricate equilibrium of Claire Mar­ tin's  first  page,  too,  has  been  admirably preserved. Bitterness, irony,  sober  reflec-
 tion,  and  an  indomitable desire  to wrest some   fun   out   of  life,  are   not   only  all visible, but  also  in  the  right  proportions.
An  exact   and   exacting sense  of   pro­ portion, found   above  all  in  Claire  Mar­ tin's  style,  is  essential   to  understanding her  work.  Without it  this  autobiography risks  falling,   at   times  indeed   does  fall, into  a  closed  world  of  self-pity.  It is the quality of expression  that  shows  the  way out.
The  following passage gives some idea how  delicate the  task  can  be:

... les  clercs   bretons   et   autres   que   nous valut  l'anticlericalisme fran  ais
arrivil:rent  bien  resolus  a Iutter  contre   tout ce qui  pourrait les amener  a demenager en-
core  un  coup.
*
... clerics  from  Brittany and  elsewhere sent
our   way  by  a   wave   of  French   anticleri­
calism,  immigrants  who  arrived   firmly  re­
solved   to  fight   anything  that   might   ever
force  them  to move  on  again.

"Sent  by  a  wave" and   "force   them   to move  on"  are  a shade stronger than   the original,  while   "demenager  encore    un coup" suggests  a vein  of irony  lost in  the simple  adverb "again". The  result  is that the  English   version  evokes  a  picture of inveterate   tenacity  and   shades   of   the heroic  homesteader, whereas   the  French maliciously  suggests   stupidity  bordering on   sloth.   This    difference  carries   over much  of the work,  and  the  diminution of that  ironic  deftness  tends  to give the nar­ rator a more  indignant character in  Eng-

REVIEW ARTICLES



lish, a more  mocking attitude in  French. What I  am  saying  here,  it  must  be  em­ phasized,   simply   brings   us  back   to  the commonplace that  literature is  not  com­ plete   in   translation,  not   even   such   a painstaking and  sensitive  one  as  this.  It may   even   go  beyond   questions  of  lan­  guage,  for  with   the  cult   of  the  Pilgrim Fathers   resounding   in   our    ears,   how could  we ever  avoid  the  wrong  connota­ tions?
The world revealed  by Claire  Martin's autobiography  is  predominantly  one   of the Self struggling with other Selves. The main  enemies  of the  budding author were the stupidity and  hypocrisy of the other characters. These  highly prized  virtues made a  deadly   combination, amounting in some instances to brutal or hysterical cruelty. Though entirely  credible  and convincing, the  account has  the unfortu­ nate  effect  of harping all the  time on the contrast  between   the  author's  innocent intelligence and  the  limitations of every­ one  else, even  of  those  she respected  and loved.  Covering a  period  which  is better  known  for  the  Crash, the  Spanish Civil War  and  Buchenwald, it  runs  the  grave risk of  seeming  like a  privileged   form  of suffering, the misfortunes of a pert  young miss. Yet  the  well-to-do child's  suffering also  commands our  respect,  for  her  situ­ ation  was  (as  her  foreword to  this  trans­  lation  comments)  hazardous  like  that  of any  weak  and   persecuted  sector  of  hu­  manity. The value  of this  recital of com­ plaints lies precisely  in  the  fact  that  the author has  chosen  to  run  her  risks  bra­  zenly.  She  includes the  narrow horizons of her  bourgeois education (anti-semitism and   all)   in   her   own   tribulations.  The  work   holds   our   attention  by  the   total  absence  of  sentimentality, as  well  as  by the   response   it  has  aroused  in   readers
 who  see  in  it  something  of  their   own experience.
The  characterization of a milieu  is the other  side of what  we expect  from  auto­ biographies.  At  first  sight,   this  is  secon­ dary  to personal  analysis  in Dans un gant de   fer. The   author's  sequestered  child­  hood  accounts   for  that. The   reader   can make  no reliable inferences on  how  typi­ cal  Claire  Martin's family  was. She  her­ self   sometimes   makes   remarks  on   how times  have changed, implying that  much of  her  experience was  common, and   at other  times insists that  she was never  able to compare herself  with  the other  girls at school.  What they  had  in  common  was the detested  institution, with  its pettiness, its  prudery,  piety  and   persecution. But her  special  misfortune was  that  she dreaded going  home  even  from  that, whereas  she  imagined all  the  other  girls had   alternate spells  of  happiness.  Con­ sequently,   the  whole  experience  of  con­ formist  family   and   convent  school  was intense  for   her,  while  others  may  have found  the  convent education  little  worse than   humdrum. Her   portrait  of  it  has been   challenged   by   people   with   equal  claims  to knowledge  of  the  original.
On  the  other  hand, the  lively  French­ Canadian  reaction to  the  publication of these  family  secrets  has  also  rev.ealed  a certain    complicity.    Other   Quebeckers have  claimed  to  recognize  themselves  in Claire   Martin's  mirror.  Adrien   Therio, rejecting  the  use  of Queen Victoria as a convenient  explanatory  scape-goat, sug­ gests  that  the  father figure  seen  here  is an   extreme  case  but   also  an  authentic prototype of  the  patriarchal society.  Al­ though  the  reader   must  beware  of  facile assumptions  in  placing  this   work   in   a social context, it does communicate some­ thing  essentially  characteristic.

REVIEW ARTICLES



Despite  the   limitations  I  have  men­ tioned, and  sometimes   because  of   them,  In  an Iron Glove  is a rich autobiography. We  get   to  know   Claire  Martin  to  the point  of sympathizing with  the vestige of reticence  which  occasionally  lies  behind  the  wit and  polish. It adds  new meaning to  the  psychological  games  of her  earlier
 works,  the  ensemble creating a mystery which  we feel  impelled to explore.  Even the  narrowness of  the  vision  offered  en­ larges  our  understanding of  this  impor­ tant   moment in  Canadian  life.  Pascal's  words  may  be  twisted  to  meet  the  case:  we  were  attracted by a  stylist,  and  were delighted to  meet  a  woman.








ACORN BLOOD


George Bowering



MILTON  ACORN, I've  Tasted  My  Blood. Poems  1956  to 1968, selected  by Al Purdy. Ryerson.  $3.50.


AL PuRDY and  Milton  Acorn have  a  lot  in  common,  especially  in  the recent  history  of Canadian poetry.  They both  came  to maturity at about  the same time  in  the  early  sixties,  not  at  an  early age  for   either   of  them.   They   edited   a magazine together in Montreal where Purdy was working  in a mattress  factory and   Acorn   was   selling   his  carpenter's tools. Acorn was flopping at Purdy's flat, reading Purdy's library,  and  being intro­ duced  to Purdy's poet-influences, Layton, Dudek,  et  al.  More   than    one   reader  thought  at   the   time  that   Acorn  was  a pen-name for  Purdy. That was  all  more  than   ten  years ago.  Now it is fitting,  not to   mention  fortunate  for   Acorn,   that  Purdy  edits  the selected  poems of his old pal.
One    sometimes    gets   the    idea    that
 Acorn   doesn't  edit   himself   with   much taste.  Purdy   has  put   together  this  thick book  of  poems  in  such  a  way  that   even those  among us who  think  Acorn  can  be very  good  will  be pleasantly surprised by the  quality through the  whole  work. Having so many  good  poems  together in one  book convinces  me  that  Acorn  is not only  honest  and  exciting, as  no  one  has ever  doubted, but  also very much accom­ plished   as  an   artist,  not   so   much   the natural  beast  as  he  has  often  been  en­ visioned:

so man's   truest  home  is the  wind created of his breath
and  he  breathes deepest  in  mystery.

That kind  of imagination has as much root  in  Acorn's earlier trade of carpentry (though Purdy  tells me that  when  Acorn

REVIEW ARTICLES



was "helping" him  erect  his  A-frame he proved   not   much   of  a  carpenter)   as does his celebrated socialism.  He  is still resolved   to   make  his   lines  run   true, to make the sounds  render their finest possibilities  lying  in  rime  and   punctua­ tion,  stress  and   juncture, all  the   joints fitted  by a  union  man  with  pride  in  his craftsmanship.  When    he   writes   poems about  carpenters the  stanzas   are   filled with   real   men   and   tools  and   evidence  that  Acorn  knows his materials as well as they do:

Since  I'm  Island-born home's  as precise as if a mumbly  old  carpenter,
shoulder straps  crossed  wrong, laid  it  out,
refigured  it  to  the  last  three-eighths of  shingle.

Acorn is an old union  man,  and  he has in his poems  as elsewhere  a genuine sym­ pathy  for  people, especially  those who get pushed   around  by  systems   designed   to perpetrate the  various  poverties   capital­ ism  feeds  on.  He  calls  himself   a  com­ munist,  but   his  communism  is  so  pure and   human that  he  would   probably   be sent  away  by  any  postrevolutionary poli­ ticians.  His  politics  are  as much  a  poet's communism   as   Shelley's   were.   He's   a romantic  radical, looking   to  awaken   or "find  outside   the  beauty  inside  me."  He has   the romantic sense of man's  per­ fectability:

Knowing  I live in a dark  age before history, I  watch  my wallet  and
am  less struck  by gunfights  in  the  avenues than  by a newsie  with  his dirty  pink
chapped face
calling  a shabby  poet  back for  his change.

But  he doesn't romanticize the  poor in the  way the  bored  bourgeoisie do. To  be honest   about the  world   (Acorn's  inten­ tion  and   his  strength)  you  have  to  in-
 elude  yourself  in  it.  You  don't go  slum­ ming.  The  poor  people  of the  poems  live in the  next  room  and  you can  hear  them through   the    walls.    Sometimes   Acorn carves  his subject's  name  with  a  mining drill.
Speaking   to   the   Daddy  Warbuckses with    their    usorious    power,    he    says, "When  I  shout   love  I mean   your  de­ struction." That's the  last  line  of  one of his famous  poems,  and  when  he  read  it in  a  Toronto  park  some  years  ago  the fat  cats sent  down  their  mounted police to  chase   him   away.   Recently  he   read  poems from  this new book in an alley be­ hind  a  complex  of  chi-chi  stores  in  To­ ronto,  and  the  cops were  there  again   to close up the reading. (Purdy was reading too-Acorn  introduced  the  two  as  the leaders  in  the  realistic   school  of  Cana­ dian  poetry :

Dear  fine-eyebrowed  poet writing  of "vengeful  owls"; before we use up  truth
our  tongues'II  slough  off. Why waste time telling lies?)

There are  also  two  fables  in  prose  in the  collection.   The   better   of  the  two  is "The Legend  of  the  Winged  Dingus," a sweet  tale  of  rising   innocence  and   de­ light  cut off by the suspicion  and envy of a  nation's old  establishment folk.
Purdy's   anecdotal  introduction  settles
the   historical   details   of  Acorn's   emer­ gence  on  the  scene,  and  wins  the  Great Canadian Describe  Acorn sweepstakes  by referring to  him  as  "a  red  fire  hydrant wearing  blue  denims."
It's    a   nice   heavy   book   of   Acorn's
record,  the first in six years, and  the most accessible.  Previously  there   had  been  In Love  and  Anger  (I 956)   as  bad  as most early privately printed jobs, Against a League  of  Liars  ( 1961), a  small  broad-

REVIEW ARTICLES



side,  The   Brain's  the  Target   (I g6o),  a chapbook, Jawbreakers ( I963),  his  Con­ tact  Press  book,  and  in the  same  year  a special   Acorn   issue  of  The  Fiddlehead. Purdy  got  himself  out  of  communication with  Acorn,  and  made  the best selection possible  from  those  sources.  In  addition we get our  first look at a collection  of the magazine verse sinceI g63.
As a whole, these later poems employ longer,   looser   lines,   where   the   careful cutting  has   gone   with   the   carpenter's tools. A kind of prosy abstraction emerges ("bubble on  the  universe  in a conflagra-





































86
 tion  of  dimensions") . At  first  I  was  dis­ appointed that  the  earlier exactitude had faded.  But  this  book  shows  that   Acorn has always known what he's making,  and  I'm  willing  to wait hopefully to see what  his  open-endedness will let  free.  He  says that his eyes look in more than  a simple outward direction now:

My  arts  are  the  impossible  shades
I see under  closed  eyelids, the  attributes with  which  I  caress  my friends,  not
the amendments
time  makes  as it passes, but  the  stillness sudden and  lasting  of a brainrooted  flower.






YOUNG  TORONTO POETS


T.O. No.w.  The  Young ToTOrnto Poets.  ed. Dennis  Lee.  House  of  Anansi,  $1.95·

DENNis LEE's perceptive introduction  to this anthology  points  out  that  there is a very small group of poetry readers who actively read  what  they  know  to  be  ap­ prentice  poetry.  He  admits  that  T.  0. Now  is a  collection  of such  poetry, and he  warns  us:

Sooner  or  later   you  come  back  to  the  fact that   there   are   poetry-readers  and   poetry­ readers,    and   that    any   collection   of  new poems -especially    by   younger    poets   as varied  as  these-tests  the  reader's  calibre as  much   as  the  writers'.  To  have  a  sense for   what's   at   stake   in   their   explorations, you  need  to  be  among  the  rugged  discern­ ing  elite  of  poetry-readers.

I don't  think  that  even  this  "discern­ ing  elite"   would  say  that   all   thirteen poets in this anthology are good poets, or even show signs of  becoming so. On  the other   hand,   any   number   of  discerning readers  would   probably   disagree  as  to the choice of scapegoats. As an anthology it is well worth  the entrance fee, I think, because  there  are  a  number  of  exciting signs of  promise  within.  The   poets  you finally  choose to  look for  again  at  your bookseller's will depend  upon your own preconceived   notions  of  what   a  poem should do.
Form,  and  the  poet's  concern  for  lan­
guage  (does  he  see  the  way  words  can be made to match  and mate, the dancing
 patterns  of sound  that  can  be found  in an organic form?)  are what interest me most. These interests have focussed my reactions  to  certain  of  the  young  poets in  this  book.  Thus,   I enjoyed  reading Greg Hollingshead, Andre Scheinman (who, at 16, is the  youngest contributor, and  shows signs of going on  very well) , Ian  Young, Robert  Read, Peter Anson, Charles Douglas, Ted Plantos (because I have heard him give an extraordinary reading of one of his two poems here, "Visiting Roselynn Crystalle"), and Wayne Clifford. Of these eight, there are four  who  really  get  to  me,  and  whose work I shall enjoy re-reading:  Greg Hol­ lingshead, Peter  Anson, Charles Douglas, and  Wayne Clifford.
Greg   Hollingshead    has   an   oblique
imagination.  The  ingredients  of his  pri­ vate  world achieve  a strange  mixture  in his  poems,  which  are  surrealist  almost, but hold firm to reality throughout. Peter Anson calls himself a religious poet. Cer­ tainly  he  plays  with   religious concepts, tries to articulate The  Name, and forces situations upon our consciousnesses which intrigue  and  tug  the  mind.  Charles Douglas  loves  words  and  medieval  stu­ dies. His sense of the ridiculous is refresh­ ing.  Wayne  Clifford   has  already  made himself  known  in  his  two  small  Coach House  Press books. His  presence in  this anthology is a bit of a mystery, although I'm   perfectly  happy   to  find  him  here. He,   too,  loves   language,   I  think.   He works  with  words  as  a  sculptor  would, shaping   and   moulding   them,   playing them  into   the  form  he  wants  them  to hold.

is entertained, entered
a phase, her face  turned to
open hand's flight  over
her, scrutible,  in that

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the shadow  is as wing's
tilt
as bird flies
 "The Huntsman," to the  familiar Jewish family   epic,  "The Old   Lady's  Money,"

as quick whose flicker does delight
As  this  poem  indicates, he  is something of  a  miniaturist. Certainly, I think  he is a  conscious  craftsman, something I  ad­ mire  always.
This   book  is  not  for  those  who  seek what    is  known    and   already   given   its place  in "Canadian letters". But if you're interested in  seeing  what's  happening at the  periphery, then  this will afford  you a good   glimpse   of  the  new  action   there. A  few  of  these  writers   will  be  around for  some  time.  It's  always  interesting to be  in   on   the   discovery  of  new  talent. T. 0. Now  affords  you this opportunity.
DOUGLAS BARBOUR



CHANCE  MET IN CANADA


New   Canadian  Writing  1968.  Clarke   Irwin.
$2.95·

THE   THREE  WRITERS included   in  this anthology are  represented in  depth, Da­ vid Lewis Stein  and  Clark  Blaise by  four stories  each,  Dave  Godfrey   by  three.   It goes without saying  that  the trio are  bet­ ter   judged,  separately and  privately, by such   exposure.  One   thing   more:  who edited  this volume?
Stein's    collection  coincidentally   pro­ vides  us  with   a  "history"  of  the  short story in  twentieth century  North America  in  its  movement  from   the  understated, laconic  "Charlie Chan and  Number One Son,"    which    is   Morley   Callaghanese, through  the   adolescent   rite   de   passage

88
 to   the   Herzogian "The  Night    of   the
Little  Brown   Men."  However   inadver­ tent   this   arrangement   probably   was,   I found it  useful and instructive. Mr.  Stein seems  willing  and  able  to  handle a  vari­  ety of forms  and  traditions. I would  like to focus  on  one story,  "The Night  of the Little  Brown  Men" which  impresses  me as unusually  cogent.
The   unnamed  protagonist, the  arche­
typal  anti-hero, wages  a  terrible conflict in   his  mind   between   his  own   idealism and  individualism and  the  hordes  of  des­ perate brown  men  who stand  for Histori­ cal  Necessity   and   Class  Interest.  Quite naturally for  a  young  man reared in  the  mid-twentieth   century,   the   struggle    is imaged   in  terms of  motion picture ex­ ploits,  with   the   Hero of  Heroes   being John Wayne. In  fact,  John Wayne  stands scowling    as   the   protagonist  signs   the articles  of surrender on  board  the U.S.S. Missouri.  If the  struggle   is fantasy,  it  is none  the  less "real" for  one  can  surren­ der   to   the   inevitable  impulses   around him  without ever venturing literally on to a  battleground, without  once  leaving  his bed.
The  protagonist approaches his defeat with   all  the  intense   angst  of  a  Herzog. The story  is  one  long  monologue  inter­ rupted only  by bits and  pieces of  conver­ sation   with  the  wife.  The  lack  of move­  ment,  the   absence   of   externalized  con­  flict,  the  traumatic  examination of one's  own  basis  for  existence,  the  allusions   to popular  icons,  even  the  surrender, place this  story  in  a  contemporary tradition of black   humour  in  which   the  scrupulous study   of  a  single  animated  and   nerve­  wrecked consciousness  has become a prin­ cipal subject.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Clark Blaise was raised in the United States,  in  Georgia. There is in  his work a density  and  atmosphere which  is, with­ out  question, the  product of  that experi­  ence. What is more,  all four  of  his stories employ  narrators, while  only  one  of  the other   seven  is so  constructed.  This  may be only coincidence, but  the intense  chat­ ter  of  narrators in  American fiction  has long  struck  me  as  a  characteristic tactic  as well as a thematic feature. In any case, it  is  impossible   not  to  notice   these  ele­ ments  of  atmosphere, density  and  st:Iuc­ ture;  their   presence   in   this  volwne   of Canadian stories  may  assist  those  readers  who  are  interested in  contrasting Cana­ dian  and  American literary resources  and traditions. Blaise  is steeped  in  the  values of  American   language  and   experience. And  those values  can  be appraised not so much   for   their   quality,  although  they will  be,  as  for  their   historical  and   cul­ tural  relevance to  the  artist. While  de­ ploring  the  persistent complaint about Canadian  identity, yet  I would   recom­ mend   Blais's  work   for   what   it  implies Canada is not.
His story, "Notes Beyond  a History," is developed   around  the  American's  quest after  his  past,  after  that  elusive  moment in  his  youth   when   the  world   ceased  to glisten.   In   this   case,   the   narrator-pro­ tagonist  makes  a  journey into  the mythic  primordial condition and  discovers  there,  in  the  Florida swamps,  a  clan   (or  race) of  white  negroes.   At  least,  I  think   this is  who  he  finds  there.  It is  an  experi­  ence  that   is  no  more  comprehensible to the  narrator  for,  a  historian years  after,  he  acknowledges Henry  James'  remark, " ... the  radiance of this  broad  fact  had quenched the  possible sidelights of  reflec­ tion ... "
 I too am a partisan of the broad sweep, of mystery  that   sweetens  as  its  sources  grow deep  and  dim.  I live in  the  dark....

Whatever the reason for my confusion about  this story,  I am  still satisfied  with it,  believing  that   the  mythic-racial  com­ plex in the American character continues to defy explication, continues to tantalize and   terrify,   compelling  all   Americans, like   Blaise's   narrator,   to   become   his­ torians  but  never  to be very good at  their  work.
Godfrey's    "Gossip:  The  Birds   that Flew, the Birds that Fell" reveals a pro­ found  comic  sensibility  deployed  here  in his study  of the  Joss of meaning and  the encroachment of civilization upon  nature and   sanity.  If these  are  not  original themes,  the  author still  approaches them with  fresh  compassion. I say "fresh"  be­ cause   no  theme   loses  its  meaning   and vitality  as long  as  an  artist  can  come  to it  with  independent  judgement  and   un­ derstanding. The hero  of this story  is an angry   middle-aged  man,    a   happy    re­ minder  that   the   young  aren't the  only ones  who  have  the  right,  not  to say  the audacity, to  bitch  about  life. Mr.  Court­ ney barely manages to hold  his temper in front   of   his  son   and   daughter-in-law, bright  young superficial  things  who want  only to be left alone  to switch  lovers, and  before  the  onslaught of  a  building con­ tractor  who is digging  up  a fine grove  of trees in order  to erect  two high  rise apartment buildings.  Familiar, but  God­ frey  brings  off  the  piece  by  having Mr.  Courtney finish  off the disaster  by shoot­ ing   the   bird   population. I  can't  help thinking what Thoreau would  have  been compelled  to do  if he  could  see the  pic­ nic tables and  used condoms littering the edge of  Walden Pond.
I might   add   that   Godfrey's "Kwame

8g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Bird  Lady  Day"  is  the  most  original  in form  of all  these  stories in its  incorpora­ tion  of  verse,  medical   log  entries  and  a narrator who  recites  his  own  conversa­ tion  in  the  third   person.  This  is a  piece about  Africa,  at  that.
The   very  rationale for  this  collection
invites inquiry into the Canadianness of it all.  I'm   forced   to  say  that   none  of  the pieces suggests to me some feature of structure or  theme   that   is  "Canadian." Stein,  Blaise and  Godfrey  are  writers writing, not  writers- writing- about- or­ from-Canada. Their common  interest  is in  the  human condition, as it  should  be. If anything,  they   have   their   windows open   on  the   world,   and   that   world   is forthrightly  engaged    in   the   vigour   of their  prose and  in the  tough, demanding, yet  sensitive   perspective   they   bring   to bear.  These   are  new  writers; they  hap­ pen  to come  from  Canada. But  I suspect that   they   will   insist  that   this  last  fact least  of all  concerns them.
VICTOR HOAR


IMPETUOUS ICONOCLASM

JAMES   BURKE,   The  Firefly Hunt.  Collins.
$4-95·

HERE IS  JAMES BURKE's second   novel, even funnier than his first, a topnotch contribution  to   the   tradition  of    anti­ heroes   who   stem   in   recent   years   from Gulley   Jimson. In  its  opening  chapter, Timothy  Badger   grabs   you   like  there's no tomorrow, demolishes  a  military  tank with   a  flick  of  his  cocked  finger,  then looks  back  long  enough   to  flesh  out  his own  unlikely  history.   In  the process  he raises eclectic  Caine with  a society going

go
 soft  in  an  Age of  Masterbation, by  gun­ ning  his eight  cylinder wit  to produce an exhaustive rush  of informed  detail.
A  middle-aged car  washer,  social  and
marital  dropout,  he   inherits  from   his eccentric uncle  a  neo-Gothic castle  situ­ ated   in  the  centre of  a  Canadian  city, presumably Toronto. His  first  impulse is to unload this  bastion  of elite living -at least  convert it  into  a  home  for  unlucky  children-in  order to  preserve   himself from   capitalistic  pretentiousness  against  which   he  has  so  sedulously   battled. But a clause  in  the will provides  for  the  fatu­ ous institutionalisation of  resident  collec­ tions  of  bugs,  buttons, phony   paintings, etc.  Hence the  castle  is Badger's in  trust only,  and   his  reaction leads  him  to  the discovery  of his  uncle's fortune which  he dumps into  a  lake  to  keep  his  escaping balloon   aloft.   But   as  a  confessed  "Ish­ maelite" he  sinks  anyway,  and  from  his plunge    he   emerges    at   the  shore   of  a nudist   camp-not  to  languish in  deca­  dent   idyll -instead   to  answer   the  her­  mitic  call  of  the  castle,  from  whence  he resumes  a  relentless  struggle  against folly. End  of  fable?
Almost.   To   an  advertising agency   he rents  space   for  an   enormous  neon  sign which tingles the merits of Gardyloo mouthwash, then  uses the  rent  money  to defend   himself   in  court   against   charges of   desecrating  and    holding    at   bay   a national monument.
For   all   the   apparent  plot,   however, Burke  doesn't tell a story so much  as he innoculates it  with  ribaldry. The tank  of the  first  chapter epitomizes the  besieging forces  of the  last,  and  crammed between are  fifteen  other chapters that  secrete intrigue, a nymphomaniacal landlady, black humour, and  nimble  digressions lambasting everything from  the  Dicken-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sian   clutch    of   lawyers    (Cutter,   Man­ drake  & Swingle), to "Ginsberg celebrat­ ing   his  mother's  grey-haired   moribund vagina   to   the   clash   of   Mickey   Mouse cymbals."
Rather than a banging together of  dis­ parates, Burke's  style features a  melding  of iconoclastic observation that carries  all his  prose  into   a  fusillade  of   irreverent artistry. In The  Firefly Hunt  the  author juxtaposes   images   with   a  dexterity that  picks  up  detail like  a  serge  suit  fetching lint.  Modern  youth,  for  example, has  a justifiable   right   "to  refuse  to  co-operate in   the   old   Jekyll-Hyde  transformation into  the  solid  citizen  who  looks like  the unbandaged  mummy of  a  zombie  dedi­ cating himself  to Science  and  the Genetic Warfare Branch of  Acme  International Pluperfect Peace  Products  Division,  Inc.  where  he counts  the  radioactive turds  of chromosomatically  disoriented  body  lice in  the  interest  of  human betterment. On  the  moon." At  his  best  Burke  fobs off  a fund    of   encyclopedic  scraps   to   create an  organic sense of  picayune society. By timely    allusions,    moreover,   his   novel shows  he's  in  cahoots with  a  good  deal of tradition too.
In Flee Seven  Ways  these  characteris­
tics are  less apparent. For  one  thing  that first novel sticks closer to its story-line and pursues  fewer  tangents; for  another, pro­ fiteering speculation occupies  its narrator (who   has  a  cameo   appearance  in  The  Firefly Hunt), making him  part and  par­  cel of  the  rat  race.  Badger's  role, on  the other  hand, tends  away from one-upman­ ship  to  concentrate on  the  monkeyshines  of society  watchmen: he mails  off clocks that   sound   like  bombs,  "to remind   the cannibalistic egomaniacs of this world  of their  forgotten mortality  and  humanity,"
 and  sends  out   good  conduct medals to those who buck  the  bureaucrats.
Yet both of Burke's novels possess an impetuosity which  makes  them  impossible to  put  down.  If his first  marks  an  occa­ sional  coincidence or  flat  character, his second  improves  with  a  riper  insight  that  adumbrates  his   third   as   something  to anticipate. While  Timothy Badger  fights desperately   for  his  individuality from   a position  of   individualism,  he  cauterizes his  own  frustrations with  a  sense of  hu­  manity through humour. Given  the  need for   panacea  it's   one   style   that    might catch on.
KEATH FRASER


ASCENT
AND AGONY

MARGARET LAURENCE,   Long  Drums  and  Can­
nons.  Macmillan.  $5.50.

MARGARET LAURENCE's  Long Drums and Cannons  is  a  study   of  Nigerian  drama­ tists and  novelists from  1952  to  1966.  It was  planned and  written to  provide  the kind  of detailed handbook  that   those  of us who  have  been  interested  in knowing,  teaching,  and  enjoying West  Mrican lit­ erature have  needed  as  guide and  refer­  ence.  Now, since  the secession  of  Biafra,  the   madness   of   civil   war   is  Nigeria's tragic  reality.  We  are  bound  to  read  the  book  in  search   of   another possibility  in its dimensions -some increase in  under­ standing of  the  destruction to  which  we stand  confused  and  appalled  witness.
Each  of Long Drums and Cannons' six
chapters is  a  comprehensive  essay,  five of  them   dealing  with   single   writers­ Sayinka,    Clark,    Achebe,   Tutuola  and  Ekwensi -and   the   sixth   grouping  to-

91

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



gether   a  half-dozen  significant,   but,  at the  moment, less prolific  authors-with the  exception of  Flora  Nwapa,  all  male. The   total  achievement represents  an  as­ tonishing flowering   both  in  bulk  and  in excellence, since  1952,  when  Amas  Tu­ tuola's The  Palm-Wine  Drinkard became the  first  novel  in  English  by a  Nigerian to   be   published    outside    Nigeria    and widely  read.   We  have  not  been  able  to get the works of  these authors easily. The interest and   the  value  of  this  effort  at complete   coverage   are,   therefore,  very great, abundantly justifying the plot sum­ maries  which  might   be considered  over­ lengthy   or   expendable  in  more  widely dispersed  literatures.
Margaret  Laurence's own  fiction  has
already given evidence of her depth of knowledge, understanding and  sympathy for  the  emergent African  peoples. In this undertaking   she   puts   off   the   fiction­ writer,   to  put  on  most  convincingly the plain,    clear,   expository   style   and    the meticulous  research  of a careful  scholar. The  information  she  gives  about   tribal rituals which  are  the  well-springs  of  Sa­ yinka's   and   Clark's  dramas  is,  for   in­ stance,   indispensable  to   their   complete understanding; the  non-specialist  reader  finds it difficult  or  impossible to assemble such  information  and  its inclusion  is very valuable here.  Margaret Laurence holds her   own   flair   for   drama  in   language firmly  in  check  as each  Nigerian author and  his works takes  centre-stage. Only  in her   summary  criticisms   does  she  allow her preoccupations in theme and her own distinction in  language to  challenge her subject  matter:

In Ibo villages, the men working on their farm   plots  in  the  midst  of  the  rain  forest often  shout  to one another-a reassurance, to  make  certain the  other  is still  there,  on

92
 the  next  cultivated patch,  on the  other  side of  the   thick  undergrowth. The   writing   of Chinua Achebe  is like this. It seeks to send human  voices through the thickets of our separateness.

What beats  through the  book  and  the work of each  author most  consistently, of course,   is  the   impression  of   men   and women-and their  nation rushed dev.elopments   far   faster   than   they   can possibly assimilate the  changes.  Not  only this-there  is  also  the  imperative  need to  resolve  somehow   a  three-layered  per­ sonality,  rooted  in the  rituals  of the tribal  past,  uneasy  in  the  fac;;ade-overlay  of the colonial - missionary   period,   and   bewil­ dered,  brash   and   agonized   in   the   de­ mands of the  present.  Margaret Laurence speaks  of  Cyprian Ekwensi's  latest  novel Iska, in  words  which  speak  for  them  all
-then, in   the   perilous   days  of  hair's­
breath  balance -and  now,  in  the  atro­
cious  reality  of  the  war:

The  novel as a  whole  burns  with  the  pain­ ful  love  of  a  country   in  which  individuals are  caught  up  in  lunatic  ferocities   not  of their  own  making,   forced  to  make  choices which   no  one  should  have  to  make-the cruel  choices  imposed  by a situation.

It is, however,  both  the  particular chal­ lenge  and   the   measure of   success  of  a book of this  kind,  to assemble  and  to  re­ mark   on  the  differences and   the  varia­ tions  within  the  frame of common back­ ground.  To  each   his  own   donnee:   Sa­  yinka's  from   the  mask  dramas of  Egun­ gun, the  festivals,  the  drums, the  Yoruba mythology and  the  folk-opera; Ekwensi's from the city streets, the beat of highlife music;   Flora   Nwapa's  from   the   minds and  the  village  tribal  society  of  women; and  Achebe's  from  background and  fore­ ground  so  intimately  known   and  finely balanced by his art that  his novels  have

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



already taken their place internationally, among   the   accomplished  fiction   of  the last  decade.
Each  writer uses the  English  language as  his  tool,  sometimes   achieving a  mov­ ing  effect   with   a  translation  as  simple but  as  charged  with   the  uncertainty of all   things    as   Elechi   Amadi's  villagers greeting one  another  with  "Let the  day break."  Sometimes a  writer,   Amas  Tu­ tuola  for instance, plays variations on  the norms   of   speech   rhythms  and   diction with   stunning   effect:   "Whisperly,  the king  spoke,"  or  "so  the  whole  of  us left the  hut   and   were  singing   and   dancing along   on  the  road   to  the   town   of  the huntingprince."
Long  Drums  and  Cannons  is  an  im­
portant  guidebook and   commentary on Nigerian literature;  more   than   that   the themes   and   concerns  of  the   works  de­ scribed   are   timeless-"the  individual's effort   to  define  himself ... his  perpetual battle  to free  himself  from  the  fetters  of the   past   and   the   compulsions  of   the present." And  beyond  all that, the  book's title  touches  everything in  it  with  tragic  irony.  It is  a  line  from   Heauensgate  by Christopher   Okigbo,  now   dead   in   the civil war:
 I have visited,  the  prodigal  ... in palm grove,
long  drums  and  cannons :
the  spirit  in the  ascent.

The   cost  of  the  ascent  has  always  been great: now, literature cannot begin to measure  its agony.
CLARA  THOMAS


THE MUSE ACCLIMATIZED

GRAEME GIBSON,  Five Legs. Anansi.  $2.50.

Fiue Legs is an exploration of the struggle for   art,   or   for   the   freedom    that    art symbolizes, in  a  society that  rewards men   for  their   capacity  to  kill  and  ac­ cumulate rather  than   for  their  capacity to  love  and  enjoy  life.  In  the  world  of Fiue Legs art  is a metaphor for the crea­  tive life -art is living fully;  it represents  a  break   with   deadening  hypocrisy   and sentimentalism. Martin    Baillie,    whose funeral provides  the  focus  for  the  action  of   the   novel,   represents   the   essential death  - wish   underlying   the   Protestant ethic  of  righteousness  and  work;  his  re­ jection  of  the  possibility  for  sexual  and spiritual freedom   and  his capitulation to





Write  or Phone

THE UNIVERSITY BOOK   STORE
Vancouver  8,  B.C.	
 Text
Trade
Medical

wheneuer  you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back



93

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  "safe"  world  of  his sick parents and frigid  girl-friend are  suicidal  by  implica­ tion.  His  absurd  death at  the hands  of a hit-and-run driver   is  merely  a  concrete manifestation of  the  inner  death he  has willed  upon  himself.
Lucan Crackell, whose inner  landscape is laid bare in the first half of the novel, represents a variation on the same  theme
-that of  death-in-life. He  is a  Martin
who  has  survived   his  own  self-betrayal, his failure to follow  his instincts  and  pas­ sions, only to find himself in a living hell. He  inhabits an  atmosphere of  guilt  and  regret,  physically  and  emotionally consti­ pated, and  impotent  as a  man  and  as a husband. His  career  at  the  university  is ultimately parasitic,  based  on  exercise  of the  mind   and  severing  of  the  balls.  As Gibson's  imagery   suggests,  Crackell is  a frustrated Prufrock in an emotional wasteland.
These   two  lives  do  not  represent the only  alternatives in  the  novel.  It is true that Baillie and Crackell are very much victimized    by  the   values   of  a  warped society, but  Gibson  is no simple determi­ nist;  he gives us, in the character of Felix Oswald (the  consciousness   rendered  in the  second  half  of Five  Legs)  an  avenue of  hope  and  escape.   In   many   respects Five  Legs is about  Oswald,  since he rep­ resents  an  as  yet  undefeated faith.  Felix is a Canadian Holden Caulfield, a Grad­ uate,  trying  to  break  through the  layers of hypocrisy and  indifference of upper middle-class life in Ontario. He  struggles to escape  a "fucking underworld" where "you're dead  if you play the  rules." Con­ sequently,   he  is  misunderstood,  disliked, abused  and  resented. He  is at  odds  with the   world   of   computerized   friendships and   Boy Scout  morality. At  the  conclu­  S10n of  the   novel  Felix  strikes  out   pre-

94
 cariously  towards freedom  (perhaps only the  freedom of insanity)  like Huck  Finn, or  rather  like  Paul   Morel   in  Sons  and Lovers.
Gibson  has had  the  courage and auda­ city  to aim  for  the  stars in this first novel. Not only  is Five  Legs conceived in grand  terms,  it  also has as its models  the works of Faulkner, Hesse, Joyce  and  Lowry. At times  Gibson  is too  close  to  his models: for example, the novel begins with  a situ­  ation  which  is  perhaps too similar  to  the Bloom-Molly  breakfast incident in  Ulys­  ses;  and   the  events  of  Crackell's school career  lose  something by being  too  close to  those  of   Stephen  in  Joyce's   Portrait. The  Spanish  quotations and   the   image of   the overturned car  (which  actually originated in Heart  of Darkness)  are the legacy  of  Under the  Volcano. The final pages of the  novel seem  to have  been  in­ spired  by the  conclusion of  Steppenwolf.
Of   course   Eliot   is  right   about  such things:  poor  artists   imitate, good  artists steal.   And  Gibson   steals  from   the  right places. Five Legs re-opens the doors Joyce closed firmly behind  him  and  lets us back into   the   rich,   confused   garden   of   the mind. Gibson  is especially  talented in his simultaneous rendering of different levels of consciousness.  Like  Lowry  and  Faulk­ ner,  he  understands that  speech  and  ac­ tion  are  a  very  small  part   of  the  fabric of man's conscious  life, no more than  the visible  tip  of  the  iceberg.  In Five  Legs Gibson   renders not  only  speech  and  ac­ tion,  but  also the  myriad  of feelings,  im­ pressions, sensations, memories and  asso­ ciations that  constitute the  intersection of internal  and  external worlds  at  any  mo­ ment  of  an  individual's  life.
Five  Legs  is brilliant in  its use of two first-person narrators,  though "narrator" is hardly the  right   word  since  the  effect

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



is  that   of  having   entered  the  minds  of two persons  who haven't the  slightest no­ tion  of  your  presence.  And  yet the  most interesting  and   original  aspect   of   the book  is  the  manner in  which   point  of view is buttressed  and  rendered  convinc­  ing by Gibson's  peculiarities of  prose. He rejects  for  the most part traditional gram­ mar  and  syntax  in  favour of a seemingly disjointed, chaotic  cascade   of  thoughts, feelings, impressions.  Words  pile up, sen­ tences  are  broken   up  by  periods,  words are  run  together. All one  can  say is that  this  is how  the  mind   works.  We  seldom think   in   complete  sentences  or   para­ graphs like  those  delivered   to  us  in  the first-person   novels  of  the  last  I oo  years. Sterne was  closer  to  the  workings  of the mind  than was Henry  James. Gibson  pre­ fers to render his characters as characters in the swim or whirlpool of  existence  just at   the  moment  of  going   under, rather than  as old  men  reminiscing about  their  part  in a fading drama.
There  is  danger  in   this   method.  An author may  become  either unselective  or too   clever.    Occasionally   one   wonders about   the  inclusion   of  certain  materials in the  consciousness  of a  particular char­ acter.   For  example, is  the  caricature of academia a  product of  Lucan's mind  or of  the  author's?  Similarly, if  he  is upset about  returning to Stratford, the scene of his  early   disgrace,  will  Lucan  be  con­ scious of  the  ease with  which  the  toaster  plug  slips  into  the  socket?  The two  fol­ lowing sentences  seem to me to exemplify  the  two dangers I have  suggested:

1.    "The terrible  noise this razor  makes out­ side  my  head   re-emphasizes   the  neces­ sity of water."
!1.    "Her teeth  tearing delicately worry loose a piece of toast."

In   the   first   sentence  the   word   "re-
 emphasizes" and  the  phrase  "necessity  of water" sound  too thought-out, too verbal to even  resemble  a  disjointed  impression or  semi-conscious observation.  The  sec­ ond sentence  seems to be striving ( rhyth­ mically)   too  hard   for  the  effect  of  the stock  poetic  line  and  is far  too elaborate (and   demanding)  for   the  relatively  in­  significant  action  it  is  describing.  It may be argued  by die-hard  surrealists  that  in this kind of book no one incident is more significant  than  another, but  I think  Gib­ son  would   agree   that   this   argument  is rubbish.
If his prose is occasionally  too clever, it
is often  extremely   beautiful and   lyrical. In one spot Crackell goes into  an Eliotish reverie  that  is quite  moving:

Singing  I  have  danced   about   a  runty  hy­ drant. Here  we go round.  Drunk  with  use­ less joy I  have  danced   night  from  the  open streets,  from  eaves  and  branches,  from  be­ tween   tomb   homes  at   five   o'clock  in  the morning.  Here  we go round  and  round.

And  later,  Felix  Oswald:

Trees  shiver  with  the  leaf-loud   wind  as  I walk and  hear  far-off  engines : faint  anony­ mous  feet  to  the   tree   where   I  once  saw, sudden  raccoon  away,  I  almost  stepped   on it, then  heard  the claws escape among  those branches  from  me down  below.

Few authors can sustain  such  rhythms for more  than  a  few  paragraphs, but  some­ how  Gibson  manages to  keep  them  roll­ ing page after  page.
This  is a brilliantly written novel;  and it is important precisely  because  it is bril­ liantly   written,  not   because   it   tells  us about   death   or  the  dangers of  waspish­  ness.  I   believe   with   Ezra   Pound   that  technique is the  test of a man's sincerity.  Every Canadian ought to read  this book, especially  young  writers;  Five  Legs  will help  us  move  beyond   the  insipid   natu­ ralism  that  has  stopped up  the  imagina-

95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tions of our  novelists. I think  that  the emergence within   two  years  of  Gibson's Five  Legs  and  Epp's Pilgarlic the  Death suggests  that  our  fictional  muse is finally becoming  acclimatized.  She   may   even take  out  citizenship.
GARY  GEDDES


CAPRI PEDE

PATRICIA  MERIVALE,  Pan the Goat-God His Myth  in Modern Times. Harvard University Press. $Io.oo.

PATRICIA   MERIVALE'S   thematic  study   of "the goatherd God" is the  latest  volume of  the  Harvard Studies  in  Comparative Literature. It is a  powerful  contribution to  this  distinguished series, not  only  for the  success  with   which   the  author  em­ ploys  the   methods  of  that  recently  ac­ knowledged academic  discipline,  but  for the  way  she  surpasses  them.  The   neces­ sary  apparatus of  comparative literature is  a   tireless   compendium  of   parallels,  corollaries,  and  comparisons limited   not by formal  pattern but  by  the  individual scholar's   reading  and   perseverance.  At its  best  this  leads  to  astonishing insights into  the evolution and  metamorphoses of myth  and  idea; at  its worst  the  reader  is denied-or discouraged from-active participation  in  the  process  of  aesthetic and  literary judgment. We  are  shown  in painstaking detail   the    historical   and chronological occurrences of  image,  mo­ tif,  or   theme;  we  are   told   the  critical conclusion.  Dr.   Merivale's   book   is   an admirable  example of  the  strengths  of the  discipline and   an  ingenious  illustra­ tion    of   how   to   avoid   the    attendant pitfalls.
Her  breadth of knowledge  and  variety of reading are so impressive  that  it would

g6
 be petty  to  grub  about   in  search  of  the occasional Panic manifestation omitted from   her  literary catalogue.  (The  illus­ trations  are   interesting but   unnecessary to her  argument.) We are plunged  head­ long  into  the  biographical  details  of  this Arcadian  god   of  woods   and   shepherds with  the  feet  and  legs of a goat.  Chapter One    begins   with    the   classical   sources  (Plutarch's   tale   of   the   death  of   Pan,  Ovid's  Judgment of  Midas  and  Pan  and  Syrinx,  Apuleius'  Pan   and   Psyche)   and traces   the   origin    of   the   concepts  on which  she  will  base  her  distinctions: the Orphic   Pan   of   universality,  the   bene­ ficent   pastoral  Pan   of  Theocritus;  the satirical  Pan   of  Lucian; the  Eusebian­ Rabelaisian Pan-demon and  Pan-Christ. She   then   examines the  development  of these  images  from  the  Arcadian through the Renaissance, Spenserian and   Mil­ tonic   to  the  Augustan. The  allegorical, emblematic,  ceremonial  and   intellectual uses of  Pan  are  closely documented with  a searching  but  regrettably limited  glance  at  the  related figures  of faunus and  satyr (there  are  aspects  of  the  centaur figure for  example which  are  intriguing in  this context).
Chapter Two  examines Romantic Pan in  his  two  most  frequent roles,  the  uni­ versal   "Soul   of   all   Things"   found   in Wordsworth, Keats  and  Shelley,  and  the Plutarchan dying  god  of  Byron  and  Pea­ cock,   a   frequent   mingling  of   the   two resulting  in   the   nostalgic   sense  of  loss which  permeated  the  age. Victorian Pan is  similarly  generalized  (and   character­ ized)   in  Chapter Three, leading to  the  detailed analysis of the  double  cult,  bene­ volent   and   sinister    fin  de   siecle   Pans, with  which  the  remainder of her  book is chiefly concerned. And here text  and footnotes leave  categories behind   as  Dr.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Merivale swings  into   her  critical stride.
It is hardly  surprising that  Pan  in modern times  appears most  frequently in prose fiction.  Mrs. Browning's surfeit of lament ("Pan, Pan  is dead!") and  Aleis­ ter   Crowley's  pseudo-orgiastic   chanting ("Io  Pan   Pan! Pan! Pan! Io   Pan!") could   never   be  fully   redeemed   by  the superior efforts  of  Robert  Browning and  Ezra   Pound   or  the  more  vehement  an­  nunciations  of   Swinburne.   And   W.   S. Gilbert  effectively circumscribed  the  cliche  in   Patience   (thereby  dealing yet another blow to Oscar Wilde's artistic pretensions) :

Let  the merry  cymbals  sound, Gaily  pipe  Pandaean pleasure, With  a Daphnephoric  bound Tread a gay but  classic measure.

Nor  would  we expect  Eliot's predilection for   anatomizing  the   Christian  ethic   to lead him further than  the furies; while Yeats, whose interests coincided with Crowley's on  more  elevated, hence  more fruitful, ground, does  not  appear to have struck fire with Pan.  (Although the benevolent  little   god   peeped   out   from many of his London Friends, especially Sturge Moore   and  Charles Ricketts and Florence Farr's Dancing Faun, and   the Dionysian  Pan described in Chesterton's book  on  Blake  offers  a fascinating gloss on  the  final  lines  of  "The Second  Com­ ing".)  When   one  considers the  signific­ ance  of Pan  to Emerson and  Hawthorne, however,   it  is  rather  surprising that   he did  not surface in Edgar Allan  Poe. And, although   Whitman   declared  allegiance  and  Thoreau remarked on the  physical resemblance,  "All   Walt   is  Pan,   but   all Pan  is not  Walt", as Lawrence shrewdly observed.
It is modern prose  fiction,  and  the  re­
sulting    mythic  attitudes,  therefore, to
 which  Dr.  Merivale devotes   the  second half  of  her  book   (and   here  one  cannot help   but   wish   she   had   devoted    more space  to the  one  significant Pan  in  mod­ ern  drama, O'Neill's). In  the earlier  cen­ tury,  Meredith had  already indicated the pattern which   would   be  followed,   pre­  serving  "the  paradox of  Pan's dual nature and  the concrete qualities of his essential  form". Now  she  traces  the  development of  this  paradox  through  the  benevolent Pans  of   Kenneth   Grahame  and   James Stephens,  whose  ironic  fable  The  Crock of   Gold   "foreshadows  the   best   myth­ making   of  the   twentieth  century", cul­ minating,  for   the   author,  in   the   Pan cluster   of  D.   H.  Lawrence. Unfortun­ ately,  the  greater  the  literary artist,   the less help  this kind  of analysis  is in pursu­  ing  the  artist's  meaning. A study  of  the Pan  tradition  in  Lawrence, as Dr.  Meri­  vale  admits,  leads  us  to  his worst  novels and  least  successful  short  stories.  An  an­  aysis of   the   "sinister   Pan" of  Machen, E.   F.  Benson,   Saki   (whose   Superbeast returns  us  directly  to  Lucian  and  Lon­ gus), McKenna and  Blackwood  provides  far  more  evidence of  the  state  of  myth­  ology in the  modern age. The dual  vision of terror  and  ecstacy  in the Panic  experi­ ences  of  E.   M.  Forster's  early  work proves  far  more  conclusively   Dr.   Meri­ vale's  thesis concerning the Death of Pan in  our  age,  with  the  additional  chrono­ logical   significance    that    Forster   ceased to  write  fiction  of  any  kind  many  years
ago.
Dr. Merivale's admirable summary and  conclusion closes with  the distinction between  Pan  as "Nature" outside  of man and   as  "the  natural" within man,   and her own critical conviction that  "Pan is unlikely to  become  a literary fashion  or a
'public myth'  again-as  such,  he  'died'

97

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in  I9I4." But when  one considers  the persuasive    power    of   Milton's   mighty "God  half-goat, goat  half-God", the sub­ stantial weight  early  supporters  like  Lyly and   Heywood    found    in   the   perennial debate  between    "art"  and   "entertain­ ment"" (or  in more contemporary terms, melody  and  rhythm), and  the  continual struggle  between  the  god within  and  the world  without, it is difficult  to relinquish  to  classroom  obscurity the  claims  of  the mighty Pan. To quote yet again from Coleridge and  Schiller,

But  still  the  heart  doth  need  a language, still
Doth  the  old  instinct   bring  back  the  old
munes.

Meanwhile, Patricia Merivale has indeed provided  matter   "sufficient   to   furnish many   landscapes".  The   goatherd   God lives still in  her  keeping.
ANN SADDLEMYER


THE SYMBOLIC CANNIBALS
MARGARET  ATwoon,  The   Edible  Woman.
McClelland  &  Stewart.  $5-95·

IF   YOU   IMAGINE    that   all   our   younger poets  are  addicts of  trick  typography or inarticulate,  grunting  imitators of   Wil­ liam  Carlos   Williams, you  have  only  to read    Margaret   Atwood's   books-The Circle  Game  and   The  Animals  in  that Country-to  be  cured   of  the  illusion. They  are  highly  articulate, and  continue the   tradition  of   sophisticated  utterance one  associates  with  the  poets  who  came into  prominence in  the  Fifties,  with  Eli Mandel and  Jay  Macpherson and,  in another way, with  Phyllis Webb.
Now  Margaret Atwood  has  published a novel, The  Edible Woman. It is, again,

g8
 articulate,  sophisticated, turning  phrases and   collating images   in  prose  with   the same  assurance as Miss Atwood  does in verse.  All in all, let  me say at  the  outset, it  is  an   extremely  good   book,  as  pun­ gently   expressive   of  a   tantalizingly  de­  fensive   individuality   as   anything  Miss Atwood  has  written  in  verse.
Some poets who turn  novelists show a curiously   divided    literary   personality.  I say   this   with    fresh   experience  in   my mind, since  I have   just  finished  a  study of  the   verse  and   novels  of  the  English poet   Roy  Fuller, and   have   been  aston­ ished   by  the  lack  of  capillary  links  be­ tween   the  two  aspects  of  his  work.  But there   is  none   of   this   kind   of   division in  Miss  Atwood's writing.  Between   her poetic  and  her  fictional  talents the  rela­  tionship is at  least  that  of Siamese  twins whose   nervous   systems   are   inextricably connected.
The  identity is,  indeed, so  close  that when   I try  to  think   of  a  quick   way  of saying  what  The  Edible Woman is about, a verse from one of her poems comes appropriately to  my  mind:

These   days  we  keep our  weary  distances :
sparring in  the  vacant  spaces
of  peeling   rooms
and   rented   minutes, climbing
all  the  expected   stairs,  our  voices
abraded with  fatigue,
our   bodies   weary.
In  one  way  at  least,  The  Edible  Wo­ man  is  about the  distance and  defences  between    human  beings.   The   distances  and  defences   are  necessary  because  fun­  damentally (in  Miss Atwood's view)  hu­  man   beings   are  predatory. The   Edible Woman is really a  novel about  emotional cannibalism.
Here  we  come   to  the  significance   of
the   title,  which   also  names   the  central

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



image.   The  .edible   woman    is  a   cake shaped  like  a  woman   and  carefully  iced for verisimilitude, which the  heroine Marian  McAlpin  eats  at   the  key  point of  the  novel,  when  she  is  released  from the  doggedly  normal life she  has  insisted on  pursuing.
Having - cannibalistically - trapped a  highly  normal young  man  into  a  pro­ posal  of  marriage, Marian  has  felt  her­ self  becoming   the  victim  in  turn  of  his emotional   anthropophagy.   Seeking   es­ cape  with  a  graduate  student she  meets in a laundromat, she finds that  he too, if not   exactly   a   cannibal,  is   a  more   in­ sidious  kind  of   parasite, a  lamprey   per­ haps,   battening  on   her   compassion   to feed  his monstrous  self-pity.
Marian's recognition of  her  situation takes  the   form   of  a  symbolic   neurosis. She finds her throat closing first against meat,   as  she   vividly   associates   a  steak with   the  living  steer.   There comes  the stage  when  she  peels  a  carrot and  ima­ gines  the  soundless  shriek  as  it  is  pulled from  the  earth. But  this  point  when  she seems   doomed  to   starvation,   coincides with  the  point  of climax  in  her  personal relationships, when  she  runs  away  from her  engagement  party   to  sleep with  the man  from   the  laundromat, and,  having  discovered  that  there  is no external solu­ tion  for  her  problem, returns and  bakes the  edible  woman   which,  having  offered it   in  vain   to  her   outraged  fiance,  she proceeds  to eat.  She  has, of course, eaten  herself,  and  in  consuming  the  artificial  "normal" being  she  tried  to  become, she is cured.
Such   an   account  does  far   less  than justice  to  a  novel   which   is  extraordin­ arily  witty, and  full  of  ironic observation of  human  motives.  But  it  does  suggest the extremely capable way in which  Miss
 Atwood  has  handled the  element  of  fan­ tasy which  has  become  a  key  element  in the  New Fiction.  She has made Marian's improbable  condition   extremely    plaus­  ible;   beside  Miss  Atwood's  handling  of the  fantastic, that of the  average  novelist seems crude  and  uncraftsmanly. One  has only   to   compare   The    Edible   Woman with    Mordecai   Richler's   Cocksure   to realize  this.  But   Margaret  Atwood   is  a poet  and  Richler is not, and  I am sure  a training in the  poetic  handling of images and  myths  gives an  enormous advantage to  any  writer  who  moves  in  the fashion­ able  field of fantasy  fiction.
The virtuosity of  Miss  Atwood's achievement becomes  completely evident when  one  considers  the other, more mun­ dane  aspect of the  novel. For The  Edible Woman, among many  other  things, is a social  novel  of   high   perceptiveness. Marian moves  in  a  square world  of,  to quote   the  author  as  quoted   on  the  dust jacket,  "ordinary  people  who  make   the mistake  of   thinking they  are  ordinary." By her  occupation as a market researcher, Marian  is kept  in  constant contact with that   vast   world   of   unswingers    (rarely celebrated in  modern writing)  who want nothing more  than  sheltered normality: the  platinum blonde  virgins,  more  num­ erous    than    sophisticates    assume;    the young  men  whose ambitions are bounded by suburban  retirement; the  casualties  of the   graduate  school,  obsessed  with   the detritus of  scholarship; the inhabitants of the supermarket world.  Miss Atwood  has done,  in  her  own  way  and  for  her  own time  and  place,  the  same  kind  of  thing as  Jane Austen   did   for  similar   people a  century   ago.  Not  that   she  is  another Jane Austen  or,  I imagine, would  want to  be.
The  Edible Woman  is the  kind of tour


99

BOOKS IN REVIEW



de force in prose which a poet often manages to perform with great skill, bringing   to  fiction  a  precision  of   lan­ guage   and   a   needle  sharpness   of   the observant  eye which  the novelist  trained merely in  prose may lack. Poets'  novels, when  they  are  successful, usually  shine with   a  particularly   crystalline   lucidity, and   that  lucidity  Miss   Atwood  has achieved.  I am  not  going  to  prophesy that  she will  achieve  it  again,  for  it  is also  one  of  the   peculiarities  of  poets' feats  in  fiction,  that   they  rarely  repeat them. But if  Miss Atwood does go on to write   another   novel   as   good   as   The  Edible  Woman, I  shall  be  doubly  de­ lighted.
GEORGE WOODCOCK



UKRAINIANS  IN CANADA

M.  I.  MANDRYKA, History  of Ukrainian  Litera­ ture   in  Canada.   Ukrainian  Free  Academy of Sciences, Winnipeg. $7.oo.

IT HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED that the first literary   work  written   in   Ukrainian   in Canada  was Ivan  Zbura's  poem  "Kana­ dijski  emigranty"   ("The  Canadian  Im­ migrants") . It was dated "Beaver Creek, Alberta,  December  30,  18g8"  and  pub­ lished on  February  2,  1899 in  Svoboda, at  that   time  the  only  Ukrainian   news­ paper    in   the   U.S.A.   The    Canadian Farmer  (since 1903)  and The  Ukrainian Voice  (since  1910) , both still flourishing in Winnipeg, should  also be credited  for their  great  contribution  to the early out­ put  of  Ukrainian writing.  Before World War  I,  some fifty  pioneer  authors  pub­ lished  in  these newspapers,  their  poems, short  stories and  plays.

100
 In his history Mr. Mandryka  divides Ukrainian literature in Canada  into four main   periods:    ( 1 )    beginnings  of   Uk­ rainian  letters  and  pioneer  folklore;  ( 2) late pioneer era  and  beginnings of litera­ ture;  ( 3 )  new horizons and  new achieve­ ments  (since  the  early  192o's); and  (4) influx  of   new  intellectuals.  It  seems  to this  reviewer  that   it  would  have  been more proper  to unite the first and second periods. Sava Chernetskyj,  who produced poetry and prose on Canadian themes in I8gg-Igoo,   is  not   worse  than,   for   in­ stance, Semen  Kovbel  who wrote twenty years  later,  and   thus  his  work  has  the same  right  to  be  considered  among  the beginnings  of  genuine  Ukrainian litera­ ture in Canada. With this exception, Mr. Mandryka's   periodization    truly   reflects the reality of  Ukrainian literature  in this country.
Mr.  Mandryka should  be  praised  for
his  excellent   treatment  of  Ivan  Danyl­ chuk  (1901-1944), a  Canadian-born au­ thor  who  broadened  the  horizons of the Ukrainian  poetry,  as   well  as  of  Elias Kiriak    (lllia   Kyriyak   1888-1955)   and Oleksander   Luhovjy   ( 1904-1962),   who greatly   contributed  during   World   War II with  their novels on Ukrainian pioneer life in  Western  Canada. E.  Kiriak's  tri­ logy is translated  into  English as Sons of the  Soil  (1959).
I.  Danylchuk,  H.  Ewach,  E.  Kiriak,
0. Luhovyj,  T.  Shevchuk,  M.  lchnian­ skyj, and  M.  Mandryka  himself, author  of  four   collections   of   poetry   and   five narrative poems, including  Canada, have brought  Ukrainian literature in  Canada  to   a   higher   level.  Newcomers,   among them  Ulas Samchuk,  Levko Ramen,  and L. Murovych,  have enriched  it with vari­ ous fresh themes and  techniques. Impor­ tant   also  are  the  scholars,  L.  Biletskyj,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



J. B. Rudnyckyj, Metropolitan Ilarion, Watson  Kirkconnell, C.  A. Andrusyshen, G.   Luckyj,    C.   Bida   and    others,   who helped to make Ukrainian literature, abundant in  its  styles  and   significant in its ideas and  artistic accomplishments, an integral part  of Canadian culture as a whole.
Mandryka's History  of Ukrainian  Lit­
erature in Canada is well organized, and rich   in  factual  material  and   in  quota­ tions  from   typical   works.  It  has  a  few errors   of  fact:  for   example,   I. Danyl­ chuk's Svitaje  den was published in  1929 (not  in  I920  as stated  in  the  book), and Honore  Ewach's  Ukrainian   Songs  and Lyrics appeared  in  I933   (not  in  I93,1). But  these  and  similar   shortcomings,  do not   lower   the   value   of  this   important publication,  a   lasting    contribution   of literary  scholarship to the cultural mosaic of   Canada, which   proves  that  national groups   in  this  country  have   the  oppor­ tunity   to   retain  and   develop   the  heri­ tages  they  brought here  from  Europe.
The book has a "Selected Bibliography on  Ukrainian Canadian History  and  Lit­ erature",  and    an   index   of    Ukrainian authors  who  have   lived  and   written   in Canada,  some  I 20  names   in   all.  The
foreword by J. B. Rudnyckyj and  the  50
photographs  add   to   the   value   of   this
book.
YAR  SLAVUTYCH


MAKING THE SCENE

RAYMOND SPENCE.  Nothing Black But a Cadil- lac. Longmans. $s.7S·

MR. SPENCE's HERO, Joady, MA   (Eng. Lit.) ,  a   Jamaican,  whose    father   was negro  and  who  has  lived  in  Canada for six years, has  decided  as the  novel  opens,
 "to   make    the    San    Francisco   scene." Make  it  and   several  women   of  assorted sizes, shapes,   colours,   and   nationalities, he  well and  truly  does  before  the  novel ends,  in a series of outrageously comic scenes, described  with close anatomical detail,  that  show  him  to  be as proficient a  sexual  athlete as  Fanny   Hill   (though more  disinterested) . He  is clearly  a man possessed -of   what, we  are   assured,  is the novelist's gift:  the ability to involve himself  completely in an experience while at  the  same  time  observing  himself   ex­ periencing  it   with   an   objectivity   that,  given  the  fever  of activity, is quite  awe­ inspiring.
For   the  first   twelve   chapters  of  the book the question of pornography hardly arises  any   more   than  do   the   kind   of social  issues  suggested   by  the   epigraph from  Eldridge Cleaver on  the  title  page. In fact  a more  suitable quotation for  this part  of the  book  might  have  been  taken from   Dylan   Thomas's "Lament". The race   of  the   mighty    hero   is  minimally relevant   in   the   scenes   that   show   Mr. Spence's  comic  gift  at  its  best,  and   the so-called  narrative line  that links  them, as he moves from  the  back  seat  of a car to the luxury of a well-appointed yacht (mobile like all conventional picaresque heroes  up  the  social  scale) , is trivial  and poorly written. The language throughout will offend  some  and,  for  my  own  taste, I   would   not   strongly   recommend the novel  to  anyone of  the  sacred   and  en­ lightened  generation under thirty.  How­  ever  if  pornography is  prurient,  makes nastiness  of  what   is  innocent,  provokes sniggers,  and   is  apt   to  pervert  and   de­ prave,  then  I  should   not  categorize this part   of  the  novel  as  pornographic. Mr.  Spence  (in  this  first  part  of his novel)   is anything but  pretentious. As his hero  re-

IOI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



marks  in  media  res:  "this  was no adver­ tisement  for   stately   living",   but   Joady gives and  receives  pleasure,  is  naked,  in­ nocent   and   unashamed,  his  lovemaking is not  sadistic  and  one laughs  with  none of  the  degrading sens.e  that  man  in  this posture  is  inevitably   absurd   which,   as Aldous   Huxley   felt,  ruined   the   act   of love  for  the  civilized.
But  from  chapter twelve to the end  of the  novel  one  feels  the  deadly  influence of William Burroughs at  work.  Naked Lunch,  as  Burroughs  remarked  in   his own  introduction, "is ... brutal,  obscene and   disgusting." So,  in  my  opinion are the  last  five  chapters  (but   for   the  last few  pages)   of  Mr.   Spence's   novel.  He may  be  right,  and   his nightmare of  lust ruled   by a  sadistic  voyeur  WASP,  from which  one  can  only  escape  through filth and  corruption, may  be a valid  vision of American  society.  On   balance   I  would think  there  is an appalling amount of evidence to support it. Unfortunately I think   that   Mr.  Spence   produces   in  this section  the same sort of reaction as does William   Burroughs in  sections  of  Naked Lunch. One   feels  nauseated   but  not  at the  horrifying facts  in  the  world  one  is aware of;  rather at  their  vision  and  des­ cription  of   it.   The  satire   boomerangs. Swift,   whom   Burroughs   quotes   as   his master, was  wiser  than  his  disciples.  On  his  journey  through the  capital  of Brob­ dingnag Gulliver saw  the  enlarged hide­ ousness  he  could  avoid  on  his own  scale in  his  native  Bristol,  but   that   was  not all  he saw.
There  are   passages  of  dialogue even in  this  last  section   that   have  a  superb comic  rhythm and  some of the  scenes on the  yacht  have  a satiric  bite.  Mr.  Spence may  well  (as  the  cliche  has it)   be on  his way  but  if  it's  only  to  be  (as  this  novel

I02
 ends)  naked  in his "undeniably black Cadillac filled  with  women", then   I  do not   think   too  many   people   will  be  in­ terested    in   another  ride   through    the same  landscape -no  matter how  bawd­  ily entertaining the  first  part  may  be and serious  of  intention beyond  the  point  of no return.                           W. F. HALL

ON THE VERGE
*****   HENRY  I. MORGAN, Bibliotheca  Cana­ densis:   or  a  Manual  of  Canadian  Literature. Gale   Research  Company,  1969.  $Ig.so. First  published in  1867,  long  out  of  print, and  now reissued in  facsimile  reproduction,  Bibliotheca Canadensis  is  an   invaluable  record  of  Cana­ dian  writing  in   the   century  preceding  Con­ federation.   An    alphabetical    dictionary of writers, with  notes  on  their lives  and   copious lists  of  works,  it  was  compiled by  a  dedicated "Canada   Firster"  whose   inclination  to   dis­ cover   national  achievement  led   him   perhaps too   far   in   seeking sermon-writers, amateur scientists and  experts on  cookery  to  fill out  his impressive  411   pages.    Nevertheless,   a   most useful   reference work  to  have  available again, and an  extraordinary index to  the  vast  back­ ground  of   scribbling  out   of   which   emerged the   few  writers we  still   read  from  the  age  of deep   colonialism.
*****   I. s.  CONWAY, The  Nazi   Persecution of   the    Churches,  1933-45.  Ryerson.  $14.00. This is  a  book  with, up  to  now,  no  real  com­ petitors in  the   English language. There  have  been    martyrologies  of   the    Christian   perse­  cuted by  Hitler, and  apologies from  the  stand­ points  of   the   various  German   churches  and  their  sympathizers outside   Germany.  This  is something  different:   a    thorough   historical study  which  combines   objectivity  with   sym­ pathetic    understanding   and    examines  care­ fully  the  ineffectual and  sometimes disgraceful records  of   most   churchmen,  unwilling to  see the  worst  in  Nazism, and   the   heroism of  the few  in   the   face   of  the   unsystematic but  for­ midable  efforts  of   the    Nazis    to   bend    the Churches to  their  will.
**** EUGENE CLOUTIER, No  Passport: A Discovery    of    Canada.   Oxford.    $s-95·   A French-Canadian  writer explores Canada from Vancouver Island  to Newfoundland, and  finds, not    only   more    friendship  than  he   had   ex­ sharp  comments on   public  figures,  sometimes

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



pected,  but   also   the   reality  of  a   land   which fascinates  in   its   variety  and   complexity.  An eye-opening book  for  Canadians of  both  heri­ tages,    showing   the    Anglophones   how    they seem-faults and   virtues-to  a  man  of  that  other  Canada  of   Quebec,  and   revealing   to separatist Francophones-and   one   hopes some   at   least   will   read   it-the   community they   will  lose  if  once   they   sever  the   hope   of building a diverse and  unified  land.
****   MICHAEL BRECHER, Jndia   and   World Politics: Krishna Menon's View  of the  World. Oxford. A  fascinating non-book, to  which Michael   Brecher   has    contributed  merely    a preface and  an  analytical epilogue. The rest consists of a series of verbatim transcripts of conversations  with   Krishna  Menon  on   many facets of  Indian  foreign policy.   Important  as a  background work  to  the  first  twenty years  of independent India's history, but  revealing also for  the  insights it  presents into   one  of  India's most  intelligent, complex and  now  neglected leaders.
***   RICHARD   GWYN, Smallwood:  The   Un­
likely  Revolutionary.  McClelland  &   Stewart.
$1 o.oo.  Smallwood  is  clearly one  of  the  more
important   political  figures   of   Canada  in   re­ cent   years,   and   one   of   the   more   intelligent. It is  surprising that  this   should   be   the   first study of  him,  and  disappointing  that it  should  not  be  better. Mr.   Gwyn   delves  well;   he  is a good    and    serious    journalist.    But   the   great difficulty in   writing of  a  politician is  that of keeping  the   subject  from   being    dwarfed  by the    background   of   events.   Joey    Smallwood was  never  so  dwarfed  in  real  life,  but  he  is in Mr.  Gwyn's  book,  and  so  we  have  an  interest­ ing  but  uneasy hybrid  between biography and  local  history.
***   jUDY LA  MARSH, Memoirs of a  Bird  in a  Gilded   Cage. McClelland &  Stewart.  $7·95· Is   it   symptomatic  of   Canadian  politics    that our   most   dynamic  minister  of  culture  should have   been   the   unashamed vulgarian Judy  La Marsh  reveals herself   in   this   record  of  eight years    in   politics?  Or    is   it   symptomatic  of culture  in    our    time?  One   way    to   regard Memoirs  is   as   an    audacious  work    of   pop literature, guying the  whole  custom of writing political  memoirs, and   this  is how  its  designer has   treated it.  But   that,  evidently, was   not the  author's intention. For  her  it is a great catharsis, a  long   wail  of  grievance and  anger, shot  through with   not  unjustified pride at her own    achievements,   and     embroidered    with grossly    unfair,   sometimes accurate   and   de­ served. Not  her  last  kick,  we  may  be  sure.
 ***   The Journals of Mary O'Brien, 1828-38, edited  by  Audrey  Saunders  Miller.   Macmil­ lan.  $8.75·  Mary O'Brien  came to  Canada in r828    as   Mary  Gapper,  a   member   of   that class  of  genteel  English   which  played   so  in­  teresting  a   part  in   the   opening  of   Upper Canada. She   married  an   Irish ex-officer,  and  founded a    distinguished   Canadian   family. Her   narrative   covers   the   decade  that  came  to  a  climax   with   Mackenzie's Rebellion;  her family   was   closely   linked    with    the   political life   of   Upper  Canada.  Written  in   letters to her    relatives,   her    account   lacks    the    self­ conscious  finesse   of   Mrs.    Moodie and   Mrs.  Traill,  but   it   is  observant,  touched   with  in­  sight,   and   not   without  personal  drama.
***  DOUG    STUBBING, Building   the   CPR. CHARLES  HUMPHRIES, The Great   Depression. RICHARD   HOWARD, The   North-west  Passage. RICHARD   HOWARD, Louisberg. Clarke  Irwin,
$2.50  each.  The latest  coloured pouches in  the Jackdaw series,  containing  facsimiles of  auth­ entic  documents of  Canadian  historical  events,  including maps  and  prints, and  sometimes sup­  plemented by  miniature  gramophone records: e.g.  the  voices  of   Aberhart  and   Woodsworth and   of   Diefenbaker  acting as  John  A.  Mac­ donald.   Each  packet   is   accompanied   by   a lucid   introduction.  History  can   never   be  in­ stant, but  these  collections get  as  near  to  it  as possible.
**  joHN   UPTON TERRELL, La  Salle.   Clarke Irwin. $5.95.  It is  not  easy  to see  the  justifica­ tion   for   this   book,   except  that   the   author wanted to  write   it.   A  year  or  so  ago  a  good popular  biography   was   published   by   E.   B. Osler,    of   which,  curiously,  Mr.   Terrell  ap­ pears   to  be  unaware, since   he  fails   to  men­ tion   it  in  his  bibliography.  Mr.  Terrell adds little    new   of  any   significance,  though  there are    times   when   he   carries  the   imaginative reconstruction of  history over  the  edge  of con­  jecture  into   the   field   proper  to  the   novelist  rather  than   the  historian. Some   of  his  usages are   odd.   I  have   never  before  heard,  for  in­  stance, of   couriers de  bois!
**  FRANK RASKY, The Taming of the  Cana­ dian   West. McClelland &  Stewart. $14.95· A picture book  of  the  penetration of  the  Indian West  by fur-traders and settlers. It is copiously visual,  but  since  many  of  the  illustrations  were fabricated at  the    time    by   print-makers far from   the  scene   of  action, it  often  documents the   mythology  of   the   West   rather  than   the reality.  The  text,    too,   appears  to   verge   at times   on  the   mythological. One  is  surprised, for  example, to  be  told  that the  Coast  Indians

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of   British   Columbia  poisoned   their   arrows with  rattlesnake  venom  and  that  Carrier  In­ dians  were so called  because they carried  mail for   the   fur   traders.    Of   a   piece  with   such statements is  the  claim  of the  publishers  that "This is  the  only  book  of  its  kind."  Unfor­  tunately  for  such  pretensions,  it  appears  after Douglas   Hill's  excellent   The  Opening   of the Canadian   West, which   covers  approximately the  same ground, and  more accurately.

NEW  VERSE
LAZAR GARNA.  The Singsong.  Canadian  House Press.  This   is  a  fine   little   book  of  poetry, mainly sad in tone. The control of the images occasionally  gets  out  of  hand,  but  the  poetry does   flow   easily.    "The   Weather  Is   Fine Here" is  especially   good.  The   book  is  third in  a  series,  and  nicely  printed.
Introductions from an Island. Edited  by Robin Skelton.  University   of  Victoria.  $1.00. A selection of poems by students of the Creative Writing   Programme of  the  University  of Victoria.   Mr.   Skelton   has  compiled   a  good book   of   poems   here,   obviously  showing   his own   taste    and    approach.  The    poems   are more   than    exercises,   and   reveal   a   control rarely  shown  in  younger  poets.  It is  too  bad there   is  not   some   humour   here;    they   are, in fact,  almost  too serious.
BILL BISSETT.    Of  the   Land   Devine   Service. Wind/Flower  Press.  $r.75.   A  good  example of Bissett and his interest in concrete poetry. Definitely    worth    looking   at   for   its   simple charm  and  careful  execution  of form.
Fifteen  Winds. Edited   by A. W. Purdy.  Ryer­ son  Press.  $2.75.   An  anthology  designed  for the  schools.  The   range   of   poets  represented  is  good,  and   the  topics  are  boundless.  Parti­  cularly  striking are  the  notes by Purdy.  They are  all  precise  and  would  be  of  help  to  any student -old    or   young.    Purdy   should   be commended   for   his  selection,   and   his  com- ments.                                                            D. s.

WAR AMONG WASHERMEN
Sir:
In Canadian  Literature No. 40, Mr. Louis  Dudek   is concerned with  protect­ ing  us  from  errors committed  by critics of  high   reputation. These   he  likens  to "dirty  collars" and   refers  us  all  to  the


104
 laundry of  The Making of Modern Poetry  in  Canada   run   by  himself   and Mr.   Michael  Gnarowski. Their   institu­ tion   is  a  valuable collection   of   articles.  "As  a further aid  to the serious reader  or student, the  editors  (also)   provide care­  fully edited  explanatory  notes which guide  the  reader."
I am  not concerned with  the distortion of "historical perspective" allegedly com­
mitted  by A. J. M. Smith  nor the number
of times  Irving Layton is to be found between  covers.  I  am  concerned with Messrs  Dudek   and   Gnarowski's  provin­ cialism.  Imagine presenting The  Making of  Modern   Poetry  in  Canada   without mentioning  the   Anthology  of  Canadian Poetry  (English)  published   by  Penguin Books  in  1942,  a  book  which  ante-dates all  compilations  breaking through to Canadian  poetic  vitality; without  men­  tioning   Canadian   Accent   published  in I 944  with   a  breathless index  of  critical articles ;  both   books  reprinting each   of their authors  1oo,ooo times; without mentioning A  Little  Anthology  of  Cana­ dian Poetry published by New  Directions
in  I943,  an introduction a quarter of a century ago to poets from  W. W. E. Ross to Souster-all this, together with articles,  reviews and  editings of Canadian Issues of foreign  periodicals, hung  on the line   by   the   present    washboarder   with misty-eyed  trust  that  ignorance would  be eliminated. It was  (slightly), in  Rio  and Cairo.  Mr.   Dudek's  Montreal  laundro­ mat  chunks merrily  on.
He  unnecessarily inquires about  the quality of Smith  and  Pacey's  underwear. Ihope this toot on my own horn alerts Messrs Dudek and  Gnarowski to the inadequacy of their  own  critical briefs.
RALPH GUSTAFSON
(The laundry is now closed. Ed.}
