1/r.oo  per  copy




CANADIAN liTERATURE N°*7








The  Unwitting Elegiac

BY PAUL WEST


A Mirror  of Moore

BY JACK  LUDWIG


Original Relations

BY R. E. WATTERS


Annual  Supplement

A CHECKLIST OF
CANADIAN LITERATURE,  1960




A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








A RECORD WRIT IN AIR



ONE OF THE FAMILIAR COMMENTARIES  on life and  literature during  the past generation  has been the radio talk, and,  despite the territory  won by television, there  is no reason to suppose that it will not remain  an important vehicle of ideas and impressions and information.  In Canada-and particularly through  such  programmes  as Critically Speaking and  Anthology--the radio talk has been one of the means of developing a mature standard of literary  criticism. But perhaps  its greatest  achievement  has been a more general one-the creation over the years of a kind of mosaic record of a country's life and thought,  its man­ ners and opinions, its arts and sciences.
Unfortunately in Canada that  record has been almost entirely writ in air. The
talk is spoken and heard and  passes fugitively away, its only residue the typescripts that  lie in  the  CBC  archives, and  the dwindling  memories of the listeners.  Pub­ lishers will rarely  handle  radio  talks, and  their disinclination  may be  justified to the  extent  that  such  a conversational  kind of writing does not lend  itself to the solemnity of stiff covers. This,  however, does not mean  that  the radio talk is un­ publishable.  The  long record  of The  Listener in Britain shows emphatically  that the reverse is true, and that  the periodical collection of talks can form a magazine that  is rich  and  varied  as few other  periodicals can  afford  to  be. If one had  to prepare  a history of British attitudes  and  tastes and interests over the  past thirty years, one  might  well begin with the files of The  Listener, for there,  more than in  any  more  profound  or  more single-minded  periodical,  the  changing  identity of the nation over those decades would lie concealed.
We have no similar  magazine in Canada, and it is only exceptionally  that  our radio  talks  find  their  way  into  print.  One  of the exceptions  is the  programme known  as University  of the  Air. I have beside me now half-a-dozen  attractively presented  pamphlets, each   containing a series of  talks delivered  in  that  pro-

3

EDITORIAL



gramme. They  range  from  Paul  West's  reflections  on  the  growth of the  novel to W.  G.  Hardy's  reconstruction of  the  world  of  classical  antiquity, from   Lewis Walmsley's interpretation of China and  the  Chinese  to William Robbins' discus­ sion  of humanistic values in English  literature. These  scripts  vary  a great  deal  in quality. Some of the speakers  have fallen into  the cardinal academic sin of  conde­ scension,  and  have  chosen  a talking-down superficiality which  experienced radio  hands   know  is not  expected  or  liked  by  the  seasoned  listener;  others  have  pre­ sented  models  of condensation and  clarity; even the least satisfying  of the  pamph­ lets  is  informative and   provocative enough  to  have  been  worth   printing and preservmg.
This  experiment in  publication has,  I gather, been  as successful  commercially
as  in  other   ways;  without the  distributive organisation which  commercial  pub­ lishers  have  at  their  command, the  CBC  has sold  an  average of between  2,ooo and   g,ooo  copies  of each  of these  pamphlets at  prices  in  the  middle  paperback range   ( 7sc  to $I .oo). This  success is encouraging, not  merely  to the CBC  Pub­ lications Branch, but  also to all who  regret  that  so many  excellent radio  talks are heard   and  forgotten. It prompts one  to  ask  for  more  of  the  same thing,  more paperback collections  perpetuating worthwhile series in  other  programmes, and, ultimately, a CBC  magazine on the lines of The Listener.
I have  been  raising  the  question  of such  a magazine with  CBC  executives  on and  off for  the  past  decade,  and  I have  gathered that  the  principal obstacle  has lain   in  the  opposition of  Canadian  publishers   of  commercial  periodicals, who have  feared  that  a  periodical  sponsored  by  a government corporation would  be a formidable competitor. Such  an  attitude is illogical  and  short-sighted, and  has robbed   the  Canadian public  of  much  more  than  it  has  given  them.  Since  our commercial  magazines, with  their  notoriously low estimate of the  intelligence of reading Canadians, do not  customarily publish  the  kind  of material that  is used in serious  radio  talks-particularly those concerned with  literature and  the arts­ there  would  clearly  have been no direct  competition, in the sense of similar maga­ zines struggling for  the same  public; obviously  a Canadian  Listener would  have been  quite  different in character from  any existing homebred  popular periodical. But  perhaps it  was  a  more  dangerous form  of  competition, the  competition of better and  more  interesting material, that  our  commercial periodical publishers feared;  perhaps  they  foresaw   that   the  success  of  a  CBC   magazine containing intelligent talks would  expose the shallowness  of  their  own  achievements.
One   might  in  fact hazard the  opinion that, had  there   been  a  good  CBC­
sponsored magazine operating in  Canada over  the  past  thirty years,  the  general


4

EDITORIAL



level of  our  periodicals  would  have  been forced  up  by example,  and  that  the American   magazines  whose  competition  has  been  given  so  much  prominence during  the  recent  proceedings  of the  Royal  Commission on  Publications  would not have established the dominance  they now hold on our magazine stands, a dominance  which  we must  reluctantly  attribute  to the fact  that  they have done their  work more skilfully and  attractively  than  their Canadian counterparts.
Now, it seems, the attitude of Canadian magazine  publishers has changed.  In their  demands   before  the  Royal Commission on  Publications for  protection against American  periodicals, there has been a hint of willingness to grant the desirability of free competition  in Canada, of a more-native-periodicals-the-better attitude. Without  desiring  to take part  in the politics of mass media, or to judge the veering commercial  point of view, we would point out that such a change of attitude  seems to leave  the  CBC free to enter  the field of periodical  publication with something  of more  permanent  value than CBC Times. We hope the oppor­ tunity  will not be missed, and  that at last a systematic publication  and perpetua­ tion  of our  best radio  talks can  begin. Nothing  would  contribute  more  usefully to  that   "development  of  a  Canadian identity  through   a  genuinely  Canadian periodical  press", which was named  as one of the aims lying behind  and  beyond the appointment of the Royal Commission on Publications.
Let  us, then,  have our  Canadian counterpart of The  Listener. But more good things  than  talks are  lost upon  our  northern  air. In  Canadian  Literature  No. 5
Gerald  Newman  remarked  that our "important dramatic writing"  is done largely for  "media  other  than  the stage",  that  is to say, for  radio  and  television. Every year several good original plays are among those produced  by the Canadian Broadcasting  Corporation; very few of these find  their  way into  print.  Again, there seems to be the idea  that such publications are not commercially  profitable. This has not been the experience of other countries. For several years now a Frank­ furt  publisher  has been  bringing  out  the Horspielbuch,  an  annual anthology  of plays produced  on  West  German  radio  networks;  the  continued  appearance of these yearly volumes suggests that  they find a sufficient and  faithful  public. It is certainly  worth  an  experiment   to  see if  there  may  not  be  a  similar  public  in Canada for radio  plays of lasting worth;  this is another function  which the CBC Publications  Branch  might  assume, either independently or in collaboration  with the commercial publishers.






5











R. E. Watters

The substance of this paper was originally prepared as a lecture  given during  a tour of Australian  universities made  possible by the generosity of the Humanities Research Council   of  Australia  and   the  hospitality of the universities themselves. On  June  30,
1959,  it  was   delivered  as  a   Common­ wealth  Literary  Fund  Lecture at Canberra University  College.


DURING THE  PAST fifteen  years the wodd  has  witne=d
a  swiftly  rising  wave  of interest  in the  literatures of the  British  Commonwealth.
Half   a  dozen   North  American libraries   are  rapidly acquiring extensive  collec­ tions;   bibliographies have  appeared in  the  literatures of Australia,  Canada and  New  Zealand, as well as on  Indian fiction  in  English; and  every  week sees new titles in fiction  and  poetry not only from  these countries but also from such  regions  as  the  West  Indies   and  Africa.  Each  of  these  emerging  literatures can  be  con­ sidered  a tributary to a larger  stream-the stream not of  English  literature, to be sure,  but   of  literature in  English.  The   literature of   the  United States-which happens to be outside  the Commonwealth-is increasingly influential everywhere, even  in  Great  Britain   itself.  But  the  stream  is steadily   widening. If few  signs exist as yet of mutual influences  among these newer  literatures, there  is certainly an  increasing awareness of one  another, and  before  long  the  readers and  writers  of  one  Commonwealth  country  will  recognize   that   they  can  profit  much  from fuller  acquaintance with  the literatures of the  others.
In  this  paper  I shall  concern  myself only  with  the  two senior  members of the
overseas  Commonwealth, Australia and  Canada, and  consider  the  backgrounds of  their  two  literatures as reflected  in  a few  significant philosophical and  social themes  current in  the  fiction  of the  two  countries. Despite  some similarities both superficial and  profound, Australians are  not  Canadians, and  Australian fiction

6



ORIGINAL
RELATIONS
A Genographic  Approach  to
The Literatures of Canada and Australia














reflects  the  thoughts and  feelings of a people  whose land,  history  and  way of life differ significantly and  emphatically from the Canadian.
In  literary studies  national characteristics are  often  discounted if not  entirely
disregarded. Yet  the  physical,  social,  and  spiritual environment surrounding a writer   must  inevitably enter  into  the  substance of  what  he says  and  also affect his  very  manner of  expression, his  style   and  form.  Therefore, when  readers assume,  as  they  often  do,  that  an  Australian or  Canadian writer  is trying  to do what   an  English   or  American writer  would  try  to  do  ("and not  succeeding  so well"  is the  stock  inference), the  conclusion  may  be ignored   but  the  erroneous assumption on  which  it  is based  must  be  challenged. Two  essays by Arthur A. Phillips  in his The  Australian Tradition suggest the  needed  corrective. Analyzing the  work  of  Henry Lawson   and  Joseph   Furphy, Mr.  Phillips  refutes  orthodox critics  by demonstrating that  what  they  had  called  "weaknesses" in  the  fictional techniques of  these  two  writers  were  actually brilliant adaptations  of  imported forms  to  native  substance, and  completely  integrated with  their  essentially  Aus­ tralian subject matter and  point  of view. The  critics who had  uncritically applied alien  standards were  making  erroneous assumptions about   work  whose  unique nature they  had  not  seriously  tried  to  understand. The  same  errors flourished  in the  United States  a  century ago  when  uniquely  American writers like Thoreau, Whitman, and   Twain won  far  less favour   from  contemporary  academic critics

7

ORIGINAL RELATIONS



than  skilful but unimportant imitators of the then dominant British tradition  and practice.
When American  literature  was struggling out of its adolescence, Ralph  Waldo
Emerson  posed a question:  "Why  should not Americans  enjoy  an original  rela­ tion  to  the  universe?"  A few years later,  Walt  Whitman was to assert  that  his countrymen  were at fault  when they looked at their  country  and  their literature  through  eyes distorted  by foreign values and  interests. By doing so they saw only that  the United  States lacked much that  Europe  had,  whereas  unimpeded  vision might  more usefully detect what  the States had that  Europe lacked.
It is not too soon to ask whether Canadians and Australians  also enjoy original relations  to  the  universe,  possess some  things  with  literary  implications  which other  countries  lack-not entirely, perhaps,  but  relatively. The  originality  might be some special point of view towards aspects of human  life which may exist everywhere  but  are observed nowhere so clearly or  profoundly as in Canada or Australia.  To  consider such a possibility means that  for at least a little while we should stop listening to complaints that  our young literatures lack certain dimen­ sions of the human  spirit found  abroad: certain  types of intellectual complexity, for  example,  or  certain  nuances  of sensitivity and  refinements  of  emotions,  or certain  aspects of spiritual  and religious intensity. Such stock complaints  are never accompanied by a relevant  question:  have these approved  qualities  been gained in  older  literatures  only after  the loss of other  desirable  qualities?  Are  they, in short, gains counterbalanced by losses?
Remembrance of  things  past  is more frequent  in  those  with  a  brighter  past than  future,  nuances  in sensitivity are treasured  most by those whose senses have become  jaded,  and  some forms of intellectual  complexity seem substitutes for an enfeebled  imagination  or atrophied  muscles. Are the  processes of age necessarily better  suited  to  literature   than  those of youth?  Is The  Wasteland   so obviously superior to The Canterbury Tales? Admittedly, both Australian  and Canadian literatures  are frequently  concerned  with exploring  the spirit or character  of our peoples as national  groups and  with attempting to discern  and  absorb the essen­ tial  characteristics  of our  geography  and  history. Why  not, since the  possibility exists that  something  new in the world may be discovered? Every national  litera­ ture  seems to have gone through  a comparable  process and  period. Youth is not directly in competition  with age, for youth may be doing things that age has for­ gotten  how to do, or has never done, or has done differently.  Every young nation may find itself enjoying an original relation to the universe.



8

ORIGINAL RELATIONS




WEREAS CANADA is merely the  northern half  of a  conti­ nent, Australia is geographically  unique, and isolated as no country  has ever been, except  New Zealand.  Far  away from distracting influences and  freed from close supervision  or control,  the Australians  were able to construct  their own national myths and  prototypes  well before the first world war. Canada has never enjoyed any  period  at all comparable. To  Canada,  the mother  country was always close, and  the  United  States  even closer, with  neither  geographical  nor linguistic bar­ riers between.  Within  the  precarious  present  we have  become sharply  aware  of the nuclear squeeze from above and below. Since infancy,  then, Canada has been unlike Australia,  in being always beset by varied external  pressures and influences. We have never been isolated enough.
Australian   literature, around   the  turn  of this century,  displays a  widespread Utopian  faith  that  a new and  better society might be built in the Southern Hemi­ sphere,  far  away  from  the  wars and  miseries of the  Old  World.  Similar  aspira­ tions  are  found  in  American  literature  beginning  with  the  first  settlement  and long  continuing.  Canadian literature  reveals no such  optimistic  dream-time,  for Canadians have never been able to dream-or dream for more than  a moment­ that  they were in  full control  of their  total  destiny. Far  from  expanding in un­ trammeled   visions of the future,  Canadians  have been  advancing one step at  a time,  balancing  this gain  against  that  loss, this promise  against  that  threat,  the horizontal  British attraction against the vertical American one. Such a way of life has its own  exhilaration, but  not  the  exhilaration  of rhapsodic  vision or of any "damn the  consequences"  type  of  heroic adventure.  More  goes on in  the mind and  muscles of the  tightrope  walker than  meets the eye of the casual  onlooker, and  this fact  is quite  in  keeping  with the world's opinion  that,  by contrast  with either  Australians  or  Americans,  Canadians  appear  to  be a  pretty  sober if not colourless body of  people-at least outwardly.  Our literature, too, shares the con­ trast,  for it tends less towards  either exuberance  or violence than  towards  lonely endeavour, introspection, and ironic undertones.
In  history,  too, Australia  and  Canada  possess soil for distinctive  literary  har­
vests. I  am  not  referring  to dramatic incidents or  heroic  individuals which are to be found in the history of each country and which supply each literature  with specific subject  matter  or allusions or symbolic imagery.  Instead,  I wish to exa­ mine one or two examples of what  might be called "sensitive areas" or, perhaps better,  "sensitizing  factors",  which seem to have produced  original  responses in both  the  life  and  literature of each  people. They  are  "sensitive  areas"  because


9

ORIGINAL RELATIONS



they are subjects we are sometimes touchy about,  sometimes deliberately  exclude from our consciousness. Yet they are also "sensitizing factors"  because they refine or colour  our  outlook, affect subconsciously perhaps  our interpretation of things. To  literature they can  be like the irritant  grains of sand  that  produce  the pearls.
First but not the most important of these sensitive areas is our treatment of the original  native  inhabitants of our  two lands.  Neither  Canadians nor Australians find  much  comfort  in  this subject,  even though  our  current  efforts may  mark  a great  advance  over  those of our  ancestors.  Nevertheless,  rationalize  all we will, reiterate  endlessly that  if  it hadn't been us it would  have been someone else, we still  cannot  wholly  erase our  hidden  knowledge  that,  by our  own  ethical  code, might  is never right,  and therefore  we have no legitimate  moral claim whatever to the  lands from  which we displaced the original  inhabitants. To  be sure, such displacement  has happened  in most if not all countries-usually so long ago that no  discernible  trace  is left on the conscience of present  generations.  Victor  and victim have long since assimilated. But in a handful of countries, including  ours, the event is so recent that it is still a sensitive and sensitizing fact.
I  am  not  at  all concerned  here  with  advocating or  disapproving  the literary
use of Indian or aboriginal  myths, terminology,  or cultural  customs or symbols, though   one  might  perhaps  mention,  in  passing,  that  Canadian literature   has never  had  a literary  movement  like that  of the Jindyworobaks, a group  of  Aus­ tralian   writers  who  consciously sought  to absorb  and  express in  literature  their extensive  awareness  of aboriginal  lore and  language. What  interests me more is the literary  treatment of the interrelationships,  past and  present, between original inhabitants and  white intruders.
In  North  America  the Indians  were often a  highly formidable  enemy,  unlike the  far  more  primitive aborigines of Australia,  and  the violent feelings they pro­ voked in generations  of white North Americans  have notably affected the literary treatment of the subject.  North  American  Indians have  provided  the  substance for a host of "adventure" stories of all the popular  sorts, but they have occasioned little  true  literature. American  and  Canadian  treatment of the  Indian  in  both life and  literature has, however, by no means been identical.  That "the  only good Indian is a  dead  Indian" was an  American,   not  a  Canadian,  aphorism.  Our  history  contains  the  names of many  good  Indians   who were  neither  traitors  to their  own  people  nor sycophants of the white  man's  way of  life, and  our litera­ ture,  in  turn,  tends  to avoid the diabolized  stereotypes of  American  frontier  fic­ tion.  Nevertheless, surprisingly few Canadian novels of  literary  merit  have been written  about  Indian-white relationships of either  yesterday or today.

IO

ORIGINAL RELATIONS



In  Australia,  on  the  contrary,  the  results have been much  richer.  Only there has it been possible to observe and interpret  the consequences of juxtaposing the stone age and  the  Igth  or 2oth  centuries. Latent  are many  original interconnec­ tions of space  and  time  and  spirit  of hardly less significance than  exploring  the jaded  sensibilities of  bohemians  in  flight from suburbia.  Relationships  between the intruder and the dispossessed in Australia encompass implications  and compli­ cations  of greater  literary  effectiveness, perhaps,  than  those  in  North  America. One  reason  may  be that  the sensitive Australian  conscience cannot  be so easily calcified  by  the  ready  rationalization   of  self-defence;  another  that  because  the stereotypes of embattled conflict were clearly impossible the subject attracted  only authors of higher abilities. Moreover, the greater disparity  between aborigine and white, the formidable  racial, social, and  cultural  barriers  to be scaled, also make for  power  and  poignancy.  Consider  simply the subject  of sexual love. In  Cana­  dian  fiction, a white  man  who  rejects or deserts an  Indian  girl must be either a snob  or  a  cad,  both  stock  figures who cannot  seriously engage  the sympathetic  self-identification  of a  reader  for long.  I  do not  recall  a single good  Canadian novel about  an  Indian-white love affair. The  same interracial situation  in Aus­ tralia  forms  the  substance  of several excellent works, including  Susannah   Pri­ chard's  Coonardoo, Xavier Herbert's Capricornia, and  Mary  Durack's  Keep Him My Country.


To AUSTRALIANS,  a sensitive area  and  sensitizing factor  of far greater  significance  than  their  relation  to the aborigines is what  has been called
convictism,  a term  which  not only embraces the historical facts about  the  trans­ portation   and  treatment of  convicted felons  but  also implies  certain  complex social  and   psychological  consequences  which  long  outlived  the  ending  of  the system. There  was a time  when Australian  sensitivity about  this portion  of their history was such  that  both  historians and  the general public tended  to minimize the alleged consequences  upon Australian  life, and  to deplore the fascination  the convict system exerted  upon  producers  and consumers of  popular  fiction. Within recent years the attitude has changed  to one that is both less emotional  and more profound.   Convictism  is indeed  far  from  providing  the  whole  explanation   of Australian  characteristics,  but it cannot be ignored for its share in creating certain features  that  distinguish  Australian  society from  societies lacking  this  historical factor.


I I

ORIGINAL RELATIONS



Leaving aside the colourful possibilities for romantic  and  realistic literary treat­ ment  of the convict system itself, one may still look for surviving consequences of great  literary  significance. For  example,  what  were  the  lasting  effects upon  the life and  outlook of the  free settlers of having for two or three generations  in their midst and  under  their control convicted persons as servants and laborers? Again, what  was the  effect  upon  the convicts themselves of  serving out  their  sentences not  within  walls, as in other societies, but in the  open  air, doing things of indis­ pensable  social  usefulness instead  of routine  drudgery, and  in  continuous  daily contact  with  free  people who  could  hardly  survive  without  them?  Though the convict's  present  was certainly  bound  up  with  his master's,  his ultimate  future was not, for he was not a slave; nor was he distinguishable  by colour, education, or culture.  The  convict's wife (or  husband)   might  be a free settler to whom the convict was assigned for the duration  of the sentence.  In  any event the children of convicts, whether  legitimate or illegitimate,  were born free. For the first forty years of Australian  settlement,  free settlers were outnumbered by persons either still under  sentence or emancipated  on completion  of their sentences.
Obviously, this unique situation must have occasioned reflections of an original
sort about  the nature  of society, of justice, of crime  and  punishment; about  the authority  of those in control yet dependent  upon  the controlled; about  the rights and  social status  of those who made  laws, those  who  enforced  laws, and  those who violated  laws;  about  the privileges of property  and  the powers of  property­ less workers. Though the convict system existed for  not  more than  two or three generations,  the  results of  this sensitizing factor  in  Australia's  formative  years are still discoverable.
In  his recent  book The   Australian   Legend   Russel  Ward  has clearly  demon­ strated  some of  these consequences. They  are  not  all  to be found,  however,  in overt  social  patterns,   for  such  a  unique  historical  experience  can  sensitize or colour  a  people's  outlook  and  give a different  aspect  to common  human  situa­ tions. The  "universal" theme  of the individual's relation  to his  community  fre­ quently  becomes in Australian  fiction notably  different  from  the way it appears  in  British, American,  or Canadian writing. And  unless such  differences in point of view are recognized in criticism, and properly  weighted, an author's characters  may easily be judged  as "weak",  or "confused", or "implausible" simply because they behave  differently from the supposed norm  of  the critic's own society.
In Great  Britain, for instance, the class structure  of society has been a sensitizing factor  of great  literary  significance. Among  other  things, it has motivated  much reflection  about  the  "universals"  of human  nature  which  transcend  distinctions

12

ORIGINAL RELATIONS



based   on  birth   or  family.   Consider   the  recurrence in  British  literature of  the concept that  "a man's a man  for a' that", or that Judy O'Grady and  the Colonel's lady  are  sisters  under the  skin, or  that  a girl of the  lower  classes such  as Pamela or  Tess  merits   treatment enjoyed  as  a  matter of  course  by  a  girl  of  the  upper classes. In  the  literatures of the  United  States,  Canada, and  Australia we are  not expected  to  feel  astonishment at  so  original a  moral discovery.  In  these  three societies a colonel's  lady  could  quite  easily be Judy's sister in fact  as well as femi­ ninity.  In  Britain the  obvious  social  differences  have  impelled   a quest  for  simi­ larities  or  universals, whereas  in  the  other  societies  the  obvious similarities have invited  a search  for differences.
In  the  United States  a  principal factor   has  been  slavery,  with  manifold but still  largely   unexplored  consequences in  American society  and  general   outlook. For  over  two  hundred  years  Americans lived  with  slaves  in  their  midst  before Lincoln  gave  them  legal freedom, and  this historical  experience has marked their society  as indelibly as convictism  has done  the Australian. In  American literature one  consequence has  been  an  incessant  concern  with  questions of liberty  in  all its  ramifications: free  will  versus  determinism, individual freedom versus  social and  moral  conventionalism, untrammeled "free  enterprise" versus "socialized" or public  enterprise. The generations following  the war  that  freed  the slaves saw the rise  of  the  literary  movement called  "Naturalism", the  philosophic centre   of which    concerns the  problem  of personal  freedom, or lack  of it, amidst  a variety of environmental controls.  A frequent theme  in American fiction  has  long  been the  individual gripped by  a  situation for  which  he  is not  responsible  and  from which  he  wishes  to free  himself,  often  by severing  his bonds  and  running away physically  or  spiritually to  search  for  a  new  life elsewhere.  The parallel to  the fate and  hope  of one born into slavery is obvious.
This  kind  of  theme  is rare  in  both  Canadian and  Australian literatures. Un­ like a  slave,  a  convict  was  born  free,  was responsible  for  his own  servitude,  and in  time  would   regain   his original  freedom. In  neither Australian  nor  Canadian literature has  Naturalism  been  an  important  movement.  Vertical  relationships between   God   and   creature, master  and  slave,  have  been  of  less concern  than  horizontal relations between   equals  and  potential equals.  Problems of  fate  and freedom give  place  to  problems  of fraternity and  isolation.
Neither slaves  nor  convicts  were  significant  in  Canadian historial  experience, but  we  have   a  sensitizing   factor uniquely   our  own,  with  far-reaching  conse­ quences in  our  national life and  literature. From  our  earliest  years, we  have  had  a large  French-speaking group anxious  to maintain its identity against  influences

ORIGINAL RELATIONS



from the conquering  British and the neighbouring  Americans.  In the 178o's these original  Canadians were joined by the Loyalists who had  been expelled from the new-born  United  States but  who had  no wish to cross the Adantic  and  become Englishmen.  These  newcomers  might  be separated   by language  from  les  cana­ diens but they were firmly united with them in wishing to be something different from  either  the  English or the Americans. Since then, apart  from some invasions during  the War of 1812 and the Fenian border raids half a century later, Canada has never feared  for her national  liberty but  has never been free of fear for her separate identity.
From  the  beginning  Canadians  have lived within  a complex  network  of cir­
cumstances  and  influences internal  and external,  historical and  geographical,  not of our own making, to be sure, but certainly of our own choice. Escape from the tensions  we experience  has  always   been  possible   but  never  chosen.  Although hundreds of  thousands of  individual   Canadians have  migrated  south  of  the border,  the  remarkable thing  may well be not  that  the  number  is so great  but that  it is not far greater!  To  remain as we are and  become what  we want to be­ come in our own way has always cost Canadians more in both money and effort than  if we accepted  the apparent logic of geographic,  economic, cultural, or mili­ tary arguments.
To  the onlooker,  there  may well be something  pathetic  or even absurd  in the incessant  Canadian desire to feel and  assert a difference  between  ourselves and our  American  brothers;  our  difference  from  the  English  no longer  needs  argu­ ment. The  outsider  readily sees the many "American" similarities but few if any of  the  alleged  differences.  But  while feelings are  not  visible, they  can  be  pro­ foundly  important, regardless of whether  or  not  their  foundations  may  appear  dubious  or illusory. The  feeling of difference, even the mere wish to be different, can  have consequences, and  some of them  may be found  in our literature.
With  unusual  frequency  our  authors  depict  individuals struggling  to achieve some personal  goal while resisting pressures or attractions of various kinds from their environments.  The characters  are not shown as seeking escape  from a shack­ ling situation,  however;  rather  they are shown  as attempting to achieve or pre­ serve some separate  purpose or identity  within  the social complex.  In  this light consider  the central  characters  of such varied  novels as Birney's Turvey, Callag­  han's  More  joy In Heaven or The  Loved and the Lost, MacLennan's The  Preci­ pice or The  Watch that  Ends the  Night, Grove's The  Master  of the Mill, Buck­ ler's  The   Mountain and  the  Valley, Peterson's  The  Chipmunk, Richler's  The  Apprenticeship of Duddy  Kravitz, and  Gabrielle  Roy's The  Cashier. It should

14

ORIGINAL RELATIONS



not surprise us that even a popular  novelist like Mazo de Ia Roche should employ the  same  theme  as the  basis of the entire  f alna series; the characteristic  family identity of the Whiteoaks is shown persisting through  more than a century despite changing   social   and   economic  pressures of  various  kinds  and  despite  inter­
marriage  with  Americans  and  British through  the generations.
The  hero of an American  novel may be an implausible weakling if he doesn't cut  loose from  his social shackles and  take to the open  road  to seek his private New Jerusalem,  whereas  the  Canadian may well prove himself a weakling if he does. The  Australian  character  who seeks a personal goal by deserting or resisting his former  companions  or  their  values is seldom the  hero  but  often  the  villain. Instead  of people entangled  in inherited  or environmental  social patterns  beyond their  control,  Australian   literature   tends  to  present  people  in  interdependence within  a group,  which may of course be at odds with another  group; it explores such  problems  as  limitations  on  authority  or  privilege, forgiveness of sins, the nature  of  justice, of loyalty, of "mateship". Neither  Canada nor Australia  have folk  heroes  like  Washington   and  Lincoln  who established  national  liberty  and personal liberty respectively, for such  achievements were  unnecessary in our societies. In  Canada, Montcalm  who resisted is as much  honoured  as Wolfe who overcame  him. As we begin to understand  Sir John  A. Macdonald better we see him as the quintessential  Canadian who maintained  and  achieved  his dream  by adroit  manreuvrings  through  a welter of pressures and influences, and in defiance of  apparently  unanswerable logic. Canada has no folk hero  remotely  like  Aus­ tralia's  Ned  Kelly,  the  outlaw  who was unshakeably  loyal to his mates  and  his class, but implacably  hostile to the police, who in their turn  appear  to be less the arm  of society than  an alien third  power. The  chief folk hero in Australia, how­ ever, is no particular individual but rather  a composite or type figure of the foot­ loose workman,  going where and when he lists, sure of the necessity for and value of  his skilled  labour  when  he  chooses to  work, sure  also  of assistance from  his "mates" when  personal  misfortune  strikes. For  decades,  the  overwhelming  ma­ jority of Australians  have lived in large urban  centers, but  their folk hero is still the  nameless swagman,  the independent,  propertyless  but  skillful rural  itinerant  burdened   only  with  his  blanket  roll  or  waltzing  matilda.   He  wears  no  man's  collar  but  he is always spiritually,  socially, and  culturally supported  by the sense of fraternal community  with his fellows. He feels no need either  to compete  with them  or to resist their influence  upon him.

ORIGINAL RELATIONS




MoRE DIFFERENCES  in national attitudes towards  "uni­ versal"  human situations can  be found  than  I have  been  able  to touch  on  here. Examination of  the  humour or  the  poetry  produced in  Canada and  Australia would   provide   further evidence.  To  describe   all  the  national  peculiarities and  trace  their  genesis  will  require   a far  more  wide-ranging study  than   anyone  has yet  made,   but  not  until  their  intrinsic character is  understood  can  the  literary  accomplishment of  either  country stand   revealed  for  whatever  it  may  prove  to be  worth. Meanwhile, the  most  useful  hypothesis,  I believe,  derives  from  Emer­ son:   that  Canadians and  Australians, like the  Americans, may  enjoy  an original relation to  the  universe.  Our  task is to discover  what  this is.
Still  to  be  answered is why  our  two  literatures have  only  recently  begun  to
attract attention. If  "originality" is what   matters, why  has  world  interest   been so tardy  and  so tepid?  In reply one might  fairly  point  out  that  literary  history con­ tains   many   examples of  inadequate  appreciation  resulting from   faulty  under­ standing. To   their   contemporaries, Gower   seemed   as  important  as  Chaucer, Longfellow more  important than  Whitman. When  eventually the  direction of a new  development is  perceived,   the  true  worth of  the  early  pathfinders can  be understood  and   acknowledged. Only   then   do  most  readers  and   critics  really scrutinize  the  work  with  sufficient  care  and   humility  to  discover  what   has  all along  been  its essential quality. What is most original in the outlook, assumptions, and  values  of  an  emerging literature  or  pathfinding  author is often  the  very feature that  provokes  contemporary misjudgment or  dismissal.
Taking possession  of  a  new  land  psychologically  is a  far  slower  process  than merely  occupying it physically. In  the United States  more  than two centuries had to  elapse   before  the  imported  literary   tradition was  sufficiently   transformed to begin  producing a native  literature, and  the  fact  that  a new  and  different litera­ ture  was  indeed   emerging was  not  recognized, even  by  many  Americans  them­ selves,  until  the  present  century. That such  a development was even  a possibility was  quite   inconceivable  to  an   English  critic  in   r82o,  the  year  Sydney  Smith  asked  his rhetorical question: "In the four  quarters of  the world,  who ever  reads  an American book?"
I am  not  for  a moment  trying  to insinuate that  within  a century Canadian or Australian literature will be as firmly  established, as important, or as well known as American literature now is. Neither  country will then  be as populous, as rich, as powerful as the  present  United States.  Yet little gift of prophecy is required to claim  that  in the  world of nations  the status  of the  two Commonwealth countries

r6

ORIGINAL RELATIONS



will  continue to  rise,  and   that   attention will  be  increasingly accorded  to  their literatures. However, those  literatures will require, I believe,  a longer  time  than American literature needed   to  emerge  to full  maturity. The  intellectual climate of their  adolescence, for one  thing,  has been far more  complex. Even  if we could disregard  the  vastly  increased  cultural  interrelationships with   the  non-English­ speaking world,  the  fact  would  remain  that  in  Canada and  Australia an emerg­  ing  literature must  reconcile   and   transform literary  importations from  not  one but  two  established literatures in  English.
One   advantage is nevertheless possessed by  those  Canadians and  Australians who  desire  a  mature literature for  their  countries.  The  American example has shown  that   the  way  of  growth is likely to be found  in  differences from  the  im­ ported  stock   rather  than   in  similarities. Whether  it  comes  from   one  or  many sources,  whatever is imported is likely to be sterile  until  it is transformed  to suit the  new geographical and  historical  and social environment. Therefore the sooner we begin  to  understand the  original  nature of our  own  relations to the  universe, the sooner  we may learn  in what  directions  lie our literary  futures.










A MIRROR OF
MOORE



Jack  Ludwig








BRIAN MOORE's  FICTIONAL  WORLD  ;. la•gely  a  matte<  of mirrors: a  recurrent scene  in  each  of his novels  has  a  character facing  his face in  the  mirror which  is not  magic,  and  the  question asked  is:  "Mirror, mirror on the  wall,  have  I any  right  to life at  all?"  The mirror's plain  unmagic answer  is the substance of Moore's  novels.
So  at  the  beginning of The  Lonely Passion of  judith  Hearne the  mirror moment sets the crisis, the let's-face-it  scene:
Her  angular  face smiled softly at  its glassy image. Her  gaze, deceiving,  trans­ forming  her  to  her  imaginings, changed  the  contour  of  her  sallow-skinned face, skilfully  re-fashioning  her  long  pointed  nose  on  which  a  small  chilly  tear  had gathered. Her  dark  eyes, eyes which  skittered  constantly  in  imagined  fright,  be­ came  wide, soft, luminous.  Her  frame,  plain  as a cheap  clothes-rack,  filled  now with soft curves, developing a delicate line to bosom.
She watched  the glass, a plain woman, changing  all to the delightful  illusion of beauty. There was still time  ....

But  at  the  end  of the novel Judith Hearne must  return to mirrors and  see, now without hope of time or change:
She  sat  at  the  bare  white dressing-table  and  saw her  face in the  mirror.  Old, she thought,  if I met myself now, I would say: that is an old woman.
Moore's second  novel,  The   Feast  of Lupercal, has  the  mirror "truth"  joined by  another truth-the  eavesdrop. His   hero Diarmud  Devine is  existentially arrested by  hearing himself called  an "old  woman":

He  made  straight  for  the  washbasin  in  a  hurried   ritual  of hand  washing,  hand shaking  and  hand   drying, all  the  time  staring  shamefaced   at  his image  in  the mirror  opposite.

A MIRROR OF MOORE



When  Devine  finds  a young  girl and  a chance  at  "life" he blunders and  blus­ ters, confused  and  confounded, and,  while they are  both  preparing to make love, takes  quick  stock  of  himself  in  the  Moore  way:
He  . . . looked  in  the  dresser mirror.  The  face  which  looked  back was weak with fright  . .  . .
But now, in the  dresser mirror,  his long pale body was shamefully exposed. His
legs seemed knock-kneed and his hair was tousled like an idiot's.

In  Judith Hearne and  Diarmud Devine  the truth paralyzes. Life tests by mak­ ing  love  possible.  The faint  of  heart  end  in  fear  and  loneliness: the  young  girl with  whom  Devine  could  not  make  it is his accusation of failure  at the end of the book:  she is his mirror now: "She  was right,  he couldn't change. For the rest of his life he'd  go on telling  people  what  they wanted  to hear."
Moore's third  and  best  book,  The   Luck  of Ginger  Coffey, probably the finest novel Canada has seen,  uses mirrors  to set up soliloquies, to add  a dimension miss­ ing in  the  other  two  novels, a personal  style, a unique  voice;  Ginger  is the suffer­ ing  ham,  the  corny  sentimentalist, the confused  failure, but,  as always,  facing it: Judith Hearne's "There was  still  time" has  been  replaced  by  a  ]uno  and  the Paycock  character's wish, "Maybe today  his ship would  come in." But the mirror  on the wall is relentless :

His  image  in  the  dresser  mirror  looked at  him:  large, trembling  . . .  Look at yourself, would you. Take  a good look.
He looked at him. A stupid  man, dressed up like a Dublin squire. Looked at the frightened, childish  face  frozen now in a military disguise. He  hated  that  man in the  mirror,  hated  him.  Oh,  God,  there  was a  useless bloody man,  coming  up  to forty and still full of boy's dreams of ships coming in  .  . .  .
The  mirror  man  looked  sad. Yes, he hated  that  man,  that  man  he had  made in the mirror,  that  mirror  man who had unmade him. No one honored  that foolish sad impostor,  no one loved him. Except  him:  for only he know that  the big idjit had  meant   no  harm,  had  suffered  many's  a  hurt.  Ah,  poor  fraud,  he  thought. You're all I have. Yet even I don't  like you.

At  the  end  of The   Luck   of Ginger  Coffey Moore  adds  something new  to the mirror message: loneliness  is not  all:  failure  is not  the  final  judgment: the  last page of the book returns to the mirror:
In  the  dresser  mirror,  the  man  began  to cry. Detached, he  watched  the  tears run  down  that  sad  impostor's  face, gather  on the edges of that  large moustache. Why was that  man  boohooing?  Because he no longer lusted for his wife? Because he wasn't  able to leave her?  Ah, you idjit, you. Don't  you know that  love isn't just going to bed? Love isn't an act, it's a whole life . . . .

A MIRROR OF MOORE



He  had  tried:   he had  not won. But oh!  what  did  it matter? He  would die in humble  circs:  it did not matter.  There  would be no victory for Ginger Coffey, no victory big or little, for  .        he had learned  the truth.  Life was the victory
Going on was the victory  . . . .

The  mirror as teller of truths  is, of course,  one of Joyce's  epiphanic devices in Dubliners,  and   Ginger Coffey  is, in  a  sense,  a  non-literary Gabriel Conroy, a stylized  ham  version  of the weak nervous  Conroy whose glimpse  of himself in the glass is the  climax  of Joyce's  "The Dead".

As he  passed in  the way of the cheval-glass  he caught  sight of himself in full length,  his broad,  well-filled shirt-front,  the face  whose expression always puzzled him  when  he  saw it in a mirror,  and  his glimmering  gilt-rim  eyeglasses ....A shameful  consciousness of his own person assailed him.  He saw himself as a  ludi­ crous  figure,  acting  as a  pennyboy for  his aunts,  a  nervous,  well-meaning  senti­ mentalist,  orating  to vulgarians  and  idealising  his own clownish lusts, the  pitiable fatuous fellow he had caught a glimpse of in the mirror.



IHAVE  DWELT so long on  the  mirror of Moore  and  Joyce be­
cause  I think  Moore  is probably, at  this time,  Joyce's heir  in fiction.  Not  his sole
heir-for Joyce  has many  children: and  not  being  sole heir,  Moore  has inherited so
essential  openness   and  anticipation which  never  disqualifies any  man  from  the
possibility  of fictional-i.e. human,  significance. Moore's heroes  are  all unheroic, lead  lives below history-as indeed,  Leopold  Bloom  does. No civilization  depends on Judith Hearne or Diarmud Devine or Ginger Coffey: their  death would  leave the world  unchanged except  that  Brian  Moore, like James Joyce,  believes there  is limitless  fiction  in  the  fall of a sparrow.
Moore's Belfast  and  Montreal are  similar  to  Joyce's Dublin. Details  of a  city are  used  to  build  a  world: Belfast  is dreary, Montreal is alien,  but  the  human condition of  Moore's heroes,  like that  of Joyce's, is only  partly  dependent upon cities and  surroundings. Life is tough.  Men  are  judged  daily,  weighed  and  found wanting. But  the  judgment must  not  paralyze. The significant difference between Moore's Ginger Coffey  and  his Judith Hearne and  Diarmud Devine  is that Gin­ ger  knows  defeat  must  not  defeat  him,  that  the  miracle  which  is life flares forth from  the  unworthy as from  the  worthy. Moore has  taken  Ginger  Coffey  not merely  beyond  The  Lonely Passion of judith  Hearne  and  The  Feast  of  Lupercal

20

A MIRROR OF MOORE



but  he  has,  in  a  way,  passed beyond the  limits of Joyce's  Dubliners and  has entered the  greater world  of Leopold  Bloom in Ulysses.
Ginger   Coffey  is out  of  Leopold  Bloom  and  Ulysses;  Moore  has  pared  away
the  literary devices  and  touched  the  core of that  novel,  the  lonely  passion  of the uninvited-to-the-feast unlucky  man,  Leopold  Bloom  turned into  a celebration of the  human spirit  doing  what  it  does in  moments of magnificence-liberate itself from  the   facts of life. To  write  the saga  of Ginger  Coffey  Moore  obviously  had to see Bloom's  facts-suicide  father, dead  infant son,  alien  daughter, cuckolding wife,  hostile  city,  despising,   hating   him  for  his Jewishness,  his  advertising  job, his sobriety,  his  doctrine of love:  and  he had  to see, too,  that  Leopold  Bloom is not  the  sum  of  these  facts  nor  their  categories.  Bloom's  being  is a success,  and heroic.  This, I submit, is what  Moore  is after  in The  Luck  of Ginger  Coffey. The portrait of a hero as failure: the celebration of life by those who don't define themselves  by defeat  and  "humble circs".
As  I've  already indicated, though, Moore's  being  Joyce's  heir  is so far  only  a limited   accomplishment. Anyone  reading Moore's  three  novels knows,  of course, that  they  are  really  one  novel  being  rewritten (if the second  was not an  advance over  the  first,  the  third  is certainly  a wonderful culmination of the earlier two). Which   brings  me  to  the  question   of what  Joyce  might  yet will Brian  Moore­ or  what   Moore   might  do  all  on  his own.  Moore  has  opened  a  tiny  window  on a fully-developed world.  He  has done  what  he has done so well that it  must  now be considered done.  Another novel  about  an  imposter,  a nervous  man, a fearful  lady  would  be, in my opinion, unworthy of his talents. The  window must be shut: other  windows  must  be opened.
So  far  in  Moore's fiction  there  is almost  no sense of a  larger  world  of space and  time,  of history,  of ideas, of complex  feelings, situations. His fiction  expands the  "moments seized"   theme   of  Browning's poetry:  in  the  first  two  books  the characters don't make  it,  in  the  third  it's  a  tie. His  heroes  see their  faces in  the mirror   but  the  effect  tends  to turn  the  world  over  to Narcissus.  What's showing around  the  hero's face?  What's on the other  side of the mirror? In short,  to return to  Joyce,   Moore   has  not  yet  found   the  Joyce  way  of  using  the  sensibility  of  a simple,  uncomplicated, concrete, specific man  like Bloom  to reach  unsimple  cos­ mic  questions like the  ones that recur  in Bloom's interior monologues during the course  of  his  Ulysses  wandering. I won't, of course,  be  put  off  by  that  old  bit about "such  was not  his intention". Ginger  Coffey is a sufficient departure stylisti­ cally  to indicate the  possibility  of new intentions.
Religion   and  its  symbols  are  almost  the  sole contact with  a  greater world  in


2I

A MIRROR OF  MOORE



Moore's  novels. The  questions of life and  death  are  subjected  to the  prevailing religious answers by three heroes uncertain  of God, their church,  their faith. This uncertainty is very significant, I think  because as one passes from  the first books to the third one finds that the difference between Ginger Coffey and the earlier characters  is that  Ginger  is married, that  he has a  daughter, that  he has made some commitment to life literally, and that  he has near him the human  answer to man's  age-old questions. Moore's  "religion"  is what  Arnold  gets close to as  pos­ sibility in "Dover  Beach":  "Come,  love, let us be true  to one another," because, if  we are  not,  then  the  rest is despair  and  ruin  and  darkness.  If God  and  the Church   (or  church)  are solace is not the  question:   human  loneliness can  only have  a  human  comforter.  Judith Hearne  and  Diarmud Devine  are  existentially dead  without another  human's  warmth: Ginger Coffey has a wife-not triumph­ antly. His realization is the human  answer:
Love [is]  . . . knowing you and she will care about each other when sex and daydreams, fights and futures-when all that's on the shelf and done with . . . . Moore  has  a  great  comic sense in  his books:  each  of the  novels has a great
scene in it,  usually a sad attempt  at  making  love or a  wild confrontation scene such  as the one  between Ginger  and  his wife's lover.  Moore  never loses sight of the  absurdity  of his Devine or Coffey, and  in the midst of a scrap is always  re­ minding   you  of  how  ludicrous  a  figure  his hero  cuts.  Like  Joyce,  Moore  uses humor   to  point  up  the  serious. Ginger  Coffey's  silly appearance, like  Bloom's poached  egg eyes, doesn't cancel out the tension in his quest.



E  rather than the satiric eye is the eye of compassion, and  Moore's greatest accomplishment so far is his delicate combining  of love and the absurd,  compassion and  the ludicrous. Even a clown, a fool, a fop may have significant  destinies. This  is what  makes Brian  Moore  truly  the  heir  of James Joyce.  He  has  picked  up where Joyce left off-with the commonplace,  the  un­ heralded: Maria  in Dubliners' "Clay", Little Chandler in "A  Little Cloud", Mr. Duffy in "A  Painful  Case". Disregarding  the literary  innovation  of A  Portrait of the  Artist  as a Young  Man, its concern  for the  artist,  for literature,  Moore  has renewed  our  awareness of the complexity of the clerical character as well as any other  contemporary writer, including  J.  F. Powers. The  "retreat" section of the Portrait means most to Moore. Finally, as I've  already  indicated, his Ulysses is a novel without  Stephen  Dedalus in it: his Ulysses-The Luck  of Ginger Coffey­ is a novel told solely from the point of view of a Leopold Bloom.

22

A MIRROR OF MOORE



I've  made much  of the Joyce  connection because  I want  to suggest  that  I think Brian   Moore   a  highly  significant writer. His  significance  is far  greater than  the fact  that  he  has  come  to  reside in  Canada and  set his fiction  in  Canadian  cities. In  The  Luck  of Ginger Coffey, if not  earlier, Moore  shows a first-rate talent  for the  creation of  characters with  style-in fact  I  wish  Brian   Moore   had  greater confidence in  his gift  to  do  this:  he  would  dispense  with  tags  and  exclamations and  repetitious devices to coerce us into hearing the voice of Ginger Coffey. Ginger Coffey  is. His style is not  the superficial  tricks of literary  art  but  a way of looking at  the  world,  a way of thinking, a way of feeling. And  out of Ginger's style grows the  unique style  of  Moore's entire  novel-a searching, relentless  analysis  of self which   here,  for  the  first  time  in  Moore's fiction,  is entirely  successful.  Ginger's style is everywhere and  adds  flair  to every part  of Montreal he sees and  touches. This  is the  new  dimension in Ginger Coffey-the affirmation of the world  which comes,  as it  does in  Bloom's  Ulysses, from  an  insignificant  man  seeing  the  world significantly.
This is what  Ginger Coffey,  proofreader, sees:
Mr.  MacGregor   [his  boss] was corning through.  Bony old arms hanging  naked from shirt  sleeves, blue vein pumping  in his pale forehead,  fanatic  eye starved  for trouble.  As he swept out  on his nightly visitation, office boys, delinquent  deskrnen, guilty reporters,  all avoided  his eye, practiced  the immobility of small animals as a hawk moves over a forest  . . . .  The  composing room foreman  waited  his nightly sortie  with  the  amused  contempt  of a Roman  general  dealing  with  the  chieftain of a small hill tribe. Here, each night, MacGregor relived his defeat.
Ginger's style-Moore's style-has brought colour  and  joy into  a world  which, from  the  point  of view of the  character observing  it, may be essentially  colourless and  joyless. Ginger may  be a failure,  but  the  world  can  never  be a flop--as the world  lonely  despised  Bloom moves through is not; the life-force  and  human magnificence are  as  vividly  dramatized in the  vicious  as in  the  saintly; Moore's Mr.   MacGregor and  Joyce's Citizen   or  Buck  Mulligan, no  matter what  harm they  may  cause  a  Ginger or  a  Bloom,  celebrate possibility,  go  beyond  the  cate­ gories  of success and  failure, high  or low, good or evil.
We  had  no significant football in  Canada before  we took  to imports. Perhaps Brian  Moore  will have  a professional import's effect on the quality of our  writing. The  Luck  of Ginger Coffey  marks  him  as a  man  of great  talent  who  still works within  a  relatively narrow world.  Signs  of change  are  in  this  book. And  in The Lonely  Passion of judith  Hearne and  The  Feast of  Lupercal signs of other  possi­ bilities  abound. Brian  Moore is a writer  in  Canada who  has  just  begun  to write.
As  result  and  as omen  his effect  on  Canada cannot be anything but  good.


LIFE  IN
A NEW LAND

Notes  on the immigrant   theme  zn
Canadian fiction


Ruth McKenzie

LUFE  OF   THE  IMMIGRANT would  ><eem  an  obvious  theme
for the Canadian novelist, particularly  as the pioneer early became a popular  and
romantic  figure  in  our  native  literature. Yet it was only comparatively  recently that  the  immigrant  made  his appearance as a specific fictional  type-a stranger in  a strange  land,  uprooted  from his native soil and  struggling  to adjust  himself to a  new  world.  Only,  in fact,  with  the  publication of Ralph Connor's The Foreigner in 1909  were the peculiar problems of the immigrant really introduced as a subject  of fictional study. The  purpose of this essay is to examine some of the aspects of this theme as it has been developed during  the half-century  since Con­ nor's novel appeared.
As an  attempt  to  penetrate  the  problems of the immigrant, The  Foreigner is
only partially  successful. It centres around  a Russian family, the Kalmars. They live in one of the "little black huts"  that  marked  the "foreign" section of  Winni­ peg at  the turn  of the century,  and  here we are introduced  to the typical Conti­  nental  immigrants of that era. "With a sprinkling of Germans, Italians  and Swiss, it was almost solidly Slav," Connor remarks of the Winnipeg colony, and it seems likely that  he is speaking of these people from  a direct  acquaintance gained  in real life in his role as Presbyterian minister C. W. Gordon.
Even  in fiction Connor's  approach is still that  of the missionary. He wishes to convert  the immigrant, not to accept  him as he is. As in all his novels, one of the leading  characters  of The  Foreigner is a preacher,  Brown, who works among  the Galicians   (Ukrainians)  in  a  remote  Saskatchewan   settlement.   We  may  safely assume  that  Brown  expresses Connor's  viewpoint  when  he says, referring  to his desire to help the Galician children, that he will "do anything  to make them good

LIFE IN  A NEW LAND



Christians  and  good  Canadians, which is the same thing."  And,  even more sig­ nificantly:  "These   people  here  exist as an  undigested  foreign  mass. They  must be taught  our  ways of thinking  and living, or it will be a mighty bad thing for us in Western Canada."
In spite of Connor's  evident good will towards the Russians and Galicians who
people a great  part  of The  Foreigner, it is clear that he is not really at home with them.  He  sees them  as picturesque  but somewhat  uncouth  characters, requiring Canadianisation, by which he means, apparently, a knowledge of the English language,  education  in  British principles of democracy, and  a moral  code based on the Protestant Christian  faith.
His lack of real understanding is evident in the portrayal  of his leading charac­
ter,  Kalman  Kalmar,  son  of  an  immigrant   ex-Nihilist.  Kalman  does indeed develop into a romantic  hero of the type familiar in Connor's  novels, but he never comes  alive  as  the  Scottish-Canadian  heroes  do-Ranald Macdonald in  The Man   from Glengarry, for instance, or Shock MacGregor in The  Prospector. And his eventual  success in  life derives far  less from  his own  efforts  than  from  the intervention of fate. As a boy he is rescued from the foreign colony in Winnipeg by the  kindly  Mrs.  French   ("a  little  lady with white  hair  and  a face  pale and chastened  into  sweetness"), who sends  him  to live on  a  prairie  farm  with  her brother-in-law, Jack  French.  Fate steps in again when, as a young man,  he dis­ covers a mine  in  northern  Saskatchewan,  and  yet again  when  he wins the love of a rich girl.
Indeed,  while one must give Connor credit for introducing the theme of the immigrant to Canadian fiction, one has only to compare  his Russians and  Gali­ cians  with  the  Ukrainian settlers in  the  recent  novel, Sons of the  Soil, by  Illia Kiriak,  to see the  difference  in  understanding between an author  writing of his own  people  and  from  direct  experience,  and  one who,  like  Connor,  views the immigrant from  outside  without  sufficient creative imagination to enter  into his predicament. Sons of  the  Soil has no literary  value  whatever,  but it has at least a  documentary value  which  The   Foreigner lacks;  the  Ukrainian-born Kiriak shows  his settlers  in  a  convincing  relationship  with  their  background  and  their traditions,  and  from  his  own  knowledge  he  helps  us  to  understand the  efforts that  were needed to settle their Alberta farms.

BuT THE  IMMIGRANT THEME,  first sketched  by  Connor  in
The   Foreigner,  was to  be  developed  with  surer  knowledge by two  writers  of

LIFE IN A  NEW LAND



European origin  whose early works appeared  while he was still writing  the last of his popular  novels. These were Frederick  Philip  Grove, born in Sweden,  and Laura  Goodman  Salverson, an Icelandic  Canadian. These writers combined first­ hand  experience  of the immigrant's life, which  Connor  did  not  have,  with  con­ siderable  creative  ability. Except that  both  wrote  of pioneers in  Manitoba, they had little else in common.
Grove, who reached Canada in 1892, was fascinated  by both the idea and  the
experience of pioneering, and he saw his work as having a peculiar relation to this social  phenomenon. "I,  the  cosmopolitan," he  says in  his  autobiography,  In Search  of  Myself,  "had  fitted myself to be the spokesman  of a race-not neces­ sarily a race in the ethnographic sense; in fact  not at all in that  sense; rather  in the sense of a stratum  of society which cross-sectioned all races, consisting of those who,  in  no  matter  what  climate,  at  no  matter  what  time,  feel the  impulse  of starting  anew,  from  the ground  up,  to fashion  a  new  world  which  might  serve as  the  breeding-place  of  a  civilization  to  come  . . . Order   must  arise  out  of chaos; the wilderness must be tamed."
Most of Grove's novels are in fact concerned  in one way or another  with tam­ ing the wilderness, and two of them-not counting  the autobiographical A Search for America-are concerned  with immigrants. Both of these  novels-Settlers of the  Marsh   (1925)   and  The  Yoke  of  Life  (1930)-are set in  the  wilderness to the  west of Lake  Manitoba  where Grove  taught  school and  which  he describes so vividly in  Over  Prairie Trails  ( 1922); their  characters  are settlers of many nationalities-German, Russian,  Swedish,  Icelandic   and  Canadian-and the pioneer environment is the setting for the drama  of love, ambition  and frustration which emerges.
Grove's  approach to literature  was very different  from  Connor's. Grove  "ab­ horred" romanticism  which, in his view, "means  essentially a view of life in which circumstance is conquered  by endeavour  only if endeavour  is aided  by  the  deus ex machina."' And,  unlike Connor's  heroes, Grove's are often thwarted in ambi­ tion  and  defeated  in  life by combinations of  circumstances  which  they have neither the strength  nor the wisdom to overcome.
This  process is evident  in  the  fate  of  Niels  Lindstedt, the  central  figure  of Settlers in  the  Marsh,  who  brings about  his own  tragedy  by his very simplicity and  his awkwardness  in human  relationships.  Niels is a Swedish immigrant who takes up land  in Canada  to escape from the poverty and  humiliation  his mother


' In Search of Myself, Toronto, 1946.

LIFE IN A  NEW LAND



had  endured. "In  this country," he feels, "there  was a way out for him who was young and strong." He cherished a "longing for the land that  would be his; with a house of his own  and  a wife that would go through  it like an inspiration."
Materially,  Niels succeeds. The  farm he clears is one of the best in the district,
and  the  house  he  builds  is the  largest. But  this man,  so strong physically, so shrewd  in  planning   his  farm  operations,  is  naively inept  in  his  relations  with other  people. When  Ellen, resetved, repressed and  unable  to forget her mother's sufferings, tells him  that  she cannot  marry him, he is overcome with despair, and falls easily into  the  hands  of the gay widow, Mrs. Vogel. But he is incapable  of making  the  adjustments  that   might  render  his marriage   with  her  reasonably happy,  and  so he becomes more isolated and  withdrawn. When  the blinkers are suddenly  removed  from  his eyes, and  he sees his wife as the prostitute  she is, he becomes violent and shoots her.
Yet Settlers in  the  Marsh  does not end  pessimistically. Niels escapes hanging, serves his  time,  and  returns  to  his farm,  where  he  and  Ellen,  ten  years older, resume the pursuit  of the dream  which previously he had followed alone.
A more complete  and final tragedy destroys Len Sterner,  the hero of The  Yoke
of Life. Len's ambition  is frustrated  in boyhood by the lack of a school, and later by  the  demands   made  on  him  by his hard-working  and  poverty-stricken  step­ father.  And  his desire  for  love is thwarted  because he fixes his  affections  on a girl who wants more of the material  pleasures and comforts than he can give her. The  girl, Lydia, is also a product  of pioneer farm life; shallow and vain by nature, she longs to escape from  the hard  and  barren  existence she sees all around  her, and she uses her feminine attractions  to this end.
Len is in  fact  a kind  of frontier  Jude  Fawley, and  the author  says of him, as Hardy   might  have  said  of  Jude,  "All  things  had  come  to  him  ill-adjusted  in point  of time."  When  Lydia eventually turns towards him, he cannot  forgive the destruction  of his idealised  boyhood image of her, and  when he takes her on the long and  fateful  trip  up the lake the atmosphere is heavy with impending  doom. The  possibility of happiness  has come too late for Len,  and  he makes his fatal decision. "A  thought  had  flashed through  his brain, and lamed him like a hemor­ rhage.  No. Life was not  for him. That  thought  decided  all things. His  road lay clear ahead and led into death."
Len exemplifies the  poetic temperament  that is crushed  by the exigencies and the  practical  necessities of pioneer life. He  has no worldly ambition  and  he can work  hard  only as long  as he has a dream  possible of fulfilment.  But when the dream  is extinguished,  life loses its meaning.  His inadequacy is emphasized  by

LIFE IN A  NEW LAND



the contrasting  temperament of his young brother  Charlie, a man happily attuned to  his environment. "Charlie  was clean-limbed  and  strong: the  beginning  and starting-point of a race of farmers."  Appropriately, in terms of Grove's attitude, it is Charlie  who is fortunate  in his choice of a wife and  who takes over the home farm when his stepfather  is forced through debt to abandon it.
In  both these novels Grove presents, as a background  to the individual  dramas
of frustration  and  maladjustment, a picture of pioneer life painted  in naturalistic detail.  The  back-breaking  labour  of clearing  stumps  and  rocks from  the  land, the calamities  brought  by flood and  hail, the harsh  life of the women-all  these are  vividly described. And over the whole scene Grove creates an atmosphere  of elemental  struggle which intensifies the grimness of the human  drama  and which, in  Settlers  of the  Marsh  particularly,  recalls Knut  Hamsun's Norwegian  classic, Growth of the Soil.
In  order  to  judge  the extent  of Grove's creative  imaginativeness  in Settlers  in the  Marsh  and  The  Yoke  of Life, it is helpful to compare  them with A Search  for America, the  autobiographical novel which ironically  remains  his most romantic work.  Grove  started   writing  A  Search  for  America in  I8g3, a  year  after  he reached  Canada; he  did not succeed in  getting  it  published  until  1927. To  all intents  and  purpose,  it is the story of his own experiences  as an immigrant con­ densed  and  re-arranged so that  what  happened to Grove in about  twenty  years occupies in the novel a year in the life of the hero, Philip Branden.
Branden  is the son of a  wealthy Swede. He  has been  brought  up to a life of luxury  and  travel,  but  this ends abruptly  when  his father  loses his fortune.  He then  sails to  Montreal,  hoping,  like so many  immigrants of his day,  to make  a modest fortune.  To  his consternation,  he finds that  he is completely unadapted to earn  his living. "I had stepped,"  he says, "from  what  I could not help regarding as a well-ordered,  comfortable  environment  into what  had  upon  me the effect of utter  chaos. For  the moment  all human  contact  was non-existent. I felt that  not only had  I to learn a great many things, the social connections of a world entirely different  from  the world I knew, for instance; but  I also had  laboriously to tear down or at least to submerge what I had built up before-my tastes, inclinations, interests."  Branden  is in turn  a waiter in Toronto, a book agent in New York, a hobo, a factory  worker and  an itinerant  harvester; he returns  to Canada where, like Grove, he remains and becomes a teacher.
A  Search   for America is interesting  for the  light it  throws on Grove  himself, but  its  value  does not go far  beyond  the  documentary. It is not  a novel in the strict sense of the term, since its actions and its characters have not been conceived

LIFE IN  A NEW LAND



imaginatively; it is  always,  at  best, fictionalised  autobiography. Settlers  of the Marsh  and  The  Yoke of Life, on the other  hand,  present  their own convincing imaginary  worlds,  and  for  this reason they are better  works of literary  art;  they also-and perhaps  for  the  same  reason-contribute much  more  to our  under­ standing  of the immigrant, his problems, and  his psychology.


As WE  HAVE SEEN,  nationality in  the  ordinary  sense counted  for little in Grove's  mind;  he was concerned with men whose distinctions
of  race  and  nation  had  been submerged  in  the  common  struggle  to tame  the wilderness. Laura  Goodman  Salverson, on the other  hand,  deliberately  set out in her first novel, The Viking Heart   ( 1923)   to offer an interpretation of her own people, the Icelanders. "I wanted," she remembered  sixteen years later, "to write a story which  would define the price any foreign group  must pay for its place in the national  life of the country of its adoption."
The  Icelandic  immigrants of The  Viking Heart  live in a remote community  of Manitoba, and,  like Grove's  pioneers, they must endure  privation  and  hard  toil. But  they have  one advantage; where men like Niels Lindstedt  and  Len Sterner fight their  battles in isolation, the Icelanders  gain support  and strength  from  the feeling of kinship  which  binds the community  together  and  which arises from  a common  background  and  common  traditions.  In  the new land  the children  are nurtured, like their parents,  on the old sagas, and the older generation  never lose their  faith  in  education. "There is but  one hope, one liberation  for the poor. It is education," says the preacher Sjera Bjarni.
As the children  grow up, a rift appears  between the generations  in The Viking
Heart, and  Mrs.  Salverson  is more  successful in  depicting  the  first  generation than  the second.  Her  portrayal  of the  parents,  the  real immigrants, is based at least partly  on actual  people and episodes in the Manitoba Icelandic  settlements, and  it  attains  an  authenticity of feeling which is  not  always  present  when  she comes to describe  the sons and  daughters  and  their  withdrawal from  the  tradi­ tional pattern  of life.
Unlike  the  heroes of Grove's  novels, the  young people  of The Viking Heart
achieve  astonishing   material  success. A  violinist of  international fame,  a  well­ known  surgeon,  a  successful dress  designer-these are  produced   by  a  single pioneer  community. But  the success has its tragic side, and  here  Mrs.  Salverson
2   Confessions of an Immigrant's Daughter, Toronto, 1939.

LIFE IN A  NEW LAND



reveals  a sharp insight  into  the effects of immigration even on a closely knit com­ munity. The   parents find  a  tendency  in  the  children to  turn   against  them and  all  they  stand   for;  this,  along  with  their  severe  hardships, is the  price  they  pay for  seeking  a  new  home  in  a  strange land.  The children, on  their side,  cannot any  longer  accept  the  old values without question, but  they  are tempted to grasp  at  the  most superficial and  least worthy  aspects  of the  new environment in order  to gain  a sense of belonging.
However, not all the children react  extremely; most of them, indeed, are level­ headed enough to be able to adjust  to the new  country without discarding every­ thing  their  parents have taught them.  As Thor, one of the second generation, says to  his  mother, "I  am  not  likely  to forget  the  heritage of  my  fathers, but  I can best prove  my Norse  blood by honouring this country which  is mine." And  so the Canadian-born sons  and  daughters of  the  immigrants are  unmistakably Cana­ dian,  and  even  the  parents  become  so, imperceptibly.  After  Thor dies, it dawns on  his  mother that  she,  too,  is Canadian. "This  Canada, which  has  demanded much  of them-it was her country."
Yet,  despite  the  capability with  which  Mrs.  Salverson   has  observed  the  phe­ nomena  of  immigrant  integration, the  most  convincing aspect   of  The  Viking  Heart  remains its  success  in  portraying the  original immigrant  community, in evoking  the  integrity, the  courage and  the  power  to  endure of  the  people  who carne  from  Iceland to the  prairies.  Chiefly  because  of this, it  remains the  best of Mrs. Salverson's several novels.
At least  one other  of these, The  Dark Weaver  (1937), also develops  the immi­ grant theme.  It differs  from  The  Viking  Heart  in  that  its  characters  are  town­  dwellers  of  mixed  Scandinavian origins,  but  it  resembles  the  earlier  book  in  re­ vealing  the  clash of the generations, and  the propensity of the sons and  daughters to go their  own way to the chagrin of their  European-born parents. But this intent is almost  submerged in the  profusion  of plot and  in the author's efforts to develop  the  rather  artificial secondary theme  suggested  by  the  title-that each  of us is a shuttle in the  hands of Fate  (the  Weaver) which forms a pattern out  of our  lives that  for us has little meaning.




UNDOUBTEDLY  the  best  novels  written  about  a  particular group of immigrants are  those  by such  Jewish  writers  as  Mordecai Richler and Adele  Wiseman. But  here a distinction should  be made. These  writers  do not  set

LIFE IN A  NEW LAND



out deliberately to expound  an idea about the effects of immigration  on a particu­ lar group  as Mrs. Salverson did in The  Viking  Heart, nor do they see themselves, like Grove,  as the spokesmen  of some race of pioneers. Furthermore,  they write about  Jews, not  with  the deliberate  intention  of  interpreting Jews to others, but because these are the people of their milieu, because the conflict between foreign­ born  and  Canadian Jews, between orthodox  and non-orthodox,  and  between the generations,  has been part of the fabric of their lives.
Conflict forms the essence of two of the best of these Canadian Jewish novels, Son  of a Smaller  Hero  ( 1955)  by Mordecai  Richler, and  The  Sacrifice  ( 1956) by  Adele  Wiseman,  the  former  set in  Montreal  and  the  latter  in  an  unnamed city  presumed  to be  Winnipeg.  The  Jewish  immigrants  and  their  children  who figure in these novels experience some of the same problems of adjustment as the characters  in Grove's and Salverson's novels, but their situation  is further compli­ cated  by the  underlying  fear  of anti-semitism  and, even more,  by the  distinctive character  of their religious beliefs and practices.
In The  Sacrifice even the names of the characters  have a religious significance. The  dominating figure is Abraham, a butcher who believes  implicity in the orthodox  tenets of his forefathers  and  who looks to his son Isaac and  later to his grandson  Moses to fulfil his frustrated  ambitions of scholarship  and  to carry on the  Jewish  faith.  These  hopes are intensified by the fact  that  Abraham and  his wife Sarah  are  never able  to adjust  completely to the new world in which they live. They  are  always looking  back,  their  memories held  by the  episode  which impelled  them  to flee from  their  homeland-the hanging  of their  two sons in a Ukrainian  pogrom.  Isaac  too  looks back,  remembering  his gay  and  intelligent brothers and knowing that somehow he must make up to his parents for their loss.
But although  Isaac can never forget the past in Europe, his eyes turn more and more towards  the future  in  Canada, and  so he is caught  in the conflict between the  past  and  the  future,  the  old and  the new. He  marries  a  Canadian girl;  he finds that  he cannot  accept  his father's  orthodoxy without  question;  he yields to the necessity of working on the Sabbath. And when in the end he rushes into the synagogue  to save the  Torah from fire he does so impulsively, and  not out of a deep religious urge, as his father  prefers to believe.
When  Abraham loses Sarah  and  then  Isaac, his last bonds with  the old world are gone. His hopes for the future  become concentrated  on Moses, Isaac's  child. But  here  he comes into  conflict  with  Isaac's  Canadian wife Ruth,  a product  of the  new world.  And  the  quarrel  between Abraham  and  Ruth  leads  to the final disaster  in which  the  unbalanced old man  commits a murder,  with the implica-

LIFE IN  A NEW LAND



tion  that  he believes he is atoning  by blood sacrifice for the death  of his sons.
It is the young Moses, of the second, Canadian generation, who is left to carry the  burden  of memories and  guilt. Only after  he has become reconciled with his grandfather and  has found it possible to forgive him and  accept  the past, can he face the future  with confidence. "It was as though  he stood suddenly  within  the threshold  of a different kind of understanding, no longer crouching  behind locked doors, but standing  upright, with his grandfather leading him, as he always had." The Sacrifice  is an  ample novel, warm  and  rich in feeling. By contrast,  Mor­ decai Richler's  Son  of a Smaller  Hero is terse and satirical, yet the conflicts which the  two  novels portray  are  basically similar.  Richler's  hero,  Noah  Adler,  is the grandson  of  a  family  which  has gone  much  farther  towards  adaptation to the new land  than  Abraham  in The  Sacrifice. Melech Adler, the head of the family, has  worked  his way  up from  a scrap-collector  to a coal  merchant; some of his sons have  become prosperous and  have moved out of the ghetto;  they and  their kind  deplore  the influx of the "greeners",  the post-war immigrants. "They  speak with  accents  two  miles long  . . . Wives who  still wear  wigs! After  all  we did here  to improve  conditions they'd  like to put  us back into the middle  ages." But Melech  Adler  has the  patriarchal  desire to dominate; his grown-up  sons do not please him, and  he turns to his grandson  Noah,  whom he hopes will "be  a some­ body.  Something.  Something  not  like  them.  All  there  is for  them  is  money." Noah,  however, wants to lead his own life. He wants to think  things through  for himself. He  resents the domination  of his family and  he does not believe in their
orthodox  religious practices. So he asserts his independence by leaving home.
Yet  Noah  finds that  he cannot  make a complete  break  with the past. His love affair  with  a Gentile  girl peters out, and  he is drawn  back into the family circle after  the death  of his father. But only temporarily,  only to escape again,  this time by going  to Europe.  The  ending is inconclusive, tentative,  yet, in fictional terms, the problems that  lead up to it are made real and convincing enough,  and so one feels that  departure is forced  upon  Noah  Adler  as the  consequence  of conflicts that are both pressing and-for the present, insoluble.
The  foregoing  notes on the immigrant  theme  in  Canadian fiction are  not ex­
haustive,  but  I have endeavoured  to deal  with  what  seem to me the best novels and  the most interesting authors  in this genre. They  are novels which, insofar as they  truly  portray  the immigrants'  condition,  are  marked  by a peculiar  intensity of conflict, conflict between man and an unfamiliar  and  harsh environment, con­ flict between generations  at different stages of adaptation to that environment.
One  of the  most striking conclusions that  emerges from  this study is that  the


32

LIFE IN  A NEW LAND



problems of the immigrant have rarely been successfully observed and interpreted from  outside;  quite  apart   from  its literary merits  or  demerits,  Connor's  The Foreigner fails because the author  cannot enter fully into the real problems of his characters. The  authors  who have produced  more or less successful novels on this interesting  theme  have  either  themselves been immigrants,  like Grove,  or  they have  grown  up  in  communities   where  they  know  immigrants   intimately,  like Laura  Salverson, Adele Wiseman and Mordecai Richler.
The  major   native-born   Canadian novelists have,  indeed,  ignored  the  immi­ grant  to a striking degree. It is true that  Mazo de Ia Roche occasionally brings in an American,  English or Irish immigrant  to marry one of her characters, and in The  Building  of  ]alna  ( 1944)  she describes the original  Whiteoaks settlers, but her  attitude   towards  them  is almost entirely  romantic  and has little  to do with the  problems of real immigrants. Similarly, while Hugh  MacLennan writes with great  sympathy  of the Highland  settlers on Cape Breton in the Prologue to Each Man's  Son, this serves only as a background  to the novel proper,  with its Cana­  dian-born  characters. And,  while immigrants  have  appeared  in some of Morley Callaghan's stories, such  as  Last  Spring  They  Came  Over,  he  has  never  been concerned with the special problems of immigrants as a social group.
Thus  there  appears  to be a direct  connection  between  the  time an  author  or his forebears  have  been in  Canada and  his interest in  the immigrant theme. By the third  generation  it appears  to recede and  become inactive.  But this does not mean  that  the  theme  is likely to disappear  quickly from  Canadian fiction.  In­ deed, when we consider that some two million people have entered  Canada from abroad  since the last war, it seems likely that some outstanding Canadian novels on this theme may even now be in the making.3

3  Since these word& were written an important new irrunigrant novel, Brian Moore's
The Luck of Ginger  Coffey, has indeed appeared. -ED.















33



THE UNWITTING
ELEGIAC

Newfoundland folk-song


Paul West


The  substance  of  this  article  will  appear in  somewhat  different  form  as  a  chapter in Paul  West's book on Newfoundland, to be published  later  in the year by the Mac­ millan  Company  of Canada whose permis­ sion  to  publish  beforehand  we  wish  to acknowledge.
TEVISITOR   who is anxious  not so much  to see what  is bm­
geoning in  Newfoundland as to find  what  has  fed  it  spiritually will not  look  in
vain  for  signs of a special  heritage. In  the folk-songs,  for instance, he will find  a mixture of worlds: that  of traditional English  and  Irish  balladry, that  of the sung lyric-ageless in  certain   of  its  tropes,  and   that   of  extempore local  satire,  yarn­ spinning and  drinking-song.
During more  than  three  hundred years as a Cinderella colony,  Newfoundland
grew  rich  in song.  In  one sense such  wealth  is ineffable; in another 'ineffable' is, of course,  quite  the  wrong  word.  Songs  were  brought across from  England,  Ire­ land  and  Scotland. Others found  their  way  into  Newfoundland from  the main­ land,  thus   adding  some   things   exclusively   Canadian  and   others  which  were variants on  songs  originally  British.  But  many  songs  were  created in  Newfound­ land  itself,  and  it  is  no  exaggeration to  describe   these  as  the  pithiest,  the  most ingenious, and  the  most evocative  of the island  temper.
The best are  by Johnny Burke, a man  gifted  in the yoking together by violence of heterogenous images.  No one is quite  as bizarrely ingenious as Burke; but other names   usually   noted   are  H.  Le  Mesurier (not  prolific)  and  A.  R.  Scammell (author of  The  Squid  ]iggin' Ground). It was  customary for  outport  fisher­ men  to record  local events, especially misfortune at sea, in songs known  as "Come All  Ye's"; the  first  line  usually  ran,  "Now come  all  ye jolly fishermen". But  the

34

THE  UNWITTING ELEGIAC



songs were not always jolly. Disaster, animosity and unlyrical candour  keep show­ ing a face alongside lullabies, satires and euphoric  rants. In isolated fishing com­ munities a new song was an event, whether composed locally or imported  orally. Many  songs were  written  down,  and  crudely  printed  songbooks  exist. In  1929 the Vassar College Folklore Expedition collected almost two hundred  which were later  published  as Ballads  and  Sea  Songs  of  Newfoundland and  about  the same time  Maude  Karpeles  gathered  a similar  number  in  Folk  Songs   for Newfound­ land.
These songs are still sung and enjoyed;  they do not always mean what visitors think  they  mean,  and  much  in some of the most arresting  songs in esoteric. But this is a way of binding  together-in a community  of consent and  rhythm-that takes  us back  to  the  first  ballads.  The  Newfoundland   song has  a defensive or reckless quality  missing from  most English songs; when  matiness is suggested it is often of a provocative,  provoked, baited, delirious kind. The native Newfound­ land  songs are  rather  lacking in repose; even the lyrics get restless at  times. And a  sheer love of naming  objects produces songs that  seem riotous, knobbly cata­  logues offered  to someone  who does not  believe in  the external  world. In  fact, for  most of Newfoundland's severe history, that  world  was not  much  worth  be­ lieving in;  so the  songs have  a  resolute look at some of the  better  objects. The rest is imported  keening, languishing and suspense.
Songs are  still written  in  Newfoundland; each  year many specimens are sub­ mitted  for the Ballad section of the Provincial Arts and Letters Competition. But what  will happen   as the  province  becomes affluent? Perhaps  the folk song will fade out until the external  world drives people back to primal images. When men no longer  need  to sing while hauling  a boat  up the  beach, straining  at the cap­ stan  or  floating  a  house  across a bay, they will be utterly  civilised-at peace to listen to the ticking of their synchronised gadgets. That day  has not yet come in Newfoundland; the songs still have a use in addition  to their charm. And, one is glad  to say, while  the  people of the outports  sing spontaneously  (and  with their own  local variations), St. John's  has a Glee  Club  with  many fine recordings to its credit  and  will shortly see published a local collection of the songs of Johnny
Burke.


1:HEAR  AND   READ   Newfoundland  folk-songs is to move, for part  of the time, through  a simplified and  unreal landscape; obviously the words


35

THE UNWITTING ELEGIAC



are  the  merest  pretexts, although none  the  less rich  in  associations  and  nostalgia for  that. What is fascinating is to see the local  ethos  being  grafted into  the time­ honoured catch, and   the  gradual incorporation of  local  names. And  above  all one  gets  the  feel  of a  community where  singing  is important-as  a  principle of identification and   membership as well as a  celebration of  the  human  and  local lot. The folk-song  is social, intended to elicit ready  participants. Its  art  is assimi­ lative; your  own  life  is implicit  in  the song  and  might  even  be incorporated in stanzas   of  your  own  devising.  Let  us take,  as  an  example, The  Badger  Drive, whose  words  were  written   by  the  Newfoundland  folk-singer, John   V.  Devine.' This  is a  song  about the  fishermen  who  work  in  the  lumber camps  during the winter: a  familiar  pattern  of  local  life. But  the  familiar is hammered home  by the  use of proper  names; so that  this song  becomes  not  so much  a chant as an anthem in  which  individuals, with  all  the  backing of  group unison,  take  utter  possession of a part of the world. The  song is all compact, all complicity, all apart­ ness merged  in  community. At  times there  is just the  merest  touch  of sycophancy
-"Bill Dorothey, he  is the  manager I And  he's  a  good  man  at  the  trade." But
at  other  times  there  is also hero-worship:

And Ronald Kelly is in Command, For Ronald is boss on the river
And he is one man that's alive; He drove the wood off Victoria;
Now he's out on the main river drive.

The   whole  conception of  the  song  is realistic: the  life of  the  men  who  drive the logs downriver to the mills in the spring  is presented in considerable detail:

There is one class of men in this country
That never is mentioned in song,
And now, since their trade is advancing, They'll  come out on top before long. They say that our sailors have danger And likewise our warriors bold,
But there's none know the life of a driver, When he suffers in hardships and cold.
With their pike-poles and pea-vies and bateaus and all, And they're sure to drive out in the spring, that's the time, With the caulks in their boots as they get on the logs,
And it's hard to get over their time.
' Badger is west of Grand  Falls, on the Exploits River.

THE UNWITTING ELEGIAC



Such  a  song  is written to give  men  the  means  of celebrating their  own  daily lives; it adds  a modicum of dignity,  of self-expression,  of communal pride.  To understand its particular character, one can compare it with the hackneyed tropes of another Newfoundland song, which  is fairly  representative of its type:


One evening late as I rambled by The  banks of a fair pearly stream, I sat on a bed of primroses
And soon I fell into a dream.

I dreamt  that  I saw a young virgin
Whose equals I ne'er saw before,
And she sighed for the songs of her country
As she wandered from Erin Green Shore.


Before  long  we  reach  eyes like diamonds, gold  tresses, ivory  teeth,  green  mantle, and  shamrock: all  very  artificial although once  it  might  have  been  fresh.  This is the  conventional lyric,  devised  more  as an  excuse  to sing  than  to convey  any­ thing  social in the song. It is like a thousand other  folk-songs;  it lacks the particu­ larity  of  The  Badger  Drive,  that  song's  lively sense of a  distinct  ethos. And  the Newfoundland folk-song,  I suggest,  excels  when  it  gets  nearer to  folk-lore  and local  history  than   to  transatlantic models  of shopworn vagueness. The folk-song is a  kind  of  local  signature, evocative  and  atavistic,  an  earnest  of  presence  and  vitality; it is also, to my mind,  one of the most authentic introductions to an island  people  of considerable inventiveness.
The  variety  of  these  Newfoundland songs is immense: tragic,  usually  death at sea  bringing in  its  wake  penury and   broken   hearts;  tragic-jocular, the  hearty version  of horror, so that  true  horror  can for once be taken  lightly; tales of misled maidens and  duped sailors-the romantic ironic; the  rollicking  catalogue and  the heroic   affirmation. There  are  all  kinds,  and   innumerable permutations. Here, however,  my  special  concern is with  songs distinctively  regional.
Let  me start, then, with  the  polemical Anti-Confederation Song, first in vogue
during the election  of  I869  when  Newfoundland voted against joining  the newly­ founded Dominion. The sentiments were still valid in  1949,  when  Confederation became   a  fact; and   they  were  still  being  chanted by students  and  muttered by taxidrivers in  1959,  the year in which  Premier Smallwood, as a gesture  to Ottawa, had  all public  buildings draped in black.



37

THE  UNWITTING ELEGIAC



Hurrah for our own native isle, Newfoundland! Not a stranger shall hold one inch of its strand! Her face turns to Britain, her back to the Gulf. Come near at your peril, Canadian Wolf!

Ye brave Newfoundlanders  who plough the salt sea
With hearts like the eagle so bold and so free, The  time is at hand when you'll all have to say If Confederation will carry the day.


InI 86g  they said  no. Notice  the attribution there  of the cliches  to the oppressors! The coercive  flattery   rebukes  itself;  but  the  next  stanza   puts  things  in  down-to­ earth language, just  to make  Canadian penny-pinching and  hypocrisy  clear:

Cheap  tea and molasses they say they will give, All taxes take off that the poor man may live; Cheap nails and cheap lumber our coffins to make,
And homespun to mend our old clothes when they break.


The touch about the coffins gives a suitably  morbid frame for the  next complaint:

If they take off the taxes how then will they meet
The  heavy expense of the country's  up-keep? Just give them the chance to get us in the scrape
And they'll chain us as slaves with pen, ink and red tape.

Would you barter  the right that your fathers  have won, Your freedom transmitted from father to son?
For a few thousand dollars of Canadian gold
Don't  let it be said that your birthright was sold.


The song  is to  be  sung  "fervently". No  wonder! Similar sentiments can  be found in  Cyprus, Man   and  Sardinia; island   people  are  strong in  the  sense  of domain. On  the one hand, there  is a pride  always  three  parts of the way towards taking   offence; on  the  other,   there  is an  understandably  extreme form  of  the human urge  to cherish  a clearly-bounded area. And,  of course,  there  is too a bit of the old Adam of arrogance; not pride but disdain.
The reflex  is harmless. It is an  essential  item  in  the  epic  story  that   takes  us
from   the  days  when  Cassie  Higgins   tore  her  flannel petticoat to  make  mittens for  a  sailor  to stories  of the  recent  present: I was  told  how  two  brothers found

g8

THE  UNWITTING ELEGIAC



themselves  together on  a  sinking  icefloe;  one  of  them   jumped calmly  into  the deep  water, taking his knife  with him. Such stories abounded in codfishing  centres like  Indian Harbour around  r goo;  some  of  them  were  true,  and  some  of them were tall. In  jack Was  Every Inch  a Sailor, a Newfoundland version  of the Jonah story,  the  hero  is born  with  the  black  portents usual  in  the songs  based  on  these
tales:
Now, 'twas twenty-five or thirty years since Jack first saw the light; He came into  this world of woe one dark  and stormy night.
He was born on board his father's ship as she was lying to
'Bout twenty-five or thirty miles south-east of Bacalhao."

There is surely  something ominous in  the identical numbers for  years  and  miles; a  sailor's   coincidence reinforcing the  odd  circumstances of  birth. Jack   was  cut out  for  what  might  be called  a great  reverse:
When Jack grew up to be a man he went to Labrador;
He fished in Indian  Harbour  where his father  fished before; On his returning in the fog, he met a heavy gale,
And Jack was swept into the sea and swallowed by a whale. But  note  the  song's  title;  Jack  sets every inch  to work:
The  whale went straight for Baffin's Bay 'bout  ninety knots an hour,
And ev'ry time he blowed a spray, he'd send it in a shower.
"Oh, now," says Jack unto himself, "I  must see what he's about." He caught  the whale all by the tail and turned  him inside out.

And  that  is that; take it or leave it.



1 E MYSTIQUE     of the  Newfoundland song  comes  from  hard­ ship  and   hard   pleasure. There is a  rioting  vigour,  an  archetypal joy in  oneself and  one's  abilities  in  the stamping rhythms of I'se the B'y That  Builds the  Boat:
I'se the b'y that  builds the boat, And I'se the b'y that sails her! I'se the b'y that catches the fish And takes 'em home to Lizer.

Sods and rinds to cover yer flake, Cake and tea for supper,
Codfish in the spring of the year
Fried in maggoty butter.
"  Bacalhao  (pronounced Backaloo)  is an island off the east coast of Newfoundland.


39

THE  UNWITTING ELEGIAC



This percussive  hymn  of praise,  at once vaunting and  ironical, concrete and  sug· gestive,  reveals  the spring  of vitality.  There is pride  in simple  achievement as well as a stated  formula for the  simple,  hard  life. It takes  nothing much  to construct a flake  on which  to dry your fish-except energy  and  heavy  materials. Notice  the diet  on  which  work  is to  be done.  Notice  too  the  tone:  nothing whining, but  a plangent gusto. When  sung, the verse's fourth line assumes the form of a triumph­ ant  clincher as  well  as the  denouement line.  Essentially   this  is the  pattern of  a dance, each   line  pushing  audacity a  little  further until  the  fourth  line  thumps down  into  common-sense again.  The  refrain  is almost  a magic formula:

Hip  yer partner, Sally Tibbo'! Hip  yer partner, Sally  Brown! Fogo, Twinningate, Morton's Harbour, All around  the  circle!

The robust  invocations are  to things  utterly  familiar, but  to things  here  capable of being  catalytic, merely on  being  mentioned, in an  orgiastic  frivolity.  The song goes on  into  an  intriguing mixture of complacency and  the  preposterous:

I don't  want your maggoty fish, That's no good for winter;
I could buy as good as that
Down in Bonavista.

I took Liza to a dance,
And faith, but she could travel! And every step that she did take Was up to her knees in gravel.
The conclusion of the song is one of provocative irrelevance: Susan White, she's out of sight,
Her petticoat wants a border; Old Sam Oliver, in the dark, He kissed her in the corner.

Perhaps inevitably, many  of the  Newfoundland songs  record  economic plight. A  Great  Big Sea  Hove  in  Long  Beach, for  example, treats  of  the  Depression; the  fishermen, getting poor  prices for their  catch, had  to pay highly  for imported flour.  The hardship is decorated with folk humour of a traditional, filling-in-the­ space  kind:

THE  UNWITTING ELEGIAC



"Me  boot is broke, me frock is tore", Right  fol-or-al taddle diddle 1-do. "Me  boot is broke, me frock is tore, But Georgie Snooks I do adore",
To  me right  fol-diddy fol-dee. "Oh, fish is low and flour is high", Right  fol-or-al taddle diddle 1-do. "Oh, fish is low and flour is high,
So Georgie Snooks he can't  have I",
To  me right  fol-diddy fol-dee.

This  is one  way of making the facts,  as well as expensive  flour,  palatable. Things are  not   usually  so  muffled;   the  Newfoundland  folk-muse is  more  often   pithy, robust  and  concrete.
These  are  the  qualities of  a  jovial end-of-the-season blues  called  Squarin' Up
Time; the  fishermen have  been  paid  for their  summer catch, and  they now  have to  pay  off accumulated bills. The  song  puts  us thoroughly in  the  picture:

Oh, the fish are all caught and the squids are all jigged, And the traps are caught up and the schooners unrigged; All hands  round the cutters are driving the smoke,
While Jacob is splicin' some left-handed  rope.

'Tis the squarin'  up time inside the big shop; The clerks are kept busy and right on the hop.
"Look sharp,  now then, sonny, and 'tend  to my needs: A pack of those raisins without any seeds".

All  arrive: Skipper John Wilkins,  inquiring about  his credit, gets a shock;  all he wanted  was  "a few  slips  of  twine"; Uncle  Dick  Nicholls  takes  his  balance in Indian Root   Pills,  borrows Tommy Hayes's  pipe  and  sets  his  whiskers  on  fire. Business  and  pranks are  going  full  swing  when  the  Parson walks in.  Changes of heart, against the  grain, suddenly take  place:

"There's five dollars comin' to you, Mr. Knee." "I don't  want it, sir; that's no good to me.
Share it up 'tween the parson and Dr. Carew
For I wants to keep on the good side of them two.

If I've got to niggle on six cents a day,
I'll be wantin  'the doctor by the end of next May,

THE  UNWITTING ELEGIAC



And maybe the parson will have to come round
To help me square up 'fore I go underground."


These  stanzas remind me of the  poetry  of Crabbe: precise,  dry,  folksy, expert  at making the  simple  astonishing.   Life  is made   to  show  its  true  nature; it  is very much   an  affair  of  commodities, prices,  scarcities,  debts  and  reckonings.  Some­ thing  of the  merchandising attitude rubs off into  the  personal relationships.
Basically  these  songs  are  much  concerned  with  amour-propre; pride,  dignity
and  face  count  for  a great  deal.  But,  as often  as not,  for  every  gallant triumph over  the  elements there  is an  ignominy  at  the  hands of a  woman-as  if Nature were  resolved  to  be  recalcitrant in  one  way  or  another, and  to  prevail. So it  is that  in an epic context men of stature are felled by a winning female  eye, directed upon  them  or  someone  else. And  the  whole  business  fascinates them.  They  have to ·get it out,  have  to marvel  at  it, in song-and in the  unison  of company. Per­ haps  these  songs,  among  other  functions, offer  the  singers  a chance of  coming  to terms  publicly  with  life's minor  defeats.  But  not  every  song  presents  an  account as frankly autobiographical as that  of Harry Russell  in The  Gallant  Brigantine:

My name is Harry Russell, And I am a married man.
Three weeks before I left the shore
My trouble first began;
It started when a girl I wed
Brought forth to me a son.


That is the end  of the song;  the rest is unspeakable grief, and  we have to imagine.
Misadventure recurs  in  the songs-suggestive, perhaps, of a dominantly tragic view  of  life;  heaven  knows, in  the  old  days,  life on  potatoes, hard  tack  and  fish stew  was  hard   enough. Sometimes it  is  all  in  the  tone  of stilted  melodrama, curiously  mingling sentimentality with irony:

I said:  "My good woman, were you ever married, Or have you a father for these children  small? Have you a house, a place, or a dwelling?
Were you ever wealthy? What  caused your downfall?"

That comes  from   The   Poor  Distressed Woman. A  rather subtler   presentation appears in  the  pathetically titled  All Gone  Now:

THE UNWITTING ELEGIAC



Said  he:  "By gosh
One  day I owned  a watch,
A diamond ring and  a necktie pin; And it's all gone now.
It's  all gone now, and  I got so I have a wonderful cold
For  drinking odd glasses. It's all gone now."

The  mock-naive wonderfully illuminates the  dying fall  of  the  last  few  words.
An  altogether different and  extremely extravagant  mood  is that of The  Kelli­ grews Soiree,  a garrulous and  high-spirited account of escapades at  an island get­ together. The form and the  model of  the  song  come from Ireland;  the  content and the spirit are pure Newfoundland.

You may  talk of Clara Nolan's Ball or anything you choose, But it couldn't hold a snuff-box  to the spree at Kelligrews.
If you want  your eyeballs straightened, just come out  next  week with  me,
And  you'll  have  to wear your glasses at the Kelligrews Soiree.

There was birch  rine, tar  twine, cherry  wine and  turpentine, Jowls and  cavalances, ginger  beer and  tea,
Pigs' feet, cats' meat, dumplings boiled in a sheet,
Dandelion and  crackies'  teeth  at the Kelligrews Soiree.

Oh,  I borrowed Cluney's beaver  as I squared my yards to sail, And  a swallow-tail from Hogan that  was foxy on the  tail;
Billy Cuddahie's old  working  pants  and  Patsy  Nolan's shoes, And  an old white  vest from  Fogarty  to sport  at Kelligrews.

There was Dan  Milley, Joe Lilly, Tantan and  Mrs. Tilley Dancing like a little filly, 'twould raise your heart  to see. Jim  Brine, Din  Ryan,  Flipper  Smith and  Caroline;
I'll tell you, boys, we had  a time at the Kelligrews Soiree.


The  song's method, invigorated and   given   a  repetitive spin   by  the  internal rhymes, is to  let  the  end-rhymes have  their  head as  far  as is possible within the dictates of  the  simple intention to  say  what is going on.  This mixture of  irrele­ vance  and  almost  over-explicit cataloguing works   admirably. The  people are crowded in   by  the   eatables. The  mock-sophistication in   the   choice  of  'soiree' supplies an  essential touch of  irony, and   thus  gives  edge  to  what  might have seemed a  merely lumpish catalogue. The tone  is impetuous and importunate, and

43

THE  UNWITTING ELEGIAC



carries  with  it-well beyond  the  scrutinies  of commonsense-the  contradictions. This  is  a  rich  song,  crammed with  matter; it  makes  exuberantly free  with  the language, and  the  strain  one  notices  as the  singer   (or  speaker)  pushes  towards the  end-rhyme gives the  whole  thing  an  added, rather costive  tension.
Similarly  percussive  in rhythm  but  by no means  as concrete in variety  is We'll
Rant  and  We'll  Roar,  a  well-known  near-anthem. But  the  whole  song  is staid, tame  and   conventional after  Kelligrews;  the  bizarre inventiveness is missing  in such lines as these :

If the voyage is good, this fall I will do it;
I wants two pound ten for a ring and  the priest, A couple o' dollars for clean shirt and collars, And a handful o' coppers to make up a feast.

This  song  forces  no special  atmosphere upon  us, and  evokes  many  similar  pieces from  the  repertoire of  generalised   elegiac  ballad. It might  even,  for  some  ears, share  something with The  Blooming Bright Star of Belle Isle:

One evening I rambled
To view the fair fields all alone, Down by the banks of Loch Erin
Where beauty and pleasure were known.

We do not  have  to attend as minutely  to this as to Kelligrews. And  it quite  misses the  almost   Elizabethan  flavour,   the  slightly  stilted   simplicity  of  Summer   and Winter's  opening lines:

Flora beautiful and fair
To winter now give room;
He will rob you of your finery And from your sweetest bloom. It's  with his eyes
His face comes in  . . .


The  sudden image   in  those  last  two  lines  gains considerable force from  the seemingly  guileless opening; the image  blurts  into  the stereotyped, although melo­ dic  invocation. For  the  Newfoundland song is a mode  of art  that  will carry  sud­  den.  contrasts; it  documents more  thoroughly than most  types  of  folk-song,  and  its dignity  is never  too precarious to admit  a flash  of realism. That, surely,  is why it survives with the minimum of incongruity.

44



DON QUIXOTE AND THE PUPPETS

Theme and Structure in
Robertson Davies'  Drama



M. W.  Steinberg






TE STRUCTURE of a play must  b' dd'rmin'd by th' dmna­ tist's  effort  to  achieve  maximum  clarity  and  impact.  Every  character,  situation and  episode must  contribute  to the tone of the play, the revelation of  character, the  development of  plot,  or  the  unfolding  of theme.  To  the  extent  that  these elements  are  irrelevent  or  tangential   to  the  playwright's  intention,  structure  is weakened,  and  as a consequence  the theme gets out of focus and  dramatic force diminishes. This criterion of unity is perhaps the best measure of  the achievement of Robertson  Davies, who may well be considered Canada's leading  playwright.
In  Fortune,  My  Foe  ( 1949), Davies' first full-length  play, the action  centres on  the  dilemma  confronting the intellectual  or  the  artist  in  Canada, who feels that  he must either  emigrate  to the United  States or remain  in Canada defeated in his work by the naive or hypocritical attitude  of his countrymen. On  this prob­ lem, perhaps  the most persistent to engage him, recurring  as it does in his novels as well as in  his plays, Robertson  Davies has many sharp  and  sad  comments  to make.
Nicholas, a young university instructor  contemplating  departure for the United States,  denies  the  charge  that  he is a traitor  to his country  selling out  his ideals and  responsibilities  for  the  fleshpots of the south. He sees behind  the stereotype of America  that  Canadians, perhaps defensively, have established. Behind all the commercialism   and  vulgarity,  he  argues,  "there  is a  promise,  and  there  is no promise here,  as yet, for men like me." He  rejects the attempts of Rowlands,  an older  professor,  to dissuade  him from  leaving  Canada. Rowlands,  though  him­ self embittered  long before by a similar frustration  to the one that was presumably


45

DON QUIXOTE AND THE PUPPETS



impelling Nicholas  to emigrate, queries his colleague's motives, sneering at the incentive of money  and  shrewdly,  almost cynically,  suggesting that  the real reason was  pressure  from  Vanessa,  the self-willed  young  lady  whom  Nicholas  wishes to marry. In   part   Rowlands' action   may  be  prompted at  this  time  by  a  residual affection   for  Canada, soured  but  yet  abiding; but  for  the  most  part  one  is  in­ clined  to  agree  with  Nicholas,  who senses in  the  tone  of Rowlands'  comments a jealousy stemming from  personal  frustrations.
Nevertheless, as we can  judge from  the  unwarranted fury  of his reply to Row­
lands'  taunts about  his subservience to Vanessa, Nicholas  has an  underlying sense of guilt  about  this aspect  of his motivation, reluctant as he is to admit  it to him­ self.  The   dramatist  further  weakens   his  hero's   position,   reducing to  absurdity Nicholas' rather   pompous claim  that  he seeks admission to American  university  life  primarily in  the  service of culture, by showing him  engaged in  the scholarly  task of editing a  joke-book, an  undertaking applauded by the American  professor from  whom   he  was  expecting an  offer,  but  labelled   by  Rowlands as  "nonsense and   shoddy, catch-penny scholarship," a  species  of  research  suggesting   his  in­ sincerity.
Into this  fairly  straightforward  situation in  which   the  characters and  their relation  to each  other  and  to the  central problem are  clearly  delineated, Robert­ son  Davies  introduces a  new  element, Franz  Szabo,  a  refugee  puppet-master, a mature artist,  whose  puppet-show, we are  told,  creates  an  effect  of "intensified reality,  rather than  of make-believe" and  enables  us to see  people  and  situations "clear and  fresh  and  marvellously  detailed." With  almost fairy-tale effect a trans­ formation begins  to  take  place  in  the  chief  characters.
The most significant change of all takes place in Nicholas. He  had  no difficulty earlier  in  rejecting Rowlands' argument for  his remaining in  Canada partly  be­ cause  he  recognized   the  basis of  the  argument, and  he  could  counter with  per­ sonal  reasons  of  his own,  and  partly  because  Rowlands' approach was negative, belittling the  importance of  money  and  love  as  motives.  But  Szabo  presents  a positive  attitude towards staying  in  Canada, based  on  love of country and  one's duty  to it, an  ideal  resting  on courage and  hope.  "This is my country now  and  I am  not  afraid of it. There may be some bad  times;  there  may  be some misunder­ standings . . . . The educated like my work,  and  the  uneducated like it. As for the half-educated-well, we can only pray for them in Canada, as elsewhere   ... we artists  learn  very young  not to mind  too much. We  must  be tough, and  hope­ ful,  too." And  Nicholas,  at  the  play's  conclusion, influenced  by  the  example of Szabo,  decides  to stay in Canada, saying, "if we all run  away  it will never  be any

DON QUIXOTE AND THE PUPPETS



better. So let the geniuses  of easy virtue  go southward; I know  what  they feel too well  to  blame  them.  But  for  some  of us there  is no  choice; let  Canada do  what she will with  us, we must stay."
The   ending is  somewhat  pat  and   sentimental. The   romanticism  that   Hugo
MacPherson  rightly   finds  underlying the   satire  in  Davies'   novels   (Canadian Literature  4)  is evident  here  too. But the criticism levelled at Davies by a reviewer of  Fortune,  My  Foe in  Canadian  Forum  that  he offers  no  constructive  sugges­ tions  concerning the  loss of talented young  Canadians to the  United  States  is, of course,  invalid. Though we  may  agree  that  Nicholas'  decision  is not  based  on  a premise  widely  acceptable, the  only question  we are  justified in asking is whether such  a person  as Nicholas is represented as being would  arrive  at such a decision. The  dramatist is not  obliged  to offer solutions  to social  problems. And  Nicholas' decision,  we find, is in character. Davies  prepares us for it by indicating Nicholas'  sense  of guilt  in  the  conversation with  Rowlands, and  his sense of duty,  of obli­ gation   to  Canada, in  the  conversation with  Vanessa.  It  becomes  quite  clear  in the  play  that  a major  reason  for wanting to go to the U.S. was his desire  to earn  enough money  to marry Vanessa, but  as she had already broken  up  their  engage­ ment,  this motive  is gone.  But  perhaps most important, Nicholas, like Szabo,  is a romantic idealist   at  heart, and   Davies  makes  this fact  clear  when  he  has  both men  choose enthusiastically the Don Quixote story for the puppet play.
The  events  centering around Szabo  and  his puppet show, though amusing and meaningful in  themselves,  serve  the  primary dramatic purpose of developing the main  action  and  bringing about  the conversion  of Nicholas and  changes in Row­ lands  and   Vanessa. In   these  terms  the  play  has  thematic and  structural  unity.  There is a second  theme  that  arises out  of the Szabo  episode: the question  as to the  function and  purpose of art,  a question  to which  several answers  are  offered by  the  characters. For  Ursula Simonds,  a left-wing  do-gooder, art  or  culture is but  an  instrument of politics,  a form  of propaganda. For  Mr.  Tapscott and  Mrs. Philpott, art  is an  instrument of the social worker  and "the handmaid of educa­ tion" to  be  used  on  tot-lots  or  in  creative  character-building-courses sponsored  by  libraries, or  YMCA's or  Extension  Departments of  universities.  These short­  changers are  driven   out  of  the  temple  of  art,  i.e.  Chilly's  ambiguous establish­  ment,   by  the  enraged and  cursing   Professor  Rowlands shouting "Anathema". Chilly,  whose  speakeasy  is  the  setting  of the  drama, expresses a more  acceptable view  when  he  remarks  that  the  marionette show gave  him  "a  religious  feeling", a  view  with  which  Nicholas concurs,  saying  "It fills a  need  in  the  heart. Why not  call  the  feeling it arouses  religious?" This  theme  is related  to the first, for we

47

DON QUIXOTE AND THE PUPPETS



see that  the artist Szabo and  his work of art  make  Nicholas see into himself and effect a change  of heart that  results in his abandoning his false aims and  accept­ ing his responsibility.



IN  HIS NEXT  PLAY At My  Heart's Core  ( 1950)  Davies is still concerned  with Canada  as a land of frustration  in which there is almost no gen­ teel, sophisticated society, and in which there is little interest in the arts or sciences. As a result the inhabitants who are gifted or cultured  reveal a deep, though often unspoken,  longing to escape. But in this play the theme  does not imply criticism of Canadian society; by setting the events in the early 18oo's in a sparsely settled country  where  pioneering  conditions  make  inevitable  hardship  and  deprivation, Davies shifts  the  emphasis  from  social criticism  to a  consideration  of a  human  problem-the ways in which people react to their uncongenial  environment. The  dramatist is concerned  with the unrealized  dream  at the heart's  core and  how it can be manipulated to create discontent.
Cantwell,  the omniscient villain, subtly plays on the vanity of three ladies in successive interviews, giving expression and  support  to their  hidden  doubts  and wishes, releasing an  unhappiness which each heretofore  was heroically managing to control. The  women are clearly depicted, each with her own temperament and special  capacity,  though  they are, on the whole, sketchily outlined.  Cantwell,  on the other  hand,  is presented in more ambiguous  terms. He is a glib, sophisticated fellow  whose  realism,  untouched   by  virtues  or  ideals,  becomes  cynicism. The ladies'  somewhat  self-righteous statement  that  they  are  beyond  temptation  sug­ gests a way for him to rob them of their peace of mind,  an action  which, as the dramatist explains  somewhat  belatedly  near  the  end,  is  prompted   by  a  slight which  Cantwell  and  his wife suffered at their  hands.  The  malignancy  is entirely disproportionate to  the occasion and  is not  fully credible.  One  feels  that  Cant­  well, clever and  insincere, merely rationalizes  the  reason for  his conduct,  which actually  is an expression of unmotivated  evil. Indeed, Davies goes out of his way to present  Cantwell  as a satanic  figure, the great  tempter and  destroyer of peace of  mind.  Though the  frequent  assertion  by  Phelim,  a  superstitious  Irish  bard­  settler,  that  Cantwell  is the  Devil may  not  be  convincing,  and  Cantwell's  own jesting references to himself as the Devil may  by  themselves be ignored,  the fact that  Cantwell  knows not only the weaknesses  of each  of the ladies and  how to play  on  them,  but  also the  circumstances  of  their  earlier  lives and  associations makes him inhumanly omniscient. This ambiguity in the characterization is main-

DON  QUIXOTE AND  THE PUPPETS



tained  to the end of the play. When Mr. Stewart impatiently  tells Phelim to stop shouting  that  Cantwell  is the Devil, "We  don't  have the Devil in the nineteenth century,  and  we certainly  don't  have him in this country,"  Cantwell  ironically re­ marks, "What a happy state  of affairs. These ladies have nothing  to worry about then."  And  when  Mrs.  Moodie a few moments later  asks "Who  are you, to cast our  sins of omission in our  teeth, and  to stand in judgment  upon  us?" Cantwell replies "That, Mrs. Moodie, is a matter which I prefer to leave in doubt." Phelim has the last word on Cantwell  and his comment applies to the ladies, who, Cant­  well believes, will always have doubt  gnawing at their  hearts, "Ah,  wasn't it the big fool I was to take his coin! And sure I'll be in the Devil's own hand from this day!"
In  a  review of At  My  Heart's Core  (University  of Toronto  Quarterly,  April
I 95 I), Vincent  Tovell  criticizes the  plot as being contrived  and  the  character­ ization  of  Cantwell  as  unsatisfactory  because his behaviour  is not  dramatically  credible.  This  judgment  is valid if we regard  the play simply as a  realistic his­ torical play. It is that,  of course, and  indeed is a very fine historical drama  with the  setting  and  dialogue re-creating the  period  honestly  without  the  kind  of quaintness   that  is often  associated  with  historical  dramas.  The  criticism is not applicable  if we emphasize  the symbolic nature  of  Cantwell  and  perhaps  of Mr. Stewart  in order  to develop the underlying pattern of ideas.
Whether  Cantwell  is an inadequately  motivated  "real" character  or a diabolic force, he is used as an  agent  by the dramatist  to develop what  there is of a plot and to establish his theme. The  view of Cantwell as Devil relates closely the theme and  structure,   for  the  simple  structure  of  the  play  with  its  three  temptations echoes in its outline  the story of Satan's  triple temptation  of Jesus in the wilder­ ness. Furthermore, each temptation  in At My  Heart's Core is followed or accom­ panied  by a  blast of a  hom  in the distance,  "clear  and  mysterious." This horn, as  we learn  later,  announces   the  approach   of  Mr.  Stewart,  returning  from  a successful expedition  against  the rebels in Upper  Canada  under  the discontented William  Lyon  MacKenzie. He  comes in  the aspect of a  redeemer  more than  a match  for  the  insidious Cantwell; his good humour  and good sense clear the atmosphere  which  has  been  poisoned by Cantwell's  flattery  and  deceitful senti­ mentalism,  qualities  which  the  tempter  shares  with  Shaw's  Devil in  Man  and Superman, but  which in At My  Heart's Core thinly disguise malice. Stewart  also is the supreme  authority  in  the district,  but  though  he puts the adversary in his power  he  cannot  wholly  undo  his work.  Where  he does succeed  is where love exists. His love for his wife, full and  unqualified, evokes in her a similar response


49

DON QUIXOTE AND THE PUPPETS



and  enables  her  to redeem  herself and  thus defeat  Cantwell's  effort.  Earlier  she did not hear  the horn announcing  her husband's coming, though she usually did, because she was at the time heeding Cantwell's  words, but now she realizes that what  Cantwell  roused in  her "was  not  regret,  but  discontentment, disguised as regret."
Like Fortune)  My  Foe) At  My  HeartJs Core  has basically a very simple struc­
ture.  Into  the  initial  situation  an  outsider  is introduced, in  the former  a  Czech refugee  artist,  and  in  the latter  a mysterious stranger,  whose view of life makes the other characters  examine theirs. In Fortune)  My  Foe the resolution is simple: the young hero romantically  accepts the new vision, that of the mature  artist and decides to remain  in Canada,  foregoing a supposed  benefit out of a sense of duty. The  resolution  in  At  My   Heart's  Core  is somewhat  more  complex.  The  three women are affected by Cantwell's view of life, a bad one in this case. What  would have  happened   to  Mrs. Traill  and  Mrs.  Moodie  as  a  consequence  we do  not know, for they are fortunately  rescued from  the situation  which was presumably the basis of their discontent when their husbands,  unfit as pioneers, are given government  posts in York, where their talents as officers can be put to better  use. Perhaps  one  might  say that  out of the somewhat  remote  "evil"  of MacKenzie's rebellion  came  this "good"  to these noble ladies, an  extension  of grace to those on the verge of "falling". Mrs. Stewart's fate is more positive and rewarding. She definitely rejects the tempter  when she gains new insight, helped  perhaps  by the power of love.
Despite the more involved resolution of the issue in At  My  Heart's  Core, there is greater  structural complexity and  unity in  Fortune) My  Foe. The  sub-plot  in the  earlier  play, or to be more exact,  the second strand  of action,  involving the new though  closely related theme-that of the function  of art-which centers on Franz  Szabo and  his puppets, bears closely on the first theme  which involves the unsatisfactory  consideration  accorded  art  and  culture  in  Canada, and  the intel­ lectual's  responsibility to the country which slights him. In fact, as we have seen, the Szabo episode produces significant changes in the major  characters and  leads to  the  resolution  of  Nicholas' problem.  It is otherwise in At  My  Heart's Core) however,  where  the  delightfully original sub-plot  involving  Phelim, the  besotted Irish  ex-bard  and  his foster-child "wife",  is not  clearly or significantly related  to the main  plot. The  dramatist  uses Phelim as a device for getting  Cantwell  to stay at  the Stewarts,  but  this end  could have  been achieved  in a less elaborate  way. Insofar  as the Phelim subplot provides some commentary on the main action and much  comic relief, it does contribute  to the total  effect  of  the play, but it is not

50

DON  QUIXOTE AND  THE PUPPETS



closely integrated with the main plot, neither strand  of action depending seriously on the other.



ROBERTSON DAVIES in Fortune, My  Foe is chiefly concerned with the ideas he treats rather  than with the characters  through  whom he presents the  ideas in  action.  Even  though,  as we have seen, there is development  in the character   of  Nicholas  and   his  conversion is made  credible,  the  treatment of character  is superficial.  In  general, this judgement applies also to At  My  Heart's Core, although  here  the  dramatist, dealing  with a  problem  more deeply rooted in human  feelings and  one that  has universal aspects, creates characters  who are more clearly realized, and indeed genuine pathos emerges. His primary interest, however,  is still  in  the  idea  that  runs  through  the  play-the heartbreak   and loneliness in  the  wilderness and  the effect of temptation  in  these circumstances. He examines the effect on three ladies, proving their vulnerability,  but in so doing he fails to explore in depth  the complex of motives and feelings involved in each case:  he presents  one and  moves on, paying almost equal  attention  to each. He comes closest to realizing  idea  through  character  in  the rather  moving scene  be­ tween Mrs. Stewart  and her husband at the very end of the play.
In  A  jig  for the  Gypsy   (I 954)  Davies is still absorbed  more by the ideas he is considering  than  by  his characters,  though  the character of Benoni is probably more  many-sided  than   any  other  he  has  attempted. The  structural pattern  of A  jig  for the  Gypsy  in  a sense reverses that  of At  My Heart's Core.  Instead  of having  one  person  come into  the established setting and  in the course of events interview  separately   the  three  central  figures there,  we get  one key figure  esta­ blished in  the  one  place,  and  the other  characters  all come to visit her. As the play develops we get again  three  major separate  interviews. This  use of  parallel situations  within  a  play gives a certain structural  unity  to the material, which is reinforced  by the fact  that  Benoni's personality and  values figure largely in each episode, as Cantwell's did  in  the earlier  play. But the discussions and  the inter­  views in  At  My   Heart's Core  have a closer thematic  relationship than  those in A  jig  for the Gypsy.
A  jig  for the Gypsy  lacks the clear focus the other plays possess. Davies cleverly satirizes politicians, their motives and behaviour, through  a diversity of characters, bumptious  and  scheming,  in  whom strong feelings are  aroused  over petty issues. At the same time he shows the emptiness of the politician's dream,  the disillusion­ ment  that  accompanies even  political success. Even more  mockingly  he satirizes

DON QUIXOTE AND THE PUPPETS



the  so-called  idealist  through  the  "romantic" Edward   Vaughan, who  worships abstract   principles  and  exalts  the  working  class and  who,  like his disciple, the starry-eyed Bronwen, is ready to spout Ruskin at the ennobling sight of a labourer dully performing  his chores.
The  most important theme in the play, however, is that  of love and  marriage.
Benoni, a free-souled realist who cannot abide  the rigid restrictive code by which the  "moral" middle  class lives, urges Bronwen  to love many  young men  before she marries.  She does so not because, as the conventional people like to believe, the gypsy is lustful and overvalues physical love and  undervalues  marriage. Quite the contrary.  It  is the so-called modest people, like Bronwen,  who by idealizing sex place too much  emphasis on it. Benoni advocates experience in love not as an end in itself but  as a preparation  for marriage.  Nor, furthermore, is physical love to be considered  as the purpose of this important union. "There's more to mar­ riage than  four bare  legs in a blanket," she tells a shocked Bronwen. Later  Con­ juror  Jones  makes  precisely the  same  remark  to  Benoni  when  she  hesitates  to marry  him  because  of  his age,  and  he  adds  that  the  firmest  foundation for  a marriage is a joint interest.
Robertson  Davies seems to take here, as in the other  themes, an anti-romantic position.  To  be  truly  joyful one  must  learn  to  live with  reality,  and  one  must avoid  creating  abstractions,  ideals, supported  by a host of taboos, which obscure or reject reality. The  trouble with the world, says Conjuror Jones, is that  it keeps nagging  itself; it takes a perverted  pleasure in its denials. Actually  Davies is not so  much  anti-romantic  as  opposed  to  conventionalized   romanticism,   or  senti­ mentalism,  which  is in fact  the arch-enemy  of true  romanticism.  This  in  part  is the  gist  of  Benoni's  advise to  Bronwen.  And  though  Benoni  accepts  Conjuror  Jones  because it is the sensible thing to do, she does not idealise this union as she did  an  earlier  one  with  Rhodri  Lloyd which  was based  on  love.  "What I  felt with Rhodri  Lloyd was true love. It was as sweet and  fair as the daffodils in the spring."
Davies' earlier  plays also have much satire,  often  directed  at the same targets as those in  A  jig  for the  Gypsy, but  it is largely incidental, growing out of the dialogue,  and  it does not hinder  the development  of the central  theme.  In A  jig for the  Gypsy almost  equal  attention  is given  to various  episodes and  the effect is that  strength  is lost. Benoni, who is perhaps  the  only  unifying  element,  acts more  as  the  agent  affecting  others, like  Szabo and   Cantwell, than  the  chief figure in a plot. And perhaps equally serious, what would seem to be the most important theme  ends rather  lamely with  the marriage of Benoni and  Conjuror

52

DON QUIXOTE AND THE PUPPETS



Jones.  While  this  marriage may  be so apt  as to have  been  made  in  heaven  and while we may  agree  with  Davies that  "it is a union  of two people  of extraordinary character and  outlook, as a defense against  a world  which  is becoming more  and more  unfriendly toward  their  kind," dramatically  it  is  inappropriate  because Conjuror Jones seemingly  is introduced at  the  end  only  to  help  Davies  dispose happily  of Benoni.
All in all, the  plays of Robertson Davies are a substantial contribution to drama in  Canada. The   comic   spirit   which   pervades  them,   expressing   itself  through language, situation and  character, in  a variety  of modes,  is unexcelled in  Cana­ dian  writing. Davies  has  also given  evidence  of considerable originality  and  skill in  creating and   projecting character. Such  characters as  Phelim,   Mrs. Stewart and  Benoni  not  only substantiate this claim  but indicate something of the breadth of his range.  It is unfortunate that  in no case in his plays does he explore charac­ ters in  depth-for the  most  part  they  are  used  as a means  to present  or  develop  ideas.  It is, of course,  not  unusual in  comedies  to find  the  dramatist subordinat­ ing  character to situation or  to his interest  in  themes  dealing  with social  conven­  tions  or  institutions. Many  of  Davies'  themes  involve  satiric  thrusts  at  the  rigid and  doctrinaire forces in society, the pompous, and  the unrealistically sentimental, whether in personal relations or in social values. But, underlying his satire,  Davies offers  directly   or   by  implication,  through  such  characters as  Pop,  Szabo,   the Stewarts and  Benoni,  a  positive  vision of life. In addition, he has given  evidence  of  superb craftsmanship; his  plays  move  quickly,  the  scenes  following   one  an­  other  quite  naturally. At  his best his plays achieve  a considerable degree  of unity of structure and  theme. When  he falls short,  in  this respect,  as he does at  times, it is because  he is undone by the delight  in ideas  and  zest for fun  that  constitute his  most  attractive  qualities.  Because  his  fancy  is  alert   and  comprehensive he attempts to crowd  too much into  his plays, without due  regard for  the  discipline  of his form. As a result,  while the constant play of wit on a wide variety  of themes  may  amuse  and  impress,  this  breadth diminishes  the  dramatic force  that  comes from  concentration on  a  given  theme.  Another weakness,  one  to  which  writers  of  comedy,  particularly  of  satire,  are  prone,  lies in  the  dialogue. While  for  the most  part  the  language  is adequate-trite when  triteness  is called  for,  vulgar  or genteel   as  these  qualities  are  expected-the  dialogue at  times  reveals  startling incongruities and often  fails to distinguish adequately the characters. These  flaws, however,  in  the  context of  the  entire  work,  are  minor. The  plays  are  eminently stageworthy and  are  a valuable contribution to a genre  that  Canadian talent  has unfortunately neglected.

53




chran.icle




LETTER
FROM TORONTO


Robert McCormack






TERE IS A  SENSE ill which Toronto must  be, for its size and age, the least literary city in North America. I do not mean  that it has no writers. I shall  be saying in a moment  that  it has quite  a number.  Nor do I mean  that it  rejects them,  although  this is closer to the truth.  It  would  be truer,  however, to say that  it evades them. And it does this in so many  ways as almost to suggest conscious effort. In fact, there are times when one finds oneself believing in some kind  of sinister  plot  to keep the city forever  unavailable to the imaginations  of its citizens. That way lies paranoia.  But two events of the past year may illustrate what I mean.
The  first is the "rediscovery" of Morley Callaghan, which took place, as every­
one must by now know, last November. In its pure or newspaper  form this story has  all the simplicity  and  mass appeal  of the  best soap  opera-the poor young writer  from  the  provinces who makes good in the Big Time  but  then  returns  to his native  city  where  he is ignored,  his books banned  by the  public libraries  or scorned  by hick reviewers and left unread  by a doltish populace,  until, after years of obscurity,  he is rescued from  oblivion by a shrewd  national  magazine  (Mac­ Lean's) and  reclaimed for world literature  by "the  Dean of American critics" in the  pages of  an  international one  (The New   Yorker) . Needless to  say, this is caricature. Still, it does have some basis in fact.  Mr. Callaghan's books, including those set in this city, have frequently  been greeted with less than wild enthusiasm. And  perhaps  we should  also allow it a sort of "mythic" truth. For it seems pos­ sible that Toronto wants  to believe in it. In the last paragraph of his New  Yorker

54

LETTER FROM TORONTO



article,  Edmund  Wilson  suggested  that  the  reason  for  "the  current  underesti­ mation of Morley Callaghan" is simply "a general incapacity-apparently shared by  his compatriots-for believing that  a  writer  whose work may  be mentioned without   absurdity   in  association  with  Chekhov's  and  Turgenev's  can  possibly exist in our day in Toronto." This magisterial statement  permits us to feel at once proud  that  we have  produced  a  great  writer  and  guilty  that  we have neglected him,  and  there  are  few  combinations  of feeling that  your true  Torontonian re­ lishes more. "There's a moral in the story," observed The  Toronto  Star with stem satisfaction.  "It is that, despite the currently  fashionable outcry  about  preserving Canadian culture,  too  many  of us fail to recognize native artistic  talent  when it stares  us in  the  face. The  fact  is evident in our stolid ignorance  of Callaghan's genius in  our  midst." But it  remains  to be seen whether  "genius  in our  midst" will now be more  readily recognized, or whether  the whole story, moral and all, is not simply another  way of avoiding real contact with it. Will this curious affair have,  for  example,  any  lasting  effect on  the sales of  Mr.  Callaghan's books? I am  told  that,  as one  might  expect, sales of The  Many  Colored  Coat  increased considerably  in  both  the  United  States and  Canada  after  the appearance of the Wilson article. But it would be a rash prophet who would predict that Morley Callaghan would ever be a run-away  best-seller in his home town.
But Toronto  does have its best-sellers. The second event I referred to a moment ago is the success here of Phyllis Brett  Young's novel The  Torontonians. It  has been on the Public  Library's  ten-most-popular  list practically since its publication last  October.  So  here,  apparently, is an  instance  of the  city grappling with an image  of itself. Mrs.  Young's  story  requires  her  heroine  to  do  a  great  deal of brooding  over  the  differences  between  the  new suburb  which  she inhabits  for most  of the  book and  the old  Toronto  where she grew  up.  I don't  think  there can  be much  doubt  that  this contrast, and  more particularly the much-lingered­ over portrait  of the old city, have had  a good deal to do with  the popularity  of the book locally. But The  Torontonians is women's magazine fiction. The thema­ tic contrast  sags into  opposed  cliches, or even into a mere conflict of status sym­ bols. And  as for  the  portrait   of old  Toronto,  what  emerges  from  a  wealth  of evocative detail  is not a real city but a town called  Nostalgia with which we are already  overfamiliar. Once  again  we have  escaped  literature. Perhaps  the late Gilbert  Harding was right,  at least as far as writers are  concerned,  when he de­ clared  with his usual finality:  "Toronto is not a good address."
Yet Toronto  is the address for a good proportion  of the country's  writers, and presumably  they  find  something  interesting  in  the  place  or  at  least  something

55

LETTER FROM TORONTO



convenient about living in it. One  thing  they do not find,  however,  is each  other. I think  it was W. H. Auden  who once defined  an American intellectual as some­ one  who knows  all the  public transportation routes.  I doubt if this entirely applies  here. Toronto writers  are not usually rich and  they are scattered in every direction about the  vast  metropolitan sprawl  the  city  has  become. But  it is my impression  that, aside  from  the  occasional  party  for  a  visiting  celebrity,   they  seldom  meet. No  doubt in  some  cases this  is  just as well.  Certainly I do  not  want  to suggest that   there  should  be  some  kind  of "Toronto Authors'  Association" with  weekly meetings.  The  mere idea  is enough  to put  any  writer on the  next  plane  for Ibiza. There is a good  deal  to be said, too, for the absence of  the kind of ingrown clique that  can  be the curse of provincial literary  life. But cliques  can  also be productive (in  which  case  they  are  usually  called  "movements" or "groups"), and  the  lack of any  real  sense of community can  make  life more  difficult  than  it needs  to be. Some  talents need  relative  isolation  to  work  at  all,  but  even  they  can  have  too much  of it, and  for many,  isolation can  be both  discouraging and  damaging. This  applies   particularly to  the  young,  and  it  is of  course  the  young  who  are  most actively   doing   something about  it.  They   are   not  alone,   however,   and   I must attempt to  brighten the  possibly  rather grey  picture I have  been  sketching.
One  of the  oddest  developments of the  past  year  has  been  the  appearance of a  number of more  or less amateur night  clubs  with  a literary  turn  as part  of the entertainment. Perhaps six or  seven  of  the  places  I have  in  mind  have  sprung up  recently   in  various  cellars,  garrets, old  barns and   abandoned  warehouses in the  downtown area.  They  are  usually  called  something like The Village  Corner or  The  Purple Onion and  have  in  common a  devotion to  espresso  coffee  (the drinks  are  always  non-alcoholic), a generally  murky  atmosphere, a taste  for  ab­ stract   painting of  uncompromising ferocity,   and   a  clientele   of  roughly  under­ graduate age  or  a  little  older.  Most  of them  specialize  either  in  jazz or  in  folk­ singing   (which seems,  at  least  locally,  to  have  regained the  position  it  held  in the  lateI 94o's). But  some,  as I say, also offer  literature. The First  Floor  Club,  for  example, used  to harbour from  time  to time  something called  "Vocal Maga­ zine". This consisted  of  poets  and  short  story  writers  reading  from  their  works interspersed with  comedy  routines,  interpretative dancing and  what-not. I gather it  is now  defunct. But  the  Thursday "Literary  Evenings" at  the  Bohemian Em­  bassy  continue under the  direction of  John Robert  Colombo. Here  such  poets as  Milton  Acorn  and  Padraig O'Broin read,  and  there  are  folk-singers,I 6 mm. films  and  jazz. It is difficult  to take  all this very seriously.  Too  much  of the  tone is summed up  in  the  Bohemian Embassy's  somewhat wistful  description of one

LETTER FROM TORONTO



of its performers as a  "young Toronto poet who has  been  to California". Never­ theless,  the  audiences are  enthusiastic, a great  deal  of energy  is given  some  kind of literary direction, and, as one of the poets remarked to me, "This city is alive." On  a  rather different level  are  the  Contact Poetry  Readings. In  their  second year,  these  are  now  organized by Raymond Souster  and  have  moved  from  the small  art  gallery  where  they  began  to the  YM-YWHA  whose  Arts  Council has since  last  October been  a  co-sponsor.  With  the  aid  of a  Canada Council grant they  have  this  season  been  presenting not  only such  poets  as Francis Sparshott, George  Johnston and   (again)  Milton  Acorn,  but  also  a  number of Americans imported  for  the  occasion-Leroi Jones,  Louis  Zukofsky  and   in  the  new  year Cid  Corman (editor of the about-to-be-revived Origin) . The  quality of the poetry is a  good  deal  higher   here  and  the  whole  enterprise considerably more  serious. This   may  be  part  of  the  trouble. In  any  case, the  milieu  does  not  seem  to suit the  Muse.  The   YM-YWHA is a  new  building  with  all  that   means  in  terms  of bright  lights, low ceilings,  and  a large expanse  of heavily  draped window. Acous­ tically,  it  would  deprive  a  bull-frog  of resonance  and  it  tends  to  reduce  all  but the  loudest  poets  to something close to inaudibility. The  audiences, too, although there  is usually  a sprinkling from  the  coffee houses, are  on  the  whole  older  and  inclined   to  solemnity. They  frequently seem  to have  difficulty  responding natu­ rally  or  spontaneously to  the  astonishing presence  in  their   midst  of  an  actual, living  poet.  But  one  must  be  grateful to  Mr.  Souster   that   a  poet,  often  a  dis­
tinguished one, is in fact  there.
In   the  more  traditional form  of  the  literary  magazine there  have  also  been changes and   new  developments in  the  past  year.  The   Tamarack   Review   has undergone a  reorganization from  which  Robert   Weaver   has  emerged as a  kind of  editor-in-chief  over  the  old  editorial board. It is  perhaps too  early  to  tell whether this  presages  any  change  in  policy,  but  the  first  issue  (Autumn, 1g6o) with  Mr.  Weaver on  top  of  the  masthead suggests it  does  not.  This  is both  en­ couraging and  disappointing: encouraging because  the  magazine has maintained a  remarkably high  standard of  writing  over  the  past  four  years;  disappointing because  it seems  to  me  that  Tamarack  suffers from  a lack  of  focus, a vagueness  of  purpose that  sometimes blurs  its impact. Of  course  there  are  also dangers in a  purpose too  sharply defined, and  some  of them  are  perhaps illustrated by the new  semi-annual  Alphabet   edited   and   (literally)   printed by  James Reaney in London, Ontario. Alphabet  stems more or less, according to the  editor, from  the criticism  of Northrop Frye,  and  Mr.  Reaney  is very clear  about what  he wants­ "a  small  secret  looking  book  devoted  to the  proposition that  it is very interesting

57

LETTER FROM TORONTO



mankind  should  answer the terrors of the inner  and  the outer  world with a sym­ bolic fruit  and  an  iconic sea-beast." The  contents  of the first issue, with  one or two  exceptions,  follows this line and  it is all interesting  stuff. But it  does  read sometimes  as if it  had  been  written  in  an  ashram  somewhere  on  the  Brahma­  putra.  I have to confess to prejudice here, however, since for some reason I have never  been  able  to  work  up  the  hatred  and  contempt   for  science  apparently necessary to the true  believer in iconic sea-beasts. In  addition  to Alphabet, there have  been  one  or  two other  new publications  of  which  the  most substantial  is Evidence,  a quarterly  edited by Kenneth  Craig. I am afraid that  the contents of this one belong to a category I can only describe as "beatnickery".
Finally,  I  realize  that  although  I  have said  there  are  quite  a few  writers in
Toronto   I  have  really said very little about  most of them.  This  is because they are at the moment  busy writing and there is nothing  to be said about  that  except that,  with  luck,  1961  should  be a  good  year  not  just for  writers  here  but  for literature  in Canada.









review articles





A TALE RETOLD

Hugo McPherson



MORLEY CALLAGHAN. The  Many  Colored  Coat. Macmillan. $4.50.


FIVE YEARS ago  Maclean's magazine awarded Callaghan's short novel,  The  Man With  the  Coat, a  five thousand  dollar  prize.   This   story,   the source  of the  new  novel,  is the  history  of Harry Lane, a carefree young public relations man  whose unsuspecting friend­ liness   involved    him   in   a   fraud   trial; though he  was  merely  a  witness  against the  accused, the  affair  ruined his reputa­ tion   and   his  career.  In   defiance of  this freak   of   justice,   Harry  parades  about  Montreal in a shoddy  sports  jacket  made  for  him  by a  prize-fighter-turned-respect­ able-tailor-the very man  whose public testimony   had   stained  him   with   suspi­ cion.  In the  end,  the  prize-fighter-tailor, no  longer   able   to  bear  the  reproach of seeing  Harry in  the  tattered coat,  strikes him  a  blow  which  breaks  his  neck;  and  then,   recognizing   too  late   that   he,  not Harry, had   made  the  coat-that Harry Lane   had   never   been   a  fraud-he be­ comes   an   apostle,  a  convert  who   pro­ claims   the   innocence  of   the   crucified  Harry  Lane.
This   story,   with   its  angry   revelation of  the  world's  habit of  judging and  des­ troying   its  innocents (particularly  when
 they   protest   their   innocence,  as  Harry did)    marks   a   major  turning  point   in Callaghan's  exploration  of   experience. To  appreciate why  he  had  to  retell  it  in The Many Colored  Coat, and  what  the retelling    reveals    about  his   developing vision  we  must   look  briefly  at  the  road behind   him.   In  the  early   phase   of  his journey,    dating  from   Strange  Fugitive ( 1928),   Callaghan   cross-examined   un­ sparingly  the  claims  of the  politician, the humanist, the  sociologist  and   the  priest as guides  to  enduring  value,  and  ended, in  Such  is My  Beloved   ( 1934), by mak­  ing   a  broad   if   unorthodox  religious affirmation.  In  this  novel,  a  priest   who had  attempted to  reclaim  two  prostitutes
is  confined   by  his  bishop   to  a  mental hospital-forced, so  to  speak,   to  "give up  his own  mind". But  if  the  officers  of the   temporal  church   are   fallible,    the priest   (even  though he  is "mad" in  the eyes  of  the   world)    has   discovered the timeless   truth  of   "the  Church  in   her
implicit  being  . . . the   Church  not   of
this  world,  Love". This affirmation of a transcendent love  that  cuts  across all  the lines of man's temporal patterns and  in­ stitutions  was  a first   turning  point  for

59

REVIEW ARTICLES



Callaghan, but  it  confronted him  with  a new  problem. If man  commits  himself to a  value  that  exists  out  of  time,  how can he survive  the  terrible pressures  of a conventional, self-regarding world?
In attempting to answer this question Callaghan turned to  the  classic dilemma of the individual whose vision differs radically  from   the   mores   and   institu­ tionalized  truths  of  his  society.   Shaw's  Saint   Joan,  perhaps, was  his  archetype of  the  innocent, and   like  her   the  pro­  tagonists   of  the  next   three  novels  were all  destroyed:  Kip   Caley,  the  reformed  bank   robber    of   More   Joy   in   Heaven (  937), was  shot   by   the   officers  of  a community which  had  welcomed  him  as its   prodigal  son   until   he   revealed   his desire   to   redeem    all   criminals;  Peggy Sanderson,  heroine  of    the   beautifully constructed  novel   The   Loved   and  the Lost   ( I95I),  died   because   neither  the upper-caste   whites   of   Westmount  nor the   negro   untouchables  of   Montreal's lower   town   could   believe   in   her   dis­ interested   love;   and   Harry  Lane,   the glad-hand  public  relations man   (appro­ priately the  representative of a distillery)  died  because  the  "sober" members  of his community judged  him  by the same nar­ row  laws of acquisitiveness and  decorum that   governed their  own  lives.
But   if   the   prize-winning    Maclean's
account of  Harry  Lane's martyrdom  re­ vealed   mankind's neanderthal   instinct  to stone  the individual  who questions  the value   of  the  tribe,  it  did  not  solve  the riddle  which  Callaghan  had  proposed  at the  end  of  Such  Is My  Beloved:  Can  a man   be  innocent  in   the   contemporary world   and  survive  the  stings  of  its  self­ righteous  disapproval?  Like  Saint   Joan, Kip   Caley,   and   Peggy   Sanderson, the Harry  Lane   of  the  Maclean's  story  be-

6o
 came  a martyr-a crucified  ideal.  Yet Harry's  destruction  did   not   close   the subject of innocence for  Callaghan, for  a final question remained (a  question which    he   had    hinted  at   as   early   as I 935) :  If the   innocent  risks   physical death by defying  temporal values, or em­ braces   spiritual  death  by  compromising with  them, is it  possible  that   he  himself has  helped to  create  these  terrible alter­ natives?   Is  innocence  a  form   of  pride?  This is the question that Callaghan turns  to  in  The  Many  Colored  Coat,· and   he answers   it   with  rare  authority  and subtlety.
In Callaghan's retelling (at more than double  the  length of the  original) Harry Lane  survives  his ordeal, not  at  the  price of losing  his innocence but of recognizing that  innocence entails both  dangers and exceptional responsibilities. By  emphasiz­ ing  in  his  new   title   Harry's  relation  to Joseph,  the   favoured son  of   the  many­  coloured coat,  Callaghan   underlines his  hero's  inexperience.  Harry's  urbane background  and   his   freedom  from   the hard  necessities  which force  most  men  to struggle and  scrimp  and   calculate make him  at once  an object of envy and  a man  who  is  completely unarmed  with  know­ ledge  of  the  world.  Thus, when  his  esti­ mate   of   man's  integrity  proves   un­ founded-when an erring bank manager, hoping  to  spare his  family  humiliation, allows   the   prize-fighter-tailor's  incrimi­ nating  and mistaken evidence to stand uncontradicted - when this disaster strikes,  Harry, with  the  glistering probity of  a  Conrad  hero,  sets  out   to  vindicate his  pristine image   of  himself.   He  wears the  coat  of  guilt   which   his  judges  have made  for  him-wears it  defiantly to  tax them   and   haunt  them   with   the  know­ ledge  that   they  value   their  social  status

REVIEW ARTICLES



more   than  truth.  And  in  following   his vision  of  an  ideal  justice  he  alienates all of  the  people   who  are  important in  his world: his employer, his sweetheart (the daughter   of   a   judge),   his   journalist friends, his professional buddies. His only advocate, indeed, is Annie  Laurie, a wonderfully maternal  tart  who  embraces the human condition without prejudice, whose compassion and  acceptance of life includes  both   the  erring  bank  manager and  Harry Lane. From  this gloriously humane outcast Harry at last learns  the tolerance and  love which  he  had  lacked. As  the   novel   ends,   he   is  prepared  to mingle  with  the  jostling crowd on St. Catherine Street. He  will be terrifyingly alone,   he   realizes,   but   he   has   learned that    "innocence  was   like   a   two-edged sword    without   a   handle .  . .  if   you gripped it and  used it, it cut  you so pain­ fully  you had  to lash  out  blindly, seeking vengeance on someone  for  the bleeding." Recent literature  has  produced  no better  image   of  the   paradox  of   temporal  and  eternal, experience and  innocence.
The Statement of The Many  Colored Coat  compared with  the  frantic escapism of  America's "beat"  novelists  is  mature and  durable. The flight of Jack  Kerouac's heroes   to   high    and    holy   plateaux  in Mexico   is  powerful  if  hallucinated   ro­ mance. Callaghan,  by  contrast,  looks  steadily   at   the  contemporary  scene  and  probes  with   a   deceptive   gentleness through its  best-conceived  disguises.  Yet for  all  this  The  Many  Colored   Coat   is not   an   entirely   satisfying   novel.   In   a thanksgiving  review  in  the  New  Yorker (Nov.   26,    1g6o)    Edmud  Wilson   des­ cribes   Callaghan  as   "a   writer    whose work  may  be mentioned without absurd­ ity   in  association with   Chekov's and Turgenev's."  This  comment, I  believe,
 is a valid  estimate of the  subtlety  of Callaghan's vision, but  it neglects  the equally   relevant  question  of  style.
Since  World  War  I we  have  come  to
honour   the  unobtrusive  reportorial  style so highly that  we forget  its triumphs of precision  in Swift and  Flaubert and Hemingway, and  succumb to  the illusion that   a  good  style  is  really  "no   style  at all."  Callaghan's best short  stories are models of the  pellucid, flexible and apparently effortless prose which Swift described  as "proper words in proper places."  In  The Many Colored  Coat, however,  this  simplicity  often   becomes  a bland reflex, slippery with participles, progressive  tenses  and generalized diction
-a casual  cloak  which  obscures  the arti­ culated   muscle   and   bone  of  the  Joseph  beneath. It  is  unreasonable,   perhaps, to   demand  that    the   winnowed   vision of maturity be  projected  with  the imme­ diacy  and intensity of youthful discovery:  mature  vision  and  passionate immediacy are  rarely  found  in  combination. Never­ theless, the  texture and  colour  of  Callag­ han's  retailored coat  are   less  rewarding than    its   substance.  But   the   figure   of Harry Lane   is as  real  in  this  century as it  was for  the  biblical  writer. One  leaves the  book  with  the  hope  that  Harry, like Joseph,   may  yet  win  the  understanding of his brethren.





61

LA POESIE
DE NELLIGAN

Gerard Tougas


PAUL  wvczYNSKI. Emile  Nelligan, sources et originalite  de  son ceuvre. Editions  de de l'Universire d'Ottawa.


CET IMPORTANT  OUVRAGE vient  clore  plus d'un demi-siecle  d'etudes nelliganiennes. 11 manquait a Emile  Nel­ ligan,    le   premier   grand    poete   de   la
litterature  canadienne-franc;aise,   une
claire  definition de  sa  breve  mais signifi­ cative   reuvre   poetique. 11  fallait,  avant de  pouvoir   situer   Nelligan  avec  exacti­ tude,   depister   les  nombreuses  sources  de son  inspiration,  les  soupeser,  puis  arriver
a une  conclusion concernant  la  part  qui
revient   a  son  genie  propre. Or,  comme
le remarque avec  justesse M.  Wyczynski, si  tous  les critiques ont  evoque  les noms de   Verlaine,  de   Baudelaire  et   de   tant d'autres poetes  franc;ais  qui  auraient  in­ fluence   Nelligan   .a ses  debuts,   ces  rap­ prochements, toujours  vagues,  n'autoris­ aient   aucune  conclusion  motivee   quant a  la  valeur  intrinseque de son reuvre.
M.  Wyczynski,  avec  une rare  patience, a  epluche  toutes   les  revues  qu'auraient pu  lire Nelligan  pendant sa fulgurante carriere  de   trois   annees;   chaque  piste ainsi decouverte a ere suivie jusqu'a sa source.  Dans  la premiere partie  de sa minutieuse enquete, Wyczynski etudie chronologiquement le developpement de Nelligan, d'apres ses  lectures  et  les  imi­ tations que celles-ci lui auraient inspirees.
L'influence directe  de  Millevoye,   qui se fait  sentir  au  debut   de 18g6, entraine la conviction du  lecteur; celle de Chenier parait  etre   une  simple   rencontre.  Wyc-
 zynski  fait   preuve  d'une   ingeniosite  in­ discutable  lorsqu'il  dechiffre  pour   nous l'origine  du   pseudonyme  Emile   Kovar. Quant  a  l'effet   produit sur  la  sensibilite  de  Nelligan  par  sa decouverte de Baude­ laire  et  de  Verlaine,  le  grand  merite de Wyczynski   est  de  preciser   cet  effet,  de
fac;on a faire  ressortir, par  le  rapproche­
ment   des  imitations  et  des  modeles,   le genie  naissant du  poete  canadien. Enfin, les  pages   consacl'ees   a  !'influence de Rodenbach   et   de   Rollinat   retiennent notre   attention,  ne  serait-ce  que   parce que   jusqu'ici,  le  role  catalytique de  ces deux  poetes n'avait pas ete suffisamment souligne.
Abandonnant sa  methode  chronologi­ que,    probablement   parce   qu'il    n'etait plus   possible   de   suivre   d'assez   pres   la marche de  Nelligan,  Wyczynski  consacre les   trois    chapitres   qui    suivent    a   des aspects   particuliers   du   poete:  son  arne religieuse,   son  ideal,  son  acheminement vers  la  folie.  Le  dernier chapitre est une etude  technique de  la  musicalite du  vers nelliganien. Une  tres breve conclusion resume  le  travail accompli.
M.   Wyczynski,   qui   est   le   Directeur du   Centre de   recherches  en   littera­ ture   canadienne-franc;aise  a  l'Universite d'Ottawa,   a   reussi  dans   son   dessein: rendre  moins   obscur   le   mystere   de   la creation poetique de  Nelligan. L'import­ ance  de  sa  contribution aux  etudes  nel-

REVIEW ARTICLES



liganiennes peut  se  juger  par  la question que  l'on  doit  maintement se  poser:   que reste-t-il    aux   futurs  exegetes   de   Nelli­
gan?   Pour   repondre a cette   question, il
est   necessaire   d'examiner  de   plus   pres
la  methode de  travail de  M.  Wyczynski.
La  recherche des sources,  telle que l'entend  Wyczynski,   est   un   legs   de   la critique historique du  dix-neuvieme siecle.  Elle  repose sur cette idee, qu'avant
de   pouvoir    admirer  a  bon   escient,   le
critique  doit   s'assurer  qu'il   a  entre   les
mains  le prototype, non !'imitation. La difficulte-on  s'en   est   tot  aperc;u-pro­ vient  du  fait  que  toute  ceuvre  ressemble
a une  ou  a plusieurs   autres ceuvres.  En
outre, il est extremement difficile de prouver,  a mains   d'une declaration  for­
melle  de  !'auteur en  question, que  !'in­ fluence   de   tel  ecrivain, de  telle  page  a ete  consciemment subie.  Les critiques qui
 ant  fait  des decouvertes imaginaires d'in­ ftuences  "directes" sont   legion.  C'est  en raison  des  difficultes  inherentes  au  genre que la recherche des sources  est aujourd'­ hui  entreprise avec  beaucoup  de  circon­
spection.
II  est evident que  les  sources  mises  a
jour  par  Wyczynski  sont  ou  certaines, ou
probables,   ou  possibles.  Un   rapide  exa­ men  des  tres  nombreuses  sources  analy­  sees revele que seule  une minorite d'entre
elles  sont  a  peu   pres  certaines.  Voyons
ce  qu'il   advient  du  "Vaisseau  d'or,"  le
plus  celebre   des  sonnets   de  Nelligan   et celui  auquel  sont  consacr.ees  une  dizaine de  pages.
D'abord,   Wyczynski fait   etat   des
theories  emises  par  Alfred  Desrochers et Luc  Lacourciere, deux  "sourciers" parmi ses predecesseurs.  L'origine de  notre son­ net   remonterait,  selon   Desrochers,   au




Politics &  Religion in Seventeenth-century France

A STUDY  OF POLITICAL IDEAS FROM THE MONARCHOMACHS TO BAYLE, AS REFLECTED IN THE TOLERATION  CONTROVERSY.  BY W. J. STANKIEWICZ. "Jn this treatment of the   Huguenots and   the  long, slow  loss  of  their   liberties, he   (Dr. Stankiewicz)  is presenting us with  the  paradigm of our  own  problems. This is a book  which all  who believe in  civil  liberty and   religious toleration  should   fortify  themselves by  posses­ sing."-ROY DANIELLS, Vancouver  Province.
256 PAGES	         $6.oo


French Existentialzsm

A CHRISTIAN   CRITIQUE  BY F. TEMPLE KINGSTON. In  this  study, Dr. Kingston makes a  comparison between Christian  and   non-Christian existentialism, neither  conceal­ ing  his  own  position nor  dealing unfairly with   those  of  whom   he  is  most  critical. The  intelligent English reader, lay  or  academic, will find   this  an  excellent intro­ duction  to  a   whole   area  of  modern French  life  and   thought   with   which  he   is unlikely to be well  acquainted.
244 PAGES	6 X 91NCHES	$5-50


llniversity oronto



6g

REVIEW ARTICLES



"Bard"  de  Thomas Gray,  et  selon   La­
courciere,  a  Une   saison   en   enfer   de
Rimbaud. Remarquons qu'il  s'agit  la  de
deux   suppositions,  non   de   sources   au­ thentiques.  Wyczynski   suggere   d'autres sources   et  quelques-unes parmi  celles-ci nous  semblent plus  pres  de la  realite.
Choisissant comme   point  de  depart   le
symbole central du vaiseau, Wyczynski, textes  a l'appui, demontre que c'est la un des  themes prin.cipaux   de  toute  !'evolu­ tion  de   Nelligan, a  partir   de  1897·  Ce theme correpond .a  la  jeunesse  du  poete. Puis,  ayant etabli au  debut  de sa demon­ stration  la  filiation   avec  Baudelaire  et Rodenbach,  Wyczynski  compte sept  ex­ emples  du  vaisseau  utilise  comme  image poetique dans  Les {leurs du  mal  et  deux autres   chez   Rodenbach.  Enfin,   un   ex­ emple   tire  de  Rollinat semble  indiquer que   Nelligan  s'en  est   probablement inspire.
C'est   a  partir  de  ce  moment  que   le
lecteur   sera  tente   de  fausser  compagnie
a son  guide.  Oubliant qu'il  est  question
d'un simple  sonnet   pour  lequel  il  serait
abusif  de trouver des sources pour chacun de  ses  quatorze  vers,  Wyczynski  ajoute
a sa  premiere  liste  les  noms  de  Joseph
Autran  et   de   Fernand  Gregh. Chemin
faisant  il  declare:  "...  nous   ne   pou­ vons    nous  empecher  de   citer   deux strophes de  "La barge  d'or" du  Vicomte de  Borelly,  ou  le  navire   est  taille  de  la meme   maniere que   celui  de  Nelligan." Puis,   Wyczynski   de   conclure:   "On  ne serait   pas  surpris   de   voir   Nelligan   col­ legien   decouper  ce  poeme  et  le  garder dans  son  carnet personnel."  ( p. 240)  Le lecteur, a  son  tour,  ne doit  pas  etre  sur­  pris   de   trouver  reunis  dans  cette   com­ pagnie  d'autres  invites.  En  effet,  sous les pressantes   comparaisons   de   Wyczynski, Viele-Griffin,  Millevoye   et   Lamartine
 viennent s'ajouter au cercle deja  trap nombreux.
QueUe conclusion tirer de ce periple poetique? Simplement que Rodenbach, Baudelaire et  Rollinat ant  inspive,  beau­ coup  plus  probablement que  ne  l'ont  fait Thomas Gray  et  Rimbaud, "Le  vaisseau d'or" de   Nelligan. Cette   relative  certi­ tude  permet a  Wyczynski  de  nous  expli­ quer   le sens  d'un  vers  reste  obscur:

Degout, Raine et  Nevrose  entre eux  ont disputes.

Les  trois   "marins  profanes" sont   sortis des reuvres  de Rodenbach, de Baudelaire et  de  Rollinat. Quant au  reste  de  l'echa­ faudage, il  doit   rester   dans   le  domaine des  suppositions pures  et  simples.
Cet  exemple nous  autorise a  juger  de la valeur  d'ensemble d'Emile Nelligan, sources  et  originalite   de  son  muvre. Par ce  que   cet   ouvrage contient  de  decou­ vertes  indiscutables ou  meme  probables, il   constitue  une   clef   du   monde    nelli­ ganien  qui   fera  longtemps  autorire. La patience de  detective et  la sure erudition avec  lesquelles  l'auteur a examine toutes  les   sources   imaginables  de   l'reuvre de Nelligan   est  digne   de  taus  les eloges  et
·ecarte la possibilite que le meme travail puisse etre refait profitablement, du mains  dans  ses grandes  lignes.
Ceci  admis,  il faut   reconnaitre que Wyczynski eut  beaucoup gagne  a ne pas conduire le  lecteur   par   toutes   les  pistes qui,  a un  moment donne  de son enquete, ant   pu   lui   paraitre   prometteuses.  Plus irritant encore  est l'usage qui  est fait  des citations.  Le   critique  ne   nous   epargne aucun philosophe, aucun ecrivain parmi ses  pref,eres.  A  compter  de  la  premiere page  de  son  Introduction, ou  sont entas­
sees des  references a Gaetan Picon,  Jean
Duvignaud,   Sully   Prud'homme,  d'An-

REVIEW ARTICLES



nunzw, un  panorama de  Ia pensee europeenne se deroule devant le lecteur,
qui  ne s'attendait pas a un  tel festin  pour
honorer le seul  Nelligan.
Lorsque,  dans   son   dernier  chapitre, "Le  secret  musical," Wyczynski  en arrive
a I'originalite du  poete,  il commente fort
heureusement  Ia  qualite  particuliere de Ia poesie de Nelligan: "L'originalite des rimes  de  Nelligan ne  resulte   done  point des desinences joliment composes  de trois elements  phoniques;  elle   ressort   plutot de  Ia  justesse  du  ton  que  Ia rime  ajoute au  flou  du  lyrisme." Mais  encore  aimer­ ait-on  etre   sur,   apres   tant   d'influences



A CALL TO THE CLERISY
 depistees,   que   tous  les  exemples   choisis soient  purs,  debarrasses autant  que  pos­ sible de  toute  pensee  etrangere.
Les  futurs exegetes   de  Nellig,an  s'en­ gageront sans doute  vers une  redefinition de  son  ceuvre.  Gerard  Bessette  vient  de traiter  Nelligan   tres  differemment  (Les  images   en   poesie    canadienne-franfaise,
Beauchemin,  I g6o,  pp.  2 I  5-274). D'autres viendront qui,   demandant   a
Paul  Wyczynski  Ie secours  de  son  erudi­ tion,  tacheront  de   trouver  Ie  mot d'un secret  qui,  pour  lui,  ne  se  definit  pas  et
"se devine  a peine".










S. E. Read


ROBERTSON DAVIES, A Voice   from the  Attic.  McClelland & Stewart. $s.oo.


THE   ATTIC is  "America's  at­ tic"-Canada-and the   "voice"  is  that  of   Robertson  Davies,    critic,   novelist, playwright, wit, humanist, actor, teacher, editor,  publisher,  and   bibliophile,  but above   all  passionate  lover  of  literature, who  stands  firm  in  his  belief  that  books are  still a shaping  power  for  good  in  this world    of   chaos   and    uncertainty.   His comments on  Daniel George might   well be applied to  himself:

He   is   a   deeply  and  curiously  learned man,  and    one   of   the   few   critics  of  our time  whose  good  opinion is  a great  compli­ ment.  One  receives the   impression  from  his  writings that  he  makes  it his  plan   to read   any   book   whatever that  no  one  else can    bear    to   read.  He   seeks   dated  books of   travel,   moribund   theology,  discredited
 science,    and   outmoded  poets,    and    from them  he    culls ... little gems  ... His essays  are   not   intended  primarily to  make you   laugh;   [he]  does   not    crack  jokes. Rather, the  climate of  his  mind   is so salu­ brious,   so  invigorating, that  dull   thoughts and   heavy   cares  are   dispelled  by  contact with  it.

Mr. Davies  is a scholar, but a merry scholar,   who  despises  pedantry and   the sour  academic, who  lashes  out  at  irasci­ ble  critics,  and  who  utters a  clarion  call to his readers  to  join  him  in  the  ranks  of the  "awakened  clerisy".
"Clerisy"  is   a   precious   word,    and, though  Mr.  Davies  would  have  it  other­ wise, I doubt that  it ever  passed  as com­ mon   currency  in  the   English  language. But use it  he must  for it "has no familiar

REVIEW ARTICLES



synonym" and   is  "little known   because what   it  describes  has  disappeared".
But   what    does   the   word   describe?
What is it  that  has  disappeared?

The clerisy  are  those  who  read  for  pleasure, but   not  for  idleness; who  read  for  pastime but   not   to  kill  time; who  love  books,  but do  not  live  by books.

In  years  past,  especially  in  the  I gth  cen­ tury,  the  clerisy, he says, held  "sovereign­ ty in  the world of letters". Through being united   it  wielded  great  power,  but  now, alas!  if it exists at  all, it is disunited, and "has    been    persuaded    to    abdicate  its power   by   several   groups .  .  .  ,  which are  part  of the social and  business organ­ ization   of   our   time."   Awake,  then,   oh Clerisy!   Shake   the   slumber   from   your eyes;  gird   up   your  loins;  and   go  forth  once   again,  as   your   forebears   did,   to fight   the   battle  for   good   books,  good reading,  and   a   better   culture.  Such   is Mr.   Davies'   clarion  call,  and   such   the stated  purpose  of   the   book.   But   Mr. Davies  is  not  really  a  pugnacious   batta-



66
 lion commander, leading his Christian soldiers    once    again    to    war.    Having uttered the  call  in  his opening pages,  he then gets down to his real purpose-to entertain  the   reader    (with   some  John­ sonian   instruction  thrown  in   for   good measure)  through  a  series  of   brilliantly written  essays on  books  and  on  reading.
To   describe   the  book  in  detail   is  im­ possible.   True,  it   does   have    a   stated unity    ("Reading  is  my   theme"),   but this  allows   for   much   pleasant  wander­ ing,  chiefly  within  the  time  confines  of the    I gth    and   2oth   centuries,  though occasionally   into   earlier   ages.   But   Mr.  Davies  is no  ordinary reader. Rather  he is possessed  of  a  d<emon, a curiosity  that  drives   him   into   obscure,  dusty   places (the   attics  of   literature), and   in  them  he  rummages with  such  obvious  delight that  most  readers  must  feel  delight   with him.  Take for example his chapter, "Enjoying and  Enduring", the  section  of the   book  that   laughingly  discusses  such works  as Howard's Word   Power,  Peale's The Power  of Positive  Thinking, or Steincrohn's Live  Longer  and  Enjoy   It: it  takes  for  its opening, not  one  of  these
2oth   century  guides   to  lovely  life,  but rather a real attic-piece, Samuel Smiles' Self-Help,  with   Illustrations  of  Charac­ ter  and  Conduct, a  work  of  the  middle Igth  century, which  Mr. Davies  discusses with    great    relish.   With   even   greater relish   and   more   exuberance  he   intro­ duces  the  modern  reader to  Fowler,  the phrenologist, who  wrote  a  pioneer work, Science  of Life, in  the  field of sex educa­ tion,  and  to Pye Henry  Chevasse, author of   another  noted   book   on   sex,  Man's Strength  and  Woman's  Beauty.
This    love   of   the   forgotten  book   is further illustrated in sparkling comments on   Henry   Cock ton's    novel,    Valentine

REVIEW ARTICLES



Vox the  Ventriloquist  (a  Victorian  best­ seller), on  Joe Miller's Jests or the  Wit's Vade-Mecum (that most  famous  of  18th century  joke  books), or  on  Puniana, so aptly   advertised  as   "An   Awfully   Jolly Book  for  Parties".
These   portions of   A   Voice  from  the
Attic  are  brilliant fun,  but  to  over-stress them   is  to  do  the   book  as  a  whole  an injustice. For  in  nearly  all  cases  the  dis­ cussions of these  works  (and  many others  like  them)  are  but   prologues  to  deeply serious  and   sharp,  razor-edge  comments  on  some  of  the  great   and  really  signifi­ cant   writers  of  our  own  age,  as  well  as on   some   writers    who    have    achieved popularity without true  greatness.
With  a  sure  touch   and   with  astonish­
ing   agility   Mr.    Davies    moves   rapidly from  the  works of Havelock Ellis, Freud, and   Jung  to  the   novels  of  Joyce  Cary
 or  the  humour of  Stephen Leacock.   He discusses  at  some  length   the  reading of drama and   its  relationship to  live  thea­ tre.  He   looks  at  some  of  the   problems  that  face  the  creative writer  and briefly peers  into  those  wells of  inspiration from  which  writers   take  sustenance. He  gives a   cool    appraisal   of   Maugham,  the  novelist  (he  "is  a  masterly  conjurer, but we  can   only   be   deceived   once") ,  and  takes   a  close   look   at   The  Robe    (that prime   example   of  a   best-seller   by  the "Lutheran  Dumas", Lloyd   Douglas)  to probe   the  reasons  why  it  achieved   such phenomenal sales.  He  then   compares it with  Robert Graves'   King   Jesus, which, though  a  much   greater  work,   was  not a  success  at  all.   ("There is  intellectual and  moral  and  spiritual sinew in Graves's book  which   makes   the   best-seller   seem vulgar   and   naive.") .  And   finally,  after






GERARD TOUGAS
Associate Professor  of French  in  the  University of British  Columbia


HISTOIRE   DE  LA LITTERATURE CANADIENNE   FRANCAISE

A  complete  survey   of  writing in  French Canada  from   1763   to  the   present day,   containing a  special chapter  on  the   relationship between French and French Canadian literature. Generous bibliographical notes, together with  an index of all  authors and  works mentioned.

Presses  Universitaires de  France,  rg6o.   286  p. 	Price:  $3.00


Order  your  copy   from:
UNIVERSITY  BOOK STORE, UNfVERSITY OF   BRITISH COLUMBIA VANCOUVER  8,  B.C.





REVIEW ARTICLES



THE CANADIAN MO][)ERN LANGUAGE REVIEW



stressing
the  practical aspects of instruction

LITERARY ARTICLES TEACHING METHODS LESSON HELPS AUDIO-VISUAL AIDS REVIEW  MATERIAL OBJECTIVE TESTS
TERM EXAMINATIONS
BOOK REVIEWS



Editor
Dr.  George A. Klinck
194  Dawlish  Ave. Toronto 12, Canada

Business  Manager
Mr. P. K. Hambly, 34 Butternut St.
Toronto 6,  Canada

published  quarterly  by
The  Ontario  Modern  Language
Teachers'  Association

Subscription $4.00  per  annum
Send for  a sample copy



This  book   was   not   undertaken  to  explain the   world-only  to   make    some   comment on   literature  as   it   has   developed during the   past   century. But   to  divorce literature wholly   from   the   world  in  which   it  is  pro­ duced  is   absurd;  it   is,   indeed,  to   deny  that  literature  is   anything   more   than   a form   of  entertainment  which  may,  in   the  hands  of   finical  writers   and   critics,  be lifted  to   the   status  of   a   minor   art.  But there is  nothing  minor  about it, and when  it  truly   mirrors any  part  of  the  soul  of  the  time,    it   is   revelatory  and    prophetic  as nothing  else  can   be  in  quite the  same  way.

But  no  such  summary as  I have given can    really    indicate  the   flavour  of   the book,  or  its  real  values. To  appreciate it at all  fully  one  must read it  at  a leisurely pace so  that the  joy  that is within it  can be really  tasted and its rich  intellectual contents slowly  digested. Certainly not many books  of  like  value have  appeared in  the  history of  Canadian critical  writ­ ing,  and rarely does  such a pleasant criti­ cal  work  appear  anywhere.  It will  surely  appeal  to   nearly   all   readers  who   can  lay   a  claim   to  discrimination and  taste in  the  world of  books.  They may  be  irri­ tated    (and  rightly  so)   by  Mr.  Davies' occasional sweeping generalizations, they may  take  issue  with some  of his critical evaluations.  But   the   irritations  will   be offset   by   the   pleasures  to   be  found on almost  every   page.  For   Mr.  Davies  is not   only   a  man possessed   of  a  dremon; he  also  has   at   his  command an   urbane wit,   a   sharp  critical  mind, and  a   vast store of  learning, which he  carries lightly and on  which he  draws without  ostenta­
tion   or   pedantry.

68







THE QUALITY OF SPACE

DAVID WALKER.   Where the  High   Winds  Blow.
Collins. $3-95·

WE   HAVE BECOME   accustomed  in   the novels   of   this   century  to   the   shifting quality of  time,  but   the  shifting quality of  space,   while   we  live  with   it,  is  yet strange to  us.  It is  this  new  element   of our   everyday   lives  that   David    Walker uses  with  great  skill  in  Where the  High Winds  Blow.
In this novel about Canada, people breakfast  in  Montreal  and   have   dinner the same day on the shores of the Arctic Ocean. Yet  the  space  which   they  cover is   only    a    footstep   beside    the    great distance of  one  hundred and  fifty  miles by   dog-sled   in   the   winter   north. It  is through such  shifting perspectives as this that  Mr. Walker  creates a fresh and exhilarating  vision  of  this  country.  We are lifted out of the singular view of the pavements of  the  East  or  the  prairies  of the   West   to  an   encompassing  view  of size,  depth,  complexity, and   vigor.  The airplane  has   burst   through  the   barrier of   distance,  and   Mr.   Walker    uses  this literal fact   to  bring  a  new  sense of  free­ dom  and   unity  into  our  living  present.
Just   as  he  looks  at  that   which  is and sees   in   it   heroic    proportions,  so   Mr. Walker   looks at  people  and  sees in  them heroic   proportions. In  fact,  Mr.  Walker may   be  said   to  celebrate  the  return  of
 
the  hero,  life-size.  A hint  of  his  purpose is  given,  surprisingly enough,  in  one  of his  pieces  of  light   fiction,   Digby,  when one  of  the  characters reflects  "how  sad it  is that  the  epic  poem  is never  written in  this  epic  age."  Since   the  publication of  Digby  seven   years   ago,   Mr.   Walker has   obviously   been   exploring  ways   in which  to express his conception of this century.
He    established   the    pattern   for   his study   of   the   modern   hero    in   Harry Black,  published  in   1956.  He   has  used that  pattern again, both  in  the  plot  con­ tours  and  in  the  outlines  of many  of the characters,  in   Where  the   High    Winds Blow.  The   similarity  of  the   two  novels is  particularly marked  in  the  hero  him­ self, for Simon  Kepple Skafe  is, in effect, Harry  Black  transported  from  India  to Canada and  given  a different  profession. Skafe  can  be  described,  as  Harry Black is, as a combination of  "Al  Capone and Good-time  Charlie  and    Sir   Galahad". Both   are   leaders  of   men,   legendary figures,  handsome,  physically   strong,   li­ terate,   and   lonely.  Both  are  honourable (except   in   the   matter  of   their  friends'  wives)   and   ruthless. To   both,   love   is only  an  episode,   an  interruption  in  the pursuit   of  their   d:emons,   and   for   that  reason   the   wives   of  both   men   divorce  them.   Both,  however, have   "frigid   mis­ tresses"-Harry Black's  the  snow-capped Kachenjunga  in   the   Himalayas,  Simon Skafe's  the  Arctic.   Both  have  protagon­ ists  whom  they  admire and  fear:  Harry Black's   is   a   man-eating   tiger,    Simon Skafe's  is the  north. Both  men  test  their cunning  and   strength   against  this  pro­ tagonist  on  three  occasions,   and  on  the third   they   both   experience  a   religious conversion  which  brings  them  peace  and  humility.

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



The  difference in  their  professions, however,  is a significant  one. The tiger hunting soldier-hero of Harry  Black  is clearly  too specialized  a figure to be a meaningful hero of an age of great experiment and  discovery.  Therefore, Simon  Skafe  is the industrialist-hero, the creative man  of action  who wants  money "to  make  things  with  to do things  with", a  Jason   wresting   from  the  frozen  north its   treasure  of  pitchblende,  a  visionary who    sees   that    "the    world   is  coming North",  and    who   dreams   of   the   day when  there  will be shipping "by nuclear submarine tanker  under the ice-cap".
Just    as   Simon-Harry-Black-Skafe   is Mr.   Walker's  hero   figure,   so  the   two women  in  the  hero's  life are  Profane and Sacred   Love.  They   appear  not  only  in the  two  recent   novels;  they  are  a  stand­ ard  item  in  all  of Mr.  Walker's  novels­ in  his  earliest   one,  The  Storm  and  the Silence,  and   even   in   the   light   fiction, Geordie  and  Digby.  The one  is always  a sturdy, luscious  wench  (usually  dark)  "a  queen, a  gypsy,  a  courtesan"; while  the other is a slim  (usually  fair)   coolness.  In general the  hero  turns  his  feet  into  the path  of  the  slim  coolness  while  at   the same   time   he   looks  back  over   his  left shoulder.  Yet  the  fair  one  has  him,  he is  hers.  And  in  case  we  miss  the  point,  her   name  in  Harry   Black  is  Christian, while  in   Where  the   High  Winds  Blow it  is· Grace.
Any  assessment of  Mr. Walker's serious   novels  must   necessarily  be  tem­ pered   by  such   heavy-handedness  in  his symbolism.  It can  perhaps best  be  illus­ trated in  the  endings, for  they  have  the curious   effect,    not    of    expanding  the meaning of  the  novels,  but  of  reducing it.·  In   The  Storm  and   the   Silence, for instance,   the    hero    meets    his   demise
 skewered   on   the  antlers of  a  royal  stag when   he  happens to  fall  into  a  bog-pit where   the   animal  lies,  and   there   is  a similar   distasteful  shock   in   the   ending of  Where  the   High   Winds Blow.  After an   Arctic    storm,    Simon    Skafe   crawls out  of his tomb-womb-a cleft  in  the ice of his "frigid mistress"-newborn  into religious     conv1ctwn.   The    death-and­ resurrection  theme  which   is  brought  in here  simply  does  not  fit  the  rest  of  the novel.   I   think   it   is   possible   that    Mr. Walker     has    been    over-awed   by    the modern  symbolist  movement. While  it  is true    that    the   movement  gave   a   new vigour  to  writing at  the  turn  of  the  cen­  tury,   now,  a  half   century  later,   it  has lost  most  of  its  virtue  and   tends  to  pro­ duce    simply   another  kind    of   literary cliche.   It is  the  very  tiredness   of  many of  his symbols  that  creates  in  the  reader a  puzzled   disappointment  in   Mr.  Wal­ ker's   work.    I   wish   he   would   let   his characters come  out   of  the  bog-pit   and  stand on  their   own  meaning. They   are  sturdy  enough to  do  so.
For  apart from  the  weary  symbols,  the astonishingly  good   thing    about  Where the   High   Winds Blow  is  that   the  work as    a   whole    abounds   with    life.   Mr. Walker  is,   of   course,    a   superb   story­ teller,   and   in  the  moments of   crisis-a hurricane on  the  New  Brunswick  coast, a strike  in  a mine,  a  blizzard  in  the  Bar­ ren  Lands-we  are swept  along  with  the subtly   gathering  forces   to  the   peaks  of exciting   climaxes.   But   there    is   much  more   here  than  just   narrative  skill, fine  as  that   is.  Mr.   Walker   has  also  an unusual    alertness   for    the    sights    and sounds  of the  land  and  its creatures,  just as  he  has  a  lively  interest in  the  people
-bush pilots,  St.  James   Street  tycoons, the  French-Canadian fisherman Roland,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the    Eskimo    hunter   Avakana.  Beyond this,  he  is concerned with  "the  convolu­ tions  and  involvements of  reason,  trifling motive, misconceptions,"  that   lie  behind human action, and   with  "the shades  of grey  which  are  the  truth"  about   human beings.  This  kind  of  COffitplexity  is much more  marked, and  as a result  the charac­ ters  are  much  richer, in Where the  High Winds  Blow  than  in  Harry  Black.  Simon Skafe's  dark  love,  for  instance, has  burst out  of  her  confining symbol  to  rival  the hero  in  stature and  many-sidedness. Her  growth  is  evidence of  Mr.   Walker's ex­ ploring  mind   which,   I feel,  is  not  yet satisfied.   In    Where  the    High    Winds Blow   he  has  created  a  fascinating  work of  intricate texture, but  this  will  not  be his last  work,  nor,  I think, will  it  be  his best. 	MARGARET STOBIE
 A COMMONPLACE REGARNISHED

s.  MORRIS  ENGEL.    The  Problem of  Tragedy.
Brunswick Press.  $3.50.

FROM THE  8 I  PAGES which  make  up  Mr. Engel's   book  we  may,  indeed   ought   to in  all conscience, subtract  the  following:
I 6  pages  at  the  beginning, consisting  of blanks, acknowledgement,  dedication, title   pages,  table   of  contents,  foreword, and  epigraph; and  in  the  text:  I 2  pages (out   of   I 8-some of  it  seems  to  have been  necessary)   rehearsing the  views  on tragedy    of   Aristotle,    Hegel,   Schopen­ hauer,   Nietzsche, Hume,   and   Jaspers; IO pages  retelling   The  Dibbek   (includ­ ing one page  on  the early  fortunes of the play  and  the  life of  its  author); 3 pages



G.  R.  STEVENS	CANADIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS
VOLUME  ONE:   SIXTY YEARS OF  TRIAL AND ERROR









Illustrated

AT  ALL BOOKSTORES
$8.oo
 
Inspiring,  hilarious and   shameful:  the   history  of the  first  sixty  years  of  Canada's railroads can   best be  summed  up   in   these   three   words.   From  what was   at   first   a   glorious    failure  has   emerged  the C.N.R., largest railway system  in  the  world  outside the  Soviet  Union. Now  Colonel Stevens tells its colourful and  dramatic story.








CLARKE IRWIN
TORONTO- VANCOUVER

BOOKS IN REVIEW



paraphrasing  the   stories  of  Hosea   and Job;  2  blank  pages;  and  2  pages  review­ ing  the  Oresteia trilogy.  This  all adds  up to  45,   a   formidable   subtrahend   which strongly   suggests   that   Mr.   Engel,   like Chaucer's  Sergeant   of   the   Lawe,   has "semed   bisier  than  he  was."  But  36, the arithmetical   remainder,  is  not   in  itself an   unseemly   number  and   may  still  be enough  to  provide answers  to  the  prob­  lem of  tragedy.
The  problem   of  tragedy  as  Mr.  Engel
sees  it  is  that   "the  kind   of  experience provided  by  the  encounter with  tragedy is  irrational  and   founded  upon  an  illu­ sion."  What this  means,  I  think,  is  that  tragedy seduces  the spectator into  believ­ ing  he  understands what  the suffering  of the  hero   is  all  about  and  why  it  is  in­ evitable. But,  the  argument  runs  (and   I think   I  follow  it  fairly  enough, in  spite of   the   undergrowth),  tragedy,    consi­ dered  as  it  ought to be from  within  and on  its  terms,  only  pretends to,  but  does not  really,  explain human  suffering.  The appearance  of   causality    in   the   tragic conflict,   the   appearance of  reason   and logic  behind    man's  woe,  is  appearance only.   The  conclusion then   is   unavoid­ able:  "Although  tragedy   does  confront us  ... with   a  mystery,   this  mystery  is not   Dionysus  [Nietzsche],  not   Will  [Schopenhauer]   not 	the    Absolute [Hegd])    but    simply   the   mystery    of human suffering, and   before  it art  fares no   better  than    science,   philosophy   or religion." This   is  not  to  say,  Mr.  Engel rightly  cautions us, that to become aware  of  the  illusion   in  tragedy is  to  cease  to be  enchanted   by  tragedy.   What it  does indicate is  that  the  consciousness  of  the failure of   tragedy  to  provide  answers  is "the   only    real    piece    of   knowledge" gained   by  the spectator.
 To  answer   this  last  sally,  I  shall  only pause   to  throw   at   Mr.   Engel   his  own phrase    "a   higher    rationality"  with   all that  such  a  phrase  should  suggest  to him but apparently does not. But the main weakness  in  his  argument, as  argument, lies   elsewhere,   namely    in    his    super­ rational refusal,  delivered with  a  strange sense  of  nostalgia or  disappointment, to allow   a   system   or   world-view  even   in the  work  itself  to  provide the  answer  to the  tragic  question.  Of  course  art  is not Revelation.  Of  course  no  ultimate  solu­ tion   to  the   predicament  of   existence   is possible   without  recourse   to   a   theory  or  a   philosophical   attitude.  Is  this   not the  great  disillusionment, if not  the great eclaircissement,  of   life   itself?   Surely what  Mr.  Engel  has examined here, sometimes   quite  eloquently, is  the  most basic   of   commonplaces,  the   one   com­ monplace   which    emerges,   or    should  emerge, from   every  sophomore  bull  ses­ sion.  But  perhaps it  is salutary  occasion­ ally   to   have    the   great   commonplaces regarnished for  us and served  up in small books.
S. WARHAFT




THE WITCH WITHIN

MARIE-CLAIRE BLAIS, Mad Shadows (La Belle Bete,  translated by  Merloyd Lawrence) . McClelland and   Stewart. Cloth $3.50; paper, $1.95.

BEFORE FINISHING the  first  chapter  of this novel,  I had  that  sinking feeling  all composition teachers   have  experienced reading the  intensely  subjective  outpour­ ings  of  an  adolescent mind.  But  by  the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



time  I  had  read  half  of  the  book,  I  was caught in the  world created by the author's nineteen-year-old imagination. She had proved  the validity of Conrad's stricture on  the Romantic sensibility, that it  must  "in   the  destructive element  im­ merse". Miss  Blais  has  plunged  into  her nature and  written a parable out of what she   discovered   there.  Like   other   figur­ ative  narratives, this  novel  can  be under­ stood  on  more  than  one level. A religious­ provincial   interpretation  appeared  last summer in  The Tamarack Review.
The   reader  who  is  not  familiar  with
Catholicism in Quebec may  be pardoned if  he  finds  other   modes  of  appreciation. Freud,  for   instance,  would    appreciate the  mother's love  for  her  idiot  son,  and the   daughter's  hatred  of   both,   not   to mention   her   idealization  of   her   dead father:  "Far  off  in   her   childhood,  she



A  FEW COPIES LEFT

More  Letters of
Duncan Campbell Scott

(:md   series)

Selected and  Edited  by Arthur S.  Bourinot (with some  personal
recollections by the  Editor)
Editor
The  Thomson, Lampman and  Scott  Letters,
I st  series,
At  the  Mermaid Inn, etc.

PRICE $2.50
LIMITED EDITION

ORDERS TAKEN FROM:
Arthur S. Bourinot
I 58 CARLETON  ROAD ROCKCLIFFE, OTTAWA
 could  see her father, the  austere  peasant, the  maker  of  bread.   When  he  tilled  the virgin   loins  of  the  earth, he  was  pene­ trating to the heart  of God." The daugh­ ter's   concern    with   the   farm   and   with making   bread   become  in  this  light  per­ haps   a  little   too  obvious,   as   are   many of the motifs  that  run  through  the novel. But  like Emily  Bronte,  though  Miss Blais may  tell, she  never  explains.  As a  result Mad   Shadows  has  the  convincing irra­ tionality    and   vivid   detail   of   a   dream  (and   dreams   are  frequently  mentioned in  it).  Fortunately  it  also  has  an  ima­  gistic  complexity   and   unity   of  purpose  which  elevate  it  to  the  realm  of art.   Its many   striking   scenes   convince,  not   as having    been    recreated   from    observed outer  reality,  but  as having  been  created for  the  first  time  from  felt  inner   reality.
A single  strand will  have  to  suffice as



The
Fiddlehead

a Q,uarterly
:kfagazine of Prose and Poetry

for a subscription to THE FIDDLEHEAD, or  a sample copy, apply to  THE FIDDLEHEAD, University of New  Bruns­ wick,  Fredericton, N.B.   I    year,  $2.00;
2  years,   $3.75;  3 years,   $5.00.



73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



a sample  of the figurative quality  of the narrative. Because  of the daughter's rela­ tion   with   her   mother, she  is  governed  by   "passions   that    seethed   within    her. Wickedness  was  her  second  self;  she  was like  those  beings  who  lead  two  separate lives,  one   by  day,   and   a  more   sinister one   by  night."  The   wrong   attempt  at solution  of the  problem is simple  escape. In   Chapter  I   the  reader   is  told  she  is ugly;  Chapter  6  begins  "In the  middle  of  the   night   she  suddenly  turned  over in  bed  and  felt consumed   with  pleasure,  imagining  that   she  was  beautiful." She goes  to  a  dance and   meets  a  beautiful, blind young man  with  "pure-white hair". She   falls   in   love   and    entrances  him, partly   by  telling   him   she   is  beautiful. They   marry, but  when  her  husband  re­ gains  his  vision,  he  leaves  her.
The  woman, Isabelle-Marie, goes back to   live   with   her   mother  and   brother. "Her soul  withered  .  .  .  She  was  grow­ ing  thinner, uglier,  as crabbed  as  an  old witch."  After   this  description it  is  not surprising  that    a   few   pages   later   she finally   gives  vent   to  her   hatred  of  her brother,  Patrice, by  tempting him  to get his face over  a  pan  full of water.

Her  hand hesitated in midair and  then, triumphant, it  plunged Patrice's head   into the  boiling water. This hand was  as  strong as  a  claw   and   Patrice, who  did   not   even cry out, was taken unawares as a human sacrifice. After  her  impulse had   been  satis­ fied,   Isabelle-Marie  went   down   the   dark stairs  leading to  a  part of  the  house  which  had    been    closed    since   the   death  of   her father.

Here,   as  frequently  in  the   novel,  what seems perverse  is in reality a necessary purging, a preparation for something positive:  "Shaking  off  the  deathly  bur­ den  which  has oppressed  her  for so long, Isabelle-Marie  finally   began   to  breathe

74
 freely."   No   longer   under  a  compulsion to  be a witch  to Patrice, "she  now  baked bread   for   him,   made  up   his  bed   with clean   sheets,   and   let  him   wander  with the  horses."  But  she is unable to come  to terms    with    her    mother,   Louise,    who finally  orders  her  out  of the  house.  Later she returns and  acts out  the second and unredeeming   half    of   her   destructive role:   "Isabelle-Marie hurled the  lantern into   the   driest    sheaves   of   straw.    She thought  that   it   was  Louise's   land   that she  was  destroying but  suddenly she realized  that   it  was  God's  land."
The  light  and  the  dark,  the  witch  and the  provider, the  fire  and  the  water  are images   capable  of   enlargement.   Miss Blais has linked them with others equally suggestive-the sun  and   blood,  the  mir­ ror  and   the  lake,  the  green  and  dark  of the  woods.  They  interweave in  patterns controlled by  an  imagination  which   the sympathetic  reader  must  admire. Strik­ ing  and   readable,  Mad   Shadows  is  an impressive  first  novel.
ELLIOTT GOSE


THE EVER-BEARING CHRONICLE

MAZO  DE   LA   ROCHE.   Morning at  jalna.
Macmillan. $3.50.

MORNING  AT  JALNA is  the   sixteenth volume   of  the  Whiteoak  family  chroni­ cle,  apart  from   the   author's  successful  three-act  play   published  in   1936.  Al­ though Mazo  de  Ia Roche  has  also  pub­ lished  fully  as many  books not concerned with   the   Whiteoaks, her   reputation  as novelist   will  continue  to  be  linked   with the  family  she  has made  known  through­ out  the  world.  If  Morning  at Jalna can-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



not  diminish that  reputation, it  certainly offers  nothing to  increase it.
Chronologically this novel  becomes  the second   in   the   series,   preceded  only   by The  Building of  ]alna    ( I944), one  of the  best  books of  the  whole  sixteen.  The events   in  Morning  at  J alna  take   place about   I863-ten years after  those in The Building of Jalna.  There still  remains   a thirty-year  gap    in   the   family   history, since   the   next   novel,   Mary    Wakefield (I949), is set in  the  year  I893·
Miss  de  la  Roche's fertility   in  the  in­
vention of incidents has  always  been remarkable,  and   at   least   quantitatively there   is  no   falling   off   in   Morning   at
]alna. A few episodes-particularly the boating   expedition of  the  three  children
-are developed with characteristic verve   and   vividness   of   detail,  but   too maQy   are   so  scantily   treated  that   one
 wonders   if  the  author  just  got  tired   of them.  For  example, the  comic  potential­ ities  in  the   pursuit, capture,  marriage, and   escape  of  Lucius  Madigan  are  dis­ posed of in a few summary pages.  Some­ thing   similar   seems   to   have   happened with   what   appeared  to   be  the   central theme   of   the  novel-the  appearance at Jalna of  a  slave-owning family  from  the American   South. That  the   impact  on Canada  of  the   American  Civil   War   is only  lightly  portrayed  may  be  regretted as a lost opportunity, but  a more  serious defect   is  the   huddled-up  conclusion of this  part   of  the   narrative.  Everyone at Jalna  is  delighted  when   at   last   Lucy Sinclair   is  hurriedly  bundled   off   with her  blacks  and  baggage,  and  the  author herself  seems  no  less  glad.   The  White­ oaks   had    never    solved    the    problems  created by the  presence  of  Sinclair;  now




Subscriptions are  invited for this  new  semi-annual devoted to the  iconography of the imagination.
Poems,  stories, articles, reviews by Jay  Macpherson, Daryl Hine, Richard Stingle, Colleen Thibaudeau, John Peter
and  others.
ALcpHA
13CT I
"serves as a useful  meeting place  for  some  of the
most  stimulating figures  in
Canadian writing ..."
ROBERT FULFORD,  Toronto Star
 







Send  $2.15  for  two issues  to ALPHABET,
I 7  Craig Street, London, Ontario.



Edited  and   printed by  JAMES REANEY (handset in
I 2   pt.  Baskerville) .


75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



they   could   just  drop   the  subject.  Miss de  Ia Roche also  drops  the  subject,  even though  the  reader   is  left  puzzled  about how Curtis Sinclair, earlier  reported as captured   by   the   Northerners   and    in danger of imminent execution  as a secret agent,  not  only  escapes  that   fate   but  is able   to   reappear  in   the   final   chapter fully restored to wealth and social position.
Adeline, the   eventual centenarian, appears in  Morning at  J alna  as  a  paler character  than   a   reader   would   expect from    his   acquaintance  with   her   else­ where  in  the  saga;  her  greatest  moments were  either behind  her  or  ahead  of  her. The  most   vividly   realized  character  in this  novel  is  the  half-breed  Titus   Shar­ row, whose bland  French-Indian exterior conceals  a  ferment of ambitious schemes, amorous,   artistic,    and    financial.   This  outwardly  diffident   young  Canadian, in pursuit  of   his  own  mysterious  purposes, outmanceuvres   everyone    else,   whether British-born or  American-born, child  or adult, black  or  white.  His morals  are  far from  admirable by any  standards except his  own,  but  he  is clearly  alive.  He  also appeared occasionally  in The Building  of Jalna,  without  being  so fully  character­ ized.   I   for   one   hope   we  shall   yet  see more  of  him. 	R. E. WATTERS

A SEARCH FOR ROOTS

ELI   MANDEL.   Fuseli   Poems.   Contact  Press.
$2.00.

PETER  BYRNE.  Once & Some   Words  Between the    Minutes.   Editions  Quartz.   (Address:
474   de  la  Lorraine, Montreal.) $r.50.

IN  HIS EDITORIAL  to  the  first  number of
Alphabet James  Reaney  refers  to  the  in-
 numerable literary gatherings he  can  re­ member    in   which    "the  Fall"   was   the main  subject   of  discussion.   What  struck  me  in  this,  as I said  to a  Montreal  poet, was   that    I   cannot   remember  a   single meeting in  Montreal  from   I940  to  I96o in  which   this   was  a  subject   of  serious discussion.  The  difference between   "the Montreal school"-from Scott  and  Klein to   Purdy   and Cohen-and  the   poets of   Toronto--from  Pratt  and   Finch   to Reaney and Jay Macpherson-is starkly revealed by  the  contrast.
Eli Mandel clearly  belongs with the Montrealers: a few of the poems are practically parodies of Layton, e.g., "The Dialogue of Last  Mountain Lake", "Map of   Love",  and    "In  the   Caves   of   My City". But  he  is also  embroiled in  meta­ physical   problems  of  the  "dualist" To­ ronto   type   (vide  "Biopsy"), and   study­  ing  Frye,  he  has  bitten   off  a  good  deal of Blake and  Yeats, so that  the  difference between   the   "schools"  begins to   be blurred.
The  fact    is   that    since   about    I950
Canadian poets  and  poetasters have  been concerned with metaphysics, directly  or implicitly, in  a  way  that   was  quite  un­ known   to   the   socially-conscious   poetry  movement  preceding. It could  easily  be argued that  political  leftism  was replaced by  a  troubled  metaphysical  questioning here  just  as it  was in  England.
In   Eli   Mandel  this   theme   originates in  personal  anguish  and  culminates in cosmic  agony:

Read in  the  water how  a drowning man sings of a free  green life.

He  writes  then   his  "Mr. Mandel's  Sun­
day  Service" :

I  have    heard   singing  and    thought   how singing maddens  the   singers   because their

BOOKS IN REVIEW



mouths are open in  a shriek and the strained  muscles    of   the   faces    pull   down the   eyes  in   a  clown's cry   ....
This cosmic   song   was  sung   my  murderous friends  by  you   who   raped  the   bear's   girl before   you   hurled  her   in   the   pit  and   you in  whom   the  stake is never  still.

One  could  go  tb  some  length  to demonstrate how  this  poetry  expands  on a  view of life as an  ordeal  in  an  intoler­ able  limbo   (pp.   32, 31), an  unredeem­ able  place  of  suffering,  where love  and reason   carry   on   a   futile  dialectic  (pp.
I 3,   44) ,   where    any   possible   God   is absent  or  invisible   (p.  I 2). It is  rhetori­ cal   poetry   like   George   Barker's  in   his ranting early  style  (not  his formal  best); and   it  records   a  transitional  turmoil   of philosophical  anguish and   personal   des­ pair.   Essentially   tragic,  it   is  somewhat purified   and   lifted   above   the   chaos   of actuality by  the  will  of  the  poet  and  his
 feeling  for  language. The  poem  on  Wal­ lace  Stevens,   despite   its  sceptical  nega­  tions  that  out-do Stevens,  is as  crisp and detailed   in   its   phrasing  as   the  master  himself.
Peter   Byrne's   book,   though    it   is  a small  one,  is  not  to  be  therefore  under­ rated. It  is  an  odd   and  beautiful  piece of  prose  writing, in   English,   published  by a French  group in  Montreal. The  in­ fluence  here  comes  from  France-some­ times  the   English   reads  almost  like  translation, e.g., "only  what  lacks is real"
-but the  "theological ideas"   are  really
on   the   same   plane    as   Eli   Mandel's. This  in fact  is the characteristic French would-be comic statement of the same human  condition, a sort  of Chaplinesque pathos    showing  the   individual  within "that  tremendous absence" .  .  . against "the empty   sky"  .  . .  "a   great   painless





Mean.Jin

QUARTERLY


Readers of Canadian  Literature  will be interested in  Australia's leading literary quarterly, Meanjin, now in its
20th  year  of  publication. Here
will  be found a cross-section of the best  work  written by Australian
poets,  short  story  writers, literary and art  critics, together with commentaries on  national and international affairs.

PP.  128-$4.50 a year  (posted)

The  University if Melbourne




77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



silence".
It is an  amusing book,  and  a  painful one    (we   are   not   yet   in   that   painless silence)   that  I would  greatly  recommend to  the  amateur  of  Canadiana.  Coming from  a young  man, it is Existentialism in a   minor   and   personal  mode,   but   per­ fectly   authentic.  How   differently   from the  English  writer  he writes  of  isolation: "Still   assuming  that    the  lack   of  com­ munication  was   somehow   my   fault    I struggled so hard  to overcome it that  my nerves   got   the   best   of  me  and,   to  my surprise,  I  found I   had   my  hands   on my  fellow  actor's  neck,  strangling him!  But  I had  a  further  surprise.  Apparently he had  felt  the same  impulse  at  the same time  and  was  strangling me!  I realized that   this  simultaneity would  be  the  only agreement we would  ever reach and thenceforth considered all  the  other actors  as simply  inexistent insofar  as this was  compatible with   all  of  us  being  on the  same  stage  and  performing in  what­ ever  this  is  together."
Obviously,  we  need   to  think   through some  elementary  philosophical problems, as  Plato   would  have  said.  Both  religion and art are the flowering of science and philosophy; i.e.,  the  state  of  knowledge and  thought always  provides  the  ground in  which  religion  and  poetic  imagination find  their  roots,  relig on
lar or universal form  of imagination  (i.e., religion   is  bad  poetry)  and  poetry  itself the  particular, more  speculative, more complex  and   adventurous form   (poetry is  the  highest   religion) .  Our   poets,  like those   of   Europe,  have   discovered   that they  were  living  and  thinking  in mid-air, and   now   they   are   trying   to  find   roots which   neither  science   nor  religion  is  at the  moment  equipped  to  provide.
LOUIS  DUDEK
 THE SEAS OF FAIRYLAND

FRANK   NEWFELD.   The   Princess  of Tomboso.
Oxford. $2.50.

ANNE  WILKINSON.   Swann   and   Daphne.
Oxford. $2.50.

Too OFTEN  nowadays the  writer  of  chil­ dren's  books   is  so   tenderly   concerned about  the   susceptibilities  of   his   young audience that  his  work  becomes a bland, innocuous,  unexciting   dish   of   pablum. Avoid   trauma  at   all   costs!   In   my  son John's  copy   of  The   Gingerbread Man the  author assures  us,  when  the  fox  with a   final   snip-snap   gobbles   up   the   last quarter  of   the   runaway,  that   after   all Gingerbread  Men are  meant   to be eaten. A great   deal  of  contemporary children's literature   smells   too   obviously   of   the psychological  clinic;  it   is   over-scrupu­ lous,  inhibited and  consequently lacking  in  gusto,  humour  and  excitement.
It is  refreshing, therefore,  to  find   in The Princess  of Tomboso the  magic,  the charm,  the   forthrightness  of  Anderson. This  story,   a   translation  of  a   French­ Canadian  fairy   tale,   makes   use   of  fa­  miliar,  but   always   effective  devices: objects  having  magical  properties; a hero;  a   cruel,   wicked    Princess;  over­  whelming odds for our  hero  to surmount. The  story  moves  along  at  an  admirable pace; the  magic  is pure  and  astounding; the   hero   is  properly  heroic;  the   cruel  Princess  is  punished  for  her  wickedness by being left  at  the  end  of the story  with a  nose  a  foot   long  disfiguring  her  once beautiful   features.  Serves   her   right!
No  attempt has  been  made  to  palliate the  cruelty or  violence.  "The King's soldiers rushed to the room and captured Jacques  and   beat   him   nearly   to  death

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and  flung  him  out  the  window.  For  five days  and  nights  Jacques lay in  the  ditch unconscious." Our  hero,   however,  sur­ vives  this  and   worse, and  if  Jacques  can take  it,  so,  I  imagine, can  my son John. The  compact text  is  admirably  com­ plemented  by   Newfeld's  charming  and lively   illustrations,  many    in   gay,   eye­ catching  colours.   These,  like  the   story itself,  retain   the  fairy-tale quality of  re­
moteness  in  time  and  place.
Anne  Wilkinson's Swann and  Daphne is intended for  children somewhat older, from,   I  would   say,  ten  to  twelve  years. It is  a   humourless,   melancholy  story, rather ponderously academic in  its attempt to  mingle the  traditions of  nine­ teenth-century  fairy   lore   with   Greek myth   and   transplant  the   whole  to  the very  realistic  contemporary  setting,  tele­ vision studio  and  all. It is a  book written
 for children by an adult adult; contrived, tidy, studied. The elements  of the  narra­ tive  which  ought   to  provide the  delight of magic  are  unconvincing and  the  inci­ dents  which  comprise   the  plot  are  lack­ ing  in  interest  and  excitement.
Swann    and   Daphne  appear  out   of nowhere  in  place  of a  swan  and  a  birch tree  which  also  appear out  of  nowhere. "...  two  fat  babies  rolled  on  the  grass beside   the   pool."   Swann,  has   feathers on  his  head,   and   Daphne  birch   leaves on hers. They are  adopted by the  Whites (birdwatchers)   and    the   Greens    (gar­ deners).  Eventually, in   spite  of   the parents'  protectiveness, the  children are subjected   to   life   outside  their    homes. They   suffer   jeers  at  school,  then  adula­ tion;  they  suffer  stardom on  a  television programme;  they   suffer   the  discomfort of   hair    wigs.   Eventually,   they   admit










3  NEW  BOOKS
FOR  CHILDREN

THE  PRINCESS OF   TOMBOSO,  designed  and   illustrated  by Frank   Newfeld. A  popular French-Canadian  fairy-tale retold in  a magnificent four-colour picture-storybook. For  ages  5 to  8_      $2.50.

SWANN  AND DAPHNE, by Anne Wilkinson; illustrated by Leo Rampen. A  modern  fantasy  by  a  distinguished writer  about  two strangely 'different' children. For  ages  6  to  g.    $2.50.

THE MAP THAT GREW.   Written and  illustrated by  Selwyn Dewdney. An  introduction  to  map-reading  combined with   an  ex­ cellent adventure-story. For  ages  8  to   1 1.    $2.75·

OXFORD


79

BOOKS IN  REVffiW



defeat and  run  away  together. They  live idyllically   on  the  shores  of  a  lake  until the   arrival of  a  flock  of  swans.  In   the depth of his being Swann  recognizes his kinship   with  the  birds  and,  riding  upon the  back  of  one,  he  flies away  from  his beloved   Daphne.  Griefstricken, the  girl roots herself on the shore of the lake and fulfils   her   destiny   by  becoming   a   tree like  her  namesake in  Greek  myth.  Twice a  year  the  swans  pass over  the  lake,  and among them  is Swann, now completely transformed. He  pauses briefly to visit Daphne.  "He  sings   and   whistles   and wraps  his  feathers round   her  thin  white bark, and Daphne bends down her branches and  embraces him."  As a result of  these  two  brief  meetings  per  year  they "live   happily   ever   after". These  inevit­ able   words   rather  incredibly   bring   the story  to  an  end.
The seas of fairyland are  indeed  peril­
ous  if  we  try  to  navigate them  in twentieth-century  powerboats; it  would be  safer,  I  think,   to  trust  ourselves  to  a nutshell  and   let  the  seas  take  us  where they  will.
J. DEBRUYN


A STUDY OF
IMAGES

GERARD BESSETTE,   Les  images  en    poesie canadienne-fran<;aise. Editions   Beauchemin.

PROFESSOR  BESSETTE,   already   well­ known  in  French Canada as  a  poet  and  novelist,   has  given   us  in  this  volume  a stimulating and  original study of French­ Canadian  poetry.  Although  not  without shortcomings, this  tropological  study   of nine  French-Canadian poets   (Cremazie, Frechette, Beauchemin, Gill, Desaulniers,

8o
 Choquette, Morin, DesRochers and  Nel­ ligan)   presents  a fresh  approach to  their  work  and   offers  as  a  bonus  a  wealth of provocative  observations  about  both French and  French-Canadian  poetry   in general.
The book  is divided into  four  sections. The first  chapter, "Les   differente  sortes de   tropes",  provides  a  system  of  classi­ fication   that   takes   as  its  starting   point  Dumarsais' eighteenth-century Traite  des tropes.  Bessette  recognizes  five  basic tropes:    ( 1)   comparisons,  both   general and  specific;   ( 2)  metaphors, both  simple and   compound,  the   latter  sub-divided into  substantival, verbal, and  adjectival­ adverbial types;   ( 3)   assimilations, which are   copulative,  appositive  or  expletive;
( 4)    symbols,   defined    ( p. 39)    as   "une metaphore obscure, qui, au lieu  de n'avoir qu'un premier terme,  en compte plusieurs, entre  lesquels  le  second  terme semble  hesiter,  mais  qu'il  suggere  tous"; and   ( 5)   visions,  "la  figure   par   laquelle le  poete  affirme  ou  laisse  entendre qu'il reve   ( ou  a  reve)' qu'il imagine, qu'il   a une   vision,  qu'il   fait   un   souhait, etc." (p.  40). Five  secondary types  of  images are   also  defined:  personification,  trans­ position   (which includes  synesthesia  and  concretization) ,  ascending,  horizontal and   descending  comparisons.
The second  chapter,  "L'evolution  des tropes   en   poesie   fran aise",
to  apply   this  system  of  classification to the figures used by French poets from Corneille to Valery, in  order  to show  the evolution towards "modernite".  There  is no  indication  why  Corneille and   Valery were  chosen   as  the  limits  of  the  experi­ ment   and   the  reader is left  to  conclude that   modernity  is  somehow   related  to Mallarmean   symbolism.   Numerous  sta­  tistical   tables  are  included, giving   totals

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



and   percentages  of  each   type  and  sub­ type  of figure  in  a sample  passage of the work  of  the   particular poet  under  con­ sideration. One  gathers  from  a foot-note on  page  53 that   the  sample consisted  of
750 lines of verse, although the Corneille
and  Racine samples  apparently included twice  this  number of lines. There is no explanation  why  750  lines  was  decided on  as the  base, or  what  means  was taken to secure  a "representative sampling". In fact,  the whole statistical apparatus is disappointing; there  is, for example, no criterion of  significant variation, and Corneille  with    65   tropes    and    Racine with    101  are   thrown  together  in   the same   table   as  "classiques". Despite the unsatisfactoriness  of   the   statistical   ap­ proach, this  chapter, like  the  others,  re­ wards  the  careful reader  with  numerous incidental observations which  arouse  him either to  indignant  protest  or  to  further investigation.
In   the   third   section, "Les   tropes   en poesie  canadienne-franc;aise", the  princi­ pal  French-Canadian poets  from  Cvema­ zie to DesRochers  (except  Nelligan,  who has   a   chapter  to   himself)   are   then  analyzed   by  the  statistical  method  used in  the  previous  chapter. Fortunately the scope   of  the  studies   is  here   frequently enlarged :  "nous devrons souvent  quitter le point  de  vue  tropologique pour  entrer en  des  details   plus  specifiques"  (p. 99),  and  thus we have  a  systematic  re-exami­ nation of  French-Canadian poetry  from
1850 to 1933. The final  chapter contains an   extended  analysis   of  the   poetry   of
Nelligan,undertaken quite independently of Professor  Paul  Wyczynski's  Emile Nel­ ligan:    sources  et   originalite   de   son ceuvre, which  was published at about  the same  time.
Professor   Bessette  does  not  set  out  to
 tum our  views  of  French-Canadian poetry  upside  down,  and  he  does not  do so.  By  his  original  and   painstaking  in­ vestigation,  however,  he confirms  a num­  ber of traditional evaluations and  invites a  re-appraisal  of  certain  aspects  of  the work of the  principal older  poets; he also leaves his reader with  the conviction that  tropological studies  can  be  a  useful  tool for   research  in   Canadian  literature. There  can   be  no  doubt  that   his  book deserves   the   attention  of  every   serious reader  of  French-Canadian  poetry.
DAVID  M.  HAYNE


THE POLITICAL PERSONALITY

LORD    BEAVERBROOK,  Politicians  and  the  War,
1914-1916. British  Book  Service.  $g.so.

IN 1928, Lord  Beaverbrook published  a book, Politicians  and  the  War, which covered  the  period  from  August  1914 to the  summer  of  1916. The  study  was completed  in  1932  to  include the  com­ plex  negotiations leading  to  the  second Coalition  Government  in   December
19 I 6, when  Lloyd  George  became  Prime Minister. The whole work has now been reprinted in one volume, and  despite the number of  books  that   exist  on  the  First World   War,   it  is  still  the   most  studied and    analytical  account   of   the   secret springs in English politics during those crucial   years.
One theme emerges above all others throughout the  book-the problem  of combining effective  leadership with stable  cabinet  government. This  was not easy,  certainly  not   nearly   so  easy  as  in the  Second  World   War.   Party  divisions had   been   strained  almost    to   breaking

81

BOOKS IN REVIEW



over   the   Parliament  Act,  Home   Rule, and  the  vindictive speeches of Lloyd George. Once  the  war had begun,  the Liberals were  handicapped by an  Oppo­ sition  so embittered that coalition seemed hardly   possible.    Yet,   from    the    very nature of  the  crisis,  some  reconciliation had    to   come   if   the   war   were   to   be guided  by   a   cabinet  both   united    and accepted  by  parliament.
Beaverbrook does not so much  develop this  idea  directly, as illustrate it by dwell­ ing  with   almost   clinical   interest  on  the relations among the  most  powerful men in  the   two  parties.  First  there   was  the clash  between  Churchill and  Lord  Fisher at   the   Admiralty,  so  serious  that   it  led to   the   resignation   of   Fisher   and   the formation of  the  first  Coalition, without Churchill.   The   new   government   was held   together  by  Asquith,   to  whom  the traditional  Conservatives gravitated more easily   than   to   their   own   party   leader.  Asquith   represented  political   unity,   but his  handling of  the  war  revealed  an  "in­ veterate procrastinator". The author makes  it  clear,  however,  that  the  matter went   deeper-to the  lack  of  any  prece­ dent in cabinet organization  which  could deal  with  total  war. According  to Beaver­ brook,    two   men   provided    the   answer above  all  others:  Bonar  Law  and  Lloyd George.
Beaverbrook's attachment  to  Bonar Law   was  born   of  their  common  Cana­ dian   origin  and  confirmed   by   the  struggle over  the  leadership of  the  Con­  servative party  in  rgi r, which  had  been managed  more  by   Max   Aitken,  as Beaverbrook  then   was,  than  by  anyone  else. He  admired Law's capacity for  pre­ cise, detached thinking on political  prob­  lems,  his integrity and sense of duty.  The sketches   of  the  dour  and  cautious Con-
 servative   leader    are   among  the   most vivid  in  the  book,  although the  descrip­ tions   of   Lloyd    George    come   a   close second.   They   were   a   remarkable  con­ trast.    When    they   joined    to   form   the second   Coalition   in   Igr6,  Bonar   Law never    lost   his   mistrust  of   the   Prime  Minister, but   he   gave   him   such   com­ plete   loyalty  and   co-operation  that   the work   of   politics   could   be   carried  on without  serious   blunders,  leaving   Lloyd George  free  to  guide   the  War   Cabinet.
What  Beaverbrook does   not   say   di­ rectly  is that   the  negotiations  leading to the  second  Coalition  were  made possible largely  because  of his own  initiative. The immediacy of   his   analysis   comes   from the  notes  which  he  made  at  the  time  as the  hidden  political  manipulator. These  notes    had    what    he   himself    called    a "photographic"  quality, and   his  camera was   often   a   subjective  one.   His   judg­ ments  make  it  clear   that   he  was  drawn instinctively to self-made men,  or  to men with  a  bold  and  adventurous  flair.  It is

BOOKS IN REVIEW



striking how often  he interprets their ambition in  terms  of duty  or self-abnega­ tion  and  assesses his own  love of political intrigue  in   terms   of   national  necessity. Even  his  more   trivial  judgments are  re­ vealing,  as when  he suggests  an  ordinary note  from  Lloyd George might  rank  with the  Gettysburg  address,  or  when  he  dis­ misses   Churchill's  painting  as  a  "calm amusement." But  these  are  mere  threads, woven  into   a  whole   that will  remain   a minor  classic  for  both  Englishmen and Canadians as  long  as  they  are  interested in the  political  personality within  the structure of  cabinet government.
A.V.TUCKER


ORDEALS
AND REWARDS

RALPH  GUSTAFSON.  Rocky   Mountain  Poems.
Klanak Pres.

RALPH GUSTAFSON'S  ordeals  by  moun­ tains,  undergone during a  climbing   tour of  the   Rockies,   and   his  consequent  re­ wards,    are   recorded   for   us   in   Rocky  Mountain  Poems.  The  obstacles   he  en­ countered  were  inevitable; stones  on  the path, mud,  muskeg,  mosquitoes, were  to be   expected.   The  obstacles   his   poems provide,   however, are  not  essential.
A major problem arises  from  an  over­ consciousness  of what  he  is  doing-writ­ ing poetry-which  tempts  him  to prosaic anti-pedantic asides. Take "On Mountain Summit." Having told  us  he  and  his girl
"picked  flowers  . .  . I the  scarlet  paint­
brush I White   heart   and   pink   heather I
True yarrow  lupin", he  reminds  himself that  lists are  "always  I poor  kickbacks  in poems". Now,  first,  we'd   like  to  be  out
of  the  study   or  chalet and   back  on  the
 path,    picking;  and,    second,   we   don't agree;  we remember Shakespeare's  sixty­ sixth   sonnet,  Milton's   "Rocks,   Caves, Lakes,  Fens,   Bogs,  Dens   and  shades  of death". Nor   it  is  easy  to  see  how  Mr.  Gustafson    can   back   up   his   statement without   damning his  own  poems.
It is  understandable that,  to  get  the stark mountains across, Mr.  Gustafson should employ  simple  language; it is heartening that  in  this  he often  succeeds. When   this  simplicity   is  coupled   with  a manner reminiscent of Anglo-Saxon and
Icelandic poetry   ("Icarus and  Mallory I
Lacked  luck  and  were  legend"), it  pro­ vides  the  rippling  muscular  imagery   of "Mountains I Tipped   over   morning,
tree  trunks I Trimmed the  sun  to dazzle,
we tripped I On  ragged  dapple", and  of
these   passages   from   "In  the   Valley   of
Wenkchemna:
Spunsilkengreen
It hovered,
Bit  the  flower; And  went   ...

This was  high
In the  mountains
Of  hemlock And  rushing Marbled, Rockflour creeks.

Unfortunately,  plain    speakers   some­ times   become   vague.   After   taking  the trouble  to  delight us with  a  "spunsilken­ green" hummingbird, Mr.  Gustafson can only  say  of  the  forest  in  "The Walk  in
Yoho Valley" that  it  was "green, I Green
and  silence", of  the  forest  seen  "In  the Yukon" that  it was "green, I Green hang­ ings",  of  Laughter Falls  that  they  were
"cold  as  all  get-out among   green". The multitudinous forest  colours  go  unquali­ fied;   by  his  failure  to  avail   himself  of adjectives  to   shade   in   the   noun's   out­  lines, he gives us a surfeit of  greens.  This

BOOKS IN REVIEW



wrong  sort  of simplicity which  is mental sloth   informs  us  that   he  came  up  "the surest  way,   each  foot I Alternatively ahead",  that    he   put    the   flowers   he picked    in   an   empty  jamjar,  that    the "lupin   which    follows I The    sun"    has
"foliage [which]  folds I At  night".
But  I have  strayed   from  the  trail  of his style  to  pick  wild  tautologies. Let  me express  gratitude for  the  rewards  poems like "The Walk  in Yoho Valley" and "In the  Valley   of  Wenkchemna" offer,  for lines   like    "ten    thousand   flowers,   an
alpine  I tumbling of  them", and  "Hoo­
dooed  Baker  floated; we  had  seen I Her grounded the crown  all glow". They are worth  coming  all  the  stony  way for.
DAVID  BROMIGE


SHORT REVIEWS

OF THE FRESH batch  of titles in  McClel­ land  & Stewart's New Canadian  Library, the   most   welcome   is   undoubtedly  the translation of  Ringuet's classic and  pene­  trating   novel   of   rural  Quebec,  Thirty Acres   ($1.25). Morley  Callaghan is  re­ presented by one  of his best novels, More
]oy   in   Heaven   ( $1.00) , and   Stephen Leacock   makes   a   third  appearance  in the  series  with   Sunshine  Sketches  of  a Little   Town  ($1.oo), whose  rare  ming­ ling  of  the  milk  of  human  kindness  with the  lemon   juice  of satire  is  as irresistible  as   ever.   The   other  two   volumes   are Ralph  Connor's The  Man   from  Glen­ garry  ($1.25)   and  Gwethalyn Graham's Earth  and  High  Heaven ($1.oo).
The Man from Glengarry  poses the question  of  just  what   we  are  to  expect before   we dub a book "Canadian classic". It is not great  literature; it does not even
 present  a  plausible series  of  events.   Its epic  violence,  its extravagant pietism  and its  Daisy   Ashford   glimpses  into   wealthy life  present  a  picture  of  the  Canadian past   in   which   the   clouds   of  grandiose myth   are   every   now   and   again   swept aside  to  give  us  a  sharp vignette of  life in action: a sugaring-off party, a wake among Highland emigrants, a revival meeting  in   the   backwoods-the   things that   Connor  really   knew.   But,   though The Man  from  Glengarry may  not  pre­ sent   a  reliable   document  of  life  in   the past,   it   does   give   us  an   extraordinary view  of  the  Canadian  mind  at  the  time when  this  book  was a  best-seller; for  this reason   alone,   it  is  fascinating  and   per­  haps  a  little  disturbing.
In  Earth    and   High   Heaven,   which
aroused  considerable  attention  when   it first  appeared in  1944,  Gwethalyn  Gra­ ham   wrote   a   novel   on   the  subject  of racial  discrimination in  modern  Canada. Her    message   is  one   that   should    have  been   told,   but   perhaps  not   as  she   has told  it.  For  the  novel  wears  poorly.  The theme   is so  inadequately  assimilated, so woodenly  presented in  didactic dialogue and   soliloquy,   that    both   message   and  novel  fail  in  the  end   to  convince.  Like gentlemen, good  novelists  never  tell; they leave  one  to  find  out.

* 	* 	*
AMONG THE  curious,  unclassifiable, but
interesting volumes that  come  to an  edi­ tor's    desk   is   The  Face    of    Toronto (Oxford, $3.00), a  volume  of  sometimes beautiful   and   often   devastating archi­ tectural and   topographical  photographs of   Toronto   by  Ralph  Greenhill;  Alan Gowans has introduced them  by an  essay on  the  city's  styles  of  building.
G.W.

CfiNfiDifiN LITERfiTURE -1960

















A	CHECKLIST	EDITED  BY INGLIS   F. BELL


ENGLISH-CANADIAN

LITERATURE
compiled  by Inglis F. Bell





COLLECTIONS
BARBEAU,   MARIUS. Huron-Wyandot    Tradi­ tional   Narratives in  Translations and Native Texts. Ottawa, Queen's Printer.  338  p.
CLARK, ELLA ELIZABETH. Indian  Legends  of
Canada.  Toronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart. I77  p.
COLOMBO, JOHN   ROBERT, ed.    The   Varsity
Chap-Book. Toronto,  Ryerson, I959·   28  p. (Ryerson  Poetry Chap-Book  I 89).
JENNEss, DIAMOND.  The Corn  Goddess and Other Tales  from  Indian Canada. 2nd  edi­ tion.   Ottawa, Queen's Printer. I I I  p.
Lamplight Poems  No.   I. Toronto, Hawkshead
Press,  I 959· Broadsheet.
NELSON,  GEORGE   E.,   ed.   Northern Lights.
Toronto,  Doubleday. 736  p.
RICHARDS, STANLEY, ed.   Canada  on   Stage: a Collection of  One-Act Plays.  Toronto, Clarke Irwin. 324  p.
ROSS, MALCOLM  MACKENZIE,   ed.  Poets  of the
Confederation.  Toronto,  McClelland &
Stewart, I30  p.
SMITH, ARTHUR JAMES MARSHALL, and  FRAN­ CIS REGINALD SCOTT,  eds.  The  Blasted  Pine. Paperback   edition.   Toronto,    Macmillan. I38   p.
SMITH,  ARTHUR JAMES  MARSHALL,  ed.   The
Oxford  Book  of Canad ian  Verse   in  English and  French. Toronto, Oxford University Press.  445  p.
WEAVER,  ROBERT, ed.  Canadian Short Stories.
London, Oxford  University Press.  420  p.


FICTION
BEATTIE,  JESSIE LOUISE. The Split in  the  Sky.
Toronto, Ryerson. 2 I4  p.
BENNETT, ETHEL  MARY   (GRANGER).   Short  of the  Glory. Toronto,  Ryerson. 333  p.

86
 BIRNEY, EARLE. The  Kootenay Highlander. London, Landsborough Publications. 253  p. (First  published  as  Turvey. Toronto,   Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart, I949.)
BLAIS,  MARIE-CLAIRE.   Mad    Shadows.   Trans­
lated  by  Melroyd  Lawrence.  Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland &  Stewart. I 25 p.
BLONDAL, PATRICIA.  A Candle to Light the  Sun.
Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart. 3 I 6  p. BORNEMAN,  ERNEST. Tomorrow is  Now.  Lon­
don,   N.  Spearman,  I959· 205  p.
BYRNE, PETER.  Once  and   Some   Words   Be­ tween   the     Minutes.   Montreal,    Editions Quartz. Unpaginated.
CAILLOU,  ALAN. See  Lyle-Smythe, Alan. CALLAGHAN, MORLEY.  The   Many    Colored
Coat. Toronto, Macmillan. 3 I 8 p.
-. More  Joy   in   Heaven. Toronto,   McClel­ land  &   Stewart.  I59    p.    (New   Canadian Library No.  17).
CONNOR, RALPH. The  Man From   Glengarry.
Toronto,   McClelland  &   Stewart.  288   p. (New Canadian  Library No.  14).
COSTAIN, THOMAS B.  The  Darkness and   the
Dawn. Garden City,  N.Y.,  Doubleday, I959·
478  p.
DE LA   ROCHE, MAZO.  Morning  at   jalna. To­
ronto, Macmillan. 263  p.
FINDLAY,  DAVID KILPATRICK.   Search  for  Ame­
lia. London, G. Bles,  I959· 256 p. FRANCE,  CLAIRE. See  Morin, Claire.
FRY,  PAMELA. The   Watching  Cat.  Toronto, British Book  Service (Canada)  Ltd. 224  p. GALLANT,  MAVIS DE TRAFFORD.  Green Water, Green Sky. Boston, Houghton Mifflin,  I959·
I54  p.
GIBBS, WILLA. The  Dedicated; a  Novel.  New
York, W.  Morrow. 224  p.
-. The Two Doctors; a Novel. London,  Hod­
der  and Stoughton, I 959·  222  p.
GILLEN, MOLLIE. A  Star   of  Death.  London, Geoffrey  Bles.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



GINSBERG,  BERE JOSEPH.   Generation  Passeth
. .  . Generation Cometh.  Toronto,   Ryer­
son.  215  p.
GRAHAM, GWETHALYN.  Earth  and  High  Hea­ ven.  Toronto,  McClelland & Stewart. 254 p. (New   Canadian  Library No.   13).
HAILEY, ARTHUR. The  Final   Diagnosis.  Gar­
den   City, N.Y.,   Doubleday. 319   p.
HAILEY, ARTHUR and    JOHN   CASTLE. Flight into   Danger. Toronto, Ryerson, 1959, 162 p. HOMAN, ROBERT.  Dust   Before   the   Wind.  To­
ronto, Clarke Irwin. 223  p.
KEITH, MARIAN. See  MacGregor, Mary  Esther. LAURENCE,   MARGARET. This Side   Jordan.  To­
ronto, McClelland &  Stewart. 282  p.
LYLE-SMYTHE, ALAN. The  Plotters [by   Alan Caillou pseud.].  London, P.  Davies. 285  p. MACGREGOR,  MARY  ESTHER. The Grand   Lady. [by   Marian   Keith   pseud.].   Toronto,   Mc­
Clelland & Stewart. 222  p.
MACKENZIE,  DONALD. Dangerous Silence.  Bos­
ton,  Houghton Mifflin.  178  p.
MAYSE,  ARTHUR.  Morgan's  Mountain.    To­
ronto, McLeod. 21 1  p.
MILLAR, MARGARET   (STURM).   The   Listening Walls. London,  V.  Gollancz,  1 959·  236  p. MITCHELL, WILLIAM ORMOND.  Who Has  Seen the    Wind.   Reprint.   Toronto,   Macmillan.
300  p.
MONSARRAT,  NICHOLAS.  The  Ship That  Died of Shame  and   Other  Stories. London,  Cas­ sell, 1959.  228  p.
MOORE, BRIAN. The  Luck   of  Ginger   Coffey.
Boston, Little, Brown. 243  p.
MORIN, CLAIRE. Children In  Love. [by Claire France pseud.].  Translated  by  Antonia White.  Toronto,   McClelland  &    Stewart,
1959·  167  p.
O'HAGAN,  HOWARD.  Tay  fohn; a  Novel.  New
York,   Clarkson  N.   Potter.  263  p. PENFIELD,  WILDER. The Torch. Boston,  Little,
Brown. 367  p.
PERCY,  H.  R. The  Timeless Islands and  Other
Stories. Toronto,  Ryerson.  163  p.
POCOCK, WILFRED.  The    Three    Gifts.   New
York,  Pageant, I959· 375  p.
PREBBLE, JOHN.   The   Buffalo  Soldiers.  Lon­
don,   Seeker  &  Warburg, 1959.   223  p.
-. My   Great   Aunt  Appearing Day.  London, Seeker  & Warburg, 1959.  214  p.
RADDALL,  THOMAS  H.  The  Governor's Lady.
Toronto, Doubleday. 474  p.
-. At  the  Tide's Turn and  Other Tales. To-
 ronto,   McClelland &  Stewart, 1959.   I 79  p. (New   Canadian Library No.  9) .
RINGUET.  Thirty  Acres.   Toronto,  McClelland
&  Stewart. 249  p.   (New   Canadian Library
No.  I2).
RUNNING, ARNOLD.  Stay   But   Till  Tomorrow.
London, E. Benn,   I959·  I9I   p.
STERN, KARL. Through  Dooms of  Love.  New York,  Farrar, Straus &  Cudahy. 433   p. STILMAN,  ABRAM. Healer   of All Flesh; a Novel.
Toronto, Burns   & MacEachern, I959· 44I  p. WALKER,  DAVID. Where the  High Winds Blow.
Glasgow, Collins. 5 I 2 p.
WEAVER,  ROBERT.  ed.  Canadian Short  Stories. London,  Oxford  University  Press.   420   p. YOUNG, PHYLLIS  BRETT. The   Torontonians.
Toronto, Longmans Green. 320  p.

POETRY
ACORN, MILTON.  The  Brain's the   Target.  To­ ronto,   Ryerson.   I6    p.    (Ryerson    Poetry Chap-Book I 99) .
ADAMS,   MYRTLE REYNOLDS. To  Any   Spring.
Toronto,  Ryerson.  I 2  p.    (Ryerson  Poetry
Chap-Book 197).
ARTHUR,  CATHERINE.  Ferry. Toronto,  Hawks­ head    Press,    I959·  Broadsheet.    (Bagatelle No.  g).
AVISON, MARGARET    KIRKLAND.  Winter  Sun
and   Other  Poems.   Toronto,  University  of
Toronto Press.  8g  p.
BAYER,   MARY   ELIZABETH. The  Silver Swan: An   Epithalamion. Toronto,  Ryerson.  8   p. (Ryerson Poetry Chap-Book  I g8).
BOURINOT,   ARTHUR s. A   Gathering,   Poems,
1959.  Ottawa,  Bourinot, I959· I4  p. BULLis, HELEN. Wanderings. [by  R.  E.  Quest
pseud.].  Montreal,  Renouf  Publishing  Co. I22  p.
BYRNE, PETER.  Once  and   Some  Words   Be­
tween   the    Minutes.   Montreal,   Editions
Quartz. Unpaginated.
CAMPBELL, MARJORIE  FREEMAN.  Ports  of Call.
Toronto, Ryerson. 64  p.
COGSWELL,   FRED. Lost    Dimension.  Outposts
Publications.
COLLIE, MICHAEL. Skirmish   with    Fact.   To­
ronto, Ryerson. 24 p.
COLOMBO, JOHN  ROBERT and CATHERINE ARTHUR. Design-Poem "Nada".  Toronto, Hawkshead Press,  1959.  Broadsheet.  (Baga­ telle  No.8).

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



COLOMBO,  JOHN   ROBERT.  Lines   for  the   Last Day.    Toronto,   Hawkshead  Press.    Broad­ sheet.
-. Millennium.   Toronto,   Hawkshead  Press.
2  p.  (Bagatelle No.  I 1).
-. Poems  and  Other Poems.  Toronto,  Hawks­
head   Press,  1959.  8  p.   (Bagatelle No.  6).
-. They!   Toronto,  Hawkshead  Press.
-. Three  Poems   in   Two  Colours. Toronto, Hawkshead  Press,  1959.   (Bagatelle No.  7).
-. Towards a  Definition  of Love:  Lines   for
a Broadside with  a Marbled Back. Toronto, Hawkshead  Press,   1959.   Broadside.   (Baga­ telle  No.  5).
 SMITH,  ARTHUR JAMES  MARSHALL, and  FRAN· CIS  REGINALD SCOTT,  eds.  The Blasted   Pine. Paperback   edition.   Toronto,    Macmillan.
138  p.
SMITH,  ARTHUR JAMES  MARSHALL, ed. The Oxford  Book   of Canadian Verse in  English and    French.  Toronto,   Oxford   University Press.  445  p.
STRONG,  MIKE.   Heart    Honey Churning. To­
ronto,  Hawkshead  Press.   Broadsheet.
SWAYZE,  JAMES   FREDERICK.  In the   Egyptian
Gallery. Toronto, Ryerson. 12  p.
WEST,  PAUL.  The Spellbound Horses.  Toronto, Ryerson. 16  p.  (Ryerson Poetry Chap-Book

-. ed.    The   Varsity
Ryerson,    1959.    28
Chap-Book 189).
 Chap-Book. Toronto,
p.     (Ryerson   Poetry
 195).

CONKLIN,  WILLIAM. For  the  Infinite. Toronto, Ryerson. 8  p.   (Ryerson  Poetry   Chap-Book
193).
DRUMMOND,  WILLIAM  HENRY. Habitant Poems.
Toronto,   McClelland   &    Stewart,    1959.
111  p.    (New   Canadian  Library  No.   11).
GUSTAFSON, RALPH.  Rivers Among Rocks. To­
ronto, McClelland &  Stewart. Unpaginated.
-. Rocky Mountain  Poems.  Vancouver,  Kla­
nak  Press. 36 p.
HINE,  DARYL.   The  Devil's Picture   Book.  To­
ronto, Abelard-Schuman. 32  p.
KERR,   ALEXANDER.  The Ten Words. Toronto, Ryerson. 44  p.
Lamplight   Poems    No.    I. Toronto,   Hawks­
head  Press,  1959.  Broadsheet.
LOCHHEAD,  DOUGLAS GRANT. It  Is  All  Around. Toronto,  Ryerson.  24   p.   (Ryerson  Poetry Chap-Book 191).
-. Poems   in   Folio:    Number  One.  Halifax,
Three  Fathoms Press,   1959.   4  p.
MACPHERSON,  JEAN  JAY. A  Dry  Light & The
Dark   Air.  Toronto, Hawkshead Press,  1959.
4 p.  (Bagatelle No.  10).
MCROBBIE,  KENNETH   ALAN.  Eyes   Without  a
Face.   Toronto,  Gallery  Editions. 58   p.
MANDEL,  ELI  w.  Fuseli   Poems.  Toronto,  Con­
tact  Press.  68  p.
MATHESON, MARY MACKENZIE (NASMYTH). Autumn  Affluence. Toronto, Ryerson. 8  p. (Ryerson Poetry Chap-Book 195).
NELLIGAN,   EMILE.   Selected Poems.  Translated
by P. F.  Widdows. Toronto, Ryerson. 39  p.
QUEST, R. E.  See  Bullis,  Helen.
SAUNDERS,  THOMAS.   The Devil  and  Cal  Mc­ Cabe. Toronto, Ryerson. 26 p.

88
 
DRAMA
BLACKLOCK, JACK.  Not   All  Who  Grieve.  Ot­
tawa,     Ottawa   Little   Theatre   Workshop.
21  p.
BUCKLEY,   MARJORIE.   Prologue. Ottawa,   Ot­
tawa   Little Theatre  Workshop. 24  p.
CAMPBELL,  JOHN   G.    The   Optimistic   Dollar.
Ottawa,  Ottawa  Little Theatre  Workshop.
15  p.
COHEN,     M.    CHARLES.    The   Member   from Trois-Rivieres:  a   One    Act   Play   Based   on the   Life   of  Ezekial Hart.  Montreal,  Cana­ dian  Jewish Congress, 1959.  17  p.  (Written for   the   National  Bicentenary of   the Cana­ dian  Jewry 1759-1959).
COUPAL,   CLARE   FOLEY.    The  Empty    Cornu­
copia. Ottawa, Ottawa Little Theatre Work­
shop. 24 p.
-. When the   Bough Bends. Ottawa, Ottawa
Little Theatre Workshop. 26 p.
DWYER,  PETER.  Hoodman Blind. Ottawa,  Ot­
tawa   Little Theatre  Workshop. 16  p.
EDGELL,   MIMI.   A   Quiet  Half-Hour. Ottawa, Ottawa  Little  Theatre  Workshop. 19  p. FLAVELL, ANNE B. Back  to  the  World. Ottawa, Ottawa  Little  Theatre  Workshop. 38  p. GRAYSON, PHILIP.  No  More Octobers. Ottawa, Ottawa  Little  Theatre   Workshop. 21   p. HAILEY,  ARTHUR.  Close   Up:  On   Writing  for
Television. Garden  City,   N.Y.,   Doubleday.
307  p.
HONEYSETTE,    ANNE   C.    The  Last    Chapter.
Ottawa,  Ottawa  Little  Theatre  Workshop.
23  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



LIBMAN,  CAROL.  The Reluctant Hero. Ottawa, Ottawa  Little  Theatre   Workshop. 21   p. MACLEOD,    ROBERT.    Flood.  Ottawa,   Ottawa
Little Theatre  Workshop. 20  p.
NEWTON,   NORMAN  L.   The  Rehearsal. Ottawa, Ottawa  Little  Theatre  Workshop. 21   p. RICHARDS,   STANLEY,   ed.   Canada  on   Stage;
a   Collection  of   One-Act  Plays.    Toronto.
Clarke Irwin. 324  p.
RINGWOOD,  GWEN.   Lament for  Harmonica (Maya). Ottawa, Ottawa Little Theatre Workshop. 20  p.
RUGGLES,   RUTH.    The Moon for   a   Candle.
Ottawa, Ottawa  Little Theatre  Workshop.
17  p.
STEWART,   LUKE.   The Revolt of  the   Puppets.
Ottawa, Ottawa Little Theatre  Workshop.
31  p.
WARREN,    EILEEN.    Whatever the    Guise.   Ot­
tawa,  Ottawa   Little   Theatre   Workshop.
20  p.
WATT,    GLADYS   CAMERON.   Sawdust.  Ottawa, Ottawa Little Theatre  Workshop. 40   p. WRIGHT,     CHARLES    WILLIAM.     The  Rowley
Band. Ottawa, Ottawa Little Theatre Work­
shop.  22 p.

ESSAYS
BARBEAU,     MARIUS.      Indian   Days     on     the
Western  Prairies. Ottawa,  Queen's Printer.
234  p.
BERTON,   PIERRE.   Adventures of  a  Columnist. Toronto,  McClelland  &  Stewart. 2 1 1   p. COCKLOFT,    JEREMY.    Cursory   Observations:
Made  in  Quebec, Province of  Lower  Can­
ada,  in   the    Year  IBII.  Toronto,   Oxford
University Press.  42  p.
DAVIES,  ROBERTSON.   A   Voice  from  the   Attic. Toronto,  McClelland &   Stewart.  360   p. FAIRLEY,    MARGARET,  ed.   The   Selected   Writ­
ings   of  William  Lyon Mackenzie. Toronto,
Oxford University Press.  400 p.
MACLENNAN, HUGH.  Scotchman's Return and
Other  Essays.  Toronto, Macmillan. 279   p.

HUMOUR
LEACOCK,  STEPHEN    B.   Arcadian  Adventures with  the   Idle   Rich.  Toronto,  McClelland
&  Stewart.  157   p.  (New Canadian  Library
No.  10).
-. Laugh   with  Leacock.  London,  Trans-
 world  Publishers, 1959.  288  p.
-. Sunshine Sketches  of  a  Little Town. To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart. I53  p.  (New  Canadian Library No.  I 5).
MOORE,  MAYOR.  And   What Do  You Do?  Don
Mills,  Ont., Dent. 57  p.
NICOL,   ERIC   PATRICK    and    PETER   WHALLEY. An  Uninhibited  History of  Canada,  Mont­ real,    D.    Hackett   (by   arrangement   with  Ryerson), I959·  76 p.
WARD,   NORMAN.   Mice in   the   Beer.   Toronto,
Longmans Green. 206  p.

BIOGRAPHY
COPELAND, DONALDA MCKILLOP.   Remember Nurse.  As told  to Eugenie Louise  Myles. Toronto, Ryerson. 250  p.
COSTAIN,   THOMAS    B.   The  Chord of   Steel: Alexander  Graham  Bell   and   the   Story    of the   Invention  of   the    Telephone.  Garden City,  N.Y.,  Doubleday. 238  p.
DAVIES,    EVAN    and    ALED   VAUGHAN.    Beyond
the  Old   Bone  Trail. Toronto, British   Book
Service   (Canada). 172  p.
DESAULNIERS,   ABEL.   In    Love   With   Wings. New   York,    Exposition  Press,    1959.   78   p. EDWARDS,   c.   A.     M.    Taylor Statten:  a   Bio­
graphy. With  a  foreword  by  J. Alex  Edmi­
son. Toronto, Ryerson.I 56  p.
GRAHAM,    ROGER.    Arthur  Meighen,  Volume One: The Door  of Opportunity,  I874-1920. Toronto, Clarke Irwin. 34I   p.
KENNEDY,    THOMAS     LAIRD.    Tom  Kennedy's
Story. As  told   to  Ralph  Hyman. Toronto, The Globe  and  Mail. 62  p.
LAPORTE, PIERRE.  The True Face  of Duplessis.
Montreal, Harvest House. I 40 p.
LEE,     NORMAN.     Klondike  Cattle  Drive;  the journal  of Norman Lee. Prepared for  publi­ cation   by  Gordon  Elliott.  Vancouver,  Mit­ chell  Press.  58  p.
MCDOUGALL, ROBERT  L.,  ed.  Our   Living Tra­
dition. Second and  Third  Series.   Toronto, Published in  association with  Carleton  Uni­ versity    by    University   of    Toronto    Press,
1959·  288  p.
MCRAE,   JAMES   A.     Call   Me   Tomorrow. To­
ronto, Ryerson. 240  p.
MANION,   JAMES    P.    A     Canadian   Errant; Twenty-five Years in  the  Canadian  Foreign Service. Edited  by  Guy   Sylvestre. Toronto, Ryerson. 196  p.

Sg

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



MURRAY,   GORDON.   Medicine  in   the   Making.
Toronto, Ryerson. 235  p.
NIX, JAMES ERNEST. Mission Among the Buffalo:  The Labours of  the  Reverends George   M. and   John   C.  McDougall in  the Canadian Northwest, r86o-r876. Toronto, Ryerson. I 23 p.
POPE,    SIR   JOSEPH.    Public     Servant:  The
Memoirs of Sir  Joseph  Pope.  Edited and completed  by  Maurice  Pope.  Toronto,  Ox­ ford  University Press.  3I2  p.
RICHARDSON,   EVELYN M.  My   Other  Islands.
Toronto, Ryerson. 2 I 3 p.
SHARCOTT,  MARGARET. A    Place    of    Many Winds. Toronto, British   Book Service  (Can­ ada). 236  p.
STEEVES, DOROTHY. The  Compassionate   Re­ bel:   Ernest E.  Winch and  His  Times. Van­ couver, Evergreen. 227  p.
THOMSON,  DALE c.   Alexander   Mackenzie­
Clear   Grit. Toronto,  Macmillan. 436   p.
VARICK,   MARY  M. My   Yoke is  Easy,  My  Bur­ den  Light. Cap de la  Madeleine,  Que., Our Lady of  the   Cape Publications.  I 79  p.
VEFFER, SARA    ( NEBIG). Hidden  for  a  Thou­
sand   Days.  As  told   to  Ray  Sonin. Toronto, Ryerson. 2 I 2 p.
WILLINSKY, A.  I.   A   Doctor's Memoirs.   To­
ronto, Macmillan. I83  p.


JUVENILES
ALLAN, IRIS. The Boy  in  Buckskins. Edmonton, Institute of  Applied  Art,   I 959·   I 6o  p.
BELL, ELEANOR.  The  Black   Totem.  Toronto,
Ryerson. I8o  p.
BOYLE, JOYCE. Bobby's Neighbors. New  York, Abingdon Press,  I 959· 96  p.
CLARKE, GEORGE  FREDERICK.  The  Adventures
of   Jimmy-Why.   Fredericton,  N.B.,   Bruns­
wick  Press,  I959· 9I  p.
-. Noiil   and   Jimmy-Why.  Fredericton, N.B.
Brunswick Press,  I959· 97  p.
COOKE, RONALD  J.  Algonquin Adventure.  To­
ronto, Ryerson.
CRAIG,  JOHN  ERNEST. The Long   Return.  To­ ronto, McClelland &  Stewart,  I959·   255  p. DENBURY, MABEL L.   The  Story  of    Johnny Doogit.  New    York,    Vantage   Press,    I959·
62  p.
DEWDNEY, SELWYN.  The  Map    That   Grew.
Toronto,  Oxford  University Press.  32  p.

go
 EATON, SARA. Mocassin  and   Cross.   Toronto, Copp Clark, I959· I8I   p.
GARST, DORIS SHANNON and   WARREN  GARST.
Ernest  Thompson  Seton,  Naturalist.  New
York,  J. Messner, I 959·  I 92  p.
GRAHAM, ROSEMARY. Mustard &  Company.
Toronto,  McClelland  &   Stewart.  ISO  p. GRANNAN, MARY EVELYN. Maggie  Muggins
and   Her   Animal Friends. Cleveland, Ohio, Pennington Press,  I 959· 6o  p.
-. Maggie Muggins  and   the   Cottontail.  To­
ronto, Thomas Allen. I 5 I  p.
-. Maggie  Muggins   and    the    Fieldmouse.
Toronto, Thomas  Allen,    I959·  154   p.
-. More  Just   Mary Stories. Revised edition.
London, F.  Warne, I959· 128  p.
-. More Maggie  Muggins. Cleveland, Ohio, Pennington Press,  I959· 6I  p.
-. This is Maggie Muggins. Cleveland, Ohio,
Pennington Press,  I959· 6o  p.
HAYES, JOHN  F.  Quest  in   the   Cariboo.  To­
ronto, Copp Clark. 240  p.
HOLLIDAY, JOE.  Dale    of  the   Mounted,  Pur­ suit  on  the  St. Lawrence. Toronto,  Thomas Allen. I6o  p.
MONTURE, ETHEL  BRANT. Famous Indians: Brant, Crowfoot, Oronhyatekha. Toronto, Clarke Irwin. I6o  p.
MURRAY, LILLIAN.  In the  Track of the  Huskies.
Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart. 208  p. NEWFELD, FRANK. The  Princess   of  Tomboso. Toronto,  Oxford  University Press.   24  p. RILEY, LOUISE. A  Spell   at  Scoggin's  Crossing.
Toronto, Abelard-Schuman. I 7 5 p. ROXBOROUGH,  HARRY. Olympic Hero. Toronto,
Ryerson. 236  p.
SCHULL,  JOSEPH.  Battle   for  the   Rock:  The Story of  Wolfe and  Montcalm. Toronto, Macmillan. I 58  p.
SETON, ERNEST THOMPSON. Two  Little  Sav­
ages.  Reprint.  Garden  City,   N.Y.,  Double­
day,  I959· 4I6 p.
-. Wild   Animals  I   Have    Known. Reprint. New   York,   Looking  Glass   Library.  2I8  p. SWAYZE, JAMES  FREDERICK. Run  for    Your
Life! Toronto, Ryerson. I49  p.
SWAYZE, NANSI. The  Man  Hunters:  Jenness, Barbeau, Wintemberg.  Toronto,  Clarke   Ir­ win  180  p.
TOTTON,  s.  J. The Story of Canada. Toronto,
McClelland & Stewart. 64  p.
VAN STOCKUM, HILDA. Friendly  Gables. New
York,  Viking. I86  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN LITERATURE



WILKINSON, ANNE. Swann  and   Daphne.  To­
ronto,  Oxford  University  Press.   48  p. wooD,   KERRY. The  Queen's Cowboy: ColoneL
Macleod   of   the   Mounties. Toronto,   Mac­
millan. 157  p.
YOUNG,  FLORNIE  BAXTER. Songs    from    Ka­
wartha. New   York, Vantage,   1959.   221   p.



BIBLIOGRAPHY
BELL, INGLIS FREEMAN,  ed.  Canadian  Litera­ ture-1959: A  Checklist.  Canadian  Litera­ ture  No.  3:91-ro8, Winter.
-, ed.  Canadian Literature-!959: A  Check­ list.  English-Canadian. Canadian  Literature No.  3: 92-roo, Winter.
BOYLE, GERTRUDE M., ed.   A   Bibliography  of
Canadiana  - First   Supplement.  Toronto, Toronto Public Library, I959· 333  p.
Canadian Book-Prices Current. Vol.  II-I 956-
sB. Toronto,  McClelland &  Stewart,  I 959·
2I4 p.
The  Canadian Catalogue of  Books   Published in  Canada, about   Canada, as Well as Those Written  by  Canadians, with   Imprint  19!:/I-
1949·  Toronto, Toronto Public Libraries, I959·   Vol.    I   (r92I-I939)  532   p.;   Vol   2 ( 1940-1949) 399  p.
Canadian  Heritage  Books.   Canadian   Library
I6: 267-275, May.
Canadian Index to  Periodicals and  Documen­ tary   Films,  I 959,  Vol. I!:/.  Ottawa,  Cana­ dian Library Association  and   National Lib­  rary  of Canada. 2 79 p.
GRANT, DOUGLAS. Letters  in   Canada:   1959· University  of   Toronto   Quarterly  29:439- s8o, July.
HAMILTON,  ROBERT M. Canadian  Book   Prices
Current. Vol. Il-I956-I958. Toronto,  Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, I 959·  2 I 4 p.
HERBERT, WALTER. Periodical   Literature   in
Canada:  The  Humanities. Canadian   Lib­
rary  I 6: 289-290, May.
KLINCK, CARL F.,  ed.  Canadian   Literature­
!959:   A  Checklist. Theses. Canadian  Lite­
rature  No.  3: 1·08, Winter.
LUNN,  JEAN.  Milestones  in  Canadian  Biblio­ graphy.  Canadian   Library     I6:31 1-314,  May.
PARK,  M.  G.  Canadian   Poetry.  Meanjin  No.
78, Vol.   r8,  No. 3:350-352,  I959·
 TANGHE,  RAYMOND, comp.   Bibliography   of Canadian    Bibliographies.    Toronto,    Uni­ versity  of Toronto Press.  240  p.



BOOKS AND READING
BROWN, GEORGE w.   Dictionary  of   Canadian
Biography. Canadian  Historical Review 41:
277-279,  September.
CRAICK,  WILLIAM ARNOT. A  History  of  Cana­ dian    Journalism,   !:/.    Last     Years   of    the  Canadian   Press     Association,    I 908-I 9I 9, with   a Continuing  Record of the  Canadian Daily    Newspaper    Publishers    Association, I9I9-I959·   Toronto,   Ontario    Publishing Co.,  I959·  31 1  p.
DUDEK, LOUis.  Talking  Doorknobs. Delta   No.
8: 22-23,  July.
EDINBOROUGH,  ARNOLD.  Sex  and   Violence  on the   Bookstalls. Canadian  Author  &  Book­ man  36:10, 12-I4, Spring.
Governor General's  Literature  Award. World
Affairs  25:14, April.
HAMMOND,   ARTHUR. Obscenity  in   Montreal.
Canadian Forum 40: 73-74,  July.
Honours  and   Awards.  [Editorial].  Canadian
Literature No.  6:3-4, Autumn.
Immoral Literature   and  Pictures  Public Charge. Saturday  Night  75:7-8,  June  11. MACLENNAN, HUGH.  The  Defence  of   Lady Chatterley.  Canadian  Literature  No.  6: r8-
23, Autumn.
MARTIN,  PETER G. Readers'  Club  of  Canada.
Canadian  Library  I 7: 8o-81, September. NOWLAN,  ALDEN A. A  Defence of  Obscenity.
Delta    No.    9:27-28, October-December,
1959·
o'BRIEN,  R.  A.  "There's  no   way   to   control
censorship!"  Canadian  Author   and   Book­
man  36:  I 1-I 2, Summer.
On   the   Cultivation  of   Laurels.  [Editorial.]
Canadian  Literature  No.   4: 3-6,   Spring. REID,  ROBERT  and   FELICITY  REID. Book  Jackets
and   Covers,  Book   Illustration  and   Typo­ graphy,   Magazine   Covers,   Editorial    Art,  House   Organs, Photography.  Canadian Art
17:148-165, May.
SHERWOOD, MARTIN A.   Sex    in    Literature.
Delta  No.  1 1 : 5, Spring..
SMITH, ELSPETH, ed.  Recording Toronto. To­
ronto, Toronto  Public Libraries. 36  p.

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE


TRUEMAN,  A.   w.    1959    Governor-General's
Awards. Canadian  Author  &  Bookman
36:18-19, Spring.
WEAVER,  ROBERT.  Governor General's  Awards.
Saturday  Night   75:29-31,  April    2.


PERIODICALS

NEW TITLES

Alphabet:  A  Semi-annual Devoted   to  the  Ico­ nography of the  Imagination. Number  One, September,  James  Reaney,  17   Craig   St., London, Ont.
The   Canadian   Reader,  November  1959.  To­
ronto,  Readers'  Club of  Canada,  1959.
Kaleidoscope, 1960. Windsor, Ont.,  Assump­
tion   University  of  Windsor.


HISTORY AND CRITICISM

DUDEK, LOUIS. Vancouver  Lights.  Delta.   No.
9: 25,  October-December.
EVANS, J. A. s.  Little  Magazines in  Canada.
Canadian Author  &  Bookman 35: IO-I2, Winter  1959-60.
FRIEDSON, ANTHONY. Let's  Pan   a  Magazine.
Canadian  Literature  No.  3:86-89,  Winter. HERBERT, WALTER.  Periodical  Literature   in Canada:  The  Humanities.  Canadian  Lib­
rary  r6: 289-290, May.
MAC DADE,  J. Three Dollars, Please.  Canadian
Commentator 4:22,  February.
MARTIN, PETER.  A   Household  Word.   Cana­
dian   Reader  2  No.   2:2-3, December. SELBY,  JOAN.  New    Departures:  Canadian
Literature and  Prism. British  Columbia  Lib­
rary   Quarterly 23:29-32, January.


LANGUAGE

DEVIAULT, P.   Evolution  of   the   English and French Languages in  Canada. Transactions of  the   Royal Society  of Canada  3d  ser  53 (Proceedings) :63-72,  1959.
Linguistica  Canadiana:   A  Linguistic   Biblio­
graphy  &   Supplement  for   Previous  Years. journal of the  Canadian  Linguistic Associa- tion    6:85-89,  Spring.	'

92
 LITERARY HISTORY AND CRITICISM


GENERAL

BERTON, PIERRE. Gold   Rush   Writing:  The Literature of  the  Klondike. Canadian  Lite­ rature   No.  4: 59-67, Spring.
DUNCAN,  CHESTER.  Anthology   on    the    Air.
Canadian Literature No.  6:90-92, Autumn. EDINBOROUGH,   ARNOLD.  On   Keeping Ideas in Motion.  Canadian  Library  17: 58-6r,  Sep­
tember.
EMERY,  TONY.  "Critically   Speaking"    Criti­ cized.    Canadian  Literature   No.   4:69-71, Spring.
GRANT, DOUGLAS.  Notes  and  Comments.  Cana­ dian   Historical Review  41:183-184,  June. KLINCK, CARL F.  "The  Charivari" and   Levi Adams. Dalhousie Review 40: 34-42, Spring. LUCHKOVICH,  MICHAEL.  Racial    Integration and   Canadian Literature.  Canadian Author
and   Bookman  36:14-16,  Summer.
LUDWIG, JACK. Clothes in  Search  of  an   Em­ peror.   Canadian  Literature   No.    5: 63-66, Summer.
REANEY, JAMES  c.  Writing. Royal   Architec­ tural   Institute  of  Canada   journal   37:136, April.
RICHLER, MORDECAI.  Canadian  Outlook.  New
Statesman  6o:346-34 7,  September  1 o. WATT, FRANK w.  Growth of  Proletarian  Lite­
rature  in    Canada,   1872-I920.  Dalhousie
Review 40: 157-I73, Summer.
WEAVER, ROBERT.  Governor General's  Awards.
Saturday  Night  75:29-31,  April   2.
WILSON,  ETHEL.  The  Bridge  or   the   Stoke­ hold?  Views   of   the   Novelist's Art.   Cana­ dian   Literature No.  5:43-47,  Summer.
WOODCOCK,  GEORGE. Venture  on   the   Verge.
Canadian Literature No.  5:73-75, Summer.


FICTION

BIRNEY, EARLE. On   the   Pressing of  Maple Leaves. Canadian Literature. No.  6:53-56, Autumn.
HICKS,   GRANVILLE.   Novelists  in   the    Fifties.
Saturday   Review   42: 18-20,  October   24,
1959·

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



TALLMAN,  WARREN.   Wolf   in   the   Snow:  Part One; Four Windows on  to  Landscapes. Canadian  Literature  No.   5: 7-20,  Summer.
-. Wolf  in  the  Snow:  Part  Two;  The House
Repossessed. Canadian  Literature No.6: 41-
48,  Autumn.
WATT,   FRANK   w.   Letters  in   Canada   1959: Fiction.  University  of   Toronto   Quarterly
29:460-475, June.


POETRY

BILSLAND,  JOHN    WINSTANLEY.   Moving   Be­
yond    Borders.   Canadian   Literature   No.
6:56-59, Autumn.
FRYE,  NORTHROP   N.  Letters in  Canada  I 959: Poetry.   University   of    Toronto   Quarterly
29:440-460, July.
MANDEL,   ELI   w.   Poetry   Chronicle:   Giants,
Beasts,     and     Men     in    Recent   Canadian Poetry. Queen's  Quarterly  67:285-293, Summer.
PARK,    M.   G.   Canadian Poetry. M eanjin  No.
78, Vol.  18,  No.  3: 350-352, 1 959·
WEST,   PAUL.  Ethos and   Epic. Canadian  Lite­
rature  No.  4:7-17, Spring.
WILSON, MILTON. Klein's Drowned Poet: Canadian Variations on an Old Theme. Canadian  Literature  No.   6:5-17,  Autumn.


DRAMA AND THEATRE

BOOTH,  MICHAEL R.  Pioneer Entertainment: Theatrical  Taste  in    the    Early  Canadian West.  Canadian Literature No.  4:52-58, Spring.
CROFT,  FRANK.   When Show   Business  Was  All Talk.  Maclean's  73:30-31,  45-47, May   21. DAVIES,    ROBERTSON,     Robertson   Davies   on Architects  and    Architecture.  Royal    Archi­ tectural  Institute   of    Canada  Journal
3 7: 346-349, August.
EDINBOROUGH,   ARNOLD.   Stratford's Slow   but
Solid  Start.  Saturday Night 75: 12-14,  July
23.
FERRY,   ANTONY.    The  Tyranny of   the   Strat­ ford   Stage.  Canadian  Forum   40:106-108, August.
FULFORD,  ROBERT. Television Notebook.  Cana­
dian  Forum 40:49-50, June.
MCKAY, A. G.  Western Ontario Drama. Water­
loo  Review No.  5: 15-19, Summer.
 sMITH,   MARION B.  What Is   the   Role   of  the DDF?  Saturday   Night   75:33,  June   25. STRATFORD,  PHILIP. New  Canadian Plays  Pre­
sented.  Canadian  Literature  No.   6:49-52, Autumn.
-. Orchestrating the  Arts:  Stratford  Festival
1960.   Canadian  Forum  40:185-188,   No­
vember.
Theatre    Criticism   To-Day.    Canadian
Forum. 39: 258-259, February.
Stratford  Shakespearean   Festival.   Culture
21:91-92, mars.
WHITTAKER,  HERBER. The Audience is There.
Saturday   Review   42:25-26,   October   24,
1959·
WINTER,   JACK.  The  Theatre  Season:   Mont­
real.  Canadian  Forum 40:201-205,  Decem­
ber.
-. The  Theatre  Season: Toronto.  Canadian
Forum  40:178-179,  November.


JUVENILES

BELL,   INGLIS   FREEMAN.   Mountains  with   Le­ gends.    Canadian  Literature  No.   4: 74-76,  Spring.
HOLLIDAY, JOE.  Writing for  the  'Tween-Agers.
(Part  1).  Canadian Author and   Bookman
35:4-5, Winter.
-. Writing for   the  'Tween-Agers. (Part  II).
Canadian  Author   and    Bookman  36:6-9, Spring.
SELBY, JOAN.  The Transmutation of  History:
Landmarks  in   Canadian  Historical Fiction
For    Children.    Canadian   Literature   No.
6:3 2-40,  Autumn.

INDIVIDUAL  AUTHORS

BIRNEY, EARLE

ELLIOTT, BRIAN.  Earle Birney: Canadian  Poet.
Meanjin  No.   78,  Vol.    18,  No.   3:338-347,
1959·
FREDE MAN,  WILLIAM   E.   Earle  Birney:   Poet.
British    Columbia Library Quarterly 23:8-
15, January.


CALLAGHAN, MORLEY

AVISON,  MARGARET. Callaghan  Revisited.  Can­
adian  Forum 39:276-277, March.

93

ENGLISH-CANADIAN  LITERATURE



MOON,  BARBARA. The Second   Coming of  Mor­ ley    Callaghan.   Maclean's   73: 19,    62-64,  December 3.
WATT,    FRANK    w.     Morley  Callaghan   as
Thinker.   Dalhousie  Review   39:305-313, Autumn 1959.

CRAWFORD, ISABELLA VALANCY
REANEY,  JAMES.   Isabella  Valancy  Crawford.
In   Robert L.  McDougall, ed.   Our   Living Tradition.  Second  and   Third  Series.   To­ ronto,  Published in  association with  Carle­ ton    University   by   University  of   Toronto Press,  '959· 268-288.

DANIELLS,  ROY
MCPHERSON,   HUGO. Roy  Daniells: Humanist.
British   Columbia  Library Quarterly  24: 29-
35,  July.

DAVIES, ROBERTSON
MCPHERSON,   HUGO.  The Mask   of  Satire: Character and   Symbolic Pattern  in  Robert­ son   Davies'   Fiction.   Canadian   Literature No.4: r8-3o, Spring.

GROVE, FREDERICK  PHILIP
HOLLIDAY,  w.   B.   Frederick  Philip  Grove:   An
Impression. Canadian Literature No.  3: 17-
22, Winter.

HALIBURTON, THOMAS CHANDLER
MCDOUGALL, ROBERT L. Thomas Chandler Haliburton.  In   Robert  L.  McDougall, ed. Our  Living Tradition. Second  and  Third Series.    Toronto,   Published  in   association with  Carleton University by University of Toronto Press,  1 959· 3-30.

HOWE, JOSEPH
BECK, J.   M.    Joseph  Howe:  Opportunist  or Empire-builder.   Canadian  Historical    Re­ view  41: 185-202, September.
THOMAS, w.  K.  Canadian Political Oratory in the   Nineteenth  Century.  Dalhousie Review
39: 3 77-389, Autumn I 959·

LAMPMAN, ARCHIBALD
BEGLEY, LUCILLE.  Harmonies Canadiennes: Pamphile le May,  Archibald Lampman. Lectures 6:296-297,  juin.


94
 LAYTON, IRVING
DUDEK,  LOUIS.   Layton on   the   Carpet.  Delta.
No.  9:17-19,  October-December '959·

LEACOCK, STEPHEN
WATT,  FRANK  w.  Critic or  Entertainer?  Cana­ dian   Literature  No.   5: 33-42,   Summer. WATTERS,  REGINALD EYRE.  Leacock  in  Limbo.
Canadian  Literature  No.  3:68-70,  Winter.
-. A Special Tang:  Stephen Leacock's Cana­
dian   Humour.   Canadian  Literature   No.
5:21-32, Summer.

LEVINE, NORMAN
LEVINE,   NORMAN.  Why   I  am   an   Expatriate.
Canadian Literature No.  5:49-54, Summer.

LIVESAY, DOROTHY
STEINBERG, M. w. Dorothy Livesay: Poet  of Affirmation. British   Columbia  Library Quarterly 24:9:  3,  October.

LOWRY, MALCOLM
BONNEFOI,  GENEVIEVE.  Souvenir de  Quauhna­ huac.  Les    Lettres   Nouvelles  5   Huitieme Annee: 94-1 o8,   juillet-aoilt,  Nouvelle  Serie. CARROY,    JEAN-ROGER.  Obscur  present,  le  feu
... Les  Lettres Nouvelles 5  Huitieme An­
nee: 83-88,  juillet-aoilt,  Nouvelle Serie.
FOUCHET,   MAX-POL.  Non    se  puede ... Les Lettres Nouvelles 5  Huitieme Annee: 21-25, juillet-aoilt, Nouvelle Serie.
FRANCILLON,   CLARISSE.   Malcolm,  mon    ami.
Les  Lettres Nouvelles 5  Huitieme Annee:8-
I 9,  juillet-aoilt, Nouvelle Serie.
MCCONNELL,  WILLIAM.  Recollections  of   Mal­
colm  Lowry. Canadian Literature No.6: 24-
31,  Autumn.
MYRER,    ANTON.     Le    monde   au-dessous  du volcan. Les  Lettres Nouvelles 5  Huitieme Annee: 59-66,  juillet-aoilt, Nouvelle Serie.
NADEAU,   MAURICE.    Lowry. Les   Lettres   Nou­
velles   5   Huitieme  Annee:3-7,  juillet-aoilt, Nouvelle Serie.
SPRIEL,   STEPHEN.   Le   cryptogramme  Lowry.
Les  Lettres Nouvelles 5 Huitieme Annee:67-
81,  juillet-aout, Nouvelle Serie.

MCARTHUR, PETER
WATT,    FRANK    W.    Peter McArthur and    the

ENGLISH -CANADIAN LITERATURE



Agrarian  Myth.  Queen's  Quarterly 67-245-
257,  Summer.

MACLENNAN, HUGH
MACLENNAN,   HUGH.   The Story of  a   Novel.
Canadian  Literature  No.  3:35-39,  Winter.

MAC PHERSON, JAY
REANEY,  JAMEs.   The Third Eye :  Jay   Mac­ pherson's "The  Boatman."   Canadian  Lite­ rature  No. 3:23-34, Winter.

MONTGOMERY, LUCY MAUD
MONTGOMERY,  LUCY   MAUD.  The Green   Gables Letters,  from  L. M. Montgomery to   Eph­ raim   Weber,  1905-1909. Edited  by  Wilfrid Eggleston. Toronto,  Ryerson.  102   p.

NICOL, ERIC PATRICK
BAKER, RONALD JAMES.  Eric  Nicol: The Low Calling of a New  Hero. British  Columbia Library Quarterly  23: 3 I -34,  April.

PRATT, EDWIN  JOHN
BIRNEY,   EARLE.   E.   J. Pratt  and   His   Critics.
In Robert L.  McDougall, ed.  Our  Living Tradition.  Second and  Third  Series.   To­ ronto,  Published in  association with  Carle­ ton    University  by   University  of   Toronto Press,  I959· I23-I47·

RICHARDSON, MAJOR JOHN
PACEY,    DESMOND.     A    Colonial   Romantic:
 Major John Richardson, Soldier and  Novel­ ist.  Canadian Literature  No.  3:4 7-56,  Win­  ter.

RICHLER, MORDECAI
TALLMAN,   WARREN.   Richler and   the  Faithless City.  Canadian Literature  No.  3:62-64, Winter.

SCOTT, DUNCAN CAMPBELL
BOURINOT, ARTHUR  s., ed.  More Letters of Duncan Campbell Scott. 2nd series.  Ottawa, Bourinot, 104  p.
SMITH,   ARTHUR   JAMES   MARSHALL.  Duncan
Campbell Scott. In  Robert  L.  McDougall, ed.    Our    Living   Tradition.   Second     and Third Series.  Toronto, Published in  associa­ tion  with  Carleton  University  by  University of Toronto Press,  I959· 73-94·

WALLACE, JOE
COLOMBO,  JOHN    ROBERT.   Canada's   Banned
Poet.   Canadian  Forum  40,:80-82, July.

WATSON, SHEILA
CHILD,  P.  A.    Canadian Prose-Poem.  Dalhousie
Review 39:233-236,  Summer  I959·

WATSON, WILFRED
BILSLAND, JOHN  WINSTANLEY. Vision  of  Clar­ ity:  The   Poetry of  Wilfred  Watson.  Cana­  dian  Literature No.  4:40-5I, Spring.



















95

LITTERATURE

CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE

liste etablie  par G. P. Selth





ANTHOLOGIES
BOULIZON, GUY, ed.   Antho/ogie litteraire.
Montreal, Beauchemin, 1959.  2 v.
LE    DEvom.   Le    Devoir    litteraire.  Montreal,
1959.  32  p.  (Avec  Le  Devoir, v. 50,  no  279, nov.  1959.)
SMITH,  A.  J.   M.,  ed.   The  Oxford  book   of
Canadian verse  in English and  French. To­
ronto,  Oxford  University  Press.  445   p.

ROMANS
ET NOUVELLES
ANNE-MARIE. La    nuit    si   longue.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France. 2 15 p.
BENOIT,  PIERRE. Le    marchand   de   /a   Place
Royale. Montreal, Fides.
BESSETTE,   GERARD. Le    libraire.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France. 1 73 p.
BLAIS, MARIE CLAIRE.  Tete  blanche. Quebec,
Institut Litteraire du  Quebec. 205  p. BOUSQUET, JEAN.  Mon  ami   Georges.   Mont­
real,  Levrier. 204  p.
DESROSIERS,  LEO PAUL. Rafales   sur  les  cimes.
Montreal, Fides.  235  p.
DORAN,  DIELLE. Maryse. Montreal, Cercle du
Livre de  France. 1 7 1  p.
FERRON,  J.  Des  Mistigoches  a Tartufe.  Situa­
tions, v.  r, no 3-5,  mars-juin 1959.
GAGNON, MAURICE. Entre  tes   mains.   Mont­ real,   Cercle  du   Livre  de  France.   229  p. GRANDMONT,   ELOI  DE.  Chacun  sa   drole   de
vie;   nouvelles.  Ecrits    du   Canada   franrais
6: 103·23.
JASMIN, CLAUDE.  La  cor de  au  COU.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de France. 233 p.
-. Et  puis  tout   est  silence.  Ecrits  du  Canada
fran(ais   7:35-192.
LA  ROQUE DE ROQUEBRUNE,   ROBERT.  La   sei­
gneuresse. Montreal,  Fides.  270  p.

g6
 LASNIER, RINA.  Miroirs;  proses.   Montreal, L'Atelier. 127  p.
LAURENDEAU,    ANDRE.  Voyages  au   pays    de l'enfance. Montreal,  Beauchemin. 218  p. LEMOINE, WILFRID CHARLES. Les   anges   dans
la  ville, L'ange  gardien, et  L'ange  de  soli­
tude. Montreal, Orphee, 1959.   rso  p. MALOUIN, REINE. La  prairie  au  solei/.  Quebec.
!81  p.
-. Vertige. Quebec, 1959.  r6r  p.
MARTIN, CLAIRE. Doux-amer. Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France. 192  p.
PALLASCIO-MORIN,   ERNEST.  Rumeurs.   Mont­
real,  Beauchemin.
PINSONNEAULT, JEAN  PAUL.  jerome  Aquin.
Montreal, Beauchemin. 210 p.
PORTAL, MARCEL. Au    creur   de   la   chenaie.
Montreal, Fides.  155  p.
PRIMEAU,  MARGUERITE    A.  Dans    le   muskeg.
Montreal, Fides.
SAINT-GEORGES,  ALBERTINE.  Les   vacances  de Chantal.  Montreal,  Rayonnement. 8o   p. SILVA,  VIVIANE  DA. Visage de  fievre.  Montreal,
Cercle du   Livre de  France. 2 1 7  p. THERIAULT, YVES.  Ashini.   Montreal,   Fides.
176  p.
THERIO, ADRIEN.  La   soif  et  le  mirage. Mont­ real, Cercle du   Livre de  France.  222  p. TREMBLAY, LAURENT.  Combats   de    /a    vie.
Montreal,  Rayonnement, 1959.    151  p.


POESIE
ARSENAULT, GUY. L'eau,  /a   montagne  et   le loup. Montreal, Goglin, 1959.  93 p.
BERGERON, JACQUELINE. Fantaisie  poetique.
Montreal, Beauchemin. 62  p.
BOUDOU. Arc-en-ciel.  Montreal,   Beauchemin. BRAZEAU, MME   JACQUES.  L'etrange    saison, par    Alma    de    Chantal,   pseud.  Montreal,
Beauchemin. 58  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



CONSTANTINEAU,   GILLES.  Simples  poemes   et ballades. Montreal, Hexagone.
DOR, GEORGES. Portes   closes.   Montreal,   Edi­
tions  de 1'Au be,  1 959· 40  p.
FERLAND, REAL.  Carrousel. Montreal,   Noc­
turne, 1959.  37  p.
GIGNAC,  RODRIGUE.  Toua. Quebec, Editions de l'Hote. 76 p.
GODBOUT, JACQUES. C'est    Ia  chaude  loi   des
hommes. Montreal, L'Hexagone. 67  p. HEBERT,  ANNE.  Poemes.  Paris,  Editions  du
Seuil. 109  p.
HENAULT,  GILLES.  Voyage  au   pays    de   me­
moire;  poemes    en   prose.    Montreal,  Erta.
36  p.
LABRECQUE,  PIERRE. Corai/  de soi-meme. Mont­
real,  Beauchemin. 6o  p.
LAPOINTE,  PAUL  MARIE. Choix  de   poemes.
Montreal, L'Hexagone.
LASNIER,  RINA. Memoire sans  jours.  Montreal, L'Atelier. 138  p.
LEBLANC,  MADELEINE. Ombre et  lumiere. Hull, Brume. 63  p.
LEMOINE, w.   Images  d'assassinats. Situations
I : 56-68, llOV. I 959·
MASSICOTTE, FRANCOISE. Serenite.  Montreal,
1959·  I 16 p.
MONETTE,  ARCADE    MARIE.  Poemes.  Culture
2 I : 308- I I, sept.
-. Suite a vingt-cinq poemes. Culture  2 I : 78-
86,  mars.
MORIN, PAUL.  Gironte  et   son  miroir. Mont­ real,   Cercle  du   Livre de  France.  I67   p. PARADIS, SUZANNE. A  temps, /e  bonheur  ...
Beaumont, P.Q. 116  p
-. Les   enfants  continuels.  Beaumont,  P.Q.,
1959·  68  p.
PETIT,  LEON.  Fragments.  Montreal,  Editions de 1' Aube.  39  p.
PILON,  JEAN  GUY. La    mouette  et   /e   large.
Montreal, L'Hexagone. 70  p.
PREFONTAINE, YVES. L'antre du  poeme. Trois­ Rivieres, Editions  du   Bien   Public. 87   p.
RACINE, GERARD. Tragedie  a  Springhill,  par
Michel Aubier, pseud. Montreal,  Beauche­
min.
ROBERT, GUY. Broussailles givrees.  Montreal, Goglin, 1959.  71  p.
SMITH,  A.  J.  M.,  ed.   The  Oxford  book   of
Canadian verse  in  English and  French.  To­
ronto,  Oxford  University  Press.   445   p. TREMBLAY, GEMMA.  Rhapsodic auburn.  Mont­
real,  Beauchemin. 62 p.
 TROTTIER, PIERRE.  Les  belles  au  bois  dormant.
Montreal, L'Hexagone. 55  p.
UNION DES JEUNES  ECRIVAINS.  A  treize   voix.
Montreal, Nocturne, 1 959· 78 p.
-. Oasis. Montreal, Nocturne. 63  p. VIGNAULT,  GILLES. Etraves. Quebec,  Editions
de 1'Arc,  1 959·  167  p.


THEATRE
GELINAS, GRATIEN.  Bousil/e   et  /es  justes.  Que­ bec,  Institut  Litteraire  du   Quebec.  206  p. LANGUIRAND,    JACQUES.  Le    gibet.   Montreal,
Cercle  du  Livre de  France. 147  p. LAURENDEAU,   ANDRE. La   vertu  des   chattes.
Ecrits   du  Canada  franr;ais 5: I I 5-46,   I 959· LECLERC,  FELIX. Le   p'tit   bonheur  et  Sonnez les   matines.  Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1 959·
153  p.
LEGAULT,   EMILE. Kermesse  des   anges   et   des
hommes. Montreal, Fides. 63  p.
MOREAU, FRANCOIS. Les    taupes.  Ecrits    du
Canada  franr;ais 6:9-90.
SAVARD,   FELIX ANTOINE. La   folie.   Montreal, Fides.  91 p.
TOUPIN,  PAUL.   Le     mensonge.  Montreal,
L'Hexagone. 52  p.


BIOGRAPHIES
BALTHAZAR,  RITA. M a  sceur  Eulalie, par   Pia
Roseau,  pseud.  Montreal,   Beauchemin.
139  p.
-. Maman Youville, par   Pia   Roseau, pseud.
Montreal, Beauchemin. 107  p.
BEAUMIER,   JOSEPH  LOUIS. Marie   Guyart   de
/'Incarnation.   Trois-Rivieres,  Editions  du
Bien  Public, 1959.  266  p.
BENOIT, REAL. La   Bolduc. Montreal, Editions de !'Homme, 1959. 123  p.
BOUCHARD,   TELESPHORE DAMIEN. Memoires.
Montreal, Beauchemin. 3 v.
BRETON, P. E. Vital  Grandin. Paris, Montreal, Fayard. 366  p.
BRUCHESI, JEAN. Breve   histoire  d'une  longue
amitie.  Montreal,  Editions  des   Dix,   1959.
28 p.
CARRIERE,   GASTON. Un  apotre a  Quebec;  le
Pere  Flavien Durocher. Montreal, Rayonne­
ment. 192  p.

97

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



-. L'arpenteur du  bon  Dieu;  Mgr  Rheaume.
Montreal, Rayonnement. 224  p.
-. Le  Pere   Louis-Etienne Reboul.  Ottawa, Editions   de    l'U niversite  d'Ottawa,   I 959· I54  p.
COITEUX,    FERDINAND.   Pere   Didace    Arcand.
Montreal,  Editions Franciscaines.
DES   TROIS   RIVES,   JEAN.   Maurice   Duplessis.
Montreal,  Editions  du   Chateau.  I24   p.
DURAND,   LOUIS    D.   Laborieux, diligents,   de­ brouillards. Trois-Rivieres, Editions du  Bien Public, I959· 354  p.
 OUELLET,    FERNAND.   Louis-Joseph  Papineau, un   etre   divise. Quebec,  Societe Historique du  Canada. 24 p.
POULIOT,  LEON.   La   survie    de   Mgr    Bourget.
Montreal, Beauchemin. 63  p.
SOEURS    GRISES   DE   MONTREAL.   Beatification de Mere Marguerite d'Youville. Montreal, I959· 8o  p.
TOUPIN,  PAUL.  Souvenirs pour  demain.  Mont­
real,   Cercle  du   Livre de   France.  roo   p.
TRUDEL,    PAUL     EUGENE.    Mgr     Ange-Marie
Hirai;  4e   partie,  Gardien  et   provincial   a

GALARNEAU,    CLAUDE.
essayiste.  Quebec, Laval. 95  p.
 Edmond    de    Nevers,
Presses     Universitaires
 Montreal. Montreal,  Editions Franciscaines.
220  p.

GOSSELIN,  GERARD. Monsieur Hockey; Maurice Richard.  Montreal,  Editions  de  !'Homme. I25  p.
GROULX,  LIONEL   ADOLPHE.   Dollard   est-i{  un
mythe? Montreal, Fides.  57 p.
HORTULANE, pseud. Dans  le  jardin  de  Claire;
Yvonne  Bernard.  Montreal,  Rayonnement.
8o  p.
HUOT,  MAURICE. Journalistes canadiens. Trois­ Rivieres, Editions du  Bien Public, I 959· 9 I  p. LAURENDEAU,  ANDRE.  Voyages au pays del' en­
fance.  Montreal,  Beauchemin.  2 I 8  p.
LEFEBVRE, ESTHER.  Marie Morin. Montreal, Fides.  2 I I   p.
LELAND, MARIE ELIZABETH.  foseph-Frant;ois Perrault:  annees de jeunesse,  I7SS-I78J. Quebec, Presses   Universitaires Laval, 1959.
76 p.
MAGNAN, JEAN   CHARLES.  Confidences. Mont­
rea),  Fides. 207  p.
MAURAULT,  OLIVIER.  Confidences. Montreal, Fides.   I65  p.






g8
 LITTERATURE
DE JEUNESSE
ACHARD,  EUGENE.  Sur   les  sentiers de  la  Cote­ Nord.  Montreal,  Librairie  Generale   Cana­ dienne. 206  p.
ALLARD,   JEANNE     (GRISE)     Un  billet    pour
l'Espagne.  Montreal,  Beauchemin.  I22   p.
BALTHAZAR,   RITA.   Maman Youville, par   Pia
Roseau, pseud. Montreal, Beauchemin, 1959.
107  p.
BASTIN,   ROBERT.  A  la   forge   de   Dieu. Mont­
real,  Rayonnement, 1959? 32  p.
BERGERON,  PAUL  AIME. Le  bon  pasteur. Mont­
real,  L'Atelier, I 959· 76 p.
BOISVERT, LAURENT.  Grain de  Sel  au  pays  des M au   M au.    Sherbrooke,  Apostolat   de    Ia Presse,  1959.   II 9 p.
CHALVIN,   MICHEL.    Le    sous-marin  fantome.
Montreal, Beauchemin, 1959.  140  p.
CHARLES  HENRI,  FRERE. La  belle  aventure  de Ville-Marie, par   Dollard  des  Ormeaux, pseud.  Sherbrooke,  Apostolat  de   Ia  Presse,
1959·  204  p.
CORRIVEAU,   MONIQUE.   Le   secret    de   Vanille.
Quebec, Pelican, 1959.  92 p.
COUPAL, MARIE ANTOINETTE.  Une histoire fantastique.   Montreal,   Beauchemin,   1959.
86 p.
DAIGLE, JEANNE.  Grind'or. Sainte-Hyacinthe, P.Q., Editions d'Aigle. 51  p.
DOMEY,   CLAIRE.   Ilinishu, enfant des  bois,  v.  r.
Montreal, Rayonnement, I959·
DUCHAUSSOis,    PIERRE.   Femmes heroiques.
Montreal,  Rayonnement,  1959.   2v.
FONFON,  MAMAN. Le  bonhomme comme-ci, comme-t;a. Montreal, Fides.   r6  p.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



-. Le   medaillon  de   Lucia.  Montreal,  Fides.
J6  p.
-. Miki fait les  sucres.  Montreal, Fides.  16 p.
-. Monsieur Trop  et   Monsieur  Peu.   Mont- real,  Fides.   I 6 p.
-. Pablo   et  la  neige. Montreal,  Fides.  16  p.
-. Le  serin   volage.  Montreal,  Fides.    16   p. GREGOIRE-COUPAL,   MARIE-ANTOINETTE.   Des
yeux  noirs,  des  yeux   bleus. Montreal,  Beau­
chemin.
LAFLEUR, CLAUDE. Le    braconnier. Montreal, Fides.  16 p.
-. Les   loups  de  rna   foret.   Montreal,  Fides.
J6  p.
-. Maitre  Renard.  Montreal,  Fides.    16  p.
-. L'ours  apprivoise. Montreal,  Fides.   16  p. LAPLANTE, GERMAINE. Sans-souci.  Montreal,
Fides.
LA  TOUCHE, MME DE. Aventure dans  le  Grand
Nord. Montreal, Beauchemin.
-. Chasse   et   aventure.  Montreal,   Beauche­
min.
LEDUC, FRANCOISE. Pierre    et   son   aventure.
Montreal,  Rayonnement, 1959.   93  p. LEGAULT,  AGATHE.  Les  aventures de  Sigisbert.
Montreal,  Beauchemin,  1959.   62  p. LEGENDRE,  IRENE. Pompon  cherie. Montreal,
Beauchemin, 1 959·  6 I   p.
LEMOINE,  AMABLE MARIE.  Cesar,  ceux    qui vont    mourir   te   saluent.  Montreal,   Beau­ chemin. 139  p.
MARCHAND,  LOUISE. La   marraine  des  oiseaux.
Sherbrooke,  Apostolat  de   Ia   Presse,    1959.
152  p.
MATTEAU,   ROBERT. Six   de   La-Roche-jaseuse, par Robert d'Estrie, pseud. Montreal, L'Atelier. I 39  p.
MORENCY, LUCIEN.  L'adoption   de    Shirley.
Montreal, Fides. I6  p.
-. Le  lutin de  la  montagne.  Montreal,  Fides.
I6  p.
NANTAIS, LYSE  et   MADELEINE  LEMIEUX. Des cavernes  a  Cesar;  petite   histoire  de  l'anti­
quite. Quebec, Garneau. 88  p.
OUVRARD,   RENE. Le   mage   de   Chandernagor.
Montreal, Beauchemin. 126  p.
SCHMID, CHRISTOPH VON. Genevieve  de   Bra­ bant.  Sherbrooke,  Apostolat  de   Ia   Presse, I959· I53  p.
TESTORE, CELESTINO. Les    enfants  des   bois.
Sherbrooke, Apostolat de  la   Presse,    1959. I26  p.
THERIAULT,  YVES. Alerte  au  camp 29.  Mont-
 real,  Beauchemin. I 959· 62  p.
-. L'homme  de   la   Papinachois. Montreal, Beauchemin.
-. La   loi   de  !'Apache.  Montreal,  Beauche­
min.
-. La    revanche    du    Nascopie.   Montreal, Beauchemin, 1959.  6o  p.
TURCOT,   MARIE  ROSE. La   belle   Marie. Mont­
real,  Fides,   I 959·  29 p.
-. Les  bessons. Montreal,  Fides,   I959· 28  p.
-. Le  chevreuil  ensorceU.  Montreal,   Fides,
1959·  29 p.
-. L'oiseau vert. Montreal, Fides,  1 959· 29 p.
VERNAL,  FRANCOIS   CHARLES METZGER  DE. La villa   du    mystere.  Montreal,   Beauchemin,
'959· 86  p.

BIBLIOGRAPHIES
Canadian  index   to    periodicals    and    docu­ mentary  films.  v.   12,   1 959·  Ottawa,  Asso­ ciation   Canadienne   des    Bibliotheques    et Bibliotheque Nationale  du   Canada. 279   p. COMMISSION DES  ECOLES    CATHOLIQUES DE MONTREAL.   ]eunes,  voulez-vous  des  livres?
Montreal. 318 p.
FORD, A.   E.   Litterature   canadienne,   1959:
canadienne-frant;aise.   Canadian   literature
3: IOI-8,  hiver.
ROBITAILLE,   LUCIE. Bibliographie  de   Jinguis­ tique.  Academie   canadienne-franfaise.  Ca­  hiers  5:139-56.
TANGHE, RAYMOND.   Bibliographie  des   biblio­
graphies  canadiennes.  Toronto,   University of Toronto Press.  206  p.
UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  QUARTERLY.  Letters
in   Canada,   1 959·   University  of   Toronto quarterly 29: 529-66, juillet.

OUVRAGES CONSACRES A L'EDITION
ANON. Le   code   de   Ia   Presse   catholique   ap­ prouve   par    les   eveques.  Lectures   6: I 86,  fev.
-. Liberte  et   licence  de   Ia  presse.   Lectures
6: 282-3,  mai.
-. Les   prescriptions  de  l'Englise  en  matiere de    censure   ecclesiastique.  Lectures   7: 66, nov.

99

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



-. La   responsabilite  des  educateurs   en   ma­
tiere   de  lectures.  Lectures  6: 162,  fev. ANJOU, J.  D' Guide de  lecture enfantine.  Re­
lations 19:323-4, dec.  1959.
BARBEAU, VICTOR.  L'Academie     canadienne­ franijaise.  Montreal,   L' Academie  cana­ dienne-franr;aise. 84  p.
BUJILA,  BERNARDINE.   Michel  Bibaud's   Ency­
clopedic  canadienne.   Culture   21:117-32, juin.
DALLAIRE, HENRI. Le  journaliste et  son  drame.
Revue  Dominicaine  66:11-9,   jan.-fev. FILIATRAULT, JEAN.  Henry   Miller    et   notre
faculte   de    liberation.   Liberte   6o: 79-83, mars-avril.
GAY, PAUL. Les   revues   obscenes:  les  combat­
tre,    mais    surtout  les   remplacer.  Lectures
6: r87-90, fev.
GENEST, JEAN. Le  Devoir, hier  et  aujourd'hui.
Action  nationale  49:531-53,  mars.
HUOT, MAURICE.  ]ournalistes canadiens. Trois­ Rivieres,  Editions   du    Bien   Public,    1959.
91  p.
LAMARCHE,   ANTONIN. Les   cinquante  ans   du
Devoir. Revue Dominicaine 66: roo-2, mars.
-. L'heure  litteraire  du    Canada  fran<;ais. Revue  Dominicaine 66: 3-7,  juillet-aoO.t. MARTIN, PAUL A. Les  ceuvres   de   presse   dans
l'Eglise. Lectures 7: 58-6o, oct.
MAYRAND,   OSWALD. L'aposto[at   du   journa[­
isme. Montreal, Fides.  257  p.
OTTAVIANI, A.   Livres   et    censure.   Lectures
6: 130-3, jan.
PARENT,  c. E.  Le  probleme des  lectures.  Lec­
tures  6: I 57-8,  jan.
PILON, JEAN GUY. Situation de  J'ecrivain canadien de langue fran<;aise. Revue  de l'Universite Laval   15:55-64, sept.
ROY, MICHEL. La   Guilde du  Livre   se  propose
d'editer des  romans canadiens inedits en langue   fran<;aise.    Le    Devoir     51 : I 2,    16 avril.
ROY, PAUL EMILE. Le  livre  et  Ia  culture.  Lec­
tures  6:194-5, mars.
SIMON, LOUIS MARIE.  La  lecture  dans  [a   per­ spective catholique. Ottawa, Ecole  de Biblio­  theque de  l'Universite d'Ottawa.  I4  p.   (Et  dans le Bulletin de I'Association  Canadienne des    Bibliothecaires   de   Langue    Fran<;aise
5:6-I5, dec.  1959.)
SOCIETE DES  EDITEURS CANADIENS   DU   LIVRE FRANCAis.  Salon   du    livre    1959.   Quebec, I959· 40  p.

100
 WAITE. P.  B. The  Quebec resolutions and   Le Courrier du Canada, r864-I865. Canadian historical review 40: 294-303.



LINGUISTIQUE
ACADEMIE CANADIENNE-FRANCAISE.   Bulletin de linguistique. no.  31 -40,  jan.-dec.
-. Le   j ugement   des   professeurs;  sommaire de  l'enquete ... aupres des   colleges  mas­ culins  et    feminins  du    Quebec   en    I955· Academie   canadienne-franfaise.   Cahiers
5: I 35-8.
AN J ou, J.  D' A  Ia  "Soiree du  hockey". Rela­
tions  20:41, fev.
-. L'Acelf   et  notre parler. Relations 20: 262-
3, oct.
-. Alerte  aux   professeurs. Relations  20: 237, sept.
-. "Car  le   mot    c'est    le   verbe."  Relations
20: 181,   juillet.
-. U n    code   de    bon     langage.   Relations
20:265, oct.
-. Correction  mutuelle.   Relations   20: 291, nov.
-. De  quelques irreflexions. Relations 20: 16 r, juin.
-. Du    nouveau,   tout   de    suite.   Relations
20: 2 I 3, aoO.t.
-. lnsupportables  anglicismes. Relations
20:97, avril.
-. Reflechir  en   parlant,  en   ecrivant.  Rela­
tions  20: 126,  mai.
-. Souhaits  et    regrets   de    fete.    Relations
20: 3 r 9,  dec.
-. Tout  au   debut.  Relations 20: 13,   jan. BARBEAU,   MARIUS. Les   mots   indigenes.   Aca­
demie  canadienne-franijaise.  Cahiers  5:27-
34·
BARBEAU,  VICTOR. Les   anglicismes. Academie
canadienne-franijaise. Cahiers  5:4I-9.
-. Les   mots    dont   nous    souffrons.  Action nationale 50: 269-7 I, nov.
-. Les  sources.   Academie	canadienne­
fran Jaise. Cahiers 5: I I-24.
BOUTET, o.  Donnons-nous notre langue au Prince?   Action   nationale  49: 290-6,    dec. I959·
BRUNET,  MICHEL.  Naissance  du   bilinguisme.
Academie  canadienne-fran Jaise.  Cahiers
5:6I-7o.

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE



DAGENAIS,    GERARD.   Reflexions sur  nos   fafions d'ecrire  et   de   parler.   Fasc.    2-5.  Montreal, Cercle du  Livre de  France.
D'ALLEMAGNE,     ANDRE.    Les    americanismes.
Academic canadienne-fran,aise.   Cahiers
5:51-].
 HISTOIRE ET CRITIQUE  LITTERAIRE

OUVRAGES ET ARTICLES GENERAUX

DECARIE,  VIANNEY.  La   langue parlee au  Que­
bec:   qui   est  responsable? Cite libre   21 : 20-
r, oct.
 BAILLARGEON, S.
franraise.     2e
525 p.
 Litterature   canadienne­
ed.    rev.    Montreal,    Fides.

DULONG,   GASTON.    Les    canadianismes.   Aca­ demic    canadienne-fran,aise. Cahiers 5:35-9. GENDRON,    JEAN    LOUIS.    La    prononciation.
Academic canadienne-fran,aise.   Cahiers
5:121-32.
GROULX, LIONEL.  La  crise  du  franr;ais au  Que­
bec.  Le  Devoir 5 r  : 9, 24  dec.
HEBERT,   ANNE   et   FRANK   SCOTT.  La   traduc­
tion;  dialogue.  Ecrits  du   Canada   fran,ais
7: 195-236.
KLINCK,   GEORGE  A.    L'enseignement  du   fran­ r;ais   dans  nos   'ecoles   de   langue   anglaise. Revue de  l'Universite  Laval   15:43-54,  sept.  LACHANCE,   LOUIS.    Le    biiinguisme   scoiaire.
Academic canadienne-fran,aise.   Cahiers
5: ]I-88.
LAMARCHE,  GUSTAVE.  Le   biiinguisme  concen­
tre.   Action  nationale  50: 362-4, dec.
LEBEL, MAURICE. La langue parlee.  Quebec, lmprimerie  Franciscaine  Missionaire, r 959·
3 r     p.    (Et     dans   Revue   de    l'Universite
Laval 14:385-4II, jan.)
LEGER, J.  M. Le  salut  de  Ia  langue  franc;aise. Action  nationale  49: 56-63, sept.    '959· LORRAIN,   LEON.    Le    vocabulaire.   Academic
canadienne-franraise. Cahiers  5: 9 r- r 05.
POISSON,   JACQUES.  Les   educateurs  et  !'ame­ lioration  de   Ia   langue  parlee.   Action  na­ tionale 49: 2 70- r, dec.  r 959·
-. et  GUY  Dozors. Nos   universites  sont-elles franc;aises? Action  nationale, v. 49-50,   fev.­ nov.
ROBITAILLE, LUCIE.  Bibliographie de  !inguisti­ que.    Academic    canadienne-fran,aise.  Ca­  hiers  5: r 39-56.
SEGUIN,  ROBERT LIONEL.  Le  parler de  !'habi­ tant. Revue de  l'Universite  Laval   14:831-2, mai.
 BONENFANT,  JEAN  CHARLES.  Les  essais,  image
de  notre  milieu. Revue  Dominicaine 66: 38-
44, juillet-aoO.t.
GAGNON,  MAURICE.   Notre litterature, image  de notre milieu. Revue Dominicaine 66:8-17, juillet-aout.
HARVEY, JEAN  CHARLES.  Nous  sommes  encore
des  coloniaux  de  !'esprit.  Le   Devoir   51:9,
30  avril.
HAYNE,   DAVID  M.   Les   lettres  canadiennes  en
France.  Revue de l'Universite Laval   15: 222-
30, 328-33, nov-dec.
HENAULT, GILLES.  Une certaine vitalite et  des reserves    inconnues   d'energie.   Le    Devoir
5 r :9,  r 6 avril.
HORIC,   ALAN.  Litterature canadienne ou  fran­
c;aise? Le  Devoir 51 : 1 1, 28 mai.
LALONDE, MICHELE.  Les  influences immediates des  ecrivains canadiens-franr;ais.  Le   Devoir
51:11, 14 mai.
LEBEL,   MAURICE.   Histoire de  Ia  iitterature canadienne-franr;aise. Instruction   publique,
v. 4, I959-60.
PILON,   JEAN   GUY.  La   vie  litteraire  au   Can­ ada   frangais. Canadian  literature   5:55-61, ete.
POTVIN,  DAMASE.  Ecrivains nordiques.  Revue
de  l'Universite  Laval    I 5: I 55-65, oct.
ROBERT,    GUY.    Litterature  comparee,  1959.
Revue  Dominicaine  66:82-8, mars.
TOUGAS,   GERARD.  Histoire de  la  litthature canadienne-franfaise.   Paris,   Presses    Uni­ versitaires de France. 286 p.
VADEBONCOEUR, P.  Une gauche inactive.  Situ­
ations  r : r 6-26, nov.  r 959·


LE  ROMAN
DUHAMEL,    ROGER.   Roman et   theatre,  1959· University of Toronto  quarterly 29: 539-59, juillet.
MARTIN,   CLAIRE.  Notre roman, image de  notre
milieu. Revue  Dominicaine  66: r 8-24, juil­
let-aoO.t.


101

LITTERATURE CANADIENNE FRANCAISE




LA  POESIE

BESSETTE,    GERARD.     Les canadienne-franraise. min. 282  p.
 

images
Montreal,
 

en    poesie
Beauche-
 OUVRAGES CONSACRES
AUX ECRIVAINS

LOCKQUELL, CLEMENT. Notre   poesie,  image de
notre milieu. Revue  Dominicaine 66:45-7, juillet-aofi.t.
SYLVESTRE,  GUY.  La   poesie,   1959·  University of Toronto  quarterly 29:529-39, juillet.


LE THEATRE

ANON.    L'Ecole nationale du   theatre  ouvrira ses  partes le  2  novembre. Le   Devoir   51 : 9,
16  juillet.
AUTEUIL, GEORGES  HENRI  D'    Crise  du  theatre.
Relations 20: 36-7,  fev.
BEAULNE, ouY. Notre theatre, image  de notre milieu. Revue Dominicane 66: 25-37,  juillet­ aout.
BERAUD, JEAN.  350   ans  de  theatre au  Canada franrais.   Montreal,   Cercle   du    Livre    de France, 1959· 319  p.
BOBET,   JACQUEs.    Le    cahier   de    doleances.
Liberte 11 : 213-5,  mai-aoilt.
-. Le   heros,   !'anti-heros  et   le  dramaturge.
Liberte 1 1 : 301-6, oct.
DUHAMEL,    ROGER.   Roman et   theatre,   1959· University of Toronto  quarterly 29:539-59, juillet.
KEMPF,   YERRI.  Le   theatre et   les   justes.   Cite libre  11 : 28-9,  jan.-fev.
MARSOLAIS,  GILLES.   Eclairages  sur   Je   prob­ Jeme    du     theatre.  Revue     Dominicaine
66: 156-61, avril.
PRIMEAU,   MARGUERITE  A.    Gratien  Gelinas et le  Theatre  Populaire au   Canada  fran<;ais. C nadian
SAVARD, FELIX ANTOINE.  Je  vois Ja pressante necessite d'un  grand  theatre chez   nous.  Le Devoir  51:7,17  dec.


LA LITTERATURE DE  JEUNESSE

CLEMENT,     BEATRICE.    Notre  Jitterature de jeunesse. Relations  20: 234-7,   sept.




102
 
BARBEAU, VICTOR
CHARTIER,   EMILE.   Victor   Barbeau.  Lectures
7 :99-1 oo,  dec.

BLAIS, MARIE CLAIRE
ANON.     Marie-Claire Blais.    Quill  and    quire
26:10, 14, Noel.
DAVIS,  M.  1.   La   belle   bete;  pilgrim unto life.
Tamarack  review    16:51-9, ete.
RIGGAN,   B.    Lightning on   the    literary   land­
scape.  Saturday  night    75:14-17,  19   mars.

CONAN, LAURE
DUMONT,  MICHELINE.   Laure  Conan.  Lectures
7:67-9, nov.

DESROCHERS, ALFRED
LEGARE,  ROMAIN.  Alfred Desrochers. Lectures
6: 228-30, avril.

FRECHETTE, LOUIS
DASSONVILLE,  MICHEL.   Louis   Frechette.   Lec­
tures  7:35-7, oct.

GARNEAU, SAINT DENYS
GARNEAU,   SAINT-DENYS.    Lettres a   Jean   Je
Mayne.  Ecrits  du   Canada  franrais   5: 205-
63,  1959·
HAYNE,  DAVID M.  A  forest   of  symbols; an  in­
troduction  to   Saint-Denys-Garneau.   Cana­
dian  Literature 3:5-16, hiver.
LE   MOYNE,   JEAN.    Saint-Denys-Garneau,   te­ moin de  son  temps. Ecrits du  Canada   fran­ rais  7:9-34·
ROBILLARD,  HYACINTHE    M.   De   Saint-Denys­
Garneau;  destinee inachevee. Revue  Domi­
nicaine 66: 282-9,  juin.

GARNEAU, FRANCOIS  XAVIER
SYLVESTRE,    GUY.    Fran<;ois-Xavier Garneau. Dans McDougall, Robert L.,  ed.  Our  living tradition, 2d  and  3d  series.  University of Toronto Press,   1959.   p.  170-84.
