$2.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·55
Winter, 1973




DISCOVERIES	JIND	REDISCOVERIES





Articles

BY D. G.  JONES, CARL  BERGER, JEAN-LOUIS  MAJOR, ROBERT GIBBS, MARIE-GERTRUDE GRENIER, DOROTHY LIVESAY


Review Articles and Reviews

BY  PETER STEVENS,  ANDREAS SCHROEDER, RALPH GUSTAFSON,
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH,  HERBERT ROSENGARTEN, RONALD SUTHERLAND, ALAN SHUCARD,  FRANK  DAVEY, LINDA ROGERS, LAURENT MAILHOT, NORMAN NEWTON, JOHN  REID, ROLAND BONVALET





A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








HORIZON OF SURVIVAL







BECAUSE THE  LIFE OF   MOST WRITERS  is a struggle-for money, for acceptance, even for the very time to write-they are inclined to see their careers largely in terms of survival, and  in a deeper,  more biological sense, the  theme of survival enters into  a great deal  of classic  literature from  the Odyssey,  surely  the  prototype  of  the  survival  epic,  down  to  Zola  and  Hardy, down-in our own time-to works like Camus's The  Plague and even to 1984, where the survival  power of the proles is one of the novel's leading  themes.
Is there,  then, a special way in which Canadians  are committed  to the idea of
survival? That such  a commitment  has shaped  our literature  is one of the  basic themes  of  Margaret Atwood's  first critical  work,  Survival   (Anansi,  $3.25), in which, following  the example  of Northrop  Frye in The  Bush Garden and  D. G. Jones in Butterfly  on Rock, she outlines yet another schematic view of the nature of writing in Canada.
There  can  be  no  doubt  of  Margaret  Atwood's  qualifications  for  this kind  of
task. In  less than  a decade  since her first book of verse appeared   (other  than  a brief pamphlet  in I g6 I ) she has established herself as one of the leading  poets of this  country,  and  her  two  novels, The   Edible Woman and  Surfacing, have  ex­ tended  into  wider frames  that  extraordinary intellectual  clairvoyance  which  has enabled   her  to  see so  many  human   predicaments   with  a  lucidity  that  many people find distressing because it endangers  their images of a safe life.
Survival  is a fine example  of what  happens  when  a  highly analytical  intelli­ gence of this type becomes involved in the kind of task that is usually performed by semi-writers  on  the  principle  that  "in  the kingdom of the blind  the one-eyed man is king."  It  was originally  planned  "as a teacher's  guide for the many  new courses in Canadian literature", but what has emerged from that plan is a highly


3

EDITORIAL



intelligent  series of critical  insights and  controversial  arguments that  will leave most students  bewildered.  It  is as if Third-Eye  were trying  to instruct  One-Eye on  how to guide  No-Eye on  a tortuous  quest  after  the  Canadian psyche as  re­ vealed  in our  literature.  Yet, juxtaposed  with  the ten  brilliant  essay chapters on various  aspects of the literary  persona  (a  particularly fascinating  one is on  the key role of animal  literature), there remain  the fragments  of  apparatus that  be­ long  to  the  originally  conceived  easy  guidebook -the  lists  of  recommended texts, the "fifteen  useful books", the appendices  devoted  to  research resources - and  this has resulted in a strangely hybrid book with clumsy outlines. It is best to forget  the  apparatus (those who have  read  enough  to appreciate Margaret  At­ wood's  arguments  will not  need it in any  case)  and  to concentrate on the sub­ stance of the essays.
Margaret   Atwood  presents,  and  supports   with  many  shrewdly  chosen  ex­ amples, the theory  that  our literature  is still scarred  and  mis-shapen  by the state of mind  that  comes from a colonial situation; she even has charts  which tell us how to  define the  degree of acceptance  or  rejection  which  a writer's  work dis­ plays. This  situation,  she suggests, has  made  ours  a  literature of  failure.  Our  greatest  triumphs  as a nation  have  been achieved  by blind  collective urges;  the "heroes" we name in connection  with them  tum  out to be at  best outward  suc­ cesses (rotten   with  the  consciousness of ultimate  failure  by any  standards that count)   and  often  not  even  that.  Thus  our  literature  reflects an  attitude to life that aims no higher than survival.
It is certainly  a thesis that  isolates a habit  of thought  to which  Canadian in­
tellectuals  are liable. We pride ourselves on our ironic  modesty. When this  jour­ nal-whose  basic subject  is the  same as  Margaret  Atwood's-celebrated  ten years of publication,  the editorial  was entitled  not "A  Decade  of Achievement", but  "Getting away  with  Survival".  Indeed,  Margaret  Atwood's  special merit  is to  have  condensed  into  a sharp  focus the scattered  insights  which  many  other critics  have  already  formulated  or  half-formulated  about  the  Canadian condi­ tion.  In  developing  her thesis, which  certainly  fits  many  of the facts about  our life and  literature, she presents a salutary  picture  (and  salutary  in this case, as in most  cases,  means  depressing)   of  a  people  who  express  their  nature  only  in struggle against the forces of economic and cultural  frustration which turn almost every Canadian work of writing into a depressive reflection on our slavery.
Yet  I  cannot  accept  Margaret  Atwood's  vision in its detailed  entirety,  and  I suspect  she  does  not  anticipate  such  literal  and  complete  conversion  from  any reader; rather  she has been occupied in creating  a logical horizon  within which

4

EDITORIAL



we can seek our bearings. It is possible to find many important Canadian writers who fit only square-peggedly into the pattern  of failure and smvival she presents. Robertson   Davies,  I feel,  does  not  belong,  nor  does Irving  Layton  or  Robert Kroetsch,  and  Hugh   MacLennan and  AI Purdy  fit the  pattern  only  partially. Margaret Atwood has in fact drawn  quite heavily on a restricted group of young novelists and  poets to  make  her  most  telling points. She could  have  made  the points  even  more  telling  if she  had  not  been  too modest  to  draw  on her  own verse and  fiction,  and  one  suspects a  temperamental inclination   has led  her  a long part of the way towards her conclusions.
Yet the poets and  novelists of failure and survival still surround us in a  haunt­ ing circle, too numerous  not to give a special tone to Canadian writing. And can we be sure that  these are  not  the writers who give faithful  expression to our in­ most urges? Are we not, as a people, inclined to be content  with pulling through rather  than  triumphantly succeeding?  Yet even this  does not  mean  one has to accept literally  Margaret Atwood's  thesis that  it is colonial economic domination  that  has made  Canadians so obsessed with failure. The theme of survival is, after all, not  unique; as one of Margaret  Atwood's fellow  poets remarked  in a letter that  reached  me today,  "survival  is the spine of  worldlit !"  Canadians may dis­ play an extreme  case of this concern with survival, but so did the Eskimos to an even  more  advanced degree,  and  it  was  geographical,  not  colonial  economic, factors  that  produced  the original  survival arts of the north.  Yet, considered  as a critical  tool, a frame  of reference, a  usable hypothesis, it is hard  not to accept Atwood's  horizon of survival  as the  circle that  best defines the bounds of Cana­ dian writing.


* 	* 	*


CoMMENCING  with  this issue, Canadian  Literature will grow in  size to  between   120 and   128 pages  an  issue. This  enlargement of  content represents  an  expansion  of scope. In  the  past our  pages have  been in  principle devoted  to the  criticism  of Canadian writing  in both  French  and  English,  but up to now we have in practice  done little more than  signal from Vancouver  our
cordial  feelings  towards   writers  in  Quebec; on  an  average  less than   10% of
our  material  has been in French.  With  the increased size of our  journal,  which has been made  possible in part  by a special grant from  the Canada Council, we shall  be  able  within  1973  to  increase  to  at  least  25%   the  proportion   of  our

5

EDITORIAL



content  devoted -in French  or  in  English -to the  discussion  of  writing  in Quebec,  and  in later years we hope further  to expand  that  proportion. Thus  we shall  be  able  at  last  to  fulfil  the  second  of  the  aims  with  which  Canadian Literature  started  publication  more  than  thirteen  years ago.  The  first of  these aims was to establish a high and  consistent standard of reviewing  and  criticism in Canada, and  if we have not been wholly successful in this task  (as the  book pages of so many  newspapers still suggest by their  abysmal inadequacy) at  least we can  point  to the vast growth  of serious studies of Canadian writers-many of  them   published  in  our  pages-since  Canadian   Literature   first  appeared. Our  second  original  aim was to  produce  a  journal  that  on  the  level of literary achievement  rather  than  political fantasy  would  bring  the  two  leading  cultures of Canada together.  Politics did intervene,  particularly during  the middle  1g6os, to frustrate  this intention,  but at last we hope that  we have earned  enough credit and  trust  in all parts  of Canada for our  project  of a truly  comprehensive  organ of  Canadian criticism  to  gain  what  all  of  us -led  by  Margaret  Atwood - suspect to be the  prime Canadian achievement: survival,  with any other success
an astonishing  bonus.
G.W.














CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at

the bookstore
UNIVERSITY  OF BRITISH COLUMBIA VANCOUVER 8, B.C. 	228-4741


6



MYTH,  FRYE

AND CANADIAN WRITERS



D. G. Jones







WEN ROBERT KROETSCH  publffihed The  Wo.d<  of My Roaring  in  rg66,  I thought,  the Canadian writer is finally home free. It was the first really exuberant novel to come out of the west. After those laborious  novels of Grove's  in  which  the  heroes struggle  to defeat  or ironic  self-discovery; after the  beautifully  realized  but  wracking winter of the soul from  which the hero of Ross's As For Me  and My  House emerges, reborn, but barely;  after the torturous journeys  and   almost  pyrrhic  victories of  the  women  in  Margaret   Laurence's novels, Kroetsch's  hero  moves with  a kind  of magnificent  inevitability  towards his own triumphant self-realization.
J. J. Backstrom,  undertaker   and  political candidate, has  neither  money  nor
education   nor  influence.  He  is running  on the  coat  tails of Bible Bill Aberhart and  his evangelical  politics. But that  has little to do with  his success. He lives in his own imagination; like the studhorse man in the later novel he lives in his own myth,  larger  than   life.  Aware  as  anyone  of  the  depression,  the  drought, the general  helplessness of  his  world  to change  the situation,   he  is full  of energy. Bitten or badgered  as he may be by a nagging wife, by personal and  mechanical failures, by his own sense of the impossibility and folly of his contesting the elec­ tion against the elderly, respected and repeatedly successful local doctor, he none­ theless shakes  these  annoyances  off as a  grizzly might  shake  off the  rain.  And with  the  rain  he wins the  doctor's  daughter  and the  doctor's seat in  the legisla­ ture as well.
Here  too  we find  the  first real garden  in prairie fiction. And  there  the  great
man -"I  have  these big fists," he says, "I have these perfect teeth" -lies with the moon, the waterlilies, the doctor's  daughter. He is Adam  in Eden, unused to the place but nevertheless making himself at home.

7

MYTH, FRYE AND CANADIAN WRITERS






l:E POET is the nth Adam, wrote A. M. Klein:

taking  a green  inventory in world but scarcely uttered, naming, praising, the flowering fiats in the meadow, the
syllabled fur, stars aspirate, the pollen whose sweet collision sounds  eternally. For  to praise

the world -he, solitary man -is breath
to him. 	Until it has been praised, that  part has not been. 	Item  by exciting  item-
air to his lungs, and pressured  blood to his heart  - they are pulsated, and  breathed, until  they map,
not the world's,  but his own body's chart!

So Klein, the city-dweller, despite the "daily  larcenies of the lung,"  proclaimed in 1948, nearly ten years before The  Anatomy of Criticism. And three years later in The  Second Scroll he celebrated  the imagination of a whole people, in Israel, recreating the collective poem of language.
In 1954, Irving Layton wrote:

And  me happiest  when I compose  poems.
Love, power, the huzza of battle are something, are much;
Yet a poem includes  them like a pool water  and  reflection.
In me nature's divided  things­
tree, mould  on tree - have their fruition;
I am their core. 	Let them swap, bandy, like a flame swerve.
I am their  mouth; as a mouth I serve.

The  poet speaks  with  confidence. As in  the  case of Klein,  it is a  confidence rooted in a clear conception of the function  and capital  importance of the imagi­ nation,  and  one very like Frye's, that  the imagination creates, and  in the case of the  writer,  creates  through  the  word,  the  myth  within  which  men  may  live in communion  with  all life, within  which all separate  lives, nature's divided  things, may find their identity  with the whole of life, with the result that they may praise instead of curse the world.

8

MYTH, FRYE AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



Frye did  not create  this conception.  It was anticipated  by the writers. As Frye would  say,  he  found  it  in  the  literature  of the world.  But  it  was  particularly anticipated by such  writers  as the American  Wallace Stevens, and,  in terms still closer to  Frye, by such  Canadian writers as Klein and  Layton  and  even Ernest Buckler in The  Mountain and the Valley, published in 1952.
rrhe  basic conception  of the  poetic imagination  given such elaborate articula­ tion in his critical  theory  is not peculiar  or opposed to the main  development  of Canadian literature or the  Canadian writer's imaginative  convictions. Rather,  I suggest that  it is but  one more expression, given detailed  articulation in critical or  analytical   terms,  of  a  more  general  conviction  arrived  at  by  a  number  of writers and  given a special development  in Canada at about  the same time. It is shared  not only by such writers as Jay Macpherson and James  Reaney, who may be suspected of being directly influenced by Frye, but also by those who ostensibly see him  as an  enemy,  Layton,  for  example,  and  Dudek,  whose  Atlantis,  in  its basic image  and  theme,  develops entirely  within the same perspective as Frye's. What could sound more like Frye than these lines?

Not an individuality but an identity
is what we are. That continues, as it lives in the body
in fraternity with things and men.
It is the whole reality that is always there;
something that we are, that we become,
that now we cannot know or share.

Most of our  world is fragmentary, but  the poet goes on to evoke the vision of a glimmering Atlantis:

An architecture of contradictions and inexorable chances reconciled at last,
in a single body.

Atlantis, alone, he concludes is real.

More  surprising  still is the fact  that  this conception of the  poetic imagination is shared   by  Canadian writers  working  in  another  language  and,  presumably, another  literary  tradition.
Gabrielle  Roy's  allegorical  novel  La  Montagne   secrete voices the  conviction
that  it  is the  artist's  role to  make articulate  all that  is inarticulate, that  in  him and  through  his creation  nature's divided things will have their fruition, discover their  community  with each other, their identity in a single body, that,  as a conse-


9

MYTH, FRYE AND CANADIAN WRITERS



quence,  life may be praised. As the narrator says early in the story:  "Thus it was that  Pierre  discovered what was expected of persons like himself (i.e. the artists)
-that they should, thanks to them, rejoice and be sustained by hope."
Anne  Hebert  arrived  at the same conclusion a few years earlier in a talk  pub­ lished  in  I958  with  the significant  title,  "Poesie:  solitude  rompue." There she proclaimed,  "Notre  pays-our country  has arrived  at the first days of  creation; life here is to be discovered and  named." And  the  convictions expressed in that essay provided  the  basic poetic  platform  for  the  Quebec  poet  throughout the sixties. Whether  he said so explicitly or not, the poet  became the nth Adam, call­ ing for and  taking  a green inventory in world but scarcely uttered.  One  may list a  few  titles:   Yves Prefontaine's  Pays  sans  parole,  Roland  Giguere's  Age  de  la parole, Gatien  Lapointe's  Le  premier  mot, or Mile Hebert's  own poem, "Mystere  de Ia parole," where she writes:

Silence, nothing stirs, nothing speaks, the word breaks, lifts our hearts,  seizes the world  in a single thunderclap, binds us to its dawn as the rind  to the fruit.

The  poem concludes with a kind of prayer that  he who has received the office of the word  take charge  of all the oppressed and  disinherited  as of a heart  grown dark  with  unrealized  life, that  both  the living and  the dead  may find their  lives justified in a single song between the grasses and the morning light.




W,TH THIS  LARGE   AFFIRMATION of poetic faith,  there is a sense in which Canadian writing comes of age. Klein or Layton  or Anne Hebert have a clear  raison d'etre  for their activity, and  they write with a profound con­ viction  as to  the  central  importance   and  power  of the  imagination. No  doubt
that shrewd  chameleon A. J. M. Smith had implied some such idea of a poetry's
worth  in  News   of the  Phoenix  and  A  Sort  of Ecstasy.  Some  of  F.  R.  Scott's poems have an intensely confident elan.  Pratt's long and  unfailing  career implies such  confidence.  And  the  gist of "Brebeuf" and  "Towards the  Last  Spike"  is precisely that  it is imagination  that  creates  a  vision of community  and  inspires men to realize it. Birney too has an unquenchable vitality and  he has a stubborn faith  in the imagination  of Mrs. A. or Everywoman,  who saves Vancouver  from damnation. But  he is also a man  on  the  run,  sniping  at  a  world  in which  the

IO

MYTH, FRYE  AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



individual   imagination struggles  to survive  and  frequently  loses, and  in  which the collective imagination is most likely to create a nightmare of destruction.
I  remember  receiving a note one summer  in which Layton  wrote that  he was writing  poems like a burst  waterspout.  He  has been doing  that  for years. If we look back on the poets before him we do not get this impression of exuberant fecundity.
Roberts  peters out  between  a wilful optimism and  a spontaneous  melancholy. Lampman dreams,  increasingly  alone, in the wintry fields. In  French,  Nelligan begins with a magnificent  series of poems inspired by a passionate but hopelessly exclusive ideal and  founders  on the rocks of the excluded  reality;  much  like the early Duncan  Campbell  Scott's  Piper of Arll, he sinks in his golden ship in a sea of  self-doubt.  Saint-Denys-Gameau,  a  truly  original  talent,  turns  on  himself, denies his joy three  times over and  forsakes the creative  word for the iron cross of dogmatic  faith.  P. K.  Page  struggles against  a metallic  logos, an  impersonal technical  and  rational  order  whose perspective must be resisted within  as well as without,  and for some years she is silent, preferring to map  her own body's chart in a graphic  line less prejudiced  by analytic  reason. As Margaret  Avison puts it in her poem "Perspective," speaking of those who reduce their world to a rational geometry, "your fear has me infected."
It is the  doubt   within  that  is most corrosive:  the  artist's  suspicion  that  his
audience  is indifferent  or hostile; worse, his complicity with his audience,  with a world suspicious of the wild energies or dreams loosed by the imagination. Some novels seem  designed  to  dramatize  our  divided  mind  in  regard  to imaginative vision.
Callaghan's novels are  a record of the defeat of the imagination. And it is the doubt,  the indecision of the best as well as the worst that  often ensures its defeat. McAlpine  in The   Loved  and  the  Lost is an  intelligent,  highly educated,  liberal person.  He  is even  in  love with  the  girl,  Peggy Sanderson,  whose  vision of a more  open  society  nonetheless  shocks him.  No more  than  the  rest of his world can  he  trust  in  an  order  arising from  dreaming  desire, in  an  imagination   that couples black and white, the church and the leopard. His distrust ensures the destruction of the girl. He abandons  her the night she is murdered.
George Stewart  in  MacLennan's The  Watch that  Ends the  Night  is a similar case. He loves the girl Catherine and admires  her masculine counterpart Jerome Martell,  but  he stands  incredulous  before their faith  in "Eros,  builder  of cities". He trembles as they pour themselves out in exuberant activity as if they were themselves the  creations  and  instruments  of dreaming  desire and  the community


I I

MYTH, FRYE  AND CANADIAN WRITERS



it  would  create.  Catherine  and  Jerome  live in  their  own  myths. Almost to  the end,  Stewart  remains  a  student,  fascinated  by the  power  of  that  insubstantial vision which  they  proceed  to make incarnate in  their  lives. He  ends a convert, but we can be pretty certain he will never be among the saints.
Sinclair  Ross's As For Me  and My  House was entirely  preoccupied  in drama­
tizing  and   exorcising  that  inner  division  or  self-doubt.   When  Philip  Bentley finally submits  to Eros, risks rebirth  in an illegitimate  child, he ends his compli­ city,  resigns from  the  church  and  resolves to  be  no  more  and  no less  than  an artist.  Yet it  is not  clearly within  the scope  of  the  book  to  indicate  what  this means, and  the  conclusion as it stands does not suggest that  the artist  will have a particularly large or important role to play, or that  the life of the imagination may  be of profound  influence. Mr. Bentley may do no more than open a book­ store  in  Winnipeg  and  sketch, which  for his own soul's  health  and,  to a slight degree, for that  of the body politic, may be something  but not much.
Other  novels such  as Mitchell's  Who  Has Seen  the  Wind  or  Wiseman's  The Sacrifice may be seen to touch obliquely on this theme  and  to be more hopeful. Sheila  Watson's  The   Double  Hook  was one  book  which,  in form  as in  theme, affirmed  the  central  importance  of imagination, of vision or myth, in creating  a community  in a world divided and infected with fear. Yet none of these authors has impressed us by writing like a burst waterspout.
These  are  no  doubt  questionable  and  certainly  invidious  comparisons.  Yet
thinking  back  on so much  of our  writing,  noting  how even Souster  depreciates his muse, disguising  her in  the most ordinary,  even  dumpiest  dress, remarking how Dudek  seems compelled to document  his vision with fragments  of  conversa­ tions and observations on two continents, as if they were droppings from Pegasus, guaranteed evidence  of the  scientific validity  of the  vision of  Atlantis,  we may detect  a  certain  inhibition  and  doubt,  a lack  of faith  or fear  of heights in  the writer,  especially  if  we  turn  to  a  Layton  or  a  Frye  or  an  Anne  Hebert   for comparison.




LAYTON IS  PROBABLY our first important poet to pour out books, good, bad or indifferent, with an absolute conviction  as to the significance of poetry and  the power of the word. He creates and  lives in his own myth, most validity in his role of poet in the poems themselves. There he becomes Orpheus, Adam,  the  dying and  rising god, the living word  through  whom  the identity  of

12

MYTH, FRYE  AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



all nature's divided  things is manifest. He is worshipped and  praised, for through him  the  vision  of  the  community  of living  things is ever  created  anew,  life is justified and men may praise, not the god but the world.
At best, it is not in himself but in his office as poet, as instrument  of the imagi­
nation,  that  Layton  finds his authority.  As such, it does not matter  what  sort of scribbler  his particular audience  may think  him to be;  he knows that  the poet is not irrelevant  or powerless, but  central  to their lives. As he says in "The Fertile
Muck":
... if in August joiners and bricklayers are thick as flies around us
building expensive bungalows for those who do not need them, unless they release
me roaring from their moth-proofed cupboards their buyers will have no joy, no ease.

It is he who can extend their rooms for them, enlarge their world.
"How   to  dominate   reality?"  the  poet  asks, and  replies,  "Love  is one  way, imagination another." And, as the final image of the poet sitting with his consort implies, surely they  are  inseparable.  Eros inspires us with the vision of what  we would create,  and  the imagination comprehends  that  vision along with its oppo­ site. It comprehends the  distance  between what  we are and  what  we might  be, without  losing faith  in the transforming power of dreaming  desire. Its  capacity,  as Frye would say, to provide the goals of human work.
It is, I suggest, the courage of such convictions that  has increasingly sustained a  number  of writers  in  this country  and  contributed  to the  remarkable literary production  of the fifties and sixties. Such convictions are shared  by other  writers, of  course.  By Blake, who  has  contributed   a  good deal  of Frye's  conception  of poetry, but  also in varying degrees by a Rilke, a Yeats or a Breton, whom  Prof. Alquie cites in his rather dry observation:
The surrealist idea that "the imaginary is what tends to become real" is calculated on the casualty of desire. Desire tends in effect to realize what it imagines.

I  quote  M.  Alquie's  remark,  because  long  before anyone  in  Quebec  had  ever heard  of Northrop Frye,  the  poets and  painters  were being strongly  influenced by the surrealists. That is not an influence shared by writers in English Canada, though  it  has contributed to a shared  conception  of the  nature  and  function  of poetry. Yet that  conception,  I suspect, would have developed any way in Quebec, and  it often  appears  closer in its terms to a Frye or a Klein or a Layton  than  to Breton or Professor Alquie.

MYTH, FRYE AND CANADIAN WRITERS



Fernand  Ouellette describes his coming to be a poet as a spiritual  birth, an experience  of  liberation  consequent  upon  his  intimate   recognition  of  the  two poles of life, the  dark  and  the  light,  and  of  the  need  to  reject  a  Jansenist  or Manichean dualism in favour of a vision that  comprehends them both  (a central theme  in recent Quebec poetry and,  as I have tried to suggest elsewhere at some length,  in  English-Canadian literature  as  well).  Ouellette,   writing  of  how the profound  affront of death, as the ultimate privation, is yet comprehended  or transformed  on the poetic or metaphysical level by an even more devouring  hope or expectation,  remarks:

It's the awareness of death and of hope which transforms me into a demiurge, and not all the "isms", such as surrealism.

Certainly  Anne  Hebert  arrived  at  her  view of  poetry  through  a  painful  ex­ ploration  of her own imaginative  world, discovering gradually that  her  personal imprisonment  in  silence,  her  sense  of  isolation  and   paralysis,  was  shared   by others  and  was indeed  a reflection of a cultural  paralysis, a collective vision be­ queathed by the past. She came to recognize and  reject the past, in the rapacious kings who, in "Le  Tombeau  des rois", propagate themselves through  her;  in the wraith-like  Michel,  who secludes his bride  in the  closed  rooms of the novel Les chambres  de bois and  cannot  bring himself to consummate their marriage; in la grande Claudine, the bitter, puritanical  and  fierce jailor to her son Frant;ois who begins the story "Le  Torrent" by saying, "I was a child  born  dispossessed of the world."
For  Anne  Hebert,  rejecting  the old vision and  going on  to articulate  a  new, was again  a liberation  and  a birth  into the world. It  was a living demonstration of the  transforming power of the  word.  In  her  1958 essay on  poetry,  "Poesie: solitude rompue", she writes :

... I believe in the virtue of poetry, in the clarion health of all just speech, lived and articulate. I believe in the solitude broken like bread by poetry.

A year later,  during  a round-table discussion of Canadian literature, the critic
Gilles Marcotte  broke in at the end to say:

Je  tiens a souligner  ... I am concerned above all to emphasize that  literature is not simply a diversion, however noble; it is one of the means we have been given to be born into  the world, to possess the world. Under  this head, the attention which we give to Canadian books is a human act of extreme importance. We can­ not  abstract  ourselves with impunity-that is, without  becoming  humanly  im-

MYTH, FRYE  AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



poverished-from the literary or artistic creation taking place in our midst-at the point I would dare to say of our incarnation ... Besides, to my way of  think­ ing, it  is impossible to  be truly interested in  literature-conceived  again  as a means of possessing the world -while  totally ignoring that  which is  being born right here.

Robert  Kroetsch  was to say essentially the same thing, more simply, during the interview  with  Margaret Laurence  included  in  the  volume  Creation  published by Anansi last year:

"In  a sense," he said, "we haven't got an identity until someone tells our story. The fiction makes us real."

It  is much  the  same  conviction  that  lifts John  Newlove out of his usual  pre­ occupations  with  the  experience  of isolation,  the  lack  of  communication  even between lovers, to a large vision of communion that forms the rather magnificent peroration  to  his poem  "The Pride".  There  the  Indian  and  the  white man,  the dead  and  the  living,  all  will find themselves at  home  at  last,  "in amazement", when  the  whole  of  their  lives have  been  grasped  and  made  articulate   by the imagination. Then,   he  says,  we  shall  dwell  on  nothing   else  but  those  rooted words;  we shall dwell in nothing  else. We shall become the others in our desires, which are  their  "hard-riding desires". That  vision may be compared  to Layton's  in  "A  Tall  Man  Executes  A Jig",  where  the tall man  finally comprehends  the living  and  the  dead,  the  bones of badgers  and  raccoons, all the generations  of life, englobes them,  digests them, and  becomes one body with the world.



DESPITE DUDEK's irritation  at Frye's emphasis on the Bible as furnishing  the  most  complete  grammar  of the  western  imagination, we may note that  many  of the  terms used by the writers themselves are Biblical, that  the more profound  religious concepts furnish the language  in which they define their experience of poetry and their sense of its significance.
Anne  Hebert   managed  to  effect  an  imaginative   revolution  without   cutting herself off entirely from her cultural  heritage. She re-interpreted the Christian tradition of her province  giving new stress to the incarnation  of the Word, to the figure of Adam  making  articulate  the  Word incarnate, naming  and  praising  the world, to the  communion of all life realized in and  through  the word. And  this was doubly  possible because she could see in the religious experience  defined in these theological concepts the analogy to her experience of poetry.

MYTH, FRYE AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



The  poet  is not,  she protests, the  rival  of God;  but  a  witness to  His  grace. Perhaps  she would  concur  with  Coleridge in saying  that  the imagination  is the repetition in the finite mind of the infinite "I am". Certainly  it is difficult in Miss Hebert's  view not to see him as the rival of the priest.
However  that  may  be, the function  of the  writer  has taken  on something  of that  large significance during  the past two decades. He  is the imaginative  man, whose vision reveals and  whose articulation makes possible an order and  a com­ munity.  For some in Quebec it may be primarily  a community  of  language  and culture.  For many  it goes well beyond that  to mean  a community with the land and  the sensuous world, the world of action  and  their own bodily life. And such a community  is most explicitly evoked in  Newlove's "The Pride", and, in terms of its absence, in  Atwood's  poems on Susanna  Moodie  or  "Backdrop Addresses Cowboy",   where  the  indifferent   and  hostile  progress  of   western  man   across North  America  is seen to have developed an absurd  Hollywood parody of a real community.  And  it is a spiritual  failure, as the  voice which speaks for the land, for the dead,  for the community  of life not  realized,  indicates  in the concluding lines, saying, "I am  the space you  desecrate/as you pass through." For finally it is a vision of a  universal communion  that  is implied  or explicitly adumbrated in the work itself.
Gwen  MacEwen   may follow strange  gods, those figures whom  Miss Atwood
characterizes  as the  male muse, and  in whom  the  world  and  the word  become one. But when  we are  addressed as "My  friends,  my sweet  barbarians" and  in­ vited  to  "consume  our  mysteries", though  in  a  world  of computers  and  super­ highways and Alexandrian  libraries, we are being invited  to the same communion  meal as Anne Hebert  had in mind. Miss MacEwen wishes us "bon appetit", but she also reminds  us not to forget the grace. The  world of Breakfast  for Barbarians is a world  of continuous  incarnation and  transubstantiation. Consuming  we be­ come one body with the world, which is the word incarnate.
Paul Chamberland's career seems designed to illustrate  Frye's theory of histori­
cal modes and  his view that  since the  1gth century  we have been moving from a low mimetic  through  an  ironic towards  a new  mythical  mode. Chamberland begins with  the  inherited  tradition  of symbolist and  surrealist  poetry;  he moves in  The   Sign  Poster  Howls  and  The   Unspeakable   through   a  period  of  ironic tirades,  confessions of pain  and  outrage  reminiscent  of Ginsberg's  "Howl" and other  poems:  he has now begun to speak like a prophet,  in oracular  utterances, proclaiming  the  spiritual  truths  of the age  of Aquarius,  announcing the immi­ nent birth of the gods. It is a world of myth in which he writes:

MYTH, FRYE  AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



I have placed my confidence in the whole of reality
in the immense
joyous and beautiful child bride
whose body
is riddled with suns

Chamberland is now  the  William  Blake of Quebec  poets, proclaiming the  reality of vision,  the  sanctity of Eros,  the  infernal divinity  of man  as God's  accomplice in   his  incestuous  relations  with   himself.  He  echoes  George   Whalley   quoting Coleridge to the  effect  that behind  all poetry there  lies the  conviction that every­ thing   has  a  life  of its  own  and  we are  all one  life. "I am  the  Unique and  the Universal" he writes in his "Canticle for the New Age".

I am the Ancestor, I am Man. 	In me all men advance towards the light, whose seed since the beginning of time has shone in the gloom: dark egg, divine embryo. 	I will be Man on the day that all men are born in the divine radiance, that day Heaven and Earth  will be forever reconciled.

He is also the nth  Adam. He continues:

I invoke my eternal name, my legitimate paternity.  I am the first Adam. 	I bear in my flesh all the wounds of man. 	From the beginning of time I have been driven by desire.

The writer's role is now  conceived  in increasingly  hieratic  terms.  "We are wait­ ing," he says, "for  the  electronic Vedas,  the  return  of a writing, sacred  and abso­ lute."  Finally, Chamberland affirms  the  supreme relevance of  the  creations of the  imagination when  he writes,  "We do  not  write  poetry: rather  poetry,  which is Reality, engenders us."
Clearly, with  such  convictions, the  writer  need  not  despair  of his raison d'etre,
even  in  a  mass society.  Poetry  finds its  justification  outside  the  particular talents of  the  poet  or  the  particular tastes  of a  cultivated elite.  It shapes  the  myths  in which  we live; it shapes  us. And Northrop Frye has argued just that.


BuT WHY, we might  ask, do the  poets like Layton attack the critic,  often  with  some venom?  Are they not allies? Perhaps Nietzsche,  who is one

MYTH, FRYE AND CANADIAN WRITERS



of Layton's  mentors, can suggest an answer.  Nietzsche distinguishes between the philosopher  who creates  values  and  the philosophical  worker whose job it is "to determine   and  formalize  some  large  reservoir  of  value-judgements, that  is of former  value-creations."  As a  critic,  the  greatest  part  of  Frye's  work  is of the latter  type. His job has been to order and classify, to clarify and explain the type, whether  he  is talking  about  the  specific forms  of literature  or  the  nature  and function  of the creative imagination. The  motive of such workers, says Nietzsche, is to  make  everything  that  has heretofore  happened and  been evaluated  into a visible, thinkable,  comprehensible  and  handy  pattern; to abbreviate everything that  is long,  to abbreviate  time  itself;  to  overpower  the  entire  past.  Frye  has articulated a critical perspective of such clarity, scope and  persuasiveness that  he has succeeded  in  doing  just that.  An  enormous  and  admirable task but  not  in Nietzsche's view the primary one, which is to create  the future.  And that,  I sus­ pect, would be in Layton's view the role of the poet.
Something  may  be said  for  the  creative  nature  of Frye's  work.  Yet we may agree  that  it is one thing to articulate  in discursive terms a conception  of poetry and  another  to prove it on  the  pulse. And  beyond  the  conception  of poetry  to find the motive of the poem, the necessity within the vision.
Nietzsche's  distinction  here  suggests  his  distinction   between   the  Apollonian and  the  Dionysian  imagination.  The  Apollonian  artist  is not  unlike  the  philo­ sophical  worker who overpowers, abbreviates  and  makes visible an ordered  past. His  bias is towards spectacle, to fix the world in a vision, large, splendid,  richly varied,   perhaps,   but  intelligible  to  the  light  of  reason.  The  Dionysian  artist plunges into  time,  risks himself and  his world in the flux, dark  to all except  his desire, to the elan of the dance  to which he abandons himself. His is the spirit of music  that  Nietzsche linked  to the  birth  of tragedy,  which  gives us the  title of Layton's  poem  and  reveals his bias, whereas  Frye's is surely  towards  the  Apol­ lonian.
It is the  Dionysian  poet  Layton  cultivates,  and  whose irregular  footprints  so horrify those whose rooms he would extend;  and in a time of cultural disintegra­ tion, when the visible or articulate  order is so largely diseased, it is the Dionysian imagination that  we may need to cultivate, abandoning ourselves to Eros and  the deepest springs of our desire. And that is itself no easy matter when we have been so  bombarded  by  voices telling  us  what  we  ought   to  think  we  desire.  "The writer," complains  Chamberland, "has  a  rapport  with  the  whole of the  word presently broadcast":

MYTH, FRYE  AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



not  a commercial  that  doesn't  leave me cold. I am battling  the lie, the systematic immorality  of  the  establishments.  My weapon  is rhetoric,  I mean  the most  lucid awareness that can be exercised in language.
Let  the  imagination   take  power:  let it  destroy the  obsolete  codes that  fossilize man's  brain.

We are on trial,  he says:

Our dreams accuse us
No use pleading  not guilty
And let's not swear to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth
We do not even know how to tell the difference between true and false

A  major preoccupation of  the  contemporary writer  is and  probably will be  the delineation of diseased  desire,  an  inventory of what  in  truth he  does  not  desire.
·But it may  be necessary  to prove  as well Nietzsche's  aphorism: "The greatest epochs  of our  lives come  when  we gain  the  courage  to rebaptize our  evil as our best."
I think  of a streak  of perversity  in us, that  leads John Newlove  to frighten him­ self, time  and  again,  in  the  night,  in the  mountains; that leads  Susan  Musgrave to  the  "Mackenzie River,   North", the  vast  emptiness  "like  continents  of  tooth  and  stone", where  there  is "nothing about  for  usjbut  fear/And  moving,jalways moving,/ out  of the  night/it comes".  That led  Frank Scott  to celebrate the same  river, which  "turns its back on America".
For  it is one of the  problems of established  culture that  it has distinguished the world  so  thoroughly  into   black  and   white  and  attacked so  much   of  life  as  a darkness,  telling  us  to  desire  only  the  light.  And  the  Apollonian vision  and  the impulse  to  overpower the  past  lends  itself only  too easily  to an  excessive and  at times  almost   paranoiac desire  for  light: the  desire  to  analyse  it  into  a series  of rational elements that  can  then  be dealt  with systematically by a series of rational techniques, so that  man  can  control  life as it were from  the  outside,  rather than participate in  it. Then, whatever is dark,  if it cannot be eliminated in fact, dis­ appears from  the vocabulary and  from consciousness.
There is a strong  messianic cast to the  very terms  used  here so often  to define the  role of the  artist  and  of the imaginative vision he serves, as if it would  deliver us from  the  dark  once  and  for  all.  In  part  no doubt  it does, but  it must  do this continuously, and, more  radically, it  must  deliver  the  dark  itself,  not  just  make it disappear.

19

MYTH, FRYE AND CANADIAN WRITERS



That is why one must insist on the Dionysian  quality  of Layton's  imagination that  can dominate  reality; it must be qualified  by the title of the poem in which he speaks of that  imagination; it must spring from "the  fertile muck".
Ouellette,  too, while leery of the  primitive  connotations of the  word  "myth" and  anxious  to insist on the  continued  value  of the  most lucid  awareness,  also insists on  the  necessity to breathe,  as he says, darkness  as well as light,  on  the virtue  of the obscene. The  obscene, he suggests, is the crudity  of sexual  hunger, of raw  appetite; and  any expression of grief or despair  that  goes beyond certain limits  will  be  considered  raw,  crude,  obscene  by  society.  Yet,  definitively,  he writes, it is in accepting  the excessive hunger  of sex, of poetry, of sainthood  that one  comes to  accept  oneself, one's own  being.  And  it is through  the  power  of "erudite" that  one  advances,  he insists, towards  God,  the  infinite,  the  eternal, towards  love, towards  the great  hope, "le  grand  desir".  The  way to the stars is through  the fertile muck.
Thus,  though  the  Canadian writer may  have  arrived  at  an  assured  and  pro­
found  sense of the  writer's office, with no need to  justify the fictions he creates, as  no  more  than  irrelevant  "fictions",  he is still in  no  position  to whip  off an apocalytic  vision of the communion  of saints, and  he may still feel compelled  to do battle against the powerful but possibly seductive light of a Frye.
For  the  artist  is ahnost  as much  in  the  dark  as ever.  He  must  look deep  to
discover the real springs of his desire, and he must prove its rhythms in his pulse, beginning with the first word and the second, one by one, one after the other. He must  test the false desire against  those same rhythms.  It  may lead Chamberland at  this moment  to proclaim:  "The  Milky Way leaps with  the inordinate joy of God."  It may lead equally to Dale Zieroth's: "Times  are when  we're/no longer sure of the  things/we wanted  to say," or "My  life fragments  too easily, things/ have  no  core,  break  up,jsometimes end.  I  am  not  tough," lines seemingly flat, but  with  curious  rhythms,  carrying  conviction.  Or  Dennis  Lee's "Glad  for  the Wrong  Reasons,"  in which after a nightmare  of absence, the glad  racket of  gar­ bage cans and  the familiar features of his domestic life, he can say, "Jesus, there is/something about  our  lives that/ doesn't  make  sense ... " Or  the  devastating  opening lines of Susan Musgrave's "Once  More":
We sit by the river you, drunk already, and I
your day's feed.
It is perhaps a negative conviction, but it is a conviction.


20

MYTH, FRYE  AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



Miss Musgrave  may discover that  her most earnest desire is for death  or mad­
ness: she begins a poem called "Celebration":

Being someone's last woman
and the only passenger of the day
I rode out after madness ...

Yet  given  Miss  Musgrave's  world,  her  desire for  death  may  be  honest,  her desire for madness a desire for sanity. In that obscenity she may find a Dionysian music, the  birth  of Tragedy. "To  be born,"  says Ouellette,  "is to have  a shar­ pened awareness of the two poles of life and to feel the tragic in our very being."  "We  begin to live," said  Yeats, "when  we begin to conceive of life as tragedy." Yet Layton's "The Birth of Tragedy" concludes with the poet:

noting how seasonably lea£ and blossom uncurl
and living things arrange their death while someone from afar off
blows birthday candles for the world

There  is always  the  point  in any society when it is no longer  appropriate to rage against  the  dying of the light. Our  mutability  is a token of our  community with life as a whole. The  local tragedy opens into the divine comedy. Frye could speak to that,  but let me repeat Ouellette: "It is the awareness of death  and  hope which transforms me into a demiurge and not all the 'isms' ... "
The  more extravagant the vision of a radiant  community  the more it is neces­
sary  to  recall  the  opacity  of the  individual  fate,  the  fertile  obscenity  of death. Thus  Ouellette  insists upon  remembering  the deaths at Hiroshima,  the deaths  on the  highway,  the  death  of the man  carried  out of the barber  shop, your  death, my death,  his own. Therefore Layton, crying his visionary conviction, there  is no such  thing  as  death,  there  is no  death  anywhere  in  the  land,  brings  his hand down  on  the  butterfly  on  the  rock -not  because he takes a sadistic  delight  in breaking  butterflies,  but  because  he must  assert two  realities at  once:  one  life and  the  many  unique,  mortal  lives. There  is no divine  comedy except  through the individual  tragedies. Any other proposition would be false.



DURING THE   PAST  GENERATION Canadian writing  both  in theory and  in  practice,  both in French  and  in English, has discovered an assur-


21

MYTH, FRYE AND  CANADIAN WRITERS



ance,  a  range  and  depth,  a boldness, that  suggests it is entirely  at  home in  the world  of the  imagination. The  news of the  phoenix  no  longer  comes to  us in rumours,  from  abroad.  The  Canadian writer  can now live in that  fire. Yet he is also aware  of the dark  that  makes the light flame. He is prepared  to fly, but  he is also aware  of the gravity that  will ensure that  his imaginative flight does not become  weightless, an endless drift  in free fall. Therefore it is not  plain sailing. He  has no guaranteed technique.  It is with a paradoxical assurance  he proceeds.
I am  reminded  of the strange  phrase of Roland  Giguere,  Poetry is an obsidian
lamp: "La  poesie est une lampe d'obsidienne."
I  am  also reminded  of Gwen  MacEwen,  whose "Shadow Maker" may  pro­
vide a conclusion to these remarks.

I have  come  to possess your darkness,  only  this. My legs surround your black, wrestle it
As the flames of day wrestle night
And everywhere you paint  the necessary shadows On  my flesh and darken the fibers of my nerve; Without these shadows  I would  be
In air one wave of ruinous light
And night with many mouths would  close
Around my infinite  and sterile curve.

Shadow-maker create  me everywhere
Dark spaces  (your face is my chosen abyss),
For  I said I have come to possess your darkness, Only  this.





















22



THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK


Carl Berger






STEPHEN LEACOCK was four part• hummi•t, one part poli­
tical economist  and  two  parts  controversialist. During  his lifetime  these discrete
proportions  were hopelessly confused and  it is only with a great  deal of  excruci­ ating  research  that  we can  now see them separately  and  clearly. Literary  critics have been mainly interested  in his life and times in order  to illuminate  and inter­ pret  his fiction;  historians  have recently become interested  in his writings for the perspective  they  throw  upon  the  past. The  inadvertent  result is that  we are be­ coming  acquainted  with  two  Mr.  Leacocks-the  one  a  kindly  and  humane commentator on  the  foibles and  fads of humanity, a  genius apparently  beyond both  history and  analysis;1  and  the other  an  imperialist,  critic of the  Canadian plutocracy,  middle-class  reformer  and  an  intellectual  deeply engaged  in the  de­ bates of his day. 2   There  was, of course, only one Mr. Leacock and  an examina­ tion of his social values and  assumptions may be of some relevance to the inter­ pretation  of the humorous works upon which his reputation justly rests.
Leacock  was a  political  economist  for some time  before his name  became  a byword  for  humour. Though his academic  credentials  were impressive and  his position as head of the Political Economy Department at  McGill University pre­ eminent,  he saw  the  role of the  man  of learning  in  a very different  light  from what these symbols of professionalism suggest. He had been educated  in literature  and  the classics, had  taught  these subjects for eight years at Upper  Canada Col­ lege, and  was thirty-one  when he went to Chicago to do graduate work in econo­ mics. This shift from  the traditional learning  to the new discipline was made  by many other  Canadian intellectuals in the decades after 1895. 0. D. Skelton, who had  graduated in  classics and  English literature  at  Queen's  University  and  was in the political economy  course at Chicago in 1907, suggested the reason for this change  when  he  told  the  economist  Adam  Shortt,  that  "Strikes,  trusts,  taxes, socialism, tariffs  [and] banking  bulk a good deal larger  in the public mind  than the authenticity of John's gospel or the wherefore of the shyness of Hegel." 3  Lea-

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK



cock made  the same  journey, but,  perhaps  because he did so only after  his out­ look was more  or less fixed, his allegiance  to the  new discipline was  partial and incomplete.  He  had  no taste for specialized  research  and  no  patience  with  the pretensions  to expertise  purchased  at  the  cost  of  cutting  up  the  wide  field of human  knowledge into tidy compartments.  And  he did  not share  the conviction of Shortt  and  Skelton that  the expert  training  of the economists should  be put at the disposal of the efficient, regulatory state. He was as impatient  of his discipline as  he  was  of social  constraint  and  regulation  and  he  remained  dubious  about economics as a body of solutions. In one of his last  pronouncements on the sub­ ject he said that  the current economics of the schools was just a "babble of mathe­  matical  jargon, all plots and graphs and curves, signifying nothing."4  Economics, he believed, was not a science; it was the name  of a problem, the problem essen­ tially of a socially just distribution  of  material  goods and  this was, in a profound sense, a moral and not a technical question.
True  to his classical training  he was committed  to the view that  education  was
to concern  itself with the formation  of character, the understanding of man, and the search  for  truth.  He expected  the university  to be one of the driving forces of civilization,  not in the obvious sense of being a part  of politics, but as a place where the great issues of politics could be explored  and  clarified free from intem­ perate  partisanship. Because the ultimate  questions  reduced  themselves to moral ones, to questions  about  man,  Leacock believed that  the old learning was indis­ pensable for dealing with those problems that  modem  political economy grappled  with  in  vain.  He  also believed that  these could  be simply  taught.  Though   the delight in entertaining and  the desire for money were motives that  played a large part  in  his life, still  many  of his stories were  vehicles for  expressing  his social ideas and  economic  beliefs. Leacock was quite  conscious of the serious purposes that  even light fiction could serve-indeed, it followed logically from his critical view of popular  democracy that for purposes of  discussion of social and economic questions  the generality  of people could not be  reached  through  excessively seri­ ous books and  articles. If the average reader were to be ensnared  at all into con­ sidering  these issues, he wrote in I 920,  the  message must  be hidden  among  the flowers. "Such  is the recognized method  by which the great  unthinking  public is taught   to  think."5    It  is  hardly  surprising  that   the  line  between  his so-called humorous stories and his serious work was blurred  and indistinct.
The  society that  Leacock saw around  him in  the years before the Great  War
bore no resemblance to that golden age of harmony  and  innocence  which was in­
vented by nostalgic imagination  in the I g2o's. The  dominant note in his magazine

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK



articles and  his satire was one of dissatisfaction and revolt, a worry that  traditional standards and  historic  ties  and  habits  were  being  eroded,  and  a  feeling  that national  development was unbalanced  and  unhealthy. The  most obvious charac­ teristic of Canadian life in these years, a fact which astonished visitors like Rupert Brooke, Andre  Siegfried  and  James  Bryce, was materialism,  the simple-minded concentration on  development and  reckless individualism.  "Our  prevailing  pas­ sion,"  Leacock wrote  in  I 9 I I, "is for bigness, for rapidity  of  growth, for a sud­ den  and  sensational  development." "We  have  gone astray  in  the wilderness on the false estimate  that  we have  placed upon  wealth and  mere pecuniary  success
... Our  whole conception  of individual  merit and  of national  progress has been expressed in dollars and cents."6
Leacock found  the explanation  for the degeneracy of the times in the triumph of what  he  called  business values. The  whole "bias  of our  American  life  [is] towards  commercialism" -"business, and  the business credo, and  business prin­ ciples have  become everything.m  He was a child of the depression of the  I 87o's and  I 88o's and  he knew what had happened  to his remarkable  uncle in the brief western boom  of the early '8o's: like most children of depression he was  uneasy at the sight of prosperity and  luxury, and filled with forebodings that these could not last. For  the  millionaires  whose voice had  become the voice of  the new god Leacock  had  little  but  contempt.  But it was qualified  contempt.  Back in  I899, the  year  in  which  Thorstein Veblen's  Theory   of the  Leisure  Class appeared, Adam  Shortt  had  presented  the conventional  apology for the millionaire  as the vanguard of economic  advance.  "America," he wrote, "is at once the most spec­ ulative of countries,  and  yet the one where mere luck counts for least and ability for  most."  In  spite  of  speculation,   wealth  "usually  reaches  the  most  capable  hands"; the  contrast  between  the millionaire suffocated  with wealth  and  money and  others  with  nothing  was fallacious;  and  the  real  motive  of the  millionaire was not money-making -his chief "interest is creative and  is akin to that of the scientific enthusiast,  the statesman  or the artist."8  Leacock accepted  none of this. In  his description  of the  Canadian  plutocrats  in  Arcadian  Adventures  with  the Idle  Rich  ( I9I4) he made much of the illegitimate manner  in which their wealth was acquired  and,  above  all, their  inordinate  luxury and  wastefulness. Tomlin­  son owed his money  not  to hard  work and superior  ability but  to luck;  his son, the perfect representative of the leisure class, spent his time reading  inconsequen­ tial  novels and  eating  chocolates.  Leacock never questioned  the  permanence of private  property,  the  legitimacy  of profit, or  the  primacy  of individual  selfish­ ness as the  motive  of  economic  progress. What  he  denounced  was not  wealth

25

THE OTHER MR.  LEACOCK



itself  but   the  easy  acqUisitiOn of  money  through   get-rich-quick-schemes,   the manipulation of paper,  gambling  and speculation,  and  political  favouritism.  He could  easily have  subscribed  to Shortt's  contentions,  but  in  the  Canada of Sir Henry  Pellatt  with his extraordinary castle and  Mackenzie  and  Mann  who were showered  with political favours almost every day, such views no longer coincided with reality and it must have seemed that Veblen was a better guide than Shortt. What  obviously disturbed  Leacock was that  the  plutocrats  were a living denial of the  older  ethic,  the one he retained,  that  work  was a discipline  and  had  its own rewards and that wealth was merely its token, not its only and exclusive aim.




LEACOCK BELIEVED that the pecuniary standard, the primacy of  money-making,  and  the  fascination  with  size had  permeated  all  institutions and  spheres of activity. The  university which was once the custodian  of a genu­ inely  humanistic  education  had  become devoted  to specialization  and  technical training  in the immediately  usefuP  The  professor, once the disinterested pursuer of truth,  was now the symbol of the useless and  redundant  because, as Leacock put it, he did not know how to make money. 10  Literature, like religion, was con­ demned to sterility because all intangibles were irrelevant in an age of materialism.
The  acceptance  of pecuniary standards  and  delight in size were nowhere more evident  than  in the  management  of national  affairs.  Leacock's  thought  on  poli­ tics was very much  part  of the long tradition  of Victorian  criticism  of  popular  democracy,  and  his denunciation  of politicians  was lifelong  and  intense.  Long after  the  plutocrat   disappears  from  his stories,  the  politician,  surely  the  most pathetic  creature  in all his fiction, puts in a regular  appearance. However  much he might attribute Carlyle's pronouncements  to indigestion, or Sir Henry  Maine's  critique  of democracy  to an excessive exposure to the  East, Leacock shared  with them,  and  with others like Goldwin Smith and  Henri Bourassa, the concern that democracy  had  developed  unforeseen  and  perhaps  fatal  tendencies.  "Our poli­ tics," he wrote in 1907, "our  public life and  thought,  rise not  to the level of our opportunity. The  mud-bespattered  politicians  of  the  trade,  the  party  men  and party  managers,  give  us in  place  of  patriotic  statecraft the  sordid  traffic of a tolerated   jobbery. For  bread,  a  stone.  Harsh  is the  cackle  of  the  little  turkey­ cocks of Ottawa, fighting the while as they feather  their mean  nest of sticks and mud, high on the river bluff."11
Leacock  was not  talking  of the spectacular  incidents  of political  corruption:

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK



he condemned  all politics because its practitioners had  pliantly accepted the stan­ dards  of the  plutocrats  to  measure  national  progress. This  was obvious in their total  preoccupation with  public works; there was, he confessed, something about the  Canadian mind  that  finds gigantic  projects irresistible. But  for Leacock one of the  best examples of how the worship of numbers was  undermining the stan­ dards  of national  life was the uncritical acceptance  of  thousands  upon thousands of what  he called "Slavonic  and  Mediterranean peoples of a lower industrial  and moral  status."  Canadian immigration  policy  was a  monument to the  mistaken belief  that  a  nation  could  be  built  by  "holding  a  basket  at  the  hopper  of an immigration   chute."12   Such  a  policy  was not  only working  against  an  organic unity of east and  west; it was also destroying the bicultural dualism of the coun­ try  which  was Canada's unique  national  asset. Since the  corruption  in political life  was  due  to  the  confusion  between  business standards and  statecraft,   and since,  as  he  made   clear  in  "The   Great   Election  in  Missinaba  County", the malaise  had  spread  to all  corners  of society, Leacock  placed  very little faith  in organizational  improvements. The  professionalization  of politics,  the  machines, bosses, cliques and  contractors,  could not be checked by the progressive remedies of the initiative, referendum  and recall. Moralistic attacks devoted  to purity only ended  in the ironies of "The Great  Fight for Clean Government". Though  Lea­ cock  dabbled  with  electoral  reform,  he was convinced that  the cure for political depravity  lay in the improvement of public morality which would come through the work of the universities and the public schools and  with the infusion of ideals into  public life. For  a while he believed that  the World  War,  with its demands for sacrifices and  service, was enough  to fill all men with a passion for an ideal, yet  he quickly  discovered  that  one of its by-products  was prohibition.  He  pas­ sionately hated  this measure  of "social tyranny,"  and found  that  its victory could only be explained  by assuming  that  politicians in fact  had  no power at  all, that the  real  governing  forces  in  North  America  were such  things  as  Big  Business, Manufacturers, Labour   Unions,  and  various  forms  of  National  Hysteria.  The most  contemptible of all  men,  the  politician  was satisfied  with  something  even less than  corruption-he was satisfied with only the appearance of power. "He  moves about  in his frock coat and  his silk hat, a garb which he shares alone with the  undertaker.... The  ordinary  politician  is merely  busy  picking  up  his votes from  the mud  of democracy  like the ramasseur of the Parisian  streets picking up cigar-butts."13
By I 934  when   he  gave  his  presidential  address  to  the  Canadian  Political
Science  Association  on  the  theme  of  the  revision of  democracy,   Leacock  had

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK



come to the  furthest  edge of despair.  Nineteenth century  political  freedom,  he argued,   rested  upon  an  economic  base which  favoured   individualism,  govern­ ment  by  representation,   and  legislation  by  discussion. The  growing  complexity of  modern   technology  and  society, however,  made  government  by  parties  and parliaments "a  vast complicated artificiality which serves only to conceal its own insufficiencies." For  the party  system he could  only say that  it  was at  least one solution to a major  problem of civilization-how to keep a fool in his place and make  him imitate  wiser men. But for the ordinary citizens all they can do "is to try to get a set of men, trained  and specialized  to carry  on  the government, to cut  loose from  the  mock allegiances and  fictitious opposition  of party.m4   What he hankered  for was not the rule of the expert  manager, but the kind of leaders that  Sir George  Parkin  had thought  Upper  Canada  College could produce,  per­ haps  also the  return  of the  Union  government  that  had  come into  existence in Canada in I gI 7, a  government  which at  least in  its  own  propaganda had  put the national  interest first and had submerged partisan politics.
Leacock's  imperialism  was inextricably  intertwined with  his social satire  and
his distaste  for  the  perversions of Canadian politics. Imperialism, in  one sense, was  the  voice of  an  older  Canada, the  Canada of  Macdonald reminding  the new country  of Laurier  of its historic obligations.  Leacock was one of its most authentic spokesmen. He reiterated  that  this imperialism  had  nothing  to do with economic greed or territorial  acquisitions; it was in fact the antidote  to material­ ism as much  as it  was a denial of colonialism  and  prolonged  subordination. It was born  in  the  English associations of the  farm  near  Lake  Simcoe  but  it  was always  much  more  than  a sentimental  admiration  for  British  culture  and  the historical  connection.  For Leacock the imperial  ideal  meant  a determined  effort to  accept  the  obligations  of nationhood  and  to  fulfill  the  promise  of freedom. Fresh  from  his study  of the  fathers  of  responsible government-Baldwin, La­ fontaine   and  Hincks -Leacock  claimed  that  these  men  had  believed in  two ideas which  were still the foundations  upon  which  Canadian development  must proceed.  The   first  of   these  was  that   the  steady   extension  of  Canadian self­ government  could  only find its logical culmination in a more complete consolida­ tion of the British  Empire. "I am,"  he testified, "an  imperialist  because I will not be a colonial. This colonial status is a worn-out, by-gone thing." 15
As Leacock and other imperialists saw it, Canada was virtually an independent
state;  the only power which she lacked was control  over issues of peace and  war, over foreign policy; this lack was dwarfing and  incompatible with her actual importance and  power;  the only way Canadians could attain  full national  rights

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK



was to  gain  a voice over the  destiny of the British Empire  which  was as much theirs as any Englishman's. When he declared in rgo6 that "We cannot be an independent country,"'6    he  did  not  mean  that  Canada would  for  ever  be  a colony;  he meant  that  given the interdependence of nations and  what he took to be the very real threat  of war, Canada  could never attain  independence in com­ plete  isolation.  To  say  that  Canada   had  no  need  for  maritime  defence  could only be based on the assumption  that  "no foreign nation could ever quarrel with us, or on the theory of a parasitic subordination to the United  States."17  A sharp sense of Canadian nationalism  pervaded  Leacock's imperialism: he rejected from his depths  the view of Canada as an outpost of England  or a transcript  of  British society. Though he  admired  such  English  institutions  as Oxford,  he  could say that  "we  do not  want  to take things over ready-made;  ... we believe we have a national  task of our  own and  we want  to confront  it with  our own strength."18
His  descriptions  of  how  the  old  and  declining  Britain  would  be surpassed  in power  by the  young and  larger  countries like Canada  led Winston  Churchill  to term  his speech  "offensive  twaddle". It  was, ironically, John  Ewart,  one of the great  Canadian critics of imperialism, who chided Leacock for his bad-mannered remarks about  Englishmen.19
When much  later someone asked him whether he was interested in going home
to  England,  Leacock  replied  by describing  what  he loved about  Canada-the great  spaces, the north -and  concluded "Thank you, Mother  England.  I don't think I'll 'come home'. I'm  'home' now." 20
The  second idea which Leacock traced  back to the Baldwin-Lafontaine legacy was the "real  and  organic  alliance of the two races" 21   in Canada. As his allusions to  the  immigrants suggest,  Leacock  was  not  unaffected  by the  popular   racial cast of thought  of his day. For him the real Empire meant  the white Dominions and Britain, not the tropical dependencies. Yet in Canadian politics he was no intolerant Anglo-Saxon  supremicist.  "In   one  sense of  the  word,"  he  candidly wrote  in  rgro, "this  is not a British country."  Its roots and  traditions run  back to France  as well as Britain  and  the presence here of two races is "our  greatest national  asset."22   He  believed that  the French-Canadian desire to preserve their rights,  privileges  and  "nationality" was compatible  with  traditional Canadian conservatism,   but   what   he  and   other  imperialists  discovered  was  a  French­ Canadian  nationalist  movement  which  emphatically  denied  every  one  of  their tenets  and  sentiments.  Leacock could not possibly sympathize  with  the visions of Henri  Bourassa, and  for those separatists  of the 192o's and  1930's who dreamed  of a Laurentian republic  he had only warm  ridicule. Laurentia, he wrote,  "is a

THE OTHER MR.  LEACOCK



lovely  place: there  are  no  English  there,  and  no  capitalists or  power  companies, and  there  are  no soldiers and  armies,  and  it never  goes to fight in Europe; in this dream   world  the  Government is all by orators -young orators -and  they talk and  talk,  and  write  newspapers and  pamphlets, and  fall asleep  and  wake  up and talk.   No  one  quite   knows  where  this  Laurentia is,  whether  Montreal is in  it, whether it has  ports  and  ships  that  block the  outlet  of a continent, or whether it is up  somewhere in  the snow  near  Peribonka, in  the  country of  Maria  Chapde­ laine."23  Leacock's intellectual commitment  to  the  dualism of  Baldwin  and  La­  fontaine collided  with the  announced purposes  of the  French  Canadian national­ ists and  he  reconciled  these  two  facts  by convincing  himself  that  the  nationalists did  not  represent   the  true  feelings  of  French Canada.  Though he  lived  in  the city  where  the  two  cultures  touched   there  is little  evidence of  any  meaningful French Canadian contacts  in  his life, and  aside from his early  histories,  none  of his books. One  who  described  conscription in I 9I 7 as the  triumph of democracy purified  could  not  have  had  a very penetrating insight  into  the feelings of French Canadians.
The truth seems to be that  Leacock  was able  to retain an  academic allegiance to the idea  of the  duality  of cultures  in face of much  disturbing evidence  because he  subscribed to  certain   widespread views  about French Canada  which  turned out  to be untenable. It was much  later,  in  I943, that  he himself  came  to see this, only  after   another  war  had  swept  aside  the  convenient  rhetoric of  the  bonne entente  and  only  after  a lifetime  of observation convinced him  that  the separa­ tion  of French and  English  children  in  Montreal was "as  complete as Turk and  Christian, as  Mohammedan and  Hindu."24  In  one  of his finest  autobiographical passages Leacock dwelt on this division:

In  the  days of peace  that  once were, many  of us British  people  in Canada,  and certainly  most of us British people living in French  Canada, considered  the  pres­ ence  of the  French,  of their  separate  language  and  distinctive  culture,  a decided asset to the Dominion.  It seemed to us to balance  and  offset certain  shortcomings of our  own people. The  hysteria of the swing to prohibition led us to admire  the refusal of the  French  to be carried  away ... We admired  the  quiet  contentedness of the  French  Canadian habitant  and its contrast  to the eager  haste, the get-rich­ quick,  the  quest  for money of the  restless English.  We liked  the stories  that  Dr. Drummond told us of  Jean  Baptiste corning home again  from the States, of Louis Hernon's   far-away-and-long-ago  picture   of   the   world   of   Maria   Chapdelaine. Around  French  Canada  hung  the  romance  of history,  the  appeal  of a lost cause and  the respect for  a people happy in their own lot. Above this level of the plain life of simple  people was the  pride  felt by the educated  and  academic  classes of

go

THE OTHER  MR. LEACOCK



society living in a dual culture, in drawing upon two languages and two great literatures.... It  looks  in  retrospect  like  a  beautiful  landscape,  now  a  deserted garden ... The  old  rallying  cries no longer  call  to  the  heart.  Where  now is the twin  glory of Montcalm and  Wolfe, the brotherhood  of Lafontaine and  Baldwin, each elected by the other's  people in North York and Rimouski?

Leacock's description of the loss of credibility  in these views was the admission, not  of  one  man, but  of  a  whole  generation of  English  Canadians. A tradition had  collapsed  and  nothing remained, certainly  not  the  vain  dream of  bilingual­ ism.  "The French have  no  right  in  law  or  in  history  or  in  common  sense,"  he concluded, "to  think  of Canada as a combination in which  all grave policy must depend on French Canadian veto or consent. The  British  have  no right  to misuse the  British   connection and   the  British  heritage   to  give  an  unfair   deal  to  the French by  sheer  majority power."25   All the  rest depended  on men  of goodwill and  fairness.
Leacock's imperialism, then,  rested  on  the  belief,  mistaken as  he later  recog­ nized, that  Canada with  her unique  foundations in a duality of culture could best attain  nationhood within the  imperial system.  It  expressed  the  conviction   that only  within  the  context of her  historical  ties could  she  attain not  only  the status of  a  nation but  the  functioning power  of one.  But  it  was  also  rooted  in  a  pro­  found  rejection of  the  country, and  it  is this  which  joins  his  distaste  for  politi­  cians  and   the  triumph of  pecuniary values  to  imperialism.  Imperialism  was  a means  of escape-an escape  from  the  stupefying  preoccupation with  material­ ism  and  the  coils of partyism and  race  and  religious  wars  into  the  high  uplands of wider  activities  and  concerns. After paying his respects  to the mud-bespattered politicians  with   their   views  of   statecraft  hardly   rising   above   the   village  post office,  he  wrote:  "This is  the  demon   we  must  exorcise,  this  the  disease,  the cankerworm of corruption, bred  in  the  indolent  security  of peace,  that  must  be burned from  us in  the  pure  fire  of an  Imperial patriotism that  is no  theory  but  a  passion.  This  is our  need,  our supreme need  of the  Empire-not  for its ships and  guns,  but  for  the  greatness of  it, aye, for the very  danger of it." 26   Leacock's imperialism, like  Kipling's, was  at  once  a  rejection  of  the  ceaseless getting  and  spending and  an idealistic antidote to the follies of the age.
As it  turned out  it  was  not  any  commitment to  imperialism that drew  men back  to service,  but  Canada's participation in the  World  War  with  its insatiable demands for  sacrifices.  The war  generated an  indescribable idealism   in  many quarters of  Canadian society,  especially   among   the   Protestant  clergy,  and   it seemed  that  the  sense of sacrifice  it evoked  was the  real  answer  to the self-indul-

3I

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK



gent luxury of the rich. Only sacrifice and self-denial could bum  away selfishness and  restore direction  to national  politics. Even  Leacock's imperialism  was trans­ formed: he later  confessed that  he had  been mistaken  in his advocacy of  Cana­ dian  representation in  the  Imperial  Parliament. The  war  had  proven  that  the shared  values and  intangible  bonds of Empire  were more  powerful  than  consti­ tutions  could ever  be:  the legalistic debate  over the Statute of  Westminster  left him   untouched.   His  later   books  on  Empire   were  completely   dominated   by economic considerations. The  war, moreover, had  thrown  a lucid light  upon the nature   of  capitalistic   production   and   distribution  and   increasingly   Leacock became preoccupied  with economic problems and social justice.
In  his diagnosis of the ills of capitalism, Leacock  was the disciple of no single thinker.  Too  much  of his analysis consists of personal  predilections  projected  on to  all  of  society  for  that  to  be  the  case, and,  in  any  event,  Leacock  was too unsystematic  an  economist to be imprisoned  in any theory or doctrine.  Yet  Lea­ cock's economic thought  does bear  upon it the unmistakable imprint  of the ideas of Thorstein  Veblen under whom he had studied  at Chicago and  whose Theory of the  Leisure Class had  first attracted  him to that  university. It was Veblen's fate, as it  was to become  Leacock's, that  he was frequently  mistaken for an  amusing clown  and  his abstruse  books forgotten  except  in  academic  circles. The  essence of Veblen's  teaching  did  not primarily  rest on  his mordant  commentary  on the eccentric  habits  and  "conspicuous  consumption" of the idle  rich. What  Leacock himself termed  "the  central point" of Veblen was an explanation for the obvious disharmony  between  the  productive  capacity  of  technology  and  the  persistence of poverty  and  periodic crises in the age of  financial  capitalism.  Veblen saw the economy as divided  between  two irreconcilable  forces -the one represented  by the engineer who was concerned with workmanship,  efficiency and increasing pro­ duction,  and the other symbolized by the financiers who controlled the instruments  of production and were animated  by atavistic values. They  were concerned  exclu­ sively with  making  money and  their  relationship  to machine  production  Veblen described  as  systematic  sabotage.  These  ideas  were  most fully elaborated  in  his The  Theory of  Business Enterprise  ( 1904). The   point  of  the  Theory of the Leisure Class was that  by drawing  innumerable parallels  between the  behaviour of primitive  tribes  and  the mores of the rich,  Veblen  demonstrated how  waste­ ful and  pre-industrial the values of the financiers  and  all  coupon-clippers really were.  It  was in  terms  of this conflict  between  those  who  produced  goods and those who made  money that  Veblen explained  the major  problems of American capitalism.

THE OTHER  MR. LEACOCK



Though   there  is  no  indication   that  Leacock  ever  understood,  let  alone  ac­ cepted, the complicated  theory of instincts or the technological environmentalism  which  underlay  Veblen's  thought,  there  is no doubt that  in his Unsolved  Riddle of Social  justice  ( 1920)   he followed Veblen's  general  approach. Leacock saw the  problem  in terms  of the "contrast  ... between the vastly increased  power of production and  its apparent inability to satisfy for all humanity the most elemen­ tary  human  wants,"27   and  he advanced  two explanations  for this paradox.  The first  lay  in   the  wastefulness  of  capitalist  production-in  the  channeling   of resources and  energies into  the  making  of  nonessential luxuries  and  in war  de­ struction.   Leacock's  personal  abhorrence  of waste was abiding:  he  husbanded his own resources very carefully;  nothing figures in his pictures of the plutocrats so prominently  as their  "shameless luxury", and  during  the war  he appealed  for a  campaign for  "national  thrift".28   He  was convinced  that  perhaps  nine-tenths of all workers were  involved in basically wasteful occupations.  Leacock's second explanation for the  failure  of machine  production  to fulfil human  needs related to the fact  that  the supply and  value of commodities were determined  not by the upper  limits of  machine  production  or the satisfaction  of wants, but in terms of guaranteeing  satisfactory  returns.  Supply  and  values are  the outcome  of "com­  peting   forces   that   are   not   based  upon   justice  but   upon   'economic   force'."  Ideally,  if a  large  enough  quantity  of any  commodity  were  produced  it  would ultimately be worth  nothing  at  all:  sellers therefore adjusted  price and  quantity in  order  to ensure  returns; the  whole system rested on artificial  scarcity. "Pre­ cisely here,"  wrote  Leacock,  "is  found  the  key to  the  operation   of  economic society ... The  world's  production   is aimed  at  producing  'values',  not  at  pro­ ducing  plenty."29   In  pitting  productivity  and  social justice against  the  concern with  money  values and  a brutal  conflict of forces Leacock was true to the tenor of  Veblen's   analysis.  It   followed  from  this  diagnosis  that   the  betterment   of society  could  never  automatically  come  from  unlimited  technical  progress  or mere development, nor did it necessitate, as Leacock's rejection of socialism made clear,  any  wholesale alterations  in  the fundamentals of capitalism.  The  solution lay in the encouragement of countervailing  powers like labour  organizations  and in  the  regulatory   activity  of  the  state,  in  "a  progressive movement  of social control." The  war  had  taught  everyone the lessons of social obligation: if a man were obliged to die for his country, society owed him the opportunity for a live­ lihood.  The   "government of  every  country,"   he  concluded,  "ought   to  supply work  and  pay  for  the  unemployed,  maintenance for  the  infirm  and  aged,  and education  and opportunity for the children."30

33

THE OTHER MR.  LEACOCK



For a brief moment,  Leacock was inspired by the example of war-time regula­ tion  and  a  genuine  humanitarianism, and   he stood  with  many  others  on  the brink of a new era. This enthusiasm and idealism, however, vanished in the early
192o's.  By the  193o's he spoke less and  less of a progressive movement  of social control and  more and more of the spectre of socialism and the dangers of restraint and  regulation.   The  connecting  link  between  his rejection  of socialism in The Unsolved  Riddle  in 1920 and  his writings of the  193o's were those stories, pub­ lished  in  the  192o's,  in  which  he  made  very  clear  his suspicion  of   restraint,  restriction and  regulation.
Leacock  was fascinated  with  the construction  of utopias  in which  the funda­ mentals  of an  ideal social system were realized in their simplicity and one of his favourite  devices was to take a simple item from the popular  culture and  develop it into a kind of anti-utopia,  until it became a caricature of itself. His story, "The Man  in Asbestos: An Allegory of the Future", published  in  191 1,  was an early example  of this style. In The  Garden  of Folly  ( 1924)  and  The  Iron  Man  and the Tin  Woman ( 1929)  he turned  his irony and satire upon nearly every popular  fad  of  the  twenties-popularized  psychology, personality  building  courses, in­ telligence  tests, love of  gadgets,  spiritualism  and  many  others -but  his most effective pieces are those in which he dealt with the hateful way that  social regu­ lation  impinged   on  the  deeper  aspects  of   human  life, especially  on  love  and courtship.  "The  Iron  Man  and  the Tin  Woman" was a satire  upon  the faith  in gadgets  and  labour  saving  devices:  it  had  reached  the  point  where  men  used robots to propose to women in order  to spare  themselves embarrassment. In  the tale,  "When Social  Regulation  is  Complete", the  two  lovers encountered  "Pre­  ventive  Officers Against  Premature Courtship", possessed a  "Suitable Acquain­  tance  Tag", and   had   to  obey  the  "Use-of-Endearing-Terms-in-Public-Places­ Act".  "This  present  Age of Restriction," Edward  tells Angelina,  "seems to have begun  bit  by  bit;  first one  thing  got  regulated   and  then  another.  The  more people got of it, the  more they seemed to want.... It began with the world war and after that it all came in a rush."31
This  impatience   with  restraint  and  restriction  underlay  Leacock's  attack  on
socialism in 1920 and throughout  the 193o's and early 194o's. He was very much a  participant in  the great debate  of the depression  years over social control and the  role of the social scientist in the practical  world,  but  the extent  of this  par­ ticipation  was concealed by personal preference. Just  as there are few direct and specific allusions to the Canadian context  in  his stories, so too in his polemical essays there  are  few specific references to  the  current  Canadian  scene.  He  pre-

34

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK



ferred,  he frequently  said, to deal with movements and  ideas rather  than  parties and  personalities, and  he expected  that  just as humour  should  be kindly and not vicious, so  also  it  should   be  possible for  decent  men  to  discuss fundamentals without  being bad-tempered and  nasty. At a time when governors of universities were hounding  academic  socialists, Leacock defended  their  rights to free speech
provided  they  were not  merely  propagandists  in their  classrooms.32  But in spite
of such  disclaimers, those against  whom his darts were directed  understood  well enough.  When  in  his Hellements  of  Hickonomics,  published  in  1935, the same year that  the League for Social Reconstruction  put out its blueprint  for a socialist Canada, Social Planning  for Canada,  he denounced  that  man  with "his goddam Social Plan",33 there was no doubt as to whom he had in mind. When he appealed for  a  group  of  apolitical  men  to  lead  Canadians  out  of the  depression,  F. H. Underhill said of Leacock that  he "rushes madly into Fascist mysticism, shouting
a la Carlyle for leaders who will act and not talk, their action apparently  to need
no guidance  from  trained  specific intellectuals  but  to be decided  by pure intui­ tion."34 And  when  in  1934  he  warned  of the  growing  unrest  and  longing  for security in Canada and  a possible social catastrophe,  it was obvious that  he was referring  to  the  growth  of  C.C.F.  strength  which  took  that  party  to  power in Saskatchewan  in 1944 and  within an ace of victory in Ontario. Even his critique of economics may  be  read  in an  anti-socialist light, for to  question  that  subject as the  key to all problems  in  the 193o's was like doubting the efficacy of prayer at an earlier date.
His case against socialism in the thirties was the same as that  established in his
Unsolved  Riddle.  In  the  193o's, as in 1920, he found  the essence of the socialist argument in  Edward   Bellamy's  utopian  romance,  Looking  Backward.  As some observers  have  pointed  out  it  was unfair  to  take  a  book  published  in I 888 as though  it were the  latest  pronouncement of socialist thoughe5  and  Leacock was certainly   aware   that   democratic  socialism  had  since  that   date  abandoned  its revolutionary  aims,  had  settled  on  a  policy of gradualism, and  was in  many respects  profoundly   individualistic.36    Yet  he  insisted  that   Bellamy's  common­ wealth, where the instruments of production  and distribution were owned by the state  and  administered  by elected officials, necessarily and  inevitably  had  to be the only logical conclusion  of all socialism. The  Canadian social democracy  out­ lined  in  Social  Planning   for Canada,  with  its  Benthamite  zeal for  rationality, efficiency and  order,  and  with  its board  of  experts overseeing even the nation's mental  health,  could  only have confirmed  him in that  conviction.  Revolutionary or  gradual,  socialism  was all  the same -it expected  a sudden  and  mechanical


35

THE OTHER MR.  LEACOCK



transformation in human  nature  and assumed  that  democratically  elected boards of officials would  behave quite  differently  than  popular  democracy  in  the  past. And above all, what Leacock rejected in his addresses to the Canadian Political Science Association as well as in his stories in Afternoons in Utopia  (1932), was the restriction  on individual  freedom and  the uncontrollable itch of all moralists and reformers to tell other people what to do.
The  uncritical  adherents  of free enterprise  on the right  were just as dangerous as the  planners  on  the  left, and  Leacock's  attacks  on  the  outmoded  cliches of laissez-faire were consistent with his earlier  views. He  enthusiastically  supported R.  B. Bennett's  new deal in 1935 and  announced in a preface  to the published version of the  Prime  Minister's first radio  address  that  laissez-faire, under what­ ever  captions  it appeared, "was  evidently no cure  for social injustice, for  social inequality,  for industrial crises, for low wages, for the starvation of the submerged poor  and  the  intolerable  opulence  of  the  over-rich."37   Laissez-faire  economics was  bankrupt: the  only thing  left of Adam  Smith  was the  principle  of human selfishness, that  "the  world  can  only be run  on  the  principle  of  every  man  for himself."38  That  motive  and  that  system  had  produced  prodigious  wealth;   it could not ensure its just distribution.  Only the state  could do that  through  social welfare and  the  creation  of equality  of opportunity. It  was on  the  idea  of the "social heritage", a concept shared  by the founder  of  social credit,  Major  Doug­ las, and  Veblen,  that  Leacock  based  his  argument.  No  one  brought  anything  into  the  world  with  him, Leacock  explained,  "Each of us has his natural claim to  a  share.  We  are,  as it  were,  the joint  heirs  of  a  great  estate,  whereas  our present social order  dispossesses  ninety-nine  to instal  one. We may imagine  that, in a general  way, of all the wealth  produced  in a year, a certain  part  is due to the original  heritage,  and  each of us has the  right  to that,  whether  we work or not.  Rich  or  poor,  wise  or  stupid,  lazy  or  energetic-that much  is ours."  39
Though   this  conviction  led  him  to  support   the  welfare  state,  Leacock  came down  in  the  end  to insist on the  primacy  of individualism. It  was because "we want  to  retain   the  essentials of  individual  freedom," he  concluded,  that  "we must be prepared  to restrain its incidental injustices."40
There   is one  final  dimension  to  Leacock's  response  to economic  breakdown
which further  affirms his hatred of restraint and limitations. One of the main contentions  in the socialists' indictment  of capitalism  in 193o's was that  the long period  of Canadian economic expansion  which  had  concealed  the weaknesses of the economy had come to a conclusive end and  that  rationalization and  planning were  necessary  adjustments. Coupled  with  this  belief was  the  feeling  that  the

THE OTHER MR.  LEACOCK



outer  limits of geographical expansion had  been reached  and  that  Canada could absorb  no more  immigrants. In  his three books, The  Economic  Prosperity of the British  Empire    (I 930),  Back  to  Prosperity  (I 932)   and  The   British  Empire ( I 940), and  his last articles warning  of imminent  catastrophe, Leacock rejected these notions of the stationary state. His short-run  solution  to the depression lay in the establishment  of a new gold standard and in inflation; but the path  to per­ manent  recovery was to be found in further  expansion within Canada and in the economic unity of the Empire.
Leacock was convinced  that  the insistence on political liberty had undermined
imperial  economic  integration and  he insisted that  the  unity  of an  earlier  day could be restored.  "Is  there  no way to get back to what  we have lost?" he asked in  I935· "George III  and  Lord  North  and  those people had the  right idea:  an empire,  a  real one-ships, colonies, commerce. Can  we not still find it?" 41  The Dominions  were practically  empty countries;  their resources, a heritage of all the British people, were rich and  immense. He then proposed an elaborate  and  com­ plicated  system  involving  an  imperial  super-tariff,  common  currency,  regulated triangular trade  between  Britain,  the  Dominions and  the tropical  dependencies, a quota  system on exports and imports, government  purchase of  Canadian wheat for  storage  in  England,  the  stimulation  of immigration   (of  the  right  sort)   by chartered   companies,  and  a  pool of investment  funds.  For  Canada his dream was no less grandiose: a  rush to develop her natural resources, the construction  of highways,  the  rebuilding  of railways, the reconstruction  of her cities, and  an immigration  programme which would help expand her population  to 2oo,ooo,ooo  people. There would  be ceaseless  expansion northward. "The  course of civiliza­ tion,"  he wrote in paraphrasing the chief theme of his friend Vilhjalmar Stefans­ son, "moves  northward." "We can abolish cold"-cities like Montreal  will rise in the far  north.  He had  never been there, he confessed, but the thought  of it as he sat in his study made  him feel good. We are the  trustees of that  vast territory,  he added  more soberly, "let us see to it that  in the new trust of the future  of the North we make fewer errors than in the old."42  Only by the denial of limits, only by hectic development  under  the stimulus  of free enterprise  and  under  the  aus­ pices of  the  welfare  state  could  a  political  upheaval  in  the  post-war  world  be avoided.
It  is tempting to see this appeal for imperial  economic integration  and  Cana­
dian  development  as the result of Leacock finally giving way to that  temptation to construct  his own utopia,  or rather  anti-utopia.  Could  it be that  his books on Empire  were  huge  satires  on  the  current  zeal for  reducing  economic  life to  a

37

THE OTHER MR.  LEACOCK



system?  What  better  way  was  there  to satmze   the  faith  in  planning  than  to employ it to reconstruct  Lord  North's empire, what  more effective way of poking fun  at  the folly of sudden solutions? Surely Leacock knew better  than  to expect such  heroic measures from  the  politicians who gathered  at  the  Ottawa  Confer­ ence  of  1932  and  to  whom  Back to Prosperity was ostensibly  addressed.  And what  was his endorsement  of Canadian development  but  a  harking  back to the boomsters of the  Laurier  era  with their endless designs for  transcontinental rail­ ways. But to see these works as an elaborate  joke would  be to attribute to Lea­ cock more cunning  than  he really had. They  confirm, on one level, his failure to solve the  problem  of capitalism  as he had  defined  it  in I 920  and,  on  another  plane,  they suggest that  in terms of his early  remark  about  the  Canadian mind finding  grand   material   projects  irresistible  that  never  was  he  more  Canadian than in his last pronouncements.
The  most arresting and persistent features of Leacock's social thought  were his
virtual  indifference  to institutions,  his hostility to restrictions, and  the unresolved tensions in  his outlook.  He  had  no feeling for the  malleability  of human  nature and  he hated  the  gross oversimplifications that  were preliminary  to  reconstruct­ ing society. In  a  profound  way he believed that  laws, institutions and  politics in a  conventional  sense were  of secondary  significance  in  human  affairs.  "In all institutions," he wrote, "in  all laws, the inspiring spirit  must  come first ... Laws merely  express and  make  regular  the  forces that  the  mind  and  will of society have  already  brought  into  being."43   His imperialism  was as  much  an  inspiring spirit  as a political  programme; the ills of popular  democracy  were to be cured, not  by  institutional   correctives,  but  by  good  men  and  the  uplifting  of  public morality;  the depression and  the threat  of social upheaval  were to be vanquished by a will to recast an Empire  and  tum  back over a century  of history.
Leacock was a man of passionate convictions and  his mind fell prey to a series of utopian  idealisms. Yet he knew too much  of human  nature  to expect, perhaps ever  really  desire,  the  attainment of  these  hopes.  And  certainly  he knew  how easy  it  was  to  accommodate   the  temptations  of  this  world  and  do  the  radio broadcast  for Pond's  Cold Cream  and  write an indifferent  history of Canada for the  House  of Seagram.  It  almost seemed that  in his social writing  he was often gripped  by  the  feeling  of how simple  great  changes  could  be, if only  the  will were  there,  and  that  he immediately  drew  back, conscious of the foolishness of such  hopes. It is not  accidental  that so much  of his social thought  hinges on the perception  of opposites-the promise of a Greater  Canada and  the squabbling of politicians, potential  plenty and  the facts of waste and  poverty, the admiration

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK



for the "economic  man" and  the existence of the "idle  rich", the desire for social justice through  progressive control  and  the suspicion of control  and  regulation, the  disdain  for  mere  bigness  and   his own  worshipful  attitude to  population figures. He  said of humour  that  it rests on the strange  incongruity  between our aspiration   and  our  achievement; it  might  be said of his social thought  that  it rested  on  the  tension  between  an  idealism which led  him  to  hope for a  better world verging on perfection, and a pessimism about human  nature  which warned
him that it could never be.

NOTES


1 R.  Curry, Stephen Leacock:   Humorist  and Humanist	(New    York,    I959);   Donald Cameron,   Faces    of   Leacock     (Toronto, I967); Robertson Davies,  Stephen  Leacock (Toronto,  I 970) ;  David   Legate,   Stephen Leacock   (Toronto, I 970).
2   G.   R.  Cook,   "Stephen  Leacock   and   the Age  of  Plutocracy, I903-I92I",  Character and   Circumstance, ed.  J.  Moir   (Toronto,
I 970),  I 63-8 I; C.  Berger,   The   Sense  of
Power  (Toronto, I 970).
s  Douglas  Library, Queen's  University, Adam
Shortt   Papers,  Skelton   to  Shortt, July  27,
1907-
4   Stephen Leacock,  "What's Ahead  for  Can­ ada?"  Maclean's Magazine, LVI   (May   1, I943),  I2.
5   Leacock,   The    Unsolved  Riddle   of  Social
Justice  (Toronto, I 920), 104.
6   Leacock,    "Canada  and    the   Immigration
Problem", National   Review, LVII   (April,
19 I I), 326;  S.  Leacock,  "Democracy and Social  Progress"  in  The   New  Era in  Can­ ada, ed.,  J. 0. Miller  (Toronto, 19I7),  32.
7 Leacock,  "Literature and  Education in America", University Magazine, VIII  (Feb., Igog), I6.
8   Adam  Shortt, "In Defence  of Millionaires", The    Canadian  Magazine,  XIII     (Oct., I 8gg)' 493-gB.
D   Leacock,   "The  University   and   Business",
University Magazine, XII   (Dec.,    1913),
540-49·
1o  Leacock,   "The  Apology   of  a   Professor",
ibid.,  IX  (April,  Igio),  I76-gr.
n Leacock,  "Empire and  Education",  Empire Club  Speeches, Being  Addresses   Delivered Before  the  Empire  Club  of Canada  During its   Session   of   1906-07  (Toronto,  1907),
285.
 
12   Leacock,   "Canada  and   the   Immigration
Problem",  3I7, 3I8.
1a   Leacock,  "The  Warning of  Prohibition  in
America",  National  Review, LXXIII  (July,
1919),  682.
H Leacock,   "The  Revision   of   Democracy", Papers and Proceedings of the  Canadian Political  Science   Association,   VI    ( 1934),
5-16.
15  Leacock,  "Empire and  Education",  282.
16   Leacock,  "The  Imperial Crisis",  Addresses Delivered  Before  the  Canadian  Club  of Toronto, Season  1905-06 (Toronto, n.d.),
118.
17   Leacock,  "The Great Victory  in  Canada",
National  Review, LVIII  (Nov.  I91I), 390.
18 Leacock,  "The Political   Achievement  of Robert   Baldwin",  Addresses  Delivered  Be­ fore the  Canadian   Club   of Ottawa,  1903-
09  (Ottawa, I9IO), 163.
19  John   Ewart,    "A   Perplexed    Imperialist",
Queen's   Quarterly, XV   (Oct.,  1907),  go.
2o Quoted  by Frank  Watt, "Nationalism in Canadian Literature",  Nationalism in  Can­ ada, ed.,  P.  Russell  (Toronto,  1966),  246.
21    Leacock,   "The  Political    Achievement    of
Robert Baldwin", I63.
22   Ibid.,  I 64.
23    Leacock,  "Canada and  the  Monarchy" At­
lantic Monthly, CLXIII  (June, 1939), 743·
24   Leacock,   "'Tale of  Two   Cities'",  Mac­
lean's  Magazine, LVI   (Mar. 1, 1943), 41.
25  Leacock, While There is Time: The  Case Against Social Catastrophe (Toronto, I945), I 19·2I, 126-7.
26  Leacock,  "Empire and  Education",  286.
2 7   Leacock,   The  Unsolved Riddle   of  Social
Justice, 25.

39

THE OTHER MR. LEACOCK




2B   Leacock,   "Our  National   Organization  for the  War"  in  Miller,  op. cit., 409-!11.
2o  Leacock,  Unsolved  Riddle,  73·
3o Ibid., 151-2, 128, 140.
81    Leacock,  The   Iron  Man  and  the  Tin  Wo­
man  With Other  Such  Futurities  (Toronto,
1929), 15·
32  Leacock,    "'Academic  Freedom"',   Mac­
lean's  Magazine, XLIX  (Feb.  1, 1936)   14-
5, 38-9.
33 Leacock,  Hellements of Hickonomics  m Hiccoughs  of Verse  Done in  Our Social Planning  Mill  (New  York,  1936), 3·
34   F.    H.    Underhill,   "The    Conception   of National Interest", Canadian journal  of Economics and  Political  Science,  I  (Aug.,
1935), 407.  In  connection   with  Leacock's Back  to  Prosperity  ( 1932),  Underhill  com­ mented:  "Professor   Stephen  Leacock  still remains  our leading  humorist when it comes to  writing   serious   books  about   Canadian social   problems."   Canadian   Forum,   XIV  (Nov., 1937), 74·
8      F.  W.  Watt,   "Critic or  Entertainer?  Ste­ phen  Leacock  and  the Growth  of  Material­ ism",   Canadian  Literature,  5    (Summer,
1960), 36. R. Cook, "Stephen Leacock  and
the  Age  of  Plutocracy,  1903-1921",   178n.
36  Leacock,    Elements   of   Political    Science
(Boston,  Revised  Edition,  1913),  383-4.
 37    Leacock,  "Foreward", The   Premier  Speaks to  the  People. The   Prime  Minister's   janu­ ary  Radio  Broadcasts  issued  in  book   form. The   First  Address ... (Ottawa  f 1935], 6.
38   Leacock,  "What is Left of Adam Smith?", Canadian Journal  of Economics  and  Politi­ cal Science, I  (Feb.,  1935), 43· See also his "The Economic  Analysis  of  Industrial De­ pression",  Papers  and   Proceedings   of  the Canadian  Political  Science   Association,  V
( 1935)' 5·24.
39    Leacock,   "Social   and  Other Credit   in  Al­
berta",  Fortnightly Review, CXLVI  (Nov.,
1936), 529.
40 Leacock, Back to Prosperity, The Great Opportunity of the Empire  Conference (Toronto, 1932), 8.
41  Leacock,  "Economic Separatism in  the Bri­
tish Empire", Quarterly Review, 265  (July,
1935), I I.
42    Leacock,  The British  Empire. Its  Structure, Its  Unity, ts
65;   My   D1scovery  of  the    West   (London,
1937),  !190-304.  His   "Reflections  on   the
North", which  originally   appeared  in  The
Beaver,  Dec.   1936,  has  been  reprinted in that  magazine,  Summer, 1970.
43    Leacock,  My  Discovery  of the  West, 305.




RINA LASNIER ET

LA CONNIVENCE DES SIGNES


Jean-Louis Major



"Passe  un  certain  point, il  est surement un moment  ou l'extase n'est plus un tour­ billon ou une  folie des sens, mais la lumi­  ere qui provient d'une exacte  perfection."

(E. Pound)




LT EN  SITUANT Ia poCsie de Rina Lamie< a l'oppoo<! de certaines  tentatives  actuelles qui  font  de l'extase un divertissement,  cette  phrase d'Ezra Pound1  pourrait definir d'une  fa<;on adequate quelques-uns  de ses mom­ ents privilegies, car  Ia visee essentielle d'oeuvres telles que  Presence de  ['absence (Igs6), Les  gisants  (1963)  et  L'arbre  blanc  (Ig66)   trouve  a  s'accomplir, me
semble-t-il, dans  une forme  proche de l'extase. C'est done  a preciser Ia qualite  de
cette "lumiere" ainsi que  les conditions  de I' "exacte  perfection" du poeme  que s'attachera rna lecture du dernier recueil de Rina Lasnier.2
Man  point  de depart  pourrait  se fixer sur a peu pres n'importe quel texte  de
Ia section intitulee  La  Nuit. Je  choisis, a cause de sa brievete,  L'iris sauvage, un
poeme  qui  met  en  oeuvre  divers procedes  d'ecriture  que  l'on  retrouve  tout  au cours de 1'oeuvre:

Iris, blason royal de la nuit des marais, robage germe bleu par floralie de reine, coeur resserre sur des effluves intouchables et sur l'obscur d'une blessure d'apanage; la corolle ala majeste courbe de l'acanthe
et du don deverse aux larges bords des paumes.

Iris, mut  investie dans l'etroitesse du signe par cette deuillante mal evadee de la bourbe.

(La Salle des reves, p. 30)

RINA LASNIER



J'y   reconna.IS d'abord   les vers  chamieres   qui  accentuent  Ia structure   d'en­
semble:

Iris, blason royal de la nuit des marais,

Iris, nuit investie dans l'etroitesse du signe

Comme  dans  presque taus les poemes d'une  certaine  etendue,  ces vers jouent ici sur Ia reprise de quelques elements. Et les termes qui s'y retrouvent marquent du meme  coup  le mouvement  du  poeme par  les modifications  qu'ils  subissent dans le systeme du vers lui-meme. Deux termes remplissent cette fonction: l'un, "iris", occupe  Ia position initiale  dans  les deux vers; l'autre, "nuit", se deplace le long de l'axe  syntagmatique. A quai  l'on  peut ajouter  les termes "blason" et "signe", dont  Ia position est intervertie  d'un  vers a l'autre. Etroitement lies entre eux par une structure  et des termes communs,  les deux  vers clefs se repondent et, d'une certaine  fac;on, se repetent:  chacun  oriente  I'iris vers la  fonction  de  signifiant mais selon un mode particulier.
:Le premier  vers etablit  "blason" en apposition  a  "iris",  manifestant   ainsi Ia
volonte  de faire  entrer  l'objet  dans  un ordre  de signification  explicite. D'entree de  jeu, le poeme  annonce  done Ia fonction  symbolique  de l'iris, mais en  meme temps il Ia restreint  car le blason est une forme hieratique du symbole. La struc­ ture   appositive  ne  correspond   ici  qu'a   une  association   intellectuelle:   l'ecart  d' "iris"  a "blason" est immediatement comble  par  Ia logique  de !'intention dis­ cursive. Que  l'on  ajoute  l'epithete  "royal"  n'y  change  pas grand'chose: ce n'est que  redondance   pour  assurer  l'ampleur   et  !'elevation   du  ton.  "Nuit",  l'autre
terme  clef, se trouve  relegue  a Ia fonction  de determinant et escamote  dans  le
cours du vers.
A un premier  niveau, le vers se donne comme  une description  et, plus exacte­ ment,  comme  une interpretation de I'objet. On  peut le lire de deux fac;ons, soit: Iris, blason dans  Ia nuit des marais, soit:  Iris, blason  ( symbole, signe)  de Ia nuit
des marais.  J'ai  tendance  a croire que Ia premiere  lecture  est Ia plus juste, mais
d'une  fac;on ou  de  l'autre,  a  cause du  caractere  intellectuel  de !'apposition,  Ia valeur   de  "nuit" demeure   limitee  et  proche   d'une   representation  univoque. Toute  Ia strophe  se developpe  d'ailleurs  sur  le mode  d'une  description  en deux temps:   d'abord   Ia fonction  de l'iris, qui  est celle d'un  signifiant  emblematique, puis, dans  les cinq  vers suivants, sa description,  rehaussee  en  particulier  par  les valeurs metaphoriques de Ia blessure et du don.
En  verite, seul le "couplage" avec le debut  de Ia seconde strophe  donne  tout

RINA LASNIER



son sens a !'apposition de "blason" a "iris" en ouvrant  "la  nuit"  a une veritable portee symbolique. A lui seul, le premier vers ne parvient  pas a faire valoir les connotations symboliques  de "la  nuit",  parce que le terme  ne  joue que dans les limites d'une  determination logique s'ajoutant a "blason", qui constitue le pivot, et le point d'appui de toutle vers.
Dans le second vers chamiere, construit selon la meme structure grammaticale que le premier,  la nuit est associee directement  et immediatement a l'iris. Le de­ placement  de ce mot  a un  premier  efiet au niveau  de la constitution  sonore du vers:  alors que  le premier  vers est domine  par  le son a dans "blason", "royal" et "marais" qui attenuent les i de "nuit" et "iris", le second prolonge et accentue  les deux i de "iris"  avec "nuit", "investie" et "signe".  C'est  un procede frequent  dans  la  poesie de Rina  Lasnier  que le redoublement  ou la  repetition  d'une  con­ sonne  ou  d'un   son  vocalique  dans  un  meme  vers, mais  l'effet  n'en  est pas  le meme  selon que  la  structure sonore est soutenue  ou  non  par  la  creation  d'une  structure particuliere du sens.
Dans  ce  deuxieme  vers chamiere, la  juxtaposition  de  "nuit" a  "iris"  trans­ forme  totalement  la lecture. Alors que le passage de "iris"  a "blason" s'effectuait sans  difficulte,  par  simple  prolongement  logique,  l'ecart   entre  "iris"  et  "nuit" oblige  a  un  reajustement du  systeme de signification. Tout  se passe  comme  si, pratiquant  jusqu'a  ce point  une  ecriture  "realiste",  le poeme  rompait  par  une seule  opposition  l'enchainement du  discours. Le blanc  qui separe  les deux  pre­ miers mots de ce vers est d'une  autre  nature  que ceux  entre  les autres  mots du poeme.  Aucun  signe lexical  n'annonce le changement  de mode  d'ecriture, et la structure apparente se  repete:   Iris,  blason ... , Iris,  nuit.... Mais,  en  fait,  de l'un  a l'autre rienne se repete. C'est la nature  meme des rapports de sens qui est modifiee. Alors que le premier  vers attribue  une fonction a l'iris, ce vers-ci change l'essence meme  de l'iris:  la  nuit  devient substance  de l'iris, I'iris  est immediate­  ment  perc;u comme  nuit.  Toute  notion  de signe est expulsee de la lecture:  nous quittons  un  systeme ou des chases sont signes d'autres  chases, ou telle valeur  est attribuee a un objet,  pour  nous  retrouver  de plain-pied  dans  un univers ou l'iris a substance de nuit.
La  suite  du  vers  est construite  de fac;on a  preserver,  a  accentuer  le rapport
essentiel entre  "iris"  et "nuit". Le determinant est hausse a l'etat  d'abstraction: ce n'est  pas le "signe"  qui,  par  l'intermediaire du participe,  determine Ia "nuit" mais bien "l'etroitesse." La fonction de signifiant symbolique  qui, dans le premier vers, est plaquee  sur  l'iris,  est ici effacee par  le fait  qu'elle  ne  joue en quelque sorte qu'au  deuxieme  degre, a travers la notion d'etroitesse, qui  peut etre pen;ue

43

RINALASNffiR



immediatement plutot que par l'effet d'une  description  et qui, en realite, echappe
a toute  description  objective. AIOI'S que  le premier  vers designe Ia fonction sym­
bolique,  celui-ci l'accomplit  en ne Ia designant  que de fac;on indirecte. Emprun­ tant  au  vocabulaire  thomiste,  je dirais  que  l'iris,  dont  Ia substance  est "nuit", prend  ainsi une forme nouvelle, "l'etroitesse". On  reconnait  ici l'un des procedes
les plus efficaces de Ia poesie de Rina  Lasnier, qui consiste a transformer  certains
elements  concrets,  .a  leur  ouvrir  un  champ   de  signification  spirituelle  en  leur
adjoignant une  valeur  abstraite.  Ainsi !'invisible  fait-il  irruption   dans  le visible.
Le  renversement  de position des termes clefs et leur  projection  dans  un autre ordre  de signification  a l'interieur  d'une  meme structure apparente met en relief
un  changement de niveau  du  poeme lui-meme.  Ce qui est en  jeu dans  les deux vers charnieres,  ce sont deux formes de  Ia pocsie, partant, de Ia lecture:  l'une qui  appartient  au  systeme de  Ia  description,   l'autre que  l'on  peut  concevoir comme une perception.
Le  premier  vers de  Diris  sauvage prelude  a une  description  qui  se prolonge
sur  toute  Ia strophe.  En fait, on  peut  dire  que  tout  le poeme,  a !'exception  du
deuxieme  vers chamiere,  n'est qu'une description.  C'est  une  logique  de Ia  con­ stitution  ou plutot  de Ia reconstitution  de l'objet  qui en commande l'ecriture, et les  termes   "robage",  "coeur",   "effiuves",  "corolle",  "bords"  en   jalonnent   le developpement. Mais toute description est, de soi, illimitee meme si elle se donne l'apparence d'un  arret  nature!avec l'epuisement  des parties  de  l'objet.  Aussi le premier  vers  et  le demier  ont-ils  un  caractere   plus synthetique  qui  permet  de fermer  Ia boucle de Ia description en meme temps qu'il  en oriente le sens.
A  partir  d'une  structure  fondamentalement enumeratrice qui,  aux  vers deux et trois en  particulier, emprunte  visiblement  a Ia forme  du  blasonnement,  Rina
Lasnier  projette  un developpement  metaphorique dans sa forme apparente mais comparatif   dans  sa signification. Car  dans  cette  representation de  l'objet,  tout
effort  de  sens  supplementaire apparait  precisement   a Ia  fois comme  effort  et
comme  supplement.  L'axe  de  rna  lecture  demeure   le  deroulement   de  l'objet selon ses parties;  ils s'y  joint, par  le jeu de l'ecriture imageante, les valeurs du don  et  de  Ia  blessure qui  elles-memes se resorbent  dans  l'allegorie  de  Ia  reine­ veuve,  dont  le  developpement  double  celui  de  Ia description.  C'est  une  repre­
sentation  culturelle  qui repond a Ia volonte de faire entrer  Ia description  dans un
ordre  affectif  et  intellectuel,  mais  le mouvement   du  sens est en  quelque  sorte entrave,  trahi,  par  }'effort trop  visible du  langage.  D'autant plus que,  dans  le
meme  poeme,  le  vers  qui  correspond   a  une  perception   fait  contraste  par  Ia
simplicite du vocabulaire.


44

RINA LASNIER



EN VOULANT  hausser  Ia description  a  un  niveau  poetique, Rina  Lasnier  recourt  de  fa<_;on  systematique  .a  un  certain  nombre  de  procedes
que l'on  apprend vite a deceler. II y a chez elle une fa<;on de forcer l'enonce qui apparait dans  le choix  meme  des mots et qui impose un caractere  heraldique  a Ia  description.  Bien sur,  dans  L'iris  sauvage Ia fonction  de  blason  attribuee a l'iris  commande d'emblee  cette ecriture.   Mais  on Ia retrouve  ailleurs  sous une forme  ou  1' autre.  Ainsi  en  lisant  ce vers des  Relais  de  Marie   ( p.  18) : "Cet etranger  qui  passage  par son sang pour s'exiler",  je m'interroge sur le choix du verbe. Pourquoi  "passage" plutot  que  "passe"?  Qu'ajoute ce mot  qui  accroche comme une trouvaille,  Ia justement ou aucun  mot ne devrait  retenir, ou celui qui parle  devrait  s'effacer  devant  ce qu'il  dit? Le vers que  je viens de citer met aussi en  relief un  autre  trait  d'·ecriture:  l'homophonie. La  plupart  des vers semblent construits sur le retour ou Ia predominance d'une consonne initiale ou d'un son vocalique,  et ce de fac;on volontaire  plutot  que  par appel  de sons et devers. "Je ne suis plus Ia marcheuse  vaquant   a ses vocalises," dit  l'auteur ... et pourtant, meme en  ce vers les sons attendus  se juxtaposent.  II faut  reconnaitre  cependant que  cette  preoccupation de  Ia  persistance sonore  donne  lieu  parfois  a  des vers d'une  merveilleuse  cohesion. II semble, en general, que Ia repetition  d'un  meme son  alourdisse  le vers lorsque  le vocabulaire  en est plus recherche  ou lorsque  Ia parente  de sons ne sert  pas a creer une veritable association de sens. Par  contre, elle  assure  admirablement bien  Ia  continuite  de  l'emotion  et  de  Ia  perception lorsque le language  est plus familier, plus pres du quotidien.
Malgre  tous les moyens mis en oeuvre pour  lui donner  un caractere  de spon­
taneite  lyrique,  la description  demeure  un parcours, et rna lecture  n'echappe pas a  Ia  temporalite  des  parcours,  de  meme  qu'elle  demeure   une  reconstruction soumise a  Ia spatialite  des elements qui s'y  juxtaposent.  La  perception,  au  con­ traire,   est  une  saisie  immediate   d'une   essence particuliere.   Pour  apprecier   Ia difference,  i1 me  suffit de  refaire  le deuxieme  vers chamiere  sur  le  modele  du premier.  Ainsi "Iris,  signe etroit  de la nuit"  n'appellerait plus la  perception  qui s'accomplit   avec   "Iris,   nuit  investie  dans  l'etroitesse  du  signe".   Ma  lecture demeurerait au niveau  d'une  logique raisonnante  pour etablir une equation  entre l'iris et Ia notion  de signe, laissant ainsi se perdre  Ia fusion de l'iris et de Ia nuit de meme  que  le caractere intensement  existentiel qui est lie a l'expression  "dans  l'etroitesse".  Dans  la  forme  actuelle  du  vers tout se passe comme si Ia fonction  de signe attribuee explicitement  a l'iris cessait  d'etre  lue comme  telle pour  etre remplacee par un acte de signification vecue.


45

RINA LASNIER



Pour  mesurer  l'efficience particuliere  de la  forme  adoptee  par  Rina  Lasnier, on peut encore la comparer  a celle du premier  vers de La courbure  (p. 31):

Dans la courbure du secret se voute la nuit

On  y reconnait  une structure  analogue et des termes equivalents: "la  courbure" est le terme abstrait  qui correspond  a "l'etroitesse", sans en avoir pour autant les connotations  existentielles  puisqu'il  ne fait  appel  qu'a   des  representations  geo­ metriques  ou spatiales;  par contre, le "secret", qui se trouve  dans la meme posi­ tion grammaticale que le "signe",  evoque des valeurs plus emotives;  le  participe  y est remplace  par une forme active et le terme "nuit" s'y retrouve mais en posi­ tion intervertie. 11 ne manque  a ce vers que la structure appositive du debut. On constate alors a quel  point le seul mot "iris" a un role important, non seulement pour  faire  le raccord  avec le debut  du  poeme  et  en  assurer  la  reprise, mais  a l'interieur meme  du  vers. En fait, c'est ce mot  qui  donne  une assise concrete  a tout  le reste du vers, comme c'est la presence de ce terme concret  et particulier, se posant  en debut  de vers comme un point  d'orgue lyrique,  qui  fait de la nuit une substance  unique.  L'irreductible pouvoir  de ce  vers consiste a me faire  per­ cevoir  d'une   fa on
etroitesse  de  fleur  et  de symbole:   ce que,  dans  un  autre   poeme  ( Le  bleu  de
l'heure), Rina  Lasnier  formule  sur  le mode  d'un   conseil mais  dans  une  forme qui pourrait  etre une paraphrase du vers de L'iris Sauvage:
comme l'iris a veture de profondeurs entrevues
ecoute 	Dieu prendre pour presence l'obscurite respirante.

Un  vers comme celui de L'iris sauvage represente  la part  capitale  de la poesie de  Rina  Lasnier:   il est le signe et le lieu d'une  communion intime  a la densite
spirituelle de l'univers. Dans le depouillement  de son expression, cet instant privi­ legie marque   la  rencontre  entre  l'ecriture  et  !'experience interieure,   en  meme temps  qu'il  accomplit  le sens meme de la poesie. Car, selon Rina  Lasnier, "plus le poete aura  une haute  conscience de la poesie, mieux il 1'ordonnera  a sa fin qui est la transcendance."3
Par  contre, il est une autre  part  de l'oeuvre  qui s'attache a decrire les etres et les chases  en  y superposant, en  y imposant  meme,  une  intention   spiritualiste. C'est  la  surtout   que  l'on  retrouve  la  contention   de  l'ecriture, la  somptuosite precieuse du  vocabulaire,  en meme temps que  le cote moralisateur de l'oeuvre. 4
L'ecart   entre  description  et  perception   (qui,  au  plan  de  la  structure   de  la signification,  est analogue  a celui qui separe  la  comparaison de la metaphore)

RINA LASNIER



me  para!t  correspondre  precisement a la difference  d'orientation qui  existe entre la  volonte  d'assigner un  sens  spirituel a  l'univers et !'apprehension d'une etoffe invisible  de  l'univers. Rina  Lasnier   elle-meme  semble  bien  reconnaitre quelque difference entre  les deux  temps  de  l'oeuvre. Dans  La salle des reves, elle dispose en  des  sections  distinctes des  poemes  tels  que  L'iris sauvage et  Une   feuille ou Patriciennes,  qui   semblent  tres   pres  l'un   de  l'autre  par   leur  sujet.   C'est   que
!'orientation  des  deux   demiers poemes  est  purement  descriptive, alors  que  le premier a pour  noyau  une perception qui en modifie tout  le sens.
ll y a dans  l'univers de  Rina Lasnier  une  densite  de !'invisible qui  habite  les
choses  et  les etres,  du  moins  certains d'entre eux. Or, il semble  que  l'on  ne re­ joigne  cette  secrete   etoffe  qu'a  certaines conditions:  I'experience en  est  re<_;ue plutot que  pratiquee, donnee plutot  que  cultivee.  C'est  vrai  du  sens spirituel  de l'univers,  ce  l'est   aussi,   croirait-on,  de  l'ecriture  elle-meme,  juste  quand  elle epouse  la  perception, Iegerement fausee  par  un  haussement du  ton  quand elle veut forcer  la vision ou imposer  un sens.
Le  poeme  ne saurait se substituer a !'experience du  spirituel. Dans  les instants privilegies,   il se  fait   lecture  attentive  et  humble   d'une  presence; ailleurs,   il manifeste un  orgueil  de !'expression qui l'engage dans  une  toute  autre voie. C'est la difference entre,  accepter de recevoir  et vouloir  capter. Tout au  plus le poeme tentera-t-il parfois  d'operer une  mediation. Toutefois, Rina Lasnier  nous previent que  l'on  ne fait  pas violence  au spirituel, du moins pas a cette qualite du spirituel. Le premier vers d'Ecouter ( p. I o I ) le dit de fa<_;on lapidaire:

Ne precede pas Dieu s'il ne choisit pas ton cri
C'est   aussi,  me  semble-t-il l'un   des  sens  du  poeme.   Ne  touche   pas a  la  mer
(p.g7):
Si la pluie touchait a lamer par le gain des deluges lamer rejetterait l'insipide et ses eaux maigres;
si les oiseaux la pressaient de toutes parts de cris passeurs pour qu'elle s'ouvre a !'acclamation de la foudre,
et si le vent echouait sur elle et la rebroussait blanche comme le ventre de mille coursiers cabres,
lamer n'entrerait pas dans la connivence des signes.

Je  note  que  les poemes  qui  affirment  l'autonomie de !'experience spirituelle se situent dans   des  sections  du   recueil  ou  l'auteur semble  s'y  resigner  et  se  can­ tanner dans  l'ordre de  la  description. Par  contre,  les poemes  de la  premiere sec­ tion  tentent de combler l'ecart entre  les deux  temps  de la vie interieure en  effec-

47

RINA  LASNIER


tuant   le  passage  de  Ia  description  a Ia  perception.   L'iris  Sauvage en  est  un exemple,  de  meme  que le poeme-titre  qui s'installe  d'emblee  dans  une  presence
a }'invisible:
Ce lieu de toutes parts comme les nappes du rayonnement, cette etendue sans engendrement comme la hauteur suspendue et comme les salles de la neige vastement reposee
de ses naissances stellaires superposant ses tufs fermes;
c'est le lien de I'arne immobile et avancee devant moi

Le  poete  s'y  donne  pour vocation  de faire  entrer  un espace sans limite  dans  Ia
"terre etroite  de  moi". On  reconnait  dans  ce mouvement  Ia "nuit  investie dans l'etroitesse  du signe".  Et ce mouvement,  qui  caracterise  Ia communion  a l'ordre
de Ia transcendance, eclaire le sens et !'orientation de l'autre part  de l'oeuvre, ou
Rilla  Lasnier  evoque  Ia somptuosite de l'univers  pour  donner  libre  passage  a Ia
dimension  infinie en chaque  etre. C'est  precisement  le paradoxe  de cette  oeuvre qu'elle  entretienne Ia conscience d'un  irreductible ecart  entre  les deux formes de
Ia  vie  interieure   en  meme  temps qu'elle  s'attache a le combler.  C'est  aussi le
signe  de sa valeur  qu'elle  reussisse parfois sur  les deux  tableaux ... ou  presque.
Le  poeme  La  salle des reves semble situer  hors du  langage !'experience  de Ia communion  totale:
Salle sculptee d'un souffle par les ajours du silence
et les mots n'ont plus le pouvoir alterant de l'oeuvre;
lieu sans lieu du reve par profondeur ronde
et I'esprit n'a plus le harnachement des paroles
ni les trajectoires d'etincelles ala voute du songe;
que je m'accole a cette arne sedentaire du reve,
plus liee .aces fonds taciturnes que le germe au soleil;
que je me separe de I'arne repondante par la frappe de l'airain et cloisonnee dans l'epaisseur comme le son de la cloche;
proie ployee de l'inexprime dans le pourchas de la parole moins pres de moi que l'ombre touffue de l'inexperimable.
Pourtant, on vient  parfois tout pres d'avoir  acces a ce "lieu sans lieu" par l'inter­
mediaire   du   poeme  lui-meme,  situe  alors  "a Ia  charniere du  naturel  et  sur­
naturel".5   Mais  c'est  en  quelque  sorte  comme  si Ia description  du  visible  pre­
parait  la perception  de !'invisible a la fa on
que l'extase  mais, semble-t-il, Ia precede et parfois y conduit.  A preuve le poeme Une  etoile (p.  24)  qui, en ses deux strophes  de niveau  differents,  represente  les deux  formes  de !'experience  et de Ia poesie en  indiquant peut-etre  le moyen de
passer de l'une a I'autre:

RINA LASNIER



Pour  qu'une etoile me regarde  droit
ce n'est pas trop  de l'encontre de la nuit, de l'arasement du socle solaire
et me reste l'etroite strie de l'oeil.

Pour  qu'une etoile dise !'intention de !'Oeuvre je la vois laisser preseance a la nuit,
granule grave ou s'interiorise l'embrasement, milieu  de moi dont l'obscur est une presence.
C'est, a certaines conditions ( celles  de  la  plus  exacte perfection de  l'ecriture), le  pouvoir de  la  poesie  de  depasser les limites  et les contraintes qu'admet la  claire conscience. L'oeuvre de Rina Lasnier en temoigne.


NOTES

1 Ezra  Pound, Esprit  des litteratures  romanes, trad. Pierre  Alien, Christian  Bourgois,
I 966, p. I I 8; call.  10J I 8.
2   La Salle des reves, H.M.H., I97I,  I I3 pages;  coll. Sur parole.
8   Communication  de  Rina  Lasnier   lors  de  la  "Rencontre  mondiale de  poesie"  a
Montreal en  septembre I967. Le  texte est  reproduit dans  Etudes  litteraires, vol.  I,
no 3, decembre Ig68, pages 402-404.
4  Plus encore  dans  les oeuvres precedentes que dans  La Salle des reves.
5   Rina  Lasnier, ibid,  p. 404.


























49



A KNOCKING

IN THE CLAY

Robert Gibbs



I was consumed with a desire to write a philosophical-lyrical drama in which all I had learned in philosophy and psychology would  be  presented to  the  public  in  a  verse composition.  I spent two  years upon  it,  which  meant  two  summers  and two Christmas vacations. ... 1



TE PERioD of compooing a dmma referred to in the above quotation was  presumably  between I 9I 7, the  year  Pratt   completed  his  Ph.D.
and  published his first major  poetic effort, the narrative poem, Rachel, and  1920, when he formally  joined the department of English at Victoria  College. The story of "Clay's" fortunes  following composition is a familiar  one:  the preparation of a number  of typescripts for circulating  among  friends  and  colleagues, their  cool and  cooling reception  of the opus, Pratt's  ceremonial  immolation  of the scripts, and  Mrs.  Pratt's  opportune  rescue of one  at  least, for  posterity.  To  her act  of mercy or treason this paper owes its existence.
Pratt   has  left  us  his  own  characterization  of  "Clay":  " ... it was  full  of
theories, ethical  maxims, philosophical truisms, bald very bald  generalizations­ practically  the  whole cargo of the department of philosophy  and  psychology as it existed twenty years or so ago at the University of  Toronto."2   Pratt  had set out to  write  a  lyrical  drama,  and  although  he  hoped  to  achieve  something  "Eliza­  bethan  in character,"3  the result is more Victorian than  anything  else. There  are some  affinities in  the total  design and  in  the  detail  with  Hardy's The  Dynasts, but  Pratt  was neither so ambitious  as Hardy  nor so sure about  his philosophical ground. If anyone,  taking Pratt's characterization of "Clay" too literally, should go to  the  work looking for  a  complex of philosophical  and  psychological ideas, he would  be disappointed. The conflicting views that  beset the later  Victorians are all there in a general  way, but in no greater  depth  or complexity than  in In

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



Memoriam. In  fact,  it is with  that  work that  I find its closest affinities both  in the conflict and in its resolution.
"Clay" is a  study  of  cosmic irony. The  conflict  has  its basis in  the  central
character, Julian, but  it  does not work itself out in  him. Julian's character  and the  basis of the  cosmic irony  remain  a "folded  scroll" until  the end  of Act  II. There  is no development  in him up to that  point and little beyond it. He appears as a man completely disillusioned from the outset and moves from that state only in  the  final scene of the  play,  when  he acknowledges an  intimation  of  immor­ tality  in  himself, which  answers rather  faintly the cosmic idealism of  his friends Thaddeus and  Merrivale.  The  conflict is one  between  cosmic irony,  embodied in Julian  in the form  of Romantic angst, and transcendental optimism or ortho­ dox  conservatism,  embodied  in  the  other  characters.  The  drama  is  lyrical,  not only because it includes lyric passages spoken by disembodied voices, but because it is essentially a stating  and  restating  of opposing sets of feeling. The  events of the  play, chiefly two-the storm  of Act I and  the war of Act  II-serve only to  fix  Julian   in  his convictions:   first, of the  meaningless  hostility  of nature  to man,  and  second, of man's  failure  to realize any moral progress since Cain. The coming of spring  in Act III effects a change in Julian's outlook,  but  the change is not  profound  enough  to constitute  a real dramatic development. The  intima­  tion that Julian  confesses to having is really in evidence from the beginning, since Julian's state  of mind is clearly one of failed  Romantic  idealism throughout, and glimmerings of that idealism are constantly shining through  his darkest utterances.
Pratt  himself  recognized  the  failure  of the  work as a  too  conscious effort  to embody sets of attitudes  with  no imaginative  grasp of characters  as people. The play owes whatever  force it  has to the rhetoric of its outpourings  rather  than  to conflicts  within  or  between  characters.  Its  chief interest  for  us lies in  certain relations it reveals between the writer and his material.



E      SCENE  of the  play  consists of a  conversation between   Penrose  and   Donaldson,   two  characters   who  observe  and  comment rather  than  express any real concerns or convictions of their own. Their  function here  is to  introduce Julian   and  his situation.  He  is a  man  removed  from  the world, a kind  of Prospero  figure, whose knowledge of nature  causes the humble folk, whose sick he heals and  whose drowned  he resuscitates, to regard  him with awe. But as Penrose continues  his account,  the character  of Julian becomes more clearly Romantic-Byronic or Tennysonian:

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



A nature fierce and passionate, his soul
Smoked over with the hottest vapours of revolt Against the ground-plans of our mother-earth. His face was of fine cast; his stature  tall;
His eyes took on the bluer edge of flame Beneath grey brows; this was at times displaced By softer hues for he was as a child
In singleness of heart and guileless ways; Strange that he looked obliquely on the world He lived in; everywhere that human  feet
Had  trod he saw the Satyr's hoof; a core
Malevolent inhered in life; the ape
Was grinning through men's eyes and teeth, and
Marked all his utterance  with a tragic note4

Here   we  have  the  Byronic  mixture of  hot  rebellion   and  guileless  innocence, although Julian  never  acts in  his rebellion  and  so never  has  cause  to feel  guilt. He  is no  Manfred, but  a  purely  literary  echo  of the  Romantic hero.  His  vision of  nature is Tennysonian; the  "core  malevolent" points  also  to  Hardy, but  his confrontation is emotional and   rhetorical rather  than   actual, so  that   he  never achieves  the  stature of intensity  of a Hardy figure.  His  "tragic note" is a  matter of utterance, a role assumed,  not one of life or action. We learn  later  in the scene that  he is a naturalist in every sense of the  word,  looking  into  physical  processes for  clues  to  human nature and  behaviour. To  this extent, he is a Wundtian  psy­ chologist,  but only to this extent.
The second  scene  begins with  Julian in  soliloquy  on  the  shore  with  a  storm
brewing. The   blank  verse  opening   is impressive-Miltonic and  descriptive­
but hardly the voice of a man communing with himself:

Swift has the darkness settled on the deep; A moment past, and livid streaks of day Were casting fitful splendours on the waves. Retiring, they have left the graying sea Mantled  in gloom.

As the  soliloquy   moves  forward  through forty  lines,  it  gathers a  good  deal  of rhetorical force.  At  one  point  only  does the  voice  with  its echoes  of Milton and Wordsworth give  way to something more  closely the  poet's  own.  The  transition is worth  observing:

And so, does man's existence find its form
Envisaged in the ocean's eyeless face

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



Swept by the besom of the winds.	Its lines, Its furrows, all its corrugated cares
Are mirrored in its gulfs.	Dark nature's minions
Break from the leash of law, and each with each
Contending, joins the universal strife; Winds claw rebellious seas; the billows spit Their salted rheum upon the rocks, are cuffed And broken in return. 	The  Atlantic  plants Its heel of death upon the transport's hull,
Strides over the breaker's line; bludgeons the Cape, And  flung in thunder  from the embattled brows
Of jag and bluff, reels with a drunkard's tread
Along the shore, and falls upon the beach. (italics mine)
The  passage opens  with  conventional  diction, as Julian continues  to  philoso­ phize in rather  facile terms  about  man  and  nature.  The  verse begins to  pick up with  "Dark nature's minions",  but  the  movement,  the  diction,  the effect  are so patently  Miltonic  as  to  be  almost  parody.  The  real  change  comes  with  "The Atlantic.... " It is as if the word itself triggers the poet's imagination. He leaves for the  moment  the sea as a  purely literary  phenomenon  and  confronts  his own particular sea, one of ocean liners and  contemporary  disasters. Up  to this point, the  poet in the persona  of Julian  has been too intent on expressing the besetting mood  of his hero,  his relentless cosmic irony in the face of nature.  The  Atlantic releases  him  from  his  literary  preoccupation   and  allows  him  to  indulge  for  a moment   his  own  imaginative   bent,  that  of   identifying  with  the  gigantic  and powerful  in  nature.  The  self-conscious voice  of the embittered  eiron  makes way for  the  true  voice  of  alazon. Even  the  movement  from  verse to verse becomes expressive  and   individual.  In  "Strides  over  the  breaker's   line;  bludgeons  the Cape,"  the poet becomes his ocean, striding as it strides, toppling  barriers, assert­ ing as it asserts a free, drunken  play of titanic energy. The  force of the lines owes a good deal  to Pratt's breaking of the mould in which he has encased his imagi­ nation,  and  the  joy carried  by  the  movement  is that  of one  released from  un­ natural fetters.
Following Julian's soliloquy, six lyrics assigned to various voices act as a choric commentary  on the events of the storm. Although  Pratt  handles the verse grace­ fully enough,  the emotion  expressed is overt rather  than  inherent,  and the ironic force  is attenuated and  weak.  The  universe seen in  these  lyrics is  anomalous.

53

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



Certain stanzas are stronger  than  others,  but  for  the  most  part  the effect is one of facility  rather than power.

Whose feet and whose wings Contend for the prize? Seraphs and dragons
Harrow  the skies.

This  is a  strong   enough  expression  of  the  anomaly taken  alone,  but  it  loses its force  in  the  context   of  ten  similar  stanzas,  similar in  expressing   essentially  the same   thing.   Perhaps the  tightest  single  lyric  is  number four,   which   treats   the theme  of the sea's ever-deceiving surface:

What is that colour on the sea, Dotted  by the white sails of ships?
It is blue, you say.	We know it not, and yet
We know the blue of violet, The hue of mid-day skies,
And the sapphire of young children's eyes. But that we do not know,-unless it be The pallor of dead lips.

The  ironic  contrast here seems forced on to the  poem. The  succeeding two stanzas simply  restate  the  theme  with other  images. Yet the  theme  itself is one that  would again  occupy  the  mind  of Pratt and  receive far  more  powerful expression  in such poems  as  "Sea   Cathedral" and  The  Titanic,  where it  lodges  in  strong   central symbol.
The   third   scene  of  Act  I  brings  to  the  fore  the  central conflict  of the  play. Thaddeus is present  at  Julian's house  and  gives  his  report of  the  storm. In  his view,  nature is neutral, and  man's  tragedy  is a  result  of  his own  hubris,  not  of any  malevolence in her:

The oar, the sail, the paddle and the screw
Are patterns of a moving tragedy
That men misread. 	They think by labored art, They have snared the magic of the wind's uprising, And its down-sitting.

It is  a  tragic   view  as  old  as  Job's.   Julian's reply   reflects  sharply Pratt's  own sense of its contemporary relevance:

54

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



Aye, every step upon the grade seems vain. And every boast a signal of distress.
The halliard, and the rocket, roar of gun,
The code's weird speech that would out-wit the air,
Are helpless blazons when the tempest stops
The ear and seals the sight. 	Death flags the running storm
With signs of more imperious beckoning,
Than those which from the wireless deck flash out
Their  dots and dashes of a giant loss.

Here  where  the  cosmic  irony  which  Pratt has sought  to express  lodges  in a  par­ ticular technology, the  verse  becomes  more  vital,  the  rhetoric, fresh  and  authen­ tic. The  conclusion that  Julian comes to is more conventional:

A gambler's been at work upon this job, Or else a journeyman  that did not learn His trade too well, and somewhere a flaw Spoiling a nobler plan.

He  sees caprice not  only  in  the  total  design  of nature but  in  the  workings  and evolution of the  human heart.
In  scene  iv,  the  debate continues with  Penrose,  Donaldson and  Merrivale  at­ tempting to  counter Julian's cynicism.  Donaldson finds  in  the  stoicism  of  those who  suffered   from  the  storm   a  reason  for  optimism. Julian attacks the  stoical  ideal  as  false,  as  requiring from  a  man  a  surrender of  his  humanity:  "It is a lesson  that  before  it's  learned/ A man  must  unman  himself  to read."  Merrivale, the  traditionalist, argues  for accepting the divine will. Julian declares the  universe to  be  totally  unconscious and  uncaring, reasserting  his view of God  as a kind  of tinkerer with  man:

A sufferer calls in pain In the lone watches of his couch, and hears No answer save the leaden brush of wings
Against the window-pane. 	The son's last right
To heirship, to inheritance  of love
Is spurned  upon the doorstep of his home, His kinship cancelled, and his brother's ties
Dissolved in mutual blood. 	Named you him, Father? God. 	No. 	Rather  a Potter wit..l-.1 some clay.

55

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



These lines close Act I. Only once or twice has the force of ironic debate  lodged where  it belongs:  in the  character  of Julian   himself. The  rest is a far  too  con­ scious and too facile statement of its terms by various voices.
To  prepare  for the second stage of the debate,  Pratt  opens Act II with a series of fragments  intended  to provide impressions of the war in progress. This section is perhaps  the  most prolonged success of the  play, and  the success rises, I think, from  the  fact  that  Pratt  has for  the moment  set aside  his main  concern  and  is working  with  matters  that  have  honestly  engaged  his imagination. The  blank verse owes its vitality here to the life of common speech in the mouths of simple characters; it shows this gain in a flexibility of movement  as much  as in idiom.

Great lads those! 	Every one reliant, firm, Steady of step,-muscle and  bone storm-hinged, Yet supple as the fine battalion's lines
In which he swings. 	Straight-eyed with face
clean-bronzed
In the clear sparkle  of the morning's light. How well the khaki takes the October sun, Fits the square  shoulders, matches cheek and
hand.
That lad there, see! 	third  line, first on the left,-
Mine!  youngest one of four,  turned twenty-one,
Blue eyes, and hair  light brown. 	Two months ago, He left the ship, and  with two other brothers, - The second and the oldest, both  big lads -
He  joined the colours. 	Soon, at dawn, they say,
To-morrow, they are off. 	God  wish them  well.

The  figure of the young man is heroic in his father's eyes, and  the poet is sharing the  father's  frank  pride. The  poetry is only an approximation of speech,  retain­ ing  a good  deal of fine rhetoric,  but  fine rhetoric  is often  present in  the speech of  simple  men  under  the  stress  of  strong  emotion.  The   illusion  of  speech  is strongly  present in the abrupt,  broken rhythm.  The  six "Fragments from a field" which follow are reminiscent of similar vignettes in The  Dynasts.

Here, on the double. 	Cut  that  out. 	That shell
Is half a mile off. 	What's in this pit?
A clean half-dozen-tangled up in skeins; The first one's dead,  and  this ... and so, the
sixth,

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



That's all. 	Make for that clump of wire.
This rain
Beats like a flood.
The smoke's too thick to see, The slime's a mile deep.
Here, over here,
Three-four, alive; let's get this fellow out, He's got it worst.
Pratt, like  Hardy, is able  to depict  heroic  action  best  through personae who  are not  conscious  of the  magnitude of  their  actions.  Engagement with  events,  even in fragmentary form, releases the  poet from  self-consciousness.  He stands  enough apart from  his  actors  to  allow  them  some  of their  own  life. These  vignettes  are followed  by  "Cries Mar Off", a  protracted lament in  quatrains, part  of which appears in the second  edition of the  collected  poems as "A  Dirge."5 It is, like the earlier  lyrics, facile and  attenuated. The effect is sentimental.
'Scene  II opens   with   Thaddeus  speaking in  his  role  as  Romantic seer.  He
describes his vision of the war as a universal conflict:

All earth's tribes
Had  by some common instinct gathered  there, Peopling the shadows of the awful zone, - The  forest shades, the fissures of great rocks, And caverns cut within the rotted mould; Closed up the crimson rendezvous.

The vision is gothic  and  only vaguely  realized-a secondary, literary  experience. Nevertheless, it may  be seen as an  embryonic form  of a theme  which  would  pre­ occupy   Pratt later and   which   would  receive  expression  in  "The Great  Feud". Julian's reaction to  the  vision  of  man  engaged  in  total  war  is to shift  his view more expressly toward fatalism:

0 Thaddeus! there is an iron in the will
Of Him who shapes the times.	His power is seen Within  the flash that cleaves the oak; it germs Within  the hidden matrix of the earth,
When cities rock before convulsing fires
Prepare  their tombs, it lurks within the fang
Of shrike and puma.

Nature malevolent, "red of tooth  and  claw," shows  only  a "sterile progression! where  each  life  repeats/ The racial  circuit,  and  finds unrepealed/ The  acrid  law by  which  its  parent died." The irony  of an  evolution which  maintains not  only

57

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



continuity  but  identity between   man   and   beast   was  to  become   an  important aspect  of Pratt's total  vision, but here it receives too overt  an expression  to be imaginatively expressive.  Julian's long  speech  ends  with  a  depiction of  Calvary as history's supreme irony:

There was a hill once climbed, on which the world
Had  built the warrant  of a grander  faith,
A hope more excellent. 	A cross was raised, And at its foot a river ran whose fount Welled from the noblest veins that ever bore Imperial  tides ...

. . . Calvary -is but a peak that flared
An evanescent torch whose light was quenched
In a red mist of sweat, and man's tired feet,
When once they scale the summit must, in shame, Re-walk the bloody gradient to the grave.

Here   the  rhetoric is freer  of literary  echoes;  the  voice  is more  clearly  Pratt's own.  The image  of  the  Cross  engaged   his imagination sufficiently  to  free  him from second-hand effects. The irony  that comes through  underlies a clearly  affirm­ ative  view  of  Christianity. It  is an  irony  central to  Pratt's vision  and  one  that  finds its way into  some of his finest poems. Thaddeus responds to Julian's despair  with an even darker vision:

Death,-Death stalked everywhere on land  and sea,
In clouds that banked the sun, in mists that hid The stars, or half disclosed the swollen moon. No cavern sunk beneath the earth  but bore
His foot-prints. 	Deep below the waters' rim
Great fish had trailed his scent. 	Earth's myriad forms
Had felt the plague-spot of his rampant touch,
From the small field mouse caught  within the fumes
Of sulphurous air that crept from knoll to knoll,
Withering the grass-blades, to the giant fighter
Of storm and wave, that, planked and sheathed with steel,
Felt the swift scorpion in her sides, then
rocked,

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



And plunged with bellowing nostrils till she sank
In a wild litany of guns.

This  is one of the  finest passages in "Clay". It shows the  poet again  breaking from  a conventional rhetoric  into his own rhetoric. It shows again,  in its cumu­ lative power and  in the identity  that  the poet assumes with primitive and  titanic forces, his tendency  to slip from the mask of eiron into that  of  alazon. Pratt  was to write off "Clay" as a failure, but to any discerning eye, such verse as this from a  young poet  bears the marks  of no ordinary  command  and  no ordinary  imagi­ ation.
From  this  opening,  the  debate  proceeds between Julian  and  Merrivale.  The latter   holds  out  a  naive  faith  in  an  "inscrutable   wisdom"  behind  the  face  of things, but Julian  counters  with a strong argument -the failure of Christianity, as man's brightest hope, to live up to its promise:

If the one, Who was the very rose-ray of all dreams The world's imagination fed upon,
Yearned for through centuries before he came, And raised in retrospect to rank of God,
Worshipped by many whom the world, in turn, Crowned with a lustre comparable with the might Imputed to him, -if he failed, as failed
He has with the momentum of the years
Of twenty centuries to make his name
The lode-star of the race-pray, tell me then,
Is there another yet to come ...

This passage,  like  the  earlier  passage concerning  Calvary,  stands  out  from  the verse that  surrounds it.  Although  both  passages express overtly Julian's  disillu­ sionment,  the grounds of his cynicism, their strength  appears  to have its source in the  power  Christ  still  has  to  hold  the  poet  and  his persona's  imagination. In rhetorical  terms, the will to affirm appears  stronger than  the more conscious will to deny. This  fact gives to the passage a more truly poetic irony than  that overtly expressed. The  ambivalence in Julian  reflects here,  I  think,  an  ambivalence in the  poet,  which  was to  affect  his treatment of the  Christian  theme  throughout his life.
In  Scene iii, set a year later, Thaddeus reassumes his role of principal  antago­
nist. He presents Julian  with concrete instances of the human  capacities  for self-


59

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



sacrifice,  simple   compassion,   courage, and   aspiration beyond   hope  of  achieve­ ment. These  constitute the  strongest   affirmative arguments  in  the  play  and  lay the  ground for Julian's slight  change  of heart in  Act  III. Of  these, perhaps the first  is  most  significant, although  each  has  its  place  in  Pratt's  own  humanistic values. Here Thaddeus is describing a shipwreck:

The boats were few
And small, and there was left upon the deck
A sturdier throng who stretched out willing hands
To save the weak. 	One boat hung yet suspended,
Filled short of obvious risk, and a slim girl Stepped out, and gave an aged woman left Unnoticed in the crowd, her place. 	Her lips Were closed, and her face pale, but yet her
smile
Made sweet and soft the pallor of her cheeks.

The   passage  is not  remarkable as poetry.  It is, in  fact,  working too obviously for  an  effect  which  turns  out  to be sentimental in much  the same  way as Rachel is  sentimental. The   figure  employed   is  too  evidently   that   and   not  a  concrete reality.   The   poet  sees sacrificial   love  here  as  irrational, since  by  any  rational standard, the  aged  should  have  given  place  to the  young.  The theme  is another that   would  remain central  to  Pratt's view of man. Julian concedes  to Thaddeus a little at this point,  but very little:

Chaos indeed may well disclose a star, Caught  unawares within the tangled drift
Of cloud and chasing glooms.	Earth's wastes are full
Of miry swamps and quicksands. 	Compensates
The flower, rare and lovely though it be,
For the death-suctions of the stretching  void?

This  reply  is typical  of the  purely  conventional progress  of much  of the  debate. Thaddeus proposes  human compassion, courage and  aspiration as ends  in  them­ selves,  regardless   of  final  defeat.  Julian  cannot separate human  strivings  from
their  outcomes:

Is there for human kind
A scale that weighs the profit differently, A higher calculus that measures loss

6o

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



By hidden worths and meanings to the brute
Denied?

The argument does not  really proceed  beyond this point  but  consists of  rhetori­ cal  reiterations, which  carry little  real  force.  Julian reaffirms  his  conviction that  the   universe   is  the   work   of  a  mad   artisan, "who slays  while  fashioning", in Donaldson's phrase. He  and   Penrose   join Thaddeus in  arguing  that  Julian's is only  a  partial view  and  that   human aspiration points  to something beyond  the natural in human nature:

The leap's the symbol of his daring. 	More! There  are great promptings  planted, mightier Than  what sense enfolds; they bid him cross Spans unexplored, gulfs where the plumb-line
hangs;
Try for vast title-holdings where the hands
Are bankrupt for the bids.


Here   the  heroic  theme   that  is so central to  Pratt's view  of  man   finds eloquent expression  in language that is his own.  There is a defiance  in the  tone  that coun­ ters  too  effectively   the   asserted   cosmic  irony   of  Julian.  Again   we  detect   the presence  of an  alazon with  whom  the  poet  can  more  honestly  identify than  with his  eiron figure.  Only  in  Julian's final  speech  does Pratt's own  conviction  strike through the conventional mask:

... the fight
With nature grows more simple every hour
Her ways are known, but when the struggle takes
Hell's routes and ends in bloody fratricide, Not once, nor twice, as though an incident Of casual kind had touched man's history, But as a baffling epidemic strokes
A thousand  times his life, failing of cure;
How strike this foul insistent integer
Clean from his life? 		The taint is in the blood, Try surgery there! 	Find the right scalpel first.

In  Scene  iii, Julian chooses  at  last  to  unburden himself  to  his  friends  and antagonists in  the  prolonged debate. Here  the  affinity  between "Clay" and   In Memoriam is most strikingly apparent. It turns  out  that  Julian's cynicism  has its root in the loss of a friend, who had all the marks of an A.H.H.

6t

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



Never was a nature
More finely strung to touch or glance or word, For like a harpsichord it registered
All moods,-the flame of passion in just cause, Anger and quick revulsion when a deed Showed foul at the core, and yet his soul could
breathe
Such adoration for a cherished friend,
Such warmth of fealty for a cause held high, That  he could lose the temper of restraint With lavish offering; as generous in heart,
As keen in mind. 	Then suddenly, well ... a
blank,
A veil hangs that may not be lifted here ...
I saw him dead, his face all passionless, cold, The luminous shafts that kindled in his eyes Sparkless as flint in loam, his head, his brow, The flexions of his body-graven stone.
So cloud and dust have since companioned  me;
There's  nothing left.

As a  revelation, this  is disappointing. The sterile  quality of the  verse  points  up the fact  that  the source of Julian's angst  is, like much  of the angst  itself, a literary abstraction. The  unlifted   veil  hides  something too  dreadful to  see  in  the  best tradition of Victorian melodrama. The  failure to conceive  of any  real  cause  for Julian's bitterness is perhaps the root of Pratt's failure in "Clay."
Act   III opens   with  two  lyrics  announcing the  arrival of  spring.  Thaddeus follows  these  with  a  blank  verse paean, which  is on  the  whole  conventional and stifled.  Two  or three  lines stand  out  from  their  context as genuine Pratt:

Beyond the snow-capped  ranges Lusty young rivers tear and strain at the dugs Of the foot-hills.

Here  again  the  poet  is identifying with  the  primitive energy  of nature, its  peren­ nial  youth  and  high  spirits. These  lines say more  than  the forty  odd  lines of their context. The scene  proceeds  with Julian's protesting Thaddeus' efforts  to stir  him from  his  melancholy. Nothing new  emerges  from  the  debate until  Julian  yields
at last-

I find the roadways blocked, And memory ranging through  the fungus years

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



Finds but the husks where it would take the fruit.
And  yet there  is a knocking  in this clay,-
A restless flame,-something that, if it could,
Would leap the  grammared  confines of slow speech, And  give the echo to your dancing  words.

(italics mine)

When  his wife asked him  why he had  called his dramatic poem "Clay", Pratt replied,  "Why   not?"6   but  there  is more  to the  answer  than  that.  "Clay"  here represents  the  physical  confines of the  human  spirit, both  in the individual  and in  the  universal  sense. The  "knocking" is a kind of intimation  of immortality, but it is also a form  of resistance or defiance. Pratt's  chief concern in the play is with  a  man  whose  vision  has  become  circumscribed  by  the  limits  of physical sense,  yet  whose  instinctive   resistance  to  such  confinement  manifests  itself  as cosmic irony or cynicism. Although  the play fails in total conception  and  realiza­ tion,  it  does confront  aspects of himself and  of the  external  world  that  would always be of deep concern  to Pratt.  Pratt, in seeking to see man's place in nature,  often uses the metaphor of speech to symbolize man's  humanity. The  distinction between articulate and  inarticulate in nature  is fundamental to  Pratt's  thinking, and  man's  central  concern  as man  is for him communication on various levels. The  spirit  is not  something   which  Pratt  and  his  contemporaries find  easy to comprehend   or  apprehend in  the  way that  the  Romantics  apprehended it. To Pratt,  the deeper  levels of man's  being, in seeking to communicate with his con­ sciousness, must  "leap   the  grammared  confines."  The   conditions  of  existence impose mechanical  limits;  man  must live in the order  of nature.  A condition  of man's   humanity   is for  Pratt   a  resistance  to  such  confinement,  an  instinctive truancy  against  the rule of  natural law. Pratt  came to see the writing of verse as "a  grand  binge",  a breaking out against the confines of decorum,  a release of the instinctive  self. Pratt's irony  rises from  his profound  consciousness of the "clay"  in which man's being is confined. His alazony  rises from his defiance of a mecha­  nistic view of  man.  His task as a poet was perhaps  to find an adequate means of expressing this  dualism  in  himself. In  "Clay",  the dualism  finds expression only in a limited  and fragmentary way. For the most part, the poet is well within "the  grammared  confines"  of literary  convention. When  his verse does leap into life, the  tone is almost  always  hyperbolic  rather  than  ironic, yet the central  preoccu­ pation  with cosmic irony  reflects more than  a purely literary concern. The  ques­ tions  posed  rhetorically  in  "Clay" will find in later  poems a  more  truly  poetic lodging.

KNOCKING IN  THE CLAY



Pratt himself  felt  that  he  had  learned  something important from  the  writing of  his  "philosophical-lyrical" drama:  "I  came   around  to  the   conviction that philosophical  and   ethical   insights   whenever   they   find   their   way   into   poetry should  be emotional renderings of experience actually lived or imaginatively grasped.m

NOTES

1 E.  J. Pratt,  cited  in  Henry  W. Wells, and  Carl  F. Klinck,  Edwin   f. Pratt:  The
Man and His Poetry (Toronto: Ryerson Press, I947), p. I5.
2  Ibid., p. I6.
3 Ibid., p. 15.
4   "Clay,"   (a  drama), unpublished  typescript,  file  I8  in  E.  J. Pratt  Collection  of
Manuscripts,  Victoria  University,  Toronto.  All quotations from  "Clay"  are  taken
from this typescript.
5  The   Collected   Poems  of  E.  f. Pratt  2d ed.,  ed.  Northrop Frye  (Toronto: The
Macmillan Co. of Canada,  I962),  p. I8.
6   Wells and Klinck, Edwin]. Pratt, p. I6.
1  Ibid.



DU SINGULIER

A L'UNIVERSEL


Marie-Gertrude Grenier







LoNGTEMPS IGNoaiE, l'oeuwe  du conteur Albert Labecge
fut tiree d'un  oubli immerite  grace a l'interet  que lui porterent  quelques critiques
des lettres quebecoises. Parce  que l'un  d'eux,  M. Gerard  Bessette, "lui  a apporte la  caution   de  sa  culture,"1   l'intransigeant  naturaliste,   qui  publiait   a compte
d'auteur pour ses amis et ses familiers sept recueils de contes et de nouvelles tires a une soixantaine  d'exemplaires  chacun,  est maintenant connu  de tous ceux qui s'interessent  a la  chose litteraire  quebecoise. Mais !'ensemble  de l'oeuvre  laber­
gienne  n'en   reste  pas  moins  hors  de  la  portee  du  public  lecteur.  L'excellent ouvrage   de   M.   Bessette,  l'Anthologie   d'Albert   Laberge,2     presente  differents aspects du talent de l'auteur de La Scouine.3
C'est  trop   peu  cependant  pour  se  faire  une  idee  juste de  l'ampleur et  de
la diversite de l'oeuvre  du conteur. On  risque alors de ne voir en Laberge qu'un auteur  regionaliste  traitant presque exclusivement de sujets sinon de themes dits "du  terroir." 11 est vrai que le choix des textes contenus dans 1' Anthologie  revele sans equivoque  possible que  Laberge,  par sa vision du monde, se situe aux anti­ podes des ecrivains  du mouvement  du terroir.  Le naturalisme souvent outre dont fait  preuve ce grand  admirateur de Maupassant se veut  justement  une denoncia­  tion  de  la  mystique  agraire  propagee  par  les litterateurs   du  terroir.  Le  grand  merite  de  Laberge,  et c'est sans doute  pour  cette raison que les jeunes ecrivains quebecois  gravitant autour   de  la  revue  Parti-Pris dans  les  annees  '6o  l'ont  en quelque  sorte  recupere  et voulu  pour  precurseur,  c'est  d'avoir,  le premier,  refuse de  mentir.  D'authentique souche  rurale,  Laberge  connaissait  trop  la campagne et  ses  habitants,  il  connaissait   trop   la  stagnation,  voire  l'etat   de  pourrisse­ ment  avance   d'une   certaine  societe  traditionnelle   fondee  sur  des valeurs  sur­
annees pour  croire et faire  croire au mythe du salut de la nation  par  le retour  a
la  terre.  Cette  societe sur  son declin  conservait suffisamment  de force  pour  im-

DU  SlNGULlER A L'UNlVERSEL



poser  le silence aux  dissidents. Et  Laberge  la  meprisait  assez pour  ne  pas  lui imposer de force la confrontation  avec le miroir.
Moraliste  austere  qui  n'en  cultivait  pas  moins  son  hedonisme  par  la  lecture d'Omar Khayyam-il  possedait dix-sept editions differentes  du  Roubaiyat, son livre  de  chevet,4  -naturaliste  qui  s'exclamait:  "Ah,   ecrire   un  livre  qu'une pauvre  ignorante  refuserait de lire parce que  c'est  trop  le miroir  de la vie, quel reve !"5  Laberge  fut  le chroniqueur  passionne des annees  difficiles qui  ont  vu  le Canada  fran<_;ais   rural   devenir  le  Quebec   urbanise   et   moderne,   le  Quebec dynamique  et problematique  que nous connaissons aujourd'hui.
Fils d'un  habitant quasi  analphabete, Laberge  avait  accede  a la petite  bour­
geoisie grace  a  la  protection  d'un   oncle  medecin  qui  lui  rendit  possibles des
etudes  collegiales. Chasse de son college, il connut  quelques  annees de misere et gouta  de la vie de boheme par  necessite. Entre  au service d'un  grand  quotidien francophone de  Montreal,  il s'y tailla avec  un  acharnement, une tenacite  toute
paysanne,  une  place  peu  confonne   a ses gouts,  celle de  redacteur  sportif;  ceci
lui  assurait  neanmoins  une securite  financiere.  A soixante  ans, il prit sa retraite et quelque  temps apres, il entreprit  la publication  de ses livres. Les contes et les nouvelles, les poemes en prose contenus dans ses recueils sont le fruit d'une  lente germination. Tout  au  long  de sa  vie active,  Laberge  compila  des faits  divers, recueillit  des anecdotes,  jeta sur  papier  des reftexions, ecrivit  au  gre de son  in­
spiration  des pages ou il fixa a jamais par l'ecriture des moments  heureux  qu'il
avait  vecus avec intensite, des sensations qu'il  avait  pen;;ues avec une rare acuite.
On a souvent, avec raison d'ailleurs, reproche a Laberge de ne pas creer de personnages  veritablement  complexes mais plutot  des automates qu'il  livre pieds
et  poings lies a leur  destin implacable.  Le grand  personnage  de 1'oeuvre laber­
gienne,  c'est  l'ecrivain  lui-meme  dont  le cynisme, le  desespoir, la  passion et  la hargne  animent  ces pages ou il exprime  son mal  d'etre,  son desarroi  d'homme
coince entre  un monde  ancien condamne  a disparaitre et un monde nouveau  ou
il se sent  etranger  parce  que les valeurs de son  patrimoine culturel  n'y  ont  pas cours. Des nouvelles a caractere  autobiographique telles "L'homme a la chaloupe
jaune"  et  "La  vocation  manquee" ne le sont  pas seulement  parce  que certains details anecdotiques  referent a la vie meme de l'auteur. L'homme a la chaloupe
jaune,  c'est l'homme  nouveau, sans racine, sans tradition, le voyageur sans nom, le citoyen du monde;  c'est un homme seul, sans famille, sans ami, sans patrie. Parfaitement amoral  et asocial, l'interet,  au sens le plus etroit  du tenne,  regie sa conduite.  Cet  homme  qui  ne vit que  pour  jouir, c'est le sage selon Laberge,  le

66

DU SINGULIER A L'UNIVERSEL


speCimen  parfait de  la  faune urbaine, l'etre  le mieux  adapte a un  monde  sur­
determine, amoral et inhumain.
Quant  au   personnage central  de  la  seconde   nouvelle,   l'orphelin Gaspard, adolescent amorphe et  debile,  exile de sa campagne natale et chasse  de son  col­
lege, qui  arpente sans espoir  les rues de Montreal a la recherche de travail avant
de  crever  dans  un  reduit   infect,  cet  etre  pathetique dans  sa  souffrance comme les betes que  Laberge aimait decrire,  incarne la fatalite de l'homme sevre de son milieu  naturel et  projete par  un  destin  aveugle  dans  une  voie sans issue, dans  un monde indifferent ou il n'a  pas sa place.
On   pourra toujours gloser  sur  le  naturalisme de  Laberge, lui  trouver toutes les  epithetes imaginables, le  porter  aux  nues  ou  le  rejeter   pour  des  raisons  qui
souvent n'ont  rien  a voir  avec  la  litterature, on  meconnaitra toujours la  portee
de  l'oeuvre de  cet  ecrivain si on la  reduit  a une suite  de  tableaux, de scenes  de vie croquees  sur  le vi£, d'histoires, de faits vecus tantot banals tantot sordides. A
une  certaine profondeur-c'est precisement cette  dimension que  l'on  se  refuse
a  reconnaitre dans  l'art du  conteur -le naturalisme de  Laberge acquiert une singuliere resonance. 11 echappe a  l'individuel et au  particulier, caracteristiques de  l'univers  bi-dimensionnel du  realisme  photographique dans  lequel  il semble vouloir  se  confiner   pour  atteindre a la  verite  historique, sociologique, voire  uni­
verselle.

LA NOUVELLE   intitulee "La Mouche" constitue un  bel exemple   du  talent   dont  sait  faire  preuve  un  Laberge a  son  meilleur. Dans   ce
texte,  il  traite d'un theme qui  a  fascine  deux  maitres  du  naturalisme  franc;ais, I'auteur de  Therese  Raquin  et  le  genial  pupille  de  Flaubert, I'auteur  de  "La Ficelle." Cependant, une  nouvelle  comme  "La Mouche" donne toute  la  mesure de  l'originalite et  de  l'independance d'esprit du  conteur quebecois. Rien  qui  ne sente  la  plate  copie  dans  cette  nouvelle;   au  contraire, tout  y sonne  si  juste  au plan  de  la  psychologic  qu'elle ne  peut  que  jaillir des  profondeurs de l'esprit, de la conscience  de celui qui l'a conc;ue.
Cette  nouvelle  merite  de  retenir  notre  attention a plus  d'un titre.  En  plus  de
ses qualites litteraires incontestables, elle revet  une  importance capitale par  rap­ port  au  cycle  du  fils puni.6   Elle  constitue en  quelque sorte  la  nouvelle-type de cette  categoric. Ce  n'est  pas  tant  qu'elle  influence  quant au sujet, ala forme, ou
a l'ecriture, les  autres  nouvelles   de  ce  cycle.  L'ensemble de  ces  nouvelles, au
contraire, est marque au  coing de la plus grande diversite  d'inspiration et d'execu-

DU  SINGULIER A L'UNIVERSEL



tion.  Mais  "La  Mouche" se distingue  parce  qu'elle comporte le dessein  premier, qu'elle  est  constituee  essentiellement du   motif   fondamental que   l'on   retrouve dans  toutes  les histoires  de ce cycle, auquel il donne son  nom  d'ailleurs, le motif du  chatiment du  fils. Et  non seulement "La   Mouche" presente-t-elle un exemple frappant  de  punition,  encore   comporte-t-elle  sur   le  mode   implicite,  la  cause meme,  le "crime" qui  a entraine le chatiment dont  la fatalite devient  la  realisa­ tion. Une  analyse,  meme sommaire, de la nouvelle s'impose done.
"La Mouche", comme  la  plupart des nouvelles  du  cycle du  fils puni,  raconte le deroulement d'une vie. Une  vie breve,  car  les fils maudits de !'oeuvre de  La­ berge  ne vivent  guere  au-dela des premiers  temps de l'age  adulte. C'est !'objet de la  hantise, une  mouche etrange, verte  "chatoyante du  reftet  des  pierreries,m qui  donne son  titre  a la  nouvelle.  Le heros, lui, est anonyme. Tout  au  long  du  recit,
!'auteur le  designe  par  ces mots:  I'enfant, l'orphelin, le malheureux, la  victime
de  la  mouche verte.  Aucun  des personnages du  recit  n'a  de  prenom, ni de  nom de  famille. On  les  designe  par  leur  statut au  sein  de  la famille  surtout: le pere, la mere,  !'enfant. Tout se passe comme  si !'auteur voulait, par  ce procede, mettre en  relief  ce  qu'il y  a  d'universel dans  une  histoire  tres  particuliere, a  ce  qu'il semble au premier abord.
Au ·moment ou le recit debute, le heros a trois  ans. Son  pere  est mort  quelques
jours  auparavant. La scene initiale  de la  nouvelle presente le groupe  familial au complet pour  la  demiere fois. La mere,  en vetements de deuil,  ecrasee  de fatigue et de douleur, ne peut  retenir  un sanglot.  Le pere  repose dans  un cercueil  de bois brun: on  va  l'enterrer dans  quelques heures.  Un  bambin penetre dans  la  piece tendue de  lourds  rideaux  noirs  masquant presque completement l'eclat du soleil matinal. Et void que:

Par   la  fenetre   legerement  entrebaillee,  s'introduisit soudain   en  bourdonnant une  grosse mouche  verte, luisante,  bizarre.  L'enfant entendit  ce bourdonnement, un  long, long  bourdonnement qui lui entra  dans  le cerveau  pendant  que ses yeux fascines  suivaient   le vol  zigzaguant  du  brillant   insecte  qui  alia  s'abattre sur  le front de son pere, dans le cercueil brun.
Oh,  la miserable  mouche! s'exclama  la femme  en faisant  de la main  un geste
pour la chasser.
Rapide,   la  mouche  verte,  chatoyante  du  reflet  des  pierreries,  s'echappa.  Elle voleta  un instant  au-dessus du cadavre, puis s'elanc;a dans la trouee  lumineuse  de la fenetre qu'un souffie de vent avait ouverte toute grande.8

Tel  est  l'evenement donnant naissance  a !'obsession qui  gachera !'existence du personnage central. L'obsession, si torturante qu'elle puisse etre,  n'est  pas  un mal

68

DU SINGULIER A L'UNIVERSEL



en  soi mais  bien  le symptome  d'un  mal  moral.  Laberge  avait  deja  exploite  le theme  de la  hantise  dans  la nouvelle "Les  deux freres."  L'obsession manifestait alors sans mystere et sans equivoque  l'angoisse ressentie par l'un  des personnages. Ce demier,  non sans raison, se sentait responsable de la mort de son frere.
Dans  le  cas du  protagoniste  de "La  Mouche",  l'auteur se montre  beaucoup moins  explicite.  Et  la  nouvelle  y gagne  d'autant au  plan  artistique.  Si la  nais­ sance de !'obsession est montree sur levi£,  la source du mal moral que la hantise trahit,  demeure  secrete.  Elle transparait neanmoins dans le sujet meme du recit, dans les circonstances qui entourent le commencement  du phenomene  de hantise, et  dans  le contenu  de cette  hantise.  Pour  bien la mettre  au  jour, il faut  quitter  momentanement les sentiers de l'analyse litteraire  proprement  dite pour emprun­ ter ceux de la psychocritique.
Si l'on  en croit  Freud  et ses disciples, la nevrose obsessionnelle resulte, la plu­
part  du  temps,  d'un  etat  d'angoisse  relic au  complexe d'Oepide. Cette  angoisse est le  produit  d'un  sentiment  de culpabilite  inherent  au  complexe.  Au  moment ou commence  le recit, le personnage de Laberge a trois ans, l'age du  petit Hans, celebre par la psychanalyse que fit Freud de sa phobic chevaline. Get age critique dans  le developpement de la libido voit souvent !'apparition de la nevrose dans les cas  ou  ce  developpement  est contrarie  et  devie. Le  heros labergien   en  est
vraisemblablement arrive  a ce stade  ou l'enfant  male desire la disparition  de son
pere qu'il  considere  comme  un  rival dans l'amour  de la mere. Le hasard, servi­ able et perfide comme toujours  dans l'oeuvre du conteur, comble son desir secret. Les choses ne vont  pas completement  au  gout de l'enfant  cependant. La  mere, tout  a son chagrin  et aux longues veillees funebres, le delaisse au  profit du  mort.
C'est un enfant  seul et desempare qui vient retrouver sa mere dans la piece ou
s'acheve sa demiere veille. Dans son arne bouleversee s'agitent  des sentiments contraires: au  desir  de  posseder a lui seul sa mere s'oppose  le remords  d'avoir cause son chagrin  en voulant  la mort du  pere. L'enfant, ne l'oublions  pas, en est au stade  de la pensee magique. 11 croit que la mort du  pere s'est produite  parce qu'il  l'a  imaginee  et desiree. Obscurement  peut-etre  mais surement,  il s'en  tient responsable.  Et  void   que  !'incident   de  la  mouche  se  produit.   Cette   bestio]e commet  une  agression  pour  ainsi dire, un sacrilege, contre  le pere reposant  dans son  cercueil.  Elle est  punie  et  chassee par  la  mere outree  d'un  tel  manque de respect. La  reaction  de la mere apparait exaggeree et absurde  car  Laberge,  avec le realisme souvent  morbide  qui le caracterise, note aussitot apres que le corps du pere sera  mis en terre  dans  quelques  heures pour etre  la  proie des vers. Toute­
fois, l'auteur ici ne se laisse pas simplement  aller a son penchant  pour le macabre.

6g

DU  SINGULIER A L'UNIVERSEL



Une telle  remarque trahit sa sympathie pour l'obsede mais  souligne surtout que le  malheur dont il  est  victime est  le  fruit d'un  hasard, d'un geste  absurde qui s'inscrit  neanmoins dans   le  determinisme rigoureux d'une  chaine de  casualite. Nous   touchons  au   coeur   de  la  problematique qui  sous-tend toute !'oeuvre de l'ecrivain.
Mais reprenons notre analyse la  ou  nous  l'avons laissee.  L'agression, ou  plus

justement la  conduite irrespectueuse de  l'insecte a  l'egard du  pere, est  mise  en parallele par  !'enfant avec,  sinon sa conduite du  moins ses propres desirs  a l'egard
de   la   personne  patemelle.  11 enregistre egalement  la   reaction  punitive de  la mere. La  nuit  qui  suit  l'enterrement du  pere, l'orphelin connait les premieres manifestations du  mal  qui  va  ronger sa vitalite tout aussi  surement qu'un cancer.

Son imagination en delire  lui montrait une grosse mouche verte, luisant  dans l'obscurite; son  vol  lourd   planait  dans   la  charnbre.  Elle  grossissait,  prenait  les proportions d'un  colossal  papillon, d'une  chauve-souris. Elle  devenait un  animal
monstrueux et  fantastique. Apres  s'etre  repue  a toutes  les charognes, apres  avoir
suce  taus  les  poisons  et  toutes  les corruptions, la  mouche, s'abattait sur  lui,  elle penetrait en  lui.  II la sentait  marcher sous son  crane; elle en  faisait  le tour  a pas
precipites, comme   une  bete  prise  au  piege  qui  cherche a sortir,  a s'evader. Puis,
elle  voletait eperdument et  se heurtait aux  parois,  rencontrant  toujours une  bar­ riere   infranchissable.  Elle   faisait   !'impossible  pour    s'echapper  et   ne   pouvant trouver d'issue,  sa  trompe, comme  une vrille,  creusait, pen;ait une ouverture dans  le  sommet   de  la  tete,  pour  s'enfuir.  Alors  lui-meme  joignait  interieurement ses efforts   a  ceux  de  I'insecte  afin  de  s'en  debarrasser, de  le  voir  s'envoler et  dis­ paraitre a  jamais.  Dans  cette  agonie  terrible, les heures  s'ecoulaient lentes  comme  des  siecles.  II  souhaitait  desesperement voir  apparaitre  le  jour,  mais  les tenebres paraissaient  devoir   regner   a  tout   jamais.   Peut-etre  etait-il   arrive quelque cata­ clysme   et   le  solei! ne  se  leverait   plus.  L'obsession   lancinante  le  tenaillait.   II s'imaginait  etre   etendu   dans   un  cercueil  de   bois  brun   aux   poignees   nickelees. Une  forte  odeur   de  eire  fondue  lui venait  aux  narines. La  figure  douloureuse et fatiguee,  une  femme   etait   la  ecrasee  sur  une  chaise,  les  mains   croisees  sur  les genoux. Sa  mere.  Elle l'avait  veille  toute  la  nuit  et  bientot, des  hommes  l'empor­ teraient et  le descendraient  dans  la  terre,  pour  etre,  lui, la  proie  des vers.
·Par  la  fenetre  entrebaillee s'introduisait  soudain  en  bourdonnant, une  grosse
mouche verte,  luisante,   bizarre,  qui  s'abattait sur  son  front. II  entendait la  voix de sa mere  disant:
Oh,  la miserable mouche!
Mais   la  voix  etait   changee; elle  resonnait avec   un  eclat  de  trompette et  la mouche s'evanouissait.9
11 m'a  semble d'une imperieuse necessite   de  citer ce  long  extrait car  il com­
porte, de  fa<;on cryptique il est  vrai, les donnees essentielles a  la  comprehension

DU SINGULIER A L'UNIVERSEL



du  probleme qui  perturbe et  menace meme  !'existence  du  protagoniste de  cette nouvelle.  Pour   peu  que  l'on  scrute  ce  passage,  on  y decouvre les reponses  aux questions qui  nous  sont  venues  a  l'esprit   en  lisant  ce  recit.  Que   represente au juste  cette  mouche? On  ne saurait voir dans  cette  nouvelle  des signes de l'action mysterieuse  d'un etre de l'au-dela.


SI Nous   NE SAVONS  avec  precision   ce  que   represente la mouche pour  l'obsede, nous  savons  qu'elle est objet  de  degout, qu'elle incarne a
ses  yeux  tout   ce  qu'il y  a  de  plus  nefaste  puisqu'elle s'est  gorgee  de  tous  les poisons,  et  de  plus  repoussant, car  elle  s'est  vautree   sur  toutes   les  charognes. Pourtant  c'est   un  insecte   aux   reftets  de  pierres  precieuses,  qui   fascine  par  sa beaute.  lncarne-t-elle  la  libido   refoulee   a  cause  des  exigeances  de  la  morale inculquee a l'enfant? Cela  se pourrait. Les assauts  furieux de  la  mouche et son harcelement constant traduiraient les tentatives de cette  derniere de se liberer  de la gouverne d'une conscience par trop moralisatrice.
La   vision  fantastique  de  l'hallucine  combine   les  phantasmes  d'impuissance aux  souvenirs  inconscients et fort  anciens  du traumatisme de la naissance,  comme en temoigne I'agitation de bete  prise au  piege de la mouche a l'interieur du  crane du  heros.  Or  le  tabou   que  la  pere  fait  peser sur  l'activite sexuelle  du  fils peut, dans   les  cas  extremes,  entrainer  !'impuissance. Comme  chacun  le  sait,  toute
!'education  morale inculquee a  l'enfant  repose  sur  la  crainte de  la  castration.
Une  education morale trop  coercitive  et surtout trop  hative  peut  conduire, non pas .a une atrophie de la libido  mais a son gauchissement et a !'apparition des symptomes d'angoisse. Tel  semble  bien  etre  le cas  de  la  victime  da  la  mouche verte. Laberge ecrit a son su jet:

Le  plaisir, la  joie, l'amour  etaient  pour lui choses inconnues.  Son infirmite l'acca­ blait  comme  un  vetement  de plomb et en lui germait  une haine effroyable contre toute  ce qui existe, une  rancune  contre  le sort qui l'avait  choisi  pour  victime, qui le sacrifiait.10

Cela  semble  confirmer !'hypothese a l'effet  que  la mouche soit  un  representation de la libido  refoulee.
Neanmoins,  cette   hypothese, si  plausible  soit-elle,  n'est  pas  la  seule  valable. Une  autre m'a  ete suggeree  par  l'etude de  Marie  Bonaparte d'un conte  d'Edgar Poe,  Le scarabee d'or.11  La  psychanalyste demontre avec force  preuves  a l'appui

DU  SINGULIER A L'UNIVERSEL



que  le scarabee  represente dans  le langage  de l'inconscient,  la mere. Chose cer­ taine,  l'insecte  choisi par  Laberge  pour  etre  le signe tangible  de la  fatalite  qui ecrase son  heros a ceci en commun  avec le scarabee,  que sa beaute  exerce  une etrange  fascination  sur le protagoniste  du  conte  et qu'en  meme  temps il suscite chez l'un,  et le devrait chez l'autre,  le heros de Poe, une reaction  de degout, car la  mouche,  tout  comme le scarabee,  affiche une  predilection  marquee  pour  les charognes et les excrements.
Cette representation  de la mere par de tels insectes peut sembler injurieuse et invraisemblable  de la part  de personnages eprouvant par  ailleurs  pour leur mere un attachement tres fort. Le langage de l'inconscient, qu'on  retrouve dans les manifestations   nevrotiques  et  hysteriques,  dans  les reves des gens que  l'on  dit normaux  ou desequilibres, et dans les creations  artistiques,  se doit d'etre  obscur, parfois antinomique, et la plupart  du temps, symbolique,  car pour s'exprimer  au grand   jour,  l'inconscient  doit  contourner   les interdits  et  dejouer  les gendarmes de la conscience moralisatrice.
La  mere,  dans  la situation  oedipienne  que  decrit  la  nouvelle de Laberge,  est
l'objet  des desirs du  fils. Ce qui explique  la fascination  qu'exerce  la mouche sur ce personnage.  Mais  la conscience est en eveil. Le fils se sent  coupable  a cause
des pulsions de l'inconscient  qui  l'assaillent. 11 est pour  lui-meme,  pour son moi conscient  qui  a  commence  d'assimiler  les interdits   moraux   de !'education,   un objet de degout. Par  un deplacement frequent  dans de tels cas, il reporte sur I'objet de son desir ce degout qu'il ressent afin de se mieux defendre  contre lui-meme. Le meme  mecanisme  de  deplacement  exprime  sur  le mode  horrible,  son  desir  de penetrer  la mere:  la mouche penetre en lui, gorgee de tous les poisons et porteuse de  toutes  les  pestilences. Le  soleil, symbole  male  par  excellence,  ne  se  levera peut-etre  plus. Un  cataclysme s'est produit ... phantasme inspire par  la crainte de la castration,  punition  encourue  par l'obsede  pour  avoir satisfait  meme sur le mode  penible  et masochiste de !'obsession son desir de la mere. Puis survient  un autre  phantasme punitif: l'orphelin  qui a desire la mort  de son pere se voit mort
a  son  tour,  allonge  comme  le  pere  jadis  dans  un  cercueil  de  bois  brun  aux
poignees  nickelees. Toutefois,  meme  par  cette  punition,   il exprime   a nouveau
son  desir  de  la  mere. 11 ne peut  posseder la mere  qu'en  devenant  lui-meme  le pere, qu'en  s'identifiant   a lui par la mort. 11 subit alors le meme assaut irrespec­
tueux de la mouche  que son pere autrefois -belle manifestation  de la justice du talion  regnant  dans  le monde  des profondeurs  de l'ame  humaine-et la mere, d'une  voix eclatante comme celle de la trompette du Jugement dernier, le delivre
de son  obsession en  chassant  a nouveau  la  mouche.  La  justice divine,  incarnee

DU  SINGULIER A L'UNIVERSEL



par  la mere,  abolit  le chatiment car  le coupable a suffisamment expie son crime.
Cette derniere image   de  la  fantasmagorie obsessionnelle  ne  represente qu'un souhait de la victime.  La  realite  n'y  correspond guere. 11 n'y a ni pardon ni repit pour  les fils coupables, ou  mieux  pour  les fils vaincus  dans  la  dure  lutte  oedi­ pienne.   Par   un  renversement de  la  situation, attribuable au  mecanisme  de  de­ placement, le fils qui  souhaitait la  mort  du  pere, ou  son equivalent  symbolique,
l'errance perpetuelle, se voit  maintenant, selon la logique  inherente a la nevrose,
condamne a l'errance comme  le Cain  de la Bible et comme  le navigateur maudit
du  poeme  de Coleridge. Vers la fin de sa vie, l'obsede  cree par  Laberge n'est  plus qu'une ombre d'homme, dont I'auteur decrit ainsi le tourment:

Desempare,  pris de l'idee fixe, le malheureux  n'avait  plus un seul bon moment.
11 n'y avait  pour  lui de  refuge  nulle part.  Le bourdonnement le pousuivait  avec
Ia tenacite d'une  meute de loups affamesP

Cette  meute vengeresse  se compose  d'animaux totemiques: les loups  sont  autant de  reeditions de  l'image  paternelle courroucee. Le  pauvre obsede  qui  aspire  de toutes  ses forces  ala paix  de l'ame  ne la trouvera que  dans  la mort,  seule capable de donner le sommeil "sans  reves mauvais".13
Le recit-type du  cycle  du  fils puni  s'acheve done  sur  une  image  de desespoir, l'obsede  se  jetant devant le  canon  de l'arme d'un camarade pratiquant le tir  a
la  cible. 11 n'est  pas  rare  que  des personnages labergiens ploient  sous le faix  du desespoir  et  mettent un  terme  a leur  vie de misere. Pour  cette  raison,  on a  beau­
coup  parle  du  pessimisme  de l'ecrivain, pessimisme que  d'aucuns jugent etonnant chez  un  homme dont  la  vie fut  longue,  paisible  et somme  toute  assez heureuse. C'est  que  l'oeuvre de  Laberge se resume  en  un  long  dialogue de  l'homme avec lui-meme et  qu'inlassablement  reviennent ces angoissantes questions:  Qu'est-ce que  le destin?  Pourquoi tant  de laideurs, tant  de mal?  Pourquoi tant  de victimes? Pourquoi lui  et  non  moi?  L'oeuvre n'apporte pas de reponse: elle est un  cri d'impuissance et de revolte.


NOTES

1 Jean  Ethier-Blais,  "Le   cycle de Gerard  Bessette, un univers alimente  aux sources de Ia mort et de l'erotisme", Le Devoir, 5 juin 1971, p. 14.
2    Gerard  Bessette, Anthologie  d' Albert  Laberge, Cercle  du  Livre de France,  Mon­
treal, 1962.
3  Albert Laberge, La Scouine, Edition privee, Montreal, 1918.
4  Gabrielle  Clerc,  La  vision  du  monde  d'Albert   Laberge,  these  de  maitrise  pre­
sentee a l'Universire Laval, 1961, p. 57·

73

DU  S1NGULIER A L'UN1VERSEL



Albert  Laberge, Quand  chantait  la cigale, Edition privee,  Montreal, 1936, p. 73·
6   Marie-G. Grenier, A  Comparative  Study  of the  Works   of  Albert  Laberge  and
Morley  Callaghan, these de ma.ltrise presentee a l'Universite de Sherbrooke, 1971.
7    Albert  Laberge, Visages  de la vie et de la mort,  Edition privee,  Montreal,  1936,
p. 72-
8  Albert  Laberge, ibid, p. 71-72.
9   Albert  Laberge, ibid, p. 73-74·
10  Albert  Laberge, ibid, p. 75·
11 Marie Bonaparte, Edgar Poe, sa vie, son oeuvre, 3 volumes,  Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, 1958.
12  Albert  Laberge, Visages de la vie et de la mort,  Edition privee,  Montreal,  1936,
p. 75·
13  Albert  Laberge, ibid, p. 76.







































74




THE  HUNTERS  TWAIN



Dorothy Livesay














EYEARS    nee
 An examination  of the narrative  back­ ground to Isabella Valancy Crawford's poems, The  Dark  Stag,  The Lily Bed and The  Canoe; from  an  unpublished  manuscript, "Without, the  West  drew flaming gates across ... "

Collected  Poems it has been held that  Malcolm's  Katie  and  Old  Spookses' Pass
were the  chief  examples  of the  poet's  narrative  style in verse. Her  prose novels and  short  stories are  now  being collected and  analysed, but  their  romantic Vic­ torian  style aimed  at  the  "lady  readers"  of the Toronto Globe,  Mail  or  T ele­ gram  in the  188o's  would  seem to  have little  bearing  on  the  realistic  lyricism found in Malcolm's  Katie  (subtitled though it was, "A Love Story").
Valancy,  as she  was known  to  her  family,  certainly  suffered  from  a  schizo­
phrenic  dilemma.  On  the one hand  she was trying desperately to earn  a modest living  from  her  writing  by assiduously catering  to  popular  taste;  on  the  other hand she was a young woman alone, without literary friends or critics, who was consumed   by  a  fiery  poetic  imagination   and  intoxicated   with  language   and metaphor. Doubtless  through  trial  and  error,  mingled with some marketing suc­ cess, she learned  in her prose writing how to handle narrative  style, characteriza­ tion  and  plot;  but  these  became,  I  would  contend,  simply  the  tools available  whenever  required,   in  whatever   genre  the  poet  was  working.1   Quite   another  persona  appeared  when  Crawford  chose a  looser form  of  documentary verse: the  dimensions  of  time  and  space  were  added  in  the  poem  Malcolm's   Katie.  Whereas  objectivity  and  aesthetic  distance  were the strengths  of  Old  Spookses' Pass, in  Malcolm's   Katie  the subjective  feelings of  the  poet  broke  through  the

75

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



objectivity  of the  narrative.  The  resulting bursts of song added  another  dimen­
sion to the poetry.
But  would  a critic  be  justified, I  wonder,  if he isolated  these lyrics from  the main  body of the narrative?  Crawford's  first editors after  her death  on February
12, 1887 were  Mr.  and  Mrs. John  Garvin  of Toronto. In  their  1905 Collected Poems they omitted  quite a number  of published poems, and several unpublished ones. Then  in 1923 Mrs. Garvin  (Katherine Hale)   edited a Selected Poems for Lome  Pierce of the Ryerson Press, in which she "lifted" individual  lyrics like "0
Love Builds on  the  Azure Sea"  from  Malcolm's Katie. Later  anthologists  have "lifted" "The Axe".  It  seems to  me  that  this  practice  is dubious.  Part  of the tension and charm  of imaginative  poetry resides in its relation  to character, time, place. Thus, although  Max's song "The  Axe" is a refreshingly natural,  even Whitmanesque piece of poetry from the Confederation era, it takes on greater symbolic value from its position in the longer poem. This is equally true of other lyrics in which the characters  Max and  Katie  burst out in true aria style.2   Craw­ ford's  lyrics, I believe, were intended  to be a part  of the structural whole.
Indirect   evidence  of  this  kind  of  organization   is  now  coming  to  light.  In searching   through   the  unpublished   papers  of  Isabella   Valancy   Crawford   at Douglas  Library,  Queen's  University, I have found  a curious long poem parallel to  Malcolm's  Katie.  Lyrics by Crawford  which  have  been considered  her best, and  which  have been the subject  of considerable speculation  and  interpretation, are  in  reality  part  of this long narrative-philosophical poem,  beginning  "With­ out,  the  West drew  flaming gates",  which, as it lacks a title,  I have called The Hunters Twain.3
The  protagonists  in The  Hunters Twain  manuscript are  Hugh  and  Ion,  "my
masters twain"  of "Said  the Canoe".  As was the case in Malcolm's Katie we are presented with two young men of very different backgrounds. Hugh,  who is part­ Indian, part  Anglo-Saxon, may be compared  to Max,  the Scot;  both are men of action  who  possess the gift of song. In  The  Hunters Twain  Ion  is an  exile, an intellectual  of a similar type to Alfred in Malcolm's Katie. But he is not in any way sinister,  or  a  villain. His  name  brings  up  connotations of the  Attic  myth concerning   Ion,  abandoned  by  his mother  and  rescued  by Apollo.  Eventually Ion  becomes king of Athens. Crawford's Ion  is an  artist  who wants  to find for himself "a little Athens" where he may paint to his heart's  content and heal him­ self  of  a  disastrous  love  affair.   Whereas  in  Malcolm's  Katie  the  organizing principle  is  Narration and  the  theme  is the  power  of  Love,  in  The   Hunters

THE  HUNTERS  TWAIN



Twain  the  organizing principle is Time and  the  theme   is Hope versus  despair
(symbolizing pioneer  optimism versus sophisticated pessimism  or  cynicism) .4
The  manuscript begins   then   with   that   theme   which   will  recur   again   and again. Here  are the opening lines:

Without, the West drew flaming gates across The grey, gaunt distance of the wintry street; Low down were welded fast against the sky Dull, purple bars that held the first fine snow. Lower, the old inutterable  prayer
That  glows in golden script behind the day
Stretched  its still strength about the darkening  world
And as a cobweb delicately spun
Her black thin boughs hung orbed against the sky; And in their subtle lacings seemed to cling
Arachne-like,  the round, full Evening Star.

Dark on near hills the primal forest heaved
Its haughty  heart against the City's claws
That lengthened  towards its ramparts day by day; Dark on near sands the tideless waters stood
Meek with dun, moaning mist against wan wharves
Dying to dumbness as the fierce young frost Gazed on the shuddering  world, ere serpent wise He coiled chill crystal folds about its breast.

A  description of  Toronto in  I 876?  It would  seem  likely.  This  was  the  city  to which  Mrs.  Crawford and  her  two surviving  daughters came  after  the  death  of Dr. Crawford in Peterborough. They  lived in rooms above  a store  in John Street; and  though the  city  could  scarcely  have  been so grim,  with  "heaving drains" as Crawford describes  it  in  this  poem,  it  must  have seemed  much  more forbidding than the  market town  of  Peterborough. Would  she  have  read  Thomson's "City of  Dreadful Night", which  was first published  in I 87 4?  In  any  event,  after  the wintry  description of the  opening lines the leading  theme is introduced:

On such an eve despair is no strange growth, But a chief vein that feeds the chilling heart, With  pausing billows stiffening as they burst And Hope an alien flame fallen from the wick Of a cold lamp that chills the failing hand. Dust, sharp as spearpoints on the rising frost Whirled  in keen simooms;3  and, sullen orbs, The  base stars of the city lamps leaped up.

77

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



This  is the  setting  from  which  both  Hugh and  Ion  hope  to flee, once  the  winter is over.  But  before  we are  introduced to  these  two  "heroes" there  is inserted  in the  text  yet  another  poem! It is also  written in  blank  verse,  and  is  concerned with  the  loss of  love  (Ion's dilemma). It begins  obscurely  and  continues errati­ cally, even  chaotically, as if written  by someone in a disoriented state:

Where's speech in anguish? 	0 she never throve
On the high swell of sorrow's bursting heart.
Two groans are hers that give themselves to speech: "God, God!" 	With this she wails him up before Her bar of desolation, then, "Why?  Why?"

A  dialogue ensues  between  Sorrow  and  a  disdained lover. She  tells him  a fable to  prove  that  he is caught  in a mirage,  a "phantom little  cross of love".  His reply is:  "Away with  Love, away! And  give us up Barrabas." From here  on the  poem dwells  on  the  theme of  "Barrabas" who  is viewed  as  the  opponent of love  but the choice  of the  people clamouring in the  marketplace (the  industrialized city?) . The passage  is placed  in quotation marks,  but  there  is no  clear  indication as to who is speaking (Sorrow  or "the man"?).

Barrabas was a robber. 	Lack-a-day! We of the golden tissues floating far
And sandals jewel-laced -we need our thieves
Our  Benedit Barrabas who can steal
With such bland gestures, and wise brows bent down
In plans financial, that the feeble-folk
Stand all at gaze in envy and delight
Yes-even while he plucks the crusts from lips Blue with their torture for it. 	Away with Love, Dark God of Voids-and if his frame be knit
Of any tissue tougher than a dream
Crucify him-pierce him to death  with doubt, Loose us Barrabus-we of the jewelled coifs!

After  54  more  lines  of chaotic and  obscure  rhetoric on  the  subject  of Love  and Hate, the  blind   woman,  Sorrow,  vanishes: "The sharp dust  caught and  veiled her,  and  she passed." The  poem  again  centres  on the  young  man  in the  city, and the Barrabas theme:

The  bitter eve grew vocal as he went. The infant city nursing on the breast
Of unhewn woods found virile voice to shout

THE  HUNTERS  TWAIN



The cry of eighteen hundred years ago.
The church towers roared  it in their evening  chime: "Loose us Barrabas!	he will rear  us high;
Will lay his gold along our organ  pipes; Will beat  his stolen silver in our bells;
And stain  our windows with the blood he robs From the free Melot's  heart.	0 Christ,  0 Christ! Thy  robe is sordid  and thy palms are hard -
Hang on thy Cross! 	Loose us Barrabas, yes!
And while Christ  hangs, the Thief  shall build  to him." "Loose us Barrabas", all the busy marts
Buzzed with the cry, for none but robber  thews Can  wrestle with fierce fortune, now-a-days. Vice reared  its supple  serpent  head  and  hissed: "Loose us Barrabas-let our fellow free."
Want, lean, lank giant,  honest  and  hunger-blind Stood  groaning 'tween  the cries, and questioning: Might not Barrabas be a newer Christ?
With  newer  gospel fitter for the time?

But there  is one man  who is not going to yield to the temptations of Barrabas and  the City, and  this is Hugh,  now for the first time mentioned  by name.  Hugh for a time is groping and  lost amidst the evils of poverty and  greed :

With  the illimitable wilderness around
From the close city hives rang up the groan
"So little space!     we starve-we faint-we die!" Lord! Lord! to see the gaping  city sewer
Beaded  with  haggard heads and  hungry  eyes
Towering above the heaving  of the drains
And hear  the harsh, unreasonable cry
"We starve, we starve!"	While half a world  lay fresh
And teeming, out beyond  the city gates!

In  this situation  Hugh  goes through  a traumatic struggle with his Soul, who calls on  him:  "Up, up,  thou  weakling!  Wouldst thou lay thy palms/  Against a stub­ born  world,  to  hurl  it far j Into  a truer  orbit-then  up,  up  and  forge/ Strong  sinews for the deed ... Weld strength  with strength, so let us face the world!"

So spake  his soul, and  plucked  him from  the town
With  its young walls and venerable sins, The smell of primal woods upon its air
The groans of Ancient  Famine in its slums.


79

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



The   next  section  of the  poem  finds  Hugh in  the  forest.  It is spring,  and  the life-giving  rains are falling:

All through the night
Life loosed the fountain of his heart
And earth grew tremulous with pulsing seeds And leaping stems, and juices rushing up From her wide veins along the barren  woods.

Under that  influence Hugh's creative  powers  are  released. He sees his task clearly and  makes a vow, Old  Testament-wise, to lead  those  whom  the city has destroyed into the haven  of the forest.

Hugh caught the dove of Spring between his palms
And unashamed  before his large thewed soul Drew her soft plumes against his warm breast And held her to his ear to coo her rime
Of deep green woods, and creeks and purple hills.

I'll plunge to drowning depth in leaf-built waves
And let them wash me from this clanging world
That shrieks with steam -where mostly men are slaves
That tend on iron tyrants-solid things
That turn and rend the dream-like flesh and blood That forms and serves them- (I saw one monster take A serf that served it, in its mighty maw
And comb his sweating flesh sheer from his bones
With glittering fangs ... )

The leafy shades shall wash
The roaring of the city from my ears
And drive before their sibilant strong rush The weak despair that sickens all my soul Bores through my brittle bones, and nips apart The very sinews of my straining mind.

And  here is Hugh's prophecy  and  vow:

Then will I come again when I am healed
And shout such gospel of the woods and plains
As, like the music of the lean Hindoo
Shall drag from sewers and drains, and noisome holes
Worn-minded  men who bore their abject way
In pain and darkness through the city's mire.

So

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



I'll have them out! -A saviour of their flesh­ Yes, even while they howl about the streets "Loose us Barrabas -we will cheapen toil
For him, and throne the robber on our necks!"
I'll have them out! 	God, knit my sinews up.

Hugh's meditation on  the saving  powers  of nature now  begins  to stir the  more primitive  instincts   in  him.  Thus   the  "ideal" for  the  poet  Crawford is  always counterposed  with  the  "natural" man's instincts  for  self-survival. Half   Indian, Hugh turns  his attention to the needs of his body:

The primal savage in him shook his gyves ... And like a hawk peered up the very sky
For quarry; and shamed, Hugh felt great throbs wing his dull heels behind the scudding deer, Beat at his wrists above the bending rod
And leap from out his very breast along
The keen, clear sky behind some dappled wing. What honey made the marrow of the food
He chased and slew?	And from the very leaves
Joy wrung strong wine into his weary soul.

It is after   this  long,  often   tedious,  but   philosophically and   dialectically  useful introduction that we  finally  become  engage:  The  actual story  of The   Hunters Twain  begins.



b:E STRUCTURE of  the  passages  that   follow  develops  in  a clear logical  pattern:
"Dawn of Day  1" "Midday Heat" "Evening Sunset"
"Night (The Campfire)"
The  poem   then    ends   abruptly   (clearly   unfinished)   with   Hugh's  midnight dream: a  vision  of storm  in  the  wilderness.  Broken  off as it  is at  a  violent  and passionate moment, one  gets  the  impression  that  the  poem,  if it  had  been  com­ pleted, would  have moved  into the serenity of "Dawn of Day  2".
Let  us return now  to  "Dawn of Day  1".  The  two  men,  hero  and  anti-hero, are  found  together in  their  tent.  The  hunt  is over for  the  time  being: a new  day
is  beginning. Their  argument, one  feels, has  been  continuous: Hugh comes  to

81

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



the  wilderness with  hope,  Ion  flees to it from despair. In a curious way  they  mix their  metaphysics with   their   physical living. Although  this  section is  written as third person narration it  is so clearly  a  dramatic dialogue that I  propose simply to set it up  that way. So instead of "said Hugh" I will write Hugh:

Hugh:  Now see
How buxom Hope  becomes, with Diane's bow
Laid on her shoulder, and  her rosy foot
Inlaid with dew from  fern and  flag.
Come, grasp her hand, and  stumble to your feet.

Ion:	Nay ... Hope  built to breathe
From  venison and  trout and  oxygen
Has so much  clay knit in her throbbing flesh­ That clay will pluck  her back  to clay again. Could  I clasp Hope, she should  be all a God
The builder  not the built, and  move strong  wings
Wide as a world cleft into semi-spheres
And have great  arms to thrust malignant stars
Back from  her course along  the Universe And a broad foot to crush  the serpent's head That lifts, and spits his poison in her face: Hope, less the Goodhood -bury her for me!

Hugh:  There cries a loon ... and  all our  tent
Glows shiftingly; and on its canvas  roof
Dance the dark  shadows of deep  leaves above. Come, burst our lintels, and  behold
Hope swimming up the dawn upon  the world.

Ion:	Strong  with deer's flesh ... and  the curve
Of tricky trout-stand you, my friend, at gaze: I'll  build the fire, and  brew the  natant maid
A draught to cheer the kernel  of her heart­ Hope, without breakfast, has a swooning trick!

There  follows, in  true  Crawford style,  an  extended metaphor describing the arrival of  the  dawn. It is extremely lush,  with a sensual, even  sexual description of a naked woman, the personification of Dawn, who

Swam against the east, against her breast  the night
Broke purple, and  her curving arms beat  back
The starry surf ...
Naked,  a second, on the shore she stood
With  all the innocent small feathered things

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



Flying  to touch  the scarlet, lined  bars
Of her stretched  fingers, and against her knees Rubbed the soft sides of shadowy  deer, and  high The squirrels  chattered at her from  rich boughs - Then warmer wound  the blood wide in her veins, She moved an ardent palm, and  drew the mists From lakes, and  swamps and valleys, and  their folds Spiced  with the cedar  and the balsam -bright
On  their  curled  edges with a saffron  dye She  upward  drew along her rosy knees Her  ivory thighs, the silver of her breast.
So veiled and draped she waited  for the sun.

Ion:	These  mists are prophets of a torrid  day
a fierce, red day Of zenith  summer, snorting  in sharp peals Of dry, short thunder, as a stallion  snorts At gaze at midday  on an arid  plain
The herd  afar -where ere the fevered  palm
Falls on him, leaps an artery of fire.
What see you in the dawn? 	Come,  prophet, speak!

Hugh:  I see dead  night ... and  tears that  dry
In aching eyes turned on the growing  light.

Ion:	But that  dead  night! ... Many  slaves
Died  at his burial; where may be their  dawn? Stark  at his feet they lie -their leaking  hearts Dust  on his sere clothes. 	Lo, for some the dawn
Is named  despair!	and  you-you call her Hope!

Hugh:  Aye Hope ... and by her sturdy  side
And ruddy  kertle hangs my fluttering soul. No goddess she-but God's own very breath Shaped into one grave splendour of the East
Come,  Ion, love her! 	Clasp strong  palms with her.

Ion:	Your  dawn! ... Sometimes  she drove
The last nail in the gallows-and the wretch
Wakes  to the rope beneath her rosy palms.
0 God, your Hope!	A smoke-wreath of the soul - Despair a firm flint rock beneath the feet!
Give me despair's strong  certainty-I'll stand On  the grim cliff, and dominate the world Aye-use it tripod-wise, and sybil-like

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



Look from it through the universe, and see
The birth of ruins, and the horrid flames
Of bursting worlds -The man who hopes and laughs
Is nature's fool and wears her motley well.

Hugh:  Then  I am grateful for my cap and bells­
... And nature's zany is her king!

In  this  vein  the  argument between  the  two  men  continues, a  bantering irony. Neither wins, but  Hugh  culminates his case with  a transcendental vision of  rein­ carnation as the hope of the universe :

So are the souls of men
Caught from the secret spaces in the war
Of circumstances rudely moulded, and sped on
Along eternity from sphere to sphere
Polished in speeding -0 this clanging world Is no snug nest for doves!    My Hope, you see, Faces eternities-Archangels  hold
Her torches high against the mysteries
Their soaring wings still seek -and yet she smiles
Into the daisy, drying on the grave, And leaves the dewy jewel of her dawn Starred in its withering breast.

To all of this high rhetoric Ion finally replies:

I hope! 	in faith, so keenly hope [that]
I see some half-hour hence the flashing trout­ Yet snug in yonder pool-yield mellowly
His rose-leaf flakes and opal curds to us.

And  thereupon one of the  two friends-it is not  clear  which -bursts into song, in celebration of  "The dawn   I love".  That song  is the  well-known lyric,  "The Dark   Stag", which   was  first  published  in a  somewhat  different version  in  the Toronto  Evening Telegram on  November 28, 1883.  I have  indicated in brackets changes  that   have  been  made,   presumably by  Crawford  (but   why,  one  might ask, would  she  have  changed  that  striking epithet, "The stout  and  lusty stag" to "strong and   dusky"?). I have  also numbered the  original stanzas in  the  order
given in Crawford's revised version.



"A startled stag, the blue grey Night
Leaps down beyond dark pines
 
(I)

THE HUNTERS TWAIN




Behind, a length  of yellow light, The hunter's arrow shines
His mocassins  are stained  with  red
He bends  upon his knee
From  covering peaks his shafts are sped
The blue mists plume his mighty  head!
Well may the dark  stag flee!
 








(2)

The moon  like a snow-white doe
Bounds  by his dappled flank; They  beat the stars down  as they go
 1The pale, pale moon,  a snow-white doe)

As wood-bells growing  rank. 	{like) The winds lift dew-laps  from the ground
Leap  from  dry shaking  reeds 	(the quaking) Their hoarse  bays shake the cedars round 		(forests) With  keen cries on the trail they bound 		(track)
Swift, swift the dark  stag speeds!


Roar  the rent lakes, as thro'  the waves
Their silver warriors plunge
As vaults  from core of crystal caves
The vast, fierce maskelonge 	(strong) Red  torches  of the sumach glow
Fall's council  fires are lit
The bittern, squaw-like, scolds the air
The wild duck splashes loudly, where
The waving  rice-spears knit. 	(Rustling)


Shaft after  shaft  the red sun speeds
Rent the stag's  dappled side,
 







(s)











(6)

His breast  to  fangs of hoarse bleeds
He staggers  on the tide.
He feels the hungry  waves of space
Rush  at him high and  blue
 (fanged by the shrill words bleeds)

The white spray smites his dusky face 		(their) Swifter the sun's swift arrows  race 	(fierce)
And  pierce his strong heart  through.	(stout)



Away! 	his white doe, far behind
Lies wounded on the plain
Yells at his flank the nimblest wind
 (3)





as

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



His large tears fall like rain 	(in) Like lily-pads small clouds grow white
About his darkling way
From her bald nest upon the height
The red-eyed eagle sees his flight
He falters-turns-the antlered  night
The black stag stands at bay!


His feet are in the waves of space
His antlers broad and dun
He lowers, and turns his velvet face
To front the hunter sun,
He stamps the lilied clouds and high
His branches fill the west, The lean stork sails across the sky The shy loon shrieks to see him die
The winds leap at his breast.


His antlers fall-once more he spurns
The hoarse hounds of the day
His blood upon the crisp blue burns
Reddens the mounting spray
His branches smite the wave-with cries
The shrill winds pausing, flag 	(wild winds pause and flag) He sinks in space -red glow the skies;
The brown earth crimsons as he dies
The stout and lusty stag!" 	(strong and dusky)


Mter this  ecstatic  song-Crawford's paean of delight  in  which  the  poet  and her  two  personae are  all  worshippers-the  narrative moves  into  description of a magic  scene on  the lake. It contains perhaps the  best example of "clean" direct language, free  from  Victorian rhetorical trappings.  As such,  it  offers  a  hint  of how  the  poet's  imagination, when  released  through participation in  nature, finds a language that  is increasingly  fresh  and  natural. Like  Emily  Carr, she begins to paint  in her own true fashion.

Later they laid the silver bough canoe
On the fresh tide and paddled from the shore.

Hugh:    Hush, hush-0 paddle, noiseless slip
Through  velvet waters, dusky, deep and still

86

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



As hearts  of newborn  flowers and  thou, Canoe, Make  smooth  thy birchen  sides, and  like a beam That pushes night all noiselessly aside
Part  the still lake-Lo, all the little  isles
Seem at a mid air, mystic anchorage
Sky laved at granite plinth, and  cedar crest
As though a god stood doubting -holding them Between  the wave and sky. 	And shall I pluck Them up to gem my calm immortal lakes?
Or  shall I spare them  yet a space  to man? Eastward the large, long shadows  lie and gaze Into brown waters-Westward on gold feet The sultry light stands on the polished  lakes And eyes the raven thunder cloud  that flies
With  plumes all rent far down the curving wave. Ion,  behold! 	here lies the old mossed crib
Knit to yon isle by weft of reaching vines, Fringed with round  lilies; and  a bubble  floats On  the sleek wave -a little rainbow world With  isles and  pines and lilies set in it!
Cool, cool the smooth  brown shadows!	Lo, how quakes
Yon lily in tl1e deep core of the shade!
There drop  the line-there lurks the spangled fin!

Ion:	We will bait the hook with Hope
And with keen hope the trout  will nibble it! And then  to one -despair-to trout or man!

Hugh:  The trout  is welcome to the hope  a trout Can  nibble from  the hook. 	Now draw The paddle  in-like a swan's foot it shines And frights  the fish-Against this lily bed
We'll  lie-and silence-gild our  dangling bait.

Here  follows a  somewhat irrelevant series  of  expository lines  which describe the  psychological background  of  the  two  young men. The material is interesting but its introduction at this  point halts  the  flow  of the  narrative and the  dialogue. It seems  highly probable that if Crawford had  ever  revised this  poem she  would have inserted those   descriptive passages  much earlier on.  I therefore omit them here.
Meanwhile the   fishing scene   continues:  two  men in  a  canoe out   on  a  lily
pond. It is exciting to  find  that the  next  song  is none other than "The Lily  Bed" (first  published in Collected Poems, 1905). Ion  is the singer.

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



There  has  been   considerable critical  speculation about  this  lyric.  We  know now,  in   fact,  that there  were  two  men  in the  canoe.  But  Ion  appears to  be the only  one, in  the song. He  pushes his paddle down and  he is so overcome by the breathless beauty  of  the  landscape-forest  mirrored in  lake-that  the  meta­ phor   overpowers him.  We  feel  his  utter  silence,  "cloaked in  a  golden  pause." And  out  of this silence which  has now become  personified as a chief "in his lodge of  leaves"  there  arises  the  image  of  the  tree  as  a  hunter, wooing  the  water  as maiden.
Ion  now  draws  his paddle up and  as his canoe  rocks  on  the  lily-pads  the  lily
blossoms  sing  to  him  with  "their cool lips"  and  cling  "to  the  frail  sides."  And now  the lilies have  become girls, "With breast  and  lip they  wove a bar." As even­ ing  deepens  cool  winds  spring  up  and  "They swayed  the  high,  dark  trees,  and  low/ Swept  the  locked  lilies to and  fro."  The  key melody,  that couplet, ends the song-but  with  a  difference: "He  pushed out" from  the  lily  bed.  The  tale  is over.  Once  again I reproduce the  original  a<;  it  stands in  the  manuscript, with the  revisions  in  brackets  at  the  side;  in  this  case  it  is possible  that  the  revisions may have been made by Garvin.

"His cedar paddle, scented red
He thrust down in the lily-bed.

Cloaked in a golden pause he lay
Locked in the arms of the bay.	(placid)

Trembled  alone his bark canoe
As shocks of bursting lilies flew

Thro' the still pulses of the tide, 	(crystal)
And smote the frail boat's silvery side 	(birchen)

Or when, beside the sedges thin
Flashed the sharp  jewel of a fin; 	(Rose ... silver)


Or when, a wizard swift and bold
A dragonfly lashed out in gold
 
(cold) (beat)


And  fire and  flame, the widening rings 		(And  jewels all) Of waters whispering to his wings 	(singing)

Or when, like a winged and burning soul, Dropped  from the gloom an oriole

On the cool wave, as to the balm
Of the Great Spirit's open palm

88

THE HUNTERS TWAIN




The freed soul flies.	Soft  silence clung
To  the still hours as tendrils  hung,

In  darkness  carven, from the trees
Sedge-buried to their  burly knees.

Stillness sat in her lodge of leaves, 	(his) Clung golden  shadows  to its eaves,
 (And)


And on its spicy floor like maize 	(cone-spiced) Red-ripe, fell sheaves of knotted rays.

The wood, a proud  and crested  brave; Bead-bright, a maiden, stood the wave.


And  he had  told his tale of love
With  voice of eagle and of dove.
 
(spoke his soul)


Of loud,  peaked  pines his tongue  had made; His lips soft blossoms of the shade

That kissed her silver lips-hers cool
As lilies on his inmost pool

Till  now he stood in triumph's rest
 
(strong)

His image in her crystal breast; 	(painted in her  breast)

One  isle 'tween blue and  blue did melt
A bead of wampum from  the belt,


Of  Manitou -a purple rise
On  the far shore slipped up the skies.

His cedar  paddle scented  red
He drew  up from the lily bed.
 
(heaved to the)


All lily-locked,  all lily-locked
The light  bark on the blossoms rocked. 	1(His)

Their cool lips round  the sharp  prow sang,
Their soft  palms to the  pale sides sprang. 	(clasp to the frail)

With  breasts and lips they wove a bar - Stole from  her lodge the Evening Star,

With  golden  hand  she grasped  the mane
Of a cloud on the azure plain. 	(red)

It by the coned red sunset flew 	(peaked) Cool winds from  its bright  nostrils blew.

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



They swayed the high dark  trees and  low
Swept the locked lilies to and  fro.

With cedar  paddle, scented  red
He pushed  out from  the lily-bed. The narrative continues :
Thus Ion sang, and  rustling thro' the rice
They  met the shining fingers of the moon
Thrust thro'  the woods to touch  the shining lake : She lifted mellow lips to dying day
And all her kisses quivered into stars.
Then from  the large rose of the lake leaped  up
A million little lilied mists that  played
And curled  before the prow; like naiad hands Bore the birch bark in snowy palms,  and  hid The rice, the lilies, and  the flashing  wave.
A campfire flared far on an ebon spear
Of pine-black  land  that  split the lake, and  pale Their tent gleamed  in the light, and  Hugh beheld And sang a paean  to its canvas  caves.

Hugh's song  which follows   I  have  titled "The Tent." As far  as can  be  deter­ mined it  was  never published. Interestingly, although  it  follows the same  metri­ cal  pattern as Ion's "Lily Bed" song,  it lapses  more often into colloquial phrasing.
THE  TENT  (Hugh's song) There stands  my tent secure between
Two  pointed  pines, twin guards of green

My palace of mid-pine delight! The canvas walls no longer white:

By smoke from camp-fires  keenly kist
Into a dim, dim coil of mist

By past long summers,  bronzed  as brown
As cones from  pine peaks shaken  down.

Would  I thy mellow walls exchange
For snowy canvas  fresh and strange?

Perish the thought! 	there's not a rent
Or  stain,  I'd  spare  thee from, my tent!

Lo, that long wound  healed  with a seam
Thou hadst  it in Walpurgian dream

go

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



Of branches bellowing  through the night
As when strong, leafy giants fight,

A smitten pine, his dying grip
Laid  on thee with faint  finger-tip,

And  jagged thee sore -That russet strain
The fire-kiss of a flaming  plain!

That patch-'tis victory's squalid  flag
Against  thee  hurled  the hounded stag

Fangs  at his throat, he reels! 	he falls! His antlers in thy yielding walls.

Thy  linen  lintel  bears a blot
I would  not move a single jot.

0 misty, yellow, murmurous eaves,
On  crooked  sticks displumed of leaves

I hung  beneath thy trembling thatch
The scaly treasures of my "catch"!

The speckled  sweetmeat of the stream
The darling of the angler's dream,

The silver of the creek
That leaps, a pale nymph, from the peak

Of woody hill, and  on her way
Shares  such sun flashes, as she may;

And from  the glittering rays, small doubt
Evolves her  jewel's sprite,  the trout!

Then later,  simple ecstasy
That grew between  my pipe and me

Impletion of serene content!
Joy to thy smoky walls, my tent!

Now  that Hugh and Ion  are  safely  back  at  their camp, having lit  their camp­ fire  and  cooked their trout, they  cease  their singing and  take up  their  longstand­ ing   argument. The  marked contrast between the  characters of  the  two  friends, the  optimist and cynic, is highlighted in this dialogue.

So sped the eve, and lying on piled spruce
Beside the red camp-fire, Hugh  mused  and  planned; And  Ion smoked, or sang his sorrow songs

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



That sounded  merrily,  to say the least.
Thus  Hugh, with eyes large on the ebon woods:

Hugh:  A fine, full soil-free grants for every soul­
Pure  water -timber -hills for little towns - Shelter  for cattle  in the valley dips.
I'll search  no further-hither my colony
Shall tramp; here tent,  and  touch  red Plenty's robe.

Ion:	Yes-and yonder  frowning isle
That burst the lake so furiously at birth,
The  wave still hisses round it-there your  jails
Can  cage their  birds. 	Oh, all fits well!
Heights  for your towns and  temples-rugged  rocks
To hold your ready  rogues,  meek murderers
Your multi-married, and  the hoary  heads
That whitened  churches, while the hungry hands
Plucked  at the public  placket -or betrayed The  orphan's trust. 	Oh,  all fits very well! Prepare the wilderness for crime-and man!

Hugh:  Nay, man  and crime.... name man  the first: He is the stronger -yield him all his rights.

Ion:	0 optimist!	0 owl that  through the pitch Of midnight gazes clearest!	And  no doubt Sees the grim ruins gay, to his round orbs!


Hugh:  ... Behold this bay, how firm the sweep
Of the high headlands heaved  from  its deep  heart. Here  wharves shall grow, and  docks, and  sails shall set To this large shelter, from  the furious leaps
Of yon unsalted  sea.

Ion:	And to their slimy lips shall steal at night
Lost mothers with their  bastards at their  breasts
And stare a moment at the town behind,
A moment at the stars, then  make the choice Of filthy water. 	Spurned merrily  by Fate The  madmen of Dispair shall leap from  them
And  rotting ships, brave  in fresh  paint, shall swing
Loose from  them  to the wrecking; thus it holds in my young, leafy Athens, thus it holds
in Babylon.

THE  HUNTERS  TWAIN



Hugh:   ... And thus it holds
Round our rude star:	from hurricanes slip up Sleek calms, and  healthier airs-and hideous slimes Labour with lilies-0, God's moulding place
Is full of riot, roar of furnaces
Glaring of metal,  recurring in fierce tides­ Smoke, violence and strife -but ever tends  The storm  to music, and the strife to peace. Mayhap the music sounds dim aeons hence,
Perchance the Peace shapes on immortal shores.

Ion: 	Hope is your creed! ... You cling
To  rainbows, like the elves in picture books!
You ride the moth, and clasp the trembling reed! Ion I worship-sets my soul that  way.
And  Hope is Pythia  to the God I know, Utters His will; and  looks along His Hand Stretched through the Coming  Ages shaping them.

Hugh:   Shall  I pass sentence  and condemn myself
To  present  Hell, and  consort  with damned souls?

God is God and  Hope
His chiefest prophet!

Ion:	Prove that!	I'll  be your pupil then.
Yes, faith,  I will.

Hugh:  Proof, proof! ... Nay, work the problem  out
Alone; nor waste your toil on it unless
You feel at times the passionate, plain  pang
Of adoration paining  all your soul
And  hear, " 'Tis well to worship" from  her lips. Then seek my God, and  you shall find his Hope.

In  the meantime, roll up that  lusty log
Astride  the flames -the night grows pale and chill. So saying, the  hunters' argument trails off into smoke and dreams.
Hugh lay and  dreamed, with movements of the feet
And starting fingers, and  with pricking  ears Full of the crash of stags, thro'  brush and  fern And  ripping of deep waves by dappled breasts. And so his spirit struggled  with the earth
Then upward burst to the clear airs of sleep.


93

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



While   Hugh sleeps,  one  may  ask,  does  not   the   canoe  speak  of  "my   masters twain"? That song  would  seem  to be most  fitting  at  this  point  in  the  narrative; but  it is not  to  be found  in this manuscript or  in  the  known  Crawford archives. Instead of that  song, or any  concluding passage  on the stag  hunt, we have a final fragment which   might  be  titled: "Hugh's Dream". In  it  the  darkness and  the violence  takes  over-indicating  those "presences" that  are  just beyond  the  rim of the campfire in "Said  the Canoe".

He clung against the blackness of a cliff
With bat-sharp nails, and felt against his lips The awful granite that he could not see. Against his naked soles he felt a cloud
Rub its dark down as if an eagle passed.
Thunder filled space: 	the thunder spirits rolled
Their  balls in such hot sport, the roaring orbs
Smote side to side. 	Then  to the south some sped - A riot of red arrows rushing down
On  the swift bird that ever flies before
Their  ruddy shafts, yet never drops to them.

Below him leaped the thunders of the Lake; Against his breast, reverberant,  the cliff Belched brittle echoes; burst from every pass Responsive floods of sound, as to the Joy
Of the wild thunders they lent their rocky throats.
Night! 	Was this night, or some space set apart
For lasting dark scorched with the lightning's  blast? His soul stood tip-toe for the groan of woods:
For forests grow by sun, but stone and wave
Made all this world; and thunders all its voice. Deep dawns of newer darkness filled the east Till, like a swamp-bred monster's hide, the sky
Grew wrinkled with them, and the lightning's shafts
Broke on their fleeter blackness, wave on wave­ Sprang as a growing buck leaps upon his foe
That fights him for his mate-and rearing high
Grew lank against his stretching  foe, and roared
[And with fanged furious stabs tore at his throat]	(line  scratched
[And so] with branches locked they strove and reeled. 	out)

So ends  this  poem  which  I have  named  "The Hunters Twain". The  great  lyric that  finally  burst  to light  from  its shaggy  loins  must  surely  have  been  "Said the

94

THE  HUNTERS  TWAIN



Canoe" ... which  I re-publish  here. Its first known printing  was in The  Toronto
Telegram, December 8, 1883.
SAID   THE  CANOE My masters twain  made  me a bed
Of  pine-boughs resinous, and  cedar; Of moss, a soft and  gentle breeder
Of dreams of rest; and me they spread With furry  skins and,  laughing, said: "Now  she shall lay her polished sides As queens  do rest, or dainty  brides, Our slender  lady of the tides!"

My masters twain  their camp-soul lit; Streamed incense from  the hissing cones; Large crimson  flashes grew and  whirled; Thin golden  nerves of sly light curled Round the dun  camp; and rose faint zones, Half  way about each grim bole knit,
Like a shy child  that  would bedeck With  its soft clasp a Brave's red neck, Yet sees the rough  shield on his breast, The awful  plumes shake on his crest, And, fearful, drops his timid  face,
Nor dares  complete the sweet embrace.

Into the hollow  hearts of brakes­
Yet warm  from sides of does and stags Passed to the crisp, dark river-flags - Sinuous, red as copper-snakes,
Sharp-headed serpents, made of light,
Glided  and  hid themselves in night.

My masters twain  the slaughtered deer
Hung on forked  boughs with thongs of leather: Bound  were his stiff, slim feet together,
His eyes like dead  stars cold and  drear.
The wandering firelight drew  near
And laid its wide palm, red and  anxious, On  the sharp splendour of his branches, On  the white foam grown hard  and sere
On  flank  and shoulder.
Death -hard as breast of granite boulder - Under his lashes

95

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



Peered  thro'  his eyes at his life's grey ashes. My masters twain  sang songs that  wove­ As they burnished hunting-blade and rifle­ A golden thread with cobweb trifle,
Loud  of the chase and  low of love:

"0 Love! 	art  thou  a silver fish, Shy of the line and shy of gaffing,
Which  we do follow, fierce, yet laughing,
Casting at thee the light-winged wish? And at the last shall we bring thee up From  the crystal darkness,  under the cup
Of lily folden
On  broad  leaves golden?

"0 Love! 	art  thou a silver deer With feet as swift as wing of swallow, While we with  rushing  arrows  follow? And at the last shall we draw  near
And o'er thy velvet neck cast thongs
Woven of roses, stars and songs - New chains  all moulden
Of rare gems olden?"

They  hung  the slaughtered fish like swords
On saplings slender; like scimitars,
Bright, and  ruddied from  new-dead wars, Blazed in the light the scaly hordes.

They  piled up boughs beneath the trees, Of cedar  web and  green fir tassel. Low did the pointed  pine tops rustle,
The camp-fire blushed  to the tender breeze.

The hounds  laid dewlaps on the ground
with needles of pine, sweet, soft and  rusty, Dreamed of the dead stag stout  and  lusty;
A bat by the red flames wove its round.

The darkness  built its wigwam  walls
Close round  the camp, and  at its curtain
Pressed shapes, thin, woven and  uncertain
As white locks of tall waterfalls.

g6

THE  HUNTERS TWAIN



TIE READER of this "reading" is now entitled to ask: does the publication   of  this   hitherto   unknown   manuscript   fundamentally  change   the
critics' view of Isabella Valancy Crawford?
In  my opinion  it adds  to her stature  and confirms her virtuosity. It illustrates that  she saw  herself as a narrative-philosophical poet whose role it was to define the epic aspects of immigration, settlement  and  pioneer life in Ontario. Further, more  than  any  other  Canadian poet  of  her  period,  Crawford   is shown  to  be deeply aware  of the social, class and  moral clashes that  arise in a free-enterprise society. Although  perhaps  she is best known and loved for her lyrics in praise of love, she was no mere lyricist. She possessed a political conscience.
This  unpublished   manuscript is valuable  in another,  literary  sense. It gives a clue as to  Crawford's creative  method,  "the  poet at  work".  She wrote at white heat  impelled  by passion. The  result is often wordy and  even chaotic,  showing little  regard  for syntax, spelling,  punctuation or the dangers of repetition.  There is clear evidence  that  she did spend time on revision, but it is difficult to see the rationale  behind  her  revisions  (see especially "The  Dark  Stag"). At  times she uses inversion  of subject  and  predicate  with  great  force  (as  was true  in "The Helot"  and  in Malcolm's  Katie)  but she relies on this rhetorical  device too often. What  emerges however, from  this method  of composition  (and  is it also true of Malcolm's   Katie,  which  I  take to be earlier  than  The  Hunters  Twain) is that Crawford  worked  on a generous scale with a broad  canvas  in view; and  out of this wide documentation of detail  and  theme she allowed her imagination to lift her free into  pure  lyric song. She responds to the wilderness with love, not fear; and  she  believes that  love will win, if only man  will work with  nature  and  not against  her.  In  this  sense  Crawford  is the  most modern  of the  Confederation Poets and the most relevant for us here and now in the Seventies.




ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Acknowledgments are  due to the archivist,  Douglas  Library, Queen's University, Kingston, for  permission   to  search  and  copy  the  extant papers of  Isabella Valancy Crawford. My  grateful thanks are  also due  to two of my students, Francine Pelletier and  Penny  Petrone, for their  assiduous search in newspaper archives.
In following the  original text  I  have  had  to  make  modifications in  spelling  and punctuation, to suit modern practice.

D.L.

97

THE HUNTERS TWAIN



NOTES

1 For   instance, her  greatest   achievement in  the  narrative form  is  undoubtedly the dialect   poem,  Old  Spookses Pass: a  tour  de  force  linguistically and  dramatically. It is set in an  imagined  locale never  experienced in  real  life by the  poet, who  never moved   west  of  Ontario. Thus,   long  before   Robert Service  arrived on  the  scene Crawford was writing  a true "western" in ballad  form.
2   As in  an  opera,  Crawford has skilfully  combined  the  lyric  moments with  the  dra­ matic tension.  There is documented evidence  that  she saw and  heard  Italian opera  in Toronto.
3  Embedded in  this  poem  are  two  famous  lyrics:  "The Dark  Stag" and  "The  Lily Bed".  There is one  unpublished lyric, "The Tent", in  the  same  style as "The  Lily Bed"; and  a  strong  indication that  the  famous  poem,  "Said   the  Canoe", was part and  parcel  of The  Hunters Twain  manuscript.
• The  total   unfinished  manuscript  is  some  Boo  lines  long,  in  iambic   pentameter, written by hand  on  lined sheets of legal size foolscap. The indication is that  Craw­ ford  was  short  of  paper  and  that  she  used  every  inch  of space,  crowding  together section   upon   section.  Since  only  a  long  pen-stroke separates  each  "piece" from another, there  is as  yet no  way  of  telling  whether any  one  "piece" is  intended to be a  part  of the  whole structure. Only  in the  last  half  is there  a flowing,  integrated narrative line, combined  with lyrical bursts.
5 Most  curious  here  is the  use of  the  word  simooms  which  are  found  only  in  desert country: "hot sand winds".




























g8




review articles


THE BEOWULF POET IS ALIVE AND WELL

Peter Stevens



AL   PURDY,  Selected   Poems. McClelland & Stewart.  $6.95  hardcover, $2.95  paper.


IN A BRIEF REVIEW of The Crafte So Longe To Lerne Eli Mandel recognized  that  "Purdy is clearly  another beginning for Canadian  poetry". Purdy himself   has   rejected  almost   all   of   his poetry  written before  the  volume  Mandel was reviewing, and indeed  this Selected is chosen  almost  wholly  from  his  poetry  of the  1g6os, the  period  in  which  he  made a new beginning for  himself.
In what  sense  is this  poetry  a  base for new  things,  a foundation for  a new kind of Canadian poetry?  The first line of the first poem  gives an  indication: talking  of driving his Ford  through Newfoundland, Purdy  writes, "My  foot  has  pushed  a fire ahead of  me."  George   Woodcock   in  his personal  reminiscence that  serves as Intro­ duction  to  this  volume   points  out   that  although this appears a far-fetched meta­ phor,  it is basic to the development of the poem.  For  me  the  phrasing of this image is  a  basic   ingredient  of   Purdy's  meta­ phoric method throughout his poetry. His poems  are   full  of  poetic   compounds of this nature-"mind-light", "God's belly­ scratcher", "bone rooms", a lake as "mon-
 ocle eye"  or  "glass  house"  for  fish -all these  and   more   remind   me   of   Anglo­ Saxon    kennings,     and    indeed    Purdy's poetry  at  several  levels is the  equivalent within  the  new  Canadian  poetry  of  that first  attempt  to  weld  disparate elements  into a genuine expression  of the emerging Anglo-Saxon    nation.   So   this   volume  creates  a  kind  of  Beowulf  poet  living  in Ameliasburgh, poet of an  emerging nation.
The  Anglo-Saxon elements in the poet­ ry  do   not   parallel    the   studied   use   of Anglo-Saxon   rhythms and   forms  found in some of Earle  Birney's poetry, although Purdy's   flexible  lines  certainly  have  the changing hesitations and  speed,  the  sud­  den   polarized    contrasts that   occur   in some Anglo-Saxon alliterative poetry. Any number of  Purdy   poems   jolt  the  reader from  place  to  place  and  time  to time:

Alexander  turns  from the gates of the
Ganges
and moves with his generals  and phalanx  to bulldoze  the Kremlin
while the eunuch  priests conspire in Assyria to defoliate  the Vietnamese rice fields of
bananas.

99

REVIEW ARTICLES



And  in  this  same  poem  Purdy  recognizes the primitive and  tribal  ideas in all of us: "witch-doctors dance in  our   blood  for­ ever",   and   although  he   traverses   such enormities of space,  he returns to  the es­ sential  human group, coming  back  to his village of Ameliasburgh.
Purdy's poetry  has  this primitive qual­ ity,   but   this   is   not   to   deny   its   real technical sophistication and control. Like Anglo-Saxon  poetry,    it   welds   together  sharply   contrasting  states  of  mind   and  emotional moods:  all the memories of the past   from   the  variety of  races,  all  the alien  strains  grafting themselves  onto  the poetry.   Purdy's  is  a  haunted  poetry­ the  word   "ghost" and   its  variants  keep cropping up. The memories  contained in a  poem  can  come  from  within   Canada and  from  without: in  "The Cariboo Horses"   there   are   the   Kiangs,   onagers and  quagga as well as  the  North  Ameri­ can  Indian horses  and  the  ghosts. There are  the  ancestral memories dredged  from the   country  north  of   Belleville,   upper  Hastings County and  Ameliasburgh and Roblin  Lake.  But  there is also a personal  investment in the past found  in the ghosts of  all   the   other   Purdys   somehow   con­ tained  in  the land. Somewhere his grand­ father exists and  will tell him  (and  us) :

the  way  it was without no streets
or names of places  here nothin but  moonlight  boy
nothin but  woods.

This  sense of involvement with  the country is robustly  manifest in the  Arctic poems, not expressed  in terms of simple glorification and awestruck wonder (though  that   tone   is  sometimes   there) but   rather in  an  ambivalent attitude towards his experience of the  country in his  travels   through it,  and   this  again  is


100
 reminiscent of Anglo-Saxon poetry. There is the attraction of travel,  the glowing description of scenes:

the  sun  a hovering golden bird nothing moves
soft  clouds wait like  floating houses  in  the  sky
and the  storm beyond  the  horizon waiting ...

But  there is also  the  fear  of travel,  never knowing where  he is going, simply grow­ ing  older  travelling through time  as well as  space.   He  finds  an  image  of   himself and   man  in   the   constantly   migrating birds:   "by   what   bonds/are   we   always exiles?"  And  yet  his  relations  with  space  tend  to lead  him into  notions of transcen­ dence,  as  travel  takes  him  past  the  limits of the  human condition, expressed  simply in "The Turning Point" as he moves into  the   new  space   of  the  Arctic,   or  stated exhilaratingly when  he follows the hockey players  as they  break out  to skate

thru the  smoky  end  boards out
of sight and  climbing up  the  appalachian highlands
and racing breast to breast  across
laurentian barrens
over  hudson's diamond bay and  down the
treeless tundra where
stopping isn't feasible or possible  or lawful.

In these  transcendent moments he comes to terms with  Canada and  the  universe through which  he travels: "our  opponents never  Geography/or distance".
Yet   the   land   constantly  looms  large over  man's  transience and   this  mixture of  beauty, awe  and  fear  in  the  presence of  our   space   is  very   much   a   part   of Purdy's poetry:

the  iron  north beyond the  last  streetlight ... biting the  stammered name
to pieces ...
in a man's cold  mouth
the  edge of our  loneliness.

REVIEW ARTICLES



This  polarized  view of  the  land  is like the stance some Anglo-Saxon poets take. Purdy  too sees the land  as harsh and stubborn, "the  country of  our   defeat". Yet  the  poetry  is full  of abrupt flashes of observed detail of nature and  the poet's delight as he sees "cedars grow pale green candles" and

the  running animals gather their bodies together
and  pour  themselves upward into the  tips of falling leaves

and  birds

perched on  rubbery muskeg like blue  teacups
or lost  brown mittens.

So  in  spite  of  the  unyielding quality   of the  land   Purdy   persists  in  focussing  on spring,   with   himself   always  cast  in  the role of the god of spring with "both hands high/under the skirts of the world".
Still, the elegiac  note  (again like Anglo­ Saxon    poetry)   resounds   through    this volume   and   the  central  polarity   of  the poetry  is the  transience yet  persistence  of man,   the   vitality   of   life  in  the  face  of inevitable  death:   "we   live  with   death  but it's life we die with". Perhaps Purdy's  best   poems are   the   elegies -"Lament For The  Dorsets", "Old Alex",  the poems about the  dead  of  Roblin's Mills, "Ever­ green  Cemetery"  (and   Purdy  has a  pre­ dilection for  graveyards) . Yet  his elegies do in fact show  a  triumph, that  common  human   persistence,   the    persistence    of those small Arctic trees whose roots touch permafrost. Their smallness  he mocks but he turns  on  himself  because  their dogged­ ness  is  to  be  admired:  "to  make   sure the species does not die ... they use death to  remain alive".
That kind   of  courage is  the  heroism
Purdy  celebrates, not  the  epic exploits  of
 the Anglo-Saxon  poets. Purdy is conscious that  man  is his own  worst  enemy,  but  he sees  man   trying   to  live   by  ideals   and usually failing,  yet at least  he can admire men  like  Castro, Che  and   Kennedy for having   those  overwhelming  beliefs.  But he also admires the smaller  men: the farmers  like Sisyphus, who are continually defeated  but  who  also continually return to the struggle, like Alex whose meanness was transcendent, like his mother biting hard  on death, like the  8g-year-old  Jack­ son in  the  Arctic,  like the  hockey  players with  their  inability   to  overtake  "a  hard  black   rubber   disc",   like  Percy   Lawson  haggling  over  a lousy nickel.
This  focus  on  men  and  on  himself  is something  outside  the  Anglo-Saxon aura of his poetry. Self-consciousness is a much more  modem trait. Purdy  is very much  a character in his own  poetry  and  often  he shows  the  modem  poet's   concern   with poetry   itself.  The  subject-matter of  his poetry  at  times  is simply  the  process  of the  poem  itself and  my one  regret  about this   volume   is  that   it   doesn't  contain Purdy's  best poetic  statement of his poet­ ics, "Metrics". We get  to know  Purdy as man  and  poet  much  more  than  we  will ever   know  the   Beowulf   poet.  And   the difference  is most marked  in the humorous poems, for  as Woodcock  points out  he is "the poet of comedy". At times the comic spirit  can get the better  of him, and  some poems  are  ruined   for  me  by  the  cheap  wisecrack,  the  too  easy  gag.  But  this  is not really apparent in the poems selected for  this volume.
And  after  all it may  be the  persona  of the  poet as he appears in  the  poetry  that counts   most  of  all,  the   poet   telling   us about   himself  as  Canadian, as  traveller, as poet, as man. The  man  and  his country become one:


I 01

REVIEW ARTICLES



after a while  the  eyes digest  a country and the  belly  perceives a mapmaker's vision
in dust  and  dirt  on  the face and  hands here its smell  drawn deep  thru  the  nostrils  down to the  lungs  and  spurts thru  bloodstream campaigns in  the  lower  intestine.

Here  is the  poet  who by defining him­
self  in  relation  to  this  country and   the
 world  has  told  us something about  all of us. If Purdy   didn't exist,  it  would  have been   necessary  for  Canadians to  invent him.   But  fortunately  he  does  exist  and this  Selected  is the  best  proof  we have  so far  of  his  existence  as  Canadian and  as poet.




DIFFICULT SANITIES

Andreas Schroeder


DENNIS LEE, Civil Elegies and Other  Poems. Anansi.



IF I RECALL it correctly, it was A. E.  Housman who  used to get  so  ner­ vous  when  he ran  up  against  a good  line of  poetry  that   he'd  cut  himself  shaving.  Since  I wear  a  beard  I don't  have  that  problem, but   I do  admit   to  a  peculiar  sense  of  alarm  on   those  rare  occasions when  the  poetry  suddenly  gets  up  on  its hindquarters and  begins to paw  the air. I had  that   feeling  from  virtually cover  to cover when  I first read Dennis  Lee's Civil Elegies  and  Other   Poems,  and   having  reread   the   book   many   times  since,  the sense  of  red   alert  continues  to   persist. This   is  indeed   an  exceptional  book  of poems.
I think  what  I appreciate above  all in Civil  Elegies is  Lee's  forthright  honesty. Not  honesty   because  he  is  incapable of lying, not  honesty  in a sticky confessional way,  but  honesty  in  that  he  admits  that lies exist in his own perception; he doesn't pretend  the   answers    (where   they  seem available)  aren't  suspect,   he  admits in fact   that   even  the  problems   as  he  per­ ceives them  may be bogus. For  there is an unavoidable   paradox   involved    in   the

I02
 business  of  a man   attempting to  get  an aerial  view of the human condition while continuing his race  on  the ground; some­ how  he  must  become  observer  and  par­  ticipant   simultaneously, and,   while   all certainty  is  suspended,   nevertheless   live without  pause   by  the  seat  of  his  pants,  whether they dress him like the Emperor's new  clothes  or  his  everyday, no-nonsense fruit-of-the-looms.   In   Civil  Elegies  Lee shows  that   he  not  only  understands the inevitability   of     such     ambiguity,   but demonstrates   himself   to   be  capable  of conveying  it  equally  well:

Supper is over,  I sit
holed  up  in my study. I have  no answers again and  I do not  trust the
simplicities, nor  Sibelius Park;
I am  not  to be trusted with
them.

But  I rest  in one  thing. The play of dusk  and  atmospherics, the
beautiful rites  of synaesthesia, are  not  to be believed;
but  that grisly  counter-presence, the
warfare in  the  lockers, myself  against myself,  the  years  of
desperate affirmation and  the  dank
manholes of ego which  stink  when they

REVIEW ARTICLES



come free at last
-the seamy underside of every
 

stiff
 copout, we know that  game, it's as real
as the
whisky, the fights, the pills.

iconic self-which are  hard 	which
are  welcome
are no more real than  that  unreal  man who
stood and  took them in;
are no more real than  the fake
epiphanies,
though  they ache  to
bring  them  down.

For  they are all given, they are  not to be believed  but constantly
they are  being
given, moment  by moment,  the icons and  what  they
suppress,  here and
here and  though  they are not real
they  have  their  own  real
presence,  like a mirror  in the grass and
in the
bodies we live in....

In this  book  one  feels  as if  the  poems are  themselves  the  exploration, the  blow­ by-blow    account  of   Lee's   search   for direction and  a  workable  sanity.  Almost all  are  written in  the  present   tense,  and  almost  all  include  within themselves,  un­ compromisingly,  all   the   contrary  forces and  arguments Lee  finds  himself  capable of   perceiving,   regardless  whether  those forces   might   quite   possibly   overwhelm the poem and inexorably neutralize what­ ever  tentative  hopes  have  been  smuggled  in   between   the   lines.  That too  is  part  of  the  honesty  of  the  book.  Throughout, there   is  consistent  evidence  of  a  lot  of damned hard  work, by a man  who refuses to make  himself,  or his reader, the victim of short-cuts, who  refuses  to let the  surge of  the  poetry   run  away   with   him.  One senses  the  strain to  untangle, to  decode the  cryptogrammatic, to  melt  away   the deceptive fat  build-up around words:

... So lady
 And I do not start  this now because the
grass is green,
and  not because in front  of us the path  makes stately  patterns down  the
slope  to Grenadier
and  all the
random  ambling  of the couples
hangs
like courtly  bygones in the shining  air;
the old longing  is there,  it always will but I will  not
allow it.

But there  is
you, lady. I
want  you to
be, and  I want  you.
Lie here on  the grass beside me,
hear me tie my tongue  in knots.
I can't  talk brave palaver  like
I did  10 years ago-I
used up all the words-but now I
sense my centre  in these new gropings,  wary, near  yours lady,
coming  to
difficult  sanities.
I want  to be here.

As   the   title    indicates,  the    book   is divided  into  two  parts,  the  first of which is comprised  of a selection  of more  recent poems,  while  the  second  is a  rewrite   of the earlier  book Civil Elegies which Lee published   in  a  limited   edition  in  I g68. The first  section   is  private, is  personal both  in  tone  and   voice;  poems  charting the difficult births  and  deaths of domestic warfare, the minuscule progress, the bitter relapses, the infinitely slow and  painful process   of   recapturing  one's   life   after having  squandered the length  and breadth of it  to strangers for  a  song.  For  this  is one  of  Lee's  major points,  of  which   he speaks   with   both    sadness   and    alarm:
we've   handed  over   the   control  of  our

it is not that
I hanker  for new beginnings -
confession and
 lives to others,  we've  become  suckers  for the  ad-men dangling fake  gaudy  baubles

REVIEW ARTICLES



before our eyes; we've been so thoroughly side-tracked  so often, we couldn't  tell the difference between what we really wanted and  what  we eventually settled for if our lives depended  on it. Needless to say, and unfortunately for us all, such discernment is of course exactly what they do depend on, and so what we have here is the advocacy of a sort of personal buy-back programme which parallels our similar national   difficulty  and   dovetails  neatly with  the  second  half  of  the  book,  the very public-voiced and rewritten Civil Elegies. For the step which irresistibly follows the reoccupation of one's own consciousness  is  the   urge  to  repatriate one's own  geography  to settle it  in, and here  too,  the  recapture   will  be  painful and slow; Canada is already so firmly in the hands  of foreigners that  her situation seems every  bit  as grim  and  dubious  as the  personal  ones of her citizens:

Many were  born  in Canada, and  living unlived lives  they  died
of course but  died  truncated, stunted, never at
home  in  native space and  not  yet
citizens of a human body of kind.  And  it is
Canada
that specialized in  this  deprivation.
Therefore the  spectres arrive, congregating
in  bitter droves, thick  in  the  April sunlight,
accusing us and we are no different, though you  would  not  expect
the  furies assembled in  hogtown and  ring
me  round, invisible,
demanding what time  of our  lives we wait for  till we shall  start to be....

The Civil Elegies address themselves directly or indirectly to the entire nation, largely  on  matters   of  national  indepen­ dence,   national   consciousness,   national sanity   and   national   purpose.  Nine  ex­ tended  poems comprise this section, each pouring  through   2  or  3  pages of  long,


104
 rambling  lines. They're formidable, quite without   parallel  in  Canadian  literature, and though  I feel that if the book has any difficulties, most  of  them  may  be traced to this section, there is an intellectual candour,  an urgency, in fact a compelling desperation about  them  which  leaves one virtually   exhausted   by  the  end   of  the ninth   poem.  Lee  plays  for  high  stakes here,   wrestling   with   both   private   and public  angels  for  nothing  l"Ss than  sal­ vation,  and  with  a  26-page  battlefield  to do it in, the struggle quickly  widens and deepens into bulldozer  proportions  which are  overwhelming   from  any  angle.  But here  again,  though   the  approach  is  of necessity a bit more  meandering than  in the  individual   first  poems,  Lee  keeps  a tight  control  on  the  proceedings,  aware that   in  the   heat  generated   by  such  a large-scale  enterprise,   unacceptably  syn­ thetic alloys are too often  the result:

I know
the  world  is not  enough; a woman
straightens
and  turns from  the  sink  and  asks her  life the
question, why  should she
fake  it? and  after a moment she
shrugs, and  returns to  the  sink.  A man's adrenalin takes  hold, at a meeting he makes his point, and pushes  and  sees that
things will  happen now ... and  then in  the
pause he  knows
there are  endless things in  the  world  and
this is not  for  real.

There isn't  enough  space  available  to discuss the changes  Lee has made  in this new version of the Elegies, except perhaps to say that  the transformation is extensive, not particularly in terms of the content, which  is the  least changed,  but  in  terms of the language  and  the inflection. What was formerly  too often a thin  and uneven rhetoric   has  been  smoothed   out  into  a better   modulated,  more   assured   voice; the  colloquialisms  which  once  stood  al-

REVIEW  ARTICLES



most  bashfully amidst the formalities have now become  quite at ease with  their surroundings and  work along without any undue  fuss -the   incident  of   Chartier blowing   himself   up   in   the   parliament john  is an  example.
Lee has, in short, quite literally outdone himself  in   this   book,  and   the   result   is
 important not  only  as a work  of art,  but as  a  working   record   of  one  man's  per­ sistent  attempts to  regain  his footing on  the  roller-coaster route  towards rebirth. It's  like a piece of  sculpture someone has  had  the  brains  not  to  encase  in  glass;  it demands to be used.



CIRCUMVENTING DRAGONS

Ralph Gustafson


DAVID   MCFADDEN, Intense Pleasure. McClelland & Stewart, $4-95·
PETER STEVENS, a  few myths. Talonbooks,  $2.50.
FRED COGSWELL,  The Chains of Lilliput. Fiddlehead Poetry Books, $0.50.
GWENDOLYN MACEWEN, The Armies of the  Moon. Macmillan, $2.95.


EACH BOOK  is to  be  judged within  its own  terms.  It is the critic's  part to  accede.  Distasteful to  Robert   Bridges were both  the  subject and  treatment of Hopkins' The Wreck of the  Deutschland. With  his warning that  the  poem  stood in the  front  of the  book  he  presented like a great  dragon folded  in  the  gate  to forbid all  entrance,  he   nevertheless  presented the poetry  to the public.
Reluctantly but  within   the  dutiful  de­ mands of this  tradition, the  above books, not  completely but  nearly,  are presented. The  dragons  which   had   to  be  circum­ vented  were either egocentricity or sloppy artistry or both.
Entry  into  Hopkins' book was difficult
because  of  prosody.  Entry into  Mr.  Mc­ Fadden's Intense Pleasure is easy  because of its lack of it; so easy that  the adjective of  his  title   is struck   out   of  existence.  I present  Mr.  McFadden's  book  with  diffi­ culty  and  irritation. Before  setting  out  to assess this  further  witness  to  the state  of
 Canadian poetry  in  the  books sent  to me for review, I had  been reading Wallace Stevens; I   was   receiving immortal wounds  from  the right  and  left.  Mr. Mc­ Fadden's  verse   left   me   total   and   un­  scathed. Previously  I  had  been  irritated. Last  year  (Mr. McFadden  writes  a  book a  year,  I gather), in  1971,  he  presented a  book  called   Poems  Worth  Knowing. The  title embodies the unspoken assump­ tion  of every  poet  who publishes,  but  he usually  has  the decency  to leave  the  say­ ing   of   it   to   the   critical    reader.  "Not again," I  groaned. I  was  already fed  up  with  the  colossal  inter-adulation carried on  by  our  Little Press groups.  "All  right, skip   the   groans,"   I   browbeat  myself. "Here might be Canada's Ezra  Pound, Canada's John  Clare!" Poems  worth knowing?  Here is one:

After breakfast
I listen to music
or it listens to me
& watch an airplane flying over -

105

REVIEW ARTICLES



So. But  he might  have  inadvertently suc­ ceeded   in  hiding   his  great   thoughts. I read    another   poem;    about   his   little daughter eating  her own shit. I persisted; children  can  be  adorable. I read  others  which   say  that  Kerouac is  the  author's all-time hero and  that  Michael  Ondaatje is a "living legend", I thought, "Well,  the verse   in   this   book   does   resemble   the
'spontaneous prose'  Kerouac advocated;
it  does  a  hatchet  job  on  almost  every­ thing,   rhythm, music,  the  works;  but  if McFadden   gets   intense   pleasure   from playing   tennis  with  the  net  down,  leave him  alone  with  his  love  match.  On  the Ondaatje theme,   I thought,  "Mike will get  him  off that  hook."  Then  it  dawned  on me. The  book is a put-on! I am a dolt.  This  is  comedy.   But   no.   The  author's introduction   tells   us   that   the    author writes poems seriously,

with  sincere  attempts at  truthfulness, accu·
racy,  meaningfulness & self-discovery.

The self-discovery  would  eventually take care  of itself, I felt; and  the  guy is truth­ ful-but  that's the  trouble,  therein lies the   trouble:  he  believes  that  if  he  tells the  truth he has written a  poem.  Almost as  bad,  he  mistakes  domesticity  for  pro­ fundity. He  should  go  out  and  listen  to Richard  Strauss'  Sinfonia  domestica.
Nevertheless, I  opened   Intense   Plea­ sure. I read  a poem  called  "Eight  Inches of Snow." Mr.  McFadden  was struggling with  himself, asking,

Should  I allow myself the pleasure of writing  poems
when  the idea of being a poet sickens me?

I couldn't help  him  out  without denying him  pleasure. I turned elsewhere  in  the book. I read  happily that  Mr.  McFadden understood Wallace   Stevens'  dump; one of his poems says that  instead  of his

106
 writing far into  the night ... I should  be spending time
with  real people with  ugly fat & hairy ears.
His  "Meaningless Midnight Musings" go
on to declare :

I'm  no ant.  I'm  not trying  to build a perfect society.
I'm  all gross rotting imperfections of selfishness, I'm  interested in my own personal  world.

I recommend a dose  of Ezra  Pound.
Peter  Stevens  as poetry editor of The Canadian  Forum   must   be  hard   put   to keep   his  perceptions  about   him.  Never has  Canadian verse  been so dedicated to solipsism, and  he must  be battered by it. Judged by  his  new  book,  he  pretty  well has  kept  his  perceptions about  him.  But being   perceptive  and   changing  percep­ tion  into  poetry  are  two different  things. His  new  book,  "a  few  myths", following its  title,  must  be  put  in  lower  case.  The book is far  less like a hawk  than  a hand­ saw:   deliberate and  without flight.  The patterned and  exploded type  on some  of the  pages  is  easily  framed into  sequence. On   other   pages,   the   conventional  lines are  wordy  and  this is the  trouble.  This  is wordy  poetry,  willed  into  existence.  The linguistic counterpoint is everywhere; the vital  tension  is lacking. The result  is ex­ pository,   not   creative. The  poem  "Sas­  katchewan"  will   do   to   illustrate.   The poem  begins:

All skylocked,  this enormous  flatness holds Like a prehistoric beast a long machine Angularly unheroic.

The  poem concludes:

We'll  all drop  into deepening well of sky
Which,  patronizing all at last, will stoop
down
And  neatly folding  all the edges first of all
Will pick the prairie up, to swallow it whole
Like  an  oyster ...

REVIEW ARTICLES



and  so on, without inner  tensions,  music, persuasion.  Our   awareness  is verbal:

The  river, Lethed  by ice .. . numbed  by ice's tourniquet .. . Crocodile  logs sniff .. . sunflowers ... prance  .. .
insect  Altamira ...

The title  poem  escapes  the  linguistic fatality; so does most  of the  Vietnam "Warming  Up,    Tuning  In."  But   the book, and my unassigned  look at the sequential  new  one   called   "breadcrusts and    glass",    witness    only    a   pleasant­ enough, unmoving, deliberate  verse.
I wrote   a  review  of  Fred   Cogswell's first book. Twenty years ago?  Now comes an  eighth   book,  The Chains  of Lilliput. It issues from  the same press which  is flooding   us  with   other   books  by  other poets, fledglings and  otherwise, that prob­ ably  would  not  have  appeared  except  for the  guiding, generous hand   of  Cogswell. As all  hopeful poets  know,  the  reference  is to  the  Fiddlehead  Poetry  Books which Fred    Cogswell   edits.   The   series  is  the contemporary counterpart of  the Ryerson Chap-Books  edited   long  ago  by  Lorne  Pierce.  Like  that  older  series, the  present  one  is helpful and  unselfish  and  produc­ tive  and   far   too  prolific,  indiscriminate and   genial.   Its  benevolent  conservatism combined with  the way-out  indiscrimina­ tion  of the  self-adulatory Group  presses, the  togetherness makes  one  long  for  the days  when  it  was  hard  to  get  published  in  Canada. If genius  was stifled  in  those days  at  least  it  was  less brutal than   the present  overkill.
One  remembers with  pleasure much  of
Cogswell's  poetry.    The  latest   book   is genial  and   unpretentious; and,  alas,  flat and   of  startling linguistic   sogginess.  "A red-blood moon  low-hangs the  wood / against time's  ruthless, slow decay."  Other
 poems sound like that distorted prose currently named "found  poems" -as if the adhesion of the word "poems" could rescue the discovered from  its assigned vulgarity.    Cogswell   agrees   that    poetry won't  result from  plodding

through   Hansard seeking found  poems.

But  he  really  should  not  rhyme  "dawn" with  "corn" even  if  his  rhyme  is  trying not to be found out.
Mostly these days Pegasus  pulls a hack.
But  not always. Way  back  in  I963  (or  is that  yesterday?) Gwendolyn MacEwen wrote  that  as  the  horizons  of  the  world widen  for  her,  "the  poetry  moved  paral­ lel,  shifting,   forming  new   complexities and sudden  simplicities." Mostly  her work is   "to   chalk   out   quickly   the   peril   of beauty."  As  her   work   has   progressed, however, there  has appeared a dangerous tendency  to  devote  everything to inward complexity;  to   confine   repetitive  com­ munication to  the  demon   of  her  darker self, the  red  beast  who  moves  her  blood where  there  is  civil  war.  The pursuit is carried   even   into  an  elegy  on  someone  else. Her  poetry,  at those  times, is as ego­ centric as a dream.
That Miss  MacEwen is aware of  this
danger   is  proved    (and   proved   beauti­ fully)  by her  novel, King  of  Egypt, King of Dreams. The theme  of  the novel  is of the   wreckage   which   a   dream  imposes. The  plot  is based  on  the  heresy  of  Akh­ naten,  Pharaoh of  Egypt.  But  inner  exis­ tence  rather than  outward  excitement is the  true  battleground. And  so it  is with her  new  book  of  poems,  The Armies  of the  Moon. The inward voyages  are  con­ tinued, to shattered dreams and  primor­ dial mysteries, the lens

REVIEW ARTICLES



turns  in to the vivid zero of your dreams,
the  place where  nightmares burst  like bladders.

Not   too  happy   a  simile-and  there  is other evidence of the strained  metaphors which   have   marked  the  author's  work from the   beginning.  In  her  latest   book we find  it in her  fables of the seamstress, of  the   unseen   film  projector   run   by  a cruel  Technician, and especially in the coyness  of  her  Vacuum Cleaner:  "I dreamt I was vacuuming the universe" (Yes, males have the counterpart to this female  domain) .
What  does  not  help  these  fables  is a
new  lowering of  the  level of speech  into the colloquial. This  may bring  relief from
 the persistent uptight inner  world but it fatally tramples its reality.  And  does wit­ ness  literature,  those   dealings  with   the temporal world,  have  to  descend   to  flat statement?
But   Miss  MacEwen is  poet.  The  ex­ pository  is obliterated and  we have  such poems as "Hypnos",

and  the Enemy is where  he always was­
in the bleak lunar  landscapes of our mirrors.

Above all, she writes  her  series of Arcana wherein   the   return  is  to   her   ancient Egypt,  to the lovely Meritaton and the hapless  Smenkhare. The moving  lyricism of these nine poems is of the first intensity and   only   Gwendolyn  MacEwen  could have made us this gift.



VICTIMIZATION OR SURVIVAL

Phyllis Grosskurth

MARGARET  ATWOOD,  Surfacing. McClelland & Stewart, $6.g5.


IN  HER FIRST NOVEL, The Edible Woman, Margaret Atwood  seemed unable to  effect  a  resolution   between  a novel  of  manners and   an  expression   of her  essential  vision.  With  Surfacing,  she has   brilliantly  succeeded   in   creating a narrative style which  fuses content and form -a   quality  of   prose  comfortably close to the diction of her poetry.

I said  "It's a  heron.  You can't   eat  them." I couldn't tell how it had  been done,  bullet, smashed with a stone, hit with a stick. This would   be  a  good   place  for   herons,   they would come to fish in the shallow water, standing on  one  leg  and  striking  with  the long  spear  bill.  They  must  have  got  it  be­ fore it had  time to rise.

This  central  passage   from   Surfacing


108
 summarizes  themes   that   have   informed her  five books of poetry: anger  at wanton destruction; the dehumanization of people to   the   point   where    the   crucifixion  of other creatures elicits only  a morbid eagerness to record  it; and  the supine resignation of  the  witnesses  to  the  desec­ ration.
Surfacing    is   about   victimization -
both  external and   self-imposed. Atwood has   already  written  about  it   in   many poems,  particularly in one she  calls "The trappers" in The  Animals in That Coun­ try:

The  trappers, trapped
between  the steel  jaws of their answerless
dilemma, their  location,

REVIEW ARTICLES



follow,  stop,  stare down at dead eyes

In  Surfacing  the  narrator travels  north to search  for  her father, a recluse botanist, who  has  been  reported missing  from  the isolated  island  which  was once  her  home. She is accompanied by a married couple, David  and  Anna   ("She's my  best friend, my  best  woman friend;  I've   known  her two   months")   and   Joe,   a   potter   with whom   she  has   been   living   for   a  short time.  The others  have  offered  to go with her  because  they  are  making an  impro­ vised film called  Random Shots in which they  attempt  to  impale the  bizarre   va­ garies  of existence.
The tripartite structuring of  the  novel is an essential  key to an  understanding of the  developing self-awareness of  the  un­ named  narrator. The first part  is recorded  in  the  present  sense  because  she  has  lost her   temporal  and   emotional   hearings.  The  mythologized Canadian   landscape becomes  a  metaphor for  something that  somehow   got  mislaid   along   the   way­ innocence,   security,   peace.    Her    father had  once  said  that  there  was  nothing in the  north   but  the  past,  so  perhaps this journey  will be a re-charting of time  past. Possibly  she  can  erect   a  marker on  the spot   where   her  head   had   been  severed from  her  heart.
Everything   is   disturbingly   different until  they reach  the island. Here she takes over  efficiently and  naturally because  as a child she had  memorized its rules for survival, exemplified by the  manuals kept in  the  cottage-How To  Stay  Alive in the  Bush, Animal  Tracks  and Signs, The Woods  in Winter. At first  the  others  find everything "neat";  in  fact,  for  a  while  it is so much  of a  holiday  that  they  decide to stay on  for  another week. Absorbed  in their   own  hedonism, it  never   occurs  to
 them to consult  their  "hostess" who is withdrawing from  them  to a point  where she feels a menacing sense of entrapment by  a  decision   over   which   she  had   no control.
Part  II reverts  to the  past  tense as the characters, now  truly  in  extremis,   begin to  reveal  the  fear  that  fills their  hollow­ ness. The  "armour" (a  reiterated image)  with  which  they  have  fortified  themselves in  the  city, cracks  into  alarming fissures. Anna   continues to  apply   the  protective "vizor"  of   her   make-up,  but   the   true  desperation  of   her   marriage  to  David emerges in a situation where  they can  no longer cope with  their ever-changing rules of  who  is  to  play  victim   and   who  vic­ timizer. The narrator tries  to continue to work    at   the    "career"  she   had    been persuaded  to adopt in the city-an illus­ trator of translations of children's stories. Her   fabrications  are   now  distorted and grotesque  monsters.
Despite   her   longing    for   solitude   in which   to   pursue  her   quest,   her   com­ panions  are  necessary  because  they  help her   to  identify  the   enemy.  David   con­ tinues   the  ritualistic  gesture  of  shaking  his fist at  the  Americans fishing  out  the lake   ("Bloody  fascist   pigs"), but   "she" begins   to   see   that    he   and   the   other  Canadians are indistinguishable from  the Americans  in  dress, manner, and  speech: they  are  the   real   destroyers  with   their slogans,  their  laminated equipment, and their indifference to  the  creeping univer­ sal disease symbolized  by the dying white birches.
Her  relationship with  Joe  also  under­ goes a  series  of  changing  attitudes. He  had  first  been   attracted  to  her  because she  seemed  so  "cool", so  completely ac­ quiescent   in  non-commitment. His  phy­ sical  attractiveness and   his  work  are  the

109

REVIEW ARTICLES



only  things  that   define  him.  She  loathes his ugly pots, mutilated and slashed with holes  so  that   she  can't   even  put  flowers in  them   because   "the   water   would  run out  through the rips." Their basement apartment filled with these objects is an appropriate setting for aborted fertility. Joe,  too, begins to lose his nerve. In  order to seize some sort  of security,  he suggests that   they  get  married. When  she  rejects him,  his moodiness  stalks her  like a lurk­ ing  predator.
Against  this background of alienated relationships, she  withdraws into  her furtive search   for  her  father. A  ration­ alist,  he had  believed  everything could  be explained; a botanist, he admitted nothing that   could   not  be  classified.  Accordingly  she  searches  through  his  numerous dia­  grammed papers  for a key to his condition and  his whereabouts. Eventually she finds some  drawings of  Indian  rock-paintings. Her  first   reaction  is  that   he  has  gone mad; but  when  she finds a letter  from  an American academic, she realizes  that  her father had   been  abetting him  in  photo­ graphing the  paintings as classifiable arti­  facts.  But  the  level  of  the lake  has  been raised  by the  power  company, so she has to  dive  deep   below   the  surface   of  the  water  where  she  encounters only a float­ ing  image   of   death. Later   her  father's body is  recovered, weighted  down  by the camera  which  is as alien  to this environ­ ment as David's random shots.
There is no longer  any  necessity for pretence; and  Anna  now openly  describes her as "inhuman" because she has refused to play  the  game  according to their  rules. Having accepted the fact of her father's death, she  can  view  her  life in  terms  of





I IO
 the present  tense. Redemption lies through expiation,   exorcism,    and    fertilization. After  rejecting Joe  in  Part   II, she delib­ erately   lets  him   impregnate  her.  Then, just  as  they  are  about   to  depart  for  the city,  she   unrolls   the  film  into  the   lake and   flees  in   a   canoe,   a   refusal   to   re­ accomodate  herself   to  rules   and   values she  can   never   absorb.  It  is,  in  fact,   a more  affirmative act  than Marion's con­ sumption of her surrogate self at  the  end of The  Edible Woman.
Left  alone  on  the  island,  she  destroys
all   the   records   of   her   past.   Most   im­ portant of  all,  she  realizes  that  she  has been  looking  for  the  wrong  person.  It is her  mother, with  her  instinctual rapport with   what   is  truly   natural  who  should  have  been  the  object  of  her  search. Pre­  viously  she  had described   her  mother as either  fifty  years  ahead or  ten  thousand years   behind   her   time -a   true   earth­ mother. It is she  who  provides   her  with a  legacy  for  the  future. By  returning to the  primitive life of the woods into  which her  mother  has  been  re-incarnated,  she catches a  glimpse  of  what  she  might   do with  her life. She  had  denied  her essential nature when  she killed life by an abortion in   the   city.   Victimization  is  no  longer inevitable. Perhaps survival-and some­ thing more-can  be  achieved  with  Joe who  is still "only  half-formed."
This novel-like  all Atwood's writing
-is so  richly  complex that   a  review  of this  length can  do  no  more  than   sketch some  of  its aspects.  Exploration in  depth can   be  achieved  only   by  complete  im­ mersion in  her  work.  When  one surfaces,  the  world  looks startlingly new.

REVIEW ARTICLES


WRITER	AND SUBJECT

Herbert Rosengarten


ANDREAs SCHROEDER,  The  Late Man. The Sono  Nis Press,  1972. $6.gs.
AUDREY THOMAs,   Munchmeyer  and    Prospera  on   the   Island.   The  Bobbs-Merril
Company, Inc. $6.g5.


CONTEMPORARY  CANADIAN WRITERS, conscious  perhaps of a  need  to free  themselves  from  the  taint of literary colonialism,  are   in  the   forefront of   in­ novation, ready -perhaps too ready-to shed   old   skins   and    assume   new   ones. Andreas Schroeder's  collection  of  stories The   Late Man  provides a  good  example of  some  of  the  virtues   and   the  vices of this experimental spirit.  He  has set out  to create  a new style in short  fiction,  reject­  ing  (according to  the  publishers' blurb)  "the  rgth  century quality of reality  char­ acteristic of much  of the  literature hiding under the  protection of  'Canadian  Real­ ism'."  Disregarding the questionable logic of  such  a  statement, it  is  true  that   Mr.  Schroeder  has   an   acute   sense   of   the "unreality",  the   nightmare  lurking   be­ neath  the comfortable conventions of our daily lives; and  his rather disturbing view of  life is conveyed  in  stories  which  reject the  usual  conventions of  character  and plot    in   favour   of    Kafka-esque   non­ sequiturs and the techniques of surrealism. The result  is a collection which  provokes and   stimulates in  some  places,  but  per­ plexes  and  irritates in  others.
The stories  which   are  easiest  to  des­ cribe  are  those  which   contain  "content" along   traditional lines.  "The  Theft" re­ lates  the experience of a man who wakes up  in  his apartment to find  two  burglars  removing  his  belongings; and   when   he attempts to  resist, they  show  him  that  all
 his things bear the name of one of the "thieves." Here a dramatic situation and sharply-defined characters are created swiftly and  effectively; and  there  is just enough   of  a  twist   to  give  a  disturbing overtone  to the story. "The Connection" uses the  device  of  linguistic  confusion to describe the journey of a Mr. Derringer, bound  for  New  York: at  each  place  he arrives,  a  message  awaits   him-or  is it for him?  for  his name suffers a sea-change during his  travels,  from  Derringer to Derring, Farronger, Garroncton and Garotta;  and    the   messages   send   him from   New  York   to  Mexico,  and   finally Peru, where the story leaves him, now addressed   as  Senor   Tarotina,  travelling by donkey-cart towards another identity. Other stories  resist summary, because content and  structure are so intimately connected, as  in  "The  Meeting," where what  is apparently a  speech  to  an  audi­ ence on  the  subject of suicide, turns  into a  discourse  on  the  artifice   of   narration and  the possibility  of the narrator and  the audience   (or   reader)   changing  places. There is subtlety in these stories, and there  is power;  yet even  as one recognizes their  force  and  complexity,  one  experiences a certain  discomfort  caused   by  something other  than  the  sombre vision they present. The problem  is that, though each  story is effective  in  creating a  sense  of  the  mys­ terious, in upsetting narrative conventions or  expectations, as a group  they  seem  to


I I I

REVIEW ARTICLES



blur   together  in   the   mind,   to  become echoes of each  other, one story told many times. Perhaps this is the result of Mr. Schroeder's style, which  varies little throughout the book:  the cool, controlled prose   and    the   flat,   unemotional   tone create a uniformity of impression, a sameness reinforced by the choice in most cases  of  a  first-person narrator  lacking any distinctive qualities. The  urge to experiment also seems to become  an  end in  itself,  so  that  what  we are  sometimes asked   to  applaud  is  the  ingenuity and skill of the  performance, while content in the   usual  sense  is  of  secondary  impor­ tance.    But   despite    these   failings,   Mr.  Schroeder writes  with  commendable pre­ cision  and  economy;  and   his  ability  to create  haunting images  in  a few  words gives   his  writing  an   almost   poetic   in­ tensity  at  times.
Audrey  Thomas' new  book  might  also be designated "experimental;" but  the surreal  and  symbolic  in her work are sub­ ordinated to  larger patterns of  dramatic action    and    psychological    penetration. Mrs.  Thomas  uses  such   devices  as  the diary  "confession", dream sequences,  and waking   fantasies   to  convey  the  spiritual confusion   of  one   Will   Munchmeyer­ graduate  student,   pere  de   famille, and frustrated   novelist.   Munchmeyer's sense of   failure,   and   his   revulsion   from   an empty marriage, drive  him away from  his family,  in  the  first  instance to  a  diary, where   he  confides   his  loathing  for   his wife.  He sees  himself  as a  modem Gul­ liver,  trapped in  the  land  of  the  giants, and confronted by the sweaty pores of a merciless Glwndalclitch; but an  epigraph from  the  Inferno   suggests  that  Mrs. Thomas wants  us  rather to  see  Munch­ meyer as a latter-day wanderer traversing the  circles  of  Hell,   and  moving  up  to-

Il2
 wards   less-than-divine versions   of  Eden and   Beatrice.  At   the   end   of  the   first section,  having  parted from  his family, Munchmeyer is alone  and  depressed,  and his state  is mirrored in the faulty  gasoline advertisement which  flashes "Super-Hell" at  him  out  of  the  darkness.  The second section  presents a dream  episode  in which Munchmeyer is captured and  imprisoned in a department store, where  a mysterious young   man   tortures him   with   his  own fears  and  inadequacies, until  he manages to  take   refuge in   the   Mothers'  Room. The final section,  entitled  "Resurrection: Mr. and Mrs. Lodestone", describes Munchmeyer's return  to  confidence and self-respect, helped   by the  understanding and  affection of  Maria Lodestone, house­ wife  and  mother of  a  young  baby.  The book's  mixture of  psychological  and  reli­ gious  symbolism  is  rather  crudely   sum­ marised here;  but   in  structure  and   in narrative   detail,   Munchmeyer  has   the trappings of Christian epic. However, the parallels  are   not  forced   or  mechanical; Munchmeyer is allowed  to find  his Eden, but   he  is  still  l' homme   moyen   sensuel, troubled by unsatisfied  longings; he finds his  way  to   Maria,  but   she  is  someone else's  wife,  and   he  must   solace  himself with  fantasies, or with  the grosser charms of   Mavis    Marvell,  queen   of   Crescent Beach.  Munchmeyer is a sympathetic character because  his  rehabilitation  does not  make   him  a saint: he  continues to indulge   in    adolescent  daydreams,  in which  he  is by turns  the  lonely  but  suc­ cessful writer, the  pathetic down-and-out, the   cruel   and    inspired   artist;  and   his entanglement with  Mavis  hints  at  future tribulations-a return to the  Super-Hell he thought he had  escaped.
His    creator,  the    novelist    "Miranda
Archer", tells  her  own  story  in  Prospera

REVIEW ARTICLES



on  the   Island;   in   a   journal   covering seven  or  eight   months,  she   relates   the daily  events  of her  life during the  period of	Munchmeyer's	compos1t10n.	The strongly    circumstantial  quality  of   her narration,  with    its   many    allusions    to details   of   British    Columbian  life   and topography, suggests  an  autobiographical basis  for  the   story,  so  that   we  may  be tempted to  see  it  as  a  kind  of  "Writer's Diary" rather than  as  another  novel  in its  own   right. It  is  certainly  a  highly personal   account;  but   the   character  of Miranda is too completely realised  to  be regarded   simply    as   a   voice    for    the thoughts of  the real   author. In some ways   she   is   a   female    counterpart to Munchmeyer:  much   more  sophisticated, sensitive,    self-critical;   but,     like    him, haunted by fears  of inadequacy, potential failure,  departing  youth.    Munchmeyer retreats into  fantasy, a world  where  he is, temporarily at  least,  in  control; Miranda has taken  a more  positive  step  by retreat­ ing  to  an  island,  but  there she  still finds herself  wracked by guilt  and  uncertainty. Her  creative powers  are renewed  and  her self-confidence partly  restored   by her  re­ lationship  with   an   artist   who   has  also retreated   to   the   island   to   work,   and whom   she  dubs  "Prospero".  The   artist  comes   to   exercise   a   decisive   influence  over  her  imagination -as  well as arous­  ing   her   sexual   awareness -and   she  is drawn  to  him   by  his  calm,   methodical ordering of things. Despite his importance to  Miranda,  Prospero remains a  rather
 shadowy   figure:  Miranda  is  more  con­ cerned   with   the   analysis   of   her   own responses  to  him  than   with  the  creation of a rounded portrait; but  this externality endows  him  with   an  enigmatic quality, something which  presumably Mrs. Thomas wanted  to convey.
The literary parallels with Shakespeare's Prospero  are  few, and  deliberately played down; the characters themselves  discuss whether their  island  contains a  Caliban, but   reject   the  idea.  Nor  is  there   much stress laid on  the  device  of a novel about a novel, or on the similarities between Munchmeyer   and   his   creator,  though we are often  reminded of him  by  Miran­ da's   self-questionings  or   her   need    of reassurance  by   one   less   anxiety-ridden than herself. The  relationships between  a writer  and  his subject, between  "reality" and  artifice, are, one suspects, of as much  concern  to  Mrs.  Thomas as  they  are  to Mr. Schroeder; but  in  Munchmeyer and Prospera their  importance is hinted  at rather  than   made   a  dominant  theme: they contribute another level of possible meaning to a broader whole.  Mr. Schroe­ der's   impatience  with   traditional  tech­  niques   is  quite   understandable;  but   in fiction,    stylistic    innovation   does    not necessarily  lead  to  clearer   vision,  nor  is the  search  for  deeper  truths made  easier by the rejection of "realism" -Canadian or   any  other. Mrs.  Thomas  has  wisely chosen a middle course  between  tradition and   innovation, and   her   writing  is  the richer  for it.










113





PUBLISHING WITH INSPIRATION

PAUL-ANDRE BIDEAU, D'un  mur tZ  l'autre. MADE­ LEINE   OUELLETTE-MICHALSKA,   Le   feu  des saisons. YVES THERIAULT,  Le  dernier  havre. YVES  THERIAULT,   Cul  de  sac. CLAUDE JAS­ MIN,  Et  puis  tout  est  silence. All Les  Edi­ tions de !'Actuelle. n.p.

DESPITE THE AMERICAN TAKEOVER of two large firms amid great  lamentations in the last   few   months,  Canadian  publishing may   well   be  in   a  healthier  state   than ever   before.   The  dramatic increase   in small presses, each of which seems to be operating with  more  imagination,  cour­ age  and   inspiration  than   the  old  estab­  lished  houses  ever  had,  is surely  a  good sign.  And  what  is perhaps most  encour­ aging  is  that   the  phenomenon  is taking  place  simultaneously in both English  and French Canada.
Jean-Guy Pilon's  Editions  de 1'Actuelle is one of the  latest  arrivals  in the Quebec publishing world.   The   format, cover  il­ lustrations and  printing of the books Pilon has  so  far  released   are  uniformly  excel­ lent.   L'Actuelle  has  apparently  adopted the   policy   of  balancing  promising  new novelists-Paul-Andre  Bideau  and Madeleine  Ouellette-Michalska-against established writers  such as Yves Theriault and Claude Jasmin.
Bideau's D'un  mur  a l'autre  is an  ex­
perimental novel consisting mainly  of two monologues.  Madeleine  Ouellette-Mich­ alska's  Le  feu  des  saisons is the  story  of of the  thwarted love of a young Montreal girl and  a  French immigrant, set against
 the climatic correlative of the Quebec winter  and  summer. Both  novels explore the ancient problem of communication between  individuals, and  both  reveal genuine sensitivity  to language and  char­ acter, although with  the  uneven  success to be expected  of beginning writers.
By  contrast, Yves   Theriault's  two
books,  Le dernier  havre  and  Cui  de sac, and   Claude  Jasmin's  Et   puis  tout   est silence (first published in I 959, then  again in I g65)   are   marked  by  polished   and even  craftsmanship. Theriault's  capacity to produce book after  book  (some 40 volumes  to date) of  undiminishing qual­ ity  has  long  been  one  of  the  marvels  of Quebec writing.
Jasmin's and   Theriault's three   novels all  employ   the  same   basic  technique­ flashbacks   by  a  narrator  who  is  at  the point   of  death. Cul   de  sac  is  about   a Quebec  engineer who  achieves   interna­ tional  success and  fame, then  loses every­ thing   because  of  alcoholism. His  mono­  logue  is  delivered  while  he is lying  help­ less at  the  bottom  of a ravine,  gazing into the   sky   at   a   hawk   which   periodically dives and  tears  away  part  of his flesh.
Thematically the  book  is far  from  ori­ ginal.  It is  based  on  Jacques  Maritain's idea  of "le  don  de  soi" -giving of  the self-which   has  inspired  a  number of Canadian  novelists, Robert Charbonneau and  Morley Callaghan in particular. The protagonist, like  so many  of his  counter­ parts  in  Canadian fiction,  is  psychologi­ cally  deformed by his  repressive  upbring­ ing-"Etait-ce    un   vieux fond  de jansenisme qui  lui  imposait de  nous  voir comme  des   enfants  plutot  que  des  hommes?" Quebec Jansenism again  rears its ugly head.  The hero  is trapped by life, by  the  realization of  his own  mediocrity as a  human being  and  by the  existential

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



vacuum. In  other  words,  he is almost  the archetypical Canadian hero.  The  best tribute one can  accord  to Theriault's  skill as  a  novelist,  then,   is  that   he  is able  to take such time-worn material and still produce a fascinating book.
The  performance is repeated in Le dernier  havre, which  deals  with  the com­ mon problem  of enforced retirement after an  active  life. An old fisherman, living in uselessness with  his  son  and  condescend­ ing  daughter-in-law, decides  to  recondi­ tion  secretly  an  abandoned  fishing  boat and   to  die  as  he  has  lived  rather  than waste  away.  Reading Theriault's two novels one after  the  other, it is intriguing to  see  him   move   from   the   mind   of  a world-traveled, well-educated engineer more  or  less in  the  prime  of life  to  that of an  old  man  who  knows  only  his little village  and  the  sea.  The author has  im­ mense  powers  of empathy. The engineer  rings  true   in  every  respect, and  so does the  old  fisherman. Vocabulary,  diction,  particular details  of the trade, psychology and  atmosphere are  all convincing. In  Le dernier  havre  one  can  smell  the  inviting  pure  salt air, and  one can feel the mount­ ing excitement of  the old man  as his boat takes shape  for the final  voyage. One  can also appreciate the hero's observations on the small-town  hypocrisy surrounding him. Old  age provides the freedom  of complete honesty; he can  chuckle  to him­ self  when  his daughter  is  scandalized by the  advent of  the  mini-skirt and  observe that  it is about time a man  could  see how these  gorgeous  young  things  are  put  to­ gether.
The protagonist of Claude Jasmin's Et
puis tout  est silence looks back on his life as he is lying  pinned  under the  beams  of a collapsed  barn.  Descriptions of the working-class areas  of  Montreal are  rich
 and  accurate. Also convincing is Jasmin's portrayal  of a young  Quebecker reacting against  his family, his acquaintances, his society  and  the  religion  which  had  been thrust   upon  him.  He  is a  French-Cana­ dian    Holden    Caulfield,   searching  for meaning and  rejecting what he discovers  to  be phoney.  But  just as he is physically  trapped under  a pile of  heavy lumber, he is psychologically  trapped under   the  col­ lapsed edifice of  his past. When  finally he reaches  the  point  of  prayer, he addresses himself   to   "un    Dieu   que,   cette    nuit,
j'invoque   a  rna   guise  en   lui  disant   du
fond  du  coeur  que  sa  volonte  bizarre  et
inexplicable se fasse ... " Thy  bizarre  and inexplicable will be done!
Anton   Chekhov,  commenting  on  the
art  of fiction  in a letter  to a friend, once remarked   that   the  main   key  to  success lay in one special talent  possessed by his grandmother. The old  woman  could  tell a  story  in  such  a  way  that  everyone  lis­ tened,  held  by the  narrative interest  until  the  last  word  was  uttered. In  the  three  novels  we  have  glimpsed   at,  both  Yves Theriault and  Claude Jasmin,  whatever criticism  one  might feel  inclined  to make  about  lack  of  originality  and  profundity, prove  once  again   that  they  have  a  large  measure   of   the   special   talent  of   Che­ khov's  grandmother.
RONALD SUTHERLAND

KENNETH LESLIE

KENNETH   LESLIE,    The    Poems   of   Kenneth
Leslie.  The Ladysmith Press,  $3.25  paper,
$6.95 cloth.

IN  HIS POEM "Street Cry"  in  the   1938 volume  By Stubborn Stars,  Kenneth  Les­ lie  called  attention to  his  isolation  as  a poet largely  without an audience:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



I build  my stand  here in the market-place and show my wares, but no one stops to
buy....

Although that  collection  won  the Gover­ nor General's Award  in 1938, his "wares" have  continued to go unnoticed, particu­ larly  in  Canada, up  to  the  present.  The  publication of a  book of  poems  from  his four  volumes  of the  193o's, along  with  a number of  previously  uncollected   works written since, must  be regarded as one of the events  in Canadian letters  in the past year, for  it grants public  and  critics an opportunity  to   decide   whether  or   not Leslie finally merits  greater accolade than one  page  in The  Penguin Book of Cana­ dian Verse.
While  it is true  that  Leslie has much  in
common  with   his  Canadian  contempo­ raries,    it   is   probably  with   his   friend  Robert Frost   that   he  bears  closest  com­ parison.  It is more  than  in  the  matter of association  with  a region, Frost with  New England and  Leslie with his native  Nova Scotia,   and   of   values   that   have   their roots in the region and their  ramifications wherever man  lives. The  only way a poet can  make  his  audience perceive  such  ab­ stractions  as   beauty   is  through  sensible things,  and  Leslie  is at  his best  when  he adequately uses the things  Canadian, and  especially  Maritime, that   he  knows  best
-sea and  cliffs, "cod  lines on the floor",
porridge,  the   feeling   of  the  entrapped fish. Beyond this, there  is a similarity  with Fr0st  in manner, sometimes  in tone. Les­ lie's "The Ski Runner" (from Windward  Rock,  1934,  his first  book), is  a  kind  of hybrid    "Stopping   by   Woods"- "Road Not    Taken"   poem.   There  are   Leslie pieces  that   do  not  measure   up  to  Frost counterparts:    "Requiescam"   (from Windward   Rock),  for   instance,  plays with  death in somewhat the same way as

116
 "Stopping by Woods"  but  is utterly lack­ ing in  the force  of surprise. But "The Ski Runner", though lacking Frost's subtlety, is more  muscular than  Frost,  as the  skier contemplates

Two  ways for home : one undulating and slow,
the other  sheer and swift;  how shall I go?

The Leslie  sonnet  continues as a  power­ ful statement of the  need for  the mind  to succumb on occasion  to the indispensable intuition of the  body.  This is not  to sug­ gest   that   Leslie  is  as  superb  a  poet  as Frost; few poets in  the twentieth century have   been.  It is,  however,   to  say  some­ thing of  which  Leslie  can  be  justifiably proud :  that  in  some of his poems  he can hold  his own with his friend.
There are serious  weaknesses in Leslie's early  work,  of  course.  Sometimes he  can find  the  appropriate imagery  to carry  the burden of his traditional insight  (in, for example, "Poor  Herbert",  in  the  Wind­ ward   Rock   group),  but   too   often   the binding of  the sonnet  form  cuts painfully into  the  religious  and  love  lyrics, and  he will   pay   triteness   for   the  exigencies   of form  ("when one but breathes your name  my  limbs  grow  weak,/ my  marrow turns  to  water, ... "). The  problem with   the early  pieces  is perhaps  that  Leslie  is too willing  to indulge himself  in form  to  the  detriment  of sense, a luxury  no poet  can afford;  as  is  remarked to  the  hedonistic lady  in "Amos and  the  Lady," one might  say to him,  "Could you but know enough to know your sinning.... "
Yet   even   in   the   early   poems,   Leslie
sometimes  conveys   a   delicate  sense   of mood   through the  precise  image; to  de­ scribe   a  profound  bereavement, he  ob­ serves  quietly, "The light  on  the foam  is a  burned-out star." And  with  the  poems

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



of   Lowlands   Low   ( r935),   among   the stock  rhyming images   there   are  experi­ ments   with   the  instantaneous  insight  of imagistic   pieces   ("Wild   Eyes",  for  ex­ ample,  or  "The Curse of  Song"). There is a loosening of the sonnet  form  to marry  more   securely   the   basically   traditional sound   patterns to  the  sense,  and   Leslie fashions  some  memorable lines,  such  as this  description  of the  oppression of Mil­ ton's daughters by a father who places

... his name above
whatever  wish may ache  their  pulsing
throats,
whatever  rage may clench  their  inkstained
hands,
rolling the billows of his cosmic anecdotes
over and  over their  muttered sharp
demands.
In  By Stubborn  Stars, especially  in the sonnets, Leslie most successfully and with seeming  ease makes form  the willing mis­ tress of meaning. There is still, in general,  too  much   dependence  upon  abstraction
--life, the  soul,  death,  love,  freedom­ and  sometimes  he seems banal   (as in the brief sense of tree-ness he proffers  in "The Tree"),  but   now   he  frequently  weaves the  abstractions into  networks  of sensible imagery;  and    the   rhyme    and   rhythm  mostly work  unobtrusively to imply  what  Leslie  has  to  say  about the  abstractions. Now  he  is  capable of  composing even  a simple  nature sonnet  that  is a pure  lapi­ dary  piece:  in  it  the  day  "slipped out  of the  web  of  her  fog-wet  gown"  and  lives deeply, looking "through  the  lucent panes/ of  maple   leaves".   He  is  capable now  of the  quick  slash  of  perception, as in "Acquisitiveness":

How different here in my net, bright one of the shadowed depths!
How dull and  dry your scales,
how limp your body.
Oh swift and lithe  and  glittering!
Why did  I tempt  you here?
 One  of the  best poems  in the  new  col­ lection  is an  exact,  caustic  little study  of "A Certain Liberal", in a loose, five-beat­ line  sonnet.   Leslie  carries  through  with admirable  completeness a   conceit   of  a commander who  can  deal  with  a  hypo­ thetical  storm, but  who, when  faced  with the actual, "cries  out 'abandon ship!'  and fouls  the  ropes/ and  carries  tales  against  the  hard-eyed  captain." But  most  of  the previously uncollected "New  Poems" rep­ resent  a  falling away  from  the  consider­ able  peak  of power  Leslie attained in  By Stubborn  Stars. It is fitting  for Leslie the man,  but  not  so for  Leslie the  poet,  that The  Poems of Kenneth  Leslie should conclude  with  an endless  poem, "O'Mal­ ley to the  Reds", that  attempts to recon­  cile Christianity with Communism and  is too  much  an  essay  in  rhyme  to  support the body of his work.
But   no  single   poem   can   destroy   the
effect of the volume.  Had  Leslie not been a  singer,  farmer, teacher, preacher, taxi driver,  and  editor, had  he not  dedicated much  of himself  to politics -even  earn­ ing  the  distinction of  being  declared an eminent fellow  traveller by Life magazine in  1949-he  might  have  been  a greater poet;  but  the  humanity  that  he  brought to  all  those  pursuits and  that  he learned through them  is what  is  most  clearly  re­ flected  in  his  poetry  and what  makes  it a  pleasure  to  read. Like  the fallen  leaves in  "The  Old   Man",  which   are  stirred with  a  walking  stick,  there  is something elemental and  softly human that  Leslie's poems  stir   in   a  reader,  and   he  knows that: " 'Listen,' he  said,  'they  are  whis­ pering.'"

ALAN  R. SHUCARD





117

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



AT A DEAD END

STUART  MAC IN NON,   Skydeck. Oberon, $2.50. GEORGE MCWHIRTER,  Catalan  Poems. Oberon,
$2.50.
TOM  MARSHALL, Magic  Water.  Quarry, $2.50. B.P. NICOL, ABC. Oberon, $2.00.

EVERY SERIOUS POET must   have   hope that  his work  will give something new to poetry,  that  his own  uniqueness  will  cre­ ate   in   his  work   that    qualche   cosa   di speciale  insisted  upon  by Pound. The  al­ ternative  is  stalemate for  the  poet  and redundancy for his art.
These  four  poets -all of them  capable
manipulators of  words -appear  to  be finding  such  a  stalemate almost  inescap­ able.  The   most  distressing  plight is that  of  George   McWhirter,  who  has  written in  Catalan   Poems  a  collection  of  exqui­  sitely  sculptured  impersonal lyrics which would  have  been startling and  impressive in  the  early  I g2o's.  But  it  is a long  time since  Pound's  "Medallion", since  Eliot's  Sweeney  poems,  since  the  McGill   Fort­ nightly  or Canadian Mercury. The  mask has been  worn often  and  well, and  much better  than   here  by  McWhirter. These poems are no more than deftly crafted anachronisms -stiff,  cold,  and   timeless to the  point  of utter  irrelevance.
With  Stuart MacKinnon's Skydeck  we advance a decade. The only mask here is that  of  the  poet  as  public  speaker  com­ mitted    to   "address"  his   audience.  The  subject    matter  is  the  poet's   ideas   and experiences, but,  as  in  Spender, Auden,  Layton, or  Klein  of the late  thirties and war  years,  highly  edited  and  organized. Poems  like  these,   with   rather  ordinary form   and   conventional   viewpoint,  de­ pend   for  their  authenticity on  freshness of  idea.  MacKinnon's ideas  are  neither  novel nor exciting,  as in "Sun  Time":

118
 Perhaps our dreams  are like that  instant  on the sundial,
a kind of zenith of fulfilment

when  the shadow  is broken and  there  is no past or future, only the calm clear light
of our  own becomingness.

Tom  Marshall, unlike McWhirter or MacKinnon, at  least appears to know the danger of stalemate and  be putting up  a struggle. Nevertheless, the  bulk  of Magic Water is pastiche, with  undisguised echos of  editorial  Layton  or,  as  here,  imper­ sonal, pattern-making Smith.

To  the  right
a green  man from  the bush
grasps  a maiden.

To  the left,
contrasted, a boy lightly
shakes down  an apple.

Flora  smiles.
(Her  ageless petal-flesh.)
Green  death

reaches  from  wood behind  which  burns dusk, green sky.

The  only  poem   which   seems  authentic Tom   Marshall is  the  opening  fourteen­ part   sequence, "Politics",  where   he  ap­  pears   to  trust   completely  his  own  ideas and   perceptions and  does  not  ask  them to  conform to  models  of wit, objectivity, or "Poetik" form.
The one  poet  here  who  is fully  facing
up  to  the  problem   of  overcoming  hack­ neyed   and   redundant  expression  is  the concretist  bp  Nichol.  He  tells  us  on  the first  page   of  ABC,  "Poetry   being  at   a dead    end    poetry    is   dead" -a   thesis which  the  work  of  McWhirter, MacKin­ non, and  Marshall only too sadly tends  to confirm.   Nichol's  solution   is  to  give  up linguistic expression and with it the entire  task  of   projecting an  authentic self.  In

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ABC  he   returns  to   the   basic  form   of written language, the letter, to create concrete poems extended from  its shapes. His originality is both  in the concept and in  the  wit of the  resulting glyphs.
Ironically, despite   this  originality, the
aesthetic of  Nichol's   poems  is essentially the  same  as that  of George  McWhirter's
-the creating of static, impersonal form. And  it  may  be  just  as  limited. That is, while   Nichol   himself   may   not   reach   a "dead  end",  the   concrete  poem   may prove   to  have   no  more   flexibility   than any other  specialized  aesthetic -whether the  imagist,  the metaphysical, or  the neo­ classical. Any aesthetic can  become habit­ ual, or as Nichol  puts it, "dead end", and require a  breaking of  its  orders for  the achieving of significant work.
Nichol's  book is by far  the most engag­ ing  of  the  four  reviewed   here,  but  that  fact   may  be due   as  much   to  the  other  poets' failures  as to his success. I seriously doubt  that  poetry  will ever  be  at  a dead end.  Poets  like  McWhirter  may  be, and sub-forms such  as concrete  may  come  to one,  but  poetry  itself  has  possibilities  as infinite   as  the  potentiality  of  poets  who will write  it.  At least  three of these writ­  ers should  go back and  look for theirs.

FRANK DAVEY


SPIDERS AT WORK

ROBERT KROETSCH,  JAMES  BACQUE and  PIERRE GRAVEL,  Creation. new  press,  $3.50.

IN  THE  INTRODUCTION to  creation, a writers'  notebook   and  manifesto of three embryo artists  in the  process of gestation, Robert  Kroetsch, both   editor  and  con­ tributor, refers to the significance of  webs created by gods  and  men.  By  examining
 the quality  of the  microcosm  and  macro­ cosm   of   literary  webs,   three   writers, Kroetsch, James Bacque  and  Pierre  Gra­  vel,  who   came   together   in   the   "salon terrible" at  67 ISpadina in Toronto in the sixties, and  three writer-critics, Margaret
Laurence,  Milton   Wilson   and   J.  Ray­
mond   Brazeau   attempt, in   creation,   to
reflect  the  patterns of  a  growing  Cana­
dian  literature.
This geographically and culturally heterogeneous trio  (Kroetsch from  the west,  Bacque   from   Ontario and   Gravel from   Quebec)   endeavour  to   find   the unity  in  multiplicity through examining the various  aspects of the "dome of many coloured  glass that  stains  the  white  radi­ ance of eternity." Their contention is that  only  through looking  at  our  own  reflec­ tion in the  (literary) mirror can we know what  we are.  The mirror of  the work  in progress, with  all its blemishes and  points of beauty  glaring on the  page,  has a valid function so long  as  it  is saved  from  nar­  cissism and  the  reader   is not  left  staring in the artists'  toilet  bowl, afterwards.
creation is rough  and  varied like the Canadian  landscape, and  that   is its  sal­ vation.  Some  of the  pieces are  as smooth  and   polished   as  river   rocks,  and  some, honestly   evaluated   in    the    discussions which  follow  each  of  the  three sections, are  jagged  and  unformed. There is a re­ freshing  candour in the willingness of the three  writers  to  open  up  to  this  kind  of examination.  The  book is alive and  grow­ ing, and  the  reader  shares  the experience of the  birth  of  individual works and  of a collective consciousness.
There is a oneness  to the web which persists in spite of superficial differences. The  quality of  voice  changes   from  man to  man,  language to  language, but  there is  a  common   compulsion,  which   comes

119

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



from  a shared  experience in the new (Canadian)  eden.   The   shared   myth   of the  Promised  Land, which experience has twisted  into  bitterness,  is central to the disillusionment of Kroetsch's brothers in "That Yellow  Prairie Sky",  Jack  in Bacque's  A   Man  of   Talent,  Yves   in La  Corrosion, and   to  the  prairie  politi­ cian,  who  was  supposed   to  embody   the properties  of   the   messiah   during  the Canadian   drought   and   depression,    in Kroetsch's "Election  Fever".   Kroetsch's messiah  is an undertaker.
Caught between  the historical  past and
present, most of the characters become either  comic  or  grotesque in  the  inability to balance the mythic energies of creation and  generation. The problem  is focused in  A Man of Talent and  La Corrosion  in political  revolution against  the status quo, and    emotional   revolution    against    the male   parent who  represents   an  impedi­ ment  to growth. However, the past is part  of  the  present, "ne  rien  oublier", and  it cannot be expiated by violence.
The result  of the  failure  of reason  and violence  is a kind  of ennui.  In  La  Corro­ sion,  we  are   bored   by  the  paralysis   of action,  the   constancy  of   snow  and   the interminable lighting of  cigarettes. Noth­ ing  changes. "11 etait  inutile  de  contin­ uer."   In   all   three  writers,   the   residual legacy  of  the  American frontier is mani­ fested. Violence and sexuality are the ways of   the   mythic  hero,   who   is  ultimately comic and  impotent. Mounted and  armed  with  pistol  and  penis, he wanders,  parody  of    the    knight    of   chivalric    romance, through the  complexities of the web, only to strangle in it.
The hero  and  the  writer  keep on mov­ ing,    Kroetsch   to    the    United    States,  Bacque   and   Gravel,   like  Henry  James  before  them, to Europe, but  they are  still

120
 part   of  the  web  that   wove  them.  In  his discussion with  Margaret  Laurence, Kroetsch  acknowledges  the   dry   prairie soil that  is the  medium for  his creativity. There is a preoccupation with  landscape, with   dirt   bitter   and   fertile,   in   all   the works of fiction  in creation. " ... j'aimer­ ais  aller  planter rna  verge  dans  un  trou de  terre  molle  et  y deposer  mon  germe." The  new  celluloid   myth  is  juxtaposed
in  the  stories  and  poems  with  traditional
values. The media  of the  new technology, best  utilized  in  Leonard Cohen's  Beauti­ ful Losers, are  reflected  in philosophy and style,  or  voice.  In  "the  truth shall  make you   free'',  from   Bacque's  A   Man    of Talent, Jack  articulates a common prob­  lem:

it's  all a giant  TVscreen and  we're on  it
we are  not even the shadows on the cave­
wall  anymore,  but  a  million  times  more  re­
mote,  the  electrons dance   for  us, and  soon
we shall  dance  for them

There is a preoccupation with  the film, illusion  or  reality,  as mirror and  as liter­ ary  device.   Kroetsch  and  Laurence  dis­ cuss the  delicate balance  between  dream  and  nightmare in "the fiction  that  makes us  real". It  is  a  grave  responsibility  to shape    the   fiction   that    is   the    reality.  creation   is   about    the   morality  of  that responsibility. The  anxiety  of choice  that confronted  Hamlet  confronts  the   con­ temporary artist. What is to be saved and  what   is  to  be  thrown  away?  Kroetsch's "Stone  Hammer  Poem"   is  the  quintes­ sence of the problem.

The  poem is the stone
until  it is shaped
like the stone hammer, the  maul

UNDAROGERS

BOOKS  IN REVIEW



Nl SOCIOLOGUE Nl CRITIQUE

AXEL   MAUGEY,   Poesie   et   sociltl  au   Quebec (1937-1970). Les  Presses  de  L'Universite Laval,  coil.  "Vie  des  Lettres canadiennes".

MALGRE LES HAUTS patronages dont  elle s'honore (Jean Cassou, Edgar Morin, Georges  Friedmann, Jacques Berque), la these  d'Axel   Maugey, qui  en  eut  l'idee lors   d'un  premier sejour   ici,  en   I964, risque   de  decevoir  et  les  sociologues  et les litteraires, et l'hexagone franc;ais et l'Hexagone quebecois. La  sympathie de l'auteur est  evidente.  Malheureusement, sa connaissance du  milieu  et  de  l'epoque demeure partielle, superficielle.
La documentation est souvent de deux­
ieme  ou  de  troisieme main;  les  erreurs fourmillent, des  dates  aux   tableaux, des
notes  et  references a la  bibliographie. Le
sigle  F.L.Q.  devrait  renvoyer au   Front de liberation du  Quebec, pas seulement a
la Federation des liberaux du  Quebec; la
F.T.Q. n'est   pas  affiliee  a la   ( defunte)
C.T.C.C., mais au  C.T.C.  Projections
liberantes  ne   fut   pas   redige    "par  un groupe de  jeunes  poetes"    ( p.  2  et  8g), mais  par   Borduas seul.  Paul-Marie  La­ pointe   n'est   nullement  "en   quete   d'un  monde vierge"  (p.  88)   dans  son  premier  recueil.  II  est  bizarre de  classer  Maurice Lebel,   Julia  Richer  et   Jean   Hamelin parmi les critiques jeunes  ou  qui "se sont fait   recemment connaitre" (p.  74); de voir   "la   fraction  'laique'  de   la   classe dirigeante"   s'exprimer   dans    L' Action nationale   (p.   23). Les   poetes  de   Parti pris-auxquels    !'auteur  veut   bien   ac­ corder  "leurs  moments de   lucidite" - n'etaient  pas   tous   "membres  du   Parti  socialiste"   (Iequel  ?) , ni tous  "des  epi­ gones qui  plagient le genial  Maiakowski"
 (p.  Io6-ro8). II  n'est  pas  prouve que Liberte  regroupe "peu  d'intellectuels de gauche" (p.  44), que  Revolution  quebe­ coise soit allee  "plus  loin"  que  Parti pris, etc.
La seule nouveaute de Poesie et societe au Quebec reside  dans  ces interpretations mal fondees et  dans  des expressions dout­ euses comme  "l'equipe de la solitude" (p.
70)  ou  "le  jansenisme de  la  pensee  am­
biante" (p. 77), ou encore  tel paragraphe ou  la  tautologie succede   a la  contradic­
tion:  "II  appartiendra au  mouvement de L'Hexagone de structurer avec plus de coherence  le milieu  des poetes  en accueil­ lant  des  poetes  de  toutes  tendances. En effet,  on  peut  imputer  l'echec du  Refus global aux   difficultes  que   rencontrerent les membres   du  mouvement automatiste dans leur entreprise" (p. go). Par ailleurs,  ce qui parait juste et interessant n'est  pas neuf:   au  chapitre des  ideologies,  mieux vaut  lire  Rioux,  Falardeau ou  Dumont; au   chapitre des  theories  et  methodes litteraires, mieux  vaut  lire  Les Chemins actuels de  la  critique  (Pion), ou  meme son appendice, la  bibliographie commen­ tee de Dominique Noguez  (cite ici comme  auteur du  livre!).
Restent   deux   chapitres, les  plus  con­ siderables  de chaque volet de ce diptyque socio-critique. Dans  le  premier,  !'auteur enquete sur   le  milieu  d'origine,  les  in­ fluences,   le   budget,  etc.,   de   77  poetes quebecois   qu'il   repartit  en  "2 I  femmes
-soit   26,  3%; s6   hommes-soit  72,
7%", laissant   sans  doute I%  a !'And­
rogyne.  On   compte  un   bouddhiste, un
pantheiste et  un  socialiste   ( comme  reli­
gion)'  a  cote   de   I4   catholiques  prati­
quants   ( dont    7   femmes),  parmi   nos
poetes  contemporains. 22  ont  eu une enfance  difficile. "II  appert que la grande majorite  des  poetes   est  convenablement

121

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



remuneree"'  conclut-on avec  optimisme (p. 6g)  du  fait  que  ceux qui sont  profes­ seurs  ou  joumalistes re oivent
ment  de  $8,000  a $15,000  (mais  ce sont
surtout  le  psychiatre  et  le  directeur de la  Bibliotheque nationale d'Ottawa qui font  ici pencher Ia balance) . 11 me semble que   le  sociologue   aurait  dQ  etudier de plus pres les problemes  d'ooition et de diffusion   ( ses  "Precisions sur  le  public" ne  sont   guere   precises) ,  la   lecture,   la critique et l'enseignement de la poesie, la difference entre  les  poetes  de  Quebec et ceux  de  Montreal  ( cf.  Ia-dessus  Michel van Schendel dans  Liures et auteurs cana­ diens 1965, p. 15).
Le demier chapitre se presente  comme
une  "etude  thematique" de  !'oeuvre de dix  poetes  importants. 11 s'agit  en fait  de tableaux descriptifs (poeme  par  poeme) et  recapitulatifs  (recueil  par  recueil) devant "permettre aux chercheurs une formulation objective et efficace de la problematique  en   poesie  quehecoise   de
1947  a  rg67''   (p.  231). M.  Maugey  est bien  bon.   Les  "chercheurs" lui  sauront gre d'apprendre, par  exemple,  qu'il  est question dans  Le  Soleil sous la mort  de "vie,   paix   par    opposition  a   la   mort, guerre, recherche d'une  parole  nouvelle, menace atomique, presence  de  Dieu"  (p.
233) .  Voudront-ils plus   de   precision? Vie, amour, mort, "vie  agonisante", "vie par  opposition ala mort" (p.  221-222), leur  enumerera !'imperturbable  analyste­ synthetiseur, qui  dira  d'ailleurs a peu pres la meme  chose de Brault  ou de Chamber­ land,    Prefontaine  ayant   droit   pour   sa part  cinq  fois a  "vie  agonique" ( il  vient apres  Miron). Bref,  un  beau  sujet  gache par  de  mauvaises  methodes. Une  public­  ation  inutile.

LAURENT MAILHOT


122
 KWAKIUTL  WORLD

Cuests  Never   Leave   Hungry-The   Auto­ biography    of   James   Sewid,   a   Kwakiutl Indian.   MeGill-Queen's   University   Press,
$3.95·

THIS BOOK, first  published by Yale  Uni­ versity  Press  in  1969,  has  now  been  put out  in a paperback edition by a Canadian university. Another instance of  Canadian academic initiative.
James Sewid  is a  village  leader  (Alert Bay, British  Columbia), a prominent member of the  Native  Brotherhood, and a one-time associate  editor of The  Natiue Voice. His autobiography, superficially another story of a self-made man,  is more interesting than   most  novels. Mr.  Sewid, at  the  urging of an anthropologist named Spradley, talked  his life story  into  a tape recorder.  Mr.    Spradley  then   boiled   it down  to publishable length  and  corrected some grammatical errors.
One  should   be grateful for  this  neces­
sary  editing job,  I suppose,  but  Spradley has made us pay for our  pleasure by forc­ ing on us a thirty-page appendix in which Mr. Sewid  is treated as a case of "cultural adaptation". It reads  like the  report  of a prison  psychiatrist and  is one of the most appalling examples of  Yankee  effrontery I  have  yet  come  across. It is interesting and  instructive to see how a human being  (Mr. Sewid is a warm, easy and  accessible person  and  an important figure in British Columbian  local  politics)   can  be turned into   a  laboratory  specimen. "In   recent research   on   the   achievement  motive, a projective  test   was   developed    that   has been    used   cross-culturally   to   quantify different degrees  of the  achievement mo­ tive.  The  procedure, which   was  devel­  oped   by  David   McClelland and  his  co­ workers   (McClelland et  al.  1953. Atkin-

BOOKS  IN  REVIEW



son,  1958)   was  used  with  James  Sewid. The    set   of   pictures   chosen ... "  Mr. Spradley also  tested   Mr.  Sewid's  intelli­ gence.  All  marvellously lunatic  and  La­ putan, but  then   one  realizes  with  grow­ ing dismay  that  people  like  Mr.  Spradley  have  a  great   deal   of   power  these  days. Today the  reserve;  tomorrow the  world.
Not  that  there  is anything wrong in generalizing about modern Kwakiutllife on the  basis of this book. Mr.  Sewid con­ siders  himself   a  representative  man: "I realize  that   I have   gone  through  many things  in  my  life  and  I  think  lots of my people  can  learn   from  my  experiences." What  stood  out  for  me  was  the  manner in which  traditional Kwakiutl oral  litera­  ture  has  influenced  Mr.  Sewid's  manner of looking  at  his own life; it is this which makes   his  book   an   offshoot   of  ancient British  Columbian  literary forms.  He  be­ gan  life as  a  boy  of  high  potential rank at Village  Island, but  later,  in Alert  Bay, he   found    himself    a   scorned    outsider. "Alert Bay was a Nimpkish village and  I was  half-Kwiksutainuk and  half-Mama­ lilikulla". It  is  a  constant  theme   in  the traditional stories  of  the  coast.  He  spent much   of   his   boyhood   with   his  grand­ mother Lucy,  who  was  "a very  religious woman, Anglican". "The most important thing  that  she told me from  the Bible was that   I should   be  faithful to  my  elders".  The   emphasis  is   perfectly  traditional: Mr.   Spradley   glances   at   this   fact,   but rejects  "elders" for the carefully inhuman phrase  "authority figures"   and  refers  to "submission" rather  than  "faithfulness", an  example of the  brutalizing effect of anthropological  jargon.    "She   told   me many  of the  Bible stories  and  my favour­ ite ones were  about Joseph  being sold by his  brothers and   the  story  of the  flood."  These   are   the   Bible  stories  which   are
 among   those   closest   to   themes   in   the native  tradition. The  way in which James Sewid  recounts his  rise  to  a  position  of high   respect   among  the   native   peoples shows a profoundly traditional mode  of thought. Even   his  pride   in  his  achieve­ ments  has a certain formal quality and  is not  offensive.  Life  is a   journey   towards wisdom   and   maturity,   each   step   cele­ brated    by   a   ritual.   Is   this   why   Mr.  Sewid's  book,  which  is  no  work  of  art,  seems  to  have   more  "form" than   most contemporary  novels?
The book ends with  Mr.  Sewid's  lay sermon,  which  he  preached "in   xg66 on Harvest Thanksgiving Sunday at Christ Church  in   Alert   Bay".  He   describes   a trip  across Canada in rather conventional terms,  thus  showing  himself  to  be a  tra­ velled   man,    at   peace   with   the   white  world,  and  a  patriotic Canadian. But  his real  homeland is that  country  within the country we  know,  a  Canada  whose  out­ lines  are  too  shadowy  for  most  of  us  to see,  a  country  which   is  divided   among the   tribes   in   the   old   way.   He   visits Ottawa  and   the   Parliament  Buildings  where  "they  had  carved  everything that  is in Canada, animals, fish, birds, flowers and   trees";  but  the   real  capital  of  his world  is  Alert  Bay, and  when  he is there  his  sense   of   distance  changes   and   his world  shrinks:  "Some of  your  children come from afar  off from  Alert Bay, places like  Bella  Bella  and   Bella  Coola". This sermon  is a  true  apologia  and  a summa­ tion  of his life;  it and  the  book end  with a prayer.
His  autobiography is moving,   not  be­
cause  he  possesses literary gifts  but  be­ cause  he  has  led  a  useful  life,  which  he describes  simply.  It is difficult  for  us  to see how useful it has been, because  we see Kwakiutl territory as a  very  tiny  part of


123

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



our  world,  whereas  it  is in  fact  a  small world  of  its  own.  This  book  shows  how rich  and  full  a  world,  in  spite  of all  the well-known   horrors  and  despairs,  it  can be.
NORMAN NEWTON


EXILED IN AN EXILED LAND

JACQUES  FERRON,  Tales  From The  Uncertain
Country. Anansi,  $2.85  paper,  $6.50  cloth.

THE  NEW  REVOLUTIONARY is a capitalist­ in-reverse,   possessed  by  a   metaphysical avarice which  blinds  him  to  the  spiritual well-being   of  others   and  himself.  He  is also  a  Puritan, one  of  the  elect  of  the new   dispensation,   guided  by  an   inner  light,  and  an  antinomian. The  world  he inhabits, like that  of his disavowed  ances­ tors,  is  corrupt, barren, distractive: only an apocalypse can save it.
This  one gathers from  Dr. Ferron's stories.  Take  Jeremiah, inhabited not  by the   invisible    God    but    by   the   world around  him :  having   become  the  land­ scape,   the   landscape   becomes  him:   he and  the  Cosmos are  one.  Friends compli­ ment  him.  "Not a  bad  shower  that," or "Turned out  well,  that  wind  of  yours." But base humanity intrudes: "acceptance by his family  had  made  him  an  exile  to himself."  Lacking  his  loved  isolation,  he drowns.   After   fog,  the  landscape  reap­  pears.  "This was  the  landscape Jeremiah had   painted   day  after   day,  season  after season,   for   years,   leaving   behind   him enough   to  last  forever." The  translator tells us Dr. Ferron depicts  "very  real situ­ ations", while  "establishing a  new order,  a new reality".
 The new  reality  is that  of  the Symbo­ lists a hundred years  ago:   both  man  and the external world  are their "glorious lie", subjective  creations  by  means  of  an  art  that   has  become  magic.  In  many  of Dr.  Ferron's stories  the  enemy  is love:  cupid  leads   only   to   cupidity.  A  young   man makes  up  for  seducing a  girl  by  paying  her;  in   a   lumber  camp  he   purchases gonorrhoea,  pays  over  ten  dollars  a  visit for   treatment,  is  given   a   potion    by  a disciple of the occult and emerges after a psychomimetic experience of  death-and­ rebirth to  become   wealthy  under an  as­ sumed  name,  return home,  unrecognized, buy the family  mansion, bum it, exiled.
The next  stage  is  to  reverse  relation­
ships.  Let  a  doctor suffer  from   lack  of opium, care  for  no one.  "Without opium you  cannot give  religion  to  the  people." His moment of inverted revelation comes at  the  sight  of a  terrified  horse.  "He did not  heal  me,  he saved  me.  When  I  man­ aged to find a little  opium, it is as though I  were  injecting it  into  the  poor  animal
... The horse  is encompassed  by all  the wickedness  of  the  world.  I must  comfort him.... From   now   on   he  is  the   drug addict." Thus the doctor gives his religion to  the  people -or  to a horse  that  is un­ changed  except   in   the   doctor's   mind,  where  his altered consciousness is the new dispensation.
Let   us  next  apotheosize cupidity. For years  a widow  waits  for  her  dead  son  to return from   a  war.   She  saves  for  him: "the longer  he stayed  away,  the more handsome  her   present  would   be."  One night  his apparition appears and  demands the money.  As she gives it to him she dies. "Their long  wait  had  been  their  Purga­ tory.  Together they  went  to  Heaven, so true  it is that  love will heal all ills!" Is it avaricious love  and   the  love of  avarice

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



(which can  make  a  Hell  of  earth)  that are  mocked?   To  find  out,  consider  love. An  American  soldier   meets   a  girl  in Louvain. "They stopped side by side and love focussed  [sic]  its camera on  them." Is   this   not   saying   that   love   is  but   a phenomenon, which  like the camera  does not  know  what  it sees or  does?  As some­ times  the  author does  not  know  what  he writes:  for the couple  settles in Montreal, neither speaking the other's language, but when   she  tells  the  doctor   (in   French) that   her   husband  is  dotty,  the  husband answers  her  in  English.  And  the  author answers  both: they  are  not  two  persons whose  lives  matter,  but  the  conquest   of Europe by  America.   Power   is  the   ulti­
mate  reality.
What, then,  is humanitas?  Cut  off the tail of a calf, dress it in a frock coat, and immediately  it  will   begin   to  metamor­ phose  into  a  man.  Within a  year  it  will be   a   lawyer-poet. "There   was  a   time when  I hoped  to  free  myself  by  writing,  but  the  poems  I wrote  then  did  not  ren­  der  my  cry."  Back  on  the  farm,   a  bull now,  "he  is able  to  utter  his poet's  cry, a bellow  such  as  to  drive  all  the  cows  in the   county   mad."  The   bull   is  natural, man  (as he pretends to be)  a self-deceived subterfuge.
The human condition likewise  exacer­ bated   Flaubert, whose  style  (as  much  as one   can   judge    from   translation)   Dr. Ferron  often   echoes.   In   all   the  stories existence  is an  oppression, and  one  does not free oneself  or it  by writing. The  fan­  tasies   are   not   those   of   the   fairy-tale: fairy-tales  (witness  Tolkien) are  the mir­  roring  of  an  abiding morality in an alien setting.  For  Dr.  Ferron all  is alien: the dream  condemns the  actual, which  must be  burnt to  the  ground, altered by con­ sciousness,  reduced to  sexual  potency,  or
 become  one's  own  creation. If, like  the archangel  in  one  story,  distinctions  be­ tween  good and  evil are found to be dis­ tasteful, after  the apocalypse on what will justice  be  based  so  that   the   earth  will again   be  inhabitable?  Drugs?   Or,  like Rose  in  the  witness  box,  will  we  all  be superior   to  the  laws  of  men?  Miss  Bed­ narski,  the  translator, is  right:  "A  great deal  of  what   Ferron  says  can  apply   to us."
JOHN REID


QUI LIT GROULX?

LIONEL    GROULX,   Mes   Memoires,   I     ( 1878-
1920), V. II (1920-1928), Fides.

Qm LIT  GRour.x? Comme le carillon son­ nant    tous   les  quarts  d'heure,   pendant trois  quarts  de  siecle,  qui   l'entend  en­ core?  Rabachant, depasse,  rebutant, res­ sasse, obsedant. II  a  si  bien  epouse  son
pays  a defaut   de  son  siecle,  qu'il   reste,
comme  celui-ci,  forclos,  paralyse,  prison­
nier, temoin exemplaire de la condition canadienne fran<;aise meme.  Sa  mort  en
1967 a l'age  de  8g  ans  dont   pres  de  70
sur   la  breche,   donna }'occasion,   mieux
que les agiographies esquissees par  les journaux, d'un  premier bilan general. L'oeuvre represente une somme d'ecrits concurren<;ant  Balzac.
Le   petit   paysan   frele   devenu    jeune pretre sera d'abord l'apotre educateur du college  de  Valleyfield  qui  se sent  la  mis­ sion de ranimer le feu  sacre sur les autels  de   la   patrie   par   l'action   catholique  et nationale   chez  les  jeunes.  Au   point   de passer,  aux  yeux  des  bons  bourgeois  de Quebec,  y  compris  le   clerge,   pour   un revolutionnaire empietant de fa<;on desor­  donnee sur   le   politique. Car   il  entend


125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



secouer  l'inertie, l'apathie, la  routine des methodes scolaires  en integrant la forma­ tion   civique  et  nationale au  curriculum trap  classique.   La  foi  nationale  doit  se vivre  comme  la  foi  religieuse,  ce qui  lui
vaudra ['opposition sourde  de son eveque bien  dispose  a l'egard d'Ottawa. Pour  ce,
il se fera  historien de sa race. Une  crois­
ade  d'adolescents   (rgi2),  represente a
ce  titre   ses  premiers  Memoires.   Sur   les traces de Bourassa qu'il salue comme un maitre,  et   de   la   premiere  equipe    du Devoir  ( I905-I9Io), qui  comprit un  in­ stant  Asselin et  Fournier, premier profes­ seur  d'histoire du  Canada de  l'universite de  Montreal en  I9I5, il  devient,  apres  la premiere guerre, l'fune de "l'Action fran­ aise",
ences   innombrables,  directeur  de   con­ science de I'elite; illivre en fait, malgre ses sorties  multipliees, un  combat  d'arriere­ garde  contre l'encerclement.
Il  avait  bien  compris  des  I 920 -et  a
cet   egard   Rene   Levesque   ne  fait   que
reprendre   ses   directives-qu'il 	fallait s'emparer des  leviers  de  commande  eco­ nomiques et politiques; malheureusement, au   tournant des  annees trente, apres  la condamnation de  l'Action  franc;aise  par Rome  et   la   debacle  economique, alors qu'il  va prendre la place de Bourassa qui
s'efface,  il ne trouve  a offrir a la nouvelle
generation  ( celle  de  Laurendeau) ,  dans son   impatience  d'agir,  pour    pallier    a
!'impuissance de  son  peuple,  que  la  ten­ tation  du   fascisme.   On   lui   reprochera assez son eloge de Mussolini, restaurateur de  la  fierte  italienne et  de  la  grandeur romaine. S'il  avait  reussi,  Groulx  aurait­ il  promu au  Quebec  l'instauration d'un  "Opus Dei"?
Ce  fils spirituel du   I9eme  siecle  fran­
ais
romantique   impenitent,  d'autant   plus
 batard qu'il  renie de bonne foi ce meme romantisme; croisement monstrueux de Lammenais et  de  Maistre, qui  aurait dil etre   un  Savonarole, ne  sera  ni  un  Lam­ menais, ni  meme   un  Lacordaire.  Il  sau­
tera  de  Veuillot a Maurras et  a Massis.
Impermeable a Nguy et a Bernanos qu'il a  pourtant Ius, qu'il  cite  a ses meilleures
heures,   sa  croissance   intellectuelle  sera bloquee   des   1930.  Victime d'une  situa­ tion?    Question  de   temperament?   Les deux,    certainement.   Il   est   reparti  en guerre apres  la 2eme guerre et le jour de sa  mort,  il  devait  lancer  son  livre  "Con­ stantes  de   vie".   Doctrinaire  rigide   et moraliste   myope,   intellectuellement,   il s'est survecu un  demi-siecle au  nom  de la
fidelite  a la race et au passe.
Le   prix   des   M emoires  est,   sous  les cendres d'une idee  fixe, de  nous  restituer l'homme; et  c'est   sans   doute   pourquoi ces premieres oeuvres posthumes sont certainement son  chef  d'oeuvre litteraire
comparees a ses pietres  et mievres  tenta­
tives  dans  le  domain de  la  fiction.  A 76 ans, c'est  beau!
Les  premieres pages  en  particulier sur sa famille et  son  enfance contiennent de veritables morceaux d'anthologie:

Je  suis  ne  d'une famille   terrienne ... Mon pere ... rna  mere ... avaient   connu,  l'un  et
!'autre, sinon !'ecole  de  Ia misere,  du  mains
celie   de   Ia  pauvrete  et   du   rude   travail.
Man   pere  etait   un  pauvre  enfant   donne    '
!'age  de cinq  ans, a une famille  d'etrangers.
Son  pere  avait  bu son  patrimoine; il en  fut reduit a donner ses enfants; il les distribua a gauche  et a droite.

La  mort   le  cotoya   tout  durant sa  petite enfance. Son   pere  fut  emporte a trente
huit  ans par  la petite verole.

Cet  homme,  "donnt " a !'age de cinq  ans et qui  avait   passe  sa  jeunesse  dans  les  chan­
tiers,  avait,   a sa  mort  presque  entierement
paye sa terre.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


La  mere,  a vingt  six ans,  se  remarie  un an   apres,   "pour  sauver   la  terre". II  a trois ans, quand la diphterie emporte trois enfants  sur   cinq!  Au   seuil   du   siecle, Groulx a  connu   les "anciens canadiens" aux  vertus  bibliques.  A ses yeux, la gran­ deur,  la noblesse d'un tel peuple devaient lui  suffire,  le  rendre immortel,  sans  que rien  ne change, ne dusse changer au  pays de   Maria  Chapdelaine.  L'abbe  raconte l'arrachement  que   lui   causa   le  depart
pour   le  college  a ]'age  deI 3  ans.  II  est
particulierement sans indulgence pour  ses maitres a qui  il ne  pardonne pas !'esprit
militaire de  leur  discipline, leur  manque de  competence, d'imagination,  leur  en­ crassement dans  Ia routine. II  evoque sa quete  d'une  vocation, ses  ambitions:  il sera   avocat,  politicien,   pretre  ou   bien cultivateur.  II  sera,  en  fait, un  compose original de  tout  cela.  Tenter de  resumer  est trahir le sujet.
Le  premier tome  donne une  idee de ce
que  fut   ce  printemps canadien franc;:ais de   rgoo  a  1914,  les  hommes qui  l'ani­
merent et  d'ou   devait sortir   l'equipe de I'Action franc;:aise. II y a la un  document historique:  profil  de  Laurier,  carrure de Bourassa.  Le deuxieme tome  se concentre autour de  Dix  ans d' Action   franfaise  qui represente une  synthese  remarquable des domaines qui  au  Canada franc;:ais  peut­ etre plus  qu'ailleurs  s'interpenetrent: l'economique,  le   politique,  le  social,   le culture! et   le   religieux.  En   theorie  au moins,   Ia   pensee canadienne  avait   rat­  trape  son  siecle. Le  plus grand merite de
Groulx a Ia fois malgre et a cause  de son
entetement, aura ete  d'etre un  eveilleur

d'ames.  Les   nouveaux  chefs   de  file  et maitres  a  penser    des   generations   sui­
vantes:  Laurendeau,  Michel Brunet, Ethier-Blais, tous  les jeunes  nationalistes,
meme  s'ils se sont  appliques a demolir la
 plupart  de  ses  theories   les  plus  cheres, sont taus d'accord pour  reconnaitre son influence, car s'il n'a  passu faire fructifier
!'heritage selon  les exigences  modernes, il
l'a garde; et meme  les marxisants saluent l'homme pour  sa fierte  et le defenseur du pauvre.
II est regrettable que  Ia suite  ne puisse
etre   publiee   des   maintenant,  meme   en edition expurgee. Un  biographe de Groulx se levera-t-il bientot qui allierait l'objectivite du  specialiste au  temoignage d'un  homme   qui   aurait  connu   person­ nellement  le   petit   et   grand   chanoine? Groulx reste  tres  franc;ais,  de Ia race  des mousquetaires  qui   font   aussi   les  Don Quichotte, aussi opposes qu'ils  fussent  les uns   aux   autres,  tels   Asselin,   Fournier, Vallieres ... , idealistes, jusqu'auboutistes, utopistes.
ROLAND BONVALET


REPRINTS

THERE rs  ALWAYs a touch of satisfied  nostal­ gia  when  one  receives the  latest batch  of  titles  from  the  New  Canadian Library; for  the  most part   they  recall to  us  a  relatively  recent past  and   how  quickly  things  change  in   the   liter­ ary  scene of our  generation. Here, for  instance, in  the  most  recent group of  selections, is Rudy Wiebe's  Peace   Shall   Destroy   Many  ($2.35), to   remind    us   how   much  better  a   novelist  Wiebe   has   become   since   this   first   work   ap­  peared a  decade  ago,  and   Brian Moore's The Luck   of Ginger  Coffey  ($2.35)  to  remind us that twelve  years  ago  Moore's imagination still played   over  things  Canadian;  there is  Penny Williams's    excellent   translation   of    Hubert Aquin's  Prochain Episode  ($1.75)  to   remind us  that   novels  about  terrorists are   no  longer the  mode  in  Quebec, as  they  were  in  the  late sixties,  and   Thomas H.  Raddall's Roger  Sud­ den  ($2.95)  to  remind us that, for  all our  full and  vivid  share of history, we  have  never  been very good at  historical novels.
Finally, there is Robertson Davies's A Voice from  the   Attic, a  collection of  light   literary pieces   by  an   omnivorous  reader,  which   was


I27

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



published   in    I g6o   but    reflects   back   to   the author's  much  earlier  connection with  Satur­ day  Night. It is the  ambivalent kind  of  writing at   which   Davies is  so  adept; the  look  of  the creature is  somewhat  antique,  but   its   bite  is strictly  contemporary,  But   things  change  in­  deed;  Robertson Davies is now  dispensing his urbane wit  at  Massey  College, and Robert Ful­  ford   is  directing a  very  different  but   equally interesting Saturday  Night.
Meanwhile, Coles   Canadiana Series  carries on  as  vigorously as  ever  a  task  that   might  be regarded as  discovery rather  than rediscovery; a  kind  of  literary archaeology that draws long forgotten works  into  the  light.
Half   a  dozen   such   books  have   reached  my desk  during the  past  month or  so. Most  are  of interest less  as  works   in  their   own  right   than for   the   odd   details of  information  by  which they   fill   out   one's  picture  of   the   Canadian past.  They vary  from  the  more  or  less straight history  of  In the   Days  of the   Canada  Com­ pany    ($5.95)  by  Robina and  Kathleen  Mac­ farlane   Lizars   (I 8g6)   and    The   Canadian Rebellion of  1837-38  ($2.50)    by  Orring Ed­ ward    Tiffany   ( I905),   to   the   documentary matter   of   The   Narratives    of   the    Fugitive Slaves  in   Canada  ($4.95)   collected  by  Ben­  jamin Drew ( I856), the  contemporary report­ age  of Vancouver  Island  and  British  Columbia ($6.95)  by  Matthew  MacFie  ( 1865)   and   the mingled  curiosa  of  The  Emigrant and  Sport­
man   of  Canada   ($4.95)  by  John  J. Rowan
( 1876). The last,   which   is  further  described
as   "some   experiences  of   an    Old    Country
Settler, with   sketches of  Canadian life,  sport­ ing  adventures and observations of  the  forests  and   fauna," is  certainly  the   most  interesting of  these   volumes, for  it  is  full  of  sharply ob­ served  minutiae of Canadian  rural  and  wilder­ ness  life,  mainly in  New  Brunswick, just  after  Confederation. It also  projects a  clearly out­ lined   and   engaging   personality  in   its  writer, but, alas,  we know  almost nothing more  about him  than the  book  itself  contains. Indeed, one of   the   defects  of   Coles'   otherwise  admirable collection  is  that,  unlike  the   New   Canadian Library, they  offer  no  introductory material to set  the   works   in  context or  to  give  even   the briefest    biographical   information  about   the author.  They are  reprints and  no  more.
One  among the   batch of  Coles  Canadiana reprints which   has  a  special  literary  interest  is Canadian  Wild   Flowers    ( $6.95).   Originally published  in    1868,  the   text   was   written   by Catherine Parr Traill  to  illustrate a  series  of lithographs  of   Canadian  wild   flowers   made from  drawings by  Agnes  FitzGibbon. They are not   the   best  of  drawings, and   the  colours  of
 the    reproductions  are   excessively    harsh,  but Mrs.   Traill lives   up   to  her   name  as  a  good woman  of  letters  and   produces  a   competent and   even   elegant commentary. There is  a strangely  contemporary  note in   one   sen­ tence of  her   Preface:  "With a  patriotic  pride in  her   native land, Mrs.  F.  was  desirous  that the   book  should  be  entirely of  Canadian  pro­ duction, without any  foreign aid,  and  thus far her  design has  been  carried out;  whether suc­  cessfully  or   not,   remains  for   the   public  to decide."
Other welcome reprints, both  from  the  Uni­ versity  of   Toronto  Press,   are   The   Canadian Identity  by  W.  L.  Morton  ($2.95)   and   Wil­  liam  E. Mann's study-essential  to  an  under­ standing of  the   mental  background  of  prairie writing-Sect,  Cult   and   Church  in   Alberta ($3.5o).
* 	* 	*
ANNE   WOODSWORTH    of   the    University   of
Toronto library justifies  the  title  of  her  check­
list,  The 'Alternative' Press  in  Canada   (Uni­
versity  of   Toronto  Press,    $3.50),  with    the remark-in  her   introduction-that:   "With few  exceptions, what are  commonly known   as
'underground'  newspapers should more proper­
ly be labelled 'alternative'."
The  correction to   the   usual  definition  is clearly  justified,  since   most   such   papers are published  freely   and   openly,  and    that  alone tells   us   a   great  deal    about  the    culture  in whose  shadow the  counter-culture they  repre­ sent   has  grown up.  Having taken up  in  I945 in   England  the   editorship  of   a   real   under­ ground  journal,  three  out   of  four   of   whose original   editors  had    just    disappeared   into  prison  on   quite  long   sentences,  the   present reviewer is  able   to  relish this  distinction. The perils  he   has   seen   the    editors  of   so-called
'underground'   journals risking in  the  Canada of  the   197o's have   been  minuscle in  compari­ son  with   what, if  luck  had   not  held,  he  might have  endured a  quarter of  a  century ago.
But   if  underground  has   been   mainly mere
bravado,  alternative does  have   a  meaning, in terms  of   style,   theme  and   content,  and   one hopes that  before too  long   the  careful  listing of  nearly 400   titles  of  "newspapers" (perhaps it would  be better to call most of them  very occasional periodicals)  which  appears in Mrs. Woodsworth's  checklist will  be  fleshed   out  by a study that goes   beyond   the   bibliographical skeleton  to   consider  the   significance  of   the fact   that so many unorthodox  journals -400 in   about  seven   years-can  emerge among a population so small  and  so straight as ours.
o.w.
