!/I.25 per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·17








WRJTERS ON THE	PRJIJRIES



Articles

BY NORMAN SHRIVE, WILLIAM H. NEW, ADRIEN THERIO, A. T. ELDER


Reviews

BY GEORGE  WOODCOCK, MARGARET STOBIE, E. W. MANDEL, DAVID M. HAYNE, DAVID WATMOUGH, EDITH FOWKE, ARNOLD  EDINBOROUGH, AND  OTHERS







A QUARTERLY OF
CRITICISM AND  REVIEW








A SPECTRE IS
HAUNTING  CANADA



THESE  REMARKS  stem  from  the  disturbing recent   history  of Pierre   Berton's dismissal  from  the  staff  of  Maclean's  Magazine. If Berton  had been  sacked  from   Maclean's  on  the  grounds of  the  quality of  his  writing, one would  have  assumed  that  the editors  were fulfilling their  legitimate selective func­ tion.  But Berton  was not dismissed  because  he was thought a poor  writer. He was dismissed  because,  in  an  article  actually  passed for  publication by  the editors  of the  magazine, he expressed  rather pungently certain  views on current  hypocrisies regarding sex which  offended those  people  who for various motives-including both  prejudice and  profit-try  to limit  what  other  Canadians shall  be  allowed to  read,  hear  and  see.
Berton's case is not isolated. At almost  the same time  Robert Thompson, leader of  the  Social  Credit   Party, stood  up  in  the  House  of  Commons and  asked  for action  against Max  Ferguson (alias  Old  Rawhide) on the grounds that  his radio show  was  "undermining our  national morals"  and   that   it  threatened in  some undefined  way  the  security   of  our  social  order. A  few  weeks earlier the  Quest television  programme, based  on a selection  from  the British satirical revue,  "The Establishment", brought a series of frenzied  protests from  individuals and  groups. An  Anglican  clergyman  in  Ontario called  for  heads  to  roll.  "I  challenge the Members of  Parliament," he  said,  "to  demand quick   disposal  of  those  senior officials of  the  C.B.C. responsible  for  such  programmes. They  have  no  excuse." The particular aspect  of the  Quest programme that  annoyed the  reverend gentle­ man  and  many  other  viewers was a satirical  impersonation of the Queen as public  speaker.  To  cap the record  with a citation  from the press, the Vancouver Province on  June sth linked  Berton's dismissal,  of which  it evidently  approved,  with  the controversy over  television  programmes like Quest,  in  an  editorial  which  began  with these words:

3

EDITORIAL



In  the firing of writer Pierre Berton from Maclean's Magazine  many Canadians must see a notable  example of the difference between private enterprise  and public ownership.  The  reaction  of  the  magazine's  customers  to  the  disgusting  material Berton  was publishing in Maclean's  had  its effect. But the  reaction  of the  public to  similarly  disgusting TV  programmes  presented  to the nation  by the  Canadian Broadcasting  Corporation had  no effect whatever.

In this comment the Province uses the emotive  word  disgusting  without attempting to state  what  in its view arouses  disgust; in  trying  to stir  up  feelings  rather than provoke   thought, this  is typical  of such  attacks. It also  talks  in  vague  terms  of "the reaction of the  public"  without telling  us who "the public" in this case may be. To  that  point  I shall  return.
These   three   incidents, in  which   disapproving  readers,   listeners   and   viewers attempted to  impose  an  unofficial  censorship-and in  the  case  of  Maclean's succeeded -came  within  a few weeks of each  other. They  achieved prominence either   because  they  involved  well-known  personalities like  Berton  and  Ferguson or because  they involved  the C.B.C.,  a familiar target of attack. Less publicity  has been  given  to the  persistent  attempts of individuals and  organizations to interfere with  the  freedom  of publication in its various  forms,  such  as the  recurrent  cam­ paigns  to "clean up"  the bookstalls and  to prevent so-called  "objectionable" books from  being  made  available  in  public  libraries.
Perhaps Mrs.  Grundy has  always  had  a  home  in  many  Canadian hearts, but nowadays her  presence  seems  uncomfortably evident in  the  form  of a continual pressure   to  restrict   the  freedom   of  opinion   and   expression,  a  pressure   that   is dangerous precisely because its nature and  its limits are ill-defined. Official censor­ ship,  bad  as it is, at  least proceeds  by law,  and  cases can  be argued in  the  courts  with  the  possibility of appeal, so that  in the end  manifestly  foolish  judgments, like that   which   banned  Lady  Chatterley's Lover, are  sometimes  reversed.  The   un­ official  censorship   presided  over  by  Mrs.  Grundy is defined  not  by  law  but  by such   intangible  elements   as  emotion   and   prejudice. Its  advocates  begin  from personal distaste,  and  seek  to deprive  others  of  what  they  find  offensive.  When  reasons  are  produced they usually fall into one of two categories. Where  the work condemned has an  element  of social or political satire, the objector bases his case on  public   order; its  mockery  can  sap  the  foundations of society  by  destroying reverence for institutions hallowed  by custom. Where sex enters  the question, the would-be censors  are  liable  to  fall  back  on  the  hoary  old  argument of  the  cor­ ruption of  the  young.
The first kind  of objection  completely  misses the  purpose of satire-to expose


4

EDITORIAL



and  laugh  away  the pretences  and  complacencies which in themselves can rot a society away.  Satire  is part  of the  healthy  functioning  of a mature  society that can  look at itself ironically, and  no institution or public figure-even  the royal family-can claim legitimate  immunity from this salutary  process. As for the argument on  the  corruption   of the  young, that  was disposed of three  hundred years ago by a Christian  poet, John  Milton, in Areopagitica.
But possibly the most disquieting aspect of contemporary  Canadian Grundyism is the difficulty of telling how far  it spreads. A single man  with an axe to grind can  and sometimes does create  panic by a determined  campaign  of letter-writing and  telephoning.  And  twenty  devoted bigots can raise enough  noise, individually and  through  organizations,  to suggest that  battalions  are  behind  them.  It is the impossibility of assessing the following of these self-styled spokesmen of the public that  makes  them  seem  so frightening  to  publishers and  broadcasting  adminis­ trators. In  the Province  editorial  which I have quoted, the vague statement  about the  reaction  of "the  public"  to current  TV  programmes  calls  up  the  idea  of a multitude  of angry  voices. In  fact, the voices are numbered  not  in thousands  or even hundreds,  but in dozens; in the British Columbian region, despite the shout­ ing and  the fury,  the C.B.C. received 44 protests by  phone and  mail against  the controversial  Quest   programme on  "The  Establishment". It is the  amount  of unexpressed  feeling which  these 44 vocal  men and  women  represent  that  looms so ominously and  so indefinably.  Is it  real  and substantial?  Or  is it  just a paper tiger? What  does the public feel? Too often it is only the voices of the bigots that speak out, and in the silence around them they are loud enough  to start  the chair. reaction  that  first scares publishers and  administrators,  in turn  creates insecurity among editors and producers, and in the end threatens the integrity of the individ­ ual writer or artist.
If Mrs.  Grundy  wins, part  of the blame will lie with  those of us who believe
in freedom of choice, in the liberty of opinion and expression, yet never speak up to defend  it. The  reason for this comparative  silence of the supporters  of artistic freedom  is obvious; they are often creative people whose lives are fully occupied, while  the  bigots  are  usually  drawn  from  the  ranks  of  the  frustrated and  the unsatisfied. But the hands of the bigots are strengthened  whenever their opponents fail to voice approval  of an intellectually or artistically daring  piece of work or fail to make a counter  attack  when the ban-the-book squads get to work. Let us make our voices heard.  We alone can exorcise the spectre that  is haunting Canada, the spectre  of  Mrs. Grundy.



5


POET AND POLITICS:

Charles Mair at Red River





Norman Shrive




TE SIGNIFICANCE  OF   CHARLES  MAIR   m the  development of
Canada and of her literature is today almost unknown. Some Canadian historians,
of course,  have  remembered  him-perhaps  only too well-as  a controversial figure in  a controversial  event:  the Riel uprising of 186g-7o. But their accounts, both fair  and  prejudiced,  of the part he played in that  historical episode are con­ cerned  with  only a few months  of a life that  lasted nearly  ninety  years,  and  he has been depicted,  therefore, in a very limited context. On  the other hand Cana­ dian  literary  scholars  have  ignored  him  altogether   or  have  dismissed  him  con­ descendingly,  preferring  to name Roberts, Carman, Lampman and Scott as their "Confederation Poets,"  despite the fact  that  none  of these more  famous  figures was over the age of seven in 1867 or published anything  until almost fifteen years after  that  date.  But Charles  Mair  not only gave  Canada  what  was regarded  in
1868 as its first significant collection of verse; he also, unlike Roberts and Carman, retained  faith,  however dim at times, in his country's  future,  and,  unlike  Lamp­ man,  lived  long  enough  to see that  faith   justified. He  offers  to the  Canadian literary historian, in fact, an ideal illustration of the struggle of  post-Confederation letters for survival and recognition.
For even when  Mair is revealed as a precious fool and a bad poet he provides a singularly striking parallel to the cross-currents of aspiration  and frustration, of success  and  failure,  of even  tragedy,  that  marked  that  struggle.  His  life gives us a  tableau  of some of the  most significant  aspects  of Canadian history-of pioneering  in  the  Ottawa  Valley, of the Canada First  movement  in politics, of both Riel rebellions, of the opening up of the West. His writings and the influences behind  them  reveal  the cultural  climate in which  he lived- more particularly,

6

POET AND  POLITICS



the  way  in  which  nationalism and  its  judgments intruded  into  literary  matters, not  only in the  nineteenth century  but  also in a much  later  period.  Because  Mair and   his work  were  so closely  associated  with  the  political and  cultural  develop­ ment   of  Canada, there   is  little  wonder   that   journalist Bernard  McEvoy  could call  him  a "marvel of miscellaneousness" who had  "the knack  of  carrying a load of versatility," or that  the late  Lome  Pierce could describe  Mair's life as "a  thrill­  ing  romance" and   his  work  as  part  of "the  structure of our  national life."  Or,  perhaps, that   Louis  Riel  could  find  him  "a  barely  civilized"  Upper Canadian who  found  amusement in  "uttering follies to the world."
Unfortunately  for   Mair   the  published   commentaries about  his  career   have been  both  few in number and  limited  in value. John  Garvin's supposedly authori­ tative   biographical  essay  in  the  Master-Works of  Canadian  Authors  edition   is ludicrous in its bias  and  pretentiousness, its critical  posturing and  unscholarly in­ accuracies. And   the  articles  on  Mair  in  newspapers and  periodicals are  of  the "popular" type: in them  he is invariably depicted  as a "great singer  of Canadian Literature" or as a "saviour of Canada's nationhood." The suspicions  stimulated by such  apotheosizing are  confirmed  of course  when  one  reads  those  social  and  political  histories  that  have  included Mair  in their scope;  for in these works he is revealed   as a  quite  different figure.  Part  of this contrast is often  explainable by
personal and  commercial prejudices (J. J. Hargrave's Red  River), by  religious
intolerance ( R.  E. Lamb's Thunder in the  North), or by  journalistic indulgence to popular taste  and  by distortion of historical  evidence  (Joseph Kinsey  Howard's Strange  Empire). But an  unattractive Mair  is also to be found in works of scholar­ ly excellence  such  as  W.  L.  Morton's Alexander Begg's  Red  River  journal  and  G. F. Stanley's The  Birth  of Western Canada; unfortunately once again  for Mair, however,   the  objectives of  these  latter  studies  have  not  warranted more  than  a rather abstracted interpretation of his role  as a literary  figure  at  Red  River.



A MORE  DETAILED  EXAMINATION  of  Mair   that   must  still remam  selective   in  emphasis  would  begin,  nevertheless, with   Red   River   in
I 868-70; for  better or  for  worse, his reputation and  subsequent career  depended largely  upon  his  actions  at  that  time.  How  he got  on  the  trail  to  Fort  Garry  in the  first  place  is  a  theme worthy  of that   writer  he  himself  most  esteemed, Sir Walter Scott,   but  since  the  melodramatic details  have  already been  tortuously exploited   by Garvin' it is unnecessary  and  undesirable to repeat  them  here.  Suf-

7

POET AND  POLITICS



ficient it is to  note   that  a trip  to  Ottawa  in  May, I 868,  to see his first book, Dreamland  and  Other   Poems,  through  the  press led  Mair  to the  Canada   First Association,  then  to  the attention  of the  Honourable William  Macdougall, the Minister  of Public  Works and  ardent  proponent of  North-West  expansion,  and then  not  to Kingston  and  Queen's  to resume medical  studies but to Fort  Garry, ostensibly as paymaster of a Government  road party. "At  once we saw the oppor­ tunity,"  said  fellow  Canada   Firster  George  T.  Denison,  "of  doing  some good work towards helping on the acquisition of the territory."• And William A. Foster, another  member  of  the group,  promised  to arrange  with  George  Brown of the Globe  that  Mair  should  be the paper's  North-West  correspondent  and  therefore the advocate  of the western policy that Brown had in common with Macdougall.
The  appointment was a last-minute  decision by Macdougall, and  because the road-party had  left days before, Mair's  departure was a hasty one. But he began the adventure  as best he could. In his pocket he had a letter of introduction from his friend,  the Reverend  Aeneas Macdonell Dawson  of the Cathedral of the City of Ottawa, to the  Right  Reverend  Monsignor  Tache, Bishop of St. Boniface, in which Dawson emphasized that "Mr. Mair's great  abilities have commended  him to the notice of the leading people" of Ottawa, and  that,  although  "Mr. Mair is not  precisely of our  communion  ... Dr. Pusey himself does not surpass him in respect for Catholics." 3  And  when he reached  Toronto Mair  took advantage  of a stop-over, as his expense account  reveals-"revolver and ammunition, $I5.25"
-to prepare  himself even further  for the eventualities  of the  West.
The  letters that  Mair wrote to his brothers in Perth,  Ontario -letters immed­ iately given to the Perth  Courier  and subsequently  copied by the Toronto  Globe and  other  papers-provide a detailed record of his trip to Fort Garry  as well as considerable  critical  comment  on  the  land  and  peoples  he  encountered   on  the way. The  letters in fact are so full of information and  are so enthusiastic  about the  greatness  of  the  new land  that  with  certain  exceptions they  were almost certainly  intended   not  for  private  reading  but  for  newspaper  publication  as a form  of "immigration literature."
From  Toronto  he  travelled, as did all who  wished to get to Red  River in less than  a month,  by rail to Chicago, and thence by a combination  of water, rail and road  to Fort  Abercrombie,  North  Dakota,  where  he hoped  to overtake superin­ tendent  John  Snow  and  his party.  The  trip  under  the  best of  conditions  could be only an  arduous  one, but  Mair, either  because of youthful enthusiasm  or be­ cause of his patriotic  obligation, reveals in his reports  little if  any sense of hard­ ship.  Petty  annoyances  are  not  mentioned  or  are  treated  humorously,  and  the

8

POET AND POLITICS



more  obvious  deprivations concomitant with travel  through a primitive West  are either  understated or  are  exploited  as intrinsic  to the  romance of the  great  new land. The  letters  in fact  continually emphasize  the ease and  comfort that  the new settler  would  experience once  he had  left his Ontario town  or farm. In  the  Globe of December 2 7 Mair  reported that  after  three  days on the  train  to Chicago and LaCrosse,  he  journeyed by "immense steamer" up the  Mississippi  to St.  Paul­ "a  splendid  two  days'  sail"  made  constantly  enjoyable by "magnificent and  strik­ ing"  scenery.  A  further I 70  miles by rail  brought him  to St. Cloud  "in  time  to attend Judge Donnelly's political  meeting"; and  "four splendid  horses,  changed every  fifteen  miles"  pulled  his stage-coach to Sauk  Centre, seventy  miles farther west.  There, "after great   difficulty"   (which   he  does  not  detail)  and   "valuable fact! only  on  account of  being  a  Mason," he obtained a  driver  to  take  him  to Abercrombie, "where I found   Mr.  Snow,  the  Surveyor, waiting  for  me."
Mair  and  Snow  then  travelled together  the  250 miles to Fort  Garry, this time by  a  horse  and  buggy  bought by the  latter  at  St.  Paul  and  with  "every  luxury, even  condensed milk, an  admirable thing." The  record  of this part  of the  journey (Perth Courier,  January  I4,  I86g)  reads  like a idyllic  travelogue:

No  description  of  mine  can  convey to you an  idea  of  the  vastness  and  solitary grandeur   of these  prairies.  Sometimes for a  whole day  you will drive  through   a perfect  ocean of luxurious  grasses now yellow and decaying, and  perhaps  the  next day your tracks  will be through  an immense expanse of inky soil where the prairie fires have consumed  the  herbage.  The  prairies are a dead  level, and  the traveller drifts  along  in  a sort  of a dream  between earth  and  sky over roads  as solid and even  as marble  . . . .

Mair  and  Snow  reached the  edge of the Red  River settlement one evening in late October just in  time  to  hear  "the convent  bells of St. Boniface  sounding sweetly over  the  water   " (Globe, December 2 7,  I 868)   and   within  a  few  minutes had registered   at  "Dutch  George" Emerling's hotel.
But  Mair's stay  at  Emerling's was  brief,  for  he  lost  little  time  in  finding his Queen's College  friend, John Schultz; and  for  the  few days  prior  to his leaving with  Snow  to set  up  road  headquarters at  Oak  Point,  thirty  miles to the east,  he lived  with  Schultz  at  the  latter's combined medical  dispensary  and  trading store. There is no extant correspondence between  Mair  and  Schultz  prior  to  I 86g,  and it  is therefore difficult  to  determine whether or  not  Mair  had  more  than  super­ ficial knowledge about Schultz's standing in the Red  River  settlement. This  point  is of some importance because  historians  have emphasized the "error" committed

9

POET AND  POLITICS



by Mair  and  other  "Canadians" in intimately associating themselves  with Schultz. To  Mair especially,  however, such association  was not  an "error". If he was aware before  he arrived  at  Red  River  that  Schultz  was extremely unpopular among the great   majority of  the  settlement, it  must  be  concluded that  he  would  have  dis­ counted such  an  attitude as  being  unreasonable and  short-sighted, for  Schultz  represented to  Mair   an  avant-coureur  and   agent in  Red  River  not  only  of  his own  theories  on North-West expansion, but  also of those of the Minister of Public  Works  and  of  the  Canadian  Government itself.
Dr.  John Christian Schultz  had  had  a  stormy  career   at  Red  River  since  his arrival there  inI 861.  Perhaps he had  never  really  intended to practise  medicine, for  within a year  he had  established  a lucrative fur  trade  and  a thriving general store.  In  1865  he  had  acquired control  of the  settlement's only  newspaper, The Nor'  Wester,  and   had   continued with  ever-increasing frankness the  policy  on which  that  paper had  been founded-the necessity for ending Hudson's Bay rule and  for  opening the  country  to settlement. Because  of this and  other  factors,  by
1868  he  had  emerged as the  most notorious figure  in  the settlement. In  1864  he had  been  instrumental in  forming  a  Masonic Lodge; in  1867  he had  married a Miss Anne  Farquharson just in time to prevent her conversion to Roman Catholi­ cism;  and  in early  1868,  after  refusal  to pay  a debt  in favour of his half-brother and  partner, Henry McKenney, he had  to be taken  to jail by force. In this affair,  even  his release was dramatic. No sooner had  he been  carried off by carriole than  his  bride   of  a  few  months  "forthwith caused   all  the  doors  and  windows  to  be barred and  secured  with  nails and  spikes, so as to guard the shop  against  a fresh entry   on  the  part  of  the  Sheriff." Then,

towards  one o'clock on the Saturday  morning  about  fifteen persons, among whom was  Mrs.  Schultz,  forcibly entered  the  prison  where  Schultz  was confined,  over­ powered  the  constables on duty,  and,  breaking  open  the  door  leading  to  his cell, liberated  him. This  done, the party adjourned along with him to his house, where report  says "they made a night of it." 4

The special  Nor'  Wester  of  the  following  day  not  only  presented Schultz's side of the story  but  also took the occasion  to point  up the  complete incapacity of the Hudson's Bay  Company as both  a  judicial  and  executive authority.
Schultz is one of the ambiguous personalities of Red  River  history. He obviously had  many qualities of the  natural leader: he  was strikingly handsome, of great physical   strength,  aggressive,  ambitious,  decisive   and   intelligent. He   was  also known  as a man  of kindness  and  reserve, even of scholarship; articles he wrote  on

IO

POET AND POLITICS



Red  River  botany had  been  recognized  by the Royal Botanical Society  of Canada and  those  on  primitive western  fortifications and  on  the  Eskimo  later  led  to his election  to the  Royal  Society of Canada. Certainly among his devoted "Canadian party" associates  he  was  an  almost  archetypal figure  of the  national patriot and champion  against tyranny. Professor  W.  L. Morton   fairly  conceded:  "He  sin­ cerely  sought   to  develop  the  North-West; he saw its possibilities  with  the  vision of  the  statesman as  well  as  the  eye  of  the  speculator." 5   Schultz's  enemies  and many   other   historians, however,  saw  not  the  visionary  statesman  but  only  the arrogant  speculator. The   metis  and   the  Roman Catholic  clergy  disliked  his Masonic Protestantism  and  feared   his  bold  expansionist  policies;  the  Hudson's Bay Company resented  his abusive  vilification  of its authority; and  those  traders and   colonists  of  the  settlement who  opposed the  transfer of  the  Territory to Canada found it easy to distrust  him  as a selfish, unscrupulous adventurer.
Mair's immediate association   with  Schultz   at  Red  River  was  not  in  itself  a matter  of  resentment  to  the   anti-"Canadian"  group. He   himself   records   the warmth of welcome  extended to him by representatives of both  the main  factions: "We had  a very  pleasant stay  at  Fort  Garry  and  received  all sorts  of  entertain­ ment," he reported (Globe, December 2 7, I 868) ; "they  live like princes here"­ even to the extent of "nuts of all kinds, coffee, port and sherry, brandy punch and cigars,  concluding with whist until four o'clock a.m."  And  at the  home  of Alexander Begg, an  anti-"Canadian" free  trader, he was offered  "hospitalities to my heart's content" (Globe, January 4, I 86g).
But such  initial relationships were soon put  to test. Mair  and  Snow  made  their
headquarters in  a  log  and   mud  hut  at  Oak  Point  and  prepared to  build  their road; by  Christmas the  former's intimacy with  Schultz  and   his support of  the "Canadian party" had  become  obvious  enough  to  cause  resentment where  pre­ viously  there  had  been  friendly acceptance. Begg, no longer  the  hospitable  host, wrote  that both  the  road  officials  "severed  the  confidence . . . by  their  joining hands with  this ultra  and  dangerous party." The  activities  of the road-party itself were  also  a matter of concern, particularly to the  metis. Actually, the  Canadian Government had  as yet no right  to construct a road  over what  was still the  terri­  tory  of  the  Hudson's Bay  Company,  although  some  justification for  the  project did  exist  in  the  oral  permission  Snow  had  received  from  Governor Mactavish. And  to those  metis and  settlers who were suffering fainine following a grasshopper plague   of  the  previous   summer, the  announced  intention of  the  road-party to provide   money  and  provisions  in  return for  work  was more  than   welcome. But the  first trees  were  hardly felled  when  news of  trouble  was reported back  to Fort


I I

POET AND POLITICS



Garry. The   relief  programme  had  proved   a  disappointment: fewer  men  than expected were  hired,  and  these few  (about forty)   claimed their  wages were low. In   addition  was  the  more  serious  charge,   according to  J. J. Hargrave, "that Messrs.  Snow  and   Mair  were  purchasing from  the  Indians portions of land  to
which  the actual occupants laid a pre-emption claim." The actual occupants were mitis  and  such  was their  indignation that  "Mr. Mair  was brought to Fort  Garry under  compulsion of  an  excited  crowd  of  French  half-breeds who  required he should   forthwith quit  the  country, as  he  was,  in  their  opinion a  man  likely  to create  mischief." 7   Governor  Mactavish  intervened,  however,  and   "after  some altercation" Mair  was permitted to return to  work.  Snow  was  not  quite  so  for­ tunate. For  having  sold  liquor  to the  same  Indians he  was  fined  ten  pounds in Petty   Court   and  later  accused  by  Riel  of  trying  "to  seize  the  best  lands  of  the mitis  ... at  Oak  Point."8
Because  of the welter of conflicting evidence  and  bias it is difficult  to determine
the  truth of  these  charges.  Hargrave, nephew and  secretary of Governor  Mac­ tavish  and  no supporter of Mair, admits  that  the  episode  that  he himself  reports  was  the  result  of a misunderstanding about  payment for  work  on  the  road. The Mair   Papers include "private vouchers" from  Mair  to Alexander  Begg for  con­ siderable quantities of  brandy and  gin,  but  such  transactions  between   a  trader and  the  paymaster of a road-party would  hardly be unusual. Snow's  sale of liquor  was  proved; but  surely  it  is irresponsible to  state  blandly, as  Joseph Kinsey Howard does,  that   "Snow  started dickering with  the  Indians for  property ... and  one  of  his favorite  mediums of exchange  was  whiskey." 9   Professor  Morton suggests  instead   that  there  may  have  been  "some  treating  of  Indians to induce  them   to  tolerate   the  claim-staking." 10  In  any  case  these  irritations might  have been  forgotten or  pardoned if  they  had  not  been  aggravated by  Mair   himself, not  only  by  his association  with  Schultz,  but  also  by what  Begg described as his "preaching a  doctrine sufficient  of  itself  to  cause  distrust   in  the  minds  of  the Red   River   people."''


Lxs "nocTRINE" was contained in  the  supposedly private let­
ters  Mair's brothers gave  to the  newspapers and  in  those  Mair himself later  sent
when   he  was  appointed  special   correspondent. The  young   poet   (Dreamland appeared  in  the  bookshops  while  Mair   was  en  route  to  Red  River)  either  did not  realize  that  his commentary would  cause "distrust", or was indifferent to such

12

POET AND POLITICS



a consequence. His correspondence indicates that  he saw himself as a professional writer  from  the  east  with  a responsibility  both  to his own  newly-acquired  reputa­ tion  as a man  of letters  and  to his special appointment as a Governmental agent. And  certainly his reports in the newspapers contain some of the most vivid descrip­ tive  prose  ever  written in  Canada. It is effortlessly  fluent, revealing the  same  sensitivity  to sights  and  sounds  that  mark  the  better  lines of Dreamland  ( Mair's notebooks  give ample  evidence of his propensity  to  jot down  whatever interested bim  at  a  particular time). The   letters  are  lengthy-in some  cases  over   2,500 words-but they are consistently stimulating. A description of the  prairie may  be followed  by  historical  or  even  geological  comment. That of a "genuine out  west political  meeting" includes the  humorous "tall tales"  related  by the speakers and  the   earthy,  sarcastic  observations of  their   listeners.  And   pictures of  the   river steamers, the mule-trains, the  Red  River  carts, of the Indians, the  half-breeds, the white  settlers,  are  all  made  more  vivid by interpolated accounts of incidents and  events that may befall  the frontier traveller  or immigrant. It is when  Mair's depic­ tions seem  exaggerated, a little  too lush, even though  always  maintaining a tone  of  sincerity, that  the  reader is reminded that  the letters  were written not for  their own  sake  nor,  as Hargrave innocently-or  ironically-suggested, "to  vary  the monotony of  existence   in  the  backwoods," 12  but  to  convince   Canadians of  the desirability  of  settlement in  the  North-West and  of  the  great  possibilities of Canada's future. "So  far  as I have  yet seen,"  Mair  informed his readers (Globe, January 4,  r86g),

the  country   is  great-inexhaustible-inconceivably  rich. Farming here  is  a pleasure -there is no toil in it, and  all who do farm  are  comfortable, and  some wealthy.  What  do you  think  of a farmer  within  a  bowshot of here,  being  worth seven or eight thousand  pounds sterling, and selling to the Hudson's  Bay Company last  week  £s,ooo stg.  worth  of cattle:   a  man  who  came  from  Lower  Canada nineteen  years  ago,  not  worth  sixpence?

Beyond  Red  River  is the  prairie (Globe, May  28,  186g) :

There  the  awful  solitude  opens upon  the sight and  swells into an  ocean, and  the eye wanders  over  the  "silent  space"  of the  West. The  man  must  be corrupt  as death  who, unaccustomed,  can look unmoved upon this august  material  presence, this calm unutterable vastness. Man is a grasshopper here-a mere insect, making way between  the  enormous  discs of heaven  and  earth.

Portage la  Prairie, is not  just a thriving  settlement; it is really  a  portal, through which  will flow  "the unspeakable blessings of free government and  civilization."

POET AND POLITICS



It is there  that  the  Canadian "for  the first time clearly  recognizes  the significance and  inevitable grandeur of his country's future." Far  behind him "are his glorious old  native  Province [s],'3  the  unsullied  freedom of  the  North, the  generous and untiring breed  of  men;" before  him  "stretches through immeasurable distance the   larger   and   lovelier  Canada -the  path   of  empire and   the  garden of  the world."
The  letters seemed  to justify the high hopes of Macdougall and  Mair's Canada
First  friends   when   they  had  urged  him  to  open  "the sealed  book"  of  Rupert's Land. The  Toronto Globe of June I I,  I86g, remarked that  "the greatest interest has  been  manifested in  every section of  Ontario in  the  letters  ... from  Mr. Charles  Mair,"  and   emphasized   with  some  specificity   Mair's call  for  settlers. "We hope  to see,"  it said, "a new Upper Canada in the  North-West Territory­ a new Upper Canada in its well-regulated society and government-in its educa­ tion,   morality  and   religion." Denison wrote Mair   (March 10,  I86g)   of  his pleasure in  reading "such  good  accounts . .  . of   the  great   North-West," and  added characteristically that  "together we  Men  of  the  North  ... will be able  to teach  the Yankees  that  we will be as our ancestors always have been, the dominant race." But such  bold  confidence  might  have  been somewhat qualified  if Denison  had   known   that his  friend's  ardently  nationalistic  journalism had  a  few  weeks before  caused  him  to undergo a most  humiliating experience.
The   Globes  containing the  first  two  or  three  of  Mair's letters  began  arriving in  the  settlement some  time  in  January,  I86g.  To  a  people  already   tense  over recent   events  and   the  implications of  the  approaching  transfer the  letters  were little  short  of sensational. Their glowing  accounts of the  possibilities  of the  West were  in  themselves enough,  as Begg states,  to cause  "distrust" among the settlers and  natives; but  certain  passages of a more  personal nature infuriated them.  The metis, said  Mair   (Globe, December   I4,  I868), "are a harmless obsequious set of men  and  will, I believe, be very useful here  when  the country gets filled up." But they  are  "a  strange class," he continued (Globe, December 27,  I868); "they  will do  anything but  farm,  will drive  ox-trains four  hundred miles-go out  on  the buffalo   hunt-fish-do  anything but  farm." The metis, indeed, said  Mair­ and  this  annoyed many  settlers  receiving  or  awaiting assistance  as a result  of the famine-"are the  only  people  here  who  are  starving;" of the  rest, "not one  of them  requires relief other  than  seed wheat  which  they are  quite  able  to pay for." But  to add  to this impression  of a lazy, self-indulgent metis and  to that  of himself as a rather superior being viewing the lower orders with  disdain  was one especially offensive  passage  in  the  Globe  of January 4,  I 86g :

14

POET AND POLITICS



After  putting  up  at  the  Dutchman's hotel ... I went  over and  stayed at  Dr. Schultz's  after  a few  days. The  change  was comfortable,  I assure you, from  the racket  of  a  motley  crowd  of  half-breeds,  playing  billiards  and  drinking,  to  the quiet  and  solid comfort  of a home. I was invited to a dinner-party at  Beffs [sic], where  were  the  Governor's   brother-in-law,  a  wealthy  merchant here,  Isabister [sic]  and  other  Nor'  Westers.  Altogether,  I received  hospitalities  to  my  heart's content,  and  I left the  place thoroughly  pleased with most that  I had met. There are  jealousies and  heart-burnings, however. Many  wealthy  people are  married  to half-breed  women,  who,  having  no coat of arms but  a "totem" to look back to, make up for the deficiency by biting at the backs of their "white" sisters. The white sisters fall  back  upon  their  whiteness, whilst the husbands  meet  each  other  with desperate courtesies and hospitalities, with a view to filthy lucre in the background.




MAIR SURELY  NEVER INTENDED that such  lines  would  be made   public  and  had  hoped  his brothers  would  use greater discretion in giving them   to  the   papers. He  later   defended   them  as  reflecting "the  usual  freedom and  flippancy of a private letter  to a friend," and  himself  as a victim  of "an  un­ pardonable indiscretion" that  "allowed the  letter  to  be published verbatim."  He sincerely   regretted  the  letter's appearing in  print,  for  he  "had received   much kindness  in Red  River, and  certainly  bore  no feelings of dislike or ill-will to any­ one.  But  political  and  monopolist antagonisms ran  high,  and  ... this letter  ... , amongst sensible  people,  at  any  other  time  would  have  only  provoked a smile" (Saskatchewan Herald, March  rs,  r88o).
The   good  folk  of  Red   River,  however,  were  not  amused. Hargrave  records
that   one  of  the  first  to  react  was  "Dutch  George" Emerling, who  "threatened that  should  the  author of these  philippics  ever  enter  the  house  he had  maligned, he should  be expelled." Much more severe was the anger  of the Red  River  ladies:

One  lady  pulled  the  poet's  nose, while another  used her fingers rudely  about  his ears.  A third  confining  herself to words, said  his letters  would  be productive  of serious mischief by circulating  doubts about the reality of the destitution, of which they gave an account  highly calculated  to mislead and  to paralyse the efforts being made  to raise money  abroad  for  the relief of the suffering  poor.'4

The scene of  the  settlement post office, as recorded  by Abbe  Georges  Dugas,  the
Roman Catholic director of St. Boniface  College, was  even  more  violent:

Mair,  having  committed   the  indelicacy  of writing,  in  the  Ontario   papers,  some words offensive  to  the  women  of Winnipeg,  underwent  the  humiliation  of being

POET AND  POLITICS



horse-whipped  in  the  town  post-office, by the  wife  of  one  of  the  most  notable citizens, Mrs. Bannatyne.  She asked the clerk of the store in which the post-office was located  to let her know when Mair  came  at his regular  time on Saturday  at four o'clock in the afternoon,  when the store was full of people. Daniel  Mulligan, the  clerk, seeing  Mair  coming, ran  to tell  Mrs.  Bannatyne. She quickly threw  a shawl  on  her  head  and  arrived  like a  bomb  at  the  post-office; she held  a large whip in her hand.  Without  hesitating, she seized him by the. nose, and administered five or six strokes of the whip to his body:  "There," she told him, "you see how the  women of Red  River treat  those who insult  them."
The. scene lasted only half a minute.  But it seemed long to Mair  who hastened to  leave,  daring   neither   to  speak  nor  retaliate. That  evening  the  episode  was known  throughout  the  district.'5

The   unfortunate affair  made   Mair  the  object of  all  the  resentment that   the majority of the  populace felt for  the  "Canadian" party. A "French gentleman" wrote  to  his  friend   Hargrave: "The indignation against Mr.  Mair  is going  on furiously."'6   According to  another witness  it  was  so great "that he was  ordered to  leave  the  territory," but  through the  intervention of Governor  Mactavish  he was  allowed   to  return and  remain  "after apologizing to  the  leading half-breeds and  promising that  he would  write no more letters  of such  a nature." ' 7 This  latter report probably inspired  Joseph  Kinsey Howard's glibly inaccurate comment that Mair  "apologized abjectly,  abandoned  journalism, and  thereafter confined  him­ self to epic  verse." • 8
Mair's enemies  made  certain  that  their impressions of his early conduct at Red River  would  never  be forgotten. Hargrave, Begg  and  Dugas  were  not  only  an­ tagonistic participants  or  spectators in  the  events  of  this  time  and  afterwards; they  were  also,  to  varying  degrees  of proficiency, journalists, and  some  of  their works  have  become   basic  documents. Begg  in  particular  carried  on  a  form  of literary harassment, and  among his many  writings is what is considered the first historical novel  of  the  North-West, Dot-lt-Down,' 9   a  smugly  nai:ve and   rather clumsy  satire  in  which  Mair  plays a notorious role  and  for  which -by  his pro­  pensity  for  note-taking-he even provides  the  title. As Begg describes  "Dot", he is a bumptious and  cocksure  young  man  constantly  trying  to impress  the  modest,  hospitable Red  River settlers  with  his  social  and  literary prowess.  He  is also depicted as a  would-be gallant, too free  with  both  wine  and  ladies.  As a  result Dot's  friends   are  soon  only  "Cool" (Schultz) and  "Sharp"  (Snow) ;  but  after several  brushes  with  the  law  and  the  righteous folk  of Red  River-one is over claim-staking-these three  are  reduced   to  utter  disgrace   and   leave  the  settle­  ment. "Ah! Canada, how  your  champions suffered  for  your  sake!  Ah! Canada,

r6

POET AND POLITICS



how  you  have  also suffered  by their  deeds."  Sharp becomes  the  proprietor of "a third-rate boarding house" in St. Paul; Cool disappears to some other  community where  "assuredly there  was  trouble  in store  for  them," and  Dot,

the unfortunate correspondent,  found to his cost that he had got into bad company, and  felt that  he was consequently  a loser by the connection. His land speculations were frustrated by the  action  of the settlers in the matter.  His expenses while in Red  River  had  been enormous,  through  his extravagance,  and  he found  that  he possessed few friends on account of his untruthful letters to Canada. He, therefore, decided  to follow in the footsteps of Cool; and it is to be hoped when  he reached Canada he tried  to make some reparation  for the evil he did while in Red River.20

How  much   of  Dot-It-Down can  be  accepted as  a  realistic  depiction of  per­ sonalities  and  events at Red  River is difficult to determine. Begg certainly deviates  from  fact  when  he disposes of his villains:   Mair, Schultz  and  Snow  were to play even  more  dramatic roles  in  the  near  future. His  characters and  situations, al­ though  they  may  have  historical   basis,  are  mainly  caricatures-Begg did  not have  the  skill  to  make  them   any  other.  Unfortunately for  Mair, however, his friends   in  the  East   have  helped   to  confirm   the  impression that   Begg  created. Fellow  Canada Firster, R.  G. Haliburton, reviewing  Dreamland  (Halifax Daily Reporter,  July I 3,I 86g)  refers to him  "as  brimful  of fun  and  frolic  as a school­  boy  ... as if cricket  or  croquet, boating  and  flirting,  were  more  likely to be en­ grossing  his  thoughts,  than   the  quiet  mysteries  of nature." The  correspondence of Foster  and  of  Henry  J. Morgan (the  other  founding member of the  Canada First  group)  contains more  than  one reference  to the frivolity  of a rather dubious quality that  enlivened  their   evenings   when   Mair   was  with   them   in  Ottawa. "Speaking of  girls,"  wrote  Morgan (April  4,I 86g), "reminds me that information has reached  here  of a little mishap  on your part  with a little feminine Nor'Wester. Haliburton  and   I had   a  good  laugh   over  it,  but  the  elderly  gentlemen frown  dreadfully,  and  say all sorts  of things  against  you." These  eastern  friends treated Mair's  adventures with  the  good  humour and  tolerance   that  common interests  and  distance could  allow,  and  they  sympathized with  Mair  in  his self-imposed banishment. As Denison  said  (March 29, I 868)  :  "I do  not  doubt that  you are lonely  enough out  there,  and   you  ought  to  have  some  friends -white  folks­ with  you.  It is  not  right   you  should  be  entirely  alone  among  those  wretched, half  starved  half-breeds."

POET AND  POLITICS



EoM MAIR  HIMSELF there  is little even  to be guessed concern­
ing  the  charges  against  him.  The  liquor  vouchers  in  the  Mair  Papers  are doubt­ ful  evidence; other  documents are  similarly  ambiguous. Three days  after  John Garrioch of Portage la Prairie had  reported that  there  was "a perfect  misunder­ standing" between  Mair  and  the Indians over what  land  "they would allow immi­ grants  to  occupy"  (June  I8,  I86g), Mair   wrote   to  Macdougall  that   he  had applied "a  modest  pressure" upon  the Indians by "pointing out  their insignificant numbers compared with the incoming multitude and  the obvious necessity, hence,  of  acting   friendly   and  honestly.""' In  the  same  letter,  however,  he  decries  the methods  used  by  certain   landseekers and   advises  Macdougall that   one  of  the greatest problems   will  be  "to  devise  a  method of  distributing Indian  annuities in  such  a manner that  they  shall  be of real service  to the  recipients and  not find their  way into  the  pocket  of the  rum-seller  as soon  as paid." The  only indication of  Mair's personal  acquisition of land  is a quit  claim  deed  between  himself  and  one  Charles Demerais, with  Schultz  as witness,  by which  he  bought  a thousand square chains  of property at  Portage for eighty pounds sterling-a quite  reason­ able  price.
The  memory,  certainly,  of his humiliation at  the  post office was to haunt Mair for  many  years.  Ten  years after  the  event  an  official of the  Hudson's Bay  Com­ pany  recalled  it during a newspaper-letter controversy with  him. Of the Reverend Georges  Dugas,  when  his  Histoire Veridique   appeared in I 905,  Mair  wrote  to Denison: "[He]  impales  your  humble  friend  as the  Advocatus  Diaboli." •• And in  a letter  of  I9 I I   from  a relative  in  New  Zealand, a significant  comment-"I saw  ... a Judge Mair  had  been  horsewhipped at  Prince Rupert, I think; surely he is not one of our  Mairs"-is underlined, undoubtedly by Mair, in red pencil." 7
Whatever his feelings may have been on those occasions,  during the first months of  I86g  Mair  must  have felt beleaguered by friend  and  foe alike. For  despite  the good-natured levity  of his Canada First  cohorts,  there  was another friend  whose whole  future depended upon  the  manner in  which  the  transfer of  the  territory was  effected  and  who  had  to  view  Mair's conduct from  a  perspective different from   that of  Denison  and   company. This  was  the  Honourable William  Mac­ dougall, who  on June I3,  r86g, wrote  to his  paymaster-cum-correspondent:

I  regret  to  have  heard  some rumours,  which  upon  enquiry  I found  too true, that  prevent  me from doing all I had intended  in your case. I need not be more precise, but  you will at  once  admit-your  own  good  sense will tell you-that full confidence cannot  be placed in one who sometimes forgets  himself, and  what

18

POET AND POLITICS



is due  to  those  who  become  answerable for his conduct. I hope  for  the  best. Your future  is  in  your  hands. You  have  talents   and  genius  of  a  high  order-don't follow  bad  examples, or  the  end  will be like theirs.  I write  you as a friend  who is willing  and  may  be able  to do you service, but  not if you become  your own enemy.


There was  also  another  correspondent, but  one  who  obviously did  not  write "as  a friend," and  who  expressed his opinion publicly in the  pages of the  Montreal Nouveau Monde  of  February 25,   r86g:



Mr. Editor:
 Red  River, February 1, 186g.

Please  be so good  as to give me a little  space in the  columns of your  journal, in order  that  I too may write  of Red River.
I  cannot resist  that   desire  since  I have  read  the  enormities which  a  journal of Upper Canada, the  Globe, has  just  uttered, in  publishing a  letter   of  a  certain Mr.  Mair, who  arrived in  Red  River  last  fall. This  gentleman, an  English Cana­ dian,  is, it  is said,  gifted  in  making  verses; if such  is the  fact  I should  advise  him strongly   to  cultivate  his  talent, for  in  that   way his  writings   would  make  up  in rhyme  for  what   they  lack  in  reason.
Scarcely  a month after  his arrival in  this country, Mr.  Mair  desired  to describe it  and  its  inhabitants. He  succeeded   rather like the  navigator who,  passing  by a league  from  the  coast,  wrote  in his log:  "The people  of this country seemed  to us to be well disposed  . . . ."
I know  some  men   who  have  more  than   two  weeks'  experience and   who  say
the  opposite to  this  gentleman. He  says finally:   the  city  of Portage  la  Prairie  is destined  to become  one  of the  most important in the  country:  however, I shall not speak  to  you  of it  until   I  have  seen it.
And  why  not?  You  speak  of a great  many  other  things  that  you  have  not  had
time  to see or know;  that  would  be worth  as much  as the remainder of your letter; as  much   as  the  scarcely  courteous terms,  I will even  say  barely  civilized,  which you  use in  speaking of  the  ladies  of the  country,  who  certainly by all  reports are equal  to  the  ladies  of  your  country.
Be it said in  passing,  Mr.  Mair,  if we had  only you as specimen of civilized  men,
we  should   not  have  a  very  high  idea  of  them.  If I  wished  to  amuse  myself  by wielding   the  pen  as  you  do  for  the  sole pleasure  of  uttering follies  to  the  world, I  should  have  some  amusing things  to say on  your  account .
L. R.


The editor of  Le  Nouveau Monde noted that the  letter had   been  written "by a half-breed  ... rightly indignant of  the  stupidities which a certain Mr. Mair" had   published. If "L.R." was  "almost certainly" 24   Louis Riel, he  would later

19

POET AND  POLITICS



have an  opportunity to  show  his  indignation in  a  much more forceful and per­
sonal manner.
But  that is  part of  another story,  one  that is more familiar to  Canadians  be­ cause  of its tragi-comic elements of bravado and  bloodshed, because of its central importance in  their  history. Not  so  well  known is how  a  minor versifier  from a small village in the  Ottawa Valley   provided significant material for  its  opening paragraphs. For  Charles Mair, less than a year  after he  had  journeyed to Ottawa with  his manuscript of Dreamland, a work  intended to sound a key-note of  a new,  unified nation, had  by his pen,  ironically, helped to create a situation of  potential danger to  Confederation itself.  This Upper Canadian had   brought to  the  West  the  attitudes and prejudices that   had  been  formed over  a  period of  thirty years  and   then sharpened by his alliance with  a  particularly  aggressive  group of other Upper Canadians; one  of them, Macdougall, was  even  a  "Father  of Confedera­ tion."  In  Ontario  such   pro-British, Protestant  attitudes and   prejudices  could flourish with   little   or  no  opposition. In the   melting pot  of  the  new   West   they  were  almost bound  to  provoke conflict.


Notes

' Master-Works  of Canadian  Literature,  Vol.   XIV  (Toronto:  Radisson   Society, Ig26).
2   The  Struggle   for Imperial  Unity  (Toronto:  Macmillan, I909), pp.  I3-I4.
3  Queen's University Library,  Mair  Papers,  October 6,  I868.  All subsequent  refer­ ences  to  Mair's  correspondence and  papers, unless  otherwise indicated,  are from this source.
4   J. J.  Hargrave, Red  River  (Montreal: John   Lovell,   I87I), p.  426.
5  Alexander  Begg's Red  River  Journal  (Toronto: The Champlain Society,  I956), p. 22.
6  The  Creation  of Manitoba  (Toronto: Hovey,  I87 I), pp. 20-21.
7   Red  River, p. 458.
8  Morton, Begg's journal, Document XXVII, "Memoir of Louis Riel," p. 528.
9   Strange  Empire,  p. 87.
•o   Begg's journal, p. 528, n. 5·
11  The  Creation  of Manitoba,  p. 41.
'2    Red  River, p. 451.
•3   Thus Mair   corrected his  own  copy  of  the  Globe;  but  it  is highly  likely  that   his letter  read  simply "Province," as the newspaper had  it.
'4 Red  River, p. 456.
'5 Histoire Veridique des Faits qui ant  prepare le mouvement des Metis ala  Riviere Rouge  en  1869  (Montreal:  Librairie Beauchemin, I905),  p.  27. The quotation is translated from  the French  of Dugas.


20

POET AND  POLITICS



'
•7   Thomas Spence, deposition, Report of the  Select  Committee on the  Causes  of the Difficulties in the  North-West Territory in 1869-70, Canada, Journals  of the  House of Commons, VIII, app. 6, 133·
rs Strange Empire, p. 86.
rg   A Story  of Life  in the  North-West (Toronto: Hunter, Rose,   I87I).
20   Pp. 354-6.
2 ' Public  Archives  of Canada, Public  Works Files, ser. g8, subj. 429, June 21, 186g.
20   Ibid., Denison  Papers, 5148, June 2, 1905.
23   Ethel Harrington to  Mair, December 20, 1911. Mair  did  become  a Justice of the
Peace  in Prince Albert.
•4   Morton, Begg's  Journal, p. 399, n.  2. The  translation of the letter  and  the original appear on pp. 399•402 and  pp. 567-g, respectively.


















21


A FEELING OF COMPLETION

Aspects  of W.0.Mitchell




William H. New






WN I BECAME A MAN," wrote Saint  Paul to the Co,in­  thians, "I  put  away  childish   things." In  context, this  exchange of  childish  for mature  behaviour is  related   specifically  to  man's  perception of   God,   but   the question of human growth  and  development, of man's relationship with time dur­ ing  his mortal existence,  is one  that  varies  with  each  society's estimation of what  constitutes appropriate reaction  and  behaviour in childhood and in maturity. The  transition itself is many-sided, and  when  it is recorded in  written literature or in folk  traditions, it  takes  on  different forms  and  emphasizes  various  concepts.  In his  two  novels,  The  Kite  and  Who  Has Seen  the  Wind, W.  0. Mitchell makes use of  this  transition as a  means  to  consider  man's awareness of time  and  per­  ception   of  reality  during his  life's  span  on  earth. The   two  novels  explore  these questions, however,  from  different points  of  view.  Though one  is an  artistic  suc­ cess while  the  other  falls short  of this,  part  of their  interest  lies in  the  extent  to which  they  complement each  other,  and  an  examination of the  intent, method, and   accomplishment of  the  two  works  leads  to  a  clearer   understanding of  the questions that   Mitchell  asks about  life  and  of the  answers  that  he  postulates.
Mitchell's first novel,  Who  Has Seen the Wind, is the  success. It is a study  of
the development involved in a boy's increasing conscious  awareness of abstraction, a study  of Brian  O'Connal's transition from  the  perfection of sensitive childhood, through conflict,  to  a  balance that  is achieved   in  early  maturity. In  The  Kite, which  fails  largely  because  of technical difficulties,  Keith Maclean is parallel   to Brian  in many  respects, but the author is concerned less with the growth of a child than with the effect of continuing awareness of time on an old man,  Daddy Sherry, and   the  late  awareness of the  truth  of emotional abstractions that  comes  to  the apparently mature  David   Lang.


22

A FEELING OF  COMPLETION



Brian  O'Connal's growth begins  in  perfection. He  is a child,  complete in  his own environment, when  Who  Has Seen the Wind  opens; he meets existence  from an  awareness of self and  by sense perception of the  material things  around him. For  the  actual growth to take  place,  however,  this state  of harmonious innocence must  be  disrupted, and   it  is, by  the  conflict  that is  aroused in  Brian  as  he  is brought into  contact with  death. An  examination of each  of the six death scenes in  the  novel  will  demonstrate Brian's   changing reactions-his  growth-and the  extent   to  which  he  transcends age  in developing to maturity.
Before  he encounters death for the first time, Brian  is given  a dog for a pet, to serve  as  a  diversion   from   the  incipient  jealousy  he  feels  towards his  younger brother Bobbie  and  to counteract the  fantasy  world  of R.  W.  God  which  he in­ vents  to escape  the  imagined tyranny of his grandmother. When the dog is taken from  him  because  it annoyed the grandmother, Brian seeks another pet in a baby pigeon  and  inadvertently kills it  in  his attempt to love.  Because  death  deprived him  of the  pet  he wanted, he cries, and  drying  tears stain  his face  when  he seeks explanatory knowledge from  his father, asking" 'Why  does it happen to things?' " [cf.   Keith   Maclean: "'Why  does  stuff  have  to die?'"] But  not  till  the  bird's body  ("just like dirt,  he thought, like prairie  dirt  that  wasn't alive  at  all") was placed  in the  prairie was Brian  "aware of a sudden  relief"; not till then  was "the sadness  ... lifted  from  him". Immediately following  this first contact with  death, however,  he is reunited with  the dog, and  he then experiences a "soft explosion  of feeling.  It was  one  of completion and  of culmination." The sought-after know­ ledge  concerning the  abstract is forgotten in  the  immediacy  of  the  child's ego­ centric  world.  "The boy  was aware that  the  yard  was not still. Every  grass-blade and  leaf and  flower seemed  to be breathing, or perhaps, whispering-something to  him-something   for him."  (Italics mine.)  His  world  is complete; the  truth he  knows  begins  and  ends  in  himself,  in  sense  perception. It is only  disturbed when  emotion  is kindled  in him  by contact with  the implied  complements of life and  death, with  the  abstracts that  youth  does not and  cannot comprehend.
The feeling  of  completion alters  in  character as Brian  grows  older,  however, for  with  growth  and   experience comes  an  intimation  that   beyond   the  private world  is a social world  and  beyond  that  another, a universal world,  wherein Abso­ lute  Truth and  Basic  Reality can  be known.  But certainty still  eludes  him.


The  barest breath  of a wind stirred at his face, and its caress was part of the strange enchantment too. Within  him something  was opening, releasing shyly as the petals of a flower open, with such gradualness  that he was hardly aware of it.... He was

A  FEELING OF COMPLETION



filled with breathlessness and expectancy, as though  he were going to be given something,  as though he were about  to find something.

But  though the  feeling is intermittent, it carries,  by the  time  Brian  encounters the  second  death, a tremendous impact. Brian,  Art,  Fat,  and  Bobbie  at this time go to the  prairie to drown  gophers,  but  when  Art  begins to torture an  animal by pulling its tail  off, Brian

realized  with  a start  that  an excitement,  akin  to the feeling that  had  moved him so often,  was beginning  to tremble  within  him.  His  knees felt  weak with  it;  the Young  Ben could  cause it too. The  Young  Ben was part  of it.

Indeed, the very old Young  Ben, who was "born growed  up", springs  into  action at  this  moment, killing  the gopher  with  "one  merciful squeeze" and  clawing Art in  a  violent  retributive attack.
Uninhibited and  primitive,  the Young  Ben is a personified  eternal in the novel;
one  with  the  prairie, he is a sort  of incarnate life-urge  that  in  microcosm and  in physical  terms  demonstrates in  his attack  on  Art  the  potent  retributive violence that  knowledge of not having  acted  justly can  wreak  upon  the spirit  and  mind­ the  conscience, or  the  childhood memory  of  perfect  order  -of  man. Art,  who repeated tearfully" 'I didn't do anything to him'", did  realize that he was "doing something" to Life:  which, however,  amounts to the same thing. Bobbie's reaction  in  this situation is the  child's  reaction of crying,  but Brian's, characteristically, is introspection.

The  feeling was in Brian now, fierce - uncontrollably so, with wild and  unbidden power, with a new, frightening  quality....  Prairie's  awful, thought  Brian, and in his  mind   there  loomed  vaguely  fearful  images  of  a  still  and  brooding  spirit,  a quiescent  power  unsmiling from  everlasting  to everlasting.  . .. The  Young  Ben was part of all this.

In  introducing characters such  as the Young  Ben or Saint  Sammy, who  are in some ways the  most vividly drawn of all the  people  in the book,  Mitchell runs  the danger of letting  his focus shift from  the central development. Such  a shift occurs in  The  Kite  and  weakens  that  book,  but  in Who Has Seen the Wind  the  focus is fortunately  sustained, and  because  of  this,  the  author achieves  a  remarkable insight  into  the  operation of his central character's mind.  Though much  of this novel deals with characters other  than  Brian  O'Connal, Brian's growth to responsi­ bility  always  remains central, and  the  various  successful  and  unsuccessful  adap­ tations that   the  minor  characters make  in  their  respective  situations of conflict,

A FEELING OF COMPLETION



reflect upon  this central growth. Svarich,  for example,  fails to accept his Ukrainian identity; Hislop  fails to accept the existence of opposition  in his church and  merely resigns.  Sean,   Digby,  and   Miss  Thompson, however,  come  to  take  responsible positions  in  their  own  spheres; they  act  positively to solve the  conflict  in  which they  find  themselves,  and  yet they are  able at  the same  time  to accept  what  they cannot control. Brian,  therefore, has both  examples  before  him.  Also before  him are  the  vividly-drawn Saint  Sammy  and  Young  Ben with  their  strange adaptive abilities,  but  even they remain minor  figures, because they, too, serve to contribute to an  understanding of the  emotional sensitivity of Brian  himself.
After  Brian  has  encountered death for  the  second  time,  this sensitivity  brings him  to  a  vague  awareness of  a  difference   between  death inevitable and  death avoidable and  of  the  bond  of life that   joins all mortal creatures. He  must  then come  to a realization that  in life there is deformity, but  that  this can  be lived wih and  even loved.  His first reaction to such deformity  is one of shock. "The feeling", when  he looks at  a dead  two-headed calf, for example, "was  fierce in Brian  as he stared  down  . . . ; he felt  as though  he were on a tightrope high  in the  air.... It was  wrong!" His  judgment is based  on  the still vivid  recollection of comple­ tion-of  perfect  order-but the very recognition of deformity leads  to a move­ ment  away from  the complete awareness of this perfection, and  the feeling "lacked the  sharper quality of  the  other  times."  The  knowledge  of perfection decreases, therefore, to  the  extent that   the  knowledge  of  departure from  perfection   (de­ formity)  increases.
Later   in  the  novel  Brian   becomes  aware  that  the  deformities men  recognize
are  those  that  differentiate physical  realities  from  earthly norms,  but  that  some deviations from  those  norms  do  not  necessitate  correction in  order  that  human love can  be expressed  toward them.  On  Sean's  farm  he looks down  at a pet runt pig  and  considers:
It would  always be a runt,  he decided, a shivery runt.  It had  no twist to its tail; it  never  would  have.  The  world  was a funny  place. He  loved his runt  pig that wasn't  good  for  anything.   Ab was fussy about  Noreen,  the  snuffiest cow in  the herd,  with  her wheezing and  sneezing and coughing. Before Annie's eyes had been straightened he had ... [loved her too].
Brian knew then.

But by loving  what  exists on earth, man  moves imperceptibly further and  further from  instinctive love of antecedent perfection. By consciously  becoming aware  of love   per se, as  of  death, he  is becoming   increasingly   aware of  conceptual and emotional abstractions which  sensory  perception cannot explain.

25

A FEELING OF COMPLETION



To   the  deaths which  he  has  heretofore encountered,  Brian  has  been  largely able  to  maintain an  objective  attitude. Even  towards the  baby  pigeon,  the  love expressed  was in  infancy  as well as the  child  who  loved.  With  growth and  with acquaintance with  the love object,  however,  comes  a more  fully developed  emo­ tion,  and  when  that  is disturbed, as in the  case of the  fourth death when  Brian's
dog  Jappy  is killed  under  the wheels of a dray, the  boy's  reaction is as profound
as it is subjective. Though he "looked  as though he  were going  to cry",  he does not.  Though filled  with  memories  of the  dog's  life, he also "remembers the stiff­ ness of the  body,  the  turned head,  the  filmed  eyes. He  knew  that  a lifeless  thing  was  under   the  earth. His  dog  was  dead."  [Italics mine]. With   this  personal deprivation  comes  also  a  knowledge   of  personal mortality, and   the  feeling  of completion, once  so strong,  is lost.

Somewhere  within  Brian something was gone;  ever since the accident  it had  been leaving  him  as the sand  of an  hourglass threads  away grain  by tiny grain.  Now there was an emptiness that wasn't to be believed.





IT IS  AT  THIS  STAGE that The  Kite  can  be again  considered, for  the  reader knows  of David  Lang's childhood completeness only  by inference from  his loss of it. As a boy, David  had  anticipated a day  of kite-flying  with  Lon Burke,  only  to  be  disappointed by lack  of space,  by bad  weather, and  finally  by Lon's  heart attack, at  which  time  David  loses the  kite:

as  he  walked  towards  home, the  late  guilt  he  felt  could  not  overcome  his sense of irreparable loss, mortal loss too great for tears. It would never soar for him.... While  he  had  been fruitlessly searching  for  his  kite, Lon  had  died.

David  tries  to fill the  void  he has now  encountered by taking  Lon's "explosion­ pills",  by experiencing as it  were  "explosions of feeling", and  knowledge of the pills "soothed and  reminded him  of when  he  used  to suck  his thumb, though he hadn't done  that  for years." But this is an unsatisfactory solution, for it is in effect an  attempt to regress to a stage of childhood that he had already left behind, and  so after  the pills are used up, the emptiness  returns, partly  because  David  has been using another's remedy,  partly  because in attempting to achieve  a reversal of time,  he  is attempting that  which  is  impossible.
The  "other sort  of legacy from  Lon", however, was the  encyclopaedia, and  by

A FEELING OF  COMPLETION



immersing  himself  in  knowledge,  David  can  grow intellectually  and  after some time  accept   adult occupations in  journalism   and  in  the  television  industry. But these  do  not  complete him; "In a way it was as though  he were being  requested to  die -as  himself." What  he  lacks  he  lost  when  he  never  flew  the  kite:   the elasticity,  the  acrobatics, that  would  allow  him  emotional maturity, that  would give  him  an  awareness of life whereby  he could  realize  that  social  participation does not  necessarily  mean  concomitant death  of individuality. His visit to Daddy Sherry  is the  growth of  this  awareness.
David   does  not  know  what  he  is looking  for  when  he  first  heads  to  Shelby; nor  does he understand Mr.  Dalgliesh  when  the latter  says, " 'I suppose  all of us at  one  time   or  another  have  had  something  to  do  with  Daddy that's-well especially  between ourselves  and-and  Daddy.'" Like  the  Young  Ben,  Daddy Sherry  is  more  in  the  novel  than  an  individual character; like the  Young  Ben, too,  he is a  sort  of  incarnation of a life urge.  "'He is excitement'," says Harry Richardson; " 'The life force sparkles more through him,'  the minister suggested"; and  after  some  time  in Shelby,  David  himself realizes that  Daddy "had been  too immersed  in living  to build  historical  significance  out  of his days."  He  too has to have  an  individual contact with  Daddy, with  life;  he  too  must  find,  in  living, the completeness that  has only been known  before in his childhood lack of  aware­
ness of anything that  might  disturb the  apparent immortality of the immediately perceived   world. David   is of  course  attempting to  write  and  complete a  story, but  the  completion he  needs  and  of  which  he  becomes  aware in  the  old  man, is bound   with  the  other   need  for  completion at  an  emotional level;  "the  cross­ willed old human had  completely won him, and somehow-f
now-their  relationship would  have  failed  to  complete  itself."
David's contact with  Daddy is the  central relationship in  The  Kite,  and  the growth that  occurs  through this relationship is David's, not  Daddy's. The  danger of shift  of focus,  however,  that  had  been  circumvented in the  case of the  Young Ben and  Saint Sammy in Who  Has Seen the Wind, recurs  here  with  results  that weaken  this novel.  Structurally and  thematically, Daddy Sherry  is a minor  figure, but the vividness with  which  he is drawn and  the frequency with which  he appears in  the  novel  combine to draw  attention away  from  David  Lang.  Neither  charac­ ter is sufficiently  created to take a central position therefore, and  the novel suffers from  the  resultant lack  of an  insight  into  human behaviour  comparable to that  achieved  in  the  depiction of Brian  O'Connal.
To  achieve  in The  Kite  the focus  he desires,  Mitchell  has set up  reflector  pat­
terns  in the subplots comparable to those in Who  Has Seen the Wind; he depicts

A FEELING OF COMPLETION



a series of  relationships with  Daddy  on  the  part  of the  Shelby  townspeople that should  act as reflectors or commentaries on the  central interaction. Unfortunately this  device  fails  in  operation. Because  Daddy figures  prominently in  each  case, and  because  David  himself remains  relatively  passive during the  recounted anec­ dotes,  the  focus  shifts  to  Daddy,   and  David's centrality is  concomitantly  dimi­  nished.  Daddy, however,  remains  a constant throughout  the  book,  albeit  a con­ stant vitality; he does not  change. It  is David  who suffers  the  development and who  discovers  the  "answer", achieving completion,  at the end  of the  book and  at the  end  of his stay  in Shelby.
Like David  Lang,  Brian  O'Connal, too, must  move from  childhood completion through  emptiness to  a  new  completion. The   "explosions of feeling" which  he has  felt  before  his  "emptiness" do  momentarily return after  Jappy's death and before  his own  final  glimpse  of the  nature of  reality.  A visit to Saint  Sammy on the  prairie, who mystically in age can know  (to  his own satisfaction) the "majesty of  His  glory" and  "the  greatness  of  His  work" stirs  up  the  feeling  once  more, but  this  time  "coloured with  sickening  guilt". In  his  development, Brian,  again like David, has been  acquiring knowledge, but  when  that  knowledge deals grossly with  the  physical facts of birth  and  life and  death, it "spoils" the inherent knowl­ edge of immortality. Brian is in conflict with experience, and  more often than  not,


it was as though  he listened to the drearing  wind and in the spread darkness of the prairie  night was being drained  of his very self. He was trying to hold together something  within  himself, that  the  wind demanded and  was relentlessly leaching from him.


At  this stage  in Brian's  development, his father succumbs to hepatitis and  dies, and  Brian  is forced  again  on a highly  personal level to recognize  the inevitability of  death -this,  however,  the  death of a  human being.  Moving as he has  been from  childish  reaction  in emotional situations (the  tears  of deprivation)  towards more  verbal  response,  Brian  "did  not  feel like crying" at  the  death of his father. Tears of relief come  only when  he realizes responsibility for others  and  a direction to  take  during his own  life:  his mother  "needed him  now". Aware  of death, he is  maturing; aware of some  inevitabilities, he  begins  to  accept what  he  cannot control; and  some years later  his grandmother MacMurray's expected death "did not come with the shocking impact."
Brian's "growing sense of responsibility" accompanies the growth of this aware­
ness;  expressed  towards  all  around him,  it  is a  manifestation of his increasingly

A FEELING OF COMPLETiON



competent  and   humanistic  attempts to  rectify  the  unjust and   the  improperly controlled in  that   part  of  his  environment over  which  he  has  influence. But  as the  growth takes  place,  the  feeling  disappears, and  Brian  would  wonder  "with regret,  that  he  never  had  a  return of the  old excitement since  he had  heard  the meadow lark  sing  to  him  the  day  of his father's funeral." The  egocentric world becomes  a sociocentric one  with  Brian  outward-oriented, a transition which  cul­ minates in his desire  to be a "dirt doctor", in his laying  plans  for  his own future in  terms  of living  in the  physical  and  the social world.
Still  seeking  certainty in  his new  role,  Brian  meets  Digby  and  Palmer in  the
harness  shop  and  puzzles at the adult  difficulties of Berkeleyan philosophy. Digby's first impression that  Brian  was "not  old enough" to understand, that  his approach to understanding would  be through the child's sense perception of material things, is changed when  Brian  abruptly tells him: " 'I don't get  the  feeling  any  more. I-don't think  I will-get it any  more.' " At this point  Digby  makes  the  judg­ ment  which  I assume is crucial to the novel. He

was struck  by something  more  than  familiar  in  the serious eyes under  the  broad band of the toque with its red porn.... That  was it-the look upon Brian's face­ the same expression  that  had  puzzled him on the Young  Ben's:  maturity  in spite of  the  formlessness of  childish  features,  wisdom  without  years.  'Intimations of Immortality,' he thought.
'Perhaps,' said Digby to Brian, 'you've grown up.'


And   yet  Brian   is  certainly  different from   the  Young   Ben.  Western   society defines maturity as responsibility to the social world, as the leaving of petulant childishness   for  emotional  restraint  at  least  in  recurring  situations, and   Brian comes to this, in spite  of his years, whereas  the Young  Ben does not.  But for that matter, few  of  the  adult   characters in  the  novel achieve maturity to  the  extent Brian  has done.  Bent  Candy in his greed  and  the Abercrombies and  Mr.  Powelly in  their   desire  for  revenge   furnish   ready  examples of  pettiness   and   petulance despite   their   adult   years.  Their world,  like  the  child's world,   is  built  around themselves,  and  basing  their  actions  on  material values,  they  can  neither  appre­ ciate  breadth of  mind  nor  express  valid  and  deep  emotion. But  the  Young  Ben and  Saint   Sammy,  though socially  immature to  the  extent that  they,  too,  live for  themselves,   do  possess  a  maturity of  a  different kind.  Unlike  Bent  Candy or  Mrs.  Abercrombie and   although their  methods  of  appreciation remain  those of sensory  perception, their  values  are  non-material. By reason  of their  primitive  awareness of  life and  death and  existence,  by their  uninhibited passion,  by their

29

A FEELING OF  COMPLETION



oneness  with   the  prame, they  have  achieved   apparently  instinctively the  ego­
centric  "maturity" of contact with  the  timeless  and  immortal.
Brian,  however,  gives promise  of coming  to a contact with  the Absolute  which is comparable to this, but  of course  his methods will differ.  The  approach of the Young  Ben  and   Saint  Sammy   to  eternal   truths is from  a  material, a  physical point  of view. They  see the Eternal through the senses, by running with the prairie wind  and   watching coloured  butterflies and   collecting broken  glass and  labels, and  their  appreciation of beauty  and  truth is  as if  by instinct, whereas Brian's changed approach, his socially mature approach, is not  through sense perception but  rather through the  more  abstract routes  of emotion and  conscious  intellect. Staring out  at  the  prairie  when  he is twelve,  he  muses:

It had something  to do with dying; it had something  to do with being born. Loving something  and  being hungry were with it too. He  knew that  much  now.... Some day, he thought,  perhaps  when he was older  than  he was now, he would  know; he would find out  completely and for good. He  would be satisfied.... Some day. The  thing could not hide from him forever.

But  the  day  of rebirth to oneness with  the  perfect and  immortal would  be a day of death to the  physical  and  mortal, a cycle of existence  that is reflected  in  Mit­ chell's   recurrent  imagery   of  light  and  dark, summer and   winter,  growth  and decay  and  new  growth.
The   realization of  the  nature of this  cycle  would  bring  Brian  to  the  state  of awareness-an intellectual awareness-that Digby  himself  has achieved. Brian does not  in the  novel  come to full knowledge and  understanding of the  "realities of  birth, hunger, satiety,  eternity,  death". For  him  are  only  glimpses,  only  fore­ tastes  of  the  final  order-or  perhaps only  recollections of early  childhood -in Mitchell's terms:  "moments of fleeting  vision". Maturity involves  moving  from childhood, however, and  to acceptance of  the  responsibilities of a  social  world.  Brian,  in  achieving the  degree  of  maturity beyond   his child's years  that  Digby recognizes  as "growing up",  chooses a way of life which  is balanced  between  the isolating  extremes of  material crassness  and  private mysticism.  And  yet  he  pre­  serves in  curiosity  and  breadth of vision  the  sympathetic state  of  mind  that  will allow  at  once  both  acknowledgment of  human interdependence  and  an  adult­ grown   contemplation of  the  mysteries  of  existence   that  activate  the  world  in which   he  lives.  This  is  the  maturity  that   will  allow   the  new  completeness­ leading a full life -to replace  satisfactorily for the  period of mortal existence  the old,  the  childlike   awareness  of a  different   order.

A FEELING OF  COMPLETION




DAVID LANG  and   Keith   Maclean  and   Daddy Sherry   are seen  in  their  period  of mortal existence,  too,  and  at  the  end  of The  Kite David realizes  that   it  is  Daddy's  "awareness of  his  own  mortality" that  supplies   the completion he needs  to live his own life fully. David  already has intellect, but  as Donald Finlay  has  told  him,  intellect  by itself is insufficient:

"... intuition  is nearer  to life than intellect-or science ... That's why we have the arts, isn't it?"
"I suppose."
"It's one of the reasons I'm  a minister." "Just  what do you mean by living fully?"
"Expressing  your whole potentiality-taking advantage of every bit of elasticity
life offers and  stretching it to your profit. ... Liberty-freedom."


But  freedom does  not  mean  indulgence of appetite, nor  does it  mean  disregard of  all but  the  self.  Daddy Sherry,  for example, has led  a full life, has  taken  ad­ vantage of  its elasticity, and   though  in  his age  he  is at  times  cantankerous, he remains loyal  to his ideals  (Ramrod Parsons)   in spite  of the opportunity to turn Paradise Valley  to personal material gain.  He stays concerned, too, for his family  (Helen and  Keith), but,  as the  doctor  notes, " 'he steps  at  will into  the  past­ might  even  be a form  of adjustment for him.  His personality may  have  lost some of  its elasticity.' "
Daddy's life, which  in Helen's words" 'didn't encourage conformity-it gave
him  a  chance to  resist  imprint' ", has  therefore been  a  continual expression  of individuality within   the  framework of  a  given  environment. Because  it  has  ex­ pressed the  potentiality of the man,  it has brought him  happiness-an awareness of growth and  an  expectation of the future that  will not  allow  him  to die in the  spring  season.  Having achieved  the  completeness  of a full  life, Daddy  no longer  fears  death, just  as the  child,  who is unaware of death, also has  no  fear of it­ but  different, because  the  mature approach is a conscious  one. No longer  fearing death, he  must  still  continue to live fully, however,  for  once  he  consciously  lets time  live for  him-once  he  allows  his actions  to  be  governed by  the  clock - he  loses  the  attunement with  immortality that  allows  him  to  continue to  live. Hence he  can  say  to  Keith   Maclean:


"Get  to  ninety-five  an'  you're  immortal  agin-jist  as immortal  as you are  right now-settin' there ten years old on the front my porch step...."

A FEELING OF COMPLETION



The one  does  not  know  death, and  the  other  does  not  fear  it and  can  therefore destroy  time  by destroying  the  clock on  his one  hundred and  eleventh  birthday. Unlike  the others  at the Daddy Sherry  celebration, Daddy himself cannot partake in  any  "propitiation of the god of mortality". He  recognizes  it, and  that  suffices.
At  these  celebrations, however,  David  Lang  achieves  a new  completion of his own,  for  here  he  at  last  recognizes  the  necessary  relationship between  the  indi­ vidual   and   the  realities  of  life  and  death. Limbo  -surrender  to  the  negating power  of time -is  a kind  of death-in-life for the  journalist in him,  but elasticity  of self within  his own  environment, in place  and  in  time,  will allow immortality and  let the  artist  in  him create.  Recognition of this also allows  him  to anticipate a  full  future-out  of limbo-with  Helen  and  Keith Maclean.



BOTH DAVID    LANG  and   Brian   O'Connal, then,   undergo a process  of growth and  development that  results  in  their  increased awareness of
realities  beyond  the  physical.  But  though  their  situations are  in  a sense  comple­ mentary-the sensitive  boy  balancing emotion with  intellect and  the  man   in limbo  balancing intellect  with emotion-the two novels that  explore these situa­  tions  differ  markedly.
In  Canadian   Literature  No.  14,  Patricia Barclay   quotes   W.  0. Mitchell as
saying: "When I wrote Who  Has Seen the Wind, I didn't have  an answer. It was just a question, which  is a perfectly  fine reason  for  writing a novel.  In  The  Kite, there  is an  answer.... " The  answer  in The  Kite,  however, which  should  have become  apparent through the situation itself, is made so explicit  by the end of  the book  as  to  weaken   the  effect  of the  central symbol:

Now  he  knew  what  it  was that  Daddy  had  for  him-the  astonishingly  simple thing  the  old  man  had  to say-and  had  said  through   the  hundred   and  eleven years of his life -between  the personal deeds of his birth  and  his death,  knowing always  that   the  string  was  thin-that  it  could  be  dropped-that it  could  be snapped.  He  had  lived always with the awareness  of his own mortality.

But  Who  Has  Seen  the Wind   approaches the  question merely  from  a  different point  of view,  and  the same answer  is implicit  here  in the development that  takes place  in  the  novel  itself.
The flaws  which  weaken  The  Kite  do  not,  however, prevent an  appreciation of  the   concepts  that   Mitchell   attempts to  convey.   David   Lang's intellectually

A FEELING OF  COMPLETION



competent  approach to living recognizes the truth  of there  being life in art;  only when  he  tempers  his objectivity  with  emotional  intuitiveness,  however,  can  he recognize also that  there is art in life. His contact  with the forces of life when he visits Daddy  Sherry in Shelby allows him at last to see the short period of mortal existence as a continuum  that  does not "arrive  at anything" or "echo  anything" except  what  the individual  makes of it. If he orients physical reality  towards  the self only  or  if  he  reacts  only intellectually  towards  life, he deprives  himself of values  that   are  inherent   in  more  abiding  relationships;  and  if  he  indulges  in emotion  only,  he  again  lives in  a  world  populated  by self alone.  Only  by the balance   of  objective  reason  and   judgment  with  subjective  concem   and  con­ templation  can he enjoy the fullness that mortal existence offers. Brian O'Connal's development  is also one  that  brings  him  to an  awareness  of the  possibilities in mortal  life.  His  maturation  takes  him  from  unimpeded  emotional  indulgence when  confronted   with  death  to a  balance  beyond  his  child's  years that  allows him  to  recognize  intellectually  the  inevitability  of  death  and  yet to  appreciate through  his emotional  sensibility the abiding  expressions of transcendent perfec­ tion. Here, in Who  Has Seen the Wind, the answer to Mitchell's question is more subtly  revealed;  partly  because of this, and  partly  because of the  novel's  unity, its insight, and its world of suggestion, it manifests the strength of certain  artistry.


















33


LE JOURNALISME
AU CANADA	FRANCAIS




Adrien Therio






(,EST UN  TRUISME de dire que  Ia littCrature  canadienne est nee du  journalisme. C'est tout a fait dans l'ordre  des choses. Un pays colonial
et  par surcroit  une colonie qui  passe aux mains d'etrangers ne peut se permettre d'evoleur,  sur le plan intellectuel et litteraire,  comme l'ont  fait les vieux pays. Un peu  remis de la guerre de la conquete,  apres  I 76o, les Fran  ais
serent  d'abord a vivre, non a s'exprimer  dans des livres. Mais il ne leur fallut pas
longtemps  pour se rendre compte que s'ils voulaient  vraiment  demeurer  Fran  ais en  terre  d'Amerique, i1 leur  faudrait defendre  leurs droits.  C'est  pour  defendre ces droits que le Canadien vit le jour au commencement du dix-neuvieme  siecle.
Le  premier   journal  public  au  Canada fut  La  Gazette  de  Quebec   (I 764), d'information surtout  politique,  redige en anglais  et en fran ais.
chronologique,  la  Gazette  du  commerce   et  litteraire  (I 778)   qui  s'appela   la Gazette   Litteraire  apres  quelques  numeros,  fondee   par   un  Fran ais, Mesplet;  la Gazette  de Montreal  (1785)   et le Courrier de Quebec  (q88). Ces trois  derniers  journaux,  tout  comme  la Gazette  de Quebec, etaient  redigees en anglais  et en fran ais,
les Anglais qui  montraient  peu d'ardeur a defendre  les interets des Canadiens  de
langue fran<;aise. Il faut se rappeler aussi qu'avant la constitution  de I 79 I, il fallait une  permission speciale pour imprimer  les nouvelles du  jour. Jusqu'en I8o6,  nos journaux  se contenterent  de publier de brefs rapports  des seances de la chambre. Il n'etait  pas question de critiquer  le gouvernement. D'ailleurs,  deux de ces quatre journaux  seulement  eurent  une carriere  assez longue.  Le Courrier de Quebec  ne fut public qu'une fois et la Gazette Litteraire ne dura qu'un an.
Le vrai journalisme canadien  commence avec Le Canadien, fonde en I8o6 par
Pierre Bedard qui avait a ses  cotes comme collaborateurs D.-B. Viger, F. Blanchet,
J.-T. Taschereau et  quelques  autres  mecenes qui  contribuerent autant de  leur


34

LE JOURNALISME AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



argent  que  de  leur  plume  a cette  oeuvre  qu'ils  jugeaient  necessaire.  Il faut  noter que l'annee precedente, soit en  I8o5,  un autre  journal,  anglais  celui-la, le Mercury avait  ete  fonde   a  Quebec et  ne  se genait   pas  pour  repeter que  la  province   de Quebec etait  encore  beaucoup trop franc,;aise et qu'il  fallait se hater  de l'angliciser. C'est  en  partie pour  repondre a cette feuille que  le Canadien parut. Meme  si les editoriaux de ce journal n'etaient pas signes, le ton etait  trop  ose pour legouverne­ ment  du temps,  et en  I 8 I o tous les principaux collaborateurs furent arretes et mis en  prison.  Fleury   Mesplet avait   donne   l'exemple   qui  avait  lui-meme gofite  de la prison  pour  avoir  voulu  se meler  de parler  religion.  La tradition ne devait  pas se perdre. La  plupart de nos journalistes  d'envergure iront faire  un  jour ou I'autre leur  tour  en  prison.
Le Canadien reparut pendant quelque temps en  I8Ig, mais c'est en  I82o,  avec Flavien   Vallerand  qu'il   entreprend  la  deuxieme  etape   de  sa  vie  qui  devait  se terminer cette  fois  en  I825. C'est  pendant cette  deuxieme etape,  en  I822,  qu'­ Etienne Parent en  devient le  redacteur. Mais  c'est  en  I 8g I  que  renait  pour  de bon  le Canadien, sous !'impulsion de  Parent, qui  avait  reussi  dans l'entre-temps a faire  son droit. Le  journal a pour  devise:  Nos Institutions, notre  langue  et nos
lois. C'est  a ce moment que  s'engage vraiment la lutte  entre  le parti anglais  et le
parti franc,;ais, au  sujet  de  la  langue  franc,;aise, des ecoles franc,;aises, de la  consti­ tution,  de  la  representation  canadienne-franc,;aise   a  l'Assemblee et  surtout  du gouvemement  responsable. Parent s'est  de  plus interesse  a !'education, au  com­ merce  et a l'industrie. Un  des premiers  chez nous, il a conseille aux  Canadiens de se meler  a la  vie economique du  pays. Un  des premiers  aussi, il a reclame  ''!'in­ struction obligatoire pour  tous  les enfants".  Etienne Parent n'etait peut-etre pas un fin styliste mais sa prose garde encore aujourd-hui une certaine distinction. On peut  sourire  en  parcourant  certaines de  ses conferences ou  il essaie de  jouer  au grand   philosophe, mais  ceci ne diminue en rien son merite comme  joumaliste de combat. Sa prose sobre  et claire, son  talent  de polemiste  nous permettent de relire ses articles  sans  impatience.
Avant   que  ne  paraissent d'autres  joumaux de  combat,  mentionnons-en trois qui voulurent donner plus de place aux arts, aux lettres et aux sciences:  le S pecta­ teur,  fonde  en  I8Ig, l'Aurore en  I8IS, et l'Aurore  des Canadas en  I8IJ. Michel Bibaud   eut  l'audace dans   l'Aurore  des  Canadas   de  publier a  cote de  textes d'auteurs classiques  les poemes  et les chansons  des premiers bardes canadiens.
La  Minerve  toute   devouee   aux  interets  du  parti  conservateur vit  le  jour  en I826. Elle etait  propriete deL. Duvernay. Ce journal  eut  une influence profonde sur  les destinees  du  pays  et  plusieurs  collaborateurs de  marque l'illustrerent, au

35

LE JOURNALISME AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



nombre desquels  on  peut  remarquer Gerin-Lajoie, Oscar Dunn, A.  Decelles  et R.  Bellemarre. Elle  s'etait  donne  pour  but  de  defendre les intere:ts canadiens en politique et des son premier  numero louait  le systeme  representatif qui  "a  couvert
!'Amerique de  nouveaux Etats  composes  de citoyens  honnetes et libres  ..." Elle aussi insiste sur !'instruction et ses bienfaits.  Avec  Ia Minerve etait  ne le premier journal   de  couleur  politique.
Un  des journaux les plus populaires de l'epoque et que  peu de gens connaissent aujourd'hui fut sans doute  le Fantasque  qui,  fonde  en 1837,  mourut a differentes reprises pour  renaitre a l'heure ou I'on s'y attendait le moins. Legrand responsable de ce journal  humoristique, celui qui le redigeait du commencement a Ia fin, etait
Napoleon Aubin, un  Suisse emigre  au  Canada en  1834.  Si nous  voulons  trouver de !'humour dans  nos lettres,  c'est dans  le journalisme qu'il  faut  l'aller  chercher. Napoleon Aubin  est le premier  de nos journalistes a savoir  manier l'ironie. II s'en
est  pris  a plusieurs  politiciens  du  temps,  a tous  nos travers. Ce  qu'il faut  savoir
surtout, c'est  que  le  Fantasque   malgre  son  ton  Ieger,  ses sautes  d'humeur  pas toujours serieuses,  a eu une tres grande influence dans  son temps,  principalement pendant les troubles de  1837-38. Grand admirateur de  Napoleon, Aubin  devait
l'etre  aussi de  Papineau. IIle fut  peut-etre un  peu  trop,  car  a son  tour,  il connut
les  honneurs de  Ia  prison.  II  y resta  deux  mois.  Mais  ce  n'etait pas  pour  faire peur  a notre  homme. Aubin  trouvait toujours le tour  de faire  renaitre son journal.
Et  les Quebecois s'en  delectaient. Aubin  ne s'en  est pas  tenu  au  Fantasque. II a fonde  et redige  aussi le Castor, le Canadien Independant, et il a ete collaborateur au  Canadien, a Ia  Tribune et  au  Pays.  En  resume,   Napoleon Aubin   a  ete  le fondateur de  Ia petite  presse au  Canada fran ais
par  son  patriotisme, merite  d'etrc mieux  connu.
Voici  maintenant un  ennemi  de  Papineau:  Joseph-Edouard Cauchon. Apres avoir  fait  son droit,  Cauchon etait  entre  comme  assistant-directeur au  Canadien, alors dirige  par  Etienne Parent. Cauchon ne pratiqua pas le droit  mais il pratique
la  politique et  le  journalisme. II fut  tour  a tour,  depute, ministre, president du
senat,  president de Ia Compagnie du Chemin de fer du  Nord,  et meme lieutenant­ gouverneur du  Manitoba en  1877.  II a  poursuivi sa carriere  politique en  meme temps  que  sa carriere de  journaliste. Desireux, dans  ce  domaine, de voler  de ses propres ailes, il fonda en  1842,  de concert  avec  un  beau-frere, Augustin Cote,  le
journal  de  Quebec, une  feuille  qui  devait  par  Ia suite  prendre de !'importance,
a cause  justement du  ton emporte de son  directeur. Cauchon s'en  est pris a tout
le monde  et ses coleres ont  ete parfois  terribles.  II n'a  pas craint en maintes occa­
sions  de se contredire. C'est  ainsi qu'il  ecrivit  une  brochure pour  prouver que  Ia

LE  JOURNALISME AU CANADA  FRANCAIS



confederation  n'etait  pas une chose possible et que quelques annees  plus tard,  il en ecrivit une autre  pour prouver le contraire. Dans ses polemiques, il usait parfois de  termes  assez grossiers, mais il avait  souvent  de l'esprit.  Cauchon  est une des figures les plus originales que le journalisme canadien  ait produit.
Une  autre  figure  imposante  de  cette  periode  est  Louis-A. Dessaules, qui  fut
d'abord  collaborateur de l'Avenir, journal  qui  avait  ete fonde  en  1847  par  un groupe de jeunes gens a I'esprit liberal. L'ame de ce journal fut pendant longtemps
celui qu'on  a appele !'enfant  terrible, Eric Dorion. Faisons ici un effort pour nous remettre  un peu dans I'esprit du temps. Les troubles de 37-38 n'etaient pas encore apaises. Papineau etait  devenu  un  heros national.  Et  Papineau  a ete l'ame diri­ geante  du  liberalisme  qui  envahit  le  pays  a  ce moment-la.  Des  journaux se fonderent   a  Quebec   comme  a  Montreal   pour  defendre  les  idees  liberales  de Papineau   et  de  ses disciples, au  nombre  desquels, il y eut 1'Avenir, le Pays, le journal  de Quebec  et meme la Patrie fondee en 1854. Ce fut  ce qu'on  a appele l'ere du rougisme et qui conduisit les tenants de I'ecole a fonder l'lnstitut Canadien  d'illustre  memoire.  Du  cote  conservateur,  il y avait  la  Minerve, le Courrier  du Canada  et plus tard  la Presse. Ce liberalisme a  outrance  devint  presque  aussitot
de  l'anti-clericalisme a outrance.   Louis-A. Dessaules qui  fut  un  des fondateurs
de  l'lnstitut Canadien  et  en  fut  le president  pendant  plusieurs  annees,  est l'un des piliers de cette ecole liberale. Apres avoir collabore a l'Avenir, il prit la direc­ tion  du  Pays,  journal  qui  avait  ete fonde  en  1852  pour  rallier  certains  esprits liberaux  qui  ne voulaient  plus suivre l'Avenir. Ce fut  une epoque florissante  en polemiques.  L'Avenir proposait  2 I  reformes, parmi lesquelles il y avait I'abolition de la dime, !'annexion aux  Etats-Unis  et la secularisation  des reserves du clerge. Le  Pays  pour  sa  part   presentait  29  propositions  des son  premier  numero.   En voici quelques  unes:  abolition  du  pretendu  gouvernement  responsable,  abolition du  Conseil  Legislatif,  separation   de l'Eglise et de l'Etat,  abolition  des pensions payees par  l'Etat, annexion  aux Etats-Unis,  reforme de !'education, etc. Louis-A. Dessaules s'est  battu   avec  une  ardeur  de  croise pour  faire  triompher les idees liberales de son ecole, ou plutot  de son Institut. Certains de ses articles nous don­ nent une assez juste idee de la fureur anti-clericale du temps. Dessaules a certaine­  ment  bien  merite  du  Pays et de l'Institut  Canadien,  mais si les idees qu'il  a de­ fendues  nous interessent  encore  aujourd'hui, il faut  ajouter  que  son style n'etait
pas a la hauteur de la tache.  Dessaules ecrivait aussi mal que faire se peut.
On  ne peut  passer sous silence, pendant  la meme periode, deux  journalistes qui ont eu une  certaine  influence sur leur  milieu, meme s'ils n'appartenaient pas au groupe liberal: Hector  Fabre  et Oscar Dunn.  Le premier a commence sa carriere

37

LE JOURNALISME AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



a  l'Ordre  qui  representait le  liberalisme   modere a  cote  de  l'autre a  l'emporte­ piece,  pour  entrer en  I863  ala redaction du  Canadien  et fonder enfin,  en  I86g,  l'Evenement. Hector  Fabre  avait  de  l'esprit et  c'est  dans   ce  journal qu'il   a deploye  toutes  les ressources  de sa verve et de son  ironie.  C'est  Ia aussi qu'il  prit plaisir  a  attaquer un  de ses adversaires preferes: Joseph-Edouard  Cauchon. On  oublie  peut-etre trap  que 1' Evenement  de Quebec a ete pendant plusieurs  annees  un  journal tres  populaire et  recherche, grace  a son  directeur  Hector Fabre. On  n'oserait pas classer  Fabre dans  la  galerie  des grands  journalistes, mais il merite  une  place  d'honneur parmi nos bans  journalistes. 11 ecrivait bien et quelques uns de  ses articles  sont  encore  d'actualite. Quand a  Oscar  Dunn, il fut  redacteur au Courrier  de  Saint-Hyacinthe et  c'est  la  qu'il  attire d'abord !'attention par  ses editoriaux. 11 passa  ensuite  a la  Minerve  et s'y  fit egalement remarquer par  son ecriture et le ton  sabre  de ses polemiques. Mentionnons encore  L.-0. David  qui fut  l'un  des fondateurs de !'Opinion  Publique,  en  I87o, et qui  eut son  heure  de gloire.  M.  David  s'est  taille  dans  le  temps  une  reputation  enviable et  son  nom peut  rester  associe a ceux de Fabre, Dunn  et Arthur  Buies.
L'arrivee d'Arthur Buies sur la scene marque une date importante dans l'histoire du  journalisme canadien-fran ais.
Buies  rentra au  pays,  se fit  avocat  et  se  livra  ensuite   au  journalisme avec  une
ardeur peu commune. Revenu  d'Europe avec des idees ultra-liberales, il entreprit d'eclairer le peuple  canadien qui  vivait  encore  dans  les tenebres de !'ignorance.
11 fonda pour  propager ses idees La Lanterne, a l'instar de La Lanterne de Roche­
fort,  puis 1'I nde pendant  et  le Reveil.  C'est  avec  La Lanterne  qu'il  s'est  fait  une reputation de polemiste  violent. 11 prit part  a la querelle qui  opposait l'Institut Canadien   et  Mgr   Bourget  et  n'y  alla pas   de  main  morte.  L'Archeveque de Montreal et le clerge en general  furent plus d'une fois les cibles de ce franc-tireur. Mais  Buies  savait  ecrire.  On  l'a  souvent  compare a  Rochefort et  a  Paul-Louis Courrier et  il  faut  admettre que  le disciple  canadien n'etait pas  indigne de  ses maitres fran  ais.
queur. On  retrouve  dans  ses chroniques quelques phrases  lourdes, mais  certaines de  ces pages  peuvent encore  figurer  dans  une  anthologie. Buies avait  aussi beau­ coup  d'esprit, ce qui  n'est  pas  un  tort  pour  un  joumaliste. Cet  esprit  l'a servi  et desservi,  mais  en  depit  des  reserves  qu'on peut  faire  a son  egard, il  reste  un  de nos  grands  journalistes   canadiens.
11  n'est   peut-etre  pas  mauvais, apres  Arthur Buies,  de  parler de  Jules-Paul Tardive! qui  s'est  fait,  a peu  pres dans  le meme  temps,  le champion de la presse catholique et ultramontaine. Tardive! a fonde  la verite, a Quebec, en  I 88 I. Alors

LE JOURNALISME AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



que  Buies se faisait le champion  du  liberalisme, Tardive! entreprit une sorte de campagne  de purification  du  peuple canadien.  II precha,  comme il est dit dans l'Evangile,  a temps et a contre-temps,  et pourchassa les ennemis de l'Eglise avec des elans de neophyte.  II s'est de plus interesse a !'education et a Ia langue fran­ c;aise. II publia  une  brochure  intitulee: La  Langue   franr;aise au Canada  qui fut repandue   avec  les benedictions  de  presque  tous les eveques et  archeveques  du Canada. II en veut aux anglicismes, mais il defend avec brio Ia langue  paysanne et ses archaismes.  Malgre les exagerations de son directeur, Ia V bite  garde encore une  place  importante parmi  nos meilleurs  journaux.
Pour  terminer   cette  periode,  mentionnons  Israel  Tarte   qui  fut  directeur  du Canadien d'abord et de Ia Patrie  ensuite, et qui ecrivit des articles assez violents contre  la  politique  de  Laurier.  Tarte  avait  moins d'envergure que  Tardive! et Buies, mais sa prose se lisait sans difficulte.

Nous ENTRONS maintenant dans la periode contemporaine avec  Olivar  Asselin, Jules  Fournier  et Henri  Bourassa. Ces trois journalistes ont
illustre  la  periode  de  nationalisme  intense  des annees  1900-1920.  C'est  Olivar Asselin qui  a  ete le fondateur de Ia ligue nationaliste  en  1903. II lui fallait  un journal  pour  defendre  ses idees.  II  fonda  le  Nationaliste en  1904.  Avec Jules Fournier  qui etait passe par Ia Presse et le Canada  avant d'arriver au Nationaliste, Asselin a fait  campagne  apres  campagne  pour defendre  Ia politique  de Ia Ligue qui  s'accordait assez bien avec celle de Bourassa, en politique  federale  d'abord, provinciale  ensuite.  Le  N ationaliste   soutint  a  ce moment-la  des luttes  epiques contre  le gouvernement  Laurier  a Ottawa  d'une  part, et le gouvernement Gouin a Quebec  d'autre part.  Les polemiques furent si rudes que Fournier  et Asselin connurent eux aussi Ia prison.  Mais comme ils n'y sejournerent   jamais en meme temps,  le  N ationaliste   survecut.
Bourassa  preferait  avoir  son propre  porte-parole  et fonda  le Devoir  en 1910. Asselin et Fournier  y entrerent comme collaborateurs  mais en sortient  au bout de quelques  mois. Habitues  d'avoir  leurs coudees £ranches, ils ne pouvaient  accepter de se plier a une discipline etrangere.  Le Nationaliste  continua sa carriere  jusqu'en
1922, mais apres le depart  d'Asselin et Fournier en 1910, c'est le Devoir  qui devint
Ie veritable  organe  des  nationalistes  militants.  On  ne saurait   trop  insister  sur
!'importance du  Devoir  dans  notre vie nationale.  II a ete et reste encore,  malgre certaines  tendances   politiques  passageres  bien  comprehensibles,  un  journal  in­ dependant. Bourassa  s'adjoignit, a  Ia  redaction,  des  journalistes  comme  Orner

39

LE JOURNALISME AU  CANADA FRANCAIS



Heroux  qui s'est fait le champion des minorites fran<_;aises au Canada, et Georges Pelletier qui y signa d'excellents editoriaux  et succeda a son maitre  a la direction du  journal.  L'influence  du Devoir s'est fait sentir dans tous les domaines de notre vie politique,  economique, sociale, religieuse et litteraire.
La carriere d'Asselin et de Fournier  ne s'est pourtant pas arretee avec leur experience  au  Devoir. Apres avoir collabore quelque  temps ala Patrie,  Fournier fondait  l'Action, le  journalle plus litteraire  et le mieux ecrit que nous ayons eu au Canada. Ses polemiques furent moins retentissantes, mais les critiques litteraires qu'il publia dans cet hebdomadaire  firent connaitre  un nouvel aspect de son talent. A  n'en   pas  douter,  Fournier  reste l'une  des  plus  belles intelligences  qui  aient
illustre  le  journalisme  canadien.  Malheureusement, il mourut   a trente-trois  ans,
au  moment  oil d'autres  commencent  leur  carriere.
Asselin, pour sa part,  revint au  journalisme  avec l'Ordre. Il s'etait  entoure  de journalistes de reelle valeur tels que Georges Langlois, Jean-Marie Nadeau,  Albert Pelletier,  Valdombre et  Berthelot  Brunet.  Rendons  hommage  en  passant  a  ce dernier  qui fut  un humoriste comme nous en eCimes peu au Canada  et qui avait, en  sus, beaucoup  de talent.  Mais l'Ordre quitta  l'arene  apres que  l'archeveque de  Quebec  en  eut  deconseille la  lecture.  Asselin cependant n'avait  pas dit  son dernier  mot. Il fonda encore la Renaissance  qui ne fit pas long feu et passa enfin au Canada pour servir un maitre qu'il avait combattu  pendant longtemps. Meme au Canada, Asselin eut soin de conserver une independance a peu pres complete.
Asselin eut  beaucoup  d'influence  sur la  jeunesse et les ecrivains de son temps. Il a preche  toute sa vie l'amour  de la langue fran<_;aise et du travail bien fait. Il a exhorte  les Canadiens  fran<_;ais  a  retoumer   aux  sources de  l'esprit  fran<_;ais. Ses
idees avancees le firent passer a certains moments, tout comme Fournier  d'ailleurs,
pour  anti-clt' rical.
calomnies.  Olivar  Asselin est la figure la  plus  illustre  du  joumalisme  canadien. Par  son style autant que par sa pensee, il a ete l'inspirateur de plus d'une generation.
Un  disciple  d'Asselin, Jean-Charles Harvey  entreprit de suivre  les traces  du maitre  et fonda  le jour qui n'a  jamais ete vu d'un  bon oeil par les catholiques de droite.  Harvey  a quand  meme montre beaucoup de courage et il merite une place d'honneur dans  la galerie de nos  journalistes. Ses phrases  ne sont  pas toujours aussi coulantes qu'on  le souhaiterait,  mais il a ecrit, certains  jours, des articles remarquables. Lui aussi d'ailleurs  avait su s'entourer de travailleurs  competents. Mentionnons Charles  Doyon, le pere  Carmel  Brouillard,  Emile-Charles  Hamel et Henri  Tranquille.

LE  JOURNALISME AU  CANADA  FRANCAIS


La Patrie  ( r854), journal  liberal a l'origine, a eu aussi dans notre vie nationale une  certaine  influence.  Cette  influence se fit sentir d'abord   dans  les annees  qui suivirent  Ia fondation  de I'Institut Canadien, et plus tard,  avec Louis Francoeur,
dont  Ia mort  a 46 ans fut  un  deuil national.  Francoeur  devait  redorer  le blason
du  journal  par  des  chroniques   brillantes  et  une interpretation des evenements dont  il avait seulle tour.  Eustache  Letellier de Saint-Juste  prit sa succession.
Enfin le Canada a ete pendant une cinquantaine d'annees  un journal important au Canada fran<;ais. Avant  Olivar Asselin, on y avait vu des joumalistes de valeur. Edmond  Turcotte rempla<;a Asselin et continua  son oeuvre avec un certain  brio. Ce journal a eu Ia chance d'avoir  des chroniqueurs de Ia trempe de Rene Garneau
dont  Ia prose etait  excellente et de Jean  Le Moyne qui alliait a un style tres per­
sonnel  une  pensee religieuse elevee qui  derangeait  un  peu les fa<;ons de voir de nos catholiques  bien-pensants.
II faut  aussi faire  mention  de quelques  journalistes qui ant  reussi a se faire un
nom dans divers joumaux.  Roger Duhamel a commence de publier ses chroniques litteraires  dans  le  Devoir. II  a collabore  a plusieurs  journaux  par  Ia suite et sa prose a toujours  ete egale a elle-meme. Duhamel a ete pendant longtemps un chef
de file parmi  nos intellectuels  avec Victor Barbeau  qui  a peut-etre  fait moins de journalisme,  mais  a  reussi  a s'imposer  comme styliste et  penseur.  valdombre  a
publie  des articles un peu  partout.  II a fonde des cahiers qui ant  eu une grande vogue et il a utilise Ia radio  pour mieux se faire entendre.  Enfin, Fernand  Denis, au  Petit  journal, s'est  acquis  une bonne reputation.
Parmi  les joumaux  de province qui, de nos jours, tiennent  une place de choix dans  cette  nomenclature, il y a d'abord  le Droit  d'Ottawa qui a ete fonde pour defendre  les droits  des minorites  fran<;aises de !'Ontario. Toute  une  pleiade  de joumalistes s'y sont fait Ia main. Les plus connus sont probablement Camille I'Heureux et Guy Sylvestre. Le Nouvelliste  de Trois-Rivieres est un journal soigne
et dont !'information est juste. C'est un des seuls joumaux  de province  a posseder
une  page  litteraire  avec  I'Echo  du  Bas Saint-Laurent de  Rimouski,  et !'Action
(hier  encore  !'Action Catholique)  de Quebec.  Le Solei!,  le  journal  le plus  im­ portant  de Quebec,  a mis bien du temps a  comprendre  que les arts et les lettres interessaient les lecteurs. II vient tout juste d'inaugurer une page a cette intention.
Les  journaux  les plus  importants au  pays  a l'heure  actuelle  sont  sans doute le Devoir  et Ia Presse. Le Devoir  a perdu depuis quelques  annees des journalistes de valeur,  tels que Jean-Marc Leger qui y a fait des reportages  remarquables sur
Ia situation intemationale et Gilles Marcotte qui s'est occupe pendant quelques annees  de Ia chronique litteraire.  Mais Gilles Marcotte  continue  son travail  a Ia

LE  JOURNALISME AU CANADA  FRANCAIS



Presse.  Il  y  a  encore  au  Devoir  des  hommes de  talent, comme  son  directeur, Gerard Filion  qui  ne soigne  pas toujours sa langue, mais  qui  n'ecrit jamais  pour rien  dire; il y a  aussi Andre  Laurendeau qui  suit  de  pres  tous les evenements de notre  vie nationale et les interprete avec beaucoup d'intelligence. Andre  Lauren­
deau   ne  fait  jamais  de  grandes coleres,  mais  il reussit,  peut-etre meme  a  cause de sa ponderation et de sa distinction, a tenir  tete  a des adversaires bien en place.
La  Presse n'a  pas toujours  ete aussi soignee  qu'elle l'est  aujourd'hui. Elle a ete pendant longtemps un  journal  de  pietre  information. C'est  Jean-Louis Gagnon, grand voyageur  et  journaliste  d'envergure, qui  a pour  ainsi dire nettoye  la maison et  refait  sa toilette. Mais Jean-Louis Gagnon s'est  lance  dans  une  nouvelle  aven­ ture  avec le Nouveau-journal, aventure qui  n'a  pas dure  un an mais qui a souleve beaucoup d'enthousiasme. Il a ete remplace par  un autre journaliste de caractere, Gerard Pelletier. Ce dernier  a continue de  reorganiser la maison,  et son ecriture nerveuse   jointe  a  son  talent   de  polemiste  ardent en  font  un  des  meilleurs  edi­
torialistes   du   Canada fran  ais.                                                    a son  service  depuis
longtemps des  critiques comme  Jean Beraud  et  Marcel Valois  qui  connaissent a fond   leur  metier.
Les  journalistes dont  la  voix  est  la  plus  ecoutee, a l'heure  actuelle, semblent
etre   Andre   Laurendeau,  Jean-Louis Gagnon  et   Gerard  Pelletier,   auxquels  il faudrait peut-etre ajouter Pierre-Elliott Trudeau  qui ne collabore a aucun journal,
mais  qui  publie  des articles  dans  Cite Libre  et ailleurs  qui  sont  tres remarques.
Quelle   difference y a-t-il  entre  le  joumalisme d'aujourd'hui  et le  journalisme d'hier?  Le   journalisme  est  devenu   depuis   quelques  annees   une  profession   au Canada fran ais.
Un  grand nombre de  nos  journalistes,   a l'heure  actuelle, sont  des gens  cultives
et  plusieurs  d'entre eux ecrivent  bien.  Il y en eut  aussi dans  le passe qui  savaient manier la langue, mais ils faisaient  plutot  d'exception. Quand ala matiere traitee, elle ne differe  peut-etre pas tellement, si on tient  compte du temps  et de l'histoire. Au  dix-neuvieme siecle, on  parlait de l'Union des Canadas, de  la  confederation des provinces,  des Metis de !'Ouest, d'autonomie provinciale et de pots-de-vin, des difficultes  scolaires  des minorites  fran aises
du  clerge  dans  plusieurs  domaines, notamment dans  !'education, de !'instruction gratuite et  obligatoire, de la  creation   d'une  universite a  Montreal, comme  suc­ cursale   de  Laval, d'un  drapeau national, d'une  loterie  nationale,  de  cercles d'etude, de  fermes  experimentales, d'efforts de  guerre, du  cours  classique  ou  il faudrait mettre plus de sciences exactes et naturelles, de notre langue qui degener­ ait   au   point   de  n'etre plus   reconnaissable; on  discutait  de  graves  questions

LE   JOURNALISME AU  CANADA FRANCAIS


economiques  et sociales;  on craignait  le communisme  et le socialisme a peu pres egalement.  y a-t-il beaucoup  de difference avec les sujets d'importance qui retien­ nent  les journalistes  d'aujourd'hui? Sans doute,  nous avons evolue et  les sujets d'actualite, que ce soit en politique, en economie, en sociologie, en education,  en matieres religieuses, sont  traites  avec plus de savoir-faire.  Mais nous sommes lies
a une tradition  et cette tradition  obligera encore longtemps nos meilleurs journaux
a combattre pour la defense de nos droits et le redressement de notre vie nationale.
N'est-ce pas d'ailleurs  le devoir de tout journal qui se respecte?















43


WESTERN	PANORAMA
Settings and Themes in Robert]. C. Stead




A. T. Elder







TOUGH THE NOVELS of Robert J. C. Stead have '<Ceived some notice  from  the historians of Canadian literature, especially  in Edward McCourt's The  Canadian  West  in  Fiction, no study  has  yet  examined the  entire  range  of Stead's novels  on  Western   themes.  Yet  the  full  import of  these  novels  is best revealed   by considering them  as parts  of a single  body  of  writing  on  the  West. Considered individually, they seem chiefly  remarkable for their  flaws;  considered in toto,  with  special  attention to their  settings  and  themes, they  reveal  a breadth of achievement not obvious in the single novels and  a seriousness  of purpose often obscured by the  too-favourable view of the  prairie environment, the  occasionally weak  characterization of  major  figures,  and  the  runaway plots  of the  individual novels.
Stead's difficulty  with  plots  is nowhere   more  evident than   in  his  first  novel, The  Bail Jumper.  Ray  Burton, a  store  clerk  unjustly accused  of robbing a safe to which  only he and  his employer, Mr.  Gardiner, have  keys, had  to contend not only  with  Gardiner, who is secretly  trying  to ruin  him,  but  also with  an  obvious villain,  Hiram Riles, a miserly  bad-tempered farmer, and  with  two private detec­ tives-one  a  female-who are  searching for  the  missing  money.  If  this  had been  Stead's only  novel,  it would  scarcely  warrant a second  look. As the  first of seven,  it  merits  some  attention, especially since it takes  place  in  Plainville, Mani­ toba,   and   the  Alberta foothills,  the  principal settings   of  the  later   novels,  and suggests  most  of  Stead's major   themes.
Plainville  is not  specifically  located  in  The   Bail Jumper, but  in  The  Home­
steaders is  placed  east  of  Turtle  Mountain, the  approximate location   of  Cart-


44

WESTERN PANORAMA



wright, Manitoba, to  which  Stead,  at  the  age  of two,  travelled   with  his family in I 882,  the  year in which  the settling  of the Plainville  area  begins in The Home­ steaders. In  this second  novel, published  in  I9I6, two years after The  Bail  jumper, we  find  references to  some  of  the  characters who  appear in  the  first,  including John Burton, the  father of the  hero of The  Bail jumper, and  meet again the two villains  of  the  earlier novel,  Hiram Riles  and  Mr.  Gardiner,  who  are  also  the villains  of  the  second.  Stead's last  two  novels,  The  Smoking  Flax  ( I924)  and Grain  (I 92 6), are  also laid  in  the  Plainville  area,  largely  during and  following  the  first  world  war.  There is much  more  overlapping of  characters and  plots  in this  second  pair  of  novels,  but  little  connection with  the  early  books,  though, as reference   is  made   to  Sempter and  Burton's general  store, there  is a  slight  link with  Ray  Burton in  The  Bail  jumper, who, in  that  novel's  conclusion, agrees  to manage  the  store  owned   by  Mr.  Sempter. Stead's  other   favourite setting,   the foothills  of Alberta, appears in  the  latter  part  of  The  Homesteaders  and  in The  Cow  Puncher and  Dennison Grant,  as well as in The  Bail jumper.
One  can  only  begin  to suggest  the detail  with  which  Stead  presents  his history of  Plainville.  Its  beginnings are  seen  in  The   Homesteaders  in  the  account of Harris's trek  northward  by  sleigh  from  Emerson in  I 882, his  selection  of   a quarter-section and  building of a sod hut,  and  the early  development of the area as more  settlers  appear. The  account to this point  emphasizes the cooperation of the new community in the face of hardships. The  changed  attitude of the farmers as they  achieve  prosperity is the  main  theme  of The  Homesteaders; to present  it, Stead, having  barely  established his settlers, skips twenty-five  years to I 907.  And,  since  the desire  for  new land  and  greater wealth leads John Harris westward and  away  from  Plainville, we must  turn  for a fuller account  of the community in these years to the story  of Gander's growing  up in  Grain. Gander is born  and  raised  in the  house  of  poplar logs built  by his father, Jackson  Stake.  At the  age  of five he goes to  the  country school,  "a room  of  four  walls and  a ceiling,  with  a door  in the  east,  windows in  the  north, and  blackboards above  the  wainscoting on  the west and  south", where  he learns  to play  Porn,  Porn, Pull-away and  "Drowndin' Out Gophers", and  absorbs  as little as possible of learning. Gander's real interest  is in  farming, so that  by  the  time  he is ten  he is driving  a  two-horse  team  on  a mower,   not  long  after,   a  four-horse team  on  a  binder, and  soon  is aspiring to operate  a  steam   thresher.
The  coming of war  to Plainville  is described  in Grain. In  I9 I4,  when  Gander
is eighteen, his father finally  builds  the  house  he has been  promising his wife for so  many  years.

45

WESTERN  PANORAMA



First  a  carpet,  which cost him eleven dollars  ... ; then  ... a  parlor  suite with birch  mahogany  arms  and  brightly  patterned   upholstery  and  crimson  furbelows that  hung close to the carpet,  and a rocking chair  with springs that  squeaked ... ; then  a  polished oak centre  table  on legs as spindly  as those of a young calf, on which  to set photographs  and  Minnie's  copy of "Songs  of a Sourdough" ....

This year  also  brings  the  telephone and  the  automobile, "that cost  two  cents  a mile  for  gasoline  an'  the  rest o'  your  bank  roll for  incidentals". Stirring as these events  are,  they  are soon accepted in the excitement of the approaching war.  On the  day  of  its  outbreak Gander  and  Jackson   Stake  drive  to  Plainville, to  find its streets  "lined with  buggies  and  motor  cars;  the  livery stables  full;  every hitch­ ing  post  occupied". Even  the  Stakes,  both   unused   to  displaying  emotion, are smitten with war-fever  and  cheer a gang of youths parading an effigy of the Kaiser  into  the  Roseland Emporium to  demand a sauerkraut cocktail.  While  the  Ger­  mans  are  forcing  their  way  across  the  Yser, Gander takes  over  the  operation of Bill Powers's  steam  thresher, throttling the  forces impelling him  to war  by work­ ing  fourteen hours  a day  on  the  farm. Though touched  occasionally by the  war on  his  infrequent trips  to  Plainville,  he  is more  interested in  the  new  forms  of power   than   in  world  events,  hanging about  the  grain   elevators, fascinated  by their  gasoline  engines.  That year  Jackson   Stake  buys  his  first  Ford  car,  which prosperity replaces  with  a  Dodge.  Grain  concentrates on  the  effect  of  the  first World  War  on Gander, but  we see as well its impact on the whole community: the recruiting of men,  the  news of the  first  casualties, the  rise in  the  price  of wheat, the  efforts-not for  money-to grow  more  grain, the  end  of  the  war,  and the  return of the  veterans.
Grain pays little  attention to the  rural  life of Manitoba following  the  war,  but
this  part  of Plainville's history  is filled out  in The  Smoking  Flax. Some  elements in  the  picture are  unchanged: the  school  Cal  Beach's adopted son  Reed  attends is  that   to  which   Gander  went,  and   the   upholstered  chair   in  Jackson   Stake's parlour is the same that  added  glory to the new house in Grain; but many  changes are  evident. Plainville   itself  with   its  double row  of  cars on  Main   Street   has changed greatly  from  the settlement that  Ray  Burton knew. It is still a makeshift community, but  one  with  a  growing   social  sense:   "To the  first  generation of pioneers  the farm-hand is preferred above the bank  clerk;  to the second,  the bank clerk  is preferred, a little,  above  the  farm-hand; in  the  third, collars  and  cuffs are in the saddle."
There  Plainville is left  at  the  pinnacle of its  pre-World-War-II  development. We  see  that   no  strict  chronological sequence  is followed  in  the  novels;  indeed,

WESTERN PANORAMA



there is much  leaping  about in and overlapping of time. Obviously, then, Stead  did not intend a connected history  of more  than  forty years in the life of a Manitoba farming community or  a saga  of the  people  of that  community. Rather, having created the setting  in his first novel, he retained it as a convenience and  provided only  the slenderest links between  the early  and  later  pairs of novels. Nevertheless, though Stead's interest  in  the  development of Plainville  is only incidental to the telling  of his stories,  these four  novels give a rather complete picture of the growth of  a  Manitoba  farming community up  to  and  following  World  War  I.




b:AT STEAD could  have dealt  with  Plainville in the stagnant thirties  is doubtful, for  he gloried  in  expansion. He  had  found  another scene of rapid   development in  the  foothill  country of Alberta. Again  we  are  introduced to this setting  in The  Bail jumper, as Burton  flees from  Plainville  to escape punish­ ment  for  the  crime  he has not committed. He eventually  reaches  the open  ranges  of  the  foothills  where,  hired  to  raise  grain  in  ranch  country, he  is  conscious  of and  sympathetic to  the  cowboys'  conviction  of their  superiority  to  him:

He envied them  their wild free life, their rides over the limitless plains, their "leave and  liking to shout,"  while he sharpened  the  binder  knives and  tacked  new slats on  the  canvases,  and  made  fly-blankets for  the  horses out  of twine  sacks.

Attracted as Stead  is by the  free  life of the  range-its spell is acknowledged in the  openings of The  Cow  Puncher  and  Dennison Grant  as well  as in  The  Bail jumper- he is more  thrilled  by the prospect  of a settled  and  developed country. That he  would  prefer  an  orderly  development is obvious from  his description of the  western   boom  in  The  Cow  Puncher:

The  thing  grew  upon  itself.  It  was like a fire starting  slowly in  the  still prairie grass, which  by its  own  heat  creates  a  breeze that  in  turn  gives birth  to a gale that  whips it forth  in uncontrollable  fury. Houses went up, blocks of them, streets of them, miles of them,  but  they could not keep pace with  the demand,  for every builder of a house must have a roof to sleep under. And there were streets to build; streets  to grade  and  fill and  pave;  ditches to dig and  sidewalks to lay and  wires to  string.  And  more  houses had  to  be built  for  the  men  who  paved  streets and dug ditches and  laid sidewalks and strung wires. And more stores and  more hotels and  more churches  and  more schools and more places of amusement  were needed. And  the  fire fed  on its own fury  and  spread  to lengths undreamed by those who first set the match  to the dry grass.

47

WESTERN  PANORAMA



Not  content to  present  the  mere  physical evidence of  the  West's  explosive growth, Stead  is  also interested in  the  psychological effects  of  the  boom.  John Harris, in The  Homesteaders, is a conservative all his life, but  in  the  heady  at­ mosphere of Alberta, "where the successful man  was the man  who dared to throw  discretion to  the  winds  and  take  the  chance", he eagerly  surrenders to the gam­  bling  spirit  of  the  new  land.  He  is not  alone  in  his consequent  sufferings.  Dave Elden, in The  Cow  Puncher, a man  of some  principles who  has risen from  cow­ boy  to  millionaire  real  estate  promoter, finds  himself  involved  in  "the thing" and  helpless  to extricate himself or his victims. Yet, in these accounts of an empty  land  filling  with  settlers,  of cow towns  exploding into cities, Stead  finds satisfac­  tion  in  the  many  who are  not  mere  speculators. Ray  Burton, viewing  an orderly  crowd  assembled  to file on  homesteads that  will  be  open  for  entry  in  two  days' time,  finds  men  "gathered from  the  corners  of  the  globe  and  waiting patiently through night  and  day,  through heat  and  cold, through wind  and  rain,  through any  trial  and  any  hazard  for  the  God-sent  privilege,  born  of a  new  country, of calling   the   land   beneath  their   feet  their  own." These hopeful   settlers,   whose household goods and  effects were piled in great  heaps  in the railroad yards, repre­ sented  the  real  promise  of the  West  to  come.
A major interest  in Stead's novels, then,  is their  account of the West's develop­
ment  in  the  years between  1882  and  the  middle  twenties.  The  novels laid  in the foothills   cover  a  shorter   interval than   the  four  Plainville novels,  but  they  con­ centrate on  the  exciting  period  of the  boom  preceding the first world  war-the years,  incidentally, when  Stead  was  living  in  High  River  and  Calgary. The re­ maining novel,  Neighbours  ( 1922), laid  in  Saskatchewan  north   of Regina just after  the  beginning of the  century,  describes  the  efforts  of  two Eastern couples  to establish   themselves  on  homesteads, and   serves  to  amplify   the  account of  the settlers  in the  opening chapters of The  Homesteaders.
Although Stead  has been  praised  by all his critics for  his realism,  a reading of his seven  novels  proves  that  it is a limited  realism.  The details  are  accurate, but carefully selected,  and  despite  occasional  references to the  hardship of life on the prairies, the  privations of the settlers  are submerged in a generally buoyant tone:

It was  a  life  of  hard,  persistent  work-of  loneliness,  privation,  and  hardship. But it was also a life of courage, of health,  of resourcefulness, of a wild, exhilarat­ ing freedom found only in God's open spaces.

Neighbours,  to take  an extreme  example, presents  a Saskatchewan prairie almost devoid  of  wind,  dust,  drought, hail,  grasshoppers, mosquitoes, blazing heat  and

WESTERN PANORAMA



freezing  cold,  yet this is the  book in which  the idyllic strain  which  runs  through­
out  the  novels  finds  its most  lyrical  expression.

My earliest  recollection  links back to a grey stone house by a road  entering  a little  Ontario town.  Across the  road  was a mill-pond,  and  across the  mill-pond was a mill. ... Beside the  mill was a water-wheel, ... which, on sunshiny days, sprayed  a  mist  of  jewels into  the  river  beneath  with  the  prodigality  of a fairy pnnce.
My father['s] ... days were full of the labor of the mill, but his evenings and the
early, sun-bright  summer  mornings  belonged to his tiny farm  at  the border of the town.  We  had  two  cows, a  pig or  two, some apple  and  cherry  trees, and  little fields of  corn  and  clover.

These  opening words  of  the  narrator, Frank   Hall,  in  Neighbours,  set  the  tone maintained  throughout  the  novel  as  Frank   with  his  sister,  Marjorie, and  Jack Lane  with  his sister, Jean, locate  their  homesteads,  sharing a treed  coulee watered by  a  running stream; turn   the  first sod  on  the  boundless  prairie, and  work  out their  obvious  destinies  under the  equally  boundless  sky. Jean becomes  a  prairie Lucy,  whose  idealism contrasts with  the  practicality of Marjorie, who  recognizes from  the  outset  the  necessity of marriage between  the  pairs  of brother and  sister. Stead  achieves  a triumph in his handling of the relations between the two couples in  love  living  in  isolation in  neighbouring shacks  on  the  Saskatchewan prairie; the  reader  is left  convinced that  the  couples  are  as innocent in  their  thoughts as Keats's Madeline. The  plot,  chiefly concerned with  the difficulties  preventing the marriage of  Frank and   Jean, reaches  its  conclusion  as  Jean emerges  from  the prairie pool, clad in a bathing suit, to accept  her lover. The level prairie, unrolling to the  horizon  on  all sides of the  lonely shacks, supplies  the  isolation  necessary  to the  idyll.
The  idyllic  note  so evident in Neighbours is associated  in the other  novels with
characters either  close  to  nature or  living  in  the simple  economy  of the  pioneer settler  or  rancher. It touches the  description of ranch  life in The  Cow  Puncher and  Dennison  Grant  and  appears also in  the  account of the  early  settling  of the Harrises in  the  Plainville area  and  Beulah  Harris's retreat to the  Arthur's ranch in  The  Homesteaders.  It appears, too, in  the  carefree, roving  life of Cal  Beach and   his  sister's  son  in  The   Smoking  Flax and  in  the  lakeside  retreat to  which Cal  retires  to  write  articles  on  sociology  after  his marriage to  Minnie Stake.  It is present  as well in The  Bail  jumper  in Burton's flight  to the  McKay ranch.
Although Stead   views  with  evident  nostalgia  the  arduous but  uncomplicated life of the  pioner, he is interested as well in the stresses that  develop  in the settler's

49

WESTERN  PANORAMA



life when  his days  are no longer  filled by necessary  labour and  when  he becomes more  dependent on the services of others. The  appearance of these stresses accom­ panies  a thread of social criticism  which  runs  through Stead's novels. In The  Bail jumper, it is limited to passing comment on the sharp practices of  merchants and  their  equally  resourceful  customers,  on the  advantages taken  of  farmers by grain  companies, on  the  weaknesses of the  law,  and  on  the  timidity  of churches faced  with  a  question of conscience.  It is more  central to The  Homesteaders  and  The  Cow Puncher as Stead  attacks  man's  greed in his treatment of the  Western  boom. It is very  prominent in  Dennison Grant, involving an  exposition of  unorthodox economic doctrine,  but  in  the  later  novels  the  evils  of society  are  seen  from  a sociological  rather than  an  economic  point  of  view.
Stead's concern about  these  evils is first  clearly  revealed  in  a minor  theme  of The   Homesteaders   that  explores  the  discontent of  women   on  the  farm. Mary Harris, willing  to  labour long  hours  to establish  the  farm, finds  that  even  after she  and   her  husband  have  become  prosperous life  remains for  her  a  wearing grind. She  complains to her  daughter, Beulah:

Here  I've  slaved  and  saved until  I'm  an-an  old  woman,  and  what  better  are we for it?  We've  better  things to eat and  more  things to wear and  a bigger house to keep clean, and your father  thinks we ought  to be satisfied. But he isn't satisfied himself .... He  knows our  life isn't  complete,  and  he  thinks  more  money  will complete  it.  All the  experience  of twenty  years hasn't  taught  him  any  better.

Mrs. Stake,  in Grain, does not get her long-promised new house  until she is about forty-five -"and  farmers'  wives  are  sometimes old  at  forty-five" -and  even then,   after   Minnie has  left  her  to  attend high  school  and  business  college,  she carries  on alone  her multitudinous duties. Only  an outsider, Cal Beach, a graduate in sociology,  realizes  her crushing  burden and  sets out  to help  her  by using gaso­ line  power  to  run  the  cream  separator and   the  washing machine and  to  pump water.
Cal  Beach  becomes  concerned  as well about  the  problems of the farm  labourer and  of  children leaving  the  farm. Earlier, in The  Homesteaders,  Stead  lays the blame  for  the  exodus  from  the  farm  in  part  on  the  farmer himself,  who  desires "something better" for  his  children.

It is a peculiarity  of the agriculturist  that, among  all professions, he holds his own in the  worst  repute.  As a class he has educated himself to believe that  everybody else makes an  easy living off the farmer,  and,  much  as he may revile the  present generation  for doing so, he is anxious that his children  should join the good picking.

WESTERN  PANORAMA



The  problem of the  farmer's son is treated both in The  Smoking  Flax and  Grain, largely  through Jackson Stake  Jr.,  who leaves because  his father refuses to agree that  his son, as much  as the  hired  man,  is entitled  to a wage. The  problem  of the farm  labourer is faced  by Cal  Beach  when  he wishes to marry  Minnie Stake  and realizes that  though he is working  hard  and  earning what  is called  "good  wages" he  cannot afford   to  marry.
The  problems of the  farmer's son and  the  hired  man  are  at  least  in  part eco­ nomic,  but  the  farm  wife faces a broader problem  that  concerns  Stead  in  almost  all his novels:  the  need  in farm  life for an expanded horizon.
As  with   most  of  Stead's  themes,  we  first  encounter this,  somewhat  crudely expressed,  in The  Bail jumper. It appears in the opening chapter as Ray  Burton, at  the  supper   break  in  the  square dance, recites  "The Nautilis", to which  only Myrtle  Vane, a  cultured Eastern   visitor,  responds.  Myrtle  Vane  is an  apostle  of broader horizons; her  text,  the  masterpieces of English  literature; her  principal convert,  the  Barnardo boy. To  him,  after  exposure  to her  influence, "there were greater things  in  life than  cows, and  gardens, and  fields of wheat; and  in a dim way  these  things  of  which   he  had  not  so much  as guessed  were  opening to  his astonished   vision."
Myrtle  Vane  is only  the  first of a number of cultured Easterners who  help  to raise  the  eyes of Westerners beyond  the  boundaries of their  farms. However, the Western  women   are  more  conscious  than  the  men  of the  need  for  something in life  beyond   acres  and   barns.   Beulah   Harris, in  The   Homesteaders,  frequently feels a gap in her existence: "She  was not unhappy, but a dull sense of loss oppres­ sed  her-a  sense  that  the  world  was very  rich  and  very  beautiful, and  that  she was feasting neither on its richness  nor its beauty." This  sense of a defect in farm life  is shared   by  Jean Lane  in  Neighbours  and  Minnie Stake  in  The  Smoking  Flax. Jean's need  to  have  something beyond  farm  life is an  integral  part  of the plot  as her  search  leads  her  to imagine  herself in love with  Spoof,  the remittance man,   and   to  refuse  to  marry   her  lover  from  childhood, Frank  Hall, until  he remedies  his  defects.   Not  until  Jean   refuses  him,  however,  does  Frank turn   to Byron,  Gibbon, Shakespeare, Whitman, Burke,  and   Burns:

At first I had  to drive  myself to it, but  presently I began  to be carried  away in the spirit in  the  new world  which was opening  before me. With  joy I noted, sud­ denly, that  I had  forced  my boundaries far  beyond the corner stakes of  Fourteen,  beyond  even  the  prairies,  the  continent,  the  times in  which  we live.  My  mind, from sluggishly hibernating for the winter, became a dynamo of  activity.... I was so filled  with  thoughts   that  I  threatened   to burst.

WESTERN  PANORAMA



Though  Jean is at first suspicious of Frank's  demonstrations of his new breadth  of outlook,  as the  reader  may well be, she is finally satisfied.  Minnie  Stake,  more fortunate than  Jean,  falls in  love with  Cal  Beach  who  recognizes the  farmers' lack  of  vision.  Minnie  does not,  however, share  his hope  of bringing  about  a permanent change  in the Western way of life:  "They  haven't  a glimpse, and so they're  content.  I  had  a glimpse, and  it drove  me from  the farm.  You have  a glimpse,  and  it's  making  you do wonderful  things  -    ... if only they'd  last!" Beach's  purpose is  nothing less  than   to "bring order  into  the chaos  of farm labor,  ... [to]  touch  with one glimpse of beauty  the sordidness which was ex­ pressed by 'forty  dollars a month  and  found',  ... [to]  awaken  to spiritual con­ sciousness the  physical life of which the Stake farmstead  was typical. ..."
Stead's  belief in  the farmer's  need for  an expanded horizon  helps to account
for the ending  of Grain, which Professor McCourt is unable  to accept.  Gander's decision to go East may not be consistent with his character as it is presented  up to this point,  but  his awakening  to the need for a broader  life is something  that Stead  believes ought  to come to every Western farmer.  Indeed,  the ending is not so inconsistent  as it  seems at  first glance,  since  Gander's second  love, next  to farming,  is machines.  More  difficult to  explain,  is the  interest  taken  by Jerry Chansley,  the  Eastern  girl,  in  making  Gander's escape  possible. Jerry,  in  fact, remains  little more than  a mouthpiece for Stead's  ideas:  "That is what  you lack here, Gander. You don't see enough people. New people give you new ideas, and make life more worth  living.... They  draw  you out."  Her  effect upon Gander, prior  to this speech,  has been precisely of the kind she has described, though  not precisely in a way that she would welcome, since Gander  has been busily imagin­ ing  how  he would  rescue her if the car turned  over.
The  little we learn of Jerry  Chansley suggests that  if Stead  had developed  her character  she would  have  turned  out  to hold  unconventional, but  by no means loose, opinions. It is Polly Lester, the girl detective in The  Bail jumper, who sug­ gests the  basic attitude  of Stead's  heroines:  ". . . I  am  not  a woman  as  other women  are. I defy traditions;  I defy conventions.  I claim the right God gave me to live my life as I  will, where  I will, how  I  will, with  whom  I will." Though Stead's  heroines usually observe the moral conventions, Zen Transley in  Dennison Grant  is willing to break with them to the extent  of taking  up her  romance  with Grant  after she is married.  The  others do not go so far.  Beulah Harris,  the run­ away  daughter  in The  Homesteaders, quits  her family  to seek  freedom  with  the Arthurs  family in  the foothills. Minnie  Stake, in The  Smoking  Flax and  Grain, insists on staying alone with Cal Beach on a Saskatchewan homestead  while she

WESTERN PANORAMA



nurses  Reed  Beach,  who  is ill with  typhoid. Reenie  Hardy, a refined  Eastern girl in  The  Cow  Puncher, finds on the  Elden  ranch  a world  where  "conventions had been  swept  away,  and  it was correct  to live, and  to live!" On  returning East, she disposes  of  her  mother's choice  of suitor  in  an  unusual way.  Having gone  with him  to  the  theatre, she  returns with  dishevelled  hair  and  flushed  checks  to walk unsteadily across  her  mother's room.  When  her  mother  anxiously  inquires if she is ill, Irene replies  that  she  is drunk   and  angrily  rejects  the  soothing suggestion that  she  has  only  had  too  much  champagne:

Mother!  I have had too much champagne, but not as much as that precious Carlton of yours had planned  for. Ijust wanted to see how despicable he was, and I  floated down  the stream  with  him as far as I dared.  But just as the current got too swift Istruck  for  shore. Oh,  we made  a scene, all  right,  but  nobody  knew  me there, so the  family  name  is safe, and  you can  rest in peace. I called  a taxi  and  when he  tried  to  follow  me  in  Islapped  him  and  kicked  him.  Kicked  him,  mother. Dreadfully  undignified,  wasn't  it?  ... And  that's  what  you want  me  to marry, in place of a man!

Though Stead's heroines  often  express  themselves  melodramatically, one  ought not  to  ignore  their  "thrust for  freedom".



IT IS A  PARADOX in Stead's novels that  the Easterners who seek so earnestly  to open  the minds  of Westerners are contemptuous of the  conventions
of  the  East  that   has  produced  them,  and  all  find  in  the  West  a  freedom that attracts them. Dennison Grant is foremost  among  these  refugees  from  the staid East,  and   the  book  in  which  he  appears provides  the  largest  gallery  of  uncon­ ventional people.   Zen  Transley is only  one  of  these,  for  Phyllis  Bruce,  Grant's secretary in the  East, in her first conversation with her new employer, immediately wins  his respect  with  a statement that  marks  her as the Stella  to his Swift:

The  position I want  to make clear is this:  I don't  admit  that  because I work for you I belong to a lower order of the human family... , and .. that, aside from the giving of faithful service, I am under  any obligation to you. I give you my labor, worth  so much; you  pay me;  we're  square. If we can  accept  that  as an  under­ standing  I'm  ready  to begin work now; if not, I'm  going out  to look for another  job.

Grant himself,  upon  his return to the  West after  the war,  is "happy in his escape from  the  tragic  routine of being  decently  civilized...." His primary function in

53

WESTERN  PANORAMA



the  novel  is to expound his economic  doctrines, which  he does to Zen -as  Pro­ fessor  McCourt  complains -even  under   the  blaze  of a  full  moon  on  the  open prairie after  he  has  rescued  her  from  death in  a  prairie fire.  He  then  explains  why  he  had  left  his father's prosperous firm,  founded on  the  profits  of  a lucky investment in  land,   to come  West:

I told  him  that  I didn't  believe that  any  man  had  a  right  to money  unless he earned  it  in  return  for service given to society, and  I said that  as society had  to supply  the  money, society should  determine  the  amount.  I  confessed that  I was a little hazy about  how that  was to be carried  out, but I insisted that  the principle was right.

Notwithstanding his view  of  wealth,  when  his  father and  brother are  killed  in an  accident, Grant  accepts  the  duty  of  returning East  to  carry  on  the  family business  until  with  the outbreak of war  he winds  up the concern  in order  to fight. In  spite  of the  emotional scene in which  Grant informs his staff of his intentions, painful reading for  one  acquainted with  the  aftermath of  the  war,  his  actions and  words  are  in keeping  with  his character and  beliefs. Upon returning to find that his riches  have  increased  in the  interval, he determines to put  the  money  to work  in  a  utopian scheme  for settling  returned soldiers  on  the  land. Grant sum­ marizes his  "Big  Idea" in  this  way:

I propose to form  a company and  buy a large block of land, cut it up into farms, build  houses and  community  centres,  and  put  returned men  and  their  families on  these farms,  under  the  direction  of specialists in agriculture. I shall break  up the  rectangular survey of the West for something  with  humanizing  possibilities; I mean  to  supplant  it  with  a  system of survey  which  will permit  of settlement  in groups  ... where I shall instal all the modern  conveniences of the city .... Our statesmen  are  never  done  lamenting  that  population   continues  to flow from  the country  to the city, but the only way to stop that  flow is to make the country  the more attractive of the two.

Though  Professor   McCourt objects   to  the  mixture of  "social   doctrine  with romantic  adventure" in  Dennison  Grant,  it  is  the  social  doctrine, along   with Grant's  unconventionality, that   makes  the  book  something better   than   popular romance. The weakness  lies less in  the  mixture than  in  Stead's failure  to  make Grant a convincing figure and  to make  the  economic theme  intrinsic to the  plot. Grant's speeches  are  invariably stodgy,  and   he  is at  times  merely  eccentric, as when   with   rough lumber   he  converts the  living  room  of  his  city  apartment in the  East  into  a  replica  of  the  interior of  his  ranchland shack.  However,  those

54

WESTERN PANORAMA



who  object  to  Dennison  Grant  may  read  a version  called  Zen  of the Y.D., pub­ lished  in  England  by  Hodder and  Stoughton, from  which  all  economic  theory  and  eccentricity have  been  cut.  This  version,  by manipulation of the  plot, makes possible  the  marriage of Grant and  Zen Transley. The changed ending provides  a more  satisfactory tying  up of events in the novel, but  I am  convinced that  any­ one  who  reads  the  two  versions  will prefer  the  uncut, for  the  second  is popular romance and  nothing more.
The outcome of the  plot  of Dennison Grant is determined not  by Grant's un­
orthodox economic theories  but by a moral  principle  that  could  be basic to Grant's thinking in  economics, though  this  connection is not  made   by  the  author.  To­ wards  the  end  of  the  novel,  when  Grant and  Zen Transley are  on  the  verge  of destroying her  marriage, Zen  leaves  her  son  with  Grant for  the  night  while she sees her  husband off on  a  trip.  When  a tremendous thunderstorm sweeps out  of the  mountains and  the  boy  wakes,  Grant soothes  him  and,  comforting the  boy, recognizes  the  wrongness of  his intention of destroying  Zen's marriage and  the necessity  of  renouncing her  for  the  boy's sake.  Soon  after  Grant has  made  this decision,  Zen  arrives,  having driven  through the storm from  town,  to announce that  she  had   reached the  same  conclusion.
This  theme of self-sacrifice  receives its most elaborate development in the  pre­
ceding  novel,  The  Cow  Puncher.  Lack  of space  forbids  a full  explanation of its working  out  in  the  novel,  but  Elden,  in  the  course  of events,  is persuaded that forgiveness   and  service  should   be  part  of  his creed.  His  service  takes  the  form of serving  his country, and  his dying  words,  uttered  in  Flanders, reflect  both  his earlier  belief that  the  innocent always suffer and  his later  that  one must  be ready to sacrifice  oneself:

. . . I said  it  was the  innocent  thing  that  got caught.  Perhaps  I was right.  But perhaps   it's  best  to  get  caught.   Not  for  the  getting  caught,  but  for  the-the compensations.  It's  the innocent  men that are getting killed. And perhaps  it's best. Perhaps  there  are  compensations  worth  while.

Stead  pursues the  same  theme  in The  Smoking  Flax and  Grain. In the first of these,  it is once  more  associated  with  the  need for forgiveness implicit in the text from  which  the  title  comes: " bruised  reed shall  he not  break,  and  the  smoking flax shall  he not  quench." In  this novel Cal  Beach gives up his chance for happi­ ness  married  to  Minnie Stake  in  order   to  protect  Reed,  illegitimate  son  of  his sister  and  Minnie's elder  brother. These  events,  which  appear again  in the  later  novel Grain, help  to account for Gander's rather  improbable decision to go East.

55

WESTERN  PANORAMA



When  Minnie  explains  to Gander  that  Cal  ran  away  to protect  Reed,  Gander, on the verge of winning the love of Jo Klaus, the wife of an invalid war veteran, perceives that  to preserve the honour  of the Stake family he too must run  away. Thus  the working  out of this theme in Grain,  complicated  somewhat  by the in­ clusion of events from The  Smoking  Flax that  help to lead to his decision, serves
to explain  in part  the otherwise unlikely flight of Gander  from the farm.
The  reader  of any single novel by Stead,  with the possible exception of Grain, may  not  perceive  through  the  multiplicity  of  incident   the  seriousness of  the author's intention. Or,  having learned that Stead  was a publicity agent for colon­ ization  during  the years in which his novels were being written,  he may conclude that  the  author,  in  presenting so favourable  a view of Western  life,  was merely fulfilling his other role in society. Yet such a judgment  would be extremely unfair,  for  though  the  books were written  by a  publicity  man  and  seem to have  been directed  at  the  popular  taste,  they  are  not  invariably  optimistic.  Indeed,   they frequently   have  rather   unhappy   endings:   John  Harris  in  The   Homesteaders suffers a serious financial loss, Dave Elden  dies in  battle,  Dennison  Grant  is not allowed  to win romantic  Zen, and  Gander  is forced  to forego the pursuit  of his childhood  sweetheart.  What  is more, the  major  figures in the  novels, whatever the weaknesses in their characterizations, are by no means the conventional  heroes and  heroines  of  popular  fiction. In  addition,   though  Steed  may  moderate  the physical  harshness  of  the  prairie  environment, he stresses in  all  his novels the intellectual  dearth  in and the aesthetic drabness of prairie life. And, in spite of the limitations   already   noted,  the  novels still  succeed  very  well  in  imparting the atmosphere  of the times about which they are written. Above all, however, Stead's  themes  are  usually  critical  of society and  consistently serious.


















s6



reviev 	




THE  ENEMY AS MAN

George Woodcock



The  Letters of Wyndham Lewis,  ed. W. K. Rose. Ryerson.  $r3.75.


"THINGS HAVE COME to an aw­ ful  pass here: if I don't do something to break  out  of the  net,  I shall end  my days in  a Toronto flophouse." So, in Septem­ ber, 1941, wrote  one of  the great  painters and  writers  of our  age,  Percy  Wyndham Lewis.  Lewis's  life  in  Canada is one  of the   more   melancholy   episodes   of   our literary  history.   It   produced  a  strange  tragic  novel, Self-Condemned, which Ca­ nadians-perhaps from  a sense of guilty discomfort-have tended to ig;nore. And, in   the   recently    published   selection   of Lewis's  correspondence, it  is represented by a long  sequence of mainly  embittered letters   which   etch   out   in  darkest   tones the  trials  of  a  literary exile  trapped  in wartime Toronto.
The  Letters of Wyndham Lewis  con­
tain,   of  course,  a  great   deal  more  than the   record   of   those   lost  years   of  The Enemy   at  Bay.  For  one  thing, they  lift a  disguise,  or  perhaps rather a  series  of disguises.
In  his  life  Lewis  tended to  be a  man
of  masks.   There  is  a   masklike   quality about  much   of  his  painting, and   even about  his view of the  nature of art, which he seemed  often  to see as the  mask with-
 out a face. As the hero of Tarr  remarked: "This  is  another  condition  of   art:   to have  no  inside, nothing you  cannot  see. Instead,  then,   of   being   something   im­ pelled   like  an  independent  machine  by a  little  egotistic  fire  inside,  it  lives  soul­ lessly and  deadly  in  its  frontal lines  and  masses."
But  if the  truth of art  might  somehow, for  Lewis, lie  in  the  still  mask  that  is its own  justification, masked   humanity  was its negative opposite; Lewis's  satirical fic­ tion  was mainly  concerned with stripping the   masks   from   a   series   of   loathsome hollow   men   and   women,   purveyors  of fake  art  and   bogus  philosophies,  beings so empty  within  their  outer  shells  as "to  pose  the  whole  problem of  the  real  and  of its various mixtures and  miscegenations with its opposite, right  up to the negative pole of  absolute  imposture."
Yet  the  artist   who  savagely  tore  away masks  was  himself  masked   in  such  per­ sonae as The Enemy  and  The Tyro.  For all  their   forthright   condemnations  and extravagant opinionatedness, even Lewis's  literary  polemics  had  a  curiously  deper­ sonalised   quality;  their   passion   was  al­ most  wholly  intellectual.  And   when  he

57

REVIEW ARTICLES



ventured into  autobiography in 1937 with Blasting  and  Bombardiering, he was still in  effect  hiding  himself  behind  his roles. He  boasted: "I  am  a  novelist,  painter, sculptor, draughtsman, critic,  politician, journalist, essayist, pamphleteer, all rolled into  one,  like one  of those  portmanteau­ men   of  the   Italian   Renaissance." This  was all true,  but  it significantly  presented the  man  as the mere  suitcase for his own disguises.
Behind  the manifold artist,  behind  The
Enemy,   behind   the   productions of  that cold  and  furious genius  which  lacked  the facile   talent   to  please,  Lewis  resolutely hid  his  inner,   personal  self. This  is why the  publication of  his letters  is an  event of great   literary importance, since it  not merely   publicly   illuminates for  the  first time   the   character  of  the   man   whom T.  S.  Eliot   called   "the   greatest   prose master  of my generation", but also places him  among   his  peers.  The history  of  a half-century of  British  movements, from the Vorticism which  Lewis founded  to the Social Realism  he despised, is enriched by these  documents of the life and  thoughts of a man  who was in the  heart  of a hun­ dred  literary and  artistic  battles; the cor­ respondences, often  lifelong,  with writers like  Eliot,   Pound  and   Read  illuminate the  significant  ways in which  the  literary  outlook   of   the   English-speaking  world changed in  the early  years of the  present century;  the  many   and  often  aggrieved  letters  to  publishers show  the  difficulties which   one   of  the   most  important  but least  "popular" writers  of  our  time  ex­ perienced in  even  getting   his  work  into print.    And,   most   important,  a   person appears  instead   of  a   persona.  We   see Lewis  as he  was;  as a boy devoted  to his mother and  hating his irresponsible rip of a father; as  a  petulant man  who fought
 over imagined ills and maintained long friendships. We see him in enthusiastic youth  in  the  London and  Paris  world  of art  and  letters,  loudly  defending and  in­ venting causes. We see him  as an old man  of  seventy  concerned to  save  his  youth's companion Pound from  the consequences of  his  own  folly,  and   at  the same  time spending a vast  amount  of  time  and  im­ patience over  the  works  of  an  unknown Vancouver  writer,  David   Kahma,  with whom   he   established  an   extraordinary epistolary  relationship. We  see  him,  last of  all,  going  with  stoic  courage into  the dark   room   of  his  blindness,   and   living his final  years in full and  resigned  knowl­ edge   of   the   deadly   tumour  that   grew within   his  skull  until  it  killed  him.  The masks  have  been  shed,  and,  in  a volume that   is always  alive  and  interesting, and often   unexpectedly moving,   we  meet  at last  the  man  within the  Enemy.
Lewis's associations with Canada  weave
a curious and  oddly  persistent  pattern in­ to  his  life  and  into  this  volume.  He  was born,  if  not  on  Canadian soil, at  least  in Canadian waters,  when  his father's yacht was   berthed  at   Amherst,  Nova   Scotia.  During the  First  World  War he  was ex­ tricated from   the  front  lines  to  serve  as a Canadian-paid  war artist  in connection with   Beaverbrook's  plan   for  decorating the  Parliament  Buildings  in Ottawa. The  day  before  World   War   II was  declared Lewis  sailed  for  America; he  was, as he carefully explained to  Eric  Kennington, a  sick man   well  over  military age.  After a disillusioning year in  New  York,  where he  discovered  that   his  celebrity   was  not of the  kind  that  could  bring  him  even  a modest   living   in   the   American  literary world,   he  was  forced   by  United  States immigration  regulations  to  move  north to  Toronto, and  there  he  found  himself

REVIEW ARTICLES



trapped by economic circumstances; Eng­ lish currency regulations would  not allow him  to send  home  for  the  money  to  pay his passage  back,  and  his Canadian earn­ ings  never  gave  him  a  sufficient  surplus  for  the  fare.
The  first days in Canada were  at  least
encouraging. Lewis moved  into  an apart­ ment   hotel   at   I4  dollars   a  week-the old   Tudor  which,   in   Self-Condemned, he  changed  into   the  fantastic  Blundell  that   was  transformed  by  fire  and   water into  a  palace of ice.  At  first  "an  interim dwelling", after  nearly three  years it  be­ came  a  prison  to  Lewis  and  his wife.  In the  beginning, though he found Toronto "a   mournful   Scottish   version   of  Amer­  ica",   he  had  enough luck,   with  C.B.C.  talks, a small contract with Ryerson, some drawings,  to  believe  he  was  on  the  up grade.
 After  the  winter of  my  discontent in  the long   and   chilly   shadow  of   that  statue of liberty, I  feel  as  if  I  had   come   up  out   of a  coalmine or  a  dungeon into the  fresh  air again.

Within   a   year   Canada  had   become "this  blasted  country" and  Toronto "this godforsaken city". Lewis's   income  de­ clined,  so that   at  times  he  and  his  wife were  on  the   verge  of  starvation,  living from  hand  to mouth. "The supernatural, in  the  form  of luck  as  we  say,  has  been present: we  have  been  miraculously fed and   sheltered." His  hopes   of  academic posts  in  either   Canada  or   the   United States  came   to  nothing, and   in  March,
1942,  he was  writing to  Leonard  Brock­
ington:

I have  no idea  in  what direction it  would be best to look. Some ill-paid, half-time job would  be the  ideal, in  which I was left  half my  time  free  for  my  usual   work,  of  writing






THE SAGA OF GISLI

translated   by  GEORGE JOHNSTON
introduction and notes by PETER FOOTE

An  outstanding piece  of  medieval literature, one  of  the  most memorable  of   the   Icelandic  sagas,  in  a   translation  which captures the  movement and  texture of  the  original.
160 pages,  $3.50




UNIVERSITY  OF TORONTO  PRESS





59

REVIEW ARTICLES



and   painting -though   a   48   hour    week would be okay  with  me.

The lack of a real intellectual milieu troubled  Lewis,   with   his  London  and Paris   background, as  much   as  the  lack of money.  The University  of Toronto almost   ignored  him,  and   what   literary world   there   was  in  Toronto during  the war  years  seems  to  have  acted   as  if  he were  not  present; Lome Pierce,  who was generous  to  him,   and   Douglas   Le  Pan are   the  only  Canadian literary  names that  appear in  his letters during the "Tudor  period" as  he  called  it.  Finally, in  the  summer of I 943, a  tiny  Catholic college,   Assumption  at   Kingston,  gave him  a  poorly  paid  but  welcome  teaching post. There he encountered  Marshall McLuhan, who went to a great  deal of trouble  to  help  him.  After  Lewis  finally got  away  from  Canada in  1945, he  kept up  with  some of the friends  he had  made
 there,  McLuhan and  Kahma, while a Canadian scholar, Hugh Kenner, wrote one of the first good critical books on his work.
But   on   the   whole   the   hospitality  of
Canada was shamefully scanty.  Lewis, given  to a degree  of paranoia, interpreted his situation as the  result  of Anglophobia and  of  the  resentment of mediocrities in high position  towards their  intellectual betters.   I  suspect  the  neglect  was in  fact due  partly  to sheer  ignorance, and  partly to  the  political unfashionableness of Lewis's  views  at  a  time  when  the  Cana­ dian   literati  were  still  in  the  pink   age that  had  already passed  away  in  Britain. I  hope-though I  am  not  quite  sure - that  we have  gone  a long  way since then,  for  Lewis's  letters,  like  Self-Condemned, make   uncomfortable  reading in  their record   of  what   once  happened in  Can­ ada   to  a  great  writer  and  painter.





DOCUMENT IN DISILLUSION


Margaret Stobie


ROBERT HARLOW.  Royal  Murdoch. Macmillan. $3.95.


Royal Murdoch is a novel worth noting.  And  it is so in spite  of the fact   that  it  is about  so many  things  that the  reader's mind  is awhirl  by  the  time he   finishes   it.   It is  about   the   sudden middle-ageing of the West, marriage and the individual, the Canadian identity, the conflict  between  generations, the  Indian­ White racial   problem, living  and  dying, and    a   particular  and   unusual  family.

6o
 With  so many  themes  jostling for position in  the  two  hundred and  fifty pages,  it  is to  Mr.  Harlow's credit   that   he  achieves as  much   coherence as  there   is.
The novel  is set  in  Linden, one  of the
grey  little  towns,  points  on  the  railroad, where  men's dreams died  and  women learned  to  endure. Like  its  first  genera­ tion,  Linden is middle-aged. Its  creator, now  eighty,  is  dying,   and   its  teen-agers

REVIEW ARTICLES



are  possessed of a dull  viciousness.
We  are  shown   the  last  two  weeks  in the life of Royal  Murdoch, on whose ori­ ginal   holding  the  town  has  grown.  His wife   Emma  summons the   members  of their   divided   family :  James  and   Ruby,  their children;  and Roger  LaPointe, Royal's foster-son,   the  child  of  his  dead Indian  mistress,   Yvonne.   All   three   are middle-aged. The  other  member of  the household  is  the  Murdoch  maid,   Mary Ann,    an   eighteen-year-old Indian  girl from  the  nearby   reservation. At  the  end of  the  first   week  of  the   uneasy   death­ watch, Mary Ann  is raped, almost casually,  by three  boys of the town. This viciousness  unites  and  clarifies  the  Mur­ doch  family.  It forces  Royal  and  Emma to  forego   their   habitual  antagonism, as they  hold  the  last  of their  annual garden parties  and,  united, face the outside  world and  quell  the  gossip.  The following day, as  Royal   dies,  Emma's mind   gives  way and  reverts  to the early  days with Yvonne  (she  cannot  free  herself  from  the  past); James  is fatally  injured in a fall from  an oil-rig  (he  is not  worthy  to  follow  in  his footsteps) ;  Ruby   and   Roger   go  off   to­ gether  in search  of a new  life;  and  Mary Ann, having been accepted and protected by  the  family  as  one  of  them,  is left  in charge of  the  house.  It is  a  happy   end­  ing,   symbolically   speaking.
Symbolism  is  rampant. It is  in  Royal
Murdoch's  name,   and   in  the   fact   that as mayor of the town he ruled it like "a Scottish   laird   entertaining  the   villagers from  beyond  his  keep."  It is in  the  cot­ tage   in  which   he  lived  for   thirty  years with  his  Indian mistress  and  her  son, in the  big house  which  he  built  for  his con­ sort  and  their  children in  which  he dies, and   in  the  field  between  the  two  dwel­ lings. The field of twenty acres  is various-
 ly referred  to as  the  moat  separating the two   parts   of  his   life,   as  his  only   real home, as his kingdom, and  as the man himself,  his  inner  identity, existing   be­ tween  the two  poles  of his  being -good and   evil,   love   and    duty,   Indian  and White,   nature  and   civilization,  and   so forth.  Royal  Murdoch, the  field  and  the two  houses  obviously,  if  somewhat  fog­ gily, have  to do  with  a  national image.
It is  partly   because   of  Mr.   Harlow's preoccupation with symbols that the characters  themselves are  not   clear. James,   Ruby,   and   Roger   all  have  mo­ ments   of  intelligence,  but  for  the  most part  they act  and  speak  like  twenty-year­ olds.  They  all  seem  to  be  the  same  age as Mary  Ann. Even  Royal is  unclear. His last conscious  act  before  he  dies is to ask Emma to repeat the  one  happy  moment  of  their   marriage that   he  can   remem­  ber -to  sit  beside  his  bed  and   tell  him the   story  of  Rapunzel.   The  impression that   we  are   left  with  is  that   what   this man  had  wanted all along  was a mother. I  doubt   if  that   is  the  implication  that  Mr.  Harlow  intended. Emma says at one moment,  "It's  hard to  picture  yourself in  all  dimensions at  once," but  one  has the  uneasy feeling that  it  is Mr.  Harlow who    cannot    see   these    people    in   all dimensions  at once,  that  the  author  him­ self does not  know  them,  or  at  any  rate  that  he has not  made up  his mind  about  them.
But  when   we  brush   aside  the  rococo
imagery   and   the   disjointed  characters, we  find  Mr.  Harlow  concerned with  a matter of some  moment to  us. It has  to do with  the pioneer  whose acts dwarf  the lives of his successors  ("He was a builder, not  a  caretaker"), and   with  the  succes­ sors,  the  caretakers, who  must  live  with the   muddle  that    has   been   created. I

REVIEW ARTICLES



think  the  reason  for  the  lack  of focus in the   novel   is  that    Mr.   Harlow  cannot decide  where  his sympathies lie. But what he  can   and   does  do  is  to  examine   the muddle, the  grey  little  town.
On  this  level,  Mr.  Harlow's novel  has
much   in  common with  American  novels of  the   rg2o's  and  30's,  when  the  Great Disillusion  swept  across the United States, and  writers like   Dos  Passos, Sinclair Lewis,   Faulkner,  Steinbeck   began    to probe  the  unloveliness, both  physical and moral, of  the  cities,  towns,  and  villages of  the  land  of hope  and  glory.  A similar disenchantment  with   the   Golden   West has  become  immediate to us, and  since it is part  of our  lives, we too must  probe  it. Roger  says of Royal  Murdoch, "The man has done  nothing to deserve such a grisly end.   He   has  worked,   built."   The   sense of  bitter   failure is  something   more  im­ portant than  a small  boy's crying because there   is  no   Santa  Claus.   It   raises  the question  of  what   men   do  with   a  new place,   new  hope,   a  new  start.   Are  the dreams inevitably defeated? And possibly more  important,  why did  the  dry  rot  set in  before  there  was  any  maturing? Mr.
 Harlow does not offer answers  to these questions,  but   that   is  not   his   job.  He does  set  about   to  pose  them.
His  method is through a careful obser­
vation of things: streets, houses, rooms, furnishings, faces, shapes, clothes,  objects. It is, of course,  the  method of the  docu­ mentary, and  here,  I  think,  is where  Mr.  Harlow's  considerable ability  lies.  While other   aspects   of  the  book  lack  focus,  in his  choice   of  the  facts  and   the  objects  which  he examines, Mr. Harlow presents  a very definite point  of  view and  a judge­  ment. He  writes in a curiously  slow-paced prose.   Even    in   lists   of   things,    where usually  the  tempo  quickens, here  it  does not:  "a  store,   a  hotel,   a  whorehouse." Yet it is the  very deliberateness, the care­  ful  turning over  of  objects   and   musing upon them,  the  inexorable accumulation of  facts,  that  create the  texture, the density,  the  complexity of  the  life of the town.   The result   is  that   by  the  end  of the  book,  in  spite  of  the  confusion, the reader   feels  that  this  is impressive  work. That is why I said that  the novel is worth noting.




INTERNAL RESONANCES

E. W. Mandel


RAYMOND sousTER. A Local Pride.  Contact Press.  $2.00.


RAYMOND SOUSTER must be counted among the  most significant  con­ temporary  Canadian  poets,  though   the reasons   why  are  not  so  clear.  One  does have  to  reckon  with  the sheer  bulk of his work -eleven  volumes and  hundreds of
 poems  in something over thirteen years - but   bulk,   after   all,  is  only  bulk.   More important, perhaps, is the  range  of Sous­ ter's  activities: it's really a carefully culti­ vated legend  that  he languishes neglected and   forlorn  in   academic  Toronto;   his

REVIEW ARTICLES



contacts,  m   fact,   are   international,  his influence   profound. But  while  this  kind of  professionalism may  be an  index  to  a poet's   impact  on  his  contemporaries, it has  to  be  regarded as  extra-poetic. The puzzle  we come  back  to again  and  again is  the  nature of  his  poetry  and   whether some   of   the   extraordinary  claims   that have  been  made for  his  accomplishment are   justifiable.   The  normal view,  as  I understand  it,   is  that    Souster's  poetry, extraordinarily  direct   in   its  social   and personal  comment, is to be valued  for its intensity, accuracy,  and   sincerity.   But  I think  some  question can  be  raised  about the  accuracy of his  vision,  the  "common experience"  with   which   he   supposedly concerns himself.  My  own  feeling  is that he  is  not  a  realist   at  all.  Reading  him, I  find  myself thinking of poets  who seem totally  unlike  him,  Rilke,  say, or  Wallace



In  the  current

AUTHOR   &  BOOKMAN

POETS IN  CONTACT:
An  Adventure in  Publishing

New poems by

RAYMOND SOUSTER LOUIS DUDEK
PETER MILLER


HOW GOOD IS CANADIAN POETRY?
by Lionel Stevenson

THE  MORALITY OF  LETTERS

Quarterly, $2.00 a  year
Room   1,  Hillcrest School
1339  Bathurst Street, Toronto 4, Ont.
 Stevens; anyhow,  one whose poetic  world is totally self-contained, echoing  to the winged  sounds  of  necessary  angels.
However  perverse  this  view  of Souster
might  seem to be, it at least  accounts for the  curious   fact   that, as  the  volume   of his  work  grows,  his  vision  itself  remains static.  And  how difficult  it is to reconcile a static  vision of society  with  the actual­ ity.  Enormous changes have  taken  place in North  American  society since Souster's  first  publication  in  the  forties,   changes  accompanied by a  multitude of  exciting  literary  developments. But  has  Souster's  Toronto changed, or his Ontario country­ side, or  his cast  of characters, or the  role he has taken  up  as poet?  Perhaps a more acute  critic  will soon  show  us the  subtle development in Souster's work.  But  until then,   as  I   read   his  newest   volume,   A Local   Pride,  I  have   to  account for  my feeling   that   I  have   heard  and   seen  all this  before.  Once again,  as in  the  earlier volumes,  we  encounter  the   cripples, drunks, whores, beggars, lovers in corners, shining  nudes,  sinister  insects  and  beaten animals. Once  more   we  meet   the  poet himself  as plain-dealer, malcontent,  pro­ letarian,  melancholic, ecstatic  sensualist,  rogue,  and  saint.  Christmas is  still  com­ mercialized  and  Christ  lies in  the slush of Yonge  Street.  The  memories  of  the  war linger  in  bitter   fragments.  In  a  loveless society  men  are  eunuchs,  women  objects of  use;  and  beyond  exploitation, beyond vulgarity and  brutality are  the  ultimate insults  of  disease  and  death. The  pattern translates itself easily into  social  criticism  (man  as victim of external social tyranny, product of restraint and  conformity) and a theory of art  (inner vitality) as a heal­  ing exposure  by the ironically-placed doc­ tor-saint-poet who, seen from  the middle­

 		class perspective, is rogue-villain-fool. As

REVIEW ARTICLES



sociology  and   psychology,  this  VISion is much more impressive in the hands of someone   like  Layton  with   his  uncanny sense of the ambiguities involved  in it. Souster's strength, it  seems  to  me,  does not  lie  in  any   attempt  to  cope  with  a complex  society and  its impact on human personality, but  rather in  another  direc­ tion   entirely,   in  his  exploitation  of  the conventions, the  formal   elements,  of  his art.
One  of the oldest  sayings about  poetry,
that   it  strikes   the   reader   as  a  kind  of deja vu   ("What oft  was thought" or  "a wording   of  his  own   thoughts, almost   a remembrance") , clearly  has something to do   with   poetic   convention  or   what   in darker  modern  jargon   would   be  called archetypes. Since  we habitually think  of convention as applicable mainly  to forms and  especially  to  "outmoded" forms,  we can  easily miss the  power of skilfully used convention in  a  poet  whose main  pose is "unconventional".  The   tendency    is  to think  of  such  a  poet  as  a  realist  and  to measure  his   achievement  in   terms   of fidelity  to experience. But any poetic pose (and   especially  one  that  has  been  main­ tained   so  consistently   as  Souster's)  is  a convention, and   the  terms  by  which  it should  be measured  are not external, but internal,  that   is,   the   use  made   of  the convention  itself.  It seems  to  me,  then,  that    the   greatest   pleasure    in   reading  Souster   comes   from  one's   sense  of  an unusual  formalism. He  works  with  pat­  terns  as  stiffly stylized  as  the  figures  on an   Oriental  scroll:    a   rigid   vision   of society  and  nature as a demonic  city  in­ habited by beast-man, harlot, and cripple,  surrounded by a  scarcely  attainable gar­  den  where lovers become trees or budding leaves,  and  flowers  turn  into  gypsies and  sirens.  Within  this  landscape, all  things
 are icons or ideograms, so that  the appro­ priate poetic  form  is the  pun,  riddle, or puzzle,  or  a  curious version  of  imagism  which    defies   precise   description.  One  wonders to what  extent Souster  has  been influenced  by  Cid   Corman  whose  con­ cern    (through   Pound   and    the   Black Mountain  writers)  has  been  increasin&ly with    a   kind    of   pseudo-oriental   calli­ graphy.  In   any  event,   the  closest  I  can come  to pointing to the imagist  technique Souster   uses  is  a  comment  of  Wallace Stevens:   "To be  at   the  end   of  fact   is not  to  be  at  the   beginning of  imagina­ tion,  but  it  is to  be  at  the  end  of  both." Or   as   Souster  puts   roughly    the   same point in  his poem  "On  a Piece  of  Birch­ bark":  "You'll have   to  guess  my  three words   unsaid."
Once we begin to look at Souster's formalism and stop worrying about his realism,   we  seem  to  be  able  to  account for   the  internal  resonance of  his  work, a resonance which  seems to me the  mark of  genuine  poetry.   It may  be  no  more than    the   defining  pun   of   his   football poem  in  which  the  Argonauts'  slau&hter of an  unnamed team  spreads  a pattern of blood  over   the   entire scene  beyond   the CNE  stadium, even  to the  Pure  Food Building itself;  or  the  wry twist  by which the  misnamed poet   (he's  called  Bernard by  a  well-meaning  "lady   chairman" at a   poetry-reading)   becomes   both    saint and   dog;  or  the  rude  comment on  gal­ lery   openings  in   which   an   abstract   of shapes  competes  unsuccessfully  with  the "heavenly  backdrop" of a female  bottom. Like  the  pun,   the  riddle  echoes  with  its own   internal  and    unusually    grotesque logic,  and  as  I  read  Souster  many  of his poems seem to me riddle  poems: when  is a  permanent  not  a  permanent?  Why  is a  canary like  a  dying  man? What   do  a

REVIEW ARTICLES



child's  umbrella  and   homelessness   have in  common? A  riddle  involves  what  the Opies  in their  Lore and  Language of Schoolchildren call  verbal   duplicity, the kind   of  duplicity  we  find   in   Souster's "City  Morgue":

The brass  name-plate on  this  building doesn't look  as if it's  been  polished
in  God  knows  how  many years,

but  the  street's so badly  lighted that most  of the  new  arrivals can't read  it  anyway.

As for his imagism, any one of a dozen examples might  do:  prostitutes as "pale butterflies of night"; a six quart basket which   "slowly   fills  up/  with   the  white fruits  of the  snow",  or  this:

Porcelain-white squat jug
of your  body

slowly  lifted
and   upturned....

Doubtless there  will be those who will decry  the  aridity of a forrnalist  approach to a poet  whom  they regard  as one of the few  "honest" writers  left  in  the  country,
 and  I would grant at once  the limitations of the approach. It simply seems to me dictated by Souster's own  methods. Doubtless   too  there   will  be  others   who will  say  it  is  precisely  in  his  form   that he  is  weakest,  indulging  as  he  does  in casual and loose diction ("hot, naked, unashamed  beauty"  or   "shivering  deli­ ciously"  or  even  the  ending   of  the  jug­ body   poem   quoted  above   which   spells out  what  it  is  that  spills).  But  what  we have  to grant  him  is that  within  his care­  fully   chosen   limits   he   can   skirt   those swamps   of   self-indulgence  few   writers  dare  even get close to;  and  too a mastery  of his own way that  makes some astonish­ iQgly  difficult  feats  look  casual   and  off­ hand. I think  of him as a craftsman. And I would  go  even  further: in  the  end,  I think,  he is seeking for a kind of "purity" which  will  prove  tougher  than   any  un­ enduring joy or ill, something found only "in   the  last  zone  of  silence"  where  "a poem  writes itself".  In  a noisy  world  few writers   have   the   courage  to   be  quiet  enough    to   hear    that   creative   silence. Souster,  I think,  has  the courage.









The Hudson's  Bay Company has, for nearly three centuries, been in the North. Now, as in the early days,our interest is held by those people and events which have helped shape the developing destiny of this part of our country. D We publish a quarterly magazine  ( n its42ndyear),devotedtothepastandpresentoftheNorthland.DThe subscription is $2.00 a year,  or $5.00 for one 3-year subscription.

The :Beaver
Hudson's Bay House,Winnipeg 1,Manitoba



66








A POET'S DIARY

The  Journal of  Saint-Denys-Garneau,  trans­ lated  by  John  Glassco, McClelland  &  Ste­  wart, $2.75.

REVIEWING   A TRANSLATION  requires that three  questions be answered. Did  the ori­ ginal   work   deserve   translation? Is  this particular rendering a  faithful  reflection of  the  sense  and   spirit   of  the  original? Does  the  result   read  well  as  an  English book?
In   the  present   case  the  original  work was  the  private diary  of  one  of  French Canada's major poets,  Hector de  Saint­ Denys  Garneau  (he   wrote   his  name   at least  two  different   ways,  although never as in the  title above), whose death at  the age   of  thirty-one   occurred  just   twenty years   ago.   His  diary,   not   intended  for publication,   was   nevertheless  published  by  two  of  his  friends in  I954·  The  first edition   soon   went   out   of  print, and   a second  appeared in  I962.  Together  with Garneau's poetry   (which appeared  in  a single  volume  in  I 937 and  was  re-edited m  I 949)   and   his  correspondence  (soon to  be  published), the  Journal   reveals  to us  the  intellectual and  spiritual quest  of a  young  man   whose  gifts  invite   the  use of   that    rare    Canadian  word,    genius. Whether it is read  for  itself or as a com­ mentary  on   the   poems,   the   Journal   is indisputably one  of  the  most  influential documents  of   the  one-hundred-and­ thirty-year   history   of   French-Canadian literature. It was essential  that, sooner  or
 later, it be translated for English-speaking readers.
The  Journal  contains something for nearly  everyone.  The  musician  finds here a music lover who can write of Mozart's Symphony   No.  40:

I love it  more  and  more, and  above every­ thing  else.  This  perfection of   balance and  harmony  which   makes   Mozart  fail   to  age by  a  single   day,   even   less  than  Beethoven. Perfection  remains always  young, it  is eter­ nal; things   grow   old   through  their  imper­ fection, through  their  particularities which  lean  on men  and  times.  Even  that by which  a  man   precedes  his  epoch, like  the  light  of a  century to  come,  is often the  reason  why he  ages.

The  student of Canadian life meets a strikingly  independent  observer:

Can  culture be considered from  a  nation­ alist  point  of  view? I don't think so. Culture is something essentially human in its aims - it  is essentially humanist. To  'form'  French­ Canadians,  that  is   to   say   to  make   them  conscious of  themselves as  such, is  perhaps a  popular notion, but  it  lacks  all  sense.  It's even  against sense  and  against nature.

The admirer of Garneau's poems finds in this book a refreshingly outspoken commentary:

On   a decide de   faire  la  nuit   is full  of  a tragic romanticism which   can   perhaps only fool whoever wants to be fooled. Fievre  is unreadable. Qu'est-ce qu'on  peut   pour  ... is a  vile piece  of  padding. Mains the  same: the  exploitation of a  minor sensation. In all these  I was  parading in  borrowed peacock's feathers; I  was  covering up  my  tracks, an absolute emptiness clothed in  brilliancy.

One  is  tempted  to  compose   a  review solely of excerpts from  this fascinating book.
The  translation of  the   Journal   is  by
John   Glassco,  who  gave   us,  in   Fiddle­ head  (Spring  I958)  and  in The Waterloo Review (Winter  I g6o), excellent English  versions of some of  Garneau's poetry, and

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in Tamarack Review (Summer I958) a sizeable sample of the present book. Mr. Glassco's  translation of the Journal  also formed  the  basis of the C.B.C. "Wednes­ day  Night" programme  heard  on  April
3,  I963.
By its  faithfulness to the  original   and
by  its  technical  accuracy, Mr.  Glassco's version   is  a  remarkable  piece  of  work. Translation is never  easy, and  the  trans­ lation   of  an  author like Garneau  is ex­ tremely   demanding.  It   is   evident   that  the  translator has  thought long and  care­ fully  about   nearly   every  word  and  that  the  transfer of  sense is  almost  complete. The  rare   mistranslations   are   in   detail  only:   it  is  not   legitimate, for  example, to  render  "transparent" as "translucent" (p.  24)   since  Garneau's whole  theory  of symbolism  in  poetry   hangs  on  the  idea of transparency to ultimate reality: "tout ce que  l'homme fait  est decouverte"  does not   mean    "All   that   man   does  is  dis­ covered    (p.   42),  any   more   than    "la philosophie  qui   est  decouverte"  means "the  philosophy which  is so discovered" (p.  43) ; "au  soleil doree"  is not  a com­ bination  of   a   noun   and   its   adjective (p.  44);  "enfoncent des coins"  is not  to be  translated "are   burrowing"  (p.  I I I), and  so on. As is to be expected  of a well­ qualified translator, there  are  a few Gal­ licisms: "And see ..."  p. 45, for "Et voici que") ; "Those were  ways of  conception so  opposed!"  (p.  24,  for   "C'etaient des  conceptions  si   opposees!").  Never­ theless, when one has finished pinpointing the  flaws, one  is  left  with  a real  admira­ tion   for   the   translator's  painstaking in­ genuity; it  is  unlikely  that  anybody  will give   us  a   better   English   equivalent  of the  Journal  than   this  one.  Indeed even those who can read  the Journal  in French will   profit   from   Mr.   Glassco's   helpful

68
 renderings.
Not  only  is  the  transfer of  sense  and spirit   successful,   but   the   resulting  text reads   well  in  English.   One   could   wish for  a  few  tiny  revisions: the  elimination of  the   tautology "I  would   like";  more attention  to   the   position   of   the   word "only", invariably misplaced; and  a more discriminating use of "which" and "that". But  these  again   are  details; the  general effect   of  the   English   text   is  a  pleasing and   stimulating one.  It is  to  be  hoped that a great many English-speaking Canadians will  read  this  book,  which  is, both   by  the  quality  of  its  original and by the  ability  of its translator, one  of the most   important  English   translations  in the  history  of  our   two  Canadian  litera­ tures.
It should  be  added that  Mr.  Glassco's
translation comes  to  us in  a volume  that is  typographically attractive  and  free  of the    numerous   misprints   of   the    I962
French edition. The cover  and  jacket  are
novel  and  arresting, although the  figure on  the  cover  clearly  owes  more  to  Fidel Castro than   to Saint-Denys Garneau.
DAVID M. HAYNE


THE OBSERVING  LENS

HUGH    GARNER.   The  Silence on   the   Shore.
McClelland & Stewart. $s.oo.

THE  TERM "NOVEL"  as a blanket  appela­ tion   for   any   piece   of   extended   fiction could    not    be   better    exposed,    as   the clumsy  and   ineffective  thing   it  is,  than  when  used  in  the  context of such  a  book as   Hugh   Garner's  The    Silence   on   the Shore.  For  the  relationship existing   be­ tween  this  tale  of  life  amid   the  several rooms  of  a Toronto rooming  house,  and the  work  of,  let  us say, John Updike, is

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



that   between   photography and  painting. Mr.    Garner's  pages   brim    with    the authentic  flavours   of   diurnal  minutiae for  the  characters he  has  chosen  to  pre­ sent,  but  he  observes   with  the  accuracy  of the  camera and  not  in  that  dimension  of  the  distilled  imagination  which  is the prerogative of  the  true  artist  working  in
either words  or  pigment.
In  saying  this  I  am  aware that   I  am in   fact   making  an   evaluation:   placing The Silence  on the  Shore  in  the category of  journalistic enterprise  rather  than  in the   superior  one   of  literary  art.   But  I believe it is only fair  to the  book to make this distinction and  make  it emphatically. For   judged    as   creative  fiction,   in   the highest   sense  of  that   imprecise  term,  it fails.  While  judged  within  its true  genre, and  according to the  goals  and  standards we  rightly   accord   to  those  books  which seek  to  reproduce "life" in  faithful  de­ rial,   it   is  highly   impressive.   Indeed,   I think   it  superior  to  many   of   its  peers, such  as the  novels of  the Londoner Nor­ man   Collins,   of   Claude   Mauriac  (the journalistic son of  an  artist  father) or of such   half-forgotten  writers  as  Bruce
 Marshall and  Cecil  Roberts.
Had  Hugh  Garner not  written about Toronto but  New York,  Paris or London, and  had  he  been  writing  in  the  'twenties or   'thirties,  I   believe   this   book  would have  been  a  best-seller.  As it is, it  repre­ sents   a   thoroughly  acceptable   example of  a  rather  old-fashioned g,enre  which  is both  effective  in its writing  and  powerful  in  its  ability  to  disturb the  reader.
The  technique of plot  Mr.  Garner has
adopted is a  proven  one.  He  has  placed a group  of people  under  a common  roof and then set about exploring their characters and  their  influences  upon  one another. In  the course of doing this he presents   aspects   of   human  degradation that    are   sufficiently   eloquent  to  force one's  eye from  the page for momentary respite.
A  utility   of   warning  and   admonish­ ment    legitimately   enters   his   narrative from   time   to   time.   For   instance,  his blow-by-blow  account of a  man  embark­ ing  upon  an  alcoholic binge and  the sub­ sequent   development   of   delirium  tre­  mens,  not  only  carries   the   hallmark  of truth,   but   is   disturbing  enough  to  do signal  service  as an  AA  tract. Or  again, his  delineation of  the  perverted and  sick mind  of a Fundamentalist fanatic is a salutary   reminder that  some  of  the  pro­ foundest human activities  lie but  a  hair's  breadth from  some of the foulest.
However, there  are times when Mr. Garner refuses the middle-brow, slightly antiquated role of yarn-teller that I have designated him,  times  when  he succumbs to the temptation to indulge  in a little philosophizing. And when  this happens, calamity ensues.  Just  as  it  is  possible  to enjoy a detective story per  se without bothering much  about  the depth  of characterization,  so  one  can   take   those

6g

BOOKS IN REVIEW



examples  where    Gamer's  pen   fails   to yield  anything more   than  stereotype,  m the  wake  of  such  offsetting   triumphs as his realization of Grace  Hill,  the rooming house  owner.  But  when  explicit  moraliz­ ing   appears  one   must   bring   a   sterner  critical apparatus to bear.
And  in  the  case of The  Silence  on the
Share   there   is   just   a   little   too   much straining after  seriousness  of an  aesthetic and   metaphysical  nature  for   my  peace of  mind.
DAVID  WATMOUGH


A SHELTERED NEST

PAUL WEST.  I, Said  the  Sparrow.  Hutchinson.
r8/-.

PAUL WEST's  ACCOUNT of his Derbyshire village  boyhood  is  another of  the  auto­ biographical  books  by  young   men   and women-Mr.  West is  thirty-three­ which    are   now   extremely    popular  in England. To  wonder why this  particular mode  should  be so just now is to launch  oneself  onto  the  choppy   waters   of  cul­ tural  theory:  waters  on which  Raymond Williams  and  Richard Hoggart ride so buoyantly. From that surface one's initial impression  is that  the "new wave" of autobiography is another reflection  of the awakening to consciousness of the English working-class   and  of  the  new  man's  at­ tempt  to  define  himself  in  a new society. This   is an  attractively  neat  explanation of  the  whole  genre   and  superficially   at least  of I, Said  the  Sparrow.
The book is the  record  of the  life of a
working-class boy in the village of Eckington  up   to   the   time   he  went   to grammar school. Then his  "world changed".  Mr.   West  describes   this  life, its  physical   environment,  its  ethos  and
 his family's place  in  it  with  great  energy and  with  masses  of, on  the  whole, effec­ tive  detail.  His   father was  a  fitter,   his mother "the butcher's daughter  who was also  a  schoolteacher  and   a  well-known local  pianist." He  fixes their  place  on the social  scale  with   a  nice  accuracy. "On one  side  you  found  the  obsequious, the sanctimonious and  the pseudo-genteel, on the other  the  uncouth, the obtuse  and  the crude. We  were somewhere in  between." They   were   between,  that   is,  the   lower middle-class and  the  lower reaches  of the working-class   represented  in  the  village by the miners.  However, as Mr. West suggests  in  the  closing  pages  of his book, this   society   has   now   been   replaced  by another; the  village  has  become  "a  vil­ lage-cum-suburbia  now  spilling   out   to­ wards   both   Chesterfield and  Sheffield," while   Mr.   West,   in  a  phrase  that   is  a little   pretentious, is  "now  familiar with worlds   very  different  from   that   of  the village."
It is this  distance that  Mr.  West  him­
self  has  travelled from  the  boy  and   the society  he  describes   that   makes  at  times for   a  curious  tone   that   I have   noticed in other autobiographical accounts of the same  type.  At  times  Mr.  West  adopts  to­ wards   his  own   past   experience  what   I can  only  call  a  professorial   air;  as if  he were  describing  the  habits   of   some  ab­ original  tribe    to   a   more   sophisticated audience of  another  race  with  which  he now  feels  himself  to  be  quite  at  one.  It is  this  tone   as  much  as  anything,  both in   Mr.   West's   book   and   in   the   others  like  it,  that   make  one  hesitate to  attach the    culture-theory    label    I    mentioned earlier.  In   any   such   terms   Mr.   West's book  presents  an  image   of  a  society  in which   the   working    class  was   still   un­ conscious;  a society  from  which  he  feels

BOOKS IN REVIEW



himself   now  separated  by  his  own  edu­ cated  "grammar  school" consciousness.  I do  not  mean   to  suggest  that   Mr.   West condescends to  this  society,  but  that  the consciousness    that   so  vividly   describes that   society   is  no   longer   working-class itself.  Nor   do  I   think   Mr.   West  is  at­ tempting  primarily anything so  abstract as  a  definition  of  himself  as  new  man.  His  purpose in  the  book  is I  think  much simpler   than   that    and   is  suggested   in the  following passage:


Deep  fishing  into  childhood is never  futile yet  never wholly   beneficial either, tempting one as it must  to inventive hindsight yet, paradoxically,  reviving bewilderments  im­ mune  to   that  adult  chimera, the  sense  of responsibility. The half-illicit spell  of  young  awareness,  all   careless alchemy  and   rebel­ lious  retreat, too  easily  becomes  a  flood  of information. How  it  felt  is nearly impossible to  establish.
 Mr.  West is intent simply  to recapture the  "feel"  of  a  life  that   ended for  him with  the  entry  into  grammar school.  He does  not  always  succeed,   and   when   he does not he simply lets loose "a flood of information",  slang, descriptions of games,   magazines,   places    and    so   on. Items  on this flood  occasionally triggered my  memory  of  my  own  boyhood,  but  I don't  suppose  that  was Mr.  West's inten­ tion  since it  led  me away  from  his book. There  is  too  one   part   of  the  book,  in which   Mr.   West   quotes   his  own   early poetry  and  recaptures  wartime  fantasies,  the  feeling  of  which  I  did  not  care  for at   all.
Mr.  West  succeeds  brilliantly however
in projecting the "feeling" of his parents, his  affection   for   them,   the   life  of  the family and the  house in which  his parents lived  then  and  still live now. He  conveys





LAWRENCE  DURRELL AND   HENRY  MILLER: A  PRIVATE  CORRESPONDENCE
EDITED AND  INTRODUCED BY GEORGE WICKES

These  two   very   different  writers  of  genius  have   been   exchanging  ideas   and reactions since  Durrell wrote to  Miller in  1935  about  Tropic of Cancer. 	$8.75

THE  MAN OF  PRINCIPLE
BY DUDLEY BARKER

Mr.   Barker  has   drawn  on  letters and   records and   the   recollections of  people who   knew   John  Galsworthy to  form   his  view   of  the   outwardly austere  and reserved  but   also  generous and   gentle  novelist.                                            $7.50

MATHEW  ARNOLD   AND   THE  ROMANTICS
BY  LEON A. GOTTREID

A study of  the  literary relationships between Mathew Arnold and  the  Romantics in  his literary, social,  and  theological criticism, and  above  all in  his poetry where the  influence and   reaction are  most  significant.                                            $I o.oo

BRITISH  BOOK   SERVICE (CANADA)  LIMITED
I068 BROADVIEW AVENUE, TORONTO 6, ONTARIO



71

BOOKS IN REVIEW



well  also  the  boy's  attitude towards   the miners.  They  emerge at intervals through­ out   the   book,  seen  at   the  cinema,  the local  fairground, passing  down  a  street,  involved in  an  argument  outside  a  pub. The tone  in  which  they  are  described  is one  of  secret  admiration  for   their   vio­ lence.  Yet  the  miners  appear as  remote  from   the  life  of  the  West  family  as  do the  Sitwells,  who  from  nearby  Renishaw Hall made  periodic  visitations  on Ecking­ ton,  as  remote as  Sheffield  (seven  miles away), as  remote   as  the  war.  My  final impression  was   that   the   Sparrow  had grown  in  a nest  quite enviably  sheltered.
WILLIAM HALL


HERO WITHOUT MOTIVE

GEORGE WHALLEY.  The Legend   of  fohn  Horn­
by.   Macmillan. $6.50.

GEORGE WHALLEY is a scholar of great energy   and   erudition  and   The   Legend of John Hornby gives evidence of a relentlessness  not  very often  encountered in  Canadian biog,raphy  or  history.
John  Hornby embodied all  the  quali­ ties    necessary    to   a   legendary    figure. Thought by some  Canadians to  be  mad,  by others  to be a wealthy  English  eccen­  tric,   he  lived   and   died  in  an   aura   of mystery.  He  had  a  paranoiac distrust  of man's  civilization,  and  an  obsession  for the  Canadian  Arctic. In  a letter  he once wrote: "It  would  have  been  better   if  I had   not   come   back   to  civilization  but stayed   with   the  savages  leading   a  wild
& natural life, able  to act on  the impulse of the moment, bound  to no restrictions." In   systematic   order   Mr.  Whalley   fol­ lows   the   track   of   Hornby,   from    1904

72
 when   he  first  ran   away   from   England to start  his bizarre career  north from Edmonton,  till   the   final   tragic   but   in­ evitable starvation  on  the   banks  of   the lonely  Thelon River   in  the  long  winter  of  rg26.  Mr.  Whalley does not skim over the   story;   if  anything,  he   overloads  it with   day-to-day  documentation, gather­ ing  letters,  journals, government reports
-anything that   so  much   as  mentions
Jack   Hornby.
Mr.  Whalley is best as a historian, par­ ticularly when   he  turns  his  attention  to a sweeping description of the prairies and the   Northwest Territories at  the  begin­ ning  of  this  century. But  when  he  turns  to   a   characterization   of   his   hero   the writing seems  to fade.  For  the  Quixotic, Chaplinesque Hornby,  wandering  with­  out  any  apparent  reason  back  and  forth  across   the   barren   snow,  always   talking  about  the   book   he  was  going   to  write,  the  minerals he was going  to carry  south,  the  animal  expeditions he  was  going  to lead,  would seem  to be inaccessible  to the historian,  faced   with   the  task  of  trying

BOOKS IN REVIEW



to   render  an   unbelievable  man   believ­
able.
With a matter-of-fact mien, Mr. Whalley  follows Hornby through his odd adventuring, and  makes  available to the Canadian reader   the  story  of  a  man  too little   known   in  this  country. In  the  re­ counting of Hornby's last  agonizing fight for  life  through a  long  winter of  starva­ tion  in  an  isolated  cabin   buried  by bliz­ zards,    Whalley    does   his   best   writing,  bringing  to   life  an   absurd   ordeal   that  would   seem   to   be  beyond   the   normal man's ability  to  comprehend.
The Legend  of John  Hornby will sometimes   be  slow  reading  for  the  lay­ man,   but   the  story  is  so  big,  the  man's  experience so disturbing, that   the  image of  John  Hornby will  stay   in  the  mind  for   a   long   time   after   the   book   is  put away.                                GEORGE BOWERING


THE THEN  GREAT AMPHITRYON

MARJORIE WILKINS  CAMPBELL.   McGillivray­
Lord  of the  Northwest. Clarke  Irwin. $6.50.

THE    NORTH WEST  COMPANY is  best known   for   the   discoveries   of  its  three great  explorers-Alexander MacKenzie, Simon  Fraser, and  David  Thompson. As an   organization,  however, its  story   has been  obscured by the  prominence of the Hudson's  Bay   Company  in   Canadian history.  Marjorie Wilkins  Campbell  has done   much   to  bring   to  light   the  facts about    the   Nor'Westers  as   a   company, first  in  her  book  The  North West  Com­ pany, and  now in McGillivray- Lord  of the   Northwest.
William   McGillivray joined  the  North
West  C::1mpany as an  apprentice clerk  at
 the  age of nineteen in  I 783, through the influence  of  his uncle,  Simon  McTavish, the  dominant  figure   of  the  early   years of  the  company. Twenty  years  later,  on his  uncle's   death, he  succeeded  him  as the   chief   partner.   Another  twenty-two years and McGillivray was dead and  the North  West Company was no more, hav­ ing been dissolved into  the  rival Hudson's Bay  Comparw in  I 82 I . The  forty  years from  I 783  to  I823  saw  the  Nor'Westers successfully  wrest   leadership  in  the  fur  trade  from  the  Hudson's Bay  Company, extend   their  trade to  the  Pacific  Ocean, grow  nepotic,  and   die  in  a  savage  eco­ nomic,  political,  legal  and  even  military war  with  their  older  rival.  It is a drama­ tic  story,  well  worth   searching  out  and  telling  again, especially  as Mrs. Campbell does it, from  fresh  sources  and  with  new information.
Having  recognized the  interest of Mrs.
Campbell's topic  and  the  importance of her   research,   it  is  a  shame  to  have   to express  doubts   about her  use  of  sources and  her presentation. To  begin  with  pre­ sentation, here  is  the  first  paragraph of McGillivray:
London had   never seemed  so dreary. It was the  fog,  he  told  himself, February  fog  that chilled   him   till  he  felt  colder than  he  had ever   felt    in   Montreal  or   in   the    Indian country  of   the    Canadian   Northwest,  fog that   froze   his   marrow  whenever  he   went into  the street. Spring had  never  been so reluctant.

If Mrs. Campbell likes to ascribe sym­ pathetic emotions to  the  weather  and  to the inanimate background of a character, probably   no  harm is  done.   It  is only  a rather obvious stylistic trick  known  as the pathetic fallacy.  No  one  is  likely  to  take the  fiction  seriously.
Perhaps the trick of imagining the feel­
ings  of characters on  almost  every  occa-

73

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sion  and  stating them  as  known  facts  is also basically innocent. What  professional historians call this fallacy  I do not  know, but  since  it  deceives  only the  very naive, it can  be regarded as nothing  worse than a  condescending attempt at  what  is thought to be a popular  style.
The indulgence of fancy  becomes  seri­
ous  when  the  author seems to be invent­ ing   details   which   could  conceivably   be demonstrated and  for which  there  might be direct  evidence which she alone knows. To  illustrate this  abuse  of  the  imagina­ tion,  I must  take an example  from  where I am  aware of  the evidence.  Mrs. Camp­ bell   states   that  after   the   North   West Company   was   amalgamated   into    the Hudson's Bay Company, William  McGil­  livray took down  David  Thompson's map from   the   wall   of   Fort   William    as   a souvenir  and  that  it  eventually  found  its way  to  the  Ontario Provincial  Archives. How   does  the  author know  this?  If she has  evidence that  the  Fort  William  map and   the  Ontario Archives  map   are  one and   the  same  and   that   its  history  is  as stated, she ought  to make the information public,   since  it  concerns a  primary  his­ torical  document. Actually  the documen­ tary  evidence, as  far  as I  know  it,  indi­  cates   that    the   Ontario   Archives   map  came   from   Thompson's  estate   and   was likely  a  later   map   than  the  one  which hung   at  Fort   William.
In   a   similar   offhand  manner,  Mrs.
Campbell  refers   to   the   above   map   as "the first  ever  drawn of  the  Northwest as  far   as  the   Pacific  Ocean",  although Alexander  Mackenzie  had   published   a map  which  extended  to   the   Pacific thirteen years  earlier. Had   Mrs.  Camp­ bell  taken   all  the  information  to  be ob­
tained  from  one  of her  sources. Dr.  J. J.
Bigsby's The Shoe  and Canoe, she would


74
 have   known   that   the  earlier  map   was also  drawn  by  Thompson.
Bigsby's  book contains a description of a dinner party  at William  McGillivray's mansion in Montreal, on which  Mrs. Campbell draws  in some detail. But she omits Bigsby's significant and  mildly satirical  epithet  for   McGillivray  as   a host:  "the  then   great   Amphytrion". I think  the  omission  is typical  of a certain lack  of  objectivity towards her  hero  on Mrs.  Campbell's part. She  is oblivious  to the fact  that  Moliere had  a word for him.
Mrs.  Campbell states  that  McGillivray was  "largely responsible  for  the  explora­ tion  of a quarter of the continent." What she  ought   to have  said  is that  men  asso­ ciated with  McGillivray were  responsible for  some  such  amount of  discovery  and that   McGillivray  played   an   organizing role in part  of the exploration. It is surely an  exaggeration to give  McGillivray any significant share,  as Mrs.  Campbell  does, in   the   accomplishment of  Alexander

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Mackenzie.  Overstatement   and   roman­ ticization   only  result  in  diluting  McGil­ livray's  vigour  of  character, not in height­  ening  his  interest and   significance.
Mrs.  Campbell has  written a  study  of an  important but   neglected figure.  Un­ fortunately,  much   of   what   she   says  is impossible  to verify  and  may at  points  be misleading. Taken  with  caution, her  la­ test  book  is  informative  and  indicates a valuable area for further research.
V.  G.  HOPWOOD

SINGERS OF QUEBEC
MARIUS   BARBEAU.   Jongleur Songs of Old
Quebec. Ryerson. $8.50.
MARIUS BARBEAU. Le  Rossignol y Chante.
Musee National  du   Canada.  $6.oo.

IT  Is   HARD FOR the   public   to  keep  up with   Dr.   Barbeau's  published  work  for books and  articles pour from  the pen of Canada's leading folk-lorist  at  a rate  that astounds those  of  lesser  energy  and  nar­ rower   interests.   Here we  are  concerned with  his two  most  recent  volumes  in one of   his   several    special   fields:    French­ Canadian  folk  song.  The first  Jongleur Songs  of Old  Quebec,  will  be of greater interest   to  English   readers, for  its  pro­ vides  translations of  the  forty-two songs it  contains, and  the  notes  are  in English. The  second,  which  is entirely in French, is probably of more  importance, since its
16o songs  form   the  first  instalment of  a series  designed   to  provide a  representa­ tive    selection    of    the    whole   French­ Canadian  folk  song  repertoire.
Jongleur   Songs  of Old   Quebec  serves the same purpose as Dr.  Barbeau's earlier and  long out-of-print volume,  Folk Songs of French Canada (1925):  to give English-Canadians  some   conception  of the  richness  and   variety of  the  French-
 Canadian folklore  heritage. The songs of the new volume, which were all recorded between  rgr6 and  1925 from  folk singers along  the St. Lawrence River,  include samples   of   many    different  types:    old French ballads of knights and ladies, of shepherdesses   and    soldiers,   love   songs, songs  of  girls  who  want   to  get  married and  of those who  are  married and  regret it,  songs of the  French court  which  were adapted to the rhythm  of the voyageurs' paddles,  and  songs composed  by  the habitants   and    coureurs-de-bois  to   des­ cribe  the  rustic  life  of  New  France.
Included  are  familiar  songs  like  " A Ia   claire    fontaine"   and    two    of    the hundred-odd versions of "Trois beaux canards", and  unusual ones  like  the  tale of  "La   Bergere   muette" who  is  healed by   the   Virgin   Mary,   and   an   Acadian version   of   "The  False   Knight  in   the Road" (Child 4), "Ou vas-tu,  mon  petit gan;on?"
Of even greater interest than  the songs themselves are the detailed notes that accompany them.  Into these notes Dr. Barbeau has  skilfully  woven  much  back­ ground    information   showing   how    the songs originated in  medieval  France and  how they formed  part  of the life and  the work   of   the   pioneer   settlers   of   New France. The  book  includes   also  a  short account of  "Discovery of the  Folk  Songs of   French   Canada"  and   an   extensive bibliography.
Le  Rossignol   y  C hante   takes  its  title
from   a  line   in   the   familiar  "Gailonla, gai le rosier"  which Dr. Barbeau included as  a  tribute  to   his  predecessor, Ernest Gagnon, whose Chansons populaires  du Canada, published in r865, was the first important French-Canadian song  collec­ tion.   The   book   has   been   divided  into  eleven  sections  beginning  with  "Oiseaux,

75

BOOKS IN REVIEW



messagers  d'amour" and  ending  with "Voyages  sur  mer  et  sur  terre".  Some­ times  the  songs  are  grouped   by  types, as in   "La  pastourelle" and  "Nocturnes  et aubades", and   sometimes  by  subject,   as in   "Princesses   emprisonnees  dans   une tour" and "aventures galantes". The  larg­ est  section  is  made   up  of  "Chants  reli­ gieux   et  miracles",  and  particularly  in­ teresting are  the  "Chants  historiques".
Those  interested in folklore  and litera­ ture   will  enjoy   noting   how  the  French  songs parallel themes  they know in  other  forms:  for   example, the   aubades  echo the    Shakespearean   scene   about    "The lark,  the  herald  of the morn"; "C'est un docteur  bien  miserable"  is  a  variant of the  Faust  legend; and  "La courte  paille"  tells  the same  story  that  Thackeray gives in  comic  form  as  "Little  Billee".
For  those  who  want  a general   picture of French-Canadian folk songs and  their background, Jongleur  Songs of Old  Que­ bec  is  highly   recommended.  For   those interested  in   exploring the   breadth  of the  French-Canadian  repertoire, Le Ros­ signol  y Chante  will  be essential  reading.
EDITH FOWKE


HOUSE OF WORDS

LOVAT  DICKSON.   The   House  of Words,  Mac­
millan,   $5.50.

NEARLY THIRTY YEARS before Roy Thom­ son  had   the  idea,   a  young  man  called Lovat  Dickson  left  Canada  for  England to  become  a  publisher. His  progress  was slower   than   Thomson's in  that   he  had only brains  and  burning ambition. Thom­ son  had  money.
The slow  progress  from  review  editor
to  partner in  Macmillan's-one of  the great   publishing houses  of  the  world-

76
 is our gain.  For Lovat  Dickson  has now recounted that  progress in  a  second volume  of autobiography entitled The House   of Words.
Dickson  was a young lecturer at the University of  Alberta when  he  met  with an  eccentric and  wealthy  Canadian  busi­ ness   man    called    Hammond   who   was about   to  buy  The  English   Review. On an  impulse, Hammond offered  the  job of assistant   editor  to   Dickson   who,   on   a similar  impulse,  took  it.
In   the   event   Hammond  did   not  get
The English   Review; Dickson   arranged for   him   to   purchase  The  Fortnightly. This  he  did  in  1929,  and  for  three  years Lovat   Dickson  edited it.  He  was  aware, more  than  the editors of other surviving nineteenth-century magazines,  that The Fortnightly had lost  touch with its twentieth-century readers.  So he enlarged and  diversified  his role by personally buy­ ing  the  Review of Reviews.
He  also  became the  English  scout  for
the  Macmillan Company of New York. Much as  he  liked  putting together a magazine -indeed  two  magazines -he became  absorbed  in   the  picking   out   of books. And  within  another year he had established himself  as Lovat Dickson Limited  with   a   colophon  designed    by Denis  Tegetmeier, and  a first list that included two  best  sellers.
From  here   on  The  House   of  Words
concerns itself  with  what  it  is like  to  be a publisher: the ferreting out of good authors;  the   careful  weighing   of  merit and   commercial  feasibility; the  estima­ tion   of  how   many   should   be  in  a  first print order; the  careful  public  relations which  can  make  or  break  a  book.
Just    for   this   The  House   of   Words would  be interesting and  worthwhile, but the   authors  whom   Lovat   Dickson   col-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



lected  under   his  imprint were  a  cunous lot. They  included Captain von Rintelen, a German spy who  told  all;  Nis Peterson who   drank   himself   to  death  before   he could  duplicate the success of The Street of the  Sandalmakers; and,  the  man  who made   Dickson's first  few  seasons  profit­ able,   Grey   Owl.   His   account   of   this pseudo-Indian's escapades on  the lecture  circuit  are  funny  but    the   scene  at Buckingham  Palace  when   George   VI  asked  his  daughter  to  meet  a  real  Red  Indian is both  hilarious and  touching.
In  the course  of his career, Lovat Dick­
son has  met  with  many  great  men  of his time  and  his stories of Sir Osbert  Sitwell, Sir John Squire and  Charles Morgan are all  fresh  and   amusing. He   also  gives  a neat  vignette of  one  of  the  great   young writers  who  were  lost  to England by the war: Richard Hillary.
Lovat   Dickson   emerges   as  a  man   of
humour, integrity and  unusual personal candour. In addition the  reason  why  he has  picked  so many  winners in  his  pub­ lishing life becomes  evident: he can write very well  himself.  It is no mere  business­ man  who  can  end  a first-rate  episode  of autobiography with  a  passage  like this:

It is  a  pity   that we  ourselves  can   never see  the  promise that  others see  in  us  when we  are  young. Or   is  it  perhaps better that we should  not know? Would the intensity slacken  if  we  were   assured  we  were  doing well?   Now   that my  own  star, after its  long sweep   across   the   arc   of  the   sky,  is  sinking towards the  horizon, I want to hail  the eager newcomers pressing forward through the ante-room, past  me, through the open  door beside  which I stand. They cannot spare   a side   glance  for   me,   the   veteran.  It  makes me  wonderfully happy that  the   young   are lost  in  intensity, eagerly pressing forward: a  salute from   an   old  publisher to  a  young one  would   be  lost  in  their excited chatter. That  is  as  it   should  be.   In the   House  of Words  the   voices   of   the   young   are   what one  ought to  listen  for.
 That  is  the   work   of  a  writer.   It is worthy  of being published by anyone.  But while Dickson  is still keeping  a watch  for good  books himself,  it is no surprise  that The House of Words is published by Macmillan, his own  firm.
ARNOLD EDINBORO UGH

FROZEN DISBELIEF
NICHOLAS  MONSARRAT. The  Time Before This.
$g.so.

NICHOLAS   MONSARRAT has  crossed  evan­ g,e!ical religiosity with  the gee-whiz school of  science  fiction,  and  The Time  Before This is the issue;  it is an  ugly  child.
Peter   Benton,   a  disassociated  young
newspaperman, goes  to Canada's Far North for  the  true  story  on  this  latest  of frontiers.  Among   other   things,   he  finds a  messianic  old  man,   called   Mr.  Shep­ herd,   who  spends  his  time  enraging the low life  in  Bone  Lake's  only  temple,  the hotel  bar.  I  know, the old  man  says, this has all happened  before, and  his gesture  includes   all   of   Bone   Lake,   a   scabrous  boom   town  created  by  modern  techno­ logical   legerdemain.  Almost nightly, Shepherd is  cast  out  of  the  temple   and nursed  home by a slightly soiled, but ascendant,  young   woman;  her   name   is Mary.  Eventually the  old  man  is beaten up -"crucified" -and Peter,   involved against  his will by Mary, helps him  home to his tomb-like room. There, dying, he imparts his knowledge to  Peter.
Long   ago,   Shepherd  came    upon    a great   mountain  of  ice  far   beyond   our present  northern frontier; it was an enor­ mous   storehouse    containing a   colossal abundance of  foodstuffs, the  whole  con­ trived  with  a technical sophistication un­ known   to  us,  and  millions  of  years  old. It was  guarded by  seven  corpses,  frozen

77

BOOKS IN REVIEW



in attitudes of disbelief and instant death, the   last   men   of  an   incredibly   ancient and   advanced  civilization   that   perished by  nuclear war.  Since  finding  the  store­ house  and   returning from  it,  Shepherd has   wandered  the   wilderness   trying   to rediscover   the  site  and  deter  civilization  from   the   course   of   self-destruction.  He has   succeeded    in    neither,  but    before dying   converts   Peter   to  his  beliefs  and  appoints him  heir  to  the  crusade.
Couched in  the  terms  of a  prosaically
realistic    novel,   but   clumsily   encrusted with    symbolic    analogues,    The  Time Before   This is  vitiated   both   as  a  novel and  a parable. The parable is embodied in   the    characters,  but    they   lack   the vitality  to  carry  its  weight.  If Mr.  Mon­ sarrat sincerely  believes that  nuclear  war is the Hell  our civilization  is manufactur­ ing  for  itself,  and  wants  to  stop  it,  then he  has  done  his  cause  a  great  disservice.
BARRIE HALE


TOONERVILLE TROLLEY TO TRANSCONTINENTAL

G.  R.  STEVENS.   Canadian  National  Railways: Vol.    I,  Sixty    Years    of   Trial  and    Error (I 836- I 8g6)  ;   Vol.    II,  Towards the    In­ evitable (I8g6-Ig22). Clarke, Irwin. $I6.oo.

ALL  THE  EVIDENCE of the  last  decade or so  to  the  contrary many  Canadians still believe  that  their  history  is largely  a dull tale  of rails,  tariffs  and  freight  rates.  To them  the  publication of two fat  volumes on the history of the hundreds of railways which    eventually  formed    the   publicly owned   Canadian  National Railway   will not   immediately  appeal  as  an   exciting event.   Yet  it  is,  for  this  is  a  different kind  of railway  history  than  any we have
 had   in  Canada before,   and   it  makes  a valuable contribution to the  understand­ ing  of  our  social  history.  That is not  to say  that   there   are   no   dull   patches  in Colonel  Stevens'  more than  one thousand pages.    Even    his    literary   skill   cannot make    enthralling    reading   of   all    the merger   negotiations  and   financial  crises which  are  an  essential   part  of  his  story, but   with   many   such   episodes   he  more  than  manages  to  do  so.
Whether   he   describes    the    "puffing
billies"  of  the  early   portage railways  of theI 8go's or the twentieth-century giants, Colonel  Stevens has  a  perceptive eye for the  physical  features of the  railways  and the  country through  which  they  passed. What is rarer is that  he never  allows  the reader to  forget   the  human beings  who were  employed on  the  railways,  rode  on them,    and    used   them,    often    without knowing   it,  to  shape   the   material and spiritual  fabric  of  a   nation.  The   book evokes sharply  the  excitement of the first railway  boom  in  the  Canada West of the
I 85o's  when  every  small  town  was  pre­ pared to  risk  the  upheavals  wrought by riotous Irish immigrant  construction workers    in   the    hope    of    becoming   a metropolis, and  is equally  convincing in its  portrayal  of   the   mood   of   bursting optimism at  the  beginning of "Canada's century".
Except for  the  more  colourful C.P.R.
figures, we have known little about the organizers and  operators of our transpor­ tation   systems,  for  the  railroaders them­ selves  have  usually  been  lost  behind   the mileages  and  deficits  of their  companies. Every  schoolboy  knows  that  the  building  of the Intercolonial Railway was a condi­  tion   of  Maritime adherence to  Con­ federation, but  he hears  little  of it  there­ after,   unless   as  a   warning   against   the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



evils of public  ownership of utilities. Inci­ dentally, although  Colonel  Stevens  pro­  vides  many  examples of   the most  venal corruption  in  the  Intercolonial, he  sug­ gests  that   the  railway's weaknesses  have  often   been  exaggerated  by  persons  with private  enterprise  axes  to  grind. As  he shows,  the  Intercolonial had  its  victories no less  than  the C.P.R.; one  of its heroes was   David    Pottinger,  who   served   the company for thirty-six  years, first as Superintendent and  then   as   General Manager. Pottinger's determined but only partially  successful   efforts   to   limit   the worst  kinds  of patronage as practiced by both   political   parties,   and   his  achieve­ ment    in    reforming  the    "loutish   be­ haviour" and  irresponsibility of the  early employees  which   often   made a  journey on  the  Intercolonial a  threat to  morality and   life,   warrants  the   conclusion  that  "no  railway   officer  ever  deserved   better  of  his  country".
Among   the   many   other  figures   who
stand   out  vividly  are  Henry  Tyler,  who became  president  of  the   Grand  Trunk m 	1876,   and    his   General   Manager, Joseph   Hickson.    The   imagination  and financial audacity of this pair  in eliminat­ ing  competition in  Canada  through the buying  up of branch  lines, and in extend-
 ing   themselves   into   New   England  and west to Chicago  against the bitter opposi­ tion   of   Sir   John  A.   Macdonald,  the C.P.R., and   the  Vanderbilts, made   the Grand  Trunk  one  of  the  most  efficient and  admired  railways  of  the  nineteenth century.  The   leadership  given   by   Sir Charles  Rivers  Wilson  and  C.  M.  Hays in  the  "boom-and-bust" years  after   the turn  of  the century was powerless  to  save the Grand  Trunk from  the  effects of the inflationary spiral  of  the  war  years  as it joined the Grand Trunk Pacific and the Canadian Northern on the  road  to bank­ ruptcy  and  the  climax  of the  story in the creation of the  Canadian  National  Rail­  way.  The   author,  like  most   Canadians then  and  now,  accepts  public  ownership  not  as good in  principle,  but  as the  least objectionable  of  the  possible  solutions  to the  railway  problem.
Historians will  be grateful for  Colonel
Stevens'   careful  research  in  the  official records  of  the  C.N.R. and  in  numerous archival  collections.  To  mention only two of his contributions to historical studies­ he  has  added   to  our  knowledge  of  the Mackenzie and  Mann enterprises and  has provided   new   and   convincing  evidence  that   Laurier's  enthusiasm  for  a  second transcontinental   railway   owed   more   to political   than    to   economic  inspiration. But  it is lamentable that  there  is no pre­ cise documentation of sources;  there  are only   meagre  references   to   secondary  works  which   obviously   played   a  minor  part  in the preparation of these volumes. While  it  is  true   that   the  author's com­ petent   handling of  his  material  inspires confidence   and   reduces   to  a  minimum the  limitations  imposed   by this  lack,  the value    of   his   work    would    have   been greatly  enhanced by adequate  documen- tation.	MARGARET PRANG

79

BOOKS IN REVIEW



VISION AND WORD
MARIUS  BARBEAU.  Cornelius Krieghoff.
R.  H.  HUBBARD. Tom Thomson.
ALAN JARVIS.  David  Milne.
DONALD W. BUCHANAN.  Alfred   Pellan.
McClelland &  Stewart. $r.75 ea.

IN  SPITE  OF  Malraux's optimistic report some   years   ago,   the   museum   without walls  still  does  not  exist.  Books  contain­ ing   reproductions  of  works  of   art   con­ tinue    to   pour    from   the   presses,   each presumably intending to add yet another gallery  to  the  world  museum  figuratively  abuilding on  our  bookshelves.  However, it   takes   scarcely   more   than    the   most cursory   check   to  discover  that   the  pic­ tures  we  are  buying  in  reproduction are not  reproductions at  all;  but  are,  for  the very  greatest part, grotesque  caricatures of  what  they purport to imitate, grossly misleading the  student of art  who  wishes to  make  even  the  shallowest  generaliza­ tions  from  the  "facts" which book repro­  ductions offer.
But since we are  not yet so mobile  that
we can  flit about from  the  Louvre  to the Hermitage, and   then  on  to  the  Metro­ politan in  an  hour   or  so of  effort,  it  is obvious  that  we still must  depend  on  the device   of  books  to  fill  in,  however   in­ adequately. It  also   becomes  apparent that, in spite  of the visual nature of such a  thing  as painting,  the  verbal  assistance to  our  education in  art  continues to  be essential.
This  brings  us to the core of the  prob­
lem  posed  by the  first four  little  volumes in  the  series called  The  Gallery  of C ana­ dian   Art.   The question   that   the  editor  must  ask  is:   "If we  can  afford  to  print  about a dozen  pages  of words per  mono­ graph to go with  the reproductions, what  would  be  the  most  useful, or  most  inter-

8o
 esting,  thing  we might  talk  about?" It  is related  to  the   age-old   dilemma  of  the critic   and  commentator of  art: what   is it that  he can  say which  will add  to what the   viewer   can   see  with   his  own  eyes? The problem is compounded when  what is offered  to the  viewer  is not  very much like  what  is really  under  scrutiny;  name­ ly:  the  work  of art.
By publishing a  monograph on  Cana­
dian   Artist  X,  the  publisher is implying that  Canadian Artist X is worth talking about. Perhaps under the  limited  condi­ tions   imposed,    this   implication   is  the most  important one  for  the  book  to sup­ port.   Thus, the  book's  raison  d'etre  be­ comes  its short,  emphatic suggestion  that  X  and   his  work  have  been  exceptional in  their  contribution to  the  history  of art  and   artists   in   Canada.   With   this   ap­  proach,  and   assuming  that   each   book will be the  reader's first  essential  contact with  the  artist, we have  a basis on which to compare the effectiveness  of these four efforts.
Robert Hubbard sets out  to discourage
us in  his first  sentence by telling  us:  "It is  over   forty   years   since   the   death  of Tom   Thomson, and  still  we  know  very little  about  him." Later on, after  sketch­ ing  out  those  superficial facts,  which  he has   been   able   to  gather,   Hubbard  re­ minds  us that, "We  know  nothing of his personal life."  And  then, before  summing up,   as  if   to   clinch   the   futility   of  the whole  task,  he  asks:  "What sort  of man was    Thomson?"   and  then   answers, "There is  very  little  first-hand  material on  which  to  base  a description and  form an  estimate."
Even  Alan  Jarvis, who seems to be less hampered by a lack  of material in  refer­ ence  to  David   Milne,   is  cautious  about  making   certain  psychological interpreta-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tions "where documentation is scarce." Nevertheless,  after   reading  the   ten   or eleven  short   pages  which  Jarvis  devotes to  Milne,   one   does  come   away   with  a sense of  having  read  about a great  man. Even   without  looking   at   his  work,  one is somehow  convinced that   the  man  was a   strong   and   dedicated  artist   who  de­ serves  to  be  discussed  and  to  be  remem­ bered.  "Milne's personality is elusive ..." says Jarvis; yet  he  tells  us  that,  "behind his mild  exterior there  lay an indomitable will  bordering  on   the   obsessive  which, together with  a vein of ruthlessness, drove him  to sacrifice  everything to  painting." This says  quite  a  lot,  and,  incidentally, encourages one to read  on.
On   the  other hand, the  biography of
Pellan, the  only  living  artist  in  the quar­ tet, limps  along  tediously  as  presented by Donald W.  Buchanan.  When  a man  has lived  a life as inconsequential as Buchan­ an  seems  to  make  it,  one  wonders  a  bit why  he  has  been  singled  out.  The illus­ trations, a   hodge-podge  arranged  only more  or less chronologically, seem to con­ firm   the   artist's  lack   of   uniqueness, a lifetime of conviction-less dabbling in imitation of a variety of early  twentieth­ century  image    makers,   such   as   Klee, Lurc;at,  Picasso,  Ernst,  Miro,  Leger,  Ko-
 koschka,  Braque, di Chirico, et  al.
Cornelius Krieghoff  comes off even worse from between  the lines of Marius Barbeau's tautology. (Speaking of Louise Gautier  Krieghoff,  he  intones,  "Yet   it was  her  fate   to  stand   at   the  crossroads of destiny.") The words speak  of a banal and   wooden   man,   and   the  illustrations show us banal and  wooden  pictures. Obviously    it   is   neither  Krieghoff    the man,  nor  Krieghoff   the  artist  who is im­ portant in  Canadian history.  The  thing that  is important-presumably  the semi­ journalistic record  of  nineteenth-century Canadian life-has been  skimmed  over. But  without  emphasizing the  importance the  paintings  have  in  the  documentation of  Canadian history,  the  reason  for  the book  remains  obscure.
ABRAHAM  ROGATNICK


SOMETHING TO SAY?

BEULAH  GABRIEL SWAYZE.  Father   Gabriel's
Cloak.
LORRIE MCLAUGHLIN.   West to  the  Cariboo.
ADELAIDE LEITCH.  The Great  Canoe.
Macmillan. $1.50  ea.

C.  s.  LEWIS  says  that   there   are   three ways of writing  for children. The best consists  "in  writing  a  children's story  be­ cause  a  children's story  is  the  best  art­ form  for  something you have  to say".  In other   words,  the  author is  true  to  him­  self. This  approach has  given  us  most of the   great   books  in   children's  literature such   as  Treasure Island, The   Bastable Family,  Jim  Davis,  Swallows  and   Ama­ zons,  The   Three  Mullah  Mulgars. The  second  way is somewhat of  a corollary  to the  first;   it  is  to  write   a   story  for   an individual child  and  perhaps  produce a Wind in  the  Willows,  an  Alice  in  Won-

81

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



derland. The  third   way  is  for  a  writer to   give   children  what   he   thinks   they want  or need; it has little  hope of true success.  Unfortunately it  is the  way  fol­ lowed  by the  writers  of Macmillan's new series, Buckskin  Books, which  consists  of realistic  stories  for  children  eight  to  ten, in  the  "Dick and  Jane"  tradition, using a thin  thread of  Canadian  pseudo-history as the  story  line.
Father  Gabriel's  Cloak  by Beulah Gar­
land  Swayze,  has  the  classic  plot  of  the white  child  kidnapped and  adopted into an  Indian tribe.  Marie  Lemieux  was captured in  I674  at  the  age  of  six and was   rescued   by  Tonty  six  years   later. This  theme,  when  handled for older  boys and   girls,  has  produced such  fine  books as Lois Lenski's  Indian Captive and John Craig's The Long  Return. In  both  these books the  relationships between  the white children and   their   Indian  foster-parents are  handled with  depth and  emotion  and the   adventures  are   credible   as  well  as being   exciting.  Father   Gabriel's   Cloak with  its   short  sentences  and   over­ simplified   vocabulary  just   cannot   bear the  weight  of  either   the  realistic  or  his­ torical    action,  to   say   nothing  of   the development of  character  or  the  oppor­ tunities for  emotional expression  implied in  some  of  the  events.  "She  was a  quiet girl, small for her age, and dark.   Madame Lemieux   had   been   worried   about   her that  summer.  She   had   had   a  fever,  so they  had  cut  her  dark  hair  close  to  her head.  But   by  early   September  she  was much  better." Somehow   it  reminds   one of:  "Take one  cup  of flour.  Add  a table­ spoon  of  baking   powder.  Mix  well with a  cup  of  milk."
West   to  the   Cariboo, by  Lorrie  Mc­
Laughlin, tells of two brothers, aged eighteen and  twelve,  who  journey  from

,.,_
0:.1
 Queenston, Ontario, to Kamloops to find their   gold-prospecting father. The   story suggests  the  exploits  of  the  Overlanders in  1862; it is a long  journey  to dramatize in  I 2 2  pages of large  type. The singularly dull story is not helped  by the author's continued  attempts  to  indicate  the  un­ couth frontier atmosphere by  the  use of quasi-colloquialisms. The  following  para­ graph indicates the  level  of  the  style:
As  he  passed   a  small  group of  men  near the   door   he  stopped  to  listen   because they were   talking  about  Cariboo.
"... out   there a  year  or  so  ago," one  of the  men  was  saying, "Gold the  size of  your fist,  waiting  to  be  picked   up."
"Why'd  you   come   back?" asked   one   of
the   listeners.
"To get  me  another stake," said  the man.
"Going  to   build   a   hut   and  move   in   this
time."

The Great  Canoe, by Adelaide Leitch, is the  best of the  three.  Based  on a small part  of Champlain's diary, it becomes  the story  of a small  Huron boy  ( Gros-Louis) who  inveigles   himself   into   a  war   party against the  Iroquois and  wins the friend­ ship   of  Champlain.  Although   seriously marred by infelicitous dialogue,  the  nar­  rative   moves   along   fairly  expertly  and  with  a  ring  of  authority,  particularly in the   account  of   the   boy's   trip   through Lake   Couchiching  and   the  Kawarthas. The  quality that   this   book   has   which makes  it  stand  out  in  comparison  with the  other  two  is  a  believable  young  hero with  whom  the  young  readers  can  iden­  tify  themselves.                     SHEILA  EGOFF

WONDERFUL WONDERFUL
JAMES    REANEY.   Twelve Letters   to  a  Small
Town. Ryerson Press.  $1.50.

As   r   READ    Twelve  Letters   to   a  Small

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Town, I cannot escape   the  feeling  that it   is   an   extremely  charming   book   of verse,   although  I  constantly hear   my conscience  demanding that  I do  not  call it   poetry.   James  Reaney  displays   here an  extraordinary  capacity for  capturing and   beautifying  the   naive   and   hyper­ sentimental kindergarten  teacher's  inter­ pretation of  the  child's world.  He  stimu­ lates  all  that  is  unrealistic and   nostalgic  within   a  reader  to  acclaim  his  verse  as great; it may  be only a touch  of cynicism that   can  save  a  reader   from   deception, and   bring   him   to  want   to  say,  "James Reaney,  the   world    is   not    so   goody­ goody."  Perhaps I am   being  insensitive  to  Reaney's verse,  but  I do  fear  that   it is   only  the  unperceptive, naive,  and sentimental  adult  who   can   look   back and   say,  in   effect,   "0 for   the   perfect childhood days  astride the  Crimean  can­ non!"-for    even   the   actual   child   on the  cannon is  usually  only  too  painfully aware that  life's  joys tend  to be balanced by  misfortune.
"Wonderful, wonderful!" Reaney keeps saying   in   these   verses  that   made   their debut   on  the  C.B.C.,  and,  pinned   down on  the   page  without  the  camouflage of John   Beckwith's music,  the  message  ap­ pears   rather  trivial.   The  works  bear   a striking   similarity  to   the   child's  Grade One  Dick  and   Jane reader that  has  re­ cently  received  severe  criticism  for  being overly  infantile:

Dick said,  "Look  look. Look up.
Look up, up, up."

Here   is Reaney:

PUPIL:
Twig  and  branch, twig  and  branch
Bricks, stones and  traffic hum
Twig  and  branch, twig and  branch
Bricks, stones  and  traffic hum
 or:
A First  take two sticks and  two leafy branches.
B First  take two sticks and  two leafy
branches.
A Put their  ends together so they form
spokes.
B Put  their  ends together so they form
spokes.

and  so on in this "Letter" for three  pages.
Sometimes   the  verse  does  threaten  to rise near  the  significance  of a  poem.  But once  out   of  the   child's garden  Reaney seems  to  want  to  become  only  the senti­ mental   middle-class  C.B.C.   poet.   Do twelve   home-town   reminiscences  com­ missioned  by the  C.B.C. have  to contain only   such   things   as   nostalgia  for   the cloakroom  (Fifth Letter), a gentle  eulogy for   the   river    (First    Letter),  or   sac­ charined    approval   for    maiden   aunts  (Sixth   Letter)?  Perhaps so,  but   still  I suspect  that  the  mind  of  the  writer  may be  as  much   to  blame   here  as  the  tastes of  the  radio  network.
There  is  magic    indeed    in   the   way Reaney    makes   the   child's  world   even more   than   alive,   but   I am   afraid that most   people,   especially   children,  would laugh   at   him.   If Reaney  is  serious   in this  book,  he  is sadly  out  of  touch   with reality.  Twelve Letters to  a Small  Town is strictly  for  watery-eyed old  ladies.
FRANK  DAVEY


BEFORE THE VOLCANO
MALCOLM LOWRY.  Ultramarine. Clarke,  Irwin.
$4.00.

Ultramarine is Malcolm Lowry's first novel, published twenty years ago and fourteen years before  Under the Volcano. Lowry saw his writing as a continuous process;  he could  never  regard   anything

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



he produced as finally complete, and  so during his years  in  Canada he  kept  not­ ing in his copy of Ultramarine alterations that  might  be used in a  future edition  if it  ever  appeared. Thus  the  novel  as it is now  printed a  generation  after   its  first publication  differs in a number of details  from  the original version. But none of the changes is of major importance, and  only the scholar  need  be concerned with asses­ sing  their  significance.
Ultramarine  is  a  frankly   derivative
novel.  Lowry  made   no  bones  about   the fact  that  in  writing  it he  was influenced by both  Conrad Aiken's  Blue Voyage  and Nordahl Grieg's The Ship  Sails On, but, while   the  extent   of  his  borrowings and imitations might   form   the  subject   of  a valuable research  article,  it  seems  to  me that  in first considering the  reappearance of a work  of this  kind  one should  regard the   book   in   its  own   rights,   accepting whatever has  been  derived  as  part  of  a work  as ultimately autonomous as, say, a neo-Classical  building   that   openly   pro­ claims   its   ancestry.   Is   Ultramarine, in fictional  terms,   a   convincing  and   self­ consistent  book?  Or should  we  regard  it as  the  work  of   a  brilliant   young  writer  nearing  the end of his apprenticeship and  preparing  himself  for  the  creative efforts  that  were to make Under  the Volcano one of the important novels of its generation?
The  latter  assessment is  nearer   the
truth.  The  structure of  Ultramarine  is dominated by Lowry's  attempt to create a counterpoint between  the interior  mon­ ologues   of  the   middle-class hero   Dana Hilliot, who  has  gone  to  sea  for  the  ex­ perience, and   the  talk  of  his  shipmates as  the  boat  trails  from  one  Far Eastern port  to   the   next. There  is  a  certain inconsequential  drama   about    the   long dialogue   passages;   there   is  at   times   a
 poignant, romantic nostalgia  in the hero's stream of thoughts, stated  with  the ebul­ lient  prolixity  of a  mind  mad  for  words. But   the   two  ways  of  writing  seem  like never-meeting  parallels,  and,   despite  some  finely  worked  passages,  the  book as a  whole  remains  the  brilliant exercise  of a young  man preparing for greater things. As such  it is worth the reading; we often  gain  more from  a good  writer's juvenilia than   from  the  masterpieces of  mediocri­ ties,  and  aficionados of  Under the  Vol­  cano  will  find  in  Ultramarine  the  roots and   buds   of   that    magnificent  effiores-
cence.                                                        G.W.



TO THE EDITOR

Dear Professor   Woodcock,
I   read   in   No.   I 6  of  your  admirable journal,  and   in   a   review   of   Malcolm Lowry's Poems  by John  Robert Colombo on  p. 6I,  the  following: "In many  ways a genuine literary interest  in  Lowry's poetry  is as hollow  as the  Ig62 Governor­ General's Award for  Fiction,  which  was given   for  Hear  Us  0 Lord.  The   novel got   the  award, yes,  but  not  the  $I,ooo prize,   which    the   Canada   Council  re­ serves  for  living  authors."
It is true  that  the  $I ,ooo  prize was not given   directly  to  Mr.   Lowry,   who  had not  left a forwarding address: it was, however, given  to  Mrs.  Lowry.
Yours  faithfully,
NORTHROP  FRYE,
Victoria College,  Toronto.

We  regret   the   false  impression  created by this  reference, and  draw  the  attention of  our  readers  to  Dr.  Frye's  correction.
Ed.
