$;so per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·96
Spring, 1983
SCIENCE & LITER71TURE
Articles

BY  J. R.  NURSALL, PATRICK J.  MAHONY AND  HUGH  HOOD, S. E.  D.  SHORTT, THOMAS R.  BERGER, JANE  E.  LENEY, TARA  CULLIS
Poems

BY  HENRY BEISSEL, CHRISTOPHER DEWDNEY, TOM WAYMAN, KEVIN ROBERTS,  MICK  BURRS,  DOUGLAS BARBOUR, GORDON TURNER, KIM MALTMAN, JOHN  BARTON, KENNETH  SHERMAN, DAVID  MCFADDEN, RUSSELL THORNTON, JOHN  V.  HICKS
Reviews

BY  HILDA THOMAS,  ELIZABETH WATERSTON, S. E. READ, W. C. GIBSON, EVA-MARIE KROLLER, LORNE DANIEL, PATRICK HOLLAND, RICHARD DUBANSKI,  MICHELE  LACOMBE, CATHERINE  KERR, SUSAN WHALEY, PAUl- M.  ST. PIERRE, JANETGILTROW, SUSAN STONE-BLACKBURN, MURIEL WHITAKER,  MARIAN FOWLER, MICHAEL PETERMAN, RENATE
USMIANI, MARILYN E.  KIDD, JANE  MOSS, DOUGLAS BARBOUR, P. MERIVALE, PERRY NODELMAN, DAVID  JACKEL, TERRY GOLDIE, GEORGE WOODCOCK Opinions and Notes
BY  YVON   BELLEMARE, F. E.  STOCKHOLDER, CLIFFORD G. HOLLAND,
EVA  TAUBE
A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








VERBAL PULSARS





WHEN  I   WENT  TO    SECONDARY  SCHOOL,   xenon  was  inert. That's not the way I usually think of those years, but  it usefully characterizes  a certain  frame  of mind:   of a  time  when  atoms  methodically  revolved  in  their molecules, the sea was silent, and science held within  its grasp  the secrets of the order of the universe. Even then the picture was distorted, of course: atom bombs, in the name of order,  had  already  disintegrated  an  order  of another  kind,  and educators' scientific "fact"  was some steps behind scientific theory. As time moved on, researchers discovered that  the  world they  analyzed  was far  more  complex and far less predictable than  they had thought.  Now xenon will actively combine with some other elements and scientists know  it;  the movement  of atoms seems a lot more random  than  it had earlier, at least as observers  record it;  and scientists eager  for  accuracy  now speak  of leptons,  hadrons,  gluons,  neutrinos,  and  the flavour  of quarks.  (Quarks  come, I  am  led  to  believe, in six flavours, each  of which can have three colours. This information  may be out of date.)
Scientists speak  to each  other  more  concretely  in  mathematics than  in  such verbal terms, though  each of the terms  (including  "colour")  possesses a  mathe­ matical  meaning.  Like Leacock's Dean Drone,  who assigned to his  mathematics teacher  his own failure to progress in life, the rest of us may despair  of following the idea of Number through  to its logical consequences, but the flavour of quarks gives those who work with words something to sink their teeth into. In many ways, the  language  of those in  the sciences and  those  in  the  humanities  operates  on parallel  planes-even the word "language," as the  computer   programmer  uses it, refers to a binary code of abbreviations  and  not to the aural  felicities, the con­ textual implications, or the multiple  (perhaps intentional) ambiguities of a phrase like "the  green teacher's wastebasket." And  whereas poetry and  prose fiction rely on the associational  processes of reading  which  ambivalence,  allusion, and  asso­ nance  allow, the language  of the technical  report  strives to avoid them  entirely, and to achieve instead a precise and exclusive set of referential  meanings. Such a difference spells out a difference in expectations of life as well as of language, one

2

EDITORIAL


declaring itself  accountable to  that   which  can  be  imagined, the  other   to  that which  can  be demonstrated by repeated experiment and  "blind proof."  The  one appears to favour  invention, the  other  utility.  Yet such  dichotomies are  not  uni­ versally applicable. It may  be true  that  many  scientists see language (the  image, the sentence,  the  essay, the  book)   as a  mechanical means  of conveyance  rather  than  as a  plastic  medium of art  or a subject  of investigation in  its own  right; it may  also  be  true  that   many   investigators of  the  world  or  words  and  the  con­ trarieties of human behaviour use an  ostensibly  technical language to  give their observation and  judgments the  illusion  of "scientific" authority;  but  it  does  not follow that  scientists  must fail to imagine  or poets to be precise. Seeking  words  to express  what  they  understand, both  groups  of people  have  borrowed  from  each other.  The  "flavour of quarks" tells us so. It  tells us also of an  implicit effort  on the  part  of scientists  to use mathematics to describe  the  very large,  the very small, and  the  very complex  -and  words  to tame  them.  They  talk of the  "Big Bang," the  "Missing Link," of  "floppy  discs,"  "black   holes,"   "software," and   ( mis­ leadingly, at first)  of "spreading time"  (the  time it takes for a pulse to double  its size). Laymen, by comparison, have  borrowed  the language of science  to expand the  parameters of metaphor: more  than  one human relationship in the twentieth century  has  been   perceived   as  "symbiotic,"  "polarized," "amoebic," or  "bio­  degradable"-which neither  ratifies  them  more  convincingly nor  makes  them more  real than  they  would otherwise have  been, but  marks  them  unquestionably
as the  product of their  own  time.

* 	* 	*
Scientists  learn  about science  from  other  scientists  and  from  laboratory  prac­ tice. Laymen  learn  about  science  by listening to David  Suzuki  and  by reading  the columns of Time magazine; by  looking  at  Equinox,  Scientific  American,  Na­ tional Geographic, Creative Computing; by absorbing the intelligent popularizers of science: Roderick Haig-Brown, Lewis Thomas, Carl Sagan, Jacob Bronowski, Isaac  Asimov,  Loren   Eiseley,  Stephen Jay  Gould-variously from  their  essays and  their  programmes on  television.  (So  popular is National  Geographic  indeed
-so colourful, so glossy, so heavy,  so carefully  preserved  in dens  and  rec  rooms across  North America -that  one  scientist  in  mock  method  has  calculated the time it will take for parts  of the continent to sink into the sea from  the  cumulative weight  of suburban collections.)
Each  year,  in addition, bookstores  fill with  a variety  of new  volumes  designed ior  the enquiring lay reader more  than  for the specialist.
The  range  of new  publications is wide:  from  new  handbooks of basic  BASIC to fundamental attacks, like  Ian  Reinecke's  Microlnvaders (Penguin),  on  com­ puter   technology. Opposing  the   actual   technology   less  than   its   implications, Reinecke   claims  that   videocommunication  (because   it  pre-selects  information)

3

EDITORIAL

is "undemocratic," that  the  economics of  mass  computerization  translates  into there  being  fewer  modes of  communication,  rather   than   opportunities  for  a greater variety of individual expression, and that  academic  TV courses in Ontario and  B.C. are about  as academically useful as the  training  programmes  given an encyclopedia sales staff. These are clear dangers.  Captivated by the arts  of high rhetoric, however, Reinecke dismisses those who applaud computers  as "boosters" and "utopian propagandists"  who would use TV  as a means of behaviour  modi­ fication and  transform  men into machines;  intrinsically  he argues that  watching TV  is less productive  than  the active enterprise  of going out  to  watch  a sports event:  at which point he invests more persuasive power in his rhetoric  than  in his logic, and the main  justification for his concern  dissipates in  a  cloud of emotion.
By contrast, emotion enters only indirectly into a book like Zile Zichmanis and James  Hodgins'  splendid  Flowers of the  Wild: Ontario   and  the  Great  Lakes Region   (Oxford), as  when   (about   the  Ox-eye  Daisy)   the  writers  neutrally observe, in a metaphor  it is not certain  they are  even aware  of:  "This  species is too aggressive for most gardens." Combining  photographs with illustrations  (and with data  specifying genus, habitat,  features,  uses, and  other  information),  the book is essentially a catalogue of some 250 flowers, from  Agrimony  and  Blood­ root to Grass-of-Parnassus  and  Spotted  Jo-Pye  Weed.  "Scientific  accuracy  and skilful composition,"  writes the  Royal  Ontario Museum  director  in  a  preface, make the illustrations  "both  useful and  aesthetically  pleasing."  Indeed  they  do. The  flower names tell more still:  of settlers with an eye for cultural  mythology as well as for concrete images, with a need to preserve as well as to see. The  volume is also a handbook  with paradoxical  intent: at once to encourage  environmental recognition  and  ecological preservation  and  to  aid  domestic  cultivation  of  the plants of the  wild and  wayside, presumably  after  they are  taken  from  the  wild in the first place.
While Sandford  Clark's Environmental  Assessment in Australia and Canada (Westwater) faithfully  records a set of workshop  proceedings on the legal  basis for governmental  and  industrial  involvement  in environment use (and  so limits itself to a  professional audience), Paul  Tisdall's   In  Search  of Human  Origins
( CBC)  is more discursive in form and  more open  to the general  reader.  Tisdall
takes interviews with Richard  Leakey, Robert  Ardrey,  Desmond  Morris, Clifford Jolly, and others, concerning current  ethnological  thought,  and  recounts some of the changes that  have taken place between Darwin  and  DNA.  His interest is less in the categorization  of ideas than in the "speculative  consequences" they lead to. But Tisdall  manages  also to give the  enquiry  some  human   dimension:   "I  was dizzy with bones," Leakey says, with an excitement  born  of watching  his theory about  human  development  take palpable form  in the fossil evidence he carefully unearthed  and  reconstructed.  Other  works are more interested in establishing  the historical  record  than  in  pursuing  the  excitement  or  implications  of  discovery.

4

EDITORIAL

W.  E. K. Middleton's Radar   Development in  Canada   (Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press), a factual account of the impact  of World  War  II on  the  radio  branch of the  National  Research  Council, is  a  case  in  point.  Compare  Middleton  with George   Woodcock, writing   in  a  note  appended  to  The   Benefactor   about   the changes  that  stereophonic recording have  had  on  radio  drama: "one  is  [now] among speakers in a landscape of sound." One  writer  turns  technology  into  his­ torical  data, the other  into  metaphor. Compare both  writers  with  Northrop Frye, who  (writing in Science  in I g8 I ) identifies metaphor with  equation. Or  compare all three  with  those  who  have  assembled  The  Cambridge Encyclopedia  of Earth  Sciences, ed. David  G. Smith   (Prentice-Hall). More  than  a reference record,  this book takes the  work  of 32 contributors (including William  Fyfe  and  R.  Kerrich of  the  University of  Western   Ontario, who  write  about   Earth  Chemistry)  and transforms what  could  have  been raw  data  alone  into  an  absorbing sophisticated symposium   on  the  earth's  behaviour. There  are  chapters  on  tectonics-with passing  reference to the  work of]. Tuzo  Wilson  on  Continental Drift-and  on tides, gravity, the  function of satellites,  energy,  sand,  ice, microbial impact:  the whole  book shows a general  fascination with  process  which  makes  it  quite  unlike the taxonomic structure of, for example,  Flowers of the Wild. Profusely  illustrated, the  photographs, diagrams, and  maps  add  another  extraordinary dimension   to our appreciation of the earth; the coronagraphs, the  polarized  light  thin  sections, the  computer-enhanced satellite   photos  seem  like  abstract art -or  perhaps a concrete   art   of  another order. The   question   is:   how  does  the   mind   react - decoding information from  what  it perceives, or  understanding meaning through metaphor, analogy, and  the  aesthetics  of pattern and  design?

* 	* 	*
Besides Tuzo Wilson, several other scientists loom large in the collective national portrait of  Great Canadians:  among them,  Alexander Graham  Bell, Frederick Banting,  Charles  Best,  Wilder   Penfield,   Hans   Selye.  Why-for   their   actual accomplishments, or for  the  lustre  they directly  or indirectly give us as an  inven­ tive,  rational, practical people?  Should  a  communications theorist  like  Marshall McLuhan be listed among them?  Is theory ever truly scientific? Have communica­ tions  had  more  impact on  Canadian  writing   than   scientific  theories   have?   Is Sandford Fleming a communications theorist  because  of his mapping of Standard Time  Zones-or is he a cartographer of the limits of the  political  imagination? Why is it that  there  has been  more enquiry into  the connections between  medical history and  literary expression  in Canada than  between  literature and  any  of the other sciences? Does the Canadian literary fascination with  the anatomy have  any scientific  parallel  -is  there  more  interest  in  diagnosis  than  in  analysis,  descrip­  tion,  or measurement? or  more  interest  in  theoretical modelling   than  in  techno-

5

EDITORIAL

logical  application? When   Hugh   MacLennan  writes  that   "science   is  the   new theology,"  do  we believe him?

* 	* 	*
I once  thought that  literature concerned  itself only  with  the  past,  and  science only with  the  future; now  I'm  not so sure.  Seemingly  such  a  conclusion  follows logically from  the research  methods  that students of literature and  science employ. Literary scholars  seek repeatedly  to verify texts and  to weigh  contemporary  judg­ ments  against   the  cumulative views of generations past   (taking  alchemists and phrenologists into  account, when a world-view  requires it), whereas scientists  and technologists require only the latest experimental results, the results  which  render all  previous  enquiry invalid   (hence   unnecessary, hence  of  interest   only  to  the antiquarian) . The  literary  scholar  asserts  the  need  to  preserve  tradition in  the light  of what  we value,  the  scientist/technologist to  shape the  future in  light  of what  we learn. They  speak  to each  other,  each  repeating a  message  for  the  nth time,  on  planes  that  appear never  to  intersect.  "The realm   of  science," said Duncan Campbell Scott  to the  Royal Society  of Canada in  192 1,

appears  to an outsider  to be a wonderland.  By comparison,  literature seems to be divorced from  life, and  we would  need  to  point  to  some  book  that  had  altered definitely  the course of the world's thought  to match  some of the  discoveries of Science which have changed our conceptions of the nature  of life and  of the  uni­ verse. Perhaps  ... I am confusing for the moment  the function  of pure literature with the function  of Science. Literature  in its present form is vowed to  the service of the  imagination; its ethical  powers are  secondary,  though  important; and  it cannot  be forced  to prove its utility....  [Furthermore, the]  biological  notions of Elizabeth's  day are  merely objects of curiosity, but  Marlowe,  Webster  and  Shake­ speare are living forces.... Created,  beauty persists; it has  the  eternal  element  in its composition....

Yet  beauty  is not  the  sole attribute of literature, nor  an  attribute of  art  alone. Eternity is an  unknown. And  just as literature attempts as  often  to  throw  light into the future as it does to ratify the past, so does science  as often  record  the  past as shape  the future. In  fact,  the  more  one  learns  about the  relation  between  the scientific observer  and  the truth observed,  the more it becomes  clear that  scientists are   historians despite   themselves.  The   astronomer, recording supernovas and white  dwarfs,  is observing  or  decoding  phenomena that   have  taken  place  light years away  and  before;  the physicist using the electron-microscope traces  the  path where  the  electron   has  been;   the  anthropologist  (who   by  his  simple   presence among  a  people  has  disturbed their  former   way  of life)   records  a  life  that  has already  altered. How  then  to  brace  for  Futureshock, prepare for  change?
Isaac  Asimov  once  spoke  of  science  fiction  as  a  "topical  fairytale where   all scientists'  experiments succeed" -then  later  regretted the  remark, because  of its implication that  scientists desire only success and  that  they  cannot or do not learn

6

EDITORIAL


from  failure;  in  fact,  he adds,  many  of the greatest  insights derive  from  seren­ dipity. Because the accidental  discovery does not take  place logically,  the  mind is freed  at such times from  the constraints  of received expectation.  Eureka:   the penny drops, the light dawns, the kettle whistles, the apple falls.
The  science fiction  writer  whom  Asimov describes is one like himself or  like
Arthur   C.  Clarke:   one  who  explores in  imaginative  narrative   the  possibilities inherent  in a scientific principle. Science fiction in Canada appears  to owe more to Doris Lessing and  Ursula  Le Guin than  to Asimov and Clarke, however, for it is more inclined  to political fantasy  than  to scientific enquiry.  The  examples  are not numerous-the stories of Phyllis Gotlieb and Jean-Fran<;ois Somcynsky, tales collected by John  Robert  Colombo, Hugh  MacLennan's Voices in Time, Spider Robinson's  Mindkiller, Carol  Matas's  The  DNA  Dimension- but  Lessing  pro­ vides the pattern, in works like The  Sirian Experiments  and  The  Making  of  the Representative   for Planet 8  (Clarke  Irwin), the third and fourth  volumes in the Canopus  in Argos: Archives series. The  mode is primarily documentary or  arch­ ival; the theme involves the explanation  of how political power operates  (through symbol and  ritual)   and  how male-female relations represent  accommodations  to the distribution  of power between empire and  colony; and  the narrative  compels interests less through  suspense than  by the  pattern  and  process of revelation.  In an  appendix  to the latter  book, Lessing even goes so  far  as  to  provide  a  com­ mentary  on  the  process of reflection that  led to the  writing  in  the  first place: fascinated  by the power which the historical Captain Robert Scott's Zeitgeist held over  him  and  his doomed  Antarctic   expedition,  she  constructs  a  narrative   to enquire  into the constrictions of a fictional "Time of the Ice": it is a time when rulers are ruled not by judgment  or sensible planning  but  by their own rhetoric, when they identify so completely with their own propaganda that  they no longer doubt it-and  hence do not, cannot  doubt  themselves.
Like Lessing, MacLennan and  Matas  and Robinson  are less futurists than historians of the exaggerated  present. Robinson's  M indkiller  (Holt  Rinehart) is an  allegory about  mindcontrol  and  human  choice, and  about  the  central  char­ acter's  decision  to  surrender  his  independence   to  the  "Conspiracy-for-Good" because "mindfill" from  a Good  Person must  intrinsically  be a Good Thing; it is a frightening failure  to allow for the limits of good intentions  or the creativity of error.  Matas's children's  book The  DNA  Dimension  (Gage)   argues  equally vehemently the opposite case: when four children fall through  the snow in Winni­ peg into a world of perlect symmetry, total centralism, and a choice only between programming and  elimination,  they  fight  to  preserve  themselves  not  from  the good man's  paradise  but  from  the  dictatorship  that  he requires  to engineer  his version of perlection. The  moral? not quite what the reader  expects, in a decade of Western Alienation: at the end of her book, Matas  asserts her case stridently, declaring  scientists  to  be  potential  agents  of  political  evil  because  they  gain

7

EDITORIAL

people's trust  by fighting hunger  and  disease. In  both  cases, the simplistic  con­ clusion derives from  the failure of the causal  logic. But do  readers  read  fantasy for logic, or only to confirm their current  opinion  about  the status quo?
For that  matter,  do literary writers write about  science to test their  knowledge or to support  their expectations? When  E. J. Pratt  "set  j A tripod's  legs upon  a trilobite" and wrote

It was the same world then as now-the same, Except for little differences of speed
And power, and means to treat myopia
To show an axe-blade infinitely sharp
Splitting things infinitely small, or else
Provide the telescopic sight to roam
Through curved dominions never found in fable,

he was not  minimizing  the differences but  rather   (despite  the  gruff  Hibernian tonal understatement of the passage)  placing  his faith  squarely  in epic progress. When  in Two  Solitudes  MacLennan averred  that  "Science  and  War  ... have uprooted  us and  the whole world is roaming,"  he was declaring  his allegiance to Classical verities even in the face of the change  he found  it necessary to accept. But in both  cases the  "scientific"  reference is thematic. How  should  we  judge Dave Godfrey's  formal literary fascination with computer  technology (the "Fables and Inputs" in Dark Must Yield, for example)  or with quantum mechanics and the  "uncertainty principle"  in  The   New  Ancestors?  How  do  we  interpret   the allusions to Giordano  Bruno in the poetry of Margaret Avison or in Chris Scott's novel Anticthon?  How do we understand  the formal discontinuities that  interrupt Chris Dewdney's meditations on technology and  knowledge?



There is a cartoon reproduced in Fred Alan Wolf's lucid introduction to physics for non-scientists called Taking  the Quantum Leap  (Beaverbooks); it depicts two people in conversation. "Is that  a good book?" asks one;  "No," replies the other, "it's a sufficient condition for reality." Taken  out of context, forced into its mun­ dane  literalness, jargon from any discipline seems bizarre;  the  physicist's  in-joke here reminds us in addition  of the impossibility of separating an evaluation from the  evaluator.  We  misunderstand   the  basic idea  of  matter,  the  particle,  Wolf observes, if we assume it has  properties  independent of  the  observer;  and  this interpretation of matter  is born of the twentieth  century,  born out of the research of Max  Planck, Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr, Murray  Gell-Mann, which disputes the Newtonian  presumptions that had governed the quest for a "hidden mechani­ cal order" that  would explain the world. The false  presumptions  are  these:  that things move continuously, that  things move  for  reasons, that  all motion  can  be broken into component  parts, that  (because  he is "just" observing)   an observer

8

EDITORIAL


does not  disturb.  They  led  to  a  quest  for  an  objective  reality  that  twentieth­ century  physics belies, and  to a belief in the power of technology to explain how and  why things work. To challenge such assumptions is implicitly  to  break with the accepted  notion  of reality. What  replaces it? A belief that  the discontinuous processes of motion are the basic paradigm of matter: it is by moving that matter continues to exist; not to move is to cease to exist. How  movement  takes place is another  issue, for this is not a theory of progress, only of  change.  Wolf adds that by choosing among any alternatives,  we repeatedly choose to see what  we do see, making our "reality" sensible but also paradoxical, like a Vasarely  painting or a trompe d'oeil  box:  "our  acts of observation are what  we experience as the every­ day  world."  We do choose -living, as  human beings do, yearning  for design. But as with postmodernist  fiction, physics thus inveigles the observer into accept­ ing some responsibility for the  putting  together of truth.  If the world  pre-exists, the observer is logically  incapable  of affecting it;  but  if the observer does affect the  environment,  he   becomes  part  of  the  world's  continuing   process.  What restrains  this  practice  from  solipsism? Peraps  cosmic  will,  Wolf  suggests  (the scientist enquiring after religion) : perhaps  the dreams  and  observations of God. Or  perhaps,  as the  biologist Lewis Thomas  frames an  answer,  the  processes we see are all only parts of the unified organism  we call the world.
"In  brief," lhab Hassan summarizes, partway through  The  Right  Promethean Fire  (Univ.  Illinois), "relativity,  uncertainty,  complementarity, and  incomplete­ ness are not simply mathematical idealizations;  they are  concepts  that  begin to constitute  our  cultural  languages;   they  are  part  of a  new  order  of  knowledge founded  on both  indeterminacy and immanence." His book says as much  by its method  as by its subject; an  enquiry  into  "Imagination, Science,  and  Cultural  Change," the text is disrupted  to enact  the new science -there are  "intertexts" within  the  "texts," and  "slippages"  within  the  "frames," fragments  of memoir both  framing  and  shaping  the substance  of his  insights. Ostensibly  his book  is about  American  culture  at large  ("indeterminacy  surely need not deny an  ideal of harmonious  perfection") -but  in some ways it seems without  knowing it to be as much  about  Canadian culture in particular  ("nor is strangeness sometimes but the action of an immanent future in our lives").  By extension, we might ask, need language  fragment  itself in order  to comment  on fragmentation? Is it not possible to dream or observe our way through words  (as well as through  numbers) towards coherence, logic, value, meaning? If we declare that "we are the masque: performance,  performer,  performed," are we merely taking  refuge in an isolating Yeatsian trope, or do we thereby claim for ourselves once again  an  involvement with the world we thought  we had lost?

* 	* 	*

9

EDITORIAL

The  fact that  most lay people closely identify  the world of "science" with  the world of "technology" creates a problem of interpretation as well as one of classi­ fication. People admire scientists and technical experts because they solve puzzles, create things, cure diseases, and generally make life better -and at the same time they are deeply suspicious of scientists and  technical  experts  because they create puzzles, destroy things, cause dis-ease, and generally make life seem stranger  and more unknowable.  If the strangeness derives largely from  the new vocabulary  of number  (we need mathematics  to understand  twentieth-century physics, and twentieth-century  physics to  understand   the  ideas  of  uncertainty   and   motion which  permeate  modern  life),  the suspicion  derives  largely  from  the  fact  that (whatever  its positive byproducts), science has too often  been put to destructive political use. As one of Robertson  Davies's characters effortfully  describes:  "In Paracelsus's time the energy of universities resided in the conflict between  human­ ism and  theology;  the  energy of the  modern  university  lives in  the  love-affair between government  and science." Too true, but also a paradox: we live with the image of the mad  genius in his laboratory  concocting  potions and  plotting  world takeover, with the moral equation  between eating  the fruit  of the tree of knowl­ edge and  pursuing  evil, and also with the bland  assurance  of  quality  that  a doc­ tor's white coat gives a television commercial for laundry soap or headache  pills; as a culture we seem concurrently to believe all three. We yearn for the paradisal good life, but  we do not yearn to go back to a  pre-technological  society to get it (Clifford Jolly may tell us that the Pleistocene Age was "a  pleasanter time to live in ... than  the present,"  but we do not take him at face value) ; we talk of the "good old days" and  elect to power governments  that  promise  to retrieve  them for us, but  we know  they can't,  and  won't,  because  times  have  changed -the need is more  psychological than  political, more  ideological  than  logical,  which invites manipulation. What the paradox suggests is that  people live in the presence of change  but  always in the  hope of order,  and  that  they surrender  to external authority   (scientist, churchman, politician, tycoon), altogether  too readily, sup­ pressing their  suspicion of the institutional  structure because  their  fear  of inse­ curity and  uncertainty is greater  still. What  it also suggests is that  a little more willingness to enquire  into the unknown might  have ramifications  far beyond the results of  any immediate  enquiry. Scientists themselves divide on their  interpreta­ tion of  the  results they get -the  biologists and  the  information  theorists  assert the  possibility of holistic pattern,  while the  physicists pursue  the implications  of randomness,  the  mathematics  of fragmentation -and  they  understand the  im­ plications of each  other's specialty all too little.  But if people ever  begin  to sur­ render utterly to their inability to understand, even to congratulate themselves on their ignorance  as though  that somehow ratified  their  "specialist" expertise, then they open  up  territory  for  the  ambitious  (and   usually  no  more  adequately in­ formed)  to occupy, and they create opportunities for rule by  fiat  rather  than  by

10

EDITORIAL


shared desire.  Too  many   people  in  the  humanities in  particular  have  written science  off  as  numerically incomprehensible; others  hang  on  desperately to  the snippets of information they  remember from  schooldays  or glean  from  Time.  Yet they,  like the  scientists  and  all other  people,  are daily  shaped by  the  currents of ideas  around them -as true  in an age of quantum mechanics and  computers as it  was  in  an  age  of  positivism  or a  sun-centred universe -and  insofar  as  they cannot afford  to be unaware of the impact science has on ideas and  life, they  can only  pretend now that  the  sea is silent,  light  is constant, time  is steady,  and  the world is a Cartesian plane.  The  scientists in their tum can,  one  hopes, learn  from the humanities to think  associatively, can learn  not to reduce  culture -or all  pro­ cesses of understanding, verbal  ones included -to simple  systems of  quantifica­ tion.  In  other  words,  they  cannot  ignore  each  other,  and  the  world  they  share.

* 	* 	*
Conclusions: 1. Everything connects. 2. Perhaps.

W.H.N.






Henry Beissel

at the speed of light a seed
contains the universe that is
light cast into a black hole

slows into darkness explodes
a whirl of particles grows
a beginning of elements
in a drop

of water the mystery of matching
atoms of making three
out of two in time


I I

POEM

rain drew blood from stone
when  only wind
swept
bleak landscapes towards  a birth

formula to make flesh
of salt to force
clouds
into roots to melt the sun

into green into fins into fear
all that  in a drop of water
the chaos of order uncertain

frenzy of molecules clashing
electrons  protons
forcing
salt into water to reflect

the frenzy of molecules clashing
electrons  protons forcing
fear into hearts to know

the water's  reflections love
and  agetoo­
oh
the terrible  tides of stars!






12


TO DARE TO ATTEMPT IMPIOUS WONDERS

Science & Canadian Literature



]. R. Nursall




TE PARADOX OF  THESE TIMES ffi  that  thing. a<e not  what they seem to be.  We  live enmeshed in a web of technological marvels,  the  prin­ ciples and  operations of which  often we barely  understand.

The chances of survival on this earth are perhaps one to three now
this year of the atom. Do not increase them
by adding  that strange word love  to your vocabulary.1

That is indeed  a  problem, but  there  is hope  in  the  possibility  that   equal in  its power  to the strange word  love is the  sweat-borne action  of understanding. The poet must  be careful that  he is not substituting comfort  and  convenience for sur­ vival,  mistaking soft  for safe. The  basis for  both  comfort and  survival  is  the  fit and  proper application of science-our knowledge of the working of the universe. But  do we realize  it?  David  Suzuki  tells us that,  on  the  basis of his street  inter­ views, most  people  see science  as something that  does not  affect  them  and   is of little  concern  to them.2   In  the  United  States,  the  White House  worries  that   the American  population  is  drifting  towards   "virtual  scientific   and   technological illiteracy"3  with  the  potentially catastrophic effect  that  many  important national decisions will be made on the  basis of ignorance and misunderstanding. These are  serious  matters that  suggest  a  constriction  of our  vision  and  a  weakening of our  adaptation to the  world  as we make  it. Love, without  some direction from  under­ standing, cannot save  us. Understanding comprehends love;  the  depths  of under­ standing must  be plumbed for love to work its best. That is the  part  for literature to play in man's attempt to rationalize himself.
For  my  part, I shall  quickly  explore  the  nature of science-and technology, which  is something else. I shall  examine  the relationship of science  and  literature, and  see if the  phantom of the Two  Cultures can  be appeased. I shall seek literary scientists  and  scientific  litterateurs to ask  what  it is they  can  offer  us in  under­ standing.

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

Science is one of the  great  creative  activities  of man.  Definitions  of science abound,  but  for  pragmatic  purposes let  us go to  a committee  of learned  men. They  will start  us with our  feet on the ground.  The  Frascati  definitions of the Organization for Economic Co-operation  and Development  ( OECD) say, "Basic research  [which  I shall call 'basic science' later]   is experimental  or  theoretical work undertaken  primarily to acquire  new knowledge of the  underlying  founda­ tions of phenomena  and  observable facts, without  any  particular  application  or use in view."4   If we grant the savants a certain  leeway with the use of "phenom­ ena," we have a definition we can use.
As an example of another  definition, we can quote  Wilder  Penfield, who said that  Science is the knowledge of physical phenomena  while the Arts embrace  all other  forms of human  knowledge.5    This  is not  a  workable  definition,  not  only because it  lacks any  explanation  of  how science  works,  but  more  importantly because on one hand  it casts everything into  a pair  of global  categories of little analytic value, while on the other it is too restrictive in its "either-or." It  raises a kind of fundamentalist C. P. Snowstorm.  Both  Penfield  and  Snow  will appear later in these pages.
As is the case with any creative endeavour,  science has its few  prime  practi­ tioners, standing  recognized, well above the thousands  of lesser talents. The  very best have insight and abilities, methods of procedure  and incisive thought that  are only dimly  perceived  by others, but  the  beauty  and  universality  of their  results demonstrate  the value of their techniques. The intellectual  achievement  of grand science is homologous to the achievement  of  grand  art,  literature, or any  mind­ designed accomplishment.
Science as an intellectual activity is more open than  any other.  By this I mean that the practice of science is more than  just the use of the imagination. It requires imagination  bound  to externals; it bears within itself a burden  of proof. There  is, with any result of science, the possibility of its being shown to be wrong, in a way that  no work of art, no piece of literature  can be shown to be wrong. Literature, art, or science may be shown to be bad,  but only to science can  "wrongness"  be attributed, hence  only  to  science  is something   other   than   a  value   judgment possible.
"Openness," as expressed here, is enforced in science because science deals with verifiable results. Science is undertaken  according  to rules,  which  do  not  neces­ sarily constitute  a formal "scientific method,"  but  are  rules of honesty,  enforced by reiteration  and repetition;  of testing of probabilities; of establishing  hypothesis and  theory with  the corollary of the  possibility of the  growth  of  knowledge and even substance;  of formal  publication,  which,  by  exposing  methods  and  data,  allows, even calls for further  testing and  continued  growth. This  is the "Sense of consolidating  progress which belongs to a science" spoken  of  by Northrop  Frye. 6

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

Scientists hardly  ever make a statement  without reference to "the  literature," the very basis of their own endeavours.
The  data  of science are external;  they are  recognized, not invented.  Explana­
tion follows recognition, which is the famed inductive method.  Imagination takes its leap  at  two stages:  first, in the invention  of methods  to force  recognition  of phenomena  (experimentation) ; second, in explanation  (theorization) . Both may be elegant  and  beautiful,  and  appreciation  of them  is expressed in  those terms by practitioners.
The openness of science is to be contrasted  with the closed nature  of literature or art. The  closed nature  of, say, literature,  is indicated  by the fact  that  it is not reiterative or repetitive-it is unique in a way that science is not. Nor is it proba­ bilistic, nor does it grow from  inclusive theory. The  subject  matter  of  literature  is internal  and  invented.  Its publication  exposes the inventions of the author  for acceptance  or rejection on the basis of the judgment of the audience-and "the  power of the writer to bounce the reader  into accepting  what  he says." 7
If it is the  case that  science is "open" and  literature  "closed,"  are  they  then mutually  exclusive? Can  literature  deal with science? These are simple questions for which answers readily leap out:  no, they are not mutually  exclusive, for they are  both  artificial;  yes, literature  can  deal  with science, as it should  be able  to deal with  any subject.  It  is the author's problem to deal with  his subject  in  an enlightening  manner: by delineation  and  analysis of personality;  by implication in plot; in imagery;  or in any way to the limit of his imagination. If it is possible to explore the motives and emotions of Ginger Coffey or Hagar  Shipley, why not those of an active researcher, someone flagellated by the need to know as much as possible about something, sooner than anyone else?
Is there any subject of that  sort in Canadian literature?  Not really, that  I have seen. Perhaps  Lesje Green  gets close, but  she is not a scientist originating  data; she has intelligence, curiosity, and with them gains the satisfactions of a good technician.  She seeks what  is known, not  what  is not.  Even so, her  reactions  to her  problems are  modified  by her interests and  training.  Of  course they are,  to our advantage, for it is a rare occasion on which technical  backgrounds  are seen in literature  to affect relationships. But the stupendous, egotistical and often annihilating drive of a productive,  cutting-edge scientist is not there.8
Has it ever  been?  I  know  of one piece of literature  in  which  the  mind  and
attitude  of a scientist is laid bare and his motivation  made explicit. It is The Life of Galileo  by Bertold Brecht.  The  memory  of it colours all my observations  on the  possibilities of connection  between  literature  and  science. Towards the  end of the play Galileo makes a general statement  which says what  modern  philoso­ phers of science say:  "The pursuit  of science seems to me to require  particular courage.  It   is  concerned   with  knowledge,  achieved  through   doubt.   Making

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

knowledge  about   everything  available  for  everybody,  science  strives  to  make sceptics of them all."9
Science, perceived as broadly as possible, is still more complex than shown here
so far.  It  has many  parts;  it is easy to distinguish  basic science, applied  science, and  technology, though like all distinctions these are quite often  not made. They are even denied at times, usually in fervent, democratic  zeal. But I hold that  there are  differences  (in  which opinion  I get support  from  the  OECD Committee), and that literature should recognize them. That means that science explored in literature  need  not confine itself to the Galilean  stratosphere, but  that  the  bio­ sphere of Lesje Green has some priority in exploration  because it is nearer  each of us and encompasses most of us in science.
For a definition of basic science we may  return  to the  OECD. We may  also paraphrase its committee for applied science:  original  investigation  directed primarily towards a specific practical  objective,  i.e., science with intent. And technology:  systematic use of knowledge and  practical  experience directed  to producing,  installing  or  improving  processes, systems, and  services. The  three, basic science, applied science, and technology, are directly related, with fuzzy boundaries.  Theories of electricity were utilized to develop a means of  transmis­ sion of sound over distance;  the telephone  today  is rather  better  than  it was 50  years  ago  although   its  operating   principles  remain   unchanged.  Basic  science established the possibility, applied science built it, and  technology  maintains  and improves it.
What is of interest historically is that technology was much the earliest to appear. Man  needed and  provided goods and services long before he sought  a theoretical explanation  for their operation. Assimilative or applied  science followed, marked by the change from Stone Age to Age of Metals.  Creative  natural science, basic science, is described as making an appearance about  the middle  of the sixteenth century,  bringing  promise of Utopia  soon after,  but  really flowering only in the past 150 years-and seeming less Utopian  in  the  process. Utopia,  as a state  of mind,  is more  a  function  of literature   than  science. "Reality   is imperfection," says Ralph Gustafson.10
I  have  distinguished  basic from  applied  science  and   both  from  technology because in the public's eye they are seldom separated  and  the sins of one are often visited on another.  They are related and interdependent, which means that  there is no reason why a scientist cannot  move back and  forth  between  them,  and  the best often do. Much modem science advances by using the latest technological machinery.  These  marvels, in  turn,  are  developed  by  taking  advantage of  the latest applicable knowledge. But I insist that  they are separate; they are separated by intent.  Technology, of course, fits well into popular  fiction, particularly  of the sort  recently  described  as  "thinly   novelized  instruction   manuals"11    in  which process is the main  theme, syncopated,  more or less, by frenetic  plot. The  strug-

r6

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

gles of the scientist are  rather  different, but when they appear  in literature  very often  they  are  directed   to  some  (often  malevolent)   end -they  are  applied science.  Rigorously  controlled  curiosity  is  not  strong  as  a  motivation  among recent  heroes  of  fiction.  That   is  a  pity,  for  as  Northrop  Frye  has  observed, "Between  imagination and  belief there  is constant  traffic  in  both  directions.m2
Although  Frye's context  was different than  mine here, what  he has described, in addition  to gods, philosophical positions, and political loyalties, is the escapement and mainspring of scientific action.




GoETHE CLAIMED THAT   THE  IMPULSE  to  understand   the relations of the  parts  to the whole, which ruled his activities in science, was the same as his artistic  impulse. I know of no better authority  to support  the  claim of creative unity between science and the arts than  Goethe, for he did reach  pre­ eminence in both fields and  we must listen when he says that  creative life is the same  in  science  and  in  poetry.  Goethe  came  to  science  in  his  mature  years. Barker  Fairley  argues  that  it gave him  discipline and  that  it  put  him  at  a  far remove from  "the  average  run of literary dreamers  about  nature  of whom  there was an abundance in his dayma and who are still around  to pump  out a sizeable proportion  of our  poetry.  Fairley's  comments  on  the  discipline  of  Goethe  are interestingly  comparable to Forster's on H. G. Wells:  "The  addition  of science has strengthened  his  mind  and  suborned  his  hysteria,"14    although  it  must  be recognized that  Forster is rather  less sympathetic to Wells than  Fairley to Goethe.
Regrettably,  Goethe is almost unique in near-modern  times. Not even Voltaire, another  marvel of energy who lived to a great  age, produced  new ideas both  in science and  the  arts,  although  he mastered  and  championed   Newtonian  ideas. It  is only for the  ultra-exceptional that  success does not  lie with  specialization.
Wilder Penfield, when he retired from a brilliant scientific career, said that  he then lived the life of a professional writer. What  came out as literature,  then and earlier, was good, wholesome, and gave little insight to the  mind  and  motives of science. His novels are  well-organized  and  are  provided  with  maps  and  handy lists of characters.  That is tidy, but  it  hardly  reveals essentials. His essays tend towards the inspirational. So Penfield is polar;  though  he saw both sides, he illuminated  only one.
English literature has its writers who take, with more or less success, the subject of science and  scientists into  their  bag. Dickens  (e.g.,  Dombey  and  Son,  Bleak House)  described the consequences of technology on society. H. G. Wells worked on the fringe of science throughout his career and included  science and scientists in his writing.  In  Tono-Bungay, George Ponderevo  is distracted  from  the  main events by his own scientific career, his social instincts are coloured  by his concep-

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

tion of science, and  Wells uses the text to comment  on the attractions of science and to fictionalize scientific advances  (for instance,  the discovery of canadium, a mythical  radioactive  element-mythical, but  nevertheless  representing  the state of an active science at the time of writing) . I know of no writing of good fiction today in Canada that  keeps us up to date in science.
C. P. Snow is another  Englishman  whose works of fiction  have  significantly
utilized science. The  New Men  and The  Search are from works specifically using science as a main theme. The one thing that  science as a theme  must accomplish is to transmit  a sense of the attitude  of scientists. Perhaps  because that  attitude is a result of training  and  discipline in stubborn  rationality, it is only occasionally possible that a writer not scientifically trained  can approximate the inner life of a scientist as hero. Even Brecht was trained in medicine, which must have deepened his insight, though  I do not know of his giving credit  to it.

Data) data) data
Sang  the stars.15

Surely that  is an  opening. Stars  provide entry  for  poet  and  scientist. E.  W. R. Steacie, a Carlylean  hero credited  with taking  the  National  Research  Council  of Canada into  its  period  of greatness,  said,  "It seems  to  me  that   on  historical grounds there is emphatically no incompatibility  between science and  the humani­ ties."16 Steacie goes further, saying that "science is one of the humanities, although technology is not."17 Thomas  Kuhn  quotes another  source:  "The more carefully we try to distinguish  artist from scientist, the more  difficult  our  task becomes." 18
But this does not solve the problems of difference, because they do exist. Kuhn,  in another  context,  comments on communities of practitioners  of this or that,  and makes each real and distinctive from others, by its possession of a common  para­ digm.19 The  idea of the Kuhnian  paradigm  has been embraced  with  enthuiasm by many scientists. The sense of a paradigm  is a sense of shared  commitments,  a characteristic  set of beliefs and  preconceptions.  So there  are  differences, and  by them  we can  distinguish  community  differences  between  artists,  scientists, and humanists,  as well as within  each  group,  and  talk  of  chemists,  physicists, and biologists among scientists. For that matter, paradigmatic differences can be used to distinguish organic from inorganic chemists, physical chemists from biochemists, and  so  on.  But  all  share  a  plesiomorphous  paradigm:  imaginative,   creative curiosity.
Even so, we are trapped  by attitudes. We are told that

All that  scientists, as scientists, ever do
Is to stick labels and  numbers
On  things that  are already there;
And don't  let them  tell you differently.20

That  is a terribly  narrow  and  despairing  view, and  bad  advice  to boot. I  tell

18

SCIENCE &  LITERATURE

you differently. As I have tried to make explicit, scientists do not invent facts, but by exploring  nature  in imaginative  and  creative ways they may reveal incredible, profound  and exquisite phenomena.  It is the effects of the discovery of such phenomena  on the discoverer himself or on the world in general  that  the writer can  and  should  explore. As the  exploration  of the motivation  and  responses of such an unusual and creative being as Magnus Eisengrim enriches our literature tremendously,  it should  be equally valid and  rewarding  to follow, say, a fanciful physicist, for such a person may be emotionally driven, affected  by his past and fearful of the future.  In fact, it is difficult for a novelist or poet to avoid science, for we are embedded  in our knowledge of nature  and  that  is what scientists have done for us. In  untold  ways we are affected  by this knowledge and  our use of it. The insight of Heisenberg and Skinner are echoed in the words of V. S. Naipaul: "As I write, my own view of my actions alters.m1  How subtly are  we influenced and how seldom de we recognize it.
C. P. Snow made popular  the idea of two intellectual cultures, the literary and the scientific, separate  from  each  other  and  uncomprehending. Although  Snow spoke  primarily   on  a  British  theme,  his  conclusions  were  generalized   in  the English-speaking  world as a single debate:  arts us. science. Well, indeed there are problems. For example, a recent report of a conference between physicists and historians noted that  there was a failure "to  produce any effective interchange."22
The  physicists talked mostly among themselves and are said to have "rather mis­ understood  the few questions from historians." I suppose such examples could be totted  up and  analyzed statistically,  but the data  are  not profound. Both  science and  the arts,  however either  of these is expressed, are  artefacts,  and that  alone is sufficient to  unite  them.  They  are  of one stream  along  which  the  current  of thought  can carry ideas and  insights from one place to another. Although  it may be a  quick  run  in  one  direction  and  hard  paddling  in  the  other,  source  and destination  for ideas are  never isolated.
F.  R.  Leavis  argues  thus,  in  thunderous   passages, palisaded  by  parentheses,
dissected by commas.23   Unsparing, infuriatingly  righteous,  Leavis demands  hu­ maneness,  declares  the  inseparability  of  a  transmitted   culture   and  pleads  for standards to which an educated  public may appeal.  Northrop  Frye  has taken  a somewhat  more  understated   view. He sees the separation  of  "two  cultures"  as inevitable  and  bound  to increase;  " ... it  cannot  possibly be  cured  by  having humanists  read  more  popular  science or  scientists read  more  poetry.  The  real problem  is not the  humanist's  ignorance  of science or vice versa, but  the  ignor­ ance  of both  humanist  and  scientist about  the  society of  which  they  are  both citizens."24  Though mild in tone it is a well-stamped ticket  to perdition.  Nor does C. T.  Bissell offer  much  more  help.  He  has suggested  that  those  who  look to science for answers  based on "calm  objectivity  and  ingrained  cosmopolitanism"  may  "preach a  naive gospel,"  and  he named  C. P. Snow  and  H.  G.  Wells as

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

exemplars.25    If true,  what  does that  do  to the  value  of science as a  theme  of literature?
We seem to keep coming back  to the same  cluster  of problems.  The  benefits
expected  of science  are greater  than  can  be delivered,  and  science is at  fault because it cannot  deliver that  which is expected of it.  Is science just "an  elastic
band,  holding  a  bundle  I of small white  filing-cards  I printed  with  important
facts"?26



Two  THEMES SEEM TO   PERVADE  the  literature   and  other writing in Canada  that deals publicly with science:  Frankenstein and  Prometheus
-monster-maker and  bringer  of fire. These are  two sides of the science model, though Mary Shelley herself called Frankenstein  the modern  Prometheus.  Indeed, the Shelley circle seemed to try to stay au  courant with advances in natural philosophy and  took it as a  proper  and  expected  topic  of their  writing.  Maybe then one mind could enfold and understand  much of what was known. That  does not obtain  now -there are tens of thousands  of journals of science alone, trans­ mitting  arcane  facts and fancies in all the major  languages  of the world.
That  leaves us with attitude. It is probably  the  most important  contribution science can make to humanity. It certainly is the aspect of science most amenable to literary  treatment, hence exegesis. The  scientific attitude comprises sceptical curiosity, which it attempts  to satisfy by logical procedures.  Science is as simple as that,  but  as it builds its own  base, and  accretes  technology,  it often  appears monstrous,  foreign  and  impenetrable.  And  many  a  specialist  likes to  maintain a certain  privacy, or glories in the appearance of mystery.
Frankenstein  in his laboratory  may, in the public mind,  prototypify  science at a technological frontier. At least latterly, with a cinematic  glaze, he seems to. Originally, Frankenstein  was not often, and increasingly reluctantly,  at his bench. It was the humanitarian consequences that  motivated  the story;  the science was minor and  the scientist regretful. Indeed  the monster  himself seemed to be more torn by human  emotion than  moved by inhuman motor  connections.
Today, the picture of the isolated, lonely scientist is entirely incorrect. The  best science is still done by the best scientists, those with imagination, energy, single­ mindedness, and  motivation,  but  it  also calls for  institutional   money,  often  in large amounts,  to provide the human  and technological assistance. Governmental  assistance to science is now rated in proportion  of Gross National Product  (where­ at it may be noted in passing that  Canada  lies very low in the scale in any inter­ national  comparison -which may reflect its dim appearance in our society and its small  place in our  literature) .27   Scientists  do  not  work  alone;  they  work in teams, with  colleagues, students,  research  associates, technicians.  The  enterprise is collective. Right  at the boundaries of  knowledge, science is as much  like a pr

20

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

fessional athletic league as anything, with teams competing for an elusive prize­ the answer  to a  puzzle. J. D. Watson  has told  us something  of that  life 28    and Jacob  Bronowski suggested his account, or at least its protagonists, as models for
scientists in literature.29   Scientific research is engrossing for the  people involved; its results are often dramatic for the public in general.  Moreover,  it is unending through  the  full  career,  unless the  individual  is sidetracked   by  administrative duties or fame.
The  primitive legendary  account of the curiosity of the spirit of man, now recognized  as the  motive  force  of science, is the  story  of  Prometheus.  Present before  the  gods  appeared, the  Titans  were suppressed  and  supplanted   by  the gods, but the irrepressible Prometheus was midwife to knowledge and tutor of mankind  and,  with his forethought, attempted  to box the spites.
Politically  involved with  the  gods, threatened, tortured, and  occasionally for­
given by them,  his good works often undone by the pandoric  ignorance  of  man­ kind,  Prometheus  persisted in  his search  for  understanding and  safe  use  of the forces of nature.  We faintly  perceive Prometheus's labours on our behalf; indeed, it is said that we wear rings with stone settings in memory of his Caucasian chains.
F. P. Grove proclaimed  the Promethean  fate for mankind. 80   Worthwhile goals, he said,  are  unattainable, but  the  failed  attempt   is glorious,  even  though  we remain shackled to a mountain. Art that does not mirror the Promethean  fate, he continued,  is untrue  in its fundamentals. That  sounds as if it makes tragedy  uni­ versal, which is truly  pessimistic and  restrictive. Still, we can  escape it  as  indi­ viduals, for  our  concerns  are  not  normally  for  universals.  We  can  work  quite happily  with  limited  goals. Our  operational  dimensions are  much  smaller  than the universal limits. For instance,  the Laws of Thermodynamics place inexorable restrictions on  universal  reactions  (there  is only so much  energy,  and  its upper and lower limits are the same), but smaller, local orbits allow all sorts of ingenious reactions and  apparently improbable  uses of energy.
Margaret  Atwood,  as speechwriter,  sees as clearly as anyone  the struggle for knowledge that  a scientist  undertakes:
Since I dared
to attempt impious wonders

I must pursue
that animal I once denied was mine.

and the frustration that  may accompany  profound research and  that  will require the utmost ingenuity, the most dogged persistence, the fiercest striving;  for all too often, in place of results there is the answer:  "I will not come when you call."31
That  is the spirit;  that  is where literature  can illustrate scientific effort.


21

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

There  has been a  truly Promethean  figure in  Canada. His  name  was Henry Marshall Tory.  His accomplishments were so vast in the Canadian scene that  an estimation of his influence can hardly be made. A simplified listing of his accom­ plishments shows him to have been involved in the establishment of the University of British Columbia,  the University of Alberta,  the Research  Council of Alberta, the Khaki University,  the  National  Research  Council  of Canada,  and Carleton University, as well as serving on innumerable  commissions for federal and provin­ cial interests. Threatened, tortured and occasionally forgiven  by his masters, Tory persisted in  his task to make Canada  intellectually  independent. It is said  that "the air about Tory was never still for very long; he moved always to the snapping  flutter of banners."32
One does not hear much of him these days. On my shelves I see two books entitled The  Canadians.33  In one, published in 1979, there is no mention  of Tory.  In the other, from 1967, Tory receives four index references, all of which  relate  to one
20-page chapter  called "Science and  Medicine." The  probable  reason for this is
that Prometheus  was silent. Tory's written output, except for letters34  and  reports, was negligible. A couple of introductory  books of algebra  and the editorship  of a pedestrian  History  of Science in  Canada  were  his  contribution. His  forte  was action; he saw what Canadians  needed and he did his utmost to get it for them­ whether  they recognized their  needs or not. Many  of use owe the  safety of our academic perches to the nests of learning he planned  and started well.
Scientists, too, recognize Prometheus  and  the  dangers  a generous  and  encom­ passing spirit faces. There is for Canada  a Guide  Michelin  to the back country of science administration as travelled in recent times. It was written  by F. R. Hayes35 from  the  vantage  of a lifetime of  first-class science  and  top  level  institutional  administration. Salty,  outspoken,  witty, and  deeply  concerned,  Hayes  has  been able to characterize  the popular denigration  of science and  its near-strangulation, perhaps inadvertent, by political control. To  his Prometheus, which was Science itself, he provided a Pandora  in the form of Senator  Maurice  Lamontagne, who opened the  box of spites with the  publication  of the  report  of  his commission.36
Only delusive hope remains;  Canadian scientists call it MOSST.37  There  is the
mother-substance  of a whole series of establishment  novels in that stuff, especially in the transcriptions of the hearings.
Civilization  Exponentiating: an odd  phrase  I  heard  from  Carl  Sagan,  CRT­
engendered38 to express our desires and raise our hopes for ever-increasing mechan­ ically and  electronically  cradled  life. This  becomes the  world of  science fiction, that strange  and  largely preposterous genre that  has replaced  tales of magic and fairies. Science fiction has been claimed to be a window to the future.  What  it is, of course, is an imaginative  projection of technology,  and  never very far  at that.  No science fiction writer, dreaming  generalities for the future,  has the power of a technologist planning  specifics for tomorrow.  We are regularly surprised  by what

22

SCIENCE & LITERATURE


is brought  forth  by applied  scientists. Roger  Bacon, in  the  thirteenth   century, predicted  mechanically  powered ships and  flying machines, submarines  and  cars, but  he did  not  direct  science to them,  he simply gave  voice to  a  desire. Such devices were developed  in due course, when it became  possible by the  concomi­ tance of knowledge to make that step towards increasing convenience, so desired by man.
As an example of the power of science fiction to resemble and affect the future, we can take Ralph  Centennius's  piece "The  Dominion in 1g8g."39  J. R. Colombo, in his introduction to it, quotes Lawrence  Lande  as saying  that  it is a  work of "science fiction -probably  one of the earliest in Canada-brilliantly  executed with many accurate  forecasts, especially Chapter  2  on Science."  I think  Centen­ nius's piece is just silly. His predictions in science are  no more accurate  than  the ones he makes in demography, economics, politics or social advance.  It  is sort of fun to read,  but much  less so than, say, any one of the "Sunshine Sketches," and to much  less value.  One  cannot  blame Centennius  for  missing  the  future.  Sin­ cerity, concern and  patriotism do not guarantee  sight of things to come. We can­ not bespeak our expectations.  In  the web of guesses that  is  cast over the future,  some meshes are bound  to entangle fact, but most fall hitless to the ground.  What the best of science fiction may do is to raise questions of  ethical  concern,  as by Aldous Huxley or Olaf Stapledon.  Dorothy  Livesay speaks of this, setting a hier­ archy of concerns to be mourned,  then choosing from among  them:

... deed neglected, desecrations done
Not on the lovely body of the world
But on man's building heart, his shaping soul. Mourn, with me, the intolerant, hater of sun:
Child's mind maimed before he learns to run.441

Livesay's words reflect equally on past and future:  failed dreams;  bespoke expectations.
Science fiction deals little with science. It tries to stretch  technology, do wonders with meccano, and generally falls behind real life.




CANADA HAS DONE WELL with its describers of fierce nature. Jack London, C. G. D. Roberts, E. T. Seton, Vilhjalmur Stephansson, Sheila Burnford,  Fred  Bodsworth,  Farley  Mowat,  James  Houston,  Grey  Owl,  make  a sampler, with scenes for every taste. These names are catalogued  by Alec Lucas.41
Most of us, I daresay, have been influenced  one way or another  by such  writers and cherish our own image of the true north strong and  free. Only in these high temperate  (temperate?) latitudes do the Seasons roll by with such inexorable pontificality:  high ritual and circumstance for each. Then,  for each an outpouring

23

SCIENCE & LITERATURE


of good,  bad,  and  indifferent verse, tinged  variously  with  biology,  meteorology, physics and  biochemistry.

. . . frost-fingered wind rolls snow
Through  lifeless stubble,
And sap hides in the roots of things42

*
Spring is here, the breezes blowing,
four inches of top-soil going, going;
farm ducks rolling across the prairie; Spring is here -how nice and airy!43

*
I grazed the green as I fell
and in my blood
the pigments flowed like sap. All through my veins the green made a lacey tree.44

*
And soon, too soon, around  the cumbered  eaves
Sly frosts shall take the creepers by surprise,
And through  the wind-touched  reddening  woods shall rise
October with the rain of ruined leaves.45

There is, too, the literature of personalization of the  creatures of nature, every­ where  a fantasy  of absolutely  certain  charm and  interest. A  kind  of  sociobiology enters  into  these  works. Sociobiology,  defined  as the systematic study  of the  bio­ logical  basis of all social behaviour, is currently a widely  discussed,  controversial region of science. It deals with  heredity, kinship, behaviour of all sorts and  altru­ ism. It  takes  as one of its functions "to  reformulate the  foundations of the  social sciences in a way that  draws  these subjects  into  the  Modern Synthesis  [of  evolu­ tionary  theory] ."46  Here  is a scientist  proclaiming the  oneness  of man's curiosity.  We  are  predisposed   towards  sociobiology's  conclusions, because   we  have   been told of puzzled  but instinctive curlews, we have  been  told  of the  blind  determina­ tion  of misplaced   house  pets,  we  have  been  told  of  the  joys of  freedom   of  the otter.  Yet this gives us a certain  uneasiness  with  scientific  sociobiology.  Although its data  require the highest standards of quantitation and  the  most rigorous  use of scientific  methods,  we are  always  aware  of  the  literary licence  available to  the storyteller   who  uses  nature   as  his scene  and  creatures as  his  protagonists. The imagination of  man  is one for literature or for  science.  The  results  of science  are put  in  place  by  imagination, not  by numbers, which  only  serve  to  support con­ clusions. What of the licence  that  is used?
Of  the  nature stories, in many  ways the  most  complex  and  certainly the  most
unusual is F. P. Grove's  myrmecological fantasy.47  The adventures of the  ants  he

24

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

follows make sense if one takes the deeply ironic myrmecocentric  point of view that  "our  own race stands  at the very apex of creation  as far as that  creation  is completed  today."  The  ant lore presented is relatively accurate,  certainly for the time it was written; Grove is punctilious  in  reference  and  clearly  was familiar with ants from more than  the  picnic viewpoint.
Not only that, but Grove comprehended  much of the fine flavour and challenge
of science. In  the  great  argument  of Anna-zee, the  core  of science is revealed when  the  question  "How?" -when answered-is shown  to  lead  to  "Why?" "How" can  be  answered,  but  leads only,  and  infinitely,  to  further  questions; science supersedes  itself.  Grove's  statement,  "The   achievement   of  any  ant  of science is merely  the  basis for  the  achievement  of  another   ant  of science,"  is absolutely  Kuhnian,  made   20  years  before  Thomas   Kuhn   pointed  out  that, "unlike  art,  science  destroys its past."48 It is part  of  the  openness  of science: everything is exposed, to be changed.
Grove, in Anna-zee, says, "In  fact, what  was left of the science of a few  mil­ lenia ago? Names, that  was all; and, perhaps, a few things to laugh at. Venerable names -names  revered  in  spite  of the fact  that  the  theories,  hypotheses, and so-called discoveries with which they were associated have long since disappeared  into the limbo of a forgotten  childhood of thought."
Kuhn says, "Science textbooks are studded with the names and sometimes with portraits  of old  heroes, but  only historians read  old scientific works. In  science new breakthroughs do initiate  the removal of suddenly outdated  books and  jour­ nals from their  active  position in a science library to the desuetude  of a  general depository."
In the progress of science "Why?" is unanswerable and  not scientific, but is demanded   constantly  when  "How?" is answered. Grove's  philosopher-ant  pro­ claims that  the sole and  exclusive ultimate  value of a fact  is that  it  allows the question  "Why?" "Ants  are  constituted  in such a  way  that  they  must  ever  try to storm  heaven.  They  are  suspended  between  two  worlds:   the  world  of  the knowable and  the world of the unknowable."
Grove's ants observe, speculate, and erect hypotheses, which are testable, in the most modern  style. He  has tried and,  I think, largely succeeded in capturing an essence of science among  his artful ants.
Moreover,  this  represents  a  more  mature  and  reasoned  position than  Grove
himself took some 20 years earlier when, in his essay on "Realism  in Literature,"49 he described science as being  "in  a state  of everlasting  flux;  it  changes  almost from moment  to moment; and  certainly from year to year." At that  time he mis­ interpreted  the flux as an instability that reflected indecision-a kind of  fiddling rather  than  a building.  In the  20 years between the essay and  the  novel, Grove changed  his denial of the ability of science to interpret  phenomena  to a recogni­ tion that  "Why?" is not a scientific question, and with that, to recognize, at least

25

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

implicitly, that  there  are other  modes of interpretation than  by way of "Why?" Even in  his earlier  essays Grove specified the  fundamental unity  of  the  higher activities of man:  religion, science and art, expressing goodness, truth  and beauty. "[E]ven  today we cannot divide them without  disastrous results."
A more  superficial  expression of science  is widespread   in  current   literature.
That  is the recognition, description, and  influence  of technology on our  lives. It may  be in  the  form  of a simple glaze, or  catalogue  lists popular  in  drugstore literature ("Yes. It's a Zeiss. A two-lens automatic Reflex f/3-5-") .50  It may provide the essential setting for a novel, it may be thematic,  or it may  just give a  com­ fortable feeling to the reader, for it is what he can see and feel and is surrounded  by. It puts reality into the imaginary;  it makes literature almost tactile. It  reduces strain on the imagination.
I am not aware of a body of science-delimited poetry of consequence anywhere, but  we can  expect  to find expressions of attitude, celebration  of technology  or even the establishment of scene. Even these possibilities are sometimes forgone by poets with a prejudice.
We have heard  David Andrew say that  a scientist can tell nothing  worthwhile of a river, but  that  is not so. Perhaps  he cannot  "calibrate serenity  in so many decibels per gurgling ... ," but he can extrapolate to history; he can define a cool, curving world;  he can, with elegant geometry, describe a course, and,  in playful spirit on a sand-table, build and  live along with  a fluviatile  creation  of his own. This can teach him much of the spirit of rivers. Were  he so inclined,  the scientist could describe his feelings and his motives as creator in a poem. Why does he not? Perhaps because as a scientist his approach  to understanding is in itself satisfying; his play is not with a tapestry of words but  with  a model of ideas. Only  a  pro­ scriptive idealogue  would suggest that one is greater  than  the other.  Nor  can  we afford to let go of either.  Poets tell us of the  need  to  understand  ourselves and the world.






Or again:
 
Sometimes I think gravity's just man's hunger holding things together
He wants to belong so bad.n


my desire
to meet myself
is so great
I could eat it. 2


Science is one of the  paths by which we can  reach  meaning  in ourselves; if it is ignored by literature, our search is incomplete.
There is a lot of poetry published in Canada, much of it very good. So far, poets
have explored mostly technology, celebrating artefacts  and the superiority of man

SCIENCE & LITERATURE


over  nature, which  is perhaps the last of his great  Bronze  Age misapprehensions. Watch The  6000,  beautifully characterized, take its place  to do man's will:

A lantern  flashed out a command, A bell was ringing as a hand Clutched  at a throttle, and the bull, At once obedient to the pull,
Began with bellowing throat  to lead
By slow accelerating speed
Six thousand  tons of caravan
Out  to the spaces -there to toss The blizzard from his path across The prairies of Saskatchewan.53

It  is glorious-and dead  false. I remember, long  after  that   poem  was written, the  winter  in Saskatchewan  (was  it  1947?)   when  trains were  swallowed   up  by blizzards  and  left entombed till spring,  thirty  feet beneath the surface of the snow !
But  I take  a special  example to make  a special  point.  A biologist,  as one  kind of scientist,  matures to the  recognition that  every species is successful  in  its own terms,  that  every species  (including us)  is the  product of its own  evolution, and that   the  forces  of  nature, physical  and   biological,  still  determine the  ultimate course, despite  man's fearful wish that  it were not so. One  characteristic of science il'>   that  it  does  depreciate the  concept  imperium hominis and  reduce   man's ego. Maybe that  in itself is thought to be undesirable for  purposes  of literature. If so, that  in itself depreciates literature.
If we stay with  E. J. Pratt we see the poet,  par excellence, of material man. His
assumptions are  simple  and   honest.  He  illustrates  superbly; his  pictures  never expose a soul.  His  compulsive cataloguing of things shows  the  end,  not  the  pro­ cesses of technology and  science.  Pratt produced encyclopaedias of faunas  ("The Great   Feud"), naval  technology  and  practice   ("Behind the  Log"),  he  rivalled  Janes in  his  descriptions of  boats   ("Dunkirk"), and   he  linked   them  all  with astronomy, anatomy, and  ancient and  modern geography. Pratt's is technological poetry,  skilful  and  attractive constructions that  stir admiration and  emotion, but do not set us on new ways.
A step  further along,  we come to perceived  demonic  science,  a response  to the unease felt towards cool intellectualism. Anyone  understanding, or seeming  to understand, those  things  which  are  preferred to  be seen  as  mysteries,  is suspect and  open  to scorn,  for mysteries are easier to accept  and  easier  to blame  than  our own irrationality or misunderstanding.
Like Moebius's strip, this argument has reversible sides:

And being gods to themselves
grinding lenses and finding new beasts in human  semen ditchwater monsters

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

peering beyond the moon
to reach the dark side of knowledge
where people die and worse
they don't know why they lived.54

One side is simply a continuation  of the other. There  is no dark side of  knowl­ edge, save ignorance. The adventure  and value of science is that  it can  illuminate the darkness  and  disperse it.  Wilful  denial  of that  is simple  obfuscation.  One thing  science does know is that  it has a  never-ending  task,  because  each  scene illuminated  reveals new roads, new comers, new intriguing shadows. That  is one of  the  chief  experiences of science.  Though   it  be  imperfect,   unfinished,  and worked by inconstant  man, science is necessary and should  be celebrated.  George OIWell knew that: "In  Newspeak there is no word  for  'Science.'  The  empirical method  of thought,  on  which  all  the scientific  achievements  of  the  past  were founded, is opposed to the most fundamental principles of IngSoc."55  The  trans­ cendence  of a model system left  no  place  for  empirical  thought  or  study,  and certainly not for new knowledge or deeper understanding. I borrow a phrase from Leon Eisenberg56   to say that  "mysticism, hermeneutics,  and  transcendental rap­ ture"  are  no substitutes  for science and  reason.  Northrop Frye  is right  to  say "We  have so much less to fear from science than  from a misuse of words.''57  To avoid science in  literature  becomes  a  disuse of  words, and  that  too  may  be  a fearful error.



kERE IS  NO  NEED FOR  SCIENCE to perfuse literature. It is but one of the interests and occupations of man and  under  many  circumstances  plays no direct role in the details of his affairs. But it is not usual for science to be universally absent from a modem  literature.  From  a limited  experience, it seems to  me  that  Quebec  literature  dwells little  on  matters  of  science, even  though Camille  Laurin  seems to believe that  science can  be packaged  and  directed  the same as social propaganda. Laurin,  in planning  his Utopia,  has either  missed, or perhaps agrees with Frye's dictum  that  "No  society can  plan  for its own culture unless it restricts the output of culture to socially predictable standards.''68
By and large, the poetry and  prose of Quebec  these days is intensely personal in either  the individual  or the collective sense, echoing the  parochial  celebration of the land. There  is beautiful science being done in Quebec,  but  as a universal subject  it is, for now, irrelevant  to the  narrow  needs of that  self-isolated  nation and is left out of the voice of its writers.

A Ia droite du silence Un peuple de patience Se !eve
Pour quitter sa nuit.59

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

The  struggle is for an immediate  end;  science is seen as a luxury. It will appear in literature  when identity needs are satisfied. Unrealized  by most writers, it could be of help even now, for it will be a significant part of whatever  identity emerges.
The  beauty  of form  provides  aesthetic  experience,  "but   rarely  do  [writers] refer to the beauty of process or  function." 6 ° Form is fixed:  it is the product, it is the image, it is the still photograph  advertising  the  movie.  Movies form  a  con­
tinuous sequence;  the most recent movie is, in our experience, really just a contin­ uation  of the  last one  we saw, and  so back to the time  we began  going  to the cinema. It is when we see the old stills that we realize that changes have occurred. During  the movie itself, we do not realize that our response must be changing too.
Science deals with process; literature deals with form. That  could be a great aphorism; regrettably  it  is not  precisely true.  However,  bits  of  reality  do stick to it.  I  reiterate  that  science is more  open  than  literature. Literature   is more closed than  science.  Literature  tends  to  encompass  its subject  in  its  analysis; science tries to pave a segment of a road. Of course process is dealt with in litera­ ture, often  deliberately  and  extensively:  ]alna, for instance,  or  more  effectively in A Dance to the Music  of Time. Nonetheless, each of these is sharply circum­ scribed, with little past and  no future. At least I know of no sequels by successors to original authors  that  have themselves had any real success. On  the other hand, succession is the business of science. This means that  there is a qualitative  differ­ ence between literature and  science, but  neither does it  deny  the fact  that  both are activities of the same creature,  nor does it make a  rule that  literature  cannot represent  science.  Literature can,  and  should,  take  the  still  photographs   that record some instant  in the  process of science and  thus  provide  what  could  be a profoundly annotated picture  of us ourselves in one of our modes of imaginative­ ness and creativity.
Margaret Atwood  has  no section on  "Science"  in  Survival.  What  does that mean? For one thing, it may suggest that  there remains a belief in the dichotomy of science and art as human  endeavours, that instead of human  creativity being a centre from which results radiate in all directions into an expanding sphere of experience, each activity of mankind  is a self-centred puttering. That  suggests to me  that  we are  early  closeted  with  our  limited  interests  and  can  expect  little advantage from  other  sorts of experiences. What  a  paralytic  portent! Nor  do  I think  that  Atwood  means such  a thing, for as much  as any  active  writer  that  I know, she involves science, its contributions  and  its concepts in  her  work  impli­ citly (Frankenstein) and  explicitly  (R.O.M. recurrens).
If the creative  activities of man can be thought  of as the ever-expanding out­ ward growth  of interpretive understanding,  powered by a single creative source, specific in the  biological sense, i.e., belonging to the species man,  then  it  is pos­ sible to view the results of his creativity in a global sense. Our  present status, the

SCIENCE & LITERATURE


frontiers of our  attempts to live fully and  to understand that  life, then  are repre­
sented  by the surface  of that  globe, the shell of a sphere.
Such  a  globe  has  a geography. On  its  surface one  might   find  more  or  less discretely,  the  continent of  literature, the  kingdom  of  prose  and   poetry  in  the empire  of words.  Over  the  globe,  music, say, may  be  displaced in one  direction, and  science  in  another. All  will have  their  provinces and  satrapies; often  there will be shared   jurisdictions. But the most important attribute of this metaphor is that  all are on the same surface  and, even if polarly  displaced, one can  be reached from  another. Travel between  seemingly  isolated  regions  is possible.  A  bit  of  a sense of adventure, a willingness to sample  other  customs  uncondescendingly and a recognition that  motivations here and  there  are  not  widely  different, will allow the traveller  to discover  that  the  natives are  friendly.
Therefore, literature can treat  science. It  may  be by an  open-mouthed traveller
in a foreign  land, full of misconceptions about  awesome  wonders  or fanciful tales of not yet explored regions, or it may deal with  the experience of people immersed in their  work,  affected  by it as well as by the  same  emotions  and  outside  forces that  affect  us all.
Love and  understanding are interchangeable here.  The  writer  has  a chance to
help save us.

The biochemist exhales words which few can swallow, the professor drones out truths which none will follow, and on a bushel of talk and a hi-diddle-diddle
sits the Saviour Poet dangerously there in the middle.61

Science in Canadian literature?-it's all opportunity!


NOTES

1 Raymond  Souster, "Memo  to the Human  Race"  ( I952), Collected  Poems of Ray­
mond Souster, Vol.  I (Ottawa: Oberon,  I98o), p. I53·
2  Speech to the University of Alberta, Folio, I7  (20 November  I98o), pp. 3-IO.
3  Clive  Cookson,  "Notes  from   Washington,"   C.A.U.T. Bulletin,   27   (December
I 980) , p. I I.
4  Organization for Economic Co-operation  and Development. The  Measurement of
Scientific  and Technical  Activities  (Paris:  Frascati  Manual, I975).
5  "Science,  The  Arts, and The  Spirit,"  Second  Thoughts (Toronto: McClelland  &
Stewart,  1970),  p. I.
6 Anatomy  of Criticism  (Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  Univ. Press, I 97 I), p. 8.
7  E. M. Forster,  Aspects of the Novel  (I 927; rpt. Harmondsworth: Penguin,  I 976), p. 82.
8 It should be noted that Margaret  Atwood has had long time fascination  with the illustrative  catalogues of science, or at least with  the Royal Ontario Museum  and, despite her protests, she finds herself "dragged  to the mind's end I deadend,  the roar
of the  bone- I yard, I am lost I among  the  mastodons  and  beyond."  Perhaps  we

SCIENCE & LITERATURE


there  see the gestation of Lesje  Green.  Margaret Atwood,  "A  Night  in  the  Royal Ontario  Museum" in  The  Animals   in  That  Country  (Toronto:  Oxford Univ. Press, I g68), pp. 20-2 I.
9  (London: Methuen, I963), Scene  I4.
10 "Dr. Johnson Kicks  Hocking's Shin," Rivers  Among  Rocks  (Toronto:  McClelland
& Stewart, I g6o), poem  29.
11  Thomas Hopkins, review  of The Clan  of the  Cave  Bear by Jean Auel,  Maclean's
( 6 October I g8o), pp. 64-65·
12  The Well-Tempered Critic   (Bloomington: Indiana Univ.  Press,  I963), p.  I50.
13 A Study of Goethe   (Oxford: Clarendon, I947), p. 201.
14  Forster, p. 34·
15  Ralph Gustafson, "Four Songs   for   Antiquated Music-Transfigured    Night,"
Rivers, poem 40.
16 J. D.  Babbitt, ed.,  Science  in  Canada. Selections   from  the  Speeches   of E.  W. R. Steacie  (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press, I965), p. 68.
17  Babbitt, p. 74·
18  "Comment on  the Relations of Science  and  Art"  (I g6g) ; rpt.  in T. S. Kuhn, The
Essential Tension (Chicago: Univ.  of Chicago Press, I977), p. 341.
19  "Second Thoughts on  Paradigms" (I 974) ; in Essential Tension, pp.  293-3 I g.
20  David   Andrew, "Pure  and   Applied   Rivers,"   The   Lure   of  Lanark     (Ottawa: Borealis,  I974),p. Ig.
21  The Mimic Men  (London: Andre  Deutsch, I967), p. 2Ig.
22  Science, 207  (I  February Ig8o), p. 5I7.
23 Nor Shall My  Sword  (London: Chatto and  Wind us, I972).
24  "Varieties of Literary Utopias," Daedalus,  94, No.2  (Spring I965), pp. 329-30.
25  The Strength of the  University (Toronto:  Univ.  of Toronto Press,  Ig68), p. 237.
26   Margaret Atwood, "Provisions" in The Animals  in That Country, p.  I.
27  I have  dealt  with  some of these  matters in a report  to  the  Alberta Society  of  Pro­ fessional   Biologists,  "Biology   and   Science   Policy  in  Canada,"  Biology,  Science  Policy  and  the  Public,  a  Symposium  (Edmonton:  A.S.P.B.,  27-28  April    I978), PP· 28-58.
28   The Double  Helix  (NewYork: Atheneum, Ig68).
29   "Honest Jim  and  the Tinker Toy  Model," The Nation, 206  ( I8 March I968), pp.
38I -82.
30  It Needs To Be Said  (Toronto: Macmillan, I929), pp. 88-89.
31  Margaret Atwood, Speeches    for  Dr.   Frankenstein   (Bloomfield    Hills,   Mich.:
32   Mel Thistle, The Inner  Ring  (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I966), p. 2I2.
33  J.  M.  S. Careless   and   R.  C.  Brown,  eds.,  The  Canadians 1867-1967   (Toronto: Macmillan, I967); George  Woodcock,  The Canadians (Don  Mills: Fitzhenry and Whiteside, I979).
34   I have  not  seen all  the letters  myself, but  the samples  quoted  in  Thistle (see foot­ note  32)   and   Corbett show   a  man   literate,  incisive,  well-ordered, and   clearly  directed towards an  end.  His  vision was  broad  and  his  confidence  overwhelming.

SCIENCE  & LITERATURE

The  letters, it seems to me, would be a goldmine for the biographical novelist. E. A.
Corbett, Henry  Marshall  Tory, Beloved  Canadian (Toronto:  Ryerson,   I954).
35   The Chaining of Prometheus   (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  I973).
36   "A Science  Policy for Canada," Report  of the  Special  Committee of the  Senate  on Science  Policy  (Ottawa): Volume  I: A Critical Review: Past  and  Present  ( I970); Volume 2: Targets and Strategies for the Seventies  ( I972); Volume 3: A Govern­ ment  Organization for the Seventies  ( I973) ; Volume 4:  Progress  and  Unfinished Business (I977).
37  Ministry of State  for Science and  Technology.
38  CRT-cathode ray tube,  the  increasingly ubiquitous device  across  the  surface  of which  flit  the  green  letters  and  numbers,  or  the  coloured  pictures of  computers, word-processors (!)  and  television.
39  Ralph Centennius, "The Dominion in I983,"  in J. R. Colombo, ed., Other  Canadas
(Toronto:  McGraw-Hill Ryerson,   I979), pp.  296-3I9.
40   "Of  Mourners," in  Ralph Gustafson, ed.,  The Penguin   Book  of Canadian Verse
(Harmondsworth: Penguin,  I959), pp.  I67-68.
41  "Nature Writers  and  the  Animal  Story,"  in  Carl   F. Klinck, ed.,  Literary   History of Canada   (Toronto: Univ.  of Toronto Press,  I976), Vol.  I,  pp.  364-88.
42  James A. MacNeill, "Chinook," Prairie fire (Saskatoon:  Western Extension College
Educational Publishers,  I976), p. I6.
43   P. G. Hiebert, "Song  to the Four  Seasons,"  in F. R. Scott  and  A. J. M. Smith, eds.,
The Blasted Pine  (Toronto: Macmillan, I 957), p. 73·
44  P. K. Page, "Summer," in The Penguin  Book  of Canadian Verse, pp.  202-03.
45  Archibald Lampman, "September," in  The  Penguin   Book   of  Canadian Verse,
pp. 7I-73·
46   E.  0. Wilson,   Sociobiology: The  New   Synthesis  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  Belknap
Press, I975), p. 4·
47  Consider  Her Ways   (Toronto: Macmillan, I947). Anna-zee's argument occurs  on p. I67 ff.
48  Thomas S. Kuhn, "Comments on  the  Relations of  Science  and  Art" (I 965), in
Essential  Tensions, p. 345·
49  It  Needs  To  Be Said, p. 56.
50   Hugh Gamer, Death  in Don Mills  (I975; rpt.  Toronto: Bantam, I976).
51 Tom Farley,  "Gravity," in The Last Spaceman (Ottawa:  Borealis,  I974), p. 42.
52  Miriam Mandel, "Group Therapy," in  Station 14  (Edmonton:  Treefrog, I 977),
p. 2I.
53 E. J. Pratt, "The 6ooo,"  Northrop Frye,  ed.,  The Collected   Poems  of E.  ]. Pratt
(2nd  Ed.)   (Toronto: Macmillan, I958), pp. 58-6o.
54  AI Purdy, "Atomic Museum," in Sex  and Death  (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, I973)' pp. I 23-24.
55    Nineteen Eighty-four (London: Seeker and  Warburg, I949), p.  I98.
56   "The Social  Imperatives of Medical Research," Science, I98  ( I6 December I977), p. I 105-IO.
57  The Well-Tempered Critic,  p. 47·

SCIENCE & LITERATURE

58 Anatomy  of Criticism, p. 348.
59  Gilles  Marsolais, "Aube," in  La  Mort  d'un  Arbre   (Montr·eal:  Librairie  Deom,
1967)' p. 36.
60  Harold J. Brodie,  Fungi, Delight  of Curiosity  (Toronto: Univ. of  Toronto  Press,
1978), p. 32. But  listen-"L'eau:  I Je  me suis changee  en  neige  I pour  danser   I
avec  le  vent." Felix-Antoine Savard, Aux  Marges  du  Silence  (Quebec:  Editions
Garneau, 1975), p. 62. The  poets can  bring  bright  understanding to us all.






from a continuation   rif

LOG ENTRIES
 





Christopher Dewdney


WINTER CENTRJIL

A spill contained in the fissure of light  admitted by its own  mani­ festation. An  illumination of  the  crystalline moss  of  slanting light fissured  by the  lens of the  control  data truck.  The surveillance car behind  the control data  van carries  the  gamma radiation equipment necessary  for  these types of covert  "hot" waste dumps.  The  van  is on its way to the exchange centre.
The  visitation  of the luminous discharge is correct in the seething
mass of frozen  light waves already parting for the control  blind.  The figure,  discernible only after  computer enhancement, standing in the centre of the  luminous  discharge. The  lens  held  by the  hand  carries filament waste-disposal  sea of crystals, imperfect by the highway maintenance teams. Control data  imperfect response  to the van maintaining radio  silence in the absolute  surveillance of the anterior vehicle.  Astounded luminous figure holding the cameral to the light­ spill  a fissure  dump in  the  hot  light  of  central winter.  The  image  taken  away  by their  heat,  the image  deflected  by transmitted images from   the   bicameral  care-package  following closely.  Visited   by  a luminous discharge of gases in the image  clarification process. Wafer  by-product of the  programming, a non-actual event.  Identity with­  held  for security  reasons, as the negligible  remnants of the  countless  passings  fry the  ice into a frilly brocade  of  tormented  hydrogen.

* 	* 	*
directional leakage  accounting for  only  2% of our  de-coded
material. Data-base was originally detected after  assembly of a mam-


33

POEM

milian  receiver  sensitive enough   to override hardware ambivalence. The receiver  began  to masturbate somewhere in  the  range  of  I, 700 toI ,8oo megahertz.
Running a tracing program on a fractionated D.N.A.  extract paralleled with  intelligence drag the  time-factor cut  in  so  fast  we thought we'd  run it backwards. By the  time  we'd  stripped down  the synchro  the  origin-program had  run  out  of  amino  proteins.  Trian­ gulation of





"Then  data-base talked   to  us  and   then   the  receiver  was  taken away."

* 	* 	*
As frequency  monitors   working   in  a  linkage   system  outside  of history we are faced  with  many  responsibilities. We must  sustain  our prime objective  in  the  shifting   data-base  priorities. In  the  face  of equipment limitations we  must  perfect a  helix  sensitive  enough  to anticipate frequency   shifts.  Only  at this  point   will  localization  be possible, for our  perceived  vulnerability is unqualified in  the  search mode.





phase sector control  Niagara







EJIST KOOTENJIY  ILLUMINJITION

Tom Wayman


As I drove in summer  along the valley
between the Purcells and  the high wall of the Rockies, the road speeding  north  through forests
and  out to broad  vistas of lakes or heights  of land

I heard  the earth

34

POEM

say:  when  you know the blue of the sky does not extend  to the sun,
when you feel there is the star we swing around
blazing this morning above the apparent horizon,

you sense that  this planet, this white-and-blue ball turning through space
watches  what  happens
with  benign  indifference.
Formed of matter which originated immense  distances  away, the earth
is intrigued to see what  occurs in its interior or on its surface,
wishes all living beings well,
yet is unconcerned. Much  is at stake for any species, but not for the world.
That which  humans find beautiful, and  threaten, the earth does not treasure. Atoms
are what  are marvellous to the planet:
the atmosphere can carry smoke, lose oxygen,
allow  more  ultraviolet in, fill with  radioactive dust, the globe remains whole;  pollution or species death
is merely a rearrangement of molecules
and  not a loss. The earth  observes as if it attends a play, unmoved  by
the outcome, although it wants  the actors  to succeed
because of its friendly  nature. "Thrive, thrive," the earth  says,
its only law, and  if a species proves unstable or destructive, another will replace it
or won't. This is still a world
if it rolls lifeless around the sun-
the planet remembers when its atmosphere was nitrogen and  carbon  dioxide
before photosynthesizing organisms
appeared; it remembers when it had no atmosphere. And when in some cataclysm  the globe
disperses back  to interstellar space,
these atoms  had  their  time as this planet,  as the Earth, as they had  their  time before in stars.

And as I steered  north
on an artificially-hardened surface
in the valley of the rivers we call Kootenay and  Columbia, I felt that  always with me is the earth

35

POEM

like a friend  too remote to assist in any difficulty but interested  to learn what  I will accomplish:

myself, a person, human beings,

and  the third  planet  from a star.







OF THE STJIRS
for Jon Roberts

Kevin Roberts

In  the beginning was the Great
Bang
flamed molt  I the gases feathering in space

found  their circles the spin of cooling concentration

but the pocket of gas on Earth lingers
struck  by lightning into the

amino  acid soup of our  time

the first space travelling fish eye
swivels up

and  out again  to the stars wondering I wonder

as I do
of my brothers in green somewhere  up there  in Time


HUGH HOOD'S EDENIC GARDEN

Psychoanalysis Among the Flowerbeds

Patrick J. Mahony with a reply by Hugh Hood





PCHOANALYTIC  uNDERSTANDING, "Wettably, ;, mrely brought to  bear  on  contemporary Canadian  writing.   As  a  practicing  literary critic  and  psychoanalyst I daily  realize the  harmony  of my two disciplines,  and  I realize,  too,  that   such  interdisciplinarity  can  illuminate  much   modem  fiction.
Any  reader of Hugh Hood's The  Swing in the Garden  ( 1975)   will  begin  his
further critical   appreciation of  it  by  taking   up  Robert  Lecker's indispensable essay, "A Spirit  of Communion: The  Swing in the Garden." 1  Lecker  explores the novel's optimistic dimension through its four  types of communion: the  aesthetic, communal, transportative, and  spiritual. First,  as  an  aesthetic communion, the novel unites such  opposites as the passing of ubiquitous time  and  the  permanence of the swing  in the  garden, an  emblem  of security.  In  other  words,  art  serves to unify  the  fragmentation within   both  time  and  space  and   yet  transcends them. Innocence and  experience, light  and  dark,  spring  and  fall,  the  voice of the  nar­ rator  shifting between  the  language of childhood, adolescence and  adulthood­ all these  artistically fused  components mimic  the  desire  of  Hood's  central  char­ acter, Matthew Goderich, "to  see permanence coexist  with  change, one  moving in  the  other." Second,  in  a  communal sense,  the  novel  strives  to  harmonize the holy and  secular, and  thereby  sets up  a parallel  between  the  church and  society as  communal bodies.  Third, pointing   up  the  transportational theme,  the  train  looms as the  eminent symbol  of national time  and  potential. The  fourth   kind  of communion is spiritual intercourse, which  is held to win out  over  the  two divided  worlds of romance: the upper idyllic childhood of happiness and  security  and  the lower  demonic world  of  experience, separation, pain,  and  fear.   Lecker  insight­  fully concludes that  Matthew, seeking  to return  to the  idyllic  world,

exercises his memory, hoping  as he does to recover through  imaginative  recreation a much  more powerful  version of a world which has been physically lost. Thus  it can  be said that  the stiUcture of The  Swing in the Garden  is essentially ironic, in that  the voyage toward  the end of the narrative  actually  describes a quest for its

37

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

beginning:  the progression towards darkness is, for  Matt,  a  movement into  the light of self-discovery.
I would like to use Lecker's conclusion in order  to orient  the question  of my central  concern:   What  kind of  personal  relationships  did  the  young  Matthew have  which  determined  the four  kinds of  communion   marking  the  orientation of his adult  life?  Granted   that  developmental   and  maturational factors  were involved and  that  there were ripening  cognitive  capabilities  that  influenced  the older Matthew's choice and  understanding  of that  tetradic  communion, we must nevertheless not overlook earlier factors such as narcissistic hurt,  emotional  depri­ vation, sibling rivalry, supercargo strictures, and overdetermined ego ideals which shaped  Matthew's integrating strategies in the face of frustration, fragmentation, and incoherences in his life's experience.
Let us now attend  to the data  and psychodynamics of Matthew's three-genera­ tional home setting, starting  with his mother's  side. The  maternal  grandmother, Madame  Archambault, was an unbending  arbitrary spirit, indeed the very incar­ nation  of law. Of  the four  grandparents it  was only she  who  would  hazard  a wounding  word.  Not  much  is said  about  Grandpa  Archambault save  that  his favourite  grandchild   was Tony,  and  just about  nothing  at  all is said  about  the paternal  grandparents. By and large, the story  we  hear shows an alienation  from the two sets of grandparents, especially the  maternal ones. The  normal  leverage and  freedom  that  a grandchild  seeks from  his grandparents as a  relief to  daily parental  strictures seemingly did not obtain in  Matthew's young life. We are  not surprised  to  learn,  therefore,  that  Matthew's cravings  for  admiration and  love from his own parents were so much the stronger.
Matthew's mother, a displaced French-speaking  Quebecer  in Ontario, the first university woman in her family, was a convinced  early feminist, avidly given to reading  class-conscious novels even though  they  were second-class literature. To her children she presented the image of being firm, distant, eminently fair, and responsive to all their needs except the most fundamental one:  their need for tenderness  and  expression of  physical  affection.  Although   Matthew   felt  that there was no other woman "more  reasonable and  less dogmatic  than she," he was also subjected  to her lack of empathy  and  loving introjection,  manifested  by her consistently using adult syntax with her small children.  In  light of such  depriva­ tion, he sought and became the pet of neighbourhood mothers. Though his mother never  hit  him,  neither  did  she  caress him;   remonstration  was  habitually  of  a highly controlled  nature  purged of affects, and so typical were the mother's  criti­ cal words "silly" and  "idle"  that  at times our  hero  would  have  preferred  being spanked.  Apart  from  the need for a more immediate  discharge,  Matthew's pen­ chant for physical punishment  was deeply motivated  by a wish for libidinal  con­ tact  with  his mother; the  forbidden  incestuous  libidinality  of  that  wish would accordingly have been simultaneously satisfied  and  paid for by a punitive smack.

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

Hence  a  masochistic  nucleus  in  Matthew's  female  relationships.  Another  point worth making concerns  Matthew's ambivalence toward  the earliest fusional, symbiotic relationship  he had  with his mother.  He subsequently  tried  to detach himself from  such  a strong  tie, and  at  the same time  he ever  mourned  for  its passing. Curiously  it  was he  rather  than  younger  Tony  or  the  elder  Amanda Louise that  was sensitive to the flicker of their mother's  eyelids and  could detect a secret amusement  behind them. We are not taken aback to discover the  uneasi­ ness and the tentativeness  of Matthew's feeling about  being the  untold  object  of her affection;  so on page 67 we read "It's possible that  I was her  favorite,"  and then over  xoo pages later, "I was almost certain  that  I  was her  favorite."
Caught   between   his  grandmother's  tyranny   of  morality  and   his  mother's tyranny  of reason,  Matthew suffered  an  accumulative  trauma   wrought  by  the absence of a sustained, tender solace which has its own exclusive claim to primacy in a well-rounded  life;  exclusively reasoned  expression should  be  held  to  limits in social intercourse.  Here  we cannot  forget the appropriate words of Edgar  in the antepenultimate line of King  Lear:  "Speak what  we feel, not what  we ought to say." To repeat: Matthew's compensatory reaction drove him to seek affection from maternal substitutes  in the neighbourhood  and  it was their  dandying  him which  influenced   his  permanent   penchant   for  female  friendship,   significantly meriting the divine epithet "thank  God." Matthew's  particular preferences for girl companions  actually  reflect the two sides of his own mother:   he preferred  those ignoring him or those who were distant  princesses. Admittedly  his subsequent  role before women  was submissive, bearing  the  traces of irrecoverable  unfulfillment from  his mother  who had  precipitated  him prematurely  out  of childhood.
Upon  reading  the  novel  who  can  avoid  the  impression  that   Matthew   was ushered too soon into adult  life? We hear tones of complaint  in his memory that his mother  never babied him after he learned to read at four. But if his babyhood was not well received, we may assume that  neither  were his recurrent  yearnings as a child to  regress. Behind  a too easy acquiescence to  his father's  decision  to delay entrance into  primary  school for one year because  of his relatively  small stature,  we sense the  compensating  gain  of staying  one  more  year  close to  the maternal  hearth. It  stands  to reason-and more so to emotion-that at  nine Matthew  still  wanted  to be babied,  though  he avowedly  concealed  this strong wish. One  gathers  that  the  well-articulated  discourse  prescribed  for  everybody at home was enlisted in the service of fending off feelings, including  sexual ones, which might  have been focused on if the family members  had  listened  more  to their silence. Indeed  we are told that "too great readiness of self-expression inhibits and  finally dissipates delicacy of feelings" and  that  Mr.  Goderich  "often  found his vocabulary  inadequate to his feelings."
Next  in  order  of  our  consideration  is  Matthew's father,   whose  obsessional character  structure is pointed  up by his intellectualization,  scrupulousness, puni-

39

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

tive superego,  doubt,  suppressed  feelings, a  controlling   guilt,  and  compulsive repetitiveness. If he was like his wife in his highly controlled  criticism,  he  was unlike her in his repetitive expression. One of his favourite  phrases was "Perhaps I  have  not  made  myself clear,"  a  telltale  statement  highlighting   not  only  his obsessional concern for clarity but also a hesitating  doubt  and  scrupulous exacti­ tude  as signaled  with  the  word  "Perhaps." We  often  hear  his hatred  of  wilful obscurity leading  him into recurrent  circumlocutions  and  efforts at  clarification, a verbal characteristic  which was one with his dislike of any ambiguity  in social relationships. Here  we immediately  think  of the  repressed  hostility typifying the obsessional who is given to control his deep-seated ambivalence  by reaction forma­ tion as a defence-hence the overdetermined concern for unambiguity. A further  insight into the father  is provided  us by the revelatory  titles of the  two books he authored  as a philosopher. The first, The Place of Conceptual Thought  in Ethical judgments, Matthew  well opined, reflected the "impossible  task of throwing  the net of logic over instinct  and  feeling."  Neither  are  we astonished  that  an  anal retentive character  would devote his political book strictly to Property and Value. At  this  juncture,  implicitly  acknowledging  a  paternal   identification,   Matthew avers that  while the  book told him enormously about  his father  it  disclosed "far far too much about himself."
Was the father a sufficient masculine model for his son? With  the meagre information  we are given I doubt  it. But the most intriguing  declaration  we find about the father is his confession that no one enters the teaching  profession without a very good reason which he is anxious to conceal. We know that  an unfortunately inevitable  part  of a  teacher's  role forces him  into  the  position  of  being  judge, corrector, dominator. Did such a role channel  Mr.  Goderich's  aggression which elsewhere gave rise to anxiety? He was a pacifist and  would  not have enlisted in wartime service even if he could have. His quixotic belief that  hiring  was a really Christian  act whereas firing was inconceivable might  have found  a release of an affective damming  up in the teaching profession where grading constantly involves sanctionary acts of approval  or disapproval.
We might profitably pause to reflect on Matthew's domestic situation  when his two parents are taken together as a dyadic unit. The  Latin  maxim Summa iustitia est iniustia (extreme  justice is in justice)  well describes  the  Goderich  household where reigned the parental  lack of appropriate emotional  response, of warm love, to their  children. Between themselves the parents  had  three  ideals, in order: the loving caress, hard  thought  and  political commitment. Eliminated  from  the first ideal, Matthew  got what comfort  he could from  "hard thought" (the  polysemy of the  adjective  hardly  escapes us).  Excluding  their  children  from  the  loving caress, the  parents  displaced,  putting  an  excessive weight  on  justice, an  inter­ actional ideal rooted in the repressed hostility of a sadistic superego. A rare, direct return  of the repressed took place when, without  any consultation, or  better  yet,

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

without  giving any mention,  the parents withdrew  nearly all of Matthew's bank account  to pay for rent and food.



WILE REDUCING
 PERSONAL  FLEXIBILITY,  an  atmosphere

of extreme justice promotes castration anxiety and conflicts in one's internal negotiation  of further  separation  and  individuation.  Overall  the  novel describes the fate of certain  middle class virtues relatable to justice but vividly scrubbed  of any  libidinal  dye. Guided  by entrepeneurial   ambition  rather  than  by  passion, Matthew  immediately  forsook his infatuation  with Letty when  he could not suc­ ceed in selling a newspaper subscription to her mother. Yet even though extolling middle-class virtues  such  as steadiness, thrift,  prudence  and  survival,  Matthew the  narrator fights  against  being  classed  (here  we  see  the  great  development impact  of separation  and  individuation  on  Matthew's life, starting  from  spatial perception  and extending  in a continuous line to ambitious strivings). Hence,  in spite of having  risen to the  professional status  of art  historian,  Matthew   insists he is the same man  as he always was, and  more than  that,  recognizes no one  as either superior or inferior. There  is something true and false in such a statement: false in that  it tends to de-differentiate,  to deny differences  and  to discount  for the moment  the perilous flight into self-distinction marking  Matthew's life from childhood  to adulthood; true in that it represents the nostalgic wish for symbiosis, fusion,  and  the  collapse of ego  boundaries.  So threatening are  the  fantasies  of fragmentation that  Matthew  astoundingly  declares:  "Schizophrenia is  illusory: you can't  break a person." This  denial encapsulates the conflicts of the  narrator who struggled  against  his  restraining  line and,  with  the  ani.val  of his mother,  came near to tears because he could not embark on the passing caboose, "the  most romantic  image of my infant  fantasy life." That  yearning  for departure strikingly contrasts with Matthew's earlier avowal about that first expulsion which, "psychi­ atry  to  the  contrary,  is nothing  to  what  follows, successive expulsions  outward  toward larger, larger, less enclosed spaces."
Briefly, ego ideals and  moral  constraints  shaped  Matthew's sense of place  on various levels. The  swing returning  to the same spot  made  the  young  Matthew very cranky, for it was a symbol of status quo  as opposed  to enviable  progress; yet this attitude did  not develop without  some ambivalence,  for he subsequently envied shiftless people to some extent, comparing  their  lot  to his tiring  constant movement toward  progress. Furthermore, in compensation for his lack of security and  preferential  place in  his family,  the young Matthew  always  rooted  for  the winning side, not for the underdog.  This  reactive determinant was  joined along with his acceptance of the family's ego ideal of optimism  to a "savagely supersti­ tious" character  trait  which,  based on magical thinking  as it is, listed  among  his arsenal of self-protective measures.

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

As we shift focus from Matthew's  parents to his siblings, we are thrust evermore upon the exceptionality of his innocent world. Overall  the novel is bathed  in the tradition  of such fictional series as those of the Rover Boys or Tom  Swift, where innocence, adventure, excitement,  invention,  and  travel set a major  tempo. The nigh prelapsarian  innocence of Matthew's  youth  prepares  us for his later  retro­ spective comment  about those moments when "the  sinless facade  of  middle-class society only conceals depths of the same innocence."  However,  if  we accept  the existence of a child's  intensely passionate life in  terms  of rage, envy and  sexual cravings, we are inclined to see large elements of denial  and  repression in  Mat­  thew's portrayal  of innocence and his downplaying  of  persistently strong  negative emotions. We hear nothing about  incestuous fantasies of childhood  sexual games between  the  protagonist,  his four-year-older  sister  Amanda, and  his three-year­ younger  brother  Tony.  Neither  do  we come  upon  any  rageful  reaction  to  the fact that  Amanda  was the maternal grandmother's favourite  and  that  Tony  was the  maternal   grandfather's  favourite. It is of  the  highest  significance  that  the latter's  dying  words-"How's little  Tony?"-comprised  the  only  set  of  last words  recorded  in  the family history. Those  words,  repeated   by  Mr.  Goderich who admired  his father-in-law,  bespeak, inter alia, Matthew's estrangement  from the male grandparental and  parental  figures in his family.
From a perusal of The Swing in the Garden one could draw  up an  impressive
list of the narrator's minimalizing or disclaiming emotionally threatening activity: Matthew's  childhood  companions  were  remarkably   free  from  indecency;   his youthful visits to the graves of relatives were free of morbidity  and  were natural, like breathing; the four-year-spate  of family  poverty,  resulting  from  Mr.  Code­ rich's resigning his university post, left but  psychically "tiny  marks"; Matthew  at four years of age could not have had  a erection;  before the  age of  six he knew nothing "of the decencies and indecencies of action"; he was merely annoyed  by the birth of a younger brother who would share the family fortune; Matthew  was not really jealous of his grandfather's preference  of Tony. Because of the  purga­ tion of sexuality from Matthew's  world, I looked in vain for  explicit evidence of the family romance,2   which is a predominant feature  in  children's  fantasies. The rich narrative  potential  of such fantasies is undeniable:  the  child imagines  that his present parents  are not his real ones and  that  his real  parents  are aristocratic  or famous;  then again, the child may feel that  he is a  bastard  or that  his siblings are.  The  multiple  motivations  in  this  interpersonal  drama   include  incestuous strivings, revenge, defensive  degradation  of  parents  or  siblings, a  compensatory exaltation  of oneself, and an attempt  to recover an idealized past when the great­ ness of one's real parents went unquestioned.
We may turn next to consider the universal fantasy of the primal scene whereby
the child is a visual or auditive  witness of a seemingly aggressive sadistic father making love to the mother. Derivative traces of this fantasy are of decidedly impli-

42

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

cit nature  in The  Swing  in  the  Garden. Thus  we read  in serial  fashion  about young Matthew fitting himself into the "cockpit"  of the captivating swing, twist­ ing himself inside the heavy velvet curtains  as if they were ancient  robes, or that he, Amanda, and  Tony  shared  the  bedroom which  in late  evening  hours  occa­ sionally assumed the character of a "cockpit."  Closer to home, the three remem­ bered examples  of the  erudite  vocabulary  Mrs.  Goderich  used with  her  son - "investigate," "proboscis,"  "superannuated" -strikingly testify  to  the  oedipal c;verdetermination of Matthew's verbal selection: he himself wanted  to investigate with his proboscis-penis his mother,  thereby establishing the superannuated  con­ dition of his father.  The  wishful intensity for a superannuated father  may also be gauged  by  the  young  Matthew's mispronunciation   (the  novel  revealingly says "misconception") of the brand-new  and  powerful Ford  phaeton,  which sounded like "pah-thigh-on" from the lips of the castrated son.
In  my opinion  two particular  traumatic events marked  Matthew's childhood. The first occurred  at the age of three when Matthew  had  to contend  with a new brother; an alert critic's eye halts on one of the first sentences which Matthew  had memorized verbatim, i.e., the father's  prophetic pronouncement  to his wife, "We're going to  have  a  boy." When  the  time  came  for christening,  Matthew   was  left home with  his grandmother while the rest of the family went  to church.  Put  to bed for a slumber,  Matthew woke sometime later  with  a sudden  start  (why?), was frightened  by the deathly stillness of the house (his own lethal  rage over the birth), got  up and  slipping  on Amanda's skate, tore  his back on  the edge  of a wastebasket.  Upan  being  bandaged,  he was returned  to  bed  in  the  dark  room where we can listen to an  after-account  of his revealing  thoughts:   "I was  emo­ tionally overwrought, the rites of baptism,  the claims of sibling  rivalry  and this stab  in  the  back  all  mixed  together.  I  felt guilty. I  felt  as if  this  wound  were deliberately  self-inflicted."  Feelings of abandonment,  jealousy,  envy,  guilt  and reactive masochism define the anguished  Matthew  and  deposited  their  traces in a  permanent   dorsal  scar,  which  his  mother  unsympathetically   helped  to  turn into a brand:

My mother sometimes used to refer to this memento, not wholly joking, as  the brand of Cain, this perhaps after I'd beaten up on Tony or broken something that belonged to him. And the Biblical reference, once I understood it, infuriated  me. Tony was no Abel, I knew, and I was no Cain.

Thus the shift from a sadistic to a masochistic posture was abetted  by the mother's fratricidal inculpation.
The second trauma came from the hands of Marianne, Mr.  Goderich's restau­
rant employee, who publicly pulled down the pants of the nine-year-old  Matthew and  gave him  his first and  only physical punishment.  Thereafter the crying  boy was filled with  both  rage and  passiocate attraction  toward  her and  even adored

43

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

her.  He  tried  afterwards,  abortively,  to court  more  physical  punishment  from her. In  the analysis of the scene offered by the  novel, Matthew recovered  from this incident  without psychological damage and  purportedly  resolved the previous split in his attitudes between respecting the women of his household and both devaluating  and  mistreating  any others.  I would  suggest  that  he redirected  his hostility from  family female members  to female figures outside  the family  circle so that  now any woman became a maternal  centre  of admiration and  potential threat; in other words, castration  anxiety, submissiveness, and  self-assertion were groping toward  a readjustment involving a disavowal of considerable  fear.
We  have  now  reached  a  vantage  point  where  we  might  summarize   Hugh Hood's impressive achievements: comprehensive vision, verbal genius, expertly organized narrative  structure  and movement, extraordinary dialogue, and astound­ ing  knowledge of literature  and  social history. As a  psychoanalyst,  however,  I would have preferred  that he joined to his memorable  observations of  personality an extensive examination  of intrapersonal  and  interpersonal  conflict.  This  said, we may resort to the psychoanalytic theory of Melanie Klein to clarify the creation of aesthetic beauty in general and Hood's in particular.3
Early infantile psychology for Klein is marked by the passage from the so-called paranoid  position to a depressive one. In the paranoid  position the child's psychic world is dominated  by part  or split objectives, either  ideally  good or thoroughly persecuting. The  child  projects impulses and  parts  of his self outside,  with  the result that  he forms a false picture  of the object,  denies  his own  impulses  and cannot  differentiate  between his self and  the  external  object.  Concomitantly   he fears an attack on his ego by persecutory objects. Guilt exists but only as a simpler impulse, isolated and unintegrated; typical defenses at this time are splitting, idealization, denial, and projective identification  (an  unconscious defence where­ by parts  of the self are  projected  into  the  external  object,  which  then  becomes identified with those projected  parts).
With the depressive position the child attains the stage where he sees people as real persons and also as whole objects being simultaneously good and bad. He introjects  the loved object, which then  forms the  core of an  integrated  ego, yet he continually destroys and fragments with greed and hatred  external  and internal objects. The results are a predominant fear of the loss of the internal and external loved  object;  the  attendant fear  that  fragments  of  the  destroyed  objects  may return as persecutors; and a guilt for his attacks. Then  the memory about  his containment  of the  good loved object along  with  feelings of loss and  guilt  pro­ motes the wish to restore and recreate the lost loved object outside and  inside the ego (such  a wish constitutes the foundation  of later sublimation  and  creativity). If the child doubts  his capacity  to restore the loved object  internally and  extern­ ally, that  object  is experienced  as irretrievably  lost and  the  child's  inner  world becomes one of hopelessness. At which  point, to protect  itself from  total  despair

44

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS


the  ego  resorts  to  man1c defences-omnipotent  control  and   a  regression  to paranoid  defences.
The  wish to create,  rooted  in the depressive position, involves some successful
working  through   of  mourning   over  lost  objects.  Successful  symbol  formation equally dwells in the depressive position. Since naming  a thing  means also losing it and  acknowledging  separateness,  every aspect of an  object  and  situation  for­ saken in  the  developmental   process gives rise to symbol formation.  Within  this context  the  artist  is often  neurotic  (like his readers)   and  may  often  lack  com­ plete objectivity  but  in  two situations  he  exhibits  a  high  sense  of  reality -in relation to his own internal  reality and in relation to the material  of his art.
Out of chaos, loss, and destruction the artist fashions a product  which is whole, unified, and  beautiful.  As Rilke said, however, our difficulty is not to understand beauty but to bear it. Complete  beauty makes one simultaneously  happy and sad. Its seeming  unchangeability expressing the death  drive and  its peacefulness con­ stitute  its terror.  Preeminent  among  human  activities,  art  confronts  death, yet curbs it to the needs of the life drive and  creation. From the fall will spring.
As much as these remarks on life and death might comprise an appropriate conclusion, I feel that  I must add a final note about  my own critical dilemma  in this paper.  I attempted  throughout to analyze within the  boundaries  of the  text and its depiction  of character. At all costs I wanted to avoid completing  the biographical  details of the Goderich  family as given. Yet at  certain  times I  was drawn  to conceiving a creative space of fantasy out of which the characters  were shaped.  My  working  presumption   was that  in  that  creative  space  either  con­ sciously or  unconsciously  the  novel's  dramatis  personae  were  more  completely imagined  and  subsisted in a more coherent line of psychic  development.  Never­ theless the essence of art is selectivity, and so to the extent that  I have poached off bounds,  I  have  will-nilly disregarded  the  artist's  demand  that  he be  judged  on what  he included,  not  excluded.  Have  I  transgressed  into  a  space  where  both fools and  angels fear  to tread?  To apply  my critical  approach to what  I  myself have done, I could examine the very selectivity of my elaborations  in that creative space. In the garden  of criticism the swing never stops.


NOTES

1 In Essays in Canadian  Writing: Hugh Hood's Work in Progress, ed. J. R. Struthers
(Erin, Ontario:  Porcupine's Quill, Winter/Spring  1978-1979),  pp. 187-210.
2 See Freud's essay "Family Romances" in The  Standard  Edition  of the  Complete Psychological Works  of Sigmund  Freud, tr. J. Strachey (London:  Hogarth, 1959), vol. 9, pp. 236-41.
3 For the next four  paragraphs  I am wholly indebted  to the following article  by Hanna Segal, Melanie Klein's principal living commentator:  "A Psycho-Analytical Approach  to  Aesthetics," International  Journal  of  Psycho-Analysis,  33   ( 1952),
196-207.

45

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

Hugh Hood replies:



IT IS  A REMARKABLY VALUABLE EXPERIENCE  for the author­ the artist-to have directed upon his artifact  the disciplined regard of  the skilled psychoanalytic critic, whose special competence will often illuminate aspects of a narrative  structure  which conventional  literary  criticism  will not  detect.  I  have learned  much  from  Mr.  Mahony's  examination   of my  novel,  and  I  am  extra­ ordinarily  pleased that  in many  places he selects for special  attention   precisely those passages which I had intended as high points, special moments of revelation, in the narrative.
I will begin a more specific response to his discussion by saying first that  I have chosen the fundamental family unit, mother, father,  three children,  two boys and a girl, with  four living grandparents in  the  background, because  I  believe that the greatest literature  is built on the examination  of intrafamilial relations, those of mother  to son, father  to daughter,  brother  to sister, or  to  brother,  father  to mother.  One need only think of the great Greek dramatists, or the great  novelists, Tolstoi, Joyce, Proust, to see how these fundamental human  liens form  the  core of literary art. My epic series in its wholeness is a study of the epic journey of the family's knowledge of itself. It is important  to state that  The  Swing in the Garden first presents us with  a family structure  which  seems innocent  and  untroubled, but also one which will be understood  more fully, with hidden  motives and  rela­ tionships more and more fully revealed as the sequence of twelve novels progresses.
In  this first novel, we encounter  the  family  as it  is seen  and  understood  by Matthew  as a child.  There  is deliberate  confusion  of the  persona  of the  adult, forty-five-year-old, narrator, and  his child's vision of four decades earlier.  I  con­ ceive the co-existence of adult and child in my narrator as one of the main  tech­ nical devices of this initiatory  book. The  narrator  understands/does not  under­ stand,  AT  THE  SAME  MOMENT, the  conflicts in his person,  and  those  which  are inter-personal,  in such a way as to allow these  conflicts  to  lurk  just  below the surface  of the narrative.  Matthew  is never certain  exactly  what  his  relationship with his mother or father is. He doubts as much at forty-five as at five that  he will ever solve these motivational  riddles, and at forty-five is just  beginning to be able to  rest content  with  half-knowledge,  rather  than   insisting  on  resolution  of  all conflict.
The  basic family situation is this:  Andrew and  Isabelle, the  parents,  are gifted and  high-spirited  people, richly-endowed  by  nature,   who  are  ardently  in  love with one another,  sexually and spiritually, in what  I have attempted to depict  as one of the  great  human  love affairs.  Their  courtship  is rendered,  I  believe, in Reservoir Ravine, in terrns which  justify this assertion. They  are  peculiarly  for-

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS

tunate  people, even blessed people, to the point of an absorption  in one another which  excludes  the  rest of the  world, the  chief danger  of the  great  love-affair. Their  mutual   absorption  is entrancing  for  them,  but  perhaps  unjust  to  their children.  Matthew, in  particular, has glimpses of a  kind  of sexual and  spiritual Eden  in  which Andrew  and  Isabelle dwell, from  which  he is himself excluded, much  as Cain  and  Abel were excluded from  prelapsarian  Eden.  Matthew  longs to enter  the  private  kingdom  of his parents'  bliss, but  knows that  he can  never do so. He would like to interrupt them, even to come between them, even perhaps to supplant  the father  in  the  relationship,  and  even perhaps  the  mother,  in  an intense and all-absorptive  relation with his father. But these are impossibilities in life as it is socially lived, and  Matthew  forces himself to depart  from  this  lost Eden of perfect understanding; this is signalled in the title, the swing in the garden away from perfect love and  communion  towards the  "long  fall."
In  the  actual  family  situation,  then,  Matthew   constantly  doubts  the  precise nature  of his two parents' feelings for him, from a very early age. He is constantly imagining  their  perfect  union,  with Isabelle as "blushing,  ardent  girl,"  and  this union  is fully given  in  a  later  novel, but  he feels distanced  from  them  by  the intense privacy of their obvious love for one another.
Matthew  therefore suffers from the low-affect, relative coolness of his mother's treatment  of him,  and  seeks a series of substitutes,  Letty  Millen,  Alanna  Begin, l\1arianne  Keogh,  and  develops a strain  of masochism and  a submissive posture towards women whom he admires which will colour his adult  emotional life very deeply. He does not quite  drive his siblings from the  book  (as  Proust's  narrator did Proust's own brother) but some of his later actions have the effect of  alienat­ ing him from his brother  very effectively. Matthew  likes to believe that  he is "his mother's  favourite" but is deeply uncertain  about it. His relation  with  his father is even more problematic, and it is in the analysis of this relation that Mr. Mahony  excels. He finds here the source of the almost torrential  legion of  defences which both  Andrew  and  Matthew  Goderich  erect, "throwing  an  intellectual  structure  over a flux of duration that  cannot  finally be contained." I  have meant  Andrew and  Matthew  to be men who see into things so deeply that  their  need to defend themselves from fragmentation in the "flux of duration" is clearly obsessive and compulsive. The  intellectualizations,  the  categorizings,  the  skill in  dialectic,  the long lists and  roll-calls, the  continual  attempt   at  control,  before  anything  else, all are  brilliantly  picked  out  and  thrown  into  relief by  Mr.  Mahony's  analysis. I should  call  the  passages following the  opening  paragraphs very distinguished psychoanalytic/literary criticism indeed.
The selection of the incident  of the self-inflicted wound in the back, or "brand of Cain,"  and  the  primal  masochistic  scene  of  the  spanking  administered   by Marianne Keogh,  which issues in adoration  of the woman  who punishes, seems to me resoundingly accurate,  as a choice of determinant  indicators of the structure

47

HOOD & PSYCHOANALYSIS


of the  narrator's emotional life. I intended these  two  incidents, with  one  or  two others,  to  be specific  keys to  his development, and   I am  pleased  that   they  have proved  identifiable as such.
Mr.  Mahony's concluding pages,  which  invoke  Melanie Klein's notion  of  the progression  from  the  paranoid to the  depressive  position,  are  not  at  first  imme­ diately  clear  to me,  but  if I judge  them  rightly,  I conclude that  they  justify  the sense, with  which  I have  tried  to imbue  the  novel,  that   joy and  innocence may co-exist in  and  with  terror,  extreme  anxiety,  and  the  sempiternal  fear  of  death. Matthew Goderich is a  happy  child  and  a  driven   "collector,"  terrified  of frag­ mentation and  increasingly  afraid  of dissolution,  AT  THE  SAME  TIME. The  oscilla­
tion, the movement of the swing, is, precisely, the  motion of time  itself.








SJINCTUJIRY
 


Mick Burrs


The accountant  on occasion looks outdoors. Where trees should stand
walls of brick have been planted.
Before his eyes the ruled sheets are laid cold and null as algebra.

When he leaves the office he divorces himself from alleys of dark ice that crust on his boots. His day has now dwindled
to drops of black water
that bleed on the staircase of the building he lives in.

Inside his apartment he begins to see small forests of crystals
sparkling, pencilled into opaque maps, steaming countries to be explored across his windowpanes.

Later, after dinner, he lies down in the dark, and his eyes go, first, outside in,
then up the staircase in his brain
to another door, left open,
where the warm light guides him home again.


ESSAYIST, EDITOR,
& PHYSICIAN
The Career of Sir Andrew Macphail,1864-1938



S. E.D. Shortt


S,.ANDREW  MACPHAIL,  described  iliortly  afte< ru, death
in  I938,  as "the  most eminent  Canadian literary figure of his generation,"1  has
been relegated  to undeserved  obscurity by contemporary  Canada. More surpris­ ing still, is his neglect by the medical profession. In the years separating the fame of Osler  from  that  of Banting  and  Best, Macphail,  as founding  editor  of  the Canadian  Medical  Association  journal, was one of Canada's most  widely known physicians.  His  books  and  essays were  commented   upon  in   newspapers  and periodicals  not only in Canada, but  in  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States  as well. He was in many  respects a twentieth-century  renaissance man,  having  been at various times a school teacher,  journalist, physician, playwright,  eidtor, soldier, author  and  professor. Such  a  remarkable  career did  not  pass unnoticed  by his contemporaries. In  recognition  of his wartime  service  he was knighted  in  I 9 I 8, while his intellectual  achievements  were rewarded  by  membership  in  the Royal Society of Canada, an  honorary  doctorate  from  McGill University,  the  Quebec government  prize for literature  in  I928, and  the prestigious Lorne  Pierce Medal of  the  Royal  Society  of  Canada   for  outstanding  contributions to  literature   in I 930.  In  view  of  these  accomplishments,  the  following  pages  present  a  brief review of Macphail's career and his contributions  to both Canadian literature  and the medical profession.
John Andrew Macphail was born at Orwell, Prince Edward  Island,  in 1864. It was here on the family farm  that  many of his later ideas -a  preference for rural rather  than  urban  life, a respect for  thrift  and  manual  labour,  and  an  absolute insistence on the responsibility of the individual  for his own welfare -took  root. Here, too, his fascination  with  the Bible was encouraged  at  the local  Church  of Scotland  and  he  began  his first explorations  into  literature with  the  works of Swift,  Macaulay, and  Shakespeare.  Despite  his later  affection  for  Orwell,  he soon  realized  that   "the   school  was  the  open  door  of  escape,"   and   in I 88o accepted  a scholarship  to Prince  of Wales College in  Prince  Edward  Island.

49

MACPHAIL

Macphail spent two years at the College studying  languages,  mathematics, and "infantry   foot-drill"  under  a  veteran  of  the  Indian  mutiny.  Following  in his father's  footsteps, he accepted a teaching  appointment at the Fanning  Grammar School in Malpeque.  The teacher he considered primarily  a disciplinarian  whose role was to ensure that natural aptitude  advanced  while those with less ability abandoned  futile academic  pursuits. Two  years of such supervisory work seemed to him dull and  unrewarding,  but he had  accumulated sufficient savings to  con­ tinue his education.  It was in the fall of I885  that  Macphail began  his  life-long association with McGill University.
During  his undergraduate years, formal studies were often  neglected in favour of  voracious  reading.  Arnold,  Ruskin,  Bagehot,   and   Pater   were  among   his favourites  and  Macphail  soon discovered that  "the  danger  of reading  is that  it engenders  the  desire to write."  He  wrote  frequent   reviews and  articles  for  the Montreal   Gazette  and  became  the  accredited   Chicago   Times   correspondent. Though  this compulsion  to write consigned  him  to  "the  large  middle  average" of his class he received a Bachelor of Arts in 1888 and  three years later -despite the fact that, as he phrased it, "even my professional studies were perfunctory" - a medical degree.
Armed  with $I ,200 saved from his journalistic efforts and  a reporting  contract from  an  American  newspaper syndicate,  Macphail embarked  on  a  trip  around the world. Late in 1891, he arrived  in England  to work at the London  Hospital. A year later,  "a  lean and  broken  wretch,"  he  received  the  Membership of the Royal College of Surgeons and the Licentiate of the Royal College of Phycicians. Returning to Montreal  he was appointed  Professor of the  Diseases of Children at Bishop's Medical College in I 893 and in I 895 became a consulting pathologist at the Western and Verdun Hospitals. These appointments, combined with private practice, attracted Macphail's  full attention  for almost  a decade. 2
Already,  however,  he had  begun  to  formulate the  philosophy  which  would
animate   most  of  his subsequent  literary  career.   These  views  were  eventually summarized  in  his "History  of the  Idea  of  Evolution," which  appeared   in  the Dalhousie Review  in 1925, a reworking of an  address  to the  McGill  Biological Society earlier  that  year. Four  years later, a revised version appeared  as "Evolu­ tion and  Life" in the Annals of Medical  History. Finally,  in  I934,  the  Montreal Herald  printed  a synopsis of the argument   under  the  heading,  "I  Believe, This is My Credo,  My Philosophy of Life."3  What  were the essential  elements  in the belief structure?
Macphail's philosophy  was  born  of  what   he  referred  to  as  "the   principle debate of the nineteenth  century," the confrontation between science and  religion. "Those  alone  who  passed through  the  period,"  he  continued,  "can  understand the havoc wrought in the minds of men. The fabric of their dearest belief appeared to be dissolving." By 1905, however, he was convinced that it was generally recog-

so

MACPHAIL


nized that  the conflict had been "a  figment of the theological imagination." The force  behind  this  transformation  was  the  writing  of  Hegel  and   the  German idealists.4   Two highly significant assertions emerged. First, the gradual  process of evolution could be interpreted as a slow, but intentional  act of creation  by God. Secondly,  when  the  motivating  force for  evolution  was  considered  divine,  the process of natural selection  was no longer  a  mere  brutish  struggle,  but  rather, represented  the  survival  of  the  morally  fit. Macphail phrased  this synthesis in the following terms:

Life  is the final expression of the universal Will. That  is the inner meaning of evolution ... Giraffes and  men who tried to live without  conformity to ... that Will, have come to a bad end ... By this universal formula of the emergence of the universal Will, every problem in biology is solved.5

Such was his eclectic view of life. It borrowed heavily from nineteenth-century scientists such as Darwin  and Huxley, from the American  transcendentalist Emer­ son, and from German  idealism filtered through  British thinkers such as Thomas  Carlyle and the theologian,  Edward  Caird.  Nor was this synthesis of  religion and science  unique,  for  William  Henry  Drummond   in  England   or  Henry   Ward Beecher and  Lyman  Abbot  in the  United  States  popularized   the  incorporation of evolution  into  traditional faith.6   What  was  remarkable  was  the  consistency with  which  his social  philosophy  adhered  to  these  underlying  assumptions.  In education,  for example,  the teacher  acted largely as a  disciplinarian  to supervise the natural ascent of the bright  and  the gradual withdrawal of the less talented.  Society as a whole was naturally  arranged  in a  hierarchy  with  the  morally  and intellectually   fit  as  its  leaders  and   the  lower  orders,   according   to  capacity, arranged  below. Efforts at  uplifting these lower orders were misguided, for  their position was in accord with the dictates of  nature, or, as he phrased it, "a species, when true  to itself, however humble,  is admirable." Similarly,  the emancipation of women denied  the role evolution had  allotted  them;  better,  he felt, that  they should  "live  in  subordination to their  essential idea."  The  industrialization  of Canada  was a process which was, for  Macphail,  a rejection  of Canada's natural agrarian  character and  thus  doomed  to failure.  Attempts  to erect  tariff  barriers would similarly fail for ignoring  the  principle  of free  trade  which  allowed each nation to assume its natural economic role. Finally, attempts to sever the Imperial tie, by denying Canada's natural  link with the venerable  British tradition,  would result in the type of political chaos which characterized  the United  States. When­  ever a  nation  or  an  individual  attempted   to  deny  the  role  allotted  by  nature,  disaster was a certain consequence.7
This  philosophy  found   its  way  into  Macphail's attitude  towards  medicine. While at Malpeque he had  resolved, for reasons never made  explicit in personal or published sources and  despite his strong  interest  in  philosophy,  to become  a

MACPHAIL

physician   rather than   a  m1mster.  In   his  own  mind   the  alternatives  were  less distinct  than  might  appear, for  as  he later  wrote,  "religion and  medicine have arisen  out  of the  same  protoplasm." Indeed, medicine was  a  profession  devoted entirely  to the selfless service of man,  the  reward for  which  he  believed  was  per­ sonal  salvation.8     Throughout  his  professional   life,  Macphail   never   ceased  to emphasize  this moral dimension  to the  physician's career.
Success  in  the  practice  of  medicine, as  in  all  human  activities, depended on the degree  to which  the practitioner acted  in harmony with  the  dictates of nature. In  fact,  in most cases, patients  "will  recover  if they  are  left  alone." The  modem emphasis  on specialization and  research  was, therefore, at  odds  with  the  essence of medicine. This  trend  was particularly regrettable in the  medical schools, where,

in these days, when a student  must be converted  into  a physiologist, a physicist, a chemist, a biologist, a pharmacologist  and an electrician,  there is not time to make a physician of him. That  consummation  can only come after  he has gone into  the world  of sickness and  suffering,  unless his  mind  is so  bemused,  his  instincts  so dulled, his sympathy so blunted  by the long process of education  in those sciences, that he is forever excluded from the art of medicine.

Rather than  esoteric  specialization, the  true  physician   relied  on  a  sound  knowl­ edge of anatomy and  an open, honest spirit.  Inevitably, intellect  and  reason would fail where  instinct  alone  would  prevail  for, in  the  final  analysis, "medicine is less a science  than  an  art." In  broader terms,  the  physician's  primary  role  was  to assist nature -a reflection  of the Will-in  healing the infirm. These  views were neither  simplistic  nor  homeopathic; rather, they  grew  from  a  profound, philoso­ phical  commitment to the  principles  of evolutionary  idealism.9




IT WAS   ON  THIS  BASIS that   Macphail continued his medical practice  in  Montreal for a dozen  years in relative  tranquility. But  the  year  1907 proved  to  be one  of change.  The  first  major event  was  his appointment to  the Chair  of the  History  of Medicine at  McGill.  This  position  allowed  him  to  com­ bine a career  in medicine  with the  reading  of philosophy and  history  he found  so essential. Though he remained  in this position  until I 938,  it appears that  in later  years his lectures  were not always well attended and  he himself  wrote, as early  as
1920, that  "the business of being  a professor  has  fallen  sadly." Nevertheless,  the
post was ideally  suited  to his temperament and  interests.10
The  second  significant  event  of I 907 was  Macphail's installation as editor  of the newly founded University Magazine, a quarterly journal of politics and litera­ ture  sponsored  by Dalhousie, McGill,  and  Toronto  Universities. Its  contributors included Rudyard Kipling, several  cabinet  ministers, many  Canadian  academics, and  literary figures  such  as Stephen Leacock  and  Marjorie  Pickthall. Macphail

MACPHAIL


believed the  journal existed to give advice to government and  the reading  public for, while academics  "merely stand  and  watch," it "is only a bystander  who can direct  a game."  Macphail's own frequent  articles and  his strong  editorial  hand seldom  left  doubt  as to  the  magazine's  viewpoint.  Unfortunately,  subscriptions never exceeded  the  I 912 level of s,300, financial  problems  (despite  Macphail's own generous contributions) were always present, and the publisher was never entirely  satisfactory.  The   journal  stopped  publication  in   1920 and   Macphail himself had ceased to edit five years earlier. Yet, as Governor  General  Lord Grey noted,  during  its time  it  was "the  best periodical  published  in  Canada."  And while its circulation  was limited in numbers, its contents were frequently  quoted and  reviewed in London,  Boston, Montreal,  and  Toronto. Though  it  was soon followed by journals such as the Dalhousie Review and the Canadian  Forum, the quality of the University  Magazine  under  Macphail's  editorship  has seldom been surpassed in Canadian academic  publication.11
The  year  1907 was important to Macphail  for yet another  reason:  the  cam­ paign  to found  a  journal  by the  Canadian Medical  Association  at  last  neared success. At  the  annual   meeting  in  Montreal,  Macphail  argued  that  without  a journal to express its views and  record its proceedings the Association would have little impact.  Despite opposing views, the newly adopted  constitution  included  a clause urging the publication  of a journal. At the  191o annual meeting the report of  the  Executive  Council  suggesting  immediate  steps  to  found  a  journal  was adopted  and  Andrew  Macphail was appointed   the  first  editor.  The  Montreal Afedical  journal, of which  Macphail had  been editor  since  I903, was acquired by the  Association and  the  Maritime  Medical  News  agreed  to terminate its 22 years of publication  so as to  allow the new C.M.A.  publication  a  wider  scope. With  a  strong  editor  and  the  elimination  of some  competing   periodicals,  the
]ournal set out  to establish itself as "a  medium  for the expression of all that  is
best in Canadian Medicine."
The   ]ournal  appeared   in  I 91 1, but  the  preceding  year  had  seen  extensive effort  by Macphail and  other  interested  physicians. George  Morang  and  Com­ pany  was chosen as the  publisher  (possibly because he already  published  Mac­ phail's  University   Magazine), the  terms  of  acquiring   the   Montreal   Medical journal  Co. were finalized,  and  goo  initial subscribers  were  secured.  Through­ out  191 I Macphail gave freely of his own time and  held  clerical  expenditures to  a  mere  $125 monthly.  Yet  problems  soon  appeared.  Most  damaging   was the delay in publishing  the first five issues in  1912.  Though Morang  attempted to blame  Macphail, the real difficulty arose from the  publisher's  poor credit  and the  resulting  necessity of  paying  printing  costs  in advance.  Legal  proceedings resulted  in  a  C.M.A.   victory,  but  Morang's  precarious  finances  continued   to cause the Journal  problems. The  publisher apparently  appropriated subscription fees to which he was not entitled  and  refused to issue reprints as the expense was


53

MACPHAIL

not  mentioned  in  the  contract.  More  serious  was  the  publisher's  irresponsible control of advertising. Though  the contract  prohibited  the inclusion of  advertise­ ments which would  not be appropriate for  "a  high  class medical  journal"  such as the British Medical  journal or the  journal of  the  American Medical  Associa­ tion,  Morang  exercised an  arbitrary  selection.  He  "refused  to  withdrew  a  full page advertisement  of an  alleged remedy for  diabetes  ...  manufactured ... in Winnipeg, and  widely advertised in the lay press." The A.M.A.  had investigated the compound  and  advised the C.M.A.  that  it was simply "an  aqueous  solution of  plant   extractives  with  a  small  amount   of   sodium   salicylate   and   sodium chloride."  Apparently,  because  the  product  was  advertised  in  the  Lancet,  the C.M.A.  was unable  legally to force its exclusion.
Despite these initial difficulties, as well as a dispute with the influential Toronto Academy  of Medicine  concerning  one of Macphail's editorials  which  criticized their  membership  policies, the C.M.A.]. rapidly  established  itself. In  1913,  for the  first time,  the  journal showed  a  profit-$214.97-sufficient  to  liquidate the  previous deficit. Subscriptions increased  by 6o  per  cent  over the  191 1 level
and accounted  for about  Ys of Canada's 7,500 physicians. Finally, Macphail was
in the enviable  position of having to refuse many  contributions because of a lack of space-a situation  which suggested to the optimistic  Executive  Council  that "a  fortnightly  or weekly journal is indicated." Unfortunately, with  the outbreak of the  First  World  War,  Macphail's forceful  and  aggressive editorship  came  to an end.  Yet in the  first half decade  of its existence he  had  guided  the  ]ournal through  a  variety  of difficulties to  which  a  less experienced  editor  might  well have succumbed.12
Macphail spent the war years in Europe  with the Sixth  Field Ambulance  and served with  distinction  at  a  number  of battles  including  Vimy  Ridge.  How  he secured an overseas posting at the age of so, after an initial commission as an equestrian  instructor in Canada, remains obscure. But many of his cherished nineteenth-century beliefs must  have been left, along  with  the  body of his close friend, the poet John  McCrae,  in the muddy  fields of France.  Though he seldom wrote of personal matters, glimpses of Macphail's own experience  can  be gained from his history of the military medical services. He quotes with an appreciation doubtless  born  of shared  misery, the  words from  a  Canadian medical  officer's diary in 19 15 :

October  28 -Cold rain, so cold and  so wetting;  the  earth  is turned  to  black grease. November 3 ... 75 patients were admitted,  not sick, but exhausted and in the last extreme of misery; ... November 7-A  whole battalion  went sick and was withdrawn; five days is more than men can endure.

From  Val  Cartier  Camp  in  Canada   to  the  front  lines, ram  and  mud  defined army life.

54

MACPHAIL


The  traditional  ravages   of  troops   at   war-typhoid,    dysentery,   lice,   and venereal diseases -were  joined by newer maladies -shell shock and  poison gas. The  former   Macphail viewed  with  distinct  suspicion,  sensing  many  malingerers for every legitimate case. But trauma remained the  primary concern.
Twelve surgeons worked  by day and twelve by night  at twelve tables. The  supply of cases never ended ... At the height of the action, the officer in command  worked
72 hours without  sleep... .

Under constant threat of  shelling  and  often  evacuated at  the  last  minute, the "field  ambulance service  was  a  dangerous one,"   Macphail asserted,   and   their members accounted for a portion  of the casualties. And  casualties were staggering. At  Passchendaele, 3,130  Canadians were  killed,  12,076  wounded and  947  went missing.  While  only  I 1 ·4  per  cent  of the  Canadian  wounded  (themselves 34·59 per cent of all  troops)  died  of their  wounds,  the  carnage and  pain  were  almost indescribable. In  fact,  Macphail concluded, "It  became atrocious and  had  best not  be  spoken   of  even  in  a  history  of  military   medicine.ms Such  scenes  must surely  have  had  a  profound influence  on  Macphail and   his  view  of  the  world.
Seen  from  this  perspective, it  is not  surprising   that   when   he  returned from
Europe in  1918,  at  the  age  of  54,  it  was  to  a  world  with  which   he  no  longer seemed  at  ease.  Certainly, his literary  efforts  continued and  included his  contro­ versial  and   critical study  of  the  Canadian forces  medical  services  which   con­ demned the  minister  of  militia,  Sir  Sam  Hughes,  as  well as  his  devastating but internationally acclaimed collection  of  biographies, including  that of  Lawrence of Arabia.14 But his editorial days were over.  Except  for a well  publicized  trip  to Russia  (where the  orderliness of collective farming and  absence of industrial dis­ putes  impressed   him), his time  was spent  in  Montreal  teaching medical   history or  reading Orwell, writing, and  musing.  Much of   this  musing   seems  to  have focused  on  the  decline  of western  civilization  after  the  Great   War. "The World  does seem  different," he  complained to  a  friend  in  1926,  adding later   that   "a great  epoch  has as usual  ended  in disaster.mUniversities were  becoming Ameri­ canized  and  technical; literary standards declined; the  British  Empire-an insti­ tution   dear   to  Macphail-was  ''crashing into  the  abyss  of  chaos";  economic liberalism was  in disrepute;  and   democracy, as  he  had   always  predicted, had  proven  itself  unable to deal  with  modern political  complexities. With  his  values obsolete  and  his society  apparently decaying,  he concluded: "The social  fabric is falling. The old are left in gloomy  isolation.m6  Yet  Macphail is more  fortunate than  many of his generation. For  his contributions to Canadian literature and  to the medical  profession, history  will rescue him from  the  isolation  he so disliked.

NOTES
1 J. A. Stevenson, "Sir Andrew Macphail," Canadian Defence  Quarterly,  16 ( 1939), p. 210. Other useful assessments include:   Pelham  Edgar,  "Sir  Andrew  Macphail,

55

MACPHAIL

I864-I938," Proceedings and Transactions  of the  Royal  Society  of Canada,  Series
3, vol.  33  ( I938)   I47-49, and  "Sir   Andrew Macphail,"  Queen's  Quarterly,  54 (I947), 8-22;   Stephen  Leacock,   "Andrew  Macphail,"  Queen's   Quarterly,   45
'( I938), 445-52;  Archibald MacMechan, "Andrew Macphail,"  in  J. W.  Cunliffe
and  A.  H.  Thorndike, eds.,  The  Warner   Library:  The   World's   Best  Literature
(New York: Warner Library, 1917);  C. F. Martin, "Andrew  Macphail," Canadian
Medical  Association Journal, 39 (1938),  508-09.
2 A more  detailed review  of  Macphail's literary career may  be  found   in  S.  E.  D. Shortt, The  Search  for An Ideal: Six Canadian  Intellectuals  and their Convictions in  an  Age  of Transition, 1890-1930   (Toronto:   Univ. of  Toronto Press,   I976), Chapter 2.  Biographical details  are  from  Andrew Macphail, The   Master's  Wife (Montreal:  privately printed, 1939).
3 Andrew Macphail, "A  History   of  the  Idea   of  Evolution," Dalhousie  Review,  5 ( 1925),  22-32; "Evolution and  Life,"  Annals  of Medical  History,  New  Series,  I (I929), 553-61:  "I Believe, This  is My Credo, My  Philosophy of Life," Montreal Herald  ( 10 December 1934).
4  These  concepts are explicit  in "A History  of the Idea of Evolution"; "John Wesley" in Essays in  Puritanism  (Boston  and  New  York: Houghton Mifflin,  pp.  275-339; "The Attainment of Consideration," British Medical  Journal,  2 (1902),   I6I2-I4; "Women in Democracy," University Magazine, 19 ( 1920),  1-14.
3 "A History  of the Idea  of Evolution," p. 30.
6  Walter Houghton, The  Victorian Frame of Mind, 1830-1870   (New  Haven and London: Yale  Univ. Press, 1957),  pp.  36-38, 144-54;  Richard  Hofstadter,  Social Darwinism  in  American  Thought, rev.  ed.   (Boston:  Beacon,   1967),  pp.  24-30; Paul  Boller,  American Thought in Transition: The  Impact  of Evolutionary Naturalism, 1865-1900  (Chicago: Rand  McNally, 1969),  pp.  22-46.
7  See The  Search  for an Ideal, chapter 2,  section  III.
8  See  Andrew Macphail, "The  Education of  Graduates,"  Manuscript in  the  Sir Andrew Macphail  Papers  privately   held  in  Montreal; and   "The  Attainment of Consideration."
9 Andrew Macphail, "The Medical Student," Manuscript in  the  Sir  Andrew  Mac­
phail  Papers; "The Healing of a Wound," Canadian  Medical  Association Journal,
30 ( 1934),  669-74;  "An  Address  on the Sources  of  Modern  Medicine," Canadian Medical  Association  Journal, 28 (1933),  239-46;  and  "The  Attainment of  Con­ sideration."
111 E.  A.  Collard, "Voices   from   the   Past,"  McGill   News,  53   (I972),  25;  Public
Archives  of Canada, Sir Arthur Currie Papers,  Alexander Macphail to Currie  (27
May  1920), containing a letter  from  Andrew Macphail dated 24 May  1920.
n For  a more detailed account see The  Search  for an Ideal, pp. 16-19.
12  Information on  Macphail's role  in  the  early  years  of  the  C.M.A.J. is taken  from The  Canadian  Medical  Association  Minute   Book  General  Meetings, 1907-1925 and  The  Canadian  Medical  Association, Minutes Executive  Council,  1908-1927, both  of which  are  located  in  the  Archives  of  the  Canadian  Medical Association, Ottawa. See also H. E. MacDermot, History of the Canadian  Medical  Association,
1867-1921  (Toronto: Murray Printing Co.), 1935.
13 Andrew Macphail, Official  History  of the  Canadian   Forces in  the  Great  War,
1914-19:  The   Medical  Services  (Ottawa:  King's Printer, 1925),  pp.  55-56,  91, IOI, 105, 136.

MACPHAIL


14 The  Medical  Services; Three  Persons (London: John  Murray, 1929).
15 Dalhousie University Archives,  Archibald McKeller MacMechan  Papers,  Andrew Macphail to  MacMechan (4  April  1926); Andrew  Macphail, "The  Immigrant," University  Magazine,  19  ( 1920), 133-62.
16 Sir  Arthur Currie Papers, Alexander Macphail to Currie  ( 2 7 May  1920) ;  Mac­ Mechan Papers, Macphail to MacMechan (23 January 1923); Andrew  Macphail, "John McCrae: An Essay in Character," in John  McCrae, In  Flanders Fields and Other  Poems  (Toronto: William  Briggs, 1919), p. 86;  "Women in  Democracy"; Macphail  Papers, Macphail  to  Lord   Beaverbrook  ( 23  October  1930) ;  Andrew  Macphail, "Art in Democracy," Dalhousie Review, 4  ( 1924), I 72-80.






Selected Bibliography of Works by Sir Andrew Macphail


Essays in Fallacy  (New  York  &  London:  Longmans, Green, 19 10) .
Essays in Politics  (London:  Longmans, Green, 1909).
Essays in Puritanism (Boston &  New  York: Houghton Mifflin,  1905).
Official  History   of the  Canadian   Forces  in  the   Great  War,   1914-19:  The   Medical   Services
(Ottawa: King's Printer, 1925).
The  Bible in Scotland   (London: John Murray, 1931).
The  Book of Sorrows  (London: Oxford Univ.  Press,  1916).
The Land, a Play of Character  (Montreal:  University Magazine, 1914).
The Master's  Wife (Montreal:  Jeffrey Macphail & Dorothy Lindsay, 1939).
The  Vine  of Sibmah: A Relation of the  Puritans  (London & New  York: Macmillan, 1906).
Three Persons  (London: John Murray, 1929).
"A  History of  the  Idea of Evolution," Dalhousie  Review, 5, no.  1 ( 1925), 22-32.
"An  Address on   the   Sources  of  Modern  Medicine,"  Canadian   Medical   Association   Journal,
28, no. 3  ( 1933), 239-46.
"An  Ambulance in Rest," University Magazine, 16, no. 3  (1917), 330-37.
"An  Obverse View  of Education," University  Magazine, 9, no.  2 ( 1910), 192-204. "As  Others See  Us," University Magazine, 9, no. 2  ( 1910), 165-75.
"A  Voice  from  the  East," University Magazine, 9, no. 4  ( 1910), 517-23.
"British Diplomacy and  Canada," University Magazine, 2, no. 2  ( 1909), 188-214. "Canadian Writers and  American  Politics," University Magazine, 9, no. 1  ( 191 o), 3-17. "Certain Varieties of the  Apples of Sodom," University Magazine, 10, no.  1  ( 191 1), 30-46. "Confiscatory Legislation," University Magazine, 10, no. 2 ( 1911), 192-206.
"Consequences and Penalties," University Magazine, 13, no. 2 ( 1914), 167-77.
"Conservative-Liberal-Socialist," University of Toronto Quarterly, 3, no. 3  (1933-4), 263-85. "Evolution and Life," Annals  of Medical  History, New Series,   1, no. 5  ( 1929), 553-61. "Family and  Society," Quarterly Review, 268,  no. 532  ( 1937), 214-24.
"Greek Medicine," Queen's Quarterly, 43, no.  1  ( 1936), 25-37·

57

MACPHAIL

"New  Lamps  for Old," University  Magazine, 8, no. 1  ( 1908),  18-35.
"On  Certain Aspects of Feminism,"  University  Magazine, 13, no. 1 ( 1914), 79-91. "Oxford and  Working-Class  Education," University  Magazine, 9 no. 1  ( 191 o), g6-so. "Patriotism and  Politics,"  University  Magazine, 13, no.  1  ( 1914),  1-11.
"Sir  Gilbert   Parker:  An  Appraisal,"  Proceedings  and  Transactions  of  the   Royal   Society   of
Canada, Series g, vol. 33, sect. 2 ( 1939), 123-36.
"Sir  William  Dawson," McGill  University Magazine, 5, no.  1  (1905),  12-29.
"The Atlantic Provinces  in the  Dominion: Introduction," Canada  and  Its  Provinces,  Vol.   13, ed. Adam Shortt and  A. G. Doughty   (Toronto: Glasgow,  Brook, 1914-17), 3-12.
"The Attainment of Consideration," British  Medical  Journal, 15  November  1902,  pp.  1612-15. "The Cleansing of the Slate," University Magazine, 10, no. 2  ( 1911),  183-91.
"The Conservative," University  Magazine, 18, no. 4 ( 1919), 419-43. "The Day of Wrath," University  Magazine, 13, no. 3 ( 1914), 344-58.
"The Dominion  and  the Provinces," University Magazine, 12, no. 4 ( 1913), sso-66. "The Dominion  and  the Spirit," University Magazine, 7, no. 1 ( 1908), 10-24.
''The Healing of a Wound," Canadian  Medical  Association  journal, go, no. 6 ( 1934), 669-74. "The Immigrant," University  Magazine, 19, no. 2 ( 1920), 133-62.
"The New Theology," University  Magazine, g, no. 4 ( 1910), 683-97. "The Old  School,"  Saturday  Night, 53, no. 9 (I 938), 5·
"The Patience  of England," University Magazine,  6, no. 3 ( I 907), 28 I -go.
"The Reading  of History," Canadian  Medical  Association  Journal, 29, no. 6 (I 933), 664-71. "The Women of Leningrad," Saturday  Night, 50, no. 42  (I935), I, 3·
"Unto the Church," University  Magazine, 12, no. 2 ( 1913), 348-64.
"Val  Cartier Camp," University  Magazine, 13, no. 3 ( 1914), 360-72. "What Canada Can Do,"  University  Magazine, 6, no. 4  ( 1907), 397-411. "WomeninDemocracy," University  Magazine, 1g,no.  1 (1920), 1-14
"History of  Prince  Edward Island," in  Canada  and  Its  Provinces,  Vol.   13,  ed.  Adam  Shortt and  A. G. Doughty (Toronto: Glasgow,  Brook, 1914-17), 305-75·
"John McCrae: An Essay in Character," in John  McCrae, In  Flanders  Fields and  Other  Poemj
(Toronto: William  Briggs, 1919), 47-141.
"Loyalty-to What?" University  Magazine, 6, no. 2 ( 1907), 142-51.






JIRT OBJECTS FOR JIN INNER LJINDSCJIPE:

douglas barbour

bare prairie
the wheat everywhere a rich gold sky cloudless & pristine  blue

there  is a promise  here
& here    emerges from  the horizon a skywriter

sa

POEM

there  is no one watching
within  range  of our monitoring systems


the plane -no
man 	spread  eagled &
 


floating


with such ease seems not to notice he turns gracefully &
begins to spell out his message

it says:
full  moon 	hangs above  the city



pare away 	pare away
 of the living
of the dead


moon
 yr false seeming

orange

or white
 
hangs

(where i put it)
 
caught

in the telephone wires caught in the branches

perception is not understanding
is not




VISIOn
 pare  away

the living

at least can see it


moon

full
 
quiet

glowing     above


the places of men

59


CONSERVATION, TECHNOLOGY, & THE IDEA OF PROGRESS


Thomas R. Berger




IN r637, DESCARTES PREDICTED that man's reawn and knowl­ edge would enable  us "to  render  ourselves the  lords  and  possessors of  nature." The  advance  of science and  technology has  brought  us very  close to  achieving
this. In fact,  we tend  to think of the history of the last  400 years as the  history of the  triumph   throughout   the  world  of  Western  science  and  technology;  we regard our world as an industrial world -one conceived by science and  built  by technology. We used to think that the changes wrought  by science and  technology would be altogether  benign, that science and technology could provide the means to abolish human  misery. For many, this is still the secular  faith  of our  time. In recent years, however, another  view has begun  to  take  hold :  that  the  advance of science and technology -especially large-scale technology -may entail social, economic,  and  environmental   consequences  whose  cost  may  be  enormous  and which may condition,  or even severely limit, the choices open to us in the future.
The pace of change, and the costs that it entails, are only now beginning  to be understood in the industrialized nations. In North America the metropolis's requirement  for energy and  resources-energy and  resources now being sought at  the  frontier  and  beyond-are bringing  industrial   activity  to  communities which may  not  be able  to cope wtih  the impact.  Often  these communities  are Native  communities,  our  own  Third  World.  In  Canada, the  recent  clashes of culture  and  of values between the dominant  society and  the  Native  peoples are forcing a reconsideration  by Canadians  of the assumptions  by which we live and of the means by which we hope to prosper.
Industrialism  is not only a creator of wealth, but also a shatterer  of established social systems and a powerful instrument  of control in the new social systems that it gives rise to. Its attraction  lies not only in the affluence it promises, but  also in the freedom  it offers from the constraints  imposed  by  nature  and  tradition.  Its emphasis on material  values and the challenge it presents  to an ethically-oriented idea of society have led many  to oppose its proliferation. These  include  conser­ vationists, educators,  and  clergy, who may nowadays  be found  engaged  in  the

6o

CONSERVATION & TECHNOLOGY

struggle  to preserve  heritage  buildings, environmental  values, and  the  rights of
Native peoples-all  possibly threatened  by the advance  of industrial  man.
Two ways of looking at the world are in conflict; indeed, they have always been. Throughout the  New World,  since the  time of Cortez  and  Pizarro,  men  have sought wealth at the frontier, wealth to enrich the metropolis. Ever since the days of New Spain, men have wished for another Montezuma's treasure, another Atahualpa to be ransomed. The drive to extract the wealth of the New World continues today. But now it is intensified by the instrumentalities of modem industrialism.  In  a speech that  he gave in August  rg8o, John  Armstrong,  chair­ man  of Imperial  Oil, said : "The  Canadian oil industry  should  be  moving into our  most promising  Atlantic  and  Arctic  properties like an  army  of  occupation." The language  Mr. Armstrong  chose epitomizes a value judgment about the future and  the  predominant  place  of  large-scale,  capital-intensive  technology  in  that future.  In  fact,  his preferences are  widely shared.  Our  notions of progress have acquired  a technological and industrial  definition.
But there has always been another  strain  running  through  our  attitude  toward the land and its resources. It is exemplified by the members of the first European settlement  in  North  America  (north  of Florida)-the  Frenchmen   who  estab­ lished Port Royal on the Bay of Fundy in  r6o5. One of them, Marc Lescarbot, a lawyer from  Paris, wrote in his diary:

farming must be our goal. That is the first mine for which we must search. And it is better worth than  the treasures of  Atahualpa for whoso has corn, wine, cattle, linen, cloth, leather, iron and lastly, codfish, need have naught to do with treasure.

It is not surprising  that  these settlers-who came to be known as the Acadians
-had  the most harmonious  relations of any European  settlers with  the  Native peoples of North  America.  The  view of man's  occupation  of the  land  that  they exemplified is one which has an increasing number of adherents  today in Canada.
The history of North America is the history of the frontier, of pushing back the wilderness, cultivating  the  soil, populating  the  land  and  building  an  industrial way of life. The conquest of the frontier in North America is a remarkable  episode in  human   history;  it  altered  the  face  of the  continent.  The  achievement   was prodigious:   transportation systems were evolved, cities founded,  commerce  ex­ panded,  and  an industrial  way of life established. The  superabundance of  land, forest and  minerals  gave rise to a conviction  that  the continent's  resources  were inexhaustible.
Thus, in North  America  a particular  idea of progress has become fixed in our consciousness;  but  there  is also  a  strong  identification  with  the  values  of  the wilderness and  of the land  itself, a deeply-felt concern for  the  environment.   In Canada, this concern goes back a long way. It was John  A. Macdonald who, in r885, the very year that  the construction  of the C.P.R.  was completed,  brought

CONSERVATION & TECHNOLOGY

a bill before the House of Commons  to establish Rocky Mountain  (now  Banff) National  Park,  Canada's first national  park.  In  recent  years, we have seen the growth  of ecological awareness, a growing  concern  for  wilderness and  wildlife, and  environmental legislation that  parallels -although  it does not match-the increasing  power of our  technology, the  consumption  of natural resources, and the impact  of rapid  change.
The Canadian identity is intimately connected  with the idea of wilderness. Our literature,  not to mention our art, is permeated  by a fascination  with the frontier, a dread  of what lies beyond it and,  in recent years, a desire to grasp  the oppor­ tunities it presents. Now, not only against the backdrop  of the Canadian  wilder­ ness, but also in its midst, there is a struggle  to affirm an  ethic  of  conservation, and to establish a redoubt of sanity in a world that sometimes seems wholly com­ mitted to fulfilling Descartes' prophecy.




LET ME  BE  CLEAR   ABOUT THE  IMPORTANCE that  I accord  to environmental  values. I do not urge that we seek to turn  back the clock, to return in some way  to nature,  or even  to deplore,  in  a  high-minded and  sentimental manner, the real achievements of the industrial system. Rather, I suggest that environmental  values constitute an invaluable  aspect of modern-day  life:  its preservation is a contribution  to, not a repudiation of, the civilization upon which we depend.
Of course, it may be said, this is all very well in  the case of urban  amenities, recreation  areas,  camp  grounds, and  our  national   parks.  But  of  what  use is a far-off landscape  or seascape which  urban  dwellers may never see? Why  should it matter  to the urbanite  whether  or not the  Porcupine  caribou  herd  still makes its annual  journey to the Arctic coast, whether or not the white whales abounding in Canadian waters along the Arctic Coast and Hudson  Bay maintain  their present numbers,  and  whether  or  not  the  snow  geese still  feed  on  the  islands  of  the Arctic archipelago?  I think it matters  because wilderness and  wildlife are  essen­ tial to mankind's  sense of order in the universe. They affirm a deeply felt  need to comprehend  the wholeness of nature  and  of life. They  offer serenity  and  peace of mind. As Wallace Stegner wrote:

Without any remaining wilderness we are committed -to  a headlong drive into our  technological termite-life, the Brave New World of a  completely  man-con­ trolled environment -We  need that  wild country -[as]  part  of the  geography of hope.

Wilderness implies a remote landscape  and  the presence of wildlife. There  are species that,  because of their intolerance  of man  or their  need for large areas of

CONSERVATION & TECHNOLOGY

land, can survive only in the wilderness. Such are caribou,  wolf and  grizzly bear, which  require  wilderness  to  protect  the  integrity  of  their  populations  and   to preserve their habitat. Other  species conjure  up visions of wilderness; there  can­ not be a Canadian anywhere  who does not think of wilderness on hearing the call of a loon or of migrating  geese. Then  there are the rare  and  endangered  species that do not inherently  require a wilderness habitat,  but, because they are tolerant of man,  have  been  driven  close to extinction.  The  peregrine  falcon,  trumpeter swan, and whooping crane are well-known examples of species that  are abundant (if abundant at  all)  only in wilderness areas.  You do not  have  to be  a fervent environmentalist  to  hope  that  the  process of adaptation and  evolution  through millenia of each of these species should  not be ended,  that  we  should  not allow their extinction  if it can be prevented.
We think of the city, of the metropolis, as the mirror of progress. So we in the industrialized  nations consider that  the model of economic development  that  our own experience  represents is the only one to which Third  World  countries ought to aspire. But such  a model invariably  requires  an emphasis  on large-scale  cen­ tralized  technology  at  the expense of traditional  values and  local self-sufficiency. Usually,  though   not  invariably,  such  a  model  emphasizes  the  development  of non-renewable   resources   (in   this  sense,  even  hydro-electric   projects,  though generating  a renewable  resource, may entail the inundation  of  whole river valleys and the renewable  resources they contain) .
In   many  countries,   where  there  has  been  undue   policy  emphasis  on  the non-renewable resource sector, unhealthy dependence on that sector results, with corresponding  losses in the renewable resource sector. Iran  under  the Shah,  and Nigeria today,  are examples  of regimes where concentration  on development  in oil and gas has led to a loss of self-sufficiency in agriculture.  The same results can occur of course when  agricultural development  is seen as essentially a means  of obtaining cash crops, and  the need to feed a nation's  people is neglected. Indeed it is alarming how  many  Third   World  countries  have  followed  this  path  and now find themselves utterly dependent on the fluctuations of world commodity markets  while at the same time they are unable  to supply their own basic  nutri­ tional requirements.
In  Canada our  policy has  been one of expanding  our  industrial  machine  to the limit of our country's  frontiers. It is natural  for us to think  of developing the frontier,  of subduing  the land,  populating  it with people from  the metropolitan centres, and extracting its resources to fuel our industry  and  heat our homes. We have never had  to consider the uses of restraint. The  question that  we and  many other  countries  face is this:  are  we serious people, willing and  able  to make  up our own minds, or are we simply driven, by technology and  egregious patterns  of consumption,  to  deplete  our  resources wherever  and  whenever  we find  them? Can  we-and  others-turn away from  this monolithic  economic mode?

6g

CONSERVATION & TECHNOLOGY

Since the  Industrial Revolution,  we have  thought  of  industrialization as  the engine of prosperity and  the means to material  well-being. As so it has been, to many people, and to many parts of the world. But the rise of the industrial  system has been accompanied by a belief in an ever-expanding cycle of growth  and consumption.  We should  now be asking  whether  it  is a  goal  that  will suffice. Ought  we and our children to continue to aspire to the idea of unlimited  growth? And, equally important, ought the Third  World  to aspire to this goal?
This belief in an ever-expanding  cycle of growth  and  consumption  conditions our capacity  and  our  willingness to reconsider, or even to contemplate, the  true goals of the industrial system. There is a feeling that  we cannot  pause to consider where we are headed,  for fear of what  we shall find out  about  ourselves. Yet, if anything  is plain,  it is that  we in North  America  will have  to get along  with  a smaller  proportion   of  the  world's  energy  and  resources.  This  entails  a  recon­ sideration  of conventional  wisdom, for we have  conditioned  ourselves to  believe that  the  onward   march  of  industry  and  technology  cannot   and  must   not  be impeded or diverted.
I am  not urging  that  we dismantle  the industrial  system. But  we must  pause, and consider to what  extent our national  objectives are  determined  by the  need for the care and feeding of the industrial  machine.  Our  inability  to contemplate
-even  during   the  current  recession, unprecedented  since  the  Second  World War in its severity -an economic future that  is not a counterpart of our experi­ ence of the  last  35  years, has  altogether  disarmed   us, leaving  us  without  the slightest intellectual  equipment  with which to grapple  with adversity.
The  issues are profound  ones, going beyond the ideological  C<?nflicts that  have occupied the world for so long-conflicts over who was going to run  the indus­ trial machine,  and  who was going to get the  benefits. Now  we should  ask our­ selves, how much  energy does it take to run  the industrial  machine, where does the energy come from,  where  is the machine  going,  and  what  happens  to  the people who live in its path?
Even our terminology has become eccentric. Those who seek to conserve the environment  and traditional  values are often regarded  as radicals, and  those who are undertaking  radical interventions in the natural world that  threaten  the future of existing communities  think of themselves as conservatives.
The  arguments   between  industrialists  and  environmentalists  are  often  con­
ducted  at the top of their voices. Those on each side have strong  convictions, on the one hand  about  the future  of industrial  man,  on the other  about  the world's environment.  For  the one side, the  advance  of industry  and  technology  to  the margins of the globe represents a kind of manifest destiny for Western man, while for the other  it represents an  unacceptable  threat  to the  future  of the  biosphere itself.

CONSERVATION & TECHNOLOGY

Lus THE DEBATE ABOUT THE  FUTURE often  tends to become a barren  exchange of epithets. But we do not face  a choice  between  unrestrained
growth  and  consumption on the one hand  and  stagnation on the  other  hand. To reject  the  philosophy of  endless  and   unlimited growth   does  not  mean   that   we must choose scarcity  and  reject  abundance.
I am  not  a  partisan of either  view. I urge  that  we adopt a  policy  of  rational
and  orderly  development. The  implications of unrestrained growth  and  expansion are  becoming apparent.  Examples of the  pervasiveness  of large-scale technology and  marketing out  of  control   can  be seen  everywhere:  tankers   cracking up  on the  beaches; infant formula being  peddled  indiscriminately in the  Third World; the  continuing destruction of the  rain  forest  of the  Amazon; the  mining  of soils in many  countries. The  oil blowout  at  Ixtoc  1 in the  Gulf  of Mexico,  which  ran uncontrolled from  June 1979  until  February 198o,  and   the  loss of  the  Ocean Ranger in  February 1982,  have  reminded us that  enthusiasm for  untried  tech­ nology may  outrun present  scientific  and  engineering knowledge.
The  vital  agency  of change throughout the  world  is industrial man.  He  and his  technology, armed  with   immense   political   and   administrative  power   and prepared to  transform the  social  and  natural landscape in  the  interest  of  a  par­ ticular kind of society and  economy,  have a way of becoming  pervasive. Industrial man  is equally  the creature of East and  West. And of the Third World too:  many  of the governments of the Third World  share  our commitment to endless growth, even though they may have no real prospect  of achieving it. And this is so whether they  purport to share  the ideology of the West or call themselves  Marxist.
Can  the nations of the Third World  achieve  the levels of growth  and consump­ tion  that  have  been  achieved   by  the  industrialized countries? If they  cannot­ if the  consumption of natural resources  at  a rate  necessary  to enable  them  to  do so  (not  to  mention the  concomitant increase  in  pollution)  is  not  possible  in  a practical sense-then what? We  have  been  unwilling  to  face  up  to  the  moral  and  ethical  questions that  this  would  raise for all of us.
Our   ideas  are  still  the  ideas  of  the  mid-nineteenth century:  the  era  of  the triumph of  liberal   capitalism and  the  challenge of  Marxism, the  era  of  Adam Smith  and  the  Communist Manifesto. Both  of these  creeds  are  the  offspring   of the  Industrial Revolution. Of  course,  our  traditions of democracy and  due  pro­ cess,  and   our   willingness   to  allow  the   market  to  determine  many  important economic choices,   distinguish  the   industrialized  democracies from   the   Soviet Union  and  its empire. Nevertheless,  capitalism (I include under this  heading all the  regimes  of  the  industrialized  democracies, as variants on  the  capitalist eco­ nomic  model)  and  communism constitute two  forms  of  materialism competing for the  allegiance of men  in the  world  today.  Neither  has yet come  to grips  with the   necessity  for   rethinking  the   goals   of  the   industrial   system.   As  Dr.   Ian

6s

CONSERVATION & TECHNOLOGY


McTaggart-Gowan observed in an address  he gave in 1975  to the Pacific Sciences
Congress:

Is the only way to improve the lot of a country's  citizens the way of  industrializa­ tion, whether it be the western way or the forced march of the U.S.S.R.? ... Almost inevitably, diversity is sacrificed to a spurious efficiency. The loss of diversity is not merely a matter  for sentimental  regret.  It  is a direct  reduction  in the  number  of opportunities open to future  generations.
As we look toward  the end of the  twentieth  century  ... we see ... this diversity threatened  by dominant  society pursuing goals that,  though  they have produced  a rich material  culture,  are already eroding  the sources of their  original  stimulus.

We  should   not  draw   the  wrong  conclusions.   We  cannot  return  to  Auburn, there  to live without industry  and  technology. It is rather the  rational application of industry and  technology  that  we must  pursue: an  order  based  on  the  human scale and  directed  to human needs. If we are  to  do  this  we shall  have  to  recon­ sider our  belief in an  ever-expanding cycle of growth and  consumption.  It  is not only  we in  the  industrial democracies who  are  being  urged   to  do  so.  In  1975,  before  he  was  expelled  from  the  Soviet  Union,  Alexander  Solzhenitsyn, in  his "Letter to the Soviet  Leaders," reminded them  of

what  any village graybeard  in the Ukraine  or Russian  had  understood  from  time immemorial  and  could have explained  to the  progressive commentators ages ago, had the commentators  ever found  the time in that  dizzy fever of theirs  to consult him:  that  a dozen worms can't  go on and  on gnawing  at  the same apple  forever, that  if the earth  is a  finite- object,  then  its expanses and  resources are  finite  also, and the endless infinite progress dinned  into our heads  by the dreamers  of the Enlightenment cannot be accomplished on it.

He went on:

We have squandered  our resources foolishly without  so much  as a backward glance, sapped  our  soil, mutilated  our  vast expanses with  idiotic  "inland seas" and  con­ taminated  belts of wasteland around  our industrial  centres-but for the moment,  at least, far more remains untainted  by us, which we haven't  had  time to touch. So let us come to our senses in time, let us change our course.

Solzhenitsyn's plea was not well received.  The  Soviet  Union is now  embarking on  a  civil  engineering project  more  extensive  than   any  ever  undertaken in  the West.  A  dozen  rivers  flowing  into  the  Arctic   are  to  be  closed  off,  their   flows reversed,  thus  increasing enormously  the  volume  of  the  Volga  flowing  south  to the Caspian Sea and  inundating whole cities, millions  of acres  of land, and  plant and  forest  life. The  environmental and  ecological   consequences are  staggering; the  impact on  the  Soviet  landscape and  on  Europe's weather patterns is hardly imaginable. In  the  Soviet  Union   protests  are  being   heard   from  scientists,  his­ torians,  writers,  even from  regional  units of the  Communist party  in  the  affected areas.

66

CONSERVATION & TECHNOLOGY

Our imagination has  become  impoverished in  the  face  of  calls  for  salvation through technology on  the  one  hand  and  cleansing  through a  return to  nature
on the other. It is necessary, as J. E. Chamberlin, writing in the  Hudson Review
in 1982,  has suggested, to take  control  of events in our  minds,  if we are  to shape society  according to images  which  are  humanly ordered.



AT
I think  that  they  have  everything to  do  with  it. For  literature and   art  are  the expression  of our imaginative response to the condition of our  time.  It is freedom of the  imagination that  will enable  us to resist received  wisdom,  to  question  the principles that  are  said  to  justify the  wrongs  of the  world,  and  to speak  against the  mores  that  limit  our  perception of the  possibilities the  future holds.  In  the West -and even  in the  East -people are  insisting  upon  their  right  to call  con­ ventional truths into  question.
Liberal capitalism is in the throes of one of its recurring crises; Marxism, though still vigorous as a tool of analysis,  has been a conspicuous  failure  in those countries where it has been installed as the established  ideology.
We need  a philosophy to sustain  us in the  post-industrial era,  an  era  for which
we have  no name, since  we cannot yet discern  its lineaments. We  cannot expect that  within  a week, or a month, or a year, a new  philosophy  can  be worked  out in  all its details.  We  must  realize  that  if we are  to  postulate, let  alone  erect,  an alternative  to  a system   established  400  years  ago,   and   which   has   ramified throughout the  world,  we must  be prepared to begin  on a small  scale. Small  can be beautiful, and  that  applies  to theorizing as much  as to  anything  else.
The intellectual challenge of  comprehending the  shape   of  the  post-industrial era,  of  comprehending the  moral,  social  and  economic goals  that   will  inform that  era,  will soon  be facing  us all.  We shall  have  to  consider  the  question  that Adam  Smith, the  prophet of capitalism, asked:

For to what  purpose is all the toil and bustle of  this world?  What  is the end  of avarice and  ambition,  of the pursuit  of wealth, of power, and  pre-eminence?

In  seeking  an  answer, we  may  discover  that   insights   can   be  found  in  the experience of  other  countries and  other  cultures.  We  are  now  confronted  with scarcity  of  resources,  an  environmental crisis, and  over-population -conditions which  have  been  the  lot  of the  Third World  for so long.  At  the  same  time  it  is the  Native  peoples  in our  own  country who  insist on  asking  profound questions about   the  goals  of  industrialism, and  about   the  values  that   actuate us  in  our dealings  with  those  who  may  reject  industrial advance.
If we were  not distracted by the  prospect  of ever-increasing wealth, if we were prepared to  take  control of  the  industrial system so  that  it will  not  run  free  of

CONSERVATION & TECHNOLOGY


ethical and moral values,  then  we could conceive a new  vision  of the  just society. Nature has  a  place  in  this.  On   this  continent  we  have always thought  of  our mountains, lakes,  and   forests  as  the   equivalent  of  the   wonders of  the   ancient world. This cliche  may  still  have  life  in  it. For  our  mountains, our  forests,   and our  wilderness may  still  provide a sense  of order in  the  universe, a counterweight to  the  relentless pull  of industrial goals,  a  place   where the  imagination may   be defended. In  seeking to save  the  wilderness we may  save  ourselves, for  wilderness is a  reminder of  the  impermanence of  the   works   of  man, a  reminder that  the earth must be  shared with  other species  and that we  are  trustees of  its  wealth, guardians of these  other species,  and  responsible -to  generations to  come  -for their preservation.





Jl  POEM JIS BIG JIS  Jl MOUNTJIIN

Gordon Turner

Here  where  the sky is not  an inverted bowl, is not  a roof  and  walls, but  a tiny opening  to the  stars,  miniature possibilities  at  the  wrong end  of  a  telescope,  the  heaved-up mountains are  obstacles   to  be overcome  one way or another:  pierced, scraped, sliced,  blasted,  dis­ lodged,   overturned,  transfigured  for   human  linear    motion   and  thought. Here   words   build   into   balsam   trunks,  jagged   boulders, scarred   cliffsides,  compress   into   mass  or   jam   into   perpendicular holds  on  the  imagination. Lines  here  cannot string  telephone poles to  the  horizon,  but  disappear beyond  slashed  ridges,  around valley corners  and  you don't know  if  your  words  really  move  onward or outward, if there's  actually anyone  out  there  to  hear  or  read  what  you would  tell them.  Unless  you  travel  their  way.

How  many  people  on  the  prairies  hike  across  their  vastness?  There are  no  guidebooks  called  101  Hikes  in  Central  Saskatchewan.   In mountain country, guidebook or not,  people  climb  and  every  height has  its enthusiast, those  who  have  been  there,  would  go  again, are going.  The  mountains alive  in  summer with  the  clunk  of  boots  on rock,  in winter  with  the  swish  of  skis on  snow.  Noise  accentuating silence.  Sit  on  an  outcropping on  a  rarefied   autumn day  and  feel you can reach  out  and  touch  Old  Armchair or run  your  hand  along Wedge,  but  you know  that  if you did  the  white-hot brilliance of the snow  would  burn  you.  Mountains like  words  have  to  be  handled with  care,  if  at  all.  If you  clamber over  boulder-strewn gullies,  if

68

POEM


you scale  uncertain rock-faces,  to get up  and  out,  to seek air  that  is finer and  won't  send your words back in echo, echo echo, watch  that the alder  you're  grasping doesn't slip from  its rockbound sheath, that the  ledge  you're  resting  upon  doesn't  give  way.  That loose boulder won't   feel  your  death as  it  tumbles  you  to  a  halt  in  those  firs  far below. You  won't  even have  time to notice  that  the V of  mountain­ join  just  across  that  rubble  can  be geese against  the  sky  if  the  eyes alter  perspective, that  the  hump of the  mountain's top  you've  been pursuing is no mirage: just  a single stride  away.




THE  TECHNOLOGY OF OBJECTS

KimMaltman

Suppose one has forgotten a chair There it sits in the corner  unused not-a-chair a haven  for
discarded objects  a pair of old boots maybe or an open  book a cat in mid-air
So suppose  one hears a noise a
falling boot a page being torn  Whatever Absentmindedly one lifts a slipper Absentmindedly you understand
But now it's gone Nothing there but empty  space So there one stands
looking foolish staring  Now one has forgotten the cat  the slipper  is heavy
Hmmm one says a chair a chair




THE  TECHNOLOGY OF TERROR

KimMaltman

Suppose one has found  a terror. There, a long ways off,
curled  up around itself. Suppose one has a room.
A good big room with strong doors.
(Of  course, but  this supposes many things.)

6g

POEM

Inside  the room the terror
tums on itself, divides and schemes, becoming many  terrors. Larger and smaller.
Suddenly, no waming, poof! it's gone, out under the door, into  the streets. Someone
hears it coming, someone whispers, there  are rumors.
Now a crowd  has gathered, someone is afraid, or nervous, the fear is like oil.
One  by one they tum to greet it. Nervous  smiles.
It is a simple mechanism. Incomplete. These  are its engine.






GREY



Harris said: Cast
that  Indian stuff aside, find totems  of your own. And  I did,
for he spoke
what  I had left unspoken  in my heart.
When  the forest was dry enough
I edged my
way down between  the boles, found solace
in the water-soft quiet.

And  here I am again,
a late-comer this spring to Heaven's gate,
the forest a tinderbox locked against me.
A heavy mail of darkness chains  the cedars.
They cannot  move.
 


John Barton

POEM

Even  their  branches won't ease back,
let me pass.
I could  stand  before them a thousand years,
never know I'm  here.

Sit on your camp-stool, old fool, and  think.
Get out  your  journal, think  a way in between the trees.
These  cedars are older
than Adam.
God had no voice and spoke only in  forms.
'Forest','tree',
cones overlapping and wrapped in darkness,impenetrable
as one's heart.
God was waking Himself. Now, drawn to the  forest edge, I am one of His thoughts-

It's  almost  dawn. The  first light  rolls off the cedars.
They  shimmer, wet
windows, turn black­
green.
That little  pine in the foreground,
the first and  last of this race, could  be the centre.
It shines from  within:
bronze  light cracks  through its crust  of darkness,
It draws me
into its cave. I shall
burn  there,  untouched, unborn, outside memory.

"IN THE FIFTH CITY"
An Integral Chapter  of
"The New Ancestors"

Jane E. Leney




DAVE GODFREY's NOVEL The New  Ana,ton' contaills one very puzzling chapter  entitled "In  the Fifth  City." The  book's other five chapters are set in Lost Coast, a fictional representation  of Ghana; the surrealistic  action of "In  the Fifth City" takes place in countries to the north of Lost Coast and  it is difficult to relate this action to the rest of the novel. Far from being gratuitous, however, "In the Fifth City" is an essential chapter, an  understanding of which is crucial to a meaningful study of The  New  Ancestors. An analysis of the struc­ tural shape of the book provides a way of seeing how "In  the  Fifth  City" func­ tions within  the  novel. By examining  the  significance  of  the  kambu  ritual  so central  to this chapter's  theme, one comes to understand what  Godfrey  learned from Africa,  especially about  the  political  position of the  foreigner  living  there.
The   Lost  Coast  chapters  concern   the  activities   of  Michael   Burdener,   an Englishman  teaching  in Lost Coast, and of various  characters  connected  to him. Married  to an  African  woman,  Ama, Burdener  becomes involved in  politics in this African country through  his association with  his brother-in-law, Gamaliel Harding, and  with  Harding's   half-brother,   First  Samuels,  also  known  as  FS. Gamaliel  is a loyal spokesman for  the  country's  leader,  Kruman, who  is often referred to as the Redeemer.  First Samuels supports  the  Redeemer  initially,  but later   joins  a  group  of counter-revolutionaries   plotting   to  overthrow   Kruman because they view his regime as corrupt.  Eventually  political  and  personal  ani­ mosities lead  FS  to  murder  Gamaliel  Harding. Michael,  Gamaliel,  and  First Samuels are all opposed to Rusk, an American  meddling  in  an  unspecified  way in the affairs of Lost Coast. Following Gamaliel's  murder,  First Samuels  is  him­ self killed, perhaps  by Rusk, and  Michael  Burdener  is expelled from  Lost  Coast. Rusk's fate remains a mystery. Although in the Fifth  City chapter  he is murdered numerous  times in  a variety of ways, the  Lost Coast  chapters  tell us  only  that Rusk has disappeared.
The  narrative technique of "In  the Fifth City" distinguishes it from the rest of the novel. The  chapters  set in Lost Coast -namely  "Prologue," "The  London Notebook,"  "A  Child  of Delicacy," and  "Freedom People's  Party," which  pre­ cede the  Fifth  City  chapter,  as well as "Agada  Notebook,"  which  follows  the

GODFREY

Fifth City-are each associated with a particular  point of view. "Prologue" deals mainly  with the situation  in  Lost Coast as seen by Geoffrey Firebank,  a British expatriate. "The London  Notebook"  concentrates  on  the  thoughts  and  jottings of Michael  Burdener. "A  Child  of Delicacy" consists of the stream-of-conscious­ ness musings of Michael's  wife Ama. "Freedom  People's Party," while departing  more from  the  single  point  of view than  the  preceding  chapters,  treats  events, mainly  political,  in  which  First  Samuels  is involved.  "In the  Fifth  City"  has much  more frequent  changes in point of view, an  indeterminate number  of nar­ rators  in  fact.  With  "Agada  Notebook"  which  ends  the  book,  we  return   to Michael Burdener's  point of view.
The  contrast  between  the narrative  technique  in  the  Lost Coast chapters  and that  in "In  the Fifth  City" is of structural  importance.  We observe a progression towards a more and  more African look at events, a progression which culminates in "In  the  Fifth  City." The  first narrator, Firebank,  is an  outsider  like Michael Burdener, but more detached  and isolated than is Michael.  Firebank observes his surroundings from  inside a car for a good part  of the chapter,  and  reads about political events in the newspapers. "The  London Notebook" shows us Michael, sometimes in  London,  but  mostly in Lost Coast, attempting to  understand  and become involved with Africa. The  chapter  ends with his decision to say "yes" to Africa. With  Ama  narrating the  next chapter,  we move inside the  mind  of an African, yet it is an African who has been subjected to Western influences through her husband.  First Samuels'  chapter  progresses one step further  into the African consciousness. Its somewhat  inconsistent point of view serves as a transition  into "In  the Fifth  City" wherein  the perspective shifts constantly.  "Agada  Notebook" suggests a movement  back out of Africa through  the fact that  Burdener  narrates, this time as he prepares  to depart  from Lost Coast.
The  shifting  perspective  in "In  the Fifth  City"  is meant  to represent  African thought  patterns  as opposed to European.  In this one chapter  there are an indef­ inite number  of narrators and  it is not always easy to ascertain  who is speaking. In addition,  here we encounter  a "voice" resembling that  of an omniscient narra­  tor.  This  voice makes  remarks  which  amount  to  authorial  intrusions,  drawing  attention  to the fact  that  the speaker is responsible for ordering  the details of the chapter.  For instance it says, "We  have heard  that  description  already, or  would you like it  repeated  now. I  think  not."  Another similarity  between  the  "voice" and  that  of an omniscient  narrator  is that  "the voice" knows how the story is to be interpreted. Paradoxically,  what it knows is that  the story is to be interpreted by taking  into  account  a  number  of points of  view. To  discourage  the  reader from  accepting  any  one version of events, it  repeatedly  uses such  expressions as "perhaps," "or else," and  "yet if," denoting that there  are a number  of possibili­ ties open. A contrast  is established  between  the European  mind  seeking absolute answers, and  the African  mind  accepting diverse answers simultaneously.

73

GODFREY

In considering the function  of this "voice,"  it is important to note its  associa­ tion with one of the characters  in the chapter,  Burr.  Sometimes  it is  difficult to distinguish between Burr and the "voice" as narrator. A complication  arises here because, as critic Robert  Margeson  points out,  Burr  is the  Fifth  City  equivalent of  Michael  Burdener.2    Furthermore, Margeson  indicates   that   a   possible  link between the Fifth City chapter and the rest of the novel is to be found in Michael's dream  described in "Agada  Notebook":   "He  dreamed  that  night  of  hatred  and tossed in his narrow  and  disease-infected bed.  In  his whore's  room.  Cursing  the secrecy. Living and  reliving Rusk's death  and  the arrival  of the military  figures." Since Rusk's death  occurs repeatedly in "In  the Fifth  City," there is some justifi­ cation for connecting  the chapter  with Michael's  dream. Additional support  for this theory  comes from  the fact  that  one senses a  similarity  between  Michael's arrogant  tone in "The London  Notebook"  and  the  tone  of the guiding  voice in "In   the  Fifth  City."  Scientific  jargon  and  French  expressions  feature   also  as factors common to the two narrators.
What  results, then, is an  association between  Burr  (and  therefore  Burdener) and the "voice," suggesting that Burdener holds a special place among the narra­ tors of the novel. This leads to a possible theory concerning  the narrative structure  of the book. All of the narrative  voices, while they are  not  quite aspects of Bur­ dener's  personality,  represent  phases through  which  Burdener  passes or  wishes to pass. Thus  the Englishman, Firebank, stands for the position of outsider  which Burdener rejects. The  African narrators,  Ama and  First Samuels, offer a view of things Mrican which  Burdener  wishes to attain.  The  desire for  total  immersion in the African  consciousness is fulfilled through  fantasy  in  "In the  Fifth  City" but negated in the book's final, more realistic chapter.
Although  this structural analysis may  help  in  a general  way  to  establish  the place of the Fifth City chapter  within The  New  Ancestors, much  of the chapter and indeed  the  novel remains a mystery unless one  investigates  the  significance of the kambu  ritual. An understanding of this fetish reinforces what  has been said thus far about  narrative  technique and also links the Fifth  City thematically  with the Lost Coast chapters.



tE NOVEL   OFFERS  LITTLE  DIRECTION on the subject  of the kambu. Godfrey states in an interview with Donald  Cameron: "There's a whole voodoo level in The  New Ancestors which no one has discovered yet."3  However, he gives no hint  where the  reader  is to look for  further   information   about  the voodoo involved. A book by Horace  Miner  called  The  Primitive  City  of  Tim­ buctoo4 provides a very helpful explanation  of North  African  fetish  practices.
Miner  tells us that  kambu  means tweezers or tongs. The  fetish objects  made
in Timbuctoo consist of a pair of metal tongs. Between the  ends of the  tongs a

74

GODFREY

written charm is placed; a piece of cloth  from  a saint's  tomb  or from  a shroud is sewn  to the  tongs;  four  cords,  red,  white,  black  and  yellow  are  tied  around the kambu.  The sorcerer  speaks  secret  words  over  each  cord.  The  blood  of a white cock known  as  bono  dyongu  is smeared  over  the  kambu  and  then  the  fetish  is placed in the belly of the dead  bird. The sorcerer  drives spikes into  its wings while chanting a secret  incantation. He  feeds the  kambu  chewed  kola  nuts  at specified times  while  reciting the  Moslem  fatihah.  The   blood  of  a  sheep  is  put  on  the fetish  every  ten  days,  and  after  forty  days the  kambu  is removed  from  the  bird's belly. When the sorcerer  pulls the coloured  cords the  kambu  speaks  words  which the sorcerer  interprets. After  it has spoken,  the  kambu  is placed  in a leather sack. The sorcerer  continues to  administer kola  nuts  and  cock's  blood  weekly.  When he wishes to use the  powers  of the kambu for divination or to destroy  enemies,  he winds one of the cords around the body of the fetish to make it speak  again. Three times the  kambu  is placed  in the sun  until  it becomes shaded, and  then  it will do what  is required of it.
In the course of describing the kambu ritual, Miner  points out  that  the Mrican's faith  in  the  sorcerer's magic  is based  on  a  frame  of  reference   quite   alien  to  a Westerner's concept of reality. He also notes that  there  are a number of variations in the  procedure used to create  the kambu:
The  difference  between the native and  myself is not in our  manner  of thought or in what we observe. We differ in the nature of the techniques in which we place our faith. The  technique of the doctor is no more rational  than  that of the sorcerer. Rationality operates  within  a set of logics-a frame of reference. The  techniques of the doctor, however, are more practical.  It is this secular factor of efficiency, recognized  by every man,  which leads to the  ultimate  dominance  of the  doctor's techniques in my cultural  order.
To  return  to the realm of logic of the smith whose ritual  was just described,  he affirms that  he would use the kambu against anyone who worked in a metal  other than  that  which  his forbears  used. It will be recalled  that  the smiths  are  family
guilds specializing in particular metals or combinations of metals. It is said by some
that kambu  made of iron are all-powerful. Those made of copper are only effective in  witchcraft   against  children  or  in  their  protection.  Kambu   of  brass  can  only protect  against  health  and wealth. The  colors of the kambu  cords have special significance.  When  the  fetish  is to be  used  to make  a  victim  sicken  or  die,  the particular colored  cord  selected  to tighten  around  the  kambu  depends  upon  the skin color  of the  victim. Thus,  the black strand  is used against  Negro  Bela and Gabibi, the red against Arabs, and  the yellow against the French.6

In  the  Fifth  City  chapter, certain  details  concerning the  kambu  underline the distinction already noted  between  African and  Western   thought. One  example is the following  passage:
Whatever  the  texture  of the metal,  whatever  the  purpose -even  if merely  the brass which causes children  to sicken and  die-the important factor  is the  words that are spoken, the story that  is told before the kambu will take on life and  begin

75

GODFREY

to move in the sun  like the rest of us. The  charm that  is written upside  down  and placed  between  the  tongs, the charms  which  fill the skull  of  the  bono  dyongu, the victim of the hundred heads, are important also, but  more  important are  the words that  are spoken  as the smith  attaches the four  cords,  the  words  that  Burr  speaks  as he drives  the two spears  through the arms  of his father to spreadeagle him  in  the burning sun,  the  daily  chanting of the ffitiha  morning and  evening as the  kambu is fed  with  chewed  kola, the  final  words  which  are  spoken  as  the  living  force  is drawn from  the cavity of the decayed  victim.  Look  closely. You  will see where  we have  hidden these  words. If your desires are  truly  one  with  ours  you will  have  no difficulty in deciphering them.  This  is not it:
X   = k 	fl  + at   + b
2m

The  dismissal of  the  scientific formula,  an  equation of  motion in  a  classical sense,  suggests that this  kind  of  Western science is not  the  answer to  an  under­ standing of  the  chapter's message. Further  explanation  of  the   gap  in   oudook which prevents Westerners from understanding comes in  a section  concerning the  Dogon story-teller  (the  story-teller is  a   blacksmith  or   weaver,   a fact   which establishes a  connection  between the   art   of  creating a  kambu  and   the   art   of story-telling) :

an old man of the Dogons is called in, a blacksmith or a weaver,  and  lectures  begin, or  perhaps stories  would  be a more  exact  word.  Certainly begun  is a fixed  word, for  wisdom  is a wife not  a whore,  and  if  the  listener  were  French or  Arab,  what difficulties  might  not  be  present  because  of ancient enslavement recorded in  this man's memory,  sons conscripted for wars  and  lying dead  and  sullied  in Verdun or Morocco, ancestors  mutilated in  war,  villages  destroyed, grinding stones  broken. Yet if the listener  walks beyond  all that,  slow wisdom  and  enrichment. An ancient pattern of patterns of the universe  revealed.

What  Godfrey does,  then, is  to  contrast the   logic   of  the   oppressor  and   the magic of the  oppressed. In  the  Fifth City  chapter, as  in  the  kambu itself,  we  are confronted with   words acting as  a charm, not  as  a means of  designating  some­ thing which Westerners would  consider rational. Thus the  meaning of the chapter comes  largely from the  spell  created by the  words. In the  Lost  Coast  chapters, we find  a series  of  individual views  of  the  truth all  of  which make up  a consistent story; in  the  Fifth City  chapter, we  gain  slow  wisdom and  enrichment through the  multiple perspectives, contradictory though  they  may  be.




AT            FAR   should  clarify the  rela­ tion   between "In  the  Fifth City" and   the   Lost  Coast chapters as  far   as  struc­ ture  and style are  concerned. There remains the  question of theme: with  Miner's information about the  kambu, one  is better able  to appreciate what "In  the  Fifth

GODFREY

City" implies about  ancestry  and  neo-colonialism, central  concerns in the rest of the novel.
By comparing  the details of Miner's  description of kambu  with  the ritual  we
witness in  the  Fifth  City,  we find that  the  ritual  has  been  considerably  altered such that sometimes Rusk's murder  becomes part of the kambu  ceremony. Some­ times his blood is used instead  of the cock's, and  his skull is part  of  the  ritual object.  That  the  traditional practice  is not  being strictly followed is  clear from the following passage:  "Gazing  at  the skull, the three  men,  the  three sons, the murderer   brothers,  encourage  one  another.  None  are  reticent  about  inventing ritual."  Significantly, the three are described here as sons. The three  people who are present when the skull is mentioned are Burr, El Amaliel, and Effez, the Fifth City counterparts of Burdener,  Gamaliel, and  FS.6    Evidence that  the skull is that of Rusk, and  that  Rusk  is being called "father" comes  when  the skull is placed in  the  leather  sack  and  the  question  is asked:   "What  memory  of  the  potent colonel father  does this leave us with?" Rusk himself says at one point:  "You  do not wish to hear  how my sons rose against  me." Perhaps  the most telling quota­  tion on this subject is this one:  "The  men are peacefully remorseful. The  difficult adjustments which follow the killing of  the father  and  the realization  that  none, now, may  occupy  the  place  that  all  have  dreamed  of  within  their  hatred,  are completed."  It seems that  the American, Rusk, provides a focus for the hatred  of Effez,  Burr,  and  El  Amaliel  in  the  same  way  that  a  father  or  an  oppressive authority  figure might do.
The  alteration   in  the  use of the  kambu  ritual  indicates  a  changeover  from acceptance  of African  myth  to acceptance  of Western  myth.  African  tradition demands  respect for the elders:  the influence of Western values has reversed this, requiring  that  the fathers  be killed in order  that  the  young may  take over. The contrast between the two systems is expressed in a remark  Godfrey makes to critic Robert  "Veaver. Weaver says:  "Godfrey  told me recently that  he brought  out of Africa a sense of 'the  determination that  is built up in a family from generation to generation' and which to him is opposed to the American  dream  where 'Adam is reborn for each generation'."7  It is the former which is giving place to the latter in the symbolic proceedings  in the  Fifth  City as well as in  the machinations  of the young counterrevolutionaries in Lost Coast.
The  political implications  of Rusk's death  require some explanation.  Although the murder  takes place in the Fifth  City and thus can  only be seen as part  of a dream,  the fantasy  described in that  chapter  is related  to political events in Lost Coast. Burdener's  dream  in  the final chapter  has already  been  mentioned  as a linking factor in this respect. It is important to note that  Burdener  invents scenes in which "the  reactionaries were destroyed. And the revisionists were redeemed." Through a series of details  in  "In  the  Fifth  City"  the  ritual  killing of Rusk  is connected  to  Burdener's   wish for  the  political  redemption  of  Lost  Coast.  The

77

GODFREY

murder  seems to  be  a  means  of  protecting  the  Redeemer,   Kruman, and  thus assuring the future  of Lost Coast. Clues about  the  motive for  the murder  come from a conversation in which Donalda  asks El Amalie! why the men want kambu. "Someone important asked us to obtain it,"  "Someone  who desires kambu," and "You would have to return with us to the rain forest to discover." The  important person is perhaps the redeemer himself who has sent these men on a mission from Lost Coast. Other  links with Kruman  are established.  In  his speech  to Rusk, El Amalie! says: "you're made me a fraud and  my redeemer  a crook by precisioning yourselves into gold machinery  which only kambu  will destroy.... " Also, a line in "Freedom   People's  Party"  informs  us that  Kruman wore  Nehru  suits in  an early stage of the  revolution. In  the Fifth  City  chapter, a girl sews a  miniature Nehru  jacket of blue silk and gold thread.  Other  references indicate  that  the tongs of the kambu  are  wrapped  in blue cloth,  presumably  the  same  blue silk  jacket. According  to traditional practice, the tongs are  wrapped  in a shroud  of a  piece of cloth from a saint's tomb. It would appear that  a miniature of Kruman's Nehru jacket, symbol of an earlier uncorrupted  era of the revolution,  is being substituted for the saint's shroud.  From  all this we conclude  that  Rusk's  killing, at  least in this instance, is a political murder,  meant  to further  the  cause of the  revolution by restoring it to its purer state.
Any suggestion that  political murder  represents a solution  to the oppression of Lost Coastians is undercut,  however, by the irony and  ambiguity  with which the murder  is handled.  An  identification  between  oppressor  and  victim  contributes to this irony. Blatant  anti-American  sentiment  is expressed throughout the novel, especially by Burdener,  but also by FS and Gamaliel.  The  Americans  are viewed as powerful imperialists using force to advance  their country's  interests. The  focus of this hatred  is Rusk,  yet Rusk's  role is never  clarified.  One  realization  that Michael reaches is worth noting:  "His [Rusk's]  purpose is exactly similar to ours. Up  to a  point."  More  specifically, this  purpose  is "encouraging chaotic  condi­ tions." Although  their  ideals may differ, both  Michael  and  Rusk  are  outsiders interfering  in the  internal  politics of Lost Coast.  Thus  the  oppressor  Rusk  and the victim  Burdener-a victim  because  he  sympathizes  so strongly  with  Lost Coastians -are not unalike.
The most striking similarities between Rusk's role and  Burdener's  emerge when one considers the significance of the term  pharmakos, a word  used several times in "The  London  Notebook."  In  Anatomy  of Criticism, Northrop   Frye  defines pharmakos as:  "The character  in an ironic fiction who has the role of scapegoat or arbitrarily  chosen victim."8  He also tells us:  "The pharrnakos  is neither  inno­ cent  nor  guilty.  He  is innocent  in  the sense  that  what  happens  to  him  is far greater  than  anything  he has done  provokes, like the  mountaineer  whose shout brings down  an  avalanche.  He is guilty in  the sense that  he is a  member  of a guilty society, or living in a world where such  in justices are an  inescapable  part

GODFREY

of existence."9  The  term  pharmakos is Greek; Jane  Harrison  in her Prolegomena to the  Study of Greek  Religion explains the function of the  pharmakos in Greek society. The  leading out of the  pharmakos was part  of a festival in Athens. The victim  was expelled  from  the  city and  beaten  to death,  both  to  drive  out  evil influences from  the  city and  to relieve the  feelings of the  beaters.10  The  above passages bring to mind Rusk's treatment  in the Fifth City. In effect, Godfrey has created  a hybrid of pharmakos and  kambu rituals in which Rusk serves as sacri­ ficial victim.
The  further  association between Burdener  and Rusk comes from  the fact that the word  pharmakos is used in The New  Ancestors with explicit reference not to Rusk but  to Michael.  Michael  opens his London Notebook by stating: "I  know how I am spoken of, perhaps that is the first thing to set clear;  in the whispers, in analysis and  in loud goatish laughter.  Pharmakos." He  claims that  the  Africans victimize  him,  criticize  and  mock  him,  blaming  him  for  their  troubles  simply because he is white.
Burdener's   name  denotes  his situation:   he bears the  white  man's  burden  in Africa,  being held  responsible for the acts of his compatriots.  Similarly,  Rusk is blamed  for the imperialist  policies of his home government.  In  fantasy  at  least, Burdener  and  his African friends persecute Rusk because of his nationality. Thus Michael's statement about  the duality  of his own identity  becomes noteworthy: "Forget   what  I am:   pharmakos. I  do  not  know myself what  I  am.  Michael Burdener   named.  Pharmakos  and  creator  of  victims  and  tormentors."  While Michael is victim of the Africans and  the Americans, he is the tormentor  of Rusk and, in the minds of some Africans,  just as much an expatriate neo-colonialist as is Rusk; while Rusk may be an exploiter of Africans, he himself is victimized eventually.  Thus  Michael  and  Rusk  occupy ambiguous  positions in  relation  to one another  and their  roles in the two contrasting  portions of the novel are inex­ tricably intertwined.
Having  recognized that the Fifth City chapter is not logical, the Western reader is still tempted  to sift through  its contents, trying to arrive at a rational interpreta­ tion. What  makes "In  the  Fifth  City" such a rich chapter  is the  fact  that  it so strongly resists this approach. In effect what one must do in  reading  the chapter, indeed  in relating  it to the  whole novel, is to view it as one  is told to view the cords wrapped  around  the  kambu fetish:  "The  yellow  winds. The  black  winds. The  red winds. The  white  winds. You must  observe  all  the  colours.  What  else provides the bulk?"

NOTES

1 Dave  Godfrey, The  New Ancestors  (Toronto: New Press, 1970).
2  Robert Margeson, "A  Preliminary Interpretation of The  New  Ancestors,"  Journal of Canadian  Fiction, 4, no. 1 ( 1975), 99-100.

79

GODFREY

3 Donald Cameron, Conversations  with  Canadian  Novelists  Part  Two   (Toronto: Macmillan, I973), p. 36.
4  Horace Miner, The  Primitive City  of Timbuctoo (New  York: Doubleday, I965), pp. 109•I2.
5 Ibid., p. I I 2.
6   Margeson, pp. 99- I oo.
7  Robert Weaver, "Reviews," Macleans, 84  (February I97I), p. 57·
8  Northrop Frye,  Anatomy  of Criticism  (Princeton:  Princeton Univ. Press,  I973),
p. 367.
9  Ibid., p. 41.
10 Jane Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study  of Greek Religion  (New  York: Meridian
Books, I 96o), pp. 95-98.






DI:21NE :21RBUS: GROUND GL:21SS
 




Kenneth Sherman


You grew up
peering from behind  smoked glass your schooldays private, privileged.

Freaked  by surfeit of attention the unreality  of your class,
you by-passed fictions
saying ground glass does not lie.

Who could escape the vicious scrutiny
of that  wide eye, a voyeur's
insatiable hunger?

I can  hear the film's manic whirr, the clack clack of the shutter
as you move in, as you
work

pushing  the real towards  the fantastic

So

POEM

(nothing sentimental about your  junkies

your dwarfs, or that New Jersey woman cradling a baby­ bonnetted monkey)

your fascination
fixed in razored  clarity: the lines and  pores of faces, life craters

our inescapable stories.








THREE  POEMS
 


David McFadden



M)IRG)IRET HOLLINGSWORTH'S TYPEWRITER

I was eating scrambled eggs in the Shamrock Restaurant and  the eggs tasted  like Chinese food
so I said to the waitress I'm  a person
who likes Chinese food but doesn't  like
my eggs in the morning to taste like chicken fried  rice and  she laughed and said it must have been
the green  onions  and suggested the next time
I come into  the Shamrock for breakfast
I specify that  I want Canadian green onions
with my scrambled eggs or I'll get Chinese  again

and  I said there  won't  be another time,
this is it, I'm  a widely respected  Canadian writer  and  editor and  well-regarded in the community too
and  shouldn't have to subject  myself to such bad food. I'm  finished, I said.

81

POEM

This  used to be my favourite Irish-Chinese restaurant in the entire  West Kootenay
but this is it, I'm  never coming  back­
and  through the kitchen  door  I could see
the Chinese chef covering  his ears with  his hands.

And so I went to pay the bill
and  this is the really embarrassing part, this is why I'm  writing  this poem
by hand, pencil on paper,  because  Margaret Hollingsworth's typewriter has a three-prong plug
and  all the outlets in the house are two-prongers
and  her adapter is up at the college
and  I begged her to let me cut  the third  prong  off so I could use her typewriter
because I had a simply overwhelming desire  to write this poem and  she refused and  I told ... oh, never mind  all that.

This  is the embarrassing part.  After  complaining
so vociferously about  the eggs I went  to pay my bill and  discovered  I had  no money with  me
so I had  to go home and  get my wallet and  bring it back to the restaurant making myself a liar for having said this is it, I'm  never coming  back.
The waitress was very nice about it all.

Is it hard  to write poetry?
Yes, I would say it is. For instance
in this poem I didn't know whether to start by talking about  the scrambled eggs
or the Smith  Corona. And I didn't have a lot of time to think about  it

because I simply had  to start  the poem, it was that  urgent
and  when you have to torture yourself
wondering if it's all right  to write  about writing  in a poem and  you keep resolving never again  to write about  writing
and  you always break  your resolve.
It's as if writing  has a will of its own and  wants to be written about
just like Margaret Hollingsworth's typewriter.

POEM

M]IRG]IRET HOLLINGSWORTH'S GL]ISSES

You decide  to write about  what  is in front of you like Bannard painting a table-top still life
and  you look up and  there is Margaret Hollingsworth in front  of you. She is wearing  a fluffy
wine sweater and green silk scarf
and  is smiling  at you and on the table in front  of her is her glasses.

This poem  was written  during a writing  seminar given by bpNichol at the college in Nelson, B.C., in March, 1982. He was wearing  a brown  velvet shirt  and  brown  velvet trousers and aroused
in you a certain amount of animosity by suggesting  the use of the word "I" makes for sentimentality in the poem
and  in giving  you and  the students this exercise
to write a poem about  what  is in front  of you like Bannard painting a table-top still life said the use of the word "I"
at least for the purposes of this exercise should  be avoided. "Me too," he said, ambiguously.

And so you look up and  there is Margaret Hollingsworth smiling  at you and  you know right away
you are going to write a poem about  her and  her glasses
just as last week you wrote a poem about  her and  her typewriter and  you hope that  seeing as you
are likewise directly  in front  of her
for as you know what is in front  of you you are likewise in front  of
she will write a poem about  you.

And  you suddenly realize you've used the word "I" twice already in this poem, inadvertently.
And  the word "me" once. Make  that  twice.
You  just can't get away from it. As if there  wasn't already  enough sentimental slop in the world.

POEM

But then you stop and  think  (to yourself),
hey, maybe if everybody wrote more  in the first person of things personal  and sublime
maybe  just maybe people would stop  treating each other as if they were second persons.
Make  that  second-rate persons.
Right?








M]IRG]IRET HOLLINGSWORTH'S MILK

Margaret Hollingsworth phones you first thing  in the morning and  asks if you'll bring her a jug of two per cent
when  you come up the hill to the college
because she has tom  ligaments from  a skiing accident
Saturday and  you are happy  to oblige
but when you hang  up you remember it'll  be impossible for you to get to her place for a couple  of hours
at least and  you can't phone  her back to tell her because you don't  want  to put  her  through the misery of hobbling to the phone for what  might  after  all
be a rather  insignificant  (to her)   message so you don't  phone
but by the time you do arrive at her door a couple  of hours later  with the milk
after  going to the bank to see about an NSF cheque to the Nelson Daily News to see about the magazine to the florist's shop to order  some pink  roses
for your mother who is in the hospital

she is sitting  there at the kitchen  table right  next to the telephone
and  you could  have called after  all
but she smiles anyway and  says thank  you
and  says it doesn't matter the milk is late

and  you look out the window at the clouds sailing in over the crest of Elephant Mountain.




SEJIGULLS TWIST JIIR
 POEM




Russell Thornton


Seagulls  twist air in their gray
bodies. Waves heave themselves on the sand. If there  is an antique myth
people  recall here, or a god presiding  over huge waters
that  I could  invoke, I am not aware of it.

But I can see that  oceans carry  hearts
turning blood. At ocean's shores, reeling seagulls are ghosts of children
who lived alone; their cries rush down  their own brain  holes like a numbing wind.









SURPRISE
 


kevin roberts


we 	are angry  at it all nothing we have works all the time
fridge  stove dryer     always
pinging to a stop

this middleclass collar  that  shrinks as we grow

we are on perpetual clean  up and  repair

even each other
somehow we had  not planned this sea eating at  rose roots in the front
garden
white  ants in the floor

POEM

the first grey hair  you pulled with  horror  held up to me
as if it was a live snake

and  all the symbols in the garden cannot  put  this stuff in place

roses blown, fallen  gladioli but if this is the Big Dipper
it's slow enough  we don't  notice descent 	and Indian Summers offer storms in remission

but this strange tangled  love ball of old garden twine
holds us in between  the spit of anger and  the shrieking  tumble  of escape
is still part  of that  shaking head

I mean. Who  the hell thought this out?  Knew  that  though it would always be falling  apart it would grow wiser
at the seams    or come so quickly to this recognition?













86


SCIENCE & LITERATURE IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY


Tara Cullis


If the  labours  of men  of science should  ever  create  any  material revolution, direct or indirect, in our condition, and in the impres­ sions  which we  habitually   receive,  the   poet  will  sleep  then   no more  than at  present;  he will be ready  to  follow the  steps of the man  of science, not  only in  those  general  indirect  effects, but  he will be at his side, carrying sensation into  the  midst  of the  objects of the  science  itself. The remotest  discoveries  of  the  chemist, the botanist, or the  mineralogist  will be as proper objects of the  poet's art as any upon  which  it can be employed ....1



IN THE LATE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, the "'ientific era began. Steam  engines  hissed,  foundries   glowed,  mines  were  dug-and   nineteenth­ century  authors  from  Wordsworth   to  Whitman   noted  their  arrival,   pondered
their  meaning,  and   predicted   a  new  direction  for  literature   in  the  twentieth century. Yet today, in a generation  that has seen the appearance of the  jet plane, the Pill, the atomic bomb, plastics, Xerox, lasers, television, and men on the moon, our  writers  (in  contrast  to those of the nineteenth  century)   now rarely  mention the  word  science.  The   tacit  opinion  has  developed  that   Wordsworth-and Shelley, and  Tennyson-were hopelessly wrong:  that  science and  literature  are incompatible, even enemies. Scholars such as C. P. Snow,  Aldous Huxley,  and P. B. Medawar noted the growing split between arts and sciences in this century, and  found  fault  with  writers  for failing  to mirror  their  worlds and  for  cutting themselves off from  the  rich  and  varied source material  science has to offer.
But  these critics  to date  have  primarily  been trained  in  science. In  stressing
content  over form, such critics have failed to realize that  the writers reflect their world all too accurately. They reflect a society whose points of reference have been swept away-one which has lost its sense of meaning  and  has turned  inward  in search of significance amongst  absurdity;  a society which as a whole has little understanding and  a great  deal of fear of the forces unleashed  by its scientists. It is paradoxical that  the explosion of science has not increased  man's sense of order and  logic in his universe, but instead questioned and  disrupted  it. "The  theme  of perplexity and  terror  before the surrounding  world, which  is seen as a kingdom

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY

of chaos and  absurdity,  resounds with particular clarity."2   Today  man's  sense of harmony is gone.

The Split Society
" 'I have got lost ... ' sighs modern man." "After  us the Savage God ... " "Imagination of Disaster ... "
These turn-of-the-century quotations from Nietzsche, Yeats, and  Henry  James,
respectively,  point  us  towards  the  central   characteristic  of  the  novel  in  the twentieth century: awareness of the loss of organizing  structures-of  hierarchies of religion, tradition, morality, class, and family. A new logic, that  of science and itf>  offshoots, had  pushed man carelessly aside as it rearranged his world. Biology (Darwin,  Mendel)   removed man from his God-given  position as monarch  of the earth;  geology reduced  his part in earth's  history to mere moments  in vast time; astronomy shrank  his position of power from  the centre  of the universe to a lost corner of infinity;  Newtonian  physics disrespectfully  ordered  him  about.  Tech­ nology and  industrialization further  reduced  him  to  a  pawn  of  massive  forces beyond  his control;   resultant  urbanization   and  emigration  destroyed  roots  and sense of place and  kinship;  an explosion in population, and  the development  of a vast labour  class, permanently altered the structure of  society; communications, with information  from around  the world, opened up a dizzying wealth of alterna­  tive moralities  and  choices; the  growing rapidity  of  change  altered  attitudes  to time  and  permanence. Coming  at  a  seminal  time  in  the  history  of  Canadian literature,  this movement  has had a profound  impact. A useful way of summing up the collapse of faith  in authority structures is to define it as the  breaking­ or at least, challenging-of  the  logos  (J.  Hillis  Miller,  Deleuze,  Derrida), the line of meaning,  authority,  order:  the Law.
The traditional literary text, like language  itself, is linear-as is basic plot development   and   the  establishment  of  the   basis  of   judgment   on   which  to recognize the significance of events or moments. Jakobson  points out that  the nineteenth-century novel is basically metonymical   (i.e.,  linear) : "Following  the path of contiguous relationships, the realist author  metonymically  progresses from the plot to the atmosphere  and  from  the characters to the setting  in space  and time."3  The logic of a story or poem runs through  it like a thread  connecting  the
parts, and it is this thread which J. Hillis Miller has conveniently  named  the logos
of the text. But  Miller noted the appearance of a second logos, an  "anti-logos," in the literature of the latter  part of the nineteenth  century.  This  anti-logos runs parallel to the linear  text and is glimpsed at moments,  allowing reverberations  of spatiality,  complexity,  depth.  Miller  believes this  anti-logos  is present  in earlier texts; but its appearance is usually minimal, its impact  non-disruptive. But by the twentieth century, the line of logos itself is at times reduced  to glimpses only, the

88

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY


spatializing  anti-logos fragmenting  mere   narrative  moments  with   exploratory snapshots, or dreams outside  of time.
The  appearance of  the  anti-logos,  or  rather the  alteration of  its  interference
and  importance from  minor   to  profound, corresponds closely  with   the  rise  of science and  technology in society. But  here we have a paradox. Can  the  presence of science, that  heir  of rationality and  natural laws, act  as an  "anti-logos" in the structure of  a  novel's  thought? The   concept   is self-contradictory. No.  Rather: science  has  been so successful  in  casting  the  traditional logos into  doubt   because it is more  rigorous,  more  rational -it beats the logos at its own  game  and  usurps it, taking  it over  together with  its position  of authority and  power.  Presenting a new definition for reason  and  fact,  "that which  can  be experimentally repeated," science   tested  ·the  hierarchies  of  society-religion,    monarchy, class,  family, morality-and found   them  lacking  a  purely  rational basis. This  narrowing of the  logos  to  the  rigorous  standards of  science  forced   a  split; once  capable of encompassing a  balance of  reason  and  imagination, the  logos  could  no  longer condone the  unprovable, driving an anti-logos  into  (separate) existence,  an  anti­ logos which  comprises  the non-rational: the artistic,  the spatial, the metaphorical, emotional, mystical,  and  the  insane.
Religion  fought being  moved  from  centre  stage,  choosing  to  fight  science  on the latter's own rules-physical, testable fact-where, by basic principles (proof vs. faith), it could  not  win.  Now  it was science  that  could  move  mountains, and by the  end  of the  century, God  was  pronounced dead. Such  was  the  sheer  ap­ parent  physical   power  of  science  and   technology   to  affect   the   world  that  its standards-rationality, objectivity, cool-mindedness, level-headedness-became judgments of value for the century  to come.
Artists,  too, including poets, sensed  that  the  rules had  somehow changed; but instead  of fighting  beside  the  priests  to  broaden   and  rebalance the  logos,  many responded to  the  perceived  split  by  turning their  backs  on  the  mode  that   had rejected   them,   to  embrace the  opposite   extreme.   Culture  became  at   its  base radically polarized  by the  tum of the  century. No longer  were  poets  Renaissance men,  or soothing purveyors of eighteenth-century decorum, or nineteenth-century mirrors  of the external world  about  them.  Perceiving  the anti-logos as the rejected, neglected  artistic  dimension of life,  poets  embraced it  as  their  true  medium. It was narrow, but  it was theirs,  and  many  followed  the lead  given  earlier  by Blake and  the  Romantics, and  gave  up -or  at least distorted -that  balance between Reason  and  Imagination for which  poets before them  had  striven.
Twentieth-century novelists  have  had  a slightly different response  but  basically they, like the  poets, have  responded to this situation by recording the  new mean­ inglessness and  absurdity of events  and  external  hierarchies, to  turn  towards the inner  world  of the  self in  a search  for  reality  and  meaning.  Following  Cartesian reduction, authors adopted the  symbolist  point  of  view  that  external reality  is

8g

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY

(merely)  a function  of the senses, thus expanding  the ego to creator  of external reality, and enveloping God within the self. But awareness of the meaninglessness of external  reality and of man's physical self as a component  in that  reality  neces­ sarily impinged on the consciousness, and in many authors  we find a presentation of a resultant  split within the self, a division variously perceived as nature/spirit, temporal/external, rational/irrational, ApollonianjDionysiac, self/other, the con­ scious and the unconscious. By expanding  the mind to include all, man has incor­ porated  philosophy's  dualism debate  (the  relation  between  mind  and  body, or between  cerebral  and  physical worlds)   into  his  own  head.  Paradoxically,   the absorption   of  the  division  effectively  destroys  man's   time-honoured   sense  of mental  unity. Thus  it is that,  through  knocking  out  the  underpinnings of faith and  hierarchy,  science and  technology  have  divided  man's  consciousness. Com­ ponents of thought  that  once were viewed  as coherent  now line up  in the  form of incompatible oppositions, and  the logic  behind  human  actions seems to  have vanished.   Roles  become  questioned   as  their   traditional  meanings   disappear.  Perusing Western  literature,  Valentina  Ivasheva  states that  "the  influence of the modern sciences [results in] the identity  crisis as a theme  in Western  literature," and notes "the ever-larger place occupied in Western literature  by themes centring on personality disorders."54
We begin  to see that  the disintegration  of faith  in Authority  is paradoxically both  liberating   and  limiting  for  the  artist.  Liberating   in  that   conventions  of decorum-subject, place, time, setting, characterization, adherence  to conven­ tional  reality  and  social modes-become fair  game  for  free  experimentation; and we observe a vigorous burst of originality of both form and  content, especially in the early decades of the century. But this freedom  is also limiting.  If we look at the novel, for example, we see that  turning  from external  reality to inner perspectives "reduces" the novel towards  pure  aestheticism  and  autonomy,  often separated  from  a  social role. Since  reality  and  meaning   are  not  to  be  found externally,  the  point  of view narrows from  omniscience  towards  one character's consciousness. Since time is no longer  taken  for  granted   to  be  linear   progress, narrative time shrinks towards cyclical repetition, strings of static scenes, and eventually  the spatialization  of a single day or even  moment.  And  plot  accord­ ingly diminishes towards examination  of a near-static  situation. Many twentieth­  century  authors  have, like the  Surrealists,  seen  language  itself  as  an  artificial, inhibiting  construct  which, by organizing  our  perceptions,  disguises  true  reality; and in struggling to liberate their works from unwanted  hierarchies, some dissolve into incoherence  or stutter into silence.
In  the  drama  we can see the  poles of liberation-reduction by comparing  the exuberance of Jarry  with the despair of the absurdists;  in the poem it is apparent in the juxtaposition  of the explosive futurists  with the blank  pages at  the close of Dadaism; in the novel it is visible in the contrast between the encyclopaedic, ener-

go

SCIENCE,  LITERATURE,  LOWRY

getic Joyce or Lowry, and the pruned leanness of the retreating  Beckett. But since liberation  and  limitation  are  linked,  they exist in  varying  degrees side by side within most contemporary works.
The  twentieth-century novel has fewer characters  than  does  the  nineteenth­ century  "realistic" novel, and  those characters  are usually quite  ordinary.  But  a more important characteristic of the character  in modern fiction is a development of the Romantic idea of the artist as hero. Why is this so widespread  in contem­ porary  fiction? Because it is a concept  that  fits well  with  the celebration  of the anti-logos. It is defiance, an  assertion of the value of  art  in a  world overrun  by science and the debris of its inventiveness. Again and again  (Proust, Joyce, Mann,  Gide,  Grass,  Sarraute, Greene)   this  occurs. But  usually  this  artist  reflects the divided  self,  the  split  personality,  mentioned  earlier.  Emphasis  on  the  artistic nature  of man  can no longer be made authentically  without  there  being a simul­ taneous recognition  that  it is but one extreme, and  that  the scientifically rational is at the other. Artistic innocence is gone:  the two modes bring  each other,  their opposites, into  compromised  existence. In  Thomas  Mann's work after  Budden­ brooks (Tanio Kroger and Tod  in Venedig, for example), the main  character  is an  artist  who  is aware,  or  becomes aware,  of the  polarity  of Apollonian  and Dionysiac within  himself. In Venedig, Aschenbach cannot  assimilate or unite the two sides of himself, which  results in his death. Tanio Kroger,  however  (notice the symbolism of the two types in his name), recognizes the duality of his northern  rational,  practical  bourgeois self and  his other  "dark" bohemian-Mediterranean tendencies,  and  transcends  them  successfully. This  Hegelian  dialectic  is clearly visible in  Hesse  also.  In  Siddhartha, the  protagonist  tests  both  ascetism  and physical  pleasures  before  working  his way  towards  transcendence. In  Steppen­ wolf, the same process is presented quite differently. Instead  of the calm narrative  of  Siddhartha, we find a tortured  mix of action and  morbid  self-doubt  as Haller tries again  and again  to solve the battle between his bourgeois spirit  and  his dis­ ruptive  wolf-self, the  Appollonian  and  the  Dionysiac, the  rational  and  the  un­ tamed.
One  of the  major  techniques  in this struggle within  the  artist-self is the  frag­ mentation  of a character into  several  people, each  corresponding   to a  facet  of that  character. Hesse points this out explicitly within Step·penwolf,  and  Hermine  and  Pablo,  as well as the  bourgeois landlady,  are  parts  of modern  man  in  his multiplicity.  The  technique is also central  to  Frisch's  Homo   Faber  where  the technological  Faber  must  accept  the  irrational  life which  includes  Sabeth  and Hanna. Joyce uses this technique,  too:  Steven and Bloom are father/son, spirit/ nature, etc. By far the most common representation  of this split  in the self in the contemporary   novel  is  the  novel  with  two  main  characters. Beckett  uses this duality in Mercier et Gamier  (and, of course, in En Attendant Godot with Vladi­ mir and  Estragon  forming  complementary  characters,  and  Pozzo and  Lucky  as

91

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY

Hegel's master and slave). It is central also in Boll's U nd Sagte Kein einziges Wort where the practical  Kate must cope while Bogner dreams,  and  is to be found  in Lawrence's  The  Rainbow  and Women in Love  (Ursula and  Berkin, Gerald  and Gudrun), as well as Hawkes's The  Blood Oranges  (Cyril  and  Fiona,  Hugh  and Catherine), and Greene's The  End of the Affair.
In all of these examples and so many others,  the division  (which  can  be seen as either  complementarity or  opposition)  of  the  two  characters   is based  on  a rational j emotional  polarization. This basis for the division of human  nature  has become so predictable  in our literature  that  we have  come to accept  it without question. But such a division was until the last century  and  a half or so not  just uncommon,  but  actually  rare-until  the reality  of the  technological  revolution had  become  commonplace  to  the  citizen.  The   alacrity  and   decisiveness with which this split occurred  are particularly  noteworthy.  What  is it about  this  par­ ticular  polarity  which, once adopted,  has struck  us as so profoundly  satisfactory and indeed, so natural?

The Split Brain

The  rapidity  and  thoroughness of the usurpation  of the logos by science, and the resultant  creation  of an opposing  anti-logos,  were so sudden  and  profound that  the truth  could almost be guessed:  the  divided  consciousness, the sensation of self and the other, of emotion contradicting reason, has at its base a metaphor
-the split brain -which is literally true. The  human  brain  has two lobes, one of which-the left lobe, controlling the right side of the body -excels at linear, logocentric  thought; the other, the right hemisphere  (controlling  the left side)  is metaphoric (imaginative) , seeing patterns and  the overall picture.  And it appears possible that  one  mode  of  thought,  or  hemisphere  of  the  brain,  can  come  to dominate  the other.  The  resulting potential  for ambivalence has always existed, but  has  remained   potential  only, until  the  balance  of  reason  and  imagination became radically upset by the startling growth of reason's physical power via technology.
Everyone  is aware  that  humans  go through  puzzling  variable  modes of  con­ sciousness from  one  day-no,  from  one  moment   to  the  next.  We  vacillate between conditions: concentration  and  restlessness, goal-oriented  activity  ( prob­ lem-solving)  and daydreaming,  linear and "roundabout" thinking,  planning  and memories. It is almost as if we had two brains, not one, and couldn't  decide which we preferred  to inhabit.
It has been known since the first autopsy, long before Hippocrates, that  man's brain  is composed  of two almost  totally separate  lobes, mirror  images  of  each other. The  first medical man  of the modem  era  to relate  this doubleness of the organ to the thinking  it produces was Dr. A. L. Wigan  who, in  1844, published a book entitled  The  Duality of the Mind. In  1861, the Frenchman, Paul  Broca,

92

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY


published  the  first of  his  papers  on  language and  the  brain. He  had  discovered that  damage to  a  specific  area  in  the  front  left side  of  the  brain   (in  the  third frontal gyrus  of  the  cerebral cortex,  now  called  Broca's   Area)  caused  speech disorders  (aphasia) . InI 865,  he added  a very significant  finding: damage to the corresponding area  on the right side of the brain  did not affect language capacity. Language is localized  in the left brain.  For  the first time,  it was realized  that  the two  halves of  the  brain   are  not  literally  symmetrical in  operation and  that   one side  may  have  "cerebral dominance" over  the  other  for  any  given  function. (It should  be  pointed   out  here  that  the  location  of speech  in  the  left  brain   is not universal  among left-handed people.  For  simplicity,  the  observations made  here concern  right-handed individuals.)
Broca's  work  was immediately joined  by that  of the  eminent English  neurolo­
gist, John  Hughlings Jackson. In  1864, Jackson  wrote:

If, then, it should be proved by wider evidence that the faculty of expression resides in one hemisphere,  there is no absurdity in raising the question as to whether per­ ception-its corresponding  opposite-may not be seated in the other.  5

Attention to  the  more  visually  oriented   right-brain was shunted aside,  however, in the  haste  to explore  the  verbal,  powerful,  left brain.
It was in  recent  work  with  epileptics  that  the  next  breakthrough came.  The two  brain  hemispheres are  joined  by  the  corpus  callosum, a  thick  band  of  200 million  neural fibres  through  which  electrical   impulses  move  constantly. Four billion impulses  a second  ( 2 o per fibre per second)   connect  the  two  hemispheres. In  the severest,  most  incapacitating fmms  of epilepsy,  the  level of activity  across this bundle is greatly  increased from  the  norm,  the seizure  moving  from  one  side to the other  to involve  the  whole brain.  Roger  Sperry  and  his colleagues,  Michael Gazzaniga and  Joseph   Bogen  at  the  California Institute of  Technology, found success in halting seizures in monkeys by severing the  corpus  callosum.  Bogen and
Philip  J. Vogel  tried  it on  humans-and it worked.
Many   of  the  patients treated were  to  all  intents  and   purposes  cured  of  the disabling  seizures and  could  go back to their  normal  lives after  having  their  brains cut  in  half.  It is remarkable to note  that  on  the  surface they  appeared normal. One  nine-year-old boy,  for  example,  retained his sense of  humour and  his  out­ ward  personality, joking  with  the doctors  the  morning after  his operation  that  he had  a "splitting headache." But Sperry  and  Gazzaniga et al. devised  systems of testing  the  patients. These  involved  flashing  images  onto  the  retina  of  one  visual field. As in  normal people,  a cross-over  effect  was found:  information  from  the left side of the  body is processed in the right side of the  brain, and  vice versa. But when the corpus  callosum  is cut, if the image of, say, a horse, is flashed only to the left  visual  field,  the  right  brain, being  speechless,  cannot  respond.  When  asked what  he saw,  the  patient says "I don't  know." Yet the  patient is not  blind  in  the

93

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY


right  visual field. The  left hand,  if given  the  opportunity, will point  to a  picture of a horse.
The  minor  hemisphere  also  triggers  facial  expressions,  grimacing,   and  wincing when an error  is made  by the vocal hemisphere  and  where  the  correct  answer  is known  only  to  the  minor  hemisphere.  The   minor   hemisphere   seems  definitely bothered in the situation.6

Clearly,  there  are  two separate brains  at  work  here.  When  disconnected, they can  function on their  own-simultaneously.
The  minor  hemisphere  can also spell on a very low level. ... It is not  the  major hemisphere that is doing the spelling here, because it vocalizes a running commen­ tary on the progress of the left hand, like "This  is A" when  it  really is  "T," and so on. This vocal commentary is entirely off on the progress of the left hand,  except for accidental  coincidences. This in itself is of some interest  here, namely, that  the minor  hemisphere  can  concentrate   and  carry  on  tasks of  its  own,  ignoring  the erroneous and distracting  chatter  of its better half.1

As long  as the  right  brain  has  no access to speech,  outward conflict  is rare.  An exception  is the famous  case where  an  angered husband, attempting to strike  his wife with  his right  hand, found  that  his left hand  reached out  and  held  the  right arm  down.
Further such  experiments show  that  calculation is very clearly  localized  in  the left brain, while facial  and  pattern recognition is found in  the  right,  and  so on. Many  have  been  tempted to jump  to grand  conclusions from  the  resultant data, and  others  are  now calling for restraint. It is important to keep  clear  what  is fact and  what  is wild  surmise,  and  to  remember  that   hemispheric  lateralization  is relative,  a matter of degree.  Nevertheless,  it  cannot be  denied   that  it  is in  their implications that  these data  hold their  most  profound fascination.
John  Eccles's summary of the findings  from  the  experiments8  is representative
and  can  be used as an  initial list:  the dominant  (left)   hemisphere  has a liaison  to consciousness,  and   is  verbal,  analytic, sequential  (linear) , detailed, arithmetic and  computer-like, and  temporal  (i.e.,  tied  to  linear   time)  ; the  minor  (right) hemisphere has no such liaison to consciousness, is almost  non-verbal but  is musi­ cal, synthetic (i.e., synthesizing), holistic,  coherent, geometrical and  spatial, and  is simultaneous, that  is, unconscious  of linear  flow of  time.  Past  and  present  are interchangeable and  this is the  world  of memory, fantasy, and  dream. The  left brain  appears to  be  the  site  of  logical  thought, step-by-step  reasoning, mathe­ matics.  Because  it has  control  over speech  and  voluntary  muscles  and  therefore interacts with  the external world  because  (as Robert Ornstein9  would  say)  of the bias of our  science-oriented society, it has  been  labelled   "dominant." The  right or so-called  "minor" hemisphere grasps  spatial  relations-it  allows  us to  recog­ nize faces, for  example-and  understands  patterns in  a  thought, seeing  it  not piece  by  piece,  but  as  a  whole.  It  is  thinking in  the  AHA! mode,  where  one

94

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY

realizes "now  I see the picture." It is the realm of complex multifaceted  ideas, or "Gestalts," which are holistic, or unified, modes of thinking.  These modes are not goal-oriented.
The  left  brain  controls  muscular  activity  and  is closely concerned  with  the
external  world.  The  right  brain  tends  to  emerge,  therefore,  when  the  body  is relaxed and goal-oriented activity suspended:  Archimedes in his warm bath, for example, or Kekule's famous drowsing before the fire when he envisioned the structure  of the benzene ring and ushered in the new science of organic chemistry. The words he used in announcing this new branch of science were telling: "Gentlemen: we must  learn  how to dream!" Meditation  techniques  appear  to put the left brain  into neutral  by giving it a task it cannot  complete logically (as in  contemplating the  Zen  Koan  "what  is the sound  of one  hand  clapping?"), thus releasing the intuitive,  inconcrete, synthesizing right  brain  functions. This  is the  state  Keats  called  Negative  Capability,  "which  Shakespeare   possessed so enormously ... that  is when  man  is capable of being in uncertainties,  mysteries, doubts, without  any irritable  reaching after fact or reason.... "10
A few important thinkers  have  noted the great split in our  mental  processes. Each  has devised a schema  to deal  with the  rupture,  and  these schemas  are at heart homologous. The mention earlier of Apollonian and Dionysiac, for example, foregrounds the fact that  Nietzsche faced the growing left-brain,  right-brain polarization  straight  on, viewing the dichotomy as rational-sensual.  Levi-Strauss, too, was aware that  two great modes of thought  exist. He named  them  primitive ( "sauvage"), and  civilized. They  involve different  uses of minds  which  are  at root comparable. The  "untamed" or primitive mind, for Levi-Strauss, "is neither the mind of savages nor that  of primitive or archaic  humanity,  but  rather  mind
in its untamed  state as distinct from mind cultivated or domesticated  for the pur­ pose of yielding a  retum"11  (i.e., goal-oriented). Its  approach is  "timeless";   it grasps the world as both  a synchronic  and  diachronic  totality;  it  "totalizes  ... " refusing "to allow anything  human  (or even living)  to remain  alien to it,"'2  and it is dominated  by the symbolic function,  "a  consuming symbolic ambition  such as humanity  has never again  seen rivalled."13  All these  characteristics  duplicate  those of the  right  brain,  implying  that  tribal  society  profits and  results from  a different  balance  of cerebral  dominance   (i.e.,  right  brain)   than  does our  left­ brain  civilization. In  a further  passage of La Pensee  Sauvage,  Levi-Strauss con­ firms the homology between  his system and  ours, writing  that  there  are enclaves within civilized society where  these "primitive" thought  processes are still to be found. "This  is the case of art," he writes, "to which our civilization accords the status of a national  park.... "14
Julian  Jaynes,  in  his The Origin  of  Consciousness in  the  Breakdown  of  the Bicameral  Mind, independently reaches  very similar  conclusions,  namely  that pre-civilized  thought   involved  far  readier  access to  the  right  brain-indeed

95

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY

exhibited a kind of "normal" schizophrenia-which gradually  became lost with the development  of consciousness and  the suppression  of the voices and  inspira­ tions of the right brain.
Another  who recognized and  explored the two modes of thought  operative  in our brains was, of course, Sigmund Freud. The  homology between the split brain and  Freud's  schema  is inescapable.  In  Freud,  we find  that  the  unconscious  is characterized   by lack  of language  (it  is the  pre-linguistic  source of  language, without ego and subjectivation:  there is no "I" or "he," but a flux of subjectivity, and  no connection  between signifiers and  referents:  such  correlations  are  con­ ventions established  by the  conscious mind) . Instead,  signification  results  from relations between signifiers. Secondly, the "reality  principle" is not in effect:  there is no distinction  between what  the conscious mind  would  label "real" and  what it would  call "imaginary." Similarly, the  unconscious is pre-logical:   we  do  not find adherence  to continuity or coherence. Instead,  concepts, objects, ideas swarm in a kind of chaos.  Fourthly,  socio-symbolic orders  governing  concepts  of  right and wrong are suspended. And finally, Freud  tells us, "the  time-factor ... has no application  to unconscious processes . . . the  Kantian proposition  that  time  and space are necessary modes of thought may be submitted  to discussion today in the light of certain  knowledge reached  through  psychoanalysis. We  have  found  by experience  that  unconscious mental  processes  are  in themselves 'timeless' .ms All of these characteristics  coincide with those of  the  right  brain  as summarized  by John  Eccles, while the distinguishing features  of the  left  brain  correspond  with those of consciousness.
Our  society, then,  is a split-brain society. The  rise of science and  its enormous
physical  power  has  caused  a  dominance  of  left-brain   thinking,  causing  many artists (and  numerous citizens, as evidenced by the rise in fascination  with UFO's, astrology, ESP, etc.)  to retreat  to the right  brain,  pulling  up the drawbridge. Or to use another  metaphor,  this polarization  has severed the  corpus callosum,  and we are left with  precious little communication  between  the  two worlds. Yet, as we have seen, if writers reject science as a specific subject,  they are  nevertheless aware  of the great  division in society and  in  themselves. This  rupture  concerns them deeply, and is in fact the subject of our era's literature.




AN EXAMPLE IS ONE OF   THE best novels to be written  in Canada this century, Malcolm Lowry's Under  the Volcano. Like many other contemporary  novels, it takes the form of a  mental  conflict  within  a  hopelessly divided  "hero," a character  now so representative  of modern  man  that  George Woodcock writes that "Geoffrey Firmin  ... can well be considered  the represen­ tative of much  more than his own inner conflict -in fact  as an aspect of Every-

g6

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY


man.... ma   Behind  Levi-Strauss and  Freud, and  even  Nietzsche,  stands  one  of the most helpful  philosophers of rupture, namely  Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, analyst  of the  modern divided   consciousness.  A study  of  Volcano  according to the Hegelian dialectic of the stages of the Unhappy Consciousness in Hegel's Phenomenology  of the Mind-through Ansucht, despair, fragmentation, resigna­ tion to the existence  of both  the immutable self or essence and  the physical nature, and  eventual transcendence into  unity-is  very rewarding;  space  unfortunately precludes its appearance here,  other  than  to summarize that  Lowry's  novel is the search  for  the  absolute, unchangeable, by a  man  who  finds  a  gulf  both  within himself,  and  between  himself  and  the  world.  The  Consul exemplifies  the  failure  of this search  due  to fatal  isolation  into  one self of  a divided  consciousness, rather  than  acceptance of the necessity of both selves for the total individual. The  Consul is a classic study  of gradual immersion  in the right-brain state  of mind,  where  the practical left brain  loses hold.
A few words on Lowry's handling of language are pertinent here. At the extreme of  his inner  battle, the  Consul  struggles  to  retain  control   of  language, that  last left-brain  lifeline,  to  prevent   total  control   of  his  physical   body  from  slipping away.  (Only when  he  begins  to lose control  of language, in  Cervantes' cafe,  do we know  the  battle  is lost.  The   Consul  loses his ability  to  talk,  and  with  it  all connection  to  left-brain  reality.  Within  moments   he  is falling   into  the  ravine, the  barranca-dead.) 	Significantly, that   control   of  language  has  been  chal­ lenged  throughout the  novel, and  ultimately  destroyed,  by usurpation  by science and  technology. The Consul's spiritual struggle   (and  his half-brother  Hugh's)  is a twentieth-century one:  the  attempt to reconcile the impotence of  the individual with  the  enormity of events,  an  enormity  the  horrors  of  which  are  brought  into consciousness  by  the  radio,  the  telephone, the  movie  newsreel,  machines which speak  of the  dehumanization of  battles  in  which  machines  replace,  direct,  and  kill men.  The  individual seems  capable  of  ridiculously  little-Hugh's ideas  of fighting  in Spain, for  example, are depicted as naively  idealistic -in  the  world of machines; yet  by his machine-brought knowledge  of  injustice, the  individual nevertheless   becomes   responsible,   and   in  doing   nothing  he  is  guilty.   "They are  losing the  battle  of the  Ebro.  Because  of you, said  the  wind." 17  The  Consul,  finding  the outer  world  of uncontrollable powers terrifying, its language a threat, withdraws into  alcohol  to drown  his conscience. But  his own  mind,  in its guilt, recreates the  division  and  strife  of that  other,  outer-world reality.  Mentally   the Consul  "kills" himself  by drinking;  physically  he is ensnared by the  fascist  police and  executed as a Jewish  spy:  Lowry draws a careful  parallel  between  the Consul as individual and  the  Consul  as representative of Western  civilization. The  same telegram reappears at  the  end  of  the novel, no longer  separated from  the  flow of the text since  the language of the Consul's  environment has  become  as terrifying, impersonal, and  urgent as that  of  the  outer  world.  Its  harsh  language, ostensibly

97

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY

"misinterpreted," condemns the  Consul  to death. The telegram and  its language are  symbols  of  power  "towards unseen  high  events" against   which   the  "little man" is helpless.
Lowry  also  uses newspaper   headlines  to  similar  effect.  In  the  Consul's  night­
mares,  accusations of his existential  guilt  come  from  impersonal sources,  and  are expressed in the terse and  merciless language of the  printing press. Even  his death is predicted   to  him  by this  impersonal voice  of  the  headline:  "Es  inevitable  el muerte  del Papa."18
Similarly,  the  Consul  cannot  speak  the  language of the  telephone. Terrified of
the  machine, he  is incapable of  using  it  to  call  for  help.  He  cannot dial;  the emergency   number 999  turns  upside  down   to  666,   and  instead   of  stating  his message  he  shouts:  "Who  do  you  want   ... God!"19   The   Consul   is  simply incapable of holding on to the logos in the  face  of its  usurpation by  technology.
Volcano  presents  a search for meaning that  failed. And  in the cynical  twentieth
century,  one  would   be excused  for  assuming   that   most  novels  must  reflect  the pessimism of the  times  by  consistent  such  failures. But  according to  Hegel,  the state  of rupture is most fruitful when  transcended. We  find  the  same  message  in Nietzsche's  Socratic and  Dionysiac  and  in  Levi-Strauss, with  his concept of the basically  binary  thought processes. Robert  Ornstein  concurs:  "our  highest  crea­ tive achievements are the  products of the  complementary functioning of  the two modes."  Albert  Rothenberg20  arrives  at  the same  conclusion through  his study  of the  differences  in  thought-processes  between   creative achievers and   ordinary people.  He  concludes that  genius,  or  at  least  the  "Eureka" process,  stems  from an ability  to consider  opposite  sides of a thought, and  to leap  to a  higher  level of
thought to  unite   the  polarities.   He  calls  the   process  Janusian  Thinking,  in  a
tribute to the  twins  of opposing  vision. Arthur Deikman21  also notes  a  combina­
tion of the two "brains" in the  highest creativity. L. Ponomarev concurs:

Both points of view are equally valid, but, taken separately,  are incomplete  ... the art  of ballet  requires mathematical accuracy  and,  as Pushkin  wrote, "Inspiration in geometry is just as necessary as in poetry ... " We cannot  assess the degree of damage we undergo from a one-sided perception  of life.22
And  indeed  we do  begin  to find  such  literature appearing. It  is literature of balance once  more,  but  with  a  new  maturity: taking  little  for  granted now,  its treatment of the struggle  is thoroughly self-conscious; and  its right-brain develop­ ment, thanks  to vigorous exercising earlier  this century, is greater and more experi­  mental  and  experienced than  before. It still sets up  the  terms  of the debate in the format of  an  opposition; but  the  corpus  callosum  is  beginning  to be  rebuilt. Volcano's  Geoffrey  Firmin  recognizes the duality but  cannot  bridge or transcend it, and shows us the price of failure: we fall into the gap,  the barranca, Malebolge. In novels such  as Homo  Faber by Max  Frisch,  or Zen  and  the  Art of Motorcycle Maintenance by Robert  Pirsig, however,  we find  deliberate, self-conscious  recog-

g8

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY


nition  and  reconnection of the severed  elements.  These  are  novels which  face  the fact  of rupture head-on and  in so doing  they  begin  deliberately to involve  tech­ nology and science into their subject  matter. The  impact  of science on the content  of  the  novel  is, ironically  perhaps, coming  long  after   its  effect  on  novel form (including language)  has  been established.
Canadian  writers   are  peculiarly   well-suited   to  join  this  movement. A  long history  of dealing with  the  left-brain/right-brain opposition  in  the  terms  of  the­ great-Canadian-wilderness vs. controlled-European-pastoral, and  later  of  Western  (and now   Northern)  frontier-freedom vs.  Eastern   conventionality  and  order, has  given  Canadian authors from  Moodie   to  Atwood  first-hand  experience  at grappling with  the  intricacies of the  hemispheric conflict  and  the  complexity of its resolution. In  the  process, Canadian writers  have  coloured  that  literary polar­  ization  with  a particular Canadian tint,  that  of expertise  in  landscape metaphor; and  like Lowry  with  his Malebolge (the  barranca) and  Paradise (British  Colum­ bia)  they now  use it adeptly  to present  the geography of mental conflict.  William  New goes further:
what is vital about both of them [Canadian identity and  the essence of artistic experience]  is expressed when order somehow interacts  with generation,  east with west,  Calvinist-Jansenist  reality  with  visionary  "pagan"  myth.  And  the  points where the  "Eastern" forces of civilized restraint  and  the  "Western" ones of free growth  meet are the moments when artist  and  reader  alike tune in to the  tension at  the  heart  of the Canadian experience  they are  trying  to  render  and  realize.23

The  best of Canadian literature is beginning to face,  encompass, and  transcend the  division   between   order, the  rational, scientific   mode,   and   the   right-brain mythic  mode   which   is our  legacy  for  coming  of  age  culturally  in  the  Age  of Science.
For  its  part, science  already, if involuntarily, began  the  rapprochement  long ago. Earlier  we noted  the value of the underrated right-brain's "Eureka function" to scientific thought; it is not really surprising that  the  new left-brain logos should prove too narrow. It is ironic that  even while artists rebelled  against the cold logic of science,  physicists  found  themselves  in  the  midst  of a  revolution. It began  in
1900  with  Max  Planck  and  Einstein,  though by 1927  the  scientific  community had  still only  begun  to sense the  philosophical ramifications of the  new  world  of quantum  mechanics:
The Copenhagen Interpretation  (of quantum physics) was, in effect, a recognition of the limitations  of left hemispheric  thought  although  the  physicists at  Brussels in 1927 could not have thought  in those terms. It was also a re-cognition  of those psychic aspects which long had been ignored in a rationalistic society. After all, physicists are essentially people who wonder at the universe.24

It turns  out  that  the  classical  physical  laws  we've  accepted simply  can't account for the way things  are after  all. Even logic gets false results in the  reahns of intense

99

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY

cold, high speed,  extreme  smallness.  Now science  has left  its moorings in  the  left brain,  finding  that  the  rational logos is simply  inadequate to  deal  with  physical phenomena. It was an immensely  useful tool in such forms  as Newtonian physics; but like its opposing  extremes, such as surrealism, it eventually ran  dry.  Its version of  the  truth was  exposed  to  be  limited.  The  trend towards a  new  balance  is becoming  visible in the very titles of science books:  The Dancing Wu  Li  Masters or The Tao of Physics  come very close in tone  to Zen and  the  Art  of Motorcycle Maintenance. The  same  recognition is being  made  from   both  sides:   deliberate exclusion  of  one  of  the  two  time-honoured  dimensions of  thought can  be  im­ mensely  productive, but  only  in  a limited  arena. Outside that   arena, the  truth which  seemed so satisfyingly  evident  simply  ceases to  be valid.
Perhaps it is too early  yet to say whether literature of rupture is beginning to give way to literature of rapprochement. But the  hope  is there.


NOTES

1 William Wordsworth, "Preface" to Lyrical  Ballads, I80I.
2 Valentina Ivasheva, On  the Threshold of the  Twenty-First Century: The  Techno­
logical  Revolution and  Literature  (Moscow:  Progressive Publishers,  I978), p. 47·
3 Roman  Jakobson,  "The  Metaphoric  and  Metonymic  Pole,"  in his Selected  Writ­
ings II  (The  Hague: Mouton,  I97I), pp. 254-59·
4 Ivasheva, p. I3.
5  J. Hughlings Jackson, quoted by J. Taylor, ed. Selected  Writings of John  Hughlings
Jackson  (New York:  Basic Books, I958),  p. 220.
6 R. W. Sperry and  M. S. Gazzaniga, "Language Following Surgical  Disconnection of the Hemispheres"  in Brain Mechanisms Underlying Speech and  Language, eds. Charles  Millikan  and F. L. Darley  (New York:  Grune  & Stratton, I967), p.  I I5.
7  Sperry and Gazzaniga, p. I I4.
8  John C. Eccles, The Understanding of the Brain  (New York: McGraw-Hill, I973).
9 Robert  Ornstein,   author  of  The  Psychology   of  Consciousness   (San  Francisco: W.  H.  Freeman,   I972)   and  The Nature   of  Human  Consciousness: A  Book   of Readings (San Francisco:  W. H. Freeman,  I973).
10 John Keats, "Letter to George and Thomas Keats"  (December  2I or 27, I8q), in Norton  Anthology of English   Literature, M.  H.  Abrams,  gen.  ed. 	(New  York: W. W. Norton,  I962),  p. I274·
11 Claude  Levi-Strauss, The Savage  Mind   (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago  Press, I966), p. 2Ig.
12 Levi-Strauss, p. 245·
1
14 Levi-Strauss, p. 2 I 9·
15 Sigmund  Freud,  "Group   Psychology and  the  Analysis  of  the  Ego"   (I 92 I).  A General  Selection  from  the  Works of Sigmund  Freud, ed.  John  Rithman  (New York: Doubleday,  I957L p. 203.

100

SCIENCE, LITERATURE, LOWRY


16 George  Woodcock, Odysseus   Ever  Returning  (Toronto:  McClelland &  Stewart,
1970) ' p. 66.
17  Malcolm Lowry, Under the Volcano (Toronto: Signet,  1966), p.  r8o.
18 Lowry, p. 269.
19 Lowry, P· 238.
20  Albert  Rothenberg, "Creative Contradictions," Amer.  Journal  of Psychiatry, June
1979, pp. 55-62.
21 Arthur J.  Deikman,  "Bimodal  Consciousness" in  The  Nature   of  Human  Con­
ciousness, ed. Robert Ornstein (San  Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1973).
22  L. Ponomarev, In Quest  of the Quantum, trans.  N. Weinstein (Moscow: Mir  Pub­
lishers, 1972).
23  William H. New, "Introduction" to Articulating West  (Toronto: New Press, 1972),
p. XXV.
24 Gary Zukav, The Dancing  Wu Li Masters:  An Overview of the  New  Physics (New
York: Bantam, 1980), p. 40.




SHELF LIFE
 


Mick Burrs


I'm  greeted  by a constellation of grain  bugs,
some pulsing  their  wings against  the cabinet's dark, others  asleep, stationary as cold stars.
On  the shelves above my warm  stove
their  casings hang  like beads.

They  rest inside plastic bags of oats and  wheat and  crawl  between  long grains of brown rice and wait  to hover over all my future breakfasts. I grab  a newspaper and  roll up
the violent  headlines, my poised club.

Method of extermination: the printed  word. It takes one hour  to spatter the kitchen  walls with blood,  tiny eyes, crushed  wings.
I throw  away  the food they've infiltrated, black raisins glistening with white grubs.

No longer  hungry, I admit  my guilt, await  my verdict:
should  I be shot, hung,  or burnt at the stake? Is there  really any difference now
between  the prolonged life of a prosaic dictator and  the brief career  of an exterminating poet?

101

POEM

Dictators enjoy keeping statistics: body counts. They  sleep with revolvers under their  pillows.
I'm  supposed  to be the lyrical enemy of statistics:
how could I sleep where dictators rule?
Yet today I'm  their  brother stained in blood.

When  my victims return tonight
to flutter  in the cabinet of my dreams
will I again step forward to execute their  ghosts? Or will the angel hidden  deep in me
reach  out and  touch  their  brittle wings?









SLIP-FINGER



Cried  to me from a crannock bush, go back, you don't  approach here.
I am already, fell my dry lips;
go back I'll  not, not for squeevy, pumpfret, winking scriffin, golly-pip, pidwing or all whatever company.

At once, bold, my footstep  left me as I walked seemingly  the mists
of air; in the unsensed forward
of my going I joined the chittering and  chaffering soft as scented  leaves dancing to the whisp of puff-breeze

that  stirs that  seldom sort of morning. It is a warmth and  a good feeding,
and  accepted  company, more  joy's whirl
than  I found  ever in your country. More I may not tell; you must  wait  out your hours till whether I come again.

Should  none slip fingers through easily here, you know a long waiting.
 


John V. Hicks


102






A TIME TO REMEMBER

ANN   GOMER SUN AHARA, The  Politics of Racism.
James Lorimer, $19.95; pa.  $12.95.
JOY  KOGAWA, Obasan. Lester & Orpen Dennys,
$ 13·95·

WE  CANADIANS  LIKE TO THINK of  our­ selves as a generous people,  always ready to welcome immigrants from  remote lands who  come  to Canada seeking  new  hope and  refuge from oppression-this despite the  documented history  of  rejection  de­ nial,  and   oppression.  British   Colu bia, the  point  of  debarkation for  most  Asian immigrants, has a particularly sordid  rec­ ord   of   violence   and   injustice  towards immigrants of Chinese, East  Indian, and Japanese origin.  The politics  of  the  his­ torical  moment determine which  of   the two contradictory versions  of reality  pre­ dominates. In  times of depression  or war, deep-seated  prejudices  can   be   grafted  onto  new  fears  and  anxieties to  produce  a rank growth of racism.  In  times of afflu­ ence and  peace, it is expedient to cultivate the myth  of ethnic harmony and of toler­ ance  for cultural and  racial diversity, and to encourage a sort  of  collective amnesia.
The  Politics of Racism  by Ann  Gomer Sunahara and 0basan by Joy Kogawa are two  works  which  seek  in  very  different
ways to deny  us the  comfort of  forgetful­ ness, to impress  on our memories the real­  ity of one episode-the expulsion  of the Canadian  Japanese from   the  west  coast during World  War  II-so that  no such act   of   official  racism   can   ever   happen again.
Ann Sunahara's study  of the uprooting
of 20,000 Canadian Japanese on grounds of national security,  their  detention in internment camps,  the seizure  and  forced
 sale  of  their   property, and  the  planned deportation of half their number to Japan after   the  war,   attempts  to  analyze   the politics of  the  event.  Sunahara  combines recollections of individuals interned under the  War  Measures Act  with  official  rec­ ords  to provide a comprehensive account of  the  period. Her  well-documented  re­ search  of  newly  available materials con­ tributes  significantly  to  the  picture pro­ vided  in   works  like  Ken   Adachi's The Enemy  That   Never  Was,  published   in
I 976. The  mixture of personal  experience and official papers  is not, however, wholly successful.  The  empirical evidence  con­ tained   in   official   memos   and   statistics  seems divorced from  the  individual real­  ity, and  the  reticent, even apologetic tone of Sunahara's informants contributes to a feeling of flatness and discontinuity in the narrative.  Moral  indignation is  perhaps inappropriate in  the  writing   of  history, but  when  even   the  victims  of  injustice appear unmoved by their  experience, it is hard   for  a  reader  unfamiliar  with   the event  to grasp  the full extent  of the injury inflicted  under  the guise of necessity.
That note of apology, that reticence, sounds again  and  again  in Kogawa's Obasan,  but   here   the   intent,  and   the effect, are  quite  different. By means  of carefully controlled images, Kogawa seeks to recover  and  to confront the ugly facts, to piece together the "Fragments of  frag­ ments"   which    have   been   erased   from memory,  like words  erased  from  a black­  board,  and  to penetrate the "sealed vault of silence." But in Obasan the experience of   betrayal,  fear,  and   loss   revealed through  the  exploration of  the narrator's individual consciousness  goes far  beyond  the facts. Like  Poe's  purloined letter,  the facts  are  in  plain  view  from  the  outset.  While the narrator and  her aunt, Obasan, search  the  attic with  its black  fly corpses, dead  birds, and spiders, its "Shredded rag shapes thick with  dust  [which] hang  like evil laundry on a line,"  "A graveyard and


103

BOOKS IN REVIEW



a  feasting-ground  combined," the  pack­ age from  Aunt  Emily which contains  "All the  details  of  death  that  are left  in  the laps  of  the  living"  rests, ironically,  in  "a mandarin orange  box under  the table"  in the  kitchen. For  Obasan, "Everything is forgetfulness. The time of forgetting is ... come."  For  the  narrator, Naomi  Nakane, it is the  time  of  remembering. Moved  by the death of  her  uncle,  she searches  "the  caverns  of  [her]  mind," tunnelling back­ wards through the attics  and living rooms of   memory.   The heroine   descends   into the  dark recesses of the past where "in­ describable items" lie  buried.  "What  is past  recall  is past  pain," she argues.  But the   bitterness  of  repression   and   denial have  turned her  into  an  amputee with, as she says, "the social  graces of the com­ mon  housefly."  Only  by digging  through the  sedimented layers  of  memory  to  the underground stream where the water  and the  pure   white  stone  dance  in  a  "quiet  ballet,  soundless  as breath," can  she  put off the  body of  grief  which  is "not  fit for human  habitation" and   become  a  live, sensual  being.
With  technical skill and delicacy of feeling,   Kogawa  creates   a   parallel   be­ tween  the  political   and   the  personal  in the experience of the  narrator. Deprived of the calm, gentle presence of her mother who "disappears" at  a moment  when  the child  is becoming  aware  of the  existence of  a  tabooed  realm of  carnality, Naomi  experiences  an   "ominous  sense  of  cold and   absence."  Old    Man    Gower,    the neighbour  who  molests   the  child  under the pretense  of protecting her from harm, has his counterpart in the Canadian gov­ ernment which,  using the excuse that they are protecting them,  uproots men, women, and   children  and   interns   them   in   the abandoned ghost   towns  of   the  B.C.  in­ terior. Her  mother's failure to return from Japan, where  she  has  gone  to  visit  just prior   to  the  outbreak  of  war,   is  never explained  to  the  child,  and   because  of


104
 this misguided desire  to spare  Naomi  and her  brother Stephen the pain  and  grief of knowing that  their  mother is dead,  a vic­ tim  of  the  Nagasaki  atomic  bomb,  the children are left with  confused feelings of guilt   and   rejection. Stephen,  unable   to bear  what   he  interprets as  the  "rebuke" of  Obasan's silence,  rejects  his  heritage and   flees  "to  the   ends   of   the   earth." Naomi  experiences a  "rift" in  the  centre of her  body. In silence, a small frightened animal, she clings to the fragments of her past  as Obasan, "Our  Lady  of  the  Left­  Overs," clings   to   bits   of  string,   pencil stubs, half-eaten scraps  of food. The "col­  lage of images" associated  with her child­ hood  home  in  Marpole -the  porcelain crane, the  Ninomiya Kinjiro statue with his  white  and  gold  book,  the  songs  and stories-are lost in  a "white heavy  mist of fear," displaced by nightmarish  visions of death and  darkness "connected to one another like a string  of Christmas tree lights."  In   the  background, "There's something called  an  order-in-council that sails  like  a  giant   hawk  across  a  chicken yard."
The retelling of  the  child's  experience culminates in the unspeakable injustice of the  forced   move,  after   the  war,  to  the Alberta sugar  beet farm. Of  these "sleep­ walk  years"  the  narrator says,  "I  cannot tell  about  this   time,   Aunt   Emily.   The body  will not  tell."  Had  the  novel ended  here,  it  would  serve  as a  moving  indict­ ment   of  an  episode  in  Canadian history for   which   only   "the   lowest   motives   of greed,   selfishness  and  hatred  have   been brought forward." But  Kogawa does not leave  the  reader   with  the sour  taste  of a
mean   and   sordid   experience.  Her   pur­ pose,  which   goes  beyond   the  particular moment, is expressed  in the seven canoni­ cal  words  of Aunt  Emily's  diary: "Write the   vision  and   make   it  plain."  In   the letter from   Grandma  Kato with   which she  concludes the  telling,  Kogawa deliv­ ers  the  memory  to  her  readers  in  a  long

BOOKS IN REVIEW



lament  of  scalding  and   searing   power. The  shreds  and  rags of memory,  the  torn net  of  the   family,   are   linked   with   the stumbling ghosts  of  Nagasaki, their  skin hanging in  tattered rags  from  their  bod­ ies. In  the final  pages of Obasan  the pro­ tective lie is erased-the lie which served only  to cover,  not  to  heal,  the  wound­ and  the  white  stone  of  silence  bursts  to release  the  living  word.
In  the  poetry  of its language, the sub­
tlety and  truth of its characterization, and the  skill  with  which  both  point  of  view and  narrative structure are  employed  in the  creation of a unified  aesthetic whole, Obasan  is an  impressive achievement. It fulfils the highest  function of art: to rep­ resent  by means  of affective  images what critical  thought  attempts  to  convey through a  recounting of  the  facts.  The  Politics of Racism  adds  to our knowledge  of  the  expulsion of  the  Japanese Cana­ dians.  Obasan   tells  us  the  truth.

HILDA L. THOMAS


CIVILIZATION?

A.    A.   DEN   OTTER,   Civilizing the   West: The Galts  and  the  Development of Western Can­ ada.  Univ. of  Alberta Press,  $24·95·

WHEN JOHN GALT LEFT  the west of  Scot­ land for the New World,  Canada's "west"  meant the forested  reaches between Lake Erie and  Lake  Huron. For his sons, John, Thomas and Alexander, "the west" meant  the land  beyond  Lake Superior. For Alex­ ander's son  Elliott  Galt  it  meant south­  western  Alberta. A. A. den Otter, who has himself gone East lately-to Newfound­ land -focuses   his  book   on   the   Leth­
bridge   region,   in  the  years  roughly  be­
 


THEATRE HISTORY  IN CANADAJHISTOIRE  DU THEATRE AU CANADA


Theatre History  in Canada  analyses the development of Canadian theatre and drama from the late fifteen hundreds to the present. Recent issues include articles  on theatre and playwriting in Quebec.  theatre censorship in Toronto, Tyrone  Guthrie's radio theatre, 19th century  theatre  in the Prairies and the Atlantic Provmces. Shakespeare in Canada, Sarah Bernhardt, theatre criticism. scene design, contemporary playwriting m Ontario, changes in Vancouver  theatre  and book reviews.

Theatre History  m Canada  is the official bi-annual  journal  of the Association for Canad1an Theatre  History/Association d'histoire du theatre  au Canada. Journal subscription is $15 for institutions, $10 for mdividuals  (students  $8) and $20 with membership  in ACTH/AHTC (students $12).

For subscnpt1ons and Associat1on member­ ships, forward  a cheque  payable to the Univers1ty of Toronto to: Richard Plant and Ann Saddlemyer. Editors, Theatre H1story
in Canada, Graduate  Centre  for Study  m
Drama, Un1versity of Toronto. Toronto, Ontano  M5S 1A1.








This publication
is available in microform.

University Microfilms International

tween  I 88o  and   I 910.
In  spite  of  the  subtitle, this  is  not  a
comprehensive family  history  of the  sort so modish  now in the  United States.  It is more   like   Michael  Bliss's  story   of  the
 300 North Zeeb Road
Depti'R
Ann Arbor, M1. 48106
U.S.A.
 30-.32 Mortimer Street
Dept.  P.R.
London WIN 7RA England





105

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Flavelles, a mixture of business and social history,  together with  a probing of the familial  compactness of the Canadian establishment, and  a reminder of some peculiar   aspects    of   Canadian    expan­ sionism.
Canadians have clung to the belief that the  Canadian west,  wherever  located   in the  mental  map,   was  more   "civilized" than  its American counterpart. London's garrison  elegance  outshone  anything con­ temporary in Cincinnati, Ohio; Winnipeg slipped  from  muddy  village  to grain  and rail  centre without any of the badness  of the  neighbouring Dakotas; Banff  offered grace  and   comfort  unmatched in  Mon­  tana;  and   ultimately  imperial    Victoria would   cast   a  genteel   shadow   over   the more blatant opulence of Seattle and  San Francisco. So goes the myth.
Impelled in part  by such a myth, Alex­ ander and   Elliott   Galt   moved  into   the west.  They   saw  their  expansion  as  pro­ ducing both  personal  profit and  civilized progress.   But  after  outlining   the  Gaits'
"techniques of growth" -their financial
manipulations, management and market­ ing  practices-den Otter  turns  to  "the  burdens of  efficiency."  Here   he  reveals the  uncivilized  aspects  of  the  expansion westward:  the  strikes,  the  social  turbu­ lence,   the  bitter   clashes  between   immi­  grant workers  from  mid-European coun­  tries  and   the   small-town   entrepreneurs from central Canada. Alexander Galt  was connected with a very sophisticated group  of  politicians and  financiers  in  England, Montreal  and   Ottawa:  Burdett-Coutts, W. H. Smith, Macdonald, Cartier, Sifton, Gzowski, and  Ramsay,  but did  not  man­ age  to carry  the  threads of  sophistication across the continent.
Each  section  of Civilizing the West  be­ gins  with  a  reminder of the  look  of  the land  before  development came: the cou­ lees shearing treeless grasslands,  the rivers in  spate   or  drought,  the  winter   forage bared  by the Chinook, and "the rich black

106
 coal cropping out  of the river  banks."  By
18go the fragile ecology was changed. Irrigation had reset the rhythm of natural production, and  "unpainted buildings, encrusted in coal  dust,  and  tall  chimneys spewing smoke broke the expanse of the yellow  grassland."
In  1870, the Canadian government had taken over these territories and  enforced order  on  the  rumrunners and  wolf  hunt­ ers -partly through the agency of  young Elliott  Galt, secretary to the Indian Com­  mission.   Elliott's  father,  Sir   Alexander Tilloch Galt,  distinguished as a  Father of Confederation, first  High  Commissioner of Canada in England, railway  builder  in Quebec and  Ontario, had  based his politi­  cal   career   on   arguments  for   annexing Rupert's Land and  using the vast prairies  as  a  haven  for  British   immigrants. His expansionist  vision  of  a  transcontinental transportation system  was ratified  by the granting of huge  lands  and  cash subsidies to the CPR; he  jumped at  the chance  of developing  coal   supplies   to  power   the new  railway.  By  the  time  Sir  Alexander died  in 1893, he could  leave to his son the colliery, sawmills,  railway,  land  sales, and town  development. Elliott  added the full development of irrigation. In  the end,  as den  Otter points  out,  the  public  paid  an extravagant price to convert  a region perfectly  suited  for ranching purposes into an  area  organized to support, man, sup­ ply,  and   expand  the  Gaits'  business  in­ terests.
Galt   employees   paid   an   even   higher price.  Den  Otter writes  movingly  about the    miners'    working    conditions -the darkness,   the  silence,  the  staleness  of air which  dampened sounds. Coal  miners de­ veloped  in  this  lonely sub-world an  inde­ pendence, a  pride   in  the  "man's  work"  they  did,  mixed   with   resentment  at  its inadequate rewards. The Gaits were ruth­ less managers. In  1887  the  miners  twice quit   work,   only   to  be   driven   back   by strike-breakers  and    the   RNWMP.  In

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



18gg,  and  again   in  1go6,  trouble flared over  efforts  to  bring  in  unionization. In the  working-class shanties  north  of  the tracks  in Lethbridge lived cosmopolitan newcomers, mostly  Slavic,  many  of them aware of European radicalism.
Yet   the  Gaits   had   developed "their" west:  their  business and  their  town,  with its Galt  Hospital and  its Galt  Park, its sidewalks  and  sewers,  its churches and school, newspaper and local dignitaries: McKillop the minister from  the Ottawa Valley, Higinbotham the druggist from Guelph, Magrath the  mayor  and  land commissioner from   North Augusta,  On­ tario,   all  diligently enforcing  the  bour­  geois  norms  of  small-town  central  Can­  ada.
Surely only in irony can such a double development be subsumed under the title "Civilizing the  West."  Den  Otter  writes of  "the   broad   range   of  western  civiliza­ tion,  including technology" and  says that  A. T. Galt  "initiated a process  that  tied a portion  of the  undeveloped  west into  the political and  economic,  that  is,  the  cul­ tural  structures  of  Canada." He seems to accept  the  Gaits'  assumption  that   inte­  gration into  the  economy  of  the  techno­ logical  society  was a guarantee of "civili­  zation." In  fact,   the  two  worlds  locked into  Lethbridge seem  to  have  lacked  all the  traditional marks   of  culture:  open­ ness,  harmony,  sophistication,  curiosity,
 sympathy.   The   ceremony  of  innocence had  disappeared with  the  frail  traces  of the hunting society. The Gaits had helped develop a unique, interesting, vigorous society, and  certainly one relatively unex­ plored   in  our   literature  as  yet.  Not  a civilized west-but one well worth artic­ ulating,  in  historical  reconstruction-or in  fiction.
ELIZABETH WATERSTON




Out-of-Print

CANADIANA BOOKS

and

PAMPHLETS





HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX 685

ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues  free on request



CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available  at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COWMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5  /228-4741
 









107

BOOKS IN REVIEW



PENFIELD

JEFFERSON  LEWIS,  Something Hidden:  a  Bi­
ography    of    Wilder   Penfield.    Doubleday,
$ 19·95·
WILDER  PENFIELD  CONSTRUCTED his OWn monument, the Montreal Neurological Institute. He  also contributed, obliquely, to the creation of his own biographer. Jefferson   Lewis   (his  first  name  honours the memory  of Penfield's  mother) is his grandson. An  able  writer,  who did  a  su­ perb   script   for   a  NFB-CBC   documen­ tary  on  Penfield,  he  now  proves  to be a fine handler of the difficult art  of biogra­  phy, and  he  is  to  a  marked  degree  Bos­ wellian.
In  the  opening pages of his incompar­ able life of Samuel Johnson   ( 1791), Bos­ well   precisely    gives   us   his   theory   of biography: "I  cannot  conceive  a  more perfect   mode  of  writing  any  man's  life, than   not  only  relating all  of  the  most important  events of it  in their  order,  but interweaving what  he   privately   wrote, and  said,  and  thought; by which  we are enabled  as it were  to see him live." Lewis basically follows the Boswellian scheme. After  briefly outlining Penfield's ancestral background  he   moves   quickly   to   Pen­ field's  own  life,  tracing it  from  the  day of his birth,  26 January 18gi,  in Spokane,  Washington, to  the  moment  of  death   in the  Montreal  Neurological  Institute  on
5 April  1976.  And  in  so doing  he draws heavily  on  Penfield's unpublished diaries and  letters,  and  on  the  reminiscences  of many  close friends and  associates. It is a warm   and   a  polished   work.  But  aside from  a  brief  and  strangely  moving  per­ sonal  preface, he  removes  himself  from the  unfolding tale.  So  here  we  have no neo-Boswell  recording the  jovial  days he passed with  a man  he idolized, but rather an   objective  biographer  who  wishes  to bring  to  his  readers an  unvarnished life of a brilliant, complicated, and  at times a difficult  man.


108
 
'
But he loved  the outdoors and  would dis­ appear for  long  periods  to fish and  hunt big  game   in   the  wild  country  close  at hand. His practice declined  and when  the young   Penfield   was  nine   years   old  his parents  separated  and   his  mother  took her   three   children and  returned  to  her hometown-Hudson,	Wisconsin.    Jean  Jefferson   Penfield    was   a   strong-willed woman-highly   intelligent,   deeply   re­ ligious, ambitious, and an adoring mother. From   the   beginning  it   was   she   who planned the  way that  Penfield  was to go; he  was  to  attend a  good  university; he was to become a Rhodes scholar; he  was to lead  a  religious  life;  he was  to be suc­ cessful  in  his life's  work.  And  perhaps it was  to  ensure this  success  that  she,  ably assisted  by her  son-in-law and  her daugh­ ter,  established  a  small   private  school, romantically named Galahad. It was from Galahad that Penfield  went  to Princeton. He  was a fine scholar, a popular student, a  more   than  competent football player, and  eventually  he  did  receive  a  Rhodes scholarship. In  the  dark  days of January
1915,  he  arrived in  Oxford and  quickly came  under the  influence  of two medical
giants-William Osler and Charles Sher­ rington. In  1916 he suffered  a  temporary setback. He  was on  his way to France to do  volunteer work  in  a  hospital  and  the ship  that  he was on,  the Sussex,  was  tor­  pedoed  in  the  English  Channel. He  was severely  wounded and recovery  was slow. But  before   the  year  was out  he  had  en­ tered   the  famous  medical   school,  Johns Hopkins in  Baltimore. Six  months later,  in  June  1917,  he  married his  long-time love,  Helen  Kermott. They  spent  their honeymoon as volunteer workers in the American Red  Cross Hospital in Paris. Within a short  time,  however,  they  were back  in the States, Helen  to start  her  task
-a well-liked  one-of  raising  a family, and   Wilder  to  finish  his  basic  medical

BOOKS IN REVIEW



training. Then, after  a  period   of  intern­ ship  in Boston,  he  returned  to Oxford to do further medical research, again  under  the  influence   of   Sherrington.  And   two years later  he started his active  career as a neurosurgeon in the Presbyterian Hospital in New York. His  reputation in the medi­ cal  world  began   to  grow  with  amazing rapidity.
The year   I 928  was  the  year  of  great decision  for  in  that   year  he  accepted an invitation to go to Montreal to become Professor  of Neurological Surgery at Mc­ Gill   and   Surgeon-in-Charge  of   Neuro­  surgery  at   the  Royal   Victoria  Hospital, for  with  the  invitation had  come  assur­ ances  from  McGill  authorities that   they would  do all  in  their power  to  help  him see  his  dream  come   true -that  dream  being   the  establishment  of  an   institute where neurology, neurosurgery, and other  closely  allied   sciences  could   be  brought together  under one  roof.  And  six  years later,  in  1934,  with  strong financial sup-
 port   from   the   Rockefeller Foundation, the Montreal Neurological Institute was officially opened. His  dream   had  turned into a reality.
In the year of his appointment as direc­ tor of the  M.N.I. he became  a  Canadian citizen  and  from  then  on  was  ever  more deeply  involved  in  Canadian  affairs.  But he  also  travelled  widely  in  Europe, the Middle    East,    Russia,   China,  etc.;    he spoke  before  many  gatherings of  distin­  guished  scientists  (for  example, he  gave the  prestigious  Ferrier lecture  before  the Royal  Society  in  London in  1946); and,  with  the passing  of the years, he gathered to himself many  awards  and  honours, cul­ minating in the  moment that  he received the  Order  of  Merit   from   the  hands   of Queen Elizabeth shortly  after  her  acces­ sion to the throne. In  the words of  Lewis, he   evolved   from   "a   Canadian   neuro­ surgeon  into  a  humanist-scientist-philoso­ pher  of  world  fame."





MONEY  AND  THE  NOVEL Monetary Motivation in Defoe and His Immediate Successors
SAMUEL  L.  MACEY

ISBN o-919203-01-9	Hardbound 	184   pages 	6x9

Samuel L. Macey  explores  why  and  how  money, in recognizable quan­ tities  of  pounds sterling, became  almost  as important as time in  struc­ turing all  the  major novels of Defoe,  Richardson, Fielding and  Austen.  The why  and   how  lead  to investigations of interest  rates,  navigation breakthroughs,  actual  and   fictitious   dowries,   the  Bank  of  England, trade practices and  the general  economic  climate.

Available  from
SONO  NIS  PRESS
I745  Blanshard Street, Victoria, British  Columbia v8w 218



109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



On  his retirement from  the  M.N.I. in
1960, he left  his role as an  active  neuro­ surgeon; but ever restless, ever ambitious,  ever  aggressive,  he  spent  the  last  fifteen years  of  his  life  writing,  making   public speeches,  and  giving  his services  to what he deemed  to be good causes. For  a brief period  he  acted  as  the  first  president   of the Vanier Institute of the Family,  estab­ lished in I965 by the then Governor Gen­ eral   of  Canada   and   his  gracious  wife. But  here  he  ran  into  early  troubles  with the  active  management of  the  Institute because of  his ultra-conservatism and  his failure   to  understand  the  problems  of a rapidly  changing society.  For   as  Lewis says:   "he wore  his  own  prejudices and convictions like a slightly old-fashioned garment, with  a  touchy  pride," and  "it was difficult  not  to come away either fer­ vently  admiring him,  or fervently  dislik­ ing  him.  He  was,  first  and  last,  a  com­ mitted  man."
On   his  death  he   left   a   treasury   of
materials for his biographer. During his first career  he had written two historical novels -No Other Gods ( I954), a highly imaginative tale of the departure of Abraham  from   Ur   of  the  Chaldees to found a new nation and a monotheistic religion  (in  writing this  work  he was in­ spired  by his  mother who  had  drafted a tale   about   Abraham  and   Sarah); and The  Tore h ( I 960) , a novel  based on the little  that  is known  about the life of Hip­  pocrates,  the  father of  medicine.  In  pre­ paring  these   novels  he  did   careful   re­ search; he  went  toUr and  to Cos;  and he  eventually  showed   that  he  could  un­ fold a good  story. Both  books were  mod­  erately successful  in a highly competitive market.  He   also  published,  in I 967,  a biography, The   Difficult  Art  of Giving: The  Epic of Alan Gregg (Gregg for many years had worked with the Rockefeller Foundation and  Penfield knew him well), and  just a few weeks before his own death he  completed  No  Man  Alone,  a  partial


I 10
 autobiography that traces his life from childhood to  the  opening of  the  M.N.I. It is a well-written and  richly informative work.
But   left   in   manuscript  at   his  death were other materials of great  value,  in particular the weekly letters that  he had written his mother over  a period  of some thirty   years   (she  died  in I 935  but  had carefully  typed  up  the  letters  to preserve them  for posterity), and also the highly intimate, though somewhat sporadic dia­ ries that  he had  kept from  boyhood down to almost  the  moment of death.
With  this mountain of information  be­
fore him, Lewis was obviously faced with many   problems.  In   his  youth   he   had found   the  great   man  to be "a powerful but   a   distant  figure ... someone   to  be wary of because his occasional  anger was apocalyptic." With   the  passage  of  time he  came   closer   to  him,  and   after   four years  of  working  on   the   biography  he found  a still different man. The diaries affected  him  especially.  They  "revealed a man   I  had  known,   and  a  different  one, a man  more ambivalent, self-critical, mus­ ing, and  troubled than  any  of us  around him   would   have   guessed."   The   uncer­  tainties  and  the  troubled mind  came  un­ doubtedly from   the  questions  that   Pen­ field was always asking himself and others.  And  the dominant question was:  What is the  relation  between   the  spirit   and   the brain? Having probed hundreds of brains,  he was still asking:  Where  in the physical brain  can we find what  we call the mind?  And  at   the   end   of  his  life  he  had   no answer.  He died  a frustrated man.  Hence  Lewis's  title-Something  Hidden.
But  now  to conclude, let me quote  the
final  sentence of  Lewis's  preface. It  well sums up his approach to his task:  "I hope that  my affection, my admiration, and my critical eye have  struck  a  balance in  the pages of this book." And Lewis has greatly succeeded.

STANLEY E. READ

BOOKS IN REVIEW



DOCTORS

DONALD JACK,   Rogues,  Rebels  and  Geniuses: The   Story  of Canadian Medicine.  Double­ day,  $24.95.

TRYING  TO APPRECIATE  THE HISTORY  of Canadian  medicine from   this  volume  is like trying  to get a drink  from  a firehose. The   reader   is  overwhelmed  with   some well-researched material, some gossip and some very amusing yarns. Despite  certain minor  flaws in the  book it is highly read­ able  and  will  give a  lay audience  an  in­ sight  into  the  incredible things  that  may happen in  medical practice.
Canadian contributions to medical sci­ ence are  well set out  and  sympathetically recounted. The  author knows  his subject and  has a pleasing style in  discussing  the outstanding  discoveries   made   by  Cana­ dian  doctors.
In  addition  to  the  obvious  candidates for historical treatment-Osler, Banting, Penfield  and   Bethune -there  are  some less well-known but absolutely fascinating characters, many  of them  from  the Mari­ times,  whose  autobiographical   accounts are   drawn  upon,  appropriately,  by  the
author.
One  superior chapter concerns  the Grenfell  Mission and its founder. Another introduces the delightful Dr.  Gustave Gingras whose  rehabilitation of  paraple­ gics,  post-second   war,   has  been   an   in­ spiration  to  thousands of  patients, their families  and  their  eventual employers.
The  editorial work  could   have   been
improved insofar  as spelling,  particularly of   names,    is   concerned.  The    author should  not  be blamed  for  that.  Otherwise the  publication has  been  well  produced, and  the illustrations are remarkably well chosen.
All in all  this is a book of great  appeal to  those  interested in  medicine in  Can­ ada's  past, and  it is well worth reading by lay  people   and   by  health   professionals. The   bibliography  is  disappointing, again
 not  the  fault of  the  author. The  back­ ground   reading by  the  author  is  prodi­ gious  and  he  tells  his  stories  well,  if  in rather unorthodox terms.  That is refresh­  ingly different from  many desiccated his­ torical   texts.  One   would   have   liked   a little  more  accuracy on a few points,  but the sweep  of the  work  makes  up  for  any deficiencies.
WILLIAM C. GIBSON, M.D.


TWO HEADS
JACQUES    GODBOUT,   Les   T tes  a   Papineau.
Seuil,  n.p.

IN  MOST  OF HIS NOVELS,  Jacques  God­ bout  has  been  concerned with  Quebec's position between  two cultures, the French and  the American. In  Le  Couteau sur la table,  Salut   Galarneau!,  and   L'Isle   au Dragon,   Quebec's   specific   character  is described  as arising  from  a  dialectic be­ tween its French intellectual heritage and its americanite, i.e., the geographical and  mental proximity to the United States.  As Godbout's heroes oscillate  between  the extremes  of junk culture and  linguistic sophistry, neither influence  is without its problems,  yet  their  co-existence and  mu­ tual  conditioning is  the  prerequisite  for an    unmistakable,   although   precarious, Quebec identity.
In  Godbout's latest  novel,  Les  Tetes a
Papineau,   this   dialectic   has   assumed
physical expression  in the shape  of a Sia­ mese   twin   by   the   name    of    Charles­ Fran<_;ois  Papineau. The  book  appeared in the midst  of the confrontation  between  Trudeau and  Levesque over  the  Consti­ tution,  and   Godbout's   independantiste convictions  are  as strong  in  his  previous
books. But the tenor  of Les Tetes a Papi­
neau  is  considerably  more   resigned,  al­
most  pessimistic.  Open  confrontation is not desirable  in the post-referendum era: "Nous  n'en  avons  plus  le  courage." In-


II I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



stead,  Godbout's monster   pleads   for  an
"exercise lucide, utile et difficile de nos libertes."  Thus,  Les  Tetes   a  Papineau
may be said to belong a reflexive stage  in Quebec literature,  a  counter-current  to the  nationalist  ebullience   of  the   196o's and  early  197o's.
The    adventures  of   Charles-Franc;ois
Papineau  take   us  from   his  conception during a power  blackout  in New York through his childhood, education ( includ­ ing a brief association with a circus), and first sexual  experiences to his "successful"  operation  by  an   English-Canadian  sur­ geon who, by separating the twins, creates
a   unilingual  Charles  F.  Papineau.   Les
Tetes a Papineau obviously belongs to the
genre  of the  picaresque novel  and  could
be profitably compared to Giinter Grass's The Tin Drum, which displays similar juxtapositions of history and surrealism through  the  character of  Oscar  Matze­ rath; both   Oscar   and  Charles-Franc;ois  suffer   physically-and     allegorically­ the  monstrosity of   their  country's situa­  tion, while attempting to make  their  very monstrosity the basis of a liveable identity.
Like The  Tin  Drum, Les Tetes a Papi­
neau draws  on  a  precise  historical  back­
ground, featuring personalities like  John Glenn,  Ed Sullivan, and  the late Shah  of Persia  to  provide a  chronological frame of reference. More  importantly, Charles­
Franc;ois  Papineau's  fate   parallels   to  a
certain   extent   that  of  the  Dionne  quin­ tuplets  who,  alienated from  their  parents  at  infancy,  were  exhibited  as  a  curiosity and   became   incapable of  establishing a sense of their  own selves. The  text on the cover of Les Tetes suggests that  Papineau, too, is historical and  celebrating his 25th birthday,   "Les   Quebecois  ont   Ia   tete dure." But Charles-Franc;ois is, of course, Godbout's   invention;  for   him,   fiction serves as a  necessary antidote and  correc­  tive  to  history,  as  imagination gives  the freedom  to  reverse,  reassemble,  and  re­ create    time.   "Ecrire  c'est   changer   les


112
 chases,"  Godbout noted  in a recent inter­ view  with  Donald Smith  in  Lettr,es que­ becoises, thus alluding to  the  interplay of fact  and  fiction  determining most  of  his work.
Similarly, Godbout's characters are combinations of none-too-subtle allegory and  tangible, eccentric personality. The monster's name  Charles-Franc;ois suggests a co-existence  of French and  American character traits,  followed  by the  name  of one   of  Quebec's  most   famous   Roug.es. Yet Papineau assumes a rather startling personality of his own  as his  heads  sway in unison  to the music  at  a cocktail  party or whisper,  en stereophonie, endearing words into  the ears of Irma Sweet,  movie actress.   The   monster's  mother,  a   com­ puter operator, and  his father, an  imagi­  native    journalist,   represent    head    and heart  respectively  in the Papineau family, while    "memee   Papinette,"   the   grand­ mother, seems  to  incorporate the  collec­ tive memory of  Quebec, albeit  artificially kept  alive by a pacemaker. Each  member  of  the  Papineau family,  stereotypical as he may seem, is endowed  with a sufficient number of idiosyncrasies; Godbout's char­ acters appear never  lifeless or cold. They  are, however,  at  times unbearably "cute," especially  if  one  remembers Galarneau's family whose mannerisms were rather too similar  to  those  of  the  Papineau brood.
A  favourite  pastime of  the  Papineaus is  to  put   together, as  a  team   and   over rather  long   periods   of   time,   a   puzzle. Their  favourite scenes  are   pictures   de­ picting  the  American  prairies,   and   the monster's  father   approaches  the   table "jamais ... sans  s'etre   ceint   les  reins  de ses revolvers  nacves." The  puzzle is obvi­ ously  a  mise  en  abyme  of   Quebec's at­  tempted revival  of  the  American Dream and   of  the  virgin  space  representing it. Godbout's  indictment of the  idea  of his­ torical  and, by implication, technological progress is unabashedly romantic; in the aforementioned  interview  with   Donald

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Smith  he does  not shy away  from  hyper­ bole  in  linking America  to  the  idea  of imaginative space,  "Les Americains, c'est le  roman, c'est   le  cinema, c'est   l'aven­ ture."  Godbout  obviously   separates  be­ tween   the  actual  and   a  sort   of  mythic America,  postulating one  as  a  challenge for  the  other, for  the  jig-saw  puzzle  and the  patient  creativity it  requires are  op­ posed, all through the novel,  by the com­ puters  programming and  predetermining Papineau's fate. Quebec's literary attitude toward   the   United   States   has   recently been  placed  in a historical perspective by Guildo  Rousseau  in  L'lmage des  Etats­ U nis dans la litterature quebecoise; God­  bout's  view  appears, in  many  ways, as a resurgence  of   the   Rouges'   faith   in  the ideal  of  American democracy as an alter­ native  to their  own  political  situation.
Like   Salut   Galarneau!,  Les  Tetes a
Papineau  is mildly  metafictional in draw­
ing attention to, and  ironizing, its own narrative  devices.   Charles-Franc;ois   re­ cords his pre-separation days in a journal; he  insists  that   the  reader  not  interpret it  as  a  definitive  autobiography  but   as a   "l'ecit    bi-graphique."   Franr;ois    and Charles,  faithful to the polarity of their temperaments, quarrel over  the  formula­ tion  of  their  text  and  discuss  whether a narrative "en  alternance" (a  Ig8I  L'An­ tiphonaire, as  it  were)   would  not  be  a more    satisfactory  way   of   approaching their  subject. But  they  decide  that  "L'es­ sentiel ... c'est  d'etre  confrontes dans  Ia meme   phrase   jusqu'a  la  phase   finale."  As a result,  Papineau's readers will never quite  know what Charles-Franr;ois is like; in  this  indeterminacy lies his chance for survival. Yet  Godbout's novel  ends  with a  letter,  written by Charles F. Papineau after   the  operation:  the  monster's  crea­ tive ambiguity has been truncated. In  her article, "Culture, Revolution and  Politics in   Quebec"   (Canadian   Forum,   May I982),  Patricia Smart   speculates  on  a new  phase  of "cultural  fatigue" in  Que-
 bee  as  Hubert Aquin   phrased   it  in  his famous   Ig62  essay;  as  Godbout's  novel ends, it remains open whether that fatigue implies  creative  (and   political)   exhaus­ tion   or  whether  it  signals  a   period   of reflexivity  preparing a  literature of  re­ plenishment.
EVA-MARIE KROLLER


IMAGES OF PERSON

MIKE MASON and  T. F. RIGELHOF, A Beast With
Two Backs.  Oberon, $6.g5.
DAVID  HLYNSKY, Salvage. Coach House, $7.50.

THE  IDEA   BEHIND A  Beast  With  Two Backs  seems  good:    two  44-page   novels bound  together in one cover. In  this case, they  are  "The  Beautiful Uncut Hair   of Graves"  by Mike  Mason,  and  "Hans Denck,  Cobbler" by T. F.  Rigelhof.  For both writers this is apparently a first book, and  it is doubtful either  of the short nov­ els could  have  been  published as a  book on its own.
Mike  Mason  tells the story  of a young Indian girl who goes missing from  her family,   which   is  scavenging at   a  small town  dump. Aside  from  the  presence/ absence  of  the   Indian  girl,  the  central figure is Susan  Groening, a high school student and  part-time Girl  Friday  for  the local  weekly  newspaper. Mason  balances
a   plot   line   which   involves   the   towns­
people's  efforts  to locate  the  missing  girl (or  her  body)   with  Susan's  discovery  of human mortality.

It was June 10  and  spring had  come  early. The first  week  in  March the   weather had turned  hot,   summer  hot,   and   stayed   that way. For  over   roo  days  now  there had  been no rain.

Already   the    ditches  along  many    of   the country roads   were  filling   with   pale  dunes of silting  topsoil.

In these early pages, Mason has a credibility   problem, although  later   pas-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sages resolve most  of these difficulties. In the  midst of drought, the  nuisance grounds are  a slough  of floating  garbage; "Must be near  twenty  feet of it, places," says  a  police  officer.  Later,   Mason  ex­ plains   (not   entirely   convincingly)   that  the section  of land  was "swampy  and full of clay. In  the drought that spring,  it was the  only  spot   for   miles  that   held   any standing  water."  :Mason's   townspeople, in  the  early  pages,  seem as  unreal  as his nuisance  grounds, preferring to play cards rather than   join  the  search  for  the  miss­ ing  girl.  Small  town  folk,  in  my  experi­  ence,  are   in  their   glory  when   jumping  into  some  "emergency"  with  a  helping  hand. But  these  points  can  be conceded to Mason: the authenticity of his descrip­ tive  phrases,  and   the  building   mood  of gloom, gradually absorb  the reader.

As  the   poles   raked  through  it,   the   liquid moved  sluggishly like viscid soup  or the hair­ less  hide  of  an  animal, and  all  around the packed  floating  garbage  heaved  gently, al­ most  as if  something  were  breathing under­ neath  it.

Almost forty  pages of the short  novel deal with this probing/exploring, with the darkening of spirits  and  the growing  rea­ lization   of  the   presence   of  death.  The  experience is a  sort  of  death  and  resur­ rection    for    Susan    Groening.   Mason's  characters  dredge   up  the  black  guts  of the  dump, of their  lives, and  in  the  end the reader  feels very much  a participant, a  witness  to  some  primordial  spectacle.  The  work is gut-wrenching, and cathartic.
The  book's second half, though often entertaining reading, has little  of the staying power of Mason's story. "Hans Denck,  Cobbler" tells of a second-genera­ tion  cobbler   who  comes  to form  an  un­ usual  alliance  of  spirit  with   the  young "hippie" grandson of a long-time  friend/ associate.  Both  Hans Denck  and  the hip­  pie  "Raf"  are  simple   people   at   heart, although their lives differ radically.  Rigel­ hof spins out  the  old  cobbler's  biography
 in the first pages of the story, sweeping through  decades  and   generations  in   a flash. The  problem is, at  this point  in the narrative, we have  no reason  to care. Rigelhof   has  not  led  the  reader   into  the story,  but  rather  dumped it  in  his  lap. Long  rambling paragraphs are  thick  with plodding plotting. The narrative is choppy, and  the  tone  strident.
At  times  terse and  explanatory,  Rigel­ hof  also  resorts   to  affectations,  such  as saying  "At  the  moment under  considera­ tion," instead   of  "Now."  The  last  third  of  the  novel  dwells  more  fully  and  in  a more  satisfying  depth  with  the  character of Hans  Denck,  and  his very personal set of values. Throughout, however,  one feels that   the  writer manipulates rather  than  explores  his characters.
David   Hlynsky   is  primarily  a   visual artist,  and  his book Salvage  is a fusion  of
45   black   and   white   photographs  with forty-odd  pages  of  fiction.  The   result  is an   intriguing,  if  not   wholly   satisfying, book. As the back cover blurb says, "the words serve best as illustrations to the photographs  of  meticulously arranged, familiar objects." A smoking  toaster,  a sponge  in a rubber-gloved hand, a bunga­ low,  coffee  mug,  street  sign:  the  photo­ graphs create sharp imagery of the  mun­  dane.    And    Salvage    is   a    good    title:  Hlynsky   salvages   the  waste  land   of  the "Sunset" cafe, and  the objects and  people to  be  found   in  such  places:

Inside  the   can,   a   small   man  was   white­ washing  the   washroom.  He   was   the  only janitor  in   the   Sunset  and   if   he   had   any teeth,  he   certainly  wasn't   showing   them. When  he   rubbed  his  gums   together  from  side   to  side   his  cheeks  took   turns  sagging over  his  jaw  and  his  lips  moved  in  and  out like  a  couple of   pancakes with   nowhere to go.  If he  wasn't  in  fact   (and in  the  flesh) Popeye, the  former  spinach  snorter,  there was  more  than a  strong hint  that  the  old sailor  had been  skinny  dipping in  his genetic pool. Dodo  birds  cooed  in  the  low  branches of his  family   tree.  He  dipped his  brush and painted.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Wit, style, "smarts": Salvage  has them. Hlynsky is apparently not interested, though, in insight,  understanding, or com­ passion.  His  people  are  "interesting" as creations of  western  culture-no  more or   less   interesting   than    the    smoking toaster.   He   makes   us  see  these  objects with  a  new  perspective, but  in  the  end the   reader   feels   he  has   consumed    the literary equivalent of junk  food.
Hlynsky's   prose  is amusing and  witty, in  small   servings,   but   its  appeal  wears off;  his  photographs,  by  contrast,  tease the mind  with  their  fascinating ambiguity long after  the  book itself  has  been  closed and  tucked  away.

LORNE DANIEL


MANICHEES & OTHERS

DAVID  HELWIG, It Is  Always Summer. Stoddart,
$15·95·
JOHN   LANE,  Return  Fare.   Turnstone   Press,
n.p.

It  Is Always  Summer, latest  published of David  Helwig's "Kingston" novels, probes two  particularly seductive illusions:   that summer is not merely an idyll but a prom­ ise of  infinite  contentment; and  that  an island,  insulated and   at  a  remove  from the  darker world,  is the  place  where  this promise  is to be fulfilled. Helwig's  island is specifically  Wolfe  Island  off Kingston, but   it  is  also  the   isle  of  Shakespeare's The   Tempest  and   the  dream  island   of imagination. The   twin  seductions do  in­ deed   prove   to  be  illusions,   as  summer burns out  in apocalyptic violence, and  the manic  world  of the  city-a city symbol­ ized  by  domed   and   turreted  edifices  of law-and-order-infiltrates  the island.
Helwig's method is to create characters whose lives impinge in more  or less casual ways, and  amongst whom  he moves with apt  detachment yet closeness, telling  their stories and  mediating their  thoughts. Jane
 Burtch, an  earth-mother figure, summers on Wolfe Island with her small son, her lawyer-husband Wayne  commuting daily to  Kingston. At  Wayne's invitation  they are  joined  by Elizabeth, a  poet,  visiting from  England; she had  known  him  years earlier  during Kingston student days. Elizabeth is severely virginal  but,  despite her professional  celibacy, her bony attrac­ tiveness  proves   disturbing;  Jane   knows that  Wayne  is drawn to her, and  regards Elizabeth's up-front  spirituality as a spe­ cies   of  more   earthly  erotic   seduction. Elizabeth  has  a  counterpart in  her  lover of ten  years ago, Robert; at  fifty he finds himself  the unemployed managing editor of   a   university   press   which   is  closing down.  His  daughter Cindy   begins  as  a water  figure,  her  world  having  drowned on  the  collapse  of an  affair,  but  she  sur­ faces  to fall in with  an  artist-chef named  Paul,  a  creature of  zucchinis   and  other exotic  vegetables.  The other major  char­ acter  is the  fire figure;  he is Carl,  a  dis­ missed prison  guard, estranged from  his wife, denied access to home and son, a Caliban whose rage is not to be appeased. Wayne Burtch  is his wife's lawyer,  a circumstance which  sets up the novel's conclusion  of murder and  arson.
Helwig  introduces his  characters  indi­ vidually   through  a  sequence   of  focuses, then   brings   them   together  in   two  key island-party encounters. The  major sur­ face  interest  is eroticism   in  all  its  varia­ tions:  flirtation, arousal, fantasy,  jealousy, power.  He   is  adept at   exposing   social eroticism,    in   a   dinner-party   flirtation which peels the corners  from  private pho­  tographs to  provide  glimpses  of attitude, obsession,  and   anxiety.   But   erotic   fan­  tasies  and  encounters also serve as meta­ phors for the intellectual substance of this novel  (and  Helwig  is a cerebral writer), which  is nothing less than  an  anatomy of deep-rooted Manicheanism in the modern psyche-in other words, inability  to inte­ grate soul with  body. If we cannot realize


115

BOOKS IN REVIEW



perpetual summer  on a paradisal island, Helwig seems to suggest, it is perhaps because many people must bruise body to pleasure  soul, or vice versa. The  heresy of the Manichees becomes an explicit  thread when   Elizabeth  reveals   her   fascination with the Montsegur atrocity,  when the Manichees were hounded from  refuge  to perish  under  the  Inquisition's edict.
On one level, Elizabeth  functions some­
what  simply as a woman  whose denial  of sexuality   seems  inextricably  linked   to  a beauty   which   leads   men  on  even  as  it holds  itself aloof; in  fact,  she  brings  out rape fantasies in both  Wayne the happily­ married lawyer,  and  Carl  the  brutalized prison    guard.  On    another   level,   one which   emerges   from   Jane's  hostile  fas­ cination with  her, we test the imaginative and   moral    implications  of   Elizabeth's celibacy.  She  calls  herself a  witch; is her psychic  insight   phoney  or  real?  is it  re­ lated   to  her  sexual  aloofness?   do  these things   give  her,  simply,   metaphors  for poetry,  or  is she  (as  Jane  thinks)   a  suc­ cubus,   harmfully -and    maliciously - feeding off  the  lives of others?  Certainly the  final  catastrophe which  visits  Eliza­ beth  seems  to  enact   a  kind  of  fated   re­ sponse  to  her  particular  spiritual/sexual condition.
There is more to admire in It Is Always Summer than  can  be indicated in a brief review,  but  I  must  single  out  the  evoca­ tiveness  of   place  Helwig  achieves   (we hardly  need  to be told it is Kingston and Wolfe Island) and, additionally, the har­ mony  between   realistic   description  and symbolic  reference. It  is  a  novel  always under  the intelligent control  of its author. Perhaps  too  much  so at  times, since  the symmetry of plot and character becomes unnerving: for example,  Robert  as coun­ terpart  to  Elizabeth,  the  one  dying   by water,  the  other  (virtually)  by  fire;  and  the contrast between  Robert who drowns, and  his daughter Cindy  who  surfaces  to become  an  earth-maiden,  just  as  Wayne

II6
 and  Jane survive  as  naturals in  the  ele­ ment   of  earth. Philosophically,  too,  the novel  may  be  too  neat  if  Helwig  means  to  imply   that   were  it  not  for  Carl   (all body)   and  Elizabeth (all  spirit), perpet­ ual  summer on paradise  island  might  in­ deed  be  realized   by  the  wayneandjanes of this world.
If Helwig's novel  is satisfying  and  pro­ vocative,    John    Lane's  Return   Fare   is neither, despite   the  fact  that  its  subject  matter-the  brutal ordeals  of a  fifteen­  year-old   boy  trying   to  make   it   to  Los Angeles   from   British   Columbia,  in   the wake of a forbidden love-allows plenty of scope. The novel  is set in a very dated nineteen-fifties, and   the  sensational  ma­ terial-harsh  treatment  of Mexican mi­ grant workers,  mindless  U.S.  police  and  prison   wardens,  buggery  in  the  prisons, and  so on-is  presented devoid  of sub­ tlety or imaginative colouring. The  jacket blurb states  that  this  is a  "powerful, raw novel  in  the  tradition of classic realism," and  the  second  word  is certainly opera­ tive;  the implied  invocation of Grapes  of Wrath, however,  is gratuitous. This  is not to say that  Lane  never  creates  a  memor­ able scene;  he does occasionally catch  the atmosphere of a diner, for example, ably, and  some of the dialogue is very convinc­ ing.   But   almost   without   exception  his characters are stereotypes, all good  or all bad,  and   all  predictable. This   does  not hold  for   the  hero  Dave,   however,   who remains  lifeless  throughout. You  have  to hold on  to the fact  that  he is fifteen,  since other  than  that  his acquisitions are  a vo­ cabulary  limited   to  ingenious  combina­ tions of expletives, and  a horror of homo­  sexual  acts  to which  he is subjected with monotonous regularity. This  is, strangely, a novel  which  does improve somewhat as it goes. The  first  pages  hold  out  the  pros­ pect   of   frenetic   verbal   overkill:   "stag­ gered,"  "jerking,"  "brushed madly," "stumbled";  thereafter  the  prose  settles

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



down  into  arrangements of  words  more or  less appropriate to  events.

PATRICK HOLLAND


LOOKING BACK

BRUCE HUNTER, Benchmark. Thistledown press,
$7·95·
KIM    MALTMAN,    Branch  Lines.   Thistledown
press,  $7·95·
DON      GUTTERIDGE,     God's   Geography.   Brick
Books,  $7.50.
BRUCE   MEYER,   The   Tongues  Between  Us.
South Western Ontario Poetry, n.p.

HERE, IN   THE LANGUAGES of the  geogra­ pher,    cartographer,  and   scientist,    the Canadian  poet/artist   steps   forth    once again  as mapmaker, demarcating the dis­ tances  in  time  and  space  between  us and our   ancestors,  significant  places and  events: the boundaries of a still-unknown country.  Placed   end-to-end,  these   texts neatly   bridge   old   and   new   worlds   of meaning.
In Bruce Hunter's Benchmark, the poet as itinerant worker,  drifter, loner,  moves through a primarily Western  landscape of "ambivalent dreams." And  it's  the  same old  story:    "the old   highway  solution," "with pack slung over one shoulder /  bal­ ancing guitar in hand  /home no longer  is the  place   to  be."  But  where,  amid   the diversity   of   tractors,   half-breeds,  high­ ways, and  hockey  players,  the  benchmark (the  surveyor's starting mark) falls is dif­ ficult  to determine. There are  also some words  of  admonition to  a  Toronto poet, to  wake  up  and  hear  "this new  clamour of  America" rather than  remain "stunned in  the  other   time  / on  a  continent de­ serted." More  effective  is "Selected Cana­ dian  Rifles,"  a  cogent  reminder  of  some home-grown atrocities:

in  Bienfait cemetery near  Estevan
truth and  time  marked in  stone
over  a common grave
 MORGAN MARKUNAS
GRYSHKO
MURDERED IN  ESTEVAN SEPTEMBER 29, 1931
BY R.C.M.P.
the  rifles miss children and  women in  the  angry crowd
but  their  fathers, husbands fail  to  return
The open-ended lines that  characterize Hunter's form  add  to the epitaphic qual­ ity of this distinctive political  piece.
Kim  Maltman's book  is more  unified.
His  subject   is  the   prairie,  and   Branch Lines traverses  that  hard, elemental land­ scape   of   Sinclair   Ross -though   now even the rattlesnakes have trouble surviv­  ing.  Yet,  despite  the  odds,  life  persists, appalling us with  its  power  and  strange beauty:
smoke  still  curling from  a few clumps,
and  it seems  endless. Only when  you  look
off, into  the  distance, do  you see
the  grass  already pushing up  through the
burnt soil,
and  then  you  realize the  roots  are  hardly
touched,
and  look around again
and  suddenly it all  comes  into focus, cycle within cycle, pouring out  into the
thick  black  soil
the  eerie  violence of flowers.

This   comes  from   one  of  several   "Fire" poems. Through fire and  ice, the extremes that rule this harsh land, the cycles of life continue.
Then there  are   the  people,  who  lead lonely,  empty  lives:   the  endless  cups  of coffee in fly-blown  cafes,  frustrating sex­ ual   encounters,  mindless    drives   down  straight lines  of  highway,  dying  towns. These   portraits  are   vividly   etched  in stark,  powerful  language.  A  combination of poems and  prose pieces in the flat tones of reportage, along  with  gritty  pen-and­ ink  sketches,  give  the  book· a  black-and­ white  documentary  quality  that  conveys a  strong  sense  of  suppressed drama,  the intensity  of  people  living  on  the  edge.


II7

BOOKS IN REVIEW



In  God's  Geography, Don  Gutteridge's latest  book,  the  poet  turns  from  the  ab­
 When we  kissed
 
our   tongues  locked

stractions of  Canada to  its  human  con­ tours,  as  expressed   by  the  details  of  life in small-town Ontario. The  book  is dedi­  cated   to  Gutteridge's  grandparents  and family.  Many of  the  poems are,  in  fact,  memorials; others  trace  roots  through a growing    child's   perplexing   encounters with    life   and   death.  Another  central thread  is  the  examination of  the  poetic process as a  part  and  continuation of the life process. It is the  "Saving  Grace":

Pain  writes  poems on  a  human face, crooked lines scrawl  flesh.
We  make  poems
with our  skin  I  bones, words  obey,
dance the  tune of our  pain.
How  many lines must  I scrawl from  the  mask
of your  ruined face?

This  is potent stuff. But God's Geography transcends the personal. The  book is a collage: poems, photos from the family album, reminiscences in dialogue, intrigu­ ing  clippings  from   newspapers  of  1838 through World  War  II. These poems and  odds-and-ends do not  just relate  the story of  the  Gutteridge clan  but  also  tell  how the  individual and  family  are  tied  to  the history  of the nation. From  the arrival in the  new  land  to  foreign   battlefields,   to death  and  the  rise  of  new  generations, the  ties are strengthened.
In Bruce Meyer's  slim volume, The Tongues Between Us,  tracing  roots leads back  across  the  Atlantic to a  rich  Gaelic past  and   a  fleeting   sense  of  connection before  the  realization of the need for "separate  journeys." The  historical  mat­ rix is central and  interestingly worked,  in a traditional mode,  as in "Culloden." But scope   outstrips   language   at   times   and  leads  to cliched expression :


118
 a Gaelic brogue wrapping  itself
around the  flat  words of  a Scots  descendant
sharing language as the  air  we breathe.

The  attempt at  a  mythic  apprehension of a lost heritage and  birth of a unique poetic  voice is perhaps too large  a subject for so small a book; and Tongues shows promise  rather than  completion.
Overall,  there   is  much   of  value   and
interest in  this quartet. It does,  however, engender a  slight  sense  of  deja  vu.  Not only  do  these  new  texts  look  back  over old  ground, but  there  is in  them  collec­ tively something of that  too familiar sen­ timentality and   absence   of   wit  that   re­ minds  us  that   being  a  Canadian poet  is still  a  preciously  self-conscious  business.

RICHARD DUBANSKI


BEJIR'S TALES

ANTONINE   MAILLET,  Christophe Cartier De  La
N oisette  Dit    N ounours. Hachette/Lemeac,
$13·95·

SOME  OF  OUR BEST  CHILDREN'S  STORIES have   been  written  by Canadian  women shortly   after   producing  a  major   novel. Margaret Laurence gave  us The  Olden Days'  Coat   after   The   Diviners;  Jason's Quest  was inspired by a playful  family  of moles  living  behind  Elm  Cottage, shortly after  the  appearance of The Fire  Dwell­ ers. Margaret Atwood  and Gabrielle Roy, among others,  have attempted the  genre  with  success.  It  may  be  that   writing for children is a  form  of play  which  restores the  creative  impulse.   The latest   and  in some  ways  most  challenging addition to this  expanding body  of  writing, in  that  it  addresses   the  issue  of  inspiration and the  creative imagination, is by the  Aca­ dian  writer  Antonine Maillet. Best known for  the  play  La Sagouine ( 1971)  and  the prize-winning  novel  Pelagie-la-Charrette

BOOKS IN REVIEW



( 1979),  she  now   gives   us  a  delightful children's  book,   Christophe  Cartier   De La Noisette  Dit  Nounours.
In   the  magic   realm   of  bears,  Chris­ tophe  Cartier is neither archaic  nor  aca­  demic -he is Acadian, pure  and  simple. The  first  two  names  are  self-explanatory
-not content to root around in the back­ woods where  he  belongs,  but  yearning  to explore  the  sand  dunes  and  to  make  ac­ quaintance with   the  creatures who  live by  the  sea,  this  bear  indiscriminately as­ sumes  the  epic characteristics of Christo­ pher  Columbus  and  Jacques Cartier. In his more conventional but equally endear­ ing moments, he becomes "Nounours"­ the common name  for  "Teddybear" in a French child's vocabulary. His acquisition of the title "Sieur de la Noisette," roughly translatable  as  "Lord of  the  Haycoms," to  use  the  vocabulary  of  A.  A.  Milne's Piglet,  is, however, less easily  explained. It involves  a  full-fledged Homeric battle of the beasts over  a store  of nuts, and  the love of a certain white  weasel.  Because of an accidental skirmish  with  a skunk, Nou­ nours   wins   the   battle  but   temporarily loses his  newly  acquired  lady  love.  Like children, Nounours is an inveterate story­ teller  and  mythmaker,  as well as an  ad­  venturer; he  proudly  counts  amongst  his relatives  and  ancestors  the  Big Dipper or "Big   Bear,"  and   throughout  the   book stubbornly  refuses  to grasp  the difference  between meteors  and  metaphors.
If children of six to ten will greet Nou­ nours's  escapades with  a  sense  of  recog­ nition-he  has  no  trouble  climbing up sand  dunes,  but  tumbles  down  them  be­ cause  his  back  paws  are  longer  than  his front   paws-only  adults  can   fully  ap­  preciate his role in the spiritual and  crea­ tive life of the older  narrator, whose exis­ tence is at once upset  and  renewed  by her encounter   with   Nounours.  A  maritime pastoral  spanning four  seasons,  the  story is told  by  a nameless  writer, whose home by the  sea  used  to  be a  lighthouse. The
 light has gone out, only to be magically rekindled, made  "real" once more, by her friendship with  Nounours, during the course  of which  both  characters grow  in love of one another and  understanding of the  world  they  share.  The   story  merges the pastoral  of childhood with the dream­ vision;  like  Alice  with  the  white  rabbit, the  narrator begins  by  observing  the  ac­ tivities of an anthill in the springtime, but suddenly  finds  herself  in  a  magic  world transcending human logic, the memory of which  she  carries  back  into  her  waking  life and its everyday reality. Unlike  Alice's experience, however, here  the "dream" (never  identified as such)  is reality  in the world  of  Nounours, who  spends  half  of his life in active  hibernation.
Language is of  primordial importance in  the  magical  transformation  of   mun­ dane   reality   which   takes   place   in   the story-Nounours's  narrative vocabulary, because  he  is  a  creature  both   close  to childhood  and   close  to  nature,  expands and  unifies the disparate or forgotten ele­ ments   of   the   narrator's   landscape,  al­ chemically converting pebbles into  agates and  a  rowboat into  a  sailing  ship,  com­  plete   with   a  seagull   for   a  figurehead. Nounours's speech  incorporates myth, legend,  and  the  folk  song;  it may  be full of Acadian  malapropisms, but when he declaims  the fables of Lafontaine, he does so with  the  assurance of someone  who  is an  expert  in animal fables. He even  goes as  far  as  to  accuse  "her   fountain,"  his term for "Lafontaine," of plagiarism. The non-rational, non-linear logic of bears  in fact  dictates the  shape  of  the  story:   we are   told   that   the   narrator  would   have liked  to begin  at  the  beginning, with  her hero's  birth, first  words,  socioeconomic background, etc.,  but  that  Nounours was the first to inject  chaos  into  her  priorities and  sense of order.
When  we encounter Nounours at  the beginning of the story,  blissfully ignorant and  unschooled, he  is nevertheless  deliv-


Il9

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ering a learned discourse on the stars Aldeberan and Betelgeuse to his fellow creatures and  elders.  This  is the occasion for  his meeting with  the  author; he  fol­ lows her  home,  and   for  a  year  she  un­ successfully  tries  to  civilize  him,  but  in­ stead  gradually learns   to  see  the world through his eyes. It  is difficult  to convey the   combination  of   whimsical   humour and  sophistication  contained in  this  tale, whose  contents  range  from  the  perils  of making  pumpkin  preserves  to  a  discus­ sion of  time  and  mutability, both  from  a bear's-eye  view. The book offers at  least one  set  of  readers a  wise and  witty  ap­ preciation of the role of magic in life and literature, converting pumpkins into jack­ o'-lanterns  and   causing  field   daisies   to take root in sand  dunes.
The  story may contain subtle national­ istic  overtones:  the   narrator,   until   her encounter  with   the   bear,   bemoans   the fact  that  while agates  are  to be found  on the  sandy  beaches   of   Gaspe,  her  dunes only harbour common  pebbles. Of course, Nounours has  no  time  for  the  stories  of Canada geese from their migrations to the south; instead,  emerging from   hiberna­ tion,  he  tells   them   about   his  very  real dream-life, during which he visited all his bear  relations, including those  who  live in  the  Milky  Way. In  the end,  Nounours returns  to  the   forest   to  rediscover   his roots,  and  the  narrator climbs  her  tower with  a  bucket   of  soapy  water,   to  scrub her  lantern  clean.   Her   home  has  once more become a source of light, although Nounours is no longer  living beneath the terrace  of her  lighthouse.
There is an old Acadian  saying-"Ne reveille pas 1'ours qui dort" -let sleeping bears lie. It is good that  Antonine Maillet did  not  follow  this advice.
The illustrations by Hans  Troxler add much  to a beautifully produced text. The book's  two appendices, a letter  from  An­ tonine  and  a  letter  from  Nounours,  un­ derscore  the role of the two players in the


120
 drama:  Antonine's letter  is a glossary  of the dozen or so Acadian  words used by Nounours, explaining their  origins; Nou­ nours's letter  is his version  of the  history of  Hallowe'en. Together  they  reveal  the family  connection  between  game,  ritual, the  oral  tradition, and  literature.

MICHELE LACOMBE



STRONG WOMEN

MARGARET CREAL,  The  Man  Who  Sold  Prayers.
Lester &  Orpen  Dennys, $14.95·

"I CONSIDERED WHAT actually happens in women's  lives, in my life, and  the dimin­ ished   reflections    of   that    in   literature. I  considered  myself   among  women: mother, grandmother, aunt, sister-in-law, colleagues,  friends,  enemies.  There were many  stories  to be told  there, much  to be understood." So saying, Louise  Bernikow  in  Among Women  has  told  us  why  we might   attach  special  value   to  Margaret Creal's short   story  collection   The  Man Who Sold  Prayers. The title does not sug­ gest  it,  and   the  title  story  obfuscates   it, but  Creal's  distinctive achievement is to reveal   the  mysterious integrity  of strong  women  in their  most central, self-defining relationships, and  to show  that  relation­ ships   between    women    are   very   often primal  in  this sense.
The first story, "The Man  Who Sold Prayers," concerns a  primal   relationship too -the link  that  connects an  Anglican rector with  his God.  This  sweet-tempered mystic is the only male  protagonist in the collection, and  the  motivation for  build­ ing a story  around him  may relate  to the novel,  set  in  an   Anglican  girls'  school, that   Margaret  Creal  published   in  1957· The language and  manners of Anglican­ ism are comfortable territory for her; she may have  decided to display  her maturity in  this recent  work  by attempting a more

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



original  and  wittily  detached portrait of the church and  churchmen.
Where  her  work really transcends the ordinary, however, is in the much  more personal canvases of  "At Sunnyside Villa," "Two  Women," "Tales  from   a pensione," "Counterpoint,"  and  "Inland beach" -in fact,  almost  all the others  in the  book.  Here the  action  is deeply  inti­ mate,  and  the  mainsprings of each  small drama are  meticulously coiled.  Each  fol­ lows the  destiny  of  a  bond:  the  circum­ stantial  dependency   between   two   very old  room-mates in  a  nursing   home;   the ambivalent tie between sophisticates in an adulterous  affair; the  profound  connec­  tion   between    mother  and    endangered child; the confounding erotic  attachment between  two  thoroughly married women.
In   these  stories  Creal makes  efficient use of  her  observant eye, her  knowledge and  love  of music,  and  her  sensuous  vo­ cabulary-the diction of a well-travelled and  well-read epicure. In "Counterpoint" and   "Tales  from   a  pensione," particu­ larly,   her   language  helps   to  create   the intricacy  of  design   that   inspired   V.  S. Pritchett to compare  the writing of short stories  with  the  writing of sonnets.  These  stories  are  as  poignant as  they  are  intri­  cate.  "Tales from  a pensione" powerfully conveys   the    helpless    resentment   with which  mother  and   young  adult experi­  ence  their  symbiosis:   each  feels  the  oth­  er's awareness as a kind of damnation, yet can  gain  no  distance from  it.  "Counter­ point" follows  an  equally  sad  and  angry ego  struggle   between   lovers,  again   seen through  the   self-knowledge  of  the  wo­ man.    In   each   story,   self-knowledge   is shown  to  take  one  only  so far,  as  "The Man   Who  Sold  Prayers" expresses  in  a different way:  "He saw that  his existence depended not on his own  perception of it but  on  that  of  other people."
Even  more  moving  are  the  two stories in   which   Creal  penetrates  floundering
 and   finds  eloquence. In   "At   Sunnyside Villa" Mrs. Cameron, a stroke  victim, speaks through the exquisite  details of her behaviour. Andrea in  "Two  Women" is assailed with confusion when her best loyalties conflict with the taboo against passionate   feeling   between   women,   but her  almost   mute   struggle   to  assert   her dignity   and   love  is  conveyed   indirectly by  expressive   touches   of  dialogue and action.
The  power  and  freshness  of these stor­ ies are  of a  wholly  different order  from the  qualities   that   recommend the   title story.   Though  "The  Man    Who   Sold Prayers" is often original, it sets up stereo­ types  in  order   to  attempt  an  essentially  metaphysical statement. And  lamentably, some  of  these  stereotypes   trivialize   the very subject  with  which  Creal  elsewhere  displays  her  greatest  sensitivity  and  acu­  men:  the   centrality   of  women   in   the moral order, and  in civilization  generally. I'm   thinking,  naturally,  of   the   ladies' auxiliary president with her  irrelevant lemon   pie.  I  wondered  if  it  were   not equally stereotypical that, having  depicted the  Reverend in  his  youth  as  a  delight­ fully  original   thinker, Creal  portrays   his daughters as  trite   parrots  of   adolescent slang. But  then,  not  all of  Creal's young­  sters  sound  real:  kiddie  dialogue is  not her  strength.
In  looking at The Man Who Sold Prayers as a whole,  I am reminded of the dilapidated exteriors  that serve as theft deterrents  for  some  of  San   Francisco's most opulent rooms. Camouflage is the effect of the title story, as if the author, having discovered  that  she had  written something which   the  critics   might   dis­ parage   with   the   word   "feminine,"  de­ cided   to  place   her   unforgettable  Mrs. Preston  and   Mrs.  Cameron, her  Sophia and  Julian, her Ariadne and  Andrea, be­ hind  a  distracting edifice.  Of  course  the main  source  of  wonderment is  not  this


121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



rundown housefront on its million-dollar lot, but  the artistry  displayed  behind  it.

CATHERINE KERR


TO THE BONE

CHRIS scoTT,  Antichthon. Quadrant  Editions,
$B.gs.

Antichthon proves as complex  a  novel­ as  great   a  mass  of   contradictions-as was Giordano Bruno  a man.  But  the  un­ ravelling  of so  densely woven  a  fabric  is well  worthwhile. Language denotes  para­ dox in this, Chris  Scott's  third  novel. And language-or, rather, kinds  of language
-forms the unsettling thematic basis for
this admirable work. Antichthon succeeds in  presenting a  complicated narrative timescape where historical fiction merges with  fictional  history.
The  historical Giordano Bruno  ( 1548- I 6oo:   preceded in  his heretical ways  by Martin Luther and  followed  in  the same by Galileo), declared his intention to be a philosopher early  in  life.  While  still  a young man  he mastered the works of  pre­ decessors  such  as  Agrippa, Ficino,  Pico, Pythagoras, and  Heraclitus. Giordano re­ jected  Aristotle as "too literal  minded­ a man  who saw but did not  believe what  he  saw"   and   developed   his  own   anti­  system of  thought. Bruno evolved his doc­ trine  of  ideas-that reality  existed  not in  the  realm  of the  senses but  in  that  of the  ideal-and  his doctrine of recollec­ tion  (or, "the art  of memory") from  the fusion   of  neo-Platonic  philosophy with Christian  doctrine.  He  asserted that
"everything  contradicts  itself ... [that] God  was  created to  serve  man ... [that the]   man   who   longs  to  know   God ... must first study nature. For  just as the divinity  descends  to nature, so there  is an ascent  made  to  the  divinity  through  na­ ture." These  beliefs were  not  as  incrimi­ nating  as   those   which   held,   in   direct


122
 opposition to the teachings of the Church, that  the  sun was the centre  of the  plane­ tary  system  and   that   there  existed  other  suns  and   planets. Threats  from   the  ec­ clesiastical  arm  and,  finally,  excommuni­ cation    drove    Bruno    from    Italy    into France,  England, Eastern  Europe, and Germany in turn.  At each  stop  Giordano found   royal  favour  and  an  audience for his alarming ideas.  Tried once in Italy  in
r 592  and  released  because  of insufficient evidence,  Giordano Bruno was lured  back in  I 599,  tried   again, and   sentenced   to death.
The (anti-)hero of Chris  Scott's  novel proves  a  man  of many  identities: Bruno is referred to variously  as the  Magus,  the Nolan   (this  label  derives  from  Nola,  his place of birth) , Brother Jordanus, Filoteo, and  by the  British  as Jordano Bruno  No­ lano.  Antichthon is at least partly by and mostly  about  this  sixteenth-century  phi­ losopher /metaphysician. Each  of the nov­ el's   dozen   parts   is  further  sub-divided and preluded by appropriately ironic  epi­ graphs   as  well  as  by date  and  location. However, none  of the  narratives remains strictly  loyal to its affixed time and  place. "History is a kind of memory"; thus, nar­ rative   flows   through  and   beyond   such attempts at  historical accuracy,  vaulting effortlessly  from   the  elapsed  past  (both  present  and   past)   to  the  future present. One   narrator  in   particular  links   these varied   perspectives;  Kaspar  Schopp would recreate the  (hi) story of Giordano Bruno, about whom  it is whispered   after  the execution that  he still lives. But, while investigating these rumours Kaspar  inad­ vertently connects the heretic's death with the almost simultaneous execution of Por­ tia and  Roberto-adulterers and  unwit­ ting   murderers.  The  real   reasons   for Bruno's   death  prove   anything  but  reli­ gious.
To  paraphrase the  Nolan  himself, con­ stancy    exists   only   in   change -hence Antichthon's  ever-shifting  time  horizon.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Further,  the   novel's   circular  structure successfully   embodies  Giordano  Bruno's heretical  belief   in   "cyclical   existence." Parts  one  and   twelve  take  place  at  ap­ proximately  the  same   time   and  locale:  the  first  issues from  the  cell  of  the  con­ demned, the latter from  the elevated  dais of those who witness his end. No one nar­  rator   dominates   these   major   sections, however,  for  there  exist  as  many  stories about the Magus  as tellers of them. These  tales  differ  only  in  quality; all  speakers tacitly  agree  that  Bruno's life  and  death are  better  relegated to  the  annals  of  fic­ tion.  Giordano himself  defines  his  death as "a fiction: the only way to keep on liv­ ing."  Hence,  perspective  differs  to  a  lit­ erary  rather than  to an  historical degree.  The   novel's   use  of   language  remains  interesting throughout  because  it embod­ ies Giordano's  assertion, near  the  begin­ ning  of the text,  that  "perspective is all."  As  always,  this  self-conscious   author  of "his several selves" claims  to speak figura­  tively. In  literal,  Aristotelian terms,  how­
ever-the way Bruno's language seems doomed   to be  taken -perspective is all, and   this  all  shifts  and   dissolves  in  time and  space.  Narrators appear at  once shadow  and   substance;  abstract  nouns such  as life,  death, flesh, and  soul  (once rigorously   defined   by  the   Church)   be­ come   equally  ambiguous  and   hollow. Seeming contradictions unnerve those like Kaspar, who,  as  soon  as  he  learns   the murderous extent   to  which  politics  and religion    have    merged    in   seventeenth­ century Italy,  loses his once-solid  grip  on reason.  Madness and sanity  fuse one with the  other:  "With  the  simplicity of  one who has found  the truth, he knew  that  he was  insane."  Yet  each   narrator in  turn  proves  a  heretic  at  heart; not  one  really despises  Bruno.  All  speakers   preserve  an intrinsic  style,  and  each   carefully estab­  lishes  those  polarities with  which  his  or her character  remains particularly  associ­ ated.  Paradox and  contradiction abound.
 The   reader   comes  to  feel  very  much  a captive  of  the  same  metaphysical  tread­ mill   which   traps   the   novel's   anti-hero. Words accumulate, making it increasingly  difficult for both  characters and  reader  to escape the sticky, linguistic mire.
Much   of  the   language  remains  self­ conscious   throughout   the   novel.   "The "\Vord" burdens  Bruno   as  much  as  the meaningless,   dogmatic  drivel   mumbled by  his  Inquisitors  does.  Unimaginative men,  they  persist  in  taking everything - including their  captive-too literally  yet not  literally  enough. Although Giordano protests   time   and   again   that   he   "was speaking  figuratively, and  did  not  mean to  be  taken   literally,"  reason   reigns   to such  an  irrational extent  at  this  Inquisi­ tion  that   the  accused   is  tried   and  sen­ tenced  on  the  basis  of  his  language.  A determined resolver of contradictions, the Magus  proposes  too many  that  are  not so digestible to those who privately ruminate on  the  same   themes.  Their shared  lan­ guage  becomes  somehow virulent  to  his judges when it issues from Bruno's mouth.
Language remains  as reflective  as it  is reflexive. Mirrors provide  the basis for an imagery  dealing heavily  in echoes,  shad­ ows, and  reflections.  Every  thing  contains its  opposite:  hence   the   novel's   title - Antichthon -defines   that   hypothetical second  earth on  the  opposite side  of  the sun-and  hence   the  novel's  preoccupa­ tion   with   paradox.  Witness Bruno's motto: "I am  changeable, I  contradict myself. Free,  I am  shackled; bound  I am liberated. lnfigurable, I  am   time's   geo­ metrician."  Each   narrator  represents a segment   of  Giordano's  self;   because   of the heretic,  the others  glimpse a none-too­ flattering portrait  of  themselves.   There always  exists  the  danger, however,   that contradictions  cancel    each    other    out, much  like Bruno's response  to the  Inter­ rogatus  about  the number of  natures pos­ sessed by man.  He unhesitatingly replies: "The nature of  an  angel  and  the  nature


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of  a  demon-none." Contradictions  so convincingly  resolved   also  threaten   un­ imaginative, literal  minds.  In addition to mirrors, visceral  imagery  is strikingly  well employed  and   helps  counter the  heavily metaphysical  diction   a  majority  of  the characters use. Chris Scott peels back lay­ ers of language as effectively as language shaves   the  skin  from   Giordano  Bruno's  bones.
Antichthon is also reader-oriented. Gi­
ordano  ostensibly   directs   his  early   ref­ erence   to   "You,  my   distant   yet   close auditor'' to  his  confessor  Robert  Bellar­ mine.  As Bruno  foresaw, however, death only guarantees  his fictional  immortality; that   the   reader   reads   assures   this:    "I dreamed, of course. But who has dreamed me?   Another-you,    my   friend." The dreaming is mutual.
The novel does reveal certain  stylistic flaws.  At  times  the  sheer  accumulation of paradooc and  metaphysical discussion proves  overwhelming. Dialogue   tends  to lag   during  the   middle  portion   of   the work,    and    interior   monologue    infre­ quently  succumbs to melodrama, as when Kaspar awaits his audience with the Car­ dinal: "0 death where  is thy sting?  Tod, wo ist dein Stachel? 0 grave, where is thy victory?  Holle, wo ist dein Sieg? Death is swallowed   up   in  victory!  Der  Tod   ist vorschlungen   in   den   Sieg!"   Certainly Kaspar should  be viewed ironically at  this juncture, but  such  simultaneous transla­ tion of  morale-boosting platitudes defeats the intention. In fact,  the continual trans­ lation of Latin phrases into their English equivalent becomes downright annoying. Perhaps the  practice is supposed  to rein­ force the  reflectionjrefleocivity motif?
Eoccept for occasional  lapses into cliche and all-too-familiar phrases like "Who'd have  thought an  old man  could  weigh so much?" following the murder of one who would otherwise have discovered  Roberto and   Portia's  adulterous  affair,   the   se­ quence  of narratives is fast-paced. Thanks


I24
 to the aforementioned sordid sub-plot  and to Kaspar Schopp's quest  for  truth, Antichthon also  eochibits certain  thriller characteristics. Finally, typos abound; despite   this  needless  frustration, the  vol­ ume  is a  handsome one  and  worthy of critical attention.

SUSAN WHALEY


IN CUSTODY

DAVID   DAY,   The   Scarlet  Coat  Serial.  Porcepic,
$6.gs.
JON  WHYTE,  Homage, Henry   Kelsey.   Tum-
stone, $g.gs.

THE   SOVIETS   PROPAGATE  HISTORY; the Americans perpetuate it; Africans repeat­ edly inaugurate history  and  West  Indians celebrate their  historylessness;  Canadians seem  to  go  unaware of  their  history,  to be  uninterested in  it,  or  to  fancy  them­ selves as the  very custodians  of their  his­ tory,  responsible  for  tidying  it  up  for  all their   uninformed    and    detached   com­ patriots. Having given   up  the  ghost  of the  Canadian  identity, Canadian  writers now concern themselves  largely with identifying the protagonists of their imag­ ined    history:   everyone    from    Captain Vancouver and   Susanna  Moodie  to  the merely  anonymous.
The  historicity of  literary works  is of course  less important than   their  fictional authenticity, but  occasionally fiction  is so dependent on idiosyncratic interpretation of  a  kind  of  mock  history  as  to  be  aes­ thetically pretentious and  uneocciting. This urge   to  improve  on   truth  by  rewriting history  appears to have  been  the  inspira­ tion  both  for David  Day's eocamination of one Canadian institution, the North  West Mounted  Police,   and   for   Jon   Whyte's investigation of  Henry  Kelsey,  for  forty years  a  servant of  another Canadian in­ stitution,  the   Hudson's  Bay   Company. One  doubts  whether their  respective as-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sertions  of the  Mounties' pristine corrup­ tion  and  of  Kelsey's  central  eccentricity really  do  justice  either  to  history  or  to literature.
The Scarlet  Coat  Serial  is a rather un­ comfortable mixture of  verse  and  prose, narrative  and   journalism,   photographs and   documents, all  in  the  name   of  au­ thenticity and  at  the expense  of credibil­  ity.  In   his  effort   to   resuscitate  history, Day  seems  to  suggest  not   just  that   the past   is  irrecoverable  but   also  that   it  is still,  inanimate, perhaps even  dead.  The subject   of  an  early  piece  in  this  unpre­ dictably  episodic  book-a  poem entitled  "This as a  Child" -is  representative of the  author's thesis:   a  child   playing  sol­ diers   near   a  war   memorial  slips  away from  his companions and  down  through  a manhole into a tunnel beneath the monu­  ment  and into  the  monument itself. Oc­ cupying  the enormous head  of a stone lion (suggestive   of  heroism, Empire, death), the  child  inhabits  the  past,  but  not  the associative   past  he  glimpsed   while  play­ ing,  because  within the  lion  he  encoun­ ters   simply armature  and  emptiness. Day's  contention that   the  child  actually  becomes  the  lion,  recognizing its  reality as  the  poet  fancies  he  himself  identifies the workings of history,  is not totally  con­
vincing: "Slowly  I I have  become  I con­ scious I I have entered the stone I I make a stooped  I small-shouldered stand  I peer out  I into  the bright  world  I through this
lion's  drilled  eyes." Day's  subsequent  ex­
aminations of factual and  fictional  events merely  emphasize the  contrivance of this petrified-boy image.  The  author devotes so much of his precious time simply to describing  photographs,   recording   leg­ ends, and  presenting documents, many  of them  inexcusably mundane, that  (to  his readers' disappointment) he sacrifices not just his work's  literary qualities, but even its literary  pretensions.
The  book  is most  impressive in its  hu­
mour   and   in  its  intensity.  One  episode,
 for   example,   concerns   Staff   Sergeant Poett perfonning his toilet  before a group of  fascinated  Blackfeet:  when  Poett  re­ moves  and   cleans   his  false   teeth,   the natives are  puzzled; but when he removes  his glass eye and  drops  it  into  a  cup  of water,   they  are   shocked,  dismissing   his detached stare  as the  Devil's  coup  d'oeil.  In  another episode,  "Vennilion," Moun­ ties elude  a raging prairie fire by leaping into   a  snow   bank   and   into   a   nearby slough,  emerging  from   their   safety   in­ stants  later  to  find  "only   seared   earth, dead   horses   and    the   flaming   outpost building." But  in  later  episodes  Day  be­ comes entangled in the paraphernalia and esoterica  of Canadian  history, portraying Mountie Francis Dickens  (son of Charles) with   the   imaginative  insight   of  Who's Who, analyzing and synthesizing Dr. Gat­ ling's  gun   with  the  precision   of  a  ripe recruit,  and  covering the story  of a cele­ brated   wedding  of  giants   with   tabloid fidelity.   Curiosity  piled   upon   curiosity does little more  than  kill one's interest.
The   main   problem  with  the  work  is that   it   touches   on   genres,   forms,   and media  without  actually exploiting them, the author proving to be ineffective  in his roles  as  historian,  compiler, raconteur, and   paste-up artist,  and   particularly  in his role as experimenter. Although   more successful  as  a poet,  Day  is rather stingy with  his verse  here.
Jon   Whyte   offers  a  more   impressive poetic response  to history, mainly  because his book is a  unified  whole, rather than  a collection  of distantly related  parts.  Like
Day, Whyte  concerns himself with  actual
documents from   history,  in  his  case  ex­ cerpts   from    the    journals    of   explorer Henry   Kelsey,  but   he  appears   to  have selected  them  skilfully  and  to  have  deli­ cately incorporated them  into  his poetry, playing   one   off  against   the  other,  the other  against   the  one.  In  its idiosyncrasy  and  eccentricity  Kelsey's  diary  is a  kind of  late   seventeenth-century approxima-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tion of Mackenzie King's,  and  for Whyte to have made  literary use of it at all is an accomplishment of some note. But his de­ pendence  on   what   is  strong   historical  material  but  frail   literary  material  sug­ gests  his  poetic  insecurity,  which   is  es­ pecially  unfortunate given  the  fact  that  his verse would certainly have stood much better  without Kelsey  and  the  historical context. His poetic  descriptions of  north­ ern  Canada are  as  beautiful and  barren  as the land  itself-and at  times as intri­  cate,  drawing us  in  all  the  directions of the   compass    at   once.   Attempting   to achieve  this  effect,  Whyte  from  time  to time  sends  his  verse  down  both  sides  of the  page, creating caesurae of alienation and  indecision   suggestive  of more  tradi­ tional  poetic  rhythms. But the verse is not consistently   successful.   One   finds  hack­ neyed lines such as "Silence is born of the marriage  of  deep   wonder   and   winter" side  by side  with  such  challenging  lines
as:   "Stillness   I the  centre   of  wonder."
Despite  his sometimes  prosaic  loyalties  to free verse, Whyte does manage to exploit poetic  conventions to  good  effect,  as  in this  catalogue  of  flowers:   "Bog  myrtle,
sun   dew,   bracken   and    pincherries,  I
pitcher plants,  touch-me-not, milfoil  and brome,  I twinftowers, bishop's  cap,  run­ ning   pine,   cloud berries:  I  garland   the
one  who  returns slowly  home." But  na­ tural   lists  and   descriptions  are   not   in themselves enough  to sustain a poem with epic  pretensions.
As a series of meditations on uncharted territory, both  natural and  psychological, the work  is engaging, but mainly  because it is a  unique  source  of information, one by which the student of history and litera­ ture  is made   captive-and  a  little  un­ comfortable. But  to  say  that  his verse is interesting is  an  understatement; to  say that  it  is  imperfect because  of a conflict between  personality and  historicity  is ac­ tually   to   compliment  the   poet   on   his
 humanity  and   on  his  dedication  to  his craft  and  to  his  subject-matter.
That neither volume  is wholly satisfac­ tory in its treatment of such  basic literary  devices as rhythm and structure, and  par­  ticularly in  its  attention to  the  essential historical analogue, points  to the tendency of  too  many   Canadian  writers   to  treat literature as  a  disposable   medium,  one that  can  accommodate the  most  perma­ nent  of  subjects in  the  most  ephemeral of forms. The  practitioners of  this kind of Can'tLit  are   the   last  ones  who   should  address  themselves  to history and  the last ones  with  whom  history,  if  it  ever  wants itself  discovered,  will  co-operate. To   be custodians  of   history,   writers   must   be dedicated enough to  art  to  take  custody  of  time.   These  works  are   timeless  only in   the   sense   that  history   will  have   no time  for  them.

PAUL M. ST. PIERRE



RAYEN'S LANDS

GAIL ROBINSON,  Raven the  Trickster: Legends of the  North American Indians. Chatto and Windus,  n.p.
YVES TROENDLE,  Raven's Children. Oolichan, n.p.
ROBIN  SKELTON,   Landmarks. Sono  Nis  Press and  Oolichan, $5·95·
IN  Raven the  Trickster, Gail  Robinson collects and retells nine stories from Northwest  Coast  folk  narrative. The events described by these stories occurred "when things were not ordered as they are now" -at a time,  that  is, when  the ordi­ nary   laws  of  cause   and   effect  had  not been   established,  and   almost   anything could  happen. The world  was a work-in­ progress, and  this premise opens the door to fantasy: as modern narrators of science­ fiction   use  the  future as  a  setting   and rationale  for  marvellous  happenings,  so native  folk  narrators referred to a distant

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



past, out  of reach  of common sense reck­
onings.
rManaging  this  inchoate cosmos  is  Ra­ ven,  the creator. He  is very  busy  making  the  world,  stocking it  and  adjusting  it. Unlike  more  aloof  creatures, who get  the job done  promptly, once-and-for-all, Ra­  ven  seems  to  have  no  master   plan.  He makes  mountains  or  creatures,  or  puts light in the sky, and  then  sits back to con­ template his project. Noticing areas  that need  refinement or  development, he goes ahead    with    renovations  and   improve­ ments.
What  moves Raven to creativity? Some­ times  he  is touched by  petitionings from the  Humans he  has  made,  for  he  seems to  have   their   interests  at   heart. When they  get  cold,  they  complain  to  Raven, who  undertakes to get  fire for  them.  But fire  is  owned  by Qok,  a vain  and  selfish owl. So, posing  as a famous  dancing deer, Raven  tricks Qok,  and  steals  a few flames for   the   chilly   villagers.    Although  the trick in a sense backfires -Raven's beau­ tiful  tale is burnt to a stump -mankind benefits. Yet  the  boon  is not  the  point  of the  story.  Rather, it  is  the  trick   that  is most    pertinent:    Raven's    insight    into Qok's   vanity,   and   his  ingenuity  in  out­ witting this unworthy  bird.  Likewise, Ra­  ven  outsmarts the  Man-who-sat-on-the­ tides,   a   small-brained  giant    ruled    by habit.  Once   more,  human  living  condi­  tions  improve  as  a  result,   but   the  real pleasure   of  the  tale  lies  in  Raven's  en­ counter  with   the   giant:   nimble   brain  conquers  brawn,  as  it  often   does  when folk heroes  encounter massive obstacles.
In  most  of  the  stories,  Raven is  pro­ tagonist.   But  two  present   plots  that re­ semble   those  of  European  folk   tales  in which  young,  human  heroes  have  prob­  lems and adventures. In "Cannibal" three brothers go  forth   to  overcome a  female monster  who devours hunters. She is hor­  rible:  "old  and  dried  blood,  sweet-smell­ ing  with  decay,  covered   her   wrists  and
 elbows.   Flies   clung    to   her   arms   like burrs." Readers familiar with  European tales about  brothers might expect  the youngest  of the  three  to  take  this oppor­ tunity  to show  that  he is brave and clever beyond  his  years,  and  defeat  the  blood­  thirsty adversary single-handed, saving his siblings in the process. But all three  broth­ ers  are  equally   irresolute and  confused, and  Raven  must  intervene at  the end  of the  tale.  In   "Sila" Raven   does  not  ac­ tively intervene in the fate of the young heroine   but   appears intermittently  as  a sage and sensitive  counsellor. When  Sila's doting brothers  complain that  she will not submit  to her  proper feminine role in the tribe,  and  goes swimming instead, Raven advises  them: "'Let her  swim  the  tides, for it is in her  nature to do so.'"
Raven's activities  do  not  always  grow out of humanitarian impulse.  In "How Raven  Brought  the Salmon" he goes on a dangerous  venture  because   he  is  bored with  eating  cod  all  the  time.  In  "Raven and  the North Lands" he is lonely, and weary  of his bachelor doings.  He  falls in love with  a young  Canada Goose.  When her flock takes off over the Clapping Mountains, he  goes  along.  But  he  can't keep up, and  the goose's mother expresses her  contempt for  her  daughter's suitor: "'It is our  opinion that  you aren't strong enough   to  endure  the  hardships  of  the long flights  to the  lands  of the sun  as we do.'"  Rejected and  miserable,   Raven learns   that   love  can   humiliate  even   a creator. And  the reader  learns  that  this mountain-maker is not  omnipotent.
·Even the last tale holds surprises  about Raven's character. So far  he  has  been  a decent creature, sometimes  exempt  from the human  condition, sometimes  included in  it.  His  indefinite physical  capabilities
-shape-changing and so on-match his variable character, motives,  and  desires. But in "Why  Raven Is No Longer" he demonstrates yet another quality, a quick moral   readiness.   He   discovers   that   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



villagers  among whom  he lives are  being terrorized by a  hideous  trinity-a  cruel young  man,   his  monstrous mother, and the ferocious  beast she has created  to pro­ tect  her  son. Raven confronts and  over­ comes  this  dreadful   threesome,  who  are none  of  his making, and  thereby  purges creation of evil. His  job done,  he flies off to  "the   black  night,"  whence   he  came. The  villagers  weep  at  his departure, and the  reader   will  understand  their  regret,  for Robinson  has made  Raven  an  engag­ ing and even lovable figure, an unpredict­ able but reassuring presence in the world.
For  a long  time,  since  the  seventeenth
century  at least, European literary  culture has maintained two enduring ideas about folk stories. One  is that  these tales can  be retold   with   literary   purpose.   Perrault's work  popularized this  practice long  ago, and  Robinson follows it now in her treat­ ment  of North  American stories:  via her keen,  densely  textured  prose,  she  intro­  duces  these folk texts  into literature. The  second  idea   about  the  oral   tradition  is that   children  are   a   particularly  appro­ priate audience for  folk tales. The  moral  character of  the  tales  has  recommended them  to  those  who want  to address  chil­ dren: the stories often  demonstrate moral  priorities,  and   their   telling  incorporates the  child-listener or child-reader into  a community value system. This  second no­ tion seems to have influenced  Yves Troen­ dle in  his  Raven's Children.
Seemingly aimed at  pre-adolescent readers,  Rav.en's  Children is a  novel  de­ rived from  Northwest Coast  tales. Troen­ dle's   most   novelistic   innovation   is  the introduction  of  two  young  protagonists, whose  presence  unifies an  otherwise  epi­ sodic  narrative. These heroes  are  Satsum and   Gyila,   brother  and   sister,   orphans who  live  with   their   grandmother  in  a coastal  village.  Both  children   are  on  the verge of adulthood: Satsum  is about  to be initiated into  manly  activities,  and  Gyila will soon  be marriageable. But  trouble  is
 afoot, for the villagers have bad attitudes. They   no  longer   respect   the  natural  en­ vironment  that   sustains   them,  and  they are   suffering  as  a  result: '"Fish   don't swim into  our  nets any more; bears don't come out  of their  caves,"' says the grand­ mother. Hardship and  decadence  end  in a volcanic  eruption  that  destroys  the  vil­ lage.  Only  Satsum  and  Gyila  survive.  In a  way,  the  catastrophe is fortunate. Not only does the collapse  of the accursed and corrupt   community  preserve    the   chil­ dren's innocence, but  it also generates the subsequent  narrative,   for   the   children must  rebuild   their  lives from  scratch, on conservative principles.
Separated  from   one  another,  Satsum and   Gyila  go  out   into   the  wide  world. Their adventures bond   them  to  the  na­ tural  order-or  confront them  with  the supernatural. Gyila is mistaken  for a prin­ cess  returned  from   the  dead;  later she marries a  bear   and   gives  birth  to  bear twins.  Satsum  is  enslaved,  but   becomes friends  with  his captor, and  journeys with him  to  the  realm  of  the  Salmon People,  where  he becomes  a salmon.  Later, when he  has  resumed   his  human form  and  is reunited  with  Gyila,  he  kills  her   bear­  lover. As they turn  homewards, they meet a  shaman  who  helps  them  resurrect the dead   of   their   village,  and   begin  recon­ struction.
Aspects of these episodes remind one of various  European tales-of  Kai  and Gerda's separation in "The Snow Queen," and  Gerda's difficult journey  through northern terrain; of Tom's amphibious voyage in The Water-Babies; of stories of beast-marriage, or of orphans discovering a  royal  birthright. Yet  each  of  these  fa­ miliar   elements appears in  exotic  dress, contributing  to  new  meanings.  And,  in sum,  the  whole  story  has  structurally an alien  character. After  their labours   and travail,  the  children  assemble   the  dead  and  begin  to rebuild  the village. Yet  they express  neither  exultation  nor  ambition.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Rather,  they  seem   to  be  exhausted  by their  endeavours, and  the story  tapers  off inconclusively. One   looks  for   the  assas­ sination of a giant, the discovery of  riches, or,  at   least,   marriage  to  a   princess   or potentate to round  things  off.
And  then,  more  curious still,  the  sha­ man  begins  to  tell  stories  about  Raven, and  these  six tales  end  the  text,  without even  closing  the  frame  by  returning  to the  village setting. This  is not to say that  these  stories  are   not   valuable  in  them­  selves, for  Troendle's narrative skill is as apparent here  as  elsewhere  in  the  book. His  Raven is not  Robinson's. His  Raven is  a  misfit,  a  disreputable creator  come down in the world-a self-centred habit­ ual  liar  whose  tricks  are  little  more  than practical  jokes and  whose  prodigious ap­ petite   makes   him  an   unwelcome  guest. Troendle's Raven is a  bum,  a  loser  with limp  tricks,  whose  wife leaves  him.
Both  Troendle and  Robinson are  very good  at  producing wry and  realistic  dia­ logue among the  creatures who  populate this   marvellous  coastal   domain.   Their beasts are easy speakers. And  both  writers handle  descriptive  tasks  with  great  skill, although Robinson's style is more  concise than    that    of    Troendle,  who   goes   to greater  lengths  to  give  a  comprehensive picture of  tribal  life, in  the  interests, no doubt,  of   informing  his  young   readers.  Both  writers find  their  tropes  and  figures in the natural world, describing behaviour and sensations  in  local  terms.  This  prac­ tice has  the effect,  in both  texts, of  dem­  onstrating the fluid boundary between  the human and  the  natural  world  and  show­ ing  their  ultimate unity. So, too, does the intelligent  discourse  of  their   beasts  sug­ gest kinship  between  man  and  animal.
In  Landmarks, a recent  addition to his large  poetic  output, Robin   Skelton  con­ siders more  directly  the relations between  man  and  his west coast  setting. But Skel­ ton,  unlike  Troendle and  Robinson, en­ counters  distinction  as   much   as  unity.
 Some of his poems -"Makar" and "The Hermit Shell," for  example-use  com­ parison   as   a   topic,   and   reveal   logical differences   between    the   natural   world and  the  human,  differences which  show human  experience  as  the   greater   phe­ nomenon.  In   other  poems,   though,  he discovers  equivalences   between   outdoor scenes  and   human  sensations, as  in  the similes of "Above":

Sometimes in  the  bush the  sky is  personal

a purely  singular and  private place

as innocent as the stillness   after  passion.

Yet  in  this  volume  it  seems  finally  that, while the west coast may provide  a happy climate  for  poets,  it  makes  a  prickly  and resistant  subject   for  poetry.  It confronts the artist  with  problems  that  may have  to do with the  landscape itself.  Massive and complex,  composed  of such  proliferating detail -lichen,  waves,  rocks  and   tides, chipmunks, shells,  rank  foliage-it  can defeat  painter or poet  working  in an im­ ported  tradition. One  tiny  poem, amidst  many  that   try  to  account  for  abundant settings,  suggests  that  Skelton  sometimes  feels  stalled   by   the   difficulty   of   tran­ scription:

It would  be  hard to  take this  pebble  home

unless  we knew  the  way to take  the  sea.

But  he  persists   ("Since  I  am  a  poet,  I must  make  poems") , looking  for a  meta­ physical  dimension  that   can  confirm  his connection with  this  place.  And  it  is the forest  gloom,  rather than  the shore,  that  seems to promise  most mystery-or yield most  disappointment.  In "0 Lazarus," a hike  in  the  woods  is  transit between  life and    afterlife.   "Landmarks,"  the   final entry  in  the  collection, takes  him  on  an­  other  hinterland journey,  away  from  the


129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



beach, where  the-wife-and-kids wait, pro­ saically.  He  proceeds  expectantly,  antici­  pating or dreading something or nothing,  daring the  scene  to  be  ultimately empty of spiritual tokens.
With  his inland  penetration, Skelton prepares  himself   rather   apprehensively for visions of lurking beings, mystic or bestial.  And his nervous  watchfulness can make even  animal sightings  transcendent moments of  "memory and  terror": "the glimpsed eye of the deer  / through ageless trees" holds supernatural surprise. All this is a far  cry  from  the  easy commerce  be­ tween   human  and   beast  in  Raven   the Trickster, where  nature shares  a  wealth of spirit  with  man-and  a far  cry  from the land  of familiar mysteries Troendle so clearly  envisions  with  the  help  of an  in­ digenous  folk aesthetic.
JANET GILTROW


CHARACTER IN CONTEXT

SHARON  POLLOCK,  Blood  Relations and  Other
Plays.  NeWest  Press, $1 7·95; pa.  $8.95.
SHARON POLLOCK'S apprenticeship as a playwright  is  clearly   behind   her.   The three  plays in  this  book, One  Tiger  to  a Hill,  Generations, and  Blood  Relations, all first produced in 1g8o, establish  her as a major playwright. They  are collected  in a  sturdy   and   attractive  paperback,  the fourth  in NeWest  Press's Prairie  Play Ser­ ies. An introduction by Series  Editor Di­ ane Bessai summarizes Pollock's playwrit­ ing  carer   to date,  noting  her  affinity  for the epic-documentary theatrical tradition, her  emphasis  on  the  placement  of  her characters in social and  political  contexts, but  observing also  that  her  two most  re­ cent   plays   deal   with   private  life,   the politics of the family.
Generations is a naturalistic treatment of a  day  in  the  life  of three  generations
 of  an   Alberta farm family. "THE LAND," Pollock directs,  "is a character revealed by the light and shadow it throws on  the  Nurlins' lives."  The play  depicts the  characters' attitudes toward  the  land and   the  conflicts  among   them,  activated by  three   different  plot   devices.  Despite the  interest of its character  relationships, the play lacks structure and  satisfying resolution. Any  urgency  in  the  plot  de­ rives  from  the  pressing  need  to solve  the problem of lack of water  on the farm, yet no  solution   is  provided except   the  tem­ porary   one  of  rainfall. The  relationship between  Old  Eddy  and an ancient Indian is  absorbing  but   irrelevant   to  the   out­  come. The same is true of the relationship between  Old  Eddy  and  his son, and  one grandson's  interest  in  the  other's fiancee. Such  resolution as  the  play  offers  comes in  the younger  grandson, David's, affir­ mation of  devotion to  the  land,  a  devo­ tion that  is tested by all three  plot devices. Scene  by scene,  the  play  is a  convincing and  entertaining  portrayal of  farm   life, but  as  a  total  work,  it  is  weakened  by David's lack of weight:  his affirmation is not  enough  to pull  together all the  play's various  strands of interest.
The  other plays,  however,   add  com­ pelling plot  development  to  the  interest of characters' relationships in  their social context  which   is  Generations'   strength. One  Tiger to a Hill is based on the killing in  I975  of  a  penitentiary  rehabilitation worker   who  was  shot  with   the  prisoner  who  held  her hostage.  The  characters in­ clude  prisoners,  penitentiary officials and a  guard, rehabilitation officers, and  out­ siders who are caught up in the hostage taking. One   of  these  is  a  lawyer  whose direct  addresses  to the audience frame  the play. His opening speech reveals  him as representative of the public Pollock means to  reach : for  years  he  has  repressed   the questions prompted by news articles about prison  riots and  deaths of inmates; finally he is drawn into  an  event  in which  "two

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



people   died   to  confirm   a  resolve ... to find out  what  happens to them-and  to us -when   we   condemn  men   to   that wastebasket we  call  the  pen." We  know from the beginning that  the evil will be violent; tension  is sustained as  the  peni­ tentiary system is explored through a par­  ticular event  and  the characterizations of those   who   participate   in   it.   There  is warmth at  the  heart of  the  play  in  the caring rehabilitation officer and  the Metis prisoner whose  love  for  her  and  concern for his fellow  prisoners  outweigh his own self-interest. That  these  two  are  the  vic­ tims guarantees emotional impact, yet we are  not  allowed   to  lose sight  of  his vio­ lence  or of the  fact  that  her  most  earnest efforts  to help  the  prisoners only intensify the conflict  between  prisoners and  prison officials. The  ultimate  villain  is a  prison guard, but  he is believably  depicted as an inevitable  product  of  the  system  which forces  prison  workers   to  cope  with  vio­ lence and  contempt. The play is gripping and  persuasive  in its indictment of the penitentiary system.
,In  Blood Relations  Pollock  focuses on one  character, Lizzie  Borden, and  again uses effectively   foreknowledge of  a  hor­ rifying  climax-the axe  murders of  Liz­ zie's  father  and   stepmother-to  create  dramatic tension.  Ten  years after Lizzie's acquittal,  the    tantalizing   question    re­ mains: did  she or didn't  she?  Lizzie pre­ fers to leave the  matter in doubt in keep­
ing with her desire  to be someone  special,
unsure  whether it is worse "to  have mur­ dered  one's  parents" or  to  be  simply  "a pretentious small-town  spinster." The ac­ tion develops  as the hypothesis of Lizzie's friend,  an actress; she plays Lizzie during the two days that lead  up  to the murders, while Lizzie supports her  performance in the  role of  the  maid.
Lizzie's  character and  her  relationship with   her   father  are   beautifully drawn. She is a spirited spinster  who  does not fit into  the social  role approved for  women,
 and  her  loving  relationship with  her  fa­ ther  is blighted   by his sense of  obligation to make  her  conform to  the social  ideal.  Lizzie  and   her  stepmother  despise  each  other.  Her  sister  Emma, a  colorless good girl  who   brought  Lizzie  up  after   their mother's death,  mediates  between  Lizzie and  the older  Bordens.  On  the day of the murders, the  stepmother  and  her  brother have persuaded  Lizzie's father to alter  his financial  affairs  to keep Lizzie and  Emma financially  dependent even after  his death. The  day is as stifling as Lizzie's  life, and  Emma  withdraws  from the  heat  and  the conflict into  the country. Lizzie's murders of the stepmother she hates and  the father she loves are both convincingly motivated.
Drawn  into  a persuasive  portrayal of a murderess, we  are  then   jolted  back  into the recognition that  this is the actress's creation, and   the  question  "Did   she  or didn't  she?"   remains  technically  unan­ swered,  though  the  play  unambiguously suggests  that  she  did.  The  device  of  the actress  taking   Lizzie's  part   while  Lizzie looks on in  a  neutral  role  is illuminated in  the  closing  sequence when  Lizzie  re­ minds  Emma,  "It was  you  brought me up.... Did  you ever  stop  and  think  that  I was like a  puppet, your  puppet.... me saying  all  the  things  you felt  like saying, me doing all the things you felt like doing.
..." The  actress  taking  Lizzie's  place  is a metaphor for  Lizzie taking Emma's, which adds depth to the psychological, social,  and   artistic  implications  of   the play,  as  well  as  distancing us  from   the horror of the deed enough to permit  an objective  view  of Lizzie's  character. The strength  of  the   play's   appeal  has   been proved  by numerous productions and  its merits acknowledged by the first Governor General's  Award  for drama.
The  plays all show  Pollock's  great  skill in characterization; in consideration for her actors  born  of her own  acting experi­ ence, she gives even  her  minor characters depth   and  considerable  interest. All  her

BOOKS IN REVIEW



social  settings  are  effectively  created,  di­ verse though  they are  in these three plays. Each  play encompasses a wide emotional range,  from  humour to anguish. The  col­ lection  demonstrates  that  in Sharon Pol­ lock   we   have    an    accomplished   and versatile   playwright   whose  work  seems destined   to  absorb  audiences   for  many years  to come.

SUSAN STONE-BLACKBURN


PUPPETEERS

JOCK  CARROLL, The  Life   and  Times of Greg Clark:  Canada's  Favorite Storyteller. Dou­ bleday, $1 9·95·
BETTY KELLER,  Pauline: A  Biography of Paul- ine  Johnson. Douglas &  Mcintyre, $18.95·

THE   TWO BOOKS UNDER   REVIEW   have little   in  common  except   that   both   are biographies of  Canadians who,  through their   public   personae,  achieved  "house­ hold word" status.  Every subscriber  to the Star  Weekly or  Weekend  Magazine was familiar  with  the  folksy accounts of  the "King-Size   Leprechaun,"  "the    lovable little  gnome"  who  described  himself  as a puppet-master. And  for  two  generations of schoolchildren, memorizing "The  Song my Paddle Sings"  was an obligatory  task. The Canadian Press obituary  of Greg­ ory  Clark   ( I892-I977)  describes  him  as
a pixie-like  character:

Perch   a  pork-pie hat  atop  frizzy  white  side­ burns;  match  twinkling grey   eyes   with   a cherubic smile; clothe a five-two frame in  a rainbow of  colors; add  a  gnarled  cane  and  an   almost  cocky   jauntiness  and   you   have  Greg Clark.

Though his official  biographer Jock Car­ roll  no  doubt   intended  to  write  a  cele­ bration, what   emerges  is the  portrait of an egotist  whose craving for attention and  approbation  expressed  itself   in  overtip­ ping,   competitive   fishing   and   hunting, glad-handing the  rich  and  famous,  wear-
 ing flashy clothes,  drinking with  the boys, joining elitist male conclaves such as the Madawaska Club,  and  indulging in "shit­ house  humour"  (Robert Allen's  phrase). Carroll's Clark  is a  red-neck   in  his  atti­ tude  to "hairy fairies," a Victorian in his attitude to women  (his wife, Helen  Mur­ ray, was treated as the angel-in-the-house and  left  alone  a good  deal), a  victim  of his father's preference for brother Joe, but who nevertheless displayed  the same kind of  favouritism in  his  own  family,   a  ro­ mantic  whose  literary preference ran   to Kipling,  Longfellow, and  Maeterlinck, a big  spender  who  was  regularly  in  debt,  and a war  correspondent who liked  to be mistaken for a general.
Carroll's style is graceless,  and  even infuriating, marred by an  excess of short paragraphs,   repetitions,  carelessly   con­ structed  sentences, cliches,  and  so  much trivia   that   the  central  character  is  often submerged. Do  we really  need  to  be  told that    Mackenzie   King    would    become Prime  Minister, that  the first Fig Newton  bars  were  produced in  I892  by  the  New York  Biscuit  Company, or  that  in  I9I 1
Charles Arthur McLaren Vining achieved
a   first-term  average  of  92   percent at Woodstock College? Can  readers  outside Ontario be expected to have an insatiable curiosity  about Toronto's newspaper  per­ sonalities  (not   to  mention  the  nonenti­ ties) ? The book  is most  successful  when the  subject speaks  for  himself,  as  in  the reminiscence  of   Hemingway's Toronto interlude or the description of Roosevelt's burial.  Isuspect   that   Carroll  does  less than  justice to Clark. Certainly, he fails to convince  this  reader  that   Clark   was  a lovable  character and  Canada's favourite storyteller. Maybe   the  book should  have been reviewed  by a macho  male from Toronto.
Carroll's research  was facilitated by his tape-recorder, the  voluminous diaries be­ gun  when  Clark  was fifteen,  years of  per­ sonal  acquaintance with  the  subject, his

BOOKS IN REVIEW



family   and    friends,  and    two   Canada Council   grants.   Betty  Keller's more  ex­ tensive and  valuable research  (apparently unfunded)  was inhibited not only by the lapse  of time,  her  subject  having  died  of cancer  in  I9I3, but also by Eva Johnson's destruction of her  sister's personal  papers  and  by the  lies of  Pauline's collaborator, Walter  McRaye. The  biographer proposes to correct the entirely  romantic and com­ plimentary   public    image    sustained    in Mrs.  W.  Garland Foster's  The  Mohawk Princess: Being Some  Account of the Life of Teka-hion-wake (E. Pauline  Johnson) (I 93 I). The poetess,  it  seems,  was  not only a talented, charming entertainer but also  a  manipulative, aggressive,  sexually disappointed   woman    who   used   every weapon  at her  disposal  to make  her  way in  a male-dominated world.  Unlike  Car­ roll,  Keller  succeeds  in  arousing  our  in­ terest  and  sympathy.
Emily  Pauline Johnson, "the Mohawk Princess," was  born  in  I86I   near  Brant­ ford,   Ontario,  the   daughter  of   Emily Howells    and    George    Johnson    (Chief Teyonnhehkewca). Only   a   quarter   In­  dian  and almost  entirely Aryan in appear­ ance,    Pauline   emphasized   her    native  blood because she idolized  her father and because  she  realized  the  marketability of this  undeveloped cultural  tradition. She made a  point  of  posing  for  photographs in  profile  to  highlight her  aquiline nose; she adopted her great-grandfather's name, using it as a signature; and  for her public appearances after  r 892 she wore a fringed buckskin dress low cut at the neck and decorated with silver brooches  and ermine tails, wampum belts, a Huron and a Sioux scalp, her father's hunting knife, buckskin leggings,  moccasins, a  red  woollen  cloak, and a bearclaw necklace.  Educated by her Puritanical and  class-conscious mother to be  a  middle-class wife,  she  reached   the age of thirty without finding  a suitor  who did  not  bore  her.  The only  reputable  al­ ternative was  writing, then  reciting,  po-
 etry.  Later   her  repertoire was expanded to include  travel  pieces, children's stories, Red  Coat  tales, and  Indian legends.
A first-class promoter at  home  and abroad, Pauline seems to have  juggled successfully  the  dual   roles  of  cultivated lady at ease in society drawing rooms and princess from  the primeval forest. Yet her life was not an easy one. Her  engagement in   I895   to   a   prosperous  businessman eleven years her  junior  was terminated by his parents  who would  not accept  a "half­ breed  actress."   Her   family  relationships were  inhibited  by  her  extensive   travels and   the  loss of  the  Brantford home   on her  mother's death. She  was plagued by infected  throats and shrinking audiences. Her final years in Vancouver were genteel  but  impoverished. A new contribution to the  Johnson   vita  is Keller's explanation of the poetess's uncharacteristic behaviour in   I9oo   when   she  apparently departed from  her  rigid  moral  principles "to  be­ come sexually  and  romantically  involved  with   an   unscrupulous   small-time  pro­ moter," Charles Wurz,  possibly  the  only man  whom she was unable  to manipulate by means of flattery and  charm.
Not  the  least  of  the  book's  merits   is Keller's evocation of the  transient  enter­ tainer's life  at   the  turn   of  the  century. Pauline  preferred to  travel  first  class  on the CPR  (and  to stay at  the  best hotel  or in the homes of the local gentry), but  the caboose of a  freight  train  or a  horse  and buggy would do in a pinch. Her sponsors ranged  from  the  Rover  Bicycle  Club of Winnipeg to  the  Methodist congregation of a tiny  mining  town  in  the  Kootenays. The  locale  of  the  performance might  be a  small  town  opera   house,  schoolroom, or  pool  hall,  and   the  hazards  included rowdy  boys  imitating roosters,  cats  and dogs,  howling  infants,   censorious   wives who  regarded  all  female   performers  as immoral,  and  stagestruck farmers or min­ ers   avid   for   the   sight   of   a   beautiful female.


133

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Pauline has  little  to say about  the  po­ etry  itself,  which  it  is usual  nowadays to treat  with  disdain. Surely  some explana­ tion  is required for  the  fact  that  Charles G. D.  Roberts hailed  her as the  voice of Canada,  that   Hector  Charlesworth  de­ scribed  her  as the most popular figure  in Canadian  literature, that  John  Greenleaf  Whittier   commended  the   strength  and beauty   of   her   poems,  and   that   Watts­  Dunton,  Swinburne, and  Alma-Tadema joined   in   the  applause?  Moreover,  the most  prestigious London  publisher, John  Lane, agreed  to publish  her first volume, The  White  Wampum, while  denouncing her  typescript   with  the  words,  "I never take  a book for publication without the expectation that  my author will be great, and how would this look in the British Museum  labelled,   'Original  Manuscript of  Miss  Johnson's  first  book'?"  Was  it charm   alone  that   elicited  the  praises?
In some ways, Pauline  was ahead of her time,  championing causes  and   attitudes that  did  not  become  popular for another seventy  years-an ardent Canadian  na­ tionalism  that did not discriminate against  "White" or  "Red"; distrust  of  American takeovers; pride  in  Indian  ancestry; col­ lection   and   propagation  of   native   folk­ lore;   and   a  feminism   that   encouraged other   women   to   "strive  for   name   and place  in this Canada of ours,"  to quote  a church  ladies  group  in Saint  John. This scrupulously documented and  engagingly related   biography may  re-establish  Paul­ ine  Johnson as a  minor  but  not  entirely  negligible   figure   in  the  Canadian  pan­ theon.
MURIEL WHITAKER


COMPLETE ROMANTIC

H.  PEARSON GUNDY, ed.,  Letters  of Bliss  Car­
man. MeGill-Queen's Univ.  Press,  $45.00.

IN  I908,  BLISS  CARMAN'S  BOOK of essays entitled  The   Making  of  Personality ap-


134
 peared, a  vaporous work  best  forgotten. The   real  Making of  Personality unfolds in  this  volume   of  letters,   and   what   an engaging personality it is! Carman cared mightily about the  design  of his books, debating choices of cream  or white  paper, black  or  brown  ink, and  one feels that  he would have  been pleased  with this beauti­ ful volume,  designed  by Peter Dorn, with Tom  Meteyard's stylized  portrait of Car­ man  on  the  dust  jacket.  Inside,  we find the  man   himself  laid   bare,  with  all  his mercurial  moods,  his  loyal  affection   for his friends, his love of women  and  nature, his whimsical humour. H. Pearson Gundy, former  Librarian of  Queen's  University, has  selected  630  letters,  only  a  third   of those extant, arranging them  in fifteen chronological  sections   with   linking  bio­ graphical passages  and  a fine  general in­ troduction.  Gundy's  main   criterion  of selection   is  "to   let  Carman  reveal  him­  self" in all his complex emotional nature, but  Gundy  also includes letters  in  which Carman  discusses  "social,  economic,   po­ litical  and   religious   topics   of  the  day." Carman was  too  fuzzy a  thinker to hold our  interest  on such  topics;  this group  of letters   could   have   been   drastically   re­ duced   without losing  the  essence  of   the man.
The   book's  first  letter   was  written to
Carman's mother in  I874 when  he was thirteen; the  final  one  was written three days  before  his sudden death in  I929,  at the  age  of  68.  In   between   is  his  auto­ biography in  letters: his  desultory  years of  schooling, never  really  applying him­  self, in Fredericton, Edinburgh, and  Har­ vard,  his Grub Street years in  New York and   Boston,   his  life-long  vagabondage, flitting  restlessly  from   friend's home   to boarding-house to wilderness  cabin.
"I feel  as  if  I had  crossed  the  divide and  hit  the  damned old  steep  trail  that leads downwards all the rest of the way," wrote   Carman  when   he  was  forty-two, and  it did indeed  turn  out  to be downhill

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



all the way. Poetically, he peaked  early; "Low  Tide  on  Grand Pre"  appeared  in the    Atlantic   Monthly   when    he    was twenty-five; his collected  works of 1904 contain most of his best work. He kept  on writing  but  knew  the  Muse  had  fled. "I tried  to  write  a  poem   today," he  wrote pathetically to  a  friend  in  1897.  "It was like  a  sick  kitten   trying   to  crawl." The downhill slide included a nervous  break­ down,  a bout  with  tuberculosis, other  ill­ nesses, continuing financial  debts.  Letters to his many  publishers  reveal a  tangle  of bankruptcies, general bungling, copyright problems. It  was  a  steep  slope,  but  with a sunlit  meadow or  two at  the bottom. In his  final  decade,  Carman's  cross-Canada reading tours brought him both  fame and financial  security.  "People are  willing  to pay  just  to see what  the  darn fool  looks like,"   he   wrote    in   astonishment.  The  sunny fields of fame  were full of Flowers: beautiful, bright  young women  who wrote him fan letters, and  clamoured for his friendship. He chose a handful, and wrote them  playful,  passionate letters.
The man  so candidly revealed  in this volume  is, before  all else, Canada's  com­ plete  Romantic. Like  Wordsworth,  Car­ man   had   a  beloved  sister  who  was  his chief  correspondent  and  the  mainstay  of his  life.  "The  room  without your  gowns hanging up,  the silent table  without your papers,  the  lack  of  you  everywhere -0
I  hate   it,"   he  wrote   when   she  left  his
wilderness  cabin.  Her  death in  1920  was "the  heaviest  blow I have ever had." Like Keats,  Carman formed  his poetic  theories in his letters,  albeit  with  much  less  origi­ nality.  There are  distinct  Keatsian  ech­ oes:  "Amid   so many  perplexities of aim and   activity," writes  Carman, "it  seems best of all  to be devoted to beauty.  That certainly must  prevail  at last. And  beauty is only  truth  made  visible."  The  core  of Carman's  Romanticism  was  his  intense love of  Nature and  his  belief  that,  with­  out  it,  there   could   be  no  poetry.   "Old
 Nature lies out   there  in  the  sun ... and poetry  is what  she would  say if she could speak,"  he writes. He  hated  cities-"cit­ ies almost  make  a  body  believe in  a  per­ sonal  devil"-and hated  the  stuffy  New York  and  Boston  magazine offices  where he  toiled,  a wood  thrush in  a  cage. The  best passages  in  the  letters are lyrical  de­ scriptions  of some forest  path or seashore, in  which,  as  in  his  best  poetry,   an  im­ mediate  emotional  response  to  the  scene swells to musings  on  love  or  death. Car­ man  had  the  Romantic relish  for  enthu­ siasm:   "my   frenzied   enthusiasm  is  the mainspring   of   the   Universe,"  and   the Romantic  reliance  on  Imagination: "To introduce  facts  into  literature is  to  ruin it."  He  restlessly  pursued the  Ideal: "If I  had  means,  I  think  I should  be always on  the  move,  looking  for  what  is  never found!"
And if, occasionally, Carman is, by his own  admission,  a  "weeping  sentimental­ ist," he  also  has  Byron's  ability  to  laugh at  himself,  to balance  the  Childe  Harold side of his  nature  with  a salty,  sardonic Don  Juan   one.  By  far   the  most  enter­ taining  threads in  the letters  are  the love affairs of this male Carmen-gypsy. ''These women  will  be the  death of me yet,"  he sighs to a male friend, but he needed  their adoration  just  as  Byron  did.  To  be sure, there  are  fewer  lady-loves   here  than   in Byron's  letters.  We  are,  after  all,  in  the colonies, where  expectations are necessar­  ily   more   modest.   Carman  remained  a bachelor,  although he was engaged  twice and subsequently formed  a thirty-year liaison with a married woman, Mrs. Mary Perry King. What a pity that  no letters  to these  three  have  survived! This  leaves  a most  regrettable  gap   in   the  collection. There are, however, delightful love letters to those young  women  who blossomed on the downhill  slope. Particularly charming are those to Kate Eastman, the platinum­ haired  beauty  with  whom Carman had  a reckless and  rejuvenating  affair  in  1922.


135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



His  life   on  the  whole,  was a quiet,  un­ eventful one;  its drama,  mostly  comedy, comes   from   his   love   tangles.   We   see plump, aging  Mary  Perry  King  trying  in vain   to   uproot   all   those   pretty   young things from  his path. We see  Mary  Perry staging  her  worst  "heart  attack" just  as Carman prepares to go  west  with  Kate. We  see  Carman,  in   letter   after   letter,  strenuously exhorting his Flowers never to marry.
Another engaging leitmotif  in  the  let­ ters is Carman's innate modesty and  self­ insight.  He  recognized  his  limitations as a  poet,  particularly  his  worst  defect: his "baleful obscurity." "A  great  deal  of it," he writes,  referring to his early poetry,  "I cannot read  any  more  myself. It offends me by reason  of  its lack of clarity, its lack of definiteness." When  a student writing
a  thesis on  Carman's poetry  queries  him
about   a  specific  poem,  Carman  replies: "There seems  to have  been some idea  or moral  purpose in my mind  in writing  the lines  but  I don't remember what  it was." "Letters should  never be kept. I always keep  too many  and  have  destroyed  thou­ sands,"  wrote  Carman to  a  lady  friend. Most of the recipients of Carman's letters saw their  worth, and  kept them.  Now, in this handsome edition, they can  delight  a wider audience. Carman was never  more than  a  second-rate poet;  his letters  were
the finer  creation.

MARIAN FOWLER












136
 COVERING
THE TERRITORY

LORRAINE  MCMULLEN,    Sinclair   Ross.  G.  K.
Hall, $I 4·95·
PETER  THOMAS,  Robert   Kroetsch. Douglas  &
Mcintyre,  $5-95·

IN THE RAPID, SOMETIMES overzealous de­ velopment of  scholarly  interest  in  Cana­ dian  letters,  what  was once  a rare occur­  rence-the appearance of a book-length study  of  an  individual  writer-has  be­ come  a  much  more  commonplace event. Several  on-going series  now  vie  to  cover the territory. However, while there is deep within   us  still a  desire   to  applaud  and welcome  each   new  entrant at  the  gate, one increasingly feels a need for tempered evaluation. What does the new study add? How effectively  does it undertake its  busi­ ness?  Indeed, what   is  its  business?  And how felicitously,  how trenchantly is it able to  meet  and   treat  its  subject   matter?
Lorraine McMullen's Sinclair  Ross and Peter  Thomas's Robert  Kroetsch are  two such  studies,  the former a contribution to the long-established "Twayne World  Au­ thors" series  and  the  latter the  most  re­ cent   addition  to  "Studies  in   Canadian Literature" under   the  general  editorship of  Gary  Geddes.  They   are  reviewed   to­ gether   for  obvious  reasons;  both  writers  are  deeply  interested  in  the  West,  both are  fascinated  by  technique,  and   both have made  significant  contributions to the development of serious  fiction-writing in Canada.
Their  differences are,   however,   far greater than  any  similarities they  super­ ficially  share   and,   though  Kroetsch  has written  provocatively and   wittily   about  Ross  (see "An  Erotics  of Space" in Cross­ ing  Frontiers, 1979),  neither McMullen nor Thomas sees significant links between  them.  Given  this  and  a  disinclination to offer   yet   another   brief   treatise   on   the phenomenon of Western   Canadian liter-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ary fertility,  my focus  here  falls rather on the   studies   themselves.    Of   the   two   I found Thomas's the more pleasing and useful, in part because of the freer format allowed  by the  Geddes  series, in part  be­ cause,  with  a  writer as  playful,  allusive and   confusing  as  Kroetsch  can  be,  co­ herent  and  thoughtful analysis of  the sort Thomas  offers   provides a   helpful  pur­  chase  for  further  engagement with  stud­  horses and  bones.
rThat  a  book-length  study   of  Sinclair Ross should  appear was inevitable. His stature in  the  realm  of  Canadian  litera­ ture  is at  present   very  high  and  it  will doubtless  remain high.  Professor McMul­ len  has  no  hesitation in  calling  As  For Me  and  My  House  "a Canadian classic" or  in  making  a  case  for  the  power  and variety  of Ross's prairie stories. Sawbones  Memorial, she  argues,  remains an  unrec­  ognized gem many years after it appeared. She  gives  Ross  due   prominence  in  the early  development of  serious  prairie  fic­ tion, stresses his fascination with modes of narration, and  locates  his deepest  concern in the search for and the difficulty in sustaining "interpersonal  relationships."
The  problem with   Sinclair   Ross  lies not   so  much   in   Professor   McMullen's ideas but in the fact  that  she repeats  them so many  times. One  senses a convergence of problems  here.  In  the  first place  there is the question  of whether or not a writer of  Ross's   surprisingly  small   output   (4 novels  and I 8 stories)   can  sustain  book­ length  analysis.  In  this  regard it  is inter­ esting  to note  that  when  R. D. Chambers undertook a study  of Ross for the Geddes  series   ( 1975) ,  he  did  so  by  combining Ross with  Ernest  Buckler,  a  writer  of the same  age,  and  of similar  regional  signifi­ cance  and  limited  output. This  is not  to say  that   a  large-scale  study   of  Ross  is impossible.   One   can   imagine  a  mono­  graph  especially  attentive to  Ross's  aes­ thetic  or   the   relation  between   his  un­ usually private life and  his art. Such is not
 the case here, likely because the Twayne format  calls for  a general, introductory approach. This seems to have forced upon Professor McMullen the requirement of going over time and again  what  is already well-trod  critical   ground in  order  to  fill out  the  series'  precise  demands about length.
rAs such,  it  is a  book  to be used  selec­ tively.  Sinclair  Ross  provides  substantial new information -welcome information
-about Ross's personal  life and his tastes in  reading,  the  fruit  of  McMullen's  sev­ eral interviews  with him in Spain. It adds  to our  knowledge of Ross's  penchant  for revision.  It provides  detailed  readings of most of his stories, of  those curious  book­ ends, The  Well  ( 1958)  and Whir of Gold (I 970),  that  give a dark  twist to the age­ old  tale  of  the  country  mouse  and  city mouse,   and   of   Sawbones  Memorial,  a novel  written, as  McMullen interestingly points  out,  in  response  to  Claude Mau­ riac's  "Nouveau  Roman"  experimenta­ tions in Diner  en  ville  ( 1959).
The  problem  is that  Sinclair  Ross reads
too much  like As For Me  and My  House; the  study  door  slams  too often,  the wind of repetition relentlessly  blows. The  crude sort of echo one hears in McMullen's description   of   Ross's   first   story,   "No Other Way," is a distressing  case in point. To  write  within  four  paragraphs "Ironi­ cally, Hatty has lost her husband through her  devotion to a cause  she  thought they shared,   the  success  of   their  farm" and "The  irony   present   in   most   of  Ross's writings   is  evident  in   the   dilemma  of Hatty Glenn   who  realizes  that   she  has lost  her  husband  through  her  excessive devotion to the farm  which  she had  con­ sidered  to  be  their  shared  concern" is to confess to insufficient  material.
What,  one  wonders,  might  have  been done to enliven  this study and to give substance  to the interest and  variety  Pro­ fessor  McMullen  sees  in   Ross's   work? While  I have  already suggested  a  couple


137

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of fertile  emphases, one  that  needs  men­ tion is the book's inattention to the range  of criticism  Ross's great  book, As For Me and  My  House, has  occasioned. There is no mention of E. K.  Brown's seminal  re­ view, of Kroetsch's "Erotics," of Wilfred Curle's  highly  intriguing pair  of articles,  or of Morton  Ross's "critography" of the novel.  Publishing delays  may account for some  but  not  all  such  omissions.  As  For Me  and  My  House  remains  a controver­ sial novel. Even readers approaching Ross for the first time, whether in Hamburg or New Hampshire, should  be aware  of the debate  it has inspired, the hold  it has on its   serious   Canadian  readers.    Readers need  to know  what  it  means  to say that Mrs. Bentley  is "not a reliable  narrator." Surely the Twayne people, even in their passion  for  minimal footnotes  and  seem­ ingly  endless  chapter  subdivisions,  don't  want  their  studies  to bypass crucial  criti­  cal issues. Such  an  approach is in itself a backward step  by  which  Ross  may  seem to a wider,  international audience duller than  need  be  and  Canadian  scholarship both  mute  and  immature when  faced  by interesting  issues.
Peter  Thomas's study is, like the author it  examines,  more   energetic  and   unre­ strained. In  his first sentence  he  cleverly encapsulates  his  problem:  "A  critically self-conscious  writer  both  anticipates the responses of his readers and is tempted  to betray  them." Aware  of Kroetsch's tricki­  ness, aware too  that  Kroetsch   has  with his  latest   novel   What   the   Crow   Said (I 978)   reached  a  critical   phase  in  his comic   self-consciousness    as   a   novelist, Thomas offers  an  introductory study  of the  recognizable patterns  and  obsessions of Kroetsch's versatile imagination. Call­ ing for further studies  along biographical and  aesthetic lines,  Thomas  opens  up  a complex  territory with minimal  confusion  and  critical   gibberish.  He  resists for  the most part  the seductive tendency  to adopt  Kroetsch's   own   elaborate  language  of
 Post-Modernism, shamanism and  parody, holding back  and  maintaining a  perspec­ tive whether considering the novels them­  selves or  Kroetsch's many  interviews.
Such  caution is both  necessary and  ad­ mirable.  Where  Sinclair  Ross   kept   his silence   amid   the   steely   presbyterianism of his native Saskatchewan, exercising  his voice  only  in  staccato bursts  over  a  long lifetime,  Kroetsch, like  the  Alberta   that  bred  him  and  the  tall  tales  that  inspired  him,  has  been  irrepressible and   volumi­  nous both  as poet and  novelist since  I965. From the vantage point  of a wide literary knowledge and   out  of  a  deep  desire  to write   down   tales  of  the  sort  his  father told so wonderfully, he has playfully con­ cocted  a written version  of oral  tradition as if, as author, he sat  calmly  in  the  eye of an  imaginative storm  sweeping  up  all of   the   West's   history   and   culture,  its kitchens  and   beerballs,  in  one   glorious topsy-turvy chaos.
Thomas has prepared himself well, tun­ ing  Hemingway's "bullshit-detecting ma­  chine" to the voice-madness of Kroetsch's "bullshit   artist."  While   he   might    well have taken  time  to locate  Kroetsch's debt  to   older    Western    writers    like   W.   0. Mitchell and  while he provides  almost  no information to show  (and  it surely  must be an interesting evolution) how Kroetsch emerged quite  as he did, he has steeped himself  in  Eliade, Campbell and  Graves, in  Scholes  and   Kermode, in  Barth   and Sheila  Watson. He concentrates almost exclusively on Kroetsch's six novels, offer­ ing not  only a cogent  account of  the line of Post-Modernist narrative experimenta­ tion from  But We  Are Exiles  to What the Crow  Said  but  also linking  the  novels  to Kroetsch's poetry  of  the same period, par­  ticularly  the  studies  of  Frederick  Philip  Grove,  Tom Thomson, and  Albert  John­ son,  and  the  books  The Ledger   ( I975) and  Seed  Catalogue  (I 977) .  He  locates Kroetsch's  best  work  in  his middle four novels,  showing  a  particular  affinity   to

BOOKS IN REVIEW



what  he  judges  to be  the  best-conceived and  most  humanistic of  them,  Badlands. In reaction to the humanism of Badlands, writes  Thomas, Kroetsch seems  to  have felt  it  necessary   to  create   "a  conscious counterblast" in  the  form  of  the  highly negative and  bleak  What the  Crow  Said. Attentive to earlier  critics and  Kroetsch himself,  Thomas succeeds  in  giving  pat­ tern  and  point  not  only  to  the  evolution of Kroetsch's fiction  but  to the paradoxes, games,  and   persistent parody  that  char­  acterize   his   trickster's   imagination.  As critic,  Thomas  inspires  confidence in  the way  he  keeps  to  his  path. At  the  same time  he establishes certain insightful con­ nections  especially  pertinent for  readers  less  caught up  than  Kroetsch himself  in the  fascinations of  Post-Modernism. For instance, by  linking   Kroetsch's  preoccu­ pation  with  the  "deconstruction" of  tra­  ditional  characterization, of "the  ethical intrusion of personal relationships," to his awareness,  culled   from   an   unpublished journal,  of   his  unwillingness  to  "trust (him) self  to interrelationships," Thomas offers  a  glimpse  of  the  sentimental  vul­ nerabilities the  affable  author  character­ istically  seeks  to  disguise,  a  clue  to  the emotional  man   behind    the   cool   Post­ Modernist mask. Thomas's efforts overall,  make  for  a  refreshing  and  useful  book, one  that  effectively  brings  together much disparate  criticism  while  opening up  the
territory in a variety  of intriguing  ways.

MICHAEL PETERMAN


CHURCH & STAGE

JEAN  LAFLAMME and  REMI  TOURANGEAU,  L'E-
glise et  le ThUitre au Quebec. Fides, n.p.

THE STORMY RELATIONSHIP, within Que­ bec society, of a paternalistic Church and a theatre groping for direction constitutes one of the  most  interesting and  revealing  chapters of  Canadian  theatre history.  It
 is  a  sad  comment on  the  state  of  that discipline  that   there  has  not  been  avail­ able  to scholars  until  now  a  single syste­ matic study on the subject. Laflamme and Tournageau's book  finally  fills this  void. Many  are sure  to receive it  with  a grate­ ful  "at  last!" For  those  who  do not  read French, one  can  only  hope  that  an  Eng­  lish version  will be  made  available soon. L'Eglise  .et le  Theatre au  Quebec ex­ hibits  the strengths and  weaknesses  to be expected  in  a  pioneering enterprise:  ex­ cellent in the area  of documentation, it is less good  in its discussion  and  analysis  of the   material   presented.  This   may   be partly due   to  the  fact   that   the  book,  a project  of  the  Centre   de  documentation en  lettres  quebecoises   de  l'universite  du
Quebec   a Trois  Rivieres, was  originally
planned   as   a   collection  of  documents
only. A., the  authors explain  in  the  pref­ ace,  thi3 limited  scope  was eventually ex­ panded    to  serve   a   threefold  purpose: "une  connaissance chronologique des rap­ ports  et  des  attitudes de  l'Eglise  face  au
theatre ... une abondante documentation qui  sera  utile  a l'histoire de  la culture et indispensable aux  chercheurs interesses  a
entreprendre d'autres travaux sur  le sujet
... le trace  d'evolution sociale  et  morale d'un  peuple   jeune  encore  qui  s'interroge et s'affirme  toujours davantage." Of  the three  goals  they  set  themselves,   the  au­ thors have achieved the first two fully;  as to  the  third,   the  scope  and  emphasis of the  book  obviously   do  not  allow   for  a really  meaningful  discussion.
On  the level of documentation, its  pri­ mary  purpose, the  book  is excellent. The authors have  had  little  previous  work to guide   them   (although  they  do   use  the theatre histories of Jean Beraud and  Bau­ douin  Burger) ; most of the material they present   is  quite   new.  To   obtain  their wealth  of information, they  have  gone  to some  fifteen   archival   depositories  (Na­ tional  Archives,  diocesan   and  parish   ar­  chives,   archives   of  educational  institu-


139

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tions). Even so, not all the material mentioned  is  always  documented;  espe­ cially in the case of sermons, second-hand information   only   is   available   in   some cases. The nineteenth-century polemic be­ tween  the  Catholic clergy  and  defenders of the theatre is further extensively  docu­ mented  from newspaper material (some thirty-four papers  are  cited). A general bibliography  includes   relevant   works  in both   French  and   English,   and   will  be useful  to theatre historians as well as scholars  of social and  cultural history.
In   organizing  the   book,  the  authors have   attempted  to  impose   order   upon their  somewhat amorphous material by a chronological  division   into  three   parts: I. "Rigorisme de l'Eglise  et hesitation du theatre, I 6o6-I836"; 2."Conservatisme de l'Eglise et contestations du  theatre,  I837- I 896";  3· "Moralisme de  l'Eglise  et  pro­ vocations   du   theatre,   I837-I962."  The  divisions are  based on changes  in  Church leadership. Part  One  starts  with  the earli­  est available document on  the  topic,  the "Avis  donnes   par  Mgr.  de  Saint-Vallier
au  gouverneur  et  a  la  gouvernante du
Canada  sur  !'obligation  ou  ils  sont   de
donner le bon example au peuple," 1685,
which  includes   a  warning not  to  allow
"Mademoiselle leur  fille"  to take  part  in theatricals. It goes on  to a description of the  close watch  kept  by Church  authori­ ties over  all  worldly  activities;  over  dra­ matic    performances at   schools,   which must be in Latin and  "on pious subjects"; and  to the  well-known  Tartuffe affair  of I694· Following the Conquest the position of  the  clergy  was  rendered  considerably more  difficult  because  of the British  offi­ cers'  and  officials'  love  of  theatre, and attendance  at  performances.
Part   Two  covers   the   period   of  the height  of clerical   power.  Attacks  are  di­ rected  especially  against the  increasingly frequent  foreign  touring  companies. However, as the tide of  theatrical activity  cannot   be stemmed,  the Church retreats
 to a more realistic  position in the late nineteenth century, holding the  line mainly  on the issue of the sanctity of the Lord's Day.
Part  Three shows  the  last stages of the
battle  for control, with  cinema, radio  and eventually television changing the scene somewhat for both  sides. The  Lord's Day controversy remains a major issue, and  a new one is added, the question of the morality of newspaper advertisements. Eventually,  the   rise  of  a  "respectable" native dramaturgy  (Father Legault's Compagnons;  the  work  of  Toupin  Le­ clerc,   Gelinas)   allows   the   Church   to change  its   position    from   rigorisme   to actual encouragement.  With  the gradual loss of  power   by the  Church, and  espe­ cially with  the takeover of the educational system  by  lay  authorities, the  theatre is finally independent of ecclesiastical  inter­ ference.
Laflamme  and   Tourangeau  have  at­ tempted  to  present   the  material  objec­  tively throughout-a difficult task. They argue  against  the   prevailing  view   that  clerical   repression  of   "worldliness" is  a typically  qw§becois phenomenon, pointing out  that  it should  be seen in a wider  con­ text.  They  emphasize  the  fact   that   the clergy  of  Quebec often  simply  reiterated views  held  in  France at  the  time   (e.g., Bossuet) ; the difference was often  simply the  fact  that  Parisians did  not  feel  duty­ bound    to   obey   the   teachings   of   their bishops,  while  the population of  theocen­ tric   Quebec  did.   As  well,  the   relation
between  episcopal exhortations in Quebec and  the prevailing moral  climate in Rome is emphasized; the Quebec clergy reacted strongly  to the  warnings of popes such  as Benedict  XV,   Leo  XIII, Pius  XI,  and Pius XII.
In  view  of the  ferocity of many  of the
documents presented, one may argue  with the  moderation of  the  authors' point  of view  expressed   in  the   Conclusion  ( "Ni l'Eglise   quehecois  ni  le  theatre  ne  sont

BOOKS IN REVIEW



en tres  en  guerre ...") ; while  their  posi­ tion is at  least debatable, the value of the book  as  a  research   tool  and   source  of information stands unquestioned.

RENATE USMIANI


OTHER FRANCOPHONES

L.  LEVEILLE, Le  Livre  des  marges. Editions des
Plaines, $7.00.
MARGUERITE  LAPALME,   Eperdument. Prise   de
Parole, $4·95·
ALEXANDRE  AMPRIMOZ,   Changements de  tons.
Editions  des   Plaines, $7.oo.

MoNSIEUR LEVEILLE's Le  Livre des marges  is  his  second   attempt at  poetry (for  want  of a more  accurate term),  his first  work  being  Oeuvre  de  la  premiere mort. This   was  preceded by  two  novels Tombeau and  La  Disparate. Critical ap­ praisals  of  these  earlier   works  evoke  the beauty  of the imagery, the sobriety  of his perfect prose,  the preciseness  of his meta­  phors,  the rarefied nature of his verse. In the  present  volume,  LeveiHe  has  set  out on a somewhat different tack. The  author is engaged  in a reflexion  on  the nature of the language and  literary expression.  His view of literature is summarized in the following  defence and  illustration of the ludic  qualities of the act  of writing:
On  dit,  a Ia Iegere,  qu'ckrire est  un  jeu  de mots.
C'est exact.
Un  je de  mots.
Je  d'·emaux.

The possibilities  of this  game  seem  to be endless as we are presented with a variety of  sound-sense  puns  and   clever  etymol­ ogies:  Comment taire,  Pere-mettre, Poe­ tes  ou  peaux etes,  Tout QUESTion est quete   d'etre.  Punctuation is  also  scruti­  nized  and   it  is  revealed   that   a  comma  indicates propulsion rather than  a pause;
 therefore, when two commas are joined together they form a wheel, a source of momentum. Not to be overlooked  is the eloquence  of a totally  blank  page or, to a lesser degree, a wide expanse  of margin encasing a gem-like kernel of text. The author's justification for his close analysis of the  elements  of language is suggested through  references from such disparate sources  as  Marshall McLuhan  and   the Bible  which  indicate that   words  are  de­ ities, myths  made  flesh so to speak.
It  is evident that  this  is not  a book of poems,  at   least   not   in   any   traditional sense, but a collection of thoughts. The author has interspersed his own comments with a host of quotations from  such  well­ known philosophers, prophets and writers as:  Virgil, Socrates,  Gibran, Sappho, Va­  lery  and  Saint-Denys-Garneau.  Unfortu­ nately,  the   contrast  is  only  too  telling. Leveille may  be in good  company but he is definitely  outclassed. In  choosing  to be­ gin and  end  his work  with  the  trite fairy­ tale formulae, "Il •etait une fois" and  "El Le  vecu t  heureux"  [sic],   he   has   con­ demned  it  to  the  realm  of  pure fantasy,  all illusion  and  no substance. As the  title suggests,  Le  Livre  des  marges  is a  book that  can  only  be  considered marginal.
Eperdument is a collection of  interest­ ing and  engaging poems  by a  young  au­  thor,   Marguerite  Lapalme,   writing    in Sudbury, Ontario.  One   is  struck   by  the coherent whole these poems form and  the recurrent use  of  certain themes  and  im­ ages.  This   is  not   to  say  that   they  lack variety,  for  innovation in  form,  perhaps more than in content, is definitely  present.
From  the  outset  the  poet  establishes  a very  intimate, if  not  erotic,   relationship with the reader, "tes  yeux glissent sur mes
mots  f comme  sa langue  sur mon  corps." The  exact  physical  nature of the creative act   is  further  elucidated  by  Lapalme's
statement that  she is an "ecriveine," ink is the  lifeblood   which   flows  in   her   veins and  must find an outlet. The  blood in her

BOOKS IN REVIEW



veins  ( veine)   like  the  wine  ( vin)   of life embodies  her  "ivresse de vivre." The par­ allel  between   blood  and  wine  naturally causes her to evoke the Eucharist-albeit irreverently, as  the  wine-blood   becomes coagulated into  ketchup  and   Christ   is transformed into  the  King  of  the  Juice.  Thickening or lack  of blood is associated with  a  showing  of  the  life  force.  This impotence  is   suggested    metaphorically throughout  the   poems  by  references   to "les manchots" -armless men. The limb­ less men,  however,   are  not  passive  and seek to deprive others  of the ability  to act by sucking  their  blood  like leeches. Love, as well   is violent  and  destructive as  the poet's  lover  strips   her  of  her  limbs  the way  one   plucks   the   petals   of  a  daisy (marguerite) to determine if one is loved. Despite   the  title  of  the  work,  the  de­ spair  is not  total. The  poet expresses ten­ derness  and  love  in  a  poem  entitled   "A Robert ..." even  though  the object of her affection stubbornly refuses to reciprocate. Finally, a promise of happiness is found in
dreams   "un   pays  sans  frontieres  I sans hivers  et  sans  deserts ... I plein  d'amour
et de  joie," although the ultimate end  of life still remains "un  cimetiere  I une biere pour   nos  poussiercs   I au  fin  mond   de
l'enfer."
Unlike many of her contemporaries, Lapalme makes extensive  use of such for­ mal devices as alliteration, assonance, rep­ etition  and  rime:
a front un   j'affronte Ia  nuit
un  delire fougueux ravissant mon  esprit
et  mon  coeur bat   tout   famelique
mon  coeur bat  tout   arythmique le grand  tempo frenetique
d'une fugue fantastique et  je reve  je reve
au  creux de  bras  imaginaires.

This  can  become  a bit overwhelming but usually the effect is palliated by other passages where these elements are used sparingly. A  certain  awkwardness is  ob­ served,   however,    when   the   poet   seeks
 originality at any price. The results strike some rather jarring notes such as:

un  gouffre s'ouvre devant  moi cyclone de  coma

tu  disparaitras [...]
comme u{le grenouille au  bout  d'un megot

je t'ai, tu  m'as, on  s'a.

Fortunately these  are  not  too  numerous and  one is impressed  less by them  than  by the integral consistency of the rest of La- palme's poetic  expression.                   .
With   several   works  of  poetry   to  his
name,  both  in English  and  French, Alex­ andre Amprimoz is by no means a debu­ tant. A  comparison of  this  most  recent  work  with  his earlier  works  of  poetry  in French, namely Chant solaire  ( I978)  and
10111  (I979L indicates a definite matur­ ation  of his technical prowess and  a new sureness   of   touch.   Some   of   his  earlier poems   showed   flashes  of   brilliance  but often  the unusual  juxtapositions and  met­  aphors  seemed   self-conscious   and   con­ trived.  Changements de  tons  presents   a more   sustained  argument  expressed   in images that  strike  one as being more sincerely conceived and  more completely integrated into  the  whole.
The work  is divided  into  five sections. The first  entitled Mots, speaks of a desire for  liber tion
the  vanity  of words,  and  a  type  of hope held  out  in  the  form  of change:

le  sang  gicla
de  Ia madeleine
que  le songe
avait change en  moule

tu  tendais Ia main.

The next section, Orages, focuses on the suffering and  destruction of the  innocent ( enfants decapites, biche  ,eventree), the poet's  depression ( "et  toute  cette  vie n' st que  pourriture"), his  despair   at  the. m­ evitable passage  of  time,  and  his  f_atigue
("et je m'epuise 1 au  pied  de ta spir  le  I
babel"). In one of the longer  poems, Iron-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ically entitled "Encore sur le neant," Am­ primoz   evokes   the   tenuous  situation  of man  "Seul  dans  les  brumes  du  savoir  / les mains  tendues vers  l'infini  des reves" and   suggests   that   religion   is  a  sort  of parapet that prevents man  from  tumbling into  the abyss. Yet,  the  poet himself  prays "si  peu  et si mal" that   the  only  hope  he sees in  the  future would  be  in  a human saviour "le  fils de l'homme."
In  the fourth section,  Solitude des  jar­ diniers,  the  poet  is seen  as  the  gardener who creates  new flowers. The creative act is held  forth  as a  possible  means  of per­ sonal  as well as social  liberation; yet, the greenhouse is an artificial world  that  pro­ duces  "fleurs  fictives"  and  "palmiers du songe." The  real  world  is a frigid  lonely plain.
:The final  section,  Changement de ton, represents not  only  a change in  tone  but also in form  as the text is written in prose. Paradoxically, the subject of this  prose is poetry  itself.  Despite his affirmation that poetry   should    be   quite   spontaneous­ "ne  pas  tomber dans  les  pieges de  la lit­ terature, ne   jamais   se   relire-voila   la vraie  poesie! Je la  veux  insensee  et  sim­ ple" -this can  only be considered a vain hope  as  Amprimoz'  own  poetry   betrays his academic  background. Not  only  is it worked  and  reworked, it  is also  redolent  with  allusions  to  literary figures.  In   his closing verses the  poet  seems to find satis­ faction and  a kind  of peace  in his chosen occupation along  with  the  certitude that  there  is something more:

£tre !'artisan d'un texte. Respirer Ia satisfaction
de  !'oeuvre finie....
Deja  tu  vois  venir un  autre monde.

I have deliberately left discussion of the third   section,   Graines   de  lumiere, until the last. This  lengthy  series of poems  ( 21 pages)  is in fact  not new material but a revamping of the previously  published poems Chant solaire and  Deux  Points contre  le soir  (although no acknowledge-
 ment is made  to this effect). One wonders what   the  author felt  incorporating  this piece  (originally a  meditation on  Egyp­ tian    civilization    under   the   Pharaohs) might  add  to his latest  work. Its presence is regrettable in an otherwise commenda­ ble volume.

MARlLYN E. KIDD



FROM THE ASYLUM

JOCELYNE   BEAULIEU,   J'ai    beaucoup  change depuis. ... Lemeac, $6.g5.
NORMAND CHAURETTE, Provincetown  Play­
house, juillet  1919, j'avais  19  ans.  Lemeac,
$6.gs.

THESE TWO PLAYS by promising  young playwrights underscore the  Quebec  thea­ tre's  continuing obsession  with  madness analyzed  so  brilliantly by  Pierre  Gobin's study,  Le Fou et ses doubles:  figures de la dramaturgie quebecoise. In  these psycho­ dramas, Jocelyne Beaulieu and  Normand Chaurette tum away from the social real­  ism and  political  themes of the 196o's and
197o's, instead  emphasizing the alienation of their characters by placing  them  in the sterile environments of psychiatric clinics. There,  the   mentally-deranged   protago­ nists  re-enact the  past  in  series  of flash­ backs,   persuading  the   other   chartcters (real  or imaginary) to play roles in  their  personal  theatres of  the  mind.  Curiously enough, both  sick  characters are  haunted by memories  of  killing a child  and  by the need  to  give  birth.   Traumatized  by  the abortion her  lover  forced   her   to  have,  Beaulieu's heroine wants  a baby, but  first she must  take  control of her  own  life  by symbolically giving birth  to herself. Chau­ rette's  hero,  committed to a  mental hos­ pital   following   the   murder   of  a   child during the sole performance of a play  he wrote,    also   craves   auto-engenderment, but  for  him  it  is a  prelude   to the  act  of creating   pure  art.   Despite   the   striking


143

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



parallels   in   setting   and   circumstances, Beaulieu  and  Chaurette use the figure  of the   folle  or   fou  for  very  different  pur­ poses.  ]'ai  beaucoup  change  depuis ..., originally  written for  the  students of the Ecole  nationale de  theatre  in  I 979  and later    worked    for    the    Theatre   d'au­ jourd'hui in  I98o,  examines   the  case  of one  woman  in  order  to show  the  reasons why so many Quebec women suffer from mental   illness  and  how  they  are  treated  by  psychiatrists. Provincetown Playhouse, juillet   1919,   j'avais  19  ans,  written   in I98I, portrays an  actor/playwright  who risks his freedom and  sanity  for  the sake of  realizing  a pure  theatrical  experience and  loses. For  Beaulieu, the   folle  repre­ sents   Quebec  women    whose   marginal status  in  society  brings  on  neuroses.  For Chaurette, the   fou  represents the  artist (and  homosexual)  who is driven  mad  by a  society  which  can  neither   understand his work  nor  tolerate his presence  and  by his own creative dreams.
Beaulieu's play deals with  the standard themes of Quebec women's  theatre: fears which  paralyze  women, resentment of the
martyr  mother figure, rebellion  against dependence on men, conflicts between women's   professional and  personal  lives. The  heroine remains unnamed; she is called according to the subtitle  "F comme dans  Folie,  Femme." Still  trying  to over­ come  the trauma brought on by an abor­  tion,  F  is  back  for  her  third   stay  in  a mental  hospital, this time suffering  a false pregnancy.  Several   unresolved   conflicts contribute to  the  illness:   her  dependent love  for  her  boyfriend and  anger  at  his insistence  on  the  abortion, her  desire  for a  baby  and  fear  of losing  the  child,  her guilt   for   being   a  "bad"  daughter and rejection of her mother's resigned submis­ sion  to  her   brutal  drunken  father.  F's psychiatrist, Marguerite, spurns  the usual drug  treatment and  helps F act out her feelings,  fears,  and  fantasies.  F's  psycho­ dramas reveal  her  paranoid  fears,  perse-
 cution  complex, and feelings of alienation. Marguerite encourages F  to  defend  her­ self,  to  resist  and   fight  back  against  the dark  forces  which  hound  her.  With   this "anti-psychiatric"  therapy,  F  has  made  progress,  but  the  treatment is threatened by the  impending  departure of Margue­ rite  who  is  pregnant. The  male  director of the mental hospital criticizes  Margue­ rite's   experimental  work   for   its  heavy reliance on the identification between patient and   doctor.  Marguerite  is   par­ ticularly   sensitive   to  this  criticism  since the close identification threatens her own sanity  and   because  she  feels  guilty  that  her  professional career interferes with her personal life  (her  wife/mother role). See­ ing  that   Marguerite also  has  fears  and  weaknesses   gives  F   new   strength.  She imagines leaving  the  hospital  and  telling her  boyfriend that  she does  not  want   to depend on  him  anymore. The  transfor­ mation announced by the  title,  ]'ai beau­ coup   change   de puis ...,   begins   at   the play's   end.   In   her   final   monologue,  F realizes that  she never  really existed  since she always lived  for  others.  So now is the time  to give  birth  to herself:

J'vas accoucher d'moe.
J'vas dev'nir une  sage-femme. U ne  sage  femme?
U ne  sage ... femme ...

While  Beaulieu's play implies a positive message  of change and  liberation, Chau­ rette's work suggests the endless repetition of the  same  obsessive fantasies. Provinc.e­ town  Playhouse, like Chaurette's first play Reve  d'une  nuit  d'hOpital,  deals  with  the relation between artistic imagination and  insanity. It  ends  where  it  begins,  in  the mind   of  the   hero,  thirty-eight-year-old Charles  Charles, who   has  directed  this theatrical reverie  every  night  of the nine­ teen years he has spent  in a Chicago men­  tal  asylum.  It is a play  within  a play, the one-man show   of  a  madman  who  can conjure  up   the  setting,   props,   lighting, music,  characters,  and   audience  he  re-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



quires.   On   the  surface,  the   play  is  an experimental  work   which   ironically  be­ comes  a  melodramatic murder  mystery. The evening of July  Ig,  I9I9, a full moon rising  in  a  sky  ablaze   with   the  orange  glow  of  the  setting   sun,  three  nineteen­ year-old  actors    (including   Charles Charles)   performed  a  play  which  was to be a  symbolic  sacrifice  or  immolation of beauty.   When   the   audience  applauded the  nineteen knife  blows to the sack con­ taining the  sacrificial  victim,  a  five-year­ old  black  child,  it believed  that  the  sack was   stuffed   with   cotton   and   that   the blood  was  pig's  blood.  After the  "truth" was  discovered, the  critics   panned  the play and  the courts condemned the actors to death. Young Charles Charles escaped hanging  by  convincing  the   judge,   jury, and  psychiatrists that  he  was insane.  Be­ ing a  perfectionist devoted to  the  dream  of  making art  and  life  coincide,   he  has become  insane  in  order   to  play  his  role correctly. The play's enigma-"Savaient­ ils que  ce  sac  contenait  un  enfant?"­ goes unanswered until Tableau I8  (there are,  of course,  nineteen  tableaux in  all) when  Charles  Charles admits he  set  up the  murder  by  putting the  drugged child in the sack. He did  it impulsively  to pun­  ish  the  infidelity   of  his  lover,   Winslow Byron,  with  the  other actor,  Alvan  Jen­ sen.  But  even  when  the  mystery  appears solved,  the  question remains whether the events  of July  I9I9 are  real or simply the hallucinations of a madman.
Within the  plot  and  structure of  Prov­ incetown Playhouse, Chaurette   touches on a number of complex themes and  still finds  room   for  comedy.   On   the  lighter  side,  Charles Charles's play  is  at  various  times  a  parody of  avant-garde  symbolic dramas, a pastiche of lonesco, a satire  of murder mysteries, and  a comic  attack on the notion  of  "theatre de la verite." Chau­ rette   also  makes   fun   of  spectators  who arrive  late,  literal-minded  critics,  and  a public  which  fabricates motives   (racism,
 homosexuality,  sadism)    to  fill  its  own need  for  "truth." On  a deeper  level, the playwright questions  the possibility of cre­ ating  a  pure  theatrical illusion  in  which reality  and  art  come  together in  an  eter­  nal present  which  abolishes  the  notion  of time. With  the insertion  of  excerpts  from Charles   Charles's  M emoires,   Chaurette suggests   that   writing,   like   silence   and  madness, attacks and  undermines the idea of   objective reality. In his preface to Provincetown Playhouse, Gilles Chagnon interprets the  murder of the child  in  the sack as the symbolic suicide  of the author who  became   lost  in  the  enigma   of  his own  deranged  imagination. The   folie of Charles   Charles  reinforces  what  Chau­ rette  said about  the mad  poet Emile  Nel­ ligan  in  the  preface   to  Reve  d'une   nuit d'hopital:  "au  bout  du  reve,  il y a  tou­ jours le risque  d'un hopital."
Provincetown Playhouse, juillet 1919, j'avais 19 ans and  ]'ai beaucoup change depuis. . .  point   to   new   directions  for Quebec theatre in  the  I98o's.  No longer obsessed  with   political   and   cultural  na­ tionalism,  Quebecois playwrights  are  ex­ ploiting   the  dramatic  potential  of  their personal,  sexual,  and  aesthetic  concerns. If Beaulieu  can  avoid  the  cliches  of  the
feminist   piece  a  these  and   if  Chaurette
can  use his wit  to keep  his poetic  drama
from  becoming  static,  we  may  look  for­ ward    to   some   original  and   thought­ provoking    plays   by   these    two   young dramatists.
JANE MOSS


ISN'T REALITY?

ROBERT  ALLEN,    The  Hawryliw Process:   Part
Two.  The  Porcupine's Quill,  $8.g5.

J THINK IT'S SAFE  to say  that  if you  en­ joyed Robert Allen's  The Hawryliw  Pro­ cess: Part  One, you  will  also  get  a  kick out  of  Part  Two. All  the  metafictional


145

BOOKS IN REVIEW



craziness  of the  earlier  book is present  in the  later   one,  with   some  brilliant   new tropes  laid on especially  for the occasion. In  fact,  it's  all one  novel, like those  Vic­ torian   triple-deckers  (if  like  them  only in  that   respect), and  it  would  probably  best  serve  your  interests   as  a  reader   to read  both  volumes  at  the same  time.
Allen is still playing games with the philosophical conundrum of the emperor and   the   butterfly:  just  what   is reality, and  furthermore, what  is the  story  on  it. This  story, "The Adventure of the Novel in Manuscript," which  at almost  the very end we discover "was never written," may not,  within  its own  fictional  world,  really have    an   author;  yet   there    are   other worlds,  other  books. Our  world  may  not seem  quite  so strongly  present  when  we finish reading this one, but it is still here, gentle reader. Isn't it?
The intrepid cast  of characters spend a good  deal  of time  traversing Hell,  the outer  precincts of which they had reached and  determined to  breach  at  the  end  of Book  One. Hell,  it  turns  out,  is a  giant underground parkade  (well,  Dante had the right  icons for  his time;  and  it seems to me Allen  has made  an inspired  choice of  icons  for  ours) .  They  spend  a  lot  of time  travelling from  level down  to lower level  of  the  "Parking Lots  of   Retribu­ tion,"  during which  they see a  truly  con­ temporary  horrorshow  of   lost   souls   in various   stations of  suffering  traffic.  But Minden Sills, the  "author" of the  novel, though  "paralyzed  by uncertainty" (and  creating a narrative based on the  Uncer­ tainty   Principle), is  forever  finding his story   in  memory  or   else   having  it wrenched out  of his control,  so the  skit­ tering    narrative  is   lively   and   full   of changes,  providing many  other  points  of view to complement his.
Sills, as we found  out in Part One, has been a patient at The  Hawryliw  Institute, where  Docs Hawryliw and  Hangham hoped  to make  a new  man  of him  based
 on  "cHRISTIAN & EMPIRICAL PRINCIPLES." Although he has escaped, followed  by the doctors,   and   taken   up  with  a  band   of self-created characters, some of whom challenge his authority, much  of what  he tells takes  us back  to the  Institute and  its ideals,  which  he hates. Here, in the words of Dr. Hangham, is one example of those ideals:
Language, he said,  language is the  proper province of the  educated-at least  proper language, sensible, empirical  language. Now we  find   that  rather  than  steering you   on the  straight and narrow our  help  has  done nothing but  drive  your  fantasies deeper and deeper  into  the    muddy   gerrymandry   of words   in   themselves. Don't  you  know   that words   are   the  sakred marks of  things, that just as God gave us the world in all of its breathtaking  detail  and    the   laboratory  in which to  range them  in  temples of empirical science   he  also  gave   us  words   to  sing  their praises, words   to  refer, one   to  one,  to  the things of  the   world  -each  and   every  iso­ morphic  one?  Each  sparrow  falling   is   a word.  The word  is  the  truth and   the  thing the  word   names  is  truth-the  truth  of  the referent! And   now  we  find  you  diving  into a  maelstrom of   words   stripped  from   their things, names that  name nothing  but  them­ selves,  twisting round to  kiss  their own  arse like  the  nonreferential  buggerly names  they  are....
With thin-lipped hatred he glared at me, clenching  and   unclenching  his   hands. He was  making  a  large   effort   to  control  him­ self and  at  last  he succeeded.
You  make  light   of  all  this,  he  said. All  of  uh,  what?
Respectable learning, respectable science.
Of  course  because you  live  in  such   an  un­ quantitive world  you  cannot appreciate  that science  has codified the  world  of  phenomena and   put   it  in  complete control  of  Church, state and  business.  We  have  rationalized the world  -and  I am  proud  to  think that  we at   the   Hawryliw   Institute   have   done   our humble  part.   You   believe    that  what   you write  somehow  is  the  world, that you  make  it  as  you  go  along-
Neither Sills  nor  Allen  agrees  with  this, as any  reading of The Hawryliw Process makes  clear.  Neither, finally, does Sandor Hawryliw, who,  having harrowed and been    harrowed   by   Hell's    Pavements,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



changes  his views on reality.  If Hawryliw is finally  "saved," many   others   are  not. And  even  Sills is finally  forced  to admit he  cannot change  the  reality  of his own past  simply  by trying  to rewrite  it.  Thus the  pain  he  has  delivered  to  others,  the losses he  has  suffered, remain inviolable.
However, an  outline of the  plot  would miss most of the delights the novel offers. It's  a  grab bag  containing something of everything. If it  plays  William   Gass's metafictional games, it also insists upon commenting, usually  in a wickedly satiric fashion,  on  the  culture and  society  of its readers.  Though it never  lets us forget  we are  reading a  carefully crafted fiction,  it nevertheless  captures the voices of its characters so as to grant them  real  pres­ ence  in  the  story.  It offers  images,  large tropes,   slapstick   comedy, and   whatever else comes  to hand   with  such  a  winsome smile  it  would   be  ungracious  in  the  ex­ treme  not to applaud such entertainment. And,  though  obviously not for every taste, it is a grand  and  stylish entertainment for those  who  do  enjoy such farragos.

DOUGLAS BARBOUR


FOUL-WEATHER PASTORALS

GILLES   ARCHAMBAULT,  Le   Voyageur  distrait.
Alain Stanke, n.p.
ROCH  CARRIER, La  Dame  qui  avait  des  chaines aux  chevilles. Alain Stanke, n.p.
GILBERT   LAROCQUE,   Les    Masques.  Quebec/ Amerique,  n.p.

THESE THREE  NOVELS, all by experienced and   successful   Quebec  writers  (though only  Carrier  is  well   known   in   English Canada) ,  are   held   together  by  versions of the climatic claustrophobia that  shapes so  much   Quebec literature into  predict­ ability.  The climates-two  urban sum­ mers,  one  rural winter,  two  humidities,
 one  endless  blizzard-are objective  cor­ relatives  for  the  centrality of  the  sexual­ domestic  relationship in  each  book, forc­ ing climate  into correspondence with  the inward-turning, self-devouring psycholog­ ical intensity  of an emotional claustropho­ bia. Two  of  the  books are  quite  deliber­  ately  old-fashioned: Carrier  has  written a sort of classic comics Kamouraska, with, as  far  as  I  can  see,  no  touch  of  irony; Archambault, a novel which  is very like a fictional  memoir. Even  LaRocque-Les Masques  is by no  means  as Aquinian or as Pavelesque  as its title  might suggest­ only  hints  at  textuality  or  self-reflexive­ ness, in order  to tell  much  the  same  sort of story as the  others,  though  very much  more  impressively.
Carrier's simple  narrative is loosely structured  upon    an   intermittent,   half­ hearted set of mythic  parallels, which  ex­ plain  the  present by  juxtapositions with the  past. His  heroine, in  mid-nineteenth­ century   Quebec,   trapped  in  the  winter  cabin  with  the   husband  whom  she blames  for  the  death of  their  baby  in  a blizzard,   plans  his  death, slowly,  obses­ sively, repetitively, over  the whole of one of the longest  winters  in fiction,  drawing herself into  ever-closer identification with "la  Dame ..."  of  the  title,  a  legendary figure from  the founding of Quebec,  who also killed her  husband, and  paid  the  ju­ dicial penalty,  but found  a new life in the new  world.  Comes   the  spring,  and  Car­ rier's heroine  puts poison in her husband's coffee, confesses,  is tried,  convicted, and  nearly  executed,  when  her  husband   re­ turns  and  saves  her  and  her  second  ( un­ born)   child.  Kamouraska with  a  happy  ending.   The   repetitiveness  and   simple, overlapping   sentences,   representing  the thought-processes of a heroine  with  only one  thought to get  her  through the  win­ ter,  delineate the  slowing  down  of  time in  a  claustrophobic situation,  as  well  as suggesting   the   stylization    of   the   main  story, as it approaches, like its inner  ana-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Iogue, to  the condition of legend,  and  as it aims to express the intensity of domestic tragedy  marvelously turning, with the seasons,   into   cyclical   renewal,   reunion and  rebirth.
Gilles Archambault's introspective real­ ism also  juxtaposes  legend  with actuality. The   narrator-cum-central-consciousness of   the  book   (Michel)  is  a  not  terribly successful  writer,  pushing  fifty. He  is ob­ sessed (but  with  a smiling sadness, rather than   an  involuted  frenzy),  with  death, the  transience of  love,  his  "steadily  de­ teriorating equipment," his  own  self­ knowledge  and  responsibility  for  others: he  is, in  short,  caught in  the  existential  dilemma  of    the   sensitive   middle-aged male intellectual in our days, as found  in many an  English-language novel as well: Fowles's Daniel  Martin is a rather heavy­ handed    but   familiar   example.   Michel structures his identity quest  upon  a half­  hearted journey  in  the  tracks of  the  peri­ patetic Jack  Kerouac,  whose rather more Dionysian    life   provides   the   legendary  counterpoint of  his  own;  it  is an  ironic juxtaposition throughout, however, rather than   a  heroic  identification  of  the  sort which  gives  Carrier's heroine  something to  cling   to.  The never   very  convincing attempt to recapture Kerouac (in  a sort of elegiac romance, no doubt,  as it would have  been chiefly  about  himself)  isaban­ doned  for  the last  third  of the book. The absent-minded traveller is on his own, definitely "distrait" in turning towards  his own existential quest, a detour through areas  of his past  (notably  a  neurotic  ex­ wife)   and   a  return, in  terms  of  muted  affirmation, to  the stoic melancholy  hap­  piness of his present  vastly more satisfac­  tory domestic alliance. The  book, written  with  a  delicacy and  exactness  that  gives it a real, if low-keyed,  distinction  of style, deserves   more   readers  than   it  is  likely to get. Predictability is not necessarily a deficiency,  but  it  may  be a  practical  dis­ advantage.
 Another, stylistically  more  daring,  ver­ sion of  the  middle-aged writer  as  hero  is found  in LaRocque's book. Like Archam­ bault's,  his   narrator   (Alain)    explicitly says that  his reminiscences will be written in the third-person, and  (though not con­ sistently)   they are.  But Alain  has a much  more  tangible  obsession  than  any  of Mi­  chel's,   and,  curiously   enough, it  is  very similar   to   that   of  Carrier's  heroine.  A child  has  died,  by "accident," and  some­ one is to blame.  Much of each  book, hav­  ing  revealed   the  mere  fact  of  the  death at  the  beginning, is  devoted   to  working through and  uncovering the details  of the death and  apportioning the blame and responsibility for  it.  The   central  charac­ ters  go  over  and   over  these  details,  but only  very slowly  do  we come  to see how entirely  blameless    (in   Carrier)   is   the child's father, and   how  truly  accidental was the death of the child in the blizzard.  And  how  rather  more  blameworthy the father  (in  LaRocque)  finds himself  to be as he slowly builds  up the narrative of his son's death by drowning. If the story  had been   narrated  by   the    boy's    mother (Alain's neurotic ex-wife), the thematic resemblance  between   these  two  Kinder­ mord  stories  would  be very strong indeed.  Foul-weather  pastorals! As Jay  Macpher­ son reminds us, "a drowning is almost  the standard  pastoral  catastrophe"; children are  often  sacrificed  to  the  adult   world; the  enmity  of  personified   natural  forces shows   itself    particularly   in   "the   un­ trustworthiness  of  water:  the  deceplive stream"; snow is awfully  cold  water,  and  Canadian pastorals are  the coldest of any.
Alain,  like  the  hero  of Joseph   Heller's Something Happened (and  many another purgatorial novel), keeps  running an ob­ sessive movie  of recollections  through  his head,  which  tells the same story over  and over-"se repeter jusqu'a la nausee dans mon  cinema interieur"-but  finally  tells it in its entirety, the story of the  ( ambigu­ ously)  accidental death of his much-loved

BOOKS IN REVIEW



son. Only  by exploring horron of his own childhood can Alain achieve  such therapy as his creative reconstruction can afford him,  such  acceptance of unacceptable horror  and  responsibility as art  may make possible.   Two   central  images,   those  of masks and  the  river,  unify  the  book:  "II
pensait  la  riviere  qui  coulait  d'un bout  a
I'autre de ce roman a ecrire 0    0    0   difficile de
demeler  masque et face." So dominant is
the image  of the  river  that  the  relevance of  the image  of  masks  is not  made  clear until   the  climactic scene  very  near   the end. The  imagery  of stink, chill, filth, and stagnation which  prompted one  reviewer to speak  of LaRocque's  olfactory disgust with the world links Alain's nightmare recollections of his own  childhood to the partially repressed  central episode, and leads to a ghastly  identification of himself with Eric, his dying son. Stagnant yet murderously polluted water  taints and flavours all his recollections, as his mental cinema   circles   round  the  damp,  putrid event  of the  drowning.
The  climactic scene,  which  it would  be a  pleasure   to  quote   by  the   page,  must surely  be  one  of  the  great   set-pieces  of Quebec fiction.  It  is a reworking in a different key of the conclusion of Proust's Recherche,  where   people   not   seen  for years are grotesquely transposed by the power of Time into  monstrosities. A petit­ bourgeois  Dance of Death  is  enacted on the  banks  of the  river,  in a carnavalesque family reunion, where everyone  is masked by the  changes of  time. The cover  illus­ tration, James  Ensor's "Les   Masques   et la mort," evidently alludes to the heavily satirical  component of this scene, as well as to its key symbolic  patterns. The  patri­ arch  of  the  family  is as moribund as one can  be, and  yet alive,  but  all of us go on living  with  steps  made   ever   heavier   by the  clay  of  time  adhering to  our  feet:
"cela  commencerait infailliblement a res­
sembler  a ce qu'on appelle la  vieillesse."
In  irnnic   juxtaposition to  his  elders,  "le
 plus vieux parmi nous etait  Eric dont  tout le reste de vie pouvait  deja  tenir  dans  une toute  petite  pinoee  de  minutes." Thus in this scene masks and  the murderous river are brought  together in Alain's  mind; the cruelty  of the one leads through his recol­ lection   of  suffering   to  the  artistic  and  moral  truths   of  his  self-discovery,  which constitute a  partial  removal  of  his mask, at least. Perhaps, after  that  revelation, the action-filled   realistic   description  of  the search  for  the  boy-mere  story-is  al­ most anti-climactic, and  the very cautious affirmation of  LaRocque's  conclusion­ "je  me disais c'est  du  beau  temps" -can be better  justified in terms of the pastoral tradition -"fresh   woods   and    pastures new" -than by the damp logic of Alain's  existential   quest.   No  matter. This   foul­  weather   pastoral  deserves  quick   transla­ tion  and  wide  reading.

P.  MERIVALE



IN PRAISE OF INADEQUACY

JAMES  CLAVELL, The Children's Story. Double­
day,  n.p.
GWENDOLYN MACEWEN,  The Chocolate Moose,
illustrated by Barry  Zaid. NC  Press,  n.p.
GLORIA  MONTERO,  Billy  Higgins Rides the Freights, illustrated by Olena Kassian. James Lorimer, n.p.
The Mare's Egg,  retold by Carole Spray, illus­ trated  by  Kim   La   Fave.   Camden   House, n.p.

GwENDOLYN    MACEWEN   once   wrote    a poem  about

the  imponderable agony of being  here, of having
to have  a shape, a foot,  an  ugly  face a mind
("A  Dance at the  Mental Hospital")

Martin, the  distraught Alces  americanus chocolatus  she writes about  in The Choc-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



alate Moose,  suffers  much  the  same agony. Since  he is made  of chocolate, the sun melts his antlers  and he leaves brown stains on the  piano  keys. Worst  of all, "whenever he drank  milk, it  turned  into a  chocolate  milkshake and   bubbled   out of  his  ears."  Isn't that   just  too  cute  for words?
That old  poem  of MacEwen's implied unending despair  over being stuck with oneself.   But   Martin  is  in   a  children's book, so when  he gets tired of the annoy­
ing   consequences  of   being   Martin,  he meets  a  disgustingly   cheerful   strawberry owl who  seems  to  have  a degree  in  psy­ chotherapy.  Having  gratefully  accepted her   own   strawberryness,  she   soon   gets Martin straightened out:

I'm not  afraid to  be  me!
Everyone's different, don't you  see?
You  are  you  and  I am  me,
And  that's the  way  it's  got  to  be!

But hold on a minute, folks:  Martin's problem   wasn't that   he  was different, it was that  he was chocolate. When  Martin swallows   the   owl's   psychotherapeutical get-happy bilge, everybody,  including the author, seems to have  forgotten that  poor Martin's ears  are  going  to keep  right  on bubbling, no matter how positive his self­ image  is. The story  is as illogical  as  it is twee.  Barry  Zaid's   pictures  for  it  are  as twee as they are  old-fashioned; and they are   old-fashioned  not   because   of  their thirtyish   art-deco  gestures,   but   because thirtyish  art-deco gestures  are  more  sev­ entyish  than  eightyish.
James  Clave!l,  who  is best  known  for very  thick  books  like  Shogun,  has  pro­ duced  a very  thin  book called  The  Chil­ dren's Story.  It's   certainly not  the  chil­ dren's story, and  it's  not even a children's story,  for  any   of  the  children   I  know. Come  to think  of it,  it's  not even a story. It's  an  allegory,  a  ponderously meaning­ ful parable about how They  take over the school  system  after   They   win   the  war, and  how They quickly  turn  all Our  chi!-


ISO
 dren  into  unthinking followers  of Their ideas.
But for all the fuss Clavell  makes about protecting their  individuality, he  implies that  all  children are  exactly  the  same  as each   other, all  constantly  dumb   in  the same loveable  way. Throughout the book, children all  think  the  same  childish thoughts, react  with  the same childish reactions, and  speak  with  the  same child­ ish inaccuracy: "I askt  Danny  once  and he  didn't know  and   none  of   us  knowed really.  It's  grownup talk,  and  grownups talk   that   sort  of  words.   We   just  havta learn  it."  The huge  disdain  for children implied   by that  attempt  to  capture their "cute" dialect   is  confirmed  by  Clavell's theme:  how  an  entire  classroom  can  be turned into  obedient commies,  or fascists, or  maybe  comptometer operators-this is Serious Allegory,  so the bad guys aren't specified -in twenty-three minutes.
Gloria  Montero has more  respect  for children. Billy Higgins Rides the Freights does deal  with  life in the depression; Montero does put Billy on the train carry­ ing  desperate,  unemployed  men  toward  Ottawa  for   what   they   hope   will   be  a confrontation with   Prime  Minister Ben­ nett.  In  a  quotation  on  the  back  cover, Farley   Mowat says  this  book  is  "frank,
honest,  and  gutsy."
But  it  really  isn't  any  of  those  things;
it  just  pretends to  be.  Montero  is  con­ stantly   saying that  life  is  tough;  but she doesn't show it, and  she doesn't make  her characters feel it.  We  get  statements like "a  free-for-all broke out" with  hardly  any of the ugly details  of the free-for-all; and Billy  is  so  imperviously  ingenuous  that  he emerges  from  his theoretically harrow­ ing  experiences  with  the  same  uncynical  love of life he began  with.
Billy Higgins  Rides  the  Freights is less
the  "exciting adventure" for  children its publisher promises  than   it  is an  exercise in  nostalgia for  grownups. Montero  pro­ tects her characters from  reality  by loving

BOOKS IN REVIEW



their  theoretically awful  lives  too  much, and  by shutting up about the awful  parts. In   the  sweet   Depression  of  this  novel, there is no sex, violence never hurts much, and   swearing   goes  like  this : "Jack   was muttering under  his breath. 'The sons of
...,'  on  and  on,  over  and  over."  Strong stuff.
After  reading about a  boy  who  learns nothing from  experience, a  classroom  of grammar dropouts, and  an  easily swayed moose, I'm glad to report that The Mare's Egg  not  only  does  not  praise  stupidity, but  actually laughs  at  it. The  dumb hero of the  tale  Carole Spray  retells,  is an  in­ experienced immigrant  to  Eastern  Can­  ada  who  buys a pumpkin from  a  farmer in  the  faith   that  it'll  hatch into  a  horse if he sits on  it long  enough. Spray tends to  dissipate  the   joke  by  explaining  too much  too obviously, and her sentences  are too  unrhythmic to  read  aloud   well.  But Kim   La  Fave's  wonderful pictures   turn  this merely  adequate story  into  an  excel­ lent  book.  While  they  seem  meticuously  accurate  as  to  the  styles and  gestures  of the  period,  the  early  nineteenth century, they are  also ineffably  silly -loopy cari­  catures that  let us laugh  at the immigrant without  depriving him  of  his  dignity.   I wish  the  publishers would  have  let  these pictures do  the   job  they  do  so  well  by asking  for  some  judicious  cutting of  the text they make seem wordy; they are good enough  pictures to deserve  less.
But The Mare's  Egg is the only one of these  books  I  would  recommend to  any­ body of any  age who likes good stories. It is a good  children's  book  because  it  does not  assume   the  inadequacy of  its  audi­ ence, does not find inadequacy delightful, and   is   therefore  able   to   transcend  in­ adequacy.

PERRY NODELMAN
 PARTICULARS

GEORGE BOWERING,   ed.,  Fiction of  Contempo­
rary  Canada. Coach House Press,  $7·95·
JOAN   PARR,   ed., Manitoba Stories. Queenston
House,  $2.95·
ROBERT KROETSCH,  ed.,  Sundogs: Stories  from Saskatchewan. Coteau Books. Thunder Creek Publishing, $7·95·

THE PRIMARY PROBLEM for most editors compiling a collection  of Canadian short stories is this:  how  to justify its existence. Books that give us the previously scattered stories of a good writer  are self-justifying; collections  of  the  "best" stories,   or  the "best  new"  stories,  of  a  particular  year are  justified  if the  editor is a good  judge of   literary    merit;  textbooks    rest   their claims on the existence  of a real or imag­ ined  market. Beyond  these  examples lie the  majority of  recent  collections, which are   assembled   on  stylistic,  thematic, or territorial  premises,  and  are  occasionally  justified  by  good  editorial  judgment but more  often defended by ingenious special pleading.   The  three    collections  under  review,   with  the   partial   exception  of Kroetsch's Sundogs, fall  into  this last category.
The  titles  of  these  collections might encourage  the  reader to  anticipate that the stories included were selected  because, in varying ways, they manifest a sense of place and deal  with  the range  of  contem­ porary  experience in particular  locations.  This is seldom  the case, despite  the claims made in the editors' introductions.
In  the title  of Bowering's collection  the operative word is contemporary, not Can­ ada; as he says:  "I want  this set to be an introduction to  the  contemporary  in  Ca­  nadian  short  fiction." But  contemporary does   not   mean,    for   Bowering,    "of   its time";  it   means   avant-garde,  or   post­ modernist. This  question-begging argu­ ment  enables  Bowering to  exclude   such important contemporary short-story writ­  ers   as   Hood,  Blaise   and    Valgardson

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



(among others) ,  and  it  raises doubts   as to the value  of his collection  as an "intro­ duction"  to  the   genre   at  this  point   in Canadian   history.    Furthermore,   Bow­ ering's  introduction raises one of the main critical problems for  the reader  confront­ ing  post-modernist theory  and  art -the art  is praised  by its proponents for  being "open," yet  the  theory  is "closed." "The post-modernist," says  Bowering,  "invites his readers, & sometimes  his characters, to take a hold  somewhere & help  him  move the damned thing  into  position." Yet  the reader (or writer) who does not subscribe to this view is defined,  a priori, as a recal­ citrant modernist (or  worse),  and denied  a   place   in   the   "contemporary"   scene (which   is  neatly   narrowed   thereby   to stress the importance of the post-modern­ ists). Bowering's familiar, cheeky, pseudo­  colloquial manner  cannot,  in  the   end, disguise   what   is  essentially   a  dogmatic position.
Fiction  of Contemporary Canada  is in­ teresting primarily as a statement of  Bow­ ering's   critical  views.  The  stories  them­  selves  constitute  what   might   be   called supporting  evidence  (carefully  selected) for  the  theory.  The  authors include  those we might  expect  to find:  John  Newlove,
Ray   Smith,  J. Michael  Yates,  Daphne
Marlatt,  Dave    Godfrey,    Matt  Cohen,
bpNichol, and  Bowering  himself.  (Sheila Watson   and   Rudy   Wiebe  are   also  in­ cluded, and  sit  rather oddly  among  the others  despite  the editor's explanation for their  presence.)  Contemporary Canadian experience is  seldom  a concern  for  these writers; the emphasis is on the individual or  the  universal; settings  are  metaphori­ cally  relevant, not  referential; social and political issues of concern   to  contempor­ ary Canadians  (contemporary in the right sense of  the  word)   are  conspicuously  ab­  sent   from  most  of  the  stories,  and   ob­ scurely  presented  when   they  do  appear (as in Godfrey's "A  New Year's  Morning on  Bloor  Street"). Finally,  the  value  of
 the collection as an "introduction" is questionable. All but one of the sixteen stories  have  previously  been  published  in other  collections; two of them, in fact, are making  their   third   appearance in  book form.
Bowering's   collection   does,   at   least,
raise  some  important  critical questions; and   the  writers   he  has  included are  all skilled  at  their  craft,   however one  may judge  what   they  have  crafted. Manitoba Stories manages to be almost completely uninteresting. A few of the  selections  are competently written, most are  poor, and some are embarrassingly bad. In addition, the  book  does  not  live  up  to  the  other claims made  for it by Joan  Parr  in her foreword:  the  stories,  she  says,  were  se­ lected  not  only for  their  "literary  value" but also "for  the honesty  with which  they reflect  the  experience of life  in  the  prov­  ince.  Manitoba  encompasses a great  vari­  ety of geographical  settings,  social  struc­  tures, and climatic conditions. This  variety is reflected   in  the  stories." Most  readers  will  disagree,   and  strongly.  The settings are  usually  vague  backgrounds, society  is presented and  analyzed  in  ways that  sel­ dom  reach  past the level of popular jour­  nalism,  and  climatic conditions are   no more  successfully   evoked   than   the   set­ tings. Manitoba's complex political  life is neglected altogether. Manitoba Stories  is far less Manitoban than  it is anonymously contemporary. The writers  Joan  Parr in­ cludes  deal,  she  notes,  with  the  "conflict between   past  and   present,  between  con­ formity  and  individuality," and  with  the "seeming  disintegration  af  family   ties." Yet  these  are,  as she  herself  says, "mod­ ern"   issues;   to  make   them   Manitoban the authors would  have  had  to give them a  "local habitation," and   the  great   ma­ jority have  not.
Several   of  the  stories   in  Sundogs do
convey a sense of place-of place ob­ served,   felt,   analyzed,  and   understood. The  idioms   and   rhythms  of   ordinary

BOOKS IN REVIEW



speech,  speech   that   belongs   to  the  west (if not exclusively  to Saskatchewan), are captured  and   used  to  good   purpose   by Edna  Alford,  Robert Currie, Glen  Sore­ stad, and  Ken  Mitchell (although Mitch­ ell exhibits  his  tendency to  slide  too far in  the  direction of caricature) .  Sorestad, W. L. Riley,  and  Gertrude Story,  among  others,  deal  well with  the complexities of ethnic relationships.  Perhaps none  of the stories   in   this   collection  could   be  de­ scribed  as outstanding, but  most  of them are good, and  none of them  (apparently) has been previously  published -a further reason for  recommending the  book.
But any recommendation of Sundogs must  be a qualified one. The range of experience dealt  with is limited; not so limtied  as  in  Manitoba Stories, but  cir­ cumscribed nonetheless, particularly so in the   superficial    treatment   (or   complete  omission)  of economic and political  issues
-issues that  have  been  and  still are cen­ tral  concerns in  the  life of  Saskatchewan. Writers  of fiction  seem  too  willing  to re­ linquish   these  questions  to  the  social sci­ entists,  and  here  again   one  can  see  the pervasive  influence of  post-modernist dogma.   In   his   introduction,   Kroetsch states  that "the awareness of  the  art  of story-telling is  everywhere in  the  collec­ tion."  Not  everywhere, I  think,  but  cer­ tainly  in many  places.  The stories here  by Mick Burrs, Eugene Strickland, and Geof­ frey  Ursell,  to  cite  three  among several, would  not  be  out  of  place  in  Fiction  of Contemporary Canada. Self-reflexive, self-conscious,  and  non-referential; art for the artist's sake, art  for  the  reader  to pol­ ish and  give meaning to, art  that  is  nar­ row in its vision.  Post-modernist attitudes are,  indeed, so pervasive that  they affect many  writers  who would  not, consciously, adopt them.  The  results  may  challenge, surprise, or engage the reader, but seldom can  writing of  this  kind  deal  effectively with  the  particulars  of  culture, with  the social,  political and  economic character-
 Ishcs of  a  region   or  a  nation. Two,  at least, of these anthologies, suggest that  the time has come  to ask whether many writ­ ers  of  fiction   should   begin   to   engage  themselves as seriously with the complexi­ ties of life as they engage  themselves with the complexities of art.

DAVID  JACKEL


A TO THE

ROBERT LECKER  and  JACK  DAVID, eds., The Annotated  Bibliography  of Canada's Major Authors    ABCMA.  Volume  Three.   ECW Press,  $35.00; pa.  $22.00.
MICHAEL  E.   DARLING,  A.  J. M.  Smith:  An
Annotated     Bibliography.  Vehicule    Press,
$r6.oo.

IT   IS  DIFFICULT not   to  rate   these   two books by the titles. The ECW  publication is the,  of the  major. The  Darling book is
an, of one  writer, A. J. M. Smith. There
is an  ex  cathedra   quality about  the  first
which is supported by self-congratulatory advertising  and   a  similarly   self-assured introduction to each  volume.  The  second has a degree  of humility; it is content to be  another  contribution  to  scholarship. The   difference extends   to  the  beautiful textured   paper and  stylish  typeface  used by ECW  in  comparison to  Darling's  use of offset typescript on  plain  white  paper. A probable reason  for  the latter  would
be  that  Darling wished  to  maintain a degree  of control over  the  final  product not possible when  typesetters  are involved. Perhaps ECW  felt  that   their  house  staff were more than  adequate to cope with possible  problems.  Whether  this  is  the case or  not  I  cannot say.  I  made  a  few random checks and those listings are accurate.
ECW  sets  itself  up  for  at  least  some errors   in  its  attempt  to  be  up  to  date. Volume  three,  with  bibliographies of  Er­ nest Buckler, Robertson Davies, Raymond Knister,  W.   0. Mitchell,   and   Sinclair


I 53

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Ross,  was  published  in  rg8r   and  yet  it claims to offer "complete information" up to "December 31,  rg8o."  In  fact,  it  tries to go  beyond  this,  as  in  the  listing  of  a January rg8r  Ariel article  on  W. 0. Mitchell. The  efforts  involved  are  obvi­ ously praiseworthy and  yet the result is at least partly  confusing. The critical  works, other  than  reviews, are given C headings. The  section  Cr   to  C35 is given  the sub­ heading, "Articles and Sections of Books." Then   come   "Theses" and   then   "Inter­ views."  But  the  last  "interview" item  is the  Ariel  article, which  is clearly  not  an interview.  Was  it  added   too  late   to  be given  an  earlier  number  (although  the old  bibliographer's trick  of "a" listings is used  elsewhere)  or  were  the  preceding pages  already typeset?  Is any  excuse  ac­ ceptable in a work meant  to be "depend­ able,"  and,  more  important,  "the"?
There seem to be a variety  of other problems  with  such  subheadings. For  ex­ ample,  in  the  section  on Ross a  piece  by William   French  which   the   annotation itself shows to be an interview is not listed as  such.  At  first  I  thought  there  might have  been  some  intent to distinguish   be­ tween   the  loose,  at   times  paraphrastic, interviews   in  the  popular press  and   the transcripts of  dialogue usually  presented in   semi-scholarly publications. But the inclusion  of other pieces very similar to French's belies this.
One   might   also  question   the  evalua­ tions.  In   a  review   of  ABCMA  volume  one,  D.  G.  Lochhead showed  a  general  distaste  for  annotations in any  bibliogra­ phy  which  claims   to  be  authoritative. I could  not go that  far  but the ECW  intro­ duction   states,  "The  annotations in  the sections  devoted  to  critical   writings  are designed  to furnish  an  informed, but ob­ jective,  summary  of  the  arguments  ad­  vanced   in  each   secondary source."  Of course, any summary is at best chancy,  as all   writers   claim   that    their   argument would  not  be complete if one  word  were


154
 deleted, a sentiment that  every editor  has heard expressed  all  too often.  But  such  a summary could  at  least attempt objectiv­ ity. Instead, a  variety  of  evaluative com­ ments  continually creeps in. They  are  not so obvious  in  most  of  the  bibliographies, but  John  Ryrie's, of Robertson Davies,  is full of  them. By my cursory count  he gives thirty-one  positives   and    thirteen   nega­ tives.  The  former are  genially  assertive,  something  like    "A   convincing   essay," whereas  the latter are hesitant and  usually equivocating:   "Regrettably,  this   rough­ hewn  article  does  not  penetrate beyond the    surface   parallels  to   Jungian  psy­ chology."
The one  place  where   Ryrie  seems  to exceed  this is in an  assessment  of an  arti­ cle  by Stephen Bonnycastle: "The  dense diction in  the  article   corresponds  to  the weighty  tone; Bonnycastle  takes  the ethi­  cal  and   moral   content  of  the  Deptford novels very, very seriously." This sarcastic squib  is entertaining but  I  doubt  whether it belongs in an annotation.
For  the  most part  Darling's book is the height  of objectivity. The  annotations for books  by Smith  give publishing histories, in many  cases quite  interesting ones. The annotations for secondary sources are lim­ ited   to  brief  quotations and  careful  de­ scriptions of the central theses. Again, any reduction  might   be  seen  as  inadequate but,   assuming one  accepts annotations, Darling could  hardly be faulted.
The one  exception, I  think,  is the  one time he gives in to a bit of subjectivity. He quotes   an  amazing series  of  vilifications in Nathaniel Benson's review of Smith's Collected Poems. Among other things, Benson  calls  Smith, "the  Most  Unintelli­ gible   Bardling  who   ever  scrambled  his symbols." Darling ends with a parentheti­ cal  comment: "One  suspects  a  personal malice   behind   this  rather  heavy-handed hatchet  job."   I   doubt   that   any   reader  would  require  this elucidation.
I appreciated Darling's precise descrip-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tions  of  the   books  as  physical   objects. These  are  especially  attractive after   the ECW  offerings   which   don't even  go  so far   as   to   mention  whether  books   are paper or hardcover. Still,  there  is at  least one  point  where  Darling's careful  biblio­ graphic procedure leaves  a  gap.  For  the first edition of Smith's The  Book  of Ca­ nadian   Prose  he  quite  rightly   describes the   title   page   as   consisting   of  only   a "double rule  101  mm"  and  then  the  title and  then  "double  rule  as above." In  the remaining notes about  dimensions, casing, dust  jacket and  publishing history  he does not   state   who   the   publisher  was.  One must  turn   the  page  to  the  entry  for  the second   impression  to  find   that   it  must have  been Gage.
It  is important to  mention that  while they  have  a  number of questionable  ele­ ments,   the  ECW   bibliographies  are  ex­ traordinarily useful, particularly in teach­  ing,   for   suggestions   of   where   to   find specific ideas  in  print. Still,  I  doubt  that  anyone  doing  serious research  will be able to use them  as more than  a starting point.  This  is particularly the case as so many of the authors are alive and  active.  Thus  for Davies  the  list  of  books  by the  author is already out  of  date,   not  to  mention   the secondary sources. The  introduction states that  ECW will issue updates in the future. Given ECW's many  other ambitious proj­  ects,  one  wonders how  soon  this  will  be possible.
Other reviewers,  like Lochhead and David   Jackel, have  already  commented on the idiosyncratic choice  of who is "major." I  notice  that   the  last  publicity pieces  from   ECW   do  not  list  who   the
major authors are.   Perhaps  this  reflects
 both  fields,  but  she  is unique  in  this  re­ spect. Thus  Knister's position  in this  vol­ ume  shows  ECW's  decision   that   he  is primarily a writer  of fiction and his poetry  is a secondary  matter. The  next  volume,  on poetry, will include  Earle Birney. Thus Down  the   Long  Table  and  Turvey are relegated   to second  place.
This  might  seem like quibbling, as few would disagree  that  Birney  is primarily a poet.  But  I  once  again  question  whether it  is the  role  of  a  bibliography to  make such  divisions,  as  so  many   writers   have this  nasty  habit  of writing  in  more  than one  genre.  Still,  I  think  a  larger  issue  is raised  by that  fourth volume.  It  will  in­
clude  A. J. M. Smith. If Darling's  bibli­
ography  is used again  it will be essentially
a  reprint  in,  I  think,  an  inferior format. If another bibliographer is used  I  doubt whether he can  possibly surpass  Darling's work,  except,  perhaps, in  a very few  ad­ ditions.   In   any   case,   the   existence   of Darling makes  one  thing clear.  ABCMA, useful as  it  is, is much  more  of an  "an" than  a "the."

TERRY GOLDIE




**   FREEMAN PATTERSON, Photography of  Na­ tural   Things. Van    Nostrand  Reinhold,   n.p. I'm a fan  of Patterson, though not  particularly of  this  book.  Its  best  features are  the  practical tips   it  offers   the   amateur  about   how   to   go about  photographing  animals   and   plants­ close  up,  in  frost,   at  sunset,  out   of  focus,   in foreign places, under water, and  in other ways, too. Unfortunately, despite Patterson's skill, the sample photographs don't  always  suggest   that the  effort  is worth it.

a reassessment of the selection  or perhaps just embarrassment at being knocked  so often. But  still there  are other  rating problems.  The bibliographies are  divided into poets and  writers of fiction. Margaret Atwood  was divided  between  volume one and  volume   two  to show  her  stature  in
 W.N.

**   DOUGLAS   C,    POCOCK,    ed.,    Humanistic
Geography  and   Literature.  Croom Helm,
£14.95·    A  set  of  "essays   on  the   experience of  place," this  collection offers  less a  coherent
discussion   of  the   connections  between  books and   place  than a  glimpse of  the  kinds  of  dis­ cussion  there could be.  There are  accounts of


155

NOTES



reality, roots,  tourist taste, and  socioliterature, with   reference  to  Ruskin,  Lawrence,  Lessing, and  Crabbe, among others. Pocock's  introduc­ tion  touches on  the  geographical  basis of much  literary "experience," and  connects  this  with the   "deliberately   cultivated   subjectivity"  he identifies with literature. Gunnar Olsson's essay on  ontological  transformation is  of  particular interest:  inasmuch as  we gain  insights through negation   (hence  through  others),  Olsson   ar­  gues,  the  most   penetrating  accounts of  home stem  from   people   away   (Joyce,  James, Nabo-­ kov). Expatriate writing  (Lowry? Gallant?)  is given  a new  context.
W.N.

**  LEWIS   GREEN,   The  Boundary Hunters: Surveying the 141st  Meridian and the  Alaska Panhandle. UBC  Press,  $18.95·   The Alaska Boundary Award  of 1903,  in  which  the  British representative  grossly   betrayed  Canadian   in­ terests    to   secure    a   rapprochement   between Whitehall and  Washington, stirred the passion­ ate   reactions of  Canadians  and  nurtured  na­ tionalism in  this  country. Like   181 2, it  is one of our  historic dates. Lewis Green is little con­  cerned with   the  political  aspects of  the  event; his  book  adds to  Canadian history   by  telling, in  greater detail  than ever  before,  the  story  of the  arduous, often  adventurous and  sometimes highly  dangerous  task  of  surveying  the  boun­ dary  between Canadian  territory and  the  Pan­ handle. It is a workmanlike but  rarely exciting book, yet it will be useful  to students of western Canadian  history.
G.W.

**   JOHN  SAWATSKY, For Services  Rendered: Leslie  James  Bennett and  the  RCMP Security Service. Doubleday,  $22.95.   This  work   will be  interesting to  readers of  Canadian  Litera­ ture, mainly because it  concerns  Leslie  James Bennett,  who    inadvertently   caused    a  great many  Canadian authors to  defend  the  wrong  book  for  the  right   reasons  when  he  brought a libel  action claiming that  S., a  Soviet  mole  in Ian  Adams's dull   novel,   Portrait    of  a  Spy, was  meant to  represent  him. The real  Bennett and   the   reasons    for   his   dismissal   from    the RCMP's Security  Service is the subject of John Sawatsky's  book.  Sawatsky has  done   his  work well,   and   his   achievement suggests that  in­  vestigative   journalists  are   usually    somewhat brighter  than spies  and   counterspies, for  it  is hard to  think of  a  more  inept   security service  than  that  operated by the  RCMP as Sawatsky describes   its    blundering   existence.  Bennett emerges  as   a   thoroughly  banal    man    thrust
 irrelevantly into  the   limelight.  Need   we  pay
$22.95 to  read   about him?
G.W.

**   LEWIS  ARMOUR, The Idea  of Canada and the   Crisis  of  Community. Steel   Rail  Publish­ ing,  n.p.     Leslie  Armour is an  almost  lone  ad­  vocate -but no less passionate for  that reason
-of our   native Canadian  philosophers, and the  history of  "Philosophy in  English Canada" which   he  wrote on  the  subject with   Elizabeth Trott, The  Faces  of  Reason, is  the  only   full study of  its  kind  and  for  that good  reason the best.  In The Idea of Canada and  the  Crisis  of Community, he  brings our  philosophers to wit­ ness  on  the  issues  of  a  pluralist  society.  The philosophers, in fact, are  somewhat  recalcitrant to such  treatment, and  one  realizes  that, what­ ever  their value as  thinkers in  other directions may  have  been,  they  were  not  notably origina­ tive    as   social    philosophers-not   even    the shadows  of   Marx  or   Proudhon.  As  Armour glancingly  admits,  the   most   interesting  ideas  about  Canada as a  political society  have  come from  writers outside  the   ranks  of  professional philosophers.
G.W.

*  MARGARET  CROSLAND,   Beyond    the   Light­ house. Academic  Press,  $29.50.   The  subject of  this  book  is both   large and  substantial: the work   of   some   sixty   English-language  female novelists of the  twentieth century. The style  is easy  to  read.  The book  is  packed with  names and plot  summaries. But  the  judgments of  the writers  from  outside the  author's own  culture reveal  the  extent to  which some  English criti­ cism  refuses   to  let  colonialism  die.  If foreign writers don't  behave as   English  writers  do, they're  considered  peculiar.  Hence  for  Cros­ land, once  you  start reading May  Sinclair you can't stop,   but  Katherine  Mansfield is  no  ex­ perimenter; by  the  same  token,   reading Mar­ garet Laurence is  "good  for  the  muscles" but  not   pleasurable; and   she  has  met  Mavis   Gal­ lant. The  personal bias  of  the   judgments  re­ veals  more  than the  judgments themselves, but  perhaps  that  is  intentional, and   this   is  more  a   book   about   Crosland  reading  than  about modern  literature.
W.N.





"LES TETES A PAPINEAU"

Une  Demonstration en stereophonie
"Les  cometes font  jaser. Les  monstres aussi."
VINGT  ANNEES  SE SONT  ECOULEES entre le premier roman de Jacques Godbout et
Les  tetes  a Papineau.1  De  l'histoire d'un
monde   colonialiste a  la  fin  tragique de
Charles-Fran<tois Papineau doublement colonise  s'inscrit   une  quete  qui  aboutit a la desillusion. Le dernier roman de Godbout, en effet, illustre  la situation politique du  peuple  quebecois tiraille en­ tre  une  francophilie bien  legitime  et  une anglomanie qui  a  son  utilite,   ce  qui  re­ vient   a   dire   tiraille    entre   Quebec  et Ottawa. La fable  politiquc que livre cette fiction   caricature  la   problematique  na­ tionaliste d'une  impossible  autonomie du "Canadian-Quebecois." Cette  confronta­ tion  legendaire, dechirure  chronique  et ecartelement  stupefiant,   organise   d'une fa<ton   spectaculaire,    comme    dans    un cirque,   !'exhibition   du   monstreux  duo. Doublement   examine   par   le  monde,   le bicephale erie a la face des nations  !'inco­ herence,  l'incompatibilite, voire  l'ahuris­ sement,   de   deux   chefs   piques   sur   un meme   col.  C'est   pourquoi  !'inspiration dualiste de ce roman  exploite  un procede bipolaire qui  permet en  quelque sorte d'allcgoriser ces deux  tendances.

Le  chiffre  deux

Le  chiffre   deux   et  les  nombres   pairs organisent  la  toile  de  fond   des  Tetes a
Papineau. Tout  d'abord,  le  pere   et  la mere "des"jeunes Papineau possedent  une double  caracteristique:  parents et  en meme  temps agents  teratogenes. Leur  pro-
 geniture,   doublement surprenante, etait deja  comme  inscrite  dans  le prenom  aux initiales   repetees   du   pere:  "A.A."   Qui plus  est,  Alain-Auguste Papineau,  jour­ naliste    sentimental   et    impressionnable comme  du  papier  recouvert de  sel  d'ar­ gent,  vit  dechire  entre   deux   extremes: "Homard  thermidor et hotdog stime sont les deux  poles  de sa culture." Sa  femme aussi,  Marie Lalonde, "a   dans   le  sang
!'approche binaire." Quelque temp sapres la  naissance  de  sa  fille,  la  mere  se  pas­ sionnera   pour   les  mathematiques  et  re­ servera   toute   sa  tendresse   aux  binomes plutot   qu'a    ses  "bi-momes"!   Tant  de duplicite devait  conduire le couple  Papi­  neau,  lors de son voyage  de  noces a New
York,  a  engendrer  un   enfant   aussi  ex­
ceptionnel  que   monstrueux -deux   pe­
tites  tetes naquirent, ou  si l'on  veut,  une
"petite  tete  suivie de son echo."
Charles-Fran<tois, bicephale ambigu,  ou pour    les   intimes    "totos,"  se   presente comme  une  aventure. Deux  dans  un, il justifie,   evidemment,  qu'une  mere    ait deux seins! Selon la nomenclature de Godbout, il se classe dans  la categorie  du "monstre  double  autositaire  du   groupe des Atlomydes  [sic] . ..."2   Une  telle nais­ sance,  celle  d'un   enfant   bicephale  bien vivant,   ne  pouvait  passer  inaper<tue  Le "It looks  like  a  frog"   qui  a  echappe a Irma  Sweet,  se refere  a !'image publique la  plus  repandue  de  !'enfant des  Papi­  neau.  Get  enfant-monstre, on  s'en  dou­  tera,  possede  un  double  caractere:
Charles trouve  [les]  jeux  de  mots  particu­
lierement idiots. Le  oore gaulois  de  Fran<;ois
l'horripile. [...] Charles  est   effectivement
discret. Franc;ois  est  beaucoup plus  porte, en toute   circonstance, a gueler, a discutailler,
a se  plaindre.  11 aime   baratiner. C'est  un enjoleur.  La   tete   .a  Charles  refoule tout.
C'est  un etre complexe, une  arne insondable,
un  volcan   paresseux. Enfin.

Charles   s'interesse   a  la  litterature  alors que  Fran<;ois  a  un  esprit   "plus  scienti­ fique."    II    prefere   les   HEC.    Quand Charles  ecrit,  Fran<tois parle.  Si  Charles


157

OPINIONS & NOTES



a  horreur d'etre manipule, Franc;ois  s'a­
muse a "jouer le jeu." Alors que Franc;ois
apprend le nom  des plantes  et des fteurs, Charles consent  a respirer seulement  leurs
odeurs.   De   plus,  Franc;ois  s'attache  au passe   et   aime   les  traditions,  meme   si
Charles fremit   a toute  evocation  ances­
trale.  Bref, !'union de  ces deux  tetes  en­
tees  sur  un  meme   corps  n'est  guere  vi­
vable:

Quand une  idee,  un  souvenir, une  remarque plaisent .a  Fra ois,
Doit-on le noter? Chacun des mots que  nous enregistrons doit  etre approuve par  les deux tetes   qui   gouvernent. Les  lois  de   nos  cer­ veaux s'ajustent  mal.   Les  discours  se  croi­  sent,   se  bousculent, s'entrechoquent.

C'est pourquoi Charles-Fran<;ois demande Ia  "separation," qu'un  eminent  chirur­ gien,    le   Dr    Gregory   B.    Northridge, pourra effectuer avec  les risques que cela comporte.
Toutefois, si Ia vie a tetes engendre des
complications, elle favorise  aussi des per­
formances remarquables. Brillants comme des "tetes  a Papineau,''3  ils fracassent  taus
les  records   scolaires  et  savent  plaire   au public  en  Je divertissant originalement: "Une  guitare,  deux    voix."   Leur   sexe unique   qui  depend de  leurs  deux  cerve­ Jets, exige, pour  une simple masturbation, une  rencontre  au  sommet  des  volontes. Mais,  lorsqu'il  y  a  synchronisation  par­ faite,  Ia "Coincidence" rend raide comme une  flute   le  penis   unique   et   provoque l'extase.  La rencontre avec Irma Sweet illustre  bien  l'orgasme himalayen   du  bi­ cephale:

Nous   nous   sommes   redresses   un   peu   plus encore. Notre appendice comrnun pour  Ia premiere  fois  en   fit   autant.  II  etait  raide comme une  flute.  Nous  fUmes saisis. A deux mains. Surpris. Ravis. Epanouis. C'etait une Coincidence  miraculeuse. Une  synchronisa­ tion    totale,   parfaite,   sans   laquelle  notre  J nis

Le  terme  "Coincidence" ecrit avec  une majuscule suggere l'apotheose certes, mais aussi  le  lien  exceptionnel entre  les deux
 tetes que  Je cum  latin  transcit. L'un avec
!'autre, Charles avec  Franc;ois! La double entite s'est  comme  mue  en  une  seule  vo­ lonte.  Ce  qui  fait  dire  aux  tetes  eblouies  que !'amour avec  cette  actrice  "etait une cour  haletante  en  stereophonie."
Les prenoms de Charles et de Franc;ois rappellent   enfin    une    double   apparte­ nance. Comme dans  Salut  Galarneau!/ le  nom   de   Franc;ois  evoque   l'ancienne
appellation donnee a Ia langue  fran<;aise,
ses  antecedents, ses  traditions. D'autre part,  Charles,  qui,   vu   de   face,   est   a gauche,  jouit   de   par   son   prenom,  des
prerogatives attachees  a Ia  personne du
prince  du  meme  nom,  l'actuel heritier de
Ia couronne d'Angleterre. Dans  les  initi­ ales   "A.A."  ne   se   trouve-t-il   pas   un "Auguste" capable d'engendrer  un  roi? En somme,  le premier-ne des Papineau
est  une  creature qui  agit  sur  deux  plans.
La  bipolarite des caracteres, les divergen­ ces  de  gout  et !'equivoque du  nom  com­ pose,  tout   cela  offre  un  spectacle   ou  le chiffre  deux   joue  significativement.
II faut  ajouter que  Ia seconde  fois que Marie  Lalonde  devint   enceinte,  ce  fut pour  enfanter une  fille. Le nom qu'on lui
attribua correspond a Ia deuxieme lettre
de  !'alphabet  repetee:  "Bebee." Encore
ici, Ia recurrence phonetique du  prenom exploite  Ia propriete representative de  Ia
fonction du double  attachee a Ia  remons­
tration  intratextuelle.
Pour  continuer dans  le meme  sens, les mentions retenues pour  faire  allusion  aux "tetes" reprennent regulierement des cor­ respondances relatives au chiffre deux. Le rappel des  celebres  freres siamois Chang
et Eng,  qui  moururent "a New York  Je 20
janvier   I874 a deux  heures  d'intervalle,''
n'est  pas  sans  evoquer Ia  copulation  ex­
ceptionnelle, quelque soixante-quinze ans plus tard,  dans Ia meme  metropole ameri­ caine.  Pour  celebrer  les  merveilles de  Ia science,  "A.A." offre  deux  bouteilles de champagne aux "tetes." Curieuse coinci­ dence! La  marque connue   comporte un

OPINIONS & NOTES



nom double: Moet-et-Chandon!5  Double certes, mais uni  par  des traits  d'union qui les relient  comme  Charles et Fran  ois existent  dans  un seul corps.
Bien plus, les activites  generales reliees au  bicephale appellent  une  organisation materielle double  comme, par   exemple, les deux  ecrans  cathodiques a leur  usage. De la meme  fa on,
silence le fait que l'infirmiere ait du s'y prendre a deux  reprises  pour  percer  la membrane de  caoutchouc qui  recouvrait le corps  des patients afin  que  les tetes de Charles et  de  Fran ois
couvertes.   Si  Britty,   toute   jeune,  tenait ses tresses a deux mains  lorsqu'elle travail­ lait  a  l'hotel   de  son  pere   dans  l'Outa­ ouais,   c'est    aussi   a   deux   mains   que Charles-Fran ois
qui   procura  au   novice   un   plaisir   bien
"synchronise"!
A venir jusqu'ici, la demonstration "stereophonique" du  recit  de  Godbout exploitait le chiffre  deux pour reveler les caracteristiques du duo  issu de parents sensibles a ce qu'on pourrait appeler l'ambigenese. La  recurrence soutenue  de ce nombre suggere la bipartition cellulaire des  cerveaux de  Charles et  de  Fran  ois, de meme  que  leur  double orientation dis­ tincte.   Mais   on   ne   peut   ignorer   pour autant !'importance attachee aux  autres  nombres   commen ant
sieurs  reprises  en  effet,  le  chiffre   vingt, par  exemple, s'inscrit comme  repere  dans le recit. Est-ce seulement l'effet  du hasard, si on apprend que "A.A." a eu ses enfants a  vingt   ans  et  que,   lors  de  !'operation delicate du bicephale, Bebee fete ses vingt ans?   Pourquoi  la   naissance  du   fils  de "A.A." arrive-t-elle vingt  ans  apres  celle non  moins  spectaculaire des  jumelles  Di­ onne ?6   Curieusement, le  jour  de  la  mort des freres siamois  tombe  un vingt janvier! Enfin,  les rejetons de  "A.A." sejournent
vingt  mois  a l'hOpital   avant d'etre  kid­
nappes   par   leurs   parents. Ce   n'est   pas
tout.   Le   nouveau-ne aurait  pu   mourir
 vingt  fois avant de  s'habituer a  respirer alors  que  les "huileux" du  Colorado  sol­ licitaient   vingt  fois les heritiers  du  lopin de  terre  legue  par  Ia  grand-mere  Britty.  A l'Ecole  Nouvelle, Charles-Fran ois subir  l'apprentissage  de  vingt  methodes "definitives" de  mathematiques,  et  pour avoir  droit   au  spectacle   des  nains  Fon­ taine,  il en  coutait vingt  sous. Enfin,  lors de  !'operation  historique  du   bicephale, "ils  etaient vingt  autour du  Dr  Gregory
Northridge qui  s'agitait."
Le  recit  jongle  aussi avec  les multiples du numbre vingt. S'imaginant au "Ed Sullivan  Show," Charles-Fran ois
son succes:  "Vingt millions de postes cathodiques   bleuissant     les   chaumieres nous  auraient  ouvert   les  oreilles  et  les yeux de quatre-vingts millions d'auditeurs eblouis."  Ces  chiffres  sont  completes  par les deux cents maladies de degenerescence que  le Dr  Bonvouloir, biographe des  en­ fants   Papineau, a  denombrees  dans   les families du Quebec, et les quelque quatre­ vingts  positions   du   Kama  Sutra  qu'un fonctionnaire peut exploiter pour ses ebats  sexuels, apres  son  travail.
A considerer tous ces chiffres,  Les tetes
a Papineau   ressemble-t-il   plus  a  un  ou­
vrage   de   comptabilite  plutot    qu'a  un
roman  qui  decrit les aventures d'un  bice­ phale?  II ne faut  pas etre  dupe.  Le chiffre  deux  abondamment exploite  dans le texte de Godbout se refere  a la parite Charles­ Fran  ois.
fant  de Marie Lalonde et  de  "A.A." im­ priment une  insistance  telle  au  niveau de l'enonciation  qu'ils   mettent  a   jour,  par leurs  diverses  activites,  le  contenu   bipar­ tite  de  l'enonce. La  recurrence attachee au  chiffre  deux eclaire  la dichotomie des entites. Charles et Fran ois
deux   cerveaux  mais   ne   jouissent    que d'une seule "identite civile."
Si  on  scrute  avec   plus  d'attention   le sens vehicule par le caractere pair  des chiffres  utilises, on se rend  compte  que  le terme  "pair" renferme un signifie double


159

OPINIONS &  NOTES



dont la teneur est presque contradictoire. Comme  designation nominale en effet, "pair" signifie ce qui est egal, pareil. L'egalite prime dans cette definition,  de meme que l'autonomie entiere des parties. En revanche, la connotation du divisible exactement  par   deux   domine   lorsqu'il s'agit  de l'epithete. En somme, le nombre pair  se dit  d'une fonction  separable par deux, alors qu'un pair est une personne semblable  a une autre quant  a la fonction et a la situation sociale.  La  polysemie de "pair" offre done  une nuance  interessante dans  !'elaboration de  la  pensee  godbou­ tienne.  Le  nom  de scene "La  Paire" que Fran«ois   a  retenu,   homonyme  de  pair, contient  une  signification   ou  la  notion d'union   est   naturellement  incluse.   La premiere  acception de  "pair" (qui  favo­ rise  !'unite)  sera  vite  sacrifiee  au  profit de I'autre (qui  separe) avec !'impair final du  Dr  Northridge. L'exploitation du  bi­ naire  tout  au long du  recit rend  plus  pro­ vocatrice, pour  ainsi  dire, le reduction en "monocephale" du  monstre  ne  en  1955· Desormais, les deux  voix  autonomes fon­ dues en  une seule font  perdre  toute signi­ fication   au   dicton   que   Marie   Lalonde  aimait  proclamer:    "Deux  tetes   valent mieux  qu'une."

Bis repetita  placent
Selon  le double  narrateur des Tetes a Papineau, le journal de son evolution  jus­ qu'au scalpel  se definit  comme  "un  recit bi-graphique." Ce   jeu  de  mots  qui  ex­ prime  la dualite des deux  etres, se  reftete dans  le discours  par  la  manifestation du dedoublement. En  effet,  toute  similitude tend a engendrer des effets de duplication dans  un  ensemble  unifie.
Dans   un  premier  temps,  la  repetition du meme  terme ou du meme son entraine un  phenomene d'echo,  de  reftexion   du son comme  pour donner un sens aux deux voix  du   bicephale.  Le  perpetuel   tete-a­ tete  auquel sont  condamnes  Charles   et Fran«ois  les tient  ensemble:  "Cela  nous


r6o
 tient  ensemble. Ensemble." Un  peu  plus loin, on insiste:  "Et  nous mourrons  rapi­ dement tous deux  ensemble. En-semble." La separation du vocable repete suggere-t­ elle seulement I'echo comme  dans  l'exem­ ple  suivant:   "Chacun  contenait un  etre humain a  l'etat embryonnaire, an-bri-yo­ nere," ou bien le presage  de la disjonction des  tetes?  Quoi  qu'il  en soit,  on  ne peut nier  l'effet  que  produisent ces redondan­ ces: I'affirmation non  equivoque de deux entites  qu'exprime avec a propos le "Presentez-nous votre mere!  Nous vous presenterons la  notre! La  notre," et aussi de  deux  langues que  la  traduction  pho­ netique simultanee de  "Freak  show.  Fric chaud" n'est  pas sans evoquer!
Si  la  reprise  du  meme  terme  dans  les exemples  precedents  illustrait  la  reftexi­ vite  du   double   comme   une  occurrence sonore,    d'autres   repetitions    presentent plutot l'image d'une recurrence definitive, voire  sans appel. Des les premieres lignes du  recit,  !'intervention  chirurgicale de  la fin   pose   une   interrogation.   Sera-t-elle definitive?  La   reprise    du   meme    mot tranche par !'affirmative, et  d'une fa«on incisive.  La  conclusion que  suggere  cette redondance   prophetise  deja   le  resultat final  de  I'operation:  "Les   droits   subse­ quents, s'il en  est, seront  verses au  survi­ vant, s'il y en  a  un.  Un." "Definitive" et "un"  reunis   ensemble   dans   une   meme formulation  nouvelle font  songer  au  sens de  la conclusion:  definitiv,ement, un seul survivra!
Avant   de  scruter plus  en  profondeur cette  caracteristique du  bis repetita, il faudrait   analyser    certaines   repetitions d'une ideologic  facile  a deceler. L'impor­ tance  de l'intimite des actants est procla­ mee  a   plusieurs  reprises.  En   revanche, cette  meme  intimite  est  comme   projetee au  grand    jour,  a  la   face  publique, car toutle monde, tel un rayon X, peut  "pho­ tographier" et  analyser la  "structure in­ time.  Intime" de  Charles et de  Fran«ois.  En d'autres termes, l'insistance provoquee

OPINIONS  & NOTES



par la repetition montre la supercherie, peut-etre  double,   jouant   contre   le  bice­ phale,  meme  si celui-ci,  qui  en  est  cons­ cient,  refuse  d'y  participer: "Nous  n'avi­ ons pas le  temps  de  nous  apitoyer sur  la betise dominante. Dominante." Charles et Franc;ois  ne  sont  pas  sans  ignorer   qu'ils sont  "solitaires" a  cause  de la "celebrite" que  les  media  leur  ont   donnee, et  leur cote "intellectuel" pressent  que "des qu'on met   le  doigt   dans   les  rouages   politico­ juridiques on en a pour  l'eternite. L'eter­ nite." Ces donnees  inscrites  dans  le jour­ nal  des  Papineau livrent  "une  collection  d'histoires   'v,ecues.'   Vecues."    Double­ ment  vecues! La fin du deuxieme chapitre conclut  sur  une  prise  de conscience  dou­  ble:   "Nous   ne  ressemblions   a  personne.  Personne." Le  jeu  du  dedoublement ins­ crit done, pour ainsi dire,  la double  entite  des  principaux personnages qui  reflechis­ sent leur  pensee  dans  le miroir  de l'autre et  l'expriment dans   un  discours  "egale­ ment"  distribue,  comme   de   la   stereo­ phonie!
Ces  redondances  multiples qui  email­ lent   le  recit   etablissent, d'une   certaine maniere,  la  naissance de  Charles et  de Franc;ois,  doublement  con<;us par  Marie Lalonde. Plus  tard,  lorsqu'ils   feront  !'a­  mour  avec  Irma  Sweet,  ils  personnalise­ ront  leur identite. Ils deviendront non pas un homme, mais des hommes.  Cependant, cette  reflexion  fait  bon marche de la per­ manence de leur  coexistence. Si du "un," ils evoluent vers le "des," apres !'interven­ tion chirurgicale, le "des" se convertira en "un," definitivement.
On  peut  considerer ces nombreuses  re­ petitions, tantot  comme  une  fac;on  d'ex­  primer   deux   voix,  deux   tetes,  et  tantot comme  le reflet  propre au  miroir. La  tete de l'un  reflechit  l'autre, et  vice-versa.  Le "bis  repetita placent" qu'aimait redire  la mere  du  bicephale,  recoupe la significa­ tion   sous-jacente   aux   "six   millions   de descendants   quelques  siecles   plus   tard. Descendants"  qui   exploitent  une  vision
 dedoublee d'une realite  non  mains bipar­ tite.  En  d'autres termes,  la  "demonstra­ tion  en  stereophonie" du  recit  proclame les grandes lignes de "notre veritable livre d'histoire! L'histoire."
Le sens premier  du  roman de Godbout reside  dans  la  demonstration allegorique de !'incommunicado entre  les deux  tetes, celle de Charles et  celle de  Franc;ois. Les deux  tetes, a force de se regarder, de se reflechir dans le visage de l'autre, en vien­ nent  a  se considerer   comme  differentes. "Franc;ois  qui  se voit  comme  le Sacrifie" estime  son  vis-a-vis  comme  un  "Judas," un  traitre. Le  "bicephalisation" illustree par  la  bipolarisation grave   l'image   d'un Charles-Franc;ois   Papineau  relie  d'abord par  les circonstances fortuites de la  nais­ sance et, par la suite, separe  par la science du  Dr  Northridge. Le  trait  d'union s'ef­ face,  et  dans   la   manipulation  du   bloc operatoire disparait ce qui le suit, c'est-a­  dire Franc;ois. Cet "enfant-monstre," veri­ table entreprise qui fait  jaser Ottawa et la Chambre des Communes, "vit"  l'incom­ patibilite de son existence. S'il fut "sauve" une  premiere fois du  carcan  de l'hopital, il succombera au scalpel habile  du celebre medecin  anglophone de  Vancouver, B.C.
La  jonglerie  binaire  largement  exploi­ tee  par  Godbout tend  a  une  double  ac­ tivite  contre-ideologique. D'une part,  !'u­  nite  du  corps   des   jeunes   Papineau  est incontestable et, d'autre part,  il y a  scis­ sion  de  cette  meme  unite  dans  les  deux tetes.  Le  jeu  des dedoublements se solde par  la separation, par !'amputation d'une tete au profit  de l'autre. En effet, le "une guitare,  deux   voix"   joue   le  partage a egale  intensite  du  verbe   de  l'un   et  de l'autre, mais  le son provenant de !'instru­ ment    unique    n'est   pas   necessairement compatible avec  les gouts  des  "voix." Si l'un  ou  l'autre  prefere  une  tonalite dis­ tincte, comment les mains  d'un  seul corps pourront-elles  accorder  des  orientations diverses, voire  opposees?  Tel  semble  etre l'effet  que produit un  discours  ou faison-


r6r

OPINIONS & NOTES



nent des marques d'un  interet  reel pour  le nombre deux et le dedoublement.
Bien   plus,  les  similitudes   nombreuses que  provoquent aussi  bien Ia convenance chiffree  du  nombre deux  et  le  redouble­ ment  de certains termes, font songer  ace que    Ricardou   appelle   "des   mises   en abyme   litterales."7   Le  reftexivite  que  Ia similitude  accorde  transmet, d'une  cer­ taine  fa'<on, ce que le systeme du  dedou­ blement   des  memes   lettres   figure.  Bien sur, !'extension qui accompagne ce phe­ nomene lexical  projette une  nouvelle  lu­ miere sur le sens a donner a ce que reftete Ia  repetition. La   recurrence  ajoute  des effets  qui  obeissent  a  !'idee  sous-jacente. En   d'autres  mots,   les   termes   souvent repetes  ressemblent a  une sorte  de miroi­  tement  de Ia pensee de l'un  dans l'agir  de
!'autre  ou  de  !'action  de  l'un   issue  de
!'idee   de  !'autre. Cette   stereophonie du
miroir,  d'un visage se reftetant  dans !'au­ tre, d'une voix accompagnant !'autre, re­ sume  bien Ia resultat final du "deux dans un"   auquel  Marie  Lalonde  refusait   de croue.
L'allegorie du bicephale legendaire fait desormais partie  de  l'Histoire, car  le  na­ tionalisme de  Godbout dans  cet  ouvrage  romanesque, contrairement aux  romans  precedents, aboutit a  une  desillusion  que laissait  sans doute presager le nom  meme de Papineau.8  La predestination attachee a  ce  nom,  le  jeu  "double" de  ce  parle­ mentaire canadien justifie une conclusion ou  Fran<_;ois, le surgeon  fran<_;ais, est raye de   l'ecran   cathodique  pour    ceder    Ia totalite de  Ia place  a Charles,  le drageon anglais.  Tout comme   le docteur  North­ ridge qui  a oublie son appartenance fran­
'<aise aux  Beaupre, Charles,  a !'image de ce dernier, conservera le vestige de son "tete-a-tete" avec  Fran'<ois, en signant Charles F.  Papineau.

NOTES
1 Jacques  Godbout,  Les   Tetes  a  Papineau
(Paris: Seuil,  1981).
 2 Dans  Ia section  des monstres doubles, les autositaires sont  compos,es de deux  individus egaux en  developpement et  jouissant d'une egale  activite  physiologique. Dans  cette categorie se retrouvent les monosomiens, essentiellement caracrerises par  !'unite du corps. Les  atlodymes et  non   les  atlomydes, un genre dans  cette classe,  ont  un  seul  corps et   deux    tetes   sepa!'ees,   mais   contigues et portees par  un  cou  unique. Tel  est  le cas de Charles-Fran<;ois Papineau.
3   L'expression quebecoise "etre  une   tete   a
Papineau" signifie  etre  tres  intelligent, fute. "Ref.erence a Louis-Joseph  Papineau,  bril­
lant  tribun et  homme politique de chez  nous dont le  nom   est   passe   dans   !'usage   popu­ laire." Pierre Des  Ruisseaux, Le  Livre   des expressions  quebecoises   (Montreal: Hartu­ bise  HMH, 1979), p.  240.
4   Jacques Godbout, Salut Galarneau! (Paris: Seuil, 1967).
5   En  realite, Ia marque de  champagne "Moet et Chandan" s'ecrit sans  trait d'union. Faut­ il  voir  ici,  dans   l'ajout de  ces  signes  typo­  graphiques, une  allusion aux  liens  presque indissociables de  ces  deux  entites?
s  Elzire Dionne et  son  mari, Oliva, donnerent naissance entre trois  et  six heures  du  matin, le  28  mai  1934,  au  fond   des  bois  du  Nord
de  !'Ontario, a cinq  filles  identiques. Selon
Pierre Berton, "Les chances qu'une femme
mette au  monde des quintuples fraternels etaient de  cinquante-quatre  millions contre un.   La   probabilite que   de  tels  enfants  at­ teignent  !'age  adulte  etait   infinitesima!e. [ ...] Dans le genre humain, des quintuples identiques sont   une   sorte   de  facetie de   Ia nature." Pierre Berton, Les  ]umelles Dionne et  leur   epoque, traduit   par   P.  Pourchelle (Montreal:    Les    Editions    Mirabel/CLF,
1979), p.   13.
7   Cf. Jean Ricardou, Nouveaux Problemes du roman (Paris: Seuil, 1978), p. 159·

s Louis-Joseph Papineau, !'homme politique canadien  qui   donna  au   xrxe siecle   une
nouvelle impulsion au   parti canadien  fran­
c;ais fut  elu  a deux   reprises president de  Ia
Chambre. Ayant soutenu !a  revolte des  Ca­
nadiens  fran<;ais,   il   fut    accuse    de   haute trahison et  dut s'enfuir en  1836.  Meme s'il fut   reelu   au   Parlement  en  I 84 7'  il   n'en demeure pas  moins  qu'il s'etait discredite.

YVON BELLEMARE

OPINIONS  & NOTES



HUGH BRODY'S
IIMAPS AND  DREAMS"

PosT-MODERNISTS DIVIDE  into  two camps. The deconstructionists examine texts scep­ tically, pulling  here,  tearing there, reveal­ ing  everywhere the  decayed  meanings in modern  thought.  Relentless,  thi& scepti­ cism   spares    nothing,   not   reality,    not criticism,   not  even  literature.  The other  camp   redeems   literature. It  is  no  less sceptical,  but  for   it,  scepticism   is  only one  stop  in  the  stations  of consciousness. The latter camp writes fictions, or critical fictions  which  insistently  refer  to a world of   detail we used to call reality. The deconstructionists tear  at  this  reality,  re­ marking as  they  go  about  its  dead  co­ herence. The  redemptionists peel the texts of the  real  entities  like onions,  and  thus, meanings, structures  are   revived  to  en­ chant and  enlighten readers again.  (Har­ old  Innis,  the  historian, was such  a mod­ ernist   and   Marshall   Macluhan  was  his critical fictionist.)
Hugh   Brody's   Maps   and   Dreams,   a work of anthropology, alternates between narrative and  discursive  chapters. Brody chose this way of presentation as a means of entering into  a discussion,  a dramatic one,   with   white   Canada-not    all   of white   Canada,  perhaps,  but   that   large part  of it enacting the current tempest engulfing the nation  as it tries to weather the economic crisis and  the  simultaneous blowing around the new constitution. Be­ cause  of its discursive/narrative &tructure the   formal arguments are   tested,   con­ trasted, and  integrated with  Indian reali­  ties. The  book, however, is not  merely  an argument against   its  own  formal   asser­ tions or against public texts. It is also are­ demptive rendering of an  Indian drama which  for  a variety  of reasons  white  Ca­  nadians fail  to  see.  The   Indians in  our public   arenas   are   often   converted  into stereotypes. We understand these conven-
 tions  when  members of  the  royal  family play theatrics with  Indians at  the Calgary Stampede or in Rideau Hall  pledging undying fidelity "as long as the rivers flow and   the  sun  shall  shine." All  recognize that drama to be an expression  of ideals. Ideals in this sense require very little scepticism.   The  gap   between   the   ideal and the actual is a given. Brody's redemp­ tive  text  is  directed  toward   those  who believe they  deal  in actualities.  (The late Arthur Laing,  when  he  became  Minister of Indian Affairs,  said, "These people  do not  want  to  work."  The zoologist  Peter Larkin,  in an  article on salmon  enhance­ ment,  referred to the  Indians as "natural predators" of  the  salmon. The   poet  AI Purdy described Indian women as cariboo  horses, "with  fire in  their  heads  and  slip­ pery froth on thighs." And  then  there  are the  do-goodcrs who  see  the  Indians as a clutch  of  Little Nells  pathetically acting in  a  show  we  now  call   the   culture  of poverty. A social  worker  in northern Brit­ ish Columbia took an  Indian  child  from its family, reporting as she did so that  the family had  no food and  lived in a shabby one-room  cabin  with  junk  hanging from the ceiling. The junk  was  the winter  sup­ ply of dried  moose and venison.)
There are   more  serious  opponents of the Indians than  these. In the  MacMillan Bloedel Building in Vancouver, there  is a large  collection  of B.C.  Indian art.  That company,   one   among  many,   daily   de­ stroys the land  and  fishing  base  which  is the life of the  Indian. It is hard to believe that  the  presence of that  art  there  is the tribute hypocrisy  pays virtue. The  opera­ tions  of  the  forest  company  are  in  tune with a main stream of western intellectual life. Hobbes  believed the North  American Indian to  be the  exemplum of man  in a state  of nature,  a  life  which  is "solitary, poor,  nasty,  brutish, and   short." Locke, Rousseau,  and Hegel  each  in  their  turn  justified attitudes which  made  the cruelty  to Indians an  inevitable cost for progress.


163

OPINIONS & NOTES



Ellman, in his biography  of James  Joyce, tells  how   the  great   writer,   late  in  life, went again to Catholic mass. He said that it   was   beautiful  but   all   wrong.   That spiritual   iciness   was   characteristic   of Joyce but it is also a symptom  of an emptiness in the enlightenment which accompanies modernity.
Anthropology takes  us out  of all  that. Sometimes it takes us too far out;  the conventional judgments by enlightened Europeans, the revulsion  at the Arctic peoples  who  kill the enfeebled  old, or the fear   of  the  self-mutilation  in  the  Sun­ dance,  can  be reduced to  the  abstracted state  called  cultural  relativity. The  great  achievement of cultural  relativity  is that  it  opens  the  understanding to an  appre­ ciation  of  human variety.  The  great  pit­ fall  is  moral   anaesthesia. These  two  ele­ ments  of anthropological thinking neces­ sarily  weave   together in  even  the  wary practitioner. That is why the presentation, the  writing of   anthropology  is  difficult. Brody's  struggle  with  that  difficulty  most probably  motivates the  form  and  style of his  book;  his  way  out  of  the  problem  is the  pathway of  art,   not  Joyce's  art   but the  structural device  of Brecht's  art,  the epic  stage  with  its alienation effects and its bifurcated shaping of the stage business into action and  direct  address to the audi­ ence.  Thus,  Brody's   alteration   between narrative and  discourse  engages the read­  er's  emotions and   then  denies  the  emo­ tions  with   an  insistence  that   the  reader  think  and  know more  than  his  feelings, know  more  than   the  painful   drama  of Indian life. He must also know the origins of that  pain  in a set  of large  structures.
The  narrative in Maps and Dreams is a rendering of the day-to-day Indian life in
northeastern B.C. It opens with a descrip­ tion of Joseph  Patsah  walking through  the snow.  He  is hunting. The  temperature is subarctic and  he is lightly  dressed. Given the circumstances, his  poor  dress seems a sign  of  miserable  poverty.  All  day  long
 this  elderly  man,   the  oldest  in  his  band, lights fires. He stays warm  and  alive light­ ing  those small  fires. Despite  his apparent poverty,  Joseph  Patsah   is an  inheritor of the  traditions and  technology  of  one  of the  "oldest  affluent  societies"   (Marshall Sahlins's term). The rest of the narrative, the  mapping, a  funeral, a drunken spree in  Fort  St.  John, a  passage  through the hunting  seasons,  parliamentary  subcom­ mittee hearing on the reserve, Brody com­ poses  as  would   the  traditional  symbolist author. The symbols are  never  what  they appear. The Indians are furtive about the actuality of their  lives; and  the whites  do not really  want  to see behind  appearance.
The whites  seem  insistently   to  believe that  Indians are  lazy;  the  hard  work  the Indians perform goes on  ignored. Beliefs which  contradict  well-known evidence  in symbolist   dramas  most   often   cover   an inner conflict   that   the  players  find  hard to  reveal.  The idea  of  the  drama  here, what  Aristotle  calls the whole action, con­ cerns   the   collision   between   two  econo­  mies.  The working  and   the  playing,  the buying and  the selling, the saving  and  the owning you and  I do constitute a conflict against  unseen  peoples.  This   is so  even though we are unaware of our participant roles.  The  Indians of  northern B.C.  are often  unaware, too,  but  they  do  believe that  if  their  traditional economy  is under­ stood  or  widely  known   it  can   be  taken  from   them.   Brody's   book  is  a   gamble  which  he  and   the  Indians are  taking  in the  hope   that  a  better   understanding of the   Indian  condition  will   engage   our sympathy and support. Their claim is that the Indian is not a victim,  not lazy, not impoverished, but that  the Indians on the reserves  are  viable  fully-functioning  cul­ tures  and  economies. Moreover,  this so­ ciety  originates in  millennia now  gone  in northeast B.C.:   the  Athapaskan  peoples began    a   great    hunting  culture   which spread  over more  than  half the continent.
Today,  the   Patsahs continue  to  live,

OPINIONS & NOTES



with  much  adaptation, in  a  precapitalist economy  and  in an epic culture. The  way they  explain   the  secret  power  that  holds them  on  this  course   is  with   their  maps drawn and   painted on  hides.  The  maps describe their  hunting  and  trapping routes.  These   routes  go  beyond  the  trip out   and   back   to  camp.  They   are  also paths  to more  spiritual goals. The  whole lives of peoples  are  drawn there,  and  the places  they  go  after  death are  shown  as well.  The  spiritual routes  come  from  the dreams of the  people.  The Athapaskans, like the  Iroquois and  like some Solomon Islanders, dream  in  a  fashion   which   is akin  to our  making of art.  These  dreams and  dreamers require the development of talent. This   cultural  formation, the  one surrounding maps and dreams, bears some resemblance to Nietzsche's conception of tragic   forces.  The   maps  are  rationalistic and    apollonian,  and    the   dreams    are dionysiac   realizations  of  death  and   the natural. That the Athapaskan culture has a   tragic   motion  within   it  is  manifest; these  peoples  are  vulnerable. Brody's  dis­ cursive   chapters  show   the  dreams and maps  being  interrupted and  transformed by  broken   treaties,  incursions  by  white farmers   and    hunters,   pollution,   and mega-projects (pipelines, highways, dams, and  mines) . The Ingenika people  were flooded out  by a B.C. Hydro dam  without warning or  restitution. The Blueberry re­ serve  was gassed  by an  oil driller  and  as yet  they  have  received  no compensation. Industrial  development,   particularly  in energy,  has cut  across traplines and  hunt­ ing  preserves.  Productive  lives  and   the active  wills  are  thus  seriously  damaged. The  region is famous for  the harshness  of social life:  alcoholism, rape, suicide, mur­  der, accidental death have  very high rates here.
Although  the   archaic  economic and
social order  has  been  battered, the Atha­ paskans  of B.C. continue their berry pick­ ing,   their    fishing,    their    hunting   and
 trapping.  (Brody  does  an  elaborate  cal­ culation  of the cash value  of the food and fur   production  and   he  finds  that  each family  unit,  on the average, makes  some­ thing  close  to  eight  thousand   Ig8o  dol­ lars.)  The  material life they lead, in some ways,  is not  very  different  from  that   of other  rural  people  in B.C. But the Indians in B.C. do  more  than  survive.  Adversity,  the  entry   of  the  tragic  into   their   lives, some theorists argue,  has made them tena­  cious. Other rural  populations in B.C. are giving  up  and moving  out  to the  city  as industrialism  rolls  over  their   land   base. The  tragic  in  the  Indian life has  become a source of publicly  understood enhanced stature. Most  of us live relatively prosper­ ous  lives;  they  are  a  strong  people  who live close to nature, a nature whose mean­ ings are  again  becoming clear  to us as it gets chewed  up  to  supply  us more  pros­ perity.   Brody   refers   to   the   belief   that  limitless  development is necessary  as  the "carcinoma of  the  imagination." The spiritual aspirations of white Canadians overlap   with   the  Indian one  in  strange ways. The  Indians seek a  harmony with nature, and  we are  all implicated in  log­ ging, mining,  and  polluting, but when we are on holidays  we seek rural settings,  we hunt   and  fish,  we  hike  and  go  to  zoos. The   pathos   in  civilized  lives  is  that   we are  fantasy  primitives in leisure  time; the everyday  time  of  the  Indian, his reality,  is under  onslaught, and a great  many  In­ dians   experience  tragedy,   but   their   un­ happiness rises out  of direct  conflict  with the  forces  opposed   to  their  reality.  It is true  that  we can  romanticize the  Indian suffering and  talk about  the dignity  of his tragedy,  but  that   is  not  the  point   here.  The Indian is caught in spiritual struggle; most of the  rest of us have  given  that  up. Brody,  in  short, seeks  public  support  to preserve  the  Indians' way of life because that  support  would  help  us. To  protect the  people  and  the  land  of Canada is to cure  the  carcinoma of  the  imagination.

OPINIONS & NOTES



That is the  structure of Brody's  argu­ ment.  His  conclusions,  the style of  them, warrant some critical questioning.  Brody believes that  the Indians can in the future avoid  living  through an  apocalyptic era­  sure  of  their  culture.  He is neither  opti­  mistic nor  pessimistic about  this; Canada, its various constituencies, is now deciding  how it  will  turn  out.  For  a  positive  out­  come,  the  nation  will have  to protect re­ serve lands  and  crown  lands, and  in addi­  tion  the  nation   will  have  to  honour the treaty and aboriginal rights of the native people.  All this is written  in a style which is familiar enough, that  English  lucidity, moral and verbal, we find in writers so disparate as Bertrand Russell and  E. P. Thompson. Martin  Green  refers  to  that prose instrument as the style of English decency. That style here is part  of Brody's rhetorical strategy for  persuading  Cana­ dians  to choose  the right  course. But that  strategy   does  place  some  constraints  on Brody   as  he   selects   his   material.  The  voices  of  Indians  are  not   heard   often enough. I  presume  Brody  wants  to  hear enough  to understand the collective  men­ tality rather than  the special  buzz of par­ ticular experience. His discursive passages similarly  leave out emotionalities which would intrude on his strategy.  These  pas­ sages presume a genteel  decency which  is Canadian. That is fair  enough  as rhetori­ cal stance. Speakers often  flatter their au­  diences.  But the Canadian myth concern­ ing its social traditions-blandness, calm, rationality,   deference  before   authority, and civility-is only a partial description of  our traditions. Canada and  Canadians are not so nice as the myth-makers would have  it; the  country and  the  people  are crankier and   more  violent   than   Brody's fine  writing  and   focus  of  decency   can openly reveal.  In short, Maps and Dreams is not  an  angry  book. To  avoid  anger  on this subject, he and  we must pretend that this country has operated with some good will. But  the  maltreatment of the  Indian


r66
 in  Canada is more  than  an  oversight  by genteel   administrators who  sought  pros­ perous  modernization and  then  inadver­ tently  neglected to control  overenthusias­ tic  entrepreneurs. This  nation   has  evils within  it.  They   need  exposure  and  criti­  cism.  Trotsky  said  about   Shaw   that   he wished   that   the  playwright's  blood  had about   five  percent  of  the  acid  found   in Jonathan  Swift's  system.  It  may  be carp­ ing  to  ask  for  more   acid  in  so  good  a book as  this,  but  the  redemption of Can­ ada,  a  more  difficult  alchemy  than  turn­ ing lead into gold, needs a strong solution.
What  would   it   mean   to  have   more acid? Brody's  book does have some in its ironies. The funeral scene is probably the best-with  the  white  priest  trying  to preach   to  a  drunk asleep  in  the  back  of
the  church  and   the  few  mourners  who
come  to hear  the official Christian ritual. The whole  community mourns  after  the priest  leaves. The important thing  about this scene is that  it shows most clearly  that the  Indians are  more  than  victims.  They are  active  agents  who  seek their  own  in­ terest.  If they  get  their   own  interest  it will  be  so  because  they  have  the  will  to force  some  issues.  We  can  close  with  a statement by   an   Indian   whom   Brody quotes:
Are   we  supposed  to  be  nice  and give  you our   traplines so  that you  put  your  pipeline and benefit other people? ... These traplines are   for   us,  so  we  keep   them. Why   cannot you  guys  understand that? . . . I guess  you don't really understand that this  is our  way of  life  and  always will  be.
Clarence  Apsassin
Blueberry  River  Indian Reserve
Public Hearings, December  1980
That is the acid  voice.

F. E. STOCKHOLDER

OPINIONS & NOTES



THE SAGE OF OTTAWA: WILLIAM DAWSON  LESUEUR

lN EVERY GENERATION  men  of distinction are   born   who   are   destined    to  wield  a critical influence upon  their contemporar­ ies. Such  men  are  noted  for  their  powers of  reasoning, exposition,  and   argument; they   are   recognized    as   leaders   among  those  who  strive,  in  the  words  of Adam  Shortt, "to maintain an  interest  in  things of the mind." Northrop Frye and  the late Marshall  McLuhan   spring   to  mind   as contemporary  examples of  the  type.  As the  pre-eminent Canadian Victorian in­ tellectual, William  Dawson  LeSueur was a complex  individual. He  was not only a cogent   critic,   accomplished and  persua­ sive   journalist,   controversial   historian, classical scholar, scientific writer, essayist, and   litterateur, but   a  positivist  philoso­ pher and  original thinker in his own right,  contributing something of his own critical  intellectual   scepticism   to   the   nexus   of transatlantic  Victorian thought, with  the rigour   of  an  intellect  that   invoked   the spirit  of  Spencer, Huxley, and  Mill.  His intellectual influences were drawn  from some of Europe's finest minds,  not only Spencer, Huxley, and  Mill, but  also Fred­ eric   Harrison,  Comte,  Carlyle,   Sainte­ Beuve,  Lyell,  Darwin, and  Matthew Ar­ nold.    He    represented  a    synthesis    of thoughts and  values common to Victorian culture and  society.
The  scanty   and   elusive   biographical data  on the Sage of Ottawa is a source  of singular frustration to the researcher/ but it has been established that  the LeSueur family hailed  from  the island of Jersey: William's father,  Peter,   being  one  of  a large family that emigrated to Canada around  I 828.  His  health was  so  precari­ ous  the  family  feared   for  his  life,  but  it was  hoped   that   a  new  life  in  Canada
 would  prove  beneficial; this proved  to be the case, for  Peter  LeSueur grew  up  and proceeded  to father thirteen children. He became  a  civil  servant  and   held  the  re­ sponsible position  of chief  superintendent of  the  money  order  branch of  the  post office department for many  years. He had been  sent  down  to  the  United States  to study their money order  system, and  upon his return inaugurated a similar  system in Canada. Later on he  was  to become  the respected  secretary of  the  board   of civil service  examiners. The  Dawson    family came  from   the  town   of  Sunderland   in northern England; William's grandfather had   been  a   master   mariner  who  emi­ grated   with  his  wife  Martha  and   their children   to  Canada  in   I 83 I.  William's mother,  Barbara  Dawson   (who   had   a brother  and   two  younger   sisters) ,  was born  in Sunderland on October I5,  I8I7. It is  curious   to  note   from   the   church record  that  she was baptized immediately on the day she was  born,  which  reflected  the gruesome  belief  in  infant damnation quite  common  at that time.
William  was  born  at  Quebec on  Feb­ ruary   Ig,  I84o.  As a  consequence  of his French and   English   descent   he  was  bi­ lingual,  and  destined  to become a  profes­ sional public servant  like his father Peter.  Nothing is known  of his  childhood other  than   his  deep  attachment  to  his  large family, particularly his sister  Annie.  One  story that  has survived  concerns his Aunt  Jane who lived in Nova  Scotia; when  his mother wrote  to her, little  William  would always  insist  on  enclosing  a  special  ink blot in the letter especially  for his favour­ ite  Auntie   Jane.2    The  LeSueur   family moved  from  Quebec to  Montreal some­ time in the early  I85o's, where  the young LeSueur completed a  brilliant secondary education,  graduating  "Dux" from   the Montreal High  School. He  was well read in  Latin   and   Greek  at  a  time   when   a classical   education   was  still   the   norm,  with  purely  scientific interests being  con-

OPINIONS & NOTES



sidered   peripheral to  the  spiritual  ideals of scholarship. Writing many years later about his early education, he rejected  the idea  that  the old system had  been nothing but   memory   training  and   learning  by rote, without recourse  to the intellectual powers:

There was  some  very  unintelligent teaching in past times  undoubtedly, and  there is some very  unintelligent teaching today.... But  it was  not  all  memory training. My own  recol­ lection  tells  me  there was  much   to  engage and   stimulate  the   more   active   intellectual faculties....  For  those  who  took  any  pleas­ ure   in  intellectual  exercise -and   I fell  in with  many  in  those  benighted times -there was  ample  opportunity for  obtaining it.B

Through his father's connections, Wil- liam  first  entered the  civil service  in  the post office department as a youth in  r8s6. The department was located  in  Toronto at  this  time,  as  was  the  seat  of  govern­ ment,  which  had  been moved  down  from Quebec.  For   his  reputation  as  a  vora­  cious  reader, his father  set  him  the  task of naming the  newly  opened  post  offices in  the  province.  He  named  Gravenhurst, along  with  Agincourt  and  literally  scores of others, with  the tiny towns and  villages often  taking   their   names  from   the  new post offices he had designated. Apparently his duties  with  the  post office department were   nominal  at   this  time,  for  he  was given  ample  time off to pursue  his studies at  the  Law  School  of Osgoode  Hall  and the University of Toronto.4 He is listed on the  rolls  of  the  Law   Society  of  Upper Canada, but there  is no evidence  of being called  to the Bar.  Doubtless  his legal training was  to  prove  valuable in  later years, while he was involved in wearisome court  proceedings over  his ill-fated  Mac­ kenzie   biography.   He   evidently   aban­ doned   the   idea   of  a   legal   career  and entered the University of  Toronto, where his best friend  was William  Henry  Corry  Kerr,  a   gold   medallist  of   1859,   who promptly fell in love with William's pretty


J68
 young  sister,  Annie,   marrying her  when she reached her  nineteenth birthday.
At Toronto his teachers  were John Mc­ Caul,  James  Beaven,  and  Daniel  Wilson. He  was to imbibe  a lifelong love of  Greek and  Roman literature from McCaul, who had  been  educated at  Trinity College  in Dublin,  and   had   emigrated  to  Canada to become  the principal of Upper Canada College,  and  eventually professor  of clas­ sics  at  King's College   of  the  University of  Toronto in 1842. McCaul not only in­ fluenced  LeSueur as an accomplished classical scholar with an international reputation; he was also responsible  for founding and  editing The Maple  Leaf, a periodical devoted  entirely  to Canadian letters.
LeSueur studied   moral  philosophy  un­ der  James  Beaven,  who  was to be charac­ terized  by Daniel Wilson  in  his  diary  as "A stupid  dry old stick we should  be well rid  of."5  In  r8so  Beaven  had  written the influential Elements of  Natural Theology while  professor  of  divinity  at  King's  Col­ lege;  it was to be  the  first Canadian uni­ versity textbook. As an orthodox Payleyite,  he subscribed   to  the  so-called  "argument from  design"6   and felt  it his duty  to sol­ emnly   warn  his  students of  the  danger presented to  their  faith  by the  pursuit of independent critical thought and  inquiry, for  this  could  result  in severing  their  in­ tellect from  that  of the Deity. He stressed his  conviction  that   natural reason  must always   be   subservient  to   the   sublime truths of revelation. Beaven's  fear  of free unfettered  critical  inquiry  was  manifest in a blinkered ultraorthodoxy, which in LeSueur's case had a counterproductive effect,  for  his  intellectual  paradigm  de­ veloped  in  reaction  to  his  teaching.  Le­ Sueur's   lifelong    commitment   to    free thought and  his relentless  search  for phil­  osophical truth was the fruit  of his teach­  er's  dogmatic certitude.
He  had  the good  fortune to study  his­
tory  and  literature under Daniel   Wilson

OPINIONS & NOTES



who was later  to become  president of the University  of  Toronto.  A   graduate  of Edinburgh   University,  distinguished  in the  fields  of archaeology and  ethnology, and  inventor of  the  word  "prehistoric," Wilson  had  earned an  honorary  Doctor­ ate  of Laws  from  St.  Andrew's  with  his work on The  Archaeology and  Prehistoric Annals  of Scotland  ( I85I).  Along  with John  William Dawson  of  McGill, he gave the   first   Canadian   critique  of  Charles Darwin's The  Origin  of Species  in  I86o, the year after its publication.7  From  what we  know   of   Wilson's   life-his  liberal Anglicanism,  his  devotion to  intellectual truth,  his  commitment to  nondenomina­ tional   education,  and   his  resistance   to narrow sectarian ultraorthodoxy-he un­ doubtedly exerted  a compelling influence upon  his gifted  young  student. LeSueur's writings  over  the years  (on evolution, sci­ ence, education, and  free thought)  reflect his  teacher's  devotion  to   the  ideals   of truth; Wilson  both  stimulated  his critical  spirit,   and   imbued  him   with   his  own deeply  moral   sense  of  the  sanctity   of  a sincere  and  honest  striving after  truth­ wheresoever it might  lead  one.8
LeSueur graduated with  a B.A. taking honours in classics as a silver  medallist  in I 86g. He  read  extensively and  was influ­ enced  by the  best  minds  of the Victorian age. By the  time he left  the  university  the most  influential works  of  the  nineteenth century  had   been   published:  Darwin's Origin  and  John Stuart Mill's  On  Liberty in  I85g; the Essays and  Reviews in  I86o;
Colenso's   The  Pentateuch ... Critically
Examined  in  I862; while  Matthew  Ar­ nold's  Culture and   Anarchy was  to  ap­ pear  a  few  years  later   in  I86g,  followed by T. H.  Huxley's Lay  Sermons in  I87o. LeSueur's firm  grounding in  the  classics and  his devotion to the purity of that  tra­  dition, were the foundation of  his culture, yet  did  not   prevent  his  deep   apprecia­ tion of contemporary literary, philosophi­ cal, and  scientific  topics,  nor  the  cultiva-
 tion  of  the  most  intense  critical  inquiry in the spirit  of Sainte-Beuve.
In  I867  he  married Ann  Jane  Foster,
the second  daughter of James  Foster,  the head of a well-known Montreal family. They  had  two children, a son and  a daughter; the son, Ernest  Arthur, died in I953, achieving distinction as a Canadian inventor   and  chemical engineer of some consequence. In   I 888  LeSueur was  ap­ pointed  secretary of the post office depart­ ment,  a post  he was  to hold  until his re­ tirement  from  the  service in  Igoz. As the deputy  postmaster general  was a political  appointee, his was the highest  nonpolitical post  in  that  branch  of  the  service;  while in  many  branches  of   the  government at this  time,  the  deputy minister  was a civil servant  who had  risen  to  the  chief  posi­ tion and  was independent of the political structure. He was later  to be described  in Prominent  Men of Canada  as one who fulfilled  the
onerous duties of  that branch of  the  execu­ tive  with  intelligent industry and  rare  abil­  ity.  Known and   respected  as  a  valued civil servant, Mr. LeSueur  enjoys,  however,  the wider   reputation of  a literary  man,   though with  the  modesty of  true  worth  he  conceals his  honours under  the  mantle  of  devotion to his official  duties.9
There is something ironic  in the spectacle of a man of LeSueur's erudition and awe­ some  intellectual calibre,  spending  him­  self in the routine duties of the post office department, but  in order  to discharge his family responsibilities he felt the necessity of  securing  a steady  income  while pursu­ ing his literary activities.
He held positions  in many learned soci­
eties during his years  in Ottawa: he was
president  of the  Toronto University Club of Ottawa, and  vice-president of the Ca­ nadian Society  of Authors, while  he  was actively  involved  with  the  Ottawa  Liter­ ary  and  Scientific  Society,  and  the  Pro­  gressive Society of Ottawa. He was elected a fellow of the  Royal  Society  of Canada in  Igog,  and  held  the  position  of  pres1-


169

OPINIONS & NOTES



dent  in  I9I2. He  had  received  an honor­ ary  LL.D. from   Queen's  University   in I900  in  recognition of  his  reputation as an  essayist,  journalist, and  thinker. Dur­ ing the war years he was vice-president of the  controversial  Peace  and  Arbitration Society,  reflecting the  feelings of French­ Canadians and  those  in  English  Canada who  sought   an   honourable  end   to  the protracted  horror  of a  conflict  that  had claimed  the lives of so many  native-born Canadians.
After  retirement from  the civil service, LeSueur continued to live with his family at   their   modest   residence    ( 478  Albert Street  in Ottawa), but  by I 9 I 2 the family had  moved   to  326  Waverly  Street.  We know  (from  a letter written  in  I 9 I 2 to a family  friend  by the  name  of Matteson) that  he was involved  in some sort of auto­ mobile   accident   around   this   time.   It throws  an interesting light on  the rapidly  expanding use of automobiles  in  the Ca­  nadian capital.  "I  got  completely   over that accident," he declared, "and  am now pretty    wary   in   my  movements   in   the house  and  out  of  it,  for  I do  not  want another. For  a  man  moving  about  town I  think  automobiles are  the  chief  source
of danger these days."10 The consequences
of that  accident were to prove far more serious  for  him  than  he imagined, for he was to suffer  pain  and  ill-health as a  re­ sult  of  it  until   his  death   from  a  heart  condition on  September 23,  I9I7,  at the age of seventy-seven.
A. G. Bailey has noted that William Dawson  LeSueur "was  typical of the best minds   of  that   period.  . . . So  wide  and varied  were his interests that  they almost epitomize   the   influences,   British,  Euro­ pean and  American, then  current in Can­ ada."11  One   might   add   that  Canadian intellectual thought almost wholly derived from    those    influences,   until    LeSueur brought  to  bear  his  creative  original   in­ sight.  His  many  years  of  journalistic ex­ perience  had  the  effect  of perfecting  his

qo
 readable and  incisive  style, for  he  was  a regular contributor for  over  twenty  years to  the  Montreal Star, Montreal Gazette, and  the Ottawa Citizen. He was described by the Citizen as "a powerful  writer,  who is noted  for  the  purity  of his English  and the clearness  of his reasoning," while  the Montreal Star made  the observation that: "His   writings   are  chiefly  remarkable for purity   of  diction, clearness  of statement,
and   a  masterful vigour  in  argument."12
His  total  literary and  journalistic output was remarkable in view of his professional responsibilities as a civil servant. While several  of his essays were reprinted in pamphlet   form,    his   most    noteworthy books  were  the  highly  successful  biogra­ phy  of  Count  Frontenac, the  writing  of which   was  facilitated  by  his  knowledge of  French  and   his  ability   to  peruse  an­  cient  records  and  documents in  that  lan­  guage,    and   the   controversial  study   of William Lyon  Mackenzie which  was not published  during his lifetime.
Matthew Arnold's attention was drawn to  an  essay  on  Sainte-Beuve  which  Le­ Sueur    submitted   to    the    W,estminster
Review when  he  was  thirty-one. 13 It  at­
tracted international attention; thereafter he  was  a  prolific  writer  on  a  whole  host of topics  that  included poetry,  education, science,  religion, philosophy, and  politics. Over   the  years  he  wrote  essays and  ar­ ticles for  the Canadian Monthly and  Na­ tional  Review, The Week, The University Magazine, Queen's Quarterly, The Uni­ versity    of    Toronto   Magazine,   North American Review, The Canadian Maga­ zine,  The  Commonwealth, The  Nation, Canadian   Educational Monthly  and School    Chronicle,  and    the    influential New   York   periodical,  Popular   Science Monthly.
The Sainte-Beuve essay was based upon a  paper he  had  given  before  the  rather select membership of the Ottawa Literary and  Scientific Society  in  I87o. The great French  critic,   universally  recognized   as

OPINIONS & NOTES



the first literary critic  of the age with  his famous  articles   in  the  Paris  Globe,  had died  the  previous year.  Sainte-Beuve did not think  the  job of the critic  was to be a judge  so much  as  to  be a  systematic  in­ quirer.  Sainte-Beuve  had   declared   the need  to  call  constantly into  question  his judgments  on  a  given   subject, and   re­ cast   his  opinions  if  they   appeared   no longer  valid.  LeSueur drew  attention  to the  fact  that  his method of  criticism  was not a pedantic system of  rules and  prece­ dents  but  a  living  science.  Sainte-Beuve rejected   the  concept  of  criticism   being subjected  to  some  external  authority or some preconceived idea:  it could  only be sustained    by  systematic  intellectual   in­ quiry.   For   LeSueur, "One  consequence of the effort  which Sainte-Beuve made  to pursue   criticism  in  a  scientific  spirit,   is that  of all critics he is the least dogmatic." Sainte-Beuve  exercised  a  profound influ­ ence  upon  LeSueur  and   was  to  inspire the Sage of  Ottawa to follow  in his foot­ steps. As  A.  B. McKillop explains  it:

LeSueur insisted throughout his  life that the essence of civilization lay in an individual's ability to  exercise, in  a  responsible fashion, a  critical enquiry that  asked   nothing  more than honesty and  sincerity and  sought  noth­ ing  less than truth. His  was  a moral  as well as   an   intellectual  vision.   The   thought  of William  Dawson  LeSueur,  as  set  forth  in scores    of   essays   published    over   the    last quarter of  the  nineteenth  century, provides abundant  evidence of a  mind  that  knew  few intellectual boundaries.14

Between  1871 and  1915 LeSueur wrote seventy-two articles   on  topics  as  diverse as  "Bernardin de  St.  Pierre" and  "Big­ otry." In  a wide range  of articles on poli­ tics he articulated a fundamental critique of  the  institution  of   party   politics  in  a democracy. As  a  Comtean  Positivist  he subscribed  to an  organic concept of soci­ ety as a "whole" in which  each  individual is  called  upon   to  work  for  the  common good, and  assume  responsibility for other individuals.15 The organization and struc-
 ture  of party  politics  in  a  democracy­ what  he  termed  "partyism"-was  anti­ thetical   to  such   a  concept.  In   "Party Politics,"  which   appeared in  the  Cana­  dian  Monthly  and  National  Review  in November  1872 under  the  pseudonym of "A  Radical," he  claimed   that   parties   in themselves  created antagonism and  ten­ sion,  with  the  party   in  office   proposing and   the   party   out   of  office   opposing, rather  than   both   simply  opposing  that which  was  demonstrably  wrong.  Both  of course  profess to  do so-yet  if they  ac­ tually did so, there would be no particular reason  for  calling  one faction an  opposi­  tion,  for  both  would  be  united   in  their  resolve. The party  system "puts a ban  on the  free  exercise  of  a  man's   mind,   and leads  people  to  conceal   or  misrepresent their  real opinions." The party  was to be supported at  all  costs even  if conscience and  true feelings were violated  in the pro­ cess. The  State  was  "set  on  fire  with  all kinds  of  false  and  factitious  issues,"  for the   sole  purpose    of   partyism   was   the naked  pursuit  of  power  for  its own  sake. While all men can see the hollowness  and bitterness   of   partyism  which   can   "give  shelter and asylum to all kinds of crimes," those who call for a truly  national system based on  honesty  and  disinterestedness in which   men   would   seek   to  make   their opinions prevail  by legitimate means,  are denounced as doctrinaire dreamers. Sen­ sible,   practical,  realistic    political   men complacently laugh  at such an outlandish idea, without bothering further to inquire into its value.
In   his  article   on   "Partisan   Govern­ ment," which  was published in  the North American Review in  January  1881, Le­ Sueur observed  how a party  in  power  will cheerfully    sacrifice   the   very   principles that  caused  its  triumph at  the  hustings,  rather than  relinquish the  privileges  and emoluments  of  office.  As  for   the  daily press:

OPINIONS & NOTES



Day  after day,  the  same  miserable evasions, the  same  varnishing over  of  unsightly facts, the same  reiterances of unproved charges against   opponents,   the    same    taking   for granted of things requiring proof,  the same proving of  things which  nobody   questions, the   same   hypocritical  appeals to  the  good sense  of  electors whom  every  effort  is being used   to   misinform  and   confuse,  the   same dreary unmeaning platitudes, in  a word,  the same   utter  abuse   of  the   reasoning faculty and  of  the  functions and  privileges of a free press.

These articles are exciting to the modern reader  who  comes  to  them  with  a shock of delight   and  recognition, because  they are so true and  fearless, as fresh, pertinent and  relevant for  the I g8o's as  they  were for the 188o's, not only for the alienated intellectual, but for the ordinary citizen, disgusted  with  the posturing of political hacks  and  the  hypocrisy,  cynical  expedi­ ency,   and   ignobility    of   modern   party  politics.
LeSueur's ideal  of democracy was  en­ shrined   in  the  Athenian  model   of   Per­ icles;  in  its  contemporary garb   he  sub­ scribed  to  the  dictum of de  Tocqueville that  democracy represented "the  reign  of the   commonplace."  He  felt   that   when equality  was  divorced   from   the   moral  and  intellectual achievements of the indi­  vidual,  and  the  desire  for  absolute  free­ dom-"doing as one likes," to use Mat­ thew    Arnold's  phrase -was   divorced from  a  sense  of  social  responsibility,   the ultimate end  was  anarchy. The anarchy of modern politics  resulted  from  the set­ ting  up  of  progress against  order, by  the lack  of  a standard of morality in  public life  which  was duplicated in  the  private sphere.   A   reasoned   subjection   to   law, rather  than   the   factionalism   and  self­ interest   of  party   politics  was  the  funda­ mental basis of civilization. Profound dis­ gust  with  the corruption of  party  politics in  Canada  found   LeSueur  united   with such disparate figures as the idealist  Mac­  phail,  French-Canadian  nationalists like Henri Bourassa,  imperialists like Stephen
 Leacock, and  loyalists like Colonel Denni­ son. All were profoundly disturbed by the idea  that  the narrow interests  of the busi­ ness lobby  were  paramount in  Canadian life.16
In  the developing conflict  between  sci­ ence and  religion  initiated by the Darwin­ ian  revolution, LeSueur  played  a crucial  role  in  Canada,  finding  himself   at   the centre  of   the   evolutionary  controversy. "The great  intellectual issue of the  pres­ ent   day,"  he   declared,  "however  some may   try  to  disguise  it,  is  that   between  dogma  on   the   one   hand   and   the  free spirit  of scientific  inquiry on the other."17
As the  leading Canadian  controversialist
of  his  time,  he  was  a  bete  noire  to  the orthodox and  an intellectual hero  to their opponents. The  battle raged   in  lecture halls  and  pulpits, in  pamphlets,  periodi­ cals,  and   in  the   press.  LeSueur   was  a model  of rectitude:  polite, restrained and utterly  serious in debate, which he insisted be conducted  on  the  highest  intellectual plane. It  must  have  taken  an  extraordi­ nary  amount of  moral   courage  to  have remained serene  in  the  face  of  the  per­ sonal  attacks and   virulent  abuse,  which was  the  common lot  of  the  declared ag­ nostic and  free-thinker in  Victorian Can­ ada.   In   his  confrontations  with   raging  orthodoxy,   this   slight,   gentle,   dignified  man  inevitably  invites   comparison  with T.  H.  Huxley, for  like  Huxley  he  disbe­ lieved  the crude supernatural aspects  of religion    and    substituted  for   them    an ethical morality. He saw  the "religion" of the  future being  based  upon  science  and culture, for culture was a continual quest for perfection in which  the living of one's life became  an  art  in itself.
John  Travers Lewis, the Anglican arch­ bishop  of  Ontario, made a  bitter  attack upon  agnosticism in a lecture given in the St.  George's  Hall   in  Kingston  in   I883, which    was   subsequently   published    in pamphlet form.  LeSueur  responded with a pamphlet entitled "A Defence  of Mod-

OPINIONS & NOTES



em  Thought" which  was later published in  a  shortened  version   in   the   Popular Science  Monthly in  April   1884. An  edi­ torial  commenting on  the  confrontation in  the  Ottawa  Daily  Citizen observed  of the archbishop: "No man  is better  quali­  fied  than  he  to defend   the  citadel  of or­ thodoxy," but   that   in   replying   to  Mr.  LeSueur he  would  find  "a   literary   foe­ man  worthy  of  his  steel."18   In  response to  the archbishop, LeSueur affirmed his positivist  social  theories, and  denied  that they were materialistic or that modern thought was "agnostic" because  it sought to rebuild  society on sound  scientific prin­ ciples.  As  for   the   affixing   of   labels  on those  who  do  not  believe  in  revealed  re­ ligion,  "Let their  opponents  coin  names if  they  will:   they  whom   the  truth   has made free feel that  their  creed  is too wide for  limitation."19
He  sought   a  foundation for  morality based   on   the   intellectual  life,   for   the purely   intellectual  life  was  essentially  a moral  life, where  intellectual concern  was also moral  concern. In  his essay, "Moral­ ity  and   Religion,"  LeSueur   traced   the existence  and  evolution of the  moral  im­ pulse-natural    morality-quite   inde­ pendent of  religion  or theology,  affirming his  conviction  that   an  ethical  influence could  be assured  by the critical scientific spirit. Like Matthew Arnold, he noted the absence  of high idealism among large sec­ tions  of the  religious  world: "What  they wanted  was not  truth, but  an  easy, com­ fortable frame of mind  ... the idea of loy­ alty   to   truth  has   no   recognition,  and  where,  therefore, it is enough to condemn any  opinion to say  that  it  is an  'uncom­ fortable' one."20
While clearly  standing for free thought, such  thought was of no value  to him un­ less it  was  also  responsible  thought.  He demonstrated the  universal  character of all   great    thought  in   his   essay,   "Free Thought and   Responsible  Thought," in which   he   deplored  the   narrowness  of
 those who held  that  the reason  was inde­ pendent  of  the  moral   nature;  rather it was the moral nature that  gave  direction to   reason.21    This   reflected   his   organic view of life and  society  and  his  belief  in a cosmic moral  order. In  the essay "The Intellectual Life,"  he observed how  vexed and  irritated  people   became  with   those whose sole aim  was to pursue truth, using right  ends  and  right  means. Most  people  seemed  to set opinion above truth, rather than  truth  above opinion. They  dread not the  loss of truth "but   the  loss of persua­ sion:  that  truth may  be on the other side they cannot  help  at  times suspecting, but they are determined  never  to be brought face  to face  with  the  proo£."22
Carl Berger has said LeSueur delighted in baiting  ultraloyalists "as much  as he enjoyed confuting the reactionary clergy with  the latest  revelations of Huxley  and Spencer." LeSueur rejected an  idea  of loyalty which  was nothing more  than deference and fidelity of an inferior to a superior,   having for  its  purpose the preservation of Canada's colonial  status. While rejecting Canada's dependent posi­ tion  with  respect  to  the  mother  country, he  rejected  even  more  strongly  the  idea  of annexation by the United  States."3  He saw both as a threat to the cultural inde­ pendence of French  Canada, for  pushed  to excess the  only  result  could  be assimi­  lation  and  the  outright destruction of its culture;   this    anarchy   could    only    be avoided  by the  realization of true  Cana­ dian  independence and  sovereignty.
The  theological establishment mounted a fierce attack upon  Herbert Spencer with the  publication of  his  Data  of Ethics   in
187g. LeSueur defended him,  writing an article  called  "Mr. Spencer and  his Crit­ ics" for Rose-Belford's Canadian Monthly in April  188o.  He  sent  a  copy  of his  ar­ ticle to Spencer in London, who  replied:

You have not only given a very admirable exposition of  certain of  the  cardinal  princi­ ples  contained  in  the   work   but   have   very


173

OPINIONS & NOTES



effectively enforced  them   by  arguments of your  own.  How   much importance I attach to  your  essay  you  may   judge  from  the  fact that   I am  about to forward it  to  my friend Professor Yousmans, of New York with  the suggestion that it might be  with  advantage reprinted in  the  Popular Science Monthly.24

This is indeed  what  happened; the article was republished as "A Vindication of Sci­ entific   Ethics" in  the  July  issue  of   the influential American monthly.  In  answer to the objection that  Spencer's system did away   with   the   essential   distinction  be­ tween   right    and   wrong,   LeSueur  re­ marked  "I fail to see that  under  this mode of treatment the distinction between right and  wrong  is in  danger of disappearing. Those  possibly  who  have  considered it  a pious thing  not to know why right  is right or  why wrong is wrong  may resent  being told  that   a  rationale   of  the  antagonism between   the  two  has  been  discovered." The impression his article  made  was such that  he  was  invited   to  join  the  Popular Science  Monthly as a contributing editor; his association with  it  was to further en­ hance  his  international reputation  as  he wrote   on  topics  such  as:   "Creation or Evolution?," "Evolution and  the Destiny of Man," "Science and its Accusers,"  and "Mr.  Goldwin Smith  on  'The Data   of Ethics."'  When   Spencer  was  given  his famous testimonia] dinner  at DeJmonicos Restaurant  in   New  York  in   1882,  Le­ Sueur   was  invited   by  the  organizers  to represent Canada.
There  can   be  no  doubt   the  Sage  of Ottawa was  greatly  influenced  by  Spen­ cer, but while a conservative in  the Burk­ ean  sense  he  was  not  a  reactionary, and far  too astute  to fall into the trap of many of  the  followers  of  Darwin   and  Spencer  in  drawing  conclusions   that   helped   to erect   the   edifice   of  Social   Darwinism. Darwin  objected to  natural selection  be­ ing used to justify the more brutal  aspects of  nineteenth-century  industrialism, while Spencer, in stressing  mutual dependence,


174
 can  be  used  as  much   to criticize  laissez­ faire  society  as  to  condone it.  LeSueur's conservative-radicalism was wrongly  seen as  tory  reaction in  the  Canada of  Mac­ kenzie King,  but  he was no tory and  sup­  ported no  party;  as  a  positivist  critic  of "partyism" he  was  apolitical. He  was  a radical in his defence of intellectual free­  dom   in  the  face  of  coercive   orthodoxy and   in  claiming  knowledge was  gained  through   scientific   method,  rather  than Christian metaphysics. While  he was nominally a positivist  with  much  that  was empirical in  his thought, we cannot clas­ sify LeSueur too  rigidly,  for  there  is  also a  component of idealism  in  his  thought. We can see this in his idea of a university, in   his  moving   and   spirited   defence   of classical  education, and  in  his  Amoldian conception of culture.
In one  of  his  major philosophical  es­ says,  "Idealism  in  Life,"   he  marks   the secret   contempt  of   the   world   for   the
idealist   and  the  artist,  for  those  who  do
not  habitually think   money,  and  make  a fetish of mammon worship; "in  most pur­ suits, money  broadly speaking  is the great­ est criterion and  measure of  success." He suggests   that   truth  can   only  be  found  when  there  is patience  and  disinterested­ ness.   The  mind    was    open    to   many  choices; should  it choose  the easiest or the more  difficult? Should  appetite or reason prevail?  "I   call  that   man   an   idealist
... who   asks,  regarding  an   action,   not whether it  is  profitable, or  safe,  or  cal­ culated to  win  applause,  but  whether it is  the  action, which   under  the circum­ stances,  ought   to  be  performed." In  the last analysis the question facing  humanity was  simple:   "Shall  we  idealize   life,  or shall  we vulgarize  it? ... if we choose  the former  we choose  struggle,  but  the strug­ gle  will  be for  ever  upward and  our  last days shall  be our  best."25  In  his devotion to the purity of moral  truth his positivism "came within   a  hair's   breadth of  philo­ sophic  idealism" and  in  addition  "owed

OPINIONS & NOTES



far  more  to the spirit  of Christianity than his opponents cared  to admit."26
After his highly successful  biography of Frontenac for the "Makers of Canada" series-it remains one  of  the  three  vol­ umes of the series that  has been reprinted
-LeSueur was invited  by the  publisher, George  W. Morang, to make a second contribution: this time a biography of William   Lyon   Mackenzie. The  fascinat­ ing  story  of  the  Sage  of   Ottawa's most controversial work  is told  by A.  B.  Mc­ Killop,  thanks to whose  persistent  efforts the  book  was  finally  published in  I979, seventy-one years  after  it  had  been  writ­  ten  and   its   publication  blocked   by  Le Sueur's   foes.   The    author's  frustrating attempts to  publish   his  work,  McKillop suggests, "may  constitute the most lament­ able   episode   in   the   history   of  critical intellectual enquiry in  Canada."27
When  it became  apparent he had writ­ ten  an  objective rather  than   a  partisan study,  Mackenzie's heirs held  that he had obtained improper access  to  a  collection  of family papers and materials in the cus­ tody  of  Mackenzie's  son-in-law and  first biographer, Charles Lindsey.  They main­ tained   he  was  unfair in  his  analysis  of Mackenzie  and   too  sympathetic  to  the "tory"  point   of   view.   Mackenzie  King  conspired  to  put  pressure  on  Morang to reject  the completed manuscript on these grounds.  He  went  even  further and   re­ fused   to   return  the   manuscript  to   Le Sueur,   who   was  forced   to  sue  for   its recovery. The  issue was simple despite  the complex   legal  wrangling which  dragged on in five court  actions  between  I9o8 and I 913; it involved  historical interpretation. In  writing the  first critical and  objective Canadian  biography LeSueur had  dared to  question  the  unquestionable, by  sug­ gesting  that, hitherto, historians had  been so  biased  in  favour of  "reformers"  and rebels  like  Mackenzie that   they  had  un­
justly  denigrated and  obscured   the  solid work  of  the  Family   Compact, and   that
 the beginnings  of a more  realistic form  of government had  actually preceded the agitation and  rebellion  of Mackenzie. He realized  he was involved  in slaying sacred cows, in his effort to expose sacrosanct partisan  myths, for in a letter  to his friend John  Lewis he acknowledged that  he had presented  the  Family  Compact in  a new guise, and  had  removed  many  of the "re­ pulsive features under  which  an  enlight­ ened  posterity  has  loved  to  contemplate them. They  were all, or nearly all, decent  old-fashioned folk doing their  duty  in the several  stations to  which  they  had  been called  in an  honest  old-fashionad way­ not entirely unsuited to the comparatively undeveloped   situation  in   the   country.
••• "28   He  frankly  acknowledged  he  was treading on  dangerous ground   by  taking away  "a  favourite object  of detestation." The  Mackenzie heirs could  not stomach
a  dispassionate,  objective  biography  of their  illustrious  forebear; they demanded one  that  was  laudatory, and  capable of upholding  the   liberal   "myth" of   Mac­ kenzie's   single-handed  creation   of    so­ called  responsible  government. "Even the most  enlightened  survivors,"  Sir  Harold Nicolson  points  out,  "are  inclined   to en­ trust  the  biography of  their  dead   chief, not   to  an   outsider   who   may   take   too objective   a  view  of   his  subject,  but   to some  inexpert, but  loyal,  member of  the family, who can  be trusted  to suppress  all unfavourable truth."29 Such  was certainly the  case with  the  Mackenzie decendants, for  Charles  Lindsey's  official  biography almost borders on adulation of its subject.
In  old age LeSueur was ordered by the court   to  surrender  his  original   manu­ script,   and   the  notes  and   materials  he had  taken  while  consulting  the  Lindsey­  Mackenzie papers;  an   injunction  was granted that  prevented him from publish­ ing a book  based  on  those  materials. De­ spite ill-health, his devotion to intellectual truth  was  such  that   he  set  out  virtually to duplicate  his  laborious research, using

OPINIONS & NOTES



source   material  from   other    than    the Lindsey-Mackenzie collection. Thheart­ breaking   task  took  him  to  within  a  few years of his  death. His  mood  of  despon­ dency can  be glimpsed  from a letter  to his friend  John Reade, a  poet,  essayist, and literary  critic  for  the  Montreal Gazette:

But  what troubles me more  than the  costs is that  the   judge   should  most  unjustly,  have taxed  me  with   bad   faith. It  is  still  in  my power    to   appeal ... some   excellent   legal authorities ... are   confident  that    I  would win  an  appeal. ... It is mainly on  account of my health and  in view of the age I have reached that my family  urge  me  to drop the matter. It has  acted at times  on  my  spirits, and   in  that way  on  my  health to  a  rather serious extent.110

By defending the  Family  Compact  in Upper Canada he had sought  to maintain that  the essential  nature of history "is not affirmation but  enquiry." The  writing  of history  in  Canada was  dominated  from the  r85o's  by the  Whig  interpretation of history, which saw great  men as the prime movers of history-as exemplified  in the writings  of  Carlyle.  In  a  Canadian  con­ text it centred on Mackenzie's role in the struggle  for so-called  responsible  govern­  ment.    LeSueur  disproves   the   myth   of intolerable  social   conditions   before   the rebellion,  and    shows   that   the  Family Compact had  genuine  support   from  the electorate; indeed,  without   the  unhappy combination of  Mackenzie and  Sir Fran­ cis Bond Head, it is doubtful the rebellion  could  have  taken   place.  He  shows  that  with  or  without the  actions  of  the  rebel agitator,  there   were   political   and  eco­ nomic   forces  at  work  in  Great  Britain, the  United States,   and   Upper  Canada, which   would   have   eventually   brought about  a more  developed form  of  govern­  ment  quite  naturally, without recourse  to revolt.
The nature and  depth  of LeSueur's inquiry   was  such  as  to  reveal  new  facts and insights about his  subject who emerges   as   a   complex    character.  His
 painstaking  research  digs  out   the  facts and  lets Mackenzie's record  speak  for  it­ self.  The  case   against   Mackenzie   as   a rabble-rousing demagogue, agitator,  and  traitor is based on his own public speeches, his own  newspaper articles,  and  his own public   and   private  letters.  If  he  stands  condemned, it  is  by  virtue   of   his  own words.  LeSueur is at  pains  to  show  the less negative aspects of his personality, but in   his  final   estimation   of   Mackenzie's character,  he  is  perhaps  more  generous  than the facts  he has  presented us would allow. Only  those who are completely in­ different to  the  truth can  fail  to  be  re­ pelled  by  Mackenzie's squalid  sojourn  in the United States  and  his disloyal slanders against  his  Queen. His  hand   was turned against   his  country  and   his  home,   and "He   was  willing  to  make  it  the  theatre of  civil  war; he  invoked   the  aid  of  for­ eigners   to  put   down   its  government  by force, and  meantime to devastate  its fron­ tier.... he desired,  and  did  what  in  him lay  to bring  about, a  war  between  Great Britain  and   the   United  States."31    It is surely   ironic   this  same   Mackenzie   was subsequently pardoned  and  treated   with magnanimity  by  the  young  Queen  and  by both  provincial  and  imperial govern­ ments   he   had   so   eagerly   vilified   and  slandered  while  a  not  entirely   welcome guest  of the  Americans. Furthermore, he was to  become  the  living  embodiment of a  myth  he  largely  created and  sustained  himself,   which   "partyism" has  been   at pains  to perpetuate without regard  to the truth. LeSueur's achievement was  to ex­ plode  the  simplistic mythology of the  re­ form  tradition, which  had  developed into sacrosanct legend  and  lingers  with us still.
There is a  footnote  to  the  whole  sad
story  of  the  Mackenzie affair.   As  presi­ dent   of  the  Royal  Society   in  1913,  Le­ Sueur  was  in  attendance  in  his  official capacity at the celebrations of  the society. For  the  procession  to  table  he  was taken over  to meet  his partner who was a blind

OPINIONS & NOTES



man.  He  was  very  much   amused   to  be introduced to  Mr.  John King,  who  was none other  than  the father of W. L. Mac­ kenzie  King.  Despite  his shabby and  vin­ dictive   treatment  at   the   hands  of  the Mackenzie clan  which  almost   broke  his kindly gentle  spirit  in those unhappy final years,  LeSueur  was  without bitterness  or rancour. In  his own way he was a deeply spiritual man,  with  his sense  of a cosmic force  of moral  truth  at  work  in  the  uni­ verse. Despite  poor  health he returned to a study  of  history,  translating some of the work of  the great  figures  of French Can­  ada,  notably   La  Verendrye and   Cham­ plain.   In  his  unpublished  A  History   of Canada    from  1763,   he  remarked: "In history  we are  led  to see  the  connection between  events,  only  in proportion as we do so, our studies,  instead of merely  bur­ dening the memory,  yield us the  pleasure  and  profit  which  always  accompany ex­ panding intelligence." 32
As we have seen, the Sage of Ottawa resolutely  confronted  the  orthodoxies of his  time:  to  what  extent was  his  liveli­ hood  as a permanent civil servant threat­ ened   by   the   freedom    with   which   he challenged  them?   We  do  know  that   in order  to protect himself  he  felt  impelled to   employ   the   pseudonym   "Laon"  in some   of  his  articles.   The   debate  with G.  M.  Grant on  the  evangelists,   Moody and   Sankey,   was  conducted  under   this pseudonym,  although  by  I885  "Laon's" identity had  been  revealed to the  general public.33  Although the intellectual climate  by the  I88o's  was slightly  freer,  we have evidence that  prejudice died  hard  with respect   to  LeSueur. The   Royal   Society of  Canada  had   been  founded  by  Lord Lorne,   the  Governor General, in   I882. An  interesting unsigned   article,  "Found­ ing of the Royal  Society of  Canada," pos­ sibly  by  the   editor,  G.   Mercer  Adam, appeared   in    Rose-Belford's   Canadian Monthly in  I 882.  It  reads  in part:
 .we  are  aware that the  appointments to membership in  the  society  ... [are] made on recommendation to Lord  Lome, who is not personally responsible for  the  omissions  from the  list.  Mr.  LeSueur's name, for  instance, does  not appear on  the  list, and  if there  is a man  in Canada entitled to  that honour, and who by achievement and  reputation, both  as a thinker and a writer, deserves  to sit in  the highest  seat  in  a  native Academy of letters, it   is  the   able   and   learned   gentleman  we have  named.
As we know,  he  was  to  wait  twenty-one years  before  clerical   prejudice was  suffi­ ciently  overcome for  him  to be elected  as a  fellow  of  the  Royal   Society  in   I 903. However,  his outstanding devotion  to his public duties,  the high regard  with which he  was held  by his  superiors in  the  civil service, his  exemplary character and  pri­ vate  life,  and   above  all  the  loyalty  and devotion  of  his  friends,  were  to serve  as a shield to protect him from  the pettiness of  those  who  were  morally  and  intellec­  tually his inferior.
Noting   a  forthcoming  review   by  Le­ Sueur  in The Week (of Matthew Arnold's  Discourses   in   America),   their   mutual friend  Goldwin  Smith, writing to Arnold,  commended him  as "the   best critic  Can­  ada  has. A St.  Beuve  she  has  not...."34
A. B. McKillop reminds us that  he  was the first to introduce the spirit  of modern criticism   into   Canadian  life.  Why  then we may ask has William  Dawson  LeSueur been  so shamefully neglected by the  Ca­ nadian  historical-literary   establishment? As a  truly  representative  Canadian, na­ tive  born,  product  of   both   cultures, he presents  a far  more  recondite intellectual paradigm than  the Anglo-Canadians. The  depth    and   variety   of   his   philosophic,  ethical, political, scientific,  and  historical concerns, particularly  his  authorship of the  revisionist  Mackenzie  biography,  as­ sure  him   the   position   of   quintessential Canadian  critic   of  the   late   nineteenth and   early  twentieth  century, a  position moreover,  fully recognized by his contem­ poraries. This position  has  been routinely

OPINIONS & NOTES



allocated  to  LeSueur's  friend,  English­ born Goldwin Smith, ex-Regius Professor at   Oxford,  who   moved   to   Canada  in
187I,  and  who led  the continentalist  fac­ tion  who  ardently  desired  annexation by the  United  States.35   As  Wayne  Roberts  has   pointed    out   in   "Goldwin's  Myth" (Canadian  Literature, No. 83), the  rea­ son for this is perfectly clear. Smith's  aca­ demic  liberalism was tailor-made for  the historians of  the  reform  tradition. One might   add   that   here   was  the  essential great   critic   and    intellectual,  imported and  ready-made for the standard Whig version  of Canadian  history.
'What   is  the   nature  of   the   animus against  LeSueur? It is both  political, re­ ligious,  and  racial.  The  liberal  establish­  ment still looks with distaste on those who question  the  reform  tradition.  A. B. Mc­ Killop  reminds us, in  his  editorial intro­ duction,  that   even  as  late  as  1945,  Le­
Sueur's son was told it would take another
fifty years before the book could appear, when   animosities  had   diminished. The long  arm  of  Mackenzie King  protecting his   illustrious  forebear  and   his   sacred image reached down  to our time. A. B. McKillop also points  out how even the Canadian literary imagination, like Cana­ dian  political  history,  has been attributed to  the  development of  some  mysterious Canadian "maturity" which resulted from reform,  as  though  there  were  no  Cana­ dian  literature or  literary spirit  prior  to the 1837 rebellion, or any political  events worth   chronicling  in  the  Canada of  Sir Francis  Bond  Head.
In  his confrontation with  the  religious establishment  in  Victorian Canada,  Le­ Sueur   trod   upon   a  number   of   clerical toes,  for  which   he  was  both  feared   and hated. As  a  formidable  intellectual  op­ ponent he was impossible to ignore in life, while  in   death  he  merited   that   silence which  has  been  meted  out since time im­ memorial to those who persist in asking awkward, uncomfortable, and  searching
I7B
 questions  in  their   lonely  pursuit  of  the truth. While  the  principles of intellectual freedom and  liberty of conscience  which LeSueur  fought  for  are   universally   ac­ cepted in a  post-Christian age,  prejudice lingers  in some quarters, for we may seek in  vain  for  any  recognition or  discussion of the crucial  role he played in improving the ethical and  moral  climate in Canada.
Finally, LeSueur has  been  ignored   by the  historical-literary establishment, in both    French  and    English   Canada,   as much   for  his  race  as  anything else.  He has little appeal to the more anglophobe faction  among  the   Quebecois,  for   he stands for  nothing less than   true  recon­ ciliation of the  two founding races of our nation,  while    for   English    critics    like George Woodcock, he is an intellectual of the "cold-hearted" kind, whatever that  is. Both ignore  the basis of his Canadianism: an  affinity  for  both  cultures. As a  bicul­ tural,  bilingual,  freethinking Canadian, with  a  negative  attitude towards  democ­  racy  and   party  politics,  he  does  not  slot easily into  the all-encompassing rubric  of the    historical-literary  establishment  in English   Canada. His   obvious  sympathy with  Quebec and  its attempt to preserve cultural independence has  a  timely  rele­ vance  for  us, but  was suspect  to many  of his  contemporaries, and   to  some  of  his modern critics.  For  his part  he saw Que­ bec  differing  from   the   uniformity  and  greyness  of  life style  existing  in  English­ speaking Canada. Like  Matthew Arnold  he was excited  and stimulated by the val­ ues  and   traditions  of  French Canada as they  were  organically linked  to the  great  classical  tradition of the  past.  Despite  its ultramontane base,  he felt  the  culture of Quebec, with  its ancient traditions, could have  a  beneficial  effect  upon  the  undif­ ferentiated  sameness   of  the  rest  of  the North American continen t.36
In defending the Family Compact in Upper Canada and   the  Chateau Clique of  the  ancien   regime  in  Lower  Canada,

OPINIONS & NOTES



LeSueur used  history  as a  tool  in an  at­ tempt  to accomplish his conservative goal of   bringing  together  both    races   from which  he  derived   his  common  heritage. His  life  and   work  were  directed  to  the task of harmonizing and reconciling these two disparate elements which  constituted the  nation. As we have  seen,  he  rejected  both  an  outmoded  British  Loyalism  and the traitorous continentalist faction  which yearned  for democratic levelling  and sub­ jection  by  the  United States,  but  for  the Sage  of   Ottawa, only  genuine  indepen­ dence  could   preserve  and  guarantee the unique   bicultural  reality   which   consti­ tuted  the  nation. These  are  some  of  the reasons why LeSueur has been ignored  by the   Canadian   establishment,  and   as  a consequence,  is barely  remembered today by his indifferent countrymen. In  view of this  every  student of  Canadian intellec­ tual   history   acknowledges  the   debt   he owes to A. B. McKillop, whose original work and  scholarship have  done so much to  illuminate  this  unjustly  neglected thinker of our  Canadian  past.
In  his  study  of  Canadian history,  Le­ Sueur  felt it lent  itself, by its very nature, to  misrepresentation and   misinterpreta­ tion   which    resulted    in   "an   imperfect blending ... of certain of  the  constituent elements   of  the  Canadian  people."37    A nation  without a  strong  sense of its own history,   along   with   the   divisiveness   of "partyism,"  was  doomed   to  anarchy. In his  unpublished manuscript, which  is of timely significance for Canada today, Le­ Sueur  wrote: "Until a nation  knows itself and  has  found   itself,  there  is  always  the possibility   of   an   outbreak   of    internal strife. With  true self-knowledge comes the spirit   of   appeasement,  of   national  co­ hesion founded on mutual comprehension leading  to  sympathy  between   class  and class, and element and  element in the population."38 The lack of a cohesive, assertive unified history on the part of Canadians is a  factor that  has  bedeviled
 us  to  the  present   day  and   which   con­
tributes  greatly  to our current malaise. LeSueur  felt   the   function  of  history
was the uniting of divergent peoples,  like the  French and   the  English,   in  mutual respect and  friendship, for all nations,  like all  individuals, had  both  faults  and  vir­ tues;  yet  each  owed  a  debt   one  to  the other.39 It was a view  that reinforced his positivist  concept of  a  mutually  depen­ dent  society, which  was  the  antithesis of the fragmented, anarchistic cult of selfish individualism,    wherein     total    freedom, without  mature  responsibility, cou}d lead only  to  enslavement and  spiritual death. He   sought   to  synthesize   not   only   the French and  English  fact  in  Canada, but also  the  warring camps   of  science  and religion,   and   idealism   and   empiricism, through the prism of his eclectic intellect. F. W. Watt  has  remarked that  to be a disciple  of  Auguste  Comte in  Victorian Canada was  to be almost  a  unique  phe­ nomenon, but  we cannot begin  to under­ stand   LeSueur  without  reference  to  his positivism,  not only in  terms of positivism  as  a  scientific  outlook  and   variation  of empirical ideology,  but  in  terms  also  of the official positivist  philosophy of Comte and  his followers.4'0    Despite  his  complex paradigm  LeSueur   was   an   intellectual who  dwelt  in  the real world  rather than  in an ivory tower. As a first-rate polemicist  he never shrank  from  disputation, but  as we  have   seen   pursued    a   distinguished career  in  Canadian letters  for  over  forty  years,  engaging  the   orthodoxies  of  his time  with  dignity   and   courage. His  in­ cisive probing  criticism   and   defence  of intellectual inquiry  in the face  of  dogma­ tism and  reaction was to raise the level of the  debate   between   science  and  religion immeasurably in  Victorian  Canada. His impartiality  was  such   that   even   when science itself became  too dogmatic, he did not  hesitate to castigate it  with  the same
verve  he reserved  for  faulty  theology. LeSueur aspired  to a moral  and  intel-


179

OPINIONS & NOTES



lectual  ideal  in his exercise of the critical faculty  and  his search  for  truth. He  was concerned less with  rigid  moral  formula­ tions  than   with  cultivating  the  force  of moral  vision.  Devoted  to  the  classics,  to the spirit  of Homer and Marcus Aurelius as much  as to the modern spirit  of Sainte­ Beuve,   he   stressed   the   importance  of the  humanities in  education, along  with purely  scientific  and   technical   concerns. Notwithstanding his  admirable and  un­ compromising Canadianism, he  exempli­  fied the cultural ideals of  France, Europe, and  the English-speaking world. The  very tenacity  with  which  he pursued  the criti­  cal  spirit  and  his single-minded devotion  to the sanctity of  truth represent  his most enduring memorial. Culture for  the Sage of  Ottawa  was a high  and  holy  thing;  it involved   a  spiritual  journey,  an  odyssey of  mind  and  spirit.  His  life  was  an  elo­ quent  testimony  to that  inward perfection he  sought.   He  aspired   to  the  good,  the true,  and  the  beautiful, but  above  all  to the  true,  for  he could  find  no refuge  but in  truth. His  credo  can  be  found  in  the words of the  poet  Arthur  Hugh  Clough:
It fortifies my soul  to know
That, though I perish, truth is so; That,  howsoe'er I stray  and  range, What'er I do, Thou dost  not  change. That, if I slip,  thou  dost  not  fall.

NOTES

1 The mrn;t  extensive biographical treatment of LeSueur thus far  can  be found in A. B. McKillop's introduction to A Critical Spirit: The Thought of William Dawson  LeSueur (Toronto:  McClelland &  Stewart, I977), and   the  section on  LeSueur in  his  A  Dis­ ciplined Intelligence: Critical Inquiry  and Canadian  Thought  in   the   Victorian   Era (Montreal:    MeGill-Queen's  Univ.    Press, I979).
2    I am  deeply  grateful to  Miss Muriel Sissons and  Mrs.  Shelia K.  George  of Whitby, On­ tario,   surviving  grand-nieces  of    William Dawson LeSueur, for  sharing their  recollec­ tions   of   "Uncle  Will"  with   me,  and   for supplying new  biographical  material  on  the LeSueur   and    Dawson   families,   and    for

I8o
 allowing me  to  examine unpublished letters and  materials of LeSueur.
3  W.  D.  LeSueur, "Education, Past  and  Pres­ ent,"  The  University Monthly, I I    (May I9I  I), 279-92.
4   According to  the  librarian of the  Law  Soci­ ety  of  Upper Canada,  the  Law  School of Osgoode Hall was only  renamed  the Ontario Law   School  in   I873;  therefore  most   stan­ dard sources are incorrect in  calling it  that when  LeSueur attended in  I862.
5   Daniel  Wilson Diary,  entry for   November
25,  I853, Univ. of  Toronto  Archives. Most of  the  diary was  destroyed after his  death; what little has survived makes  interesting reading. See  n. 8.
6  William Paley   (I743-I8o5)  inferred the existence  of  a  deity, as  throughout nature there is ample evidence of a plan  of  design. As  we have  no  possibility of  design   without a  designer  he   came  forward  with   the  so­ called "argument  from  design."
7    See   my   "First  Canadian  Critics of   Dar­ win," Queen's Quarterly, 88, No.  I   (Spring I98 I), I oo-o6.
s  For  evidence of Daniel Wilson's more open­ minded attitude  to  intellectual  enquiry, see his  letter to  the  Anglican  Bishop of  Huron refusing the   headship of   a  new  Protestant university on  the  grounds  that  higher edu­ cation must  be  free  of  ecclesiastical control. As  quoted  in   H.   H.  Langton, Sir   Daniel  Wilson: A Memoir  (Toronto:  Thomas Nel­ son,  I 929), pp. 88-89. Several entries in  the diary are  revealing, such   as  that for  April
29,  I 888: "Men may  venture on  sayings  in the  orthodox precincts of  Oxford that dare not  be  whispered in  the  State University of Ontario." See  also  his  Presidential Address, Convocation of the  University of Toronto, October  I6,   I88s  (Univ. of  Toronto   Ar­ chives).
9  G.  Mercer Adam, ed.,  Prominent Men of Canada (Toronto:  Canadian Biographical Pub.  Co.,  I892), pp.  I99-200.
1o   Letter from   W.  D.  LeSueur  to  Mr.  Mat­ teson,    August    29,    I9 I 2.  W.   D.   LeSueur Papers, Vol.  I, Public Archives of  Canada.
11 A. G.  Bailey,  Culture and  Nationality (To­
ronto: McClelland & Stewart, I972), p. 66.
12  H. J. Morgan, ed.,  The  Canadian Men and Women of the  Time, 2nd  ed.  (Toronto: William Briggs,   I 9 I 2), p.  654.
13   American edition of   Westminster Review,
95  (April  I87I ),  208-27.

OPINIONS  & NOTES



14 A.  B. McKillop, A  Critical Spirit, p.  xiv.
15  The genesis  of some  of  LeSueur's ideas  can be found in  Auguste Comte, The System of Positive Polity, 4 v.  (London:  Longmans, Green, 1875-77).
16   Carl Berger, The Sense  of Power   (Toronto: Univ. of Toronto Press,  1970), p.  '99·
17 W. D. LeSueur, "Ex-President Porter on Evolution," Popular Science Monthly,  29 (September r886), 577.
18   This  editorial  appeared  on   February   15, r884,  at the  time  of  Matthew  Arnold's visit to  the  capital. He  lectured  on  "Numbers" at the  Grand Opera House on  February r6, with    the    Governor  General   Lord   Lans­ downe taking  the  chair.
19 W. D.  LeSueur, "A Defence of Modem Thought,"  Popular Science Monthly, 24 (April 1884),  781.
20    W.  D.  LeSueur, "Morality  and   Religion," Rose-Belford's Canadian Monthly  and  Na­ tional Review, 4  (February r88o),  r66-71.
21  W.  D.   LeSueur, "Free  Thought  and   Re­ sponsible Thought,"   Rose-Belford's   Cana­ dian  Monthly and  National Review, 8  (June
1882), 6!4-20.
22  W. D. LeSueur, "The Intellectual Life," Canadian Monthly and  National Review, 7 (April r875),  320-30.
23    W.  D.  LeSueur, "The True Idea of  Cana­ dian   Loyalty,"   Rose-Belford's    Canadian Monthly,  8   (January r882),  1-11.
24    Letter from   Herbert Spencer to  W.  D.  Le­ Sueur, April  2,  r88o. W. D. LeSueur Papers, Vol.   r,  PAC.
25    W.  D.  LeSueur, "Idealism in  Life,"  Cana­
dian   Monthly  and   National  Review,   13
{April 1878), 414-20.
26  A.  B. McKillop, A  Disciplined Intelligence,
pp.  149,  169.
27    A.  B.  McKillop, A  Critical Spirit, p.  249.
See   W.  D.   LeSueur,  William  Lyon  Mac­ kenzie:  A  Reinterpretation, ed.  and   intro. by  A.  B.  McKillop (Toronto:   Macmillan,
1979).
28    As  quoted  in  A.  B.  McKillop,  A  Critical
Spirit, pp.  281-82.
2\l    Harold Nicolson, The  English Sense  of  Hu­ mour,  and   Other  Essays   (London:   Con­ stable, 1956),  p.  149·
30  Letter from  W. D.  LeSueur to John Reade, March  8,   1913.   Quoted  in   Percy   Ghent,
 fohn   Reade  and   his  Friends (n.p., 1925), p. 48.
31  W.  D.  LeSueur, William  Lyon Mackenzie:
A Reinterpretation, p. 307.
32   W. D. LeSueur, "A  History of Canada from
1763"   {unpub.   mss.),   W.    D.    LeSueur
Papers, Vol.  II,  PAC.
33  See  "Messrs. Moody  and   Sankey   and  Re­ vivalism,"  by  "Laon"  (pseud.),  Canadian Monthly   and    National  Review,   7   (June
1875), 510-13.
34  Letter from  Goldwin Smith to Matthew Arnold, August 17,  1885,  as  quoted in  Ar­ nold   Haultain, A  Selection   from  Goldwin Smith's  Correspondence,   1846-1910  (To­ ronto:  McClelland  &  Goodchild, n.d.), pp.
175-76.
35 Comfortably ensconced in  The  Grange in Toronto, aping the  social  milieu  of an  Eng­ lish  country gentleman, Goldwin  Smith was hostile  throughout his life  to  the concept of Canadianism, and  can  still  be found writing and  talking against  Confederation as late  as
1885  in  a letter to Justice Langley of  Hali­ fax.  Although he  generously  supported  the periodical  press  in  Toronto,  his  ideas   were unpopular  with   the   rank  and  file  of  loyal Canadians.   Characteristically, after  living  in  Canada  most  of  his  life,  he  bequeathed his   considerable  fortune  to   Cornell  Uni­ versity  upon his  death in  1910.
36    See  B. B. Opala, "Matthew Arnold  in  Can­ ada," unpub. M.A.   thesis   (McGill  Univer­ sity,  I968), p.  I I4.
37    W. D. LeSueur, "The Political Development of Canada, I763-I84I," p. 2 (unpub. mss.), W. D. LeSueur Papers, Vol.  II, PAC.
38    Ibid.
39    See  W.  D.  LeSueur, "History, Its  Nature and  Methods" { 19 I 2), his  Presidential  Ad­ dress  to  the  Royal   Society of Canada.  Pro­ ceedings  of  the   Royal  Society  of   Canada,
19I3. App.  A, LVII-LXXXIII.
o		W.   Watt,  "Literature  of   Protest,"  in Literary  History   of   Canada, ed.   Carl  F. Klinck   et  a!.   (Toronto:  Univ. of  Toronto Press,  1965), p. 460.

CLIFFORD G. HOLLAND

OPINIONS & NOTES



liST. URBAIN'S HORSEMAN"

THE  NOVELIST OF THE HOLOCAUST faces the  unique  problem  of reconstructing an order   of   experience  the   human    mind never  confronted  before-the  eruption of unprecedented explosive irrationality into history.  He must create art out of the most extreme form of anti-art. The organ­ izing and  clarifying power of art is under­ mined   by  the  irrational  events  he  must explore.  He  must exercise his imagination on  situations  which,  when  experienced, transcended the imagination. For the sur­ vivor,  who  attempted  to  transcribe  his experience into artistic  form, the imagina­ tion  with  its  capacity for  bringing   inci­ dents  into  sharp  focus,  was  potentially the  most  painful and  self-destructive of all   his  faculties.  The   difficulty  for   the Holocaust  novelist,   according  to   Law­ rence  Langer, is "to  devise an  idiom  and a style  for  the  unspeakable at  the  heart  of  the   Holocaust  experience."1   Alvarez suggests that  the most convincing method  of penetrating  the inferno  and  recording the scope of  mental  and  physical suffering  is "the way  in  which  dreams  express an­  guish:   by  displacement, disguise, and  in­ direction."2 North  American  novelists, historically insulated  from  the  agony  of the  experience, confronted  with  a  chal­ lenge  to  the  imagination, must  approach the  unknown  territory of  the  European catastrophe  with limited  credentials. Rather than  reconstructing  the  unspeak­ able  suffering from  within,  through  the eyes and  minds  of  its victims,  they  gen­ erally employ indirection, through a form of witness, or historical reconstruction, or through  a  leap  of  fantasy  charged   with nightmare.
In his essay "The Holocaust and After," Mordecai Richler notes  the  influence  of the  Holocaust in  the  contemporary  Jew­ ish novel:
 the   Holocaust  is  at  the   very   core   of  the most  serious Jewish   writing since   the   war. It is  what  binds   Malamud  to  Bellow,   the one  having made the  moral gesture of  The Fixer  and the  other continuing to  write  the novel  of  the  survivor's  reflections and  self­ justification. It  is  what  connects   both  of them,  through  Isaac  Bashevis  Singer, who  carries  Warsaw, as  it  was,  in  his  mind, to the  documentary account of  events, notably Raul Hilberg's The  Destruction of the  Eu­  ropean  few  and  ultimately, Elie  Wiesel,  our witness.a

Malamud, in  The Fixer,  uses analogy  to explore   the  meaning of  Jewish  persecu­ tion  through a fictionalized  historical in­ cident, the  Beilis case  in  Czarist  Russia.  Bellow,  in  Mr.  Sammler's   Planet,   uses recollection to  reconstruct the  Holocaust experience through his protagonist, a Jew who confronted and absorbed  the major cataclysmic events. Wallant, in  The Pawnbroker, reconstructs his protagonist's concentration camp  experience through a succession  of nightmare images.  Wallant, like Richler, draws  a grisly catalogue of atrocities from the vast accumulation of survivors' accounts to convey the immense suffering of  those  who  endured  the  ex­ perience,  images   that   have   become  the objective correlative for  Auschwitz and a part  of  the  contemporary  collective  con­ sciousness.
Richler discusses the impact of the tragedy on his own emotional life and provides a  clue  to  the  novel's  genesis  in "The Holocaust and  After":

For  some  time  now,  I've been  reading  pub­ lished  memoirs  about  life   in   the   Warsaw ghetto,  the   Paradies-ghetto  of   Terezin  in Czechoslovakia, Treblinka, and  the  Janow­ ska  camp near  Lvov,  Poland. After all  these  years,  the  record is still  terrifying, enraging, and impossible to  digest  more   than a  small chunk at a  time.4

In  this  novel,  Richler distills  the  experi­ ence  into basic  symbols-sharp  impres­ sions,    actions,   grotesque    images  - to evoke the atmosphere of the death camps.  They  recur  as an obsessive element in the

OPINIONS & NOTES



protagonist's consciousness  in  the form  of nightmare, hallucination, and personal fantasy.  The  "attic aerie" to  which  Jake withdraws intermittently, with  its  photo­ graphs   and   journals depicting  the  Nazi terror,  is  a  symbol   of  his   imagination haunted  by  the  sense  of  intolerable vio­ lence.  A series  of  overlapping images  in­ termittently  flash   through  the  narrative like camera  shots  repeated and  relocated  in various contexts  in the novel, images of human  beings  reduced  to  impotent vic­ tims.  The   repetition  functions emotively to  heighten the shock, and intellectually, through the  sheer  restatement, to induce a mood  of brooding and  thoughtful con­ templation.
Richler's protagonist in St. Urbain's Horseman, a Canadian expatriate in Lon­ don in the sixties, experiences the Holo­ caust  vicariously  through his encounter in Israel  and  Germany with  authentic  jour­ nals,   photographs,  and   eyewitness   ac­ counts of brutalities. The novel penetrates and illuminates the dark areas  of an inner  life   and   the   deepest   perplexities  of   a moral   world   shaken   by   events   of  the Holocaust and  its  images.  Richler estab­ lishes tension between  the fictive situation and  the inescapable horror of the histori­ cal past to suggest  that  the  Holocaust has become  a   part   of  the  modern  Western consciousness.  Through the  novel, the fa­ miliar   gives  way  to  threatening  intima­ tions   of  disaster   and   Existential   angst. Even  when  the  protagonist is "cavorting with his family," he is caught up by anxie­  ties, scrutinizing  the  surrounding woods for  advancing  Nazi   troops,  haunted  by fears   of   sharks,   submarines,  fires,   gas leaks.   Authenticated   by   the   historical  images of death, the  terror under  the skin of the death camps  explodes  into  his very living  room  in  a  concrete image  of  de­ humanized extermination:

In Jake's Jewish nightmare, they  come  into his  house.  The extermination officer  seeking out  the  Jewish   vermin. Ben  is seized  by  the
 legs  like  a  chicken  and   heaved   out  of  the window,  his  brains  spilling   to  the   terrace. Molly,  whose  experience has  led  her  to  be­ lieve  all  adults gentle, is  raised   in  the  air not  to be  tossed  and  tickled, but  to  be flung  against  the   brick   fireplace.  Sammy  is  dis­ patched  with   a  pistol.5

To  overcome  the  reader's inability  to ap­ prehend   the  terrifying magnitude of  the ultimate  in  human  suffering,   to  bridge the abyss between  those who endured the anguish  and   those  who  did  not,  Richler  brings the  unimaginable new order  of ex­ perience  close  to  the  reader's conscious­ ness   through   the   stark   realism   of   his images  and  through  duplicating the  per­ sonal  trauma of the  Holocaust victims  in a  familiar setting.   He  explores  the  mal­ aise  arising  from  the  knowledge that,  in a  savage  world  which  can  accommodate such  atrocities, anything is possible.
To  carry  this burden to post-Holocaust anxiety,   Richler  uses  as  central  figure, Jake  Hersh,  minor  character in his earlier novel,  The  Apprenticeship of  Duddy Kravitz. Jake pursues  the  life of the imagination as  television  and  film  direc­ tor.  Through focus  on  Jake's  inner   life, Richler   dramatizes a  contemporary  cul­ tural   phenomenon,  the   posture   of  self­ indictment of the  educated Western  sen­ sibility.   Jake   is   both   observer   of   life around him  and  observed  from  the  re­ flective  narrator's  viewpoint  through fre­ quent  introspective expository  intrusions in the narrative.
Richler  constructs his narrative around a single event, a  three-day trial.  He  uses suspense  centred on  the  trial  as a  struc­ tural    device   beginning  in   the   novel's opening with  the first two days of  the trial
and  returning in  the  concluding book  to
the initial  crisis to give an account of the trial's  resolution. Realities are introduced in the guise of flashback as the narrator reaches  back  into  Jake's  childhood in  the Jewish ghetto of Montreal, to the cultural establishment in Toronto, and  to the  ex­ patriate  film  colony  in  London. In   his

OPINIONS & NOTES



interplay among  settings and  in the fusion of art  with  reality  as  the  artifacts of life from  various  cultural elements  flow into the work, Richler provides a startling mixture. This  disjunctive narrative is par­ ticularly  suited  to the portrayal of a mind disoriented by personal trauma.
The  novel's  opening prefigures  the fic­ tional  pattern which  deliberately  violates normal    time   sequence. The   reader    is plunged  directly into  Jake's  mind  which darts  from  present   to  past  to  future un­ hampered by spatial or temporal orienta­ tion.  He  alternates  between   reality  and  compensating fantasies, between  the Nazi nightmare  and  anxieties centred  on  ill­ ness and  death. Random phrases  in  the opening   book,   initially   mystifying,   are later incorporated in their  logical context  and  clarified.
Structurally, the novel resembles a musical composition written in four move­ ments   with  multiple motifs   that  weave congruently through the entire work, each with its own mode and  tone. Motifs  recur at  important  junctures of  the novel  sig­ nalled  by echoes of earlier phrases. Along with   recurrent  motifs   are   the  shifts  in focus.  Often perspective  opens  into  dra­  matic  scenes  which  capture accents,  in­ tonations, and   rhythms of  speech.  The expanding and contrasting points  of view with their multiple perspectives  on reality and   their   rapid   shifts   in  focus  impart vitality,  a  dynamic upbeat  quality  to the novel.
The  unifying strand  beneath the  dis­ parate  elements and   perspectives  is  the protagonist's  search   for   his   picaresque cousin Joey. The spiritual quest incorpor­ ates  a  circular  structure  with  recurrent images  in  the  novel's  conclusion   corre­ sponding to the novel's opening,  implying  the  cyclical  rhythm of an  eternal search. One  motive  behind  this unique  structure is to suggest  the  impact of Jake's voyage to  Israel  and  Germany. The central   ex­ perience, the reality  of the nightmare, the
 eyewitness  accounts of  the  atrocities,  en­ dure   beyond   his  acquittal,  casting  their shadows  across  the  future. Richler super­ imposes  other  experiences over  his  pro­ tagonist's inner life. The superimposition breeds confusion as well as multiple vision as two time senses, present  and  past, exist simultaneously.
Richler presents the central episode, his protagonist's journey  to Germany,  retro­ spectively    as   an   obsessive   memory    in Jake's mind.  In Germany, Jake's imagina­ tion  is  placed   in  the  very  centre of  the Holocaust. There,  by attending a trial  of the  war  criminals, he  experiences an  im­ mersion  in the facts. Through the authen­ tic  recitation of   the  victims,  he  inherits their  portion  of  pain.  In  his  thoughts as Jake  drifts  from  Jazzkeller to  Jazzkeller, Richler  dramatizes  the   response   of  the Jewish  sensibility   to  the  "concentration­ ary universe."

Jerky  accordion  music   reverberated  in   his ears,  even  on  the  black  night streets. You're in  Gehenna, Jake. The lowest  regions. Shouldn't he  raise  fires?  Shout at passerby? Murderers, murderers. But  he  continued to walk.   One  foot,   then  another. . . . Hatred was  a  discipline. He   would   have   to   train harder, that's all.

Elie Wiesel confesses to a similar  inability to sustain  hatred during his return to Ger­ many  seventeen years  after  his  detention in a Nazi  death camp:

The Germans did  their best  to  teach us, but we   were   poor   pupils  in   the   discipline  of hate. Yet  today even   having been   deserted by  my  hate  during that  fleeting visit   to Germany, I cry  out  with  all  my heart against silence.G

Ingrid, a German au  pair girl,  the plain­ tiff  who  accuses  Jake and   his  co-defen­ dant, Harry Stein,  of sexual assault, func­ tions in  the  novel  as a symbol  of modem Germany.  Her   presence    evokes   Jake's Nazi-haunted  nightmare.  As  Existential man,   Jake  recognizes   that   the  logic  of revenge  presupposes a  belief  in  the  exis-

OPINIONS  & NOTES



tence  of order, harmony, and  justice;  he apprehends  the  dissonance  between   the fact  of atrocity and  the  principle of  jus­ tice.  He  becomes  aware that  revenge  is incommensurate with  the enormity of the Nazi  crimes,  nor  is it  possible,  as  Ingrid  indicates,  to   reverse   the   contemporary German denial  of  complicity. Elie Wiesel, in  his  essay  "Appointment  with  Hate," articulates  the  survivor's moral   response to revenge:
In  Palestine, in  Kibbutzim and   around Palmach  campfires, the   idea   of  vengeance was  violently  argued -and rejected. The basic  principle was that Nazi  crimes  must  be opposed by human justice: hate must  not  be fought with  hate. We  had  to  show  the  exe­ cutioners  our    moral  superiority,   prove  to other  people  that  Jews    are   incapable  of deeds   of  hate.1

Richler  dramatizes  this   conception  m
Jake's encounter with  Ingrid.
In the novel, Jake  confronts the dual aspect  of violence embodied in Harry and Joey.   Ingrid  is  the   abstract  focus   for Harry's malice; in  his  role,  she  provides an  occasion  for  Jake  to  test  the  viability of heroic  revenge.  Unlike Duddy Kravitz in the earlier novel who, uninhibited  by social ritual, is moved  by spontaneous impulses  and  desires, Jake, more cultured and  socialized,  is inhibited by civilization. As an outlet to unsocialized  aggression,  he resorts  to fantasy and  to  a  vicarious fas­ cination with  violence.  Harry  symbolizes the  negative aspect  of  revenge.  A victim of the indignity of  poverty  and  exclusion, Harry  becomes   a  ticking   bomb  of  fury and   resentment  seeking  a  scapegoat. In Harry, appreciation of the arts, an intelli­  gence  quotient which  places  him  among the   intellectual  elite,   co-exist   with   an­ archic, sadistic  impulses  brought to criti­ cal   pitch    in   blackmail,   bomb   threats, attempted  murder, obscene  phone  calls, brutality to women.  Harry  reinforces  the bitter lesson  Nazi  Germany   taught  the world  that  culture and  knowledge are  no barriers  against   inhuman,   barbaric  be-
 haviour,  that  extermination camps  could function  in  a country with  a tradition of culture, the  arts,  and  famous  institutions of learning.
In  the concluding episode  in the novel, through  Jake's abortive suicide,  Richler explores its validity in an age which has witnessed a catastrophic failure of human possibilities.  In  the Myth of Sisyphus, Camus  explores  the alternative of suicide as a viable response  to an absurd  universe. Jake's discovery  that  he cannot shoot himself is an  occasion  of self recognition : "I want  to  find  out  who  I  am,  he  had told  Issy Hersh. It's  taken  years  but  now I know."  Consciously,  Jake, like  Camus, rejects  suicide  as  a  morbid  solipsistic  re­ sponse   to   a   universe   devoid   of   moral  order.   Like   Camus, he  affirms  survival  without recourse to self-delusion. Yet  his rejection  of illusion is equivocal. The  trick revolver,  which  fascinates  Jake,  is Rich­ ler's  metaphor for  iHusion  and   fantasy. Fantasy  is an inextricable part  of his life, persisting  as  a submerged theme  beneath his other  experiences. Unassimilated like the letters of personal anguish  in William Carlos  Williams's Paterson, they form a sharp contrast to the daily  banalities and frustrations.
Against the dark theme, the historical madness of the Holocaust, Richler sets his satire  of the  Jewish  middle-class commu­ nity of Montreal, insulated from the reali­  ties of contemporary history  by  an  obso­ lete   set  of   rituals,   traditions,  and   the middlebrow  Jewish   ethic.   Richler  pro­  vides a close-up  through Jake's reflection  after  his father's funeral:

Jake was   incredulous, that  after  so  many years and  fevers, after Dachau, after Hiro-. shima, revolution, rockets in  space, DNA, bestiality in  the  streets, assassinations in  and out   of  season, there  were   still   brides with shining faces  who   were   married  in   white gowns,  posing  for  the  Star social  pages  with their  prizes,  pear shaped boys in evening clothes.

For Jake, this tranquil community has the

OPINIONS & NOTES



unreality of  a  nostalgic  memory of  the pre-Holocaust era  when  it  was  still  pos­ sible to dream  of peace, of God's benevo­ lence at the centre  of an ordered universe, and  of the power  of man's rationality and imagination  to  synthesize   fragments  of reality.   Marooned  on  a  sea  of  compla­ cency, in search  of  self-definition against  the existential void, Jal'e  is an intellectual orphan. He is spiritual heir to the images of  encroaching chaos and  the burden of metaphysical angst which the Holocaust unleashed in the modem world. Jake's reflections recall Sartre's indictment of bourgeois complacency in Nausea. As wit­ ness to the naked  contingency at the heart  of  daily  life,  convinced   that   the  social, spiritual, and  cultural structures are  false and  insecure, Roquentin,  Sartre's prota­ gonist,  observes,  with  clairvoyant amaze­  ment,   the  meaninglessness  of  bourgeois society:

They come   out   of  their offices  after  their day's  work,   they   look   at   the   houses   and squares  with   satisfaction,  they   think  it   is their city.... They make laws, they write popular  novels,   they   are   fools   enough  to have  children. And  all  the  time,  great vague nature has  slipped into  the  city,  it  has  infil­ trated  everywhere in   their   house,   in  their office,  in  themselves....  I know  that  nature
... it has  no  laws....  What they   take  for constancy is only habit and  it can  change tomorrow.s

For Richler, Sartre's encroaching chaos is the  historical  irreversibility of  the  Holo­ caust,    the   landscape  of   total   disaster  which  broods  over contemporary life and which  functions in  the  novel  as  a meta­  phorical focus of the immense circumfer­ ence  of  public  and  private  violence  and human suffering, the climate of extremity in   which   any   lunacy   of  oppression  or sudden  devastation has  become  credible.
Underlying  the   rambling  account  of the  crisis in  Jal :e's life and  the  extended introspective passages  is the  dilemma of the  materially affluent  Jew  whose  inner life  is haunted by  the  moral  and   social
 legacy of the  Holocaust which  challenges the  very   foundation of  his existence.  He is convinced  that   retribution for  his  en­ joyment  is approaching and looks for it in persecution by "injustice  coHectors."  His response  to  the  threat posed  by  his  trial for  alleged   sex  offences   is  an  interplay between  fear  and  relief  rising out of con­ flicting  desires.  On   the  one  hand, he  is afraid  that   his  security   will   be  under­ mined; on  the other hand, he is relieved,  because   he   would   like   to   climb   down from   the   penthouse  of   success.   Unap­ peased   by  the  cultural  spokesmen   who attempt to  adjust  with  the  coolness  and  smoothness of  reason  to  the  unbearable, he is burdened with  the  mentality of the apocalypse. Living  in  the  shadow of  his estranged father's impending death, he is haunted  by  the  images  of  entropy,  like the characters in Thomas Pynchon's nov­ els. Fear  of  dissolution clings  to him  like an  incubus.  His  father's death is both  a revelation of  man's  precarious condition and  an awakening to life. Returning from the  funeral, he  asks:  "What of  me  and  my   house?"  Against  his   father   Issy Hersh's imminent death, Richler sets the birth  of Jake's children, symbol of  regen­ eration and  the viability  of  personal hap­ piness and  home, a source of stability  and value  to counterbalance  his protagonist's anxieties  and  the  dark  theme  of the holo­ caust-haunted imagination-the concen­  tration camp of the  mind.
In this atmosphere of crisis, the basic question  Richler asks in his novel  is this: What can  be the  meaning of human life, human aspirations, and  the destiny  of the human species   to  post-Holocaust man? For Jake, the answer  lies in the discovery that  his private destiny  is not  to seek  re­ venge,  but  to reaffirm  his commitment to moral  values  infinitely fragile,  yet viable:  justice,  conscience,  honour, dignity,   ac­ countability.  Beyond social  and  personal  values,  however, he  is  still  troubled   by the   perplexing  twentieth-century   prob-

OPINIONS  & NOTES



!em: the  presence of  pexvading  violence and  the  collapse  of  faith   in  the  shadow of the  Holocaust experience.

NOTES

1 Lawrence Langer, The  Holocaust and  the Literary Imagination (New  Haven and Lon­ don: Yale  Univ. Press,  1975), p. xii.
2   A.  Alvarez, "Literature  of  the  Holocaust," in  Beyond   All  This Fiddle: Essays  1955-67 (New  York: Random House, 1969), p. 26.
a   Mordecai  Richler,   "The   Holocaust  and After," in  Shovelling Trouble (Toronto: McClelland &  Stewart, 1972), p.  95·
4   "The Holocaust and  After," p. 84.
5    Mordecai  Richler,  St.  Urbain's  Horseman
(New  York: Alfred  A. Knopf, 1971).
6  Elie Wiesel, "Appointment with  Hate," in Legends of Our  Time (New York,  Chicago, San   Francisco:  Holt, Rinehart,  and   Win­ ston,  1968), p.  142.
7    "Appointment with  Hate," p.  140.
8   Jean   Paul   Sartre,  Nausea,  trans.  Lloyd
Alexander   (New    York:   New    Directions,
1964), p. 158.

EVA TAUBE



LANDSCAPES

CANADIAN PUBLISHERS   HAVE a love affair  with landscape which  I suppose will  not  die  as long as  there  remains a  market for  views  of  lonely lighthouses, distant  parks,   and   waving grain. The latest   batch of  landscape   books  occasion­ ally  rises  above  such  photographic  cliches,  but not  often  enough, Canada, subtitled "Pictures of  a  Great Land"  (Macmillan/Gage,  $39·95) at  least   portrays  people in  the  landscape, but the  glossy  pictures  are  more  the  stuff  of tourist brochures  than art, and  burdened by grandilo­ quent  captions ("Man in  the  loneliness of  the mountain world"). It is harder to  explain  why Lorraine  Monk's  Canada  with  love   (McClel­ land  & Stewart, $29.95) also dissatisfies, for the photographs   (by   amateurs   and    professionals alike)  are  far   more  skilled  and far   more  skil­ fully   reproduced. But   the  main  problem may have  something to  do  with  the  hype   that sur­  rounds the  book.  Billed  as  a Gift  of  Love  at a time  of acquiring a Constitution, it  comes  with  capital-letter  Eloquence; the   photographs  re­ peatedly   focus  on   golden  leaves   and   golden
 grain   under  a  wide   and   blackening sky,  and mist  performs a  nicely  sentimentalizing role  as (with love  and   a  constitution)  we  Canadians drift   eloquently  into    our    century.  Harold Town's "Prologue" eulogizes: "There are  in Canada no  superb urban centres to soundproof us from  the  call  of  the  wild.  We  possess clean cities,  pretty cities,  even  quaint cities.  But  we do not have  a city  that is greater than its myth, that dangles   in  the  imagination of  the  world.
... We ... are  similar to the  Celts  in our myth­
ical  determination to  remain in  flux, in  move­
ment  with  the wind.  Though Canada has an immense  government we have  no sense of being governed. We  believe  in  earth, trees,  and  sky.
..." Well,   nonsense. We   have   dirty   cities,  a
violent  crime  every  15  seconds, myths  that   we have   to   live   with    in   abundance   (including that of an  unlittered land), and  scores  of  pic­ ture  books  that perpetuate the  call  of the  wild by  ignoring the   lives  of  some  25  million  resi­ dents.
Canada   Coast   to  Coast    (Oxford, $24.95), in   186  postcard  plates,  takes   us  on  another cross-country tour  of   the   familiar.  Oxford's much   more   splendid  regional  series   ( $15.95 each  manages to  come  closer  to  the  character of  each  of  its  subjects; it's  not  just  a question of having a smaller compass, but  also one  of trusting the  metaphor that each  photographer has  in his mind's eye. Of  the  three most  recent volumes  in  the  series   (Robert Taylor's  Mani­ toba, which  is all  museum pieces  and  carvings, replete with   a  sense   of  frozen  history;  Peter Fowler's Niagara, which  lovingly  contrasts the uniforms   of  tourist  carnivals   with   the   work­  wear   of  daily   routine; and  Paul  von  Baich's Northern  Ontario,  with    an   anecdotal  intro­ duction by AI Purdy),  my  favourite is the  last. It has  its  share of  lonely  roads   and  sparkling streams,  but  they're all  punctuated by pictures of   people-of   worn   shutters  and   telephone lines  and  vans  and  violins: the  accoutrements of culture on  the ragged edges  of rock,  remind­ ers of a people's  desire  to communicate as well as   to  be  alone.   And   Canada:  A   Landscape Portrait, ed.  J.  A.  Kraulis  (Hurtig, $27.50), grandly  demonstrates  what can   be  done   in  a book  about  landscape alone:  this   is  a   book about   texture,   colour,  form,  and    therefore about the act  and  art of perceiving. The photo­ graphs (by  several eyes)  that Kraulis has evocatively arranged  are   alive   with   light,  be­ cause  the  photographers  themselves have  been stirred as  much  by  the   pleasure of   design  as by  the   power    of   convention  or   the   will   to record.
Of   several    related  books,   one-Spirit    of
Place   (Oxford, $14.95),  by  F.  W.  P.  Bolger

ON THE  VERGE



et  a!. -follows  the  pattern of the  Monk  book (mist,  sea, sky, with  literary quotations  accom­ panying),  but    as   it   is   designed    to   portray L. M. Montgomery's version  of P.E.I., it proves more  successful; the  sentimentalizing is part  of the   subject,  as   is  the    joy   Montgomery  felt,  more   in  nature,  perhaps,  than   in  the  people  she  so often ironically  observed. On   the  Fron­ tier,  ed.  R.  G.  Blackader  (Ministry of  Supply
&  Services, $19.95; $23.95 outside Canada)  is more   historical  and   documentary,  though  in some  ways  no less lyrical. A collection of sepia and  black-and-white photographs taken  by the Geological Survey of  Canada, from  the  186o's to  the   196o's, it  records winter   camps   in  the Peribonka, canoes at Moose  Factory, Victorian middle-class fashions at  a  buffalo  skin  lodge  in Manitoba, Franklin's sundial, a  Peace  River cooking  scow,   Indian  villages   in   the   187o's, and   Bell  helicopters in  the  Arctic; it  records, in  other words,   the   people's  presence on  the land,  tilling, harvesting,  observing, recording, analyzing,  using.   Bryan    Holme's   The    En­ chanted  Garden  (Oxford,  $20.95)  is  a  strik­  ingly  beautiful  record of  a  different  tradition, of  European and   Asian   gardens  that  gave  de­ light   because they  were  under  human  control. Perhaps the  impulse to sentimentalize the  wil­ derness in  Canada is  part of this  same  garden tradition,  an  endeavour  to  accommodate  the wild by arranging it outside human experience; but   the  facts   of   technological adaptation  in Canada  tell  a  different story,  one  which  many of the landscape stereotypes have  yet  to under­ stand.
W.N.



ON THE VERGE

*****   ULLI  STELTZER,  Inuit: The  North in Transition. Douglas &  Mcintyre, $29.95. Inuit  is   a   combination  of   the   photographs which  Ulli  Steltzer took during many  months wandering in  the  Canadian  northland and   of oral   statements by  the   people-mostly  Inuit
-she persuaded to speak  to her  tape  recorder. As a collection of photographs it is superb, convincing that black-and-white is a far  better medium than colour photography for  trapping the  stark, cruel contrasts of  the  beauty of  the North. As a document it  is fascinating, since  it emphasizes the  extraordinary rapidity of  north­ em   changes. People speak   who  remember  the days   before  even   rifles   were  common  in  the Arctic, the  days  of  that  superbly adapted  na­  tive culture which the  Inuit developed to keep

188
 them   alive   through  the   Arctic   winters.  And the   photographs  show   people    who   still   live mainly by hunting, beside  other Inuit who  are TV  technicians and   mine  surveyors. Not  only the  North as a geographical unit, but  also  the whole   Inuit way  of  life  is  in  acute transition; one senses from  this book that the Inuit's adaptability, which  allowed them  to survive almost unendurable conditions in  the  past,  will cope  with  the  new  conditions, however difficult the  change. They neither speak  nor  look  like  a dying  people.
G.W.

****   ARTHUR    C.   TWOMEY,    Needle to   the North, ed.  William C.  James. Oberon, $11.95· This  book   is  a   throwback  to   the   Victorian days  when  great naturalists like  Darwin and Huxley, Wallace and  Bates, wrote absorbingly interesting narratives of their journeys in search of  the  unknown species  of  plants and   animals that still   crowded  the   barely   known   remote­ nesses   of   Africa,  Asia,   South   America, Oce­ ania. In 1938  Twomey and  Kenneth Doutt set off  on   a   winter  journey  into   the   interior  of Ungava, seeking a  hitherto  unidentified fresh­ water  seal.   After  much  hard   travelling,  they  found  the   animal.  Later  disputes in  scientific circles as  to  whether the  seal  was  a  true   sub­  species  are  really  irrelevant at this  stage, since it  is  for  its  exceptional narrative vitality that Needle to  the North emerges again into print after   being   virtually  unnoticed  when   it  was published in  1942; after being  disregarded for forty  years,  Twomey's is the  kind  of prose, idiosyncratic yet   highly   serviceable and   clear, that keeps  well.  Needle is one  of the  fine  travel books  about Canada, and   by a  Canadian.

G.W.

****   CLAUDE LEVI-STRAuss, The Way of the Masks, trans. Sylvia  Modelski. Douglas &  Mc­ Intyre, $24.95.   A lucid  translation of [,a Voie des  masques, which   appeared in  two  parts in
1975    and     1979,  this    splendidly  illustrated work   provides an  opportunity to  perceive the connections between structural anthropology at work  and  critical theory about literature. Levi­ Strauss's first  subject is the  connection between mask  and myth; probing the one  (in  particular the  Swaihwe and  Dzonokwa masks)  leads him  to   explain  their  apparent   opposition  in   the binary terms  of  complementarity. Extrapolating further  for   his  second   subject, he  probes  the significance of  the  masks  and  myths in  encod­ ing   the   "rules   of   avoidance"  by   which    the West  Coast cultures (he  focuses  on  the  Salish

ON  THE VERGE



and   Kwakiutl)   were   preserved.  Beyond   the anthropological significance of these  notes   the literary  scholar  can   find   examples  of  ain­ structive process  of  analyzing tales,  and  a  sub­ stantial  context  for   writers  as   disparate   as Emily  Carr and  Anne Cameron.
W.N.

****   CHRISTOPHER  MOORE, Louisbourg  Por­ traits: Life  in  an  Eighteenth-Century  Garrison  Town. Macmillan, $19.95·   This is  an attrac­ tive  and   informative  book,  and  good  popular history. Christopher  Moore  worked   for  some years  as staff  historian to  the Fortress of Louis­  bourg  National Historic  Park, and  now  he  has turned his  researches  into  an  original series  of portraits of the  times. Taking the  stories  of five ordinary  people  who  in   some   way  attracted attention in  the  small  garrison community, he uses their  tribulations and  their small  triumphs to  show  what it  was  like  to  live  in  a  military outpost on  the  North  Atlantic nearly   two  and  a  half  centuries  ago.  It is  all  presented  with d scriptive
with   that  excellent alternation  between   par­
ticipation and  observation which  goes to  make the  best  kind  of  informal  history.

G.W.

***   GLYNN  BARRATT,  Russia   in   Pacific  Wa­ ters:   I7I5-I825.   Univ.  of   British   Columbia Press,  $24-95·     In a backhanded  way, the  his­ tory  of  Russian intervention in  Alaska  is very much   part  of   our   Canadian   history. If  the Russians had  not  moved  into the  seas  north  of the  Queen  Charlottes,  the  British  presumably would  have  been  able  to acquire title  over  the whole  of  the  North  Pacific coast  as  a  result  of the  Nootka  Convention with  Spain. And  then  the  foolish  situation would   never   have  arisen,  in  which   the Hudson's  Bay  Company  turned down  an  opportunity to  buy  out  the  Russians, thus leaving Alaska open to American purchase
?-nd British  Columbia liable to be caught, as it IS,  between American pincers. All  this gives Russian-American history a special interest for us,   which    is   largely  satisfied    by   Russia    in Pacific    Waters, I 715-I 825,  in   which    Glynn Barratt  tells  for   the  first   time   (in   English   at least)  t!Ie  full  story  of  Russian naval   activity in  the  Pacific during  the  eighteenth and  early nineteenth  century. It is  a  well-written and researched book,  presented with  vividness  and even   humour. It forms   part of  the  excellent Pacific   Maritime  Studies series   published   by the  University of  British   Columbia  Press.

G.W.
 Among   recent  reference books  are  several  of particular   interest.   From  Dalhousie   Univer­ sity's  School  of  Library  Service  comes  Charles T. Laugher's  Atlantic  Province  Authors of the  Twentieth Century: A  Bio-Bibliographical Checklist (n.p.),  which   lists   writers  born   in the   area   and    writers   who   lived    there    long  enough to publish work while  there. Biographi­ cal   information  is   reduced  to   dates,  places, positions; "publication in magazines" is limited to listing  magazine titles; play  productions are  listed,  but   academic  and   journalistic writing are  only   sometimes  included   (Malcolm  Ross merits    listing,  but   other  academics  are   left out).  That  Bliss  Carman  is  also   listed   gives some  sense  of  t!Ie  historical  range.  The  two volumes   of   A   Reader's  Guide  to   Canadian History    (Univ. of  Toronto  Press,  $8.95 and
$7.95),  variously edited  by  D.  A.  Muise   and by  J. L. Granatstein and   Paul   Stevens,  splen­
didly   update  and   expand  their   earlier   anno­ tated  guide   to   sources   in   Canadian   history, Canada Since   I 867;   selective and  evaluative,
the   2  volumes  are   somewhat different in structure  (vol.    1   ignores  literature,   for   el(­ ample, though vol.  2 acknowledges it), but  are  sound  and  instructive guides through a mass of material. Scottish  Literature in   English  and Scots, ed.  W.  R.  Aitken (Gale,  $4o.oo), is of less direct  use;  its entry on John Galt  lists some of  t!Ie  Canadian  commentary  that exists,   but  his   account  of   Frederick   Niven    ignores    all Canadian commentary and  republication since
1962.  Gilbert Forest's Petit   Dictionnaire  heri­ tage  des Citations  (Heritage, n.p.)   lists  2,500  quotations from  437  Quebecois novels,  by  key­ word  (mensonge, pdtre, discipline, terre, etc.); a   sourcebook  to   poets   and   political  writers would  now  be a most  welcome  companion vol­ ume.  Guide   culture[  du  Quebec, ed.  Lise  Gau­ vin   and    Laurent   Mailhot   (Boreal  Express n.p.)   is still  another  kind  of compendium, full of  useful  addresses   (of  magazines, publishers, archives, stores,  galleries, institutions, all  with  annotations  about   their   special  interests  and  functions);    mini-guides   to    Quebec   writers (both   English   and    French,  with    a   notable omission  of  Ralph  Gustafson), artists,  archi­ tects,    and    ot!Iers;  developments  in    music  theatre,  political  culture,  and    more.   It's teacher's guide to finding things, and  a cultural browser's whole-earth catalogue.  Revue  d'his­ toire  littiraire du  Quebec et  du  Canada  fran­ (ais  ( 2. 1980-81  ; Bellarmin,  $20.00)  variously surveys  the  problems of  writing literary history and   probes  semiological   and   other  solutions then goes on  to  provide an  extensive bibliogra phy  of  Jacques  Ferron's writings and   a  list  of literary   criticism   published   on   francophone



189

NOTES



Canadian   writers  in    I976-I977·  Livres    et auteurs 1981  (Laval, $IS)  critically and biblio­ graphically  reviews   Quebec  publications, and  commentary on Quebec writings, for  that  year. And  the  massive  and  highly  valuable Diction­ naire  des oeuvres  litteraires du  Quebec, ed. M. Lemire  et   a!.   (Fides, n.p.),  has   reached  its third  volume,  which   covers   the   period    I 940- I959·  As  with   the   earlier volumes,   there   are  substantial  entries for  book  titles,  groups, and  the  cultural  framework, together with  illustra­ tions  and  reference guides.
Among  recent books for children are three sprightly novels  from   Clarke Irwin:  Eric  Wil­ son's  adventure, Disneyland Hostage  ($10.95);  Florence McNeil's account of  a  girl  growing into   her  own,  with   the   help  of  others, called  Miss  P.  and  Me    ($10.95); and  J. R.  Jones's thriller, Danger   on  the   River  ($u .95).
Fides  comes  Roger  Gicquel's Si  Taus les  en­
/ants   du  monde ... , with   a  preface  by  Felix Leclerc; hopeful, eager for international under­ standing, the  book  collects the  aspirations and  observations of  children  around  the  world.   In letters,  poems,   colourful   drawings  and    car­  toons,  they  speak   of  peace   and   possibility, of beauty   and   nature,  and   of   a  machine  that  gobbles   snackfood,  garbage,  loud   noise,   and  violence,  and   transforms all  into hearts, hare­ bells,  and birdsong. Also from  Fides  is a series of  four graded anthologies, edited by  Yoland Grise; in  order  (from primary text   to  secon­ dary   school   text)  called  Parli  Parlo  Parlons, Les  Yeux en  fete, Des  Mots   pour  se  connaltre, and  Pour  se  faire un  nom, their  distinguishing feature   is   that   they    draw    their    examples entirely from  franco-ontarian  authors.
Recent paperback reprints include Andre Major's L'epidemie and  Jacques Benoit's Les Princes     (both   Stanke,  n.p.)  ;   Peter    Such's Riverrun (Clarke Irwin, $5.95); four  of  Rod­ erick  Haig-Brown's best  books on  fishing, Fish­ erman's Fall,  Fisherman's  Winter, and   Return to   the    River     (Collins,   $10.95  each),   and  A Primer  of Fly Fishing  (Douglas & Mcintyre,
$8.95) ; three  novels  by Felix  Leclerc, Andante, Adagio, and   Allegro (Fides, n.p.);  and   (to celebrate the centenary of the author's birth) Maurice Constantin-Weyer's Un   Sourire   dans la  tempete  (Les   Editions  des   Plaines, n.p.). Earth-Light (General, $9.95) is a splendid paperback collection of Gwendolyn MacEwen's selected poeins  from   I963 to  I982; Brick, no. I6  ($2.00), is a special collection of new trans­ lations of stories  and  essays by Jacques  Ferron; George   Myers's  An   Introduction  to   Modern Times  (Lunchroom Press,  $6.oo)   includes an essay on  the  prose  of Opal  Nations; and  a new journal of poetry, fiction, interviews, and  com-
 mentary has  begun, called The Canadian Liter­
ary Review, available from  P.O.  Box  278,  I 678
Kingston Road, Scarborough, Ont.  MIN I s6. The first  issue  (with some  remarkable poetry, and  lively  comments on or  by writers as diverse as Leacock, Kosinski, and  Layton)  promises much to come.  Another new  journal, Arts Manitoba (88 Frances Street, Winnipeg, Man. R3A IB3), substantially illustrated, is  de­ voted   to  all  the  arts; vol.   I,  no.  I, contains a commentary  on   Ivan  Eyre,   plus   interviews, book   reviews, and   notes   on  photography and  theatre.
W.N.








One of  the  most  attractive features of Leandre Bergeron's French-English The Quebecois  Dic­ tionary (Lorimer, $17.95)  is the introduction: a witty,  polemical account of  the  political ori­  gins and  earthy character of  the "real language of Quebec." To  the  notion that  only  "Parisian" is correct, Bergeron has  a  ready   reply:  "Pari­ sian" is  not   so  much a   foreign  accent  as  a deliberate  political  act,   an   imposition  of   a "laundered  language" on  Quebec by  the  "re­ actionary  French   religious order"  that   struc­ tured  its  educational system  during  the   nine­  teenth  century. The 6,ooo   words   and   expres­ sions in  the  dictionary itself-condensed from the   I 980  Dictionnaire de  la langue   quebecoise
-provide  a  clear guide to  the  local  vocabu­ lary,   including  a   set   of   graphic   and    often  highly   instructive demonstrations of  Quebecois inventiveness with  epithet and  metaphor.
More sedate is the  Canadian version  of  Paul Bonnevie's  Dictionnaire   CEC    jeunesse,   pre­ pared  under  the   direction  of  Jean   Darbelnet (Centre  Educatif et  Culture!, n.p.).  A version  of  the   I98o   Hachette  dictionary for  children, it  is generally clear and  frequently  illustrated. Despite  the   "Canadianization"   ("orignal"  is there, as  is a  labelled illustration  of  a  baseball game), one  looks  in  vain  for  some  of  the  ordi­ nary  Quebec vocabulary one finds  in Bergeron: "char,"  for   example  (for   "car,"  rather  than "chariot"),  or  "debarquer"  (for  "get out  of  a car"  rather  than  "sail   away"). It's  a   useful young  student's guide,  but  for  quality of  defi­ nition  (both of  verbal  meaning and   of  colour plates)  it's  not  a patch  on  the  junior Larousse.

NOTES



Other books  of particular interest in  schools will   be   Peter   Baltensperger's   Souldust   and Pearls   (Belsten Publishing, $7.95),  an  anthol­ ogy  of Ontario student poetry from  1981  (ele­ mentary rhymes, defensive wit,  young  people's wishes,     adolescent  dreams),    together   with  poems  by  their teachers. Many  appear to stem from  set  themes ("If  I were  an ..."), but  are none   the   less  able   for   that;  there are   young  writers here, with   naive  artifice but  also  a  lot of sensitive aspiration. The book  is yet  another reminder that  a  society  does  well  to  place  its faith in  its  people  and   to  devote its  resources to  encouraging the  abilities of  the  young. The Novice  and   the   Newcomer, ed.   George   Ban­ croft   (Third Eye,  n.p.)  is  a  set  of  University of Toronto student teachers' views about multi­ culturalism,  with   the   editor's   prefatory  com­ ments  on   the   discriminating  force   of  accent, colour, and   cultural   assumption when   people  move  outside the  norms   to  which   their child­ hood  or  upbringing has  accustomed them. The student   papers  tell   anecdotally  of  immigrant experience, adaptation, the difficulties of  avoid­ ing  some  form  of  faux  pas with  a  multiethnic group. They call   for   teacher  sensitivity, more than ever.  Bancroft  himself  offers  some  rather more  concrete suggestions  for  teachers. But  at the  heart of the  whole  book lies a tension about the   nature  of   multiculturalism  itself:  about whether the  new  ethnicity has  made historical norms intrinsically embarrassing in Canada and whether  a   culture  can    sustain  the    surface illogicality  of  multiple  norms   comprehensibly co-existing.
Several of  the  Indian  portraits of  Nicholas de   Grandmaison,  the   post-czarist emigre  to Canada who  was drawn to the  life and  features of the  Plains Indian, are  splendidly reproduced from   the  Bank  of  Montreal Collection as  His­ tory   in   Their  Blood    (Douglas &   Mcintyre,
$40.00). An  able  text  by Hugh Dempsey  anec­ dotally records the  surface eccentricities  of the  painter's  life;   it   traces,  too,   his   quest   for   a romantic history which  he found in Sarcee and  Piegan faces   and   idealized in  the  aristocratic notion  of   a   pure-blood  line   of   inheritance. (Wilfrid Eggleston's Homestead  on  the  Range
-Borealis, n.p. -tells another account of the Piegan country;  an   autobiographical account of the  opening up  of Palliser's Triangle around
191o,  it  is full  of tales  remembered and  details of  farm  and   school   life,   to   which   local   his­ torians will  be  appropriately attracted.)
Quebec, The  Fortified City: From  the  17th
to  the   19th Century, by  Andre Charbonneau
et  al.   (Parks Canada, $45.00), is a  history  of quite  another  kind.  With  a  solid,   clear  text and   the  support of  many   tables, graphs, and
 integrated data, the  book  is a detailed account of  the   defence structure  planned  and   shaped for  the  city, and  will be fascinating for  military buffs and  historians of the  changing regimes  in Quebec.  For   more   casual  enquirers,  the   ex­ traordinary wealth of visual  material may  take  precedence; of maps, plans, photographs, draw­ ings,  prints, and  paintings, there is  an  abun­ dance. The   book  makes  apparent  the  garrison centre that  guarded both  the  city itself  and  the kingdom  of  trade  and   of  souls   that  was   its province.
W.N.



LAST PAGE

THERE IS A HEALTHY   INDUSTRY  in  collections and  reprints, motivated sometimes by sheer commercial enterprise, sometimes by cultural nationalism (whether in Canada or abroad), sometimes   by  new   fashions,  a   new   focus   of ideas,  or  a  re-evaluation of  what matters. The new status accorded the  short story  in England, for  example, has  led   to  a  host  of  reprints of stories by Buchan and   Stevenson and  Kipling, and  to the Collected Works  of writers like V. S. Pritchett  and   Elizabeth  Bowen -for   reasons of  quality first  of  all  and   Bowen   for  feminist reasons   as  well.   For   feminism  is  one   of  the chief  efforts  in  our  day  to  re-evaluate accepted sets  of  standards.  Virago  Press,  for  example, has  done  a  fine  job  of  searching the  past  for works-that-matter  by  women, many   of  whom have  been neglected because they  were  women, or  because   they  were  colonial, or  both   (there are many  ways that people  in authority define "peripheral"). The rediscovery of Miles Frank­ lin's   My  Brilliant  Career   (a bad  novel  but   a good  film  and   a  sharp revelation  of  the  pres­  sures  that   inhibited  women's  independence at the  tum of  the  century)   tells  us  much about the  decision   to  republish.  There has  to  be  an audience-but  in  Franklin's case it is an  audi­ ence  for  issues  and   history rather  than  for  a consummate  art.
The film   and    the   issues   have   nonetheless aroused an  interest, and  now  there comes  from the  University of  Queensland  Press   ($14.95) a previously unpublished Franklin novel  called On  Dearborn Street. Set  in  Chicago and  nar­ rated  by   a   mechanical  male    of   substantial means,  it  tells  of  an  infatuation  with Rapture and    Woman- treating    comically  (but  not denigrating)  the  serious  issues  of  My  Brilliant Career. When  World   War    I  breaks   out, so does  a  lot  more  attitudinizing  ("I  decided to

NOTES



take  up  aviation seriously and  go to France"), but  so do  women then break  free  from  a lot  of stereotypical  roles.  The  central female   figure, named  Sybyl,   decides  she   does   not   need   to marry  ("'I   should be   glad    to   marry ... if things were different.' 'What things?' 'Men.'") ; but   when she  changes  her   mind, as  soon   as The Hero admits to  his foolishness, one  begins to  wonder about Franklin's intent. There are moments  when   her   satiric impulse interrupts her   narrative  and   when   her   aspirations  for social  order in  a time  of war  will settle  conflict more  neatly than a contemporary reader might find  credible.
No  such   orderliness  surrounds  another  re· print,   Jean   Devanny's  The   Butcher    Shop (Auckland/Oxford, $g.gs), which  was banned when  it first  appeared in  New Zealand in  1926 because   it   was   considered  "disgusting  and communistic." Even   Devanny questioned  the literary merit of  her  novel; it  had  "sincerity," though, and  it had  a thesis,  which  the  narrative directly serves.  In the  argument, women   (the first  agriculturalists) were  subverted by monog­ amous   marriage, by  which   they  became men's  property,  like   sheep;  made   neurotic  by  this recognition,  they   turned   from  sex   and   their husbands turned  to   prostitutes-a  situation that only  socialism  would   resolve,  by establish­ ing  an equality of  mind   and  body   ("a society of   reasonable   men   and   women   unsoiled    by filthy  conventions").  Flamboyant in  its  rhet­ oric,  graphic in   its   details  of  sheep-farming, precise in  its  property metaphors, and  violent in  its  conclusion, it  bears   rereading. The  re­ print   comes,    moreover,  with   an   instructive account of  the  history of its  suppression.
I am  less persuaded by the  reprint of Helen
Shaw's The   Gypsies  (Victoria/Price  Milburn,
$4.50), a  set  of  mannered stories  mostly  from the  195o's. Beside  them  Dan  Davin's Selected Stories    (Price   Milburn,  $12.95)  seem   still fresh, and   Ian Wedde's "Dick  Seddon's Great Dive," reprinted in  The  Shirt Factory  (Price Milburn, $8.gs),  positively experimental. Wedde's  colloquial  idiom  addresses itself   di­ rectly  to the  disorder of the  day; male strutting in   these   stories   hides   male   insecurity.  So   it does   in   Davin's  much   earlier  sketches of   a Catholic boyhood and  a  New  Zealander's war­  fare,  but    with    less   apparent  consciousness. Clearly   the   childhood  sketches   are   meant  to explore the  roots  of  violence  in  a pastoral cul­  ture, but   in  the   war   stories   and   other  later tales   the   characters  seem   not   to  know   how much  they  strut and  how  much  their language betrays   them. In  the   brilliant  stories   of   the late   Maurice  Duggan  (Collected   Stories,  Ox­ ford, $25.00), however, language is all. Catho-
 lie  boyhood, troubled  marriage,  plain   loneli­ ness,    resourceful   age,    sheer    sexuality:   the themes are  familiar-but  in  Duggan's hands the   language  flowers; it   becomes   a  mode   of living  as  well  as a mode  of  telling-variously plain, ornate,  outrageously  clever, and   delib­ erately   contrived -matched   to   its   purpose, celebrating the  joys of living  and  the  dilemmas to which people  who  live  joyfully  are  led.

W.N
