$7.50  per copy



CANADIAN
l]TERATURE N°·93
Summer, I982

WILSON, LAURENCE, G:ztLL]INT, GL SSCO

Articles

BY  BLAN C HE GET.FANT, CONSTAN CE  ROOKE, STEPHANIE  A. DL'\lETRAKOPOl l LOS, C\l!C:HEJ.  FABRE,  \\'. H. NEW, DAVTD o'ROl'RKE, LEON EDI':L

Poems

BY  NAOMI RACHEL,  RON   l\1ILES,  f.
GASPARINI, KEN NORRIS, LILIANE WELC H , ROBE.RT  BRINGIICRST

Reviews

BY l\!ARK ABLEY, P. COLLET, 1\IILTON ACORN, JOHN  MILLS, PETER STEVENS, F.RIC THOMPSON, MAl'RICF. LEBEL, JACK WAR\'\'TCK, MA R GE R Y FEE, CHRISTOPHER \\'ISEM AN , MUR IEI, WH ITAK ER, IA N  R . MC LATCHIE,
! ARK   BENSON, TERR Y GOLDIE, MARY   JANE EDWARDS,  J. KIERAN KEALY,
LINDA ROGE.RS, RONALD 'HATCH, J Ai\ f F.S DOYLE, GFORGF.  WOODCOCK

Opinions and Notes

BY  RORF.RT GRF.EN

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW







OUTSIDE CHANTS





ONE OF   THE  MORE   REMARKABLE  developments  in Canadian studies in the last decade has been the growth in the number  of international con­ tributions   being  made  to  the  understanding of  Canadian literature and  other aspects of Canadian culture  and social structure. Canadian Studies centres have sprung  up  in  countries  as close geographically  as the  United  States,  as  close in cultural  history as Scotland and  France, as related  and  as far-flung  as Germany,  Italy,  Denmark, Israel, India,  Fiji, Australia,  Russia, and  Japan-for different reasons, one suspects, and  unquestionably  with different  results. Sometimes Can­ ada serves as a contrast or a parallel with the "home" culture, as for example in Australia.  Sometimes it appears  to fulfil, as for many years it did in Germany,  a romantic dream  of open space  and  rugged  wilderness.  Sometimes  it looks like America's  Poland, a buffer zone of curious politics and  uncertain  temperament, which might be taken as a "reasonable" trial territory  for a possibly unreasonable  idea.
Canadian responses to this international interest  vary  considerably,  from  the
ideologically defensive ( "no-one but the Canadian-born can ever know Canada"), to  the  suspicious  but  perhaps  realistic  ("to   conquer  your  opponent   you  must know  him first"), to the blandly indifferent,  the serious but  puzzled, the curious and  welcoming. Undoubtedly much of the variation  relates directly to the nature of the  enquiry.  But often it demonstrates  something  else:  a degree of limitation
-possibly  unconscious-in the critical  approaches that  Canadians  themselves most  commonly  bring to their own writers. Thematic still, despite  the technical revolution  led by Frank  Davey and others, Canadian criticism remains as rooted as most literary  works themselves are in the mores of the culture.  It is grounded in views of society, in the values of the people, in notions of a shared  or defined or  distinctive  nationalism  which are  often  more  real in  the  mind  of the  writer than  in the facts of national experience -but which nonetheless shape the moral and  political  expectations  which  so often  constitute  the  active  criteria  behind critical  judgments. Reading Canadian literature, in other  words, Canadian critics

2

EDITORIAL


repeatedly perceive  the indirect dreams and  the expressed  pleasures  and  the open critiques of their  own  society;  their  literature, for them, in some  measure enacts themselves,   connects their   sensitivities  with  the  values  of  the  culture that   has shaped them.  This  seems to be a perfectly  reasonable, right,  and  proper function of criticism.  But  it is not  the  only  one. And  it is in  this  regard  that critics from outside  the  culture can  teach  the insiders some lessons on critical  method.
For if the outsiders fasten  on the mores and  politics of the literature, they often
do  so  with  an  inexactness that   tells more  of  the  culture they  themselves come from   than   of  the  culture the  literature directly  portrays. But  if  they  fasten  on literary form,  they  often  do so with  such  a precise focus  that  they  illuminate the suppleness and  subtleties of  a laconic  methodology that  within  Canada is often ignored-ignored, I think,  because  the natural cadences of the laconic  speaking voice are familiar, therefore seem ordinary, therefore  are taken  for granted. What the  sensitive   reader  realizes,  however,   is  that   the  able  writer   can  shape   these cadences and  these  habits of language into an aesthetically  pleasing  construct, an intellectually pleasing  form.
French critical  methods are particularly useful in this respect, as Michel  Fabre's recent  issue of Etudes Canadiennes (December 1981)  shows. Devoted entirely  to essays  (by  ten  Canadian, French, and  German scholars)  on  The Stone   Angel, the  issue  demonstrates not  only  the  strengths of Laurence's novel,  but  also the virtues  of two  kinds  of critical  methodology. One  kind  probes  biographical roots and   cultural  mythologies, the  social  resonances of the  narrative events  and  the effective  allusions,  the  particularity of the  characters and  the  commonality of the experience. The  other  kind  distinguishes more  severely  between  text  and  reality, separates character  from   person, fastens  on the  artist's shaping of artifice  (con­ scious or unconscious, but  in either  event  a donnee), and  explores  the novel's  use of speech  act  discourse,  its patterns of binary opposition, its fragmentation of time­  frames and   narrative frames, and  the  system  of  conventions on  which  it  relies. One  critic,  disputing others, avers  that  a literary form  does not  have  to be  justi­ fied on  mimetic or  psychological grounds. But  presumably this is a formula that can   be  stated    just  as  adamantly in  some  inverse   way.  Seeking   (or   finding) formal   pattern can  be as  barren an  enterprise (whatever the  pleasures  of intel­  lectual  order)  as the  lamest  of  thematic descriptions. The  fact  of the  matter is that  a good  novel  succeeds  both  because  it is said  well and  because  it has some­ thing  to say. That's a reductive  way of putting it, but  it's  a strong challenge to any  artist  to  meet.  By extension  it's  also a strong  challenge for  any  critic  (none free  of  bias)   to  elucidate,  which  merely  reaffirms  that critical enquiry is never adequately seen  as a set of  absolute  pronouncements, but  is only comprehensible as an exchange of insights and  understandings, and therefore as a collective enter­
prise that  national boundaries affect but do not enclose.

W.H.N.


3

THE HIDDEN MINES IN
ETHEL WILSON'S  LANDSCAPE

(or, An American Cat among Canadian
Falcons)


Blanche Gelfant


IHAD HANDLED DYNAMITE,"  Fmnkie  Burnaby  thlnlo< at  the end of Ethel  Wilson's novel Hetty Dorval:   "I had  handled  dynamite,  and  in so
doing  had  exploded  the hidden  mine of Mrs. Broom to my own great  astonish­
ment.... "2
I start  with this image of a hidden mine in Ethel Wilson's fiction because I am an American  reader,  accustomed by my literature to explosions of violence in the novel and  also to abundance, to the presence within  a vast and varied landscape of  rich  deposits -the  inexhaustible  resources of art.  Canadian critics, as they describe the  abundance contained  in Wilson's fiction, its richness of natural and social detail,  have praised the surface serenity of her art:  the detached  tone;  the compassionate  and  comic insights into the foibles of the great  human  family;  the faith  that  remains  unshaken even when these foibles, our seemingly innocent  but obsessive meddling  with each other,  turn  into destructive  or coercive acts, viola­ tions of each  other's  freedom. I wish to excavate  to a depth  hidden beneath  the surface  sustained  so  beautifully  by  Wilson's  style  and  tone  and  the seemingly casual meandering of her form;  I wish to dig for the dynamite  I suspect she has concealed. By her own image she has alerted  us to the possibility of hidden  mines and so validated  the process of excavation,  which I take to be the critic's essential act.  First  of all, I  want  to extract  from  Wilson's fiction  the  violence that  lurks beneath  its serenity.  In these dangerous  depths,  I expect  to find also abundance
-a rich subterranean treasure of motives and meanings that constitute the source of Ethel Wilson's art.
To  the critic, surface and depths evoke complementary images of light and darkness, the contrast  integral to Wilson's art and to her vision of the duplicity of life which  allows us brilliant evanescent  moments  whose meanings  are shadowy and  elusive. In a striking passage, Wilson describes a fluidity of light flowing over the landscape of British Columbia and defamiliarizing the "daily look" of moun-

4

WILSON


tains  and  forests. Falling  obliquely  upon  mountain  slopes, light  "discloses new contours"; in forests,  it  "discover[s]  each  separate  tree  behind  each  separate tree."3  Then  it fades, leaving  us with unforgettable  images. The  light  I hope to bring  to Wilson's landscape  is also oblique;  but I hope its illumination,  coming from   an  unfamiliar   direction   and  moving  into  an  unexplored   darkness,  can discover aspects of Wilson's art-images of hidden  violence and  of abundance
-that we will remember long after the critic's light fades.
Obviously,  violence in  Wilson is much  more muted,  much  less shocking and perverse, than  in the fiction of William Faulkner and Ernest Hemingway, not the most brutal  but the most famous male American novelists writing as Wilson's contemporaries.  American   women  writers  also shed  blood  more  unsparingly than  Wilson. Murder, rape,  mob vengeance, and war erupt  in Flannery O'Con­ nor  and   Katherine  Anne  Porter;   and  in  Willa  Cather,  violence  assaults  the peaceful  Nebraska  landscape  with the suddenness of locusts. In  Wilson's novels, a  child  can slip into  a  turbulent  ocean  in one unobtrusive sentence,  a beloved mother   die  almost  parenthetically, a  wife submit  to  her  husband's "hateful assaults"  as a nightly  aside to daily life, and  a war, or  two wars, fit incidentally into  the  unimportant gaps  within  a family's continuous life.  If in  these wars, a man's  hand  should  be "blown  off," neither  he nor his family "look  upon  this as anything  out  of the way."4  Nor do we, for Wilson somehow  disposes of the vio­ lence  she  has  released,  tucking  it  away  among  the  details  of  daily  life  which resumes its ordinary  course after an explosion; or else she separates  us from vio­ lence, as Frankie  is separated from  war-torn  Vienna,  by a convenient  "wall  of silence." In  Wilson's stories, however, the violence contained  within  the beautiful  Canadian  landscape   cannot   be  concealed  by silence,  hardly  allowable  in  the short  story's  urgent  form,  or  by  dense details  that  attract  our  attention in  the novel, detracting it  from  hidden  dangers.  The  "humped" body  of a murdered  woman  lies exposed  on  the  dyke  in "Hurry, hurry"; the  blood of an  innocent Chinaman flows from  repeated stab  wounds and a gun-shot in "Fog"; blackness and  the  sea  pour  into  a  reeling  boat  that  strikes a  reef and  splits, spilling four people  into  death   and   causing  the  suicide  of  a  pregnant   woman  in  "From  Flores";  and in "The Window," a would-be murderer stands with "a short blunt weapon  in his hand," arrested  in his deadly assault only by the shocking image of his own imminent violence.
Violence held in arrest  by its own image seems to me a stunning  effect of  Wil­ son's art.  At  the moment  when the would-be murderer  sees himself, his hand  is halted,  perhaps   (to  use one  of Wilson's favourite  words)  only  temporarily, but long enough  for Mr.  Willy's life to be spared. Violence thus allows for providen­  tial  rescue, common  in  Wilson's fiction;  and  rescue influences our  perception  of life, of its indifference  to  human  needs or  its  concern,  its accidental  nature or design. With  these polarities we plunge to the depths in Wilson's fiction, reaching


5

WILSON

her bedrock  thematic  issue. Has human  life ultimate  meaning,  or is it simply­ like Topaz  Edgeworth's  life-a succession of "sparkling  dots" uninscribed  in a "significant  design"?  Nihilism and  belief struggle for supremacy in  Wilson's fic­ tion,  which  like the darkened  window of her story  reflects the interior  space of the  mind-or  perhaps  it  is the  soul-where  significant  human   action  takes place.  When  the  murderous  thief  brings  violence  into  Mr.  Willy's living  room, the  consciousness  where  life is centred,  he  cracks  the  darkness  that  is slowly enveloping  Mr.  Willy; he allows in an  unexpected  slant of light  that  can show Mr.  Willy where meaning may exist in an apparently meaningless life. To recog­ nize the  danger  of irrational,  unpredictable, undeserved  violence seems in  Wil­ son's  fiction  a  necessary  preliminary  to  believing  in  providential   design.  Such recognition,   however,  brings  one  precipitously  close  to  the  Abyss, the  empty darkness  that  Mr.  Willy sees outside  and  within  his window  when  night effaces the day's stirringly beautiful Canadian landscape.  However abundant and  varie­ gated   external  nature   appears  in  Wilson's  lavish  descriptions,   human   reality enacts  its drama  in an interior  private  living room -in  the heart  and  head,  as Nell Severance  tells us in Swamp  AngeZ.S Any human  being isolated in this room, cut off from significant relationship to others, must find his or her thoughts  mined (or undermined) with dangerous elements:  a fear of nihilism, a suspicion of life's ultimate  meaninglessness, a sense of the fortuity  of encounters that  may end in death  or in permanent  scarring such as Ellen Cuppy  will suffer in Love and Salt Water. If we dig deeply enough into Wilson's fiction, we strike against the Void; and  when  Nothingness lies below us, leaving us unsupported, then life and fiction may catapult  us into a violence as sudden and  meaningless as that  which engulfs the  odd  assortment  of men  who  drown  together  in  the  death-drenched  story "From Flores."




LIKE THE wATERS INTO WHICH A WILSON  character may at any  whimsical  moment sink, the desert represents  an endless Void. Thus  aridity recurs  as Wilson's thematic  term  for deprivation of meaning,  an invidious form of violence that  can enter a room impregnable  to a thief. In "Tuesday and Wed­ nesday," Victoria  May Tritt  (who has more of a name than an identity)  lives "in a  parched  way,"  lost in  a "desert  of loneliness" created  by  time-"the  desert between now and sleep." Water and desert sand, both vast, elemental,  and seem­ ingly  empty,  both  dangerous  for  men  and  women  to  traverse,  especially alone, stretch  before the reader as irradicable  images of a cosmic Void. "Do  we always live on a brink,  then,"  Nora asks in Love and Salt  Water. Wilson's fiction shows us that  "we  do,"  while every urbane  aspect of her style and  tone, so admirably  discussed by her Canadian critics, tries to pull us back from the Void,  providing

6

WILSON

us with a calm  or comic or collected perspective that  diverts us from the empti­ ness of spirit  into  which anyone,  particularly  anyone of our  modern  world, may fall. If oblique  means of preventing  us from exploding the hidden mines of nihil­ ism,  means  of  formal  control,  seem inadequate,  then  Wilson  openly  moralizes against  despair,  insisting upon  the "beautiful action[s]"  of  which human  beings are capable,  acts of compassion, performed by Maggie Lloyd in Swamp  Angel, of loyalty and love, exemplified by Morgan  Peake and George Gordon  in Love and Salt  Water, of  self-discipline  developed  by  Lilly  in  her  story,  and  miraculous rescue produced  by "dirty,  old" men like Mr. Abednego.
A profound  fear that  man may be an island, a desert island, the fear that leads
Mr. Willy to despair over the "aridity" of his isolated life (rather than exalt over his freedom)   makes  Wilson  insist, I  believe, upon  the  integrity  of  the  human family. This  insistence, however,  raises my anxiety, and  like Lilly, I grow afraid of  unforeseen  "Trouble." For  since  we  are  all  related,  enmeshed  though  we cannot  know how in each  others' lives, I worry about  effects upon  my own life that  may come from  gratuitous and  unfathomable  causes. I feel myself treading over hidden  mines, any one of which may accidentally  blow up in my face and leave me, like Ellen Cuppy,  scarred.  How can I tell what  "arrangements of  cir­ cumstance" have been prepared  for me by those nebulous agents of  causality in Wilson's fiction, "life  and  time,"  which are fusing all of us into one continuous family, relating  me to generations  past or distant whose effects I can neither know nor  avoid?  Occasionally  the  long-range  fortuitous  effects of  family  ties will be amusing.  In The  Innocent  Traveller,  Rose attends the theatre  (and  develops "a taste  for ... the  deceits  of  beauty")  because  ten  years  earlier  her  Great-Aunt Annie  and  a famous  actor  had  met as ship-mates, in an encounter  arranged  by chance.  But  when  chance  becomes causality, linking together  a chain  of events we find incongruous  but  destructive,  I fear its vagaries. If they affect my life­ as they effect Mort's  death in "Tuesday  and Wednesday"6 -then life itself seems random,  without  intrinsic  order.   Wilson  tries  to  mollify  the  fear  of  chaos she arouses by showing how families maintain order as they transmit  from one gene­ ration  to the next a pattern  of manners, traditions, and beliefs. Families provide a context of relationships  which give a woman  (in particular) a meaningful role in life as mother,  wife, daughter, sister,  cousin. The  Innocent  Traveller  celebrates these roles, but also undermines them, I believe, by showing Rachel  as a woman held  in  perpetual  if loving servitude,  and  Topaz  as a "youngest  child"  held in perpetual  helplessness.  Always cared  for  by her family,  Topaz  seems extraordi­  narily lucky in her hundred  years of cheerful idle life; but even she may not have escaped  the  explosions  of  hidden  mines.  Triviality   may  be  one;  helplessness, another.  The loving family that  pampers Topaz also infantilizes her, I believe, by accepting  (if  not fostering)   her helplessness; in her comic way, she remains for­ ever helpless, a child even when she reaches venerable age. Though family ties are

7

WILSON

tenuous  in "Tuesday and  Wednesday,"  they do hold together  Myrtle's  ego, but also they bind  Myrtle forever to her cousin's life. If in this novella Wilson paro­ dies family life, creating  an  aunt  who is a "kitten" and  a "conveniently anony­ mous"  cousin, she nevertheless reveals its profound  ambiguities  which  her most serious fiction cannot  resolve. In Swamp  Angel, Maggie  Lloyd's surrogate  family focuses the heroine's new identity, but also infuses it with new anxieties and prob­ lems;  and  in  Love  and  Salt  Water, Nora  Peake's  loving  sister  nearly  wrecks Nora's life.
Wilson also celebrates and  undermines  marriage, which stultifies characters  to whom it brings the only fulfilment possible. Married  men and  women run away from   each   other   in Swamp   Angel,  "The  Window," "Beware   the   Jabber­ wack ... "; wives dream  of freedom, and  husbands  of "slugging"  or  even mur­ dering  their  wives. In  "A drink  with Adolphus," Mr.  Leaper  notes in his secret diary that  a man  "is undergoing trial for the murder  of his wife. The thing that  impressed me [he writes, thinking of his own marriage]  was that he and his wife had   seemed  to  live  a  devoted  and  harmonious life  together."7     I  emphasize seemed because appearances  conceal the truth  of  family life in Wilson's fiction; or the  fiction itself conceals the truth  it makes us suspect,  hiding it beneath  the surface  of serenity  so that  we see the  Edgeworths,  or  Cuppys,  or  Forresters  as "ideal  couples,"  much as Vicky May saw that  irascible pair,  Myrt and  Mort.  In Swamp  Angel, Maggie experiences marriage  at its best (but  death  ends her hap­ piness)  and  at its most crimping. In the same novel, Nell Severance understands that  her marriage, never sanctified by law, only by love, required  her to hurt  her only daughter. This  daughter,  at first fearful  of marriage, finds in it her fulfil­ ment;  but  happiness  demands  her submission to another, and  Wilson's women typically say they wish to be free. Thus family relationships involve so many com­ plexities they elude  understanding  or judgment.  They  become mysterious though ordinary; and  mystery engenders fear. If a woman,  in a moment  of carelessness, might cause her nephew's death, then sisters and aunts, no matter  how loving and well-intentioned, have ominous  potential.  Wilson never  lets us forget  the  harm we might do each other within the family; and since she insists that family bonds (the commonplace phrase implies imprisonment as well as security)  somehow connect  all of us to each other,  she implies that  the invidious  effects of human relationships  are  general  and  inescapable.  Within  the  great  human  family  are hidden subterranean links that no one can discern because they are buried like an enemy's mines where one would least suspect their presence and where one would be sure to tread.
The  enemies  to human  happiness  are often  coincidental  circumstances  which defy  rational  explanation. How  can  we find  meaning  in  life, the "belief" that Mr.  Willy seeks to rescue him from the aridity  of his desert island, the faith  that Nell Severance  magisterially declares in Swamp Angel,  when we see that  at any

8

WILSON


moment  coincidences may spring upon us as the hoodlums sprang upon old Mrs. Bylow, precipitating her  death  in  the  aptly  named  story  "Fog"?  Coincidence, sheer  coincidence,  brings  together  Eddie  Hansen,  Mort  Johnson,  and  Victoria May  Tritt   at  the  corner  of Powell Street,  from  where  the men  march  to their accidental  death  and Vicky to her unexpected apotheosis as a teller of tales. What I call  accident  other  readers  may  consider  providential  design, a view we can justify when  we see fortuity  as part  of a comprehensive  plan to educate charac­ ters to their  responsibilities and to love. In Love and Salt Water, family members meddle  with  good  intentions  in  each  other's  lives, but  the  results  are  almost disastrous. Though she is a strong swimmer-Wilson's repeated  metaphor  for a self-reliant,  courageous  woman-Ellen  Cuppy  nearly  drowns,  and  worse, she nearly  causes  the  death  of  her  beloved  nephew  Johnny.  From  this experience Ellen learns  that  "She  had  better  mind  her own  business. Everyone  had  better mind their  own business." But in a family where everyone's business is inherently  connected,  bound  together  by inextricable  and  untraceable  human  ties, letting others be, an allowance  that  is surely one equation  of love, may prove impossible. Acceptance  of others does lie within one's capacity. Ellen learns to value Morgan  Peake  and  to trust  George  Gordon's  love  which her  terrible  accident  could not jeopardize.  We  learn  a lesson I find frightening:   that  the "circle of life is extra­  ordinary," including  relationships among  people widely separated  in space  and time whose lives touch  by coincidence, by accident  (or design? what design?), in ways that  may affect  them  "perhaps temporarily," Wilson equivocates, "or  per­ haps  permanently  and  fatally."  Wilson's uncertainty   catapults  me into  an  un­ knowable  world  where,  I  suspect, only caprice  rules. We  may be trapped: we may escape. We may be rescued:  we may die. Whatever  happens seems beyond control  and  beyond  reasonable  prediction.  We do  not  know  where the  hidden mines in life are buried and which will explode when.



IF 1 WERE TO  IMAGINE EDITH  WHARTON  taking  over Wilson's novel Love  and Salt Water, I would feel certain  that  fate would be cruel. Once Ellen and  Johnny  fall into the sea, I would expect them to drown,8  for again and
again  Wharton shows that  life is so constituted  that  rescue never comes when we need it, when  we are  trapped  by the capacious web woven by circumstance, by small  choices,  weak  mistakes,  fortuitously  untimely  encounters,   by  a  lapse  in manners,  a break in traditions that  Wharton  like Wilson fastidiously portrays. No one rescues Lily Bart  in Wharton's inexorable  novel, cruelly entitled  The  House of Mirth. Lily  dies,  probably  by her  own  hand,  and  Selden  arrives,  when  he arrives,  too  late.  Only  death  releases Lily from  the  despair  which  time  makes inevitable.  Sometimes,  Wharton will not allow even death  to give her characters

9

WILSON

respite  from  pain.   They  live  on  in  Ethan  Frome,  caught in  an  incredible  web woven of human passion and  irrational accident. Perhaps I am saying that for all the similarities between them  as keenly observant novelists  of manners, Wharton as an American has a vision of life somehow  inaccesssible  to Wilson.  Providential rescue  from   seemingly   inescapable  dangers,  like  those   besetting Oliver Twist, belong  to the  tradition of the  Victorian novel  with  which  Ethel  Wilson's fiction seems  to  me  continuous. Though  Wilson  creates  for  her  readers (and  for  an American  reader   especially)   a  magnificently highlighted Canadian  landscape, her  vision of life seems as unconditioned by this landscape as her famous travel­ lers  who  retain   in  the  new  world  an  "innocence" they  acquired in  the  old­ whose  innocence consists  precisely  in  their  preservation of  English  traditions in the  new  Canadian city of Vancouver where  they  come  to live with  family  con­ nections  intact. In  The  Innocent  Traveller,  when  Sister  Annie looks at  the  vast Canadian country passing elliptically  outside  the  railroad  window, she says:  "We  shall  have  to  try  and  learn  new  ways ... and   I for  one  am  quite  ready."9  But almost  immediately, as she sees the  "same  sheep,  same  cows,  same  horses as in England," she dispels thoughts of a new life and  thinks instead, "I am  rather old
... to be able to assimilate  great  change." But her daughter Rachel is not too old. Yet though Rachel falls in love with  the  Canadian landscape, responding  mysti­ cally, ecstatically, to its "dark endless prairie," she lives in Canada the traditional life of filial  responsibility she  would  have  led  in  England. We  all  know  that  the Canadian  landscape figures  in  Wilson's  fiction  as  a  constant  source  of  wonder and  beauty, giving to her themes of nihilism and  faith, isolation and love, random­ ness and  providence a  richly  symbolic  representation  through  abundant indige­  nous  detail.   Moreover, her  characters need  the  space  of the  Canadian continent both   to  effect  their   escapes  from  confinement  and  to  discern   "the  miraculous interweaving of  creation -the  everlasting web"  that  engenders their  faith   in God's  boundlessness.  Ultimately, however,  Wilson  uses a uniquely Canadian set­ ting  to universalize human experience, to arrive at  truths that transcend place or time. To say this is not to diminish  her stature as a Canadian writer, but  to praise her as she praised  "great" writers-for being "both regional  and  universal.mo
Willa  Cather, the  American  writer  with  whom   Wilson  would  inevitably be compared, also  sought  for  universal  meanings, those  expressed  in  the  cycles of nature and  the  passage of time.  But when  Cather dealt  with  time, she focused  on change-upon development, maturation, and  decline; upon  history. She recalled, with  nostalgia, a past associated  specifically and  uniquely with  the transformation of  America from  an  inchoate land -"the  material out  of  which  countries are made"11 -into a country. In  A Lost Lady, a novel to which  Hetty  Dorval bears almost  startling formal resemblance, the fate  of a beautiful woman melds insepa­ rably  with  the  fate  of  the  American West.  Marion Forrester  disillusions young Niel Herbert as Hetty Dorval  does Frankie Burnaby; but  the American woman's

10

WILSON


betrayal  of the ideals of honour  with which, Niel (and  Cather) believes, a great country  was created  represents a crisis in history, the  passing of an old chivalric order  to  make  way for a new crass society represented  by such grasping  men as Ivy Peters. When the "lady" of Niel's visionary dream of the West becomes "lost," an entire  community  dependent upon  her civilizing force suffers. Mrs. Forrester understands her cultural  role, that she personifies a dream  and must purvey grace, beauty, and  manners  to a crude primitive people living through  a time of  histori­ cal transformation. Even when she is depleted, without money, friends, or honour, Mrs.  Forrester  tries with her dinner  party  to bring civilization to the impervious stolid young  men  of Nebraska.  Like Antonia  in My  Antonia  and  Alexandra  in
0 Pioneers!, Mrs. Forrester's destiny intertwines with the future of the American West, and  as time diminishes her brilliance, it also fades the dream  that,  Cather believes, imbued  the American  past with heroism. Hetty's  fall from grace carries no such historical connotations.  Frankie's  changed perceptions of Hetty invite no thoughts  about  the destiny of Canada. The context of Wilson's drama  is a moral world in  which  change  arranges  for  the  convergence of two lives that  momen­ tarily  flow  together,  like  the  cojoined  Fraser  and  Thompson  Rivers,  and  then separate,  leaving a young woman to ponder the unfathomable mystery of human  relationships.  Hetty's  amorality  remains unattached to historical or even psycho­ logical  causalities  (though we might  infer  that  her  fatherless  childhood,  which she thought  also motherless,  may have conditioned  her  to the sense of isolation that  becomes merely selfishness). Hetty  appears  gratuitously  in  Lytton  and later in London  as a wanderer  who brings disorder because disorder is inherent  in life and  will make  its  presence  known  even  when it  is hidden  behind  the  face  of beauty. Marion  Forrester  belongs to her particular  time and place; and  when she suffers displacement, her loss entails the loss of Captain  Forrester's  heroic dream of the future,  of Niel Herbert's romantic dream of the past, and of the pervasively shared  American  Dream.  Even Hetty's end in the novel seems adventitious  as she disappears  into  a country  where she is a stranger. But Marion  Forrester  remains an irrefrangible  part of the land in which her husband and her honour lie buried. She  survives  in  Niel's  consciousness as "a  bright,  impersonal  memorym2  -the memory of the glorious "promise" that  life extends to youth and  to young coun­ tries.  Hetty  Dorval,  like Topaz  Edgeworth,  both  sharply  defined  but  atomistic characters, can be forgotten.
In  her own wrong way, Hetty seeks freedom and security, the goals of all Wil­ son's  women,  incompatible goals perhaps  and  perhaps  not  susceptible  to  clear definition.  By freedom,  Hetty  means a life without  "complications," a term  im­ mediately familiar  to the American reader because it recurs thematically in Ernest Hemingway's famous  collection  of  short  stories, In  Our  Time. Unlikely  as  a comparison  between  Wilson and  Hemingway  may seem at first, it discloses con­ tours  in  Wilson's  landscape  that  perhaps  the oblique light  of an  American  per-

I I

WILSON

spective can best reveal. Both writers were consummate  stylists using style to curb meanings too turbulent to release. Both were masters of understatement: of irony
-each creating  a discrepancy between tone and meaning; and of elision -each leaving  narrative  gaps implicit with meanings,  often terrible  meanings,  we must infer. Both sense the tension between natural beauty, which endures,  and human vulnerability: "you are walking along through  the grass on the cliff top, admiring the pretty  view, when-crack  crack." 13 Either  could have written  this sentence (though   "pretty" would  have  had  a special ironic  intonation in  Hemingway) , for both have been alerted to the profound  insecurity of human  beings who may at any moment  be surprised by violence. Their  unsurpassed fishing scenes drama­ tize a concern  with surfaces and  depths, as well as a love of the art of  fishing, of nature,  and  of the  possibilities for self-possession in solitude.  Like Hetty Dorval, Nick  Adams  in  "Big  Two-Hearted  River,"   the  greatest  of   American   fishing stories, seeks to escape human "complications," but unlike her, he has already felt the  world  "crack" beneath   him,  literally,  shatter   as  the  bombs  of  war  have exploded.  The  wounds he suffers end his innocence  as a young traveller. A trau­  matized  hero, hurt  physically and  emotionally,  he  wants  to be alone so that  he can  be let  alone and  perhaps  recover the balance  he has lost. He needs to hold himself "steady," like the big trout  in the depths of "deep,  fast  moving water" who resists the current  that could sweep him away. Hetty's  avoidance of compli­ cations  is different,  an effect of laziness, indulgence,  or egoism. She wants  to be alone to do so as she pleases because she considers herself an island, free from any intrinsic  connection  with  others  who  share  her  human  state.  She  desires only sensuous ease, at  least superficially;  perhaps  beneath  this desire lies fear  of the possibly dangerous  currents  of life.  Like Nick, though  for different  reasons and to a different degree, she feels the tenuousness of her control over her own destiny. How little it would take to throw her off-balance-only some shipboard gossip. "I want  security,"  Hetty says, "I  want  it badly"; and  though  Frankie  and  her mother  suspect  Hetty  of  artfulness, they believe that  her plea for security is real, that  Hetty is truly "frightened." She does not know, of course, all that she has to fear, the war that "life and time" are arranging. After Nick crawls inside his tent, "the  good  place,"  he thinks "Nothing could  touch  him."  Eventually,  however, inevitably, he will have to enter the swamp and fish in its "tragic" waters. Neither he nor Hetty  can  remain safe. Hetty  Dorval  ends in uncertainty, the milieu that,  I believe, Wilson, like Hemingway, finds as natural to us as rivers, forests, moun­ tains, and sky.
"We  have  no  immunity," Mrs. Severance  tells Maggie,  saying  in effect that
life cannot  be ordered  and that  in its disorder, it allows no one to remain secure. Though   Wilson's  characters   travel  and  run  and  hide,  trying  to  escape  from "Trouble," they can never rest at "the  good place."  Where is it to be found,  her women ask, the place where they can be secure? Is it by the Similkameen  River,

12

WILSON


where  Maggie  hides from  the  meanness of her husband  only to become  threa­ tened  by the  jealousy of Vera  Gunnarsen?  Is it at Comox on Vancouver Island, where Lilly remains  isolated with the Butlers, or in the Fraser  Valley, where she merges into  the order  of the  Matron  and  her well-run  hospital?  But  here, inex­ plicably, a strand  of her  former  life as a hunted  creature reappears, woven for­ tuitously  into  the  web  no  one  can  elude.  The  Chinaman Yow  arrives  in  the Valley, and  once more,  Lilly is on the run, seeking in the anonymity  of Toronto  the security now imperilled  by this figure from her past. Love and  marriage seem to  promise security;  but  the  happiest  of marriages,  like  those of the Cuppys  in Love and Salt Water  or the Bumabys in Hetty Dorval or the elder Edgeworths in The  Innocent  Traveller, may be terminated  abruptly  by death.  Impersonal forces as well as  people  threaten   any  woman's  security at  any  time.  So do one's own emotions,  especially the  welling of loneliness. Even  Vicky  May  Tritt  recognizes the danger  of "insupportable" insights into one's isolation, insights that  threaten  the security she tries so carefully to create through the meagre "arid" routine she calls her life. Like Lilly, like Hetty, Victoria  May wants  to be safe. But "at  un­ expected  times"  (chosen,  one  guesses, by chance), she  cannot  help  catching  a "frightening" glimpse of  "something  vast" that is usually "concealed," something always "there" -like "the  sorrow of humanity.m4  To  protect  herself against the pain of "revelation," Vicky May "averts  her gaze" and  waits until what she can­ not  bear  to see is  once  more  concealed.  But she cannot  deny this revelation  of human  sorrow,  and  neither  can  Wilson's fiction, though  it  persuades  us also to avert  our  gaze  from  the  suffering  it  reveals. Like  Wilson's  women,  we  want security  and  see it jeopardized  by life's hidden  mines. How  can  we avoid them
-the destructive  emotions  of others,  jealousy, meanness, the  will to oppressive power, and the accidents of chance?




AT	comes, it seems, from an innate  human  impulse towards order;  and when we share the order we create, we perform the beautiful  act of charity. It occurs almost always in Wilson's fiction in a clean  well-lighted  room, to use one of Hemingway's famous  phrases. Again and  again, Wilson shows that  we may find safety in an interior  made comfortable by human  hands,  though  when this safety remains unshared, it seems pathetic  if not simply ludicrous.  Vicky May's room, illuminated  by one small naked bulb, is not  a well-lighted  place, but  when Vicky is there, reading  her old newspapers or her movie magazines  and  munching  on her apple, she feels "safe": "Here  in her room she was at  home and  secure.mIn her diminished  way, she has found  the good  place for  which  all the  homeless, alienated  characters of American  fiction yearn.  Perhaps  because  I have so often identified myself with these homeless in-

WILSON

secure  Americans,  I  particularly  appreciate  the  recurrent image  in  Wilson of a small protected  world that  human  hands create. If a "room  lit by a candle  and in a silent and  solitary place is a world within  itself,"16  it is one that  the human being makes and offers as a refuge to other members of our oddly assorted chaotic human  family.  When  Vera,  near  death,  enters  Maggie's  room,  Maggie  thinks that   warmth,   not  words,  should  communicate  between   these  two  estranged women:  "it  seemed  to her  the least important thing  that  she should  speak and make words, and the most important thing that  a fire should bum  and warm the cabin  and  then  there  would  be, somehow,  a  humanity in  the  room."  Maggie warms  Vera  as she has warmed  Mr.  Cunningham, rescued  by her  hands  from death.  She  instructs  Angus "to  start  the  fires everywhere" when  they  return  to open  up the camp.  She understands  that  a clean  well-lighted  place offers us the only  security  we  can  expect  in  a  vast  impersonal  complicated  landscape   that could overwhelm  us with its immensity as well as its indifferent  beauty,  its inevi­ table darkness, its dark waters, its fog. Earlier, alone in a cabin, she had retrieved her  own life. At  Chilliwack,  Maggie repossessed herself in a room that she had first to hold private  and inviolate so that later she could share it with others who come to it  ravaged  by the sea and  by life. "The cabin  was a safe small  world enclosing  her" -this  image  of security  is appealingly   regressive :   Maggie  has gone back to a former and authentic  identity; to a place still untouched  by time;  to  a  primitivism  that  historical  change  will challenge  and  in  time  destroy;  to elemental  needs, like the human  need for  warmth, touch, food.  Maggie  cooks, and  Lilly  cleans;  and  both  women,  by  responding  to  elemental  needs,  create order  in  a world that  can fall quickly into chaos. "It seemed as if order  flowed from her fingertips,"  Mr. Sprockett thinks, watching Lilly straighten out his hotel room.17   Intuitively, he feels she will bring order  into his life, disrupted  and left in confusion by his wife's death.  Making  Mr. Sprockett comfortable  becomes Lilly's equation  of love as she earns  her  right  to  respectability  and  marriage through  years of self-discipline spent in creating  a  clean  well-lighted  place for others. If the world were not intrinsically chaotic, asks the American  reader, why would we so delight in women who bring order? If it were not so menacing, so full of immi­ nent "Trouble," why would we seek refuge in a solitary warm  room;  why would women  who  can  bring  order  into  others'  lives be on  the  run  seeking for them­ selves a security  that  has been  denied?  If the world  were not indifferent  to our needs,  why  would  we tum  again  and  again  to another  for  comfort  and  com­ passion, so highly valued in Wilson's fictional world?
As  an  American   reader  who  is also  a  woman,   I  respond  ambivalently  to Maggie cooking at camp and  Lilly making  Mr. Sprockett  comfortable, though  I celebrate  their  ability  to care for others.  I like the desire of Wilson's women for self-possession, and  I am not always pleased at  their  acquiescence  to a servant's

WILSON


role, no matter how  much  I admire the order  they bring  into others' lives and  by this means  into  their  own.  Guiltily,  I enjoy  Myrtle's merciless domination of her employer; but  at  the  same  time  I am  annoyed at  simpering weak  Mrs.  H.  X. Lemoyne who  "was   terrified   by  Myrtle's eyelids,  and  could  be  disciplined any minute that   Myrtle chose.ms  What an  invention-those formidable drooping domineering eyelids  and  those  outlandish soap-opera instantaneous lies! Wilson makes  me  laugh, and  for  the  sheer  pleasure of laughter I am  grateful. Laughter may  also instruct  us,  and   Wilson's  funny  satiric  treatment of  Myrtle  sets  into perspective for  me the serious impelling need almost  all her women  have for free­ dom.   Myrtle does  not   want   anyone   to  dominate  her -but  neither   do  other characters. Ellen  Cuppy initially  refuses George  Gordon's proposal of  marriage in Love  and  Salt  Water  because  she  did  not  "want to  be controlled  by  him  or  by anybody." As soon  as  he  proposes,  freedom  becomes  essential  to  her,  and  mar­ riage  seems,  mistakenly as  it  turns  out  (or  so we imagine), "a  prison  far  away  with a stranger." Mrs.  Emblem, though  "formed for" male companionship, resists another  marriage, having   discovered  that  one  of  "the  joys of  privacy" is that  "she  now  owns  herself." For  a  hundred years,  Topaz  Edgeworth has  remained irrepressibly herself.  Oddly, of all the  characters in The  Innocent  Traveller, only she  sees Canada as  offering  its immigrants freedom. She  suggests  a quintessen­ tially American theme  -that of a new life in a new land. "This is a free country, isn't  it,"  Topaz asks  insistently, as she  crosses the  prairies  on  her  way  to  Van­ couver; "We've come  to a free  country, haven't  we?"  But  Topaz's idea  of free­  dom   (she  is here  defending her  right  to enter  the  gentlemen's smoking  car)   is, of course,  comically skewed.  For freedom means to Topaz being  her idiosyncratic self-obsessively  loquacious, basically  idle  though  busy,  dependent upon  others  and  yet detached -a likeable  and occasionally  admirable woman  who might fill us with  dread at  the  ultimate inconsequentiality of a human life. Having always been  treated lovingly,  Topaz  responds  to  life  with  a  continuous interest  which  effects  nothing. On   a  few  crucial  occasions,  she  shows  generosity  of spirit  and  exquisite   manners-when  she  defends   Mrs.  Coffin  in  danger of  being  black­  balled,  and  earlier, when she withdraws from  Mr.  Sandbach's dinner party.  I like her  best  when  she  curses  Mr.  Sandbach aloud  in  her  bedroom, but  that   may reveal my secret wish for  release from  gentility  rather than  the  novel's moral high point.  If Topaz  remains a  free spirit  through the  Family's financial and  moral support, other  characters like Maggie Lloyd  and  Lilly struggle towards freedom through the  murky   circumstances of desertion, betrayal, jealousy,  moral  mean­ ness, isolation. Both  undergo a "rebirth" in which they act as their own midwives. In  her cabin  in  Chilliwack, Maggie  Vardoe is reborn as Maggie  Lloyd.  In  the beauty   shop   of   Miss   Larue,  Lilly   Waller   becomes   immutably  Mrs.   Walter Hughes, an  identity which  permits  her a new life as Lily  [sic] Sprockett.  Wilson

WILSON

tells us that  fitting Lilly with a wig and advising her on wardrobe, "Miss Larue, on a fine creative spree, was assisting at the rebirth  of a free woman, Mrs. Walter Hughes."  "But  will it change  me?" Lilly thinks, "Shall  I be safe?" Perhaps  she can never be safe, but she has become free of feckless Lilly Waller.
Wilson's free characters  are also fugitive, running like their American  relatives to a territory  ahead  where they can elude repressive men  like Edward  Vardoe, Huw  Peake, or Yow. They  need the space of the  Canadian landscape  to effect their escape. But  while Wilson's sense of spaciousness suggests to me the Ameri­ can theme  of freedom  (for space and  freedom  are  often synonymous in  Ameri­ can fiction),19 her manner seems alien to American  writers, insofar as we differen­ tiate  them from  the British. Occasionally, Wilson reminds  me sharply,  and  with pleasure,  of  Virginia  Woolf, whose consummate  novel  To  the Lighthouse  she recalls to me with a  work that  apparently  I like much  more than  her Canadian critics. In Love and Salt Water, Wilson shows the passage of  time through  elision, as Woolf  does in  the  central  section of her  famous  novel.  Like Woolf, Wilson evokes the  menace  of the sea and  the  world of nature  which  makes the  warm safety of home so essential to the human community; of fortuitous death described but  not dismissed in one sentence; of a child's wish-fulfilment-to see the seals, to  go  to  the  lighthouse-that  brings  unanticipated  realizations  and  unantici­  pated  terrors.  Ellen learns to let her sister Nora  be-and  letting  others  be  (as Maggie  Vardoe  thinks, her husband  "would  never have let me be")  emerges as the essential equation  of love that Woolf works out in Mrs. Dalloway.20  As I read Wilson, I en joy her  evocation of  English literature, her command, her deftness, certainty,  and  lightness of tone,  her  confidence in  the quixotic  phrase,  the  wry aside, the moralizing  moment.  I find in her work both the fastidiousness and  the insouciance  that  belong to one  who possesses a native  tongue  as her  birthright. But I miss the struggle contained within American  writers like Theodore Dreiser, Sherwood  Anderson,  or  Gertrude  Stein. Bereft of a language  of their own, they laboriously invent  a  style that  turns  out  polyglot, awkward, cacophonous,  collo­ quial,  confused,  but  also powerful:  a style that  confronts,  without  possibility of easy evasion, the  profoundly  difficult and  unanswerable questions of life. I find Wilson's use of  John  Donne as a kind of last resort for coping with ultimate  prob­ lems  uncomfortably   facile.  I  brood  with  Dreiser,  whose  work is impressed  in­ delibly upon  my American  imagination, over the possibility that  man  or woman is a:n island, a person essentially alone and adrift in life, like Hurstwood  or Carrie in Dreiser's ponderous and imponderable novel Sister Carrie. Perhaps,  as Dreiser shows, we are creatures  driven by chemic compulsions that  nullify our pretensions to personal freedom.  In Dreiser, great economic forces, as well as hormones, are released upon  the  world to determine  not only an  individual's fate but  also the evolutionary  direction  of a  vast society. When  Wilson  described  the  growth  of

16

WILSON

Vancouver, she made it seem, by her simple cartoonish description, almost comic: "Down  came  the  forests. Chop.  Chop.  Chop.... The  forests vanished,  and  up went  the city."21  Wilson does note that  "men  of the chain-gang" were doing the chopping,  but  she disposes of their  plight and  of the implications  of power and powerlessness, and  of tremendous  historical transformations that  effected radical social reorderings -of  the entire  drama  of growth,  industrialization,  urbaniza­ tion,  and  their  consequences-in three  words now rather  terrible  for  modem  ears attuned  to cries of ecological depletion and economic greed:  "Chop. Chop. Chop." Because  Dreiser  could  not  be  fluent,  lacking  a  literary  language  and tradition as an  American  writer,  because he could not  reach  into a bag of past poets and  pick out a consummate line that  would epitomize a world view -"no man  is an  island" -because  he had  to struggle in  his life and  in  his work, he became  enmeshed  in  the  endless web  about  which  he wrote,  a  web woven by desire, irrational chance,  coincidence,  natural  forces,  evolutionary  drives, social designs. He  cared  about  his characters  in ways that  could  not  allow him to be detached  or superior.  Never could I imagine Dreiser describing a woman or man as  Wilson  describes  Victoria   May:   "Insipid,"  "unimportant,"  "anonymous," "stupid." Wilson is "cool"  but Dreiser heatedly compassionate and committed  to his characters. Though   obviously unlike  Dreiser,  Willa  Cather  shared  Dreiser's absorbing  interest  in  characters, no  matter how humble.  In  One  of Ours,  half­ witted  illiterate  Mahailey  emerges  as loving and  lovable,  worthy  of the esteem given her by the family she faithfully serves. None of Cather's women is "insipid." Each  is potentially  a creator  of life, is herself alive, and  finds life interesting.  A minor  character in Sapphira  and  the  Slave  Girl epitomizes this interest:   "Mrs.  Ringer  was  born  interested." Though   Mrs.  Ringer  is poor,  unendowed,  alone, "misfortune and  drudgery  had  never  broken  her  spirit.... She  had  probably never spent  a dull  day."  If  her days were never dull for Topaz,  they seem so to us; but  all the days of  Cather's women belong within a large significant pattern  in which, whatever they do, they sense themselves a creative part.  Nell Severance would have  been  quelled  by them,  I think, for they could have articulated fully and  precisely the  faith  she asserted in vague incomplete  terms. Even  when they lived in Canada, like Cecile Auclair in Shadows on the Rock,  they sensed them­ selves part  of a process that  was creating out of individual  and inchoate  efforts a whole way of life, creating  by preserving and by making anew, by continuing  and beginning again, as Cecile continues the French traditions  her mother  transmitted  to her and  makes them  pristine and  permanent  by transferring them  to Quebec. Unlike Wilson's women,  Cather's seldom seek security;  rather,  they provide it as they make a home and a great nation. A hidden mine that Cather  describes is not explosive, except with life, as we know from the famous image in My Antonia of children  bursting  out  of  a subterranean storehouse -"a  veritable  explosion of life out of the dark cave into the sunlight."

17

WILSON



QHAPS  I AM  SAYING THAT  in American  novels the sense of the  new -of  a new land,  new pulsating  cities like Chicago,  pristine  prairies of colour-drenched   grass,  new  railroads,   new  openings,   new   beginnings -stirs American  readers  deeply  because  they  share  the  writer's  concern  with  a  new American  language  and  a new style. Americans  know  they must  create  a style that  expresses a perennial sense of discovery, dream,  and  disillusionment.  As an American  novelist,  Dreiser could  not  rely upon  what  was said  before,  because the  city  he  describes had  not  existed  before, and  even  as he  wrote,  he saw it grow,  develop,  and  change.  He was driven  by the  historical  urgency  of  captur­ ing a kaleidoscopic scene that  would not stay still long enough  to be memorial­ ized.  Wilson feels neither  this urgency -the  typical  sense of rush  that  Ameri­ cans experience  as their daily lives-nor Cather's nostalgia over  what has been and  will be no more. Her anecdotal  ease in dealing  with  the  past  in The  Inno­  cent Traveller  seems inaccessible to American  writers, who invariably  regret and long for  a  past  that  has disappeared. Think  of Cather's  A  Lost  Lady  or Scott Fitzgerald's   quintessentially  American  novel,  The   Great  Gatsby.  Not  without reason, the  most popular  American  book is entitled  Gone  With the Wind, and the  greatest  Southern   writer,  William  Faulkner,  shares  with  the  most  widely read,   Margaret  Mitchell,  a  passion  for  the  past  to  which  American   readers resonate  as  they  typically feel loss and  separation   as  their  real  experience.  In Vancouver,  Wilson's  characters  find  continuity:  as  Annie  noted,  correctly  or not, "the  same sheep, same cows, same horses as in  England." Beyond the city, in  mountains, lake  areas,  woods, Wilson's  characters can  recapture   their  own past, or at least exorcise a present they find  oppressive;  in unchanged places (of which few  remain  in America) , they can  retrieve  a pattern  of peace  they once knew. They  cannot  "escape" from life, as Nell Severance  tells Maggie in Swamp  Angel,  but   they  can  recover -recapture  the  past  and   recuperate  from  the present.  Nick  Adams  knows  that  a  wounded  American   can  hope  only  for  a temporary   stay  against  chaos  before  he  fishes in  "tragic" waters  that   Maggie may not  have  to enter.  Maggie  will not  escape Vera  Gunnarsen's jealousy, but Nick  will never  escape  himself. Nor  will he find  refuge with  others, even tem­ porary  or turbulent  refuge, as Lilly found  with the Butlers and  Maggie with the Gunnarsens.   Like  Wilson,  Hemingway   turned   to  Donne   for  a  definition  of human   relatedness,  for directions on  how  to deny  his own  bleak  vision of life, one  which  I  believe  he found,  finally, both  inviolate  and  intolerable. Much  as he wishes to  deny  it, he saw that  man  was an  island -separate, alone,  adrift. In  For Whom the Bell Tolls, Hemingway's  hero tries to link himself with others in a concerted  effort to make shared ideals prevail, but the occasion of his union is  war,  and  the outcome  is death.  Robert  Jordan lies alone,  merging  himself in lyrical rapture  and  in terror with the earth.  Hemingway's vision of life is ecclesi-

18

WILSON

astical:  it  contains  the  vanity  of human  wishes-even the  wish for love, mar­ riage,  family-and  the  etemality   of  the  earth   upon  which,  with  an  order denied  to chaotic  human  affairs, the sun rises. As a reader  of American  fiction I feel  buoyed  by  Wilson's  way  of  tucking  war,  chaos,  and  violence into  the parenthetical asides of her  novels; but  unlike Maggie, when she thinks she can swim  about  obstacles,  I  feel insecure  on  surfaces, accustomed  as  I  am  to the inevitability  of depths.  Even while I delight in reading of a happy  but thorough­ ly inconsequential life, like that  of Topaz  Edgeworth,  I cannot  help remember­ ing  other   characters  to  whom  nothing   happened.   I  remember   Marcher   in Henry  James's  "The Beast in  the  Jungle,"  and  then  I  feel my  pleasure adul­ terated  as I consider the life of a woman to whom nothing  happened -though everything  in the world  was happening-and who made nothing  happen,  who in effect was  powerless? Powerlessness, fear of isolation, alertness to violence and acts of violation,  the  vagaries of chance  and  indifferent  if not  malign forces, as well as the  urgencies of economic and social inequality  which must lead to con­ flict-so I learn  from The  Grapes of Wrath-how could I not be conditioned by all this which  I encounter again and again in American  fiction? Abundant as it is, American  fiction is deeply mined with skepticism and  uncertainty.  Its land­ scape is vast, beautiful,  and  bleak. I have travelled in it for many years, and  to deny its influences, to say I am still innocent and can enjoy without  wryness the surface  skimming  of a  waterglider  or even the complex skill of a  juggler  (jug­ gling a weapon  of destructive  power)  would be to deny the  power of literature.
Wilson celebrates  this power by consciously drawing  attention  to the creative
act of story-telling. Her  characters  tell stories-are unabashed  liars;  and some­ times  by  withholding their  stories, they  assert their  autonomy, their  possibility of eluding  facts and  consequences by refusing to acknowledge  that  they exist. In Love and Salt Water,  Ellen  Cuppy  tries tJo  keep her mother  alive by not telling that  she had  died,  and  her sister Nora tries to keep her son whole by not telling that  his  hearing  is impaired. Frankie  collaborates  in  the  fiction  Hetty  Dorval creates  by  not  telling  what  she knows about  Hetty;  and  Hetty  herself remains somehow inviolable  because she has not told the truth  about  herself, by this withholding  making  herself inaccessible even to Frankie  in whose consciousness she lives. Frankie  knows she is inventing  the story of Hetty  Dorval;  this act frees her  of  Hetty's  influence  and  at  the  same  time, since  stories  last,  makes  the influence  of  Hetty's  distinctive  beauty  and  power permanent. Through the art of story-telling,  Frankie  both  dispels the  trance  in  which  Hetty  has placed  her and  captures  it for all time;  and she becomes a force powerful enough to cause an  explosion  in  which  another  story, Mrs. Broom's version of the  past, will be released from  the  depths  of silence in  which it lies buried.  Frankie  makes Mrs. Broom  tell the  story  she has withheld,  and  we cannot  minimize  the  power she exercises in forcing,  without  forethought,  another's  confession. In  "Tuesday and

rg

WILSON

Wednesday," characters  make up stories all the  time.  Mort  and  Myrtle  lie  un­ conscionably,  and  by their  lies, they subdue  others,  sometimes each  other, and so exercise their  wills. The  stories  that  give  them  momentary  victories  cannot save them,  however, from the fate that  coincidence  has laid in store;  but  rescue does come from  a most unlikely source, from  the story of heroism that  reticent neurotic  Victoria  May  Tritt  invents. By telling her story, Vicky frees herself, if only for a moment,  from the prison of shyness, insecurity, silence, and  a sense of worthlessness; from  the  inconsequentiality  of  her  life;  from  powerlessness. She effects a change  in how Mort  will be remembered, in how  Myrtle  will feel, and in  how  an  inexplicable  accident  will evermore  be  described.  She  changes  her own  behaviour,   her  very  identity  from  a  silent  and  withdrawn  woman  to  a purposeful  active  storyteller,  the  focus of rapt  attention. In  The  Equations  of Love,  Lilly's  lies become  the  truths  of  her  life,  the  means  by  which  she  can possess herself  and  give a  happy  useful  identity  to her  daughter. Through her own fictions, she learns how to serve others,  and  though  she seeks isolation, she belongs to a community  that  includes the  Matron, the  hospital,  and  finally the wide  world  where  she  may,  perhaps,  live  as a  free  woman  with  the  man  to whom she brings comfort.
This  confusion of lies with truth  celebrates the story-teller's  power to convince
us of the  reality  of fiction;  it also dramatizes  the  mysteriousness of life whose essence we  cannot   know  with  certainty.  As  Wilson's  stories show,  we cannot know each other  because we present, in everyday life, social faces that  conceal a real identity  shown  only to a friend or lover. Though Mrs. Forrester smiles and talks and  entertains in the story "Truth and  Mrs.  Forrester," her  reality  exists thousands  of miles away from  the room where  people come and  go and  where all her familiar  things are placed -thousands of miles away where her husband lies ill,  possibly dying.  The  "true   Mrs.  Forrester" is the  loving  wife,  not  the charming  hostess who lies out of politeness and  boredom or the helpless employer "in  thrall" to her garrulous  maid. "Truth is so hard  to tell," says Mrs. Forrester, "while fiction is the easiest thing in the world."22  Certainly,  Ethel  Wilson makes fiction seem easy, though  the truth  of her  women  is hard  to define-whether they are  utterly  traditional creatures finding happiness  only in caring for others, cleaning,  cooking,  creating  comfort,  yielding compassion.  Is Family  their  essen­ tial need, and  marriage,  though  initially avoided  (as by Ellen Cuppy  and Hilda Severance), their  ultimate  fulfilment? Is Mrs.  Emblem,  in "Tuesday and  Wed­ nesday,"  with  her  pink boudoir  and  her  pink complexion  and  golden  hair  and her  three  husbands,  truly  an  emblematic  Woman   as the  story  insists?  "Vicky Tritt  does  not  know  what  it feels like to be a  woman," the story tells:  "Mrs.  Emblem  knows  nothing  else." "Truth is so hard  to  tell,"  Ethel  Wilson  might answer,  and  she enacts  the difficulty in  her equivocal  style. She shows us com­ plexities, gains and  losses within a single situation, and generosity and  withhold-

20

WILSON


ing  within  a  single  person:   "I knew  I  was in the  web,"  Mrs. Severance  says, explaining  her  desertion  of her  daughter; "I  did  the  best I  could  in the  web, and  it takes God  himself to be fair  to two different  people at once." One  must juggle one's  responsibilities, as Mrs. Severance, a skilled juggler, knows; and one must  distinguish  between  the  symbol and  the  essence, deciding  finally for  the essence, though   one  has  become  attached   to  the  symbol  as  though  its glitter were real.  Perhaps  the  truth  is that,  like Wilson's characters,  we are  all story­ tellers. When  we tell our  own story, we come into possession-not of objective truth,  but  of a reality we imagine, that  of the person we would wish to become, like Mrs.  Walter  Hughes,  or wish to retrieve, like Mrs.  Maggie  Lloyd. Perhaps our  own  power  of invention  is the  truth  about  us, and  those who  possess this power strongly  imagine  a  person into being, becoming in fact  their  own fiction, as Lilly becomes  Mrs. Walter  Hughes.  Naming one's self represents a quest for one's  own  truth.  Topaz   Edgeworth   never  changes  her  name  in her  hundred years  of  life,  and   her  reality  as  a  person  becomes  evanescent,  forgettable - except  in  the story that  Wilson tells. Lilly changes her name several times, and in the end  accepts  the name  of a stranger  in order  to become the self whom she has imagined  into  being. Kind  as he is, her future  husband  takes possession by reiterating  the  name  he will impose-"LilySprockettLilianSprockettLilySproc­ kettLilianSprockett." The name delights him and with it he makes Lilly a charac­ ter in the story of his life. "Would  you mind me calling you Lilian?" he asks, and Lilly, either  entirely  secure now in her achieved identity  or else willing to relin­ quish it for another  that  promises love, does not mind losing a name that gave her "self-possession." Is Wilson mocking Lilly when she has her confess her secret at the end of her story-that she wears an "adaptation" -or is she rejoicing in the erasure of Lilly's past, once so full of "Trouble?" The  truth  is hard to tell, though the fiction, "Lilly's Story," is easy to read. "Perhaps" or "perhaps not," "I think," "it  was impossible to say," the omniscient  narrator  says again and  again  in Wil­ son's  fiction,  implying  that  even the  all-knowing story-teller  does not  know the truth.  Sometimes  we as readers have a choice, because the narrator, uncertain  of the truth,  offers two exclusive possibilities, two adjectives or nouns linked together by and  though  they require  or. Perhaps  we need faith  because we cannot  know the  truth.  This,  at  least,  is what  I  think  when  I read  Wilson's  fiction, but  of course I cannot  be sure. Her fiction makes me certain and uncertain.
Of  her descriptive  powers I have no doubt. Her effulgent images of the North­
ern Lights, of the  perfect V of flying wild geese, of indigenous creatures, chang­ ing landscapes,  sky and space, are famous. Her short short story, "Hurry, hurry," to which I referred  at the beginning, is charged with natural scenery which seems to me translucent. Mountains, trees, slanting  rays of light, fog, birds, dog, hawk, heron, bushes, blackbirds,  steep grassy dyke -all  take on a brilliant  and  unfor­ gettable  urgency, a cosmic meaning whose truth might be so terrible that it eludes

21

WILSON

us as the image  of the "hunched" hawk gives way to that of the "humped" corpse of a  woman. Human life and  animal life seem  internecine. The hawk  "with its sharp beak and  tearing claws ... would  have  mauled the terriers, and  they would have  tormented it."  The  hawk  stares  brightly, and  so does  man  the  murderer, compelling the  woman to  hurry  away  as "he  held  her  eyes with  his eyes." She escapes,  running. The  murderer shows  her  mercy,  or  perhaps only  indifference. The  woman he  has  killed  lies "beside  the  salt-water ditch." His  tears  must  be salty as he stumbles along  "sobbing, crying out  loud." Does he cry in regret  or for love lost?  Are  love  and  salt  water  inseparable in  Wilson's world?  If some  lucky ones escape  the salt  water,  if they are rescued  from  drowning, is it at the sacrifice of others,  like the  drowned boy in Love  and  Salt  Water or the  murdered woman in "Hurry, hurry," characters linked  with the living in Wilson's great  web of life? Meanwhile, the  light  falls  obliquely on  the   mountains. Each  tree  stands out separately. We  see  each  clearly.  We  see each  fade.  "The light  is gone"-the story  is over-"but those  who  have  seen  it  will  remember." The   memory  of Ethel  Wilson's  story lies deeply  buried  in our  consciousness,  our  imagination. It is a  hidden   mine  that  we might  at  any  moment of recall  explode with  terror and delight.

NOTES

1 In her essay "A Cat Among the Falcons"  [Canadian Literature, I (Autwnn  I959),
10-Ig], Ethel  Wilson avers  that  she is  not  a  "qualified   critic,"  not  one of  the "falcons  [whoJ  cruise  high  above  and  search  the  literary  plain."  Rather,  as a country  cat,  she remains  indoors,  keeping  her  literary  convictions  safely private while she watches the sky where the "formidable and  trained" -and contentious
-falcons soar. Having  been invited  to give an  American  perspective  upon  Ethel
Wilson's  fiction  at  a  conference  distinguished  by Canadian critics  immersed  in Wilson's work, life, and  milieu, I recognize my affinity with  the country cat. If I venture  out with the falcons, I do so in the hope of making criticism "interesting'' and  perhaps  even "amusing,"  the effects that  Wilson valued  in diversity of critical opinion.   [ED. NOTE:  This  paper  was first delivered  at  the  Wilson Symposium at
the University of Ottawa  in Ig81.]
2   Hetty   Dorval   (Toronto:  Macmillan,   Laurentian  Library,   1967),  p. 86.  Hetty
Dorval was published originally in 1947.
8  Ethel  Wilson, "Hurry, hurry,"  Mrs. Golightly  and Other  Stories  (Toronto:  Mac­ millan,  I 96 I), p. 106. "Then   the light fades  [Wilson  writes] ... , but  those who have seen it will remember."
4   Love and Salt Water  (Toronto: Macmillan,  I956),  p. I52.
5  "'I don't  care for fresh air myself except for the purpose of breathing. I exist here
... and  here ... ' Mrs. Severance touched  her heart  and  her head.  'Everything of
any  importance happens  indoors ... ,'" Swamp Angel  (Toronto: McClelland  &
Stewart,  Ig62),  p. I49• original ellipses. Swamp Angel was published originally by
Macmillan  of Canada  in I954·
6   "Tuesday and  Wednesday,"  The  Equations  of Love  (Toronto: Macmillan,  I974 paperback,  published  originally  in  I952).  See  pages  I27-28,  in  which  the  word

22

WILSON


caused appears seven  times,  linking  together an  incongruous sequence of events that  "life  and  time" effect  through "manipulations ... of circumstance and influ­ ence  and  spiked  chance and  decision  among  members  of the human family."
7   "A drink  with  Adolphus," Mrs. Golightly, p. 79·
8   David  Stouck  reported to the Ethel  Wilson Symposium (Ottawa, 1981)  that  other manuscript versions of Love and Salt Water  do show them  drowning.
9  The  Innocent  Traveller  (London:  Macmillan, 1949), p. 101.
10  See Wilson's  letter of July  12, 1953, to Desmond  Pacey,  quoted in his book Ethel
Wilson  (New  York: Twayne, 1967), p. 25.
11  The phrase  comes from  a famous  passage in My Antonia  that  describes  young Jim Burden's first  sight  of  Nebraska: "There was nothing but  land: not  a country at all, but  the material out  of which countries are made" (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, Sentry  Edition, 1954), p. 7· My Antonia was published  originally in 1918.
12  A Lost  Lady  (New  York: Random House,  Vintage, 1972), p. 172. A Lost Lady
was published originally in 1923.
13 Love and Salt Water, p. 149.
14   "Tuesday and  Wednesday," The  Equations of Love, p. 68. u  "Tuesday and  Wednesday," p. 77·
18  Swamp  Angel, p. 146.
17  "Lilly's  Story," The  Equations of Love, p. 262.
18   "Tuesday and  Wednesday," p.  101.
19  In  an  essay on  modern American city fiction,  I discuss this relation between  space and   freedom. See  "'Residence  Underground':  Recent Fictions of  the  Subter­ ranean City," Sewanee  Review, 83  (Summer 1975), 406-38.
20    I have  discussed  this  thematic meaning of love in  Woolf  in  the  essay "Love  and
Conversion in Mrs. Dalloway," Criticism, 8  (Summer 1966), 229-45.
21  The  Innocent  Traveller, p. 124.
22   "Truth and  Mrs. Forrester," Mrs. Golightly, p.  I I 1.




THE HOME OF THE BEWILDERED

Naomi Rachel

The birches  guard  the straw  lawn, a chorus of singers stripped of their  finery.
The old clapboard house, as if touching memory, harbours a corniced roof and  gabled  windows.
Its age is revealed  in the peeling  paints, layers of effort and  the strength of summer suns.
A wheel  from  an ancient farm  machine gathers moss; by the well, a china doll robbed  of her silk curls stares exposed  at the sky.

POEM

On  the veranda a rocker, stock-still  for many  a year, cradles nothing but  dust.
The oak darkened to a motley black, like wet leaves fallen
and  trampled.
Cracks  from the high straight back  to the wide armrests seam a tale of neglect..
These are only objects.

Enter the home of the bewildered. Austin  lives here.
Martin lives here.
Marilyn  as well as others  are housed  in these rooms, walk over
the oak floors, up the balustraded stairs, seek faces in carved  mirrors, seasons through the  panes.
Silently  they eat in the kitchen  by the wood stove, later  they gather
at  the hoarse piano. They  are not demented.
Their only sin is muddlement, the inability to reconcile  what  is happening here to what  happens there.
They  have forgotten how to place  truth along  with dread on
the horror  shelf and  walk past gingerly  to the travel  section  beyond. They  reside in a state of nonplusation more  aware than  reason, more trying than  insanity.

Austin  with pipe and  worn  red sweater  has not for years been able to fathom why we die and is lately  uncertain how we live.
He came  to the home of the bewildered from  a crossroads  without
even a main  street.
A wide place in the road  without locks or mailboxes.
In  that  place a young girl, hired  to babysit  imaginary children, ended  up three  weeks later  at  the bottom of a body of water with  lead weights on her arms.
Austin  laments  a private hell so public.
Unable to bear  the intense  horror of premeditation, he renounced his former  home  to come here,  to make  bewilderment his dwelling.

Martin cannot  grasp radiation.
To  the side of the warm  fire in the front  room,  he reads scientific articles,  blueprints of the ultimate device,
political  statements, sagas of one disaster  after  another war. Martin ponders fate as mutation, his perpetual thoughts work like termites  against  wood.
In solitude  he transmits only small sounds, communications strangled in fear.

POEM


Marilyn reads newspapers, clicking her  tongue  on the back of false teeth.
She is caught up, poor dear,  in details.
Is it possible to survive  ten years of torture in a political  prison? Can  it be that  twenty children were murdered by one man  within five days?
Will a woman raped  seven times in that  manner survive forgiveness?
Marilyn makes extensive charts with a complex code of comparisons. She does not ask why, only how.
Why is a word  not uttered lightly in the home of the bewildered.
A word  which  creates so intense a purgatory is not to be taken  in vain.

The inhabitants of the home of the bewildered do not often connect. Slippered feet shuffie through the dim halls, heads  nodding in
tune  to a shared  grief too common  to mention.
They look neither to the right  or left;  they have
discovered a tunnel  vision that  contains its own peripheral field. "How are  you?" becomes a question too complex to answer  without
either dishonesty or guilt.
James once announced that  it was raining in the right  side of his brain, and  it was understood how intense  was the shine in the left hemisphere.




FOREST
 


Ron Miles


I. Words  whispered  in your sleep :
needles on the tree you hide  behind.

n.   Seekang is no game.
My dreams are littered with abandoned campfires.

m.   Paths re-cross my memory.
We chase each other  deeper into  known  territory.

IV.    If the wilderness  had edges we might  fall out of it.

A FEMINIST READING OF "THE STONE ANGEL"



Constance Rooke


LSTONE  ANGEL ffi a au-dully o,-ganized novel which operates  on  two  obvious  levels:  the  present  time  of  the  novel which  takes  us through  Hagar's last days on earth, and the past time of memory which moves us
in strict  chronological  order  through  the major  events of her life to explain  the old woman  whom we see now. In support  of this structure, we are made to sense the physically decrepit  Hagar  as a mask behind  which the true  Hagar  continues to reside. The  novel is also elaborately  based upon  the  biblical stories of Hagar and Jacob  and  upon sacramental  patterns of confession and communion, so that the reader  may well arrive at yet another  sense of the novel's two dimensions:  in the foreground   (both  past and  present)  we have  the realistic tale of a woman's pride,  and  in  the  background   (where  confirmations   or  hidden  meanings  are supposed to lie)  a Christian  context within which we are to measure the signifi­ cance of that  pride. Thus,  we might suppose that  Hagar's pride is something like Eve's and that  it is seen by the author  as reprehensible,  the cause of her fall from the garden.  Yet here we falter.  In  the realistic foreground  we feel that  Hagar's pride is not merely her downfall, but also her salvation -and  we may question what  sense to make  of that  within  the  religious context.  Our  difficulty is com­ pounded  by Hagar's refusal to capitulate  finally to that insistent religious dimen­ sion. While she does clearly make certain accommodations, it is equally apparent that  Hagar   approaches  her  death  still  in  the  spirit  of  those  lines from  Dylan Thomas  which Laurence  employs as epigraph: "Do  not go gentle into that  good night. / Rage, rage against the dying of the light."
The  difficulty which has been described here comes from our expectation  that background  and foreground  should cohere, and  perhaps from an assumption that any extensive  use of the Bible and  sacraments  will very probably  signal  belief. Some of this difficulty can be resolved if we approach The  Stone  Angel from  a feminist  perspective.  If we consider the role of Christianity in Hagar's life as a woman,  we  may  find  another   justification  for  the  weight  which  is given  to Christianity  in this novel and  a partial  explanation for  Hagar's resistance to it. We will also discover another significant area of backgrounding, an area of femi-

FEMINISM


nist concern  which explains  or corrects our  vision of the foreground  in which a woman  is chastised for  her mistreatment  of men. These various  backgrounds - the past time of the novel, the religious and feminist dimensions -must be con­ sidered together if we are to understand The Stone Angel as a whole. They cohere as an  historical  explanation of how Hagar  came to be the woman she is at the point of death.
.The feminist  dimension  of The  Stone  Angel can  be described  as a kind  of
backgrounding because  there  is almost  no overt  consideration  of these themes, and  because the foreground  may seem to be occupied  with antithetical ideas. If Hagar  is Everywoman,  she is apparently  a woman on trial for her crimes against men. Indeed,  Hagar  sees in the woods of Shadow Point the imaginary  props and players for a  jury trial in which she will summarily be found  guilty;  her sense of guilt is also indicated  when she finds an old scale with its weights missing. But if the trial were a fair one and her attorney as eloquent as Margaret Laurence,  there is little question that  Hagar  would be let off on compassionate grounds. The Stone Angel is told in the  first person, by Hagar  Shipley-so that  Laurence  must do all her pleading behind the scenes. In that background she prepares a devastating brief, a full-scale feminist analysis which operates as counter-weight to the crime of  pride.  While  she  admits  Hagar's share  of responsibility, Laurence  also cites patriarchal society as a kind of instigating  culprit;  and she argues that  men and women  alike have been injured  by the forces which lead to Hagar's intractable, compensatory   pride.  The  novel avoids polemic by this fortunate  circumstance, that  Hagar  cannot  herself articulate  (because historically she does not know)  the feminist  view of her  case. Thus,  Laurence  is compelled  to embody  these ideas rather  than  to discuss them,  and she does so ultimately in defence of her heroine.
Hagar is consistently identified with the stone angel which is the central image of the novel, indicative  obviously of her pride and blindness. But the angel is in fact  a  monument  to  Hagar's  mother,  "who  relinquished  her  feeble  ghost  as [Hagar] gained  [her] stubborn  one." The  association between angel and  mother will require our careful attention, for it is obscured by Jason Currie's  evident lack of interest  in  his dead  wife and  by our  knowledge that  the stone angel is essen­ tially a monument to his own  pride.  Indeed,  so thoroughly  has she been oblite­ rated  that  even  her  name  is missing from  the  text.  Hagar  has  supplanted her mother,  rejected  her image,  and  chosen instead to mirror  her father's  pride. But in the shadow of that stone angel which she becomes is another angel, ministering and mild-the kind of woman we take her mother to have been.
This  stone  angel  is an  imported  creature,  not anything  original  to the  Cana­ dian  soil. The  would-be  pharaoh  Jason  Currie  has purchased  it from  Italy,  pre­ sumably  because he thinks he can establish his pre-eminence in  Manawaka only through   an  image  crafted  abroad.  Clearly  his is the  colonial  sensibility  which looks to the old world for its values and for a continuation  of  class privilege. By

FEMINISM

the time Hagar  is an old woman, Jason's  pretensions  (like those of Ozymandias) will have turned  to dust:  the Currie-Shipley  stone will be recognized by a new generation  as simply  Canadian, marking  the  graves of two pioneering  families with  little to choose  between them. The  angel itself  is "askew and  tilted"; and  even  marble  does not  last  forever-as  we know  from  the  description  of Hagar's aged skin:  "too white ... too dry, powdery as blown dust when the rains failed, flaking with dryness as an old bone will flake and  chalk, left out in a sun that  grinds  bone and  flesh and earth  to dust as though  in a mortar  of fire with a pestle of crushing  light."  In the light of truth,  which is partly  the recognition  of our common mortality, the proud marble angel will finally be dissolved. But there is another  angel  which  also  must  be laid  to rest. And  that  is the image  which Jason   Currie  seems  to  have  imported  from  Britain:  the  Victorian image  of woman  as "The Angel in the House," a seminal conception  of the Victorian era which is celebrated  in Coventry Patmore's poem of the same name. This angel is soft, but  it is ironically as rigid in conception  as the marble  image which Jason Currie  erects  over  the  corpse of a  wife driven  to  an  early  grave-a  woman puzzled,  we may  suppose,  that  her  accommodation to  the  feminine  ideal  has served  her  no  better  than  this.  The  stone  angel  in  this  sense expresses Jason Currie's  privilege as a man, as well as the  privilege he enjoys as a man  of  sub­ stance.  Jason  had  little  use for  women,  and  little  reverence  for  those feminine virtues which inspired men like John  Ruskin or Coventry  Patmore  to such absurd heights of idolatry;  but he shared their more significant belief in male superiority, and he accepted  their notions of what behaviour and what education were appro­  priate for a lady.
Hagar  very naturally  wishes to exhibit  whatever  qualities  are consistent  with her pride and are admired  by others. Her nearest  judge is Jason,  who encourages the male virtues in her and  neglects certain  of the feminine  virtues which he will expect  her  eventually  to display. Proud  of her  refusal to cry in the scene where he  beats her  with  a  ruler, Jason  remarks  that  she has a "backbone" and  takes after him. He is proud also of her intelligence, but wishes it had been granted  to his sons instead.  So  Hagar  is courageous,  proud,  brainy -everything  that  her father  admires;  and she is also female, so that  these virtues are perceived as use­ less. Moreover,  they  prevent  the subservience which  Jason  ultimately expects of her. The  tender  virtues are not developed in Hagar: she perceives them only as weakness, a malleability which is unacceptable to her sense of self. She repudiates  the silliness of other  girls, dislikes anything  flimsy or gutless. Only when she be­ comes aware  of the  standard  which  holds Lottie  Drieser's  china  doll  prettiness superior  to  her own  strong-boned  handsomeness  does Hagar begin to share  her father's  view that  a genetic irony has transpired  in the Currie  family:  she should have  inherited   her  mother's  "daintiness," and  the  "graceful  unspirited   boys" should  have  had  their father's  ox-like strength.  Symbolically,  however, Hagar's

FEMINISM

backbone  and  other  insistent  bones preserve her from  the  repulsive formlessness which is stereotypically  assigned to women, even as they condemn  her in another sense to the rigidity of a stone angel.
In  particular, Hagar   loathes  the  vulnerability  which  she associates with  the
image of her  mother,  and  which she perceives is equally despised by her father. Jason Currie  would occasionally squeeze out a tear at the thought  of his late wife, for the edification  of "the  matrons of the town, who found  a tear for the female dead  a reassuring  tribute  to thankless motherhood." Margaret Laurence  reminds us here of the perils which attended  childbirth in the days before antibiotics, and which required  that  women  be rather  forcibly locked into a notion of themselves as mothers  to the  race. Hagar  has no wish to be a martyr; thus she approaches the birth of her first son reluctantly,  convinced it will be the death  of her. Often in the novel, images of the birth process seem repulsive -as when Hagar observes the "mammoth matriarchal fly ... labouring  obscenely to squeeze out of herself her  white  and  clustered  eggs."  As a  child  Hagar  refuses  to  be  lulled  by  her father's crocodile  tears;  she  knows that  her  mother  was "the  brood  mare  who lay  beneath  [the  monument] because she'd  proved  no match  for  his stud." So Jason  Currie  pays his token dues to womankind in pretending  to honour his wife for her status  as victim, but  Hagar-instead of feeling compassion or anger on her mother's  behalf-merely shares in his contempt for the biological slavery of women.
Jason's   wife, in  the  daguerreotype which  Hagar  keeps of her,  is "a  spindly and anxious girl ... [whoJ peers perplexed out of her little frame, wondering how
on earth  to please." That little frame is, of course, the straitjacket which Hagar wishes to avoid  in  her  own  life. It  requires of women  that  they live to please others,  and  it  is  clearly  pernicious.  But  Hagar  reacts  too extremely,  becoming hidebound  in pride -so that  only at the point of death  can she engage in "truly free"  acts of maternal tenderness.  The  first of these, involving  the  pursuit  of a bedpan  for her young room-mate  in the hospital, is possible only because Hagar has been liberated  from  an  actual  straitjacket.  The  second  of her free acts also signifies a  release  from  constriction  and  a  motherly  reaching  out  to others,  as Hagar  breaks the death  hold of her wrestling match  with Marvin  (in  the role of Jacob) to give her son the angel's blessing. Although she does not remember  her mother  in  these last  hours  of life, Hagar  as she approaches her own grave  has achieved  something   like  a  reconciliation  with  that  other  angel.  So  it  is that Hagar's last  thought, as she  holds the glass of water  triumphantly in  her own hands,  taking  what  is there  to be had, is "There.  There." These are the mother words,  which  she  has  failed  to supply  for  others in  their  deepest  need -and which should  have been as free as water. At least three  times before in the novel these  words  have  appeared, once when she thought  but  could  not say them  to Bram,  once when she was trying  to calm herself into  remembering the name of

29

FEMINISM

Shadow  Point,  and  once when she congratulated herself for standing  upright  in the  woods:  "There. There."  Motherless, Hagar  has for  nearly  all her life been unable to give a mother's  love and consolation to the people who needed her. In these last words, she appears  as mother to herself:  it is a beautiful  resolution of her independence and her need.


As THE  WOMAN WHO  WAS  NOT   THERE,   Hagar's mother figures powerfully  also in the lives of her two sons. Their  sexual identity  is un­ certain.  Dan  is described  in  terms which  may suggest effeminacy,  and  Matt  is
childless for reasons which are bitterly apparent to his wife (the suggestion is that they did  not  make love, or  not often) . Although  either  or  both of the brothers might be considered  homosexual, Laurence  does not give us enough information to conclude  that -nor does it matter  in the least. What  does matter  is that  the Currie  brothers  have  been  made  deeply miserable  in  two ways:  they  have  not been  allowed  to  experience  or  to  express feminine  tenderness,  and  they  have failed to achieve an imposed standard  of masculinity. These sons are a consider­ able  disappointment  to  Jason  Currie,  whose  expectations   about  what  a  man ought  to be and  what  a woman  ought  to be have damaged  the lives of all his children.
The  extent  of that  psychological damage  to his sons is indicated  symbolically in their  early deaths.  Particularly  in Matt's  case, death  seems a release from an impossibly blighted  existence;  Dan  presumably  escaped  before  the  bars  of his cage  were  altogether  apparent to  him.  At  the  moment  of Dan's  death  we see clearly what  has been missing from their lives:  Matt  wraps around  himself the plaid  shawl  of their  mother, and  so becomes her  in order  to console Dan.  We realize in this poignant  tableau  that  both boys have been sorely deprived by their mother's  death,  occasioned by the birth  of Hagar-and  that  this is one reason for their resentment  of Hagar.  But that feeling might have been avoided if Hagar had  supplied   anything   of  the  mother's  tenderness  which  they  missed on  her account,  or  if their  father  had  done so. At it happens,  Jason  Currie  prefers his daughter. Thus  it would seem to the boys that  Hagar  has deprived  them of both parents, and  they express their resentment  by taking a switch to Hagar  whenever their father  has beaten them. The harshness of the father  is in this way communi­ cated  to the surviving female, who has refused to embody  the gentleness of their mother.
The  plaid shawl is first offered to Hagar,  who refuses to wear it despite Matt's pleading.  It is easier for Matt,  a boy, to assume this maternal guise than  it is for Hagar-who is unwilling to relinquish even for this occasion her own identity, and  particularly  unwilling  to  associate herself  with  what  she  takes  to  be  the

FEMINISM

mother's  frailty. When  Hagar  marries, Matt  thinks of sending her the shawl as a wedding gift, either to mock her lack of womanliness, or to invest her with those qualities which the shawl represents and which she will need as wife and mother. For  whatever  reason,  Matt   changes  his mind.  And  Hagar  goes into  marriage without  the  talismanic  shawl,  unable still to express the tenderness she mistakes for weakness. Repeatedly  we see Hagar  on the point of relenting, of  acknowledg­ ing despised feminine sentiments in herself-feelings which are there, and which are  needed  badly;  repeatedly,  she retreats  into that  pride which  is based on her rejection of the mother image.
Another  face of the angel is mistaken as belonging solely to the stone angel of
her  father's pride,  and  this is the image of herself as lady  which she embraces gladly. What  she forgets is that  a lady is first of all a woman. Essentially, Hagar falls victim to the lure  which is held out by John  Ruskin in Sesame and  Lilies: much as Jason  Currie  would produce a tear in payment to thankless motherhood, so Ruskin sugar-coats  the pill of servitude to men by describing woman as queen of her own household.  Ruskin appeals covertly to a sense of class in his audience, an  eminence  which  women  achieve  through  the standing  of their  fathers  and husbands.  In this way women are to be compensated for the inferior position they hold in relation  to men;  with this pride of class in their hearts, women who were less  than   wholly  convinced   by  Ruskin's  arguments   about   a  woman's  special powers (of gentleness, piety, and so on)  might still be reconciled to the subservi­ ence  which  is in  fact  allocated  to them  as a sex. We  may suppose  that  some women  were so daunted by male authority  that  they neglected to take refuge in this  bounty  of  Ruskin's;   thus,  Hagar's mother  in  the  daguerreotype "looks so worried  that  she  will not  know what  to do, although  she came of good family and  ought  not  to  have  had  a  moment's  hesitation  about  the  propriety  of  her ways." Hagar would  not be so intimidated, but it  takes her some time to realize that  behind the lady she becomes is a woman in harness.
As her  mother  was a brood  mare, so Hagar  when she is sent by Jason  to the
young ladies' academy  in Toronto  is described as "the  dark-maned colt off to the training  ring."  Jason wants the angel of his house to be proud, requires her social arrogance  as an extension of his own -although he naturally  expects obedience within doors. It  was his wife's failure  to embody both  halves of this paradoxical ideal which made  him feel that  her death  for Hagar's life was "a fair exchange." He would  rather  have a thoroughbred who acts like one, so long as he can  keep possession of the  reins. Hagar  is sent  east  because "'there's no  woman  here  to teach you how to dress and  behave like a lady,'" and she returns two years later to confront  her father's evaluation  of the expense. Always the canny Scots mer­ chant,   Jason  examines  his  daughter's lady-like  attire  and  nods  approval, "as though  I  were a  thing  and  his." Hagar  does rebel momentarily  when she dis­ covers her father's opposition  to her plan to become a teacher, but she yields and

FEMINISM

walks upstairs to begin her duties as Jason's  chatelaine.  She pauses there on the landing  to stare  rather  enigmatically  at an engraving  of cattle.  Hagar  is on  her way to discovering that the distance from chatelaine  to chattel,  from dark-maned colt to brood mare to cow, is not so very impressive after all.
Hagar's education  has been as close as possible to that  of a Victorian  young lady:   "I know  embroidery,  and  French,  and  menu-planning for  a five-course meal,  and  poetry,  and  how  to take  a firm  hand  with  servants,  and  the  most becoming way of dressing my hair."  Thus superfluously equipped, she returns to grace Jason's  transplanted haven of Victoriana, his "square brick palace so oddly antimacassared in the wilderness." Like certain  of his brother  merchants  abroad, Jason  requires such aristocratic  trappings  in his chatelaine  as proof to the world (in  this  case, Manawaka)  that  he is a  rising man.  Very  little  of what  Hagar learns in Toronto  would have served her in a career  as a teacher,  still less in the life she chooses after  three years as Jason's  hostess. In each  instance,  we see the irrelevance of imported  concepts of gentility to life on the Canadian prairie. We see also that  an education  which aims at making woman decorative  will keep her dependent  upon  men. Later  Hagar  will envy young women  like the nurse who have been better equipped for autonomous survival.
When  Hagar  has had enough of her father's  rule, she marries Bram Shipley -
because  he offers an  opportunity for  rebellion,  and  because  she is attracted to him physically. Since the erotic component in the masculine image has been care­ fully obscured  in Jason  Currie's  household, Hagar's response to this in  Bram is rebellious; but since Jason's own stereotypical view of masculinity  has been com­ municated   to  Hagar, he  is peculiarly  responsible for  the  fact  that  she  prefers Bram with his exaggerated  masculinity to "the pliable boys of good family whom [Jason]  trotted   home"  for  Hagar's inspection.  Mare-like  and  malleable,  they must  have  seemed  like women  to  her -and  singularly  unappetizing, as most things  female  are  to  Hagar.  There  ought  to  have  been  other  alternatives,  but Hagar  has  reached  the  point  where it is necessary for  her  to leave Jason: the harness is chafing beyond endurance. Bram looks like freedom  because he would look so unsatisfactory to her father. But again,  her rebellion is not so thorough  as she supposes, for Hagar  intends  to reform Bram  into something  more like what her father  has in mind. Thus,  she luxuriates  in his savagery -"he looked like a bearded  Indian" -and in the next instant imagines  him "rigged  out in a suit of gray soft as a dove's breast feathers." Her laundered, fairy  tale vision of the life she  would  lead  with  Bram  is similarly  inspired  by the  poetry  she  has read  in Toronto, so that  Bram  is cast  in  her  imagination as the  primitive  who  would miraculously  prove to be a gentleman.  The  lady  is still in harness, blind  to the rough plebeian life outside her sphere.
Then  Hagar  marries  and  the veil is lifted. She finds that  one of the identities
envisioned for her husband  is impossible: Bram Shipley is obviously not going to

32

FEMINISM

improve  his grammar, or prosper, or take to wearing the clothes of a gentleman. He is not going to do any of these things because he never wanted  them enough, and  because the  contempt  which his new wife shows for what  he is makes him resist any of her efforts to remodel him. Yet Bram had  been attracted  to Hagar largely because of her lady-like ways; like the Victorian  male, he aimed at  pro­ curing  an  angel  for  his house-some gentle female refinement  as a compensa­ tion  for  the  roughness  which  the  male endures in his role as  provider.  Bram's roughness is more literal,  his provision scantier by far -but he is not so different from  Jason  as Hagar  thinks.  Thus,  he gives her the elegant  decanter  as a wed­ ding gift, and  so like Jason  he wants sons (not  daughters)  to create a dynasty. Hagar's response to this ambition  in Bram is "the  nerve of  him,"  anger both at his  absurd  social  presumption   and  at  this  new proof  of  masculine  arrogance. Bram  could not have supposed  that  the angel would find  his manner  so disgust­ ing,  or  that  her  pride  of class  (based  irrevocably on  her  father  rather  than  on him)   would  so  thoroughly   obstruct  her  wifely  subservience  and  love. Bram's genteel ambitions  (never  very strong)  wither in the stone angel's gaze. But there is another  Bram,  corresponding  to Hagar's  more genuinely  rebellious image of the  man  she  married  -and  this  is the  sexual,  laughing   Bram,  the  one  who seemed to promise joy.


W.COME NOW TO   ONE of the most insistent themes of the novel. Hagar  is unable  to let Bram  know the satisfaction she feels in their love­ making;  her pride as a lady forbids any admission of that  kind, so that ironically
she cannot  profit fully from her choice of a virile man. Immediately following her memory  of this forced  coldness in Bram's  bed, Hagar  is seen as an old woman lying flat  on  her  back  and  "cold  as winter"  in another  bed,  remembering  how children  lie down in snow to make "the  outline of an angel with spread  wings." Significantly crafted  in childhood, this snow angel recalls obviously the whiteness and  chill of marble as well as the chastity of the Victorian  angel. The root cause of Hagar's dilemma  is religion, by way of Jason-for  her father's dour  Presby­ terianism  holds  that  sexuality  is evil. Accordingly,  his  affair  with  "No-Name Lottie  Drieser's  mother" is perceived  as dirty, something  to be concealed from decent folk. Jason's  partner in crime is a Victorian stereotype, abused and dwell­ ing in shadows:  "her  face soft and  blank as though she expected  nothing out of life ... she  began  to trudge  up  the  hill." Because women  like  this exist, others may remain  pure ... so absurdly  pure in fact, that  Hagar  is condemned  to enter marriage  with absolutely no information  about what will happen  on her wedding night.  The  sum  of Jason's  teaching  is that  "'Men  have  terrible  thoughts,'" a notion  which  explains  in  part  (for there  are also economic  motives)  the Victo-


33

FEMINISM

rian  allocation  of chastity  to women :  as angels  they  must  compensate  for  the bestiality of men, keeping humanity  as far as possible out of Satan's grasp. Par­ ticularly was the lady to be unimpassioned, while women of a lower order  ( har­ lots and  half-breeds)   might be lascivious in the service of any man  who chose to risk perdition.  Hagar  is not devout, but she is Presbyterian  and Victorian enough to associate sex with  stable beasts and  the lower  classes, with  men who cannot help themselves, and  with ladies least of all. In  this way is her  body victimized
-not that  she must endure her husband's  embrace,  but that she may not labour in love for their  mutual  satisfaction. She is paid for her sacrifice in being known as a lady. Again  and  again. Hagar  relinquishes her claim  to a full humanity­ always in order  that  she may remain  a lady, always failing  to  perceive that  this apparent superiority is a ruse.
Hagar's exposure  to genteel poetry and  art  have also contributed to her view
of love as asexual:  "Love, I fancied, must consist of words and deeds delicate as lavender sachets, not like things he did sprawled  on the high white bedstead that rattled  like a train." Bram has proven more rough  Indian  than  Hagar  had  any reason to suspect. She brings to his house a print  by Holman  Hunt  which she had acquired  in the East  (always the avenue for Victoriana): "I did so much admire the knight  and  lady's swooning adoration,  until one day I saw the coyness of the pair,  playing  at passion, and in a fury I dropped  the picture,  gilt frame  and  all, into  the slough, feeling it had  betrayed  me." Significantly,  this picture  is  juxta­ posed against  another  of horses-which Bram  dislikes, despite  his  passion for horses, because he is annoyed that  Hagar  prefers the  picture  of the thing to the reality. The  horses here  (recalling Jason  as stud  to his wife's broodmare) obvi­ ously signify the truth  of sexuality, in contrast  to the myth  which is perpetrated in  Holman   Hunt's picture.  But  Hagar   knows  that  she  has  been  betrayed,  is angered  not  by the harsh reality of love so much  as by the fact  that  lies such as these pale images of Holman  Hunt  have cut her off from authentic passion.
Hagar   enters  in  her  marriage  to  Bram  a  new  kind  of subjugation. She  has escaped the destiny of Victorian females who sacrifice everything  to their parents, a fate  like that  of the  poor  Manawaka spinster  whose tomb  inscription  reads: "Rest  in  peace. From toil, surcease. Regina Weese."  But sexual experience is not liberating  for her, and  the work she must  perform  for a houseful of men is still drudgery.  That ox-like strength  she would once  have  exchanged  for  daintiness takes her through  twenty-four years of hard labour in which she becomes increas­ ingly like Bram's  first wife. Clara  Shipley, "inarticulate as a stabled  beast,"  was fat, her voice gruff as a man's; likewise, Hagar  gains bulk  (for lack, she believes, of a  proper  lady's  corset)  and  wears a man's  overcoat  without  remembering  to object.  But internally she remains Hagar  Currie.  She is contemptuous of Bram's daughters  by Clara,  coarse women who cannot  in any way transcend  their condi­ tion. At  the same  time, she is reduced  in the  fashion  of all such  farm  wives to

34

FEMINISM

cheating  her  husband   on  the  egg  money  and  never  questions  that  what  little Bram's  farm  makes  is not  his own  entirely. She is Hagar  the  Egyptian  bond­ woman of Genesis, no happier in her servitude than was that other Hagar. Always she rejects  the satisfactions  of martyrdom, the support  which Clara Shipley re­ ceived  from  what  Hagar   calls her  "morbid   motto": "No Cross  No  Crown."  Even  as an  old  woman,  Hagar  will recoil from  the  martyrish  attitudes  of  her daughter-in-law, despising that slavish Christianity  which looks for its reward  in another  world.  Hagar  is too proud  to grovel for profit, and  we may honour  her for that -even as we deplore her failure to appreciate  the labours of Doris, and of those other  women with whom she denied kinship.
Finally,  Hagar   decides  to leave Bram.  The  offence of her  pride  has become
unendurable, and she is anxious to provide another sort of environment for John, the favoured  son in whom she believes the Currie heritage  will flower. Ironically, she must become a servant  in earnest-a woman in uniform,  no longer veiled as daughter or  wife -in  order  to earn  money and  to live in the sort of house she thinks is appropriate for a Currie. Also ironically, her new position echoes that of Auntie  Doll,  housekeeper  to the  Curries,  in relation  to  whom  Hagar  had  sup­ posed  herself  "quite different ... a  different  sort  entirely."  That  she  has  gone from bad to worse is suggested by the peculiarly unsavoury manner  in which Mr. Oatley,  her employer,  has made  his fortune: he has shipped  Oriental  wives into Canada, allowing  them  to plummet  through  the false bottom of the vessel when­ ever  Immigration became  suspicious. This  grisly practice obtrudes oddly  in  the book,  until  we realize  that  it announces  the  author's  concern  with  the  wrongs which have been perpetrated against women by male society.
In  a male fortress, then, a house founded on the death  of women, Hagar  lives quietly  with John  and  at night  (but  only then)  yearns for the body of her  hus­ band.  She has resumed  a version of the place she held in Jason  Currie's house, and  in her retreat  to such spurious prestige has re-created  for John  the prison of her  own childhood.  John  is deprived  of Bram,  as the  Currie  brothers  were de­ prived  of their  father's  love;  and  he is raised to hold  himself aloof  in  pride,  in circumstances  which  reveal the foolishness of pride. When  the Depression strikes and  his prospects are reduced  to zero, John  returns to Manawaka. There  he pre­ sides over the death  of Bram, caring for him as Matt  had for Dan -again as a substitute  for  Hagar, who comes finally but is not  recognized. This is a kind of retribution  for  her  unwillingness  at  Dan's  death  to  bend  and  assume another's role:  now Bram,  the one person who called her Hagar,  mistakes her for "his fat and cow-like first wife," Clara.
During   this  and  a  subsequent  visit to  Manawaka, Hagar   observes the  love which is growing  up between John  and Arlene Simmons, who is Lottie Drieser's daughter. Arlene's  position  in  Manawaka society is superior  to John's,  a  neat reversal of the time when Hagar  could hold herself superior  to Lottie. Thus, John


35

FEMINISM

thinks at first that  he is Bram-like for Arlene, illicit and  therefore attractive  as an opportunity for rebellion. But Arlene is free of such considerations. She has aban­ doned  the sense of class superiority  and  with it the sense of sex as something  a woman  cannot  enjoy without  demeaning  herself. She loves John  and  is capable of  redeeming  him  for  a  life of  joy-not  of  changing   him  exactly,  as Hagar  (thinking  of Bram)  warns her that she cannot,  but of being open to him in such a way that  John  will change and grow of his own volition. That "stiff black seed on the  page"  of her Sweet  Pea Reader,  at  which  Hagar  had  stared  as a child, hoping  it  would  "swell and  blossom into something  different,  something  rare,"  shows signs of doing  just that  in the relationship  of  Arlene and  Hagar's son. See­ ing how freely Arlene can show her  passion to John,  Hagar  finds it "incredible that  such  a spate  of unapologetic life should  flourish in this mean  and  crabbed world"-incredible perhaps, but for an instant she believes in this new, miracu­  lous life for men and  women.
Then  she conspires with Lottie to separate  their children, symbolically to stamp
out their  life,  just as once before she stood by as Lottie  trampled  on the chicks emerging  from  their  shells; in both  cases death  is accomplished  presumably  for the good of its victims. In  the same punishing spirit,  Jason  Currie  had  claimed that  he  beat  his daughter  for  her  own good;  thus  he forbade  her  marriage  to Bram.  In  fact  his motive  was self-interested,  and  the  motive  is what  counts. Hagar,  in need of water  (her well in the wilderness)  at Shadow  Point, will quote Coleridge and  ask "What albatross did I slay, for mercy's sake?" She will wound a gull (the spirit of love)  and think "I'd gladly kill it, but I can't  bring myself to go near enough." The significance of this seems to be that  Hagar's fastidious pride keeps her from an act of mercy, as it had when she refused to wear the plaid shawl to ease Dan's  death.  In  causing  the separation  of John  and  Arlene,  however, their  mothers  do  not  kill "for  mercy's sake,"  but  for  their  own.  John   (whose mother  will not  allow him independent  life)  regresses to the  recklessness of an embittered   child  and  kills both  himself and  Arlene in  a car  crash. Their  life is coolly stamped  out.  And Hagar's albatross, the guilt she feels for John's death, will be appeased  only when  Hagar  in the  role of the  ancient  mariner  can look into her heart and admit the failure of love.


kE CIRCUMSTANCES   SURROUNDING  John's death   are  re­ pressed by Hagar   (and  kept from  the reader)   until  the  turning  and  gathering point of the novel, which occurs at Shadow  Point.  Hagar  has run away from her
house in Vancouver  because Marvin  and  Doris intend  to put  her in the nursing home which Hagar  the Egyptian thinks of as "a  mausoleum": she is running  still from  incarceration, from  any  imposed  image  of herself  as feeble or subject  to

g6

FEMINISM


another's will. Twice  before  Hagar  had  fled -from her father's mausoleum  to Bram's  house, and from  there to Mr. Oatley's death-like mansion in Vancouver. Her destination  now repeats  the flight to Bram's house. The abandoned house in which she first seeks shelter is unpainted, as the Shipley place had been; but now Hagar  takes satisfaction  in its weathered state, thinking how Marvin  (the proper son, who sells house paint) would disapprove as once she relished Jason Currie's disapproval.  Her second shelter, the cannery, with its "rusted  and unrecognizable machinery" and  the "skeleton" of a fishboat, also recalls the Shipley place, where "rusty  machinery  stood  like aged  bodies gradually  expiring  from  exposure, ribs turned  to the sun."  These  connections  are important, because at Shadow  Point Hagar  will confront  the deaths associated with the drought-plagued Shipley place
-Bram's death,  and finally John's.  Hagar,  we may remember,  is herself a figure of the drought: her aged skin is "powdery  as blown dust  when  the rains failed
... left out in a sun that  grinds bone and flesh and earth  to dust as :though in a mortar  of fire with  a  pestle of light."  But she will also, when  she has suffered enough  of such  fiery enlightenment, be granted  the  mercy of water  before her own death  comes in fact.
Significantly,  she  must  descend  a  stairway  to arrive  at  the  place  where  her
genuine  freedom   will  begin.  There  may  be  echoes here  of  that  staircase  she climbed  up  in Jason's  house to begin her tenure  as his chatelaine.  Now, as the stone  angel  topples,  as a  lady  would  come down  from  her  pedestal, so Hagar laboriously  descends  the  half-rotted  steps which lead  to the  beach.  "It's not a proper stairway, actually"-it is returning  to its natural condition,  just as Hagar, "feeling slightly dizzy," abandons propriety to enter the depths of her own nature. On  the way down  these steps she feels the "goatsbeard  brush satyr-like" against her -as Bram had done when they met; and she sees a kind of wildflower called the Star  of Bethlehem,  which  (together  with the Pan  images)  implies the spiri­ tual rebirth  which is waiting for her at Shadow Point. She delighto; in thinking of herself as Meg Merrilies, from the poem by Keats-an old gypsy woman  (com­ mon, by the world's  reckoning)   whose house was "out  of  doors," whose "book" (like  Hagar's)  was "a  churchyard tomb."  It  is as Meg  Merrilies  that  she will encmmter  Murray  Lees, her spiritual double, and drink the wine which is referred to in Keats'  poem. They  will exhibit toward one another  something of that  ease­ giving  generosity  which  is also  contained  in  the  poem:   "She  plaited  mats  o'
rushes, I And gave them to the cottagers I She met among the bushes." Old Meg
is compassionate; she sings and decks her hair with garlands  (as Hagar  does with June  bugs); she rejoices in nature; and she dies. The  model of womanhood  she offers to Hagar  on the eve of her own death  is also one of independence and  of
undiminished   pride:   "Old  Meg  was  brave  as Margaret Queen  I And  tall  as
Amazon." This is the resolution of compassion and pride which Hagar seeks.


37

FEMINISM

On  the  beach,  Hagar  sees a small boy and  girl playing  house. These children are later compared  to John and Arlene, and there is also a connection  with Hagar and  Murray   Lees, who  take  up  residence together  in  the  cannery.  The  girl is nagging  at  the  boy, fussing about  appearances; and  Hagar   wants  to  warn  her that  she  will lose him if she continues  to  be so critical,  so niggardly  of praise. Again, the drought  metaphor  is employed:  "The branches will wither, the roots they  will  die, / You'll  be  all  forsaken and  you'll  never  know  why."  When  she intervenes,  however, the children  cling to one another-and this show of unity makes Hagar  think  that  she has underestimated them,  as clearly she does in the case of John  and Arlene. Rather strangely, Hagar  has claimed that she was herself forsaken:   "I never left them.  It  was the other  way around, I swear it."  In  any case, she is at last beginning to know why. She acknowledges here that love is the water  required  for growth, and that  false pride can kill as surely as the drought. When  love fails, each partner  is forsaken;  both lose, and  blame is not the crucial
ISSUe.
The  turning  point  comes with the arrival  of Murray  F. Lees. Almost her first remark  to  him  is " 'I hope  you'll  excuse  my  appearance,' " but  soon  Hagar relaxes enough  to share  his wine and  listen to  his tale. What  she hears is essen­ tially her own story:  a tale in which religion plays an important  role, where the chief  villains  are  a  concern  for  appearances and  the  denial  of  sexuality,  and where  the  catastrophe  involves the  loss of  a  son.  Murray's  story  is about  two women,  his mother  and  his wife. Rose Ferney  was his mother's  name, "'A deli­ cate name,  she used to say,'" but  Rose was in fact as tough  as a morning  glory vine.  Ironically,  Hagar  fails to see herself in  Rose:  " 'Fancy  spending  your life worrying  what  people were thinking. She must  have had  a rather  weak charac­  ter.' " The  point, of course, is that  the proverbial clinging vine takes many forms, both  strong  and  weak;  the frailty of women can  be deceptive  (as in the case of Rose  or  Lottie) ,  and  the  tenacity  which  is  shown  in  an  obsessive regard  for appearances is also weakness.
Murray's grandfather was a  circuit  rider,  an  evangelist  who  greatly  embar­
rassed his Anglican daughter-in-law; yet Murray  preferred  "'hellfire to [his mother's]  lavender  talcum,' " and  became  himself a Redeemer's Advocate.  The passion of that sect became still more attractive when he met Lou at Bible Camp, for  here it seemed  was a  religion  in  which  " 'prayer  and  that' " were not  the " 'odd  combination' " which Hagar  thinks they are. Then  Lou got pregnant  and began  to  worry  (as  Murray's  mother  always  had)   about  her  reputation. They married,  but her concern grew with the arrival  of a child too big to be premature
-and  her heart  went out of sex. She thought  that  God was punishing  her, and
her religion became  (like Jason's  Presbyterianism) a denial  of the flesh. But the real punishment  came for Lou and  Murray,  as it had for Hagar,  in the death of their  son -and  not  his birth,  which  was the  fruit  of love. Thus,  the  child  is

g8

FEMINISM

killed in  a  fire while  Lou  is in  the  tabernacle  with  Murray,  " 'begging for  the keys of heaven.'" They  are  punished  symbolically, as Hagar  is throughout  her life and  especially  in  John's  death,  for  the denial  of sexuality  which  Laurence opposes so vehemently  in  this novel. In  Lou's original sensuality and  its demise, we see clearly  what  Laurence  believes has been done  to women in the name of religion and  propriety; in Murray's  deprivation  at the change in his wife, we see how this process has worked also to the disadvantage of the male.
Hagar  does not  come to any conscious realization  of her error  in listening to
Murray's  story.  But  it  works on  her subconsciously, as in  a sort of dream  she admits  the  guilt  which  is parallel  to Murray's,  and  he assumes the role of John in order  to forgive her. She also exhibits forgiveness toward  Murray,  first in try­ ing to assuage his guilt over the fire, and second in pardoning him for the broken promise which brings Marvin  and Doris to the cannery. Strictly speaking, Hagar  is wrong when she tells Murray  that  "'No one's to blame'" for his son's death.  Yet there  are times when compassion requires us to act and speak not strictly in accordance  with some ideal of truth,  but with a clear sense of the other's  plight. That  same generosity in which Hagar  has failed so often, and which she is learn­ ing  with such  difficulty now, must in the end  be applied  to  her.  We  judge her less harshly  than  we  might  because we acknowledge  the  power  of those forces which  have  worked  against  her.  At  the  same  time,  we  admire  Hagar's pride precisely because it is a form  (however twisted)  of  resistance to those forces -a statement,  in fact,  that  Hagar  Shipley is her  own  woman.  She  will not  beg at heaven's gate, or cite excuses; if there is a God, he must take her as we do-for better or worse.
With  the  arrival  of Marvin  and Doris at the cannery,  we learn  that  Hagar  is dying. She is taken  to a hospital, where her pride seelllS to be thriving still as she insists that  Marvin  get her a private room. A ward full of helpless women, where you  sleep  "as  you  would  in  a  barracks  or  a  potter's  field, cheek-by-jowl  with heaven  knows who  all,"  is not the  place for Hagar.  Although  she has  just been comforted  by a night in the proximity of Murray  Lees, "Nothing is ever changed at a single stroke."  In fact, the ward is exactly what Hagar  needs, and she is kept there long enough  to make friends with Elva Jardine, a common woman-as if to repeat  in another  key her experience of comradeship  with Murray  Lees. It is at this point  in the novel that  the theme of sisterhood becomes apparent. After a lifetime of despising women,  Hagar  is at last compelled  to  join the ranks of her own sex. Her  democratization (the  lessening of class pride)  takes the form of a movement  toward  her  fellow women in order  to suggest that  Hagar  has turned to pride of class partly as an escape from the humiliations of her sex.
Elva Jardine recalls Mrs. Steiner,  the woman at  Silverthreads Nursing  Home who had  seemed briefly to hold out the  promise of friendship  for Hagar.  It was she who spoke of the  comfort  to be had from daughters (a  point also made  by


39

FEMINISM

Lottie), and  who articulated   Hagar's own  astonishment at  the  way a woman's body can  travel  from  puberty  through  childbirth to menopause  with such  har­ rowing speed that  the mind seems left behind at every stage, aghast and wonder­ ing.  Hagar  liked  Mrs. Steiner  immediately,  but  saw  her  as a trap  designed  to make Silverthreads and  resignation seem attractive. She  ran  from that  "oriental shrug"  which accompanied  Mrs. Steiner's ironic question: " 'Where will you go? You got someplace to go?' " Having run from "oriental" (or submissive)  woman­ hood as far as she was able, Hagar  at last can run  no more; the body is insistent, and  now  what  it  insists upon  is death.  Thus,  she  confronts  her  human  fate simultaneously  with  her  identity  as woman,  which  she recognizes through  Elva and other women in the hospital. It is important for Laurence that  Hagar  should make this connection  before she dies.
Hagar doesn't  like Elva immediately,  for her  pride  interferes,  and  she recoils
as usual from the sort of woman who seems "flimsy as moth  wings." But Elva is tough in spirit,  as well as compassionate toward  other  women and tender  in the love she exhibits toward  her husband.  All of this is a lesson for Hagar,  one that strikes to  her  roots  because  Elva  (by  a  fortunate coincidence)   is from  Mana­ waka.  Thus,  Hagar  can  return  in  imagination  to claim  Bram  instead  of Jason (whom  she might  have  used to impress Elva)   and  to admit  through  Elva  her kinship  with  those  common  women  of  Manawaka she  had  once  denied.  Like Mrs. Steiner,  Elva Jardine faces her own imminent death  as a woman and  with courage, revealing to Hagar  that  the two are not at odds. And she offers another  lesson in  the  way she handles  the indignities of bowel and  bladder  which  have been so oppressive to Hagar  in her infirmity. She struggles  to the  bathroom  on her" 'own  two pins,'" but will accept help when she needs it-as well as offer help, in  the shape  of a bedpan  for Mrs. Dobereiner.  Hagar  proves that  she has learned  what  Elva  has  to  teach  when  (valiantly,  but  with  an  appreciation of absurdity)   she gets the  bedpan  for Sandra  Wong,  her  final  room-mate.  Those bedsheets which Doris washed so frequently,  without complaining  to Hagar  until the end, are  recalled  by these events-so that  we have a sense of many  women joining together  to admit  the realities of the body, and  to deal with the indigni­ ties that oppose them.
In  Sandra  Wong,   Hagar   confronts  the  changes   which   have  occurred   in women's  lives. Laurence  makes her  Chinese so that  Hagar can  imagine  her as "the  granddaughter of one of the small foot-bound  women  whom  Mr.  Oatley smuggled in, when Oriental  wives were frowned  upon." But Sandra "speaks  just like Tina," Hagar's own liberated granddaughter-which places Hagar squarely in  that  generation  of women  whose feet were bound.  The  corset of a lady  was more appealing  to Hagar,  and  would seem more natural; but it is not dissimilar in function,  as both  forms of binding  work to restrict  the movements of women and reduce their size. And all of this occurs for the delectation of the male, whose

FEMINISM


vanity  is flattered  by an  implicit  comparison  to his own  superior  mobility and stature,  while ironically the vanity of woman is provoked to make her collaborate in the process of diminution. In effect, woman turns to self-love in order to avoid self-hatred; she defeats  herself in order  to save herself when she embraces  pride of class or  personal  vanity  as her defence. This image of constriction  (the foot­ binding)   connects  with  that  straitjacket  of  pride  from  which  Hagar  must  be released in order  to get  the bedpan  for Sandra  and  to bless Marvin -her  two "truly  free"  acts -and  so reveals the deep interpenetration of  these  themes in the  novel.  Hagar's own  complicity is further  implied  when she  thinks, "Maybe  I owe my house to her grandmother's passage money. There's a  thought." She does not  pursue  that  thought, but  we may -and  we realize that  Hagar's  mis­ take has been to  join forces with the oppressor (all that Jason Currie  has repre­ sented in the way of patriarchal, Victorian arrogance), and that  she has done so for  her own  profit, although  that  profit has been  illusory. In  fact,  she has been deformed  as badly as those other women from whom she had hoped to dissociate herself. As their feet were crippled, so in her compensatory pride Hagar  has been kept from  the natural, healthy  development  of feeling which  was her birthright as a woman and as a human  being.
Hagar   welcomes the  changes  which  have  come about  for  women,  that  the
young nurse has training which allows her independence  and that  Sandra Wong can  refer knowledgeably  to hysterectomies, but she knows that  nothing  changes all  at  once:   "The plagues  go on  from  generation  to generation." With  Tina, however, it seems that  progress has been made, for contrary  to her grandmother's expectation, Tina  has found  "a  man  who'll bear her independence," and  Hagar sends her a sapphire  ring as a wedding  present. With  this ring, the novel comes a full circle. It  had  belonged to Hagar's  despised mother,  and  should have gone (as Hagar  tells Doris in a gesture of reconciliation)  to her despised daughter-in­ law first of all. It  might  also have gone to Arlene, of course, if  Hagar  had  pos­ sessed the  wisdom then  that  she shows now in sending  the ring  to Tina.  Hagar  does not envision here a future  for women without men, but a situation  in which both men and women will be free to love one another  and to respect each other's needs. She cannot  undo  the past. She will not deny the person she has been. But in  the  act  of ring-giving,  Hagar  succeeds in linking four generations  of women with  some  faith  that  whatever  plagues  continue,  of  pride  or  other  oppression, there will also be increasing  joy.





LAURENCE'S FICTION

A Revisioning of Feminine Archetypes


Stephanie A. Demetrakopoulos




MARGARET LAURENCE SAYS THAT SHE  write< what .be believes everyone has always known.i  Yet she is making  a radical  change  in the whole literary  tradition by re-telling from  a  woman's  point  of view traditional and  archetypal  feminine life patterns  that  have been portrayed  hitherto by male authors  only. In this essay I will trace her delineation  of feminine archetypes  and culture  in  Africa,  both  native  and  colonial;   her  development of  Stacey  and Rachel  as modem  versions of Aphrodite  and  Artemis,  of Hagar  as a redeemed yet Medusan  Crone, and of Morag as perhaps a new form of feminine individua­ tion, a positive Arachne,  weaver of truths: an  artist  on the move but grounded  in the matrilineal roots of mothering.  My analysis follows the chronological  pub­ lished order  of her work except for The  Fire-Dwellers and  A  fest of God which
I treat together as two sides of one coin.
,It is Laurence's very ease and  comfort  at being a woman  and  an artist in the same skin  that  makes her  work so remarkable,  so trustworthy, so full of vision and compassion. Even her Somali travelogue,  New Wind  in a Dry Land,  reflects this in her loving study of all the natives and especially her feminine insights concerning  the women. By the end of the book, she has articulated the plight of the  native  women,  as well as some of the  problems  of the  wives of foreigners working  in  Somaliland.  She makes us aware  of  the suffering  of native  women who "fail" to produce sons; the repression of individuation in the native women through  enforced  "modesty"; the plight of the young fifteen- or sixteen-year-old girls  married   to  elderly  men;  and  the  low status  of  the  women  in  tribal  and religious traditions: "a  woman's  wits and  her sharp  tongue  were often her only protection." We are  also made  aware  of the terrible  and  "desperate boredom," "the  sense of life being lived pointlessly and  in a vacuum" suffered by the wives of the English stationed in Somaliland.
Because Laurence  is a woman,  the Somali  women  felt they could ask her for help with  the considerable  pain that  menstruation, intercourse,  and  birth  caused them,  because  of the  clitoridectomy  they  underwent   at  puberty.  The  nomadic women  who led the camels especially found  this pain  unbearable. Laurence  had only aspirin  to offer them and was obviously chagrined  at having  to commit "the

ARCHETYPES


lunatic audacity of shoving a mild pill at their  total situation.... " She tells them she has nothing and

The  nodded  their heads, unprotestingly. They had not really believed I would give them anything.  Women had always lived with pain. Why should it ever be any different?  They  felt  they ought  not  to have asked. They  hid  their  faces in their cloths for a moment,  then spoke determinedly of other things.

With  this  single  passage,  Laurence demonstrates what  happens when  a  woman is available for  women  of other  lands  to approach; she also shows that  the many people  who  defend  these  mutilations as mere "traditions" do not realize the  pain these  women   undergo in  their   most  purely  female  functions. Yet  we  see  the courage and  perseverance of the  women  in spite  of it all.  Self-pity  is never  part of Laurence's own  baggage, and she recognizes a certain heroism  in these women who have so much  to endure but complain so little.
Her   sense  of  the  plight   of  the  children   again  reflects  her  feminine point  of
view. She  learns that  one  of the  camp  followers "Asha ... about eight  years old with  a curiously  vacant and  withdrawn look" is a child  prostitute. Laurence gives the  unkempt, dirty  little  girl a comb,  the  only  thing  she  ever  asked  for;  during the  months the  family  travelled with  their  camp,  she frets  over  how  to help  the child.  She does nothing because  there  is no way to take  the child out of the situa­ tion, and  to interfere would  only make things worse:

But  Asha's  half-wild,  half-timid  face  with  its ancient  eyes will  remain  with  me always, a reproach  and a question,

Typically feminine, she  internalizes the  plight  of  these  people.  Her  response  to the  children of Africa  is always  maternal, womanly, and  compassionate:

Malaria is the  largest  child-killer  in  all  Africa ... the  children  under  six ... are most afflicted, and  it was these young ones whom I found  hardest  to look at.... I turned  away,  unable  to  meet  those eyes.... To me, it seemed that  these children died pointlessly, and  vanished  as though  they had never been, like pebbles thrown into a dark and infinite well.

This  is an  especially  feminine image,  a  Demeter  sense of  death as a devouring Hades or even  Chronos -death is not so much  a brutal antagonist as men  tend to see it.2 It is rather like a return to the  unconscious or  to non-being. The chil­ dren   seem   to   have   flickered   into   consciousness  only   to  sink  back,   to  be re­ immersed in the dark waters  of origin.
It is Margaret Laurence's response  as a woman  and  a  mother that  gives the following  passage its depth and  poignancy:

Driving  along  the  Awareh-Hargeisa  road, we saw two burden  camels laden  with the  crescent-shaped hutfrarnes  and  the  bundled  mats.  They  were halted  by the roadside, and  as we drew  near, we saw one of the beasts slide to its knees, sunken in the apathy  of thirst  and  exhaustion.  Beside them, squatting in the sand, was a

43

ARCHETYPES

woman, a young woman, her black headscarf smeared with dust. She must have possessed, once, a  tenderly beautiful  face. Now her face was drawn  and  pinched. In her hands she held an empty tin cup. She did not move at all, or ask for water. Despair  keeps its own silence. Her  brown robe swayed in the wind. She carried  a baby slung across one hip. The  child's face was quiet,  too, its head  lolling in the heavy  heat  of  the  sun. We had  a  little water  left  in our  spare  tank,  and  so we stopped.  She did  not say a word, but she did something  then which  I have never been able to forget.
She held the cup for the child to drink first.
She was careful  not to spill a drop. Afterward,  she brushed a hand  lightly across the child's  mouth,  then licked her palm so that  no moisture  would be wasted.
To  her, I must have seemed meaningless, totally unrelated  to herself. How could it have been otherwise? I had never had to coax the lagging camels on, when they would  have  preferred  to stop and  rest and  die. But  what  I felt as I looked into her face, was undeniable  and  it was not pity. It was something  entirely different, some sense of knowing in myself what her anguish  had  been and would be, as she watched  her child's  life seep away for the lack of water  to keep it alive. For her, this was the worst that  Jilal drought  could bring.  In all of life there  was nothing worse than  this.

I quote  this  haunting passage in its entirety because  it not  only shows her  depth as a  human being  a:nd as a  woman  but  is also  exemplary of  her  superb prose style,  which   keeps  her  vision  from  ever  becoming sentimental. She  emphasizes the  complete fatigue  and  inertia   of  the  small  group through the  details  of  the camel  that  "slides" and  "sinks." This  stillness and  the  poignant stasis of despair in  the  once  "tenderly beautiful" face  carry  the  first  full  paragraph. The  starkly juxtaposed  affirmation  of  the  mother's love  for  her  child,   the  self-sacrifice,  is contained  in  the   two  one-sentence paragraphs  which   formally centralize the depth and  beauty of  the  young  woman's selfless devotion to  her  baby.  I think this  passage  demonstrates John  Baxter's  assertion  that Margaret Laurence is as much  a master of the  plain  style as Shakespeare was of the  Elizabethan.3  In  the last  paragraph Laurence herself  not  only experiences this  maternal anguish  but also sees herself from  the mother's point  of view as a being light  years away  from her  plight.   It  is  this  constant  sense of  feeling  with  her  characters, yet  moving outside  of  them   to  the  universal  human condition, that   gives all of  Laurence's works their  archetypal depth, their  numinosity.
Laurence thus  brings  to this male-dominated genre  of the  travelogue the fresh­ ness  of  a  typically   feminine sensitivity,  what   Nancy   Chodorow calls  the  more  "permeable-ego-membrane" of the  woman, who  wants  not  only  to  describe  the  natives  objectively,  but  also to  get  actually into  their  skins,  to  feel  with  them  their  subjective and  internal sense of reality.  By filtering her experience through a finely honed  analytical mind  that  rests on a rich,  insightful, and  sensitive femi­  nine  sensibility,   Laurence  takes  the   travelogue into   an  unexpected  and   new

44

ARCHETYPES

dimension.  We experience  her portraits  more complexly, more subjectively, and hence more fully.

ALTHOUGH  HER AFRICAN FICTION features mostly male protagonists,  the men's psychic ground  of being is the world of women; feminine symbols usually  carry  the  theme.  In  This  Side  jordan,  both  male  protagonists
are driven  away from and  out of their pasts by fear of certain  faces of the femi­ nine. Johnnie Kestoe  is repelled  by the  pregnancy  of his wife Miranda,  which seems to  trigger  in him  the  horrible  memory of his own mother  dying from  an abortion.   He  rejects  the  world  of  the  feminine-eros,  relating,  bonding,  em­ pathy.  He prefers a hierarchical  world that keeps women and the natives beneath  him so he need not  deal  with their  feelings but only with their  role. He is most comfortable  with the idea of the native women as low-level, faceless, interchange­ able creatures  of nature.  When  he actually  has intercourse with a native girl, he sees to his horror  that  he has in essence mutilated  her with his penis, ripped open her sewn organs.  He has tom  apart  her clitoridectomy, and she becames a meta­ phor of the suffering, voiceless, passive Mrican continent, unavailable to the white man  except  through  mutilation. This African  woman  also reflects the low-level anima  of Johnnie, shows that  his feminine  principle is virtually  undifferentiated. Johnnie's own wife Miranda  (though  blundering in her attempts) shows him the path  that  he must follow if  he is going to relate with the natives other than  as a hierarchical superior. Though  naively Western, Miranda does at least somewhat connect  with  the  natives  and  it is important that  she gives birth  to a girl;  her husband  must face the matrilineal,  feminine values as they proliferate in his own house. The  novel's ending  foreshadows Johnnie's  future; he will be pulled back from a proud,  pathologically  masculine and alienated self into a feminine matrix  or ground  of feeling.
Nathaniel Amegbe, on the other hand, needs to fight his way clear of a devour­ ing mother  in the form of his people and the Mrican  mother/river who call him back to his village. Laurence  gives these forces feminine gender-metaphorically in  that  the  pleading  river is called his mother.  His  wife Aya reflects the  patho­  logical side of the  matrilineal, Demeter/Persephone side of woman. 5   She pleads to have her baby delivered among the women folk, a desire that  Laurence  makes understandable but  also  irrational   and  dangerous  by  discussing the  horrors  of primitive  delivery. Nathaniel's victory when Aya decides to go to the hospital  is ambivalent; the  feminine  has lost some of its own more  primordial  alliances in order  to go with  the  African  masculine in its heroic ego jconsciousness develop­ ment as it assimilates Western masculine consciousness. The  term "assimilates" is important  here  because  Nathaniel  seems the  most developed  of the  male  pro­ tagonists.  He  never  loses his roots in  his own  culture,  and  that  ground  seems

45

ARCHETYPES

healthier, sounder than Johnnie's. Nathaniel prays  to a Black  Madonna and  his whole  sense  of  reality  seems  richly  syncretistic and  polytheistic, reflecting, I  be­ lieve, Laurence's own  metaphysics.6  Aya's giving  birth  to a son, of course, signals Nathaniel's own  deeper   connections  with  another  type  of  masculinity  that   is highly futuristic.
The  characters who  are  not  part  of  the  future  (like  Cora and  James)  have dead  children, who highlight the meaning of the  fertility  of the  two  protagonists' wives. Children of  course  carry  the  archetype of  the  future, and the  ending of the novel  points  towards a merging  of traditionally separate realities  that will ultimately constellate into  a pattern that  Laurence does not define. Nathaniel has changed  a  good  deal; Johnnie's changes  seem  rather in  potentia. The   novel's values  and  open-ended form  reflect  what  Ann  and  Barry  Ulanov would  call  a highly developed "matriarchal superego":

Matriarchal clarities are found more than created,  discovered in the joining of ambivalent  responses to situations  that  require  mixed  reactions.  We are far  now from  the certainties  of determinism  and  universal law patriarchal values. We are in the  indeterminate tonalities  of lived experience ... the  "both-and" style of the matriarchal superego is characterized  by its openness to a variety of conflicting viewpoints ... and  a widely inclusive judgment  rather  than  a narrow discriminat­ ing one.7

The  Tomorrow-Tamer  also  reflects  a  structure that   sees  the  feminine as  a ground of  being.  The  first story,  "The Drummer of All  the  World," features a young  white  man  who longs for his beloved  African nurse, who suckled  him  and soothed  him  in  the  dark  when  his own  parents ignored his fears.  His loss of her seems  to  cut  him  loose from  his moorings forever,  as he  drifts  about in  Europe dreaming of "the beauty  of African  women." The  last image  in the  book is beau­ tifully  archetypal-an older  native  woman  through whom  the  goddess Demeter shows  herself:

Mammii   Ama  straightened   her  plump  shoulders.  Like  a  royal  palm  she stood, rooted  in magnificence, spreading  her arms lie

The   tree  whose  roots  grow  deep  and   whose  branches (arms)  become  as  the brooding hen's  is an  image  that  many  women  are  generating now  to express the powerful   endurance  and   protectiveness  of  older   women. 8   It is  an  image   of incredible beauty and  naturalness, reflecting  matrilineal connection and  a sense of  existential  anchoredness  that   older   women   embody for  themselves and   the culture.  The   Africa:n  matriarch  is  an   unchanging source   and   future for  her people.  The  book  begins  with  a male  cut  off from  and  yearning for  the  mother a:nd ends with an image of the permanence of the mother.
Thus Laurence gives tribute to  the  feminine principle throughout  her  works on  Africa. Nor   does she  shrink from naming the   negative aspects of  the

ARCHETYPES

feminine  principle,  such  as the women of Aya's family  who would more or less eat  Nathaniel alive if they could. Also, the lack of education  among the African women  makes  them  a  dreary  and  grim  weight that  the  often  lonely and  more advanced   Mrican  men  must  carry  in  their  quest  for  national   development. Nathaniel  works at  a school for only boys; and  although  he never directly sees the  connection,  the  reader  sees the  ironies when  he  wonders  why  his wife is involved  with  an  evangelical,  ignorant  religious group.  Nevertheless, Laurence never lets us look away from the suffering of the African  women, and for me an important part of her Mrican works is that she speaks for a voiceless group, from the  mute  suffering  of the  child  prostitute  and  the mutilated  women of  Somali­ land  to  the  puzzled,  frightened   wife of  Nathaniel  who  is being  scurried  into Western civilization with no true understanding  of it at all.

IT IS IN   HER   MANAWAKA NOVELS  that  the  full  breadth  and scope  of  Margaret  Laurence's sensibility  most comes  to  life.  For  the  sake of brevity,  I  will confine  myself to configurations of adult  feminine  archetypes  for
the remainder  of this essay. I would only point out that  I think  the stories in A Bird in the House accomplish several kinds of exorcism/revelation without which perhaps  Laurence  would  not  have been able to write  her later  novels. Vanessa looks squarely  at the  psychological brutality  of her grandfather; he is the face of the negative  World  Father, the patriarchal  mindset that  all women fight against in  some  form  and  at  some  time.  Vanessa  is able  to  feel compassion  for  him finally-she  comes even to admire  his strength.  Laurence  develops his shadow figure of failure, Uncle  Dan, and finally shows that the grandfather can and does change.  He  would  not let her  mother go to school although  she had  the highest marks in the province. He finally breaks his other daughter Edna,  chiefly furious because she is just like him;  she loses the man she most loved because she has so internalized  her  father's pride  that  she cannot  reach out  to her lover. Although he has crushed the psyches and blocked the development  of his wife and two daughters,  he in the end sells bonds so that Vanessa can go to school. This in no way lessens the crimes he has committed  against the other  women. Yet Vanessa does see him as a changing  person and it is important for her animus development that  she recognize  the  potential  for change  in even the  most  rigid  personality. The   collection  of  stories  also  portrays  the  significance  of  woman's  often  un­ questioned  and  unconscious feminine ground of being, the Mother/Aunt/Grand­ mother  faces from among  which we choose our future. More than  that  the book reflects in Vanessa's  mother  our collective mothers asking their  daughters  to go forth  as their delegates, to break the umbilical cord away from a solely feininine, sex-typed  role in  life. They  ask us with  their  lives, as  Laurence  so poignantly portrays.

47

ARCHETYPES

Perhaps   the  most  fascinating  amplification   of  an  archetypal   feminine  that Laurence  develops occurs in the polarities embodied  by Rachel  of A  fest of God and Stacey of The  Fire-Dwellers. These two faces of women are present even in the  earliest  Greek  myths.9   They  reflect  woman  defined  as she  relates  to  man. One  type  of  woman  orients  herself entirely  towards  man  and  she  becomes at varying  times Aphrodite,  Demeter,  Hera: his lover,  mother  of his children,  his wife. The  other sort of woman flees from man  and  defines herself as Artemis or Persephone.  Persephone  is the  eternal  "puella,mo  the  mother's  daughter; and Artemis  lives in  a  purely matriarchal realm,  killing  men  who enter  her  realm. Pluto and Actaeon are typical of the obtrusive role of men in the totally feminine world of Persephone  and Artemis. Spenser in The  Faerie Queene  portrays  twin sisters named  Amoret  and  Belphoebe who are  taken,  respectively, to Aphrodite and Artemis to be raised. Amoret is raised only for wifehood as a sort of "anima" hook  for  male  projection.  She  is too  passive, fearful,  does  not  know  how  to simply be a friend  to men or women. She gets captured by a professional adul­ terer  (a  courtly  lover)  and  must be rescued by a more  balanced, active female figure, Britomart. Spenser shows that  Belphoebe on  the other  hand  is a sort of teaser,  riding   bare-thighed   through   the  woods,  never  giving  any  favours   to Timias  who  hopelessly follows her  about.  He,  in  fact,  just sort of  withers  up. Belphoebe is cold, vain, and though Spenser gives typical Renaissance lip service to the glory of her virginity, he clearly finds her distasteful.  This archetypal  pair emerges again  in modern  male-authored literature in D. H. Lawrence's Women in Love. Ursula  is the good woman, naturally  formed for wifehood; she and  her lover go south  where she will warm  him to  her  hearth. Yet he mourns  for the more  "true" friendship  of another  man - so Ursula  like Amoret  (and  Aphro­ dite/Demeter /Hera) supposedly cannot provide the intellectual  and  moral com­ panionship  that  a male friend can give. Lawrence  makes his Artemis figure much darker  than  Spenser's. Ursula's sister Gudrun destroys Gerald,  taking  him north where he literally freezes to death.  Her independence of men is seen as devour­ ing, killing. Her  art  work is described as abortions. She is sterile, anti-life.
These  are  male fantasies. Spenser and  Lawrence  mainly treat  these women in terms of how they affect men as types of anima  figures. Laurence  takes the same images  and  renders  them  from  the  woman's  point  of view.  (She  says that  she knew somehow that  these two women were sisters, Stacey and Rachel.)
Stacey  is like the  AphroditejDemeter /Hera faces of woman.  She  begins her love relationship  with  Mac  as a type of Aphrodite; after  their  marriage, when we first meet  her, she has slowly metamorphosed into  the  Demeter/mother and Hera/wife archetypes. Like all Laurence's  women, she goes to a body of water to connect  with her own deepest self. There she finds her "flower  boy," whose offer of fleeing responsibility with him makes her realize how deeply committed  she is to her children  and  Mac. As a resolution to the novel Laurence  gives Stacey an

ARCHETYPES


Athena kind  of development. Athena is like a sister-anima, an often  rather mili­ tant  and  helpful  companion to man.  Contrary to Spenser  and  D. H. Lawrence, Laurence shows  that  the  woman  who chooses wifehood  as a major source  of her identity can  individuate and   become  a  friend  and  companion to  her  husband. The  novel  does  not  fall  into  the  weary  pattern of so many  feminist novels that insist the  woman leave  the  home or take a job to become  a person. I think  Stacey has  the  hardest job  of self-actualization of all Laurence's women.  The  constant distractions and  interruptions that  a housewife  lives with make  it easy for her  to fall into  a peculiarly feminine kind of sin. Many  women theologians are insisting  now  that   pride  is more  usually  a  masculine sin and  that  women  sin  oppositely  through

triviality, distractibility,  and diffuseness; lack of an organizing center of focus; dependence   on  others  for  one's  own  self-definition;  tolerance  at  the  expense of standards  of excellence;  inability  to respect the boundaries  of privacy; sentimen­ tality, gossipy sociability, and  mistrust  of reason-in  short  underdevelopment or negation of the self.11

By keeping  her  protagonist at  home, Laurence is, I think,  affirming  the need and worth   of  feminine  values  in  a  masculine  world.  Stacey  is  the  connector, the harmonizer in  a  family   consisting  of  three  predominantly male  generations in one house. The metaphor of fire seems an important one in delineating her place in  a  world   dominated  by  masculine values-the news  media   constantly  an­ nounce potential or actual destruction of Stacey's  world  by fire.
An  alchemical fantasy deepens  and  helps  explain   the  elemental basis of  the
human  psyche  as  Laurence develops  it.  Alchemists  identify   the  masculine  ele­ ments  as fire, air,  and  sulphur (a hot demonic substance) ; the feminine elements  are  water,  earth, and  salt   (too  much  makes  you  bitter,  but  a little salt smarts and  "wises  you  up") .12   Mercury is the  element  that  connects salt  and  sulphur, the  imaginative element that   connects  the  masculine and   the  feminine in  this scheme.  The  overweight Stacey  perhaps begins  with  too  much  earth -she  has become  too  much Hestia, the  goddess  of the  hearth. 13 Stacey  connects with  her own  watery   depths through Luke,  and  the  salty  wisdom  she  derives  from  that  connection helps  her  to imagine and  understand Mac. Mac  is  burning up  with frustrated ambition and  must  connect  with little Duncan who has been delegated the  "inferior"  masculine principle in  the  family.  Duncan  almost   drowns   (too  much  water, he needs  more  connection with  the father)  and is carried, loved for the  first time  by his father at  the end  of the  novel. The novel ends  with Stacey's youngest  daughter finally  speaking, and  speaking  comes  the  hardest to  the  side of the  feminine for  which  Stacey  stands.  It is hard  for the  feminine in a mascu­ line-patterned world  to speak,  to name herself, to find  herself. But when she does she not only establishes self but also gives self and  connection to those around her.

49

ARCHETYPES

Rachel,  too, can be seen in archetypal  terms as going finally, for the first time in  her life, to the  deepest waters of the self, there  to take  her  chances,  to take risks in Vancouver  beside the  Pacific Ocean.  Unlike  Spenser's  and  Lawrence's figures, she does not finally hurt  anyone,  except  herself, with  her  cold, critical view of life. She carries the matriarchal world with her, taking  her mother  with her;  but now she is no longer the Persephonejdaughter,14 but the mother herself, in command.  Leaving  Manawaka is in itself leaving a matriarchal realm of the known  and  comforting.  Had  she  stayed,  she  would  have  risked  falling  more deeply into a purely feminine world, with Calla. It is important to see that  Calla is not a repellent character.  She is plain, even a little dull;  but she does genuinely love Rachel  other  than  erotically. But Rachel  cannot  stay in one place anymore; she  needs to change  more  than  just internally  like Stacey.  The  novel is  open­ ended,  but one feels that  whatever  happens, she has escaped  the traps she made for herself.
$tacey  has too much  impinging on her life, and  her task is to order  and  rank
priorities. Like Psyche sorting the seeds,15  this is often the task of a woman  who orients herself to a man and  her home. Rachel,  on the other  hand,  is spiritually dying from lack of connections in the real world; she becomes pregnant  with her own   internality.  One of the appealing  things about  Rachel  is her rich inner life, but it is unanswered  by her outer world. Interestingly, in each novel, the protago­ nist envies her sister's life. Each  needs the balance  the opposite other symbolizes.



LAURENCE's DEVELOPMENT AND  TURNING inside out of these polar feminine  archetypes suggests that the  right side of the  brain  (left-handed­ ness, the feminine,  the dark and  irrational) suddenly  after thousands  of years of evolution  has begun speaking, explaining  itself to the left side. Just  as Laurence  spoke for  the  Mrican women, she has spoken for  two  very "oppressed" arche­ types of  our  culture  and  literary  heritage.  Stacey  and  Rachel  also show  how Laurence  intuits  the advent of middle-age as a "boundary" time of new identifi­ cation  for  women.  It  is important to see  that  unlike  two  other  protagonists  of Laurence,  Morag of The  Diviners and Hagar  of The  Stone  Angel, neither Stacey nor Rachel  really take the risks of  moving from one lifestyle to another.  In  con­ trast,  Hagar  and  Morag  both  accept  a lack of security  and  a life of hard  work (supporting themselves both  economically and  emotionally)  to secure the inde­ pendence   and   autonomy  that   take  them  into  new  situations   and  give  them opportunity for  psychic  expansion.  Since  neither  Stacey  nor  Rachel  essentially changes her life-style, her change must be internal so as not to jostle or worry her dependents.  (Rachel does move, but takes her  mother  along.)   Both make these internal   changes  through  connections  with  dynamic   animus   figures  that   the women  internalize  although  the  men  themselves are  ephemeral  figures in  their

so

ARCHETYPES

lives like  Hermes,  the  messenger god. They  are  both  typically  feminine  in  the ease with which they assimilate the values/personalities of others. Hagar  and Vanessa's  Aunt  Edna  are  antithetical in their  tight  hard  ego boundaries  which reflect the negative animus influence of their fathers.
A sympathetic  rendition  of the Medusa, Hagar  of The Stone Angel re-tells an
old  story  from  a  feminine   point  of  view. She  corrects  the  myopic  masculine vision that  tends only to see woman as she affects him and as he hence imagines she is. I will mention  here only a few important distinctions between Hagar  and such old women as Chaucer's Wyf of Bath or Joyce Cary's Sarah  Monday. Older women  have  often  been  seen as revoltingly lecherous, spending  their  days and nights  plotting  how  sexually  to  entrap   various  men.  Male  authors depict  the women as feeling great sadness over losing their sexual charms.  Hagar,  however, still feels nice-looking in certain  dresses, and clearly needs no man  around  to tell her  so. In  fact,  independence and  autonomy  are her  most impassioned  desires. Hagar's problem  is a sort of "animus-bound" pride that  makes her reject  femi­ nine  relatedness,  as embodied  by  her  daughter-in-law Doris  who  is  truly  con­ cerned  about  Hagar.  Again  we see the image of water.  Hagar  has become not just earth  but cold marble  and  too much salt, bitter. Afraid of being placed in a nursing home, she escapes to a deserted building by the sea where she learns how she  has  destroyed  others  through   her  pride;  when  dying,  she  wrests  a  cup  of wateru  from  Doris at  the end. Although  she is still quite stubborn  and  prideful, Hagar  symbolically accepts feminine relatedness from the hands of a woman she sees as less beneath  her  than  before. She has moved  to a  healthy  Demeter  role with  her  young  female  hospital  room-mate  shortly  before  her  death.  Laurence  shows an old woman interested  in metaphysics, younger women, her children, the meaning   of  the  past.  Cary's  Sarah   Monday  dumps  her  children   behind  like Defoe's  Moll  Flanders.  Chaucer's Wyf sees  life only  in  terms  of  malejfemale relationships. This is not how women imagine old age for themselves.
Hagar  is one face of the daughter with no mother. Hagar  had no ameliorating feminine  to save  her  from  internalizing  the  harshness, severity, even cruelty  of her father. She is Persephone trapped forever underground with the depressing, disconnecting   masculine   values  of  Hades.  In  some  ways  she  is  redeemed  by becoming a daughter, a dependent  to Doris. She signals her sudden  awareness of a matrilineal alliance with Doris when she tugs off her family ring and gives it to Doris to give to Tina,  the granddaughter.
Thus  we see Hagar's metaphysical dilemmas, not just her assessment of outside
forces like the  Wyf of Bath's  listing of lovers and  her  wistful  hoping  (through her story)  that  men will love her soul more than her body. Hagar's psychic quest is to break  through  to an  affirmation  of feminine values, eros, relatedness. She does not need a man  to establish her self worth. In a sense she always has loved herself-her own ferocious  wit and  observations nourish  her soul. She is remi-

ARCHETYPES

niscent of the  older  Lillian Hellman,  or May Sarton's Hilary  Stevens-we see inside the face of Medusa or Hecate, an aged and  not-to-be denied  Fury. As her son says in despair and pride, "She's a holy terror." There  is a holiness in her life energy  and  a  kind  of holy terror  indeed  in  her  impassioned  expression of self. Like the protagonist  in Tillie Olsen's "Tell  Me a Riddle," Hagar's consciousness is evolving; she is learning  to her last breath -which is a truly marvellous affir­ mation  of life. She  embodies the  older  woman  as Mary  Daly  in  GynjEcology defines her, a self-proclaimed Crone.
Often  one  can  recognize the  worth  of an  artist  by the  quality  and  type  of: critics  she/he attracts.   As a  Renaissance  scholar,  I can  attest  to  the  humane openness of Spenserians as opposed to the more hierarchical and elitist Miltonists. There  are  several  brilliant  and  insightful  essays on The Diviners.11   As Thomas remarks, it is an epic work?8  We finally have in Morag  the feminine  counterpart of Odysseus. She carries a lot more burdens  than  he does, including  the  whole metaphysical  baggage of the twentieth  century,  but she comes home more surely and enduringly than  he. Morag constellates a new archetypal  feminine.
Morag,  like Hagar,  is motherless; but like Jane  Eyre, she is fortunate enough
to have some surrogate  mothers. Prin is a fascinating  study of a woman trapped into a purely Hestian or domestic role, but not by a man or society so much as her own limited  intelligence and  lack of will. She spins herself a cocoon of fat  that slowly submerges  her  psyche into  total  non-individuation. She is one of the ter­ rifying (especially for women)  faces of the feminine  and  represents the way that the flesh itself can swallow up the feminine spirit.  Buckle's mother  in The  Fire­ Dwellers  is blind,  also hugely obese, and  drinks  wine all day from  a  teapot­ another   rendition  of  psychic nothingness  that  women  fear.  Women  can  retire from life into  a domestic setting more easily than  men and  can slowly drift, slip into  oblivion.  Yet  Prin  is nevertheless a grounding force  in  Morag's  childhood and  her  very fleshiness is an embodiment  of the  great  good mother; Neumann says this  figure is usually mostly torso with  tiny legs and  heads  with  no eyes.19
Prin apologizes to Morag that she is not a more complete person, a better mother:

"But now-I don't know how to be any different, like. That's  why I don't know, look after you better, sort of. I'm that sorry, M@rag."
Morag is crying. Holding onto Prin's awful fat belly wrapped around in the brown wraparound, Prin's good good good.
"Prin-I never meant! I never!"
Prin wipes Morag's eyes with fat warm hands.

The earthy,  brown, fat warmth  here is typical of the Hestian image that grounds all children in their beginning years. Ella Gerson's mother  provides the more individuated mothering  that  Morag  needs and  she realizes that  she has missed her mother  as profoundly  as her father; Mrs.  Gerson is important not only for

52

ARCHETYPES

her  "ability  to  reach  out  her  arms  and  hold  people, both  literally  and  figura­ tively. It is also her strength." Mrs. Gerson also teaches  Morag  to read Russian revolutionary  authors,  and  so she sows the seeds of rebellion that  finally explode when Brooke insults Jules' Indian  heritage.
,Thomas finds Morag's  ten years with Brooke amazing,  marvelling  that  "such
superficiality  could  hold  her  for  ten  years."20    Yet  Brooke is an  extension  of Morag's  need  to  assume  a  Persephone  roJe as she grows up.  Brooke like Pluto holds her in a  psychic underworld  of depression. He treats  her like a child with no past, and  part  of their split is asserting her own fathers against  his fatherhood by speaking  in  Christie's  rhetorical  forms. It  is important for a woman  to have been a daughter, a Persephone,  and in orphaned  Morag's  case her marriage  with Brooke is rather  like a protracted  grounding in the father's underworld.21 Jules is the dynamic,  moving, loving animus who releases her to the roving, independent woman she becomes.
He  releases her  to  become  a  Demeter  figure herself, and  it is this role that
provides her with a continuity  of roots for the rest of her life. One critic says that Morag hits rock bottom in the same way all Canadian protagonists do before rebuilding.22   This  is not true.  Because she is a mother,  she cannot  and  does not ever really give in and  wallow in her despair as a male protagonist might do. She makes her despair  for Pique's  sake as when she visits her artist lover's home and sees his wife and  children.  Laurence's  women are strongly enduring  through  an almost infinite flexibility that  is probably the base of feminine strength  and resili­ ence. Vanessa's  mother  is the  most quiet  example  of this. Matrilineal  roots are the ground  of being for women, and Pique L'>   part of this matrix for Morag.




bE ENDURING CHTHONIC  is imaged  in the beginning  of the novel by the  river  that  flows both ways. Morag's  form of water makes me hope that  she  will  be  the  matrilineal   antidote  for  Pique  whose  ancestress  Piquette dies  by  fire,  a  sinister  foreshadowing.   But  Laurence   always  insists  that   we must  go through  the  fire  to  become  whole. She  in  fact  reiterates  the  idea  of the Fortunate Fall that  a redemptive growth and wholeness come from engaging in struggles and taking risks; from a feminine and psychological point of view, exposure  to  the  fire  of  patriarchy   hardens  and  articulates   the  self. Laurence shows innocence  is at best a vacuous state  (Morag's first novel on Lilac)  and  at worst is painful  to others  (Miranda of This Side Jordan embarrasses  and  alien­ ates Africans in her lack of decorum and  awareness).  The  fall is into hard work and  complexity.  But using the resources of the feminine  principle can make the redemptive quest  for achievement  and self easier. Morag shows how one can sort of flow around obstacles;  a good example is her stay at Vancouver  when Pique

53

ARCHETYPES

is born.  She lets life eddy and  push around  her as she accomplishes  her goal of becoming a mother; the spiteful landlady,  the economic  difficulties, none of this stops her. Laurence  makes a point of Morag's  astrological sign of Cancer,  a sign of sensitive water.  This  flowing dynamism  of  Morag,  her  forward  movingness, are perhaps  the most important aspects of this feminine  archetype  of the woman artist.  Morag  embodies  a  type  of soul development  common  to many  modern women.
,But the variation  in her protagonists reflects Laurence's knowledge that  femi­
nine individuation is pluralistic. I suspect that  Laurence's own openness to life is what  gives each  work its own  breathtaking new  and  unique  sensibility. So fav she has never  written  the same novel twice;  each  of Laurence's novels traces a highly  individual   yet  universal  type  of  development. Laurence's  polytheism  is best expressed in The  Diviners. Each  critic finds new diviners  within  the novel, and it is important that Laurence  gives mystical skill and  vision via diverse routes to each  character. The  actual  diviner is Rayland  who has left his fire-and-brim­ stone religion behind  him as he searches for water in the ground  (think  alchemi­ cally here) . Christie  divines people through  their  garbage,  and  he knows more truths   than   anyone  in  Manawaka. The  divining  "medium"  or  stuff  through  which she/he sees reality becomes a sort of existential anchor for each character. Morag's  sense of  continuity  is through  her  matrilineal  roots  and  through   her writing.
Laurence  tells us a singular  truth  about  the woman  artist-that she must be alone to create-and answers an age-old query, "Why  aren't there more women artists?" The  child Pique's interruptions of and  resentments  towards her mother's writings, the many  kinds of care that  only that  one child  needs  (stories to build past/soul/myth;  nursing   during   illness;  daily  affection   and   care:   time  and energy consumers)  demonstrate  the difficulty a woman  faces trying to find time and  energy to create.  Pique  is necessary to Morag's  own  development; but  like all existential anchors,  there is the cost of commitment. She is glad that  her lover Dan  McRaith does  not  live with  her  and  leaves  periodically.  But  her  life has great  continuity  internally.  It is through  her  art  that  she  remembers  the  past, makes connections.
The  Diviners also establishes the kind of men that  this type of woman connects
with  and   needs.  Margaret   Laurence   creates  two  of  the  more  powerful  and memorable  portraits  of men  I  have  seen in  literature by  women.  In  different ways Jules and  Christie are the garbage, the refuse of their society. The efferves­ cent,  mercurial  artist  Jules  Tonnerre  is totally  unconcerned  with  immortalizing himself, even calls his work "crap." He teaches Morag  that  the drive to create is in its finest form unselfish, impersonal, an expression of love as deep and abiding as Jules' love for his father.  Morag  learns from Christie  more than  is possible to sum  up.  He teachers  her for one thing  that  no matter  how  entrapped a person

54

ARCHETYPES

may  look to others,  the  mind  need never stop questing.  He  teaches  her the  power of the  analytical mind  that  can literally  cut through garbage to meaning. I think he  is the  first  layer  of  the  dynamic animus that  keeps  her  restless and  moving. (Every  woman needs an outspoken anarchist in her childhood !)
As  an  American Iam  curious  as  to  what  in Canadian culture is producing
women   writers  like  Laurence, Margaret Atwood,  Alice  Munro, Gabrielle Roy. Several   hypotheses occur   to  me.  Canadian literature is  not  imbued  with  the American "go  west"  motif,  the  idea  that  geographic movement causes  growth. The   separation  motif  in  American literature  encourages concentration on  the Oedipal complex, the  act  of severing  oneself from one's  roots as the  primary way to find  identity. To  stay  in one  place,  to return to that  place,  as is more  possible in  Canadian thought, is to insist  that  one  can  and  must  go home  again.28  This encourages  what   some   psychoanalysts  would   call  concentration  on   the   pre­ Oedipal concerns of the female  child  who cannot  and  does not separate from the mother so  much   or  in  the  same   way  as  the  male  child.  Also,  the  Canadian woman author seems  to  create because  she  wants  to and  according  to  her  own standards as she  envisions  life. Laurence, it is important to note, creates  form  to carry  her  vision.  Perhaps since  the  various  cultures  in Canada have  not amalga­ mated so much  as in America, Canadians may have more respect for many  ways of  becoming; Canadian  experience would  allow  the  feminine sensibility  more scope  perhaps in  expressing   its  "both/and,"  more  polytheistic view  of  reality. Perhaps the  lack  of a  strong, national image  has  discouraged the  more  narrow sexual   stereotyping that   American  women  fight  against. No  matter what   the explanation, Ithink  Margaret Laurence's body  of  literature will  take  its  place among that  of the great  women  writers  of all time like Jane Austen, Colette, and  Virginia Woolf.  She  is re-visioning  what  it  means  to be a woman, and  her hero­  ines are  changing the  very structure of  characterization in world literature.


NOTES

1 Clara  Thomas,  Margaret Laurence  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1969), p.
12.
2    For  a  good  discussion of  the  difference  between the  way men  and  women view death  see Kurt  W. Back, "Metaphors as Test  of Personal  Philosophy of Aging," Sociological  Focus, 5 (Autumn  1971), 1-8.
3  "The  Stone  Angel:  Shakespearian Bearings," The Compass, 1 (August  1977), 15. Another critic who particularly appreciates  this passage is George Woodcock in his helpful "Many Solitudes:  The Travel  Writings of Margaret Laurence," The Jour­ nal of Canadian Studies, 13 (Fall 1978), 3-13.
4     "Family  Structure and  Feminine  Personality," Woman, Culture, and  Society, eds. Michelle  Zimbalist  Rosaldo  and  Louise  Lamphere   (Stanford: Stanford   Univ. Press, 1974), pp. 43-67.
5  This mother/daughter bonding can become regressive, inward-turning, in its rejec-

55

ARCHETYPES

tion  of  masculine values.  Or,  in  other   words,  feminine bonding can  cause  one­
sidedness,  a lack of balance.
6   David  Miller,  one  of the more  visionary  of modern theologians, says that  "A poly­ theistic   theology   will  be  a  feminine  theology   (Rosemary Reuther),  but  in  the manner of all  the  Goddesses-the  thousand daughters of Ocean and  Tethys, to name  only a few. By being many,  these Goddesses  avoid  a monotheistically chauvi­ nistic view of the  feminine," The  New Polytheism  (New York: Harper and  Row,
I974)' p. 74·
7   Ann  and  Barry  Ulanov, Religion and the Unconscious  (Philadelphia: Westminster
Press,  I975), p. I 54·
8  A clinical  psychologist  who  has studied  depth images  of female patients also finds that   women   identify   their   deepest   selves  with   trees; see  Katherine  Bradway, "Hestia and  Athena in the Analysis of Women," Inward  Light, 4I  (Spring I978),
36.
9   An  interesting analysis of how the  Greek  goddesses  emerge in Canadian literature complements my study of Laurence's works; see the chapter "Ice Women  vs. Earth Mothers" in Margaret Atwood, Survival  (Toronto: House  of Anansi  Press,  I972), pp.  I 95-2 I 3·
10  Linda Leonard has  authored a series of articles  on  what  she calls the  "puella" or woman  fixated  into  the daughter role, an immature woman. Her  article most rele­ vant  to  my essay is "Puella Patterns," Psychological Perspectives, 9  (Fall  I978), I27-47·
11  Valerie Saiving Goldstein, "The Human Situation:  A  Feminine Viewpoint," in The   Nature   of Man  in  Theological  and  Psychological  Perspective,  ed.  Simon Doniger (New  York: Harper and  Row,  I962), p. I65.
12  A difficult  but  rewarding work  that  elucidates the connections between  depth  psy­ chology   and   alchemy   for  women   is  Robert  Grinnell's  Alchemy   in  a  Modern  Woman (Zurich:  Spring   Publications, I973). A  complementary study  to  mine that  examines the earth,  air, fire, water  elements in the  novels is by David Blewett,  "The  Unity of  the  Manawaka Cycle,"   Journal  of Canadian   Studies,  I3   (Fall  I978), 3 I-40. I read  this essay after  finishing  mine  and  find  it  interesting that  he finds  the  masculine elements   of  air  and   fire  predominantly  in  the  Aphrodite/ Artemis  duality.
13   Readers will have  recognized  Demeter's name  as the  mother half  of the  mother/ daughter Demeter /Persephone dyad  on which  the  Eleusinian rites are  based. The Hestia/Vesta archetype is not as well known.  Hestia is the hearth fire goddess who warms,  contains, and  holds the family  together. She is symbolic of the process that supports human  life.  The   earth, the  number four   (wholeness), the  circle-all these  images  are  important to this archetype. For  a fuller  treatment of Hestia, see my  article, "Hestia, Goddess  of  the  Hearth: An  Oppressed Archetype," Spring: An  Annual  of Archetypal  Psychology and  Jungian  Thought  ( I979L  pp. 55-77· See  Bradway's excellent   article   cited   in  note  8  for  an  analysis  of  how  Hestia manifests in modern women's  psyches.
14  A short  but  very insightful essay on Rachel as Persephone is by Warren Stevenson, "The Myth  of Demeter and  Persephone in  A  Jest of God,"  Studies in Canadian Literature, I  (I97I),  I20-23.
1  This is the first task Venus sets Psyche as she sets about seeking for Amor,  her lover and  animus figure; see Erich  Neumann, Amor  and Psyche: The  Psychic Develop­ ment of the Feminine  (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press,  I956).

ARCHETYPES


16  The cup  is also a communion cup, part of the Christian imagery  that  underlies  the novel  as traced  by several  critics. Thomas in Margaret  Laurence gives an inspired and  thorough reading of this imagery; see especially p. 49·
17  Though I do  not  agree with  all her ideas, Sherrill  Grace's essay "A  Portrait of the Artist  as Laurence Hero," Journal of Canadian Studies,  I3  (Fall  I978),  illustrates the  polish  and  depth of  the critics  who write  on The  Diviners. Another excellent essay  is  Ildiko de  Papp Carrington's "'Tales in the  Telling': The   Diviners as Fiction about Fiction," Essays on Canadian Writing, 9 ( I977·78),  I54-69.
18  She  works  this out  through contrast and  comparison to Paradise Lost in her chap­
ter on this novel in The  Manawaka World.
19  See  his  chapter on  the  great   good  mother in  The   Great  Mother, trans.  Ralph
Manheim (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press, I963).
20    The  Manawaka World, p.  I51.
21  For  an  interesting discussion  of  Pluto/Hades as an  animus figure  who  can  hold woman   trapped in  a  peculiarly feminine underground of depression, see Patricia Berry,  "The Rape of Demeter/Persephone and  Neurosis," Spring:  An  Annual  of Archetypal  Psychology and Jungian Thought ( I975),  pp.  I86-99·
22    Sherrill E. Grace, "Crossing Jordan:  Time  and  Memory in  the  Fiction  of Mar­
garet  Laurence," World  Literature Written  in English, I 6 (I 977),  335·
23   Morag actually says this  in The  Diviners, p.  302.  The importance of the  family, the  Canadian  emphasis on  it  as an  ontological structure  in  self conception, also gives  women   writers   access  and  perhaps permission to  write  about   those  things women  have  always  known  more  about  than  men.  David  L. Jeffrey  develops  the importance of the  family  in The  Stone  Angel although like many  male critics,  he does  not  see that  for  women  the  health  of the self concept seems  to depend  upon the  extent to which  she can  affirm  her  matrilineal roots. The patrilineal roots are important, but  not  as emphasized in  women's  fiction  or  autobiographies. Jeffrey's article  is otherwise very helpful,  "Biblical  Hermeneutic and  Family  History  in Contemporary  Canadian  Fiction:  Wiebe  and   Laurence," Mosaic,   I I   (Spring I978).







CANADIAN AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075 WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C.  V6T 1W5  /228-4741



57

POEM


NEED
 


M. Travis Lane


Need  is a spare  island: a beach rubbed clear  of diamonds,
a moon-pronged antler, a white  tree  trunk
scoured by the  urgencies  of sand -

as if plain weather could  redeem our  cankers,  drain
our  inward  autumns!

Time,
( oh boats, oh voyageurs) absorbing breast  of water,  take your  paddlers like apprentices
and  ease us out of memory  to rest­
excursion  on the instant of your lap rolled  round  in  time's  abstraction, sleep-

and  you will dream  us as we were, childlike  and  rowing in your sea
hung round  with stars and  majesties, the  intimate, tender  netherlands
from  which  our fountains leap.







JINGELUS DOMINI
 


Erin Moure


To  say prophecy, to say reason
& fight out
the length  between  them,
a broken  board  for a measure,  for an audience
a girl in the fast-foot  apron, reading a comic  on the lawn. The stale houses of memory shut  their  doors,
sweepings  on the doorstep.

POEM

You're swept  away by the tide of cars passing  red lights into infinity.
The  radio  brings  back rock & roll of the sixties, you turn it up,
curious,
wondering where  you stand  in this. It is what  you remember.
It is all.
It is all a noise. It is all over. The young  are
younger  than  you.
The  sum  total  of reason  has not changed one  bit.
& the sum of.prophecy:
the time you've  wasted, an Incarnation you couldn't quite  manage, divided
by the pell-mell  cars









THE BOOK REVIEWER



In  my study -snug as a monk's  cell,
the  mushroom-coloured walls are  book ends. Here  one can  almost  read  the smell of books: novels,  books of poetry,  short  stories
I've  reviewed  in magazines  and  newspapers
over  the  past  fifteen  hack  written
The paper ghosts of authors haunt this room, breathing my blurbs  and  squibs.
They  stand  on dusty pinewood  shelves, and  rub shoulders with  the classics. How can  I venture a further judgment
except  to repeat what  Auden  once said? "Some  books are  undeservedly forgotten; none  are  undeservedly remembered."
 


Len Gasparini




















59

WORDS AND THE WORLD
''The Diviners" as an Exploration of
the Book of Life


Michel Fabre



CRITics HAVE  ADEQUATELY  ANALYSED  M..-garet  Lau­ rence's last volume in the Manawaka cycle as an experiment  in "voice and  pic­ tures"  which  attempts to convey the quality  of experience  through  an  "audio­
visual"  narrative process.1   Still,  it  remains  that  The   Diviners  is  patterned as much  as  a  pilgrimage  along  epic  lines as  a  Bildungsroman, and  that  Morag Gunn's archetypal  quest for salvation  and  meaning  is linked, through  fable and dialogue,  to an insistent theme:  that of writing as a creative and communicative process  indissociable  from   the  problematic   relationship   between  fiction  and reality,  between  the Word and  the World.  Evident  as it is in the programmatic title,  The   Diviners,  the  rendering  of  the  exploratory   process inherent   in  both experience  and  writing deserves more than  a mere decoding  of allusions because it proposes at the same time an exhaustive, coherent  inquiry into the verbal crea­ tive process and a mimetic, self-contained symbol of whatever  "divining" may be.

By professional, more than religious, definition, diviners at first appear  to be somewhat  different from word-makers, creators, and even readers. The story pro­ vides  explicit  answers  to  the  question:   what  is it  to  divine?  The  professional diviner is, of course, Rayland,  a water-diviner  who makes a living finding springs and  wells underground with the help of a Y-shaped  willow wand. Although  one must  have the gift, he concedes, this is no magic trick but only a process which works most of the time even though  it cannot  be explained. His character, how­ ever, is endowed  with more than  the  usual  professional and  even human  attri­  butes. His name  makes him the "king of  the land," the Prospera  of McConnell's Landing,  the  genius of inland  and  underground waters. He  also is a fisherman,  "the  Old  Man  of the River"  (as Pique likes to call him), a sort of river god or Fisher  King  who  brings Morag  offerings of pickerels. Like the  mythical  Fisher King  he has been cursed.  Indeed, his fanatical  religious zeal  (he  thinks  he has received "the  revealed  word")   brought  about  his wife's suicide, because, though initially  close to  God,  he  had  turned   priesthood  into  tyranny.  He  is thus  left

6o

DIVINERS


without  offspring as  a  retribution for  his sins. Even   more  than his long,  grey beard, his "terrible eyesight" -he is too stubborn to wear  glasses-marks him as gifted  with  "some other kind  of sight," the  visionary  powers  of a seer. Thus, Royland is not  only  a  "diviner," through unseen  vibrations, of water,  but  also a prophet from   whom   "Morag always  felt  she  was  about to  learn  something of great  significance ... which  would  explain  everything ... his work,  her own,  the generations, the  river."
Morag is linked  paradigmatically to Royland, not  only  as a substitute daugh­ ter   (since   he  considers  Pique   his  granddaughter), ready   to  welcome  his  wise teachings, but  as an  antithetic equal: she is 47 and  he is 74;  he is nearly blind,  she is terribly myopic.  They  are  companions in many  ways, although she appar­ endy  does  not  have  his  gift.  As she  remarks:  "She  wasn't  surprised. Her  area  was  elsewhere.  He  was  divining for  water.  What  in  hell  was  she divining for?" You  could  not  doubt the  value  of water,  she implies, the  way you can doubt the value of words  and  literature.
"Old  as  Jehovah,"  "ancient,"  Royland embodies an  inexpressible,  archaic force.  He  is

Old  Man  River. The  Shaman.  The  Diviner. Morag,  always glad  to see him, felt doubly glad. He would, of course, not tell her what to do. Not Royland's way. But after a while she would find she knew.

Royland's  gift  as  a  soul-diviner  duplicates  his  ability   to  release  earth-locked water; he  releases  pent-up spiritual resources  from  others' innermost beings.  He does  not  create them, however,  and  when  Morag speaks  of  his  Celtic second­ sight  he answers  that  she  is the  Celt,  not  he. Gradually, they  exchange roles, or with  time  his powers  at  least  seem  to be  transferred to  her.  One  day,  when  he comes  to see her,  he says  he has lost his divining abilities.  He  insists it is not  an  uncommon occurrence, rather  a  rule  as  one  gets  older   and   "by   no  means   a matter for  mourning." And  as he loses his power,  he imparts a lesson  to Morag
-maybe not  the secret  she expected, but one that  enables  her to hope:

It's  something   I  don't   understand, the  divining ... and  it's  not  something  that everybody can  do, but  the  thing  I don't  usually let on about  is that  quite  a few people can learn  to do it. You don't  have to have the mark of God between your eyebrows. Or if you do, quite a few people have it.

The  elect  are  more  numerous than  is believed.  Royland's power  (or  faith)  can be acquired by trying  hard  and,  especially, by not attempting to understand and explain. And  the gift can be transmitted:

The  inheritors.  Was  this, finally and  at last, what  Morag  had  always sensed that she  had  to learn  from  the  old  man?  She had  known  it all along  but  not  really known. The  gift, the  portion  of grace, or whatever  it was, was finally withdrawn to be given to someone else....

61

DIVINERS

Contrasting  Royland's true achievements, to which existing springs testify, Morag doubts her own "magic  tricks ... of a different order," because the reality of her achievement -communication-cannot  be  gauged:   "She  would  never  know whether  they actually  worked or not, or to what extent. This  wasn't given to her to know. In  a sense, it did not matter. The  necessary doing of the thing-that mattered." Such is the answer to her earlier, anguished  question: "Why  not take it on faith, for herself, as he did. Sometimes she could, but not always."
The second character  who comes to mind as a diviner is Christie Logan. Their appearances, as well as their ages, point to a parallel  between Christie and Roy­ land.  There   is  something   downlike   about   both -Royland  is  "a  loon"  and Christie  laughs  like a  "loony" -and  both  are  brothers  to  the  mythical  Piper Gunn.  When  Royland  performs,  he stalks the  ground  "like  the slow pace of a piper  playing  a  pibroch.  Only  this was for a  reverse purpose.  Not  a  walk over the  dead.  The  opposite.... " This  recalls the  pibroch  piped  at  the  funeral  of Christie  and  his tales of Piper  Gunn.2  Also, structurally, both  men stand  in the same  relationship   to  Morag  as adoptive  fathers   and   as  spiritual   guides  and mentors.8
Christie  is early characterized  as another  type of diviner-a garbage  reader.
Like Royland,  his appearance marks him as one of the elect. He "looks peculiar," slightly misshapen  with bobbing  head and "cloudy" eyes. He is soon revealed to be a clown, a jester, a sacred idiot. When he acts for the children,  he is possessed, in  a sort  of drunken   ecstasy.4    He  becomes, by physical similarity,  a "redskin," i.e., a "natural" man or shaman,  and uttters his divining words, "By their garbage shall ye know them." Christie yells like a preacher, a clown preacher: "I swear by the ridge of tears and  by the valour of my ancestors,  I say unto you, Morag Gunn,  that  by their  bloody goddamn  fucking garbage  shall ye christly well know them."  Christie  prophesies, in biblical language  as befits his role, and  interprets men's  "monuments in  muck,  reading  their  lives from  their  garbage -a  true fortune-teller." Appropriately,   the  text  reminds  us that  Christie  gets into  such states when "the  whiskey is in him,"  thus linking  this episode with another sec­ tion,  "Christie   With  Spirits."  Here  "spirits"  is nicely  ambiguous,  the  meaning slowly progressing  from  alcohol   (namely  "red   biddy"), to  inspiration,  as "he  gets into the subject  he always talks about  when  the spirits are in him,"  then to possession:  "the  spirits  are  really in him.  His eyes are  shining.  His  right  hand comes up,  clenched.  He is pretending  he is holding  a  claymore ... " until  the "spirits start  to get gloomy in him.... " He  tells Morag tales "sometimes  when the spirit moves him."
.Moreover,  his name  and  his favourite  swear  words  ("Jesus" and  "christly") make Christie  an incarnation of Christ. Indeed,  he takes upon himself the physi­ cal and moral muck of the Manawaka community,  making the Nuisance Ground homologous  to a peaceful  cemetery. His symbol is a  heart  pierced  by a  passion

DIVINERS


nail, not  unlike the image  of the Bleeding Heart  of Jesus Morag  can see on the wall of Lazarus's  shack.
A later episode develops "Christie's Gift of Garbage Telling":

"Did  I ever tell you, Morag, that  telling garbage is like telling fortunes? ... You know how some have  the gift of second sight? ... Well, it's  the gift of garbage telling which I have myself, now."

Telling,  in  this sense, is richly ambiguous  again since it means deciphering  and recounting,  interpreting and  handing  down to others through  oral tradition. This is in part  what  Morag  attempts as a novelist. Several years after Christie's death, she wonders:   "Would   there  be a special corner of heaven,  then,  for scavengers and  diviners?  Which  was Morag,  if either,  or were they the same thing?"  And again,  nearly  despairing  of emulating  him, she proclaims her spiritual  and  voca­ tional relationship  to Christie  just as she had to Royland:

Christie, tell the garbage -throw  those decayed bones like dice or like sorcerer's symbols. You really could see, though. What about me? Do I only pretend to see in writing?

Then,  at  last,  Morag  regrets  that  she could only see "too  late"  the  beauty  of Christie  and  his love for  her. And she grieves at  her  lack of response:  "I  told my child  tales about  you, but  never took her to see you. I made a legend out of you  while  the  living  you  was there  alone  in  that  mouldering  house."  Indeed, literature is a pale substitute  for life, words for feelings. One should keep legends for the time  when  death  has taken our  relatives, for myth-making cannot  equal the giving of love.
This  may be one of the secrets Morag  was incapable  of guessing, the message
associated  with  her  river-  or  bird-watching,  or with  the  cry  and  flight  of  the geese, themselves associated on one occasion with Royland's  divining.  The  flock sounds  a  "deep  drawn  resonant  raucous  cry that  no words can  ever catch  but which no one who ever hears it will ever forget." Through this indescribable,  yet unforgettable and  eternal  sound, divining  and  memory are associated. The  river and the geese also become spatial equivalents through  their north-south  dynamic movement: the  river  seems to flow simultaneously  in  two  opposing  directions, while  the  geese  twice-yearly  ply  their  route  between  the  arctic  cold  and  the milder  south.  These  movements  can  be  watched  and  their  meaning  read  by Morag.  Part  diviner,  she is a bird-watcher  and  a river-gazer, still fascinated  by the  apparent  contradiction, "even   after  the  years  of  river  watching."  Bird­ watching  is not for her  primarily  a form of scientific inquiry: she is more inter­ ested in  metaphor than  in  observation.  She reads human  behaviour  (although railing against her own pathetic fallacy)  into a bird giving advice to its fledglings, or adopts  Eula  McCann's deciphering  of the sparrow's  trill as a "loud  and  clear message,"  "Pres-pres-pres-pres-Presbyterian!" That   for  her  bird-watching is a

DIVINERS

means  of  gaining  access to  the  primeval  secrets  of  nature   is revealed  in  the climactic and emblematic Great Blue Heron episode.
The  apparition of the heron is led up to linguistically  by Morag's  fear of the
weeds. They evoke in her mind "a river-monster,  probably  prehistoric, which has been hibernating here in the mud for ten million years and  has just wakened. Or Grendel in Beowulf, and me without courage or a sword." The monster clearly represents a being contemporaneous  with the  beginnings  of creation,  waiting in the clay of life in an enchanted  sleep, opponent  of a mythical literary  figure out of the  dark  ages. The  prehistorical  metaphor  is continued  through  "mini-dino­ saur  bullfrog"  until it turns  into a "pterodactyl," thus  making  the  heron into a divine, archetypal  bird, "like a pterodactyl,  like an  angel, like something  out of the world's dawn." The description of the heron began in a very literal fashion:  it was simply signalled by its long legs, neck and  beak as in La  Fontaine's fable. Then  it  became  a  listing in  a  book compiled  by a local  Audubon: "A  Great Blue Heron  (note  the generic name) . Once  populous in this part of the country. Now rarely seen."  The  third,  evocative description  at  once transforms  the  bird into a mythical  embodiment  of flight, serenely  balanced  in its trajectory  toward death  and  eternity.  A "creature" and  "a thing," the heron  is indeed  a monster, not only because of its hugeness or  association with prehistory,  but in the etymo­ logical  sense  of  "monstrum." It  is a  prodigy  which  reveals  and  demonstrates  some hidden meaning in creation.5
Filled with  religious awe, communicating "in  unspoken  agreement," Royland
and Morag  take the boat home:

That  evening Morag began to see that here and now was not after all an island. Her quest for islands had ended some time ago and her need to make pilgrimage had led her back here.

Now  is  the  log  cabin  of  pioneer  Sarah   Cooper  allowed  to  become  properly Morag's  home because it is no longer a retreat  cut off from  the world and  time. The  bird's  flight has re-established for her a link with history and eternity.  Such is the moral of the heron.




DIVINING THUS  AMOUNTS, in many senses, to being able to read  the  meaning  inscribed in the world, in nature, and  in events by the hidden hand  of God.  It  is the ability to discern a design or a "pattern." The  word sig­ nificantly  recurs  in  the novel, calling  to mind  the  Jamesian   metaphor of  "the  figure in  the  carpet." When  Morag  scans snapshots  of her  parents,  she  cannot "discern  the pattern" in her mother's  dress; in another  snapshot  "you can see the pattern  quite  clear."  At school, the visibility of a dress pattern  similarly serves as

DIVINERS

a criterion  for the  value and  social standing  refused Morag.  "Pattern" refers to the used, worn-out  condition  not only of garments  but of words, while the dress itself, according  to the metaphor in Carlyle's Sartor Resartus, is the visible mani­ festation  of essence and  being.  The  metaphor  of meaning  is thus  compellingly pursued  when  Morag,  wearing  glasses for the first time, can discern the patterns of leaves on the trees, thus reading  what Whitman  called "leaves of  grass" as she would the leaves of a book.
To discern word patterns  and to wield language is tantamount to creating some degree of reality. Practically  all references to words in The  Diviner, from Morag's early  attempts at  school to  her  later  hesitations as a novelist at  work, point  to this.  Words  generate   words  through  sound  combinations,  it  seems:   "they  are dumb,  dumb-bells,  dumb  bunnies!" They generate images which give the illusion of  being  visually  real :  "Morag thinks  of the  sparks,  the  stars,  and  sees them again  inside her head. Stars!  Fire-stars! How does it happen?" Metaphors, hom from  words, change  appearances in a funny  way:  "The blinds are pulled down the  front-windows  of the  houses to keep out the heat.... The  windows are  the eyes, closed, and  the blinds  are  the eyelids, all creamy, fringed  with lacy lashes. Blinds make the houses to be blind. Ha ha." Very soon Morag  masters the mean­ ings of new words-"principal," "strap," or "recess" at school, and "gaelic"  or "scavenger" out  of school.  From  denotative,  functional  meaning  she accedes to plural  senses and   connotations. When  Prin  calls her  a  "mooner," she  super­ imposes  her  (preferred)  new  meaning,  that  of a child  from  a fabulous  planet like the  moon,  on that  of "daydreamer." She perceives the scandalous situation  of  a  term  whose morphology  is at  odds with  its referent: "The flies  are  blue­ bottles.  How  come  they  got  this  nice  name  given to  them?  They're  ugly." A name is thus felt as emblematic of its referent and the reality link  between signi­ fier  and  signified is vindicated   as a  rule. Whereas  Prin  is a  big, fat,  slovenly woman  in  the  novel, her  "real  Christian  name is Princess.  Morag  thinks this is the  funniest   thing  she  has  ever  heard." Of  course,  such  textual  incidents  or remarks  must  be read  as pointers  to  the way in which  the  narrative should  be decoded,  not only as steps in Morag's  discovery of words or of the fact :that cer­ tain  things,  like the  face  of Botticelli's Venus, cannot  be  described  for lack of them.6
The  same  words can  mean  different  things in different  places, and  even at a
later  age, Morag  notes dissimilarities between the referents of "bluff" in Ontario, where it applies  to a ravine,  and  on the prairies where it designates a clump of brush.  Or   the  same  signified  can   have  phonetically  different   signifiers, and Morag  proudly  insists that  "coyote"  should  be pronounced  "kiyoot" in Canada while only in John  Wayne's  movies does one hear  "co-yo-tee."  This  introduces the  notion  of local  linguistic  custom,  of the  link  between  language  and  com­ munal  roots.

DIVINERS

The  most  liberating  use of words for  children  is the  making  of puns.  Thus, Mrs.  Crawford   becomes Mrs.  Crawfish  in  the  clasrroom, or  Christie,  his face dusty and  his skin red, becomes for a while a "redskin." And  thus can  Christie invert the usual phrase and say, "Bad  Riddance to Good Rubbish." But one can run  into  contradictions,  which at times seem inherent  in language  itself:  "How can  one  say  'dead   when  born':  how  both  at   the  same  time?"   As  a  child Morag  early discovers proper usage. She comes to understand that  Christie says, "Did  they learn  you anything  today?"  intentionally, whereas  Prin  would say it "not  on  purpose."  And she discovers that  status is attached to the  proper wield­ ing of words  (note  how "proper" recurs in the  book, its meaning  undefined  by heraldic  reference) . Those  who  master  the  prevailing  linguistic  usage  are  re­ warded  at  school and  and  placed  in  a special  category;  an  "educated" elite is thereby granted  status. Even in Manawaka Morag  can acquire  as a novelist the recognition  she had  been refused as a  poor  girl of the  people.  This  power  will eventually  become  her temptation-a sin-against  which  Lachlan, the  news­ paper editor, vehemently warns her:
If you ever in your life presume to look down on them  (those not very verbal people)  because you have the knack of words and they do not, then you do so at your eternal risk and peril.
The  writer's  attempt  at  properly  reading  and  expressing the  pattern  of life is an  attempt at  reducing  chaos, dispelling  ambiguity, eliminating  "the  blur"  in vision. Some forty years later,  Morag  is still struggling  with the same problem of rendering  referential  reality in words:
How could that  color be caught in words? A sort of rosy peach color, but that sounded corny and was also inaccurate.
I  used to  think  that  words could do anything.  Magic,  Sorcery. Even  miracles.
But no, only occasionally.
As she reflects upon  her "trade" as a writer,  the  protagonist  is aware  that  she must aim both at mimesis and at respecting the prevalent  cultural  code; she must be neither  inaccurate nor "corny." As a result, she is always compulsively look­ ing  for  the  right  word.  Speaking  of "creases"  to  evoke the  effect of  wind  on water, she catches herself: "Naturally the river wasn't  wrinkled or creased at all
-wrong  words, implying something  unfluid,  like skin, something  unenduring, prey  to  age."  The  right  word  is most  difficult  to  find  in  the  case of images, precisely because the link between the referent  and the connotation is so tenuous. And  words  are  always ambiguous  because  intent  can  modify  meaning.  Maybe the only occasion  when  Morag  could be sure of the  match  between  intent  and meaning  was when Christie  (who often  used "blessed"  as a swear word in order to express surprise or indignation) answers, "Well,  I am blessed" from his death bed with  clear  purpose and  joy, as Morag  thanks  him for having  been a father to her.

66

DIVINERS


But  which  is the  right  word  when  love is at stake?  When Pique  asks Morag whether she loved  Skinner, her father, Morag is unable to "reply and  get across so much  complexity in a single well-chosen  phrase":

I guess  you could  say love. I find words more difficult  to define than  I used to. I  guess-I felt-I  feel ... I'd  known him an awfully long time then, even. I'm not sure know  is the right word, here.
Who  cares  about   the  right  word?  Pique  cried.  Then,  suddenly,  the  hurt  cry which must have been there for years, "Why did you have me?"

There are  times  when  words  come too late  and  are  ineffectual, times when some other means  of  communication should  be established between  living  people; yet this  does not  negate the  value  of the  word,  in the  form  of the  Book, within the larger  context of the world.
The Book:   the  Bible.  Throughout Morag's life,  books  are  essential.  In  the
family  setting evoked   by  a  snapshot of  her  at  age  three,  she  places  "stacks of books"   in  the   closet   under  the  stairs,  with  leather   bindings and   "the  names marked in gold." Books recur,  though  in less fine form,  among the  items  rescued from  the Nuisance Grounds and  displayed  in Christie's sitting-room:

books, old old  old  books, and  one has real leather  for  the  cover, and  the  letters are  in real  gold  but  now you can hardly  see them, and  you can't  read  the book because it  is in another language, but Christie says it is the Holy Bible in Gaelic. Throwing out a Holy Bible! Oh. But would God mind so much seeing as it was in Gaelic?

In  spite  of  the  attenuation in  the  last  sentence,  the  sense  of sacrilege  is plain, because  the  Holy  Bible  is archetypal. Like  the  Blue  Heron, it  is divine,  ancient and  superlative. ("Gold" symbolically  increases  its value.  It is the  Book.)
Here,   the   book  is,  significantly, in  another language, which   implies  that   it should  be translated and  deciphered, and  which introduces the theme  of different and/or lost  languages, an  important topic  in  the  novel.  When the  school  chil­ dren  sing  "0 Canada," rendering the  second  line,  in  roughly  phonetic  French, "Teara da  nose ah  yoo,"  it always  makes  them  titter: "They know it means the  land  of our  forefathers but  that  is not  what  it seems  to  mean."  French is per­  ceived  as  possibly  ludicrous through mispronunciation. Yet, when Morag listens to  Christie   reading Ossian  and  he shows  her  the  Gaelic  words  but  cannot say them, the "old  language" is highly valorized:

"It must  sound  like  something  in  the  old  language" ... Christie  claims, ... "I
never learned  the Gaelic and that is a regret to me."
Together they look at  the strange  words, unknown  now, lost, as it seems, to all men, the words that once told of the great chariot of Cuchullin:
Carbad; carbad  garbh  a' chromhraig
'Gluasas thar comhnaird le bas; Carbad suimir, luath Chuchullin

DIVINERS

Sar-mhac Sheuma  nan cruiaidh  chas;
"Gee. Think  of that, Christie. Think of that, eh? Read some more in our words,
eh?"

"Our words": language creates kinship  and  a sense of belonging, tradition and identity. At  school,  when  Skinner Tonnerre does  not   join  the  children singing "The Maple Leaf  Forever," Morag concludes: "He is not singing  now. He comes from  nowhere. He  is not  anybody." In  fact,  Skinner refuses  to sing  because  the song  does  not  belong  to  his cultural tradition. Of  course,  he should  be  able  to speak  French and  Cree,  but  he only remembers scraps  of these  tongues.  Morag's remark that  Christie pronounces "Ossian" "aw-shun" and  Skinner's remark that Morag  pronounces "Jules"  "jewels" point   to  translinguistic homophony, but they  mostly  emphasize lack  of  communication or  language as  obstacle. When Pique  sings  Louis  Riel's  song, which she has learned from  a book, in French and then  in English,  she acknowledges: "I only know  how to make the sounds,  I don't know  what   they  mean." Here,  the  non-French-speaking reader is in  the  same position  as the  non-Gaelic-speaking reader  was when spelling  out  the stanza from Cuchullain's ballad.
,When  Morag plays the  record  of "Morag of Dunvegin" in Gaelic,  she cannot
understand  the  words  nor  even  make  out  any  kind  of  pattern and  distinguish between  the sounds:

Yet she played  the  record often  as though  if she listened  to it enough she would finally pierce the barrier  of that  ancient speech and  have its meaning  revealed  to her.... Too  lazy  [to  take  lessons]. She  would  have  liked  to gain  the speech  by magical  means,  no  doubt.  Yet  it  seemed  a  bad  thing  to  have  lost a  language. Talking  to one or two old fishermen at Crombruach, she had  realized that.  They spoke a  mellifluous  English, carefully,  as though  translating in it  in  their  heads and  some of their  remarks were obscure to her, but  they would  never explain  or could not.
Christie,  telling  the old tales in his only speech, English,  with  hardly  any trace
of  a  Scots  accent,  and  yet with  echoes in  his  voice  that  went  back  and   back. Christie,  summoning  up  the ghosts of those who had  never  been and  yet would always be.
The  lost languages forever lurking somewhere inside the ventricles of the hearts
of those who had  lost them. Jules, with two languages  lost, retaining  only broken fragments  of both French and  Cree, and yet speaking English as though forever it must be a foreign tongue to him.

This  need  to recapture one's  lost linguistic  heritage and  the  inability  to magically have  access to it explain  Morag's frustrated urge  to look  up the Gaelic  nickname Dan  McRaith has  given  her-Morag  Dhu, Morag the  black-in  the  Gaelic glossary  in  The  Clans and Tartans  of Scotland: "It says dubh, dhubh, dhuibe, dubha,  but  omits  to say under  what  circumstances each  of these should  be used. Morag Dhu. Ambiguity is everywhere."

68

DIVINERS


Again, words  and  books  are  not  enough. There exist  dictionaries, catalogues, lists of recipes  and  sets of tools and  tenns, but  these must  be reinterpreted, put in context, recreated by reader and  writer  alike. More interesting than  Margaret Laurence's attempt at  "audio-visual fiction" in The  Diviners is her repeated reaffirmation that  reading and  writing  are not only complementary but also homothetic or  homologous activities. Just  as a professional writer  encodes  in a text  his  reading of  other books,  including the  Book  of  Life,  so  does  a  reader recreate the  book he reads,  or rewrite it in his specific idiom.  From  the genesis of fiction,  the  emphasis is thus  displaced to reading as an  active  form  of  communi­ cation, most  textual incidents in The  Diviners being evident metafictional reflec­ tions on and  hints at this process.
In  the  course  of the  narrative, the  writer  is defined  not only as a diviner,  with all  the  connotations the  word  assumes,  but  as a craftsman, in a coupling which evokes the "Tinker, tailor, soldier, sailor" rhyme:

Wordsmith,  liar,  more  likely. Weaving  fabrications.  Yet, with  typical  ambiguity, convinced  that  fiction was more true  than  fact. Or  that  fact was in fact fiction.

The  crux  and  truth of The  Diviners may thus be found in its demonstration that fact  and   fiction  are  indistinguishable in  appearance and   may  well  be  alike  in essence.
,Practically all of Morag's activities,  past and  present, tend  to prove  this truth. At   five  she   would   surround  herself   with  imaginary  creatures  like  Blue  Sky Mother and  Old  Forty  Nine,  drawn from  songs she  had  heard; she  would  pro­ ject  herself  into  blonde   Peony  or  her  true  alter  ego,  Rosa  Picardy, who slayed dragons and  polar  bears  and  was Cowboy  Joke's  mate.  At forty-seven, she is still engaged in repeating the  recreation of  imagined   memories from  a  handful of photographs in which,  as in a pack of tarot  cards, she guesses her past and  future. Although she  can  recognize that  some memories  are  "totally invented," she can­  not  stop  elaborating upon  scraps  from  her half-forgotten  past, not only in a com­ pulsive attempt  to  compensate for   her   being able  to  remember only   her parents' deaths "but not  their  lives,"  but  because  a distinctive mark  of the  crea­  tive  imagination consists  in elaborating ancestors,  in  giving  voice  to  a  presence which,  Morag feels, is "flowing unknown in my  blood  and  unrecognized in  my skull."
This  explains Morag's peculiar relationship with  her  photographs, kept,  as if
in a treasure chest,  in an  "ancient tattered manilla  envelope" which  Christie  had given her when she was five:

I've  kept  them,  of course, because something  in me doesn't  want  to lose them, or perhaps  doesn't dare. Perhaps  they're my totem and contain  a portion of my spirit. Yeh, and  perhaps  they are exactly what  they seem to be-a  jumbled mess of old snapshots.

6g

DIVINERS

Ambiguity again   characterizes the  snapshots which  are  preserved   not  so much for  what  they  reveal  as for  what  they  conceal,  "not for  what  they show,  but  for what  is hidden in  them." They  are  monuments to memory, totems,  items  to  be deciphered without one ever being  certain  of their  meaning and  of the  reality  of the  past.
The narrator presents  a  skeptical   view  of  man's power  to  establish  meaning
and  order:

Morag  put  the  pictures into chronological  order.  As though  there  were really any chronological  order,  or  any order  at  all if it  came  to  that.  She  was not  certain whether  the  people in the snapshots were legends she had  once dreamed  only, or were as real as anyone she now knew.

More  than one  of Morag's psychological  hang-ups, this is a clue, indicating how the  novel  should   be  approached and  stressing  the  undefined, changing  relation­ ship between  the real and the fictive.




ONE HAS  TO   LOOK   FOR   ANSWERS  to  the  question of  the status  of  fiction  in  the  novel itself. Christie is unambiguous. Just  as the  Bible is the  archetypal book  and  the  blue  heron  is the  archetypal bird,  he  establishes Ossian  as the archetypal poet:

In  the days long long ago ... , he lived, this man, and was the greatest song maker of  them  all, and  all  this was set down later,  pieced  together  from  what  old men and  old  women  remembered,  see, them  living on far  crofts  hither  and  yon, and they sang and  recited these poems as they had been handed  down over the genera­ tions. And the English claimed as how these were not the real old songs, but only forgeries,  do  you see, and  you can  read  about  it  right  here in  this part  which  is called  Introduction, but the English were bloody liars then  as now. And  I'll  read you what he said, then, a bit of it.

Not only  is Ossian  cast as the superlative example of the  poet, the  nature of song (or   ballad, or  legend)  is  also  defined   as  a  collection   of  generations-old oral traditions. The  relation between  literary criticism  and  literature is also hinted  at. Clearly, the  stanzas by "Ossian" are  taken  from  a volume  which  is described in accurate  bibliographical fashion   as "The Poems  of Ossian- In  the  Original Gaelic with a Literal Translation into English and a Dissertation on the  Authen­ ticity  of the  Poems by the  Rev.  Archibald  Clark,  Minister  of the  Parish  of Kit­ mallie. Together  with the English translation by Macpherson, in  2  Vols., 1870." The   extra   and   referential reality  of  the  volumes  is  indubitable,  and  the  truth (i.e.,  the  non-authenticity of the  poems and  non-existence of Ossian)  established in the  "Introduction" is part  of European literary history.  Yet there  is no way of going  against "the strength of conviction" here  evidenced by Christie. Not  only

DIVINERS


in his mind,  but  also in Morag's and  in the reader's the  existence  of the bard  and the  authenticity of  the  poems  are  established  as truth. His  "act  of faith"  (em­ bodied  in  the  "Strength of  Conviction" motto) duplicates the  reader's "willing suspension of disbelief" usually  required by tale-telling. This  is a magical practice rooted   in   belief   which,  not   unexpectedly, connects  Morag  and   yet   another ancestor-diviner, Old  Jules  Tonnerre.
In  her  "Tale of Piper  Gunn's Wife," as she plans  to set  it down  in her scrib­
bler  (a tale  thought out  is as good  as written), Morag had  decided:  "Forests cannot hurt  me because I have the  power and the second-sight and the good eye and the strength  of conviction."  This  is the definition  of a heroic  wife, a persona Morag would  like  to  project herself into,  yet, interestingly, it also equates divin­ ing  (second-sight)  with  "the good  eye"  (bringing luck  as the  antithesis of spell­ casting  or  "the evil  eye")  and   with  "faith" or  an  active  decision  to  entertain forceful belief -although  Morag later  wonders  what "the Strength  of  Convic­ tion" means  and  will try  to find  out  in her quest  throughout the novel.  In  other  words,   Morag's  problem will  stem  from  her  eagerness  to  understand and  her inability simply  to  believe,  while faith  constitutes  a deliberate affirmation.
The  characterization of  divining  as second-sight, or  seeing  through people,  is developed in several  scenes in which  one character looks at  the  other  intently, as though seeing  the  deeper truth and  reality  behind  his appearance. This face-to­ face  reading of the  other comes to a climax in the perfect understanding brought about by love.  Not  only  is it referred  to in John  Donne's lines about two lovers seeing  as  one,  which   Morag explains  at  the  university,  but  it  is dramatized in the tete-a-tete between  Skinner and  Morag.
.Second-sight  or  the  good  eye serves as a  powerful  talisman when  the  time for action   comes.  Thus, the  strength of Louis  Riel  as a  "prophet" is rooted  in  his strength of  conviction, as  evidenced  in  "Skinner's Tale of Rider Tonnerre and the Prophet." He is

Somebody  who  can  [be  a  leaderJ ... who is  just waiting  the  chance. -I  guess you'd call him Prophet. He is like a prophet,  see? And he has the power.
(The  power?)
He  can  stop  bullets-well, I guess he couldn't,   but  lots of  people,  there,  they believed he could.  And he has the sight, too, that means he can see through  walls and  he can see inside a man's  head and see what  people are  thinking in there .. .
Well, the Prophet, then, he's a very tall guy, taller even than Rider Tonnerre .. . and  he carries  a  big cross with  him all the time-this  protects  him, like. He's  a very religious guy, see?

Here,  although he is recounting a tale handed down  by tradition, Skinner is also sketching, making up,  creating the  portrait of an  archetypal religious  and  mili­ tary  leader,  endowed with  clearsightedness, with  a sense of being invincible and  with  religious  faith which   enable  him  to  rally  people  to  his  cause.  His  cross is

DIVINERS

only  a  material sign  for  his  faith,   just  as  the  fact  that people  believe  he  can actually  stop  bullets  is sufficient,  even if contrary to actual fact.  And  Riel  is also cast as a "very  tall  man" -tall not only in actual height  but in mythical size - a hero out  of the  "tall tales."  In  the following episode,  the tale of "Old Jules  and the  War  Out West," the  Prophet is defeated, less because of the  sheer  military superiority  of  the   English   than   because,  instead   of  attacking, he  "is  walking around with  his big cross, waiting  for the sign ... a bit too long,  because  by that time  the  big guns  begin." Defeat  comes to those  who  wait  for omens  too long or who cannot read  them  properly  at the right  moment.
Piper  Gunn stands  in very much  the same  relationship to Morag as Old  Jules Rider  Tonnerre stands  to  Skinner. In  "Christie's Tale of  Piper  Gunn and  the Rebels," Gunn plays a role comparable to Riel's  as a leader. He finds his people, the  Sutherlanders,  "sitting on  their   butts   and   [doing] nothing,"  just  as  Riel found   the  Metis.  And  Gunn   arouses  them  to  battle through the  power  of  his music:

So walk  he  did,  along  every fann  on  the  river  front,  there,  and  he  played  the entire  time.  He  began  with  the  pibrochs,  which  was for  mourning.  To  tell  the people  they'd  fallen  low and  wasn't  the  men  their  ancestors  had  been. Then  he went  on  to  the  battle  music. And  the  one  he  played  over  and  over  was "The Gunn's Salute." A reproach, it was.
The  Suther!anders listened and  they knew  what  he was saying. They  gathered together  and  Piper's  five sons with them, and  they took the Fort  at  the  rising of the day the very next morning.

The   most  evident  characteristic of  these  two  tales  is the  fact  that each  one stems from  an  oral  tradition which  runs  counter to the  other; each  one  presents a version  of the  past  which  apparently negates  the  antithetic version of the other insofar  as  each  side  may  claim  to  have  been  the  only  heroic  one.  But  the  two traditions also  are   complementary,  just  as  the  Gunns and   the  Tonnerres are needed  to converge and  create  Pique.  When  Christie tells the  tale of Piper  Gunn and  the  Rebels,  Morag has  not  yet heard  Skinner's tale  of "Old Jules  and  the War  Out West." Yet  she  has learnt   about   the  Canadian past  in  History  class, and  her  heart is on  the  side  of  the  Metis,  partly because  of  her  attraction  to Skinner. She reacts accordingly at the end of the tale:

(I liked him, though. Riel, I mean.)
That  so? Well, he had his points, no doubt.
(The  book in  History  said  he was nuts, but  he didn't seem so nuts  to me. The M,etis were losing the land-it was taken from them. All he wanted was for them to have their rights. The government hanged him for that.)
Metis, huh?
( Halfhreeds)
Well, well, hm. Maybe the story didn't  go quite like I said....

DIVINERS

Similarly,  when  Skinner  tells "The  Tale  of Lazarus'  Tale  of Rider  Tonnerre," where tradition is at second-remove,  a frequent  occurrence in tale-telling  (name­ ly the existence of variants) is introduced. Variants  can result from the telling of the  same  tale  several  times,  yet each  performance  is unique,  as  Skinner  com­ ments:  "Lazarus Tonnerre sure isn't  the  man  to tell the same story twice, and maybe  he couldn't remember,  because each time he told it, it  would be kind of different."
The  questions  Morag  asks the tale-teller are concerned with accuracy  of name and   detail.  "Arkanys?" she  asks,  which  leads Skinner  to  explain  his  father's term:  "That is how my dad  called the Scotchmen.  Men from Orkney,  I guess." And  when  Morag  interrupts him  with,  "Hired  guns?  I  bet  they  weren't," he reacts the  way Christie  did  above:  "Sure,  they were. Anyway, it's  just a story." Each  claims a right  to his own version of a story and  disclaims it as exclusive or as historical truth.  Finally, when Morag  provides precise historical references like the  "Falcon's Song"  and  "The Battle  of Seven Oaks,"  Skinner  only answers: "Is  that  so?  I  never  connected  it  with  that,  because  my  dad's  version  was a whole  lot  different." Alternative   versions are,  then,  up  to  a  point,  potentially equal in the value of the truth  they convey.
,More important than  Christie's  willingness also to consider the  point of view of  the  Metis  as an  antithetical variant  is Morag's  measuring  a  story  (tale  or legend)   against  the  yardstick  of History. It  is commonly  assumed  that  what  is printed  in  history  textbooks  and  taught  at  school is true.  Indeed,  it  is conse­ crated,  official "truth" but  nothing  more.  Rather,  truth  is not  reality  but  the interpretation of it by and  for a given person or group at a given moment.  Such recognition  is implied  in Morag's  remarks about  the official, national  character­ ization  of Louis Riel as a "mad" rebel and  her own conviction that  he was not. A  further   example   of  how  partisan   truth   enters  into  history  is  provided  by Lachlan   McLachlan  when  Morag's   report  on  Piquette's death   mentions  that "the  deceased's  grandfather fought  with Louis Riel in Saskatchewan  in 188s, in the  last  uprising  of the  Metis."  Lachlan   just deletes the sentence,  saying "that many  people  hereabouts  would  still consider  that  Old  Jules  fought  back  then fought  on  the  wrong side." If truth  is nothing  more than  individual  conviction or group  consensus, it ensures that  history and legend, factual  report  and fiction, are  on  the  same  footing.  This  is the  point  of Morag's  interruptions when she listens to Christie's  later stories or to Skinner's tales. Earlier  Morag  was only able to  respond  to  the  unlikelihood  of  certain  details-"Did they  eat   foxes?"  or "They  walked? A thousand miles? They couldn't."-which caused the teller to reduce  the scale of epic descriptions  in order  to achieve a sense of versimilitude. In  the later  stories, Morag  intervenes as a critic, an intellectual,  full of bookish knowledge, in order  to re-insert legend into history, to sift myth from fact, or at least  to  distinguish   clearly  between  the  two.  When  Christie  tells about  Piper

73

DIVINERS

Gunn and  the  Rebels,  her  acceptance is mitigated ("You are  romantic,  Chris­ tie") or skeptical. She  identifies  "the short  little  man, with  burning eyes" whom the  teller  calls Louis  Riel  as "Louis Riel," and  she  restores  official  truth:  "The government Down  East sent out  the  Army  from  Ontario and  like that, and  Riel fled,  Christie. He  came  back,  to Saskatchewan, in 1885." Later, she even  denies that  the Sutherlanders had taken  back the Fort.
The  teller  is forced  to compromise on  unimportant points  ("this Reel  or Riel, however  you  want  to call him" ) and  to acknowledge the  possibility  of different verswns:

Well, some say that,  others  say different.  Of  course  I know that  the  Army and that  came  out,  like, but  the  truth  of the  matter  is that  them  Sutherlanders had taken back  the  Fort  even before a smell of an army got there.... I'm  telling you, what happened  was this. Piper Gunn says to his five sons....

As a consequence, truth is defined  explicitly  as what  the  teller  of the legend  says it  is, here  and  now,  because  this  is necessary  for  the  telling  to function and  the tale  to exist. The  teller may  know  (rationally or by having  read  volumes of  non­ fiction)   that   certain historical  events  took  place,  but  the  telling  of the  tale  de­ mands another truth, not so much  a different version  as a different kind of truth whose criteria are not to be found  in fact but  in language. Later in her life, when writing  fiction  about the same episodes,  Morag discovers  that legend  and  history mix, indeed, in an unbelievable and  inextricable fashion:

I  kept  thinking  about  the  tales Jules once told  me, a long  time ago about  Rider Tonnerre. Which  brings to mind  a curious  thing-something that  must've  come from  Old  Jules. Rider  was called  Prince of the Braves, Skinner  said, and  his rifle was named La Petite. Infactuality (if that isn't a word, it should be),  those names pertained  to Gabriel  Dumont,  Riel's  lieutenant in Saskatchewan, much  later  on. That's okay-Slcinner's grandad  had  a right  to borrow  them.  I like the thought of history and  fiction interweaving.  The  tale of how Rider  got his horse, Roi du Lac,  I've  recently  discovered,  comes from  a  Cree  legend -probably Old  Jules didn't  know that. You wonder how long that story has been passed on.

She  then  readily  accepts  and  even  welcomes  "the thought of history  and  fiction interweaving."




IT THUS  APPEARS  THAT  THE  CRITERION for  evaluating the success of a story is not the measurable degree  of truth it contains but  the "agree­ ment" -both  as  pleasure  and   mental or  spiritual adhesion -it  can  evoke  in the audience: "I liked it fine" is Morag's ambiguous appreciation.
Evidently,  such   dialogues   and   episodes  of  story-telling  as  we  find  in  The
Diviners have  to  be read  as parables of the  writer's situation and  the  way litera-


74

DIVINERS


ture  functions. They  also  point  at  the  difference  existing  between oral  text  and written  literature. The  gestural or  verbal  response of the  audience while the tale is being  performed and  told,  as well as the  comments which  express  pleasure  or displeasure after  the  telling,  are  clear  signs of success or  failure. The same  goes for  the singing  of a song  as is evidenced  in  the several  sessions when  Skinner  or Pique   perform and  the  listeners'  emotions  are  shown  through their  physical  or verbal   response.   But,  in  the  case  of  fiction,  the  audience is absent; the  person reading a  tale  is separated from  its  teller  by time  and  distance. This  probably entails  more  creative participation on  the  part  of the  reader, but  it  also leaves Morag at  a loss as to  how  she can  measure  her success as a novelist.  In spite  of the  bunch  of  review  clippings she receives from  her  agent  at  the  publication of each  novel  and  of  the  statistical reaction   they  more  or  less adequately  express, she  continues to  wonder about the  way in  which  her  novels  are  being  read  and about the degree  of communication she has achieved.

At  least  Royland  knew  he  had  been a  true  diviner. There were  the  wells, proof positive. Water.  Real wet water. There  to be felt and  tasted.  Morag's  magic tricks were of a different  order.  She would never know whether  they actually worked or not, or to what extent. That wasn't given her to know.

Literally, no writer  can  gauge  how his books will be read, deciphered and under­
stood  by readers.
To  revert  to the  ambiguous relationship between  tale  (or  fiction) and  truth, a further step  towards  reversing the  status   of  history  as  official  record  and   the status of  personal versions  or  visions of it  is provided by the  Battle  of Bourlon Wood  episode.  As in the  case of Ossian's  poems, the  bibliographic reference  to a real,   extra-textual  book,   The   6oth   Canadian   Field   Artillery   Battery   Book (I 9I 9), the  reproduction of its complete  Table of Contents and  a  partial listing of  its  illustrations all  serve  to  authenticate and  establish its  existence   as  fact. Christie  only   has  to  read   what   the  book  "says" -an I 8-line,   third   person, matter-of-fact,  condensed  report  of  military   operations  in  the  Bourlon   Wood section  on September 26th.  Since he actually was on  the  battlefield with  Morag's father, Christie can  comment, "Oh Jesus, don't they make  it sound  like a Sunday school  picnic?" Consequently, he feels moved  to tell his eyewitness  version  of it: "Well, d'you  see, it  was like  the  book says, but  it wasn't like  that, also. That  is the strangeness.... " His is a story of fire, mud, and slime, guns  pounding,  horses dying,  noise,  and  a man  blown  to pieces, and  such fear  that  it left him  "shaking like a fool"  at the  time  and  still leaves him shaking  as he evokes the events again. "It was like the  book says and  it wasn't  like that,  also. That is the strangeness." Such   is  the   Janus-faced  appearance of  reality  and/or  literature. Not  lies,  as Morag-the-novelist first thought, but  ambiguity. Ambivalence, rather monumen-

75

DIVINERS

tally  symbolized   by  the  apparent contradiction with  which  the  narrative opens, as opposing dynamics arrest the river in statuesque stasis:

The  river flowed both ways. The current  moved from north  to south, but the wind usually came from the south, rippling the bronze-green  water in the opposite direc­ tion.  This  apparently  impossible contradiction, made  apparent and  possible, still fascinated  Morag even after the years of river-watching.

The  first  paragraph not  only  introduces the  theme of  "the River  of  Now  and Then," the  possibility  of a simultaneous journey  back  into  the  future and  ahead into  the   past; the   complementary action   of  the  two  elements, air  and   water, also  serves  as  a  superlative paradigm or  emblem cast  in  bronze,  of  the  ambi­ valence  of reality  couched  in words and  "divined" in fiction.
Only thus  can  the  dilemma of  the  writer   be solved  and   can  Morag accept
what   she  at  first  half-ironically called  her  "trade" as  a  worthwhile vocation. Quite  rightly,   A-Okay  Smith   had   once  said   "with  embarrassing loyalty   and evident   belief: 'It's there  you have  to make  your  statement'." Morag meditates that   she  could   fail  and  that  she  cannot write   a  novel  in  such  an  intentional fashion, possessed as she often is by her characters: "They'd been  real to her, the people  in  the  books.  Breathing inside  her  head." Word-beings are therefore akin to the  old, long-lost  languages "lurking inside  the  ventricles of the hearts of those who  had  lost  them" or to  one's  real  or imaginary ancestors. The  writer is  pos­ sessed like  a  shaman, chosen  as a vehicle  or  voice  for  spirits  to speak  through:

The  words not having to be dredged  up out of the caves of the mind  but rushing out  in a spate so that  her head could not keep up with them. Odd  feeling. Some­ one  else  dictating  the  words.  Untrue,   of  course,  but  that  was  how  it  felt,  the characters speaking.  What  was the character and  who?  Never mind,  not Morag's  concern. Possession or self-hypnosis, it made no difference.

Again,  the  narrator refuses to act  as a critic,  to analyze the  nature of character and  of so-called  inspiration, but fully accepts  the role of the  writer  as "posssessed" (in  a  fashion  comparable to  Christie moved  by  the  spirits)  while  claiming the responsibilities attached  to it.
The  writer  is thus  defined  as an  interpreter of the  past,  a transmitter of  tradi­ tion  in a relevant and  usable form  to new generations, as well as a diviner of the pattern of  the  world.  Again,  art  and  belief  are  reconciled in  action; for,  like divining, writing has to be taken  on faith  because it sometimes, magically, works and  sometimes does not.  Morag's letter  to Ella  concerning Prospero's Child  con­ tains a paragraph which is another way of answering this question:

I have  always wondered  if Prospero would be able  to give up his magical  advan­ tage  once  and  for all, as he intends  to do  at  the  end  of The  Tempest. That in­ credibly  moving  statement  " -what Strength  I have's  mine own. Which  is most faint-" If only he can  hang  onto  this knowledge,  that  would  be  true strength.

DIVINERS


And  the  recognition  that  the  real enemy is despair  within  and  that  he stands  in need  of grace,  like everyone else-Shakespeare did  know  just about  everything.

Of  course,  Morag is speaking for  herself,  alluding to  the  magical  island  she has  tried  to  build  in  order  to fend  off harsh  reality.  And  her  enemy  is her  own despair  at not  coping  with  her  responsibilities as a  twentieth-century Canadian woman, mother, and  writer  now  that  she  has  definitely  asserted  her  own  worth in  the  face  of  Manawaka and  achieved  recognition. She  still stands in  need  of love and  grace  and  security, however.  And  she finally learns  from  Rayland's loss of  his divining powers  the  lesson  that  she,  too,  can  be  an  inheritor and   have inheritors: "The gift,  the  portion  of grace,  or whatever it was, was finally  with­ drawn to  be given  to someone else." She can  experience this "now," at  the  end of her  career  and  of the  narrative, which  has been an exploration or incantation leading to such epiphany and  self-realization.
Also, she  has  been  able  to see the sign  (the  Great Blue Heron's rising)  and  tQI
accept the  token.  The token  is the  plaid-brooch of  the  Shipley  family  which, properly traded against the  knife of Lazarus Tonnerre (whose  hieroglyphic mark is at  last  read  for  what  it means,  a half-inverted "T"), provides  Morag with  the symbolic  weapon she  needed  to slay the  Grendels of doubt, "an arm  in armour holding  a sword." She  also receives  (adopts?) a motto  blessing her with  what  she lacked, the Strength of  (religious) Conviction: "My Hope  Is Constant in Thee." Finally,  her  war  cry, "Gainsay Who  Dare," allows her to assert  herself as well as to create a possible meaning and  order  in a world where she could see no pattern. "Everything is improbable. Nothing is more  improbable than anything else," explicitly  applies to  the  coincidence of  the  knife  finding  its  rightful owner   but also  refers,  by extension, to  the  not  improbable, hence  possible -it  is a  matter of faith -design of a superior order  or providence.

.With  the  buying   of  the  house  at  McConnell's landing, the  protagonist  has found her  roots:   "Land. A river.  Log  house  nearly  a century old  built  by great pioneering couple,  Simon  and  Sarah Cooper. Ancestors." She  has  accepted her ancestry   to  be,  not  of  pre-revolutionary Scottish  stock  but  of  post-immigration Canadians, "here and   now." She  has  allowed  the  half-breed line  of  the  Ton­ nerres  to  blend  with  a line of Scottish  descendants to make  a truly Canadian off­ spring, whole  in  the  flesh and  spirit  of Pique.  She duplicates this creation in life and  blood  with  a creation in words  by writing  Shadows of Eden, which  follows the  trek  of the  Sutherlanders to Hudson Bay and  York  Factory. She  thus  allows history and  fiction  to blend:

Christie  always  said  that  they walked  about  a  thousand  miles-it  was about  a hundred  and  fifty, in fact,  but you know, he was right;  it must've felt like a  thou­ sand.  The  man  who led  them  on this march  was young Archie  MacDonald, but in  my mind  the  piper  who played  them  on  will always be  that  giant  of a man,

77

DIVINERS

Piper  Gunn,  who probably never lived in so-called real life but who lives forever. Christie  knew things about  inner  truths  that  I am  just about  beginning  to under­ stand.

All  passion  spent, and  confidence-however fragile-restored, the  quester j writer  at  middle-age thus  brings  to a close her spiritual pilgrimage, the  wiser for knowing  the  limits  of her  ignorance, the  more  secure  for  having experienced the presence  of  a  pattern and  meaning in the  Book  of  the  World. She  can  finally proceed   to  return to  "the house,  to  write  the  remaining  private and  fictional words  and  set down  her title." The  phrasing is ambiguous and  broad enough to duplicate literal   meaning-the final  words  and   title  of  a  novel  (possibly  The Diviners)   in  the   process  of  completion -and  the  connotation of  a  life  to  be continued and  a title  to be claimed, be it that of inheritor through heraldry and tradition or that  of diviner  through clear vision and  deliberate faith.


NOTES

1 See, among  others,  Marcienne  Rocard,  "Margaret Laurence s'oriente-t-elle  vers un roman audio-visuel?" Etudes  Canadiennes, no. 8 ( Ig8o), pp. I I3-20.
2   Royland  and  Christie  are  also linked  through   their  connection   with  the  Great
Blue Heron  (see Note 5) .
3  Lachlan  McLachlan is another  of Morag's  mentors  and  guides. It is symptomatic that  the  only  occasion when  he  performs  as something  more  than  a  newspaper editor  should be signalled by a change in his appearance: "God  help me, I have all  the  symptoms  of a  pregnant   woman  this  morning -except  I suppose  they don't  normally twitch or imagine their eyeballs are falling out."  No mere mimetic expression of his headaches, words make him akin to Royland  (nearly blind)  and to Christie  (twitching); they  transform  him  into  a seer. His frequent  references to God and inspired tone  ("low but slightly menacing") emphasize that  his warn­ ing is supremely important-"you do so at your eternal  risk and peril." It literally becomes a message from God about the sin of intellectual pride.
4    "He  is twisting his face like different  crazy masks. His tongue  droops out.... He crosses his eyes and  his mouth  is dribbling  with  spit.  Then   he  laughs ... like a loony."
5  It is to be noted  that  the heron's gait and stalking along the river connect it with Christie,  with Royland  when he is divining springs, and  with the pibroch  players, especially Piper Gunn;  he also is "The Old  Man of the River''  as totem.
6    Morag's   description  of  Venus  in Botticelli's  painting   significantly  connects  the goddess with  the  archetypal  woman.  She has "tresses,  as it  says in very ancient tales and  the bardic songs ... like a queen in the old old poems, like Cuchullain's queen, the woman beloved by all men." An antithetic homologue of Morag, Venus also is "an  angel,"  i.e., an  archetypal  being of the  air  like the  Blue Heron.  But what strikes Morag most is that "maybe there are not  [any words to describe her]. This  thought  is obscurely frightening.  Like  knowing  that  God  does not actually see the little sparrow fall."


EVERY NOW AND THEN

Voice and Language in Lawrence's
"The Stone Angel')



W.H.New






MARGARET LAURENCE's  MAIN CHARACTERS "em to spend   most  of  their   waking   hours  seeking  the  right   words  to  tell  the  story  in which  they  live.  Morag Gunn, the  novelist-narrator of The  Diviners  (I 974), is only  the  latest  in  a  line  of  language-conscious figures.1   Artful, articulate, and acutely   aware of  the  limits  of articulateness (her  own  or  anyone's), Morag  re­ trieves  from  memory  not  just the  events of her  life and  the  emotions she at least once  attached to  them,  but  also the  language of different stages  in  her  develop­  ment.  There was  a language of class and  place,  a language of song and  race,  a language of teaching, a language of learning, a language of seeing, a language of knowing, a language of flesh and  a language of shaping form. But how does it all come  together? Out of  her  daily  round  and  the  tangle of  her  memories,  out  of the  tension  between  now  and  then,  she composes a world  that sometimes  rises to eloquence, and  every now and then descends to the banal, and otherwise records  the  different reaches  of the  Canadian English  tongue.  That  there  should  be this unevenness of  diction   does  not  seem  to  me  a  flaw  in  the  work,  but  instead  a deliberate effect:  the   novelist-author  forcing   the  novelist-character to  explore  the limits  of her  verbal  understanding, so that  in turn  the  reader might  learn  the connection between   mode  of speech  and  pattern  of  thought. We  are  made  con­ scious  of  the   artifice   of  her  linguistic  variation,  because   Margaret  Laurence chooses  to  make   us  aware; by  making  Morag a  writer, by  making Morag so deliberately reconstruct a life, she draws our  attention to the  process of fabrica­ tion,  in other words-by indirection finding  direction out.  But to talk of Morag
is to talk  not  just of the  latest  but  also of the  most obvious case of this authorial
concern.  Even   with   characters  who  are   neither   writers  nor   public   speakers, Margaret Laurence calls  our  attention to  the  language they  have  access  to,  no matter how  indirectly. So it  is with  Hagar Shipley  in  The  Stone  Angel  (I g64), the first of her series of Manawaka novels; Hagar's is a world  that  is riddled  with the  tensions  of  language and   utterance, and  it is with  the  language of Hagar's

79

VOICE & LANGUAGE

world -and  what  it  tells us about  the shape  and  the  reading  of the  novel in
which she appears-that I am here concerned.
In  fact,  though  it's  not  perhaps  been apparent, I've  been talking  about  The Stone  Angel  from  the  very beginning-indirectly  (in  order  to emphasize  the irony and  the other  indirect  methods Laurence  uses) , and  methodologically  (for my opening  paragraph, full of rhetorical  salvoes and  variations  in diction,  deli­ berately  emulates  some of Laurence's  stylistic techniques). For all the formality with which  Laurence  examines and  employs every now and  every then, that  is, we have  to listen in the text for the moments  when she fades into  the colloqui­ ality of every now and then.2   It is part of the way she shapes her characters,  and part,  too, in The  Stone  Angel, of the way the language  she uses shapes an argu­  ment of anger into a revelation of love.
Let  us begin, then,  with the opening  chapter of the novel, and  with the lan­ guage it uses to establish the character  of the 92-year-old narrator and the earlier selves with  which she claims kin. The  plain  contrast  between  Hagar's now and Hagar's shifting  then  is implied by the perspective of memory, and confirmed by the detailed  record of events-but from the very beginning  we are invited to see two  features  more  of the  character's dilemma  and  the  novel's  character. Each will, first of all, delve backwards into the past;  the structure  tells us this, for the novel opens with an inversion, with a reversal of standard English sentence order ("Above  the town ... the stone angel used to stand")  (parenthetically we might compare  this rhetorical  gambit  in function,  if not in  precise form, with the sym­ bolic opening  of The  Diviners-"The river flowed  both  ways"-and observe how Laurence  has continued  to experiment  with  ways to probe the workings of the associational  mind). Secondly, both Hagar and The  Stone  Angel as a whole will concern  themselves with language,  and  in  the  process will draw  inferences and  conclusions from differences in usage and  level of diction  to which we must respond.
.Thinking  about  the stone angel  in  the  Manawaka cemetery,  that  is, Hagar
speaks of why her father  built it:  to mark her mother's  bones, she says, and then, with a sharp  ironic edge that  at once uses her father's colloquial vocabulary  and criticizes  her  father   for  his  patriarchal   ambitions,  adds  "and   to  proclaim  his dynasty, as he fancied, forever and a day." Almost at once she begins to discourse on the angel itself, in a sentence whose form enacts a careful contrast  with what has gone before:  "I think now she must have been carved in that  distant sun by stone masons who were the cynical descendants  of Bernini, gouging out her like by the score, gauging  with admirable  accuracy  the needs of fledgling pharaohs  in an  uncouth  land." Tonally,  the  sentence  continues  the  irony  we have  already heard;  semantically,  it carries notes on the differences  between style and  public taste, between  Europe  and  the Canadian West;  but formally,  it draws  attention to its own  formality.  The  techniques  and  cadences  are  those of stylized written

8o

VOICE & LANGUAGE


English: alliteration, assonance, slant  rhymes,  allusion,  the  doublets (as in other passages  the  triplets) of balanced parallel  structures. This  pattern of alternation between  the  colloquial and  the  formal  voices continues through the  rest  of  the chapter and  then  in varying ways through the  rest of the book as well. The shifts in  pattern are  clear  in  sentences like  those  that  concern  the  cowslips  that  grow naturally in the  cemetery, about which  Laurence writes  (or  Hagar remembers):

•They were tough-rooted, these wild and gaudy flowers, and  although  they were held  back at  the cemetery's  edge, torn  out by loving relatives determined  to keep the  plots  clear  and  clearly  civilized, for a second or  two a  person  walking  there could catch  the  faint,  musky, dust-tinged  smell of things that  grew untended  and had grown always, before the portly peonies and the angels with rigid wings, when the  prairie   bluffs  were  walked  through  only  by Cree  with  enigmatic  faces  and greasy hair.

The  alliterative formality of  "portly peonies"  is deliberately comic  here,  for we hear  Hagar's voice fairly  spitting out  her dislike of them; the use of the  word "bluff,"  moreover, declares the  degree   to  which   Hagar uses  the  local  idiom, and  "greasy hair" declares a distance and  distaste  the old  woman still maintains in  her  view  of  society.  And   then  at  once  the  discourse  is rendered  rigorously formal,  as  Hagar slowly  fades  into   the  past,  declaiming in  an  elevated   tum of  phrase,  "Now I am  rampant with  memory." Subsequent passages emphasize even  more  clearly  the  writerly  quality of  the  language with  which  Hagar  con­ structs the   world.   Between   the  informal  put-down  with   which   Jason   Currie dismisses Telford  Simmons's father  and the  childish singsong  chant  with which   the   children taunt  Henry   Pearl   ("Henry  Pearl / looks  like  a  girl"4 ), Hagar finds  the  formalizing words  to isolate  No-Name Lottie  Drieser  from  the plainly  ordinary. The  passage  takes a cliche and  a significant simile, and  by turns alliterative and  assonantal, shapes  a  different effect:   "Then  Lottie  Drieser,  tiny and  light  with  yellow  hair  fine  as embroidery silk,  bold  as  brass  although her dress was patched and  washed  raw."
rThe patterns of alternating formal  and  informal diction  continue. With  allite­
ration  and   syllepsis,  Hagar speaks  of  Manawaka  being   largely   "shacks and shanties, shaky  frame and   tarpaper,  short-lived in  the  sweltering summers and the  winters  that froze  the  wells and  the  blood." We are  told  dismissively that  the Shipleys  have  "squat brown   names,  common   as  bottled   beer," as later  we are told  that   the  "square"  prairie houses  "squatted" during the  Depression, their windows  "boarded over  like  bandaged eyes."  We  are  given  an  adjectival  cata­ logue  about the  chicks  on  the  dump  (they  are  "feeble, foodless,  bloodied and  mutilated, prisoned by  the  weight  of broken  shells,"  and  a formal  catalogue of the  dump itself, in  which  cliches, formal  diction, and  ironic  jests, all  juxtaposed, rebound off one  another:

81

VOICE & LANGUAGE

Here were crates and cartons, tea chests with tom  tin stripping, the unrecogniz­ able effluvia of our  lives, burned  and  blackened by the fire that seasonally cauter­  ized  the  festering  place. Here  were  the  wrecks of cutters  and  buggies, the  rusty springs and  gashed seats, the skeletons of conveyances  purchased in fine fettle by the town fathers and grown as racked and ruined as the old gents, but not afforded a decent  concealment  in earth.  Here were the leavings from tables, gnawed bones, rot-softened rinds of pumpkin and marrow, peelings and cores, pits of plum, broken jars of preserves  that  had  fermented  and  been  chucked  reluctantly  away  rather  than  risk ptomaine.  It was a sulphurous  place, where even the weeds appeared  to grow more  gross and  noxious than  elsewhere, as though  they could  not help  but show the stain and stench of their improper nourishment.

To  this   Hagar adds,  in  a  passage  that  we must  read  as a  comment on  the  fic­
tional  method as well as on the event itself:

,I walked there once with some other girls when I was still a girl, almost but not quite  a young lady  (how quaintly  the starched  words shake out  now, yet with the certain  endearment). We tiptoed,  fastidiously holding  the  edges of our  garments clear, like dainty-nosed czarinas finding themselves in sudden astonishing proximity to beggars with weeping sores.

The   formal  and   the   vernacular,  in  "sudden  astonishing proximity," that   is, connect.
,And what  then? The  novel,  instructing us how  to  read  the  novel,  requires us obviously  to see things  in both  conscious and  unconscious opposition. The linguis­ tic tension,  between  formal  and  informal, enacts a social  tension  that exists both within  Hagar and  within  the  social  structure of the  world  she inhabits. But  we would  be unwise  to view any of these oppositions oversimply. The novel does not enact   a  rigid  confrontation  between  two  absolute sides,  whether we  call  those sides high-born a:nd low-born, stylish and  crude,  exclusive  and  inclusive,  metro­ politan and   provincial, foreign  and  native,  European and  Canadian, static and  dynamic, artificial and  natural, learned  and  unlettered, or written and  spoken  in pattern or form.  The examples of style I have been drawing attention to are only to a  degree  classifiable  in such  ways.  Far  more  importantly, they  demonstrate a shifting  linguistic  hierarchy, a fluid interpenetration between formal and  informal patterns, which  is neither  rigidly coded  nor easily interpretable. For these reasons,  the  shifting language patterns, like  the  novel's  shifts  in  narrative  perspective or narrative voice, convey  more adequately than would  an  unalloyed style the  kinds  of  tension  that   the  particular  character of  Hagar Currie Shipley,  and  the  par­  ticular generation  that  in  her  way  she  represents, must  try  to  resolve.  To  hark back  to  my  title  and  put  this  contention another way,  we  are  led  by the  novel first to perceive  a sharp categorical distinction between  Hagar's now and  Hagar's then,  but  then  led  further to realize  that  this  binary distinction is not  adequate to  the  occasion,  and   that   (if  we  seek  a  parallel)  such  a  distinction manifests Hagar's  repressive,  divisive,  will;  the  fluid  associations of  memory, by contrast,

VOICE & LANGUAGE

like the  dynamic  processes of the living colloquial language, are  expressive and connective.  Hagar  has to come  to terms with  the ongoing  language  of  remem­ bering,  in other  words, as well as to understand  the shaping  effect that the divi­ sive language  of now and  then has had  upon her. Indeed,  we might go so far as to say that  the  success of  the  novel stylistically derives  directly  from the inter­ penetration between  levels of discourse, and  that  when it  depends  solely on one level  (as  it  does in  the  straight  narrative  of Chapters  6  and  7, which  recount the  romance  between  John   and  Arlene  and  the  events  leading  towards  their deaths) , then  the  novel is at its flattest, its weakest, functioning only to record externals and not to reveal the internal growth of the narrating characters  as well.


To FOLLOW FURTHER  THIS  IMPORTANT ROLE that  the collo­ quial  voice has in  marking  Hagar's world,  we must  now turn  our  attention  to the   elements   which   distinguish   it  from  the  writerly  "thinking"  patterns   of
Hagar's educated  mind.5   I  have  referred  already  to several aspects of informal style:  to  localism,  relaxed  speech  cadences,  vernacular  intonations. There  are others,  too:  slang,  vulgarisms,  solecisms, and  the unthinking speaker's  more or less automatic  reliance  on  the  vernacular   patterns,  although   Hagar's  private finishing school  has educated her childhood  cadences almost  out of her. Hence Clara  Shipley,  with  her  "impermissibles,  I  seen and  ain't,"  offends  Hagar,  for they  are  "even  worse  coming  from  the  woman  than   the  man" -after  which Hagar  adds  her  own,  genteel  colloquial  disclaimer, "the  Lord  knows why." At this point,  of course, Hagar  has little to do with the  Lord: it's what  she thinks that  matters  to her, and  her ironic voice is to be heard  through  the phrase, some­ what  condescending  towards  the  world around  her.  She  puns  condescendingly, "a  pint-sized  peacock, ... haughty,  hoity-toity,"  thinking "tend-as  though  I were a cash crop"  or "in  their  prime, as they say, like beef." And herself always precisely careful  about  pronoun  case  ("It wasn't  I";  "It could  not  have  been I"), she mimics her daughter-in-law Doris (who says "M arv and me" "are  hav­ ing a cup of tea,"  " 'It's me that  trots up and down these stairs a hundred  times a day' ") : " 'I dasn't  give a good loud  rap  these  days or you know what she'll say. Oh,  the secret  joys of martyrdom.'" About which, of course, Hagar  knows a good deal.
It is her husband  Bram,  though,  who offers Hagar  the greatest linguistic chal­
lenge-as  it  is her  son  John,  later,  who continues  to defy  her  efforts to train him : to train  him, I might add, not so much to the linguistic patterns of her own day as to the linguistic patterns-even the archaisms-of  an earlier generation still, which  Hagar   has  unquestioningly  adopted  from  the  past  as though  dimly aware  that  the  dynamics  of the language,  which she acknowledges  but  overtly

8g

VOICE & LANGUAGE

rejects, record  the changes in society which she is unwilling  to accept, if to see at all. She marries Bram because he is a challenge to the old code, just as he fancies her  because  she  represents  it.  She  alienates  her  father  by choosing  Bram,  but expects him to "soften and yield, when he saw how Brampton Shipley prospered, gentled,  learned  cravats and grammar." But neither  man  alters. Bram continues with his mistakes:  "'This here's for you, Hagar,'" he says, and she is so caught up  in  his grammatical error  that  she fails to  notice  his gesture  of conciliation towards  taste, his gift of a decanter  with a silver top:  "I took it so casually," she recalls, "And  laid  it aside ... Then  he laughed.... " Steeled against  syntactical rules  and   the  niceties  of  diction,  he  walls  himself  off  in  deliberate   affronts: "Bugger  the money," "Won't the saintly bastard  ever shut his trap?", "What the hell's the matter  with you? Judas  priest, woman," "I should of kicked the living daylights out of her," "I don't give a good goddamn."
We are given other examples, too, of controlled  and  uncontrolled  speech:  the Reverend   McCulloch's formal  intonations,   the  matron's "professional  benevo­ lence,"  Murray Lees's mock Pentecostal  rhetoric,  the senile babble  of  Miss Tyr­ whitt  in Silverthreads nursing  home, the  polite daggers  and  verbal fencing  that constitute   Hagar's  conversation  with  Lottie  Simmons  over  John  and  Arlene. Such  passages  reinforce  for  us the  kind  of  articulateness Hagar  possesses, the degree of control she exerts:  over speech and through  speech. Yet the important fact  to  bear  in  mind  is that  even for  Hagar,  language  will not  be static.  Her language  changes,  partly  by exposure to other  patterns,  partly  by  choice, partly by the accidents  and  unconscious alterations  of time.  The elements of language  that  reveal  these  changes  are  both  lexical  and  dialectal;  their  implications  in­ struct  us  both  about  Hagar's  character  and  about  the  relation  Margaret Lau­ rence  draws   between  Hagar's development   and   the  development   of  Western Canadian society.
,We  are  dealing  in  this  novel  with  four  generations:  Jason's,   Hagar's and
Bram's,  Marvin's and  Doris's,  Steven's  and  Tina's. The  point  about   Hagar's two-sided connection  with her own generation  is made  again  if we consider the speech  patterns they  all use. Jason  Currie,  the  Scots Presbyterian  Western  pio­ neer, speaks  with  the  Scots  burr,  the  Old  Country  idiom  (" 'Do  you  want  to grow  up  to  be a  dummy,  a daft  loon?'"), and  the  colloquial  formulae of his birthplace   (the  homilies, the clan motto, the Selkirk Grace,  and  the tight-lipped message of approval: "<Hayroot,  strawfoot,  j Now  you've  got  it!") He  yearns for connection, but also for propriety, as we see in his three tonally different com­ ments on  Lottie  Drieser's mother's  death: the one full of  pity  ("'Poor lass.... She couldn't have  had  much  of a life' "), the next indignant and  self-righteous (" 'Her  sort isn't  much loss to the town, I'm  bound  to say' "), the third  at first appalled  at the implications  he thinks of and  then formulaic and smug  (" 'Con­  sumption?  That's contagious,  isn't  it?  Well, the  Lord  works in wondrous  ways

VOICE  & LANGUAGE


His  will to  perform' "). It  is his overriding  will to achieve success-which is measured  in  terms  of  financial  security  and  public  propriety-which  dictates the way he educates  Hagar. But his own Scots patriarchal upbringing recognized propriety  in  terms involving  language; so in Western  Canada by buying Hagar an  Eastern  education, he imposes on  her  an  artificial  tongue  and  presumes he has thereby  provided  her with status. But by so doing he has separated  her from the Western rural  norms of her generation,  as represented  by the speech of Bram and  Telford  and  Lottie  and  Henry  Pearl, and she spends most of her life listen­ ing to the quarrel between  the voice of her training  and the voice of the genera­ tion to which she belongs.
For despite  Hagar's personal style, the ordinary  language  in Canada takes on
its own  characteristic patterns.  Marvin  and  Doris emulate  the flat norms of the generation   before  them;   Tina   and  Steven -and  their  contemporary   Sandra Wong-display  the  characteristic,  American-influenced, laconic  speech  pat­ terns  of  the  present.  My  point  here is fourfold:   to say first that  the standard process by which  the  English language  has developed  is to adopt  foreign words into  the lexicon rather  than  to translate them in, which means that  the vocabu­ lary makes English  out  of various original structures; second, that such  borrow­ ing  has  also  taken  place  in  Canada, which  means  that  some  words  will have developed or re-rooted  there and  will geographically  mark a speaker;  third,  that the successive waves of multicultural immigration  into Canada are observable in speech  pattern, at  least  while the society undergoes  the  process of producing  a new  norm  for  itself;  and  fourth,  that  Hagar's life  records-through  language
-one angle of understanding these changes in social structure.  Steven and Tina, urban,  independent, and  professional, that  is, represent opportunities that  Hagar either  never had or could never seize, but they do so in their own idiom,  without the particular artifice of speech that Jason had seen fit to value.
In some sense it can  be suggested that  Hagar  has always known that  the lin­
guistic  distinctions  she  makes  are  dislocating.  Certainly  her  formal  "speaking patterns" differ from  her formal "thinking  patterns" -and both are punctuated by informal  interruptions and  regional vocabulary. The  Canadianisms (or some­ times  the  Canadian  adoptions of isms from  elsewhere)   appear  in  phonology; they  also show  up  in  lexicon  and  local  allusions-in words  like  bluff,  bald­ headed  prairie, shinplaster,  gopher, chokecherries, slough, T. Eaton's, The  Hud­  son's Bay, blackflies,  a tin  lizzie, saskatoons, Indian  paintbrush,  Toronto  couch, sockeye, cohoe, Cariboo  and  Peace River  Country, a two  ninety  two-and  in the endemic  eh that  we hear from John,  Hagar, Sandra Wong, and from Mar­  vin, when he uncharacteristically gets his emotions outside him and says to Doris, "'Dry up,  honey,  eh?'" Hagar   will use  such  words  without  apology;  but  it's almost as though  she doesn't  hear the paradox  that  therefore  emerges in her own voice. She resists changing  forms and contemporary slang, but she expresses her-

VOICE & LANGUAtH!:

self ably enough in the slang of an older  day -in phrases like "stem  to gudgeon" or "hey-day, go-day, God-send-Sunday." Her  adaptation to Murray Lees and  her conscious  response  to Sandra Wong  late  in the  book therefore mark  a significant alteration in  attitude which  as readers  we are  meant to  hear-for  the  change in language signifies an  easing  of the  resistance  she  has  erected  against her own emotions,   her  ability   to  connect   with  others.   " 'Quite-okay,' " she  says  to Sandra in  the  hospital, after  voluntarily helping   the  girl:   "I have  to  smile  at myself. I've  never  used that  word  before  in my life. Okay- guy-such  slangy words." We  recall  one  of her last  conversations with  Elva  Jardine in  the  public ward,  mildly  comic  in  the  way  the  two  old  ladies  rationalize their  frailties and manipulate an out-of-date slang:

"My  memory is very good ... but sometimes a thing slips my mind-" "Yeh. Same here. Well, let's hit the hay, kiddo."
I have to smile at that. And then I feel myself sliding into sleep.

And  then: shortly  after,  the  tone  changes,  as  we  hear  Hagar  admitting some­
thing else:

"I can hear my voice saying something, and it astounds me." "I'm -frightened.... "
"What possessed me? I think it's the first time in my life I've  ever said such a
thing. Shameful.  Yet somehow it is a relief to speak it."

And thus  her resistance  to herself eases more still.
Elva  Jardine is of her own generation and  her own  rural background; Marvin is her son  and  therefore akin  to her in another way;  we might presume connec­ tions to be possible between  them.  But Sandra Wong is of a new generation and  another  background  entirely   (a   background, moreover, from  which   Hagar's experience of Mr.  Oatley's smuggling  stories  has  further divided  her) ; hence  to connect   with  her  is doubly  significant. With  the  other patients,  both  in  Silver­ threads  and   in   the   hospital,   Sandra  demonstrates the   processes  of  linguistic change   that   have  been  wrought by  the  demographic  changes within   the  com­ munity. As we have  seen,  Hagar has approved of a strict  pattern of speech; she does not suffer  deviations from  these patterns easily. In  Manawaka, the poor and the  "Galicians" and   the  Metis  Tonnerres are  all  beyond   the  pale; at  Silver­  threads, the  pointed ironies  and  Jewish  cadences  of  Mrs.  Steiner's speech  first attract and  then  dismay  Hagar, so that  she  retreats into  the  formal balances  of the language of her mind :

"Don't mistake me," she adds in haste. "Nobody  said in so many words, 'Mam­ ma, you got  to go there.'  No, no, nothing  like that.  But Ben and  Esther couldn't have  me  in  that  apartment of  theirs-so small,  you'd  think  you  walked  into  a broom closet by mistake. I was living before with Rita  and  her husband, and  that

86

VOICE  & LANGUAGE


was fine  when  they  had  only  Moishe,  but  when  the  girl  was born,  where  was the space?"


"Do  you-" I hesitate. "Do you ever get used to such a place?"
She  laughs  then,  a short  bitter  laugh  I recognize  and  comprehend at once.
"Do  you get  used  to life?"  she says. "Can you answer  me that? It all comes as a surprise. You  get  your  first  period,  and  you're  amazed  -I can have  babies now
-such a .thing! When   the  children come,  you  think-Is it  mine?  Did it come out  of me?  Who  could  believe it? When  you can't have  them  any  more,  what  a shock-It's  finished-so soon?"
I peer at her,  thinking how peculiar that  she knows so much. "You're right.  I never got used to a blessed thing."
"Well, you and  I would  get on  pretty  good,"  Mrs.  Steiner says. "I hope  we see
you here."
Then I perceive  how  I've  been led and  lured. She hasn't meant to. I don't blame her.  I only know  I must  get out  of this place  now, at once, without delay.

By  the  end  of  the  novel, in  the  multicultural ward, Hagar becomes  accommo­ dated to other cadences, however, and to her  own  part in the connections among them. At  first  it  is only  the  flat  accent of  Elva  Jardine that  connects with Mrs.  Reilly's Irish and Mrs. Dobereiner's German, with  Hagar  holding back:
"Funny, ain't it?"  Elva Jardine says. "Take me, for instance. I could  stuff myself with  bread  till the  cows come  home,  and  I wouldn't put  on a blessed ounce.  Well, it's God's  will if a person  runs to fat."
"That's so,"  Mrs.  Reilly  penitently says. "And   I'm   the  willful  creature, to  be sure.  To  think  it was you that  had  to point  it out  to me, Mrs. Jardine, and  you a Protestant. I should  be ashamed."
Her   meekness   turns   my  stomach. In  her  place  I'd  roar  for  bread   until  I  was
hoarse; and  die of apoplexy if I pleased. "Pan."
The voice is like a puff of smoke, faint  and  hazy. Then, as it comes again,  it has a desperation in it.
"Pan. Pliz -pliz -"
Elva  Jardine cranes  her  wrinkled  neck like an aged seafarer in some crow's-nest, peering  for  land.
"Oh-oh. Where's that  nurse  got to? Nurse!  Yoo-hoo!  Mrs. Dobereiner needs the bedpan."
"All  right," an  unperturbed voice answers  nearby. "Just a second."
"You'd better   get  a  hustle  on,"  Elva  Jardine says, "or  the  dear  knows  what'll happen."
The nurse  arrives,  pulls the curtains. She looks tired.
"We're  short-staffed tonight, and   everyone   needs  a  pan  at  the  same  time.   I
never knew it to fail. Okay,  here you are, Mrs. Dobereiner."
"Danke vielmals. Tausend  Dank. Sie haben ein gutes Herz."

But  then in  the  nighttime chorus, with  Mrs. Dobereiner muttering pa.< Sages from the  Litany and the  song  of  the  Lorelei, and   Mrs.  Jardine expressing her  love for

VOICE  & LANGUAGE

her husband,  Hagar  participates;  the controls gone, the inner  volition allowed to surface, she openly declares-even "almost  screeche[s]-her abiding  need for "Bram!" With  these utterances of the last two chapters,  moreover, we move into another  level of  understanding the  language  which  The  Stone  Angel  employs.


IHAVE REFERRED TO  DIFFERENCES between written and aural patterns,  between  formal  and  informal  vocabulary,  between  learned  and  vulgar usage, and  to the intricate  tensions among them.  I have referred  to the connec­
tions  between  notions of language  and  attitudes to  class, taste,  and  snobbery, between  the  localisms of language  and  the  changing  sociological structures  of place,  between  the  cadences of speech and  the  changing  values of the speaker. But there  is more.  For the language  in this novel is also an act of  communica­ tion, which goes beyond any of these systems of analysis and  also beyond any one of the separate  physical acts of speaking,  writing,  or  thinking-in-words. So it is that  in corning to terms with the way Laurence  has created  Hagar, we are led to perceive the difficulties Hagar  has in voicing her deepest self, or in translating, as it were, her  wishes and  needs rather  than  her  biases and  defences into  effective speech.
From  the  fragmentary  utterances  of  the  novel's  opening   pages,  the  empty
threats  and  the inarticulate, half-thought-through phrases, we presume we are to follow a narrative involving uncompleted  communications. The  narrative  process then  confirms this supposition  by what Hagar directly  tells herself and  indirectly reveals to the reader.  Repeatedly she finds herself hampered  by the fact that  her tongue  will not co-operate  with her mind. One  way of interpreting such a state­ ment  is to  understand it figuratively, as a comment  on the discrepancy between her will to join in experience and the linguistic barrier  which her father's educa­  tion erects against  it. Another is to see it as a literal  truth: a declaration of the physical  infirmities  of the  aged.  Between  these  two  positions  is a  third -one which is essentially psychological, which explores the readiness of the speaker  to reveal  the  innermost  self:  in  this  case Hagar's readiness  to  admit  her  love, to admit   her  fear,  and  to  reveal  thereby  a  vulnerability  which  she  has  always scorned in others and  (quite untruthfully) denied in herself.
Through much  of  the  book she  believes she is declaring  the  truth; but  the careful  reader  will not wholly trust  her. Sometimes she knows she lies, as when she tells Mrs. Steiner John died in the war, and  wonders why, but more often­ living the lie about  high culture and  evading her own culpability  in John's death
-she does not even know. Between her  mind  and  her spoken  words, between her intent  and  her actions, between her belief and  the truth  about  herself, there lies a substantial  chasm. In  the  novel Hagar gradually tracks  her memories to-

88

VOICE  & LANGUAGE

wards the  truth and  towards an admission  of fear and  love;  and  as Laurence has structured them, the  processes of the novel lead  the reader to follow, more clearly than Hagar herself can, this growth  in understanding.
For  Hagar's prose  has  to it, as well as a balance between  formal   (and  there­
fore  conscious)   speech  and  colloquial  (and therefore familiar, even unconscious) speech,  a kind  of burden  or  refrain  which  draws  our  attention to the  mixture of wilfulness  and  inability that  sabotages  her  acts of speech.  Repeatedly she tells of a disparity-always of her own  making,  though  not  always  under  her conscious control. The  examples are  numerous: when  she can  neither comfort her brother Dan  nor  communicate with  her brother Matt, she "used  to wonder afterward, if I had   spoken   and   tried   to  tell  him-but  how  could   I?  I didn't know  my­
self .... " "I will  not  tell  him  more," she says about her  conversation with  the Reverend  Mr.  Troy. "Oh,  but  that  was  not  what   I meant to say  at  all,"  she thinks  after   insulting Marvin;  "How is it  my  mouth speaks  by  itself ... ?" "I wanted to  say  'There, there' " to  Bram,  she  thinks,  one  night  after  they  make love,  "but I did   not  say  that. My  mouth said,  'What is it?'  But  he  did  not answer." She  wants to  joke with  her X-ray  technician, "But  I've  bungled  it. My voice ... falters and   fades."  The fact  that   the  voice  does  speak   without the interference of her  conscious  will gradually leads,  however,  to the  truth that  will free  her from  the  past.  Fragmentarily she recognizes  what  is going  on-indeed, she does so even  to the  degree  that  she is aware of how  her memory associatively takes  over  her  conscious  mind   (and for  that  matter shapes  the  novel) . At  first the  revelations are  both  short   and  fragmentary, as  when  she  discovers  herself irrationally screaming at  Marvin " 'I'm not  worked  up  a  bit!' Is  it  my  voice, raucous and  deep, shouting? 'I only want  to tell you-.'"
:She cannot complete what  she wants  to say here,  partly  because  all her actions up  to this  point  have  been  saying  something else. Clearly, words  are  not  always required for  communication, as many  of the other  characters in the  novel know. Doris  and  Marvin, for  all  their  limitations, have  a  working  marriage, and  they can  communicate by sigh and  eyebrow. Tom  and  Elva  Jardine touch  each  other in  mutual tenderness. Murray Lees,  talking  of  the  springtime of  his own  mar­ riage,  declares his  delight in  the  sweetness  of sex  with   his  wife  Lou  (and the "plain words" by  which  he recalls the fact  take  Hagar aback). For Hagar loves the  body  but  denies  it by her learned  language. When  they are  first  married, she says to Bram:

"It seems that  Lottie  Drieser was right about you.... although  I certainly  hate to say it."

"What did  they say of me?" Bram asked. They-knowing more than  one had spoken.

I only shrugged and would not say, for I had manners.

Bg

VOICE  & LANGUAGE

A "prissy  Pippa" by her own  admission, she uses her  learned skill with  words­ her  allusions  to  Coleridge and  Browning and  Keats  and  the  classics  (the  satyr, Socrates' hemlock,  the  gorgons) , and  the  Bible -to  distance herself  from  life. She even refuses to admit  to responding sexually  to Bram,  because  she perceives it as a betrayal of her  dignity.  "It was not so very long  after  we wed," she  recalls, "when first I felt  my blood  and  vitals rise to meet  him.  He  never  knew.  I never let  him  know.  Inever  spoke  aloud,  and  I made certain that  the  trembling was all inner.... He  never  expected  any  such  thing, and so he never  perceived  it. I prided   myself  upon   keeping  my  pride  intact, like  some  maidenhead." But  she tells more and  he perceives more than she realizes, as when  they part:

"I  wouldn't  take eggs onto a train,"  I said. "They'd think we were hicks." "That would be an everlasting shame, wouldn't  it?" he said.
"That's all you've got to say?" I cried. "Food, for heaven's sake?"
Bram  looked  at  me.  "I  got  nothing  to  say, Hagar.   It's  you  that's  done  the
saying."

Capable of  tears,   she  turns   to  stone  when   John dies.  Educated  to  be  the "chatelaine," she is embarrassed to become "the egg-woman" instead. For safety, she closes herself  up,  as she indirectly admits when  Marvin and  Doris  first raise the possibility of selling the house and storing  the furniture:

If I am not somehow contained  in them and in this house, something of all change caught  and  fixed here, eternal  enough for my purpose,  then  I do not know where I am to be found at all.6

But  there   finally   follows  a  set  of  reconciliations. Murray  Lees  is  boring   and crude,   but  she  finds  his voice  "comforting," and   when  she  talks  to  him  about John, she speaks  aloud  once again  without knowing it, this time  the truth. When she  utters  Bram's name  aloud  in the  hospital  night, it is an  open  declaration at last  of  her  desire  and  her  need.  When  she  deigns  at  last  to  hear  the  Reverend Mr.  Troy, he sings, and  all the  "fumbling of his speech  is gone.  His voice is firm and  sure."7  But the  partings that  proceed  to take  place  are still troublesome. Mr. Troy  thinks  he has failed,  and  she "can't muster words  to reassure  him"; she tells Doris  the  truth, but  Doris  does  not  believe  her; she  "would have  liked  to  tell Steven  that  he is dear  to me"  but  instead  they  "have nothing more  to say to one another." And  the  parting with  Marvin is most  troublesome of all. She deliber­ ately  lies to Marvin and  calls him "A  better  son than John"; what  she means by this  she  is  herself  unsure,  except  that   the  reconciliation itself  matters  to  them  both.  When  she  later reflects,  though, that  it  was  "a lie -yet  not  a  lie, for  it was spoken  at  least  and  at  last  with  what  may  perhaps be  a  kind  of love,"  we still cannot accept the  statement at  face  value,  for it  is couched in that  writerly  balance, that  formal "thinking" rhetoric with  which  she has all through the book distanced herself from  what she didn't want  to face. What the  phrasing suggests is

go

VOICE  & LANGUAGE


that  she finds "a kind  of love"  but  refuses fundamentally to back  away  from  her feistiness;  "She's a holy terror," Marvin says-a  holy terror: struggling to hold life,  as  it  were,  "in   my  own  hands," to  hold  in  another kind  of  balance her independence and  her  need.  What she thinks  about  one of her last quarrels with Doris-"I won't take  back  the words" -could stand  as a kind of paradigm for her  whole  life, the  colloquial thought being  redolent  with  meaning: which  takes
us once more  back into the language of the novel.




LET ME   oo  so BY   RETURNING  to  the  rhetorical the opening page,  to the sentence about  the stone angel itself:
 passage  of


I think  now she must have been carved in that distant sun by stone masons who were the cynical descendants  of Bernini, gouging out her like by the score, gauging with admirable accuracy  the needs of fledgling pharaohs  in an uncouth  land.

I have  referred already to the  artful  shape  of this sentence, and  I have  referred, too,  to  the   propensity  of  English   to  derive   its  vocabulary from   a  variety   of sources -a  fact   that   the  "multinational"  character of  the  words  in  this  sen­ tence  only  confirms. But  further  consideration reveals  something else  as  well, which  derives  from  the  main  distinction one makes in dividing English words by their    root-derivation -between  the   native   or   "Germanic"  words   and   the Romance or  "latinate" and  "Classical" ones. By and  large  the  native  words  are the  everyday ones,  the  words  for family,  animals, farm  and  house,  the words for praising, the  words  for  swearing, and  the  sentence  function words  like then  and now.  The   latinate words  record   ideas,  attitudes, the  language of   civil  mores, social style,  and  aesthetic order. It's  the  difference  between  a title like chatelaine and  a function like egg-woman,  between  the  domesticated  petunia  and  the  wild cowslip.  It's  a  rough  distinction, and  one  which  the  native  speaker less realizes than  responds to,  not  knowing precisely where  the words come from,  most of the time,  but  knowing when  vocabulary, level of  usage,  and  given  audience meet. Now  Laurence didn't invent  this distinction, of  course,  but  she makes deliberate and  creative use of it.  Her  ordinary vocabulary, influenced as it is by the  word­ stock  of  the  King  James  Version  of  the  Bible, is markedly Germanic:  this  fact,  coupled  with  the  supple  way she manipulates current idiom  and  Canadian loca­ lism,  helps  to  give  her  writing  its  vernacular character -and  therefore to  a Canadian reader its sense of  familiarity: which makes the occasional latinate pas­ sages seem  all  the  more sharply outlined, more  consciously  foregrounded. To go back  to  the  stone-angel  sentence, then,  is to appreciate how  latinate (or  classi­
cal)   the  key  words  are -distant Imasons,  cynical Idescendants,  gauging 1goug­
ing, admirable Iaccuracy- as well as how  ordered the  pattern is, and  to  reflect on the audience for whom  the sentence is shaped.

gr

VOICE  & LANGUAGE

In  one sense the  audience  is the  reader,  of course,  but  this  holds indiscrimi­ nately true  for all the words in the book; within  the book, the sentence appears  to be one that  Hagar  concocts for Hagar  herself to listen to, an articulate shap­  ing and  orderly interpretation of events, one which will, as we have seen, defend her against  the  flow of life, the  body  of truth,  the  nature  of change.  But these are  the evasive moments. The  moments of revelation  come during  the  passages of uncontrolled  utterance,  when the natural  Hagar  can be heard -not less feisty, but certainly more caring, more in tune with the world around  her. They come in the vernacular  interruptions, therefore, and in the native vocabulary  of her ordi­ nary speech. We hear  her ironies, her beliefs, and  her wants all mixed together,  but what  I am emphasizing here is the fact that  the regional or "daily" vocabu­ lary persists to puncture  the forms of  discourse she uses as her defence and  (she thinks)   her  norms. The  true  base, I suggest, lies in the community from  which she cuts  herself off. But that  her  connection  with it persists despite  her artifices and  her outward  beliefs appears in most central  metaphors she uses -of  which I propose to look at two:  those involving animals and shade.
Various  commentators  have  remarked  on the  animal  imagery,  and  indicated how it suggests that  Hagar  perceives the animal  rather  than  the spiritual  in the human  beings around  her-or  perhaps in the nature  of life. Certainly  it would be in character  for  Hagar  to value the body but to use a language which would at  once  demonstrate   this  preoccupation  and  yet appear to  devalue  the  body's importance. Indeed,   to follow the  animal  comparisons  through the  book is to come up with quite  a catalogue:  early on Jason  considers an uninformed  person a "daft  loon"; shortly after,  Hagar,  still touched  by her father's accent, is afraid Doris will think  her  "daft  entirely"  if she takes  "both her  hands  in  mine  and beg[s] forgiveness," but goes on at once to characterize  itself as "an  old mare, a slow old sway-back"  and  Doris "a  calving cow";  then on subsequent  pages she hears "frogs ... like choruses of angels with sore throats"; she calls herself and then  Marvin  "fish,"  herself a "colt," Jess and  Gladys "heifers," Doris a "pouch­ faced  gopher," herself  a  "crow," a  "constipated cow,"  and  a  "berserk  bird,"  Doris a "flounder," the Silverthreads  patients  "ewes,"  Bram  an "eel,"  the Ton­  nerre boys a "swarm," the Oriental  wives "tinned shrimp," John a "spider," her­ self a "chambered nautilus,"  Clara  a "cow,"  Arlene a "pouter pigeon"  (though John  calls her a "rabbit"); she calls John and herself "two moles" when they are scrabbling  to put  the angel up again;  her  pursuers  (as she sees them)  are both "hounds" and "hunters"; Mrs. Reilly is a "slug," Mrs. Dobereiner a "mosquito"; she herself is a "ladybug," and  with June  bugs in her hair  becomes the "queen  of  moth-millers,  empress of earwigs"; she has "a parody  of a smile, a serpent's  grin"; and  when  Marvin  tries to aid  her  once  again,  she "snappishly" ironizes over  her  hospital  transfer,  which  is cast  as a  need  for  a  "new  wing,"  though whether of bird, insect, or angel she does not make clear. Now I can appreciate,

VOICE  & LANGUAGE


compiling this  list,8   that the  animal references  permeate the  entire  book,  but  I can  neither see  any  particular progression -ontogenic or  phylogenie-in the arrangement of epithets, nor  any  philosophy  governing the selection  beyond  the suitability of each  word  to the  comparison at  hand : unless we consider  the effect of  the  word  choice  itself.  Of  the  thirty  epithets I've  named, only  five  (pigeon, serpent,  nautilus,   mosquito, and   gopher)   are  not  drawn  from   the  Germanic wordhoard -and serpent is Biblical and  gopher a North  American Indian word. Only  nautilus  is unusual; in  the  way  that  albatross alludes  to Coleridge, it may be  another covert  literary reference, in  this  case  to  a poem  by  Oliver   Wendel Holmes9   and  in  any  event  in  context   (beside  "hulk" and  "baggage") it is an educated irony.  The rest  are  equally  ironic,  but  also  reductive,  ordinary-at­ tempts to  assert  either  the  ordinariness of Hagar's antagonists  (as  she  perceives them), thus   reducing them   from  some  presumed   superior  status, or to  admit Hagar's  own  ordinariness, the  ordinariness of her social  milieu,  the  ordinariness of  the  animal body  that   has  always  threatened or  embarrassed her,  and  which slowly decays.
The animal body  is the  substance of  the  world  Hagar has  primarily seen in shadow, and  here  the  other   strain   of  imagery  reveals  its  function-partly  to return us  to  appreciating the  process of  human time,  partly  to  contrast Hagar with  the  two  women  who dominate the way she thinks  about herself:   No-Name Lottie with  her  tasteless  ornaments and  silken hair,  and  Doris  with  her  propriety and   her  "rayon  shoulders." Hagar has kinship  with  them   both; her  sense  of propriety links  her  with  Doris  despite  her  overt  protestations, and  her delight  in silks links her  with  Lottie despite  her  inclinations. But Lottie has a capacity that Hagar lacks.  Lottie can  confront reality,  and  knows  her  own  connection with the  chicks  she  destroys  on  the  town  dump. Hagar, preoccupied with  death but always  less able  to confront it, more  fearful  of the  moment-until the very end of  the  novel,  when  she  still  chooses  to  rage-wears  Oriental silks and  bright colours  of life against it: as the imagery  tells us. In  one  passage  we are  told  that the  children

played  shadow  tag  around   the  big spruce  trees  that  shaded  and  darkened   that whole yard. All of us except Lottie, that is. She went home.

And  about Doris  we are told that

She  wears  her  dark  brown  artificial  silk. Everything  is artificial  these days, it seems to me. Silks and  people have gone out of style, or no one can  afford  them any  more.  Doris is partial   to drab  shades. She calls them  dignified, and  if your dignity  depends  upon  vestments the shades of night, I suppose you're well advised to cling to them.

J3y contrast, Hagar struggles with  the  dark, as she struggles  against her  own body.  Leaving Silverthreads, she feels she is "Emerging out  of the  shadows ... [,]

93

VOICE & LANGUAGE

gifted  with  sight  like a  prowling  cat," finding  "the darkness not  complete after all."  But  it is to Shadow Point  she must  go before  she can  reconcile  herself  with the  past,  declaring more  truthfully than  she  realizes: "I'll have  a  word  or  two to say ... before  my  mouth  is stopped with  dark." She  still  needs  Bram,  the  eel who  could   "swim  ... in  a  pool  of  darkness"; but   as  she  is  unable   yet  to  be reconciled  with  herself, the  darkness  threatens her: "I merely  sit on  the  bed ... until  the  dark  comes  and  the  trees  have  gone  and  the  sea  itself  has  been swal­ lowed  by the  night." Once  again  we recognize  in this prose, however, the tell-tale  signs of elevation and  defence,  which  convey  less the  world  of shadow  than  her artificial way of thinking  about the  world  of shadow. Only  in the hospital at  the end  does she come closer to realizing  that  one kind of language has been  illusory, and  that  the trust she has placed  in  form has paradoxically not been in substance:

when  the  lights  are  out,  the  darkness  swarms  over  us and  talk,  between  bed  and bed  is extinguished. Each  of  us lives in  our  own  night,  a  drugged semi-sleep  in which  we darkly  swim, sometimes  floating  up  to the  surface where  the  voices are. If you  shut  your  eyes after  looking  at  a  strong  light,  you  see shreds  of  azure  or scarlet across  the  black.  The  voices are  like  that,  remembered fragments painted on  shadow.   I'm   not  as  frightened by  them  as  I was  before.  Now  I  know  where they come from.

At the same  time,  the  eel or fish image  persists through passages like this as well, or  as when  Murray Lees speaks  to her  at  Shadow Point: "His voice is blurred, or  else it's  my  hearing. The  words  swim  waveringly to  me  across  the  dark  that separates us."  And  so to learn  words, she discovers,  is not  only to learn  form  but also to  learn  communication, which  is as often  an  act  of the  body  as an  act  of mind,   a  kind  of  sexuality  of  speech,  a  fertility   of  hearing, which   governs  the reader  as well as it governs Hagar herself.
How  then  do  we  hear  that  central contrast in  the  narrative form -the  dis­
tinction between  then and  now? Which is substance and  which  shadow? Clearly, to  think  of the  structure is to  differentiate Hagar thinking and  speaking in  the present   from  Hagar living  and   reacting in  the  past:  but  this  is  not  the  same question. Throughout Hagar's quest  to relive  the  moments that have  eluded  her and  to stave  off  the  moment   that  awaits  her,  she  thinks  of  her  past  life not  as then  but  as something interpenetrating now :  as something ongoing, as a  body of moments of transformation. "I  think  now," she  writes;  "Now I am  rampant with   memory"; "Only  now,  when   I recall  it"; "Up flames   the   pain   now"; "Emaciated trunks  of  maple  and  poplar   were  black  now" -until  at  Shadow Point  she is "crying now,"  "trembling now," "feeling better now"; "If there's a time  to  speak,  it's  surely  now,"  she  thinks-but hallucinates about Arlene  in­ stead,  so  that   her  ostensibly  calm  reasonable speech  does  not  connect with  the present; "I'll sleep  now,"  she adds,  and  thus  we are  led  irrevocably towards the separateness she  has  always  sought  and  feared, towards her  moment of  death

94

VOICE  & LANGUAGE


and  her  unquiet peace.  At  this  point  the  novel shifts  again: "And then -," it closes, on this moment; and  we are asked to hear through the language -in the triple   meaning the   word   then  has:   meaning next  and   meaning on  the  other hand and  meaning at that time in the past- the paradox that  has been Hagar's life. We  hear  continuity in  the  phrase,  and  we hear  alternative possibility,  and we hear  the  finality  of the  past imposing  itself on the  present  moment. Hence to close the  novel  this  way is therefore on the  author's part  a remarkable dramatic ploy.
In another context, the  short  story  writer  Clark  Blaise has commented on  the structure of narrative in this way:

!The  first  paragraph is a  microcosm of the  whole, but  in a way that  only the whole can reveal. ...
In  the  stories  I admire,   there  is a  sense of a  continuum disrupted,  then  re­
established, and  both  the disruption  and  reordering are part of the beginning of a
story. The  first paragraph tells us, in effect, that  "this  is how things have always been," or at  least, how they have been until the arrival  of the story. It may sum­ marize ... or  it  may  envelop  a life in a single sentence ... until  the fateful  word
that occurs in almost all stories, the simple terrifying adverb:
Then.
Then,  which  means  to the reader:  "I am ready." The  moment  of change is at
hand....
And  the  purest  part  of  a  story, I  think,  is from  its  beginning  to its "then." "Then" is the  moment  of  the  slightest tremor,  the  moment  when  the author  is
satisfied that  all  the  forces are  deployed, the unruffled surface  perfectly cast, and the insertion,  gross or delicate,  can now take place. It is the cracking  of the  per­ fect, smug egg of possibility.10

To  read  The  Stone  Angel  properly  requires  listening,  I suggest,  in this way:  for the  possibilities-to listen  to the  message that  the  voice in the  words declares,  a message  often   hidden, often  indirect, often  overlaid   with  fabrication and  con­ trivance, but  there  to  be  heard. The  novelist  has created a  book  of  echoes; she invites  us to understand what  F. R. Scott  has referred  to as the "cabin syllables," the  "nouns of settlement," the  "steel  syntax" of the  New  World. For  Scott,  in
his  poem  "Laurentian Shield," the  land  "stares  at  the  sun  in  a  huge  silence  1
Endlessly    repeating   something  we   cannot  hear.  I Inarticulate, arctic,  1Not written on  by history,  empty  as paper.... I It will choose its language I When it has  chosen  its technic, I A tongue  to shape  the  vowels of its productivity."11  But
for  Margaret  Laurence, the  Manawaka World  shows  history  already   shaping character,  the   paper  no  longer  empty, the  language in  flux,  and   the  voices repeating words  for  us to hear  with  care.  In  The  Stone  Angel, we follow an old woman   less  through  the  shadow   past  than   through  the  present   mazes  of  her mind,  and  listen  while  she  unravels  the  substantial possibilities  that  have  been her life's story.


95

VOICE  & LANGUAGE


NOTES

1 George   Bowering,  for  one,  has  noted   how   language is  a  recurrent  subject  in Laurence's work; see "That Fool of a Fear: Notes  on  A Jest of God,"  Canadian Literature,  50  (Autumn 197I), 4-I-50; see also Theo Quayle Dombrowski, "Word and  Fact," Canadian  Literature, 8o (Spring 1979), 50-62.
2    John Baxter,   in  "The Stone  Angel:  Shakespearian  Bearings," The  Compass,  I (August 1977),  3-I9,  points   to  Laurence's  orchestration  of  a  "plain" and   an "elaborate metaphoric style,"  finding  a  parallel with  Shakespeare in  that  the  two styles "interinanimate each  other."
3  In  an  admirable essay on art  and  nature in The  Stone  Angel, Dennis  Cooley  also begins  with  an  analysis  of this  passage, and  through his essay refers  to a  number of  the  same   passages  as  I do:   but  to  the   rather  different end  of  arguing the Jungian nature of  the  novel;  Cooley's  use  of  "conscious" and   "unconscious"  is also  different  frOin  mine,   therefore.  See  "Antimacassared  in  the   Wilderness," Mosaic, I 1, no. 3 (Spring I978), 29-46.
' Cf. the later  chant concerning Hagar's brother Matt.
5   Laurence herself  avers  "I felt ... an  enormous conviction of  the  authenticity of Hagar's voice," "Gadgetry in Growing: Form  and  Voice  in the Novel,"  Journal of Canadian  Fiction,  27  ( I98o), p. 54;  Simone Vauthier notes,  however,  in  "Notes on the Narrative Voice(s) in The  Stone Angel,"  Etudes Canadiennes, I I  (Decem­ ber  198I), I3I-53, that  the  novel is told not  by one  voice but  by at  least four.
6    Her  concern for  putting  framed pictures on  her  walls  also  reiterates this  notion. On   the  Benjamin West  painting, see Laurie Ricou's "Never Cry  Wolfe," Essays on Canadian  Writing, 20  (Winter I98o-8I),  I7I-85. Various critics  have exam­ ined   order   in  the   novel,  or  the  contrast  between   order and   nature,  including Cooley,  Linda Hutcheon ("Pride and  the  Puritan Passion"), Andre Dommergues ("Order  and  Chaos in  The  Stone  Angel"), and   Pierre   Spriet  ("Narrative and  Thematic Patterns in The  Stone  Angel"); the  last  three  articles are  all in Etudes Canadiennes,  II  (December I98I),  pp. 55-6I, 63-7I, and  105-I9 respectively.
7   On   the  role  of  Mr.  Troy   and   the  framing function of  The Lorelei  and   Litan allusions,  see David Jeffrey,  "Biblical  Hermeneutic and  Family  History," Mosaic, I I, no. 3 (Spring I978), 9I-97·
8    The  list is not  exhaustive; Cooley  mentions  still other examples. The  point  is that they occur  throughout  the book.

9    I.e.,  "The Chambered Nautilus," which  reads  in  part: "This is the ship  of pearls, which,  poets feign,  I Sails the unshadowed main,  I The venturous bark  that  flings I On   the  sweet  summer wind  its  purpled wings I In gulfs  enchanted, where   the Siren  sings.... I Still  as the  spiral  grew, I He  left  the  past  year's  dwelling for  the new ... I Stretched  in  his  last  found   home,   and   knew   the   old  no  more.... I Build  thee  more  stately  mansions,  0 my soul,  I ... I Till  thou  at  length  art  free, I
Leaving thine  outgrown shell by life's unresting sea!"
10  "To Begin,  To   Begin,"  in  The   Narrative  Voice, ed.  John Metcalf    (Toronto: McGraw-Hill Ryerson,  I972), pp. 22-26.
11 Events and Signals  (Toronto: Ryerson,  I954), p. I6.





g6

POEM



THE VOICES
 


Ken Norris


I listen  to the voices. There are  more  than one. One  voice sings creation, one  prophesies destruction,
one whispers  of the heart's compassion, one tells of the heart's sad failings,
one explains its joy of life,
one declaims its love of death, one speaks of the daily round, one foretells a night of bliss, one praises  the lover's virtues,
one condemns her for her flaws,
one  talks of the moment passing, one gives voice to eternal calm, one cries out  against  in justice,
one makes excuses for shabby crimes, one looks at itself in mirrors,
one peers out  beyond existence, one rhapsodizes high events, one mutters of small occasions, one invokes the silvered  moon, one chants the golden sun.
I listen  to the voices. There are more  than  one.




















97

EXILES IN TIME

Gallant's " Heart


David 0'Rourke

AsIS OFTEN ·rHE  CASE when  attention ie fin<t turned to
a neglected  writer, a good deal  of the criticism  which  has been  written on Mavis
Gallant  has  been  influenced  by  those  personal glimpses  which   the  author  has allowed  of  herself.  To  be sure,  the  biographical approach is valuable in  illumi­ nating certain aspects  of  Gallant's fiction.  Her  interest  in  familiar  relationships might   be  assigned  to  the  fact  that  she  was  left  orphaned at  an  early  age.  Her  own  attendance at  seventeen   different schools  might   account  for  some  of  the transients who  drift  through her  fiction.  An  early  and  unhappy marriage might  explain  the  presence  of so many  young  widows  and  divorcees in her  work. Every writer   draws  from  personal  experience, but  the  problem with  the  biographical approach is that  it is often  just too convenient. Anything may  be drawn upon  to explain anything else. With  Mavis  Gallant and  the  theme  of  exile,  this  is par­  ticularly   the  case. Gallant is a  Canadian who  lives in  Paris and  publishes  in the New  Yorker. Because  many   commentators view  her  in  the  romantic sense  of expatriate or  exile,  a  kind  of  hangover from   the  twenties, there   has  been  an unfortunate tendency to look for  romantic exile in  her  work.  In  short, there  has been  a great  deal  of wishful supposition.1  It is quite possible that  the author lives in  Paris  because  it  is an  exciting  and  vibrant  city-briefly,  because  she likes it
-not because  she feels unable to return to a geographical home.  It is true  that Gallant's fiction  is populated with  exiles, but  the  process of identification in this regard   is not  difficult; more  debatable is the  implicit suggestion that  their  root­ lessness is tied  to some sort of physical  alienation. To  say that  Gallant's exiles are "out of  place" simply  because  they  have  left  one  country for  another  is to state  a  half-truth:  metaphorically quite  correct, but  on  a literal plane  without much  meaning.
Exile  may  well be  Gallant's preoccupation, but  it  is not  so much  an  exile  of
space  as it  is one  of  time.  Her  characters have  typically  taken  a  wrong  tum in life  and  are  unable to go back.  In  My  Heart  Is Broken  (1964), Gallant fuses technique and  theme  in order  to portray this universal dilemma. A careful analy­ sis of each  story reveals the unity of the collection  and  clarifies the Gallant "exile" as a  person  who  is locked  into  a  present  situation, condition, stage  of  personal  history, from  which  escape is difficult, and sometimes impossible.

g8

GALLANT

"Acceptance of Their  Ways" is set against  the backdrop  of winter, "the  dead season," in an  Italian  Riviera  pension distinguished by the smell of "decay." The story  covers the span  of one evening and  the morning  after.  During  Mrs. Gar­ nett's  "last  meal"  before  her  departure from  the  pension,  an  argument  erupts between  her  and  the  owner,  Mrs. Freeport.  Watching  the  owner,  water  lily in hat, shouting  at Mrs. Garnett reminds the only other guest, Lily Littel, of similar fights with her former  husband.  Mrs. Garnett  finally, and literally, buckles under the  verbal  onslaught  of  Mrs.  Freeport.  After  the rather  orgasmic  triumph, the victor  becomes very loving toward  the sobbing Mrs. Garnett. This tenderness is shown again  the next day at  Mrs. Garnett's farewell. It is when Mrs. Freeport is feeling her most wretched  and, perhaps, most human, that  Lily delivers the blow of her next-day  departure for Nice. It should be remembered that "Mrs.  Freeport couldn't  live without  Lily, not more than  one day."  Mrs. Freeport  comes to the realization  that  eventually she will be abandoned completely. "Instead of answer­ ing,"  Lily adjusts  Mrs.  Freeport's  water  lily, "which  was familiar  of her."  Not surprisingly,  Lily  becomes identified  with  the  water  lily. As  Mrs.  Freeport  has cruelly  triumphed over  Mrs.  Garnett,   so  Lily  has  won  at  the  expense  of her instructress,  Mrs. Freeport.  Lily has come to accept their antiseptic  ways. She has become adept  at stinging in a gentlewomanly, sophisticated fashion.
"Acceptance of Their  Ways" offers a portrait  of three rather  genteel widows. Mrs.  Freeport  lives in a state  of poverty in order  to remain  close to "someone precious" in a nearby cemetery. Mrs. Garnett's thoughts are never far away from her dead  husband,  William  Henry. It is not clear whether  Cliff Little died dur­ ing the war but, for Lily Littel, he might as well have. The  claustrophobic scene is set in winter  to accentuate the near-to-death existence of the three characters.  For  Freeport  and  Garnett, after  the  death  of their  husbands,  life is  essentially over.  One  lives near  Bordighera  to be  close to a corpse, the  other  cannot  help but  retreat  to the past in simple conversation. The younger Lily  willingly adopts the sterile lifestyle. As a "widow" herself, it is likely that she has come to identify with  the  older  women. It is also quite  clear that  she is  attracted by a  certain aura   of  snobbery,   having  long  ago  changed  her  name  from  Little  to  Littel. Although   apparently  more  innately   vicious  than  either   Freeport   or  Garnett, having  deliberately  chosen  her  course, Lily is still able  to  escape the vestiges of decay  through  a kind  of schizophrenic  existence. "Two-faced Lily Littel"  has a secret life in  Nice. Under  the pretext  of visiting her sister, she becomes the "old forgotten  Lily-girl" caught  in "the  coarse and grubby gaiety of the French  Rivi­ era." This  escape  to a more  youthful, liberated  self is always short-lived-not unlike the effects of alcohol.
In  "Bernadette," Robbie  and  Nora  Knight,  although  considerably  younger than  Mrs.  Freeport  and  Garnett, are also exiled from the vitality of their youth. They  have come to live a fa<;ade: a picture of the liberal  WASP,  bourgeois life-


99

GALLANT

style. Their  maid,  Bernadette,  is everything  that  they  are  not -she stands  for spontaneity  and life, as opposed to analytical dissection. Bernadette is given books to  read  but,  unlike  Lily Littel,  is not  a  very good student.  She chooses not  to accept  the  Knights'   ways. Rather   than  trying  to  understand things  to  death, Bernadette stands  in awe of the mysteries of life. She represents  a youth  that  is ultimately  compelling in attraction for Robbie, but a threat  at the core for Nora. The  reason  is that  Bernadette  symbolizes something  they  might  both  have  be­ come. After college, Robbie and Nora sacrificed authentic feelings and desires in order  to programme themselves for a materialistically  rewarding  existence. The route  taken  has  left  both  discontented,  resulting  in  a  very  precarious  sort  of marriage.
The  time  of the story is late  December.  The  living-room  has been set for a post-Christmas, discussion-group party.  It is ironically  described as being "like a room  prepared   for  a colour  photo  in  a  magazine."' As "Acceptance of Their Ways" builds to a climax in which a character loses all composure, so Nora loses control when the party gets out of hand. Throughout, Robbie's temperature rises. It is significant that his illness is a cold :

Because he had a cold and Nora had gone out and left him on a snowy miserable afternoon,  he saw in this picture  [Orwell's  portrait  of a working-class interior] everything missing in his life. He felt frozen and left out.

Winter  is used to depict the decline of the Knight  marriage; that  it is the end of the  year  does  not  suggest a  very optimistic  future  for  Robbie  and  Nora  as a couple. But winter is also employed to represent a stage in life into which Robbie, particularly, finds himself locked. It is not a coincidence  that  Robbie  has a cold and  feels frozen at the same time he is trying  to get back to the warm  centre of his school days.  He  has left  behind  an  important vitality-"the only result of his reading  was a sense of loss." By contrast,  the younger  Bernadette  represents "an  atmosphere of warmth  and  comfort": "She  was the world they had  missed sixteen years before, and they, stupidly, had been trying to make her read books."
Like "Acceptance of Their  Ways," the story covers a time-span  of just under two days. On  the second, Nora confronts  Bernadette with the knowledge of the latter's   pregnancy.  She tries to  dissect the  situation  in the  same  way  that  she dissects  her  relationship  with  Robbie.  Not  surprisingly,  she  is shaken  by  the prospect  of  Bernadette's   harbouring new life.  Her  mistake  comes in  assuming that  Robbie  is the father. It leads Robbie  and  Nora  to individually  admit  that their  marriage is a sham -like their living-room,  a  picture  lacking  much  sub­ stance.
Bernadette, like Lily Littel, flowers outside of a claustrophobic boarding  house. She leads a secret, and double, life in which emotions are given full reign. She is also able  to find  refuge in fantasy.  Sitting  in  a  theatre,  she identifies with  the

100

GALLANT


people  in  the  film  who  are  looking  on,  never  expecting the  "picture" to become true  for herself. In this sense, she lives the authentic life compared to the Knights' rather empty  existence. She feels nothing but  warmth for the  child,  aware that  it will  become   an   "angel"  awaiting death-very  similar to  her  own  situation, trapped in an  environment and  culture neither  of which  is conducive to life.




bE MOABITEss" is also set in winter; it  is November, and again  out-of-season on  the  Riviera. Miss Horeham's identification is clearly with this time  of year :

She was thinking  about  the Bible and the old days, and of what a nice time of year this was; in spite of what  she had said about its being off-season, it was really the period  she liked best.... In  Miss Horeham's  vision of life this was the climate in which  everything  took place. On  November nights, the  world closed comfortably m.

Here winter  does  not  represent the  kind  of sterility  exhibited in "Acceptance of Their Ways"  and  "Bernadette." Miss Horeham is elderly  and  ready  to die, and hence  winter offers  more  of a tranquil dream-state than an  abrupt death. What is interesting is the  imaginative, treasure-box world  Miss  Horeham has  created to obtain some  comfort in  the  desolation  of life. Like  Lily  and  Bernadette, Miss Horeham  juxtaposes a meek  and  mild  public  life and  a secret  world  of her own. The   major difference is one  of  tense.  Miss  Horeham moves  from  a  day-to-day present, characterized by change, into  an idyllic past  where  she is once again  the daughter-wife of  her  father. In  this  way,  nothing is  lost  or  left  behind. The important treasures of the  past  are always under  lock and  key in  the  present.
"An   Unmarried  Man's Summer" presents  yet  another character against a
background  of  the  off-season  Riviera months,   by  now   clearly   a  motif  in  My
Heart  Is Broken:

He is surrounded by the faces of women. Their  eyes are fixed on his dotingly, but in homage  to another  man: a young lover killed in the 1914 war;  an adored  but faithless son.... Walter  must  be wicked, for part of the memory of every vanished husband or lover or son is the print of his cruelty.

But Walter is not the  only window  on the  past. "An  Unmarried Man's Summer" turns  on  the  irony  that   Walter employs  the  elderly  women  for  exactly  the same purpose: "Once, he  had  loved  a  woman  much  older  than himself.  He saw  her, by chance, after  many  years, when she was sixty."
An event  equal  in importance in shaping Walter's life occurred during the war when  his body  was  burnt from  head  to foot. The  author does not  draw  a lot of attention to  this  event, but  it  surely  goes a  long  way  towards explaining why


101

GALLANT

Walter  prefers the winter months with elderly women to frolicking on the beach each summer: " -for it had all of it gone, and  he wanted  nothing  but the oasis of peace, the admiration of undemanding old women,  the winter  months." It is tempting   to  say  that   Walter's  scars  are  symbolic-that, having  once  been "burnt," he does not seek to venture into the realms of love and  affection again. But, more likely, he has been rendered  physically incapacitated to return  sexual love. The  women  are  "undemanding." Even  if  Walter  could  have sex, he has probably  accepted  the fact that  his scorched body is not very appealing.  He has adjusted  to  this situation  and  gives the appearance of being carefree,  but  he is still seen to mutter  such unheard  remarks as:  "I wish it had been finished off for me in the last war."
In "Bernadette" and "The Moabitess," fragile, make-believe worlds are shaken at  their  roots  by some realistic intrusion.  In  "An  Unmarried Man's  Summer," the visit of  Walter  Henderson's  family serves as a "revolution" ("nothing to do with politics, just a wild upheaval of some kind") which upsets the "mosaic pic­ ture"  Walter  has formed of himself. It forces an epiphany of his empty existence, and  leads Walter  to the key question of what  he will do at sixty. His life has no direction;  it  wanders  in seasonal cycles. At sixty, he will be asked to vacate  his house. Removal  will be tantamount to abandoning what  little life  he  has left: "Look  at  the house I live in. Ugly box, really. I never complain .... No heat in winter. Not an anemone in the garden."
1Walter is able to ride out  the revolution  by means of great  cruelty  to his ser­ vant,  Angelo:  yet another  "angel" given more  to  warmth  and  life than  to the sterility exemplified by his master. With  the return  of winter, Walter resumes his orderly, vacuous existence. Like Robbie and  Nora,  however, he has been shaken by a vision of an energetic past, a past that  is no longer accessible to him. He is left locked in the present, apprehensive of what is to come.
"Its Image  on  the  Mirror" is of novella length,  yet the story line is relatively
simple. The  lives of two sisters -one vital and spontaneous, the other  prim and predictable -are  traced  more  for  reasons  of  contrast   than   to  arrive  at  any specific  point  in  plot. This  is not  to say that  "Its Image  on  the  Mirror" is a simple  story.  Gallant   orchestrates  several  levels of  time  and   provides  a  well­ intentioned  but  not  totally  reliable narrator in the  person of the  prudent sister, Jean Price.
Briefly stated,  the chronology is all backwards. The story begins with a middle­
aged  Jean  carefully  trying  to  think  back  to  the  summer  of  1955. She  recalls helping her parents move from their Allenton home in July of that year, then remembers  her sister's  promise to  join them  at  the  cottage  for the  Labour  Day weekend. The  weekend is recounted in some detail  before the reader  is led even further  back  in  time  to a World  War  II  Montreal. Still  more light is shed on Jean  and  her  Isadora  Duncan-like  sister, Isobel,  before the reader is left "hang-


102

GALLANT

ing" with a conclusion not unlike, in style, the ending of The Great Gatsby. Jean feels that,  for the  first time,  Isabel needs her and,  consequently,  will never shut her out of her life again.  Of course, this conclusion is quite ironic. The  narrative has already  shown  that  the sisters grow even further  apart. Not only does lsobel end  up  moving  to Venezuela,  but  Jean  also becomes a  perfect  carbon  copy of her mother.
"Its  Image  on the Mirror," being longer, magnifies the technique  used in most of the short  stories. References  to the  past are employed  to inform  the  present. Middle-aged  Jean,  the  picture  of contentment, is revealed  to be a very insecure person who is envious of her sister's rebellious spirit. Early  in the story, Jean  is seen to feel sorry for  her  father: "It seems hard  to have your  views shared  by everyone around you all  your life and  then  confounded  in your old age."  And yet there is a real danger  of this happening  to Jean. The  narrative demonstrates that  she clings to, and  echoes, her mother's  opinions like someone holding on to a lifeline. She  has sacrificed spontaneity,  vitality, in order  to fulfill some  precon­ ceived notion  of proper  behaviour.  Isabel is her opposite, and  must be attacked  and  criticized, or Jean's life will be revealed for the sham  that  it is. Isabel is the person Jean  might have become.
There  are  a  number  of rather  remarkable  similarities between  "Its Image  on
the  Mirror" and  "The Cost of Living."  In  the former story, there is a five-year age difference between  Isobel and Jean.  When they meet at the summer  cottage after  a  separation of six years,  Isabel  is thirty-three   and  Jean  thirty-eight. In "The Cost of Living,"  Patricia  and  Louise also meet after  a six-year separation; Patricia  is thirty-three and Louise thirty-eight.  Patricia describes herself as having been  the  "rebel" of her family:   "I had  inherited  the  vanity,  the stubbornness, without  the  will; I was too proud to follow and too lame to command." In con­ trast,  the  older  Louise is best described  as "prudent." She  has a  predisposition towards  proper  behaviour,   and  frequently  adopts  not  only her  mother's stance but also her inflection. The  echoes of "Its  Image on the Mirror" are quite  clear. Isabel  and  Jean  are  back  with an  important twist. Although  Louise makes "a  serious effort to know" Patricia,  she eventually becomes more interested in Sylvie. The  latter  is described as "the  coarse and grubby Degas dancer,  the girl with the shoulder  thrown  back  and  the insolent chin": another  Isadora  Duncan. As the story unfolds, the differences from "Its  Image on the Mirror" begin to multiply. In  a sense, the other  sides of an  Isabel and  a Jean  are presented.  Louise is pru­ dent, but there  can be little doubt about her warmth  and love. Sylvie is energetic, but  also selfish and  immature. The  most  dramatic  difference lies in the reaction of Louise to her own mother's  death:  "With  every mouthful of biscuit and every swallow of tea, she celebrated  our mother's  death and  her own release."
Louise's sudden  liberation  is like a springtime  in winter.  She meets Patrick  on
December  2 rst, falls in love, and begins to transfer the attention, previously paid


103

GALLANT

to her invalid  mother,  to this new lover. It soon becomes apparent that  Patrick represents to Louise more than  simply his own  person. After Patrick's  departure, Louise says to Sylvie, "I've forgotten  what  he was like";  Patricia, the narrator, quickly  notes,  "But   I  knew  it  was Collie Louise  had  meant." Later,  Patricia observes:

Louise never mentioned him [Patrick]. Once she spoke of her lost young husband, but Collie would never reveal his face again. He had been more thoroughly for­ gotten than anyone deserves to be. Patrick and Collie merged into one occasion, where someone had failed. The failure was Louise's; the infidelity of  memory, the easy defeat were hers.

In a theme  typical of Gallant  in My Heart  Is Broken, one character  employs another  as a kind of double for a  person who has been lost in the  past. When Patrick  rejects this love, Sylvie becomes the next emotional  surrogate.  In a sense, Louise's history  has  been one of displaced  love -from Collie to her mother  to two  characters  in  Paris.  It is significant  that  the  narrator notes that  Sylvie is young enough  to be Louise's daughter: "Sylvie must  have been born that  year, the  year  Louise was married." The  winter  in  Paris  then  becomes to Louise an opportunity to play out what might have been in her own life.
But Louise's attraction for Sylvie probably goes even deeper. If "Its  Image  on
the  Mirror" is considered  an expansion  of this situation,  we may conclude  that Sylvie  represents  to  Louise  a  certain  vitality  or  exuberance which  she  herself lacks. The  interest in Sylvie then becomes a fascination  with an aspect of herself which has never been developed. The difference is that  by living a life that  might have been, Louise is better able to ad just to her present situation instead of being left with  a vague sense of loss. She comes to recognize by contrast  with Sylvie's irresponsibility  her  own  distinct  merits.  She  even  goes so far  as to  encourage Sylvie  to  adopt  some  of  her  own  rather  old-fashioned   (for  bohemian   Paris) attitudes:  initiative   and  prudence  in  monetary   matters.  By  April,  a  genuine spring,   the  narrator  observes  of  Louise,  "the   ripped   fabric   of  her  life  had mended." It has been a painful  process, hence the title of the story, but she has been able to accomplish in physical encounter  what is usually only attempted on the  psychiatrist's  couch.  Having  come to terms  with  the  past,  Louise is able  to leave  the  stage  of  the  present  for  what  appears to  be an  optimistic  future  in Australia.




1E FEMALE  CHARACTERS  in  "My   Heart   Is  Broken"  and "Sunday Afternoon" are  not  so fortunate. They  appear   as helpless victims of lives that   have  "gone  wrong."  In  "My   Heart   Is  Broken,"  Jeannie   has  been raped  and  beaten  by an  unidentified  assailant.  The  assault  is an implicit  com-

GALLANT

ment  on  the  beating  that  Jeannie  is taking  at this stage of her life. She lies on the  bed,  pathetically  still doing  her nails. She is still trying  to look pretty in an environment which steps on whim and penalizes any sign of sensuality. The stem and  sexless Mrs. Thompson knowingly tolls "Winter  soon," despite the fact that it is only August. She signals the reality that  if Jeannie  is to stay with her hus­ band  and  adjust  to the life presented in "My  Heart  Is Broken," she will have to abandon her  youthful  instincts,  her wonderful  naivete. But the story is as much Mrs. Thompson's as it is that  of Jeannie.  It is not  unreasonable to assume that Mrs. Thompson  may once have been as vitally alive as Jeannie, prior to accept­ ing  the  grotesque  sentence  of pushing  a doll carriage.  In  this sense, Jeannie  is Mrs.  Thompson's window  on  the  past. It is therefore  natural for Mrs. Thomp­ son,  when she looks at  Jeannie,  to end  up "trying  to  remember  how she'd  felt about  things when she was twenty." Mrs. Thompson's state is even more pathetic than   Jeannie's.  The   younger  Jeannie  still  has  her  humanity, still  feels pain, whereas all Mrs. Thompson can do is sit "wondering if her heart  had ever been broken, too."
The setting of "Sunday Afternoon" is a "married scene in a winter room." As
in  "My  Heart   Is Broken,"  a brief sketch is offered of a  young,  and  seemingly helpless, heroine  trapped   in  a  relationship -really  a life situation-not  older than  five months.  Veronica  Baines clearly sees her forlorn  position in the "black mirror" of the apartment window. Jim feels no more love for her than  does the Algerian  for  the  European girl being led from  the  Montparnasse cafe. Just  as Jeannie  wants  to  be liked,  so would Veronica  like to be loved.  Unfortunately, she has to settle for "a  ribbon  or so, symbols of love" which she, herself, has to provide.  The  climax  of the story arrives when Veronica  discovers that  not only has she not  been sufficient reason for Jim  to dip into his large  cache of money, but in fact  the money has been hidden for the express purpose of preventing  her from spending  it.
Veronica  and  Jeannie  have much in common  with the character of Sylvie in
"The Cost  of Living."  All three  are sensual women with  child-like mentalities; they  prefer  to  be  taken  care  of as opposed  to developing  their  own  initiative. When  something  goes wrong,  particularly  in the case of Veronica  and  Jeannie, there is a tendency  to stand  bewildered  rather  than  change  course. They  tragi­ cally lack the discipline of a Louise, and have not (yet)  developed "double lives" to allow for  the protection  of what  is vital in environments hostile to emotional growth.
It  is appropriate that  "The Ice  Wagon  Going Down  the Street" is the final
story in  My  Heart   Is  Broken   because it  brings together  a number  of the tech­ niques and  themes previously employed in the collection. The story begins in the present tense. It is once again a Sunday and, while Peter and Sheilah dote on the past, their  hall-closet clothes become "crushed  by winter overcoats." The bulk of

GALLANT

the story is set in the  past in order to illuminate  the present domestic scene. The reader  is led  back  via reminiscence to a lost  paradise: a "fragile" Paris  winter when the "dream of a marriage" held true. Once  the dream  falters and  paradise is lost, the  husband  and  wife find themselves "in  exile" in Geneva.  Eventually, Paris  becomes to them  not so much  a geographical place as a  period  in time: "Paris  was already a year in the past."
Of  the other  short  stories, "The Ice Wagon  Going  Down  the Street" is most closely allied in theme to "Bernadette," with particular parallels between Robbie and  Peter,  and  Bernadette  and  Agnes. Although  both Sheilah  and  Peter lament a "golden" period in the past, it is Peter  who sees in Agnes something  he might have  become:   "I'd be like Agnes if  I  didn't   have  Sheilah." Like  Bernadette, Agnes is  strictly  working-class. When  she  hangs  her  university  degree  on  the office wall, Peter  notes, "It  was one of the gritty,  prideful  gestures that  stand  for push, toil, and family sacrifice." Agnes lacks Bernadette's immediate  warmth,  but she has all the discipline and fortitude of a character like Louise. When Peter complains  of the  cold in Geneva,  a complaint  not  unrelated  to Robbie's condi­ tion  in  Montreal, Agnes replies, "Your  blood  has gotten  thin." At the costume party, Agnes's directness, or honesty, is symbolically portrayed  by the unassuming  costume she wears. When the tramp  outfit is later  discarded  for an "orphanage dressing gown,"  she comes even closer to a declaration of what  she  really is:  a young Norwegian  from Saskatchewan  trying to make her way in the strange city of Geneva.  Agnes is as much  a transient  as Peter,  but  whereas Peter looks back and  is bewildered  about  why no one is helping  him, Agnes is building  toward  a future  on  her own. The  question  raised is one of control. Agnes, as does Louise in "The Cost of Living,"  takes charge of her life without  losing her  humanity.
.Like  the  conclusion  of "Its   Image  on  the  Mirror," the  ending  of "The Ice Wagon  Going  Down   the  Street"  is  reminiscent  of  The   Great  Gatsby.  Peter "thinks  about  families in the West as they  were fifteen, twenty  years ago-the iron-cold  ambition, and  every member  pushing  the  next one on."  He "wonders what they were doing over there in Geneva-not Sheilah  and  Peter, Agnes and Peter."  Finally,  he sees Agnes's "Western  town"  complete  with  "prairie trees" and  "shadows  on the sidewalk." This is a Nick Carraway who is realizing that  a glamorous  dream,  in this case his own, has gone sour, and  is looking to a period in the  past for more stable values. The  irony, of course, is that  he does nothing with  this epiphany. At the end of the story, he is back  holding  Sheilah's  hand, trapped  in the present.

Although  the New  Yorker stories collected in My  Heart  Is Broken range from the years 1957-63,2   they achieve a tight unity through  a repetition  of theme  and technique  which approaches  pattern.  Throughout, Gallant  is shown to be prima­ rily interested  in  problems of the status  quo.  The  sterility  of an old  order,  fre-

106

GALLANT


quendy manifested by a  pseudo-aristocratic gentility  and  symbolized  by the sea­ son  of winter, is contrasted with  a vitality  traditionally assigned  to the working­  classes and   youth. Characters suffer  "revolutions" in  which  they  come close  to losing  "control," or  lead  "double lives" in order  to  conform to societal  expecta­ tions  and, at  the  same  time,  retain  what  is essentially  human  and  true.  This  is not  to  say  that all  of  the  younger  characters in My  Heart  Is  Broken are  para­ digms  of  desired  behaviour. Many  lack  the  very  "control" without which  inde­  pendence is impassable. What is called  for is a balance, a determination, a flexi­ bility which  allow for continued growth.

NOTES

1 Gallant  employs photographs to depict "appearance" -veneers of existence -as well as  to stop  time.  It  is ironically  employed here,  as the  scene described  is a living-room.
2    A chronology  is as follows:  "Bernadette," 12 Jan. 1957; "The  Moabitess," 2 Nov.
1957;  "Acceptance of  Their   Ways," 30 Jan.  196o;  "My  Heart   Is Broken,"  12
Aug. 1961; "The Cost of Living," 3 March  1962; "Sunday  Afternoon,"  24 Nov.
1962;  "An  Unmarried Man's  Summer,"  12 Oct.  1963; "The  Ice Wagon  Going
Down  the  Street," 14 Dec. 1963. The  date  of publication  of "Its  Image  on  the
Mirror" is I 964.





WINTER


Goosedown arms raised against
the  north  wind -
winter crackles in our walls. Snow withers the stars'  track: frozen dance. All is blue cold
down to the pink paperbirch skin.
We chop  maple trunks for evening fires
in our woodstove and quiver
under  heavy blankets, inward  dawns.
 

Liliane Welch

JOHN GLASSCO (1909-1981)

and his Erotic Muse



Leon Edel





JOHN GLASSCO CULTIVATED THE  LYR<C  and  erotic muses­ Euterpe and  Erato. He  was,  above  all,  in  his later years,  a  tough-minded poet who mingled  reflection with  satire,  and  most of his reflections were on the  wear­  and-tear of life, the  crumbling of man's creations, old  houses -like the  body­ disintegrating in  a  mournful landscape, mixed  with  sweet  and   bitter  memories and  delicate observations; the triumph of the dust  and  yet somehow out  of death and  decay  the hardness of reality:

It is the world that counts, the endless fever
And suffering that is its own and only end.

The  elegance and   polish,  rhythm and  cadence, the  perfect   pitch,  as it  were,  is curiously  to be found also in his erotic  writings  which  are  largely  in  prose. John Glassco -he  had  been  Buffy to us from  his earliest  years -made  a distinction between   "porno" written as art  and  that  which  is scribbled as commerce. Yet even  when  he  attempted to  write  for  commerce he  proved   unfailingly delicate and  aristocratic: he wrote  in the  tradition of Cleland, or the  Contes drolatiques, or the  French elegants. He captured the spirit  of the conte leste, the frivolous  and "improper" fantasy, for  which  the  Gallic  world   has  so  many   more  synonyms than  we have.  The  phallus  was for Buffy a wanton and  pretty  bird  of flight  and repose;  the libido  an  exquisite  gift of nature. His  erotic  muse  was forever  young, born  of pre-adolescent titillation and  exposure. There are  brief  backward glances in various  of Buffy's  prose writings-"in view of my own  upbringing" and  "my own  early  memories supplied  much  of the  psychology," and  an  allusion  to "that susceptible teen-ager  who  could  never  say  no  to  anyone." These  brief  autobio­ graphical  references allow  us to extrapolate some  early  governess  in  Montreal's Simpson  Street, where  Buffy was born,  who perhaps administered spankings that  had  erotic  overtones; or  some  early  housemaid  taken   with  the  charms of  the juvenile  Buffy -he  had  so many.  He  is our  one  writer  in  Canadian literature who  has  completely  escaped  self-consciousness.   And   if  his  poetic  musings   on death are  unsentimental and  confront reality,  he is an  unabashed romantic when

108

GLASSCO

erotism  triumphs. His porno  is a reaffirmation  of the life-spirit and  the magical solace of fantasy.
,Glassco was  the  one  sensualist  of  the  "Montreal Group." F.  R.  Scott  was intellect and  gambolling  wit;  A. J. M. Smith aesthetic force and bourgeois rebel­
lion;  A.  M.  Klein,  rectitude  and  rhetoric  of the  prophets  and  Hebraism; and Leo  Kennedy   was  Puck.  Buffy was a  shy  youth  who  talked  of "lesbians  and lavender  boys" and  went to a Paris to be, if possible, a libertine. The word has a certain  vicious overtone  that  could never be applied  to the faun-like  creature  I knew  between  his  seventeenth  and  twenty-first  years. And  then  he had  thrifty Montreal  in  his veins, in spite of his desire to be rid of it;  and  strong  literary ambitions.  His late  poem  about  the  old city, its Scottish-French mix, its sordid annals  of  rapacity   and  piety,  the  established  streets  of  his childhood  and  his memories of the red light district make curious reading  beside Klein's Montreal, the  weighted  city  of  Joyce's  cosmopolite  verbal  mix,  polyglot  and  romantic. Klein,  the  ghetto   stranger,   observed  Montreal   as  a  phenomenon; Buffy,  the rooted  Canadian, took it for granted  and  brooded over its changes. I think  that in his poetry he was the most ingrained existentialist of our little group.
I met Buffy at  McGill  when he was seventeen and in full rebellion against  his
father-the  family  dictator  and  pillar  of  affluence and  authority, bursar  of McGill  University.  Later  we met in  the  bars of Montparnasse; and  during  an idyllic  episode,  shared  a  fiat  with  Graeme  Taylor  and  a  young  girl from  the Canadian west in  Nice. I have suggested in  my preface  to Memoirs of  Mont­ parnasse  some  part  of  our  youthful  feeling of irresponsibility  and  the  fleeting fool's  paradise -a  paradise  of ddight-in  which  we lived till the  Depression caught  us. Buffy's precocious  memoirs, which he was writing then  as if he had already  lived  his entire  life, became  his liveliest-and in some ways saddest­ book. Our  ways parted  in I 93 I for many years, and we met again in late middle life and  renewed  the old friendship on the basis of our late maturities.  In his last years, Buffy was still in full possession of his quick imagination, his grasp of the colour and  detail of life and  his ability, as always, to take the world in an easier stride than  those of us who had grown up inhibited and  been limited by poverty or  conflict -as  Smith  was  in  his  middle-class ways and  English  heritage,  or Scott  in  his  marvellous  and  consistent  knightliness  arrayed   against  economic dragons,  or  myself in my role of perpetual  "outsider." John  Glassco's good for­ tune  was to have accepted  early the benignities of his sexual self. He was a very handsome  youth  when I  knew him;  there was something faun-like in his aspect, the bright  eyes, the slightly receding chin, the soft smooth roseate skin -one can see his  physical  charm  and  vitality  in a photograph reproduced  in one of Kay Boyle's books of  reminiscence.  He  was a faun  ready  to  make  friends  in some enchanted  woodland  with  man  or woman;  a bit frightened  by certain  kinds  of women and nearly always delighted if he could establish a triangle. He then liked

rog

GLASSCO

best  as a  kind  of untragical  Oedipus  a  male  companion   and  a  woman  to be shared  between them. This is the subject of Morley Callaghan's acute  yet crude story "Now  That  April's Here" about Buffy and Graeme Taylor  and their plump little girl at  Nice. One  finds the pattern  in Buffy's works and  it may sound  a bit kinky. It depends on the sexual point of view, for uninhibited sex demands  free souls as well as free bodies. I  think  Buffy felt that  a male companion  defended him against  predatory  females; he could then all the more enjoy the latter, for­ to  judge  by the  forms of his fantasies-he could,  given  the  right  woman,  be comfortably  bisexual.
Some years ago Glassco, in an interview, listed his three  primary  fears-"the fear of women, the fear of poverty and of course the fear of death." His fear of women is constantly illustrated in his "fatal  women" stories-the Electra female of the  brandishing   whip  who  brings  the  joyful  pains  of traditional  masochism and  subjugates  the  male. His fear  of poverty  came from  his having  been for a longish period genuinely down-and-out  in Montparnasse where he lived hand-to­ mouth  as a writing  or typing hack or as a sexual convenience  to women willing to pay a price. This is all confessed in the Memoirs  with the lightest and yet most probing  touch.  To  have  grown  up  in  a  millionaire's  family  and  to  have  to scrabble for his food eroded Buffy's sense of self:  and in his later years he rebuilt his finances  by scrupulous  study  of  the  business pages  and  apparently shrewd sallies into the stock or bond market. As for his fear of  death,  this was, in Buffy's case, not at all the normal  "existential" fear we all share.  For Buffy, death  was terror:  like one placed in a firing squad  and  reprieved  at the last minute.  After his scrounging  days in  Montparnasse he  returned  to  Montreal-he was 24- suffering from  galloping consumption.  The story is touchingly  told, even humo­ rously, in his memoirs. But the trauma was permanent. He was saved by a now obsolete kind of lung surgery that  left him with  a single lung  and  a consequent shortness  of  breath.  He  had  learned  the  meaning  of survival;  and  during  his months  on  the edge of death  he escaped into  memories and  fantasies of his life abroad.   He  relived  his brief  happy  years. Most  of Memoirs of M ontparnasse was written  in the Royal  Victoria  Hospital  in Montreal, and  then laid aside, as if Buffy now had a new life to live.




JOHN GLAssco's POEMS   about man's daily  death-world spring,  as we can  see, from  old intensities. His  pictures  of human  fragility  are etched out of his own fragile yet life-consuming passions. His erotic writings thus carry, in the midst of their frivolity, the post-Montparnassian experience.  There is surely  a  distinct  relation  between  Buffy dying  and  surviving  at  24  and  his picking up later  the last writings of Aubrey Beardsley who did die of tuberculosis

110

GLASSCO

at  26.  Buffy's  emotions  on  discovering   Beardsley's   unfinished Under  the  Hill were  a kind  of reliving  of his own  reprieve -with the  difference that  there  had been   none  for  the  great   artist  in  black  and  white  who  revolutionized  the  art nouveau  of the  nineties.  Buffy was nearing  fifty when  he set out  to finish Beards­ ley's  work  even  as  he  had  completed his own  memoir of  himself  which  at  that  time  lay  unpublished in  his attic.  The  Olympia Press in Paris, which  specialized in  both  erotic  and   porno publication, produced a  beautiful  green-doth edition  of  the  Beardsley   work  limited to  3,ooo  copies in  which  we  may  read: "Under the  Hill  or  the  story  of  Venus and  Tannhauser, in  which  is set  forth  an  exact account of the  manner of state  held  by Madame Venus, Goddess  and  Meretrix, under  the  famous Horselberg, and  containing adventures of Tannhauser in that  place,  his  journeying to  Rome,  and  return to  the  loving  mountain, by Aubrey  Beardsley,  now  completed by John Glassco." In  the  introduction-and Buffy's introductions to his erotica are  miniature masterpieces of the  mock-pedantic and mock-academic-he tells us how  Beardsley's  pen dropped from  his hand   (so to speak)  at  the  end  of  a sentence  on  page  6g of this edition, and  how  he  picked up the  pen at that moment. Here are Beardsley's last sentences:
Venus was in a ravishing  toilet and confection of Camille's, and looking like K--. Tannhauser was dressed as a woman  and  looked like a Goddess. Cosme sparkled with gold, bristled with ruffs, glittered with bright buttons, was painted, powdered,
gorgeously  bewigged,  and  looked  like a  marquis  in  a  comic  opera.  The  salle a
manger at De La Pine's was quite the prettiest that ever was....

And  here Buffy begins:

The  walls, covered with pale blue satin, held in silver panels pictures of shepherds and shepherdesses, of nymphs and heroes, moving in measure in Sicilian landscapes or  upon  the  azure  shores of Aegean waters. From  the  ceiling beautiful  divinities made  as to throw  garlands  on the guests, with such effect that  one was surprised that  the  roses, as if  unwilling  to quit  Olympus, would  not  descend on earth....

The  transition from  one  writer  to the other  is harmonious. It is, however,  no easy task  to  compare the   two  texts,  for  the  Beardsley  fragment  contains bedroom sequences while  Buffy's  deal  with larger  frolics and  the  journey  of Tannhauser to Rome,  the sadder part  of the  story. Beardsley's  exotic  work is filled with  passages that  seem to be describing his own drawings:
Before a toilet-table  that  shone like the altar  of Notre Dame  des Victoires, Venus was seated  in a little  dressing-gown of black and  heliotrope.  The  coiffeur Cosme was caring  for  her  scented  chevelure, and  with tiny silver tongs, warm  from  the caresses of the  flame, made  delicious intelligent curls that  fell as lightly as breath about  her  forehead  and  over her eyebrows, and  clustered  like tendrils  round  her neck.

Buffy in his portion understandably gives the effect of Beardsley's art  as well, but he  works  more  out  of  literary allusion,  the  words  come  to  his mind  before  the


I I I

GLASSCO

picture.  Both delight  in using French  and  other  foreign  words as if they were a part of the English language.  Beardsley thus speaks of "all  the decollete spirits of astonishing conversation," and in Buffy's portion  we find him exclaiming "What frolics and  romps!  What  bagatelles, fredaines  and  folasteries!"  Buffy captures the  girlishness Beardsley imparted   to  Venus  in  accord  with  Edmund  Wilson's observation  that  Beardsley made  "the  grotesqueries  and  orgies of her  court ... quite  natural and  harmless." This is the effect Buffy gives not only here but in all his erotic writings. But it is again in his Introduction to his Beardsley pastiche that  Glassco reveals to us the depth,  below the surface of the frolic, of his identi­ fication and  empathy  with the artist's ability to laugh  and  mock a:nd invent dur­ ing the short  hours left to him. Beardsley, Buffy writes, may  have  partly failed "due  only  to his partaking  of the all-too-human faults  of dejection, listlessness, ennui.  But  now, in  an age whose painfully  enlarged  vision he may  have antici­ pated, an age which  has learned  to value, as his own never did, the existence of
a world apart  from  the sphere of our sorrow, we can appreciate the marvellous
cohesion of his fancies, the sheer boldness and  elan of his conception,  the perfec­ tion  of  taste  shown  in  the  apposition  of thought and  epithet  which  is  always startling  and  always delightful, and the sheer freedom  and beauty of  this elegant, playful, sad, supernal  world of the spirit which  he was still attempting to realise even  while  he  was slowly dying."  It  is as if Buffy were  remembering his own spirit  when  he was writing the Memoirs of  Montparnasse, and  he adds this sen­ tence  that  expresses  not  only  his emotion  but  also  defines his erotic  writings:  "Above  all  let  us not  make  the  mistake  of  identifying  his partial  failure  with what  was in  truth  his greatest strength,  his essential  unabashed   reliance on the prodigious  inner   power  of  eroticism,  his  sense  of  what  makes  man's   private universe  revolve."  Completion  of  Beardsley's  fantasies  appear   to  have  meant more to Buffy than  the stimulus of  matching  wit with wit, cleverness with clever­ ness, bawd  with bawd. The  old and the new text are seamed  together-it is all but  invisible -by  the  common  life-in-death  and  death-in-life  experience  of  a strange,  one  might  say almost  macabre,  English  artist  who founded  a new style in art,  and  an artistic spirit from Canada  who possessed the empathy  needed to forge the  posthumous union.  In  Buffy, there  seems to  have  been in the  experi­ ence, a way of  proclaiming  his own survival and  the permanence of art, through  a  reliance  on  fantasy.  We  find  a  repetition  of the  Beardsley experience  a few years later,  when  Buffy translates  into  English  the  French-Canadian poetry  of Sa:int-Denys-Garneau. Buffy's  preface  to  this  translation, which  received  the Canada Council  translation  award,  refers us back  once more  to his brush  with death  in  1932. For Garneau's art  was born out of the same experience: he had in  1928 suffered  a heart  injury  which forced  him to abandon his studies. Buffy writes; "Thus, at the age of 22, he was brought  face to face with his own immi­ nent death; and  the next nine years of his life -the last nine -were passed in

112

GLASSCO

intimate converse   with   a  few  close  friends  and  in  the  feverish  search  for  the religious  certainty and  the  poetic 'truth' that  had  always obsessed him." We need not  labour the  point.  Translation is a form  of imitation: and  as Buffy had imi­ tated  and  completed Aubrey  Beardsley in the  194o's so in the  197o's  he carefully  rendered Garneau into  English  and  made  his prolonged struggle  and  his poetry available to English  readers.
We can  see the  imprint on an entire  literary  career  of a life-and-death experi­ ence -the life reprieved to do its work. Buffy was not a Catholic, like Garneau, and   so  was  free  to  be  more  light-hearted in  his secular  alternations  between poetic  meditation and  the  aphrodisiac delights  of Harriet's whip  or Squire  Hard­ man's voyeured  double satisfaction: a relish both  of the  whipping of the  young and  of the  sexy female  form  that  is administering the  punishment -and  all in heroic couplets derived from  Alexander Pope.




BEFORE wE LOOK AT JOHN GLASsco's poetry, which together with  his Memoirs is perhaps the  most enduring of his writings, we might  linger briefly over  his pastiches  and  collages, the ingeniosities of "porn." I have  already suggested  that  his erotic  writings,  because  they are fantasy and  aphrodisiac, con­ tain  affirmations of  life  and  of life's  health-giving sensuality. Buffy's flagellism, in  various  books, shows  a  young  exuberance fluted  through high  verbal  diverti­ mentos.  It also suggests  his  curious  plight,  for  he is always describing a  passive male  whose  sexual  power  is derived  from  a  whipping  femme  fatale:  a  kind  of romantic agony  described by  Krafft-Ebing and  earlier  in  the  works  of Leopold  Sacher-Masoch,  whose   novel  Venus in  Furs  Buffy   translated  and   inevitably prefaced. The  "fatal woman" rather than  the  punishment is the  prime  mover  in this  area  of Huffy's  erotic  world.  She  whips  the flesh into  activity  and  with  her own  compulsive erotic  drive  makes  the  male  rise before  her; he has  been subju­ gated   but  he  triumphs. It  was  perhaps  no  accident  that   Buffy's  first  book  of poems  was  titled  The Deficit  Made  Flesh -the  process  I describe  is that  of  a deficit  for  which   compensation is  found:  pain  inflicted   by  female  hands  so  to speak  takes the  delicate youth  "out of the red" into an  Elysium  of sexual  delight. Within  this   process   we  can  discern  the  narcissistic  element-it  is inevitably there.  One  must  learn  first  to admire one's  self in order to admire others; there  must  be a love  of self to learn  the  love of another. This  is enacted for  us when Buffy  writes  a book  under the  name  of Sylvia  Bayer  and  has  her  dedicate this  book  to John Glassco.  There is more  than  authorial vanity  in the  act: there  are  all the pleasures of  transvestitism. When  Sylvia's heroine  contemplates the phallus as a  work  of art, it is Buffy  who is doing  the  contemplating -our  components are  now  beyond  narcissism  and  the love of Hyacinthus. The beauty of flesh, the

113

GLASSCO

artistic  form  of flesh, is discerned  through a series of masks.  The  mode  is always one of indirection.
One   of  Buffy's   inventions is  that   of  collage:  he  transports the  term   from
modern art  into  his way of grafting on another text  a quantity of erotic  activity not originally intended. We can see his elaborate gambit in a collection  of  homo­ sexual  stories  which   he  bluntly  titled  The  Temple of Pederasty, borrowing his text from  some standard translation of the Japanese realist  Ihara Saikaku   ( 1642-
1693), and  doubtless dressing  it  up  a little;  and  then  interpolating erotic  detail.
Saikaku   wrote  vividly  in  the  Tokugawa period  of  that  "floating world" which has  given  the  west  so much  delight-in  the  form  of  those  delicate and  docu­ mentary  prints   made from   wood   blocks  of  streets   and   waterways,  men   and women,  and   notably poised  and  indeed  "floating" courtesans in  multi-coloured kimonos  reflecting an entire  era of popular as well as courtly sex. The  Temple of Pederasty,  published in  1970  with  a  warning that   it  was  not  to  be  read   by children, gives Saikaku   as  primary text.  The  translator is invented: he is none other  than  Buffy  in  a kimono  bearing  the  name Hideki Okada. However, Buffy writes the  preface  as John  Glassco and  it gives the  work  an  air of solemn autho­ rity.  In  his preface, Buffy explains  very carefully that Saikaku lent himself  to this treatment -"the rather  highflown  sentiment of the original is subtly  and  sharply redressed  by  a frankness of epithet  no less than   by the  tone  of  genuine passion, supplying elements which  give an  added  dimension to the stories themselves  and in  many  cases  transform them  entirely." He  adds  that  "the authorship of these interpolations is extremely doubtful"-but we may  be sure  that  their  author is John  Glassco alias Hideki  Okada.
A  word  needs  to  be said  about  the  introductions in  which  the  transvestitism
and  other  acts  of  role-playing are  performed. An  entire essay might  be written on  Buffy  the  prefacer; and  it  is difficult  to  tell  when   he  is himself  and  when someone  else. I suspect  he is himself,  for example, in  the  preface  to  his transla­ tion of Leopold  von Sacher-Masoch's Venus  im Pelz which  James Joyce so much  admired and  had  in  his library. Who  knows?  Joyce  may  have  named  Leopold  Bloom,  who  is quite a masochist,  after  the  man  whose  name gave  the language that  word.  Perhaps the most amusing of Buffy's mock-introductions is the one  he appended  to  the  amusette  he  created   called   Squire   Hardman. He  printed  a limited  edition of fifty copies at  his own  expense  and  carefully explained to the reader  with  a show  of pedantry that  the  author of this early nineteenth-century flagellant poem,   written in  the  manner of  Pope,   was  George Colman,  whom critics  called  a writer  of "filthy  facetiae." For  those  who  want  to pursue  the elu­ sive pseudonymous life of John Glassco,  I might  as well enumerate all the  pen­ names  I have  found (there may  be others) under whose  masks Buffy created his diversified  erotic  works.  I have  already  mentioned  Sylvia  Bayer,  Hideki Okada, and  George  Colman. There are  also  Grace Davignon, W.  P.  R.  Eadie, Albert

I 14

GLASSCO


Eddy,  Silas  N.  Gooch, S.  Colson-Haig, Nordyke  Nudleman, Jean de  St.  Luc, and  Miles  Underwood. The  latter  is the  pen-name used for Buffy's international success,  his  best-sold  tale  of  the  governess  and  the  whip.  Indeed it was  pirated and  translated in so many  countries that  Buffy -given  the  new dispensation to such  works-decided in the  end  to legitimize  the  governess.  Harriet  Marwood, Governess   had   been   published  by  Grove  Press  in  the  U.S.A. and  in  1976  he brought out  a  Canadian edition   that   bore  his  own  name as  well  as  his  usual preface.  The  book  is filled with  much  amusing pastiche-and-collage of Victorian novels-all  careful reticence and  politeness  until  one  arrives  at  the  whippings. These  have  the  usual  monotony of porn  though they  are  constantly lightened by Buffy's  waggish  style. We  are satiated with  the  constant cut of the  whip or strap. Buffy  was  well  aware he  was  administering pain  and  saccharine -but mostly the latter -in these  masturbatory fantasies. They are written in a closely-imitated style and  Buffy supplies  a genuine source:

the  whole  problem  had  resolved  itself, quite  simply, into  the  question  of  what literary  style would  be the most effective; this, I came to see, was crucial, and on choice the success or failure  of my book would depend.  After long deliberation,  I found  that  the finest model I could take was Frances Trollope,  that shrewd coura­ geous and  observant  Englishwoman  whose Domestic Manners  of the  Americans  I had  long admired: her  leisurely periods, her stylized dialogue, her ringing cliches and  redundant cadences  seemed  perfectly  adapted   to  my  purpose. Accordingly, having soaked myself in her dreadful  and  now forgotten  novels for a whole week, I completed  my own book in the comparatively short period of four months, finish­ ing it on  March  4th,  r 955· I have never written  a  novel so rapidly,  nor with so much  pleasure.




IT IS   CLEAR FROM   MY  ACCOUNT of John Glassco's  erotic writ­ ings  that   his  method has  been  one  of imitation, of  pastiche, of  using  well-tried models,  but  invariably wrapping them  in  the  delicacy  and  elegance  of  his own large   literary talent.  Buffy's   poetry,  however,   is  neither pastiche   nor  collage: and  if it is imitative we might  say this  was because  he adheres to the traditional forms  and  to  classical  models.  His ear  is for  the dignity and  verbal  power  of the seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries. He  tends  to  be  elegiac  but  he  is looking  backward from  Gray  to  Marvell and  Donne  and  the  less strenuous metaphysi­ cals.  His  modernity resides  in his using  his own  immediate world  and  his own death-in-life  experiences and   his  capturing the  old  tone  with  a  cold  unsenti­ mental ear:  yet  behind all  he  wrote  there  is  the  warmth of passion  and  a love of  the  fantastic. Occasionally he returns to the poet  of his youth, T. S. Eliot,  as in this echo of the Four Quartets:

GLASSCO

The  day when it will not matter
The  day no longer depending on another  day
When time shall have run out
When nothing will matter.

Yet  he is not  religious.  "God  will desert  us when  we come  to die." The  fatalism runs  deep.  And  so we are  not surprised  when  he selects  Don  Quixote as subject for  death-an  unsentimental elegy in  reality  for  the  self, an  extended epitaph. We might  have  suspected  that  the  Knight of the  Sorrowful Countenance would please  Buffy. He  had  lived  by his fantasies  and  when  these  dreams were gone  it
was time to die:

The  withdrawal of the vision, The  removal of the madness,
The  supplanting of a world of beauty
By God's sticks and stones and smells
Are affiictions, I find, of something more absurd
Than any book of chivalry.

The  same   hard   almost   relentless  inquiry   is  pursued  in  a  finished  sonnet   that reaches into the heart of Utrillo's painted streets:

Streets without figures, figures without  faces, Desolate by choice and negative from need.
But the hoardings weep, the shutters  burn and bleed; Colours of crucifixion, dying graces,
Spatter  and cling upon these sorrowful places.
-Where is the loved one? Where do the streets lead?

The   light-hearted  pornographer  is  not  light   of  heart   when   he  writes   poems which  are  the  truest  expression  of John  Glassco.  He  is indeed  the  poet  of "Grief without  voice,  mourning without mind ... The shame and  self-loathing of  man­ kind." The  romantic eroticist  looks backward to  Pope  or  to  Dryden; and  when he invokes  Eros in  his poetry  it is to use her  with  irony,  and  satire,  and  to make  of her a metaphysical conceit. As in "Belly Dance":

The  corpsewhite column spiralling on slow feet Tracing the seashell curve, the figure eight, Coldly unwinds its flowing ribbon
With public motions of the private  psalm
Of the supposed woman to the thought  of man.

The  belly dance and  the  masturbation become  one  "the viewless member in his nerveless  hand, j Working   within   the  adverse   air." In his  metaphysical  vein,
John  Glassco  is close to  his old  friend  in the  Montreal Group, A. J. M.  Smith.
But if  I were  asked  where  the  difference  lies, I would  find  myself forced  to say (for  I do  not  want   to  diminish  Smith's achievement)  that   the  latter drew  his poetry  out  of literature much  more  than  Buffy,  who  was keenly  literary and  in-

116

GLASSCO

tellectual   but  drew  his  poetry  out  of  felt  experience.  There   lies  the  crucial difference.  In  his poetry,  Glassco is making  use of the central  experience  of his life and  it takes over as he looks upon "hope  battered  into habit,  and  a habit I
Running to weariness."  The  houses in the countryside-in the  Eastern  Town­ ships  where  he lived -are  mute  and  sealed  with  their  secrets;  they  are  dark and  void of man  and  set in dull meadows that  have gone to seed. He finds the White  Mansion  "which  is the death of man and of his dream" as in the Quebec farmhouse  in  which  he reads the earlier  history of the  Canadian French -the
house that  is "the  sweet submissive fortress of itself I That the landscape  owns!"
and  in it  "the  airless dark, I Of  the  race so conquered  that  it has made I Per­
petual  conquest  of itself."  The  graveyards  "minding  their  own  business," "the green  paths  trodden  by patience," "the  fathomless future  of the underdog" who beats  the  ploughshares  into  an  honest  dollar. "April  again," he sings, echoing Eliot, but with a wry twist

and its message unvaried, the same old impromptu Dinned in our ears by the tireless dispassionate chortling of Nature.

He  looks with  this  aging  cold  eye acutely  enough  to  observe  the  flowers, the snakes, the  squirrels,  the  willow-wren, and  the field-birds,  and  for  the eroticist at  a given moment  sex becomes "the  bitter  triumph  over a stranger's body."
I have  quoted  enough  to suggest  the  mood  of Buffy's poetry;  when  he  re­ members,  it is to recall such matters  as the dictatorship  of his father,  in a poem titled  "The Whole  Hog"  where  he asks himself through  what  consciousness of his own fragility his parent

set himself to become
Great God to a little child? It is a question
that opens up vistas of personal hell....

Buffy unfolds  for  us in  other  poems other  aspects of his life removed  from such  hells;  and  nothing  is more  moving  than  the  moment,  in  his long  poem about  Montreal, when  he remembers  how in the rue  Jeanne Mance,  when  he was an adolescent,  he made  his way to an elaborate  house, "pre-eminent in the
houses  of  ill-fame I Of  our  metropolis"  and  there  lost  "my  too-long-tried  vir­
ginity."  He  was fourteen  and  "warm   beyond  my years."  It would  have  been another  of life's ironies for  John  Glassco if he could  have foretold  that  in  that very street,  at  the age of 7 I, one cold January day of I 98 I, in the  town rooms in  which  he and  his wife lived when they were not at  Foster,  Quebec,  the end would  come,  with  great  swiftness, a  sudden  moment  of  malaise,  without  the time  to  meditate,  like  his Don  Quixote,  on  the  moment  that  did  not  lead  to another  moment.

I I 7

lPOEM
























































IIB
 

P1tRTS OF SPEECH



Not knowing how to take the bird  as he did
& release it into air:
the strange  protective motion  of the arm, his hand  cupped, a whistle of feathers
& the  bird disappears, becomes a dot,  then  nothing

Our  fears are all melancholy
& make me laugh.
I can  put on my coat & walk
Or  I can stay

& talk about  anything that's in newspapers. From  murders to movies to motives
to criminal  negligence

What do you like, anyhow?
Last  night in the late movie while  you slept
the trapped hero  tied his message to a pigeon,
a bird as ordinary as the ones on the roof outside;
he cupped it in his hand
& threw  it upward out the window, his ann tuned  perfectly
When  he let go it just got smaller,
its words more & more compact & sure

Not knowing what  he knew,
how to send the message when  you're cornered with  no gun or food
just scares me
I can only wish, or dream;
& when  I dreamed I didn't see the movie end, or find out if it helped,
or if rescue was something else, or
if I can describe it, when  you speak  to me/
 




Erin Moure




NEW 	TITLES


An Annotated Bibliography

A comprehensive work  by Michael   Darling.
240pp, cloth  ISBN:  0-919890-34-2$16


CONTINUATION 1
Louis  Dudek's most  important poem  since  Atlantis ( 1967). An experiment in poetic  process  covering some ten  years.
ISBN: 0-919890-32-6 (paper) $4.95   ISBN:  0-919890-33-4 (cloth) $12


Selected Poems	David Solway
This  Selected  presents poems from  5 books published over  the  last  ten  years and  includes 10 previously unpublished poems.  A Signal  Edition.  108pp. ISBN:  0-919890-36-9 (paper) $6.95   ISBN:  0-919-890-37-7 (cloth) $14


The   Mulberry   Men

Whimsical and  offbeat poems  by David  Solway. Illustrated by  Maureen Maxwell. A Signal Edition.
ISBN: 0-919890-35-0 (paper) $4.95 Signed  and  numbered  $7.95


THE WOMB  RATTLES ITS POD POEMS
Cathy Ford's fifth  collection. Her  work  has  been  described as  being  a
"delightfully sensuous cacophony" (CVII).
ISBN: 0-919890-31-8 $4.95


Vehicule
P.O.B.  125,  STATION "LA CITE",   MONTREAL H2X  3MO






IN PLACE

JACK  HODGINs,  The Barclay  Family  Theatre.
Macmillan.

IN  HIS LONG  STORY  "More Than  Con­ querors," Jacl<Hodgins  briefly lets an old Finnish  painter speak  for  the author. Eli Wainamoinen has  been resident  on Van­ couver  Island for decades,  but only at the age  of  seventy  is  he  honoured by a full­ scale  exhibition,  which  occupies  a  local ballroom. At the ceremony that  opens the show, Eli remembers the voices that coun­  selled   him   against  this   distant    home:  "Why,  why, they  said,  did  you choose to hide   yourself   on   that   island?  ... In   a country  that   is  only  beginning  to  care, you hide  out  on  an  island  that  is not  yet even aware of itself."  He answers  that  the island is big enough, and that  the prospect of being "a  Canadian painter, or a North American  painter,"   induces   only   fear. "How was it possible to identify  with any­ thing  so unimaginably huge except by in­ duction, except by  seeing  the  small  first and  knowing it so well it must include  all of the  rest?" There, in a sentence,  stands  a manifesto for regional art. Jack Hodgins is  known   to  delight  in  Marquez's  Ma­  condo   and   Faulkner's  Yoknapatawpha, and  he  has  become  famous  for  seeing  a small  patch  of  land  so well  that   it  em­ braces the world.  "Be not afeard: the isle is full  of  noises,  / Sounds  and  sweet airs that  give  delight and  hurt  not."
It's  a cheering image,  but  in The  Bar­ clay  Family  Theatr.e  it  isn't   all  of   the truth. Or  at  least: the  truth is  that  on Vancouver  Island,  like  everywhere else, the sense of being  "in  place" is a blessing granted  to  fewer  and  fewer  people.  In
"The Plague  Children," the  bemused  in-


120
 habitants of  Waterville  find   themselves invaded by  waifs  and  strays  from  Saska­ toon  to Katmandu, from  Nome to Rome.  The  obese   real-estate   salesman   whom Hodgins  lovingly  satirizes   in  "Mr. Per­  nouski's  Dream" has a vision of providing all  the  hungry, dissatisfied  citizens  of the planet with  a  new  home  on  Vancouver Island-where  they'd   be  stranded  like beached dolphins, as alien as the humour­ less  couple   from   Regina  who  refuse   to buy  any  of  Mr.  Pernouski's  houses.  This  sense of foreign-ness reaches its maximum in  "Invasions '79," the  main characters of  which   are   from  Vancouver,  Boston, Armenia, and Russia; they come  together in Ottawa, a city where  poetry  is a prod­  uct  that  arrives in a foreign  language on an  official  tour.   Elsewhere   in  the  book, too,  art  is something that  comes  from  a distance, something to  be  regarded  with suspicion.  Mr.   Pernouski  laughs   at   the idea   that   his  island   town  might   have  a gallery   in   it:  "With all   this   beautiful scenery   to  look  at,  he  said,  why  would anyone want  to  look  at   pictures?"  Eli Wainamoinen  finds  that   the   people   he lives among don't  understand and  don't much  like the paintings that  have been his life. By contrast, the two stories that hap­ pen  abroad (in  Ireland and  Tokyo)  put residents of Vancouver  Island  in settings  where  artistic endeavour seems as natural as light and water. On  these other islands, the  protagonists are  out  of place.  But  by defining   themselves against  the  strange­ ness   of   their    environments,   they   can, Hodgins suggests,  gain  the  confidence to act.
He  has  a sharp eye for foible and  self­
delusion, the  sort  of crisp  perceptiveness that once   led   to  lapidary  epigrams or heroic  couplets. Hodgins, however,  is a good-humoured writer:  he  refuses  to grant the  reader any  easy feelings  of  su­ periority over  the  characters, no  matter how  ignorant and  vain  they  may  appear. His  sense  of  social   comedy   is  basically

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



affirmative:  pretension is  tolerable,  self­ ishness is not. For  an undue concentration on  the  self  threatens the  existence of  the group. We  can   laugh at  Mr. Pernouski, the   extrovert  salesman  who   dresses   for work   in   a red   and   white  suit   to   take  advantage of  his monstrous bulk; but  we stop  laughing when he's  left  to his solitary fate  by  a   pair  of   clients  who   place   a higher value on  catching their ferry  than on   phoning  for    help.  The   destructive forces in  The  Barclay Family Theatre  (a Canadian in Tokyo, a Russian in Ottawa, the   Plague  Children  in Waterville)   al­ ways  reside in   those   who   think  only  of their own   egos,   their  own  pleasure.  In this   sense   imagination,   the   process    of reaching out,  has   in   Hodgins'  work   a moral force. The humour in  these  stories
stops,  sometimes abruptly, at moments of public humiliation.
The six  stories I've  been  discussing so far are all  set  in  the  present. But  Hodg­ ins  opens and closes  the  book  in  the  past,


Gardens, Covenants, Exiles:
Lqyalism in the Literature if
Upper Canada/Ontan·o


DENNIS  DUFFY

Scraps, tags,  figments of the United Empire Loyalist  heritage dot  the  Ontario landscape.
 with   tales   about  the   boyhood  of  Philip Desmond. Philip's mother  is  a  Barclay, the  eldest of  a  rollicking tribe   of  sisters who  give  the  book  its  title   (each of  the other stories contains a Barclay in it some­ where) .   And    here,  in   a   profusion  of home-grown theatre,  music,  and  yarns, Hodgins  does   provide   examples  of   in­  digenous  art.  The  Barclays make  their own  music; if  life  threatens to grow  dull, they  liven  it  up  with   a miniature circus or  an elaborate practical jolre. Their zest and  creative enthusiasm  form  an   acute contrast with  the  passivity of a few  char­ acters in   the   other  stories, who  merely wait  for experience to hit  them, and deny  it  when   it  does.   Hodgins  has   used   the  framing device before (in  his  first  book,  Spit   Delaney's   Island)    and   these    two  stories of  boyhood form a  kind  of  touch­ stone against which the  present-day epi­ sodes  can  be  measured. They are  a  cele­  bration, not   so  much   of  physical  as  of spiritual innocence;   they   are   boisterous



Something  of  Loyalism lies in the very  Ontario air  and  pervades the imagination of its people. In this  volume Duffy reveals how one historical event and  the mythology it engendered  have helped shape the  province and its literature. Included are vignettes of various authors and their writings: William Kirby's The Golden Dog, Major Richardson's Wacousta,  Charles Mair's Tecumseh, and  thejalna series of  Mazo de Ia Roche. Contemporary analogues to the Loyalist habit  of mind are pursued in the  writings of George Grant, Dennis Lee,  AI Purdy, and  Scott Symons.
$25.00 cloth, $10.00 paper

University of Toronto Press



I2 I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



laments  for an irretrievable time.  "When tragedy  or even sickness struck  one of the homes  in  the  community-an accident in  the logging  camp, say, or chicken-pox
-the  aunts   were  happy   to  spread   the word  themselves,  since  telephones  hadn't yet been installed  in private  homes in the
1940's.  They   were  happy   to  embroider the details with morbid  speculations while they  were  at  it."  And  these  speculations form  the  basis of the  fabulous,  melodra­ matic,    wildly   popular   Barclay   Family Theatre.
This  was, then,  a folk culture based on the word, a culture where language enter­ tained.  Almost  as isolated  from  the  out­  side  world   as  Yoknapatawpha  or  Ma­  condo,   the   Waterville  of   Philip   Des­
mond's boyhood   was  free  from  tourists, telephones,   and    television  -a   liberty which  had  its drawbacks, needless to say, but   which   permitted  the   tradition  of story-telling to flourish.  It's  useful to read Hodgins in the light of Walter  Benjamin's remarks   about   "The  Story-Teller": "If the  art  of story-telling has  become  rare, the dissemination of information has had a  decisive  share   in  this  state   of  affairs. Every  morning brings  us the  news of the globe, and  yet we are  poor in noteworthy stories.   This   is  because   no   event   any longer  comes  to us without already  being shot   through  by  explanation.  In   other words,  by now  almost  nothing that  hap­ pens  benefits  story-telling; almost  every­ thing  benefits information." Jacob Weins, the protagonist in "The Sumo Revisions," doesn't   comprehend the  Kabuki theatre or  the  Sumo   wrestling  that   he  watches one afternoon; yet the  two spectacles  in­ filtrate  and  fertilize  his  imagination. For the most part  we know  too much; we are paralyzed   by  facts. "Invasions '79" ends with   Bella  Barclay   Robson   watching a TV  report  on  the  Soviet  intervention in Afghanistan. It relates  to nothing in  her own  experience: "Was  that  what  an  in­ vasion was like -soldiers stretching their


122
 legs  and  stomping around in  the  snow? Did  it happen like  that?" She  feels help­ less, we all feel helpless. But in Waterville, as  a  young   woman,  where   the   outside  world  impinged only  in  the  form  of  ru­  mours and  radio, Bella might hardly  have  known   the   meaning  of   helplessness.   At present  people  talk  glibly about the  "in­ formation   explosion"  as  if   it   was   the greatest   thing   since  sliced  bread;  have they forgotten the effect  that  sliced bread  had  on  good  baking?
fThe idyll  ends.  (Perhaps it  was  never idyllic - yet   the   imagination  needs   a faith.) Story-telling slides into  the careful making of a short  story  by a  skilled  pro­ fessional    writer;   the    most   beautifully shaped    piece    in   The   Barclay   Family Theatre, "The  Lepers'  Squint," evokes the  rewards and  difficulties  of  writing. Hodgins  leaves  us  in  self-consciousness, even  self-referentiality. The  impromptu public spectacle of the Barclay  Family Theatre has  turned into  a  private act  of scribbling and  an  equally  private act  of reading.  "Our  revels   now   are   ended.
These   our   actors,   I As  I  foretold  you,
were all spirits  and  I Are melted  into  air,
into   thin   air...."  But   the   dream,  the
longing,  remains.
MARK ABLEY



L'ENFANCE

LIONEL    ALLARD,    Mademoiselle  Hortense  ou l'ecole   du  septieme rang.  Lerneac.
JACQUES  FILLION,  Il   est  bien   court, le  temps des cerises. Lemeac.

BIEN QUE L'ENFANCE soit le sujet  du  livre de Jacques Fillion  et de celui de Lionel Allard, il s'agit  de deux ouvrages tres differents. Dans celui  de Fillion,  un  pre­ mier  roman, le  narrateur est  un  gan;on  d'une dizaine   d'annees, dans  celui  d'Al­ lard,  c'est  un  adulte qui  se  rememore ses
premieres annees a !'ecole  du  rang.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Il  est  bien  court, le  temps des  cerises debut par   un  prologue  dont   les  evene­ ments  se situent en  I952,  deux  ans apres  ceux qui constituent le corps du recit. Puis le  narrateur se  rememore l'ete  fatidique de 1950. C'est  une saison que l'a marque, car  cette  annee-la, il a appris que rien  ne dure,   que  la  mort   frappe  aussi  bien  les vieux,  que  l'amour et  la  beaute sont  sou­ vent   sources   de  douleur.  A  travers  les yeux  du  jeune  Toto, qui  possede  Wl in­ vraisemblable don d'ubiquite, nous voyons le  village  d'Isieux se  lever  devant nous avec sa faune humaine. Malgre certaines mesquineries, la vie s'ecoule paisible,  jus­ qu'au moment ou  parait lebeau Damien qui  vient  de la ville. Survenant et citadin par  surcroit, Damien apporte, malgre  lui, le malheur au  village.  Il  s'amourache de la  jolie Rose-Mai, soeur  du  narrateur, et cet  amour  causera trois  morts: celle  de Damien, celle de son rival Bemard Caux,  et  celle  du  jeune  Fran($ois, hire de  Ber­ nard. Le prologue, qui  pourrait tout  aussi
 bien  clore   le  roman,  nous   avait   appris que  Rose-Mai avait  trouve  un  autre amour, mais  ce  nouveau bonheur coO.te la  vie  a  Pepe,  qui  aime   Rose-Mai sans
espoir,  et  qui  se  tuera   a l'endroit meme
ou  ont  peri  Daniel et  Bemard. On   ne
badine decidement pas avec l'amour dans l'ouvrage de Jacques Fillion.
,Malgre   cette   hecatombe,  Il   est  bien
court, le temps des  cerises est  un  roman grouillant de vie. Isieux est peuple  d'etres
a  la  fois  pittoresques,  loufoques  et  pa­
thetiques. La  sympathie qu'eprouve !'au­
teur  pour ses personnages est contagieuse. Il est vrai que  le groupe des epouses frus­ trees en mal  de chair  fraiche est quelque peu   flou,   comme    l'est   aussi   celui   des
ivrognes  que  le  lecteur a  de  la  peine  a
ne  pas confondre. En  revanche, certains
personnages sont bien vivants et bien caracterises,  telles   Madame  Gloire,  an­ cienne  prostituee au  grand  coeur,  et  sa fille Sophie,  pour  qui  elle s'est vainement sacrifice,  tels  aussi  Monsieur  Damase, le





WIUJM( ARTHUR DEA(ON
lf.aniiDmt
UtmtryUte
(lARATIIOI'W&
)OliN LENNOX










Deacon was an intellectual patron and prophet in Canadian  writing. For almost forty years (1922-60), as literary editor for Saturday
 Night, The Mail and Empire,  and The Globe and Mail he contrib­ uted immeasurably  to building a readership and a sympathetic climate for Canadian  writers and writing. The list of those who enjoyed his friendship  and sup­ port reads like a who's who of Canadian literature, and his associations with French­ Canadian writers after World
War II broadened the cultural awareness of his readers. 'This
is not only a biography of a great
and generous man ... it is also a spirited account of Canadian letters over some four decades. Anyone interested in the litera­ ture of our country should read this book.' Margaret  Laurence
$24.95
University of Toronto Press



I23

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sage  du  village,  et  Monsieur Onill,   qui s'est enrichi a force  de  travail  et de ruse. Toutefois,  les   amoureux  Damien    et Rose-Mai n'ont guere  de personnalite et, ce qui  est plus  grave  et constitue a notre avis  le  defaut principal du  livre,  le  per­ sonnage du narrateur n'est guere convain­ cant.  Comme Brian  dans  Who  Has Seen the  Wind? et  Christine dans  La  Route  d'Altamont, Toto, bien  qu'un  peu  plus age, est initie  aux  mysteres de la vie et de la mort. Mais  alors  que  nous connaissons  Brian   et   Christine, Toto   n'est   qu'une paire  d'yeux a travers lesquels nous assis­ tons aux  evenements. Il est rare que l'au­ teur  nous revele les sentiments ou les pen­ sees du  gan;on.  Lorsqu'il lui arrive  de  le faire,  il attribue a Toto une precocite  qui
frole le genie,  comme  dans ce passage :
Je  ne  me  sens   pas   trop   inquiet a  devenir paien, au  contraire cette eventualite caresse une  corde sensible, presque sensuelle,  quel­ que   part dans les  meandres  mysterieux de  mon  arne.  Je  crois  que  le  monotheisme est une    leeton   apprise,  une   valeur  purement intellectuelle qui   neglige  de  faire une   part  aux  sens....

Voila   qui   ne  manque pas  d'eloquence, sans doute, mais sont-ce la des reflexions possibles chez un enfant de dix ans?
L'humour est certainement une  des qualites maitresses de  l'ouvrage, mais  ici encore,   Il  est  bien  court, le  temps  des cerises  peche   par   l'exces.  La  grivoiserie cede  trop souvent la place  a la scatologie eta la vulgarite. L'episode du champion­ nat   de  fers,  que   l'auteur  voudrait sans doute scabreux, est  profondement ennu­  yeux;   celui   oil   Madame  Roma,  vieille bigote  dessechee, tente  de violer Levis est grotesque et   ridicule;  on   se  demande comment   une   femme   agee   et   malade pourrait  deshabiller  de  force   un   jeune homme  en pleine  sante.
Malgre ces defauts, Jacques Fillion  a reussi a ecrire  un  roman  qui  amuse  sou­ vent  et qui,  parfois,  passionne.  Son  style, truculent  et   vert   lorsqu'il   raconte   les


124
 frasques de ses personnages loufoques, se fait  lyrique  et  emouvant lorsqu'il decrit les affres  de }'amour ou  la  fatalite de  la mort.

Le   temps   passe  comme  les  nuages dans   le ciel,  en  passant  il  pourrit les  chases   et  les gens,    la   fleur    s'etiolera  a   l'automne,    les foins   se  degraderont, les  feuilles  aussi,   un oiseau    partira,  un    autre  mourra,  la   vie coule comme l'eau  de  la  Ridee, parfois en terrain  calme, parfois dans   un  rapide, mais toujours elle s'aneantira dans le vide  comme l'eau  dans !'ocean. Pour  la   premiere  fois, la  mort fait   partie de  mon   paysage et  deja l'enfance s'enfuit comme de  l'eau vive  entre les  doigts.

Il  est  bien  court, le  temps des  cerises est  un  coup   d'essai   remarquable.  Lors­ qu'il  aura  appris a se limiter, a elaguer, a demeler le tragique d'avec le melodrame,
}'humour d'avec  la  grossierete, Jacques Fillion   reussira, nous  n'en   doutons  pas, un  coup de  ma.l'tre.
L'entreprise de  Jacques Allard  est plus modeste  que  celle de Fillion.  Il veut sim­ plement evoquer ses premieres annees ala  petite ecole  du  rang  et  tracer  le portrait de ses premieres institutrices. S'il  se sou­ vient   sans  plaisir   de  l'austere  Madame Celina, dont la severite frolait  le sadisme, c'est  avec  une gratitude melee  d'admira­ tion  qu'il  evoque la  jolie  Mademoiselle
Hortense,  a  qui   la   majeure partie du
livre  est consacree. Malgre des difficultes
en apparence insurmontables, la  jeune institutrice a reussi a inspirer au narrateur
le gout  de l'etude et  de la lecture, et sans doute est-ce grace  a son exemple qu'il  est
lui-meme devenu instituteur.
Meme a notre  epoque, l'enseignement
est   rarement  facile;  autrefois, il  fallait
etre  heroique ou  temeraire pour  s'y  con­ sacrer. Et  c'est  aux  femmes  qu'on  reser­ vait  la  tache ingrate d'enseigner  dans  les ecoles   de   campagne  oil   les   conditions etaients  deplorables:   une   salle  unique pour  toutes  les classes, un  poele qui  tirait  mal, des instruments de travail defectueux ou non-existants. Mais le principal adver-







UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBI]I MED]IL FOR C]IN]IDI]IN BIOGR]IPHY

1981


The books received  this year suggest that  the field of biographical writ­ ing  either in  Canada or  by Canadians seems  to  be  broadening out,  much   to  the  benefit  of  readers   interested in  Canadian history.  The books  were  not  as much  concerned  with  Canadian  politicians as they have  been  in  the  past  few  years;  rather,  the  range  represented many  aspects of Canadian life.
There  were   at   least   three   good  studies   of  public   servants-Hugh
Keenleyside  on  Hugh  Keenleyside, J. L. Granatstein on  Norman  A.
Robertson, and  Claude Bissell on  Vincent Massey;  Bissell on  Massey
was  by  far  the  best,  for  it  was well  researched   and  written, giving  a well-drawn picture of the  man.  Other books added to the  variety: the study  of  Wilder Penfield   by his  grandson, Jefferson Lewis,  was  most informative. Mary   Meigs'  memoir /autobiography possessed  many  fine qualities, the  main  one  being  its exceptionally fine writing. The  anec­ dotal-form biography took a large  step  forward  in Jock  Carroll's book on  Greg  Clark,   and   in  Scott  Young's edited  autobiography of  Conn Smythe, which  proved  a refreshing exception  to the  rule  that  works on sporting figures  tend  to be juvenile  in approach; and  Raymond Fraser's study  of  Yvon  Durelle  was  journalism at  its best.  There was also  the fascinating story  of David  Lewis which  indicated that  there  was much  more  to tell  by the  man himself  before  he died. The  biographical form  was extended with  the Gundy  collection  of the letters  of Bliss Carman, a  book exceptional not only for its content but also for its cover. Emerging from  the  short  pile of very good  books is Elspeth  Cameron's book,  Hugh MacLennan: A  Writer's Life,  the  winner of  this  year's award. It is a substantial, candid  portrait of a living  figure,  a fact  that  can  often  create a  problem for a biographer but  does not appear to do so in  this  case. The  mixture of psychology and  literary criticism  in this finely  written  work  reveals  the  essence  and  the  fundamentals of  the artist; this  is  a  deftly   drawn and   well-rounded  assessment  of  Hugh MacLennan, a great  Canadian writer, by a careful and  uncompromis­ ing  critic.	D.S.





125

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



saire  de  l'institutrice etait  la terre,  car  la culture  du   sol  avait    necessairement la priorite sur  les taches  ecolieres et,  a  cer­ taines   epoques   de  l'annee,  les  absences etaient plus nombreuses que les presences. L'hiver,  c'est   le  climat   qui  s'acharnait contre   l'institutrice en  rendant les mau­  vais  chemins  impracticables.   Mademoi­ selle  Hortense, qui  decide  de  quitter l'e­ cole  du   7e  rang   pour   se consacrer aux missions, a du  trouver l'enseignement en Afrique  une  veritable sinecure.
Dans l'ouvrage de Lionel Allard, l'ecole et  Mademoiselle Hortense, comme  l'in­ dique  le  titre,  figurent au  premier  plan; mais  le  narrateur  donne   aussi  un   bref apevc;u des gens  qui  ont  marque son  en­ fance: de son pere, toujours courbe  sur sa terre,  de  sa  mere,  morte  en  couches,  du cure   qui   surveillait  de   pres   l'enseigne­ ment,   surtout celui  du  catechisme,  ma­ tiere  privilegiee  entre  toutes.  Le sujet  ne manque certes  pas  d'interet et  pourtant, le livre se lit sans enthousiasme. L'auteur n'a  pas  insuffie la  vie  a ses personnages. On   aurait  voulu  mieux  connattre  cette  petite  soeur emportee par  une meningite, cette   mere  morte   en  donnant  naissance a  son  septieme enfant. Quant aux  petits camarades du  protagoniste, c'est  a  peine s'ils  sont  mentionnes.  Meme  Mademoi­ selle Hortense et surtout le  jeune eleve en adoration devant elle ne sont pas convain­ cants.  Un  enfant n'aspirant qu'a plaire  a tous  les  adultes   qui   l'entourent  est  un oiseau vraiment trap  rare. On  voudrait le voir  desobeir,  jouer,  avec  ses amis,  quel­ que   tour   pendable.  On   pourrait  alors croire  a son existence.
(Le style de Lionel  Allard  n'est  pas non plus  une  des qualites mattresses  du  livre. Sans doute  cherche-t-il a bien montrer la tache   herculeenne a  laquelle  Mademoi­ selle Hortense et ses semblables avaient a faire  face,  mais dans son desir de  rendre hommage aux  institutrices d'autrefois, il ne nous fait  grace  d'aucun detail:
 Nous  etions  done  vingt-quatre en  tout:  cinq en  premiere annee, six  en  dcuxieme, quatre en   troisieme, cinq   en   quatrieme  et   quatre en  cinquieme. Deux ou  trois  pretinaient en deuxieme  et   en   troisieme:  ils  n'arrivaicnt
pas    a  apprendre  a  lire   convenablement;
parmi eux   on   trouvait  le  grand  Jules   qui
avait deja un  soup:;on de  poi! sous  le  nez. L'an  dernier, Ia  maitresse l'avait  place   en arriere  de  Ia  classe   pour  qu'il  derange  le moins  possible  les  autres e!eves.

Une  telle exactitude finit par  devenir fas­ tidieuse.  D'autre part,  les dialogues, d'ail­ leurs  assez  clairsemes,  sont  artificiels.  Et que  vient  faire,  au  milieu  d'un  passage serieux,  une  expression  telle que  "se  pla­ c;ant les fesses avec precaution sur le bane  noueux"?  L'auteur  tente-t-il de  faire  de l'humour?   Malheureusement,  c'est   pre­ cisement  l'humour qui   manque  le  plus a un ouvrage qui devrait se lire le sourire  aux  levres. On  pourrait alors  pardonner plus facilement des fautes  de syntaxe,  des fautes de  genre  qui,  de  toute  fac;on,  au­ raient du  etre  relevees  par  l',editeur.
Bien   qu'Allard  et   Fillion   aient   tous deux  ete  inspires  par  l'enfance, leurs ou­
vrages   n'ont   guere   de  points   communs. Fillion  tente  de  creer  un  univers,  Allard fait  un  panegyrique. 11 reste  que  le livre de ce dernier n'est pas sans interet. Sans doute le  voudrait-on mieux   fini,  moins naif,   plus  vivant.  Mais   l'auteur a   tout de meme 'ecrit un ouvrage  honnete, ayant valeur  de document.
P.COLLET



JOE WALLACE

Joe  Wallace  Poems. Progress Books,  $7-95·

THOUGH   HIS  WORKS travelled  all  over the world,  were translated into many languages (one  such  transcriber being Boris Pasternak) and  did  not  really  have that   few  readers at  home,  Joe   Wallace spent his life in the role of a prophet in Galilee,   ignored  by  the   pundits  of  his

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



own land.  It takes sophistic:ation of a high order  to recognize  that  what  is bizarre can nevertheless shine  if  judged   by  its  own terms.  There were  reasons  for  that ignor­ ance aside from  the political; for he wrote in  a  style  which   if  it  were  not  for  his vitality   would   be  called   arcane.  Today his mannerisms would  not  be regarded as out-of-date by readers who had  not gone through the  literary  controversies of  his time,  or  known  of  the great   numbers of lame   and   thoughtless  rhymesters  whom he  superficially  resembled.
The  see-saw  of fashion  has  tilted  into
regions  new,  and  of a  strange flat  calm. What is accepted now as the latest great­ est  thing  is the  syntax  and  vocabulary of the soap  opera; and  nothing more  excit­ ing  may  happen in  a  poem  than   would happen in  the  aura  of the  suds.  Outside Joe's  native  Maritimes the  art  of  talk  is dead.  No one of  the  younger  generation seems  to know  it  ever  existed.  Therefore the gaucheries of Joe's  artistic method  go unnoticed. On  the  contrary Joe's  verse strikes   the   young  reader  as  remarkably fresh.
"He writes  like  a  man   who  couldn't write  would  write  if he  could," said  one such   young  fellow.  It is  the  effect  Joe was  seeking,  and   actually  (as  many  an artist   who  has  attempted  to  counterfeit a  child's   drawing  knows   well)   a  hard thing  to do. Also he had  one  foot on one side  and   one  foot  on  the  other  of  the Freudian rift,  while  the  earthquake  con­ tinued. Joe  had  a  tendency to deal  with sex almost  as  if  it  did  not  exist,  and of course  when  sex goes out  the  door  senti­  mentality comes  drooling  in.  His  faults  were  of  his  own  time,  his  virtues  of  the future  with   which   he  was  occupied  as much   as  was  Tennyson; and   he  made  some lightning prophecies.

The filaments   from  your  fingers spun Repeat your  message   from  sun  to  sun; And  where   our  sun  is a ray  at  most You've planted   an  observation post.
 Joe   wrote   this  in  1923,  the   year  your good  grey  poet,   presently  writing,   was born; 34 years before Sputnik was to orbit.
All right.  You  can  make  all the allow­ ances  you  like  for  philosophical  difficul­ ties,  apart  from   those   issuing   from   a differing  class stance, encountered  by the educated   readers of  Wallace   when  Wal­ lace  was  actually  popular  with  workers
... but   what   exactly   was   wrong   with
"How High,  How  Wide"?

My  prison  window is not  large Five  inches  high, six inches wide, Perhaps  seven.
Yet  it  is large  enough to  show
The whole  unfettered to  and   fro
Of heaven. How high, how  wide  is heaven?
Five inches  high, six  inches wide, Perhaps  seven.

Didn't Blake  say, "To see a  World  in  a Grain  of Sand,/ And a Heaven in a Wild Flower"?  Ah  yes. But   part   of  a  poet's duty  is to  say  old  things  again   because they continue to be true.  In fact Blake's approach, though that  doesn't matter a damn  now, is rather didactic, while Wal­ lace  shows  the  reader   the  unity  of  fini­ tude  and  infinity.
Joe  lived,  and  we still  live, in  the  era of  the  "Lunar Lacuna," in  which  poets consider it old-fashioned to look at the moon, or describe any cosmic phenomena. The   attitude of  your  usual  poetaster is that  of the  American matron who  when asked  to view a  magnificent stellar  spec­ tacle,  said  she  didn't believe  in  all  that science-fiction  stuff.
Now who,  I ask you, is bizarre?  I  pre­ sume  most  of  our  secret  fantasies,  if  we spoke  of them  openly,  would  look  pretty  bizarre: but  a poet  who  doesn't  speak  of the  real  world   in   the   light   of   his/her fantasies  is worth even  less than  the  mis­ erable  wages one  gets.
1Is  Pratt's line, "There is no silence  on the  earth  like  the  silence  under  the  sea," bad?  Even  though it can  be contradicted by anyone who's put a head  under  water?

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Not with  the  magnificent poem  that  goes with   it,  it's   not ... and   Wallace   rarely recorded a faulty  observation.
One  of Joe's  poetic strengths  was in the art  of the epigram. A couple of his shorter ones,  published in The Blasted  Pine, are so  well  known   now  there  is no  need  to repeat them.  He has received the ultimate compliment of the folk poet, being quoted by  persons   who   don't know  his  name. Here   is  one  of  his  longer   ones,  "Your Arm  Is Long  Enough":

Your arm  is long  enough
To reach  the  stars
Your arm  is strong  enough
To break  all bars.

Your arm  has skill  enough To set  all  wheels  in motion To skim  the  sky  with  ships To mine   beneath the  ocean.

And   yet  your  golden   guests In  their eternal south Swear that   your  arm's
Too short
Too weak, Too lame,
To reach  your  mouth.

Anyone who's read Joe Wallace with percipience, or so I fancy, has his favour­ ite Joe Wallace  poem.  Mine is "The Road  To Understanding," which I have quoted  enough. He  never  used  a  word  that  any­ one  half-familiar  with  the  English   lan­ guage  would  have  to  look  up  in  a  dic­ tionary. There was a  reason  for  this. He was  writing for  the  workers,  and  during most  of  his  days  most  workers  did   not own  dictionaries.  Couldn't afford   them.
\Two   of   the   poems   mentioned  were written in  prison.  It is fashionable now to speak  of the travails of Canadians of Japanese ancestry, unjustly  imprisoned during the  Second   World  War.  The  in­ ternment of  many   Nova  Scotians  is  less often  spoken   of.  It does  not  bespeak  a racism  "of  which   we  are  all  guilty"; it shows  a   plain   dirty   oppression   of  the working   class,  a  section   of  it  with   the


I28
 "highest" ethnic qualifications. One  was a man guilty only of taking leave of his acquaintances with a saucy "See  you after the revolution"! One  was Joe. He wrote several of his best poems while under confinement, but  wrote  quite  a few other good  ones  before  and  after. Long  before and  long after.
He lived 85 years, though plagued with ill-health, from  late  Macdonald to  mid­ dle   Trudeau.  He    wrote   hundreds  of poems, many flippant to the point  of care­  lessness, but never dull.  In his last decade­ and-a-half  some  chinks  began   to  show through  the  curtain of  obscurity   which surrounded him.  John  Robert Colombo, I  believe,  was the  first  to write  an  article  about him for an establishment magazine
-if you  can  call  the  Canadian Forum that. Later came  the appearance before  a wide  audience in  Scott  and  Smith's Blasted Pine. I saw his Making Hay, dramatized with  dancers in folk  costume on  the CBC ... not  however  in  Maritime folk costume  -I  wonder  if there  is any?
I must  confess, though I knew  and ap­ preciated Joe  Wallace, I  greatly  under­ estimated  him.    I   would    say   "There's something to old  Joe,"  quote  "The Road  to  Understanding"  when  asked   for  my favourite poem; and  leave  it  at  that. A slighting reference to   Wallace   was  in­ cluded   in   the  introduction  to  my  I've  Tasted My  Blood.  I  pencilled it out,  but somehow it  got  in  again. This   book  is going  to start  a controversy. It  will be a long  one.  I  think  I'll  write  Joe  a  letter. Though a  Communist he  also  had   the brass  to  be simultaneously a  mass-every­ Sunday, confessing  Catholic; so there's a chance he might  receive it.

MILTON  ACORN

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



GENERATIONS

IAN    MCLACHLAN,  Helen  in  Exile.  McClelland
& Stewart, $I4-95·
IAN  MCLACHLAN'S  FIRST NOVEL The Sev­ enth   Hexagram was  a  pleasant  thriller,  set amusingly in  Hong Kong,  whose en­ ergy as an  entertainment  was  vitiated  by a combination of prolixity and  solemnity with   regard   to  political  message.  Helen in  Exile   works  better,  though  verbosity remains  a flaw, because  the author seems much  less confused  about what  genre  of book  he  is  trying  to  write,  so  that   the political  struggles which  interest him arise more  naturally out of the  general  texture  of the  book. The novel  consists of a poly­ phonic  interweaving of  three  narratives, each  concerning a  woman:  the  women are  mother, daughter, and  granddaugh­ ter  but  there  is also a fourth, still a child, who ends  the  novel  with  a  little  story  or parable of  her  own -a  parable  whose meaning is not  as clear  to me  as perhaps it should  be. Sometimes the woman speaks in  her  own  voice,  sometimes a  narrator speaks  for  her.  Not  much  distinction, re­ garding style, is made between  one voice and   the  next  so  that   reading  the  novel requires  a good  deal  of attention.
rThe oldest  woman   is  named   Helena. She  is the  daughter of  a  Greek  shipping magnate  and   is  brought  up  by  him  in Smyrna when  that city  was still  a Greek enclave  on the  coast  of "Asia  Minor" or, as the  Greeks  perceived it,  a  bridgehead of high  culture on an  alien  and  barbaric shore. Though she is surrounded by the trappings of upper class society and,  as a debutante, is  the  toast  of  the  Mediter­ ranean military and  nautical chivalry,  she chooses  for   her   mate   an   ungainly   but highly  energetic and  ambitious Scottish engineer   possessed   also  of  great   sexual drive. He deceives her almost  immediately and   eventually,   as  their    life   together  grows more  and  more  impossible,  deserts
 her. He winds up broken in a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp while  Helena  sur­ vives World  War  II comfortably  enough  in an apartment in Paris  hiding refuge:s. After  the  war  she  joins  her  daughter m Montreal and,  aging,  is farmed out  to a succession of old people's homes in which she  awaits  her  death twitching intermit­ tently with residual  life energy, some of it directed  towards feuding with  fellow  pa­ tients and  the nursing  staff while  the rest of it goes on haunting a Greek  restaurant in  search  of  some  of  the  flavour  of  her youth.
I think  McLachlan is saying  that  each generation is confronted with a particular struggle   which   defines   morally   all  who engage  in  it:  Helena's life,  seen  in  this light, is almost  entirely meaningless since her engagement with  the  problems  of her time is minimal. She has, instead, been almost   totally   defined   by  her   husband and, when  he abandons her, she becomes a Separated Middle-Aged Woman, then, after  he's  dead,  a  Widow.  What she  re­ members  is what  creates her individuality and  humanity and  her  memories  are cer­ tainly   rich   enough.  They   include   the sensuous  delights of  her  youth,  the  vio­ lence of the  war  between  the Greeks and the Turks and  the role her  husband, who has friends  in both  nations, played  in the escape  from  Smyrna. This section  of    e book is done  with great panache and  VIV­ idness.  In  fact  McLachlan's great  talent  lies  in  descriptions  of  violence,   rapine, torture,  and   physical   ugliness.  First   the Greek  armies  land  in Smyrna to make  as much  offered   by  the  Turkish  defeat  in
1918 as  they  can.  They push  the  Turks back almost to Ankara: much looting, defiling,  desecration of mosques,  binding of   prisoners    together  and    hurling  of flames, shootings, and  dumpings in the harbour. A Turkish officer, in one of  Mc­ Lachlan's little  anecdotes,  lies  paralyzed in the gutter with  his neck  broken,  moan­ ing  for  water:  women  taunt  him   then


129

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



urinate in his face. Three years later, of course,  and  it  is the  turn  of  the  Turks. They pursue the Greek rabble exacting terrible   revenge.   This  particular horror was depicted, of course,  so well by  Hem­ ingway  in  the  famous dispatches  and  in the vignettes of In Our Time. McLachlan is more long-winded but approaches these events with  the same horrified  mixture  of fascination and  recoil.
Helena is a spectator of her  war: her Scottish  husband is more involved and throughout it he retains a certain human­ ity. In  the  next  generation the  roles are somewhat  reversed.   Helena's   daughter, confusingly  named  Helene,  is  married to an ineffective  French  nobleman who dis­ appears at  the  time of the French defeat  in 1940 while she is thrust  into  an active participation in  the  war.  She  begins  by hiding  allied  airmen  but  is betrayed, un­ wittingly,  by her own small daughter. She and   the   young   French-Canadian  radio  operator she is captured with are tortured by the Gestapo and  rescued, in the nick of time,  as  they  say,  by  the  maquis. When everybody   is   recovered    in   health   they participate in a raid  on a German airfield and,  in withdrawing, almost  get captured again. Again  McLachlan is at his best in this section of the book:  in fact the reader  has,  by  this  time,  learned   to  trust  Mc­ Lachlan's expertise in  grand  guignol  so that  even  a simple  sentence  like "As  the car rounded a curve, Maurice slumped against  her  and  groaned" presages  a fine exercise in the pornography of violence. Some  of  the  action  is  presented  stereo­ typically:  there   are  the  last  minute res­ cues,   the   ripping-yam   hairbreadth  es­ capes,  the fat,  gentle Gestapo officer who likes  Mozart and  sadism,  the  dedicated, bespectacled  young  torturer, the  stocky, down-to-earth guerilla leader cutting through the  middle class
his temporary friends and  allies. But it is all highly  readable and  entertaining, par­ ticularly  to those of strong stomach. After
 the  war,  they  settle  happily in  Montreal, but  Maurice dies  prematurely of a  heart attack leaving Helene utterly  defeated. Despite her  participation in  the  defining events of her  time-her "European edu­ cation" in torture, rape,  execution, totali­ tarianism, and   total   war -she  has  still used her  husband, as women  of  that  gen­ eration typically  used  their  husbands, as the  centre of her  system  of  values.  When  he  dies,  then,   her  emotional  being  is  a wasteland  and   her  only  way  of  coping  with  it is to relive the past.
Her  daughter, named  Helen,  whom  she detests,  seems  intended by the  author  as an  example of a woman  who has at  least begun  to perceive  a solution to this  basic problem.  She   is   a   good   painter   who reaches  out  for  independence by leaving the  man  she  married while  she  was still an  adolescent. She finds  that  the  path  to emancipation is narrow and  twisting  and beset by two great  dangers: the first is of easy and  ultimately futile  sexual  promis­ cuity,  and  the  other  is of  being  nurtured by  a  paternalistic  figure   by   whom   she could  quite  easily allow herself to be taken  over.  Naturally  there   are  people   in  the novel   who   "represent"  these   extremes. Helen's  other   struggles  consist  of  deter­ mining the  kind  of  painter she would  like to  become,  and  of  trying  to connect her life  with  the  radical  politics  she  has  be­ come   involved  in.   While   her   mother's participation in the war was forced on her both  by external circumstances and  her reactions to the  execution of her  brother, Helen's is more  voluntary. The nature of Quebec politics  at the  time of the govern­ ment  crisis concerning the F.L.Q., violent though   they   are,   permitted  men    and  women   to  make  conscious  choices.  The discussions  about  the  morality of action, the   ends   and   means   of  engagement  so much  a  part  of  Helene's life  during the war  in  France  are   repeated  in  Helen's time in the context of Quebec sovereignty and  the  role  of  violence   in  securing it.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Helen  is arrested under  the  War  Meas­ ures Act during a three  a.m. round-up of "suspects"  and   miscellaneous  innocents and  spends time in jail being casually mis­ treated -an  experience far  less intense than  her mother's but, in its own way, just as  formative. As  the  novel  ends  Helen hides   a   terrorist  involved,  though   un­ known   to  her,  in  the  murder of   Pierre  Laporte and  the narrative climaxes melo­ dramatically with  a  police round-up and  a shooting and  this just at the point  when she  has  decided to share  a  house  with  a group of women.
McLachlan, then, attempts to chart the growth   in  consciousness  concerning  fe­ male  autonomy that   has  taken  place  in people since the  war-to-end-all-wars ended   in I gI 8.  The woman   most  con­ scious  of  her   enslavement  is,  as  seems appropriate  here,   the   youngest,   though  the  little  coda presented as  the  work  of her infant daughter, Ann, seems to prom­  ise  yet  further growth though, as I say,
I have  not  yet been  able  to figure  it  out. The  novel  generally  is  tight-lipped  and  humourless but it is convincing enough in
its  earnest   way. Ienjoyed  especially  the inclusion   of  the   F.L.Q.  manifesto, ver­ batim, as a souvenir of the past, the James Cross  episode,  and, again, verbatim, the incorporation of a  peculiarly nasty coro­ ner's  report on  the  body  of  Pierre   La­ porte.   Apart from   these  fringe   benefits, which  Ithink  most  readers will  skip,  I found   the   novel  structurally  interesting though, on  the  actual page,  overintricate to the point  of distraction.
 ures in a faraway dream-America, playing in plush but dimly-lit,  smoke-filled  rooms, all gently high on dope,  blowing beautiful solos to gorgeous women  waiting  for them on high stools at the bar, showing off their sleek, silk-stockinged legs.
Those  of us who collected  their  records were  part   of  that   aura, we  thought, a cult  with secretive  inroads into  that sub­
culture,  rebellious   disciples   of  a  music
that  undermined society's  staid  authority and  highbrow culture's condescension.
That is something of an  exaggeration, of  course,  but   it's  hardly   too  florid,   as Josef Skvorecky  makes  clear  in his intro­ duction to  this  coupling of  his  two  nov­ ellas.  For   him,   growing   up   under  the Nazi occupation and  then later as a writer  under   the  Communist  regime,  jazz  has always   had    that   element  of   rebellion about it,  but  not  as  politically   dynamic in   its   empathy   with    black   militancy against  the  white  establishment as  Leroi  Jones  would  have it. "Its essence is some-




Out-of-Print

CA.l.'JADIANA BOOKS

and

PAMPHLETS




NOVELLA  BLUES
 JOHN  MILLS
 
HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX  685

JOSEF  SKVORECKY, The Bass  Saxophone.  Les-
ter  &  Orpen  Dennys.

JAZZ FOR  EUROPEANS   has  always  had symbolic  connotations.  Jazzmen were often  seen  as  mysteriously  romantic  fig-
 
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



thing   fax more  elemental: an  elan  vital, a forceful vitality, an explosive creative energy as breathtaking as that  of any true art." Skvorecky   continues  by  suggesting that   it  is  a  music,  as  is  the  case  with other arts as well, because of its creative energy,  that  will always  be  anti-authori­ tarian. "When the lives of individuals and  communities  axe   controlled  by  powers that   themselves  remain  uncontrolled ... then  creative energy  becomes a protest."
The   title   novella   is  obviously   about music  but  it is linkied in this volume  with another novel, "Emoke," titled  in the original   Czech  as  Legenda Emoke, and in a  short  dedication, the  author alludes to it as the Emoke blues. So, although its subject   matter  has  only  peripheral  ref­ erences  to  jazz, the  novella  takes  up  the thematic concern of  a  mysterious  being, Emoke,   towards  whom   the  young  nar­  rator  edges affectionately but never totally convincing-  of  his  true  feelings.  He  is in competition  with  a  petty  official  of  the Party,   an  older  man  who  boasts  of  his conquests but whose feelings are obviously corrupt, and  whose life is conditioned by his lowly officialdom.
The narrator's tale  is a kind  of  cathar­ tic  song,  a  blues.  After   his   experience with   Emoke,   he  flounders   back   to  his desultory   affair   with   a  married  woman  "in   that   great   game   of   petty   cruelties, artifices,  pretences and lies," a game  that  Emoke  herself had  been damaged by pre­ viously. Yet at one point the narrator had convinced her  of  his genuine feelings  for her   through   jazz:   he   had   recited   the lyrics  of   blues  while   dancing with  her, and  the band  had  suddenly  seemed  to be transformed into  a musical  equivalent of his  words,  and  Emoe
kind.   But   the   transforming  moment   is
destroyed  by the Party official, and the narrator can only work vengeance against him  later,  leaving  himself  only an  image full  of wonder  and  wondering about Emoke.
 1This novella,  then,  is a song based on a real  woman, a  presence  reached through music, lost in reality  but preserved as an image,  even though the actuality of the woman   is  lost.   A  sad   romanticism   re­ mruns.
The  other novella,   "The Bass  Saxo­
phone," has the same  kind of simple  plot. It  recounts the  way  in  which  an  adoles­ cent,  full  of  that   exquisite  romanticism about  jazz  and   its  players,  encounters a Gennan band  coming into  town  to  play for  the  Nazi  occupiers and  their  sympa­ thizers.  He  is fascinated  by  the sight  of a bass saxophone, an  "almost  unusable in­ strument" yet shining with legend for him like "a  blind  silver  tower."
In the  town  the  code  of  non-co-opera­ tion and  refusal  to collaborate was strict.  The townspeople were ever watchful: no one  could  even  speak  to a Nazi  without it  being  seen  and noted.  Yet  the  adoles­
cent   is  drawn  to  the   band   and   to  the
instrument, so  that   when  he  is asked  to play  it  at  the  concert with  the  band  be­ cause  of  the  mysterious  unavailability of the  usual  musician, he is sorely  tempted. Eventually, he agrees  to appear with  the band  in  disguise   (the  other   members of the  band   also  dress  somewhat outland­ ishly in  costumes). He  spends  time  with the other musicians, learning about  their lives,    their    pasts,    their    travels,    their dreams, and  their  music which  transcends their  differences, their  nationalities, even their  enmities.
The experience of  playing,  the  fear  of discovery, the effect of the lugubrious, sombre,  primitive sound  of the saxophone remains with  him  as a "desperate scream of youth," constantly reminding him  of "dream, truth, incomprehensibility."
tWhile the outlines of the narratives are clear  and  simple,  the  surfaces  of the novellas  reverberate with  those  often  in­ describable moments of  musical  involve­ ment   and    transcendence.   Skvorecky   is faced  with  the  problem of  rendering an

BOOKS IN REVIEW



essentially  non-verbal experience in  ver­ bal tenns; furthermore, these musical mo­ ments  are  not  the considered and  known structures that  can be given  to the reader  as  a  frame of  reference  (as  in  Forster's passage   about   Beethoven's  Fifth    Sym­ phony  in  Howard's End) but  are  sponta­ neous overflowings  and  improvisations.
Skvorecky attempts  to solve  the  prob­ lem  not  with  the  free-wheeling  flow  of Kerouac's prose  but  with  a  more  formal  arrangement  that    contains a   rigorous,  even meticulous concern for structure, yet allows  for   associative   connections,  per­  haps  a  verbal  equivalent  of  a   jazzman improvising on   the  chord   changes   of  a song.
His  prose,  then,  tends  to  be  Faulkner­ ian: long  paragraphs  filled  with  appar­ ently  loosely-knit  sentences  that  weave  a sinuous   line  through  dreams, memories,  digressive   associations,   name-dropping, romantic  exaggerations, and   a  piling  up of  details. At  times  the  ends  of sentences seem  to  have  lost  contact with  their  be­ ginnings.   Paragraphs  lurch   and  skitter,  narrative is suspended, and  the  narrator analyses  his  responses,  and  the  effects  of jazz  recordings  on   him,   expressing   his desire  to  inhabit that  world   of  Chicago  jazz inscribed  in shellac, banned and  dis­ credited.
Sometimes the  prose seems a little self­ indulgent, even  too  cluttered. It is  diffi­ cult, then,  to agree with  one  critical opin­  ion  that   this  is  the   "finest  fiction  ever written about jazz,"  for  the  jazz element is imposed  on ordinary, even  sentimental dance tunes and  folk music. But then  jazz can  synthesize  many  disparate elements,  make  over  other  music  for  its  own  pur­  poses, elevate the most ordinary dress into a pure distillation of  joy or sadness.  And perhaps   that's  what    Skvorecky's  prose does-it  is the  manner, not  the  matter, that  may  correspond most  fully  with  the world  of jazz.
1Skrvorecky makes a parallel of jazz with
 the soaring,  passionate melodies  of gypsy songs  in  both  novellas,  and   the  parallel works, for  that  spontaneity and  outburst of feeling is at  the  heart  of jazz. And it is perhaps no accident that  one of the finest guitarists  in  jazz, Django Reinhardt, was a  Belgian  gypsy,  and   that   some  of  the most prodigiously accomplished bass play­ ers   in   contemporary  jazz   come   from Skvorecky's  part  of Europe.
,It  is that uprush   of  feelings  through blues that  enables  the narrator to reach Emoke and  she responds with  a wild folk song. It is through his involvement with his saxophone playing  that  he transcends the  band's   "circus sentimentality." And that  is what  Skvorecky's prose in all its rambling intensities, its sudden shifts and oblique flow, captures-the magical reach  that embraces loss and  despair, that plays with  rebellion  and  the bridging of bleakness   and   joy   in   adolescence, the union  of human beings  through love and its transience, the  memories, dreams  and legends that  all coalesce in listening  to the music of master  jazzmen,  though it avoids for the most part  the tendentious outpour­ ings  and   the  closed,  secretive  references  known   only   to   jazz   aficionados  which bedevil  much  writing about the music.
PETER STEVENS

IMAGINATION'S SOURCES
JOAN  FINNIGAN,  This Series  Has  Been  Discon­
tinued.  Fiddlehead Poetry Books, $6.oo.
BRIAN   FAWCETT,    Tristram's  Book.   Capi!ano
Review,  No.  I9,  $s.oo.
JOHN   BARTON,  A   Poor  Photographer. Sono
Nis, $5·95·
GILLEAN CHASE,  The   Distress of Harvest. Fid­
dlehead Poetry Books, $3.50.
GREG   GATENBY,    Growing   Still.   Black   Moss,
$4-95·
THIS GROUP OF NEW  POETRY serves to remind  the reader of several  different sources of the  imagination. In  the case of

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Finnigan, the  history  and  the  legends  of the  Ottawa Valley  Irish  settlements  fur­ nish   material  for   charming  and   lively tales. For  Fawcett, the  story of  Tristram and  Isolde,  one  of the  world's great  love stories, is the starting point of  his lyricism. And,   for  Barton, Chase,  and  Gatenby, personal  experience provides the raw con­ tent  for  poems.
Finnigan has been writing about  the Valley  for  several  years but she may  just now be on  the  verge  of becoming recog­ nized  as  one  of  its  significant  voices. In poems such as "Do  Ya Mind the Time?" and  "O'Kane  Kielly," she  reveals  a sure touch  in  the  handling of  garrulous char­ acters  and  folkways.  "Seana Quilty" is a lovely rime  in  the  traditional gypsy-lover motif. But perhaps the most notable  poem on the Irish  theme in the collection  is "A Legend  from  the  Valley,"  a tale  about  a giant   named Joe  Mufferaw who  was  a misfit  until  he  got  a  job as the  Walking  Boss (i.e., peacekeeper) in the tough lum­  ber camps.  The climax  of his adventures occurs   when   he   does   battle   with   the deadly  Windigo, that  fierce spirit of the woods,  and  slays  it.  Then the  ladies  of the  Roman Catholic and  Protestant churches gather to help  Joe  with  the "burning" of  the  demon   (else  it  would rise  again) ;  thus,  "The  burning of  the
Windigo I brought creeds and  breeds to­
gether  in  a  Melting Pot.  I And  the  Ot­
tawa Valley was melded into a separate entity,  I unique  and  special as an island." In  later years  Joe's   fame  as  the  heroic
giant-killer spreads far  and  wide  as  his sons and  grandsons become such great hockey teams  as the  Montreal Canadiens, the Ottawa Silver  Seven, and  the Trail Smoke  Eaters; and, "In time  they  even
became   I the   Wolves  from   the  North­
West Territories."
Not  all  of  Finnigan's work  is quite  so mythopoeic in design.  Her  usual medium is the  short   lyric,  used  effectively  in  the poem  series  "A   Set  of  Marriages" and
 "Men" to comment on ordinary domestic relationships or to puncture the egos of fellows like Harry, King of the One-Night Stands-"a woman  would  have  to bend
down   I to  love  him." But  always   her
thoughts turn   back  to  the  Valley,  espe­
cially    when    chronicling   the    woes   of "toned-down men I and wired-up women"  who've  moved    away   from   its
familiar rhythms to  the  suburban  mazes of  the  big  cities.
IAt first glance  Fawcett's subject matter seems to take him light years away from Finnigan's  down-home approach.  After all,  he has at his disposal  all the  ingredi­ ents  of  a  fabulous romance.  Disappoint­ ingly,  then,   he  chooses  to  focus  on  the aging  character of  Tristram  rather than  on  the  doomed  lovers  at   the  height   of their   passion.  Fawcett's method does  al­ low him  to reflect,  with  Tristram, on  the affair;  but  we  miss  the  active   presence  of the  bewitching Isolde  or  the  scheming villainy of King  Mark. The result  is a set of  one-dimensional lyrics,  a  certain  mo­ notony,  and  the  constant danger of  triv­ ializing  a  great   theme.  Yet  some  of  the poems  do  work.  Sitting  disconsolately in exile,  besieged  by  plots  against  his  life, and   yearning for  his  beloved,  Tristram sings his songs of woe. He remembers the magic   potion  that   sealed   his  love   for Isolde,  and  their  happy  idyll  together in the Cave  of Love. Momentarily, he thinks all   of   his   travails   have   been   illusory:
"Maybe  I  there   were   no  dragons,  no
castles I not  even windmills. Just I women  and  men,  men  and  women  I and infant dreams I of pure  crystal." Yet, he can't "shake off  I the  hangover, nor  the fatal pride   I that   demanded a  life-long
enchantment," and  so, like all "modern"
lovers,  is left  to  brood  "in  the  opacity  of a  world   I where   no  magic  can   be  be­
lieved."
Barton's "Poor Photographer" pursues almost  as solipsistic  a  route  to  the  truth of his existence as Fawcett's Tristram, but

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  way  is less  marked by  sorrow and highlighted  more  by   the   real   world   of natural and social  milieux. Indeed, the poet's use of ocean, island, seashore, mountain, plain, and   river imagery  pro­ vides  an  artful structure for   his  inward journeying. But  whether the  terrain tra­ versed is a memory of  adolescent guilt, an  incident recalled  from  European  travels, or   the   mixed   emotions of   relationships with  friends  and the  region of  his  birth, Barton  maintains a delicate balance be­ tween the  inner and outer worlds. It seems to   me   he   has   the   true  poet's sense   of wonder, as these  lines  from "Hieroglyph" suggest:

to dance afresh frOIIl sun-up
on

wide-eyed & dew-rich with  music

bright
with  archetype

In sum, A  Poor  Pho.tographer  is an  Im­
pressive first  book.
As a contrast to Barton's work, the  tone of  Chase's and Gatenby's books  is gritty, iconoclastic. The  Distress   of  Harvest   is full  of poems about what the  author calls "our mangled histories," even if it is also her  intention "to discover an  identity  be­ yond  roles" for  men  and women. An  ex­  ample of  this  backward-forward  tension occurs in  "Adjusting  Lenses,"  where  we
see  "eyes  in  which anguish  I and  love  I
are  twin  I contradictory legends I at the
beginning of  our   fugue." And   while  the
surface of her  verse  is often liquid  and dreamy, it  does   not   mask   an  essentially shrill, moralistic viewpoint. On the  other hand, Growing Still  manages to be moral without  losing a  sense  of  hwnour.  Gat­ enby  is a  satirist; he  is  at his  best  when mocking pretension  (''The  Sophisti­ cates")  or   smiting the   pusillanimity  of fellow  poets    ("Wenceslaus   Was No
 King") .  However, the   invective  of   his attacks on  present and former politicians and   his smirking put-downs of  academe are  merely ephemeral diatribe.

ERIC THOMPSON


QUEBEC EN TEXTES

GERARD BOISMENU,  LAURENT MAILHOT, et JACQUES  ROUILLARD,  Le  Quebec  en  textes I940-198o. Boreal  Express, n.p.

LE TITRE DE CETTE  VASTE  anthologie des­
tinee   surtout aux etudiants d'histoire et de  science   sociale, est  a la  fois  ambigu,
incomplet, piquant,  populaire et   trom­ peur. II ne corresJX>nd pas exactement au  contenu; il  suggere plus  qu'il ne  donne. Amon avis, il n'est pas tres heureux. Mais il s'inspire des  Americains, et c'est  ce  qui  compte le  plus  pour les  trois  auteurs de  cette  anthologie, un  peu   massive  et  spe­ cialisee  en  economique, en histoire, en politique et  en sociologie. Le  Quebec est divise  en  comtes, en  regions, voire  en royaumes. Le  voila  maintenant divise  en textes,   corrrme   le  jambon et  le  pain   en tranches. Autant dire que  tout recueil, qui
est un  choix, est discutable, a commencer par   le  titre, et  ne  peut  plaire  a tout   le
monde. Trois  autres auteurs pourraient en composer un autre tout a fait different,
qui  serait aussi  discutable.
Ce  recueil, substantiel et varie, est bien imprime tres  rares y sont  les coquilles
et   possede  de   solides  qualites   peda­
gogiques.
La premiere partie: I 940- I g6o est ainsi subdivisee: A.  La  Guerre  B. Le  develop­ pement  economique  et  £'urbanisation  C. Le  duplessisme   D.  Refus en  mutations. La   deuxieme   partie:  Ig6o-Ig8o  est   re­ partie de  la  fa($Oll suivante: A. La  revo­ lution  tranquille et  le developpement  de l'Etat B. Economie et travail  C. Montreal D. La question nationale E. Luttes popu­ laires. Voici  les noms des auteurs dont on


135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cite des extraits: Franc;ois-A!bert Angers, Hubert Aquin,  Sheila  Arnopoulos,  Henry Aubin,  Francine Barry, Gerald  Bernier, Gerard Bessette, AndreJ. Belanger,  Paul R. Belanger,  Maurice Blain, Robert Boily, Gerard Boismenu, Paul-Emile Borduas, Guy Boulizon,  Gilles Bourque,  Michel Brault, Dorval Brunelle, Paul  Chamber­ land,   Pierre   Chantefort,  Hubert  Char­ bonneau, Robert  Charlebois, Dominique Clift,  Collectif,  Confederation des syndi­ cats  nationaux,  Conseil  Attikamek>-Mon­ tagnais,  Hugues  Corriveau, Pierre  Dage­  nais,    Marcel  Daneau,   Helene    David, Paul-Eves Denis,  Roch  Denis,  Rejean Ducharme, Jeanne Duval,   Jacques  Fer­ ron,  Gerald  Fortin,  Francine  Fournier, Mona-Josee  Gagnon,  Gerard   Gardner, Herve    Gauthier,   Jean-Denis   Gendron, Roland Giguere, Gouvernement du Que­ bec, Richard Jones,  Paul-Marie Lapointe, Andre  Laurendeau,   Camille Laurin, Charles Lemelin, Vincent Lemieux, Jules  Legare,   Jean-Franc;ois  Leonard,  Pierre  Maheu,  Laurent  Mailhot, Manifeste du Front  de  Liberation  du  Quebec,  Gilles Marcotte, Fernand Martin, John  Thomas McDonough, Alain Medan, Gaston Miron, Denis  Moniere, Louis O'Neil, Ro­ land  Parenteau, Jacques Parizeau, Michel Pichette, Luc  Racine, Marcel Rioux, Uo Roback,  Jean-Claude Robert, Leslie Rob­ erts,  Jacques Rouillard,  Robert Rumilly,  Celine   Saint-Pierre,   Michel   Tremblay, Louis   Trotier,   Pierre   Elliott   Trudeau, Pierre  Vallieres.
Si  j'ai  tenu  a dresser  cet  Index  Nomi­ num, ce n'est  pas seulement pour combler  une lacune de cette Anthologie, c'est aussi et surtout pour  faire  ressortir  le  fait  que "les  auteurs sont  presque  tous  du  Que­ bec."    Entendez  par    la   de   Montreal, comme  il en est d'autres, tres importants, qui  brillent par  leur  absence.  Le  recueil vise  a  "reconstituer  les  principaux  mo­ ments  de l'histoire  I'ecente du  Quebec, a presenter, dans une perspective historique, la societe quebecoise dans son ensemble."

136
 Pour  arriver a cette  fin, on  a accorde la priorite aux  articles de periodiques; quel­ ques-uns sont  un  peu  courts.  La  perspec­ tive  a  beau   etre   multi   ou   pluridiscipli­ naire, il ne saurait etre question de  trou­ ver   ici   une   presentation  de   toutes   les disciplines. D'ailleurs les trois  auteurs de ce texte  de  base  pour  les etudiants de  la Faculte des arts et  des  sciences de  l'Uni­ versite  de Montreal, n'en  ont  pas du  tout Ia  pretention. Nous  ne saurions  trop  re­ commander Ia lecture de !'Avant-Propos et  de !'Introduction pour  bien  compren­ dre  l'esprit de  ce  livre,  meme  si le  style manque  de  clarte  et  de  simplicite.  En effet,   que   d'adjectifs  et   d'adverbes,  de phrases et  de  tournures  m'ont fait  sur­  sauter! J'ai  eu  souvent  !'impression  de lire  du  franglais et  non  du  franc;ais,  de l'americain en franc;ais.
Excellente  et   fort   instructive  est   Ia
chronique  des  evenements  d'ordre  poli­ tique, socio-economique et culture!. D'au­ tre  part, trop  peu  de  pages  sur  Ia  pein­  ture; rien  sur  !'architecture,  la  creation musicale    et   Ia  sculpture.  Les   Inuit­ "hommes par  excellence" -les  Amerin­ diens  auraient pu  etre  mieux  traites.  Ne sont-ils  pas,  bien  avant  nous,  les descen­  dants des premiers occupants du  sol? Les minorites   ethniques   qui   groupent   des citoyens  quebecois a  part entiere, le role du clerge et  de  l'enseignement a  tous  ses niveaux: voila  des  themes qui  auraient gagne   a  etre   presentes  dans   ce  recueil visant  a  donner une  vue  exacte  et  fidelc de  la  societe   quebecoise. Que  d'articles de  revue  n'a-t-on pas  ecrits  sur  ce sujet! Je forme  le voeu ardent que  la seconde edition de  ce  volume  en  tienne  compte. Tel  que!,  Le  Quebec en   extes
sente  un  certain Quebec vu  sous un  cer­ tain  angle. Reste  a le completer  pour  en avoir  une  bonne  vue  d'ensemble.

MAURICE LEBEL

BOOKS IN REVIEW



FABULOUS, GREY

HONORE  BEAUGRAND, Jeanne  /a  fi/euse. Fides.

HoNORE  BEAUGRAND  ( r848-rgo6)    has never  quite found his place  as one of the major  nineteenth-century   French-Cana­ dian  novelists.  New editions of his major works are  welcome, because  they typified so much  of his time,  while showing  some important variance with it. Anyone  wish­ ing to have  a full  idea  of traditional Ca­  nadian literature  needs  to  take  this  into account.  Beaugrand now  has  a  well  as­ sured  place  in  Fides'  prestige   collection Nenuphar, where  his La Chasse-galerie  is followed  by Jeanne  la file use (first edition r875-r878).
(The novel  falls easily, as do so many of
its  time,   into   two   parts:  the   fabulous memories  of  a  harmonious  canadien  ex­ istence,  and  the grey light of  actuality. In a world of voyageurs, habitants, violinists, story-tellers and  their  ghosts,  rural   ban­ quets,  haymaking,  and   plentiful  drink,  two young lovers begin their edifying story in  the  stilted   language and  shallow  psy­ chology   of   Victorian  convention.  Old hatreds  between their   two  families  pro­ voke  them   to  seek  a  new  life,  and  from here  on, interpolated legends  give way to selected  information regarding wage rates and  emigration figures.  An intelligent re­ viewer   in   1878  commented  that   Beau­ grand would  have  done  better to write  a pamphlet  about the  emigration question.  The same critic  objected that the coureur de  bois  content was  anachronistic, as  if the  characters were  got  up  in  Carnival costumes.  As for  the author's didactic in­
 

«A  Better  Way to Buy Books"

The  Academic Book Club  has ex­ panded  the  idea  of  a  traditional book  club  into  a  completely new and  unique concept.
Saue 20-40%   on any book in  print! Saue up to 80%  on selected titles. NO GIMMICKS
NO HIDDEN CHARGES
AND NO HARD SELL
Just  low,  low  prices  every  day  of  the year;  unlimited   choice  of  books;  and fast, efficient, personal  service on every order.

ACADEMIC BOOK  CLUB
Canada: 105 Wellington St., Kingston,  Ont.   K7L 5C7
U.S.A.:  Cape  Vincent,  New York,
13618-0399
Europe: Postbus 1891, 1005 AP Amsterdam,  The  Netherlands














Conespondance
Sous  Ia direction   de  B.H. Bakker
Tome I   (1858-1867)
,e(e             600 p.                     40$
\'(.e\'\'\o   Tome II   (1868-mai  1877)

tentions,  the   book   looked   equally   con­
 e   ,a
 648 p. 	48S

fused: Beaugrand was clearly  not against emigration in the same way as his clerical contemporaries,  so  they   were   not   sure which  side he was on.
The many  questions raised  by this book are  not  to be answered in a brief  review. Beaugrand's novel deserves attentive
 c,(\\ 	Tome Ill (Juin 1877-mai  1880)
a paraftre (aout 1

BOOKS IN REVIEW



reading and  careful deliberation in the wider  context of literary myth  and  ideo­ logical  infrastructure. Roger  Le  Moine's so-page introduction  (to  which  he adds  excellent  bio- and  bibliographical  notes) gives some  very  positive  directions, find­ ing  the  real  centre   of  the  novel  in  the failure  of the  I837  rebellion.  This  would account for the hiatus  between a fabulous past  and   a  factual  present.  Le  Moine's argument is visibly dominated by his own ideologicgal concerns and  his own mythi­  fication   of   I837·  He   omits  mentioning obvious   questions  such   as  Beaugrand's lavish  flattery   of  the  mill  owners  whose mantraps occasionally   caught   fire,  deci­ mating the  new  proletariat  without  re­ gard  for  ethnic  loyalties.  But  he  is right  to insist  that  ideological  extrapolation is the  main  interest of  what he describes  as "our   first   bourgeois   novel."   Beaugrand was exasperated by  a  Canadian political  elite that  wasted its time on constitutional problems   rather  than   tackling   the  eco­ nomic  situation  of the  people. The  novel as a  whole sustains  a confused  but  lively mixture of  political  and  social conscious­ ness  which  the  author could  not  resolve in  his copious  journalism. The  imaginary remains the right meeting place for his conflicting types of concern.

JACK WARWICK


GOLD AND COAL

DENYS  CHABOT, Eldorado  on Ice, trans. David
Lobdell. Oberon, $17.95; pa.  $8.95.
JEREMY   AKERMAN,  Black   Around    the   Eyes.
McClelland &  Stewart, $14.95.

ELDORADO sous LES GLACES, Denys Cha­ bot's  first  novel,  won  the  Prix  litteraire Gibson for I 979· Translated into English  and  out  of its own literary context, it may seem, to the  reader  unfamiliar with Que­ becois   literature,   disconnected,  bizarre,  and  experimental.  Disconnected  and  bi-
 zarre it is, but, ironically, these qualities connect it securely  to the conventions favoured by the  best Quebecois novelists, notably   Hubert Aquin   and   Rejean  Du­ charme. For  novelists  in  this  tradition, a narrative fragmentation that  reflects  the state  of  mind  of  a  psychopathic revolu­  tionary, a  mad  dreamer, a suicidal  poet,  or  a  despairing  child   is  quite  common­ place.
'In  Eldorado,  an  unidentified narrator explains   that   the  story  was  dictated to him  by a "capricious lunatic," Oberlin Fonteneau, on a transatlantic voyage from Le Havre to  Montreal. In  case any  par­ ticularly  obtuse   reader  might  persist   in
seeing  this  novel  as  a story,  rather than as  a  literary artifact, Chabot names  the ship  VaisSieau D'or,  after   the   poem   by Emile  Nelligan  where he records  the ship­ wreck  of his heart and  its descent  "dans l'abime du   Reve." As  the  ship,  so  the novel.  Oberlin's  naive   literalism,  which leads him  to believe  that  the ship is made  of solid  gold,  is only  a  little  more  naive, Chabot  implies,   than    that    of   average readers,  who  are  "predisposed,  one  and  all,   to   believe   anything that   they   are told."   Here,   this  belief   becomes  impos­ sible, as the narrative breaks  into  the first person stories of six "characters" who may be  "masks" for  Oberlin, just  as Oberlin is  a  kind   of   mask   for   Chabot.  These voices give different versions  of the  same "event" and almost  everything recounted is either  impossible, implausible, or  un­ convincing. Chabot  refuses  to  enter  into the usual comfortable literary conspiracy where    the    author   pretends  to   write "truth" about the  "real world" (or  fan­ tasy  about  a   consistent  unreal   world), and  the  reader pretends to believe it.
Some  of the "real world" does struggle into  the novel, only to be buried  under  "a profusion   of   lies."   Oberlin  leaves   the ship  and  travels  north  from  Montreal to the gold-mining country around Val d'Or, Chabot's birthplace. Val d'Or becomes an

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



inverse   image   of  the  Spanish-American El  Dorado,  the  marvellous  paradise  of gold and  delight. Chabot's gold country is a  hell  of  ice,  on  ice,  or,  in  the  punning French  title,  paradise  as  mirror  image, and certainly through a glass darkly. Of course   there   are   several   conflagrations, whose  survivors   avoid   roasting  only   to face  freezing  to  death.
Also  part   of  Chabot's  tradition  is  a central scene  of  pornographic  violence;
as  in  Aquin,  a  main  female  character is
subject    to   brutal  sexual   attack.  Such scenes are  problematic enough when  they are  there  to shock, arouse,  or gratify; they are even more difficult  to accept as neces­ sary  when  they  seem  to  be included, not out  of  passion,  perversion,  or  obsession, but  simply  because  the  tradition requires  them.  Chabot has  mastered his tradition and  his form; now he has to convince  the reader   he  is  not  simply  playing   literary games.
To   move  from   Chabot's  Eldorado to
Jeremy    Akerman's  Black    Around     the Eyes is to move  from  formalism to social realism,  from  a  novel  that looks inward to art  and  up  to  the  "high" literary  tra­ dition,  to  a  novel  that  looks  outward to society,  and  down  to  the "low" forms  of popular oral  culture.  Akerman only  re­ cently  resigned  as leader  of Nova Scotia's New  Democratic  Party   and   member   of the   coal-mining   constituency  of   Cape  Breton   East.   He   became    interested  in politics after spending several  years listen­ ing to yarns about the "men  of the deeps"  in Cape Breton  kitchens. The narrator of the  novel  is  an  old  man,  Donnie Ross, who is looking  back  on  his turbulent past as a union  leader in  the mines.  Although he is the  narrative voice, and  his memor­ ies  the  focus,  the  novel's   real  hero  is a
historic   figure,   J. B.  MacLachlan,  who
arrived in  Canada in I 902, after  having
been  blacklisted during a  strike  in  Scot­ land.  He immediately plunged into union organizing in Canada, and  inI 923 he was
 jailed.  Miners  all  over  Canada struck  to show sympathy. The novel focuses mainly on  the  battles  of  the  1925 strike,  where the miners burned  company stores, the owners sent in "goon  squads," the govern­ ment  rigged  trials,  and  food  trains  came  in  from  the  west  too  late  to  save  many Cape  Breton  children from  death caused by starvation.
Akerman's approach  to  his material is the one Donnie's Uncle  Walter uses to recount Scotch  history: "In reality,  Uncle Walter    was   giving   me   history    lessons (and   surprisingly accurate  ones,  I later discovered), but painting this history with broad  strokes  and  vivid  colours  to  catch the imagination and  coax  the  memory  to retain  them." Akerman, in  trying  to tum a period of history  into  one long yam  for us,  forgets  that   much   of  the  charm of these stories cannot be captured in print. Since  his  main   purpose  seems  to  be  to rescue  a  part  of labour history  from  ob­ livion,   the  novel   may   not   be  the   best choice of form.  Popular social  historians, like Barry  Broadfoot or  Heather Robert­ son, have achieved good results with  tran­ scriptions    of    taped    interviews,  photo­ graphs, and  a linking  historical narrative. This  mode of  history  allows  room  for  the kind of  evocation of place  that  Akerman does so  well.  The fascinating content of Black   Around   the   Eyes,  because   of  its form,  the  novel,  is unlikely   to  reach  its best  audience, or  to  stay  in  print   long, which is a pity.
MARGERY FEE

BOOKS IN REVIEW


DEEP PLEASURE

GREG SIMISON,  Disturbances. Thistledown,
$14.oo;  pa. $6.gs.
JILL    ROGERS,   Alternate Endings.   Sono   Nis,
$4-95·
PETER  CHRISTENSEN,   Rig  Talk. Thistledown,
$14.oo;  pa. $6.gs.
LEONA GOM,  Land  of the  Peace. Thistledown,
$14.oo; pa. $6.gs.
JOHN  v.  HICKS,   Winter Your  Sleep. Thistle­
down, $14.oo; pa. $6.gs.

THESE  FIVE   BOOKS,  all  beautifully  pro­ duced   and   designed, show  something of the strength and  variety  of  recent  western Canadian poetry.  Two  of  these  are  first collections,   two  second  collections,   and one is a third, but, in spite of their  seem­ ing  inexperience,   the   poets'  voices  are assured and distinct and  their imaginative territories  sharply differentiated by  tone and  the  use of language and  image.  The two first  books demonstrate in particular what  one  hopes  for  in  a  new  poet -a freshness  of approach and  a sense of  po­ tential  which  more  than  compensate  for any lack of range or risk-taking.
Greg  Simison's  Disturbances is a  fine
book. His poems are short, like extended epigrams, usually employing just one run­ ning    image,    explored  and   developed, leading to an ironic  twist at the end. The  writing is  tight   and  highly  disciplined; the   tone   perfectly  controlled.  Many   of these   poems  concern  male-female rela­  tionships with, as often  as not, the man as victim,  but   treated  through semi-comic  imagery to create a subtlety  of tone. The  poet  often ends  up  smiling  wryly  as  he realizes the  way  the  experience has worked  on  him; the  reader  smiles at  the way the image has worked itself out and resolved   matters. It  is  refreshing   these days  to  be  shown   the  world   from   the often   very  funny   point   of  view  of  the ruefully  musing exploited male,  sur­ rounded by predatory and  calculating fe-
 


males,  "barely clearing out  I before  the sack  was  on,  I my  feet  firmly  knotted."
But  he  hits  back at  times  in his sardonic style:

she once told  some friends that  if she were tattooed from  head  to thigh
as a detailed  map  of Canada
my favorite spot would  be the Niagara
Gorge

it's only recently  I've  realized how very clever  the image  was considering the  lifeless tundra stretching  beyond
the  arctic circle  of her  throat

There are  also  more  serious  and  moving poems here, which show directions this talented poet  might take  in the future­ about his grandfather,  his ex-wife's  fam­ ily,  a  dead   fisherman,  ageing   into  mid­  thirties domesticity.  A  really   good   first collection, brilliant  in  its use of imagery,  consistent in tone, cheerfully grotesque.
Less direct  in her treatment, Jill Rogers also  explores   male-female  roles  and  re­ lationships in the first section of  Alternate Endings.  Still  only  in  her  mid-twenties, she   is  an   accomplished   poet   who   has largely  managed to avoid  the  often  soft­ centred "shells  and  spells and  stones  and  bones" approach which has characterized some   recent   Vancouver   Island    poetry. More  subtle   than  Simison,   she  is  also more  elusive,  and  occasionally her  "peo­ ple"  seem  unreal, and   the  poems  some­ times   seem   to  merge   together  because they  don't  have strong and distinct enough  imagery  or   enough    variety   of tone.  But  she  can  write,  and  write  well. The best  poems  here -"Plans  for  Sur­ vival,"  "Second Day," "Expect a Haven," "The  Women," "Counting Our  Losses"
-are finely crafted and  deeply felt, their ambiguities carefully worked  for:

your recent  return
announced last week on the news
is puzzling

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



I stay  at home await the  doorbell holding a knife
and flowers

There is  toughness beneath  the  fragile surface  of these poems. They  repay  many readings,   but   I  feel   that   Jill   Rogers  is going   to  have   to  become   a  little  more hard and  realistic,  more  direct  in her  use of  image.  She  and  Greg  Simison  should study each  others' books-both so prom­ ising,  yet  each,   perhaps,  lacking  some­ thing  of what  the  other has in profusion.
To  move from  Jill  Rogers to Peter Christensen is to move  from  gentle quiet­ ness to a deafening roar.  It is interesting that  the  inside-cover  cataloguing data  of Rig  Talk   reads  "Petroleum  Workers­ Alberta -Poetry"   in   that   order-not "Poetry'' -and  this  is perhaps a clue  to the  strengths and  weaknesses  of  the  col­ lection.  This  book concerns the oil-rigs of Alberta-it is dedicated to  the province
-and the  men  who  work  them.  It  is as tough  and  uncompromising as the coun­ try, the  job, and  the  people,  and  is illus­ trated with  drawings of  rigs  and trucks and  other  hardware.
The problem with  the collection is that, at  times, the  poetry  does take  a back seat to  the  endless  details  of  the  rig-workers and  their  jobs and  becomes  mere descrip­ tive gloss:

Derrick man
in  the  crowsnest racks  the  pipe  along the  tower
A new  bit  is screwed onto the  pipe
You  drill  another hundred feet maybe  ten
before the  pipe  must  come  up     again slick  and  running mud

This  kind  of  catalogue  description does not  produce good  poetry. It is  just  not enough  to say that  this happened or  that happened, and   too  often   the  poet  relies on  the  descriptive details without  trans­ forming them  imaginatively into  poetry. But  it  is  not  all  like  this.  The  strength
 of  the  book  lies  in  its  unflinching  treat­ ment  of a  swaggering, macho, often  pa­ thetic   world   of   isolated   action,   intro­ ducing  us  to  areas  of  experience poetry  does not often  touch.  If sometimes we feel bludgeoned and overwhelmed, so perhaps we should.
Personally  I prefer  Christensen's moun­ tain  poetry -a  short   section  tucked   in among  the  dark  satanic rigs -which  re­ veals a shrewd  observer  of  the wild com­ ing  to  tenns with  the  Rockies  in  a  way he never quite  does with  the oil-rigs. The language softens  and   expands and   the poetry  demonstrates awarenesses  beyond  mere description. To  describe  and  appre­ hend and come to terms with extreme toughness does not necessarily demand extreme  toughness in the writing. But Christensen can  be a very good poet, and at   his  best  makes   us  feel  the  hell,   the losses, the sad  bravado of a strange  ethos.
Another world,  just  as dramatic in  its own  way as that  of the  rigs, is created in Leona  Gom's  Land  of the  Peace, where she writes  of her  childhood in  the  newly settled  Peace   River   country of  Alberta. But  time  is her  real  subject: time  which has   reduced  the   family   homestead  to ruins,  memories which   will  not  let  her go, and  the  urgent need  to face and  un­ derstand her  past,  her  family,  the forces and  people which  have shaped  her.
Beautifully produced, with  sepia-tone photographs from  an  old family album complementing the poems, Land  of the Peace  follows  up  on  what  the  poet  was doing in parts of her last book, recreating a vanished  way of life, at once brutal and comforting,  which,   through  the  clarity and  imaginative power of her writing, be­ comes a moral, emotional and psychologi­  cal  referent against  which  the  self  was, and   is,  measured  and   judged.    Being caught with  purple  gas  in  the  car,   the shock of an electric fence, going to school on horseback  and selling rides, getting the strap,  being locked in a cellar, setting  her

BOOKS IN REVIEW



hair  alight, killing  bears,  her  father's death, the terrible  life of the farm-women
-all this  subject-matter is richly  auto­ biographical, but  it  is a place and  a  life in   time   which   is  examined   as  well  as merely  described. She  visits  retired   pio­ neers now living in town :

They tell  me of  the  good  old  days and  then they  laugh,
waving at the  walls  folding them  in, and  say,
we never  had  it so good, running water  and  elect1icity,
such  miracles!
and  of course it  is true, of course
it  is true.

And  the  hundreds of  arrowheads found, taken  to  the  museum which  would  take only a few:

A  dime  a dozen, they  said. The memories so cheap, eventually, and all  of us harvesting
still  that history.

"Pieces" is a superb poem  on the  passing of time;  "Horsepower" deft and  funny.
Finally,   John   V.  Hicks'  Winter  Your Sleep is another splendid volume.  Now in his  mid-seventies,  this  poet-musician­ an organist  and choirmaster in Prince  Al­ bert-has  brought out  a  second  collec­ tion which is distinguished and  attractive. There is a  quiet  dignity  in  this poetry, a wide range of tones from  the high-serious to the ironically comic, an impressive lyri­
cism  and   love  of  language. John   Hicks treats  words  with  respect.  He  tries  noth­ ing  new  or  trendy, but  his  work  has  a flavour   all   its  own   and   a   remarkable depth and  resonance. Any lack of surface  excitement is more  than compensated for by an intelligence, a wit, a cultured man­  agement of theme  and  tone.
It is  the  endings of  his  poems  which impress   me  the   most.  Fully  earned   by the  developing patterns,  they  are  often full  of a  soft, heavy  sadness, or, at  other
times, cautiously optimistic:


142
 That much, then, is certain; let  us look  toward new strengths, peace  of sorts  at the  last.

His poems  on old musical  instruments are a delight; so is the sequence on the  ritual Church  services   with   which   the   book ends.  Poems  to   do   with  music run throughout  the   book;   sonnets,   rhymed and    unrhymed,  punctuate  the   careful free-verse. It is a collection full  of  rich­ ness  by  one  of  Canada's best  and  most underrated  poets.  Reading  these  poems  gives deep  pleasure because  we are in the presence of a good  person  who feels and cares-for words, for music, for the frag­  ile  and   transient  epiphanies  which   life gives  us. Winter   Your  Sleep  is  humane, generous and  wise.

CHRISTOPHER WISEMAN


TIME IN YOUR FLIGHT

MARY   ALICE   DOWNIE    and    GEORGE  RAWLYK,
A  Proper   Acadian. Kids Can Press.
MARY    HAMILTON,  The  Tin-lined Trunk. Kids
Can Press.
BETTY  WATERTON,  Pettranella. Douglas &  Mc­ Intyre,  $8.gs.
FRANK   CONIBEAR   and    J.   L.  BLUNDELL, The Wise One. Abridged Edition, adapted by Nicky  Millard. Scholastic-TAB, $ r.so.

UNTIL  RECENTLY,   Canadian   children's fiction,   likie Canadian fiction   generally, has  been  predominantly local  and  con­ temporary.  L.   M.   Montgomery's   para­ disal  island, Roderick  Haig-Brown's Pa­  cific   rain    forest,   and   Mowat's  prairie towns and northern barrens are described in  the  context of  the  authors'  personal experiences. Now  as  evidence of our  lit­ erary  sophistication we are  developing a sense of the  past  and  an awareness of the circumstances that  effected  geographical and    cultural   transitions  from    France, England, the  United States,  and  various East European countries to our land. The

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



historical    approach  often   has   didactic motivation-fair    enough, since  fiction may  convey  a  more  memorable  impres­ sion of historical events  than does a text­ book  full   of  dates   and   treaties.    (How  many  of  us  have  taken  our  idea  of  the French Revolution from Charles Dickens and  the  Baroness Orczy?)  In  the case of historical   fiction   for   younger    readers,  however,  there  is a danger that  characters and  events  may  be swamped by a mass of factual   information.   The  best  modern practitioners-English authors like Rose­ mary   Sutcliff,   Joan   Aiken,   and   Hester Burton-scrupulously  research their chosen period, then  with equal  care select only those details  that  can be melded  with particular  characters  and   a   particular story  line.  Creating a  sense  of  what   it must  have  felt  like to live in another his­ torical   period    requires  more   than   the substitution of horses and  candles  for cars and  electric lights.  At  the  same  time, the exoticism   must  not  be  so  overwhelming that  the  reader  feels  alienated. In  adult  historical  fiction,   sex   and   violence   are common elements  that  link  past  to pres­ ent.  In  children's  fiction,  present  readers  often   identify  with   the   past   through  a child  hero   or  heroine. Furthermore, an author's use of  such  archetypal motifs  as the loss of  parents, the quest or journey  to an  unknown land,  and  the  happy  ending  can  give historical fiction  the  patterns of familiar fairy  tales.
A  Proper Acadian  by  Mary  Alice Downie   and   George   Rawlyk   deals  with the eighteenth-century persecution of the Acadians, a subject that may  be unfamil­
iar,  now  that  Longfellow's "Evangeline"
has disappeared from school readers. Timothy  Parsons,    an   engaging  young hero, is sent  in 1754 from  Protestant, An­ glophone Boston  to  Minas, Nova Scotia,  where  he is to live with his dead mother's Catholic,   French-speaking    family.    In comparison  with   the  sober,  Puritanical Bostonians, these   hard-working  farmers
 are  "a merry-hearted people.  You'll  hear more laughter in a day in Acadia  than  in a month in Boston," as the sea captain, Ebenezer,   tells  Timothy. The characters are  plausibly  distinguished from  one an­ other-Timothy, his nagging  sister Pris­ cilla,  his cousin  Martin (a  mirror  image of  himself),  the   Yankee-hating  French priest, and  Uncle  Pascal and  Aunt Made­ leine who, like the other  Acadians, "love  their  land,  their  families  and  the  church and  haven't much  use for anything else." When,  on  the  eve  of   the  Seven  Years'  War, the new English governor  in Halifax decides  that  the  Acadians must  swear  to bear  arms  against the  French and   their  allies,  the  Micmac Indians, Timothy  is forced   to  choose   between   two  cultures and  two causes. The theme  of A  Proper Acadian  is the  nature of loyalty  and  the injustices of war.
The story is developed largely by means of dialogue  and  short  expository  passages. Careful attention is paid  to sensory details that   recreate  the  milieu -the  smell  of salt water, molasses, and stale fish in the Reliant's hold; the cabin  table set for  the Festival of the Geese with wooden trench­ ers,  pewter   dishes,   horn   spoons,   cider, French wine  and  brandy  smuggled  from Louisbourg, and  quantities of  food; the old women  in black dresses watching and  wailing as English  soldiers set fire to their  village. While  A Proper Acadian is simple enough  for  quite   young  readers,   it  does not give an impression of superficiality.
The   background of  Mary   Hamilton's The Tin-lined Trunk  is the British Child Emigration   movement   which    between r868 and 1925 brought Bo,ooo children to Canada to  work  on  farms.  A quarter of them came from Dr. Barnardo's rescue homes,  one  of  which   is described here. Polly, a scrawny  eleven-year-old, and  her brother Jack  live on  the  London streets, spending their  few  coins on  periwink,les, steamed  puddings, ginger  beer, and  thea­ tre tickets. Rescued  by Dr. Barnardo from


143

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



the  rats,   bed-bugs,   and   child-exploiters like Old  Briggs, they are cleaned  up, doc­ tored,  fed,  and  introduced to  a  regimen of  lessons,  prayers,   Bible   reading,  and vocational training. In 1888, they are sent to  Canada  where   they  find   themselves working on separate farms near Stratford, Ontario.
iDnfortunately, Mrs. Hamilton does not do justice to this promising  subject. In an
effort  to downplay the  abuses revealed  in
such   sociological   studies   as  Joy   Parr's Labouring Children, British Child  Immi­ grants  to Canada   I86g-1924  ( rg8o), the author has  produced only a shadowy  im­ pression  of  the  children's  sufferings  and deprivations both  in  England and  Can­ ada.  Most  of the  participants seem cari­  catures from Victorian "penny dreadfuls" rather than  real  people.  A  Proper  Aca­ dian  and  The Tin-lined Trunk are  pub­  lished by Kids Can  Press in a similar  for­ mat-a   map   at   the   beginning,   about sixty  pages  of  text,  an  afterword  giving the  historical context, and  several  black and  white  illustrations by Ron  Berg  that are  adequate but  rather short  on  atmos­ phere.
The  prize-winning team  consisting  of author  Betty   Waterton  and   illustrator Ann  Blades   has  treated  the  immigrant theme  in a picture-storybook of  consider­ able  charm.  When  Pettranella's parents decide  to exchange an upstairs  apartment in a  European factory  town  for  a home­ stead   in   Manitoba, Grandmother  must be left  behind   because  she  is too  old  to make  the   long   journey.   Grandmother's
gift  of  a  muslin   bag  filled  with  flower seeds is to form  a bridge  between  the old world and the new when Pettranella has carried out  her  promise  to  "plant  them and  make  a  beautiful garden   for  you." On  the  trip  across  the  prairie,  however, the seeds, which  the child  has poured  out onto  her  lap,  are  lost.  Pettranella is  dis­ consolate.   The  garden beside   their  log cabin  will contain only  turnips  and  cab-
 bages.  But  one  day,  while  driving down the   track,    they   suddenly  see   "blowing gently   in  the  breeze,   their   bright   faces turned to the  sun and  their  roots firm  in Canadian soil-Grandmother's flowers." This  story  describes  separation and hard­ ship  and   loss, a  lcind  of  pain  that  even small  children  can   understand,  but   re­ deemed  by  the  symbolism   of  seed  and blossom.
The text  gives little  specific indication of  time   and   place   but   the   meaning  is expanded by the illustrations which  show tall stone houses with rows of shuttered windows  such as might have  been seen in a central European country; lamplight falling  on a round table; the grandmoth­ er's   brightly  striped   apron,  blue  shawl and  white  cap; Pettranella in high  black boots, black stockings,  a long black  dress and  blue  coat seated  on a steamer trunk  in a  room crowded with  peasants; and  a big-wheeled ox cart  carrying the family along   a  dirt   track   lined   with   poplars. Colour is used  to create moods appropri­ ate  to  the  context. The dull  tones  of the old world  scenes are  replaced  by the deli­ cate  tints  of  the  early  spring  landscape, suggesting that  the  new homeland is hos­ pitable  and  innocent. Pettranella's brown  depression   as  she  looks  into   the  empty  seed bag is followed by a brightly lit pas­ toral scene showing the  child  surrounded by the gently coloured flowers that "bloom each  year beside a country road  in Mani­ toba."
The Wise  One, by Frank Conibear and J. L.  Blundell,   belongs  to  a  genre   that Canada  contributed to  world   literature
-the realistic   animal  story.   Conibear,
who  was born  in England in  r8g6  (he  is still alive and well and  living in Victoria) , spent  much  of his life as a trapper in the Northwest Territories where  his observa­ tions  of  animal life  inspired  his  writing. He  evidently agrees  with  Charles G.  D. Roberts' contention  that  a  writer   must  first note  the  animals' forms  and  colours,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



seasons and  habits,  food, tracks,  dwellings and   matings, and   then   "'get under   the skins' ... to  discern  their  motives,  to  un­ cover  and  chart their  simple  mental  pro­  cesses, to  learn   to  differentiate  between  those  of  their  actions which  are  the  re­ sults of blind, inherited instinct, and  those which   spring   from  something  definitely akin  to reason."
The Wise  One, the biography of a rare black  beaver,  begins when  an old trapper who has chanced upon  an uncharted lake determines  to  solve  the  mystery   of  the empty  lodges  around the  shore:
Some  tragedy had  befallen the  beavers that had   lived   here for  so  long.   He  knew  from his  inspection of  the  lodges   that now  only one   beaver  remained.   A   large,  old   buck beaver.

We  are   then   given,   from   the   animal's point  of view, that  beaver's life story from the  time  when  the  two-year-old is chased out  of the lodge  where  he was born  until, old,  lonely,  and  mourning his  mate  and family  who  have  been  slaughtered by  a pack   of  otters,   he  himself   dies  in   the white  man's steel  trap.  Ernest Thompson Seton   claimed    that   "there  is  only  one way to make  an animal's history  untragic, and  that  is to stop  before  the  last  chap­ ter."  What occurs  before  the  last chapter in  this  book  is an  affirmation of  animal heroism,  as  the  courageous,  kindly,  and  intelligent beaver  outwits and  outfights a variety  of  opponents,  including the  des­ picable   wolverine,   eagles,   owls,   and   a whole  family  of  Indians, in order  to  pro­ tect  his  mate  and  successive  generations of  their  offspring. Sensitive   descriptions of   landscape, details   of  natural history, vignettes  of  the  animals who  share   this aqueous world -"desperado" otters, syb­ aritic  muskrats, rival  buck  beavers,  the malicious  wolverine -are  combined  to produce what  the  Ladies'  Horne Journal quotation on the  back cover  calls "one  of the very best animal  books ever  written." By  reducing  the  lengthier  nature  de-
 scriptions, omitting some events, eliminat­ ing  digressions,  and  tightening  the  sen­ tence  structure,  Nicky   Millard  has  ac­ tually  improved  on  the  original. Fortu­ nately,  this abridged edition has retained many  of  Michael Bevans'  original   illus­ trations,   careful  pen-and-ink  drawings that  not only convey  faithfully the archi­ tecture of a  beaver  lodge  and  the  shore­ line  of  a  northern lake  but  also  suggest the  joy  of  early  spring   or  the  demonic gloom  of the  enemy-infested underwater world.  We should  be grateful to Scholas­ tic-TAB  for  resurrecting this masterpiece of its kind.
MURIEL WHITAKER


SUBVERSIVE FORM

MARGARET   CRAVEN,    The    Home   Front:   Col­
lected  Stories.  Putnam, $15.50.
w. P. KINSELLA, Born Indian. Oberon, $15.95;
pa. $7.95.
STEVE   LUXTON,   ed.,   Saturday  Night   at  the
Forum.  Quadrant, n.p.

THE  SHORT  STORY IS A  rigid  and  essen­ tially conservative form  which resists radi­ cal  alterations to  its  established  frame­ work and  casts an  imposing shadow  over the entire   field  of  short  fiction.  Yet,  the "conventional short story"  remains a vital and   dynamic  genre   whose  fragmentary, hit-or-miss quality seeins particularly well­ suited  to the modern consciousness  which Nadine Gordimer summarizes as "fearful insight   alternating  with    near-hypnotic states of  indifference." In  other  words, at its  best,  the  story  is  a  subversive   form, hostile  to  the   world   of  decent  appear­ ances,   easy   judgments,   and   rationalist perspectives.
,When,  on  the  other   hand, a  conven­ tional  story-structure is imposed  without irony  upon   the  "polite"  conflicts  of  in­ offensive characters, or  is  used simply  to verify  established  values,  the  short  story


145

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



can easily degenerate to a mechanical exercise. Indeed, the pieces collected  in Margaret Craven's The Home Front demonstrate that, without a subversive testing  of  its  formal   boundaries, a  story may seem  all the more  static,  the greater the author's mastery  of technical conven­ tions. In  terms  of structural cohesion  and  narrative control, most  of  Craven's stor­  ies are  exceptionally  well-crafted; in  the story, however, perhaps more than  in any other   form,  technical  competence is not equivalent to artistic value.
The  subject-matter of  several   of  the stories  in  The   Home  Front suggests  po­ tential for an original and effective treat­ ment  of the  short  story form: for exam­  ple,  the  changing  economic  and   social role of women,  and  the difficulties of post­ war  reconstruction,  the social  hazards of rapid   urbanization.   Craven's  approach, however,  is unremittingly sentimental, her treatment  of  serious  issues too easily  de­ finable  in  terms  of a  narrative parabola of    exposition, climax, denouement. Simply   stated,  there   is  no  evil  in  these stories,  no sense of  the  author grappling with  a  truth only  partly  or  momentarily recognized. Consequently, the tension  be­ tween  form  and  content  (requisite, in so well-defined  a  structural context,  to  the revitalization  of  received   forms)   is  al­ most   non-existent.  The   notion   of    the story  as  a  controlled, rationalist  form  is further intensified   by Craven's  tendency  to underline her themes,  or to force char­ acters   into   representative   roles:   "Even then,  Ben  knew  she  was  not  going  to be merely  important to the plant  and  to her sex.  No,  this  girl  was  going   to  be  the significant one"   ("The  Wall  Between"). Nor  is this  undercutting of dramatic ten­  sion   countered  by   an   ironic   narrative perspective which  might  place  events  in fuller  relief  or  suggest  a significance  be­ yond the anecdotal surface: the narrative tone   is  generally   more  one  of  amiable gossip than of full ironic  detachment.
 In succession,  then,  the stories  take  on the  unmistakable character  of  a  pre-de­ termined form  imposed   upon  particular sets of circumstances: the story  as magic formula through which  all human experi­  ence  can  be  distilled, its  significance re­ duced  to a brief closing paragraph : "She was gone, and  in a sense she would  never be back.  Yet  the  mother watched her  go with  pride"  ("Leading Lady") . The  full thematic force of the story is thus directed towards  a closed  end; epiphany becomes a rationalist tool. The collection is finally a  set  of  moral   fables   whose  dominant theme   is  "You   have   to  believe  that   no matter what  happens to  any  of  us these days, we can keep our-our essential decency" ("White-Collar Town").
The  difference between    The    Home
Front and  W.  P. Kinsella's Born Indian
is principally a  difference of  social  per­ spectives.   The view  of  society  as  a  ra­ tional  unit,  controlled  by  "essentially de­ cent"  men   and   women,   gives   way   in Kinsella's  portraits  of  an   impoverished central-Alberta Indian reserve  to  the  ar­ tistically  more  wholesome  notion  of  soci­ ety   as   a   vast   unknowable,   maliciously  indifferent to  the  fate  of  those  groups  or individuals whom  it  deems  unworthy. In Born  Indian,  Kinsella  creates   the  com­ posite impression of a carnivorous, overtly hostile white  society: "the daughter, who was named  Dora,  went  off to Edmonton, got swallowed up by the city and it be just the same as if she died" ("Born Indian") . On  one hand, the sheer absurdity of racial oppression becomes almost  a liberating force;  as   one   character  says,   "When we're  down  as low as we are on the totem pole  then  the only  thing  there  is to do is laugh" ("Jokemaker"). Balanced against the  humour of the stories, however,  is the sense of dangerous unpredictability which generally prevents the narratives from lapsing  into  the  seductive category of the formulaic short  story. For  Kinsella's long­ time  narrative persona, Silas Ermineskin,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



any   tendency  towards  artistic   compla­ cency  is  prevented  by  the  constant evi­ dence  of his "beneath the underdog" role as an  Indian and  a creative artist; as Silas says, "Being smarter than I  used  to sure ain't as  much fun  as  I  thought it  would be"  ("Indian Struck") .
As in  the  case  with  most  single-author story  collections, a  successive  reading of the fourteen stories in Born Indian accen­ tuates  certain  narrative  and   structural deficiencies. Most  notably, Silas occasion­ ally seems little  more  than  a  mouthpiece for   his  author; at   these   moments,  the charge of Kinsella's presumptuous liberal­  ism seems justified. And yet, it is a tribute to   Kinsella's   story-telling  ability    that,  overall,  the stories benefit from  placement in an anthology. In particular, the subject  of cultural, rather than  economic, poverty emerges  as  the  most  important and  con­ vincingly  stated theme  of  the  collection. The  surprising shift,  in  the final piece of the collection, to magic realism,  however,  radically  affects   the  significance  of  this theme.  The process  of  cultural degrada­ tion   is   momentarily   reversed    as   Silas realizes,  in  his  ability   to  create fictional  worlds,  a  far  greater power  than  that  of his  antagonists. The story,  "Weasels  and Ermines," is one  of  the  more  impressive pieces of short  fiction  to appear in Can- ada  in recent  years. 	·
It is  not  possible  here   to  describe  in depth  the  particular strengths or  weak­ nesses of  any  of  the  stories  in  Saturday Night  at the Forum, or to discuss how the best  narratives together  represent a con­ siderable range  of  responses  to the  "insti­  tutional  imperatives" of  the   traditional short  story  form. It is  necessary  only  to say  that   this  uneven   but   generally   im­ pressive anthology of works  by new Que­ bec anglophone writers ranges over styles from  surrealist fantasy, to  Marquez-like magic   realism,   to  Alice  Munro Gothic,  and  contains successful experiments both within  and  outside the familiar boundar-
 ies  of  the   short   story.   Especially   note­ worthy   are   Ludmilla   Bereshko's   "And  With  Two  Such  Husbands," Jerry  Wex­ ler's   "The   Bequest,"  Anne   McLean's "Confession  of Lucille Robillard, Accom­ plice,"  and   above  all,  "Rosarnunda," a hypnotically  beautiful, wonderfully   con­ centrated  piece  by Frances Davis.

IAN B.  MCLATCHIE


PENSEE AMERICANISANTE

GUILDO  ROUSSEAU,    L'Jmage des   Etats-Unis dans  la  litterature quebecoise (1775-1930). Naaman.
"DE LA NOUVELLE-FRANCE  a nos jours, }e Quebec a  tou jours  possede  une   pensee arnericanisante." A partir de cette  phrase,
Guildo  Rousseau se met  a analyser  com­
ment  et pourquoi le mythe  des Etats-Unis
a tellernent  preoccupe les ecrivains cana­ diens-franc;ais entre 1775 et 1930. II prend  soin  de  souligner que  son  etude  est  lit­ teraire  et "laisse  de cote  tout !'aspect his­ torique  des  rapports  entre le Quebec et les  Etats-Unis."   Precisons   que   son  ou­ vrage  est un  survol  historique, une  vaste synthese  de  la litterature  quebecoise  de
1755 a 1930.  Son  dessein  n'est  pas  d'a­
nalyser  les ecrits  afin  d'y  deceler  l'esthe­
tique litteraire; !'approche qu'il  choisit est plutot  celle  de  l'historien  litteraire,  role qu'il  revet d'ailleurs des !'avant-propos lorsqu'il propose "de faire ressortir des situations historiques particulieres." En fait,   M.  Rousseau  a  raison   de   ne  pas s'occuper  de la "litterarite" des ecrits  car la  ligne  de  demarcation entre  la  littera­ ture  et la  propagande est  souvent  mince chez  les auteurs  traites.  D'ailleurs, c'est un  probleme dont  il est conscient.
La   litterature  quebecoise    du   XIXe
siecle  foisonne   d'images de  notre  voisin du sud. A force de puiser dans les romans,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW


contes,  p1eces, et,  a un  moindre   degre, dans  les poemes  et essais de l'epoque, Rousseau   nous  demontre que  ces images illustrent sans  cesse le  phenomene de  ce qu'il  appelle le "mirage americain." En plus, notre  auteur a decouvert que l'image globale des Etats-Unis subit d'importantes
'modifications au cours de la periode en question. Il y aurait trois orientations suc­ cessives  et   distinctes  qui,   toutefois,  se chevauchent.
Les  premiers  ecrits   des  auteurs  que­ becois  sont  caracterises par  une  sympa­  thie   pour   la   liberte  et   les   institutions democratiques  americaines.  L'Amerique est  vue  sous  un   jour  favorable  par   les romanciers, conteurs et  poetes de la pre­  miere   moit1e  du   XIX• siecle.  Le  desir
d'inciter  le  Canadien  franc;ais  a  suivre
l'exemple americain pour  mieux  se faire
valoir  ainsi  que  !'influence  considerable du  romantisme les amenent a peindre  les
Etats-Unis  comme   le  nouvel   Eldorado; un  pays  legendaire d'aventure, de  rich­ esses et d'opportunite  illimitee.
Vers   le  milieu   du   XIX• siecle  cette image  se  ternit   et  cede  la  place  a  une
autre, plus realiste.  Les premiers ecrivains avaient trop  bien  accompli leur  tache; la fascination qu'exercent les Etats-Unis de­ clenche   un  exode  massif  des  Canadiens fram;ais  et, par  le fait  meme, un rejet  de la  vie  et  culture  traditionnelles. La  lit­ terature des annees  r8so-7o se caracterise done  par  un  effort  de  la  part  des  ecri­ vains   de   contrebalancer  l'attirance  des Etats-Unis. Pour   contrer  cet  exode,  les
auteurs s'en  prennent a tous les elements
d'une Amerique nefaste; le culte  de l'ar­
gent, le manque de sentiments, la vie mal­ saine  des  usines  et  des villes, le  materia­ lisme et  la corruption  n!gnantes, et ainsi de  suite.  Une   telle  resistance  au  mirage
americain aboutit a une  "exaltation  des
valeurs  nationales." La litterature devient
done tres nationaliste. On y prevoit  meme la decheance inevitable des Etats-Unis et, par  consequent, le rachat de !'Amerique
 
par  les  Canadiens franc;ais.  On   reve  de voir un  jour "les Canadiens franc;ais seuls possesseurs  d'une  Amerique franc;aise  et catholique."
Cependant  ce  reve  s'effrite contre la
realite. Vers   rgoo  se distingue une  nou­ velle  orientation dans   la  production lit­ teraire. On commence a se rendre compte de  l'enorme influence  des Etats-Unis sur le  Quebec.  Il  y  a   par  consequent  une tentative  litteraire   "pour  subjuguer un puissant voisin" dont !'influence s'accrmt de   jour  en  jour.  Pour   mieux   resister   a l'imperialisme americain on  exalte  la  fi­ delite   a  la  foi  catholique,  a  la   langue franc;aise,  aux   valeurs   nationales  et  cul­
turelles et  surtout la  fidelite  a la  patrie.
Pour   echapper  a  !'influence  preponde­
rante de  !'Amerique, les ecrivains n'ont
qu'une  ressource -l'imaginaire. La  lit­ terature pullule  de heros romanesques qui demontrent  la   superiorite  inherente  de la societe canadienne-franc;aise tout  en se vengeant de la societe americaine. L'enjeu est considerable; comme  le dit  M. Rous­ seau,  "l'idee fondamentale qui  se degage
de cette  revanche finale  aboutit a la lutte
pour  la  survivance nationale."
Voila,  en resume,  le tableau que  brosse
M.  Rousseau. Ces  trois  images  distinctes permettent a l'auteur d'organiser le con­
tenu  de son ouvrage sous les rubriques suivantes: le mirage americain, le combat contre 1'Amerique,  et  la  revanche finale. Faisant  preuve    d'une  affinite    pour    le chiffre  trois,  Rousseau etablit  ces parties de sorte  que  chacune se subdivise  en trois
chapitres dont  chacun a son tour  se com­
pose  de  trois  sections.  S'il  y a  une signi­
fication  a  cette   demarche   ternaire,   je
l'ignore.
Bien  presente, d'un style lucide  et con­ cis,   l'ouvrage  de   Guildo   Rousseau   se complete fort  heureusement  par  des  ap­  pendices,   une   bibliographie  exhaustive, des  index  complets et  une  table   analy­ tique  des  matieres tres  detaillee. Il  a en outre   richement   documente  ses   trou-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



vailles.  On   pourrait  neanmoins lui   re­ procher que  les notes  deviennent  parfois un peu fastidieuses, comme, par exemple,  ala page  137, ou au  lieu de se contenter de nous donner deux  ou trois exemples  de lettres parues dans   les   journaux de  l'e­  poque,  il nous  en  donne une  quinzaine.
Cette remarque faite,  on  doit  avouer
que  M. Rousseau a bien su structurer son livre. II procede toujours d'une logique solide  et  methodique et  ne  laisse  jamais le lecteur  dans  le vague.  Les resumes  a la fin de chaque chapitre en sont  un  temoi­ gnage  pertinent. On  apprecie en outre  la fac;on objective dont il traite sa  matiere. II   nous   fait   voir,   par   exemple,   l'idee  exageree  chez les ecrivains de leur  propre importance et de }'importance du Quebec face  a une  nation  aussi puissante que  les Etats-Unis.
En  contrepartie, il est  regrettable que l'auteur ait choisi de passer sous silence l'image  du   Canada anglais   dans   la  lit­ terature  quebecoise. Je  conviens  qu'une telle etude aurait depasse l'etendue de son livre;   neanmoins, un  silence   aussi  total laisse  }'impression   que  le  Haut-Canada n'etait  considere   qu'une  extension    des Etats-Unis. On   aurait  aime   au   moins connaitre les raisons  de cette  exclusion.
Le   livre   de   Guildo  Rousseau  tombe bien a point  aujourd'hui, car  le probleme de  "l'americanisation" du  Quebec est encore   plus   epineux  a  l'heure  actuelle qu'a   nulle  autre  epoque. En  choisissant
de  fixer  les bornes  de  Son etude a I 930, il  nous  fournit le  point   de  depart  pour des  recherches supplementaires  dans  ce domaine. Ainsi,  il  peut  realiser  son  but: "a  savoir  de  constituer un  cadre pour  de futures recherches." II serait en effet pas­ sionnant  de   voir   comment   l'image   des Etats-Unis se  dessine  dans  les  ouvrages  ecrits   a  partir de  1930,  surtout en  vue des grands  changements  qui  se sont  pro­  duits   au  Quebec  pendant les  trois  der­ nieres   decennies.   Le   tiraillement  entre  "l'americanite" d'un cote  et la "francite"
 de  l'autre  n'est   certes   pas  pres  de  dis­
paraitre.
MARK BENSON


FOR THE KICK

TOM WAYMAN, ed., Going   for Coffee: Poetry  on the   job. Harbour.
BARRY  MCKINNON, ed., The Pulp  Mill: An Anthology  of  Poems/Prince  George, B.C. Repository.
ROBERT ALLEN,  STEPHEN   LUXTON,  and   MARK TEICHER, Late  Romantics: A Collaborative Book  of Poems. Moosehead.

jAY MACPHERSON, when asked why she studied   literature, said,  "For  the  kick!." This  is presumably why  most  of us read, for   the   thrill,   the   elation  that   seldom comes but  is always  hoped  fo-r. It is also a  major   part  of  evaluation. Criticism   is an  attempt to explain: "It hits  me;  why does it hit  me?"
In  prose  there  are  a number of  more
mundane factors  added, such  as:  is the syntax  clear?   Is  the  story  cohesive?  Are the characters fully realized? If the prose is non-fiction some of the questions  change but the essence is the same. And then, of course,  there   are   the  great   writers   who break  all the  rules and  still succeed  mag­ nificently.
In poetry, evaluation is much  more difficult,  even  for  the  most  minor  versi­ fiers. If there  are  any  rules  left  that  we all  agree  on,  I  don't know  them. If you ask for a clear  syntax someone  will reply
with  a  "me   happiest" from   Layton   or
even  Browning's "Irks care  the  crop-full bird?" If you ask for scansion  or a precise narrative you will  be considered a  bron­ tosaurus  and  treated as such. Thus what is left but the kick?
I  am  attempting  to   justify   my  very
subjective  examination of three  poetry anthologies. Very   few  of  the   poets  are well known  in general and  only a couple well k!nown to me. Thus I am also lacking


149

BOOKS IN REVIEW



the crutch that  I might  have if reviewing the work of someone  for whom  there  is a received  wisdom.
Not  that  some received  wisdom doesn't
take  part. At  the  end  of  the  196o's  one poetry  editor said,  "One day, some  time after   Atwood   became  popular, I  looked at  my latest  pile of rejects, and  I realized how  I had  been  influenced. Each  time  I read  a  poem   I was  looking  for  the  At­ wood  hook,  a  grabber. No  hook  and   I chucked it  into  the  rejects. And  I wasn't even  sure  that  I liked  Atwood's  poetry." I don't think  I was looking for Atwood
in  these  volumes   but  I was  looking  for whatever it  is  that  produces  my  kick.  I thus  will  examine them  in  the  order  of kicks I  received.  This also  happens to descend    from   the   anthology  with   the most   poets   to   the   one  with   the   least. Which   might   simply   show  that   if  you
include enough   writers  you are  bound  to
find someone  that  the  critic  likes.
'The  inspiration behind  Going  for  Cof­ fee, edited  by Tom Wayman, seems clear. He   wanted  to  anthologize  work  poems which  didn't romanticize work or refer  to future  proletarian  valhallas.  These   are poems  by people  who are doing the work or have  done it. There are 221 poems and
93  poets.  Some  have  become  academics or  professional writers  and  some  remain "workers" in the  traditional sense but  all appear committed poets,  not  just  people who  happened to  write  a verse one  day. The poets are American  and Canadian. Their geographic range  seems  to  reflect Tom Wayman's life more  than  anything else. Thus the  majority are  in some  way connected  with    British   Columbia,  the Detroit-Windsor  area,   the  prairies,   and California. One  inspiration seems to have been  The Waterfront Writers, a publica­ tion   by   the   San   Francisco  Waterfront Writers and  Artists,  of  whom  a  number are represented in Going  for Coffee. Some of  the  Canadians are  part  of  the  Van­ couver  Industrial Writers'  Union, a group
 which   is  new  to  me  but   which   would appear to be similar to the San  Francisco collective.
The poems are distinguished by straightforward diction and  the  common use of  narratives. Simplicity is the  norm and  brevity  is cherished. The main prob­ lem  I see is a certain lack of  inspiration. This may sound  like a bourgeois  reaction, but  a poem  becomes special  only when  it transcends the subject. For  the  most part,  these  poems  about work  are   not  much  more  exciting  than   the  work  itself.
Thus the  best  section  of  poems  seems to  be the  one  on  hospital work.  The  ex­ perience of caring for  the severely ill and  the  dying  has  an  inherent impact  which most  of  these  poets  are  able  to  transmit, particularly Phil  Hall. In  an instance like this,  all  that   is required  is  the  restraint to   let    the    experience   stand,   without overtly  poeticizing it. Kirsten Emmot re­ flects on her success with one small  baby:

Long live  Surinderjeet!
You  were  the  first  whose  life  I ever  saved. Any  long  and  tiring night I can  go to  the
nursery
and   have  another hit
of what it can  mean to be a doctor.

In a  similar  way,  Hans Jewinski   does  a fine job of recounting life as a policeman. Jewinski is one  step  further along,  how­ ever, in that  his success is created as much  by  his  hard, clipped   style  as  by  the  ex­ periences behind  the  poem.
Some  very personal reactions are  quite compelling,  such  as  those  from   Patrick Lane  and  Helen  Porter, two of the better­ known  writers  in  the  collection.  I think  the  best  two  individual poems  are  "Fac­ tory   Time,"  by   Wayman   himself,   and "Loading Rice  at  14th  Street," by Gene Dennis. The  former  gives  a  perfect ac­ count  of the way the clock rules a labour­ er's  life. The latter  describes  that  almost  mindless  transcendence which   many   la­ bourers seek and  so few achieve. The best group of  poems  is by Gwen  Hauser. She

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



has  a  reasonably wild  wit  which  she  ap­ plies  to a  variety  of  assembly  line  tasks. Hers  is the  one  new  voice  which  I  will be eager  to hear  again.
One  work, "Industrial Poem," by Peter Trower,  raised   a  couple   of  interesting questions for me. It comes  near  to falling into  a  regular metre   and   rhyme   and   I kept  wishing  it  would.  Is it  possible that work  poetry  might still  respond   well  to the  traditional forms  that most  poets, in­ cluding  the  ones   in   this   volume,  have rejected?  Also,   Wayman's   introduction makes  the  point  that  in  the  Thirties po­ litical   poets   did   not   really   write   from within    the   immediate   worexperience and   about  it.  However,  the  authors of traditional work  songs  did.  It would  be interesting to see if the  old  shanties and logging  ballads could  provide some mod­  els for  new writers.
I'm  afraid the  other volumes  offer  far less on  which   to  ponder. Barry  McKin­ non's  The Pulp  Mill  gives us a look at a creative  writing workshop in a reasonably  isolated   industrial   environment,  Prince  George,  but  the  poems  tend  to be of less interest  than  the situation. A free-wheel­ ing stream-of-consciousness piece by Brian Fawcett has moments but also a lot of padding.  Kathy  Donovon  may   not   be much  of a  poet  as yet  but  she  has  some hard feminist insights which are worth examining. Peter Lindelauf needs a few sparkling phrases  and  ideas  to set off the pleasant clarity  of his brief  pieces but  he still holds up well against the pretentious­ ness of  some  of  his  colleagues. The  one writer   of  real   potential  here   is  Sharon Stevenson. But  the  editor notes  that  she died  in I 978. She  had  some  unusual in­ sights  into  radical  politics  and  also a gift for  putting  the  right  words  in  the  right places.
Something is almost  always  lacking  in Late  Romantics. The image  of Daedalus on  the  cover  gives some  idea  of the  pre-
 tensions of the authors, Robert  Allen, Stephen  Luxton and  Mark  Teicher.
To  make  things  worse,  they  drift through the usual  references to butterflies and  Greek  myth   until   they  end  with  a poem  from  Teicher to the  other  two. As they are also  the  publishers, everything seems  just  a  bit  too  incestuous. I  stated that  critical  opinions are  subjective  and mine  obviously  are.  But  I still  think  the Late  Romantics should  be encouraged  to go for  coffee.  And  make  it a  nice  long break.
TERRY  GOLDIE


HARD THINGS

ROBERT  LECKER   and    JACK   DAVID,    eds.,   The Annotated  Bibliography of Canada's Major Authors. Volume Two. ECW   Press,  $3o.oo; pa.  $18.oo.
THOMAS VINCENT, ed., Eighteenth-Century Canadian Poetry An  Anthology. Loyal  Col­ onies  Press,  $6.oo.
THOMAS VINCENT,  comp., Joseph  Howe: An Annotated  Chronology  of  the  Poems   I8I6- IB72-  Loyal  Colonies Press, $6.so.

IN  AN  ARTICLE PUBLISHED   IN    1973,  the late  Desmond   Pacey  argued  that  it  was time in  "The Study  of Canadian  Litera­ ture" to  try  the  hard   things:  bibliogra­ phies,  biographies, and  editions. And  in the last few years, several attempts to per­ form  these  tasks  have  been  made.  The works which are  the subject  of this review represent  three examples.
Eighteenth-Century Canadian Poetry is an  anthology of  thirty-seven poems  col­ lected    from    colonial    newspapers   and magazines,  published books, and  unpub­ lished  papers,  and   presented  in  order  of "types":   "religious,  moral,   and   philo­  sophic verse," "love  laments and  pastoral poetry," "descriptive  and   topographical verses," and  "social  and  political  satire." The authors are  mostly  anonymous, al­ though   poems   by   Henry  Alline,   Jacob

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Bailey, Jonathan Odell,  and Joseph Stans­
bury are  also included.
'What  bothers me about  this anthology is not  the  content itself  but  its  presenta­ tion.  In  preparing this  edition,  Vincent has  done  such   hard  things  as  spending hours  reading  through  papers  of  various  sorts  and  sifting   their   material. His  pa­  tience  and  thoroughness, in  fact,  should  be   commended,  as  should   his  making available  a  selection   of  the   poems   his labours  have  uncovered. But  in  the  end the value of all this work is much  reduced because, instead of telling us the precise source  for  each  poem,  Vincent refers  us in "A  Note  on  Sources" to  rare  editions of poems by Alline, Odell,  and Stansbury, two sets of unpublished papers, and  to the Chronological Index  of locally  written verse published in the newspapers and magazines  of Upper and  Lower  Canada, Maritime Canada, and  Newfoundland through   IBIS   he   compiled   with   Ross Stuart and  published in a small limited edition in 1979. Thus the information we most  need  is not  given  to us in  a  usable form.
What I shall  call  Vincent's lack  of perspective is revealed  again  in Joseph Howe. Aiming for  "more than  a  check­ list  of   [Howe's]  poems,"   the  compiler provides  for each  entry  the year in which the  poem   was  written; its  first  line;  its "length  /  verse  form   (metre  and  rhyme
scheme)   I genre-mode"; its subject; the
history   of   the   text;  and,   if  necessary,
notes.   In   addition  to  this   "Annotated
Chronology," Vincent includes  a "Mode I Genre Index," a "Title Index," a "First­ Line  Index," and  a "Thumbnail  Biogra­
phy."
There is, of course, nothing intrinsically wrong   with   any  of  these  parts.   In   this case,  however,  their  number is excessive, and  their  information a curious  mixture of  hard  fact,  critical definition,  and  aes­ thetic  judgment. Since  the poems are  ar­ ranged chronologically, the  biographical
 details,  for example, might  well have been either  integrated  into    the   checklist­ although that  would  have encumbered it even  more-or  into  the  "Prefatory Re­  marks." Simplification and  integration, in fact,   would   have   produced  a   shorter, sharper  "chronology" suitable for  publi­ cation,  in  say,  the  Papers  of the  Biblio­ graphical  Society of  Canada, where, among other advantages, it  would  have had  a wider  readership.
:The form  of publication of these two works is too pretentious, and  their  modes too mixed. But  the gold among the  dross is the  result  of  the  hard   things  Vincent has done  as a researcher into  a relatively unknown area  of Canadian literature. His job  now   is  to  eliminate  the   dross  and fashion   the  gold  into  a  careful study  of our  colonial   poetry.  When   he  does  this, these preliminary publications will  fall naturally  into   place   as  steps -albeit somewhat ill-advised  -along the way.
I  wish  I were  as  optimistic about the ultimate value  of  the  series and  volumes called   The   Annotated  Bibliography of Canada's Major  Authors, or   ABCMA. The series  is  "designed  to  be  the   first collection  of  comprehensive, annotated bibliographies of  works  by and  on  Can­ ada's major French and  English  authors from   the  nineteenth and  twentieth cen­  turies."  The   volumes- there    are   ten planned-will each  contain five of these bibliographies-a  more    suitable  name would  actually be  checklists.  So  far  two volumes  have  been  published, and check­ lists  of  nine  writers produced.  Margaret Atwood's  "Prose"  appears  in   Volume One; her  "Poetry" in  Volume  Two,  the  subject of  this  review.  Also  included  in this   volume    are   checklists   of  Leonard
Cohen, Archibald Lampman, E. J. Pratt,
and   Alfred   Purdy, each   compiled   by  a
different person   or  persons.  One   of  the many  problems with  ABCMA  is that  the compilers are  named  but  not otherwise identified.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



<Whoever they  are, neither they  nor  the editors know enough about bibliography and  its  types   or  comprehensiveness and its   traps  to    avoid  making  inaccurate claims. In the  "Introduction," the  editors state that the  "bibliographical principles" (italics mine)  are  those of the  MLA Handbook; that  each  bibliography   pre­ sents  "full  listings of  all  works"  by  each  author, except for  selections in  antholo­ gies;   that the  "comprehensive  presenta­ tion  of  primary sources includes all book editions"; and that  secondary material is "complete"  up   to   31   December  1979, except for  book  reviews "selected accord­ ing  to such criteria as critical importance, regional  response, idiosyncratic  perspec­ tive,  and  non-Canadian evaluation."
In   the   face   of   this   apparent  compe­ tence and  confidence, it seems churlish to be  negative. But, there are  few  "biblio­ graphical  principles"  enunciated  in   the MLA  Handbook;   its   purpose,  as   the editors themselves recognize, is to describe conventions  of   bibliographical style  "for writers  of   research  papers,  theses,   and dissertations."  While  comprehensiveness is  the   ideal  of  every   good   enumerative bibliographer, it is so rarely attained that it is distinctly unwise to  claim, let  alone emphasize, inclusiveness. Although  a  se­ lection  of   reviews  seems    sensible,   one  needs   factual and easily   applied  criteria for  making the  choices. One  also  needs  clear guidelines on  the  style, content, and  length of  annotations. Finally, since  Lec­ ker   and  David   describe  themselves  as editors, they  need  to  edit-to  verify  in­  formation   and  to   render  consistent all entries in  all  the  checklists. Most   of  all,  however,  they   need   to  define their con­ cept   of    "major."   Why,  for    instance, among  modem and contemporary poets  are these five "rna jor"?
The  quality of   the   checklists  varies. Marianne Micros' "Purdy"  seems  good.
Alan  J. Home's  checklist of   Atwood's
poetry  is  marred  by   such    examples   of
 bad  prose  as "The poems are  specifically addressed  to   an   audience  and    are   so reader-involving, using  rhetoric to achieve power and  force." Bruce Whiteman's "In­ troduction" to   the   Cohen  checklist  has  a confusing statement about the  "compre­ hensiveness" -or lack!  thereof-of   its secondary material.  George Wicken, the compiler  of  "Lampman," misses  the  first publication  of  Duncan Campbell Scott's "Poetry  and  Progress" lecture, and   does not  record  the   reprinting of  Pacey's "A Reading  of   Lampman's 'Heat'"  in   his collection  of  essays.  The group of  four who  compiled the  Pratt checklist need  to make  their  entries  on    the    subject   of "Clay" consistent. Did   Pratt bum a  or the manuscript, for example?
The editors, however, not  the  compil­ ers,   are   ultimately   responsible   for   the  success  of  these   volumes.  Certainly  their energy, initiative, and courage in attempt­ ing  to  get  fifty  checklists compiled  and  published in  a  relatively short  time   are  admirable. But  it is  not   enough  just   to decide  to   do  bibliographies. One  must know   how,  and  if  one  doesn't, one   has  to  learn,  and  the   lessons  are   hard. But unless and  until Lecker and  David learn a good deal more about editing and  bibli­ ography than they  appear to  know now, they   need   to  be  less  assured about the nature of  their checklists and   their  pub­ lication.   Otherwise,   despite    their    un­ doubtedly good   intentions,  they   will  ac­  tually  delay the  achievement of  the  hard things that must  be both done, and done well,   if  we   are  to  make  the   next   leap forward  in    "The   Study  of   Canadian Literature."
MARY  JANE EDWARDS








153

BOOKS IN REVIEW



PAST AND FUTURE
KEVIN  MAJOR,  Far  from  Shore. Clarke,  Irwin,
$9-95·
ERIC  WILSON, The Lost  Treasure of Casa Lorna.
Illustrated  by  Gavin   Rowe.  Clarke,   Irwin,
$ro.95.

IN THEIR LATEST BOOKS, Eric Wilson and Kevin  Major provide,  in a sense, a virtual history  of  the  boy's  adventure  story  in Canada. Wilson's  The Lost  Treasure   of Casa Lorna  is a journey  into  the  past,  a nostalgic   glimpse   at   what   these  stories once were. His is a world of spunky  junior detectives,   stern   Mounties, and  "spine­ tingling''  adventures,  a world  accurately and   traditionally   described   by   Wilson's publishers as "light-hearted and fast mov­ ing."  In  such  texts,  there  is little  if  any characterization; the  focus  instead  is on the  plot,  the  variety  of  adventures faced by  the  rather  faceless  protagonists. Ma­  jor, on  the  other hand, clearly  points  to the future. His first children's book, Hold Fast,  winner of  almost  all  of  the  major children's  book  awards in  Canada,  sig­ naled  a  major change in Canadian  chil­ dren's fiction, a sudden maturity; Major's second  book,  Far   from  Shore,  is  of  the same  high  quality,  proving  conclusively that  the  Canadian boy's  story has  come of  age.  The hero  of  Far   from  Shore  is not a hockey  player,  nor is he lost in the barren North. He  is  instead  a  painfully  ordinary boy -lazy, selfish, and  not  ter­  ribly clever-who is  trying  to survive  in
a  family  dominated by a  drunken,  out­ of-work   father and   a  mother  who  IS   a potential adulteress.
The first few paragraphs of the  two books  quickly   establish   the   vast  differ­ ences between  them.  Wilson's book begins in  Casa  Lorna,  a  Gothic  castle  conveni­ ently  situated in the heart of Toronto. It is  a  dark   and  gloomy   night; suddenly  there  is a  flash  of lightning and  the  cas­ tle's  sombre  butler speaks:   "We  fear  it was murder." Tom and  Liz, the two pro-


154
 tagonists,   shiver   with  delight; here  is  a mystery  to  be solved.  Just  then  Hatfield, the valet, appears; he clearly knows some­ thing.  But,  just  as  he  is about to  reveal his dire secret,  the lights go out. Moments later,   light   is  restored and   the  children find,  to  their   horror, that  "sprawled on the floor,  the  twisted  features of his face yellow in  the  candlelight, was  Hatfield." To  be fair, the story does become  a bit less  predictable as  one  reads  on,  but  it does  nonetheless remind  one  of  an  old children's game  in which,  after  some ma­ noeuvring, one   finally  discovers  that Colonel  Mustard is the murderer and that  he   did   it   in   the   conservatory   with   a candlestick.  Not    surprisingly,   Wilson's  children also discover  whodunit, exposing  a  smuggling  ring   along   the   way.  The butler didn't do  it,  by  the  way; in  fact, he turns out  to be a  Mountie in disguise. The adventure ends  rather effectively  in the  traditional series  of  chases,  rescues, and  unmaskings, the final episode  chron­ icling  the children's desperate attempt to avoid  being swept over  Niagara Falls. To  his credit,  Wilson  does provide along  the way a series of  clues which  the intelligent child  can decipher, long before  the rather dim-witted protagonists in fact.  But there is still  predictability to all  of  the  adven­ tures. It's  like watching an old black-and­ white  cowboy  movie  of  the  Forties,  one which   once   seemed   so  vital   but   which
now  just seems out  of  place.
Major's world,  on the other hand, is anything but  predictable. Again,  as in Wilson's   story,   the  first  few  paragraphs tell  all.  Though Far   from  Shore   begins with  a  description of a  traditional  New­ foundland  Christmas dinner,  one  notes immediately that  there  is  something dif­  ferent here.  For  one  thing, they're  eating lasagna. More  importantly, the  dinner is not  being  described  by some  omniscient third-person narrator, but  by each  mem­ ber  of the  Slade  family.  And  each  has  a clearly   unique voice;   the  teen-agers   ac-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



tually  sound   like  teen-agers. The   festive scene  ends  abruptly when  Gord,  the  fa­ ther, returns home  drunk and  knocks over the Christmas tree: "Shit, I can  feel  the feet giving out on me ... and  the branches piling  in on  top!  Jesus  Christ, my face!"
rThus, in  an  extremely courageous de­ parture from  the  narrative patterns  tra­  ditionally found  in children's fiction, Ma­  jor  allows  the  Slade  family  to introduce themselves.    Although   the    son,   Chris,  comes  to  dominate the  story  to  such  a degree  that   much  of it  becomes  a single first-person narrative,   the   overall   tech­ nique   is  extremely  successful,   for  what the  audience  learns  quite   quickly   from this cacophony of voices is that,  ironically,  the  family's  main  problem  is  that   they cannot  communicate  with   one  another. Thus,   the   audience  alone   realizes   the complexity of this troubled family.
\Just  as  Major's  narrative style  is  in­ novative,   so  too  is  his  examination   of contemporary society. Chris's problems do not    involve    smugglers,  murderers,   or even   opposing   goalies.   They   are   more immediate and  far  more  frightening: an unemployed, drunken  father;  a  restless mother; and   most  importantly, a  world in which  he seems  to have  no place. In  a sense,  the   story   is  nothing  more   than Chris's  day-by-day account of the worst summer of  his  life.  He  loses his girl;  he flunks  grade ten; and   finally,   when   he gets drunk and  apparently helps  vandal­ ize his school,  he becomes  a criminal. But Chris  is not  an  eternal  victim  of fate; he clearly  causes  most  of  his own  problems.  He  is  selfish,  not   too  bright, and   most tragically, entirely susceptible to even the most  ridiculous  of   his  friends' schemes. Simply  put,  he is a follower,  and  when his father leaves  to find work elsewhere,  he is left  with  virtually no  leadership. In  the midst  of  his despair, however, the  town's  minister  comes  to his aid  and  invites him to come to  his summer camp as a coun­  sellor.
 Anyone  familiar with  children's fiction can  now predict the inevitable pattern of Chris's life: he will find a place through helping  others   and   return  to  his  family with  a  new  sense of  his true  worth. But Major does  not   provide  such  easy  an­ swers. Chris  does  not  redeem  himself  at summer  camp; instead, he  is  talked  into  smoking  some  dope  by one  of  the  other counsellors  and,  as  a  result,  almost  kills himself  when  he  unwisely  takes  his  boat  too  far   from   shore   during  a   summer squall.
Ultimately, Chris  does  begin  to  move back  to  shore,  to  find  some  small  place for himself. His father returns; his mother breaks  off  her  affair  with  her  employer; and  Chris  finds a new, more understand­ ing   girl.   But,   above   all,   Chris   simply learns  that  he is going  to have  to change himself;   he  can  expect  little  help  from  others.   When   he  finally  does  decide   to return to school, signalling the emergence of the "new" Chris,  he fully recognizes his own  capabilities:  he  won't get  straight A's;  in  fact,  he'll   be  lucky  if  he  passes. When the story ends, Chris's  father is still awaiting confirmation of his new job. The family  is  optimistic, but   there  is always the chance that  it will not  come  through and  that  he  will  have  to  leave  again. If so, Chris's  world  could  once  again  crum­ ble.  Such   is  Major's vision  of   contem­ porary adolescence.
1In his  autobiography,  Leslie   McFar­ lane,   creator  of   the   Hardy   Boys  and  probably  Canada's most  prolific  teller  of the  type  of  adventure  stories  epitomized by  The    Lost   Treasure   of  Casa   Lorna,  occasionally  feels compelled to apologize  for the lack of sophistication in his stories, admitting   that   some   of  his  adventures were  simply  good  hack-work.  With   the advent of  Kevin   Major and  writers  like him,  the  writer  of realistic  children's  fic­ tion need  never  apologize  again.

J. KIERAN KEALY


155

BOOKS IN REVIEW



SOUR GRAPES

GEORGE JONAS,  Final  Decree. Macmillan.
HEATHER ROBERTSON, The  Flying Bandit. Lori­
mer.
ANNORA BROWN,  Sketches From  Life. Hurtig.

fROM  THE  SEEDS OF BITTERNESS have sprung three very  different books: Sketches  From  Life  by  Annora  Brown, the  autobiography of  a  prairie painter, The   Flying  Bandit  by  Heather  Robert­ son,  a  somewhat thin  biography  of  Ken Leishman, and  George Jonas'  novel Final Decree,  each   telling  of   an   individual's response  to the bitterness of the soil from which  it grew.
Annora  Brown   is   a   painter   mostly known for her lyrical  renderings of wild flowers. The  picture she paints  in her autobiography is a  much   darker one,  a little  family  tragedy  where  the  good daughter, who  harbours the  fragile  light of  creativity  but   is  conditioned  to  self­ effacement, is  caught  between   the  dust of prairie depression  and  the demands of elderly  parents, and  is  nearly  pressed  as flat as the flowers in her sketchbook.
What Brown   may   not  realize  is  that her  problem  is hardly unique.  Women artists  have  always  been  trapped in  the vise of parents and  children and  the mundane requirements of house and  gar­ den.   I  hope    she   has   read   Germaine Greer's   The   Obstacle  Race, a  semi-his­ torical  account of women  painters. What Greer  lacks in scholarship, she more  than  compensates with  a sense of humour that  turns  on  the  oppressors  of  women   who would    be   artists:   time,   biology,   men, other   women,  all  the  miscellaneous cul­ tural circumstances of our  civilization. It is  true, there   have  been  very  few  great women  painters or  composers,  and  those who  survive   to  achieve  greatness   must rage.
Brown  is, I suspect,  too polite  to rage. Her  book, well drawn  and  anecdotal, re-
 calls to me  the letters of my own  maiden aunt, whose generally optimistic Christian view  of the  world  only  occasionally slips into  crankiness, mostly  directed at  life's little irritations rather tl1an the great  deep sources  of anger. "My kitchen  was not  a shrine.  It was a cell."  Amen  to that.
The terrible sense of being  wasted  is a legitimate source  of anger  and  the  spark of  creativity  which   Freud  identified  as the offspring of neurosis. Brown overcame the    assault    of   her    time    and    energy through a strong belief in herself and vicarious experience of the other world through friendships with  other artists whom  she had  met  during the years of freedom before  her  mother's last illness.
She  persevered and  survived  to see the
optimistic colours  of her changing prairie give pleasure to others.  The  pictures and the  book  are  a celebration of  that  world and  an  indictment of  the  unnatural one we have  struggled to replace  it with.
Ken  Leishman, the flying bandit, made anger his  vocation  and   became   a  spec­ tacular folk  hero  of  the  prairies  during the  Sixties  and   Seventies. He  turned a dazzling  intelligence   to   crime  and changed  an   ordinary   life,   marked  by childhood deprivation,  into  a  metaphor for   the   changing  values   of   the  Sixties, when    authority  was   being   challenged everywhere,  largely   as   a   result   of   the Vietnam war.
Robertson is obviously  as charmed with this stylish rogue as was the public who followed  his adventures in the newspapers until  the  time  of his  mysterious death in a  flying  accident in  late   I979· Her  style is  reportorial  and   somewhat  facile.   No doubt her hero  would  have enjoyed  read­ ing  this   adventure-filled and  awestruck story  of  his  life.  It is a  good,  fast  read,  but  what  of the  agony  of this lonely man  and  the  wife  he  took  from  prairie farm­ house  to stardom in the ephemeral world of  newspaper  heroes?  This   pain  is only sketched  in  the   brief   biography replete

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



with  two-  and  three-word sentences,  the real life that was the substance of a glam­ orous and  futile  pose.
Final Decree, a novel written by George
Jonas, is the  story  of an  immigrant who
is a stranger in his own house. Kazmer Harcsa is a Transylvanian, exiled  from birth  in a country which  never completely belonged  to its own people, continually transformed as it was by more  aggressive Europeans.
Bound  to Hungary only by poverty  and memories of youth  as an outsider  and bridegroom  to  a  corpse   spit  out  of  the latest invaders' shiny new combine on the eve of her  wedding, Kazmer takes his isolation   to   North   America,  where   he works  hard to establish  a dynasty  in  the body  of  Petrona,  a   Polish   Hungarian­ American, who awakens on  her marriage bed  to  a  warped  understanding of free­ dom  gleaned  from  glossy magazines  and  colour  television.
Petrona takes  the  children, the  TV, a lamp  and   six  hundred dollars   and  files for  divorce,  leaving Kazmer in a terrible personal   and   cultural void.  He  is angry and   inarticulate  in  a  strange  world   of jargon  and  amorphous morality. What  he does  with  his  rage  is  predictable. For  a man  abruptly weaned on  war  and  revo­ lution   and   the   disgusting insult  of  the thresher  that   ate   his  Hungarian   bride, the  only  means  of  expression  is  violence.
Kazmer is a gentle  man,  neutered and without dignity, like a castrated pig. "Yet even  if the  pain  lasted  only  for a minute, a  piglet   would   still  be  neutered for  all time.   A  knife   was  a   knife   whether it severed  bits of flesh or feelings."
His  revenge  is an act of high drama. It
finally  wins  him respect   and   a  sense  of peace  with  the  machine. There  is  only God  left to contend with,  and  the aveng­ ing ghost of his conscience.
As the novel quickly progresses, Jonas skilfully  leads   us  from   the  facile  ironic view of Kazmer, the cuckold, to the very
 bowels  of  his  pain.  Then  the  book  be­ comes  not   only  Kazmer's  but  also  Pe­ trona's, because she, too, is a victim in the steel-sided  dialectic of change.  They  are  both  foreigners to themselves and  to each other,  struggling to  maintain  some sense of  who  they  are  in  a  throwaway world.  Jonas  is telling  us we  can't afford  to be strangers. The  adversary system  will  not work   on   this   tiny   frightening  planet, where  some  men and   women  still  have the   energy   to  transform  powerlessness into  action  and  damn   the  consequences.

LINDA ROGERS


PUBLISHING CRITICS

FRANK    DAVEY,   Louis    Dudek   and   Raymond
Souster. Douglas &  Mcintyre.
w.  K.  THOMAS, The Fizz  Inside: Critical  Es­ says  of a  Lighter Kind. Univ. of   Waterloo Press.

FRANK  DAVEY's  Louis   Dudek   and   Ray­ mond  Souster  is a  welcome  addition  to the Douglas  & Mcintyre series "Studies in Canadian Literature," under the general editorship of Gary Geddes.  Although the inclusion    of   two   such   different  poets within  the covers of  a single volume  may at  first seem suspect, Davey  offers ample justification in his first chapter, where  he discusses  the  overlapping careers  of  the two men as publishers. Indeed  the volume  opens most fittingly  with  a description of Dudek and  Souster's first meeting in 1943 at   the  apartment  of  John  Sutherland. Sutherland, who was then  editing Fi.rst Statement, taught both  men  a great  deal about the publishing of little magazines. Davey's  presentation of  the  tangled  his­ tories   of   Direction,  Contact,   CIV / N,  Combustion and   Delta  is  extremely  in­ formative and  valuable, although perhaps a little more credit might have been given to  Wynne  Francis,  pioneer   in  the  field. More  than  a  mere  history  of  publishing,


157

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



this  first  chapter establishes   the  impor­ tance  of  private publishing to Canadian poetry  in the  post-war period, and  points up the  centrality of Contact Press, begun by Souster, Dudek, and Layton.
Davey's   intention,   however,    is   not merely   to   catalogue  short-lived   maga­ zines.  He  sees in  Souster's   and  Dudek's experiments  with   private   publishing  a profound  estrangement  from  Canadian society  and   its  commercial  presses.  Da­  vey's thesis is that  the same impulse  that  drove  Souster and  Dudek  to  private pub­  lishing  drove  them   also  to  strive  for  a kind  of  poetry  that   would  avoid  all  ap­ pearance of slickness, all sense of a liter­ ary  artifact  that   was  packaged  for  the North   American consumer  society.  Both writers  wanted an  anti-aesthetic expres­  sion  that   would  allow  them   to  describe their  time,  not sell  it, to create  literature not  merchandise. Dudek,  especially,  ap­ pears  as a strong  and  striking  spokesman for  the  position  that  the  poet  must  take into his own  hands  the power of the press in  order  to  write  poetry  that  could  exist in its own right  without becoming  a com­ modity  that  society  could  "accept" with­  out  ever  feeling   the  need  to  make   the changes that  the poetry advocated. Need­  less to say, there  are important differences  between    the   two   poets,   Dudek    being strongly influenced by Pound, and Souster  by  Williams.  While  Davey   is  relatively discreet,  the tensions  between  Dudek  and Souster   become   evident,  as  Davey   de­ scribes  how  each  fought to  use his  pub­ lishing ventures as a means to promote his own conception of literature.
tWhat is perhaps most intriguing about Davey's  approach is the way in which  he shows convincingly that  Dudek  and Sous­ ter developed their  styles as a response  to a   perceived  social   disease.   Confronted with   the   formalist   tendencies   of  early modernism  to  create  perfectly   polished, highly  recherche  objets  d'art, and  refus­ ing  to follow  the  Layton  road  to become
 entrepreneurs  of  their   own   personality cult,  Dudek and  Souster  developed a "functional" or  "minimal" style  of  writ­ ing  that   allowed   the  poem  to appear as part  of  the  world  of  continuous ongoing  experience,  taking   it   out   of   the   early Yeatsian world  of  art as idealized  vision. Davey  develops   this  central  insight throughout the  rest  of his book,  treating the  poetry  of  Dudek and  Souster  separ­ ately,  and  showing how  each  developed in terms  of  his own  preoccupations.
1While Davey's explications are basically sound,  the  fact  that   he  begins  with  Du­ dek-as-critic, stressing  Dudek's belief  that  tl1e modern poet  must  first  be  a  culture critic,  runs  the  risk of  mistaking the criti­ cism for  the  actual  poetry.  From  Davey's  account one might be pardoned for think­ ing  that   most  of   Dudek's early  verse  is concerned with factories and  the working  classes. Yet in turning to these poems one finds   a   fine   lyric   talent,  as  well   as  a likeable  person,  attempting in  small  pri­  vate  ways  to create beauty  and  order  in a  world  of chaos.  Indeed, in his split  be­ tween  the  poet  of private experience and the   poet   of  social   criticism,   one   is  re­ minded of Lampman's dilemma, the dif­  ference   being  that  Dudek  aspires  to  live a  much   more  fully  developed   romantic hedonism than  Lampman, and can see all too clearly  the relation between restrictive social practices and  the smallness of man's private expectations.
Davey  is at his best in his analysis of Dudek's two  long  meditative poems  Eu­ rope  and   En  Mexico,  where   he   quite  rightly  points  out  that  Dudek  is writing a kind  of  "functional" poetry   in  order to be  true   to  his  own   unsuccessful  search for  a  better  social  order. As Davey  em­ phasizes,   Dudek   deliberately  shuns   the spectacular in  the  belief  that  an  attitude
of  faithfulness to  the  banality of  experi­ ence  will  eventually  reveal  insight,  spots of  time  in  which   the  dross  is erased   to reveal  the  truth open  only  to  those  who

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



can still believe that  the ordinary contains the miraculous. To  my mind,  however,  it is in the  third of Dudek's long poems, Atlantis, where  he is at the height of his powers in creating a sense of plenitude within  a world  of apparent social  desola­ tion.  I could  have  wished  that Davey had spent  more  time  with  this  quite  remark­ able   work,  in   which   Dudek   mixes  ex­ periences and  styles  to create a most  un­  usual  canvas  of  intersecting private and public  planes.
In   the  case   of  Souster,  Davey's  ap­ proach   appears not  quite  so radical  and exciting,  perhaps because  more  has  been written about  Souster's poetry  (some of the  best  criticism is by  Dudek  himself) . Still, Davey's notion  that Souster's poetry contains  an   opposition   between   inside/ outside,  and  that  Souster  has deliberately refused   to  give  his   poetry  a  machined aesthetic   appearance,   offers   interesting handles on a poet  who has always seemed to refuse such  helps.  Like  Dudek's, much of  Souster's poetry  is about seemingly  un­ inspired moments, but as Davey observes, this was the  only  course  open  to Souster when he saw that  inspiration itself had become a marketable quantity. Unlike Dudek's poems, where one can feel the pressure  to break  through into a new kind of experience, Souster  usually  identifies himself  with  victims,  although  there  are a number of important Souster  poems where  the spell of victimization is broken in  moments of whimsy.  Davey  also com­ ments  on Souster's two  novels,  neither of which  appears to be very good, but  both offering  intriguing insights  into Souster's war  experiences.
In his final chapter, Davey gives a sum­ mary of the modernist movement as it has developed in Canada, and  offers the  ten­  tative   conclusion  that   whereas  the  first wave   of  modernism  in  the   192o's  and
193o's  was  formalist in  conception and linked  to  the  despair of  the  early  Eliot,
 both  Dudek  and  Souster  evolved  a new style of modernism which  has important links  to post-modernist involvement with the world of process, and  perhaps even to exuberance.
A different kind  of critical  book is that by W. K. Thomas, an established scholar and  writer  at the  University of Waterloo, who has collected  a number of his essays under  the title The  Fizz Inside: Critical Essays of a Lighter  Kind. The  idea  for a book  of light  essays directed to  the  gen­ eral   reader   is  certainly  welcome  at  the present  time, to fill the gap between schol­ arly publication and  slick literary journal­ ism. Appropriately enough  for  a  book of light  essays, Thomas  begins  with  a  sec­ tion entitled  "Satirists at  Play,"  in  which he offers essays on Alexander Pope, Jana­ than   Swift  and  Joseph   Heller.  Indeed, the  first  selection  is a satire   in  its  own right-aimed at   the  many   critics   who have   rather  heavy-handedly interpreted Pope's  two-line  poem: "I am  his  High­ ness'  Dog  at  Kew; /  Pray   tell  me  Sir, whose Dog are you?"  In other sections  of the   volume,   Thomas   discusses   a   wide range  of  writers  such  as Sidney,  Shake­  speare,  Milton, and  Goldsmith, and  fin­ ishes  with  a  section  on  "Early Canadi­ ana," in which he comments on Canadian nineteenth-century  political    oratory   as well  as George  Cocking's heroic  tragedy The  Conquest of Canada.
While  recognizing  that   individual  es­ says have much  to recommend them and that   Thomas's  material  shows  extensive  research,  I confess  to  being  a  little  dis­ appointed in the volume.  I had originally reserved  it  for  bedside  reading,  thinking it would  offer interesting human insights  into  some  of   my  favourite authors. All too  quickly,  it  became   obvious   that   the articles were standard academic fare.  The essay on Cocking, for example, originally appeared in Canadian  Drar7Ul, and  many of  the  others  appeared in  the  Dalhousie


159

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Review.  They   would   have   been   better served left in their original, decent  homes, awaiting the  occasional   academic caller.

RONALD HATCH


CLOSE ENCOUNTERS

JOHN   ROBERT COLOMBO, ed.,  Friendly  Aliens: Thirteen Stories  of the Fantastic Set  in Canada    by   Foreign   Authors.    Hounslow,
$B.gs.
THIS  IS THE SECOND COLLECTION of  sci­ ence fiction  and  fantasy  by the most tire­ less  and   ingenuous  collector   of   literary curiosities   in   Canada. The   catchy   but somewhat  misleading  title  refers  to  the alien  origins  of the  authors, all of whom are  British  or  American;  the  "friendly" qualification, however  it may be applied, does  not  refer  to the  authors' use of Ca­  nadian landscapes, which are  consistently  associated   with   remoteness,   barrenness, disorientation,  monstrosities,   and   terror. Not unexpectedly, the favourite Canadian setting  for foreign writers  of this kind  of fiction  is the  Arctic.  As Colombo  rightly observes,  the frozen  wastes, like other in­ frequently   experienced  regions   of    the earth,  provide an  irresistible  setting  for the  mysterious and   monstrous,  as  Mary Shelley, for example, demonstrated when she  set  Frankenstein's  monster  adrift on an  Arctic   ice  floe.  But  there  are  other  images of Canada here as well: Algernon Blackwood   makes   effective   use   of   the Laurentian resort  region  in  "A  Hannted Island";  the   Manitoba   prairie    is   the scene  of  August  Derleth's  "The  Thing that  Walked  on the  Wind"; and  Vincent Starrett's "The  Tattooed Man" is set in a village  near Toronto.
All the stories in the collection have considerable historical interest, for  the glimpses they provide of the occasional inspiration Canada  has  provoked   in  the imagination of foreign  artists, and  for the


r6o
 inferences they  make  possible about pop­ ular  foreign   notions  about  Canada.  Not all   the   selections   are  deathless literary works:  John Russell Fearn's "Arctic God"  is pure  pulp fiction, more  unintentionally funny  than frightening-although read­  ers of a  certain generation raised  on  the Toronto   Star   Weekly   can   blow   their  Ininds  on   the   revelation  that   Fearn  is none    other  than   the    author  of   the "Golden  Amazon" stories  of  the  1940's. Some  of the  pieces,  however, are  of  con­ siderable literary distinction:  the  Black­ wood  tale,  written in  r8gg,  is one of the best studies  in suspense  and ambiguity by this  neglected author;  H.  P.  Lovecraft's "Polaris"  ( Igi8)  is  a   brief,   suggestive exploration of  dream  and   reality   reini­ niscent of Poe.
The  numerous formal and  thematic variations on  the  science/fantasy  genres in  this  collection compensate for  the  re­ strictive   tendency of  foreign  authors  to see  Canada  mainly   as  wilderness.   Jack London's story  of  prehistoric monsters  in the  modem  Arctic, "A  Relic  of the  Plio­ cene"  (Igor), is a tall  tale almost  worthy  of  Mark Twain; M.P. Shiel's  "The Place  of   Pain" (I 9 I4)   is a  study  of  insanity; James Tiptree's "Forever to a Hudson's Bay  Blanket"  (I 972)   is  good  futuristic
science fiction, and  C. Q. Yarbro's "Swan Song"    ( I978)    effectively    opposes   the imaginative idealism  of ethnic folklore  to modem scientific  materialism. It  is  not easy to discern any substantial distinctions between  the American and  British fantasy
images  of  Canada, especially  since  only three  of the  writers represented are  Brit­ ish. The editor's introduction might have  indulged  in  a little  speculation  in  that  direction,  and   perhaps  said   something more about other tales which  were turned up in his research. But like a good master  of   ceremonies,  Colombo  says  his  brief piece  and,   except for  providing further biographical and  bibliographical detail  in the   well   prepared   headnotes  to   each

BOOKS IN REVIEW



story, lets the writers speak for themselves. Some  general speculation is provided   in the   concluding item,   an   article   on  the possible development of a Canadian fan­ tasy  tradition,  written  by  an  American editor during World  War  II when Ameri­  can   pulp   magazines were  banned  from Canada   and    home-made    productions briefly flourished.
But Friendly Aliens  obviously aims somewhere short  of heavy scholarship, seeking  a balance between  entertainment and   literary  history.   In  its  modest  aims it succeeds  well, and  should  attract  read­ ers interested in  American/Canadian lit­ erary   interrelationships  as   well  as  SF/ fantasy fans. The editor was evidently  the victim  of evil vibrations from  outer  space, or  the  curse   of  the   wendigo,   while  he was  correcting proof:  there   is  an  inex­ cusable  number of misprints in the  book.

JAMES DOYLE


DISTORTIONS

ANDRE  GAULIN,   Entre la  neige   et  le   feu.  Les
Presses  de  l'Universire Laval, $13·95·
JEAN-CLAUDE  MARSAN, Montreal in  Evolution.
MeGill-Queen's Univ. Press,  $27.50.

THE  SUBJECT OF EACH of  these  books is suggested  in its subtitle. Entre  la neige et le   feu   deals   with   "Pierre   Baillargeon, ecrivain  montrealais"; La N eige et le feu, probably his  best  known  work,  provides, in  fact,  Gaulin's title.  Montreal  in  Evo­ lution is  an   "Historical  Analysis  of   the  Development of Montreal's  Architecture and   Urban  Environment."  Despite  the emphasis, however, that  both authors give to what  has certainly been Canada's most important city,  neither  work  illuminates clearly  and  concisely  either its  people  or its places.  Indeed,  the  respective subtitle  of  the  two  studies  might  well  have  been "Un  Montrealais  manque," and  "Mon­ treal meconnu." Despite, furthermore, the
 numerous sources  each   writer   has  con­ sulted,  and  the  often  interesting  insights each  has on his subject, both book'S invite questions    about   the   adequacy  of   the choice  and  handling of  their  Inaterial.
Entre  la neige  et  le  feu is Number  18 in the series "Vie des Lettres quehecoises." Like  other   works  in  this  series,  it  deals with  an  aspect  of  French-Canadian  lit­ erature, and  it is based on a thesis. Pierre  Baillargeon   ( 1g 16-1 g67)    was   a   Mon­ trealer  who  published poetry  and fiction, and  contributed essays and  other iteins to the   Canadian   periodical  press   in   the
194o's,  so's,  and  6o's.  Gaulin's doctoral dissertation, accepted  by  the  Universite de Sherbrooke in  1975, was "Pierre Bail­ largeon, l'homme et I'oeuvre." Such char­ acteristics  of  Entre  la neige  et  le  feu, in fact,  as its  substantial checklist  of  works by  and  about  Baillargeon, its  numerous footnotes, and  its rather arbitrary division into  three  parts-"L'homme," "Le   ro­ mancier," and  "L'essayiste"-all suggest its  origin  as  the  formal  exercise   which most  theses  necessarily  become.  Gaulin's decision  to  study  Baillargeon because  he was  "un  auteur  Inajeur et  inconnu  du Quebec" also  smacks  a  little  o.f  a  Ph.D. student in  search   of  a  subject, for   the claim  that  Baillargeon was unknown is at least   partly   contradicted  by  the   num­ ber of reviews of each of his works Gaulin  himself  lists. The claim  that  Baillargeon was a major  writer  is, of  course,  both  less verifiable  and  more  debatable.
Gaulin's  thesis   is   that    Baillargeon's most  important  works  were   Les  M edi­ sances  de  Claude   Perrin   (1945),  Com­ merce   ( 1947) ,  and   La  N eige  et  le   f.eu
( 1948)   published   in   Montreal   before
their author left Canada to live for almost
a decade  in France. Usually  called  novels, Gaulin  discusses  their  genre  at  some length, and  points  out  the  connections between  their  style and  that  of Le Scan­ dale est necessaire  (I g62), the  collection  of  essays and   epigrams that  Baillargeon

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



published  following his  return  home  in I 959· Gaulin also argues  that  these semi­ autobiographical works  reveal most clearly Baillargeon's sense of balancing "entre le silence et le cri, entre  l'etre et le neant, entre  une  mere  patrie  envoutante et-encore maintenant -le non-lieu his­ torique."
These  final  phrases  of  Entre  la  neige
et  le  feu provide  a  key to  what   I  think is the essential  distortion of Gaulin's  por­ trait   of  this  "ecrivain  montrealais":  his attempt to  turn  Baillargeon  into  a  po­ litical   writer,  even  an  "independantiste,
converti  ... a la  cause  du   nouveau   na­
tionalisme quebecois." The  idea,  of
course,  "scandalizes" in  the  best  Baillar­ geon  tradition of  the  writer  "shocking'' the reader into  thought. Since Gaulin  has read  the  unpublished diaries which  Bail­ largeon  kept  until  his death, the interpre­ tation   may  also  contain  an  element  of truth. Baillargeon's published  works, how­ ever,  offer  contradictory  evidence. Chi­ ron,   a   friend   of  Philippe  Boureil,   the chief   character in   La   Neige   et  le   feu, complains that  "nos  rares entretiens rou­ lent  sur  la  politique et  les  affaires.... A vrai  dire,  les Canadiens  n'ont  pas  de vie interieure." And   Boureil   himself   seems most   concerned   with   his   private  life. After  the  death  of  his  wife's  child   and her departure with her lover-the events which end the work-Baillargeon's alter­ ego mourned  "sans  fin."  In  Le  Scandale  est  necessaire,  moreover, Baillargeon makes  very  ambivalent statements about Quebec  politics,   including  "ces  separa­ tistes" whom  he compares to Don  Quix­ ote.
But  even if Baillargeon wrote  long pas­ sages about politics in his diary, his worth  as a writer must  ultimately be  judged  on his published work or that written  with a view  to  publication.  And   that   work,  it seems to me, deserves finally to be judged  by  literary-not   political -criteria.   I should  have preferred at any rate  to have
 read  more  about Baillargeon's careful crafting of words and  phrases  into  the brilliantly polished  and  witty  images  and aphorisms on  the  ironies  and  ambiguities of life characteristic of much  of his work.
If Gaulin  ultimately misses  his  man,
Marsan finally  fails to provide  a satisfac­ tory  appreciation  of  his  place.  Actually  his  study   Montreal  in   Evolution  is  an English   translation of  a  book  first  pub­  lished  in  French in  1974,  and   reprinted "with    only    minor    corrections   and changes" in  1976.  To  this  edition, dedi­  cated   "To  all  Montrealers at  heart and in spirit," Marsan has added a "Preface" and   an  "Epilogue." The   former  points out   that  the   French  version   "was   well received  by  the  critics   and   the  general  public." The  latter focuses on "the  major projects   implemented  since   1974,"   in­ cluding   the   Olympic  installations,  and  "offers a new interpretation" arising  from the "recent evolution of the  metropolis." The main  part  of the  book is divided  into four  parts:  "Where the  Old  World  and the  New World  Meet," "The Frontier Town, I642-184o," "Victorian Montreal
-World War  1," and  "Montreal in  the
Twentieth Century."
Being a sometime-Montrealer and a member, at least when  it comes to "archi­ tecture and   urban  environment," of  the "general public,"  I  too  expected  to  re­ ceive  the  book  well.  And  in some  ways I did,  for  Montreal in  Evolution  provides interesting and  little  known  details  about such aspects of the city as its streets, build­ ings,  and   transport systems  from  its  be­ ginnings to  the  present. It is fun, for ex­ ample, to  follow  the  Bank  of   Montreal building on  Place   D'Armes  through  its various evolutions. In the end, however,  I neither saw   Montreal  nor   felt   its  "es­ sence," as at  one  point  Marsan promised  I should.
I  think   there are   several   reasons   for this failure. Marsan organizes his material in  a  way  which   creates   repetition. The

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



reader, for  example, is  constantly  being told  that  "we  shall  return" to something or other  "later." There are  too many de­ tails  about too  many   buildings and   too many  types of buildings. Would  the book have  suffered, for  instance, if  the evolu­  tion  of  the  architecture of  only  a  few representative churches were traced? The  book  contains illustrations,  but  Marsan's prose  does  not  make  the  reader see  the details  of  the  architecture  he  is discuss­ ing.  The  details   themselves  do  not  ac­ cumulate in a way  which  builds  either a total  picture of an  evolving environment or  a  convincing thesis  about the  reasons for   the   nature  of  its  evolution.  Those theses   which    are    suggested    are   often vague.  Marsan, for  example, talks  about "nineteenth-century romanticism" and "eighteenth-century rationalism" without offering  a  convincing and   usable  defini­ tion   of  either. The  result   is   that  such terms  sound  pretentious, mean  little,  and allow  the  author to substitute cliches  for sharp analysis.
I  supose  what   strikes  me  most  about this study is its lack of humanity. Reading it,  I  had  the  curious feeling   that   apart from  such  constructs as "capitalists" and the  "poor," few  individuals  used  Mon­ treal's  buildings, walked   its  streets,  and lived  in  its  environment. To  be  fair,  of course,  Marsan is an  architect, an  urban  designer,   and   a  regional planner,  not  a humanist in  the  more  conventional sense of the word. To be just, too, he does men­ tion  Stephen  Leacock and  cite  Gabrielle Roy's  Bonheur  d'occasion,  and   he  does reprint  early   sketches  of  Montreal,  in­ cluding William Henry Bartlett's "Inter­ ior of Notre-Dame Church." But  I  think that  what  is missing  from  Marsan's ad­  mittedly  impressive    list   of   sources   are more  references to such  items  as  novels, paintings, and   even  essays  about   Mon­ treal   that  describe-or imagine-how individual   Montrealers  have   perceived their  urban  surroundings.
 Entre la neige et le  feu and  Montreal in Evolution, then, are both stimulating books.  Neither,  however, fully  succeeds in illuminating its subject, and  both  raise problems  about  the  material chosen  by their  respective  authors. Should, for  ex­ ample,  late  writings  in a diary  be used to help   interpret  early   novels?  Should   an architect  interested  in   the   "mentality" which  produced a  style  of  building  look to  other  forms  of  contemporary art   for comparisons and  contrasts? However   we choose  to  answer   these   questions,   they need  to  be  asked,  for  the  tendencies to politicize  literature and   to  ignore  other relevant  cultural  material are  strong   in current Canadian criticism.

MARY  JANE  EDWARDS


***   TWAYNE  WORLD  AUTHORS   SERIES.   Pa­ tricia  Morley's Margaret   Laurence    ( $13.95) takes   the   Twayne-format  survey   and   trans­ forms  it  into  a  thoughtful  account  of  the  con­  nections between  Laurence's  African and   Ca­ nadian worlds,  based  largely on  0. Mannoni's theories of colonial encounter. Politics (coupled with comedy) emerges as Morley's chief  theme, therefore, and   the  work  includes summaries of Metis   history   and   accounts  of   the   East   and
West   African  elements  in   Laurence's  stories and   translations.  Occasional  errors  mar   the work   (Jessie   Weston at  one   point turns into Jessie    Watson),   and   a   fuller   bibliography would  have  been  more useful  than the one provided. Two  other  Canadian   books   have also  recently appeared  in  the   Twayne  series, and    they   will   attract   aficionados of   Brian Moore and  of theatre history. Hallvard Dahlie's Brian Moore  ( $14.95)  offers  a  solid  portrayal of  Moore's life,  travels, fictional stances, and the   connections among  them,  but   sometimes tries  too  effortfully to  defend Moore's failures and   his   political  journalism.   Geraldine   An­ thony's  Gwen   Pharis   Ringwood    ($14.95)   is richest as a  descriptive account of  theatre his­ tory; on  Ringwood's  novels   and  stories, she, too,  is  effortful, struggling  to  find   a  way   to discuss  fiction   more full   of   heart  than  craft. But    by   drawing   documentary  attention   to Ringwood's  remarkable  career,  Anthony does Canadian  literary history great service.

W.N.






THE FUNCTION OF POETRY IN BRIAN MOORE'S "THE EMPEROR OF ICE CREAM"

THE    EMPEROR OF  ICE-CREAM ( I g66) was  Moore's  fifth   novel.   His  first   two works,    published   in   the    195o's,   had treated failure and  frustration in Belfast (Judith Hearne, The Feast of Lupercal). These   were  followed   by a  study  of  the partial,  conditioned, ironic  success  won by an  Irish  immigrant in Montreal (The Luck   of Ginger   Coffey); and,  in  1963, by  An  Answer   from  Limbo, the  first  of Moore's novels  to  look at  the  nature of the artist's own craft, a theme repeated in Fergus  (1970)   and  The  Great  Victorian Collection ( 1975). The  Emperor returns to  the  Ulster   setting   of  the  first  novels, but  at  an  earlier period-the Belfast  of the late  Thirties and  early Forties.
It has  been  acclaimed as  "one  of  the finest and  most  moving  books about ado­ lescence  of  our  time,"  and   it's  certainly true  that  the  passage  of the  hero, Gavin  Burke, from  dependent, stumbling adoles­ cence into  a mature independence is nar­  rated  with  great  insight  and  conviction.1
Moore himself described the novel as a Bildungsroman and, as a  novel  of  indi­ vidual  development, The  Emperor  is as­ sured  and  achieved.2  But its treatment of youth is only a part of the novel's interest,  for Moore  is also concerned with  the way in which  poetry, the poetry  of the Twen­ ties and  Thirties, is able  both  to foretell  Gavin's development, and,  more  interest-
 ingly, to  offer an imaginative form through which  private experience will be comprehensible.
Of  all  Moore's novels The Emperor  is
the most "literary," in that  it is so deeply saturated with allusions to other works, particularly to the poetry of the early twentieth century. The novel's  very  title, beckoning towards Wallace Stevens, boldly  announces its intention to exploit this area,  and  the  prefatory  acknowledg­ ments   record    Moore's   indebtedness  to Stevens  himself,  to Yeats, MacNeice, and to  Auden   for  permission  to  quote   from their   works.   In   part    the   frequency  of poetic allusion in The Emperor is a func­  tion  of the  character of Gavin  Burke,  an autodidact who, against the grain  of his philistine  family   and   utilitarian   educa­ tion, enjoys reading literature. Moore  has recorded how  he  was first  introduced to the  great   modem  poets  at  Gavin's age, seventeen, and,   as  The  Emperor is  un­ doubtedly  partly  autobiographical, it  is scarcely surprising to find its hero so often returning to the poetry  he has been read­  ing.3 Nevertheless there  are still more  im­ portant reasons  why  The  Emperor is so imbued with  poetic  references.
In addition to functioning as a  means of characterizing Gavin's alienation from
family  and  school,  several  of  the  quoted poems also operate as ways of structuring the   narrative.  Thus  poems   by  Auden, MacNeice, and  Yeats are employed "met­ onymically,"   to   suggest   certain   literal parallels Gavin  perceives  between his own life and  the  content of the  poems. Yeats'  "Easter 1916,"  a poem inspired  by a par­  ticular episode   in  the  Irish   Revolution, has  an  obvious  relevance to  Gavin's in­  tuition that Ulster in the early  194o's was also  in  the  process  of  change. Similarly  the  quoted  poems  of  Auden and   Mac­  Neice  are  close  to  Gavin's apprehension of himself  and  his existence  in  the  same decade. Furthermore the novelist uses an­  other  poem,  Stevens' "The  Emperor of

OPINIONS  & NOTES



Ice-Cream"   ( 1923),  to   imply   certain "metaphorical," less  direct   or  mechani­ cal, parallels.4   On  the surface the Stevens poem  doesn't possess an  obvious  applica­ bility,  for  nothing in  it  seems  to  corre­  spond  to Gavin's circumstances or to the history  of Belfast between  1939 and  1941. It appears to  be  a  frugal   meditation on the  rhythms of  marriage and  death, be­ yond  anything  as  specific  as  personal  or national  history.  "Easter 1916"  and  the work of  Auden  and  MacNeice could  pro­  vide an "instant" gloss for the  adolescent  Ulster    non-conformist   in    the    193o's, whereas  the  difficult,  allusive,  ahistorical poem  by Stevens  offers a rather different kind  of  illumination.
The  poetry  of   the    Thirties   had equipped Gavin  with  an  apocal tic
ion  a confidence that  the world  m which
he 'was growing up  was  doomed   to  de­
struction. Indeed he left school and  joined the A.R.P.  as a wager  that  the poets were right,  and  that  there  would  be no future. If the world  was going to be blown up, he reasoned, why  should   he  waste  time  ob­ taining  those   qualifications   whose   sole purpose  was to secure  his future for  him, as a solicitor?

The  poets   knew    the   jig   was   up;  they knew   the   rich   and   famous  would   crumble with    the   rest.... It  was   all   prophetically clear. ... It would  not  matter in  that  ruined world if Gavin Burke  had  failed his  Schools Leaving Certificate. The records would  be buried  in   rubble. War   was   freedom,  free­ dom  from  futures.s

MacNeice, Auden-even Yeats earlier with  his  "Things fall  apart; the  centre cannot  hold" -had revealed   to  Gavin the  shortsightedness of his father's  devo­ tion  to examinations and  university work as  an  as urance
then   shows how much  of their  attraction for ; young man  growing  up in the Thir­ ties  was  that   the  poets  appeared   to  be equipped with  a clarity  of vision  denied those  who,  like   Gavin's   father   and
 brother, ignored   or  derided  their  w rk. The  poets could cut  away the obfuscatmg pieties of their generation to disclose the approach of  the  millenium.
It is now or  never, the  hour of the  knife, The break  with  the  past,  the  major
operation.

Gavin  doesn't quote  these  lines, the  con­ clusion   of  Day   Lewis'   "The   Magnetic Mountain"   ( 1933),  yet  he   certainly  is drawn   to  the   poets'  surgical  powers  of incision  and   revelation.  Gavin  worships the  poet  as  seer,  and   to  a  great   extent  The  Emperor  endorses  such  confidence: life in  Belfast  assuredly  was  changed by the  Blitz,  Mr.   Burke's  house   was  dam­ aged  by a  bomb,  and  the  family  fled  to safety in neutral Dublin.
Gavin  is indeed  convinced that  change is imminent and  an earlier poem, "Easter
1916," has exerted  an enormous influence on  the  young  man. Gavin's every  use of the  verb  "change" indicates how  deeply he has absorbed  the images  of that  poem. On  the day  when  his academic failure  is announced Gavin  meditates on how his father, who  until  then  had  made all  hi.s
son's  decisions,  "was   unaware that,  this
morning,  all  had  changed." Yeats'  poe stands  for Gavin  as a model  even  of  pn­ vate  domestic  changes, the  altering  rela­ tionship   between   a   father  and   a   son. Returning briefly to his house, which  has now   been   rocked   by   bomb-blasts  and vacated  by the family, Gavin  looks into  a mirror in the deserted sitting room.  (This  episode  in  the  final  chapter repeats in  a different key a moment in  the first chap­ ter   when,   long  before   the   Blitz,   he'd  looked  into  the  same  mirror.)  This  mir­  ror   as so often  in  Moore's novels, offers no;the distorting falsities of the fairytale, but  the harsh  truths of life as it  now  is:
He   went   toward  the   fireplace, holding a candle aloft  and, in  the  round looking glru;s, saw  himself,  dirty and  strange, his steel  hel­ met  askew.  In that world, encircled  by  the looking   glass,   he   had    acted  and   reacted,

OPINIONS & NOTES



had   left   his  mark   and   had,   in   turn,  been marked.. , . Over his  mother's writing desk, the  fierce  stag  still  peered  from  a dark forest glade. But  the  picture which  had   hung  be­ side  it,  a  framed Raphael print, had  fallen behind  his   father's  bookcase.   The   looking  glass  room,  unchanged since  his  childhood, had  changed at  last.

The  episode  that  immediately follows this meditation and  that  ends the novel is the fullest  ratification of Gavin's reading of "Easter I9I6." In this scene the father returns from  Dublin in search  of his son, who has elected  to stay behind  in Belfast. Now, though, the roles are  reversed,  with the  father  confessing   that   he  had  mis­ judged   both   his  son  and   the  course  of history,   and   the   son   providing  mature paternal absolution:

His  father seemed   aware of  this  change. He  leaned his  untidy, gray  head  on  Gavin's shoulder,    nodding,   weeping,   confirming. "Oh, Gavin," his  father said.  "I've been  a fool.  Such  a fool."
The new  voice  counseled silence. He  took his  father's hand.

This final scene thus confirms that major changes  have  really  taken  place  as a  re­ sult  of the  air-raid; and  that  Gavin  was correct in  divining the  prophetic  quality  of Yeats'  poem.
Modern poetry,   then,  provides  Gavin with  the power  both  to anticipate histori­ cal  changes and   to  understand  and  de­ scribe such changes when they do come to pass.  His   brother,   Owen,  believes   that  Belfast   is  a   "benighted   outpost,"  safe from  the  Luftwaffe bombers,  and  wagers on  the  continuation  of pre-war security.  His anti-British father stakes a pound  that  Hitler will win the  war by the summer  of I940. At first they appear to be right,  for planes fly over and  beyond Belfast, "turn­ ing in  formation as they went  out  to sea, toward    England,   toward    Europe,  far away   to  that   faraway war.  German or English,  they  ignored Belfast."  For  many months Gavin, discouraged by the peace­ ful  stolidity  of  Belfast  and  by  the  public

r66
 ridicule  the  A.R.P. attracted, is  fearful that  he has made  the  wrong  choice, mis­ led  by the  poets'  visions of the  imminent apocalypse. At  one   point   indeed   he  is convinced that  Yeats  had  been  wrong  to claim  that  Ireland   was   capable  of "change." Seated in a room  in  the Cath­ olic  hospital where  his  girlfriend works, Gavin's  attention  is  caught by a  photo­ graph of the medical staff for  I 930:
He   looked   at  this  photograph and   felt  un­ easy.   Nothing  had   changed  in   this   room since    1930.   Nothing  would    change.   Out there, in  the   world, governments might  be overthrown,   capitals   occupied,   cities   de­  stroyed, maps redrawn, but  here, in  Ireland, it  made no  difference. In  convent   parlors, all  was  still.  ... Nothing  would  change.... Yeats was   wrong in  '16  to   think  that  he and his  countrymen,
Now  and  in  time  to  be, Wherever green is worn,
Are  changed, changed utterly: A  terrible beauty is  born.
This room   denied that boast.   Even   Hitler's victory would   not   alter this   room.  Armag­ gedon  would   bypass  Ireland; all  would   re­ main still   in   this   land  of  his  fore-fathers. Ireland free  was  Ireland dead. The terrible beauty was  born   aborted.

Gavin's  relapse   here   into   pessimism   is only  temporary. Belfast  is soon  involved in  the  war,  the  air-raids proof   that   the facile optimism of his family  had  been mistaken.
At last, in the Spring of  I94I, the Ger­ man  planes  do  turn  towards  Belfast  and  as their  first bombs drop on the city,
within Gavin, there started an  extraordinary elation, a tumult of  joy. He  felt  like  dancing a Cherokee war   dance on  the  edge   of  the parapet. The world   and   the  war  had  come to   him   at  last.    Tonight,  in   the   Reichs­ chancellery  of   Berlin, generals   stood   over illuminated maps, plotting  Belfast's destruc­ tion. Hitler himself  smiled  in  glee,  watching the  graphs of  the  planes'  progress. Tonight, history had  conferred the  drama of  war  on this  dull, dead town  in  which he  had   been bom.

Watching  the   bombardment  of   Belfast from  the  roof  of  the  hospital, in  which

OPINIONS &  NOTES



he  had  earlier feared   that  Ireland might be forever  immobile, Gavin  and his friend chant  the   death  of   the   old   bankrupt world, elated that finally they have been included in that  history prophesied by the poets. Tonight Belfast was part  of the "world"; "Tonight, all was changed."
However, although the  climax  of The Emperor, the  air-raid, confirms  the  pro­ leptic  force  of  Gavin's  readings,  in  an­  other respect the novel demonstrates how, as  in   Northanger   Abbey   and   Madame Bovary,  an  adolescent reading of  litera­  ture  is  capable of generating quite  falla­  cious expectations. Poetry,  allied  to thea­  tre   and   the   movies,   had   implanted  in Gavin  stock notions  of his heroic  response to  the  anticipated  disaster. Thus,  many months  before   the   raid,   he  looked   out onto   the   backs  of  neighbouring   houses and  envisioned  himself,  "wearing his steel helmet,  dashing into  the  house across the way  to  carry   the  typist  downstairs, she half-naked and   hysterical   in  her  relief." A few moments later,  in  his parents' sit­ ting  room,  he "tried to imagine himself a Siegfried    Sassoon   commando,   crawling through no man's land  with  a  dirk  in his teeth." Gavin   had   these  two  daydreams when   he  first   joined   the  A.R.P.,   some eighteen months  before  the  air-raid, but even  later,   during the  bombardment it­ self,  Gavin   was  still  decoding the  world in  terms  of  the  literature and  movies  he knew :  "the  hall  of  the  extern reminded Gavin   of  field  hospitals he  had  seen  in films of  the First  World  War." As Mich­ ael   Roberts  remarked  in   his  Introduc­ tion to New  Country (I 933), the Thirties generation  "grew   up  under the  shadow of war."
Reality is quite  other. During the bombing of Belfast  Gavin  is given the opportunity to behave  heroically, but  his demonstrated bravery isn't of the kind commemorated in film or literature. There are  no hysterical  typists or Sassoon commandoes in  the  yard  of  the  morgue
 where Gavin  volunteers to work, coffining blasted  and  dismembered corpses :
He  went  back  into   the  yard  ... he  thought of  old  films  he  had   seen:  perhaps, at   this very  moment, smiling German pilots  were eating a  hearty  meal   of  sausage  and   beer in   their   mess   hall,   while,  outside  on   the tarmac, German mechanics fueled the  big bombers    for   their  long   run   up   the   Con­ tinent and  across  the  Irish Sea.  He  saw  the German  pilots    exchanging   gallant   toasts  across  the  mess  hall   table in  a  scene  from  The  Dawn   Patrol. But   this  was   no  film. There were  no  ugly  corpses in  films.

In the morgue  Gavin  is initiated into adulthood, this development being insep­ arable  from  a  realization that  literature and  film  had  in  fact  previously  offered him  cameos  of   heroism  that   were  cari­  catures  of  the   test   he   had   to  face   in actuality. None of the received  images  of the heroic correspond to the  messy, whis­ key-dulled "black  comedy" of the morgue scene, but,  nevertheless, Gavin's heroism as he remains  at  his post, outstaying men older   and   more  familiar with   death,  is real  and  utterly   persuasive. Still,  for  all their  prophetic power,  nothing in  Mac­ Neice, Auden, or Yeats  had prepared him for this kind of heroism.
!The most important poem in Moore's novel  is, of  course,  the  title-poem,  Wal­ lace   Stevens'    "The   Emperor  of    Ice­ Cream." This   was  a  poem  Gavin   had long  admired, for,  though  he  didn't un­ derstand  the   meaning  of   the  climactic lines-
Let  be be finale of seem.
The only  emperor is the  emperor of
ice-cream.

-they "seemed to sum  things  up." Ste­ vens'  "The   Emperor"   differs  from  the other  poems cited  in the  novel  because  it contains   no  clear  announcement  of  the future in  comprehensible narrative form.  The  American   poem,  on  the  contrary, is spare  and   elliptical, communicating  in­ stead  through the accumulation of  mem­  orable  images,  rather than  on a narrative

OPINIONS & NOTES



axis. In a letter Stevens provided a brief commentary on the poem:
the  true sense  of let  be  be the  finale  of seem is  let   being   become   the  conclusion or   de­ nouement of  appearing to be:  in  short,  ice­ cream  is  an   absolute  good.   The   poem  is obviously  not   about   icecream,   but   about  being  as distinguished  from  seeming to  be. 6

This  poem  doesn't function  as  the figure in  Gavin's carpet, suddenly  revealing   to him  the whole pattern of his life in a flash of insight.  Indeed, he's  unable  to offer a neat  paraphrase of  it  at  the  end  of  the novel.  Instead, as  he  awaits  his  turn   at the   anaesthetizing  whiskey   bottle    and gazes  at  the  pile  of  corpses,  "his  atten­ tion" is "caught by the bare, callused  feet of an  old  woman, sticking  out  from  the bottom of a pile of bodies," and he recalls the last four  lines of  Stevens' poem:

If her  horny  feet  protrude, they  come To  show   how  cold  she  is, and   dumb. Let  the  lamp   affix  its  beam.
The only  emperor is the emperor of
ice-cream.

In this moment the images from a poem Gavin   had  failed  to  understand overlap with what  he perceives around him in the morgue. The  young  man  is still  too close to the experience to organize  and verbal­ ize  it,  but   clearly   he   believes  that   the whole  of his life  to that  point, the  move­ ment   from  illusion   to  reality,  is  encap­ sulated  in the Stevens' poem.
The  latter affects  Gavin  in a different manner from   the  other   poems  that  in­ fluence  him, "EasterI gr6" and  the verse of  MacNeice and  Auden.  These  provide  him  with  metonyms of  his own  life,  ex­ tensions   and   parallels  he  can  elucidate with   some  facility,   whereas   "The  Em­ peror" is more  like a yeast, lying dormant until   activated by  a  sugar.  The various  stages   in   this   gradual  process,  Gavin's reading of the American poem, are clearly delineated in  Moore's novel. At  first  the poem  exists for him  as a powerful, albeit incomprehensible,  mystery;   a  group   of

r68
 images  that, the  boy suspects, have a wise synoptic  potency. As yet he cannot eluci­ date   the  poem's  hold,   but   its  magic   is undeniable. The second stage,  at the con­  clusion   of  the   novel,   is   reached  when Gavin's experiences at the morgue assume an  identity with  the  images  in  the  poem, confirming the accuracy of his earlier  in­ tuition that the poem  summed things  up. "The  Emperor of  Ice-Cream"  provided Moore with the title for his most explicitly autobiographical novel and with the structural principle on which  it was built. Stevens'  belief that  "being" was the finale, the decisive climax  to "seeming to be" or "appearing to be" was given narrative treatment in the novel.
At  the  beginning of  The  Emperor of
I ce-CT<eam Gavin  "seems" and  "appears"
to have won independence from his father through his decision  to leave  school  early and  enlist  in  the  A.R.P.  The young  man wants  to  believe  he's  escaped  his father's attitudes  towards class,  politics,  sex,  re­ ligion,   and   race,  but  the  early  episodes only prove  that  Gavin  is still basically un­  liberated. The  "voices" of  his  twin  An­ gels,  relics  of  childhood  catechisms, still criticize  his every  move. He  is critical of his colleagues  at the A.R.P.  post, because, echoing his father's snobbery, "they're the sort  of men  who  never  wear  collars  and ties," and ashamed of inviting his parents to  watch  him  acting in  Odets' socialist play.  His  first  meeting with  a  Protestant minister, a couple  of Jewish  refugees  and some  young   homosexuals fills  the  naive Catholic boy with  shock  and  confusion:
Jews, left-wing ministers, pansies, poets, boozers, puppeteers:   this  was  a  grown-up world,  undreamed  of  in   the   St   Michan's school  philosophy.
Freddy Hargreaves, a worldly  philander­ ing  "independent  Marxist,"  plays  Ham­ let  to Gavin's innocent Horatio. The lat­  ter  is pulled  between  the  adult world  of sexual  and  moral  freedom and  the "nor­ mal   ordinary   life"   of  his  father,  elder

OPINIONS &  NOTES



brother and  his deeply  conventional girl­ friend. Offered a  friend's beautiful  wife, Gavin  is so intoxicated and  shocked  that  he collapses,  limp  and  inert.
rThe  young  man's independence from his upbringing is, then,  still illusory. In reality  he  is  becalmed   between   two "worlds,"  respectable  dependence  upon his  father and   bohemian independence:
His  life,  since  leaving school, had  been  a seesaw,    going    up    to   the    height   of   the grown-up world  ... then down  with  a bump to being a child  again, slapped by Daddy, lectured  about  exams,   sent   to   bed  in   dis­ grace. Yet  both  worlds   ran  on  the same  old moral lines: although  he  had   left  God   be­ hind  in   the   dusty   past   of   chapel,  confes­ sional,  and  classroom, the  catechism  rules prevailed. In  both worlds,  lack  of  purpose, lack   of  faith, was   the   one   deadly  sin.   In both   worlds, the  authorities,  detecting that sin,  arranged  one's  punishment. All  of life's races  are  fixed  and false.  You  stand at  the starting  line,  knowing that  you  can   run   as well  as the  others, but  the  authorities, those inimical   and    unknown  arbiters,  have    de­ creed  that you  will  not  get  off  your  marks.  They   know,    those    authorities,  that  your place  is  with   the   misfits,   that your   future will  be  void.

Gavin's  gloomy   meditation  here   marks the nadir  of his fortunes, his deepest  sense of being a failure in both  worlds,  neither grown-up nor  child,  "seeming" to belong to the adults but  really  imprisoned in  the parental home.
The next chapter opens with  the first German raid  on Belfast, which  is literally a baptism  of fire for Gavin. The last three chapters of the  novel are,  like the second verse of Stevens'  poem,  dominated by images   of  death  and   destruction. The "three glass   knobs,"  missing   from  Ste­ vens'  "dresser of deal" that  provides  the dead  woman's shroud, are  transformed in Moore's  novel  into   the  terraced  houses of  Belfast,  shattered by  bomb  and  blast. Stevens'  single  corpse, "how  cold ... and  dumb," becomes  the  hundreds of cadav­ ers in the makeshift morgue. This  indeed  is the  world  of  "being" and  here,  amidst
 horror  and  carnage, Gavin  finally  proves his  independence and  courage. Refusing to kneel for prayers  in the hospital, Gavin says to himself  that

You're not  afraid now  of  bombs,  or  priests of Our Father or your  father or anybody. You've  changed, Gavin.

He  realizes  that   at  last  "he   had  grown up,  escaped," and   he  demonstrated  this new liberation by volunteering to work overtime  in the morgue, coffi.ning the corpses. The  task is deeply  unsettling but Gavin  does not  shrink,  and  knows at  the end   that   "he   had   done   the  first  really grownup  thing   in  his  life."   He   has,  as Stevens  put  it, left  the world  of  "appear­ ing"  and  begun   to  "be."  This  new  ma­ turity  is marked  by  the  realization  that  he  can  never   build   his  future with   the conventional  Sally,   who's  incapable  of "change"; and  that  his relationship with his  father  has   been   decisively   altered: "His father was the child  now; his father's world  was dead."
!The events  of this novel can,  therefore, be  seen  as  fiction's   narrative  expansion of   the  images   in  Stevens'  poem,   both works mediating the development from appearance to reality.  Each  validates the other.  The  poem  provides the novel  with its  title   and   its  narrative  spine,   while Gavin's  original commitment to Stevens' vision is endorsed by the  uncanny  corre­ spondence  between   the   corpses  in   the morgue   and    the   dead   woman   in  the poem.  "Easter I gI 6"  and   the  poems  of Auden and  MacNeice impress Gavin  with their  power  to foretell  the  general course of historical change, though he finds them inaccurate  in   their   presentation  of  the individual's  role   in   this   change.   (His  heroism  is   enacted   in   a   temporary morgue,  not  in  Spain   nor  in  a  political  uprising.)    The  Stevens   poem,    though superficially private and  apolitical, may have a more lasting resonance, precisely because  of  the  generalizing power  of  its

I6g

OPINIONS & NOTES



imprecisions. Stevens'  enigmas  were  truly able  to  illuminate  the  personal  changes that    overtook   Gavin    and    his   father
-each moving  from  illusion  or  self-de­ ception  to an  acceptance of the reality  of a changed present; and  to illuminate the larger   developments  in   Belfast,  as   the hopes   of  the   "phoney  war" were   suc­ ceeded  by the reality  of  the Blitz.
Nevertheless,   despite    their    different functions, all the poems cited in the novel are  alike  in  that   they  are  employed   by Moore   to  demonstrate the  value  of  the artist's  imagination  as  against   the   cal­ culating faculties of  those  whom  Shelley had  called  the  reasoners  and  mechanists, Gavin's father and  brother. The Emperor  of Ice-Cream is, in  truth,  Moore's  "De­ fence  of  Poetry."  When,  at  the  age  of seventeen, he was introduced to the work of Yeats  and  Joyce,  his father called  the latter  a   "sewer."7     The  Emperor  was Moore's validation of the integrity of his adolescent reading and  of his chosen  vo­ cation. Though quite  free  of  rancour  or arrogance, the  novel  was  clearly  "a  per­  sonal  and   artistic  resolution   of  tensions which   Moore   [had]  been  working   to­ wards for ten years."8 Tellingly,  The Em­  peror was  the first of his novels to which Moore  had   planned  the  ending   in  ad­ vance.9  The  conflict  between  Gavin  and his solicitor  father, between  the rebellious embryonic writer  and  the successful  pro­ fessional   parent-Moore's   own    father was  a  doctor-is  here  resolved.  In the novel's  concluding sentence  Gavin  "took his father's hand."
In  Moore's earlier novels the power  of the  imagination had   seemed  a  dubious, potentially dangerous quality. The fantas­ ies of Judith and  Devine  were  aberrant, self-destructive: the "successful" figures in Judith  Hearne  and  The Feast of Lupercal were    those-the	University   professor and  his  wife, or  Heron-who  were  un­ ambitious, unimaginative,  stolid,  reliable.  Ginger Coffey,  in  the  third   novel,  only
 reached an  accommodation with  his wife and his new Canadian environment through learning to discipline his prolix Irish   imagination. The  novelist  of  An Answer    from  Limbo,  Brendan Tierney, was a selfish, destructive force,  partly  re­ sponsible  for  the death of his mother and  his wife's sordid  infidelity. The  Emperor's portrayal of the writer's imagination as a liberating  force,  capable   of  reconciling familial  tensions,  marked,  therefore, an important  development in  Moore's artis­  tic  career.  It has  generally  been  recog­ nized, indeed, as a decisive  and  successful novel.
Nevertheless, certain reservations have been  recorded. The  Emperor, for  one reader, "is  flawed  by Moore's use of  the techniques of  narrative realism  when  he no longer  has  a view of the  world  which can  be expressed  by such a convention."10
The argument here  is that  there's a dis­ junction   between    Moore's   new-found commitment to  the  imagination and  his continuing  employment of  third-person, linear   narrative; realism   is  an  inappro­ priate  vehicle   for   a   novelist   now  con­ vinced   of  the  legitimacy  and  power   of the imagination. In  later novels, it is true, reality  will increasingly be confined  to the inner  consciousness  of  the central figures, the  private worlds  of  Mary  Dunne, Fer­  gus, of the hallucinating historian of The  Great   Victorian  Collection and   the  re­ bellious   heroine   of  The  Doctor's   Wife. These  texts  may  indeed   suggest  that   in The Emperor Moore  was still  restrained by some  vestigial  unconfidence; that   he didn't quite   possess the  imaginative  cer­ titude ascribed  to Gavin. This reading of the   novel,  though, is  flawed  because   it assumes an exact correspondence between  Gavin's imagination in 1941 and  Moore's method  of recording that  imagination in rg66.  It assumes,  to  put  it  crudely, that  Moore was in every respect identical with Gavin, was incapable of standing outside  his  own  younger   self  and  criticizing the

OPINIONS & NOTES



boy. Gavin's virginal  abhorrence of homo­ sexuality  and  Thirties socialism is ascribed  to   a   forty-five-year-old   novelist   whose wartime service  had  taken  him  to  North  Africa,  Poland, and Scandinavia, but who can    still   only    "caricature"   Protestant bohemianism.U  The ending of The  Em­ peror  is   criticized    because   in   fact  the world  of  Gavin's father did  not  collapse, and  because  the  novelist  appeared ignor­ ant  of  the  continuing bigotry  of  Ulster. Moore's lengthy  exile  in  North  America, it is implied, has prevented him from see­ ing   the  extent  to  which   Ulster   is  still dominated by the implacable bigotry per­  sonified  by Gavin's father.
Such  rnisreadings arise  from  an inabil­ ity to dissociate  the creating novelist from  the   Bildungsroman's  experiencing  hero.  Just  as Joyce  was  cognisant of Stephen's callous   arrogance,   so   too   was   M.oore aware that  Gavin's confidence in his own sudden maturity and  in the destruction of his father's ancien regime was over-ween­ ing.  Gavin is not  intended  to  be  viewed uncritically, for  the  author's  affection   is mixed  with  an  ironic,  uncensorious un­ derstanding  of   the   boy's  callowness. Moore's use of  Stevens' poem  is an  iron­  izing device, enabling his readers to per­ ceive  what  is invisible  to  Gavin  himself. Even  at  the  end  of the  novel  Gavin  can­ not   fully   understand   Stevens'   puzzling  lines,  but   Moore   does  grasp  them,  em­ ploying  them   as  a  "grid"  superimposed upon   his   young hero's   experiences.  Moore's employment of  "The Emperor" renders  any  intrusive  authorial commen­ tary  unnecessary.  Moore   doesn't have  to intervene to point up Gavin's errors  when newspaper  headlines  and   television   im­ ages have so eloquently exposed  the  boy's misjudgment of  his  father's capacity   for change. The  poem  frees  the  novelist  to create   a  world   as  it  appeared  to  Gavin as he  experienced it  at  a  particular  mo­ ment  in  history,  Moore  being  confident that  the reader will be able  to discern  for
 himself  Gavin's tendentiousness, his flashes of  irrational malice   (particularly to his girlfriend), and  his adolescent self­ consciousness.  Controlled  by  the  frame­ work  of the  title-poem, the  novel  aspires to  the  intimacies of  the  diary,  in  which it would  be maladroit for the older,  wiser novelist  to intervene with  a wagging fin­ ger.  Simultaneously  we  are   both  within  Gavin,  as  he  tries, and  often  fails  to  un­ derstand  himself    and   his   world ;   and within Brian  Moore, the watching, quietly critical  novelist.
The  Emperor  of Ice-Cream  is, then,  a substantial achievement as a form of  "his­
torical  novel,"  in its embodiment of how the late 193o's and early 194o's in Belfast appeared to an intelligent, self-educated boy coming to maturity at that  period. Introducing an  anthology of Thirties po­ etry,  Robin  Skelton has  remarked  upon the rare self-consciousness  of that decade. This,  he claims,

makes  the  study of  the  poetry of  the  period interesting, for  so  many gestures are  delib­ erately "placed" in the  period that it is often hard to  tell  whether a  poem is  to  be  con­  demned  for   undergraduate and   narcissistic posturing,  or   praised  as  a  truly  witty   im­ personation   of   the    Zeitgeist   made  more subtle   by  ironic overtones.12

Gavin is very much  a figure of this period, acutely-to our eyes, comically-aware of  himself  and   his  city  as actors  in  his­ tory's   play.   Several   times   he   imagines  himself  a  great   actor;  the  quarrel with his father   is experienced  by  Gavin  as  if it  were  being  acted   out;  Royalty's brief farcical  descent  upon  the Belfast  hospital  is felt and  described  as a charade; Gavin's feelings  on   the   night  of   the  Blitz  that  "history  had conferred the drama of war" on Belfast is as portentously self-conscious as  his  optimism  that   his  father's world had   collapsed   is  naive   and   impetuous. The reader's uncertainty as to how  much self-deflating  irony   is  present    in   these scenes only indicates the scrupulous fidel-


171

OPINION5 & NOTES



1ty with  which   Moore   recorded   the  his­ tory  of  himself  and   his city,  the  ironies that   accompanied what  Charles  Madge in "Instructions" ( 1933)  called "the  new world  lying  in  ambush round  the  comer of time."13 Moore had  turned that  comer twenty-five   years  before,   the  darkening sectarianism of  Ulster   not  hidden   even from  the exile's eye, but  he is careful  not to  betray   his  presence,  not  to  allow  his shadow to cross Gavin's stumbling path.

NOTES

1 Philip  French,  "The  Novels of   Brian
Moore,"  London  Magazine  (February
1966), p.  89.
Hallvard  Dahlie,  Brian   Moore    (Toronto: Copp Clark, 1969), p.  85.
3   Richard B. Sale,  "An Interview in  London with   Brian   Moore," Studies in  the   Novel,
1, no.  1  (Spring 1969), 69.
4   For   the   metaphorical/metonymic contrast, see  David Lodge, Modes of Modern  Writ­ ing   (London:  Edward Arnold,  1976).
5  Brian Moore, The  Emperor of  Ice-Cream
(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977).
s  Letter  to   Henry  Church,  dated  J nne    1,
1939,  in   Letters  of   Wallace  Stevens, ed. Holly    Stevens  (London:   Faber  &   Faber,
1967)' p.  34 [.
7    Sale,  p. 6g.
s  French, p. go.
9   Sale,  p.  73·
10 Jeanne Flood, Brian   Moore    (Lewisburg: Bucknell Univ. Press,  1974), p. 69.
11 J. W.  Foster, Forces  and  Themes in  Ulster Fiction (Dublin: Gill  &  Macmillan, I 974), p. 125·
12   "Introduction," Poetry   of the  Thirties, ed.
Robin Skelton  (Harmondsworth:  Penguin,
I964), p. 13.
13   Skelton, pp.  83-84.

ROBERT GREEN



•m	0
 ON THE VERGE

*****   HELMUT   KALLMANN,  GILLES  POTVIN, and  KENNETH  WINTERS, eds.,  Encyclopedia of Music  in   Canada.  Univ.  of   Toronto   Press,
$6s.oo.  It is  hard to  know  how  to  begin   to praise   this  work  adequately. Over a  thousand pages   of   close-written  commentary   on   over
3,ooo   subjects, this   book   is  both  a  broWl!er's delight and   a  scholar's handbook:  a  guide to music   in  Canada  and   a set  of  histories and critiques.  Composers,  performers,  broadcasts, librettists, orchestras,  singers, prizes,   folk  tra­ ditions, pop  groups, regional enterprises, church music,   festivals, performances,  musical  educa­ tion,   operas, the   recording  industry,  summer camps, archives, relations  with   music  in  other nations:  all   these   and   more   are  subjects  for extended consideration. For  those interested in literature and  cultural  history  there are  added bonuses: substantial accounts of  (for  example) school   songbooks,  of   musical   publication,  of musical adaptations  of  Canadian  literary  texts
-all  of  which  are  at once  fascinating to  read in   their own   right and   a  stimulus to  further
enquiry into   the  many  connections among the arts  and into the  many further connections between the  arts  and  society.
W.N.

***"·  A. G.  MCKAY,  ed.,  The Written Word/ Prestige   de  l'ecrit.  Royal  Society of  Canada,
$7.00.   The  proceedings of   the   22nd   Royal Society of Canada  Symposium (March  I g8o), this   collection  of   talks   by    14   distinguished academics on  the  subject of  the  printed  word is  mandatory  reading  for   anyone  concerned with   the  survival of  books  and  reading. D.  G. Jones on  poetry, James Reaney and  Ann  Sad­ dlemeyer on  theatre,  Philippe  Sylvain  on  his­ tory,   Francess  Halpenny  and    Nairn    Kattan and   George  Whalley:   these   are  among  the contributors. By turns  witty, didactic, reflective, and   hortatory, they   record  their own  connec­ tions  with  literature-the  values they  find  in it,  the  nature of  their  commitment to  knowl­ edge  and   discovery  and the   not-always-simple play  of  style.  Repeatedly  there  sounds a  note  about technology: its advantages and  its threats to communication. Central  to this  collection is a  quietly brilliant essay  by  Basil Stuart-Stubbs, called "The Library and the  Unwritten Word." Cast as an  analysis of the  role  of microfilm and data base  communication in  scholarly research in science, it sounds a cautionary note-affect­ ing   both   cost   and   methodology-about  the assumption that  these   methods can   be  trans-

ON  THE VERGE



planted wholesale into the  humanities. At  this time,  when every  journal in  Canada is in  dan­ ger  of losing  its financial support unless  it con­  verts  solely  to  microfiche format,  readers who still   value   scholarly   communication  in   print form  should make  their views  known, to  their  MP  and  to the SSHRCC.
W.N.

****   The Dalhousie  Journals,  Volume Two, ed.  Marjorie Whitelaw. Oberon Press,  $17.95· This is  the  second volume of  Marjorie  White­ law's   edition  of  the   journals  of   the   Earl   of Dalhousie, Governor General  of  the  Canadas from   1820   to  1828   and   perhaps  best  known for  his  inability to get  on  with  Papineau, then  Speaker  of   the    Lower   Canadian  Assembly.  History -or at  least  Canadian history  -has tended to look  sombrely on  Dalhousie's record, though he failed in  a  role  in  which it is doubt­ ful  whether any  other potential Governor Gen­ eral could   have   been  successful. The  journals certainly reveal a  different Dalhousie from  the man  history books tend  to present. He was conservative  by  nature, but   also   sensitive to other personalities and  to  the  country through which   he  restlessly  travelled in  response to  his wish  to make  himself  familiar with  the  outposts of  that smaller Canada of  the  182o's. He  had good    ideas    of   efficient  administration,   and much  of  the   blame  for   his  failure to  get  on with  his Speaker must  be placed on  Papineau's obstinate  resolution  not   to   reach  an   under­ standing. When Dalhousie writes on  travel   in Canada during the  years  of this journal  ( 1820-
24)   he  is  never   less  than interesting with   his
sharp  and    often  amused  observations, and much   he  says  is  still   the  unused raw  material of  Canadian   history. An   attractive  and   hu­ mane  personality  emerges, and   not   the  least interesting aspect of the  journals is the gradual shift   in  Dalhousie's  response to  the  Canadian land. In  November 1820,  seeing  the  last  ship  of  the   year   leaving Quebec for   London,  he feels  "as  if  the   door   of  St.  Lawrence is  now shutting against the  European world," and   in August 1821,  when  he has  pushed as far  as the shores  of  Lake  Superior, he  remarks: "I turn  my face  homeward, conceiving that all  I leave  behind is a world  uncivilized, a forest inhabited by wild  beasts  and   by  human beings  nearly as wild  & as ungovernable...." Yet  the  Canadian landscape was  imposing itself   rapidly  on  his mind, and  only  a few days  later, on the  Ottawa River, he  remembered that it was  the  opening day   of   the   grouse  season   in   Scotland, and realized  that   when   he  looked   around  him   at
 nature "bold &  wild,  &  beautiful beyond  lan­ guage to describe," "I would  not exchange my day's   pleasure for  theirs."
G.W.

****  CLAUDE DE  LORIMIER, At War with the Americans,  trans. and   ed.  by  Peter Aichinger. Press  Poroepic, $5·95·     This is  an  extraordi­ nary   small  classic  of  frontier  warfare. Claude de   Lorimier, a   French-Canadian  gentleman who   rallied   to   the   British   cause   during  the American War of  Independence, left  a  journal of  his  adventures that  has   been   available  in French  since  1873,  but  this  is  the  first  time  it has  been translated and  presented with  useful supplementary material about  the  author  and his milieu for the benefit of English-reading Canadians.  The  English  version, by  the   his­ torian  Peter  Aichinger, adds  to  our  detailed knowledge of  the  struggles  by  which  Canada kept   free   from   American   domination.  Apart from   that,  it  is  a  first-rate  piece  of  adventure narrative, gripping from  beginning to  end.

o.w.

***   MARY    LEE  STEARNS,  Haida  Culture   in Custody:   The   Masset   Band.  Douglas &   Mc­ Intyre, $29.95; pa. $14.95.	Mary Lee Stearns went  as an  anthropologist to  the  Queen  Char­ lotte  Islands  village   of   Masset   to  study   the effects  on  the  Haida culture of  generations of white dominance. Her   approach  was  unortho­ dox,  since  she   earned  the  confidence  of  the local  Indians by  working  as  a  school   teacher and   marrying into  the  community.  For   this  reason   her  account  is  more   intimate and   hu­  mane than one  has come  to expect of academic anthropologists,  and  refreshingly undominated by  the  outdated  Boasism  that is still  so preva­ lent    among   British    Columbian  ethnologists. There  are   really   two  main   themes:  first   the changing  relationship between the  Indians and  the  federal   government  that   appointed  itself their  guardian under the  Indian  Act; second, the  division   within the  Indian community  be­ tween  the  official,  government-supported band structure, and  the  unofficial, traditional  struc­ ture,    dominated  by   the    hereditary   lineages which   in  fact   direct  the  ceremonial  and   eco­ nomic   aspects  -the  important  ones -of   life in  Masset, that has  provided the circumstances in  which  traditional Indian arts could-with the   support  of  outside interest -be  revived. It is the  role  of outside  interest-the  interest of the  unofficial  non-Indian  artistic community
-that   has   not   been   sufficiently  studied   by
Stearns or   any   other  anthropologist. For   no


173

ON THE  VERGE



creative conununity is any  longer  entirely  self­ generating. Both   of  the   great   modern  Haida artists  Bill  Reid and   Robert  Davidson,  were large!; inspired and  sustained  by white  friends and   patrons  before   their  fellow   Indians  ac­  knowledged their  existence, let  alone  their art,  and   it  is  debatable whether there   would  have  been  any  renaissance of  Indian culture on  the
 ing   the   morality  of  language  and   the   ethics of  cross-generational relationships, Jane  Rule reveals a lucid  intelligence. What emerges  most clearly  from   this  work   is  her   quiet and  per­ sistent  will -even  in   the   face   of   deliberate hostilities-to celebrate the   power,  the  com­  plexity,  and    the   plain   ordinariness   of   love itself.

West Coast  if its importance had  not  been recognized  in   time   by  the   wider   conununity of artists and  art-lovers in  Canada and  abroad, taking  off   from    the   historic  People  of   the Potlatch exhibition at  the  Vancouver Art  Gal­ lery  in  1956.
G.W.

*** 	THOMAS    MCMICKING,   Overland    from Canada   to  British  Columbia, ed.   by  Joanne Leduc. Univ. of British  Columbia Press, $19.95· Thomas  McMicking  was   the   leader  of   the largest group of  Overlanders who  crossed   the plains  and  the  mountains from  Upper Canada to  British   Columbia in  I 862.  His  account of the  trek   was  published  in  the  New  Westmin­ ster  British  Columbian in  1862-63,  and   is  the most   important  of  the   several   contemporary narratives. Now,  for  the   first  time,  it  is pub­ lished   in  volume   form.   But  the   journal  itself forms  less than a  third of  Overland   from Brit­ ish Columbia, and  the  supplementary material is almost  more  valuable  than the  journal itself. It consists   of  Joanne  Leduc's excellent intro­ duction, elaborate  and  very  useful  explanatory notes  describing  almost  every  person  and  place  involved,  together with  appendices relating to the  McMicking family   and   the   actual  course which   the   trek   took.   The  book   is  copiously illustrated  with    photographs   and,   most   im­ portant, with  reproductions of  29 of the  paint­ ings  and  drawings which   the fine  artist  W. G. R.  Hind made when he  travelled with  one  of the    smaller   groups   of    Overlanders    along  roughly  the   same   trail   as  McMicking's  com­
pany.
G.W.

***  JANE   RULE,   Outlander.  Naiad   Press,
$6.gs.   This  collection of  13  stories   and   12
essays  explores a  variety  of  attitudes  towards
lesbian experience.  Deftly, the   stories   tell   of jealousy, separation,  affection, badinage,  gos­ sip,  cruelty, and   all  the  other sides  of  human connection. The  brief  essays, more  powerfully still,  confront  directly  the   issues  of   isolation, bigotry, and   fear   which   women  generally and  "outlanders" in   particular  repeatedly experi­ ence.    Whether   reflecting   on   the   publishing history of  her  own  works  or  critically examin-
 W.N.

***  LOIS  DARROCH,  Bright   Land:  A  Warm Look  at  Arthur   Lismer. Merritt,  n.p.  Almost all    the    members   of   the    Group  of    Seven now  have  separate books  devoted to  their lives and   work,   and   it   is  always   a  great  pleasure when   one  of  them, like  Lois  Darroch's  warm biography of Lismer (the adjective tells  a lot), draws attention to strengths in  the  person  and the  painting that   have   not  to  this  point been widely  appreciated. In  her enthusiasm, Darroch overwrites a  little, waxing eloquent about the vigorous new  land  for  which  Lismer had  fresh eyes.  More   compelling is  her   account of   Lis­ mer's  own  enthusiasms-his  ability to encour­ age  children to  paint spontaneously, for  exam­ ple-and   his  quick-wittedness.  She   recounts (but  does   not   explore)  the   many   facets  of Lismer's career: his involvement in commercial art, his  teaching  career in  Halifax at the  time of the  Mont  Blanc  explosion, his  trip  to South Africa in  the  193o's, South  Africa's influence on   him  and  his  on  South  African children's art  teaching.  (These subjects have   wider   im­ plications than Darroch  pursues; perhaps one should greet   them  as  hints  of other books  that need   yet  to  be  written.)  Lismer's connections with   many   people in  Canada's cultural  com­ munity besides  the  Group-among them  Em­  ily  Carr, Merrill Denison, Barker  Fairley,  and  Murray Gibbon-testify  to  the  range  of  his interests but  also  to  the  closeness  of  the  com­  munity. The excellent plates  which  accompany the  text  give  evidence, too,  of  Lismer's growth as   a   painter-a   growth   which     (countering the  received judgment  of  the  Group of  Seven  movement)   continued   into  yet   another  new form  in the  lively line paintings of Lismer's late  years.
W.N.

*  M.   s. WADE, The  Overlanders of '62. Fron­ tier  Books,  Surrey, B.C.     This is  an  abridged version  of M.S. Wade's 1931  book, The  Over­  landers  of '62,  which is  unfortunate since  the original has  been  out  of  print for  many   years.  Much more   useful  would   be  a  complete new printing of  the  book,  with  notes  to  bring it  up to  date with  facts  of  which   Wade, more  than
50  years  ago,  was  unaware.	G.W.

ON  THE VERGE



**  DAVID RICARDO WILLIAMS,   Trapline  Out­ law. Sono  Nis,  $I 2.95.     Simon  Gunanoot has been  a  legend  in  British  Columbia ever  since the  day  in  1906  when   he fled  into the  wilder­ ness  rather  than  face  charges of  two  murders near  Hazelton on  the  Skeena River. Gunanoot stayed  out   in  the   bush   for   13  years,  and   in
'9'9 emerged  to  give   himself   up,  face   trial, and   be  acquitted.  Many articles and   at  least one  long   radio documentary  have   been  writ­ ten  on   the   case,   but   Trap!ine Outlaw  is the first   book   about  it.   David  Ricardo  Williams used   both   written  material  and  oral  material gathered from  people surviving into the  1970's  who  knew   Gunanoot. He   does   not  appear to have    been   thorough  in   his   research   of   the  written material, since  some  important secon­  dary   items  are  missing   from  his  Selected Bib­ liography, but  he  certainly combed out  a good many   new  facts   through  interviews with   par­  ticipants  and   spectators  in  the   Gunanoot af­  fair   and   through   painstaking  research in  the Provincial   Archives   of   British  Columbia,  so that    he   presents  the   fullest  account  yet   of­ fered    of   Gunanoot's  life,   and    does   so  with considerable  style.   As  a  lawyer,  Williams  re­ assesses  the  evidence, and   his  verdict  seems  to differ   from   the   trial    jury's  and    to  veer   to­ wards   the   assumption  that  Gunanoot   was  in fact   a  double murderer.  But  he  is  guided  by second-hand and  third-hand  hearsay evidence, by  oral  confessions  Gunanoot  is  said  to  have  made  two generations  ago,  and   by  statements of    Simon's  relatives  made   at   a   time   when active  resistance  on   the   part  of   the   native people   was   regarded  as   praiseworthy  among Indians. It seems  to  me  he  shows  at  most  that the  case  was  never   really   proven  either   way, which   is  essentially what  the   jury  concluded.

G.W.





This Publication  is available  in  Microform.

UNIVERSITY  MICROFILMS INTERNATIONAL

300  North Zeeb  Road, Dept. P.R., Ann  Arbor, Mi.  48106
 **  GERALD DONALDSON,  Books. Van Nostrand Reinhold, $'9·95·    Another  scrapbook about books-handsome,  though the   quality of  the colour  reproductions is singularly poor-Books is a  kind  of  John  Robert Colombo version   of publishing history  and  the  book  trade, all notes and   quotes  and   amiable designs. There  are snippets  on   alphabets,  print,  book   burning, book worms,  book  plates; figures  on  the world's most  valuable book,  the  biggest  book,  the  pro­ duction totals in  the  world  at  large. There are anecdotes about  people who  make  books,  and  there   are  quotations  about  books  and   people  who  read  books,  among them   one  from  Scho­  penhauer:  "We throw away  a  book  when  we find  ourselves  in  a  darker  mental region   than  the  one  we  have  just  quitted."
W.N.






































175



OLD MAN FALLING
 


Ron Miles


Arms outstretched after  the  just missed bus, body leaning
into  the space he only now
looks up amazed  to find

empty, the crooked man would shout, would run but then, admitting
years have left him
lame  and  nearly  mute
jerks back toward  the shade

instead  of falling,  leaving me alone,  my thought
of calling  to the driver
unresolved	'·
in a bus that  moves too steadily
toward  the light.





POEM WITHOUT  VOICES

Robert Bringhurst

The light that  blooms in your body
blooms in my hands. Around us the ground is strewn  with its petals.

I have seen on a street in Guadalajara wind set the petals of a  jacaranda
down  on the ground surrounding a pine.

Love, this is evergreen. Let it be. You will see, they fall also. Listen again : the silences

ripen
deep  in the sullen beaks
of the intricate wooden flowers.

q6
