!15.00 per  copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE
N°·87
Winter, 1980

THE MAKING OF MODERN POETRY

Articles

BY  SUSAN BECKMANN, KEITH GAREBIAN, GERMAINE WARKENTIN, DAVID  O'ROUR KE, PERRY M . NODELMAN, KATHY MEZEI

Poems

BY  FRANCIS SPARS HOTT, BERT ALMON, FRASER SUTHERLAND, IRVING LAYTON, P. K. PAGE, DOROTHY LIVESAY

Reviews

BY  ED PRATO, G. V. DOWNES, ER IC NICOL, ALAN R. SH UCARD, DAVIDS. WEST, ROD WILLMOT, W. MACNAUGHTON, LORRAINE MCMULLEN, R. L. MCDOUGALL, DOROTHY LIVESAY, MAURICE LEBE L,  PEGEEN BRENNAN, GWENDOLYN  DAVIES, LORNE DANIEL, GLEN CLEVER, EVA-MARIE KROLLER,
MICHAEL BENAZON, D.  J . DOOLEY, J ANET GILTROW , R. G. MOYLES, DIANA
BRYDON, CAROLINE  BAYARD, D. PRECOSKY, MICHAEL HURLEY, LINDA H UTCHEON

Opinions and  Notes

BY G. M. LANG, RICHARD A. CAVELL, GEORGE WOODCOCK

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW








IN THE LAND OF EITHER/OR






IN 187 1, BRITISH COLUMBIA joined Confederation  on the prom­ ise of a railway connection across the continent.  In 1876, Alexander Graham  Bell made  his telephone  work. Marconi  received the first transatlantic telegraph  mes­ sage in 1901, in Newfoundland. The  CBC was founded  in 1932. Television came to Canada in 1952. Jet passenger service linked Toronto with Vancouver  in 1960. Anik I inaugurated Canada's satellite communications system in 1972. By the end of the  197o's,  "fibre  optics"  and  "computers" had  become  the  watchwords  of communications analysts and  technicians;  and  in  1980,  "Telidon" promised  to become the system of the future.
Looking  back  at  this sequence  of attempts  to  conquer  distance  and  time  in
Canada, we can marvel at the changes that  have affected  peoples' lives; and  we can  reflect on  the  increasing  speed with  which  changes-of  magnitude-are taking place. But can we comprehend such changes? We tend to interpret sequen­ tial  events  passively, as though  they  were  merely  new  stages  in  a  simple-life­ unrolling-as-it-should.  As  though  simplicity  were  still  possible. As  though   new experiences in life are always extensions of the structure of life we already enjoy. Perhaps wishful thinking governs more than  we care to admit. Because those who don't  "already enjoy" tend to interpret  sequential  events as though  each new one inaugurated a revolution to end all revolutions. Such  responses render  it difficult both to make credible claims for social stability or to  recognize a real revolution when one's in the offing.
David Godfrey, in Gutenberg 2 (Porcepic), the fascinating  volume on the "new electronics and social change" which he and Douglas Parkhill  (of the federal Department of Communications) have edited, claims that  just such a real revolu­ tion is underway. Changes in technology are invoking changes in lifestyle, Godfrey writes, with such speed that  they have happened before  most people  know they are coming;  hence the technology is qualitatively  altering  society and at the same time invoking a new ignorance and a new illiteracy. Who will be involved? Every-

2

EDITORIAL


one. Who will be in control? That  depends on who remains "illiterate" and  who acquires the ability to help shape the connections between technology and social structure.
That  computers  already  are  variously aiding, folding,  and  spindling  our  lives
there  is no doubt.  In  the  thirty  years since 1950-from  a  time  when  experts thought  twelve computers  would satisfy U.S. needs to a time  when  home  com­ puters are marketed  as a suburban  necessity-technologists have evolved  micro­ transistors,  taken  advantage of the  cheapness of silicon  to develop  optical fibre communications systems, produced graphics components which have all the clarity of  printed   diagrams,  and  adapted   other  sciences to  an  exponentially   growing machine  memory to produce, for example, programmes in sociology and  reflexive psychology with  all  the  illusion of objectivity. There  are  valid  applications  for such techniques. But it is hard to remain placid when considering all their implica­ tions. It is not comforting,  in other words, to know that -faced with a question from a machine -many people will be more willing to reply than  they would if a human  being had asked it, and more open, because they attribute to it at once a  certain  dispassion  and  a  predisposition  to  listen. One  must  remember  John Madden's solemn observation in Gutenberg 2: "computer  and telecommunications technologies are  not neutral  and  unbiased." Indeed  not. They  are  hailed  as the likely replacement  for  conventional  mail  delivery and  bill collection;  computer disc programmes  are marked  as the probable substitute for newspapers and direc­ tories; the systems are claimed  as the resolution to problems  (of both  space and time)  affecting  telephone  communication. The  computer  can  take simultaneous events  (like  conflicting  television  productions)   and   by  recording,   make  them sequential,  so that  they  can  all be enjoyed;  it can receive messages at  awkward hours, and so contend  with the dilemmas of time-zone differences;  it can  take a mass of data which confuses the human mind, and classify and sort it till it becomes comprehensible.  Behind  these  capacities,  however,  lies the  imagination  of  the programmer. And extrapolated from  the computer's  proposed functions  lie such problems as free choice, privacy, and legal responsibility.
One  can  rephrase  these problems as four  questions about  any  computer  com­ munication: who writes it? who controls it? who reads it? and  who judges it? For a communications system to work it is clearly advantageous  for the elements in it to be standardized. But if standard, do they then come under  a single monopoly control? If under  a single control,  who makes the decisions and  who  makes the profit? If profit is the motive behind a communications system, and not merely an adjunct  to it, does the  amount  of profit, more than  the  commitment to sharing  information, govern the availability of information?  Will there be barriers against some information, and if so, who will be in a position to make appropriate distinc­ tions between, say, openness and obscenity, advertising and economic exploitation,  a complex defence of national independence  and a simple border-closing profiteer-

3

EDITORIAL

ing? If the computer  replaces the newspaper,  who guarantees  that  the computer­ services will supply the range of information  and informed commentary that  once characterized newspaper  journalism? Who guarantees  the  privacy of the  private letter on computer?  If a libel is perpetrated and  retrievable on thousands  of com­ puter  screens, how many court  cases, how  many  courts, how many  lawyers will the  "new  electronics" prompt?  What  price  the freedom  to be at once informed and independent?
Questions such as these we have asked in various way for some years, and they
underlie  a lot of adults'  resistance to the computer  "revolution." But what  often goes unmarked  is the fact that the revolution involves not only speed and  magni­ tude  but  also changes  in  patterns  of thought.  Computers are  not  human; they operate  on electrical circuitry which has been designed to select serially between sets of two options. The mathematics which governs them is dual: an algebra  of
( o,1 ) . In  order that  the computer  might make its "choices,"  all the information
programmed into it must be reduced to an absolute and dual system. The circuitry is either "on" or "off"; the machine either selects or it does not;  there are no other options. Which explains why computers continue to have some difficulties respond­ ing directly to language.  Language  is plural, not dual, full of multiple meanings, puns, metaphors, and  contextual  distinctions, and  it depends  often on  ambiguity more  than  on  categorical  clarity  for  its artistic  effects-just  as  a  style of life depends  on  circumstances,  moral  understandings, custom,  ceremony,  and  other non-exclusive  claims  upon  a  complex  heritage.   For  the  mind  impatient   with ambiguity,  intemperate towards relative values, or inflexible about  options, dualis­ tic computer  logic provides both the security of neat  boundaries and  the illusion of truth. But unless we wholly restructure  our  perception  of human  experience, it must inevitably distort as well.
So  much,  then,  depends  upon  the  programmer's totally  human   imaginative reach that  one must encourage people with a sympathy  for the humanities  not to flee the computer  revolution but to engage with it. Children  must discover the freedoms  and  complexities of both  language  and  number; we cannot  sacrifice the future  to easy dualisms. Life offers already too many instances of plural truths giving way to circumscribing dualities, in politics and  publishing, for example, as well as in technology. Constitutional  debates which differentiate  between  "Cana­ dian" and "provincial" rights as though the provinces were not of their very nature
Canadian imply an eitherIor dualism that the plural nature of the Canadian Con­
federation  will not  justify. Publishing houses which sacrifice the original  and  the unusual in order to print only the familiar  and the commonplace  might maximize their  profits but will not sustain the culture.  Critical  and   pedagogical methodolo­ gies which  narrow  the options for creativity  and  learning,  rather  than  enhance them, will-because  (often unwittingly)  they predefine art and thought-ines­
capably inhibit  both art and thought.  It need not be an eitherIor world in which

4

EDITORIAL


we live.  We  can  still  choose. If the  communications revolution keeps  its  goal - communications, not  revolution -clearly in  focus,  then it  carries the  promise of further enfranchisement and opportunity for  understanding. But  it cannot do  this if people remain passive   about their   own   future. The  computer, that intricate servant, that possible  master, that biased  machine, awaits the  plural mathematics
of the  humanist's mind.
W.H.N.








THE POETS MELT ON WINNIPEG BEJICH
 




Francis Sparshott


Mayday. Three poets walk between  ice and  sand, three  poets.
One  on the lifeguard station
stares  away  sunward over  the soiled beach hugging his old knees;
one  poet.
One  with  her eyes black-framed aiming a black  pen at  the  black book
on her  black  lap  makes  the  white  pages  tremble:
one  poet.
One  that  I could  not see, one  I have  never  seen, one  poet.
They  hold  up  the ice to the sun, exlaiming together in their  hoarse  voices because  the crystals die with a faint  chant;
but  the sky is suddenly filled with stretched necks
of geese going  over  in their  changing skeins and  a babble  of nests in the clear  north.
Three poems  are  written between  sun  and  sand. Geese in  three  poems
strut on  the  beach.  The air fills
with  words  going  over in  their  changing skeins calling  each  other hoarsely,  urgently
home  to the clear  north.

5



JAVA TO GENEVA

The Making of a Pratt Poem
 




Susan Beckmann

LEVOLUTION OF  EXPRESSION is just one of the meanings underlying the highly suggestive phrase "from  Java  to Geneva"  in the Pratt  lyric
"From  Stone to Steel," but it is this aspect of the phrase that metaphorically evokes E. J.  Pratt's whole  creative  process from  the  first  primitive  stammerings  of  an idea to its articulate expression in a finished poem. What  we have known of this creative method  goes very little beyond such a metaphorical analogue,  as our knowledge has generally been limited to comments  Pratt  made in interviews, such as these from a conversation with the CBC's Jed  Adams:

... an idea  comes  to your mind  and  it's nebulous at first and  it takes shape  by con­ tinuous reflection on it. And  always  in  my  mind  is the  importance of  having  the ending right.  That's the reason  why I write  the  end  first.... I gradually weave my way back  to the  beginning,  rather than  from  the  beginning to the end.  I find  that's more  satisfying  because  I have a terrible fear  of anti-climax.1

By studying  all the materials we have available  to us on one given  poem, we can find out a great  deal more about  Pratt's working  practices from  the concep­ tion of that nebulous idea to its polished expression in a finished poem. The writing of "The  Truant" provides an  ideal example  for such  an  examination, as it was unencumbered by the problems of working with vast amounts  of factual  research, and  because it reflects in miniature  Pratt's usual method  of proceeding from idea through  research,  drafts, excision, expansion  and  revision to the final form of a poem. Yet it should be conceded that the creation of "The Truant" is not entirely typical of Pratt's writing process, for the  poem is dramatic rather  than  lyrical or narrative, the two types of verse most  commonly  associated  with  Pratt, and  thus required  not only different materials, but also a slightly different  handling.  How­ ever, its creation is representative enough to illustrate the most characteristic habits of his writing  process, and  after examining  the creation  of "The Truant" I shall turn  to  a  study  of  the  additional  complicating   factors  and  working  practices exhibited  in the writing of Pratt's  narrative  verse.
In a letter to A. J. M. Smith dated July 13, Pratt's friend and colleague at the University  of Toronto, Ernest Sirluck, described  the immediate  circumstances  in which "The Truant" took shape:

Ned  Pratt has  been closeted  with  himself  on  the  second  floor  of Vic  since  the  end of  term; he's  working  on  a  poem  about  which  he's  unusually close-mouthed.  All

6

PRATT

he'll  say is that  it's  concerned  with  the  relation  of human  nature  to power. I've never seen him so serious. 2

This  brief  statement can  help  us  begin  to  reconstruct  the  way  in  which   Pratt worked  and  furthermore identifies the environment in which so much  of his poetry was written. There is the  reminder that  only in the  holiday  period  when  he  was free  from  the  demands of  lecturing and   marking papers   for  Victoria College3 could  he settle  down  to  write  his verse. But  the  compensating advantages of  his position  at  the  University are also made  evident  in an  indirect fashion. A private place  to work,  colleagues  with  whom  he could  discuss his writing and  on  whom he could  call for specialized information for the documentary narratives, and  the security  of  a  guaranteed income,  however  small,  helped   to  offset  the  immense demands on his time  and  energy.
The  specific  information that  Sirluck's comments provide  about  the  writing of "The Truant" also commands attention. The  concentrated effort  and  seriousness with  which  Pratt  undertook the  whole  endeavour suggests  that, although Pratt intended the  poem  to  be  fun,  he  also  had  an  important personal   statement to make.  "The Truant" was written  under  the shadow  of the Second  World  War  so that  it  bears  the  defiant   stamp of  battles  waged  against   great   odds  which   are definitive  for Pratt of heroic  conduct. It is the archetypal conflict  of the individual against  overwhelming and  oppressive  power  that  stands  behind  the  extravagance of  the  Panjandrum's  accusations and   curses,  and   the   effrontery  of  the   little genus  homo.
While  Sirluck's observations contribute knowledge  about   the  external  circum­
stances  in  which  "The Truant" took shape,  for  detailed information about   how the  poem  was  actually written, what  literary influences  it  was  subject   to,  and what  it meant to Pratt, we must  tum to other  sources. Among these is a descrip­ tion  of the  poem  prepared by Pratt for  a  reading  given  in  the  Victoria  College Library in March 1956:

This is a poem called "The Truant" representing  man  as talking  back to a totali­ tarian  God  of power divorced from human  considerations  of kindness, equity  and justice tempered  by mercy. He is called here  the great  Panjandrum, a  silly non­ sensical term  like the  Lord  High  Executioner,  knowing he can  crush  the  human  species physically by his overwhelming might. Hence the language he uses is formal,  erudite  and  in accordance with a Gilbert  and  Sullivan  court  etiquette,  and  I am afraid  able  to vex his cousin. The  theme is a conflict between  the human  will and an arbitrary oppression. Some of the words used in this poem  I didn't  know myself until I began searching for scientific terms in the unabridged  dictionaries.4

Pratt points  here  to  several  influences  on  the  poem  which   we should   briefly consider.  If the  seventeenth-century court  masque  lends  structure and  character to the poem, it is the court  masque as seen through the gay nineteenth-century  eyes of Gilbert and  Sullivan. It is from an eighteenth-century nonsense story by Samuel

7

PRATT

Foote5  that  the title "Panjandrum" comes, but the evolved meanings of the word contain  an  ambiguity  which  Pratt  built  into  his  portrait. The  Q.E.D.  defines "panjandrum" as "a mock title for an imaginary or mysterious personage of much power, or a personage of  great  pretension  [my emphasis]; a self-constituted  high mightiness  or magnifico;  a local  magnate  or  official of grand  airs;  a  pompous pretender." By design, the  poem does not answer  the  questions  of whether  the Panjandrum is a mysterious, or  just an imaginary  character, of whether  he is a personage of much  power, or simply one of great  pretensions.
Sandra  Djwa6  has demonstrated  that the truant is revolting  against a stoically­ conceived  cosmic power, yet conflict of the  human  will with  an  overwhelming mechanistic  power is not only a standard  theme of Pratt's, it is at least as old as Blake, as Northrop  Frye has pointed  out.  After  listening  to  Pratt  read  his new
poem, Frye wrote this account for A. J. M. Smith:

Ned has just read us his best poem yet, I think, called "The  Truant." It's Blake's conflict of Ore and Urizen, the Prometheus-Jesus agent of humanity revolting against the God of universal machinery.7

In  view of Pratt's  close association with  Frye  at  the  time  when  the  latter  was absorbed  in  his Blake studies, the  possibility of the  poet  having  this  particular instance of an archetypal  conflict in mind when he wrote "The Truant" is not to be discounted  out of hand. A comprehensive study of such sources and analogues for the  poem would  make a valuable  addition  to Pratt  criticism,  but  is beyond the scope of this paper.



Q.TT'S SEARCH  FOR   SCIENTIFIC  or  specialized  terms  in  the unabridged  dictionaries  is evidenced  in several  places in  the  manuscripts  where words such as "troglodyte," "coprolite" and  "thaumaturge" appear  in the  mar­ gins. Some were worked into the poem; others never found  their  place. Similarly, lists of rhyming  words jotted down in the margins,  a characteristic feature  of all Pratt  verse manuscripts,  contain some material  the poet was able to use and some that  had  to  be  discarded.  For  example,  from  the  list  "black,"  "egomaniac," "track," "back," "bric  a brae"  and  "claque" only the first  (at 1.  53 of the final version of the poem), second (at 1. 55)  and fourth  (at 1. 6I  )  found a permanent  place as rhyming  words in the poem. The  manuscripts  of  "The Truant" written in pencil in two battered  notebooks (Box 4, no. 30 and 33) and four typescripts which I shall refer to as typescripts one, one A  (a  carbon  copy of the typescript one with pencil emendations in Pratt's  hand), two and three, have been preserved
in the E. J. Pratt  Collection of the Victoria College Library,  University of Toronto.
These drafts indicate  that  the poet's usual practice of beginning  by writing the end of the  poem first and  then  working his way backwards  was not observed in

8

PRATT


the  creation of "The Truant." The  first  fragmentary lines  Pratt wrote  for  the poem  were  part  of the  Panjandrum's  recitation of the  truant's  ancestral history and  his threatened punishment:
I found  you in the primal slime -the protozoa
And though  you've grown I've modelled you
You have become arrogant,  a little dot speck mote
Six feet tall and  two feet wide
I'll  take you at the end intoxicate your cells cancel
Put arthritis in your joints   I'll dim your eyes deafen  your ears8

What followed  were  preliminary versions  of the  truant's reply,  insinuating that man  had  in fact  created God.
There is considerable evidence  in the manuscripts that  "The Truant" grew out
of  another poem,  the  little  lyric  "Out of Step" from  Many Moods (Toronto: Macmillan, rgg2), for this title stands  at the top of the second  page of the earliest drafts and  re-appears twice at later  stages in the working  papers. No doubt  draw­ ing  on  the  age-old   traditions of  the  harmonious  music  and   movement  of  the heavenly  spheres,  Pratt spoke in the earlier  poem of a "celestial dance" set  to the "perfect orchestration" of him  who held  the  "mighty baton," the  "Master of the Skies."  The   measures  of  that   dance  were  bungled   by  the  numerous, awkward human imitators of the  heavenly  grace  and  expertise:

But when the human  dancers met, This  year-about  two billion­ They  fumbled  with their minuet And CRASH  went their pavilion!9

The dramatic situation which  structures "The Truant" is man  being  called  up before  the  Master of the  Skies  (now  in the  person  of the  great  Panjandrum), to answer for his infernal awkwardness, for his being out of step in the celestial dance. Here  the  dance  is seen  in  the  character of a court  entertainment which  requires the direction of a Master of the  Revels, and  it is he who levels the  charge  against
truant man  of walking  "with tangential step  unknown I Within the  weave of the
atomic pattern"  ( ll.   r 4-15), while  the  Panjandrum  recites  the  accusations of "singing out  of key" and  "shuffiing  in the measures  of the  dance" (ll. 66, 68). In one  early  draft   of  "The Truant" the  Master  of the  Revels  "trained his  cosmo­
scope  I Upan the  ballet  of the  fiery molecules" rather than   on  his captive, but
Pratt revised  the  lines in  accordance with  the  new  poem's emphasis on man   (as compared with  the  cosmic interest  of "Out of Step"), shifting the subject  for the microscopic investigation to the  truant.
It should  be noted,  however,  that  it is typical of Pratt that  once he has hit upon a  particularly euphonic  phrase   or  striking   image  he  is  unwilling to  discard   it lightly,  and  so "the ballet  of the  fiery molecules" found  its place  elsewhere  in the poem  at I. 27. But  the  phrase  "rhumba of the stars"  which  came  to Pratt's mind

9

PRATT

at  the  initial  drafting  of lines for the  poem  never  met  the  demands  of  rhyme, rhythm  and  sense at  any one point in the  poem so it  was reluctantly  dropped. Similarly, other examples of the terminology of music and dance, vestiges of "The Truant"'s relationship  to "Out   of Step,"  disappeared or  were  modified  as the drafts  developed. The  Master  of the  Revels, describing  his rebellious captive  at one early stage of the writing, added, "I have vowed to make a dancer  of him"; this despite the fact that his unwilling pupil "forswears all tempo."  An unrhymed and  unpolished  statement  of the truant's rebellion  was also phrased  in  terms of music and dance:

I will not  join your ballet,  sing your  chorus
I'm  six feet tall and  two feet  wide
And fourteen stone 	You
Out of the fire water  slime, I crawled found  dry land fugitive from  the dance

The  air of Renaissance court masque that  lingers in the poem as we now have it was once a stronger controlling metaphor  in the  verse, for the charges against the truant  at one point included the disparaging  of the fawning audience of the Panjandrum's cosmic pageant,  or as Pratt  put  it:

I now indict  you of your capital crime

Your  foul  unmitigated arrogance 	dissonance
Of  singing  out  of key,  i:ag-the--daR€e­ And  leaving  that  dance
And  jeering  at  our  universal  claque.

A proposed title for the poem, "Off-Stage," appears  in both  notebook drafts and suggests that  for some time Pratt  conceived of the whole poem as a kind of  pre­ show confrontation between director and reluctant  actor. "Still on the Stage" was another  prospective title for the poem and it too emphasized its dramatic context.10
A character  called the Astronomer  Royal was also originally  a part  of the court masque cast, though  he did not survive the third  draft  of the opening lines of the poem. To him was initially assigned a part in the opening question-and-answer sequence of the poem, with the Astronomer Royal in the role of custodian  of the truant  and  the  Master  of the Revels in  that  of interrogator. The  Master  of the Revels did survive, however, and he remains a somewhat  incongruous  relic of this stage of the poem's development. The  highly dramatic structure of the  poem is a happier  result of Pratt's  handling of his subject  matter  in the fashion of a Renais­ sance court  masque.
Chaos, Old  Night and Apollo proved to be the only survivors of another  group of characters  who were excised from  the  poem. They  had  found  their  way into the verse as the result of the only factual research Pratt seems to have done for this poem. On the title page of the notebook in Box 4, no. 33 11 are notes on the Greek

10

PRATT


creation  myth.  In  capsule  form  they record  that  the  universe  began  as "a  formless mass" ruled  over  by Chaos, until  Erebus,  his son, became the father (by his sister, Night) of Darkness and  Light.  From  the  union  of  this  latter pair  came  an  egg which,  when  hatched, resulted  in the birth  of "Eros-God of Love who formed the  universe." Using  this  information, Pratt drafted these  fragmentary lines:
Who pinned  upon your Seraphim  their  wings
We showed you how to knot the tether
A rain of atoms
Banished Saturn  and placed Jove upon  his throne
Toppled  the Giants
Sent Apollo after Daphne
We pulled  you out of Chaos and Old  Night
We painted  pictures of your face And then-RibBed-el:lt tee eeloi.H'S- A rain of atoms
A stone dropped  in a pool
A bursting bomb.

Between  this draft of this section  and  the next, these  notes on Norse mythology appear:
Thor  (Zeus)  foe of the giants whom he killed with his hammer
Freya  (Venus)   blonde 	.

Luna  Tiu  (Mars)  Loki   { e11
g1ant
 smoky.


Note  how even in  the  process of recording factual material the  poet in Pratt is at work,  jotting  down  the word  "smoky" as a possible rhyme  for "Loki."
The  Norse  mythology was incorporated into  the  succeeding draft, so that  the lines  (with  marginalia enclosed  in square brackets) then  read:
We painted  pictures of your hybrid broods

Jove nestling as a swan in Leda's arms
Aurora  blushing at her birth from Thea
-t\pe:lle-with -ltts-
Hyperion  with the sun-burns  on his face
Golden  blond diaphanous  Freya


Coyly watching Thor's  conceit
Over his biceps as he left his smoky
Anvil to compete
In  trials lost through  the pranks of Loki And when we tired of Chaos & Old Night And  the baby symbols Darkness and Light We pictured  you as a rain of atoms
Or as a stone dropped in a pool
Set of circles made
 sandals
[Atlantic	race]
chase

we washed cosmetics J
[from your cheek





[archaic]

Or as a bursting bomb exploding every in flight.

I I

PRATT


One more revision  saw  the  cutting of much of the  mythological material and the emergence of the  passage in  a form  similar to  the  one  in  which we  know  it:
[Prelude to birth  postlude  to death] And when one day pondering an eolith
We suddenly  grew conscious of your  age
And turned  a human  page 	[fern and  fungus  breath] We  jettisoned  the cosmic myths
With  all its baby symbols to explain
smiliglH-iB o'-&-eyes-	[our  rising  pulses] Chaos  and  darkness  and  the  birth  of pain
The sunlight  in Apollo's eyes
And  it was then  we learned  how to anatomize
Your  body calibrate your size
And set a mirror  up before  your face
To  show what  you really were a rain
Of dull  Lucretian atoms  crowding space
A series of concentric waves which  any fool
Could  make  by dropping stones within  a pool
Or  as a bursting bomb forever  in flight
Within  a slough of Chaos  and  Old  Night.

Such large-scale excision  and  revision  is matched on  a smaller scale  by the evo­ lution of individual lines, couplets or  groups of lines.  We  can, for  example, trace what became of 11. 148-so through nine stages to  their present form. At  first there is simply   a list  of  rhyming pairs  in  the  right-hand margin of  a drafted  stanza:
pain
cosmic stain earth
birth

The last  line  of the  drafted stanza

The rising pulses and  the  birth  of pain

incorporated the  first  and  last  words  from the  list, suggesting that Pratt was  con­
sidering a couplet with  an  internal rhyme here.
In the  next  stage at  varying intervals in  the  right-hand margin of  the  revised stanza appear the  phrases:
prelude to birth    postlude to death fern  and  fungus  breath
our  rising pulses. Then after rejecting
That blend  of fern  and  fungus  breath,

Pratt filled  out the  line  to  complete the  couplet and  reversed the  association of
"prelude" with  "birth" and  "postlude" with  "death" in  this  fashion:


12

PRATT

Fear and  the fern and fungus breath
Postlude  to birth  prelude  to death.

But still not  happy with  the  result,  he tried  yet again,  immediately modifying  the second  line as he wrote :

Fear and  that  fern and fungus breath
-Wfliefl-ste£tls-l.lf*ffl-UH%t ettr death­
That  clogs our nostrils at our death.

In the  next  draft   the  couplet  does not  appear as a  unit,  the  line  "The  rising pulses and  the  birth  of pain" standing on its own. But  by the following  re-writing the three  lines are brought together, though the last line is still undergoing internal
change:

Our  rising pulses and the birth of pain, Fear  and  that  fern-and-fungus  breath That  clog 	the approach  of Clogging our nostrils at our death.

Two  more  attempts at  this troublesome line follow, as

Which stalks our nostrils to the caves of death,


yields to
 

Stalking our nostrils to our caves of death.


In the reasonably complete draft  of the poem in the notebook  of Box 4, no. 33, the lines reach  their  final form,  except  for the punctuation which  is not fixed until the typescript versions.

Our  rising pulses and the birth of pain
Fear and  that fern-and-fungus breath
Stalking our nostrils to our caves of death-.

It should  be emphasized that  such  experimentation with  the  form  and  place­ ment  of individual lines is typical  of Pratt's writing  process, and  that  the experi­  mentation  continues in  some  cases  through typescript  and   manuscript  versions.
Lines 32-33  of the  poem

The  chemists have sent back the same old story-/ 'With our extreme gelatinous apology,'

were first drafted as

Our chemists have returned  the same old story
With the most humble*
apology

By the  next  draft they  read :

* word is unclear  in manuscript.

PRATT

We
The chemists have returned the same old story
With our most debased apology.

The first typescript version appears  as:

The chemists have sent back the same old story - "With our most debased apology, ... "

Typescript  one A shows an emendation  of the second line to read: "With our knee-bent gelatinous apology, ... "
and  in succeeding  typescripts and  published  versions the  lines reach  and  retain the form in which we know them.
Line 7 of the poem as it appears in the Collected Poems, ed. Northrop  Frye (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1958), "By the keen logic of your two-edged sword!"  did not become part of the poem until it was published  in book-form in Still Life and
Other  Verse   (Toronto:  Macmillan,  1943). Line  122,  "drew   I Your  mileage
through  the Milky Way," did not reach its present form  until  the re-publication of the  poem  in the Collected  Poems  (Toronto:  Macmillan, 1944). Before that
time typescripts and published versions had  read:  "drew  I Your mumu,s through
the Milky Way."

A COMPARISON  OF   THE  VERSIONS of  the  poem  from  the final holograph  version, which totalled  I 78 lines, through  the  typescript  versions
of varying lengths, to the final form of 190 lines in the Collected  Poems  (1958), shows just how much  revision and expansion  Pratt  demanded  from  himself even when the outlines of the poem were fixed. Typescript  one shows significant  vari­ ants from the final version in ten places. The  Panjandrum is addressed as a "uni­  versally acknowledged  Lord!" at 1.  6, rather  than  as a "forcibly  acknowledged Lord!" Entirely  absent  from  typescript  one  are  line  7   (discussed  previously),  ll. 47-52,
Pulled forward with his neck awry, The little fellow six feet short, Aware he was about to die, Committed grave contempt of court By answering with a flinchless stare The Awful Presence seated there,

and 11. 72-73, "You have fallen like a curse jOn the mechanixs of my Universe." The  variants  on 1. 33, "With   our extreme gelatinous apology," and 1. 122, "Your mileage through  the Milky Way" are discussed above. The  "spavined  troglodyte" (as  it  becomes  in  typescript  three)   is at  this  point  a  "cocktailed12  troglodyte." Rather  than "ordered  the notes" at 1. I 33, typescript one has "paraded the notes."

PRATT

And II. 172-73 then read: "Will catch you blind and  reeling and  wm send  I You on that long and lonely...."
Besides the change  in I. I33 noted already, the only significant change between typescripts one and  one-A is the modification of "dust" to "ash"  in I. I64,  "We
grant  you power, and  fire I That  ends in ash."  Lines  72-73 are  added  in  type­
script two and II. 47-52 first appear  in typescript three.
The early holograph  drafts are punctuated  extremely lightly, but the final holo­ graph  draft  in the notebook of Box 4, no. 33 shows evidence of a conscious effort to guide the reader  by means of punctuation.  The  typescripts of the poem  reveal Pratt  polishing the grammatical aspects of his punctuation, for example, removing the comma after "size" in I. 152, "calibrate your size I And set a mirror up ... ,"
and closing the quotation marks that had formerly been left open after the truant's final vaunt, "No! by the Rood, we will not join your ballet"  (I.  I go).
A collation of any of the published versions of "The Truant" with that  of the Collected Poems  ( 1958), reveals a mistake in the latter,  and since it has been the copy text for most, if not all, subsequent republications of the poem, the error  has been  perpetuated. In  both  typescripts two and  three,  I. 28, "His  concepts  and denials-scrap them,  burn  them-" appears  at the top of a new page. In  the Canadian  Forum  version of the poem, 22 (December   I942 ),  264-65, as well as those of Still Life and  the Collected Poems ( I 944), the line begins a new stanza, consistent with the rest of the poem's practice of assigning a new verse paragraph to each new speaker,  but in the Collected Poems ( I958) this stanza  division has been lost. Both the  rules of grammar  and  consistency with  the rest of the  poem argue that  this division should be restored.
Northrop  Frye  reports  that  Pratt  revised the  poem  yet again 13  for  the  1958
Collected  Poems, toning  down  the rebellious nature  of the  "little  genus homo," but ultimately  Pratt  was convinced by the  judgment of his friend  and editor that the original version was the better poem, whatever the poet's change of heart may have been.
And when all the  revision was completed, what  did  Pratt  think  of the poem? Another  letter  from  Ernest  Sirluck14   to A. J. M. Smith  records that  Pratt  spoke
of it as "the  present development of his central practice" indicating  that  the symb­ olism of "The Truant" was in the mainstream  of Pratt's poetic practice, and that  he saw himself as a symbolic  poet rather  than  as a  chronicler  or  ballad-maker. Yet there  is no  record  of Pratt's  ever having  referred  to  "The  Truant" as  his favourite  poem, that  distinction  being reserved at different  times for "The  Roose­ velt  and  the  Antinoe,"   "The Titanic"   and  "Brebeuf  and  His  Brethren." The  observations  he did  make  on  the  poem  are  largely  restricted to  thematic  com­ ments such as this:

The  theme is the revolt of the human individual against tyrannical power. Man through evolution has become a truant from the original dance of the atoms. He

I5

PRATT

has developed concepts, a will of his own, a moral sense and  a spirit of adventure which refuses regimentation.  He has left the stage and  gone off on his own but is discovered by the Master of the Revels whose job it is to superintend the festival of fire. The  man is brought  up before the great Panjandrum of the Universe for trial. He is accused of singing out of key and  of walking  out  of step and  the Judge  or Panjandrum assigns to him a penalty-not only of death  but of being sent  back after  death  to  join the original  molecules of fire in  their  eternal  revolution.  The Judge  relates the man's ancestral past and the man replies that  everything of value which  the  universe  possesses is created  by man  himself and  that  this is a part  of human  nature  which survives death and the material  universe. The free personality is  something   immeasurably   greater   than   mere   bulk  and   power  and   physical motion.15

The  evolutionary road  of Pratt's thought on  the  relationship between   cosmic order,  man  and  a ruling  power,  from  its first  expression  in  "Out of Step" to its polished articulation in "The Truant" was indeed  a long one. Thematically, Pratt moved  from  presenting the  orthodox Christian position  which  sees universal  dis­ order  as a result  of man's  fall from  grace,  to a more  broadly humanistic  position which  views whatever there is of either order  or disorder in the universe  as a mani­ festation  of  man's thought and  action.  Stylistically, the  development  was  more complex,  though the stages have been clearly traced.



IN FACT, THE  DEVELOPMENT of  almost   all  the  poems  after those of Newfoundland Verse can  be studied  by scholars  interested in the  genesis and  evolution  of Pratt's poems, as much  of the  draft material has been  preserved in the  Pratt Collection  of Victoria College.  The introductions and  explanations that  Pratt wrote for much  of his verse are also among these  papers  and  they often provide  information about  the  original  impetus towards the  writing  of a  poem.
Sometimes the  germ  of a  poem  has  become  fairly  well  known,  as is the  case with "The Titanic." The ship went down very close to Pratt's home  in Newfound­ land, but  it was the  aspects of irony in the  disaster  that particularly  drew  him  to it as a poetic subject. Pratt, in speaking  of how  he came  to write the  poem, said,

My interest  in the loss of the Titanic  was always more  than  a desire to record  a story, a concern  more with  the implications  of the  disaster  than  with  the  factual side of it, though  of course the impression has to be produced  through  the  facts. It is a study in irony, probably the greatest single illustration of the ironic in marine history. I do  not  think  that  the  public  have  ever  been completely  aware  of how deeply involved the Titanic  was in the web of fate. It was as if the order of events had been definitely contrived against a human  arrangement. 6

Part  of the  irony  was reinforced  for Pratt by his meeting with  Marconi on  the day before the inventor's history-making reception of a trans-Atlantic radio-signal and  the  resulting elation  that  Pratt shared  with  so many  others  at  the  promise  of

16

PRATT


no  more disasters at  sea,  no  more of the  grief  he knew  so intimately. Relating the number of safeguards built  into  the  Titanic, Pratt explained:

And  the  greatest of all  lifesavers  was the  wireless which  for  ten  years  before  1912 had  demonstrated its wonderful efficiency in  the rescue  of life at  sea.  I remember the intimate contact with  wireless which  a number  of us had  in Newfoundland  just at  the  time  of  the  achievement. I was  attending the  public  school  at  St.  John's where  we  had  a  remarkable teacher of Science,  a  man  named Holloway.... We were  just  getting over  the  thrill  of  the  discovery  of  the  X-ray,  the  Roentgen ray which  he was demonstrating to us in his laboratory, when  he announced to us that a greater thrill  was awaiting at  the  House  of Assembly where  the  class in  Physics went  to see Marconi in person.... No one knew why Marconi was in town, or what he was doing  up  on Signal  Hill a mile away at  the mouth of the harbour. It  was a dead  secret  only disclosed  the next  morning when  the papers  headlined the fact  he had  bridged the  Atlantic from  Signal  Hill  to Lizard  Point  in  Cornwall with  wire­ less telegraphy. I mention this because accompanying the  thrill  was the widespread confidence and  boast  that  the days of great  disasters  at  sea were soon  to be ended.
And  the  most  powerful set on  the ocean  had  been installed  on  the  Titanic, with  a radius  of  r ,ooo  miles at  night.  They  said  it  was inconceivable in  this  modern age with  the ocean  alive  with  ships  that  a steamer could  founder before  her  passengers and  crew  were taken  off by a rescuing  ship.... When  the news of the disaster  came to New York,  Marconi, who was in the city at the time, and  who was preparing to go  back   to  Europe  upon   the  Titanic   on  the  return  trip,   wouldn't  believe  the report.11

Pratt's connection to  Marconi and  Marconi's to the  Titanic disaster were  part of the strange and fateful web of circumstance that so attracted the  poet  to the  event.
Little, if any, of  this  is new  information, but  often  the  germ of  a  poem  is less well  known. Few   people are  aware, for  example, that "The  Depression Ends," to  quote Pratt, "sprang out  of a single  word." His  holograph introduction to  the poem expands on  this  comment about how  it  was written:

My  friend   and  colleague P [ elham] E [dgar] shouted   at  me  as  I was  passing  his room in the college one day not very long ago to come in and  look at a word  which he  had  just  read  in  the  A[tlantic?]  M[onthly?]. Here's a  word  which  has  never been in a poem  to his knowledge, the word  'prognathic.' "I'll stump you,"  he said, "to  get a poem  out of it... .''
I went  home  and  said  to Mrs.  P [ratt], "What does the word  suggest  to you?"  She closed her eyes and  saw a Dickensian character, a Dominie,  standing, birch  in hand, over a squad  of cringing schoolboys  ... "Well,  what  are  you going  to do with  her? Are you going  to make  her  the heroine  or the villain of the poem?"
"No," I said,  "I am  not  going  to have anything to do  with  her,  except  that  she is going to suggest  the content of the poem  by contrast.m 8

The poem he  wrote was,  of course, filled  with  the spirit of generosity.
Sometimes poems grew  out  of  direct  personal experience, as  was  the  case  of
"The 6ooo" which, Pratt said,

PRATT

was suggested by a ride from Toronto  to Belleville in the cab of a fast locomotive of the 6ooo series. The speed, power and  roar of the engine presented  the analogy of a monster-a bull conceived in ancient  fable  with  fire for  breath  and  steam for blood.19

At other  times, generally  accepted truths would  be undermined by some  current event  and  Pratt's new insight  would  be given  a literary form.  Such  was the  case, according to Pratt, with  "The Prize  Cat":
"The Prize Cat" ... refers to Mussolini's attack  on Ethiopia  just before the Second World War. I had been pondering over the illusion that, with the growth of civiliza­ tion and  culture,  human savagery was disappearing.: o

At  still  other   times,  it was  a  written source  that   first  prompted  Pratt's  poetic energies.  Speaking about  the  origin  of "The Roosevelt and  the  Antinoe"  Pratt revealed:
there was quite a long incubation  period of straight amazement at the magnitude  of the  rescue without  any formulated  intention  on my part  to write  about  it. I first saw the account  of it headlined  in our Toronto papers  and  was so struck  by the heroic outlines  that  I sent for and  obtained  copies of the  New York  papers  and later of the English papers....21

To  observe  that  Pratt followed  a  pattern of exhaustive research  following  his decision  to write  a long poem on any given topic  has by now  become  a common­ place of Pratt criticism,  but  often  the sources  and  extent  of his research  have  not come to light.  The  poet's comments about  the sinking  of the Titanic suggest some of the resources he may have drawn  on in assembling information for his narrative of the event:

I do not suppose there is in this century a single "local" event which has given rise to  more  discussion and  heart-probing than  the  loss of  the  Titanic. Witness  the length  of the list in the Periodical Index, and  the volumes-two of them  during the past  year-relating the  reminiscences of the  survivors  and  casting  new light upon the disaster.... I had heard many people say that after seeing the film Caval­ cade, the one unforgettable  impression was the inscription  of the name S.S. Titanic  on the lifeboat  when the lovers were taking their  journey across the  Atlantic.22

In  another commentary on the  poem  Pratt quotes  somewhat imperfectly from the  report of  the  U.S.  Senate  Committee headed by Senator W.  A. Smith   that investigated the  disaster, so he was obviously  familiar with  this source  of  informa­ tion  in one form  or  another. Furthermore, he  not  only  familiarized  himself  with the records of the operations of the White Star  Line to which  the Titanic belonged, going  so far  as to secure  menus  of what  would  have  been  served  to  the  ill-fated  passengers,  but  he  also sunk  himself  in  the  trade rivalries  of  the  period.  A very different kind of research  went into the section titled  "D- 179·" The  technical terms used in the  poker game Pratt gleaned  from conversations with  Pelham Edgar and other  poker-playing friends. A variety  of  other  resources,  including books, articles

18

PRATT


and  technical reports of the disaster contributed in a general  way to Pratt's feeling for the  atmosphere and  events  of the ship's  fatal  maiden run.
Much of this research found  its way directly into the  poem. The  rivalry between the shipping lines makes  its appearance in the opening lines as Pratt narrates the way  in  which  the  Titanic out-classed  the  Hamburg-American's  Imperator, and again  as a topic  for discussion  in the dining saloon as the  possibility of the Titanic outstripping the speed  of the  Cunard liner  M auretania is debated. The  menus  of the  White Star  Line  were  well  utilized  in  "7.30 p.m.  at  a Table in  the  Dining Saloon" as  Pratt used  an  itemized   list  of food  and  spirits  to  counterpoint the conversation  of  the  diners   and  illustrate the  scale  of  pretension  to  which   the Titanic rose.



QTT SEEMS TO   HAVE  NEEDED  a  special  intimacy with   his subject-matter, a physical closeness to it, to write at his best in the narrative poems. Commenting on the  value  of the reconstruction of Fort  Ste.  Marie and  St. Ignace Pratt said: "There is something very dramatic in the  very  matter of exactitude. Indefiniteness is always a psychological loss to a pilgrim  who is visiting a shrine." 23
It was  just such  a  heightened sense of the  dramatic and  a  psychologically  con­ vincing  portrayal of the  events  he narrated that  Pratt sought  to achieve  in  paying  such  careful  attention to detail  in the  writing  of his verse. Thus, to  prepare him­  self to write  "Brebeuf   and  His Brethren" he not only sunk  himself  in the  literary accounts of the  history  but  he also made
a number  of visits to the shrines and  the sites of the ancient  missions to get some knowledge of the  topography,  of the flora and  fauna,  of the  rocks and  trees, the trails,  the  waterways,  the  edible  roots and  the  proper  names  personal  and  geo­ graphical. ...24

For  "Behind the  Log"  he spent  several  days at sea aboard ships that  participated in Convoy  sc 42, or ones similar  to them.  He  interviewed seamen  who  had  been at  the  Battle  of  Cape Farewell. He  secured  copies  of  the  Forms  and   General Instructions relating to  convoys  and  even  paid  a  visit  to  the   Norse-Canadian Trading Company office in Toronto in order  to get an  authentic Norse translation of the  words  he wanted to  put  into  the  mouth of the  Norwegian captain at  the Convoy  Conference.
Pratt's need  for direct  contact with  his subject-matter is perhaps best illustrated by his struggles  with  the writing of "The Roosevelt and  the  Antinoe."  Pratt relates that after  reading the  newspaper reports  in January rg26,
I did think that possibly during  the following summer ... I would make an attempt at it, which I did, but I realised that  I was making a failure  of it. I had selected a light  mode of verse, the  faster  tetrameter  in which "The Cachalot" was  written.
I saw it wouldn't go;  the  material  broke the  mould  and  so I abandoned it.2

rg

PRATT

It took the stimulus of several scientific articles on the radio  compass  (an  instru­ ment  that  had  played a crucial role in the rescue)  and  renewed  press interest  in Captain  Fried  that  was occasioned by his rescue of the  Florida on  January 23, I929, to fully re-excite Pratt's  interest in the Roosevelt's  rescue of  the  Antinoe  as a poetic subject.  But in the meantime  he had  written  to the U.S. Steamship  Line to get permission to visit the Roosevelt, a trip  which  was made  in  early January of I929. He secured a passenger's diary, the logs of both ships, the exact messages which had  been flashed back and forth  between  the two ships during  the rescue operations  and  the contracts made between the master  and  sailors, signed before the departure. He was shown and allowed to operate the wireless, direction-finder  and lifeboats aboard  the Roosevelt and with the help of the second officer retraced from stateroom  to deck the steps of the priest who  had  attempted to administer the last rites to the drowned sailors. Pratt  had  to  leave the actual  writing  of the poem until the university year was over, but it was then  drafted  with relative ease in the summer of I929 and published in early  I930.
We can document  the practice of undertaking  such thoroughgoing  research for
the first time in the writing of "The  Cachalot." In  an  address on his publishing career Pratt explained how he came to choose the subject and also why he thought research such an important part of the writing process.

I began  hunting for a subject  which  would  require some  research  and  give body to poetry [my  emphasis] and  I thought of whale-fishing. I had  seen whales  alive  and dead.  I had  seen them  in the harbours of Newfoundland, particularly at  Moreton's Harbour where  I taught school for two years. I rowed  around them  where  they lay dead  after  capture prior  to their  manufacture into  oil. I  realized  that  at  last I had a  subject   which   could   lend  itself  to  research  -to  the   digging   up  of  the   raw material. ...zs

Pratt's notes to the poem published in Verses of the Sea  (Toronto:  Macmillan, I 930)  indicate two literary sources Pratt  used in his research:  Frank Bullen's The Cruise of the Cachalot  Round  the World  After  Sperm  Whales  (London: Smith, Elder  and  Co.,I 899)  was no doubt  consulted  for the fight  between  the  kraken and  the cachalot,  and  it may have suggested the  poem's  title.  Alpheus  Verrill's The  Real Story of the Whaler:  Whaling  Past and Present (New York:  D. Apple­ ton and Co.,I 916)  contributed other details of whaling expeditions and the object of their enterprise.
The fact that  early drafts of "The  Cachalot" can be found in a notebook which also contains copious notes on M oby Dick opens again  the whole vexed question of the relationship  between  Pratt's  poem and  Melville's  novel. Considering  this fact, the striking structural similarities27   and  many other  "coincidental likenesses"
-such as the fact that  Melville's Pequod meets (in Chapter 52)  a whaling  boat called the Albatross, the name Pratt  chose for his whaling  vessel in "The Cacha­ lot" -one is inclined to think that  M oby Dick was another  source book.

20

PRATT


In  addition to personal  experience and  literary  sources,  the  poem  also benefited from  Pratt's consultations with  Frederick Banting  regarding "data  about   [the] internal constitution of marine mammalia."28  One humorous result of this relation­ ship  was the  mock-heroic passage  about  the  cachalot's pancreas and  liver  which was, if Pratt is to be believed, written because of the wide-spread current interest  in those organs  resulting from  Banting's research.  The  notebooks in the  Pratt Collec­ tion  show  that   Pratt's own  research  included a lot  of  fact-hunting about   early explorers, whalers,  and  whaling, as well as the assembly of  a great  deal of informa­ tion  about whales,  krakens,  and  other  forms of  marine life. These  materials were worked  into  the verse to give it an air of  authenticity.
The  research  carried out  for  the  companion poem  of  the  Titans  volume  was
even  more  extensive  if the  amount of factual notes which  precede  the  drafts are an  accurate measuring standard. Pratt carried  out  an  intensive  study  of geologic ages,  flora,  fauna,  geography, diseases  and   disorders  of  a  dietary origin,   and weather patterns in  Southeast Asia for  "The Great  Feud." Though most  of  the information seems  to  have  come  from  written  sources,  Pratt's visit  to  the  Field Museum of Natural History  in Chicago  in June of 1926  when  he was already at work on  the  poem,  provided him  with  the  object  of his search  for  a counterpart to the semi-intelligent, female  anthropoidal ape:
I went to the zoological section and noticed that a whole floor was occupied by the skeleton of a carnivorous  dinosaur  named Tyrannosauros  Rex. I looked at a num­ ber of the dinosaur's  eggs which had  been dug up in the Gobi desert,  petrified  of course through  age and  of enormous size. I said to myself-"What  a  monster  to introduce into the fight."29

The  impetus and  the  structuring principle behind  "The Fable  of  the  Goats" was  a combination of the  political  situation in  Europe  in  the  mid-1930's and  a little-known  Aesop's  fable.  According to  Pratt, Aesop's   "Fable of  the  Goats" became  "the basis of a rather elaborate poetic symbolism  which  ... reflect[s] in an  ironic  manner contemporary world  conditions."30  Pratt's outside   research  for the  poem was principally geological  as he reports:

I had  to consult a geologist in order  to construct aright  the structure  and strata of the mountain range on which the duel between the two goats took place. I  wanted an  exceedingly  slippery  rock and  Professor Thompson  gave  me  the  names  of  a number  of rocks, amongst  which  was schist, which he said  would  be  geologically and  mineralogically  authentic.31

One  could  examine at  greater length  the origins  and  research  processes behind Pratt's narrative poems, but  I have  cited  the  preceding  cases as the  most  interest­ ing and  illustrative of the  widely  varied  kinds of impetus by which  the  poet  was motivated, and  the  equally   varied   kinds  of  investigation  he  undertook  to  give substance to his work.  It is not  possible within  the confines  of  this  paper  to trace  each  poem  discussed  through its development in drafts,  typescripts and  publica-

21

PRATT


tions; for the road from  the "Java" of Pratt's thought and expression in manuscript drafts, to its "Geneva" in the  production of a finished poem, is typically a lengthy and  involved one.  The detailed study of "The Truant" shows  the  kinds of intense revision this  commonly meant for  Pratt. When writing a narrative poem, the  poet was careful to ensure that  he was factually accurate in every  detail and  thoroughly knowledgeable about the  environment and atmosphere in  which he set  his  tales. Characteristically, Pratt would  seek to attain this  knowledge at  first hand in order to have the  details of an incident vividly  and  accurately set in his mind. Then, and only  then, could   he  begin  the  long  and   demanding process  of  transforming the stammer of his ideas  into  articulate expression.


NOTES

1 "First Person: An Interview with  Jed  Adams," transcribed from  a tape  in the CBC archives, Toronto. The   programme, which  was  written  and   produced by  Lloyd Chester, was aired  in 1959·
2  Ernest Sirluck  file, A. J. M. Smith  Collection, Thomas Fisher  Rare Book  Library,
Univ. of Toronto.
3 In  an  address   delivered   at  a  testimonial dinner  to  mark   the  publishing of  The
Roosevelt  and the  Antinoe  Pratt remarked, "the University vacation [is]  the  only time  I have for writing" (Notebook, Box 9, no. 65, E.  J. Pratt Collection, Victoria
College  Library, Univ.  of Toronto).
4  Holograph in  pen  on small  slip of paper, Box 4, no.  34, E.  J. Pratt Collection. I have   punctuated this  and  other   Pratt prose  commentaries in  order   to  facilitate reading.
5  The story was recounted by an  anonymous book reviewer  in Article  VII,  Quarterly Review, XCV (r854), sr6-r7. The anecdote, which  is full  of  non-sequiturs,  was designed   to  test  the  memory  of the  actor,  Charles Macklin. Pratt's epithet "great Panjandrum" may  be an  imperfect memory  of  Foote's "Grand Panjandrum."
6  Sandra Djwa,   E.  ]. Pratt:  The   Evolutionary  Vision   (Vancouver:  Copp Clark,
1974) ·
7  Undated letter, Northrop Frye file, A. J. M. Smith Collection.
8  Notebook, Box 4, no. go, E.  J. Pratt Collection. All  subsequent quotations  from manuscript drafts  are from  this notebook  unless otherwise stated.
9  This,  and  all quotations of "The Truant" with  line  numbers cited,  are  from  E. J.
Pratt, The   Collected  Poems, 2nd  ed.,  ed.  Northrop Frye   (Toronto:  Macmillan,
1958).
10  Another title which  appears to read  "Still  on the Rungs" seems to have  no dramatic context at all, but  may be meant  to suggest an evolutionary scale.
11 Why  these notes should  appear here  rather than  with  the earlier drafts  I have been unable to discover.
12  "Cocktailed" in this context  means  an animal of less than  pure  breed.
13 I have  found  no evidence  that  this revised version  has survived.
14  Undated letter, Ernest  Sirluck  file, A. J. M. Smith  Collection.
15   Notebook, Box 4, no. 33, E. J. Pratt Collection.

22

PRATT

16  Typescript, Box 3, no. 18, E.  J. Pratt Collection.
17  Typescript, Box 3, no. 18, E. J. Pratt Collection.
18 Notebook, Box 7, no. 51, E.  J. Pratt Collection.
19 E. J. Pratt, holograph introduction to "No.  6ooo," The Canada  Book  of Prose and
Verse, Book 4, ed.  C.  L. Bennett and  Lome Pierce  (Toronto: Ryerson  and  Mac­
millan, 1935), P· 544·
20   Notebook, Box 7, no. 6o, E.  J. Pratt Collection.
21 Notebook, Box g, no. 65, E.  J. Pratt Collection.
22   Notebook, Box 3, no. 16, E.  J. Pratt Collection.
23   Typescript, Box 3, no. 24, E.  J. Pratt Collection.
24   Typescript, Box 3, no. 24, E. J. Pratt Collection.
25   Notebook, Box g, no. 65, E.  J. Pratt Collection.
'
27   See  Robert Gibbs,   "The Living  Contour:  The   Whale Symbol   m  Melville   and
Pratt," Canadian Literature, 40  (Summer 1g6g), 17-25.
28   Typescript, Box g, no. 70.3, E. J. Pratt Collection.
29   Typescript, Box 1, no. 6, E. J. Pratt Collection.
30   Typescript, Box 3, no. 21, E.  J. Pratt Collection.
31  Typescript, Box g, no. 70.3, E.  J. Pratt Collection.












THE SM)ILLEST DET)JJLS
 


Bert Almon


You could  call him cautious, or timid: prudent is the  word  that  he'd  select. He  wears  a red shirt  to eat spaghetti, and  for  the  colder  nights  he  turns  on the  electric blanket a little  early
and  puts  his pajamas under  it to warm. But  when  he goes to meet  her-the  joker, the  casual  one  who puts  his ways down
to a sign  of the  zodiac -he forgets his gloves, scarf,  hat,  and  once even fumbled his car  keys into  a snowbank.

POEM
























































24
 

TJICTICS



He  lived he lives here that  is true
a man  with  neither  sons nor spouse he cannot will not  talk  to you
I am  the daughter of the  house

My  seven brothers went  to war they all fell burning from  the sky they  joined  the  Royal  Flying  Corps and  that  is how and  that  is why

The baron  hid behind  the sun
he wore a scarf and  leather gloves and  they were seven and  he was one and  he the falcon  they the doves

The portraits hang  in heavy  frames above  the  mantel  on  the  wall
I never  read  the dates  and  names
I dust  the glass and  that  is all

My  mother's gone she crossed  the  seas to tie a laurel  round  a cross
I was the one  they loved to tease
they  pinched  and  punched they are  no loss

But  Billy Bishop where  were  you hopping the  misty hedge  below those  brilliant  losses of the  blue
you did  not share  you could  not  know

You  strafed  the  trench  you downed the  hun then  homed  on whisky in the  mess
until  your dingy war was won
that  left my father comfortless.
 




Francis Sparshott


DON GUTTERIDGE'S MYTHIC TETRALOGY


Keith Garebian





LEE PARTS OF   DON  GUTIERIDGE's  tetralogy  appeared  in the seventies, so there  is no analysis of them  in John  Moss's  Patterns Of Isolation, Doug  Jones's Butterfly  On  Rock,  or  Northrop Frye's  The  Bush  Garden.  Nor  is there  any  particular comment in Frank Davey's  From There  To Here, Elizabeth Waterston's Survey, or The  Oxford  Companion  to Canadian  History and  Litera­ ture. Gutteridge does get  worked  into  Margaret Atwood's victimization  thesis in Survival,  but  the insistent  generalization, blatant oversimplifications, and  flippant humour of that  book would  hardly  tempt  a critic to examine Gutteridge's poetry for  something other  than   thesis  fodder. Gutteridge's  historical tetralogy-Riel
( 1968), Coppermine ( 1973), Borderlands ( 1975), and  Tecumseh ( 1976)-is a relatively  recent  corpus,  but  right  from  Riel it is apparent to  a  perceptive critic that  Gutteridge is more  than  a journeyman poet.
Superficially, Gutteridge  appears to  be  a  documentary  poet  along   the  lines drawn by  Dorothy Livesay  in  a  celebrated paper  presented at  York  University, June 12, 1969.1 His tetralogy-where each  work can stand impressively  by itself
-does not  follow  the strict  narrative pattern in Browning's or Tennyson's man­ ner;  nor  does it place  its chief emphasis  on historical  perspective -despite all its debts  to such  eminent sources  as Samuel   Hearne, Louis  Riel,  John  Jewitt,  and David  Thompson. Unlike  American epics such as Leaves Of Grass or The  Bridge, Gutteridge's tetralogy does  not  seem  to create  a single  national  myth, but  reads very much  like a group of long  poems  that  are  "based on  topical data but  held together   by  descriptive, lyrical,  and   didactic  elements."  Gutteridge's poems­ especially  Riel  (subtitled "a poem  for  voices")  -are  meant   to  be  read  aloud; thus  they  join  the  ranks  of  other   Canadian  long  documentary  poems  such  as Marriott's The  Wind  Our  Enemy, Birney's  Trial of  a City,  Pratt's The  Titanic, and  Livesay's  Call My  People Home.
The  most recent  preoccupations with the documentary form  in Canadian  poetry
-Andrew Suknaski's Wood   Mountain Poems,  Michael Ondaatje's  The  Col­ lected Works  Of Billy The  Kid,  Milton  Acorn's The  Island Means Minago-try to be more than  either simple reportage or skillful didacticism. They attempt myth­ making on  a  national scale,  beginning with  locale  and  extending, like  Yeats's

25

GUTTERIDGE

famous gloved hand,  past the cobwebs of history to universal  themes and  myths. Always there is an insistence on symbolic significance beyond the mere themes or didactic  force. Indeed,  all the  parts of the  tetralogy  tell  real stories -factually documented  in fundamentals-for a myth's sake; and this myth is nothing if not that of a psycho-spatial man-doomed redeemer, freely adventuring explorer, or shocked captive-initiate.
Gutteridge  -like Pratt -begins with historical  data,  but inevitably moves to create a poetic meaning for his stories. If we were to stand  back from each of his four narratives, we would find four types of myth with their languages of symbolic translation. Riel, for instance, could be interpreted as a salvation-history,  a story of a redeemer  and  his martyrdom.  The symbolist Coppermine  is in the old  tradi­ tion of the quest. Borderlands is a myth of psychic integration  and  uses the motifs of  captivity  and  cruelty.  Finally,  Tecumseh aligns  with  Riel  in  becoming  an explicit myth of translation with Osirian analogies. In each case, there is an obses­ sive intensity of theme, but the entire form of mythos  is clarified by Gutteridge's skillful deployment of language. The  lyrical mode holds sway over all other styles, and  diction  and  image  show  Gutteridge's  preoccupation  with  transformations, with writing a language  capable  of  expressing states of being.




RIEL DRAMATIZES ANTITHETICAL  responses to land and life: the Metis response (personified and intensified by a neurotic Riel), and the white, colonial  response. The  first response is expressed through  symbolism, lyrical  and dramatic rhythm,  while the second response is made  explicit by flat prose.
At the beginning of this five act drama,  we do not hear Riel's own voice, though
we feel his spirit -especially  as this vibrates  in  the  act  of his walking  with  his father in Pembina in I858. The Metis, we are told, find "in walking a togetherness of spirit,"  and the image of legs dominates  the whole first section of Part  One - particularly  the  first five lines, which  use words  like "walking," "legs,"  "steady stride,"  "lean-muscled," and  "striding." The  second sentence  begins with a verb and  (because  of the omitted, but  implied, connecting  pronoun  "they," i.e., Riel and  his father)  we have the emphasis on  a verb  that  becomes the  principle  of continuity,  the  dynamic  essence of the  joining  and  separating imagery  and  the evocation of a linguistic characteristic  of Cree  (one of Riel's tongues)  which can render  a whole sentence or idea by a single word. A scholar  has called the Cree language  "one gigantic verb" because it often achieves through  alterations in verbs what  other  languages achieve through  declension or addition  of nouns,2   and  the unmistakeable  impression we get from the third-person  narrative opening is of one gigantic  verb -the act of walking in togetherness  before space  and  event  inter­ vene and separate  the two walkers.

GUTTERIDGE


The   preponderance  of  prepositional  phrases -two  in  almost   every  line - creates  a density  of detail  and  modification; and  a concreteness derives  from  the several  dozen  nouns.  As the  fellow-feeling  between  father and  son  is built  up,  it becomes  increasingly clear   that   Gutteridge is  aiming   for  a  tribal   sense  in  the rhythm, imagery, and  event:

They were walking:  as a Metis always walked
Because a man could feel the Mother  Earth  through  the palms
Of his feet, and know the firmness of her flesh
And the great  unturning  heart at the centre  of her,
Were walking because walking told in every stride Of man's  moving over the earth  in a passing as brief As a footprint, and because a M'etis found
In walking a togetherness of spirit,
Of flesh knowing the same earth  at the same turning
Of the sun or the season, and a man moving
Was like the wind's loving of the deep  grasses,
And did not stand like the rocks and die with stillness
In  the  bones, and  because walking made  spring Out  of muscle and limb, and  a man could feel His body lean as a willow in its long greenness, And because there was joy in a Metis walking
With  himself or his brother.  These things had  been told
To  him by his elders, and he had felt them.

Gutteridge's technical virtuosity is impressive. There  is a taut  quality in the buffalo hunt  episode;  a dream  quality during the homeward journey,  with  slowly stretch­ ing  syllables  languorously and  softly  pronounced; a  surrealistic  overlapping of Thomas  Scott's  hysterical, sadistic  laughter  with   the  thundering  noise  of  the stampeding buffalo; complex modifiers and  descriptions from  nature that  (like the Cree tongue) are expressive  and  dramatically rhythmic in their  rich vowel sounds,  strongly  aspirated consonants, verbal  insistence,  and  varied  tempo. Gutteridge is a  prime  synecdochist, for  he  takes  the  half  wagon-half man  configuration of the
nomadic Bois-Brulis, and  makes the wheel and  circle emerge  as dominant images
during great  colourful  moments such  as the gathering at Pembina.
But  Gutteridge retains control  over  his language and  his subject. Immediately following  the  opening section  on the fellowship  of walking, there  is a  prose letter by Charles Mair to The  Globe in which  the possession of land  is made  a bourgeois theme.  An irony  is obtained from  the sharp contrast  between  young  Riel's appre­ ciation  of the  "great unturning heart" at  the  centre  of Mother Earth  and  Mair's utilitarian approach to the  question  of prairie settlement:

But who should  come in  and  possess this land?  The  question  is easily answered. Any farmer  who has  £goo of capital and provisions to subsist his family for at least one year. He  should  also bring  his seed-grain, a Pittsburgh  plough,  harrow  teeth and a separate  mower. And he would have no difficulty in selecting a farm. There

27

GUTTERIDGE

is no Stobson's choice about it, 'this or none.' The  cake is 700 miles long and  400 miles wide-and  plenty of elbow room. Here  at the western terminus  of the  pro­ posed route from Canada  are the three prime desiderata of the husbandman:  land, wood and  water.  Land  upon  whose bosom has  withered  the  enriching  and  pro­ creant  vegetation  of centuries -land which  drops fatness, as if in the  fulfillment of prophecy:  at once generous and abundant, and  more durable  than  its tiller.

Mair, in an extremely ironic way because  he is a poet writing so mundanely, sug­ gests that  he  himself  is much  of a  bourgeois  materialist, seeking  to  convert  raw land  into  productive landscape.
The  rift between  man  and  land,  western  landscape and  colonial  encroachment,
is further dramatized by the image  of the  railroad. Here  geometry and  language are the twin  nuances of meaning, for the railroad is a "straight line"  to "horizon's roundness" and  its "steel tongue" intones "its single word  into empty  western-sky." From  the  beginning, then,  of European expansion farther west, there  is a drama and  difference in  viewpoint  and  language. Where the  Metis,  because  they  are native  to the  prairie, commune with  the  dusty  plains  and  the  ghostly  winds  and lights of the  aurora borealis  ( chepuyuk), the  white  colonizers  impose  their  shapes on the land  via their  technology, and  show off "brick towers," "stone  spires,"  and "square roads." The names  of  concrete  objects   contrast  with  images  of  hands, feet,  and  heart, sometimes  allied  to  and  consecrated by  M etis
tions:   "he  was  happy just to feel his father's strides  I Coincide with  his own";
"liking the feel of current pulling at his feet"; "twin-spires of the love I He learned at  the  altar of  his mother's voice  and  arms  I And  hands." The   community of feeling is intensified  via the brief family-history of the Lagimodieres and  the repeti­
tion of the  joining  and  separating images of feet, hands, and  waters.
Though Gutteridge keeps his eye on event  and  connection, his dramatic evoca­ tions of personality and  motive  are strong.  He shapes  mundane, detailed  portraits of such  figures as Schultz,  Scott,  and  Sir John A., which  contrast vividly  with  an impressionistic, abstract  rendering of  Riel.  Schultz, the  western  archetype of  a political  physician, is sketched  as a staunchly respectable  bourgeois,  a freemason with  Orange sympathies, bureaucratic, scheming,  dyspeptic, arrogant, hostile  to Catholics and  Metis,  and  the  prairie  landscape. When  he is first introduced to us, we  take  note  of the  strong  patterns in  his  rhetoric. There are  several  adverbial phrases  and  clauses  of concession  that  serve  to  make  Schultz  seem  an  archly  sly conciliator who balances limitation against  achievement, handicap against  advan­ tage.
Sir  John  A. comes  off no less ironically.  He  is placed  in  a  concrete world  of
objects,  textures, and  material values,  and  it  is altogether a  comfortable,  elitist setting  with  its sideboard of American mahogany, its French port,  crystal,  scraps of parchment, quill,  desk, stuffed  chair,  cigar-box, cut-glass  decanter. With  all the accoutrements of  material  comfort, Sir  John A.  entertains his  distaste  for  the

GUTTERIDGE

Catholics, and  seems intolerant  of anyone else. His character  and  Schultz's show that  the  new  Northwest  was to  be an  extension of  Protestant  Ontario.   In  the archetypal  mode of a nation-builder, he is represented as an architect  toying with building  blocks of the country's  future  as his alcoholism weaves its dark  river in his blood.
In  contrast  with  his white  antagonists,  Riel  is represented  through  emotion­
charged  symbols. Many  key periods of his life are suggested -his  "miracle" in
1874, his wooing of Evelina, his madness, exile, and trial-but, in general, there is little attempt  at a direct  revelation of character  and  certainly  no explicit  con­ juration  of what Kinsey Howard  calls his "paranoid schizophrenia":  wherein he was prone to grandiose  illusions, egotistical spells of morbid  introspection,  mental excitability, a sense of persecution, and a conviction of  divine mission. This is not to suggest that  these traits or symptoms are  not  present  in the  poem. Gutteridge  does not  take  license with  history;  he merely  departs  from  it in order  to create something  quite different.
If (as A. R. M. Lower argues)  there is a point when history becomes myth, then Gutteridge's Riel is less a historical figure than  a mythic one. He is not a rebel or insurrectionist  but  a line of resistance -a core of anarchic  defiance. Yet Riel is not simply a symbol. If he were only this, then Gutteridge  would  have ironically repeated  a historical mistake which once caused Riel to cease existing as a credible man.  Though  he is dramatized in opposition  to Scott, Schultz, and  Sir John  A., Riel is an eloquent  mystic, but here again irony prevails; for unlike the mysticism of orthodox  Catholics, Riel's mysticism contains little or no joy. Instead,  Riel's mysticism is based on certain magical superstitions, and expresses the transports  of one who has not been estranged from his "primitive," native self. It is the root and delimitation  of his messianic obsession, and  leads to dreams  and  visions that  are lyrically intense and  totally alien to the minds and hearts of the colonizers.
There  is another  problem  with Riel's characterization, and  this probably  arises out of the lyrical compression in the verse. To begin with, we do not have enough of the priestly rhetoric that often drenches the historical Riel's letters and sermons. And because of this deficiency, we do not obtain an effective contrast  between the religious musings of a man  obsessed with his self and  the political writings of the same  person  where  there  is scant  attention   paid  to  personal  fate.  Nor  is there enough  ambiguity  surrounding Riel's sanity. In Gutteridge's  poem, we feel some of the soul-magnifying  and mind-splitting force of his sense of destiny, but there is no sense of bizarre,  anthropomorphic eccentricity, no grotesque distortions of the ego and  religious belief that  could possibly arouse solid doubts  about  his mental equilibrium. He is very realistically a David, awaiting  the moment  of his victory
over Goliath: "David: fondling  a  I smooth stone, fingers seeking I The  spring
of its power." He is also very credibly a historical Messiah-manque, "Moses  con­
fronted  by a burning  bush I That  made the sky around  it only blacker," and even,


29

GUTTERIDGE

spiritually, a Christ  among  men. But  he is not  a madman, even  in  passing  flights of uncontrol. His flashes of apocalyptic imagery  (such  as allusions  to moving mountains, the  Four   Horsemen   of  the  Apocalypse, and   the  Second   Coming) make  him  an  intense  mystic, but  they  do not  suggest  he is hallucinating like one who  has lost all distinction  between  the  actual and  the  imagined.




l:E ENDING  OF  Riel  RENDERS  the  poem  apocalyptic in  its symbolism and  meaning, and  this revelatory  impulse  links it to Coppermine, which, however, expresses a very different myth in a different style. The  period  of Copper­ mine occurs  roughly  a century  before  Riel's  story,  and  now  we are  in  the  North rather than  in the West. If Riel can  be seen as a would-be Messiah's quest  for his people's  salvation, Coppermine  can  be interpreted as a  Canadian  version  of the El Dorado myth.
Though Matonabbee, Chief  of the Northern Indians, is the  most striking char­ acter  in this  poem, it is the figure  of Samuel Hearne who  projects  (through  Gut­ teridge's poetic  refractions)  the  white  man's quest  for  the  golden  (read copper)
one:
Matonabbee  speaking

'Where the mouth  of the grand  river opens To swallow the sea, lies the Copper-mine: And they say the metal sits there in chunks As big as a bison's flank, and  that once
When the dogs long ago dwelt there,  they built
Giant fires out of the burning  Aurora
And ate the copper flesh to make their
Blood hard, and  what you now see there  are  bones
The  gods have left behind in the daylong Darkness, with only the Boreal light Flickering on their nakedness like pale
Shadows of flame from some far-off dying
Hearth-fire  of the Manitou.'

As Matonabbee tells this legend  of the  coppermine, he seems  to be  enjoying  the myth  possibly because  he gauges  its special  enchantment for Samuel Hearne and company. And  the  copper  symbol is portentous from  the start-sinisterly so, for it is present  in "gold  visions" rejected  by Midas whose  gold-lust  would  normally not exclude  anything golden.
Gutteridge projects  through Matonabbee the  sort  of terror sprung out  of the land   and  described   by  Frye  in  the  Literary  History  of Canada:    "It is  not  a terror  of the  dangers or discomforts  or even  the  mysteries  of nature, but  a terror of the soul at something that  these things  manifest." In Coppermine  the  terror  is

GUTIERIDGE


temporarily attenuated as the  Copper  Woman  myth  enlarges. Geography is inter­
nalized  and  reprojected in lines that  describe  this mythic creature:

Because she was a magic god-woman - Brown, like us, only her skin glowed as if
Tiny  fires burned  in her flesh and shone  through
So you could see the rivers and runlets
Her  blood made, her whole body like a map
With  its own lakes and streams, and dark  patches
Where  the land  lay, and she had  no deerskins
On  her, though  the cold made the tent-poles snap,
And snow melted on the flesh of her breasts, Buttocks and  unlit cave of her thighs.
They  followed  her over the treeless Barrens Through the darkness of night and day, their  eyes On  the north,  which was the darkest part  of
The sky, and on the crevasse of those deep Woman-thighs, till they came to the place of The  copper,  and  found her vision was true.

Everything is transmuted surreally into  copper.  Even  the  sexual  sadism   (just  as strong  in  Borderlands and  Tecumseh) is converted  into  something like a  picture by Salvador Dali  whose surface exoticism or polished strangeness does not obscure the  psychological  portent. The  purpose  of the  surreal  is not  simply  to excite  the senses with  a flow of apparently discrete images  and  colours,  but  to create  a field of association  that could  develop into  an  integration of meaning. Though at  first the surreal  seems only unlikely  or purely imaginative, its symbolism  has an impor­ tant  psychic  import. The surreal allows  the  poet  the  opportunity to  indulge  his artistic  imagery, dispense  with  linear  narrative, and-provided  his synecdoche  is clear  enough  -to build  up  a special  significance  for his motifs.
The  method of Coppermine is largely  symbolic  and  abstract-unlike  that  of
Riel  where   meanings and   symbols  are  connected   through  events  that   can   be verified  historically. Not  that Coppermine  is not  based  on  history,  but  its  com­ position  appears to  rely  less on  documented experiences -though  its  depiction of the Eskimo slaughter is thoroughly accurate -and more  on Gutteridge's power of lyric projection. Because  the  poet is interested in determining "what the eyes / won't  tell,"  "what kind  of  mind" feeds on  certain  legends,  he  uses history  as  a point of departure or, at least, a core of radiation. The  core is, of course, Hearne's obsession  with  discovering the  source  of  copper,  and   the  separate rays  are  the moments (scenes)   of energy  where  the  characters and  the  poet  think  "copper." There are  accordingly periods  of  powerfully  evocative  symbols,  moments when the  struggle  of  the  inarticulate seems to  be overwhelming, phases  of  unresolved  enigma, but  the  total  work  ultimately creates  a significant  story  that, in using the archetypal quest   form,  finds  analogues of  being  and   types  of  knowledge  that  radiate from  Hearne's adventure of exploration and  discovery.

GUTTERIDGE

External  and  internal  worlds converge in Coppermine, and  the mouth  image becomes the chief expression of this phenomenon.  Even  in hi.s fantasies, Hearne imagines himself being swallowed by the mouth  of the  mine,  and  his brain,  the seat of reason and animal spirits, becomes metaphorically contracted  to the mouth as space, light, and knowledge enter it.
This particular metaphorical  alliance is especially significant, for it is an impor­
tant detail in Gutteridge's synecdoche of psychic integration. Even space is repre­ sented as a "polar  mouth  I mind eaten  I with its own appetite" and  then,  even more explicitly  (but  repetitively),  its "magnetized teeth  I nibble my brains  I like
copper meat."
The  poetic voice of Hearne  the explorer develops the drama  of quest wherein the spirit seeks unity in the material  world. In  this regard,  the geometric  images (especially those of circles) are particularly  effective. The  first circle is, perhaps, the explorer's own eye, which besides throwing its focus on the sun (a cosmic eye) and the lines of vision measured by the quadrant (Hearne's third  eye),  also looks at  itself in a sort of Plotinian  reflexiveness. For  Plotinus,  the  eye would  not  be able to see the sun if the eye itself were not  the sun. Hence  we have traditional representations of the sun as an eye, or of Osiris and Christian  God as a divine eye.
With  his quadrant, Hearne  acquires a third  eye which is of dual significance. On  the  positive side, it symbolizes superhuman or divine  awareness-much  in the manner  of Shiva's  powerful third eye. However, on the negative side, a third eye is useless and is cast in darkness. In symbolist theory, the multiplicity is a sign of inferiority  or psychic decomposition. It  is the  negative aspect which is stressed rather  comically when Hearne  breaks the quadrant:

That  day on my
first journey when I
broke my quadrant;
they found it funny to see a blind man
with three eyes.

The  broken  quadrant itself has an interesting  significance,  for the symbolism of quaternity implies the idea of a perfect order,  the  idea  of the four  natural  ele­ ments that  compose the universe in ancient  Greek  philosophy.  Elsewhere  in  the poem, there is a moment imagined by Hearne  when the square is circled: "Circles
in a I squared  eye:  I earth  affirmed...." Here  the squaring  of the circle (or the
circling  of  the  square -the  order  is reversible)   is  a  geometric  metaphor   for stability, order, and  materialized energy.
The point of Hearne's  quest in this poem is not simply a geographical  adventure or a colonial enterprise. It is abstracted  into a quest for self-transformation. Matonabbee indicates as much by his own self-translation, when in dance  he becomes a man  recovering his sense of the eternal:

GUTTERIDGE


Matonabbee as leader of the band conducts the supplicantatory  dance,
and for an encore swallows whole
(like a slithering  adder)
a ten-inch  rancid  penis,
then,  puffed as a bullfinch struts and  prances
till we almost believe those antlers sprouting from  his skull!

The  energetic verbs and  participles ("puffed," "struts," "prances," "sprouting") align  with  the slithering adder and  penis to signify both  an  inner  spiritual and  an external material strength -potential  for the  propagation of cosmic  forces. The rising  force  is developed in the swelling  dance  where  the  verse follows the  ascent of  Matonabbee's force,  moving  upward from  the  sexual  organ   to  the  skull  or realm  of  thought, at  which  point  Matonabbee becomes  a  horned god  or  motif of eternity.
Samuel  Hearne,  however,   never   attains  this  height   of   elf-transformation,
though   he experiences intensely  an  implosion  of energy  and  consciousness:  "the caves in the  I brain  flame  inward I like igloos of I transfused light." Hearne is always  uncertain of his direction:

I am here, I know, was there, and  there

but
if I lose this
book	map 	page where have  I been?
where do I go?

Despite  his confusion, Hearne experiences  an upward movement. This  is catalyzed by  Matonabbee's  ritualistic dances,  priogenitive prophecies,  and  symbolic  refer­ ences. It is Matonabbee who suggests  the  unity  in multiplicity, although  Hearne does not confine  his images  and  symbols to Indian myth.  He  conjures up  psychic significances from  the  Bible  and  Egyptian myth,  and   just  as  he sees in  Maton­ abbee's slithering adder dance a  spiritual ascent,  he  also  intimates  through  his reference  to  Osiris  rising,  an  evolving  ascent; the  very  name   Osiris  means   "he  who is at  the  top  of the steps."
Matonabbee,  nevertheless, becomes  the  prime  reference  for  Hearne as Gutte­
ridge  carefully represents the chief as a symbol of supreme spiritualization. There


33

GUTTERIDGE

is a section,  for instance,  where  Hearne observes, at first hand, the strange art  of the medicine man-cum-conjurer:

See Matonabbee the conjurer swallow a four-foot sword with his two-inch tongue!
No tricks here
no sleight-of-hand, naked as a bird he's plucked from tuft  to toe!

Old man in his death-throes waits for the magic to come: I watch his face, see
death growing there like a masque of plaster bone,
eyes adazzle with
the glitter of dying: last radiance of mysteries not  known
magic unredeemed.

But see how the conjurer  plunges the healing wand into his living throat,  four feet
down to the blood and  bone
to the heart  of the mystery,
see him pull the cord
to draw the magic out:
glittering sword
adazzle in the darkness,
bloody tongue of radiance.

The  sword  has obvious magic  power -linked  as it is to steel and  hence  to trans­ cendent toughness  or an all-conquering spirit.  It is a symbol of spiritual evolution3 and  in the context  above, its association with light and fire ("glittering," "adazzle," "radiance")  intensifies the spiritualization.
The "old   man" is  not   a  decoration  or  self-evident  symbol.   Besides  being obviously  a personification  of age-old  wisdom, he is the symbol  of what  Jung calls the  "mana" personality -that is,  the  spirituality  of  personality  caused   when consciousness is over-burdened with matter from  the  unconscious -death, in this context.4
It is Matonabbee who activates  the magic  of the sword,  who releases the magic spirit  welcomed  by the old man  awaiting death, and  who  (an  hour  later)  takes

34

GUTTERIDGE

on the crooked grin of a slightly ruflled bird -another symbol of spiritualization
-as the old man  is returned  to life.


ER ALL    THEIR   STRANGE  BEAUTY   (a  beauty  coupled  often with the  obscene cruelty  of violence),  their intensity of imagery,  their  technical skill, Gutteridge's  poems move inevitably towards the theme  of death.  Riel ends with  the  eponymous  figure's  abrupt   hanging,  with  the  cold  "gray   towers"  of
Ottawa dominating the fadeout.  Coppermine  charts its quest  pattern surrealistic­ ally, but moves to the subject of a material death. Yet, this time the end is dualistic, for while Hearne  begins his "long  walk," he moves "back," i.e., returns  his spirit to its cosmic source.
Borderlands, the next  poem in the tetralogy, does not suggest a positive aspect to the death  theme, for it shows John Jewitt, its protagonist-initiate, preparing  for death  without  any spiritual  translation.  Borderlands, however, continues to show Gutteridge's variations on patterns.  Unlike Riel, it is not about  an ambivalent historical figure. Unlike  Coppermine, it is not abstract  in its method; nor is it a quest narrative. It  is what  could  be called a story of initiation,5   where the chief narrator is primarily  concerned   with  self-preservation.  The  difference  between quest  literature   and  initiation   literature   is  that  between  free  exploration   and captivity, or between ultimate  purpose and a sense of immediacy.
Ostensibly  based on  Jewitt's  account  of life among  the  Nootka,  Borderlands
substantiates Frye's claim that  "literature is conscious mythology" where its mythi­ cal stories "become habits of metaphorical thought."'6 This symbolic aspect crystal­ lizes early  as Maquina, the  Nootka  chief, articulates  the  perimeter  of  his geo­ graphical  knowledge:

Looking out  is West where  Ocean begins

Looking in is East
where  Forest  has his root

We have  no  North:
sun  is always
South of this coast

North  of here is nothing, nothing I
want  to know.

The  primeval setting is radically different from the prairie in Riel and  the sur­ real locale in Coppermine. Here myth grows out of "immense ranges of  mountains  or impenetrable forests" and  "the  pain of constant  j distance"  in the ocean. It is


35

GUTTERIDGE

the myth of the captive-artisan,  the blacksmith  who is almost broken on the forge of his experience in an alien world. Jewitt,  whose blacksmith-father wanted  to be "Christ's armourer," discovers that  his craft  has dual  significance:  it is both  his salvation  and  his weakness, for it permits  him Maquina's favours  but  also keeps him the chief's captive. Maquina  intends to be the strong hammer  that strikes the metal of white man's flesh.
Here, as in Riel, Gutteridge  develops a dialectic out of two contrasted  ways of
life-each  apparently  extravagant  to the other.  Where  Mozino's  Journal  refers to a  "barbarous sacrifice," Captain  Gray  and  his crew  take  sadistic  delight  in
murdering and  committing  outrages on the  Indians: "we  giggled as the  I little
puddings  of their  I brains dribbled  out,  I we took turns  pissing I on  their  last smiles." The  two tribes-Nootka and  European-are closer in  their  instincts
than  they realize, for there is no difference between Maquina's lyrical description of the slaughter  of the crew and Captain  Gray's sadism-except one:  Maquina is coldly detached  while Gray is emotionally and  psychologically involved.
In  other  aspects,  too,  Nootka  and  European  resemble  one  another   closely.
Maquina is ruthless in sex and war:  he hacks his wife to death  just as brutally  as he assaults the Boston's crew. Jewitt,  by the same token, becomes pure animal  in his lust, and  though  some whites have objected  that  his idiom is too modern  for the setting, we should  remember  that  animal  nature  lies under  the accretions  of time and  culture.
The  shared  savage instincts are set apart  by contrasted  languages  which attest to distinctions in background, sensibility, and  objective.  Maquina asserts that  the white man's  way of fixing and cataloguing  reality by rigid, unchanging names contrasts with the aboriginal  proclivity towards multiplicity:

My daughter has had three names and many more to come, when I have reached my
last name on earth
I shall already be dead,
when my tribe runs out of words
this coast will be blowing sand.

Maquina calls the white man's words hard,  many-edged,  angular,  and sharp,  but destructive.  The  irony is that  while the  white  characters  often  struggle  to  give names to feelings and experiences, Maquina is an  eloquent  primitive.  There  is a strong  clipped  quality to Jewitt's  diction, as though  speech were being wrenched out of him.
The only time Jewitt becomes lyrical is when he describes his smith's craft. Here Jewitt  is released from the burden  of his coarse, ungraceful  aspects and  exults in the grace of his craft. Maquina, by contrast,  consistently sounds a raw music that attests to the tactility of his being-a drum  on which the universe sounds itself.

g6

GUTTERIDGE


This  eloquence is a crafty  device  which  does not simply serve Gutteridge's lyrical impulse; it  is a  valid,   psychologically correct   product of  passion  and  a  human nature attuned to its setting. Gutteridge, perhaps anticipating critical  queries  or objections, quotes Mozino's view on native  eloquence  and  rhetoric:

Since eloquence  has always been considered  the child of vivid passions, and  since these are capable  of firing even the imagination  of these savages, it should not seem strange  that  I affirm its existence among  these islanders, and  in  passing forestall those critics who are quick to claim that the speeches placed in the mouths of these savages by certain  writers are false, as if in order to speak with enthusiasm,  making use of the  most moving figures of speech, it is necessary to attend  universities, to read books entitled  'Rhetoric,' and be ridiculous mimics of Marcus Tullius.  To  be eloquent,  it is enough  to follow freely the impulse of nature,  whose mastery created the most celebrated  orators  of Greece.

What Borderlands amounts to, then,  is a literary  documentary where  the desire to impress  by  a  cumulative piling  of effects  diminishes  its intrinsic dichotomous nature. At once  direct, immediate, colourful, and  powerful, Borderlands does not move  deeply  enough  into  realms  of the  archetype. We see that   Maquina intuits the symbolism  of salmon  as the fish of wisdom; we know  that  the  Bear  ceremony has  a significance beyond  the  merely sensational enigma  impressed  upon  Jewitt; but  the symbols  do not amount to much  in the general scheme  of the  poem.  What we  tend  to  remember best  are  the  sexual  sadism,  certain   exotic  ceremonies­ documented in Jewitt's original journal-and Maquina, who despite  an impres­ sive theatricality, integrity, and  strength, does not overwhelm  Jewitt.
The  fundamental  problem might  be  in  Gutteridge's tendency   to  oversimplify the  captivity story.  His  poem  misses the  motive  for  the  chief's  slaughter of  the crew;  it also misses the striking indignity  suffered  by Maquina, following  Captain Salter's reproach. The poem  fails to become  the  tragedy  it could  have  been,  and becomes a melodramatic narrative where Jewitt prepares for death  and  Maquina reasserts his "sea-dream" mortality.



l:E FINAL  PART OF  Gutteridge's tetralogy returns us to  cos­ mos and  epiphanic translation after  exploring the borderland between history and  myth.  Tecumseh is, like  Riel,  an  example of  conscious  mythologizing, and  like Riel, extends from  historical   circumscription to  a  psychic internalization  of  the  land  and  its various impulses.
The  first part  of Tecumseh provides  us with  pioneer  dreams in French Quebec. There are  various dreams projected in  this section - that  of a seigneur  who  is full of alcohol,  blood  lust, sex, and  tawdry religiosity; one by a young  woman and her mother-for both  of whom  reality is paradoxically an illusion of security  and permanence; and  two dreams by pioneer father and son who struggle  to make  the

37

GUTTERIDGE

land  fit their  dreams  of colonization  and  prosperity.  These  dreams  are  counter­ pointed by Tecumseh's  in Part  Two, where the Indian  strives to find a language appropriate and powerful enough to free the figures of dream: "my tribe's history j the necessary nightmare." There  are several other  elements  as  well-interludes, commentaries,  historical expositions, meditations,  a  proclamation by General  A. P. Hull, letters, and orations-but the predominance of dream  renders this poem apocalyptic, and when we view it in the total context of the tetralogy, we see how the apocalyptic  is a frame around Gutteridge's  mythic  mode.
As in all major works of prose and poetry about  colonial Canada, it is the white
man's  dream  of imposing himself upon the land  that  degenerates  into a horrible nightmare  wherein  the external  is internalized.  Just  as with  Margaret Atwood's pioneer, who grows progressively insane as the land  invades his resisting mind, the Quebec  habitants  are  imprisoned  in "cages"  of  their  own  making  and  become victims to their own paranoid  delusions of security  and  permanence.
The  colonial dream of civilization is protected  assiduously by the various emi- grants, but no dream  remains inviolate:

The dream of civilization
I carried with me
over the borderless ocean
kept pure in the stink
and rabble of the ship,
have guarded here
against all enemies - needs room to breathe,
as well, will soon be
feeding on itself.

No matter  how zealously the bishop attempts  to assert pioneer endeavour  and instruments of colonization, his apology is a weak resistance to the inevitable power of the land  which compels the pioneers to admit  that  their  log-walls are only an illusion of a home, "a  domestic fiction" which ineluctably  becomes a squelched dream.
Pioneer  effort  becomes  grotesquely  obsessive, but  even  the  most  grotesque human  aspiration  cannot match  nature's  grotesqueries.  Father  and son, both full of harsh labour, cannot force the land into a Procrustean adaptation to their ambitions:

But the big trees remain
beyond the clearing beyond the arc
of hand or axe, nightmare or dream: in the coldest day

g8

GUTTERIDGE


they etch their grotesquerie across the whitest sky.

In  the end, the son wants freedom from both his father  and  the land,  the father is swallowed  by his own  dream,  and  there  is an  overwhelming  sense of defeat despite the advent  of nationalism  and territorial  protectionism.
Tecumseh's dream  is to  reclaim  the land  his people  have surrendered   to the
white man. What  justifies this dream is not simply a moral right of  re-appropria­ tion,  but  a  fundamental  understanding of nature  that  is resisted  by the  white colonizers to whom land  is simply property or a possession that  is without  numi­ nousness.
As in  Riel,  the  political  element  is strong -particularly  with  the  genocidal charge laid against the Canadians, and the subtle American  strategy of exploiting Tecumseh as an agent for their own imperial expansionism. But the controlling dialectic  (as  in  Riel  and  Borderlands)  is expressed by a  clash  of symbols and values in the white colonial language of steel (the railroad  a "steel tongue inton­
ing I Its single word into empty western sky")  and the Metis language of spiritual
brotherhood. In  Borderlands this clash is polarized in two modes of language - the rigid tongue-sounds  of the whites and  the  perennially  recreated  language  of the Nootka's never-depleted  supply of words. Now in Tecumseh we have language that suggests a primeval myth, and the images (as in Scott's Laurentian poems and many  sections of Pratt's Towards  the  Last  Spike)  spring  out  of the  elemental
landscape-of  rock older than first bone, "seamed with myth  I with hieroglyphic
runings  I sealed by a silence I that stilled I the first and  vital Word."  We have the  aggressive, destructive  language  of the  western colonizer  whose speech, like
his pioneer activity, testifies to a ruined dream feeding on itself, and  is expressed with energy but without  love or understanding.  And we have the second language
-the self-conscious, visionary  utterances  of Tecumseh,  chief  of  the  Shawnee,
who tries to unite different tribes against the U.S. and save them from extinction.
Gutteridge generally finds the right sensuous lyric form to vitalize his narrative and absorb the prosaic ironies of miscellaneous documentation. His diction is powerful but beautifully simple except when he tries to express a character's intui­ tive intelligence by means of sophisticated abstraction. At these points, Gutteridge's  imagery   becomes  obtrusive  and  anachronistic,  especially  when  it   issues from Tecumseh  in  moments  of intense  lyric self-consciousness. With  Tecumseh,  Gut­ teridge  too  often  strains  western  diction  into  expressing  an  acute  anguish  and sensitivity whose pain is older than language.
But there  is achievement  even in  this failure, for  Tecumseh is an  impressive drama of translation. Despite his mutilated corpse, Tecumseh  remains the unstilled voice of conscience in a land that  has the scattered pieces of his body. His Osirian dismemberment is a deliberate  mythic reference, and  when  his resurrected  spirit is said to enter  all things and  speak to us in a way that  "humiliates the air"  and

39

GUTTERIDGE

breaks the chronology of his people's despair,  we know explicitly that  Gutteridge is exploring  the borderland  between history and  myth.
With  Riel and  Tecumseh,  Gutteridge  finds two historical figures who indulge in conscious mythologizing. Riel cultivates tenaciously  his self-images of prophet and messiah where Tecumseh's  oratorical  power, while asserting the  catastrophe and  pacifying  powers of language,  enlarges  his own  vision of a  personal  myth that  will be both strong and liberating:

I want to fashion good words forever, stretch my body into a continuous sentence, humiliate the air with speech, break
the chronology of my people's despair,
sew them green stories, chronicles of hope,
weave a new history from our twin beginnings:
we shall see our own shame and the
white man his-he will smile and give up his books, his bellicose
reading of the world's working-out, my myths will eat him, page by page, into silence-decoded, he will be free
at last to utter those poems that have
no need for the curvature of words....

At  the end,  of course, Tecumseh  becomes the  spirit  in  all things,  the  historical hero, prophet,  and  mythopoet.
In  sum,   Gutteridge's  tetralogy  crystallizes  his  sympathy   for   underdogs  - whether  they exist in western society or outside it, sinister or disturbed.  This  pro­ duces-for  all  the  sophisticated  symbolism-a  worldly  vision  of  a  human struggle for power. But this power is not simply the power of politics or technology. It is, instead, the power to evolve spiritually, and it is a mystery treated  with sensi­ tivity. Clearly,  the  heroes in Gutteridge's  landscapes  are  not  the  bourgeois  pro­ ponents  of  planning,  technical  efficiency, regimentation, and  social  convention. When  his men  become  heroic -and  it  is always  in  extrem1:s-they do  so in circumstances  that  do not afford the protection  of social order.
What  this produces is a sentimentalization  of the  primitive  ethos, and such an
effect is yet another  demonstration  that  the  romantic  age of Canadian poetry is not really over. From  Purdy to Cohen, from  Gutteridge  to Atwood,  there  is still a fascination  with  masks-with gestures and  expressions of the  primitive,  as if that element were the residue of a civilization purer than  our own. All these poets are concerned with visions of destruction which may or may not be translated  into a psyche-enlarging apocalypse, but the combination  of brutal sex, physical violence, and  psychic confusion  is metaphysical  in  its attempt   to  yield a  transcendental value as art. The danger inherent in this position, as Sandra  Djwa  has pointed out in a piece on Cohen's  black romanticism,  is "the  temptation it offers to mistake

GUTTERIDGE


catalogued  sensation for new revelation."7   I think, however, Gutteridge  generally succeeds admirably in resisting this temptation.


NOTES

1 "The Documentary Poem: A Canadian  Genre," in  Contexts  of Canadian  Criti­
cism, ed. Eli  Mandel (Chicago: Univ.  of Chicago  Press,  I97I), pp.  267-81.
2  Joseph Kinsey  Howard, Strange  Empire  (Toronto: Swan  Publishing, I965),  pp.
44-45·
8 J. E. Cirlot, A Dictionary Of Symbols, trans.  Jack  Sage  (New  York: Philosophical
Library, I 962) , p. 308.
4  Ibid.,  p. 231.
See  Maurice Hodgson, "Initiation  And  Quest: Early  Canadian  Journals," Cana­
dian Literature, No. 38 (Autumn Ig68), pp. 29-40.
6  Northrop Frye,  "Conclusion to a Literary History of Canada," in The  Bush Garden
(Toronto: Anansi, I 97 I), p. 232.
7  Sandra Djwa, "Leonard Cohen: Black Romantic," in Poets and Critics, ed. George
Woodcock (Toronto:  Oxford Univ.  Press, I974), p.  I83.









THE BLOOD-ORJINGE MOON

Fraser Sutherland

A lonely  hanging sun,  the moon  is full of itself.
In Bethel  Cemetery the corpses  take  their  Sunday stroll. Why  should  we living  wake?

In  the several  darknesses  the leaves are fronds, oarmen of the outer  river.
Our lives are  cryptocrystalline.

But  we have  more  neighbours than  we thought, in the  opaque  passages.
They  are  making deliveries. Calling  cards.

Yet  that  moon,  a rutted pippin, a swollen  bitter tangerine
is picked  out  of darkness.


SCOTT'S  IILAKESHORE" AND ITS TRADITION (For A.]. M. Smith)


Germaine Warkentin



FRANK SCOTT's   POEM "Lakesho'<" first  appo=ed m Event< and  Signals  (I 954), a volume that  bore as its epigraph the  words "between  the event and the observer there must pass a signal-a wave, an impulse, or perhaps
a  ray of light."  Events  and  Signals  provides a broad  conspectus  of the state  of Scott's  art  in  I954• and  the volume stands, Janus-like,  facing  backward  on  the terse and satiric modernism of the poems in New  Provinces  ( I936)  and Overtures (I 945), and forward  to the reflective, yet experimental modes of the Eye  of the Needle, Signature, Trouvailles, and  The Dance  is One, the latest of which  was published in  I973· When Scott issued his Selected   Poems  in  I966,  "Lakeshore" was placed at the beginning, as if to constitute  a signal itself, a definition of the poet's vision and a statement of his art  which provides a necessary prelude to con­ frontation with the whole man.
What  kind of signal does "Lakeshore" constitute?  What  event  does it record, and  to what observer is the message sent? We need  to know, in order  to resolve the  problem-often voiced by readers-of  the meaning  of the  poem's ending. Is the figure of the poet musing alone on Ararat  an image  of contemporary  dis­ illusion, or is the fact that  he has survived his Flood the expression of some  kind of blessing? One  route to an answer is through  an exploration  of the  richness of the poem itself, not merely the complex interweaving  of its biological and Biblical themes, but  its intricate  and  beautiful  texture.  Such  an  exploration  leads us not only to a new view of the poem, but to several other  perceptions  as well : a sense of "Lakeshore"'s original literary context, its meaning  for Scott's art, and particu­  larly a recognition of the extent to which it articulates a solution  to the  problem of man  in nature  which has been tested out by other  Canadian poets before and since, though  rarely with such mastery.
"Lakeshore"'s point of departure is a visual image striking not only in its exacti- tude, but in its unexpected point of view:

The lake is sharp along the shore Trimming  the bevelled edge of land To level curves....

42

F.R. SCOTT

This is the archetypal  lake-Northern, one supposes-of  Canadian poetry and painting. But although  Scott sees it pictorially, he does not treat it as if the subject were a static one. Rather, the lake is an agent, carpentering  its place in the visual ground  as it trims and  orders the earth  around  it. Yet the border  between water and shore is not as sharp  as we at first think:

the fretted sands Go slanting down through liquid air Till stones below shift here and there Floating upon their broken sky
All netted by the prism wave
And rippled where the currents are.

Through this amphibious  medium the sands fretted by the carpenter's saw descend into the medium  that  works at them until the very visual ground  itself shifts and inverts, and the stones beneath the water seem to move upward  and float upon the broken surface that is their sky, though it is at our feet. The  world is turned  upside down, yet the inversion is not disorienting, for the stanza  ends  with the floating components  of the scene serenely "netted" by the now prismatic  water, which still works variations in the surface of the lake by the internal force of its own currents.
The  stanza  establishes a thematic  opposition between  the  rigid  delineation  of
boundary  lines and  the  gathering  of  disordered  fragments  into  unified  wholes which turns  out  to have technical, structural, and eventually  moral  implications for the development  of the  poem as a whole, and  which can  be seen even in its metrical  features.  A steady,  four-beat  line is the  prosodic  unit  throughout the poem, and  imposes upon  its internal  shifts and  inversions a containing  net  like that  of the  prism  wave, while at  the same time allowing  other,  more  irregular forces to act. For example, "Lakeshore" is not in any usual sense rhymed after the
first stanza.  In the lines we have  just looked at, a pattern  exists:  a, b, b2     [land  I
sands], c, c, d, e, c 2  [air I there I are]. This looks like rhyme at first, but in fact the expectations Scott establishes include those of half-rhyme, and there is considerable internal  rhyme and  assonance:  bevelled  I level;  level I fretted;  sands  I slanting;
stones I floating  I broken; netted  I rippled. Thus, the poem, like its subject, moves amphibiously   between  two  worlds, one  rigorously ordered  and  controlled,  the
other yielding, shifting, and changing, but like the prismatic wave full of many different ways of seeing.
It is upon this metamorphic scene that the poet gazes:

I stare through windows at this cave Where fish, like planes, slow-motioned, fly. Poised in a still of gravity.

The image of his eyes as "windows" recalls the severe, almost reductive carpenter­
ing of the first lines. Earlier  our vision had been led downward  through  a lucent


43

F.R. SCOTT

and yielding medium  into another  world. Now, through  his "windows" the poet stares, not down into, but at a scene which he describes as a "cave."  The  word "cave," unexpectedly  applied to the  jewel-like underwater scene of the first lines, suggests another distinction between shore and lake. The lake,  t'n
to a primitive  world before historical time, and  the poet on the shore to its oppo­ site:  the  sophisticated  dimension  of  temporal  experience.  That  the  distinction between them is tragic is clear from the impoverishment  of true seeing suggested in the strangled  words, "stares at."
The  stillness of the staring  poet is reproduced  in a different  way in the scene upon  which  he gazes. His only idiom for describing  this draws  upon  similitudes from the windowed world he lives in:  the fish are like "planes," the suspension of law he senses is described as "a still of gravity." And the line itself is full of expres­ sive halts and stoppages. The  light by which he sees all this is like the sun, only paler and  of a different colour. The  lines tell us that  the  poet and  the world out of which he gazes are unilingual,  perhaps even inarticulate, that  they  lack words and images for experiences other than  their own.




Y.T AT  THE  SAME TIME, the  poem is speaking  to us almost privately in a language  which is quite different  from  this constricted  idiom;  it is more fun,  for one thing. Scott's word-stock has the simplicity and  clarity of the language  of a poem by Ben Jonson-"store," "cave," "still,"  "hangs," "open." But at the same time as he is presenting us with this limpid linguistic medium,  he is playing with the currents in it, in such lines as

The narrow  minnow, flicking  fin, Hangs in a paler,  ochre  sun,
His doorways open  everywhere.

The stoppages in "where fish, like planes, slow-motioned,  fly" seem to express the watcher's   own  constraints,  but  balanced   against   this  is  the  delicious  rapport between  "narrow" and  "minnow," "flicking"  and  "fin,"  "paler" and  "ochre." And in its terminations  this stanza  relies not on rhyme and  half-rhyme  but on a few simple cases of assonance that open up alternatives  in the method of the poem at the same time as the grave and regular metre  provides a source of strength.
These  prismatic  possibilities the  windowed  poet  can  sense at  the  end  of the stanza,  when  he realizes the fish's relationship  with  his environment  -his door­ ways are open everywhere -and implicitly contrasts it with his own sequestration.  The image of "doorways" is still drawn from his earlier repertoire, but recognizing their openness takes him over an important boundary. Suddenly  metamorphosed into a thing of nature  himself, a tall frond leaning  into a marine inversion of the

44

F.R.SCOTT

world in  which it is nevertheless rooted, he bends to seek another  light, another forest.
Scott's  control  of image,  prosody, and  diction in this  poem is almost  perfect.
Only twice does it loosen for a moment;  once here, in the flaccid line "vivid with gloom and  eerie dreams"  which is meant  to suggest the dreamlike  "otherness" of the inverted  world beneath  the water, but really just seems effect for effect's sake. He does the same thing,  although  without such costly results, when  towards  the end of the  poem the swimmers rise towards  the surface with "mermaids in their memories."  This  want  of vigour is oddly unlike the  rest of the  poem, which  is much  tougher  and  more rigorous, as we can see when Scott begins to shape for us that  which seems like dream  to the descending poet, but which is to constitute a discovery of the  "home  that  stirs the  dark  amphibian," that  is, the  ultimate reality of the experience of primal being.
Entering  the  water,  the  poet has seen himself metamorphosed  for an  instant into the vegetable frond,  rooted on the shore though searching  downward  into an element mysteriously more natural  to it. But Scott's real interest is in the somatic responses of human  flesh -its eyes, orifices, loins -and  he abandons  the  vege­ table metaphor to explore an  image which extends itself over almost all  the rest of the poem:  that of the body of the poet descending into the deepest of the water's colonnades, the currents of its physical rivers contracted  as it strives to return  to a place which is both its metaphysical  centre and its point of historical origin. This experience is not a solitary one, for with him others come of their own will, naked swimmers drawn  likewise to their beginnings. The image is riveting:  through  the water the bodies fall home "like tumbled water loosed above," not rooted like the poet, but liquid like the medium  that gave them birth. "Stroked  by the fingertips of  love,"  they  lie  "diagonal," a  seemly ordering,  but  in  accord  with  another  geometry than  that  of the severe shore above. They fall  not into water, but  into what  the  water  means:   a locus amoenus, this sheltered  grove, the  place  where being originated, and where the act of creation takes place again in the act of love.
Scott,  however,  tries to state  what  union  in an  ideal state  of being means  in
terms that  take us beyond the not unexpected sexual image. His words contradict the  watching  poet's  original  vision of the  inverted  marine  world in stanza  two, which seemed at first a curious simulacrum  of the world above. He writes,
Silent, our sport is drowned in fact Too virginal for speech or sound, And each is personal and laned Along his private aqueduct.

To see what  Scott sees here, we have to go back to two words used earlier in the poem:  "amphibian" and "prehistoric," both of which suggest conditions of being and of time that mark the "otherness" of the world beneath the prism wave. What makes this home stir us is the integrity of being suggested by "amphibian": able to


45

F. R. SCOTT

move in both elements. And this integrity of being exists in a world before the inception  of human  time, in fact,  before creation.  Thus  it is that  the  amorous sport of the naked swimmers is drowned in its turn  by the fact of the silent  con­ frontation  with true being which is its result:  a climax  without  speech, or sound, and in its virgin character, beyond even the beginnings of things. In  this climax, each  is created  as  his own  self.  He  is "personal and  laned";  not  alone  and sequestered, but  private within his aqueduct, the river of his own being.
The  staring  poet has thus, in moving out  of his windowed  isolation,  reversed time. First a frond, he has then become a swimmer, then a perfected  primal being as he has returned  home. There  is a sudden  and  painful  contrast,  then,  between this tranquil  completion  and  the  anguished  reversion  to  the  historical  body  of evolved man  which  now occurs. The  late-acquired lungs demand  in  their  turn the medium  for which they were developed, and  the swimmers  rise towards  the prison of their  ground,  the shore, the  pain  of unfulfilled  desire aching  in  their bodies. Of the experience of discovering their origins only the mermaids  remain, creatures half of one element, half of another,  and  entirely fictive.
With the swimmers' return,  there is a marked  change  in the rhetoric of "Lake­
shore." If we contrast this and the following passages with the opening lines of the poem, we find that  Scott  has  passed from  the  implicit,  the  pictorial,  the  meta­ phorical, to a poetry of direct statement.  At the  beginning,  the existence  of two worlds is set out for us through  a direct exposition of the marine  one, which in its turn indirectly creates our picture of the world above the waters, in part by making the poet fixed behind his window its exemplar. The  verbal medium of the seventh stanza  is altogether  tenser and  more direct:  the  moment  occurs "too soon,"  the lungs are "tethered," "taut," and  "straining," the  wings are  "undeveloped," the ground  a "prison," and  the experience of loss is "anguish." It is as if a pressure like the need for air had developed in the poem itself, and in the second last stanza it explodes in a firmly stated, indeed sententious summary  of the issues that  have been called up by the experience of  going underwater and  returning:

This is our  talent, to have grown
Upright in posture,  false-erect, A landed  gentry,  circumspect, Tied  to a horizontal soil
The floor and  ceiling of the soul.

It is the vehemence of the satirist that  bursts out  here. Scott's  vision is one of hopeless disillusion at  the  consequences of  the  emergence  of  primal  man  into historical time. The  image of the talent  calls up Biblical associations, yet implies that  the gift of this talent  brought  with it a curse. What  follows is a direct  and painful exposure of what we had seen before only in the person of the poet peering from  his windows at  the cave, and  trying  to  name  its features  in his imperfect idiom. We are upright,  but falsely so, powerful in our  possession of land,  yet  (in

F.R. SCOTT

a dizzying bit of word-play)  "circumspect," somehow possessed by it. Tied to the horizontal  plane of earth,  we are in fact without dimension, for earth  has become both  floor and  ceiling of our souls. Ruthlessly Scott exploits the language  of this impoverished  condition  to describe our futile attempts  to make  a  new existence in the old image,

Striving with cold and fishy care
To make an ocean of the air,

and we are reminded  for a bitter instant of the loveliness of the "narrow minnow, flicking fin ... his doorways open everywhere." In the truth  and  permanence  of the experience  of primal  being, it is the world of upright  man  that  has become the inversion.

"LAKESHORE" BEGAN  WITH THE  POET observing the natural
world  of the  lake  at  his feet:  active,  organic,  and  shimmering   with  prismatic
visions. It ends with  him looking upon another  scene, the crowded  urban  world of the  city street,  at  once  the  demonic  opposite of the  pastoral  vision, and  the consequence of our historic growth through  and  past that  vision. There  is a con­ trast in the types of moment  involved which is worth noticing. In stanza two, the poet says "I stare,"  and  this hypothesizes a single event, which takes place at the beginning of a narrative time in which we are guided from that beginning through a single experience, the descent, towards  a single moment of  vision, "too  virginal for  speech  or  sound." Stanza  nine  begins "sometimes,"  and  thus  changes  our perspective on the poem's time of enactment.  What  happens  now happens  more than once; not frequently,  perhaps, but "sometimes," and  it is an experience that the poet can enter again  and  again  as nature continues her processes around  the life of evolved man.  It  is as if the currents  of  stanza one were still in action, the prism wave still netting and gathering  all together, though in the darker  and more ironic  context  of the  world  of history  and  experience, not  the  timeless "still  of gravity" beneath  the waters' broken sky. But Scott is ruthless here as well. Between the  poet and  our  original  element  the  experience of history  does stand.  In  the early stanzas, we could see the effects of  this in the blunting  of experience  which led to the poet's sequestration  behind his windows, between "the  floor and ceiling of the soul,"  and  to his inability  to describe the cave in  terms other  than  those limited ones he already knew. Here we see it in a different, and in its turn, evolved way. Time and its events within the poem have changed the poet's perspective, and we recognize it in  the  verbs he  uses:  before, it was "I stare."  Now  he says, "I feel," "I hear," "watching," "I muse," and  the deliberateness of their succession suggests a  process of growth,  from  simple  natural  sensual  perceptions,  through

47

F.R. SCOTT

another  kind of seeing than  the fixed incomprehension  of the earlier  part  of the poem, to thought  itself.
As might  be expected,  the effect of this  growth  towards  the  unique  human evolutionary development of thought is painful, full of loss, not like the silent sport of the naked  swimmers of stanza six. The  poet hears the opening  of a gate and sees all of watery nature loosed upon the created  world around  him, and  what he watches is a drowning, the apparent  apocalypse which God decreed when He saw that "the  wickedness of man was great in the earth  and that  every imagination  of the thoughts  of his heart was only evil continually" (Genesis 6: 5). Yet we remem­ ber  the  meaning  of  water  in  this  poem-it is our  healer,  our  connector,  our originating  element -and  we recall also the  drowning  of  stanza  six, when  the experiencing  of primal fact from before the beginning  of  human  time led to the recreation of the integrity of being, and each swimmer was "personal  and laned / Along  his private  aqueduct." On  this occasion, the  poet lives the  experience  in time, not  before it, and  the result is not the  discovery of ultimate  self in  all its integrity, but something less perfect, more tarnished  by time and loss. He is simply "alone." But his solitude has a special character. Though alone, he thinks. Indeed,  if he is punning  on "muse,"  he writes poetry, and  laughs. And though  all around him was drowned,  he does remain, on  Ararat  like Noah, an emblem of the com­ passion of the fullness of being, of  timeless nature's entry into the inexorable  pro­ cess of history to ensure the completeness of creation  by the saving of the one man who has been "righteous before me in this generation."
Thus  it is that  though  the poet in solitude may  be watching  the  death  of the
world he knows around him, he is, by virtue of three things, watching its re-creation as well. The  first is the richness of implication  which the image of water has born for us as a building, connecting, creating medium since the beginning of the poem.1
The second is Ararat,  the sudden but extraordinarily fruitful  Biblical allusion that
appears  covenant-like  at  the end,  to confirm  our  sense of the  value  of at  least part  of our  historical experience, and suggest that  it will not be swept away. The third  is the  process of growth that  goes on in the  poet himself as the  poem  pro­ ceeds from the staring  wonder of his first vision of the lake, to a return  to his own original  being, to the loosing of satiric  language  that  seems to take  place  as the result of this, to the crowning experience of thought  that  visits him  when, in the presence of the  tragedy  of historical time,  he is able  to generate  an  image  of a nature  whose processes return  to recreate  the world again  and  again,  and  within which he can meditate  on the possibility of new beginnings.
The  contexts of "Lakeshore,"  which we can consider only briefly here, seem to me of two sorts. The first comes to Scott from Wordsworth, I believe. In "Tintern Abbey,"  as in  "Lakeshore," the  poet gazes upon  nature,  and  in so doing  takes possession of the "beauteous  forms" of being, in an experience strikingly like that of Scott's  naked swimmers:

F.R.SCOTT

the burthen  of the mystery
In which the heavy and the weary weight
Of all this unintelligible world
Is lightened  ...
Until  the breath  of this corporeal frame And even the motion of our human  blood Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
In  body, and  become a living soul:
While with an eye made quiet by the power
Of harmony,  and  the deep power of joy
We see into the life of things.

And  like Wordsworth standing on the  bank  of the sylvan  Wye,  Scott  at  the  end of "Lakeshore" dares

to hope,
Though  changed no doubt, from what I was when first
I came among  these hills.

What distinguishes Scott's poem  as a genuine achievement, and  not  merely  the working  out  in  a modernist vein  of the  important Romantic theme  of a crisis in the  development of imaginative power,  is the  intervening history  of the  motif  in English  Canadian poetry,  where  the question  of how to  penetrate nature's world has assumed  the  urgency  of a major  preoccupation. The problem  is made explicit by another heir  of the  tradition of "Tintern Abbey," Sir  Charles G.  D.  Roberts, in "The Tantramar Revisited," which  for its beauty  of movement and  exposition is perhaps the  finest short  poem in English-Canadian literature before  the modern period.  At  the  visionary  level Roberts' poem  of course  has  a major difficulty,  the failure  of nerve  in its last lines, where  the  poet says,

Yet will I stay my steps and not go down to the marshland, Muse and  recall far off, rather  remember  than see-
Lest on too close sight I miss the darling illusion
Spy at their  task even here the hands of chance and change.

That Roberts' "musing" leads to a reluctance to enter  nature may be symptomatic of the  poet's  own  problems or  those of his age.  What is more  interesting is that the  act  of entering nature to  discover  its secret  of being  has  become  one  of  the most persistent  themes  of modern Canadian poetry, a theme  whose history  has yet to  be  written. Its  most  startling results  are  a  series of  cognate poems  on  going underwater, some  pre-dating Scott's  like J. F. Herbin's "The Diver" or W. W. E. Ross's  poem  of  the  same  name,  others  contemporary with  "Lakeshore'' or  later than  it,  poems  like A. M.  Klein's hilarious  and  brilliant "Lone Bather" (which for  many  reasons  bears  fuller  comparison with  "Lakeshore"),  Dorothy Livesay's fine "Fantasia: For  Helena Coleman," with its forthright observation that  what is under  the  water  is "imagination's underworld," Pratt's "The Deed" and  Scott's


49

F.R.SCOTT

own "For Bryan Priestman," Atwood's "Younger Sister Going Swimming," Ralph Gustafson's  "On   this Sea  Floor,"  Irving  Layton's  and  Gwendolyn  MacEwen's poems both  called  "The  Swimmer,"  P. K. Page's  "Element," Bill Bissett's  con­ crete poem "i herd ya laflin in th water," and most important of all, Klein's magni­ ficent elegy, "Portrait of the  Poet as Landscape," which  takes as its  model  not Wordsworth, but Milton's Lycidas, a poem from another  tradition which considers loss by water and  regeneration.2
Scott's  "Lakeshore," seen in this setting, sends between  event  and  observer  a
signal of a special sort, for more than any of his contemporaries he opens up the possibility that  to go underwater,  beneath the surface of time and experience, is to generate  new possibilities in the naked swimmer who seeks for light in the water's deepest  colonnades.  What  is generated  in  "Lakeshore," however,  is  not  only vision, but also the speech in which that  vision can be uttered. Not frozen in fear like Roberts, or locked in exploration  of his own solitude, like the divers of many of the other  poems, Scott's poet, as the result of his descent and  return,  is able to confront  the world that  exists around  him with the power of a renovated, truth­ speaking language,  and in so doing, earns the right to rest, however much alone, on Ararat,  as nature  renews the world yet again.


NOTES

1 Scott's poem "Water," also in Events and Signals, seems deliberately paired with "Lakeshore," and constitutes an important gloss on it. For a different reading of "Lakeshore" in the context of Scott's treatment  of the theme of evolution, see M. Constance Higginson, "A Thematic Study of F. R. Scott's Evolutionary Poetry," Journal of Canadian  Poetry, 1  ( 1978), 37-48.
2  Important   aspects of some of these poems are  discussed by  Milton  Wilson in
"Klein's Drowned Poet," Canadian  Literature, No. 6 (Autumn  Ig6o)'  s-q.





CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C.  V6T 1W5 /228-4741


so



BEING THERE
 


Irving Layton


Though a lawyer's  serpent  wiles
gets  him  hurled headlong out  of Eden he  yet  remembers the  blameless garden, its plants vivid  with  the hues of life;
he  will inform the ignorant cop  on the  beat the  city  tree  droops  towards  death
and  just  before  he trudges  on  the  water
he'll -did you  notice? -firm  up a failing  sprig.

In  a world  where  God  has  just died
and  men  and  women  each  shocking  day grow  more  coarse  and  brutal
plainly  he's  all for  life, making  him  unfit to live among thieves  and  hypocrites unless  beneficent chance  plop  him
smack  into  a chauffeured limousine  to sit beside  a  millionairess whose  name  is Eve.

Echoing everyone's voice and  secret  thought he's  the  mirroring image  to president
and  dying  tycoon,  the  best relief of themselves  this side eternity;
why, even  the  hard-nosed Russian  ambassador sees a Krylov  in his simple  presence.
Still,  not  even  the  CIA  can  learn  his origin but  labels  it a mystery,  baffling everyone.

Of  course  he's  the green  child  and  poet whose  solipsistic  fantasies  are  realler
to him  than  the  flawed  world  outside  his head.
And  yet -mark  this -he  names  himself  a gardener who  knows  both  politics  and  nature
are  severely  bound  to growth  and  brief decay
though, loathing death, he'll  cry when  an  old  man  dies and  will not stay  to see his corpse interred.

Niagara-on-the-Lake, March  27, 1980


THE LION IN WINTERS

Irving Layton at York


David 0' Rourke





tIS FREQUENTLY  POINTED out  with  'orne  degree of  <fupar­ agement that a large  number of Canadian poets are  also university  teachers. The  people  who  are  concerned  with  this phenomenon, most  not  employed  by univer­  sities, argue that an  academic appointment ranges  in the vicinity  of dangerous to insidious.  They  worry that  the established  Canadian  poet  will become  "too  soft." They  fear  that   this  country's poetry  will  become  "too  academic." They   are  of the opinion  that  the true  poet ought  to be "on  the street" and  "with the  people." Sitting in cafes, they lament  their  brothers and sisters with  university  chairs.  The fact  that  their  own  poetry  is often  not  that  good  seems inconsequential; that  stu­  dents  may  be  considered  "of  the  people"-irrelevant; that   university  employ­ ment  does not preclude contact with "the street"-beside the  point; and, finally, that   established  poets  might  rebel  against   the  "academic  poetry"-not  quite  conceivable.
Still, there  is some cause for the hysteria.  A poet  employed  by a university  does run  the  risk of realizing  any  of these  forecasts.  So  might  a  poet  employed by  a bank.  Fortunately, these people tend  to be cognizant of the situation and  usually guard  against it. Less aware  of the  "dangers," however,  may  be the  potential, or aspiring, young  poets coming  through the  school  system.  Of  those  who  make  it to  university, most  can  thank  one  good  high  school  teacher. But,  once  arrived, these students are likely to find English  classes run  like laboratories, critics talking like scientists,  and  the skilled  technician at  the  head  of the  room  looking  down upon  the  concept  of a creative  writing  programme. Poems  are  then  submitted to microscopic analysis  and  the  poets,  who  are  given  to  esoteric  articles,  placed  on pedestals.  While  this may  sound  facetious to an  academic audience, a "layman" looking  on  would  not think  it so humorous.
This,  regrettably, is the area in which  the  established Canadian  poet finds him­ self. Often frowned upon  by  his colleagues,  the  people  who  continue to  dismiss Canadian Literature courses, the established poet  is able  to offer  a  different per­ spective  to those  young  people running the  gauntlet of university  ranks.  He  tends to be supportive of creative  writing, a touch  cynical  of the academic process, and  frequently more  informed  about  the  art  of  poetry  than  a  number of the  depart-

LAYTON

mental  specialists. Louis Dudek  is one example:  influential  in having  taught  or first published  Daryl  Hine,  Leonard  Cohen,  Michael Gnarowski,  David Solway, Pierre  Coupey,  Seymour  Mayne,  and  Peter  Van  Toorn.  Earle  Birney,  Frank Davey, D. G. Jones, Ralph  Gustafson, and  Fred  Cogswell also deserve attention as educators who have helped, and continue to aid, creative writing in this country. Yet another  poet comes to mind:  ranting  and  raging  and  telling everyone that he knows what's best, a natural  teacher-Irving Layton.




ER APPROXIMATELY HALF his life, Layton has taught in educa­
tional institutions ranging from parochial school to university. For the period from
1969 to 1978, he was located at York University, concluding  one of his most pro­ ductive periods as a poet in Winters College. Students expecting to find in Layton a prolific drinker  or, at least, a body in heat have encountered  a serious poet, an arrogant  idealist and, in many respects, a conservative in the tradition  of  the self­ made man.  Whether  Layton  has ever been any of the characters  he has paraded  before the public is a question to be considered. For one thing, the seedy bars and succession of full-breasted  women would  not  have left  a  great  deal  of  time  for some thirty-five books, as well as those which he has edited.  Also, the somewhat hedonistic stereotype  which  is often  projected  for the  benefit of the  newspaper reader does not do justice to what is certainly one of the most wide-ranging  minds in  Canadian letters. This  is not  to say that  Layton  has  "pranked" the  public, though  his sense of humour  is constantly underestimated; nor is it to suggest that there is not a bit of truth  behind each of the masks. It is merely to point out that the nature  of Layton's  personality is frequently  as protean  as many  consider the bulk of his work to be.
Like  Ken  Kesey's  powerful  protagonist,   McMurphy,  Layton's   "poet"  does battle with the sterile forces of anti-life;  though, with Layton,  this can mean  cul­ ture, gentility, castration,  Xianity,  the SS, technological society, and  almost  any­ one living in Canada. The  opponent  is awesome:  it has chlmoforrned  mankind,  driving  those with vision to alcoholism, insanity, or suicide;  it turns  on  anything  that is sensitive or creative;  and, lastly, it has made the Jew, both as  person and as symbol, into an endangered  species. What  is curious is that Layton's identifica­ tion with his poet is complete to the extent  that  they  become interchangeable­ from a boy pounding  with a broom to order the chaos (if not the gods)  to a man plugging the void with his phallus.The  role of  the public  persona is an extension of Layton  and/or his mythological  poet, and  must  be viewed in  the  prophetic tradition; that  Layton  has often  sensationalized this voice  (not  unlike  Norman Mailer)  is a technique that  has proved functional in stirring  the very people it is his vocation to reach.


53

LAYTON

It has often been said that  Layton is a didactic  poet. In an era of experimental virtuosity, this may  not be entirely  unhealthy; but,  regardless  of one's  aesthetic bias, Layton has a vision, and will continue to articulate  it. For the less perceptive reader,  he offers the  "Foreword": a  prologue,  or  handbook  of instructions,  to prevent one from missing the point. It is ironic, given his conviction  that  what  is being said  is ultimately  more  important than  the  approval   of  academics,  that Layton remains one of Canada's most misunderstood  poets. It !.s as though  people would rather  discuss what they dislike about  Layton than  actually  read his work: a practice accentuated  by his rise to national  and,  now, international prominence.
It would be convenient, but to some extent untrue,  to suggest that  Layton con­ siders the classroom a microcosm of the universe, or that  he views his students  as the members of a personal congregation. In fact, he is more interested in what his students think and have to say, and endeavours  to maintain  a low profile. Fortun­ ately, this is quite incompatible  with his personality-with  the result that  classes tend  to  be lively exchanges, frequently  off  the  topic  and  often  past  the  time. Toward  the end of his 1977-78 graduate course on  Montreal poetry, however, a rather  unique  situation  presented  itself:  Irving  Layton,  in  the  role of teacher, lecturing  on Irving  Layton, the man and  the poet. In this article,  I have divided into  three  parts  my  notes from  these  lectures:   the  first section  adding  to  the biographical  record;  the second, the artist on fourteen  poems;  and  the third,  an edited transcript of Layton's last class at York. The distinction between man, poet, and teacher is not so obvious in reality:  a fact that should be evident in the third section.
It is interesting  to note that  Layton's  vision has changed  very little in the last couple of decades, that  his current  themes and  stances amount  to a progression of former insights into the nature  of man and society. This  exploration  of  funda­ mental  problems in depth  has produced  what  is easily the  most unified  body of poetry in Canadian literature.  It  has also resulted in the critical  work of  Wynne Francis  and  Eli Mandel  remaining  the best in the field;  the latter's  1g6g  Irving Layton offers what is still the most complete perspective on Layton, and is helpful in coming  to terms  with even his most recent  work. Future  comparative  studies might  view the way in which Layton,  Cohen,  and  Klein  explore  the  post-Holo­ caust psyche of modern man, or investigate the differences between Layton's  and Leonard  Cohen's conception of the poet as Christ.
I should point out that, for the most part, in this article Layton has been allowed to speak for himself; only in the third section is a narrative framework  provided, and  that  to underline  the retrospective nature  of the  class. Layton's  words have been left unchanged,  as has the order  of the  poems taken  up in the flow of  dis­ cussion. Where  repetition  or duplication  may  be found,  it  has been  allowed  to stand in order to mark the poet's own points of emphasis. Lastly, I should like to

54

LAYTON


thank  the other  students  in the course, whose leading  questions gave Layton  the range required  to address with passion that which he has considered of significance in both his life and  work.1


Biographical Notes

Right.  Early  poetry  was framed  in Montreal,  English  and  French  Canada.  I felt alienated: all my teachers were English, not Jewish. My home was poor. My father  was a visionary, a scholar. He entertained  angels, didn't  give two shits for the kids -said about six words to me.
I was the  youngest  in  the  family. My mother  couldn't spend  too much  time with us, maintaining the grocery store. She wanted  us to be like Mrs. Steinberg's sons down  the street. She  had  to cut off her hair  and  wear  a hideous wig. My beautiful  mother.  It  was traditional-to keep the husband's mind  off his wife's beauty and on religious thoughts.
I rebelled very early against  the piety and orthodoxy  in the home. Refused to be bar mitzvahed, refused  to say Kaddish  when my father  died. Strul  Goldberg was the great  influence  on my life. He was the ideal I was supposed  to look up to after the death of my father. He was successful -made a lot of money peddling religious articles. My father  once said, "If you spit in  his face, Strul  would say it was raining."
It  was so important to  be  living where  we did-under  that  flat  (a  semi­ brothel), surrounded by Poles, Italians. I got out of the city to the country market early with my mother: that's where I got my sense of colour and  smell -great effect on  my poetry.  In  school, I found  out  the  English  didn't  live up  to their "fair  play" maxim.  I got  expelled -was in  trouble  from  the  day  I  was born. David  Lewis lent  me $ro.oo for my matriculation  fee, introduced  me to A. M. Klein. They were the famous  debating  team in  Montreal; Lewis was the serious orator,  Klein the great  wit. Klein tutored  me in Latin  on the side of Mt. Royal.
I learned  politics and literature  in Horn's  Cafeteria,  frequented  by Trotskyites,
Stalinists, Socialists, and Communists. At the time, I was a member of the Young People's Socialist  League,  which  was one of the tributaries of the  CCF.  Frank Scott  used to come  down  and  give lectures. There  was  little separating   politics and  literature  then. In the thirties, Marxism was the dominant ideology:  a good writer  helped  the revolution.  I used to get on a soapbox  in  Fletcher's  Field and give lectures on poetry, and on the revolution in factories. My girlfriend, Suzanne, a Communist,  used to come down  and  yell all sorts of names at me -I  had  to know my stuff-then, after,  we'd amorously get together.  The  early interest in politics gave me my life-long distaste for English gentility.
The  best  thing  to  happen   was  me going  to  Macdonald  College instead  of


55

LAYTON

McGill. I had  to do a lot of science -and  not  just English. When  I brought  in a Communist  to speak, I  was harassed  by the  R.C.M.P.-even  though  I  had also, a fortnight  earlier, brought  in the head  of the  Bank  of Montreal. But  the other students  were worse. When  I was in residence, they used to dump  garbage on my bed and throw my books on the floor. Every day. I could never catch them. But the B.Sc. made  me a well-rounded  person, and  you can see the agricultural images in my poems. I worked on farms for three or four summers, something significant for an urban  Jew.
My first marriage  was a disaster. I was an  idealist  and  a Socialist.  I married
her because she was scarred. It  was my way of coping  with the in justices of the world.... Stupid.
So there's the picture. Early poems born of scorn, hatred,  opposition, rebellious­
ness: all notes you find in my early poetry. The  tremendous joie de vivre is from my mother.  I can  have the most morbid thoughts  and  not lose the  joie de vivre. It has nothing to do with the brain, but everything  to do with the physical consti­ tution. So you get the two boats going in the same direction: with the rebellious­ ness, a celebration.  I enjoy living-women, wine, sewers. Up  until now I've  had more than my share of disappointment, hardship,  but it doesn't affect my tempera­  ment or  joy. It's  very Hebraic.  No poet except  the one in  Ecclesiasticus  has had such a sense of nullity. Very early the trick was to fill up the nothingness. You have to make up your own code and live by it. Never in my life have I been guided by externals.  I've  never been influenced  by others.  I fill up  the  void with  my own idea of what's  right  and follow it.
In  the later  poems, there is a deeper  note. The  Holocaust  really began  to hit me about fifteen years ago. I began to meditate  on what makes men so destructive to do such things. It becomes the black thread  which runs through  my poetry.
The "pole-vaulter" is Nietzsche's overman: to go beyond life. I don't  believe in God, but I do believe in divinity. We know there's a divinity through  truth,  beauty, and  creativity.  This  is what  allows me  to  go on  despite  the  records  of  Hitler, Stalin, etc. It doesn't  matter: they come and  go. Death  takes them  away in  his green bags. Nobody escapes death and that's  why I love it. Chance,  Appetite  and Death,  are my three  gods -they allow hope.
And  then  there's  the unfairness of the cosmos, the  poignancy,  especially as it affects little creatures.  Did I tell you the story of the  kitten?  Responsible for my first marriage  and  many other things? The  most influential  thing  in my life. My cat  gave litter  to four  kittens when I was a kid:  one was crippled  but  it didn't know it. It would drag its inoperative hind legs trying to play with the others. He was so brave. I've never been able to res,ist someone being brave and defiant despite some great  hardship. Even today, I am still vulnerable  to this kind of situation. Hence, you find so many poems dealing with wounded  birds, mosquitoes.

LAYTON


Fourteen  Poems

"Prologue  to the Long Pea-Shooter"
This is a broadside against  the literary establishment  as it was in '52 or '53:  a kind of academicism,  an  English sort. Dudek  was not originally in, but  was put in later on. Jasper  Shittick is Sutherland, Bowell is Powell, a reviewer at the time for the Montreal  Star;  genteel, narrowminded, anti-erotic -he was representing the fashion of the time:  puritanism.  When he cut down a poet, it was a compli­ ment-worth another  two hundred  books to be sold.
Here  I'm  having  a good spoof, though  there are serious parts.  I'm  attacking most people for  being lousy readers.  I'm  also attacking  other  poets who would rather see a rival poet's book bomb than be successful as, at that  point, the friend­ ship comes to an end.
Second  and  third  stanzas,  I'm  being  ironic.  Don't  try  for  greatness,  go  for fame-people  don't  understand  greatness. Be genteel:   that's  what  the  people wanted.  Women  were  into  romanticism,  something  to  take  them  out  of  their modem  homes. Then  I  attack  the cultural  philistines:  the  people who worship Eliot because everyone  worships Eliot.  In  the fifth stanza,  I'm  ironically  telling poets:  despite the Holocaust,  be genteel -write like Le Pan.
From "clergymen" on, in the last stanza,  I attack  culture  in general. Someone
should  go through  my stuff,  prose too, and  see my constant  attack  on  culture. Torture, mutilations,  beatings,  never decreased  attendance  at  operas.  Culture  is the great lie which enables people to forget, to live with, the atrocities of this age. The  erudite  cannibal  of tomorrow  will very likely be cultured.  Retired  clergymen ravage life to spiritualize.  In a later poem, it's not chicken or fowl which inspires people, but  the  broken skull of a Jewboy. So far as I know, I am the only poet who has as a theme the infinite adaptability  of people to live with a Holocaust.

"Now  That  I'm  Older"
The capacity  for assimilating murderers'  bullshit is limitless for people.

"The Improved  Binoculars"
What  I  am  concerned  with  from  the  beginning  is aggression.  Man  is  con­ demned to be either creative or destructive. Since only a small minority is creative, the  rest engage  in  destruction.  It's  an  apocalyptic  poem.  Goethe,  when  he  was dying, asked for more  light-the  irony in the  poem. "Improved  binoculars"  is the symbol for modern  technology.

"The Executioner"

These  poems are  never  picked up by genteel Canadians-they're European, Mediterranean. Europeans read  my  work  and  identify.  I  am  a  Canadian  by accident  of birth.


57

LAYTON

"My  visitor ... absence of theories":  a theme you'll find in many of my poems. Very Kafkaesque, but I hadn't  read Kafka then. Another  theme in my work:  the contrast  between the storm trooper  and  the genteel thinker-the visitor has no doubts. "We  agreed  ... the  condition  ... murder  of others": the  condition  of our century-we kill for someone else's theory. We've  arrived  at a point where one man will kill another,  not even knowing him, for a third  man's  theory. The "executioner" is my symbol for the sensibility of the 20th  Century.

"The  Cage"
This  is  an  important  poem.  The   black  irony,  the   humour,  is  maintained throughout. People will get together, love one another,  as long as there is a victim. "Mythical cage": Socialism, Communism,  religion-any Utopia.  The  virtue of altruism  is like an orgasm for them. The  function  of the  half-holiday  is to blind me. It  takes something  like that  for  people to see how much  generosity there  is in their souls.

"For  Andrei Amalrik"
Another  theme in my work:  the forgone mediocritization of thought  in every­ one. Passion, original  thought,  is penalized. The  unusual,  the extraordinary, the unique, is being punished across the world -Russia, Poland, China.  People will have to be chameleons if they want to be original.

"Elegy for Marilyn  Monroe"
The  odd, eccentric individual  is persecuted almost as much  in North  America. The  Russians send them to insane asylums; we make them  crazy so they have to go on their own. Sexton, Plath,  Lowell, Klein, commit suicide or go crazy in this world. Anyone who can see, anyone with talent,  has to go. The  pigmies are  the commissars.
The sensitive original cannot  kill: he has not fortified himself against others­
hence, the helpless Jew. The  person who can see is defenceless because  he can see. The  little man  derives a great feeling of power from  persecuting  others  and  our society, technology,  is making  nothing  but  little  men:   elevator  operators,  secre­ taries, etc.

"At  the Iglesia De Sacromonte"
An actual story-what Christianity  has done to passion. Another  theme:  the contrast  between  pagan  vitality and  energy versus what  religion  has done  to it.

''Icarus"
The difference between true poets, prophets, and false poets. The  poet is Icarus; he doesn't  hang  around  caf,es discussing literature. To  be a  poet is tragic.  He'll never make it, never get there, his wings will be melted, but  the difference is that he'll try whereas others won't.

LAYTON


"Piazza  San Marco"
II Duomo is a magnificent structure  in Venice. I'm saying that  these people will never  produce  a  cathedral like  that  again;  instead,  they  have  it  hanging  on medallions  from  their  wrists. The  diminution  of modern  man -mankind  is no longer capable  of the greatness which has produced such monuments.  You have heroes from the Bible to the Renaissance, but downhill since then.

"The Mosquito"

Nature as a battlefield. Butterfly over a dead mosquito:  a war is going on under the innocence of nature. "Crooked  Star" is the Soviet star -I was then still some­ what of a Socialist. Bloodshed and star:  my symbols for life-torture/death and illumination. Injustice,  blind cruelty, defiance, illumination, gallantry, occur again and  again in my poetry.

"Like  A Mother  Demented"

The  most  anti-Wordsworthian  poem  I have ever  written:  my  vision of  the cosmos. Note the black irony, the dark mocking vision. I'm  answering the riddle of, Why man?  Answer:  nature  needs an audience  to see its tragedy.  My verdict on man:  "nature's most murderous  tool and  accomplice."

"The Poet Entertains Several Ladies"

First stanza:  hunchback/deformity can  throw a  bigger shadow  than  anyone, ironically attracting children.  Ugliness and beauty. "My  dog ... torn ear":  bru­ tality, torture,  mutilation, goes on all the time in nature.  Second stanza: I accept the Heraclitean  notion that all is flux, change, rotting driftwood. Beauty is momen­ tary, flux forever. Humans discover this, but nature  does it. Third stanza: man­ kind  has a momentary  radiance,  but  again  nature,  "My  dog," goes on.  Fourth stanza: never resting, never ceasing ... I am full of pity to all this. Fifth stanza: mind  can  touch  memory,  turning  it into fire-poetry.  "I," the  poet  who  puts bells on machinery.  "My  dog licks his bruised fur  j paws his torn  ear": nothing overrides this fact -"bruised" is in for impact.

"Orpheus"

Here  the savagery and  the celebration are fused. The  rebel statement: God is neither  Christianity, nor  Judaism-God  is blood. The  sexuality  enables  me to forget nature's strife; look at "The  Tamed  Puma" in The Covenant. My favourite theme:  men sing best when they are cruel. Human  beings are very creative:  they will pluck out  your  eyes; they  will use your spasm  to  break  their  prison;  they will kill out of love. The poet reconciles the death wish with the love wish -living with the reconciliation is like divinity.


59

LAYTON

Last Class at York

Enter Layton, five minutes late, looking like a Jewish Zorba. He sits down, belly protruding a little over his belt. "Right!" he says, "Last  class ... I believe we're still doing me." He gives the impression of a professional wrestler.
A discussion takes  place on "coffee house"  poetry.  Layton  summarizes,  "Yes,
it's a very good  thing  for suffering  poets to get together,  but  there  has to  be a good poet or two among them; otherwise, the bad stuff will multiply. Look at the Montreal  situation: Harris  and  Solway are  besieged by bad stuff. You only get one or two good poets every ten years. What  is happening  now is quantity-in­ ferior poets financed  by the Canada  Council.  Harris  has been  around  for a long time. Was in my class in 1967. Works hard on his craft. Produced a good book like Grace. Same  with  Solway-a master  craftsman.  They   bring  their  poetry  to Hottentots and  are told it's not poetry. That's dangerous! At least in Russia they know  who  the  good  poets are-they  put  them  in  insane  asylums.  In  North America,  the good  poet is swamped  by  mediocrity.  In  Russia,  they  know  what good poetry is and stop it; in Canada, they trivialize it: surround  the flowers with weeds and  choke them.  It's terrible...."
Layton  says this not so much  in conversation,  as trying  to explain  that  some­
thing  has gone wrong. The  class has only started,  and  his adrenalin  is pumping.
A student  asks what he thinks of W. D. Snodgrass's essay, "Tact and the Poet's Force."2   Layton listens to a passage, then offhandedly  replies, "Snodgrass  is being English and  polite." It looks as though  he's going to leave it at that,  but then the tempo  beings to build. "Tact is something  a minor  poet is concerned  with. Can you imagine  Milton, Dante, Shelley, talking about  tact? Those  bishops and  those cardinals  burning.  It's context, not tact.  In one context  you overstate  like Byron, in another  you understate.  I've  never heard  Pushkin  talk  about  tact.  'Tact' has come into  being  because of minor  poets like Snodgrass.  The  academics  love it ! Have  you ever heard  anyone getting excited about  Snodgrass?"
Layton  continues  more calmly, "There are  no  rules to  poetry,  only  contexts.
The only thing is to be effective. Subtlety and  vulgarity  may be used at different times when necessary. You can't  make a rule to be subtle all the time -look at Blake!"
The  student  unrolls another  quotation, this  time  from  Peter  Hunt's "Irving
Layton: Pseudo-Prophet":

The same cannot be said of 'Whom I Write  For'  which  exemplifies  a central defect in  Layton's work.  The  very  barbarism he  deplores  (at   Hiroshima and   in  Nazi Germany) is present  in his own vision and  method:
I want  you to feel as if I had  slammed your  child's head  against  a spike;
And  cut  off your member  and  stuck it in your wife's  mouth to smoke like a cigar.

6o

LAYTON


He does not integrate the sense of moral shock with the description of the horrors he hates; rather  he attempts  to shock the reader by overt obscenity and sadism.3

Layton  leans forward  with  his hands  clasped  together,  and  answers slowly and deliberately,  "The man  is not  capable  of understanding a  poem  or  why it  was written. Hunt  is illiterate. When I talk about stuffing a man's  penis into a woman's mouth,  I'm  shocking because I've seen it. When  I write about  Auschwitz, am  I being as bad as the SS? My aim is to make people aware that  they're living in an age  of atrocity.  I'm  trying  to  tear  away  the  veil of culture.  In  the  Preface  to my forthcoming  book/  I talk about the self-horror it masks:  man's hatred  for life. Man  has a hatred  for sexuality  because he cannot  master  it. He's  arrogant.  He wants  to be God,  Master  of life, and -when he can't-he  tries to rub  it out. "I'll tell you an interesting story. People have written reviews of my latest book,5 some good and some bad. I went to an Italian  Embassy party, because I wanted to say goodbye to my translator going on vacation, and see an Italian  girl doing her M.A. thesis on me at Toronto. She tells me she's fascinated  with my idea of a poet. I deal with it throughout my work. She says what she's really interested in in my later  books is that  Christ  becomes the archetypal  poet. It  took an Italian  woman to see something as plain as the crooked nose on my face ! That Christ is the arche­
typal poet-he stands for love, creativity and, most of all, joy and  laughter.  All my poetry leads up to Jesus. Like him, I don't intend  to be tactful!"
He  turns  to The Covenant  and  reads  "Xianity." "Now  how  could  anybody have missed this?" He is standing  up, almost shouting.  "It takes an  Italian...." Layton slams his book against the table, staring directly at the class. "How  ... ?" He  reads "For  My  Brother  Jesus," gesturing  theatrically  with  his free  hand, then  turns  to "Christos-Dionysos" and  "Magdalena," noting  that  "Yeats  would have been happy to compliment  me on these ... I think."  He sits down and reads "Disguises," "where  I compress the Jewish experience into a lyric," as well as the
poem "Bambino," which starts him off again.
"No  theory can satisfy me -look at  'The  Poet Entertains Several  Ladies.'  In order  to understand me in  North American  poetry, you have to understand  that I  have  broken  all the  rules consciously. I accept  none  of the Judaic, Christian, Canadian tenets. I've  been attacking  the anti-eroticism  and  philistinian  element in  Canada. Nobody likes to have  their  tenets questioned,  much  less  violated­ that's  why the critics have been so hostile.
"I distrust  the  virtuous.  I'm  anti-ideological -Zionism, Communism, Social­ ism, Fascism-I'm opposed  to all  that.  I'm  concerned  with  the  human soul. What  the critics say can't  hurt  because I've said worse myself. They forget I had a mother who cursed me from the moment I got up. I've heard it all before. What I'm  worried  about  is the  damage  to  the spirit.  Sometimes  you  have  to  shout, scream,  kick someone  in  the  ass, pour a bowl of urine  on  their  heads, dump  a

LAYTON

bathtub of shit, to get them away from their tact ! If you feel very strongly about the dangers to the human spirit, you're not going to be tactful !
"What is it about  the English that  makes them  talk  like that?  Snodgrass  ... You'll never find a Russian talking like that!" He calms down a little. "I'm sorry
I lost my temper. It wasn't at you. It's  just that  I've been fighting this attitude all
my life-in  the thirties, in the forties-and it hasn't  changed  at all."
There  is a  long  pause, a sort  of vacuum  after  Layton's  burst  of energy.  It becomes a question  and answer period.
Didn't  someone do a survey, and  found out  you had the  third  largest vocabulary in English poetry?

"I'm supposed to have a vocabulary of 21,ooo words. Shakespeare  had 31,ooo. Only  Shakespeare  and  Milton  have  used  more,  and  yet  I am  cited  for  using vulgar words."
Do  you  see  yourself influenced  by  Klein,  and  influencing   Cohen?  Is  there  a tradition of Montreal  poetry?
"There's a tradition insofar as we're all Jewish, but  the tradition  goes further back  to the  Old  Testament. We're  capable  of drawing  on  that  tradition. Jews throughout  history in different  nations and  different  cultures-you'd be a fool not to draw  on it. What  I say, any Jew will tell you that.  Any Jew  digging into his history. We've seen empires come and go. We're still here, they're  not-some are on the way out.  What  a fantastic  privilege to draw  on  that  unique  history. Kenneth  Sherman  and  Eli Mandel  are doing it now.  In  Mandel's latest  book,6 he's looking for his roots.
"In   any other  sense of a  tradition -no.  Klein  and  I disagreed  on  a  lot  of things.  Klein  was orthodox  and  had  visions of getting  ahead.  The  respectable lawyer and  the bohemian. If anything,  I and  we -First Statement  and  Preview
-influenced  Klein.  With  Cohen  ... influence  only in  the sense that  I kicked open doors for him to write about.
"Technically, there's hardly a poet in North America  who I haven't  influenced in some way. It took an American, Olson, to point it out. Canadian critics wouldn't understand  it  if you printed  it on  their  cocks. But  I had  a  disagreement   with Williams:  they wanted to reject everything, whereas I wanted  to adapt  it.... All Canadian poets have adapted  the things I was doing in Red Carpet  for the Sun."
So you're trying to change the  psyche of Canadians  ... ?

"With Red Carpet  for the Sun, I achieved an attack on Canadian culture. After that, I got into the soul -man is either a fallen angel or a risen devil. The  problem is not sociological, political, or the price of coffee. The  problem is man.  I began to get into the darker  aspects of the soul. Then  in '66,  '67,  during  the Six Day War  when the  extermination  of the Jews-a  remarkable people, not because I

LAYTON

am  a Jew,  any  historian  will tell you they've  made  more  contributions  to  the world:  art,  medicine,  etc. -anyway, that's  when a turn  happened.  The  world was ready  to let  the Jews  be massacred. The  genteel,  religious West. Then  the attack  on culture  sharpens.
"The  academics  who attack  me today  are  financed  by the  Canada   Council.
The  genteel  academics  . . . In  the old days they were  right  from  England,  loud in  attacking   my  vulgarity,  'tactlessness';  but  they've  all  gone  and   have  been replaced  by Canadian academics.  It brings the story up to date, and  it will  con­ tinue.  Look at  the reviews of my latest books. If you want  a sensitive view, you have to go to a European, not an Anglo-Saxon."

How  do you reconcile the  relation between  Nietzsche  and  the  jewish  tradition?

"A tall point.  Nietzsche did not influence me any more than  D. H. Lawrence did,  but  they  both  had  arrived  at insights and  feelings which I  arrived  at.  And gave me more. Nietzsche's been far more a liberator than  anyone, including Marx. Nietzsche attacks  bourgeois culture.  He is the greatest liberator.
"The  Jew accepts the moral elite -I'm not saying the Jews are a chosen people
-whereas I have improved  upon it. I believe in divinity, not God:  I rejected all that stuff when I was thirteen. The Overman  is the man who goes beyond human nature-more soul and  less asshole-and that's  very close to Judaism.  'Ought' is the notion that  the Jews gave the world. 'There  ought  to be justice'-Moses, Abraham, arguing  with God, telling him he 'ought' to behave better. We are weak, we are fallible, but it's possible for us to attain  divinity.
"So there's  the theme  of rebelliousness between Jewish  history and  Nietzsche:
a  dialogue  with  divinity.  Any  wonder  why Stalin  and  Hitler  hated  the  Jews? People who have argued  with God, do you think a dictator's going to scare them? I smell the stink of the dead corpse while he's speaking. I'm  a Jewish Nietzschean. I've said it before, but they've ignored it.
"The  whole  thing  about  the Overman  is that  he does not  use violence. He's
above it. And since there's  been two wars against Germany,  it's hopeless that  the West will understand Nietzsche. Even Bertrand  Russell didn't.  Nietzsche's been called the prototype  of Nazism, but read him! He has nothing  but  praise for the Jews-he attacks  Germans! See his passages on anti-semites. But the stupidities, the nonsensicalities, are still being taught!"
Layton turns to "The Cold Green Element"  in response to a student's  request. He  reads  the  last  line  slowly, triumphantly. "The   'cold  green  element'  is my metaphor  for life, my symbol for fecundity. The  wind and  the satellite represent change,  flux.  At  the  end  of change  is death,  so I'm   calling  your  attention   to mortality. There's a reference to the A-bomb being dropped  on Hiroshima.  And then there's  the  poet who hangs like a Christ-figure, or victim, on the gate.
"The  relation between the crowd and the poet is a theme I've always kept:  they

LAYTON

go to see him tortured.  The second image of the poet, someone who's been blasted by lightning because of his vision or revelations, is that  he is crippled-the hunchback-and that  goes back to 'The  Poet  Entertains Several  Ladies.'  I see my past selves as the leaves on a tree which  will also eventually  decay. There's an awareness of not being able to divide life and death.
"So the poem's about  the poet in a Hiroshima  world, an age of atrocities, but it also has old  age  and  death.  There's  the  NietzscheanjDionysian  note:   robin chewing the worm. The ending is that you forget all your medical troubles  when you hear children. Plus, 'breathless' is ambiguous.
"'A Tall  Man  Executes A Jig' and the 'Pole-Vaulter' are two other significant
poems. They're  about  redeemers:  people who  have  experienced  pain  but  don't whine."
How do  you see your work in the context  of modern  and  contemporary  poetry?

"Modern poetry tends to be pragmatic,  not metaphysical,  due to Pound  et al. Because of my background  in philosophy, theology, and science, you hear a differ­ ent note in my poetry. There's not a single poet in Canada who has my background in the sciences, so I find many of the poems of my contemporaries shallow. Another reason why much of my work runs contrary  to contemporary  poetry is because of my Jewish background  and Hebraic literature. Anyone who is familiar  with it will not be impressed with Camus  and Sartre.  Not after  reading  Ecclesiasticus. Exile is redemption -not  Zionism. I  don't  think  we've  wandered  as far  as we have and done things that  we have done to setde for a piece of land,  an army, and  an Air Force. I'm  not against a homeland,  but your Bellows, Cohens, etc., have that Jewish imagination  which is the result of history and  the Bible."

Does that mean  you have to be  jewish to be a great poet?

Layton laughs. "Well, some poets have managed  to survive the terrible  handi­ cap of not being Jewish.  No, there  are other  great  cultures,  but  the  Jew  is very fortunate. He  writes out of time and space. He's been everywhere,  and  is aware of what goes on in the world. He carries with him his history. Isaac, Jacob,  Moses, etc.,  are  his contemporaries.  My  mother  used  to  talk  to  them  like  they  were members of the family. Same with God."

A student   presents  a  seminar  on  Michael   Harris,   David  Solway,  and  Bob McGee:  contemporary  Montreal  poets. Twenty  minutes later,  Layton notes, "It's true  that  Harris  and  Solway -I  don't  know  McGee -are  repudiating us, but they've gone to a landscape/ Archibald  Lampman tradition. That's good, because they have to rid themselves of our influence and because they feel comfortable with it, but  they'll  have  to watch  out for the -and  I  know  you're  going to  kill me when  I say  this-gentility.  Excellent  poetry,  great  poetry,  but  what  are  they saying? Where's  the satire? That's what bothers me.

LAYTON


"Look-here's a  poem  I would  like to see Harris and  Solway  write." Layton reads  "News  from  Nowhere" 7   gesturing magnificently. "The  poet  has  a  public function to perform as a prophet." He turns to "The Happening" and  announces, "Now there's  a prophetic poem-it's not the  proletarian, it's the  castrated intel­ lectual  who is going  to change the  world." He  reads  the  last  of  his new  poems, "Flies," stating that it deals  with  man's aggressiveness  and  how  it is turned into art: "The fly versus the  death of a human being."
"If there's a continuing tradition in Montreal poetry, it's excellence.  Harris and
Solway  are  genuine poets:   they'll  have  ulcers, hemorrhoids, troubled marriages, but  what  I don't want  to see watered  out  is the  prophecy you find  in  Klein,  me, Page,  and  Scott.  That's the  real Montreal tradition! Stress  on craft,  being  naked, Harris and  Solway  have  all the good things,  but it bothers me that  they're  dealing with  things  handed down  from  Lampman.
"We've come  full  circle  from   Lampman  to  Harris and   Solway.   Tying   the country to the  mind  is 19th-Century. The  tradition of Montreal poetry,  the other half, is a public  one -a concern  with the world out  there,  not navel-gazing. You get  a tradition of social  awareness, not social  realism  because  the  Russians  have bastardized that. There's less emptiness   in  Harris   and   Solway   because   they've suffered, but  still  the  poet  has  that   public  element  they  have  to  keep  in  mind. When  the  poet  becomes  too  arty-farty, he's in trouble. Especially  in  these  times. "It's the  prophetic tradition you should  shoot for. The good  poet always speaks
for  his generation...." Layton  looks down  at  his watch  and  realizes  he has gone into  overtime. "Look, I'd  like  you all to come over to  my  place  for  an  evening. We'll  have some wine, good  conversation.... How  about it?"  He  writes the  class into  a  black  pocketbook, stuffs  his briefcase,  and  heads  for  the  door,  long  hair flowing in a white  mane.

NOTES

1 The  other  students  were Maria  Jacobs, Jack  Urowitz,  J. Kertes,  and  Nancy Gay Rotstein. The  lectures in question  took place in March  1978, the last class being on the  29th of that  month.
2   W. D. Snodgrass, In  Radical Pursuit  (New York: Harper & Row, 1975); the pas­ sage begins with  the last paragraph on page 12, and  concludes  at  the end  of  Jar­  rell's poem, "Protocols," page 13.
3  Peter  Hunt,  "Irving Layton,  Pseudo-Prophet-a Reappraisal," Canadian Poetry,
I (Fall/Winter 1977),  p. 5·
4   Irving Layton,  The Tightrope Dancer  (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1978); a number of identical  phrases would suggest that Layton was very close to the manu­ script of this volume at this time.
5   Irving  Layton,  The Covenant (Toronto: McClelland  & Stewart,  1977).
6 Eli Mandel,  Out  of Place  (Erin: Press Porcepic, I 977) .
7  The  poem was later  published  in Droppings   from Heaven  (Toronto:  McClelland
& Stewart, I 979) .

6s


JINJIRCH



My uneasiness before  trees. Nothing cures  me of it or ever  will. I'm  one
my humanity dooms to gaze at  their  tall composed  shapes  with  longing; praying for  bright-wing'd insects to weave  me

By their  sallies, their  senseless thrusts
into  the green  palmate leaves  I  see filtering the  viscous sunshine  into  a  rose decanter each  opened  bud  this tranquil morning offers the surrounding thoughtless air

My  head's  too stuffed  with  griefs contemporary and  classical  to  know beneficence  today  as any grey  trunk proud of its leafy medallions and  fluttering them like a Soviet commander for  all  to see

A decaying  bug-eyed  humanist, I rot into  this murderous century, smiling tolerantly in all directions, my
blue  and  gentle  eyes beseeching forgiveness for  the compost  odours  rising  like  a  tide

But  sometimes  I turn  my eyeballs  around to see my skull's  interior, become
a mad  neurologist  and  probe  with  poised  lens the  mechanism  of brainfold and  nerve
that  ticks towards  the  bright  disaster

That must  one  day  blot out  the  heavens, the  agony of innocents caught like a lynx in  the steel trap  of human malice
or  harpooned like those other Jews,
the  harried  whales  of the  prosperous sea
 


Irving Layton








66



THE CONSUMM}ITION



When  the  sun's  overhead I exult and  when  the  sun goes down;
in my queer  head  they come  to one
and  marvels  never cease or halt.

I'm  alive. I have  the miracle  of legs, of arms,  and  of eyes that  see.
My soul has  more  deeps  than  the ocean;
Greek  goddesses  have loved  me.

For  me the stately  oak drops its leaves, midges  give me  their  attention;
this bright morning the air, full of vivas,
folds  my head  in its arms.

My frank  look compels  the flowers
to parade their  most  vibrant colours;
in their  quiet  and  holy presence
the grass  becomes  a green  pool of silence.

How  miraculous is the shoelace
that  suddenly unties  and  makes  me bend;
its defiance puts  pyramids  to shame, even  cathedrals of imposing  stone.

In  its lowly insistence
I discern  the  earliest  Christian: it's Rome that  bows to my shoe, it's  Caesar that  stares  at  the dust.

Friends, how  much  happiness I owe
to love and  knowledge, the rebel's  stance;
at my first  full  whistle  of joy
all  the  ]erichos in my skull fall  down.

On  such  days of sunburst,
his heart overflowing with  blessings,
a man  does  not  ask:  'Will  I result  in anybody?' but  accomplisht glows brighter than  the  sun.
 


Irving Layton



THE COLLECTED PHOTOGRAPHS OF BILLY THE KID
 







Perry M. Nodelman





WLE THE INCLUSION of photog<aph' m The  Collected Works  of Billy the  Kid is an interesting experiment, Ondaatje's choice of specific images is bewildering.  The  first sentence of the book mentions  a picture of Billy, but only a blank square is shown;  and  the people who do appear  in later  photo­ graphs seem incapable of the violence the book describes. They stare lifelessly into the camera, or tum  their backs to it;  or they hide their  faces in shadows, appar­ ently overwhelmed  by the empty landscapes surrounding them.
Nevertheless, photographs  play an important part  in Ondaatje's conception  of the book. The first section is a comment about  taking pictures, and knowledgeable readers  will recognize the naked  man  on  horseback  who  appears  on  the  book's cover; the picture is from one of the revolutionary  sequences taken by Eadweard Muybridge  in the latter years of the last century, in attempting to understand  the nature  of movement. According to Stephen Scobie, the techniques of photography offer "possible analogies to Ondaatje's methods"1 of presenting Billy's life.
In  fact,  by interspersing  poems and  sections in  prose with  photographs,  On­ daatje  implies an equivalence between them;  the written  sections are like  photo­ graphs  also. Not surprisingly, many  of them  begin  with  descriptive  phrases like those  written  in  an  album:  "Christmas   at  Fort  Sumner, I 88o,"2     "Blurred," "January at Tivan  Arroyo," "Miss Dickinson of Tucson," "With  the  Bowdres." These  phrases often  have no grammatical  connection  with  the  words following them;  they act like titles, or like captions to photographs.
Furthermore, the various sections of The  Collected  Works  are  not  in  chrono­ logical order.  Ondaatje's "photographs" of Billy are a disconnected series of frag­ mented moments, and the book as a whole resembles an album, organized accord­ ing to a logic that  is not chronological. Ondaatje's  obfuscation of temporal  devel­ opment  suggests that  Billy's behaviour  could  not  be explained  accurately  by the sequential  relationships of causes and effects that fluid narratives  necessarily imply. Perhaps he is trying to understand  the movement  of  the whole by breaking it into more readily comprehensible  parts.
If he is, then  the  presence of the  Muybridge photograph is important.  Muy­
bridge's  famous  studies  of bodies in  motion  began  when  he  used  a  battery  of

68

ONDAATJE

cameras  in sequence  to photograph a race horse, in order  to discover something that  human  eyes could not see -whether  or  not a moving  horse lifted all four feet off the ground  at once. Paradoxically,  by stopping motion in photographs  the workings of motion  could  be clearly seen. In The  Collected Works, Billy's life is understood  in the same way.
But  photographs like  Muybridge's are  necessarily incomplete,  mere  images  of
movement  that  do not actually  move themselves. The  "word  pictures"  that  make up The  Collected Works  are similarly incomplete;  the poems a.'ld sections in prose are as devoid  of emotion  as the  actual  photographs  Ondaatje chose to include. The  "photographer" keeps his emotional  distance  from  the  violent  events  he is describing, and  paradoxically,  his dispassionate objectivity is so disproportionate that  it amounts  to misrepresentation.  In  fact, it is the  unemotional  tone of The Collected Works  that allows Ondaatje to replace the traditional  legend of Billy the Kid with his own interpretation of him. The legendary outsider whose exuberance could not be restrained  by the petty restrictions of a narrowminded society was at least  passionately  involved  in  the  act  of living;  Ondaatje's Billy is as objective about himself as a photographer is about  his subjects.
In fact, Billy's photographic objectivity is the key to Ondaatje's interpretation of him. The "collected  works" are photographs; if they are the collected works of Billy himself,  then  Billy himself is the  photographer. If that  is true,  then  the unusual  structure of the  book mirrors its protagonist's  vision of himself and  the world he lives in;  and The  Collected Works explores that  vision.
As I suggested earlier, the structure  of The  Collected Works  denies the signifi­ cance of chronological  sequence in the explanation  of events. If the "works"  are Billy's, then  he himself denies the significance of such explanations.  In  fact,  the book as a whole never shows him developing or changing  in  relation  to experi­ ence. His character and his attitudes  are static, his vision unchanging.  For readers of the book, knowledge of Billy grows, as later sections reveal the significance of phrases and  ideas present  in earlier sections. What follows is an  attempt  to des­ cribe Billy's vision, not as a reader's  knowledge of  it develops, but  as it is finally revealed after all the "works"  have been considered, and the connections between them understood. Billy's refusal to consider the influence of events on his behaviour  seems to demand  such an approach.


BILLY EXPRESSES  HIS  INTEREST  in  the  way  photographs depict the world most openly in his references to an actual  picture of himself. The picture fascinates  him enough for him to mention it a number  of times;  but it is not  the image  of himself that  he dwells on. In  fact, he is more concerned  with
what  the  picture  does not show. On  one occasion, his indulgence  in  "red  dirt" brings the  picture  to life:  "I was pumping  water out  over the  well. Only  now,

6g

ONDAATJE

with  the  red dirt,  water started  dripping  out  of the  photo."  And  later,  he says, "When  they took the picture of me there was a white  block down  the fountain road where somebody had come out of a building  and  got off the porch onto his horse and ridden away while I was waiting standing  still for the acid in the camera to dry firm."  In  both instances, Billy is intrigued  by the  difference  between  the motionless world of the photograph  and the actual  movement  of the world it was meant  to depict.
In fact, it seems to be the camera's  ability to stop things from moving that most
fascinates Billy. As the section beginning "his  stomach  was warm"  implies, Billy views things photographically  himself to avoid emotional  involvement  with them. In this poem he remembers putting his hand  into a wounded  stomach in order to retrieve a bullet, and  the last six lines are the first six in reverse order - like a film run backwards. Each line becomes a separable  component, like the individual frames of a motion picture. By putting  these components  into a meaningless rela­ tionship  with each other, Billy purges their  meaning,  and  gets rid of the  pain it causes him. He  has stopped time,  just as a photographer does when  he  shoots a picture;  perhaps something similar is happening in  the disconnected structure  of the book as a whole.
In order to take pictures, a photographer needs distance;  he must be removed
from the scenes he captures. Billy continually expresses an interest in such distance. In one section, for instance, he describes the scene of his death  in careful  detail, and  his description  is repeated  word-for-word  after  he says "Again"; apparently he  has  chosen to  re-inspect a  photograph  of interest  to  him.  Its  importance is obvious; Billy could have described the scene so accurately  only if he were distant from it:  "all this I would have seen if I was on the roof looking." But in fact, he was not on the roof; as another section reveals, he actually views the scene in "the screen of a  horse's eye." Instead  of taking  the  picture  from  a  distance  Billy is actually in it;  and his life is taken.
In fact, Billy seems to share the belief of certain  primitive tribesmen that  having one's picture taken is a threat to one's existence. Paulita  Maxwell's comment about Billy's photograph  suggests the  nature  of the threat: "I never liked the  picture. I don't  think it does Billy justice." Billy seems to agree;  the  next section begins, "Not  a story about me through their eyes then." Billy's "collected  works," his own pictures of his life, reveal the falseness of the  pictures taken  by the eyes of others
-pictures like the Wide  Awake  Library version of his life, from which the  real
Billy has entirely disappeared.
Billy's refusal to accept other  people's pictures of him  goes beyond  a concern for his reputation; his tendency  to view things  photographically himself is also a matter  of self-defence. In distancing himself and in taking  his own "pictures," he can protect himself from the attempts  of others to capture  him.
He  seems to use a gun  for  the same  reason. Like  photographers,  gunfighters

ONDAATJE

can shoot things successfully only when they are far enough  away from  them  to get them  clearly in their sights;  and  both stop movement.  In  fact,  the similarity between guns and cameras is reinforced by the language of The  Collected Works, for instance  in the opening  paragraph when the photographer Huffman  says, "I am able to take passing horses at a lively trot square across the line of fire." Simi­ larly,  Muybridge  stopped  the movement  of the  horses he shot, and  the  photog­ raphers  who took the actual  pictures in the book captured  only motionless beings. Through the book, Billy is concerned  with the attempts  of  others to "take" him, to stop  his movement.  His  response is to  put  himself into  Huffman's or  Muy­ bridge's position, to distance himself either with his gun or with the camera  of his distancing eye, and  to stop their movement.
But  Billy's concern  with  photographs   transcends  his  identification   with  the people who take them;  the machines that  make photographs  are also meaningful to him. In  particular, he is most at ease in the dark rooms which let in blocks of light  through  small openings,  rooms that  resemble cameras.  His "calm  week" in a bam  is a good example: "it  was the colour and  light of the  place that  made me stay  there."  But  ironically,  the  colour  is almost  colourless-"a grey  with remnants  of brown" -in  sharp  contrast  to the bright  light  outside,  which Billy allows to enter the barn in much the same way that light enters a camera: "when I had arrived  I opened  two windows and a door and  the sun poured  blocks and angles in."
Similarly, Billy's description  of the Chisum ranch  contrasts  the "sunless quiet" of the dark rooms with the strong light outside:  "in the long 20 yard living-dining room I remember  the closing of shutters, with each one the sudden  blacking out of clarity in a section of the room." Billy seems to be inside a camera  again.  Later he reverses the image, but maintains  the same pattern.  Standing outside in "total blackness," he sees "a  house stuffed with yellow wet light where within  the frame of a window we saw a woman  move ... towards the window,  towards  the edge of the dark."  Sally Chisum  has lost her personality; she is just a nameless woman framed like a photograph, and Billy says that "the night, the dark  air, made it all mad"; apparendy he identifies light with  madness.
Billy explains his preference for darkness in a later section that  recalls his stay in the barn: "I am on the edge of the cold dark  / watching  the white landscape
in its frame  I a world that's  so precise I every nail and  cobweb I has magnified
itself to my presence." Hidden  by the dark and able to see the world of light this clearly, Billy feels safe from it. He mentions his ability to "magnify" objects else­
where, most significantly when he says, "Strange that how I feel people I not close
to me I ... my eyes I magnify the bones across a room I shifting in a wrist." He knows that  he can  magnify  things  to clarity  only if  he  keeps his distance  from them;  he also knows that if he sacrifices his distance and enters the world of light, he will be exposed -like a photograph.

7I

ONDAATJE

It  is for this reason that  Billy sees the  world  of light  as "mad"; if he walked through  the  "frame" of the barn  door  he would  be vulnerable  to light:   "I am
here on the edge of sun I that  would ignite me I looking out into  pitch  white I
sky and grass overdeveloped to meaninglessness"-just as Sally is "overdeveloped" into impersonality  when she is bathed  in light and  just as Billy himself is "over­ developed"  when he sees himself in the screen of a horse's eye, and dies. Symbolic­ ally, Billy retracts  into a camera in order  to avoid being  photographed.
But Billy's fear of being "framed" obviously goes too far. His hatred  of exposure destroys his relationship  with women in particular; he interprets  their  movements as attempts to take  him. When  a women  lifts a  curtain   Billy imagines  himself
framed  in a photograph: "the  bent oblong of sun I hoists itself across the room I
framing  the  bed  the  white flesh I of my arm." His  response is to  try  to  be a camera: "I am very still I I take in all the angles of the room." Angela D.'s ability to take him is particularly  dangerous. Her eyes are so big they "need  a boat"  for
him to keep afloat  in them, and  he sees her from  a distance  as "blurred in the dark,"  moving too fast for him to watch  her clearly and  therefore  dangerous  to him.  But  when  she actually  captures  him,  he is "blurred in  the  dark"  himself, having totally lost his clarity and shouting  "stop." His fear of being taken causes him to fear the lack of control inherent in his own physical pleasure.
Billy's imagery  continually  implies  that  Angela  is trying  to  capture   him - "catching me like a butterfly"  in her legs. But  his real  fear  is that  his physical
contact  with her leads to his loss of mental control: "her  toes take your ribs I her
fingers your mind."  Without  control he is exposed to danger,  and  he presents his dealings with Angela as a vaudeville act:  "up  with the curtain  I down with your pants."  That  curtain  may be the one raised by a woman  in an earlier  poem;  in
any case, Billy is unveiled and  made  vulnerable  to the eyes of his audience,  and loses control.
The  one woman who does not threaten  Billy is Sally Chisum, who always looks to him "like some ghost," a disembodied figure in white moving quietly  through dark  rooms. Sally never tries to "take" Billy, and  he does not  have  to take  her. She represents  his ideal; safe in the darkness  and  privacy  of her  house, she can let down her guard.
Billy believes that  he cannot  afford  to make  himself so vulnerable.  When  he immerses Sally in a bathtub,  wrapped  in a sheet, and  tells her that  it is like "a mad  man's  skin," he implies his own feelings of constriction,  and  his desire for freedom  from  them;  his dislike of sexual involvement  and  his need  to distance himself from  other  people suggest a fear  of his own  body  and  the  demands  it makes of him. In the solitude of dark rooms he can feel disembodied -"like some ghost."  But  he is convinced that  freedom  from  the  constrictions  of the  body is impossible.  Billy's  worst  experience  of  vulnerability   occurs  when   his  skin  is removed, in the peculiar fantasy he has as he rides in the desert after  being cap-

ONDAATJE

tured by Garrett: "the sun turned  into a pair of hands.... it began to unfold my head drawing  back each layer of skin and letting it flap over my ears." The sun's fingers are  like Angela's;  they  take Billy's mind,  and  the  rest of him  is turned inside out. Billy's description of this experience implies a peculiar confusion of sexuality and death,  and  his association of them with light;  all three imply loss of control.  "My  cock standing out of my head":  he is literally exposed by the sun, the source of light. And  as the sun fingers him to orgasm,  he loses control  and knows what  it is like to be "overdeveloped  to meaninglessneS3." Finally  he finds relief "in  the shade" of his horse's stomach.
The shade offers Billy security; "a boy blocks out the light" because he is afraid of it. But what he really fears is the world it allows him to see. That  "mad" world lacks the control  and  the clarity Billy so desires. Unlike a photograph, life keeps moving. If Billy is alone, or with Sally Chisum, he can give himself to the move­ ment and  enjoy it-as he does "moving  across the world on horses." But if he is with other  people who might move against him, he must be on guard. Finally, Billy is a photographer of life because he fears what he calls at one point "the  pain of change."



CHANGE DISTURBS  BILLY  because  it  implies  that  nothing can be depended  on:  "in the end the only thing that never changed, never became deformed,  were animals." Billy's identification  of change  with deformity is char­ acteristic; for him, no change is ever for the better. He sees Charlie Bowdre dying with  his "face  changing  like fast sunshine,"  and  purges  the  pain  of the  image photographically, saying,  "I caught   Charlie  Bowdre  dying."  But  his dislike of
flowers is more  disturbing. He seems to admire  "paper  flowers you don't  feed  I
or give to drink," and  he speaks of the pollen of real flowers in terms that,  once again, confuse sexuality and  death. They distress him by bursting the white drop
of spend I out into the air at you I the smell of things dying." This smell suffocates
Billy, "stuffing up your nose I and  up like wet cotton in the brain."  For him, the
"liquor  perfume" of flowers is paradoxically  "like lilac urine smell."  Even sweet smells disgust him.
In fact, all the smells of living offend Billy, particularly  those of other  people. He dislikes "the  strange  smell of their breath  I moving across my face,"  and  as he imagines  the scene of his death,  he says he wants  to kill Garrett  because  he
"can  smell him smell that  mule sweat I that  stink." And  as he feels exposed in the desert after  a  drunken  night  at  the Chisums',  he imagines  that  the  wind  is
carrying "the  smell off dead  animals a hundred  miles away and  aiming it at me and  my body."  For Billy, smells are weapons wielded by the world of change  in attempting to involve him in itself.

73

ONDAATJE

Billy destroys anything  that  tries to  involve  him.  He  distances  himself  from other  people, and  sometimes kills them.  He  moves away  from  the  exposure  of sunlight and into darkness. And he crushes the flowers that  get at him. As he does so, "the  flower gets small smells sane  j deteriorates  in a hand." For Billy, death smells good. The only true sanity comes with the elimination  of a painfully chang­ ing thing that smells disturbingly of life.
But Billy's anguished  response to the anarchy  of change  is most obvious as the isolated darkness of the Chisum ranch  is disrupted  by an evening of debauchery. Billy must be involved;  but  because, as he says, he is "used  to other  distances," his eyes burn  from  "the  pain  of  change"  and  he  compares  the  situation  to  a "blurred  picture." Not surprisingly, he is forced to be aware of the offensive odours photographs  cannot  record, and  he speaks with  disgust of Angela, "the  smell of her sex strong  now daubing  my chest." The  photograph has come  to life, and Billy cannot bear it.
In fact, Billy is never allowed to maintain  the repose he so desires. It is achieved by elimination;  like photographs,  it removes the smells and  the  pain of change. Billy knows that  "one must eliminate much"  to gain peace, and  he tries, not  just to eliminate  his enemies with a gun, but also to eliminate  his awareness of some important facts of life. His crushing of flowers is just one example.  He  also tries to turn  away  from  the deaths  he causes, and  "see  none  of the  thrashing"; but again and  again  he must see "wounds  appearing in the sky, in the air,"  "nerves shot out"  and  livers "running around," veins  pulled  out  of  bodies, and  so on. Furthermore, his conviction that  animals  never become  deformed  is consistently denied  throughout the book;  their  "deformity" can  not  be eliminated  by Billy's insistence that it does not exist. Animals do some of the ugliest things in the book. They eat vomit, and their smell in death  attacks Billy. Dogs are transformed  into monsters by the mad breeder Livingstone. Mild-mannered chickens become sinister as they pull veins out of human  bodies. Above all, even the animals which share the calm of Billy's bam  become deformed.
Ironically,  it is their  deformity-the fact  that  he refuses to acknowledge­
that  disrupts his calm. For that calm is not what Billy claims it is. It depends, not on the clarity provided by distance, but on a curious form of numbness. Removed from a world that might move against him, and believing there is no need to keep his eyes conscious of  possible danger,  Billy eliminates  even  his  awareness:   "I began  to block my mind  of all thought." He  drops his guard,  loses his distance, and finds peace as just another  animal;  he says, "We  were all aware and allowed each other,"  but  the awareness is not convincing.  Billy achieves the same  numb repose here he has in "moving across the world on horses" or in the undemanding company of Sally Chisum.
But that  repose is built on a false conception of reality. Billy has eliminated  the possibility of the animals changing; the rats that  turn  on each  other in the barn

74

ONDAATJE

imply that  animals  are no more capable  of being both  aware  and  allowing each other  than  human  beings are. To  be aware is to be aware  of change, and  some change is painful.  Billy's photographic calm explodes into movement, its falseness made  obvious. Billy shoots the rats in order  to stop their  movement  and  restore his own peace. Paradoxically, he performs violence to prevent  violence. If one is to achieve a perfect, unchanging  world, one must use one's gun, or one's camera, to "eliminate  much."
But the act of destroying the rats does not restore Billy's repose. He is on guard
again -no  longer  an  unthinking animal  among  animals,  but  "the  boy in  the blue shirt,"  who is, ironically, framed  by the doorway  and  forced to look at the changing  world outside. If that  world moves and  he does not, then  Billy is not really in a camera; the door that frames him makes him into a photograph -the one unchanging thing in a world of change.
Billy's insistence that  the change  inherent  in living is always painful  is clearly unhealthy.  If he needs to eliminate  the smells of flowers and of other  people, and even his own sexuality, in order to achieve repose, he actually aspires to be some­ thing  less than  human. Not surprisingly,  his images of perfection  are  inhuman, and  frequently  mechanical.  His tendency to describe rooms as cameras and  him­ self and  other  people  as  photographers is only one  manifestation   of  a  general pattern. For  him, "the  stomach  of clocks" that  "shift  their  wheels and  pins into
each other I and emerge living" is preferable to the nauseatingly "warm" stomach
of a human  being, and  he admires the "dark  grey yards  where trains are fitted I
and  the  clean  speed  of  machines  I that  make  machines   I . . . the  beautiful
machines  pivoting  on  themselves."  He  admires  them  so much  that  he  tries to transform  himself into one of them. Garrett's description of Billy doing his finger exercises recalls Billy's description  of the train  yards, "each  finger circling  alter­ nately like a train  wheel." Billy's left hand  is a mechanical  extension of  the lethal machine  it holds, and  even his fear  of sexual involvement  is expressed  in  terms
of his losing control of this machine:  "my hand locked I her body nearly breaking
off my fingers I pivoting like machines in final speed I later my hands  cracked in love  juice I fingers paralysed  by it arthritic  I these  beautiful  fingers I  couldnt
move I faster than  a crippled witch now."



BuT IT   IS  NOT    SEXUAL  INVOLVEMENT  that  finally  destroys Billy. In fact, Ondaatje's presentation  of Pat Garrett,  Billy's killer, implies that  his real enemy is his own mad  vision. For Garrett  seems to share  that  vision, and he can take Billy only because he understands him so well.
Garrett finds the movements  of Billy's fingers "the  most hypnotising  beautiful thing  I ever saw,"  and  for  good reason;  Garrett  also has turned  himself into a

75

ONDAATJE

machine.  "His  mind  was unwarped," but  only because, like Billy, he refuses to acknowledge  the complexities of living. Billy himself admires  "morals" that  are "clear  and  open,"  achieved  by eliminating   much;   similarly,  Garrett   "decided what  was right  and  forgot all morals."  Furthermore, Billy's mechanizing  of his hand is paralleled  by Garrett's  mechanizing of his life, his "schedule  to learn how to drink"  and his refusal to allow his emotions to gain control over him.
Above all, Garrett  shares Billy's dislike of change. If Billy admired  paper flowers and  killed real ones for smelling of life, Garrett  "became frightened  of flowers because they grew so slowly that  he couldnt  tell what  they planned  to do." They both  believe that  all movement  is potentially  dangerous  to themselves. Billy  ad­ mires assassins because they "come to chaos neutral," and for this reason, Billy is as much  a "sane  assassin" as Garrett  is. Ondaatje reveals the deficiency  of that cool sanity  by repeating  the phrase "sane  assassin" until  it turns  in on  itself, the "in-"  at the end of "assassin" joining onto the front  of "sane"  and  revealing the truth; the real madmen  are those who believe that sanity is total control and total lack of emotion.
If the man  who kills Billy is a mirror  image  of him, Billy is actually  destroyed by his own vision of life. In fact, understanding how Billy will react, Garrett  "does the one thing that will save him." He leaps into Maxwell's  bed, and Billy, knowing that  there  are  no other  women on the  ranch,  assumes that  Maxwell  is sleeping with  his own sister. Revolted by this evidence of humanity's subservience  to its own anarchic  sexuality, Billy is put off guard.  His need for control causes him to lose control, and he is killed.
Ondaatje's investigation of Billy answers the question Billy himself raises at one point:  was there  "a  motive? some reasoning  we can  give to explain  all this  vio­ lence? Was there  a source for all this?" Billy's explanation  of that  motive is the killing of his friend Tunstall. But Ondaatje cleverly shows Billy watching Tunstall's death  "from  a distant  hillside." That is the  real "source"; Billy's desire for lack of involvement  causes him to lash out,  to kill things  so that  he  can  preserve his distance  from  them.  At one point, he speaks of "pictures of  great  stars ... that
would explode their white I if  temperature and the speed they moved at I shifted
one degree." Billy himself explodes whenever life happens; when  he loses control and  clarity, when  his distance from other  people is lessened, or when the move­ ment of another  creature  does not fit the pattern  he has imposed on it.
According  to Stephen Scobie, "Billy's poetic personality  is not entirely distinct from  Michael  Ondaatje's."3   As a  photographer, Billy's artistry  is a  matter  of stopping change -the dead stillness of the actual  photographs in the book mirrors the dead  stillness of Billy's own perception  of the world;  he "fixes" things, either with guns or with the photographic "word  pictures"  of his collected works. The relation  of Billy's methods  to  the  traditional theory  that  art  should  be  eternal and  unchanging is obvious. But Billy's motive for taking  his pictures is a disgust

ONDAATJE

with  things  that  live and  move and  change;  it seems doubtful  that  Ondaatje's work is engendered  by a similarly insane attitude.
In fact, The  Collected Works  may be an exorcism of the poet's admiration for
his protagonist.  If the  child  in the  cowboy outfit  whose photograph appears  at the end of the book is Ondaatje himself, then he was in fact once taken in by the usual legends of Billy the Kid and other similar heroes. The  portrait  of Billy that emerges in The  Collected  Works  reveals what  is wrong  with  those legends. The heroic outsider who bravely dismissed the restrictions of society did so only because he  was  uninvolved   and   emotionally  dead.  Understanding  this,  and,   perhaps, realizing its implications  in terms of the way legends like Billy's justify the  unin­ volvement and  removed  violence of "outsiders"  in the contemporary  world, On­ daatje frees himself from the legend. The poet himself speaks in the last poem, and he is seen washing away the smoke of a bad night, the night in  which he finished the book and  purged  himself of its hero.
But in the process of disengaging himself from one false image of Billy, Ondaatje may have taken on an even larger burden. Billy's activities are identified with the methods of photography, and  they might  be a metaphor  for the work of artists. While the  "collected  works" are like photographs,  the  phrase  is usually reserved for volumes of poetry, and  many of the "works" are in fact poems. Scobie may be right. Perhaps  all attempts to fix the fluid movement of the world into an artistic­ ally satisfying  order  are  murderous; they  may  emerge  from  a  disdain  for  life, and engender  nothing  but motionless misrepresentations.  Perhaps  the words with which a  poet fixes an image  of his world are the weapons  he wields against  the "pain  of change," and  perhaps  the use of such weapons has the same  numbing  effect on poets as it had on Billy.
Such  considerations  seem to surface in The  Collected  Works  in  a  poem that
might represent the thought  of either Billy or Ondaatje. The speaker of this poem is thinking about  the act of writing:  "my fingers touch  I this soft blue paper note­ book I control a pencil ... I mapping  my thinking."  Apparently pencils are like
guns and cameras, tools that  allow one to control confusion by "mapping" it. Certainly  Billy's concern  about  a  newspaper  interviewer's  manipulation of  his
image suggests such a similarity:  "a  pencil I harnessing my face I goes stumbling
into dots." These  dots could  be either  the reporter's  shorthand, or  the dots that make up a photograph in a newspaper. In any case, the implications  of controlling a pencil are the ones hidden  in all of Billy's attitudes-he tries to use the orderly patterns  of his mind  to give form and stability to a painfully  unstable  world. His writing-and perhaps  Ondaatje's also-is equivalent  to his photography. Both retreat from reality into "the  mind's invisible blackout," the camera  that  removes itself from  the world and  stops its movement.
Ondaatje has written  elsewhere of similar concerns, particularly  in the "White
Dwarfs"  sequence  in Rat  ]elly. In  the first of these poems, he says, "Our minds


77

ONDAATJE

shape 1 and lock the transient,"4  thus capturing permanent images of things that are impermanent. But in the next poem, this ability of the mind  becomes proble­ matic:   "there  are  ways of going I physically mad,  physically  I mad  when  you
perfect the mind."5 Billy is mad in this way, and so is Garrett; they are both "sane assassins." Perhaps  the poet is a sane assassin also.
The  achievement  of total control is insane because it is an illusion; change does
not stop, and  as the  man  writing in the blue  notebook  in The  Collected  Works
realizes, the mind's elimination of it is not real. The  pencil is really "going its own way," and  similarly, "the  acute nerves spark  I on the  periphery  of our  bodies I while the block trunk  of us I blunders."  The  physical body still blunders  despite
attempts  to control  it. In  the same way, the  pain  of change  cannot  be stopped, either by photographs or by poems; life blunders on despite all the images that  try to fix it.
Significantly, Ondaatje's response to this problem, implied  later  in the "White
Dwarfs" sequence, makes use of yet another  image of photography. He speaks of "a  blurred  photograph  of a gull. Caught  vision. The  stunning  white  bird  I an unclear stir. I And that is all this writing should  be then.  I The  beautiful  formed things caught  at the  wrong moment  I so they are shapeless, awkward  I moving
to the clear."6   Billy's perfectly clear  photographs  are  lifeless; good pictures,  and good poems, should  be blurred. If they are,  the sterility  of permanence  will not have destroyed the movement of life. In fact, and paradoxically, the "blundering" movement of life is what the poet is trying to capture and make permanent. It is not insignificant  that  the  happiest  moment  in The  Collected  Works, when  Billy takes pleasure  in "riding  naked"  on horseback,  is presented  in  a  picture  that  is unclear-one that  Billy calls "blurred." Nor is it insignificant  that  Billy's enjoy­ ment ends when he looks into the eyes of a bird;  that eye stops Billy, just as the eye of Muybridge's camera stopped the movement of the naked man on horseback he photographed. Such still pictures are not satisfactory.
At this point, some history becomes significant. Each one of Muybridge's photo­ graphs  of a  horse was lifeless and  unmoving; but  as a sequence,  these  pictures represent  an  important advance  in  the  development   of  motion   pictures.  The  sequential  viewing of them could appear  to duplicate the movement of the horse; they are unmoving  photographs that  could in fact depict movement.  In the same way, Ondaatje's collection of still photographs  of Billy the Kid comes together  as a sequence  to create  a  moving  picture  of a  convincing  human   being.  In  The  Collected Works, Billy is a "beautiful formed thing caught  at the wrong moment" again  and again, so that he is always unconsciously revealing the weakness of his own attitudes.  His deliberately lifeless photographs of himself contain  implications that  allow Ondaatje to present a  fuller and  more  believable  picture  of Billy in the book as a whole, one that  moves steadily  away  from  the  empty  frame  that represents Billy's photograph  at the beginning  of the book and  "to  the clear."

ONDAATJE

Obviously, then, Billy's photography  is quite different from Ondaatje's. If The Collected  Works of Billy the  Kid  is Ondaatje's attempt  to "present  Billy himself as an artist,m  it is not for the purpose of defining his own artistry.  Billy is being criticized, and  Ondaatje is certainly not identifying his protagonist  with himself. In fact, by understanding Billy well enough to purge himself of him, Ondaatje has divested himself of a familiar  and easy idea about  poetry, and forced  himself into a much  more difficult struggle-to make things live and  move in words, rather than  simply to capture their image and stop them dead.


NOTES

1 "Two Authors in  Search of a Character," Canadian  Literature, No.  54  (Autumn
1972)' 43·
2   The  Collected  Works  of Billy the Kid  (Toronto: Anansi,  1970).
3 Scobie, p. 45·
4   "We're at  the graveyard," Rat  Jelly (Toronto: Coach  House,  1973), p. 51.
5   "Heron Rex," Rat Jelly, p. 53·
6   "'The gate  in his head,'" Rat Jelly, p. 62.
7  Scobie,  p. 44·






THE FILLED PEN
 


P.K.Page


Eager  to draw  again
find  space  in that  small  room for  my drawing board  and  inks and  the huge  revolving  world the  delicate nib releases

I have  only to fill my pen and the shifting gears begin Fly-wheel and  cog-wheel  start their  small-toothed interlock

and  whatever machinery draws is drawing through my fingers
and  the  shapes  that  I have  drawn gaze up into  my eyes
We stare  each  other  down


79

POEM

Light of late  afternoon white wine across my paper the subject  I would draw light  of the stars and  sun

light  of the swan-white moon the blazing  light of trees
and  the rarely-glimpsed bright  face
behind  the  apparency of things













THE TETHERS
 


P. K. Page


You are my tethers -you and  you and  you beautiful, ailing,  witty or beloved.
You  hold  my tent-pole upright make  my tent
symmetrical and  true -
you guy-ropes  of a tent that would  not be a tent.

Think what  a sail I'd  make against the blue-
flying! -for God's  sake. What a splendid din
the whip and  rattle of my canvas  wings flapping me upward ragged  as a crane.

Not  as I dreamed:
tent  formless, beyond form. But  as I never  dreamed:
tent  shapeless,  without shape.

8o


EMILE NELLIGAN

A Dreamer Passing By

Kathy Me;::,ei




TOUGH HIS FLAME  OF GENIUS flickered  ro  briefly,  the romantic,  tragic and  mad  Emile Nelligan ( !879-1941) captured  the imagination of  Quebec   as  no  writer  before  or  after.  The   critic,  Jean-Ethier  Blais,  once
remarked,  "ne  peut-on  pas croire  que  c'est  tout  notre  sensibilire qui  vit  a son
ombre?"
Nelligan spent  his youth  in  Montreal.  His father,  absent  most of the  year on behalf of the postal service, was a tyrannical Irishman who refused to learn French, while his mother, a gentle, musical French Canadian, protected  her son. As a boy Nelligan seemed indifferent  to his studies and as a young man showed no inclina­ tion to find regular  employment,  much to the annoyance of his father. From  age sixteen  to nineteen  he devoted  himself exclusively to writing  poetry,  affecting  a bohemian  life style. Then  he succumbed to the schizophrenia  that  had been slowly engulfing  him  and  waited  out  the  rest of his days in mental  institutions,  never writing  another  word  of poetry. One  can see, given  Nelligan's  background   and futile rebellion, how his schizophrenia  assumed a mythic quality  in Quebec,  how it came to symbolize the oppressive theocracy and uneasy dual heritage.
Far  surpassing  any  other  Quebec  author   and,  in  stark  contrast   to  English
Canadian writers, Nelligan  has been celebrated,  analyzed, and  immortalized. In his Bibliographie descriptive et critique d'Emile Nelligan ( 1973)  Paul  Wyczynski painstakingly  details  the  numerous  colloquia,  conferences,  and  publications  of all types from reviews to films. Nelligan's poems have been translated  into English, set to music by Quebec  chansonniers,  recreated in the watercolours  of Louis Pel­ letier, and  inspired  pieces by composers. His most famous  poem,  "Le  Vaisseau d'or" lent its name to Mayor  Jean  Drapeau's restaurant,  now  bankrupt. He  has been the subject  of a  ballet  "Nelligan" by Ann  Ditchburn. In  December  1974, "Le  Patriote" in  Montreal   presented  Monique  Leyrac's  "Spectacle  Emile  Nelli­ gan,"  one of several such spectacles. There  is also an  "Editions  Emile  Nelligan" and, inI 979, Le Prix Emile Nelligan for poetry was first awarded.  The  poet has also been a recurring  figure in contemporary  literary work-&ejean Ducharme's Le Nez qui voque and  Lazar Sarna's  The Man Who Lived Near Emile Nelligan.
Part  of this adulation  stems from Nelligan's eloquent expression of images and themes  that  continue  to obsess Quebec  artists:  entrapment, isolation, alienation,

81

NELLIGAN

exile, ambivalence  towards one's Catholic  heritage  which  nevertheless supplies a bottomless fount of aesthetic images. But this tribute  also arises from the recogni­ tion that  Nelligan heralds the arrival of modernism  in Quebec.  In his poetry, the fetters of a moribund  patriotism and artificial romanticism  are thrown off, reveal­ ing the possibilities of the symbolic use of language  and the psychological examina­ tion of one's inner being. This is not to deny that  Nelligan was-as any youthful poet inevitably  is-strongly  imitative  of his  masters-the French  and  Belgian poets of the parnassian  and symbolist schools, as well as Byron and  Poe. Despite the conventional,  if well-crafted poetic forms  (in  particular, the sonnet)  and  the echoes from continental  poets, a desperate and  moving inner struggle illuminates Nelligan's poems. Unlike earlier Quebec poets, he sought to portray the state of his soul, to reveal the often divided images of the self; thus he created  a landscape of the soul that  reverberates in the poems of Alain Grandbois, Saint-Denys-Garneau, and  Anne Hebert.
Both  Nelligan's  and  Quebec's  literary  awakening  were occasioned  in  part  by
the appearance of the Ecole litteraire de Montreal, founded  in 1895 and lasting in varying  degrees of intensity  until  1935· The  story  goes that  a  group  of young lawyers, disgusted by the "canadianismes," "anglicismes,"  and  "lieux  communsm polluting  a  political  banquet  they  were attending, began  to  gather  together  on Saturday nights at the Cafe Ayotte on Ste. Catherine St. Because of their addiction to huge glasses of draught  beer they became known  as the "six eponges."2   These young  men,  thus  inspired,  resolved to undertake to  "raviver   chez  nous l'interet
aux choses de l'esprit et d'apprendre a notre langage  des formules  plus neuves."3
This  was the origin of l'Ecole.
The  impetus behind the Montreal  movement,  aside from  the desire of several young poets to provide a "foyer" where they could discuss and  recite their  poetry, was a concern  with improving and  renewing the  French  language  and  literature in Quebec.  At first, the school set up a programme of studying  ten  pages of the dictionary  per week in order to improve the vocabulary  of its members.  L'Ecole was envisioned, particularly  by its progenitors, as a movement  of artistic awaken­ ing; it was to signal a new literary epoch in which the romanticism  and patriotism of their  elders would be discarded. One  of the  participants, Albert  Ferland,  des­ cribed the society:

Cercle d'etude, d'un esprit tres ,eclectique qui n'avait  pour objet que de grouper, sans distinction d'ecole, classiques, parnassiens ou symbolistes, tous les jeunes ecri­ vains de l'heure ... Deux tendances partageaient les tenants de cettc ecole: les uns n'avaient que le souci d'exprirner leur arne (Lozeau, Nelligan, Melanc;on, Demers,
Charbonneau, Beauregard);  les autres desiraient donner a leur poesie la couleur et
la saveur du  terroir:  c',etaient Albert Ferland,  Doucet, Leveille, Gill, Tremblay,
Desaulniers.4

With typical French  precision and flair, the school set about  instigating  programs,

NELLIGAN

inviting members, publishing its lectures and sessions, and  holding lively meetings in the Chateau  de Ramezay,  formerly the governer's palace, built in I 705. What began as a gathering of a small number  of people interested  in poetry  blossomed into a large organization  that  included lawyers, journalists, a doctor, a  notary, a painter  and an engraver.
In  I897,  the young  Emile  Nelligan was invited by his friend,  Arthur  de Bus­
sieres, to join the group.  Although  he participated  only sporadically,  l'Ecole gave him an opportunity to present his verse to the public. On December  29,  I 898,  he gave his first public reading  before a receptive crowd. At the third session, April 7, I899, Jean  Charbonneau gave a talk on symbolism, where he eschewed the prin­ ciples of symbolism, a stance  he later regretted. On May  26,  I 899,  Nelligan read his "Romance du vin,"  his moment  of triumph.  Louis Dantin, Nelligan's mentor and dedicated editor, described how: "J'ai vu un soir Nelligan en pleine gloire.... Quand  l'oeil flambant, le geste elargi par }'effort intime,  il clama  d'une  voix passionnee sa Romance du vin, une emotion vraie etreignit  la salle, et les applau­ dissements prirent la fureur  d'une  ovation."5 Like a victor, Nelligan was heroically lifted onto the shoulders  of his fellow poets and carried  home.
Nelligan's  verse seems all the more modern  when set against  the  backdrop  of nineteenth-century Quebec.  Unless one had  contacts with  France  or had  visited her, it was difficult in that church-dominated society to keep abreast of new literary movements. The  press6   was naturally  conservative, and  therefore,  not until  I 895 and  the  creation  of l'Ecole  did  the  parnassian  and  symbolist  movements,  long flourishing in France,  combine  to influence the direction of Quebec  art. The  two major dailies, La Patrie and  La Minerve, published articles on art, while two jour­ nals in particular, Le Monde  illustre and  Le Samedi  (both  of which  published verse by Nelligan), contained  poems and articles on literature. From I 884 to I 894, Le M onde illustre concentrated on Victor Hugo and Fran<_;ois Coppee with rarely a poem even by Lamartine or de Musset. Finally in I 895 Sully Prudhomme, Here­ dia, and Rodenbach began to make an appearance and a poem of Baudelaire's - "Le  Port"-was  published  in  I899·  Le Samedi  was a  little  more  adventurous  and  through  I895-96, poems by Baudelaire and Verlaine  were included.  Nelligan probably found many of the sources for his poetic inspiration among these poems.
Nelligan's poems were not collected and  published until after  his incarceration,
although   his  manuscripts show  that  he  had  been  arranging his  poems  into  a volume. Louis Dantin, at that  time still a priest, spent several years compiling a volume of Nelligan's poems. When his disapproving superiors discovered his activi­ ties, Dantin  handed  the manuscripts  and printed papers to Nelligan's mother, who along  with  Charles  Gill  gave  them  to the  publisher,  Beauchemin.  These  were then published inI 904 as Emile  Nelligan et son oeuvre with a preface by Dantin.  Dantin,  partly  because of this incident, exiled himself to Cambridge, Massachu­ setts, and  left the  church.  Then  in  I952,  Luc  Lacourciere  brought  out  Poesies

NELLIGAN

completes which  contained  the one hundred  and  seven poems gathered  together by Dantin,  plus thirty-five poems that  had  appeared in  journals  from  I 8g6  to
1939  (friends  who  had  received poems from  Nelligan  published  them  after  he was hospitalized)   and  twenty-one poems from  the  Nelligan-Corbeil  manuscripts now at the Bibliotheque  Nationale in Montreal. In  Ig68, Beaudoin  Burger  pub­ lished seven poems from the Carnets  d'Hopital;7  two were variants  of  poems in the  Poesies  completes  and  one,  "Baudelaire," by  Fernand   Gregh,  was  incor­ rectly attributed to Nelligan.
Nelligan had intended  to entitle his collection of poems "Motifs  du 11ecital des
anges" and had listed the sections as follows: "PrBude aux anges," "Clavecin celeste,"  "Villa   d'enfance," "Petite   chapelle,"    "Vesprees   mystiques,"   "Mysti­ cisme," "Choses  mystiques," "Intermezzo," "Lied," "Les  Pied::; sur les chenets." 8
Dantin,  apparently  with recourse to a later list, entitled  the sections:  "L'Arne du poete," "Le  Jardin de l'enfance,"  "Amours  d'elite," "Les  Pieds sur les chenets," "Virgiliennes," "Eaux-fortes funeraires,"  "Petite chapelle,"   "Pastels  et   Porce­ laines," "Vepres  tragiques," "Tristia," titles which reflect the thematic  and formal concerns of the  poet, particularly  the religious motif.  In  his edition, Lacourciere  maintained Dantin's order, with the addition  of "Pieces retrouv,ees" and "Poemes posthumes," culled from manuscripts and  journals.



BY EXAMINING THE  SPATIAL SYMBOLS that  dominate  Nelli­ gan's  poems and tracing their development throughout his poetry, we will have a better understanding of Nelligan's main themes, his poetic process, his modernism, and the reason he has had such a strong impact  on the Quebec imagination.
Heir  to the three great literary movements of the nineteenth  century,  Nelligan
drew out essential characteristics of each that suited  his temperament and  his art. From romanticism  came the concept of the agony of creation  and  the significance of subjective  impressions; from the  parnassians  came  the  emphasis on clarity  of image;  and from the symbolists, the encouragement to pillage nature  for symbols to express ideality and intense subjectivity. The symbolists, particularly  Baudelaire and Verlaine,  provided the rationale for a complex and  unnatural use of symbols from  nature: they wished to create a literature "in  which the visible world is no longer a reality and the unseen world no longer a dream."9  Nature,  then,  became a source of symbolic forms and Nelligan's expression of nature  is symbolic and  far removed from  the  natural  world. Indeed,  the  concept  of ideality  is pervasive in Nelligan who constantly strives to flee "La  Matiere  aux yeux ensorcelants  j Aux plages de Thule  vers l'ile des Mensonges."  With  true  Mallarmean horror  of "la brute  nature," Nelligan wishes to escape the ugly realities of winter, stormy seas, and the "earth," symbolically recoiling from "too  much  reality":

NELLIGAN

Et ne vous souillez pas .a contempler les plebes.

However,  the  contours  of Nelligan's  ideal  remain vaguely defined;  occasionally, this ideal  resides in  the golden  age -the  personal one of childhood  or the  his­ torical one of days of chivalry and romance, and occasionally in the future, in the golden Jerusalem.  Since the ideal can be visited most freely through  "le reve," the loose but implicit  coherence of dreams structures the ideal.
In  his poem "Reve  d'artiste," Nelligan presents the  process by which he seeks
the space that is his ideal world. Disarmingly, he describes how, were he to possess the  elusive muse "une  soeur angelique  au sourire discret,"  he would  fashion an equally angelic and  beautiful  garden -his poem.
Et pour qui je ferai si j'aborde .ala gloire Fleurir tout un jardin de lys et de soleils Dans l'azur d'un poeme offert a sa memoire.

Invoking  the  familiar  symbolist vision of "un  autre  pays"  or  "un  pays absolu" through  the common image of "azur" which he combines with  the religious and romantic images of "lys," "soleil," "gloire"  (all symbols of creative energy),  Nelli­ gan promises us a distant,  ideal space that is both poem and  dwelling place. The distance and improbability of the realm are emphasized because Nelligan addresses the reader,  not the "soeur bonne et tendre,"  thus setting the  possibility of "poem" and  personal  "glory"  in  a  remote  time  and  place. The  "Reve  d'artiste" is an exposition of the development of the conditions of artistic creation and of his vision of an "ideal  poetic space."
Frequently this ideal space is described as "un  reve enclos" or a "jardin senti­
mental" or  a  "jardin d'antan" nostalgically evoking the sheltered  innocence  of childhood  and  a traditional pastoralism  (because derived from literature). How­ ever, this ideal space is Janus-faced  for, on the one hand,  Nelligan seeks refuge in "chapelles" and  "jardins" (religious and  childhood sanctuaries)  :

Nous etions la deux enfants blemes Devant les grands autels a franges, Ou sainte Marie et ses anges
Riaient parmi les chrysanthemes.
("Chapelle dans les bois")
Here in an idyllic retreat in the woods, the poet recalls his pure and innocent child­ hood, the steady rhythmic  flow of the quatrains echoing the sad, distant "voix de la petite chapelle." But, on the other hand,  the refuge, like Nelligan's soul, has its shadowy, macabre side. In  another  poem, the "Chapelle  dans les bois" is trans­ formed  by  the  poet's  delicately  balanced  imagination   into  a  "Chapelle de  la morte."  In  a manner  reminiscent  of Gaston  Bachelard's  depiction  of houses as souls, Nelligan's  "chapelle" in  "Chapelle de la morte" assumes "les  traits  f De ton arne qu'elle  a humee."  The fear and  trembling within  the soul are projected

as

NELLIGAN

outward  and the abstract  blackness of the soul is often transferred  to the concrete ruins of "chapelles" and keeps: "mon arne est un don jon noir." A "berceuse," sym­ bol of protected  childhood,  becomes the  deadly  "cercueil" and  the  "tombeau," e.g.:
De mon berceau d'enfant  j'ai fait l'autre  berceau
Ou rna Muse s'endort dans des trilles d'oiseau, Ma Muse en robe blanche, o rna toute maitresse!

Oyez nos baisers d'or aux grands soirs familiers ... Mais chut! j'entends deja la megere Detresse
A notre seuil faisant craquer ses noirs souliers!
( "Le Berceau de la muse")

Similarly the peaceful cloister is occasionally transformed into a ghoulish mona­ stery. "Le  Cloitre noir" is a haunting  and ambivalent portrait  of monks filing into a chapel that captures, through the rhythmic correspondence of chants and march­  ing feet, the process of attaining  grace and  salvation.  This sonnet  rises to a sym­ bolic, surprise open ending so common to Nelligan, which focuses the entire poem and which sends the startled reader back to explore its symbolic evocations. Note, for example,  the significance of the difference in the ending between the original
1897 poem "Moines  en defilade" and the revised version "Le  Cloitre noir." First,
"Moines en defilade":
rien ne les emeut,

Pas meme les appels de !'infernal esprit, Supreme Tentateur des passions rebelles De ces silencieux Spectres de Jesus Christ.
Second, "Le  Cloitre noir" which is more positive and  affirmative: La lumiere celeste emplit leur large esprit,
Car l'Espoir triomphant creusa les solitudes
De ces silencieux spectres de Jesus Christ.10

The  two versions of "Le  Cloitre  noir"  are  interesting  in  the  light  of  Nelligan's occasionally demonic vision of the "Church" and  because we can see how, here as in other places, Nelligan is torn between the black and the macabre  and the pure and  the holy. Yet which is more terrifying:  the vision of hell and  temptation  in the earlier poem or the ghostly emptiness of salvation  in the latter  one?
Here, then, are the two facets that balance the scale pans of Nelligan's precarious
soul.  First  we encounter  "l'abime" with  its "Supreme Tentateur" and  second, l'abime  with "l'espoir  triomphant." Nelligan's soul is weighed  down  on one side with  exoticism and  nostalgia represented  by the  "bibelots," "negresses,"  parrots, pieces of Chopin,  Liszt, "missels d'ivoire," and  portraits  of his mother. The  other side is weighed down with morbidity  and death,  represented  by images in which

86

NELLIGAN


the  past  appears "claquant leurs  vieux  os," or in which  the  poet  gloats  over  his coffin and  approaching death. Either  by a retreat  into  exoticism  or  nostalgia  or by succumbing to morbidity and  death, Nelligan  seeks to escape  reality.
Thus, while   Nelligan  inhabited  and   desired  to  inhabit  another  reality-a
dream world  constructed out  of his imagination and  out  of the  past  recollected  in turbulence -that this other  reality  eventually overwhelmed him  is evident  in his descent  into  mental illness. It is clear that  Nelligan  had  little interest  in the practi­ cal,  everyday   world  and  felt  trapped and  horrified  by  it: "Je me  sens  des bras funebres j M'asservir au Iteel." In his recollection of Nelligan, Jean Charbonneau pointed  out  Nelligan's ethereality:
Grand,  mince, les cheveux en broussaille, majestueux, un pli d'amertume ala com­ missure des levres, les yeux perdus dans l'infini, il n'avait  pas l'air de tenir au monde materiel.11

Wavering between ecstasy and  desperation, Nelligan  subscribes  to the notion dominant among the  romantic and symbolist  poets that the  poet is seer, that he is possessed by superhuman qualities (poetic genius)  by which  he can  reveal  to the ordinary man  the  ideal  lurking in the  real  world.  This "angelisme" is present  in Nelligan's ironic  description of "the poet"  and  his reception by society:
c'est un reveur qui passe.
C'est une arne angelique ouverte sur l'espace. Qui  porte en elle un ciel de printemps auroral.
("Un  Poete")

The  poet, a  dreamer passing  by, goes unrecognized or  mocked  by  the  philistine crowd,  and  achieves  recognition only "dans le pays ou le bon Dieu  demeure." The concept  of the  poet as more  perceptive and  tuned  to other  universes  is a recurring motif in Nelligan's poems and  further supplements his aura of otherworldliness.



GIVEN THE  SYMBOLIST EMPHASIS  on  the  symbolic  possi­ bilities  of such  natural elements  as water,  trees, birds,  autumn, and  on  the  vivid reconstruction of spiritual worlds through the use of these symbols, it is no wonder  that   Nelligan found   in  their   poems  and  in  their  methods, congenial  modes  of expressing  his dream world.  But most of Nelligan's  nature symbols  are developed  from  his literary  experience rather than  his experience  of the Canadian landscape. Only  with "snow" in "Soir  d'hiver" and  "River sentimental," does Nelligan  infuse his image  with a local relevance, though cold and even snow arc certainly favourite symbolist  metaphors. But  even  with  "neige," it  is the  verbal  possibilities  of  the image  that  intrigue Nelligan, rather than  its "real" properties. As Gerard Bessette has observed:
On voit done qu'une  analyse fonciere des images naturelles de Nelligan confirme ce

NELLIGAN

que notre tableau formel nous laissait entrevoir:  notre poete ne se sent pas a l'aise dans la nature  et l'evite le plus possible.... De meme que la nature,  parce que generalisee ou effieuree, nous semble chez Nelligan aussi revee que vue....  Il ne
s'identifie pas d'ailleurs a eux les [phenomenes generaux]'  mais les regarde de loin,
avec admiration, parfois avec terreur, jamais filialement ou fraternellement.12

The  world of literature  is, for the  poet, a sacred space. And so is dream.  The sacred space is constructed by the poet and, as Verlaine  said, "tout  le reste est litterature," all the rest is profane, worldly, and of little consequence. As archetype, sacred space is inner, and profane space, outer. In his use of images Nelligan con­ tinually  makes  this distinction  between the  inner,  sacred  reality,  and  the  outer, profane  reality.13
Although  Nelligan is concerned  with illuminating the  self, he prefers to view
the self from the outside as separate and often abstract.  For example, when in "La Fuite de l'enfance," the desire of the poet to escape earthly  bounds is rendered  as "La  Fuite de l'enfance  au vaisseau des vingt ans," the self is distanced,  abstracted as "Enfance." But as Bessette points out,  Nelligan's greatness lies in his ability to combine  the  abstract  with the self, and  more significantly  the  abstract  with  the concrete. Therefore,  in this poem, the "vaisseau"  become the concrete representa­ tion of the soul; it is also a recurring symbol for the soul adrift on the seas of change throughout his poetry.

au jour ou nous prendrons vaisseau Sur lamer  ideale ou l'ouragan se ferle. ("Placet")
dans un grand vaisseau vert,
Nous revions de monter aux astres de Vesper.
("Jardin   sentimental") Et je reve toujours au vaisseau des vingt ans,
Depuis qu'il a sombre dans la mer des Etoiles.
( "Tenebres")
Lent comme un monstre cadavre
Mon coeur vaisseau s'amarre au havre
De toute heteromorphe engeance.
("Je  veux m'eluder")

Through spatial   metaphors  of  the  heavens,  abysses, seas, the  self is indirectly revealed. These often cliched metaphors  catch  our attention  first because they do reveal the self, and second, because of their  fine verbal  quality.
The  spatial  direction in Nelligan is predominantly vertical:  up to the heavens, down  into  the  abyss or the sea;  and  it is complemented   by those metaphors  of space  (sea,  abyss, heavens)  that  are  the  recipients  of this vertical  movement.14
This  preference  for  the "vertical" further  emphasizes  Nelligan's  desire to evade
the real world and  to escape into higher realms of being. Although  Nelligan does

88

NELLIGAN

deal  with  universal  themes-"La  Fuite  du  temps,"  death,   nostalgia-it  is always within  the  frame  of the self; to intimate  the stages of his soul  and  the tenuousness of his life is the concern of Nelligan's art.
As a consequence, Nelligan's nature pieces are symbolic inner landscapes avoid­
ing any direct  involvement  with  the natural  world which  is distanced  either  by window frames  or by literary  convention. Bessette comments  that
Tout moyen lui est bon qui le delivre de la realite. II n'hesite pas a recourir a des reminiscences litteraires ou mythologiques plutot que de peindre directement.15

Nelligan does not develop a region-spirit or genius loci; he is a visionary poet who projects the poetic genius which absorbs his whole vision upon  place rather  than seeking to merge his poetic spirit with the spirit of the place. Moreover,  although his "space"  is inevitably  shaped  by clearly delineated  Catholic  and  conservative forces, Nelligan  creates  a  psychological or inner space  that  requires  little in  the way of concrete physical ties to the outer space in order to express itself. Thus Nelligan's landscapes are conventional and symbolic. Enclosed gardens, pastoral vistas, and  winter scenes predominate, frequently succumbing  to macabre  visions or  formless  and   vacant   landscapes  where  the  Baudelarian   nightmare   of  "le gouffre" affirms its dreadful  primacy.  In  Nelligan's  poetry,  the  line of  develop­ ment,  therefore,  is from  "le  reve blanc"  to "le  reve noir,"  from  a  fanciful  to a gloomier symbolism:  the morbid  strain is always present in  Nelligan's symbolism and,  in "Paysage  fauve"  or  "Le  Corbeil,"  verbal  and  thematic  elements  reveal more of the morbid  than  of the fanciful or idyllic.
In Nelligan's hands, the pastoral constitutes an artificial world where simplicity,
love, the golden  age and  rural  retirement  are ideals bolstered by traditional sym­ bols of pastoral  flocks  (cows) , shepherds,  and  shepherdesses  (Gretchen) ,  Pan, song, gardens, flowers. The  motifs weaving their way through  the pastoral poems are childhood  (the  past, the golden age) ; the season of loss and sadness (autumn), the season of death  (winter), and  of love (summer  and  spring) ; song, gardens, and  religious faith  revealed  by the  recurring  image  of bells.  These  themes  and images unite and  intermingle  to represent a sense of longing, usually for a simpler, happier  past. When  the  tone saddens  and  the  vision  darkens,  the  longing turns towards death.
In  "Les  Angeliques"16   the  shepherd-poet,   "un   berger-pocte  au  coeur  senti­
mental," wanders  nervously in  the forest of his mind.  The  forest is hardly  local ("des forets de santal") but because of the presence of "chapelles" and "angelus" a sense of place is created.  The landscape is symbolic, its contours associated with certain  memories, and  with  faith.  First, the  poet  portrays  an  angelic  landscape where natural and  angelic objects merge in a dreamlike fashion:
Et les Anges, .a flats de longs timbres moroses, Ebranlent les bourdons, au vent occidental.

8g

NELLIGAN

Nelligan's clever play on the word "angelus" and  "angeliques" suggests that  the ringing bells become, in the poet's mind, the singing of angels. But the landscape is not merely angelic, it also projects the inner landscape  of the poet, and  Nelligan uses "Iande" in both these senses: "j'errais en Iande  hors du hameau  natal"  and "ta Iande intime."  The onomatopoeic  metaphor of "mes troupeaux de nevroses j Vagabondaient le long des forets de santal"  completes the association of the inner and outer landscapes  by comparing  the poet's anxieties to a flock of sheep.
Nelligan takes advantage of the sonnet  form  to organize  the inner  and  outer landscapes. In the octave he describes his wanderings  through  the moors, while in the sestet he then draws an analogy between those nocturnal wanderings  and  the poet's progression through  life, and crystallizes the landscape  of the octave into a memory in a corner of his soul. The  poet has framed  the  poem by his images of evening, bells (angels) , and  moors-images of desolation  and  passage;  but  the larger frame  is dream,  "la  nature  parce que generalisee ou effleuree, nous semble chez Nelligan aussi revee que vue."17
Three  winter pieces, "Soir d'hiver," "Hiver  sentimental," and "Frisson d'hiver"
contrast the cold outside with the warmth inside (a living heart) : sacred and pro­ fane spaces. However, cold and death  (in life and  love)  slowly invade  the heart,  and  the poems "Paysage  fauve"  ("Pastels et porcelaines") and  "Soirs hypochon­ driaques" ( "Poemes  posthumes")  become hallucinatory and  wintery landscapes.
In  the section "Virgiliennes"  Nelligan repeats  his themes  of nostalgia, melan­ choly, innocence, childhood and longing after the ideal. The  ringing of the angelus ("Automne," "Jardin sentimental") accompanies  the  poet's  melancholy  mood and signals the awakening of memories of the past. For  Nelligan,  the landscape,  as seen repeatedly in these poems, is associated with churchbells  and chapels;  thus the  countryside  has a strong  religious significance.  In  "Jardin  sentimental," the continual  reference to the angelus brings the garden close to another  metaphor  of enclosed and sacred space, the "chapelle"  (which Nelligan portrays in the section "Petites  chapelles"). The  sacred space of the garden  and  the  chapel  are  places for the poet to construct his dreams; they are also temporal  in that they are places of childhood memory.
"Presque  berger,"  along  with  "Petit  hameau" (from  "Poemes  posthumes")
which may be a variant  version, praises the bucolic life:

Les grands boeufs sont rentres. Ils meuglent dans l'etable
Et la soupe qui fume a n!joui Ia table


Oui, c'est delicieux, cela, d'etre ainsi libre
Et de vivre en berger presque. Un souvenir vibre

En moi ... La-bas, au temps de l'enfance, rna vie
Coulait ainsi, loin des sentiers, blanche et ravie!

go

NELLIGAN


In  these two poems which are a "juxtaposition de realisme paysan et de reverie poetique,ms there is, first of all, the conventional pastoral idealization  of rural life in contrast  to the city. Nelligan, in "Presque  berger," compares  the peaceful and distant  peasant life to his idyllic youth, "rna  vie j Coulait  ainsi, loin des sentiers, blanche et ravie !" But another  deeper level of meaning lies behind  these poems: in  these two  bucolic  poems, and,  in  the  insistent repetition  throughout all  the pastoral  poems of the  ringing  of the  angelus, are firmly entrenched  the  central myths of Quebec: family, farm  and  priest. Inevitably  underlying  these poems is the  agrarian  myth   (heightened   by  the  messianism  of  the  post-Confederation period)   that  idealized  the  continuation   of  rural  life, the  importance of  large, closely-knit families, and the influence of the priest. Mother, land, and  church  are the binding images of this ideology which Nelligan defies by turning  to the French symbolists. However,  his bucolic poem eventually submits to "Ia hantise du noir" and  the  peaceable  kingdom  turns  into  a  nightmare   vision in  a  kind  of   anti­ pastoral:   "Un   farouche  troupeau  de  grands  loups  affames"  prowls  the  winter landscape  in  "Paysage  fauve,"  and  ''Le  Boeuf spectral"   ( "Vepres  tragiques") "hante la-bas Ia paix des champs."
In the sixth section, "Eaux-fortes funeraires,"  the sombre landscape  dominates. The  title recalls Verlaine's  section in Poemes saturniens, "Eauxfortes," which is also composed of gloomy landscapes. Surely there is verbal  play in the composi­ tion  of the  phrase  "Eaux-fortes": etching  are  pictures  printed  from  an  etched metal  plate, the process being one in which "impressions" are produced from the plate. The  process of etching, therefore, implies an objective distance since a land­ scape  is being observed and  recorded.  In  these poems, a scene is ordered  by the poetic eye in such a way as to "impress" itself upon the reader. With the adjective, "funeraires," the motif of death  appears  and  a macabre  landscape  is composed.
In  "Tristia," the tenth section, "Reve  fantasque" ("Pieces  rctrouv,ees"),  remi­ niscent  of  Verlaine's  "La   Nuit  du  Walpurgis  classiquem9    with  "Les  beaux  ifs langoureux" and  "l'ypran  qui  s'attriste," the  "jets  d'eau   moives et  fontaines bizarres"; "des cygnes blancs et noirs," "un  cerf bronze," is a nocturnal landscape of the soul. Like Verlaine,  who describes "Le  jardin de Lenotre' and then envisions his thoughts  as phantoms  dancing sadly, wildly, around  the formal shapes of Ver­ sailles, Nelligan  pictures a formal  park against a melancholy  night sky-"le ciel triste,"  "un  bien sombre  contour," "l'ypran qui s'attriste." But  his thoughts  are not directly objectified into  phantoms;  instead  vague and  distressing sounds  rise up to disturb  the poet, and  he dreams of the sweetness of  death  until

Avec ces vagues  bruits fantasquement charmeurs
Rentre dans  le neant  le reve romanesque.

The  poem is enclosed, as are  the  poet's dreams and  thoughts,  by the  trees -les cheneaux,  les ifs, et l'ypran; the landscape is an objectification  of the state of the

NELLIGAN

poet's  soul,  and  the  symbols, literary  and  "unnatural" as they  are,  are  meant to evoke, not  to describe  a mood.
The other  pastoral image that  Nelligan  constantly employs is "Eden," generally
associated  with the colour gold. Always an evasion,  it assumes  many  forms:

... jardin de reve ou je m'en vais
( "Sel'enade  triste") Serait-ce qu'un  nouvel Eden s'opere en nous?
("Communion pascale")
Et dans l'Eden de sa Louisiane,
( "Fantaisie creole") Et l'Eden  d'or  de mon enfance
("Clavier  d'antan")
Que  ton piano vibre et pleure Et que j'oublie avec toi l'heure Dans un Eden, on ne sait ou....
("Chopin")

Eden  is an  eclectic  symbol,  a  hortus  conclusus,  which  is occasionally   a  physical place   ( Louisiane) ,  occasionally   a  manifestation  of  religious  faith, a  dream, a haven  for artists, childhood, or musical  ecstasy-but always imagined and  always the  poet's  joy and  despair  to seek and  to inhabit.


IN THE SYMBOLIST POETS, symbolic  landscapes are  essentially dream landscapes in which the reader  follows a progression  that  is not logical  but associative, and  through the unusual combination of images, reinforced by inverted
syntax  and  bizarre juxtapositions of words, is drawn into  the  poet's  mental space. Symbolic dream  landscapes were an  appropriate mode  for  Nelligan,  who in  com­ pany  with  the  French symbolists  created
dreamscapes  in  which  despair,  a  sense of  loss and  fear,  hunger  for  beauty  and release, and  a horrible awareness of sullen leaden  reality pervade  their  work. Such awareness will lead to dream, to nightmare,  to seeing the beautiful  in the ugly (and vice versa)  to boredom, to fatigue-and to the magnificent  visions that  lie beyond the window pane.20

These  landscapes like  the  "Eden d'or" are  enclosed   gardens, sheltered from nature, located  in another realm,  beyond  reality.  For  Nelligan, the  wilderness  that is both  desolate  country and  the winter  season, is a fearful, not a creative  solitude, inhabited by fierce  wild beasts  and  gruesome spectres.  In  keeping  with  his  tem­ perament Nelligan   also has  a  predilection for  the  dying  season,  autumn,  while winter  becomes  the season of despair  when  the  landscape turns to nightmare and  is haunted by ghosts. However, because  of his ability  to draw nuances from  com-

NELLIGAN


man symbols like roses, trees, pools, and to combine them  in a rhythmic movement, Nelligan's symbolic   landscapes arouse   powerful   emotions.  The   precision   with which  Nelligan  treats  language is shown  in his emendations. In  "Reve d'artiste," the last stanza reads:
Et pour qui  je ferai, si j'aborde ala gloire Fleurir  tout  un jardin de lys et de soleils Dans l'azur  d'un  poeme offert a sa memoire.

The  earlier  variant is less concrete and  imaginative:
Et pour qui  je saurai, si j'aborde ala gloire
Fleurir  un immortel  jardin  plein de solei!
Dans l'azur  des beaux vers d'un  livre .a sa memoire.21

The poem  "Soir  d'hiver," perhaps Nelligan's most  celebrated, after  "Vaisseau d'or," gives us the  best  example of his intricate use of  the  verbal  and  rhythmic qualities of images:
Ah! comme la neige a neige!
Ma vitre est un  jardin de givre, Ah! comme la neige a neige! Qu'est-ce  que le spasme de vivre A la douleur  que  j'ai, que j'ai!
Tous  les etangs gisent geles,
Mon .fune est noire:  Ou vis-je? ou vais-je? Tous ses espoirs gisent geles:
Je suis la nouvelle Norvege
D'ou  les blonds ciels s'en sont alMs.
Pleurez, oiseaux de fevrier,
Au sinistre frisson des choses, Pleurez oiseaux de fevrier,
Pleurez mes pleurs, pleurez mes roses, Aux branches  de genevrier.
Ah! comme la neige a neige! Ma vitre est un jardin de givre, Ah! comme Ia neige a neige! Qu'est-ce  que le spasme de vivre
A tout !'ennui que j'ai, que j'ai....

First  of all, the  poem  is united by the image  of "neige" which  is both  noun  and verb,  and  by the  rhythm provided by the  repetition of the soft  "g" which  recurs in  "j'ai," "gisent," "geMs,"  "Norvege," "genevrier." In  the  opening stanza, the first three  lines describe  the  scene:  by "la  vitre" the  poet  separates himself  from the  described  scene.  The objective world  is framed, but  it is framed by the sub­ jective, the self, "rna vitre." Ma  vitre is also his soul which  in its state  of  despair  suggests a garden of ice-"Ma vitre est un  jardin  de givre." The  next two lines are  a "cri  de coeur" aroused by the  cold, distressing landscape outside.

93

NELLIGAN

The  second stanza  clarifies the relationship  between  the inner  and  outer  land­ scape:  the two are  merged. First, the  poet portrays  the frozen  ponds, "Tous  les etangs gisent ge1es," then shifts to his black soul. In  the third  line, the landscape becomes subjective  when etang  is replaced  by espoirs-"Tous les  espoirs gisent ge1es." Although  Nelligan does not hesitate to attribute human  characteristics  to natural  objects, in this poem, the melancholy human  state is portrayed  by compar­  ing it to a desolate landscape. The poet becomes, finally, wintery Norway deprived of sunlight as he completely transforms himself into a paysage.
Thus, in the third stanza, nature  in the form of the birds of February  is directly addressed -they  are  part  of the same sad  landscape-and requested  to weep for the  dying  roses of the poet. The  "roses"  like "le spasme  de vivre"  are  over­ whelmed by cold and snow and so the poet succumbs to the sorrow of  winter, or death,  and of incapacity.
The  last  stanza,  echoing  the  first, encloses the  poem  as  the  window  frame
encloses the frozen soul. Pain, "la douleur,"  however, has become "I'ennui" of the symbolists. In  this poem, the  poet appears  to be looking out  the window,  but  in actuality  he is looking in, at his own soul. Here  is the  paradox  of enclosed space. Except where it provides a vocabulary for the soul, nature,  in  Nelligan's  poems, is stylized  and  conventional   ( "neige,"  "roses") . Bessette has  pointed  out  that Nelligan was attached  not to nature,  but to artificial objects, particularly  objects of cults and of music.22
The  continual   use of  exotic  and  alien  images  rather   than  authentic  native
images to describe the self can be seen as another  way of expressing alienation. Being derived  from  another  culture,  another   land,  these  images  project  a  dis­ tanced  and  alienated  self. Moreover,  exotic  images  of  Paris  salons,  Louisiana, Egypt, Vienna,  Spain  are twice removed from  the  poet's reality because they are drawn  from literature  not experience.23  This  alienation  is even  more directly and consciously expressed by the images of death,  mourning,  and enclosure.
To mirror the separation of the subjective from the objective and to project subjective  feelings onto  a distant  and  objective  space,  Nelligan  employs  formal and  imagistic devices in a persistently recurring  pattern. His predominant mode of distancing  is the window, particularly  the  frame  of the  window, which allows the poet to compose the landscape. The window is also a common symbolist meta­ phor for the  poet's  realization of the difference  between  himself, his ideal  world and the reality besieging him, and one finds the poet looking out the window, not at the landscape,  but at himself:  he is

alienated from an ideal world and also forever acutely conscious not only of this separation, but also of the sordid reality from whose perspective he is obliged to seek the azur of the ideal world. In short, the poet is trapped between his impulse to recover the transcendent world and his awareness of the utter  impossibility of ever doing so, except by resorting to the illusion of windowpane.24

94

NELLIGAN


The  window separates  the sacred  from  the  profane space,  while permitting  the poet,  seated  behind  the  window,  to see both  spaces and  to follow a controlled exchange between  the two different impressions. As already seen, Nelligan prefers to view the landscape through  the window; in "Soir d'hiver," the "vitre"  becomes a metaphor  of the soul which is a framed, composed, winter landscape. To use this image is to deliberately separate subjective feelings from the objective phenomena. Even  a metaphor as fused as "rna  vitre est un  jardin  de givre"  which  makes a direct  association between  the self and  the landscape  (that  is, the  poet does not use a more detailed  and conscious form of simile such as "rna  vitre est comme  un jardin de givre")  insists upon a separation of the self and on the inevitability of a divided  self. The  self, because  it  is symbolized  by a  "vitre" which  looks both inward and outward  and is transparent, does not belong wholly to itself but is torn between the inner  and outer and hovers at the fringe of the two worlds.
In  "Hiver  sentimental" (original  title,  "Le  Givre  dans  les vitres")   the  poet beseeches his "mistress" to move
Loin des vitres! clairs yeux dont je bois les liqueurs
Et ne vous souillez pas .a contempler les plebes.

The  window, slight  and  transparent protection  though  it  be, serves to close the poet  inside;  it also composes and  separates  the  reality  outside.  "Vieille  roman­ esque" with its faded  romanticism is a further variation on this theme. Later echoed in Anne  Hebert's  poems and  stories on the anachronistic aristocracy of Quebec, this  poem  by  Nelligan  paints  a  scene in  which  Mademoiselle  Adele  reads  her Dumas  novels inside  a  veritable  museum  of  antiquities,  "Cloitre  d'ancienneres,  dont  elle est le modele."  Absorbed in a romantic  and  nostalgic previous age, she
does not see outside,  "Dans  la  rue,  un  passant  au  visage moqueur   I . . . I Le
joueur glorieux d'orgue  de Barbarie !" Nelligan was not without  irony or  perspi­
cuity in this portrait  of a retreat  from life and the present.
Another  frame  image  to reflect the  troubled  soul is the  eye;  he describes the monks in "Le  Cloitre  noir":
et dans leurs yeux sereins
Comme les horizons vastes des cieux marins, Flambe l'austerite des froides habitudes.

Since the eye is a window to the soul, in these indirect ways, Nelligan is seeking to express essentially the same  thing:  a perspective on the  inner state of a sensitive being.



GIVEN HIS  BACKGROUND, Nelligan  was naturally  haunted by Catholicism; it pervaded  his images, his invocations to prayer, his despair over salvation  and  the other  world. This combined with his delight in visual imagery

95

NELLIGAN

provided   another variation on  "le  vitre" -that  of  "le  vitrail" or  stained  glass window. This  image  was particularly rich  because  "le  vitrail" possessed its own integral design  and  colours as well as permitting the  outer  world  to  be reflected upon  the inner  sanctum. "Le  vitrail" presented a clearly  defined  barrier to outer
realities:
Ou de grands anges, peints aux vitraux  verdelets
Interdisent l'entree  aux  terrestres scandales.
( "Le  Cloitre  noir")

In  religious  iconography and  emblematic literature the  church is a type  of the soul,  a constructed sacred  place  enclosed  from  the  profane, as is the  garden. In several  poems  Nelligan  resorts  to  the  image  of  the  church as sanctuary and   as symbol  of the soul;  thus  "le vitrail," like the eye, is a window onto  the soul, as is evident  in the sonnet, "Amour immacu1e,"  in which  the  poet  describes  a church:
Je sais en une ,eglise un vitrail merveilleux
Ou quelque artiste illustre, inspire des archanges, A peint d'une  fa'<on mystique, en robe a franges,
Le front nimbe d'un astre, une Sainte aux yeux bleus.
Then, here, as in "Les Angeliques," the sestet internalizes the  physical  place: Telle sur le vitrail de mon coeur  je t'ai  peinte,
Ma romanesque aimee, o pale et blonde sainte
Toi, la seule que j'aime et toujours  aimerai;

Mais tu restes muette, impassible, et, trap  fiere
Tu  te plais a me voir, sombre et desespere
Errer  dans mon amour  comme en un cimetiere.

Outside the sanctity of the church, unredeemed by love, beyond  the glorious colours of the stained  glass, lies "un  cimetiere." Similarly, in "Chapelle de la morte,"

Et dans le vitrail, tes grands yeux
M'illuminent ce cimetiere
De doux cierges mysterieux.

The images of the window and  "le vitrail," by their  very physicality, draw atten­ tion  to another kind  of space -the enclosed  space  of stuffy  rooms or churches or trapped souls. Throughout Nelligan's poems,  the  enclosed  space denotes  a sacred  place  within  the  profane  world  of "brutes laideurs," a  place  in  which  to dream. While  gardens, "au  jardin  clos, scelle, dans  le  jardin muet," are separated from the  real  world  by  paths,  "Chapelles" ( "le  cloitre  noir"),  circled  by  woods  and warmed by  prayer, are  divided  from  the  profane  world  by  their  stained  glass windows.  Houses,  in the shape  of villas, chateaux,  castles, are  protected by win­ dows  and  represent the spaces  of family  life, dreams,  idyllic  childhood days,  and sincere  religious faith  ( "Priere du soir," "Devant le feu"). Associated  with  either

g6

NELLIGAN


the  cozy  domesticity  of  familial  houses  or  the  glamorous  relics  of  celebrated homes are  the  even  more  enclosed  spaces of rooms and  salons. Within these "cir­ cles" lie other  small  objects  that   have  both  temporal and   psychological  signifi­ cance: cabinets of dusty  memories  ( "Vieille  armoire,")  and  vases  ( "Potiche,") containing relics of the soul and  of the artistic  endeavour-
Mon .arne est un potiche ou pleurent, dedon s,
De vieux espoirs mal peints sur sa fausse moulure;

Nelligan  is more  at home  with  objects,  images,  and  scenes  of the  "inside"-of salons, cupboards, hearths with  their  lingering memories  of the  past  than  with  the vast and  energetic "outside." Another metaphor along these lines is the celebrated ship, the vaisseau  d'or,  both  a vessel of salvation and  a vessel of death, that  carries the soul to its destiny.
Ce fut un grand  vaisseau taiHe dans l'or  massif:
Ses mats touchaient  l'azur, sur des mers inconnues;


Que  reste-t-il de lui dans la ternpete breve? Qu'est  devenu  mon coeur, navire deserte? Helas!  II a sombre dans I'abirne du Reve!
("Le Vaisseau d'or") These  enclosed  spaces are  claustrophobic as well as creative.
Enfermons-nous melancoliques
Dans le frisson tiede des chambres.
("Reves enclos") The  vacant, airless chambers mirror the soul of the poet :
J'ai toujours adore  plein de silence, a vivre
En des appartements solennellement clos
Ou mon arne sonnant des cloches de sanglots, Et plongeant  dans l'horreur....
( "Musiques  funebres")

This  image  of  claustrophobia, a symbol  of  alienation and  withdrawal from  the creative forces,  is also found later  in  Anne  Hebert's and  Saint-Denys-Garneau's images of "chambres de bois," tombs, and  decaying ancestral manors, and  may  be symptomatic of  the  intellectual trapped by  a  stifling  Quebec milieu.  Thus, the metaphors of enclosed space degenerate from symbols of nostalgic  memory  to sym­ bols of death and  entrapment as the  poet  grows  more  despairing. The  poet  then  emphasizes the  morbid spectrum of metaphors of space such  as "cercueils," "tom­ beaux," "corbillards," "chapelle de Ia morte," "chapelle ruinee" (as in "Banquet macabre," "Le Corbillard," "Le  Cercueil," "Crepe," "Tombeau de Ia negresse,"  "Homme aux  cercueils," "Le Spectre"). Coffins and  tombs  are "closed" eternally.

97

NELLIGAN

In  the celebrated destiny of "Vaisseau d'or"-"sombre dans  l'abime du  reve"
-is epitomized the  dream  that  has turned to nightmare and  which  has capsized the  soul  into  death. The  image  of the  empty  and  terrifying void  of  the  Baude­ lairean gouffre  permeates Nelligan's verse, a reminder of the  perils of the imagina­
tion:

Et nos coeurs sont profonds et vides comme un gouffre
( "Tristesse blanche")

Ainsi !a vie humaine  est un grand  lac qui dort
( "Le Lac")

Dans le puits noir que tu vois la
Git la source de tout ce drame.
Aux vents du soir le cerf qui brame
Parmi les bois conte cela.
("Le  Puits hante")

Rentre dans le neant le reve romanesque
( "Reve  fantasque")

From  this outline of Nelligan's predominant symbols of space,  one can  see that his imagination is directed  inwards into  the  self, into  enclosed  spaces  which  are unrelieved, for  the  most part, by the  energizing and  creative "green" (except for the  bitter-sweet "La Romance du  vin") and  which  eventually become  the  black and  eternal enclosures  of  madness   and   death. The  complex and   yet  coherent symbolic inner  landscape Nelligan  created  struck  and  continues to strike a respon­ sive chord  in  the  imagination of the  Quebecois. Although  his own  imagination became a macabre prison,  his eloquent expression  of it  proved  to be a liberating force for  those  who  foUowed.


NOTES

1 Jean  Charbonneau, "Fondation de !'Ecole,"  L'Ecole litteraire  de Montreal (Mont­
veal : Albert Levesque, I 935) .
2 A.D.L., "Aventures  veridiques d'un  groupe  d'eponges," Le  Samedi, 24 aout  I895,
p. I o; "Deuxieme  saturnale,"  Le S amedi, 2 I  septembre  I 895, p. 3·
3 Louis Dantin, "Preface" in Charbonneau, p. 8.
4   Paul  Wyczynski, "Heritage  poetique  de !'Ecole  litteraire de Montreal," La  Poesie canadienne-franfaise. Archives   des  lettres  canadiennes, t.  IV   (Montreal:   Fides, I969), p. 75, quoted  from a ms. note of the  poet,  Albert  Ferland,  located  in  the "Centre de recherches de l'Universire  d'Ottawa."
5  Luc Lacourciere, "Introduction," Poesies completes, I8g6-1899   (Montreal:  Fides,
I 952) , p. I 5, quoting  Louis Dan tin.
6   See Jean-Charles Bonenfant, "Le Canada  franc;ais ala fin du XIXe  siecle," Etudes franfaises,  III, 3 (aout  I967), 263-74.
7   See Wyczynski, Bibliographie, pp. 27-30 for details of these manuscripts.

g8

NELLIGAN


8  See  Lacourciere,  Poesies  completes, pp.  279-82. All  quotations  from   Nelligan's poems  will be made  from  this edition.
9  Arthur Symons,   The  Symbolist Movement in  Literature  (New   York:  Dutton,
I958), p. 3·
10 Another version  occurs  in  Louis  Dantin's Les  Debats   24 aout   I 902;  see  Poesies completes, p. 297:
L'imposture celeste  emplit leur  large  esprit: Car  seul I'Espoir menteur creusa  les solitudes De ces silencieux  spectres de Jesus Christ.
n Jean Charbonneau, "Emile Nelligan," pp. I I9-20.
12 Gerard Bessette,  Les  Images en  poesie canadienne   fran aise
Beauchemin,I 960),  pp. 246, 244·
13  Mircea Eliade, The Sacred   and  the  Profane,  trans.  by  Willard R.  Trask   (New
York: Harcourt, Brace & World, I 959) .
14  Paul  Wyczynski in Emile  Nelligan, Sources et originalite  de son oeuvre  (Montreal: Univ.  d'Ottawa, I935)  discusses "le  reve horizontal" which  moves  to the  left  into the  past, and  to the  right  to the future. The  "reve  vertical" rising  upwards, carries the  poet  into  the  contemplation of God  and  mysticism,  and  plunging downwards into  the  depths, results  in  hallucination and  despair.  He  shows  Nelligan's primary direction to be horizontal (that is, his dreams  revolve around the  past  and  future) until  the  poet's  disturbed state  predominates and  "ce  ne sera  que  Ia suite  du  reve horizontal que  !'on  verra  cependant s'enfoncer dans  les tenebres  de  l'abime" (pp. I6I-243). But,  in  this  discussion,  we view dream  as vertical, in  that  it  probes  the depths of the sub-conscious.
15 Bessette, p. 224.
16  The  revealing earlier titles  are:  "Soirs   angelises,"  "Angelus du  soir,"   "Soir   de nevrose."
17 Bessette, p. 223.
18 Wyczynski, in Sources  et originalite, p. I96.
19 See Wyczynski's  phrase-by-phrase comparison of the two poems,  ibid.,  pp.  56-61.
20   Edward Engleberg, The Symbolist Poem  (New York:  Dutton, I 967),  pp.  32-33.
21  Lacourciere, Poesies  completes, pp.  287-88. Note  also  the  two  versions  of  "Soirs d'automne," p. 119 and  p. 2I7  ("Rhythmes du soir"). The latter is the earlier  ver­ sion:   "les soirs bleus"  changes to "les longs soirs" to continue the  nasal  rhythm of the line;  "Ie reve lent  des oiseaux  solitaires" becomes the more  visual  "le reve blanc des oiseaux solitaires" where  the adjective connected with  reve actually describes  the birds  and  thus  creates a  more  complex  mood.  Similarly,  "le  lys  cristallin epris  du crepuscule" becomes  "les  lys cristallins   pourpn!s  de  crepuscule."  The last  stanza shows the subtler art  of fusing self and object  in the second version.  The substitution of "ou" for "dont" in the last line "Pleurent les souvenirs  dont  mon  arne se baigne" fuses the flowers  and  the soul  and  memory into a more  integral relationship.
22 Bessette, p. 249·
23   Marcel  Belanger, "Poesie   quebecoise   et  !'art  egyptien," Comparative Canadian
Literature Association  Meeting, Universite Laval,  Quebec, 26 May  I976.
24   Engleberg, p. 32.



99

THREE POEMS



FEVER

Frenetic beat 	foam  flying on  the stoned  shore
Do not ask me to answer:
we are  here:   there's  nothing more we are born  bare

As the old rain-hammered  logs unshipshaped   spavined
shooting at  fantastic angles    distorted silver in the sand's  caves

These  logs and  stones
are  free of human names
Catholic or  Protestant, Muslim or Christian
They  exist wholly as bones

In  this unnamed   unlanguaged unvoiced  world  of rocks
gritty-tasting earth man  leaps and  laughs returns at  morning
to rub out  all evidence of foot prints
mouth  burning against  mouth song rising beside song - careless
destroys his histories.





FRIDJIY'S CHILD

I endowed  you with  the  contents of my anxious  state
and  it was not good
 



Dorothy Livesay


100

POEM

I willed you my brush and
my fine-toothed comb with  their  dusty  hairs
And  it was not  pretty

In  the afternoons of my discontent
I pulled  up weeds in the back garden and  dressed  you in  them

When I walked  at  the seashore moaning with  the gulls
I pinned a black  crow on  your shoulder

You  have  inherited all my pain but  only  half  my laughter
And  it is not  good

You  are  burdened, my little  sister
And  I cannot lift the stone from  your heart




:zt   SOFT :ztNSWER TO BORGES

What vast world shaking its fist at  us or turning its back has to be caught
and  kissed
sucked  in and swallowed
(made visible) dimensioned down to man?

What world  he strode  in thinking the  circled  path was his to play in
that rest-that  thundering sky tempestuous sea
fathomable touchable?

101

POEM

He  has now to seize the void in his hands shaped  to his mouth
and  through that  horn  of immensity
bellow  out
his defiant  song











THE JINNUNCIJITION
 


Irving Layton


What angels will we meet on  the way to the  post-office? What kisses will the leaves rain  down  on  your  neck? Your  footsteps  leave  no shadows  on  the  ground
for  the morning sun  makes  a bale  of them
which  he tosses over the first white  fence  that we pass

The announcing angel  robes  himself  in ordinary dress. What name  does he whisper  in  your  perfumed
and  delicate  ear?  Judith? Deborah? Eve? When  you incline  your fragrant head  to listen,
the  storewindows blaze and  shine  and  the  village  street

Robed  in its summer  foliage  resounds like  a  West  Point salute  with  the sound  of uncorked champagne bottles;
all  the birds  in the  street  take  the  happy noise for  cues and  suddenly  whole  orchestras of  them and  the singing  choirs of girls and  boys

Make  such  a jubilation, it frightens off
all evils and  sorrows forever; your  burgeoning form parts  the air  before  us like a sorcerer's wand
and  the angel  in ordinary dress  extricates a wing and  blesses its bounty  with  his own  bright feathers

Niagara-on-the-Lake, June 4, zgBo

102






A NET FULL
OF ONDAATJE
MICHAEL  ONDAATJE,   There's a  Trick   With a Knife   I'm   Learning   to  Do.  McClelland & Stewart, $5.95.
ON  THE  COVER    OF    Michael Ondaatje's selected   short   poems,   there   is  a  photo­ graph of a seated  man  using  his left foot to  throw   knives  around  the  body  of  a woman  who  looks  like  Dorothy Livesay. Whether or  not  thasays anything about  the  course  of   Canadian  poetry,   it  does suggest   the   nature  of  Ondaatje's  wit:  that  is (especially while we notice  that  the title  of   the   book  is  nowhere  noticed   in the poems), the  poet's  "trick" is to use an edge that  seems  to miss its target, barely.
When  Ondaatje, while learning, comes closest  to  success  there   is  much   to  ad­ mire   in  his   performance  of  these   left­ footed  poems.  The newest  ones,  particu­ larly, are  intent upon  a  dislocating settle­ ment,  a  resolute  oddity. The  last  line  of each  poem  sounds  like  your  most  adept friend's final smack  of his hammer on his fifteen-storey birdhouse, or the last knife thudding into  the  board  above  your  own pate.  See especially  "Farre Off"  and "Country Night."
The book, "Poems 1963-1978," is made up  of Ondaatje's selections  from  his two Coach  House  books, The  Dainty Monsters and   Rat  Jelly,  plus  thirty-five   pages  of later  work called  "Pig  Glass."  We see the work of the lyric poet from  age  twenty  to
age   thirty-five,  a   bracket    that    always seems interesting in  the  careers of  Cana­ dian  poets.
That Ondaatje has  always  been  inter­
ested   in  animals  as  figures   is  apparent from  the  three   titles  just  mentioned  (as well  as  his  recently reprinted  anthology
 of animal  poems). In his twenties he explored  the  violence  implied  in the con­ frontation  between   people   and  animals, but  with a spectral uneasiness rather than  the advantageous exposition of  Pat Lane's lyrics.  Lane   says  that   man  is   naturally murderous toward   his  fellow  beasts,  but Ondaatje is interested  in  the  experiential philosophy  developing  from   a   paradox pronounced  early  in his  verse:  "Deep in
the fields I behind  stiff dirt  fern  I nature
breeds  the  unnatural."
So   did   Ondaatje,  especially    in   his
earliest  poems. Here  is a  typical  example of his early predilection for the wry meta­ morphosing of  the  Anglo-American aca­  demic poets in the post-Eliot age, the sort of   exterior   design   then    found    in   the Donald Hall anthologies:

I have  been  seeing dragons again. Last night,  hunched on a beaver dam, one  clutched a  body  like  a  badly  held
cocktail;
his  tail,  keeping the  beat  of  a  waltz, sent  a morse  of ripples to my canoe.

Ondaatje was a British immigrant student then,  at  the  Waspy  English  departments of Queen's and  Sherbrooke. His poetics during that  time  might  be characterized by a  stanza  from  another poem:

I would  freeze   this  moment and  in supreme patience place  pianos
and  craggy black  horses  on  a beach
and  in  immobilized time attempt to reconstruct.

But  he  was  to  become   involved   with the  Coach  House   poets  (this  book  con­ tains   a   wonderful   poem    about   Chris  Dewdney) , and  a poetics  that espoused  a non-Euclidean order.   Compare  to   the above  quotation this passage  from  " 'The Gate  in his Head,' " a poem  addressed to Victor  Coleman, a leading  voice from  the other side of  Canadian poetry:

My  mind  is pouring chaos in  nets  onto the  page.
A blind  lover,  dont know

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



what I love  till  I write  it out.
And  then from  Gibson's your  letter with  a  blurred photograph of a  gull.  Caught  vision.  The stunning white   bird an  unclear stir.

And   that is all  this  writing should be  then. The  beautiful formed things  caught at  the
wrong moment
so they  are  shapeless, awkward moving to  the  clear

The earliest  poems  have a dictum that is formalized, literary, or British; at  least it signifies  an  elevation into  printed  lan­ guage.  But  right  from  the  beginning  the poet  shows us a sure  sense of what  a li e is, not  just a  length, not  only  a  synta tlc unit,   but  a  necessary  stage  in  knowmg  and  surprise. It  is  telling  that   when  he comes  to contemplating a painter's work, it is the work of Henri Rousseau,  with his defined   wonderment. Thus,   even   while the subject is eerie  or  terrible,  the  words suggesting  the man's observations of them are   "exact,"  "exactness," "order,"  and "freeze."
In  Rat  Jelly  there  appear some  family poems,  with  constructed  etaphors;. what is this  (thing, expenence, feehng) like?  It's  like a--. It is still a geocentric world    in  which   the  poet's  invention  is the  e rth,
one.  But  the opening poem, "Billboards,"
seems deliberately to exhibit a promising progression  of   the   poet's   means,   from fancy   to  phenomenological imagination. Its  two  pages  end  this way:

Nowadays I somehow get  the  feeling
I'm in  a complex situation,
one  of  several billboard  posters blending in  the  rain.

I am  writing this  with   a  pen   my  wife  has used
to  write a letter to  her  first  husband. On  it  is the  smell  of  her  hair.
She  must   have  placed it  down   between sentences
and thought, and   driven her  fingers round her   skull
gathered the  slightest smell of her  head and brought it  back  to the  pen.
 The last  part  seems  tacked  on,  but  it  is really the emerging achievement of the poem.
Other  poems,    such   as   the    famous "Notes for the Legend of Salad  Woman," enact wonderful images  without any aca­ demic  superstructure, but  perhaps a Lay­  tonic   exaggeration,  and   lots   of   robust humour.  There  are   still   some   laconic poems  about men's  mistreatment of wild animals  as well as the  poet's amused ad­ miratiofor   his  dogs.  But  Ondaatje is still   looking    for   a   magically  charged world   a  world  with  Margaret  Atwood's imma ent 	and   Gwen   MacEwen's legerdemainous nature.  "Burning Hills,"  an important  piece, suggests, on the other hand    the  self-reflexive   narrative put   to such 'good  use  in  his  major books,  The Collected   Works  of  Billy  the   Kid   and  Coming through Slaughter.
The new section,  "Pig  Glass,"  partakes of their  concern with  the ironies  inherent in  the  act  of  composition, the  acknowl­ edgement that  a  writer  who  partakes of motion cannot "freeze" a  scene  for  the universal literary  museum.  In  "Country Night" the poet  notes  the liveliness of the unseen  creatures of  the  farmhouse while people   are  abed.   He  finishes  by  saying, "All  night  the  truth  happens." But  when is  he  composing  this?  During  the  con­ tinuous present  of  the  poem's  night-time verbs  or out of  bed in the daytime? Then is  this  poem  truth, and  is  that   last  line from  it?
As  before,  the  poems  are  usually  one page  filled, a regularity that  suggests that the  author is working on  a  contract,  as both  entertainers (book  title)   and  bride­ grooms   (photo)  do.  The  section  sports  some  travel-to-roots poems,  some  family poems,  but  more  important, some depar­ tures  from  the  regular observing lyric, in the direction of "Elimination Dance," his peculiar pamphlet from  Nairn. There is "Sweet  Like   a   Crow,"   two   pages   of outrageous  similes,   and   there   is  "Pure

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Memory," the non-sequential meditations on Chris  Dewdney, and  the poem of Sally Chisum's  recollection  of  Billy  the   Kid thirty-seven years later.  These are all good signs that  Ondaatje is bringing to his shorter verse  the  engaging fabrication of his longer  works.
In   his  career  to  date,  Michael   On­ daatje has been a poet who makes art that  is like  the  best  of Canadian  poetry; as a novelist  he writes  stuff  most  of our  more respected novelists  don't  begin  to dream  of. As a novelist  he is superior; as a poet he is one  of our  most  proficient.

ED PRATO


SINCE 1940

MARCEL BELANGER,  Migrations. L'Hexagone, n.p.
NICOLE BROSSARD, Le Centre  Blanc. L'Hexa- gone, n.p.
CECILE  CLOUTIER,  Chaleuils.  L'Hexagone, n.p.
GILLES  CYR, Sol  Inapparent. L'Hexagone, n.p.
JEAN ETHIER-BLAIS, Petits poemes presque en prose. Hurtubise HMH, n.p.
RINA LASNIER, Matin d'Oiseaux. Hurtubise HMH, n.p.;  Paliers de Paroles. Hurtubise HMH, n.p.
GUY MENARD, Fragments. Hurtubise HMH, n.p.

FROM PIETY TO PERVERSITY,  from   late Symbolist-Parnassian reflections  to a  dis­ integrating  syntax,   these   volumes  com­ prise such  a  wide  range  of styles and  ex­ perience  that  they might  be said to repre­  sent,   in  miniature, the  development  of poetry   in  Quebec  since  1940.  There  is one  common thread, not  a shared  politi­  cal  stance   as  one  might   expect,   but   a certain  attitude  to  language  which   has no  real  counterpart  in  the  literature of English   Canada.  The  Quebec  writer   is highly   conscious  of  the   place   language plays  in   the   conservation  of  a  culture threatened    by    anglicization   in   North  America;  survival   is  the   question. This
 understanding  is  vital.   But  another, equally  important factor  lies in  the  liter­ ary  tradition  inherited  from  France  to begin with,  an  influence  which  continues today  in  the  movement  of   ideas  about  language   which   are   sophisticated,  self­ conscious, and  in some ways alien  to Eng­  lish speakers.
Is this a simplication of a complex phenomenon? I don't think  so, although one could reasonably argue  that  Nicole Brossard's most recent  work bears no rela­ tion at all to Rina  Lasnier's poems on the Trinity.  But   Brossard    was   thoroughly steeped   in   her   own   cultural   tradition before   rejecting  it  for   linguistic   games and  collages which  are  just as much  of a convention as the forms she found  unsatis­  factory.  The  difference  between  the  two cultures  can  be illustrated by contrasting the  place  Rina   Lasnier now  occupies  in Quebec  with  that  of Dorothy Livesay  in English  Canada.  Livesay   is,  of  course, more experimental than  Lasnier, and  her career has taken  a different course both philosophically and  politically. But except in academic and  related  circles, it doesn't matter to anyone  in  English  Canada whether Livesay  writes  poetry  or  not. As a  poet,  one  is superfluous to  the  society one lives in, sad though  this may seem. Whereas   in  Quebec,  whatever  the  very real   internecine   struggles,    poets   have come  to represent in  some  way  an  affir­ mation  of a  national identity.
Rina Lasnier inherited the general principles  of  the  aesthetic movements in France  which  were influential at  the  end of the  last  century and  the  beginning of this -a   respect    for   the   poem   as   the thing made, a shaped form  rather than  a casual  personal  diary,  a concern  for  har­ monious sound  values, a habit  of  thinking symbolically  without  being  a  Symbolist. The   distinction  is  important.   Lasnicr's original  dependence on  traditional forms has gradually given  way to a control  over unrhymed   and  irregular  lines  depending

BOOKS IN REVIEW



for  their  effect  on  subtle  interior echoes and  rhythms which  flow in organic  rather than   metrical patterns.  In  M atin  d'Oi­ seaux,  images   of  birds,   of  the   sea,  of flowers,  merge   with   transitory  states   of sorrow  and  joy to create  a  poetry  which is close to the  perceptions of  Paul  Valery.  Much  of her work is closely-knit, abound­ ing  in  those  untranslatable  abstractions which  French  handles so easily.

le volcan viole  l'ultime altitude
!'argile de  feu  brule ses geneses
(Volcan)

and

C'est lui  oracle de  nuit et d'orage,
,croissance  sure,  sa fuite lente,
ne  touche pas  sa lumiere pileuse
ta  main  decompose un  nimbe   d'or.
( Pissenlit)

In  the  second  volume,  Paliers de Paroles, we find  Rina  Lasnier's  profound religious  feeling  expressed  with  sincerity in a series of short  poems which deal with biblical subjects. Only a few writers are capable of making poetry  out  of religion
-Dante, Vaughan, Eliot  are  examples
-and I don't find any kind of real poetic intensity  in  these  verses.
Jean  Ethier-Blais has  had  a  long  and honorable career   in  the  intellectual  life of Quebec, from  the  "Refus  Global" to the present day;  his poetry is only part  of his activities as journalist and  teacher. Influenced also  by French poets, he says,

Peut-etre un  jour  quelqu'un lisant  negligem­ ment   ces vers  y retrouvera le  nair  plaisir  et Ia   douleureuse   joie    d'Apollinaire  ou    de Verlaine  dont  j'aurai   un    peu    ressaisi   la voix.

One  could  add  Lafargue as  well. There is an  objectivity and  a pleasant  strain  of self-mockery  in M. Ethier-Blais, which makes a nice change from some of the narcissistic  infantilism pouring  out  of  to­ day's  presses. He is also realistic. "Grand' mere  au  Salon" is a charming  evocation of  the   past,   a  vignette   which  takes  its

IOG
 place  among all the other  pictures  of Grandmother which  have been appearing in English  Canadian verse for some years. The  poems   which   are   most   successful, where  imagery  conveys  the feeling imme­ diately and  directly, include  "Au  Loin," and  two  suites entitled  respectively  "Dies  lrae" and  "J'ai beaucoup lu."
By the  time  one  reaches  the  middle of Guy   M,enard's   Fragments,  one  is  over­ taken  by  an   inexorable and  deadening sense of "dej,a  vu,"  in spite  of  occasional  strong   lines  such  as  "Alors  me  revint   le
gout  du  meme sel 1 et quelque chose hur­
lait en mon  absence." It is strictly  literary
poetry    which    proceeds    not    from    an urgent poetic  necessity,  but  from  a series of associations which  form  a kind  of  self­ perpetuating flow  based  on  classical  and religious  references and  cliche :

en  criant ton  nom  et  !'echo de  tes  hanches etroites sur   la  nuit   de  mes  chastes  extases.

The net  effect  is curiously  old-fashioned, recalling inevitably the world of Pierre Louys  and  Gide,  circa   Igoo.  Even  when the  poet   reaches   Paris  and   Amsterdam, and  the ecstacies  become less chaste, there is no change in the quality of the imagina­ tion  or  the  intensity of the verse.
With   Sol  Inapparent, by  Gilles  Cyr, one  takes  a quantum leap  forward into  a
different  universe   which   is  light   years away  from  the  preceding one.  I  use  the term  "universe" to  indicate the  creation by a writer  of a unique  place  which  exists solely  by  virtue of  the  words  and   their disposition on  the  page.  The  air  is  brac­ ing,  if  rarefied.  Sol  Inapparent  consists of a short  suite  of poems written  with  an extreme economy  of means,  a  severe  dis­ cipline   in  the  choice   of   images,   and   a deliberate   self-restraint    one    associates with  artists  of  calligraphy,  Actually,   the word   "image"   is  almost   too  strong   to use  in  this  context, for   the  expressions  "air,  montagne, vent,  route" have   been stripped of all  associations   with  the  pic-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



turesque  to  become   like  notes  of  music in a series of Bach  variations played  with one  careful finger.  The  modulations are produced  from   very  slight   shifts  in  the poet's  angle  of  vision,  and   poetry   more bared   to  the   bone,  more   ascetic,  could hardly be imagined. Jouve, Bonnefoy, Reverdy, and   the  nouveau  roman  theo­ rists  are  probably all  behind   this  subtle,  but  strong   work,   which   seems   to  be  a first book.
Suites  of  poems  also  form  the  basis of
Cecile  Cloutier's Chaleuils, but  they  are all  more  solidly  anchored  in  the  some­ what    ambiguous   term    "reality"   than  those  of  the  previous  volume.  The   title­ word   means   a  small  lamp   used  in  the interior of  Quebec houses in earlier times, and   indicates  in   this   context  that   the poems  are  tiny,  luminous bits  of  experi­ ence crystallized  into short  forms found  in other   literatures   besides    the    French. Cecile  Cloutier is a  brilliant  writer  and academic whose  acquaintance  with  verse forms  includes, as  well  as  English,  Inuit and   Chinese. Although  Japanese is  not mentioned among the  languages she  has studied,  the   Haiku   form   has  evidently  been influential:

Le  jazz du  sang allume
Ia  patience
esquimaude de ta danse de   jade.

Some older  readers may remember Lionel Haweis'  "Little Lanterns" (I 923)  "things lanternized and  arranged," which  sprang from  similar  influences. Cloutier's  poetry is, however,  the  product of a modern sensibility, although this  volume  does not give  one  any  idea   of  the   range   of  her interests.
In    two    collections   of    considerable
length,  Migrations  by  Marcel  Belanger and   Le  Centre  Blanc   by  Nicole   Bros­ sard,  one sees more  clearly  the real  thrust  of contemporary poetry  in Quebec, differ-
 ent  though  these  writers  are  in their con­ cerns.  Belanger's   work   (the   book  repre­ sents  the I 969-75  period)  illustrates what  has  already  been  mentioned, that  regard  for   the   phenomena  of   language  itself allied to the acute  awareness of conscious­ ness  which  Valery   did  so much   to  ana­ lyze  and   reveal   in  both   his  poetry   and critical   prose.  Add  to  that   an  exposure which   all  modern  French  writers   have had  to structuralism and  other  linguistic theories  (to say nothing of le nouveau roman) and   you  arrive  at  poetry  whose self-consciousness  risks aridity. In  the first section of his book, the poet groups poems about    language -subject,  object,    and medium  at  one  and  the  same  time.  The titles proclaim this:  "Petite Theorie de la derive   des   mots,"    "Decomposition  du moi"    (an   examination  of   the   letters) , along  with  lines such  as "Un texte ,eclate de  Ia  tete,"   "la   foudre  et  le  fragment habitent le  poeme," "Un  instant suscita un  aube  en  forme  de  phrase."
But  this  poetry  is not  arid  at  all.  The
poems, based in a delight in the physical universe, are beautifully shaped  open structures anchored  in  sensations   which use quite simple things to create complex effects. The  reality  of gestures,  skin, veins, flowers, sky, becomes  a way for the self to explore itself and its relationships with experience, without  in   the  least   falling into  the  trap of isolation  and  narcissism. Belanger has absorbed  the best of the moderns,   and   made   his  own  statements which  appear to  dictate their  own  struc­ tures,  to be inevitable. If we hear  far-off echoes of French poets, they  are simply  a background to this rich and subtle  collec­ tion of original  poetry.
As the controversial editor of La Barre
du  Jour,  Nicole   Brossard   is  an  experi­ enced,   experimental  writer   with   many different   publications to  her  credit. She has  been  vocal  in  her  political opinions,  and   prominent  particularly in  the  fight for    women's    rights    against     accepted


I07

BOOKS IN REVIEW



opmwns and   the  establishment in  Que­ bec.  Although  her  early  poetic  work  is not  far  removed  stylistically  from  that  of her  contemporaries, she  has  deliberately moved from an evocation of personal  feel­ ing  through normal  syntax  to a  position which  treats  grammar and  vocabulary as part  of a  political  position.  It is a highly intellectualized approach to writing, influ­ enced  in  part  by linguistic  studies  on  the relationship between  thinking  and  gram­ mar,   partly   by  pop   art   with   its  signs, partly  by Marxism. Her  most recent state­  ment  that  I have  been able to find speaks of her goal for literature in Quebec, "une  littll rature
maire,  inoperante qui pense le present comme  le passe."
The prose  poems  in  Le  Centre  Blanc
(I965-I975), along  with others  whose typographical disposition   on  the  page  is more  typical  of verse, illustrate her  revolt against  traditional forms of grammar, poetry,  and  love. But the word-games played,  their  puns,  their  chopped-up sen­ tences  (the  text  itself  becoming almost  a linguistic-erotic image)  all  this  runs  the danger  of  turning  into   a  self-defeating process. If the  essence  of  propaganda for a  point  of view is  communication to  the uninitiated or  indifferent, then  language structures  should  surely  be the  kind  that  will carry the message in terms which are understandable.
Nicole  Brossard  is certainly  one  of the most  important writers  in Quebec today. Her  work reflects the increasing use of contemporary experience, contemporary life in a contemporary vocabulary, along with  anglicisms  and   expressions  in  Eng­ lish  which   Quebec  poets  are  inevitably drawn   to  as  North  Americans.  As  sug­ gested   in   a   recent   number  of   Ellipse (23/24)  there  is a  real  kinship  now  be­ tween  some poets in English  Canada and new  poets  in  Quebec through the  inter­ national  influences in  linguistics  and  art which  have  moulded them  both.  One  of

108
 the conclusions one  can  draw  also is that speed  of communication, travel, and tele­ vision  are  producing a  faster  rate  of ex­ change between  intellectual  centres than  used  to  be  the  case.  The  time  lag  is no longer,   for  Quebec,  marked   by  genera­ tions,  if indeed  it  still  exists. These poets from   Editions  de  l'Hexagone   are   proof of an  intellectual vitality  which  need fear no comparison  from  anyone.

G.   V. DOWNES


A VULGARIAN VIEW

ERIN    MOURE,    Empire,  York   Street.  Anansi,
$5-95·
susAN  MUSGRAVE,  A  Man  to  Marry, A  Man to  Bury.  McClelland &  Stewart, $6.g5.
PIER  GIORGIO DI   CICCO,  The   Tough  Romance.
McClelland &  Stewart, $6.gs.

MoLIERE's BOURGEOIS gentilhomme is de­ lighted  to be told  by his mentor that what  he  is  writing is  prose.  His  happiness in the  confirmation of that  natural talent is harder to come  by  today, when  so much  prose  takes  the  form of  poetry,  and  vice
-to name   but   one -versa. Some   of
Erin   Mou11e's poems  slip  across  that  in­ visible  border, heavily  disguised  by  verse form  but  speaking with  the unmistakable accent   of   the    prosaic.   Those    in   this volume   that   do   qualify   as  poetry   will appeal to admirers of the T. S. Eliot style: the    brittle  and   somewhat  dehydrated emotions of the  world  seen as wasteland. Even  the  compatible in  taste  may  be put  off, however, by the  poet's irritating man­ nerisms:

An entire  week I lay
in a room above  the traffic of Madrid, above the  avenue   w/ its  scattered  proclamations.
& sometimes  the  voice was a penitent, at the  gate
of  the  cathedral. ...

Perhaps shorthand is part  of the contem­
porary  malaise,  but   with   repetition  it

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



creates  the  suspicion  that  Ms. Moure  be­ longs to the Pitman School  of Poets. That suspicion  is not  entirely, or even margin­ ally,  deserved. She  is a  poet  of  consider­  able  sensitivity.  The  themes  of  her  poems wander about the  globe  restlessly, search­  ing  out  the  incident  that  illuminates the loss   of    empire -both    temporal   and spiritual.
Too,  the  fresh  imagery  is there.  What it  cries  out  for  is  sharper focus,  and   a greater variety of  tone.  Even  when  life seems  a  monochrome, art  must  discover and  rejoice  in its shadings. It seems likely that  this artist  will enrich her  palette.
Susan  Musgrave writes with a zest for living and, avoiding prejudice, for dying. Her  themes  have  admirable variety,  and she  is not  ashamed to  employ  rhythm as a  percussion   instrument.  Indeed, she  is bold enough to rhyme. The result is a directness that  suggests strength of  inven­ tion even  when  other evidence is lacking.  As in "Non-Status  Indians  Bingo Song":

... I did  it  because I loved  him
I did  it  because I'm White
I did  it  for  Johnny  Bingo
I'll  do  it  again tonight.

This  simplicity of treatment of the experi­ ence  of  sex  and   loving  in  our  time  hits home.  The lean  style is altogether appro­ priate   to  the  sentiments expressed.  The poet  trudges  bravely  through recollection of  emotion,  with  the  small  pack  on  her back, recording the carnal encounter that  is doomed  to be fleeting  but  that  is all the more  poignant for  being  the  victim  of its time.
If there  is a  criticism   to  be  offered - constructively-to Musgrave, it  is  that she shares  the young  poet's  preoccupation with death and  dying. Violently. The  sug­ gestion: pretend that  you have  grown old and  have  no good reason  to dwell on your
 terms of other worlds  that  have  been dis­ covered   by  no  space   explorer   but   the poet, with his private life-support system. Di  Cicco  is an  imagist who  keeps  us in touch  with  the  recognizable. His  figures are  startling  without being  so esoteric  as merely  to baffie.
As for this  poet's  approach to  the con­
temporary comeuppance, it has a bravura style that  contrasts agreeably with  the all­ too-prevalent sound   of  the  whine  ram­ pant,   of  the  versifiers  who  compete for the  distinction  of  uttering  the   terminal whimper. Di  Cicco's  private  world  ends with  a bang:

I will forgive you  nothing, to  stay  ready for the  next  time  I  the  tap  on  the  shoulder says, look  love,  one   more   heaven,  I  open  your mouth and  sing.

The  flaw in  Di  Cicco's  verse,  to  the  eye that  wilfully searches  for  such,  is that  at times the poet is self-indulgent in being clever  with  his  words,  at  the  expense  of



What is Canadian literature without Canadian drama? INCOMPl li !
Drama Is a fast-growlnQ part of Canadian literature.  Playwrights Canada represents more than 140 professional playwrights  across the country Including  George  F. Walker, Sharon Pollock, David E. Freeman, David Fennarlo,  Erika Ritter, David French, Rick Salutln, Michael  Cook, Tom Walmsley and Michel Tremblay.
Get In touch and we'll send you our new Directory of Canadian Plays
and Playwrights Including synopses of more than 300 plays In print, with biographies of the authors and exciting production photographs. At no cost
to you.

own  mortality,  and  only  mediocre  cause	 	

to be charmed by that  of others.
The metaphor-loving mind  can be dan­
gerous  in  the  wild, plundering analogy  in
 r plAYWRIGHTS CANADA J
L



109

BOOKS IN REVIEW



feelingful   message.   Free   verse  depends on a certain firmness  of structure. To  Di Cicco  as  to  many  other  poets  one  longs to whisper  "Yes,  you do have  something to  say,  but  for  God's  sake  do  introduce your  muse  to  the  peanut   butter  contest that  requires you to 'describe  in 25 words or less....' "
ERIC NICOL


SLIM, SLIMMER ...

MICK  BURRS,   Children on  the  Edge   of Space.
Blue  Mountain Books,  $4·95·
JOHN   v.    HICKS,   Now    Is   a   Far    Country.
Thistledown Press,  $12.00;  pa.  $5.00.
LORNA UHER,  Grow's  Black  Joy. NeWest Press,
$ro.95; pa.  $5.95.
READING THE  PRESENT  gathering of  vol­ umes  of  poems  by  three  poets  does  not cause  abandonment of all hope, but  with one exception it is far from a joyous enter­ prise.  The  entrance into  them  does  not lead   to  the   circles   of   hell,  but   into   a mostly tacky  little bungalow in which  the furnishings are cheap modern  and  sparse, and  the colors clash.  Perhaps  it would  be best  to  begin  at the  top-which  is cer­ tainly not a dizzying height, at that-and then   drop  into   deeper   depression   from there.
John V. Hicks'  Now  Is a Far Country is by far the most sensitive, articulate, readable volume in the group.  The power of his collection is diminished by his pro­ pensity  in  many   poems  to  say  what oft has  been  thought and  frequently  better  expressed  (his "No  One at the Door," for example, is very much  a flat echo of de Ia Mare's "The Listeners"); in many  other  poems,  though, his  mind   ranges   lightly and  his pen thrusts  deftly. "Create Away,"  for instance, is a tantalizing, kaleidoscopic examination  of  the   creative   process   in which  obverse  intrudes on  every  surface and  a definition of creation  necessarily dances  just  out  of reach:


IIO
 I and   my  chisel  make  a stone woman. Do  Isay  make? Rather unmake; the  chisel   is  the  destroyer. At  a sharp blow  it  bites,
spits,  chips, chips, chip-
chip, chip-chip, chip, chip, and  there is my  stone  woman, left
of all  I uncreate. Do  I say
there? Where? And   when
did  she  take  existence on? Was  she  in  the  block  present
all  this  while,  or  was  she  in
the  mind? Did  the  hands work
chips, or  woman? She  is beautiful; Icould  love  her  for  her  pure unregenerate silence. Do I say
silence? I think epigrams surround  her, and  one  labours to  he  spoken.
Ear to  the  lips,  Ihear  her  say
to  pare   the  dross  is  to  create away.

Hicks  is a genuine poet.  He  can  work  at the limits of language and challenge ideas and values with wit, and insight, and a freshness  of  imagery that   sometimes springs  from  his  interest in  music.  If he is not always successful, he offers a reason in  "Offensive to  Some," the  third  of  his "Cautionaries":
... if  you  prefer
the  light   breakfast, you  may  find   yourself
excusing yourself  in  advance of  others.

Mick  Burrs,  in  Children on  the  Edge of Space, speaks in a poetic  voice, too, but prefers  a lighter breakfast than  Hicks. He is capable of capturing a moment with delicacy and force, and occasionally with irony,  but  he  tends  not  to  probe  deeply or  to  discipline   his  lines,  and   he  wastes time with  throw-aways. A thin Santa who fails   to   attract   customers, he   tells   us adroitly enough, must  be  fired  and replaced  by
an  ample Santa a portly Santa
a corpulent Santa
one  who  can  smile-one
who  can  sell.

But  he  risks  yawns,  declaring in  "Auto­
biography: I Have Been  to War" that
I have  been  to  War.
Didn't learn till  I passed   ten





••••••• ·:•••••••••••••• 'C·•••••••••••••• -:






Canadran 	Canadran
 The  CANADIAN FICTION  MAGAZINE is now  ten  years old, the
finest  and  most  important quarterly in Canada devoted to  prose  fiction.
Edited  by Geoffrey Hancock
#34135  is on  sale  now

.
 
Magazme
 
Magazme
 
. the  fiction: Gabrielle Roy,

Frction 	Fielion
·:•
 Guy  Vanderhaeghe,
Alistair MacLeod and  a novella  by






.
.
:
Magazme
. 	,
 




Canadran Frctwn Magazme
 Josef  Skvorecky

the  interview: Clark Blaise

the  symposium: whooping cranes of  the  publishing world: literary magazines and  their survival
:

l• i+
!
 the  literary   portraits: 33
Canadian  writers by
John Reeves






Canadran 	:
Fiction
Magazine
 




Canadran Fz-ctzon Magazme
 
the  book   reviews: Jack Hodgins, Mavis  Gallant, Antonine Maillet,
George Woodcock, and  Magic Realism.

the  upcoming  issues:

:'----------'  : 	:
• • • • •' • • I • • • • • • • • • • •' • • • • • • • • • • •' • • •'' • • #
 A Special issue
on  Leon Rooke;
Volume two  of fiction

1:	Canad+zan
 . !Ca•nadran 1.
 in  translation from the unofficial languages
of Canada;
French Canadian fiction in  translation;

• 	•   and  fiction from

Fzctzon 	:	Fzction 	:
F"'"'Magazme 	:	Magazme	:
 Canada's best  new
and  established writers.

..( .....i.• ...<'.4.-....:.. ........:.............
 •
the  tenth anniversary offer:

.	I 	.	.
: 	: 	:
ft ""	•	:
:	:
 4 issues/$15
#34/35 is .$7.85 (post. inc.)
CANADIAN FICTION MAGAZINE
Box 946 Station F
Toronto, Ontario M4Y  2N9

BOOKS IN REVIEW



War's a  game for  children also  played   by men,

and  in "After the Landing of Vikings: September, 1976,"  he cloyingly quips

Under the  pebbles of  Mars live  little invisible beings taking pictures of  us.

When   Burrs   disciplines   himself  further, his poetry  may  well grow strikingly.
Lorna Uher, in  Grow's  Black  Joy,  is
another who  betrays  her  potential.  Mar­ garet Laurence proclaims her, on the back cover,  to  be "a  poet  to be  grateful for,"  and,  indeed,   Uher has  included a  num­  ber  of fine poems  in  the collection.  That is  precisely  why  her  self-indulgence is a great  pity. The sexuality  in her work does not become universal but turns  the reader
to voyeur.  "My  drawer is stocked  I  with
dildoes   wrapped  I   in  panties     fragile phalli  I  in  nests of silk," she declares  in
"I Am  Ready," and   the  audience  does not know what  to do with its eyes. Yet her prairie imagery  can be sensitive and powerful, and,   however  much   maturing she has  left  to do, such  a poem  as "Con­ summation" alone  explains  what  at  first seems  to  be the  aberration of the  judges who awarded her  the  1978 Saskatchewan Poetry  Prize :

The wind  began the  camouflage. Through its  teeth it  sifted
fine  topsoil  over  her  body.
,It blew  seeds  into  her  pores
but   the  season   was  fall-
the  wrong time  for  a planting.

When snow  smoothed the land she lay  silent  and  shrouded,
but  in  the  spring she  could  feel the  sun  yellowing the  snow
to  sparkling  noises
and  tiny  grass  blades sprouted
from  her  skin.

In the  summer
her  hair blew  from   the  mouths of  the  crocus.
Her nails  sharpened to  the  points of Russian thistles.

112
 Her  eyes were  sky and  water.
No longer cold 	no longer quiet she was motion	she was prairie.

ALAN   R.  SHUCARD



PREMATURE POETRY

NICHOLAS  CATANOY, The  Fiddlehead  Republic.
Hounslow Press,  $4-95·
LEN   GASPARINI,   Moon   Without  Light. York
Publishing, n.p.
SEAN VIRGo, Deathwatch on Skidegate Narrows and other  poems. Sono  Nis, $5·95·
THREE OR  FOUR, or even a dozen, compe­ tent,  well crafted poems do not  justify the existence   of  a  book  of  poems  fifty,  or a hundred and   fifty  pages  long.  Quantity can  not  apologize  for  lack  of  quality; if anything, it  makes  the  few  good  poems stand  out  like orange beacons.
Gasparini's collection  includes several fine   poems,   accomplished,  moving,   un­ postured. In  Virgo's  book, the  title poem is  frequently  impressive   despite  several weak sections. In each  case, the publishers are  to  blame  for  the  shortcomings; each book  needs  rigorous  editing, a  culling  of the  trite, self-indulgent, silly, or  just plain bad  poems.  Premature, careless  publica­ tion will not help  the reputations of these poets; and  given  time,  Gasparini and Virgo  might  well develop the  talent their work  promises.
As for Catanoy's long poem, except  for the very rare  striking image,  there  is more real  poetry  on  a roadmap of New Bruns­ wick  than   in  his series  of   jottings  about various places  in  "the  picture province." But unfortunately there are  no pictures to accompany the  commentary,  no  magic lantern shining  through the  poetry.
One   might   wonder how  Catanoy can call  a  profoundly  Loyalist   province a "Republic"; or  is one  supposed   to  take the  term   "Fiddlehead Republic" on  the same level as "Banana Republic"? Kinder

BOOKS IN REVIEW



perhaps to dismiss  the  problem as indica­ tive  of  the   poet's   lack   of   command  of language itself,  for  surely  any  ambiguity  found   here   is  purely   accidental.  Trite and   shallow,   insulting   to  the  maritime sensibility,   pale    in   comparison  to   the writers  of Atlantic Canada, Catanoy does nothing but  perpetuate the  stereotype of the  backward  maritimer. There is more  on  Grand  Manaan than  Dulse, more on Campobello than  Roosevelt (who?), and not  all  New  Brunswickers eat  their  pota­ toes with  the skins still on.
By contrast, Len  Gasparini's  "Sonnet on my Thirty Sixth  Birthday" is finely crafted, despite  faint  echoes of Dylan Thomas:

Now  would   I atone
For  everything but  love on my birthday
If I could, singing God's incarnate word
Till  death, broken-winged in  a  bright meadow,
Echoes  each  feathery note  back  to clay.

Equally undigested are the echoes of Tennyson and  Thomas in "Separated" although here  the  subject  perhaps merits the  allusions  to  In  Memoriam :

Is  it  for  this  your   blameless absence suspends me  like  a  bell?
My  heart could   be  that   bell
ringing, ringing ...

I remember reading Rapunzel to  you in  our  make-believe forest   tower,
when  the  night wind  was the  Wicked Witch, When the  magic word  was  Daddy.

Not an unmoving evocation of a separated man's  loneliness  for  his daughter. But far too many  of the  poems  are  passionless - despite  the  ardent claims  of  Irving  Lay­ ton's  "Epistolary Preface." There is, after all,  a  difference between   self-indulgence and  the  outpouring of passionate poetry. But  by  the  end  of  "After the  Divorce," some poetry  is just beginning to happen:

In the  morning you  awake
and  find  yourself on  the  wrong side
 of  the  dream.
It is called   divorce.
It is called   alone.

Here  the passion is personal and  lyrical, expressing  effectively  the mood.  Many  of the  poems  are  like  this,  succeeding only in  part  because  the  poetry  contained  in them   begins  to  happen  too  late  in  the poem. But some of the poems are entirely successful.  "Love  Poem"  manages an original  splash  in  a  worn  stream : "You
are  pregnant with  love  I and  it truly  be­
comes  you"; and  one  of  the  most  note­
worthy    poems,    "Azaleas    for   an    Out
Patient,"  memorably  depicts   the   emo­ tional   ambiguity  of  some   medical   pro­  cedures,   and   creates   a   thematic  unity among  some  of the  poems :

You  are  a  garden in  winter, and  the  gynecologist
will  see  to  it
that   no flowers  grow
in  your  garden in  spnng.

I think  of your  garden made barren, and  the  azaleas I gave  you.
I think  of  their  odorless  pink  language, and  their  apt  etymology-
so named  as growing in  dry  soil, like  metaphors for  modern  love.

There is  a  tenuous   mood  progression as the subject moves from divorce to new love, to the  fulfillment inherent in the recognition  of  the  dualities  of  life  and death, growth  and  decay  in the human physical and  emotional cycle. A recurring image  is the grave  and  the garden  juxta­
posed:   "Let   the  cosmos  dance   I to  the rhythm of your womb I your womb which
is  a  grave  and   a  garden"  ("For  Mary Jane"), and  in  a  longer,  more  powerful passage from  "Logos":
What fish ever  breathed the  ocean
That my seed  could flourish
In a  rhythm of stars?

I cannot say,  or  guess, for  I know  only
A  grave beside   a  garden,

Where the  moon  gapes,  and  the  fir  tree
Grows  taller than Christmas,


113

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



The owl  goes  hungry,
and  we become  as fertilizer, after  death.

An obvious conclusion, but satisfying in context, and  given force  by the sustained poetic  expression.
Sean   Virgo's   Deathwatch   consists  of
four  sections,  only  two of  which  are  im­ portant. The  first section, "The House  by the Swamp, "is a series of  vague and  ob­ scure  poems  in  which  the  persona  grows toward  loneliness  and  withdrawal  from society,  until  by the  end  he is swallowed up  by  nature.  Nothing wrong  with  this, but  the  poems are of uneven  interest  and quality. As   the  following   lines  demon­ strate,  the  good  bits  are  hard  to  match:
"Someone has  poured the  sea  I full,  it
bulges  I like a dead  eye"  ("Grey").  Few
other poems stand  alone, but "Midnight" is excellent: "The nightmare of a bird  I plucked  from  an  inner   branch   I by  the
prowling cat." Also, despite  the  flaws in fully  half  its  stanzas,   "She" stands   out from  the  others:

You  bring  the  rainstorm inside these  walls,
Junipers heaving under the  steep  clouds
and  shingle crowding back  down  the  strand where the  mountain  falls.

The cycle is completed, the  self is lost to some  dark  Earth  Mother, and  part   one closes.
Part  two should  never  have  appeared,
being  made  up of Virgo's  contribution to the "Kiskatinaw Songs"  (originally a col­ laboration with  Susan  Musgrave). There is little  poetry in  this  section,  where  the poet  dons  fake  Indian  garb  and  chants
nonsense  like "Mmmmh -earth  word  I
Wo-wo-wo-berry word   I Tss-tss -leaf word"  ("Lost  at   Night   Song").  Occa­ sionally,  Virgo  changes  method, adopts  a
stance  nearer  the  monologue and  creates a  nearly  convincing character  as  in "Granny Yaga," "Taunt to  a  Rival Chief," and  "Shaman's Song."
"Deathwatch  on  Skidegate Narrows,"
 the  third  section,  is a long  poem  that  al­ most  justifies the publication of this book. In  its various  component parts,  the  poet leaps back like a squirrel from the present  distance  to   explore   retrospectively   his experiences on  the  west  coast.   "Death­ watch" is a  satisfying   poem  with  plenty of  meaty  substance. "Deathwatch"  and the  final  chorter poem  "Runners," if left by themselves,  would  have  constituted an impressive  book.   "Deathwatch" is  sub­ divided   into  six  major sections,  and  not all are equal in quality. The opening lines are  captivating and  promise much  that  is hard  to live up  to:

The squirrel jerks  his  rump, his  frame feints against  invisible reins,  one   moment he  is  a  tethered dog,  eager at  master
or  prowler or  cat, the  next  he's  launched.

Even  Virgo's   approach to  the  Indians has  matured with  distance, become  more objectively poetic:

They cut  the  tree  and   they  flayed  the  tree and   gralloched it  out  as  the  coals
cooked   its  heart into  fish  meat

So  they  spread its  flesh,  like  a salmon set  out   to  cure, and   canoe was  born, the  very  first  craft of  all.

One    part    of   "Deathwatch," "Tanu," lapses  into  the  phoney   Indian poetry  of the   "Kiskatinaw  Songs,"  but   the   long poem returns to seriousness, and the lapse, over-all, is not  a  serious  detraction. The final  section,  "Runners," four  pages long, is a successfully sustained display of poetic virtuosity. One  can  only hope  that  Virgo will  learn   which   dregs  to  cast  out,  and which  gems to polish.
Both  Gasparini and  Virgo  could  have
produced books that  are completely satis­ fying. The potential is there  in each case, latent amongst the  excesses and  lapses of taste.  I  look  forward  to  the  time  when patience  and    caution   will   bring   forth  from  these  poets  the quality of books they are  capable of  producing.

DAVIDS. WEST

BOOKS IN REVIEW



WINNING SPIRIT

MARGARET  AVISON,   Sunblue.  LanceJot   Press, h95·
IT IS NOT ENTIRELY atheistic to say that where  Sunblue succeeds,  it does so largely in spite of religious fervour. Admittedly, between   Christ and   the  Muse   there  has more  often  seemed  to be an alliance than any fundamental incompatibility. But Margaret Avison's finest poetry  and  her particular sort  of  Christianity are  set  at odds  by the same rift, aesthetic and philo­ sophical, that  distinguishes a  Hopkins or an  Eliot  from  an  Anita  Bryant.
The  wages of faith, one  might  say, are intellectual and  linguistic  diminution. Too often  we hear,  in certain poems, the buzz­ words    of    the    born-again    Christian: "trusting  the    silent    Glory,"    "now    in glory   /  quickening love   and   longing," "the   glory  has  not  filled  /  His  long  ap-
 pointed  place." Yet  Sunblue scarcely im­ pugnsAvison's reputation for brilliant ver­ bal invention. The pedestrian piety of be­ seeching Christ to "keep  our courage high with  You  / through steep and  storm  and  wild"  is  well  redressed  elsewhere. Such vivid,  mouth-filling  clusters   of  sound  as "crisp   /  drought-barnacled  grass-crust," or   "salmon-stream  /  crop-green /rhu­ barb-coloured shrub-tips," continue to spike  Avison's  poems.  They are  at  once pure  verbal  music  and  rhetorical  devices to push  and  pull  the  reader.
In  the following verses  (from  a  poem
on guerrilla warfare)  distant rhymes  and loose  hexasyllabics   provide a  framework for  writing   that  seems  to  strike  off  con­ tinually  in new  directions, though  spiral­ ling tightly  towards  epiphany:

Thump and  faint  dab  of fire from  the  great  powerfuls
is ungermane; a far din defines silences.




JUST    RELEASED
The Isabella Valancy Crawford Symposium
Edited  and  with  an  Introduction by Frank  M. Tierney.
Re-Appraisals: Canadian Writers  # 5
Contributors:  Dorothy Livesay,  Penny   Petrone,   Margo Dunn, John Ower   Orest  Rudzik   Elizabeth Waterston, Kenneth Hughes, S. R. MacGillivray, Cathe;ine  Ross,  Louis   Dudek,   Anne   Paolucci, Clara Thomas.
15.5 x 23.5 em    '158 pages    Price $6.00
University of Ottawa Press
65 Hastey  Ave., Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N  6N5
Kindly send me ........................................ copies of The Isabella Valancy
Crawford Symposium.
NAME  .................................................................................................•............ ADDRESS ------············································-·--------------------·----------------·--------------··

Cheque or money order  included.
Kindly make  cheque  or money order  payable to the
UNIVERSITY OF   OTTAWA  PRESS


I I 5

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Come as it  may,  the  clinch
finds  ones,  gashed  (shin  or forearm)
but  longing for  the  once winning, the  lustral corpus.
("Embattled Deliverance")

Four  perspectives in as many  lines:  from straightforward  observation of distant artillery, to an ironic  view of world affairs (the great powers are only transient "powerfuls," after  all), to cool philosophi­ cal  judgment, followed  by a sudden  drop  into  the  quiet  centre  to  which  the  noise of  events  is mere  horizon.  Why  "unger­ mane," though?  The cryptic   answer   in the  fourth  line,  its import  stressed  by its sound,  demands the elaboration provided by the  next verse.
In the  sixth  line,   Avison  plays  upon
linguistic  expectation to heighten our response  to rhythm and meaning. Because we  expect   the  indefinite   pronoun "one" (equivalent  to   an   indefinite    "you"  or "us") , we read  "finds  ones" first of all as a trochee (as though it were "finds one") , then  as  a  spondee  (as  we  note  our  mis­ take), and  finally  as  a  heavily  accented iamb:   "finds   ONES." That   is,  in   the clinch  we are  not  nations  or  armies,  but individuals with  souls and spiritual needs. In  the  seventh  line,  the  emphasis  placed on   "once"-by    its   position    and    the double rhyme with "clinch" and "ones"­ focusses attention on the ideal  of winning definitively  on  the  spiritual plane,  as opposed  to winning and  losing repeatedly on  the  battlefield. Finally,  a phrase  from an    earlier   stanza,   "elusive    corps,"    is turned by a sort of transubstantiation into "lustral  corpus." Though  the   reference may  be specifically  to the  taking  of  com­ munion, that  trick  of words suggests that  Christ is immanent in an elusive band  of guerrillas, as peace  is in  war.
Cracking out   the  immanent seems  to be Avison's  special  poetic  task, one which at her best she approaches with verbal hammer and chisel. Aggressive, rhetorical, analytical, a  poet  of  unpolished  surfaces

116
 and  sudden apertures, she  will  pry  apart a  rhyme   until  an  entire   poem  speaks  in that  opening. "Stone's Secret" begins, "Otter-smooth  boulder," and  ends,  "this
very  stone   I utters." The  more   than   a
page dividing the rhyme  (otter -utters)
is an  expressionistic gesture  of  her  sense of the gulf  between  outward and  inward, skepticism  and  faith.
It is unfortunate the  number of poems
here that  exhibit not aperture but closure. Closure of word,  in the  uninventive illus­ tration of Biblical  themes,  and  closure  of mind,  in the  too-pat reaching of  foregone
conclusions: "nothing  is  made   I except
by  the  only  unpretentious, Jesus  Christ,
the  Lord." It is  through  cracks   in  the
evangelical plaster  that  poetry  pokes out again and   flourishes.   In   "As   Though," for  example, faith   is  seen  as  a  form  of gradual self-destruction, like the  "rotting with  reaches" of a seed. Through that unoptimism, the poem unfolds organically towards a tiny, cotyledon-like affirmation. It is formally and  rhetorically perfect.
Inevitably, there  is a certain thematic familiarity  to  that   part   of  Avison's  new work  that  must  be called  devotional. One wonders whether that  will enhance the accessibility  of her  poems, or restrict  their appeal. Certainly the  latter would  be regrettable; there  is so much  here  of real value.   If occasionally  Avison  expects   a suspension  of  disbelief   in   too   literal   a sense,   she   continues  to  demand -and reward -the   full   application  of   those critical faculties essential  to close reading.

ROD WILLMOT


EARLY OATES
G.    F.   WALLER,   Dreaming  America: Obsession and   Transcendence in  the  Fiction of Joyce Carol   Oates. Louisiana State  Univ.  Press,
$12.95·
AccoRDING TO Gary  Waller,  the fiction of
Joyce   Carol   Oates  frequently has  been

BOOKS IN REVIEW



either misread, miscategorized, or  under­ valued. Too often,  critics have drawn mis­ leading links  between   her  work  and  the tradition of naturalism;  they have  missed the  point   when   they  have   attacked  her for  failing   to  create  "the perfectly   sug­ gestive shapes  that modem art  and fiction have   taught us  to  generate"  (as  Alfred Kazin   writes);  they  have   been   myopic when  they have contrasted her  forms  un­ favourably  with  the  radical  creations of the   metafictionists; they have observed superficially  when they have seen in her multigeneric  productivity  only   compul­ siveness or  insecurity.
In  opposition to these opinions, Waller points  out  that, although she has  been at times  openly   critical of  writers   such  as Donald Barthelme, she  herself  has  occa­ sionally been brilliantly experimental; her "Nabokovian"  Expensive People,  for  ex­ ample,   "employs  a   range   of  comically alienating   techniques  such   as   internal commentary,  reviews,  fictions-within-fic­ tions,  and  frequent  dislocations of  scene and   tone."  Oates   is   hostile,    therefore, only   to   writers   whom    she   has   called "monastic" -who refuse   to  "deal with the  utterly  uncontrollable  emotions that  determine our  lives." Commenting on her fiction's  powerful affectiveness-its ten­ dency  to  "force  upon   readers  an  often frightening sense of our  own  fears, obses­ sions, and  drives" -Waller suggests, "we can see how her fiction  is experimental in the  most  radical way-by entrusting the enactment of its  meaning to  the  reader's responsiveness." And,  accounting for  the ostensibly  "slapdash" quality of  some  of her  work,  Waller suggests  that   she,  like D.  H.  Lawrence, may  be  writing out  of the  deepest   recesses  of  her   personality, which  she "refuses  to shape  into  perfected and  so completed art." Finally, objecting to  the  label  of  naturalist, Waller   argues that,  even  in  her  earliest work,  "America is not  so much  a  place  as  an  experience of surging  volatility"; consistently she has
 attempted to penetrate the surface  of America  to the  "spirit of the  place," and to  make  her  environment seem   (to   use her  word)   "transparent."
Waller  frequently compares her  fiction
to that  of D.  H.  Lawrence. Both  writers create  landscapes with  emotional and spiritual dimension, both are  powerfully affective,  both  concentrate on "sexual desire as an unpredictable and  awesome force for change in  the personality," both dramatize sex's potential to connect indi­ viduals   with   the   "most   mysterious  and vital   cosmic   movements,"   both    centre  their  fiction  on   the  dominant  issues  of their   time  and  thus   "evoke   for   us  the chaos within,  exorcising and  exhorting at once,  providing  the   reader,  one   would hope,  with   a  challenge  of  a  profound waking dream." And in the works of both writers  a  prophetic  relevance is obvious
-a "deep,  unshakeable  faith    in   the transformable quality of all  life."
A weakness in Waller's study is his tendency   to  exaggerate  when  discussing the  positive  elements in  Oates's  fiction, too often taking her  own words about  the purposes  of  the  novel  in  general   (as  ex­ pressed,  for  example, in  "New  Heaven and  New Earth") as a  description of her own  work,  which  many  readers  find  in­  tensely depressing. Waller  writes, "Oates's dream  of America is an  enticement to  a
'new  heaven, new  earth' by participating in dreaming itself, a celebration of the potential  triumph   of   the   imagination that,   paradoxically,  only   America   em­ bodies."  In   light   of  the  spate   of   grue­ somely   violent    acts   which   assault   the reader  in  most  of  her  novels,  words  like "celebration" and "triumph" seem hyper­  bolic,  something   which   Waller   himself seems to recognize, as when  he writes, for example, "the  radical breakthrough into  final transcendence of Do With  Me What  You  Will is a rare  note  in her fiction."
Another   weakness  in  Waller's study  is his failure  to see that  the critics  who have


117

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tried   to   beat   Oates  into   insignificance with  the  label  of "naturalism" have  mis­ understood  the   mode's   complexity   (as critics  like  Donald  Pizer  have  argued). Many  naturalists (Frank Norris  is a good example) would  angrily reject  the  theory that   they  have  only  been "carefully  re­ flecting  the  passing  surfaces  of  society." The  phantasmagoric city in Dos Passos' Manhattan Transfer, for example, is ex­ traordinarily   evocative.  Even   Dreiser's  urban   world   in   An   American  Tragedy becomes  a  powerful  symbol.  Writing of Jules  and  Nadine in  Them, Waller  con­ cludes,  "despite the  crassness  and  chau­ vinism  of  his  conception of her,  there  is within  his  lust  an  intensity  that  drives  it beyond  the   possessive:   what   she  repre­  sents is the spark  of the transcendent." A similar statement about  Clyde's  obsession with   Sondra  in   An   American  Tragedy would not be misleading. Oates  is most clearly   naturalistic when  she  dramatizes the often  spectacularly violent collisions between  forces  like chance, environment, and "temperament" (to use Mark Twain's term from What Is Man?) and human thrusts  for  freedom.
Despite  these  problems,  Waller's  study is generally   excellent. His  willingness  to draw  many  parallels between  Oates's novels  and  those  of other  writers  is  con­ tinually   suggestive:  between  Them,  for example, and  the  "non-fiction  novels"  of Truman Capote and  John  Hersey,  or be­ tween  Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida and  With Shuddering Fall. His close ana­ lyses, in  fact,  are  almost  always  percep­ tive, particularly his long discussion of Do With Me  What You Will. And illuminat­ ing  comments such  as  the  following  ap­  pear  frequently in his study:  "The 'them' of the  title  is not  primarily the  poor,  the underprivileged,  for   whom   most   of  us variously  feel  pity,  compassion,  anger,  or derision.  It is  the  'them' that  may  with­  out   warning   invade  our   sheltered    and  static   VISion  of  our   selves";  or  of  The

118
 Assassins, "We  are  in a world  of  accumu­ lated   spiritual  violence,  distorted energy,  and  thirsting egos so that the violent, even apparently  random,   becomes   seemingly the  inevitable  outcome"; and,  "the real assassins  may  equally   be  those  grasping, destructive  egos  with  which  we are  bur­  dened  and   with   which   we  collide."  In Waller's concluding chapter, after specu­ lating that   Oates's fiction   may  come  to exhibit a "continuing concern  with  relig­ ious  experience and  mysticism" or  with "possible   sources   of   transcendence,"  he writes,  "It might  be hoped  that  this study will be regarded in  the  future as a stimu­ lating   account    of    the    early    Oates." Whether or  not  she  will  go  on  to  write the  kind  of  novel  which  Waller predicts is  of  course  open   to  question. What  is clear, however,  is that  his account of the early Oates is stimulating.

W. MACNAUGHTON



COHEN

STEPHEN   SCOBIE, Leonard   Cohen. Douglas &
Mcintyre, $4.95.
STEPHEN SCOBIE's Leonard  Cohen makes an  important contribution to our  under­ standing of one  of  the  most  popular, yet elusive,   figures   in   Canadian   literature. Scobie  divides  his study  by genre,  dealing separately with the poetry,  the novels, the songs,    and    then   concluding   with    a chapter,  "Postscripts and   Preludes," on Cohen's  most  recent works.  His  divisions also  parallel Cohen's  development as  a creative artist.
Scobie   sees  Cohen's central  vision  as

a harsh and   disturbing one.   It begins   in  a broken world, the  world   of  the  death camp and  the  slave,   and, finding no  solutions in the  social  and  political vacuum of the  fifties, it  proceeds to  the  broken self, which   it  cele­ brates with  a  kind  of fierce  and  human joy. This  vision   provides  a   symbolic   language

BOOKS IN REVIEW



which   creates  a  hermetically sealed   world, a closed-system view  of  reality.

In   a   clear,    coherent,  and    readable style, Scobie  traces  Cohen's main  themes through his work,  demonstrating its  con­ tinuity   and   its  culmination in  Beautiful Losers.  Beautiful  Losers  also  heralds  the end  of a period  in  Cohen's  development. As Scobie  says, the  fact  that  the  novel is ultimate and  unique means  that  it is also a  dead-end.  In   it,  Cohen   more   or  less exhausted  one   set   of   themes;  he   also exhausted, at  least  temporarily, the  form of  the   novel.   If  he   were   not   to  lapse into complete silence,  his work had  to find a new direction and  a new form; and  he emerged  in  a  new  role,  as  the  composer and  performer of songs.
According  to  Scobie,   the   songs  con­
tinue   the  same  central  vision,  but  in  a gentler and  more  humane way, and  pre­ sent  the  same  themes  and  imagery.  The  detailed  examination  of   Cohen's  songs, usually  given  little  attention  by  literary  critics,   is  one   of   the   most   interesting aspects  of this study.
The  Cohen of the I 97o's is still difficult to  assess.  In   Scobie's   view,   Energy   of Slaves  (1972)   is a book of  "anti-poems," its  central statement  self-disgust.   Yet  he defends  the  book  from its critics  (notably  Tom   Wayman,  whose  clever  and   witty review   in   Canadian  Literature  No.  6o attacks   Cohen's  views   on   women   and politics), maintaining that  Cohen's poems are  about   himself,   and   his  disgust  with his own  sexual  and  political   position.
I find it hard  to accept Scobie's  defence of this book. His explanation that one offensive, bad poem  is included because Cohen  is "once again trying  on  the  mask of  the  anti-poet" and   his  reference   to some  poems  as  "deliberately bad  (which is  a  form   of  aesthetic control)"  seems overly  generous.
At  the  beginning of  his  study,  Scobie
makes  the  point  that the  facts  of Cohen's biography  are   "largely   irrelevant  to  an
 understanding of his writing" and  that  he has  therefore  "made little  attempt to  re­ search   Cohen's  life,"  nor  has  he  inter­ viewed the  poet. It seems to  me  that  the facts  of Cohen's life and  background are indeed    relevant.   As   Leon    Edel    says, "When a writer  sits down  to write, all his past  sits behind  his  pen"  (Literary Biog­ raphy,  p. 54). When  the  writer  is as ego­ centric  as Cohen this  past  is of consider­ able  significance   if  we  are   to  discover what makes him  the  man  he is, if we are to discover  the  basis of his  poetry.
Yet  this study  is an  enlightening  one,
particularly for  its fine  analysis  of  many of the poems. Scobie acknowledges critics who  went  before  him,  including Dennis Lee, with whose interpretation of  Beauti­ ful  Losers  he  disagrees  completely.  He provides  us with  the most  useful study  of Cohen  yet available.

LORRAINE MCMULLEN








Out-of-Print

CANADIANA   BOOKS
and
PAMPHLETS



HURONIA-CANADIANA BOOKS
BOX   685
ALLISTON, ONTARIO  LOM lAO

Catalogues free on request



II9

BOOKS IN REVIEW



A PLACE IN TIME

DOUGLAS   LE    PAN,  Bright    Glass   of  Memory.
McGraw-Hill Ryerson, n.p.

MosT  OF US OF A CERTAIN   age have over the years had a soft spot in our hearts for Douglas  Le Pan.  Since  World  War  II we have  watched him  surface  from  time  to time, like a friendly  dolphin, and each appearance has  brought  us,  whether  in his books or in the  record  of his presence in  the  world  of  government and  diplo­ macy  he  has  frequented, the  reassurance that  comes from  renewed encounters with integrity and  humane concern  and  a nice sense of what the ancients called decorum. Nothing  splashy.   The  Wounded Prince and The Net and the Sword, slim volumes of allusive  and  sophisticated poetry  pub­  lished  in  the  late  forties  and  early  fifties, probably  reached a  very small  audience, but  many  of  the   poems,  including  the much  anthologized "A  Country Without a   Mythology,"  were   to  leave   a  lasting mark  on  the  record. His  novel, The  De­ serter, also very special,  won a Governor­ General's Award  in  I964. When  we were at  a  loss  to  account  for  the  appearance of an  elegant and  lucid  prose  in  certain  federal documents, as for example in  the Gordon  Report  on   Canada's  Economic Prospects, it  was  good  to  know  that  the redeeming hand  was  Mr.  Le  Pan's.  We were   pleased,   as  one  is  pleased   in  the presence  of a fitting action,  to hear  of the later  appointments as teacher  at  Queen's and  as  Principal of  University   College, Toronto. Who  was  this  gentle  and  cul­ tured man? What was his  larger  life?
When  we pick  up  Bright  Glass of  Me­ mory,  described    on   the   dust-jacket  as "memoirs by Douglas  Le  Pan," we  may think  we will get some answers.  To  some extent we do, but  this is certainly not  the kind  of book  I had  hoped  it might  be. I am  not sure what kind of a book it is, and I  don't think  Mr.  Le  Pan  is either. His

I20
 most  apparent  intention is to  find  some conjunction between  the personal  and  the public,    between    himself   and  "history." The four  parts of his book, he suggests  in his introduction, arc  to be seen less as "memoirs" than  as "essays,"  and  the sub­ jects  are  to  be  "people and  events  that  have  their   place  in  history," and  at  the same  time  "their place  in  my  life,  too." The "people," as it turns out, all presented as in some way heroic, are General A. G. L. McNaughton, Maynard Keynes and  T. S. Eliot; the  "events" which are  the  frame­ work  for  the  final  essays  (Lester  Pearson  hovering unheroically in the background) are  the meetings in Sri Lanka preliminary to the launching of the  Colombo Plan  in I950. It is of course  the "place in my life, too"  that   determines  the  cutting of  the cloth and  the making of the suits. Mr.  Le Pan   was   at   McNaughton's  staff-head­ quarters in  the  early  part  of the   ar.
was   at   King's  College,   Cambndge,  m
I945,   where   Lord   Keynes   was  master­ minding plans  to save the post-war British pound    by   the   negotiation  of   massive American and Canadian loans. He was at Faber &  Faber  and  the  Carlton Grill  for visits  and  lunches  with  T. S.  Eliot   be­ tween  I943  and   I948.  And  he  was later at Colombo, where  he served as Canadian representative at meetings of economic officials  of  the  Commonwealth gathered to   broach  the   portentous  problems  of what     were    then     called    the    "under­ developed" countries of  south-east  Asia.
The  hazards  open    to   this   kind    of scheme  are obvious,  and  I believe Mr.  Le Pan must have been aware of them. The introduction, which   takes  the  form  of a rather apologetic "letter to my sons," pro­ duces   after  the  affirmation of the  "place in his ory"
a   rash   of  reservations.  The   book   isn't really history,  though he hopes it will "contribute to  history." Nor  is it  a  book of   "diplomatic   memoirs."  Is   it   auto­ biography? Not  really,  Mr.  Le  Pan  says,

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



at   least  not  in  the  sense   (and   Yeats  is cited)  that  it  sets out  "to  create a  care­ fully  calculated impression." One  thing  for  sure,  he  tells  his  boys,  this  is  not  a "book  of confession,  where  everything is laid  bare,  where  every sin is remembered, etc."  What is left, we ask?
The  book tallies  its author's uncertain­ ties  and   indecision. It  spreads  in  many directions   and 	has    little    cumulative strength. The  father-figures  (for  that   is what   they  seem  to  be  to  Mr.   Le  Pan) emerge   truncated;  they   are   glimpsed,  never    deeply    perceived.   McNaughton fares  best,  his  craggy  bearing and  fierce integrity making him   perhaps  the  most amenable of  the  three   to  the  limitations of a sketch. Of  Keynes'  brilliant and ver­ satile  mind  we get some  notion, but he is tethered  to  a   particular  aspect   of   the sterling crisis  and, despite   Mr.  Le  Pan's  efforts  to  supply  colour, remains  largely embedded in his monetary  theories. Eliot is carefully posed  but  has so little  vitality of his own  that  he has  to be  propped up by  a  mini-lecture on  his  poetry  and  re­ peated  assurances that  he  was  "a  great poet   who   was  also   a   very  nice   man." Meanwhile, the demands from  the side of "history" and  "diplomatic memoir," de­ spite  Mr.  Le Pan's  protestations, compete for  place.  Pages  are  filled  with   the  au­  thor's  despatches and  memoranda, para­ phrased or quoted, and  indeed  over  most of the length  of the book there  are simply more   anxious   explanations  of   interna­ tional   monetary  theory   and   diplomatic manoeuvring than   we  may  care  to cope with.   One   comes   to   dread   the   notice posted more  than  once:  "some  knowledge  of  the  background  is  necessary,  which  I will  try  to  sketch   in  as  summarily as  I can."
As for  Mr.  Le  Pan,  it  will  be  evident by now  not only  that  his larger life is not forthcoming, but  why it is not forthcom­ ing.  It is shut   out  by  the  book's  design and  by the  residual role  accepted by  the
 author. By  profession,   Mr.  Le  Pan   has been for the most  part  a civil servant  and a  diplomat. The barriers, the  discretions and  withdrawals, that   these  callings  im­ ply,  necessary  and   by  no  means  mean­ spirited,  carry   over  into  Bright  Glass  of Memory. What we sehere is an amanu­ ensis, a keeper  of official records, a writer of despatches. Worse, because  courted by the  very  conception  of   the  book,  is  the close-by role of  "attendant lord"  assigned by  Mr.  Le  Pan's favourite poet  to  Pro­  frock:

one  that will  do
To  swell  a  progress, start a  scene  or  two,
Advise  the  prince ... Deferential, glad  to  be of usc, Politic, cautious and  meticulous; Full  of  high  sentence....

It  takes  a   Boswell   (and   no  doubt,  as prince,  a  Johnson)  to  transform such  a role into something else.
But readers who know the full Prufrock passage will know  why I have cut it short. Our  man  is not  the  least  bit  obtuse,  and he is certainly nobody's  fool. The  humane and   disciplined  virtues   suggested   in  my first paragraph remain intact. I think  Mr. Le Pan has tried  to recreate a piece of the past  by very  difficult  means.  Charles Ritchie, facing  a similar  task in the  writ­ ing of The  Siren  Years, came armed  with a personal  diary,  and  as a bonus,  I think,  powers  of  almost   total  recall.  Neither of these resources  seems  to have  been avail­  able to Mr. Le Pan. Sound  editorial judg­ ments might have remedied matters some­ what,   but   these   were   not   forthcoming. For  this I am inclined to blame  the pub­  lishers  of   Bright    Glass  of  Memory  as much  as I am  the author. I think  Mr.  Le Pan's  copy editors,  or perhaps his friends,  either  neglected  to advise  him  when  they should have, or advised  him  badly. Who­ ever is to blame,  the  "bright  glass" is out of focus.
R.  L.  MCDOUGALL


121

BOOKS IN REVIEW



VOICES OF WOMEN

JENI couzYN, House  of Changes. Heinemann; Douglas &  Mcintyre,  $5.95.
ENID DELGATTY RUTLAND,  The  Cranberry Tree.
Turnstone, $3.95.

HOUSE OF CHANGES:

A dazzling peacock, self-proud, tail out­ spread-so one sees on first looking into Jeni  Couzyn's  art,  a  thing  not  of the hu­ man  world,  an artefact?
But   take   the   word-artefact-and split it up:

art fact

isn't  this  what  she  is doing?  Behind  the arras  of myth,  histmy,  anthropology isn't there   the   human  fact?  We  come  from this. We possess in ourselves animal, vegetable, mineral. As Couzyn  tells it, addressing her  "spirit":

Dearest light, dearest source
I am  your  prison warder with
needing you.  Ishall  open  these  muscles like  roads  and  rivers
I shall  unpick this  tangle  of bones
to  a  tree  with  loose  waving   branches
I shall  clear my  mind   like a  field for  you  to  walk  and  lie still  in
I shall  make  a  waterfall in my spine
I shall  make   rock-pools in  my  eyes
come   home.
Jeni Couzyn first became known to Canadians with her third  book, Christmas in  Africa, 1975.  It was published  simul­
taneously  by Heinemann's and J. J. Doug­
las of Vancouver, as is House of Changes.
This  publishing hook-up  plan  is interest­ ing  in  itself;  for  few  are  the  Canadian poets  who  manage to  be  printed outside the country.
Couzyn   was   born   some   thirty-seven years ago in South Africa, met her Cana­ dian   husband,  David   Day,   in   Turkey, lived  two years in Victoria, B.C. and  has now  moved  back  to  where  she  first  won acclaim  as a reader of her own  poems -

122
 England. Like  Margaret  Atwood, whose poetry  is akin  to hers, Couzyn has recently begun   experimenting  with   motherhood
-and loves it. Thus she is the  prototype of the new woman  who, after  re-enacting her  childhood through poetry,  rejects  her parents, seeks her  own identity, loves and devours men,  but  finally  comes  to  terms with  her  androgynous  self.
The poems in this book reflect all these "pulls." Often they are  dressed  up in  the fashion  of science fiction, our modern way of  myth-making. At  other moments they are stripped of embellishment or obscurity and  glow  warmly  with  love. An example of the first is the poem "Do Androids Dream." Here we  have  the  voice  of  the mechanical woman:

The factory that  made   me and for  what
purpose, makes  no difference  to  the   way  l
feel  myself
me, know  myself  mysterious. I am I as sharp as  the  lowest

creeper on  earth is himself, whatever egg  he crawled from
or  gut   he  tore  open   entering, or  cell
accidentally
dividing created him.  There are  many  ways into life.

Let  me live.

There follows, in startling contrast, the human woman, Karen, who is being kept alive  by a machine :

Lies  to call  it  dead. The little lines bright and  furious
zig zag  over  the  screen: it  is dreaming.

Machine breathes it,  machine
beats   its  heart, whoever, whatever it  is now with  its  thin voice,  screaming.

But  the  medical profession  and   the  law refuse  to let  this dreamer die:

There is  no  precedent for  pulling the  plug we  will  not  do  it,  say  the  doctors.
We  are  pleading for  mercy,  says  the  young lawyer.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



She  will  not  be granted death.
This is a  court of  justice, says  the  judge
not  a  court of  love.

Death moves in and  out of these poems ironically,    as   a   living   force.   But   life asserts itself in the lovely series called "Spells" which  recall a similar series called "Graces" (from  Christmas in  Africa).
Titles  of  these  spells  are  in  themselves
evocative as poems:

Spell  to Summon the  Owner of the  Shoes Spell  to Soften the  Hard Heart of a Woman Spell  to  Release the  Furious Old  Woman Spell  to  Curb the  Vengeance of  the
Leprechaun

And  here is a very short  one:

Spell   for Birth

God  the  mother God  the  daughter God  the  holy  spirit

Triune of love
Triune of grace

Stream take  you Current aid  you Wind  escort you Earth receive   you

God  the  mother God  the  daughter God  the  holy  spirit

Triune of grace
Triune of power.

Thus Couzyn speaks with  the immemorial voice of women: Emily  Bronte,  Christina Rossetti, Edith Sitwell. She speaks through symbol. The result  is often  dizzying, defy­ ing  explication; but  always  rewarding.

THE  CRANBERRY TREE

It is perhaps unfair to review Enid Rut­ land  alongside Jeni   Couzyn. The  differ­  ence  is like that between  a surreal  dream  and  waking  to find snow drifting through cracks  in  the  attic  bedroom. Enid  Rut­ land's name,  moreover, is  not  known  in Canada or  abroad, since  her   tight  and thoughtful lyrics written over two decades
 have never been published  till now. The present  book  contains a  long  documen­ tary  poem,  sometimes  so  prosy  that  one wonders if it is simply "notes for a novel."  The  serious intent is there: to record  the lives of pioneers  in  a  northern Manitoba mining  town;  and  the effects  upon  them  of weather,  poverty, illness, death. There are  almost  no  moments of  delight, love, song.  In   this   respect   the   author  could have learned  a good deal  from  a study  of Anne   Marriott's   prairie   classic,   "The Wind  Our  Enemy." There  the  theme  of wind and  weather is interwoven with  the lives of the people so as to reveal  not only sorrow  and  suffering,  but  enduring  love.
However,  there are sections of The Cranberry   Tree   that   come  close  to  this sort  of illumination. After  the stumbling, flat-footed  introduction called "The Old Country" -the   poet's   impressions   of  a visit  to  England-"The Homecoming" has its flashes of metaphor:
In Montreal, in  our  absence, the  highways have  expanded
into wide  swooping roller-coasters.
The rusted   underbellies of  the  metallic
animals harry me.

Penumbras of gin  rosy  rainbows of summer's unlimited ice
spread over  suburban lawns  to evening.
The fragrance of  charcoal  steaks
grass-smell, gas-smell and  the  rasping rattles of dying  lawn-mower .

But  the  travel  diary  proceeds  to  take  us across Canada without any of the excite­ ment  of language we could find in Birney,  Purdy,   Acorn.   There  just  isn't  enough action,   intensity   of  feeling   or  dramatic narrative. So  why  did   Turnstone  Press decide   to  publish   this  book?  Because  it has  a   Manitoba   setting?  Surely   not   a valid  reason! Perhaps also  because  there  are  flashes  of   insight  in  The  Cranberry Tree which might  indicate that  the writer  is worth watching. If only she had  pruned it  all  down  to  a  series  of  vignettes, like this one:


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Six  in  the  morning and  the  wind
trying to shake  the  shutter from  its sash.
A hostile sky black  as  river  mud clouds with  white underbellies.
Across  the  field,  and   past  my  grandfather's empty cabin
the  yard  light  swings  frightened arcs   jumps and   swivels.

They told  me the  night before  of the  tornado last  week
over   Crystal City   way.  Like  the  frightened
child I was
I go  to my  uncle's room  and  call
"Mike! Uncle! Uncle Mike!"

We   never   become what   we  never   were, never  lose  what  we  are ...

Well,   not  a  tornado only  a  natural sky  in ill-humour.
Icelanders,  we  sucked  our   coffee   through
sugar  lumps
as  the  faint day  sieved  through dawn.

DOROTHY LIVESAY


ESSAIS

FERNAND  OUELLETTE,   Ecrire   en   notre   temps
Essais.  Editions Hurtubise HMH, n.p.

LE  MOT ESSAIS,  qui  figure  a  la  fois  en caracteres fins sur  la  page  de couverture et  sur  la  page  de  titre,  est  pris  ici  par l'auteur dans  l'acception la  plus  large  ou la moins universitaire qui soit, comme Fernand  Ouellette lui-meme l'ecrit  fine­ ment   et  subtilement  dans   ses  "Divaga­ tions  sur  l'essai."  Ecrire en  notre  temps, qui a beneficie d'une subvention du Con­  seil des Arts du Canada, est un recueil  de
31 "essais," dont  23 avaient deja  paru  de
1972  a  1979,  dans  la  revue  Liberte, que je lis fidelement, sans y etre  abonne, pour connaitre  et  apprecier  les  dramaturges, les poetes  et les romanciers qui y collabo­ rent   uniquement. Quatre   autres  essais sont   empruntes  aux   revues   suivantes: Critere, Etudes  Litteraires, L'oeil ouvert,
Vie  des  Arts.  La   preface   de  l'auteur a
Mon  Calvaire, de  Michel  Salomon, y est
aussi  reproduite.  Le  lecteur   y  trouvera


124
 trois inedits: Poesie et  Esperance, Le  dis­ cours  de Genevieve, Le 12 aoilt  1952. La maquette de  la  couverture  est  de  Pierre  Fleury.   La   page   quatre,  elle,  reproduit seulement  le   premier   des   trois   para­ graphes de !'Avant-Propos. Sans  doute  en est-il  le  plus  important,  puisqu'il  revele l'esprit   du    livre.    En    voici    quelques phrases:

Ecrire   en   notre   temps, c'est-a-dire ne   pas detourner  Ia  tete   d'un temps   invivable, ne pas   se  couver  douillettement  !'esprit   avec des  oreilles et  des  yeux  clos.  Ce  qui  carac­ terise  les  textes proposes dans ce  livre,  c'est  surtout  le  fait   qu'ils sont   a  peu   pres   tous marques  au  fer   par   un   regard  qui  ressent  vivement son  <epoque comme un  mal.  Nous patissons  de   notre  epoque.   Que!  homme vivant ne serait pas  angoisse, exaspere, tour­ ment•e   en    subissant  notre   histoire? Que pourrait-il faire  d'autre   que   de   denoncer
!'imposture sous  toutes ses formes, non  par temperament, ni par  laisser-aller  pessimiste, mais,  au  contraire, par  volonte de  maintenir
!'esperance a vif.

A l'instar des ·ecrivains fran<;ais tels que Marot et  Ronsard, Agrippa d'Aubigne et Mathurin Regnier, Pascal  et  Vincent de Paul,  Bossuet et F•enelon, pour  m'en  tenir a quelques poetes  et  prosateurs des XVIe
et xvne siecles, qui  ont souvent protesre
avec  energie  contre les  iniquites de  leur
temps  qu'ils  ont sans doute  jug·e aussi "in­ vivable" et  ressenti  comme  un  "mal," le poete   et   romancier  bien   connu  qu'est  Fernand Ouelette a certes raison  d'elever
la  voix  a son  tour  et  de  se sentir  mal  a
l'aise  aujourd'hui; comme   il  ruisselle  de
lectures, il connait bien les textes auxquels je fais allusion  en mentionnant quelques auteurs de deux  grands siecles de  littera­ ture.  11 se trouve done  en excellente com­ pagnie. Et  comme  lui  ils  ne  ressentaient pas   seulement  leur  ·epoque   comme   un mal. D'ailleurs,  toute  epoque, l'etude de l'histoire nous  l'apprend, est a la  fois un mal et un bien. Telle  est la vie elle-meme; l'avers et  le  revers  de !'existence, comme  ceux  d'une  medaille  ou  d'une  piece  de monnaie, ne sont  jamais  tout  a fait  iden-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tiques. Ne vaut-il  pas mieux  reagir  contre son  histoire  ou  plutot y apporter sa  pro­ pre  contribution au  lieu de  la subir? Par bonheur, Fernand  Ouellette  parle  cons­ tamment d'esperance dans son anthologie
d'essais;   il  veut   meme   "la   maintenir  a
vif,"  comme  Jean-Paul Sartre, qui  garde
toujours l'espoir, ce qui  le differencie nettement  de  beaucoup  de  ses  contem­
porains  et  ce  qui  explique pourquoi Ouellette aime  le citer; alors que  "la pro­ gression du  desespoir  en l'homme" est un trait  de notre  temps.
Ecrire  est  un  acte  de  foi  en  soi et  en l'homme a qui on s'adresse,  car  on n'·ecrit
pas  seulement pour  soi, mais  aussi  pour les autres. Qu'il  fasse  un  compte rendu ou  des commentaires en  marge  d'un volume    recemment  paru-son    recueil en  comprend sept,  penetrants et  person­ nels: Pentecotes, Pierres reflechies, Contre  tout  espoir,  Souvenirs  II, Une   voix  dans le choeur, L'Oiseau  n'a  plus d'ailes, L'ar­  tiste  et  la societe,  Rapport sur la torture
( ou  qu'il  decrive  l'action et  le role de  la revue  Liberte:  l'essai  consacre .a ce sujet
est  sans  doute le plus  .etoffe et  le  mieux senti du volume) il exprime son amour passionne  de l'homme et de sa dignite, de la liberte  et  de  la qualite de }'oeuvre  lit­ teraire, de  la  puissance   de  l'ecrit et  des valeurs   spirituelles.  "Sans   esperance,   il n'y  a  pas  de  travail  d'ecriture possible." "Le  monde  se meurt de cette  dissociation  du  politique et des  valeurs  spirituelles. II faudra bien qu'un  jour la politique rende
des  comptes  au   spirituel,  et   surtout  a
l'homme qu'elle a broye avec des "raisons
d'Etat."  "Glorifier le  joual   montrealais est une forme  de fascisme.... C'est  isoler davantage le Quebec, accentuer ses  nev­ roses, aggraver son  complexe  suicidaire." Au  fond,  mal  parler, comme  mal  ecrire,
fait  mal  a l'ame; nous  ne  serons  jamais
une   nation,  aussi   longtemps  que   nous
n'aurons pas  compris  et  ne  vivrons  pas cette  profonde verite.  L'auteur ecrit  avec justesse:  "la  liberte de l'oeuvre liueraire,
 sans  laquelle  non  seulement il  n'y  a  pas d'ecrivain, mais  il  n'y  a  pas  d'homme."
Je  suis  tout  .a fait  d'accord avec  lui  au
sujet  de son  affirmation sur  Israel,  ou  il
a voyage comme  moi:  "Israel ne sera pas vraiment Israel  tant  qu'il  n'aura pas ren­ du   justice   au   peuple   palestinien."   Et pourtant Dieu  sait  si  tous  les deux  nous aimons   Israel,  comme  nous  aimons   re­ tourner   aux  sources!  Voulez-vous savoir en clair ce qu'est  l'esprit de l'U.R.S.S., eh bien!  lisez  seulement le  paragraphe,  re­ marquable  de  densite  et  de  verite,  de  la page  88;  cela  ne  vous  dispensera pas  de faire  un voyage au pays des Soviets, mais, croyez-moi,  vous  en  reviendrez tres  vite.
L'auteur est passe rna.ltre dans  l'art de poser  des  questions qui  remuent  l'esprit et  font  reflechir:  c'est  seulement en  38 pages  SUr I 58  que  je  n'ai  pu  en  relever une  seule.   Que   de  citations  aussi   em­ pruntees  aux   ecrivains    etrangers,   alle­
mands,   fran ais 	]'en  ai  fait mon  gibier.  L'auteur les  laisse  couler   a
l'envi sous sa plume. 11 semble aussi aimer
Andre  Suares,  ecrivain aujourd'hui  trop oublie,  a qui  Ouellette  pourait  consacrer
un solide essai universitaire. C'est  le voeu ardent que  je forme  en  terrninant.

MAURICE LEBEL


UNEVEN BREATHJNG
INGRID   KLASSEN,    ed.,   D'Sonoqua:  An    An­ thology   of Women Poets  of  British  Colum­ bia.  Intermedia Press,  $12.95; pa.  $7·95·
jEAN MALLINSON's introduction to D'So­
noqua  begins this way:

Anthologies are a sign of vitality: they  give evidence  of  an   abundance  and   variety  of poetry to  choose   from.   The present  collec­ tion  is a  gathering of  poems  by  women  who live or have  lived  in some  part  of the  Cana­
dian  west,  primarily in  [sic J   the  west  coast
and   the  interior of  British   Columbia.

I found  I  reacted  sharply with  two ques­
tions:  first, what  need  is there  to make  a


125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



case   for   anthologies; second,   why   an­ thologize  poetry for any reason other than its  quality?  Mallinson's statement,  "the  juxtaposition of  different  writers,  is  one that   only  an  anthology can   provide.  It highlights similarities and  increases   the intensity of contrasts," invites  me  to  an­ swer  the  first  question  by tossing  off  an analogy   that  is   just  as  flippantly tauto­ logical:   "the   juxtaposition  of  different faces  is one  that  only a collection  of por­  traits  can   provide.   It shows  how  alike, how   unalike,   people   are."   The   second question requires  more  discussion.
The Inuit concept of  poetry  that  Ed­ mund  Carpenter explains  in his introduc­ tion   to  I  Breathe  a  New  Song  I  find appealing:

The . . . word   for   'to   make   poetry'  is  the word   for   'to   breathe.' It is  a  form   of  the word  anerca, the  soul,  that  which  is eternal, the  breath of life.

To  the  Inuit, poetry  is as natural and  as basic a function as breathing. I can understand  the   benefit   of  bringing   to­ gether  for   consideration  the   best,   the most  successful,  ways of breathing,  but it seems ludicrous to restrict  that considera­ tion  to the  best breathers of  one camp  or of one  gender.  Surely_ just  the  fact  that  there   are  good  poems  is  reason  enough  to put  them  together. I can see some rea­ son  for  anthologizing  poets  (good  ones) of  a  certain era  or  nationality, so  that  readers  can   consider   the   best  ways  of "breathing" at a given time or in a given country, but  would  a poet, if her  work is good,  need  to  enter   the  lesser arenas   of region  and  gender? Why  judge  poetry  in such  restricted competition? Poets should expect their  work  to  achieve  recognition not  because  it's  good  "for  a  British  Col­ umbian"   (provincial  reasons),   not   be­ cause   it's   good   "for   a   woman"   (sexist reasons), but  because  it's good.
And  some of the  poems of these thirty­
two  "women poets  of British  Columbia"
 are good.  Judy Copithorne, Marya  Fia­ mengo,  Rona  Murray,  Phyllis Webb-to mention  only  some  of  them -have al­ ready  gained  national  recognition. Their poems here are no disappointment. Others are  interesting in image  or  theme  but are not  full-statured  in  craft. Some  are  an­  noyingly  trite. Lines  such  as "Kitty got  / the  woodpecker," "I  had   a  cat   named Nabble  Nabble    once,"   "I   have   swal­ lowed  / the  battered gold crown  /  of my
wisdom  f to the wild dismay of my guts,"
and  "stoned gallbladder  j  brewing  pan­
creatic juices  / raise  visions  erratic" are evidence   of   unsuccessful,   overly    self­ conscious  breathing.
What it comes  down  to is that  Mallin­ son's  claim  that  an  anthology  "increases the  intensity of contrasts" is  all  too  true  of  D'Sonoqua. If it  were   just  that   the very  good   poems   by  already  acclaimed poets  stand  out  in  contrast to the  faultily  crafted  ones   by   lesser-known  poets,   I could   dismiss   both   these   categories  on the   grounds   that   the   former   needs   no comment  and   the  latter deserves   none. However,  with  a  few  exceptions, quality  varies in poems by one person. That "each  poet  was  asked   to  submit   her  own  fa­ vourite poems, the ones they  [sic]  liked, published or  unpublished" (Editor's  Pre­ face), may  indicate that   people  are  not always  the  best  judges  of any unevenness in their  own inhaling/exhaling.
The  title,   D'Sonoqua, itself   inadver­
tently  speaks of the unevenness. Although it  is  intended  to  convey  "the  fierceness, the  power  and  the  grace  and  charm" of Emily  Carr's "wild  woman  of the woods" (Editor's Preface), even  a quick  reading of Klee Wyck makes clear that these are qualities  Carr  abstracts  after   she   des­ cribes   three   D'Sonoqua  figures   (each   a huge  woman   carved   out  of  cedar)  in  a rather  uncomplimentary   way.   For   her, the  woman  is not at first powerful, fierce, charming or  graceful;  she  is  awkward,

BOOKS IN REVIEW



incongruous, even vacuous. Here,  in part, is the  first  description:

The eyes  were  two  rounds of  black  . . . and it  seemed   that  the   voice   of  the   tree   itself might  have   burst   from   that  round   cavity, with   projecting  lips,   that  was   her   mouth. Her  ears  were  round, and stuck  out  to catch all  sounds. . . . Her   hands were   black,  with blunt fingertips.

Of  the  next  time  Carr sees her,  she says:

I knew  her  by  the  stuck-out ears,  shouting mouth, and  deep eye  sockets. These sockets had no eye-balls, but  were  empty holes, filled with  stare.

After  the  third  encounter, she  minimizes the  unattractive qualities of the  figure, emphasizing instead   the  overall   response it evokes:

She appeared to be neither wooden  nor stationary, but   a  singing spirit,  young   and fresh. . . . She  was  graciously feminine.

After  many  readings of  the  collection,  I admit  that   Carr's final   response   to  the totem  figure-"She caught your  breath, this D'Sonoqua" -is applicable, but only to some  of  the  poetry. For  the  whole  of the  anthology, I  must  agree  with  Indian Tom,   whom   Carr  questions about   the meaning  of  the   figure   to   the   Indians. After  he  tells  her  that  D'Sonoqua is the "wild  woman  of the  woods" who  "steals children," Carr asks:  "Then she is bad?" He   replies,   "Sometimes  bad   . . .  some­ times good."
PEGEEN  BRENNAN


POETRY & POLEMICS

SEYMOUR   MAYNE,    ed.,    Irving    Layton.  The
Poet and His Critics. McGraw-Hill Ryerson,
$u.gs; pa.  $B.gs.

AT  A   TIME WHEN ::t  special   edition   of Irving Layton's love  poems  has  sold out at  $1000 per  copy,  it  seems  appropriate that  McGraw-Hill Ryerson  has released a
 collection  of  reviews  and  articles  reveal­ ing   the   stages   by   which   Layton  has achieved  critical and  public  recognition. Edited  by Seymour Mayne,Irving Layton: The Poet and His Critics offers a valuable if somewhat predictable overview of what  the  critics  saw  or  failed  to  see from  the publication of Here  and  Now  in  1945  to the  release  of  The  Unwavering Eye  in
I975·
Much  of the  predictability stems  from
the  reviewers'   preoccupation  with  Lay­ ton's  themes,  poems,  and  pugnacity  over a thirty-year period. Thus,  it is typical  to find  Gwendolyn   MacEwen  echoing   the tone of earlier critics  when she begins her I975 review of The Unwavering Eye with "The impossible Irving Layton, the incor­ rigible  Layton, the  indescribable Layton, the  poet-for-all seasons  Layton...." The vitality   to   which    she   responds    is  the quality  in Layton's work  which  has  con­ sistently  overwhelmed  reviewers  and has often   obscured   a  discussion   of   Layton's strengths and  weaknesses  as a  craftsman and   technician.  Only   in   the   on-going response   of  critics   like   Northrop  Frye, Milton  Wilson, Desmond Pacey, Eli Man­ del,  and  Louis   Dudek  has  one  seen  an attempt to  consider  Layton's work  as  a changing and developing whole, and even here,  as  editor  Mayne   points  out,  there  are limitations in the  range  of the critics' responses.  Mayne suggests  that  Frye  has too often tried  to fit Layton into a pattem of mythopoeic interpretation,  and,  in  so doing,   has  ignored   his  Jewish   heritage and  its effect  on  his poetry.  Other critics like Louis Dudek  have  vacillated between defending Layton's work and  attacking it to  the   point   of  fastidiousness: "These three  quatrains are  the worst by a poet  of any reputation written in the twentieth century." The result,  concludes Mayne, is an   unsatisfactory  body  of  criticism  sur­ rounding a  poet  whose challenge  and  in­  fluence  should   command  a  full  critical engagement.


127

BOOKS IN REVIEW



That Mayne  attempts to base his  judg­ ments  on  a  representative body  of  criti­  cism is clear  from  the  range  of  the selec­ tions  in  his collection. There  are  reviews by  the  American  poets,  William   Carlos  Williams  and  John Ciardi; the Australian poet,  A. D. Hope; and  the British  writer,  Roy Fuller. From  Le Devoir Mayne  takes Gilles  Marcotte's  "Le  Poete  Irving  Lay­ ton  Vu  d'Ici" and  from  the Star Weekly  Magazine  June  Callwood's "The  Lusty Laureate From  The Slums."  In addition, he creates a careful balance  between  per­ sonal and analytical responses to Layton held by his fellow Canadian poets, and literary-critical evaluations of his work made  by  academics like  Northrop Frye, Eli  Mandel, Milton Wilson, and  George Woodcock.
Not   only   does   this   range   of  critical sources   indicate  the   shape   of   Layton criticism  over  the  years,  but  it  also  con­ veys a sense  of the  polemics  surrounding Layton's  books  as  they  consistently   ap­  peared   and   demanded   attention. That these  polemics  have  been  at  the  expense of in-depth  discussions  of  Layton's work is,  of   course,   part   of  Mayne's   central  thesis, but  it is a thesis heightened by the editor's eagerness  to defend  the poet. Cer­ tainly,  it  is indefensible that  Layton  had to  struggle   for  recognition  in  the  I940s and  I950s and  did  not have a book pub­  lished  by a  national  house  until  he  was forty-seven  years old.  However,  that  neg­ lect cannot be offset  by Mayne's uncriti­ cal support of  Layton's work in his intro­ duction to  Irving  Layton:  The  Poet and His  Critics.  Mayne  speaks  of  Layton's "purported" limitations and  faults,  of his work  being  acknowledged in the  Fifties "on  the terms of a criticism  which Layton rejects," and  of  Layton's early  insistence "upon  a   full   dialogue  and   encounter [with  the  critics]   on  his own  terms."  All of this suggests that  Mayne  (and  Layton) will  engage   in  critical dialogue   only  by their  own  rules,  a situation offering  little
 hope of full understanding between  the critics  and  the  poet.  In  the meantime, an impasse  exists, according to Mayne, with Layton and  his critics  "talking past  each other":

The record of  reviews and   articles must   be examined for  what it  reveals about the limitations of  Canadian  criticism, for  the resistance and  even  hostility to  Layton's writing remains. There is that sense  that Layton and his  critics, on   the   whole,  have been  talking past  each  other. Layton insisted from  an  early  date upon a full  dialogue and encounter  on    his   own    terms.  When  the critics  do   address  themselves  to  his   work, they   are   often  peripheral  to   it,   and   they take  every  excuse  to get  out  from  under the words  of  the  poet.

Mayne's unqualified support of Layton aside,  his  selection   and   his  introduction order and  interpret thirty years of critical response  to  Layton in a style that  is both cogent  and  enlightening. For  this reason, Irving  Layton:  The  Poet and His Critics is a  valuable contribution to readers and students of Layton alike.

GWENDOLYN  DAVIES


GEMS & ASHES

RAYMOND   SOUSTER,     Hanging Jn.    Oberon,
$15.oo; pa.  $6.95·
IRVING   LAYTON,   Droppings from  Heaven.  Mc-
Clelland &  Stewart, $1 2·95; pa.  $7·95·
IT  IS DIFFICULT  to  imagine two contem­ porary  Canadian poets whose sensibilities  and   poetic   perspectives are  more  widely contrasting  than   Raymond  Souster   and  Irving Layton; that   they  are  of  roughly  the  same  generation  only  emphasizes the contrast.
Raymond Souster  is a skilled  but  con­ servative poet; and  while  his poems often  show   careful  construction,  they   rarely equal   Layton's  in   energy    or   impact.
Souster has  a  pervasive concern  for  dig­
nity, and  a penchant for observing  orderly

BOOKS IN REVIEW



process  in  both   nature  and   poetry.  He seems  to  seek  external  referents  which suit  the  flow  of  his  poetic   voice,  rather than   to  adapt voice  to  his  subject.  The great  majority of  the  poems  in  Hanging In follow  a formula:  exposition, discord, resolution. The result  is a numbing effect, a  mental status-quo; the  reader  "appre­ ciates"  the  observation, but  is largely  un­ moved  by it.
That Souster  has a moral  integrity and a  certain insight   into  aspects  of  the  hu­ man condition cannot be denied. One has to respect  the  humanity of a person  who, watching a re-routed Toronto subway car carry  off  its  unsuspecting passengers   to­ wards  an  unknown destination, can  com­
pare  himself  to "a  friend  who  watched   I
his  mother,  his   father  I  loaded   on   a cattle-car for Auschwitz, I but himself forced   to   stay   behind,  to   live   I  their
deaths out   the  rest  of  his  life."  Despite
the  sincerity,  Souster's poetry  rarely  pro­ duces  any  imaginative stimulation. "Fal­ len  Apple  Blossoms"  ends  with  the poet reminding himself  "how  much every inch
of this earth  I is still  worth  fighting for!"
The  statement's delivery  is more  rhetori­
cal   than   artistic;  Souster's  poetry   does not invoke  his own  apparent  passion.
Hanging   In   includes    a   number   of
poems    dealing  with    the    atrocities    of World  War  II, including a long narrative on the famous  Czech  partisans who assis­ sinated  Reinhard Heydrich,  touching off the  Nazi  massacre   at  Lidice.  The   latter poem   irritates   by   repeatedly  prefacing stanzas  with  "Now," as if Souster  lacked confidence in the reader's ability  to recog­ nize  the   passage   of   time.   Few   of  the shorter  poems  evoke  the  horror of geno­ cide the way, for example, Layton's early poem "Rhine Boat Trip" does.
There is, in  Droppings  From  Heaven, all of what  we have  come  to expect  from Irving Layton: his  candour, irreverence,
sense of justice,  impassioned Judaism, his unbridled imagination. And,  of course,  a
 volatile Foreword which  assails "the  older poet [who]  comes across as a weak-eyed dodderer full  of  saws  and   asides,"  "ca­ nucky  schmuckism" and   "Xianity"  with "its  progeny-various kinds  of  puritani­ cal collectivisms," while championing the "battle  for   the   free,  independent  indi­ vidual,  for  his  dignity  and  waywardness, against   the  hordes  of  robots  and  fright­ ened  massmen  that  a soulless  technology is  creating in  ever-increasing numbers."
"Hurrah for  the elephant I who  tram­
pled  his trainer to  death" Layton   writes
("Hurrah for  the  Elephant"), "Hurrah for life's defiance I of all established rou­ tines." The  danger, of course, is that Lay­
ton's  own  work,  against   a  backdrop  of his controversial public  persona,  can  be­ come  an "established routine" in  itself,  a poetic  vaudeville.
But  while  there  is a  ritualistic nature
to  his  railing   against   enemies   imagined and  real,  there   is no  denying  how  often his aim  is true.  Layton's perceptions and viewpoints are not markedly different here from  those  of  recent  books.  What  keeps the  poetry  fresh  is that  Layton continues
to  work   from   new   angles   I  locales   I
settings.  Layton in  "Great Gatsby  Coun­
try"  is a treat: a number of poems  from California, Florida, and  even  Banff  lam­ poon   and   vilify  "those   sleek   impostors
with coiffured  heads  I and  upright backs"
in  the  "too  elegant, too  white,   too  spa­
cious" synagogue, or the "rich  [who] cultivate dullness  like an art." Yet it is the impression   left   by  poems   such   as   "Di­ vorce,"   "Letter  to  a   Lost   Love,"   and "Senile,   My  Sister   Sings"  that   remains strongest.  Here Layton  grapples with  the
conflicts  of temporal I lasting  love, mor­
tality   I immortality, in  truly  memorable fashion.  In  "Letter to  a  Lost  Love"   he speaks of a relationship which  has left  "a misery  I to  last  my  life,"  while  in "Divorce" a  broader  perception  of   hu­ man  relationships is apparent:  "Let  the dropped  crabapple   moulder   where    it


129

BOOKS IN REVIEW



falls,  I the seed will clutch  and  break  the soil. I Is that  what  love is:  to care know­ ing  I stars  and  blossoms flare  to  extinc­
tion?"
"Senile, My Sister  Sings" is a far  more
eloquent confrontation  with   (or  refusal of?)   death than   poems  such  as  "Prayer for My Old Age," where Layton seems preoccupied with his own image. In the former   poem  Layton seems  to  recognize this,  writing of  his  sister,  "Your   high­
pitched  notes  must   rile  him   [death]  I
more  than  rage  or defiance."
In the end, one wishes to cut away the occasional rhetoric and  bombast,  while preserving the  hard  clarity  that exempli­ fies many  of the  poems,  but  "even  as an
expurgated edition, I the guts and moodi­
ness of me painted out  I I'd  make a used
condom  float   into   your  mind,"  Layton
warns   in  "Expurgated  Edition." Better,
perhaps, to enjoy  the  fire of Layton  with "both  pitchforks blazing," and   sift   the gems  from  the  ashes at some later  date.

LORNE  DANIEL


MAPPEMOUNDE?

JACK   DAVID,  Brave   New    Wave. Black   Moss
Press,  n.p.
DAVID  HELWIG,    ed.    The   Human   Elements: Critical Essays.  Oberon, $1s.oo; pa.  $6.gs.

jACK  DAVID justifies  his anthology on  the rationale that  the  eleven  poets  discussed "are each  gifted  in  their  own  way,"  that "for   an   Atwood,   an   Ondaatje,  and   a Nichol   to  spring   up  in  one  generation clearly  marks  the maturation of Canadian poetry." His  poets  are  part   of  the  bur­ geoning of poetry in Canada over the past quarter century-a  recent  book-seller's  brochure, for  instance, has  100 pages  of selections  by  Canadian  poets,  nearly  all living.  Our  problem, of  course,  is to map  out  critically  this logarithmically expand­ ing  country, to  find  which  trails  lead  to
 tomorrow, which peter out in swamps. David's Mappemounde is  no  Rand-Mc­ Nally  road  atlas.
Jean  Mallinson  praises   John   Robert Colombo's  escape   into   "found"  poetry, "like   beach   pebbles   set  in  filigree,"   the "found" being  a matter of style, not con­ tent,  in  which  prose  may  become  poetry.  Colombo "is a good  citizen of the country of every  day," who  elaborates a  "vulgate version   of   the   visionary   world."  Sam Solecki feels that  Michael Ondaatje maps the   world   as  surreal,  absurd,  inchoate, without resorting to the fallacy  of expres­  sive  form   such   as   the   concrete  poem. Ronald Kiverago  reprimands the  critics'  mere   20   reviews  of  David   McFadden's six  books,  rooted  in  Kitsch   culture, the prose-like  texture  reflecting the common­ man  view, and says those  readers  who see the  poetry   as  trivial are  wrong   because  any other mode would  make  McFadden's world false to his vision of life-but what  if the vision itself is trivial? Douglas  Bar­ bour  more  adequately charts the  veering course of  Frank  Davey's exploration  of "our  divided, violent, sexist world," from his  early  Tishish   impotence to  his  1g66 and   subsequent  virility,  including  effec­ tive   use  of  Arthurian  myth,   in  today's imagery  and  tomorrow's style.
Ken   Norris's   language  about  George
Bowering's  poetry   kernels   his  criticism: "musical scores,"   "Creeleyesque,"  "Wil­ liamish," "proprioceptive,"  "processual," "crack  the   code   of   his   consciousness," even  the  Carman  Revisited of "incanta­ tory  invocation,"  ending with:  "neither the readers nor the poet is ever quite sure of   what   exactly   is  taking   place"-by way of  obscurity  one may experience illu­ mination? Robert Lecker  similarly  eulo­ gizes rather than  criticizes Daphne  Mar­ latt;   her    work,    he   comments,  blends  "sight and  emotion, heart  and  eye,"  "we are what we see," can comprehend reality  only  in  relation  to its "phenomenological inundation"  which   Marlatt finds  poetic

BOOKS IN REVIEW



voice to fix, a voice which  conceives crea­ tivity as "a diarrhoea of words," "absolute abandonment to flow."
Jack   David's  own  article   claims   that bp  Nichol's   concrete  and   sound   poetry digs back  to the auditory and  visual  roots to bring  new  life into  the  language-"if the reader  has not heard Nichol  chanting
'Dada Lama' then  he cannot imagine the donkey-like way  these  combinations are voiced."
But  I  like  best  Len  Early's article  on bill  bissett's  rejection of  conventions. He quotes   bissett:    "tastes   get  stratified and start  to stand  for  f  what  is permitted to
get  thru." The   examples quoted  of  the
concrete  poems   mostly   fail   to  compel, though he  does say that  some  at  least  of bissett "has  neither formal nor intellectual appeal,  and    seems   . . . essentially    the printed  equivalent  of  noise."   He   finds, however,  a religious, ritualistic side-his­ set  as shaman. I  also like  Frank Davey's article  "Atwood's Gorgon Touch," stress­ ing the sculptural quality of her language, her   preoccupation  with   space,  and   her way of "discrediting the 'games' by which mankind  converts  time  into  space." He sees her  as  presenting a  Gorgon face  to her   material-at once   shaping  it  and  freizing  it.
These    essays-together   with    pieces by Jan  Barthey  and  Eli Mandel -reflect one poetic  province, but  would  chart it as the  entire  "Brave New"  world.  Mandel's way  of putting it-"Poet  and  audience, once  in  opposition  to  each   other   as  art and  history,  now  are  coupled in  opposi­ tion  to  life  itself"-rests  on  the  fallacy that    poet    and    audience   are   in   fact coupled. Neither  Mandel's   article,  nor the  book  as a whole,  offers objective evi­ dence  to sustain  the  point.
From  the  Introduction to Helwig's an­ thology  one  could  conclude it a  frivolous  book,  for  he  says  he:    ( 1)   reads  critical articles  only  if he expects  to  enjoy  them,  ( 2)  has  a  healthy [sic]  distrust of edu-
 cated  opm10n, and  (3)  commissioned articles only from people whose work he knew-uneducated  entertainers one could   suppose.   But   the   book  has  some weight, including Helwig's own comment that  good critical literature has a tonal quality  of poise  and   urbanity lacking  in most  Canadian  criticism.
Peter  Harcourt's article on Allen King
as film maker-from Corne on Children whose "nice  kids" say "you're fucking  the shit outa  me man," to A Married  Couple where  two neurotics become  symptomatic of all  marriages-concludes that  King's "is   not   a   comforting  picture   of   our middle-class  world." Harcourt does not prove that  King's world  objectively repre­ sents anything other  than King, but  does illustrate that  at  least  up  to the film ver­ sion of  Who  Has  Seen  the  Wind, King's  films  present  characters  with  no  culture to   sustain    them,    a   culture  losing   its ability  to nurture its own  children.
Kathy  Mezei   quotes   Gilles   Marcotte ( "la  litterature fait  le pays, et le pays fait la litterature"), then  discusses how the Quebec novels  of  the  period   1goo-1 950 reflect  rural   and   traditional  values  and their collapse, those of the 195o's the alienation  syndrome,  and   those   of  the
196o's   the   new   world   of   revolution­
style changing accordingly. She speaks  of Gaston   Miron's  role   in   "inspiring and educating people" towards terrorism, and of the necessity of the writer  to be politic­ ally  engage.  In   disregard  of   extant  ex­ amples,  she asserts:  "the Epic of Quebec remains  to  be  written.  And  it  is strange that   it  is not  yet  risen  out  of  the  ashes of  the  October  crisis."  Her   article   well documents the  rise of  feminine conscious­ ness  in   Quebec   literature  and   signifi­ cantly   asks   whether  that   literature  is closing in on itself in an  incestuous circle. Nairn  Kattan,  writing of  the  Canada Council, argues  that  if the state  is to sub­ sidize  art,  the  process  must  be monitored by  the artistic  community, not  the  politi-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



cian,  that  French-Canadian literature has become  the  literature of Quebec whereas in  the  rest  of  the  country,  as small  pub­ lishers   took   over   from   the  commercial houses,  literature  rediscovered  "Canada as something  other  than  an  extension  of Europe"  even  though what  emerged  was a  regional  literature. He  regrets  that  the rejection   by   some   Quebec  writers    of Canada   Council  awards,   constitutes  a rejection    of   the    idea    of   recognizing  literary merit, and  that  the new national­ ism  has  generated  an  anti-Americanism
-a marginal phenomenon, he says, but does not discuss inter-regional bias in Canada. He  concludes that  the country's future  depends on  those  who  recognize it and  themselves  in  it.
Bronwen   Wallace   places  Alice  Munro in  a subject race  of women;  David  Mc­ Fadden  apotheosizes Christopher  Dewd­  ney and  Robert Fones;  Brian  Arnott  and Stan  Dragland, in  two excellent  articles,  respectively   explore   theatre   since   Ig6o and   reassess  the   "cinematic"  poetry   of James  Reaney.
And George Woodcock extols Margaret Laurence as a Canadian equivalent to Tolstoy,  Homer, Cervantes, Chaucer, and Dickens-on the basis, in relation  to her time  and  place,  of her  versatility  of  per­ ception, breadth  of  understanding,  ima­  ginative  power    to   personify   and   give symbolic   form,   range   of   collective   life interpreted, mythopoeic power, and recog­ nition   of  "the   national  imperative  and the  forces   that  militate  against   its  sur­ vival."  He  discusses  the  African   writing  as  well  as  that   set  in  Canada, and  con­ cludes  that her  vision  is that  of  the  true novelist whose plausible world plays a mythologizing role for society. She is, Woodcock  says,  "the best  of  our   place and  generation."
One  must at least acknowledge that Helwig  selects  the  intrepid for  inclusion in his anthology.
GLEN  CLEVER
 WORDS & POWER

ROLAND  GIGUERE,  Foret  vierge   folie.  L'Hexa­
gone, n.p.
PIERRE   MORENCY,  Torrentiel. L'Hexagone,
$4.00.
ANDRE BEAUCHAMP,  J'ai tant  cherche  [e Soleil.
Fides,  $8.g5.

AFTER  THE  PUBLICATION of  L' Age  de  la parole  in   I965,  La  Barre  du   four  pre­ pared  a special  issue on Roland  Giguere, including  statements  of  his  own  on  his exploration  of  the  relationship  between poetry   and   art.  Drawings  and   sketches had  gradually invaded the white  margins  surrounding   his   poems,   he   said,   until finally  they  had  chased   the  words  away and  occupied  the  page  by themselves.
Suitably, we find the same statement repeated   in    Giguere's   latest    volume, Foret vierge  folie, which appears as a preliminary synthesis  of the  poet's  efforts to  marry   art  and  poetry.   In  accordance with  the programme of l'Hexagone's "collection parcours,"  Foret   vierge   folie sets  out  to  trace  the  development of  the artist   in  the  multiple inspirations he  has absorbed over  the  years, in terms  of  liter­ ary   influence   as  well   as   "tout   ce   qui remue  autour des mots." As a  result,  the book   appears  like   a   brief    history,    in examples of Giguere's work, of  surrealism in  Quebec,  presenting, in  chronological order, poemes-collages, exhibition posters, reproductions of manuscript pages, photo­ graphs of  Giguere in  the "palais ideal  du Facteur   Cheval,"  of   primitive   art    in Giguere's   possession,  of  objects   he   has created  himself.   Interspersed  with   these illustrations and  always  arranged in close relation  to  them,   there   are   poems  and prose-texts illustrative of particular themes  and  techniques in Giguere's work. In   these  texts,  the  poet  is often   viewed as   a   privileged    being   whose   creativity allows  him  to  dive  below  the  surface   of reality   to  salvage   the  images   dreaming

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



there.   The   artist's  work   is  a  perpetual fight  against the  night   (significantly, one of  Giguere's exhibitions was  called  Pou­ voir  du  noir)  ; he  opens  a  window  onto an  unknown landscape;  he  constructs a fire escape; he is the  mechanic on a mo­ tionless  train  in  a  dark  tunnel. Like most surrealist poetry, Giguere's lends  itself to a statistical categorization of themes, since his choice of  vocabulary is restrictive and the  creation of  verbal  echoes  an  impor­ tant   part   of   his  poetic   technique.  But statistics   are,   at  least  in  Giguere's  case, self-defeating. Words,  despite  their famil­ iar  appearance and  sound,  are  not  to be trusted; they  may  return to  their speaker or   writer    "transfigurees   ou   defigures." The  writer   himself,  whom  Giguere   fre­ quently describes  as endowed with  magi­ cal   sensitivities,   cannot  be   sure   of   his creation and   must   regard  an   outsider's attempt at   rationalizing  his  work   with pity,  "La  nature ne  nous  aide  pas.  On l'imite  quand on  le peut,  mais  c'est  tout. Elle pousse, comme  elle veut,  folie, vierge, va  ou  bon  lui  semble." For  those  inter­ ested  in  the  development of  contempor­ ary   art   and   poetry    in   Quebec,  Foret vierge   folle  may   serve   as   an   excellent  introduction or  reminder,  whichever the case may be.
Whereas Roland  Giguere  bridges  the gap  between  art  and  poetry,  Pierre  Mor­ ency's   work   includes  both   poetry   and drama. Although his first published work was  a  volume   of  poetry   (Poemes   de  la froide merveille  de vivre, 1967), Morency claims  that  his  involvement with  theatre came   first,  and   that   reciting  verse   on stage,  while  a  student, has  had  a  lasting impact on  his attitude  towards language (d. interview with   Donald  Smith, Let­  tres   quebecoises   no.   12   [nov.    1978]). Morency's collection  of  poems,  Torren­ tiel,  reflects  a  fascination with  language that  could,  indeed, be  termed  theatrical. Frequently,  the   poet's    voice   manifests  itself  in   the  torrential  outpour  of  long
 unpunctuated lines, structured by the  re­ petition of sound, morpheme, and  gram­ matical  structure,

ces annees-13. ces  annees-la craquaient je m'en  souviens
chacune avait ses pauvres a Ia gorge  arretee
chacune avait  une  epouse chialant  dans   sa main  etc.

Not   surprisingly,  water    in   its   various forms  and  the  "periple," i.e., a long and complicated  journey,   are   among   Mor­ ency's  favourite images.  Torrentiel  itself takes  the  reader on  a  complicated  jour­ ney;   the   short   poems   introducing  the four   sections   of   the   volume   create   an illusion  of  numerical order, but  their  in­ sertion  appears arbitrary,  at  least  on  a rational level. Perhaps the poet is express­ ing   his  impatience  with   a  reader   who demands  the   existence   of  such   a  level when he threatens in  "faubourgs de bayol,"

je m'en  vais
je m'en  vais  vous  tailler une  poesie  lointaine
assez de tous  ces banes  facilcs  sur les estrades.

Unlike  Giguere and  Morency, Andre Beauchamp is not a poete revolte. The dustjacket describes  him  as the author of "travaux de  vulgarisation  religieuse," an epithet  which,   in  a  less  figurative and more  malicious sense,  also  describes   the book  under   review.   ]'ai  tant   cherche   le Soleil   contains  a   pot-pourri  of   texts: radio-plays, suspense stories, poems, reflec­ tions,  contes,  songs,  prayers,  all  roughly  held  together  through an arrangement by seasons: summer, fall, winter, spring. The  literary  quality of the  pieces ranges  from adequate  to  very  low,  but,  in  many   of them,  there  is an  annoying  tendency   to chum  up  to  the  reader, through a calcu­ lated   use  of   sentimentality,  jargon,   and religious  irreverence.  Compared  to  Gi­ guere's  and  Morency's,  Beauchamp's volume  appears like  an  anachronism, a return  to Frechette or  the  poetes du  ter­ roir. Language, in  Foret  vierge  folle and


133

BOOKS IN REVIEW



T orrentiel, is  a   power   to  be  reckoned with; in  j'ai  tant  cherche  le Solei!,  it  is often  a sorry  handmaiden.

EVA-MARIE KROLLER
 opaque jargon, delightful perhaps to racing   fans,   but   not  fully   accessible   to the  rest  of  us.
Harlow's metaphoric style is often effec­
tive:



GETTING IT TOGETHER

ROBERT HARLow,  Making  Arrangements.  Mc-
Clelland &  Stewart,  $12.95·

WHAT DO  vou  DO  when  you recognize an author's  talent,   but   fail  to   respond   to what  he has written? This  is the  problem with Robert Harlow's latest novel, Making Arrangements, much  of which  takes place in a seedy hotel  in downtown Vancouver, a locale frequented by loveable racing punters and   dedicated  whores,  none  of whom  fully comes  to life. It is a detective story in form,  but  the  tone  is comic.  The protagonists, headed  by an  ailing  retired detective, desperately seek to crack  a kid­ napping mystery  in  order  to raise  money to  put   down   on  a   horse   that  appears bound  to win  the  Friday  race. Hence  the title.  The idea,  though not  brilliant, does offer   possibilities   for   an  amusing  yarn. Harlow enlivens  the  somewhat dull  pro­ ceedings   with   a  satiric   account  of  the world   screwing   championship,  a  hard­ fought bout  between   a  well-hung Van­ couver   lad  ably  assisted  by  a  lass  from Stettler, Alberta, and  a sportsmanlike oil sheik   from   the   Persian   gulf   paired-off with   a   plucky   whore   from   downtown Vancouver. TV  announcers, Phyllis and Mike,  give a stroke-by-stroke commentary much   in  the   way  they  might   have  re­ ported  a dance  contest.  But  this  amusing  piece  of  sex  fantasy  is,  I  regret  to  say, much  the  best  part  of the  novel.
Harlow has  a  talent for  dialogue.   He has  mastered the  language of the  horse­ racing  set and  uses it to create  a fantastic yet  essentially   believable  world.  Unfor­ tunately, Harlow over-extends himself, so that   the  language  becomes,  at  times,  an
 
The lobby   was   like   an aircraft.   Every­ body  in  his  seat   between stops.  Lennie was doing  what   looked    like   stewardess duty, parading the  room. She  was  with  them but  not  of  them.

But  it  frequently  lapses  into   the  banal. The passage  quoted above  continues:

You   don't  talk   about  a   woman  anymore like  I want to  talk  about her.  She  was  slim but    generous  all   over.    She   was   like   an athlete  who'd  gone   a  little soft,   but   with none  of  the  ginger missing. Her face  was  a moon  slightly squashed down. Blue  eyes  the size  of  fists,  square teeth, and   blonde hair so  long  and   thick   it  always   hung down   her back   like  a  waterfall....  She  did  what she called custom screwing, and  for  premium prices. Goddam, she  was  a  star.

A successful detective story is usually concise    and    swift-paced,  but    Harlow slows down   the  reader with  an  unneces­ sary  wordiness. I would  not object  to the author holding me  back  if  he were  going to  amuse   me,  or  if  I felt  he  had  some­ thing   to  say,  a  perceptive  comment  on life perhaps, or  some skilful  characteriza­ tion.  But   this  doesn't happen.  There  is little   substance   to   the   novel,   and   the reader  is  frequently bogged   down.   Wil­ liam  Faulkner also  interrupts the  action  of   his   novels  and   forces   his  reader to wade  through convoluted sentences,  but Faulkner's  over-writing usually  has  the­ matic significance; it  recreates a  special atmosphere,  or   pinpoints a   character. Moreover,  Faulkner   writes    with    pas­ sionate  intensity  about   issues   that  he makes  us  feel  are  significant. The  char­ acters  and  situations he  creates  leave  an indelible  impression on  the  mind.  What we get in Harlow is the overwriting with­ out  the humour or the significance. Once  I had  finished  reading Making  Arrange­ ments, I promptly forgot  most  of the epi-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



sodes  and   the   characters,  and   when   I picked  up  the  novel  again  to write  about it, I found  I had  to reread  it in  order  to recall  the details.
Making   Arrangements   should    have
had  a  rigorous   editing before  it  was set to print. If Harlow can  learn  to curb  his tendency to  overwrite, and  if he  can  be more selective in his presentation of characters  and   situations,  he   may   yet realize  his  potential as a  writer.

MICHAEL BENAZON


SEISMOGRAPH

ROss    LABRIE,  The   Art   of  Thomas  Merton.
Texas  Christian  Univ.  Press,   $I r.oo;  pa.
$8.oo.

WAS THOMAS  MERTON important  enough as a writer  for his art  to be studied? Since he  gained   fame   with  The Seven   Storey Mountain, does  he  not  belong  primarily in  the  realm   of  apologetics rather  than literature? To  such   possible  objections, Ross  Labrie  must   provide  answers.   His first chapter, "Contemplative and  Artist," implies  that  Merton was especially signi­ ficant  because  he had  a well  thought out view  of  the  special  importance of  relig­ ious writing in  the  twentieth century. He countered the prevailing secularism  of his world  by  insisting  that  art  is relevant to religion,  religion   is  relevant  to  art,  and  the two of  them  are  necessary  to the con­ stitution of society. The artist, like a seis­ mograph, registers  the  collapse  of  mean­  ing  in  his  culture, a  collapse  which  ex­ tends   to  philosophy and   theology.   Per­ haps  the  best  way  to  approach  contem­ porary    problems,   therefore,  is  through art.   Far    from   being   too   materialistic, modern man  is  not  materialistic enough: he  does  not  place  enough  value  on  the things   around   him.   The  artist   is  con­ cerned  with  ontological reality; he  tries to  give   the   world   another  chance,  by
 rejecting the  abrasive   and  synthetic  pat­ tern  of modern life and  trying  to restore  the  face  of  nature  and   the  rhythm of natural  time.  If he  does   not   possess  a religious   vision,   however,   he   may   be caught in subjective abstractionism.
In  Labrie's exposition of it, Merton's rationale for  his  art  takes  on  coherence, and   if  there   are  parts   of  it  which   one might  wish to dispute, it at least raises interesting questions.
Merton's own  literary career, however, was  full  of  paradoxes and   even  contra­ dictions.  At the  end  of The  Seven Storey Mountain, he  described  himself  as  seek­ ing  the  anonymity of   the  contemplative life;   his   journey   to   the   monastery  of Gethesemani had  been a  journey  towards darkness,  the  darkness  of  the  great  mys­ tics and  the presence of God.  But Labrie's chapter  on   his   diaries   shows   his   later  changes; it is almost  as if Newman, hav­  ing   written   the   Apologia, had   decided that   that  classic account of a  conversion reflected only a phase  in his life and  had gone off  to join Charles Kingsley in settle­  ment work among the London poor. The Sign   of  Jonas,    dealing  with    Merton's monastic   life  until   1952,  takes  isolation from  the  world  as  a  theme and  exhibits a  profound sense  of  community. Not  so the  next  journal, Conjectures of a Guilty Bystander, which  shows him  turning into a  social  activist  of  the  sixties.  What  was a Trappist monk,  by vocation a silent and contemplative man,  doing siding  with a dissident  priest  like  Daniel Berrigan, calling  the Kerouacs and  the Ginsbergs "Pretty big  prophets," and   trying  to  de­ velop  a  poetic   style  which   was  earthy, iconoclastic, and  profane? If a  monk  out  of his cloister  is like a fish out  of  water,  why did  Merton take  trips  to California, New Mexico, and  Alaska, before  the final one  to  Asia  which  resulted  in  his  acci­  dental death? In  The  Waters of  Siloe,  he himself  wrote that  the  world  can  take its  revenge  on  those  who  choose  to  lead

135

BOOKS IN REVIEW



contemplative lives, and  it does so "when the   men   who   live  in   monasteries  pay more  attention to  the  gifts  of  men  than to  the  gifts  of  God,  when  they  begin  to depend  on  the  example and   the  tactics of the  world...." Did not  the world  take such  a  revenge   on  him,  making   him  a self-divided man? Did he really think he could  be  contemplative, up  to a  point?
Out of  such  tensions,  of course,  great art  could  have come:  unfortunately it did not. After  chapters on him as a narrative writer,  diarist, and  essayist, Labrie  takes up  his poetry,  in much  the  longest chap­ ter  in  the  book. One  of the  considerable merits  of  this  study  is  that  Labrie does not  usually  claim  too  much  for  his sub­ ject; in fact,  he perhaps under-rates some of the  religious  writings. In  his discussion of  the   poetry,   however,   he  does  see  a pattern   of    development,   a   movement from  verse which  is too derivative or glib or  even,  as  Merton himself  put  it,  "just  hanging out  the  wash  and  letting it float in  the  breeze,"   towards   the  maturity of Cables to the  Ace  ( rg68)   and  The Geog­ raphy of Lograire  ( rg6g), both  of which are  long attacks on  technocracy and  in­ deed    the    whole    of   Western    culture. Labrie  calls   the   latter   a   distinguished poem; his explication of its intricate sym­ bolism  establishes its essential  coherence, but   he   is  not   able   to  show   that   this "summa of offbeat anthropology" is suffi­ ciently  compelling  in  its style  or  subject  matter to warrant close critical  attention.
In fact  I feel that  from the first chapter on,   the   book  goes  downhill;  there   are some  high  points  along  the  way, such  as the discussion of The Seven Storey Moun­ tain,  and  The Sign  of Jonas, but  it  is a descent  from  them  to summas  of offbeat anthropology.  The   conclusion,  which   is short   and   fairly   perfunctory,   reinforces  that  impression. Labrie  thinks  that  Mer­  ton's  writings,  whether in poetry  or prose, "have a  beautiful  fullness  and  integrity," and   that   The  Seven  Storey   Mountain,
 The Sign  of Jonas,  and  The Geography of  Lograirie    reached  heights   that   will secure  his  place  in  twentieth-century letters  for  some  time  to come. The claim does    not    seem   substantiated.   Merton wrote  fifty  books,  none  of which,  unfor­ tunately, seems  likely  to  secure  him  an enduring literary reputation. If  he  con­ tinues  to  attract attention, it  will be  for extra-literary  reasons.
D. J. DOOLEY



EXPLORERS
& RUNAWAYS

DAVID   WEST,  Franklin and  McClintock.  Inter­
media Press,  n.p.
KENNETH   MCROBBIE, First  Ghost   to  Canada.
Turnstone Press,  n.p.
WILLIAM  BAUER,  The  Terrible Word.  Fiddle­
head Poetry  Books,  n.p.
MARILYN   BOWERING,   The   Visitors Have    all
Returned. Press  Porcepic, $5-95·
THESE  FOUR  BOOKS  span  a  wide  range of reference. At one extreme lie David West's  poems  on  public  occasions  of  his­ tory;  at  the  other is Marilyn  Bowering's fiction  of  private fantasies.
Enlarging on documents of the arctic voyages  of  Sir  John  Franklin and  Cap­ tain  Leopold McClintock, West's  Frank­  lin    and    McClintock    reconstructs   the journeys    of   these   explorers.   In    1845
Franklin  set  out   to  find   the   northwest
passage; in  1857  McClintock set  out  to find  Franklin, who  was at  first as elusive as the  passage:

This is the  one  wreck they'll never  find, those  explorers
and searchers after my  bones.

Ice  caught Franklin's ships  ("the  undis­ covered   passage   closes  on   them") , and  cold  and  immobility  become  the  princi-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



pal  ideas  of the  Franklin poems.  Despite Franklin's attempts  to  acclimatize  him­ self with  ice-water baths,  the  implacable freeze  gets   the   better  of   the   warm­ blooded    explorer.   McClintock  and   his company,  too,  are   trapped  by  ice,  but their  "fire  inside" flickers on  through the polar   winter  until  the  "pack  rolls"  and they  are  released.   Finally   they  discover and enumerate the remains of the Frank­ lin  expedition, cataloguing peculiar arti­ facts  left  by man  in  a  "no  man's  land." West  is taken  by the  "explorer's art":
"although I they  jotted  I prose in yellow journals  I one  could  not  say  I that  they
wrote...."  To   refine  the  "jottings," he
turns  to various  forms of discourse -dia­ logue  and   paragraph as  well  as  concise stanzas-to    reveal    the   diverse   voices within   these  remote  events. The story  is important  to   West,   but   so,   too,  is  its intricate  verbal  appearance.
So alien  is the landscape against which men act in Franklin and McClintock that human purpose and  human event  show starkly.  In  First  Ghost  to  Canada,  Ken­ neth  McRobbie pictures a more congenial  traffic  between   man   and   environment: even  in  cold  and   winter  he discovers  a metaphysical comfort unknown to West's Franklin and  McClintock.
Setting absorbs  action  in McRobbie's poems,  with  the  stylistic  result  of a high ratio of verbals to verbs. In "The Great Transformation"  participial  phrases  ac­ cumulate to  arrest  images  at  their  inter­ section  with  idea:

A smell of flags
from  clothes hanging behind the  door
dark with  work,  warming as

in  through both  windows comes first daylight straight to the  heart
scraping night's thunder
from  the  tongue, casting bloody  bones out  of  sky's  conserving power   of  space
into Rouge river's liberal time.

At  the  other  end  of  his style,  McRobbie
 develops  an  accentual  regularity to  cap­ ture   complicated   notions   coming   and going:
The snow  is  a skin, it  is the  earth
growing  a  world
for  the  air again.

In  The  Terrible World   William  Bauer makes  some  departures from  the  pheno­ menal  world  that  attracts  West and  Mc­ Robbie.  The first  section  of  his  volume contains   poems   about   poems,   through which   Bauer   negotiates   the   terms   on which  the  reader   will  accept   the  poems that  follow.  In  "An  Elusive  One" Bauer
warns that  this poem "runs I so far ahead
of the praise  the world  I would  give it it
is gone."  Subsequent sections  offer  more
runaways,   careening  towards   Bauer's vision of hectic  licence,  as on  the  "night
that  Willy Sturn  I cancelled all the rules."
Free-wheeling poems  "from Twelvebelly
the  Ogre"  tell about a  tyrant whose vast castle houses wonders. After dinner, Twelvebelly  belches like a "distant battle­
field of cannons I And  retires  to his com­
fortable den"  to  sing  hugely,  deeply, touchingly   a  "hearty song  I Of  melan­ choly    woe    I  And    vibrant    booming  beauty  I All compounded."
Especially   fine   are   Bauer's    "Elegaic
Stanzas  in  Honour of  Mr.  Herbert  Bar­ ber,  Barber." With  some  dire  puns  and ironies   these   verses   commemorate  the deceased,  and   wittily  celebrate  his  gar­  rulous  mediocrity.
Marilyn  Bowering's The Visitors  Have all  Returned  is  "experimental"   fiction, but its innovations draw  it towards  poetry. Bowering presents action elliptically; consequently her chapters have  the struc­ tural  status  of poems  collected  to address  a  unifying   theme.   In The  Visitors  the speaker's  theme  is her  detachment from her  husband   and,  eventually and  omin­  ously, from  her  daughter, and  her  resort to   private   images   of  ancient,  childless figures  traversing a  mythic  pastoral.

BOOKS IN REVIEW



When  the plotted connections  among narrative  units   are   missing,  prose  loses some  of  the  ordinary signs of coherence and  cohesion.  Bowering  supplies  this  de­ ficiency  with   relentless  reference   to  the narrator,  a   young   woman   of   inwardly spiralling self-consciousness;  the  stylistic outcome is an  extraordinarily  heavy inci­ dence  of first  person  pronouns.  A second feature of Bowering's style is related: she writes simple sentences unencumbered by qualifying   appositives  or   verbals.   This dearth of ornament parallels  the speaker's detachment from  her  surroundings, for it argues  her  indifference to audience, and a  carelessness  about exhibiting   any  per­ suasive  elaboration that   might  attract a reader  into  her  world.
Can  prose succeed  without the conven­ tional   materials of  cohesion  and  attrac­ tiveness?  If the  reader   can  take  to  this speaker,   in  all  her  focussed  self-interest, then  The Visitors works.

JANET GILTROW



NEWFOUNDLAND LETTERS

PATRICK  o'FLAHERTY,    The Rock    Observed: Studies in the  Literature of Newfoundland. Univ. of  Toronto Press,  $rs.oo.

"To EXPLORE THE  WHOLE of  Newfound­ land's   printed literature,"  writes  Patrick O'Flaherty in  the  final  chapter  of  The Rock  Observed, "is  to  become  aware  of the  richness   of  a  body  of  writing   long neglected"-neglected, one must  assume, by both  readers and scholars. The  former, of course,  have  not done so by choice  but by chance: until  recently  the early litera­ ture   of   Newfoundland  has  simply  been inaccessible,  even   to   Newfoundlanders. O'Flaherty  himself   has  done   much   in recent   years  to  help   remedy  that  situa­ tion.  The scholars   have  perhaps  always

138
 assumed  that  the literature of  Newfound­ land    was    not    worth    their    attention. O'Flaherty  now  sets  out  to  correct that  error:  to  show  that  not  only  is  there  a substantial  "body"   of   literature  to   be read,   but   that   it  is  of  a  "richness" also unsuspected.  Does  he  succeed?  I  think not.
To  begin with,  fully one-third of O'Fla­ herty's  book  is  taken   up   with   political  history  which  he supposes necessary  to an intelligent appreciation  of  the  literature. While  such  a  supposition cannot  be dis­ missed,  his  method of  merely  recounting the  history  and   then   moving   on  to  the literature-quite often only tenuously linking  the two-is unsatisfactory. While
I  am  not  at  all convinced that   the  over­ abundance of  historical fact  is  essential  to  an  understanding of   Newfoundland's literary  works,  I  might  have   been   had O'Flaherty merged   an  analysis  of  both,  thereby   achieving a  much  more  efficient cause-and-effect  argument.
More  disturbing  than   that   is   O'Fla­ herty's primary concern to show  that  any uncomplimentary  literature   written  by "outsiders" is  nothing more  than   "lies,"  while   that   which   flatters   is   the   truth. Thus  we  find   him   approving   of  such writers as  Laurence  Coughlan, who  rec­ ognizes  "the distinctiveness of the  people,  a  distinctiveness evident   to  Coughlan in the impressive way  they  had  learned the special  skills demanded by the Newfound­ land   milieu." He   similarly  approves  of William   Thoresby,   for    whereas     "the primitive  scene   would   produce  sneers about  'savages' from  the  unsympathetic observers,    . . .   Thoresby's   observations are  marked by  gentleness and   fairness." By  contrast,   "the  picture conveyed   by Reeves   in   parts   of  his  book   of   "poor labouring   fishermen,'  'spoiled    and   de­ voured'  by  merchants and  'left  wholly  at their   mercy'    was   a   distortion  of   the truth." And  Edward Chappell "is simply

BOOKS IN REVIEW



not  to be trusted  as  an  authority on  any subject," because  he  pictured  Newfound­ land   "as  a  remote,  peculiar,  barbarous, and   little   known   backwater  of  civiliza­ tion." Such  a  distinction is simplistic,  for it ignores  the  acknowledged complexities of  travel   literature-- that   many   of  its techniques are fictional ones and  its meta­  phors  are often  as  truthfully-revealing as its facts.
When   O'Flaherty  turns   his  attention to native  Newfoundland writers he is on surer  ground, but  he  is still  unnecessarily preoccupied   with   non-literary  matters. The  reader  wishing  to gain  some sense of the development of a Newfoundland literature will be disappointed. Only  in passing  do  we  learn, for  example, that Ottawah, the  Last  of   the  Red  Indians was  "the   first   novel   set   in   Newfound­ land." Not  a literary gem  to be sure, but, more  important, we never  do learn  from O'Flaherty's brief  discussion of the litera­ ture   dealing  with  Beothucks  that   there were  two other novels,  much  more  inter­ esting  than   Ottawah, written about   the Beothucks  and  by a Newfoundlander: Arthur English's The  Vanished  Race (1927)   and  Ogygia  (1930).
The reader expecting literary criticism
or even an evaluation of the achievement of Newfoundland writers  (of whom  there are several good ones)  will be equally disappointed. Harold  Horwood, the  best of its present-day writers, we are  told, has only managed to provide "a  distorted  pic­ ture  of Newfoundland to foreign  [Cana­
dian?]  readers" and   E.  J. Pratt had,  by
migrating to the mainland, discarded "his
ancestral  claim    on   the   Newfoundland experience." The richness  of  Newfound­ land's literature, then-the evocation-of the  Newfoundland  experience  in  its  bal­ lads,   folklore,   poetry    and    novels;   the artistic   perceptions  of   such   writers   as Horwood and  Janes; the  word-wizardry of  Ray   Guy-is  still,  in  spite   of  The
 Rock Observed, a woefully neglected sub­
ject.
R.  G.  MOYLES



RETRIEVING THE PAST

HUGH Hooo, Reservoir  Ravine. Oberon, n.p.
WILLIAM   BAUER,   A  Family   Album.  Oberon,
$Is.oo; pa.  $6.gs.
RESERVOIR   RAVINE,   the   third   novel   in Hugh  Hood's projected twelve-volume cycle The  New Age, moves ahead  in time to show  us Mathew Goderich, fifty years old, alone, and  "in  the middle  way of the misty  ravine   ... looking   at   the  fading autumn sky" and  trying  to locate  himself through the  re-creation of  those  decades in  Toronto preceding his  birth  in  which his parents met, courted and  married. We don't learn  that  this story of Isabelle  and Andrew  is Mathew's creation until Chap­ ter  Eleven,  where  he  begins  to speak  of himself in the first person  and  to shift  his attention away from the story into lengthy  commentary on  design,  and  the  relation­ ships   between    history,   philosophy  and narrative.
Mathew, an  art   historian by  trade, is more  of an  artist  and  less of a  historian here  than  in  the  earlier books.  Whereas The  Swing  in  the  Garden  and   A  New Athens   are   dominated   throughout   by Mathew's humourless and  pedantic voice, the  story  here   is  presented  as  if  by  an omniscient narrator until  Chapter Eleven compels  us  to  re-examine the  whole  and to see it as  Mathew'<: attempt at  a  com­ plete  imaginative identification  with  the events  of his  parents' youth,  engaged   in at a time when  his mother alone  lives on, solitary   in   a   nursing   home.    Mathew thinks  of  both  reservoirs  and  ravines   as forms   of   memory;  therefore,  Reservoir Ravine  represents an  imaginative act  of memory  at   a  double   remove.   It is  an attempt  to  understand  the  forces  which

139

BOOKS IN REVIEW



have  made   Mathew  what   he  is  by  re­ creating  them    in   fiction.   Yet   George  Woodcock   is  surely   correct   in   arguing that  Hood  is much  closer to  Balzac  than  to Proust.  The  focus is almost entirely  on the world out there,  not at all on its trans­  formation through  the  mind   of  the  ob­ server.
The story  proceeds  through a series of
memorable set-pieces: Isabelle,  dressed as a  boy,  attends a  Hart House  debate   on the  League  of Nations; she and  Andrew watch  the burning of the money after  the Domestic  and  Foreign  Bank of Upper Canada goes bankrupt in 1923; Hal  from the  'peg  tells them  of his involvement in the Winnipeg General Strike  of rgrg; Andrew  proposes  to  Isabelle  in a  "magi­ cal, sunny  cave  of ice";  and  there is the almost   mandatory  (in   a   Hood   novel) Catholic marriage  ceremony. The  static  quality,  suggesting  a  grouping  of  illus­ trative    tableaux   rather   than    the    dy­ namic  interaction  of characters develop­  ing  through   time   that   we  traditionally associate  with  the  novel,  seems  to  come from  Mathew's belief,  shared   by  Hood,  that  although "events seem  linear,  pure being isn't  linear  in any way.''  In each  of these incidents, as in all his writing,  Hood integrates personal, national and  univer­ sal  history  into  a  religious  design which values  each  detail   both. for  itself  and  its contribution to the harmony of the whole. Time  is seen as at once linear and  spatial, depending  on   the   perspective    of   the viewer;  in Mathew's words:  "human his­ tory requires  a double  mode  of existence, an  eternal  state  prior  to temporal being, and that eternal bliss reintegrated through time."
Reservoir  Ravine is not entirely success­ ful   in  suggesting   this   double   mode   of existence.    Sometimes   Mathew's   belief that  "no  voice  is wholly  lost"  makes  him the  tedious  old  bore  he  suspects  he  may seem. Hood's awkwardness with sex, with
 ordinary conversation, and  with  women repels   the   reader  when   involvement   is most necessary. Least  convincing is the novel's  claim  that   "Canadianism  is the seeing-of-man-as-religiously-political." Yet despite  these reservations, I find the novel and  the series of which it is a part fascinating for their  ambitious attempt to place  Canadian life  within   the  patterns of Western literary, religious  and  political traditions and  to transform our ways of seeing  through fiction.
William   Bauer's A  Family Album  is a collection  of   clever   stories   which   self­
consciously  play about with  point  of view and  the  interactions between  fantasy  and reality,    memory    and   observation. The stories  are  artifacts, superficially  as  obvi­ ous   and    ultimately   as    mysterious   as photos  in  a  family  album.  "How Babies are   Made,"  an   excerpt   from   a  longer  work,  is the  least  interesting. The  pom­  pous  narrator  is more  involved  in coining  phrases   (like  "fleshfiction truthlie")  and commenting  on  the  nature of fiction  (as in  the  following: "But  what   people  like to  fancy   is  the   appropriate  or  the  ex­ pected,   giving   them   clear  lines  to  com­ prehension, giving  the tellers of  varnished tales  lucid   plots,  is  seldom  what   trans­ pires")  than  he  is  in   the   lives  of  his adolescent   characters.   The   five   short  stories   are   more  successful   in  engaging interest, but  only "What Is Interred With  Their Bones"  is  memorable. The   narra­ tor's  inquiry  into the  deaths   of  two  old women,  named  Annie  and   Anna,   paro­ dies  the  Canadian  fascination for  family chronicle  and   accuses  the  reader of   vo­ yeurism   for  his  desire  to  enter   into  the lives of strangers. Easy affirmations about the  availability of the  past  are  denied  us, as are  most  of the  traditional  rewards for reading  fiction.   This   is   clearly   Bauer's intent, yet  it  seems  self-defeating in  this collection.
DIANA BRYDON

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



AFTER DESCARTES

H. C.  AR.TMANN, MICHAEL BULLOCK,  R.IKKI DUCORNET,    Contemporary Surrealist   Prose, vol. I. Intermedia Press, $7-95·
ANDR.E   BOURASSA,   Surrialisme et  litterature quebecoise.  L'Etincelle, $8.oo.

DESCARTES MIGHT   BE    turning  in   his grave,    but    neither   H.    C.    Artmann, Michael Bullock,  nor  Rikki  Ducornet would   care.   They   might  even   be   per­ versely   happy   about    it.   Since   Andre  Bourassa   is  but  a  scholar it  is  hard   for anyone  to   know   where   he   stands.  He might   be  sympathetic  to  the  Prince   of Reason, just  as he might attempt to per­  suade   him   of  the  virtues  of  surrealism. He  has  been  down and  around the many labyrinths of  his  hallucinatory  creations which,  by now, must  be more  familiar to him  than   his  own  home.
Contemporary  Surrealist   Prose  offers us a selection  of short  narratives by  Art­ mann,  Bullock,   and   Ducornet;  Surrea­  lisme  et litterature  quebecoise is a survey of  surrealism  in  Quebec and  an  assess­ ment  of its beginnings, developments and achievements. Both the collection of prose poems and  the scholarly study  are  tempt­ ing invitations into  a bizarre  realm  where corpses  are  exquisite, or,  if one  is to  be­ lieve  Michael Bullock,  where  pale  green voices  are   powerful  enough   to  cut   off birds in flight. Surrealist texts usually aim at   enchanting  as   much   as   frightening their  audience. Ultra-impressionable souls therefore   should    be   discouraged  from such reading, and  only the amateurs de sensations     fortes     will    appreciate    its merits: a solitary  house, creaky  floors and gurgly  pipes  could   be  interesting, albeit non-essential props.  We are  in good com­ pany  here.  The three  story-tellers as well as  critic-literary  historian  Bourassa  take us  up  and  around  the  tortuous path   of the  surrealist  imagination.
The  fiction  writers  subtly  complement each  other. Rikki  Ducornet has  the  wit-
 tiest mind,  and  her  "Five  stories" exhibit two virtues  which  rarely  coexist  in  prose poems:   humour and   a  flair  for  drama. Her   narratives make   us shudder at  the very   moment  when    we   explode    with laughter-not   an   easy   feat.    Michael Bullock's  style  lacks   this  razor-like   ten­ sion  but  it  has  other merits; it  delves, dredges  and   seduces-slowly:  his  tales seem written  for  thoughtful, pensive  and  maybe  clumsy  children who  have  strokes of  genius   while   they   bump  into   heavy furniture. It  is  writing   which   lets   us hibernate warmly  in our souls and  return with  flashes of quiet  illumination. H.  C. Artmann (translated  here  from  the  Ger­  man  by Derk  Wynand)  is  the  least  de­ manding of  all  three:  his  complex  con­ structions unfold  with  a tighter, mechani­ cal   rigour   which   takes   away   from   the imaginative  leaps   and   somersaults that the  other  two  force  on  their  reader.
Bourassa's  historical and  critical  forays
into  the  world   of  surrealism  in  Quebec merit   very  careful  reading,  first  of  all because  they clarify  the intricate and  not often  understood ties between  surrealism and  automatism; secondly,  because  their author helps  us  perceive   them  not  as  a movement  (with   a   beginning,  an   end, and  tombstones to the  glorious  dead)  but rather as  a  maniere   d'etre, a  creativity which  will express itself in years to come.
The   questions  that   he  raises -what was  the  role  and   the  place   of  Quebec artists  and poets in the development of surrealist aesthetics - are   worth   careful consideration. His analysis of the ideologi­ cal   forces   at   work   in   surrealist  mani­ festos  (the  rejection of  autocratic forms of government such as Fascism,  Stalinism or "Duplessisme")  is both  perceptive and illuminating. Yet  it  would  have  been  to Bourassa's  advantage   to  have   kept   the examination of poetic  texts separate from his investigation of the art and literary magazines   of  this  period   and   from   his scrutiny   of   these   writers'   interactions,

J4.I

BOOKS IN REVIEW



correspondences, and   movements across the  map  of  Europe and  North  America. Literary history  has  its  place-and  not a  negligible  one -in  a work  of  scholar­ ship.  But  its  virtues   do  not  coexist  very happily  with  the  more  rigorous  demands of  criticism,  and   the  book  as  a  whole suffers  from  this  uneasy  blend.
In  spite  of  these  flaws  Surrealisme  et
litterature quebecoise offers an incursion into   a  tantalizing  universe.  One   should not  hesitate to chart its course-or follow those devised by Contemporary Surrealist Prose-without worrying much about   Descartes; he,  unfortunately, had too much  sense to delight  in the wonders
of nonsense.
CAROLINE  BAYARD



HEART/BODY HARMONY

ANNE  LE   DRESSAY, This  Body That   I  Live  ln.
Turnstone Press,  n.p.
ALAN     SAFARIK,  The   Heart  Is  Altered.  Black­
fish  Press,  n.p.
CYRIL DABYDEEN,  Heart's  Frame. Vesta,  $4.50. DAVID     WALTNER-TOEWS,   The   Earth   Is   One
Body. Turnstone, $5.00.

EACH OF THE FOUR books reviewed  here has  either "heart" or  "body" in  its  title. After  I  read   them  it  became  clear  that this was more  than  a meaningless coinci­ dence   for  I  discovered   that  these  poets share  a  remarkably  similar  attitude. All four   writers   are  conscious  of  a  oneness between  self and  the  world. Their poems give  voice  to  a  sense  of   the  integrated wholeness  of things  which is strongly  sug­ gestive   of  the   English   romantic  poets. The   Earth  Is  One   Body,  the   title   of Waltner-Toews'    book,   comes   close   to summarizing    this    attitude.   They    use either the body or the heart, an organism  or an organ, as a symbol for an "organic"
 view  of  life,  but  manage to  express  the view only with varying degrees  of success.
Le   Dressay's   book  is  a  collection  of short,  personal  statements written in a colloquial voice. The pieces often  unite intimate self-revelation with  a sense of epiphany. "The  Window-Washer" is  a good example. Noticing a window-washer looking  at  her  makes  Le Dressay  want  to deny  that   the  sight  she  presents  is what
she really is: "This isn't me you see here  I
at  this  typewriter I doing  nothing while
you work."  In  this,  the  first  poem  of the
collection, she discovers  a type of  aliena­ tion.  In many   of  the  subsequent  pieces she  labours to  establish  a  harmony be­ tween   what  she desires  and   what  is. In "October"  and  "This Body  That I  Live In" her  manner is not  far  removed  from  that  of  Bliss Carman, the Canadian poet who  most  strongly   stresses  a  correspon­ dence   between   mood   and   environment. In both  cases  her  sadness  is reflected  in
nature: by rain  or  by "the slow  death  I
of  the  gentle  summer." But  the  pathetic
fallacy   remains a  cliche.   Le  Dressay   is more successful  in "Climbing," a piece which  voices the Wordsworthian idea of nature as a moral  force:

the  strange feeling h:>Jfway up that if I leaned back
or  even  stood  up  straight, the shale would  betray me and   the  valley  reach up
to  pluck   me  from   the  frowning hill
for  my  insolence.

Although  one   is  immediately  reminded of The  Prelude, this  is not  a mere  faded copy  of  an  old  master. The vigour  and vividness  of childhood memories create  a suspenseful moment.  We  see  the  scene; we feel  the  tension.
There is one teasing  glimpse of another side to her writing in "Midafternoon," where  Le Dressay  reveals a skill for caric­ ature  and   satire.   This   is  a   power   she ought to develop.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



In Alan Safarik's view "the heart  is altered" by all experience and  for  him experience includes  the  immensities of space  and   the  narrowness of  the  grave. Like  every  metaphysical poet  he  can  see a direct relationship between  micro-  and macrocosm because  "everything is inside the   mind"  ("Marijuana  Flowers").  At his  best  Safarik can   move  with  breath­ taking  swiftness from  a personal  to a cos­ mic frame of reference :

On  a  blanket in  the  park   they  lay
Two people, lovers  by the  hour they  play
at being  soft  shelled creatures
What talk  is  this  she  said  moving closer
He  put  his  arms  about her
And  held  her  tight like  the  grave. Beneath the  black  treed canopy
Nothing is moving, yet  the  wind  that sweeps the  sky of clouds and  clear moonlight turning the  grass  white is  never ending
("What There Is Is  Never  Ending")

Two  people  engaged  in  the  simple  act  of love  are  linked   by  the  imagery   to  both the finite  and  the  infinite. Suggestions of
 Spaces,"  is largely  devoted to Dabydeen's exploration of the relationship between "heart" and   world.   In   "A  Legend"  he puts  forth  the concept of a force,  present in  everything, which  bids  and  gives  mo­ tion  to  all  creation:
There is a  man  who  knows  the  seasons at  his finger  tips
who  holds  the  sky at  a  tilt

He's  in  the  bone  marrow beating in  the  blood
he's  enshrined

in  us all.

He  also  finds  that  the   heart   yearns   to escape   the   isolated    individual  to   find union  with  another in love:
heart falls  in  love leaving home trembling with  doubt desperation
heart wants to leave the  body
to begin
in  a world  of its own

man's  enslavement  of   death  and   time
("like  the  grave," "white" grass)  are mingled with hints of timelessness ("soft shelled  creatures" whose  fossils last  eons, the  "moonlight" that is "never ending"). In   the   title   poem   Safarik  presents   the cosmos  as  an   organism  of  which   every living  thing  is a cell :

Millions of  years  ago,  measured
by  the  speeding light, an  enormous bomb smaller than a  molecule
the  heavens are  the  battered heart
One  creature, call  it  a creature, mo·ving wider  and  wider  with  every  organism born multiplication by death is  regeneration
("The Heart Is  Altered")

Where   Safarik's heart is  "altered"  by experience, Cyril  Dabydeen's is "framed" by it. The title,  Heart's Frame, suggests a painting: a heart  within  a frame. Accord­ ing  to  Dabydeen  we  learn   and   under­ stand  through the  heart, in  other words, through the emotions. The book is divided  into  three  parts.  The first section,  "Open
 ("Heart's Frame")

Everything is related. A common impulse dwells in every  heart.
The second   part   of  the  book  is,  per­ haps,  a nod  to W. W. E. Ross.  The  title of  this  section,  "Shapes and  Shadows," reminds  one of Ross's collected  poems en­ titled  Shapes  and  Sounds, and  many  of the   poems  are   in   a  Ross-like  imagism.  This  is the  weakest  section.  The   poems, mainly  descriptive,  do  not  work.
"Tropics," the  final  part, regains   the
fine  quality   of  the  first.  Dabydeen  is  a native  of Guyana and  in  these  poems  he returns home.  The  pieces  are  deeply  per­ sonal  and   usually   nostalgic.  Like  many literary   journeys  this  one  is really  about the  artist's  self-discovery:
we'll  go back once in  a  while  opening our  hearts not  to  perfect
hate-only
conquering selves
( "Crossing")

143

BOOKS IN REVIEW



Before  I leave  Dabydeen one  question comes  to mind. Why  is such  good  poetry stranded in such a poorly prepared book? The  paper is so thin  and  the type so thick and  black  that  one can easily see through a page  to the  print on the other  side. Moreover, the  print is smeared  in places and  the cover is extremely  unappealing. David    Waltner-Toews' The   Earth    Is One  Body  is the  best of these four  books. It possesses  a  richness  of  language and image which surpasses the other three. Waltner-Toews  is   a   prairie  poet   and "The Golden Sea"  is an  excellent  evoca­ tion of  the  Western landscape. Lines like the  following make  it a  likely  candidate for future anthologies:

The golden sea  between the  shining seas overseas the  warm bread   and  steaming
porridge
of  half  the  landborne  world

is more terrible in  its  expansive silences its  white-capped storms
than the  hair-mad Viking conquests more  demanding of its  novices
than the  God  of  Leviticus

The  poem  is exciting to read. Most of his other   pieces  are  of comparable quality.
Once  again  we have a poet who is con­ scious  of  an  organic  oneness  underlying all   things.   The   middle   section  of  The Earth  Is One  Body  is made  up of poems about  his   travels    in   Guadaloupe  and  India  and   his   thoughts   on   Chile   and  Palestine. He   writes   of  children    being born  in  the streets  of Calcutta, of cutting sugar  cane in Guadaloupe, and  of torture in  Chile.  The section's  title,  "The Com­  mon  Pain," indicates the oneness of man­ kind through suffering.  Waltner-Toews also asserts the idea of unity on a more personal level  in  poems  such  as  "Marr­ iage  (Metamorphosis) " where  he speaks of his wife and  himself  as  becoming  one maple,  of  their   rootedness  in  the  prairie  soil, and  of their  change with  the seasons.
The    seventies   have   been   called   the
"me" decade. These  four  books, all writ-
 ten  in  the  last  year  of  that  decade, belie this description. They  show  us four  poets who   have   moved   beyond   isolated   self­ involvement to a vision of  wholeness and  harmony. I don't know  if  this will be the dominant attitude of  the  eighties,  but  it is a good  start.
D. PRECOSKY



ENDS OF THINGS

ABRAHAM  BOYARSKY,  A Pyramid  of  Time: Selected   Stories.  Porcupine's Quill, $10.95; pa.  $5·95·
KENT THOMPSON, Shotgun And  Other  Stories.
New  Brunswick Chapbooks, $3.00.

IN THESE  TWO RECENT collections, Abra­ ham   Boyarsky  and   Kent  Thompson  re­ veal  their  growing  facility  with  the  craft  and  technique of  the short  story.  For  the most part,  these stories are  concrete, care­ fully  made  works,  deftly   bringing  brief moments to   life,  conjuring  up   precise, memorable   images   of   particular  times and   neighbourhoods (Montreal and Fredericton) .
Thompson sees his "stories as consisting
of a  series  of weights....  I am  attempt­ ing   to  structure  the  story  by  means   of emotional  weights."  Such   a  strategy  is especially  effective  in the  last  two stories, which  are  linked  by a common narrator: it  sharpens and  refines  the  nuances   of a terrified  old  man's losing  battle with  his greatest   fear-senility.    The    collection hosts  a  wide   range   of  narrative  voices and,   in   the   best,   the   tone   is  perfectly tailored  to  the  characters. Most  are  sur­  vivors,  losers trying  to make  sense out  of confused, tawdry lives in which  "nothing adds  up,"  before  death or a deeper  spir­ itual   malaise  overtakes them.  Thompson allows  them  fugitive  glimpses  of recogni­ tion, of their own complicity with despair, degradation,  emotional  paralysis.

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Fredericton is another  Canadian  City of  the   End   of  Things.  Characters are caught in  moments of  transition,  locked into  games  that  are  about to  terminate: the collection  is initiated by the drunken bellowings of a man  bewailing the failed relationships with   his  "marvellously  ob­ scene," adulterous  wife.  "There  is  only one  solution.... suicide.  Kill  self.  Hang self."  Or  shoot  self, as the  senile narrator of  the  concluding story,  which  gives  the work  its title,  discovers  as he attempts to commit suicide  with  "the  proper symbol of  my  life" -a  shotgun.  What exactly constitutes  the   end   of   things   fascinates Thompson's   characters:   "what  was  in fact   out   there  at   the  end   of  the  river, beyond  the sea?" ("Two Photographs"); "Portents. What's on the other side?" ("Shotgun") .
Violent, cruel  death also circumscribes the  Holocaust-haunted  world   of   Boyar­ sky's A Pyramid  of Time. Although some of  these  stories  have  been  published  sep­ arately,  here    brief,   italicized    vignettes exist  in  undefined,   unannounced  reson­ nance  with  the  stories  they  precede  and,  at  times, seem  to  upend. The  first focuses the  entire  collection in  an  image  of  the ordinary metamorphosing into  the  night­  marish :  standing in  the YMHA showers, the Jewish  narrator "for  a terrifying mo­ ment" seems to be in  those  other horrific showers.  The terror is echoed  in the final image  Boyarsky  leaves  us with: the  nar­ rator  standing in   front   of  the   kitchen  wall-oven, his daughter in his arms.  "The association is overwhelming. A cold sweat covers  my  body  and   I   must  hand   her quickly  to  my wife."
The   first  three   stories   display  Boyar­
sky's considerable descriptive and  evoca­
tive  powers   as  he   depicts   the   tortuous growth of a sensitive Jewish  boy into "terribly weary" adulthood, into  his  ap­ pointed  identity as "the guardian of  our memories! ... the  avenger of our dead!" The  sepia  tones  of a distant  Europe give
 way  to "the  delusive  sparkle  of the  Gen­ tile  world"  of   Montreal.  These   initial  linked  stories act  as a touchstone for sub­ sequent meditations  on  the  inextricable blend  of  joy and  sorrow,  happiness and  pain  that  informs Jewish existence.  As in Thompson, we  are  again  confronted  by survivors -of  past memories,  of old age, of   the   Holocaust,   of   anti-Semitism  in Montreal, of  assimilation. "I  am  the  son of  Auschwitz; I did  not survive" says the narrator at one point,  ironically discover­ ing   the   locus   of   his   identity   in   non­ existence: "Only if  our oblivions  match  can  we hope  to be  friends."
What  is impressive is the assurance of Boyarsky's  writing, the  mastery  of  mood and  nuance  in a manner combining affec­ tion  and  distance. His  prose  is  engaging, at  times  beguiling,  and  one looks forward to more  stories  from  this  talented writer.

MICHAEL HURLEY



POLITICS & CULTURE

CLEMENT MOISAN, Poesie des frontieres: etude comparee  des  poisies  canadienne   et  quebe­ coise. Hurtubise HMH, n.p.
MICHEL  MORIN &  CLAUDE  BERTRAND,  £e  terri­ toire  imaginaire   de  la  culture.  Hurtubise HMH, n.p.
ROBERT MAJOR,  Parti Pris: ideologies  et littera- ture.  Hurtubise HMH, n.p.

COMPARATIVE STUDIES  of  the  two  litera­ tures  of Canada have  been  rare  and  not without their  difficulties,  not  the  least  of which  is the mutual political  and  histori­ cal  distrust  that  is registered   in  the  very fact  that  we  seem  to  accept  the  separa­ tion  of Canadian and  Quebec literature. (The  existence   of   Franco-Ontarian  or Anglo-Quebec  writers does  not  seem  to disturb most comparatists, or specialists.) In  his aptly  named  Poesie des  frontieres, Ciement  Moisan  attt'mpts to  cross  what  he sees as linguistic,  cultural, intellectual,


145

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



historical  and  geographic barriers both between and within these distinct literary entities.   Explicitly  expanding  and   par­ ticularizing  the   general   insights   of   his
1969  L'Age de la litterature canadienne, Moisan  divides  post-war  verse in Canada into  three  successive stages. This  more or less thematic division  is developed  induc­ tively  out   of  the   Quebec  context:  the inward-turning,   alienated    isolation    of Saint-Denys-Garneau,  Grandbois  and  Hebert  becomes   the  characteristic  of  a "poesie de la clandestinite." With  the col­ lective  social  and  literary   movements of the  so's  and  6o's  comes  a  "poesie  de  la Resistance,"  a  turning  outward  to  dis­ cover  the reality  of "pays" and  the threats to  it.  The  rg7o's  bring  a  "poesie  de  la liberation" with  its  political, intellectual and  formal challenging of the  status quo.
This  tripartite structuring of modern Quebec literary  history,  however,  cannot be applied  very precisely  to English Can­ adian verse,  despite   Moisan's  sometimes  heroic  attempts. The "poesie  de  la clan­  destinite" would  be, he  argues,  earlier  in time,  in  the  work  of  the  McGill  Group of  the I g2o's  and  30's.  But  what  is hid­ den?   What  is   there   to   be  clandestine about here? What emerges from  Moisan's  description  is  more  a  difference  than   a similarity in  both  social and  literary  con­ texts. And  attempts to link very different poets  such  as  Klein,  Scott,  Livesay,  and Smith result in generalizations that  might  upset at  least Smith, who  probably  never really  thought of  his  work  as  character­ ized  by  "la  fougue,   une  certaine  deme­ sure." The common "Resistance" of  the second stage is to institutions, we are told. Livesay  (again), Page, Layton, Birney, Souster,   Nowlan, Avison  and   Purdy  are all  grouped together here  (though  Page, Birney,   and   Avison   are   later   bumped back  to stage  one)  as poets whose aliena­ tion is manifest in their  satiric and realis­ tic attacks. The "poesie  de  la  liberation" in English  Canada reveals a return to the
 Canadian past,  often  to its  Native  tradi­ tion.   Here    we   find   Cohen,   Bowering,  Newlove,   and   Atwood    (though   one   is tempted  to   reclaim   Purdy   and   Birney from  the  preceding  stage) .  Moisan  adds a fourth stage  to account for the "counter­ culture" to  whom   language is supremely important.  He  appears to  find  this  truly revolutionary and  labels it baroque. Here he couples  two  rather  strange  bedfellows
-mythopoeic poetry  and  concrete  verse experimentation.
This four-part historical classification sits  more  easily  on  the  "Quebec"  litera­ ture  than  on  the  "Canadian." The con­ clusions   arrived  at   by  the   comparisons are,  as  Moisan  himself  admits, not  new. Their  Atwoodian   character  has   made  them   now   commonplaces:  both   litera­ tures   are   concerned  with   identity  and  survival  and  are  therefore full  of victims  and  martyrs. Both  suffer  from  a garrison mentality. What is potentially more  orig­ inal  is  Moisan's methodological  decision  to   compare  pairs    of   poets,   sometimes  those    already   chosen    for    pairing   by Ellipse.  There is deliberately  no common method  within  this   comparative  struc­ ture,  freeing the  author to find  the  level of discussion most appropriate to the pair under  consideration. For   example,  it  is the  theme of  violence   that   links  Paul­ Marie Lapointe and  Irving Layton,  des­ pite  their  differences of  tone.  Chamber­ land  and  Newlove  are  linked  by a  com­ mon  debt   to  Ginsberg and  entire   poems are  printed together to show similarities. With  Birney  and  Grandbois, it is upon  a conunon  relation   of  man   to  nature  as revealed  in  shared  images  of sea,  waves, grass,  roots,  flowers,  and  so on,  that   are based    what   Moisan   calls   "etonnantes parentes" between  the  poets.
This  last example points  to the main problem of  this  kind  of  comparison, for the  generality and  commonplace quality of the images  and  themes both  tend  to undermine the  claim  of  surprising inter-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



relations. Newlove and Chamberland both use the image  of the caverns  of the earth, but so do many other poets. That all Canadian  and    Quebec  poets   seem   to revel  in  dichotomies such   as  life/death and  dream/reality is not particularly sur­ prising,   since  most  poets  in  most  times and   places   have   done   so  as  well.  The  same  problem   arises  in  Moisan's  claims for  the  particular stylistic  traits  in  both literatures-"les    contrastes   abondants, les frequents paraHelismes  de  termes  plus ou moins equivalents ou  synonymes  et les articulations  grammaticales." The   ques­ tionable  value  of such  overgeneral state­ ments as the one  about both  Souster  and Miron's verse-that    "les   metaphores abondent chez l'un  et l'autre"-tends to work against the author's real insights, which   are   often   into   significant  differ­ ences  between   poets   (such   as  the  same two  writers'  opposite relation  to  the  col­ lectivity) .
One  of  the  problems for  readers   who are   less  familiar  with   the   poets'   works than  Moisan  is his  method of extracting lines  from   their   contexts. The  result   is that   the  reader   must   take   the  author's word   for   what    often    appear  as   "un­ proved" judgments, such  as  the  assertion that   two  extrapolated   lines   (Chamber­ land's "hors  du  monde saurions-nous en­ core   nous   aimer"  and   Newlove's    "you would  have loved yourself if others had") are    simply    deemed   "faussement   poe­ tiques."  Sometimes connections  between  poets appear almost  arbitrary: three  lines from  Lalonde ("Nous allons  au  bout  de
la nuit 1 jusqu'a la plus parfaite etreinte 1
qui nous detruise") are said  to have "leur
resonance" in  Atwood's "It  seems  I am
always  moving."
The fact  that  Moisan's most interesting remarks are  about differences between Quebec and  Canadian literature may  be revealing. Perhaps the  French heritage of Quebec is a  cultural as well as linguistic
 

Sono  Nis
Press

NEW POETRY

JILL  ROGERS
Alternate Endings
$4·95

ANN YORK
In This House There  Are No Lizards
$5.95

ROBIN SKELTON (EDITOR)
Six Poets of British Columbia (RONA MURRAY, CHARLES  LILLARD, LEONA GOM, KEN CATHERS,
THERESA KISHKAN,  HAROLD RHENISCH)
$7·95


NEW FICTION

RALPH GUSTAFSON
The Vivid  Air: Collected Stories
$6.95

DERK WYNAND
One Cook, Once Dreaming
$6.95

CAROI.EE BRADY
Winter  Lily
$5·95

Sono  Nis Press
I 7 45 Blanshard Street
Victor!a, B.C.  vBw  2]8

force  to  be  reckoned  with.  This,  in  fact,	 	

147

BOOKS IN REVIEW



is  the   context  in   which Michel  Morin and  Claude Bertrand situate their  philo­ sophical and ideological investigation into  "le   territoire  irnaginaire  de  la  culture," the  title  of  their book.  Out of a moribund French, European culture, condemned to repetitive formalism, sterile  intellectual fashions,  and  endless  political  debates, can  rise  the  new  French culture of  Que­ bec. The authors claim to write, not from any   theoretical  bias,   but   from  the   con­ crete experience of  living   in  the  unique part  of  North America that  is  Quebec and  which  constitutes an  "impense"­ that is,  an  openness to   cultural  possi­ bilities  that France and Europe today  can­ not   have, since   their  "imaginary space" has  been   reduced  by  world   wars and   by the   two   restrictive   ideologies  of  nazism and socialism.
However,  the   authors  ultimately end by denying even this  attenuated French connection, urging Quebec to refuse  to conform to the  concept of success  (as a nation) of what is now  a dying European society. Quebec  should accept  its  "mar­ ginal,"  dependent  past   and   present  in order to build a new  culture. The premise here  is that a real  culture  is more impor­ tant  than  political  independence. With­ out   the   former,  the latter will  have   no "real   resonance"   in    the    people.   The French  Republic is the  example given  of a legal  social contract that resulted from a  Revolution which was  only  made  pos­ sible   by  profound  cultural  changes   that preceded it.  The Jews  are  cited  as  proof that a social contract and  a  physical  ter­  ritory are   not   necessary  for  a culture to exist.   It is  the  "imaginary  territory" of the  title  that  is  important.
The  political message   of  this  book   is clear: the  energies spent on  political  in­ dependence are   misplaced because  Que­ bec  has  not   yet  achieved a  culture that could sustain social  contract.  Up   to  now Quebec culture has  been  caught in  what the   authors call   an  "aesthetic of  impo-
 tence," trapped "dans des  tentatives de definition d'elle-meme, d'auto-representa­
tion   qui   la   vouent  .a  une   desesperance sans  issue  quant a son  isolement, sa  pre­
carite, son  delaissement." The same  con­ cerns that Moisan has  isolated in Quebec verse  are here  perceived as what actually have worked  to  block  cultural  develop­ ment.
Morin and  Bertrand feel  that culture
is only  created by individuals working in all  fields,   not   by  reductive  collectivities. It was  the  individual will,  the  will  of  the people,  that   was    born    of    the    Quiet Revolution; it was  not  a new  nationalism which  would  subject  the   individual  to the  State, as  the  old  nationalism has sub­ jected  him   to  Church  and  family.  This doctrine of  cultural  liberalism is  used  to explain what the  authors see as  the result
-and hope-of November 15th: writers
have been  forced out  of their roles as spokesman for  the  people and have   had to  face   "la   pure  angoisse de  la  creation en   tant que   simples individus." Out  of this  turning inward will come, they  hope, a freeing of Quebec culture from the con­ fines  of  territorial and identity  concerns that are only  European  remnants.
The positive nature of this  hope in  in­ dividual action  is  set  against  the   more evident need   for  Quebec to  define  itself against "I'autre" in  a  negative  way:   to see itself  collectively as a colony, a victim of someone else.  This theory  provides an  interesting  perspective   from   which   to view  the  "Resistance"  work   of  the  Parti Pris group and their collective attempt to decolonialize   Quebec  and  its   literature. For   Morin   and  Bertrand,  these   writers are still  prey  to  the   "aesthetic of  impo­ tence." However, Robert Major's award­ winning study, Parti Pris: ideologies et litterature, provides a  fuller base  of data upon which to  evaluate such  a claim. He attempts here to go beyond Lise  Gauvin's
1975   Parti   pris litteraire  in   scope   and degree of analysis. In this  he  suceeds, for

BOOKS IN REVIEW



he manages to include almost  all the journal's articles   plus  all  the  books  pub­ lished  in  his  discussion   of  the  common  denominators  on   the   levels   of    theme ( miserabilisme), style,  tone,  and  formal  self-consciousness.  Al!  of   these  elements  are  in  turn discussed  in  relation  to  the group's ideology.
Major's focus  is on  the  tension  he  per­ ceives between   the  journal's  political  ob­ jectives  toward action   and  the  fact  that  its   founders  (Brochu,  Chamberland, Major, Piotte)  were   essentially   literary  writers. In  effect,  this  action/art tension both  nourished their  art and  gave  them a  political   "mauvaise  conscience." The four   parts  of  Major's  book  reflect   this focus, as does his title.  The first  part  is a review  of  the  ideological  theories  of  the journal:   it  claimed  to   be  marxist   and revolutionary, but  in  practice it mixed its marxism   with    both    Sartrean   existen­ tialism  and   the  socialist  theories  of  de­ colonialization  espoused   by  writers   like Memmi and   Fanon.  Aiming at  nothing less  than   a   radical   reform   of  Quebec reality,  Parti  Pris  wanted to  be a  centre  for both leftist intellectuals and  the prole­ tariat.   Hence   its   early   links   with   the Mouvement de  liberation populaire.
The second  section  studies  the  literary results of this view of Quebec colonialized society.  The  editors tried   to  play  down their   personal  literary  orientation  and focus  instead  on  political action, even  to the 	point 	of	denouncing 	literature. Though  bourgeois, they  also  tried  to  re­ pudiate  their   class   origins.    In   literary  terms  this involved  engagement  as an  act of unveiling Quebec reality  with the hope that    the   shock   of   this   decomposition would   affect   the  comfortable  bourgeois society-which  was,  as  Major shrewdly notes,  the  main  readership of  Parti  Pris. Although the presentation of sordid  social and  linguistic  (joual)  reality  was  not  to be  an  end  in  itself,  Major  convincingly argues  that  the  shock  value   (in  terms  of
 the official ideology)  was rather unsubtle, given    the    subtlety    with    which    that ideology  itself  operates. He  also criticizes the  group's   lack  of  theoretical  cohesion, but  his main  point  is that  there  is a con­ tradiction  between   their   history  of   the impossibility  of revolutionary literature in a colonialized  society and  their  own  con­ tinued   writing  and  publishing.
Major reserves  his main  attack for  the literary  criticism of the  journal. From  his long and detailed analysis of the official critics, only Andre Brochu comes out with any  credibility. This is doubly   damning because Brochu  was the first, the least prolific, and  the  least  accepted. Major values   him,   however,   for  his  ability   to achieve  in  his  criticism   what   he  sees  as the  European "thematic" critics' integra­ tion   of  phenomenology and   the  social sciences  into   literary  analysis  while   re­ maining  an   "immanent"  textual   critic.  The  others-Euvrard,  Duguay, Maheu
-have little  to recommend them,  by Major's standards. Usually  it is occasional contributors such as Aquin  or Desrosiers who more cogently  formalize botl1 the theory  and  praxis  of  the  group.
The  last  part of  the  book  reviews  the works   published   by   Parti   Pris,   works which  are  important, as  Moisan  saw,  in the  literary   history   of  Quebec.  Luckily these  works  were  not  the  political   tracts their editors planned them to be. Major carefully   displays  both  the  heterogeneity and  the common denominators of the collections. The much  discussed, but actu­ ally  little  used,   joual  is  particularly well treated   here,    as    Major    analyzes    the semantic,  phonetic,  and   syntactic   levels of  its  contesting of  linguistic   norms.  He then   evaluates  its  success  as  limited­ both  as  an  ideological symbol  and   as  a shock inducer. The dangers of  phoneticiz­ ing  language  do  not  escape  Major.  As Hubert Aquin  had  pointed out, the socio­ cultural, extra-literary  intent of  joual  1s

149

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ultimately a threat to literature, and  to communication and  action.
Major's final evaluation of the achieve­
ment  of  Parti  Pris is an  ambivalent one. With  hindsight he can  lament  its na.lvete in thinking that  it alone could bring  to Quebec  the  revolutions of  Africa,  Asia, and    South    America.   His    concluding words   are   these:  "malgn! ses    grandes qualites,  malgre   ses  incontestables  reus­ sites,  et  malgre   son  enthousiasme  com­ municatif, Parti  pris rend  triste. Comme tellement d'autres  aventures  quebecoises, il aura manque de souffie, il n'aura pas su aller  au  bout  de ses  virtualitks  et  se sera saborde lui-meme avant d'avoir donne  sa pleine  mesure."
The fact  that  the   journal  lasted  from
October  1g63   to  the   summer   of   1g68 should  be enough  to assure its place and significance   in  Quebec  cultural  history. But  the  other fact,   that   it  then  disinte­ grated   before  its  ideals  were  even  close, might   give  support  to  Morin  and  Bert­ rand's thesis of the unreadiness of Quebec culture, despite  its  potential. Moisan  too felt   that   Quebec  was  not  yet  ready   to enter    "!'ere   revolutionnaire."   In    any event,  we  cannot, it  would  seem, discuss Quebecois  literature apart from  its ideo­ logical and  cultural context.  Perhaps this signals  a  real  difference  in  our  two  cul­ tures, a difference whose  implications go well   beyond   comparative  literary   inter­  ests.
LINDA HUTCHEON
 **   JOHN  KENDLE. John  Bracken: A  Political Biography.  Univ.  of   Toronto  Press,   $17-50. John Bracken has always held  an  insecure posi­ tion  in  Canadian history: a  high  place  among minor politicos, but  no  place  at all  among the notable  figures of  our   political  past.   A  good farmer, a  sound agronomist, a devoted hypo­ chondriac,  he  entered  the   provincial  field   as the  half-willingly co-opted leader of  the  UFM when     it    unexpectedly   and     embarrassingly gained power in  Manitoba in  the  1920's, and as  a  local  premier he  was  shrewd  and   on  the whole successful. But   always   he  was  the  man to  fill in  where no  good  rival  existed, and   just as   the    inexperienced   farmers  of   the   UFM picked  a professor of agriculture who  happened to  be  willing, so, when the  federal Tories were in  the   leaderless  wilderness in   1·942, Bracken was   drafted  to   guide  them.  Changing   the name of the  party he briefly  led,  to  Progressive Conservative,  was   his   only   lasting   achieve­ ment;  otherwise he   was   a   disastrously  weak leader, and vanished in  1948  without regret on any  side.  It would   be  hard in  the  best  of  cir­ cumstances for  a biographer to make much  out of  Bracken. But  the  best  of  circumstances did not   exist    for   John  Kendle  when    he   rashly elected to write John  Bracken: A  Political Biography, since   most   o£  the   important  per­ sonal   papers have   been  lost  or  destroyed, and Kendle was  forced to write  a biography mainly on  the   basis  of  Bracken's  public history. The result   is a book  heavily padded  with   political facts   of  dubious biographical importance and little historical interest. Bracken-a genuine populist  somewhat  rotted  by   power-might have   been   a  good   subject for   a  brief   mono­ graph like  the  100-page volumes of  the  Uni­ versity   of  Toronto Press's  unfortunately aban­ doned Canadian Biographical Studies; there is certainly not  enough of him  to  justify  Kendle's full-sized Life,   which   notes  and  other  appara­ tus  swell  out   to  318   pages,   all  but  a  few  of them   dutiful and   dull.

o.w.



***   PIERRE   SAVARD, Aspects du  catholicisme canadien-fran!{ais au  XIX• siecle. Fides,  n.p. Savard's essays  cover   a  range   of  topics,  from political  ultramontanism  to  private  devotions to Ste.  Philomene, and  from  parish register nomenclature to the  significance of Jules-Paul Tardivel. Savard writes  clearly, and  his work provides an  informative background to studies of  1 gth   century literary attitudes in  Quebec.

W.N.





VAN TOORN
& TIBULLUS

THE  ART  OF TRANSPOSITION, as opposed to that  of translation, has its own exigen­ cies,  the   first  of  which   is  a  Janus-like double  sensitivity.  Responsive to the orig­ inal  from  which  he works, the  transposer must  also be attuned to the  temper of his times.   The  tension   between   these   two poetic  ideals  is all  the  tauter if the  orig­ inal  belongs  to  an  ancient culture, as  it does  in  the  case  of  Montreal poet  Peter  Van  Toorn's  "Elegy  on  War: Invention of  the Sword" (In Guildenstern Country, I973). At the same time, the transposition must  be a  successful  poem-or  what  is the  point?  Otherwise we  should   talk  of ponies,  cribs, and  glosses.
The source   text   consists  of   the  first
fourteen lines in the last elegy of the well­ known    sequence    Tibullus   devoted    to Delia   (I,  I o) . Considered by  some  to  be his  earliest   elegy,  possibly  written  when he was as young as seventeen, its first lines epitomize the  bucolic  themes   which  are the  poet's  hallmark. For  this  reason,  all debate  about date  of  composition aside, this  poem   caps  off  the   Delia   sequence  with   a   flourish,    though   there    are   no references to eroticism  at  all. Instead, the poet's    persona 	soliloquizes    upon     the threat  of  war   and   his  own   impending conscription into  the  3 I  B.C.  campaign in  Aquitaine. Stock  allusions   to  classical culture pervade these  lines:   the  Golden Age, the  carefree shepherd with his flocks, the  soldier  forged   of  iron,   the  common cup.  Van  Toorn has  no  trouble dealing with   these   potential  anachronisms. He portrays the  past in terms of a thoroughly modern psychology.  Rather than  a  line-
 for-line correlation of texts, there  is a striking conflation of past and  present situation.
How  far  Van  Toorn deviates  from  his
source  is  not  apparent  until   two-thirds through  his  own   2g-line   poem.   Up   to then,  approximately two  lines  of English match  every one of Latin, a good average given  the  density  of  elegiac  distich.  He does  not  duplicate the  alternating  hexa­ meters   and   pentameters  of   the   Latin, though  he does hold  to a steady compro­ mise   of  eleven   syllables   with   variably  shifting  accents. The  extra line in English allows him space  to catch up and  then  to supplement the  original.  Quis  fuit  hor­ rendos  primus  qui  protulit  enses?  ("Who was he who first made  terrible swords?") thus  becomes:

Who  was  he,  this  first  butcher and weaponmaker
who  simplified dying  and  growing up  for
a  boy?

The  notion  of a boy soldier-to-be and  the hint   at   childhood  sword-fight   weapon­ training   (which    follows   in   line   five) would  have  been  inappropriate  in  classi­ cal culture, even  for a pacifist  like Tibul­ lus.   In   the   early   197o's   when   debate raged  over military toys and  news reports on  Vietnam beamed  in  across  the  Cana­ dian  border,  it  made  sense.
By the same  process of poetic extrapo­ lation,  Van  Toorn transmutes the second line  quam   ferus et  vere   ferreus  ille   fuit ("how  savage,   as  if   truly   forged   from iron,  he was")   into:

He  must  have  been  old  and  grisly,  this  first soldier,
(poured in  the  same   mould as  his  pig-iron
sword)
forgetting  to  patent  the   world's  most
patented  toy.

Even  in  these early  lines  when  there  is a relative correspondence between original and  transposition, Van  Toorn takes liber­ ties   which   distinguish  his   poem   from translation proper. Where  Tibullus  has

OPINIONS & NOTES



dirae    mortis     ("grisly     death"),   Van Toorn has his soldier "old and grisly." Literalists would  here  insist  that  he  mis­ declined   dirus,  -a,  -um.  What   has  hap­ pened   is  that   Van   Toorn   took  a  hint,  either  from  the  original  or from  a  trans­  lation  he studied. "Grisly"  is a hard  word to  forget.   The subsequent  "his  armlong
blade was soon tooled into a cold  I killing
machine" subsumes  Tibullus' "a  quicker
road  to grisly death was opened." Van Toorn's goal is a metamorphosis of the Latin, terse  and  balanced as it is, into  a contemporary vernacular flavoured  with the  disaffection and  cynicism of the early seventies.
By the same logic, Nos ad mala nostra I
vertimus in  saevas  quod  dedit  ille   feras
("to our  misfortune we pervert  what  he intended for  wild  beasts")   translates:

Old   fool,  probably forged  it  for  hacking up wood,
or  butchering bears; and   no  one
understood -
till  there was  a  market for  it.

Though  Van   Toorn  updates the  idiom and    substitutes  an   occasionally   incon­ gruous    item   here   or   there    (like   that  bear) , he does not remove  his poem from its Latin setting.  He is after bigger game. His  unwilling conscript  speaks  the  lingo of  our   times,   but   allusions   to  classical mythology  poke  through. The  ideal   of the Golden Age was the form  primitivism took  in classical  culture. Elsewhere,  Ti­  bullus   referred  explicitly   to   that    tacit mythic  structure  (I,  3;   n,  3), and   his reader  needed  no footnotes.  According to Hesiod, the Golden  Age of Saturn was followed   by  four   others   culminating  in the Iron Age of Jove, characterized by endless strife and turmoil. Pastoralism was a  common Roman literary  pose, but Tibullus was the  most anti-military poet, the one least entranced by the imperial adventures of the dying Republic. His family  had  been  partially  dispossessed of its  holdings when   the  government  con-
 fiscated  land  in  favour of  veterans. The myth   of  a Golden Age  particularly  ap­ pealed  to him and  his readers  well under­ stood  that  divitis  hoc  vitium est  auri,  nee bella  fuerunt  ("this is the vice of  precious gold")  was more  than  another statement of the adage familiar to us as "gold  is the root of all evil." Greed  for gold motivated Hesiod's Jovian Iron  Age, whereas  in  the Saturnian  Golden Age swords  would  not be turned even upon beast, let alone  man.  Van  Toorn must  do  some  explaining to convey   this  deep-seated  myth,   but  does it  well:

I suppose brains are  to  blame - of this  Age of Iron with  its manic drive  for
gold.
For   long   ago   there were   no  wars; and   no weapon-
makers. Our  food   was  served   up  in beechwood bowls.
Those days  even  a  herdsman could safely bed  down
among his  slugcoloured  flocks  and   claim
day's work
without reporting to  ramparts, forts  and foxholes.

Beechwood  was a  token  of the simplicity of life in pre-imperial Rome  before the advent of metal  cups and  utensils. The shepherd with  his flocks was a  common­ place  of Latin verse. Van Toorn enlivens  it  with  his  bizarre  "slugcoloured" sheep, which   are  "variegated" in   the  original ( varias  oves) . In  the  next  line  he  adds "foxhole" to Tibullus' list of military paraphernalia,    palisades   and     citadels (non  arces, non  vallus erta) .
Up   to  this  point   we  have  translation, loose as it may be. But thirteen lines of English  remain, and  only  four  of  Latin. They  read  like a bare  synopsis of what  is to come:

tunc mihi   vita   foret,  vulgi   nee  tristia nossem
arma  nee  audissem corde  micante
tubam.
nunc  ad  bella   trahor, et  iam   quis   forsitan hostis
haesura in  nostro tela  gerit  latere.

OPINIONS & NOTES



A pedestrian literal  translation will show how  admirably concise  the  Latin   is, but not entirely  why Van  Toorn took so many lines   to   transmit  the   essence   of   those four:

That would have   been   the  life  for  me, having never  known
grim war   and   vulgar troops, never   heard, heart pounding, the  bugle  blare.
Now  I'm drawn off  to  war   and   perhaps some  foe
already bears   the  arm that will  stick  in my side.

The thirteen lines  which  correspond are of a different order  than  those  which pre­ cede  them.  We  are  treated to  an  intense visualization of martial life depicted in an idiom  much  our  own  and  with  no ante­  cedents  in  Tibullus:

And  this  insanity-fm years  on  end; stuck far  from  home, only  one  song  in  your  head: your  life  made lousy  by bum  gear, piles,  pot
luck
and  the  endless bungling of bureaucrats, the sweat
pouring down  at  the  sound of each  bugle call.

In this passage in fact there are only two images  from  the  Latin, and  each  plays a pivotal  role in an  entirely new poetic strategy. Van  Toorn lends a new voice to the  speaker,  and  a  new  temporal frame.
The  subject    of   this   monologue   was
originally  the  first  weapon-maker;  then the  subject   became   the  rigours  and  cla­ mour   of  military life  as contrasted  with the  bucolic  calm  of the  shepherd's.  Now, at  the  bugle  call,  the  scene  shifts  to the immediate present. The speaker hallucin­ ates a hypothetical weapon-maker behind enemy   lines,  Tibullus' foe  bearing   arms ( hostis). Speculation about the  past  dis­ solves  at  the  ominous sound   of  a  bugle "blasting us  out   for  a  roll  call   /  right now."  The foe bearing anns becomes another ordinary joe  caught up  in  Iron Age  logic. The poem  concludes:

Just think  of  it: some  energetic  jerk
on  the other side's  probably polishing blades.
 Maybe  just  for  the  sake  of doing  some work. Chances are  one  of  them  is going  to stay behind   and   rust  away  in  my  guts  one  of
these  days.

In  retrospect, this  is on a straight line of thought  from   the   pig-iron    sword,   but what  was precise  in  the  Latin  is  breath­ taking  in  the  English.  Each  language has its genius. We cannot expect original  and even   translation to   coincide   at   every point.   The  distinction   between   transla­ tion   and   transposition  is  a   matter  of degree,  but  is  best  defined   in  terms   of total  poetic  strategy, here  the  decision  to make  the bugle call concrete and  to have it waken the speaker  from  his reverie  and thought. Van  Toorn drew  upon  the same mould Tibullus used, upon  recognizable lines, upon his sequence  of ideas and  his climactic  image.  But  he altered   the  tem­ poral  frame  of the  poem  and  thereby  in­ vigorated    a   model   which   would   have been  flat  and  abstract  in  direct   transla­ tion.
G.  M.  LANG


CANADIAN LITERATURE IN ITALY

PERHAPS  BECAUSE THEY first encountered Canada in the  pages of Marco Polo's Milione/ the  Italians have  long regarded it  as a land  of myth,  a snowbound maw into   which   many   of  their   compatriots have disappeared, "un  nuovo minotauro oltremarino" -"a  new minotaur beyond the  sea," in  the  words  of Mario Praz. 2
Praz's  1936  essay was  long  one  of  the few serious, if brief, considerations of Canadian culture written by an  Italian critic,  although it  is significant   that   the essay reviewed a travel account with the deadly   title  Troppo grano  sotto  la  neve
-"Too Much Grain Beneath  the Snow."
Not  until  the mid-197o's, with  Raimondo
Luraghi's courses on Canadian History  at

153

OPINIONS & NOTES



the  University of  Genoa   (appropriately the native  city of Giovanni Caboto), and Giovanna Capone's seminar  on Canadian literature at  Bologna   (I 976),  did  Cana­ dian  culture emerge  as a field of  study  in Italy,  but  since  then  the growth  has been rapid.3  In the  same  year  that  Professor Capone  was   teaching  Canadian  litera­ ture  at  Bologna,  Giovanni Bonanno was offering  a seminar on Canadian history at the University of Messina  (Sicily), which will  host,  in  March of  I g8 I, the  fourth congress  of  Canadian studies.  The   first of  these  took  place  in  Bologna  in  I977, at   which    the   Associazione   italiana  di
studi   canadesi  I Italian Association   for
Canadian Studies was founded, with Pro­
fessor Alfredo Rizzardi (director of  Eng­ lish and  American studies  at Bologna)   as its  president, and   historian  Luca  Codig­  nola   ( Pisa)   as  its  secretary.  ( Codignola is currently  engaged  in  a  reconstruction of  seventeenth-century  Canadian  history from  documents which  have  hitherto lain dormant in  the  Vatican libraries.)
The  second   of   these   congresses   was
held  in Pisa in  I978, which  year also saw the    publication   of   Profesor    Capone's
Canada: il  villaggio   della  terra ;4    Cana­ diana:  aspetti  della  storia e della  lettera­  tura   canadese 5      (edited   by  Codignola) ; and  the  first   (and   so far  only)   number
of  the  review  Argomenti canadesi.6    Pro­
fessor  Capone's book  is  intended  as  an
introduction, which purpose  it fulfils ably, while also providing a number of insights into  our  literature, many  of which  focus on  the  land  as  a  rna jor symbol  (the  in­ ternalization  of   landscape  and   its   re­
formulation  as  inscape; the  wildernessI
madness   equation)   while   stressing   the
ambiguity  of   this   symbolism,   the   land being at once source  of identity and  locus of annihilation. Pratt, Layton, Cohen, Atwood,  MacLennan, Richler, Laurence, and  Frye are discussed, and  there  is a noteworthy chapter on McLuhan dealing with  his  literary  criticism   and   with  his

154
 debt  to Harold Innis.  The  essays in Cana­ diana  relate  to aspects  of history  ( coloni­  sation, the  Seven  Years'  War, the  Social Gospel  movement) and literature; of the literary essays,  Claudio  Gorlier's on  At­ wood's   fiction,   and   Pasquale  Jannini's note on Apollinaire's interest in the poetry  of  Emile  Nelligan,  address  the  specialist, while  Bonanno's  on  Hugh  MacLennan, and   Clement  Moisan's, which  compares contemporary  anglo-   and   franco-Cana­ dian  poetry, are of an introductory nature.
In 1979, Northrop Frye's  lecture-tour of Italy  (ignominiously reported by the Canadian press)  coincided with  the  third
congress,  held  in  Urbina; there,  as  else­
where, Frye was received enthusiastically. Although  Frye  does  not  present  himself as  a purveyor of  Canadian  culture, the great  respect  in which  he is held  in  Italy
-an interview with  him  in  Rome   was
broadcast during prime   time  on  the  na­ tional  television network  -has led  to in­  quiries   into   the  culture  from  which   he emerges,    although   the   connection  be­ tween  Frye's "international" approach to literature and  his canadesita  has not been perceived  clearly,   I  think,   given  the  at­  tempts  to  define  the  ethos  of  Canadian writing  in  exclusive,   rather  than   inclu­  sive, terms.
The other and  more  traditional avenue of   approach  to   Canadian  studies   has been through the study of anglophone literatures, and, in fact,  "Canadian" literature in Italy  has often  meant anglo­ Canadian (Torontonian, dare  I  say), al­ though Tremblay and  Blais, for example, have  been  studied as part of  the  franca­ phone phenomenon. Clearly,  the  interest in  Canadian  literature  is  academic; our literature has  not  enjoyed  a great  public  success in Italy. By way of  contrast, when we in  North America  'discovered' Latin­ American  literature-Borges,  Cortazar, Marquez, Vargas Llosa, Lezama Lima - the   interest   passed    quickly    from    the academy to  the  best-seller   lists,  with,  of

OPINIONS & NOTES



course, the  help  of a number of fine translators. Few  works of Canadian liter­ ature have   been   translated into  Italian (Atwood's Edible  Woman, Layton's The Cold  Green   Element, and  Cohen's The Favorite    Game   comprise   the   chief   ex­ amples)  and   the   translations  have   not been   of   uniformly   high   quality.  As  I browse  through the  bookstores  in  Padua (where I am giving  seminars in Canadian literature at  the graduating and  graduate levels), the  Canadian titles  most  in  evi­ dence  are  translations of  McLuhan  and Frye,  although  I  did  find  an  edition  of Whiteoak Harvest  which  had been on the shelf  these  forty-odd  years.  This  paucity  of  titles  points   to  an   apparent lack  of interest  on   the   part  of   Canadian  pub­  lishers  and  booksellers in  the  European market.  (Professor Capone showed  me a letter from  Blackwell's stating they could not  supply   a  number  of  books  because they  "Do  Not  Have Canadian Rights.") The  detrimental effect  of  this  situation on  Canadian studies   in  Italy   (and  else­ where,  I am  sure)   cannot be overstated; this is where  the Canadian government, which  has been  very active  in the promo­ tion of Canadian studies  in  Italy, can  use its  position   and   power   to   greatest  ad­  vantage.
The   Italian  view  of  Canadian  litera­ ture   readily   perceives    its   cosmopolitan element, as  Giose  Rimanelli  indicated in these  pages  fifteen   years  ago, 7    and   per­ haps  the  most important aspect  of Cana­ dian  studies  in  Italy  will be  to  make  us more  aware of  the  extent to  which  our literature   participates  in   literary  tradi­ tion.  Canada's eastern limit  is the  Terra Nova  on  which   Giovanni Caboto  (and  not  John Cabot, as  I was  taught in  high school)   was  the  "first  to  plant / ... the Lion   of   St.   Mark's  beside   the   Royal Jack,"8 in the words  of Filippo Salvatore, and its western-most province contains a large  parkland named  after  Garibaldi. Its
 culture surely  must  be seen  as an  epoch in  what  Dennis Duffy  has  most  sugges­ tively  called  "a  Judaeo-Christian, West­ ern,   world-imperial   structure,   one    of whose final waves crashed so deafeningly upon   these shores."9 An aspect of this heterogeneous element in our  culture is defined  by the  literary relations between Canada and   Italy,  as seen,  for  example, in  the  troops  of Italy  found  in James De Mille's   The  Dodge   Club;  or,  Italy   in
1859, Mazo De La Roche's Lark  Ascend­ ing, and  Callaghan's A Passion in  Rome; in  the   Italian  influence  evident   in  the novels of Frederick Philip  Grove; in  the metacritical   status    The   Second    Scroll bears   to  the   Divina   commedia;  in   the confluence  of  nationalities in F. G. Paci's  The Italians, and  so on.  It is interesting, in  this  context, that   Frye's  recent   refer­  ence   to  the   leviathan10    as  one   of  the major  metaphors through  which   Cana­ dian literature has articulated itself coin­ cides, at the  level of myth,  with  the  laby­ rinth   that  Praz  suggested  was  central to an  understanding of our culture. In  their  common  pursuit, both  critics  imply  that  through an  understanding of  the  mythi­ cal  level  of   our   literature  we  can   per­  ceive its identity, which  is another way of affirming  that one  can  successfully  study literature  from   a  centre   that   is  funda­ mentally Canadian.

NOTES

1 " 'Only  the   Canadian  archipelago can   be meant,'"  according to  Tryggvi J.  Oleson, by  Polo's  references to  the  land  of  the  Ger­ falcons. See   Early    Voyages  and   Northern Approaches  rooo-r632   ( 1963),  as  quoted by  John  Robert Colombo,  Colombo's Can­ adian     Quotations     (Edmonton:   Hurtig,
1974), 479-80 s.v.  Polo,   Marco.
2   Mario Praz,  "II   Canada,"  Cronache   let­ terarie   anglosassoni II:  cronache  inglesi   e americane (Roma:  Edizioni di  storia e let­ teratura,  1951),  p.  280.  The  essay,  dated
1936,  reviews   G.   G.   Napolitano,  Troppo grano  sotto  la  neve: un  inverno al Canada,

ISS

OPINIONS & NOTES

con   una    visita    a   Ford    (n.p.:   Ceschina,	QN A J   M SMJTH
n.d.).	• 	• 	•
3 For    an   overview  of   Canadian   studies  in

Italy, see  Luca Codignola, "Gli studi  cana­ desi  in  Italia," Atti del  I congresso  interna­ zionale  di  storia  americana  (Genova: Tilg­ her   (1978),  225-33. See  also  Damiano Pie­ tropaolo,  "The   Bologna   Connection:   An Italian  Love   Affair   with   Canadian  Writ­ ing," in  Saturday  Night,  November  1979, pp.  65-68.
4   Giovanna   Capone,   Canada:  il   villaggio della  terra: letteratura canadese  di lingua inglese   (Bologna: Patron, 1978). The title, "the village  of  the  land," alludes to  Oliver Goldsmith's  The  Rising     Village   ( 1825). Capone's  book   is   reviewed    by   Giovanna Franci in  "Letteratura  anglo-canadese," Il Verri, 6,  No.  11  (1978), 161-64.
5   Luca    Codignola,  ed.,   Canadiana:  aspetti della storia  e della letteratura canadese (Venezia: Marsilio, 1978).
6  Argomenti canadesi: letteratura canadese  di lingua inglese. A  useful  feature of  this  first number  is   the    list   of   graduating   theses (those  written  for   the   equivalent  of  our B.A.)   on  Canadian topics.  The journal also contains articles (in  translation) by Frye, Woodcock,  Bissell   and   Rubin,  and   inter­ views  with  McLuhan and  Atwood.
7   Giose  Rimanelli, "Canadian  Literature:  An Italian View," Canadian Literature, No.  21 ( 1964)' p.  20.
8   Filippo Salvatore, "Three  Poems   for  Gio­ vanni  Caboto,"   in   Roman    Candles:   An Anthology   of   Poems    by   Seventeen  ltalo­ Canadian Poets  (Toronto:  Hounslow  Press,
1978), p. 14.
9   Denis Duffy, "George Woodcock: Voyager of Liberty," Canadian Literature, No. 83 (1979), p.  158.
1'0   "The image of being swallowed by the levia­ than is an  almost inevitable one for Canada: the  whole  process  of  coming to  the  country by  ship  from  Europe, through  the  Strait of Belle  Isle  and  the  Gulf  of St. Lawrence and then  up   the   great  river,  suggests   it." See Northrop   Frye,    "Haunted    by    Lack    of Ghosts:  Some  Patterns in   the   Imagery  of Canadian  Poetry," The Canadian Imagina­ tion, ed. David Staines (Cambridge, Mass./ London:   Harvard  Univ. Press,  1977), pp.
22-45·

RICHARD  A.  CAVELL
 THE   EMERGENCE   of   a   clearly   defined
Canadian  literary tradition  is  so  recent that   we  have   actually lived  among our
classical writers. A. J. M. Smith, who died
on  November 21,  1980,  was  one  of  the
earliest of them.  From 1924 when, as a student, he began  to edit  the  McGill Literary Supplement,  he  was  a  moving force   in  the  emergence of  a  manifestly native  poetry  and, later, of a distinctive Canadian school  of  criticism.   And  until the chronic illnesses he suffered  in the late
197o's made him withdraw from active involvement, he  remained a force  in  our literary life,  even  though from   1936  he was teaching in the  United States  and returning only  in  summers to  his  Cana­ dian   home    at   Magog  in   the   Eastern Townships.
Arthur Smith   did  not  publish  his first book of verse, News  of the  Phoenix, until
1943,  the  same  year  as  he  brought out that   historic   compilation, The  Book   of Canadian Poetry. But this was more an indication of the difficulty of publishing anything during the depression  years than of a failure of Smith's work to gain  recog· nition, abroad as well as at home.  In Eng­ land,   during the  1930's,  a  decade  or  so before  I returned to Canada, he was  the first  Canadian poet,   apart  from  Robert Service,  whose  work   I  encountered. We appeared together in  the most  prestigious English   poetry  magazines of  the  period, New Verse and Twentieth Century Verse, and,  as  Ralph  Gustafson  has  observed, we were  the only Canadians to do so.
I  did  not  encounter Arthur Smith   at that   time,  but  in I 958  when  I  was  pre­ paring to  launch Canadian  Literature, I wrote  to  him,  and  he immediately sent  a fine   essay  on   Duncan   Campbell  Scott  which  appeared  in  the  first  number of this journal. From  that  time, through the
I g6o's,   he  contributed  at   regular  inter-

OPINIONS & NOTES



vals,  seminal   essays  on   general  critical themes   and   fine  sharp  studies   of   indi­ vidual  poets-Earle Birney,  F. R. Scott,  Anne  Wilkinson, P. K. Page.  He also sub­ mitted the rejected preface which  he had written inI 936 for the pioneer anthology of  modern Canadian  poetry,   New  Prov­ inces,  so  that   in  I965  it  at  last  saw  the light  of  print  and  seemed  as  timely  as it would   have   been   if  Frank  Scott-his fellow   editor   of   New   Provinces-had agreed  to use it nearly  thirty  years before.
When  Smith finally  collected  his  criti­
cal essays and  published them  as T awards a View of Canadian Letters in  I973, al­ most  half   the   pieces  dating from   I959 and  after  ( 8 out of 17) had first appeared in Canadian Literature. Eli  Mandel once remarked to me that  the emergence of Canadian Literature had in fact brought Smith back to criticism  by giving him a journal for  which  he  could   write  major essays with  the  assurance of  publication, and   the  degree   of  stimulation  produced by the association is perhaps shown  by another  figure:  out   of   the   23  critical pieces Smith  chose  to collect  in T awards a View ... , only  6  were  written  before
1959. In  other   words,  Smith's career  as an  overt  critic  largely  coincided with  the
first decade  or so of Canadian Literature, and  the very title of one of his best essays, "Eclectic Detachment" suggested  a  criti­ cal viewpoint very similar  to that held  by the first editor of the  journal.
It  may  seem  that  my  initial emphasis on Smith  as a critic  diverts  attention from his  two  other roles,  as  poet  and  as  an­ thologist.  But I believe the  three personae of Arthur Smith were very closely related, and   I  can   think   of  few  truer   examples than  A.J.M. of the Critic as Artist,  which can  always  of course  be inverted into  the concept of the  Artist  as  Critic.
One   of  my  discoveries   as   a   literary editor in  Canada has  been  the  closeness of the  relationship, in our  world  of  writ­ ing,  between  the  poet  and  the critic. The
 best criticism  written in Canada has  usu­ ally been by poets  discussing  other  poets, and  this,  I  think,  derives  from  the  fact that  poets  highly  conscious  of  their  writ­ ing as craft,  as many Canadian poets tend to  be, develop  in  the  balancing of intui­ tive   and   intellectual   elements  a   very sharp  self-critical sense  which   they  can then apply  to the work of others,  as poets like  Margaret Atwood   and   Doug  Jones and  Roy Daniells  have  done  just as ably as A. J.  M. Smith.
And A. J. M. Smith, I would say, in all his roles remained the critic,  even though at  times  he  was  the  critic  self-transcen­ dant.   Thus   in  his  poetry  we  do  indeed find  an  awareness  of  the  land  which  he shared   with  almost  all  the  notable  con­ temporary Canadian  poets.  He  declared  his intent:

To  hold  in  a  verse  as austere
As the spirit of prairie and  river, Lonely,  unbuyable, dear,
The North, as  a  deed  and   for  ever.

Yet one never finds in his verse either  the kind  of  topographical inventory that often  appears in  Birney  or  Gustafson   or the  kind of immersion in landscape prac­ ticed   by  Purdy   or   Zieroth.   Proceeding from imagism, he abstracts elements  from the  Canadian scene,  but  the  result,  as a poem,  is less descriptive  than  mythologi­  cal,  creating a  new  landscape of the  im­ agination, as in  what  is perhaps his most celebrated   poem,   "The  Lonely   Land," with  its  curiously  diembodied talk  of  "a
beauty  I of dissonance I this resonance  I
of stony strand / this smoky sky I curled
over  a black  pine...."
And in fact,  of course,  the greater part of A.J.M.'s  poetry  has little  to do with the Canadian  land,   moving   as  it  does  into areas of literary contrivance and conceit which  show Smith recognizing that  even if literature derives  from  experience, the experience  of a literary man  is likely to be that  of books. And so, like the great mod­ erns who preceded him, such  as Eliot and

157

OPINIONS & NOTES



Joyce  and  Pound, we find, as I remarked a  decade ago  m  Odysseus  Ever  Return­ ing,  that

Smith  resorts  to   those   sublime  forms   of literary  criticism -the  only   fully   creative ones: the  parody, the  translation (there are excellent  renderings  of  Gautier  and   Mal­ larme), the   deliberate pastiche (the  "Sou­ venir   du  Tempus Perdu" written  for  Leon  Edel), and   the  tribute "in   the  manner of"  (finely  rendered in  "To Henry  Vaughan"). All  these   are   more   than   feats  of  imitative virtuosity;   they    are    the    empathetic   ap­  proaches  of  a poet   who  can,   when   he  so desires, be  resoundingly  himself.

Certainly,  as  an   anthologist, Smith's role  was overwhelmingly critical.  In  The Book   of   Canadian  Poetry   he   did   not merely   make    a   selection   of   what    he thought had  been  the best poems written by   Canadians.  His   anthology,   accom­ panied   by  notes  on  each  poet  and   by a superb   36-page   critical-historical intro­ duction,  not  only  selected  earlier   poets who  had  written under  the  influence  of mainly British  models, but also picked the poets  alive   at   the   time  of  compilation (and they filled more  than  half the book) with  such   astuteness that   today,   nearly forty years later,  we accept  most of them as  significant  poets   in  our   own   terms. Smith, in other words, established  a chart and  a canon  of Canadian poetry  from  its beginnings that  have  been little  changed by the  efforts  of later  critics  and  literary historians.  In   his  later   anthologies, the Oxford Book  of Canadian Verse   (1g6o) and  Modern Canadian Verse   ( 1970)   he updated his selection  and  broadened  his chart   to  include  the   new  poets  of  the
1950's  and  196o's,  both  English  and French, and  did  so with  such  a true  ear that  both collections take their places as seminal  examples of criticism  by selection, as well as readable collections  of verse.
But beyond the impressive scholar and critic,  the  meticulous craftsman in  verse who worked  his lines to the last safe mo­ ment   of  polishing,   there  also  stood  the
 poet  concerned with  the  great  themes  of life  and  death, and  aware  of  the  darker shapes  within  the  glass-

shadows I have  seen, of me deemed deeper
That  backed on  nothing in  the  horrid air.

I met  Arthur Smith  perhaps four  times during  our   twenty   years  of  association, and  our  friendship developed almost  en­ tirely   by  letters.   I  was  indebted   to  his help  and  advice  when  I started Canadian Literature and  supported by  his  interest  throughout, and  by the warmth and  con­ cern  that  continued  even  when,  in  later  years,   he  ceased   to  contribute.  I   have always  treasured the fact  that, as a token of  his  friendship, he  honoured  me  with the dedication of Toward a View of Can­  adian  Letters. I  think  he viewed  the sick­ ness and misfortune of his later  years, the death of  his wife and  his own  impending death, with  the  kind  of stoicism  that  was the other side to the  restrain and  balance of  his poetry,  and  I am  reminded that  he closed  his Collected Poems  with  an "Epi­ taph" he doubtless accepted for  himself:

Weep not  on  this  quiet stone, I, embedded here,
Where sturdy roots  divide the  bone
And  tendrils split  a  hair,
Bespeak you  comfort of  the  grass
That is embodied me,
Which as  I am,  not  as  I was, Would choose  to  be.

GEORGE WOODCOCK


ON THE VERGE

****   EDGAR CHRISTIAN,  Death in  the  Barren
Ground, ed.   George  Whalley.  Oberon   Press,
$rs.oo; pa. $6.gs.   Many years  ago  George Whalley   wrote     a    memorable   radio    docu­ mentary which  he  called "Death in  the  Barren Ground," about the  events that  led  the  north­ ern  traveller and  his  two  companions  to  perish  of  starvation on  the  Thelon River  during the winter of  1926-27. Later  he  expanded it  into the    biographical   Legend    of    fohn     Hornby (rg62). Now  he  has  used  the  original title  for the   diary kept   by  Hornby's cousin   and   com-

ON THE VERGE



panion, eighteen-year-old Edgar Christian (first published in  I937   as  Unflinching: A  Diary  of Tragic  Adventure)   and    has    republished it, with   an   introduction  longer  than  the   diary itself.  It remains an  extraordinarily pitiful and moving document of folly  and  fortitude. Horn­ by and  his companions -all  the  evidence sug­ gests-put  themselves into a  situation where  death was  almost   certain, but  having done  so they  acted according to  their  strict British  tra­  ditions,  and    the   courage   with   which   young  Christian (a  distant  relative of Fletcher Chris­ tian   of  the  Bounty)  faced his  virtually inevit­ able  end  is  made all  the  more  poignant by the naivete of  his  prose.  A prime document of  the Canadian  North.
G.W.
****   FERNAND    OUELLET,     Lower   Canada:
179I-I84o.  McClelland &  Stewart, n.p.   With
Lower Canada: 179I-IB4o, the  Canadian Cen­ tenary series,   which   W.  L.  Morton   began   to edit   almost   twenty years   ago  and  which   Mc­
Clelland & Stewart began to publish in  I967, is virtually complete. In this  case  it  is not  a ques­ tion  of  a  wholly  new  book.  The editors  wisely chose  to  commission a  translation of  Ouellet's I876  masterpiece, Le  Bas-Canada:  1791-IB4o: changements structureaux  et  crise. Ably  trans­ lated and  at  times  adapted  by Patricia Claxton, the  book  fits  admirably into  the  pattern of  the series.   Its   sub-title, "Social   Change and   Na­  tionalism," indicates its special approach. Ouel­ let  is concerned with the  cultural and  economic changes  that attend  and   sometimes  influence shifts   in  social   attitudes, and   after  so  many  studies  dominated by  the  strictly  political cir­ cumstances that led  up  to the  rebellions of I 837 and   I 838,  it  is stimulating to  have  a  different approach, and   to  understand how  the  shifting relationships  between  classes   and   interests  in Lower Canada after its creation in  I 791  made the  political letting of blood  in  I837  inevitable and   perhaps  good   for   the   general  health  of the  community. Lower  Canada: 179I-IB4o is a  book  nobody  concerned with   examining the roots     of    contemporary   Canadian   conflicts  should  neglect.
o.w.
****   BILL  HOLM   and   GEORGE IRVING QUIM• BY, Edward S. Curtis in the  land   of the  War Canoes. Douglas &  Mcintyre,  $I8.95. One of the   ironies  born   of  a  generation  accustomed to  film  is  that   when Edward  Curtis's  magni­ ficent    I9I4 film   In  the    Land  of   the   Head Hunters was  restored  in   I972   (and   renamed In  the   Land  of  the   War  Canoes), many   ob­ servers  accepted  it   as   a   factual  account  of Kwakiutl life. Perhaps it  also  suggests an  audi-
 ence   too  ignorant  of  Indian  history   and   too eager  for   myth. The  film,  of   course,   was   a performance. In   this    fine   book,    the    film's restorers-Holm  and Quimby-provide   an engaging account  of  Curtis's  career  and   tell how   the   film   was   made;  they   include  script outlines, contemporary  reviews,  and  reflections on  why  the  film  won  so much  critical acclaim, yet  affected film  history so  little. Illuminating the   text   is  a  series   of   photographs -taken of  the   filming   in   I9I4-by  one   of  Curtis's assistants, Edmund  August  Schwinke. These constitute  an   extraordinary  cinematic   docu­ mentary in   their  own   right:  but   what   they catch   (in   addition  to   cinematic   stills)    are  those  moments of  relaxation  between  takes,  of playing and  clowning and  sober  introspection, which   reveal   both   the  human  connection ob­ viously  established  between the  film-maker and  the  cast,  and  the  substantial disparity between the  film  and  real  life.
W.N.
***  ALLEN    WARDWELL,    Objects  of   Bright Pride. The  Center for Inter-American Relations and   The American Federation of  Arts  (avail­ able  from  Douglas & Mcintyre), $22.95.   Mu­ seum  collection catalogues can  be  more   than just   tour   guides. They  can,   as  here,   provide valuable data on  stages  of  a  culture's art, and  crisp  detailed photographs of  individual pieces (though they  seldom  convey  a  sense of  texture or  reach  adequately toward  an  object's artistic vitality).  The  items   of   Northwest  Coast   In­ dian   art   assembled  here-many  taken south by  George  Hunt   and   Franz Boas-are  fine examples  of   masks,   panels,  fabrics,  domestic necessities,  and  shamanistic figures. But   their  presence  also  raises   the   moral  dilemma  em­ bodied  in  any  collection: the  tension   between the   function  of   art  in   any   society   and   the ambivalent right to  possession.
W.N.
*** GERMAINE  POULIOT  et  aJ., Par  Mille Chemins; Un  Ami   sur   ta   route;  Le   Temps d'une  rencontre. Les   Editions  Projets. These three admirable  intermediate  school   antholo­ gies provide an  opportunity to praise  again the  vitality of  literary texts  in  Quebec.  They take  seriously  the  work  of Quebec writers, and  place  Vigneault, Theriault,  Roy,  Leclerc,  and   Las­  nier   in  a context including  Dickens, Tagore, Lager!of, Wilde,  and   Brecht.  But   over   three separate  grades,   there   isn't  an    anglophone Canadian writer  to be found. So  the  texts  also provide an  opportunity to  say  that translation in  a  bilingual Canada has  to be  a two-way  art.

W.N.

159

ON THE VERGE



***   JOHN   PORTER,   The  Measure of  Cana­ dian    Society:  Education,  Equality,   Oppor­ tunity.   Gage, n.p.     John Porter  wrote one  of the  seminal  books   on   Canadian  society,   and  with    The   Vertical   Mosaic   (1965)   changed our  thinking on  the  nature and  the distribution of power  in  this  country. It  was  a  masterpiece that   combined the  intelligent  use  of  statistics with  an  intuitive  grasp of  the  whole  situation to produce a  model of  writing by an  academic that   went   far  beyond   collegiate  bounds in  its appeal and   its  influence. But   over   the   years until  Porter's  death in  1979,  waiting for  some­ thing  more  to  equal The  Vertical Mosaic, one began   to  sense   that  he   was   perhaps  a  man whose  career would   be  dominated by  a  single notable work.  For  the  books  he  published after
1965   were  of  little interest except   to  his  col­
leagues, even  when, as in  Does Money Matter? Prospects   for Higher Education, he wrote  with polemical  intent.  The   present  volume    is   a group of  papers which   before  his death Porter had  selected, with  the  intent of publication, as his  best.   They are   interesting  because   of  the man   who  wrote them, and   anyone   concerned with  the genesis  of a masterpiece will read  with much    interest  the   first   piece,   rather   forbid­ dingly  entitled,   "Research    Biography   of   a Macrosociological   Study:    Vertical   Mosaic." But  as one  continues  through  essays which  are sometimes  informational in  a  survey   manner, and  sometimes polemical, arguing  a  centralist view  of  Canadian society,   it  becomes   evident that   Porter  never   again  roused   the   creative passion    which     took    him    through   Vertical Mosaic. The surveys  are  mildly  interesting and useful  to students; the  polemics  are  honest  but unconvincing. There  is never  again that  happy marriage of information and  imagination which made Porter's single   masterpiece so  important and  so fascinating a book.
G.W.
***  DENNIS OLSEN, The State  Elite.   McClel­ land    &    Stewart,   $14.95.   Dennis   Olsen    is frank  in  admitting  his  debts   to  John  Porter, and  The State Elite  does  in  fact  take  off from  Porter's analysis in  The  Vertical  Mosaic  of the Canadian  class   and    power   structure  in   the early  196o's. Olsen concludes  that, if anything, the   elites   determined  by   class  and   ethnicity have  increased their hold  on Canadian society.  It  is  the   state   elite-political    and   bureau­ cratic-that  concerns  him,   and   he  sketches out  very interestingly how that  elite  works,  and  works  mainly in  favour of  the   upwardly mo­ bile  middle class;   the   upper class  receives  the protection  it   requires  without  being   actively involved in  the state elite, and  the working class
 receives  merely as much as will  keep  it  reason­ ably   quiet.  It is  a   concise,   provocative  and  clearly-written study.
G.W.

****   F. MURRAY GREENWOOD, ed. and  trans!., Land   o'f    a  Thousand  Sorrows. Univ. of  B.C. Press,  $25.00.   Works  like  Roughing It in  the Bush   and  scores   of   elementary  history  texts give  most  Canadians their  glimpse  of the  1837 rebellions. Papineau and  Mackenzie now  stand celebrated  as  leaders of  popular  resistance to government chicanery and  established  centrali­ zation. Fran11ois-Maurice Lepailleur  joined  the fray   in   1838   on   the   promise that   American forces   would  help   ensure  canadien   indepen­ dence.  After  a   skirmish   with    the   Caughna­ waga,  Lepailleur  and   others   were   captured, and  in  the  name of  example,  were  transported to  an   Australian  penal  colony. There -ack­ nowledged  only   as  "cut   throats"  and   "bush­ rangers" -they  were  imprisoned in  the  Con­ cord   stockade,  and  secretly Lepailleur  man­ aged   to  keep  the  daily   journal from   1840   to
1842   that Greenwood has  here  made publicly available. That  these  prisoners had   greater freedom than  those   in  the  Tasmanian  colony is only  a  comparative  judgment. Lepailleur is critical  of  the   warders, exact  in   his  observa­ tions  of  daily   life,  and   quietly  eloquent in  his testament to  the  succour of  faith and   the  sor­ row of exile.
W.N.

****   DENNIS     REID,     "Our   Own   Country Canada." National Gallery of Canada,  $29.95· This is a fine  book,  an  intelligent guide   to  the landscape paintings of Queen Victoria's  Cana­ dians, who  during the  period  186o-1890 were working in  Montreal and  Toronto and   paint­ ing   what  they    saw   of    the    wilderness   they visited.  Jingoism  and   expansion  were   social commonplaces of the  time,  and  painters sought the  extent of  the  country's  wilderness in  order to   bring    it   back   home    to   the   metropolitan centres.  Niagara,   Point  Levis,    and    Kicking Horse  Pass   vie   with  such   nameless  places   as "A    Woodland    Stream,"  but    the    paintings reveal an  increasing concern to  record exactly what  the   artists  perceived.  Such   a   develop­ ment   reflects    not    only    a   change  from    an idealization of nature to  a "scientific" attitude, but    also   the   birth  of   institutional   establish­ ments. As the  two cities  grew,  they fostered art  schools, publications  like  Picturesque Canada, an  academy, and   (importantly)   photographic studios like   that  of   William  Notman.  As  the CPR  extended   west,   moreover,  it   served   an artistic function somewhat in  the  way Darwin's



Beagle   expedition did:   to  carry   painters   to­ wards    the   new   world,  and    perhaps  a   little  closer  to  the  new  language of the  eye  their  art  required. One   could   wish  for  more  colour  in this   book-and   perhaps in   the   painters  as well:   but  to a degree Canadian  colour awaited the  eyes  of Tom Thomson and  Emily  Carr.

W.N.

**  WILLIAM  DAWSON  LESUEUR.   A   Critical Spirit: The Thought  of  William Dawson   Le­ Sueur,  ed.   A.   B.   McKillop. McClelland & Stewart,  $5.95.  WILLIAM  DAWSON  LESUEUR. William Lyon   Mackenzie: A  Reinterpretation. Ed.  A. B. McKillop.  Macmillan, $9-95· 	Wil­ liam   Dawson  LeSueur  has   long   had   a  great reputation   in   negative.   He    was-says    the legend-the  man  who  wrote  the  biography of Wiiliam  Lyon   Mackenzie that  was   not   pub­ lished  because   Mackenzie's heirs,  and   William Lyon   Mackenzie  King   in  particular,  objected to  its  criticisms of  the  great rebel.   All  this  in recent years,  when  liberal historians have  fallen into   disrepute,  had   given   LeSueur  a  modish lustre   as   a   precursor  of  contemporary  Tory historians  like  Donald  Creighton.  But  all  too often   the   eager   revival   of  a  neglected  figure results  in  his  eventual rejection, and   this  may well  be  the   case   with   LeSueur.  At   last  The Carleton  Library  presents,  published  for   the first  time,  his William Lyon Mackenzie. Simul­ taneously, in  A  Critical Spirit, edited  by  A. B. McKillop,  it   offers   a  group  of  his   essays  on morality, politics, and   like  subjects.  There are  times  when  two  works  of  an  author  operate to reinforce each   other.  The  opposite  is  the  case with   LeSueur,  for   the   very   deficiencies  that  quickly    become   evident  in   A   Critical  Spirit  help  to  explain  why  William  Lyon   Mackenzie may  have  been  rejected by  Morang for  simple literary reasons   even   before  Mackenzie King's henchmen got  to work. LeSueur was not merely  an  intellectual; he  was  one  of  the  cold-hearted kind.   For   him,   the   intellectual  is  the   writer whose   "attention  is   concentrated  on  abstract or  general  questions."  His   essays  are   remark­ able  for  the  absence in  them   of  any  evidence that  he  understood that  appeal of  the  concrete and  the  particular which  is so necessary to  the true  literary artist and, perhaps most  of all,  to the  biographer. That  absence shows   up  disas­ trously in  William  Lyon  Mackenzie.  LeSueur never  really  evokes  Mackenzie as a personality, never  creates a  living  sense  of  his  period;  one ends   by  dismissing  this   work,   so  long   cele­ brated  in  absentia, as  a  pompous and   prolix disquisition that  fails   always  to  focus  sharply enough on  its  subject to  hold  our  interest.  We
 never   grasp   Mackenzie's  true   nature;  always he  is receding into a  fog  of  words.
G.W.
**  HARRY GUTKIN,   journey Into  Our   Heri­ tage.  Lester  &  Orpen  Dennys, $24.95·      Any­ one   interested  in   the   Jewish   emigrations  to Western  Canada  and   the   heritage  that    was celebrated there will  find  in  this  book  a  quick  historical guide   and   a  wealth  of  photographs. But  it escapes  me  to  know  how  whole  chapters on   Jewish   literature   and    education  in   the prairies   could  entirely  avoid   mentioning  the names  of   Fredelle  Bruser    Maynard  and    Eli Mandel.
W.N.
