$2.50  per copy




CANADIAN l TERATURE N°·73
Summer, 1977

EXILES ]IND EXP]ITRI]ITES

Articles
BY DAVID STAINES, T. E. TAUSKY, ROSE MARJE BURWELL, ROBIN ENDRES, PETER  BRJGG

Interview
OF  GEORGE JONAS  BY  LINDA SANDLER

Poems
BY R. G. EVERSON, AL PURDY, PIER GIORGIO  Dl CICCO, JAMES  HARRISON, JOHN DITSKY, CYRIL DABYDEEN, ANNE CORKETT, RON  MILES

Review Articles and Reviews
BY GEORGE WOODCOCK, ROY  MCSKIMMING, WAYNE GRADY, MICHAEL E. DARLING, TOM   MARSHALL, DOROTHY LIVESAY, RUSSELL M.  BROWN, FRED COGSWELL, ANN P. MESSENGER, MARILYN BAXTER, PETER STEVENS,  MARTY GERVAIS, W. H.  NEW', DAVID WATMOUGH, BARRIE DAVIES, CHRISTOPHER LEVENSON

Notes and Opinions
BY L. T. CORNELIUS AND  OTHERS

A QUARTERLY OF CRITICISM AND REVIEW










MASSEY'S HARVEST







I RETURNED TO  CANADA  from England in 1949, just in time to learn of the launching of the Royal Commission on National  Development  in the Arts, Letters and  Sciences, otherwise known as the Massey Commission. Coming from literary  London,  which in the late 194o's was flourishing with an  abandon that  contrasted  with  the  physical  austerity  of  Cripps's  still-rationed   Britain,  I could not help feeling that  there was indeed need for some kind of stimulation  of the arts in Canada.
The scene in 1949 was as bleak as a Winnipeg winter. The  only literary maga­ zines in evidence were Alan  Crawley's  Contemporary  Verse,  John  Sutherland's Northern  Review,  and  the  apparently  imperishable  Canadian  Forum,  and  the first two did not have long to live. In publishing it was the pre-McClelland  era, the age of the Ryerson Chapbooks  and, outside that slim venture, of an overwhelming caution.  Art  galleries and  theatres  barely survived  in  the largest  towns, and  the touring  companies  that  visited Canada  were almost  always of the lower grade.
Only the CBC seemed a shining exception, and it had  a devoted following in those days when  radio  was still unchallenged.  Robert  Weaver  was already  per­ forming  the role of one-man  council of the arts which he has carried on so splen­ didly ever since. One  heard  regular  plays and  concerts, one could sell talks on a great  variety of subjects, for listeners were then treated  as intelligent  adults,  and at  a time when  hardly  any  periodical  would  publish a short  story,  Bob Weaver commissioned  them  for  CBC  readings  and  then  persuaded  publishers  to  issue them as anthologies. The  CBC was not only in those days a patron  and an activa­ tor of literature  in Canada. One  took pride in it when  Americans  south  of the border talked of it with envy, for it supported  drama  and music as energetically as it did literature.  Perhaps,  even then, the BBC was better,  but the BBC did not seem like the Thelon  River running  through  the Barren Land,  and the CBC did.


2

MASSEY'S  HARVEST

But that  was not enough to make me as a writer decide that  I wanted  to stay in Canada, and  when  I went off on a Guggenheim  to France  and  the U.S.A.  in
1950, I was not at all sure I would  really settle here. Some atavistic  longing  for the great  spaces did draw  me back, in the fall of 1951, just in time to read  the Massey Report,  which appeared  then, and  I was so impressed by this exhaustive and  concerned  enquiry  into a nation's  creative needs, with  its ambitious  recom­ mendations,  that  I decided to stay and see what  would develop. It  was only one of the  reasons why  I  stayed,  for  the  physical beauty  of  British  Columbia   had woven its spell, but it was a decisive reason; scenery alone would  never have been enough.
I  remembered  all this when  I was invited  last winter  to take  part  in  a  sym­ posium  in  Ottawa  called  by  the  Governor-General   to  celebrate  the  quarter­ centenary  of the  Massey Report  and  to consider the direction  to take from  now on. Half-a-dozen  artists and critics, a couple of cabinet ministers, a Tory shadow minister,  a  cosmopolitan  Senator,  and  a  clutch  of cultural  bureaucrats spent  a weekend to Government  House in which the intervals between luncheons, dinners and receptions in Ottawa style were devoted to considering the changing situation of the Canadian arts over the past quarter  of  a century;  on the last morning  we pulled our scattered  thoughts  together to  make some tentative  recommendations which, for all their  visible effect on the  powers-that-be,  appear  to have dropped into a deep well. But we were all  conscious that  in the Peacock-like atmosphere of that  great-bouse  gathering  by  no means everything had  been said that  might have been, and  one of our last decisions was that  afterthoughts in writing  would be acceptable,  particularly  from  literary  types who  talk  best  to  God  and  their typewriters.
I found  myself, indeed,  with a great many afterthoughts  (a selection of which were sent  to Ottawa and  went into the same deep well of oblivion as the  sym­ posium's  recommendations),  and  some of  these  afterthoughts  were  about  the Massey Report  itself. I was astonished, on re-reading  it, to realize that  time had given it a positively classic character; written  with a literary  flair  one  does not associate with Royal Commission reports, it showed an extraordinary  wisdom in its assessment of the great  cultural  lacks of Canada  in  the  late  194o's  and  the scanty resources to meet them. What  impressed me perhaps more than  anything  else was the way the Commission had created its own bow  wave of interest,  not only looking into needs but making people think of them, so that  when the time came to implement  the most important  of all the recommendations,  that  regard­ ing the foundation of the Canada  Council, the idea was accepted  virtually  with­ out protest.
I have often heard it said that  Massey was an "elitist" and that  the Report  was
an elitist document.  And so, if you think in such barren  terms, it was. But in the cultural  desert of Canada at that  time a group  of men and  women was needed

3

MASSEY'S HARVEST

who could act the elitist role and  decide what looked like being good for the arts and  hence  for  the  country.  I  wonder-I wonder  greatly-if Pierre  Trudeau would have the grudging  courage St. Laurent  showed in setting up a commission to enquire into such a minority interest, and, having set it up, to implement  a fair proportion  of its recommendations.
What  the Massey Commission did, if we give it credit for the consequences of its  recommendations,  was  to  create  an  entirely  new situation   for  the  arts  in Canada, and  to change,  in  ways not entirely anticipated  and  not  in every way good, the general attitude of Canadians towards the artist as creator and performer.
Really, one has to see the situation  from two points of view, that  of the artist and  that  of the  audience.  Artists  have  been  offered opportunities  of  fulfilment during the past twenty years in Canada  that were unimagined  at the beginning of the  I 95o's. And  appreciators of the arts have been offered such opportunities of enjoyment  that  recent statistics suggest attendances  at cultural  events (plays, con­ certs, the ballet, art  shows, etc.)  now exceed attendances  at spectator sports.
In  Canadian writing  (and  I suspect also in painting  though  I am not so sure about  music)  the  most striking  development  has  been the  vast quantitative  in­ crease in creations and creators, among whom -as always-there is a high inci­ dence of fool's gold, but also a surprisingly frequent  appearance of the real thing, so that  a  library  of good  Canadian books assembled  today  would  be  a  vastly richer  collection than  one assembled  in  I949·  In  poetry the  upsurge  has  been enormous;  as I pointed  out in a chapter  of the new Literary History of Canada,  no less than  6oo  poets published  more than  I, I oo collections of verse  between I96o  and   I972.  The  short  story  has emerged  from  under  Weaver's  protective wing to become a flourishing genre. If the number  of fiction titles published each year has not increased so dramatically  as the number of  books of  verse, the annual  total of good novels is certainly far higher than in pre-Massey years. Criticism  has matured  and  proliferated,  both in books and in periodicals, and  literary  journals of all kinds are not only numerous beyond all our dreams in  I949, but often dur­ able into the  bargain.  And  the appearance of new theatres of all kinds  (profes­ sional, semi-professional  and  amateur)  has  presented  dramatists  with  unprece­ dented  opportunities to write  for  the stage  which  have  partly  compensated  for the unfortunate recent shrinkage in the role of the CBC as a patron  of drama.
How much  all this is the result of the Massey Commission, with its direct  off­ spring,  the Canada Council,  and  its indirect  creations, the provincial  arts coun­ cils which support  artists in varying degrees (stingily in British Columbia, gener­ ously in Ontario), is impossible to say. In  my view, just as the  Massey  Commis­ sion sensed and  activated  an already  existing hunger  among  Canadians for arts  they could enjoy, so the first activities of the Canada  Council and  the provincial councils coincided  with  an  upsurge  in  creativity  linked  with  the  general  social restiveness of  the  I 96o's.  Artistically,  Canada  seemed  to  come  of  age  in  that


4

MASSEY's HARVEST

decade,  and  the Council  was there to provide what  the individual  artist  needed most in a country where payment for his work had always been scanty and inter­ mittent: the gift of time. The  complement  to this was giving money for material expenses to performing  arts groups,  galleries, magazines  and  publishers so that, when  writers  or  painters  or  musicians  had  made  use of the  gift  of  time,  their efforts could  be presented  to  the  public. In  these fields, the  Canada  Council's work has been excellent,  and  uninhibited  by false fears of  elitism. By removing financial  anxieties from  artists, it helped to assure that  much  good  work which otherwise would  have  been aborted  was completed  and  presented  to the  public.
But then the Council  moved into more questionable  areas than  merely giving time to artists and expenses to performers and publishers. Some of its programmes seemed to negate its grants  for creation  by encouraging  artists  to occupy  them­ selves with  things outside  their  proper  work;  writers, for example,  were  funded to wander  over the country  reading  their works in the cause of  publicity,  when they should  have been at home doing what  a writer does  best-writing.
A major Canada Council project that has always disturbed  me is the Art Bank, whose effect has been to make  the state  the principal  patron  of the visual arts, with the result that  dealers tend  to become state  purchasing  agents  and  painters to become increasingly dependent  on governmental  buying and  hence on official taste. It  is only a short step from  that  point  to the idea  that  artists  of all kinds should  become state  employees or at least state  pensioners, and  that  the Canada Council's  ultimate function  is to be either a personnel office or a welfare agency.
The  most recent Council move with regard to writers has very disquieting  im­
plications in this direction. It institutes the virtual beginnings of a "guaranteed income"  programme.  First,  only  two people will be chosen;  they  will  have  to present projects lasting for three years, and over these years their incomes will be sustained  by Canada Council  grants  at  the level of $16,ooo.  No doubt  the  first two of these three-year  grants,  and  perhaps  many  others,  will enable  writers  to fulfil long, difficult and  not very remunerative  projects that  are of real value. But it is the idea that  writers should have a "guaranteed income"  rather  than  specific grants for particular  projects, that  concerns me. The  dialectic of struggle  plays a real, though  undetermined part  in  the process of artistic  creation,  and  to make artists secure through  continuing  subsidies is more likely to produce plump  capons than soaring eagles.
It is time to look carefully at the complexity of state aid to the arts and its pos­
sible effect if it becomes too intrusive or, for that  matter,  too solicitous towards the artist.  Patronage  of any kind is an ambivalent  process, and  we have already noted in these pages the  occasional need to bite the hand  that  feeds. The ambi­ valence of aid to the arts has perhaps, however, most deplorably shown its darker side in contributing  to the transformation  of the CBC from something  near  to a dragon  of the airwaves into a moribund  dinosaur, for if the Canada Council  has

5

MASSEY's HARVEST

on the whole kept up high standards,  the CBC over the last decade  at least has gone nowhere but down.
And here we come to question of the audience for the arts, how it has changed since the issuing of the Massey Report  in  I 95 I, and the effects of the changes in its manner  of participation.
We have to bear  in mind  here  that  there  are two ways of enjoying  the  arts, direct and  indirect.  Direct enjoyment  occurs when we go to a play or a concert or an art gallery, when we listen to poetry being read, when we perform  plays or music as amateurs. The indirect way is through  the media;  we read books instead of watching  plays or hearing  poets;  we study  paintings in fine colour  reproduc­ tions;  we listen to recorded  music in our own houses. Also, we  watch  television or listen to radio, and  here there is the difference that, while we control our read­ ing or our listening to records, we are dependent  for  broadcast  entertainment on the programmes  offered by the various networks. For those interested  in the arts in Canada  this has in the past meant  principally the  CBC.
The  significant change  that  has taken  place in the habits of the arts audience
is a shift towards  participation as spectators or performers directly in arts  events and  towards  choosing those mediations,  such  as reading  books and  listening to records, which  allow  the  maximum   personal choice. The  amount  of time such an audience  now allots to radio  and  television has sharply  decreased;  they have opted out of MacLuhan's mass media utopia. This is partly because of the greater incidence of arts  events in their communities, partly because of the vastly increased availability  of paperback  books, of records and  tapes. Thanks  to these changes, largely  fostered  in  Canada through   programmes  deriving  ultimately  from  the Massey Commission, the arts audience  has become progressively less interested in what is offered by the broadcasting systems and  particularly  by the CBC.
This shift in attention  is what has allowed the bureaucrats  who control the CBC to debase their programming virtually at will, and with the illusion of public con­ sent, since they have not been subjected  to the kind of massive protest that would have occurred even as recently as the mid-Ig6o's. In the high days of radio, when the CBC was the main source of dramatic  production in Canada and the principal employer of actors, musicians and  writers, listening was a habit  among  the vast numbers of people who now frequent  arts events, and such people formed -and continued  to form until very recently-the CBC's most faithful body of support, its Praetorian  Guard.  In those days anything  produced by the CBC was a matter of interest  and  discussion among  people concerned  with the  arts;  the  CBC was their lifeline in a society where  the arts  were badly served,  and  this feeling con­ tinued  into the  Ig6o's  in radio  and  into the early years of  television, when  pro­ ducers and  programmers  alike were still conscious that  the new medium  might be even better  than  the old as a means of reporting on  the  arts  and  extending their publics.

6

MASSEY'S  HARVEST

That  time is ended.  Almost a  decade  ago  CBC television virtually  ceased  to serve the  arts.  CBC  radio  still pays lip service, and  FM  is not  wholly lost, but AM is being ruined by inane experiments in presenting the arts through  mindless chatter  and  absurdly fragmented  programmes  in which the pop and  the classical are  inextricably  mixed. The  people who concoct such  programmes  are  not  pro­ ducers;  they are communications technicians bedevilled by false ideas of  democ­ racy. They have failed to understand  that  democracy, in so far as such a concept can be taken out of politics and transferred  to the arts,  is not a matter  of  melding all tastes into a flavourless uniformity;  it depends on pluralism, on people develop­ ing their own tastes independently, and  in a situation  where one network  cannot possibly serve all tastes, it should  serve tastes not otherwise  provided  for.  There  are  plenty of stations  to serve the  pop audience;  it does  not  need  and  does  not want  the CBC. Therefore  let the Corporation  go back to what it once did so well, conserving the nation's  cultural  heritage, and content itself with serving the great middlebrow  audience,  which  likes its drama  to  be  good,  its experimental  pro­ gramming to be intelligent, and  prefers its classics unadulterated.
But where is the audience?  Lost already? It may well be, having-as I believe
-abandoned the CBC in favour of more direct and dependable forms of satisfac­ tion, such as live music and drama, quality pocket books and  recordings. Yet that lost audience  is the only true  audience  the CBC ever had, for the insane  pursuit of ratings  which  the  CBC  now carries on is bound  to fail,  if  only because the Corporation is inept  in  its  commercial  programming  in  comparison   with  the Americans. If the CBC is to recover any following it must  recover its uniqueness, the quality that once made its arts programmes and its almost vanished talks pro­ grammes  the envy of intelligent  Americans.
The situation is urgent, for the road the CBC is now taking is the primrose path to I g84. To  present programmes  in which  there is nothing  for  the  listener's  or viewer's mind to grasp as he is lulled into thoughtless complacency seems the aim of present-day CBC programmers.  Certainly, if a dictator wished to use the media to lull the  consciousness of the  people  (and  one sometimes suspects the  present government  of such ambitions), CBC AM radio as it is being mis-shaped  today would  be his ready tool and  CBC television has the same totalitarian  potential. This is the dark side of the results of the Massey Report,  which its framers  never contemplated; we have gained  vastly in direct  participation  in  the  arts, but  we have done so at the cost of failing  to notice the dangerous  debasement  of public broadcasting,  ultimately  the  most potent of the mass media.








7

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF



David Staines






BRIAN MOORE has the dffitineHon of being a write.- with two nationalities, Canadian and  Irish,  though  he now lives in California. 1 While  proud of his Canadian citizenship and  his ten-year  residence  in Canada, where  he wrote his first three  novels, he acknowledges his primary  debt  to Ireland: "I'm an  Irish writer  in this way. I was brought up in Ireland, and  Mauriac once said  'the  door closes at twenty  on a writer  and  that  forms  him.'  So I am  an  Irish  writer  in that I was formed  by Ireland, not  by Canada.'' A crucial  part  of his Irish  formation is the  world  of  Irish   Catholicism, a  religion  prominent throughout  his  fiction. "I'm  interested in Catholicism in a non-religious way,"  he continues, "I'm inter­ ested in the traditions that  it sets up, and  the confticts."2
Born  in  Belfast  of  Catholic parents, Moore  received  a  Catholic education of narrow religiosity.  Like  Stephen  Dedalus   of  Joyce's   Portrait   of  the   Artist,  he attended Catholic schools  that  perpetuated a rigorous  and  bigoted  training, and this  schooling  stands behind   the  indictment of  Saint   Michan's College  in  The Feast  of Lupercal and  later  novels. Like Dedalus,  Moore  rejected  the indoctrina­ tion  of his Catholic education, though it did  leave a powerful  and  lasting  impres­  sion upon  him and  his fiction:

I  felt, and  I still feel, bitterly  against  the school system I  was brought  up  on. It was a system of beating  and  teaching by rote, and when I saw other  children  and how bright they were able to become under American methods, it was around  that time that  I started  to write  Lupercal. I still feel that it's a wonder  I'm  not a com­ plete sadist or a masochist after  the kind of upbringing  we got.3

The seemingly  blind  adherence to religious doctrines,  in particular the preoccupa­ tion  with  hell and  damnation,  represented to  Moore  outworn and  useless values in  the  contemporary world.  Yet  his rejection  of Catholicism was  neither simple nor straightforward. Within its framework he did see a degree  of  solace for some people,  though not  for  himself.  He  could  sense,  for  example,  religion's  p<.Jsitive value for his own  parents:

8

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT  BELIEF

I've always felt, too, that  for most people any faith is better than  no faith.  It gives them something to live for and with. And while I disliked Catholicism  and disliked my parents'  religiosity, I think  that  they were both very honest  people, and  were people who, if they hadn't  had  their faith,  would have  been more  dishonest  and less admirable.  Part  of the admirable  thing  about  my mother  was that  while she was sort of depressive, her faith  kept her from being self-centered.4

"Something to live  for  and   with" is a  dominant theme  in  Moore's fiction;  his characters, trapped  in  a  post-Christian  or  godless  universe,   try  desperately  to create  a set of new values  both  permanent and  satisfying.
In all his novels, with  the possible exception  of The  Great Victorian  Collection,
Moore  juxtaposes the Catholic faith and  the contemporary world  where such  faith seems  no  longer  valid.  Three of  his early  novels,   judith  Hearne,  The Feast of Lupercal, and  The  Emperor  of Ice Cream, all set in Belfast, focus  relentlessly  on the  personal   damage Irish  Catholicism   can  inflict  on  its  unthinking adherents. Moore's  other  novels, whether set in Canada, the United States,  or France, place Catholicism in  the  background, but  its lasting  force  is still evident  in  the  mental attitudes of  the  characters. And   his novella,  Catholics,  is  the  crucial, perhaps definitive confrontation in his fiction between  modem man and  a godless universe.
Moore's  characters represent various  dimensions  of religious  belief or disbelief. The  older  ones,  usually  parental  authorities, accept   the  tenets  of  Catholicism, though  their  belief may  be battered by doubts  they try not  to acknowledge; such religion  often  degenerates into  blind  obedience to outmoded doctrines and  prac­ tices. The  middle-aged struggle valiantly  to cling to the remnants of a faith which  they often  come  to know  as  both  invalid  and  useless, yet they  hold  to  their illu­ sions rather than create any other  illusion. The  young  represent the contemporary world  as it attempts to find  illusions as sustaining and  powerful  as  religion  used to be.
A chronological survey of Moore's fiction reveals the consistency  of his obsessive attitude to Catholicism and  the development of his possible alternatives to religion. To  reject  the  faith  of  one's  parents  and  nation   is a  demanding challenge, but more  frightening is the  search  for  a substitute for  religion,  a search  that  only  a few of Moore's protagonists successfully complete.
judith  Hearne  (I 955), Moore's  first  novel,  is the  incisive  exploration of  the mental  deterioration of a  lonely spinster.  Trapped by  the  confining atmosphere of  Mrs.  Rice's   boarding  house,  thirty-seven-year-old Judith  Hearne  fantasizes about  a growing  relationship with  James  Madden, the landlady's brother. When she realizes  that  Madden has  no  marital intentions, she  resorts  to an  evening  of alcohol.  Because  the  other   boarders   object   to  her  drunken singing,   Mrs.  Rice demands her departure.
Judith Hearne is the victim  of a repressive family  and  a repressive  religion.  As the  novel opens,  two objects  of importance dominate her  room:

9

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

The first thing Miss Judith Hearne  unpacked in her new lodgings was the silver­ framed  photograph of her aunt.  The  place for her aunt, ever since the sad  day of the  funeral,  was on  the  mantelpiece  of whatever  bed-sitting  room  Miss  Hearne  happened  to be living in ...
After she had  arranged  the photograph so that  her dear aunt  could look at  her from the exact centre of the mantelpiece,  Miss Hearne  unwrapped  the white tissue paper  which  covered  the coloured  oleograph  of the Sacred  Heart.  His place  was at  the  head  of  the  bed,  His  fingers  raised  in  benediction,  His  eyes kindly  yet accusing. He was old and the painted  halo around  His head was beginning to show little  cracks. He  had  looked  down  on  Miss Hearne  for  a long  time,  almost  half her lifetime.

Like her  aunt, Miss Hearne is the  product of a narrow  Catholic upbringing. At the  Sacred  Heart Convent she learned the  prejudices that  characterize Catholic schools  in  Moore's fiction.  Religion   is a  comfort   and  a  crutch, a  comfort that assures her of her personal holiness and  righteousness  and  a crutch  that  allows her to avoid  any  confrontation with  reality.  Her  faith  prevents  her from  living  in the present; the  world  of the  past  is her  home: "Miss  Hearne's mind  moved  in  a familiar spiral  from  present  to  past,  made  a  journey  which  had  become increas­ ingly frequent since  her  dear  aunt died.  It was so much  easier  to  go  back  now;  going forward was so frightening." At the same time,  however, Catholicism looks to the  future, the  realm  of the  afterlife,  which  should  direct  all  human actions.  Father Quigley  admonishes his congregation: "And those young  people, standing here in this  church, standing there  like a bunch  of  hooligans  at the  back,  waiting  their  chance to  run  out  at  the  Last  Gospel,  what  will God  say  to them  on  that  terrible  day?  What will He say?"
For  Father Quigley  and  his parishioners, God inspires fear  and  terror, not love. Life is an obstacle  course where  God rewards the pains and sufferings  of believers: "When she changed her digs and  met  Mr.  Madden, she felt a sense of victory,  a partial fulfillment, a blessing of God  upon  her for her sacrifices."  The picture of the Sacred Heart is less a comfort than  a warning: "He looked  down,  wise and stem  and  kindly,  His fingers raised  in warning."
The folly of Judith Hearne's fantastical affair  with  James  Madden precipitates her  eviction  from  the  boarding house  as well as her  mental  breakdown. Yet  her deterioration is the  direct  consequence of her failure  to find  any  meaning in  her faith. Miss  Hearne is desperate to  find  some  consolation  and   understanding in religion,  and  her ultimate defeat  is a commentary on the inadequacy of her Catholicism.
After   her  drunken evening   Miss  Hearne flees  to  her   parish   church: "The church  was empty: cleared  of its stock of rituals,  invocations, prayers,  a deserted spiritual warehouse waiting for new consignments." The  rituals  that  sustained  her now  seem  empty   and   hollow; she  prays  naively  for  some  explicit  sign  of  the validity  of her faith:

IO

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT  BELIEF

Surely some great  design kept  it all moving, some Presence  made  it  meaningful. But what if the godless were right, what  if it all started  back aeons ago with fish crawling out of the sea to become men and  women? What  if not Adam  and  Eve, but apes, great monkeys, were our ancestors? In that  world, what  place had a God who cared for suffering?
She  began  to walk. Supposing,  just supposing,  her  heart  cried,  supposing  no­ body has listened  to me  all  these years of prayers. Nobody  at  all  up  above  me, watching  over  me.  Then   nothing  is sinful.  There  is  no  sin.  And  I  have  been cheated,  the crimson  nights  in  that  terrible  book from  Paris,  the sin,  permissible then.  Nobody above. Nobody  to care.

In her verbal exchange with  Bernard, Mrs. Rice's son, she sees her own faith  totter precariously. "God's ways aren't our ways," she tells him. "This life is a cross we have  to bear  in order  to store  up  merit  in the  next.  Don't you  know  your  Cate­ chism  at  all?"  Bernard's rejection of  his  parents' faith   makes  his  response  the embodiment of the doubts she tried  to suppress:

You and  your Sacred  Heart.  What  the hell good has it  done  you?  It's  only an idealized picture  of a minor  prophet.  It won't  work miracles. You've  got to make your own miracles in this world. Now, listen to me. I can help you, if you'll forget this nonsense and  do what  I say. You want  a man.  You can  have  Uncle  James. But don't  bore me with  this nonsense, with  these silly scruples.  Your  God  is only a picture on the wall. He doesn't give a damn  about you.5

Her  subsequent confession to Father Quigley  is her first explicit  acknowledgement of her  loss of faith: "I doubted my faith,  Father. I need  your  advice  because  I had  moments of doubt." His hollow response cannot  hide  his inability to offer her adequate reassurance: "Now, my child, we all have  burdens put  upon  us in this life, crosses we  have  to  bear,  trials  and  tribulations we should   offer  up  to  Our Lord.  And  prayer  is a great  thing,  my child,  a great  thing.  We should  never  be lonely  because  we  always  have  God  to  talk  to."  When  she  uttered these  same sentiments  to  Bernard,  he  rejected   them,   and   now  she   cannot  accept   their relevance.
Father Quigley,  the first in a long series of clerical  portraits in  Moore's novels,
cannot comfort  Miss Hearne because  he too has moments of doubt. His inability to assert  that  God  does dwell  in  the  tabernacle prompts her  physical  assault  on the tabernacle door,  an act of desperation symbolic of both  her need  for faith  and her  inability   to  accommodate herself  to  a  world  without  belief.  At  Eamdiffe Home, the sanatorium that  becomes  her final lodging, she rejects  the  opportunity to confess her sins. "In God's  house  I defied  God.  And  nothing happened," she concludes,  and  now  she  no  longer  believes that  the  sacraments or  the  spiritual world  itself have any significance.
Judith Hearne is a  member of  the  older  generation, the  world  of  rigid  and


II

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

stern  Irish  Catholicism, and  she  cannot  forsake  the  observances and  rituals  that shaped her.  Even  though she no longer  believes in God, she still attends Mass:

She was feeling tired. Why, the Mass was very long. If you did not pray, if you did  not  take part,  then  it  was very, very long. If you did  not  believe, then  how many  things  would  seem different.  Everything:  lives, hopes, devotions,  thoughts. If you do not  believe, you are alone. But I  was of Ireland,  among  my people, a member of my faith.  Now I have no-and  if no faith, then  no people. No, no, I have not given up. I cannot.  For if I give up this, then I must give up all the rest. There  is no right  or  wrong  in  this. I do not feel, I  do not  know. Why should  I suffer this?
0 Lord,  I do not believe, help my unbelief. 0 You-are You-?

In the novel's final paragraph she clings to her picture of the Sacred  Heart where­ by "a new  place  becomes  home." Convinced that  religion  is only  a  personal  illu­ sion, she confronts its vacuity, yet cannot  abandon its meaningless  practices. Her attendance at  Mass  is the  first of many  scenes in  Moore's  fiction  that  reveal  the starkness  of a godless  universe  where  observance without   belief  is  the  only  pos­ sible form  of religious  commitment.


DIARMUID DEVINE,  the protagonist of Moore's second  novel, The  Feast of Lupercal ( 1957),  complements Judith Hearne. A thirty-seven-year­ old  bachelor frightened of marriage or  any  human relationship, Devine  is  crip­
pled   by  his  Catholic  upbringing.  judith  Hearne   refers  frequently  to  its  pro­ tagonist's education at  the  Sacred   Heart Convent; The   Feast  of Lupercal  offers a vivid and  horrifying depiction of Catholic educational institutions. Devine is a schoolmaster at  the  college  he once  attended, Saint  Michan's,  which  thrives  on rumour, bigotry,  fear,  and  caning. Just  as Miss Hearne prides herself  in her alma  mater, so the faculty  of Saint  Michan's prides itself in the repression  it has created  and  now sustains:

Saint  Michan's  was not an  English school, thank  God, it was Irish  and  Catholic. There  was therefore  no nonsense about  putting  boys on their  word  of honour  to own up  to their  own  wrongdoings.  Boys did  wrong. To  find  out  what  they had done, you picked a former wrongdoer and threatened  him. No boy would be foolish enough  to suffer for another's crime. If the boy did  not tell, you gave him  what for. No boy, in Father  McSwiney's experience, was stouter  than  a good cane.

Like Saint  Michan's, Devine's life is confined  and  constricted: "He was like a flower that  had  never  opened. He felt foolish when he thought of that,  but it was true.  Like a flower that  had  never  opened.  He  had  been afraid to open,  afraid." With  unflinching servility  he adheres to the doctrines  of his school  and  its religion. A  combination of  blind  faith,   personal   fears,  and   unthinking  obedience to  all


12

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

authorities, his life is devoid  of vitality,  joy, and  love. In  his boarding-house room there  are  two pictures: one,  Ecce  Homo, a print  of the seventeenth-century  por­ trait  of Christ  dying  for the  sins of mankind; the  other,  a silent  reminder  of his family:

the Divine Infant  of Prague,  His baby body robed in prelate's  garb. Twenty  years ago, an  Irish Sweepstakes winner gave devotion to the Divine Infant of Prague  as the cause of a Derby victory. Mrs. Devine, reading  the story, sent out  at  once to purchase  this picture  and  family prayers  in  the  Devine  household  regularly  im­ plored  a  repetition   of  that  good  fortune.  But  the  Infant  never  completed  the double  and  one  member  of  the  household  knew  why. One  member  sinned  by secret,  lustful  thoughts.  That   member,  years later,  took  the  picture  with  him  to his new digs out of some vague need for penance.

The difference between  the lives of Judith Hearne and  Diarmuid Devine  is the presence  of choice  for  the  latter. Miss Hearne does not  find  a  release  from  her personal confinement; James Madden's love, a  possible escape,  is only  a figment of her imagination. In Una  Clarke,  a young Protestant woman, Devine  has a fleet­ ing  opportunity to love, yet his attachment to  Saint  Michan's cripples  him.  He knows  that   he  will  lose all  chance of  advancement if he  marries a  Protestant. Consequently, while realizing  his victimized  condition, he refuses to  react  against it: "It was all a clique,  the  city was made  up of cliques,  drama cliques,  religious cliques, school  cliques,  and  God  knows what  else. There was no use in  a fellow's trying  to fight them : it was a pure  waste of time."
When  false  rumours about   his involvement   with  Una spread, Devine  refuses to acknowledge his own complicity; fear  makes him unwilling to stand  beside her or agree  to a small lie to pacify  her  uncle's  excessive wrath. The ultimate, indeed only goal  of Devine's existence  is continued acceptance at  the  College.  When  his questionable  behaviour  is  forgiven   by  Father  Keogh,   the   President  of  Saint Michan's,6  he returns to his uncluttered, loveless life. He  is a mental cripple para­ lyzed and  permanently stultified  by Catholicism.
Devine  finds  his personal  peace  in  a life of selfishness where  the  social  world around him  has no relevance; the  only realm  of significance  is the  authoritarian religion  of Saint  Michan's, and  he never dares  to question  his blind  adherence to that  faith.  He becomes the  personal  embodiment of the  Catholic system  that edu­ cated  Judith Hearne. In  the  end  Saint  Michan's continues to  uphold  its  narrow authoritarianism,  and   the   modem  world   fails  to  impinge  upon   its   Catholic territory.
In  The Luck  of Ginger  Coffey ( rg6o)   Moore  abandons his Belfast setting for
the  new  world  of  America. Belfast's  rigid  Catholicism disappears, for  the  new setting  is the consequence of the  characters' desire to escape  their  Catholic  train­ ing.  Ginger  Coffey  brings  his wife Veronica  and  his daughter Paulie to  Canada in an  attempt to  forge  a  prosperous career,   yet  "one   of  his secret  reasons  for

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

wanting to get  away  to the  New  World  was that, in  Ireland, church attendance was not  a matter of choice.  Bloody  well go, or else, tinker,  tailor,  soldier,  sailor, rich  man,  poor  man, you  were  made  to suffer  in  a worldly  sense.  Here,  he was free."
The  Coffey family  is the first portrait in Moore's  fiction of Irish  Catholics whose presence  in  the  new  world  helps  them  to rebel  against  and  reject  their  religious training. Both  Ginger and  Veronica are staunch Catholics who  have  abandoned their  faith.  In  Ireland Father Delaney  reprimanded Ginger  for  practicing birth control: "He [Ginger] said  he was damned if any  priest  would  dictate whether or  not  he'd  have  another child." But  when  Veronica later  demands a  divorce, Ginger  takes  refuge  in  his  Catholic training that  forbids  divorce.  Her  response reflects the  degree  of religion  that  remains  in these immigrants:

Don't  you preach  religion  at  me, Ginger  Coffey, you that  haven't  darkened  a church  door  since  you  came  out  here. Don't  you  talk  about  Catholics.  What's wrong with you is that  you never were a Catholic;  you were too selfish to give God or anyone else the  time of day. Oh,  you may think  I'm  like you now, and  Iam. Inever  pray. But once Idid. Once  Iwas very holy, do you remember?  Icried, Ginger. I cried when Father  Delaney said that  unless we stopped  practicing  birth control he'd refuse us the sacraments. Do you remember that?  No, you never think of that  any more,  do you? But Ido. You changed  me, Ginger.  What  Iam  now has a lot to do with  what  you made  me. So don't  you talk sin to me, don't  you dare!  Sins-Oh, let me tell you. Once your soul is dirty, then  what  difference in the shade of black?

Veronica's attempt to shift  the  blame  to Ginger  for  her own  irreligious behav­ iour  is self-delusion. Like  her  husband she sets aside  the  religion  of her  parents, and  at the end  of the novel a new religion  asserts itself in the form  of  selfless love. As George  Woodcock notes,  "Veronica has not  changed. She is merely seeking  a new set of values  in  a new  world  that  will replace  the  old  faith."7   She learns  to heed  not  the  teachings of Catholicism but  the  demands of  unselfish  love. "You don't know  what  love  is," she  asserts. "Just  remember this,  Ginger.  Love  is un­ selfish, it's  doing  things  for  other   people  and  not  asking  them  to  do  things  for you."  This  kind  of love becomes  the  highest standard in the  new  world.  It is not coincidental that  Veronica's assertion  makes  Ginger  think of Christ: "Was that true  love? Would  the  greatest  proof  of his love for  her be his willingness  to sacri­ fice himself,  the  way  Jesus  had  sacrificed  himself  for  mankind? Jesus  considered  that  the highest  form  of love, didn't he? Well, there you are,  then." In  the  court­  room  scene  Ginger perjures himself  by  taking  a false name  so that  his wife and daughter will not suffer,  and  in the novel's final scene Ginger  and  Veronica reach a new degree  of mutual understanding and  love.
The   Coffeys  abandon the  ritualistic faith  of  their  homeland. When   Ginger

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

enters the  basilica, his reaction  parallels Judith  Hearne's  last visit to  her  parish church:

He looked at the  tabernacle. His large ruddy  face set in a scowl as though some­ one  had  struck  it.  His  lips  shut   tight  under   his ginger  mustache. I  never  could abide  a bully, he said  to the  tabernacle. Listen  to me, now.  I came  in here  to may­ be say a prayer  and  I'll  be the first to admit  I had  a hell of a nerve on me, seeing the way I've  ignored you these  long years. But  now I cannot pray, because  to pray to you, if you're  punishing me,  would  be downright cowardly. If  it's  the  cowards  you want  in heaven, then  good  luck to you. You're  welcome.

Unlike Judith  Hearne,  however, he does find meaning  and security in human relationships, and  the novel shows his acceptance  of another  standard to replace the outworn faith of his homeland.
In  Survival, her  thematic   guide  to  Canadian  literature,   Margaret  Atwood
studies The Luck  of Ginger  Coffey as a portrait  of the reluctant  immigrant  and his failure in the new world:  "He  has learned  Canada's lesson well. Endurance, survival, no victory."8  Yet there is a personal victory since the Coffeys recognize a new set of values. Despite his commercial failure  in Montreal  Ginger  doe.<>  have luck in the most important area of his life; he does come to know love as the only significant value in a godless universe.
The   ritualistic  religion  of  Judith   Hearne   and   Diarmuid   Devine  has  been
replaced by a new world where religion is a part of the past. Now man  must strive to find values to replace the static Catholicism of Ireland.  The  new world seems to free man, to liberate  him from  the paralysis of the old, and  to allow him, un­ impeded  by his Catholic  upbringing,  to accept new standards.  At the same time, however, The Luck  of Ginger  Coffey  never directly confronts  the religion  of  the old world;  set apart  geographically  from  their  ancestors,  the  Coffeys  need  not worry about the confining anxieties and pressures of Irish Catholicism.




E       between the old world's religion and  the new world's struggle  for  other standards  is the  theme  of  Moore's  next novel, An  Answer   from Limbo ( rg62). Brendan Tierney, the book's protagonist, is a struggling young journalist in New York City. He invites his sixty-eight-year­ old Irish mother to come to America and live with him, his wife Janet,  and  their two children. The  presence of Mrs. Eileen Tierney  will  allow Jane  to seek em­ ployment, which will in tum  permit Brendan to pursue a full-time writing career.
Brendan's parents belong to the world of Judith  Hearne  and Diarmuid Devine. His father kept a picture of the Little Flower of Lisieux beside his bed; his mother would  have her grandchildren "on  their  knees, saying  rosaries for  the  souls of the deceased."  Like the  Coffeys, however, Brendan  has abandoned his religion,

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

though his upbringing still haunts him; an  American film director has offered  to cast  him  as a  Calvinist   divine  because  of  his  "noble, guilt-ridden stare." Jane, moreover, represents the new world  where she was born; not Irish, she shares none of Brendan's religious feelings or  background. Even before his mother's arrival Brendan foresees a family  struggle when  she  learns  that  her  grandchildren  have not  been  baptized.
Limbo,  according to  Mrs.  Tierney, is "the place for children who  have  never been  baptized." Conscious  of her  duty  to insure  her grandchildren's baptism, she consults  a  priest  who  recalls  the  authoritarian simplicity  of  Father Quigley  and Saint  Michan's:

The  priest she had  seen in confession had  been  no use. He  said she must  make Brendan  bring  the  children  to  church  and  have  them  baptized.  As if  Brendan would ever agree to the like of that. The  priest had offered to call on Brendan  and Jane. What good would that  do? Priests live behind presbytery walls. They did not understand.

When  she baptizes her  grandchildren without  their  parents' knowledge, she finds herself estranged from  her son and  daughter-in-law. For Jane, the  baptism  repre­ sents  the  final  imposition of  her  mother-in-law's foolish faith. For  Brendan, the baptism is a vivid  reminder of his past:

In  that  moment  I  hated  her. She was my past, with  all its stubborn  supersti­ tions, its blind emotional  faith.  The  rage we feel as children  when  Mummy  knows best, the  rage we know as adolescents  when  our  parents  deny  us  the  conduct  of our  affairs, the frustration  of all intercourse  with  the older  generation.

Because  of the  baptism   Mrs.  Tierney is evicted  by her  son  and  forced  to live alone  until  her return to Ireland; during this isolation she breaks  her hip and  dies. "If there  is, as she believed,  a heaven  above  us, will her God  recompense her for our  coldness  and  indifference?" Brendan wonders.  Yet  her  death only  increases his inner  struggle  with  religion:

The  temporal  life was, for her, a secondary thing. For me, it is all there is. Because of this difference  in belief, a gate shut between us. Because of that  gate, she died alone, trying to reach me. And yet, as I sat in that coffee shop, denying and  despis­ ing my wife's tears, I asked myself if my beliefs are sounder  than  my  mother's.

Brendan makes  his projected novel  his god and  the art  of writing his religion.  At the  end  of An  Answer  from Limbo, however,  he is a writer  who  "can't feel, he can  only  record." He  is unable to  answer  his own  depressing  question: "Is  my belief in  my talent  any  less an  act  of superstitious faith  than  my  mother's belief in the  power  of indulgences?"
An  Answer  from Limbo  does  not  provide  the  comparatively easy solution  of
The  Luck of Ginger Coffey,  where  unselfish love replaces religious faith. Brendan

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

makes a religion out of writing,  but the novel closes with an ominous admission: "I have  altered  beyond  all self-recognition.  I  have  lost and  sacrificed  myself." The  confrontation between  the  old world  and  the  new world  does not  lead  to simple  resolutions. Despite  the  seemingly superstitious  nature  of  Mrs.  Tierney's faith, she does find that  her belief sustains her, even as she lies dying on the floor of a  vacant  apartment. Catholicism  comforts  her,  but  it does not  speak  to the modem  world  of Brendan  and  Jane.  Consequently,  like  Mrs.  Tierney   herself, religion seems destined to die alone and  wasted in the new world.
The Emperor  of Ice Cream   ( 1965),  Moore's fifth novel and  the final member of the Belfast trio of novels, is his bildungsroman, the novel that  reflects his own personal growth and maturing.9  Gavin Burke, the seventeen-year-old  protagonist, is a member of the Air Raid  Precautions, a British World War  II first-aid organi­ zation.  A  product  of Saint  Michan's  College, he is struggling  to  assert  himself amidst  the  bigotry  and  narrowness  of  rggg  Belfast. The  bildungsroman  is a morality  debate  between what  Gavin  names his White  Guardian Angel and  his Black Guardian   Angel. Their  frequent  intrusions  into  the  narrative reflect  the interior  moral crises confronting  Gavin as he breaks away from  the  Catholicism of his family and his schooling.
The Emperor   of Ice  Cream opens with a description  of the  most significant object in Gavin's bedroom:

The  Divine Infant  of Prague  was only eleven inches tall  yet heavy enough  to break someone's toes if  it fell off the dresser. Although he wore the coronation robes of a monarch, he was, in reality, a desperate little preacher  whose aim in life was to catch Gavin Burke's eye.

As Gavin  explores the  Belfast beyond Saint  Michan's,  he encounters  "a  grown­ up  world,  undreamed  of in  the  Saint  Michan's  school philosophy."  Each  new experience makes him increasingly scornful of his family, their religion,  and espe­ cially his girl friend  Sally Shannon, "a  repressed Child  of  Mary." Sally's religi­ osity confirms his understanding of the inadequacy  of  Catholicism  in the modem world:

Nothing  would change.  The  care  of  this room would continue,  as  would  the diurnal dirge of Masses all over the land, the endless litanies of evening devotions, the annual  pilgrimage to holy shrines, the frozen ritual of Irish Catholicism  per­ petuating itself in secula, seculorum.

Gavin  escapes this confining  paralysis by a  complete  rejection  of religion:  "he vowed  to  deliver  himself from  the sham  of church  attendance, of  pretending belief for his parents'  sake, of the  pretenses and  compromises which  had  helped keep him becalmed in indecision between adolescence and adult  life." The validity of his rejection of Catholicism is emphasized in the novel's final episode, Gavin's

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF


reunion and  reconciliation with  his father. Gavin  has outgrown his family  and  his religion,  but  his maturity allows  him  to confront his father as a human being  for the first time:

In  the  candlelight,  he saw  that  his father  was crying. He  had  never  seen his father  cry  before. Did  his father   know  that  the  house was  condemned,  did  his father  know  that  everything  had  changed,  that  things would  never  be the same again? A new voice, a cold grown-up  voice within him said:  "No."  His father  was the  child  now;  his father's world  was dead.  He  looked over  at  the  wireless set, remembering   his father,   ear  cocked  for  England's  troubles,  pleased  at  news of other,  faraway  disasters.  Forget   that,  the  grownup  voice said.  He  heeded  that voice, heeded  it  as he  had  never  heeded  the childish voices of  his angels. Black Angel,  White  Angel:   they  had  gone forever.  His  father  was  crying.  The  voice would tell him what  to do. From  now on, he would know these things.

Sally Shannon accosts  Gavin  with  the  taunt: "Don't be silly, you can't give it up,  you were  born  a  Catholic and  you'll  die one."  Gavin,  however,  does escape his Catholic background, and  The Emperor  of Ice Cream  is a young  man's rejec­ tion  of  an  outworn faith   and   acceptance of  the  modem world.  It is  also  the novelist's  catharsis, his  most  direct  assault  to  date  on  the  Catholic  religion  and  his farewell  to the stifling  world  of Belfast.




AFTER The Emperor   of Ice  Cream   Moore's novels  focus less explicitly  on the hollowness  of religion; perhaps  his bildungrsroman freed  him from  the constant explorations of faith  that  characterized his early  novels. In subsequent works  his characters usually  accept  the  fragmentation of modem  life and  attempt to  accommodate themselves.  Both  I  am  Mary Dunne (I g68)   and Fergus  ( 1970)   appear initially   to  ignore  the  problems  of  observance without belief, yet upon  closer examination these novels become  further extensions  of the theme. Set  in  the  United States,   both  focus  relentlessly  on  their  title  figures.  I am  Mary  Dunne, written entirely  in the  first person,  explores  the  mind  of a  dis­ turbed, thrice-married woman; Fergus, though  not  written  in the  first  person,  is a  vivid  portrait of the  title  character's mind  and  its hallucinations. I  am  Mary  Dunne evokes  the  world   of  literary   Manhattan, Fergus  the  literary  colony  of Malibu. Most  importantly, for  our   purposes,  both  novels  depict  modem char­ acters  who  have  rejected their  Catholic upbringing and  are trying to forge  their own  place  in society.  Mary  Dunne and  Fergus  Fadden   join  the  younger  genera­  tion  of Ginger  Coffey,  Brendan Tierney, and  Gavin  Burke, who  have  abandoned their  faith  in order  to establish  a new set of personally satisfying  values.
Mary   Dunne  is  cut   off,  both   figuratively   and   literally,   from   her   Catholic mother. She lives in  Manhattan, her mother  lives in  Nova  Scotia; she  is a more

18

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

intellectual  Veronica  Coffey, her  mother  is another  version  of  Eileen  Tierney. Mary  Dunne's  rejection  of Catholicism creates a barrier  in her relationship  with her mother; whenever  the  name  of Christ  "comes  up  in our  conversations,  my mother  and  I  become strangers  in a darkness, far  away from  contact  with  each other, strangers on a long-distance wire." In moments of desperate  need she finds herself calling upon God and invoking his name in prayers she learned  as a child. When she fears that  her mother  may have cancer, she tries to pray,  though  she admits:  "Prayers are charms,  they are knocking on wood."
For Mary  Dunne  the substitute  for religion is love. Her  need for  human  rela­ tionships has led her into three marriages;  her current  husband,  Terence  Lavery, offers her the comfort she craves. The  role of God in the lives of Mary's parents and  their  generation  is now  filled for  Mary  by her  husband:   "Terence  is my saviour, I shall not want, he maketh me to lie down in green pastures, he restoreth my soul. Yes, that's  right. He's my new religion. He's my  life after  death."
Thirty-nine-year-old  Fergus  Fadden,  a  moderately  successful  Belfast  writer,
now lives in  Malibu  with  a  twenty-tw(}-year-old woman.  With  two  novels and one wife behind  him,  he wakes up one morning  to a series of hallucinations in which his family and  other  figures from  his Irish  upbringing  appear; the  plight of the young Catholic rejecting his parents' religion plays a dominant role. Fergus' father, who attended  Saint  Michan's, reminds his son that "nothing's more impor­ tant  that a person's religious duties." Fergus' sister Maeve scolds him:

As a Catholic, you were brought up to believe in a life after death. But you can't believe in it. So you invent a substitute. You start worrying about your reputation outliving you. Your work becomes your chance to cheat the grave. That's  a very attractive  thought,  particularly  for ex-Catholics. That's  why you care so much about your literary status.

Like  Brendan  Tierney  Fergus  substitutes  literary  reputation   for  religion.  And Maeve is accurate  in  her assessment: "You  have no laws, no rules, no spiritual life at all. You have to make up your own rules of conduct. You have to become your own wee ruler, and found  your own wee religion. You are your own god." The  clerical figures who populate  Fergus' hallucinations  emphasize  the impor­ tance of the afterlife, the necessity of regulating your earthly existence in order  to obtain  heavenly  glory:  "The   Irish  people know  that  it  is not  this  world  that counts. This  life is but a preparation for eternity."  But it is Fergus' family, espe­ cially his father,  whom  he must confront  and  reject. In  the final episode  of the hallucinations and of the novel, he presents the hollowness of religion to his father:

All the things you taught  me, the things you believed in, your prayers, going to Mass and Confession and Holy Communion, your devotion to Our Lady, the whole thing! Your obedience to the rules of the church, the ten commandments, mortal

19

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF


sins, plenary indulgences, the lot! Just  think of it! A sham, a fraud,  a complete waste of time!

Fergus  raises his arm  and  dismisses the  hallucinatory  presence;  not seeking  the reconciliation  with  his father  that  Gavin  Burke achieved with his father,  Fergus turns  his back on the old world in order  to create  his own standards in modem California.
In Catholics  ( 1972)   Moore turned  to the bastion of Catholicism,  an abbey of pious monks, to make his definitive statement  on the validity of religious faith  in the  modem  world.  The  novella  depicts  the  final  days of  Muck  Abbey,  Kerry, Ireland  in the closing decade  of the twentieth  century. The  Abbey has achieved international fame  as the only remaining  stronghold  of traditional religious  prac­ tices; the Mass is still offered in Latin,  Confession is still a private sacrament. At this period in human  history the Church  of Rome is concerned with social action, not prayer and  religious observances; for the modem  Catholic priest, the Church  "exists today  as the quintessential  structure  through  which social revolution  can be brought to certain  areas of the globe." The  embodiment of this new outlook is Father  James Kinsella, a young priest sent from Rome by  his Provincial  General to  the  recalcitrant  Abbot  of  Muck,  sixty-nine-year-old  Thomas   o'Malley;  the purpose  of his mission is the  termination   of  Muck  Abbey's  outdated  religious practices.
Muck Abbey is the world of Judith  Hearne  and  Diarmuid  Devine without  the
masochistic brutality of Saint Michan's. The Abbey adheres to the rules of the traditional  Church, the sacraments,  and  the prayers that  Fergus Fadden  and  his generation  have rejected. The fame of the Abbey reflects modem  man's  desperate need for some kind of certitude,  some kind of faith: "People  don't  want  truth  or social justice, they don't  want  this ecumenical  tolerance. They  want  certainties. The  old parish priest promised that."
In the confrontation between Abbot o'Malley  and  Father  Kinsella is the battle between  the old  world  and  the  new world. When  the young  priest's  helicopter lands  on the  island  where  the  Abbey is located,  the  Abbot  remarks:   "Do  you know,  Father,   that's  the  first flying machine  of any  description  that  has  ever landed  on  Muck.  You've  brought  us the  symbol of the  century.  Just  when  I thought  we'd be able to close the hundred  years out, and say we missed our time." Cut off and isolated from  the modem  world, the inhabitants of the Abbey show no need or desire for the world beyond their island.
For Abbot  o'Malley  Rome's  attitude  to religion is strange; seeing his duty  as the care of his people's faith,  he cannot  accept the new Catholicism: "I  think  I was born  before my time. A man  doesn't  have to have such  a big dose of faith any more, does he?" As Father  Kinsella's short stay reaches its end, however, the Abbot  begins to reveal  his own loss of faith.  He  is unable  to believe in  the old


20

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

faith  but  willing to cling  to its hollow observances.  His life is a private hell:  "the hell of those deprived of God.  When  it came upon  him, he could  not  pray,  prayers seemed  false or without any  meaning at  all. Then his trembling began,  that  fear and  trembling which  was a sort of purgatory presaging  the  true  hell to come,  the hell of no feeling, that  null, that  void."  Years ago the Abbot  felt a certainty about his beliefs, but  now  he does not genuflect  when  he leaves the  church, he does not say the  Divine  Office,  he does  not  pray.  While  other  monks  cling  to old  beliefs, their superior  is the clerical equivalent of Judith Hearne. Even the men of religion, the  guardians of  the  faith,   can  no  longer  acknowledge or  accept   the  tenets  of Catholicism. For  the  younger  priests, social  revolution  serves  the  same  function that  literary  creation offers  Brendan Tierney and  Fergus  Fadden; for  the  older priests, social revolution  is not faith, yet there  is no substitute. As the  Abbot  leads his monks in  prayer  at  the  end  of the novella,  he "entered null.  He  would  never come  back. In  null."
Catholics is the  climax  of the  treatment of religious  belief  in  Moore's fiction.
The tabernacle that   Judith Hearne tried  to  open,  the  tabernacle that   received Ginger  Coffey's scoffing, this tabernacle is now empty.  Only  a miracle can  make God  present  on the altar, and  the new Catholicism  of Rome,  concerned only with man's social  betterment, disregards the  realm  of  the  miraculous. The  twentieth century has reached  Muck  Abbey,  and  mankind, including the  monks,  must  find a substitute for religion.
Shortly  before the  publication of Catholics, Moore  remarked: "When I wrote
most of my novels I was interested -I'm not sure  that  I'm  much  interested now
-in  presenting the  moment in a  person's  life, the crucial  few weeks  or months, when  one  suddenly confronts the  reality  or  unreality  of  one's  illusions,  because that,  to me, is what  the  drama of the novel is."10  Moore's next  novel,  The  Great Victorian  Collection ( 1975), exemplifies this statement. During a stay  in Carmel, California, Arthur  Maloney, a  young  History   professor  at   McGill   University, dreams of a great  Victorian collection.  When  he awakens he finds that his dream has become a reality. The novel follows the world's  disbelief in the  reality  and  the progressive  mental  deterioration of Maloney  as he becomes  a celebrity.  Religious belief has no place in the novel, since belief now centres on the collection. Arthur Maloney  does not believe in God: "God  was, like Santa Claus,  a word  his mother used."  And  Christianity finds  its only expression  in the  placard of  the  madman picketing  the  collection: "God Alone  Can  Create-Do  Not  Believe This  Lie."
In his most recent novel, The  Doctors Wife  ( 1976), Moore  explores  again  "the
crucial  few weeks or months, when  one suddenly  confronts the  reality  or unreality of one's illusions." Sheila  Redden has led a quiet  life in Belfast;  now,  however,  on a brief holiday in France she questions  her way of life and  rejects  the  dull security of her marriage to a Belfast  physician; when  we meet  Sheila  at  the  beginning of

21

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

the novel, she is in Paris, and  we never see her in Ireland  since she never returns to her old world.
Like earlier Moore heroines Sheila Redden was raised in the Catholic faith, but she no longer  finds religious belief valid  or feasible. In  earlier  years she was a devout  Catholic:  "Once, she had  asked God's help in everything  ... It seemed like another  life, that  long-ago  time of rules and  rewards,  when  prayer  and  sin were real." When she visits Notre-Dame Cathedral,  she finds a museum as hollow spiritually  as Muck Abbey:

Notre-Dame is a museum, its pieties are in the past. Once these aisles were filled with the power of faith, with prayer and pilgrimage, all heads bowed in reverence at the elevation of the Host. Once people knelt here, in God's house, offering the future conduct of their lives against a promise of heaven. But we no longer believe in promises.

Her  love  affair  with  Tom   Lowry  is  her  religion.  This  romantic   attachment possesses her in the same way that  her religion used to dominate  her life:  "These few days with Tom  were her state  of grace. She turned,  went  back  to the bed, and  lay down  beside him,  holding  him in  her arms,  pressing against  his warm body. She closed her eyes. I am in grace. In my state of grace."
In The Doctor's  Wife as in much of Moore's fiction love becomes the substitute
for religious faith  in the modem  world. The spiritual imagery that  surrounds  the love scenes indicates the new power and role of love. During his one evening with Una  Clarke Diarmuid  Devine "knelt  once more, as though in genuflection before that  altar  of her body";  Una  herself wants him to repeat  his professions of love "over   and  over,  as  though,   like  prayer,  repetition  would  buy  grace  for  the thought." When  Brendan  and  Jane  Tierney quarrel, love becomes "the  litany of atonement. They  made their ejaculations  and responses as devoutly as monk and nun, knowing all the extravagant declarations  by heart, confident that  they could pray back into their  marriage  its act of faith,  its bond of submission, its vows of obedience and trust"; Brendan  foresees a new version of hell where he may end­ lessly make love to his unresponsive wife. For Mary Dunne  her husband Terence is the new Christ and  hell is reserved for selfishness. And Sheila Redden finds her state  of grace in the arms  of her lover. In  a godless universe  love  inherits  from religion such spiritual  imagery.
Educated  in the most rigid form of Irish Catholicism, Brian Moore rejected its
doctrines and practices. Yet his schooling helped to form him, both as a man and as a  novelist, and  his indoctrination has led  to  his continuing   explorations  of modem  man's godless universe.
For  Moore, as for his fictional characters,  religion is a manmade illusion. Yet
Moore admits that man needs illusions:

A friend of mine once said that a depression is when the world is not at fault, but


22

OBSERVANCE WITHOUT BELIEF

you're at  fault. In  a peculiar way, if you  think  about  that,  it sums  up  the  reason why  we  all  have  illusions.  We  have  to  have  illusions,  because  if  you  finally  lose your  illusions  about  yourself  you lose the motive  force or  whatever it is that  keeps us going.11

Like Fergus  Fadden and  Brendan Tierney, Moore  regards  writing as his illusion: "I know  that  writing  is my illusion, and  that  it's as nonsensical  as any  other relig­ ion."12 Another illusion,  more  common  and  more  important, is love. So much  of Moore's fiction  is a  celebration  of  this  beautiful  but   precarious  substitute for religion.  Only  The  Luck of Ginger  Coffey has an ending  that suggests  any  degree of sustained happiness, and  Moore's  fiction  is sceptical  about  the  permanence of this illusion.
The characters of  Moore's novels  are  confronted  with   a  fragmented  world where  there  is no  possibility  of religious  certainty. In  Belfast  they  are  given  the answers to  life's  problems  by  their  religion,  but  these  answers  no  longer  satisfy; even  Muck  Abbey  must  move  into  the  modem world.  The old  world  of  Irish Catholicism gives way  to a new  world  where  a personal  substitute for  faith  must be found. From  the clearly  defined  but outdated world of the  Sacred  Heart  Con­ vent  and  Saint   Michan's College  Moore  leads  us into  a  godless  universe  where men  and  women  struggle  to  find  some illusion  that  will give  meaning to  human existence.


NOTES

1 The only  two full-length studies  of Brian  Moore  reflect  his dual  nationality. Hall­ vard   Dahlie, Brian  Moore  (Toronto: Copp Clark, 1969)   appears in  the  series, "Studies in  Canadian Literature." Jeanne Flood,  Brian Moore  (Lewisburg,  Pa.:  Bucknell  University Press, 1974)  appears in  "The Irish  Writers  Series."
2  "Robert Fulford Interviews Brian  Moore," The  Tamarack   Review, 23  (Spring
rg62), 13-14.
3 "Brian Moore-An  Interview Conducted by Hallvard Dahlie," The   Tamarack
Review, 46 (Winter rg68),  17-18.
4  Ibid.,  20-21.
5  Moore points  out  the  parallel   between  Bernard's outlook  and  his own: "When I devised  the character of Bernard Rice,  I gave  him some of my own  opinions. The ideas  about God's  omniscience and  omnipotence, for  instance" (ibid.,  15).
6  Father Keogh  assumes  the  role of God  as he metes  out  charity and  forgiveness  to his staff. "The headmaster, who many  critics  mistakenly  took for a kind  old  man," Moore  notes, "is to my mind  the very spirit  of authoritarianism and  Catholicism at its worst.  He  is Realpolitik  all  the  way. He  doesn't  give a damn for  anything but the  good  of the school.  He  is the  person  I think  one should  be most  frightened of' (ibid., 18).
1 George   Woodcock,   "Rounding  Giotto's Circle:  Brian   Moore's  Poor   Bitches," Odysseus  Ever  Returning: Essays on Canadian  Writers  and  Writing (Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1970),  p. 46.

OBSERVANCE  WITHOUT BELIEF

8  Margaret Atwood, Survival  (Toronto: Anansi,  I972)' p.  I s8.
9  Moore  describes  the  novel: "Every first novel  I'd  read,  by an  Irish  writer-well, Sean  O'Faolain once  said  they're all about  young  men  and  the  novel  ends  when the  young  hero  gets  on  a boat  and  goes to England. I felt  that  was  terribly  true, and  to write  a better book  than  that  you'd  have  to compete with  A Portrait of the Artist as a Young  Man. I felt  that  had  been done.  I did write  the autobiographical bildungsroman  type of novel, but  I wrote it twenty-five years later,  at a fair  remove from my own young life. That was The  Emperor of Ice Cream"  (Donald Cameron, Conversations with Canadian  Novelists, Toronto: Macmillan of Canada, I973, II, pp.  69-70).
10 Ibid., II, p. 66.
11 Ibid., II, p. 79·
12 Ibid., II, p. 8o.








DIJILECT

Pier Giorgio di Cicco


There are  wounds  we will never  touch swimming through the bright  lake of the body. We  near  them,  and  our  dreams  stand  up  and cry.
There are  needs  we shall never  fill,
swimming through the  bright  lake of the body.
Like  a fish, we imagine  all sorts of fingers
reaching the  light,  when  what  we want  is what  we held
yesterday, however  beautiful it was, we are  ready  to forgive  it,
and  say we are  coming,  we have  bare  feet, we are afraid
of nothing; open  your arms, son of man,
all five senses shut,  and  waiting  for  the screaming to begin.

GEORGE JONAS





lntervzewed  by Linda Sandler






SANDLER:  It occurs to me that  you're a distant cousin of someone like Sir Walter Raleigh -an  adventurer and  a man  of the  world  who sometimes  brought  his intelligence and  passion to the writing of poetry.
JONAS: I'm  not acquainted with Raleigh, but it's true that  my life is apart  from poetry. Poetry is not my whole existence.
SANDLER: Is that  Byron?
JONAS: Yes. Love is a thing  from man's life apart, it is woman's  whole existence. And insofar as Byron is right,  and  certainly  in his period  he was right,  I  am  a poet in the way of a man,  not in the way of a woman. You see, it's very curious. Poets bore me. I  have no idea what moves them,  or what  their  problems are. I like poetry, obviously, but I find that  the preoccupations  of most living poets are very alien to me.
I don't think that you could know your average poet for ten minutes without learning  the fact that  he is a poet. I don't  care how superficial  an  acquaintance you are; you might be his greengrocer, and you would know he was a poet. There's no point in mentioning  names, because this embraces nine tenths of the poetic community.
I belong to that  other one tenth. A lot of people have known me for ten years; they have been in daily contact  with  me, and they have no idea that  I write and publish poetry. And I could easily envisage spending a whole evening in conversa­ tion with  you without  necessarily raising the subject  of poetry. But  I  would  be distressed if somebody said to me, You're not a professional poet, and  that  is the problem with  your writing.
SANDLER: People want their poets to be dedicated.  Is that  it?
JONAS:  Do  you know  George  Faludy?  If you knew  George  Faludy  you'd  dis­ cover a  person for  whom  very little matters  in  life besides art  and  history  and philosophy. He is genuinely uninterested  in the politics of literature-who pub­ lishes what  and  how to get  readings. He  couldn't  care  less about  those  things. He's very happy whenever he's invited to read, of course. You pay him two hun-

25

GEORGE JONAS

dred  dollars  and  he's thrilled,  he won't  believe it. You're  paying  him  for  what he'd  be doing anyway,  reading  and  writing  poems! And he writes poems of  im­ mense beauty and skill in Hungarian. I only wish one could do  justice to him in English. Faludy's  attitude and  aptitude  coincide absolutely, but  I firmly  believe that  his greatness lies in the immensity  of his aptitude. The  intensity  of  his love for poetry is a mere coincidence.
The  attitude of a man like Tolstoy, on the other  hand, was decidedly anti-art. Tolstoy would never have regarded  himself as an artist. He would have regarded himself as an aristocrat and a moralist. Count  Leo Tolstoy had an obligation.  He would spit on a writer. Writer! What is that?  A clown? He had  zilch respect for art,  but of course an immense,  divine aptitude. And this is why I think that  the quality of a writer has very little to do with his reverence for art.
SANDLER: I remember that when Pat Annesley interviewed you for The  Telegram in 1970, she was surprised by your aristocratic coolness. She said something about your  being  the  most  urbane  and  controlled  adult  Canadian male  since  Pierre Trudeau.
JONAS:  That may have been a compliment. At that time Trudeau was well liked. But you see, there are all sorts of mystiques that  people associate with me. There is the  mystique  of  aristocracy,  whereas  in  fact  I'm  middle  class;  there  is the mystique  of coolness, whereas  in  fact  I'm  passionate;  there  is the  mystique  of cynicism, whereas in fact I'm soft-hearted.
If anybody  misleads people, it's me, so this is not a complaint.  If I  projected
the  image  that  Susan  Musgrave  projects,  they'd  probably  accept  that.  I  could walk around  in the most languid  fashion and  be dreamy and  vague and  helpless. Chances are, people would accept that.
SANDLER:   There's another   mystique  deriving  from  your  early  poems.  In  The Absolute  Smile  the  poet  comes  across  as  being  terribly  bored  by  his  sexual conquests.
JONAS: It is perfectly true that in my routine European way, I will verbally make a pass at  absolutely every woman  who moves, regardless of looks, age,  and  my intentions.  I was raised in a culture  where it would have been a positive offence not to do so. In  Hungary you kiss a woman's hand; you indicate,  by a combina­ tion of verbal and  physical means, that  unless you immediately  have sexual  rela­ tions with that  woman,  your life will be ruined. And you do that  to your grand­  mother. It's meaningless. In Canada, since it is not routinely done, I have received a wide variety of responses ranging  from astonishment to immediate acceptance.
SANDLER:  Let's  deal  with  the  vexing  question  of your origins. It  seems you're bored with being labelled "Hungarian," having lived in Canada for twenty years. JONAS:  I find it such a stumbling  block when people try to approach  my poetry
in this way. It's  worth  noting  that  I  was born  in  Hungary,  but  it's  not  worth

GEORGE  JONAS

getting  hung  up  on.  Certainly,  there  are  more  important things  to  say  about
Joseph  Conrad  than  that  he was a Pole who wrote in English.
SANDLER: Hugh  Hood once characterized  Hungarian emigres as "swashbuckling rogues who haunted  grand  hotels."
JONAS:  Well, there's  no  reason  why Hugh  Hood  should  know  anything  about
Hungarians. I know very little about Indonesians.
But if Hugh  Hood  is referring to the type of Hungarian he would  be likely to meet in Canada, he's not altogether inaccurate. In this century a Hungarian might go to North America if he was part of a persecuted minority, or if he was a penni­ less peasant. If he was middle class, he was probably fleeing from  the law. There  was a standing  joke about  this. "He  went to America"  was the equivalent  of say­ ing, "He  embezzled funds."  At the time there was no extradition treaty  between the two countries, so if you were in trouble you went  to America  or you went to jail. These  were your choices. Some preferred  jail,  but some chose America.  So you  could  conclude  that   middle  class Hungarian   emigres  are  swashbuckling adventurers.
And  then  there  are the political refugees, and  they are  often  adventurers,  in­ spired by the same love of excitement as the criminal. You have to have a certain temperament to enter the political or criminal world.
SANDLER:  Would  your poetry  have  been different if you'd  never left Hungary? JONAS:  I have a feeling that  poetry comes more from  the inside than  from  the outside.  I'm   not  a  great   believer  in  environmental   determinism,   beyond  the
obvious effects. I doubt if I would have been very different  in the  Middle  Ages.
Obviously, my idiom would have been different.
SANDLER: The idiom of your first book is the idiom of a exile, something like T. S. Eliot's.
JONAS:  I think  I would  probably  have expressed myself in that  idiom  even if I had not been geographically  uprooted.  Franz  Kafka  is an obvious example. This is a century  of great  migrations,  not only of the body but  also of the soul, and displacement is the common theme of many poets.
SANDLER:  Can  I retract  that  question and  ask  you this:  what  kind of audience would you have had in Hungary?
JONAS:  That  is altogether  a different  question. If I  had  remained  in  Hungary and sold out to the party, my audience  would consist of party  poets and  bureau­ crats. If I had remained  in Hungary  and not sold out to the party,  I would have the whole country for my audience.  My poems would be circulated  in manuscript  form,  perhaps,  but my audience  would be far larger  than  the audience  for  Rod McKuen,  say. I would  be known  to as many people as used  to watch  the CBC programme,  "This  Hour Has Seven Days."
The  poet  has a political role in a communist country. In  Canada, poetry does

GEORGE  JONAS

not substitute for political editorials or for underground  newspapers, so that his audience  consists mainly of poetry enthusiasts and  apprentice  poets.
SANDLER:  Your Canadian audience  has been quite wary of you. One  Telegram reviewer was quite turned  off by what he called your detachment  from the vicissi­ tudes of ordinary  life.
JONAS: Yes. The  Telegram had one half-wit reviewing my first book and another reviewing my second book. By the time my third  book appeared, The  Telegram was no longer  in  business. There is a current  trend  in literature  that  seems to regard  stridency,  indeed  sweatiness, as evidence of good faith.  Anything  that  is not wearing  its heart  on its sleeve, or that  isn't earnestly obvious, is regarded  as being too detached  from suffering  human  existence. There's  a reason for this cult of earnestness. Right  now,  people are disenchanted  with the  intellect. They  feel that  raw emotions  might  save  us. And  we have, in  positions of literary  power, people whose tastes are about  as refined as an elephant's  hide.
SANDLER: You once wrote to Michael Yates on the subject of your apparent cynicism, didn't  you?
JONAS:  Yes. You see, many  people have the ability to equate  their  own desires with absolute morality. Everybody is acquainted  with the type of person who will say that  homosexuality is obviously wrong because it's disrupting  the family or something  like that.  But can you imagine someone saying, I want  homosexuality to be outlawed  because it makes me uncomfortable?  Nobody will say that.  People want a moral backing for their opinions. And they are very comfortable  with hy­ pocrisy, but they are most uncomfortable  when they encounter a lack of  hypocrisy.
If I want something  very badly, I'm  capable of saying, simply, I want it. And if you say in print, as I have said, I want such and such, but  I've no idea whether it's good  for mankind  or not,  then  people will say that  you have a cynical bent of mind.
The  syntax  of "I want" -the statement  without  the  justification -perhaps
belonged  to a  more  aristocratic  mode  of life. People can  no longer  make  that grand  demand.  A relatively short  time ago, the idea of going out and conquering was noble and good. People could say quite openly, Let's go and conquer  Mada­ gascar. It was just fine. People have not stopped conquering  by a long chalk, they conquer  left, right  and  centre.  But now they call it "liberation". I  have no pa­ tience with this. I don't  endorse conquest, but I believe that  conquest should  be called by its right name. This  is not cynicism, but realism.
SANDLER: Do you think that the current of opinion is changing? Cities is a realist's view of civilization and it was well received in 1973.
JONAS: In the late sixties, I was intensely unfashionable. It's not that  I was swim­ ming against  the current,  because I was swimming in an  entirely  different  river God  knows I  was not  alone.  Robertson  Davies, who is probably  the  most

GEORGE JONAS

intelligent  writer  in Canada, was equally unfashionable.  I'm  not suggesting that my  achievements  are  anything  like his, but  my approach   to  life  is somewhat similar -in spite of the fact that  he is old Ontario  and Celtic Wasp.
I'm  virtually  certain  that  any critical acceptance  of my work will be due,  not to a cognition of its intrinsic merit, but to a change in fashion. This doesn't  please me, but who am I to quarrel  with fashion if it goes in my favour?
SANDLER:  Critics have said  that  you brought  an  urban  awareness  to Canadian poetry. Do you have any idea why there's so little civil poetry here?
JONAS:   I've  often  wondered  about   this-especially  since  the  population   of Canada, in common with the population of most Western countries, lives mainly in cities. It's  very mysterious.
Look at young poets. They instinctively tum  to the heavenly bodies for inspira­ tion. When they are slightly more sophisticated, they will tum  to nature; they get all rural,  when in fact their experience is no more rural  than mine. Even if they have never been north of Bloor Street, they will lapse into nature  talk. Why? The only explanation  that  occurs to me is that  the  traditional imagery  of  poetry  is rural,  because social life has been rural for the most part of recorded  history. And since most poets are not terribly original, they are quite content  to work within  a traditional poetic mode.
SANDLER:  Someone compiled a recipe for Canadianism: mountains,  three  trees and  a cow. Do you think city poetry  is generally considered unCanadian?
JONAS:  People argue  that  although  Canada  is now largely urban,  nature  looms large in the national  psyche, and the city does not. Now I like nature  as much as the next person. I can even imagine being inspired by a tree. A perfectly genuine inspiration  can  come from  the  heavenly  bodies, even.  But  I  personally  believe that  the exclusive concentration  on nature  is attributable to poverty  of the ima­ gination.
I  think  it's unfortunate that  so many Canadian writers are  preoccupied  with
discovering  their  identity,   and   with  proving  themselves.  The   mainstream  is wherever  you  happen   to  be;  your  achievements  are  whatever  you  happen   to achieve, and opening up the Canadian  wilderness, I believe, equals all the glory of conquering and losing and reconquering Italy. So many Canadians waste time defending   themselves  against  the  snidest  and  most  superficial  and   unworthy opinions of Europeans  and of Americans. They produce "cause literature," which is really a waste  product.  Do you remember  the  famous  persiflage in  Richler's Duddy  Kravitz, where  the guy establishes a newspaper  for  epileptics?  Did  you know  that  julius Caesar was an epileptic? CanLit  has a tendency  to descend to that  level. Did  you know  that  Percy Faith was Canadian?  One  can  understand this obsession, but one can only call it a pathological condition.  Who has time for things like that?

29

GEORGE JONAS

SANDLER: What  are the questions that  interest you as a poet? You often use relig­
ious tenns  to talk about  civilization or even love.
JONAS:  The  poet's concern  is often the same as the religious philosopher's  con­ cern. The  poet attempts to ask what seems an essential question-one concerned with being and  existence and  all the rest. And it so happens  that  religion is the single hwnan  pre-occupation  that  concerns itself with essential  questions.
SANDLER:  You're  not a poet who makes much  use of your daily life, are  you?
JONAS: No. And without  belittling the poet  who finds grist for his poetic mill in his daily life -God knows it's a free country- I can't see myself writing a poem about  something  I  did  yesterday.  I've  never  felt  that  anything  I've  done  was necessarily of poetic interest. Mind  you, even if I did feel that,  I couldn't  make a poem out of it. Most of the things I've  done, most of the places I've  been, most of the things I've seen, would not inspire me. I don't  sit down at my desk because it's Wednesday and  it's eight o'clock and I still haven't  written a poem. I write a poem when a poem demands  to be written. And it's fairly rare.
SANDLER:  What's  involved in the process of writing?
JONAS:  To some extent  a poem writes itself. I feel almost as though  I  were the recorder  of someone else's thoughts.  I don't  actually  hallucinate,  I don't  hear  a voice-nevertheless, somebody  else is dictating  the  lines. Then  it is done,  and sometimes the whole thing  dissipates;  I  can't  do anything  with  it, and  I  tear  it up.  At  other  times  the  poem  is there  in  rough  form,  and  I  rely on  whatever inspiration  I might  have and  whatever  craft  I might know to give it a more ac· curate  form.  Primarily,  I'm  after  clarity.  Obscurity  is anathema to me. If you read my poem and  you say, That's kind of obscure-then I have failed. What's the point of an  obscure  poem?  My whole life is obscure. Everything  is obscure. When  I write a poem I want  to make sense, to achieve some clarity;  to capture a thought,  a feeling, an  impression, an indefinable  sensation. Fishing in eternity and coming up with a fish -that's the whole point.
SANDLER: You have a series of poems set in taverns and cafes -
JONAS:  That's very European. Poets usually wrote in cafes in Hungary-bars were almost unknown.  You went to a nightclub  for entertainment and  you went to a cafe  to write.  I  didn't  frequent  cocktail  lounges until  I  came  to  Canada, actually.
SANDLER:  Tell  me about  the  cocktail waitress in "Te  Deum  on Yonge Street." Why did  that  poem demand  to be written?
JONAS:  I  recall the making  of that  poem more than  I recall the making  of any other poem because the process was more conscious than  usual. I was listening to Verdi's Te  Deum, I think it was, and reading the words of the text. I was wonder­ ing if I could write a modem  Te  Deum,  using the Latin  text as the skeleton of

30

GEORGE JONAS

the  poem. I  recalled  a cocktail  waitress who  had  executed  her  job with special grace,  in a way that  seemed  a  hymn of praise, and  it occurred  to me that  any living  creature  is capable  of  praising  God  in  her  own  way,  and  I  wrote  this Toronto Te Deum.
Had  I been a frequenter, not of cocktail lounges, but of Chinese laundries,  it's quite  possible that  a Chinese  laundress  would  have  brought  on  this impulse  to write a poem. And it's also possible that had I been a fan of Mick Jagger,  instead of  using the  words  of  the  Te  Deum  I  would  have  used  the  words  of "Sticky Fingers." Being the kind of person I am, I happened  to hit on these two devices.
SANDLER: You've mentioned  that  you're also capable of writing a poem on com­
mand, so presumably craft is as important  to you as inspiration.
JONAS:  You can't  call yourself a poet unless you can write a Petrarchan sonnet on the glories of the cow, if necessary. But that's  an exercise, and  it shouldn't be confused with poetry.
One  of my quarrels  with  contemporary  literature  is that  so many  writers  are obsessed with their tools. You have to master your tools, there's  no question about it-but that is Step One. Once you learn how to play the piano you don't  look at your fingers.
The  European  modernism  of the twenties didn't  hit North  America  until after
the  war  and  its reverberations   (especially in  Canada,   where  things  reverberate for a hell of a long time)  are still being felt. In Canada  we have little secondary and  tertiary  waves emanating from  the great  Berlin storm,  and  we have  Black Mountains  and  Yellow Mountains, and  there is a whole generation  of youthful innocents who are  terribly  preoccupied  with technique.  They  are  all looking at their  fingers instead  of playing  the  piano.  And  the  audience  quite  wisely pays little attention  to them,  because the audience wants to hear  music.
SANDLER: It's boring for you, having to talk about  poetry, isn't it?
JONAS:  It's  very curious. I don't  know how to put it. I can  be bored  by poetry in exactly the same way as a cartoon husband  in The  New Yorker, whose wife is dragging  him to the opera, and  the poor guy is out of his mind  with tedium,  the prospect of tedium  is distending  his pores ... That  is the extent  to which  I can be bored with poetry. On  the other hand,  nothing  can give me the ecstasy that poetry can. I'm  not a religious person, and  not given to mysticism of any  but a cerebral kind. For me, poetry comes closest to providing a transcendental experi­ ence.
SANDLER:  Can  we talk  about  politics? There's  a  poem  in  The   Absolute  Smile where  you ask, What   do men  die  for? It's  about  Christian  Montpelier,  Captain of the Guard.
JONAS: I'm  trying to remember  the impulses behind the poem ... I was looking at a footnote in a book about  the  Napoleonic War,  about  a man  of the  people

GEORGE JONAS

who fought  for Napoleon,  and  I was wondering  whether the ostensible cause for which  Montpelier  died  at  Waterloo-the glory of Napoleon  or  of the  French Empire-really had  much  to do with it. What  was his real motive for fighting? And  why did my contemporaries in Hungary  surrender  their  lives? That is the question  I was trying to answer-and indeed, I am still trying to answer it.
SANDLER: How did you get involved with the Young Communists?
JONAS: I guess I felt that  the world was an imperfect place. As I understood  it at the age of thirteen,  the Marxist  system was the perfect solution  for an imper­ fect world. And since I wanted  the world to be perfect, it seemed  logical for me to join the Young Communists. It took me two or three years to realize that com­ munism was not making  the world better, it was making it  worse.
SANDLER: What did Young Communists do?
JONAS: We did most of the things that the Hitler Jugend  did. We had an endless series of parades  and  meetings,  painting  cultural  halls and  politicizing  peasants
-that was ninety per cent of it. But there were worse things. The slogan at that time was FIGHT  CLERICAL REACTION, and as a child of fourteen  I took part in the forcible  evacuation  of a  nunnery.  We  descended  on  the  nuns  like a  gaggle of geese, and  we  ranted   and  raved  and  cajoled-danced madly  around   a  few Catholic  nuns while they gathered  up their  possessions and  left  the  building.  It was a Red Guard  type of activity -a mobbing action.
And  there were related  activities:  I volunteered to assist in the deportation  of
persons, many  of them  elderly,  who,  I  was told, were enemies of the  people. I loaded trucks with their belongings and drove them to resettlement areas in the countryside. These  things are horrible  in retrospect, but I can't  honestly say that they awakened  me to the evils of communism.  I was convinced  that  what  I was doing was absolutely right. God knows, I was a mindless and disruptive barbarian, and my only excuse was my extreme youth.
SANDLER: And in I956? What  did you do in the Hungarian  Revolution?
JONAS: Not  a  helluva  lot.  It  was a general  uprising and  I  did  all the  normal uprisy things,  dashing  around  and  so forth.  I  was by then  no  longer  a  Young Communist,  but  a  young  writer  among  other  young writers.  We  talked  a  lot, attended  meetings and drew up a programme of demands-the famous Eighteen Point  Programme  which  was published  in the  Literary Gazette. We  demanded the withdrawal of Russian troops, the abnegation of the Warsaw pact, the destruc­ tion of the personal file system, and so on-it's well documented.  We demanded  things that, in any Western country, would be considered the rock bottom require­ ments for social existence.
There  was a very intense two week period of fullscale war -not  nation-wide, but  confined mainly  to Budapest. The  casualties were high-but  not  nearly  as high as they would have been in Toronto  in a similar situation,  because the Hun-

GEORGE JONAS

garians  are a war-wise people. There  is, for example, an  art  to crossing a street which is under  gunfire and  the  Hungarians are practiced  in this art.  It's  a very simple art, perhaps, but if you don't  have it you are liable to get shot.
And, you know, when you find yourself in that kind of situation,  you do what­ ever seems right at the time. You fight whomever you need to fight, and  you take whatever actions are necessary to preserve your life. Do you think that  we had any quarrel  with  those Russian  peasants  who thought  they  had  been sent  to  Cairo? We had  no quarrel  with them.  There  were people who tried  very  hard to con­ vince some soldiers from  the  Second Division of the  Ukrainian  Army  that  they were in  Budapest  fighting  Hungarian communists,  and  that  this was  the  Blue Danube,  not the Suez Canal.  I didn't  want  to shoot those  poor  bastards.  But I wanted  even less to be shot by them;  and when you see a tank coming down the road you have no time to be compassionate.
In  1956 I was not fighting,  I  was running.  If I  had  thought  for one minute that  the Russians wanted  to annihilate  the Hungarian people,  I  might  have felt it was my duty to die with them. But the Russians were not interested in genocide, only in imperialism. And I did  not feel it was my duty  to live under  the system they imposed.
SANDLER:  And so you came here. What  kind of country  were you expecting?
JONAS:  I expected very little. You must remember  that  I came  to Canada as a refugee. I did not, as so many European  immigrants did, come to Canada expect­ ing to find a perfect society or perfect happiness, or to make  my fortune.  I  was looking for relative freedom, relative happiness, and a relatively civilized life. And I can certainly say that  I have found these things.
SANDLER:  In  "Civil  Elegy" you say that  no city really exists until  it has known war.
JONAS:  I  believe that  completely.  A city is forged  by  the  experience  of  war. Indeed,  urban existance originates in the need to create a defensive unit, a forti­ fication.  A nation  too, arises from  a  warlike mentality,  and  I  don't  think  that Canada  would have to search  for  its roots if  it  had  to fight for  them. I'm  not saying  that  war  is a  good  thing,  I  do  not  endorse  war.  I  simply  make  these observations.
Medical  people have observed  that  in the concentration  camps  of Auschwitz there were few psychiatric problems or ulcers or suicides. No one in his right mind will conclude that  Auschwitz was therefore of benefit to humanity.  But one can nevertheless see that  certain  problems are caused by peace and  prosperity. Strife is part of the human  condition and it has certain values. I think  that  these things have to be faced and accepted.  I don't  believe that you can  possibly improve  the human  condition  if  you're  not  willing to face  it. This  is the  very  opposite  of cyruCism.

33

GEORGE JONAS

SANDLER:  I've  heard  you described  as a political liberal  and  I  must say I  was surprised.
JONAS:  I  would  describe  myself as a liberal  in  the  tradition of the  eighteenth century  philosophes. I'm  very  much  in favour  of  all kinds  of freedoms.  I  can hardly  think  of a freedom  I might  not be in favour  of -with the exception of the freedom to disrupt  somebody else's life, or the freedom to prescribe for some­ one else. But I tend to think of our society as something which might be improved, rather  than  something  which ought  to be destroyed. My initial  bias is in favour of permanence,  and  I suppose I am conservative in this sense.
I don't  believe in closing my mind to the evidence of history. I'm  too empirical, too pragmatic,  to be able to behave in an entirely ideological fashion;  and  quite simply, I do not see a better alternative  to our present society. I see a large number of worse alternatives.
What intrigues me is that we should begin to question the values of our civiliza­
tion precisely at the moment  when it is in a position to do some good to mankind. Western liberalism has taken centuries to reach the point when it can begin to implement  certain  ideals of justice, certain humane  values. But now we say that liberalism  has lost its revolutionary  fervour,  that  the  mills of  justice grind  too slowly. We want to destroy the whole structure  and go back to zero. Our civiliza­ tion must always be in its childhood.
I  have  no doubt  that  in a  few centuries Africa  and  Soviet  Russia  will have attained  a level of civilization  comparable  to ours. But what  we definitely know is that  the first few centuries  of every revolution in  human  history will be years of oppression and  of total intellectual  darkness.
If I wanted  to improve  on God's creation I would try to find some method  of ensuring the continuity  of human  knowledge and  experience. The  wisdom of the first revolutionaries  would  be reincarnated  in these youngsters who claim to care for human  values, but who are always ready to plunge us back into darkness.
SANDLER:  Does that  imply a scepticism about social engineering?

JONAS : I am not sceptical about social reform. I am sceptical about  total reform. You see, the  best you can  achieve in this world is fairness. The  scales are some­ how in balance in the middle and if you're trying to be better than  fair, you will be worse. This  is why  I  am  not  a socialist any  longer,  quite  apart  from  what we've learned about  Marxism in practice.
If you know any  history at  all, you must see that  certain  societies were more conducive  to the  expression of evil than  other societies. And  therefore  it's  non­ sense to say that  social engineering  has no significance. But it's  also nonsense to say that the minute  you have your ideal society, all problems will disappear.  How could they possibly disappear?  If human  nature  were inclined  towards perfection, the ideal society would have evolved long ago.

34

GEORGE JONAS

I  have  never  believed  that   you should  therefore  go  along  with  the  worst injustices. You can most certainly feed a hungry child without  upsetting the grand design of the universe, or you can strike for fair wages in the textile industry,  or you can fight against  Hitler.  I'm  not suggesting that  because human  attempts to change  the  world  are  futile,  Why  fight against  Hitler?  No.  I  have  no  trouble fighting against  Hitler.  But having done so, I don't  try to make a perfect  world. Because I will then make a world of Hiders.
SANDLER:  Going  back  to art: You once said  that  it has  become so peripheral that it doesn't attract  bright  people any more. Can  you still take the value of art for granted?
JONAS: I may have expressed myself inaccurately -I don't  think  that  art is any more peripheral  than  it has ever been. The  arts are simultaneously  the most and the least important facets of society. On  the  one  hand,  they  have  always  been frills because what  matters  in  any given society is how much  power  you  have, how much  wealth. And  the artist-well,  he's  just the guy who's going to write about  the prince. He eats in the kitchen with the servants.
But when you think  of a bygone age, you can only think  of it in terms  of its art. If you talk about  the late eighteenth century, what flits through  your mind  is a melody by Mozart.  The  late eighteenth  century  is gone.  Nothing  besides art remmns.
SANDLER:  So what does art lack? Why do intelligent people gravitate  away from it and towards law, science, or whatever?
JONAS:  The  arts  are  no longer  the leading  edge of our  civilization  and  so the keenest minds in our society are  unlikely to choose art  as their  discipline. Some time ago, if you were a really smart guy, you would occupy yourself with  philoso­ phy and art even if you went into the church. Art was probably  the best medium for exercising your mind.  You  wouldn't  go into  law,  because law  was  a set of arbitrary  regulations  imposed  by the prince;  science was haphazard,  and  mixed with superstition.
There's  been a radical  shift in the last one or two hundred  years. Today,  if I
open The Ontario Report and I read a judgment on a constitutional  or a criminal case I encounter considerable  brilliance-a capacity for logic, a capacity  for judgment  that  I  just don't  find in the arts. And  I would find the same qualities in a biologist's research paper.
I don't  regret that  I  write poetry, but I  regret very much  that  I  work in  the arts. As an administrator of the arts, I find myself in the company  of some of the dumbest people of my civilization.
SANDLER:  What's  the current  value of art?
JONAS:  Art is very powerful.  What  is its power? I can only express it in  quasi­
mystical terms, as some kind  of transcendental  experience. The  only thing  that

35

GEORGE  JONAS

actually  gives me a high is poetry or something akin to poetry-music, ideas, epigrams, a bit of well written history.
One  of the  problems is that  people  note  the  power  of art  and  they  assume  that it can  be  used  to  instil  morality in  people.  Art  does  have  some  kind  of  moral influence, but  not  so crudely  and  directly  as  people  assume.  You  know?  If  you play  your  kids  Mozart and  you  talk  to  them   about   Dostoevsky, they  will  vote against  the Spadina express  way.  You don't ship  wheat  to India because  you are given  a steady  diet  of Thomas Mann, or even  Camus.  Art  will not  make  people more  peaceful,  more  altruistic, more  compassionate. And  the  funny  thing is, the same  people  who assume  that  art  can  work for the moral  good would  scream  and rage  at those who say that  art  can  corrupt innocent minds.  The  very person  who reads  Tolstoy  to  his kids at  bedtime for  their  moral  edification  will  rage  against the  prosecutor who wants  to ban  pornography.
SANDLER:   What about the  failures  of contemporary art?  The experimental novel nobody   reads,  poems  that   are  of  no  interest   to  anyone   but  the  poet  and   his friends-
JONAS:  We've  heard  about  the  failure  of the  novel on and  off for  many  years. I know  what  people  mean  when  they  say  that,  but  never  before  in  the  history  of mankind has so much  money  been  made  by selling so many  stories  to  so many readers.
Universal literacy  and  leisure  have  changed  the  market, that's all.  In  the  not­
so-remote past,  your illiterate could  not read  and  write. Today, your illiterate can
-and very  often  will-read  and  write.  You  have  an  immense  reading public which  is not more  advanced, emotionally and  intellectually, than  its great  grand­ father-except  that  its great  grandfather would  never  have  dreamed of  picking up a book. He didn't have the time,  he didn't have the money, it just wasn't done. He went to the country fair and  gawked  at the sword eaters. Nothing has changed since then,  except  that  this man's descendants read  books.
Literature gears  itself to this  market. A publisher  is after  all in the  business of making  money. If he knows that  one book can sell in millions and  another only in hundreds, why should  he not  concentrate on  producing the  first kind?  For  him, basically, a book is just ten  thousand dollars  worth  of paper  and  ink.
SANDLER:  Well ... there  are  better  ways to get rich -especially in  Canada.
JONAS: Yes, there  are. Although-I'll tell you something. Everybody wails about the  economic hardships of the  arts,  but  culture is big business. Very  big business. For  everybody  except  the  artist  who is the  primary producer.
You  are  talking to me now  in my role as one of the primary producers of art. As a  poet,  my income  does not  represent  one  tenth  of the  income  I  derive  from being a secondary or tertiary dispenser  of culture. I can make  a good living  being an  administrator of culture, or an  interpretive artist  if I direct  a play.

g6

GEORGE  JONAS

Let  me  emphasize that  I  am  not  complaining. I'm  describing.
There is an  immense  amount of money  available, generally   out  of  the  public purse, for so called high  art.  And  of every million dollars  which  the  public  spends on high  art  in this country, nine  hundred thousand goes for its administration, its promotion, its cataloguing, its popularization. Maybe  one hundred  thousand goes for its creation. And  these  proportions are wrong.
As for the artist: if, for any reason,  an artist  finds common  ground with  a large audience and  pulls in  millions  of dollars-that's fair  game.  If he  refuses  to  do that, he  has  only  himself  to  blame.  Or  not  to  blame.  He  can  proudly say,  I'm starving  and  I couldn't  give my  books away, let alone sell them!
I don't believe that   I am  the  greater   poet  or  person  because   I  have  utterly
failed  to make  contact with  a wide  public. That is a matter of complete indiffer­ ence, as far  as the quality of my work is concerned. Some  of the greatest  contem­ porary  writers  have  a wide  public  and  some of them  have  no  public  whatsoever. Conversely,  some of the most ridiculous  hacks have an enormous public  and  some of them  have  deservedly  no public  at all. If I could, without compromising any­ thing,  find  a  wide  audience, I think   I  would  deserve  every  penny   and   all  the acclaim I might  enjoy.
SANDLER:  What  about your  poem,  "The Television   Producer's Vision," about how boring  it is to work for a mass audience?
JONAS: I was a bit saddened by this common  experience: here  you have  a young man  with  a vision, and  he ends  up  painting advertising posters  or inventing ads for  Toronto Hydro. There is a  great  chasm  between  your  first  vision  and   your actual achievements within  any  artistic  medium. And  the  more  you  get  involved in  art  for  mass  consumption, the  more  you  are  haunted by  the  purity   of  your original  vision.
I  have  little  faith  in  television.  The  electronic  media  reward  mediocrity, not quality  and  intelligence.  If I, as a producer, were looking for a star  host,  I would cast someone  like Patrick Watson  before a woman  of genius  like the  late  Hannah Arendt, because  Watson  would  look much  smarter on the screen.  If you  put  the two of them  side by side on a platform in front  of television  cameras, nine  tenths of the  audience would  conclude that  Patrick   Watson  is the  more  intelligent of the two.
SANDLER: But she would  rip  him  to shreds  in a debate-
JONAS: No. Because the minute Watson  felt out of his depth  he would  ask a very dumb, superficial   journalistic question. He  would  ask,  Is  it  right   for Israelis  to bomb  Palestinian  refugee  camps?  He  would  ask a sharp question which  doesn't cut  to the  depth  of a  millimetre but  leaves  an  obvious  gash  in  the  debate. And Hannah Arendt might  throw  up  her  hands  in despair-she is talking about  the

37

GEORGE JONAS

movement of ideas  in  Western civilization.  What   can  she  say  to  this  question? And  the  audience would  conclude that  Watson  had  defeated Arendt.
SANDLER:   Didn't you  enjoy   writing the  TV  libretto   for  "The Glove"-your comic opera-and seeing it performed on television?
JONAS:  I enjoyed   that   a  great   deal-I  like sophisticated  light  entertainment. What disillusions  me  is having to make  a crude,  stupid,  earnest  statement, or  to oversimplify  a complex  issue so that  it can  fit into  the  television  tube-which  is a very, very narrow tube  indeed.
One  of the  problems  with  television  is that  is specializes  in  sham  magic. Con­ fused  thinking is not  magic.   Confused   emotions  and   moral   confusion  are  not magic. Stridency is not magic. The absence of thought is not magic,  but dumbness. I loathe  sham  magic; I want  my magic  to be real. "The  Glove," you see, is real magic. And  it's perhaps the most civilized form of art,  because  it works on several levels; kids can  enjoy it, but  you have to know something about  opera and  poetry to appreciate it fully.
"The Glove" is a game-it's  high  camp.  It has no metaphysical significance, perhaps-but God,  it's  a lovely game! Magic,  whether  it is complex  or simple, is very powerful. That's  what  poetry  is all about. And  if you did  shows like that
all the time  you would  not  be far  from  your original  vision.








LEO]l'S VERSION
 


James Harrison


A furtive  blow, more like. There  was I Thinking that  all he wanted was to take
Bread at my hand,  not play ducks and drakes
With me and  the course of history. Though  why
He should  feel that  all that  flapping would terrify Me I can't  imagine. Brute strength's one thing, fake Webbed  feet and  wet feathers another. It makes Me mad  to think  about it -lord of the sky
And in just as clumsy a rush as all the rest!
Sad  that  I could  not, at the time, have known
How he knew all along the far-flung cost
Of his sudden  whim. Contempt  might then  have grown
To  pity for so incongruous a lust,
And the whole issue been too much to be borne.

DUNCAN'S PASSAGE TO INDIA





T. E. Tausky







IN THE COURSE of the world tour recorded m A Social D,par­ ture, Sara Jeannette Duncan  and her travelling companion,  Lily Lewis, arrived in Calcutta  in the early months of 188g. Miss Duncan  was quick to notice the parti­ cular  atmosphere  created  by the  absolute separation  of rulers  and  ruled.  Even
granting  her powers as an observer, the character  of British rule must have been readily apparent, since she claims to have felt it as soon as she left the boat:

We  had  arrived at  the  dignity  of memsahibs. We  felt  this  dignity  the  moment we walked  across the  gangway and  stepped upon  India-an  odd  slight  conscious uplifting of the head  and  decision of the foot-the first touch  of Anglo-Indianism.

Sara  Jeannette Duncan was indeed destined to be a memsahib. In  Calcutta she met a museum official named  Everard  Cotes. Within  a few months, she married him and returned  to India,  which was to be her home for more than  two decades.
Both  Sara  Jeannette Duncan   and  India  changed  greatly  during   those  two decades. India  moved from  relative  passivity to passionate  and  at  times violent agitation for self-government;  in the final years of Miss Duncan's stay, the authori­ ties finally responded  to Indian  pressure by granting  a  measure  of  reform  and removing some of the official and social barriers between "sahib" and "native". Sara  Jeannette Duncan  herself naturally  first responded  to India  with  the  emo­ tions of a  tourist,  dazzled  by the  colour and  variety  of the  country.  Later,  her capacity  for  ironic detachment found  its expression in  a  series of  novels which took the British imperial  aim seriously, but recorded  the failures and  frustrations  of an idealistic theory forced to depend on "human souls of the human  average"1 for the fulfillment of its aims. Finally, when the Indian movement for independence took  a  violent form,  Miss Duncan  became  a  furious defender  of  British  rule, damning the Indian  radicals in a tense melodrama about an assassination attempt.

39

DUNCAN'S INDIA

Her first  and  last  Indian books,  especially,  are  a  fascinating record  of  a  society and  conception of life that  seemed  immutable and  immortal when  Sara  Jeannette Duncan stepped ashore  in  Calcutta in  188g, and  was already in an  irretrievable decline  when she left it.
When  she matured into  a veteran and somewhat cynical memsahib, Sara Jean­ nette  Duncan may  have  regretted the  gushings  of the  Indian section  of A  Social Departure. In  most of the  book, a fresh and  lively viewpoint compensates for the absence  of profound knowledge of the country  under discussion. But in  India, the British flag and  British friends seem to have produced a screened  and conventional impression   of  Indian life,  very  much  like  the  accounts of  other  contemporary travellers.  Representative Indian figures seem to  be part  of an  exotic  tapestry, as in the following  description of Calcutta:

A British city, for the British coat-of-arms  shone here and  the Union  Jack  floated there, but a British city with few Britons abroad  in it-the  throngs in the streets were nearly all Mahommedans, bearded and wearing little white embroidered  caps on the sides of their heads, or smooth-faced Hindoos in turbans; all flapping  nether draperies, all sleek of countenance and soft of eye. Chuprassis [messengers]  in long red coats that  reached  to the knee, and from that  to their toes in their own brown skins, hurried  hither and thither  solemnly with leather bags slung across their shoul­ ders, much  burdened  by their  own importance.  Baboos [clerks]  in  flowing  white went ceaselessly in and out of the swinging doors and up and down the broad stone steps of the great  shipping  and  merchants'  offices; and  the  streets  swarmed  with lower creatures.

The condescension evident in  the  foregoing  paragraph makes itself felt  wherever Indians are described-in contrast to Sara  Jeannette Duncan's admiring view of the Japanese, among whom  she lived on terms of greater equality. Indians are  to be respected  to the  degree  that  they approach the  English ideal, as in this remark­ able and  unironic account of an enlightened barrister  and  his wife:

This  lady  and  gentleman,  whom  we found  charming,  were as favourable  speci­ mens as we could have met of pure natives on the very crest of the wave of  progress that  is lifting their  race to the plane where men struggle and hope and  pray as we do-specimens  of  the  class that  appreciates  and  lives up  to  the  advantages  of British rule, and is received and liked by the sahib and the membership accordingly.

British society is rarely  analyzed, although it is always  present  as a constricting influence  on the  narrator. An overawed summary of its virtues  is provided  in the description of a Viceroy's Evening Party:

As to the humanity gathered  there ... for actual brilliancy ... nothing like it could be found out of the capital  of the Indian  Empire  in the whole world. The  body of it  was, of course,  Anglo-Indian, full  of the  fascinating  oddities  of Anglo-Indian speech and intercourse, with just a nuance of rich, tropical, easy unconventionality, full of gay talk and laughter  with a spice of recklessness in it, full of uniforms and

DUNCAN's INDIA

personalities and  names.  Very  charmingly indeed  do  the  Anglo-Indian ladies  cos­ tume  themselves,  and  neither in their clothes  nor in their  curtseys  does one find the stiffness-now the saints give me courage!-that is occasionally laid  to the charge of  British  femininity-but thou  shalt  not  say  I did  it.  Their pallor  lends  them shadows  about  the  eyes, and  an  interesting look of ideality; and  perhaps it  is the climate and  the  ubiquitous verandah chair  that  gives them  such graceful reposeful  ways. In fact, you delightful English  people who stay at home haven't a conception of how  much  more  delightful you sometimes  become  when  you  leave  your  leaky little  island  and  get  thoroughly warmed  and  dried  abroad.

The  Simple  Adventures  of a Memsahib  ( 1893), Sara Jeannette Duncan's sec­ ond  Indian book,  is an  account of one  of these  delightful, fascinating  creatures. The novel  relates the  story  of a young  English bride's first  year  in  India, as  ob­  served by a middle-aged veteran resident about to return to England. This is Mrs.  Perth Macintyre's final  summation of her  protegee:

Nevertheless,  Mrs.  Browne  has become  a memsahib, graduated,  qualified, sophisticated. That  was  inevitable. I  have  watched   it  come  to  pass  with  a  sense that  it could  not be prevented. She has lost her  pretty  colour, that  always  goes first, and  has gained  a shadowy  ring  under  each  eye, that  always comes  afterwards. She is thinner than  she  was,  and   has  acquired  nerves  and  some  petulance. . . . Her world is the personal world  of Anglo-India, and  outside  of it.... I believe she does not  think  at all. She  is growing dull  to India, too, which  is about  as sad  a thing  as any.... She  has  acquired for  the  Aryan  inhabitant a  certain irritation, and  she believes him  to be nasty  in all his ways. This  will sum  up  her  impressions of India as completely years hence  as it does today. She is a memsahib like another.

One could  hardly ask for  a more astonishing volte-face within three years.  The latter description doubtless contains more  truth, just  as in  every  way  The  Simple Adventures  of a Memsahib  is a wiser,  better balanced account of  India  than  A Social Departure. One memsahib at  least  did  not  have her  powers of observation dulled by the  Indian experience.
In structural terms, The  Simple  Adventures  is a  simple book.  Sara Jeannette
Duncan herself said  many of the  incidents were suggested by her  own  experience:

"It was certainly our  own  house,"  Mrs. Cotes  replied,  "and the  neighbours, yes
-you remember I talked  no scandal  about  them! -and  the garden was like ours as nearly  as I could  describe  it."2

The domestic experiences "were just what happens to everybody, modified to suit Mr.  and Mrs.  Browne." 3  There is an  elaborate account of  housekeeping and   of the  servants; chapters are  devoted to a honeymoon trip, to  a Viceroy's party, to the  young couple's first  dinner  invitation, and   so  on.   Each of  these   common experiences could  be added on like  beads  to a string. But  the  string in this  case  is a thoughtful consideration of  the  nature of  Anglo-Indian life,  as  it  affects two

DUNCAN's  INDIA

very different  but strongly  imagined  characters: the  norm  (Mrs.  Browne)  and the introspective exception  (the  narrator, Mrs. Macintyre).
If Helen Browne turns out to be "a memsahib like another", she also begins as a respectable, middle-class, provincial  young girl like any other.  Her suitor is an equally unremarkable and  representative  young man,  a clerk for a tea finn. The Brownes meet and  become engaged in England; their courtship is carried  on "in the most natural,  simple, and  unimpeded  manner," although,  of course, within the bounds of what  a Victorian  reader  and writer would assume those adjectives might  mean.  Then  Browne  returns  to  Calcutta,  leaving  Helen  with  a  year  to accept contradictory advice from friends, speculate in ignorance about  India,  and accumulate a trousseau.
When she finally lands in India,  Helen undergoes all the ritual  experiences of the new arrival.  In  order  to please her husband's  friends, she gets married  in a more formal ceremony than she would have wished. The  young couple go off on a brief and Spartan honeymoon, and then have to face the difficulties of setting up housekeeping, and  of becoming  involved  in  the social life appropriate to their station.  The  rigid  hierarchical  structure  of Anglo-Indian  society is revealed  in these chapters,  in theoretical  terms by the comments of the narrator, and in prac­ tice by the  characters'  conversation  and  actions. Government  officials  have  far more prestige socially than merchants: George Browne can only resort to sarcasm as a means of defence, as in his opinion of aides-de-camp, offered  when someone else remarks that  they have so much  to do:

"Do!" remarked young Browne, with the peculiar contempt mercantile pursuits so often inspire for the army and the civil service in Calcutta. "They order dinner, I believe."

Within  government  service, minute  distinctions of rank  are scrupulously  ob­ served. The  narrator imagines  a  special  government  department  in  charge of measuring  prestige:

[Government] affixes a tag to each man's work and person describing him and all that he does. There is probably an office for the manufacture of these, and its head is doubtless known as the Distributor-General of Imperial Tags to the Government of India.

Mr. Perth  Macintyre,  the narrator's husband, "has never had occasion to apply for  a tag,"  and  one feels in  Mrs.  Macintyre's  remarks some of the  resentment, more subtly  phrased,  that  is displayed  by George Browne. One  of the  Brownes' hosts at a dinner  party is a senior civil servant with  a most impressive tag. This manifests itself in apparent, but only apparent,  humility:

At first sight, Mr. Sayter was a little grey gentleman with a look of shrinking modesty and a pair of very bright eyes.... Custom, however, proved Mr. Sayter's

42

DUNCAN'S INDIA

modesty to be rather  like that  of the fretful porcupine, his humility  to take amused superior  standpoints  of opinion,  and  his eyes to be cast down  in search  of clever jests that were just the least bit wicked. All of which, in Anglo-India, subtly denotes the tag.

Mr. Sayter  takes delight  in unnerving Mrs. Browne by hinting of British  India's immoral past.  In  a  later  appearance, he  is given  a  more  important role,  as an apologist  for British rule. His opponent in this verbal  dual  is Mr.  Jonas Batcham, M.P., a Utilitarian industrialist turned globetrotter. It is clear  that  Sara  Jeannette Duncan shared  the universal  Anglo-Indian view that  nothing but  evil could  come from  uninformed Parliamentarians. Mr.  Batcham comes to Calcutta determined to believe labourers are  exploited  and  that  Anglo-Indian society is indecent. He is not allowed  to prove his assertions, and  a whole chapter is inserted  to show  up his gullibility,  and  the pompousness and  vanity  of his character. In  attacking Mr. Batcham's theories  through his defective  character, his inability  to defend  himself in  verbal  duels  with  wise Anglo-Indians, and  through manipulation of  the  plot, Miss Duncan anticipates the  methods she uses to assail the  credibility of Vulcan Mills, a major character in The  Burnt Offering,  published  seventeen years  later.
As the  novel  proceeds,  Mrs.  Browne  increasingly  masters  Anglo-Indian  social
customs,  and  the  intricacies of  dealing   with  servants.  By  the  end,   as  we  have already seen,  she  is  a  complete  memsahib, with  all  the  characteristics of  that species:

She has fallen into a way of crossing her knees in a low chair  [the  "reposeful ways" Miss Duncan  so admired  in  A  Social  Departure]   that  would  horrify  her Aunt  Plovtree, and a whole set of little feminine Anglo-Indian poses have come to her naturally.  There  is a shade  of assertion about  her chin  that  was not  there  in England.

Despite  her ordinariness, Mrs.  Browne  has won  the  affections of the  narrator, who remarks:

If it is necessary to explain  my interest  in these young Brownes, which  you, I regret to think, may find inexplicable, it lies, I dare say, as much  in this departure of ours as in anything else. Their first chapter  has been our last.

As The  Simple  Adventures  unfolds,  we come  to see that  it is as centrally  con­ cerned  with the story of the  Macintyres as it is with  the  Brownes.  Not  only is the reader's view of the  Brownes constantly shaped  by the amused, world-weary  Mrs. Macintyre; the  "last  chapter" of  the  Macintyres, their  disappearance into  the oblivion  of retirement and  "the warmest  south  wall of  Devonshire" becomes  both a comment on the blithe and  heedless contentment of the Brownes  and  a poignant event  in its own right.
The importance of the narrator emerges only very gradually. For  the  first hun-

43

DUNCAN'S INDIA


dred   pages,  we  are  aware of  a  distinctive   narrative tone-concise,  detached, inclined   towards irony-but  we  know  very  little  about   the  person  behind   the voice. Indeed, we do  not  even  find  out  Mrs.  Macintyre's name until  p. I 24. But then  we do get to know  her character and  situation rather  well. Her  husband is a senior  partner in a successful  firm;  nevertheless,  he is not  properly recognized  by official society. She  is thought to  be "patronising and  interfering" by some,  but does go out  of her  way  to help  Helen  Browne.  Like her creator, she  tends  to see human character in  terms  of types,  while  maintaining a  cool and  partly  sympa­ thetic,  partly  ironic  reserve. Perhaps it is more accurate to say that  she is a projec­  tion of one aspect  of her creator: her narration is nearly always  crisp, laconic  and amused, very  rarely  straying into  the  rhapsodic prose  that  marks  Sara Jeannette Duncan's moments of emotional involvement with  her characters.
The  only emotion Mrs.  Macintyre permits  herself is an occasional  tragic  lament over the  unnatural and  unappreciated plight  of the  British in  India.4  Whole epi­ sodes are shaped to reflect this theme. The  Browne's  blundering effort  to substitute a kerosene stove for the  joys of a fireplace  becomes, in the  final  paragraph of the chapter, a symbol  for the  alien  nature of the British  presence  in  India:

The  old kite that  surveyed them  always through  the window from his perch in the sago palm  beside the  verandah said nothing,  but  if  they had  been intelligent they might  have  heard  the  jackals that  nightly pillaged  the  city's rubbish  heaps, howling derision  at  the foolishness of a sahib who tried  to plant  his hearth-stone in India.

At  the  moment of the  Browne's  greatest  triumph (the  night  of their  appearance at a Viceregal reception)  Mrs.  Macintyre draws  a gloomy moral:

How  little  more  than  illustrations  the  men  and  women  have  been, as one  looks back, pictures in a magic lantern, shadows on the wall! ... How gay they were and how luxurious, and how important in their little day! ... And now -let me think!
-some  of them  in Circular Road  Cemetery-cholera, fever,  heat-apoplexy; some of them  under  the  Christian  daisies of England-probably abscess of the liver; the rest grey-faced Cheltenham pensioners, dull and obscure, with uncertain tempers  and  an  acquired  detestation  of the  climate  of Great  Britain.  And  soon, very soon, long before the Brownes appear  in print,  the Perth  Macintyres  also will have  gone over  to  the  great  majority  who  have  forgotten  their  Hindustani and regret  their  khansamahs. Our  brief day too will have died in a red sunset behind clustering palms, and  all its little doings and graspings, and  pushings, all its pretty scandals  and  surmises and  sensations, will echo further  and  further  back into  the night.

If, as  Mrs.  Macintyre suggests  in  a  passage  I have  already   quoted, the  Anglo­ Indian  experience can  be metaphorically described  as the  pages  of a  book,  the book itself makes no sense and  has a tragic  ending.  The  precariousness of life in a tropical climate  and  the futility  of the British attempt to create  a miniature parody


44

DUNCAN'S INDIA

of  their  own  civilization under  unsuitable conditions has  become  an  allegory  of the  unreality, purposelessness  and  tragic  ending  of human life itself. This  theme emerges  again  in the  moving  final  paragraphs of the  novel,  which  link  the  fates of Mrs.  Browne  and  Mrs.  Macintyre in  a lament  for  British  life in  India as an aspect of mutability:

I hope she may not stay  twenty-two years. Anglo-Indian tissues, material  and spiritual,  are apt  to turn  in twenty-two years to a substance somewhat  resembling cork. And I hope she will not remember so many dead faces as I do when she goes away-dead faces  and  palm  fronds  grey with  the  powder  of  the  wayside, and clamorous voices of the bazar crying, "Here iz! memsahib! Here iz!" ...
So let us go our several ways. This is a dusty world. We drop down the river with the  tide  to-night.  We shall  not see the  red  tulip  blossoms of the  silk cottons  fall again.


MY DiscussiON of The Simple  Adventures of a Memsahib
did not include any analysis of "native" characters simply  because  Indians do not
exist in the  world  of the  novel,  except  as picturesque or  irritating  underlings. In her  next  six  books, Sara  Jeannette Duncan remained content to  cast  Indians in minor   roles,  usually  as  loveably  childish  servants.   Finally,   in  Set  in  Authority (I go6), Miss  Duncan created a  rna jor and  relatively  sympathetically  presented Indian character: a  Mahommedan magistrate placed  in  the  difficult  position  of judging  an  interracial murder case. The Burnt  0 ffering  (I gI o), Sara Jeannette Duncan's final  Indian novel,  gives several  Indian characters an   unaccustomed place  in  the  foreground of  the  novel.  Sadly,  a  developing insight   into   Indian character is juxtaposed with  Miss Duncan's most  bitter  and  explicit  repudiation of advanced Indian opinion.
The years  separating the  publication of  Sara   Jeannette Duncan's two  final
Indian novels have  been described  as "a watershed era":

Constitutional   reforms  then  fashioned  and  introduced   mark  the  turning   point between the frost of the old raj ... and  the gradual  thaw  of decentralization and devolution  of British power toward  the goal of parliamentary self-government  for India.  The  era was one of revolutionary discontent as well as reform.5

The  effect of these momentous changes on Sara  Jeannette Duncan's work  is start­ ling. The Burnt  Offering, like its predecessor,  is based  on  actual events  and  uses historical  figures  for  characters. But  the  moral  balance and  leisurely  pace  of the earlier  novel is gone. The Burnt  Offering is a quick-paced narrative whose  main  object  seems to be to  justify the  conservative attitudes of the Anglo-Indian com­ munity  in its encounter with strange new forces.
The  novel  is so  closely tied  to  the  mood  and  events  of  its  period  that   some

45

DUNCAN'S INDIA

understanding of the situation  is necessary before any comments can be made on the novel itself. The two new elements in India at this time were the intensification of nationalist  agitation  (sometimes finding its outlet in violent incidents)  and the presence in  Whitehall  of a Secretary  of State  for India,  John  Morley, who was far more sympathetic to the views of Indian  leaders than any Viceroy or Secretary for decades. The  rash of bombings and  demonstrations  in several parts  of India led to an Anglo-Indian counter-reaction and to the imposition of press censorship and the arbitrary detention of prominent  nationalists who were thought  by the authorities  to be dangerous  agitators.  A period of extreme tension between I 906 and  I909  was finally relieved by the  Morley-Minto  reforms of  I909  which gave far greater  powers to official and legislative bodies on which Indians  were repre­ sented.
Following her method in The  Imperialist and Set in Authority, Sara  Jeannette
Duncan  selects and shapes current  events for her moral purposes. There  is no counterpart to Morley in her novel, and  the reforms she rather  hurriedly  thrusts into  her final pages are far  less sweeping than  the actual  measures.  Even  more important is the absence of a moderate nationalist like G. K. Gokhale, a leader of the Indian Congress who exercised a considerable influence on Morley. The  Burnt
0 ffering therefore gives the impression that  there is no middle  way between  the
Indians  who  are  totally  integrated  into  the  Anglo-Indian  community,  and  the extreme nationalists.
The  two characters  in the novel modeled on historical figures represent  view­ points radical enough in Miss Duncan's opinion to deserve bitterly satiric handling. As a spokesman for British advanced  thought, she chooses, instead of  Morley, Keir Hardie,  the pioneer Socialist politician who visited India in the fall of  I 907. Her representative  Indian  nationalist is a character  based on Bal Gangadhar Tilak, the advocate of extreme measures in the cause of Indian independence.
The  plot shows the sinister influence of these two radicals. The  central  event is the attempted  assassination of the Viceroy, an act strongly encouraged  by Ganen­ dra Thakore  (Tilak). Just before the attempt  is made, Thakore  is jailed for sedi­ tion, and  Vulcan  Mills (Hardie) who attempts  to speak at  a protest  meeting  is whisked away  and  out  of the  country-thereby, in  Miss Duncan's  judgment, preventing a riot that would have ensued if Mills had been allowed to speak. Joan Mills, Vulcan's  daughter, narrowly  escapes  marriage  with  Bepin  Behari  Dey, Thakore's disciple and the foiled assassin. Dey is shot by the police, but not before his bomb causes John  Game, the Home Secretary and Joan's unsuccessful suitor, to be thrown out of the carriage  carrying the Viceroy. Game, a stoical and  heroic defender of the Anglo-Indian order, dies of his injuries within a week. Joan  Mills takes a somewhat longer time to realize that her self-sacrifice to the cause of India is no longer welcomed by Dey's friends, who have been frightened  into conserva­
tism.

DUNCAN'S INDIA

As my summary  has indicated,  the plot of The  Burnt  Offering  is exceedingly melodramatic, more so than  the  events on which  it is modeled.  There  was an attempt  on the life of the Viceroy, Lord Minto, while he was on tour,  though  it did not result in any loss of life. There is no record, however, of any Viceroy crying out "Bande Mataram" (the  Indian  equivalent  of "Vive le Quebec  libre")  and having  his  audience  respond  by singing  "God  Save  the  Queen". This  is the touching sequel to the assassination attempt  in The  Burnt Offering.
It  is impossible to avoid  the  conclusion that  Sara  Jeannette Duncan, in  this
novel, finally allows herself to accept, virtually completely, the attitudes and values of the Anglo-Indian official world. The mixture of sympathy and detachment that seems to characterize  her view of the English community in her previous work is swept  away by the fear of a fundamental and  violent attack  upon  the  principle of British rule.
In fairness, some qualifications  need to be stated. Sara  Jeannette Duncan  was
never capable  of the hysteria some Anglo-Indians  could attain; for example,  the Pioneer, a prominent  newspaper,  suggested that  "ten  [terrorists]  ... be shot for every life sacrificed."6   Within  The  Burnt  Offering,  one character, Mrs.  Living­ stone Hooper,  represents the most unthinking  reactionary  Anglo-Indian  position, and  is consistently satirized. Also, Miss Duncan's  manipulation of the  plot is not always as absurd  as it seems. By linking Bepin Dey with  Thakore,  she suggests that  Tilak  actively supported  terrorism.  Tilak  did in  fact  recommend  a  young man named V. D. Savarkar  for a scholarship to England, and Savarkar gratefully supplied Tilak with a manual on bomb production, paralleling Bepin Dey's foreign education  and relationship with Thakore.7
If,  however, Miss Duncan's depiction  of Tilak  is less fanciful  than  it  may at first appear  to be, she is certainly  unfair  to Keir Hardie,  her chief satiric  target. Tilak  is at least treated  with respect, as an inspiring and  charming,  if dangerous and unscrupulous, leader of men. Keir Hardie is shown to be a vain and officious gull. A comparison  of The  Burnt  Offering  with Hardie's  own  book, India:  Im­ pressions and  Suggestions  ( 1909)   tends to dispel this view  of  him  and  reveals much about Sara Jeannette Duncan's  own political views.
Hardie's   book seems moderate,  restrained,  and,  as far  as  one  can  tell,  well informed. He seems to look forward to Dominion status for India,  but in the short run  calls for increasing  participation by Indians  in their  own  government,  and pleads for "a very little statesmanship,  inspired by a very little sympathetic appre­ ciation of the situation" which could "easily set things to rights."
One clue suggests that Sara Jeannette  Duncan  read Hardie's  book. The  Burnt
0 ffering begins with a striking scene in which Bepin Dey is denied  admission to a first-class railway carriage  by two abusive white planters, and is rescued by Joan and  Vulcan  Mills. Hardie  describes three such incidents  at  some  length  in  his book.8

47

DUNCAN'S INDIA


If Sara  Jeannette Duncan did  read  Hardie's book, she distorted his opinion  and weakened  his credibility in  her  portrait of  Vulcan   Mills.  On   pp.  92-94  of  the novel, Joan Mills and  John Game discuss a visit to the famine district  Joan  and her  father had  undertaken with  Ganendra Thakore as their  guide.  It turns  out that   Ganendra, in  his  wily  fashion,   had  assembled  villagers  from   all  over  the countryside to exaggerate pathos and  arouse  Mills's misguided  anger. Hardie was in fact  taken  to a famine district  by Tikal.9  He  does not  mention the  identity of his guide,  but  his account is far  more  restrained than  that   of Joan Mills.  Joan
says:

"One  skeleton-Ishall  see  him  always!-tried to  dig  in  the  sand  for  the withered  rice underneath. He  found  a little. And he was too weak to eat  it, and died with it in his hand-I saw him die. Oh, what a witness!"
"I  hope to God you didn't  photograph  him," said Game,  almost roughly.
"I myself couldn't  -couldn't. But Mr. Thakore  had  brought  a  photographer and told him to do it. And father  approved."

Hardie says:

They  brought  out  for  my inspection  handfuls  of boiled  rice, which  was being prepared  for their  one and  only meal, and  pieces of bread,  some made  thick like Scotch oatmeal  bannocks, and  others thin, like ordinary  oatmeal  cake.

Game patiently explains that  the famine  has been caused  by crop  failure.  Joan does not know  how to refute  this argument, but Hardie does:

If it be urged that I saw them  at their worst, owing to the failure  of last  year's crop,  then  the  reply  is that  it is only a question  of degree,  that  in  normal  times they are starved, and  that  when scarcity comes they have no resources to fall back on.

The  only good thing Sara Jeannette Duncan has to say for Mills is that  he does not advocate violence.  Mills's moderation is the subject  of a conversation between Joan and  Bepin  Dey:

"He  believes there is no sedition"  [Bepin says].
"And  there  is," said Joan  steadily. "Of  course there is. How could it be other­
wise?"
Bepin gave her a look of reverence.
"You are, I truly believe, the more advanced of the two," said he.

As this  conversation indicates, Joan,  with  her  greater   extremism, is even  more villainous than  her father in Sara Jeannette Duncan's estimation. Her  enthusiasm for  all things  Indian is seen  as a grave  defect,  leading  to the  inevitable and  un­ happy  fate  of racial  inter-marriage.
If Vulcan Mills, Joan, Ganendra Thakore and  Bepin  Dey are  clearly  villains,

DUNCAN's INDIA

there is no less certainty about the identity of Sara Jeannette Duncan's heroes: John Game and two other administrators,  Michael Foley and Fred Beauchamp, among the  Anglo-Indians,  and  Sir  Kristodas  Mukerji,  a  conservative  magistrate,   his daughter Janaki  and his spiritual  guide Swami Yadava among  the Indians.
Game is a conscientious, idealistic official. It is his misfortune that  his romantic feelings are  aroused  for the first time by Joan  Mills, who is too  blinded  by her passion for Indian  nationalism to recognize his human qualities. His vision of their future  together  contains,  unconsciously, all  the  paternalism  of  the  British  ad­ ministrator:

"I will explain everything-you will understand everything. You will find a new focus for the affairs of this perplexing country-after all, we are doing our best. You will soon feel that it is your race and your husband who is, who are, doing their best."

As well as refusing Game, Joan  twists the knife by informing him that she intends to marry Bepin Behari Dey -a Bengali:

"You are going to marry a Bengali?" he said. "Which Bengali are you going to marry?"
"Mr. Bepin Behari Dey," she answered.
His mouth took the line with which it was accustomed to confront a new set of
circumstances. He looked not so much aghast as alert and inflexible. "No," he said, "you must not do that."
"Really?"
"I must speak to your father. It is impossible."

The scene as a whole leaves no doubt that Sara Jeannette  Duncan's sympathies are with Game, not Joan.  Events prove him right, of course: Bepin turns  out to have been previously married,  to intend  using the marriage  for  propaganda  purposes, and finally, to be an assassin.
In one important respect, The  Burnt 0 ffering is much more daring  than  any of
Sara  Jeannette Duncan's  previous novels:  racial inter-marriage, never so much as whispered  about  before, here becomes central  to the  plot.  It  also appears  in another context, Janaki Mukerji's unrequited  love for John  Game. Game  regards Janaki  as a valued friend  but no more, partly  because of his temperamental in­ susceptibility  to love before Joan  Mills's arrival,  but  partly  also,  one  suspects, because of his horror  of intermarriage. Joan's  engagement  does  bring  about  a painful liberalization  of his attitudes. Although  he spurs on the police to stop the marriage  ceremony between Joan  and Dey, he also indulges in meditation:

"If she wanted to marry an Indian," he reflected, "she might at least have chosen a decent fellow. There are plenty of them."

As a lover, Game is a figure of pathos, but after his death  he is elevated  to the

49

DUNCAN'S INDIA

status  of a tragic  martyr. Sara  Jeannette Duncan delivers what  amounts to a  fu­
neral elegy, which  also serves as a defence of British rule:

To this official was accorded a funeral which was almost a demonstration of loyalty to the Raj  whose servant  he was. A thousand  students  accompanied  it, with every sign of sorrow; and it was an extremist politician who called the meeting  to discuss how most fittingly and  feelingly the memory of his services should be perpetuated by the educated  classes of the land  which had  now no other  way of thanking  him
... I find myself lending  an ear  to the observation  of Michael  Foley, who said to his wife-
"If it was expedient  that  one man  should die for the people, I fancy, as things have turned  out, old John  was pleased enough that  it should be he."

Michael Foley,  the  author of the  clever  comparison of  Game to  Christ,   also serves a symbolic  function. He  and  his wife  Lucy  represent   the  kind  of  bright, pleasant, affectionate, normal young  couple  who  stand  for  sanity  and  the  con­ tinued  British presence  in India, as opposed  to the fanaticism and  disloyal Anglo­  phobia  of a Joan Mills.
The remaining Anglo-Saxon character of any  importance is Fred  Beauchamp,
the Commissioner of Police for Calcutta. If John Game  and  Michael  Foley repre­ sent  the  wisdom  and  good  will  of British  rule,  Beauchamp stands  for  the force upon  which  British  authority depends. He is acutely  aware  of the threat to Anglo­ India posed  by terrorism, even  if the  rest of Calcutta basks in  complacency. His solution  to the  terrorist problem seems to  be to suspend  all  civil liberties.  He  has "a policeman's view  [sceptical] of Courts  of Justice" and  his first act in the novel is to urge, successfully,  the suppression of Thakore's  newspaper. He  calls Vulcan Mills a "damned explosive gas-bag" and says "the Criminal Code isn't  big enough  to  cover  our  friend." Beauchamp plays  a  key  role  in  the  detention of  Mills,  as well as in the thrilling cops-and-robbers chase that  results in the  prevention of the marriage of Joan and  Bepin  Dey. The  tone  of  these episodes is sadly displayed  in a description of Beauchamp's state  of mind following  his heroic arrest  of a middle­ aged  British Member of Parliament:

Nor was Beauchamp  late for dinner  at Government  House. He bragged of that a little later, as was natural.... As they sat down to their soup the Private Secretary leaned  a little  forward  and  looked at Beauchamp  across the  lady who separated them.
"Got  him?" he asked, with just a point of anxiety.
"Got  him,"  replied  Beauchamp,  with  joyous calm.

It is a relief to tum from Fred  Beauchamp to a consideration of the three Indian loyalist characters, who  reveal  Sara  Jeannette Duncan's widening human sympa­ thies,  rather than her  increasing militancy. Sir  Kristodas Mukerji is  an  Indian lawyer  in government service  whom  circumstances place in an  ethical quandary.

DUNCAN'S INDIA

He  is a former schoolmate  of Ganendra  Thakore,   and,  beneath  his ultra-loyal surface, even has slight and  secret sympathy with some of Thakore's views. Yet he has to try Thakore.  He finds him guilty, and gives him a harsh sentence -ten years transportation (Tilak,  in exactly identical circumstances,  was given only six years). His internal  conflict results in feelings of guilt after the trial, which mani­ fest themselves as sickness and lassitude.
Sir  Kristodas's  address  to  Thakore   before  passing sentence   perhaps  admits more about  the merits of the independence  movement  than  Sara  Jeannette  Dun­ can knew she was conceding. He says that the British authorities  have been insen­ sitive  to  Indians  and  Indian   religion. He  admits  that,  divorced  from  politics, Thakore's religious emotion might appeal to himself, as well as to others. He can only save  himself by insisting  upon  the  ethical  responsibility  of  submitting   to authority,  even if that  authority  is alien and contrary  to the  religious instincts of the people over which it rules.
But if Sir Kristodas appears  unsatisfactory as a philosopher,  he is, nevertheless,
a touching and convincing human  figure. His love for his daughter, his contrary impulses toward traditional Indian  religion and Western ways, his sad dignity are all sympathetically  revealed.  His  relations with  John  Game,  his closest British friend, are based on mutual  respect and affection.
Janaki,  Sir Kristodas's daughter,  is even more complex in her motivations  than her father. When Sir Kristodas was more of a traditionalist,  he arranged  her mar­ riage in the orthodox fashion. Her "husband" died before the marriage was con­ summated, and her adolescence was devoted to the mourning ceremonies of a Hin­ du widow. When Sir Kristodas  came to change his views, she was shipped  off to Oxford and educated by ultra-liberal friends to be an enlightened Western woman. She  returned  to India,  to fall  in love with John  Game,  and  also to contribute  financially to the independence  movement both Game  and  her father  so bitterly oppose.  Finally,  when  her  childhood  mentor,  Swami  Yadava,   returns   to  the Mukerji  household after several years abroad, she reverts to traditional  ways and also, under Yadava's influence, becomes a spy for the authorities.
With such a variety of cultural  influences at war within her, Janaki  is, naturally enough, described as being in a state of continual self-doubt and  torment.  Yet we are also given clear indications  that  she possesses charm,  wit and  courage.  Her emotions are appropriate to the situations she finds herself in, not hysterical or inexplicable. In short, Sara Jeannette Duncan has given to an Indian  character  the moral uncertainties and sensitive if not always successful responses to difficult situations that in previous works she had reserved for her most cherished  English ladies. The distance from the concept of Indian  character  in A Social Departure is immense.
The final direction Janaki  takes, along with her father and Yadava,  the decision
to abandon  the world altogether  in favour of wandering  religious meditation,  has

DUNCAN's INDIA

to its credit that  it finally resolves the cultural  confusion Janaki  and Sir Kristodas both feel. But if the ending satisfies them, it does not satisfy the reader,  because of the peculiar role played by Swami Yadava.
Yadava  is forced to serve two totally incompatible  functions  in the  novel. On the one hand,  he is a seer who brings comfort to his disciples. On  the other,  he is a spy for the Government, a sort of Oriental  Fred Beauchamp,  who reports Mills's plans to the  police and  also keeps a close eye on Bepin Dey and  his plots. The absurdity  of this role needs no further  explanation.
In  his more serious aspect,  Yadava  is used to counter  the  ideological  threat posed by Thakore's self-justification at his trial. Thakore  provides a religious basis for Indian  nationalism. Sir Kristodas attempts  to reply by separating religion and politics. But this is not very convincing, and so Yadava is enlisted to make a reli­ gious argument   for British rule:

"England  is the husband of India. We talk of the Mother as if we had  but one parent."  He smiled whimsically. "But we are the children of England  also. Can we deny it?"

This  is indeed  whimsy, but  Yadava  is not through.  It turns  out  that  a "free fighting,  kingly England" was responsible for taking  India.  Englishmen  are the "white  Kshattriyas  [warrior  caste]  and  under  them  the Brahmins  could sit and rule  and   tell  their  tale  of  God."   England   has,  however,  degenerated   under democracy:

"But from a democraticized England what can we expect?" went on  the priest scornfully. "Ideals of the pantry. A husband, I fear, grown indifferent."

It is, presumably,  under  the  patronage  of a revitalized and  firm British  govern­
ment that  the three mystics are able to "tell their tale of God"  in the final pages.
Assassination plots, suppression of civil liberties, increasingly violent rhetoric emanating from  both  radicals  and  conservatives:  it seelllS that  Sara  Jeannette Duncan  did not have to live in Canada to undergo a Canadian experience. The Burnt 0 ffering is interesting  enough  in itself as a vivid contemporary account  of a crucial moment  in Indian history;  to a Canadian reader it is even more inter­ esting in its anticipation of the emotions aroused by the FLQ crisis.



NOTES

1 Set in Authority  ( rgo6),  p. II6.
2  G. B. Burgin, "A Chat  with Sara Jeannette  Duncan," The   Idler  VIII   (August
r8g5),  p. 117.
3 Burgin, op. cit., p. II7.

52

DUNCAN'S INDIA


' This  seems to have  been a common  theme  in Anglo-Indian fiction.  Cf.  Susanne Howe, Novels of Empire  (New York:  Columbia  University Press, I949):  "Novels about India ... are among the unhappiest  books in the language.... As in no other novels in the world, homesickness becomes a speciality. Nowhere  in literature, one is tempted  to believe, is Home spelt with a larger capital letter"  (pp. 32, 34).
ft   Stanley  A. Wolpert,  Morley  and  India  (Berkeley:  University  of California Press, I967), p. I.
6  Stanley A. Wolpert, Tilak  and Gokhale  (Berkeley:  University of California Press, I962), p. 2Ig.
7  Tilak  and Gokhale, pp. I68-6g.
8  This similarity is also noticed  by S. Nagarajan, in an article  published  by Journal of Canadian  Fiction  (Vol. III, No.4) after  the present article  had  been accepted for publication.
9 Tilak  and Gokhale, p. 228.









THE TWITTERING M]ICHINE

John Ditsky

The  clockwork of dawn is the toy of God. Time  when illusion's

last bats are flitting, are all
that  maintains  the dead day's dream

to the sleepless eye and brain. Already cats creep homeward,

footsore furry windup  playthings;
and soon the sun will pop up

bubble-swift  (the  skirted lady instead of the umbrellaed  man) .

Gadgets and  toys: watch the key winding (you  see the machinery  work),

the gears a-whirl. At times, the ill­
oiled system squeaks:  is birds.

53

JOYCE CAROL OATES' FIRST NOVEL





Rose Marie Burwell








ALTHOUGH rr  HAS TAKEN REVIEWERS and  critics more than  a decade to recognize that  Joyce Carol Oates  is not writing in the mode of the naturalist  or the social realist/  her first novel introduces  the search  for  self­ realization  that  provides  the  narrative  structure  of all  Oates'  fiction. The  true subject of With Shuddering  Fall is not, as reviewers assumed it to be, madness or violence.z  It is the  complex  drive of the  human  organism  toward  psychological wholeness which  Jung   terms  individuation,3    and  here  Oates  holds  in  uneasy tension the entelechy of personal individuation  and the psychologically entrenched power of those institutions  which impede it.
Written  while the  novelist was an  undergraduate, the first novel resembles, in
many of the perceptions of the two rna jor characters, "The  Myth of Sisyphus" as it might  be recreated  by an autistic high school drop-out-exactly the  develop­ mental  stage of protagonist  Karen  Herz. With  her racing-car  driver  lover, Shar Rule, Karen  participates in a dream suggesting the extremes to which existential recognition of self-responsibility leads. The  structure  of the tripartite novel origi­ nates  in  the  psychic  condition   of  Karen   before,  during  and  after  her  moral maturation. The  short  first section  takes  place  in  Eden  County,  the  mythical territory  in which  the second  novel and  many of the early short  stories are set.4
It reveals Karen  in a quiescent, but restless, moral state. The  long middle section has as its background  the racing  circuit towns of Synderdale  and  Cherry  River, presenting the emotional  and  physical violence with which, for Oates,  the self is inevitably  created.  The  brief final section returns  to Eden  County;  leaving  am­ biguous,  but  achievable,  a  consolidation  of the  moral  independence   to  which Karen  aspires.
As the structure of the  novel derives from  Karen's  moral  states, so does the
psychology of  her  character originate  in  a  mnemonic  pattern   through   which


54

JOYCE  CAROL OATES

reduplicated scenes force her to confront the emotional price of moral dependence. In  much  the way as the  bit of tea-soaked madeleine  evokes for  Proust's  Marcel elements of the  past which create  a new reality in the present,  Karen  re-experi­ ences humiliation  and suffering and is strengthened  in her nascent  desire to seize control of her life. Waking  on the morning of what,  unknown  to her, is the day that  she will leave Eden  County,  Karen  forces herself up  and  out of the  deep, protective slumber  that  has immured  her since birth -giving  to the  life where her destiny is shaped  by the family and  its traditions  a  dream-like  quality. The previous night she  had  listened  to her father  reading  of  the  biblical  patriarchs  whose destinies were  manipulated by God  himself and  had  felt keenly the  lure of such surety. Karen  recalls the visit to a dying neighbour  on which she recently accompanied  her father.  Even when she was a small child, the hermit, Old  Rule, had inspired awe in her:  she had  feared  touching  the rock that  was his seat  by the creek. Now his impending  death  awakens in her a sense of both  dread  and anticipation. In  his junk-filled sickroom, several days ago, Karen  was seized with terror  at  the sight  of  a  trap  protruding  from  beneath   his  bed.  She  senses in­ choately that  he is linked  with  an  unknown  destiny that  awaits  her  apart  from her existence as the pampered  youngest daughter  of a back country  patriarch.
Before the  day  ends,  Rule's  son,  Shar,  has  given  Karen   a  glimpse  of  that destiny. Shar  is thirty;  brutal  and surly, he has been recalled  by his dying father to the hills he fled fourteen  years earlier. Accustomed  to taking  what  he wants, and fascinated by the pale golden beauty of Karen  who was three years old when he left Eden  County,  Shar  deceives her into  accompanying  him  on  an  errand. Though  Shar has presupposed  an innocence in Karen  that  will necessitate sexual coercion, he unknowingly  becomes the tool, and  ultimately  the victim, of a force compared  to which  his carnal  obsession is whimsy. Karen  resists his  advances, yet the idea of returning  home creates hysteria in her. Seizing the steering  wheel, she causes an auto crash that foreshadows, even in the imagery of its voluptuous­ ness, the track smash-up  in which Shar will die. The  crash triggers a violent con­ frontation  between  Karen's father  and  Shar.  As Old  Rule's  body  burns  in  the cabin his son has ignited, the two battle before it -an encounter  that  for Karen quite literally ends the old rule and further  awakens her from moral somnolence.
Since  Karen's  earliest  memories Shar  has symbolized  a  dark  and  forbidden
world, unknowable  to her  as the  protected daughter of the  community's  largest landowner:

Now, a man of thirty, Shar belonged to neither world-not  the dim, safe past or the static present ... he had always been on the periphery of their lives-despised and admired by the children themselves.... he now revealed himself as a creature of another species, a stranger. Karen had felt watching  her father  and  Shar  at supper ... a sense of warning, of something unavoidable they must-together­ defeat.5

55

JOYCE CAROL OATES

On  the day  he returned  to Eden  County,  Shar  had  reminded  Karen  of "... a hawk,  a  bird  of prey  that  circled  the skies". Now, watching  her  father's futile efforts to force Shar  backward  into the burning cabin, as though  he were driving a demon  back into hell, Karen  knows that her anticipated  destiny is embodied in this struggle. She murmurs,  "Never  the same again!"
Even  as she stands  over her father,  who has been knocked to the ground  by
Shar,  and  hears his command,  "Karen-Get  him. Don't  come to me until  you get  him.  Kill  him.  Kill  him,"  Karen  recognizes her  complicity  in  the  action:

Karen felt that, deep inside, secretly ... she was able to think clearly and sanely. The fault did indeed lie in her, was of her doing: but it originated not in the deci­ sion to go with Shar but in her deliberately resisting sleep that morning. That was so-she had pushed against sleep, pushing herself up out of it as though she were moving slowly up through water to the clean air above ... Perhaps she had under­ stood, without  really being able  to know, that  the  rejection of her  child's  bed would lead, after a series of insane, vivid scenes, to the picture of her father lying in the cold mud, bleeding ... how right he was to judge her, to find  her guilty!

Although  Karen  accepts the fact that in willing herself to awake from the dream of childhood  she is guilty of her father's  injury,  and  although  she pursues  Shar as her  father  commands,  finally  dictating  his death,  the  recognition  of  Oates' use of incrementally  important memories reveals that  Karen's actions derive not from  her father's  command,  but  from  a force toward  self-determination that  is hers alone.
The scene before the burning  cabin takes place in a context  that  seems unreal
to Karen,  like a dream  or a  nightmare. But as she begins  to  pursue  Shar,  her head is clear. These are images of a dichotomy incrementally  associated with the struggle  to free existence from  chance  that  is the  novel's thematic  centre.  What happens as the result of unthinking acceptance of the cycles established by family, church  or nature  occurs in the state of dream,  fog, insanity or nightmare and is accident  to the individual  who has not  reflected and  chosen.  What  happens  as the result of sanity or clarity of vision or choice is  freedom.  Karen,  significantly, integrates  the content  of the unconscious, making it a conscious choice when she gives herself to Shar. Following him through  the woods, while her father  lies unconscious, she ponders, "... if this was not a dream it was closely related to a dream -surely she had  dreamed  of a man  in this wood, a man  in any  of the woods, awaiting  her".
Mnemonic motivation continues as Karen pursues Shar across the frozen terrain
of Eden  County: the  memory  which overpowers her is of an  incident  from  her childhood in which she made a moral choice at great cost. She had shocked and offended a male teacher  who pruriently sought the details of what  boys had done to her on the playground:

JOYCE  CAROL OATES

"Tell  me what he does," the teacher said.
"He  does this!" Karen  said impatiently.  She pulled the skirt of her dress up and stared  at  the  teacher's  alarmed   look. "I'm not  ashamed  of  anything," she said, letting  the skirt fall back ... "Now  you leave me alone too!"  Even  in the face of the knowledge that  she would  be completely alone at school after  this, she could not help but feel a sense of bitter  joy ... In spite of her anger she knew somehow that  she had done right, and  that  the teacher, shaken and  ashamed,  recognized it.

Now,   pleading silently  for  the   forgivene&<;  of  her  father,  whose   rule  she  has abandoned in order  to further forge her own  moral  universe,  Karen follows Shar into  the  rat-infested bam where  they make  love. On  the  penultimate page  of the novel, Karen, who has suffered  a psychic collapse after  Shar's death, analyzes  the alternatives now  open   to  her  in  what  doctors  call  her  "self-cured" state.   She realizes that  in this initiation lay the germ of Shar's death:

I can accuse him [her father] of my own crime and guilt and  with enough  hysteria I can convince myself that  I had  no part in what  I did-that  the filthy way that strange  man  made  love to me  the first time  had  nothing  to do  with  that  man's death....

Together Karen and  Shar  leave  Eden  County. Shar,  who  denies  any  responsi­ bility  for  the  confrontation with   Herz,  asserting,  "... it  isn't   the  end  of  any­ thing  ... It's  only  now  begun."  When  the  mid-section of  the  novel  opens,  two and  one-half  months  later,  Shar  has  just  begun  to comprehend  the  meaning of his own  disclaimer.  Gradually he is being forced  out of the  moral  passivity  from which  Karen arose on the  morning of the  day  he struck  her  father. Here, in the racing-circuit towns  of Synderdale and  Cherry River,  the two  undergo the  violent moral  maturation that  assigns to Shar  the fulfillment  of the  novel's  strange title and  creates  in Karen a consciousness which  will ultimately transcend the  knowl­ edge  that  is its content. The  title  comes from  Meredith's "Ode to  the  Spirit  of Earth in Autumn," suggesting  in  its rhetorical context  the  positive  and  consum­ mative  nature of Shar's death:

Death shall I shrink from, loving thee? Into  the breast that gives the rose,
Shall I with shuddering  fall?

In  Synderdale Oates   introduces Max,  Shar's sponsor,   a  bloated, voyeunstic entrepreneur who  would   be  psychopomp to  Karen   and   Shar   though his  own existence  exemplifies  a  moral  stance   diametrically opposite  theirs.   Max,   whose name,  given  its  German pronunciation -mocks -indicates  his  moral  callous­ ness, insists  he  is arbiter of  ethical   responsibility  while  insulating  himself  from accountability by self-deception, over-indulgence, hypochondria and  pseudo-piety. Impotent,  Max  has  vicariously  shared  Shar's  willingly  recounted  sexual  exploits

57

JOYCE CAROL OATES

for  fourteen years-inhibiting moral  awareness  in  the  younger  man  to  nourish his  own  lust  for  omnipotence and   omniscience.  Like  the  gods  whom   Sisyphus affronted, Max  has robbed  Shar  (and  would  rob Karen) of his dignity  by assum­ ing responsibility  for  his actions. When  Shar  realizes that  in leaving  Eden  County  he  had  not  escaped  one  mode  of  life  for  another, but  merely  traded  his legal father for  Max,  he  recognizes  Max  as an  aspect  of that  imago  in  which Karen had  perceived  Old  Rule-as a rock protruding from a creek. Such figures always create obstacles  around which  the  life of the individual, if it is not to be dammed or diverted, must cut its own channel. The  image also reflects, albeit unconsciously, the   authority  of  the   Church-the   rock  which,   for   Karen,	(and   socio-his­ torically)  is inextricably linked   to  the  authority of the  father.  But  as  the  gods under-estimated Sisyphus,  so is Max  wrong  in his assessment of  Karen and  Shar. He  speaks  of  them  as innocent, incapable of sin,  brutal,  clever  children, full  of life and  destined  for a long  life-asserting that  for them  all things are  accidents. However, when  Shar  forces  an  opponent into  a flaming  crash  which  Max  calls an  accident, Karen insists in  cold  anger,  "Not all things  are  accidents." On  the evening  of the  track  "accident," Max  sits in  a country  tavern with  Shar, Karen and  other   racing  circuit people.  In  a  scene  infused  with  perverse  sexuality,   he re-lives Shar's violent  triumph:

... Max sat with his back to the wall so that  he could see everything  that  went on in  the  crowded  place.  He  ate  melons luxuriously:  pale green  melons, smooth  as skin, that  the waiter-a boy of about seventeen-kept bringing  him. Seeds had spilled out onto the table and  on the front of his shirt, though  he did not seem to notice. He waved the big glistening knife at them as he spoke ... "A woman's love is a beautiful  thing  to see," Max  went on, licking at a sudden  rivulet of juice that ran  down  his chin.  "She  is transformed  by it, absolutely  transformed. That   has never been part of my experience" ... With a flourish Max finished his melon and took a deep  breath  and  called  for  the  waiter.  "Another   one  of  these,"  he said, sighing helplessly. The  table  was wet with  juice and  scattered  seeds that  the  boy
-a rushed,  alarmed-looking country  boy with long hair-did  not offer to wipe up, "You must tell me how the race was for you," Max said, laying a damp  hand on Shar's  arm.

As  Max   leaves  the   tavern  with   Karen    ( Shar   remains   behind   with   another woman), he recoils in fear  from  a small  boy holding  a snake.  The reptile incor­ porates  for  Max  the  universal principal of evil which  he  would  deny,  and in  its phallic  signification, the  humiliation of his own impotence.5
Max  posits for Karen an  innocence that  protects  her from  suffering  and  urges her  to  abandon any  hope  of  finding  meaning in  existence: "Your life  is not  a metaphor for  anything else,"  he  coaxes;  "it   ends  when   you  do".   In   his  self­ deception, Max,  whom  Karen once  speculates  might  have  devoured  Shar,  fails to understand that  it is exactly  the  certainty  of death  which  impels  the individual

JOYCE CAROL OATES

to search for meaning  in life, and failing to find it in traditional forms and  insti­ tutions, to create it within the confines of free will. As Karen's attraction to Shar grows, she begins to sense the threat  it poses to her freedom:  waiting in a shabby room for  him  to come to  her, she contemplates  the  possibility that  the  passive resistance which has defined her intactness thus far may not  be enough. Against the force of such  passion, it may eventually  have to yield to an  act  of  violence.
Because Max considers himself alone capable of moral contemplation, his miscalculations are immense. In his blind omniscience he pontificates that Shar functions  not  consciously, but  viscerally:  Shar  from  the  stomach   and   Karen (because it seems more delicate to him)  from the heart.  Ironically,  Karen,  whose last name means heart in German,  has earlier made the bitter  decision to harden her  heart,  to  render  herself pitiless. On  the  night  of the  melon-eating  incident Karen  had lain in a hotel room, knowing as the hours passed that  Shar  was with another  woman,  and  had  resolved to  resist "... a  universe  that  contrived  her life in order that she might be here tonight in this dirty hotel room alone, waiting." Staring  at the shape of a giant cockroach formed by a water stain on the ceiling, Karen  concludes:

If some men supposed  themselves  free it was only because  they  did  not  understand that  they  were imprisoned, bars  could  be made  of any dreamy loss of light.

Max's  doctor offers her sleeping pills, but Karen  refuses, "If there was pain, she would feel it;  it  was hers."  Falling asleep, she dreams  of a child  who  has  been growing inside a dusty closet where bright summer  dresses hang-a  child  with plastic veins and a plastic heart. And she resolves not to cry for the death  of that child, not to project meaning  or seek comfort where none exists:

Better  to look  into  an  empty  drawer, stare  into  an  empty  hole,  than   to  discover oneself looking  into  a darkness  filled with shape.

Although  Karen's  dream, in incorporating  her assent to the death  of a child, fore­ shadows her desire for the miscarriage that will free her of Shar's  baby, it is more significant in the narrative as a miniaturization  of  the dilemma  in  which  she is enmeshed. Childhood  is essentially a stultifying and  confining condition,  no mat­ ter how diverting  and beautiful.  Emergence involves, by definition, giving up the protection  of the closet, the  brightness of the summer  dresses. Karen's resolution not  to mourn  the  death  of  the child is a  recognition  and  an  acceptance  of the pain  inherent  in  the  personal  transformation  toward  which she  moves. Signifi­ cantly, the material  from the unconscious, revealed in the dream,  is incorporated in her deliberate  actions later in the same way that  in giving herself to Shar  the first time she chose what she had earlier dreamed. On the day that she sends Shar to his death,  Karen's  memory of  her suffering  this night,  and  the  hardening of heart  to which it led her, is triggered by another cockroach shape  on a wall.

59

JOYCE CAROL OATES

Because Shar  has become habituated to avoiding responsibility, his moral maturation must  inevitably  be more violent than  Karen's.  As the  words dream, fog, nightmare, and  insanity are  associated with Karen  when  her  destiny is out of her own control, so the words victim, desperate,  blind,  trapped  and  possessed now characterize  Shar.  Unlike  Karen,  who assumes the existence of a  universal force she must  resist, Shar  believes his birth  to  have  been an  accident.  On  the racing  circuit, where  all his adult  life has been spent, Shar  has never  needed  to commit  himself beyond the  physical act -on the track or in bed. This  fact  has heretofore been a source of pride to him:  now, with Karen, who withholds herself even in union, he feels trapped. Reading  the newspapers over and over, he hopes that  Karen's  father  will come for  her,  relieving  him  of the  choice.  Like  Max, Shar  at first deceives himself:  he thinks that  he controls Karen,  that  she echoes his statements  and  has no existence apart  from  him. At the same time he suffers from the knowledge of his own loss of control. Shar's last name seems, like Karen's, to function signally and ironically, for he struggles fatally to attain  rule or control of his own destiny.




SHAR's FIRST STEP toward  the moral  premeditation  which produces the Nietzschean self-overcoming of the novel's epigraph  ("What is done out of love always takes place beyond good and evil")  is his imperfect awareness that  in relation  to Karen  he feels "enchanted, desperate and  incomplete". He is bewildered because, for the racer-the role in which he has until now found  his identity-danger comes not from giving in to the inside, but from  being drawn off centre  by centrifugal  force. Since he has dealt  with Karen  only as an  exten­ sion of himself, Shar, who hungers for a communion with her and with the crowd that  comes to  see him  race,  does  not  yet know  that  for  the  individual   whose existence is deliberate,  the centre of being controls all actions. Only thus does one achieve the limited  communion  possible for man in the exile that  is existence. It is in the condition  of calculated  action, which finally replaces accident  in his life, that  Shar  embraces death  as a transcendence-fulfilling the novel's tide.  Karen calls Shar's  creation  of his own death  his manhood.
Neither  brutality  nor indifference  can accomplish Shar's  desired mastery over Karen.  Their  lovemaking  becomes a battle of wills: in a terrible coupling  where Shar  takes her by force in a cemetery, Karen  dominates-putting their  actions into the realm of a dream,  absolving herself, by an act of will, from any need to control  what  is happening to her  body. At the instant  of consummation,  Karen looks-clear-eyed -into Shar's face. He is impaled, furious; even as the orgasm seizes him, he slaps her, sobbing:

6o

JOYCE CAROL OATES

"Look at me like that,  you little bitch!" ... His face was white.... "I'd like to set you on fire like I did  to him,"  he said, "take  a match  and  set you on fire -burn everything-your clothes catching on and burning-you screaming  for help, you little bitch! And all burning  up, hair and  insides, so you could see inside and  see things burning  there, melting away, burning-".

In  his desire to burn  Karen, Shar  reveals that  the lovejhate bond  between  them, which  for  Karen  is the  result  of a nascent  urge  toward moral maturation, is as yet not  different  to him than his previous  relationships-on the  race  track  and in  bed.  In  response  to  Karen's resistance  Shar  would  like to invoke  his habitual mode  of violence as he had  done  in forcing  his racing  opponent into  the  flaming crash.  Karen's response  is  diametrically opposite:  She  contracts herself  into   a "tiny   pebble-like  thing,  safe  in  her  brain". In  his  research   in  strivings  toward psychic  wholeness  and  in  his analysis of mandala symbolism  Jung found that  a conflict  rendered into  images  of stone  is a  positive  human attitude  toward the process of transformation.6  For  the person undergoing the individuation the unity of the imagined stone  is a projection of the  unified  self toward which  he strives. For  Shar  this defeat-in-victory of the deathly  union  in  the  cemetery  provides  the energy  for  his first step  toward moral  maturation: when  Karen awakens the fol­ lowing morning he is gone. She is incredulous, for she had  thought him "trapped, incapable of playing  the game,  unaware of its rules".
Tired, sick with the child  that  (unknown to Shar) is growing inside  her, Karen is tempted to  abandon the  pursuit   of  a  deliberate existence   which   must  now, because she is obsessed with  him,  include  Shar's death. She  considers  Max's offer of an  abortion arrangement and  $woo in return  for  her  going  home,  but  such  a bargain would  leave  Shar   alive  and  the  terrible   attraction  that   threatens  her freedom still viable.  Contemplating this, Karen cries, "I am  lost,  I am  lost,"  and once  again   the  necessity  of  creating whatever meaning  her  life  is  to  have  is strengthened mnemonically as she  re-experiences  a  childhood agony:

She found  herself thinking,  inexplicably, as she sometimes  did  when  Shar  made love to her, of scenes of her childhood  ... she had  not  thought  of for  years. The proud pony one of the boys had ridden to school that  time-why did she remem­ ber it  now ... How she had  wanted  a pony like that!  How she had  cried  for  it, crawling about her father's  knees! "But why didn't  he ever get it for me?" ... She was struck by her father's  queer  injustice. She felt she could  not forgive him  that.

Karen's memory  is of  an  injustice, a  betrayal.  Significantly, betrayal is also  the emotion   Karen   associates  with   being  swept  up  in  passion  for  Shar. Now  she resists the  temptation to return to a life in which  happiness can  be withheld by another. Following  Shar  to  Cherry River,  she  materializes before  him as out  of a dream.
Leaving  Karen in Synderdale was Shar's first step  in  personal transformation,

JOYCE CAROL  OATES

and  like Sisyphus discovering the  absurd  he experiences happiness  in his  height­ ened  awareness  of the limitations  to which  his existence is subject.  The  seed of knowledge that  he now shares with Karen -that  the individual  must  create his own destiny with an existence bounded by death  -begins to expand within him. He  tells his relief driver,  "For  them  [the  cars' owners]  it's  money  and  for me, waiting  to die."  And,  as the  sea and  the sun  take  on great  value  for  Sisyphus when  he is commanded  to return  to the underworld,  misanthropic  Shar  experi­ ences a strange  joy in his surroundings, "A  damn  good world!  I  can't  get close enough  to it-" he mutters.  With  this glimpse of joy inherent  in  his own free­ dom  (and  its attendant responsibility)  Shar's life takes on a new complexity:  he can  no longer  love and  hate  simply  and  immediately.  Like  Karen,   he  has left behind,  in the world of his moral childhood, such clear distinctions.  His life, like hers, will never again  be the same.  Now he contemplates  the symbiotic relation­ ship  with  Max  which  has  relieved  him  of  moral  accountability-and moral freedom-his entire  adult  life. Like  Karen  who had  rejected  Max's  settlement and  returning  to Eden  County  with  "I am lost, I am lost," Shar  thinks of Max and  feels, for an  instant,  as if he were lost. And,  just as Karen  had  done on the days immediately  before leaving  home, Shar surveys the world around  him and wonders if he is insane. Karen, who survives Shar, will conclude  that  it is insane to look for meaning  in  existence-and  insane not to.
The  two women  with  whom  Shar  passes time in Cherry  River  occupy  moral positions which contrast  with  that  taken several months ago by Karen  and  now tentatively,  reluctantly,  embraced  by the  awakening  Shar.  Miriam,  a  big, slack Italian  girl, contemplates  the horror of rape/mutilation murders  and  freak shows with a morbid,  unquestioning curiosity, "calmly and without  much  interest". She is both a foil for Karen  and  a facet of Shar's former self, insensitive and unspecu­ lative. After a night together they both have "... white, brutal  faces, pleased with each other".  Miriam's  passive acceptance  of existence is conveyed  powerfully by her reaction to a carnival  freak show. She delights in the grotesque novelty of the Siamese twins suspended  in  alcohol  and  insists on  watching  a  race  among  the armless, legless freaks. The  carnival  barker cries:

Bo, Terry, Little  Jo-here  they are,  just as they were born.  They  don't want  your sympathy folks ... they  take  their  fate  as it is, they  accept  their  condition. They don't question the  ways of our  Maker and  so why should  we?

But Shar has begun to question. He cannot  bear the sight:  "Let's  get the hell out of here," he moans. Miriam  stays.
The second girl, a hostess whom  Max sends to distract Shar  before the race, is significantly nameless. She  takes on  an  identity  to  please whatever  man  she is with  and  speaks of herself in passive voice, "... it was thought  best for me ...

JOYCE CAROL OATES

I was told ... it was decided".  Shar quickly recognizes that  Max  has chosen her because she is "... a pale, bloodless parody of Karen".
Shar  can  neither  return  to  the state  in  which  Max  absolves  him  of  moral
responsibility  nor  establish  a  relationship  with  the  girls  contrasted   to  Karen. Karen  cannot  accept the payoff Max offers and return home. For each a resump­ tion of the old way would mean loss of the awakening self. And so they pursue the collision course which  must  result in  the  death  of one.  Karen  uses  the  money Max  gives her not for an  abortion,  but to follow Shar. Encountering  her on the street,  Shar  leads Karen  directly to his shabby  room where  he takes  her with  a simple violence that  he believes will purge the emotion which overpowers him­ "He  did not know if it was anger or lust or joy," expecting from it a communion  that  will release him.  He  finds instead,  betrayal.  The  pregnancy,  unknown  to Shar  until  Karen  begins to miscarry, further  disarms  him. It has  been  a  mock communion, but through  it Shar  realizes that,  bad as existence is, he makes the choices that  determine  it: " 'A  hell of a  world,'  Shar  said  suddenly  and  self­ consciously, 'but  at least it's my own fault'". Moved as he has never been before, Shar  begs Karen  to stay, to marry  him. Although  it is a plea she has longed  to hear,  although  she  has  just  acknowledged  her  love for  him,  in  the  centre  of Karen's consciousness  remains the knowledge that  capitulation  would  again  put her destiny in the hands of another. Again memory intervenes-this time in the form  of a  delirious dream  which  links Shar  with  her father  and  the  distress of childhood dependency:

While Shar sat by the window and watched her, Karen was having a dream. She was running through grass, up the slope before her home to join her father;  his face when he embraced her was always rough ... She was going to cry to him that it was done, everything was finished, clean, she had come home, but when he gripped her she shrank suddenly in size and the air turned hot and humid ... She was seized by him -how  young she was! -and  she realized then that  someone else had held her, ... Shar-it  must have been Shar ... But when she turned, the dream ended; she saw nothing. She grated her teeth in anger and  dismay.

Once  again  incorporating the  content  of the  unconscious which  has  come  for­ ward in the dream,  Karen  makes the extreme existential decision-that  there  is no fate which cannot  be overcome by contempt.  She says, in the calm,  ordinary voice she had so despised in her sister, "You make me sick".
Once  again  Shar's  reaction  is rendered  in terms aligning  him with  Sisyphus: Both exert their whole being and  accomplish nothing.  For Shar,  as for Sisyphus, the lucidity  that  constitutes  the  torture  also crowns the  victory.  Going  directly from Karen's  sickbed to the track,  he experiences a surge of joy and  love for the world, for  Mitch  his  black assistant and  for the crowd  who he knows comes to see him  die. In  recognizing that  the communion  of violence the  crowd  seeks in

JOYCE CAROL OATES

the  race,  like the  communion   of sexual  possession he sought  with  Karen,  IS   a mockery, Shar  knows that  he has been transformed:

Shar's  heart  pounded  with  the excitement that  he finally transcended  the  frag­ ments of his anonymity. He wanted  to get out  and  run  back to Mitchie,  or  to Max, and explain to him:  he knew who he was, he knew exactly what  he  was doing, and why; he was guilty-completely guilty-and his guilt, like his  love, had pulled him together.

Karen  has always known who she is; now Shar is also certain of his identity  and in  the  transcendence  made  possible by choice, he  accepts  death: he  hates  the helmet, the fire-proofs suit he must wear-they are shock absorbers that  disguise his humanity,  devices invented  for safety's sake-"as if there  were any possible protection  against  mortality." This  realization  is Shar's  psychic synthesis, his individuation. Pushing the traction limit of his racer to the invisible point at which control turns to chaos, he embraces death.
Karen  has made  a choice which will plunge her into a less final death -the
madness that  Oates  calls the suicide of cowards.7   As Shar leaves her room, Karen masters a powerful urge to call him back:

She wanted him back, she did not care what he had done-She struggled out of bed . . . Her  blood pounding so furiously that  she could not see . . . Her vision cleared. She was staring across the corridor at something-it drew her gaze like
a magnet. A fat cockroach crawling precariously up the wall ... Her mind was emptied ... She did not call after Shar. After a minute she realized she was listen­
ing to nothing, that he had left.

Memory  has again  kept  Karen  on the course of self-determination, for the cock­ roach  she sees here,  with  terrible  clarity  of  vision, conjures  up  the  cockroach­ shaped stain on the ceiling of the room in Synderdale and with it, the bitter suffer­ ing inherent in a state where happiness can be withheld by another. The  hardness of  heart  Karen   had  resolved  to  maintain  serves  her  well:  she  does  not  call Shar  back.
The  short final segment  of the novel traces the five months  of Karen's break­
down  and  recovery. She has known  the extremes of abandonment of the self to the family and  to religious ecstasy and she has known the self-containment  which makes even love a threat  to  be met  with violent  resistance. Now she  reaches a balance  between hope and  despair. Her  physician calls her "self-cured." Return­ ing  to  her  father's   house  in  early  December,  Karen  enters  again  the  morally somnolent world where the cycles of nature  and the liturgical calendar  inure one to unquestioning  acceptance of the moral absolutes they symbolize. Parishioners who observe Karen  at mass with  her family interpret her  pain-marked  counten­  ance as proofs of the  justice of their universe, unable to comprehend  that she has

JOYCE CAROL  OATES

suffered only because either  way amounts  to the same thing-it is insane to try to make sense of existence, and insane not to.
Karen  knows, as Shar  knew at  the moment  of his death,  that  no  real  com­ munion  is possible in life, a knowledge that  allows her to choose the conformity that  will unite her-as  much  as she can  ever  be united -with  those who do not  try  to make sense of existence. She resolves to  receive  the sacrament with them the following week, but to protect herself from the thin splendour  of church ritual which stands eternally  ready to absolve her of  individuality.  She retains the terrible  clarity of vision that  impelled her  to leave  Eden  County,  to reject  Shar and  now to return  home:  Kneeling slowly,  "Karen  ... forced  her mind  to stay clear." Of the alternatives  now open to her, none is threatening for she concludes that  whatever she becomes will be of her own doing.
Karen's  final evaluation  of her circumstances can be seen in the reordering  of
her vision of nature  in Eden County. As the sense of an independent destiny grew within  her last April she thought:

In the worst days of winter the snow looked like an incredible sifting of earth and heaven, blotting out both earth and heaven, reducing them to an insane struggle of white that struck at human faces like knives. Summers reeked with heat and  hea­ ven pressed downward ... There would be holocausts of fire in the woods ... The brutality of the land somehow evoked joy in Karen.

Now she takes her father's  arm  as they leave the church.  When  she opens  the door, "... the swirling snow  ... turned  white  and  cold  and  innocent,  like the disorder of her brain". Only in the implications of Karen's changed  perceptions of the weather  (the savage extremities that had once lured her are now harmless) and  in her determination to retain  clarity of mind  can we make  even a tenuous judgment  of  the  degree  to  which  her  individuation   will  be  consolidated   and retained. She turns lovingly to the now feeble patriarch  who would  have taught her to murder.  She agrees to re-enter  the life of the family and  to participate in the ritual  of the church,  but  to guard  her self-created state.  She seems to know not only that  there is no fate that  cannot  be surmounted   by scorn,  but  also that
-if she chooses-there is no fate that cannot be borne with patience, endurance and love. Her knowledge has been dearly bought:  Karen  is a misfit and an alien, victim of her own stubborn  integrity  as surely as Shar  has  become the  ultimate victim of his.
Jung  points out that  the task of creating  a self can  be accomplished  only by
the resolution of the conflict between the conscious and  the  unconscious through experience, never by understanding alone.8  The integration of the unconscious in which we observe Karen  Herz tends to induce panic in civilized people because of its relation  to insanity-a fact  of which Karen  is keenly aware  when she  con­ cludes that it is insane to look for meaning in existence and  insane not to.

JOYCE CAROL  OATES

Further, the  traditional and  conservative spirit  of society  which  is inimical  to the  acceptance of the  unconscious still wears  the  earthly  ga.m1ent of the  church and  the father-most obdurately so in a rural  and  orthodox area  such  as Oates' Eden  County. Therefore, in  acknowledging the  reality  of the  unconscious, that awakening force  which   moves  her  out  of  Eden  County, and  in  attempting  to make  that  darker side of the self which  Jung calls the shadow/1 a co-determining ethical factor  in her life, Karen offends  against  the spirit  of convention which  for centuries has regulated the  psychic life of the  individual hy  means  of the  church and  the  family -the  institutions against  which  she  revolts.
Speaking of the  inadequacy of what  is legally,  morally  and  socially  approved to  encourage-or even  permit-the  creation   of a  tenable sense of  self,  Jung says:

Man's  great  task  is the  adaptation of himself  to  reality  and  the  recogmtJ.on of himself as an instrument  for the expression of life according  to his individual  pos­ sibilities. It is in  his privilege  as self-creator  that  his highest  purpose  is  found.10

and:

The  bringing  together  of the  conscious and  the  unconscious is a  task facing  not only individuals,  but  whole civilizations. The  political and  social isms of our  day preach every conceivable kind of ideal, but, under this mask, they pursue the goal of inhibiting  the  possibilities of individual  development  ... This  problem  cannot be solved collectively, because  the  masses are  not  changed  unless the  individual changes ... The  bettering  of a general ill begins with the individual,  and  then only when he makes himself and  not others responsible.11

In  With Shuddering Fall Oates has created  a complex  paradigm of the  tension which   exists  between   the  entelechy of  personal  individuation and   the  societal forces resistant  to it.

NOTES

1 With Shuddering  Fall was called "... a hysterically incoherent  back country excur­ sion into  the  world  of madness"  (K.  G. Jackson,  Harpers, Nov.,  1964).  Stanley Kaufmann considered the plot diluted  Faulkner, an attempt  to raise grade B movie material  to epic level (New  York  Review,  Dec. 17, 1964). John  Knowles assumed the  theme  of the  novel to be violence and  the  racing car  Shar  drives  its  symbol (NYTBR,  Oct.  25,  1964).  The  four  novels that  followed (A  Garden  of  Earthly Delights,  1966;  Expensive   People,  1968;  Them, 1969 and  Wonderland,  1971) were similarly received:  James  Doyle (of The  Critic)  referred  to Oates  as "Cather in the Raw" and praised her for taking up Frank Norris' imperative  of  understand­ ing the  plain  people. Although  here and  there  a reviewer suggested  that  the dis­ carding of circumstantiality which flawed her apparent  realism might indicate  that Oates was working in another  mode, not until the sixth novel (Do With Me What  You  Will, 1973)  did a major  review recognize that "Oates  is a potent  myth-maker in  the  drab  guise of  a  social  naturalist"  (Calvin  Bedient  in  NYTBR,  Oct.  14,
1973).

66

JOYCE CAROL OATES

2  K. G. Jackson, John Knowles.
3 Jung speaks  of the  personality as existing  in a plural  stage,  i.e., not  able  to  experi­ ence  wholeness outside  the community of the family or tribe,  passive and  unwilling or unable to assert its will, incapable of moral  judgment before individuation. Indi­ viduation is the  process  of synthesis  by which  the  personality  brings  into  the  con­ sciousness  those  phenomena which  are  hidden  from  the  ego  but  which,   because they are  a significant element in the psyche's content, must be acknowledged. Moral  self-responsibility is attainable only  through individuation.
4  Many of the  short  stories  in  By the  North  Gate   (I 963)  and  U pan  the  Sweeping Flood   ( I966)  have  Eden  County settings.  The  territory is topographically  identi­ fiable  as the area  of upstate New York where  the author was raised.
5 C.  G.  Jung,  Archetypes and  the  Collective   Unconscious, (New  York:  Pantheon
Books, I959),  pp. 3I6-I7, 322.
6   C. G. Jung, Aion,  (Princeton University Press,  I968),  p. I 70.
1 "Pastoral Blood," in By the  North Gate is a paradigm for this novel: The protagon­ ist, Grace, courts  a violent  consummation as a means  of defining  herself, expecting the  union  to end  in  her own  death. But she does not die, and  regaining conscious­  ness, she scorns  the  ease of insanity as "the  bloodless suicide  for  cowards."
8  C. G. Jung, Psychology  and  Alchemy, (New  York: Pantheon Books,  I953), p. 51.
9 The  shadow is, according to Jung, that  archetype which  lies closest  to the  surface of the  unconscious, the  acceptance of which  is the  first  step  in  the  individuation process.  Inherent in the dark  aspects  of the  personality signified  by the  shadow are sexuality and  self-determination (Jung, Archetypes ... , p. 58 and  Aion, p. 8).
10 Jung, Psychology  ... , p. xlii.
11 Jung, Archetypes ... , p. 275·











CANADIAN  AUTHORS PAPERBACKS
TEXTS

available at
the bookstore
UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA
2075  WESBROOK PLACE
VANCOUVER, B.C. V6T 1W5/228-4741

ROBERT HAYMAN'S "QUODLIBETS"





Robin Endres







ROBERT HAYMAN'' Quodlibet'-the fint  Eng!ffih poetry written  in Canada-is  part  of a tiny but significant corpus of literature  written in and about six colonial settlements which flourished and died in Newfoundland
between  I6Io  and  I628.  An  understanding of the meaning  and  significance of Hayman's work can first be attempted through  an examination  of the history of these settlements.1
In the early  I6oo's,  English colonial expansion in Virginia,  New England  and
Newfoundland  began in earnest. The era of the Renaissance courtier-adventurer, of explorers like Sir  Francis  Drake  and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  was  rapidly  being superseded by the era of the bougeois-merchant, of the colonial "Company". The individual  explorer,  seeking  adventure  and  discovery in  unknown  lands  under Queen  Elizabeth,  gave  way  to the  practical  economics of groups  of merchants seeking trade  monopolies  under  James  and  Charles. One  such group,  consisting of 48 businessmen- I o from Bristol and 24 from London-raised enough sub­ scriptions to convince the Privy Council to grant its seal, and  the Newfoundland Company  was incorporated in  I6Io.
The  aims of  the  Company   members  were  twofold:  personal  profit  and  the
furthering of England's imperialist  power. Specifically, they wanted  to secure a monopoly of the fishing trade, which had previously been controlled by individual ships from the West Country  in England  as well as French,  Spanish  and  Portu­ guese fishermen who fished off the Grand  Banks and returned  annually. The New­ foundland Company  hoped  to  achieve its  goal  by establishing  permanent   and self-sufficient settlements on the island.
Governor  John  Guy's arrival  with 39 colonizers was carefully timed -late in
the summer  of I 6 I o, just as the independent  fishing vessels were leaving. Cupid's
Cove, the sight chosen for the settlement, was the most fertile and best protected

68

"QUODLIBETS"

spot on the island; the initial settlers were carefully selected artisans rather  than unskilled gentlemen; friendly  and  tactful  contacts  with  both  natives  and  inde­ pendent fishermen were strongly advised. The settlers were extremely industrious, and this, coupled with a mild first winter, enabled  them to build  houses, a ware­ house, a forge, a mill and  a palisade, as well as sowing crops and  collecting ore specimens, cutting  timber for export and of course, fishing.
But this prosperous  beginning  was soon marred  by a  host of  insurmountable
problems, some foreseen, others not. The independent  fishermen, who had been assured, on paper at least, of their rights, grew increasingly hostile when it became apparent that  the Company was in fact attempting  to monopolize the trade. They retaliated  by damaging  the colonists' mills and  other  property.  Any profits made from fishing were immediately swallowed up by the colonists' need for provisions; the  hoped-for  iron  deposits never  materialized;  the  fur  trade  was almost  non­ existent; crops failed. Finally, squabbles and  jealousies erupted  among  the mem­ bers of the  Company,  both  in  Newfoundland  and  in  England.  John  Guy  went home in disgust in I 6I 3, claiming that he had not received his promised grant  of land from the Company,  and  that  his men's wages had  not  been paid.
In  I6I5 Guy was succeeded as governor by Captain  John  Mason.  Mason  was responsible for one of the four  works of literature  produced  during  this  period, A Briefe Discourse of the  New-found-land  (I 620). The  Discourse  belongs to the genre of colonial pamphlets  written  to encourage settlement  in the new world. It differs, however, from  the standard works of this type  (as  do the  works of two others of the four  Newfoundland  writers, Richard  Whitboume and  Robert  Hay­ man)   in that  it attempts  to give a realistic picture  of the  advantages  and  dis­ advantages  of life in the colonies, without the usual overly optimistic and  some­ times fantastic  claiins made for the new world. With  Mason's departure to New England in I 62 I, the Company  remained in existence in name only, although  the settlement continued  in the hands of a small group of families.
In  order  to supplement  its diminishing  capital,  the  Newfoundland Company was forced to sell tracts of land, and  between I 6 I 6 and  I 62 I, five purchases were made, four by individuals,  a fifth by another  group  of merchants.  The  four indi­ viduals who attempted  settlement  had  ideological as well as economic  motives. Henry Cary, later Lord Falkland,  failed in his efforts to establish an  Irish colony. Sir  William  Alexander  purchased  a large  tract  of land  from  the  Company  in I 62 I, intending  to found  New Scotland. However, the same year James gave him
a grant of land  between the Gaspe Peninsula and  Maine, and  New Scotland  was thereby destined for the mainland.  Sir George Calvert, later  Lord Baltimore,  had still another  motive for settling in Newfoundland-he wanted  to create a haven for his family and their fellow Catholics. Not to be outdone,  William Vaughan, a gentleman scholar and  poet, envisaged the area  around  Caplin  Bay as a  mytho­ logical "New  Wales" -a new Cambriol, which would relieve Wales of  her over-

6g

''QUODLIBETs''

populated  poor and  provide a golden world for all future  generations  of Welsh­
men.
To  thls end,  he  wrote  The   Golden  Fleece  (using  the  pseudonym  "Orpheus Junior"), a  work  in  prose  and   verse  heavily  influenced  in  style  by  Sidney's Arcadia.

The Golden Fleece  opens  with  a dialogue  on  the  question of how  best  to  employ the  muses in  the  service  of Newfoundland ... His fiction  for  the  remainder of the book ... is a court  or assizes presided  over by Apollos, ... it is only in the last third of The Golden Fleece that  Vaughan comes to the subject  of the island  itself. There he makes  Apollo  deliver  a verdict  in favour  of its colonization, following  the testi­ mony of a number of explorers and  colonizers.2
Vaughan's work was published in 1626, and some scholars-Anthony  a Wood in the seventeenth  century and D. L. Thomas in The  Dictionary of National  Biogra­ phy-give  him credit  for the first original  creative writing  in English in North America.  However,  recent critics and  historians, with the exception  of Thomas, agree that Vaughan never saw Newfoundland, and that all his information  derives from  hearsay  and  written  sources. The  best proof of thls  perhaps  is Hayman's own poem addressed to Vaughan:

It joy'd my heart, when  I did  understand
That your  selfe would  your Colonie  command; It greev'd me much, when  as I heard  it told, Sicknes  had  layd on you an unkind hold. Beleeve me, Sir, your Colches  Cambrioll
Is a sweet,  Pleasant, wholesome,  gaineful  soyle. (Book II, 86)

Vaughan  sent colonizers to Renewse in 1617, and  in 1618 appointed Richard Whitboume, an experienced sea captain,  as his governor. Whitboume discovered on his arrival that  the settlers had spent the previous winter in fishermen's summer shacks; he sent all but six home and apparently  made a serious attempt  to settle. However, he was back in England  in 1620 where he published his Discourse and Discovery of Newfoundland. This  prose work is similar in intent  and  design to Mason's,  based  as it is on  personal experience  in  the colony, and  dealing  with practical  matters  (a list of the supplies necessary for outfitting a ship of colonists, for  example), but  without  the  literary  design  of  the  work  of  Vaughan   and Hayman.
The  fifth, and  last, purchase  of land  from  the  Newfoundland  Company  was
made by a group of merchants  from Bristol, many of whom were probably initial investors of the  Company  who had  become disillusioned with  their fellow  mer­ chants  in  London.  The  land  was on  Conception  Bay, and  included  Harbour  Grace, the principal  settlement  (alternatively  called Bristol's Hope). The  colony

"QUODLIBETS"

was one of the most successful, perhaps because the people involved  had learned from  their experiences with  the  Newfoundland  Company,  and  were more  prac­ tical than the idealists Vaughan, Falkland and Baltimore. It was here that Robert Hayman came as governor in  I6I8 and returned  each summer  for ten  years, and it was here that he wrote Canada's first poetry.3




KNOWLEDGE of the life of Robert  Hayman, especially that part  of his life spent in Harbour Grace, is slim indeed. He was baptized  in  I575• the son of Nicholas Hayman and  Alice Gaverocke, both  from  prosperous  land­ owning families. Nicholas Hayman was prominent in civic affairs in Totnes, where he was mayor in  I58g,  and  later  in Dartmouth, where he was a member  of the parliament  in I 592-3. He was a friend of Sir Francis Drake, and once contributed
25 pounds sterling to two of his vessels.
Robert  Hayman  was educated  at Totnes Grammar School and  Exeter College, Oxford.  He studied  law at  Lincoln's  Inn  and  later spent some time  at  the Uni­ versity of Poitiers. He was married  in  I 6o4 to Grace  Spicer, the daughter  of an Exeter merchant.  Hayman was acquainted  with numerous  writers, divines, law­
yers, physicians and  merchants  of the day. At Oxford,  according  to Anthony   a
Wood, he was "noted  for his ingenuity and  pregnant  parts"  and  was "valued  by
several persons who were afterwards  eminent".  Later,  at Lincoln's  Inn,  "his geny being well known to be poetical,  (he)  fell into acquaintance with,  and  received encouragement to  proceed  in  his studies from  Michael  Drayton,   Ben Johnson, John  Owen ... George Withers ... John Vicars ..."4  These literary acquaintances are  addressed  at  the end  of Book IV.  William  Vaughan, George  Withers  and John  Vicars all wrote commendatory  verses for Quodlibets; apart  from these, the only acknowledgement  for  Hayman and  his work  occurs  in  the  dedication   to Cupid's Whirligig (I 6o7), a  play by his Oxford  contemporary Edward  Sharp­ ham:

To  his much honoured, beloved, respected, and  judiciall friend,  Master  Robert Hayman.... since our travailes I have bene pregnant with desire to bring foorth something whereunto you may be witnesse ...5

Of the time Hayman spent in Newfoundland-one fifteen month  stretch  and ten successive summers -there are no records. The  information  we have derives entirely from Quodlibets, and  from a letter sent by Hayman to King  Charles, in I628. The letter is an almost desperate plea to the King to save the dying colonies of Newfoundland.  It advances  the  usual arguments  for  colonization -securing of the fishing trade,  enlarging  of the empire, relieving of overpopulation,  poten­ tial mineral  resources, timber  and  furs, and  gives a  convincing  justification  for

"QUODLIBETS"


supporting the  lowly cod  rather than  the glamorous products of the  West  Indies and  Africa:

I confesse that the Commodities  as yett brought from thence are in their particulers base, and meane: yet they honestly imploye many people, and  make more seamen, then  all our  sea-trades  eld, ... and  I  dare  averr  and  prove  that  this  trade  hath furnished  England  for these many yeares, with more money, then all our forraigne trades  els, and  it  hath  brought  from  Spaine, silver, and  gold, more cheaply,  and conveniently, then  the Spaniards have had it, from their Indies.6

He  also proposes  that  Charles establish  a  city, Carolinople, as a  free  market  for fish, and  that  he rename the  whole  island  Britaniola.
The letter  had  no effect, if in fact it ever reached  Charles.  At any rate  the royal treasury   did  not  have  enough funds  even  for  domestic  expenses.  Hayman  must have  finally abandoned his dreams of Britaniola, but  not  of colonization in  gen­ eral, for the following  year  ( r62g)  he formed  a small company with  26 shares for the  purpose  of setting  up  a colony  in Guyana. In  November of the year,  he was overcome by  a  fever  during an  exploration of  the  Oyapock   (then  Wyapoko) River,  and  died  in  the  canoe. A few  Indian guides  who  had  accompanied him buried  him beside the  river.  He  was 54 years old.




HAYMAN's Quodlibets  (or  "what you will",  "whatever  you like")   is a collection  of satiric,  didactic and  commendatory verses in four  books, prefaced with  a  dedication to  King  Charles,  four  poems by  William Vaughan, Richard Spicer,  George  Wither and  John  Vicars,  and  an  anagram by Hayman. At  the  end  of the  four  books,  Hayman includes  his translations of John  Owen's epigrams from  the  Latin, dedicated "To the far  admired, admirably faire, vertu­ ous, and  witty Beauties  of England" and  prefaced  by "A Praemonition to all kinds of readers". The Owen  translations are followed  by an anagram on Owen's Latin  name   Johannes Andoenus, "Severall Sententious Epigrams, and  witty  sayings out  of sundry   Authors both  Ancient   and   Modeme Translated  into  English  at Harbor-Grace ... " and  finally,  translations of two letters  by  Rabelais.7
In  the  dedicatory letter  to King  Charles,  Hayman compares his verses to some unripe ears  of com  which  he  also  brought back  with  him  from   Newfoundland. The analogy  is used to stress that  the major  function  of the poems is to encourage younger  and  better  "wits" to settle  in  Newfoundland in order  that  better  poetry might  be produced.

. . . [His  verses are]  hoping  of the like successe, that  some unripe  eares of come, brought  by me  from  the  cold  Country  of  Newfound-land,   received  from  some honest, well-minded  lovers of that  action  when they saw them: who with  much-

"QUODLIBETS"

affected  joy often  beholding  them,  tooke much  comfort  in  what  they  saw:  but more,  when  they suppos'd  it  might  be better'd,   by industry,  care  and  honestie. These  few bad  unripe  Rimes of mine  (coming from  thence)   are  in all  humility presented  with the like intendiment to your Majestie, to testifie that  the Aire there is not  so dull,  or  malevolent,  but  that  if  better  wits were  transplanted thither, neither  the Summers heat would dilate them, nor the Winters cold benumme  them, but  that  they might  in full vigour flourish to good purpose. For  if Inow growne dull and  aged, could  doe somewhat, what  will not sharper,  younger,  freer  inven­ tions performe  there? They would not walke as I here doe, with short tumes,  lean­ ing sometimes  on  others  inventions,  skipping  weakly from  bough  to  bough;  but with large walkes, with long, and strong flights.

The  passage  is interesting for several  reasons.  First,  Hayman has  clearly  grasped the connection between  a flourishing economy  and  the establishment of a literary culture which   Wilfrid   Eggleston  discusses in  The  Front  and  Canadian   Letters. Hayman's pleas  for  support for  the  dying  colonies  in  his other  letter  to  Charles takes on  new significance  when  we realize  that  his optimistic vision  of Britaniola includes  a profound faith  in the future of a new artistic  culture. Second, his con­ ception   of  this  new  culture which  will  be  the  product of  the  combination  of youthful, energetic  talent   and   the  multifarious possibilities  of   the   new   world, places his work in the  tradition of the "poetry of anticipation" which  John Mat­ thews discusses in relation to Australian poetry.8
This  is the genre  of new  world  poetry which  does not look backward and  base itself on  the  ancient myths  of the mother  culture (as  William  Vaughan's  Golden Fleece does), but  which   rather looks forward to  a  new  Eden   of  the  future - symbolized  by the  potential of the  unripe  ears of com.  Hayman, who emphasizes elsewhere  in the  dedicatory letter  that  these  poems  are  the  first in  English  to  be written in  the  colonies   ( ". . . some  of  them  were  borne,  and   the  rest  did  first speake  English,  in that  Land  whereof  your gracious  Majestie is the  ... King  ... and  being  the  first  fruits  of  this  kind,  that   ever  visited  this  Land, out  of  that Dominion of yours ... "), seems to have  profound awareness  of his unique  posi­ tion in the literature of what  was to become Canada. Finally,  the tone  of  this pas­ sage is indicative of Hayman's attitude to himself and  his work  throughout Quod­  libets; quick  to praise  others,  with  never a hint  of envy of  those  who are  superior to him;  aware at  all times of his own limitations; humble  without false  modesty  or servility.
I have  divided  the  main  section  of Quodlibets,  Books I-IV, consisting  of 35 I verses, into  six categories.  First,  there  is a small  group of epigrams  ( 23)   about the  nature and  purpose of epigrams. The  largest  group   ( I 02 verses)  consists  of didactic and  satiric  epigrams dealing  with  secular  matters. The  second  largest  is the  group of 95  epigrams dealing  with  religious  subjects,  and  of  these,  46  are specifically  anti-Catholic epigrams. There are  29 epigrams about women.  At  the

73

"QUODLIBETS"


end of each  book there  are a number of poems about  or addressed to specific indi­
viduals,  and  these  total  81.  Finally, there  are  21 miscellaneous epigrams.
The epigrams written on  the  subject  of epigrams provide  some  insights  as to Hayman's  purpose in  choosing  this  form.  For  Hayman, the  didactic or  moral aspect  of the  epigram is more  important than its style. As always,  he  is modest about his abilities,  but  in  these  verses  he  usually  infers  that   there  is something more  to the  epigram than the  dainty  tum of words  he is unable to achieve:

Though  my best lines no dainty thing affords,
My worst have in them some thing else then words. (Book I, 1)

The true  job of the  epigrammatist is not only to descry evil where  it appears but also to  praise  whatever is commendable. In fact,  the  function of the  epigram  is more  that  of sermon than  satire:

Sermons and  Epigrams  have a like end, To  improve,  to reprove, and  to amend;
Some passed without  this use, 'cause they are witty' And so doe many Sermons, more's the pitty.
(Book IV,  1)

The large  group of  epigrams on  secular   subjects   range   freely  over  a  wide variety  of topics-the meaning of the various  virtues  and  vices-pride, lechery, miserliness,  charity, generosity,  kindness; satires  on  the legal  and  medical  profes­ sions;  messages to anonymous friends; the  proper  and  improper gain  and  use of money; brief  homilies of one kind  or another.
Closely related  to these secular  epigrams  are the 95 verses which  deal  with relig­ ious themes. This  group includes satires  on  preachers, meditations on  the nature of man  and  God,  concern with  the· afterlife  and  salvation, faith  and  good  works. Some of the best of these  poems  are Hayman's simple, sincere  prayers:

A Meditation for such simple innocent  people as I am.

Since thou  All-wise hast made me not so wise, With subtle Serpents for to Subtilize;
Accept  my plainenesse, and  my good intent,
That with thy Dove I may be Innocent; From subtle guard  my simplicitie,
And make me simple in subtility.
(Book II, 19)

Almost  one seventh of the  total  number of epigrams rail against  Papists, idola­
try, Latin  services and  Catholic holidays. The level of vitriol is consistent:


74

''QUODLIBETs''

Papisticall cruelty.

Were there no other argument but this,
It proves our faith, then yours the better is. We are not cruell, bloody, envious.
(Though your late-lying Legends slander us) We meekely seeke but your Conversion, Weepe at your fought for Execution:
You bloody, slanderous, and inexorable
At all times, every where, where you are able;
Witness Maries short Raigne, French Massacre, Which in red letters, your lewd minds declare.
Our God, though Just, his mercy's over all, A blood-sucker, Satan was from his fall.
(Book III,  26)

In his satirical epigrams concerning women, Hayman expresses the conventional attitudes  of the  day.  His  first object  of scorn  (and  alarm)  is the  type  of the nagging shrew:

To all the Shrewd Wives that are, or shall be
planted in Newfound-land.

If mad-men, Drunkards, Children, or a Foole, Wrong sober, discreet men with tongue or toole, We say, Such things are to be borne withall.
We say so too, if Women fight or brawle.
(Book II,  74)

Other  poems satirize feminine  vanity  and  castigate  unchasteness.  If women  in general are seen negatively, individual  women are  praised in  Hayman's series of commendatory  verses to the  wives and  daughters  of his friends,  at  the  end  of Book III. In  these commendatory   verses, Hayman  reveals  himself  as a  rather kindly  paternal ,;entleman, fond  of mildly flattering  young ladies.
The  connecting links in an otherwise more or less miscellaneous compendium of epigrams are the poems addressed to specific individuals  which  appear  at the end of each book. At the end  of the first book, Hayman  devotes his encomia  to his former friends and acquaintances of Oxford, London and  Bristol, all of whom have led highly successful lives in the old world as physicians, lawyers, reverends and merchants. Hayman  offers all of them sincere and generous praise, yet a note of melancholy  underlies  these verses. Perhaps  he felt somewhat  alienated  from the centres of culture  and  economics where these men were most active, if only because of his frequent  absences. Perhaps too, there is a feeling that  he was not quite  as successful as his compatriots  and  peers. This feeling gains expression at the very end of the book:

75

"QUODLIBETS"

A little  of my unworthy Selfe.

Many of these were my familiars,
Much  good, and  goods hath  fal'n unto their shares, They  have gone fairely on in their affaires:
Good God, why have I not so much good lent! It is thy will, I am obedient!
What  thou hast, what  thou wilt, I am content,
Only this breeds in me much heavines, My love to this Land  I cannot  expresse, Lord grant  me power unto my willingnesse.
(Book I, 116)

At the end of the second  book,  Hayman turns from  his friends in the  old world to  acknowledge those  in  the  new.  Almost  all of the  men  who  were  involved  in the  six  Newfoundland colonies  are  addressed-Captain  John Mason  and  Mrs. Mason,   John Slany   (the   treasurer of  the  Newfoundland Company),  Richard Whitboume, William  Vaughan and  Anne  Vaughan, Lord  Falkland, Lord  Buck­ ingham, Sir  William   Alexander, and   various  lesser-known   planters. He  praises those  who  have  persevered, and  encourages those  who  have  failed  to  try  again.  It  is here  that  Hayman indicates the selflessness of his interest  in the  Newfound­ land   colonies -he  even   transcends  his  religious   prejudices in   praising   Lord Baltimore. For  one  who  has  tried   unsuccessfully  to  obtain   aid  from   the  King, there  is not a shade  of envy  when  he commends the enormous grant given  to Sir William  Alexander.
It is clear  that  the  melancholic tone  of Book I is absent.  As the  last  poem  of this  book  indicates, Haym.an  has  begun  to resolve the  problem of looking  back­ ward  to  the  old  centres  of  culture by  focussing  his attention and   praise  on  the new:

I knew the Court  well in the old Queenes dayes; I then  knew Worthies  worthy of great  praise:
But now I am  there such a stranger growne,
That none doe know me there, there I know none.
Those few I here observe with commendation, Are Famous Starres  in our New Constellation. (Book II,  106)

The development which  Hayman undergoes  from  Book I  to Book  II is the  first step which  any individual immigrant to the new world  must take,  and  in fact  the first step which  the culture as a whole must take if it is to create  a new, indigenous literature.
The  verses at  the  end  of Book III, all addressed  to female  relatives  and  wives
and  daughters of friends,  have  already  been  discussed. The verses at  the  end  of

"QUODLIBETS"

Book  IV are,  generally, addressed to those  men  who  have had  the  greatest  influ­ ence  on  Hayman. He  begins with  a  tribute to  Sir  Francis Drake, whom  he  met  as  a child:

This  man  when  I was little,  I did meete,  As he was walking  up Totnes long Street, He asked  me whose I was? I answer'd him.
He  ask'd  me if his good friend  were within?
A faire  red Orange in his hand  he had, He gave it me, whereof  I was right  glad,
Takes and  kist me, and  prayes, God blesse my boy:
Which  I record  with  comfort to this day.... (Book IV,  7)

Six of the  remaining twelve poems are  addressed to  writers, all  of whom  (except John Donne) Hayman knew   personally. Once again, his praise is generous and sincere, and his modesty reflects  the  knowledge of his own  limitations as a  writer.

To  Master  Benjamin  Johnson, Witty  Epigrammatist, and most excellent  poet.

My epigrams come after  yours in time;
So doe  they in conceipt, in forme,  in Ryme; My wit's in fault,  the fault  is none of mine: For  if my will could  have  inspir'd my wit, There never  had  beene better  Verses writ,
As good as yours, could  I have  ruled  it.
(Book IV,  18)

As his praise of others' works  increases, so does his own  sense  of shortcoming, until it is almost obsessive:

To  a Friend, who asked me why I doe not compose some particular Epigrams to our most gracious King ...

Thou ask'st,  Why  I doe  not spinne  out  my wit,
In  silken  threads, and  fine, smooth,  neat  lines  fit, In  speciall  epigrams to our  wise King?
All these my selfe I dedicate to him.
Its all too coorse, what  my wit can  weave  forth, To  wrap  the little  finger of his worth.
(Book IV,  27) Hayman ends  this  book,  and  Quodlibets, with  a note to  the  reader:
If these faile in worth,  blame  me, but  consider
from  whence  they came;  from  a place of no helps.

77

''QUODUBETS"


NOTES

1 The source  for  most  of  the  information in  this  section  is Gillian T. Cell,  English
Enterprise  in  Newfoundland, 1577-I66o,  University  of  Toronto Press,  Toronto,
1969.
2  Allan  Pritchard, "From These Uncouth Shores: Seventeenth Century Literature of Newfoundland", Canadian  Literature,  XIV ( 1962), pp.  10-11.
3 Galloway, David, "Robert  Hayman  ( 1575-1629): Some  Materials for  the  Life  of a Colonial Governor and  First  'Canadian' Author'', William  and Mary  Quarterly,
3rd  Series, XXIV ( 1g67). Galloway hints  at  the  possibility  that  Hayman was not in fact  governor of the  settlement, since  the  only  indication of  this is on  the  title page of Quodlibets.
4  Quoted in  Galloway, "Robert  Hayman  ( 1575-1629)  : Some  Materials ... ",  pp.
79 and  83.
5  Ibid., p. 83.
6  G. C. Moore  Smith, "Robert Hayman and  the  Plantation of Newfoundland", Eng­
lish Historical Review, XXXIII ( 1918), p. 32.
1   "Sixteen quarto copies of Quodlibets are  known  to be extant. There are  two in the British  Museum ... , two  in  the  Bodleian  ... , and  two in  the  New  York  Public Library. The  following libraries have  one copy each: Folger  Shakespeare Library; Huntington Library;  Watkinson Library, Hartford, Conn.; Library of  Congress; Houghton Library, Harvard  University; Garrett Library, Johns Hopkins  Univer­ sity;  William  L.  Clements Library, University   of  Michigan; John  Carter  Brown Library, Brown   University; Boston  Athenaeum; Free  Library of   Philadelphia". Source: Galloway, op. cit. There is a  photocopy in  the  Massey  College  Library, University of Toronto.
8  John  Pengwerne Matthews, Tradition in Exile,  University of  Toronto Press,  To­
ronto, 1962.






NEPHEW
 


Cyril Dabydeen


Alone  in  the street his five-year  old wanders, his belly
hanging out  like a placard. The village  women
do  not  notice  his slogan; they  merely  laugh. Watching him now
I'm convinced
he's  nothing more than a fanatic.

INSITE
Place d' Armes






Peter Brigg









ScOTT SYMONs' Place d'Armes  is an  experimental  novel whose typographical   variety,  maps  and  diary  format  reflect  a  McLuhanesque aesthetic sense of the specialized use of the word in its physical context. Yet beneath the word game the novel demonstrates  a unity of pulp)Se  expressed in structural pattern  and multi-layered metaphor. A probe of the pattern  and metaphors  reveals that  Symons has set out  to clarify his conception  of Canada and  the  Canadian.
Hugh  Anderson,  the  central  character  in the  novel, seeks identity  on  several levels at  once:   Canadian identity,  personal  identity  and  sexual  identity.  The structural scheme  of  the  novel  combines  these  aspects  into  a  single  tour  that Anderson begins in Toronto and completes at the centre of Place d'Armes. Ander­ son's particular  perception  of buildings, places and  objects  provides  rich  meta­ phors for the search and  there is a clear relationship between the objects and  the structure  of the narrative.
Anderson's movement spirals into the maze of old Montreal  and his private self in an ascending fashion as he comes closer to a breakthrough combining  under­ standing and feeling that will clarify his personality and end his search for Canada. At the same time he discovers that  he must free himself from  the limits of mon­ ogamy and  accept  his "homosapient" self. The  complete  opening  up of self in­ volves body as well as mind. This leads to the passages of near  blasphemy  when Hugh  stresses the relationship  between Body and  Blood in the mass, homosexual surrender  and  the surrender of the  mind  needed  to  understand the  Canadian nation. He describes his homosexual surrender  to Andre on Day Twenty  in terms of a tour of La Place and surrounding area.
Symons' solution to the problem of keeping the quest active is to set  up a num­
ber of different points of view. These are arranged  so that  they fit inside one an-


79

IN SITE

other like zones in a maze. Like a maze they hold false trails as the  personalities of Hugh  Anderson  and  Hugh's creation  Andrew  Harrison  become confused and finally merge.
The external  point of view is the omniscient narrative  printed  in six point type. Within  this frame  (which  is not symmetrical  but occurs on various  occasions in the  novel)  the  next  level is Hugh  Anderson's  Combat  Journal that  begins on Day Two  and  is printed  in twelve point type. The  Journal  book was bought  by Anderson six years before the trip  described in Place d'Armes and  had  been left empty while he lived in Toronto. The  third level of narrative is provided  by Anderson's  notebooks and  is printed  in  twelve point  italic  type. The  notebook refers to Andrew  Harrison  in the third  person ("I'll call him Andrew-Andrew what?  Just  Andrew  for  now.m)   as Hugh  speculates on the  novel he will write based upon  the  notebooks. The  twelve point  type also serves as Andrew's note­ books when it occurs in passages surrounded  by the twelve point  bold-face type of the novel which Hugh  is writing about  Andrew. This situation occurs on Days Thirteen and  Fourteen   but  Symons  blends  the  two  notebooks  into  one  as  he moves to blur the separate  points of view in the closing days of  the quest. Andrew begins to write the diary  on Day Twenty-One but towards the end  of the entry it has become Hugh's musing on the problem of the novelette he is writing about Andrew.

(and  as I type this diary now I realize that  my novelette is in fact some deeper assault on reality than I cared to admit.)  (pp. 265-66.)

The  existence of these various  levels of narrative  adds a good deal  of variety to the potentially static situation  of contemplating  objects so that  they reveal their meaning.  (Symons has since done  a more extensive formal study of the  meaning of objets  d'art  in his fine book on Canadiana, Heritage.)
Anderson's autobiography reveals his sensitivity to the Canadian past as it is evinced in art:

... author  of Essays in Canadian  Taste:  a Study  in the  Relationship  of the  Arts and Politics from 1812 to 1914. (p. 18.)

The  emphasis on  places, objects  d'art  and  buildings is natural  in a man  with a highly developed aesthetic sense and  makes a most suitable  basis for the  percep­ tions  that  Anderson  himself tells his  friend  Luc  (poet,  cineaste,  Separatist  ... French  Canadian !) are far more than  cold criticism.

"It  is a matter of eye eating site-I call it eyesite: it is carnivorous. Omnivorous. Sometimes you choke. You're eaten by what you eat."

"You eat the site till it is inside you, then you are inside it, and your relationship

8o

IN SITE

is no  longer  one  of  juxtaposition    . . . but  an  unending  senes  of  internalities." (p. 68.)

Each  Building  was a  style and  each  Style was an  Era:   and  all  of  them  was  a
Person-a Real Presence. (p.   120.)

Anderson's aesthetic  sense helps  to  reveal  his struggles  for  identity. Three of  the locations   which   the  novel  treats:  the  antique shop  Anderson  calls  the   Flesh Market, the old Bank  of Montreal and  the  Church of Notre  Dame, will serve  as illustrations of his perceptions.
Anderson's first  experience in  the  Flesh  Market   occurs  on  Day  Four   of  his
twenty-two day search  for  himself  and  his country.  As he watches the  customers come  and  go  he sits  in  a  rocking   chair  that  yields  the  security   he  needs  when challenged by the presence  of English  Canadians.

I hubnub  the rocker turnings -quick  Canadian  chaplet-protection against  this infidel.  (p. 57.)

From   this  vantage point   he  sees several  groups  of  English   Canadian  shoppers come  and  go. He  realizes  that  they  are stiff and  lifeless and  discovers,  as one  of the  men  touches  a  diamond  point   armoire, that   they  are  drawing sustenance from  the  French furniture. This leads  Hugh  to  think  of the  mass  and  label  the shop  the  Flesh  Market because  of the  B&B, body  and  blood,  that it  provides  to the  English.  The  act  of  communion holds  in  combination the  elements of  the French-English dichotomy, the  idea  of French  Canadian sacrifice  and  the impo­ tence  which  contact   with  things  Canadien can  cure.  The   description is  overtly sexual:

Till  now I see his hand  run  amok,  running  down  the  front  of  a  diamondface, fondling  it in a mutual  moan  from  both  of them  as they are  abruptly   in  touch with armoire  us and  all the shop ignites about  them conjugal.  (p. 61.)

The antique shop  is a near-perfect metaphor for the  Canadian predicament, the English  coming  to take  the  beauty  and  vitality  of the  French in  an  act  which  is close to the buying of flesh. In  the shop as much  as in the rest of the  novel Ander­ son tries to be outside  the  English  tradition but  cannot  become  wholly  a  member  of the French culture. He is fiercely critical of the English Cubes  (the three dimen­ sional  versions  of the  American square)  who  come  into  the shop.  He  describes the  gentleman from  Toronto in terms  of the  landmarks of  the  province.

I know it because the gentleman  in the blue waistcoat is the Toronto Parliament Buildings,  the  City  Hall   (old  and  new!),   the  armouries  . . . is  a  mutation  of Premier  Robarts  and  of the Ontario Flag  (Red  Ensign Canadian) - (p. 63.)

Yet Hugh has a grudging respect  for the  High  Tory  Canadian, his own  class:

8r

IN SITE

No-these  Cubes  may  be  constipated:  but  they  are  redeemable.  They  may simply be Squares full of shit ... but it is a Holy Shit then, and  thus the Canadian remains  a Square-plus-Something which is better  than  the square-root-of-fuck-all. (p. 65.)

All the elements  of Anderson's search  are  present  in the  Flesh  Market. There are sexual  overtones to  the  passage  about  the  armoire and  in  Hugh's brief  contact with  the shop  girl. There is a personal  and  religious context  in the mention of the mass and  the taking  of sustenance as the  English take from  French Canada, using their  financial power  to commit cultural rape.  Hugh  feels that  he does not  fully belong on either  side of the  French-English dichotomy for his background and  his sympathies lie on opposite sides in the conflict.



bE Old   Bank  of  Montreal  Building   and   the  Church  of
Notre  Dame  face  each  other  across  Place  d'Armes. Hugh sees the  Bank  as  the
ponderous mother of Canada, a description which  is confirmed  pictorially  by the breast-like  dome  of the  building. He  always sees relationships between  forms  and their  meaning and  he trusts  his perceptions implicitly.

Always trust  the  object  ... objects never  lie-never.  And  objects always per­
sonify the people  they master.  (p. 151.)

When  he catalogues the  buildings in the  area  he reveals the sequence of thought which leads to his opinion of the Bank.

Bank   of  Montreal-Merchantman's   Neo-Classic-British North   America­ Responsible  Governor.   (p.  121.)

He  sees  the  history  of  the  collaboration  between   the  conservative elements   of Quebec and  English  capital in  the  stolid  building   which  rules  one  side  of  the Place  at the  heart  of Canada.

They  [Montreal 'habitants'] were the rag-tag ends of the old peasant-Church  axis that  had  sustained  Duplessis'  dictatorial   power  for  nearly  two  decades.  Behind them the Bank of Montreal rose significantly. The  Bank had  helped Duplessis too. (p. 125.)

Although he dislikes  the  English  Canadian Businessman  he sees in  the  Bank  at the  carol-singing, Anderson  recognizes  the  Bank  as one  facet  of  the  Canadian whole  in a remarkable passage  which  blends sexual  experience with  his discovery of Canada.

INSITE

while Mommy Bank remains implacably complicit ...
I've  been had I've  been had  I start to hue and
cry, but stop in full halleluia-the Church, the Church  ... I've  just
penetrated my Church  and  it is
La Place d'Armes!  (p. 205.)

On  the  final  day  of  the  Combat Journal Anderson sees in  the  stonework detail on the Bank  the perfect  emblem  for English  Canada.

And  so aptly,  atop  the  crest  of  Montreal  itself ... the  beaver-the Complete Canadian Cube  ... the  symbol of  the  state-substantial,  diligent,  sure,  sobre, comestible (but only by the tail)  ... and, of course, it could be fleeced-the Cana­ dian Golden  Fleece. (p. 277.)

In  the final action  of the  novel  Hugh  bursts  out  of Notre  Dame  and  runs  to  the centre  of the square. At this moment  he envisions even  the  beaver  as active,  par­ ticipating in the  Canadian  experience. This  is in perfect  accord  with  the  premise that  objects  never  lie, for  the  Mommy Bank is in  Place  d'Armes just as  the  Eng­  lish fact is in Canada. Hugh does not deny  this at any  point  even if  he feels that  the  bank  represents the  "Cubes" of English  Canada.
The  most important building in  Place d'Armes  is the  Church of Notre  Dame.
For  Anderson it represents the  French  presence  in  Quebec both  in  terms  of  his­ tory  and  the  present  time.  He  relates  the  Church to Bartlett's I 835  print  of  the interior, pointing out  that  the print  reduced  the interior  by leaving  out its baroque characteristic of multiple foci.

Bartlett  had failed to insite the Church  ... While in Bartlett's  church  I feel cameo constraint.  (p. I I 1.)

That  it [Notre  Dame]  was simply a cubicle, thoroughly overdecorated. A distanced cubicle. One  that  conveniently  took place out  of him  [Hugh]. (p. I 25.)

Notre  Dame  comes to life for  Hugh when  his sensitivity  is open  and  the  church then  becomes the central building  in the  process of understanding Place  d'Armes in his various  contexts.  On  the  nineteenth day of his search  Hugh is first brought into  the close communion with  the  building,  an experience which  he describes  in quasi-sexual  fashion.

. . . And  then  he realized it was no longer in objective  relationship  with  it  [rela­ tion of object-Church with Object-intent,] ... it had  penetrated  him, and  at  the same time, it projected  from him, infinitely. (p. 2IO.)

Towards the  close of the  novel  the  experience  of Notre  Dame becomes  an  even greater revelation  to Anderson.

IN SITE

This  Church, this  nave,  this is the  Body of  the  Habitant ... of  the  Habitant­ Seigneur-Cardinal-Canadien  . . . Baroque   Habitant . . .  Ecce   Homo   . . .  they couldn't  finally hide that,  even under  the Cubicularity.  This Church  is the Cana­ dien ... my missing Man.  My other  Presence ... Moi-meme.  (p. 266.)

For  Anderson Notre  Dame is the  source  of sustenance, symbolized   by  the  Body and  Blood of the mass. It is the  personification of the French tradition in Canada. It expresses the openness  Hugh finds once he gets past the "cubicle" aspect  which Bartlett captured.

. . . the essential experience  of the  nave insofar as it is cubicular  at  all, is one of vertical  upthrust. But even more important, the experience  I feel more and  more with it is one of warm  liberation.  (p.  111.)

Anderson's discovery  in the  novel closely resembles a religious surrender in which body and  soul must  be given completely  in order  to be regained  anew. Thus when he stands  in the  centre of the  Place  in the  final  passage of the  novel  he is giving himself  as the  Host  and  describes  himself as bleeding.  It  is only through this giv­ ing  that  he  is made whole  by being  existentially  open  to  all  of  the  objects  and  people  who  surround him.
The achievement of  Place d' Armes  is its ability  to  hold  the  attention of  the
reader  despite  its aggressively  blatant vulgar  language, its repetitiousness and  its singularly unlikeable principal character. Its success lies in  the  careful  structural pattern which  is created by the  metaphors of place,  buildings  and  other  objects. I have  shown  how  these metaphors are  explained in  unusual detail  in the  novel. Symons does not leave our  observations to chance and  a good deal  of the strength of  the  work  comes  from  the  way  that  objects  are  shown  in  depth   to  reveal  the historical  dilemma of  Canada and  of  Hugh   Anderson's personal  identity. Each station  of Anderson's private Calvary is marked  on the map  provided at  the front of the  book.  He  moves  in ever  decreasing circles  until  he is in  the  centre of the Place  at  the  final  moment of understanding. His  route  is as much  a  maze  as  a set of decreasing circles  because  he often  advances only to find  himself  rebuffed by a temporarily unattainable part  of his goal. When  this happens he can  actually walk  through the  Place  or  into  the  buildings  on  his route  without any  effective emotional contact. He  finds  himself  baulked  as one would  be in  a maze  when  a false trail  ran  out.

The  veil has come down  in  me, over  my eyes. I  am  shut  off-cannot  see, nor hear, nor touch. Look again  at the Place-no, it's  just a postcard  there  now, ... (p. gg.)

Symons  is quite  deliberate in making all of the narrators who seek to walk into Place  d'Armes sound   similar  so  that   the  book  ultimately   speaks  with  a  single voice.  Because  Hugh   Anderson eventually absorbs  Andrew  Harrison it  is legiti-

IN SITE

mate to speculate that  Scott  Symons  ("A  Personal  Narrative by Scott  Symons" [title page]) absorbs  both  Hugh and  Andrew, particularly in light  of the  strong sense  of intimacy and  personal passion  conveyed  by the  difficulty  of  the  search and  the  close correspondence between  Symons'  biography and  those  of his char­ acters.  Symons  comes  from  an  Ontario High  Tory  family,  spent  time  in  Mont­ real  as a  journalist sympathetic to  French  aspirations and  is an  expert  on  Cana­ dian  furniture, art  and  architecture. The  novel  has an  inward spiralling  pattern in  terms  of physical  locations  but  it moves in  the  opposite  direction in  terms  of the  attention paid  to the figures in it. Thus  Andrew  Harrison is the  least  detailed study  while  we know  considerably more  about  Hugh  Anderson and  by  implica­ tion  all the points of view reflect  outwards to Symons standing behind  the omnis­ cient  narrator.
Place d'Armes is an intricately unified novel despite the  presence  of two central
"characters" in  Hugh Anderson and  Andrew   Harrison and   by  implication the presence  of Symons  behind  the  omnicient narrator. It is clear  that  all  three  are concerned with the same dilemmas and that  they conduct the same search through old  Montreal. Unity  is promoted by the  blending of metaphors so that  the  Body and  Blood of the Antique Shop become the  Body and  Blood of the  mass at  Notre Dame and  are intertwined with  the sexual surrender of Hugh and  Andrew. The novel  moves towards a  vanishing point  in  the centre of  Place d'Armes  and  it is at  that  point  where  the  details  of  the searches  for sexual,  personal and  political identity coalesce  into  a  geographical, personal  and  political   whole  for  Andrew, Hugh and, by  implication,  Scott  Symons.  The   highly  poetic   and   metaphoric structure of the novel makes it one of the most complex investigations of Canadian identity yet undertaken by a novelist.  Symons  knows that  identity is a quality of the  whole  man: sexual,  aesthetic, intellectual and  emotional. He  has  put  the na­ tional  search  into  all of these  perceptive modes  in a single  novel.



NOTES

1 Scott  Symons,  Place d' Armes,  Toronto:  McClelland & Stewart, I g67,  p.  7 r. All succeeding quotations are  from  this volume.













as

JIVE IMPERJITOR



A I gth  century English painting
hung  outside  the  first class staterooms presented to  M.V. Bonavista
at  her  launching in I 956
by Lady  Margaret  Bowater
-foreground parkland of England's green  and  pleasant etcetera
boy and  woman  watching two swans for background a majestic  castle complete with  baronial hall
and  doubtless a Lord  & Lady  Fitzsomething

An odd  place  to find  that  painting
among the  tough  crew  of Newfoundlanders for  instance 300-pound Captain  Devlin
who  fell between   two converging ships and  escaped  with  ribs  just slightly  sore or  "Rullo me old  dear" Harold Mum
trappers and  fishermen  of cold  Labrador Eskimos  and  Indians from  Nain  and  Hopedale swigging  beer  in  the  men's  crapper
joyriding the  iceftoes for ring seal
off the  coast  of Jacques Cartier's country (who called  it "The land  God  gave  to Cain" expecting maybe  dancing girls?)
-to them  the  painting is probably  invisible

One  wonders a little  about  Lady  Bowater did  she  think  that  painting high  culture
and  believe  England's green  and  pleasant  et cetera could  be recreated in Labrador ice
nor  realize  swans  would  die of envy
watching hawk  and  falcon  riding  the  updrafts? Or  did  she imagine a phantom Englishman
art-appreciator and  tailored  bon  vivant stalking the  deck  oblivious  to commoners shouldering nobly  the white  man's  burden complete with  monocle  and  walking  stick?
-a phantom Englishman caricature of all  Englishmen
who followed  Wellington to die at Waterloo
and  choked  in  the  mud  of Mons  and  The Somme resurrected briefly  by Lady  B
 


Al Purdy
















































Nain,  Labrador


86

CJtRNIVJtL
 


R. G. Everson


Now  that  the  pyracantha berries  are  ripening robins  come  to peck at  them
The robins  are  fluttering and  hopping
all  through the  jungle  for far  as I can  see
There could  be a million  of these brute  creations along  this coastline
On  only one  palmetto, I slowly confusedly count about a hundred birds
They have  flown here from  Venezuela
on the way to their  nesting homes in Canada
This jungle  is seething

A robin  flies down  from  a  berry  bush to drink  at a small  rainpool  of water
The  bird  is Emily  Dickinson. He  is slowly hopping toward  me.  Even  on  my  Montreal  lawn
next  Summer, few  robins  will  be so brash
as this one. The bird  is staggering
Now  I see that  there  are  many  bewildered  robins
These  sly creatures have come  to the  pyracantha berries for  something better  than  food. This  is their  Mardi gras

The robin  leans against  my left foot
I reach  down,  pick  him  up. He  is cross-eyed
Carrying the slim weight,  I walk over  to a pyracantha  bush
I pick a berry  and  gingerly  nibble  it
An acrid  taste  but  not so dreadful as bourbon
(perhaps stronger, however). I  try a handful
Presently I lie down,  staining my shirt  with  fallen  berries
I  place  the  robin  on the  jungle floor  beside me
His  cross-eyes behold  me hazily as I him,  at  six inches
I am  Aristophanes the divine  humorist

or maybe  I am not, but like the bard  I feel good happenings come  to humans on  the wings of birds
This  cute  redbreast has brought me  the  notion of trying  fermented pyracantha berries
So we start  this conversation (Aristophanes and  St.  Francis chatted with  fowl, according to them). The  bird  and  I  mount up  above  the  jungle  to where  glistening  ocean
is in full view. The  robin shakily advises:
Follow  North  two thousand miles along  that  coastline
We are  both  programmed for  the  Atlantic Flyway

MOTION
 


Anne Corkett


The  air is so taut and  still I hear hills massing
by the shore where the lake lies waiting
the first thin line of trees. The  sun
is stretched so fine I see
the long forced marches of the pines
halted  by the lake's formation.

These are no lawless marches and though the signal birches' flashing warns
of farther forests moving
on another  shore yet
still my eye would mark
detente  and  so disarm the sentencing of time that  ranks my single
point of view, a private disarray.


















88


review articles




NOVELS FROM NEAR & FAR


(;eorge VVoodcock


JACK HODGINs, The  Invention of the  World. Macmillan. $I0.95· JANE RULE, The  Young in  One  Another's  Arms. Doubleday. $6.95.
LEOPOLD  voN  SACHER-MASOCH, Venus  in  Furs, translated by  John  Glassco. Black­
fish  Press.
FREDERICK   PHILIP  GROVE. The   Master   Mason's   House,   translated  by   Paul    P. Gubbins. $I5.00.
RESHARD  cooL, Price. Square Deal   Publications. Hardcover  $9.95, paper $4-95·


VANCOUVER ISLAND is a strange combination of the pristine and  the deca­ dent,  of frontier roughness and  lingering  English   manners,  with   inlays   of   sheer Canadian  myth  and   a  rather  sickening varnish   of  commercialized   tourism.  Al­ most  thirty   years  ago   I  lived   there   for three   uneasy   years,  in   a   remote  com­ munity  on the southwest coast, where  the Juan  de  Fuca  Strait  opens   out   to  the Pacific.  It  was  a  ravaged area  of  rough second  growth forest  and   stump farms, fringed   by  startlingly  beautiful  coastal vistas  of   the  snowy  Olympics  over   the Strait  and   backed   by  the  rocky,  mossy, arbutus-tufted Sooke Hills.
It was a place of loggers and  fishermen and  cougar  hunters; a contingent of  Brit­ ish  remittance men  provided  what  frail claims  it  had  to civilization,  and  among  the   mild   eccentrics  who   had   gathered there  my  wife and  I  hardly seemed  out of  place  in  our  wrong-headed  effort   to achieve  the Tolstoyan ideal  of combining manual  and  physical  work  on  a  piece of land  which  everyone  else knew   (but  did not  tell)   was barren for  the  very  reason that  made  it  seem  so  fertile   to  us;  the broom  which we cleared  with such labour
 
grew  to  a  height  of  twenty  feet  only  be­ cause  the soil was  useless for  other  crops. Along  the  rough   road  in  the  hills  be­ hind   us  lived  an  even  more  formidable tribe  than  our  own  village  loggers ;  they were people  dwelling mostly in shacks on land once given to World War I veterans. Some  of  the   veterans  were   still   there,  buried   in  time; a  few  gay  couples   had found   refuge  in  the  total permissiveness  of  the  environment,  but   the  great   ma­  jority  of  these   bush  folk,  as  we  called them,   were  loggers  of   the  wilder   kind,  poverty-stricken  marginal farmers whose holdings  have since  been  eaten  up  by the forest,   or   mere  drifters.  Between   them bitter  feuds  over   wells  and   boundaries persisted  for  decades and  were  periodic­ ally  celebrated  with   rifle  duels  through the  trees  or  fertilized  with  the  blood  of
beer  parlour brawls.
My favourite place in this backhill com­ munity    was   the    abandoned    Anglican  church, which  for  a  time  had  been  run  as  a  brothel   by  two  enterprising Van­ couver   whores,   later   became   the   local bootlegging depot, and  when  we reached the area  was  inhabited by a large  family of  undetermined origin  living  in complex

Bg

REVIEW ARTICLES



and   public  incest.  Nothing had   been  of greater  interest    to   the   local   scandal­ mongers  since  the  failure a  decade or  so before  of the  religious  community (I be­ lieve they were called  the Star  Brethren) whose decaying buildings were still visible in  the  bush  a  mile  or  so west  of our  vil­ lage, and whose leader ran  away with  the funds  he had  collected  from  the innocent mid-Westerners who  sold  up  their  farms to follow his promise  of easy salvation.
I intended, for  years,  to write  the  not­ so-plain  Tales of the Sooke Hills, but while I lived  there  the  rigours  of manual  work left  me  no  energy  even  to keep  a  proper  diary,  and  in the  years immediately after  leaving   the   village   other   interests  and travels   supervened;   gradually  the   me­ mories  lost their sharpness, until  no more remains   than  will  fill a  short   passage  of an  autobiography. But  I  always  believed that this strange combination of people, washed  up  on  that  far  shore  of  Canada by  the  tide  of  westering which   made it the last of our  frontiers, needed  its chron­ icler,  even  if  I  had  failed  my  memories,  and  I am happy  to have seen that  chroni­ cler  at  last  appear in  the  person  of Jack  Hodgins.
Hodgins, whose novel The  Invention of the  World  succeeds  a collection of short stories,   Spit   Delaney's   Island,   actually writes   about   the  opposite side  of   Van­ couver   Island   from   the  site  of  my  own experiences. The  town  that   is  the  focal point    of   his   massive    folk    epic    is   a fairly   literal   portrait  of   Nanaimo,  and the  greater  part   of  the   action  -apart from   interludes  in  western   Ireland -is set  northward  from  there,  at  the  site  of the  Revelations  Colony  of  Truth on  the edge  of  the  town,  and  then   upisland in remote logging  camps  and  decaying tide water  settlements and  valleys  where   the counter-culture has  taken  over  the  mar­ ginal  farms   and  contributed a  new ele­ ment  of  oddity   to  the  mad  old  frontier
miX.

go
 I  read   The   Invention  of  the  World with part  of my mind  wandering through the  world  that  had  seemed  so strange to me  when  I  entered   it  half  a  life  ago­ the world  of the loggers and  their whores and  the  stump   farmers and  the  Anglo­ Irish   eccentrics    and   millenarian  com­ munities,  and  I  was  delighted  with  the felicity  of  observation  that   had  enabled  Hodgins to  catch   so  well  the  look  and mood of the wild sea-forest-and-mountain landscape, and  the  speech   and  manner­ isms of its inhabitants. These  aspects satis­ fied  my  nostalgia  and   at  the  same  time pleased  me with  the  thought that  such  a strange  and  undoubtedly transient world had  not gone uncelebrated.
At the same  time,  I developed  reserva­ tions  about  the  fictional  structure of the book. In  the central strand of the  plot­ the  career  of  Maggie  Kyle  from  logger's moll to proprietor of a trailer park on the site of the Revelations Colony and eventu­ ally,  after  a  desperate search  for  impos­ sible salvations,  to marriage with  her hollow man of a cousin, Wade Powers, I found  nothing to criticize; I  have  known such a loud, leggy blonde from northern Vancouver Island  whose career  and char­ acter  were not much  different from Mag­  gie's.  Around this  main  plot  the  minor  fates  of  island  oddities  like  Madmother Thomas, Julius  Champney, Danny Hol­  land   and  Becker   (who   in  his  curiosity over  human motives  becomes  the  narra­ tor of much  of the  book)  weave  their  ap­ propriate  patterns,  and   even   the   ma­ terial  side  of the  remembered  history  of the Revelations Colony -a group  of bog Irish  led away from  home by a conjuring messiah named  Keneally -is part  of the authentic island  experience.
It is when  Hodgins turns  Keneally  into a semi-supernatural being of malign  and magical   powers  that   the  novel  weakens. For what  he is doing  is to  juxtapose true myth  with  fabricated myth.  The strange life  of  the  Vancouver Island   communi-

REVIEW ARTICLES



ties is one of those natural gifts to the novelist-truth grown  so much  stranger than  fiction  that  in  memory  it  is already myth,  even before it is set down  on paper. To  add  further convolutions is to transfer it  into   the  world  of  fictional   invention, and  to lose it as mythic  truth. The  foun­ ders  of  the   West  Coast   religious  com­ munities were strange and sinister  enough beings  in  their  own  human right.  There was  no  need  to  make  them  demonic.
If Jack  Hodgins weakens The Invention of the  World   with  an  excess of  the  dia­ bolic, Jane Rule  spoils another west coast novel,   The  Young  in   One   Another's Arms, with  an  excess of the angelic. It  is the  tale  of a  boarding-house  which  one­ armed  Ruth Wheeler  runs in  Vancouver and  in which,  herself a casualty  from  life, she  shelters   the  misfits  and   dropouts of society.  The  little  community is  threat­ ened   by  urban   development,  by  police action   when  one  member  is  picked   up and  illegally shipped  over  the  border and another  killed in  a  shootup, but  it  stays together  and  all is eventually well  when the  members   re-establish   their  little  col­ lectivity   on  Galiano Island, where   they run a restaurant and  Ruth's estranged husband  providentially dies  just  in  time for  them   to  buy  the  house  from   which they  are  about  to be evicted. This  is the kind    of   optimistic   book   which    good writers  are sometimes  inclined  to write  in spite  of themselves  in times of social ma­ laise  and   threatened crisis;  I  was  often reminded in reading  it of Priestley's Good Companions. The  Young  in  One   An­  other's  Arms  is written in too satisfying  a plain   prose  to  be  just  a  failure, but  its imaginative vision is not convincing. It is not  merely   that   such  accumulations  of goodness  are  rare indeed in real  life;  it is even  more  that  a  novel  in  which  every­ thing  always  seems  to  turn   to  the  good leaves  too  bland   an   impression   on  the mind  to be remembered as more  than  an escapist  exercise. We  may  long for  para-
 dise  regained, but   the  human  condition is a paradise lost.
The  three  remaining books  on  my  list come  all,  in  various  ways,  from  outside. The   farthest outsider of  all  is  the  cele­ brated     Leopold     von    Sacher-Masoch's Venus in  Furs,  and  this  classic  exercise by an  Austrian  novelist  in  the  psychopa­ thology  of love  concerns us only  because  it is translated  by John Glassco  and  very elegantly  printed  by  the  Blackfish  Press of  Vancouver. It is appropriate that  such a  classic  of  the  whip   should   have  been rendered - and   well   rendered - into English  by the  author of The Fatal  Wo­ man  and   Harriet   Marwood,  Governess, but   the   main   result   of   comparing  the three  books  is  the  conclusion  that   John Glassco  deals  far  more  interestingly with  the  theme  than  the  unfortunate Sacher­ Masoch,  whose  main  claim  to our  atten­ tion will continue to be that  Kraft-Ebbing appropriated his name  to define a sexual aberration.
One   steps   a   little   nearer  with   The Master  Mason's  House, for  that  was first published   in  German in  1906  under the title  M aurermeister I hles  H aus with  the name  of Felix  Paul  Greve  attached to it; now  it  appears in  English, translated  by Paul  H. Gubbins, and  under the  name  of Frederick Philip  Grove, whom  we all believe  to  have  been  Greve's Canadian alter ego. The  Master Mason's House  is indeed  a recognizable example of  Grove­ ian   juvenilia.   Readers of  the  Canadian novels  will  immediately  recognize  as  fa­  miliar  the central situation of the  coarse­  grained contractor who  drives  his wife to madness  and   then   himself   becomes   the victim of a domineering woman  of doubt­ ful antecedents. Greve's intent to push his characters into  the arms  of destiny  is per­ haps  not so powerful as it became in  the later  Grove,  and  the  young  girl  Susie - whose  growth   towards  independence  is another strand  of  The  Master  Mason's House,  is far  too  shallow  in  herself  and

REVIEW ARTICLES



in  her  relations with  her  age  peers  that occupy  so much  of the  book. Perhaps the surest   of  all  the  signs  of  Grove's  hand lies  in  the  very  evocative description of the Baltic countryside-Grove's own countryside-which  for  luminosity and particularity of observation closely resem­ bles the landscape pasages of Over Prairie Trails.  The   translation   is   spotty.   Mr.  Gubbins  writes  a  good  narrative prose, but   his  dialogue  is  clumsy,   and   his  at­  tempts   to  render  the  juvenile  chatter of another  time   and   place    into   modern Canadian teenage  cant  or to find a Cana­ dian  equivalent for  Low  German dialect speech  disastrously  mar  the  book.
The   last  novel  on  my  list  lies farther off in its locale  than  the  Central Europe of Greve  and  Sacher-Masoch. Reshard Gool's  Price  is set  in  South Africa-in Cape  Town  during the period  before apartheid  was introduced. Unlike  the novels of Margaret Laurence, Dave God­ frey  and   Audrey   Thomas, it   does  not establish   the  familiar pattern  of  African  experiences seen  from  a  Canadian start­ ing  point.   Gool  knew  South Africa   be­ fore,  by many  leaps  across  the  world,  he eventually settled   in  Prince Edward  Is­ land,   where   he  is  the  editor of  Square Deal   Publications.  And   Price,  the  story of  an  East  Indian  lawyer,  his  tragic  in­ fatuation for a beautiful and  promiscuous
 Cape  Coloured  woman, and  his eventual death   from   political    violence,    is   not merely  a  tragically   moving  study  of  hu­ man  obsessions and  their  effects,  but also a revelation of an aspect of South African  life with  which  few  outsiders  can  be fa­  miliar. For the aspect  Gool chooses is that  penetrated  only   by  a   few   whites,   the world   of  Asians   and   Cape   Coloureds, many of them highly sophisticated people, and  the  struggles  for  power  within   that  world,   even   at   a   time   when    it   was threatened  by   the   tide  of  Nationalism. The   factional  battles   between   Stalinists, Trotskyists,   Syndicalists  and   communal political   bosses   are    displayed    with    a sharply  pessimistic  eye,  and   the  way  in which the non-European and  at  the same time  non-African  communities  are  cor­ rupted by the  perils  and  opportunities of their  situation is exemplified   by  the  sin­ ister  Sheikh-Moosa,  the  wealthy  Malay  racketeer  who  in  the  end,  to  protect   his speculations,  is  prepared  to   co-operate with  the  Afrikaner  Nationalists. Price  is an  unusual  and  strongly  written book;  it is not exactly a new one, since it was pub­  lished  in  a  limited   edition  as  Price  of Admission  in  I970, but  it appears to have been  revised  and  this  is the  first  time  it has  been  offered  to  the  general   reading public.




THE GOOD JAZZ
 

Roy MacSkimming


MICHAEL oNDAATJE,  Coming  Through Slaughter. Anansi,  $10  cloth, $4.95  paper­
back.


IF   IT   SEEMED   ODD     at   first glance  that  a gifted  Canadian poet should devote   an  entire   book   to  an  American pop-culture  hero,  as  Michael Ondaatje did six years ago in The Collected  Works of  Billy  the   Kid, Ondaatje's  choice   of subject  for his latest  work  may seem even

92
 
odder.   The   protagonist  of  Coming Through Slaughter is Buddy  Bolden, known chiefly to jazz aficionados as a pioneering  musician   in   turn-of-the-cen­ tury   New   Orleans.   Bolden   is  a   hazy, semi-mythological  figure  at  the  dawning of jazz -from the days before recordings

REVIEW ARTICLES



or  big  money  or  national  and   interna­ tional  acceptance of Black  music. His in­ stinctual  genius   was   recognized   by  his contemporaries -"He   began   the   good jazz," one of  them  is quoted as saying­ but  all  that  remains of  his  career   are  a few  reminiscences, one  dim  photograph of  Bolden  and  his band, and  a record  of musician  Buck Johnson whistling  the way he  remembers Bolden  playing.
From  these fragments and  an acquain­ tanceship with  New  Orleans  and  its his­ tory,   Ondaatje  has   fashioned  a   prose work  (his first)  that is part  documentary, part   fiction   and   essentially   a   spiritual exegesis  of  a   tragic   personality.  Upon  finishing  it,  one  no  longer  asks why On­  daatje   chose   Bolden    as   his   principal character. He  has  journeyed so far  into the   world   and    mind    of   Bolden -or someone   he   imagines    Bolden   to   have been-that Coming Through  Slaughter represents  an  imaginative feat  of a  high order :   a   transcending  of  cultural  and racial  and  historical   barriers into  a state of nearly  total  identification, on  both  the author's and  reader's part,  with  the sub­ ject.
The   pattern of  Bolden's   life  is  a  fa­
miliar one in Black musical history, a precursor of those  talents  that  have self­ destructed in despair  and heroin. Bolden's music  was a  search  for  both  ecstasy  and oblivion: he lived at top speed,  becoming  celebrated young, drinking vast quantities of alcohol,  doing violence  to himself  and occasionally  those around him, going over the edge into madness  at 3r. Bolden spent the last 24 years of his life in a Louisiana mental institution. It was his way of com­ mitting suicide.
All  this  comes  very  close  to  the  ro­
manticized image  of  the  dissolute  artist, but   Ondaatje  isn't    interested   in   that cliche.  He  wants  to burrow under it and chart  the subterranean rivers in this man, the  subtle  and  elusive  but  finally  identi-
 fiable  moments when  the  decision  to  go mad  is made,  rejected, made  again.
The  process  is all  the  more  mysterious because  Bolden  did  not appear outwardly to   be   a   deeply   disturbed  person.    He could usually control the effects of his drinking, was  a  loving  husband and  fa­ ther,  an irrepressible raconteur. For a liv­ ing  he  cut   hair  at  N.  Joseph's  Shaving Parlour,  snipping  and   shaving  with   an increasingly drunken  flamboyance as the day wore on:  "Humming loud  he would crouch  over  his sweating victim  and  cut and  cut, offering  visions of new  styles to the  tilted  man.  He  persuaded men  out  of ten-year  moustaches and   simultaneously offered raw steaming scandal that  brought up  erections  in  the  midst  of  their  fear." He  even  edited   The Cricket, a  raunchy broadsheet  packed   with   local  sensation and  rumour. At  night   he  played  cornet in front  of the dancing crowds and  on holidays  there  were  the  festive  jazz  par­ ades  down  Canal Street.
Through an  aggregation of  brief  inci­ dents,    scraps    of    documentation,   and monologues in various  voices, not strictly  chronological but  generating a  powerful  sense of momentum, we become aware  of Bolden's   secret   self-infuriated   by  his "slavery" in the  barber shop, appalled by the  onrush   of  his  own  existence,   "gov­  erned  by fears of  certainty," i.e. of death. He constantly had  dreams of his children dying.  This  terror   of  mortality helps  to explain  Bolden's  sudden, unexpected de­ sertion  of  his  family   and   his  music­ "wiping out   his  past  again   in  a  casual gesture,   contemptuous.  Landscape   sui­ cide,"  as his old  friend  Webb  puts  it.
Webb  is a  police  detective (Ondaatje doesn't  say if he ever  existed)   who  takes it  on  himself  to  search   for  Bolden  and restore   him   to  his  former   place   in  the world. In a nice paradox, this structurally unconventional narrative  acquires a  de­ tective-story   suspense   in   the   course   of Webb's  investigation. Piece  by  piece  the

93

REVIEW ARTICLES



psychological  clues   pile  up   until   Webb walks  triumphantly in on  Bolden,  who  is taking  a bath  in  the  apartment where  he lives with  his new love, Robin, and  her uncomplaining husband.
In confessional passages Bolden tries to make   Webb   understand  what    he   has done: that  he was driven  into  a negation of  his  talent  by  the   very  adulation  it brought  him.   There  was   his   unlikely friend  Bellocq, the hydrocephalic photog­ rapher  (who  did  exist), who  placed   no value   whatever  on  Bolden's  music   and made    him   mistrust    his   fame,   feel   its mocking   emptiness.  There  was  Bolden's  burgeoning paranoia over  his wife, Nora,  whom  he imagined  as being  in love with the  king  pimp  of   the  Storyville   district. There  seemed   no  sane   way  out.   Even Bolden's  escape  into  Robin's arms  was a "swimming  toward  the   sound   of  mad­ ness."
Nevertheless Webb, well-meaning agent
of the  rational world,  succeeds  in  bring­ ing  Bolden   home.   In   five  days   Bolden finds  the  answer   he  wants:  he  literally  blows  his  lungs  out   in  a  New  Orleans parade, playing incomprehensible sounds.  He   has   achieved    his  oblivion.   At   this point,   after   being   excruciatingly  imme­  diate   for   most   of   its   length,   Coming Through  Slaughter subsides  into  a  neu­  tral,   scholarly, archival  mode.   Hospital records  are  produced,  along  with   taped  reminiscences of  survivors  of  the  period.
 It is  as  if,  having   tasted   a  dead   man's sweat and  blood, we are once  again look­ ing  at   him   down   the   dusty   tunnel   of history.
Ondaatje doesn't  belabour the  facts  of poverty  and  social  oppression as  sources of Bolden's  agony-they  are  implicit in the pungent historical  asides, "the Black whores and musicians  shipped in (to Storyville)   and  the  Black  customers  re­ fused."  More  importantly, Ondaatje suc­ ceeds in giving  us a sense of how  Bolden actually   played-"showing all  the  pos­ sibilities in the middle  of the story."  The texture of the book itself  has  that  fertile,  driving,  improvisational quality, rich with its own  pleasure  in  language and  human complexity. Its   considerable  drama   is marred only when the author shows him­  self too self-conscious about  literary archi­ tecture; there is an archly obscure  epitaph about  the sounds that  dolphins make, and bits of poetry  are  inserted  now and  then, as if to remind  us of the author's other avocation.  But   it   is  undoubtedly   On­ daatje's experience as  a  poet  which  has liberated him from  the  tired  conventions of the  novel and  helped  him  to  produce a fictional  work of such  uncompromising existential  power.  One  of  Bolden's  num­ bers  was  titled,  "Don't  shake,  don't   get no  cake."   Bolden   the   quiet   lunatic  is given  the  last  word,   from   the  asylum: "There are no prizes."




THE SEVERED SKULL
 

Wayne Grady


GRETL FISHER,  In  Search  of Jerusalem:   Religion  and  Ethics  in  the  Writings  of A. M. Klein.  MeGill-Queen's University  Press. $14.00.


"IT IS  PERHAPS SIGNIFICANT," Tom   Marshall has  remarked, "that  the most  perceptive reviews  of  The   Second Scroll  in   I95I  were  more   convinced  of its cultural importance than  of its merits

94
 as  a  novel."  Significantly, perhaps, but also alarming. And  it is at  least alarming that most of the recent studies of A. M. Klein's poetry have concerned themselves not so much  with  Klein  the  poet  as with

REVIEW ARTICLES



Klein  the bibliophagist, Klein  the learned, Klein   who  out-Bubers  Buber   and   then
out-Eliots Eliot.  This  is true  of Sidney J.
Stephen's study  of "Portrait of  the  Poet
as  Landscape" (Dalhousie  Review  51 ) ,
and  of Tom  Middlebro's "Yet  Another Gloss" on The Second Scroll (Journal of Canadian   Fiction   IV:3).  It  is   only slightly  less true of Miriam Waddington's A. M. Klein  ( 1970), and  it is true  to the nth degree of Gretl  Klaus Fischer's newly­ published doctoral dissertation, In Search of Jerusalem.
To give Miss Fischer her due, she recognizes, and  in part  conveys, the  value of objective  scholarship. She does not suppose   that   once   we  have   established that   Klein   read   Spinoza's   Theologico­ Politicus, that  Klein's  view of  redemption was shared  by the 16th-century Cabbalist Isaac  Luria of  Safed,   that  it  was  Moses de   Leon    and   not   Rabbi   Simon   ben Yochai   who  wrote   the  Zohar,  then  we have learned all we need  to about Klein's  writings,  and   his  book  may   be  closed. Although    Fischer    carefully   scrutinizes  Klein's  every  obscurity, she  is only  occa­ sionally condescending ("One  may  dis­ tinguish   between   three  elements of  Ca­  bala: the first is one of  systematization of numbers   which    are   to   yield   esoteric knowledge;  its   principles  and   method  cannot  seriously  appeal  to  the   modern  mind   ..." -her  attention ought   to  be drawn to Perle Epstein's study  of Under the Volcano,)  and  does seem to be aware  that  scholarly exegesis carries  us only part (or  at most, most)  of the  way to a fuller appreciation  of a  poet's  lifework.
It is not the fact of scholars that  alarms, but   the   imbalance  of   them,    of   those versed  solely in  exantlation and  delinea­ tion,  for   whom   poetry   is   uninteresting except  as a code  to  be  deciphered. Miss Fischer    seems   genuinely   interested   in Klein's  "moral  purpose", in the extent  to which  his  development  was  "the arche­  typal   quest    of   a   human  being    who
 emerges from  the shelter  of orthodox cer­ tainty  and  struggles  towards a  redeeming philosophy and  intellectual  peace." It  is the mapping of that  struggle that  we find in In Search of Jerusalem:  Klein's subtle shifts   from   orthodox  Judaism,  through Spinozan    pantheism,   via  Chassidic  op­ trrmsm,    to     apocalyptic    oecumenism. Whether or  not Klein  ever  found  his re­ demption  and  peace,  whether or  not  he ever   managed  "to   say   the   word   that would  become  sixth  sense",  it  now  seems to be certain that   his "quest" for  it  was "archetypal".
There is no doubt  that  much  of Klein's imagery  is difficult,  and  requires explana­ tion.  Fischer  quotes  Earle  Birney's  exas­ perated question:  Who  but  a  Talmudic scholar  can   enjoy   a  poem   made   up  of references  like:

The  smiling  Kahana; Shammai in a  mope; Hillel instructing an  obtuse  Ethiope ...

and it is doubtful that  even a Talmudic scholar  would  enjoy  these  lines as poetry. The  point  is that  Klein   was  not  writing for Talmudic scholars, any  more  than Cavafy  or Kazantzakis wrote  for classical scholars. Although Fischer  is good at trac­ ing  Klein's  obscure  or  undetected  refer­  ences, the sparks  thus  engendered  cry out for   weightier   wood.    Her   chapter  on Klein's  early  writing, and  her  discussion of golem, Rabbi Nachman the Bratzlaver, and  Klein's  "Ballad of the Dancing Bear"  are   excellent.  She   is   quite   convincing when  she sees in  the  latter poem  Klein's  completion of an  untold tale  from  Nach­  man's   The  Seven  Beggars, and   we  are  inclined  to agree  with  her conclusion that  this in part suggests "Klein's persistent al­ legiance to Cabalist and  Chassidic ideas".  But where do we go from  there?
The  rest is not  Miss  Fischer's  concern. She  is an  annotator, a  compiler of  foot­ notes, and  not always a very thorough one at  that.   She  is content  to  note,  for  ex­ ample,   that    in   Poem   V   of   the   early

95

REVIEW ARTICLES



sequence   "Out of  the   Pulver   and   Pol­ ished Lens", Klein  "abandons all ostenta­ tion  of  poetic   technique"  by  setting up the  poem "in  the  form  of two short  prose paragraphs", retaining, however,  "iambic pentameter ..., rime, and  metaphor". In fact,   the   poem   is  a  Petrarchan sonnet,  complete  with   octet,  sestet,   pentameter (though   not    iambic)    and    ABBACDDC­ EFFEGG,  written  in  prose.  What does  this mean?   Is   this   an   abandonment  of  all ostentatious  poetic   technique?  Or   is  it rather a  concealment of  it,  in  the  way Klein might have sensed a divine order concealed in the world's labyrinth? What­ ever  Klein's intention, surely  it was more than  to  lend  the  lines  "the  peculiar dig­ nity   of   an   understatement",   as   Miss Fischer  would have  us believe.
Similarly, in her discussion  of "Yehuda Halevi -His    Pilgrimage"   ( 1 941 ) ,   "a poem  of 42 stanzas,  most  of them  Spen­ serian," she  notes  that

Klein tells  us  how  Halevi, the   poet,  physi­ cian, and   philosopher,  spent  his   youth  in security  and   happiness,   renowned   for   his pious   songs  and   his   jousting  with   the  wit­  tiest  of his  contemporaries, until, one  night, a  dream  began   to  trouble him.  He  sees  an imprisoned lady  whose  home has  been  taken by enemies, and  unable to forget this  dream, leaves  Toledo ... to  find  her.  After various adventures  he  reaches Jerusalem, where it becomes clear  to  him   that the  city   itself  is the  princess for  whom   he  has  been  search­ ing.  With   his  beautiful ode  ... he  can  only pour out   his  love.  He  cannot free  the  city.  He   is  murdered, and   only   the  memory  of his song  remains ...

That anyone   familiar  with   Klein's   life and  work  can  read  these  lines,  let  alone write  them,  without seeing  in  the  fate  of Halevi   a  parallel with   not  only  that   of Melech  Davidson in  The Second   Scroll, but also with  Klein's  own tormented and, finally,  tragic  life, is remarkable. It is all there:  Klein's   orthodox  childhood,  his early  disillusionment, his  vision  of  Jeru­ salem,  his final,  lacunar  silence. And  yet, without so much  as pausing to catch her

g6
 breath, Miss  Fischer  rushes  on  to  tell  us that   although "few  modern readers can find  pleasure  in  the  Spenserian  vocabu­ lary,"  it is nonetheless  "fitting that  Klein should  have  chosen  to  remind  us of The Fairie Queene .. ."
Perhaps  the   real   problem  with   the book  is simply  that   it  was  not  intended to be a book at all. In one of her Acknowl­ edgements,  Miss   Fischer   thanks  Louis Dudek,  who  directed her  doctoral thesis, "on  which  this  book  is  based." A glance at that  thesis, presented  just before Klein's  death in  1972,  reveals  that   the  present  book is, except  for  the  appendices and  a few  minor  editorial  changes, a  verbatim  reprinting of the original  disseration.
Now,  there  is nothing  intrinsically wrong  with publishing a four-year-old thesis, provided  some accounting has been taken  of subsequent developments in  the field. But no mention is made  in the book of the  Klein  Symposium held  in  Ottawa in  May  1974,  and   only  a  brief,  biblio­ graphical note is made  of the appearance in  the  same  year  of   Miriam  Wadding­ ton's   monumental   Collected   Poems   of A.M. Klein, an appearance which  ought  to  have  occasioned  some  major revisions in   Fischer's   text.   Waddington  has  un­ earthed some 63 poems, for example, pub­ lished  by Klein  between  1927  and  1937, of which  only 25 are  listed  in the Chron­ ology  appended  to  Fischer's  thesis.  The  Chronology  has  been   deleted   from   the book, and  no mention  is  made  anywhere of  the   38  new-found   poems,   many   of which  ("Koheleth" for example)  are  ex­ tremely   relevant. The   Chronology  also listed  6  poems  of  that  period   which  are not found  in Waddington, and  which  are not  mentioned  again   in  the  book.
The image of Klein that emerges from these  pages  is  that   of  poet  laureate  for North  American Jewry,  a role that  he no doubt  took upon himself out of his own natural inclination to praise,  but one that ultimately  must   have   clashed   with   his

REVIEW ARTICLES



growing  sense of existence  as Godless and evil, with  his increasing inability to find anything  praiseworthy in   the   universe. This  twin-mindedness is evident  in his socialist,   anti-war poetry   written,  as Fischer   remarks,  more   from   a  sense  of duty   than   from  any  deeply-felt  passion, a  kind  of  inverted  Masefield   describing the  evacuation of Dunquerque. And  it is especially  evident  in The  Hitleriad, which Fischer    supposes    fails    because    Klein knew   too   little   about    his   subject. It
 may  be  that  Klein,  synthesist  of  history, myth   and   poetry,   knew   too  much. He could  not with  sincerity attribute Hitler's rise to mere  stupidity and  indifference in the German electorate: for  Klein,  Hitler was human nature incarnate. Not  an accident, but  an  historical inevitability.
Miss  Fischer   decapitates  Klein,  mur­ ders  to  dissect  him.  And   yet,  "instance this  much-desired  case,"  Klein  wrote  in
1943:   "the   skull/ though  severed   from unbleeding shoulders, lives."



THE USES OF BIBLIOGRAPHY

Michael E.  Darling

KAROL  w. J. WENEK, Louis  Dudek:  A Check-list. The  Golden  Dog  Press. $3.00.
MICHAEL GNAROWSKI,  Theses  and  Dissertations  in  Canadian   Literature (English):
a  preliminary  check list. The  Golden  Dog Press. $3.50.
GLENN  CLEVER, Revised  and  Updated   Index  to the  Periodical  Canadian Literature
Nos. r-62. The  Golden  Dog Press. $8.oo.


WHILE the larger  presses have been  falling over  each  other  in  the  race to produce more  superfluous thematic studies  of  Canadian  Literature,  the Golden  Dog Press has been  quietly build­ ing  up  a  reputation in  an  area  far  less glamorous  but   ultimately   much   more vital  to scholarship. Under  the  direction of  Michael Gnarowski, the  Golden Dog has published indexes  to important liter­ ary  magazines   like  First  Statement   and Canadian  Literature,  reprints and  care­  fully  edited   texts  of  nineteenth-century poems, and  now a check-list  of a major Canadian poet.
Karol  Wenek's   check-list   reveals,   as
no  critical study   has  to  date,   the  enor­ mous  range  of Dudek's talents. Here  we see not  only  Dudek   the  poet  and  critic, but   Dudek   the  editor,   translator,  phil­ osopher,   artist   and   playwright  as  well. In  attempting to list  nearly  all  published and  unpublished works by and  about  Du­ dek,   Wenek   has   turned  up   some   very interesting  items.  These  include   two  un-
 
published television  plays  by Layton and Dudek   in  the  Concordia  University Archives,  drafts  of early  poems  in  the  li­ brary   of  the   State   University  of   New York  at   Buffalo,   a  mass  of   correspon­ dence with  Layton, Souster, Birney,  Live­ say,  John   Sutherland   and   others,   and scores  of  reviews  and  literary notes  that  appeared in  the  McGill   Daily,  Culture, the  Montreal  Gazette,  and  the  Montreal  Star  over  a  period   of  thirty-five  years. Adding Dudek's regular contributions to Delta,  First Statement   and   CIV  jn,  his ten books of poetry plus nine other works authored  or  edited,  exclusive   of   Delta and   the  McGill   Poetry  Series,  and   well over a hundred uncollected poems, makes a  body  of  work  exceeded   by  few  Cana­ dian   writers.   And   yet   Wenek   has   still missed a few of the  more  obvious  items: five  reviews  that   Dudek  contributed  to Canadian  Literature  between  1959  and
1967,   and   an   article    entitled  "Exotic
Reference in the Cantos of Ezra  Pound", first  published in  the  Antigonish  Review

97

REVIEW ARTICLES



in   I972.   These   oversights   suggest   that there may be other items of comparable importance  overlooked  by  Wenek,   but he does not, in any case, pretend to have compiled   a  definitive bibliography.
What   is  pleasing   to  note  is  the  high standard of accuracy in  the  recording of bibliographical data.  Checking a  refer­ ence    to    Wynne     Francis's    Canadian Literature article on  Dudek  against   the same   reference in   Gnarowski's  Concise Bibliography of English-Canadian Litera­  ture  and  Frank  Davey's From  There to Here  reveals   that   only  Wenek   has  cor­ rectly  recorded  the   title   of  the  article. Errors  that  do occur  are  relatively minor: "Reflecting on Pain" (p.  I I)  should  read "Reflections on  Pain", and  the date  of Dennis Lee's Books in Canada review of Collected   Poetry  is October  I97I   rather than   I972,  but  on  the  whole  the  check­ list can  be recommended for its accuracy.
Unfortunately, one cannot say as much for the  Revised  and Updated Index to Canadian Literature. The index  has been updated to include the issues of  I973 and I974, and  the printing and  binding of the new  edition  certainly  make   it  a  hand­ somer  book  than   its  predecessor.  Never­ theless,  the  index   is  rife  with  misprints  and  inconsistencies, spelling mistakes  and faulty   cross-referencing.   The  following are   representative:   Margaret  Laurence becomes  Lawrence   ( p.  2) ,  Kirkconnell becomes   Kirkonnell    (p.   87),  Heming­ way   is  spelled   Hemmingway   (p.   23),  Thomas   McCulloch  is  altered  to  Mc­ Cullough    (p.    I I3),  Hernon    becomes Hemons   (p.    72),  etc.    Misprints   can creep  into  any  printed text, of course, but one  shudders to  find  the  names  of Earle Birney,  Malcolm  Lowry,  and   Farley Mowat consistently misspelled. What are we to make  of such  a horror as "A  Bib­ liography of  Works  by  and  about  Mal­  com  Lowry,   prepared by  Earl  Birney"? Incidentally, Malcolm Ross and Malcolm Miller  suffer  the  same  fate.  All  of  these

g8
 errors  are  reproduced from  the  first  edi­ tion of the index,  but  new ones have been introduced in the  "revised" text. Donald Stephens, for some reason, becomes David  Stephens  (p.  I I3). A  reference to  issue no.  I9,  Winter   I964,  is  altered to  I9  W
74  (p.  35). The annotation to  Douglas Barbour's review of Alec Lucas's  Hugh MacLennan disappears entirely (p. 103).
More  grievous  than  these errors,  how­ ever, are the inconsistencies in the record­ ing  of  articles  and  notes,  and  the cross­ referencing of these items. Theoretically, one  would  expect  to find  short  notes  in­ dexed   alphabetically   by   author,  as   is done  with  articles.  But  this  policy  is not followed   steadily.   Thus,   one   finds   the anomaly   that  Desmond  Pacey's  enquiry about  Roberts's  letters  is indexed   under  Pacey,  but  R.  E.  Watters's  enquiry  on Canadiana cannot be found. Similarly, Louis  Dudek's reply  to  an  article by A. J. M.  Smith  can  be found  under   the headings  of Dudek  and  of Smith, where­ as Nathan Cohen's  reply  to John  Robert Colombo  may  be found  only  under Col­ ombo's    name.    More   serious   omissions occur  in  the cross-referencing of articles.  For   instance,  articles   by  Robert  Gibbs and   Nancy   Bjerring  on   Brewster   and Davies  respectively  may  be  found   under their  author headings, but  not under sub­ ject  headings; conversely,  articles  by  L. A.  A.  Harding  and   Esther   James   on Haliburton and   Ludwig  may  be  found  under    subject   headings   only   and   not under   their   respective   authors.  Another annoying habit  found  only  in  the  index­  ing of articles  from  Nos. 55  to 62 of  the journal   is  that   of   cross-referencing  ad infinitum. D.  G.  Jones's   article, "Myth, Frye   and  Canadian  Writers"  (No.   55, Winter    I973),  refers    to   about  forty authors,  most  of  whom   are   mentioned only   in   passing.   Yet   Jones's   article   is cross-referenced under  the names  of each one  of  those  writers.  A student  wishing to read  criticism  of the  works  of Birney,

REVIEW ARTICLES



Callaghan, MacLennan, Pratt, Reaney, Souster,   Wiseman,    and    many    others, would  search  in  vain  to find  any  discus­ sion  of  the  writers  in  question.  In  con­ trast   to  this  rather  ludicrous  attempt at repletion,   Wynne    Francis's    "Montreal Poets  of  the  Forties"  (No.  14,  Autumn
1g62), contains   interesting  biographical
information  on   Dudek,   Layton,   Page, John  Sutherland  and    others,    but    no reference   to   Francis's  article   can    be found  under the headings of any of these authors. The  same faults  on a slightly less exaggerated scale  are  discernible if  one compares Isabel  McKenna's  "Women in Canadian Literature"  (No.  62, Autumn
1974)   with   Clara  Thomas's  "Happily Ever  After: Canadian Women in Fiction and    Fact"   (No.   34,   Autumn   1967). Again,  the recent  article, which  gives sketchier  treatment to each writer, is extensively  cross-referenced, while  the earlier  one  is not.
 A final  quibble  is in  the  matter of  an­ notation. Many of  the  articles   in  Cana­  dian  Literature sport  titles which give no clue to the contents of the piece. To  know that   Louis  Dudek   wrote   an  article   en­  titled  "A  Problem of   Meaning" is fine, but   how  is  a  reader   to  know   that   the article    discusses    the    plays    of    James  Reaney?   Occasionally,   annotations  are supplied,  but  why  not  include them  for every  article? This  is  just   another  ex­ ample  of  the  slipshod  way  in  which   the index has been compiled. Readers of Canadian Literature who  must  pay $8.oo for  this "revised" edition have  a right  to an  index  that  has  been  organized, edited and  proofread carefully and  consistently. They  don't have  such  a work  as yet.
Michael Gnarowski's check-list of theses
in  English-Canadian Literature is timely and  certain   to  be  of  use  to students,  al­ though one  might  rightly  ask  whether it is a  significant improvement  on  Klinck,



Six Journeys: A Canadian Pattern
CharlesTaylor
Scott Symons' role as a family  man,  journalist, curator and  teacher
seemed  assured, until  he rebelled  against  his genteel Rosedale milieu.  His books -- Place d'Armes, Civic Square, Heritage --excoriate  the  social  and  sexual  failures  of mod­ ern  Canada; his celebration of  homosexuality, his conser­ vatism  in politics, his views on religion and mysticism, make his "journey" particularly relevant today.
The life of Scott Symons is described in Charles  Taylor's new    , book, SIX JOURNEYS: A CANADIAN PATTERN, along with' the  lives of  Brigadier  James  Sutherland Brown,  Bishop  William White,  diplomat  Herbert  Norman, artist  and  writer   Emily Carr, and  novelist  James  Houston.
SIX  JOURNEYS gives us biographies of six Canadians who  went  against the  grain  of their society and  found their  sustaining vision in other cultures. Through the  experience of these  six, Taylor traces  the  outlines of a Canadian pattern of living, relevant to
all of  us.

New from House of ANANSI/$14.00 clothf$7.95 paper


99

REVIEW ARTICLES



Watters  and   Bell,  Canadiana, or   Naa­ man's Guide  bibliographique   des  theses litteraires canadiennes. Both Klinck's and  Naaman's lists include  theses in  progress, and  since many  of  these were abandoned or  altered, none  of  these  listings  can  be considered   accurate.  Gnarowski  rightly  omits   theses   in   progress,   and   includes  many rather obscure  writers  not  found  in Naaman, including Henry  Alline,  Jacob Bailey, Jonathan Odell, and  other  Mari­ time   loyalists.   Gnarowski  also   includes  dissertations  written   at   American  and foreign   universities, but  not  comprehen­ sively. Dissertation Abstracts lists a Ph.D.  thesis on the  novels of Morley  Callaghan completed at Florida State in I 966, which Gnarowski also could  have found  in Law­  rence F. McNamee's Dissertations in Eng­ lish  and  American  Literature.
A   revised   edition  of   the    check-list
ought to clarify a couple  of uncertainties: in  a  number of  cases,  Gnarowski  seems unsure  of whether a particular thesis is a master's or  doctoral. Generally, these are cases in which  Watters and  Bell have  in­ dicated only "thesis". A further  problem  is that  the  check-list,  although  published in  I975,  only  includes  theses  up  to  I972, and   not   comprehensively   for   the   later  years. As Gnarowski says in his Foreword, this is only "a tentative compilation," but it  does seem  unusual  that  a  check-list of this kind should  be three  years out  of date  at   the  time  of   publication, and   that   it
 should  omit  theses  from  major  universi­ ties that  fall well within the  limits  of the list. I am  thinking here  of  Stanley Drag­ land's  "Forms of  Imaginative Perception in the Poetry of  Duncan Campbell Scott" (Ph.D.   Queen's,   I 97 I),  Robert Gibb's "Aspects  of Irony  in  the  Poetry  of  E. J. Pratt"  (Ph.D.   New   Brunswick, I97o), and    Edward  B.   Davies's    "The   Alien Mind: A Study  of  the  Poetry  of  Archi­ bald Lampman" (Ph.D. New  Brunswick,
I 970) . A revised edition should  make cer­ tain  of dates  as well. This  is a  very  con­ fusing   area,   as  even   library   catalogues and   archives   occasionally  list   dates   for the completion of theses which are differ­  ent  from  the  dates  on  the  title-pages of the  theses  themselves.  But  there  seem  to be  too  many  uncertainties  on  the  whole in  the  present  compilation.  Hopefully, a revised edition will also include an author index.
The   Golden   Dog   Press  deserves   one
and a half out of three for its efforts in bibliography and   indexing. The  Dudek check-list  is definitely  an  important  con­ tribution  to  scholarship, and   hopefully  other   check-lists   and   perhaps  full-scale analytical bibliographies of  major Cana­ dian   authors  will  soon   be   undertaken. Students of  Canadian  Literature should be  grateful  to   this   small   press   for   its efforts   in   this   direction,   even   if   the achievements occasionally fall short  of its ambitions.




THE MYTHMAKERS
 


Tom Marshall


GWENDOLYN MACEWEN,  The  Fire-Eaters. Oberon  Press. STEPHEN  SCOBIE, The Rooms  We  Are. Sono Nis Press. WAYNE CLIFFORD,  Glass/  Passages. Oberon  Press.


GWENDOLYN  MACEWEN has al­ ways been  a singer,  one  who  sings  force­ fully   of   things   exotic   and   mysterious. Readers  and   reviewers   of  ten  or  twelve

100
 years  ago  responded   immediately to  her urgent  and   exuberant   utterance   even when-in  some of the  early  poems-it approached incoherency. Indeed, a  love

REVIEW ARTICLES



of sheer  sound,  encouraged by her  poetic idols  Hart Crane and  Dylan  Thomas, sometimes ran  away  with  the  poem.  But a   myth   was   being   unfolded  in   brief, sharp bursts of sound  and  imagery.  One finds,  for  instance, from  the  beginning a desire for escape to other  times and worlds (as  in  the  poems  of Michael Ondaatje) but also a passionate longing  for the inte­ gration of opposites  or  pairs -light and dark, male  and  female,  Canada and  the arcane mysteries,  past  and  future. Hers is the  alchemical search  for the  divine  in the  mundane;  magic  and  myth  abound but are expressed in terms of human emo­ tion   and   an  attractively  colloquial   and flexible voice.
The cosmos the  poet  explores  is within
as well as without:

by  eating the  world   you  may  enclose   it.

seek  simplicities; the  fingerprints of  the  sun only
and   the  fingernail of  the  moon  duplicating
you  in  your  body,

the  cosmos  fits your  measure; has  no ending ...
(The Breakfast")

For MacEwen the individual discovery of the  universe   is also  the  creation  of  the universe.   The  swimmer, the   astronaut, the dancer, the  magician recur  as images of the  poet whose activity  is mythmaking, the construction from experience of mean­ ingful   patterns, and   thus   of   the  larger self,  the  larger   consciousness   (a  process that     assumes    overtly    nationalist   and feminist  significances  in the work of Mar­ garet  Atwood). In  A  Breakfast  For Bar­ barians,  MacEwen's  first  mature collec­ tion,  the  poet  is by  turns  winemaker or magician or an escape artist  who finds his way  to  a  new  heaven   and   earth. The  poet's    "intake"   or   swallowing  of   the world  in metaphor makes  a  unity  of self and   world.    This    theme    persists   even through the  deepening and  darkening of
 MacEwen's  VISIOn   that    occurs   in   The
Shadow-Maker and  afterwards.
The  dangers  of this stance and  of  Mac­ Ewen's  markedly personal style  were  al­ ways evident,  and  they are evident in her new   small   collection   The   Fire-Eaters. MacEwen began,  like Leonard Cohen, as a  romantic  adolescent  prodigy   and   has continued   as  a  more   or  less  "natural" writer-she  was  decidedly  not   a  slow learner like,  say,  AI  Purdy    (or  myself). Consequently, her  poems  have  truly mar­ vellous  ease  and   energy   but   sometimes  lack over-all shape.  Again,  one wonders if there  is not  something of  an  imbalance in the direction of inner experience here, an  evasion  of the overwhelming external challenge of  Canadian space  and  society. On  a  vaster  plane,  one  wonders  (some­ times)  if  MacEwen has always  been suffi­ ciently  aware   of  the  trickiness,   the  hu­  mour,  the  irony  of  the  God   whom   she engages.
To  be fair,  just such  tensions  and ques­ tions  are  at  the  heart   of  her  best  work;  this is part  of the  reason  for  its dramatic effectiveness.   In   "The   Discovery"  and "Dark Pines  Under  Water" she  sees  (as she does in the prose piece "Kingsmere") that   Canada itself   must   be  approached as exotic  mystery. And  she remarks early in  her  career:

0 baby,  what   Hell   to  be  Greek in  this country-
without wings,  but  burning anyway

("Poem Improvised Around a First  Line")

In The Fire-Eaters  the  poet still  burns, but  it  would  seem  with  the  fires  of   per­ plexity.  The   book  reads  like  a  diary   in which  the reflections  of the day  (and  the night)   are set down.  The speaker is com­ ing to terms  with  the intractable realities of   the   world,   expressing  bemusement, horror, humour.

The clouds,  the  birds  and the  wind  have  no answer
even  though no  question has  been  posed.

101

REVIEW ARTICLES



("The Clouds,  the Birds and  the Wind")

That which we took so much  for granted
-Holy poetry  of water  and  of fire-
Is suddenly  debatable.

("Everyone Knows")

It is, of  course,  always  debatable, as  we all  know.  A change in  outlook  seems  to be  indicated here -perhaps it  points  in the direction of zen or the uncertainty principle. This  book  is  (it  must  be said) slighter   than   MacEwen's  earlier  collec­ tions,  though  it  bears  on  every  page  the unmistakeable stamp  of  her  highly  dis­ tinctive  tone, but  it suggests a transitional phase.  It will be interesting  to see where Canada's mystery-singer finds herself next.
Stephen Scobie's   poetic   personality  is "elusive" in  a  sense  that  could  never  be applied 	to 	the 	decidedly	"present" Gwendolyn MacEwen. One   is conscious in  The   Rooms  We   Are  of  intelligence, skill  and  sensibility,  of  clever  ideas  and exercises,  even  of  well-realized  poems­ but  without a  very  high  definition or  a very strong  sense of  individual character. Instead one  hears,  though only  at  times, faint    echoes   of    Cohen,   Atwood    and others. Scobie remarks in his nicely lyrical piece  on  the  jacket   that   the   poet  must separate himself from  his past  work, even reject  it;  noting that   these  poems  were written in 1970-71  and  that  the book was apparently  published in  1974,  though   it has reached  me two years later, I wonder if he cares  by now  what  I think  of them. Moreover, I have  the impression that  I've read  much  stronger and  larger poems  by him  in  the  last   year  or  two.  Oh   well. Many  of these  pieces are  brief  if shapely enough  "thoughts" and  jottings,  often  in very  short   lines  like  those  employed  by Dorothy  Livesay   in   recent    times.   But they  lack  the  punch that   Livesay  packs into  much  of Ice Age; they don't  remain in  the  mind.  One   poem,  the  rather  de­ lightful "Stesichoros to Helen", is  an  ex­ ception  to everything I say, though: it is


102
 sardonic, witty and  wise in a fashion  that surely  reveals  the  real  Stephen  Scobie.

Movement's the hoard  I live in swarmed  with connection,

writes  Wayne  Clifford,  thereby  suggest­ ing   the   flow  of  a  sensibility   and   con­  sciousness  as powerful as  those of  Mac­ Ewen.  Something of  a  publishing drop­ out  after  his first  book  (and   theirs)   was done   by  Coach   House   Press   in   1965, Clifford  now returns with  a  large  collec­ tion made  up of three  sequences  and  the long  poem  "Passages". These  display  the intricate   music,   wordplay  and   syllabic patterning  of  sound   that   give  his  work its  extraordinary texture. There  is even a kind of subtext  of puns e.g. "A gape" reveals itself as agape, and  "wane" refers to the  poet's  own  waning self. More  im­ portant though   (for me)  than  this verbal playfulness  is a  mastery  of  the  rhythmic phrase  that  recalls  Pound.
The three  poem-sequences are  "Kriti" (Crete),  made    up    of    travel    poems, "Blood  Suite", which  deals  with  the con­ junction  of  the  birth  of  a  daughter  and  a  ?rother's  death,  and   "The  Map", a qmte  remarkable expression  of the strains  of  marriage: all  create   a powerful   psy­ chological atmosphere through very nim­  ble  and   flexible   rhythmic  effects.  The three tend  to flow together, since there  is a  certain overlapping of  subject-matter; they   also   provide    a   (relatively)    easy access (or "passage") to the more difficult "Passages".
"Passages" itself is not only difficult but
original, intricate  and   brilliant. It  un­ folds images and  rhythmic intimations of birth,     diving,     mortality,     the    body's changes,  entropy.   The  opening fable  of Coyote  and  Duck  is  an  effective-and somewhat humorous -expression  of the search  for the  solid  in a world  of flux. It is also a creation myth  along Indian lines, involving   as  it  does  the   parting of  the waters   to   make   land    (an   event   that

REVIEW ARTICLES



occurs   in  many   other  cultures as  well, signifying the creation of self and  world). Throughout the poem  the  body is seen in terms  of  earth  and   water. The   poem's subject   is  life  in  the   body,  how  it  im­ prisons  us and  constantly  reminds  us of death. ("Now  there  are  no bonds  except the  flesh,"  wrote  MacEwen  once.)   This is an  interior  journey,  and  one  assumes that   Clifford   will   move   out   from   the centre   of  himself  in  the  work   that   fol­ lows.   In   this   book   man   reaches    out through his  senses to  communicate with the  world  but  always  feels  trapped and limited    (and    in   Clifford's  case   angry about   it) . Still   there    are   moments   of transcendence,  especially   in   the   act  of writing.  One such occurs  in a marvellous passage   linking   man,   room,   radio,   or­ chestra,  Sibelius   and   Finland,  and   an­  other   in   a   meditation  on   a   woman's photograph. Life,  consciousness  is  "pas­ sage" or a series of passages.  In  the mov-
 ing conclusion  the speaker accepts  and embraces Coyote Dungftesh  who is a symbolic expression  of this earthly sphere. Union  and  communion involve  an accep­ tance  of  the  world  in  all  its  horror and glory  (this  is a theme prominent in Mac­ Ewen's   work   too),   The  poem   resolves itself into  a kind  of  prayer:

Flowering  Corruptor, whose two-edged  joke is this exquisite  diagram of am  traced

thru  the dumb  and  burdened meat,  I  break up from  the page ...

Unbroken  Impact, I meet  you as

a  man  sees his face
leap  up to the water's  surface

to welcome to be welcomed  to be one.

Clifford's subject-matter is universal  and thus  not  new, but  his way with  language is the  most genuinely exploratory I  have encountered in some time, and is highly recommended for  that  reason.




CRAWFORD'S  STORIES
 


Dorothy Livesay


Selected   Stories  of  Isabella  Valancy   Crawford:   Edited   with  an  introduction   by
Penny  Petrone.  University  of Ottawa  Press.


THIS BOOK will not enhance Crawford's reputation as a  poet  but,  for the  diligent  student, it  may  help  to cast new  light  upon  her  narrative poetry  and to explain  her life and times. It presents, through Miss Petrone's introduction and brief biography, the very human problem of how an artist  survives in a pioneer  and colonial  atmosphere.
Isabella  Valancy  Crawford has been compared  to  Emily   Carr  as  a  creative artist   of  genius   whose   first  years   were fought   through  without  public  recogni­ tion  or  communication with   her   peers. But Emily Carr,  born in  1871, lived  to be
74· By the  time  she  was  37  (the  age  at
 
which  Crawford died)   Carr had  been  to England and  Paris,  had  encountered the French Impressionists and  returned to Canada to  paint   West  Coast  Indian  life in  a  re-vitalized   modern style.  True,  be­ cause  of lack  of  recognition she  gave  up painting for  15  years;  and  only  through the  great   good  fortune of  meeting with the Group of Seven was she released  once more  into  full creative activity.
In  the literary  field there  was to be no
such   Phoenix-like   revival    for   Isabella
Crawford. Born in Anglo-Irish Dublin in
1850,  she  was  brought  to  the  wilds  of
Northern Ontario at  the  age of 8, to  be­
come  a  part  of  the  Scotch-Irish pioneer


103

REVIEW ARTICLES



settlement in  the  Saugeen  River   valley. For the greater part of her short  life she remained on  the  fringe  of Canadian  cul­ tural  society, never  at its centre. Probably  as  a  girl  in  her   teens  living  in  Douro County on the Otonobee River she would have  met  and  admired  Susanna Moodie and  her  naturalist  sister,  Catherine Parr  Traill. They   had  an island  cottage near the  Stoney  Indian  Reserve  and  from  the internal evidence of  her  writings  it seems very  likely  that  canoe  trips  with  visits  to Indian  encampments were  a  part  of her summer  activities.
Thus  in  the  sense that  Crawford  lived close to  the  forest  wilderness,  her  experi­ ences  would  have  been  close  to  those  of Carr.  But   when   her   physician   father, Stephen  Crawford -a   pecunious   alco­ holic,   from    all   accounts-moved   his practice  to   Peterborough,  there   would have  been  scant  literary stimulus for  the young girl, except  for  that  to be found  in the  Mechanic's  Institute.  Doubtless she could    read    the    Ontario   newspapers, Frank  Leslie's Magazine from  New York, Dickens' Fireside Weekly; and  the instal­ ments  of  novels  by Dickens,  Thackeray, Bret   Hart  as  well   as   by   many   lesser writers,    men    and    women,   with    three names  to their  signature.
In   her  introduction  to  this  collection
Penny  Petrone hints  at  the  struggle that must   have   been   going   on   between   the passionate,  primitive   spirit   of   Isabella Valancy  Crawford,  the   poet,   and   her practical need  to earn  pocket  money  and perhaps fame  and  fortune through  pub­ lishing  stories.   In   the   hope   of   enticing editors  she must  have  begun early  to imi­ tate    popular   styles   and    genres.    Ms. Petrone  makes  it  clear  that  "all   of  the subjects   were   of   the   extravagant  type dearly   loved   by   readers  of   newspaper feuilletons, as they  used to be called,  and the  style  was  almost always  prolix  since the  contributors were  paid  by the  length  of  their  stories."  Miss  Petrone has  pains-


104
 takingly searched  libraries, newspaper "morgues", archives  and  the very scrappy collection   of  manuscripts saved   by  Mr. and  Mrs. John  Garvin, the editors  of Crawford's Collected   Poems,  to establish that  the  body  of Crawford's prose  work is   unfinished    and    uneven,   a   promise rather than  an  achievement. The  young apprentice was trying  to  teach  herself  by practising from  a variety  of models.
For  this  reason  the  editor has  chosen to limit  her  selections  to examples of the various   prose   styles   employed    by   the poet: "a  sentimental romance ... a fairy tale, an  essay, an  extract from  an  histori­ cal   romance,  an   excerpt   from   a  boy's story,  an  unfinished   regional  idyll,  and  two  local  colour  stories."  By  the latter I would  assume  that   Miss  Petrone means  the  selections  "Tudor  Tramp" and  "Ex­ tradited" -two   pieces   that   show   that  Crawford   was  feeling   her  way  towards  writing   the  modern  realistic   short   story or  conte. She was  developing  characters faced  with  the  pioneer  situation reminis­  cent  of  Moodie's   Roughing  It   In   The Bush,  and   at  the  same   time   making a valid  attempt to  weave  these  characters into a careful  plot structure. Popular pot­ boilers these might  superficially be called,  yet  in   reading   them   today   one  is  im­ pressed  by  the  lively  sense  of  individual idiosyncracy,   humour, dialect.  Miss  Pe­ trone   judges  that  Crawford,  at  her  best "achieves  an  epigrammatic  restraint, as in   the   following   pithy   expressions    of homespun  wisdom   . . .  'caterpillars  de­ form  the  comeliest  vines',  'wives  are  not good bridles in the mouths of wild asses'." In  this first publication ever of Isabella Valancy  Crawford's prose  in  book  form the editor has succeeded  in giving us clues as  to  the  kinds  of  writing the  versatile  Crawford  was capable of. This is a  use­ ful beginning, but  what  would  have  been more  fascinating is  an  appraisal  of  the relationship of the  prose  to the  narrative poetry.  Miss  Petrone has  not  attempted

REVIEW ARTICLES



an  analysis  of  the  mythical  symbolic themes   which   recur   consistently  in  the prose as they do in long poems like "Mal­ colm's   Katie",  "The  Hunters   Twain" and   "Gisli". Here   there  are  always  two men   linked,   as  darkness   is   with   light. Catherine Ross, another graduate student in  Canadian  Studies  has  made this  the strong  point  of her thesis, giving  evidence  that:

Crawford uses  the  device  of  the  twinship of dark and   bright brothers to  distinguish  op­ posites  and  then   bring  them  into alignment.

Mrs. Ross points  to the recurring pairs of identical twins that Crawford uses in so many  of her  prose stories.

Typically, in  these  prose  romances, one  twin is raised  at home  in  a loving  wealthy family
'that   nurtures  his  health  and   spiritual   de­ velopment; the  other, often  disinherited  or stolen   away  as  a  child, has  been  physically broken  and   sometimes  spiritually imbruted by  a  life  of  poverty,  drunkenness or  crime. In   the    novel,   Pillows   of    Stone,  Florian Dutrom,  who  has   just  come   back   to  New York  from  school  in  England, is, like  Gisli, spectacularly  vigorous and   healthy.  Clyffe, his  elder   by  fifteen   minutes,  has   been  tu­ tored  in  New  York's  dissipation and  is  now, we  are   told,   "a  ghost, a   vain   shadow, a mocking phantom of  what might  have  been of   manliness, beauty  and   strength."  One character  compares Clyffe  with  Florian and  is  moved   by  the  contrast  to  exclaim, "Oh Father! ... Clyffe  might  have  been  like  this
 nature who,  made in  Thy image, is not  yet defaced by  sin."

In  other prose  works  (as  in  the  docu­ mentary poems)   twin  figures  "intercon­ nect  the world  of the gentleman with  the life of the  convict  and  hulks,  the  expen­ sive  boy's  school  with   the  frightful city prisons  and   loathsome  city   lairs   which Crawford    describes    in    "The   Hunters Twain."
To  conclude I  would  say  that   in  the light of the research done by both Penny Petrone in  this  collection, and  Catherine Ross in  her  unpublished thesis,  the  Uni­ versity of Ottawa Press has  made a valu­  able contribution to Canadiana in bring­  ing Isabella  Valancy Crawford's prose  to light. It is unfortunate that  in appearance and   print  the  present   paperback  is  un­ attractive,  with  a  bibliography  that   has not been edited with excessive care. For example,  the manuscript of Crawford's novel Helen's Rock  (with its theme of Andromeda) is printed here as Helen's Frock!  And another novel,  From  Yule  to Yule  is listed twice, with  different word counts.  Nonetheless   we  should   be  grate­ ful  that  a start  has  been  made  in  explor­ ing the wide universe  of Isabella Vallancy Crawford who,  like  Emily  Carr  in  Wil­ fred  Watson's poem:

And down the  valley  ... looked  and  saw  ... every  bush  an  apocalypse of leaf




FOR EVERY TASTE
 


Russell M.  Brown


DAVID  WATMOUGH, Love  and  the Waiting Game.  Oberon, $7.95 cloth, $3.95  paper.
DON   BAILEY,  Replay. Oberon, $6.95  cloth, $3.95  paper.
75:  New  Canadian   Stories,  edited   by David   Helwig and Joan  Harcourt. Oberon,
$8.95  cloth, $3.95  paper.


AMONG CANADIAN publishing houses,  Oberon  has   distinguished  itself not  only  by giving  us fine  anthologies of new stories each  year since 1971, but  also by providing us with collections by writers
 
such as Hugh Hood, Beth  Harvor, W. D. Valgardson, and  George  Bowering.  Now here  are  three  new  books  added to  their list, with  promise  of more  to come.
In   My   Life   as  a  Man, Philip   Roth


105

REVIEW ARTICLES



opens his narrative with  two short  stories, purportedly written by his  fictional  pro­ tagonist    and   presented   to   the   reader  under   the  rubric   "Useful  Fictions"; the remainder of the  novel  is  in  the  form  of an  "autobiographical"  narrative  written by this same fictional author. This  juxta­ position   serves  to   illustrate  the   way   a writer    may   become    fixed   on   certain events,  certain  aspects  of  his  life-and may  work  these  into   fiction,   transform, rework   them,  and   then   return  to  them yet  again.   In  reading the  collections of short  stories by Watmough and  by Bailey, I  had  the  sense  that  I  was  encountering their  useful   fictions,   for   each   of   their stories is very nearly  the same  story, often with  the same cast of characters, but  also with  enough  small alterations, enough in­ consistencies  to keep the individual stories from  cohering into   a  larger  whole. In­ deed,  as in  Clark  Blaise's  fiction,  there  is no  attempt  to  make   a  whole   of  these parts;  they  are   rather  ways  of  dealing  with  different facets  and  different possi­ bilities of some part of a life, of some one event  on  which  that  life  has  turned.
Watmough, who  is the  more  engaging
writer of the two, writes of his Cornish childhood, stories which  are  built out of a pervasive  nostalgia. As the  narrator says at one point,  "I talk  from  hindsight." All that  is needed  is, as in  the  closing  story, "a small twist, a nudge  of distortion," and we find ourselves "following an avenue of memory which leads to a specific Cornish lane."
At  times  Watmough's re-examinations of the  past  lead  him into  a kind  of  Prous­ tian meditation on the sources of memory.  "That's the connection," his narrator dis­ covers:

Primrose  stalks,  bruised  vegetation. A  life­ time later, eight  thousand miles from  where Grandma  Bryant   yielded   her   body   to   the Hie of the churchyard, I take  the  cup of my hand  that  is holding  a sprig  of salal, a leaf of salmonberry, again  to  my nose. And  it is


106
 the   simple   vegetable    matter  that    blends with my  own scent  to ring  bells of memory.
But  if  this  passage  does  not   provide   a novel  discovery  about the  way  the  past may  unexpectedly arise  and  confront us, it is still nicely drawn and, within the con­ text   of   the   story,   entirely   convincing. Moreover, behind  this recollecting of the past lies an important question, one char­ acteristic  of the expatriate experience out of which  Watmough writes: "How much  is one where  one is? And how much  is one where one  was?"
The   central   event   which   Watmough seeks to deal  with  as  he  carries  his  nar­ rator,  Davey,  through these shaded  lanes of  memory  is that   of  a  homosexual  en­ counter. His  cousin  Jan,  and  their  early childhood intimacy  which  seems  to have led to this, is the source  of several  stories;  Jan  is in  turn replaced by other  ambigu­ ous  (and  not-so-ambiguous)  male  figures which  give  form  to  various  accounts of Davey's maturation and  his initiation into adulthood. But  as  the  stories  approach and  shy away  from,  and  occasionally  ex­ plicitly  treat, the  issue of  homoeroticism, they also provide moments of insight  into universal  human situations, feelingly  told.
In Replay, a book which  reprints stories from  two earlier  collections and  adds  one
new one, Don Bailey seems similarly  to be dealing  with  a  single  event: each  of  his narratives treats  the after  effects of  incar­ ceration, the  return to  society  or  the  in­ ability  to make  that  return; they  provide  obsessive re-examinations of  people  who are "not  used to having  so much  space  to move around in." Sometimes this experi­  ence belongs to the narrator who is meet­  ing a strange woman  in a bar  on a "nice  April   day   . . . the   first  one   I've   spent outside  prison  walls  in six years"  or  who returns to his family on parole  wondering if he can  make  it on  his own;  sometimes  it is rather that of the girl that  he's picked up and  who turns out  to be on a furlough from  a mental  hospital.

REVIEW ARTICLES



In  any  case,  these  freed   prisoners  re­ peatedly find that  they are  not free at all;  they   are   trapped  in   miserable  lives  in which   they  take  no  fruitful  action   that  might  provide  them some genuine escape;  they  return to  the  conditions which  led them  to their original acts of desperation, there   to  accept   and  even  perpetuate an all-encompassing poverty  which is not so much  physical  as  emotional. When   they can,  they  do  escape   this  prisonhouse of the  world,  but  their  flights  are  into  fan­ tasy, into  drugs,  into  frantic  moments  of trying  to  make   things   seem  better   than  they  are.

Louder   and  louder   they  sang  and  me  too, our   voices  raised   in   some  last   desperate hymn.   The   choir   at   Trinity  Church    on Bloor Street performing Handel's Messiah never sang that  loud or that  joyfully either. Maybe  it was the pills. The  booze? We were all smiling like giddy fools in some fool's paradise.    The   kid   too,   her   rotten    teeth flashing  in  the  dark. But  the  song  ended and   the  silence  returned as  abruptly  as  it had  left.

The fantasy  ends,  the intoxication passes, and the silence seems always to return. Eventually  the   truth  has   to  be  faced: these are  not  people  down  on  their  luck, these are people down  on themselves. "We never  would  have  made  it  on  our  own. Mostly   because   we  were   the   type  that didn't  even   have   the  guts   to  try.  You know what  I mean?" It is no wonder  that prison  often  seems  the  most  positive choice, a more  attractive alternative than the  life  that   waits   outside: "Shit, I thought, at  the very worst  I'd  only be 35 when  I  got  out.  And  in  the  meantime I was safe."
It is ultimately hard  to like these stories
 because   it  is  so  very  hard   to  like  the people  within   them.   These   are  glimpses into  lonely lives of people  taught to  hide their   emotions   and   not   to   care   about those of others  around them.  There are passages of good writing here  and  the concluding story, in particular, carries impact  and   poignancy.  But,   unfortun­ ately,  as readers  we too  at  last  learn  the lesson  of  a  psychic  environment domin­ ated  by fear and the imminence of death, by the loss of identity and  the lack of self­ esteem,  by  isolation,  loneliness,  and  self­ contempt-that it  is best  not  to care.
Bailey's fiction also appears in 75, with a  story  that   is only  a  little  different in
mood  from   those  of  Replay,  but   which reads  better  for its tighter writing and  its
ironic  playing-off  of a narrator who comes
from   the  world  of  the  psychic  losers  of Replay against  characters with a different set of values.  Moreover it  is much  easier to  read  a  writer   like  Bailey  when   he  is only  one  voice,  his only  one  perspective, in  what  turns  out  to  be  a  rich  selection of voices and  perspectives.
75 is, in fact,  another solid annual col­ lection   of   interesting  short   fiction.   It opens  with  a comic  tale  by  Leo Simpson
-which  in    itself    would    have    been
enough to convince  me  to buy  the  book. (I'll  buy any collection with  a new Leo Simpson  story.)  It also contains a  nicely­ executed piece of metafiction by Timothy Findley  that  sent  me looking  for  more  of his work, and  memorable stories by H.  R. Percy,  by  Jane Rule,   and   by  Margaret Gibson  Gilboord. In fact  all of  the stories in this collection  are solid and, along  with the  books  by  Watmough and  by  Bailey, there  is, as  they  say,  something  here  for every  taste.








107

MJINDEL

Ron Miles


extends an ann, produces concepts
like a magician's
coins.
Where  was air, substance finds his substantial hands, crooked fingers catch
the form and flow
of what we thought
(we know).

Or it is water
flows around  our separate boxes, through  the chains and  locks
so carefully arranged that  none expected keys and openings,
none had hoped emersion
once immersed.

If words are tricks they trick us out
of explanations. We are a deck
of single cards awaiting  summons. I am the sceptic volunteer
who almost drowned.













108





A GOOD MINOR POET

NEIL   TRACY,  Collected   Poems.  Borealis  Press.
The  Collected  Poems of  Neil  Tracy not only  puts  before  the  public  all  the  poems that   he  wishes  to  preserve  but   enables the  reader to trace  the  changes  which  he has made since his poems appeared in previous   volumes.  I have  checked   these poems  carefully against Shapes of Clay (1967)  and Voice Line (1970) -two volumes   which   I  published and   which were  evidently inadvertently  unacknowl­ edged  in  this  book -and  have  accumu­ lated   the  following  data.  Of  the  seven­ teen  poems  in  Shapes  of  Clay,  two  son­ nets   ("Bernadette" and  "Twenty Years After")  have   been  omitted. Two   other  poems  are  printed  without change. The  remaining thirteen  poems  have  been  al­ tered.   All  of  the   thirty-eight  poems   in Voice   Line  appear  in  this  volume,   but only  five  are  in  their  original  published form.   No   doubt  had   I   access   to   Neil Tracy's first volume, The  Rain It Raineth
( 1938), I would  have  a similar  report  to make.
An  analysis   of  these   revisions   would make   a   fruitful  article  in   itself.  They range  from mere punctuation and  line differences  to  differences  in   form,   and their  effect  is varied. In  practically every free   verse  poem,   the   line  divisions   are altered to make the line-unit correspond more  closely  to  the  sensory  unit  it  con­ tains; as  a  result,  the  aesthetic  appear­ ance  of  the  poems  has  been  vastly  im­ proved. In  the  sonnet-changes there  are both  losses and  gains. Few  of the  revised sonnets   any   more    than    their   original
 forms contain that  felicitous  union  of thought, image,   and   rhythm  that   make such  sonnets   that   were   not  changed  as "Eden" and  "Retribution" so totally satis­ fying.
Forty-seven   of  the   ninety-four  poems in  this  volume  are  sonnets, and  at  least ten  others,  while  not  proper sonnets,  re­ semble   the   sonnet    sufficiently   in   line­ length   and   logical  structure  to  indicate that  they  were  once  sonnets  as originally attempted.  The   remaining   poems    are written either in  jungly  couplets,   ballad  stanzas,  or imagist  free verse of a texture recalling that  of  Raymond Knister's. Neil Tracy's diction is the result  of painstaking intelligence    rather   than   of   intuition. Tracy   knows   both   how   to   use  cliches deliberately for  effect  and  how  to  avoid them.   If anything  is  "given"  in   these sonnets,  it  is his often  very fine first  and last  lines.  It seems  to  me,  too,  that   his visual gifts-despite his blindness-are greater than  his aural ones.  "Eden" is a good  example of  his  capacity as  a  son­ neteer:

I see the  long green  challenge of the  hill
Crowned  with  old  maples,  lusty  yet  and
stout,
The  broken  wall, where  snakes  slide  in and
out
To  view  our  Fall  with  hooded  eyes and
chill.
Dead  gods  in  motley  walked  there  through the  thrill
Of  frosty  evenings,  casting   tares  about,
And  bitter-hearted apples,  fair  without, The fruit  you proffered  which  I savour still.

One  time I kissed and  tears  gleamed  on  her face,
The  sickle fell  between,  and  Eve was gone. Then  Lilith  kissed and  straight in that  dark
place
The  hard  hot apples  of enchantment shone. We closed  until  the  seed  of her  embrace Lay  in  her  body like  a  witch's  stone.

Some  poems  are  personal  reminis- cences;  others  are  dramatic  monologues or descriptions of personages in  the liter­ ary,   biblical,   and   historical   past;   still

109

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



others   are   comments  upon   modernity. But whatever the theme  or the form, a common  unity  infuses  these  poems.  None of them  look to the future, and  all regard the  present   as  a  fall  from  a  more  ideal past. Neil Tracy loves the peaks of our cultural heritage and  believes in the essential  worth  of our  religious  and  moral tradition. His criticism  is reserved  for de­ parture from  that   tradition,  too  narrow an   interpretation  of   it,   and   outright hypocrisy.
It is difficult  to determine a man's out­ look from  inference. I feel, however, that  Neil Tracy's blindness, occurring as it did in   his  early   twenties,  contributed  to  a habit  of turning from the non-visual pres­ ent  to the  visual  world  of memory; from current  books,  which  were  not  normally available in  Braille,  to  the  works  of  the great  masters, which  were; and  from  the present,  where  his vision  relative to  that of  others   was   handicapped,  to   a   past where  his inner  eye put  him on more than even   terms  with   other  explorers of  the same  regions.  Be that  as it  may,  there  is in his work a blend of traditional form, traditional theme,   and   traditional  sensi­ bility  to  a  degree  seldom  matched  by  a Canadian poet writing in  this generation.
Collected   Poems  is  a  book  by  a  man who knows his limits and  does not try to transcend them.  Within this  compass  he is a  craftsman who  does  his  work  care­ fully and  well. Neil Tracy is a good minor  poet.  Though his  poems  do  not  in any way  enlarge  our  awareness of  the  possi­ bilities  of  thought, feeling,  or  form,  they are  good  poems  and  remind  us of much that  is worthwhile in  our  heritage which we might  too easily otherwise forget.  Be­ cause  they  do this, they  are  valuable and deserve  more  attention than   the  work  of many    more   spectacular  poets   writing more  original  work  that   is not  balanced by a corresponding craftsmanship.

FRED COGSWELL I I 0
 WORDS AND IMAGES

ROBERTSON    DAVIES,   Question Time.  Macmil- lan of Canada.
BEVERLEY SIMONS,  Preparing.  Talonbooks.

THE  APPEARANCE  of  a play  in  print  in­ evitably   raises  the   question, what   is  a play?  Literature or  theatre?  What  por­  tion  of  its  significance   derives  from   its words and  what  portion from its images? The  publication  of   Robertson  Davies'  Question Time and  Beverly Simons'  Pre­ paring  raises  the  old  question with   un­  usual urgency. These two major figures in contemporary   Canadian  theatre  are   as different  as  east   and   west,  the   eastern  Davies  firmly  in  the  western   European tradition and  the  western  Simons  looking to the orient  for  new forms.
The  introductions to the two volumes neatly imply their  differences. Simons  has written a "Prologue", not a discursive introduction, for   her  collection   of   one­ acters. Three people,  two women and  one man,  are  revealed  standing on  an  empty  stage;  in  short  sentences,  phrases,  single words, they conduct a witty dialogue that distances   them   from   their   author,  that  tells us a little about her, and  that  strong­  ly establishes the sense of theatre -stage, audience,   actors,   and   invisible   author. Davies,  on  the  other hand, provides  an imaginary interview in which  he answers at   length   the   typical   questions  people have  posed  to  him: "Do  you  take  char­ acters and  situations from  life?" "Do  you re-write much?" "What do you think your play is about?" To  this final  question, he replies, "It is about the relationship of the Canadian people  to  their  soil, and  about the relationship of man  to his soul. We neglect   both   at our   peril." Both   play­ wrights   inform,    editorialize,   introduce. But, significantly,  one chooses to do so in short  lines put  into  the mouths of anony­  mous actors, while the other speaks in his own voice, and  in  paragraphs.
Simons is not anti-verbal, but  her com-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



mitment   to    language   vanes.   "Green Lawn   Rest  Home," the  earliest   (I g62) of  the  four  plays  in  Preparing, predates her visit to the Orient in  I968 but not her interest   in  Artaud, Claude!, and  Genet. The most  powerful image  in  the  play  is the lawn itself, composed of small stones painted green.  The three  characters  (she likes threes)  sit on the porch  of the home, two  old  inmates attempting  to  get  ac­ quainted  with   a  newcomer. Their  con­ versation, naturalistic for  the  most  part,  is not overtly  about the pathos of  age and the  myopia   forced   upon   old  people   by their   removal   from   the  realities   of  life. But  the  play shows these  things,  through their   inability  to   see   the   large   glasses hanging on  the  bosom  of the  newcomer, by their  fear  of going  through the  rocky garden to reach  the road,  and  by various other  visual  and  symbolic  devices.  It's  a good play, with  a strong  ending in which one character  dies and  is removed  to the cemetery, just  across  the  street,  that  we have  not  been  permitted  to  see  before. The visual  and  the  verbal   are   held  in good  balance.
"Preparing"  ( I972)    is  a   monologue spoken  by a  woman   as  she  moves  from girlhood,  with    reminiscences  of   baby­ hood,  to old  age  and  death. Heavily  de­ pendent on a  box full  of  props-a wig, make-up, a  mirror, a  whiskey  bottle­ the actress  must convey  a sense of life as simultaneously  waiting  and  preparing­ for what? Only for the end of life. A good actress    with 	considerable   vocal 	and manual dexterity could  make  this mono­ logue  powerfully moving.  The other two plays,  "Triangle" and   "The  Crusader'' (both   I972), are  less successful. Allegori­ cal  geometrical,  visual   in  the   extreme,  they present  the ideologies and  moral  cor­ ruptions of  man  in  a  manner sometimes  crudely  obvious,  sometimes  obscure.
In  "The  Crusader" we  meet  for  the first   time   the   Helper,  the   figure   from eastern drama who, anonymous and  clad
 in black,  manipulates the  props  and  pro­ duces   the   sound    effects.   The   Helper appears again   in  Leela  Means  to  Play, Simons'   most   recent   play   published  in the  Canadian  Theatre  Review   (Winter I976), along  with  articles   on  her  other work   and   a   long   interview  about  the writing of Leela. Here Simons  has moved farther east, farther into  images  and  the forms  of  dance,  and  away  from  language as sequential thought. "I have  broken the limits  of space  and  time," she says in the interview.
To  a  certain   extent, Davies,  in  Ques­ tion Time, has  tried  to  do  just  that. His play takes place in the wandering mind  of the  Prime  Minister as, in a state  of shock from  an  airplane  crash  in  the  far  north, he seeks to know  his own  soul  under the ministrations of   an  arctic shaman  with an   Edinburgh   M.D.    The  play   makes much  use of  visual  effects.  As the  nation  waits  for  news of the  PM,  Lloyd  Robert­ son  appears as  himself  on  TV   to  report the lack  of news;  the  PM's wife is inter­ viewed on TV and is tormented into a scathing  denunciation  of   the    "squalid art" of such  interviewing. These episodes are  done  on  film.  The  first  act  is set  in Les   Montagnes  de   Glace,  haunted   by "the Arctic  sound" and  by the occasional flickering  presence  of La  Sorciere, where the  PM  wanders, sometimes  tuning in  to what  is being said at home, sometimes confronting the shaman, or his totem animal, or himself. The second  act super­ imposes  the image  of the  House of  Com­  mons on the Arctic  mountain, as the  PM seeks a familiar setting in which to justify himself. The  shaman acts as Speaker and  La Sorciere  becomes  the Queen. Here,  in a disruptively satirical episode,  the Beaver is  presented   as  Canada's  totem   animal (Davies  says in  the  Introduction that  he would  prefer the Lynx for  that  position). The Beaver  sings  the  praises  of  industry and  the  Honest   Broker,  but  the  Herald confronts  him  with  the  fact  of  his  cow-

III

BOOKS IN REVIEW



ardice,  his  mediocrity. The  Herald then tells  the  legend  of  how  a  beaver,  seeing that  he is about to be overcome in battle with  another animal, rolls over,  bites off his own testicles, and offers them to his enemy.  Protesting, the  Beaver  soon  loses his  argument  with   the  Herald, offers  a large   pair   of  scissors  to  his  opponents, and  assumes "an  obliging  position" as he is dragged from  the  House.
When   the   play   was  reviewed   in  the Globe and Mail, the headline read, "Question Time  complex and  glittering," but  the  review  was equivocal. The actors were complimented but said to have done "some  hard  slogging"; the  highest  praise went  to the designer for his ice forms and to the stage effects of the production in general.  The   reviewer    never   says  just what  is wrong  with  the  play  but  does in­ dicate  unease  about it.  My  own  sense  of the wrongness  comes from  the mixture of verbal   and   visual,  of  word  and   image.  Davies  is a  master  word-man. The play sparkles  with his wit, his irony, his elegant  vocabulary.  Even  the  most  visual  of  his effects is tied firmly  to the word: the TV  films are  of "talking heads"; the  fantas­ tically   costumed  shaman   has   a   Scots accent; La  Sorciere's lines echo  the  ends of the PM's  lines  (until her  final  appear­ ance  reverses  the  trick)  ; and  the  Herald anatomizes the Beaver  with Shavian pointedness. The  play  attempts to  break through space  and  time  into  the  mental space and  mental time of the central character,  but   it   does   so  in   the   kind of language that  expresses sequential thought. But even though the  central character is a  parliamentarian, the  lan­ guage   of  the   play  is  not   right  for   the purpose. The episode  of  the  Beaver,  for example, could easily drift into a wander­ ing  mind   but  the  speech  of  the  play  is anything but  wandering, hence  the  sense of  incongruous  interruption. The play  is weakened  by this  central illogicality.
All this  is  not   to  say  that   a  strongly

112
 verbal   play   cannot  make   good   use  of "non-verbals," or that  a theatre piece can afford  to ignore words. It is, rather, to indicate that  the relationship between  the two needs  the dramatist's utmost  care.

ANN P. MESSENGER


DECISIVE INTERVENTIONS

ROBERTSON  DAVIES,  World   of Wonders. Mac- millan  of Canada. $Io.gs.
WHEN  Fifth  Business appeared in  1971 it was hailed  as an extraordinary achieve­ ment.  And indeed  it was, not only in  the field  of  Canadian literature,  but  also  in the  light  of  the  author's  previous  works. While  there  had  been  no  lack  of  wit  or cleverness  in  the  Salterton  novels  or  in the  plays,  it  seemed  apparent that   with the  publication of  Fifth  Business Davies was  moving into fields which were psy­ chologically  and  stylistically  far  more richly textured. Both critics and  public clamoured for  more-more  of  the  wit, the elegant  prose, and  the quasi-profound theological  and  psychological   theorizing. But  that   was  not  what   they  got.  When The Manticore (the second book in the trilogy)   appeared in  1972  it  was  one  of the  most  eagerly  awaited  novels  of  the year, but it did not meet with the kind of enthusiasm that   had  welcomed   the  first book. Critics  were unable to conceal  their disappointment; and  the  public  seemed divided: those  who  had  not  been  intro­ duced    to   Jung  and   his   psychological  theories  before found  the book "fascinat­ ing",  but  those  who  were more  familiar with  that   old  "fantastical duke  of  dark  corners" were  less impressed. It  seemed that   Davies  had  simply   created  David  Staunton and Dr. Jo  von Haller as props (and  very wooden ones at that) on which to hang  a few rags and  tatters of Jungian

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



psychology; and even  the grand finale, David's descent  with  Liesl  into  the  bear cave,  seemed   to  be  an  after-thought­ something that  was added on to leave the reader with  a good  taste  in  his mouth­ rather like a glass  of fine  brandy after  a dinner of  warmed-over hash.  It was only to be hoped that  the  final  book would  be more   impressive.   And   it   is.  Although Ramsay is again  the  narrator, World  of Wonders is less concerned with  the  dis­ tinguished hagiographer  than   it  is  with his  friend   Magnus  Eisengrim  who  has reached what  Liesl calls "the confessional  moment in  his life"  and  has  decided   to "spill   the  beans".   But  even  Liesl,  mar­  vellously intuitive though she is, does not realize  that  Eisengrim's confessional  urges are   prompted  more  by  vengeance  than  they are  by self-revelation. Roland Inges­  tree,  a  member of  the  crew  which   has come   to   Sorgenfrei   (Leisl's   home)    to make  a film about  the  French illusionist, Robert-Houdin, is Magnus' unsuspecting "victim".
Like  Fifth  Business, World  of Wonders is marvellously credible,  urbane, and pro­ vocative.   It is  concerned, as  is  the  first book,  with   God   and   the   Devil,   man's  place   in   the   universe,   and   the   conse­ quences    that    can   follow   on   a   single action: if Ramsay's  life is shaped by the fact  that  he  ducked  to avoid  a snowball thrown at  him  by  Percy  Boyd Staunton, Paul  Dempster's is  shaped  by  the  smile that  he  beams  back  at  Willard when  the latter slips  "his  hand down   the  back  of [his]   pants".  Life,  in  both   books,  is  a "succession    of    decisive    interventions", and  part  of  man's task is to decide  which of  "those  Two" (God   or  the  Devil)    is doing  the  intervening.
'Magnus'  autobiography   begins   dra­ matically enough   on  August   30,   1918: "That was the day I descended into hell, and  did  not  rise again  for  seven years." In  a sense Paul  Dempster  made  a  Faus­  tian  pact  with  the Devil  when  he smiled,
 however   innocently,  at   Willard's   (Me­ phistopheles')   sexual   advance.  But   the Devil,  as Ramsay  points  out,  demands a very  high  rate  of  interest,  and "the in­  terest   is  charged  on   the   whole   of  the principal, right   up  to  the  last  payment, however  much  you  think  you  have  paid  off  in  the  meantime."  Pondering  these words Eisengrim  wonders if he may  have underestimated the length of his sentence. "That's  what  I  mean",  Ramsay replies suggestively,   and   the   reader  is  left   to wonder   if   Magnus has  paid   off  his  de­  monic  adversary  even  yet.  The book  is rich  in  ambiguity; but  not  all  of  it  is as tightly  controlled  as  this  particular  ex­ ample  would  suggest.
In  The Manticore Liesl  tells David Staunton that  the  fathers a man  chooses for himself are the most significant ones. Most men  have two fathers, but  Paul Dempster, alias  Cass  Fletcher, alias  Jules LeGrand, alias  Mungo Fetch, alias  Mag­ nus  Eisengrim, has  three:  his  biological  father is Amasa  Dempster, the  "father" who  chooses  him  is Willard  the  Wizard, and  the  "father" whom  he chooses is Sir John   Tresize.  One  of  the  most  fascinat­ ing  aspects   of  the   book   is  the   way  in which    Magnus'    relationship   with    Sir John  mirrors  his former relationship with Willard.  When   he  first   meets   Willard, Magnus is "very green" and  his soul longs for  the  Wizard  as  the  "hart pants   after  the water brooks"; similarly, he describes himself  as  being  "green as  grass"  in  his early  relationship with  Sir  John, and  he yearns for Sir John's lifestyle  "as  the hart pants  for  the  water brooks". With   both "fathers" Magnus travels  across  Canada by  train   and   with   both   troops   he  is  a "nobody": he is not listed as one of the performers with  Wanless's  World  of Wonders, nor  does  he  have  any  place  on the  cast  lists  of  Sir  John's  company. If Willard forces  himself  on  Magnus  sexu­ ally,  Magnus forces  himself  on  Sir  John  spiritually: and   although  Magnus' rape

113

BOOKS IN REVIEW



of Sir John's soul appears to be quite different from Willard's rape  of Paul Dempster's body, Magnus realizes  that  he is  destined   to  play   the  role  of  slave  in both relationships. "Experience never repeats  itself",  he says, and  yet in  travel­ ling  with  Sir John he sees that  he is "be­ ginning  another  servitude,  much   more dangerous and  potentially ruinous"  than  his  relationship  with   Willard. In   both relationships,  however,    it   is   Eisengrim, the  wolf,  who  eventually   triumphs:  he cares  for  the  "confused  old  wreck" that  Willard   becomes   because,   as   Magnus gloats,  that  makes  him  "utterly mine; he [is]   my  thing";  nor   are   his  desires   to devour Sir  John  ever  far  from   the  sur­  face: "I loved  him  and  served  him  faith­ fully  ... but  in  my inmost  self  I  wanted  to eat  him,  to  possess him,  to make  him mine."
World   of Wonders is clever,  complex, and  far  more original in its basic concep­ tion  than   The  Manticore, but  it is still less successful  than   Fifth  Business.  Part  of the problem  lies with  the style-while it  never   sinks  to  the  lead-footed  prose that  was  all  too  frequent in The Manti­ core, it seldom  soars  to that  compressed, witty,  elegance  that  was so much  a  part  of  the   first   book  ("To  live  in   Bowles Corners  we  felt,  was  to be  rustic  beyond redemption"; "Our privy set the  sanitary tone   of   the   village";  "The   Stauntons rarely  escaped  cliche  in any  of the essen­ tial matters of life"). But  the novel's cen­ tral   problem    has   to   do   with   tone   or voice.  Since  each  of  the  novels  depends primarily  on  first-person   narration, one would  expect  the  three  narrators  (Ram­ say, David  Staunton,  and  Eisengrim)  to be easily distinguishable not only by what they say, but  by how  they say it. But  they are  not.  When   David's and   Eisengrim's voices   sound   most    "alive",  they   both sound  remarkably like  Dunstan Ramsay who  in  turn   (I suspect)   sounds  remark­ ably like Robertson Davies.

I I 4
 World  of Wonders is not  a great char­ acter  study in the way that  Fifth Business is,  but  it  is a  fascinating  book,  full  of sophisticated  conversation,    enormously  entertaining vignettes about   circus   life, and, for those who still want  to know who killed Boy Staunton, a few ingenious  sur- prises.                                 MARILYN  BAXTER


NATURALIZATION OF MODERNISM

JOAN   MCCULLAGH,   Alan    Crawley  and   Con­ temporary   Verse.   University   of     British  Columbia Press. $I I .oo.

FoR  THE MOST PART  Canadian  literary historians    and   critics   suggest   that   the main   thrust   to  Canadian poetry   in  the
194o's came  from  the  poets  in  Montreal, in particular from  the groups  of writers associated   with  the  two  magazines,  Pre­ view and  First Statement, and  their  joint successor, Northern Review. However, re­ cently  we have  had  articles  in  this  jour­ nal   promoting   Alan   Crawley    and   his magazine    Contemporary   Verse   as   an equally  important  figure   and   magazine in  the  development  of  Canadian poetry at  the same  time.  Both  Dorothy Livesay (who   contributes  a   Foreword   to   this volume  under   review)    and   P.  K.  Page have  testified to the enthusiasm of  Craw­ ley  for  poetry  and   the  genuine  help  he gave  editorially  to poets.
This book by Joan  McCullagh is a welcome    documentation   of    Crawley's
role   in   that   poetic   renaissance  of   the
194o's. In a way it sets the record  straight, but  though  it gives some  emphasis  to the way   poets  were   responding  to   literary movements  and   cultural  background  in the  193o's,  it still  presents  the  194o's,  as Desmond    Pacey   tended    to   do   in   his Creative  Writing In  Canada, as a  mira­ culous  burgeoning  with   almost   no  pre­ vious   history.   McCullagh   gives   a   fair

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



picture  of  the   poetic   scene   in   modern Canada  before   the   194o's,  but  she  still repeats  the   cliche   that    the    193o's   in Canada was  a  bleak  period   for  poetry, whereas   in  fact   most  of  the  important poets  of  the  4o's  had  already  begun   to write  from  the late  2o's on:  Smith, Scott, Pratt, Klein,  Livesay,  Birney,  and   lesser figures   like   Ross,   Finch,  Kennedy,  all these  were  certainly  writing consistently before  their  poetry  was collected  in  book form  in  the  194o's. Of  course  there  were relatively   few  outlets   in  magazines  for their  poetry  at  that  time,  but  it is a  mis­ take   to  see  lack  of  publications  as  evi­ dence   that   Canadian  poetry  was  mori­ bund  in  the  193o's. The  Montreal maga­  zines  and   Contemporary  Verse   became  the  necessary   nuclei  around  which   this poetic  activity   could  cohere-and they brought into  light  new  poets  as well.
No  one  will  deny  the  extreme  impor­ tance  of these  events  of the  194o's but  it is also  important  to  set  them in  proper  perspective. Joan  McCullagh's version  is certainly clearer and  more  definite  but  it still  is  not  as  emphatic as  it  might   be about  the  role of the  poets  in  the  1930's. In    fact,   Crawley's  interest   in   poetry spread through the 1930's and  found  some real  focus  when  Dorothy Livesay  moved to  Vancouver in I 937,  for  together  they started some poetry  programmes for radio at the end of that decade. Crawley also undertook several reading tours, perhaps pioneering this  element   in  Canada   (for the  modern poets  at  least), as  very  few of  the   newer   poets  were  giving   public readings of their  poems.
Joan  McCullagh's book places Crawley very firmly in the native/cosmopolitan controversy of the 1940's, though he him­ self never  became  polemical about  these two strains  as Sutherland and Smith both did.   Crawley   was  very   eclectic   in   his choices  and  never  really  espoused  either  side,  though he  tended  to  be  more  cos­ mopolitan in  outlook.  However, McCul-
 lagh neatly  summarizes the effect of Crawley's selections for Contemporary Verse as being an effect of naturalizing modernism.
The  book also emphasizes the very par­ ticular help  Crawley gave  to  new  poets of  the  1940's.  It is especially  good  to  be reminded that  Crawley was instrumental in  aiding   the  development  of  such   new poets  as  P.  K.  Page,   Jay   Macpherson, Anne    Wilkinson,    James    Reaney   and Daryl  Hine. His  eleven  years  of  editing certainly reflected   the  growth  of  Cana­ dian   poetry  in  the  period, for  he  found room   not   only   for   the   new   poets   he fostered   but   also   the   more   established poets  and   the   Montreal  poets   as  well. Indeed, one  of   the  most  useful  sections of this  volume  is  the  full  bibliographical index  to  all  the  issues of  Contemporary Verse, an  index  which   expresses  clearly Crawley's eclecticism.
There was a flowering from  the maga­ zine's   early   years   when   Crawley   com­ plained   that   too  much  "churchmonthly stuff"  was submitted to him,  through the heady  middle  and  late years of the 194o's, to  the  running-down  process  that   led  to his  disillusion   and   his   decision   to  stop Contemporary Verse. By then  the  newer American   poets   (such   as  Cid   Connan and  Robert  Creeley)   were  to  be  intro­ duced  by such a magazine as Contact, signalling  the  beginning of a  very  differ­ ent  modernism  that   among  other  influ­ ences  we  can  still  see  affecting contem­ porary  Canadian  poetry.
So Contemporary Verse  was an  impor­ tant    magazine  and   Joan   McCullagh's book  is  an   interesting  addition  to   the history  of Canadian  poetry. But  the  book also raises the  question as  to how  Craw­ ley's influence will be felt in the long run. Those  poets whom he particularly helped, with  the  exception of  P.  K.  Page,  have added   little   to  their   output  after   their first  books:  Jay  Macpherson has  written little  since  The   Boatman, James Reaney

115

BOOKS IN REVIEW



is now more concerned with drama than with  poetry, Anne  Wilkinson's Metaphysi­ cal  streak  has  rarely  been  taken  up,  and Daryl    Hine    is   outside   the   Canadian literary scene.  Perhaps  Crawley's sympa­ thies were with a more literary-articulated poetry,  and  it  may  be  we  will  return to that   style  but  in  reading this  book  one wonders   whether   Crawley  would   have given his energies to the new verse emerg­  ing  in  the  late   I950's   and   whether  his sympathies  would  have  been  encompass­ ing enough to allow  him  to edit  a maga­ zine  at  that   time.  He  was  a  man  seem­ ingly in the right  place  at  the right  time, and   Canadian  poetry   has   much   to  be thankful for  in  his  persistence  in  estab­ lishing   and   maintaining   Contemporary Verse. Some  of  his other   plans  for  mod­  ern  Canadian poetry  never  came  to frui­ tion: For  instance, twice  he tried  to pro­ mote  anthologies of Canadian poetry.  In a recent  editorial in  this  journal, George Woodcock  suggested  that  the issues of Contemporary Verse  itself "have the con­ tainment of an  anthology, a selection  by a brilliant connoisseur and  critic."
His disillusion  at the end in I 95 I sounds a  little  petulant, as if  he  is disappointed that   Canadian  poetry   was  moving   into directions he  was  out  of sympathy with. Nonetheless,	Joan 	McCullagh's    book (though  astonishingly  overpriced)   is  a sincere  tribute to an important editor and critic,  giving  a clear  portrait of  the  man and  his magazine, a definite  expression  of the regard  in which  he was held  by prac­ ticing   poets,  an   indication  of  his  ideas about modern  poetry  and   its  context in Canada  (though the  book  still  does  not give  the  description  required  for  a  full understanding  of    the   development   of modernism in Canadian poetry). With its extremely  useful  index  to Contemporary Verse   and   its  sound   bibliography Joan McCullagh's  study  ia  very  interesting addition to the literary history of Canada.
PETER STEVENS

II6
 PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST

MORLEY CALLAGHAN, A Fine and Private Place.
Macmillan, $g.gs.

SEVENTEEN  YEARS ago,  Irving Layton wrote  his  poetical   obituary in  an  intro­ duction   to   his   first   Collected   Poems,  covering   the  period   between   1942  and
1958.  The author responsible   for  them, he declared, "is  now dead." Unwittingly, Morley  Callaghan has  written a  similar introduction  to  his  own  body  of  work, spanning more than  fifty years, and ironi­ cally  this  introduction takes  the  form  of another novel-Callaghan's first in four­  teen years.
A  Fine and  Private  Place embarks still further on  what   Victor  Hoar   once  de­ scribed   as  a  style  of  "literary  diction". Hoar  claims  in  his  Morley  Callaghan, a volume in the Studies  of Canadian Litera­ ture  series,  that  Callaghan put  aside  his habitual way of  telling stories plainly  and simple  to  assume, in  Passion in  Rome, a "literary  diction" that   to  a  great  extent  explains   that   book's  failure.  Hoar   nails this   failure    down    to   the   loss  of   the "figurative language" of  the  earlier  Cal­ laghan  novels;   he   suggests   that   what  characterized the symbolism of A  Passion In  Rome  was not so much  its rejection of the author's previously established  literary principles  as  a   drastic   turning  of   the attention to issues  too large,  general  and obvious  to discuss within  the structure of a novel. In other  words, if a writer  wishes to discuss art directly,  there are other  and more appropriate forms  for  the  task.
In  an interview last year, following  the publication of his coffee  table  volume, Winter, Callaghan described   his  newest novel as "like  nothing I've  ever written". This  is  not  in  fact   the  case.  In  A  Fine and Private Place Callaghan again  resorts to  the  "literary  diction",  but   he  inter-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



sperses   it  with   other  manners,  with   a kind   of   plausible   basic   dialogue,  with hard, cool and  realistic delineations of relationships. Yet these are  only  the trap­ pings of a wider  theme  which  no reviewer I've  yet read  had  recognized, so  that  one feels that  this  time at  least Callaghan has been   able   to  disguise   his  discussion   of artistic  purpose.
For  the  real  intent of  A Fine and  Pri­
vate Place is to coerce  the  reader into  an appreciation of Callaghan's writing by depersonalizing the  character of  Callag­
han  himself.  In  a  sense,  the  novel  is  in­
tended  as a  vehicle  for  discussing  how a novel is put  together, for  talking about writing,  about    the   techniques,  failures and  frustrations of  composing stories.  It is a  kind  of  literary  narcissism,  purging the   personality of  the   writer,   salvaging what  makes  him  tick.  His  style. His writing.
To  accomplish this,  Callaghan  moulds
a  trinity  of  characters: Eugene  Shore,  a well-known  novelist in a country that  has neglected   him; an  ambitious and  cocky young   academic  in   the   person   of   AI Delaney;  the   vibrant  and   moving  per­ sonality  of Lisa.  All  three  represent  Cal­ laghan. The dialectical manner in which they   are   employed    is  nothing   new;   it originates as far  back  as his  early novel, Strange  Fugitive. It allows  Callaghan to shift  about   the  personalities, quirks  and moods  of  the  three  characters in  a  way as  confused  and  magical   as  that   of  the con-artist,  who  challenges a  street  audi­  ence   to  guess  which   of  three   tumblers moved  about  on  the  table  hides  the  pea.
The   main   point  is  to  make  us  aware of Callaghan's writing. Edmund  Wilson's dictum that  he is "the most unjustly neglected novelist in the English-speaking world"   has  embarrassed Callaghan.  In fact,  more  attention has  been  paid  to his moral   objectives,   to   his  characters  en­ visaged  as  real  people,  and   even  to  his own   personality,    than    to   the   fictional
 essence of his work,  and  this  is the  heart of  his criticism  of  the  Canadian  literary world  when  he  calls  for  an  emphasis  on "excellence" rather than   on  "Canadian­ ism."  Though  some  literary  periodicals are   exceptions,   Canadian  reviewers - especially in  the widely circulating maga­ zines and  newspapers -do  in  fact  make no  serious  attempt to  criticize  a  book  in terms   of   its   writing  and    its   inherent mysteries.
In  A Fine and Private Place Callaghan sets out  to force  readers into  a discussion of  the  principles, skills  and  mysteries  of story telling  and,  by implication, of  story­ tellers. He  does this through the figure  of Shore,  an  established   writer   like  Callag­ han  himself.  A critic  (obviously  echoing Ethel  Wilson)  declares in an  essay in  the New  York  Review  of Books that   Shore  is a master who ought  to be read  wherever  the  English  language  was  spoken.   Cal­ laghan   deliberately  masks  his  character by  allowing   neither the  other figures  in the  novel  nor  the  reader to  glimpse  the man within Shore, at least in appearance, though  in reality  one  recognizes  his traits quite  clearly  in  both  Lisa  and  AI.  (Cal­ laghan   hinted   at   this   in   my  interview with  him  when  he said  he  was still  pro­ crastinating about   a  title  for  the  novel. Then   he  wanted    to  call   it   either  The  Light and The  Dark of Lisa or The  Light and the  Dark of Eugene  Shore.)
The   overt   story   line   deals   with   an ambitious writer  named  AI Delaney  who is in love with  Lisa Tolen. AI is struggling to  finish  a  book  on  Norman Mailer but finds  himself  confronting the  mystery  of Shore.   One   realizes   that   the  "fine   and private    place"   extends   symbolically  to include  not only  the  personality of Shore "and  what  makes  him  tick",  but  also the undiscovered  (or  unrealized)   weaknesses of AI and  the  mysteries  of writing  itself. AI secures an advance from  a publisher
to do a  book on  Shore.  The fact  that  he cannot    complete  the   profile    (and   this

I 17

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



appears to  be  his  curse)   is the  basis  on which A Fine and Private Place operates. Shore's  character-"his mystery" - baffles AI, and  until  the older  writer is removed  the study of his life cannot be finished.  There is a suggestion  that  AI in some  sense  might   be  responsible for  the traffic  accident which  claims  Shore's life. Once  he is dead,  the  book  is easily  com­ pleted.
The point  is clearly  to divert  the reader from  analysing the  author as man  to the direct   study   of  his  writing. Too   much study   of  writing patterns  itself  unfairly on  the   writer   himself,   his  motives   and habits.    Callaghan   enjoys    the    writer's "mystery", and  thus  he  keeps  the  figure of Shore  clouded  and  unpredictable. The dialectic  in   the   novel   is  between    Al's impatience with  mysteries  ("All  his train­ ing   made    him   reject   mysteries")    and Lisa's  and  Shore's  attraction to  shadows  and  the inaccessible-as AI admits when he defines Lisa  and  Shore  as "outlaws ... in some fine and  private place." They are inaccessible  and  out of reach.
While  AI draws   near  to  a  recognition of Shore,  Lisa becomes  alienated. AI feels frustrated by Shore's inaccessibility; it  is the  older  man's  "mystery" that  stands  in his   way.   This   is  what,  in   an   aborted sexual  scene,  Lisa  describes  as  the  "ego" of  that   distinguished  man-of-letters. Shore  despises himself for ever approach­ ing Lisa, and  Lisa is humiliated. She tells Shore: "AI  was  wrong  about one  thing.  He  said  you  had  no  egotism.  You're all ego, aren't you?" This  conclusively  points the   novel's   direction.  Al's   inability  to complete his book on Shore  is due  to the latter's "ego".
How  to  remove  this  "ego" is the  task. It is done  not  simply  by  implicating AI slightly   in  the   traffic  accident  that   re­ moves   Shore's  physical    presence   from the  novel,  but  also  by  admitting  within  the  structure of  the  book  that  Al's  work is in  fact  Callaghan's. The book  is about

II8
 himself,  and   it  is  no  mere   coincidence that   when  Al's  study  is completed, so is A Fine and  Private  Place. Callaghan  has removed  himself as well as Shore.
The  book which  AI finally writes is nothing  like  that   on   Mailer  which   he never finished. The presence  of a living author in  a  way  that   dominates the  en­ tire scope of a study  prevents an accurate account of both  the  man  and  his writing. Once   this  "ego"   is   removed,   the   book falls  into  shape   and   can   deal   with   the mysteries   of  an   author,  his  styles  and  techniques,  provided the  attention is un­  academic -practical  and  personal.
Mystery  comes  with   death,  especially that   of  an   author.  From   the   collected data  of his life one  can  only  guess what he thought. His books and  interviews are the   only   real   testimony.  All   else  after death  becomes  speculation, and  it is into this  that  Callaghan is forcing  the  reader
-back into   mystery,   into   writing. For that   reason,  Shore's death  makes  sense.
A Fine and Private Place serves as an obituary to the style of writing Callaghan once  perfected, because  in  this  novel  he has moved in another direction; he has attempted  to  destroy   the  writer   of  that past day in order  to become  himself. That is  essentially   what   he   meant   when   he said that  he had  never written a book like it  before.  One  could  even  define  A  Fine and   Private   Place  as  a  portrait  of  the artist-before and   after. A Fine and Private  Place is by no means  Callaghan's best book, but  in one sense, it is a primer to all his works.
MARTY GERVAIS

DESIGNING POET

STAN   DRAGLAND,  comp.,  Wilson  MacDonald's
Western Tour, 1923-24, Coach  House.

lT  IS   PROBABLY   NOT    difficult   to  under­ stand   why  Wilson   MacDonald  enjoyed the  reputation  he  did.  He  espoused  ac-

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ceptable  causes;    he   showed    recurrent righteous  indignation;  he   balanced   his satires  with  romances, and  his free  verse declarations  with   poems   whose  rhythm and    rhyme    were   clearly    marked  and whose   "meaning"  was   markedly  clear. "The droning scholars  far  too  long,"  he wrote  in  "A  Gypsy  Song", "Have  ruled the  rhymes  of menj Bring  back  the  way­ ward   flights  of  song/  And   errant  bards again." Rejecting Carman's success, Mac­ Donald  nonetheless   strove   to  outdo   it, and    remained   constantly  in   Carman's shadow. The  speaking tour  he undertook in   1923,  from   North   Bay   to   Victoria, grew  out  of his early  success, and  was an attempt to  further his  reputation. Lorne Pierce   and   Ryerson   Press  undertook  to establish   relationships  with   local   poetry societies   for  him;   the  CPR  provided a rail  pass;  but  as he autographed his way across   the  country,  the   poet's   tempera­ ment  repeatedly revealed  itself. By assem­ bling    the   private  letters   of   that    time (which  are  held  by the  Douglas  Library in   Kingston),  together   with   the   news­ paper reviews, brochures, itineraries, and programmes  that lay  behind   them,  Stan Dragland's Wilson MacDonald's Western Tour   handsomely  recaptures   both    the idiosyncrasies   of  the  man   and   the   ten­ sions  between   poet  and  publisher  which made  themselves only peripherally known to the poet's  public.
It  would   be  easy  to  caricature  both
MacDonald and  the  MacDonald coterie. The  enigmatic observation of William Archer    ("Dean  of  English   critics")  is open  to interpretation:

Wilson  MacDonald interested me more  than anything else in America.

Newspaper reviews often  lend  themselves to parodic distortion:

POET ONCE HORSE'S  VALET DELIGHTS  CANA­ DIAN    CLUB WITH  CHARMING  ADDRESS  •••
the  remarks of Mr.  MacDonald were  merely strings  upon   which    he   threaded  the   real
 pearls   of  wit  and   wisdom   culled  from   the volume  of his poems.

Another selection which   he  read  ... was  his "Niagara".... The  poet   went  to   the   falls twenty   times   before he  was  able   to  express the  grandeur and  the  awe  which  were  in  his soul.

His   journey  to  England  in  a  horse   boat   is told   in  one   of  his  poems   containing  more than   200 verses,  but  the  poet   recited about
20, and  added many personal touches as he proceeded,  which   increased  the   interest  in the  poem.

A  little  quoting out  of  context  produces this observation from  Lome Pierce  to the Regina  journalist Irene Moore:

I envy your  ability to empty
yourself  ... and   place   yourself   at his  feet.

And   this  apparently  serious   (and  com­ plete)    outline   of  the  first  chapter  of  a projected novel  epitomizes  much   that  is vintage  MacDonald himself:

The  homecoming of  Bond:e  Gray.   Bondie Gray  is elected May  Queen. The demonstra­ tion   against  Bondie  Gray   when  Fanks,  a dwarf, announces that she  is  of  illegitimate birth. Another May  Queen  is chosen.

There is a  good  deal  of  humour in  the book,  much  unintentional, though  Mac­ Donald's poems are  never  of the inspired  awfulness   that   characterizes  James   Mc­  Intyre's work. But to focus on the humour would be to miss much  of  the significance  of MacDonald's Western Tour.
In   the   exchange  of   letters   between Pierce and  people along  the tour we come closer to the situation. Pierce  had  written to  assorted  people  in  a  form  letter: "In closing  I  should   like  to  say,  quite  per­ sonally   and   confidentially,  that   I   have chosen  you as  the  one  most  likely  to  en­ courage    public    interest  in   talent   and  genius,  and  as  the  one  most  likely  to see that   your  community   gives  him  a  wel­ come",  promising  ro%   of  the  gross pro­ ceeds as an incentive. Dr. Ernest  Fewster,  of  the  Vancouver   Poetry  Society,   with cultural enthusiasm and  honest  suspicion,

rrg

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



replied: 	"remembering  Shelly,    Keats, Tennyson, Bailey, Noyes, Whitman, Car­ man  & a  host  of others,  shall  I  proclaim here  as  one  as  great   if  not  greater than  these?"   Pierce    replied    in    ambivalent terms: "You  were  not  the  only one  who has  been  surprised   by  'What the  Critics  Say'."  After   the   event,   Fewster    wrote again: "In  Vancouver he has  aroused  so much  antagonism that   it  would  be  very unwise  to  attempt  more   public   appear- ances  in  the  near  future.... This  is prin- cipally   on   account  of ... his  insistence both  in public  & private, on  the idea  that his   poetry   cannot  be   equalled."   Mac­ Donald  had   his  admirers, too,  and  also people  like  Irene Moore, who  were  will­ ing  to suffer  "celestial  irrationality" in a poet.  Egocentricity  there was  in  plenty. What complicated  it  for  others was  the fact   that  MacDonald's ego  was  tied  to money  even  possibly more  than it  was to Art.   He   saw   himself    as   a   Celebrity, treated himself that  way, and  railed  those who dared to react  differently.
MacDonald did  stay  at  the  best  hotels and   apparently  reject   restraint  during his  tour.   In   light   of  the  quality  of  his work, it would  be easy to charge him now with  pretentiousness, and  to see Ryerson, Pierce,   and   the   Poetry   Societies   as  the victims   of  an   harrassment  with   which they  scarcely  knew  how  to  contend. But in  large  part  MacDonald was  the  victim
-of his own ego first of all, of inflated notions  about  Art  and  National Culture, of  the  copyright  laws  which   even   then were being condemned as an "almost insurmountable barrier to the Canadian who  wishes  to  remain in  this  country", and  of  a  publisher who  failed  either   to answer   his  queries   or   to  distribute   his books  adequately. There  are  contempo­ rary  parallels.
Wilson  MacDonald's Western  Tour  is
not  a  message  book.  Beautifully put  to­ gether, in  Coach   House's  best  tradition, it incorporates some of  MacDonald's own


120
 designs  to  good  effect,  brings  archives  to life,  and   entertainingly  illuminates one of  the  smaller  corners   of  Canadian  cul­ tural   history.  But   the  message  is  there,  nonetheless,    for   readers,   writers,    and publishers  alike.
W. H. NEW


CALM SENSE ON PRISONS

ANDREAS    scHROEDER,     Shaking     It    Rough.
Doubleday.  $g.gs.

IF THERE IS  one subject that  requires  the balm  of  quiet  thought rather than  rau­ cously expressed  feelings,  and  which  suf­ fers   grotesque  distortion   through   the electronic  media,   in  the  press,  and   via such   entertainment   agencies   as   books, plays, TV  drama  and  feature movies,  it is surely  our  Canadian  prisons.
In   recent   months across  Canada  the
public has been subjected to a plethora of prison reporting: columns of irate  words, yard upon  yard of film-footage-all wit­ nessing to the inadequacy of our penal institutions, and   to  the  ire  of  the  con­ victed  or  the  frustrations of  professional custodians. And most of this coverage  has been    to    an    incessant    accompanying chorus  from  opposing  radicals   and  con­ servatives  seeking  either   a  reshaping of penal  institutions  or  a  stiffening of con­ trol  over our giant  community of the  in­ carcerated.
Historically,  it  is  not   too  difficult,  I
think,  to see how all this  has come about. From  the  Middle Ages to the  beginnings of the  rgth  Century and  the  momentum of the industrial revolution, our towns and cities    were    communities,   our    values basically   shared   ones   and,   just  as  im­ portantly,  public ones.  What  society  did with  its offenders  it  did  corporately and it  did  it  for  everyone  to  see. Executions were  largely   public,  with   the   gibbet   a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



familiar sight.  While   lesser  punishments for  criminal offenses  were  often  enacted in a strictly  social context: i.e. with the public stocks and other punitive devices serving  as cautionary witness for the populace at large  whose co-operation was actively encouraged to pour scorn and ridicule upon  the  offender.
However, with  the  rise  of  the  middle
class  and   the  emphasis  upon  individu­ ality,  upon  individual values, there  came also  the  corollary of  a  vigorous  affirma­  tion  of  privacy.  Privacy became   (as,  in­  deed  it remains today)   the most eloquent testament to  personal prosperity.
The cost  behind   this  shift  from  com­
munal to individual action  is a significant one. We are all only too aware of social fragmentation,  of   the   isolation   of   the aged,  of  mental disturbance exacerbated by  loneliness.   Well,  our   prisons,   which are    largely    nineteenth   century   brain­ childs,  often  even  in  their  physical  struc­  ture, also reflect that profound transfer in the nature and composition of our society from  a  communally oriented one  where the individual was frankly  subordinate, to a   bourgeois-dominated   one   where   the greatest price  society can  extract from  its criminals  is  to  remove   them   from   the market place   (where the  stocks  used  to sit)   and  place  them  in  a  large  complex of buildings, surrounded usually  by an immensely  high wall where  sentences can be   carried  out   beyond   the   day-to-day notice  of the public  gaze.
I am not a sociologist, nor am I a penologist, but it seems highly plausible  to me  that   with   the  loss  of  confidence in today's   social  structures, and   the  ability of  media   technology to  peep  over  peni­ tentiary walls, the confusing clamour over our   prisons,   their  structures,  and   even their   raison   d'etre,  should   be  a  direct  result.
Particularly welcome  then,  are those calmer  and  quieter efforts beyond brute statistics   and   beyond  emotional  stances,
 which  shed  light  upon  the  prison  experi­ ence,  per se. Such  an  effort,   I  think,  is encompassed in  Shaking  It  Rough, sub­ titled   "A   Prison   Memoir",  by  Andreas Schroeder.
Mr.  Schroeder is best  known   to  us as a poet,  and  a somewhat romantic one  at that. But  there   is  certainly  no  whiff  of romanticism amid   the  pages  of  Shaking It Rough.  Indeed, somewhat surprisingly for a poet, the prose employed here is generally   flat  and   leaves  the  impression that  the author has tended to bend  back­ wards   not  to  sound   sensational  or give the  slightest  flavour   of   histrionics. And the  route   Mr.  Schroeder   has   taken   in order  to  convey  an  honesty  of  depiction and   fidelity   to  observation,  is  one   that  generally  works well for  him.
Using  the  nomenclature "fragment" rather than  "chapter" what he  gives  us is a personal  account of the eight  months he spent in the B.C. correctional system. Sometimes  these  fragments describe inci­ dents,  sometimes  they  invoke  reflections. It  is in  the  latter, I  think,  that  the  book achieves   its  fullest   potential.  Here,  for example, is  the  beginning of  Fragment
20  where   attitudes  for   survival  while
serving  time,  are  eloquently expressed.

Part of the strain of being  in prison is the continual fear   of  feeling  bad,   the  constant sitting under that trembling drop of  poison which, if  shaken  loose,   will   spread  slowly but   inexorably  like   a  stain  on   wet   paper through your life, unstoppable, disastrous. Because  you  know  you  have   to  stay  healthy in  this  place. The only  defense against the undertow that keeps  people here   half   their lives  is never  to forget that you  want  to get out,  that the  present is transitory, and  must be kept  in  transit, that it  is  therefore  neces­ sary   to  resist   the   urge   to   take  offense,  to escape, to  revolt  or  fight  back, which would  simple    subtract  what  you've   already  put  behind you and  start the  wheel  rolling from  the  beginning again.

As someone  who  has also done  time - though only in weeks compared to Schroeder's months-and who  has  also

12 I

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



had  experience of visiting inmates, from Pentonville and  Wandsworth prisons in England, Sing  Sing  and  San  Quentin in the   U.S.,   to  both   Oakalla  and   Haney, (where   the  author did   part   of  his  sen­ tence), I  can  personally attest  to  the  ac­ curacy  of those quoted words of  his. And the  burden of the  book  is in  comparable vem.
But I think  the most attractive strength of Shaking It  Rough  is its fairness. With­ out  being aloof,  without the arrogance of the insider, and  certainly without the taint  of self-pity,  this memoir reveals one man's  experience and  even spiritual growth dur­ ing  his  incarceration while  at   the  same time  revealing   the  frustrating plight   of both inmates and  custodians. I have never read  a  book  on  this  subject-and  the literature is by now prodigious-which succeeds   so  persuasively   in  rendering a balanced picture of prison  life as Shaking It  Rough.
Balanced  picture, yes. Comprehensive? No.  Then if  Mr.  Schroeder had  wished to  provide  an  encyclopedic compendium of Canadian penal  institutions he would, perforce,  have   had   to  step   outside   his own  experience. He  was given  two  years minus   a  day   (for   possession  of  hashish for the purpose of trafficking) and served eight  months. Most  of that  time  he spent in works camps with minimum security regulations. Obviously  such an experience is not  going  to reflect  the  kind  of forlorn ugliness  we  have  come  to  associate  with such structures as the federal penitentiary in New Westminster.
All the more credit, then,  to Andreas Schroeder for working  so admirably with­ in  the  limitations of  experience  and  for coming   up  with   a  balanced,  eminently readable  account  of  what   he  saw  with his eyes as well as what  developed in his own soul.
DAVID WATMOUGH

122
 MARGINAL LAMPMAN

Lampman's Kate: Late   Love   Poems  of  Archi­ bald   Lampman, edited   and  with  an  intro­ duction    by   Margaret   Coulby   Whitridge. Borealis  Press. $3.95.

SEVERAL  YEARS  AGO in a thesis on  Lamp­ man   I  relegated   many   of   these  poems and   Katherine  Waddell   to   an   appen­ dix.   A   re-reading   confirms   my   earlier  diagnosis; an appendix is of little  organic value  and  if  it  does not  need  cutting out it   is  best   forgotten.  What  always   im­ pressed  me  about   these  poems,  if  looked at   from   the  standpoint  of  Lampman's work as a whole, was their  uncharacteris­ tic    and    peripheral    nature.    Perhaps Katherine Waddell did  inspire  deep feel­ ing in Lampman; what  is surer  is that  she inspired  his worst,  most  marginal  poetry.  The   poems  evince  a  marked  absence  of the  physical  and   the  concrete  and   lack thematic and rhythmic variety. Exclama­ tory reminders of worked  up  (not  worked on)   emotion   cannot disguise  metaphori­ cal    poverty,  archaisms and  ancillary poeticalities:

Ah, couldst  thou  know this and  destroy The  sorrow  and  the dull  despair, Wouldst  thou  but  smile and  pass me  by Or  wouldst  thou care?

In  this  particular area  of  his  work  then one  wishes that  Lampman had  taken  his own  advice  in  his  poem  "Silence!" and had   not  undertaken another  version  of the story  of 0!
Lampman's outer  life  was  not  an eventful  one  and  further research   is  un­ likely to alter  our  view of it. I hope  that  future energy  expended  in  biographical research  will stress his  emotional and  in­ tellectual  development; tell  us  more  of what   he   read,   speculate  less  about   his bed.  Lampman  was  neither  Byron   nor F.P.G.
The  present introduction reflects an un­
certainty of purpose,  has little direction or

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



order  and  mixes obvious  fact  with unsup­ ported   speculation. Katherine   Waddell  did  exist and  Lampman may have  had  a sexual  relationship with  her; and  a covert relationship of any  kind  probably caused him  some  pain.  However,  the  anguish, isolation,    deracination   and    alienation which   are   to  be  found   in  Lampman's wntmg    were    surely    not    attributable merely  to Miss Waddell. In  a number of articles   on   Lampman I  have   tried   to account  for  the  dominant  tones  of  his writing and  have  yet  to change my view that    this    writer's   sensibility    becomes available only  through such  a  scrutiny.
We are told, on the one hand, that "Lampman  seldom   referred  directly   to Kate   Waddell   in   his  correspondence"; on  the other  hand, that  from  his "manu­ scripts  and  letters  it is clear  that  he went through a terrible  period  of crisis between r8g5 and  r8g6." Of course Lampman ex­ perienced crisis, but  not only at  this time, and   in  my  own   work   I   have   tried   to account for  the  crises.  In  the  bits of let­ ters  quoted   here  there  is no  evidence  to suggest  that  Kate  Waddell  was  respon­ sible  for  Lampman's unhappiness, and  I would  go so far  as to say that  the  entire correspondence between  Lampman and Thomson sheds  no  light  on  "his  friend­ ship  with  'my lady'  in  Ottawa".
Perhaps a closer scrutiny of one  para­ graph  of  the  introduction   will  sharpen my argument:

The  anguish that  the   poet   suffered  was very  real   and   it  lasted for  years.   He,  who had  sought  advancement eagerly, refused Edward  Thomson's  offer   of  an   editorship on  the  "Youth's Companion" in  Boston   at a  considerable increase  in  salary. He,  who had   longed   for   academic recognition and an  ivory-tower way  of life, spurned the  offer of  a  job  at  Cornell University when   it  was finally offered, because, "To  tell   the   truth I  am   too  deeply   embedded  here   ..."  Per­ haps,   the  choice of  the   word  "embedded" has  Freudian connotations  itself. There are  many    side-long    expressions    like    that    in Lampman's  correspondence but  it  is impos-
 sible,  at this  length of  time, to say definitely whether they  indicate desire  or achievement. It seems  obvious that he  twice  refused better positions  in  the   United  States  because his wife  refused  him  the  divorce he  wanted and his "lady" refused to share permanently a scandalous liaison.

Lampman turned down  Thomson's offer because  as  he  wrote  on  March 8,  r8g3:

I doubt whether it  would   be  well  for  me  to go  to  the  "Youth's Companion". I  fear   my friend  that  it   would   merely  mean  passing from  one  frying pan   into another and  per­ haps  hotter one.  Here the  drudgery I  do - and   it  is  I  must   confess   not  very  heavy­ is a thing apart from  my literary  faculty and  does  not  directly injure it.  While  I  am  at my  desk  the  literary side  of  me  is simply  in abeyance. In  the  Youth's  Companion office my  literary  powers   would   be  brought  into  actual employment upon  a  petty and  colour­ less kind  of  work  in  which  I  could   have  no real  interest and the  performance of  which  would   require a  distinct  abnegation  of  all that   is original  in  my  bent  of  mind. A sort of employment like  that persisted in  for  any length  of   time   would    be   ten   times   more  deadly than  anything I do  now.

There was a vague  possibility  of a pro­ fessorship    at   Cornell.  Did    Lampman spurn   it?  His  letter  to  Thomson  dated  September r6, r8gr  shows that  he would have  left  the  Civil  Service,  Ottawa, and Canada with alacrity (and  with  his wife) if the  possibility  had  materialized:

My   wife   was   immensely  pleased  with   the Professorial castle  in  the   air   and   with   the joyous  instincts of the  zealous  housewife proceeded forthwith  to  map  out   the  details of a  transfer from  Ottawa to  Ithaca. I hope that   it  may  indeed be.
Those observations of  Mr. Chamberlain's in the Transcript must  have  got copied somewhere, for  when I  got  back  here  vari­ ous   persons  informed   me   that   they   had  heard that I  was  going   to  desert  my  native country. I  told   them   I  was   not   going   to abandon the  soil  just  yet,  but  that  I had  it in  mind   to  do  so at as  early  a  date as  pos­ sible.  We  talk  a  great deal  about "Canada for  the  Canadians", and  yet  Canadians find it  hardest  to  get   on  in  Canada  than  any­ where  else  ...


123

BOOKS IN REVIEW



What  Lampman  did   eventually turn down  was  another  unrealized  possibility of a  job in the library at  Cornell and  for the  same  reasons  that  he rejected  Thom­ son's offer. The  "obvious" conclusion and "Freudian   connotations"    drawn   from Lampman's refusals are obviously without foundation.
The  darker  moments in  Lampman's
work  and  his best  poetry  had  little  to do with    Katherine   Waddell.  As   I   have demonstrated  elsewhere   Lampman  felt contemporary  society   to  be  inimical  to the   values   of  the   imaginative  life.  He protested constantly against   an  enroach­ ing    materialism   which    encouraged   a defective, fragmented   sensibility   at   the the  expense  of  vitality,  intelligence, and spirit.  Such  a life was  not  in  "abeyance" (as   Lampman   sometimes feared)   and compels  fascinated attention  because   it was frequently anguished, and  rightly  so.

BARRIE DAVIES


EARLY SOUSTER

RAYMOND SOUSTER,  Rain-check. Oberon   Press, Ottawa.  $7·95·
RAYMOND   SOUSTER's latest   is   remark­ able  less for  the  poetry   it  presents   than  for  the  critical  questions it  provokes.  Of these   the   foremost   is,  should  the   book have   been   published   at  all?   For   the dust-cover  to  term   it   "a   gathering  for collectors  and  friends of  105 early  poems, all  first  issued  in  small  editions and   all long  since  out  of   print", seems  to  fore­ stall  or  at  least  inhibit  criticism. Is  this really  supposed  to be  a  publication or  is its appearance  not  rather an  act  of piety of the  kind  usually  reserved  for definitive collected  editions? However admirable it may  be  in  human  terms   for  a  poet   to accede  in  this  way to  his friends'  wishes, critically the  book's  existence  forces  us to ask more  insistently  than we might other-


124
 wise  have  done  why  these  poems  were not  reprinted in  earlier  collections. Too often   the   answer   is  not   hard   to  find: many  of  the  poems  are  peripheral  and slight. Presented in bulk, their slightness becomes  embarrassing.
What  should  one  do, then? Ignore the book? or damn it with faint praise? No, Souster  deserves  better than   that.  Along with Dudek  and Layton he performed a valuable service  to  Canadian  poetry   in the  forties  by attacking the  too-neat, too genteel,   neo-Colonial  poetry   then   cur­ rent  and  replacing it  with  a  poetry  that  displayed   a  new  frankness  both  of  lan­  guage  and  subject  matter. But  just as the main  political  party  in  Mexico  boasts the paradoxical name  of  the Party  of the  In­ stitutionalized  Revolution, so  something of  the  same  phenomenon  often   occurs with  literary revolutions: the  First State­ ment  group's  revolution is now  long  be­ hind  us and  since  the  sixties  what  Sous­ ter's   Introduction  terms   "our  kind   of poetry", encouraged no doubt  by the in­ fluence  of  Williams,  the  Beat  poets  and the  Black  Mountaineers, has  become  the dominant orthodoxy. Thus,  though  less useful  for  such  purposes than a  selected or  collected  edition, the  present  volume does enable  one to reassess some elements of  that   revolution  at  least  on  terms  of Souster's own  contribution to  it.
For  all his moderate leftish  sympathies with the underdog, Souster's clearest com­ mitment seems  to  be  a  kind  of  vitalism that  is located  especially  in  the  everyday urban or  suburban world.  Souster's atti­ tudes  and  subject  matter  constantly sug­ gest  parallels with  such  major poets  as Williams,  Hart Crane  or  Philip  Larkin, although in  fact  one need  not  go outside  Canadian poetry, for Earle Birney, Alden Nowlan  and  John  Newlove  have  all,  in their  very  different  ways, provided more impressive and incisive evocation of mod­  ern   city  life.  Two   possible  reasons   for this  emerge  from   the   present   volume:

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



romanticism and  a  sort  of  rhetorical  di­
dacticism.
'A disturbingly romantic absoluteness permeates Souster's vision:  whether he is writing of  "Times Square" 's  "acres   of neon", the "stone-iron hearts who own you",    and    its   traffic's    "mad   nowhere dashes  with  cargoes  of  nothing", its "brighter, emptier faces",  or  whether he is evoking  "Montreal after  dark" where we allegedly  find  "all  the  bars  filled/ ... all the  bands frantic/ all the  taxis taken/ all  the  rooms  occupied/ all  the  women beautiful" or someplace  else where  "that face  will always  be there/ that  hand  will always  be  waving  ... ", there   is  a  sur­ render to  sensation  for  its  own  sake  ac­ companied by  a  wilful  failure  to  distin­ guish   and   discriminate,  to  suggest   any sort of distancing. Characteristically Sous­ ter's tactic  is to submerge, to present  him­ self as one of  the crowd,  to accept  every­ thing   with   a  sad,  wry  shrug    (perhaps symbolized  typographically by  his  fond­  ness for  suspension  marks) , and   to  take on the protective colouring of the average little guy  who likes his beer  and  his ball­ game.
The reverse  side of this  is the  rhetori­ cal over-assurance of his didacticism. But here  the colours  become too strident, like pop-art without any  hint  of  controlling irony.  Nothing is done, for instance, with "your  East  River  cesspool"  to  make  the last  term   more  than   externally  applied comment,  while   poems    like   "Bourne­ mouth" or "The Luxury" choke on excess words, mostly used one-dimensionally and with   very  little sense  of  cadence or  se­ mantic    nuance,   and    on    cumbersome sentence structures. Where  this is avoided, as  in  "The  Essentials," the  effect  is one of  crude  didacticism:

tWhen your  baby's  ready/ for  his  very  first words/ don't  waste his time/ teaching mom­ ma  or  papa/  but  get  right  down/ to those few words he'll need/ all the rest of  his life/ steal/lie/  destroy.
 Why  should  we  believe  this?  It may  be true  but  nothing in  Souster's statement of  it  is  memorable  enough  to  make   it seem  so.  It is  a   jotting rather  than   a poem.
Indeed, for Souster  almost  the only alternative in  this  volume  seems  to be in terms  of vignettes,  snapshots of everyday events  in  themselves   so  minimal, or  at least  not  placed  in  any  illuminating con­ text,   as  scarcely   to   exist,  uncommuni­ cated    epiphanies.  And    is   post-Layton male   poetry   obliged   to   celebrate  every pair  of lovely legs, every  "Lady crossing Queen    Street"  of   "the   Unbelievable/ the Incomparable Buttocks"? Is this what  John Sutherland  meant by "the embodi­ ment  of the common man,  completing in poetic  terms what  the  average Canadian thinks    and    feels"?    Where   are    these "poetic  terms"? For  me  at  least  the  bar­  room   angle   on   sex  objects   has   grown tediously   voyeuristic. Perhaps  Canada needs its own Erica Jong to set the sexual balance  straight.
In  terms  of  language too  the  book  is disappointing:  many   of   the   adjectives seem   curiously    inert    and    predictable while his use of slang  is undiscriminating, more  concerned perhaps  to  stress  demo­ cratic  solidarity with  his  readers  than   to restore  the  vitality  of  the  spoken  word.  Nonetheless,   there   are   of   course   some memorable images: in the first section  of "Three Ways of Looking at  New  York", for  instance, we  are  shown   "before the Central Park  hotels  one  long/ parade of limousines  disgorging tails and  furs". Nor could  one  deny  that  there are  a  number of strong, attractive whole  poems, such as "The Attack" or  "Why", that  stand  out by reason of their greater sense of purpose and  cohesion.  Likewise,  within its  small limits,  a  short  poem  such  as  "After the necessary adjustments", about the "happy useful  lives"  the  blind  can  lead,  is very successful. It ends:


125

BOOKS IN REVIEW



For   example/ this   one   here-/ sitting out in   the   sun/ up   near  the   cornerI of  Yonge and  Bloor/ cup  and   pencils ready/ watching the  darkness flash  by.

Where,  as  in   "Recruiting  Poster",  the point depends solely upon  an ironic juxta­
position,  in this  case "adventure I travel I
sportsI companionshipI good pay I pension plan    and    free I artificial I arms I legs",
Souster  may  be  relied  upon  to  drive  the
message   home,   but   he   rarely   provides original   camera  angles   and   though   his genuinely wide  sympathies can  take  him far  they cannot take  him  the  whole  way. Most  of the  major Victorian poets  wrote far  too much.  In  his introduction  Souster says "write 75 to  100 poems  a  year  and you're  in  trouble-that is, if  you'd  like to have  the majority of them  published." True, and  his  own  case  shows  why:   he spreads  himself  too thin,  his methods are too   flat,   deadpan,  even   garrulous,  to make  such  a desire  feasible.  This volume does Souster's  reputation a disservice: al­ though attractively produced, as we have come  to  expect   from   Oberon, a  whole new  book  was not  necessary  for  the sake of four or five well-turned, incisive poems.

CHRISTOPHER  LEVENSON


THE CANADIAN THIRTIES

New  Provinces,  which   appeared in  1936,  was the   Car.adian  equivalent  of   the   English   an­ thology,  New   Signatures, which  marked   the public appearance  of  the   celebrated   Thirties poets,   looking  more   like  an   organized  move­  ment than they  actually  were.  New  Provinces was  in  some  ways  an  imitation of  New  Signa­ tures, and  fulfilled  the same  purpose of a  mod­  est   trumpet   blast,  announcing  the   arrival  of modernism in  Canadian poetry. Not  that every poet  appearing in  the  collection could really  be called a  "modernist";  Robert  Finch certainly
was  not,   nor  was  E.  J. Pratt, and   Leo  Ken­
nedy   was  a  borderline case.  But   Klein, Scott
and  Smith, the  McGill men, certainly were  in
 the  modern lineage  and   it  was  their  contribu­ tions   which    gave    the    collection   its  special value   and   turned  New  Provinces  into  a  kind of  manifesto in  verse.
The present reprint, New  Provinces:  Poems
of   Several    Authors,   ( $4.95    paper,   $12.50 cloth) in the University of Toronto Press Literature  of  Canada  series,   comes   with   an in ormative
ski, setting out  the  historical background, and with  the  "Rejected Preface" which  A. J. Smith wrote   at the  time,   but  which   did  not  accom­
pany  the  anthology, and   indeed was  not  pub­ lished   until   1965,  when  it  appeared  in  Cana­ dian Literature  for  the  first  time,  a fact  which, unfortunately, is not  noted  by the editor of the reprint.
o.w.


FILM TIPS

THE  SITUATION  has  at  long  last  been  reached when  Canadian writers can  expect to  be approached  by  Canadian   film-makers to   ac­ quire the  rights  of  their   books  for  making  into  feature  films;   the   same   writers  may  even,  if they  are  astute, be contracted to write  the film scripts   for  their   own  books.  Such  possibilities, though  they  do  not  offer  the  legendary awards of  Hollywood acceptance,   nevertheless  could  make   an   appreciable   difference  to   the   very marginal incomes  of  most  writers in  this  coun­ try,  and  for  this  reason   we  call  attention to  a most serviceable book  on  the  business  and  legal practicalities  of   the   situation. It is  Garth H.  Drabinsky's  Motion   Pictures  and  the  Arts  in Canada  (McGraw-Hill Ryerson, $14.95). The title   is  misleading; there   is  nothing about  the aesthetics of  film,  but  a  great deal   about  the law   and   the   profits.   We   recommend  it  as  a sound  business  handbook for  writers, producers and  actors.

L.T.C.

BOOKS IN REVIEW






SEPARATION'S HIDDEN COST

WE  ARE  TOLD  by  the  supporters of  the Parti  Quebecois, and  by the  theoreticians of  separatism  in   general, that   franca­ phone  culture is at  a disadvantage under  the  present  situation,  and   that   once  the domination  of  the  anglais   is  eliminated there  will  be a  finer  flowering than  ever before  of the life of the intellect and  arts in Quebec. But can we take it for granted?
Look  at  the  Irish  example. During the centuries of Ireland's absorption into  the British  political  structure, literature flour­ ished in Ireland, and  Irish  writers became recognized   as  champions  in   the   whole English-writing world.   One  has  only  to list the main  figures  to get  an idea  of the vast contribution of the Irish from  I 700 to about   I 920;  Swift, Congreve, Goldsmith, Sheridan,   Shaw,   Wilde,    Yeats,   Joyce, Synge,   O'Casey,   O'Flaherty!  Half   the great   names   in   English   writing  during that  period  were  Irish, and  there  was an extraordinary    symbiosis   between    Irish authors, who usually had  to come to Lon­ don   to   earn   a  living,   and   the   Saxon readers who loved  them  and  paid  well to be entertained and  chided  by them.  Out of  that  symbiosis emerged almost  all  the works that  give Irish  literature a right  to be considered of world  importance.
With   such   a  beginning  in  servitude,
nobody  imagined that  in a setting of  pol­ itical  liberty  Irish  literature could do any­ thing  but  rise  to  heights  unheard-of be­ fore!  There  would-there must  be-a whole   generation  of   super-Wildes  and super-Joyces!  What   actually  happened was quite  different. Deprived of the  ten-
 sions of the great  Anglo-Irish love-hate syndrome,   Irish  culture sank  down   to  a level of dull  complacency, no new  writer of notable  strength or originality came forward, and   since  Yeats   died   in   I939 there   has  been   no  really   great   poet   in Eire. In  fact  the lack of literary creativity became  so obvious  that  during the  I 96o's the  Irish  government began  to offer  free­ dom   from   income   tax   to  any   English­ speaking writer  who  would  settle  among them; the  takers  were  few,  and  most  of those left sooner or later,  so sterile had  the literary   world   of   liberated   Dublin  be­ come.
The    situation  between    Quebec  and English  Canada is not  strictly  analogous to   that   between    England  and   Ireland since -unlike Erse  in  Ireland -French has remained the living  literary language of the  province,  and  for  this reason  Que­ bec writers  have not been accepted in To­ ronto   and   Vancouver  as  fully  as  Irish  writers   were  once  accepted in  London. Yet  in  recent  years  they  have  been  read increasingly   outside  the  borders  of  their province,  to such  an extent  that  it is now hard  anywhere in Canada to neglect Que­ becois  like  Gabrielle Roy,  Anne  Hebert, Hubert   Aquin,  and   a   whole   group   of younger writers. Translation may still not be  sufficient,  but  it  is increasing year  by year. And  there  is the  vital  thing  in com­ mon   between   pre-I920  Irish  writing  in English  and  pre-I977 French  writing in Quebec-that they  have  flourished and come  of  age  in  an  exhilarating  atmos­ phere  of political  tension  and  sometimes  of strife.
Now, looking  ahead, dare  we prophecy that  the fate  of writing in Quebec will be any  different, after  separation, from  the fate of Irish writing? Once separation has taken place, once the beloved enemy has departed, will life have  the  same  creative tension,  the  same  zest of conflict  that  in recent  years  have  been  so  productive of fine work?  Will separation mean  that  the


127

NOTES AND  OPINIONS



first generation of really vital Quebecois writers-those  whose  works  we  now enjoy-will also be the last?  It is a fear­ some possibility.  And  it is another  reason for   thinking  hard    before   we   willingly consent     to    Canada's    splitting    apart, though it  does  not  take  away  from   the argument  that   without  some   return  to regional    autonomy   Canada  will    split apart in any  case out of sheer  frustration at  the  growing  weight  of  centralization, the  incubus of  excessive  government.

L. T. CORNELIUS


SAVING THE RADIO PLAYS

Time and  again, in  editorials, Canadian Literature has pointed to the appalling inadequacy of  archival arrangements in the  Canadian  Broadcasting Corporation, and   to  the  fact  that   radio   plays,  by  far the largest  body of drama written and produced  in  Canada,  tend   to  be  aired once or  twice  and  then  forgotten. Rarely are   radio    plays   published -the   ratio seems to be about Iin  35 -and  if there are no adequate arrangements for keeping this  material and  making it  available to scholars,   this  important sector  of  Cana­ dian   literary  and   dramatic  creativity is likely  to  be  lost  to  posterity.  Up  to  now the  Canada  Council has  been  secretive about    its   storage   facilities,  but    occa­  sionally  disquieting  news  has  surfaced of the   loss   of  scripts   or   tapes;  the   mass destruction  of   tapes   in   Vancouver   re­ ported   in  one  of our  earlier  issues  was a case in  point.
Now, at  last,  what  scripts  survive  have been salvaged, thanks  to the efforts of Howard  Fink   of  Concordia  University, who has persuaded the CBC to hand  over the  remnants to  be  stored   there  and  in­ dexed  under the  Radio Drama  Project.
 Much, indeed,  seems  to  have  vanished; the  writer  of the  present  note,  on  receiv­ ing a list of the holdings  under  his name, found  only half of the  titles  he  had  writ­ ten  for CBC  recorded, which  means  that  the   losses  of  material  must   have   been great.   Professor   Fink   has   a   large   task ahead   before  he  comes  to  the  point   of publishing a bibliography of  CBC  drama and   the  five volumes  of  selected  scripts  which  are  planned in  collaboration with the  University  of  Toronto Press.
But,  though  the  task  is far  from  com­ pleted,   what   has   been   done   is  greatly welcome, and  we can  hope  that, when  all the  missing  scripts   have   been  gathered together, something like   justice  can   be done  to at  least the  best of  the  thousands of plays by which  writers, actors  and  pro­  ducers  kept  drama alive  in  Canada dur­ ing  the  theatrical  doldrums of the  forties  and  fifties, and,  in the sixties, moved  into  experimental directions that  were aborted by the commercialization of broadcasting under  recent  CBC  administrations.

G.W.
