$2.oo  per copy



CANADIAN
l TERATURE N°·51
Winter, 1972




JlNNJL SUSJlNNJl, JlND CJlTHJlRINE·




Articles

BY CLARA THOMAS, R.  D. MACDONALD, CARL  BALLSTADT, NORMAN NEWTON, MAX  DORSINVILLE, J. THIESSEN



Review Articles and Reviews

BY GEORGE WOODCOCK, ALEXANDER HUTCHINSON, ANDREAS SCHROEDER, AUDREY THOMAS, ROY  DANIELLS, JOAN COLDWELL, MARY JANE  EDWARDS, AL  PURDY, PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH, JOHN  REID, GILBERT TARRAB,
W. H. NEW, ANTHONY APPENZELL, FRASER SUTHERLAND





A QUARTERLY OF CRJTJCJSM AND REVIEW










THE CRAFT OF HISTORY








WHETHER HISTORICAL  WRITING should be subject to  the stimulus  of chronological  festivities is a point one must leave to the  philosophers of that  craft.  The  fact  is that  the series of provincial  and  federal  anniversaries which  began  in  I 958 with the first of British Columbia's  many centennials,  and came  to a climax in 1967,  has been productive  of a great many  volumes which have increased notably our available sources of local and national  history and biography.  For  collectors of Canadiana it has been a bonanza  decade and  more; one doubts if so many  books in the field appeared  in the 9 I  years between  1867 and  I958  as have appeared in the  I3  years since the latter  date,  whether  as re­ prints or as original volumes.
Once  started,  the  process continues.  We are in the  predicament  of a sorcerer
overwhelmed  by a tide he has unthinkingly  called up, for the spate of Canadiana seems  inexhaustible   since  the  fashion  for  centennials  swept  from  province  to province,  and  the  astonishing  fact is that -despite the great  flotsam of rubbish that  inevitably  floats on the surface of such tides-the number  of creditable  new books in the field continues year by year to be high.
Let  me  begin,  however,  by isolating among  recent  publications  some  of the types of volume  (one hesitates to use the word book, and  non-book has become a dreary  cliche)   that  are  inspired  by historical  fashion  but  carry scanty  profit  to anyone  but  the  publisher  and  author,  and  doubtless-if the truth  be known­ little to them. There is the collection of dull photographs  of fur-clad men on sleds whose only merit is a slight antiquity, and which are reproduced, often with inept historical  comments,   to  flatter  local  vanities;  typical  is  Gold  Rush  by  James

3

EDITORIAL



Blower  (RyersonjMcGraw-Hill, $9.95),  described  as  "A  pictorial  look at  the part  Edmonton  played in the gold era of the  I89o's". There is the  provocative article  puffed into the size of a book, like William T. Little's The  Tom Thomson Mystery  (RyersonjMcGraw-Hill, $6.95), which tells of the discovery of a skele­ ton  that  may  (or  may not)  have  been that  of the famous  painter. There is the revival of a book that  has lost its context, like The  Scalpel and the  Sword  ( Mc­ Clelland  & Stewart), an  impressionistic biography  of  Norrnan  Bethune  written two decades ago by Ted Allan and Sydney Gordon  in a journalistic manner  long obsolete; one would have thought the commissioning of a scholarly life of Bethune at this time more in place. There is the dense academic study of a limited area, in a style deadened  by years of subjection to the thesis-masters;  Richard  Allen's title The  Social Passion (University of Toronto Press, $9.50)  might be that of a vitally interesting  book,  but  this  treatise  on  "Religion  and  Social  Reform  in  Canada I 9 I 4-28" in fact leads one into a dead  wood of banal  writing in which the path of genuine interest is there but hard to follow. And there is the documentary that fails a  tantalizing  title, like James  H.  Gray's  Red  Lights  on the  Prairies (Mac­ millan,  $6.95), a book which one  reviewer who had  obviously never read it de­
scribed  as "prurient". Alas, no ! James  H.  Gray  earned  deserved  respect for his
books  which  rendered  direct  experience,  like The   Winter Years  and  The   Boy from Winnipeg; they are an authentic  part  of the social history of the Canadian prairies,  and  indispensable  as such.  But his present  study  of prostitution  in the pioneer towns is second-hand  stuff, and he lacks the imaginative touch of the true historian  who can give life to scenes through  which he has not lived. The subject itself is fascinating,  but it still awaits its Mayhew.
Yet despite these varying failures, there is enough  in the  publication  record of
recent  seasons to assure one that  Canadian historians  are  still producing  a fair number  of works whose utilitarian  or imaginative  qualities make them  welcome. To  the first class belongs the series of paperback  Canadian Lives initiated  by the Oxford  University  Press at $3.50 each. Six titles have appeared so far, and  these establish that  the series is intended  to have a more popular  appeal than  the paral­ lel enterprise  initiated  by the  University of Toronto  Press in connection  with the Dictionary of Canadian Biography. The present selection suggests that the Oxford books are  planned  to fall into two categories.  I. The  brief  biographies of major figures which act as introductions  to wider reading: e.g. Donald  Swainson's study of Sir  John  A.  Macdonald  and  Barbara  Robertson's of  Wilfrid  Laurier.  2. The adequate  and  satisfying  accounts  of  lesser  but  important  figures  of  whom  a
35,ooo  word  account  is likely to  be sufficient for  all  but  the  most  demanding


4

EDITORIAL



scholar:  e.g. David  Flint's  study  of John  Strachan  and  Dorothy  Blakey Smith's of James  Douglas. Prepared  evidently with an eye to students,  these biographies are simple but  unpatronizing, and  can be read with pleasure and  a modicum  of enlightenment  by anyone with an amateur  interest in history. One  hopes that  the selection of future  titles will be expanded  in the direction  of including  as many as possible of those secondary  figures whose lives and  achievements  contain  both an  idiosyncratic  interest,  and  an  importance in terms of historical  background, which biographers have rarely explored.
After so many years of rummaging and research, one is astonishingly reminded
every  year  or  so that  some important document  from  the  more  or  less distant Canadian  past  has  been  lying  undiscovered  and  unpublished  for  a  century  or more.  The  Champlain Society has a record of enterprise in this direction  which it is unnecessary to stress, and  now, as its forty-sixth publication, it has issued the Journal  of  Major  John   Norton,  that  chief  of the  Five  Nations  whose  hybrid origin is so obscure and  whose activities have been so ignored or doubted  by our historians that  he does not yet find a place even in existing biographical diction­ aries. The  narrative, describing his journeys among the Cherokees and telling the history of the Five Nations which adopted  him, is hardly likely ever to be regarded as an  example  of masterly  writing,  though  it comes with a lengthy  introduction  by so distinguished  an  authority  on literature  in Canada as Carl  F. Klinck, but as a document  to be weighed  against  other  historical material  it is  undoubtedly  of the first importance.
In  quite  a different  category, so far as literary merits are concerned,  was one of the predecessors of John  Norton's  Journal, The  Narrative  of David Thompson which  appeared  as  the  Champlain  Society's  twelfth  title  in I 9 r 5,  edited  by
J. R. Tyrrell.  But Thompson's accounts  of his great  travels, which included  the
exploration  and mapping of a vast area of western Canada and the north-western United  States,  have  been  unavailable  up to the  present in an edition  which the general public could buy. Now this lack has been met. What  Victor G. Hopwood gives us in his new version (David Thompson: Travels in Western  North  America
1784-IBI,
manuscript  reproduced by Tyrrell, which Hopwood trims to eliminate  repetitions and irrelevancies; it also includes hitherto unpublished  portions of Thompson's journals which the editor found in manuscript  form in various Canadian libraries.
The  result is a more complete  picture of Thompson's  experiences and achieve­ ments  than  we have  had  before,  carpentered  together  with  impeccable scholar­ ship and  editorial  skill. Some years ago, in the pages of  Canadian  Literature, Dr.

5

EDITORIAL



Hopwood  put  a persuasive plea for Thompson's literary  as distinct from his his­ torical  importance, and now, reading in full his version of the Thompson  narra­  tive,  the  present  writer-an  aficionado  of  travel  writings-is  glad  to  agree; this is an  unusually  pleasing book to read  for its perceptive  observation  of men and  animals  and for its natural  style, as well as being a basic document  of  Cana­  dian  history. Thompson,  as Hopwood  claims, was a  prose writer  to  be  classed with  such  classic nineteenth  century  masters of the scientific travel  narrative as Charles  Darwin  and  H. W. Bates. Undoubtedly, among  recent  publications  in Canadian history, the Travels  deserves to be regarded  as the best; one looks for­ ward   with  strengthened   interest  to  Dr.  Hopwood's  biography   of  Thompson, which will be published shortly.
Quite  different  in character,  but still admirable in its own terms as an example of the skills of modem  reportage  turned  to historical  uses, is Pierre Berton's The Last  Spike,  the second volume of his account  of the  Canadian Pacific Railway; covering  the  years from  I88I-I8Bs, it takes  us out  of the  doldrums  of national life that  followed the Pacific Scandal  and  narrates  what  is perhaps our only epic story as a nation, the actual building of the line.
Berton is a  journalist, and inclined to the high colour and  accelerated  prose to
which  his trade  has accustomed him;  he is also prone  to the monumental  cliche (but so, the experts tell us, was Homer  himself, with all his rosy-fingered dawns). As readers  of Berton's  Klondike  may expect, he sometimes gives a hectic feeling to events that  must have seemed pretty  banal  in their day, but  his book is infor­ mative  as well as entertaining, and full of odd facts and eccentric erudition.  It is also much  concerned  with the very profound  ways in which  the construction  of the  railway  affected  the  lives of  thousands  of  ordinary   people  in  the  I 88o's;  Berton's  account   of  how  the  labourers  actually  lived  and  worked,  and  of the methods  of construction,  is unrivalled in any other  book on the period. The  Last Spike  is excellent popular  history, and one suspects the professionals will use it as a basic work on the Railway for a long time ahead, whether  or not they recognize its merits publicly.
It  would  be  unfortunate, however, if the  popular  success of The   Last  Spike
were to obscure the good qualities of another  excellent recent example of popular history  written  at  a  high  level. This  is Joseph  Schull's  Rebellion   (Macmillan,
$g.g5), an account  of the French  uprising in Lower Canada in  I 837. The rebel­ lion of  I837  has assumed a new topicality  owing  to its acceptance by  the FLQ  and  their supporters as the archetypical  separatist  movement,  and  Rebellion  pro­ vides a fluent and  perceptive account  which explores both the political and social

6

EDITORIAL



causes of the incident  and the lasting wounds that were left by the methods of repression which  reinforced  in French  Canadian minds the belief that  they were regarded as a subordinate people.
Slightly on the other  and duller side of the border from Berton and Schull, the
journalists writing history, are the historians writing for amateurs who have put together  Colonists  and  Canadians   (Macmillan, $8.95),  an  account  edited  by
J. M. S. Careless of the  various colonies of British North  America  between  the
conquest of New France  and Confederation.  It is the work of eleven writers, each taking a decade, and, while it brings out some interesting and previously neglected aspects of local  history  during  the colonial period,  it suffers from  the inevitable disjointedness  and-worse-the  inevitable  variation  in quality  of writing  that results from the now fashionable  habit of publishing books written by committees rather  than by individuals.
The  difference  between such a book and  a firmly-crafted  history written  by a
single individual  becomes evident  when one compares Colonists and Canadians, with its shifting  focus and  abrupt  transitions, with Barry  M. Gough's The  Royal Navy   and  the   Northwest   Coast,  IBI0-1914   (University   of  British  Columbia Press,  $I 2.50), a  well-documented and  lucid  ac'count of the  most  effective manifestation  of the British presence on the west coast of Canada during  the nineteenth   century; it  presents  with  much  charm  of style a  subject  which­ astonishingly -has  never  been adequately  studied  before.  An  interesting  aspect of the book is the  persuasive argument  that the United  States would indeed have grabbed  what  is now British Columbia  if the Royal Navy  had  not appeared off the disputed coast in the right strength and at the appropriate time.
At the opposite end of the scale to Dr. Gough's self-contained  study of a single phase of European penetration  into  North  America  is another  nautical  volume, Samuel Eliot  Morison's The  European Discovery of North  America: The  North­ ern  Voyages   (Oxford, $15.00). Admiral  Morison,  of course,  is no  Canadian, though  he has visited us often and with perceptive eye; but in this volume he deals mainly with the explorers who came to the lands that  eventually formed Canada, and, if he brings little new in the way of facts, he does discuss the existing knowl­ edge about  the  Norsemen,  the Cabots, Cartier  and the Elizabethan  searchers for the  Northwest,  with  a  shrewd  if erratic  judgment;   he supports  his chapters  of narrative  with  copious  and  useful notes. As a general  introduction  and  a com­ pendium  of sources, The  European  Discovery of  North  America is a useful and readable  book, once one gets accustomed to the Admiral's  rather  self-consciously

7

EDITORIAL



Old  Saltish breeziness; nevertheless, it is far too idiosyncratic  a book to be taken as more than a partial view of the facts available.

* 	* 	*
Finally,  there  are  the  picture  books, massive  and   colourful,  perhaps  more numerous  this season than  ever before, and  perhaps  more handsome.  The  best of them demonstrate  the tendency of the historical amateur in the 197o's to demand concrete  and  visual evidence.  No longer is he  willing  to take  the  professional's word;  he likes to see for  himself, to  weigh and  savour,  the  material  on  which history is based, so that  he can have the feel and  look of the  past as a physical reality as well as a written record.
The  most magnificent of the current  historical picture  books, The  Discovery of North  America  (McClelland & Stewart,  $25.00), covers much  the same ground as Admiral  Morison's  book. It also is written  by non-Canadians about  an area of history that  is largely  Canadian; the narrative-best  described as workmanlike
-has been provided  by an American scholar,  W. P. Cumming, and  two British historians, D. B. Quinn  and the late R. A. Skelton. It is by no means as lively as the  Morison account,  but in its caution  is perhaps  more  reliable. The  level tone may even be intentional, for it provided a reliable line of continuity  on which to hang the most splendid  collection I have yet encountered of reproductions,  many of them in colour, of the maps, charts and contemporary drawings and engravings that  have  preserved  the  knowledge and  view of the  world  held  by men in  the expanding  dawn  of the modem  age. The  narrative begins with St. Brendan  and ends with the Pilgrim  Fathers, and all the important extant  maps of that  age are included,  in  full  and  clear  colour.  Yet the  best  of all  the  illustrations  are  the drawings  of John   White,  who  accompanied   Martin   Frobisher  to Baffin Island and  later  played a crucial  part in the settlement  of Virginia.  White was an artist of stature-barely  recognized-and his drawings  of  Canadian Eskimos  (the first ever  made)   and  of fishes and  other  creatures,  bring  to one with  an  extra­ ordinary  freshness that sense of a new and  pristine world which the Elizabethans took home  with  them  from  the Americas. The  quality  of the  colour  printing  in this book is quite  outstanding; every graphic  artist  as well as  every amateur of history should study-should even possess it.
In  contrast,  the visual dulness of Canada's  Five Centuries, by W. Kaye Lamb
(McGraw Hill,  $2 2.50),  produces  a  rather  pedestrianly  utilitarian first  impres­ sion. Here, I suggest, the text is more attractive  than  the illustrations. Admittedly,  Dr. Lamb  is not  likely to tell the professional historian  much  that  is unfamiliar,

8

EDITORIAL



but  he does recast  the  material  for the  general  reader  in an  interesting  mosaic pattern   which  dodges  the  monotony  of  complete  chronological  continuity  and relates  the  historical  facts  to  appropriate groups of illustrations,  many  gleaned from  the  Public  Archives of Canada  over which the author  so long presided. In themselves, these illustrations  are instructive and often novel, but they are repro­ duced  either  in a greyish black-and-white,  or in black on a peculiarly  distasteful beige-brown  background, with  a few in pallid four-colour, and  some revoltingly crude  colour  photographs  at  the end. A great  deal of good material  has in fact been  spoilt  by  poor  design,  poor  printing  and  unwisely selected  paper.  All the sadder  is the fact  that  this is the only one of the five illustrated  books under  re­ view to be  printed  in  Canada. The  Discovery of  North  America  and  the  three other  texts I shall mention  were all produced  abroad, three in Italy, one in Ger­ many,  and  all are far  better  examples of the  printing craft  than  Canada's  Five Centuries.
The  remaining  books relate  to specialised phases of history. In  The  National Gallery  of Canada   (Oxford   University  Press, $27.50),  Jean  Sutherland Boggs gives a  modestly-written,  much-needed  and  well-illustrated  account  of the  Gal­ lery's development  which reveals how much  richer its collections in fact are than the limitations  of the  present  building  allow us to appreciate. Obviously we can­ not  compete  with  the  great  collections of London,  New York, Paris  and  Italy, but  we can still thank  a line of dedicated  directors for a selection of  good works from  all ages and schools that  stands high among national  galleries of  the second rank.  Now, with  the  copious illustrations  in Dr. Boggs's volume, we can gain  a far  more comprehensive  idea of the  National  Gallery than  any single visit to its restricted exhibitions will give.
Would  that  Scott Symons had been as matter-of-fact  in his style as Dr. Boggs! In Heritage  (McClelland & Stewart, $22.50), he rhapsodizes in a prose of curious whimsicality  on  the  associations  aroused  by a series of splendid  colour  photo>­ graphs  by John  de Visser of some of the best examples of early  Canadian furni­ ture.  (Nothing that  comes from  the sunset side of Sault  Ste.  Marie  is shown, which suggests that  both  author  and  photographer  regard  the west as barbarian darkness.)  The  illustrations  are so magnificently self-sufficient, so completely and poetically evocative  in their  own visual dimensions, that  the voice of the rhapso>­ dist  becomes  in  the  end  an  annoyingly  distracting  twitter.  One  would  prefer informative  labels, set in some grave Georgian  type, for with such  photographs, and such objects, one can easily do one's own daydreaming.
On the other  hand, in Seasons of the Eskimo  (McClelland & Stewart, $16.95),


9

EDITORIAL



the voice and  the eye seem in perfect harmony.  Fred  Bruemmer  has spent much time in the Arctic, living among the last of the Eskimos who have so far escaped the welfare prison of the modern  North  and still contrive to live the old hunting life. That   is, as his sub-title declares, "a  vanishing  way of life",  and  there  is a truly  elegiac quality  to Bruemmer's  account.  In  fine, sensitive prose, he records the  traditional Eskimo life from season to season, and  in what  are  probably  the best photographs  ever taken of the native life of the North he portrays the remote Eskimos of today, veritable men between two worlds, living out  the last years of their  traditional culture  in all its phases. It  is history, since what it records will soon be vanished, but it is also a moving human  statement of the greatness of the Eskimos' experiment  in living, of the nobility of their  primeval  anarchism,  and, not  least, of the  extraordinary empathetic understanding with  which Bruemmer has lived  his way into  their  collective sensibility. Seasons  of the  Eskimo  is a far more subtle  and  adequate  contribution  to our  understanding of the  Inuit  than any anthropological record I have yet read. It is likely to be a long-valued docu­
ment of the traditional  North.

G.W.

















RlchaRb as€l & company, 1nc.

Scholarly Books in the Arts and Sciences


TORONTO
PORTLAND, SAN FRANCISCO, LOS ANGELES, DENVER, CHICAGO, NEW YORK



IO



JOURNEYS TO FREEDOM



Clara Thomas




ANNA, SUSANNA, AND CATHARINE PARR  TRAILL"- their names  bounce  together  with  the  rhythm  of a  good  musical-comedy  title song.
Certainly  a libretto  written  out of the variety of their lives and  works would not be dull,  and  might  even  be a  piquant  memorial to their  adventurings in  nine­ teenth-century Canada.
All three  women  came  to Canada in the  I 83o's. Anna  Murphy  Jameson  was the  wife of Robert  Jameson, Attorney-General  of Upper  Canada and  then  the province's  first Vice-Chancellor. She was a professional "woman of letters";  this phrase suggests more  clearly  than  any other  the scope of her ambition,  and  her success, in writing.  She  was not a  poet or a novelist, and  neither  journalist nor critic is entirely accurate  in her description. When, in I 836, she came to Toronto to visit her  husband,  she had  been writing  professionally for about  fifteen years. After  the  publication, in  I 832,  of Characteristics of Wome,n,  a study of  Shake­ speare's  heroines, her  work was known and  respected, not only in  England,  but also in Germany  and  America.  She was forty-two years old when she arrived  in Canada, a practised  writer  with  heavy financial responsibilities towards  the sup­ port  of  her  mother   and  sisters;  she  was  by  no  means  committed   to  being  a colonial  official's wife, and  she was certainly  not a  prospective settler. She had expected  that  a  book would  be one of the results of  her trip  and  had  begun  to consider its themes before she left England. Winter Studies and Summer  Rambles in Canada was published shortly after her return to England  in I838.
The  Strickland  sisters, Catharine and  Susanna,  came  with  their  husbands  to
settle in Upper  Canada in  I832. They too had written for publication  before emigrating-sentimental, moralizing tales thought suitable for the children's literature and  the  proliferating   ladies'  periodicals  of  the  eighteen  twenties.  In
I 836 Catharine's letters home were published in the six-penny "Library of  Enter­
taining  Knowledge," the immensely popular  enterprise launched  in  I 829 for the


I I

JOURNEYS TO  FREEDOM



education  and  improvement  of the masses by the  reforming  enthusiasts of "The Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge." By 1836, Susanna  was well into the  writing  of sketches for  John  Lovell's  Literary  Garland,   just  beginning  in Montreal,   and,  in  fact,  weeping  with  joy over  the  first  twenty-dollar   bill she received from him for her work.
All  three  ladies  encountered  and  recorded  the  dragons  of a  new  land -its
external  elements  of fierce climate,  raw,  hard  work and  crudity  of culture,  and the  haunting,   all-pervasive,  internal   struggle  against   loneliness,  isolation  and longing for  the unattainable homes. Each  one, however, had  and  developed  her own defenses of temperament  and talent, and for each woman the Canadian ex­ perience  was a liberating  one though  often  unrecognized  or  unacknowledged as such.  Though   her  letters give other  dimensions  to  her  experience  here, Winter  Studies and Summer  Rambles is Anna Jameson's  only published book on Canada. But  to  begin  to  assess the  intention  or appreciate  the  achievement  of Susanna  Moodie  or  Catharine Traill,  we can  and  we need  to  read  further: Life  in the Clearings as well as Roughing It in The  Bush, and The  Canadian  Settler's Guide as well as The  Backwoods of Canada. And for a really just assessment of any of them, of course, we need the complete editions. 1
These  women  were  not  "Victorians" -not  in  any  sense  that  connotes  the great  middle-class edifice of custom, appearance and  convention  or the  massive empire-mystique  that  grew in the minds of men  as the century  advanced. Anna was born  in 1794,  Catherine  in 18o3 and  Susanna  in 1805. They  grew up in a society that  was more open  and  more  robustly  permissive than  it  later  became and  at a time, in the afterglow of Waterloo,  when  the major  chords of national security  and  confidence had  their minor  counterpoint in the  personal insecurity, penury or desperation  that impelled the emigrant  ships to Canada. Jane  Austen's novels and  Muriel Jaeger's Before Victoria  illuminate  the kind of society the Stricklands  knew  and  the  hopes  and  ambitions  they  had,  as Cecil  Woodham­ Smith's  The  Great  Hunger  and  John  Prebble's  The Highland  Clearances show the stark  necessities behind  the emigration  of the Scots and  the Irish whom they
met in Canada.

ANNA MURPHY  had  grown  up  in  circumstances  radically different  from  the  Stricklands.  She  was  the  eldest  of  five daughters of  Denis
Murphy,  an  Irish  miniature  painter  who had  been embroiled  a little on the peri­
phery  of  the  disastrous  revolution  of 1798  and  who  then  found  it  prudent to


12

JOURNEYS TO  FREEDOM



leave  Ireland. Mr.  Murphy  was both talented  and  charming  and  for a time  he had  a heady  success in  England.  He was appointed  a Court  Miniaturist  and  he lived in the midst of a lively company of people with intellectual and cultural awareness  and  interests.  His success did  not  prevail for a long time, nor  did  it serve to provide for his family's future;  but during its time Anna was growing up, both clever and  ambitious,  eager and willing to make the most of any opportuni­ ties her father  could arrange  for her. She became a governess at the age of sixteen and, far from being broken by the gloomy tyranny that  was very often the fate of the governess, she found in nine years of intermittent  service plenty of opportunity in  the  two  areas  that  intrigued  her  most-travelling and  writing.  In  fact  she made full use of a degree of freedom that was forbidden  to the young women she was engaged  to  instruct.   Furthermore she  continued  what  she  had  long  since begun-a  self-education  in  European  languages, literatures  and  social customs that was to make her a "new woman" in her time. She moved towards the literary  circles, the  life  and  the  reputation   which suited  her  best with  a  determination and  a constant,  dogged industry  that  makes "choice"  too superficial a word  and  "temperamental necessity" a far  juster assessment of her motivation.  By the time  she and  Robert  Jameson  married  in  I825,  she was on her  way to becoming  a popular  author  and  by the  time he came  to Canada  in I 833 she was a famous  one.
The  Jamesons' marriage had not been successful from its first days and  it  cer­ tainly  had  small  chance  of surviving  against  the separation  of colonial  postings for Robert,  and  growing literary success and  increasing family responsibilities for Anna.  Her  decision  to  come  to Canada  in I 836  was  partially  motivated  by a sense of  marital   obligation,  but  even  more  by the  need  to come  to some  firm agreement  with Robert  Jameson  about separation. There  was also that secondary  but always present factor, the knowledge that out of such an experience she would certainly  write  a  book.  Long  before she left  England  she was tantalized  by the notions of making  a "wild  expedition"  to the west and of investigating the situa­ tions and  prospects  of women  in  Canada,  both  among  settlers and  among  the Indian  tribes.
She spent  about  eight  months in Canada, from December  of I 836  to August of  I837·  She  got  her  work  ready for  the  publisher  in the  months she spent  in America  waiting  for  her  legal separation  papers from  Robert  Jameson; Winter Studies and Summer Rambles in Canada was published in three volumes by John Murray, shortly after her return to England in the spring of 1838.

JOURNEYS TO  FREEDOM



From  it, and  from lettern to family and  friends,  her methods  are clear-and by the standards of her day they were notably scholarly. She read widely before travelling, she kept careful and  copious notes, and  then she did more reading  to support  and  extend  her own observations. For instance, she inserted and  worked carefully  into  her  text  a  good deal  of material  on  the  history  of Pontiac  from Alexander  Henry,  incidents from  George Loskiel's History  of the  Mission of the United   Brethren  among  the  Indians  of  North   America,  and   Indian   legends which  she had  heard  directly from  Henry  Schoolcraft  and  his wife and  which, incidentally, were printed for the first time in her book.
She  also knew,  by this time,  a  good deal  about  the  techniques  of successful writing.  She  had  superficially  fictionalized  the  narrator of  her  first book, The Diary of an Ennuyee  ( 1826), making her into a romantic  young lady who, when the tour  was all over, Europe seen and  commented  upon,  died of a mysteriously broken  heart.  This  dramatization had  given  Mrn. Jameson   a  certain  notoriety and  her  book a special success among the spate of travel diaries produced  in the decade  of Europe's  re-opening to the touring  British after  Waterloo. Some dozen years later  in  a Toronto  January, "imprisoned  in  this  relentless climate"  in  "a fourth  or fifth rate  provincial town with the pretensions of a capital  city," Anna did not have to imagine a romantic  persona to give her  journal  an ironic tension
-she herself, was incongruous  to  her situation.  She  had  only to  characterize herself as she  had  become, a cosmopolitan,  urban  intellectual,  to give a double edge to her work.

I  wished to throw open my house in the evening, and  break or thaw the social frost around me; but such a novel and unheard of idea would startle all the inhabi­ tants from their propriety.... I must look around for some thing to try my strength
-and force and fix my attention.

I must get "a file for the serpent." (Winter Studies) .

And so Anna set about  translating  Eckermann's Gespriiche mit Goethe and com­ menting  on  German   art   and  literature  in  her  journal-thus  vanquishing her dragons  and,  simultaneously,  heightening  the  effective  incongruity   of her  own self-portrait.
As reporter  and  critic, Anna  was free, frank  and  sharply  intelligent -far too
much so to please the Toronto society she could neither  tolerate  nor penetrate.

I did not expect to find here in this new capital of a new country, with the bound­ less forest within half a mile of us on almost every side-concentrated  as it were the worst evils of our old and most artificial social system at home, with none of its

JOURNEYS TO  FREEDOM



agremens, and  none of its advantages.... We have here a petty colonial oligarchy, a self-constituted aristocracy, based upon nothing real, nor even upon anything imaginary; and  we have  all  the mutual  jealousy and  fear,  and  petty gossip, and mutual   meddling  and  mean  rivalship,  which  are  common  in  a  small society of which the members are well known to each other. (Winter Studies).

Her  acid  observations are  witty  and  convincing in a timeless way, because to look at  any  small,  closed society  from  her literary-sophisticated point  of view is always to see cultural desolation. And  over  all the  years since  1837  a swelling chorus  of voices of gloom  has continued to belabour our  provincialism-though not often with  the  wit  and   perception of Anna  Jameson or  with  her  genuine integration into  European cosmopolitanism.
Her  Winter  Studies end  and  Summer  Rambles begin  with  her departure from
Toronto to  the  west  of  the  province  in  May  of  1837.  She  did  truly  make  the "wild  expedition" that her  family  letters show she was planning before she came to  Canada. She  travelled alone  overland through the  province to  Detroit, then up  the  lakes by steamer to  Michilimackinac and  on,  by bateau, to the Sault.  She declared with  great  satisfaction that  she was the  first white  woman to shoot  the rapids at Sault  Ste.  Marie-and  it is unlikely that  anyone would  care to dispute her claim.
Anna was  a  particularly astute  observer  of  customs  and   politics  in  Toronto, but  there   were  others   who  left  their  records:  here  on  tour  however,  her  work becomes  unique and  uniquely interesting. She enjoyed  touring, even  under  travel conditions that  were often  primitive and  her tone loses both  its acid  and  an inter­ mittent note  of sentimental self-pity.  She  was protected by her  genuine enthusi­ asm  and  carelessness  of physical  hardship -and she also took  care  to be known as "the Chancellor's Lady" whenever  such  a connection might  pay dividends in comfort or  courtesy. Above  all,  she  made  easy  and  genuinely  friendly  connec­  tions  with  people  on  her  way:   Henry  Schoolcraft left  an  admiring memoir  of Anna's "hearty and   warm   affections ... notwithstanding  her strong  author-like traits   and   peculiarities." He  also  recorded   her  and,  in  general, all  Europeans' focus on the American wilderness  with particular insight.

It  seems to me that  Englishmen  and  Englishwomen, for I have had  a good many of both sexes to visit me recently, look on America very much as one does when he peeps through  a magnifying  glass at pictures of foreign scenes, and the picturesque ruins of old cities and  the like. They are really very fine, but it is difficult to realise that such things are. It is all an optical illusion.2

JOURNEYS TO FREEDOM



"You  must  be content  to be immortalized in my fashion," Anna  wrote  to Mr. McMurray, Anglican   missionary  to  the  Sault, as she  was  making the  final  revi­ sions in  her  manuscript before  Winter  Studies'  publication. She  meant   just that; she was an author, confident  and,  at times, ruthless  in her  processes. Most impor­ tant  of all, an  essential detachment underlies her  work,  giving it great possibilities in  range,   but   just  as surely  limiting its depth. She  had,  in  Henry  Schoolcraft's opinion, "the most  accurate and  artistic  eye"  of any  of his visitors,  but  she  was, for all  that, a  tourist.  Her  talents,  her  perceptions and  her  interests went  far  be­ yond  the  ordinary, but  her  springboard had  the  timeless security  of all  tourists' poise-she did not have to stay.



SusANNA AND HER HUSBAND,  William  Dunbar Moodie, had both  aspired  in  England to the  kind  of literary life and  society  that  Anna Jame­ son  had  achieved, and  on  one  of its many  levels,  Roughing It  In  the  Bush is a dismal   elegy  to  those  ambitions and  to  the  Moodies' practical  expectations of emigration as  well.  Their  friend,  Tom   Wilson,  warned them  justly,  as Susanna admits.

I don't  want  you to weep, said Tom, but as to our qualifications,  Moodie, I think them  pretty equal. ... You go with the intention  of clearing  land, and working for yourself, and  doing a great deal. ... You expect, by going to Canada, to make your fortune,  or at least secure a comfortable independence. I anticipate no such results.
. . . I mean to purchase a farm with the three hundred  pounds  I received last week from  the  sale of my father's  property;  and  if the  Canadian soil yields only half what  Mr. C -says it does, I need not starve. But the refined habits in which you have  been  brought  up,  and  your  unfortunate literary  propensities- (I say  un­ fortunate, because you will seldom meet people  in a colony who can or will sym­ pathize with you in these pursuits) -they will make you an object of mistrust and envy to those who cannot appreciate  them, and  will be a source of  constant  morti­ fication  and  disappointment to yourself .... There  was  more  truth in  poor Tom's words than  at  that  moment we were willing to allow; for youth and  hope were on our side in those days.... (Roughing It).

Temperamentally, Susanna Moodie  had  much in  common with  Anna  Jame­ son,  but  Anna's radical choices  towards  personal freedom had  begun  very  early and  Susanna never  at any time  contemplated such  choices or their price.  Instead, like most  of us, she accepted both  social conventions and economic pressures  and then  fought the  battles  within  herself  towards some  balance. Unlike  most  of us, however,  Susanna had  the  means  to free herself  through her  writing; in the  very

16

JOURNEYS TO  FREEDOM



process of recording  her conflicts she transcended  them. She beat her dragons  by fighting them  living on the  page, and the energy of her struggle suffuses Rough­ ing It in the  Bush, giving it an enduring,  undeniable,  though maddeningly frag­ mented,  power.
Susanna's interests, like Anna Jameson's, were centred in people-more speci­
fically in  her  own  encounters  with  and  reactions  to  people. There is really  no more depth  of response to the Canadian wilderness in Susanna  than  Schoolcraft records in  Anna.  Such  lines as these voice a conventional  response already  trite when she wrote them:

And silence -awful silence broods Profoundly o'er  these solitudes ... A sense of desolation  reigns
O'er these unpeopled forest plains.  (Roughing It).

There  are discomfort, economic disaster and inconvenience in Canadian nature for Susanna: but there  is no terror. In fact she and Anna,  and  Catharine Traill, were extraordinarily rugged  women and  physically very brave ones. But Susanna could  not  go  home  again  and  she  was afraid  of the strange  people she met  in Canada, who seemed so unruly to her, so appallingly likely to upset her only real security,  her  confidence  in  the order  of society as she knew it. She suffered  real "culture shock" from the moment of landing at Grosse Isle where several hundred Irish immigrants,  "each  shouting  or yelling in his or her uncouth  dialect, and  all accompanying their  vociferations with violent and extraordinary gestures, [were] quite  incomprehensible  to the uninitiated." What  was more frightening still was to find that  their fellow passengers, "honest Scotch labourers  and  mechanics from the  vicinity  of Edinburgh," who  had  behaved  with orderly  propriety  on  board ship, "no  sooner set foot upon the island than  they became infected  by the same spirit  of insubordination and  misrule, and  were just as noisy and  insolent as the rest."
Susanna  survived  the initial  shock of "detribalization" and  many  others. She recorded  her  adventures with  the people she met, playing them  against  her own dramatized persona, a version of the workaday  Susanna  who did, in spite of her storms within,  bear seven children, learn to bake and work in the fields, and with her husband,  gradually secure the family establishment they had come for.
When  she  arrived  in  Canada  she was a  writer  of sentimental  tales in  which virtue always, finally, triumphed and the sun shone again. But her perceptions deepened  as her  notions  of life and  order  were shattered  and  in  the wondering

JOURNEYS TO FREEDOM



pity  of  her  treatment of Brian,  the  lonely  hunter, in  Roughing   It, or  the  stark realism  of her  treatment of Grace  Marks,  the  murderess, in Life in the Clearings, she  moved  from  sentimental innocence to  the  recognition, with  both  acceptance and sympathy, of the irreconcilable presence of the tragic.
Susanna never  achieved  a consistency  of tragic  vision in her  writing-and  in her  life she  was  not  seriously  undermined by  bitterness or  despair. Instead, con­ flict was very often  deflected  into  comedy  as her vision of herself, and others, was tempered by  humour which  she  found  socially  unacceptable,  but  which  in  fact kept  her  going.

I wish nature  had  not given me such a quick perception  of the ridiculous-such a perverse  inclination   to  laugh  in  the  wrong  place:   for  though  one  cannot   help deriving from it a wicked enjoyment, it is a very troublesome gift, and very difficult to conceal (Life in the Clearings) .

It  is  a  fascinating exercise  to  look  at  Roughing   It  and  see Susanna's  pen­ and  her personality-at work. The  book is a  bewildering, contradictory  amalgam of  personal   moods  and  literary  modes-sentimental, comic,  tragic,  didactic. It is  also,  unmistakeably, the  work  of  a  gifted,  but  embryonic,  novelist  who,  in  a dozen  or so characters and  as many  scattered scenes,  moved  from  the  raw  world she  lived  in  towards the  timeless reality of a contained world  of the  imagination.
Anna  Jameson had  reported Canadian settlers' wives as being  "repining and discontented," almost  without exception. "I  never  met  with  one woman recently settled  here  who considered  herself happy  in her  new home and  country: I heard of  one,  and   doubtless  there  are  others,  but  they  are  exceptions to  the  general rule." (Winter Studies)



CATHARINE TRAILL was certainly the one contented woman. With   her,  it  was  simply  a  matter of  being  perfectly fitted  by  both  nature and training to adapt to and  find fulfillment  and  freedom in the  new land. She liked to  think  of her  experience as a "Crusoe  adventure"; she called  one of her  books for children Canadian Crusoes. In it, remarkably for her  time, she advocated intermarriage among the  Indian and  Scottish, French and  English  children who were  her  protagonists. And  like a  Crusoe  herself,  she  wrote  of emigration as an eminently rational, confident  and  purposeful movement towards the founding of a  property, "that their  children  may  be placed  in a situation in which,  by indus­ try  and   activity,   the  substantial comforts  of  life  may  be  permanently  obtained,

18

JOURNEYS TO FREEDOM



and   a  landed  property handed  down  to  them  and  their  children after  them."
(The Backwoods).
She  did  not  relate  to  people  less easily than  Anna  and  Susanna -on the con­ trary,  people  almost  certainly found  her easier to love. She did,  however, react  to others  less emotionally and  far  less egocentrically. She  did  not  have  their kind  of creative imagination which  made  adventure of every  movement and  themselves the   heroines.   She   was  creative,  nonetheless,   inspired   with   a  scientist's endless curiosity  about things   and   with  a  scientist's  patience  for  collecting,  tabulating, describing and  classifying.  She  simply  walked  past-or  through-the dragons which  beset the  others  to look  at, then  to study,  then  to describe  and  classify, the life, especially the  plant-life, of the world around her.
The  Backwoods of Canada was certainly  edited  in  a  way  thought best for  its didactic purpose, and  it suffers  accordingly from  a monotone blandness: there  is no struggle  recorded and  therefore no present energy on the  page. But Catharine's other  books,  particularly The Canadian Settler's  Guide  and  Studies  of Plant  Life in Canada  have edge  and  point  because,  by the time she wrote them, she knew so much,  and  she  told  it all with  beautiful precision -and sometimes wit. To  look back  at  her  life and  her  works  is to see one indivisible structure, equally remark­ able for its practical solidity  and  for the beauty  of its poise. Catharine Traill came the  closest of all our  writers  to finding  benign  perfection  in this land -not Eden,  however,  but  Canaan, a new freedom  for herself and  her family, and freedom for all the lost and  wandering in the land's own promise of fruitfulness.


FOOTNOTES

1 The  New Canadian  Library  editions of Winter  Studies and Summer  Rambles  and The   Backwoods  of Canada  were massively cut  to the  requirements of that  series. Carl Klinck explains  his editorial  decisions about Roughing  it in the Bush in his introduction  to  the  NCL  edition.  Life  in  the  Clearings, edited  by Robert  Mac­ Dougall,  is complete  in  the  Carleton  Library series, but  is not available  in paper­  back at all. Only The  Canadian  Emigrant's Guide  (NCL)  carries the complete text of the author. It has been edited of certain parts of its appendices.
2   Henry  Rowe  Schoolcraft,   Personal Memoirs  of a Residence  of Thirty Years  with the Indian Tribes on the American Frontier (Philadelphia, 1851), 567.









19



DESIGN AND PURPOSE





R. D. MacDonald









S,NCE FEW  READERS   have  seriously  considered  Su=ma Moodie's  Roughing it in the Bush as a work of art,  I have had  misgivings about my own exploration  of the design underlying  this work. Moreover,  I have had to admit  that  Mrs.  Moodie  herself seems oblivious  of her  own  purpose  or of the
pattern  developing  within her work. Says she:  "It is not  my intention  to give a regular  history of our residence in the bush, but  merely to present to my readers such  events as may serve to illustrate  a life in the  woods."1  A modest intention indeed ! All that  she seemingly requires of herself is to make her experience  real. Notice  that  she  has freed  herself from  the  requirements of a  single thesis and from the demands of a single chronology.
As Mrs. Moodie recounts the years of r8g6 and  37, her purpose shifts to "illus­
trate the necessity of a perfect and childlike reliance upon the mercies of God ... " But after  she has descended from her experience  of the sublime and  from theo­ logical  speculation,  she  becomes wholly absorbed  in  the  particulars  of  pioneer life; her  book begins to read more and more like a handyman's guide, a how-to­ make-do  book.  Her  purpose  now seems that  of the  seasoned  guide  who would show potential  emigrants  how to adapt  to the bush. Thus  dandelion  roots substi­ tute  for  coffee, and  afford  this advice  to  the  potential  emigrant:  "To  persons residing in the  bush, and  to whom tea and  coffee are  very  expensive articles of luxury, the knowledge of this valuable property  in a plant scattered so abundantly through  the fields, would prove highly beneficial." Again, as the book approaches  its close, in "The Walk to Dummer", the author seems to offer practical  advice to the would-be colonist. As she describes the qualities  required  by the successful pioneer, she implies that even a gentleman  can  be a successful frontiersman:

20

DESIGN AND  PURPOSE



... if this book is regarded  not as a work of amusement but one of practical experi­ ence, written  for the benefit of others, it will not fail to convey some useful hints to those who have contemplated emigration  to Canada,  the best country in  the world for the industrious  and  well-principled  man who really comes out  to work, and  to better  his condition  by the labour of his hands;  but a gulf of ruin  to  the vain and idle, who only set foot upon these shores to accelerate their ruin.

In  the  last  chapter, however, after  having  asserted  her  own  contentment in  the bush  ("I was  contented to live and  die in obscurity"), after  having  nostalgically described   the   pleasantness of  their  leavetaking, the  cordial hospitality   afforded them  while  on  the  road, the  beauty  and  good  humour of their  ride  itself-after all  this,  Mrs.  Moodie suddenly ends  the  story  and  then   reverts  to  the  purpose expressed in her preface:

To  the  poor,  industrious  working man  it  presents many  advantages; to the  poor gentleman,   none! The  former  works hard,  puts up  with  coarse, scanty  fare,  and submits, with  good grace,  to hardships  that  would kill a domesticated  animal  at home....

In  her  last  words  the  bush  is named  a  "prison-house" and  the  life there  simply one of "toil"and "suffering".
How  is one  to read  such  a contradictory work? Is it best simply  to use Rough­
ing it in the Bush as a historian might,  i.e. by looking through Susanna Moodie's book on to the  183o's  of Upper Canada or of the British empire? Is it best, if one is to  look at  the  work  itself, simply  to touch  and  go, to  point  out  Mrs.  Moodie's ironic  narrative voice and  then  slide away from  the book  by comparing this voice to Jane Austen's? Or  is it  best finally, simply  to accept   Roughing it in the Bush as a work  roughly  hewn,  an  anecdotal travelogue, a work  in which  experience is half  digested,  a  work  digressive  and  discontinuous, a  work  filled  with  vigorous, humorous but  rather pointless character sketches?
To  answer  these  questions, I will argue  first that  Mrs.  Moodie's representation of  nature does  unify  Roughing it in the Bush, and  secondly  that  the  design  of the  chapters emphasizes this  representation of nature. Even  here  the  book  may appear  confused:  it  is  easy  to  construe Susanna  Moodie carrying  across  the Atlantic romantic notions  of nature which  are  inappropriate to her  new setting. It becomes   clear   quickly,   however,   that   her  romantic ecstasies  are  not  single­ minded, or  naive,  at  least  in  so far  as  Moodie-the-writer re-creates  her  earlier  experience. In  her  first description of the serene  and silent  beauty  of  the shores of the  St.  Lawrence, it  is obvious  that  the  writer  in retrospect has  so  framed the

21

DESIGN AND PURPOSE



scene  that  the  reader must suspect  ironic  implication:  picturesque beauty, one is led  to  believe,  is not  reality.  Even  before  she  describes  the  scene,  her  dour  Scot sees the  picturesque white  houses in  the  distance as follows:   "Weel, it  beats  a'! Can  thae  white  clouts  be a' houses? They  look like claes hung  out  to drie !" And Mrs.  Moodie  herself  wonders  whether "familiarity with  the  scene  has  rendered the  habitants indifferent to  its astonishing beauty." Once the  picture itself  and her  day  dreams have  been  broken  by the  return of the  ship's  boat,  the skeptical frame again  is made apparent: the Captain warns  that  "many things look well at a  distance which  are  bad  enough   when  near." As the  ship's   party  approaches Grosse  Isle, the  pastoral  view of nature begins  to dissipate: "It was four  o'clock when  we landed on  the  rocks,  which  the  rays of an  intensely  scorching sun  had rendered so hot  that  I  could  scarcely  place  my foot  upon  them." Moreover the unpleasant effect of the place upon emigrants is suddenly made clear:

The  people who covered the island appeared  perfectly destitute  of shame, or even a  sense of  common  decency.  Many  were  almost  naked,  still  more  but  partially clothed.  We turned  in disgust from  the revolting  scene, but  were unable  to leave the spot until  the captain  had  satisfied a noisy group  of his people, who were de­ manding  a supply of stores.

The spirit  of the  place  becomes  a disease:  even  Scots  "who while  on board  ship had   conducted  themselves  with  the  greatest   propriety, and   appeared the  most quiet, orderly  set of people in the  world,  no sooner  set foot  upon  the  island  than they  became  infected  by the same spirit  of insubordination and  misrule,  and  were just as insolent and  noisy as the rest."
Again,  as  Mrs.  Moodie  describes  Quebec, the  same  bursting of the  romantic
dream occurs.  The   "grandeur" and   the  "picture  perfect" quality of  the  land­ scape,  and  the  sense that  this  landscape is the  work  of a "Divine Originator" so affects her that  she reports:

my spirit fell prostrate  before it, and I melted involuntarily into tears. Yes, regard­ less of the eager  crowds around  me, I leant  upon  the side of the vessel  and  cried like a child -not tears of sorrow, but a gush from the heart  of pure and unalloyed delight.  I heard   not  the  many  voices murmuring in  my  ears-I  saw  not  the anxious beings that  thronged our narrow deck -my soul at the moment  was alone with  God.

If this passage is not  bathetic, the one following  closely upon  it is, as Mrs. Moodie chauvinistically prophesies  that  only a great  nation could  rise from such a great landscape. Then to make matters worse, after  apparently coming back to herself,

22

DESIGN AND PURPOSE



she abruptly states: "But  I have  wandered away from my subject  into  the regions of  thought  and   must   again   descend   to  common   workaday  realities." On   this lower  level, what  follows is a satirical  account of the vainglorious expectations of the  working   class  immigrants.  Moreover from  the  first  hand   accounts of  those who  have  visited  Quebec, Moodie  suggests  that  man  destroys  the  perfection  of nature-a view  not  entirely  contrary to the  Wordsworthian or romantic notions which  she has carried across the Atlantic.

Towards  night,  most of the steerage  passengers returned,  greatly  dissatisfied with their  first visit  to the city, which  they declared  to be a filthy hole, that  looked a great  deal  better from  the ship's side than it did from the shore. This  I have often been told, is literally the case. Here, as elsewhere, man has marred  the magnificent creation  of his Maker.

In  this passage  and  in her description of the cholera  raging  in Quebec, the cynical empiricism of the captain is confirmed: don't  trust first appearances.
Romantic anticipation and   disenchantment, high  style  and  low,  continue to
alternate. But  this  anticipation and  high style become a smaller  and  smaller  part of the book. In  part,  anticipation is replaced  by nostalgia  for the idyllic British countryside: " ... I had  discoursed  sweet words to the tinkling brook, and learned from  the  melody  of  the  waters  and  music  of  natural sounds. In  these  beloved solitudes  all the  holy emotions which  stir the  human  heart  in its depths had  been freely  poured   forth, and   found   a  response  in  the  harmonious voice  of  Nature, bearing aloft  the  choral  song  of earth   to  the  throne of the  Creator." Nature is remembered as  the  "indulgent mother, holding  out  her  living  arms  to enfold  to her  bosom  her  erring but  devoted  child." By what  seems  a sheer  effort  of will, however,   Mrs.  Moodie turns  from  her  lament  for things  past.  Still  avoiding the present, she  prophesies  a glorious  future for  Canada, the  land  now  of her future, her  children's future and  the  land  of her  children's graves.  Typically, however, this  chapter falls  away  from   this  "high style"  to  the  ludicrous incongruities of Tom  Wilson  remembered, to the low reality  of the crowded immigrant boat,  and finally  to  the  droll  but  foreboding grumbling of Tom  Wilson,  who  has  preceded the  Moodies to the New World. Says Tom:

I was tired and  hungry, my face disfigured and blistered by the unremitting atten­ tions of the black flies that  rose in swarms from the river. I thought  to get a private room to wash and  dress in, but there is no such thing as privacy in this country. In the  bush, all things are in common;  you cannot  even get a bed  without having  to share it with a companion.  A bed on the floor in a public sleeping room! Think  of that, a public sleeping room -men, women and children, only divided  by a paltry

23

DESIGN AND  PURPOSE



curtain.  Oh ye gods! think of the snoring, squalling, grumbling, puffing; think of the kicking, elbowing and crowding; the suffocating heat, the mosquitoes with their infernal buzzing-and you will form some idea of the misery I endured the first night of my arrival in the bush.

This alternation  of the high and low may lead the reader to assert that Susanna Moodie's  vision was contradictory,  her style uneven.  But as I have said, the low is usually implied in the high or else the low frames the high. Moreover, the high mimetic  mode  becomes a smaller  and  smaller  part  of the  book as the story  be­ comes more  and  more a catalogue of narrowly averted  disasters and  as the story implies that  in Canada, at least, nature  is a heartless tyrant  who grinds down the fine  edges  of  the  British gentleman.  The   plot  itself,  (as  it  moves  in  circular fashion  from  British  village, to  the  Lower  St.  Lawrence,  to  Lake  Ontario, to the  deep  bush, and  finally back to the Canadian counterpart of  British civiliza­ tion,  the  village)  implies surely that  the  Canadian bush or  Canadian nature  is not suitable to the Moodie family.
On   a  smaller  scale,  the  arrangement   of  chapters,  especially  the  alternation
of  espisodic  chapters  and  chapters  of  character   sketch,  again  suggest  a  single significant  pattern  within  Roughing  it in the  Bush:  the  character  sketches may seem at first to have no function,  beyond merely presenting interesting personali­ ties, but  these chapters  act as watersheds between  the flows of  action, and  more importantly they imply failure,  if  the  Moodies stay in the  bush. If one sees the book in this way, he finds five sections:
1. Chapters  I and II. The  Moodies travel up-river from Grosse Isle, to Quebec,
to Montreal  and to Upper  Canada. The  third  chapter,  "Tom  Wilson", a charac­ ter  sketch,  explains  the  causes for  the  Moodies'  emigrating and  foreshadows ominously the events to come.
2.  Chapters  IV  to  X. Mrs. Moodie describes their  first settlement,  the low life
of the frontier  American, and the evils of borrowing.  Chapter X, "Brian  the Still Hunter", is again  a character  sketch, a watershed  chapter  and  a warning  against the  perils of the  British gentleman's  emigrating  to Canada. Chapter XI,  "The Charivari", does not fit neatly into  my scheme  because  this section of the  book does occasionally  seem strictly anecdotal,  especially where  Mrs.  Moodie  angrily describes the charivari,  a custom whereby newlyweds, ill-matched  in age or race, are  tormented  by the young bucks of the neighbourhood. But the  chapter  does draw  many  loose ends together  as she begins to generalize about  the differences between British customs and Canadian customs. And as in the watershed chapter, "Tom   Wilson",  Mrs.  Moodie  fills in  the  background   of  the  story:   why  they

DESIGN AND  PURPOSE



emigrated,  why she  pined  away  in the new world, why servants  brought  to the new  world  became  unruly,  and  why masters and servants  must  eat  at separate tables.2
3· Chapters  XII   to  XVI. The  Moodies are now farming  in the  bush proper
-clearing  the  trees  and  building  their  own  log cabin.  Mrs.  Moodie's  stance seems that  of a wide-eyed  Gulliver reporting  upon an entirely new world;  every particular seems a novelty and seems to demand  a new digressive anecdote. Like later  generations  of Canadian school children, she writes  what  has become the cliche forest fire, a violent story in which the hero or heroine escapes certain death by sheer  luck,  the  deus ex machina  being a thunderstorm. Her  account  of the logging bee is boisterous and  comical, especially her story of the capering  Malichi Chroak,   but  her  viewpoint   remains  consistently  ladylike:   she  disapproves  of drunken  abandon and careless accident in the bees.
The  series of  loosely connected  anecdotes  is brought  to  an  end  by not  one chapter  but three. J. W. D. Moodie's sketch of Simpson in "The Ould  Draghoon" fits into the overall pattern  of the book as the "Ould  Draghoon's" Crusoe-like iso­
lation  and  ingenuity  bode ill for the Moodies who are slowly approaching Simp­ son's  primitive  level  of  subsistence.  The   next  chapter,   XVIII,  "Disappointed Hopes",  is the  watershed  chapter  of the  whole book:  the  reader  finds himself with one foot in the preceding  flow of bush anecdotes and with the other foot in a  muskeg  of  complaints.   The   damp  summer's  ruining  their  crops,  Moodie's declining steam  boat stock, the necessity of Susanna working at last in the fields
-these sad  events begin the  chapter.  Admittedly  Mrs. Moodie shows herself as having grown as a result of these disappointments, especially as now she can sympathize genuinely with the lower class and she has acquired  the lore of making­ do-e.g.,  dandelion   roots  as coffee substitutes.  But  the  catalogue  of  afHiction continues:   their  bull  is stolen;  their  hogs are  vindictively driven  by  neighbours into the lake and  drowned.  But this afHiction is surmounted  apparently, as Mrs. Moodie's comic voice returns: she describes their more-than-Christian dog, Spot, who  won't,  even  though  necessity requires  it,  eat  the  flesh of  his dead  friend,  Hector  the hog. The  chapter  ends satirically as she describes the shy courtship of her two young servants.
Chapter   XVX,  "The Little  Stumpy  Man''  is still part  of the  watershed  and again  an  ominous  character study.  Malcolm,  the little stumpy  man,  is a direct threat  to Mrs. Moodie. He is depicted as surly, sly, selfish and unprincipled. With his smouldering  anger  he becomes virtually satanic. Her  description of Malcolm, I, at least, find extremely sexual:

DESIGN AND  PURPOSE



He  was a  strange-looking  creature; his features  were  tolerably  regular;  his  com­ plexion  dark,  with  a good  colour;  his very  broad  and  round  head  was  covered with  a  perfect  mass of close, black, curling  hair,  which, in growth,  and  texture, and  hue, resembled  the wiry, curly hide of a waterdog.  His eyes and  mouth  were both  well shaped,  but gave, by their  sinister  expression,  an  odious  and  doubtful meaning  to the whole of his physiognomy. The  eyes were cold, insolent and  cruel, and  as green  as  the eyes of a cat. The  mouth  bespoke a  sullen, determined  and sneering disposition, as if it belonged to one brutally obstinate,  one who could not by any gentle means be persuaded from his purpose.

Malcolm challenges Mrs.  Moodie's  rigid  sense  of  propriety by suggesting  that  it is a  hypocrisy  that  can  be dispensed  with.  The issue of  propriety or  hypocrisy  is raised  here  as  a  consequence of  her  objection to  Malcolm's ungentlemanly  be­ haviour toward the family maid.  Replies Malcolm:

Ah  you are  such  a  prude -so  methodistical -you  make  no  allowance  for  cir­ cumstances!  Surely, in the woods we may dispense with  the  hypocritical, conven­ tional forms of society, and speak and act as we please.

Certainly  Malcolm   is a  threat   to  the  Moodies  as  he  attempts to  foster  discord between  man  and  wife;  and  as he becomes  a  burden by  refusing  to leave  or  to share  the  work,  he is also a threat to the family  economy. This  chapter then  is an ominous prelude to the final movement of Roughing it in the Bush.
4· Chapters  XX  to  XXIII. A series of narrowly averted catastrophes increas­
ingly  implies  failure. The  burning of  their  cabin   roof,  which  could  easily  have caused  the  loss of all their  possessions; the  Rebellion of 1837,  which  could  have meant  death for  J. W. D.  Moodie  but  which  brought unexpected money  to the
family; the  hurricane which  narrowly  missed the  cabin; the  ten  weeks of sickness and  the loss of friends who move away-all these  misfortunes imply near  failure. Chapter XXIII, "The Walk  to  Dummer", does  not  really  belong  to  this  cata­ logue  of narrowly averted  disasters;  nor  is the  chapter really  a character sketch. But this short  anecdote, in which Susanna Moodie embarks on a mission of  mercy,  and  the  short  sketch  of the  destitute family  which  she is saving,  imply surely  that  the  Moodies  themselves  may soon come to the same  dire straits. Though Moodie, unlike  the  absent  head  of this destitute family,  is not  a  drunkard, he is a British gentleman  living  in  the  bush  and   therefore  within  the  terms   of  this  book,  a potential failure.
5· Chapters  XXIV to  XXV. One  might  argue that   Roughing  it in the  Bush
is nicely rounded off, as in the last two chapters the  circle of events is completed:
the  Moodies  have  left civilization,  settled  in the  bush  and  now  return to civiliza-

DESIGN AND PURPOSE



tion; through  Mrs. Moodie's plea to the Lieutenant-Governor, Sir  George Arthur, on  behalf   of her  husband, he is offered the  position of sheriff  of District V-near  Belleville. But  the  last  two  chapters move  in an  uneven fashion, begin­ ning with  elevated speculations about intuition and  then shifting abruptly  to  the  raw  chunks of  Mrs. Moodie's undigested experience of the  bush. This first  para­ graph is in her  high  speculative style:

The   holy  and  mysterious nature of man  is yet hidden  from  himself; he is still  a stranger to the movements of that  inner  life, and  knows little  of its capabilities and powers.  A purer  religion,  a higher  standard of moral  and  intellectual training, may in  time  reveal  all  this.  Man   still  remains  a  half-reclaimed savage;   the  leaven  of Christianity is slowly  and  surely  working  its way,  but  it  has  not  yet changed the whole  lump, or  transformed the  deformed into  the  beauteous child  of God.  Oh, for that  glorious  day!  It is coming.  The dark  clouds of humanity are  already  tinged with  the  golden   radiance of  the  dawn,   but  the  sun  of  righteousness has  not  yet arisen  upon  the  world  with  healing  on his wings:  the light of truth still struggles  in the  womb  of darkness, and  man  stumbles  on  to the  fulfilment of his sublime  and mysterious destiny.

The very   next  paragraph  reads like  the   diary of   an   Ontario  farmer  totally absorbed in the  particulars of his life:

This  spring I  was  not  a little  puzzled  how  to get in  the crops.  I still continued so weak  that   I  was  quite   unable   to  assist in  the  field,  and  my  good  old  Jenny   was sorely  troubled with  inflamed feet,  which  required  constant care.  At this  juncture, a  neighbouring settler,   who  had  recently  come  among   us, offered   to  put  in  my small  crop  of peas,  potatoes, and  oats, in all not comprising more  than  eight  acres, if  I  would  lend  him  my oxen  to log-up  a large  fallow  of ten  acres  and  put  in  his own  crops.  Trusting to  his fair  dealing,  I  consented to  this arrangement; but  he took advantage of my isolated  position,  and  not only logged-up his fallow, but  put in  all  his  spring  crops  before  he sowed  an  acre  of mine.  The  oxen  were  worked down  so low that  they  were almost  unfit  for use, and  my crops were put  in so late, and  with  such  little  care,  that  they all proved  a failure. I should  have  felt  this loss more  severely  had  it happened in any  previous  year;  but  I had  ceased  to feel that deep  interest in  the  affairs  of the  farm  from  a sort of conviction in my own  mind that  it would not long remain my home.

Perhaps this  kind   of  unevenness is to  be excused  in travel or  frontier literature, but   as  I  have already suggested, the   very  last  paragraph of  the   book  follows illogically from the  previous paragraphs. Mrs. Moodie warns the  emigrant gentle­ man to avoid settling in  the  bush, yet  just  before this,  she  has  been describing the  beauty of  the  winter sleigh   ride, the  pleasant leavetaking from  their  neighbours,

DESIGN AND  PURPOSE



and  the  warm  hospitality  of the innkeepers who shelter  the  Moodies on their  trip to  Belleville.  Thus though   the  reader   is perhaps prepared  for  the  closing  of  a circular plot,  he  is startled  at  the sudden and  contradictory warning which  ends the  book.
Recognizing  the   discontinuity  within   these  last  paragraphs, one  should   not
forget the pattern that  does integrate the book-the catalogue of narrowly averted disasters  which  increasingly  imply failure  for the  Moodies if they do not leave the bush,  and  the  cyclical  plot  (village,  bush,  village)  which  suggests  that  they can­ not  continue living  in  the  bush.  The  book  is also significantly tied  together by those  transitional  chapters, those  watershed chapters,  which   are  comprised of character sketches.  Each  sketch  is an  ominous picture of  the  British  gentleman who fails in the bush.
Tom  Wilson  may  be seen merely  as a humorous eccentric, but  he really serves a  larger   purpose, for  the  impractical, absent-minded Tom, a  caricature of  the British  gentleman, is totally  incapable of coping  with  the  bush.  He  fails, and  his failure   foreshadows  Moodie's   failure. This   is  obvious   in  Chapter II  as  Tom warns  Moodie that  he is even more liable to failure than Tom  himself:

As  to  our  qualifications,  Moodie,  I think  them  pretty  equal.  I know  you think otherwise, but  I will explain.  Let me see; what  was I going to say?-ah,  I have it! You go with the intention  of clearing land, and  working for yourself, and doing a great deal. I have tried that before in New South  Wales, and I know that it won't answer. Gentlemen  can't  work like labourers, and  if they could  they won't-it is not in them, and  that  you will find out. You expect,  by going to Canada, to make your fortune, or at least to secure a comfortable independence. I anticipate no such results; yet I mean to go partly out of a whim, partly to satisfy my curiosity whether it  is a  better  country  than  South  Wales; and  lastly, in  the  hope of bettering  my condition  in a small way, which is at present so bad  that  it can scarcely be worse.

Even  the  Moodies'   literary   talents  will  make  them   "an object   of  mistrust   and envy to those who cannot  appreciate them,  and  will be a source  of constant morti­ fication   and   disappointment.... " Certainly the  story  bears  out  Tom  Wilson's warning as the  Moodies  decline  to failure  and  as their  neighbours consider  Mrs. Moodie  a freak.  In  Life in The  Clearings, she becomes  "the one that  writes."
At first reading, Brian the Still Hunter, may appear as no more than  an interest­
ing  character, a  Canadian counterpart of the  American Natty Bumpo, the  iso­ lated  gentleman of the  woods who sees the woods as God's  temple and  who in his theological  musings   seems  as  much   mystic  as  woodsman. But  Mrs.  Moodie's  sketch  of Brian  is not  a comforting one. How  can  one  man  be so violent  and  so

DESIGN AND  PURPOSE



gentle?  This seems  to be the  question  she is asking.  Moreover, in  Ned's  account of Brian's attempt at suicide, she makes the violence extremely  gross:

If I did  not find him, upon  my landing  on the opposite shore, lying wallowing in his blood with  his throat  cut.  'Is  that  you, Brian?' says I, giving him a kick with my foot, to see if he was alive or dead. 'What  upon earth  tempted  you to play me and  F         such a dirty, mean  trick, as to go and stick yourself like a pig, bringing such  a  discredit  upon  the  house?-and you so far  from  horne  and  those who should  nurse you!'
I was so mad  with  him  that  (saving your presence, ma'am) I swore awfully, and called him names that would be ondacent to repeat here; but he only answered with groans  and  a horrid  gurgling  in his throat.  'It's  a choking  you are,' said I;
'but  you shan't  have your own way and  die so easily either, if I can punish you by keeping you alive.' So I just turned  him upon his stomach, with his head down the steep bank;  but he still kept choking and growing black in the face.

The  indignation exhibited in  this  grotesque account  has  its  counterpart in  the shame exhibited by Brian  himself as he explains  to Mrs.  Moodie  that his hunting is both  madness itself and  a compulsive  attempt to purge  himself of madness.

'Tis  the  excitement ... it drowns  thought,  and  I love to be alone.  I am sorry for the creatures,  too, for they are free and happy;  yet I am led by an instinct I cannot restrain  to  kill  them.  Sometimes  the  sight  of their  dying agonies  recalls  painful feelings, and  then  I lay aside the gun, and  do not hunt for days. But 'tis fine to be alone with  God in the great  woods-to watch the sunbeams stealing  through  the thick branches,  the blue sky breaking in upon you in patches, and  to know that all is bright and shiny above you, in spite of the gloom that surrounds  you.

In  this  paragraph it is evident  that  Brian's  hunting and  his individualistic nature worship  serve  the  same  root  purpose,  i.e. to  purge  him  of intolerable gloom. On the  same  page,  hunting also  becomes  a way of purging his sense of degradation, because   he  has  sunk  so  low  in  the  bush  and  because  of  his  earlier   attempt at suicide.  Thus hunting becomes  "the stimulant which  he lost when  he  renounced the  cursed   whiskey  bottle." In  his  eccentricity, Brian  is a  mad   version  of  the British  gentleman who  has gone native,  who has been swallowed  up by the  bush, while  somehow   retaining the  courtesy  of a gentleman. His  madness surely  is an extension  of Tom Wilson's  eccentricity, and  his failure a foreshadowing of the Moodies' possible end.
Simpson, the  Ould  Draghoon, can  hardly  be called  the  British  gentleman, but he is the British  soldier  "Crusoefied" by the bush. As Simpson  ingeniously  "makes do",  as he  ingeniously employs  wood  and  leather  for all  his domestic  and  farm-

DESIGN AND  PURPOSE



ing  purposes,  as he ingeniously  employs  one shoe,  alternating it from  foot  to foot to save wear  and  tear,  Mr. Moodie  is obviously  presenting a humorous caricature, one which seems based upon the isolated, affiicted and  ingenious Robinson Crusoe.
But  there  is more  than  humour here,  for  as  J. W.  D.  Moodie muses  upon  the
wisdom  of Simpson's resigning  himself to fate,  his thoughts imply  surely  the  pos­
sibility of himself and  his family  being reduced  to Simpson's marginal subsistence:

A certain  degree of dissatisfaction with our present circumstances is necessary to stimulate  us to exertion, and  thus to enable us to secure future  comfort;  but where the delusive prospect of future  happiness is too remote for any reasonable  hope of ultimate  attainment, then, surely it is true wisdom to make the most of the present and  to  cultivate  a  spirit  of  happy  contentment  with  the  lot  assigned  to  us by providence.

Thus, despite  the  unevenness  of Susanna  Moodie's style,  her  contradictory set of purposes, and  the anecdotal fragmentation of her story, a basic pattern unfolds in  Roughing  it  in the  Bush. The   movement is from   romantic anticipation to disillusionment, from   nature as  beautiful  and   benevolent to  nature as  a  dan­ gerous  taskmaster. The  story  moves  from  her  experience of  the  sublime  to  her catalogue of near  disasters.  What remains  constant is Mrs.  Moodie's  viewpoint, an  ironic  and  skeptical  retrospection, which  from  the first pages  brings into  ques­ tion  the  heady  optimism  of the emigrant. The character sketches  are constant too as they  imply  that  the  British gentleman must fail in the  bush. Susanna Moodie's
basic fable  warns  "Beware!"

FOOTNOTES

1 Susanna   Moodie,  Roughing  it  in  the  Bush  or  Forest  Life  in  Canada   (Toronto,
1923),  p. 295· This  edition  is more accessible than  the original  London  edition  of
1852 and more complete than  the New York edition of r852  or the Toronto  edition of 1966. Minor variations in spelling will be found. The chapter  entitled  "The  Magic
Spell"  in  the  original  edition  becomes "Adieu  to  the  Woods".  Two  chapters  are dropped. See below.
2   In  the  original  edition,  "The  Charivari" is followed  by "The Village  Hotel"  and "The Land  Jobber",  both chapters  written  by Mr.  Moodie.  Here  he continues  his wife's drawing  of loose ends together  and  continues  explaining  the basic difference between  life in the Old Country  and  the New. He explains more fully than  his for­ bearing  wife why he made such poor investments in land  and  in steam boat stock. More  importantly,   he  generalizes further   than  she  and  explains  why the  colonist possesses more energy and will than the European:
The knowledge of  the  causes  which   promote the  rapid settlement of a  new  country, and of  those   in  general which  lead   to  the  improvement of  the  physical condition of  mankind, may  be  compared to  the  knowledge of  a  language. The inhabitant of  a  civilized   and  long­ settled country  may  speak  and   write   his  own  language with   the  greatest purity;  but  very few  ever   reflect   on  the  amount of  thought, metaphor, and  ingenuity which   has  been  ex­ pended by  their   less  civilized  ancestors in  bringing that  language to  perfection.  The bar-

DESIGN AND  PURPOSE



barian first  feels  the  disadvantage of a limited means  of communicating his ideas,  and  with great   labour and   ingenuity devises  the  means,  from   time  to  time,   to  remedy the  imperfec­ tions  of  his  language. He  is compelled to  analyse  and  study it  in  its  first  elements, and   to augment the  modes  of  expression in  order to  keep  pace  with   the  increasing number of  his wants and   ideas.
A  colony   bears   the  same   relation  to  an  old-settled country  that   a  grammar does   to  a
language. In a  colony, society  is seen  in  its  first  elements, the  country itself  is in  its  rudest
and   simplest form.  The  colonist knows   them   in   this  primitive state, and   watches their progress step   by  step. In this  manner he  acquires an  intimate  knowledge of  the  philosophy of  improvement, which  is  almost  unattainable  by  an   individual  who   has   lived   from   his childhood in  a  highly-complex and  artificial state  of society,  where everything around  him was   formed  and   arranged  long   before   he  came   into   the   world; he  sees  the   effects,  the causes existed long  before his  time.  His  place  in  society-his  portion of  the  wealth of  the country-his  prejudices -his religion itself,  if he  has  any,  are  all  more  or  less hereditary. He  is in  some  measure a  mere  machine, or  rather a  part  of one.  He  is a  creature of  educa­ tion,  rather than of original thought.
The colonist has  to  create-he  has  to  draw on  his own  stock  of ideas,  and  to  rouse  up
ali  his  latent energies to  meet  ali  his  wants in  his new  position. Thus his  thinking principle is strengthened, and  he  is more energetic.
For  a  similar   discussion  of  the  colonist's  energy  and  ambition, see George  Grant's
"In Defense of North America", Technology and Empire, Toronto, 1g6g.



















Write or Phone 	Text

THE  UNIVERSITY  BOOK STORE
Vancouver 8, B.C.	
 Trade
Medical

whenever you need

BOOKS
 
Technical Hard Back Paper Back



SUSANNA MOODIE AND

THE ENGLISH SKETCH



Carl Ballstadt








SusANNA Mooorn's Roughing It in the Bush has long been recognized as a significant and  valuable account  of pioneer life in Upper  Canada in the mid-nineteenth century. From among a host of journals, diaries, and travelogues,  it is surely safe to say, her book is the one most often quoted  when the historian,  literary or social, needs commentary  on backwoods people, frontier living  conditions,  or  the  difficulty  of  adjustment  experienced   by  such  upper middle-class immigrants as Mrs. Moodie and her husband.
The  reasons for  the  pre-eminence  of Roughing   It in the  Bush have also long been  recognized.  Mrs.  Moodie's  lively and  humorous  style,  the  vividness  and dramatic quality  of her characterization, the strength  and  good humour  of her own  personality  as she encountered  people and  events have contributed to make her book a very readable  one. For these reasons it enjoys a prominent  position in any survey of our  literary  history, and,  indeed,  it has become a "touchstone" of our  literary  development.  W. H.  Magee, for  example,  uses Roughing  It in  the Bush as the prototype  of local colour fiction against  which to measure the degree of success of later  Canadian local colourists.1  More  recently, Carl  F. Klinck ob­ serves that  Mrs.  Moodie's  book represents a significant  advance  in the develop­ ment  of our  literature  from "statistical  accounts and  running narratives" toward novels and  romances of pioneer experience.2   Professor Klinck, in noting the fictive aspects of Mrs.  Moodie's  writing, sees it as part  of an  inevitable,  indigenous  de­ velopment  of  Canadian writing,  even though,  in  Mrs.  Moodie's  case, that  de­ velopment  was  strongly  conditioned  by  her  practice  as  a  writer  of  children's stories before she  came  to Canada, and  as  the  author of serialized  fiction with English settings for the Literary Garland of  Montreal.

32

THE ENGLISH SKETCH



Except for  passing reference, Susanna  Moodie's literary  practice  and acquain­ tanceships  in  England  have not been considered in relationship  to the form and techniques  of her most successful book. As a member of a literary family which drew  some  attention   to  itself amongst  minor  English  literary  circles, Susanna Strickland  sought and established literary friendships, and as a writer she followed an  established  pattern   which,  even  had  she  remained  in  England,  would  very probably  have led her to produce a book similar in many respects to Roughing  It in the Bush. At the very least, however, when Susanna emigrated  to Canada, she brought  with  her  an  awareness  of models for a book  of sketches about  a region and  its people.
Susanna's  early career involved three kinds of writing, the first of which was literature  for children.  The  writing of children's books certainly gave her practice in the description  of characters,  in the writing of dialogue, and  in the use of the rhetoric  proper  to  religious, moral, and  didactic  tales, a rhetoric  which she was never willing to abandon. But the children's stories were simply the first stage in a pattern  followed by many  young women of the early nineteeth  century  who tried to forge literary  careers for themselves. They  progressed to poems and stories for the  elegant  annuals  and  gift  books, and  then,  perhaps,  to longer  forms such  as romances  or biographies.  Such was the pattern  of the careers of Mrs. S. C. Hall, or  Mary  Howitt,3   or Susanna's  own sisters, Eliza and  Agnes, who distinguished themselves in  the I 84o's  as the  biographers  of the  Queens  of England.  It was virtually  inevitable,  therefore,  that  Susanna  should  proceed  to contribute  senti­ mental  and  religious poems to the annuals  and  gift books, and  that  these poems should  be  collected  and  brought  out  by subscription  as Enthusiasm  and  Other Poems (I 8g I ) . Her sister Agnes had done much the same before her.4
It is, however,  another   phase  of  Susanna  Strickland's  career  which  is most
pertinent   to  Roughing   It  in  the  Bush.  During  the  years  I827-182g,  Susanna Strickland  contributed a series of prose sketches to a London  periodical for ladies entitled  La  Belle AssembUe which was edited  by a Suffolk native  and  friend  of the Strickland  family, Thomas  Harral. The series, "Sketches from the Country", consists  of  five  pieces :  "The Witch  of  East  Cliff",  "The Two   Fishermen", "Naomi", "The Dead  Man's  Grave",  and  "Old  Hannah, or, the Charm".5  The first  four  involve  Suffolk  legends  told  to  the  author  by elderly  natives  of  the region. Unfortunately, they are  marred  by an excessively metaphorical style and are without  restraint  on sentiment.  Only in the introduction  does the author exer­ cise economy  and  limit  her  pen  to  what  she  really knows. The  fifth  sketch  is Susanna's  personal  recollection of a maid-servant  at Reydon Hall, the Strickland

33

THE ENGLISH SKETCH



home   in  Suffolk,  near  Southwold. It  reflects  warmth and   good  humour, and, perhaps because  it  is personal,  is characterized by a  greater directness and  sim­ plicity of style than  the preceding sketches.



tE IMPORTANCE of this series of sketches  is that  it represents Susanna's early  attempt to emulate the  writing of  Mary  Russell  Mitford and  to do  for  Suffolk  what   Miss  Mitford did  so  prolifically  and  so well for  Berkshire. Miss  Mitford in  tum   was  an  admirer of  Washington Irving's Sketch Book  of Ceo!frey Crayon  ( I 8I 8) , and,  although she was also inspired  by her own "hearty love  of  her  subject",6   shortly  after  the  publication  of  Irving's book  she  began contributing country sketches to the  New  Monthly Magazine and  to annuals and  gift  books. In  I824  the first volume  of a five volume series, Our Village; Sketches of Rural   Character and  Scenery   (I 824-I 837), was  published  in  London. Her first series was followed  by Belford  Regis; or Sketches of a Country Town (3 vols., I835).
Susanna  Strickland  was  a  reader   of  the  annuals and   of  the  New   Monthly
Magazine, a  journal to which  her sister Agnes also contributed in  I824  and  I825. Having read  and  admired Mitford's sketches in these sources, she began  to corres­ pond  with  her  in I 82g, first addressing a poetic  tribute to the  celebrated  Mitford in  June of  that   year.  Miss  Mitford responded with  a  letter  in  July,  1829,  and  there  followed an exchange of letters over the course of a year.
The published letters  of Susanna to Miss Mitford clearly  establish  her admira­
tion  of Mitford's work:

I had  always ranked  Miss Mitford  as one of the first of our  female  writers, and though  my knowledge of your writings was entirely confined to the sketches in the annuals,  and  to some extracts from the 'Foscari',  these were sufficient to make me feel the deepest interest in your name, and  even to rejoice in the success that  ever attended the publication of your works.7

The letter  in  which  this statement of admiration appears also contains Susanna's wish  that  she  could  visit  Miss  Mitford in  London, as  well  as an  invitation for the latter to visit the Strickland home in Suffolk where she would  find "such  sweet woodland lanes as you so inimitably describe."
Succeeding letters  from  Susanna to  Miss  Mitford  include comments on  her family   and   their   literary   pursuits; Susanna's  own   temptation  to  emigrate to Canada because  of the  attractive accounts which  her  brother, Samuel, had  sent home; a visit to London  during which she resided  with her "dear adopted father",

34

THE ENGLISH SKETCH



Thomas Pringle ;8  and   characters and  customs  described   in  Mitford's  sketches. The  recurring references to these sketches and  the occasional  tributes to Miss Mit­ ford's skills make  it  very  clear,  I  think,  that  Susanna's admiration  was sufficient to lead  her to emulate Mitford's subjects and techniques.
Such   emulation  is  indicated in  the  titles  and  contents of  Susanna's  country
sketches.  In  the  Our Village sketches,  Miss Mitford  was wont  to include portraits of  rural characters, accounts of country  walks, and  tributes to  rural institutions. A  few  titles  from   her  first  volume  give  a  reasonable indication  of  the  kind  of contents:  "Walks  in  the   Country:  the  First   Primrose", "Tom  Cordery", "A Village  Beau", "A  Great   Farm House". They  usually  begin  with  a general  pas­ sage  of reflection  or  description which  eases the  reader  into  a  particular  topic or event,   or  some   portion of  an  individual's  history,  including  his  eccentricities, dress,  occupation, and   perhaps some  crisis in  which  he  has  been  involved.  The  style is familiar and  direct, exhibiting a fine attention to detail; the  tone  is deli­ cate  and  quiet. They  are  sketches  of ordinary life and  the  emphasis is upon  the colour  and  charm of rural  living.  The  introduction to  "Hannah Bint"  is a good example of her loving attention to nature, as a prelude to the character and situa­ tion of a country friend:

The  Shaw, leading  to Hannah Bint's habitation,  is, as I perhaps  have said before, a very pretty mixture  of wood and coppice; that is to say, a track of thirty or forty acres covered  with fine growing timber -ash, and oak, and  elm -very regularly planted; and  interspersed  here and  there with large patches of underwood,  hazel, maple,  birch,  holly, and  hawthom, woven into  almost  impenetrable thickets  by long  wreaths  of the  bramble,  the briony, and  the briar-rose,  or by the pliant and twisting garlands  of the  wild honey-suckle. In other  parts,  the Shaw is quite clear of  its bosky undergrowth, and  clothed  only with large  beds of feathery  fem,  or carpets  of  flowers,  primroses,  orchises, cowslips, ground-ivy,  crane's-bill,  cotton­ grass, Solomon's  seal, and  forget-me-not,  crowded  together  with a  profusion and brilliancy of colour such as I have rarely seen equalled even in a garden. Here the wild hyacinth  really enamels  the ground  with its fresh and  lovely purple....  The variety  is much  greater  than  I have  enumerated; for  the  ground  is so unequal, now swelling in gentle  ascents, now dimpling  into dells  and  hollows, and  the soil so  different   in  different   parts,  that  the  sylvan flora  is  unusually  extensive and complete.

The same  kind  of introduction is employed  by Susanna in  her country scenes, particularly in  "Old Hannah" and  "The Dead  Man's Grave." The  latter  is characterized by  the  similar attention to the  particulars of a  locale  related  to a specific history  or event:


35

THE ENGLISH SKETCH



Should  any  of  the  readers  of  La  Belle Assemb1ee wish  to  become  better  ac­ quainted  with  the spot known by the designation  of The  Dead  Man's  Grave, they may find it at the end of a long narrow lane, in the well-known village of  Reydon, where four  cross country roads terminate,  in the entrance to Goose Green, a piece of common  so called from  the  number  of geese which  are  bred  upon it. Each  of these roads  forms  a pleasant summer's  walk, shaded  from  the heat  of the sun  by tall hawthorn  hedges full of fine old trees. The  grave rises to a considerable height in  the  centre  of a  pretty waste, of a triangular form,  which  attracts  the notice of the  traveller  from  each  of  its  approaches.  Generally,  it  is  covered  with  a  soft mantle  of  verdure,  rivaling  the  emerald  in  brightness.  The  ground  about  it  is thickly  studded  with  broom and  stunted  blackthorn   bushes, seldom  rising to the height of four feet above the turf, and affording,  with their low branches, a shelter for  the  violets  that  open  their  deep  blue  eyes beneath,  and  grows in  profusion around  the  grave, while the  more aspiring  primrose  rears  her  pale star-like  crest above the mossy mound, and encircles it with a diadem of living gems.10

In  the  introductions to four  of her  sketches  and  throughout her  reminiscence of Old  Hannah, Susanna Strickland's series reminds one of Mitford's attention to a region and  its people; it is local colour fiction.
It seems  very  likely, then,  that  when  Susanna Moodie decided  to write  of her
Canadian  experiences near  Cobourg and  Peterborough, she  would  have  thought of Miss  Mitford's books on  rural  life and  scenery.  A connection seems indicated not  only by her early interest  in Our Village, but  by the fact  that  parts  of  Rough­ ing It in the  Bush were first published  as a series of "Canadian Sketches" in the Literary  Garland.11   That series of six sketches  includes a  country walk,  a  back­  woods  custom, and   portraits of  eccentric or  peculiar  characters, all  categories used  by  Mary   Mitford, and  all assuming  an  important  place  in  Roughing  It in the  Bush  when   it  was  published   in  1852.  For  the  British  reader of  the  mid­  nineteenth century, large  sections  of  "Uncle Joe  and   his  Family", "Brian  the Still  Hunter", "The Charivari", "The Wilderness and  Our Indian Friends", and  "The Walk  to  Dummer" would  satisfy  an  appetite for  impressions of the  pecu­  liarities  of custom  and character in British North America.
Of  course,  Roughing  It was conditioned by other  important factors  and, there­
fore,  has  different  components and  tones  than Our  Village.  Mrs.  Moodie had more  functions than one to fulfil in writing  her  book.  She wished  to convey infor­ mation to  prospective immigrants, to tell her  personal  story  of fortunes and  mis­ fortunes, and  to create  impressions  and  descriptions. She is, therefore, the essayist as well as the  story-teller, and  Roughing  It is both  a didactic book, an autobiog­ raphy, and  a sketch-book  of pioneer life.

g6

THE ENGLISH SKETCH



In  Our  Village  the  author's personality  as a  unifying  factor  is much  less im­ portant.  Although the  sketches  which  are  entirely  devoted to  seasonal  country walks express  Mitford's personal  delight  in nature, she is generally  objective and does not obtrude with  her personal  fortunes.
Differences   in  the  tone  and  flavour  of  the  two  books  are  largely  due  to  the landscape which   each  writer focuses on.  While  Miss Mitford's sketches  take  on the gentle  and  fertile  character of the Berkshire countryside, Mrs. Moodie's reflect the  larger  dimensions of the  Canadian scene and  the sense of challenge which  the bold extremes of Canadian climate  and landscape demanded.
An  interesting coincidence may  serve  to  conclude  and  to support the sugges­ tion  that  Roughing  It in the  Bush has connections with  Our Village.  In  1840,  a book  very similar to  Mrs.  Moodie's, A New  Home-Who'll  Follow?, was pub­  lished  in Boston.  Its  author, Caroline Kirkland, was a refined  New  England lady who  settled  with  her  husband in  Michigan in the I 8go's. Many  of  her  attitudes and  responses  to the  wilderness  and  its inhabitants are similar  to  Mrs.  Moodie's, as are  many  of her  disappointments. Although her prose  is more  pretentious and  sentimental than  Susanna's, her book progresses by sketches  of  custom,  character, and  anecdote, and  many  of her  topics are inevitably  the same as those of Rough­  ing  It. But  Mrs.  Kirkland also  serves  to  indicate the  extent  of  Miss  Mitford's influence:

If Miss Mitford, who has given us such charming glimpses of Aberleigh ... had  by some happy  chance  been translated  to Michigan,  what  would she not have made of such materials as Tinkerville,  Montacute, and Turnip ?12

Very  probably Miss Mitford would  have made  much  the same  of Caroline Kirk­ land's backwoods towns  as she herself did, or as Mrs. Moodie  did of her Cobourg and  Peterborough environs.


FOOTNOTES

1 "Local  Colour  in  Canadian  Fiction".  University  of  Toronto   Quarterly,  28  (Jan.
1959),  176-189.
2   Introduction, Roughing  It in the Bush, New Canadian Library edition, I962.
8   Mary  Howitt  was the  author  of Sketches of Natural  History, for children,  and she later  produced  Biographical Sketches of the Queens of Great Britain  (I 85I)   in the wake of the  success of the  Strickland  sisters, Agnes and  Eliza. Mrs. Samuel  Hall, having  begun  as an  author   of children's  stories followed Mitford's  successes with Sketches  of Irish Character  ( I829)  and  Lights and Shadows  of  Irish Life  ( I838).
4   Agnes Strickland  was  the  author  of several volumes of verse, including  Worcester
Field; or, The   Cavalier  (I 826)  in  the  manner  of Sir  Walter  Scott. She also pro-

37

THE ENGLISH SKETCH



duced  Old Friends and New  Acquaintances  (I 86o and  I 86 I), two series of Suffolk sketches  which  it  might  have  been Susanna's lot  to write  had  she remained in  Eng­ land.
La
55; n.s. IX  (1829), 2I-24.
6   Preface  to Our Village, vol. I (London, I824).
1 The poetic  tribute and  the letters of Susanna Strickland to Mary  Russell Mitford are in The  Friendships of Mary  Russell Mitford  as Recorded  in Letters  from Her  Lite­ rary Correspondents,  edited  by The  Reverend A. G.  L'Estrange, 2 vols.  (London, I882), vol. 1, pp.  1g6-I98, 204-208, 2I2-2I3, 222-223.  The tribute is dated June 2,
1829 and  the  last letter  August  I2,  I83o. The quotation is from  the first letter, July
31,  I829.
8   Thomas Pringle was another friend  of the Strickland family, in fact,  the person  who carried the correspondence from  Susanna to Mitford. Pringle  was probably the man who  introduced  Susanna to John   Dunbar  Moodie. Both  men  had  been  in  South Africa.  At  the  time  of Susanna's visit to London, Pringle was secretary to the Anti­ Slavery  Society.  He  was the author of African Sketches  ( 1834)  and  Narrative  of a Residence in South  Africa ( I835).
9  Sketches  of  English life and Character  (London, The Weekend Library, I928), pp. I52-3.
10  La Belle Assemblee, n.s. VII  (I828), 51-55.
11  The  sketches,  "Old Woodruff   and  his Three Wives",  "The Walk  to  Dummer", "Our  Borrowing", "Tom Wilson's  Emigration", "Uncle Joe  and  his Family", and "Brian, the  Still  Hunter", appeared in  the  Literary  Garland, n.s. V  (I 847) .
12  A New Home, p.  I 1.



CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY AND
THE PUBLIC MUSE



Norman Newton







EVERYBODY  SEEMS TO   BELIEVE  that  classical Canadian poetry is mediocre; the  question  is not  whether,  but  why. Various  explanations have  been advanced. At times this mediocrity  has even  been treated  as its chief quality,  an  expression  of the  national  virtues of sobriety and  reasonableness.  In this article,  I propose to look into one aspect of the mediocrity of classical Cana­ dian poetry, and to offer some explanations of my own, in the hope of stimulating  discussion.
"Mediocre" means  "of  middling  quality",  not "bad". There  is no doubt  that some  classical Canadian poetry  is quite  bad.  But what  we have, it seems, is a poetic landscape  mediocre  in the best sense, possessing few outstanding features, but  rich in pleasant  fields and  wooded hills. Indeed,  when one considers English and  French  poetry  together,  one discovers a body of work which is surprisingly solid for a country  with so short a literary history and,  until recently, so small a population.  It compares   very  favourably   with  that   produced   over  the  same period  of  time  by  countries  with  much  older  literary  traditions -nineteenth­ century  Spain,  for  example.  Nevertheless, it is, even if in  the  best sense of the word,  mediocre.  One  may apply  to the Canadian  poetic tradition  the  judgment Lampman applied,  with great good sense, to himself: "There never was any great poet,  but  simply  a  rather  superior  minor  one who sometimes hit  upon  a thing which comes uncommonly near to being very excellent."
Canadian poetry is also distinctive. Nothing better indicates a national  identity than  the fact that  our traditional French and English poets, in spite of mutual ignorance,  had  a great deal in common. In this, they no doubt reflected a certain similarity  between  the  two  cultures.  As John  Porter  recently pointed  out  in an


39

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



article  in  Cultural   Affairs,  "English  and  French  Canadians are  more  alike in their  conservatism,  traditionalism,  religiosity, authoritarianism, and  elitist values than  the spokesmen of either  group  are prepared  to admit." The  poetry, for its part, reflects a conservatism closer to that of pre-industrial society than to the capitalist  conservatism  of the  United  States:   a  very strong  sense of the  ties of orthodox  Christianity  even when  these ties were rebelled  against,  a sense of the heroic,  a strong  attachment to place  (usually  expressing itself as an idealisation of the  village and  rural  life of the  poet's boyhood), a fondness for ornate  and colourful language,  a tendency to personify nature  which went beyond the poetic conventions  of  the  age  and  approached   mythogenesis-and, on  the  negative side, a lack  of wit  (Canadian wit tended,  and  tends,  to  be annoyingly  simple­ minded), an inability to sustain intellectual  argument on a high level of  subtlety, and  a lack of that  daring  which makes the  poet an  inventor  as well as a singer and  craftsman.  Clearly these positive and negative elements were related  to each other.
Simple definitions are often false ones, and  I am not oblivious of nuance  when I say that  traditional Canadian poetry in both  English and  French  seems to me very conservative even in the political sense, and  that  this quality  is closely bound up with the Canadian character  as it expressed itself in our formative  years. The two most important factors in the history of this country  have been the English­ Canadian rejection of the American  Revolution  and  the French-Canadian rejec­ tion  of the  French  Revolution,  rejections which  were  related  even as these two revolutions were. Conservatism as such does not make for mediocrity;  but a par­ ticular  kind  of conservatism  does, and  this  particular  kind  of conservatism was strong in nineteenth-century Canada. It was most evident in what one might call "public  poetry" -hence my title. It is in public poetry that  the poet most clearly expresses what  he conceives to be his  role  in society. My contention  is that  the peculiar  qualities  of  nineteenth-century Canadian poetry, both the good and  the bad ones, arose out  of the poetic community's  conception  of its own role. This in fact was a misconception, but one which developed very naturally  out of the con­ fusions of the age itself, in which the aristocratic idea of art was dying.
I first became fully aware of this when I was working on a radio production  of
Heavysege's Count  Filippo. There  has always been a clash of opinions about  the value of Heavysege's work. Smith  has compared  his Malzah  to Ariel or Caliban, and  has referred  to Count  Filippo as "brilliantly  written  and  well-constructed ... in the  manner  of Beaumont  and  Fletcher".  Others  have come to the conclusion that he is very nearly the worst poet who has ever lived.

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



I  have,  at  times,  almost  inclined  to the  latter  opinion. There is no doubt that Heavysege could  write  lines  of  incomparable grotesqueness. But  his sonnets  are good; and  when,  many  years  ago,  I came  across a copy of Count  Filippo in the Toronto Public  Library, my  first impression  was that  it  is a  curious  mixture of utter  banality and  originality, with  some  moments  of great  power  and  others of unexpected subtlety. Certainly, it  seemed  no  mere  "closet  drama", but  a  truly imaginative if ludicrously uneven  poetic drama, which  I felt then  would  probably work  in performance.
Some  two  years  ago  I had  a chance to look at it again. Since  I was producing radio  drama for  the  C.B.C., I decided  to commission  a radio version  from  Peter Haworth. Mr.  Haworth prepared a sensitive  and  intelligent adaptation, and  the play  was presented on  a  programme called  Midweek  Theatre. As it  turned out, the   play  did   indeed   "work", in  spite  of  great   flaws  which   no  editing  could eliminate.
This  makes Count  Filippo something of a rarity. As everybody knows, Victorian
dramatic literature is  a  kind  of  elephants' graveyard, into  which   hundreds of gigantic verse  dramas have  stumbled to die.  Perhaps  a  better  analogy  would  be one  of those  Siberian pits  filled  with  the  frozen  corpses  of mammoths, since  we are   dealing  with   extinct   species.  But  here  was  a  live  mammoth. How   could Heavysege, writing a  pseudo-Jacobean drama as so many  of his contemporaries had done,  have produced one which worked?
The answer,  I concluded, was to be found  in the archaic nature of Heavysege's mind. He  was, in  a  sense,  a  Jacobean, and   his archaism of  language was not merely  a literary device,  but  an  expression  of his inner  nature. Patmore, another archaic mind  whose  language surfaces  are  also sometimes  abortive, was aware of this, as his often  quoted review of Saul clearly shows.

Shakespeare  he also knows far better  than  most men know him;  for he has dis­ cerned and  adopted  his method  as no other dramatist has done. He takes not virtue and  morality, and  their  opposites generally, as other dramatists  do, but these under the single aspect  of their  dependence  upon spiritual  influences, of whatever  kind:  the direct  influence of the Divine Spirit;  and  the influence of good spirits; and  of the  principalities and  powers of darkness;  and  even the  mysterious  influences  of music, the  weather,  etc.,  upon  the  moral  state  of the  soul.  Like  most  of Shake­ speare's plays, this drama  has the appearance of being strangely chaotic. There  are hundreds  of passages for the existence of which we cannot account  until the moral clew is found,  and  it would  never be found  by a careless and  unreflecting  reader; yet the work is exceedingly artistic.

CLASSICAL  CANADIAN POETRY



If one  does not  take  "exceedingly  artistic"  to mean  that  Saul  is constructed with  sophistication   and  finesse, the  above  is certainly  true.  Heavysege  was an emotional  contemporary  of Shakespeare. Canada has been a refuge for folk and archaic  elements which have died in Europe. Folklorists have discovered medieval ballads and seventeenth- and eighteenth-century court songs magically preserved, though  in an altered and countrified form, in the folk-music of Quebec; they have discovered  Elizabethan  slang  in  the  dialect  of  Newfoundland; the  tradition   of classical bagpipe  playing, "pibroch", survived  in  the  Maritimes  long  after  the Scots themselves had lost interest in it. In Heavysege we have something more remarkable: a Jacobean  sensibility transplanted whole, though  with some damage in transit, into the nineteenth century.
Perhaps  the circumstances of his life help to explain the anomaly. He was a Yorkshireman,  and  a member of the artisan class, a cabinet-maker and carpenter. His  parents  were strict  in  their  religious views, and  rigidly  moralistic.  He  was largely  self-educated,  and  his reading  was deep  but  very  narrow; he seems to have found  pleasure mainly in the Bible and Shakespeare.  He met few writers of even  moderate   distinction,  and  his  intellectual   and  artistic  life  was  largely  a solitary one.
In other  words, Heavysege was born into a provincial and hence archaic sector of English society. When he was a child, his parents  determinedly  kept him "un­ spotted from the world". He escaped the conformity-inducing influences of formal education, and  entered  young into  a trade  which  had  maintained  longer than many others the old handicraft  traditions. True,  he did leave provincial Rudders­ field, but he did so only to go to even more provincial Montreal, ruled by an elite consisting of merchants, true-blue English Tories, descendants of French seigneurs, and a few annexationists.
Saul,  which  really should be reprinted,  is indeed  an astonishing  work, a work that  seems,  when  one  enters  into  it  without  reservation,  to  display  something like genius.  Nevertheless, there  is still a sense in  which  Saul  is a failure.  Why should  this be, when there is so much  talent  apparent in it? I believe the rea.< on is that  Heavysege did not realize how deeply inimical his society was to the poetic spirit.  His gigantic  chronicle play was completely  irrelevant, so far  as the life of his time  was concerned.  We know that  he was saddened  by lack of recognition; we also know  that  he bore the  uncertainty  and  drudgery  of his daily  life with Christian  patience, but not without the very natural hope that he would be "discovered".  Most  of the  criticism  he  received  from  Canadians-whether  it was intended  well or ill-did  him more harm  than  good]ephtha's Daughter,

42

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



which, unlike his other  works, he carefully revised along lines suggested by  well­ meaning  friends  whose taste  represented the norm of his time and  place, is dull and conventional; and  here we find another anomaly, since it is the most polished and self-consistent of his productions. Apparently Heavysege's genius and his lack of taste were inseparably  related;  he could write "correctly", but only by writing dully.



LET us  REVERT, after  what must seem a long digression, to our  main  theme.  Do  we not  find, in  many  classical Canadian poets, the same combination   of talent  and  miscalculation?  Is not this  unfortunate  combination most apparent in their public poems? This phenomenon is precisely due, I believe, to the fact that  their  poetic talents could only operate  when they wrote in a state of illusion-an illusion, I have suggested, as to their social role. They  could still deceive  themselves,  though   not  consistently, into  the  belief  that  their  society valued  their contribution to the spiritual life of the age, that  they were as poets a functional  part  of the social body. Society was willing to aid them,  though  half­ contemptuously,  in this self-deception, and  politely applauded the odes, political sonnets,  and  lyrics  in  which  they  expounded  what  they  conceived  to  be  the national  ethos. From  time to time the poets became aware  of their true position, that  of outsiders who were tolerated  rather than loved or respected, and their ten­ dency was then  to retreat  into a defensive subjectivity. Even in their most confi­ dent  moments,  however,  the  doubt  as to their  role was present, though  hidden. The   result  was  an  uncertainty of intonation  in  the  poetic  voice,  which  might manifest  itself  as  bluster,  over-insistence  on  the  obvious,  vulgar  and  fumbling attempts  to capture the sentimental  popular  imagination,  and  other  features  of bad style.
Thus  a kind  of universal schizophrenia  is apparent. There  is the  real Charles Sangster,  a  playful,  minor  poet of springtime,  with a  pleasant  taste for country girls. Then  there  is the  Sangster  who wrote  Brock, with  its marvellously comic closing lines -

Briareus-limbed, they sweep along, The Typhons of the time.

The  thought   of Brock  as Typhon  is an  image  of horror  worthy  of Blake;  but
Sangster did not mean it that way.
There  is Isabella  Crawford, who could have written fine personal lyrics with a


43

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



gnomic force, but  chose to waste her talents writing  about  men with axes, whom she did  not  understand. There  is Charles  Mair,  an autumnal sensibility, a quiet lazy dreamer  after  the manner  of James Thomson,  who trickled his gentle talent away into the vast dusty mould of a chronicle drama  about  Tecumseh.  There  is Sir  Charles  G.  D. Roberts,  who should  have  written  nothing  but  regional  pas­ torals,  but  tried  to  write  hymns of empire.  Bliss Carman ruined  his  talent,  as Desmond Pacey has pointed out, trying to be the spokesman of a crudely vigorous optimism  which  was alien  to  his sensuous, feminine  and  melancholy  tempera­ ment.  In  Archibald  Lampman  and  D. C. Scott,  who  came  nearest  to  realizing themselves in  their  work, there  is often  an  annoying  split  between  impulse  and diction.
Here we come a bit closer to our quarry,  which is an elusive one, and  must be surrounded:  it  cannot  be  dispatched  cleanly  and  at  first  sight.  As  has  been implied,  every time our classical poets tried to fulfil a social function,  to perform their  public  "use"  as  poets,  which  is to say,  every  time  they  tried  to  write  a patriotic  poem,  a  historical epic, or a serious theatrical   work, the  result was in some way embarrassing. On the other hand, when they described a personal experience,  or  responded  to a landscape  they loved, the  result was often  beauti­ ful.  Clearly,  unlike the contemporary  poet, they did feel they had a  use, and  so did their  society. Poets were still expected  to write ceremonial  odes for the visits or noble or royal persons, for example, and were expected to give utterance  to the great  religious  and  political  truths.  Society  did  indeed  demand  poetry,  and  it demanded  poetry on the same themes that  poets of  earlier  ages had treated.  For some reason, though, it seemed to demand bad poetry.
It  is a curious  fact  that  in nineteenth-century Canada literature  became  con­
nected  with the  civil service in a way it has never  been, one is inclined  to think, in any  other  country  outside Tsarist  Russia. Sangster,  Mair,  Lampman, W. W. Campbell,   D.  C.  Scott  and  Tom   Macinnes  were  all  civil servants,  and  Sir Charles  G. D. Roberts  was one of the official historians  of the First World  War. There  was also a strong connection with the  clergy:  Campbell  was a clergyman before  he  entered  the  Civil Service,  F. G.  Scott  was  an  Anglican  priest,  and Roberts,  D.  C.  Scott  and  Lampman   were  the  sons of clergymen.  Most  of the other  poets in  the  "canon" seem to have been involved  in, or related  to people involved in, high-level journalism, medicine or the law. They were an elite group, obviously:  they  were  to a very large  extent  dependent upon  public  institutions for their living, and most of them came from "good families" of the old-fashioned kind. There was little connection with the world of business.

44

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



A similar  though not  identical pattern may  be discerned in the  Quebec of the nineteenth and  early  twentieth centuries. Pamphile Le May,  Louis-Honore Frechette,  Gonsalve Desaulniers, Jean   Charbonneau, Lionel  Leveille  and   Paul Morin  were lawyers,  judges, or combined law with public service; William Chap­ man,  Albert  Ferland and  Edouard Chauvin were civil servants with  the federal or  provincial governments; Neree  Beauchemin and  Guy  Delabaye were doctors; Rene  Chopin was a notary. Most of the other  poets of the  period  were journalists; some were priests or abbes.
Compare this situation with  that  in the  United  States,  where,  at least between the  Civil  War   and   the  New  Deal  era,  national and  state  governments ignored the arts  on the whole. A few United States poets were civil servants; but most were employed by  universities, or  worked  as journalists.  On  the  other  hand, there  has been,  in  the  United States,  enlightened private  patronage of a type  very rare  in Canada. Usually   this  patronage was  offered,  in  the  days  before  the  great  tax­ exempt foundations, by members of an immigrant financial or capitalist elite, who patronised the  arts  in  the  manner of the  European  haute  bourgeoisie. But  they were  much  more  interested in  painting and  music  than  in  poetry.  It is  not  sur­ prising  that   nineteenth-century United States  writers  tended   to  be  more  "indi­ vidualist" than   their  Canadian counterparts, and  that  they felt less  identity with the  aims  of their  governments. The  great  classics of United States  literature are all  seditious, as  has  been  pointed  out  more  than  once,  and  United  States  poets who  have  consciously  identified  themselves  with  the  political establishment, such as Archibald MacLeish, have  found  their  poetic stock  plummeting as a result.  In Canada, one suspects,  a MacLeish would  have  been "Dean of Canadian Poetry" several  times over.
From  the  days  of de Tocqueville on, visitors to or natives  of the  United States have  been  pointing out  that  it is a  profoundly anti-poetic society.  However, de Tocqueville, in  his  inspired   and   penetrating simplicity,   appears to  have  come closest to the  truth, namely, that  United  States  society is anti-poetic because  it is an   anti-aristocratic  and   anti-monarchical, as  such   an   archetypically capitalist society  must  inevitably be.  The  intellectual life  of  the  United States  after   the Revolution and   before  the  Civil  War  had,  on its upper levels, elements  of a  re­ finement -though  a thin, attenuated and  provincial refinement-of  essentially European  and    aristocratic  or  pseudo-aristocratic  type,   and   the  fanners  and  frontiersmen were producing a folk culture of real vigour.  It is from such societies, when  they  mature, that   poetry  springs.  But  this society  was  not  allowed  to  de­ velop;  it was cut  down  in the  Civil War,  and  was finally obliterated by the  rise of

45

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



industrial   big business in  the  latter  half of  the  nineteenth century.  One  of the profound  and  tragic beauties of Whitman's  work is that  he was glorifying a world which  was  disappearing,   though  he  thought  it  the  world  of  the  future -the world  of the  farmer,  the  pioneer,  the sailor, and  the  free, independent artisan. The  America  he heard singing was dying as it sang, and  this gives his poems the heroic beauty of a great elegy, a beauty he could sense in the already half-mythical and archaic figure of Abraham Lincoln.



IN CANADA, THOUGH,  the social effect of the Age of Business was delayed.  Right  through  the Second  World  War  we were still presenting  an image of ourselves in our propaganda films as a nation  of wheat-farmers, fisher­ men, sailors, trappers  and  dwellers in small country  towns. French Canada, pro­ ducing  spokesmen  like the  Abbe  Groulx,  a  clerical  pamphleteer  and  historian who could  have fitted very comfortably into the France  of  Charles X  (I do not intend  this to  be taken  as condemnatory  of the  Abbe)  was  even more  archaic.  Indeed,  in  the seigneurs, Canada  had  had  a  land-owning hereditary  aristocracy up to 1854, and  the habitants  were not fully relieved of their "feudal" obligations until  1940.  Our  Governors-General,  right  up  to  the  end  of the  Second  World War,   were  English  noblemen.   Even  our   political   radicalism-the  agrarian  socialism of  the  C.C.F.  and  the  petty-bourgeois  anti-capitalism   of early  Social Credit-had a piquantly old-fashioned quality.
Furthermore, many  of the social ideals upheld  by the  "Establishment" up to the  end  of the Second  World  War  were aristocratic  ones. We were loyal to the monarch  and  to the land:   Americans fought  for  Mom's  apple  pie, that  symbol of happy  consumption,  but we fought for those waving fields of wheat.  We con­ sidered   ourselves   (though   mistakenly)   a  specifically  Christian   country,  and thought  it more important  to be law-abiding  than  to be clever. Our  propaganda media extolled the dignity of agricultural  labour  and  idealised the simple homely virtues.  Our  official symbols, and  the persons who embodied  the ceremonial  life of the state, were aristocratic  in tone. Of all American  states, only Canada could have  produced   such  a  figure  as our  late  Governor-General,  General  Georges Vanier.  In  his nobility  and  his  extraordinary public  presence,  he represented  a type-and  I mean  this as a  tribute  to his memory-not found  elsewhere out­ side historical films. He was  a poetic figure. Our  Houses of Parliament have on them  carvings of all the animals  and  birds to be found  in Canada. What  could be more poetically archaic than  that?  One is reminded  of the garden  outside the

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



Temple of the  Sun  in  Incaic Cuzco,  which  contained gold  and  silver  images  of all the birds and  animals of the empire.
The following passage,  from  a  sermon   preached   in  Upper Canada in  I824,
must  be one  of the  last statements, from  an  "Establishment" source  at  any  rate, of the doctrine of degree.

One  is formed  to rule and  another  to obey. Subordination  in the  Moral  World is manifest ... The  beauty  and  advantages  of  this arrangement are  obvious  and universally  acknowledged ... The   various  relations  of  individuals   and   societies require  a mutual  exchange  of good offices ... The  Magistrate  requires  the aid  of his people, the Master of his servant. They are all dependent  upon one another ... The lowest order enjoys its peculiar comforts and privileges, and contributes equally with  the  highest to the support  and  dignity of Society ... All discontent  and  mur­ muring  at the inferiority of our Station is [therefore]  most unreasonable.

Such  ideas  were  echoed  again  and  again  by the spokesmen  of what  has  been called  "The Family  Compact", in their  disputes  with radicals and  liberals.
In  times long  past, attitudes and  ideas such as this gave birth  to great  buildings of state,  cathedrals, epic  poems  and  verse dramas. They  did  not  in  Canada,  be­ cause  the  tradition was dying,  almost  dead.  But if  one  can  personify  a tradition, it  kept  trying,  even  in  its dying  hours,  to do  what it had  done  all its life. It was this  tradition which  continued, with  the automatism of the moribund, to produce cathedrals and   buildings of state  in  the  Gothic  style, epic  poems  in  the  Roman style, and  verse dramas in the  Jacobean style. No poet of the  United States  could address  his country as "0 Child  of Nations,  giant-limbed", or refer to one of his national heroes  as  Sangster referred   to  Brock,  as one  who  "in   his  lofty  sphere  sublime/ Sits  crowned  above  the  common throng." The  nearest  they  came  to such   classical   personification  and   apotheosis   was  in  the  Revolutionary  period,  when  some  popular broadsheets and  ballads  spoke of  Washington in tenns suit­  able  to the  eighteenth-century military  aristocrat, with his code of honour-

Great Washington he led us on,
Whose streaming flag, in storm or sun, Had  never known disgrace.

We  have  now  to  examine why  a  tradition which  was  certainly a  noble  one, and   which,  since  it  answers  certain   needs  that  seem  to  be  part  of  the  intrinsic nature of  man, is an  inherently vital  one,  did  not  produce work  of more  value. The answer  seems to be that  we are  dealing  here with an official "Establishment" ideology  which,  while  it was largely  respected  by the  people  of the  country, did

47

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



not rise from their common life, and  did not rest upon an economic and  political base consistent with its aims.
Official Canada, aristocratic Canada, was by no means alien or exotic:  it was
as native  as the  world of the logger and  the  wheat-farmer. But the  concessions made  after the MacKenzie and Papineau  rebellions, which stifled what was a developing indigenous French and English aristocracy and nipped  Church Estab­ lishment in the bud, prevented it from establishing roots in the economic, political and social soil of the country. Had  we been at that  time an independent country, this  quiet  liberal-capitalist  revolution  would  probably  have  produced  a  society similar  to that  of the United  States, which we would then have  joined.  (Indeed, as is well known, the Rebellion  Losses Bill of I 849 strengthened the annexation­ ists' cause  immensely.)  Fortunately  we were  not  independent at  the  time:   the United  States dared  not intervene, for fear of war with Britain. What  happened instead  was that  the  aristocratic  idea,  deprived  of its local  roots, became  more firmly attached  to the metropolitan  centre. Those  who  belonged  to the elite, or aspired to enter it, cultivated modified English accents and entered  their children in schools modelled after the English type. Sometimes, as is usually the case with those who pursue  refinement and  taste as canonical virtues rather  than  graces of everyday  life, the  result  was somewhat  artificial.  Brian  Moore,  in  the  book he wrote on Canada  for Time Inc., tells of a remark made by an English lord about Vincent  Massey. "Fine chap, Vincent,"  he said, "but  he does make one feel a bit of a savage."
Beneath  the  level of the  official elite, there  was developing  an  economic life very similar  to that  of the United  States, though  less sophisticated  and  less cruel. Effective power was in the hands of businessmen, and what is virtue to the aristo­ cratic  mind  is  to  the  business mind  either  folly  or  obscurantism.  Because  the United  States was above all the Land  of Business, Canadian  businessmen tended to  become  "Americanised". Indeed,  in  our  conflicts with  the  United  States  in the late eighteenth  and the nineteenth  centuries, many members of the mercantile  community   played  a  treasonable  or  near-treasonable  role,  though   there  is no doubt  that  they would  have been  fiercely and  violently nationalistic  if that  had been the profitable stance.
Nevertheless,  to them, the virtues inculcated  by the official elite were matters
of convenience only. The  monarch  was a kind of hereditary  president or a means of  preserving  social stability,  thus  a  mere  convenience.  Love of the  land  made sense  only  if  agriculture   were  more  profitable  than  other  forms  of  economic activity;  thus,  those waving fields of wheat  were merely sources of income, and

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



had  no  mystical  beauty. Labour had  no dignity,  only a price. The law was to be respected only if it encouraged business growth; if it hampered the  expansion of business,  it  was  to  be  changed. Christianity, to steal  a  phrase  from  a  man  who understood capitalism well, was the  opium  of the  people,  and  thus  of value,  but only  if one  did  not  insist on  a Christian business ethic.  As to art,  it was a diver­ sion  or  an  intellectual consumer product. Thus  the  businessmen, who  were  and are  the  effective  rulers  of the  country, had  no use for odes, epics or verse dramas. The  poets  were  serving  an  idea  which  was, in terms  of the  everyday  life of the country, completely hollow.
From   time  to  time  this  struck   home.  In  his sonnet,  The  Modern  Politician,
Archibald Lampman indicates how close he came  to understanding the situation.

What manner of soul is his to whom high truth
Is but the plaything of a feverish hour,
A dangling ladder  to the ghost of power?
Gone are the grandeurs of the world's iron youth, When kings were mighty, being made with swords. Now comes the transit age, the age of brass,
When clowns into the vacant empires pass, Blinding the multitude with specious words. To them faith, kinship, truth and verity, Man's sacred rights and very holiest thing, Are but the counters at a desperate play, Flippant and reckless what the end may be, So that they glitter, each his little day,
The  little mimic of a vanished king.

The thought in  this  sonnet  is at  once  deeply  traditional and  savagely  acute. But the diction  is Victorian Synthetic, that  grandiose and  magniloquent substitute for  true  grandeur and  magnificence which  was as much  a product of the "age  of brass"  as  Lampman's  politician himself.  Lampman has  adopted an  aristocratic voice to express an  aristocratic sentiment, but  the voice of the Victorian aristocrat was that  of a dog who is all bark  and  no bite, and  is only waiting for the burglar to toss him a bone. I do not want  to be misunderstood; Lampman is no hypocrite; he feels all he is saying; but  his muddled idea  both of his role and  of his relation­ ship  to  aristocratic ideals  has  led  him into  writing  his  poem  in  such  a manner that  it is almost  rendered ineffectual.
Had  the  poets  realized  what  was going on, they might  have  produced work of great  value.  One  of the  advantages possessed by French  writers of the nineteenth and   early  twentieth  centuries, for  example, was  the  fact  that  aristocratic and


49

CLASSICAL  CANADIAN POETRY



capitalist-democratic ideas had  been fighting openly,  and  on  a high  intellectual level, ever  since  the  Revolution.  Later  socialism,  the  child  of  capitalism,  had entered the battle. Thus, Claude!, Peguy and Bernanos knew they were being "reactionary". Writers in the United  States, too, acquired  a social consciousness; and  it is interesting  that  this consciousness showed itself in its most refined form in  New  England  and  the  Southern  States,  where  the  traditions  of  eighteenth­ century  British  America  had  retained  a  vestigial  life. James,  Eliot  and  many Southern  writers also knew they were being "reactionary", though  in many cases they had to visit Europe to acquire an understanding of  their role. Some French­  Canadian writers also achieved this awareness.
In  English Canada  this did not happen,  and  the reason it did  not happen, it seems to me, is that  here the aristocratic  tradition kept an appearance of vitality well into  this century,  just as it did  in Britain.  By a series of most astute  com­ promises, British  aristocracy  and  the  monarchy  had  lasted  through   the  revolu­ tionary  violence of the late eighteenth  century,  and  the  more subtle  pressures of the nineteenth. But there is no doubt  that  one of these compromises was accom­ modation   to  the  business ethic. It was the  sort  of thing  that  was  never  talked about  when one was wearing one's ermine;  but  in the process man  discovered a new  kind  of hypocrisy, a  new combination  of mean  calculation  with  high  and pompous speech. The aristocratic ideal of the Victorian  elite was largely a matter  of "keeping  up appearances".
Now  the  essence of keeping up appearances is that  the  appearances must  be
entered  into  with  just the  right  degree  of irony  and  inner  detachment. If one allows the pretended  motives to become real ones, then  one becomes an anomaly. An aristocrat  may  keep up the old house, and  perform  all his ceremonial  func­ tions. But if he begins to think like an aristocrat,  he will begin to scorn the capital­  ist ethic. Thus,  since the  world is dominated   by capitalism,  he will  cease to be effective. He  will fail. If he has enough  power or money to avoid failure, he will probably  be attacked  in the press as a spokesman  for obscurantism, or an enemy of the  people. Nor can he afford a spokesman  (poets have usually been, in their public  character, spokesmen  for  aristocratic  ideals  if  not  aristocratic   practice)  who gives his game  away by setting up standards  he cannot  meet. Therefore  he favours  in  literature a  certain  hollowness, pomposity  and  lack  of reality  which will correspond  to his own nature.  An aristocratic elite which has made this fatal compromise  will tend to support  an official idea of  culture  and morality  which is at once empty,  affected and  pretentious. This was the character  of Victorian  art at its worst. In Britain, it was carried into our own century  by the old Times, the

CLASSICAL  CANADIAN POETRY



B.B.C. at  its stuffiest, and  certain  aspects of the  Anglican  church.  It is in  this manner  that  avant  truths  become cliches.


b:E HEROIC,  EPIC,  ARISTOCRATIC VIEW  of Canada was  just such a "truth", and  it was made into a cliche in just the same way. For Canadian history is epic and  heroic. Something  of it comes through, for me, in Frechette's La Decouverte  du Mississippi. I am naive enough to be thrilled  by the confidence
of a stanza like:
Jolliet! Jolliet! deux siecles de conquetes,
Deux siecles sans rivaux ont passe sur nos tetes,
Depuis l'heure sublime ou, de ta propre main, Tu  jetas, d'un seul trait, sur la carte  du monde Ces vastes regions, zone immense et feconde,
Futur grenier  du genre humain!

The  same heroic quality  is to be found in Cremazie's  Le Drapeau de Carillon, D. C. Scott's Indian poems, and parts of Pratt's  BnJbeuf and His Brethren, which has moments of real nobility. I do not claim that any of these are "great  poems". The  heroic quality  I speak of is a matter  of temperament, not talent;  it is flawed by obvious stupidities;  and  I put it down to a certain  archaism  in the Canadian temperament. There  is nothing  similar in the poetry of the United  States. There is a  hidden  sadness  and  disillusion even  in  Whitman. Indeed,  there  is nothing quite  the  same  in  any  poetry  I  have  read,  except  perhaps  in  Andre  Chenier's sketch for Le  Chant  d'Alonzo, which was to have been part  of a projected  epic, L' Amerique, and  begins, "Salut,  o belle nuit, etincelante et sombre ... " Perhaps it is significant  that  Chenier  never wrote the epic;  perhaps  it is also significant that  this great  poet,  who  had  once thought  himself a liberal  revolutionary, dis­ covered, at the very foot of the guillotine, that his sympathies were aristocratic.
Curiously enough, we have never understood the ideological basis of this heroic
quality -a  quality  which,  though  I do not profess to be very sensitive to paint­ ing, I seem to find also in the  paintings of the Group  of Seven and  Emily  Carr.  We have always thought of it as a response to the Canadian landscape,  which is certainly very large.  But this is almost to take a naive environmentalist view, and in any case, if the size of the landscape explained it, we would expect to find the same quality in the poetry of the United States.
I would say that  the mediocrity of our classical public verse, at its dull average, is very closely linked  to the virtues it has at its best, and  that  both its mediocrity and  distinction  are  closely related  to the archaic  and  anomalous  quality of nine-

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



teenth  and  early  twentieth century  Canadian society,  which  was in many  respects a.s "backward" a society as Ireland and Spain  are today. To illustrate more clearly what  I mean, I will quote some lines which  indicate these two qualities, so closely related.
Sangster's The  Soldier of the Plough begins thus:

No maiden dream, nor fancy theme, Brown Labour's muse would sing; Her stately mien and russet sheen Demand  a stronger wing.
Long ages since, the sage, the prince,
The man of lordly brow,
All honour gave that army brave, The Soldiers of the Plough.
Kind heaven speed the Plough!
And bless the hands that guide it; God gives the seed-
The  bread we need,
Man's labour must provide it.

This  stanza is a  real  museum  of anomalies. The first  quatrain is a  model  of Victorian ineptitude, a crown  of coal in which  the  phrase  "fancy theme" is per­ haps  the  sootiest  gem. The  line,  "Long ages since,  the  sage,  the  prince," has, in its balancing of images  of traditional wisdom  and  inherited power,  a truly archaic ring,  almost   a  folkish  dignity; but  it  is followed   immediately by  "the  man  of lordly  brow", which  is a line suited  to a  poet  of the  Romantic Revival, such  as Sir  Walter Scott,  looking  back at the  Middle Ages. "The Soldiers  of the Plough" is the  kind  of  image  Victorian  journalists  loved  to  use  when  they  were  feeling  sentimental about  farmers.   "Kind  heaven   speed   the   Plough; / And   bless  the hands  that  guide  it" reminds  one of Hymns  Ancient  and Modern. Yet the stanza ends   with   three   lines   ("God  gives  the  seed ... " etc.)   which   are   absolutely  mediaeval in  feeling.
In  other  words,  we have  in this one stanza a poet  whose  mind  is moving  from a  truly  mediaeval, rather   peasanty sensibility  to  a Victorian counterfeit of  that sensibility.  Obviously he does not  know  the  difference; there  is no irony  or delib­ erate  contrast here.
Or let us consider Frederick  George Scott's The Wayside  Cross.

A wayside cross at set of day
Unto my spirit thus did say-

"0 soul, my branching arms you see

52

CLASSICAL  CANADIAN POETRY


Point four ways to infinity. One  points to infinite above,
To show the height of heavenly love.

Two point to infinite width, which shows
That heavenly love no limit knows.

One points to infinite beneath,
To show God's love is under death.

The four arms join, an emblem sweet
That in God's heart all loves will meet."

I thanked  the cross as I turned away
For such sweet thoughts in the twilight grey.

The   first  couplet   is a  conventional little  prelude  in  the  Victorian manner, a couplet  which   Archdeacon Scott  might  well have  used  to help  him  get into  the poem,  but  which   he should  then  have  thrown away  or  rewritten. Well satisfied with  it, he went  on. And  went  on to what?  Four  couplets  which  might  have  been written  by  a  contemporary-a  minor   contemporary,  certainly- of  George Herbert. These images   have  an  emblematic sharpness and   intellectual clarity, showing  great  things  imaged  in familiar and  homely things,  which is metaphysical, not simply influenced by metaphysical verse, as are so many  other  early twentieth­ century  poems.  (Archdeacon Scott died in  1944·)
But  then   the   poet,  as  if  somehow   embarrassed  by  the  reality  of  the  poetic
experience, begins  to drift  back  into  a Victorian facsimile  of piety. In  intellectual content, the  next  couplet is still metaphysical, but  in style it is sweet  and  sickly. The  concluding couplet  is utterly  banal, and  the  last line,  which  ought  to climax the  poem,  is the  weakest  of all. Once  again,  we find the  genuinely poetic and  the falsely poetic side by side, and  it appears the poet does not know the difference.


IN THE  POETRY OF   Duncan Campbell Scott  we find  a dark, fierce  and  direct   poet  living  in  the same  body  with  a gentle  and  dreamy "sweet
singer" of rather feminine temperament. In this case the  personality is not divided between  true   poet  and  false  poet,  but  between  major  poet  and  minor  poet.  Yet here  again   Scott   is  not  aware of  his  two-sided   personality. In  fact,  each   poet keeps  intruding into  the  other's verses. Both  are  at  their  best in  such  poems  as Night  Hymns  on Lake  Nipigon, but  their  mutual presence is just what  keeps this poem,  which  has extraordinary moments, from  being the  great  poem  it almost  is.

53

CLASSICAL CANADIAN POETRY



It is my contention that  we are  dealing  here,  not  with  a form  of mental illness, but  with  a  cultural  phenomenon -a phenomenon which  is certainly present  in much   nineteenth-century verse,  but  is apparent with  particular obviousness  in English-Canadian  nineteenth century  verse, for  reasons  which  I have  tried,  in a necessarily  circuitous manner, to examine. Many of the  classical  Canadian  poets thought of poetry  as a  public  as well as a  private art,  and  they shared  this  view with  their  readers  and  the  elite  which  sponsored them, or  into  which  they  had been  born. The  social ideas they sought  to embody in their  poems were, to a large extent,  conservative ones -more   conservative,  perhaps,  than   many   of  them realised.  But they did not understand, at least they  did  not understand clearly, the real  ambiguity of their  position  in  relation  to society,  a society  which  demanded that   it  be  reflected  and  expressed  in  poetry  because  this  was still, to  those  who spoke  English,  the  noblest of the arts.  However, this society  had  in reality  a deep­ seated   contempt for  poetry.  Thus   the  relationship between   the  Canadian poet and society was a false and  even a poisonous one, which  vitiated the poetic impulse  at  its source,  and  resulted  in a  body  of poetry  notable for  its vacillation between  the truly  poetic and  the pseudo-poetic.
For  the  reason  indicated at the beginning of this article, I have  confined  myself
largely  to a consideration of this situation as it affected English-language poets in this  country. That French-Canadian poets found themselves  in a similar  position is indicated by  the  following  lines from  La  Patrie au  Poete, by Albert  Ferland, whose dates  are  t872-I943·
Reveur, pourquoi m'aimer comme on aime une femme? Tes yeux se sont mouilles d'avoir vu rna beaure;
Pour comprendre  ton coeur et vivre ta fierte, Poete, mon enfant, il me faudrait une arne!
Les noms des fiers Aleux dont l'honneur et la foi
Font pensif l'etranger  qui traverse rnes plaines,
Chante-les, plein d'orgueil, dans tes strophes hautaines; Poete, ces grands Morts ne revivent qu'en  toi.
Va, Barde, primitif des vierges Laurentides,
Va t'en pleurer ton coeur comme un fou dans les bois, Fidele au souvenir des heros d'autrefois,
Tandis que l'or vainqueur fait les hommes avides!
Poete, mon enfant, tu me chantes en vain, Je suis Ia Terre ingrate ou reva Cremazie; celebre si tu veux rna grave poesie,
Mais pour toi, mon enfant, je n'aura pas de pain!


54



PAYS, PAROLE

ET NEGRITUDE


Max Dorsinville









UN JEUNE  robE •'exclamait tout demi<rement:  "Finie,
Ia vieille thematique. Ecrire  quelque  chose sur  le pays, csa  ne donne  plus  rien.
( ...)  Le pays, je m'en  chrisse."'  Cela  laisse songeur quand  on sait  que  le plus important  mouvement   litteraire   a  naitre  au  Quebec,  depuis  Ia  g,eneration  de
La  Releve, revendiqua le pays  a decouvrir,  Ia puissance de Ia parole  et !'enga­
gement  du  poete  comme  presages  de  Ia  fin  d'un  mal  collectif.  L'attitude  de
Desroches  parait  symptomatique d'un  desenchantement   assez general  a l'egard
de ce mouvement qui, logiquement, ne pouvait debaucher que sur !'alternative suivante: le combat  purement politique ou le refuge dans l'hermetisme.
Pendant  que  nous attendons !'issue de Ia gestation d'un  nouvel elan  poetique, il importe,  a man  avis, de degager  les racines profondes de cette  poesie, dite du
Pays, des annees  rg58-rg67. Car, tout en etant  I'aboutissement d'une  thematique authentiquement quebecoise, elle demontrait  paral1element, au  triple  niveau  du ton,  des images  et  des symboles, de frappantes ressemblances avec Ia poesie du mouvement  de Ia Negritude.  Tel est le double propos de cette analyse.
Le  premier  grand   theme  de  Ia  poesie  quebecoise,  comme  l'a  si  justement souligne Gilles Marcotte   ( ici meme, dans les pages de cette revue), est celui du sentiment  d'exiP Celui d'un  Octave  Cremazie d'abord, exprime dans des poemes tels que "Les Morts",  "Le  Drapeau  de Carillon",  "Le  Vieux  Soldat  Canadien", et autres, ou l'esseulement en terre d'Amerique  ne cede qu'a  Ia hantise  de Ia mort, veritable obsession salvatrice  que partageront de nombreux  poetes. Ainsi:

Priez pour l'exile qui, loin de sa patrie, Expira sans entendre une parole amie; Isole dans sa vie, isole dans sa mort,S


55

PAYS, PAROLE ET  NEGRITUDE



Exil douloureusement exprime  parce que vecu par le poete lui-meme. Cremazie, dans  une de ses lettres, lamentera  son sort:  "A  ce que  nous n'avons  malheureus­ ement  qu'une societe  d'epiciers. ... Dans  ces natures   petrifiees  par la  routine, la pensee n'a  pas d'horizon".4
Un  meme  mal  d'etre  tourmente  Louis Frechette,  bien  que  ce sentiment  soit inflechi  dans  "La   Decouverte  du  Mississippi",  "La   Legende  d'un   Peuple"  et autres  poemes, par !'exploration  de la nature  Sauvage environnante. Pour echap­ per  a  l'indiflerence  de  ce  Nouveau   Monde,   F echette
grands espaces, pousse par le desir effrene de s'engloutir  dans un nouveau sein maternel.  Mais  l'angoisse contenue  ailleurs  dans  La  Voix  d'un  Exile sous-tend pareil desir. Chez les Paul Morin, Rene Chopin,  et jusqu'a  Alain Grandbois,  une semblable   recherche  d'evasion  mene  aux  exercices  du  Parnasse,  ou  aux  pere­ grinations  ulyssiennes. Compensation  cependant  n'est  pas satisfaction. Grandbois  avoue dans  Les Rivages de l' Homme:

Je  n'ai rien vu
Je n'ai rien goO.te
Je n'ai rien souffert ...

La  poes1e du  terroir  des  Pamphile   Le  May,  Neree  Beauchemin,   Gonzague Desaulniers,  et  meme  Alfred  Desrochers,  colporte  ·egalement  son  bagage  d'in­ quietude.  La  celebration  du  quotidien   sans  fard,   le  recours  a  la  simplicire, exprirnes  dans  un  lyrisme  plein  de  pudeur,   semblent   taire  les  tourments  de l'exil:   "... l'espoir  en  mon  arne  repose,/   Car   je sais  les bontes  du  Dieu  que j'ai servi".  Une  note insolite se fait entendre  neanmoins  dans  ces vers. Pourquoi Beauchemin  s'exclame-t-il:  "Debout, peuple, debout! Dieu  parle"?  Et  pourquoi Desrochers  affirme-t-il:   "Je  suis un  fils deohu  de  race  surhumaine"? lei  nous touchons  a la mystique messianique, aux mythes compensateurs  au su jet desquels Jean  Le  Mayne  en dit  long.Mais que  l'on  accepte  ou  non  l'image  bucolique traoee par ces poetes, celle-d ne peut etre que marginale, alors que l'usine rem place la ferme, la ville depeuple la campagne,  que le mythe  rural se desintegre  devant la conscience urbaine.



AvEc NELLIGAN,  Lozeau,  Saint-Denys  Garneau et  Anne Hebert,  cependant, resonne a  nouveau  un  accent  proche  de  celui des origines. A la grandiloquence et au pathetisme  des debuts succedent  le sens de la mesure verbale  et,  surtout,   la  conscience  d'un   mal  relevant   doublement   du  lieu  geo-

PAYS, PAROLE ET  NEGRITUDE



graphique  et  des  trefonds   de  l'etre.  D'ou  le  mysterieux  "Vaisseau   d'Or",  Ia
"Romance du  Vin"  de  Nelligan  qui  en  for ant
vaisseau  a-t-il  sombre?  Pourquoi   cette  incantation   desesperee  de  Ia  gaiere?­ posent  Ia nouvelle  equation, dont  Ia reponse semble etre  que  "DegoO.t, Raine et Nevrose, entre  eux  ont  dispute''   (images d'extreme  violence  faisant  contraste avec le vaisseau  du  reve  "aux  flancs diaphanes")  pour  amener  l'effondrement  dans l'abime.  II y a loin de la gaiere, mais tout de !'aggravation de l'esseulement cremazien,  dans  des vers tels que:

C'est le regne du rire amer et de la rage
De se savoir poete et I'objet du mepris ...

Si le  mal sous-tend  le  vouloir  de  gaiere de  Nelligan,  sous des dehors  de  sons, couleurs et parfums,  Lozeau utilisera l'infirmite physique pour fonder son angoisse ( "Quand on  gemit  captif  de la  realite" ) . La  poesie se retire  derriere  les valets et se repait  de  douloureuses  ruminations.  Ou  bien elle se complait  dans  ce que Northrop  Frye a appele  Ia "garrison  mentality",  ou  Ia vie de cha.teau. S'isolant au  manoir  seigneurial   pres  de  Ste-Eustache,  Saint-Denys   Garneau  cultive  Ia hantise  de  l'enfance innocente   ("Le   Jeu")  et, surtout, Ia  conscience  presque morbide  de son  dechirement. Mais,  par-dela  l'idiosyncrasie,  le  poete  ressasse le malaise de toute une culture  ( celle de I'elite, du mains), tant il est bouleverse par
!'absence  de lien entre  son  moi et Ia vie qui  bat  hors du  manoir:
Je marche a cote d'une joie,
D'une  joie qui n'est pas a moi ...

Le  repliement  sur  soi accompagne   ( ou  precede?)   ce sentiment  d'alienation, et
I'obsession cremazienne de Ia mort  ne peut que sourdre:

un mort demande a boire
Le puits n'a plus tant d'eau qu'on le croirait
Qui  portera  reponse au mort ...

La cousine de Garneau, Anne Hebert,  portera 11eponse, semble-t-il. Du sentiment de l'exil pousse a son extreme,  Ia poetesse, tel le Phenix,  fera  renaitre  la vie des
cendres.  Cet  itineraire  est  traoe  ayant  comme  point  de  depart   Ia nostalgie  du monde  de l'enfance perdue   (Les  Songes en  Equilibre,  premier  recueil  qui  fait echo  aux  ]eux  et  Regards  dans l'Espace)  et comme  lieu d'arri¥ee le Tombeau des Rois, ¥eritable  "saison en enfer", s'il en fut. La progression du  poeme-titre de ce dernier  recueil resume,  pour  ainsi dire, l'historique  de Ia thematique de l'exil

57

PAYS, PAROLE ET  NEGRITUDE



et de la constance  de la mort.  Le premier  mouvement  indique  ceci clairement: "Je  descends/  Vers les tombeaux des rois/  Etonneej A peine nee". De cet affron­ tement  avec les voix ancestrales-qui n'est pas sans rappeler  la demarche d'une  Maria  Chapdelaine ou d'un   Menaud,  quoique  !'issue  ne soit  pas  la  meme - depend  I'ablation  du  mal:   "Avides  de  la  source  fraternelle  du  mal  en  moi/ lls  me couchent  et  me boivent ..." On  a  beaucoup parle  de  l'ambiguite  de la
strophe  finale,  s'interrogeant sur  le sens  a  accorder   a  !'image   de  l'oiseau  se
tournant  vers  l'aube   "ses  prunelles  crevees".  A  mon   avis  l'aube   saluant   la remontee  rep11esente bien une note d'espoir  puisque elle suit l'exorcisme souhaire, l'acte cathartique indique dans le vers: "Et  les morts hors de moi, assassines". Le "Mystere de la Parole",  ti11e du dernier recueil d'Anne Hebert,  Poemes, demontre tant  au  niveau  des images que des symboles cette  nouvelle volonre d'espoir.  Par
le recours a la parole  ("en  plein centre du verbe, nous/  avan<;ons   a la  pointe du
monde"), l'harnachement de Ia symbolique  du  feu  et du  sang  ("nous  re<;umes mission du  feu"), Ia portee  des images, "Mystere" affirme  que  Ia guerison  du mal  ancestral  reside dans  Ia destruction  de la  vie de chateau  et  l'ouverture sur le pays:

Que celui qui a rec;u fonction de la parole vous prenne en charge comme un coeur tenebreux de surcroit, et  n'ait de cesse que soient justifies les vivants et les morts en un seul chant  parmi l'aube et les herbes.

La  mission de  Ia  poesie et  du  poete  desormais  sera  celle  de  !'engagement, le mariage  de Ia parole au pays. La parole s'affirmant  rituel  d'exorcisme,  et le pays son  canon,  Ia  poesie se fait  revolutionnaire,   dans  le  sens  qu'entendait  And11e Breton. De dire Chamberland, point de salut hors de !'engagement:

Je  l'ai  appris  de  Miron:  il  n'existe pas de  salut  individuel. ... La  croyance au  salut  individuel  ne  conduit  qu'au   redoublement   hallucine,  d'autant   plus lancinant qu'il est solitaire, de l'echec collectif; on sombre dans la putrefaction du marais interieur:  Saint Denys Garneau. 6

Parallelement   a  }',evolution d'Anne   Hebert   germent   les  poemes  de  Gaston
Miron. De 1954  a Ig6o,  nous dit Miron, il eut  une prise de conscience a travers
"toutes  sortes de lectures",  et au sortir  d'un  sejour  europeen,  de ce que  Miron appelle "sa condition  de colonise".7   Un ton poetique  neuf  ( celui du colonise) , un inventaire  du  pays dans  des images telluriques  et  existentielles  p11ecises,  l'achar­ nement  du feu  et du sang couvant  sous le froid,  fondent  Ia poetique  de  Miron
et de ses camarades  a l'Hexagone,  Liberte  et  Parti  Pris. Sans  vouloir  diminuer

PAYS, PAROLE ET  NEGRITUDE



!'importance de !'evolution  retraoee plus haut, i1 y a lieu de croire que le courant poetique des annees soixante se nourrlt, en sus, au confluent du Tiers-monde. Si on peut supposer que parmi les lectures de Miron figurerent 1' Anthologie de Senghor et le Cahier  d'un  Retour  au Pays Natal de Cesaire (temoignage  que nous tenons
de Vallieres:   "Je  dois a Miron  d'avoir  appris  a connaitre  et  a aimer  la  poesie
contemporaine, ainsi que  la litterature des colonises [Aime  Cesaire, ...] ,) 8   nous savons par  contre !'admiration que  voua  Chamberland a ce dernier: "Je  peux
bien  dire  mes  preferences:   une  saison en  enfer, le  cahier  d'un  retour  au  pays natal, .. ."9    C'est  a se demander meme si Chamberland, comme sans  doute  de
nombreux   jeunes ,ecrivains de  l'epoque,  ne  connO.t Oesaire  par  l'entremise  de
Miron.
Je  voudrais  demontrer dans  ce qui  suit  comment  le  recours  a la  parole,  au triple niveau du  ton, des images et des symboles, correspond  a cette autre  poesie
engagee, celle de la Negritude.
Sartre,  dans  sa  p11eface  a l'Anthologie  de  Senghor,  l"'Orphee Noir'',  signale
le ton  commun  de la  poesie negre antillaise et africaine  par  cette  interrogation­ choc:  "Qu'est-ce done que vous esperiez, quand  vous otiez le baillon qui fermait  ces  bouches   noires?  Qu'elles   allaient   entonner   vos   louanges?  Ces  tetes ... , pensiez-vous, quand  elles se releveraient,  lire !'adoration dans leurs yeux?" C'est plutot  le vrombissement  de la  revendication,  de la  colere, qui  se fait  entendre.  "Accomodez-vous  de  moi,  moi  je ne  m'accomode  pas  de  vous,"  dit  Cesaire.10 "J'ai !'impression  d'etre  ridicule/  dans leurs salons dans  leurs manieres,"  avoue Leon  Damas.  Et  Jacques   Roumain  de  proclamer  "la  ft,etrissure amere  de  la seule egalite  du  desespoir":

Nous ne chanterons plus les tristes spirituals desespen!s.... Debout les damnes de la terre
Debout les for ats

David  Diop  de  rencherir:  "Toi   mon  frere  au  visage  de  peur  et  d'angoissej
Releve-toi et erie:  NON!"
Gaston   Miron   inaugure l'echo  de  cette  revolte  dans  les lettres  quebecoises lorsqu'il  annonce:  "Je  suis malheureux   plein  rna  carrure,   je saccage/   la  rage que  je suis." S'il est malheureux  c'est qu"'il est ce pays seul avec lui-meme ... j un  pays que  jamais ne rejoint le solei[ natal"  ( c'est nous qui soulignons). Paul­ Marie Lapointe  fait de la metaphore  de la prison le lieu de la revendication: "Ce continent  me trahissait/ j''etais prisonnier de ses pores." Mais c'est surtout  Jacques  Brault  qui  fait  sentir  la  colere fondee  dans  l'etat  de  mal  etre  des s1ens. A  Ia


59

PAYS, PAROLE ET  NEGRITUDE



maniere  de Cesaire dont Ia premiere partie  du Cahier est un  tableau  impitoyable des  "Antilles  qui  ont  faim",  de  "cette  foule  criarde  si  etonnamment  passee a
cote de son cri",  Brault s'exdame:

Nous
les batards sans nom
les deracines d'aucune terre les boutonneux sans age
les demi-revoltes confortables

Paul  Chamberland, constatant  ,egalement que  "ce  peuple  dart  aux  caveaux  de
Ia honte",  fera  hurler I'afficheur:

J'habite en une terre de crachats de matins haves et
de rousseurs malsaines les poetes s'y suicident et

la rancoeur purulle aux li' vres

Cette  revolte est done  pvecedee par  Ia penible  conscience  d'une  situation  de fait,  mais elle est toujours suivie par Ia redecouverte  du  pays. Tandis  que,  dans
un  premier  temps,  Ia prise de conscience du  malaise  mene  a Ia  revendication,
dans  un  deuxieme,  elle anime  Ia  tentative  de  repossession des siens,  du  pays. La  mission du  poete s'accouple  a celle du  mage ou  du  prophete; Ia force de  Ia
parole doit "sommer  libre  ( ...)  Ia succulence des fruits."  Eclosent les images et que  naisse le pays souhaite:  "Je  dirais orage. Je  dirais  fleuve. Je  dirais  tornade. Je dirais feuille. Je dirais arbre. Je serais mouille de toutes les pluies, humecte  de toutes les rosees."11  Pour Senghor, comme pour Chamberland, le pays est l'image de Ia femme aimee:
Femme nue, femme obscure!
Fruit  mO.r  a la chair ferme, sombres extases du  vm noir, bouche
qui fait lyrique rna bouche
Savane aux horizons purs,
Alors que  Pilon annonce  que  "Nous  sommes a Ia naissance  d'un  pays a recon­
naitre", Paul-Marie Lapointe  le celebre dans une luxuriance toute cesairienne:

j'ecris arbre
arbre d'orbe en cone et de seve en lumiere

pins blancs   pins argentes   pins rouges et gris pins durs .a bois lourd   pins a feuilles tordues


6o

PAYS, PAROLE ET NEGRITUDE



cedres de l'est   thuyas et balais   cedres blancs
bras polis   cypres jaunes   aiguilles   couturieres

Paul  Chamberland offre egalement son kaleidoscope  d'images:

notre  patrimoine sous les quatre  epees du vent et les forets les banquises les gulf-stream cinglant  !'horizon  de nos semailles

NOUS  ranc;onnerons aux cents nuits la 	TERRE 	QUEBEC
Mais  le pays est surtout, pour  Chamberland, Brault,  Miron, Prefontaine, l'image de la femme  a posseder; la possession de la femme  convie  ala possession du  pays,
et  le  contraire est  aussi  vrai:  "termine o femme  rna  deroute qu'en  toi  j'eU:ve
cej pays au  jour  claquant du  nom."
Par-dela l'image, la symbolique des forces telluriques, du feu et du sang  (forces energetiques  premieres, signes  de  l'authenticite  recherchee), alimente la  parole liberatrice. Pour  Senghor et Cesaire  de telos represente  les racines,  le souffle omni­ present  de l'Etre faisant  des vivants  et des morts le levain  de l'ame africaine. Par
!'incantation du feu et du sang s'accomplit le rituel du verbe liberateur:

des mots, ah oui, des mots! mais
des mots de sang frais, des mots qui sont des raz-de-maree  et des eresipeles
des paludismes et des laves et des feux de brousse, et des flambees de chair,
et des flambCes de villes ...

Dans  le troisieme  mouvement du Cahier le poete eleve son cri de renaissance ala vie, apres la descente aux enfers, et il est d'embrasement cosmique:

Et  voici soudain  que  force  et vie m'assaillent  (...), et  voila  toutes  les veines et veinules qui s'affairent au sang neuf et l'enorme  poumon  des cyclones qui  respire et le feu thesaurise des volcans et le gigantesque pouls sismique qui bat maintenant la mesure d'un  corps vivant  en mon ferme embrasement.

11 importe de souligner, par  ailleurs,  que  le poeme  "Heritage de  la  Tristesse" de

Miron  accomplit un itineraire semblable a celui du Cahier. La meme  constatation initiale d'agonie, d'inertie ambiante, se 11Csorbe   a la  fin dans  un 11eveil secoue  de
forces  telluriques:

vents telluriques, vents de l'fune, vents universels vents accouplez-vous, et de vos bras de fleuve

61

PAYS, PAROLE ET  NEGRITUDE



enserrez son visage de peuple detruit, donnez-lui la chaleur et la profuse lumiere des sillages d'hirondelles.

Brault,  pour  sa  part,  clot  "Suite  Fraternelle" par  un  semblable  recours:   "Un peuple  ivre de vents et de femmes s'essaie a sa nouveaute." Chamberland, rem­
plac_;ant le "morne  oublie" de Gesaire par le froid qui glace, les manguiers  par les pins, le tropical par le boreal, fera du feu et du sang l'incendie  du nord emprison­ nant.  Puisque  "le  froid  nous a tenus en  haute  trahison  peuple-bedeau  ( ... )  je verrai  le  visage  du  feu  sourdre   au  terroir  de  nos   jurons."   Le  grand   cri  de
s'elever:

o visage du feu ...
vous aura-t-il fallu flambe de 1'Asie  a 1'Afrique et de
1'Afrique aux negreries latines incendier les tropiques d'une mer a !'autre
pour enfin nous tirer des machoires du pOle et dresser dans nos corps ensommeilles de taupes l'incendie d'etre libres et d'epouser au long de ses mille blessures notre terre Quebec

Ainsi,  a la seule serieuse question  philosophique  selon  Camus,  le poete  repond avec vehemence:   "en  notre sang  terre assaillie d'aurore/ nous fondrons  l'espace au feu d'un  pays."
Que  les poetes quebecois, de  Miron  a Chamberland, aient  ete  sensibles a la
poesie de la Negritude  n'a  pas de quoi surprendre puisque  la revolte et la quete d'authenticite des Cesaire, Senghor,  Damas  et Roumain reposerent sur  une con­ dition  d'exil  eprouvee lors de sejours d'etudes  en Europe.12  Des lors ils ecrivirent
partant d'une  double  alienation:  d'abord   celle geographique, et surtout  celle  a
l'egard  d'eux-memes  causee par  le racisme. Ces poetes durent  se revolter  contre

,
 et,  en  refusant  le  role

assigne par !'Europe ( "celui  d'endurance
 a la  chicotte") 14   se  reposseder  par  le

retour  aux sources ancestrales, au pays natal. Cette demarche dialectique soutient des  oeuvres  capitales  telles que  Pigments   ( 1937)   de  Leon  Damas; le  Cahier (1939), bien  entendu,  de  Cesaire;  Chants  d'Ombre  (1945)   de  Senghor;   Bois d'Ebene   ( 1945)  de Jacques  Roumain, sans compter  les poemes dissemines dans les revues de l',epoque  (l'Etudiant Noir,  revue  fondee  par  Gesaire,  Senghor  et
autres,  en  1934;  Tropiques, fondee  par  Cesaire  a son  retour  en  Martinique  en
1941).
Bien  qu'il  y ait  loin du  malaise  issu du  racisme  europeen   a  celui  enracine
dans certaines conditions historico-religieuses, les poetes de l'Hexagone, de Liberte

PAYS, PAROLE ET  NEGRITUDE



et de  Parti Pris se sont  pourtant reconnus  dans }'alienation de l'exil  Noir. Cham­
berland, definissant son  engagement, dira:

}'accomplis  ce que  Cesaire  appelle  un  "retour  au  pays natal".  C'est  alors que s'inaugure  une etrange  mais vitale conjugaison:  celle qui enferme  le  je et le nous
en  un  seul mouvement. Le retour  au  pays natal,  a l'homme  reel,  au  pays reel,
impose deux  attitudes rigoureusement  liees:  1-  je  me  reconnais  tel  que  je suis,
tel que la situation  m'a  fait,  (...) . 2- je nous reconnais tels que nous sommes, je prends acte de notre  vie, de  notre misere, de notre malheur....15

11  y  a  bien  concordance  de  deux   mouvements  poetiques  qui   remontent  aux memes  sources: la poesie furibonde des "maudits", Rimbaud et  Lautreamont, et la  conscience   modeme existentialiste.16
La  Negritude, neanmoins, en  tant  que  mouvement litteraire,  prend  fin  avec l'avenement a l'independance des  pays  d'Afrique Noire,  ou  bien  elle  prend  le
chemin   des  redites  et  de  l'hermetisme  (voir  pour  ce  demier cas  Ferrements   et Cadastres  de Cesaire,  titres sombrement evocateurs d'une  Martinique la.issee pour compte au chapitre de la decolonisation, et qui demeure un departement d'outre­ mer  de  la  France). De  meme   le  mouvement  du  Pays  au  Quebec  revele  son epuisement avec le depart de Chamberland pour l'Europe (Yves Prefontaine part
egalement). 11  en  11esulte l'I navouable   ( 1g67)  dont   le  titre   meme   indique  le cloisonnement consecutif   a l'echec,  le retour  aux  valets  clos:  "je  sais  qu'aujour­
d'hui ce n'est  point la parole  qui confere le sens mais l'acte.m7  L'incapacite d'agir constitue justement le constat "inavouable". Le demier vers de cette etrange confession,  non  mains  etrangement signee  "Desire",  annonce le silence du repliement sur  soi:  "cette voix sourde  qui  parle  en  moi,  je l'entends."
Point  n'est  besoin  d'insister sur }',evident parallelisme de l'hermetisme, de l'interiorisation finale  de !'engagement, chez Cesaire  et Chamberland. L'echec, reconnu   par   ce  demier,  de  la  gageure   de  la  liberation  par   la   parole   fonde l'ampleur du  desenchantement du   jeune  poete  cite  au  debut.


NOTES

1 Roger  Desroches, La  Presse, 3 oct. 1970, C2.
2   Gilles  Marcotte,  "Une   Poesie  d'Exil",   Canadian   Literature, 2   ( 1959),   32-36.
3  Afin d'eviter  une enumeration fastidieuse et encombrante, !'unique  reference  aux citations,  .a moins  d'avis  contraire,  est la suivante:  Guy  Sylvestre, Anthologie  de
la Pobie  Canadienne  Franfaise  (Montreal: Beauchemin,  1963); Alain  Bosquet,
La  Poesie  Canadienne   Contemporaine   de  Langue   Franfaise   (Paris:    Seghers,
1966); Paul Chamberland, Terre  Quebec  (Montreal: Deom, 1964); Paul Cham­
berland,  L'Afficheur Hurle  (Montreal: Parti Pris, 1964); Leopold sedar  Senghor,

6g

PAYS, PAROLE ET  NEGRITUDE



Anthologie  de la Nouvelle Poesie Negreet Malgache  de Langue  Franfaise  (Paris: P.U.F.,  I948); Lilyan  Kesteloot,  Anthologie  Negro-Africaine  (Paris:  Marabout­ Universite,  I967).
4    Michel  Dassonville, Cremazie  (Montreal: Fides,  I 956) , pp. 54-55. Voir Convergences  (Montreal: HMH, I96I).
8   Paul Chamberland, "Dire  ce que  je Suis",  Parti Pris, 2, No.5  (I965), 37·
7    Gaston  Miron,  "Un  Long Chemin",  Parti Pris, 2, No.5 (I965), 25-27.
8   Pierre  Vallieres, Negres Blancs d'Amerique   (Montreal: Parti  Pris, I968), p. 202.
9   Chamberland, Ibid., 39·
10  Aime  Gesaire,  Cahier  d'un   Retour  au  Pays  Natal   (Paris:    Presence  Africaine, I956), p. 55·
11 Ibid.,  p. 75, p. 40.
12   Voir Lilyan Kesteloot, Les Ecrivains Noirs de Langue  Franfaise  (Bruxelles:  Univ.
Libre  de Bruxelles, I965),  pp.  I IO-I27.
18  Frantz  Fanon,  Peau Noire Masques Blancs (Paris: Editions du Seuil, I952), p. 25.
14  Gesaire, Ibid.,  p. 6r.
15   Chamberland, I bid., 38-39.
16  Tout  en  n'oubliant pas Breton et le surrealisme.  Voir  le temoignage  de Senghor, "L'Apport de la Poesie Negre au Demi-Siecle",  Negritude  et Humanisme, Liberte I(Paris:  Editions  du Seuil, I 964),  pp..  I 34- I 35 ; celui de Chamberland, dans ces "notes"  qui,  avec  le temps,  deviennent  un  veritable   "art   poetique"  des  annees soixante, "Dire  ce que je Suis", Ibid., 33-42.
17   Paul  Chamberland, L'lnavouable (Montreal:  Parti  Pris, I967), p. 64.



CANADIAN MENNONITE LITERATURE



J. Thiessen






BEFORE mscussmc the litcrature of the Cmadim  Men­ nonites  a  short  historical  sketch  of  Mennonitism  is in  order.  The  Mennonites belong to the radical  wing of Protestantism  who went beyond Luther in stressing
their  emancipation from  Rome,  for  they  emphasized  a  personal  free  will and regarded   the   unadulterated  discipleship  of  Jesus  as  their  overriding   concern. Infant  baptism,  taking  of the oath,  and  the  bearing of arms for military service were  repudiated  firmly  from  the  very  beginning.  By taking  literally  Christ's words in the Sermon  on the Mount,  "Swear  not at all", they refused to take any oath,  even  a  civil oath.  Christ's  words : "Love  your enemies"  and  "Resist  not evil",  and  the  Fifth  Commandment, formed  the basis of their  principle  of  non­ resistance. For their  practice of adult baptism they became known as Anabaptists.  The  right  not  to swear  an oath  or take up arms was granted  to the Anabaptists  by  the  governmental leaders  of all  the  countries  to  which  they  migrated. But these privileges were subsequently always withdrawn.
One  of the  outstanding leaders  of the  Anabaptist  movement  in  the  Nether­
lands was Menno  Simons. Born in 1496 in a Frisian village, he became a Roman Catholic  priest, but  renounced  his faith in 1536 to assume leadership  of an Ana­ baptist congregation. He became their first elder. When the Counter-Reformation under  the  Duke  of Alba  ( 1544-1572)   forced  him and  many  of his followers to flee the  country,  they found  a haven and  new fields for  their  missionary zeal in the  more  tolerant principalities  of  Northeast  Germany.  From  there  the  move­ ment  spread  rapidly; the  time for religious independence  from Rome  had  come and  many  sensed and  heeded  this spirit.  Eventually  even  Anabaptist  congrega­ tions  having  no  direct  connection  with  Menno's  movement  became  known  as

MENNONITE  LITERATURE



Mennonites,  a  generic  term  used  today  as synonymous  with  Anabaptists  of a pacifist orientation.
It was in the Vistula delta, in the Danzig triangle along the Vistula and  Nogat
rivers, that the Mennonite movement achieved an ethnic identity, a Gemeinschaft. There  they  consolidated  their  religious and  economic  community.  Towards the end of the 18th century their prosperity and established way of life was threatened once  again;   land  acquisition  was restricted  and  pressure  to  do  military  service was exerted on Mennonite young men.
When  Catherine II  succeeded to the Russian  throne  in  I 763 she published  a manifesto in Western Europe inducing foreign settlers to colonize the unoccupied agricultural lands of her domain. These lands had  been bought  with a price; she had  cleared them of Turkish  domination.  Agriculture  was central  to her plan for the stability of this area and for national  prosperity, so she sought model farmers who would work the land with perseverance. The offer she extended was generous and  attractive -free  land,  religious toleration,  exemption   from  military  duty and  taxation  and freedom in establishing educational and social institutions. A delegate  group   of  Mennonite  explorers  set  out  to  appraise   the  situation   and having  reached  accord  they agreed to settle on the Russian steppes. In  1 7 Bg  the first families arrived  in Chortitza  on the Dnejpr,  which  became the initial settle­ ment  of the  Mennonites  in Russia. By 1g 14 Mennonite villages numbering over
200, with a combined  population  of approximately  1 oo,ooo,  had spread  far into south  and  east Russia. When the privileges originally granted  the Mennonites  in Russia  were  jeopardized,  the  first migration  to Canada was undertaken during the  years  I874-78.  Subsequent   migrations  followed  in  the  192o's  after  Com­ munism  stifled religious freedom  and free enterprise  in Russia. After the Second World War many other Mennonites, evacuated  by the German  thrust of  I94I-43, gradually  found  their  way to  their  fellows in  the  New  World.  The  Mennonite  emigration  to America is over. There  are in the world today some soo,ooo  Men­ nonites. In the province of Manitoba,  where they have settled most densely, some ss,ooo have  established  new homes. Of  these at  least  I s,ooo  live in  Winnipeg, which is the largest concentration  of Mennonitism in existence today.



MENNONITES have from  their  beginnings, four and  a half centuries  ago,  existed chiefly on  a fare  of Bible and  Bread.  They  were almost ready, it would seem, to ply the pen after having  become a Gemeinschaft, a self­ conscious community  in the Vistula triangle.  But then  the time came to  pull up

66

MENNONITE LITERATURE



and   pitch  anew  in  the  Russian  Steppes.  Here  the  successive Tod, Not,  Brot, (Death, Distress,  Prosperity)   generations  ran  out  of  time  again.  There   were literary attempts but progress was slight.
The  emigration  to Canada, the  departure from the  Ukrainian steppes  which
were to have been their home "for all time", again threw the reflective mind into much  disarray  and  consternation. True,  the Russian Revolution  with subsequent famine  and  privation  inspired  and even forced many to write about  their experi­ ences. But how? The  Mennonite artist, expressing himself in a German language which  had  never  received sustenance  from  the German  literary  soil  proper,  en­ countered   the  same  difficulty  as  before  in  Russia:  to  identify  himself  with  a country  not completely native  to his formative  years. Such identification  requires time, more than  time:  it demands  a critical yet compassionate, mature  yet flexible and receptive audience. This audience was rarely there, and if it was, it demanded  literal  and  not  imagined   truths  in  novels,  and  like most  self-conscious groups whose existence has often  been  threatened, it was disposed to accept  only litera­ ture  that  favourably  portrayed  the  Mennonite  world. In short,  what  Mennonite  reading  public  there  was  wanted to be treated  to realia, a reflection no doubt  of their  modest literalist  biblical fare. Their  literary fancy is so impoverished  that  it must  be  assumed  that, unbeknown   to  them,  their  biblical  fare  not  only gave sustenance  to their faith  but also ample nourishment  to the demands  of imagina­  tion and  fancy.
This  very limited  literary  background  may explain  why the  world of fantasy, for  example,  is rare  in  Mennonite literature.  Life was simple  and  sober;  hard work and  honest living produced  prosperity which in tum  was interpreted as a manifestation   of God's  bountiful  blessings. They  lived  Max  Weber's  Protestant ethic  and  the spirit  of capitalism,  centuries  before he so pointedly  described  it. The  great, oftentimes  unique,  accomplishments  of the Mennonites in every coun­ try where they settled were limited to success in the agricultural and enterprising  area and were never matched  by their literary endeavours.
There   was  one  very  notable  exception  to  the  dearth   in  Mennonite letters:
Hans  Harder. He  was born  in 1903 in the remote Mennonite colony of Samara on  the  Volga.  It  was Harder's luck that  he wrote his numerous  novels in  Ger­ many   where  the  intellectual   climate  was  diversified,  mature   and   discerning enough  to absorb  his powerful  artistry.  Making  his home  in  West  Prussia  after World  War  I  he has written  Das Dorf an der Volga,  Das  Sibirische Tor, Klim,  Die  Hungerbrueder and  Die  Muschel.  Harder  writes  about  his lost  homeland,  about   death   and   graveyards.   Harder   understands   what   Schiller's  "fernende

MENNONITE  LITERATURE



Erinnerung"  (receding  memory)   means  and  he is warm  and  autobiographical yet not  sentimental,  maudlin,  or confessional. In  Canada, as in  the  Mennonite settlements  of Russia, we venture to say, he would have been isolated or hounded out  of the community, sharing the fate of other  Mennonite writers of less ability.
It  was this suspicion of things imaginary  and  novel that  much  occupied J. H.
Janzen's  mind  in  his  exposition  of  Mennonite literature  in  Mennonite  Life, January 1946.1 Reflecting on the situation  past and  present of Russo-Canadian Mennonites,  Janzen  writes, "Mennonitism was regarded  in certain  respects as a terra  sancta  on which the  jugglery of belles-lettres dared  not appear. That  Men­ nonites  would  write in this genre  was simply sin. Mter  all, one could  not  treat Mennonitism  that  way."
It is difficult to imagine the honest lay minister and writer Janzen  posing much of a threat  to any community  of interests, religious or ethnic.  And yet the events that  caused him pained surprise on publishing his first story shortly after  the tum of this century are to this day sadly typical of Mennonite reactions to their writers. Janzen  says:

Before  the  appearance of my  book  (I 9 I o), I had  published a story  in  Kroeker's Familienkalender in  the style of a diary,  in  which,  awkward as I was at  the  time, I had   not  sufficiently  masked  the  individuals who  seiVed  as  my  characters, and they  recognized   themselves  and  became  furiously  angry  at  me.  I had  to ask their pardon, and  it  was no easy  task  to  receive  their  forgiveness.  I  thought I had  de­ fended  them,  but  they felt that  they had  been exposed  at the rack, and  the injustice which  had  been done  they considered a sin unto  death. Later I became more  clever, and  if occasionally  someone felt offended, he would  not  know  where to send  me to beg for pardon, so that  I was henceforth spared  that  unpleasant task.

In  Canada, Janzen  and  two fellow "poets", M. Fast and  G. Loewen, organized a  "Hainbund" (league  of young  poets)  for  the  purpose  of exchanging  poetry and  criticisms. Loewen's poems were published  in a modest volume called  Feld­ blumen,  and  Janzen   published  his own  products  of  the  field and  pen  by the dozen,  mainly in mimeographed  form.  Later  poetry was much  along these lines, such  as G. A. Peter's  Blumen am Wegrand  (Wayside  Flowers). All  this led the Germanist   Hermann  Boeschenstein 2    to  observe  that   Mennonite  poetic  writing was  "blatantly  dilettante". It  is  a  sadly  true  commentary.  These  poems  are Romanticism re-visited, heavily dependent  on Goethe and Eichendorff for theme, turns of phrase and style.
Janzen  ends his hopeful exposition with  a  hearty  "Vivat ! Crescat!  Floreat!" to the future  belles lettres of "our  own",  but the echo to the valiant cry failed to

68

MENNONITE LITERATURE



resound.  And yet Janzen's first novel Denn meine  Augen  haben Deinen Heiland gesehen,  (Halbstadt, Russia:  Raduga,  1911)  was a breakthrough, not so much for  its content  but  because it was a beginning. It  was the first book in which a Mennonite wrote  about  the  common  Mennonite  life in  the  form  of fiction. In the Mennonite Life of July  1951 Arnold Dyck describes just what an overwhelm­ ing  breakthrough Janzen's effort actually  meant.  What  lasting impression it left on Dyck's mind  or to what  extent it motivated  him to start writing is a matter  of speculation.  In  any  event,  Dyck in the Thirties  suddenly  became the only Men­ nonite  writer  of note in both  the High and  Low German languages  in Canada. Much  of what  he  has  written  is  Heimatdichtung  and  was treated  and  read  as such.3
It  remained  for  "outsiders", -non-Mennonites -to  discover a  new  dimen­ sion  to Dyck's artistry.  In  a  perceptive and  extremely well written  article on A. Dyck's  Bildungsroman, V erloren in  der Steppe,  Michael  Hadley/  was quick to realize  that  V erloren  in  der  Steppe  was  much  more  than  "merely a  piece of Mennonite writing". He observes that "it is this type of bland  reasoning that  has militated  against  the  novel's  being  recognized  as part  of  the  broader  German  tradition. While the  work admittedly  has its own distinctive character and  'mys­ tique"  it takes its rightful  place in a genre peculiar to German  literature, namely that  of the  Bildungsroman." Walter  Schmiedehaus,  the  writer,  apothecary and German   Consul   in  Chihuahua,  Mexico,  stylistically  and   genetically   akin  to author  Theodor  Fontane, was also quick to realize Dyck's art,  observing:  "Wer  auch  nur  ein  einziges  Buch  von  Arnold  Dyck gelesen hat,  der  weiss, class  aus jeder Zeile ein Sanger seines Volkes, ein Heimatdichter spricht". (One  need read only a single work of A. Dyck's to know that  in his every sentence speaks a poet of his people.) 5
Dyck  edited  the  Mennonitische Warte  in  the  3o's  and  early  4o's,  the  only
respectable  Mennonite journal  in which  budding  artistry  was given even a fair chance  of expression.  In  the light of what  has already  been said it will come as no surprise  that  the W arte was soon defunct.  Another  no less valiant  effort was Victor  Peters'  Mennonitische  Lehrerzeitung  in  the  late  4o's  and  early  so's.  It suffered  the same sad fate.  The  churches, i.e. the Mennonite establishment,  felt threatened   and  granted  no support,  financial or moral,  while other support  was insular and fragmentary; another  manifestation that the field of Mennonite belles­ lettres was still in its infancy.
Dyck has written  equally  successfully in the  Low German  vernacular  and  his portrayals  of the  comic characters Koop and  Bua will probably  outlive all other

6g

MENNONITE  LITERATURE



Canadian Mennonite writings in German.  In  his best short story in the dialect, Twee  Breew  (Two  Letters), Dyck has fully utilized Low German  as a vehicle of respectable literary  art. There  is masterful dialogue  and  description : the physical setting  of a  blizzard,  admirably  and  powerfully depicted,  is set against  a lonely woman's inner struggle for hope, formerly in the Steppes in Russia, now in the Canadian Prairie, drawn with sensitivity and sympathy. The two conflicts are developed separately  but concomitantly,  until they merge with all the pathos and inevitability of great tragedy.
A Mennonite poet who developed into maturity rather  late in life is Gerhard Wiens, now residing in Oklahoma  but formerly  a teacher  in Manitoba. When in I967  the  C.B.C.  ran  a series of broadcasts  on ethnic  poetry  other  than  English and  French, they commissioned me to gather  representative  Mennonite poetry. Everything  else suggested was refused as too "doggerel", but  Wiens' poems, "His Willow  Tree" and   "The   Farmer's  Son",   were  immediately   regarded  even  in translation  as poetry of note. Of the other  Mennonites  who have put their pen to the  test  Gerhard   Friesen   (pseud  Fritz  Senn)   and   Abraham   Johann  Friesen ( pseud  Karla)  must  be rated  as the  best. Both  wrote  in  Die W arte and  in the M ennonitische Welt.
An  anthology  of  Low German,  English  and  High  German  Poetry  by J. W.
Goerzen6    was  published  in I g67 on  the  occasion  of  Canada's Centennial. The doggerel  quality  of  Goerzen's  poetry  is matched   only  by his genuine  sincerity. Goerzen is a romantic  rhymer and his innumerable Odes to the Moon are directly, sometimes literally, dependent  on Goethe and  Eichendorff. This kind of imitation resulted in obvious caricatures.



bE PERIOD OF  GERMAN-CANADIAN LITERARY EFFORTS  seems to  be over.  Young  Mennonites,  studying  and  dabbling  in  both  High  and  Low German, think  and  express themselves, in the main, in English. Some -but they can  be  quickly  counted -realize  well that  when  a system, an  institution  or  a language  and the way of life it represents are doomed,  then the flame of devotion may  flare wider  and  higher  and  bum  for a moment  with  exceptional  intensity. But man, particularly  North American man, lives rarely by nostalgia.
Before  mention  is made  of the  flicker of  hope  in  contemporary Mennonite
writing,  a brief reference must be made to the writing of Mennonites  other  than the German-Russian-Canadian Mennonites, and to literature that is marginally attributable to the Mennonite  people.

MENNONITE  LITERATURE



The  novels by B. Mabel  Dunham,  of Kitchener,  Ont.,  herself a descendant  of Mennonites,  are  warmly  sympathetic  treatments  of the early  Mennonite  settlers of that  area.  The Trail   of the  Conestoga   ( I924)   deals  with the  immigrants  to Waterloo   County,   Ontario, from  Pennsylvania,  and  their  early  settlement  in Canada. Toward Sodom ( I927)   portrays the religious problems created  later in the same settlement  by isolation from and nonconformity to the world and the consequent  loss of many young people to other creeds and faiths;  Miss Dunham's point  that  the  trend  towards  the  city  ( "Sodom")  is fatal  to  Mennonitism  has proved all too true.  Her  Kristli's  Trees   ( I948), also dealing with Mennonites  in Ontario, is a charming novel for adolescents. Her last novel Grand  River  ( I945) is a  more  descriptive  and  historical  account  of the settlement  of this section of Ontario, and  refers  to  the  Mennonite  contribution  to the  total  development  of the  province.
Frederick  Philip  Grove, who taught  at Winkler, Manitoba, some 50 years ago and  married   Katherine Wiens, a  Mennonite,  touches on  Manitoba   Mennonite life in  his novels  Our   Daily  Bread  (I929)  and  In  Search   of Myself  (I946), again  a form of Bildungsroman. To what extent Paul Hiebert's  sketches in Sarah Binks   ( I 947)   can  be  called  Mennonite  literature  is debatable,   although  they amply  demonstrate a  frustration  with  the  quality  of Mennonite  High  German, while lampooning  literary studies and literary societies.
In  the 6o's the young Mennonite  writer, Rudy  Wiebe wrote two novels, Peace Shall  Destroy  Many and  First and  Vital  Candle, and several short stories. When Wiebe's  first novel  appeared, the  Mennonite  community  sustained  a severe and trying  shock.  His  readers  were pained,  indeed  angered,  at  the thought  that  the world would see them  in a negative light, and  Wiebe was soon given a one-way ticket out of Winnipeg,  where he was editing a church  paper at the time. Wiebe is unquestionably an  artist  of note and  when  he sticks to his business of writing he  can  cause  the  dormant   chords  in  the  discriminating   Mennonite   reader  to vibrate.
His second novel First and  Vital  Candle  is removed from the Mennonite  plot.
It lacks the convincing  tone of its predecessor; indeed it is inhibited  and stultified. Wiebe's  proselytizing  theology and  his lack of a genuine  encounter  with life in­ variably  get in  his way, and  the tense effort to reconcile his ideological  baggage with  his artistic  intentions  results in two-fold damage: the theological argument is shoddy and  his writing  is not convincing. If Wiebe ever resolves the problem of  harmonizing  Christianity with  life and  living he may  achieve a  real literary breakthrough.

MENNONITE LITERATURE



It  may  just be that  the long overdue  definitive  Canadian Mennonite novel will be  produced by one  of the  writers  of the  present  generation. The  questions  im­ plied  in this statement are obvious: what  would  constitute a definitive Canadian­ Mennonite novel, and how could it come about?
It  must  of necessity  be a  work  by an  artist  who  is engaged without being in­ volved,  an  artist  who  is righteously  indignant without being  blinded; it  must  be written by an  artist  who  refuses to confuse  humility with  ignorance, who  is un­ willing  to  accept that  a  Mennonite's material success  is necessarily  a  manifesta­ tion  of God's  bountiful blessings while his opposite's possessions are spoiled  fruits  from  the  tree of avarice, who tolerates  without being  indifferent, and  who knows, understands and   accepts  that  some  Mennonite ventures have  been  trips  rather than   pilgrimages and  that  there  are  mysteries  in life  not  necessarily  attributable to  God's  intervention in  history.  The  novel  must  be  a  contestation between  the individual and  his community, an  honest  and  serious acceptance of both  self and the  world.  Only  by such  a synthesis  can  the  novel  we are  imagining be written. The young  generation of  Mennonites is no  longer  so  mortally afraid as its  pre­  decessors of being victimized  and ostracized. And so there  is hope.


FOOTNOTES

1 J. H. Janzen, "The literature  of the Russo-Canadian Mennonites", Mennonite Life,
North Newton, Kansas, U.S.A., Jan. 1946.
2  Hermann Boeschenstein:  "Canada in German  Literature", Seminar.  A Journal of
Germanic Studies, Toronto, Vol. III, No. 1, Spring 1967.
3 Mennonite   Life  articles  in  1959 on  the  occasion  of Dyck's  70th  birthday  and  in April  & July  1969 on his 8oth  birthday.  Also:  Elizabeth  Peters:  The  Poet  Arnold Dyck, M.A. Thesis, University of Manitoba,  1968.
4  Michael  L. Hadley,  "Arnold Dyck: Verloren in der Steppe,  A Mennonite Bildungs­
roman",  Can. Ethnic Studies Journal, Calgary, 1970.
6   Walter   Schrniedehaus,   "Der   Schriftsteller   Arnold   Dyck",   Mennonitische Welt,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, January 1952, p. 8.
6   J. W. Goerzen, German Heritage, Canadian Lyrics in Three  Languages. Edmonton, the author  1 967.



review articles



CANADA'S OCTOBER DAYS

George Woodcock


RON  HAGGART  and AUBREY  GOLDEN,  Rumours of War. new  press,  $6.95.
BRIAN  MOORE,  The  Revolution Script.  McClelland & Stewart, $6.95.
DENIS SMITH, Bleeding  Hearts ... Bleeding Country: Canada and the Quebec  Crisis.
Hurtig,  $2-95·
PIERRE   VALLIERES,   White Niggers  of America.  Translated by Joan Pinkham.  Mc­ Clelland & Stewart, $7 -95·
MARCEL RIOUX,  Quebec  in Question. Lewis & Samuel, $3.50.


IT  IS  A   POINT on  which  his­ torians  will long argue: whether Canada's October was  a  more  traumatic  event  to French  than   to  English   Canadians.  At first  one  was  inclined to  accept   without much   criticism   the  thesis  of  Peter  Des­ barats that  the  grotesque sequence, from the   kidnapping  of   Cross,   through  the seizure  and  murder of Laporte, the fabri­  cated   government  story  of  a  plotted   in­ surrection and  the imposition of the  War Measures Act, followed  by the arrest  and detention  of   hundreds  of  suspects,   was merely  the  externalization of the  chronic  state  of  war  that  exists in Quebec -and especially    in    Montreal -between   the various  elites  and  would-be elites  thrown up by the Quiet Revolution, and  that  the relationship between  French and  English Canada-the whole  question of  quasi­ colonial    domination-really   played    a minor   role.   Objectively   Desbarats   was doubtless  correct,  but   subjectively the whole  incident, and  especially  the  aban­ donment of  libertarian  pretences  by the Trudeau government, was profoundly dis-
 turbing to many  English  Canadians. It shook,  if it  did  not  shatter, our  vision  of Canada as  a  gentle   land, as  a  country where  the  governmental excesses and private violences that  have scarred  the United  States  could   be  avoided. Our armour of moral  priggishness  suddenly seemed a suit of ragged  gossamer, and  we realized,   perhaps  with   exaggerated  em­ phasis,  that   here,   as  elsewhere,  politics could  reveal itself as a vicious game.
It is  perhaps  the  sudden  intensity of the experience for us, the abruptness with which  that  moment of truth was precipi­ tated,  as  compared  with   the   years   of growing  awareness among  French Cana­ dians,  that   explains   why  it  is  books  by English  Canadian rather  than  Quebecois authors that  now  attempt most  anxiously to  analyse  and  explain the  crisis. Of  the five  books  I  am   reviewing  the   two  by French Canadians have only a peripheral bearing  on  the  crisis.  White  Niggers  of America  is the  translation of  a  personal and  political  apology  published in French before  October; Marcel Rioux's Quebec

73

REVIEW  ARTICLES



in Question,  a dull,  routine  statement of the separatist position of which no more need be said, has been brought  up to date to discuss the crisis on a very superficial level,  but  it  was  in  the  main  conceived and  written earlier.
The earliest of the English Canadian books, Rumours  of War, by Ron  Haggart and  Aubrey  E. Golden,  claims  to  be  no more   than   a   journalistic  work,  written and  published in a hurry so as to bring quickly  before  Canadians the  iniquity  of their  government's precipitate actions  in response  to  the  kidnappings. The   desire for  speed  was  so  great  that   the  authors did  not  even  wait  for  the cycle of events to  reach   its  conclusion   with   the  arrest and  trial  of the  murderers of  Pierre  La­ porte,  on  the  rival  iniquity  of whose kill­ ing   they   have   certainly    not   expanded themselves.  In  other words, it is a frankly  polemical work,  and  the devices of senti­ mental  and  sensational   journalism   have been  freely  used  to serve  the  accusations
-in themselves  sound  enough  -which the authors bring  forward. But cold facts and  bare  arguments would  have  spoken effectively enough  and   Haggart  and Golden-convinced civil  libertarians who   examine  with   a  ruthless   logic  the measures   taken   by  the  federal and  pro­ vincial  governments-in fact  weaken  a strong   base  by an  undue  exploitation of "the human element" and by a mannered vehemence which  leads the cautious  read­  er to wonder   just what they are  trying  to conceal.   What they  are  in  fact  trying  to conceal  is the  one-sidedness  of  their  his­ tory.  They  know  all  about  the  actions  of the  authorities, which  for  the  most  part were  conducted in  the  open,  even  if  the motives   were   sometimes   obscure;  they are evidently far  more in ignorance about the  precise  actions  of  the  terrorists, and

74
 they have failed  to provide what-given the  haste  in  which   they  wrote-might have  been  a  passable  substitute, a sound and  full discussion  of the history, philoso­ phy  and  composition of  those  rival  ene­  mies of civil liberty,  the FLQ.
Brian  Moore,  in  preparing his impres­
sionist  narrative, The   Revolution  Script, and  Denis  Smith, in writing the first profoundly reflective  analysis of the affair and  its  implications, Bleeding  Hearts . .. Bleeding Country, have  both  had  the advantage of time,  which  has deepened perspectives  and given deliberation to conclusions.
Moore  has  attempted one  of  the  most difficult  forms  of  writing, the  reportage in  which   gaps   in  direct   knowledge are filled   with   invented  dialogue  and   even invented  action.  He   has  not   been   able entirely to avoid  the  perils  of this hybrid genre.  When   he  is describing  settings­ and   especially   the  seedy  areas   in  Mon­ treal  in which so much  of  the action  takes place-he  writes  vividly  and  evocative­ ly.  When   he  reconstructs  action,   he  is almost  invariably  convincing. The   coat­ ing  of  verisimilitude, however,   begins  to wear thin  when  he tries to create  dialogue between   the   terrorists.  The   Revolution Script reads  then  as if it were written, not by Brian  Moore the  novelist, but  by some rather clumsy  imitator of  Roch   Carrier, and   the   terrorists  shape   themselves   in our   minds   as  incredibly  ignorant,  naif and   pathetic,  which   I  am   sure   is  not Moore's intention.
Perhaps even  more  disappointing is the fact  that   the  balance of The   Revolution Script  is heavily  tipped   by Moore's  con­ centration  on   the   captors  of   Cross.  In their  case he has indeed  shown what  may well  be  a  true   picture of   humanity tri­  umphing over  ideology  as  the  terrorists

REVIEW ARTICLES



find themselves unable to turn into the murderers  of  a   man   with   whom   they have  lived.  Psychologically, the  interpre­ tation has the tone  of truth, but it fails to give  a  whole   picture  because  the  other  group,   the  Roses  and   Simard,  who  did kill  their   captive, appear  as  little   more than  shadowy  and  malevolent  presences. If Moore   had   used  in  portraying Paul  Rose the care he took over  his portrait of Marc  Charbonneau, we might have  had an  absorbing study   of  the  two  faces  of the  FLQ, the  genuinely human idealism and   the  fanatical cruelty, features that combine in all terrorist movements.
In fact,  Pierre  Trudeau, not Paul Rose, is cast as the principal villain of The Revolution  Script;   Moore's   representa­ tion  of  him  is caricature of  a  passionate  kind,  even  taking into  account the  fact that  the author is by origin  Belfast Catho­ lic  and   therefore  liable  to  be  unsympa­ thetic  to   heavy-handed governments. I think  this savage  portrait is perhaps most significant   in   so  far   as  it   conveys   the degree  of  revulsion  which  intellectuals in Canada or  concerned with  Canada have developed towards Trudeau  in  his  years of  office,  a  revulsion   intensified   by  the fact  that  so many  of them  supported him when  he  ran  as  a dark  horse  for  leader­ ship  and  now feel insulted by his authori­ tarian style.
There is  much   less  of  this  distorting
passion  about   Bleeding  Hearts . .. Bleed­ ing   Country.  Denis    Smith  has   strong  convictions about  the  nature and  needs of democracy, but  he has  cooled  his feel­ ings   in   reflection,    and   the   result   is  a remarkably good  narrative of  the  events, which  leads  up  to a many-sided consider­  ation   of  the  new  set  of  possibilities  that  have  faced Canada since October.
 



Creative
Canada

A  BIOGRAPHICAL  DICTIONARY OF TWENTIETH-CENTURY CREATIVE AND PERFORMING ARTISTS

Compiled by

REFERENCE  DIVISION, MCPHERSON  LIBRARY, UNIVERSITY  OF  VICTORIA

This series provides  biographical informa­ tion  about  artists who  have  contributed to the  culture of Canada in  this century. Each  volume  contains a  cross-section  of many   different kinds  of  artists,  and   in­ cludes   those  who   have  achieved   inter­ national or  local  recognition, and  some, now  deceased,  who markedly influenced  their  contemporaries. Wherever possible, entries have  been  verified   by  the  artist. This  is not a critical compilation; it is an objective  and  factual reference work  for those  interested in  contemporary Cana- dian  culture.

Volume I $15.00

Volume II  (to  be published this spring)  $15.00


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO PRESS

I   am   not  always  in   agreement   with	 	

75

REVffiW ARTICLES



Professor  Smith, though  I admire the fairness   and   compassion   with  which  he has  tried   to  weigh   every  aspect  of  the October events, allotting responsibilities impartially and  not shrinking, as so many critics of the government have done, from an outright condemnation of the terrorists on moral grounds while insisting on their sincerity.   Nevertheless,  I  think   he  con­ fuses the ideals  and  the realities  of  demo­  cratic government when  he argues that  it would   have  been  possible  for  the  Cana­ dian  authorities to have met the demands of  the   kidnappers,  have  saved  the  hos­ tages,  and  have   emerged  politically strengthened.  Personally,  I was in favour  of  any  action  that  would  have  saved  the lives  of  Cross  and   Laporte, and   I was opposed   to   the  imposition   of  the  War  Measures   Act,   but   I was  able   to  take both  these  positions  because  I am  unin­  terested  in  politics  in  the sense of power structures. But  I knew  that  such  a  crisis calls in  question the  whole conception of government based on coercive laws by opposing  arbitrary violence to institution­ alized  violence,  and  I also  knew  that  no party  in  power  (in  the full  sense of that  loaded  phrase)  could  do other  than  dra­ matically  assert   its  authority  in  such   a situation. Even  a government of Wafflers, faced   by   acts   of   right-wing  terrorism, would   react   in  a  closely similar  way  to Trudeau  faced  by  acts  of  left-wing   ter­  rorism;  it  is  the  fact  of  administration based  on  a pyramid of power  that  has to be   changed,   not   the   attitudes  of  indi­ vidual   governments caught   in  the  plays of force.
Professor   Smith    has   been   unable   to make  this  admission, and so he argues - with  great  skill admittedly-for the kind of  realism  that   would  accept  the  demo­ cratic separatism of  the  Parti  Quebecois
 as  a   means   of  defusing terrorism and would  work  out  a destiny  for  Canada on this  basis. The virtue of  his book  is that in  the  process  he  reveals  the  hollowness of federalism as at present envisaged  by Canadian   federalists, and   demonstrates the need for a deep  re-examination of our democratic ideas  and  our  less democratic practices.
In  the  process of his discussion  Profes­ sor  Smith  presents   an  analysis  of  FLQ attitudes and  classifies them  as anarchists; with  that identification I  must  also  take issue. The evidence to support it is singu­  larly   scanty.   The  FLQ call   themselves Marxist,  and   their    spokesman,  Pierre  Vallieres, has specifically denied  that  they are anarchists.  Even  Professor  Smith un­ wittingly betrays  his own  argument  when he  says  that   "the October acts  were  an anarchist  preliminary stage  or  interlude of action in a revolutionary pattern which will  not  necessarily  remain anarchist, but which  is intended by the  theorists  of the movement to develop  later  into  a  discip­ lined   mass   revolutionary  movement." I do  not   think   there   is  much   doubt   that  the  shadowy leaders of  the  FLQ indeed  see  themselves as  little  Lenins  and  hope eventually  to   accomplish   an    October much  closer  to  that  of 1917  than  to  that  of   1970,  but  once  one  admits  this,  the argument   that   the   FLQ  is  at   present anarchist   falls  to   the  ground,  since anarchism  is  not  the  temporary strategy of  convinced authoritarians, but a funda­ mental and  consistent opposition not only to  organized government but  also  to  dis­ ciplined political   parties  seeking  to over­  throw   and   replace   governments.  There is also a crucial difference in method be­ tween   the   classic  anarchist  terrorists  of the  189o's  and   the  FLQ  terrorists. The anarchists would   kill  opponents  in  cir-

REVIEW ARTICLES



cumstances  which    often    amounted to self-immolation  so  far   as  the   assassins were concerned, but  they  never  held men hostage  under   the  threat of  death. That was  a  refinement  introduced  into   left­ wing activity  by the  Bolsheviks. To act as a  self-appointed  jailer  would  seem  con­ temptible to any true anarchist. In  taking  hostages  the  FLQ are, then,  Bolshevik by ancestry; their   formation  into   cells  de­ rives   ultimately   from   the   tactical   doc­ trines of the French nineteenth century revolutionary, Auguste Blanqui, from whom    the    Bolsheviks    too   derived    so much; only  their  rhetoric carries  an echo of Bakunin.
Some  of that  Bakuninist rhetoric, gone very rusty,  rattles through White Niggers of America, which  every Canadian in­ terested in politics should read, not for pleasure, since  it  is in  almost  every  way a  singularly   bad   book,  but   because  no­ body   can   understand  the   hallucinatory worlds  to  which   political  fanatics strive to  give  concrete reality  unless  they  read confessions  of  this  kind.  It is  true  that  some  strange WASPish  guilt  has led cer­ tin   English   Canadian   critics   to   praise White Niggers and  seriously  to  compare Va!Heres with  revolutionary theorists  like Guevara  and   Fanon,  whose  writing   he merely   lamely   imitates.  One   can   only conclude that  they  themselves are  wholly ignorant of  the  history  and  literature of left-wing  politics; otherwise  they  would have recognized  that  the  rhetoric used by Vallieres   had   been   worn   threadbare by a hundred users  before  he  took  it  out  of the   ideological  Sally   Ann   of  the   New
 Left,  while his so-called  political  analysis is the  naif kind  of radical  apocalypticism which Hyde Park orators have been spouting-and    spouting more   intelli­ gently -for fifty years.
Even  as an  autobiography, White Nig­
gers of America does not have  the virtues of  fresh  perception that   might  compen­ sate  for   the  massive  distortions  created by self-pity  and  delayed  adolescent rage. It is the  product  of  a  Celine  in  fustian; long  passages  read   like  a  burlesque skit on  Death  on  the  Instalment   Plan. Val­ lieres lacks any of Celine's literary power, but  he  has  the  same  corroding fury,  the same paranoia that  twists his view of everything  he observes.
White  Niggers of America  is the  work
of a fanatic, but  that-I repeat-is the reason   why  it  should   be  read,   since  to understand the  causes  of political fanati­ cism (which  is always authoritarian, puri­ tanical   and  thoroughly unpleasant in  its results) ,  one  has  to  observe  with  objec­  tivity   that   interplay  between   subjective feelings  of   intolerable persecution and actual social evils which  makes  men  with a  strong  sense  of  inner   impotence  seek apocalyptic ways of change  which  history has  always  shown   worsen  the  evils  they aim  to  eliminate.  Perhaps the  Vallieres are sick, and  one is ready  to believe a sick society  has  infected  them; societies  often produce   from    their    own    depths  the scourges they  deserve.  But  that  is no rea­ son for sane men  to accept  the  lash, or to agree  that  out  of hatred one  can  build  a world  of love.








77


WAYLAYING THE MUSE


Alexander Hutchinson



GEORGES  ZUK,  Selected   Verse.  "Translated from   the  French   language by  Robin
Skelton." Kayak  Books, $1.50.
ROBIN SKELTON, Private Speech: Messages 1962-70. Sono Nis, $2.50. ROBIN SKELTON,  The  Hunting  Dark. McClelland & Stewart, $2.50.


ALL  OF ROBIN SKELTON's books  reflect   the   poet's   desire  to  know and  master  his craft: his recent  publica­ tions  on  Synge  clearly  demonstrate -as in   Berryman's  early   study   of  Stephen
Crane-how  the  close knowledge  of  an­
other    writer's  life   and   work   need   not have  an  insidious  or  regressive  effect  on a   poet's   own   work   and   can,   instead, develop   his  skill  and   enrich   the  vision. Skelton's  translations  from    the   Greek anthology  are   delightful  in   themsel s, and  worthwhile for  the  literary tradition which   they   re-animate;  his  Zuk   poems are  a  tribute to  a  continental  alter-ego. Private Speech  consists of messages from the  "lively  dead," and  has  as its central theme  the  act  of  creation as a  dance  of opposites;  in   The   Hunting   Dark,  the persona often  appears as the  public  man of  letters,   walking  home   from   classes, jotting down  notes for lectures, lamenting the  makers  that  are  gone,  praising  those alive, and  learning that  to hold the atten­ tion   of  listening  children   takes  skill  to equal   ars  poetica.  In  addition  to  these books,  he  is preparing  two  others which deal  directly  with  the  practice of poetry.
The figure  of Georges  Zuk is shaped quickly  in the introduction to the Selected Verse and  gradually in the poems and collages-as  a   mask   slips,   a   raincoat flashes  open,   or  a  fly  button is  nibbled
 away-he tempts you to throw  off the visible,   assault   the   institutional   pieties, and    be   responsible  on   occasion   for   a clearly  indecent exposure.

Yesterday  I had
an enormous erection

in one of the smaller  rooms in the Plais  de Justice.

It was an  empty  room perhaps even  a vacuum,

and  the smell of the dust was exciting as young girls hair.

It's  often  a  tight  squeeze  for  Zuk:  his head  balloons  with  metaphysics, even  as the  blood is crowding to other parts of his anatomy. But  he  persuades; he  teaches; he  provides  the   bucket   in  a  well  lined with  mirrors, the fish in a bed of disguise. He  is open  enough regarding his  fetich­ ism,  his  deception,  his  revenge  on  the  machine, his  classicism,  his  modesty,  his anonymity,  his  sado-masochistic tenden­ cies, his ontology of eggs, black  vinyl and  Secret  Police.  His  enthusiasms are  infec­ tious.  His  artistry is equalled only  by his shameless  aplomb:

The  film of the  nurse and  the doctor lasted  two  hours,

and  that  of the girl and schoolmistress almost  two  more;

at last, however,  they got to the  piece de resistance,

REVIEW ARTICLES



a five minute study of Adeline buckling  her  spats.

Zuk  is known  in  part  by the  company he keeps:  Zazie, Lulu, the  Countess, and America   (the    beautiful)   deliver   their lines   like   old   troupers;  God   is  in   the wings  with  Blok  the  banker; Arthur Darkness (the heavy)  upstages Nana's German Shepherd. Schwitters, guesting, fakes it with  Sappho. Then the lady with the   walk-on    part    (in   bloomers   and   a pubic  wig)    drops  broad  hints in  an aside:   "Zuk, c'est  moi."  Zuk,  therefore, takes  other   parts besides  his own,  and  is himself   impersonated. The  "cult   of   in­ visibility,"  to  which  he adheres,  proposes that   "each  poem   brings   a   new   author into  existence." So the  audience's curios­ ity about  the character  hogging  the spot­ light  might also extend  to the  one who is cracking the whip  back-stage:

The Professor has almost  completed his volume  on Zuk:

The  volume on Zuk, however, is undecided

Whether or not  the Professor is complete

and  is obliged  to ask for outside  opinions.

The cover of Private Speech offers a collage,   also   by  the   poet,   which   sights along  a corridor, the  wing  of a Freudian clinic.  Slick,  rounded  limbs  and   bodies block  your  path  and  edge  through  door­ ways. Papa's homburg hat  hangs over the exit   like   a   cowl.   The  edifice   rests  in space; what   lies  beyond  the  open  facing  door   is  as  black   as  the  floor  that   falls beneath  your   feet.  Inside  the   book  the landscape alters; inevitably we find  a re­ ordering, a  different resonance, pale  im­ pressions  of  nightmare, a  waking  to  dis­ cover footprints of former inhabitants
 and  watch the fragments of voices form  in air

nameless voices
destroying  the  taste of nam .

The  messages of  this  dimension are  pro­ tean,   riddling; creatures quail   or  lie  in wait,  words  decay  like sand,  and  all the forces  of  nature  are  invoked.  The pro­  tagonist   as  poet,  lover,  shaman, seeks  a private speech  to  use in  the  face  of  dis­ solution,  to  discover  light and  ease-

the way the river
is careless about  the rocks
that  give it voices

-and  also to know  a strength rooted  in praise.
The   brief,  crisp  sections  of  the  poem remind  one of Wallace Stevens-but Private Speech owes little  to that  poet's typical   philosophy  or   imagery,  having less control, more appetite.
The  Hunting  Dark is divided  into  four
sections, the first, "They All Come  Back", containing several  vivid  portraits and  in­ cidents,   like  "Peter"  and   "The  Friday Fish",  which  draw  for  the  most  part  on past  experience. They   are  commemora­ tive,  nostalgic,  but  each  has  a wound   of a  kind,  a  suddenness of  painful  recogni­ tion:

One place  we met
a Halifax  crashed  in the stream.
They  heard  the  gunner screaming.  The  scar on the bank is
brown  there  yet . . . 	("Chapel Hill")

The book's  title  is  taken   from  a  line  in "New  Bedford," a poem  that  handles Lowell   themes   in   Lowell   country  and writes well up to that  taxing standard. In "Dirty Snow"  the  dark  has  another  epi­ thet-a    brilliant   one-that    clenches the  poem  like a fist, even  as the image  is perfectly  expanded:

79

REVlliW ARTICLES



Jacob   also
slid into  the rivering  dark
without a  word

and  altered  the tide of the sea.

"At   the  Centre" and   the  other  sections "It Could  be Love" and  "A Kind  of Resonance"  are   less  moving,   although they   are   just  as  ambitious. There  is  a switch  to the  immediate present,  still mindful of the past, but marked  now in calendars and  the glass. Here  a brave at­ tempt is made   to  keep  balance,  to  walk "the highest  wire"  of creativity, to find  a capacity for  love in a time that  is vertigi­  nous, chaotic, where everything
flies upwards,   beats
itself to death.     ("Warring with Emblems")

There is an  aspiration, a stretching of the   spirit   in   the   final   poems,   but   also some  hesitance   and   an  attenuation,  be-
 cause  the  poet's  strength-although  he may  wish to be "a  more  delicate fabulist"
-remruns  in  the   substance of  his  me­
mories-

an  occasion
trapped by its own discovery

in love, in poetry.  Private Speech handled these   themes   more   concisely   without a disembodiment.
The  power   of   Robin    Skelton's  best poetry   is  derived   from   the  authority of his  personal voice  and  equally  from  the scope  of his sense of history.  That he is a prolific  and  skilful  writer  is obvious; and it  is clear,  too,  that  since  his first  arrival in Canada in  rg62, he has  played  a large part  in shaping the artistic taste of this country through his writing and  teaching, his   editorial  sense,   and   his  encourage­ ment  of  the  other   arts.  He  has  candour and  he speaks for his time.




THE POET AS GUNMAN

Andreas Schroeder


MICHAEL  ONDAATJE,  The   Collected   Works   of Billy  the  Kid. Anansi,  $6.50  cloth,
$2.50  paper.


HAD MICHAEL   ONDAATJE   not come   out   with   his  lyric/dramatic The Man  With Seven  Toes  in  rg6g, I  would have  said  that   nothing in  his  previously published  work   really  prepared  me  for his  recent  award-winning The  Collected W arks of Billy the  Kid. In  fact,  in  terms of the  quite  considerable improvement in Ondaatje's recent   verse  as  compared  to the earlier Dainty Monsters, I'd  say the statement  still   holds   true.    The  many lamely    constructed   similes   of   Dainty

8o
 Monsters   and   the   often   lurid   lyric  ex­ cesses of The  Man  With  Seven  Toes are a far  cry from  the more carefully crafted, casually  understated  material of Billy the Kid.   Negotiating  this  book,  I  sensed  a sure-footedness, a  control which   I have never   felt   in   Ondaatje's  earlier   books. Indeed,  if   he   hadn't  used   the   historic  framework  of   the   adventures  of   Mrs. Fraser  (The Man  With Seven Toes)  in a manner  somewhat prophetic of his simi­ lar  technique in The  Collected Works  of

REVIEW ARTICLES



Billy the  Kid,  I would  have  found  little area  for comparison whatsoever.
The  rather  unusual choice   of  an  old Wild-West saga-the story  of  Billy  the Kid-as  a  literary vehicle  struck  me  at first  as  dubious, but   strikes  me  now  as quite  an  intelligent choice  to have  made. For   one   thing,   though  much   has  been written about   the  incidents surrounding the  Kid's life-the  early  shootings,  the cattle rustlings,  the  Lincoln County wars and   finally  his  fatal   shooting by Sheriff Garrett in  Fort   Sumner in  188o-very little  record   remains  (or  has  existed)   of the  Kid's  own version of his story, of  any­ thing  which  might  have  given  the  reader  more  of an insight  into  his character than  the  descriptions of those  who  claimed  to know  him.  Somehow,  even  after  each  of these  people  has had  his say, the  Kid  still remains  essentially   a   silent,   mysterious  puzzle, an assemblage of pieces of hearsay and   history   representing  a  man   whose deeds  were  clear,  but  whose  reasons  for perpetrating them  were  not.  For  this rea­ son  there   was  plenty   of  room   for  On­ daatje to  develop  and  amplify,  with  few restrictions, an  entire personage  to what­  ever   specifications  he   pleased,  and,   on top  of  this,  to  plunge   quickly  into  deep water   without having to  waste  unneces­  sary space  with  lengthy explanations and  introductions, since  the  exterior, physical realities    of   his    subject   were    already  general  cultural property.
In   The   Collected   Works, then,  On­ daatje projects himself  into  the  minds  of the  Kid  and  Sheriff  Garrett to retell  the saga  from   the  inside,  writing  down   the reminiscences, jokes, casual  thoughts, answers  to  simulated  questions  and  even hallucinations  which   may   have   passed through  the   two   men's    minds.    Using poems,   prose  sketches,   "eyewitness"  re-
 ports,  diary-like   notations and  an  osten­ sible  newspaper interview with  the  Kid,  Ondaatje restores  to  the  saga  the  third  dimension  it  had  lost  by  having  become an   old   tale   always   told   from   a  single storyteller's  point    of   view.  Ondaatje's "new   version",   in  fact,  becomes  one  of the  most  intimate  kinds  of  documentary imaginable, the camera having complete­ ly free  access  to both  public  and  private sides of the  subject (s) ; i.e. the  incidents themselves  as  well  as  the  minds  of  the  men   who   provoked   them   are   open   to inspection.
Of  course,  the  value  of The  Collected
Works  as  a  colourfully reconstituted  ac­ count  of the  history  of Billy the  Kid  has only  little   to  do  with   the  value  of   the book as such,  and  even  less with  its win­ ning  of  the  Governor-General's  Award.  The  success of  the  poetry  and  prose  be­ tween  its covers goes well  beyond  its sub-

(I·'
NEW FICTION

COMMUNION
Graeme Gibson 	$2.50

BARTLEBY
Chris  Scott 	$8.50

WHEN HE  WAS FREE  AND YOUNG AND  HE  USED  TO WEAR SILKS
Austin  Clarke	$2.75
Anansi


81

REVIEW  ARTICLES



ject-a  telltale  hallmark of good  litera­ ture   in  any  style.  And  if  the  person  of Billy  the  Kid   consequently  evolves  into a  character almost   too  sensitive  to  be  a believable   gunman, well-history  must remain the  slave  of Art. Frankly, if Billy the   Kid    had    ever   really   managed  to describe  a fever-ridden week spent  in an abandoned  barn   in   the  way  Ondaatje has  him   describe  it  on  Page  1 7 of  this book   (unfortunately  much   too  long  to quote), he  had  no business being  a  gun­ man    in   the   first   place,   and   probably  would  have known  it.
Indeed, one is always conscious of Ondaatje  speaking through the  mask  of Billy, Garrett, or any of the other charac­ ters  in  the  book,  but  this  never  detracts from   either   the  story  or  the  verse;  the characters, in fact, flourish by this method  in a truly  dramatic way. Whether any of the  historic   persons  really  appeared  the way  Ondaatje  recreates  them  simply  be­ comes  irrelevant; they   make  a  very  credible  amount of sense within  the  con­ text of  Ondaatje's version of the tale. His story  takes  on  its  own  rhythms,  entirely outside the realities  of history.
While  I keep itching to quote  passages to   demonstrate  many of   the  above­ mentioned  points,  The  Collected  Works of Billy the Kid is the kind of book which generally  defies quoting anything less than  the entire section  or  poem  being  referred to,  particularly since  these  sections  tend to  be  cumulatively successful  as  well  as
 individually so. Only  a very few, like this oblique little  description of  Sheriff  Gar­ rett,  are  short  enough and  can  fairly  be pulled  out  of context:

You  krww hunters are  the gentlest  anywhere in the world

they  halt  caterpillars from  path  dangers
lift a drowning moth from a bowl
remarkable in peace

in the same way assassins come  to chaos neutral

The clean simplicity, the  uncluttered, toned-down, almost easy precision demon­ strated in  this  poem  and  generally char­ acteristic  of   the   book   is   probably  the happy   result  of  Ondaatje's being  forced to  assume,   at  least  to  some  degree,   the simplicity of  speech  his characters them­ selves  would  have  used.  This  little  exer­ cise  has  done  Ondaatje a world  of good, and The Collected Works reflects it. Only occasionally, in precisely five poems, does he  let  his  lyric  overdrive run  away  with him  to the  detriment of the  poem,  which becomes  not  only  non-believable in  con­ text,  but  simply  bad  or  mediocre  poetry  outright. That's not  a  bad  average  for  a
105-page book.  Mind  you,  I don't mean to   imply   that   the   rest  of   the   work   is therefore necessarily  all  undiluted genius, but  it's  certainly strong  enough   to  keep one reading voluntarily and  continuously, from   cover  to  cover,  without the  incen­ tive of a six-shooter in the back.






AN OFFWHITE HORSE

MORDECAI RICHLER,   St.  Urbain's   Horseman.
McClelland & Stewart, $7.95.

THis Is such a complex book that  it is difficult   to  know  how  to  deal  with  it  in the necessarily limited  space of a review. Through the opposition of the central symbol,  St.  Urbain's Horseman, the sha­ dowy and  romantic figure  of Joey Hersh,  a  man  we  never  actually meet  except  in flashbacks,   and   his  cousin  Jacob Hersh,  Canadian expatriate, a  very  unromantic figure  whom  we come  to know  very well, and   through   lesser   motifs   and   a  large cast  of  secondary  figures,   Richler man­  ages,  in  the  space  of  only  467  pages,  to examine the  anxiety   and   malaise   which have  attacked  the  very  roots  of  modern society.
Jake  Hersh, a man  who, like Minever Cheevey,  seems  to  have  been  "born  too late", has  found  financial success but  no self-respect  because  his  life seems  hollow and unreal  at the core, his happiness ephemeral and  undeserved, his sadness merely  superficial, a  self-induced  substi­ tute  for  the  angst  he  really  longs for.  (It is important, I think, that  Jake is a T.V. and   film  director, i.e.  involved  in  simu­ lated   action, fake  emotion) .  On   to  the figure  of  his  counsin   Joey,  who  was  his childhood  hero,    Jake   projects  all   his dreams of glory  and  moral commitment, imagining  him   riding   his   white   horse (Death,  the  white  horse  of  the  Apoca­  lypse?)    in   an   endless   search   for   ven-
 geance, specifically Jewish vengeance. Joey's  journal, given  to Jake in Israel  by Joey's deserted  wife, discusses atrocities committed against the Jews during the Second  World  War  (a war in which Jake was  too  young   to  participate)  and   the actions   of  a  certain  Dr.   Mengele  who may still be alive and  living  in  Paraguay, "in  his villa with  the  barred windows  off an unmarked road  in the  jungle, between Puerto  San Vincente and  the  border fort­ ress  of  Carlos   Antonio    Lopez,   on   the Parana river."  (These words  come  back again  and  again  to chill the reader  just as he is lulled  into  thinking  that  this is just another  comic   book   in   the    Portnoy/ Beautiful   Losers/ A   Mother's  Kisses vein.)   In  fact,  the scramble to reach  the top in the film world (so cleverly satirized  by the  Sunday  ball  game  on  Hampstead Heath)  has  a  much   darker echo  in  the description of  the frantic Jewish prisoners,  trying  to flee the  hissing gas of the death chamber:

The bodies are not lying scattered here and there  throughout  the  room,  but  piled  in  a mass to the  ceiling.  This  is explained by the fact   that   the  gas  first  inundates  the  lower layers  of  air   and   rises  but   slowly  to   the ceiling.... At   the   hottom   of  the  pile  are the  babies,  children, women  and  aged; at the top the strongest.

And  Jake   worries   that   he  and   his  wife may  have  left  the  gas on and  hurries  her home  from  a restaurant to check his sleeping children. Thus against the wildly comic  main   plot  of  the  story  is set  the dark   theme   of   those   who   died   (those Jews   who  died   at  any  rate)  to  feed   a nation's    paranoia  and    lust   for   power. Jake  can  never  forget  and  Richler makes sure that  we can't either.
Because of the seriousness of what  may be  called   the   "subplot", for  want   of  a better   word,   the   trial   of  Jake   and   his

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



doppelganger Harry  Stein   (a  poor   boy from  England's ghetto, not  Montreal's­ a self-convinced failure who fiddles  taxes for  a corrupt and  highly  successful  Jew­ ish  accountant,  Jake's  accountant,  and who  gets  his  kicks  through bomb  threats and   attempts   at   blackmail   plus   porno photography  on   the   side), funny   as  it may  be on the surface, takes on universal significance.  (Is  it  an  accident  that  Jake mentions "Karl  M -I  mean  Kant" at his   trial   and   Karl  Marx   again   when questioned about  his  silver-wrapped bullet-like    suppositories  by   the   airline detective in  Paris?  The  two  K's  remind one    immediately  of   a   man  known only  by his initial   who  endures another, darker, trial.)   Jake's supposed  crimes are crude  and  ridiculous-sodomy  ("aiding and  abetting") ,  indecent assault,  posses­ sion   of   cannabis -but   his   existential  crime is obviously  the  fact that he is alive and   well   and   living   in   London   (and married to a Gentile, yet)  while there  are still   people   like  Mengele  alive  and   the ghosts of millions of  German Jews, Polish Jews, Jewish  Jews, cry out for vengeance.  Jake   gets  off   "with   costs"  and   this  of course   just   deepens   his  sense  of  guilt. (Harry,  who  has  a  criminal   record  and no   one   to   vouch   for   him,   gets  seven years.)   Yet  Jake   will  always  pay -his terrible  self-awareness will see to  that.
I have  only  briefly touched  on some of the major points in the novel. Richler manages,  as well,  to satirize  the  English, the Canadians  (particularly the  C.B.C.), most Jews, and stupid  working girls who spend  their  drab lives entering contests in the hopes  of someday  winning  a ticket  to paradise. The   one  character who  comes off as really good is, oddly enough,  Nancy, Jake's  Gentile   wife.  She  is the  ideal  wo­ man,   beautiful,  sexy   (even   after   three
 children),   intelligent:  a   woman  who could    embrace  one   of   her   husband's oldest  friends to whom  she has  turned in her worry over Jake's trial, but who says, fiercely,  her  thoughts on  her  children all the  while,  "I mustn't lose my milk."  The depraved  German  au   pair  girl,   Ingrid, plus  the  wives  of  all  his friends and  his own   female   relatives,   only   point   up  to Jake how  lucky  he really  is. Perhaps through  the   image   of  Nancy   with   her beauty  and  her dripping breasts  we are to conclude that  the  sooner  the  races  inter­ mingle,   the  sooner  society  might  take  a turn  for  the  better? Who  knows? Richler wisely leaves  us to draw  our  own  conclu­ sions.
Readers of this  book must  read  it care­
fully. Like tiny hammer taps certain key words  (tapeworm, General Montgomery, cunt) test our reflexes and extend  our awareness of our own enfeebled  existence.
At  slightly  more  than   I Yz  cents  a  page,
and  at today's  prices, this book is a real bargain.
AUDREY THOMAS


LANDSCAPE WITH FIGURES

Tales    from  the   Margin.  The   selected   short stories  of  Frederick   Philip  Grove.   Edited, with  an introduction and  notes, by Desmond Pacey.  Ryerson   Press-McGraw  Hill,  $7·95·

FREDERICK PHILIP  GROVE   is a  name  that refuses   to   be  dismissed   from   even   the shortest  list of significant Canadian  writ­ ers.  Discussion   nevertheless  continues as to  the  kind   and   quality of  his  achieve­ ment.  It   is  therefore   with   more   than  usual  interest and  pleasure that  one  wel­ comes  a  collection  of  twenty-five   of  his

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



stories, about half of them  previously unpublished and most of the remainder hitherto unavailable to  the  general reader.  We   are   indebted  to   Desmond Pacey  for  bringing these  together, from their  hiding  places, into  one volume,  and for the introduction and  notes that  give details  of the  provenance and  chronology of   the   stories,   relate    them   to   Grove's novels   and   offer   a   spirited   defense   of Grove's  art of fiction.
Readers -and  there  will  be  many -
across whose mental landscape Grove moves as a familiar yet mysterious  figure will  find  themselves, as  they  turn   these pages, reassessing his individual quality, deciding what  it may be that  distinguishes him from others,  like Sinclair Ross, whose major  work   interprets  substantially the same terrain. For this reader  Grove's uniqueness    has   come   to   identify   itself with  his conception of an  entity  difficult to  name:  the   natural setting,   the  back­ ground, the  countryside, the  locale,  the place  of action. None  of these  terms  will quite  serve, because,  in Grove's world, the regional   terrain  is  the   principal  actor.  Whereas Sinclair  Ross  is  occupied  with what  is done  to  people  by their  environ­ ment,  Grove  is  concerned with  the  land itself,   how   it   shapes   whatever  lives  or moves  upon  it.  His characters are for the most part acutely and  continuously aware  of  their  dependence  upon,   subservience to,   inextricable   engagement  with    the land. The earth and  the natural elements act; the characters react.
As maps  are  drawn of Hardy's Wessex, one might  usefully  be sketched  of Grove's prairie region.  It runs  athwart the  three "prairie" provinces of Manitoba, Saskat­ chewan  and   Alberta. Certain  cities  are named  and  known  but  the decisive action  takes  place  far  out  in  the  country, often
 in northern areas where  the bush becomes a light forest and  the flat  prairie of  tradi­ tion   is   unknown.  Grove's   best-known novels-Settlers  of   the   Marsh,   1927; Our   Daily  Bread,  1928;  The   Yoke   of Life, 1930; and  Fruits of the Earth, 1933
-belong to this wide region,  more diver­
sified  than   the  term   prairie  would  sug­ gest,   rich   in   contrarieties  of   contour, vegetation, climatic conditions,  and  type of settler. Of each and all Grove is closely observant.
It is  a  landscape  with   figures  rather
than  figures in a landscape. But  we must beware of hasty inferences. Grove is no misanthrope,  insensitive   to   human  joy and   suffering.   He   is  simply   recording, with  the faithfulness of one who has been a participant, the peculiar ethos  of this region  in  the  decade or  so following  the First  World  War.  His  best-known work, Over  Prairie Trails,  1922,  records   how he  drove  seven  times  during the  course of a severe winter  from  Gladstone to Fal­ mouth,  where   he  and   his  wife,  respec­ tively,  were  teaching  school.   In  the  mile-by-mile   stories   of  how   driver   and  horses   cope   with   wind   and   cold   and  snow, their  struggle  toward a  destination serves to absorb  all  personal emotion  and  the  fact  of  arrival  dominates and   over­ shadows  any  reference   to  the   joy of  re­ union  with wife and  child.
The  resonance  of Grove's work  results
from  the  repeated ringing note  of  actual­ ity that  it emits.  He  sees human  effort  as inextricably involved   with  material sub­ stance.  We  come  to  a  black  track  cross­ ing   the   grey-yellow   highway:  "There humus  from  the  field  is ground together with   the  clay  of  the  grade   into  an  ex­ ceedingly  fine  and  light   dust,   perfectly  dry,  which  betrays  that  many  loads  have  already   passed   from    the   field   to   the

BOOKS IN REVIEW



yard." On   the  same  page,  a  wagon  ap­ pears,   "the  driver,   an  elderly,  bearded  man  of   unmistakably   Scottish   cast: broad-shouldered and  heavily set,  his grave,  though not  unpleasant face dusted  over with  grime and  chaff."  Superficially, these  two bits of observation may seem all of  a  piece;  in  fact,  a closer  look  and  an attempt to sense  the  cadence  of  Grove's  thought  reveal  that  closer and  more  lov­ ing   care   has   been   bestowed   upon   the road.  It is  this  quite   literally  down-to­ earth actuality that  supplies the firm foot­ ing  for  all  Grove's literary  manoeuvres.
The stretch   of  country  represented in the  stories  is  roughly,  as  we  have  seen, the prairie provinces,  excluding the larger towns  and  the  older  agricultural areas  of Manitoba. The   time  is centred   in  that period  between  the arrival  of the railways as a major means of transport and  the supersession  of the horse by power-driven vehicles. Grove is dealing with a frontier where,    in   one   generation,  immigrants from   eastern   Canadian  provinces,   from the   U.S.,   and   from   Europe   have   been striving to make a living and,  perforce,  to establish  a new way of life. The land  and the  elements   are  at  once  promising and threatening: it  seems  possible  for  a  pio­ neer,   within   his  own   adult  lifetime,  to reach  the  status  of a patriarch. Yet enor­  mous  clouds of  unease  and  ill-omen  have been  and  still  are  sweeping  over  at  vary­ ing  altitudes, -the distant  fury  of inter­ national  war,  the  heartbreaking fluctua­ tions  in  markets for  grain,  the  ignorance and  impotence of  governments, the  ab­ sence of medical and other meliorating services. To these large movements Grove's characters pay only spasmodic attention; they  are  concerned with  con­ sequences   rather than causes.  All  man­ induced disasters  are  insignificant  beside

86
 the uncontrollable forces of the natural world,   the   capricious seasons  of  a  con­ tinental climate in  these  higher  latitudes.
The best of the  stories, such  as "Satur­ day Night  at the Crossroads", remind one of Turgenev's "Byezhin  Meadow". There is  the  same  sense  of  human activity   en­  closed   and   swallowed  up   in  a   natural world  out  of  which  a  mysterious  vitality  flows.  The   boy  Willy,  in  Grove's story "The Marsh Fire" seems like a brother to Turgenev's brave   Pavel.  It is in  an  un­ structured,  casual   frontier  life  that   the courage and  enterprise of the young  leap out  so readily.
This  world  has  no  villains,  only  a few tricky  salesmen  of  goods  and  services;  it has no contact worth mentioning with government, with the  law, with  the armed forces, with  the church. Policemen, bank­ ers,  doctors   may  briefly  appear  but they do  little  to  help  or  harm  anyone. There is  not  even,  in  Grove's  tales,  the  imme­  morial   cyclical    round    of   agricultural practice.   Everything   must   be   devised afresh.  The simple search  for water  is for one  man  a  matter  of  digging  a few  feet to find  a fresh  and  abundant spring; for another  it  is  to  lose  the  farm   itself  in payment of  a  debt to  a  well-driller who has  gone  down  over   two  hundred  feet, only   to   strike   brine.   In   such   a   world there   is   little   room   for   sentiment,  for ecstasy or for  despair; endeavour, endur­ ance  and  persistence are  all.  There is al­ ways the hope  of "advancing if ever so slowly".
Though there are,  properly, no  social
classes, the possession of land and  money creates  differentials. Grove's response  to those   who   acquire,  by  direct   fraud   or legal  trickery, what  others have  laboured to  create is  unmistakable, unmixed  con­ tempt.  Nowhere is  this  contempt  more

BOOKS IN REVIEW



evident than  in his story "Relief', where government  money   is  recklessly  wasted by the recipients. Later, as in The Master of the  Mill, I944•  questions  of corporate action    and    social   reform    will   claim Grove's attention, but  not  in  these  early stories  of the  West.  Here, in  Spring  or Summer,  hopefulness exhales   from   the land  itself and  boys will not  feel the  pull of  city  life,  "for   the  city  is supercilious and  arrogant to its visitors;  the country is humble and  friendly  to  all"; here,  when winter storms bring destruction and death, no  blame  can  be laid  on  anyone: "God's will  be  done!" says  the  bereaved mother at  the end  of Grove's story whose whole  meaning is in its title,  "Snow".
The editor's introduction makes  the point  that  Grove's apparently stilted  dia­ logue   was   generally  idiomatic   for   the time  and  place  and  that  his insistence  on detailed observations  seldom  fails  of sig­ nificance  and  at  times  reveals, in a single phrase,  a  whole  way  of  life.  Something depends on  the  reader's remembrance of things  past or his willingness  to enter  with sympathy  and  imagination  into   the  life of   the  western   provinces  as  they  were between the  two World  Wars.
This  reader, who  was  a farm  hand  in Alberta in  the  mid-twenties, can  record his  own  shock  of  recognition. The open landscape where  wind  obliged  what  trees there  were  to crouch  in the shallow gullies of the river; the unceasing pressure of the daily  round, from  dawn  to dark,  and  the annual  round  from   heat   to   cold,   not easily  sustained;  the   settlers,  differenti­ ated   by  their   place  of   origin,  England, Scotland, America, Eastern Canada; the catastrophes: a young wife crushed  under  a  hay-sweep, a  young  man, soon  to  be married, killed  by lightning at  the  river­ crossing; the   blooming,  hopeful,   lively
 children;  the   first   good   crop   in  seven years;  the  absence  of  appliances, of  ma­ chines,  of conveniences, of  comforts  and the  ubiquitousness  of   baling-wire in  all repairs; soft  coal   at   almost   no  cost  to those who dug  and  hauled  it  themselves; the  close  co-operation of  neighbours, re­ placing  recourse  to  institutions; the  coy­ otes  and  their  victims; the  overpowering imminence of  the  land   itself,  pervading and  conditioning every  activity,  reducing sensibility   and   language  to  simple,   re­ iterated forms.  The ultimate  break-up of the  community, most  families  moving  to the West Coast. Grove's  stories revive and reanimate one's memories and  they stim­ ulate   the  imaginative  reconstruction  of our   authentic  and   particularized  past:  good reasons to be grateful for their  hav­ ing   been  garnered  by  Desmond  Pacey into this volume.



The Antigonish Review
A quarterly  of creative  literature

Welcomes  stories, essays, poems

Subscription $5.00  per  year
($1.50  single copy)

Send  subscriptions  and  manuscripts   to:

EDITOR
THE ANTIGONISH REVIEW ST. F.X. UNIVERSITY ANTIGONISH, NOVA  SCOTIA

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



THE MIND  OF THE EXILE


Malcolm Lowry:  The  Man  and  his Work, ed.
George Woodcock. Wyndham  Lewis in
Canada, ed.  George   Woodcock.  University
of British  Columbia Press. $4.00  each.


THE UNIVERSITY OF  BRITISH COLUMBIA Press is publishing a Canadian Literature series,  each   volwne   devoted   to  a  single writer  or theme  and  consisting of reprints from  this periodical, augmented by new articles,  biographical data  and  bibliogra­ phies.  Two  early  issues deal  respectively wtih  "Wyndham Lewis  in  Canada" and with  "Malcolm Lowry: the Man  and  his Work".  Canadian  literature?  Neither   a fifteen-year   residence  here   on   Lowry's part   nor  the  coincidence of Lewis's  hav­ ing  been  born  on  a  yacht  in  Canadian waters  is  really  a  sufficient  qualification; Lowry  was  a  migrant  Englishman who had  roamed  the  globe, and  Lewis was so much  a   European  that   his  experience when  he  was marooned in  Toronto dur­ ing  the  Second  World  War  was  that  of an   exile.  Consider, though, the  artistic  use to which  these writers put their Cana­ dian   years,  and   their   inclusion   in   this series  is more  than   warranted.  In  Low­ ry's  case,  it  was  only  in  Canada that  he could  write  at  the  full  pitch  of  his  cre­ ative   powers; the  land-  and   sea-scapes of   the   Burrard   Inlet   near   Vancouver were the essential catalyst  to his imagina­ tion. Wyndham Lewis, by contrast, found  both  the landscape and  people  of eastern  Canada  generally  cold  and  inhospitable, but  he  too  transmuted his  response  into powerful artistic forms.
Lewis's  reputation has survived  better

88
 as  an  artist   than   as  a  writer   and  again perhaps  more   as  a   portrait-painter,  of such  contemporaries as Eliot,  Sitwell  and Pound, than  as the painter of brilliant symbolic  canvases.  As a writer of fiction, philosophy, criticism  and  autobiography Lewis  is only  now being resurrected from the    disfavour   and    neglect    he   partly brought on  himself  through the  savagery of  some  of  his  satirical attacks and through his early championship, soon renounced, of Hitler. Wyndham Lewis  in Canada  contributes  to  the  re-establish­ ment  by documenting one  episode  in  his career  and  by drawing critical attention, long  overdue,  to  his  "Canadian" novel, Self-Condemned.
This   work,   based   on  Lewis's  experi­ ences in Toronto, was dictated during his blindness  and  published in  I954, ten years after   his  return  to  England. It recreates the  hopelessness  of  the  world  situation in the I 93o's and  in  this respect  it resembles Lowry's  Under  the Volcano which,  com­ pleted    in  I 947,   uses   Mexico   and    the Spanish  Civil War  to reflect  the  political  scene   of   the   previous decade.  Though Lewis's fictional  methods are  almost  dia­ metrically opposed  to Lowry's,  there  are points,   particularly  in  the   use  of   land­ scape,   at   which   the   two   novels   invite  comparison.
Both  present   the  tragedy  of  a  man  of unusual potentialities walking  into  a hell which  is and  is not  of his own  making,  a path  of self-destruction simultaneously caused   by  and   reflecting   the   universal chaos.  The absurdist dilemma of Lowry's Geoffrey  Firmin and  Lewis's  Rene Hard­ ing  is  projected through  landscape. For Firmin,  the   path    of   destruction  winds through the  Mexican  landscape, with  its gaping ravines,  dark woods and  threaten­ ing   volcanoes,  while  the  glimpses   of  a

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



salvation  longed   for   but   impossible   to attain are  expressed   as  the  dream   of  "a house  dappled with  misty  light" between the  forest  and  the  sea, in  British  Colum­ bia. Through all of Lowry's posthumously published work the same paradisial vision persists:   the  actual  setting of  the  Lowry shack  at  Dollarton  given  the  name  Eri­  danus and  used  as  the  emblem of  "sim­ plicity  and  love".
As the  Mexican landscape is to  Low­
ry's  novel,  so is  the  Canadian setting  to Self-Condemned. The  cold  of an  eastern winter  and  the  endless  barren  wilderness furnish  an   image   of  total   sterility,   the living   hell  in   which   Harding is  impri­ soned. Understandably, Canadian readers  have  responded less than  enthusiastically to  a  picture of  their  country as  a  waste land   and   themselves  as  hollow  men.  In Wyndham Lewis in Canada, both  Hugh Kenner  and   George  Woodcock  identify  the shift  in  vision  peculiar to the exile as having  shaped  Lewis's  description. In  his case the  alien's  usual  sense of disorienta­ tion   was   exacerbated  to   the   point   of paranoia:  his very identity as a man  and artist   was  threatened  by  the  loss of  his own   cultural  milieu.   Kenner's  detailed study  of  the   exile's   heightened,  almost neurotic, awareness offers  a  fine  correc­ tive  to  the  view  that   Lewis's  picture of Canada is prejudiced and  unrealistic, and it  leads  to  an  illuminating  summary of the  novel's  method as  "from end  to end a  prolonged  vertigo, a  slow-motion  pic­ ture  of very little  happening."  (This, in­ cidentally, could  serve  also  as  a  descrip­  tion  of Under  the  Volcano  and  the  film analogy   would   be  equally  appropriate.) A further corrective lies in  considering
the  opening sections  of  the  novel,  where Harding, before  leaving England, has a series of  interviews with  members of his
 family,  clumsily  contrived to  reveal  dif­ ferent    aspects    of   a   stultified   English  society. To  discuss  Self-Condemned as if it   were   totally   set   in   Canada  (as   the articles  here  do)   is  to  lose  the  image  of universal   sterility  for   which   the  details  of  the   Canadian   landscape  happen  to provide  an  appropriate correlative. The last  lines of  the  novel  likewise  are  not  to be construed as a cheap  jab at American academia but  as  extending the  territory of  the  hollow  men  to  yet  another  coun­ try:  "and  the  Faculty had  no idea that  it was  a  glacial   shell  of  a  man  who  had come to live among them, mainly because they  were  themselves  unfilled  with  any­  thing  more  than   a   little   academic stuffing."
Lewis's own artistic use of the Canadian landscape was  preceded by an  analytical comment    in   an   article    written  about
1942   and   entitled  "Nature's  place   in
Canadian Culture". It is published   here for the first time. In Lewis's view, the overpowering presence of the northern wilderness  is the  Canadian's only  unique heritage and   the   way  to  develop   a  dis­ tinctively   national   culture  is   "through utilization   of   the   scene,  in   the   widest sense, of a given  human group, as against the   acquisition  of  a   cosmopolitan  cul­ ture." Finding no  first-rate literature in the  country   at  that  time,  Lewis  focused his attention on  the Group of Seven, and  in   particular   on   A.   Y.   Jackson    who  "stands for the savage  backdrop of Cana­ dian  life, in contrast to the central-heated sophistication of  what  is urban  and  non­ descript".
The Canadian aspects  of  Lewis's  own work  as a  painter are  documented in  an article  by Sheila Watson, from  his service as  a  Canadian  war   artist   in   the   First World  War  to his exploration of war and

8g

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



crucifixion  themes and his commissioned portraits during his  residence  in  Canada in the Second  World  War. There are now about  sixty of Lewis's  paintings  in  Cana­ dian  hands; it  would  have  been  a  useful addition to  the  bibliography if  at  least  a partial list  of  their  locations  could  have supplemented  the   few   names  given   by Mrs.  Watson.
Several  articles  in  this  and  the  Lowry
volume   present   personal   recollections  of the writers  as people, ranging from  the embarrassing to the genuinely  helpful.  In
the  latter class,  Father J. Stanley  Mur­
phy's account of Lewis at Windsor  throws interesting light  on the process whereby autobiography is transmuted into  fiction. The  memories  of Malcolm  Lowry are not so useful, though they give some informa­ tion  about   his  writing habits  and  create  a  picture of a man  rather  different from the  one   projected   through   the   various  personae of his novels.
In  general, however, the Lowry volume is  the   richer   of  the   two,  inevitably  so perhaps, considering the  productivity of his  years  here.  There is a  special  appro­ priateness  in   the   publication  of   Lowry studies   by  a   university   that   holds  his archives  and  from  a geographical area  so crucial  to his development, but one won­ ders sometimes  if Lowry's  enthusiasm for British    Columbia  has   not   been   over­ reciprocated  in  this  collection.  Each   of Lowry's  available works  is given  critical  attention, and   there   is a  sense  of  strain  when   the   posthumously   published    are considered  as  if  they  were  of  the  same calibre  as Under  the Volcano. This  novel was  the  only  published  work  Lowry  was prepared to acknowledge; his early Ultra­ marine  he  dismissed  as "an  absolute  flop and abortion". It may be that  he set him­ self  impossibly  high  standards but  it  was

go
 surely  artistic judgment as much  as any­ thing  that  kept  him  from  completing his work.  His  preface   to  the  French edition of  Under   the  Volcano   (given  here  in  a translation  by  George   Woodcock)   and the letter to his publisher  when  the  novel was rejected, show a critical  perfectionism that  demands respect. It is certainly essen­ tial  for  the scholar  to examine the  Lowry archives in order  to see his total  develop­  ment  as a writer,  but  let him keep a sen of  perspective to distinguish between  the finished   work  of  art  and  the  forever  in­ complete.
Critics rise best to the challenge of fine
work  and  inevitably the  most stimulating articles   in  this  collection   are  on  Under the Volcano. The emphasis  is on  themes, mythical motifs  and  structure, with  par­ ticularly illuminating studies  of the effect on  the   novel's  form   of  two  Lowry  pas­ sions,  for  film,  in  an  article  by  Paul  G. Tiessen,  and  for  jazz, in an essay by Perle Epstein, who  has  previously explored the Cabbalistic  elements in  Under  the  Vol­ cano.  It is  only  in  Tiessen's   article   that  attention  is   drawn   to   Lowry's    poetic prose,  with  a  scrutiny  of  the  manner in which   the  rhythms reflect  camera  tech­ nique.   The   small   selection   of  Lowry's  verse,  included with  a  preface   by  Earle Birney, seems  to  me  to demonstrate that all  of  Lowry's   poetic  genius  flowed  into prose;  some  are  neatly-turned  lyrics  but the  images   lack  the  immediacy and  in­ tensity  of their  prose  counterparts.
The  Lowry   volume   is  commendable then  not  only  for  the  calibre  of many  of the  studies it  presents  but  for  the  multi­ tude  of  directions it  suggests  for  further enquiry. It is  a  valuable  pioneer  in  the rich  but  as yet  scarcely  explored  field  of Lowry  criticism.
JOAN COLDWELL

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



TWO TORONTOS

RICHARD WRIGHT,   The   Weekend  Man.  Mac­
millan.
JUAN  BUTLER,  Cabbagetown  Diary:  A  Docu­
mentary. Peter  Martin Associates. $2.95.

RICHARD  WRIGHT's   The Weekend  Man and  Juan Butler's Cabbagetown Diary:  A Documentary are  novels  based  partly  on their  author's  experiences. Wright, born in  Midland, Ontario, in  1937, worked  in publishing  in  Toronto for  several   years before   he  moved   to  Peterborough  with his wife  and  son. The chief  character of The  Weekend Man   is  Wes   Wakeham, a thirty-year-old native  of Middlesburgh, Ontario, who has attended the  University of Toronto, worked  at various  jobs in the city,  and   married a  girl  from   Rosedale. At the  time  of the  story,  he is living  in a high-rise  apartment in a Toronto suburb, selling  books  for  "Winchester  House,   a small   Canadian   subsidiary  of   Fairfax Press  of  London  and   New  York",   and trying  to  work  out  a  reconciliation with his wife Molly  and  a solution  about  their son  Andrew, a  mongoloid. Butler,  born in  London, England, in  I942,  "came to Canada at  age  six-Gradeschool  some Highschool  some   Reformschool  lots  of Streetschool - worked    as   shoesalesman carwasher  insurance  clerk   labourer  etc. etc. -fed    up -went    to    Mexico - taught English-came back-barwaiter
-went  to   Europe ... fed   up-came back-insurance clerk  again  bartender." Michael, the  chief  character of  Cabbage­ town   Diary,  has  grown   up  in  Toronto, been  to  reform school,  and  gained  most of  his education in  the  streets,  although he  has  "always  liked   reading".  At  the time  of  the  story,  he  is  living  in  "an  $8 room" in Cabbagetown and  working  as a bartender  "at   the  Lord   Simcoe   Ladies'
 Club, a real  highclass  place,  where  all of
Toronto's rich  bitches  hang  out."
Not  only  the  chief  character but  also the  image  of  Toronto in  each  novel  re­ flects   the   different  background   of    its author. Wright's Toronto is that  of  But­ ler's    "rich    bitches":    college-educated young   professionals,   often    from    small towns,  trying  to make it in  the  high-rise, hi-fi   apartment   complexes   and   highly­  mortgaged  houses of suburbia; successful older  businessmen   with   homes  in  Rose­ dale and cottages  in the country; alcohol­ and-steak businessmen's lunches, alcohol­ and-pretty  sandwich  parties,  and   wine­ and-lasagna  dinners  at   Italian  restaur­ ants;  evening   courses,   occasional    illicit sex, trips  to  Europe,  and  new  cars.  But­ ler's   Toronto   is   Cabbagetown:  Indian prostitutes,  drunken winos,  high  hippies,  repentant  preachers, noisy  taverns, dirty  rooming   houses,   greasy   spoons,   casual sex,  violent  fights,  trips   to  prison,   and souped-up cars.  Neither   image  is  partic­ ularly  appealing. Although their  truth is helped   by  the   first-person   narration  of the   chief   character,   concrete  sketches  presented   with  cinematic swiftness,  and witty  comments  on  contemporary  issues like  the  bomb,  Vietnam, and -in Cab­ bagetown  Diary-Mayor Dennison and the  politicians  at  City  Hall,  both  tend  to become  cliches.
On  the whole, Richard Wright is more successful than  Juan Butler  at turning his surface  realism  into  a complex, emotion­ ally    acceptable   statement    about     the malaise   in  contemporary  urban   society. Fairly  simple sentence structures and  col­ loquial   but   correct   diction  locate    the reader  in  the  "here  and  now",  and   help him  accept  the  truth  of  the  daily  events  that   Wakeham   describes.   The  author's use  of   Christmas  as  a  setting gives  the

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



reader's   imagination   an    obvious,    but emotionally  charged,  symbol   to   work with.  His  focus  on  "the   weekend  man", "a person  who has abandoned the  present in favour of the  past or future" and  who suffers   nostalgies  as  a   result,   and   the various   changes   rung   on   this   concept, eventually   allow   the   reader    to   grasp Wakeham's  plight   as  "felt   knowledge" and  to consider  his own life more  subtly.
While Wes Wakeham and his Toronto drew   me  in,  Michael  and   his  Toronto finally  turned  me  off.  The novel's  epi­ graph is  a  quotation from  the  Toronto Telegram about  Allan Gardens, "a down­  town    oasis ... I 2      acres    of    pathways, flower  beds, fountains and  trees -boun­ ded    by   Carlton,   Gerrard,   Jarvis    and Sherbourne   Sts."    Butler    sets   out    to destroy   this  image  of  a  garden paradise and   to  describe   it   as  it   is.  For   Allan Gardens  is  the   heart  of  Cabbagetown, "the worst  slum  in  Toronto". Butler  cer­ tainly   demolishes  the   first   image.   The tough,  shrewd   bartender  who's   playing  the game  of life by catering only as much  as   necessary   to   his  "rich   bitches"   and laying  the  poor ones as much  as possible; his "damn", "Christ", "old scrag", "Peck­ erhead"   language;  his   images   of   the slumdwellers;  and   his  summer  romance with    Terry,  the    narrative   that   holds Cabbagetown  Diary together:  all obliter­ ate   the   initial   image   of  a   "downtown oasis".  They  also replace  it with  one that  seems  more   real.   A   casual   walk   down Jarvis Street provides many  sights similar to Butler's. But  several  questions remain. If  Cabbagetown   and   its  heart   are   not paradise, are  they the  Bosch-like hell that Butler  creates?   Is  his  documentary,  des­ pite    its   surface  realism,    just    another contemporary melodrama in which slang, sex,   and    sensation    have   replaced    the
 "slop   silly  slop"   of   this   popular   nine­ teenth-century  form   of  fiction?   Is  the reader    really   given,   as  Robert   Fulford suggests,   a   "remarkable" -presumably because it's true-"glimpse of the under­ belly of  Toronto"? I doubt  it  myself.
MARY JANE EDWARDS



ROCK GOTHIC

JOHN   FRANKLIN,  Narrative   of  a  Journey   to the  Shores  of the  Polar Sea. M.  G.  Hurtig.
$20.00.

IN I8Ig, under orders from the British Admiralty, an  expedition  commanded  by Captain  John  Franklin set  out   to  map the shores of the polar sea, from the Coppermine River  eastward. Franklin's party   consisted   of  five  Englishmen,  in­ cluding  a   Mr.    Wentzel,  clerk   of    the North West  Company;  seventeen  Cana­ dian  "voyagers", these  probably  being  of mixed   French  and   Indian   blood;   and three   interpreters, all  Indians. In   addi­ tion,  two  Eskimos,  plus  a  large   number of Copper Indian hunters, were employed  by the  Franklin  expedition.
Franklin's principal base was Fort  Pro­ vidence   on  Great  Slave  Lake.  His  final jumping-off    point    for   the   Coppermine River    was   Fort    Enterprise   on   Winter Lake.   In 1820,  two   years  after   leaving  York    Factory   on    Hudson's  Bay,   the  Franklin  expedition  proceeded  north   in birch  canoes  to the arctic sea -achieved overland by only two white men previous­  ly, Samuel  Hearne and  Alexander Mac­ kenzie.
Copper Indian hunters and  their  chief,
Akaitcho, provided game  along  the route. The  Hudson's Bay   Company  and   the North  Westers   supplied  both   food   and

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



other   necessary   provJSJOns. Wentzel,   the North  Westers'  clerk,  accompanied  Fran­ klin  to  the  Coppermine River's  mouth, and    returned   south.    Then   the   birch canoes, which  had  traversed  inland  rivers and  countless  portages,  took  to the  north­ em   seas,  hugging the  coast,  which   was mapped for 550 miles east to Point  Tum­ again.
Franklin's original plan,  after  mapping
the  coast  eastward as far  as possible, had been  to  return west  to  the  Coppermine and travel south along the river to Fort Enterprise, where supplies  would  be stored for him.  However, if the  summer was too far  advanced or  they  ran  short  of food, plans   would   be   changed,  and   the   ex­ pedition would   journey  south  across  the barren ground from  some  undetermined point   along   the  sea  coast.  As it  turned out,  they  did  run  short  of  food,  and  at  a time  when  the  season  was  far  advanced toward  arctic  winter.   Coronation  Gulf and  the  newly-named  Hood's River  was the  route  taken  to  Fort  Enterprise.
It  was  a  man-killing trip  across   the barrens! In  fact, six men  died: four of starvation, one  murdered, one  executed for    the    murder.   The   battered   birch canoes were abandoned shortly  after leav­ ing   Coronation  Gulf.    Caribou    (which Franklin calls  "deer")  were  nearly non­  existent;  any   that   were  sighted   proved too  fleet  of  foot  for  the  weakened, near­ starving barren ground  hikers.  "Tripe de roche"  (edible lichen  on  rocks), putrid animal carcasses  and wolves' carrion were their  food.  Along  the way,  Michel  Tero­ ahaute,  an   Iroquois  Indian,  killed   an English  officer  and  was  himself  killed  by another   of  Franklin's  officers.  It seems likely   that  the   Indian,  perhaps  driven  insane  by  hunger, had   been   eating   the bodies  of some  of his dead  companions.
 Fort  Enterprise was reached eventually, but  the  expected   food  supplies  were  not there.  With  total  catastrophe in sight, Lieutenant Back travelled farther south, searching  for  Akaitcho and  his Copper Indian  hunters.  After   finding  the   In­ dians,  sleds  of  food   were  sent   back   to rescue  the main  party  at  Fort  Enterprise from  starvation. At  which  point,  in  the fall  of  r82o,  the  long  journey  that  took four  years was really  at an  end.
This   book  is  a  reprint  of  Franklin's
original volume, and a very impressive reprint. It has  thirty pages  of plates  ( re­ productions   of   the   early   steel   engrav­ ings) , many  in  colour,  and  includes  four detached maps,  plus several  long appen­ dices  relating to  flora  and  fauna, etc.  If not  quite  a  work  of  art,  the  book comes close to  being  one.
But  reverting  back  to  the  expedition
itself, Franklin's narrative leaves me very unsatisfied.   Apart  from    being   a   lousy writer   (Back  was  much   better),  Frank­ lin's  conduct of  the  expedition  seems  to me   (and   others)    an  ample  explanation of his later  tragedy-a tragedy  that  sent dozens   of   English    captains   searching westward   for   the  vanished   Franklin  as well as the  North  West  Passage.
For instance, why weren't the  food supplies  more efficiently arranged? Every­ one,  including  Franklin,  knew  that   tra­  velling  over  the   barren  ground   was  no English    tea    party.    And    why    didn't Franklin rely  on  travelling west  by  sea (according  to   his   original  plan),  and  returning on  the  basis of  his actual  food supplies  on  hand, rather than  relying  on problematical   game    along    the    route? Why,  why,  why?   All  this   being   hind­ sight, of course.
In   addition,  the    curious    story    of
Michel,  the  cannibalistic  Iroquois, seems


93

BOOKS IN REVIEW



to pose more  mysteries  in Franklin's  nar­ rative  than  it solves. Probably Lieutenant Back   and    the    Copper    Indian  chief, Akaitcho, were -as some historians  have asserted-the reasons  the entire  expedi­ tion  didn't perish.  Back  nearly  died  him­ self  on  this  desperate  journey  south   in search  of supplies  to aid  Franklin. Akait­  cho  and   his  hunters  provided   the  most vital  necessity  of  all:   food.
Here's what  Franklin said  of Akaitcho
and  his people: "the art with which  these Indians pursue   their  objects,  their  avar­ icious  nature, and  the  little  reliance that  can   be  placed   upon   them   when   their interests jar with  their promises ..." And later: "Dr. Richardson, Hepburn and  I, eagerly  devoured  the   food,  which   they imprudently presented to us, in too great abundance, and  in  consequence we  suf­ fered  dreadfully from  indigestion."  Also Dr.  Richardson: "... we placed  no con­ fidence  in the  exertions  of the Canadians who   accompanied   him   (Franklin,  that  is) ..." Contrast this  against  the  Copper Indian chief, Akaitcho's own  words  (En­ glished  by  Franklin) : "I know you write  down   every  occurrence  in   your   books; but  probably you  have  only  noticed  the bad  things  we  have  said  and  done,  and have  omitted to  mention the  good."
On   the  evidence   of  this  book,  Akait­ cho,   the   long-dead   Indian   chief   who accompanied the  long-dead  English  cap­  tain,   John  Franklin,  may   have   had   a point.  Franklin and  the officers under  his command seem  to me a bunch  of upper­ class English  snobs  lording  it  over  what  they  suspected  might  not  be an  inferior  race.  But  because  Franklin and  his men both  endured and  achieved  much-are in  some  sense  underlying rock-gothic in Canadian history-I suppose  they  were also heroes.                                 A. w. PURDY

94
 INEXHAUSTIBLE RICHES

PETER  BUITENHUis,    The  Grasping   Imagin­ ation,   The    American    Writings   of    Henry james. Toronto. $12.50.

ANOTHER BOOK    about  Henry  James? Apparently  the   riches   in  James   are   so inexhaustible  that   even   Leon   Edel   has failed  to deplete them.  Was  there  ever  a writer    who   presented  academic  critics with  such  tantalizing material for exploi­ tation-ambiguities to  unravel,  symbols to  elucidate, themes   to  interpret,  struc­ tures   to  dismantle?   Professor   Edel   has pulled  off the critical coup  of the century by  cornering the  James   monopoly; and has made the most of it by writing a non­  chronological  biography which could con­ ceivably  be  stretched out  for  the  rest  of his life.
Under these  formidable circumstances, to  say  anything  new,  one  might   think, would   be  a  hurdle  to  daunt  the   most ardent Jamesian. Yet  despite  the  redun­ dancy   of  James   studies,  Professor  Peter  Buitenhuis has managed in The  Grasping Imagination  to write  a highly  competent, lucid,    and    balanced   study   of   James's attitude  toward  his   native   land. There has  been  a  good  deal  of  controversy on this  question, the  issue  muddied  by  the enticing image of  James as an ambivalent figure  torn   by  conflicting loyalties.  Buit­ enhuis   clarifies   rather   than    simplifies James's  feelings  by  concentrating on  his American novels, stories, and travel  pieces, and  by quoting comments about America from  his  letters -even  from  some  never published  before.   When   James   went   to Europe he  knew  that   he  had  found   his temperamental  ambiance.  But   America happened to  be the  place  where  he  had

BOOKS IN REVIEW



been born  and  he had  to learn  to come to terms  with  a circumstantial accident. To avoid  the confusion of cherished academic ambiguities, there  is a  lot  to  be said  for the  advantages of concentrating on  a chronological  sequence  of   development and  change as Buitenhuis  does.
The title  of Buitenhuis's book is taken
from a passage in an 1871 letter  to C. E. Norton: "The face  of  nature and  civil­ ization  in  this our  country is to a certain  point  a very sufficient  literary field. But it will   yield   its   secrets   only   to   a   really grasping  imagination."  Professor  Buiten­  huis  traces  his unsuccessful early attempts to  grasp   these   "secrets"  by  looking   in vain  for  echoes  of  Europe. Failing  here, he   felt   rejected  by   Europe  until   that triumphant day  in  1875  when  he  could write  home: "I take  possession of the old world-I inhale it-I  appropriate it!"
From   this   point   on,   despite   his  am­ bition    to   be   so   "saturated"   by   both cultures  that   a  reader  could   not  detect  whether  the   author   was   American  or European, James  could comfortably settle into what  was essentially the environment which   stimulated  his   imagination,  the only  country where   it  would   have  been possible for him to develop  his creative powers  fully.
To  me  the  most  interesting section  of the    book    is   Buitenhuis's   account   of James'  return  to  America  after   twenty years  in  1904 -as  though to  a  strange and  exotic  country. The result  of  his arduous  journey,   The  American Scene, is in  its way  comparable to Tocqueville's Democracy in America as an examination of a culture by a detached, inquiring observer.    In   a   previously   unpublished letter, James   wrote   with  anguished  can­ dour: "This country is too  huge  simply, for  any  human convenience, and  so  un-
 utterably  empty   that   I defy  any   civil­ ization,  any  mere  money-grabbing demo­  cracy   to   make    on   it   any   impression  worthy  of  the  name." In  The  American Scene  James  could  not fail to see modem America    as   a   degeneration   from    the peaceful  homogenous country of his boy­ hood  to a  dual  "fall" from  innocence in the  destructiveness of the  Civil  War  and  the  unsettling surge of  mass immigration. The   America  of  his   youth   failed   him because  it  was  not  Europe; the  mature America    to   which   he   returned  disap­  pointed  him  because it had  lost his youth.  His  emotional  recoil   expressed   itself  in fictional form in a series of doppelganger stories in which  the  author speculated on what    he   might    have   become   had    he never  left America.
Unfortunately Professor Buitenhuis seizes on too  many  advantages to press a point  home  by attacking other  critics, notably  Maxwell  Geismar and  VanWyck Brooks,  although  he  seems  possibly   un­ duly  deferential to  Leon  Edel  who, after  all,  is  not   the   reincarnation  of   Henry  James.  But  has  Professor  Buitenhuis any idea   how  often   he  has  used  the  words schema  and   schemata?  Surely  there  are other alternatives.
A final word  of praise should  go to the University of Toronto Press for  the  pro­ duction of a  remarkably attractive  book.
PHYLLIS GROSSKURTH


THE PAPER NORTH

J. MICHAEL YATEs,  The   Great  Bear Lake  Me­ ditations.   Oberon    Press.  Paperback,  $2.93 (Hardcover edition available.)
FoR   OVER   TWO THOUSAND    YEARS   the
West  has  been  inhabited in  part   by  the


95

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



ghost  of  Plato-who  makes,  appositely, a  drunken and  imaginary appearance in these  pages.  Mallarme, a  descendant of the  neo-Platonists and  alchemists,  wrote: "The world  exists to end in a book." And Michael Yates  rhymes: "Carefully I mix alcohol,   lake  and   me.  In this  manner, this  north   has  come  to  be."  This  north is the  written record; it is this that  is the ultimate, not  the  terrain and  its  people, who    exist   quite    independent  of   Mr. Yates'  awareness, or lack of awareness, of them. For he has carried with him as intellectual luggage  Rimbaud's dicta  that "I" am someone else and  reality lies else­ where.  True heir  of  the  Symbolists,  his striving is for  union  with le neant.
This  is to place  the  book, not condemn
it. Consciousness,  rather than  what  one is conscious   of,   has   become    the   centre. "Perfect  consciousness ... contains its own everything."   In place   of  Plato's  arche­ types,  we  have   a   pantheistic  solipsism. Aristotle  said  that  only  a  beast  or  a god could   live  alone.  The   Great  Bear  Lake Meditations   is  a  record   of  a  man   who seeks, by  himself,  to  become  both   beast and  god. Honesty or compulsion has made  Mr.   Yates   imply   why   he  has   rejected  companionship. Engaged in a nominalistic magic    ("the   sight   of   ticking   and   the sound  of  light"), he is an inverted  Milton  of the tundra. Unlike  Milton's epic poem, his   prose   rhymes   constantly.  Ten   sen­ tences end in eight  rhymes:  breath/ death, will/still, shore/sides, time/line, to inter­ vene/ darkening green.  Perhaps the  prose is something he  has  inhabited, not  con­ structed so that  it  might  image  the  sub­ ject-a difficult  task when  the subject  is its own  object.
The book is made up of inter-related paragraphs on  unnumbered pages. There are  four  principal characters: I, you, he

g6
 and  one. The depersonalization presented comes  from   a  sought   loneliness;   it  also comes  from   saturation  in  the  Symbolist malaise,   where   the   Inner  supplants the Outer,  where   "the  other"  exists  to  be conquered -by   words.   It is  from   this and  its  inevitable consequences that  Mr. Yates   fled   north.  Yet   the   book   is  an account of  a  prolonged inaction, a  basic refusal.  If Aristotle built  his metaphysics on  the  premiss  that  a  thing cannot both be  and   not   be,  Mr.   Yates  has  rejected the  existent for  the  sake  of  an  Hegelian inner  process   where   thought  dominates being -and  the  self. Like  Mallarme, he has   opted  for   this   Hegelian  ultimate, which  is Nothing, the ground of all being.
In contact with  others,  reality  intrudes.
In  a  northern town  he  watches a  house burn.  The owner, several  blocks away, "is perhaps   me,    but    his   heavy    clothing makes   it   difficult   to   know."   It is  the principle of the  hypallage imposed  upon the  real.  To  me  the  real  seems absent  in the  water from   the  fire-house  at  "minus sixty": at  home  hydrants froze at forty below.  In  this  town  or a similar  one  Mr. Yates  endures a  bitter  winter, though he spends   "as   little   time   at   home   as  pos­ sible".  Try  it, at  that  temperature.  When  home,   he   has   Bach   at   top   volume,   a vested  suit  and  tie, Scotch, and the  time to  read   some  twenty  volumes   of  Henry  James. For  some reason he cannot accept  the  frost  on  the inner walls, yet also wel­ comes it: he has "cold  horrors" to hound  him through the night,  and  another para­ graph for  his  book.
Though Mr.  Yates  did  not learn  much
from   Henry James, Henry   James could have placed  Mr. Yates in a subtle moral context. Certainly Conrad  did:  Decoud and   Razumov  are  two  among many   of his characters who  dwell  in chosen  isola-

BOOKS IN REVIEW



tion:   Conrad knew  who  they  were  and what  they  were  doing.
Whether Mr. Yates realizes it or not, he
has  written  a  latter-day  Paradise  Lost. The cast  includes Adam,  Eve,  the  ser­ pent,  the fall,  Noah, the Tower of  Babel, Abraham  and   Moses.   In   choosing  the Gnostic   path,  Mr.   Yates   has   expelled  reality  from   himself   (by  trying,   like  an anti-god, to  make  his  own  reality), and he  becomes  preoccupied by death: from fire, water or ice. He wants, like Conrad's Decoud  ( N ostromo) , "to   try  to  know  I am   drowning  as   I  drown." Alas,   his diary,  as  in   Under   Western   Eyes,  has come  into  the  hands of  one  who  would also  say  "Words  are   the   great   foes  of reality"-unless   one   makes   them   ser­ vants    to    that   reality.    Like    Conrad's teacher of languages, I am  familiar with the  terrain presented: I  was  brought up in the  north; I spent months in the  bush;  I have  known  some  who  have  gone  mad and   others  who  have ended   their   own lives. In  Hemingway's Big Two-Hearted  River   the   protagonist  is  under   intense interior  stress  but,   by  implying   it  only, Hemingway made of  his  story  a  greater work  of art  and  the  stress more  real.
Yet   this   may   not   be  fair:  the   true stress in Mr. Yates' book comes from the things  he  keeps  out: consciousness strug­ gles  to  obliterate conscience.   In  the  last paragraph  he   dramatizes a   suicide   at­  tempt  that one  has  the  right  to consider  unsuccessful. The  pistol  at  his head  is a Platonic pistol,  the  reality  of  which  lies elsewhere.   This  man  has  shown   in  the past  that  he has talent; there  is no neces­ sity to  trespass in the realms of non-being. Even  to  produce the  book  just  reviewed is  to  establish   another thing that   is. If reality has no significance, neither has the book nor  the situation uselessly fled from.
 At sixty below the snow sometimes evap- orates.                                            JOHN REID


MARCEL DUBE

MAXIMILIEN  LAllOCHE,  Marcel  DubJ.  Editions
Fides.

MAXIMILIEN   LAROCHE  a  fait  de  nets progres  stylistiques,  depuis  la parution de
sa  preface  a Zone  de  Marcel Duhe. On
se  souvient  sans  doute de  l'illisibilire et de la pauvrere stylistique  se cette  preface. Depuis,   il  semble   que   Laroche  se  soit repris,   puisque    son   dernier  livre    fait montre d'une intelligence syntaxique tout
a fait  valable.  Ceci  dit,  et  ce  liminaire
grammatical expose, commen<;ons par  les aspects  negatifs  de  l'ouvrage, avant   d'en degager   les  elements  positifs,   heureus­ ement  plus nombreux.
Je    ne   sais   pas    pourquoi,   mais    la premiere partie du  livre  me  semble  etre un  "devoir" de  collegien   ( du  chapitre I au  chapitre IV,  en  gros). Un  "bon  de­ voir"'  tel qu-on  les ecrivait autrefois; mais on   eprouve    tout   le   temps   !'irresistible envie  de corriger  le  texte.  Les  termes  de "destin", "destinee", "fatalite", reviennent constamment sous  la  plume  de  l'auteur, hors  de  propos:  j'en ai  compte cinq  au deuxieme   paragraphe  de   la   page   I 3 I ! (et il ne s'agissait  que  du  mot  "destin"). Comme  si  le  theatre de  Duhe etait   une sorte   de   tragedie  grecque.  Je   sais  bien que  la these  principale de  l'auteur est de montrer   que   !'evolution  du   theatre  de Duhe   va  dans  le  sens  du   passage  de  Ia tragedie  au  drame (que de  fois  ne  nous a-t-il  pas cite  cette  phrase  de Dube: "La tragedie est un acte de foi"?) mais cette accumulation  de  references au   "destin"
et   a  la   "fatalire"'  ainsi   qu'au  theatre

97

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



antique, me semble depourvue de tout fondement. D'autre part,  on  aurait aime voir  developpcc davantage la  these  sed­ uisante  selon  laquelle  le theatre de  Dube  n'est,   en   derniere  analyse,  que   l'eman­ ation  sublimee  d'un groupe  social  ( celui des  canadiens-fran ais
6o)'  veritable createur de   I'oeuvre    de Dube.   Cet   aspect   de  la  question   est  a peine  esquisse  aux   pages  42,  82  et  86: "Drames collectifs  et  drames  individuels sont  lies. Le  conflit  des  personnages   est lie a  la  crise  meme  de la societe  et  leurs dechirements sentimentaux ne peuvent se dissocier   des  antagonismes  sociaux"    (p.
82) , et  "Le   lieu  des  conflits,  perce   de
mille  ouvertures, est  un  espace  eclate   a
!'image de  cet  eclatement  des  families, des groupes ou de la societe dont  Marcel Duoo  nous  donne   le spectacle" (p.  86). Et  c'est  tout: Laroche nous laisse le soin de la demonstration scientifique  de ces affirmations.
La deuxieme partie  de l'ouvrage est neanmoins bien plus interessante que la premiere. Laroche pose comme  hypothese que,   dans    le   theatre  quebecois    d'une fa on
particulier, les  "meres" et  les  "femmes"
(qui  deviendront meres)   sont  les alliees des  jeunes   ( quel  que  soit  leur  sexe), et que  si  le  fils  se  revolte   contre   le  pere, comme  detenteur d'une autorite non meritee,  c'est  parce  que  le pere  quebecois
n'est  pas  a la  hauteur de son  role:  il ne
se conduit pas comme "adulte", politique­
ment et soci,etalement. Dans un autre chapitre, I'auteur etablit des comparaisons inreressantes entre  la  thematique du theatre americain (Albee,  Miller,  Eugene O'Neill)  et   celle  du   theatre  quebecois.





gB
 Laroche essaye de  nous  montrer, a l'aide d'exemples precis,  que  la signification ultime   de   la   revolte   du   fils  contre  le pere  est fort  differente, dans  les contextes socio-historiques americain  et  quebecois.
Etre  ne dans  les zones grises de la societe
(voir   Zone,  de  Dube)  ne  revet   pas  le meme   sens  ici  que  chez   nos  voisins  du Sud.
Enfin,  un  choix  de  textes  des  princip­ ales  pieces  de  Dube-Zone, Un  simple soldat,  Le  Temps des  Lilas,  Les  Beaux Dimanches,   Pauvre   amour   figurent  en annexe.
Malgre  ces  aspects   positifs,  le  lecteur reste  quelque  peu   sur   sa  faim.   Car   le veritable probleme n'a  guere  ete  pose, ou si peu  ( disons  qu'il  n'a  pas ete  developpe comme  il l'aurait du,  a notre  sens tout  au moins)  : si  le  theatre de  Dube   a  eu  le
succes   qu'on  sait,   s'il   a  repondu  a un
besoin  ( et qui  le nierait?), c'est que, par­
deli le  temperament  personnel de  Dube (sur  lequel  insiste  trop  Laroche), il s'est sans   doute  agi   de   tout    autre  chose: l'argent,  le  luxe   et   le  confort  materiel outrecuidant   ( qu'on   retrouve  dans    la quasi-totalite  des  pieces  de  Dube)  sont des   valeurs   normatives  de   l'environne­ ment   anglo-saxon et   protestant  ( qu'on relise  done   ce  chef-d'oeuvre de  Max  Weber:   L'ethique  protestante  et  ['esprit du  capitalisme.)  Les modeles  ou  patterns "latins" et  "catholiques"-qu'on   pense au  milieu  social  ou  Dube a  baigne  dans toute   son  enfance-sont  aux  antipodes
des  normes  qui  definissent  le  "succes" a
l'americaine  ou   a   l'anglaise.  C'est   une
difference de  taille,  sur  laquelle il  serait bon  de s'attarder dans  un  ouvrage  futur.
GILBERT TARRAB

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



COUNTRY ISLANDER


EDWARD  D.   IVEs,  Lawrence   Doyle,  the   farmer poet  of Prince  Edward   Island:   a  study  in local   songmaking.   University   of   Maine,
$7.95·

PRoFESSOR IVEs' study of Lawrence Doyle arises from  his interest  in  Maritime folk­ songs and  folklore  and  his patient search to  discover   the   actual  men   and  events that  lay behind  them.  (Two earlier books study   the  "local   songmaking" of   Prince Edward  Island  and  New   Brunswick country  composers   Larry   Gorman  and Joe   Scott.)    Relaxed  in   pace,   this  new book  has  three  aims: to  transcribe (with  all known  variants) the words  and  music of Doyle's songs, to reconstruct the events that   inspired   them,  and   to  engage   the reader  in the life and  times of Doyle him­ self. Except  for  a  style  that   plunges  into saccharine coyness at times, and  a general  failure to  distinguish between  "popular" and  "popularized" biography (and  so to reach a consistent tone) , it proves reason­ ably successful.
The   glimpses  of  late   nineteenth  cen­ tury  rural  life  in  Prince Edward  Island,  that  is, vivify  not  only  Doyle's  songs but other   literary pictures of  that  place  and time   as  well.   (Montgomery's   Anne   of Green   Gables   is  a  sentimental   case  in point.)  They  depict  a  socially  conserva­ tive,  pragmatic,  convivial, gossiping,  oc­ casionally   quarrelsome,  politically    con­ scious and politically  divided  community; the  elements are the same as those that characterize literary small towns from Mephibosheth Stepsure's rural Nova Scotia  to Salterton and  Mariposa. Doyle's response   to  such   a  climate,  acidulously good-humoured, like McCulloch's and Davies', punctured  pretension and  foible
 with ironic exaggeration, as in "The Bear at  Grand  River":

"Oh  I don't  mind  the shot, it's the noise makes me  run,
If the snow wasn't  deep I would soon show
you fun;
You're a hard  looking crowd,  I solemnly
declare,
Alas, the cruel fate  that  has made me a
bear" ...

or "The Picnic at Groshaut":

See how Noah was respected,  in the Ark he was elected
And from grapes  he caused  the richest wine to flow;
When he made  the wine, you see, he got drunk  as drunk could  be,
Just as drunk  as any man  was at Groshaut.

Perhaps  it was a shame  but there's  no-one for  to  blame,
'Twas  nothing but an accident, you know;
'Twas continued the next day but the spirit died away
And the cider changed  to water  at
Groshaut  ...

or  that   mad   narrative of  a  bashful  vil­ lager,   "Fogan  MacAleer",  whose   peri­ phrastic  attempt to purchase a horse leads to  his betrothal and  a dowry instead :

And turning  round  to Lauchlan Ban in tones both loud  and  clear
Says Fogan, "I'm a happy  man  to gain your
daughter dear."
So it turned  out contrary, not the mare  he got  but  Mary-
He got Mary  and  the mare, don't you know what  I mean?

Ives' commentaries apparently try to keep pace with such  spirited entertainment:

Imagine,  if you  will,  Lawrence Doyle, far­ mer  and  solid citizen,  driving  his cart  along this  approach causeway  turned into  a  long slough  of  sticky  red  mud  by  the  fall  rains, the  wagon  sometimes  to the  hubs,  the  poor horse on occasion  going almost  to the shoul­ ders.  Further imagine   him  going  up  over the  rickety  makeshift   span;  he  was  a  car­ penter,   and   his  practiced   eye  would   have seen  the shoddy  work  all  too  plainly,  which would  have  added   to  his  sense  of  outrage.

99

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



... All this and  much  more:  a fuming  Irish mix of red mud, bad carpentry, political skulduggery, and   a  poetical  turn  of  mind. Out   of  it  came   "The  Bay  Bridge."   Who knows, he  may  even  have  thought  it  up on the   way  home,  after   passing  through   the mess a second  time.

The  approach, instead, tends  to mask the genuine research  being done.
Ives  is  content  ultimately to  identify and  describe  these  works;  he investigates briefly  the  local  song  tradition in  which Doyle  can   be  placed,  and  digresses  still more   briefly  into   a  discussion  of   news­ paper   verse,  but   to  probe  the  aesthetic merits  of the verse and  to discourse  upon its relationship with  Canadian poetry  re­ main  outside  his  domain. Yet one of the most  interesting  suggestions  of a  book of this   kind,   which   takes  occasional   verse seriously, concerns the continuity between folk   poetry  and  established literary figures.  Canadian criticism,  for  example, has often  implicitly suggested that  writers like  Carman  were   influenced   by  their schooling  more  than   their  locale.  While a   Classical   education  and   fashionable Emersonian  transcendentalism  obviously influenced   Carman  strongly,  and   while no-one   would   identify his  vagabondage with  Doyle's  rural viewpoint, the  techni­ cal  parallels between   the  two  writers  do become  striking. Exaggerated  rhyme,  de­ liberate  repetition,  and  sheer energy characterize both.   The  writings   of  Mc­  Culloch   and  Haliburton, vivid  with  the local  dialect  voice  and  the  shrewd  aspe­ rity of  country politics, offer predecessors and  prose  counterparts. But  such  Mari­ time sensibility  is more  than  regional per­ spective.  Fred  Cogswell,  in  another  con­ text,  has  pointed   to  features  of  attitude and   style  that   link  Carman  with  Pratt and   so  with   modem   linguistic   experi­  ments; a link  in  the other  direction with

100
 the   local   songmakers  establishes   native roots   as  well  as  academic  and   literary ones  for  modern Canadian  poetry.

W.H.NEW



THE MIGRANT

Wyndham Lewis  on  Art:  Collected   Writings,
1913-1956,  edited   by  Walter  Michel   and
C. J. Fox. Funk  & Wagnalls,  $1o.oo.

WYNDHAM LEWis's connections with Canada were  elusive  but  as patterned as a horoscope: French Canadian ancestors, birth   on  a  yacht   off  the   Nova   Scotian coast,   appointment  as  a  Canadian  war artist   (War I)  when  nobody  thought of him   as  anything  but   a  British   painter, and finally those years of discontent in Toronto (War II)  out  of which  emerged Self-Condemned. Some of his finest paintings found  their  way to Canadian collections, and   some  of  his  best  critics have  been  Canadians.
It is  therefore fitting   that   what   looks like  the   definitive  collection   of  Lewis's art  criticism-Wyndham Lewis  on  Art
-should be edited   jointly  by an  Ameri­
can,  Walter  Michel, and  the  most  dedi­ cated   of  Canadian Lewis  scholars,  C.  J. Fox.  It is a  comprehensive  collection  of such   of   Lewis's   writings   as  can   be  re­
garded specifically  as those  of a critic  of the visual arts. His more philosophic work on the arts in a wider sense is necessarily excluded; space  would  not  have  allowed its   presence,    and   in   any   case   Lewis's major works  are  all  either  in  print  or  in the  process of being reissued.
Wyndham  Lewis  on   Art  is  really   a
combination  of   manifestoes,  in   which Lewis is very much  the Vorticist theoreti­ cian  about art,  and  of critiques of specific

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



artists   and   paintings  in   which   a   com­ pletely   different  aspect   of  Lewis'  mind comes   to  the   surface. He   becomes  the observer,  viewing  the  work  for  itself and in  its  own  terms,  and   his  comments are direct and eminently  sensible. While most   art   critics   regard   a   picture  as  a vehicle  for  expressing  their  own  theories (for   essentially   they  are   literary  men), with   Lewis -himself    a   painter -you have   the   sense   of   a   man   who   really looked,  looked  intently-until he  went blind -and tried  to tell us what  he actu­ ally saw. One  can  ask  no more  of an  art critic,  and  usually gets far  less.
There is only  one  piece  in  this  collec­ tion   that    has   a   specifically   Canadian application. It  is  the   essay,  "Canadian Nature and  its Painters", which appeared in The  Listener in 1946 and  which,  apart from   praising highly  the  work  of  A. Y. Jackson, pointed  out that  in a very special way Canadian  painting was bound  to be regional, as  was all Canadian culture.

Canada will always be so infinitely  bigger physically  than   the  small  nation   that   lives in it,  even if its  population is doubled,  that this   monstrous,  empty   habitat  must   con­ tinue  to dominate it  psychologically, and  so culturally ...

It is a thought that  in recent  years has become one of the cliches of Canadian criticism,    dulled    by   repetition.   When Lewis  said  it  a quarter of a century  ago, the thought was new, as so many of his thoughts were.  It is not  only ornithologi­ cally  that   Canada  has  been, as  Geor Woodcock   once  remarked, a  country of splendid birds of  passage.
ANTHONY APPENZELL
 THE GENTLE JOURNALIST

"Blair  Fraser Reports",  ed.  John   Fraser  and
Graham  Fraser.  MacMillan. $8.95·

BLAIR FRASER   did   not  succumb  to  the pompous   twaddle  that   passes  for   prose in  the  Press Gallery.  He  spent  a total  of
2 I   years in  Ottawa, and  now  two  years after   his  death  by  drowning, the  pieces he wrote from  the Gallery  still have  point and   freshness.   A  sampling of  these  re­ ports  have  been  put  together by his sons John  and  Graham. The Canadian  pieces were  chosen  by Graham, a  reporter  with the    Toronto  Daily   Star;   those    from abroad  by  John, a  member  of  the  Ex­ ternal   Affairs  Department. For  the  most part  they have chosen well.
But  what  intrigues me is the form  and pattern of  the  man's life  itself,  and   its sum.  The   memoir Graham  has  written for  the  book is the  best guide  to that  life. Fraser was born in Sydney, Nova Scotia, where   his  father  worked   in  the  Dosco steel plant and later became   neral superintendent. The  eldest   of  six   chil­ dren,  he  suffered  from  asthma  that  was not  helped  by the  damp and  smog of his home   town.   The  first   outcome  of  this sickly start  on  life was  that  he "felt  that  he  had   been   coddled   and   spoiled   as  a child,  and  as if  to  purge  himself  of  this, he  worked  summers  at  the  steel  plant  to earn  his university  tuition."
His father was a strong  force  in form­ ing  this stubborn drive  to  make  good  in whatever came hard. After Fraser finished at   Acadia    University  he   taught   at   a small  private school  near  Montreal, and, unhappy,  complained  in   letters   to   his father. As anyone with Calvinistic parents knows,  this  is  not  always  a  wise  course.


IOI

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



Back  came  a white-hot letter  from  John
Hugh Fraser.
... forget  your  likes and  dislikes, your food and  your  living  quarters, your  friends  and your   enemies   and   all   the   other   damned idiotic   bunk  that   you seem  to be  worrying about,  and  concentrate on  being the best damned   teacher   that   Stanstead  ever  had. Get  out  of there  with  a record  that  will get you   a   good   increase   on   your   next   job, whatever  it may be.
After Fraser joined the  Montreal Herald he thought of earning another degree in English back at Acadia. For his father, this  made no sense. "I think  you can  write  well enough now, and  the next step  should   be  to  go  find  something to write  about. The function of  writers,  as I understand it,  has always  been  to instil their  ideas  into  the  public  mind,  and  I am   wondering  what   ideas,  if  any,  you have   to  inject   into  the  rest  of  society." This  is  a  narrow view  of  that  function, but   one   with   much   latent   power,   and Fraser  stayed  in reporting.
He    joined   the   Montreal  Gazette   in
1933  and   in  his  10 years  there   worked long weary  hours  at  jobs ranging from proofreader on  up  to associate  editor. In
1943  he  joined  Maclean's  as  the  maga­
zine's  Ottawa man   and   became  known across  Canada for  his  columns   and   re­ ports.  For   short  periods  he   became Maclean's   editor  and   correspondent  in London.
Fraser's  career   was   marked    by  taste and  restraint. In  1951  he broke  the  news that Mackenzie King had   consulted mediums  during  his   life.   As   Graham says,  "It was  an   astounding  revelation about   a  very  private man,  only  recently dead, but Fraser  took pains to avoid a sensationalist treatment of the  news." He was thoughtful, and  he was  trustworthy.
When   he  was  taken   to  court   over  a
story  he  wrote, he  refused  to  name  the


102
 sources of his facts. Although the court would   not   accept   it,  this  stand   earned him  the  respect  of fellow  newspapermen who  regarded talks  with  sources  as  privi­ leged  as those  between  lawyer  and  client.  One    wonders  if   Fraser  were   not   too chummy with  his  contacts.  After  all,  he took   long   canoe-trips  with   friends  like the  U.S.  Minister  to  Canada; a  former vice-chief   of   the   general staff;  a  vice­ president   of    Canadian  National  Rail­ ways; and  the  president of the  Canadian Bank  Note Company.
No  one,  however, can  doubt  that   he had  "complete, unswerving integrity", as his  son  says.  He  was  not  a  mouthpiece of  the   Liberal  Party   and   decried   that party's handling of  the   Pipeline   debate that  led  to its fall  in 1957. But his friend­ ships   with   Liberals  like  Lester   Pearson  were  very  strong, and   their  values  were his.
In a  sense,  Fraser's work  was  the  re­ sult  of this  wedlock  of shared  values.  He was  perhaps too  understanding of  prob­  lems   faced   by   the   powerful,  and   too much  at  ease  with  the  presence  of thick,  sealed   files   and    discreet   Rideau  Club dinners.  One  wishes  he  were  something he was not-a  bastard.
Hugh MacLennan once told me that Fraser    had    studied  Gibbon,  and    this reading  gave   him   an   overview   of   the affairs  he  daily  covered  in  Ottawa. Gra­ ham    mentions  Gibbon    and    also   how impressed   Fraser was  with  Toynbee.  In­ deed,   Reports  shows  how  keen  was  his concern  for   history.   In   his  canoe-trips too,  he  found  a  kinship  with   Canada's past.   It is  odd   that,  unlike   Fraser,  the journalists who  live  in  history   are  rash, angry,  unreasonable  men  who  were  will­ ing  to go for  the  jugular or  the groin.
FRASER SUTHERLAND

BOOKS IN  REVIEW



TRANSLATIONS

Floralie, Where Are You? ( Anansi,  cloth
$6.50,  paper  $2.50)   is the  welcome Eng­ lish  translation of  Roch   Carrier's  recent  novel,   Floralie,  ou   es-tu?   Readers  will find  a  review   by  Ronald  Sutherland  in Canadian Literature 44. Once  again  the translation is by Sheila  Fischman, and  in our  view  it  is  more  felicitious than   her earlier  translation of Carrier's La Guerre, Yes  Sir!
Vasyl Stefanyk was one of the most respected  of Ukrainian writers, and, to celebrate  the   centenary  of  his  birth,   a group   of  his  stories  has  been  translated and  published in  Canada under  the  title of  The Stone Cross (McClelland & Stewart, $5.95). The translation is by Joseph   Wiznuk   in  collaboration with  C. H. Andrusyshen of the University of Saskatchewan,  and    Professor   Andrusy­ shen   has  added  an   introduction  which narrates Stefanyk's  life and  critically  dis­ cusses his work.                                      G.w.


ON THE VERGE
*****   Letters    to   Molly:  fohn    Millington Synge   to   Maire    O'Neill.  Saunders,   $12.00. This is an indispensable volume for  those interested in Synge  or in the  Irish theatrical renaissance  in   general.  From   1 906  to   1909
Synge   was   engaged  to   Molly  Allgood,  who created the  part of  Pegeen Mike in  The  Play­ boy  of the  Western World, and  later  followed  a   successful acting  career  as   Maire   O'Neill. Not    until  after  Molly's death  in   I952   did biographers  recognize  the    relationship,  and
only  now  are  Synge's 400 letters to Molly published under the  tactful and competent editorship of Ann  Saddlemyer of the  University
of  Victoria. They throw an  extraordinary  new illumination on  his  final  years  of  achievement and  tragic physical decline.
*****   ROBIN  SKELTON,   The   Writings of  j. M.   Synge.    Oxford   University  Press,   $8.75. As  is  perhaps appropriate in  such  a  far  west-
 ern  island, Victoria has  become a great centre of  Synge   studies, with   Robin Skelton editing the  standard Collected  Works and  Ann Saddle­ myer    contributing   to    it.   Skelton's   critical volume, The   Writings of  ]. M.  Synge,  is  the culmination of a long  interest and  much work.  Synge   has  often  been   miscast   by  critics as  a representative  of   the    Celtic   Twilight  or­ more   frequently in  recent  years-as  a  play­  wright  dominated   by   Irish   nationalism. In fact,  there   was   a   vigour,  a  gaiety  and-at times -a tragic   starkness about  Synge   that were  the  reverse of  those  half-moods suggested by  twilight-Celtic or  other-and  his  atti­ tude was  so  far  from   that of  the   nationalists that they  often condemned his  plays  as  an  in­ sult  to  the  dignity of  Ireland. It is  the  virtue of   Skelton's study  that   he   insists   on   these  aspects of Synge's work,  and at the  same  time  demonstrates   how    Synge's   personal    talent transfigured the   life  of  the   Irish   peasants  he presented,  without  in  any   way  mitigating its harshness and frequent brutality, into a  vision­ ary  landscape of man's condition.

****   Out   of Silence, photographs  by  Ade­ laide  de   Menil,  text   by  William   Read,   new press,  $7-95· Indian  and  Eskimo  Art  in  Cana­ da,  photographs  by  Dominique  Darbois,  text  by Ian Christie Clark. Ryerson,  n.p.  These are  two  fine  accounts of  the  arts of  Canada's na­  tive  peoples.  Out  of Silence  is  the  more  impor­ tant,  since  it   records the  decaying sculptures that still  remain in  situ  where Indian  villages once  stood  on  the  coast  and islands of  British Columbia. Already,  since   Adelaide de   Menil made her  journey in  1966-8, some  of  the  carv­ ings  she  recorded  have  gone  out  of  existence. Indian   and   Eskimo  Art   does   not   have   quite the   same   urgency,  since   the   many fine  illus­  trations  it  contains are  of  Indian and   Eskimo artifacts   (most   of  the  former from   the   Coast culture)   preserved  in   museums.  They   were  selected  from   around  the   world   for  a  special exhibition at  the  Musee   de  !'Homme in  Paris, and,  magnificently photographed,  they   form a  fine  record   of  a  group of  sculptures close  in time  to  the  present but  now as distant in  spirit as the  classical  sculptures to which  Levi-Strauss has  not  inaptly compared them. The  texts  in both  cases are  slight  and  self-effacing; properly so, since in these  books the  illustrations speak eloquently enough for  themselves.

***   ADRIENNE  CLARKSON.   True to  You   in my  Fashion. new  press,  $5·95· In the  good  old days  of  the  Surrealists, we  were  fond   of  pro­ claiming   the    aesthetic   qualities   of    objets trouves,  and    I  remember how   in   the   early


103

BOOKS IN REVffiW



years  of  Mass  Observation, when  it  was  still run   by  poets  like  Charles   Madge,   Kathleen Raine  and  Ruthven Todd, we would  seriously discuss the  unconscious  eloquence,  the  natural poetry,  of bits of speech  hurriedly  taken  down in  shorthand  (it  was before  the  days of easily accessible  tape  recorders)  by observers  stand­ ing  at  street   corners   or  under   the  Clock  at Paddington Station. Now  Adrienne  Clarkson has produced  a fascinating volume of  what one can   only   call   romans   trouues,   unintentional novellas.   In   presenting   the   substance   of   a series  of  interviews   conducted   with   men  on the  subject   of   marriage, she  tells  us  that  she has  performed  the  minimum  of  editing, even the   minimum   of   questioning,   and   I  see  no reason   not  to  accept   her  assurance.   But  one must  at  the  same  time  say that  the scripts,  as they   have   turned   out,   are  an   extraordinary tribute  to  Adrienne Clarkson's   skill as an  in­ terviewer,  for  almost  every  one  of  them  is  a psychological  document of deep  interest,   and some are  very evocative  indeed  in their recrea­ tion  of  the  substance of  human  relationships and   even-in    a   surprisingly   unsentimental way -lyrical  in    their    portrayal   of   small worlds of feeling. Collectively, they present  the moral  landscape of  an  age, and  raise the ques­ tion  of  how  different we are  from  other  ages. Different  from  the  Victorians  perhaps-but different  from  the  people  of  the  Restoration? Or   the  Regency?   Or  of  any  time  when  the restraints  of  a  paternalistic  social  system  are temporarily  relaxed?
***  VICTOR  PETERS.   Nestor   Makhno: The Life    of   an   Anarchist.   Echo   Books,   $3.75· Makhno was  the  leader  of  the  anarchist  gue­ rillas  who,  during   the  Russian  Civil  War, oc­ cupied   a  large   part   of  the   Ukraine,  contri­ buted   materially  to  the  defeat  of  the  White Armies   of  Denikin   and   Wrangel,   and   held their  territory against  the Red  Army until  they were   defeated  by   treachery   rather  than   by military   means.  No  full  account   of  Makhno's career  has  hitherto  been  written  in  English  or by a  non-partisan  (of  the  three  previous  nar­ ratives  all  were  written   in  Russian-one by Makhno  himself  and  the  others  by supporters, Arshinov  and  Voline), and  Dr.  Peters  brings to the  task  not  only a laudable objectivity  but also  a  familiarity  with  the  background, since he  is  the  son  of  a  Mennonite peasant  farmer
 who came to Canada from the region once dominated  by  Makhno.  Dr.   Peters  has  been able  to  trace,  among   the  Mennonite  commu­ nity   and   among    Ukrainians   now   living   in Canada and  the  United States,  a  fair  number of  surviving   witnesses   to  the   events  of  that time  and  even  some  participants in  the  Mak­  novite  Insurgent  Army.  The   result  is a  well­ documented   and   in   some   respects   original  work   which   certainly   deserves   a   respected place in the history of Russia and  of anarchism alike.
***  JEANNE MIHINNICK. At Home in Upper Canada. Clarke  Irwin, $22.50.  An excellent picture  book,  and   a  good  deal  more,  on  the physical    background   of   life   in   Ontario  a century    ago.   Jeanne   Mihinnick,  beginning with  a  lyrical  and  most  appealing description of  the  gardens of  colonial   times,  proceeds   to the  equipment, in  every  detail,   of  town  and country   houses   of   the   decades   before   Con­ federation.  The   illustrations  are   remarkably well-chosen, and  in general  At  Home in Upper Canada   is  a  notably  intelligent  and   visually satisfying   contribution   to  our   social   history. Decorative,   informative,  entertaining,  impec­ cable  in  scholarship, and  recommended.
**  Theatre and  Nationalism in  2oth-century Ireland, edited   by Robert O'Driscoll. Univer­ sity  of  Toronto  Press,  $8.50.  A  collection   of papers  delivered  in  a seminar  at  St.  Michael's College  in  Toronto. The   quality-as  always with  volumes  based on such occasions-is un­ even, and  the  title  somewhat  misleading, since it is only  papers  on Sean  O'Casey  and  Samuel Beckett   (whose  absence  of  nationalism is  em­ phasized)  that  really  belong to the period after  the  Easter  Day  rising.  Ann  Saddlemyer  writes well   on   the   leading    figures   of   the   Abbey Theatre, Robert McHugh has some interesting things  to  tell  about   the  roles  of  Irish  drama­ tists  and  actors  in  the  events  of I gI 6, George  Harper discusses  the  strange  mixture of  com­ plementary and  contradictory  in  the  relation­ ship  between  Yeats  and   Maud   Gonne   (with­ out  either  coming  very  much  alive  in  his nar­  rative)  and there  are  some  curious  letters  be­ tween   Yeats   and   Shaw.   As  with   most  such symposia,  one   wonders   whether   the  three   or four  passable  essays are  really  worth  the  price of a whole volume.
